Preface

The preparation of an international reference book such
as this could not possibly be achieved without the total
cooperation of so many individual authors and the back-
ing of their various employers, especially where company
contributions have been made, bringing together a wealth
of professional knowledge and expertise.

An acknowledgement such as this can only scratch the
surface and cannot really portray the grateful thanks I
wish to express to all these people concerned that have
devoted so much time and effort to place their ideas and
contributions to this Plant Engineering Handbook.

Plant engineering is such a broad subject incorporating
a multitude of disciplines and a wide variety of solutions
to virtually every problem or situation, unlike some sub-
jects that have clear-cut methods.

In compiling the initial suggested guidelines for each
of the contributions, I posed the questions to myself what
information and assistance had I found difﬁcult to locate
during over 30 years as a plant engineer responsible for
plants throughout the world and how could it be best pre-
sented to assist others in their profession.

I would therefore like to take this opportunity to thank
each of the contributing authors for their patience and
assistance in helping me to structure this publication.

R. Keith Mobley
President and CEO
The Plant Performance Group
Knoxville, Tennessee, USA

Contents

533
32 Pumps and Pumping
565
33 Centrifugal Pump Installation
571
34 Cooling Towers
587
35 Compressed Air Systems
601
36 Compressors
615
37 Fans and Blowers
623
38 Mixers and Agitators
629
39 Gears and Gearboxes
639
40 Hydraulic Fundamentals
687
41 Pneumatic Fundamentals
707
42 Noise and Vibration
43 Vibration Fundamentals
721
44 Vibration Monitoring and Analysis 757
45 Air Pollution
813
823
46 Dust and Fume Control
837
47 Dust Collection Systems
845
48 Maintenance Management in UK
49 Effective Maintenance
857

Management

50 Predictive Maintenance
867
51 Planning and Scheduling Outages 889
915
52 Lubrication
53 Corrosion
961
987
54 Shaft Alignment
1009
55 Rotor Balancing
1017
56 Packing and Seals
57 Gears and Gear Drives
1029
1043
58 Flexible Intermediate Drives
1065
59 Couplings and Clutches
1081
60 Bearings
1101
61 Finance for the Plant Engineer
62 Statistical Approaches in
1117

Machinery Problem Solving
63 Health and Safety in the UK
64 Regulatory Compliance Issues in

the US

Index

1131
1151

1159

Foreword
Preface
ListofContributors
1 Deﬁnition and Organization of the

2
3
4

Plant Engineering Function
Plant Engineering in Britain
The Role of the Plant Engineer
Physical Considerations in Site
Selection
Plant Location
Industrial Buildings
Planning and Plant Layout

5
6
7
8 Contracts and Speciﬁcations
9
10 Lighting
11 Insulation
12 Paint Coatings for the Plant

Industrial Flooring

Engineer

13 Insurance: Plant and Equipment
14 Insurance: Buildings and Risks
15 Electricity Generation
16 Electrical Distribution and

Installation

17 Electrical Instrumentation
18 Oil
19 Gas
20 Liqueﬁed Petroleum Gas
21 Coal and Ash
22 Steam Utilization
23 Industrial Boilers
24 Combustion Equipment
25 Economizers
26 Heat Exchangers
27 Heating
28 Ventilation
29 Air Conditioning
30 Energy Conservation
31 Water and Efﬂuents

vii
ix
xi
1

7
13
17

35
43
67
85
101
111
131
147

161
185
199
233

255
273
285
321
335
353
387
415
429
437
447
465
481
503
517

List of
Contributors

A P Hyde
National Vulcan Engineering Insurance Group Ltd

H King
Thorn Lighting

B R Lamb, CEng, MIChemE
APV Baker Ltd

S McGrory
BH Oil UK Ltd

R Keith Mobley
International Consultant

R J Neller
Film Cooling Towers Ltd

Ove Arup & Partners, Industrial Division

G Pitblado, IEng, MIPlantE, DipSM
Support Services

R S Pratt, ALU, CEng, MIMfgE, MBIM, MSAE
Secretary-General, The Institution of Plant
Engineers

G E Pritchard, CEng, FCIBSE, FInstE, FIPlantE,
MASHRAE

Risk Control Unit
Royal Insurance (UK) Ltd

R Robinson, BSc, CEng, FIEE
The Boots Co. plc

M J Schoﬁeld, BSc, MSc, PhD, MICorrT
Cortest Laboratories Ltd

J D N Shaw, MA
SBD Construction Products Ltd

R H Shipman, MIMechE, MIGasE, MInstE
Liqueﬁed Petroleum Gas Industry Association

K Shippen, BSc, CEng, MIMechE
ABB Power Ltd

A Armer
Spirax Sarco Ltd

B Augur, IEng, FIPlantE, MBES
J B Augur (Midlands) Ltd

H Barber, BSc
Loughborough University of Technology

D A Bayliss, FICorrST, FTSC

J Bevan, IEng, MIPlantE

R J Blaen
Senior Green Limited

British Compressed Air Society

G Burbage-Atter, BSc, CEng, FInstE,
HonFIPlantE, FCIBSE
Heaton Energy Services

P D Compton, BSc, CEng, MCIBSE
Colt International Ltd

I G Crow, BEng, PhD, CEng, FIMechE,
FIMarE, MemASME
Davy McKee (Stockton) Ltd

R. Dunn
Editor, Plant Engineering Magazine

P Fleming, Bsc(Eng), ARSM, CEng, MInstE
British Gas plc

C Foster
British Coal

C French, CENg, FInstE, FBIM
Saacke Ltd

F T Gallyer
Pilkington Insulation Ltd

R R Gibson, BTech, MSc, CEng, FIMechE, FIMarE,
FRSA
W S Atkins Consultants Ltd

B Holmes, BSc(Tech), PhD, CEng, FIChemE, FInstE
W S Atkins Consultants Ltd

R Smith
Life Cycle Engineering, Inc.

xii List of Contributors

G Solt, FIChemE, FRSC
Cranﬁeld Institute of Technology

K Taylor, CEng, FCIBSE, FIPlantE, FIHospE,
FSE, FIOP, MASHRAE, FBIM, ACIArb
Taylor Associates Ltd

L W Turrell, FCA

K Turton, BSc(Eng), CEng, MIMechE
Loughborough University of Technology

E Walker, BSc, CEng, MIMechE
Senior Green Limited

R C Webster, BSc, MIEH
Environmental Consultant

D Whittleton, MA, CEng, MIMechE, MHKIE
Ove Arup & Partners, Industrial Division

Copyright  2001 by Butterworth-Heinemann

All right reserved.

No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission
of this publisher.

Recognizing the importance of preserving what has been written,
Butterworth-Heinemann prints its books on acid-free paper
whenever possible.

Butterworth-Heinemann supports the efforts of American Forests
and the Global ReLeaf program in its compaign for the betterment
of trees, forests, and our environment.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Plant engineer’s handbook/edited by R. Keith Mobley. – [Rev. ed.].

p.cm
Rev. ed. of: Plant engineer’s reference book. c1991.
Includes index.
ISBN 0 7506 7328 1
1 Plant engineering – Handbooks, manuals, etc.
Title: Plant engineer’s reference book.
TS184 .P58 2000
696 – dc21

I. Mobley, R. Keith, 1943-II,

00-049366

British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
Plant engineer’s handbook

1 Plant engineering – Handbooks, manuals, etc.
1 Mobley, R. Keith, 1943 –
658.2

The Publisher offers special discounts on bulk orders of this book.

For information, please contact:
Manager of Special Sales
Butterworth-Heinemann
225 Wildwood Avenue
Woburn, MA 01801 – 2041
Tel: 781-904-2500
Fax: 781-904-2620

For information on all Butterworth-Heinemann publications available,
contact our World Wide Web home page at: http://www.bh.com

1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Typeset by Laser Words, Madras, India
Printed in the United States of America

1

1/1

Deﬁnition and
Organization of
the Plant
Engineering
Function

Richard Dunn
Editor, Plant Engineering Magazine

Contents

1/3

1.1 Introduction
1.2 Basic deﬁnition
1.3 Responsibilities

1/3
1/3
1.3.1 Activities 1/3
1.3.2 Knowledge areas 1/4

1.4 Organization

1/4

1.1 Introduction
The concept of the plant engineering function has changed
little over the years. Yet, the ways in which that func-
tion is accomplished have changed signiﬁcantly, primarily
because of changing technologies and business models.
More than ever before, for example, the plant engineer
must learn to manage from the perspective of a business
participant, relating his responsibilities and activities to
the mission and goals of the enterprise. Moreover, the
invasion of electronics and computerization into nearly
every facet of engineering and business operation has fos-
tered the integration of plant engineering into both the
operations and the business plan of the enterprise.

Changes in enterprise organization models have also
impacted plant engineering. In many industrial plants, for
example, the title of ‘plant engineer’ has disappeared,
being replaced with such titles as ‘facilities manager’ or
‘asset productivity manager’. Yet, the essential services
provided by these people and their departments remains
essentially unchanged, and every enterprise with physical
facilities must have a plant engineering function, regard-
less of the name by which it is labeled and the organiza-
tion through which it is accomplished.

1.2 Basic deﬁnition
Plant engineering is that branch of engineering which
embraces the installation, operation, maintenance, modiﬁ-
cation, modernization, and protection of physical facilities
and equipment used to produce a product or provide a
service.

It is easier to describe plant engineering than to deﬁne
it. Yet, the descriptions will vary from facility to facil-
ity and over time. Every successful plant is continuously
changing, improving, expanding, and evolving. And the
activities of the plant engineer must reﬂect this envi-
ronment. Each plant engineer is likely to have his own,
unique job description, and that description is likely to be
different from the one he had ﬁve years earlier.

By deﬁnition, the plant engineering function is multi-
disciplinary. It routinely incorporates the disciplines of
mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, and civil
engineering. Other disciplines, such as chemical engineer-
ing for example, may also be needed, depending on the
type of industry or service involved.

In addition, skills in business/ﬁnancial management,
personnel supervision, project management, contracting,
and training are necessary to the successful fulﬁllment
of plant engineering responsibilities. The function is fun-
damentally a technical one, requiring a thorough tech-
nical/engineering background through education and/or
experience. But beyond it’s most basic level, a broad
range of skills is needed.

If the plant engineer is a specialist in anything, it is
in his/her own plant or facility. Plant engineers must
learn to know their own plants thoroughly, from the
geology underlying its foundations and the topology of
the rainwater runoff to the distribution of its electricity
and the eccentricities of its production machinery. They
must ensure the quality of the environment both inside

Responsibilities 1/3

and outside the facility as well as the safety and health
of the employees and the reliability of its systems and
equipment. And they are expected to do all of this in a
cost-effective manner.

gencies, implement shutdowns

A few phrases from a 1999 classiﬁed ad for a plant
engineer provide some real-world insight on the scope of
responsibilities:
ž Support ongoing operations, troubleshoot, resolve emer-
ž Organize and maintain information on plant sys-
ž Implement plant projects and maintain proper docu-
ž Deal effectively with multiple activities, requests, and
ž Manage scope, design,

speciﬁcation, procurement,
installation, startup, debugging, validation, training, and
maintenance.

tems/equipment and improvement programs

emergencies

mentation

To this list, most plant engineers would quickly add
compliance with all applicable laws and regulations as
well as accepted industry standards and practices.
More than 25 years ago, Edgar S. Weaver,

then
manager of Real Estate and Construction Operations for
General Electric, provided a succinct description of the
function:

‘The primary mission of the plant engineer is to pro-
vide optimum plant and equipment facilities to meet
the established objective of the business. This can be
broken down into these four fundamental activities:
(1) ensure the reliability of plant and equipment oper-
ation; (2) optimize maintenance and operating costs;
(3) satisfy all safety, environmental, and other regu-
lations; and (4) provide a strong element of both short-
term and long-range facilities and equipment planning.’

The description still rings true today.

1.3 Responsibilities
There are two ways of analyzing the plant engineering
function. One is through the activities plant engineers
must perform. The other is through the facilities, systems,
and equipment they must be knowledgeable about. For
a complete understanding of the function, both must be
considered.

1.3.1 Activities

The activities that plant engineers must perform generally
fall under the responsibilities of middle-to-upper manage-
ment. Like all managers, they plan, organize, administer,
and control. But more speciﬁcally, plant engineers are
involved in or in charge of the following activities:
ž Design of facilities and systems
ž Construction of facilities and systems
ž Installation of facilities, systems, and equipment
ž Operation of utilities and services
ž Maintenance of facilities, systems, and equipment

and execution

tems, and equipment

1/4 Deﬁnition and Organization of the Plant Engineering Function
ž Improvement, retroﬁt, and redesign of facilities, sys-
ž Planning to meet business needs
ž Contracting for equipment, materials, and services
ž Project management, including planning, estimating,
ž Administration of the plant engineering organization
and personnel as well as related ﬁnancial consider-
ations (budgeting, forecasting, cost control), training,
and record keeping
ž Regulatory compliance with a wide variety of govern-
ž Coordination of plant engineering activities and
responsibilities with all other functions and departments
in the organization
ž Purchasing of requisite tools, equipment, parts, and

mental laws and standards

materials.

These activities are nearly universal throughout the
plant engineering function, although they may be
described differently in speciﬁc companies or facilities.
Also, other activities might be added to the list.

1.3.2 Knowledge areas

While most plant engineers are, in fact, engineers by edu-
cation and training, there is no single, traditional engineer-
ing discipline that comprises all areas of plant engineering
responsibilities. A combination of mechanical and electri-
cal engineering education and experience is essential, and
some knowledge in the areas of civil, structural, envi-
ronmental, safety, chemical, and electronic engineering is
useful and important.

Mere education is not enough, however. Plant engineer-
ing demands a level of experience in applied knowledge
and problem solving that is more intense than in most
other engineering functions. In fact, plant engineers are
often described as ‘jacks of all trades’ or ‘ﬁreﬁghters’
because of their abilities to respond to a wide variety of
needs on short notice, to ﬁx almost anything that breaks,
and to implement solutions to emerging problems.

Nevertheless, a major portion of every plant engineer’s
efforts is devoted to the prevention of problems and emer-
gencies, as exempliﬁed by their intense involvement in

the maintenance of virtually all structures, systems, and
equipment in their facilities.

Thus, to be successful, plant engineers must be knowl-
edgeable in the design, installation, operation, and main-
tenance of the following:
ž Electrical power systems
ž Electrical machinery
ž Lighting
ž Fluid power transmission
ž Mechanical power transmission
ž Instrumentation and controls
ž Heating and ventilating
ž Air conditioning and refrigeration
ž Pumps, piping, and valving
ž Material handling and storage
ž Paints, coatings, and corrosion prevention
ž Fire protection
ž Engines
ž Lubricants and lubrication systems
ž Environmental control systems and compliance
ž Compressed air systems
ž Buildings and construction
ž Tools
ž Welding and joining
ž Safety and health equipment and practices
ž Security.

Each of the above categories could easily be broken
into numerous subcategories, and more could be added.
But these are the generally accepted areas of expertise
that plant engineers are expected to know.

1.4 Organization
Organizational
structures and reporting relationships
within the plant engineering function and in relation to
other functions are as unique as each business enterprise
and individual plant. Yet, some common structures can be
identiﬁed.

To be most effective, the plant engineering function
should report directly to top plant or facility manage-
ment. In smaller enterprises, it should report directly to
the owner or to top corporate management. In any case,

Plant

manager

Accounting
manager

Personnel
manager

Quality

supervisor

Plant

engineer

Production
manager

Material
manager

Figure 1.1 Typical organization of a small plant illustrates that plant engineering is one of the essential functions in any plant. Maintenance
is normally a subfunction of plant engineering

Maintenance

manager

the plant engineer should have direct access to whoever
makes the ﬁnal decisions on any project, capital expen-
diture, legal concern, or enterprise policy decision. In
multi-site companies with a corporate engineering depart-
ment, each site plant engineer should report directly to
the site manager with a secondary reporting relationship
to the director of corporate engineering.

It is worth noting that a few very large industrial com-
panies have divided the plant engineering function into

multiple departments. The most common division in these
cases is the separation of ‘landlord’ responsibilities (that
is, real estate, buildings and grounds, and utilities) from
‘production’ responsibilities (that is, manufacturing and
process equipment and systems).

Within the plant engineering function, there are typi-
cally two primary subfunctions, best described as engi-
neering and maintenance. The engineering subfunction
is responsible for such matters as design, construction,

Organization 1/5

Plant

manager

Plant

superintendent

Industrial
relations
manager

Plant engine-
ering & main-

tenance
manager

Production
manager

Purchasing
manager

Quality
manager

Process B

maintenance

manager

Process C
maintenance

manager

Electrical
supervisor

Shops

Planning

Plant

controller

Plant

engineer

Industrial

engineering  &

distribution
manager

Process A

maintenance

manager

Figure 1.2 In larger plants, the plant engineering function is often divided into departments to serve particular needs

Executive

vice president

Plant A
plant

manager

Plant B
plant

manager

Plant C
plant

manager

Plant D

Director of
operations

Vice president
manufacturing
engineering

Vice president

quality

Tooling &

maintenance
services MGR

Plant

superintendent

Master

mechanic

Production
manager

Maintenance
supervisor

Maintenance
supervisor

Maintenance
mechanics

Maintenance
superintendent

Maintenance
mechanics

Maintenance
mechanics

Maintenance
mechanics

Plant

engineering

manager

Manufacturing
engineering

manager

Purchasing

director

Traffic

manager

Industrial

engineering

manager

Quality
director

Figure 1.3 Multisite enterprises are often organized with a central engineering department providing plant engineering services to all
plants and separate maintenance departments within each site

1/6 Deﬁnition and Organization of the Plant Engineering Function

Manager
facilities

Clerk

Facilities
engineer

Tactical planner

architect

Project
manager

Tactical planner

Designer

Director of
facilities

Executive secretary

Manager
facilities

maintenance

Manager
strategic
planning

1st shift supervisor

electrical & mechanical

repair

2nd shift supervisor

electrical & mechanical

repair

Maintenance
technicians

Building &
grounds
technicians

Custodial

Maintenance
technicians

Building &
grounds
technicians

Custodial

3rd shift supervisor

electrical & mechanical

repair

Maintenance
technicians

Building &
grounds
technicians

Custodial

Supervisor

planning & scheduling

Clerk

Planners

Figure 1.4 Large, complex industrial plants and other facilities require an extensive plant engineering organization to meet constantly
changing demands

modiﬁcation, and modernization of the facility, its utili-
ties, and operating equipment. The maintenance subfunc-
tion provides all maintenance services and carries out
many of the changes speciﬁed by engineering. Some plant
engineering organizations also identify a third subfunc-
tion, operations. This group is responsible for running

the utility systems, such as electrical control and distri-
bution; steam; heating, ventilating, and air conditioning;
compressed air; water treatment; etc.

The organization charts in Figures 1.1–1.4, adopted
from real plant organizations of various sizes and in a
variety of industries, illustrate some typical structures.

2

Plant
Engineering in
Britain

Roger S Pratt
Secretary-General, The Institution of Plant
Engineers

Contents

2.1 The professional plant engineer
2.2 The Institution of Plant Engineers
2.3 Aims of the Institution
2.4 Organization
2.5 Membership

2/10
2/10

2/9

2/9

2/9

2.5.1 Membership requirements 2/10
2.5.2 Courses leading to a career in plant engineering

2.6 Registration with the Engineering Council
2/11
2.7 Registration as a European Engineer
2.8 Professional engineering development
2/11
2.9 Addresses for further information 2/11

2/10

2/7

2/10

2.1 The professional plant engineer
The profession of engineering, in contrast to many oth-
ers, is extremely wide ranging in the spread of topics,
technologies and specialization included under the over-
all heading. The early engineers, the creative geniuses of
their day, encompassed all these latter-day specializations,
famous examples being Brunel, Stephenson and Telford.
Engineers have been at the heart of all technological and
scientiﬁc progress. Without them the world as we know
it today would not exist.

This has been despite the fact that the UK has devel-
oped with a culture that is indifferent to engineering,
the respectable professions being those such as law or
medicine offering more money and prestige. This deeply
rooted attitude was supported by an education system in
which on the whole applied science – engineering – was
not studied in schools or universities. This contrasts with
the rest of world, where such studies were an important
part of the curricula of many schools and universities
as early as the eighteenth century. Engineering was not
considered suitable for those with the ability to enter a
university, where arts and sciences were studied.

The need for education in engineering in the UK was
met by the development of Mechanics Institutes. By the
middle of the nineteenth century, around 120,000 students
per annum attended some 700 institutes on a part-time
basis, thus laying the foundations for the pattern of engi-
neering education in the UK. In 1840, the ﬁrst chair in an
engineering discipline (civil engineering) was established,
at Glasgow University, soon to be followed by one at Uni-
versity College, London. Oxford and Cambridge were late
on the scene, establishing chairs in engineering in 1875
and 1910, respectively.

Also peculiar to the UK is a somewhat confusing
array of professional engineering institutions. These were
originally learned societies where like-minded people met
to exchange views and information. They developed into
qualifying bodies by setting levels of experience and
academic attainment for different grades of membership.
The oldest professional engineering institution in the UK
is the Institution of Civil Engineers, established in 1818.
The Institution of Mechanical Engineers was established
in 1847 and the Institution of Electrical Engineers in
1871. Three-quarters of the approximately 50 institutions
which are the Nominated Bodies of the Engineering
Council were founded in the twentieth century, some
quite recently, reﬂecting the growth of certain engineering
disciplines such as nuclear engineering, computing and
electronics.

2.2 The Institution of Plant Engineers
The Institution of Plant Engineers (IPlantE) had its origins
in the Second World War. During this period, engineers
who found themselves responsible for the operation and
maintenance of the large excavators and other mobile
plant brought from the US to work open cast coal met
together for the exchange of information and to discuss
their problems. These meetings were so successful that
the engineers concerned decided to continue them in a

Aims of the Institution 2/9

more formal manner through the medium of a properly
incorporated body. The Memorandum of Association of
‘Incorporated Plant Engineers’ was subsequently signed
on 3 September 1946.

The concept of an engineering institution which cov-
ered a wide ﬁeld attracted engineers from many different
areas of activity, including industrial, municipal and ser-
vice establishments, civil engineering projects, transport
undertakings, design, research and education. By 1947,
branches of the Institution were holding monthly meetings
in London, Birmingham, Manchester, Leeds, Newcastle,
Glasgow and Bristol, and in the following year six more
branches were established. There are now 20 branches in
the UK and a large number of members in other countries.
In January 1959, the Board of Trade gave permission
for a change of title from ‘Incorporated Plant Engineers’
to ‘The Institution of Plant Engineers’. This marked an
important stage in the Institution’s development, enabling
it to take its place alongside other established engineering
institutions. The Bureau of Engineer Surveyors, whose
members had particular interests and expertise in relation
to the safety and insurance aspects of plant operation and
maintenance, merged with the Institution in 1987, forming
the basis of a new specialist division.

The Institution of Plant Engineers is therefore in many
ways a small-scale reﬂection of the engineering profes-
sion as a whole, embracing a wide range of disciplines and
activities. The Institution’s members work in the ﬁelds of,
and have responsibility for, designing, specifying, build-
ing, installing, overseeing, commissioning, operating and
monitoring the efﬁciency of plant of all kinds. This can
include most types of building, plant and equipment used
in the manufacturing, chemical and process industries,
educational establishments, warehouses, hospitals, ofﬁce
and residential accommodation, hotels, banks, theatres,
concert halls and all types of transportation systems. In
the broadest sense of the term, these are the assets of the
organization in question, without which it could not func-
tion. The plant engineer thus carries out a key role as the
practical manager of these assets.

2.3 Aims of the Institution
The aims of the Institution of Plant Engineers are:

1. To bring together those already qualiﬁed by the attain-
ment of such standards of knowledge, training, conduct
and experience as are desirable in the profession of
plant engineering;

2. To promote the education and provide for the examina-
tion of students in the profession of plant engineering;
3. To encourage, advise on and take part in the educa-
tion, training and retraining of those engaged in plant
engineering activities at all levels;

4. To diffuse knowledge of plant engineering by every
including lectures, papers, conferences and

means,
research;

5. To increase the operational efﬁciency of plant for the
greater beneﬁt and welfare of the community, bear-
ing in mind the importance of the conservation of the
environment and the preservation of amenity.

2/10 Plant Engineering in Britain

2.4 Organization
Overall direction of the Institution is vested in its Council,
but committees and panels of members carry out much of
the Institution’s detailed work. Branches and divisions of
the Institution are run by their own committees, which
arrange programs of visits, lectures and other appropriate
activities, spread throughout the year. Non-members are
very welcome to attend most Institution events. The Insti-
tution publishes its journal, The Plant Engineer, and other
technical information, and organizes national conferences
and exhibitions.

The Institution’s permanent staff is always available
to give help and advice on matters relating to member-
ship, education and training, and Engineering Council
registration.

2.5 Membership
Membership of the Institution of Plant Engineers is the
hallmark of the professional plant engineer and is often
a prerequisite for successful career progression. This will
become increasingly so in post-1992 Europe, when evi-
dence of appropriate professional qualiﬁcations may be
a legal requirement for employment in many engineering
appointments.

2.5.1 Membership requirements
A summary of the grades of membership and the personal
requirements for each of these grades is shown in Table 2.1.

Table 2.1 Summary of IPlantE membership requirements

2.5.2 Courses leading to a career in plant
engineering

career

In Scotland,

leading to a

The main courses
in plant
engineering are the Business and Technician Education
Council’s (BTEC) Technician Certiﬁcate or Diploma
in Plant Engineering and Higher National Certiﬁcate
or Diploma in Plant Engineering.
the
equivalents are the Scottish Technician and Vocational
Education Council’s (SCOTVEC) Technician Certiﬁcate
in Mechanical Engineering (Plant Engineering Options)
and Higher Certiﬁcate in Mechanical Engineering (Plant
Engineering Options). Additionally, certain other BTEC
Certiﬁcates and Diplomas, Higher National Certiﬁcates,
and Diplomas in subjects other than ‘Plant Engineering’
have been assessed by the Institution and approved for
membership purposes. Degrees, degree course options,
diplomas, and higher degree course options in plant
engineering are available at certain universities in the UK.
Further guidance on courses and their entry requirements
may be obtained from technical colleges or universities
or from the Institution’s membership department.

Table 2.1 Summary of IPlantE membership requirements

2.6 Registration with the Engineering
Council
An individual engineer’s registration with the Engineering
Council is a further valuable indication of professional
attainment and standing. Royal Charter established the
Engineering Council in 1981 to:

Class of membership

Minimum
age (years)

Minimum academic

qualiﬁcations

Evidence of
competence

Minimum

responsibility

Student Member

Graduate Member

Associate

Associate Member (AMIPlantE)

Member (MIPlantE) (i)

Member (MIPlantE) (ii)

Member (MIPlantE) (iii)

Fellow (FIPlantE) (i)

Fellow (FIPlantE) (ii)

Fellow (FIPlantE) (iii)

16

18

–

21

23

35

26

25

35

35

Engaged in engineering
studies and training
BTEC NC/ND or
HNC/HND or degrees
in EC approved subjects

–

BTEC NC/ND or ONC/D
or CGLI Part II in EC
approved subjects
BTEC HNC/HND or
HNC/D or CGLI FTC in
EC approved subjects
Technical Paper and
Interview
At Membership Panel’s
discretion
EC approved degree
and interview
Technical Paper and
interview
At Membership Panel’s
discretion

Engaged on an EC approved system of
training and experience

Employed in an allied industry or
profession
4 years combined training and experience

4 years combined
training and experience

2 years of responsible
experience

15 years combined
training and experience
8 years combined
training and experience
4 years combined
training and experience
15 years combined
training and experience
15 years combined
training and experience

2 years of responsible
experience
2 years of responsible
experience
2 years in responsible
appointments
2 years in responsible
appointments
2 years in responsible
appointments

1. Promote and develop the science and best practice of

engineering in the UK;

2. Ensure the supply and best use of engineers;
3. Coordinate the activities of the engineering profession.

The Charter empowers The Engineering Council to
establish and maintain a Register of qualiﬁed engineers.
The registrants may, where appropriate, use one of the
following titles and designatory letters:

Chartered Engineer (CEng)
Incorporated Engineer (IEng)
Engineering Technician (Eng Tech)

Each of these three qualiﬁcations is obtained in three
stages. Stage 1 indicates attainment of the required aca-
demic standard, Stage 2 that approved training has been
received and Stage 3 that responsible experience has been
gained. The titles may only be used at Stage 3.

The Institution of Plant Engineers is a Nominated Body
of the Engineering Council (EC) and is thus able to nom-
inate members in appropriate membership grades for EC
registration.

2.7 Registration as a European Engineer
Registration with the European Federation of National
Engineering Associations (FEANI) is now open to UK
to careers in post-
engineers, and may be helpful
1992 Europe. Such registration is available at
two
levels, Group 1 and Group 2. Group 1 is normally
appropriate for engineers having the education, training
and experience to qualify them for the title Chartered
Engineer. Group 2 is approximately appropriate for those
qualiﬁed to Incorporated Engineer level, but at the time
of writing, the matter has not been ﬁnalized. Further
information and FEANI application forms are available
from the IPlantE’s membership department.

As mentioned above, FEANI Group 1 registration is for
those registered as Chartered Engineers. Registration with
FEANI will allow the engineer concerned to use the title
European Engineer. This title has the designatory letters
Eur Ing, which should be used as a preﬁx (for example,
Eur Ing John B. Smith, CEng MIPlantE).

Addresses for further information 2/11

face from day to day. Recent advances in technology,
materials and processes emphasize this need, but with
ever-increasing demands on time, opportunities to attend
full-time courses are few. The plant engineer must there-
fore rely upon a Continuing Education and Training (CET)
program to enable successful updating to take place, thus
enhancing his or her professional development.

The Engineering Council places considerable emphasis
on CET as an essential part of a professional engineer’s
development, anticipating that in due course CET will
form a normal part of an engineer’s career and that such
CET activity will be noted in his or her personal career
record.

To enable those engineers engaged in plant engineer-
ing to look to the future, the Institution of Plant Engi-
neers has formulated a simple procedure for recording
an engineer’s attendance at activities, which contribute to
CET and have been approved by the Institution for that
purpose. Further information may be obtained from the
Institution.

2.9 Addresses for further information

The Institution of Plant Engineers
77 Great Peter Street
London SW1P 2EZ
Telephone 020-7233 2855

Business and Technician Education Council
Central House
Upper Woburn Place
London WC1 0HH
Telephone 020-7388 3288

Scottish Vocational Education Council
Hannover House
24 Douglas Street
Glasgow G2 7NQ
Telephone 0141-248 7900

City and Guilds of London Institute
76 Portland Place
London W1
Telephone 020-7580 3050

2.8 Professional engineering
development
Throughout the professional life of most engineers, there
is a need to acquire new knowledge to enable them to
tackle the technical and managerial problems that they

The Engineering Council
Canberra House
Maltravers Street
London WC2R 3ER
Telephone 020-7249 7891

3

3/13

The Role of the
Plant Engineer

R Keith Mobley
The Plant Performance Group

Contents

3.1 Responsibilities of the plant engineer

3/15

3.1.1 Design and modiﬁcation of production systems and

environmental compliance

3/15

3.1.6 Process troubleshooting and optimization

3/15

auxiliary equipment

3/15

3.1.2 Production system speciﬁcation and selection
3.1.3 Installation and commissioning of plant systems
3.1.4 Operation and maintenance of plant services 3/15
3.1.5 Plant safety, energy conservation, pollution control and

3/15

3/15

3.1 Responsibilities of the plant engineer
The increasing mechanization of industrial installations
has resulted in the use of more complex and costly equip-
ment and this has greatly increased the responsibilities of
the plant engineer. In today’s environment, the plant engi-
neer must have a practical, well-rounded knowledge of the
fundamentals of civil, mechanical, electrical, process and
environmental engineering. In addition, plant engineers
must have a basic knowledge of business management,
statistical analysis, communications and effective super-
vision skills.

The plant engineer by deﬁnition must be a generalist
who has a basic knowledge of all aspects of business.
Because of these expansive skill requirements, the plant
engineer must have the training, experience and expertise
necessary to fulﬁll this critical role in the organization. In
part, a plant engineer is responsible for:
ž Design and modiﬁcation of production systems and
ž Production system speciﬁcation and selection
ž Installation and commissioning of plant systems
ž Operation and maintenance of plant services
ž Plant safety, energy conservation, pollution control and
ž Process troubleshooting and optimization

environmental compliance

auxiliary equipment

3.1.1 Design and modiﬁcation of production
systems and auxiliary equipment

In a traditional organization, the plant engineer is the sin-
gle source of design knowledge. Therefore, he or she is
responsible for all design or redesign of plant systems.
With the increasing complexity of plant systems, the plant
engineer must have a thorough knowledge of machine
design practices (i.e. mechanical, electrical, electronic and
microprocessors).

3.1.2 Production system speciﬁcation
and selection

Plant engineering provides the technical knowledge and
experience needed to properly specify and select new or
replacement production, plant services and maintenance
systems.

3.1.3 Installation and commissioning
of plant systems

Proper installation of new production and plant services
systems is essential for long-term performance of these

Responsibilities of the plant engineer 3/15

systems. The plant engineering function has sole respon-
sibility for assuring proper installation criteria is followed.
In addition, the plant engineer is responsible for testing
newly installed systems to assure that they comply with
procurement and performance speciﬁcations.

3.1.4 Operation and maintenance
of plant services
In traditional organizations, the plant engineer is responsi-
ble for the operation and maintenance of all plant services
(i.e. electric and steam generation, water treatment, waste
treatment, etc.). In locations where these services are pro-
vided by outside sources, the plant engineering function
is responsible for the internal distribution of electricity,
steam and other services and the supervision of the out-
side service provider.

3.1.5 Plant safety, energy conservation,
pollution control and environmental compliance
Generally, the plant engineering function is responsible
for overall plant safety, as well as all compliance issues.
The plant engineer must adapt to the constantly escalat-
ing federal, state and local regulations that govern these
compliance issues.

3.1.6 Process troubleshooting and optimization
Perhaps the most important role of the plant engineer is
process optimization. This function has the sole respon-
sibility for improving the reliability and performance of
production and auxiliary systems.

As a profession, plant engineering is on the decline.
In many plants, this critical function has be discontinued
or replaced with functions that provide part of the role
describe in the preceding paragraph. In part, reliability,
production and maintenance engineers have replaced the
plant engineering function. The loss of single account-
ability that has resulted from the dilution of the plant
engineering function has had a severe, negative impact
on overall plant performance and corporate proﬁtability.
In today’s plant, the plant engineering function has
been reduced to project management, coordination of con-
tractors that provide design, construction, operations and
maintenance of plant facilities. This trend has seriously
diluted the plant’s ability to design, install, operate and
maintain critical production systems. Hopefully, this trend
will be short-lived and more plants will return to tra-
ditional plant engineering functions. This book and the
information it contains is designed to provide the prac-
tical skills required by a fully functional, effective plant
engineering functional group.

4

4/17

Physical
Considerations
in Site Selection

D Whittleton
Ove Arup & Partners, Industrial Division

Contents

4.1 Environmental considerations of valley or hillside sites 4/19

4.1.1 Effect of topography on prevailing winds and

strengths

4/19
4.1.2 Design for wind
4.1.3 Factored basic wind speed approach

4/19

4/19

4.2 Road, rail, sea and air access to industrial sites 4/20

4/20

4.2.1 Introduction
4.2.2 Design considerations
4.2.3 Forms of site access 4/30
4.2.4 Access to the road system 4/21
4.2.5 Selection of sites 4/21
4.2.6 Checklist

4/20

4/21

4.3 Discharge of efﬂuent and general site drainage

4/22

4.3.1 Efﬂuent 4/22
4.3.2 Site drainage

4/22

4.4 Natural water supplies, water authority supplies and the

appropriate negotiating methods and contracts

4/24
4.5 Water storage, settling wells and draw-off regulations

4/27

4.5.1 Water storage
4.5.2 Draw-offs 4/28

4/27

4.6 Problem areas associated with on-site sewage treatment for

isolated areas 4/29
4.6.1 Cesspools
4.6.2 Septic tanks

4/29

4/30

4.7 Landscaping on industrial and reclaimed land

4/30

4.7.1 General 4/30
4.7.2 Contaminated land
4.7.3 Non-contaminated land

4/30

4/32

4.1 Environmental considerations
of valley or hillside sites
4.1.1 Effect of topography on prevailing winds
and strengths

Apart from the obvious inﬂuence of topography in produc-
ing shelter or the enhanced exposure to wind, the inﬂuence
of large topographic features can be sufﬁcient to generate
small-scale weather systems, which are capable of produc-
ing signiﬁcant winds. Three types of wind are associated
with topography: diurnal winds, gravity winds and lee
waves.

Diurnal winds

Under clear skies in daytime the slopes of hills and moun-
tains facing the sun will receive greater solar heating than
the ﬂat ground in valley bottoms. Convection then causes
an up-slope ﬂow, called anabatic wind, which is generally
light and variable but which can often initiate thunder-
storms. At night, the upper slopes lose heat by radiation
faster than the lower slopes and the reverse effect hap-
pens, producing down-slope katabatic winds. However,
the denser cold air falling into the warmer valley can pro-
duce strong winds in a layer near the ground. The higher
the mountains, the stronger are the effects.

Gravity winds

The effect of katabatic winds can be much enhanced if
greater differences in air temperature can be obtained from
external sources. A continuous range of mountains can
act as a barrier to the passage of a dense mass of cold
air as it attempts to displace a warmer air mass. Cold air
accumulates behind the mountain range until it is able
to pour over the top, accelerating under gravity to give
strong winds down the lee slope.

Lee waves

Under certain conditions of atmospheric stability, stand-
ing waves may form in the lee of mountains. This wave
motion is an oscillating exchange of kinetic and poten-
tial energy, excited by normal winds ﬂowing over the
mountain range, which produces alternately accelerated
and retarded ﬂow near the ground. Sustained lee waves at
the maximum amplitude are obtained when the shape of
the mountain matches their wavelength, or when a sec-
ond range occurs at one wavelength downstream. Unusual
cloud formations often indicate the existence of lee waves,
in that they remain stationary with respect to the ground
instead of moving with the wind. These clouds are con-
tinuously forming at their upwind edge as the air rises
above the condensation level in the wave and dissipating
at the downward edge as the air falls again.

Conditions are frequently suitable for the formation
of lee waves over the mountainous regions of the US,
an effect that is routinely exploited by glider pilots to
obtain exceptionally high altitudes. The combination of
lee waves with strong winds that are sufﬁcient to produce
damage to structures is fortunately rare, but do occur in
hazardous mountainous regions.

Environmental considerations of valley or hillside sites 4/19

Other factors

Other factors to account for topography with regard to
valley or hillside sites should include possible inversion
and failure to disperse pollutants. Temperature inversion
occurs when the temperature at a certain layer of the atmo-
sphere stays constant, or even increases with height, as
opposed to decreasing with height, which is the norm for
the lower atmosphere. Inversions may occur on still, clear
nights when the earth and adjacent air cools more rapidly
than the free atmosphere. They may also occur when a
layer of high turbulence causes rapid vertical convection
so that the top of the turbulent layer may be cooler than
the next layer above it at the interface.

The running of a cool airﬂow under a warm wind is
another cause of temperature inversion. As a rule, the
presence of an inversion implies a highly stable atmo-
sphere: one in which vertical air movements is rapidly
damped out. In such a situation, fog and airborne pollu-
tants collect, being unable to move freely or be dissipated
by convection.

Additional dispersal problems may occur when the pre-
vailing wind occurs perpendicular to the valley or hill
ridgeline. This may lead to speed up and turbulence over
the valley or it may simply reduce the effect of airﬂow
carrying away airborne pollutants.

It is possible to obtain wind data from the local or
regional meteorological ofﬁce for almost any location in
the world, although these frequently require modiﬁcation
and interpretation before they can be used.

4.1.2 Design for wind

A structure may be designed to comply with any of the
following information:

1. No speciﬁc details available.
2. Speciﬁed basic wind speed and relevant site data.
3. Speciﬁed design wind speed, with or without FOS.
4. Speciﬁed survival wind speed, with or without FOS.

When details are given they should be checked, if only by
comparison with equivalent wind speeds derived from ﬁrst
principles, to ensure that they are reasonable. Depending
on the speciﬁed requirements, the wind speeds may or
may not utilize gust wind speeds as in CP3 (3) or mean
hourly wind speeds, v, with applied gust factors.

4.1.3 Factored basic wind speed approach

Basic gust wind speed, V, is multiplied by a series of S
factors, which adjust the basic values to design values for
the particular situation. CP3 uses up to four S factors:

S1: Topography factors
S2: Ground roughness, building size and height above

ground factors

S3: Statistical factor
S4: Directional factor

4/20 Physical Considerations in Site Selection

S1 – Topography factors
The effect of local topography is to accelerate the wind
near summits or crests of hills, escarpments or ridges and
decelerate it in valleys or near the foot of steep escarp-
ments or ridges. The extent of this effect on gust wind
speeds is generally conﬁned to mountainous regions, but
may occur in other locations. Local topography is consid-
ered signiﬁcant when the gradient of the upwind slope is
greater than 5 per cent.

The shape of the upwind slope affects the degree of
shelter expected near the foot of the slope when the
slope is shallow and the ﬂow remains attached. When
the changes in slope are sudden, so a single straight line
can approximate that upwind slope for more than two-
thirds of its length, then the shape is sharp. Otherwise
the changes of slope are gradual and the shape is smooth.
This distribution is relevant for sites close to the foot of
the upwind slope, where sharp topography offers a greater
degree of shelter.

S2 – Ground roughness, building size and height
above ground factors

The factor S2 takes account of the combined effect of
ground roughness, the variation of wind speed with height
above ground and the size of the building or component
part under consideration. In conditions of strong wind the
wind speed usually increases with height above ground.
The rate of increase depends on ground roughness and
also on whether short gusts or mean wind speeds are
being considered. This is related to building size that take
account of the fact that small buildings and elements of a
building are more affected by short gusts than are larger
buildings, for which a longer and averaging period is more
appropriate.

S3 – Statistical factor
Factor S3 is based on statistical concepts and can be varied
from 1.0 to account for structures whose probable lives are
shorter (or longer) than is reasonable for the application
of a 50-year return-period wind.

S4 – Directional factor
In the latitudes occupied by the US the climate is dom-
inated by westerly winds. The basic wind speed may be
adjusted to ensure that the risk of it being exceeded is
the same for all directions. This is achieved by the wind
speed factor S4.

When applying S4, topography factor S1 and the terrain
roughness, building size and height above ground factor
S2 should be appropriately assessed for that direction.

4.2 Road, rail, sea and air access
to industrial sites
4.2.1 Introduction

Many industrial processes and factories require speciﬁc
accessibility for one particular form of transport. Examples

of the above include distribution warehousing, transport
operations and those industries dealing with bulk
commodities (e.g. oil reﬁneries). For other industries
access to strategic modal networks is important in order to
be competitive where cost of transport and timesaving are
signiﬁcant factors. Examples of these operations include
air freighting and fresh-food deliveries. A third category
would include those establishments which would require
high-visibility sites to enhance their reputation in the
marketplace.

4.2.2 Design considerations

It is difﬁcult to give speciﬁc advice on this subject, as
there is a very large range of industrial undertakings. The
awareness for, and acceptability of, access is dependent
on the types of goods to be moved and the frequency
and method of movement. In some undertakings there
is a major movement between different transport modes,
which is concentrated either at ports or at major road/rail
interchanges.

In addition to the amount of commercial trafﬁc it is
vital to consider the movement associated with employees
and visitors, which themselves can generate large numbers
of vehicular and pedestrian movements. For very large
manufacturing sites there will also be the need for acces-
sibility for public transport, which, for a large workforce,
may need to be supplemented by investment in subsidized
travel.

Site access will reﬂect

the nature of the existing
local transport system and will need to be designed to
cater for the anticipated future trafﬁc ﬂows associated
with on-site development. At the extreme of the range
this could include a signiﬁcant on-site infrastructure,
potentially involving small bus stations for staff or
private rail sidings for goods heavily committed to
using the rail network. Special consideration might also
need to be given to customs facilities, where operations
include cross-border movements with or without bonding
operations.

4.2.3 Forms of site access

Access to the road network can range from a simple
factory gate or location on a business park to a major
industrial complex requiring its own major grade sepa-
rated interchange due to the high trafﬁc volumes on the
strategic road network. New site developments will need
to cater for future trafﬁc growth and must be adequate to
deal with a design life over the foreseeable future.

total

Access to a seaport will be limited by the ability
of
and the
incorporation of these trafﬁc movements into the local
road system.

trafﬁc generated by the docks

Air trafﬁc access may be constrained by the operational
aspects of the airport. Otherwise, the road-related trafﬁc
will be dealt with in a manner similar to that of seaports,
except that the vehicles are likely to be smaller in size
and of lower trafﬁc volumes, reﬂecting the higher-value
goods being transported by air.

4.2.4 Access to the road system

Before access is obtained to any road it is necessary
to obtain the consent of the relevant highway authority.
Direct access to freeways or limited access highways is
generally prohibited and the policy regarding access to
trunk roads is to minimize the number of accesses and to
encourage the free ﬂow of trafﬁc on these major roads.
Therefore careful consideration needs to be given to the
ability of the proposed access to cover trafﬁc capacity and
road safety adequately. The local town or county coun-
cil is the highway authority, in non-metropolitan areas,
for all other roads, although, in many instances the local
authority may have agency powers for the roads within
its area.

It will be necessary to forecast the amount of trafﬁc
to be generated by the development within the site and
to propose a form of junction that not only deals with
the site’s trafﬁc but also adequately caters for the existing
trafﬁc on the road. Tests for capacity are required and
attention should also be given to the safety of operation
of the proposed access.

As part of the planning approvals it is increasingly
common to provide road-improvement schemes that are
sometimes off-site and are necessary to deal with site-
generated trafﬁc, which has detrimental effects on the
local road network. Generally, these agreements require
the applicant of the proposed site to carry out speciﬁed
highway improvement schemes to an agreed timetable rel-
evant to the planning application.

4.2.5 Selection of sites

Suitable sites are normally limited to those areas designed
in development plans as being for industrial or commer-
cial uses. Such land should be capable of being accessed
directly from the primary or secondary distributor roads
in the area. Segregation of trucks and truck access from
residential areas should be achieved where possible.

The utilization of existing or the provision of new rail-
heads will also be a determining factor for some operators,
and frequently the rail sidings do not have good road
access. In these cases extensive improvement measures
may be necessary to provide adequate space and geomet-
rical requirements.

4.2.6 Checklist

The following list, while not exhaustive, identiﬁes many
of the issues which will need careful consideration. In
many instances it might be necessary to seek the advice
of a specialist trafﬁc consultant, either in the design of
a scheme or in access, or to negotiate with the highway
authority the impact of a proposed development and any
attendant road-improvement schemes.

1. Types of operation to be carried out
ž Number of trucks
ž Staff cars
ž Visitors’ cars

Road, rail, sea and air access to industrial sites 4/21

ž Rail/water/air access
ž Public transport provision
ž Cyclists
ž Pedestrians

2. Types of site
ž Large single site
ž Industrial estate
ž Segregation of access for lorries and cars
ž Capacity of access and need for improvement
ž Ensure no backup of trafﬁc onto highway
ž Ensure sufﬁcient on-site space for all vehicles to enter
ž Ensure off-highway loading/unloading
ž Access for emergency vehicles

highway in forward gear

3. Access arrangements
ž Access width should be a minimum of 20 feet (6.1
meters) to allow trucks to pass each other (25 feet or
7.3 meters is ideal)
ž Single access could cope with up to 250 truck move-
ž Any gate or security barrier to be set in at least 65 feet
(20 meters) from public highway to avoid blockage or
interference to pedestrians
ž Minimum center line radius to be 39 feet (12 meters)
ž Minimum entire live radius to access road to be 197 feet

ments per day

(60 meters). Widening on bends may be required

(21 meters)

(35 meters) long

(26 meters) diameter minimum

4. Maneuvering space
ž Turning circle for articulated vehicles to be 62 feet
ž For draw-bar vehicles this can be reduced to 69 feet
ž Turning head for rigid trucks only needs to be 115 feet
ž Turning head for articulated vehicles should be 174 feet
ž Loading bays at 90° to road should be 102 feet (31 m)
deep including the road width. Bay should be 12 feet
or 3.5 meters wide
ž Strong site management is required to ensure maneu-
vering space is kept clear of storage/goods/debris at all
times

(53 m) long. Curb radii need to be 30 feet (9 m)

ž Headroom clearance

a minimum of
15.25 feet (4.65 m) with careful consideration to ensure
all pipework, etc.
level. Approach
gradients to ﬂat areas will reduce the effective height.

is above that

should be

It is emphasized that the above checklist is not exhaus-
tive. Any reductions in the standards identiﬁed above will
lead to difﬁculty of operation, tire scrub, potential dam-
age to vehicles and buildings, and general inefﬁciency.
Cost effectiveness could also be hindered due to loss
of time caused by blocked-in vehicles. Safety is also a
highly important factor, which should be prominent in
any decision-making.

4/22 Physical Considerations in Site Selection

4.3 Discharge of efﬂuent and general
site drainage
4.3.1 Efﬂuent

The control of drainage and sewerage systems and of
sewage disposal is governed by federal, state, county and
city regulations and varies depending on the speciﬁc area.

Methods of treatment

Two methods of treatment can be considered:

1. On-site treatment and disposal; and
2. Off-site treatment and disposal.

Where on-site treatment is to be undertaken consideration
should be given to the following:

1. Where large volumes of efﬂuents are produced and/or
different types of contaminants, large equipment areas
may be required. Sufﬁcient space must also be allowed
for maintenance and inspection of such equipment.

2. Settlement/storage areas for efﬂuent need to be sized
not just for average ﬂow but also for peak periods.
Where production is based on a shift system, peak
ﬂows created during holiday periods (shutdown, major
maintenance, etc.) should be considered.

3. Where efﬂuents

require primary,

secondary and
possibly additional tertiary treatment, attention should
be paid to the various treatment processes with regard
to personnel safety and public sensitivity to on-site
treatment.

4. Where concentrated alkali and/or acids are stored
and used on-site as part of the treatment process,
care should be exercised to prevent misuse, ﬁre,
and security and health hazards. The provision of
emergency showers, eyewash stations, etc. needs
careful consideration.

5. If equipment malfunctions during the treatment
process, adequate precautions should be taken to
prevent
the discharge of untreated efﬂuent. Such
precautions should be the provision of emergency
collection tasks or the use of approved,
licensed
efﬂuent-disposal traders.

6. Where accidental discharge of untreated efﬂuent does
occur, the appropriate water authority and/or environ-
mental health ofﬁcer should be advised immediately.
All steps should be taken to limit the extent and inten-
sity of any potential contamination.

7. Where small and/or

single contaminant efﬂuents
are encountered, packaged treatment plants may be
acceptable. Consideration should, however, be given to
capital cost, payback period, reliability of equipment,
maintenance, plant-life expectancy and contaminant-
removal efﬁciencies.

8. Pipework material for conveying efﬂuent to treatment
plants should exhibit resilience to corrosive attack by
the efﬂuent as well as scouring and erosion created by
the material content of the efﬂuent.

9. Consideration should be given to plant operation in a
shift system and any requirements for an analyst to be
present during operational/non-operational periods.

10. Precautions must be taken against freezing for exter-
nal pipework, tanks, meters, gauges, and monitoring
equipment.

11. Assessments should be made for electrically operated
process equipment that may require an essential power
supply in the event of a main failure.

12. The quality of the efﬂuent discharge must be regularly
checked. Depending on the quantity and type of dis-
charge, this may require an in-house laboratory and
analysis room.

13. The water authority may limit the quantity of ﬁnal
treated efﬂuent, and monitoring of the ﬁnal out-fall
may have to be considered in conjunction with a hold-
ing tank.

that

quantities

14. Large or small on-site treatment plants will create
sludge concentrates
require disposal. Where
large
of
de-
watering ﬁlters may be considered with dry sludge
cakes properly removed from site by licensed
contractors. Alternatively, small quantities of wet
sludge concentrates may be removed and disposed of
by similar contractors.

on-site

sludge

occur,

Where off-site treatment
should be considered:

is undertaken the following

1. Cost comparison with on-site treatment.
2. Availability of approved, licensed contractors to handle

the type of efﬂuents being considered.

3. Reliability of licensed contractors during emergency,

weekends and holiday periods.

4. Space requirements for holding untreated efﬂuent prior

to removal from site.

5. Accessibility, safety and security associated with
the holding vessels by the vehicles of the licensed
contractors.

6. Suitable pumps may be required to pump from holding

tanks into licensed contractor vehicles.

4.3.2 Site drainage

The discharge of surface water from a site may originate
from three potential sources: rainwater from building(s),
surface-water runoff from paved/hard standing areas and
subsoil drainage (groundwater)

1. The rainwater runoff from buildings depends on the
geographical location and storm-return period speci-
ﬁed. Rainwater runoff from a roof is relatively clean
and can discharge directly to a watercourse, lake, etc.
without passing through an interceptor.

2. The surface water runoff from paved/hard standing
areas also depends on rainfall intensity calculated from
the geographical locations of the site and storm-return
period. However, the return period for a site will be far
higher than for a building in order to ensure prevention
of persistent ﬂooding of the site. In many instances the
local authority may specify the storm-return period as
the design criterion.
Where development of a greenﬁeld site or an extension
to an existing building takes place, the rate of storm water

runoff may necessitate the provision of a balancing pond
or reservoir.

While the drainage design may be able to cater for min-
imal surcharging, any substantial rise in ﬂoodwater can be
contained by the balancing pond and minimize ﬂooding
to the site and damage to plant ecology. Lining of a bal-
ance pond must be considered to prevent water seepage.
Suitable linings are clay or butyl rubber sheeting.

Where potential ﬂooding to the site is minimal an alter-
native to the balance pond could be an open-trench system
that could provide on-site storage and added security to
watercourses.

The open-trench system provides easy maintenance and
may obviate the need for highway curbs and gullies, but
requires adequate security to prevent vehicle collision.
Surface water from hard standing areas subject

to
gasoline and oil contamination (e.g. car parks) must
pass through an interceptor prior
to discharge to a
watercourse, surface-water drain, etc. The sizing of
gasoline/oil interceptors varies between local, state and
regional areas. Many agree that
the ﬁrst 5 minutes
of surface-water runoff is the most contaminated, and
accept a reduced interceptor size, while allowing a
higher ﬂow rate, caused by increased storm intensity,
to bypass the interceptor chamber
(see Figures 4.1
and 4.2).

Surface

Ventilating pipe

Discharge of efﬂuent and general site drainage 4/23

3. Subsoil drainage may be required for the following

reasons:
(a) Seasonal ﬂuctuations in water-table level may
cause isolated ﬂooding. Subsoil drainage may be
considered to keep the water-table level relatively
constant.

(b) Where underground springs occur,

layering of
subsoil drainage may be considered to maintain
water-level equilibrium within the subsoil
to
permit building construction or similar activities.
(c) Draining of permanently ﬂood land such as marsh

or bog land.

Gravity or pumped discharge

surface-water

Wherever practical,
should be
designed for gravity discharge, preferably located at the
lowest part of the site. However, where a gravity system
is impractical or impossible a pumped discharge must be
considered.

runoff

When sizing a pumped discharge the following should

be evaluated:

1. Pumps, valve controls, etc. to be in duplicate;
2. Maximum discharge permitted into watercourse by

water authority;

25

0
3
5

25

0
5
7

25

0
5
7

Section A−A

Inlet pipe

Invert of
inlet

B

0
9
9

0
9
9

A

Outlet
pipe

B

A

900

900

Plan

900

Figure 4.1 Traditional three-chamber gasoline interceptor. (Dimensions are in millimeters.) All pipes within the chambers through which
liquid passes should be of iron or another equally robust petrol-resistant material

4/24 Physical Considerations in Site Selection

Inlet

B

d

60

d

 

C
0
9

Static
water
level

11/2 d

B

Outlet

150

3d

Slot over
full width

11/2 d

Section A−A

Slot

0
0
9

A

Inlet pipe
(dia d)

900

1800

Plan

Battle board
over full width

Outlet pipe
(dia d)

A

d

Figure 4.2 An alternative two-chamber gasoline interceptor. (Ventilation not shown: dimensions are in millimeters)

3. Discharge duty to be twice dry weather ﬂow subject

to (2) above;

4. Will essential power supply be required to both pumps?
5. Space requirements for pumps, including installation,

maintenance and inspection.

150 mm
armour layer or larger
boulders or stone

Figures 4.3–4.7 show edge and bank details for storm-

retention reservoirs.

170 mm

50−100 mm limestone rubble
in gabion mattress

Water level

1:6

0.5 mm 'Fibretex' sheet
30−50 mm overlaps at joints

Subsoil

Section

'Fibretex'
95% polypropylene and 5% polyester
170 g/m2
Laid vertically on slopes

Figure 4.3 Rip-rap bank (Fibretex/stone)

30−75 mm dia.
Crushed stone
100 mm depth

Subsoil

'Terram' 1000
300 m overlap at joints
and sewn or stapled

Figure 4.4 Rip-rap bank (Terram/stone)

4.4 Natural water supplies, water
authority supplies and the appropriate
negotiating methods and contracts
There are three major sources of water supply:

Borehole
Rivers
Service reservoir

Natural water supplies, water authority supplies and the appropriate negotiating methods and contracts 4/25

50−75 mm

400−500 mm

50−75 mm gravel
Piles: 75 × 75 mm, 1000 mm long,
          elm teak or greenheart

Timber piles

Section

Figure 4.5 Piling margin

Roughsawn wale
100 × 150 mm on tangents
  50 × 150 mm on curves

200 mm

Fill

25 mm dia.
tieback rod

Anchor

300 mm

0.25 m of 50 mm gravel
per linear 300 mm of wall

Section

Piles: Red pine, pressure
          treated, 200 mm
          diameter  

6°
(1:10)

Figure 4.6 Piling edge

Three No. 8 × 200
staked timbers

80 × 200 timbers, butt jointed,
elm or greenheart

Gravel or hoggin
on hardcore

100 × 200
timber wale

Concrete on
hardcore base

Concrete
anchor

Three No.
80 × 200
staked
timbers

Figure 4.7 Board wall/path

The majority of water supplies are provided from a com-
bination of all three.

A wide variety of federal regulations as well as state
and local laws govern the supply of water to domestic and
industrial premises. Within these are included the statutory
undertakings for preventing waste, undue consumption,
misuse and contamination of water supplied by the various
authorities.

Having established the respective local regional water
authority and water company, the following is a list of
information that the water authority will require to assess
a consumer’s needs:

1. Project name
2. Site address
3. Building size (m2)
4. Number of occupants

use/tenancy

and anticipated multiple

5. Building usage
6. Point of supply connection – height above ground
7. Anticipated ﬂow rated for the following uses:

(Note: Flow rates should include average and maximum
demands and the periods throughout the year during which
supplies are required.)
8. Cold water storage volume

(a) Domestic
(b) Industrial
(c) Fire

(a) Domestic
(b) Industrial
(c) Fire

Once the water authority has established that a water
supply is available, the consumer should obtain the fol-
lowing information:

1. Copy of water authority bylaws.
2. Marked-up layout drawing indicating location, size,
depth and maximum and minimum pressure of the
main in the vicinity of the site.

3. An indication of which mains may be considered for:

a. Domestic use
b. Industrial use
c. Fire use

4. Conﬁrmation as to whether the water main passes
through any adjacent property which may involve
easements to gain access for maintenance, etc.

5. Conﬁrmation as to whether the water ﬂows and pressure
will be affected by usage from adjacent buildings. The
average roof should have a duration/runoff time not
exceeding two minutes. Periods of greater duration are
shown for information and completeness only.

6. Conﬁrmation as to whether a guarantee of security of
supply can be provided throughout the year, including
any anticipated periods of drought.

7. Conﬁrmation of the source(s) of water supplies and

provision of a current water analysis.

8. Conﬁrmation that the authority will supply the water

meter and housing.

9. Conﬁrmation of the authority’s preferred pipe mate-
rial for incoming mains and any materials not recom-
mended due to aggressive soil.

4/26 Physical Considerations in Site Selection

A

B

Strabane

C

C

D

Armagh

Belfast

C

D

A

Thurso

A

Ullapool

B

B

Inverness

Mallaig

B

Aberdeen

B

C

A

Oban

B

B

Ayr

C

Glasgow Edinburgh

Dundee
B C
D

Berwick

C

C

Moffat

Carlisle

Newcastle

C

D

Kendal

Whitby

D

E

Bangor

F

Leeds

Manchester

E

Derby

E

Grimsby

F

King's Lynn

F

G

Aberystwyth

D

Fishguard

D

C

Brecon

Cardiff

Bristol

Minehead
E

Exeter

Dorchester

D

Plymouth
D

Birmingham

F

E

F

Cambridge Ipswich

Oxford

London
F

F

Southend

Salisbury

Brighton

Dover

Hastings

E

F

Figure 4.8 Key to rainfall tables

10. Conﬁrmation that direct mains boosting is allowed.
11. Provision of rates of charges (depending on annual

consumption),

12. Conﬁrmation of costs of maintenance and metering

charges.

13. Provision of details relating to any future authority

plans that may affect supplies to the site.

14. Conﬁrmation of total capital cost of supplying a water

supply.

15. Provision of a ﬁxed time-frame installation program.
While the above list is not exhaustive, it provides an
indication of the necessary negotiated issues to be resolved
between a consumer (or their representative) and the water
authority.

4.5 Water storage, settling wells and
draw-off regulations
4.5.1 Water storage

Care must be taken when assessing water storage, as some
water authorities have special powers to restrict total water
storage retained for a given building and/or site. Early
consultation with the appropriate water authorities is also
recommended when large volumes of water storage/usage
are anticipated, especially if heavy demand is required for
industrial purposes.

The necessity of water storage may be outlined as

follows:

1. To protect against interruption of the supply caused by

burst main or repair to mains, etc.;

2. To reduce the maximum of demand on the mains;

Water storage, settling wells and draw-off regulations 4/27

3. To limit the pressure on the distribution system, so
reducing noise and waste of water due to high-pressure
mains and enabling higher-gauge and cheaper material
to be used;

4. To provide a reserve of water for ﬁreﬁghting purposes;
5. Additional protection of the mains from contamination,

i.e. prevention against back siphonage.

In designing the water storage capacity, account should
be taken of the pattern of water usage for the premises
and, where possible, to assess the likely frequency and
duration of breakdown from the water authority mains.
When dealing with domestic water storage, this is usually
provided to meet a 24-hour demand.

However, to apply the same philosophy to industrial
buildings would be incorrect, and due consideration must
be given to the effect of loss of water supply to the pro-
cess/manufacturing production.

Note:  Concrete surround

100 mm deep × 380 mm sq
In verges and fields

 

m
m
0
9
1

s
e
i
r
a
V

Packing

C.I. valve box (base 210 mm sq)
to fit pre-cast section

Pre-cast concrete adaptor unit
130 mm × 130 mm to
180 mm × 180 mm int. diam

Pre-cast concrete
intermediate sections
internal measurement 
180 mm × 180 mm

Figure 4.9 Standard pipe installations for water sluice valve up to 10 inches or 250 millimeter diameter. Notes: (1) If a valve extension
spindle is required, a galvanized centering support must be provided. (2) Flanged valves with appropriate adapters must be used.
(3) Unless otherwise directed, pre-cast concrete units shall be bedded on well-compacted granular material Type A brought up from the
base of the trench

4/28 Physical Considerations in Site Selection

When assessing water storage the following should be

considered:

1. Where there is a requirement for large volumes of
water, storage may be sized on quantity of usage per
shift;

2. Frequency of interruption to mains supply;
3. Space requirements;
4. Cost of water storage tank and associated supports;
5. Protection against frost;
6. Type of industrial usage and effect of loss of water

supply to production;

7. Minimizing the risk of Legionnaires’ disease.

4.5.2 Draw-offs

In the US, maximum draw-off from water mains differs
throughout
the various water authorities. What may

i

i

m
u
m
n
M
m
m
0
6
7

 

 

 

m
m
0
7
6

be acceptable in one area may not be acceptable in
another. Water mains may generally be able to supply
directly to domestic buildings but not industrial premises,
where constant ﬂow and negligible ﬂuctuation in pressure
is required. Contamination of water supply by back
siphonage is of major concern to water authorities.

Water consumption for commercial and industrial
premises are metered and priced per cubic meter or
gallons of usage basis, with additional costs for reading
and maintenance of the meter station(s). It is important
that assessment of water usage is as accurate as possible,
as water charges are based on a sliding scale, i.e. as
volume of water usage increases, cost per unit decreases.
Where production in new premises is to be phased with
peak usage only being attained after a period of years it is
important to consider this during initial discussions with
the relevant water authority when negotiating unit rate
costs. See Figures 4.9–4.17.

C.I. surface box
clear opening
610 mm × 460 mm
× 150 mm

Packing

Pre-cast concrete
Intermediate
Sections

Internal measurement
610 mm × 460 mm
× 100 mm

Air valve to be set within 150 mm of cover

Figure 4.10 Standard pipe installations for a double air valve. Note:Unless otherwise directed, pre-cast concrete units shall be bedded
on well-compacted granular material Type A brought up from the base of the trench.

Problem areas associated with on-site sewage treatment for isolated areas 4/29

 

m
m
0
8
4

C.l. Cover (Clear Opening 380 mm ×
230 mm) × 100 mm Deep.

75 mm

150 mm

150 mm

Pre-cast concrete
intermediate sections
internal measurement
430 mm × 280 mm

Support strap (to be
at right angle to head
of plug cock.)

Stop cock

10  S.W.G. copper tube

Stop cock
only required if air valve
some distance from main

Figure 4.11 Standard pipe installations for a single air valve. Note:Unless otherwise directed, pre-cast concrete units shall be bedded on
well-compacted granular material Type A brought up from the base of the trench

Air valve to be set within 150 mm of cover.

4.6 Problem areas associated with
on-site sewage treatment for isolated
areas

premises between disposals by tank vehicles(s). The fol-
lowing points should be noted when considering the use
of a cesspool:

The output of a foul-water drainage system should dis-
charge into a foul-water or combined drainage system
(foul and surface water). Where such a drainage system
is not conveniently available and cannot economically
be extended to a site, other methods of foul-water dis-
posal will be necessary, either a cesspool or a septic
tank.

4.6.1 Cesspools

A cesspool is a tank normally located underground that is
designed to store the entire foul drainage discharge from

1. Minimum capacity of 18 cubic meters (m3) measured
below the level of the inlet (or as equivalent to approx-
imately 45 days’ capacity);

2. It must be covered and impervious to rainwater,

groundwater and leakage;

3. It must be ventilated;
4. It must be positioned such as not to pollute any water

sources or cause a public nuisance;

5. It must be sited so that the contents may be removed
other than through a building, with reasonable access
for tanker vehicles where required;

6. Its position should also be considered relative to future

sewerage systems.

4/30 Physical Considerations in Site Selection

Cesspools should only be utilized in extremely remote
areas and after consideration of all other forms of efﬂuent
disposal has been undertaken.

4.6.2 Septic tanks

A septic tank is a puriﬁcation installation designed to
accept the whole sewage/trade discharge from premises.
Its construction is such that it allows the settling out

(Optional)

of the sludge content of the incoming efﬂuent and ren-
ders the ﬁnal efﬂuent acceptable, by prior agreement with
the water authority, for discharge to a watercourse or
drainage area. The sludge within the septic tank decreases
in volume by the action of microorganisms changing the
sludge from aerobic to anaerobic.

The following points should be noted when considering

the use of a septic tank:

1. It should be impervious to rainwater, groundwater and

leakage;

2. It must be positioned such that a tanker vehicle may

periodically remove the contents;

3. Percolation ﬁlter and/or sub-surface irrigation may be

required to provide aeration and ﬁnal puriﬁcation;

4. The change of bacterial action from aerobic to anaer-
obic produces methane gas that must be ventilated to
atmosphere;

5. Its position should also be considered relative to future

sewerage systems;

6. Minimum capacity of 2700 l to be provided. Subject
to local authority approval, the efﬂuent output from
a septic tank may be connected to an adopted sewer
subject to quality of output and size and location of
drainage.

Detachable joint

S.V

Bypass

4.7.1 General

4.7 Landscaping on industrial and
reclaimed land

Detachable joint

S.V

S.V

In the context of overall landscaping, here we will concen-
trate on what is normally recognized as soft landscaping,
i.e. that area which includes waterbodies and growing
plants. The primary problems that have to be solved in
any scheme for creating a new growing, living landscape
out of a reclaimed land, are:

1. Contamination in the ground. (There may be contam-
ination in the air, but this is beyond the scope of this
chapter.)

2. Soil structure and land drainage within the reclaimed

ground.

Swabbing point
(optional)

Figure 4.12 Standard bulk meter layout for a brick-built chamber
(230 mm brickwork on a concrete base). Notes:(1) the ﬂowmeter
should be either on straight or bypass to suit speciﬁc site (i.e. to
keep meter off road). (2) Chamber cover should be approximately
685 mm ð 510 mm

4.7.2 Contaminated land

It is not unusual for industrial land or land formed from
tipped waste to be contaminated to some degree. Heavy
contamination will have to be dealt with as a particular
engineering problem, i.e. by sealing, burying or removing
any highly contaminated material. Moderate contamina-
tion can normally be dealt with in situ by dilution of
the concentrated contaminant. Whatever treatment is uti-
lized, steps must be taken to prevent the leaching of any
contaminants through the soil.

As far as the effects of contamination are concerned,
the main problems associated with harm to plant growth

Landscaping on industrial and reclaimed land 4/31

C.I. surface box

    Clear opening 380 mm × 230 mm
  × 100 mm deep

75 mm

 

m
m
5
3
6

(Light or heavy duty)

Pre-cast concrete
intermediate sections
internal measurements
430 mm × 280 mm

150 mm

150 mm

150 mm

Figure 4.13 Standard pipe installations for a ﬁre hydrant. Notes:(1) Hydrant Tee must be appropriate to type of main installed. (2) Depth
of hydrant outlet must not exceed 300 mm below ﬁnished ground level. (3) Unless otherwise directed, pre-cast concrete units shall be
bedded on well-compacted granular material Type A brought up from the base of the trench

are the presence of particular heavy metals. These are
poisonous to plant life and/or lack of oxygen in the soil
growing medium due to the presence of gases produced
by the contaminated ground (for example, methane). Lack
of oxygen can also be the result of a poor soil structure,
over-compaction (no air voids), etc.

The Environmental Protection Agency sets guidelines
for safe limits to heavy metals content
in the soil
for reasons of both public and plant health. Before
planting regimes are implemented in any reclaimed
ground these heavy metal levels must be assessed and,
if high, reduced. Acidic or alkaline soil also will need
neutralizing and the type of proposed planting chosen for
the soil type.

As indicated earlier, heavy contamination can be buried,
sealed or removed. Burying of the material should be well
below the root growth zone, and this is normally taken as
3.0 m below the ﬁnal ground-surface level. Sealing for
heavy contamination to prevent vertical or lateral leach-
ing through groundwater ﬂow can be with compacted clay
or proprietary plastic membranes. Removal from site of
the contaminants is normally only contemplated in a land-
scaped scheme where the material, even at depth, could
be a hazard to public health directly or phytotoxic to
plant life.

Where there is a landﬁll gas-generation problem, active
(i.e. pumped) or passive venting, by way of stone-ﬁlled
trenches at least 3 feet deep, may be needed. Where active

4/32 Physical Considerations in Site Selection

m
m
 
0
8

x
o
r
p
p
A

 
 

m
m
 
0
8
6

d
r
a
d
n
a
t
S

 
 

m
m
 
0
6
7

C.I. surface box
in concrete surround

Packing

150 mm

150 mm

150 mm

Pre-cast concrete
intermediate sections
internal measurement
1300 mm × 130 mm

Pre-cast concrete
wall unit
with slots for pipes
(230 mm deep)
internal measurement
1300 mm × 130 mm

Figure 4.14 Standard pipe installations for a communication pipe stopcock. (It may be necessary to provide a base unit where polyethylene
is being used)

venting is appropriate, the commercial use of the gas
extracted can be considered.

Contaminated groundwater (leachate) should be kept
below the root growth zone. Only rainwater or clean irri-
gation water should meet the needs of plants.

Any waterbodies constructed on the contaminated
land which are to support aquatic life will need to be
completely sealed against the underlying ground and inlet
and outlet water provisions designed so that they are
sealed against any ﬂow of contaminated water into the
waterbody.

As a general rule, young, immature plants should be
chosen for any landscape-planting scheme on reclaimed,
previously contaminated, land. This allows the plants to
adapt gradually to such an environment. It is not normally
appropriate to plant mature shrubs and trees to create an
instant mature landscape in such an environment.

4.7.3 Non-contaminated land

For land that is reclaimed with inert or non-contaminated
materials the main problem in creating a good growing
medium tends to be in producing a soil structure proﬁle
within a limited period of time. A good proﬁle will
provide an oxygen- and nutrient-rich soil, not too acid or
alkaline, which is well drained. Any reclamation project
should aim to supply this ideal environment as soon
as possible. To do this, a clear and ﬁrm speciﬁcation
for the reclamation material and how it is to be placed
will be needed at
the beginning. Extensive drainage
with both the landform and the subsoil will also be
required.

Imported topsoil or topsoil manufactured from imported
nutrients mixed into existing soil will normally be
required. Topsoil depths will vary in accordance with

Landscaping on industrial and reclaimed land 4/33

88 mm

13 mm weathering

25 mm

6 mm diam. bolt holes

224 mm
184 mm
150 mm

75 mm

m
m
0
2

 

 

m
m
0
1
2

m
m
5
4

 

m
m
0
2

 

W

A

T

E

R

 

m
m
0
6
7

 

m
m
5
0
3

 

m
m
0
5
2

 

m
m
0
1
2

 

m
m
0
5
1

Relief lettering formed in
concrete flush with face
of post

'SEWAGE'. where applicable

28 mm

44 mm

28 mm

100 mm

 

m
m
6
0
1

G.L.

2 No. 10 mm dia M.S.
reinforcing bars

13 mm weathering
45 mm

305 mm

 

m
m
0
1
6

 

m
m
5
0
3

75 mm

200 mm

Indicator post

W

W

100 mm

A

T

E

R

A

T

E

R

1 No 10 mm dia M.S.
reinforcing bar

6 mm chamfers

G.L.

75 mm

100 mm

W

A

T

E

R

Relief lettering
formed in concrete
flush with face of
post

'SEWER' where
applicable

397 mm

760 mm

G.L.

G.L.

Figure 4.15 Pre-cast concrete indicator and marker posts

610 mm

Fence or wall marker post

4/34 Physical Considerations in Site Selection

Ground level

Cast iron cover to
BS 750 with 216 × 495
clear opening 150 mm
deep, bedded and
haunched to brickwork

Class B engineering
brick, internal
dimensions 675 × 338

i

 

n
m
0
0
0
1

First three courses
to be laid in sand

100 mm ductile iron
fire main to  BS 4772

100 mm HD
polythene
fire main to BS

Polythene/ductile
iron coupling

600 × 450 clear opening
cover as BS 497

(a)

Ground level

Class B engineering
brick

i

 

n
m
0
0
8

the planting, from 16 inches (400 mm) for grassed areas
to 5 feet
these
conditions instant, mature landscapes can be constructed
immediately.

trees. Under

(1.5 meters)

for major

In any scheme for creating a landscape on reclaimed
land the ultimate aim will be not only to create a green
landscape but also to provide an environment in which the
ecosystem will develop quickly. Some important factors
that must be taken into account here are:

1. Early structural planting to provide windbreaks and

shelter for younger plants and wildlife to develop.

2. A balanced landscape needs waterbodies. These should
be designed to have shallow margins to provide the
appropriate conditions for wetland planting which, in
turn, provide the balanced habitats for a rich wetland
ecosystem.

3. A properly designed planting regime away from the
water bodies will provide cover, space and the natural
habitats for a wider wildlife system.

4. It is not normally necessary to seed waterbodies with
ﬁsh. Fish will be introduced by natural means (e.g. by
aquatic bird life).

Mains water service

(b)

Figure 4.16 (a) Fire hydrant pit; (b) stop-valve pit. Note: To each
ﬁre hydrant an indicator plate with post must be provided and
installed

Finally, in any projected landscape due consideration
should be given to the future maintenance of the com-
pleted scheme. Unlike a normal building development, a
landscape progressively develops with time. In order to
maintain the original design concept a clear maintenance
regime and organization should be established early in
the project development process to start as soon as the
landscape has been initially established.

5

Plant Location

Barry Holmes
W. S. Atkins Consultants Ltd

Contents

5.1 Selecting the location

5/37

5/37

5.1.1 Factor costs
5.1.2 Protected markets and economies of scale
5.1.3 Government inﬂuences
5.1.4 Corporate matters 5/38
5.1.5 People matters 5/38

5/37

5/35

5/37

5.2 Services 5/38

5.2.1 Availability of water
5.2.2 Trade efﬂuent disposal
5.2.3 Electricity 5/40
5.3 Ecology and pollution

5/40

5/38

5/39

5/40

5.3.1 Introduction
5.3.2 Baseline studies and modeling
5.3.3 Environmental standards
5/41
5.3.4 Environmental assessment 5/41
5.3.5 Resource planning
5.3.6 Environmental management 5/42

5/41

5/40

Notes

5/42

5.1 Selecting the location
Location is a strategic issue, and the decision where to
locate cannot be taken lightly. It is the ﬁrst decision in
the implementation of a project. Upon the decision to pro-
ceed, an investment is made which is irreversible. That
investment in bricks and mortar cannot physically be
transferred to another location if the decision turns out to
be wrong. In time, the assets may be realized but probably
at much lower values than paid.

Traditionally, companies have sought to acquire com-
petitive advantage over their rivals through their choice of
location. In a historical context, ﬁrms tended to establish
their factories for reasons of economic geography, e.g.:

1. Proximity to raw material source
2. Proximity to relatively cheap and abundant energy
3. Availability of relatively inexpensive manpower or spe-

4. Good transport

links with materials suppliers and

cialist skills

markets.

In more recent times the location decision has been

inﬂuenced by government intervention, e.g.:

1. High tariff duties imposed on imports which encourage
exporters to that country to consider setting up local
operations

2. Investment incentives in the form of tax relief and

grants

3. The provision of infrastructure, especially improved

transport communication.

In today’s world the decision is more complex. Mar-
kets are more sophisticated, skills can be in short supply,
technological change can soon outdate newly installed
processes, and there has been a phenomenal revolution
in communications, both in terms of the physical move-
ment of goods and people and of information around the
world. As a consequence, companies often have to con-
sider a wide number of options, and the eventual decision
is based on optimizing the perceived net beneﬁts.

The following are the key factors in selecting a location,

and these are discussed in more detail below:

1. Protected markets and economies of scale
2. Government inﬂuences
3. Corporate matters
4. People matters

Selecting the location 5/37

2. Where considerable quantities of energy are used in
the process, relatively cheap and abundant sources of
energy need to be available (for example, alumina and
aluminum smelting, steel making).

3. Where the process is a labor intensive, low-cost work-
ers are required in numbers (for example, textiles and
clothing). The cost of capital has little effect on the
choice of location as capital sources can be from any-
where. The ability, however, to repatriate proﬁts and
the proceeds from the sales of assets and exposure
to foreign exchange risk are important if the location
options are abroad. This factor becomes more relevant,
the greater the capital intensity of the project.

Associated with factor costs are linkages with material
suppliers, subcontractors and support services (e.g. tem-
porary stafﬁng agencies, travel agents, reference libraries,
and ofﬁce maintenance services). The availability and cost
of these factors need to be considered.

5.1.2 Protected markets and economies of scale

All markets are protected to some extent. Domestic
suppliers have, at times, the natural protection of lower
transportation costs, a greater understanding of the local
marketplace through its experience and knowledge of
social customs and culture, and an easier ability to respond
to domestic customer requirements. Added to this, tariff
duties may have to be paid on imports.

Where products are demanded in volume, process tech-
nologies have been developed to minimize unit costs. The
concept of the minimum economic scale of plant (MES:
sometimes referred to as minimum efﬁcient size) is the
point beyond which increases in scale do not signiﬁcantly
reduce unit costs.

Where domestic markets are large enough, companies
can establish MES plants or larger. When they are not,
several alternatives need to be assessed, namely:

1. Setting up a plant of sub-optimal size to serve the local
market based on the premise that the higher unit costs
can be offset against factor cost advantages and the
protection that the market affords the local producer.
2. Establishing a MES plant and seeking export opportu-

nities.

3. Supplying, or continuing to supply, the local market

from a MES plant established abroad.

5.1.1 Factor costs

All other things being equal, the company will site its
plant where it is cheapest to manufacture. This is deter-
mined by the nature of the product and of the manufac-
turing process. For instance:

1. Where the process discards signiﬁcant quantities of
raw material (especially if it is bulky), the economics
favor locations close to sources of the raw material (for
example, sugar milling, cotton ginning, the processing
of non-precious minerals).

5.1.3 Government inﬂuences

(local,

state and
As already indicated government
national) try to attract inward manufacturing investment
in various ways. For example, in the 1950s, 1960s and
1970s, this was largely developed behind high tariff duties
on imports. Countries to adopt protectionist policies use
infant-industry arguments, but companies must expect
eventual pressures to grow up and face open market
competition. With trends for countries to join economic
unions such as entrance of Spain, Portugal and Greece
into the EC, the advantages of tariff protection cannot
always be guaranteed.

5/38 Plant Location

Local and regional governments are frequently involved
in the promotion of their areas. In some places, parti-
cularly in Western developed countries, they are able
to provide useful information on their locality, covering
available sites, rents, land prices and details on transport
communications. These bodies can be very effective in
helping to ﬁnalize choice.

Governments often offer monetary incentives

prospective manufacturing investors. The
inducements offered are:

to
types of

1. Tax-free holidays; periods of possibly 3 to 15 years of
no tax liability on proﬁts (this also can apply to local,
property or any other tax normally imposed on a ﬁrm);
2. Deferred tax allowances; where capital and operating
costs in early loss-making years can be offset against
proﬁts later;

3. Liberation from payment of import duties on capital

plant and equipment, and on materials;

4. Capital grants and/or low-cost loans for the purchase

of plant and equipment;

5. Liberal depreciation allowances;
6. Training grants and/or facilities; to assist towards the

cost of acquiring a suitably skilled workforce;

7. The provision of land and services at zero or nominal
prices (these sometimes extend to factory units and
accommodation for senior management staff);

8. The provision of free zones, usually in port locations,
where goods can be imported duty free, processed and
the bulk (if not all) exported.

Although many of these incentives are generally limited
to the poorest regions of the country, where natural eco-
nomic advantages to meet present-day opportunities are
few, they are also widespread in developing countries.

Investment

is more easily attracted to areas with
adequate infrastructure. Governments encourage inward
investment through the provision of industrial estates,
ready for
sometimes with standard factory units
occupation; energy and water supply;
roads suitable
to withstand heavy vehicle trafﬁc; other means of
transport, airports, seaports, railways; and waste-disposal
facilities. Progressive government departments concerned
with industrial development make available a wide range
of information about their areas, including local services,
amenities, housing and education.

When locating in a foreign country the national govern-
ment may insist on a certain level of local content being
achieved in a given period of time. This requirement,
which is often subject to negotiation, can involve the com-
pany in a signiﬁcant amount of administrative work in
order to demonstrate that the conditions are being ful-
ﬁlled. In addition, local content schemes invariably mean
higher costs of production.

5.1.4 Corporate matters

The opportunity cost of senior management time is high,
and new projects usually take up a disproportionate
amount of senior management time. This may be the
critical factor in choosing between the best candidates in
the last round of selection.

factor

critical

Another

could be

image. High-
technology companies like to reinforce their image by
having addresses that are synonymous with education and
science. Others may want to associate themselves with an
area traditional for high-quality manufacturing or research
and development such as in the pharmaceutical industry,
which is concentrated in Switzerland.

5.1.5 People matters

A prospective location may appear to be right in all other
respects but fails because of the manpower resource. This
refers to not only the economic aspects such as the avail-
ability of labor and skills but also to the qualitative ones
of being able to understand the local culture and customs,
appreciation of people’s attitudes and values. It also refers
to the conﬁdence in the ability to blend these with the cul-
ture and aspirations of the company to form a cohesive
production unit that will work. A successful processing
concept in one cultural environment may not be a success
in another.

Japanese investors in overseas manufacturing opera-
tions have been careful in their approach as well as in
their choice of location. It is notable that the United States
has received more than its share of Japanese investment
in terms of population. An important factor here is lan-
guage, as English is the most commonly spoken foreign
language in Japan.

Stability of labor relations is an important criterion for
location selection. The Japanese have negotiated single-
union plants and no-strike deals with trade unions to try
to ensure such stability.

Probably the ultimate factor behind the choice of loca-
tion is the inﬂuence key personnel can bring to bear on
the decision. Project success largely depends on people,
especially those at the top. With limited options on the
person and/or team to lead the project’s implementation,
their location preference could be ﬁnal.

5.2 Services
5.2.1 Availability of water

A water supply is an essential service for all manufactur-
ing and process industries for domestic, cooling or process
use. The signiﬁcance of a water resource on the location
of an industrial plant is essentially cost and security of
supply. Certain industries (e.g. beer and mineral water
production) may consider a water supply with particu-
lar chemical characteristics as essential to their location.
Water supply costs are related directly to quantity but can
rise almost exponentially in relation to quality. There-
fore, subject to other commercial considerations, there
is an advantage to industries that use large volumes of
relatively low-quality water for process or cooling (e.g.
paper and pulp, textiles, chemicals and steel) to locate
in areas where surface or groundwater may be exploited.
Their need for higher-quality water is met from the pub-
lic metered supply or from on-site treatment facilities. For
the majority of industries, however, water supply is not a
prime consideration in plant location.

Traditionally, their demand for water is met from the
public metered supply supplemented, where appropriate
to availability and quality for use, by surface or ground-
water. Nevertheless, the cost of water provided by water
companies varies signiﬁcantly. Recent legislation and reg-
ulations will undoubtedly increase substantially the cost
of public water supplies and also the cost differences
between the water companies.

In addition to varying in costs, the chemical compo-
sition of the water provided from the mains supply also
varies between the water companies, as may that between
independent supplies within each company’s area. The
current criterion on potable water quality requires it to be
wholesome; i.e. it should not create a health hazard, with
relatively wide limits on particular constituents. The cost
of removing these constituents (e.g. calcium, magnesium,
chlorides, iron and silica) increases with concentration and
variability. This imposes a cost burden on, for example,
the semiconductor and electronic component industries
and on the operation of high-pressure boilers. Therefore
both the potential cost of metered water supply and the
chemical composition of the supply waters may inﬂuence
future decisions on the water company’s area in which an
industry may wish to locate.

The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and other
federal, state and local authorities govern security of sup-
ply in relation to quantity for surface and groundwater by
the granting of an abstraction license. The license limits
the total daily quantity and the rate at which the waters
may be abstracted, taking account of the natural resource
and the needs of other abstractors. Metered water supply
is subject to contract with the water companies, who may
impose quantity and draw-off rate limitations. The limi-
tations imposed by the license or contract may inﬂuence
plant location.

With regard to surface-water abstraction the following

additional points are worth noting:

1. The

of

character

surface waters

change
signiﬁcantly and rapidly throughout the year, and any
process or cooling-water system should be designed
accordingly.

can

2. The higher the quality of the surface waters provid-
ing the supply, the more stringent will be the treated
wastewater discharge consent standards imposed by the
NRA on efﬂuents returned to the surface waters.

5.2.2 Trade efﬂuent disposal

It will be seen from Section 5.2.1 above that industry is an
intensive user of water. Almost all of this water produces
a wastewater, requiring being disposed as either domestic
waste or trading efﬂuent. The water companies invariably
discharge domestic wastewater to the municipal sewers
for treatment at the municipal sewage-treatment facilities.
The cost of this service is currently generally incorporated
into the rating system, with the water companies using the
rating authorities as an agent.

Trade efﬂuents may be discharged to the municipal
sewers, to surface waters or on or into the land. Discharges
to surface waters, including estuaries and coastal waters,
or into the land, are controlled by means of Consents to

Services 5/39

Discharge with the EPA and Agreements with the water
companies. Discharges to controlled landﬁll sites are by
agreement with the local waste disposal authority. In all
cases the Consents and Agreements will impose condi-
tions on the quantity, rate of discharge and chemical com-
position of the trade efﬂuents acceptable for discharge.

The quantity, rate of discharge and chemical constituent
limits incorporated into the Consents and Agreements for
surface-water discharges are set by the EPA to prevent
pollution and to meet the river quality objectives of the
receiving waters. Limits on land discharges are set to pro-
tect groundwater aquifers. Currently, limits are imposed
on organics, suspended solids, ammonia, toxic metals,
pH and temperature in the trade efﬂuent discharges. The
actual limits on each of these constituents take account
of available dilution, the surface or groundwater use and
the impact of other dischargers. The limits can therefore
vary signiﬁcantly between discharge locations. Neverthe-
less, the constraints imposed by the EPA on discharges
to surface waters and to land are generally considerably
more stringent than those imposed by the water compa-
nies on sewer discharges. Impending and future directives
on environmental protection and drinking water standards
may not only reduce the constituent acceptance limits but
also extend the list of constituents constrained. At present
the EPA does not levy a charge on the discharge of trade
efﬂuents to surface waters or to land.

Disposal of industrial efﬂuents to controlled landﬁll
sites is generally conﬁned to slurries and sludge. The
quantity and composition of the wastes acceptable for dis-
posal is controlled by licenses issued by the waste disposal
authority.

The quantity, rate of discharge and chemical constituent
limits incorporated into the Consents and Agreements for
discharges to the sewerage systems are set by the water
companies to protect the health of sewer and treatment
plant personnel, the fabric of the sewers and the opera-
tion of sewage-treatment processes. The constraints take
account of the hydraulic capacity of the sewers and the
treatment works, the organic and solids-handling capac-
ity of the treatment works the ultimate disposal route
for sewage sludge and the needs of other trade efﬂu-
ent dischargers. In addition to limiting the concentration
of speciﬁc constituents, including those mentioned for
surface-water discharges, materials, which could be dan-
gerous to the health of sewer workers, are prohibited from
discharges.

Municipal sewage-treatment efﬂuents discharge to sur-
face waters and is subject to the same EPA control on
quality and quantity as independent industrial surface-
water discharges. Any tightening of EPA standards may
therefore result in more stringent controls on industrial
efﬂuents discharged to sewers. All the water companies
levy charges on industry for the reception, conveyance
and treatment of the industrial efﬂuents.

The signiﬁcance of these industrial efﬂuent disposal
options on the location of an industrial plant is essen-
tially cost. As previously stated, the EPA does not, as
yet, impose a cost on efﬂuents complying with the Con-
sent standards discharged to surface waters or to land.
However, the cost of installing and operating treatment

5/40 Plant Location

facilities, including sludge removal, to achieve and main-
tain the Consent standards can be considerable. The cost
of treatment escalates signiﬁcantly with increasingly strin-
gent treated efﬂuent standards. The actual cost of this
disposal route will, of course, depend on the quantity
and character of wastewater generated by a particular
industry in addition to the treated efﬂuent standards to be
met. The conditions imposed in the Consents to Discharge
could therefore inﬂuence the location of an industrial plant
adopting a surface-water or land-disposal route for its
efﬂuents.

In addition to the treatment costs, it should be remem-
bered that provision of treatment plant occupies site space,
which may be more proﬁtably used, and that the penalties
for infringements of the consent standards are increasing.
The cost of depositing waste on controlled landﬁll sites
is relatively cheap. However, the expense of road trans-
port to suitable sites generally limits this disposal route
to relatively low-volume applications.

The cost of industrial efﬂuent disposal to the munic-
ipal sewers is based on a polluter pays policy, which
takes account of the quantity and pollution loads in the
discharge. All the water companies calculate their trade
waste charges in accordance with:
C D R C V C (cid:4)Ot(cid:6)B
Os

C (cid:4)S1(cid:6)S
Ss

where
C D total charge for trade efﬂuent treatment (p/m3),
R D reception and conveyance charge (p/m3),
V D volumetric and primary treatment cost (p/m3),
Ot D the chemical oxidation demand (COD) of trade
efﬂuent after one hour settlement at pH 7 (mg/l),
Os D COD of crude sewage after one hour settlement
B D biological oxidation cost (p/m3) of settled sewage,
St D total suspended solids of trade efﬂuent at pH 7
Ss D the total suspended solids of crude sewage (mg/l),
S D treatment and disposal of primary sludge

(mg/l),

(mg/l),

generated by the trade waste (p/m3).

However, all of the functions in the formula, exclud-
ing the trade efﬂuent functions Ot and Os, are different
for each of the water companies and are reviewed annu-
ally. Therefore the unit costs of charges vary between the
companies. Subject to other commercial considerations,
the cost of trade waste charges could inﬂuence the water
company area in which to locate an industrial plant. The
conditions imposed in the Consent to Discharge could
inﬂuence the location within an area most beneﬁcial to
plant location.

5.2.3 Electricity

Previous considerations concerning the purpose engineer-
ing of the facility will have established the size and char-
acteristics of the electrical load in terms of consumption
and maximum demand. These will be essential data with
which to inquire of the electricity authority as to the avail-
ability of an electrical supply.

Generally, there will be no insurmountable difﬁculty in
obtaining an electrical power supply, the principal factors
being the cost of providing it and the time delay in mak-
ing it available. The scale and nature of the project will
dictate the amount of power required, the load characteris-
tics and the most suitable voltage for its supply. The state
of the public supply network in the area of the proposed
development will then constrain the supply authority in its
ability to quote for a suitable supply in the short, medium
or long term.

A relatively small power demand at low or medium
voltage in a built-up area might be provided in the short
term by teeing from an existing main feeder in the local-
ity, or providing a radial feed from an existing substation.
If the load is large or remote from the existing supply
network, or if the local network is fully loaded, then
a new incoming supply brought from a distance might
be a medium- to long-term project. Time of cost will
be dictated by legal considerations as well as the tech-
nical aspects involved. It is therefore necessary to make
the earliest possible approach to the relevant electricity
supply authority to establish the availability and cost-
environment situation, as this may inﬂuence the initial
engineering and planning factors to be accounted.

5.3 Ecology and pollution
5.3.1 Introduction

In

the

of

case

natural

beneﬁts.

can defeat

the object of development,

Urban,
rural and industrial developments may have
profound effects on the surrounding environment. Such
effects
in
that the negative environmental impact may outweigh
the
resources,
inappropriate development may even destroy the resource
base. If environmental matters are accorded adequate
consideration during the planning and management of
is possible for
development programs and projects it
pollutants to be assimilated. As a result,
the whole
development can be accommodated by the environment
in such a way that adverse effects are minimized and
the economic and social beneﬁts of development are
maximized.

5.3.2 Baseline studies and modeling

The basic requirement of any pre-commissioning envi-
ronmental study is information on the existing state of
the environment prior to any new development. Where
such data are not already available, baseline studies must
be carried out. Essentially, such studies are designed to
provide baseline data from which the phys-chemical and
ecological effects of development may be assessed and
against which changes due to development may be mea-
sured after commissioning of the project. Computer pro-
grams are available to develop these studies to provide
accurate predictions of future pollutant loading in the
environment. For example, using the program AIRPOLL1
ground-level concentrations of stack gases are calculated
at various distances from proposed plants under a vari-
ety of meteorological conditions. The program CAFE2 is

similarly used to predict the dispersion of thermal and
other efﬂuents in the aquatic environment, and OXBAL3
is employed to determine the ecological consequences of
efﬂuent discharges and engineering works in estuaries.
Emission control equipment and waste-treatment plant can
then be designed to meet any local standards for ambient
air and water quality.

5.3.3 Environmental standards

In some parts of the world the need to exploit natural
resources is so urgent that it has preceded the formulation
of adequate environmental controls. The pace of natural
resource exploitation and the growth of associated indus-
tries have overtaken the evolution of institutions, which
would have the authority to exert such controls.

The problem has been recognized by many of
consequently
the developers
concerned, who have
themselves adopted the environmental
standards of
other industrialized nations. In the absence of national
controls this is a responsible and laudable approach.
However, the piecemeal adoption of standards taken from
elsewhere does not take account of local conditions. These
conditions may either enhance or limit
the ability of
the environment to disperse and attenuate or assimilate
pollutants (e.g. the occurrence of temperature inversions
will
the dispersion of air pollutants). Similarly,
the use to which local resources are put may demand
particularly high standards of environmental quality (e.g.
the use of sea water or river water as the basis of potable
water supply). The choice of standards must also take into
account local practices and existing local administration.
At the plant level, in-plant monitoring of unique com-
pounds and the modeling of plant conditions to develop
appropriate working practices and internal environmental
quality standards may be needed.

limit

5.3.4 Environmental assessment

impact assessment

the process of examining,

In the case of a large-scale development
it may be
desirable to combine several environmental services for
(EIA). This
a full environmental
is
in a comprehensive,
detailed and systematic manner, the existing environment
(natural, built and social) and the development that it is
proposed to place within it. By integrating the two, an
objective estimate can then be made of the likely effects
of the development upon the environment,
including
beneﬁts and negative impacts. Special techniques may be
employed to help identify or quantify these impacts (e.g.
the use of interaction matrices, overlays, screening tests,
checklists, etc.).

An EIA can be particularly useful in distinguishing the
relative environmental impact of alternative sites, pro-
cesses and strategies for industrial, rural or urban develop-
ment. Decision-makers to choose the alternative that will
provide maximum economic and social beneﬁts with the
minimum of environmental disturbance can then use this
essential environmental information, together with ﬁnan-
cial and political considerations. Guidelines for assessing

Ecology and pollution 5/41

industrial environmental impact and environmental crite-
ria for the siting of industry have been prepared for the
United Nations Environment Program.

5.3.5 Resource planning

Ecology studies employ information from all the other
environmental sciences to draw conclusions about envi-
ronmental change that will result from development. How-
ever, when the exploitation of natural resources is being
planned, the nature of the ecosystem and its response to
change are themselves the most important elements to be
considered. Industrial developments need to be assessed
in the context of their ecological setting to ensure that the
proposed development, ﬁrst, will be feasible within local
constraints and, second, will not bring about irreversible
and unacceptable changes to other essential parts of the
ecosystem.

The activity of ecologists in resource planning has three

forms: preservation, integration and conservation.

Preservation

In this case, individual new developments are designed
in such a way as to preserve discrete ecological systems
that have been identiﬁed as of importance as ‘life-support
systems’, as regionally/internationally important wildlife
habitats or as sources of rare natural materials, etc.

Integration

In the case of development projects which are on a large
scale (e.g. mining or dam construction) or which cover a
considerable area, ecological planning attempts to achieve
integration between the project and the ecosystem. The
object is to ensure not only the continued functioning
of the ecosystem as a whole but also of those elements
of the ecosystem which provide the development project
with goods and services (e.g. fuel, raw materials and the
assimilation of waste).

Ecological planning in this context will help to avoid
ecological disasters (e.g. excessive weed growth in stored
water) and maximize the life span of the beneﬁts derived
from the development. It will be clear that this holistic
approach to development has economic as well as eco-
logical advantages.

Conservation

Where regional development is to be undertaken it is
reasonable to adopt a positive ecological approach. This
can begin with the formulation of a conservation policy
with speciﬁc goals. These may include the conservation
of individual animal/plant species or habitat types which
are threatened by development. A program of conserva-
tion projects (e.g. the setting up of national parks, coun-
try parks or natural reserves) will meet the goals. This
positive approach to the ecosystem will not only beneﬁt
wildlife but will also create the opportunities for tourism
and leisure, which are vital adjuncts to most development
projects.

5/42 Plant Location

5.3.6 Environmental management

Once commissioned, even the best-planned industrial
development requires monitoring and management
to
ensure that its operation continues to be environmentally
acceptable. This applies equally to established industries.
When unexpected environmental problems develop, a
rapid response is required to assess the cause and
magnitude of
the problem and to devise remedial
measures.

Air pollution

Dusts produced by quarrying and ﬂuorides emanating
from oil reﬁneries are typical pollutants, which need
regular monitoring. A range of portable equipment for the
identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of toxic and other gases
can be used on an ad hoc basis.

When unpleasant odors resulting from manufacturing
processes or waste-disposal operations give rise to public
complaints they should be identiﬁed and quantiﬁed prior
to deriving methods of abatement. Such work is often
innovative, requiring the design and fabrication of new
equipment for the sampling and analysis of pollutants.

Water pollution

Consultants are equipped to monitor
the quality of
freshwater, estuarine and marine environments and
can make ﬁeld measurements of a variety of water-
quality parameters in response to pollution incidents. For
example, reasons for the mortality of marine shellﬁsh
and farmed freshwater ﬁsh have been determined using
portable water-analysis equipment. Various items of ﬁeld
equipment are, of course, also employed in baseline
studies and monitoring, respectively, before and after the
introduction of new efﬂuent-disposal schemes.

Where extreme accuracy is required in the identiﬁcation
of pollutants or in the quantiﬁcation of compounds that are
highly toxic, laboratory analysis of samples is conducted.
Highly sophisticated techniques have, for example, been

employed in the isolation of taints in drinking-water
supplies.

Land pollution

As development proceeds, land is coming under increas-
ing pressure as a resource, not only for the production of
food and the construction of new buildings but also for
disposal of the growing volume of industrial and domes-
tic waste. The design and management of sanitary landﬁll
and other waste-disposal operations requires an input from
most of the environmental sciences, including geologists
and geo-technicians, chemists and physicists, biologists
and ecologists. Such a team can deal with the control
and treatment of leachate, the quantiﬁcation and control
of gas generation, and the placement of toxic and haz-
ardous wastes. This may be needed in designs for the
treatment of industrially contaminated land prior to its
redevelopment.

Ecological studies

The acceptability of some industrial and ephemeral devel-
opment projects such as landﬁll or mineral extraction
may depend upon an ability to restore the landscape after
exploitation has been completed. As more rural develop-
ment projects come to fruition, ecologists will become
increasingly involved in resource management to ensure
that yields are sustained and to avert the undesirable con-
sequences of development. Some industrial developments
and rearranged plant layout schemes will not be compli-
cated, but when ecology studies are needed, the employ-
ment of specialist consultants is recommended.

Notes

1 AIRPOLL, W. S. Atkins Consultants, Ltd, Woodcote

Grove, Ashley Road, Epsom, Surrey.

2 CAFE, as above.
3 OXBAL, as above.

6/43

6/58

6/59

6

Contents

Industrial
Buildings

D Whittleton
Ove Arup & Partners, Industrial Division

6.1 Introduction

6/45

6.1.1 Procurement 6/45
6.1.2 Structural materials 6/45
6.1.3 Structural form 6/45

6/47

6.2 Specifying an industrial building

6.2.1 Procurement 6/47
6.2.2 Budgets
6.2.3 Speciﬁcation
6.2.4 Schedules
6.2.5 Procedures

6/49
6/49

6/48

6/49

6.3 Security

6/49

6/49

6.3.1 Objectives
6.3.2 Criminal action
6.3.3 Layers of protection
6.3.4 Reliability

6/51

6/49

6/50

6.4 Leases 6/51

6/51

6.4.1 Relationships
6.4.2 Preparation of a lease 6/51
6.4.3 Covenants
6.4.4 Rent
6/51
6.4.5 Reviews
6.4.6 Assigning and sub-letting

6/52

6/51

6/52

6.5 Obtaining approval to build

6/52

6.5.1 Planning approval
6/52
6.5.2 Building control approval

6/52

6.6 Extending existing buildings

6/53

6/53

6.6.1 Viability
6.6.2 Facility brief
6/53
6.6.3 Other considerations
6/53
6.6.4 Re-use of materials 6/53

6.7 Fire detection and suppression
6/53

6.7.1 Fire regulations
6.7.2 Inﬂuence of design
6.7.3 Types of system 6/54
6.7.4 Fire protection of structures

6/54

6/53

6.8 Cost comparisons and contract procedure
6.9 Structural and services supports
6.10 Natural ventilation

6/55

6/56

6/54

6/57

6.10.1 Usage
6/56
6.10.2 Requirements
6.10.3 Threshold limit values
6/57
6.10.4 Fire control/smoke clearance
6.10.5 Heat dissipation/cooling
6.10.6 Provision of air for fuel-burning devices
6.10.7 Control of internal humidity
6.10.8 General design considerations

6/58

6/58

6/58

6/58

6.11 Building durability

6/58

6.11.1 Durability and plan form 6/58
6.11.2 Structure and durability
6/58
6.11.3 Cost of construction materials 6/59
6.11.4 Durability of materials 6/59
6.11.5 Damage and protection
6/59
6.11.6 Details and speciﬁcation of construction

6.12 Building maintenance

6/59

6.12.1 Building records 6/59
6.12.2 Maintenance work 6/59
6.12.3 Maintenance planning
6.12.4 Monitoring equipment

6/59
6/59

6/60

6.13 Building repairs 6/60

6/60

6.13.1 Repair work
6.13.2 Repair: works speciﬁcation
6.13.3 Flat roof defects 6/60
6.13.4 Roof repairs 6/60
6.14 Domestic facilities 6/60

6/60

6.14.1 Toilet accommodation
6.14.2 Canteens
6.14.3 Rest rooms 6/61
6.14.4 First-aid facilities 6/61
6.14.5 Detail design

6/61

6/60

6/54

6.15 Elevators 6/61

6.15.1 Introduction

6/61

6.15.2 Elevator system design – drive systems
6.15.3 Elevator machine rooms
6.15.4 Elevator control in the event of ﬁre 6/62
6.15.5 Fireﬁghting elevators

6/62

6/62

6/62

6.16 Sub-ground pits and basement

6.16.1 Waterprooﬁng

6/63

6.17 Internal and external decoration

6.17.1 Internal 6/63
6.17.2 External 6/64
6.18 Industrial ground ﬂoors

6/64

6/63

6/63

6.18.1 Structural form 6/64
6.18.2 Abrasion resistance
6.18.3 Chemical resistance
6.18.4 Flatness
6.18.5 Dusting

6/65
6/65
6.19 Ground considerations

6/65

6/65
6/65

6.19.1 Existing site conditions
6.19.2 Contaminated sites
6.19.3 Foundations
6/65
6.19.4 Existing services 6/66
6.19.5 Car parking

6/66

6/65

6/65

6.1 Introduction
Industrial activity encompasses an enormous variety of
operations, and industrial buildings provide the required
protection from the external environment. Of necessity,
therefore, they take many shapes and structural forms and
may be composed of a variety of materials.

6.1.1 Procurement

Industrial buildings can be procured in one of three basic
forms:

1. Speciﬁc design
2. ‘Off the shelf’
3. Speculative.

Speciﬁcally designed industrial buildings

Many industrial operations will require buildings with a
large number of speciﬁc attributes. Such requirements will
include many of the following:
ž Location
ž Plan dimensions
ž Height to eaves
ž Column layout
ž Services provision
ž Drainage provision
ž Provision of cranes
ž Superstructure-imposed load capacity
ž Floor loading capacity (point load, uniformly distribu-
ž Floor ﬂatness
ž Floor abrasion/impact/chemical/slip resistance
ž Access facilities
ž Loading/unloading facilities
ž Floor pits
ž Intermediate platform arrangements
ž Suitability for automatic guided vehicles
ž Suitability of environmental controls
ž Ease of cleaning
ž Corrosion resistance
ž Machine base availability
ž Sound insulation
ž Provision for future expansion.

ted load, line load)

Any one of the above may require a speciﬁc building
to be designed and constructed due to the unsuitability
of available facilities falling into the option (1) and (2)
categories.

Apart from performance criteria, an industrial building
might also be required to project a corporate identity by a
striking appearance. This generally requires a speciﬁcally
designed facility.

Off the shelf industrial buildings

Introduction 6/45

Speculative industrial buildings

These are often developed on new industrial estates with
no particular tenant in mind. They may be quite adequate
for general
light engineering/warehousing/retail units.
However, prospective industrial occupiers with any but
the most basic general requirements are likely to have
to spend considerable sums adapting the building to their
needs, if indeed this is physically and economically viable.

6.1.2 Structural materials

The majority of industrial building superstructures are
framed in structural steel, although a small percentage
are in pre-cast concrete. Steel is used primarily for its
large strength-to-weight ratio, enabling it to span large dis-
tances economically. Steelwork is easily modiﬁed, which
provides for a degree of adaptability not always available
from concrete structures.

Ground slab and foundations are invariably reinforced
concrete, though some ground bearing slabs are construc-
ted with no reinforcement.
for
containment of toxic of other processes may require
construction primarily from reinforced concrete.

Industrial buildings

A dwarf wall of concrete, blockwork or brickwork is
often constructed around the building perimeter to mini-
mize cladding damage from fork elevator trucks, etc.

6.1.3 Structural form

Stability

Building stability can be provided by:

1. Framing action from rigid connections between

columns and roof members;

2. Vertical cross bracing or shear walls;
3. Columns cantilevering from foundations; or
4. A combination of these techniques.

Roof bracing may be required for rafter and purlin stabil-
ity or load transfer to vertical bracing.

A composite concrete slab or a stressed-skin system
can also provide a roof diaphragm, but the latter may
severely restrict the provision of subsequent roof penetra-
tions. Concrete roof slabs are unusual, due to the greatly
increased mass over the more normal metal decking/in-
sulation/waterproof membrane or insulated metal decking
options.

Column layout

It is self-evident that fewer permanent obstructions within
the perimeter provide a greater potential ﬂexibility of
operations. However, larger spans are bought only at the
expense of structure. Columns may also perform other
functions, apart from roof support:

Off the shelf buildings are generally of set modular form
designed to a standard set of criteria. The available degree
of variation may be limited, but they are perfectly suitable
for several industrial uses.

1. Support of intermediate-level platforms;
2. Restraint to partition walls;
3. Support for cranes/jibs;
4. Services (pipework, ductwork, etc.) support.

6/46 Industrial Buildings

Roof shape

Flat roofs are popular with architects due to
Flat roofs.
their reduced visual impact. However, they generally re-
quire a much higher standard of waterprooﬁng, and may
be susceptible to ponding, moss growth and dirt/debris
entrapment. Inevitably, they also require internal down-
pipes for rainwater disposal.

Falls to gully positions may be provided by the natural
deﬂections of the roof structure or small slopes to the roof
steelwork (e.g. 1 : 40–1 : 60).

Pitched roofs are typically sloped at a
Pitched roofs.
minimum of 6° to ensure the weather resistance of lapped
sheeting without sophisticated seals or a waterproof mem-
brane. Portal frames are also more liable to snap through
buckling at very shallow pitches. A pitched roof means a
greater dead volume to heat, although there is additional
space for high-level service distribution.

Roof construction

1. Flat roofs. Typically, framing is achieved with:

(a) Universal beams (span <15 meters);
(b) Castellated beams (20 meters > span > 15 meters);
(c) Lattice girders (span >20 meters).
A recent development has been the practice of using
site butt-welded, closely spaced, continuous secondary
beams spanning over continuous primary beams and
replacing the traditional purlins. Secondary spans of
20 meters have been achieved with this method. Other
considerations include:
(a) Castellated beams may require reinforcement at

high shear regions;

(b) Castellated and lattice beams provide a service

zone within the structural depth;

(c) Lattice girders may be formed into V beams of

triangular cross section.

2. Pitched roofs. Typically, framing is achieved with:

(a) Portal frames (Figure 6.1);
(b) Pitched lattice girders (Figure 6.2);
(c) Trusses (Figure 6.3);
Portal frames may be single-bay, multi-bay (Figure 6.4),
propped, tied, or mansard with pinned or ﬁxed foot.
They may be composed of universal beams or tapered
plate girders.

Rafter

Column

Haunches

Lattice beam

Column

Pinned or
fixed base

Figure 6.2 A typical lattice girder frame

Mansard
trussed roof

Overhead crane

Latticed column

Fixed base

Figure 6.3 A typical trussed roof

Castellated
beam

Columns

Pinned or
fixed base

Figure 6.1 A typical portal frame

Pinned or
fixed base

Figure 6.4 A typical multi-bay beam and post construction

Trusses may be the best solution for very high-
imposed loads. Frame action with columns is not pos-
sible with trusses. Although trusses are generally the
lightest form of roof construction, they may be the
most expensive due to high fabrication cost. A com-
bination of lattices or lattice and truss may form a
sawtooth roof proﬁle for incorporation of north lights.

Profiled steel
sheeting panel

Insulation

Liner  tray

Purlin

Bituminous felt
waterproof membrane
on plywood deck

Insulation

Purlin

Structural
liner tray

Block paving Waterproof
membrane

Insulation

Concrete slab

Purlin

Figure 6.5 Typical roof constructions

Flashing

Waterproof
membrane

Specifying an industrial building 6/47

6.2 Specifying an industrial building
Many industrial buildings, and industrial projects in the
broader sense, are completed entirely to the owner’s sat-
isfaction in terms of the key criteria of time, cost and
quality. It is also true that many are not. There can be
various reasons for this; some related to the nature of the
construction industry in general, some to the performance
of professional teams and others related to the manner in
which the project was initially set up. The most common
cause of problems with the ﬁnished product is the way in
which the owner’s requirements were speciﬁed, and this
extends to include the selection of the project team.

These problems cannot always be attributed to the
is not usually a regular
owner. An industrial client
developer of buildings, which are,
in most cases,
secondary to whatever process or production facility he
wishes to construct. He is, after all, not engaged in the
construction industry on a day-to-day basis. He should
be entitled to expect good advice from the team he
appoints, and to expect them to ask the right questions.
But whatever the project, and however limited the owner’s
resources, it is vital that he is able to provide the necessary
input to ensure that he gets what he wants.

We are not concerned here with contractual issues, or
with questions of responsibility. What follows is a set of
practical guidelines that seek to address the main areas
where problems can arise.

6.2.1 Procurement

From the time when the owner decides that a project is
desirable there are many approaches to the procurement
strategy, ranging from a conventional set-up with con-
sultants/contractors right through to a complete turnkey
arrangement. There is no right or wrong way of proceed-
ing, and it is difﬁcult to generalize, but it is true to say
that the turnkey (or design and build) approach is most
likely to succeed where:

1. The owner’s requirements are clear, simple, and un-

likely to change;

project;

2. The owner is unable to allocate much time to the

3. The owner does not require direct control over all the

participants in the design and construction process.

Opening

Closing panel

Figure 6.6 Typical roof penetration

Steel trimming
beams

3. Space trusses. Three-dimensional space trusses utiliz-
ing proprietary nodal joints can achieve substantial
two-directional spans. Typically, they are too expen-
sive for normal industrial buildings.

In other cases, where perhaps the requirements are ill
deﬁned, or there is concern over some particular aspect
of the project, it may well be more appropriate to have
the project designed and/or managed by independent pro-
fessionals. For example, most industrial building projects
are best suited to an engineer-led approach. If, however,
the owner is particularly concerned about the architec-
tural aspects of the scheme, he may prefer to make his
own selection and appointment of an architect.

Whichever approach is adopted, the owner must be sure
that he has considered those issues most important to him
and has set up the project in a way that gives him the level
of control he wishes to exercise. He should also take care
to ensure that the team involved has adequate experience,

6/48 Industrial Buildings

Chilled water pipework

Low (LPHW) pressure hot water pipework

Water main

Supply ductwork

Cable tray

Extract ductwork

Figure 6.7 Typical services coordination through a lattice girder

100 mm min
cover

Compressible filter

Concrete slab with
mesh reinforcement
in top of slab

Typical crane rail

Girder typically
composite section
of 'I' section with
inverted channel
welded to top flange

Restraint plate

Cantilever bracket
welded to face of
column

Foundation

Sub-base

Slip membrane

Configuration

either

Compressible filler

or

Compressible filler

Less likelihood of
cracks forming around
isolation joint

Figure 6.8 Isolation joint at foundation

not only of the type of project under consideration but
also of the approach being adopted.

6.2.2 Budgets

The construction industry has a poor reputation in terms
of cost control, and tales of budget overspends are legion.

Figure 6.9 Crane gantry girder

This is often attributed to deﬁciencies in the industry and
among the professionals who work within it.

Whoever is to blame at the end of the day, the prob-
lem can often be traced to the fact that the initial budget
was unrealistic at the outset. To set an inadequate budget,
watch it overrun, and then look for a scapegoat may have
become common practice but it achieves nothing.

It is therefore vital that a sensible cost plan be prepared
and agreed at the earliest possible stage. Obviously, an
owner will prepare rough budgets when considering basic
project viability, but as soon as he is able, he should obtain
advice from his selected team.

Good professionals will not simply agree with the rough
budget already prepared. They will give objective advice,
including the level of conﬁdence in the estimate and an
assessment of the likely effects of changes to the speci-
ﬁcation, so that the owner can take a realistic view. It is
better to recognize the problem immediately, and mod-
ify the scope or speciﬁcation to suit, than to be forced
into late changes or even omissions, which reduce the
effectiveness of the ﬁnished project.

6.2.3 Speciﬁcation

The level of brieﬁng which an owner can give is variable,
depending on his resources and his detailed knowledge of
building or facilities requirements. The most important
point here, however, is clarity. The brief may have to be
simple, but it must be clear – it must also be clear who
has the responsibility for developing it.

The best way to ensure controlled development of the
brief, and of the cost plans which necessarily accompany
it, is to set up a system of data sheets which deﬁne, in
increasing detail as the project develops, the spatial, func-
tional and servicing requirements of each component part
of the project. A well-resourced technical client may wish
to do this himself. More commonly, it is a task which
should be entrusted to the design team. Whoever does it,
regular joint review of this information will help to ensure
satisfaction with the ﬁnished product.

6.2.4 Schedules

Much of what has been said about budgets applies equally
to the project program. It should be realistic from the
outset – again independent professional advice should be
sought.

Modern fast-track techniques of design and procure-
ment have taken all the slack out of the traditional meth-
ods, and this is generally to the beneﬁt of all concerned.
There is a price to pay, however, in terms of ﬂexibility.
The owner, and his design and construction team, has to
work within a discipline in respect of changes; programs
and budgets are very vulnerable to changes in this envi-
ronment. This relates very closely to the earlier comments
on clarity of brieﬁng and information ﬂow.

6.2.5 Procedures

Having decided on the appropriate way to proceed with
the project, the owner needs to satisfy himself that ade-
quate system and procedures have been put in place to
give him the necessary control and conﬁdence in the pro-
ject. These will, of course, vary considerably from owner
to owner and project to project, but certain key points are
worth remembering.

There is a clear need for the owner to appoint a single
project ofﬁcer. He may well be part-time as far as this
activity is concerned, and will often need to draw on the
expertise of others in his own organization. However, a
single point of contact between the owner and his project
team has been shown to be a vital ingredient in success-
ful projects. Of equal importance is the need for regular
reviews to ensure that things are going to plan. It is also
necessary to have an agreed mechanism for change con-
trol, since once a project is under way, particularly if, as
is usual, it is being run to a tight program, any changes
are likely to have an impact on both program and budget.
The theme running through the above is that the key
ingredient is clarity, both in speciﬁcation and organiza-
tional terms. This does not need to mean a major effort
or input on the part of the owner, but rather careful con-
sideration, at an early stage, of what is actually required.

Security 6/49

If what is required is unclear at the outset, then it is
wise to say so, and allow for that fact in the development
of budgets and programs, rather than to pretend that the
project is fully speciﬁed and suffer the consequences later.
An industrial client, like any other, will get what he pays
for; but he also needs to ensure that he gets what he needs.

6.3 Security
6.3.1 Objectives

The object of all security systems is to guard the company
against loss. The principal risks that are faced include:

1. Criminal action: This may include robbery, vandalism,

fraud and industrial espionage.

2. Direct damage to assets: This may be caused by explo-
sion, rainwater ingress and ﬁre. The level of security
is dependent upon good building details and the ﬁre-
suppression system used.

6.3.2 Criminal action

This section will consider the options available to deal
with criminal action. There are several levels of security.
The higher the level of security, the greater is the cost.
This expenditure will relate not only to the capital cost of
the security system but also the restriction that is placed
upon the efﬁciency of the employees. In planning a secu-
rity system it should be recognized that no system could
guarantee detection of, or immunity from, intruders. The
purpose of a system is to confer on the property or persons
at risk a level of security that, through careful planning,
is in balance with the degree of determination and exper-
tise of the intruder. In making this evaluation, all physical
circumstances of the risk need to be assessed. However,
the degree of security decided upon has to be consistent
with a system that is, in every sense, practical and reliable
and which cannot become an unacceptable burden to the
public or police.

Furthermore, the cost of the security system must bear
a relationship to the risk, particularly since an increase in
the cost of a system does not necessarily cause an increase
in the level of security. Cost effectiveness should be of
prime consideration.

In planning a security system its requirements should
be ascertained as accurately as possible by consultation
between appropriate interested parties, which may include
one or more of the following:

1. The insurers
2. The local police authority
3. The Health and Safety Executive
4. The local public authority
5. The customer
6. Any statutory regulations
7. Consultants
8. Security companies

In assessing how to apply the requirements of a secu-
rity system the following items should be considered both
individually and collectively:

6/50 Industrial Buildings

1. Physical barriers and deterrents
2. Electronic detection systems
3. Security patrol and guarding
4. Controlling entry and egress
5. Employee awareness, procedures and training
6. Local, remote and delayed alarms.

All parts of the security system should interact with each
other to form an integrated whole.

6.3.3 Layers of protection

The security system can be considered as layers of protec-
tion. Physical barriers and deterrents constitute not only
the building structure itself, made up of walls, doors, win-
dows, ﬂoor and a roof, but the yard around the building
and probably a perimeter fence or wall.

Electronic detection systems may range from simple
intruder-detection devices monitored by basic control units
to a variety of complex systems monitored by sophisti-
cated computer-operated controls linked to 24-hour man-
ned stations. Intruder-detection devices can be arranged
into the following groups:

1. Static detection devices
2. Movement-detection devices
3. Trap and object devices

Static detection devices would include the following:

1. Tube and wire frames are used to protect windows,
skylights and similar glass areas and constitute a high
level of security but may be aesthetically unacceptable.
2. Aluminum foil is used to protect windows and glass
doors. Although usually acceptable, this is subject to
tampering if accessible to the public.

3. Break-glass detectors detect the high frequencies pro-
duced when glass is broken or cut with a glasscutter.
These are the most cost-effective methods of glass pro-
tection in most cases and are especially suited to areas
accessible to the public.

4. Vibration sensors are similar to break-glass detectors
but are ﬁxed to walls and doors against violent attack.
The structure to which they are ﬁtted must not be sub-
ject to vibration from external sources, otherwise false
alarms may result.

5. Closed-circuit wiring comprises plastic-covered single-
strand wire strung at regular intervals across doors,
walls and ceilings. This is prone to failure in damp
conditions and is mainly used in high-security build-
ings.

6. A pressure pad, also used as a form of trap protection,
is a ﬂat rectangular, plastic-covered contact placed at
strategic points underneath a carpet.

7. Magnetic reed contacts are glass-encapsulated mag-
netically operated reed switches used on doors and
windows. The contacts can be overcome by cutting
the door, leaving the magnet undisturbed.

Movement-detection devices are designed to detect the
movement of an intruder in the interior of the building:

1. Beams of invisible infrared light shone across an
opening will detect movement that breaks the beam.
Although relatively cheap, beam devices are easily
recognized and avoided, and therefore constitute low
security.

2. Microwave movement detectors utilize the principle
of the Doppler effect on high-frequency low-power
radio waves. These units are moderate in cost and suit-
able for large-volume coverage. Microwaves, however,
penetrate certain materials easily, such as plasterboard,
and careful siting is required to avoid false alarms.

3. Ultrasonic movement detectors utilize the principle of
the Doppler effect on high-frequency sound waves.
Ultrasonic movement detectors do not penetrate solid
objects, but have smaller volume of coverage than
microwave movement detectors. These units may also
be affected by moving hot or cold air pockets in a
room.

4. Passive movement detection senses radiated heat, such
as that from a human body. These units are also sen-
sitive to heat emitted by radiator, convection heaters
and direct sunlight, so careful siting is required.

5. Dual-technology detectors combine two of the tech-
niques described above, except for beams, and provide
good rejection of unwanted alarms.

Trap- and object-protection devices provide protection
to an area and object within a building and should never
be used on their own:

1. A contact on a safe will recognize attack by drilling,
sawing, ﬁling, explosions and oxyacetylene or thermic
lance.

2. Closed-circuit television cameras are very expensive
and require a manned station, but with careful siting
and the latest technology, they can see in moonlight
and can set off alarms when picking up motion.

Security patrol and guarding is only satisfactory if
properly managed and controlled with trained guards and
complemented by electronic detection and monitoring
equipment. The guards would generally be available to
react to the unexpected, and should be well briefed as to
responsibility and how to obtain help as well as how to
deal with any type of unexpected situation.

Controlling entry and egress can be very useful for
ensuring that only authorized people have entered the
secured area as well as identifying who is actually in the
building in an emergency such as a ﬁre. There are several
methods of controlling entry and egress, some of which
are listed below:

1. Guards: These are probably the least efﬁcient, primar-
ily because of the human element. However, there are
obvious psychological strengths to human presence.

2. Mechanical key system: This provides a basic level of
security for heavily used areas. Although complicated
mechanisms can be designed, their operation is slow,
and hence is suitable only for limited access.

3. Magnetic card systems: These are very good for busy
areas and can be made very difﬁcult to forge. The
level of security can be increased, at the expense of

efﬁciency in busy areas, by incorporating the necessity
for a PIN number.

4. Automatic systems: These require no direct contact
between the user and the device reading the code. They
provide a high degree of convenience in use.

For high-security buildings, it is imperative that em-
ployees are made aware not only of the need for secu-
rity but also what procedures have to be followed and
instructed on basic security awareness.

The type of alarm system used is dependent on the
expected type of security breach and the method employed
in responding to one. In unguarded premises, requiring
only a low level of security, an alarm that operates
immediately a device detects a security breach may be
sufﬁcient to ward off vandals, burglars and crimes of
opportunity. On the other hand, where breaches of security
may involve more determined criminals, such as fraud
or industrial espionage, delayed alarms on the premises
may give time for security personnel and/or police to
apprehend the criminal
in the process of committing
the crime.

6.3.4 Reliability

No alarm system, however well planned and installed,
can be completely reliable or tamperproof. The successful
operation of a security system requires the active coop-
eration of those involved in carrying out the necessary
procedures carefully and thoroughly. The usefulness of
the whole system can be jeopardized by lack of care or
inadequate attention to routine procedures in maintenance
and servicing. This care has to be extended to the secu-
rity of keys and of information regarding the system, its
installation and method of operation.

6.4 Leases
6.4.1 Relationships

A lease, whereby the landlord grants a portion of his
interest in the land and allows the tenant to occupy and
enjoy that land for a period or term usually in return for a
monetary payment called rent, creates the relationship of
landlord and tenant. The statute law is updated and revised
by successive governments and legal advice should be
sought when drafting or entering into leases.

6.4.2 Preparation of a lease

A lease or contract of tenancy can be verbal but is usually
in writing, as there is the possibility of misunderstandings
and thus disputes. In some cases, this is overcome by
a deed that sets out the conditions of the letting. This
is a contractual document, which is made by indenture,
i.e. in two parts. One part, called the lease, is signed,
sealed, and delivered by the landlord to the tenant while
the other, called the counterpart, is signed, sealed and
delivered by the tenant and handed to the landlord. The
two are identical and, being legal documents, use formal
words such as lessor, lessee, etc. and generally commence
with the words ‘This lease’ or ‘This indenture’.

The lease by deed sets out the conditions of the letting

in a formal manner and should include:

Leases 6/51

1. Generally, the description of the property;
2. The names of the parties;
3. When it is to commence and how long it will last;
4. The covenants which consist of promises and agree-
ments by the landlord and tenant to do or not to do
certain things;

5. The rent that is to be paid;
6. Any exceptions and reservations which the landlord

wishes to retain;

7. The conditions showing how the term may be ended,
extended or created (which may include implied con-
ditions);

8. The provisos, which are any express conditions. The
deed is dated, signed, sealed, witnessed and delivered
and operates by the devise of the landlord’s interest in
the property to the tenant.

The understanding of these constituent parts of the lease
is very important, and they should be read very carefully.
Expert advice should be sought for a thorough understand-
ing of them.

6.4.3 Covenants

Covenants may be express or implied, i.e. those expressly
written into the lease in a deed and those not expressed
but implied in a deed by law in order to give effect to the
intention of the parties or to remedy an obvious omission.
Express covenants could be:

1. To pay rent;
2. To pay rates and taxes;
3. To repair and keep in repair;
4. To paint/decorate within certain times;
5. To insure and produce receipt of insurance;
6. To permit the lessor and his agents to enter and view;
7. Not to alter the structure;
8. Not to assign or sub-let;
9. To yield up at the end of the term.

Implied covenants could be implied into a lease by
common law or by statute, and in the case of the latter can-
not easily be varied or excluded by agreement between the
parties. Some examples of covenants by the landlord are:

1. That the landlord has good title and therefore to give
possession of the date ﬁxed for commencement of the
term;

2. To give the tenant quiet enjoyment during the tenancy;
3. In the case of residential tenancies to give at least

4 weeks’ notice to quit;

4. In the case of furnished premises to ensure at the com-
mencement of the tenancy that the premises are ﬁt for
human habitation.

6.4.4 Rent

A landlord grants land to a tenant for a variety of pur-
poses, and several names are given to the rent due from

6/52 Industrial Buildings

the tenant to the landlord. Premises for occupation are
generally let at a rack rent which is assessed upon the full
annual value of the property, including land and build-
ings, the best rent being the highest rack rent that can
reasonably be obtained for the whole lease.

Sometimes land and buildings are let on a long lease to
a tenant who proposes to sub-let on short terms such as
weekly or monthly tenancies. In this case, the rent paid on
lease is less than the rack rent, and is called a head rent.
When land is let for construction it is usual for a pep-
percorn rent of no actual value to be agreed while the
houses, etc. are built. Although cases do occur where a
peppercorn rent is received throughout a long lease, it is
more usual for a ground rent to be charged. This is less
than the rack rent, usually because a premium has been
paid at the start of the lease. Ground rents are much higher
than peppercorn rents and may include increases during
the lease.

Rent is due on the days appointed for its payment in
the lease, and unless the lease expressly provides for rent
to be paid in advance it will be payable in arrears.

6.4.5 Reviews

Many leases, especially business leases, contain rent-
review clauses, which provide for regular reviews at, for
example, three-, ﬁve- or (more usually) seven-yearly inter-
vals. A clause will deﬁne rent-review periods and set out
the formula and machinery for assessing the rent in each
period.

6.4.6 Assigning and sub-letting

Any tenant who has not contracted to the contrary may
sub-let his land (or part of his land) for any term less
than that which he holds. A sub-letting is therefore distin-
guished from an assignment in that a tenant, who assigns,
disposes of the whole of his interest under the lease (and
thereby puts the assignee into his place), whereas a tenant
who sub-lets does not.

6.5 Obtaining approval to build
When contemplating the construction of a new industrial
building or alterations to an existing one the statutory
requirements and the powers available to the authority
responsible for issuing approval should be taken into
account. The exact procedures will, necessarily, be
dependent upon the location (i.e. district and/or country)
and the type of industrial building proposed. The approval
process can be divided into two stages. These are to obtain
planning and building control approval.

We shall consider each stage in the context of general
requirements. The standard and detail needed to obtain
approval is contained within statutory documents that can
be obtained from the relevant authority.

6.5.1 Planning approval

Obtaining planning approval provides permission to
build and, more importantly, justiﬁcation to pursue the

preparation of detailed plans and documentation necessary
for building control approval. Planning permission prior
to detailed design of the building is not a requirement, but
rejection of planning submission would probably render
the design useless.

The authority granting permission to build will depend
upon the type and size of building. Major projects, such
as nuclear power stations or large industrial complexes,
may involve a public enquiry and the need to produce
a study into the environmental impact. Though a com-
mittee nominated by the local authority will consider the
planning submission.

The following is a list of items that could (and would

usually) form the basis for a planning submission:

1. Site location
2. Building footprint
3. Height
4. Use of building
5. Aesthetic appearance
6. Utility requirements (e.g. gas, electricity, etc.)
7. Employment requirements.

The list is not exhaustive, but it will be apparent that
the submissions content implies that any decision will be
subjective. Knowledge of the current planning policy of
the local or national government is therefore advisable.

6.5.2 Building control approval

Having obtained planning permission, building control
approval involves producing a set of detailed documents
to satisfy a list of statutory requirements. These lists,
although amended and updated according to current prac-
tice, if complied with, should gain approval. The decision
to grant approval is therefore much less subjective than
that needed for planning permission, being more closely
deﬁned by statute.

The need for building control arose primarily to protect
the health and safety of the population and, latterly, to
conserve fuel and power and prevent waste. Local and
State Building Regulations give standards of performance
necessary in the building and, as such, make reference to
national and international standards and codes of practice.
The regulations cover two areas of health and safety and
can be subdivided as follows:

Safety
Fire
Structure
Stairs, ramps
and guards

Health

Toxic substances
Ventilation
Hygiene

Waste disposal
and drainage

The speciﬁc technical requirements within each category
will depend upon the type of building and the use to
which it will be put. For example, the requirements for ﬁre
escapes will be different for an ofﬁce and for a factory.
Finally, the regulations are not exhaustive and there
will be circumstances, especially relating to ﬁre safety,
where approval can only be obtained by negotiation.

6.6 Extending existing buildings
6.6.1 Viability
The extension of existing facilities can often present an
attractive alternative to relocation, with its entire attendant
disruption and potential impacts on production, industrial
relations and morale. However, the viability of extension
is predicated on the consideration of various strategic and
tactical issues:

1. Land availability and location in relation to existing

2. Nature of activities proposed in extension (e.g. linear,

cellular, storage, bulk process, administrative, etc.);

3. Topographical and geo-technical conditions;
4. Existing structures (their condition, type of construc-

buildings;

tion, etc.);

5. Infrastructure and services such as roads, telecommu-
nications, water, foul and storm drainage, gas, power,
etc., location, routing, capacity (used and spare), state
of repair, etc.;

6. Local and statutory authority issues (e.g. planning,

building control, service tariffs);

7. Environmental concerns (efﬂuent treatment, noise, etc.).

6.6.2 Facility brief
Once the primary considerations of size, height, concep-
tual layout, structural loads, servicing (mechanical, elec-
trical, communications, public health, statutory services)
requirements, access, material and personnel trafﬁc, etc.
have been addressed, a facility brief can be produced to
allow collation of the basic project planning information:

1. Scheme, site plan, layouts and elevations including

infrastructure modiﬁcations;

2. Basic plant services;
3. Budget costs;
4. Tentative planning assessment;
5. Preliminary project program.

These items should be formulated against optional app-
roaches, each option being tested against one another (and
rated accordingly) on the basis of:

1. Capital expenditure, cash ﬂow and operating cost

2. Impacts on existing operations (productivity, quality,

3. Project-completion times (including the options for

analyses;

personnel, etc.);

phased completion);

4. Comparison of operational, spatial, servicing simplic-
ity,
internal environmental performance (day light-
ing, thermal transmittance, acoustic break-in/out, etc.),
parameters between options.

The adoption of the best option should be based on all
these parameters.

6.6.3 Other considerations
Many extraneous and site-speciﬁc considerations may
have to be taken into account. Certainly, the construction

Fire detection and suppression 6/53

and layout of existing facilities will play a major role in
deciding the basic choice of location and conﬁguration of
extensions.

Particular attention should be paid to existing site
arrangements, bay widths, material handling, foundation
design, and construction methods. For instance, it may
prove impractical
to extend the bays of a traditional
steel-framed lightweight
the impact on
road rerouting, statutory services extensions, substation
requirements or other existing facilities seriously affects
the overall cost or program time.

structure if

Equally, the most logical (and least externally disrup-
tive) extension method may conﬂict with desired material
handling or workﬂow requirements. Generally, economic
bay widths should be adopted (typically c. 15 meters), if
possible. Roof design should be adapted to accommodate
roof-supported plant and services while minimizing steel
tonnage. The integration of day lighting, service routes,
cranage, etc. should all be early design issues, solved dur-
ing the evolution of the basic structural design.

Attempting to modify structure or services to accom-
modate structural idiosyncrasies later is always problem-
atic. Protection and isolation of existing facilities from
the disruption of construction should be resolved early in
the design. The reconciliation of building and production
activities is never easy, but early planning for construction
trafﬁc, personnel, site screening, security, site access and
site communications can minimize these adverse effects.
Where existing buildings are of an age which
would indicate that their design and construction were
performed in accordance with statutory requirements,
planning, building control, standards or codes of practice
subsequently superseded, care must be taken to ensure that
extensions to such facilities are designed and constructed
in accordance with current requirements.

6.6.4 Re-use of materials
Re-use of cladding or other construction materials; smoke
ventilation, drainage, ﬁre detection/suppression systems
or techniques to reﬂect
the existing installations may
not comply with current requirements, particularly with
respect to:

1. Fire protection of structural steel
2. Means of escape
3. Proscribed materials
4. Thermal performance
5. Fire detection and suppression
6. Fire compartmentalization
7. Structural design.

The requirements of the property insurers must also be
adhered to if potentially adverse impact to premiums is
to be avoided.

6.7 Fire detection and suppression
6.7.1 Fire regulations
As a general statement, it is unwise to assume particu-
lar requirements for speciﬁc cases in relation to either

6/54 Industrial Buildings

statutory requirements or preferential desires of bodies
having jurisdiction in ﬁre-related matters. The ﬁre regula-
tions pertain to building use and location. Hence, require-
ments for urban ofﬁces will vary considerably from those
for rural industrial sites.

It is generally true that the statutory instruments and
authorities are concerned with the preservation of life as
their primary objective. Consequently, the requirements of
insurance companies with regard to the preservation of the
building or its material contents may be more involved.
Adherence to such requirements (or otherwise) will be
reﬂected in the insurance premiums quoted.

6.7.2 Inﬂuence of design

The design of the structure (and its operation) will greatly
inﬂuence the effects of a ﬁre. For instance:

1. Heat sources should be kept remote from ﬂammable

materials;

2. Compartmentalization of the structure (and mainten-
ance of such compartmentalization) may contain or
minimize ﬁre spread;

3. Fire protection of the structure (discussed elsewhere);
4. Installation of detection, alarm and sprinkler (or other

suppression) systems;

5. Separation of buildings one from another.

6.7.3 Types of system

There are many types of detection and suppression sys-
tems. The one selected should be compatible with the
likely ﬁre source and be consistent with the likely loca-
tions and ﬁre size within the building.

It is essential to discuss the requirements for struc-
tural protection, compartmentalization, emergency light-
ing, detection, alarms, call points, suppression, means of
escape and signage with the applicable local authority, ﬁre
brigade or insurance company personnel before ﬁnalizing
designs.

6.7.4 Fire protection of structures

The principal construction materials used in industrial
buildings are:

1. Steel
2. Concrete

Two different types of ﬁre protection systems can be
considered:

1. Active: This is a ﬁre-suppression system (e.g. sprin-

klers) and is described elsewhere.

2. Passive: In this system the aim is to provide protection
to the structural material for a speciﬁed period of time,
and will be considered in this section.

Fire protection of concrete

Although not used extensively in superstructure work
within industrial buildings, the ﬁre-resistance character-
istics of concrete are excellent. Failure of a concrete

member is caused by a loss of strength in the steel rein-
forcement associated with its rise in temperature. The aim
in providing ﬁre resistance is, therefore, to reduce the
temperature rise of the steel. This may be achieved by:

1. Judicious selection of the shape, size and distribution

of reinforcement within the element;

2. Providing adequate cover to the reinforcement;
3. Adopting a lightweight or limestone aggregate, which
is less susceptible to spalling than a siliceous aggregate
such as ﬂint.

Fire protection of steel

Apart from concrete or masonry encasement of steelwork,
the following options are available:

1. Sprays (up to 4 hours)
2. Boards (up to 4 hours)
3. Intumescents (up to 2 hours: this can be the most ex-

pensive, depending upon the application)

4. Preformed casings (up to 4 h)

The spray is based upon either a natural plate-like mate-
rial, such as vermiculite bound together with cement, or
mineral ﬁbers. Application is fast but not precise or clean,
and is generally only suitable for areas where the steel
will be hidden (by a false ceiling, for example). Sprays
for external applications are available. However, the steel
must ﬁrst be provided with a compatible corrosion pro-
tection system.

The boards are based upon the same constituent mate-
rials used in sprays. They are suitable for situations in
which only dry trades are allowed. The boards are cut to
suit on site and mechanically ﬁxed to the steel (e.g. by
screws and straps). The system produces a smooth surface
that is suitable for decoration.

Intumescents are thin ﬁlms or mastics, which swell
under heat to many times their original thickness. Their
major use is in circumstances where the architectural
statement of steel
their
costs vary considerably. Their application is fast and can
be either by spray or brush. They are generally used
internally, but external intumescents are available.

is to be preserved. As such,

Preformed casings are very similar to ﬁre boards but
are tailored to the particular needs of the member being
protected and, as such, permit fast application. They are,
however, expensive.

6.8 Cost comparisons and contract
procedure
Building costs per square meter for the construction of
new buildings can readily be obtained from reference
books such as Spon’s Architects’ and Builders’ Price Book
and Laxton’s Building Price Book. Both are updated and
issued on an annual basis, with the costs quoted based on
the previous year’s statistics.

The costs given are for a range of prices for average
building work obtained from past records, and can vary by
as much as 50 per cent between minimum and maximum
costs. They serve therefore as an initial rough guide to

the probable cost of a new building. Spon’s also gives
details of ﬁtting-out prices within similar ranges, but these
are generally limited to ofﬁce ﬁt-outs. The introduction
to the sections dealing with prices per square meter in
both books should be carefully studied before applying the
ﬁgures to new structures or costing alterations/extensions
to existing buildings on a pro rata basis.

As stated elsewhere in this chapter, it is of vital impor-
tance to assess the cost effectiveness of any proposed
design (whether it be for a new building and/or alter-
ations/extensions to an existing one) at an early stage. This
can best be accomplished by seeking professional advice
at the earliest opportunity. Such advice is normally pro-
vided by a quantity surveyor, who can work alongside the
building owner and his engineers in assessing the cost of
alternative designs/use of various materials/construction
methods/construction times, etc. and evaluate the various
proposals as the design develops. This will ensure that
the most cost-effective solution is arrived at in the mini-
mum time.

The correct selection of the form of contract to be used
when inviting proposals is of paramount importance, as
it constitutes the signed agreement between the employer
and the contractor and forms part of the conditions of
contract.

6.9 Structural and services supports
When considering the introduction of supplementary
structure for any purpose there are a number of general
items of design data, which must be examined and
formulated:

1. Support function: What are the functional usage loads

likely to be applied (Figure 6.10)?

2. Existing conditions: What is the existing spatial, civil,
structural and access conditions within the facility?
Typically, the following data should either be accessed
from existing records and design requirements deﬁned
by the support function assessment or acquired by new
site survey/investigations:
(a) Ground conditions (soil-bearing capacity, water

table, etc.) for ground-based support systems;

(b) Existing construction elements; state of repair,
materials, composition, bearing capacity, etc.,
allowable attachment methods, existing loading
conditions;

3. Alternative optional approaches: Based

(c) Current access and people/materials ﬂow in the
area. Assessment of disruption, modiﬁcations to
existing operations required both during installa-
tion process and after completion of installation.
on the
constraints of space, cost, time, disruption, etc., what
are the viable options?
The following questions are pertinent when consider-
ing installation options:
(a) Effects on facility downtime;
(b) Use of proprietary, modularized systems;
(c) Phased installation capabilities;
(d) Cost comparisons;
(e) Capabilities for later expansion;

Structural and services supports 6/55

Floors, access
ways, elevated
storage,
mezzanine

Mechanical
and electrical
services

Equipment
and plant
support

Static loads

Static loads

Static loads

Live loads

Deflection
criteria

Wind, snow,
etc. loads
(external)

Support points

Settlement
criteria

Line and level
criteria

Personnel
safety

Live loads
(if applicable)

Live loads

Expansion/
contraction
loads

Movement
allowed

Vibration
loads,
isolation

Vibration
loads and 
isolation
(inward and
outward)

Settlement

Support point

Criteria

Wind/snow
loads
(external)

Personnel
safety

Line and
level

Personnel
safety

Figure 6.10 Support functions

(f) Consolidation of support functions (e.g. multiple
safety

service gang hangers, access/personnel
features (Figure 6.12)).

4. Where possible the best option solution should provide

the optimum mix of:
(a) Cost effectiveness;
(b) Personnel safety;
(c) Minimum impact (downtime, disruption, structural

alterations, ease of installation, etc.);

(d) Expansion capability;
(e) Multiple uses;
(f) Fitness for purpose;
(g) Off-the-shelf materials, devices, etc.

While the statements made above are necessarily general,
it is essential that the conceptual approach delineated be
adhered to. The necessity for compiling adequate design
data for the new installation, followed by examination
of existing conditions against the design requirements, is
paramount.

6/56 Industrial Buildings

Figure 6.11 A typical modular mezzanine ﬂoor (courtesy of The Welconstruct Co. Ltd)

most cost effective when effects on current operations or
potential future expansion plans are examined.

Care must also be taken where large live loading are
concerned such as gantry cranes, hoists, materials han-
dling, etc. to ensure that structural and safety implications
are properly addressed during both design and construc-
tion stages.

Where multiple service support systems are concerned,
apart
from operational movement, sufﬁcient separa-
tion must also be provided to preclude electrical
interference, water damage,
inadequate clearance for
insulation, cladding, cable de-rating (due to inadequate
ventilation), mechanical damage during maintenance, etc.
(Figures 6.12 and 6.13). It is essential that competent
professional engineering personnel with applicable design
experience be utilized for design of the installations.

Figure 6.12 Multiple piping system anchor of guide installation
(courtesy of Industrial Hangers Ltd)

In many instances, adequate existing civil/structural or
services installation information may not be available.
Guessing the likely bearing capacity of ﬂoor slabs,
foundations, structural steel or sub-slab ground, etc. can
prove disastrous. Equally, assuming likely operational
conditions for new installations can lead to embarrassing
(and quite possibly dangerous) under-performance. The
cheapest or quickest installation is not always the best or

6.10 Natural ventilation
6.10.1 Usage

Natural ventilation can be described as a process for pro-
viding fresh air movement within an enclosure by virtue
of air pressure differentials caused primarily by the effects
of wind and temperature variations in and around the
enclosure. The primary usage of natural ventilation is to
provide:

Natural ventilation 6/57

Figure 6.13 A typical multi-service gang hanger (courtesy of Industrial Hangers Ltd)

1. Fresh air introduction for odor and carbon dioxide

dissipation;

2. Fire control/smoke clearance;
3. Heat dissipation/cooling;
4. Provision of air for fuel-burning devices;
5. Control of internal humidity (primarily condensation

reduction/exclusion).

6.10.2 Requirements

For engineering purposes the composition of fresh air is
generally taken at the following standard conditions:

20.94%
0.03%
79.03%

Oxygen (O2)
Carbon dioxide (CO2)
Nitrogen and inert gases
(N2 C xenon, zeon and others)

These fractions are, of course, somewhat variable, depen-
dent on geographic location (i.e. urban versus rural).
Generally, average humidity for Britain is as follows:

75–95% saturated
55–75% saturated

Winter
Summer

General guides to fresh air requirements for odor con-
trol and general ventilation are given in Table 2.1 and
Figure 6.14. Note that requirements for removal of lava-
tory odor or for other highly concentrated areas are dealt
with elsewhere. Figure 6.14 pertains to generally venti-
lated spaces only.

6.10.3 Threshold limit values

With regard to limiting the concentration of particular
contaminants, these are generally referred to in terms of
threshold limit values (TLV), expressed either in terms
of a time-weighted average (TLV – TWA) which repre-
sents the average concentration for a normal working day
over a 40-hour week to which nearly all workers may
be exposed on a repeated basis or as a short-term expo-
sure limit (TLV – STEL), which represents the maximum

Table 6.1 Recommended outdoor air supply rates for
air-conditioned spaces (extracted from BS 5925: 1980)

Type of space

Smoking

Outdoor air supply (l/s)
Minimum (the
greater of the
two should be

Recom-
mended

taken)

Per

person

Per

person

Factoriesa,b
Open-plan ofﬁces
Private ofﬁces
Boardroom,

executive ofﬁces
and conference
room
Toiletsc
Corridorsc
Cafeteriasa,d
Kitchensa,c

None
Some
Heavy
Very
Heavy

–
–
Some
–

8
8
12
25

–
–
12
–

5
5
8
18

–
–
8
–

Per

square
metre
ﬂoor
area

0.8
1.3
1.3
6

–
10
–
20

aRate of extraction may be overriding factor.
bSee statutory requirements and local byelaws.
cA per capita basis is not appropriate in these cases.
dWhere queuing occurs in the space, the seating capacity may not
be the appropriate total occupancy.

concentration to which workers can be exposed for up to
15 minutes. Clearly, these values vary, depending on the
particular contaminant.

Reference should be made to Threshold Limit Values,
Guidance Note EH17/78 , issued by the Health and Safety
Executive (HSE), or Industrial Ventilation (American
Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists). In all
cases, proposals should be reviewed by and submitted to
the relevant local authority agencies.

Space does not permit a detailed investigation of all
the requirements concerning ventilation for the remaining
usages listed. However, a brief description of the ration-
ale for provision is given below, and further details can

6/58 Industrial Buildings

10

5

0

)
s
/

l
(
 
n
o
s
r
e
p
 
 
r
e
p
 
e
t
a
r
 
y
p
p
u
s
 
r
i

l

A

5

10

15

Volumetric allocation per person (m3/person)

Figure 6.14 Approximate air supply rate for (human) odor removal
(extracted from BS 5925: 1980)

be obtained from the references listed at the end of this
chapter.

6.10.4 Fire control/smoke clearance

Depending on the requirements of local ﬁre ofﬁcers, statu-
tory regulations and insurance bodies (or any other doc-
uments or bodies having jurisdiction), there may well be
a need to address the clearance of smoke from escape
routes, the control of smoke spread generally and the
removal of smoke during and after ﬁreﬁghting activities.

6.10.5 Heat dissipation/cooling
Human occupants, electrical/electronic equipment and
process plant all emit varying quantities of sensible and
latent heat. Equally, these various elements require (or can
tolerate) differing environmental conditions. Depending
on these operational constraints, the need may well exist
to provide natural (or powered) ventilation to maintain
environmental conditions (temperature and/or humidity)
consistent with the occupational/process requirements.

6.10.6 Provision of air for fuel-burning devices
All combustion equipment (oil, gas, solid fuel) requires
primary air to support combustion and secondary air to
permit adequate velocities in ﬂue ways, etc. These require-
ments are governed by the minimum air/fuel ratio and
operating ﬂue-way parameters. There are also published
recommended minimum requirements that are generally
in excess of these.

6.10.7 Control of internal humidity
Where human occupancy or ‘wet’ process plant is present,
the emission of water vapor will occur. Depending on
external conditions and building fabric construction, the
attendant potential for excessive ambient humidity or sur-
face condensation may exist.

Consequently, the introduction of external air ventila-
tion may be required in order to reduce ambient moisture
contents. However, this will need to be balanced against

energy costs and the use of other design solutions such
as building fabric moisture proof membranes, local air
exhausts, etc.

6.10.8 General design considerations
The use of openings within the building fabric to pro-
vide natural ventilation is predicated on various primary
factors:
1. Location and orientation of building;
2. Building height and conﬁguration;
3. Shape, size and location of openings;
4. Wind and temperature effects.

Identifying speciﬁc quantiﬁed building ventilation rates
can be difﬁcult due to the number of non-linear parallel
paths that may have to be simultaneously considered.

However, simple-case type solutions (which are often
good enough to establish whether mechanical ventilation
is required or excessive air inﬁltration problems may exist)
can be identiﬁed. These simple solutions are based on
knowledge of:

1. Wind direction and velocity;
2. Building opening locations and size;
3. Temperature differentials (internal and external).

These solutions are discussed in more detail in many
publications, including Building Research Establishment
(BRE) Digest No. 210, the American Society of Heating,
Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE)
Fundamentals Handbook and Chartered Institute of Build-
ing Services Engineers Guide (Books A and B).

6.11 Building durability
The durability of a building (i.e. its life expectancy and
its resistance to deterioration) is determined by deliberate
design decisions relating to structure and choice of mate-
rials as much as to the natural or precipitate process of
ageing. Within certain limits, the design of an industrial
building can and should take into account the predicted
use or lifespan of the process or method of operation
which it is to accommodate. To aim at durability beyond
that has ascertainable cost implications. These may be
acceptable if the building is to serve future known or
even unpredictable purposes.

6.11.1 Durability and plan form
If the plan of the building (and the same applies to its
cross-sectional features) is precisely and inﬂexibly related
to the initial plant layout and the production processes
known at design stage, non-adaptability to later desirable
changes in use is clearly a durability factor.

6.11.2 Structure and durability
The structural design of an industrial building will, ﬁrst,
reﬂect the requirements of plant layout and manufacturing
procedures. Apart from holding up the building envelope,
structural members will be designed and placed to support
particular static and dynamic loads. As with the plan form,

the shape and disposition of the structural features may
either curtail or allow extension of the life of the building.
Load-bearing perimeter walls exemplify the former and
maximum freedom from internal columns the latter. The
cost implications of reducing structural constraints and
thereby increasing durability need to be considered.

6.11.3 Cost of construction materials
There is a clear correlation between quality or cost of
materials and the durability/life expectancy of buildings.
Greater resistance of better materials to wear and tear can
be assumed, with obvious implications on future main-
tenance. Striking the best balance between initial capital
outlay and maintenance cost requires complex calcula-
tions that take into account such intangibles as future
interest rates and taxation of building operations.

6.11.4 Durability of materials
Apart from selecting better, more durable and expensive
(rather than cheaper) materials, their life can be prolonged
by appropriate treatment, coating or other protection, e.g.:

Mild steel: Galvanizing/plastic coating
Extruded aluminum: Anodizing/polyester
coating
Concrete: Integral or applied hardeners
Brickwork: Joint formation/masonry paint
screeds: Mineral or metallic
Cement
hardeners
Timber: Impregnation/staining.

powder

aggregate

Obviously, durability is greatly enhanced by specify-
ing stainless rather than mild steel, engineering rather
than common bricks, etc. Comparative life expectancies
of materials are tabulated in reference books such as that
published by NBA Construction Consultants Limited in
1985.

6.11.5 Damage and protection
Industrial buildings, more than most, are prone to dam-
age. Causes range from mechanical impact to chemical
attack resulting from the production process – quite apart
from heavy wear in normal use. Examples of causes and
available protective measures are as follows.

Mechanical impact

Vehicles (external): Buffer rails, ramps
Transporters (internal): Bollards, route demarcation,
column base plinths, guide rails, ﬂexible/automatic
doors
Production processes: Wall/ﬂoor shields pipe cages,
resilient rails
Craneage: Electromechanical limiters
People: Wall rails, door kick plates, foot mats (shop
ﬂoor ofﬁces)

Building maintenance 6/59

Humidity (condensation): Dehumidiﬁers,
ventilation, warmed surfaces
Atmosphere (external): Corrosion-resistant coatings,
fungicidal treatment, over-cladding
Fire: Smoke detectors, intumescent coatings/seals

insulation,

6.11.6 Details and speciﬁcation of construction

Design for durability, as deﬁned above, will be negated
if it does not take into account the essential need for ease
of maintenance or ignores sound speciﬁcation of work-
manship and constructional details. Deterioration factors
notorious for shortening the life of a building include
the ingress of moisture and structural or thermal move-
ment. Building Regulations and Codes of Practice, all
fully referred to in the National Building Speciﬁcation,
cover necessary safeguards against these and others.

6.12 Building maintenance
Maintenance is estimated to represent more than one third
of all building expenditure, which underlines its signiﬁ-
cance in the economic lifecycle of any building, the vital
importance of designing for it and skillfully managing its
execution.

6.12.1 Building records

The prerequisite for proper planning and performance of
building maintenance is the comprehensive set of draw-
ings, speciﬁcations and servicing manuals compiled by
architects, engineers, contractors and suppliers, respec-
tively. Those responsible for maintenance must ensure
that all records are kept up to date; computers are increas-
ingly used for this purpose.

6.12.2 Maintenance work

Depending on the scope and complexity of maintenance
as well as economic considerations, inspections and per-
formance will be (both or either) the responsibility of
in-house permanently employed staff or outside special-
ists or contractors. In the latter case, particular expertise
is required, and this should be reﬂected in the selec-
tion/procurement procedure.

6.12.3 Maintenance planning

The plant engineer and his maintenance manager will
establish whoever carries out the work, basic strategy,
programming and procedures. Inspection checklists and
record sheets are necessary for systematic location
of critical elements/potential defects and setting out
frequencies of inspection. Computers and work processors
are an obvious aid to effective maintenance management.
Inspection-based preventive methods are demonstrably
cost effective.

Chemical/atmospheric attack

6.12.4 Monitoring equipment

Plant/process emissions: Anti-corrosion coatings heat
shields, extractors

Most, if not all, of the equipment listed below is required,
even where outside specialists are generally retained to

6/60 Industrial Buildings

carry out maintenance (for either access or measurement),
including:

1. Tubular towers, ladders, long-arms, cleaning cradles;
2. Levels, tapes, thermometers, hydrometers, light meters,
smoke detectors, audio-sensors. Features such as cradle
rails, safety eyes and climbing irons should be incor-
porated into the design of the building.

6.13 Building repairs
The need for building repair arises from the inevitable
process of ageing, and such deterioration is brought to
light by systematic maintenance. There is also repair work
necessitated by damage from observable causes such as
physical impact (discussed elsewhere in this chapter).

6.13.1 Repair work

Depending on its complexity and urgency, repair work
may best be carried out by in-house staff employed and
trained for this purpose (but not necessarily to the exclu-
sion of other work) or by directly employed labor skilled
in particular trades or by specialist contractors. In many
cases immediate (but adequate) steps can be taken by
permanent staff, sufﬁcient to deal with an acute problem
while deferring more comprehensive or permanent repairs
to be carried out by outside specialists (possibly as part of
a regular maintenance program with resultant economies).

6.13.2 Repair: works speciﬁcation

Leaving aside stopgap emergency repairs, the work should
be done to a standard set by the original material and
workmanship speciﬁcation (which must be referred to by
whoever carries out the work), unless this has been found
to be inadequate. Qualiﬁed professionals with regard to
compatibility, cost and compliance with building regula-
tions must assess any deviation from original materials
or methods. The speciﬁcation must also take into account
limitations of the structure as originally designed.

If faulty speciﬁcation or unsuitable materials are found
to be the cause of defects requiring repairs, replacement
work should be considered in anticipation of problems
arising on a wider scale. A less disruptive repair program
may thereby be adopted compatible with routine mainte-
nance operations.

6.13.3 Flat roof defects

Unlike other defective building elements, roofs gener-
ally require prompt repairs. Latent defects in roofs can
go undetected with correspondingly more serious con-
sequences when they do manifest themselves. Regular
inspection of roofs is therefore doubly necessary, as well
as recognition of potential causes of damage, e.g.:

1. Inadequate falls and unimpeded water discharge;
2. Ultraviolet ray attack of unprotected rooﬁng;
3. Cracking caused by alternating expansion and

shrinkage;

4. Distortion of rooﬁng due to heat rejection (insulation);
5. Trafﬁc and impact damage of unprotected rooﬁng;
6. Perimeter constraint/up stand and ﬂashing details.

6.13.4 Roof repairs

Diagnosis of defects by inspection of visible causes or
more sophisticated means (tracer-dye inundation to ﬁnd
sources and routes of leaks, infrared photography, etc.) is
a prerequisite for correct repair speciﬁcation. Greater skill
in detailing and specifying suitable materials and methods
are required in the design of ﬂat roofs and the same applies
to repairs. Here, too, durability and effectiveness are, to
some extent, cost related.

Specialists should be employed to carry out roof repair
work that is able and willing to guarantee its quality and
life.

The Technical Guide to Flat Rooﬁng, published by the
Department of the Environment/PSA in 1987, is one of
the many useful reference books.

6.14 Domestic facilities
6.14.1 Toilet accommodation

Toilet accommodation encompasses the provision of water
closets, urinals, washbasins and/or washing troughs and,
depending on a particular trade or occupation, the provi-
sion of baths and/or showers. Provision of toilet accom-
modation is speciﬁed under Acts of Parliament, British
Standards, regulations and HM Inspector of Factories.

The provisions given in the various standards are essen-
tially minimum requirements only, and when assessing
quantities and type, the following should be considered:

1. Number of personnel and male/female ratio;
2. Is a shift system operating within the building?
3. Type of process in operation – dirty or clean, wet or

7. Provision for handicapped personnel;
8. Provision of facilities for female hygiene;
9. Changing-room facilities for male/female personnel.

6.14.2 Canteens

Canteen facilities for staff personnel can generally be
divided into two categories:

1. Provision of cold meals (sandwiches, cold buffets, etc.);
2. Provision of both hot and cold meals prepared by
resident staff or delivered under contract by outside
caterers.

Many industrial buildings offer canteen facilities free of
charge or at subsidized rates. However, before embarking

4. Specialized usage – sterile conditions, radioactive con-

5. Provision for remote-actuated appliances (i.e. foot

operated, photoelectric cell, etc.);

6. Ethnic considerations relating to siting of toilet accom-

dry;

tamination;

modation;

on the provision of canteen facilities the following points
should be considered:

1. Proximity of building relative to adjacent village, town

facilities;

visitors;

2. Hot and/or cold food and selective menu;
3. Number of meals to be catered for and operating hours;
4. Ethnic requirements (i.e. vegetarian, etc.);
5. Secondary catering facilities for senior staff and/or

6. Provision of separate hot, cold and drinking water ser-

vices for canteen facilities.

6.14.3 Rest rooms

Statutory requirements dictate that a space be set aside
within an industrial building for use as a rest room. The
usage and facilities available are often extremely varied,
and can be sub-divided as follows:

1. Use of room for morning/afternoon breaks;
2. Consumption of food at lunchtime in the absence of

canteen facilities;

3. Combined usage as a recreation room.

In providing rest room facilities the following points
should be considered:

1. Prime use of room as deﬁned above;
2. Number of persons to be accommodated;
3. Provision of drinking and snack facilities (i.e. tea-pre-
paration sink, vending machine, automated snack bar,
etc.);

4. Self-service or resident catering staff;
5. Male/female segregation;
6. Provision of recreation activities (i.e. darts, table ten-

nis, television, etc.);

7. Provision of room furniture.

6.14.4 First-aid facilities

It is a statutory requirement that ﬁrst-aid facilities be avail-
able at all times for staff personnel. This facility is very
diverse and can extend from a ﬁrst-aid cabinet to the
provision of a ﬁrst-aid room and attendant semi-resident
nurse/doctor. The extent of ﬁrst-aid facilities is dependent
on the following:

1. Type of building and nature of business (i.e. dirty pro-

duction line, computer components);

2. Number of

staff personnel

to be serviced and

3. Proximity of building to easily accessible external

4. Provision of ﬁrst-aid trained staff from within the

male/female ratio;

medical facilities;

building personnel;

5. Provision of emergency equipment for specialized
building activities (i.e. chemical, radio-active contam-
ination);

6. Provision of bed furniture, stretchers, respirators, etc.;
7. Provision of separate toilet
resident

facilities for

nurse/doctor;

8. Ethnic considerations.

6.14.5 Detail design

Elevators 6/61

Quantity of sanitary ﬁttings shall be based on total num-
bers of personnel per shift and not total number of employ-
ees per day.

Where dirty or wet processing occurs continuously
within a building, personnel at the end of the day or shift
may consider the provision of baths and showers for use.
Working areas within certain industrial buildings may
have restricted access (i.e. sterile laboratories, radioactive
areas). Separate toilet accommodation may be required
in these areas, an assessment of which may be obtained
from the operator and reference to such publications as
Atomic Energy Code of Practice, Laboratory Practice. It
may also be necessary to operate such appliances remotely
by photoelectric cell, sonic control or foot control.

Where building employees are from mainly ethnic com-
munities, consideration should be given to the position-
ing of toilet facilities so that religious beliefs are not
compromised.

In addition to the general employees of a building, the
following specialized personnel should also be considered:

1. Disabled
2. Elderly
3. Administration
4. Catering
5. Visitors.

It is a requirement of the Building Regulations 1985,
Schedule 2,
to provide facilities for disabled people.
Where provision within industrial buildings for elderly
persons are required, reference should be made to the
DSS. Consideration should also be given to providing
water at lower temperatures to appliances exclusively for
used by elderly and/or disabled persons.

Sanitary-towel disposal must be provided in each fe-
male toilet. The type of disposal can be by macerator,
incinerator, bag or chemical.

Separate changing-room facilities for male and female

personnel would include the following:

1. Personal locker with lock for change of clothes at the

end of a shift or day;

2. Bench/chair for seating.

The location of an industrial building relative to adja-
cent shops, village and town may well inﬂuence the pro-
vision of canteen facilities as well as the type of service
to be provided.

Where full canteen facilities are provided an accurate
assessment of the hours of operation must be obtained so
that plant and services are correctly sized. The operating
hours will also greatly inﬂuence the need to provide sep-
arate plant from the main building, especially if meals are
to be provided at the end of each shift.

6.15 Elevators
6.15.1 Introduction

The planning of elevator systems should be one of the ﬁrst
to be considered, usually alongside the initial building

6/62 Industrial Buildings

structure, bearing in mind the long lead in times and
structural requirements. It is important that the correct
conﬁguration is established early, as changes later can be
difﬁcult to incorporate.

The ﬁrst essential step in the system design is goods

and pedestrian planning, i.e.

1. How many people require transportation?
2. What will be the peak demand and how and when will

3. How many ﬂoors will the elevator system serve?
4. What are the loads/sizes of goods/equipment requiring

it occur?

transportation?

The responses to these questions can be used to determine
the number of elevators required, the size of the car, the
door arrangement and the speed of car travel. Other major
considerations should be the location of elevators within
the building and accessibility for disabled users.

6.15.2 Elevator system design — drive systems

There are various types of drive systems employed
throughout the elevator industry, and the following are
the most commonly used:

1. Electric a.c. motor with gearbox;
2. Gearless electric d.c. motor;
3. Hydraulic.

Electric a.c. motor with gearbox

Elevators of this type are normally rope driven and are
the most common drive used in elevator installations. The
gearbox is ﬁtted with a grooved traction sheave on which
a series of steel ropes are wound. The ropes are attached
to the top of the elevator car, wrapped around the traction
sheave (and occasionally secondary sheaves) and attached
to a counterweight of equal mass to the car and a percent-
age of its rated load (normally 40 per cent).

This drive can be used for a wide range of car sizes but
has a limit to the speed of travel of approximately 2.5 m/s.
The elevator machine room is usually located above the
elevator shaft. However, bottom-of-shaft machine rooms
are not unknown, although they tend to be more costly.

Gearless electric d.c. motor

Elevators of this type are of a conﬁguration similar to
the geared drive systems mentioned above. The difference
lies in the increase in the physical size of the drive as
the required operating torque of a gearless d.c. motor is
produced at a fraction of the rpm of a geared a.c. motor.
The cost of these drives is signiﬁcantly greater than
that of a comparable geared drive, but the quality of ride
and maximum speed of car travel are much improved.
Gearless drives usually have applications in prestige of-
ﬁces and hotels where the elevator travel is in excess
of 35 m.

Hydraulic elevators

Elevators of this type are generally used for low-rise appli-
cations and if good leveling accuracy at each landing is
required. Hydraulic elevators are either the direct-acting
type, where a hydraulic ram acts on the underside of the
elevator car, or the suspended type, where the ram acts on
the top of the car via a series of ropes or chains and pul-
leys. Hydraulic elevators can be used for very large goods
elevators when two or more hydraulic rams are used, but
are limited to a slow car speed, which improves to a maxi-
mum of 1.5 m/s for small elevator applications. Hydraulic
elevators have an advantage over rope-traction elevators
in that the elevator machine room can be situated remotely
from the elevator shaft with a connection to the elevator
ram via ﬂexible hydraulic pipe work. Hydraulic elevators
have a limited maximum travel which is approximately
12 m for (up to) 1000 kg car size and 8 m for car sizes
over 1500 kg.

6.15.3 Elevator machine rooms

Each elevator or group of elevators requires a elevator
machine room that should be designed complete with:

1. Drive system machinery, pulley mechanisms and con-

2. Elevator beams tested for safe working loading;
3. Adequate emergency lighting, small power and 110 V

trol panels;

sockets;

4. Adequate ventilation/cooling/heating/frost protection

as required by BS 5655;

5. Fire detection and alarms;
6. An electrical switchgear panel that provides an electri-

cal supply to each elevator machine.

The elevator motor room should be identiﬁed with
safety signs as required in BS 5655 and should be secured
to allow access by authorized persons only.

6.15.4 Elevator control in the event of ﬁre

In the event of ﬁre within a building, the controller for
each elevator should isolate all manually operated inputs
and return automatically to the evacuation level, usually
the ground ﬂoor. An output from the building ﬁre alarm
panel is ‘hard wired’ to the elevator controller, giving the
signal for a ﬁre condition. The elevator remains disabled
at the evacuation level and the car doors open. If a ﬁre
ofﬁcer requires control of a elevator a key switch or break-
glass unit should be used to re-activate the elevator.

6.15.5 Fireﬁghting elevators

These should not be confused with elevators ﬁtted with
a ﬁre ofﬁcer’s override control. A ﬁreﬁghting elevator is
required for any building exceeding 18 m in height or 9 m
in depth below the evacuation level, and is to be used to
allow ﬁre ofﬁcers to maneuver personnel and equipment
during ﬁreﬁghting operations.
A ﬁreﬁghting elevator must:

1. Not be a goods elevator under normal operating

conditions;

2. Have a minimum size of 8 persons/630 kg;
3. Be installed in a ﬁreﬁghting shaft with 2-hour ﬁre-rated

walls;

car;

cable;

4. Have suitable ﬁre-retarding ﬁnishes for the elevator

5. Have a separate emergency electrical supply and feeder

6. Have a machine room located above the elevator shaft;
7. Be able to complete a journey in less than 60 seconds.

6.16 Sub-ground pits and basements
Sub-ground pits may be required for access, service
distribution or process requirements. Depending on pit
dimensions and water table levels, problems that may
have to be considered at the design stage include ‘heave’
due to relief of overburden, buoyancy from water pressure
and waterprooﬁng.

6.16.1 Waterprooﬁng

There are three standard solutions to waterprooﬁng pits
and basements:

1. Watertight concrete construction;
2. Drained cavity construction;
3. External continuous impervious membrane (tanking).

Base slab

Fiberboard
protection to
membrane from
backfill operation

Fillet

Min 150

50 mm Screed

Waterproof membrane

Min 100 mm thick concrete
blinding GR 20 wood
float finish

Figure 6.15 A typical external waterproof membrane detail

Internal and external decoration 6/63

Watertight concrete construction

This relies on the integrity of the concrete construction
itself with reference to design (crack control, joint spacing
and detailing, concrete mix) and skilled workmanship and
supervision.

Drained cavity construction

This is also based on watertight concrete construction
but accepts that some seepage may occur through the
external concrete wall. The water is kept away from a
separate inner-skin wall by an intervening drained cavity.
An internal vapor barrier may be applied to the inner-skin
wall to limit humidity, but the cavity may then require
ventilation to prevent condensation.

External waterproof membrane

Two possible forms of membrane are hot applied mastic
asphalt or bitumen/butyl rubber sheeting with welded or
glued joints. The membrane under the ﬂoor slabs has to be
lapped with that around the walls. It is essential that the
membrane is protected during construction, and a typical
arrangement is as shown in Figure 6.15.

6.17 Internal and external decoration
6.17.1 Internal

Ceiling, wall and ﬂoor ﬁnishes can be separated into ‘wet’
and ‘dry’ ﬁnishes. Below is a listing of the common types
of wet and dry ﬁnishes currently in use.

Wet ﬁnishes

1. Plasterwork
2. Screeds
3. Tiling
4. Paint ﬁnishes
5. Wet structural ﬁre-protection systems.

Dry ﬁnishes

1. Dry lining (plasterboard)
2. False (suspended) ceilings
3. Wall claddings
4. Dry ﬂoor ﬁnishes (thermoplastic sheeting, carpeting,

raised deck ﬂooring, etc.)

5. Dry structural ﬁre-protection systems.

The selection of ﬁnishes is generally made against the
following parameters or constraints:

1. Acoustic performance
2. Environmental conditions
3. Life expectancy/maintenance requirements
4. Safety requirements (both installation and use)
5. Fire rating/ﬂame spread
6. Aesthetic considerations
7. Flexibility of use
8. Load-bearing requirements

6/64 Industrial Buildings

9. Costs
10. Installation time/disruption.

should be selected to be resilient

Environmental conditions
All ﬁnishes
to
expected average and worst-case environmental exposure
temperature, airborne
such as high/low humidity or
contaminants,
aggressive
liquid
spillages, cleanliness/hygiene requirements, etc.

vibration,

possible

Life expectancy/maintenance requirements
Many ﬁnishes exhibit low maintenance requirements (e.g.
plasticzed metallic sheeting, epoxy coatings, continuous
tiling systems, etc.). Others may be more maintenance
intensive and may provide lower durability. However,
selection must also consider the other operating param-
eters such as acoustic performance (which may mandate
heavier mass or more porous-surfaced materials) or load-
bearing capabilities, etc.

Safety requirements
Materials containing toxic or irritant materials should
be avoided. Flooring ﬁnishes should exhibit non-slip
properties but be cleanable and not provide excessive
crenellations, etc., for contaminants. Materials will need
to be certiﬁcated in terms of ﬁre resistance (to the passage
of ﬁre) and ﬂame spread. They are classiﬁed when tested
against BS 476 and the National Building Regulations.
Some materials (such as PVC) emit toxic fumes when
burning. Structural integrity must also be assessed where
secondary cladding or suspended ﬁnishes are being
utilized, particularly where load-bearing abilities are
required (such as suspended ceilings or wall claddings).

Aesthetic considerations
While this may appear to be self-explanatory, the need to
change color schemes or textures over the lifetime of the
installation will need to be reviewed. Self-colored materi-
als do not typically take secondary coatings such as paint
or stain.

Flexibility of use
Consideration should be given to likely layout or usage
changes. Generally, wet materials will provide least ﬂex-
ibility in terms of subsequent removal and reinstallation.
However, they may be more conducive to changes in
usage of the space.

Costs and installation time
It is generally accepted that the use of dry materials results
in shorter and less disruptive installations, particularly if
modular systems are used. However, these materials may
well not offer the least expensive solution.

6.17.2 External

In many ways, the same criteria apply to the selection of
external ﬁnish materials as to internal ﬁnishes, and can be

identiﬁed as ‘wet’ or ‘dry’ types. However, increasingly,
dry cladding (roof and wall) and bonded roof membrane
systems are being used in preference to more traditional
rendering and liquid applied rooﬁng membranes.

If extensions are being made to existing facilities or
buildings adjacent
to ‘traditional’ structures then this
may require the use of brickwork cladding or block
and render in order to satisfactorily ‘marry’ with the
existing structures. Care must be taken to ensure such
extensions/additions meet current building regulations,
bylaws, standards and codes of practice.

are

resistance

their weather

Of major importance when selecting suitable exterior
ﬁnish materials
and
‘weathering’ characteristics (with particular reference to
ultraviolet resistance and moisture staining),
including
resistance
to biological/vegetable growth. Cladding
systems, particularly, should be examined against their
wind and moisture penetration resistance. External
building elements, either individually or when viewed
as a collective system, must comply with the thermal
transmittance requirements of the building regulations.

Corrosion resistance should also be considered with
particular reference to the ambient environment. Painting
schemes, coating materials and other protective skins
(along with the substrate bonding method) should all be
reviewed against the prevailing conditions.

6.18 Industrial ground ﬂoors
The ground ﬂoor of an industrial building is arguably
the most important structural element. Failure of a ﬂoor
slab or even a topping can lead to enormous expense and
disruption due to repair or replacement. Considerations in
the design of a ground slab may include:

1. Loading (uniformly distributed loads and point loads)
2. Abrasion/impact resistance
3. Chemical resistance
4. Flatness
5. Ease of cleaning.

It is important that these are accurately assessed since
under-speciﬁcation may lead to severe maintenance prob-
lems while over-speciﬁcation may result in substantial
cost increases.

6.18.1 Structural form

Dependent on ground conditions, loading requirements
and settlement limits, industrial ground ﬂoors may be
ground bearing, raft construction or piled. The piled
option should, if possible, be avoided, as the cost
is
comparatively very high.

Rafts

Rafts fall into a category between fully stiff (behaving as
a rigid body) and fully ﬂexible. The raft may also support
the superstructure. A soil/structure interaction study must
be carried out to estimate the degree to which loads are
distributed by the raft. Hence, the resulting slab forces
and required reinforcement are calculated.

Ground-bearing slabs

Ground-bearing slabs are typically the cheapest and most
common form of industrial ground ﬂoor, and rely on the
tensile capacity of concrete. Any reinforcement provided
is to reduce the potential for cracking from shrinkage and
thermal effects. The degree of reinforcement is therefore
primarily dependent on slab thickness and joint spacing
(Figure 6.16).

The detailing arrangement of

joints is of prime
importance in the slab performance. The purpose of these
joints is to concentrate cracks at speciﬁc locations, isolate
the slab from other structural elements and sometimes to
allow for expansion or articulation.

The main elements of a ground-bearing slab are:

1. Sub-grade: the material at formation level after exca-

vating or inﬁlling;

2. Sub-base: selected imported granular material to form
a stable level surface on which to construct the slab.
Where lean-mix concrete is not used the surface is
normally blinded with sharp sand;

3. Slip membrane: serves to reduce friction between the
slab and sub-base to minimize subsequent slab crack-
ing. This is normally a polyethylene sheet. It may also
serve as a damp-proof membrane;

4. Structural slab: usually with single layer of reinforce-

ment in the top;

5. Wearing surface: may be the ﬁnished slab surface or

the surface of an applied topping.

6.18.2 Abrasion resistance

Abrasion resistance can be inﬂuenced by:

1. Concrete mix
2. Method of ﬁnishing the concrete
3. Method of curing
4. The addition of surface hardeners or sprinkle ﬁnishes

(metallic or non-metallic)
5. The addition of toppings.

6.18.3 Chemical resistance

Chemical resistance is normally achieved by synthetic
resin toppings, polymer or resin-modiﬁed cementitious
toppings or modular (tiled or paver) toppings.

Wearing surface

Screed if required

Concrete slab

Slip membrane

Sand/concrete blinding
Sub-base/hardcore
Sub-grade/natural ground

Figure 6.16 A typical section through a bearing slab

Ground considerations 6/65

6.18.4 Flatness
Flatness is of critical importance to some sections of
industrial operations such as VNA (very narrow aisle)
high rack warehouses or automatic guided vehicles. The
degree of ﬂatness achieved is dependent on construction
techniques, workmanship and supervision.

Traditionally, global tolerances have been speciﬁed for
any point on the ﬂoor relative to datum and local toler-
ances speciﬁed relative to a 3 m straight edge. For VNA
type requirements tolerances distinguish between areas of
deﬁned movement (i.e. predetermined vehicle routes) and
areas of free movement (the rest of the slab).

6.18.5 Dusting
High-quality concrete slabs that have been well ﬁnished
should not give rise to dusting. Complete avoidance of
dust, however, will only be achieved by the addition
of a resin or chemical sealer. Chemical sealers (such as
silicoﬂuorides and silicates) give little increased abrasion
resistance, and can themselves be prone to dusting on
over-application.

6.19 Ground considerations
6.19.1 Existing site conditions

The existing site conditions, which can inﬂuence the de-
sign, construction and performance of industrial buildings
and their operations, include:

1. Topography – surface topology, watercourses,

sur-

rounding property, vegetation, access;

2. Geology;
3. Groundwater conditions;
4. Site history – industrial contamination, mining, domes-

tic refuse, old foundations, cellars, tunnels;

5. Existing buried or overhead services;
6. Liability to ﬂooding, wind or sea erosion, subsidence,

slope instability;

7. Liability to vibration from earthquakes, railway tunnels.

6.19.2 Contaminated sites
Extensive available level sites have sometimes previously
accommodated gas works, chemical works, munitions
factories, or industrial or domestic refuse tips. These sites
require special consideration as regards protection of the
structure to be built, the construction workforce and the
building occupants.

Refuse tips invariably result in the production of methane
from the decay of organic matter. Measures are necessary
to avoid trapping the methane in or beneath the building.
This can be achieved by a system of methane vent pipes
in the ﬁll together with an impermeable membrane at sub-
ground-ﬂoor level. Alternatively, a vented cavity can be
constructed sub-ground ﬂoor.

6.19.3 Foundations
The foundation system will be based on such information
as can be determined together with physical and chemical

6/66 Industrial Buildings

testing carried out on samples procured from a site
investigation. In regions of very poor ground conditions,
there is sometimes an option of utilizing a ground-
improvement technique such as dynamic consolidation.

6.19.4 Existing services

Existing services are important in two respects:

1. They may have to be rerouted or the structural scheme

amended to avoid clashes;

2. The services required for the new industrial operation

must usually tie into the existing infrastructure.

6.19.5 Car parking
Car parking area per car (space C road), is approximately
25 m2. Standard car parking dimensions are 4.8 m ð
2.3 m (3.3 m for disabled persons) with access roads
6 m wide. Petrol interceptors for surface water from car
parking areas are required where 50 spaces or more are
provided.

7

7/67

Planning and
Plant Layout

Roland R Gibson
Engineering Consultant, W. S. Atkins
Consultants Ltd

Contents

7.1 Introduction
7.2 Technological development and its effect upon plant layout

7/69

7/69

7.3 Layout planning concepts
7.4 Plant data

7/70
7.4.1 Collection
7.4.2 Analysis

7/70

7/71

7/69

7.5 Process/site layout modeling
7.5.1 Computer modeling
7.5.2 Model construction
7.5.3 Model for change
7.5.4 Determination of factory areas 7/76

7/72
7/72
7/74

7/74

7.6 Design synthesis

7/76

7.6.1 Plant activities and intercommunications
7.6.2 Location criteria and boundary groups

7/76

7/76

7.7 Site layout realization 7/79

7.7.1 Process and trafﬁc ﬂows 7/79
7.7.2 Site constraints
7.7.3 Ease of expansion
7.7.4 Options

7/79

7/80

7/81

7.8 Internal layouts of buildings

7/81

7.8.1 Process ﬂows and performance indicators
7.8.2 Process equipment
7.8.3 Material handling
7.8.4 Storage
7.8.5 Electrical distribution
7.8.6 Building utilities

7/81
7/81

7/82

7/83

7/81

7/81

7.9 Selling the concept
7.10 Implementation 7/83
7.11 Consultants

7/83

7/83

7.11.1 Justiﬁcation for consultants
7.11.2 Speciﬁcation

7/84

7/83

7.1 Introduction
Plant layout can affect the total operation of a company,
including the production processes, equipment, storage,
dispatch and administration. It has a direct effect upon
production efﬁciency and economics of the operation, the
morale of employees and can affect the physical health of
operatives.

A production facility will be considered as a facility
for processing pharmaceuticals or food products or man-
ufacturing engineering products or consumer goods. The
facility must utilize real estate, equipment, materials and
labor to generate proﬁt for investors and, philosophically,
to enrich the life of all associated with it.

Layout planning involves knowledge of a wide range of
technologies that will extend beyond those of individual
planners and the full range of expertise may not exist in a
production facility. Consultants can provide the expertise
but guidance can be found in the published works listed
in the References.

The design methods presented here allow a layout plan
to be quickly formulated. The methods rely upon a thor-
ough understanding of factory operations gained from
experience and a good understanding of the relationship
between people and equipment. When such an under-
standing is not present, a more rigorous approach is rec-
ommended. Muther1 published a formalized procedure in
1973, Tompkins, and White2 a more academic method in
1984, both valuable contributions to problems of layout
planning.

The ﬁrst step in any design is to identify the real need,
and this is often the most difﬁcult task. Without it, designs
can be produced which do not satisfy the requirements and
the result is often unsatisfactory. It is essential to clearly
deﬁne the objectives of the task and to re-conﬁrm the
objectives as time progresses. A useful aid is a value
analysis at the end of the concept design stage. This
assesses the design for value for money while meeting
the deﬁned project objectives. A good source document
is A Study of Value Management and Quantity Surveying
Practice, published by The Royal Institute of Chartered
Surveyors.

A criterion of effective plant operation used to be efﬁ-
cient utilization of capital equipment. The main require-
ment is now recognized as short door-to-door times, not
short ﬂoor-to-ﬂoor times. The prime need is therefore to
achieve a plant layout that facilitates reception of raw
materials and dispatch of ﬁnished goods in the shortest
possible time with minimum capital tied up in work in
progress (WIP). This involves access to the site, reception
of goods vehicles, raw material goods storage and issue
to production, procurement of component parts and sub-
assemblies from sub-contractors, process technology and
process routes, integrating the sub-contractors’ supplies,
ﬁnished goods storage and dispatch to the customer.

Layout planning concepts 7/69

These developments, employed by companies now called
World Class Manufacturers (WCM),3 must be examined
by the company management who are contemplating esta-
blishing a new factory or expanding or reorganizing an
existing plant.

Much of the new thinking on strategy has centered
on advanced technology and the exploitation of the
computer, but the following recommendations, requiring
minimum investment in new plant, should be considered
ﬁrst:

1. Establish the operational priorities:
(a) Production to be sales driven;
(b) Make only what can be immediately sold;
(c) Make every part right ﬁrst time.

2. Reorganize production equipment:

(a) Consider process orientation but employ product-

oriented ﬂow when possible;

(b) Organize products into groups that require the

same manufacturing equipment;

(c) Arrange equipment into product cells.
3. Re-form the structure of production teams:

(a) Form accountability teams for each product;
(b) Bring staff functions onto the shop ﬂoor and into
the teams, form quality circles and establish total
quality control (TQC).

These ideas, interestingly described by Goldratt and
Cox,4 provide ﬂexible production and cater for customer
requirements. They have become known as just in time
(JIT) manufacture, but are often overlooked by many that
think that investment in computer-controlled equipment
is the only way to go. The concept, simplify before you
automate, can provide signiﬁcant improvements in pro-
duction and can point the way to later advanced manu-
facturing where:

1. Equipment cells can be replaced by computer-coordi-
(DNC),
(FMS), ﬂexible

nated machines – direct numerical control
ﬂexible manufacturing
manufacturing cells (FMC);

systems

2. Warehousing automated to include computer-controlled
storing and retrieval (AS/AR) and movement by auto-
matic guided vehicles (AGV);

3. Whole manufacturing processes computer

linked

(CAM);

4. Computer-aided design (CAD);
5. Sales and management computerized, leading to com-

puter-integrated manufacture (CIM).

The development of these technologies can be followed
in the proceedings of the professional institutions and the
many magazines, some available free. You should deﬁne
the state of technological awareness in the company and
consider how this affects the plant layout.

7.2 Technological development and its
effect upon plant layout
There have been important world developments in the phi-
losophy of factory operation and they affect plant layouts.

7.3 Layout planning concepts
A process of analysis often executes designs. The methods
vary from the traditional and well tried to experimental
techniques. These include:

7/70 Planning and Plant Layout

1. A conventional plan drawing;
2. Cardboard cut-outs depicting blocks of buildings

pinned to an outline drawing of the site;

3. Three-dimensional scale models;
4. Software calculation and simulation packages.

the actual

Proprietary systems are available10,11 employing Lego
type blocks which can be constructed and placed on a
baseboard to represent a three-dimensional visualization
of the layout. Another system employs aluminum castings
of
items of equipment and operatives.
Cardboard cutouts have been the most commonly used
method, particularly with those who rarely plan layouts.
The above methods allow proposed layouts to be
visualized, analyzed and altered. These methods are often
a try-it-and-see process, and the associated analysis is
rarely structured. The old saying that ‘If it looks right,
it is right’ is often used to justify results, but it may be
more true to say that if it looks right it is conventional,
and the analysis method will rarely produce something
original. This applies, of course, to any design activity,
whether it is a plant layout, a piece of machinery or a
consumer product.

Computer-aided methods are increasingly being used to
assist design and a process of synthesis, described later,
employs techniques to produce a design that will satisfy
predetermined criteria. This produces a layout that can be
subjected to critical review, and suggested changes to the
layout can be examined for violation of the criteria.

The introduction of computers to many companies
allows proprietary software to be used for layout design.5
Spreadsheet, mathematical modeling and computer-aided
design (CAD) techniques are available and greatly assist
the design process, and have added to the resources
available to planners. However,
the traditional scale
models described above will still be useful to present the
result to management and shop ﬂoor personnel.

7.4 Plant data
7.4.1 Collection
The objective of the production process is to produce the
right goods of the right quality and at the right price
in order to generate a ﬁnancial proﬁt from the capital
investment, but the plant layout fundamentally affects this
objective.

The essential requirement for any design exercise is
a thorough understanding of the working medium. For
layouts, this means collecting sufﬁcient data to describe
those characteristics of the company which affect the lay-
out. Data collection is time consuming and difﬁcult, and it
requires the contribution of factory personnel from many
departments. The data required includes:

1. The company organization structure

All departments, including maintenance
This should be readily available from the personnel
department but may need to be updated.

2. Number of employees in each department and shift

Administration staff
Technical staff

Factory workers direct
Factory workers indirect
This and the next item will be obtained from the per-
sonnel department, but the actual working situation
will probably need to be conﬁrmed with the individ-
ual managers of the various process departments.

3. Hours and the arrangements for shift working
Administration and technical staff on day shift
Difﬁculty is often experienced when workers are
shared between departments. Some information will
not be documented but since employees are generally
paid for attendance hours these are meticulously
recorded.
Factory workers on each of the worked shifts
Consider the arrangements for holidays
Quantify work contracted to outside organizations
Work contracted out is usually difﬁcult to quantify.
The accounts department will probably have records
of the cost of such work and this can be employed to
provide an indication of the signiﬁcance of the work
in relation to the operations within the company.

4. Process ﬂow diagram

Description of the products
Description of the processes

Flow diagram showing process material ﬂow, scrap
and recycled material. Brief descriptions of the prod-
ucts are usually sufﬁcient for the early stages of analy-
sis of the company operation. The information will be
ampliﬁed during the subsequent stages of the study.

5. Layout plans for all areas of the site

Calculate the covered areas for all process areas. Cal-
culate the areas taken up by services such as the
boiler house, fuel-storage farm, etc. Layout plans are
often available but the areas devoted to the vari-
ous activities in the plant will need to be discussed
with the individual area managers. The actual area
in square meters or square feet will need to be esti-
mated by scaling from the drawings and measure-
ment on site. List the items of equipment on the
site. Identify the location of the items on the layout
plan. This information may exist. It will be needed
for designing the layouts of the internals of the fac-
tory buildings and it is useful to initiate the quest
for the information during the early stages of the
project.

The types and numbers of vehicles moving around
the site and vehicles arriving from outside the plant
must be considered. Identify interdepartmental vehi-
cle movements. It is useful to start with the records
from the gatehouse, which will indicate the number
of vehicles arriving at the plant each day. This will
need to be conﬁrmed with the plant manager who
will know if abnormal conditions existed during the
time for which the records are valid. Aim to establish
average and maximum numbers.

The quantities of main consumables used. Electricity,
water and gas will be included in this item but of more
importance to the plant layout are those items that
occupy site space. Fuel oil is such an item, and it is

6. Vehicle movements

7. Consumables

Plant data 7/71

this is not always true, so data collectors should use their
judgement regarding what is sufﬁcient.

The data needed to plan the site layout are shown in

the form of a questionnaire in Figure 7.1.

After the site layout has been determined, the layout
of equipment inside the buildings will need to be consid-
ered. Details of the individual items of equipment will be
needed, and Figure 7.2 lists the required information in
the form of a questionnaire.

The areas for administration and amenities will need to
be identiﬁed and in some countries, space will be required
for accommodation and a mosque.

7.4.2 Analysis

The collection and tabulation of data will provide an
opportunity to become familiar with the company and
will generate a good understanding of the operation of
the plant. Much of the data will be needed to establish
the models needed to size the various areas of the
plant. For instance, hours worked should be analyzed
to identify shift work, direct and indirect effort, and
the normal and overtime activity. Outside contractors
may be employed, and this contribution will need to
be determined, sometimes by visiting the contractor’s
facilities. When expansions are being planned, it may
be necessary to discuss the contributions that outside
contractors make to the factory and assess the increase
which they can accommodate.

8. Efﬂuent

important to establish whether the existing facilities,
e.g. a fuel-storage farm, are sufﬁcient for the planned
operations in the factory.

It should be established whether the area allocated to
efﬂuent treatment is sufﬁcient, whether the technol-
ogy is up to date and determine what inﬂuence the
ﬁndings will have upon the efﬂuent treatment area
and the whole plant layout.

9. Site features

Site features can be obtained by observation and ord-
nance maps may be available from the drawing ofﬁce.
The features that need to be recorded are listed in
Section 7.7.2.
10. Future plans

It might be assumed that if an examination of the
plant layout is being carried out, the future plans,
as they affect the site layout, will be known. This is
not always the case; therefore, management should be
questioned at the beginning of the project. Particular
attention should be paid to hazardous substances that
may be used on the site, and the health and safety
document6 should be consulted.

Pareto, the Italian economist, observed that 85 per cent
of wealth is owned by 15 per cent of the population, and it
is sometimes stated that 15 per cent of a company’s prod-
ucts generate 85 per cent of the turnover. Some workers
have interpreted this to mean that 15 per cent of the data
will sufﬁce, but Tompkins and White2 demonstrated that

Figure 7.1 Equipment data sheet

7/72 Planning and Plant Layout

Figure 7.2 Basic user requirements schedule

7.5 Process/site layout modeling
Site and factory layout designs are needed when new
installations are being planned or changes to existing facil-
ities are investigated. New layouts are examined when
increased efﬁciency is being sought and when plant man-
agers are planning expansions to the existing installations.
There is also a need for plant managers to anticipate the
changing requirements of both site and plant over future
years.

When a new installation is being planned,

the site
requirements will be predetermined, but when future
expansions are being investigated, a model for sizing is
invaluable.

7.5.1 Computer modeling

The use of computer models to assist in plant layout deci-
sions can often be helpful, but a clear understanding of
what they can and cannot do is needed. Used blindly, they
can lead to solutions which are, in some sense, optimal
but which have little practical merit.

In discussing the beneﬁts and limitations of modeling

we distinguish between three types:

1. Optimizing calculations for plant layout;
2. Flowsheet models for sizing the individual items of

equipment;

3. Simulation models for understanding the interaction

between different manufacturing units.

Optimizing plant layouts

Historically, modeling techniques have had little impact
on the problem of designing plant layouts. This has been
for two reasons. First, the calculations are difﬁcult, and
second, practical constraints and considerations essential
to the decision are often ignored.

To understand the mathematics, consider a large empty
space into which a number of production units are to be
placed, and assume that the major variable to be optimized
is the cost of transporting materials between them. If the
manufacturing process is essentially a ﬂow-line opera-
tion, then the order in which units should be placed is
clear (from the point of view of transport costs), and the
problem is simply to ﬁt them into the space available. In
a job-shop, where materials are ﬂowing between many
or all the production units, the decision is more difﬁ-
cult. All the potential combinations of units and locations

Process/site layout modeling 7/73

Figure 7.2 continued

could be enumerated on a computer and the resultant cost
of each option obtained. The number of combinations
quickly becomes large, however, and more sophisticated
methods, such as branch-and-bound techniques, are requi-
red for complex problems.

Alternatively, the location of subsets of plant, within
is assumed to be ﬁxed, could be

which the layout
optimized.

Solutions of this nature ignore practical considerations
of noise, hazardous areas, etc. unless these are specif-
ically entered as constraints. Furthermore, if the site is
geometrically complex, then additional detail will need to
be included in the problem formulation.

Flowsheet models for plant sizing

The consistent sizing (i.e. balancing the capacities) of the
equipment that is to make up a plant is obviously of
importance in the overall design. Models used for this
type of decision are usually an extension of the manual
calculations that a designer would normally make.

They are based on a network of activities (or machines)
with ﬂows of materials between them. Relationships
between the activities are expressed in terms of yields
or unit consumption and, for a given output of ﬁnished
products,
the required output from each of the other
activities can be calculated.

The complexity of the plant and the type and number of
sensitivity tests to be carried out will determine whether
a formal model or a simple calculation is needed.

Flowsheet models assume that activities operate at a
constant rate. This is an important limitation, and may be
an oversimpliﬁcation. To overcome this, simulation tech-
niques can be employed.

These models, however, can be useful if estimates are
to be made of operating costs. By assigning ﬁxed and
variable costs to each activity, average and marginal unit
costs at each stage of the process can be easily calculated,
which will assist in decisions regarding pricing policies
or whether to buy in components and materials or make
them on site. ATPLAN12 is an example of a network-
based model of this type.

7/74 Planning and Plant Layout

Simulation models

Simulation models aim to replicate the workings and logic
of a real system by using statistical descriptions of the
activities involved. For example, a line may run at an
average rate of 1000 units per hour. If we assume that
this is always the case, we lose the understanding of what
happens when, say, there is a breakdown or a halt for
routine maintenance. The effect of such a delay may be
ampliﬁed (or absorbed) when we consider the effect on
downstream units.

It also has a description of

A simulation model has ‘entities’

(e.g. machines,
materials, people, etc.) and ‘activities’ (e.g. processing,
transporting, etc.).
the
logic governing each activity. For example, a pro-
cessing activity can only start when a certain quantity
of working material is available, a person to run the
machine and an empty conveyor to take away the product.
Once an activity has started, a time to completion
is calculated, often using a sample from a statistical
distribution.

The model is started and continues to run over time,
obeying the logical rules that have been set up. Results
are
then extracted concerning throughputs, delays,
etc.

It is clear that simulation models can replicate a com-
plex production system. They can be used to indicate the
level of shared resources needed by the operation (e.g.
forklift trucks or operators), the speed of lines, sizes of
vessels or storage tanks, etc.

A number of packages are available for quickly build-
ing simulation models. HOCUS13 and SEEWHY14 are
two major UK systems. They allow graphical displays to
be used to show, for example, the movement of staff and
materials between machines. This can be useful for under-
standing the way in which the operation is reacting to
particular adverse circumstances and can assist in design-
ing methods of avoiding them (for example, by building
in redundancy).

Simulation models can be expensive to build and the
results obtained need to be
analyzed with care
because they are statistical in nature. For example, two
runs of the model may give different results – just as
the performance on two real days in a factory can vary.
Sufﬁciently large samples need to be taken therefore for
a proper understanding of
the
plant.

the performance of

7.5.2 Model construction

A simple model can be produced using the areas required
for the various site activities for different scenarios. These
might include redistribution of a company’s manufactur-
ing facilities, changes in the market demand, or simply
increased factory output.

Constructing the model is an area where innovative
effort is needed to maximize the validity of the model. The
model will vary from industry to industry, but a simple
one can start with a relationship between the number of
employee hours and the output produced in each discrete
activity area on the site, e.g.

Activity area
Raw material

store

Process areas

Finished goods

store

Maintenance

Output

Tonnage/volume

handled

Output tonnage

or volume

Tonnage/volume

handled

Speciﬁc area

output

Manning hours
No. and shift no.

No. and shift no.

No. and shift no.

No. and shift no.

Service facilities, electrical sub-station, water treatment,
fuel storage, etc. will depend upon process parameters,
mainly tonnage or volume handled, and may need to be
assessed from the summation of the individual activity
areas, but it will be affected by technology when improved
techniques are being introduced.

Ofﬁce accommodation will depend upon the factory
manning and the car parking facilities upon the total man-
ning during the day shift.

7.5.3 Model for change

The recent introduction of inexpensive desktop computers
has allowed their extensive use throughout many compa-
nies. The standard spreadsheet packages which accom-
pany these machines enables the above data to be laid
out in an interactive way, so that ‘what if’ situations
can be explored at the planning stage and the implica-
tions of, for example, market trends in the food industry,
to be examined over the long term for its effect on the
plant layout. The model may include a factor to take into
account improvements in technology and working prac-
tices in both the ofﬁce and factory.

In determining the area required for increased produc-
tion the relationship between the output and the area may
not be linear, and needs to be examined in some detail.
When the output required exceeds the maximum output
of a process line then increased shift working may be
considered. Alternatively, a second process line may be
needed.

The model for the maintenance requirements of a large
metallurgical plant was recently constructed by relating
the man-hours to the production output, but the relation-
ship was not linear, and a more sophisticated model was
needed to examine the site requirements for different out-
put tonnage.

Mechanical wear is a feature which is signiﬁcant among
the causes of machinery failure and the James Clayton
Lecture delivered to the Institution of Mechanical Engi-
neers in 1981 discussed friction and wear and identiﬁed
tribological losses as 45–50 per cent of all maintenance
costs in metallurgical plants. This suggested that mechan-
ical transmission of energy could be investigated to obtain
the relationship between production output and the main-
tenance requirements.

The model equation produced was:

(cid:1)

H2H1 ð K ð

P2
P1

Efficiency rating
(h/ton)
6 5 4

3

2

Process/site layout modeling 7/75

UK 1979

1

2

107
8

6
5
4

3

2

106

1.0
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

5

6 7 8 9106

2

3

4 5 6 7 8 9

107

2

Annual production (P) tons/year

0.9

)

K

(
 
r
o
t
c
a
f
 
s
e
c
i
t
c
a
r
p
/
y
g
o
o
n
h
c
e
T

l

)

H

(
 
e
c
n
a
n
e
t
n
a
m

f
o
 
s
r
u
o
h
 
l
a
t
o
T

i

)
1

/
2

P
P
(
√
H
K
 
=
 
2

1

H

Current maintenance

Plant production capacity (P1)

Plant expansion
H2 = KH1√P2/P1

K = 0.9 

Preliminary

Future maintenance

Operation

learning above

hours/ton

K = 1

With

overtime

t
 
s
r
u
o
h
 
c
s
a
B

i

 
s
r
o

t
c
a
r
t

n
o
C

s
p
o
h
s
k
r
o
w

l

a
n
r
e

t
x
E

Dept L

Contractors 

 
s
r
o

t
c
a
r
t

n
o
C

Machining

Intern al

External

External
workshops

Figure 7.3 (a) Model of manning requirements related to plant output; (b) Sankey diagram of the changing manning requirement in an
expanding plant

s
r
o

t
c
a
r
t

n
o
C

Basic hours
plus overtime

s
r
o

t
c
a
r
t

n
o
C

Dept A

Dept B

Dept C

Redistributed
Activities

t

n
a
p

l

 

d
e
d
n
a
p
x
e

 

n
a

i

t

i

n
a
m
o

 

(a)

s
r
u
o
h

i

 
c
s
a
B

(b)

7/76 Planning and Plant Layout

where
H2 D Future man hours,
H1 D Current man hours,
K D Technology or practices factor,
P2 D Future production output,
P1 D Current production output.
This produces a global requirement chart and a chart
showing the discrete, departmental
in
Figure 7.3.

requirements

New plants and expanding plants rarely produce max-
imum output on start-up. In large capital plants, it may
need many months for staff training and equipment com-
missioning before output is sufﬁcient to need maximum
manning. The technology factor K in the above equation
can be used to reﬂect this. In Figure 7.3(a) a technology
factor of 0.9 has been used.

It is important to test models, and in the above case,
ﬁgures were obtained for other plants and the validity of
the model conﬁrmed.

7.5.4 Determination of factory areas

When existing factories are being examined, the ﬂoor
areas occupied by the various items of equipment can
be measured on site during the data-collection period.
It is important to consider and include the equipment
outline (maximum travels), space for maintenance activ-
ity, operator movement and the handling of material and
workpieces. In many cases, the space needed for handling
exceeds that required accommodating the operative part
of the equipment. Aisle space is also needed for through-
shop movement.

When planning new installations, manufacturers’ cata-
logues may be the only information source of equipment
data, but they rarely indicate the space needed outside
the equipment outline. This requires careful consideration
from an experienced facility planner to establish realistic
space requirements.

In the absence of reliable information and during the
preliminary planning stage (feasibility studies, etc.) the
following occupancy values can be employed:

Activity

Service industries
Manufacturing

Machine tool shop
Electrical/plastics
Mechanical ﬁtting
Pottery/glass

Transport

Cars/mobiles
Locos
Wagon shop
Lorries

Distributive trades (average)

Occupancy
(m2/person)

15–30
20–35

20
25
27
35

30–65

33
37
55
65
(cid:3)80

These values will change with the future move towards
unmanned factories.

Dividing the areas established in Section 7.5.3 by these
occupancy values will give building areas. Bay widths
can be established for each type of building and dividing
the areas by this width will establish a building length
that can be arranged into a convenient building block
shape.

7.6 Design synthesis
7.6.1 Plant activities and intercommunications

In 1973, Richard Muther1 published a method of ana-
lyzing the interrelationships of activities within industrial
plants, and the method allows a high degree of detail
to be examined. The method proposed here is similar
in that a relationship grid is constructed, but this tech-
nique employs the power of the modern desktop com-
puter to rapidly examine alternative layouts to obtain best
solutions.

The design synthesis starts by listing the activities
or areas in the plant and indicating the access, which
each activity needs to the other activities. The access
may be required for internal process, trafﬁc, and people
movement or plant services. Rather than go into the detail
of examining all interrelationships for all of the above
requirements, the experienced layout planner can decide
which requirement predominates and employ it to produce
quick results. The method allows inexperienced planners
to iteratively examine the implications of changing
requirements as the project proceeds and plant knowledge
increases.

Table 7.1 shows the construction of a typical activity
chart using one of many computer spreadsheet packages.
The cross (C) identiﬁes an activity in the plant and stars
(Ł) in the vertical lines denote where access to other activ-
ities is needed or an interrelationship exists. A wide scat-
tering of the stars away from the diagonal line of crosses
indicates large distances between the activities and thus
large communicating distances.

A feature of PC spreadsheets is that the position of
rows or columns can be changed at the touch of a key,
so the sequence of the rows of activities can be rapidly
altered, and the position of the columns varied to preserve
the diagonal pattern of crosses. This exercise can be exe-
cuted a number of times to reduce the scatter of the stars
away from the diagonal line and reduce the communicat-
ing distances between the activities. This has been carried
out, and the result is shown in Table 7.2, where it can be
seen that the stars are clustered more closely around the
diagonal line. The list now shows the activities arranged
in a preferred order of sequence.

7.6.2 Location criteria and boundary groups

There may be reasons why individual activities cannot
be located near to those which are adjacent in the deter-
mined sequential list, so design criteria are needed to
determine which activities are compatible and can be near,
and which are incompatible and cannot.

Table 7.1 Plant activity intercommunications: ﬁrst design criteria

Design synthesis 7/77

Ł

C

Ł

Ł
Ł

C

C

Ł

Ł

Ł

Ł

Ł

Ł

Ł

Ł

Ł

Ł

Access to each other
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
C Ł
Ł C

Ł
C Ł
Ł C
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł

C
Ł

C

Ł

Ł

C
Ł
Ł
Ł

Activity

Heavy plant repairs
Vehicle hot washing
Vehicle cold washing
Public health repairs
Store for large tires
Service station
Electrical repairs
Bus washer
Vehicle test area
Mechanical repairs
Tire shop
Welding shop
Panel beater
Radiator shop
Paint area
Compressor house
Tailor
Carpenter
Store–carpenter
Store–tires
Store–tailor
Store–paint
Store–general
Administration block
Filling station
Vehicle park

C Ł
Ł C
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł

Ł

Ł
Ł
C Ł
Ł C Ł
Ł C
Ł

Ł
Ł

C

Ł

Ł

Ł

Ł

Ł

Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł

Ł

Ł

Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł

Ł

Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł

Ł

Ł

Ł

C

Ł
Ł
Ł

C Ł
Ł C

Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł

C

Ł
Ł

C
Ł
Ł

Ł

Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
C Ł
Ł C Ł
Ł
Ł C

Ł
Ł

Ł

C Ł
Ł C

Table 7.2 Rearranged activities to improve plant operation

C Ł
Ł C Ł
Ł C

Ł

C
Ł

Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł

Ł
C Ł
Ł C

Ł
Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł

C Ł
Ł C
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł

Ł

Activity

Filling station
Vehicle park
Bus washer
Vehicle hot washing
Vehicle cold washing
Service station
Tire shop
Store–tires
Vehicle test area
Compressor house
Administration block
Store–general
Heavy plant repairs
Public health repairs
Store for large tires
Electrical repairs
Mechanical repairs
Welding shop
Radiator shop
Panel beater
Paint area
Store–paint
Carpenter
Store–carpenter
Tailor
Store–tailor

Access to each other

Ł
Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
C Ł
Ł C
Ł C Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł
Ł C Ł
Ł C
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł

Ł

Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
C Ł
Ł C

Ł
Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł

Ł
C

Ł
Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł

C Ł
Ł C Ł
Ł C
Ł
Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł
Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł

Ł
Ł
C Ł
Ł C Ł
Ł C

C Ł
* C

C Ł
Ł C

7/78 Planning and Plant Layout

Particular plants will have characteristics which will
determine the importance of particular criteria, but typical
criteria will include the following:

Groups of compatible activities together with their
major characteristic can be listed, e.g. for a transportation
maintenance facility, as follows:

1. The hazardous nature of the activity;
2. The ease of access to the entry gate which the activity

needs;

3. The amount of dirt and potential contamination that

the activity would generate;

4. The amount of noise and potential disturbance that the

activity will normally generate.

Each of the listed plant activities can be assessed for
each of the chosen criteria and a star rating determined
for each assessment. An experienced engineer will ﬁnd
that a qualitative assessment is sufﬁcient, but quantitative
measurements can be used if necessary. The results of this
exercise are shown in Figure 7.4.

For each of the criteria a two-star rating difference
between an activity and an adjacent activity is taken
to indicate incompatibility. Activities that are hazardous,
dirty, noisy or needing good access to the entry/exit gate
are consequently rated with many stars. In the site layout
they should not be located near other activities with fewer
stars because they could adversely affect that activity.
However, an activity that is not critical and has a low
star rating may be located next to an activity with many
stars.

Boundary maps can be drawn around groups of stars
which are compatible and horizontal lines drawn through
the incompatibility points to show groups of compatible
activities on the right-hand side of the chart Figure 7.4.

Characteristic
Hazardous
High trafﬁc density
Dirty

Boundary group
Filling station
Vehicle park
Servicing facilities
Administration and stores Quiet and clean
Repair facilities
Body shop
Accommodation

Medium trafﬁc, dirt and noise
Noisy
Quiet

The synthesized layout can be described in terms of the
characteristics of the various zones within a hypothetical
site boundary as shown in Figures 7.5 and 7.6.

Administration

Servicing

Repairs

Body
shop

Park

Filling
station

Figure 7.5 Synthesized location of plant activities

Activity

Hazardous

Gate
Access

Dirty

Noisy

Boundary groups

Filling station
Vehicle park
Bus washer
Vehicle hot washing
Vehicle cold washing
Service station
Tire shop
Store − tires
Vehicle test area
Compressor house
Administration block
Store − general
Heavy plant repairs
Public health repairs
Store for large tires
Electrical repairs
Mechanical repairs
Welding shop
Radiator shop
Panel beater
Paint area
Store − paint
Carpenter
Store − carpenter
Tailor
Store − tailor

Figure 7.4 Compatible activities and boundary groups: secondary design criteria

Filling station
Vehicle park

Servicing

Admin & Store

Repairs

Body shop

Wash

Tyres
Store
Test
Compressor

Store
Electric

Denter
Painter
Store
Store

Store

Quiet,
clean

Low
traffic

Noise

Dirty

Site layout realization 7/79

Decreasing traffic density

Medium
traffic

High
traffic

Low
traffic
density

High
traffic
density

Figure 7.6 Characteristics of the synthesized layout

Hazardous

7.7 Site layout realization
7.7.1 Process and trafﬁc ﬂows

Trafﬁc and material movement is a major consideration,
and should be arranged so that cross ﬂows are minimized
and the potential for congestion and accidents reduced.
Much useful information on both the analysis and practice
of movements is contained in the References.

Using the example of a transportation maintenance
that a counter-clockwise
facility, Figure 7.7 shows
rotation of
the trafﬁc ﬂow could achieve minimum
crossing and give a graduation of decreasing trafﬁc
density in the counter-clockwise direction as vehicles are
diverted off the main stream (Figure 7.8).

The circulation diagram indicates that, in a left-hand
drive environment, activities with a high trafﬁc density

Exit/entry

Figure 7.8 Trafﬁc density zones

should be located on the right-hand side of the trafﬁc
circulation diagram and the activities with low trafﬁc on
the left-hand side.

With this arrangement, the vehicle needing no servic-
ing or maintenance could be parked on the right-hand
side of the site in a park designated ‘overnight park’, and
the ﬁlling station which handles all the vehicles could be
located towards the center of the site in the ﬂow line of
the vehicles leaving the area.

The servicing area could be located on the right-hand
side of the site but remote from the gate, and part of
the park near to the servicing area could be allocated to
vehicles that arrive for their scheduled routine service.

The left-hand side of the site has a reducing trafﬁc den-
sity and could thus accommodate the vehicle repair shops.
The body shop is a repair function, and thus would be
located on the left-hand side but remote from the existing
administration ofﬁce.

The technical administration ofﬁce needs to be quiet,
clean, and central
to the facilities that it administers.
Hence, it should be located in the central area between
the service and repair shops. This is remote from the dirty
washing facility and the noisy body shop while providing
good access to the gate.

The remaining corner on the left-hand side of the site
can be arranged to be sufﬁcient distance from the body
shop so that it can be quiet and thus suitable for staff
accommodation and the plant administration ofﬁce. Thus,
the synthesized layout becomes as shown in Figure 7.9.

Figure 7.7 Ideal trafﬁc or material ﬂow

7.7.2 Site constraints
The real design must consider design criteria derived from
the physical constraints of the chosen site and the current
operating procedures. In this exercise, the site must be
examined to list the features of the site, which will affect
the plant layout. These will include the contour of the site
and the location of the following:

7/80 Planning and Plant Layout

Store
admin.

Repair
area

Repair
area

Service

park

Service

park

Low
traffic
density

Repaired

park

Low
traffic
density

Overnight

park

Filling
station

Garage
admin.

Exit/entry

Figure 7.9 Combination of synthesized layout and ideal ﬂows –
garage layout

1. Main highways and access to the site area
2. The main and other gates to the plant
3. Factories near the boundary of the plant
4. Domestic dwellings near the boundary
5. Natural features such as streams
6. Efﬂuent routes
7. Prevailing wind directions.

These can be drawn onto a plan of the site area, which
does not show the existing or any proposed arrangement
of the plant layout (Figure 7.10).

The site constraints must be considered for their effect
upon the design and the practicality of implementing the
design. When the plans are for an existing plant, the
implementation must consider the minimum disturbance

Domestic
dwellings

m

a

S tr e

to the everyday functioning of the existing plant. These
limitations can be listed as follows:

1. The location of the gate;
2. The existing buildings that have been found, during the
structural survey, to be structurally sound and which
will be retained;

3. The logistics of erecting new buildings and rearrang-
ing the plant with minimum disturbance to the plant
functions;

4. The requirement to allow for future expansion of the

production and subsequent activities in the plant.

As an example, the synthesized design considers all

these limitations in the following ways:

1. The gate is taken as a starting point for realization of the

layout and high trafﬁc densities are placed near to it;

2. The structural survey dictates which of the existing

buildings will be replaced;

3. The ﬁnal report will need to include a detailed descrip-
tion of the implementation procedure to demonstrate
that the synthesized layout is feasible.

The ﬁnal layout characteristics are shown in Figure 7.11.

7.7.3 Ease of expansion
Layout planners normally have to consider that activities
within the site may change in the future. The changes
may be the result of increased product demand or the
introduction of new product lines. They may be predicted
from the model designed in Section 7.5.2 or allowance
for unpredictable changes may be needed.

The dilemma facing the planner is between design-
ing the layout with minimum distance between buildings
and allocating free space between buildings to accommo-
date future process units. Often the problem becomes one
of providing a single building for economy or multiple
separate buildings for ease of expansion.

The solution may be a policy decision, but this decision
will be assisted by the results of the internal layout con-
ﬁgurations, which may indicate how simply or otherwise
expansion can be accommodated.

Railway

Factories

Quiet

n
o

i
t
c
u
r
t
s
b
O

Noise

Effluent

Gate

Road

Dirty

Traffic

Figure 7.10 Site constraints

Figure 7.11 Conceptual layout design on the real site

7.7.4 Options

Management usually wishes to see alternatives to a par-
ticular design in order to say that the alternatives have
been considered. Unique design solutions are rare; con-
sequently, the layout planner will normally be able to
interpret the results of the ﬁnding of the study to show
alternative possibilities. Each alternative option should be
accompanied by a critique listing the advantages and dis-
advantages.

7.8 Internal layouts of buildings
Material, trafﬁc and people are involved, and the con-
straints on internal layouts will be different to those for
site layouts but will not affect the design process. The
constraints will include organization of the factory work
tasks, which may involve trade practices and the type of
organization adopted for the control of the process equip-
ment. This is discussed in Section 7.2.

7.8.1 Process ﬂows and performance indicators

The same method as described above can be employed to
plan the layout of factory building interiors. Establishing
the interior activities and characteristics of the activities
must, however, derive from a thorough understanding of
the products and processes.

The management of production is well described by
Hill,7 but the prime consideration is product ﬂow, and all
features of the layout must assist ﬂow. There are some
indicators which can be used to measure the quality of
the production facilities, and these can be employed to
demonstrate the viability of the proposed new layout.

Performance indicators

The relative importance of each indicator will vary accor-
ding to the type, quantity, end quality, variety and value of
the product and the capital cost, ﬂexibility and required
utilization level of the plant. Three variables will serve
most industrial processes:

1. The stock value. The value of the stores stock repre-
sents a signiﬁcant investment for many manufacturers
and ﬁnancing the work in progress can represent a
signiﬁcant cost. It is a useful indicator of the ﬁnan-
cial health of a company and is a prime target for
cuts in the drive for increased economic efﬁciency.
Section 7.2 highlighted this.

2. The cycle time. This represents the maximum time
interval between the start of a single operation on a
product on a particular ﬂow line and the start of the
same operation on the next product on the same ﬂow
line. The cycle time is calculated by dividing the target
production volume (annual or monthly) by the working
time (hours, minutes or seconds) and then adjusting for
the reject rate and the per centage of lost time (down-
time). If every operation is conducted within the cycle
time then the steady-state functioning of the ﬂow line
will produce the required production rate. The number

Internal layouts of buildings 7/81

of sequential process operations multiplied by the cycle
time is the actual process time.

3. The door-to-door time. This represents the total elapsed
time from the delivery of the raw materials or compo-
nent parts to the dispatch of the ﬁnished product. This
ﬁgure can be adjusted to control the value of the stock
of materials, parts, work-in-progress (WIP), and ﬁn-
ished goods in the process. Dividing the door-to-door
time by the actual process time and multiplying the
result by the stock value can ﬁnd the gross excess stock
carried. The difference between the gross and the net
excess stock values will depend on individual circum-
stances. Reducing these ﬁgures to a minimum requires
strategies for purchasing, stock-level monitoring and
process control.

7.8.2 Process equipment

When the idealized ﬂow routing has been determined, the
equipment must be located and the practicalities of the
interrelationships between, and integration of, equipment,
services and people must be considered.

Equipment information would have been collected dur-
ing the data-gathering exercise described in Section 7.4,
but a thorough understanding of the process is vital during
this phase of the work. Adequate space for the equipment
must include:

1. The machine itself with the maximum movement of

all machine elements;

2. Space for maintenance activities, withdrawing shafts,

etc.;

3. Process material movement;
4. Operator mobility.

7.8.3 Material handling

Knowledge of material-handling techniques is vital to the
layout planner, and detailed consideration will need to be
given to the various techniques and equipment, which are
available. References 2, 8 and 9 contain valuable infor-
mation and trade journals report the current state of the
market.

In the absence of reliable information and during the
preliminary planning stage (feasibility studies, etc.) the
following space requirements for aisles can be employed:

Trafﬁc type
Tow tractor
3-ton forklift truck
2-ton forklift truck
1-ton forklift truck
Narrow-aisle truck
Manual truck
Personnel
Access to equipment
Allow extra for door openings

Aisle width (m)

3.7
3.4
3.0
2.75
1.85
1.6
1.0
0.85

7.8.4 Storage

Storage in plants range from simple facilities to fully
automated ﬂow-through warehouses. Simple facilities are

7/82 Planning and Plant Layout

11 kV ring main

(Site boundary)

11 kV/415 V
transformer

Incoming
sub-station

M

M

Metering

Incoming
sub-station

Factory low-voltage
distribution

Factory 11 kV distribution

11/3.3 kV
transformer

11 kV/415 kV
transformers

M

M
Motors

M

M

MCC boards

Figure 7.12 Typical power distribution system

installed to contain the day-to-day requirements of, for
instance, maintenance workers, and the just-in-time sup-
ply of components on the production ﬂoor. Fully auto-
mated ﬂow-through warehouses are employed in the food
industry where the shelf life of many products is short
and a high throughput is involved. Much has been written
about storage and References 8 and 9 are excellent.

7.8.5 Electrical distribution

The plant layout design and whether the processes involve
dry, wet or contaminated environments with possibly
elevated temperatures will affect the principles adopted

for the support and containment of electric cables and
bus bars. Cables from the incoming supply sub-station to
load centers would normally be run in the ground, either
directly buried with suitable route marking and protection,
or in ducts or concrete trenches. Depending on the number
of cables, the latter may incorporate support trays or cleats
ﬁxed to the trench walls.

Inside the factory buildings, below-ﬂoor trenches are
frequently the preferred method for main routes, but where
there is danger of ﬂooding, due to storms or process ﬂuids,
aboveground routing must be considered. Single or few
cable runs could be clipped to walls and building struc-
tures but multiple cable runs need tray work, involving

space equivalent to major pipes and air ducting, and rout-
ing must be coordinated with other services.

Busbar trunking systems are frequently employed in
machine shops to facilitate relocation of the equipment.
The busbars are located overhead, suspended from the
roof structure, and arranged, in conjunction with the light-
ing system, in a suitable grid pattern. Fused plugs and
sockets provide outlets to individual items of equipment.
In some installations (e.g. clean rooms), the electrical
distribution system can be located in the sealed ceilings,
allowing maintenance access without affecting the clean
facilities (Figure 7.12).

7.8.6 Building utilities

These include the canteen, toilets, workers’ rest rooms,
access routes and the car parks. Hygiene, trafﬁc density,
trafﬁc ﬂow and sizing need to be addressed and have been
discussed in the section on the sizing model.

7.9 Selling the concept
The site layout needs to be presented to management,
union, staff and possibly others to obtain approval, and
the design procedure described here, together with visu-
alization, will assist the presentation.

Photographs of

the proposed site are useful and
a site layout drawing is needed, but a perspective
artistic impression showing buildings with architectural
facades, vehicles and other site activities improves the
presentation. Employing three-dimensional models10,11
discussed in Section 7.3 helps communication and allows
layout options to be easily demonstrated and discussed.

7.10 Implementation
One of the principal tasks facing the manager responsible
for implementing a new plant layout is the planning and
scheduling of the many activities involved in the project.
Modern computerized systems have evolved into easy-
to-use tools that avoid the need for a detailed technical
knowledge of planning techniques.

Project plans for the installation and commissioning of

new plant should be prepared in order to:

1. Provide a readily understood and concise description
of the scope of work for all involved in the project
in order to facilitate easy communication between all
parties;

2. Provide an informative management tool for the mon-
itoring and control of progress, including the effect of
changing circumstances that so often occur in the form
of extended delivery time scales, revised requirements
and new external constraints on the project completion
date.

The project plan should be started as soon as possible
so that all aspects of the early layout planning can be
incorporated into the plan.

Consultants 7/83

Most detailed programs for plant-related projects are
prepared using simple critical path analysis (CPA) tech-
niques. CPA is a well-known and familiar technique to
most engineers and is incorporated into most modern PC-
based planning and scheduling systems. Such a system
typically has the following features that a plant project
manager will ﬁnd useful:

1. Easy screen-based data entry of related task details;
2. Ability to allocate material and labor resources to each
activity to allow a picture to be built of the total
resource requirements over time;

3. Simple production of bar charts or Gantt charts detail-

ing the task time scales;

4. The ability to schedule the tasks logically within the

constraints of available resources.

The deﬁnition of what constitutes a resource from a
scheduling point of view may vary, but would normally
include materials, labor, special tools, temporary services
and also access to space on the plant ﬂoor if the layout is
particularly tight. This last item is of great importance, as
it is easy to forget that a given amount of space will limit
the number of people working in it, and the scheduling
system can take it into account when re-scheduling start
dates.

For the more sophisticated requirements of complex
one-off projects, techniques such as PERT, resource, lev-
eling and precedence diagrams should be investigated.15
The most important aspect of planning the work is
that the plan should be constantly monitored for progress
and the individuals responsible for particular areas of
work should be kept well informed regarding delays or
advances in the program.

Frequent updates and reports will ensure that surprises
are kept to a minimum and allow smooth progress of
the project towards completion. Should problems occur
in the project at any time, the modern planning systems
allow rapid changes to the logic or task details and the
consequent update to the project program.

7.11 Consultants
7.11.1 Justiﬁcation for consultants

Planning the layout of a manufacturing facility should be
an infrequent activity for an operational manufacturing
company. The staff of such a company will normally be
fully committed to the day-to-day activity of assisting fac-
tory output, and they will rarely have the time to consider
the design problems associated with plant layout. They do
have intimate knowledge of the products and processes
but not the practice and techniques of the design of plant
layout. In these circumstances, it is normal to engage the
services of a ﬁrm of consultants.

The

consultants will need to conduct

in-depth
discussions with company personnel to acquire the data
described above, but will bring to the task the skills
of years of practice, often employing modern computing
techniques, knowledge of industrial trends and undivided
attention to the task.

7/84 Planning and Plant Layout

The best way to select a consultant is to seek rec-
ommendations from other companies who are known to
have carried out a similar exercise. Failing this, a useful
guide is the Association of Consulting Engineers Year-
book, which lists the consultants classiﬁed according to
the type of engineering work they engage in and their
specialist discipline. An alternative approach is to con-
tact associations set up to serve particular industries (e.g.
the Production Engineering Research Association (PERA)
in Melton Mowbray for engineering production and the
Rubber and Plastics Research Association (RAPRA)).

The consultant will discuss and determine the objec-
tives of the activity, but it is useful if a speciﬁcation is
prepared in advance of the consultant being engaged.

7.11.2 Speciﬁcation

After a short introduction to the company and its products,
the speciﬁcation should describe in some detail the rea-
sons why a new layout is needed. This will vary from the
introduction of, or change to, new products, the establish-
ment of a new factory or the need to explore the changing
future demands on an existing site because of changing
technology or market forces and opportunities. (Contracts
are described in detail in Chapter 8.)

References
Literature

1 Muther, R., Systematic Layout Planning, Van Nostrand

Reinhold, New York.

2 Tompkins, J. A. and White, J. A., Facilities Planning,
John Wiley, New York; see also Neufert, E., Architects’
Data, Halsted Press, New York.

3 Schonberger, R. J., World Class Manufacturing, The

Free Press, New York.

4 Goldratt, M. and Cox, J., The Goal, Scheduling Tech-

nology Group Ltd, Middlesex.

5 Francis, R. L. and White, J. A., Facility Layout and

Location, Prentice-Hall, Hemel Hempstead.

6 Health and Safety; The Control of Substances
to Health Regulations 1988, HMSO,

Hazardous
No. 0110876571.

7 Hill, T. J., Production/Operations Management, Pren-

tice-Hall, Hemel Hempstead.

8 Drury, J., Factories Planning, Design and Moderniza-

tion, The Architectural Press, London.

9 Material Handling, Reed Business Publishing, Surrey.

Scale models (proprietary systems)

10 Modulux Systems Ltd, Northampton; Lego symbolic

constructions on a ﬂat baseboard.

11 Visual Planning Systems Ltd; Cast aluminum scale

models of actual equipment.

Software programs

12 ATPLAN; W. S. Atkins Consultants Ltd, Woodcote

Grove, Ashley Road, Epsom, Surrey KT18 5BW.

13 HOCUS; PE Consultants, Egham, Surrey.
14 SEE-WHY; ISTEL, Redditch, Warwickshire.
15 PERTMASTER;
International

Pertmaster

Ltd,

Bradford.

8

Contents

Contracts and
Speciﬁcations

Ken Taylor
Taylor Associates Ltd

8/87

8.1 Contracts
8.2 Approaching the contract 8/87
8.3 Types and forms of contract 8/87
8.4 The speciﬁcation and drawings
8.5 Estimates and bills of quantities and estimates 8/88
8.6 Speciﬁc sums stated in bid documents

8/88

8/87

8.6.1 Prime cost (PC) sum 8/88
8.6.2 Provisional sum 8/89
8.6.3 Contingency sum 8/89

8/96

8/96

8.20 Budget control and variations
8.21 Safety on site
8.22 Delays and determination
8.23 Liquidated damages and loss and/or expense
8.24 Practical and ﬁnal certiﬁcates 8/98
8.25 Disputes and arbitration
8.26 Common problems and solutions

8/97

8/98

8/99

8/85

8/97

8/90

8/89

8.7 Bid documents
8.8 Direct and bulk purchasing contracts 8/89
8.9 Program of works
8.10 Selection of bidders
8.11 Inviting bids
8/91
8.12 Analyzing bids
8.13 Selection of the contractor
8.14 Making a contract 8/93
8.15 Relationships between contractor and

8/92

8/91

8/92

8/94

8/93
other parties
8.16 Site meetings
8/94
8.17 Progress and control
8.18 Quality control
8/95
8.19 Interim payments

8/96

8.1 Contracts
In the course of his career, the plant engineer will be a
party to a contract. His employment is a contract between
himself and his employer unless he is self-employed. What
is a contract? A contract is an agreement between at least
two parties to a matter. The important aspect is that the
agreement is to the same thing. This is known as con-
sensus ad idem, and follows an offer, which is accepted.
An invitation to bid is not an offer, the offer being made
by the bidder in submitting his bid. English law says that
certain essential elements need to be met before a contract
can be enforceable, and these are:

1. Agreement – as mentioned above;
2. Intention – The parties must intend to create legal rela-

tions;

3. Consideration – This is essential in simple contracts,
which most are. An example is that A makes a contract
to purchase a car from B at a cost of $9000. In paying
the $9000 A is fulﬁlling the essentials of consideration.
A contract would not exist if B gave his car to A,
because there would be no consideration.

The law of contract is exceedingly complicated, and
the pitfalls experienced by engineers keep a substantial
number of solicitors, barristers and judges in the style to
which they have become accustomed over the past few
hundred years or so.

Contract law is a combination of common law and
statute law. Common law is judges’ law, which is con-
tinually being revised as important cases come up in the
courts. State or federal governments make statute law.

This chapter is concerned with contracts and speciﬁ-
cations in engineering and the way in which the plant
engineer should approach them.

8.2 Approaching the contract
A contract is made when the essential elements have been
fulﬁlled and the offer and acceptance communicated, and,
apart from contracts involving land, can be verbal. A com-
mon misconception is that a party signs a contract. In
reality, a party signs a document, which contains the terms
of the contract being entered into. Almost all contract doc-
uments omit many matters, which are important, and the
reason for this is that the law says that certain matters are
implied to be contained within a contract. An example is
that if x buys an item of plant from y it is implied that
x will receive it within a reasonable time, and that it will
be of merchantable quality when he receives it.

While express terms in a contract are advisable, some
are of no value at all, and in fact can work against the
author. An example is an unfair contract term that may
be included, but if it is not sufﬁciently brought to the
attention of the other party before the contract is made, it
is not enforceable.

The object of contractual documents is to have a clear
and unambiguous agreement to supply and install plant,
which will be in accordance with the speciﬁcation and
drawings, and installed within the time agreed, or within
a reasonable period if none is stated.

The speciﬁcation and drawings 8/87

What documents will be drawn together to form a con-

tract? These will include:

1. Drawings of the installation sufﬁcient for the bidder to

be able to provide a bid;

2. A detailed technical speciﬁcation of the works, which
will contain other matters such a deﬁning the parties,
standards of work, program and basic contractual posi-
tions;

3. Bid forms, which will include provision for the bidders
to submit a lump sum bid, or a rate for labor and
materials, or both?

4. Letter of invitation to bid.

8.3 Types and forms of contract
In English law,
there are two main kinds of con-
tract – Simple and under seal. Simple contracts require
consideration, whereas contracts under seal do not.

There are many standard forms of contract which are
used in the engineering industry, most of which are pub-
lished by professional bodies or groups of professional
bodies. It is usual for large companies and government
organizations to produce their own, to suit their needs
and protect their interests. In the case of air conditioning,
because the works are likely to be carried out along-
side other building works, it is likely that either the JCT
Domestic Sub-Contract or Model Form A will be used.

A contract document cannot go against a common law
rule, by the introduction of an express term. There are
several ways to employ the contractor, and some of these
are outlined below:

1. Lump sum ﬁxed price. This is the most commonly used
method, and ensures that the client will know exactly
how much he will be paying;

2. Lump sum ﬁxed price with a schedule of rates to cater

for variations to the works;

3. Measured bill. A bill of quantities based on a measure-
ment of the amount of work, with re-measuring at the
end of the job;

4. Daywork. Rates are based on the agreed cost of labor
per hour and on cost of plant and materials. This is
sometimes the only fair way, because the amount of
work is uncertain, or cannot be sufﬁciently estimated
by the bidder.

8.4 The speciﬁcation and drawings
The smooth running of the contract and the satisfactory
operation of the system will depend to a large extent on
the way the plant engineer designs the plant, and expresses
it in his speciﬁcation and drawings. There is a tendency
for designers to adopt standard speciﬁcation formats, and
while this is to be applauded, a 50-page speciﬁcation for a
small job can mean that only a small percentage is applica-
ble to that particular project. It should be remembered that
the foreman on the job would have the task of interpreting
what the designer had in mind.

The General Speciﬁcation must coincide with the draw-
ings to be credible. It is all very well inserting a clause to

8/88 Contracts and Speciﬁcations

the effect that ‘The Engineer’ shall determine the interpre-
tation of any clause which implies that he has the power
of an arbitrator, but in reality, if he has negligently spec-
iﬁed anything by being ambiguous, then his client or the
contractor may have a claim against him if either of them
suffers loss as a result.

The General Speciﬁcation itself can be divided into the

following headings:

Conditions of Contract
Technical Clauses
Speciﬁcation of the Works.

The following is a checklist and brief description of the
various clauses:

(a) Conditions of Contract

1. General – This is a description of the type of contract
and the relationship with other parties, i.e. whether the
contract is to be nominated, main or domestic ﬁxed
price of ﬂuctuating.

2. Interpretation of Terms – Name of all known parties
and their positions. Some terms may be outlined, i.e.
month means calendar month and shall means action
by the contractor.

3. Form of Bid – A more detailed description is given
regarding the form of bid and of prime cost and pro-
visional sums, handling and proﬁt on cost.

4. Bills of Quantities – The client can require a success-
ful bidder to supply a priced-up bill of all items bided
for within a certain time after being requested to do
so. This is useful in a lump sum contract where vari-
ations to the contract occur. The bidder in this case
provides the bill.

5. Bid make-up – Invitation to the bidders to clarify
points prior to bid. Alternative makes of equipment
may be offered instead of the ones speciﬁed, but the
bidder must bid for what was speciﬁed, and include
the alternatives as a separate list.

6. Attendance – In the case of a sub-contract it should
be made clear to the bidder any attendance which will
be provided to him by the main contractor, and any
conditions attached.

7. Program – The program of works should be outlined
and any special provision, such as working in phases
to suit either the client or the main contractor.

8. Site Meetings – The frequency of site meetings
should be outlined and a commitment to attend any
ad hoc meetings, which may be called by the client
or main contractor.

9. Related Documents – A list of all the documents,

which make up the contract.
Interpretation of terms.

12. Arbitration Clause – This is likely to be mentioned
in most standard forms of contract, and if repeated
here, should be verbatim.

10. Payments – Details of when valuations and payments

11. Completion – Practical completion and defects liabil-

are to be made.

ity period details.

(b) Technical Clauses

1. Scope – general description of the works.
2. Regulations – a general list of regulations, which apply

to the particular type of work to be performed.

3. Drawings – Details of drawings and manuals, which
the contractor shall supply to other parties (e.g.
building work, drawings and working drawings, and
a description of details to be supplied).

4. Site visits – Invitation to contractor to visit site to see
for himself any possible site problems. A disclaimer
against extras in the event that the contractor does not
appreciate obvious site problems.

5. Tests and commissioning – Details of any speciﬁc tests
required, and commissioning format, and who is to
witness and reports to be submitted.

8.5 Estimates and bills of quantities
and estimates
On some contracts, mainly connected with general build-
ing projects, rather than speciﬁcally plant and machinery,
a quantity surveyor is appointed to draw up a schedule of
items which require pricing, and which the total is the bid
ﬁgure.

A qualiﬁed quantity surveyor has a ﬁrst-class knowl-
edge of building construction, is an expert in drawing up
a bill of quantities, and very often has a good knowledge
of contract law, which makes him invaluable where there
are complicated issues. While the plant engineer may not
often be presented with bills of quantities, it may be useful
to have a grasp of the general approach. There are three
stages to a bill: taking off, abstracting and billing. Tak-
ing off is a detailed measurement of drawings or on site
of the subject matter. This is carried out in conjunction
with a manual used by all quantity surveyors called the
Standard Method of Measurement. The items contained
are complete in that they include for all labor and mate-
rials. The abstract is a sheet where all similar items are
grouped together, and the bill is where the items are listed
for the bidder to add his prices. The bidder is also given
the opportunity in the bill to add his proﬁt and on-cost
for other contractors under his control.

8.6 Speciﬁc sums stated
in bid documents
In most engineering contracts for works to be carried out
on site, there are unknown costs at the time of bid and
costs which are known, where the work is to be carried
out by others, but to be under the control of the successful
bidder. These sums are shown below:

8.6.1 Prime cost (PC) sum

This is a sum which has been determined prior to bid-
der being obtained for the main works, and which can
be expressed accurately as a sum to be included in the
bid build-up. The bidder has the opportunity to add a
sum within his bid for proﬁt or on-cost in administering
the works.

An example would be where the consultant had already
invited competitive quotations for supplying air-handling
units so that he could design a particular make into the
system and ensure that his client received the best value
for money. The bidder would include in his bid, either
separately shown or in the body of his ﬁgures, a sum to
cover proﬁt and on-cost in handling the equipment. The
contractor appointed would be responsible for organizing
delivery and would give a warranty on the equipment, in
accordance with the contract. This aspect is ampliﬁed in
Section 8.20.

8.6.2 Provisional sum

This is a speciﬁc sum included in the bid documents. It
indicates to the bidder that it is contemplated that the par-
ticular work referred to will be carried out, but that, at
present, no ﬁrm plans have been made as to cost, and
usually the work has not been detailed either. The con-
tractor is not entitled to proﬁt or on-cost, unless the works
go ahead. An example of this would be a general intention
by the client to provide special ventilation to a laboratory,
which is part of a larger scheme, but that no ﬁrm plans as
to the full requirements have been drawn up at the time
of inviting bidder.

Let us assume that $100 000 has been included as a pro-
visional sum. Later a scheme is produced and priced up
by the successful bidder, and his price is $95 000, includ-
ing proﬁt and on-cost. Then at the end of the contract,
when the ﬁnal account is submitted, the contractor will
show that of the $100 000 provisional sum, $95 000 has
been spent, and the client will be $5000 better off than
expected.

8.6.3 Contingency sum

In most contracts of supply and install, a sum of money is
included in the bid ﬁgure for which there is no allocated
use. This is known as a contingency sum. The amount of
the sum varies according to the size of the contract and the
degree of complexity of the works to be carried out. For
example, the installation of a piece of plant which will be
delivered to site fully tested and ready to run on its own,
once services are installed to it, will not need a high sum.
On the other hand, a system that is a one-off, designed and
built specially for the occasion on site, depending on items
such as distribution ductwork or pipework or unknown
structural and services matters will need a substantial sum
of contingencies. There is no hard and fast rule, but the
sum ranges from 4 to 10 per cent of the contract sum.
Generally, where there are known problems that cannot
be accurately assessed (such as diverting an underground
water main) a provisional sum should be put in rather than
a contingency sum.

The danger is that often many issues are left to the
contingency sum, which means that it is spent before other
known matters come to light. It is better to report a higher
bid ﬁgure, which has the possibility of being reduced at
the end of the job, rather than a lower one, which is almost
certain to increase.

Direct and bulk purchasing contracts 8/89

8.7 Bid documents
These are documents to be completed by the bidder after
he has studied the speciﬁcation and drawings, where
appropriate, and which contain the special commitment
of him with respect to the particular job. His chances of
being successful will depend largely on how he ﬁlls in
the forms contained in the documents. Very special care
should be taken in preparing these documents, and equally
important is analyzing them after bid, as will be discussed
in Section 8.12.

Standard forms of bid contain information and ques-
tions which are carefully put together and understandable
in the industry. Contents of bid documents should include:
1. Clear indication of what the document is (i.e. Form

of Bid);

2. Who the employer (client) is with full address. He

will be party to the contract;

3. What the bid is for, brieﬂy but speciﬁcally, and ref-
erence to the documents that will form part of any
contract;

4. Date and time by when bids are to be received;
5. Where the bids are to be sent to and the manner in
which they are to be submitted (for example, in a
plain or specially marked envelope);

6. A note that the employer does not bind himself to
accepting the lowest or any bid, and that the bidder
will not receive any remuneration or expenses for
providing a bid.

The bidder should be invited to submit the following:
7. His full name and trading address;
8. His lump sum bid for the works, where appropriate;
9. His labor rates, materials and on-cost, separately or
as a composite rate in the case of a bill of quantities;
10. A statement of how long he needs to do the work
following receipt of an order or the contract being
signed;

11. Date and signature, with position of signatory (see

Figure 8.1).

8.8 Direct and bulk purchasing contracts
To bypass the contractor or installer by purchasing plant
directly from the manufacturer usually has an advantage
of a saving in cost. The drawback is that the contrac-
tor does not have control of delivery or of quality, and
this can lead to disputes or a defense against a claim for
faulty workmanship or materials. Any saving can quickly
become meaningless if the works are delayed, and a loss
and expense claim is submitted. In a competitive situation,
a bidder will keep his ‘mark-up’ to the absolute minimum,
and a saving by approaching the manufacturer direct will
be small. It is always possible to obtain a price with a
manufacturer following competitive quotations, and then
include a PC sum in the bid documents. This gives the
bidder the opportunity to add a modest mark-up, and also
place him in a position where he is responsible for order-
ing, obtaining delivery and then paying for the equipment,
in addition to installing it. There is still a responsibility
on the client or his agent for nominating the equipment.

8/90 Contracts and Speciﬁcations

Figure 8.1 Typical bid document for a principal contractor

Bulk purchase of equipment is carried out in order to
bring the price down per item. Having established that
a large number are required, a client can then negoti-
ate or invite competitive bidder to supply the number
involved over a certain period. Care needs to be taken
that the number agreed are actually required within the
period, otherwise the supplier can sue for damages if he
is frustrated from supplying the number agreed.

8.9 Program of works

Prior to writing bids, the client should decide when he
wishes the work to be carried out. Factors affecting his
decision will be availability of funds either from loans or
grants, or in the case of local authorities or central gov-
ernment departments, it may be that a capital or revenue
allocation needs to be spent within a particular ﬁnancial

year. Other factors will be other trades such as a building
to house the plant, whose timing is obviously important.
Where an architect is involved, he will draw up a gen-
eral program incorporating design time as well as instal-
lation, and this will be submitted to the plant engineer
for his views before design commences. Having agreed
the program, the bidders will be informed in the bid
documents how it is intended that the works will pro-
ceed. However, where a main contractor is involved it is
vital that he be given the opportunity to submit his own
program of works, incorporating all the various trades,
keeping within the program completion date as laid down
in the bid documents.

Difﬁculties arise when delays in obtaining bid approval
occur, because time moves very quickly, and the work
may not actually commence on the date stated in the bid
documents. This causes problems when the contractors
have carefully arranged their own work schedules. It is
better not to be too optimistic regarding start and com-
pletion dates unless various stages to a contract document
being signed are clear.

8.10 Selection of bidders
There are four ways in which a bid list can be drawn up
for a particular project:

1. Advertise in the local press or trade journal for ﬁrms

to apply and then draw up a short list.

2. Seek out ﬁrms of good reputation.
3. Draw up a list from ﬁrms who have shown an interest

4. Use ﬁrms who are known to you and who have given

in working for you.

service in the past.

All clients are able to ask their own questions. A con-
sulting engineer who did not properly assess a ﬁrm prior
to recommending that they be placed on the bid list would
be liable in negligence to his clients for not discharging
his duties with diligence. Questions that the plant engineer
should ask when compiling a questionnaire are:

1. Address from which ﬁrm would carry out contracts.
2. How long in business.
3. Number of ofﬁce and site personnel and their trades.
4. Expertise professed by the ﬁrm and size of projects

which they can undertake.

5. Sample of six jobs recently undertaken.
6. Names of three referees who can be approached.
7. Any pending litigation or recent court judgment against

the ﬁrm.

8. Name and address of bankers.

Having received completed questionnaires, a shortlist can
now be drawn up. After discarding the non-starters, the
hopefuls should be vetted.

Remember that ﬁrms will put their best face forward.
Where possible, it is advisable to visit at least two jobs
recently carried out, and to contact at least two referees. A
banker’s reference can be misleading, although perfectly
accurate. A banker’s reference will say that the ﬁrm is
in a trading position, and sometimes that the ﬁrm is in

Inviting bids 8/91

a position to carry out the sizes of contract envisaged,
but it will mention nothing about the reputation of the
ﬁrm, its quality of work or administrative ability. A bank
will not deal directly with a client, but only through the
client’s bank.

A different questionnaire needs to be sent to the refer-
ees, remembering to enclose a stamped addressed enve-
lope. The referee is doing an unpaid favor in completing
the questionnaire, and for his sake, it should enable him to
return it without having to write a thesis with an attached
letter. A box to be ticked for most questions will sufﬁce,
with a space at the end for general comments. Questions
that should be asked of the referee are:

9. How long have you known the ﬁrm?
10. What size of contracts have they carried out for you

in the past 3 to 5 years?

11. How do you rate their workmanship, administrative

ability to keep to program, after-sales service?

12. Would you use them again?
13. General comments.

Having passed the test so far, the way is now open to visit
the premises occupied by the ﬁrm and meet the manage-
ment of the company. Once a ﬁrm is accepted for the list,
it should be placed in the size of contract category and
within the range of its ﬁnancial capabilities.

8.11 Inviting bids
Most large organizations, particularly in central and local
government, have set procedures in the form of standing
orders, and this area is usually of most interest to internal
and external auditors. The object of inviting competitive
bids is to obtain the lowest price for the job, based on
a fair method, which enables every bidder to bid for the
same thing.

A design and build bid can cause problems in that dif-
ferent design engineers have their own views on approach-
ing a design. To help overcome this, the client or his agent
should issue a design brief which limits the design param-
eters. For example, in a scheme to re-light a warehouse,
the brief could say that the lighting levels should be in
accordance with the appropriate local, state and federal
codes or could quote actual lighting levels to be achieved.
When drawing up the bid list, note should be made of
the points referred to below before deciding to place a
ﬁrm on the list:

1. Financial capability;
2. Location with respect to project;
3. Workforce and administrative strength to carry out the

project.

the past;

4. Check that the ﬁrm has carried out similar projects in

5. It should be ensured that a ﬁrm is not offered too many
contracts at once. An overextended ﬁrm can cause
severe problems of performance.

Prior to inviting bidders, each ﬁrm should be contacted,
preferably in writing, to seek their agreement to bid. Infor-
mation to be given to them will include:

8/92 Contracts and Speciﬁcations

1. Approximate value of works;
2. Type of contract;
3. When bidder will be sent out and closing date;
4. Program of works, start and ﬁnish dates.

Having agreed to bid, if a ﬁrm does not submit a bid
without good reason consideration should be given to
removing it from the bid list for a short period, because
when a ﬁrm does not bid, it reduces the competitive ele-
ment, possibly increasing the cost of the job. It also denies
another ﬁrm the opportunity of biding.

The number of bidders invited to bid should be deter-
mined by the size of the works. Good contractors should
be encouraged to bid and not be disillusioned by too many
bidders. For most contracts, a bid list of six ﬁrms should
be sufﬁcient to keep the biding competitive and allow for
the odd ﬁrm that does not return its bid.

On important contracts, it may be advisable to invite
bidders to pick up the bid documents, or they could be
delivered to them. Documents do go astray in the postal
system.

Bids should be returned in endorsed envelopes so that it
can be seen that a bid for a named project is enclosed, but
should not disclose whose bid it is. In large organizations
it is normal for bids to be returned by a certain date and
time, to a certain place, which is usually either a legal or
an administrative department.

Someone other than the person involved in the job
itself should open bids and then hand them to the person
involved, after details of bidder have been noted. Bidders
cannot expect to be paid for the time or other costs in
ordinary circumstances for preparing their bids.

8.12 Analyzing bids
When the plant engineer receives all the bids returned he
will need to analyze them to ensure that they are arithmeti-
cally correct, and that each bidder has understood what
is being bided for. A pre-designed analysis sheet can be
helpful and a typical sheet is shown in Table 8.1. All bid-
ders are shown on one sheet with their prices compared.
The ﬁrst task is to check the arithmetic, which seems to
cause problems even in these days of computers. Where
the arithmetic is incorrect, it should be brought to the
attention of the ﬁrm quickly to enable it to either withdraw
or stand by the ﬁgure. If the correct addition would have
meant lower costs, the ﬁrm should be given the opportu-
nity of revising the bid, but only after consultation with
the legal or administrative department. Action taken now
without consultation can be hard to explain later.

The addition may be correct, but a bidder may have
underestimated a particular item. With an itemized bid
it is possible to spot an error of this kind. For example,
referring to Table 8.1 and looking at item 3, bidder 2
has less than half in his bid for item 3 than any other
bidder. On the other hand, item 2 appears to have made
up for it. Where an apparent mistake has occurred, the
ﬁrm concerned should be contacted, and should be asked
to look closely at a certain item, which appears low. For
example, bidder 1 has a much lower amount for item 7
than any other, and if he had bided similarly to the other

Table 8.1 Analysis of bids for replacing a drying machine

Item Detail

1

2

3

4

Strip out
Steel work
Rein. conc.

1
2
3
4 Machine
5
6
7
8
9
10

Elect.
Piping
Ductwork
Insulation
Painting
Test/

commission

Contingency
Provisional
Prime cost

11
12
13
Total tender

$2000
$1500
$2000
$99 000
$3000
$2500
$2700
$2000
$1000
$1000

$1600
$2500
$950
$98 000
$2900
$2300
$4700
$1950
$970
$990

$1900
$1300
$2100

$2200
$1700
$1900
$97 000 $101 000
$3100
$2700
$5100
$2000
$1050
$1100

$2950
$2600
$5200
$1900
$1100
$995

$5000
$500
$1000

$5000
$500
$1000
$123 200 $123 360 $123 545 $128 350

$5000
$500
$1000

$5000
$500
$1000

bidders for that item, he would not be the lowest bidder. It
is better to lose a low price than have the ﬁrm lose money
on a job, which can cause difﬁculties with performance.
Where the scheme was designed before being sent to
bid, the bids should be grouped fairly closely together,
because design decisions have already been made. Design-
and-build bids will need much more attention to ﬁnd out
which is the best value for money. For example, in light-
ing the warehouse mentioned earlier, bidders may have
been advised of the lighting level, but if they have not
been told of the type and manufacture of ﬁttings, there
can be a substantial difference in cost.

Bids received can vary by up to 100 per cent over a
range of ﬁrms. The higher bids may be from ﬁrms who do
not want the job but wish to keep contact with the client.
Where there is a difference of more than 10 per cent
between the lowest and second-lowest bidder, this can
cause problems. For example, the Electrical Contractors
Association offer a guarantee of completing through their
members, at no extra cost, in the event that a member is
unable to do so, but only if the difference between the
contractors appointed and the next bid is not more than
10 per cent. In some instances, this could be enough to
seriously consider not accepting the lowest bid.

8.13 Selection of the contractor
Having established that the lowest bidder is in fact the
lowest, after considering all matters there are other aspects
to consider before agreeing to a contract.

A qualiﬁed bid can make the offer void, and most orga-
nizations would disqualify a bid which was qualiﬁed. An
example of a qualiﬁed bid would be where the speciﬁca-
tion says that electrical attendance is part of the contract,
whereas the bidder says in his bid documents or in an
accompanying letter that he has not included for electri-
cal work, and is not prepared to carry it out. A common
qualiﬁcation is where a contractor puts forward a manu-
facturer of plant different to that speciﬁed. The plant may
be just as good, but the bid is nonetheless qualiﬁed, and
would give an unfair advantage to the bidder.

A bona ﬁde qualiﬁcation is where the speciﬁcation is

unclear.

An area of increasing importance ﬁnancially is the pro-
gram. Contractors are claiming large sums with respect
to delays, and it is important to take note before the con-
tractor is appointed of any qualiﬁcations he may make to
the bid. For example, if a bidder says in his bid that he
can carry out the works in 40 weeks and it is known that
the period envisaged is 52 weeks to coincide with other
trades, then if he is frustrated from doing the work he
can sue for loss and/or expense for the 12 weeks when
he will have, in theory, to lay off men. The solution is to
challenge the period inserted, and if the bidder will not
amend his period, then do not appoint him.

Bids are normally kept open for a speciﬁc period, which
is usually 4 weeks. In any case, without a speciﬁc period
being mentioned in law, a bid must be accepted within a
reasonable period, otherwise it will lapse. In the event that
a decision cannot be reached, or an appointment made for
some time, the bidders should be approached in order to
ensure that their bids are kept open. The problem for the
contractors is that wages and salaries increase regularly,
as do materials and other on-costs.

In contract law, the acceptance of an offer must be
unequivocal. Where a bid is accepted subject to an amend-
ment on, say, program, the client is making a counter-
offer, and the bidder then makes acceptance.

The successful bidder should be informed as soon as
possible that his bid is to be accepted, to give him the
opportunity to plan his operation. Equally, the unsuccess-
ful bidders should be sent a letter expressing appreciation
of the time they have spent in preparing their bidder, but
informing them that they have been unsuccessful.

8.14 Making a contract
A simple contract for any value need not be in writing,
but can be verbal and is known as a parole contract. Many
contracts are made which are verbal. When a person goes
into a supermarket, takes an item off the shelves, carries
it to the checkout and makes an offer to purchase it at
the price shown, this constitutes an offer in contract law.
The checkout cashier takes the money and is, at the same
time, accepting the offer.

Verbal contracts are fraught with problems and should
be avoided where possible. For example, to prove that
a verbal contract has been entered into without the work
having been carried out will need parole evidence in court.
Where arbitration is entered into later, a verbal contract
does not come under the Arbitration Acts 1950 and 1979.
Letters of intent can be the cause of problems, and there
are varying views as to their validity. These are sent in
advance of contractual documents, being signed because
either the documents are not fully prepared or a decision
has not yet been conﬁrmed. For example, in local gov-
ernment a bid may have been accepted by a committee
but needs ratiﬁcation by the full council, which can be
up to six weeks later. It is rare for a council to overturn
a decision made by a committee, but it does happen. In
an attempt to expedite matters, it is common policy to

Relationships between contractor and other parties 8/93

send out letters of intent directly following the commit-
tee. These will be marked either ‘Subject to Contract’ or
‘Subject to Council Approval’, and in these cases, they
are useless as a contract if the client does not go ahead.
Where the contractor has reasonably relied upon the letter
and the client has encouraged him to purchase the equip-
ment, then a court may order that he be paid for the work
done under quantum meruit. A letter of intent without
a qualiﬁcation will infer a contract and will committ he
client to the whole works.

8.15 Relationships between contractor
and other parties
Where only one contractor is involved, then his rela-
tionship with the client is direct and contractual. Most
contracts have more than one contractor, and the client
must decide how he intends this to be arranged. A few of
the possible compilations are:

1. Direct contract (sometimes known as a principal con-

tract), where only one contractor is involved;

2. Main and nominated subcontract. This is where one
contractor is appointed and known as the main contrac-
tor and the client nominates or instructs this contractor
to appoint a named ﬁrm to carry out part of the works.
Sometimes bids will have been sought separately prior
to the involvement of the main contractor;

3. Main and nominated supplier. The client may wish a
certain ﬁrm to supply materials for the contract, which
may be for installation by the main, or a sub-contractor.
4. Principal contractor with domestic sub-contractor and
supplier. The expression ‘domestic’ does not neces-
sarily infer housing, although housing contracts can be
carried out in this manner. A domestic sub-contractor
is a contractor who is appointed by the principal con-
tractor. The client has no relationship with a domestic
sub-contractor, unless he interferes with his selection
such that the appointment becomes nominated. This
type of appointment has become very common.

The contractors have no contractual relationships with
any independent consulting engineers who are appointed
by the client. Where the client decides to appoint a ﬁrm to
‘design-and-build’ there is a different duty on the designer.
When a consulting engineer is appointed, he must exer-
cise reasonable skill and care in carrying out his duties,
as an average ﬁrm of this type would do. However, where
the client entrusts his design and installation to a contrac-
tor, the contractor owes a strict duty to his client to ensure
that the installation works, and that it is ﬁt for its purpose,
as in Independent Broadcasting Authority v. EMI (1981).
has
contractual
relationship with the client, but
the case of Junior
Books v. Veitchi (1982) placed an ‘almost’ contractual
duty upon the nominated sub-contractor. Where a
separate agreement has been signed between the client
and nominated sub-contractor then a direct contractual
relationship applies. Problems can arise where a main
contractor says that his nominated sub-contractor or
supplier is delaying him.

A nominated

subcontractor

no

8/94 Contracts and Speciﬁcations

Because the client has instructed him to use a ﬁrm
which was not of his choice, the main contractor could
claim damages in the form of loss and/or expenses from
his client. Where the principal contractor has brought in
his own domestic sub-contractor, then he is responsible
for his actions. That is the main reason domestic sub-
contracts have become popular. The client must decide
upon which trade will become the main contractor. In
building matters, it is usual for the main contractor to
be a ﬁrm who can carry out the most substantial works,
and this will be a general building ﬁrm. Some general
building ﬁrms carry their own mechanical and electrical
departments, which reduce the need for sub-contractors.
There are occasions when it is more appropriate to
appoint a mechanical or electrical ﬁrm to be the main
contractor. An example would be the laying of a district
heating mains, where the largest value and complexity is
in mechanical engineering. However, experience shows
that not all specialists are geared to this role, and this can
cause problems, especially from a main contractor who is
more familiar with the role of sub-contractor. Overall, it
is recommended that the main contractor be a building or
civil engineering ﬁrm, unless those works are very small.

8.16 Site meetings
Meetings are a necessity to keep a contract moving. The
ﬁrst meeting is normally at the ofﬁces of either the client
or consulting engineers, and is a pre-contract meeting. A
pre-contract meeting is a gathering of all interested parties
to discuss the format of the contract and is a chance for
views to be expressed, prior to the actual formation of a
contract, which very often takes place after the meeting.
Matters which are likely to be on the agenda of a pre-

contract meeting, are:

1. Names and addresses of all parties and introductions;
2. Names of speciﬁc persons from each ﬁrm who will be
handling matters, such as site engineers and clerks of
works;

3. Format of site meetings to be agreed (who will take

minutes and who will chair meetings);

4. General lines of communication agreed;
5. How often site meetings will occur;
6. Accommodation for sub-contractors, site engineer,

clerks of works and meetings;

7. General program discussed. At this stage the main con-
tractor may not have drawn up a bar chart or critical
path program;

8. Procedures for variations and interim valuations may
need to be cleared up, depending upon the form of
contract adopted;

9. Where nominated suppliers or sub-contractors are
involved, the main contractor has the opportunity to
voice his opinion of those selected by the client.

There are generally two kinds of site meetings. One
is where all parties are present and the other is where
the professional team meets with the main contractor and
then the main contractor organizes his own contractors’
meeting with his sub-contractors. The job itself will deter-
mine the kind of site meeting to be held. Ad hoc meetings

are held throughout the job, and these meetings should
always be with the knowledge of the main contractor, if
not chaired by him.

Full site meetings may be held monthly or weekly,
depending on the pace of the job. The main contractor
or the project leader, who could be the architect or engi-
neer, will chair a typical site meeting, and matters for the
agenda will include:

1. Apologies for absence;
2. Previous minutes read;
3. Matters arising from previous meeting;
4. Main contractor’s report;
5. Sub-contractor’s reports;
6. Progress (various clerks of works’ reports);
7. Consulting engineers’ reports;
8. Any other business;
9. Date and time of next meeting.

Minutes are then published through the chairman and
circulated to all parties, even to those not present at that
meeting. When receiving the minutes it is worth study-
ing them to ensure that they are accurate and to note any
action needed. It is usual to have a column drawn on the
right-hand side of the minutes for the names of the par-
ties who need to take action. The smooth running of the
project can depend on all parties complying with action
noted in the minutes. Inaccurate minutes should be chal-
lenged at the next meeting. Site meetings and publication
of minutes are vital to a large or complicated project to
avoid misunderstandings, which can cost money.

There will be ad hoc meetings, particularly inspections
by visiting clerks of works. Points worth noting at these
inspections are:

1. The site is under the control of the main contractor, and
he must be informed of all visitors, who are advised
to comply with requests (e.g. wearing hard hats).

2. An apparently simple visit can result in disputes later.
Therefore, it is wise to meticulously record all salient
points of discussion.

The time and date of arrival and time of leaving may seem
pedantic, but can avoid difﬁculties later. Clerks of works’
diaries are often admitted as contemporaneous evidence
in litigation and arbitration. This is discussed further in
Section 8.17.

8.17 Progress and control
The client will have decided at the very beginning when
he wants the job to be ﬁnished on site. Circumstances
such as approvals, preparation of contract documents or
availability of labor and materials will determine when
the works start.

At the beginning of the contract, before work starts
on site, the main contractor will produce a program of
how he intends to carry out the works. In some bids the
contractor is invited to state what his program will be if he
is successful. This method has merit where the program
is very tight. The most common type of program is a

Quality control 8/95

On most contracts, there are requests by the contractor
for clariﬁcation of the speciﬁcation or for instructions with
regards to variations. These requests need to be answered
promptly to avoid a claim for damages by the contractor,
which may result from delay of the works.

All progress should be carefully noted in the diary of
the supervisor or clerk of works. Points worth noting are:

1. Number of men on site;
2. Weather (where appropriate);
3. Name and title of any person spoken to. Note that
instructions should generally be given through the main
contractor’s site agent;

4. Progress of job;
5. Any items discussed.

8.18 Quality control
The contractor is under a duty in contract to provide and
install plant which is of merchantable quality. There is no
duty on the client to ensure how the contractor carries out
those duties, although his client can sue the consulting
engineer in negligence, if he is not diligent in detecting
faulty workmanship, such that he suffers loss as a result.
Where an industrial ﬁrm employs a contractor, he will
have a chief engineer who will organize the monitoring of
the quality of workmanship and materials. Where a con-
sulting engineer is involved, he will recommend to his
client the degree of supervision required, as mentioned
in Section 8.17. The person appointed will need to con-
sider the following and be satisﬁed that the works being
installed meet the requirements which should be laid down
in the speciﬁcation and drawings:

1. Materials and plant which are speciﬁed are new and

unused;

Figure 8.2 Typical bar chart program

bar chart, and will show at what periods the various sub-
contractors will be on site. A typical bar chart is shown
in Figure 8.2.

The value of having one contractor to control

the
progress of the work can be seen where there are several
contractors on a site at different periods. Progress can
suddenly come to a halt if a key contractor does not
comply with an agreement. For example, if the electrical
sub-contractor does not provide a temporary electrical
supply, there may be no light and power, causing other
contractors to be delayed.

In the matter of progress, the main contractor is in
charge of the works. However, the client or his consult-
ing engineer will need to monitor the works to satisfy
themselves that programs are being adhered to. There is a
temptation for a client or his consulting engineer to assist
the contractor by instructing him how to carry out the
works. This can amount to interference, and if the con-
tractor suffers loss, as a result he can sue for damages.

There are varying degrees of monitoring which a con-

sulting engineer can recommend to his client:

1. Occasional inspection visit by the design engineer, as

necessary, on a small job;

2. Regular clerk of works visits;
3. On-site engineer or clerk of works.

It is the duty of the consulting engineer to make a
recommendation to the client as to the type of super-
vision required, and the client must not refuse a rea-
sonable request by him for on-site supervision. Where
a client refuses a reasonable request for on-site super-
vision, the consulting engineer should warn him of the
possible consequences, otherwise he might face a claim
for negligence later.

8/96 Contracts and Speciﬁcations

2. That workmanship is up to the standard expected in
this type of contract. The Codes of Practice, IEE reg-
ulations and other bodies related to standards should
be used as a measure of standard. It was ruled in the
case of Cotton v. Wallis (1955) that a lower standard
of work could be accepted in a known cheap job, as
long as the work is not ‘rank bad’.

A problem which seems to occur frequently is that
contractors do not give sufﬁcient thought to allowance
for maintenance in the future. To install plant without
means of maintaining it is bad practice and should be
avoided. The plant engineer should make sure that the
design allows for adequate maintenance. This item comes
under the scope of the clerk of works to interpret the
design.

8.19 Interim payments
In a lump sum contract the contractor does not have a
common law right to interim payments. Most larger con-
tracts have an express term within them giving the right to
interim payments, or payments on account, notwithstand-
ing that they have not fulﬁlled their contractual duties
in completing the works. The matter of interim payments
and their frequency should be resolved before the contract
is signed, and not left until a dispute arises.

Interim payments on the contract follow a valuation of
the work done. Valuations are normally carried out by the
plant engineer, the quantity surveyor, the architect or the
consulting engineer and, in the light of recent case law,
should be assessed very carefully.

Until 1974, an architect was considered in law to be
a quasi-arbitrator, and his valuation was ﬁnal. However,
the case of Sutcliffe v. Thackrah (1974) saw an end to
this role. In that case, the architect overvalued the work
that had been carried out, and because the client ordered
the contractor off the job, he suffered loss, because of
which he successfully sued the architects for damages.
Architects and engineers suddenly had a greater interest
in professional indemnity insurance.

An obvious solution would be to undervalue the work
done, in order to avoid a claim from the client. The
case of Lubenham Fidelities and Investment Co v. South
Pembrokeshire District Council (1986) took care of any
tendency to undervalue. In that case, the Court of Appeal
ruled that the contractor might sue the architect in tort for
any damages suffered by him because of the negligent
valuation.

There are occasions when a contractor will apply for
an interim payment based on plant obtained by him for
the contract and stored by him on his premises. This is
a difﬁcult situation, and should be approached with care.
Two problems can arise:

1. Should the contractor end up in dispute with the client
before the plant is installed, he may refuse to release
it, despite having been paid for it.

2. The contractor could go into liquidation before the

plant is installed.

A way around these problems is to have the plant iso-
lated from other equipment and clearly marked ‘This is
the property of (name of Clients)’ and while it may not
be a complete guarantee of success, it is at least better
than not marking it.

8.20 Budget control and variations
At the beginning of the contract, it will be known to the
client and his consulting engineer how much money is
budgeted for the project. The contractor will be aware of
the contract value, of course, and he will know of any
contingency sums that have not yet been allocated.

Contingency sums are included in a contract in case
there are any additional works that need to be carried out
and have not been covered in the contract. This may be
because the client wishes to have more items of plant than
he originally envisaged, there may be unknown features,
or it could be for items that have been forgotten in the
original design. (See Section 8.6 for a description of con-
tingency sums.) Where a consulting engineer forgets to
include an item which is necessary for the proper com-
pletion of the works he can be sued for negligence by his
client, or advised to pay for this work himself. Where a
contractor forgets an item which is necessary he will have
to install it himself at no extra cost.

There is a temptation for the contractor to see contin-
gencies as extra work, or there is always a danger that it
will be spent the end of the contract because the client
will see it as available monies.

Provisional sums are already allocated when the con-
tract is made, and while the true value is not known at
bid, the estimate should be reasonable. Where a sched-
ule of rates or a bill of quantities is available, there is
no problem in arriving at the ﬁgure after the contract has
been let. However, where the contract is simply lump
sum, there is no basis to determine any variation, and this
will sometimes mean a difﬁcult negotiation. When a vari-
ation to the contract becomes apparent it should always
be agreed in writing, preferably with a ﬁrm agreement on
price or at least an agreed rate. A major part of a dispute
when the ﬁnal account is being agreed variations. Where
the variation is too difﬁcult to assess accurately, such as
an underground gas or water main being found which
was not known previously, the contractor will have to be
instructed to carry it out on day work (quantum meruit).
In the bid, there will be a rate for labor and an on-cost
ﬁgure for labor, materials, plant and other expenses, and
the purpose of this is for items of daywork which may
occur. Certain standard forms of contract such as the JCT
form contain speciﬁc documentation when dealing with
variations.

8.21 Safety on site
Unfortunately, deaths occur every year in industry due to
accidents that are preventable. Accidents are more likely
to occur where ﬁrms are under pressure to meet targets,
and safety measures tend to be ignored. The Health and
Safety Executive (HSE) was set up to administer the
Health and Safety at Work, etc. Act 1974 and incorporates

the Factories Inspectorate. General duties of employers
described in section 2 of the Act are that ‘It shall be the
duty of every employer to ensure so far as is reasonably
practicable the health, safety and welfare at work of all his
employees’. The emphasis is on the expression reasonably
practicable, and courts interpret the meaning of it, under
the particular circumstances.

A plant engineer may become involved with an inspec-
tor from the HSE when he arrives on site to carry out an
inspection of the works under powers given to the Exec-
utive by Section 20 of the Act. The HSE will visit at
any reasonable time, or at any time where the situation
may be dangerous in the inspector’s opinion. He may
take with him a police ofﬁcer if he has reasonable cause
to apprehend any serious obstruction in the execution of
his duty.

Having carried out an inspection of the works, the
inspector has powers under Section 21 to serve an
in his opinion, a person is
improvement notice if,
contravening one or more of
the relevant statutory
provisions, or has contravened one or more of those
provisions in circumstances that make it likely that the
contravention will continue or be repeated. The person
concerned then has a duty to remedy the contravention or
as the case may be, the matters occasioning it within such
a period as may be speciﬁed in the notice.

An inspector can order under section 22 that activities
be prohibited which have not yet commenced, and may
be about to be carried on or are already being carried on,
by serving a prohibition notice.

To ignore either of the notices above is a criminal
offence, and a prosecution is likely to follow such contra-
vention. There is an appeal to an industrial tribunal against
an order.

An HSE inspector has the power under Section 25 to
enter any premises where he has reasonable cause to
believe that, in the circumstances, any article or substance
is a cause of imminent danger of serious personal injury.
He may then seize the article or substance and cause
it to be rendered harmless, whether by destruction or
otherwise.

8.22 Delays and determination
Contractors are all too frequently delayed in their com-
pletion for a variety of reasons, some of which are:

1. Client adds extra work or changes his mind;
2. Client or consulting engineer takes his time in giving

instructions or clarifying the speciﬁcation;

3. The contractor starts on site later than agreed;
4. Sub-contractors do not coordinate properly;
5. Site conditions are not as expected;
6. Materials are not delivered as promised;
7. Exceptionally bad weather;
8. Slow progress generally by the contractor.

Delays to contracts can be costly to both client and con-
tractor, and, in some cases, suppliers. There has been a
tendency in the past few years for an injured party to sue
for damages under the contract, and where there is no con-
tract, in tort. Since the case of Marden v. Esso Petroleum

Liquidated damages and loss and/or expense 8/97

(1978) it is possible to sue both in contract and tort at the
same time.

The various forms of contract make a provision for
registering a delay or possible delay, and the contrac-
tor particularly should take this aspect of a contract very
seriously, because it can be the greatest source of ﬁnan-
cial claim. Some contracting ﬁrms examine contracts very
carefully to see if a claim of delays can be made, and this
starts on the day that the contract has been signed.

Close control of the contract should be kept at all
times. This is where formal site meetings, with reports of
progress, can be most useful and can help to steer a late
contract back on the right course. When a contract begins
to fall behind the agreed program, it is important to ﬁnd
out why and to rectify the problem. It is in everyone’s
interest to see the plant commissioned on the agreed date,
and a casual attitude by the project leader should never
be taken. He should be strict with anyone who causes a
contract to slip behind schedule.

There are legitimate reasons why a contract can fall
behind, and some of these are referred to in (1) to (8)
above. However, item (8) must not be tolerated, and the
contractor should be taken to task early in the contract
when this occurs. Close monitoring will show how the
contractor is progressing, and where the contractor has
fallen down so badly that there seems to be no end to
the contract, and then the client should seriously consider
determining the contract.

Most standard forms of contract contain speciﬁc pro-
cedures for determination, and these should be rigidly
adhered to. For example, the contract document may lay
down that the contractor be given 14 days’ notice in writ-
ing to rectify his progress before determination is carried
out. Any letters should be sent by recorded delivery or
served by hand. While liquidated or non-liquidated dam-
ages can be claimed with respect to late or incomplete
work, expense claims usually follow the events shown
below, which are also mentioned in Section 8.24:

1. Client adds extra work or changes his mind. It may
seem reasonable that where the client authorizes extra
work and pays for that extra work, he should not then
be required to pay, because the contractor needs to
stay on site longer. This is, however, the case, and
the claim because of the delay very often exceeds the
actual extra costs of the works. Where a client sim-
ply changes his mind and cancels some of the work,
then the contractor can insist on his proﬁt, and over-
head costs for the time he will be without work as
a result.

2. Delay in instructions being issued to the contractor
can be a loss to the contractor if he is waiting for the
instructions, and he can sue for damages for his loss.

8.23 Liquidated damages and loss
and/or expense
This is an aspect of a contract which should not be
contemplated by either party at the outset of a contract.
However, it is common for the client to set a ﬁgure
for liquidated damages, which he considers that he will

8/98 Contracts and Speciﬁcations

genuinely lose if the contract is not completed on time,
and should not be confused with a penalty clause, which
is for punitive damages.

The expression non-liquidated damage means actual
losses, which are incurred by a client, and could be clai-
med in the absence of an agreement to a speciﬁc amount
in the contract. Loss and/or expense can be suffered by
a contractor due to other parties who caused him to be
delayed. These sums per week are invariably far in excess
of any liquidated damages amount set in the contract.

In practice, what happens is that where a contract is
falling behind program the contractor will apply to the
client for an extension to his period for completing the
works. Should the contractor not make an application then
he will be in breach of his contract to complete the works
by the date agreed, and the client can claim liquidated
or non-liquidated damages as a result. Where no speciﬁc
dates for completion have been set, in a dispute situation,
the court will set a date which, under the circumstances,
was or ought to have been in the contemplation of the
parties at the outset of the contract. For example, a ﬁrm
agrees to supply and install a machine, and while no par-
ticular date is set for installation, the ﬁrm knows that
production would be affected badly if it was not installed
within three months. Without extenuating circumstances
prevailing, the ﬁrm could be in breach of its contract if,
say, the machine was not installed within three months.
The contract could include a penalty clause for non-
completion by the contractor, and paid by him, as well
as a bonus clause paid by the client to the contractor in
the event that he completes his contract on or before the
agreed completion date. This bonus clause can be on a
reducing scale (say, from 75 per cent of the time onwards).
Liquidation of the contractor has nothing to do with
liquidated or non-liquidated damages, although these can
still be claimed to a company in liquidation. Some forms
of contract, such as the JCT form, make provision for
automatic determination in the event of a ﬁrm going into
liquidation but that the contractor may be reinstated under
certain circumstances.

8.24 Practical and ﬁnal certiﬁcates
The essence of a plant engineering contract will be that
the plant actually performs to the criteria laid down in
the design, and this must be established before a Practical
Completion Certiﬁcate is even considered. Tests will need
to be made to the plant, and then it will be commissioned
by the contractor and left in a condition whereby it can be
operated as speciﬁed. When the work within the contract
is complete, a certiﬁcate should be issued by the client (or
employer) to the contractor. The architect or consulting
engineer acting as agent normally performs this duty.

Standard forms of contract have particular formats, but

the points which should be noted are:

1. Names and addresses of parties
2. Name and reference of job
3. Date
4. Brief outline of contract and note that the works are

now practically complete

5. Period of guarantee from contractual documents
6. Signature.

There is a tendency in the building industry, for expe-
diency, to issue a Practical Completion Certiﬁcate subject
to a list of defects. Very often, this is done in order to see
the end of the main works.

From the date of the Practical Completion Certiﬁcate,
the contractor is no longer liable for liquidated damages,
and the defects liability begins to run. Latent defects which
appear for the next six or twelve months, depending upon
the agreed period, have to be made good by the contractor,
free of charge to the client.

The ﬁnal certiﬁcate is issued when the end of the defects
period has been reached, and when all defects, which have
appeared within that period, have been attended to.

The client is not prevented from making a claim for
latent defects after the twelve-month period ends, but may
be prevented from making such claims by the Limitation
Act 1980 and the Latent Damages Act 1986, after a period
of six years for a simple contract and twelve years for a
contract made under seal.

8.25 Disputes and arbitration
It is unfortunate when a dispute arises between any of
the parties. The two most common areas are a claim by
the client that the work has been done badly or taken
too long, and from the contractor that his contract has
been interfered with by the client or the nominated sub-
contractors.

Most disputes take the form of strongly worded letters
between the parties, with eventual threats of litigation or
arbitration, very often in an attempt to cause a party to
capitulate. Where there is a genuine attempt to settle a dis-
pute the letters between the parties can be marked ‘With-
out Prejudice’ and letters so worded cannot be used in
evidence without the consent of both parties. If a binding
contract has been effected because of without prejudice
interviews or letters, this may be proved by means of
the ‘without prejudice’ statement, as in Tomlin v. STC
Ltd (1969).

The standard forms of contract invariably contain agree-
ments to arbitrate in the event of a dispute and some
even name the arbitrator or a professional body who will
appoint an arbitrator, upon the application of one of the
parties. Where no agreement to arbitrate exists, the injured
party may sue in either a County Court or High Court,
depending upon the value of the claim, and he must then
prove his case before a judge.

A more speedy method, although not necessarily less
expensive, can be for the parties to make an agreement to
arbitrate, and to appoint their own arbitrator, who should
not have been previously connected in any way with
them. Where a written arbitration agreement is made, the
arbitration will be conducted under the Arbitration Acts
1950 and 1979 and, unless otherwise agreed, before a
single arbitrator, whose powers are almost those of a High
Court judge.

An arbitration hearing can be held anywhere convenient
to the parties, and at times agreed. While the arbitrator will

not meet any one party separately or take instructions from
him, he will take instructions within the law from all of
the parties. For example, if the parties wish the hearing
to be held in a certain place, as long as the facilities are
adequate for the hearing for the parties to meet their legal
advisors, the arbitrator is likely to agree. On matters of
the conduct of the hearing, the arbitrator is in complete
control, subject to a limited appeal by the parties to the
High Court, who can, on matters of law and conduct,
direct the arbitrator to take certain action.

The hearing itself will be conducted in a less formal
manner than a court trial. The room itself is set out like
a conference room, with a seat at the head for the arbi-
trator and places (called ‘the box’) at the opposite end
for the witnesses. To the left of the arbitrator is usu-
ally the claimant and his advisors and to the right the
respondent and his advisors. It is normal for all present
to stand when the arbitrator enters or leaves the room
and address him as ‘Sir’, referring to him during the
hearing as the ‘Learned Arbitrator’. A judge needs to be
treated with more respect and a procedure of bowing upon
entering and leaving is normal. A County Court judge is
referred to as ‘Your Honor’ and a High Court judge as
‘My Lord’.

The plant engineer may be asked to give expert evi-
dence, which means giving his opinion to the court or
tribunal on the subject matter. Prior to giving evidence a
proof of evidence will be prepared by the expert and will
contain simply the following:

1. Identiﬁcation, qualiﬁcations and experience of witness;
2. Details of his appointment;
3. General description of subject matter in dispute;
4. Any tests, photographs, samples or other documents

relied upon;

5. Conclusions and opinions.

There is a distinct difference in the way that expert
evidence is received by a tribunal to that of witnesses of
fact. The plant engineer is strongly advised not to agree
to accept an appointment and subsequently give expert
evidence on matters for which he is not fully experi-
enced. In accepting an appointment to write a report for
a client, his legal advisors should be made fully aware
of the plant engineer’s background and expertise. Having
become committed to the case, the client could, if nec-
essary, apply for a subpoena ad testiﬁcandum to ensure
that the expert gives evidence. There may be occasions
when the plant engineer will be called upon to give evi-
dence of fact, and under these circumstances he is not
an expert witness, although he may be able to give opin-
ion on matters for which he is considered an expert. An
example of this is where the plant engineer is an employee
of the claimant, and he needs to give evidence that a
machine delivered to his works would not perform satis-
factorily. It would be a matter of fact that the machine
would not perform, and the evidence would be strength-
ened because the plant engineer is an expert in this type
of machine.

Upon entering the witness box the plant engineer will
be invited to take the oath, and can either swear on the

Common problems and solutions 8/99

Bible, afﬁrm or take the kind of oath suitable to his reli-
gion. The advocate acting for him will then take him
through his proof of evidence, but will be careful not
to ask him leading questions, except his name, qualiﬁ-
cations and experience. The opposing advocate will then
cross-examine the witness to test the evidence given. He
will ask leading questions and may attempt to shake the
evidence given. The advice to the witness is to stay calm,
courteous and truthful, remembering that the advocate is
only doing his job.

Following cross-examination the advocate may ask a
few more questions to clear up points already raised. The
judge or arbitrator may then ask a question in clariﬁcation.

8.26 Common problems and solutions
There is no sure way of avoiding claims with respect to
contracts, but the following summary may be of assistance
to the plant engineer:

1. Vet prospective bidders carefully prior to invitations
to bid to ensure as much as possible that they are
capable of carrying out the work.

2. Select the type of contract most appropriate for the

3. Where possible, avoid nominating a contractor or

work.

supplier.

4. Make sure that the drawings, speciﬁcations and bid
documents are clear and unambiguous. Do not rely
on exclusion clauses in the speciﬁcation or bid doc-
ument. Have designs checked and use methods and
equipment that comply with British Standards and
Codes of Practice.

5. Unless there is a clear program of works which has
been mentioned in the bid documents, before accept-
ing bids make sure that the contractor or supplier has
speciﬁcally stated his commencement and completion
dates. In the event that the completion date is too early
or too late, resolve the matter before entering into the
contract.

6. Ensure that site meetings are as short as possible and
organized to assist the project, and that they serve
the purpose for which they were intended (i.e. sort
out problems and ensure satisfactory reports).

7. When a contractor indicates that he is or may be
delayed, take him seriously and solve the problem
immediately. Do not interfere with the way in which
the contractor carries out his work, unless he is
patently incompetent.

8. Make sure that all site supervisors, clerks of works
and site engineers keep good records, and that they
are kept contemporaneously, so that, if necessary,
they will be admissible in evidence in the unfortunate
event that a dispute arises.

9. Be careful on the matter of interim valuations for pay-
ments to contractors. To undervalue can be as serious
as overvaluing.

10. Keep up to date with variations to the contract. Do
not wait until the end of the contract before extras
are added up.

8/100 Contracts and Speciﬁcations

11. Safety should be completely in the hands of the
contractor controlling the site, unless the client is in
occupation. Keep a high proﬁle in dealings on safety
matters, and ensure that staff and any other parties
are conscious of the need for safety.

12. The plant engineer should be careful of giving casual
advice to parties with whom he has no contract. Under
the Hedley Byrne v. Heller rule the plant engineer

could be sued for a negligent misstatement if his
advice was wrong, and the receiver of the advice
could reasonably rely upon it, and he suffered loss
as a result.

13. When attempting to settle a dispute the heading ‘With-
out Prejudice’ can be used in correspondence, which,
subject to the rules of privilege, cannot be used in
court.

9

Industrial
Flooring

J D N Shaw
SBD Construction Products Limited

Contents

9.1 Introduction

9/103

9.1.1 Selection of ﬂooring required
9.1.2 Requirements of concrete substrate
9.1.3 Special ﬁnishes

9/104

9/103

9/101

9/103

9.2 Thin applied hardener/sealers 9/104

9.2.1 Sodium silicate and silico ﬂuoride solutions as

concrete surface hardeners

9/104

9.2.2 Low-viscosity resin-based penetrating in-surface

ﬁnishes

9/104

9.2.3 Non-reactive and semi-reactive resin solutions
9.2.4 Polymer dispersions
9.2.5 Epoxy resin dispersions
9.2.6 Reactive resin solutions

9/105
9/105

9/104

9/104

9.3 Floor paints

9/105

9.3.1 Chlorinated rubber paints
9.3.2 Polyurethane ﬂoor paints and multi-coat treatments

9/105

9/105

9.3.3 Epoxy resin high-build ﬂoor paints

9/105

9.4 Self-leveling epoxy, polyester or reactive acrylic resin

systems

9/105

9.5 Heavy-duty ﬂooring

9/106

9.5.1 Granolithic toppings
9.5.2 Bitumen emulsion-modiﬁed cementitious

9/106

ﬂoors

9/106

9/106

9.5.3 Mastic asphalt ﬂoors
9.5.4 Polymer-modiﬁed cementitious ﬂoor toppings
9.5.5 Epoxy resin mortar ﬂoorings
9.5.6 Polyester resin mortars 9/108
9/108
9.5.7 Reactive acrylic resins
9.5.8 Industrial tile ﬂoorings
9/108

9/107

9.6 Comparative applied costs
9.7 Conclusion

9/108

9/108

9/106

9.1 Introduction
There are a bewildering number of special proprietary
ﬂoor treatments available for the architect and engineer
to consider, and much of the brief technical literature
describing them suggests that many products would appear
to offer the same improved service at greatly differing
costs. It is therefore not surprising that many speciﬁers
are totally confused and tend to stick to the products
they know rather than consider some of the novel treat-
ments based on new technology, which often offer dis-
tinct improvements over the materials traditionally used
as ﬂooring materials.1

Before attempting to classify the various types of spe-
cial ﬂoorings available, it is important to consider the con-
crete substrate itself. By proper use of good mix designs
and admixtures, with careful control of the water/cement
ratio and careful attention to laying, ﬁnishing and curing
techniques, concrete itself can serve as a highly durable
ﬂooring material under many industrial service conditions
without the need for special separately applied ﬁnishes.2,3
Properly laid concrete provides an abrasion-resistant ﬂoor
surface which has good resistance to attack by alkalis
and reasonable resistance to mineral and vegetable oils,
although oils do cause some staining and impair appear-
ance. However, irrespective of how well it has been laid,
concrete has poor resistance to acids and many other
chemicals far too numerous to mention here. Where spil-
lage of such materials is envisaged, the concrete must be
protected by the application of special ﬂooring.

9.1.1 Selection of ﬂooring required
Before selecting a ﬂooring material, it is imperative to
consider carefully the precise service conditions to which
the ﬂoor will be subjected. Conditions that must be con-
sidered include:

1. Service temperature;
2. Rate of change of temperature, as rapid temperature
changes can cause some heavy-duty ﬁnishes to crack
up due to the high stresses developed by thermal shock;
3. Nature and concentrations of any materials likely to

come into contact with the ﬂoor;

4. Accuracy of laying the concrete sub-ﬂoor to levels to

allow spillage to run away reliably to drains;

5. Grade of concrete laid for the sub-ﬂoor;
6. Nature of trafﬁc (maximum loads and types of wheels

using ﬂoor) and trafﬁc concentration;

7. Degree/ease of cleaning required;
8. Non-slip characteristics required.

Without such precise information and, on occasions,
even with it, inappropriate ﬂoorings are all too often used,
resulting in rapid breakdown of the ﬂoor in service. In
some instances, some of the performance requirements
are contradictory (especially 7 and 8 above) and where
this happens, a compromise may have to be accepted.

9.1.2 Requirements of concrete substrate
If, at
the
service conditions for the concrete ﬂoor do require special

the speciﬁcation stage,

is decided that

it

Introduction 9/103

ﬂoorings to be applied subsequently, then it is imperative
that the contractor laying the concrete is fully aware of
this factor and does not use a conventional spray-applied
resin solution curing membrane, as this could seriously
affect the adhesion of any special ﬂooring to be applied
subsequently, being difﬁcult to remove uniformly and
reliably.4,5 In these circumstances, and also for industrial
buildings where the eventual use of the ﬂoor is not known
but may therefore require a special ﬁnish, overlapping
polyethylene sheets or another efﬁcient curing method
which does not affect the adhesion of any subsequently
applied ﬁnishes should be used.

It is important to examine carefully the surface of the
concrete substrate prior to applying the special ﬂooring.
Although the concrete laid by the contractor may indeed
have cube strengths well in excess of that speciﬁed, it
is still possible for the concrete slab to have a very weak
surface due to over-trowelling, for example. Special ﬂoor-
ing is applied to the top few microns of the concrete. It is
essential that any weakness in the surface be removed by
a technique that is appropriate to the type of ﬂooring to
be applied.7 Most specialist ﬂooring contractors have suf-
ﬁcient experience to assess the quality of concrete surface
without site testing. However, if there is any doubt, the
surface strength of the concrete should be tested using a
simple pull-off tester or other appropriate means. In gen-
eral, a concrete substrate should have a tensile strength
(by pull-off) of at least 0.75 N/mm2.8,9

As a rule, any concrete base that will be subsequently
treated with special ﬂooring must not be subject to rising
damp, and thus any ground-supported slabs must incorpo-
rate an efﬁcient damp-proof course. If there is any doubt,
the concrete should be tested using a direct-reading con-
crete moisture meter (maximum 6 per cent moisture) or
an Edney Hygrometer (reading not exceeding 75 per cent
relative humidity after 4 hours). It should be stressed that
these ﬁgures are based on the practical experience of a
number of specialist ﬂooring contractors and serve only
as a guide. Other factors such as the depth of the slab,
time elapsed since placing and degree of weather protec-
tion all have an inﬂuence on the moisture content within
the concrete substrate.19 Finally, before considering ﬂoor-
ing materials, mention should be made of the application
of the right joint ﬁller in all movement joints.8 Far too
often, with a carefully laid concrete ﬂoor for industrial
service, no detailed attention to joint ﬁlling is given, and
this results in unﬁlled or wrongly ﬁlled joints rapidly
spalling at the edges under heavy loads of rigid or semi-
rigid wheel trafﬁc, leading to expensive repairs. Apart
from preventing spalling at the ﬂoor edges, the right joint
ﬁller will also improve cleanliness, help smooth running
and prolong wheel life of forklift trucks, for example, and
contribute to safety. The selection of the right joint ﬁller
is, however, a difﬁcult problem, and, in general, it is true
to say that there is no one single ideal material for ﬂoor
joints, since it is impossible to combine all the perfor-
mance characteristics ideally required in one product.

There is now an active trade federation, the Federation
of Resin Formulators and Applicators (FERFA) to which
many of the specialist formulators and industrial-ﬂooring
contractors belong. If speciﬁers/users carefully list all the

9/104 Industrial Flooring

service conditions, which the ﬂooring must meet, FERFA
members should be able to recommend the most cost-
effective ﬂooring materials to give good service under
the conditions indicated. FERFA have recently produced
two Flooring Guides, Application Guide No. 4, Synthetic
Resin Floor Screeds, and Application Guide No. 6, Poly-
mer Floor Screeds. These guides cover in considerable
detail all aspects of laying high-performance resin and
polymer ﬂoorings.5

9.1.3 Special ﬁnishes

In this chapter, the author has attempted to classify the
various types of ﬁnishes available for concrete ﬂoors in
terms of increasing applied costs.

9.2 Thin applied hardener/sealers
9.2.1 Sodium silicate and silico ﬂuoride
solutions as concrete surface hardeners

Both sodium silicate and silico ﬂuoride solutions are
applied to clean, dry, sound concrete ﬂoors as dilute
aqueous solutions (10–15 per cent solids) in two to
three applications, taking care to ensure that all material
penetrates and is absorbed into the concrete surface.
The silicate or silico ﬂuoride reacts with the small
amount of free lime in the cement to form glassy inert
materials in the surface, and the successful application
of both materials depends upon ﬁlling the micropores
in the surface of good-quality concrete,
leaving its
surface appearance and non-skid characteristics virtually
unchanged.

The main difference between the two types are that the
reaction products of the silico ﬂuoride types are less sol-
uble in water and are also harder, which may give better
in-service performance but at a slightly higher material
cost. However, with recent developments in ﬂoor-laying
techniques, the concrete substrates for industrial ﬂoors are
laid with much more dense low-porosity surfaces, so that
neither silicate nor silico ﬂuoride treatments are as effec-
tive as they used to be, when the concrete used had a
slightly more open ﬁnish and hence was more receptive to
these treatments. With modern concrete ﬂoors, it is imper-
ative to wash any material not absorbed into the surface
within a short period. Otherwise, unpleasant white alka-
line deposits, which are difﬁcult to remove, may occur.

It is important to stress that neither sodium silicate nor
silico ﬂuoride will improve the p´erformance of a poor,
low-strength, dusty concrete ﬂoor and if the surface is
too porous, there is no way that all the material applied
can react with the relatively small quantity of free lime in
the concrete surface. All that will happen is that the pores
will be ﬁlled with non-reacted powder, producing a most
unpleasant alkaline dust, which can be very irritating to
the skin and eyes when the ﬂoor is put into service.

Finally, it is important to note that sodium silicate or sil-
ico ﬂuoride treatments properly applied to clean and sound
concrete ﬂoors can improve their performance, wear resis-
tance and resistance to mild aqueous chemicals and oils, at
a relatively low cost. However, they are not the answer to

all industrial ﬂooring problems, as many speciﬁers appear
to believe.17

9.2.2 Low-viscosity resin-based penetrating
in-surface ﬁnishes

Liquid resin-based systems which, like the chemical sur-
face hardeners, penetrate into the surface of a concrete
topping or directly ﬁnished slab and protect the acid-
susceptible cement matrix from attack and, at the same
time, strengthen the surface of the concrete are now being
increasingly used. These in-surface seals leave the slip
resistance of the concrete ﬂoor virtually unchanged but
the treated ﬂoors are easier to clean and are more durable.

9.2.3 Non-reactive and semi-reactive
resin solutions

Resin solution penetrating sealers are now available
which, for very large warehouse ﬂoors, are comparable
in applied costs with the concrete surface hardeners
and are now being increasingly speciﬁed. Experience
indicates that certain acrylic resin solutions are proving
more durable and offer better protection to chemical
and oil spillage than concrete surface hardeners. Acrylic
resin solution sealers can markedly improve the abrasion
resistance of concrete ﬂoors and have ‘rescued’ a number
of poor-quality ﬂoors.

Other resin solutions, in white spirit or stronger solvent

blends, used as penetrating ﬂoor sealers include:

1. Air-drying alkyds (similar to the resins in conventional

gloss paints);

2. Styrene butadiene resins;
3. Urethane oils;
4. Styrene acrylates.

All such resin solutions are based on ﬂammable sol-
vents and are becoming increasingly less acceptable on
health and safety grounds. There is therefore increased
interest in water-based polymer dispersion ﬂoor sealers,
but, to date, none offer the same improvement to ﬂooring
performance that some of the resin solutions can provide.

9.2.4 Polymer dispersions

Polyvinyl acetate (PVA), acrylic and other polymer dis-
persions have been widely used as anti-dust treatments
for concrete ﬂoors for many years. In general, the poly-
mer dispersions have been similar to those used in the
manufacture of emulsion paints, and until recently have
tended to be based on dispersions of relatively large poly-
mer particles (particle size 0.15–0.25 ð 10(cid:2)6 m). Disper-
sions are now becoming available which offer superior
performance as ﬂoor sealers. The chemical and water
resistance of the various polymer dispersions which have
been used in the past vary considerably from the PVA
types, which are rapidly softened and eventually washed
out by water, to acrylic and SBR types which exhibit
excellent resistance to a wide range of chemicals. Water-
based sealers are gaining wider acceptance because of

the increased handling problems associated with polymer
solutions based on hydrocarbon solvents.

9.2.5 Epoxy resin dispersions

Two-component epoxy resin water thinned dispersions
are now being used as ﬂoor
sealers. They have
good adhesion to concrete as well as good chemical
resistance. However, the particle size of the dispersion is
comparatively large (approximately 1–1.5 microns) and
consequently penetration into good-quality concrete is
minimal and an ‘on-surface seal’ is obtained. However,
with porous low-quality concrete substances, considerable
binding/strengthening, etc. of the surface can be achieved
with water-dispersible epoxy resin-based ﬂoor sealer.

9.2.6 Reactive resin solutions

The two-pack low molecular weight epoxy resin sys-
tems in volatile solvents have proved very effective for
improving the wear and chemical resistance of both good-
and poor-quality concrete ﬂoors. The epoxy resin solu-
tions (approximately 20 per cent solids) are high-strength
systems, very similar to those used in heavy chemically
resistant trowelled epoxy ﬂoors and, depending on the
concrete, can penetrate a signiﬁcant depth into the sur-
face of the concrete, where the solvent evaporates and
the resin cures to form a tough, chemically resistant seal,
with a compressive strength of up to 70 N/mm2, thus rein-
forcing the concrete surface. One-pack low-viscosity resin
solutions based on moisture-curing polyurethane systems
are available which perform in a manner similar to epoxy
resin solutions. Some of these polyurethane resin solu-
tions demonstrate a greater ability to penetrate and bind
the surface of suspect concrete ﬂoors measurably better
than other penetrating sealers.17,18

9.3 Floor paints
Floor paints, in a wide range of colors and based on a
number of different binder systems, are used extensively
for concrete ﬂoors in light industrial applications.

9.3.1 Chlorinated rubber paints

Chlorinated rubber ﬂoor paints are probably the most
common of the lower-cost ﬂoor paints on the market.
They produce tough and chemically resistant coatings, but
their adhesion to concrete is not always good. They tend to
wear off in patches and cannot be considered as a durable
ﬂoor treatment except under light trafﬁc conditions. How-
ever, re-coating is a simple job and ﬂoors can easily be
repainted over weekend shutdowns, for example. Similar
paints based on other resins such as acrylics, vinyls and
styrene butadiene are also used.

9.3.2 Polyurethane ﬂoor paints
and multi-coat treatments

Solvents containing moisture-cured or two-pack polyure-
thane resin paints are also used extensively. They

Self-leveling epoxy, polyester or reactive acrylic resin systems 9/105

combine excellent abrasion resistance with good chemical
resistance, and are normally applied in two coats to give a
coating thickness of 0.10–0.15 mm. In addition, moisture-
cured polyurethane resin solutions are used for quite thick
durable decorative ﬂoorings.

Several coats of resin are applied to the prepared sub-
strate at approximately 4- to 6-hour intervals, with one or
more coats being dressed with colored paint ﬂakes which
are sealed in by the next coat and then lightly sanded.
This type of ﬂooring was widely marketed about ten years
ago but, in the main, they were considered unsatisfactory
due to rapid discoloration of the ﬂoor because of the lack
of ultraviolet stability of the urethane resins used, which
rapidly turned yellow-brown and looked dirty. However,
ultraviolet-stable urethane resins that do not suffer this
discoloration are now available, and this type of durable
decorative ﬂooring is gaining re-acceptance (for example,
for kitchens, toilets and reception areas).

9.3.3 Epoxy resin high-build ﬂoor paints

Solvent-free high-build ﬂoor paints are available which
can be readily applied with brush, roller or spray to
a prepared concrete substrate to give a thickness of
0.10–0.20 mm per coat. Normally, two coats are applied
and the ﬁrst is often lightly dressed with ﬁne sand or
carborundum dust to give a non-slip, chemically resistant
and durable colored ﬂoor, ideal for light industrial trafﬁc
conditions (for example, rubber-shod wheels).6

9.4 Self-leveling epoxy, polyester
or reactive acrylic resin systems
Like the high-build epoxy paints, these are solvent-free
low-viscosity systems which are readily applied onto a
prepared level substrate to provide a jointless thin (thick-
ness approximately 1.5 mm) chemically resistant ﬂooring
in a single application.6

The term self-leveling by which they are commonly
described is something of a misnomer, as they require
spreading out to a near-level ﬁnish with a squeegee or the
edge of a steel trowel, and by themselves, they ﬂow out
to give a smooth ﬁnish. Perhaps a better description is
self-smoothing. Before the system is cured, the surface is
normally lightly dressed with ﬁne abrasion-resistant grit.
Without a non-slip dressing, there is a tendency to produce
a slippery, very glossy surface, which shows every scratch
mark. This can be overcome to some extent by careful
formulating and by the application of a slip-inhibiting
industrial ﬂoor polish on a regular basis when the ﬂoor is
in service.

This type of ﬂooring is widely used in laboratories,
pharmaceutical factories and food-processing areas where
easily cleaned, chemically resistant durable ﬂoors are
required.

In recent years, more heavily ﬁlled ﬂowing epoxy resin
mortar ﬂooring systems laid at 3 to 5 mm thickness are
increasingly being used instead of the more traditional
trowelled epoxy resin mortar ﬂooring systems described
below. The laying costs of the ﬂowing mortars are

9/106 Industrial Flooring

signiﬁcantly lower and do not require the same degree
of skill to achieve a satisfactory ﬂoor ﬁnish.

Polyester resin systems and, more recently, acrylic
resins are also used. Polyester resin-based systems have
a tendency to shrinkage during and after application and
application is very critical.

Acrylic resin systems developed in Germany are similar
to polyester resins but, by careful formulation, the prob-
lems due to shrinkage have been largely overcome. The
acrylic resin-based systems are currently based on highly
ﬂammable materials (ﬂash point 10°C), which can present
hazards during laying. However, there are systems avail-
able that can take foot trafﬁc 2–3 hours after application
and full service conditions within 24 hours, even at very
low temperatures.

9.5 Heavy-duty ﬂooring
A considerable range of different toppings is available
for heavy-duty service. The correct selection of the most
appropriate topping on a cost/performance basis can only
be made if service conditions are very clearly deﬁned. In
general, heavy-duty toppings require a sound (preferably
35 N/mm2 strength) concrete substrate.

9.5.1 Granolithic toppings

In effect, granolithic toppings are just a method of produc-
ing a high cement concrete wearing surface on a concrete
substrate. The application of separately laid granolithic
toppings is always fraught with the danger of de-bonding
and curling and, therefore, monolithic grano-toppings are
generally essential. However, for many industrial ﬂoors,
where good resistance to abrasion under heavy trafﬁc is
speciﬁed, a suitable ﬂoor could be achieved more eco-
nomically by direct ﬁnishing of a high cement content,
high-strength (40–60 C N/mm2) concrete. This was borne
out by work carried out by Chaplin,11 who found the
abrasion resistance measured by a number of different
methods to be directly related to the compressive strength
of the concrete. This work also showed that the abrasion
resistance and compressive strength could also be related
to Schmidt hammer test results, which could be of consid-
erable interest for the future non-destructive site testing
of concrete ﬂoors.

Where it is considered essential to apply a granolithic
topping onto an existing concrete substrate the danger of
de-bonding can be much reduced by the use of polymer-
based bonding aid. Two types of bonding aid are com-
monly used:

1. Epoxy resin adhesive specially formulated for bonding
freshly mixed cementitious materials to well-prepared
cured concrete substrates. With the right epoxy resin
bonding aid,
the strength of the bond achieved is
greater than the shear strength of both the topping and
the concrete substrate.

2. A bond coat of a polymer latex (also called polymer
emulsions or dispersions) such as styrene butadiene
(SBR), polyvinyl acetate (PVA) acrylics or modiﬁed
acrylics. These are applied to the prepared concrete as

neat coats of emulsion or, more commonly, as slurries
with cement.

Polymer latex bonding aids are cheaper and more sim-
ple to use than epoxy resins and give a good, tough bond
which is less structural than that achieved by the right
epoxy bonding aid. The so-called universal PVA bond-
ing aids are not recommended for external or wet service
conditions, as there is a danger of the polymer break-
ing down.

9.5.2 Bitumen emulsion-modiﬁed
cementitious ﬂoors

The use of specially formulated bitumen emulsions as the
gauging liquid for graded aggregate/sand/cement screeds
can produce a dustless, self-healing, jointless surface for
industrial areas subject to heavy wheeled trafﬁc under
normally dry conditions. This type of topping is nor-
mally laid approximately 12 millimeters thick and has
been used very successfully for more than 30 years, par-
ticularly in warehouses. The bitumen-modiﬁed cementi-
tious ﬂoor topping is less hard underfoot than concrete,
and has proved a very popular improvement with ware-
house staff. However, with recent trends towards high-rise
tracking, heavier forklift trucks and narrow aisles between
racks, the topping tends to indent or shove, and the truck
forks become misaligned with the pallets stacked on the
higher shelves of the racks, so that it is not possible to
get the goods down.

Loading levels above about 8 N/mm2 for short term and
4 N/mm2 for an indeﬁnite period are, therefore, not rec-
ommended for bitumen emulsion-modiﬁed cementitious
ﬂoors.

9.5.3 Mastic asphalt ﬂoors

Hot applied mastic asphalt ﬂoors have been used for many
years in industrial environments, where a good degree
of chemical resistance under normally wet conditions is
required. Properly laid mastic ﬂoors are totally impervious
to a wide range of chemicals but not solvents. In terms of
mechanical performance, mastic asphalt ﬂoors are similar
to the bitumen-modiﬁed cementitious ﬂoors, but they are
generally laid at a minimum of 25 mm thickness and tend
to shove and corrugate in service under heavy loads. Mas-
tic ﬂoors are not very commonly used now, except where
the ﬂoor is essentially tanked, such as car park decks over
shopping precincts.

9.5.4 Polymer-modiﬁed cementitious
ﬂoor toppings

Polymer-modiﬁed cementitious ﬂoor toppings are now
widely used instead of separately laid granolithic top-
pings. The polymers used are normally supplied as milky
white dispersions in water and are used to gauge a care-
fully selected sand/aggregate/cement mix as a whole or
partial replacement of the gauging mortar. They must
always be mixed in a forced-action mixer.

The polymer latex acts in several ways:

1. It functions as a water-reducing plasticizer, producing
a ﬂooring composition with good workability at low
water/cement ratios.

2. It ensures a good bond between the topping and the

concrete properly prepared.

3. It produces a topping with good tensile strength and

toughness.

4. It produces (based on the right polymer latex) a topping

with good water and chemical resistance.

5. It acts to a signiﬁcant degree as an integral curing aid,
much reducing the need for efﬁcient curing. (Curing
is, however, essential in dry, draughty conditions.)

commonly used – styrene butadiene

Polymer-modiﬁed cementitious ﬂoor toppings are nor-
mally laid 6–12 mm thick. Two polymer latex types
are most
and
acrylics – which have been speciﬁcally developed for
incorporation into cementitious compositions. The princi-
pal difference between the two types is that acrylic lattices
are available, which gave higher early strengths than can
be achieved with the current SBR lattices. Toppings based
on acrylic lattices are used in food-processing industries,
particularly meat processing. Toppings can be laid in a Fri-
day – Monday weekend shutdown and are reported to be
capable of withstanding full service conditions 48 hours
after laying, although longer cure periods are desirable.

When adequately cured, polymer-modiﬁed cementi-
tious toppings based on acrylic/SBR lattices can be
cleaned with steam-cleaning techniques without problems
of thermal shock breakdown, which has been observed
with other heavy-duty polymer toppings. They are resis-
tant to many chemicals encountered in the food and print-
ing industries but being based on an acid-sensitive cement
matrix, their resistance to organic or mineral acids is lim-
ited. There are now becoming available special polymer
powders derived from the polymer lattices which can
be pre-blended with sand, aggregates, cement and other
additives and then gauged on site with water to produce
factory-quality controlled ﬂooring compositions with per-
formance similar to the materials based on the addition of
the milky lattices on site.

9.5.5 Epoxy resin mortar ﬂoorings

Trowelled epoxy resin ﬂooring approximately 6 mm thick
is used extensively where a combination of excellent
chemical resistance and good mechanical properties are
required, particularly abrasion and impact resistance and
resistance to very heavy rolling loads. Epoxy toppings
are available with compressive strengths up to 100 N/mm2
and tensile strengths up to 30 N/mm2. This is achieved by
careful formulation of the binder and the incorporation of
high-strength blended ﬁllers.6

When formulating a system for optimum abrasion resis-
tance, both the epoxy/resin hardener binder system and the
ﬁller blends used appear to have an inﬂuence. The simula-
tion of abrasive service loads on industrial ﬂoor toppings
in a laboratory is not simple, and numerous wear test
machines have been devised. Correlation between differ-
ent wear test machines is not always good, although most

Heavy-duty ﬂooring 9/107

laboratory tests on abrasion resistance give an indication
of the ﬂoor’s likely performance in service in a qualitative
rather than quantitative manner.10,11

In one series of laboratory tests carried out to ﬁnd the
optimum wear resistance of heavy-duty epoxy resin ﬂoor-
ing compositions, a number of different abrasion resistant
materials were evaluated using BS 416, employing three
different epoxy resin binders which themselves had sig-
niﬁcantly differing chemical compositions and mechanical
properties. The results of this work, which was carried out
under dry conditions, are given in Table 9.1. As can be
seen from the table, the selection of the abrasion-resistant
material and the resin matrix both inﬂuence the abrasion
resistance of the system, although the abrasive material
incorporated appears to play a more crucial role.

In wet abrasive conditions, which often occur with
heavy-duty industrial ﬂooring, a small quantity of
abrasion-resistant material
tends to be carried on the
wheels of trucks and produces a grinding paste between
the heavy-duty wheel and the surface. Since the abrasion-
resistant material in the surface is generally harder than
any sand or grit carried into the factory on wheels, the
grinding paste tends to become more abrasive as the
binder is worn away. Abrasion resistance tests under wet
grinding paste conditions, however, do indicate a similar
order of resistance, although the binder appears to play a
more signiﬁcant part. In applications where the ﬂooring is
ﬂooded with water for long periods, the resin binder plays
a more important part, since the strength of the adhesive
bond between the particles of abrasion-resistant materials
can,
if the wrong resin binder system is used, drop
markedly under prolonged wet conditions. In formulating
resins for heavy-duty ﬂoors it would appear that
the
adhesive properties of the resin binder used to bond the
resistant particles ﬁrmly together is the more important
factor when selecting a resin system. In the selection of
systems for highly abrasive service conditions, costs must
also be considered and, on this basis, bauxite, calcimined
under deﬁned temperature conditions, has often been used
as the abrasion-resistant aggregate.

Table 9.1 Abrasion values of trowelled epoxy resin ﬂooring
compositions, using BS 416

Aggregate

Epoxy binder
compositions

Graded sand, Grade C
Graded sand, Grade M
Graded sand, Grade C
Graded sand, Zone 2
Graded sand, Zone 3
Gritstone
Granite
Calcined bauxite
Basalt
Cast iron grit
Copper slag
Sand (Zone 1) gritstone

(50/50 by mass)

A
B
C
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A

A

Mass loss

after abrasion

(g)

4.10
2.75
2.85
5.5
5.7
9.95
1.45
0.95
1.5
0.45
2.25

1.35

9/108 Industrial Flooring

Another aspect of epoxy resin mortar ﬂoorings which
needs careful attention is that their coefﬁcients of thermal
expansion are approximately three times that of concrete.
This, coupled with the relative low thermal conductivity
of epoxy mortar, can cause stresses to be induced at the
resin mortar/concrete interface under conditions of ther-
mal shock (e.g. thermal cleaning), resulting in break-up
of the ﬂooring due to initial failure in the concrete. Two
approaches have been tried to overcome this problem:

1. Using a lower modulus epoxy resin mortar and apply-

ing the topping at a thickness of 3–4 mm;

2. Applying a stress distributing ﬂexible epoxy layer
1–2 mm thick between the rigid epoxy topping and
the concrete.

Both approaches have been used with some success
but in (1), the lower modulus topping also tends to have
lower chemical resistance, which can be a problem, while
technique (2) is signiﬁcantly more costly in terms of both
material and labor.10

9.5.6 Polyester resin mortars

Polyester resin ﬂoor toppings, similar in performance to
the epoxy toppings, have been used but, as indicated ear-
lier, polyester systems tend to shrink and, without careful
formulation and laying, shrinkage stresses with polyester
resin systems can develop at the interface between the
topping and the concrete substrate. Coupled with the addi-
tional stresses due to the differences in their coefﬁcients
to thermal expansion, this can cause failure at the surface
of the concrete substrate.11,12

Several years ago one company had considerable suc-
cess with a carefully formulated polyester mortar top-
ping speciﬁcally designed to minimize these stresses, but
found that, unless it was laid with meticulous care, failures
could occur.

Polyester resin mortars, however, cure within 2 hours
of placing to give greater strength than concrete and are
widely used for the rapid repair of small areas of damaged
concrete ﬂoors and, with the use of ‘igloos’, even in cold
stores in service. Another polyester resin-based heavy-
duty topping that has proved very satisfactory in service
is based on a unique approach. It comprises a blend of
treated Portland cement and a dispersion of a special
water-soluble catalyst system in an unsaturated polyester
resin. This blend is mixed on site with graded aggregates
and a measured quantity of water. The water addition
dissolves the catalyst and, in the presence of free alkali
from the cement, releases free radicals, which trigger the
curing of the unsaturated polyester resin. The cured prod-
uct gives a tough ﬂoor topping that, over the past ten
years, has been widely used in abattoirs, dairies and food-
processing plants. Recently, another system based on a
similar approach has been introduced.

Polyurethane mortar ﬂooring systems based on some-
what similar technology to this special polyester system
have also been used in chemical plants and have given
excellent service. The basic urethane polymer is more
elastomeric than either epoxy or polyester resins and, as
such, is reported to have excellent thermal properties up

to at least 140°C and good resistance to thermal shock.
The adhesion of the urethane systems to damp concrete
is, to some extent, suspect, and dry substrates are there-
fore normally essential, although systems with improved
adhesion to damp substrates are becoming available.14

9.5.7 Reactive acrylic resins

Reactive acrylic resins similar to polyester resins are
also being used increasingly in heavy-duty ﬂoors.
Acrylic resins primarily based on methyl methacrylate
monomer are low in viscosity and wet out ﬁllers very
efﬁciently, enabling the production of heavily ﬁlled
ﬂooring compositions, which are easily laid. The high
ﬁller loadings much reduce the danger of problems due
to shrinkage. Most acrylic resin systems in the uncured
state are highly ﬂammable (ﬂash point below 10°C) and
special precautions need to be taken.

9.5.8 Industrial tile ﬂoorings

There are industrial ﬂooring situations where the service
requirement or the time allowed for laying does not permit
the use of jointless ﬂoor toppings. For such applications
a wide range of industrial tiles are available which will
meet most requirements, in terms of either mechanical
properties or chemical resistance. When tiles are used in
very aggressive chemical environments, the main prob-
lem is grouting between the tiles with a grout having
adequate resistance. Grout systems based on specially for-
mulated furane resins (which, in particular, resist very
strong acids) and epoxy resins are available for this pur-
pose, and tiles laid in very fast-setting mortar bedding
and properly grouted can be installed and returned to ser-
vice in under 48 hours. A typical application for tiles is
in dairies, many of which operate 364 days a year. By
using a fast-setting fondue-based mortar bed bonded to
the underlying substrate with an epoxy adhesive one day
and then laying quarry tiles bonded and grouted with
an epoxy resin system the following day, it is possible
to repair a completely broken-down and impossible-to-
clean ﬂoor to a good standard with no interruptions to
production.

9.6 Comparative applied costs
It is difﬁcult to give precise costs of ﬂoor treatments as
size of total area, areas to be coated at one time, degree
of surface preparation required and other factors all inﬂu-
ence costs. Table 9.2 is a rough guide to comparative
applied costs.

9.7 Conclusion
The range of special ﬂooring materials available is very
wide and, to many, extremely confusing. Speciﬁers, how-
ever, will ﬁnd that if they carefully list all the service
requirements for the ﬂooring, members should be able to
recommend and apply suitable products for most service
conditions.

Table 9.2

Floor treatment/ﬂooring

Concrete surface hardeners, two to three coats
In-surface seals:

Resin solution non-reactive, two coats
Reactive resin solutions, two coats

Paints:

Chlorinated rubber, one to two coats
Polyurethane, two coats
High-building epoxy, one to two coats
Multicoat polyurethane ﬂake, four-plus

Epoxy self-levelling, 1–2 mm
Polyester, 2–3 mm
Bitumen-modiﬁed cementitious, 12–16 mm
Mastic asphalt, 25 mm
Polymer-modiﬁed cementitious, 12 mm
Epoxy trowelled, 6 mm
Polyester, 6–9 mm
Industrial tiles, various

Comparative

cost index

1–1.8

1.2–2.5
2–3

1.7–3.2
1.8–4
3.5–7

5–12
10–16
9–12
7–10
9–13
8–15
18–24
15–20
15–30

References

1 This chapter is based on ‘Special ﬁnishes for concrete ﬂoors’,
presented by J. D. N. Shaw at the International Conference
on Advances in Concrete Slab Technology, Dundee Univer-
sity, April 1979. (Proceedings published by Pergamon Press,
Oxford, 1980, pp. 505–515).

2 Barnbrook, G., ‘Durable non slip concrete ﬂoors for low main-

tenance’, BuildingTradesJournal, 12 January (1979).

3 Anon., ‘Good warehouse ﬂoors don’t just happen’, Concrete

Construction, 493–494, September (1977).

References 9/109

4 Barnbrook, G., ‘The concrete slab – a base for resin ﬂooring’,
paper presented at the Symposium on Resin for Industrial
Problem Areas. Flooring and Anti-Corrosion Application, orga-
nized by the Federation of Resin Formulators and Applicators
Ltd, London, November (1980).

5 FERFA, 241 High Street, Aldershot, Hants GU11 1TJ, Guide
No. 4, Synthetic Resin Floor Screeds, Guide No. 6, Polymer
FloorScreeds.

6 Phillips, G., ‘Caring for concrete ﬂoors protects proﬁts’, Build-

ing,MaintenanceandServices, 37–38, April (1978).

7 Berger, D. M.,

‘Preparing concrete surfaces’, Concrete Con-

struction, 481–494, September (1978).

8 Shaw, J. D. N.,

‘Epoxy resin based ﬂooring compositions’,

FlooringandFinishingNews, 7–11, January (1967).

9 Simmonds, L. B., ‘Concrete sub-ﬂoor testing’, Architect and

BuildingNews, July (1964).

10 Metzer, S. N., ‘A better joint ﬁller’, Modern Concrete, 45–47,

May (1978).

11 Chaplin, R. G., ‘Abrasion resistant concrete ﬂoors’, paper pre-
sented at the International Conference on Concrete Slabs,
University of Dundee, April (1979).

12 Shaw, J. D. N., ‘Epoxy resins for construction: recent develop-
ments’, paper presented to the Japanese Society of Materials,
November (1971).

13 Hewlett, P. C. and Shaw, J. D. N., DevelopmentsinAdhesives,

Chapter 2, pp. 25–72, Applied Science, London (1977).

14 McCurrich, L. H. and Kay, W. M., ‘Polyester and epoxy resin
concrete’, paper presented at the Symposium on Resins and
Concrete, University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 17–18 April
(1973).

15 Nutt, W. O.,

‘Inorganic polymer structures’, British Patent

No.1,065,053, April (1967).

16 Benson, L. H., ‘Urethane concrete in the chemical industry’,

Acema Conference, Frankfurt, August (1973).

17 Shaw, J. D. N., ‘Polymer concretes – UK experiences’, paper
presented at the Conference on Polymers in Concrete, Fourth
International Congress, September (1984).

18 Sadegzadeh, M. and Kettle, R. J., ‘Abrasion resistance of poly-

mer impregnated concrete’, Concrete, 32–34, May (1987).

19 FERFA Technical Report, OsmosisinFlooring, August (1989).

11/131

11

Contents

Insulation

F T Gallyer
Pilkington Insulation Ltd

11.1 Introduction

11/133

11.1.1 Why insulate?
11.1.2 Scope
11/133
11.1.3 Thermal insulation

11/133

11/133

11.2 Principles of insulation

11/133

11.2.1 Heat transfer 11/133
11.2.2 Conduction
11.2.3 Convection
11.2.4 Radiation
11.2.5 Requirements of an insulant

11/133
11/133

11/134

11/134

11.3 Calculation of heat loss

11/134

11.3.1 Glossary of terms 11/134
11.3.2 Fundamental formulae 11/135
11/135
11.3.3 Insulated heat loss
11.3.4 Surface emissivity
11/136
11.3.5 Surface coefﬁcients 11/136
11.3.6 U-value calculation
11/136
11.3.7 Standardized resistances 11/136

11.4 Standards of insulation

11/37

11.4.1 Building Regulations 1990
11.4.2 Approved Document L 11/137
11.4.3 Water supply bylaws
11.4.4 BS 5422, Speciﬁcation for the use of thermal

11/139

11/137

insulating materials 11/139

11.5 Product selection

11/139

11/140
11/140

11.5.1 Limiting temperatures 11/139
11.5.2 Thermal movement
11.5.3 Mechanical strength
11.5.4 Robustness
11/140
11.5.5 Chemical resistance
11.5.6 Weather resistance
11.5.7 Surface emissivity
11.5.8 Acoustics
11/140
11.5.9 Fire safety 11/140

11/140
11/140
11/140

11.6 Thermal conductivity

11/140

11.6.1 Density effects 11/140
11.6.2 Temperature effects 11/141
11.6.3 Chloroﬂuorocarbons
11/141

11.7 Physical forms 11/141

11/142

11.7.1 Slab or board
11/141
11.7.2 Pipe sections
11/141
11.7.3 Beveled lags 11/142
11.7.4 Loose ﬁll 11/142
11.7.5 Mat or blanket
11.7.6 Rolls
11/142
11.7.7 Mattress 11/142
11.7.8 Quilt
11.7.9 Lamella 11/142
11.7.10 Blowing wool
11.7.11 Sprayed insulation
11.7.12 Sprayed foam 11/142
11.7.13 Molded products

11/142

11/142

11/142

11/142

11.8 Facings

11/142

11/142

11.8.1 Paper
11/142
11.8.2 Aluminum foil
11.8.3 PVC 11/142
11.8.4 Tissue
11.8.5 Glass cloth
11.8.6 Wire netting
11.8.7 Laminates 11/143

11/142

11/143
11/143

11.9 Insulation types

11/143

11/144

11/143

11/143
11/144

11.9.1 Mineral wool
11.9.2 Glass wool
11.9.3 Rock wool
11.9.4 Ceramic ﬁbers 11/144
11.9.5 Magnesia
11.9.6 Calcium silicate
11.9.7 Cellular glass
11/145
11.9.8 Exfoliated vermiculite
11.9.9 Expanded polystyrene
11.9.10 Extruded polystyrene
11.9.11 Rigid polyurethane foam 11/146
11.9.12 Polyisocyanurate foam 11/146
11.9.13 Phenolic foam 11/146

11/145
11/145
11/145

11/144

11.1 Introduction
Insulation is one of those ubiquitous techniques that is
always around, always impinging on our work, social and
domestic activities and yet for most of the time is hardly
noticed. Insulation is a passive product; once installed,
it works efﬁciently, quietly and continually, usually out
of sight, enclosed within a structure or a casing or under
cladding.

It comes to the fore when new design of buildings,
plant, equipment or production processes is being consid-
ered. It is at this stage that the right speciﬁcation must
be made. Any shortfall in the thickness or error in the
type and application details will prove costly to rectify at
a later data.

11.1.1 Why insulate?

There are many reasons why professional engineers, archi-
tects and laymen use insulation, e.g.:

Principles of insulation 11/133

Thermal

insulation does not generate heat. It

is a
common misconception that such insulation automatically
warms the building in which it is installed. If no heat
is supplied to that building it will remain cold. Any
temperature rise that may occur will be the result of better
utilization of internal fortuitous or incidental heat gains.

11.2 Principles of insulation
11.2.1 Heat transfer
Before dealing with the principles of insulation, it
is
necessary to understand the mechanism of heat transfer.
When an area that is colder surrounds a hot surface, heat
will be transferred and the process will continue until both
are at the same temperature. Heat transfer takes place by
one or more of three methods:

Conduction
Convection
Radiation

1. To comply with mandatory legislation (i.e. Building

Regulations);

2. To reduce heat loss/heat gain;
3. To reduce running costs;
4. To control process temperatures;
5. To control surface temperatures;
6. To reduce the risk of freezing;
7. To provide condensation control;
8. To reduce heating plant capacity;

Other reasons why insulation is used are to provide:

9. Acoustic/correction and noise control;
10. Fire protection.

11.1.2 Scope

This chapter will deal primarily with thermal insulation.
Acoustic and ﬁre-protection properties and applications
will be treated as subsidiary to the thermal insulation
aspects.

11.1.3 Thermal insulation

A thermal insulation material is one that frustrates the
ﬂow of heat. It will slow down the rate of heat loss from
a hot surface and similarly reduce the rate of heat gain
into a cold body. It will not stop the loss or gain of heat
completely.

No matter how well insulated, buildings will need a
continual input of heat to maintain desired temperature
levels. The input required will be much smaller in a well-
insulated building than in uninsulated ones – but it will
still be needed. The same applies to items of plant – pipes,
vessels and tanks containing hot (or cold) ﬂuids. If there
is no heat input to compensate for the loss through the
insulation the temperature of the ﬂuid will fall. A well-
insulated vessel will maintain the heat of its contents for
a longer period of time but it will never, on its own, keep
the temperature stable.

11.2.2 Conduction
Conduction is the process by which heat ﬂows by molec-
ular transportation along or through a material or from
one material to another, the material receiving the heat
being in contact with that from which it receives it. Con-
duction takes place in solids, liquids and gases and from
one to another. The rate at which conduction occurs varies
considerably according to the substance and its state.

In solids, metals are good conductors – gold, silver and
copper being among the best. The range continues down-
wards through minerals such as concrete and masonry, to
wood, and then to the lowest conductors such as thermal
insulating materials.

Liquids are generally bad conductors, but

this is
sometimes obscured by heat
transfer taking place by
convection. Gases (e.g. air) are even worse conductors
than liquids but again, they suffer from being prone to
convection.

11.2.3 Convection
Convection occurs in liquids and gases. For any solid to
lose or gain heat by convection it must be in contact with
the ﬂuid. Convection cannot occur in a vacuum. Convec-
tion results from a change in density in parts of the ﬂuid,
the density change being brought about by an alteration
in temperature.

Convection in gases

If a hot body is surrounded by cooler air, heat is conducted
to the air in immediate contact with the body. This air then
becomes less dense than the colder air further away. The
warmer, light air is thus displaced upwards and is replaced
by colder, heavier air which, in turn, receives heat and is
similarly displaced. There is thus developed a continuous
ﬂow of air or convection around the hot body removing
heat from it. This process is similar but reversed if warm
air surrounds a colder body, the air becoming colder on
transfer of the heat to the body and displaced downwards.

11/134 Insulation

Convection in liquids

rate according to the viscosity of

though
Similar convection processes occur in liquids,
at a slower
the
liquid. However, it cannot be assumed that convection
in a liquid results in the colder component sinking and
the warmer one rising. It depends on the liquid and
the temperatures concerned. Water achieves its greatest
density at approximately 4°C. Hence in a column of water,
initially at 4°C, any part to which heat is applied will rise
to the top. Alternatively, if any part is cooled below 4°C
it, too, will rise to the top and the relatively warmer water
will sink to the bottom. The top of a pond or water in a
storage vessel always freezes ﬁrst.

Natural convection

The process of convection that takes place solely through
density change is known as natural convection.

Forced convection

When the ﬂuid displaced is accelerated by wind or
artiﬁcial means the process is called forced convection.
With forced convection the rate of heat
is
increased – substantially so in many cases.

transfer

11.2.4 Radiation

The process by which heat is emitted from a body and
transmitted across space as energy is called radiation. Heat
radiation is a form of wave energy in space similar to
radio and light waves. Radiation does not require any
intermediate medium such as air for its transfer. It can
readily take place across a vacuum.

All bodies emit radiant energy, the rate of emission

being governed by:

1. The temperature difference between radiating and

receiving surfaces;

2. The distance between the surfaces;
3. The emissivity of the surfaces. Dull matte surfaces are
good emitters/receivers; bright reﬂective surfaces are
poor ones.

11.2.5 Requirements of an insulant

In order to perform effectively as an insulant a material
must
restrict heat ﬂow by any (and preferably) all
three methods of heat transfer. Most insulating materials
adequately reduce conduction and convection elements
by the cellular structure of the material. The radiation
component is decreased by absorption into the body of
the insulant and is further reduced by the application of
bright foil outer facing to the product.

Conduction inhibition
To reduce heat transfer by conduction, an insulant should
have a small ratio of solid volume to void. Additionally,
a thin-wall matrix, a discontinuous matrix or a matrix of
elements with minimum point contacts are all beneﬁcial
in reducing conducted heat ﬂow. A reduction in the
conduction across the voids can be achieved by the use
of inert gases rather than still air.

Radiation inhibition
Radiation transfer is largely eliminated when an insulant is
placed in close contact with a hot surface. Radiation may
penetrate an open-cell material but is rapidly absorbed
within the immediate matrix and the energy changed to
conductive or convective heat ﬂow. It is also inhibited
by the use of bright aluminum foil, either in the form of
multi-corrugated sheets or as outer facing on conventional
insulants.

11.3 Calculation of heat loss
11.3.1 Glossary of terms

Terms and symbols used in computing heat loss are as
follows.

Heat (J/s or W)
The unit of quantity of heat is the joule (J). Heat ﬂow
may be expressed as joules per second (J/s), but as a heat
ﬂow of one joule per second equals one watt the unit watt
(W) is usually adopted for practical purposes.

Temperature (°C or K)
For ready identiﬁcation, actual
temperature levels are
expressed in degrees Celsius (°C) while temperature
difference, interval or gradient is expressed in Kelvin (K).

Thermal conductivity ((cid:1))
Thermal conductivity, now denoted by the Greek letter
lambda (previously known as the k-value), deﬁnes a mate-
rial’s ability to transmit heat, being measured in watts per
square meter of surface area for a temperature gradient of
one Kelvin per unit thickness of one meter. For conve-
nience in practice, its dimensions Wm/m2K be reduced to
W/mK, since thickness over area m/m2 cancels to 1/m.

Thermal resistivity (r )
This is the reciprocal of thermal conductivity. It
expressed as mK/W.

is

Convection inhibition
To reduce heat transfer by convection an insulant should
have a structure of a cellular nature or with a high
void content. Small cells or voids inhibit convection
within them and are thus less prone to excite or agitate
neighboring cells.

Thermal conductance (C)
Thermal conductance deﬁnes a material’s ability to trans-
mit heat measured in watts per square meter of surface
area for a temperature gradient of one Kelvin in terms of
a speciﬁc thickness expressed in meters. Its dimensions
are therefore W/m2K.

Thermal resistance (R )
Thermal resistance is the reciprocal of thermal conduc-
tance. It is expressed as m2K/W. Since the purpose of
thermal insulation is to resist heat ﬂow, it is convenient to
measure a material’s performance in terms of its thermal
resistance, which is calculated by dividing the thickness
expressed in meters by the thermal conductivity. Being
additive, thermal resistances facilitate the computation of
overall thermal transmittance values (U-values).

It

Surface coefﬁcient (f)
This is the rate of heat transfer from a surface to the
surrounding air (or ﬂuid) due to conduction convection
and radiation.
is generally used only in still-air
conditions and when the temperature difference between
surface and ambient is of the order of 30 K. It is obtained
by dividing the thermal transmission per unit area in watts
per square meter by the temperature difference between
the surface and the surrounding air. It
is expressed
as W/m2 K.

Surface resistance (RS)
Surface resistance is the reciprocal of surface coefﬁcient.
It is expressed as m2K/W.

Thermal transmittance (U)
Thermal transmittance (U-value) deﬁnes the ability to an
element of structure to transmit heat under steady-state
conditions. It is a measure of the quantity of heat that
will ﬂow through unit area in unit time per unit difference
in temperature of the individual environments between
which the structure intervenes. It is calculated as the
reciprocal of the sum of the resistance of each component
part of the structure, including the resistance of any air
space or cavity and of the inner and outer surfaces. It is
expressed as W/m2K.

11.3.2 Fundamental formulae
In calculating heat loss from surfaces freely exposed to
air it is necessary to deal separately with both radiant and
convective losses.

(11.1)

Radiation
The following Stefan–Boltzmann formula applies to both
plane and cylindrical surfaces:
Qr D 5.673 ð 10(cid:3)8E[(cid:8)Ta C 273.1(cid:10)4 (cid:3) (cid:8)Trm C 273.1(cid:10)4]
Natural convection – plane surfaces
Qc D C(cid:8)Ts (cid:3) Ta(cid:10)n
The factor C and index n can be assumed to have
the following values for plane surfaces of differing
orientations:
Horizontal – downward heat ﬂow C D 1.3 n D 1.25
C D 1.9 n D 1.25
Vertical
C D 2.5 n D 1.25
Horizontal – upward heat ﬂow

(11.2)

Calculation of heat loss 11/135

Natural convection – horizontal cylinders and pipes

Qc D 0.53

(cid:1)a
do

(cid:8)Gr ð Pr(cid:10)0.25(cid:8)Ts (cid:3) Ta(cid:10)

(11.3)

However, as the Grashof and Prandtl numbers can be
different to determine, the following formula, which gives
a close approximation, can be used for cylinders freely
exposed to air:
Qc D (cid:8)Ts (cid:3) Ta(cid:10)1.32

(cid:2)0.25

Ts (cid:3) Ta

(11.4)

(cid:1)

do

(dimensionless),

In the above equations:
Qr D heat loss by radiation (W/m2),
Qc D heat loss by convection (W/m2),
E D surface emissivity (see Section 11.4)
Ts D surface temperature (°C),
Ta D ambient air temperature (°C),
Trm D Mean radiant temperature of enclosure (°C),
Gr D Grashof number (dimensionless),
Pr D Prandtl number (dimensionless),
(cid:1)a D thermal conductivity of air (W/mK),
do D outside diameter of cylinder/pipe (m).
Forced convection
It is not proposed to deal with forced convection here.
Experimental work has yielded considerably differing
results for ostensibly similar conditions. It is sufﬁcient
to note that forced convection affects small-bore pipes
to a greater extent than large-bore and is dependent on
temperature differences. While the heat loss from non-
insulated surfaces may increase by a factor of up to
200–300 per cent, the increase in heat loss from the
insulated surface would be considerably less (of the order
of 10 per cent).

11.3.3 Insulated heat loss

Heat loss through insulation can be calculated from knowl-
edge of the thickness and thermal conductivity of the
insulation and the emissivity of the outer surface of the
insulation/cladding system.

R

Single-layer insulation
q D T1 (cid:3) T2
D T1 (cid:3) Tm
R C Rs
q1 D 10(cid:3)3(cid:19)doq
For plane surfaces:
R D 10(cid:3)3 L
(cid:1)

Rs D 1
f

For cylindrical surfaces:
R D 10(cid:3)3 do
2(cid:1)

d1
do

ln

Rs D do
fd1

(cid:8)11.5(cid:10)

(cid:8)11.6(cid:10)

(cid:8)11.7(cid:10)

(cid:8)11.8(cid:10)

(cid:8)11.9(cid:10)

(cid:8)11.10(cid:10)

11/136 Insulation

Multi-layer insulation

D

T1 (cid:3) Tm

R1 C R2 C Rn C Rs

T1 (cid:3) T2

R1 C R2 C Rn

q D
q1 D 10(cid:3)3(cid:19)doq
For plane surfaces:
R1 D 10(cid:3)3 L1
(cid:1)1
R2 D 10(cid:3)3 L2
(cid:1)2
Rn D 10(cid:3)3 Ln
(cid:1)n

Rs D 1
f

ln

For cylindrical surfaces:
R1 D 10(cid:3)3 do
2(cid:1)1
R2 D 10(cid:3)3 do
2(cid:1)2
Rn D 10(cid:3)3 do
2(cid:1)n

ds
d(cid:8)s(cid:3)1

d1
do
d2
d1

ln

ln

Rs D do
fdn

Symbols

(cid:8)11.11(cid:10)

(cid:8)11.12(cid:10)

(cid:8)11.13(cid:10)

(cid:8)11.14(cid:10)

(cid:8)11.15(cid:10)

(cid:8)11.16(cid:10)

(cid:8)11.17(cid:10)

(cid:8)11.18(cid:10)

(cid:8)11.19(cid:10)

(m2K/W)

(m2K/W)

(m2K/W)

system (m2K/W)

In the above formulae the following symbols apply:
q D heat loss per square meter of hot surface (W/m2)
q1 D heat loss per linear meter of pipe (W/m)
R D thermal resistance of insulation per m2 (m2K/W)
R1 D thermal resistance of inner layer of insulation
R2 D thermal resistance of second layer of insulation
Rn D thermal resistance of nth layer of insulation
Rs D thermal resistance of outer surface of insulation
T1 D temperature of hot surface (°C)
T2 D temperature of outer surface of insulation (°C)
Tm D temperature of ambient still air (°C)
d0 D outside diameter of pipe (mm)
d1 D outside diameter of inner layer of insulation (mm)
d2 D outside diameter of next layer of insulation (mm)
dn D outside diameter of n th layer of insulation (mm)
(cid:1) D thermal conductivity of insulating material
(cid:1)1 D thermal conductivity of inner layer of insulation
(cid:1)2 D thermal conductivity of second layer of insulation
(cid:1)n D thermal conductivity of nth layer of insulation
f D surface coefﬁcient of outer surface (W/m2K)
ln D natural logarithm

(W/mK)

(W/mK)

(W/mK)

(W/mK)

Note: the values taken for (cid:1), (cid:1)1, (cid:1)2, . . . ., and (cid:1)n should
be those applicable to the mean temperature of the hot
and cold surfaces of the appropriate layer.

11.3.4 Surface emissivity

Emissivity values are needed to calculate the radiation
component of heat loss from high-temperature surfaces.
Accurate values that reﬂect actual conditions are difﬁcult
to obtain, as the emissivity value varies with temperature
and with contamination or oxidation of the surface.

For most non-critical calculations the following values

may be used:

Steel, paint (matte surface)
Galvanized steel (new)
Galvanized steel (weathered)
Aluminum (polished)

0.90–0.95

0.40
0.85
0.05

11.3.5 Surface coefﬁcients

aluminum);

These present similar problems to emissivities, and BS
5422 has standardized on three values:
1. f D 5.7 for surfaces of low emissivity (e.g. polished
2. f D 8.0 for surfaces of medium emissivity (e.g.
aluminum paint,
3. f D 10.0 for surfaces of high emissivity (e.g. matte-
steel, brick and plain insulation

planished or galvanized steel,
stainless steel and aluminum/zinc amalgam);

black surfaces,
surfaces).

11.3.6 U-value calculation

The insulation effectiveness of elements of building
structures is represented by the U-value or
thermal
transmittance. As deﬁned in Section 11.3.1, the U-value
is the reciprocal of the sum of the thermal resistances and
can be expressed as:
U D

(11.20)

Rso C R1 C R2Rn C Ras C Rsi

1

where
Rso D thermal resistance of outer surface,
R1 D thermal resistance of ﬁrst material,
R2 D thermal resistance of second material,
Rn D thermal resistance of nth material,
Ras D thermal resistance of any air space in the
Rsi D thermal resistance of inner surface.
In calculating R-values of
the material elements of
construction, their (cid:1) values should be taken at 10°C mean
temperature (which is assumed to be normal building
temperature).

construction,

11.3.7 Standardized resistances

Actual
thermal resistances of surface and air spaces
within a construction vary according to size, exposure

Table 11.1 Internal surface resistance, Rsi (m2K/W)

Table 11.4 Standard thermal resistances for ventilated air
spaces, Ras (m2K/W)

Standards of insulation 11/137

Building element

Direction of

heat ﬂow

Surface
emissivity

Surface
resistance

Walls

Ceilings, roofs

and ﬂoors
Ceilings and

ﬂoors

Horizontal

Upward

Downward

High
Low
High
Low
High
Low

0.12
0.30
0.10
0.22
0.14
0.55

Source: Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers
Guide, Section A3.

Table 11.2 External surface resistance, Rso (m2K/W)

Building
element

Surface
emissivity

Surface resistance
for stated exposure

Sheltered

Normal

Severe

Walls

Roofs

Floor

High
Low
High
Low
High

0.08
0.11
0.07
0.09
0.07

0.06
0.07
0.04
0.05
0.04

0.03
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.02

Source: Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers
Guide, Section A3.

Table 11.3 Standard thermal resistances for unventilated air
spaces, Ras (m2K/W)

Surface
emissivity

Thermal resistance for

heat ﬂow in stated direction

Horizontal Upward Downward

Width of
airspace
(mm)

5

High
Low
High
Low

25
or more
High-emissivity and

corrugated sheets in
contact

Low-emissivity multiple-

foil insulation with
air space on side

0.10
0.18
0.18
0.35
0.09

0.62

0.10
0.18
0.17
0.35
0.09

0.62

0.10
0.18
0.22
1.06
0.11

1.76

Source: Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers
Guide, Section A3.

and nature of the material. Standardized resistance values
were adopted by the Building Research Establishment
in their BRE Digest 108 (August 1969) to ensure a
constant base for the calculation of U-values. These
values are now collected in the CIBSE Guide A3, from
which Tables 11.1–11.4 were prepared.

11.4 Standards of insulation
In the UK the Building Regulations contain the mandatory
requirement for thermal insulation of building structures,

Air space thickness 25 mm minimum
Air space in cavity-wall construction
Air space between tiles and rooﬁng felt on pitched roof
Air space behind tiles on tile-hung wall
Loft space between ﬂat ceiling and pitched roof lined

with felt

Loft space between ﬂat ceiling and pitched roof of

aluminium cladding, or low-emissivity upper surface
on ceiling

Loft space between ﬂat ceiling and unsealed ﬁber
cement or black metal cladding to pitched roof

Air space between ﬁber cement or black metal

cladding with unsealed joints and low-emissivity
surface facing air space

Air space between ﬁber cement or black metal

cladding with unsealed joints and high-emissivity
lining

0.18
0.12
0.12
0.18

0.25

0.14

0.30

0.16

Source: Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers
Guide, Section A3.

and heating and hot water services. Thermal insulation
of cold water supply pipes is dealt with under the water
supply bylaws, but there are no national requirements to
insulate pipes, vessels or equipment used in commercial
or industrial processes.

11.4.1 Building Regulations 1990

These Regulations came into force on 1 April 1990 and
apply to England and Wales only. It is the government’s
intention that these levels be incorporated into the regu-
lations for Scotland and Northern Ireland.

The requirement

The mandatory requirement is that ‘reasonable provision
shall be made for the conservation of fuel and power in
buildings’. This requirement applies to dwellings and all
other buildings whose ﬂoor area exceeds 30 m2.

11.4.2 Approved Document L

The Department of the Environment’s interpretation of
reasonableness is given in the 1990 edition of Building
Regulations 1985, Approved Document L, Conservation
of Fuel and Power, available from HMSO. This deals with
three areas of energy conservation:

The building fabrics
Controls of heating/hot water systems
Insulation of hot water systems.

Limitation on heat loss through the building fabric

This section of Approved Document L allows three meth-
ods of compliance:

Elemental approach
Calculation procedure 1
Calculation procedure 2

11/138 Insulation

The insulation standards are set by
Elemental approach
the elemental approach, which establishes maximum U-
values for the various elements of structure and maximum
glazing area. These are detailed in Tables 11.5 and
11.6. The Regulations also introduce two new categories
of structure, which have previously not needed to be
insulated:
1. Semi-exposed walls and ﬂoors, which can be consid-
ered to be structures between a heated and an unheated
part of a building;

2. Ground ﬂoors, which because of their inherently good
U-values are unlikely to need insulation unless they
are of a small domestic size or are of long narrow
buildings (see Figure 11.1).

This is an alternative to the
Calculation procedure 1
elemental approach and allows variation in the levels of
insulation and of the glazing area. The calculation should
show that the rate of heat loss through the envelope of
the proposed building is not greater than that through
a notional building of the same size and shape that is
designed to comply with the elemental approach.

This procedure is the calcula-
Calculation procedure 2
tion of an energy target and allows for a completely free
design using any valid energy-conservation measure. The
procedure is intended to allow for useful solar heat gains
and fortuitous internal gains. The requirement of Building
Regulations will be met ‘if the calculated annual energy
use of the proposed building is less than the calculated

Table 11.5 Building Regulations: maximum U-values (W/m2K)

Structure

Dwelling

All other buildings

Exposed walls
Exposed ﬂoors
Ground ﬂoors
Roofs
Semi-exposed

walls and ﬂoors

0.45
0.45
0.45
0.25
0.6

0.45
0.45
0.45
0.45
0.6

Table 11.6 Building Regulations: maximum single-glazed areas
of windows and rooﬂights

Building type

Dwellings

Other residential,

including hotels and
institutional buildings

Places of assembly,
ofﬁces and shops

Industrial and storage

Windows

Rooﬂights

Windows and rooﬂights together

15% of total ﬂoor area

25% of
exposed wall
area
35% of
exposed wall
15% of
exposed wall
area

20% of
roof area

20% of
roof area
20% of
roof area

Note: In any building the above glazing areas may be doubled
when double-glazing is used and trebled when triple glazing, or
double-glazing with low-emissivity coating, is used.

)

m

i

(
 
n
o
s
n
e
m
d
 
r
e
t
r
o
h
S

i

24
22
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

Uninsulated values (W/m2K)

0.3

0.4

0.4

5

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.80.91.01.11.21.3

10

20

30

40

Longer dimension (m)

Figure 11.1 U-values of uninsulated solid concrete ground ﬂoors
with four exposed edges. (Source: Eurisol UK, U-value Guide)

energy use of a similar building designed to comply with
the elemental approach’.

Limitations are
Limitations on calculation procedures
placed on the use of high (e.g. poor U-values) and of
glazing areas when using the calculation of methods of
complying. As a general rule:

1. In dwellings: The U-value of roofs and exposed
walls should not be greater than 0.35 W/m2K and
0.6 W/m2K, respectively.

2. In all other buildings: The U-value of roofs and
exposed walls should not be greater than 0.6 W/m2K.
3. Glazing areas: If areas of glazing smaller than those
allowed in Table 11.6 are used in the ‘proposed build-
ing’ then this smaller area should also be used in the
notional building calculation.

the

actual

While

thickness
Insulation thickness
insulation needed to comply with the Building
of
Regulations will vary depending on insulation type,
thermal conductivity and the structure into which it is
ﬁtted, some general guidelines can be given:
1. Domestic roofs: U D 0.25 W/m2K
2. Other roofs: U D 0.45 W/m2K

150 mm mineral wool loft insulation

80 mm in steel-frame metal-clad roofs
40–60 mm in ﬂat roots

3. External Walls: U D 0.45 W/m2K

80 mm in steel-frame metal-clad wall
50 mm in aerated concrete inner-leaf cavity wall
65 mm in high-density masonry cavity walls

4. Semi-exposed elements: U D 0.6 W/m2K

0–50 mm, depending on construction

5. Ground ﬂoors

None needed in commercial or industrial-sized ﬂoors
exceeding about 15 m ð 15 m. Actual U-values can be
obtained from Eurisol’s graph shown as Figure 11.1.

Controls for space heating and hot water systems

11.4.3 Water supply bylaws

Product selection 11/139

This section of Approved Document L does not have any
relevance to insulation.

Insulation of hot water storage vessels,
pipes and ducts

This third and last section of Approved Document L
is not intended to apply to storage and piping systems
for commercial and industrial processes. It concerns only
the central heating and the domestic hot water supply
of all buildings. The standards are presented in three
sections for:

Storage vessels
Pipes
Ducts

The require-
Insulation of hot water storage vessels
ments for these tanks and cylinders will be met if the
heat loss is not greater than 90 W/m2. The thickness of
insulation needed will therefore vary not only according
to its thermal conductivity but also to the temperature of
the water being stored. In practice, as long as the water
is not hotter than 100°C the insulation thickness needed
is likely to be of the order of 20–35 mm.

As an alternative to the heat loss speciﬁcation, domes-
tic cylinders complying with BS 699: 1984, BS 1566:
1984: Parts 1 and 2, BS 3198: 1981 or having a cylinder
jacket complying with BS 5615: 1985 will all meet the
requirement.

The requirement for pipes is that
Insulation of pipes
they should be insulated to a thickness at least equal to the
outside diameter, and with an insulant of thermal conduc-
tivity not greater than 0.045 W/mK. Two limitations are
imposed: the insulation thickness need not be greater than
40 mm whatever the pipe outside diameter and insulation
is not needed on pipes whose heat loss contributes to the
useful heat requirements of the room or space through
which it runs.

As an alternative option, the insulation should meet
the recommendations of BS 5422: 1977. This Standard
tabulates thicknesses of insulation too numerous to men-
tion here, according to whether (1) the pipes carry central
heating or domestic hot water, (2) the system is heated
by gas and oil or solid fuel, (3) the water temperature is
75°C, 100°C or 150°C and (4) the thermal conductivity of
the insulant is 0.04, 0.55 or 0.70 W/mK at the appropriate
mean temperature.

The requirement for warm air heat-
Insulation of ducts
ing ducts is that they also should meet the recommenda-
tions of BS 5422: 1977. As with pipes, if the ducts offer
useful heat to the areas through which they run then they
need not be insulated.

The lowest thickness of insulation recommended in
Table 10 of BS 5422 is for insulants having a thermal
conductivity of 0.04 W/mK. It recommends thickness of
38 mm, 50 mm and 63 mm when the warmed air to ambi-
ent air temperature differences are 10 K, 25 K and 50 K,
respectively.

Like the Building Regulations, Bylaw 48, ‘Protection from
damage by freezing and other causes’, is a functional
requirement. It does not quote speciﬁc details but requires
that ‘every pipe or other water ﬁtting, so far as is rea-
sonably practicable shall be effectively protected . . . by
insulation or other means against damage from freezing
and other causes’. Generally, this would be satisﬁed by
insulating to BS 6700: 1987 recommendations which, for
an insulant of thermal conductivity 0.035 W/mK (which
applies to most ﬁbrous and plastic insulants) at the tem-
peratures appropriate to freezing, would mean insulation
thicknesses of approximately 25 mm for all pipes in indoor
installations and 30 mm for those outdoors.

BS 5422 (which also gives insulation thickness for pro-
tection against freezing) recommend thickness of 32 mm
and 38 mm, respectively, for pipes of 48 mm outside diam-
eter or less. It must be emphasized that these thicknesses
only give protection for a relatively short time period (i.e.
overnight). It is not possible by means of insulation alone
to protect permanently static water.

11.4.4 BS 5422, Speciﬁcation for the use
of thermal insulating materials

Much mention has been made of this Standard with regard
to insulation. It contains deﬁnitions, physical characteris-
tics and recommended thicknesses of insulation for a wide
range of industrial applications, including:

1. Refrigeration;
2. Chilled and cold water

supplies

for

industrial

applications;

supplies;

3. Central heating and domestic hot and cold water

4. Process pipework and equipment.

It also contains heat loss calculation methods. This Stan-
dard should be the basis for any speciﬁcation drawn up by
a company that does not have its own in-house insulation
standards manual.

11.5 Product selection
In selecting an insulation product for a particular applica-
tion, consideration should be given not only to its primary
function but also to the many secondary functions, and
often-unappreciated requirements, which the insulation of
pipe or vessel may place on the insulation product. Some
of these product requirements are discussed below.

11.5.1 Limiting temperatures

Ensure that the insulation selected can operate effectively
and without degradation at temperatures beyond the design
temperature called for. Temperature control of the process
system can fail and systems can overheat. Hot surfaces
exposed to ambient air will become hotter when insu-
lated if there is no control of the process temperature. As
with multi-layer systems, the addition of an extra layer

11/140 Insulation

of insulation will change the interface temperatures of all
inner layers. Do not use an insulant close to a critical
temperature limit.

11.5.2 Thermal movement

Large vessels and equipment operating at extreme temper-
atures exhibit large expansion or contraction movements.
Any insulant speciﬁed for these applications should be
capable of a sympathetic movement such that it will not
cause itself or any cladding to burst, nor should it pro-
duce gaps that lead to dangerous hot spots in the cladding
system.

11.5.3 Mechanical strength

Many insulants are made in a wide range of densities and
thus mechanical strengths. Ensure that where insulation is
required to be load bearing, to carry cladding, to support
itself across gaps or drape down the sides of buildings
or high equipment, the selected product has the necessary
strength to accommodate these mechanical requirements
as well as the primary thermal one.

11.5.4 Robustness

Insulation is subjected to abuse onsite, in storage and often
in transit. To ensure minimum wastage through breakage,
contamination or deformation, select products which are
resilient or robust enough to tolerate site conditions and
malpractice.

11.5.5 Chemical resistance

No matter how well installed, insulation is always at
risk of contamination from outside sources. Overﬁlling of
vessels, leaking valves and ﬂanges, oil thrown off from
rotating transmission shafts and motors can all penetrate
protective cladding or lining systems. Consideration of
any insulation’s compatibility with possible contaminants
should be considered in these situations.

11.5.6 Weather resistance

As mentioned above,
insulation applied to externally
located equipment can be subjected to rain and weather
contamination if the outer cladding fails. Insulants with
water-repellant, water-tolerant or free-draining properties
offer an additional beneﬁt in this type of application. In
the structural ﬁeld insulants used as cavity wall ﬁlls must
be of those types specially treated and designed for this
application.

11.5.7 Surface emissivity

The effects of surface emissivity are exaggerated in high-
temperature applications, and particular attention should
be paid to the selection of the type of surface of the
insulation system. Low-emissivity surfaces such as bright
polished aluminum reduce heat loss by inhibiting the radi-
ation of heat from the surface to the surrounding ambient

space. However, by holding back the heat being transmit-
ted through the insulation, a ‘dam’ effect is created and
the surface temperature rises. This temperature rise can be
considerable, and if insulation is being used to achieve a
speciﬁed temperature the use of a low-emissivity system
could necessitate an increased thickness of insulation. For
example, a hot surface at 550°C insulated with a 50 mm
product of thermal conductivity 0.055 and ambient tem-
perature of 20°C would give a surface temperature of
approximately 98°C, 78°C and 68°C when the outer sur-
face is of low (polished aluminum), medium (galvanized
steel) or high (plain or matte) emissivity, respectively.
Conversely, to achieve a surface temperature of 55°C
with the same conditions the insulation would need to be
approximately 120 mm, 87 mm and 70 mm, respectively.

11.5.8 Acoustics

Because of their cellular or open-matrix construction, most
insulants have an inherent ability to absorb sound, act as
panel dampers and reduce noise breakout from plant by
their ability to be a ﬂexible or discontinuous link between
an acoustically active surface and the outer cladding. This
secondary aspect of thermal insulation speciﬁcation will
gain more prominence when the UK adopts the EC Direc-
tive 86/1888, ‘Protection of workers from the risks related
to exposure to noise at work’.

11.5.9 Fire safety

Large volumes of insulation are used in industry, and
most is hidden under cladding behind linings and between
sheeting. However, much is located in voids and open to
view in workplaces.

Fires do occur and accidents happen. In selecting the
appropriate material, consideration should be given to its
ﬁre-safety properties and to methods of maintaining the
integrity of the protective cladding in ﬁre situations.

Fire properties of insulation materials range from the
highest to the lowest, from non-combustible to ﬂammable
with toxic fume emission. Generally, inorganic materials
tend to be non-combustible while organic (or oil-based)
materials are combustible, but many have surface treat-
ments to improve their ﬁre-safety rating.

11.6 Thermal conductivity
Thermal conductivity is not a static property of a material.
It can vary according to the density, operating temperature
and type of gas entrapped within the voids.

11.6.1 Density effects

Most materials achieve their insulating properties by
virtue of the high void content of their structure. The
voids inhibit convective heat transfer because of their
small size. A reduction in void size reduces convection
but does increase the volume of the material needed to
form the closer matrix, thus resulting in an increase in
product density. Further increases in density continue

to inhibit convective heat
transfer, but ultimately the
increasing conductive transfer through the matrix material
offsets the additional beneﬁt and any further increase in
density causes deterioration in thermal conductivity (see
Figure 11.2).

Most traditional insulants are manufactured in the low-
to medium-density range and each particular product
family will have its own speciﬁc relationship between
conductivity and density. One particular group of products
(insulating masonry) is manufactured in the medium- to
high-density range. Thermal conductivity is improved by
reducing density.

11.6.2 Temperature effects

Thermal conductivity increases with temperature. The
insulating medium (the air or gas within the voids)
becomes more excited as its temperature is raised, and
this enhances convection within or between the voids,
thus increasing heat ﬂow. This increase in thermal
conductivity is generally continuous for air-ﬁlled products
and can be mathematically modeled (see Figure 11.3).
Those insulants that employ inert gases as their insulating
medium may show sharp changes in thermal conductivity,
which may occur because of gas condensation. However,
this tends to take place at sub-zero temperatures.

11.6.3 Chloroﬂuorocarbons

Much has been written lately about CFCs. This gas is
used in the manufacture of a range of plastic insulants,
including polyurethane, phenolic, polyisocyanurates and
extruded polystyrenes.

The manufacturers and their suppliers are actively
seeking alternatives, and some CFC-free polyurethane is
already appearing on the market. However, these new
products do not have such good insulating properties
(thermal conductivity of the order of 0.03 W/mK is being
quoted, as against the 0.02/0.025 W/mK of the originals).

y
t
i
v
i
t
c
u
d
n
o
c
 
l

a
m
r
e
h
T

Density

Figure 11.2 Typical relationship between thermal conductivity and
density

Physical forms 11/141

80 kg/m3 rock wool

200 kg/m3 rock wool

50

100

150

200

250

300

Mean Temperature (C°)

)

K
m
W

/

(
 
y
t
i
v
i
t
c
u
d
n
o
c
 
l
a
m
r
e
h
T

0.08

0.07

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03

0

Figure 11.3 Typical relationship between thermal conductivity and
mean temperature

Where CFC-bearing

in
Section 11.9 the thermal conductivity quoted are those
of current (CFC) manufacture.

described

products

are

11.7 Physical forms
The extensive range of insulation types and the numer-
ous forms in which they are manufactured ensures that
any listing can never be comprehensive. It becomes even
more so when one acknowledges the fact that within the
insulation industry there is a secondary network of fabri-
cators and laminators who will take manufacturers’ basic
products and cut, shape, mold, laminate and enclose them
to almost any requirement. The following gives the basic
physical forms and some of the uses to which insulation
materials are put.

11.7.1 Slab or board
The basic product supplied by almost all manufacturers
ranges from ‘ﬂexible’ to ‘rigid’ forms. Dimensions deter-
mined by manufacturing facility and handling ability, but
usually in 600 mm and 1200 mm modules. This conﬁgura-
tion may be used in most applications on plane surfaces,
such as lining panels, under cladding, within casings, in
partitions, in buildings or plant and equipment.

11.7.2 Pipe sections
Rolled, molded or cut to shape as annular cylinders for
the insulation of pipes. Pipe sections are made in one
or two segments but occasionally in three or four. Sizes
are available for most steel and copper pipes of up to
approximately 1120 mm outside diameter.

11/142 Insulation

11.7.3 Beveled lags
Slabs of narrow width beveled on edges (and sometimes
radiused on faces). They are ﬁtted longitudinally on
large-sized pipes with face conforming closely to the
circumference.

11.7.4 Loose ﬁll

Granulate, particle-size material speciﬁcally manufactured
or produced from basic product off-cuts. Supplied by
most manufacturers and used for packing or pouring into
irregular-shaped enclosures.

11.7.5 Mat or blanket

Flexible material of low density and long length generally
supplied in rolls available with or without facings. Mineral
wool and ﬂexible foams are the most usual type of prod-
uct. This conﬁguration is widely used in buildings as roof
insulation and in steel- and timber-frame walls. It is also
used for sound insulation in partitions, on low-temperature
heating ducts and in equipment casings.

11.7.6 Rolls

Mat or blanket supplied in the form of helically wound
cylindrical packs.

11.7.7 Mattress

Medium- to heavy-density mineral wool mat with wire
netting or expanded metal mechanically secured on one or
both sides. Mattress-type products are used for irregular-
shaped surfaces and on large pipes and vessels. It is also
used as large-cavity ﬁre barriers.

wool or vermiculite based, used for thermal and acoustic
treatments and for ﬁre protection of steelwork.

11.7.12 Sprayed foam

A cellular plastic – usually of the urethane or isocyanurate
families – where chemical components are mixed at the
spray head.

11.7.13 Molded products

Insulation formed by slurry casting or heat curing under
pressure in molds in a number of insulation types. Most
common moldings are preformed bends, valve boxes and
ﬂange covers.

11.8 Facings
While all insulation products are supplied in their natural
‘as-produced’ ﬁnish, they are also available with a variety
of facings that are either applied ‘on-line’ during manu-
facture or as a secondary ‘off-line’ process. The facings
are applied for functional, technical or aesthetic reasons,
generally as follows.

11.8.1 Paper

Brown Kraft paper is generally used on mineral wool
products to give added tensile strength, ease handling,
aid positive location between studs or rafters, or prevent
contamination when used under concrete screeds. Paper
is often laminated with polyethylene to give vapor control
layer properties.

11.7.8 Quilt

11.8.2 Aluminum foil

Medium-density mat with ﬂexible facings of paper or
scrim stitched through. Quilts are used for acoustic
absorption behind perforated or
slatted panels and
ceilings.

11.7.9 Lamella

Paper- or foil-backed mineral wool product fabricated
from low-density slabs in which the slats stand upright
with the ﬁbers predominantly perpendicular to the major
faces. This type of product is used on circular and ellip-
tical ducting, pipes and vessels to give a compression-
resistant insulant. Supplied in roll form.

11.7.10 Blowing wool

Glass-reinforced aluminum foil with either a bright pol-
ished or white lacquer surface is utilized with most types
of insulant. Primarily it is used as a vapor control layer
or as a means of upgrading the ﬁre properties of plas-
tic foams, but it does give a semi-decorative ﬁnish to
the insulation. It is therefore often use where the insula-
tion is open to view but located away from direct risk of
mechanical damage.

11.8.3 PVC

Generally used with mineral wool products where, in its
decorative forms, it gives attractive facings to ceilings and
wall tiles and enhances their sound-absorption character-
istics. PVC is also used as a vapor control layer facing.

Nodulated mineral wool produced for application through
pneumatic hoses into areas of restricted access.

11.8.4 Tissue

11.7.11 Sprayed insulation

Insulation dry mixed in factory with inorganic ﬁllers and
binders for application by wet spraying. Usually mineral

Glass-ﬁber tissue or non-woven fabrics are used for
decorative purposes on many insulants. They also give
improved strength to foam plastics and enhanced sound-
absorption characteristics to mineral wools.

11.8.5 Glass cloth

As with tissue, woven glass cloth is used for decorative
or acoustic purposes. Additionally, close-woven fabrics
give improved ﬁre-safety properties and are resistant to
mechanical abuse. Glass cloth or scrim of an extremely
open weave is used on insulants as a key for mastic or
hard-setting ﬁnishes.

11.8.6 Wire netting

Used to give mechanical strength to mineral wool mat-
tresses and is an aid to application. Also a key for mastic
or hard setting ﬁnishes applied on site.

11.8.7 Laminates

Insulation is widely used in laminate form with plas-
terboard, chipboard, cement board, and metal sheeting,
etc. Applications are generally as lining board systems in
buildings but prefabricated metal panels and ceiling tiles
are also produced.

11.9 Insulation types
It is not possible to detail all the many different types of
insulation used in production, service and building indus-
tries. The following attempts to give a summary of the
composition, properties and major areas of use of a rep-
resentative range of insulation types.

11.9.1 Mineral wool

Mineral wool is perhaps the best known of the whole
range of insulation types. It is widely used in all sectors
of industry, transport and building for thermal, acoustic
and ﬁre-protection purposes. There is a common miscon-
ception that mineral wool is a speciﬁc product type – it
is not. Mineral wool is a generic name for a range of
man-made non-metallic inorganic ﬁbers. The following
deﬁnitions should help to clarify the situation:

1. Mineral ﬁber: A generic term for all non-metallic inor-

ganic ﬁbers.

2. Mineral wool: A generic term for mineral ﬁbers of a
woolly consistency normally made from molten glass,
rock or slag.

3. Glass wool: A mineral wool produced from molten

4. Rock wool: A mineral wool produced from naturally

occurring igneous rock.

5. Slag wool: A mineral wool produced from molten fur-

glass.

nace slag.

From these it can be seen that rock wool, slag wool

and glass wool are all mineral wools.

11.9.2 Glass wool

Insulation types 11/143

limestone, ulexite and anhydrite. They are melted in
a furnace at about 1400°C and then fed along a
channel to a forehearth, where the glass ﬂows through
bushings into spinners. These rapidly rotating spinners
have several thousand small holes around the perimeter
through which the glass is forced by centrifugal force to
become ﬁberized. Immediately after formation, the ﬁbers
are sprayed with resinous binders, water repellents and
mineral oils as appropriate and fall under suction onto a
moving conveyor, which takes the wool to one of three
production lines (Figure 11.4).

Main line

The wool passes through an oven, which cures the
resinous binder and determines the thickness of the
product. On leaving the oven, the insulation is trimmed,
slit and chopped into the appropriate product length prior
to reaching the packing station, where it is either packaged
as rolls or slabs.

Pipelines

The uncured wool from the forming conveyor is separated
into ‘pelts’, which are converted into pipe sections by
being wrapped around a heated mandrel, and the wall
thickness set by counter rollers. The sections are then
passed through a curing oven before being trimmed, slit,
covered and packaged.

Blowing wool line

The water-repellent wool is shredded by a ﬂail and pneu-
matically transferred to a rotating drum nodulator to be
further processed before bagging.

Product range

A wide product range, from lightweight mats through
ﬂexible and semi-rigid, to rigid slab. Pipe sections, loose
wool, blowing wool, molded products and mattresses.

Typical properties

Glass wool products have a limiting temperature of
540°C but are mostly used in buildings and H&V
applications where a limiting working temperature of
230°C is recommended.

Fire safety
Part 4.

1

4

Basic wool is non-combustible to BS 476:

2

3

5

6 7 8 9

10

Glass wool
principal constituents are sand,

is made from borosilicate glass whose
soda ash dolomite,

Figure 11.4 The glass wool manufacturing process. 1 Tank;
2 forehearth; 3 spinners; 4 conveyor; 5 curing oven; 6 trimmers;
7 slitters; 8 bandsaw; 9 guillotine; 10 rolling machine.

11/144 Insulation

Density range

10–75 kg/m3.

Thermal conductivity
0.07–0.044 W/mK at 100°C mean.

0.04–0.03 W/mK 10°C mean:

Special applications

Acoustic absorption in duct lining and splitters. Decora-
tive facings for ceiling and lining panels. Tensile strength
for good draping qualities. Loft insulation up to 200 mm
thick, cavity wall insulation. Fire stopping and small-
cavity ﬁre barriers.

11.9.3 Rock wool

Rock wool is made from basalt or dolomite rocks. The
crushed rock, together with limestone and coke, is loaded
into a cupola furnace where, with the aid of oxygen, it
is melted at about 1500°C. The molten rock then runs
down channels and cascades onto a train of rotating discs,
which sling the melt off as ﬁbers. Resin binders, water
repellents and mineral oil are sprayed onto the ﬁbers as
they leave the discs and fall under suction onto the form-
ing conveyor. From this stage, the wool follows a similar
processing sequence to glass wool.

Product range

Lightweight mats, ﬂexible, semi-rigid and rigid slabs, pipe
sections, loose wool, blowing wool mattresses, sprayed
ﬁber, lamella mats.

Typical properties
Rock wool special products can be used up to 1100°C, but
generally a maximum operating temperature of 850°C is
recommended. Like glass wool, the lower density prod-
ucts used in buildings and H&V applications have recom-
mended limits of 230°C.

Product range

A wide basic range of blankets, slabs, block and pipe
sections, especially molded products, felts and gaskets.

Typical properties
Ceramic ﬁbers are used at temperatures up to 1600°C but
their melting point can be in excess of 2000°C.

Fire safety
Part 4.

Basic wool is non-combustible to BS 476

Density range

50–300 kg/m3.

Thermal conductivity

1.8–0.8 W/mK at 500°C mean.

Special applications

Furnace linings, ‘refractory blocks’, gaskets, expansion
joints, very high-temperature work.

11.9.5 Magnesia

Magnesium carbonate is extracted from dolomite rock,
and after mixing with ﬁber reinforcement is slurry cast
into appropriate molds. After drying, the products are
machined to size.

Product range

Rigid slabs, pipe sections, beveled lags and molded prod-
ucts. Also as a powder mix for use in wet cement form.

Typical properties
Temperature range Up to 315°C.

Fire safety Non-combustible to BS 476: Part 4.

Fire safety
Part 4.

Basic wool is non-combustible to BS 476:

Density

190 kg/m3.

Density range

23–200 kg/m3.

Thermal conductivity
mean: 0.052–0.042 W/mK at 100°C mean.

0.037 – 0.033 W/mK at 10°C

Special applications

High-temperature work, ﬁre protection, acoustics, sprayed
ﬁber, molded products,
loft
insulation.

cavity-wall

insulation,

11.9.4 Ceramic ﬁbers

As with mineral wools, there are different types of ceramic
ﬁber, but they are all made from a combination of alu-
mina, silica and china clay and may be made by blowing
or extruding the liquid melt.

Thermal conductivity

0.058 W/mK at 100°C mean.

Special applications

Where load-bearing capacity is required and in food, phar-
maceuticals and cosmetics processing industries.

11.9.6 Calcium silicate

A chemical compound of lime and silica with ﬁber rein-
forcement for added strength. It is cast as a wet slurry into
molds and charged into autoclaves, ﬁnally being machined
to accurate size.

Product range

Rigid slabs, pipe sections, beveled lags, molded products
and as a dry mix for wet plastic application.

Typical properties
Standard products have limiting temperatures of 800°C
but special formulations enable applications up to 1050°C.

Fire safety Non-combustible to BS 476: Part 4.

Density range

240–400 kg/m3.

Thermal conductivity

0.054–0.068 W/mK at 100°C.

Special applications

Industrial process applications where compressive strength
is needed. Also used in underground pipework district
heating mains.

11.9.7 Cellular glass

Powdered glass and crushed carbon are placed in molds
and heated to 1000°C, at which temperature the carbon is
oxidized, forming gas bubbles which causes expansion of
the glass mix. The cellular material is then annealed and,
after cooling, cut to size.

Product range

Rigid slabs, pipe sections, beveled lags, molded products.

Typical properties
Temperature range (cid:3)260°C to 430°C.

Fire safety Non-combustible to BS 476: Part 4.

Density range

125–135 kg/m3.

Thermal conductivity

0.043–0.45 W/mK.

Special applications

Its closed-cell structure makes cellular glass particularly
suitable for refrigeration applications on pipes and cold
stores. High load-bearing capacity enables it to be used
under rooftop car parks.

11.9.8 Exfoliated vermiculite

Vermiculite is a naturally occurring group of hydrated
aluminum–iron–magnesium silicates having a laminate
structure. When subjected to direct heat in a furnace, the
pulverized material ‘exfoliates’ or expands in size, and
then consists of a series of parallel plates with air spaces
between.

Product range

Base product produced as a granular loose ﬁll, which can
be bonded to form boards or dry mixed with ﬁllers and
binders for spray application.

Insulation types 11/145

Typical properties
Limiting temperatures

1100°C.

Fire safety Non-combustible to BS 476: Part 4.

Density

60–80 kg/m3.

Thermal conductivity

0.062 W/mK at 10°C mean.

Special applications
Primarily used in ﬁre-protection applications as dense
boards or wet sprays.

11.9.9 Expanded polystyrene

Expandable polystyrene grains are usually heated by
steam, which causes them to expand. They are then
conditioned and, as they cool, the steam in the voids
within the beads condenses, thus permitting air to diffuse
into them. After conditioning, the granules are placed in
molds through which more steam is blown, resulting in
further expansion. As they are enclosed in the mold the
granules tend to fuse together, forming a rigid block. The
blocks are later cut to shape by the hot-wire technique.

Product range
Rigid slabs, pipe sections, tiles, and loose granules.

Typical properties
Limiting temperatures

80°C.

Fire safety
ignitable to BS 476: Part 5.

Flame-retardant grade. Class P not easily

Density

12–32 kg/m3.

Thermal conductivity
mean.

0.037–0.034 W/mK at 10°C

Special application
Used mainly for building insulation and as a laminate.
Also employed in cold water tanks and pipes.

11.9.10 Extruded polystyrene

This is produced by a continuous extrusion process, which
gives the product a smooth-surface skin and enhances the
mechanical properties.

Product range
Rigid slabs.

Typical properties
Limiting temperature

75°C.

Fire safety Classiﬁed as Type A to BS 3837.

11/146 Insulation

Density

11–45 kg/m3.

Thermal conductivity
mean.

Special applications

0.025–0.033 W/mK at 10°C

Product range

Slabs, pipe sections, beveled lags.

Typical properties

Limiting temperature

140°C.

Used mainly in structural applications. Is suitable for
refrigeration and cold stores.

11.9.11 Rigid polyurethane foam

Polyurethanes are manufactured by the mixing of various
resins, isocyanates and catalysts to produce an exothermic
reaction, which liberates the foaming agent and causes the
mix to expand. They are made in large block molds as a
batch process or are continuously foamed onto a paper or
polythene substrate on a conveyor system.

Product range

Rigid slabs, pipe sections, beveled lags.

Typical properties

Limiting temperature

110°C.

Fire safety Class 1 surface spread of ﬂame to BS 476:
Part 7. Can achieve Class O to Building Regulations when
faced with aluminum foil.

Density

32–50 kg/m3.

Thermal conductivity

0.023 W/mK at 10°C mean.

Special applications

For cryogenic and medium-temperature pipework and
equipment, especially in oil petrochemical industries and
on refrigerated road and rail vehicles.

11.9.13 Phenolic foam

Similar production process to polyurethane. Has the best
ﬁre-safety properties of all the rigid foams.

Class P not easily ignitable to BS 476:
Fire safety
Part 5. Can achieve Class 1 surface spread of ﬂame to
BS 476: Part 7 when faced with aluminum foil.

Product range

Slabs, pipe sections, pipe bends, beveled lags.

Density

30–160 kg/m3.

Thermal conductivity

0.023 W/mK at 10°C mean.

Special applications

Used mainly for refrigeration and cold-water services,
also low-temperature tankage. When laminated to suitable
facings is employed in building applications.

Typical properties

Limiting temperature

150°C.

Fire safety Class O to Building Regulations.

Density

35–200 kg/m3.

Thermal conductivity

0.02 W/mK to 10°C mean.

11.9.12 Polyisocyanurate foam

Special applications

Polyisocyanurates are manufactured in a similar way to
polyurethane, the chemical components being selected to
enhance their ﬁre-safety properties.

Commercial and industrial H&V applications and where
Class O ﬁre rating and low smoke-emission characteris-
tics are required.

12/147

Paint Coatings
for the Plant
Engineer

D A Bayliss
ITI Anti-Corrosion Ltd

12

Contents

12.1 Deﬁnitions and function of coatings
12.2 The constituents of paint

12/149

12.2.1 Paint binders
12.2.2 Paint pigments
12.2.3 Other constituents
12.2.4 Solvents
12/150

12/149

12/149

12/149

12/149

12.8.7 Experience of coating performance 12/159
12.8.8 Special requirements 12/159
12.8.9 Importance of the structure
12.8.10 Costs
12.8.11 Other factors 12/160
12.8.12 Limited choice of coating systems

12/160

12/159

12/159

12.9 Sources of advice

12/160

12/150
12/150

12/151

12.3 Types of coating and their uses
12.3.1 Air-oxidizing coatings
12.3.2 Solvent-dry coatings
12.3.3 Chemically cured coatings
12.3.4 Heat-condensation coatings
12.3.5 100 per cent solids coatings
12.3.6 Non-oxidizing coatings
12.3.7 Heat-resistant coatings
12.3.8 Coatings for concrete
12.3.9 Coatings for concrete ﬂoors
12.3.10 Coatings for wood
12/156
12.3.11 Road and ﬂoor markings
12.3.12 Anti-condensation paints
12.4 Surface preparation and priming
12.4.1 Structural steel 12/156
12.4.2 Zinc metal coatings
12.4.3 Concrete

12/157

12/157

12/156
12/156
12/156

12/152
12/153
12/153

12/154
12/154
12/155

12/155

12/158

12.5 Speciﬁcations
12.6 Economics
12/158
12.7 Painting inspection
12.8 Factors inﬂuencing the selection of coating

12/158

12/159

systems
12.8.1 Environmental conditions
12.8.2 Access for maintenance
12.8.3 Maintenance requirements 12/159
12.8.4 Facilities for coating
12.8.5 Handling, storage and transport
12.8.6 Application properties
12/159

12/159

12/159

12/159

12/159

12.1 Deﬁnition and function of coatings
The term ‘paint’ is normally used to describe the liquid
material before application and ‘coating’ after it has been
applied, dried and cured. Organic-based coatings form the
largest use for protection and decoration, and these can
vary widely in properties and characteristics, ranging in
thickness from a few microns to several millimeters. The
term ‘coating’ is not conﬁned to thick ﬁlms.

Metal coatings (e.g. zinc on steel) can also provide
a useful and economic form of protection for steelwork
and plant in the appropriate circumstances. Some metal-
lic coatings (e.g. hot-dip galvanizing) act as a complete
barrier to the environment, but most corrosion-protection
metal coatings and all organic coatings are permeable to
moisture and gases to some extent. The rate of perme-
ability varies with different types of coating, but in all
cases protection of the substrate is mainly afforded by
adhesion. Good adhesion, which is largely a product of
adequate surface preparation, prevents the lateral spread
of moisture and contaminants, which would undermine
the coating and lead to disbondment or corrosion and
eventual breakdown.

The thickness of the coating also affects permeabil-
ity, and in general, there is a correlation between thick-
ness and life. However, with relatively thick coatings as
obtained with some modern materials such as epoxies the
relationship is not so well established. There may be a
limiting thickness above which either little additional pro-
tection is obtained or the increase in cohesive strength
reduces its adhesive strength. Coatings should always be
applied as closely as possible to the manufacturer’s rec-
ommended thickness.

Coatings will also react with the environment over a
period of time. Metal coatings corrode, albeit at a slower
rate than steel. They have a ﬁnite life in a speciﬁc environ-
ment, depending on the thickness of the coating. Organic
coatings react in a different way, and generally, a type can
be chosen which will have superior resistance to chemical
attack. However, they also deteriorate in time, the main
natural destructive inﬂuences being sunlight and moisture.
The normal visible deterioration of a paint coating is by
the appearance of ‘chalking’ on its surface. Chalking is the
term used to denote the powdery material that appears as
the binder slowly disintegrates and exposes the pigments.

12.2 The constituents of paint
All paints consist of a binder
(sometimes called a
medium) and pigment. Materials consisting of binder only
are called varnishes. Most paints and varnishes contain
solvent in order to make the binder sufﬁciently liquid
to be applied. The combination of binder and solvent
is called the vehicle. Some paints are available without
solvent (e.g. solventless epoxies) but
these generally
require special methods of application (e.g. application
of heat) to reduce the viscosity.

12.2.1 Paint binders
Binders are the ﬁlm formers. After application, they turn
from liquids to solids. Different
types of paint have,

The constituents of paint 12/149

in some cases, radically different mechanisms for this
process. This gives important differences in properties
between the paints made from different binders. In all
cases, however, binders are a vital constituent of paint
and provide its main mechanical and physical properties.
Binders may vary from 20 to 50 per cent by weight of the
paint but will be a higher percentage in the coating ﬁlm.

12.2.2 Paint pigments

Pigments are the solid constituents added during paint
manufacture. Their function is not solely to provide color
but also opacity. Since pigments are opaque they also
help to protect the binder from the harmful ultraviolet
content of sunlight. In general, varnishes are less durable
than paints. Pigments also reduce permeability, particu-
larly when they are in the lamellar form (e.g. micaceous
iron oxide, aluminum and graphite), since they increase
the moisture path through the ﬁlm.

Some pigments exert an inhibitive effect on the cor-
rosion of metal. The mechanisms are complex and not
always fully understood. Inhibitive pigments include red
lead, zinc phosphate and zinc chromate.

Most pigments can be used in any type of binder; there-
fore, paints cannot be identiﬁed by pigment type alone.
For example, micaceous iron oxide pigment is tradition-
ally in an oil-based binder but is being increasingly used
in epoxies, etc. In the paint coating ﬁlm, the pigment con-
tent may vary from 15 to 60 per cent. In the special case
of zinc rich primers, it is over 90 per cent.

The proportions of pigment to binder are a critical
factor in paint formulation not only in providing the opti-
mum strength and impermeability but also in the ﬁnished
appearance (e.g. high pigmentation can give a matte sur-
face, low pigmentation a high gloss). All other things
being equal, a high gloss is generally more durable than
a matte ﬁnish.

12.2.3 Other constituents
Extenders

These are similar to color pigments but are generally inor-
ganic. Although often considered as cheap ﬁllers, they
can form a useful function as reinforcement to the coat-
ing ﬁlm.

Diluent

This is a volatile liquid, which, while not a solvent for the
binder, can be used in conjunction with the true solvent
to reduce cost without precipitation of the binder.

Anti-skinning agent

This is added to reduce or prevent skin formulation in
partially ﬁlled containers.

Water-based corrosion inhibitor

This is added to water-based paints to reduce corrosion
of the container.

12/150 Paint Coatings for the Plant Engineer

12.2.4 Solvents

General disadvantages

Solvents are used to reduce the viscosity of paint so that
it is suitable for application. They play no direct part in
the protective value of the coating and are lost to the
atmosphere. Amounts are kept as low as possible (usually
5–40 per cent by weight).

The type of solvent used depends on the binder. There
is normally more than one type of solvent in paint, par-
ticularly for spray application. Highly volatile solvents
are needed to reduce the viscosity during atomization and
then disperse as quickly as possible, but lower volatile
solvents are necessary to remain momentarily to ensure
that there is sufﬁcient ﬂow to form a continuous ﬁlm.

Organic solvents are a toxic, ﬁre and explosive hazard
to varying degrees, depending on type. Solvent entrap-
ment is one of the most common forms of premature
failure of modern, high-build, fast-drying materials. Paint
manufacturers are urgently developing materials that can
be substantially water based. Currently, this can only be
achieved with a comparative loss of durability and some
application problems, but development of suitable mate-
rials is inevitable for the future.

12.3 Types of coating and their uses
A convenient method of classifying paint coatings is by
their curing mechanism. The process by which the wet
ﬁlm turns into a solid one has a signiﬁcant effect on
the properties of both application and durability. How-
ever, within a particular generic type the formulation can
vary, and one manufacturer’s product may be superior
to another’s. The general lack of standards and changes
in the use of raw materials by manufacturers means that
testing cannot directly compare except different products.
Given below are the main types of paint, their prop-
erties and some general guidance on their use. For any
speciﬁc requirements, it is always advisable to check with
paint manufacturers.

12.3.1 Air-oxidizing coatings

Examples

Alkyds
Silicone alkyds
Urethane alkyds
Epoxy esters
Tung oil phenolic

General advantages

1. Relatively cheap;
2. Easy to apply by brush or spray;
3. Generally formulated with mild solvents, such as white

spirit;

4. Readily available in a wide range of colors;
5. Reasonable gloss retention on exterior exposure;
6. Resistant to mineral and vegetable oils;
7. Available in high gloss.

1. Poor alkaline resistance (e.g. not suitable for applica-

2. Not suitable for very wet, immersed or condensation

tion to concrete);

conditions;

3. Limited resistance to solvents;
4. Relatively slow drying (e.g. touch-dry 4–6 hours, dry

to re-coat 12 hours (minimum);

5. Possible problems of inter-coat adhesion with un-

weathered high-gloss coats;

6. Can only be applied at limited ﬁlm thickness.

Comparison of paints within this classiﬁcation

These are the most widely used of all air-
Alkyds
oxidizing coatings and have the broadest use both
industrially and domestically. They are usually classiﬁed
according to the proportion of drying oil to synthetic
resin (known as ‘oil length’). The oil length inﬂuences all
properties (e.g. chemical resistance, viscosity, ﬂexibility
and hardness).

Long oil-length alkyds (e.g. 60 per cent and over of
oil) are the most suitable materials for site application on
a wide range of surfaces under normal exterior or interior
environments. They are not suitable for very wet condi-
tions, immersion or condensation, or for application to
alkaline surfaces such as concrete.

The shorter oil-length alkyds are quicker drying, harder
ﬁnishes which are most suitable for works application.
The very short oil-length alkyds are used for stove ﬁnishes
on industrial and domestic equipment, etc.

These are alkyds modiﬁed with silicone
Silicone alkyds
resin. They have superior resistance to weathering (partic-
ularly gloss retention) than pure alkyds but are generally
signiﬁcantly more expensive. They are useful for exterior
use where appearance is important.

These are formed by the reaction of
Urethane alkyds
an isocyanate with alkyd, although the curing remains
substantially through the oil-oxidation reaction. They have
properties similar to alkyds although superior resistance
to abrasion is claimed.

Epoxy esters are a type of alkyd where a
Epoxy ester
high molecular weight resin is reacted with alkyd resin.
The curing mechanism remains primarily through the oil-
oxidation reaction and their properties are in no way sim-
ilar to the chemically reacted epoxies. They have similar
properties to alkyds although with improved chemical
resistance but inferior appearance. They form a reason-
ably hard, oil-resistant coating, which can sometimes be
suitable for machinery enamels, but are primarily for inte-
rior use, since they tend to chalk rapidly on exteriors.
Their best use is for chemical or water resistance where
circumstances dictate that ﬁnishes that are more superior
cannot be used.

fast-
Tung oil phenolic
drying material which, when combined with phenolic

is a natural,

Tung oil

resins, forms an air-drying ﬁlm of good ﬁlm hardness,
water resistance, ﬂexibility and toughness. Prior to the
development of more modern materials, it was widely
employed as a corrosion-resistant coating or varnish,
particularly for marine use. It tends to yellow on aging,
so is not suitable for decorative use but when pigmented
with micaceous iron oxide is still widely used for exterior
structural steelwork painting.

Its best use is for bridges, gantries, conveyor-belt steel-
work, etc., where the relatively drab, matte appearance
can be tolerated. The Department of Transport uses this
material on inland motorway bridges, and has found that,
if applied to a correctly prepared and primed surface, it
can be substantially maintenance-free for 20 years.

12.3.2 Solvent-dry coatings

Examples

Chlorinated rubber
Vinyls
Acrylated rubber
Modiﬁed chlorinated rubber
Bituminous
Vinyl tar

General advantages

1. Quick drying (typically touch-dry 2 hours, dry to re-

2. Low water permeability, suitable for wet conditions

coat 8 hours);

and condensation;

3. Good acid resistance;
4. Good alkaline resistance, therefore suitable for appli-

cation to concrete, etc.;

5. Single-pack material;
6. Very easy to re-coat in both new and old condition;
7. No danger of loss of adhesion between coats;
8. Can be used for water immersion (e.g. swimming
pools) but its thinner ﬁlm generally makes it less
durable than two-pack, chemically reacted materials
(e.g. epoxies);

9. With the exception of bitumen, available in a limited
range of colors, but light shades are generally more
durable externally;

10. Forms a solid ﬁlm entirely by solvent evaporation
and therefore does not rely on temperature, oxidation,
etc. to cure. For internal, closed conditions, adequate
ventilation is the main requirement.

General disadvantages

1. Limited temperature resistance (generally, maximum

600°C dry heat);

2. Very limited resistance to solvents, therefore it tends
to be ‘lifted’ or ‘pickled’ if overcoated with paints
containing stronger solvents (e.g. two-pack epoxies or
urethanes);

3. Thermoplastic material, so it moves with temperature
and should not be overcoated with harder, thermoset

Types of coating and their uses 12/151

materials such as alkyds, since these will eventually
crack and craze;

4. They contain a high percentage of strong solvents (typ-
ically 60–75 per cent), therefore a limit to ﬁlm thick-
ness and always a risk of solvent entrapment;

5. Relatively more difﬁcult to apply than other types,
particularly by brush. Since the paint always remains
soluble in its solvent, the brush tends to ‘pick up’ the
previous coat.

Comparison of paints within this classiﬁcation

These are formed by the reaction of
Chlorinated rubber
chlorine on natural rubber. They become a very hard resin,
lacking the elastic and resilient characteristics of rubber.
They have a speciﬁc gravity of 1.64, which is almost twice
that of pure rubber. Chlorinated rubber resin is odorless,
tasteless and generally non-toxic (although it is sometimes
alleged that they can contain residual carbon tetrachloride
from the manufacturing process). They are generally less
critical in application than vinyl but are less resistant to
oils and fats. They will not support combustion or burn
and need careful spray technique to avoid cobwebbing.
The best use is for surfaces liable to condensation and for
coating concrete.

Vinyls Vinyl chloride co-polymer resins were developed
in the USA in the late 1930s. They have better weather
and slightly more chemical resistance than chlorinated
rubber paints. They are generally resistant to crude oil but
application is more critical. For example, they are partic-
ularly sensitive to moisture present on a surface during
painting and this can lead to adhesion failure. They are
also more prone to solvent entrapment than chlorinated
rubber paints.

These are based on styrene butadiene
Acrylated rubber
and have become commercially available only relatively
recently. They are manufactured in several grades but
most have the advantage over other materials in this class
of being based on white spirit solvent rather than the
stronger and more obnoxious xylol. In other respects, they
are similar to chlorinated rubber and cost approximately
the same, although they are easier to airless spray and
the dried ﬁlm contains less pores. They are considered
to have superior weather resistance to chlorinated rubber
and vinyl.

In these, part of the resin
Modiﬁed chlorinated rubber
is replaced with an alkyd or oleo-resinous material.
The chlorinated rubber content can remain high but the
modiﬁcation gives better adhesion to steel and easier
application properties. However, there is some sacriﬁce
in corrosion resistance. In other versions the alkyd resin
becomes the major ingredient and these are claimed to
have good weathering characteristics, adhesion, gloss and
brush-ability, plus some improved chemical and water
resistance over the alkyd alone. The best use is as a
primer for steel under chlorinated rubber topcoats. They
are widely used for this purpose by the Department of
Transport for painting bridges in adverse conditions.

12/152 Paint Coatings for the Plant Engineer

tar sources but

This term is used for products obtained
Bituminous
from both petroleum and coal
the
petroleum products are the more widely used. These
materials are very resistant to moisture and tolerant to
poor surface preparation. They are only available as
black, dark brown or aluminum pigmented. The last has
reasonable outdoor durability but, without the aluminum,
the ﬁlm will crack and craze under the inﬂuence of
sunlight. Normally they cannot be over-coated with any
other type of paint, because not only will harder materials
used for over-coating tend to crack or craze but there is
also a possibility that the bitumen will ‘bleed through’
subsequent coats. The best use is as a cheap waterprooﬁng
for items buried or out of direct sunlight.

These are a combination of vinyl resins and
Vinyl tars
selected coal tars. They are claimed to be similar to the
two-pack coal tar epoxies but with the advantages that
they are a single pack, not dependent on temperature for
curing, and are easy to re-coat at any stage.

Their disadvantages, particularly in comparison with
coal tar epoxies, include the fact that they are limited
in ﬁlm thickness per coat and therefore require multi-
coated application. They have a higher solvent content and
therefore there is an increasing risk of solvent entrapment,
and the slower cure may limit their use in a tidal zone.
The best use is for immersed conditions.

12.3.3 Chemically cured coatings

Examples

Two-pack epoxies
Coal tar epoxies
Two-pack urethanes
Moisture-cured urethanes

General advantages

1. Very resistant to water, chemicals, solvents, oils and

abrasion;

2. Tough, hard ﬁlms that can, if correctly formulated, be

applied to almost any thickness.

General disadvantages

1. The majority is two-pack materials that must be mixed

correctly before use;

2. Their cure, overcoating properties, pot life (e.g. the
time the mixed components are usable) are all tem-
perature dependent. This means, for example, that an
increase of 10°C can halve the reaction times;

3. They are more difﬁcult to overcoat then most types,
and this can lead to problems of intercoat adhesion.
Cured ﬁlms require abrading before subsequent coats
will adhere;

4. As a rule, they cannot be applied over other types of

paint;

5. The high cohesive strength developed during the cur-
ing of these materials tends to place stress on their
adhesive properties.

Therefore, unless they are speciﬁcally modiﬁed they
require a higher standard of surface preparation than other
types of paint.

Comparison of paints within this classiﬁcation

These were ﬁrst patented in 1938 but
Two-pack epoxies
were not in general production until 1947. They have been
very widely used over the last decade. Produced from the
by-products of the petroleum industry, the basic epoxy
resins may be in the form of relatively low-viscosity liquid
resins or they may be solid resins of increasing hardness.
Both solid and liquid resins can then be reacted with a
number of different curing agents. This means that almost
any type of ﬁlm and with any required properties can
be made.

These materials are now widely used for coating both
steel and concrete surfaces that are subject to a particularly
aggressive environment (e.g. North Sea oil platforms).
There is less validity for their use under normal atmo-
spheric conditions since they are relatively expensive and
tend to chalk on exposure to sunlight. However, their use
as zinc phosphate, pretreatment or blast primers for blast-
cleaned steel which is subsequently overcoated by any
other paint system is an extremely valuable contribution
to the painting of new steel work.

These are a combination of epoxy
Coal tar epoxies
resins and selected coal tars. Properties can vary, depend-
ing on the coal tar-to-epoxy ratio. The ideal compromise
appears to be approximately 50/50. Coal tar epoxies are
only available in black or dark brown. They cost less than
straight epoxies and generally have better wetting prop-
erties, so they can be used on slightly less than perfect
surface preparation. There are similar re-coating problems
as for the two-pack epoxies.

Their best use is for water immersion, particularly sea-
water tidal situations. Performance in sunlight varies and
should be checked with the paint supplier, as should use
for lining potable water tanks.

As with the straight epoxies, a number of curing agents
that can be used. The advantages and disadvantages of the
main types are listed below:

1. Polyamine curing: This provides very good chemi-
cal and corrosion resistance, good solvent and water
resistance and excellent resistance to alkali. The resis-
tance to weathering is poor since there is a tendency to
chalk heavily from exposure to sunlight. These materi-
als can form an amine bloom on their surface if applied
under conditions of high humidity. Unless this bloom
is removed there is likely to be a loss of intercoat adhe-
sion. The amines in these materials also present some
handling hazards, since they are moderately toxic skin
irritants, which can cause allergic reactions.

2. Polyamide curing: This is the most widely used of
epoxy-curing agents and gives a good compromise of
properties. The resultant ﬁlms are generally softer,
more resilient and ﬂexible than with amine curing. They
have excellent alkali resistance but poorer acid resis-
tance than the amine cured. Generally, the two compo-
nents that have to be mixed are of similar volume, which

also makes for easier mixing. There are fewer tenden-
cies to bloom and better wetting characteristics than
the polyamine type. Both the polyamine and polyamide
types will cure slowly at low temperature and will not
cure below 5°C.

3. Isocyanate curing: These are used when the ambient
temperatures are low because they cure rapidly and at
temperatures below 5°C. There is a tendency for such
ﬁlms to become brittle with age, and it is preferable
not to use such materials at high ambient temperatures,
since the pot life and other properties may become
unacceptably short.

Also called urethanes, these
Two-pack polyurethanes
materials are similar to two-pack epoxies in that they can
be formulated to provide different properties. They can
be made into foams or soft, rubbery materials, as well as
very hard, tough, abrasion-resistant coatings.

In comparison with epoxies, the correctly formulated
urethane can possess considerably superior gloss retention
and ﬂexibility. They also form a ﬁlm so hard and solvent
resistant that they can be used as anti-grafﬁti coating. The
grafﬁti can be removed with solvent without damaging
the urethane. Since these materials give off toxic fumes
in a ﬁre it is preferable that they are not used in con-
ﬁned spaces.
The paint

is sensitive to moisture during storage
and application but then becomes exceptionally water-
resistant. Its best use is for exterior exposure in an
aggressive environment but where the maximum gloss
and color retention is required. It is preferable to apply
the urethane as a ﬁnishing coat over epoxy undercoating
and priming.

These are the only paints in
Moisture-cured urethanes
this class of materials that are single pack. The curing is
provided by moisture from the atmosphere. This has the
advantage that the material can tolerate a degree of damp-
ness in the atmosphere and on the surface to be coated. Its
disadvantage is that the ﬁlm thickness per coat is limited
and that, once opened, the entire container must be used
immediately. Conversely, if the humidity is very low the
cure may be lengthened or stopped.

It is claimed that the cured ﬁlm has similar properties
and durability to the two-pack urethane. It also is used as
an anti-grafﬁti ﬁnish.

During application of this material, the spray mist is
harmful and fresh-air masks must be worn during applica-
tion. This material should also not be used under conﬁned
conditions.

12.3.4 Heat-condensation coatings
Examples

Phenolic coatings
Epoxy phenolic coatings

General advantages

Types of coating and their uses 12/153

2. In the fully cured form, they are odorless, tasteless and

non-toxic;

3. They have excellent resistance to boiling water, acids,
salt solutions, hydrogen sulﬁde and various petroleum
products.

General disadvantages

1. These materials can only be cured at relatively high
temperatures (typically, 130–300°C). Therefore, the
process is normally carried out at works. With the
use of special reactors, it can be accomplished on-site
but the operation is difﬁcult. In all cases, the applica-
tion is critical, and variations in temperature and cure
time will result in different ﬁlm-forming properties.
The application should always be left to specialists.

2. The resins need careful storage (possibly under refrig-

eration) before application.

Comparison of coatings within this classiﬁcation

Phenolic is reacted with formalde-
Phenolic coatings
hyde under heat to form a completely insoluble material.
They are usually applied in an alcohol solution by spray,
dip or roller. During their curing, they release water,
which must be removed. They have maximum chemical
and solvent resistance but poor alkaline resistance.

These materials are also cured
Epoxy phenolic coatings
at relatively high temperatures and are made by the reac-
tion of the epoxy resin with the phenolic resin. They are
slightly less critical in application requirements, are less
sensitive to curing conditions and can be applied in thicker
coats. The best use for both these materials is as tank lin-
ings used for the storage or food products, drinks, etc.
or for process plant, evaporators, etc. that contain boil-
ing water.

12.3.5 100 per cent solids coatings

Examples

Coal tar enamel
Asphalt
Unsaturated polyesters, glass ﬂake and ﬁber reinforced
Powder epoxies
Powder polyesters
Hot-applied solventless epoxies
Hot-applied solventless urethanes

General advantages

1. In general, exceptionally thick ﬁlms, very fast curing;
2. Can provide exceptional water and chemical resistance;
3. They contain no solvents to pollute the atmosphere.

General disadvantages

1. These materials have exceptional chemical and solvent

resistance;

1. Generally

techniques;

require

specialist,

skilled

application

12/154 Paint Coatings for the Plant Engineer

2. Materials and application costs can be high, but for
large surfaces, the quick, thick single-coat application
can make them cost effective;

3. Cannot be repaired or re-coated easily on-site. In some
instances, solvent-based versions are needed for repair
and maintenance.

spray, which requires specialist skills. The ﬁlms cure very
rapidly and can be built up in one coat to at least 1000 µm.
They need a very high standard of surface preparation.
The ﬁlms have exceptional water and abrasion resistance,
and are usually only economic for use with large
structures.

Comparison of coatings within this classiﬁcation

This is derived from the coking of coal
Coal tar enamel
and is further distilled to produce coal tar pitches. It is
used for hot application on-site. It will crack and craze if
exposed to sunlight but has been employed successfully
for over 50 years for the protection of underground or
immersed structures. The main use is now for the exteriors
of buried or immersed pipelines. Different types of enamel
are available to give various degrees of heat resistance.
It is now generally used for pipelines below 155 mm
diameter.

Asphalt Asphalt is a natural occurring mineral or as the
residue from the distillation of asphaltic petroleum. It is
less brittle and has better resistance to sunlight and tem-
perature changes than coal tar enamel. Its water resistance
is good but less than for coal tar enamel. It is not resistant
to solvents or oils. It may crack at low temperatures and
age at elevated ones. Like coal tar enamels, it is primarily
black in color and difﬁcult to overcoat with other mate-
rials. Its main use is for the in-situ coating of roofs or
aboveground steel structures.

The formation of the coating
Unsaturated polyesters
occurs in situ by the reaction between polyester resin and
styrene, activated by a catalyst such as organic peroxide.
The main use as coatings is in the formation of glass ﬁber
or glass ﬂake, reinforced plastics.

It has good resistance to acid, oils and oxidizing mate-
rials but poor resistance to alkalis. Application is difﬁcult
and hazardous and is generally a specialist operation.

Shrinkage on curing means that a high standard of
visual cleanliness and an exceptionally coarse surface pro-
ﬁle is required on blast-cleaned steel. Its main use is for
tank linings.

Powder epoxies Applied as powder either by electro-
static gun or ﬂuidized bed, these materials must be cured
at 200–250°C. The coating cures within a few seconds
and is normally water quenched to control cure time. They
have good resistance to water but will tend to chalk on
outdoor exposure.

Normally a specialist works application; these materials
are useful protective coatings for such items as cable trays
and switch boxes. They are also used for the externals of
pipelines.

These are similar to powder epoxies
Powder polyesters
but with superior resistance to weathering and less chem-
ical and corrosion resistance. They are used mainly for
outdoors-decorative use on equipment, etc.

These are similar to solventless
Solventless urethanes
epoxies but can be applied in even thicker ﬁlms without
adhesion problems. They are considered to have better
water and abrasion resistance than the epoxy but cost
more and application is even more critical. Their main use
would be for large areas requiring abrasion resistance.

12.3.6 Non-oxidizing coatings

Examples

Grease paint
Wax anti-corrosive compounds

General advantages

1. Cheap;
2. Easy to apply, even with areas of difﬁcult access;
3. Surface preparation not critical;
4. Can be applied in relatively thick ﬁlms.

General disadvantage

The coating remains relatively soft and ﬂexible, and is
not suitable for areas where people may walk or touch
the surface. The best use is for steelwork in enclosed
areas or with difﬁcult access where surface preparation
and application are not easy.

12.3.7 Heat-resistant coatings

Examples

Modiﬁed oleo-resinous binder with aluminum pigment
Oleo-resinous binder with zinc dust and graphite

pigments

Modiﬁed or pure silicone resin with aluminum
Zinc silicate

General requirements

In general, the requirements of heat resistance limit ﬁlm
thickness and therefore corrosion resistance. This is a par-
ticular problem when surfaces ﬂuctuate between hot and
cold. Coatings should be selected carefully, depending on
the exact maximum temperature that will be experienced.
Wherever possible, conventional materials should be used.
The majority of air-oxidation coatings will be satisfactory
up to 95°C and epoxies up to 175°C continuous dry heat.

Comparison of coatings within the classiﬁcation

These use heat rather than solvent
Solventless epoxies
to reduce viscosity, and are generally applied by airless

Modiﬁed oleo-resinous binder with aluminum pigment
These materials are sometimes called general-purpose

aluminum paint. They are suitable for use up to 200°C
but for corrosion resistance need to be applied over a
corrosion-resistant primer such as zinc silicate.

Oleo-resinous binder with zinc dust and graphite pigments
Generally called zinc dust graphite paint, this relatively
cheap material can resist temperatures in the range of
200–300°C. However, regular maintenance repainting
will be required.

These
Modiﬁed or pure silicone resin with aluminum
silicone-based aluminum paints can be used for tempera-
tures between 260° and 540°C. They require a minimum
temperature for curing (usually about 260°C) and in gen-
eral have poor corrosion and weather resistance.

Zinc silicate This material has good corrosion resistance
and can withstand temperatures up to 540°C, particularly
when over-coated with silicone-based aluminum. The zinc
silicate requires a high standard of surface preparation
before application.

12.3.8 Coatings for concrete

Examples

Emulsion paints
Chlorinated rubber
Vinyls
Two-pack epoxy
Water-based epoxy

General requirements

Concrete may be coated for:

1. Decoration;
2. Waterprooﬁng: correctly formed concrete will not
transmit liquid water but will always remain permeable
to moisture vapor;

3. Protection from freeze–thaw cycles: because concrete
is very susceptible to damage
absorbs moisture it
by water freezing. The physical forces of the ice
are greater than the concrete’s strength and spalling
and shattering occurs. Coatings can help to keep
the concrete as dry as possible but they also must
withstand the freeze–thaw conditions.

4. Protection for the reinforcing steel: high-performance
coatings can help to prevent chloride ions, etc. per-
meating to the reinforcing steel. However, care must
be taken that the use of relatively impermeable coat-
ings does not trap water and make the situation worse.
There is a growing tendency to coat the reinforcing
bars themselves with powder epoxies;

5. Decontamination: since concrete is a porous material
it can absorb oil, rusty water, etc. and coatings can
reduce the absorption.

Comparison of coatings within the classiﬁcation

These materials are water based and
Emulsion paints
cure by coalescence as the water evaporates. Films formed

Types of coating and their uses 12/155

in this manner have sufﬁcient porosity to allow water
vapor to escape from the concrete but at the same time
to retard the entry of water. The composition is typi-
cally vinyl acrylic (e.g. a combination of vinyl and acrylic
resin). The acrylic portion has superior weathering prop-
erties. Emulsions are mainly used for decoration.

See Section 12.3.2. This is used
Chlorinated rubber
for decoration but also provides a relatively impermeable
coating. Its best use is for concrete surfaces that have to
be kept clean by regular washing.

Section 12.3.2. These have been used on con-
Vinyls
crete for a variety of situations. Thinned down, they have
good penetration of the surface and provide a good base
for subsequent applications of heavily bodied, thick vis-
cous vinyl coatings. However, since they dry quickly but
contain a high proportion of solvent, care must be taken
to avoid solvent entrapment in the pores of the concrete.

Section 12.3.3. These are widely used
Two-pack epoxy
to give the maximum protection to concrete surfaces,
ﬂoors and walls. They can be applied as relatively thin
coatings by spray or as thick epoxy surfaces applied by
trowel. In all cases, the application must be preceded
by adequate surface preparation (see Section 12.6.1). To
allow maximum penetration into the concrete the ﬁrst coat
must have a low viscosity. Coal tar epoxies are used where
protection is the main requirement.

These are sometimes referred to as
Water-based epoxy
acrylic epoxies. They are generally inferior to solvent-
based epoxies in durability and resistance but have less
toxic hazards and low solvent odor.

12.3.9 Coatings for concrete ﬂoors

Examples

Seals
Thin coating
Trowelled coatings
Self-leveling screeds

General requirements

An important requirement for all ﬂoor coatings is ade-
quate surface preparation (see Section 12.4.3). In general,
abrasion resistance is proportional to thickness and the
thick single-color epoxy screeds will give the maximum
life before wear is obvious. Thin coatings will need regu-
lar maintenance but will be considerably cheaper, and this
must be weighed against ease of access for any particular
situation.

Anti-slip properties are generally required. Nearly all
surfaces have poor slip resistance when wet. Self-leveling
ﬁnishes tend to be glossier than other types, and this has
a psychological effect. Some surfaces with good initial
slip resistance can become dangerous after heavy wear
over a long period and should be inspected regularly.
Surfaces with the highest slip resistance, particularly if

12/156 Paint Coatings for the Plant Engineer

this involves the incorporation of coarse aggregate, will
also retain the most dirt and can be costly and difﬁcult
to clean.

Comparison of coatings within the classiﬁcation

Seals are normally transparent, quick-drying,
Seals
highly penetrating materials that are used to stop cement
dusting and contamination by oils, etc. The moisture-
cured urethanes are particularly suitable, since they
penetrate to produce a hard-wearing surface. However,
if safety factors preclude their use there are also epoxy
and even oleo-resinous products available.

These pigmented materials, commonly
Thin coatings
known as ﬂoor paints, are often based on chlorinated
rubber
(see
Section 12.3.1). They have limited life in heavy trafﬁc
but are easy to apply.

(see Section 12.3.2)

ester

or

epoxy

There are a number of proprietary
Trowelled coatings
products available but the majority are based on epoxy
resins and applied at thicknesses ranging from 0.5 to
5 mm, depending on exposure requirements.

These are generally based on solvent-free
Self-leveling
epoxy and there are a number of proprietary products
available. Generally, they are 3–8 mm thick, but if the
base ﬂoor is too rough, it is advisable to ﬁrst level this
with a cement/resin screed.

12.3.10 Coatings for wood

Examples

Oleo-resinous primers plus alkyd ﬁnish
Aluminum-based primer plus alkyd ﬁnish
Emulsion-based primer plus alkyd ﬁnish
Wood stains

General requirements

Wood is painted in order to preserve from decay, to min-
imize changes in moisture content that lead to distortion,
and for decoration. It is a waste of time and effort to apply
expensive paints or stains to exterior wood not previously
treated with preservative. Preservatives are designed to
penetrate the timber to protect against microorganisms and
insect attack. Modern preservatives can be over-coated
with paint without problems.

These are nor-
Oleo-resinous primers plus alkyd ﬁnish
mally used for softwood and should be designed to be
ﬂexible and smooth for subsequent paint.

The binder
Aluminum-based primer plus alkyd ﬁnish
for these primers is normally oleo-resinous but the pig-
mentation is aluminum ﬂake. This type is preferred for
hardwoods and softwoods where knots or resinous areas
predominate. They do not give such a smooth surface as
primers without aluminum.

These are
Emulsion-based primer plus alkyd ﬁnish
based on acrylic resin dispersions and have the advantage
of a rapid rate of drying. They generally have excellent
adhesion and ﬂexibility but lack the sealing properties of
aluminum primers.

The problem with normal paint systems
Wood stains
on wood is that if moisture penetration occurs (e.g. in
the untreated end-grain) then the impermeability of the
paint causes blistering, cracking and ﬂaking. New devel-
opments with translucent ﬁnishes for wood incorporate
pigments that deﬂect ultraviolet but do not obscure the
wood grain. They are also designed to permit moisture
movement but contain wax additives, which shed surface
water. They also degrade by gradual erosion rather than
cracking and ﬂaking. If the appearance is acceptable, these
form a useful, economic answer to wood protection.

12.3.11 Road and ﬂoor markings

Examples

Road paints
Thermoplastic road-marking materials

General requirements

Road markers require ease of application and very quick
drying.

These are normally chlorinated rubber
Road paints
alkyds and are easy to apply but are inherently less durable
than the thermoplastic materials.

These require
Thermoplastic road-marking materials
special application apparatus. Although they are thicker
and last longer than the road paints their tendency to
discolor may cancel this advantage.

12.3.12 Anti-condensation paints

General requirements

These materials are designed to reduce water from con-
densation dripping on equipment, etc. They often incor-
porate particles of cork so that water is absorbed. They
are generally thick ﬁlms to provide some insulation and
have a rough textured surface ﬁnish to increase the surface
area and encourage water evaporation. In general, phys-
ical methods of prevention such as adequate ventilation,
etc. are more effective.

12.4 Surface preparation and priming
12.4.1 Structural steel (thickness greater than
5 mm)

Abrasive blasting

Abrasive blasting is generally the most suitable and reli-
able method of obtaining a visually clean surface and a

satisfactory surface proﬁle. The visual cleanliness can be
speciﬁed by reference to the photographs in Swedish Stan-
dard SIS 05 59 00. This Standard is incorporated into a
new International Standard (ISO 8501, Part 1) and a new
British Standard (BS 7079: Part A1). The surface proﬁle
can be determined by the comparison method, as speciﬁed
in ISO 8503, and Part 2 and BS 7079, Part C.

Dry abrasive blast cleaning should be used on new
steelwork where the main contaminant is mill scale. For
heavily rusted and pitted steelwork, increased durability
can be obtained by the use of wet abrasive blasting where
this is practicable. The water will be more effective in
removing the potentially destructive and corrosive solu-
ble iron-corrosion products that form at the bottom of
corrosion pits.

Hand or mechanical tool cleaning
This method is generally not capable of achieving a uni-
form standard of cleanliness on structural steel. It is not
effective in removing intact mill scale or corrosion prod-
ucts from pitted surfaces. The durability of subsequent
coats is therefore variable and unpredictable, and depends
on the thoroughness of the operation and the exact nature
of the contaminants left on the surface. The method should
be conﬁned to non-aggressive environments or where
short-term durability is economically acceptable.

Acid pickling
This is only suitable for works application and is only
economically viable for repetitive cleaning of relatively
small simple-shaped items, such as tank plate. The lower
proﬁle achieved by this method may not be suitable for
high-performance coatings.

Priming
Priming can be carried out before or after fabrication.

This has economic advantages and
Before fabrication
cleaning can be of a higher standard and take place before
any destructive corrosion has occurred. Pre-fabrication
primers need to be extremely quick drying (e.g. within
minutes) to allow handling and ensure coverage of the
blast proﬁle peaks without attenuation. Normally,
the
speciﬁers will have to accept
the type and make of
primer used at a particular fabricator because, unless it
is a major job, it is difﬁcult and expensive to change
primers on automatic plant. Most fabricators now use a
zinc phosphate two-pack epoxy primer, which is a sound
base for any subsequent paint system. At 25 µm these
primers are generally capable of being welded through,
and although they are based on two-pack epoxy they are
so formulated that the cure is delayed, and they remain
over-coatable for at least one year. Zinc-rich epoxies,
which were formerly popular for this application, are
now out of favor because the formation of zinc salts on
the surface after outdoor exposure can result in adhesion
failure of subsequent coats.

If a structure consists of a large area
After fabrication
of welds, it is inadvisable to carry out pre-fabrication

Surface preparation and priming 12/157

blasting and then prepare the weld areas to a much
lower standard. In those cases, the structure should be
blast cleaned after fabrication. This has the advantages
that a thicker primer can be used and that the entire
paint system can be completed without delay and possible
contamination between primer and topcoats.

12.4.2 Zinc metal coatings

Hot-dip galvanizing (new)

This is suitable for overcoat-
Etch primer pretreatment
ing with most coatings but is sensitive to moisture during
application. It must not be applied as a thin, transparent
coating (typically, 10 µm) or inter-coat adhesion loss can
take place.

This acid-mordant solution turns
T-wash pretreatment
the surface black when correctly treated. Problems can
occur with use of such an acid solution in situ and from
its pungent odor. It must be applied to zinc in a bright
condition without corrosion products on its surface. The
paint manufacturer’s advice must be sought before using
under thick coats of two-pack epoxy or urethane.

This is a suitable method
Sweep blast or abrading
before application of thick two-pack materials but care
is required not to remove too much zinc coating.

Hot-dip galvanizing (weathered) Weathered zinc sur-
faces that have lost their initial bright appearance and
which are to be painted with thin paint systems need
only to have dirt and zinc-corrosion products removed
by brushing. For high-performance coatings, it would be
advisable to remove zinc-corrosion products by abrading
or sweep blasting and treat as for new galvanizing.

Sherardizing No special treatment is required other than
the removal of any zinc-corrosion products, dirt or oil, etc.

Sprayed metal coatings
Zinc or aluminum metal spray
are porous and should be sealed after application by apply-
ing a sealer coat (i.e. a thin coat such as an etch primer) or
a thinned version of the ﬁnal coating system. Oil-based
systems should not be used. Metal spray coatings can
have excellent durability without overcoating with paint
and, particularly for aggressive conditions; it is preferable
to leave them with sealer only.

12.4.3 Concrete
General requirements
Surface preparation of concrete consists mainly of remov-
ing laitence, form oils and air pockets. Laitence is the
ﬁne cement powder that ﬂoats to the surface of concrete
when it is placed. Coatings applied over such a powdery,
weak layer will lose adhesion. Form oils are used for
the easy stripping of forms or shuttering. Their presence
will also cause loss of adhesion of subsequent coatings.
Forms should be coated with non-migratory hard coatings
and the use of oils or waxes prohibited.

12/158 Paint Coatings for the Plant Engineer

Air pockets or bubbles are left on the surface of all con-
crete. Good vibration and placing techniques will reduce
their number but not eliminate them. Many air pockets
have a small opening on the surface in relation to their
size. Paints will not penetrate into such holes, with the
result that air or solvent is trapped and subsequent expan-
sion will cause the coating to blister. In addition, some
air pockets are covered with a thin layer of cement that
also has no strength and will cause loss of adhesion.

The following alternative methods of surface prepara-

tion can be used for new concrete.

Dry abrasive cleaning

This should be carried out using a ﬁner abrasive, lower
pressure and a faster movement across the surface with the
blast nozzle further from the work than for blast cleaning
steel. It provides a roughened, irregular surface with the
laitence removed and all holes and voids opened up so
they can be more easily sealed.

Wet abrasive cleaning

As for dry abrasive cleaning, but with the advantage that
there is reduced dust nuisance.

High-pressure water jetting

This is an effective treatment on eroded and weak surfaces
but will not open up the sub-surface voids or pockets or
provide a surface proﬁle on dense concrete.

Acid etching

Hydrochloric acid (10–15 per cent) is generally used. If
applied correctly it will remove laitence and provide an
adequate surface for adhesion. It will not open up air
pockets and voids and is difﬁcult and hazardous to handle
and apply. It is most suitable for use on ﬂoors.

Hand or power tools

These are generally more time consuming and costly than
abrasive cleaning and can give variable results.

12.5 Speciﬁcations
The main functions of a painting speciﬁcation, whether
for new or maintenance work, are as follows:

1. To state the means by which the required life of
the coating is to be achieved. This includes surface-
preparation standards, paints and systems, application,
storage, handling and transport, quality control;

2. To service as a basis for accurate costing;
3. To provide a basis for resolving disputes.

12.6 Economics
The greatest problem in making an economic assessment
regarding coatings is the prediction of the coating life.
With paint coatings, this is particularly difﬁcult, because
there are many stages to completion of the coating process

and many opportunities in practice for problems to arise.
Furthermore, if there is poor workmanship at the outset
and this is not detected, the potential life may fall short
of expectations by a very wide margin.

However, some companies consider that

they have
sufﬁcient experience of
to use
computer programs to provide economic assessments of
candidate protective systems. The following summarizes
typical steps to be taken.

requirements

their

1. Select suitable systems based on technical requirements.
2. Estimate life to ﬁrst maintenance of each system.
3. Prepare sound speciﬁcations for each system.
4. Estimate maintenance costs at present values for each

system (e.g. by using net present value).

5. Select the most economic system if the difference in
costs is greater than 10 per cent. Otherwise, select the
system for which the most experience is available.

If at the end of the exercise the cheapest system is
beyond the budget available then either the budget must
be increased or changes in the initial protection will be
required. Whenever possible, the level of surface prepa-
ration should not be lowered, since if at a later date more
money is available the protective coating can be built up
but the surface cannot be re-prepared.

12.7 Painting inspection
The potential durability of a coating system can be real-
ized only if it is applied to a suitably prepared surface,
in the correct manner under correct conditions. Painting
differs from any other industrial processes in that it is not
susceptible to operator abuse or adverse environmental
inﬂuences throughout all stages of the work.

Furthermore, it is generally difﬁcult to deduce from
examination of the completed work what has occurred
previously.

Many engineers appreciate that painting, which should
be a minor part of an engineering project, can assume
major proportions if there are problems or premature fail-
ures. For any painting work for which premature failure is
economically or practically unacceptable, it is advisable
to use full-time, qualiﬁed paint inspection. Note that part-
time inspection, or visit inspection, can in some ways be
worse than no inspection at all.

The National Association of Corrosion Engineers
(NACE) in the USA has a comprehensive process for
the training and certiﬁcation of painting inspectors. The
following are their typical duties:

1. Measure, at regular intervals, the air temperature, steel
temperature, relative humidity and dewpoint in the area
where blast cleaning or painting is to take place.

2. Decide whether, in the light of these measurements,
the ambient conditions are within the speciﬁcation
and therefore whether blast cleaning or painting can
proceed.

3. In outdoor conditions assess the way in which the
weather is likely to change and decide how this may
affect the progress of the job.

4. Examine the abrasive to be used in the blasting pro-
cess and record the name of the manufacturer and the
type and grade of the abrasive.

5. Check that the abrasive is not contaminated with
moisture, dirt, spent abrasive, etc., that the blasting
equipment can deliver the abrasive at an adequate
pressure and that the airlines are ﬁtted with a water
trap.

speciﬁc standard (e.g. Sa2 1

6. Check that the freshly blast-cleaned surface is of the
2 , Sa3, etc.) at all points.
7. Measure the surface proﬁle of the freshly blast-
is within

and ensure

that

it

cleaned surface
speciﬁcation.

8. Check freshly blasted surface for steel imperfections,
laminations, weld spatter, etc. and ensure that any
necessary metal dressing is carried out.

9. Ensure that the newly blast-cleaned surface is primed

within the speciﬁed overcoating time.

10. Record the name of the paint manufacturer, the manu-
facturer’s description of each paint used in the system,
the reference number and the batch number.

11. Ensure that

the paints are applied in the correct
sequence, by the correct method and that they are
of the correct color.

12. Ensure that, where possible, paint with the same batch
number is used on any particularly identiﬁable unit of
the total job.

13. Ensure that the correct overcoating times are observed.
14. Ensure that all paints, particularly two-pack, are thor-
oughly mixed in accordance with the manufacturer’s
instructions.

15. Ensure that the pot life and shelf life of paints are not

exceeded.

16. Take wet-ﬁlm thickness for each coat applied and
conﬁrm that they are such as to yield the speciﬁed
dry-ﬁlm thickness.

17. Measure the dry-ﬁlm thickness of each coat over a
representative area and ensure that the speciﬁed ﬁlm
thickness has been attained.

18. Ensure that each coat has been evenly applied and is
free from runs, sags, drips and other surface defects.
19. In the event of discovering any paint defects, mark
them up and ensure that the necessary remedial steps
are taken.

20. When required, perform adhesion tests, curing tests

or tests for surface contamination.

21. Ensure that all blasting and painting operations are
carried out without contravention of safety regula-
tions.

22. Report on manning levels and time lost due to wea-

ther, mechanical breakdowns, labour disputes, etc.

23. Submit full daily inspection reports.

12.8 Factors inﬂuencing the selection of
coating systems
12.8.1 Environmental conditions

For aggressive conditions, only highly resistant coatings
can be considered; for milder environments, virtually the
whole range of coatings can be used.

Factors inﬂuencing the selection of coating systems 12/159

12.8.2 Access for maintenance

The cost of maintenance may be greatly inﬂuenced by
the disruption caused by the access requirements. This
involves not only direct costs such as scaffolding but
indirect ones such as disruption of a process plant, clo-
sure of roads, protection of plant and equipment in the
vicinity, etc.

12.8.3 Maintenance requirements

In some situations, it may be impossible for physical or
legal reasons to use blast cleaning or to spray paint when
maintenance is required. In such cases, systems that can
be easily maintained or very long-life systems should
be considered.

12.8.4 Facilities for coating

Suitable skilled labor may not be available, at a particular
site, to use complicated equipment (e.g. hot airless spray).
On a foreign site or in remote areas even conventional
equipment may be unfamiliar or unobtainable.

12.8.5 Handling, storage and transport

The choice of coating will be inﬂuenced by the need to
avoid damage during handling. Where considerable han-
dling is involved this may be a major factor.

12.8.6 Application properties

Many of the modern, high-performance coatings require
a high degree of skill in application and are considerably
less tolerant than older, conventional materials. Caution
is required in choosing coatings when there is no record
of sound work by contractors.

12.8.7 Experience of coating performance

New types of coating are regularly developed and mar-
keted. Before selecting such coatings the speciﬁers should
be satisﬁed that the test results and practical experience
is sound.

12.8.8 Special requirements

Sometimes the type of coating is determined by special
requirements such as abrasion or heat resistance. The coat-
ing may have to withstand speciﬁc chemicals or solvents.
All coatings have to be a compromise of properties. A
gain in one may be a loss in another.

12.8.9 Importance of the structure

The importance of the structure in both technical and aes-
thetic aspects is an obvious factor to be taken into account.

12.8.10 Costs

Cost is always a primary factor. However, the actual cost
of paint is generally a small percentage of the total.

12/160 Paint Coatings for the Plant Engineer

12.8.11 Other factors

Other factors may include: color, toxicity and safety, tem-
perature restrictions, ability to cure at service temperature,
resistance to bacterial effects, shelf life and pot life of
the paints.

12.8.12 Limited choice of coating systems

In practice, the selection of coatings is often the opposite
to what might be expected. There is a multitude of propri-
etary materials but the choice of generic types is limited.
Section 12.3 of this chapter is designed to illustrate the
basic properties of these generic types as a preliminary
guide to selection by the engineer. The speciﬁers tend to
examine the available materials to see if they will ﬁt the
requirements, rather than vice versa.

12.9 Sources of advice
The subject of paints and coatings is complicated and cov-
ers a large number of both uses and conditions. There
are few publications that describe all aspects that are
particularly suitable for an engineer. There are limited
publications on such specialized subjects as the protection
of iron and steel.

The technical service departments of paint manufac-
turers are a valuable source of free information on their
own products. For independent advice on new materials,
comparison between materials, speciﬁcations not tied to
proprietary types and failure investigations, there are con-
sultants and test laboratories that will generally assist on
a fee-paying basis.

Further reading

Bayliss, D. A. and Chandler, K. A., SteelworkCorrosionProtection,

Elsevier Applied Science, Barking (1991).

British Standards Institution, BS 5493: 1977, Code of Practice
for protective coatings of iron and steel structures against
corrosion.

British Standards Institution, BS 6150: 1982, CodeofPracticefor

paintingofbuildings.

Chandler, K. A. and Bayliss, D. A. Corrosion Protection of Steel

Structures, Elsevier Applied Science, Barking (1985).

Department of Trade and Industry, Committee on Corrosion

Guides
No. 3: Economics
No. 6: Temporaryprotection
No. 12: Paintfortheprotectionofstructuralsteelwork
No. 13: Surfacepreparationforpainting
No. 16: Engineeringcoatings–theirapplicationsandproperties.

Durabilityofsteelstructures, CONSTRADO.
Paintingsteelwork, CIRIA Report 93.

13/161

Insurance: Plant
and Equipment

A P Hyde
National Vulcan Engineering Insurance Group Ltd

13.9.3 Publications by other organizations
Appendix 1: Glossary
Appendix 2: Statutory report forms 13/174
Appendix 3: Report forms – non-statutory

13/173

13/173

13/181

13

Contents

13/163

13.1 History
13.2 Legislation
13.3 The role of the inspection authority
13.4 Types of plant inspected

13/163

13/163

13/165
13.4.1 Boiler and pressure plant
13.4.2 Steam and air pressure vessels
13.4.3 Lifts, cranes and other mechanical handling plant

13/166

13/165

13/166

13.4.4 Electrical and mechanical plant

13/166

13.5 Insurance covers on inspected plant

13/166

13/166

13.5.1 Boiler and pressure plant
13.5.2 Storage tanks and their contents
13.5.3 Cranes and lifting machining
13.5.4 Lifts and hoists
13.5.5 Electrical and mechanical plant
13.5.6 All machinery and plant insurances

13/167

13/166

13/166

13/167

13/167

13/168

13.6 Engineer surveyors

13/167

13/167
13/167

13.6.1 Selection
13.6.2 Training
13.6.3 Recognition of defects in operational plant
13.6.4 Reporting
13.7 Technical services

13/169
13/170

13/170

13.7.1 Pressure plant
13.7.2 Electric passenger and goods lifts 13/170
13.7.3 Cranes 13/171
13.7.4 Electrical inspection
13.7.5 Turbogenerators
13.7.6 Centrifugal pumps
13.7.7 Non-destructive testing
13.7.8 Metallurgical testing
13.7.9 Laboratory chemical section
13.7.10 Other services 13/172

13/171

13/171

13/171

13/171

13/171

13/171

13.8 Claims 13/172
13.9 Sources of information

13/172

13.9.1 British Standards
13.9.2 The Health and Safety Executive

13/172

13/173

13.1 History
It is important to understand how the relationship between
inspection and insurance, which is available from the
major engineering insurers, came about. From the outset,
the objectives have been towards the safe and efﬁcient
operation of all types of machinery and plant used in
industry and commerce.

The early nineteenth century saw the beginning of fac-
tory production systems, particularly in the cotton mills
of Lancashire and woolen mills in Yorkshire. Accidents
arising from the use or misuse of steam plant, particularly
boilers, became common and led not only to damage and
destruction to property but also to death and bodily injury
to persons in or about the scene of the explosions.

In 1854, the Manchester Steam Users Association was
formed to help with the prevention of explosions in steam
boilers and to ﬁnd efﬁcient methods in their use. To
achieve this, the Association employed the ﬁrst boiler
inspectors, whose services were then made available to
the Association’s members. Within a short space of time,
the members became convinced that insurance to cover
the high cost of repair or replacement of damaged boilers
was desirable, and this resulted in the ﬁrst boiler insurance
company (The Steam Boiler Assurance Company) being
formed in 1858. The scope of the services for inspection
and insurance later extended to include pressure vessels,
steam engines, cranes,
the
insurance protection in each case being supported by
an inspection service carried out by qualiﬁed engineer
surveyors.

lifts and electrical plant,

The development of engineering insurance has been
closely linked with legislation. The Boiler Explosions Act
was passed in 1882 and this empowered the Board of
Trade to hold enquiries into the causes of all boiler explo-
sions except where the boilers were used in the service
of the Crown or for domestic purposes, and to charge the
cost of the enquiry against any person held to have been
responsible for causing that explosion. This provided a
strong incentive to insure boilers, and in 1901, the pass-
ing of the Factory and Workshops Act made the regular
inspection of steam boilers in factories compulsory. This
was later extended by legislation to include steam boilers
in mines and quarries.

From those early days a great deal of legislation has
been passed, including the Factories Act 1961 (which
repealed earlier acts),
the Power Presses Regulations
1965, the Ofﬁces Shops and Railway Premises (Hoists and
Lifts) Regulations 1968 and the Greater London Council
(General Powers) Act 1973, which was speciﬁcally
directed at self-operated laundries. These have now all
been embodied within the Health and Safety at Work,
etc. Act 1974, which, although it does not change
existing regulations regarding frequency of inspections,
does provide that duties under earlier regulations are now
enforced within this Act.

Engineer surveyors employed by engineering insurance
companies have always been regarded as being ‘com-
petent persons’ as required by these various Acts. The
knowledge and experience, which has been accumulated
by the companies over the years, enables them to offer to
industry and commerce a service of exceptional quality.

The role of the inspection authority 13/163

13.2 Legislation
It can be seen from Section 13.1 that as legislation has
grown and changed so the role of the Independent Engi-
neering Inspection Authority has had to change to meet
the demands and needs of industry and commerce. Leg-
islation, particularly that related to health and safety at
work, is something that never remains static. As new
areas of potential hazard are identiﬁed and their impli-
cations are discussed to the point that new legislation is
needed, the engineering insurers are making their con-
tribution to discussions. Currently such matters as the
Pressurized Systems Regulations and those related to the
Control of Substances Hazardous to Health are imple-
mented, and the engineer surveyors are being trained and
retrained to enable them to scope with the requirements
of this new legislation.

The following sections include the relevant sections of
the complete Act and indicate those parts of the legislation
within the different plant categories to which the inspec-
tions provided by the independent engineering inspection
companies will conform. It should, however, be appre-
ciated that while the inspections provided will fulﬁll the
statutory requirements for inspection, the actual respon-
sibilities under the various Acts to conform remains the
responsibility of the plant owner/user. It must be appreci-
ated that the interpretation of any Act is a matter for the
local Health and Safety Inspectorate, who should be con-
sulted at all times if doubt exists as to whether any item of
machinery and plant requires inspection to comply with a
statutory provision.

A general guide is set out in matrix form in Figure 13.1,
indicating by business and trade the types of machinery
and plant that are likely to be found in general usage and
the normally accepted position of inspections which may
be required to conform with the legislation.

13.3 The role of the inspection authority
Inspection by independent persons or bodies for safety
purposes goes back to the middle of the nineteenth cen-
tury. At that time, the focus of concern was the explosion
of steam boilers, and this hazard was most prevalent in the
textile industry. Consequently, a group of public-spirited
individuals formed the Manchester Steam Users Associ-
ation for the Prevention of Boiler Explosion. This body
carried out boiler examinations and later added insurance
as an inducement to the plant owners. By the beginning
of the twentieth century steam and gas engines and elec-
trical machines had been added, followed by lifts, cranes
and hoisting machines.

The inspection companies shared their technical knowl-
edge, and 1917 saw the formation of the Associated Ofﬁce
Technical Committee, the founding members being:

The British Engine Boiler and Electrical Insurance
Co. Ltd
The National Boiler and General Insurance Co. Ltd
The Ocean Accident and Guarantee Corporation Ltd
The Scottish Boiler and General Insurance Co. Ltd
The Vulcan Boiler and General Insurance Co. Ltd

g
n

i
l

s
 
&
 
k
c
o
b

l

 
l

a
u
n
a
M

e
n
a
r
c
 
r
e
d
a
o

l
 
y
r
r
o
L

e
n
a
r
c
 
e

l
i

b
o
M

e
n
a
r
c
 
r
e
w
o
P

k
c
u
r
t
 
t
f
i
l
 
k
r
o
F

i

t
s
o
h

 
s
r
e
d

l
i

u
B

t

r
o
a
v
a
c
x
E

k
c
o
b

l

 
l

a
c
i
r
t
c
e
E

l

s
n
e
v
o
&

 

 
t

l

 

n
a
p
m
a
e

t
s
 
r
e
h
O

t

r
e

l
i

o
b

 
r
e

t

a
w

 
t

o
H

i

r
e
v
e
c
e
r
 
r
i

A

r
e

l
i

 

o
b
m
a
e
S

t

l

e
b
a

t
 

g
n

i
t
f
i
l
 

i

l

e
c
h
e
v
 
r
o

t

o
M

t

l

n
a
p
n
o

 

s
s
e
r
p

 
r
e
w
o
P

i
t
c
a
r
t
x
e

 
t
s
u
D

s
t
f
i

L

g
n
n
o

i

i
t
i

d
n
o
c
 
r
i
a

 
,

n
o

i
t

a
r
e
g
i
r
f

e
R

i

y
r
e
n
h
c
a
m
 
s
s
e
c
o
r
P

13/164 Insurance: Plant and Equipment

n
o

i
t

a

l
l

a
t
s
n

i
 

g
n
i
r
i

w

 
t

n
a
p

l

 
l

a
c
i
r
t
c
e
E

l

Business

Bakers

Brewers

Building contractors

Churches, schools and halls

Clothing factories

Dept stores

Docks

Dry cleaners
Engineering works

Farms

Flats

Food manufacturers, canners

Garages

Hotels, etc.

Launderers

Millers

Nurserymen

Nursing homes

Office buildings

Printing works

Provision shops

Quarriers

Scrap yards

Ship yards

Stonemasons

Supermarkets

Theatres, cinemas

Timber merchants

Warehouses, wholesalers

Figure 13.1 Statutory requirements

Key Statutory need for inspection.

Statutory need for 
inspection in some cases in
other cases inspection recommended.
Inspection recommended.

This Committee published its own technical rules, many
of which were later incorporated into British Standards.
It continues to make an active contribution to standards,
guidance notes, legislation and international policy on
inspection. Some independent inspection bodies have no
connection with insurance but many do, and these com-
panies have the advantage of feedback from an analysis
of insurance claims.

Legislation introduced the requirements for statutory
examinations by ‘a competent person’, the responsibility
for ensuring the competence of the examiner resting on the
plant owner. There is no requirement for the competent
person to be independent of the owner’s organization, but
independence does have clear advantages.

It will be seen that owners and users of plant which can
be hazardous to employees or to the public come at the top
of a list of inspecting authorities’ clients. Safety is the ﬁrst
objective, but avoidance of unscheduled stoppages and
objective assessments of plant condition aimed at timely
replacement are powerful commercial inducements. The
client may be an individual owner of a vintage traction
engine or a large public utility, but the advantages are
essentially the same. National and local government bod-
ies, including the Health and Safety Executive, also rely
on inspecting companies to warn the enforcing author-
ity of potential dangers and to provide ‘ﬁtness for use’
certiﬁcates for hazardous plant items or installations.

Inspection is also an important activity in the regulation
of international trade through the certiﬁcation of vehicles
and containers used for transporting hazardous products
and for providing foreign purchasers with evidence that
manufactured goods comply with speciﬁcation before they
leave the country of origin. The essential characteristics
of and requirements for an inspection authority are:

Technical competence
Maturity and integrity of judgement
Conﬁdentiality
Access to a database of relevant plant histories
Ability to communicate

The person who carries out the examination is the ‘com-
petent person’, although this term may also be used in a
corporate sense. One very concise description of the com-
petent person, which originated in a law case, is ‘he must
know what to look for and how to recognize it when he
sees it’. This has been expanded both ofﬁcially and unof-
ﬁcially, and a current guidance note on this subject is
paraphrased as follows:

and

and

theoretical knowledge

The Competent Person should have sufﬁcient
actual
practical
experience of the types of plant he is charged with
examining and testing as will enable him to detect faults
and weaknesses. He should have the maturity to seek
such specialist advice and assistance as will be required
to enable him to make the necessary judgements. He
should also be able to assess the importance of any
faults or weaknesses in relation to the strength and
function of the plant before he is required to certify it as
suitable to carry out its speciﬁed duty. The Competent
Person should have access to the equipment, specialist’s

Types of plant inspected 13/165

support and laboratory services necessary to enable him
to carry out the relevant examination and testing. Where
he is unable to carry out all parts of the examination and
testing himself, he must be a proper judge of the extent
to which he can accept the supporting opinion of other
specialists. An inspecting authority may be appointed as
the ‘Competent Person’. In this case, where more than
one engineer employed by the inspecting body carries
out the examination and testing, it is appropriate for
a nominated person within the Company to sign the
certiﬁcate on behalf of the inspecting body.

The larger inspecting companies carry their own spe-

cialist support. Typically, this will cover:

Non-destructive testing
Failure analysis using modern techniques such as
ﬁnite element stress analysis and fracture mechanics
Metallurgical and weld analysis
Chemical engineering and process capability
Quality assurance

Clearly, there are ‘horses for courses’. The practicing
plant engineer may have access to a local specialist in
certain types of non-destructive testing who provides an
excellent service and value for money. At the same time,
the plant engineer must be vigilant regarding the limita-
tions of such support.

The role of the inspecting authority must clearly be sen-
sitive to change in the light of both technical advances and
alterations in the political climate. The response time will
sometimes depend on whether the authority concerned has
addressed itself to a rather narrow sector of the inspection
ﬁeld or operates over a wide spectrum.

The 1982 White Paper on Standards, Quality and Inter-
national Competitiveness was concurrent with increasing
interest in the techniques of quality assurance and the
need for international harmonization of standards and the
reciprocal recognition of certiﬁcation. It is worth noting
that the ISO 9000 series of standards on Quality Systems:
1987 followed the layout of BS 5750: 1979 almost clause
by clause. ISO Guide 39 covers the general requirements
for inspection bodies. Auditing on behalf of certiﬁcation
bodies is part of the inspecting authorities’ role.

It is to be hoped that the variety of certiﬁcation schemes
will not multiply, or the client is likely to be confused
rather than informed. When making his choice he may
usefully remember that the criteria of good quality sys-
tems are as applicable to service organizations as they are
to manufacturers, and that clarity regarding the objectives
of the service offered together with practical common
sense in providing this service are the real indicators.

13.4 Types of plant inspected
13.4.1 Boiler and pressure plant

The type of plant which would be included in the above
generic description will include many items that, because
of difference in size, function and appearance, will appear
to be unrelated. They do, however, have one common
factor in that all operate to some degree under pressure.

13/166 Insurance: Plant and Equipment

To illustrate this the use of the term ‘boilers’ can vary
considerably not only in its design and construction but
in the class for which they are intended, for instance:

1. Steam-generating boilers
2. Low-pressure hot water heating boilers
3. Low-pressure steam heating boilers
4. Domestic hot water supply boilers
5. High-pressure hot water heating boilers
6. Process vessels

In the ﬁrst category the type most often found in use
today will be what is referred to as the steam package
boiler of the multi-tubular type, otherwise referred to as
the shell boiler. This can equally be used to describe
vertical multi-tubular shell boilers, locomotive-type boil-
ers or even watertube boilers more closely associated
with power generation or, alternatively, where there is
a high and regular steam demand from within a factory.
Shell-type steam generating boilers are also used for high-
pressure hot water heating where there is the need to
supply hot water under a pressure and temperature equal
to that of the steam in the boiler for circulation throughout
heating or process plants within a building. The circula-
tion arrangement used with these boilers is often similar
to those found in connection with low-pressure hot water
heating systems, but where the water is at a much higher
temperature and the pressure is, equally, at a much higher
level. This system can incorporate the use of its own sep-
arate pressurization unit.

By far the most numerous class of boiler within the UK
must be the low-pressure hot water heating or hot water
domestic supply boiler, and these are found installed in
various types of situations (e.g. ofﬁces, factories, shops,
hotels) and now widely used in connection with private
dwelling houses.

13.4.2 Steam and air pressure vessels

The diverse types of plant in this category would be too
numerous to list, but include steam-jacketed pans, steam
caloriﬁers, steam heating and drying units and all types
of air-pressure vessels. These are manufactured in a wide
range of materials (e.g. stainless steel) and may then be
lined with materials such as rubber or glass, depending
on the needs of the process in which the vessel will be
used.

13.4.3 Elevators, cranes and other mechanical
handling plant

Items in this category can range from small manual
items of lifting tackle (e.g. rings, hooks, slings, chains
and blocks) to the very large ﬁxed overhead or mobile
powered cranes, fork lift trucks, straddle carriers, side
loaders, loading shovels and excavators as well as the
general type of passenger lift to be found in most modern
ofﬁces and hotels. Cranes can range from the most basic
manual ﬁxed-pillar jib upon which an electric or manual
block is hung to the modern specialist container crane or
order picker.

13.4.4 Electrical and mechanical plant

Plant falling within this description includes everything
from small fractional horse-power motors and their driven
components to the major steam or gas turbine and their
generators; from small printing machines to complete con-
tinuous process lines such as may be found in steel pro-
duction. In addition, this category would include any item
which incorporates either static or moving electrical or
mechanical parts.

13.5 Insurance covers on inspected plant
13.5.1 Boiler and pressure plant

Boilers and pressure vessels can be insured against
explosion and collapse, which provides for damage to
the insured plant, surrounding property and, in addition,
liability for damage to third-party property and injury
to third-party persons. This cover can be extended
to include full sudden and unforeseen damage which,
as far as boilers and pressure vessels are concerned,
includes overheating,
frost, cracking, water hammer
action, leakage between the sections of sectional heating
boilers and damage by external impact. Often insurance
policies are written so that the sudden and unforeseen
damage extension provides for resultant water damage to
surrounding property and will also provide for costs up to
deﬁned limits to expedite repair. There is also provision
to insure on a reinstatement basis.

While boiler explosions fortunately do not occur too
often today because of the existence of extensive safety
devices as well as the regular program of inspection, their
effects can be catastrophic. Similarly, sudden and unfore-
seen damage caused by the overheating of multi-tubular
steam boilers due to lack of water can lead to eventual
furnace collapse, with very extensive repair costs as well
as lost production.

13.5.2 Storage tanks and their contents

Items of this type are linked to the boiler and pressure
plant generic type but are given their own speciﬁc covers,
which are for sudden and unforeseen damage, including
collapse,
impact and frost as well as damage to the
surrounding property, cleaning-up costs and the costs
of expediting repair. The actual contents of the tanks,
which can be very varied and expensive, can be insured
against accidental
leakage, discharge, overﬂowing and
even contamination.

13.5.3 Cranes and lifting machinery

The types of plant falling under this heading are many and
varied, and insurance covers that are offered are equally
varied, falling into the categories of:

1. Breakdown;
2. Accidental extraneous damage only; or
3. Sudden and unforeseen damage, which will include, in
addition to the electrical and mechanical breakdown,

accidental causes such as toppling, overloading and
collision.

Depending on the type of machine in question and the
operations or use to which the machine is put, there are
numerous extensions to the basic covers available. These
include third-party liability, cover while the plant is hired
out, indemnity to the ﬁrst hirer, damage during erection
and dismantling, damage to goods being handled, damage
to surrounding property and the cost of hiring a replace-
ment machine following an indemniﬁable insured loss or
accident.

13.5.4 Lifts and hoists

Lifts and hoists can be insured against breakdown only or
for full sudden and unforeseen damage, which includes,
in addition to electrical and mechanical breakdown, acci-
dents arising from impact, fatigue, malicious damage and
entry of foreign bodies. The cover can be extended to
include liability to third parties and damage to goods being
carried arising out of the use of an insured item.

13.5.5 Electrical and mechanical plant

Electrical and mechanical plant will include all types
of process machinery, engines, generators, pumps,
fans, furnaces, transformers and refrigeration plant, to
list but a few. Plant of
this type can be insured
against breakdown only or full sudden and unforeseen
damage, which will
in addition to electrical
and mechanical breakdown, accidents arising from faulty
insulation, failure of wiring, short circuiting, excessive or
insufﬁcient voltage, non-operation of safety or protective
devices, renewal of insulating oil or refrigerant and the
consequences of impact from an external source.

include,

13.5.6 All machinery and plant insurance

While the normal engineering insurance covers on
inspected plant are designed for a high degree of
selection of speciﬁc items which will be identiﬁed in a
policy schedule, there are now covers available designed
the needs of protection for ‘All Machinery
to meet
and Plant’ without
the requirement of scheduling of
the items separately. The machinery and plant can be
insured against breakdown only or for full sudden and
unforeseen damage risks, which will include electrical and
mechanical breakdown and can be extended to take in the
explosion and collapse cover normally found under the
boiler and pressure plant section.

In instances where cover is written on this basis, it is
normal that higher than usual excess is applied, reﬂect-
ing the type of plant involved. While it is normal on the
more traditional basis for the insurance cover to be com-
plementary by inspection of the insured items in the case
of covers written in this manner, it is usual for the inspec-
tion of all statutory plant to be incorporated together with
those items where the insurer considers inspection to be
necessary as part of the risk management of the cover
being provided.

Engineer surveyors 13/167

13.6 Engineer surveyors
13.6.1 Selection

The AOTC member companies use common criteria for
selection of candidates to train an engineer surveyor, and
these may be considered typical. Traditionally, surveyors
have been recruited from among sea-going engineers who
had a ﬁrst-class Board of Trade Certiﬁcate of Competency
or a similar certiﬁcate from the Engineering Branch of
the Royal Navy. Sea-going engineers have suitable prac-
tical experience, and are also likely to have had sufﬁcient
practice in working relationships to enable them to deal
with clients’ personnel, including plant engineers, on an
equal basis.

As this source has progressively dried up, engineers
with an industrial background have been recruited from
those with a Technician Engineer qualiﬁcation (now
known as Incorporated Engineer). The minimum age
for entry is 25 years, and since maturity of judgement
is required (see Section 13.3), considerable weight
is
attached to the selection interview. A signiﬁcant number
of engineer surveyors now have Bachelor of Science
and Bachelor of Engineering degrees or equivalent, some
having obtained these during their employment in this
ﬁeld.

In addition, at age 26 engineer surveyors can apply for
Associate Membership of the Bureau of Engineer Sur-
veyors, who are a division of the Institution of Plant
Engineers. Transfer to membership is possible after a fur-
ther two years’ employment as an engineer surveyor.

13.6.2 Training

The period of training following engagement varies,
depending on previous experience, and is normally of
between 3 and 6 months’ duration. Trainers are usually
streamed into specialties (i.e. boiler surveyor, lift and
crane surveyor or electrical surveyor). Alternatively,
a ‘composite’ surveyor’s training embraces all
these
technologies. Further specialization sometimes occurs
following training and some experience in the ﬁeld.
For instance, surveyors may become specialists in air
conditioning and dust extraction, power presses or new
construction of pressure containing plant or of rotating
machines.

The scope of initial training always covers an induction
period of perhaps four weeks, during which the trainee
learns about the structure of the company which he has
joined and the administration which he will be expected
to carry out in the ﬁeld. It is important that he learns about
the legislation which applies to his job and the statutory
forms which he must use. Surveyors are often required to
keep a notebook, the purpose of which is similar to that
of a police ofﬁcer. He will later be required to cover the
interests of all the clients who are his ‘district’, and he
must therefore set up in his home the necessary adminis-
trative and record-keeping facilities to enable him to do
this effectively and economically.

After initial induction training, technical training is pro-
vided which is tailored to meet the individual’s needs,
based upon background, experience and ability to absorb

13/168 Insurance: Plant and Equipment

the information. Quite early in this period of training, the
trainee will probably spend time with an experienced sur-
veyor in the ﬁeld in order to become familiar with as
wide a cross-section of plant and type of examination as
is possible in the time available. Each type of inspection
is discussed to explore the various ways in which it may
be carried out, types of defect found and speciﬁc prepa-
ration or tests that may be used. The trainee makes out
a report for each examination together with a dimension
sheet for each class of plant.

The trainee then returns to head ofﬁce and continues
training under a head ofﬁce engineer, who may be espe-
cially skilled in training techniques or may be the super-
vising or section engineer to whom the trainee will later
be responsible.

The trainee will visit other departments in the head
ofﬁce to learn about the supporting facilities which are
available such as non-destructive testing, metallurgical
and failure analysis, hazard analysis and quality assur-
ance. Emphasis is laid on safety, i.e. the integrity and
safety of the plant in operation and on the surveyor’s
own personal safety. It is important that the trainee under-
stands the techniques involved, particularly the limitations
of their application.

During the latter part of training, considerable periods
are likely to be spent in the ﬁeld operating alone but
returning to head ofﬁce to discuss the examinations and
reports with the training engineer. During this period, the
trainee’s ability to operate alone is assessed. At various
points throughout the training, written examinations may
be undertaken, and an essential feature of the training pro-
cess is that the head ofﬁce engineer responsible prepares
a report on the trainee’s progress and ultimately recom-
mends to his manager that the trainee should be assigned
to a district.

A surveyor’s district is a geographical area of such a
size as will keep him fully employed carrying out exam-
inations of plant and supporting his company’s clients
in the district. He is required to live in or close to his
district. He may report to a regional ofﬁce or direct to
his company’s head ofﬁce. Because he operates away
from base, his training is recognized as being of particular
importance, and it will later be supplemented with regular
in-service refresher courses. It is assumed that he will be
self-motivating and he is required to provide his clients
with a fully professional service, mobilizing the back-up
services of his company when necessary on their behalf.

13.6.3 Recognition of defects in operational
plant

During this training, an engineer surveyor can expect
to be shown examples of the defects that he is likely
to encounter. Many inspecting authorities have a ‘black
museum’ of such defects or they are described and
illustrated by photographs in the training literature. He
will also be instructed, both in the classroom and on-site,
about locations where defects are likely to occur. Most
surveyors develop an ‘instinct’, which helps them to ﬁnd
defects, and this can only be acquired through practical
experience of different types of plant.

Having found a defect, the surveyor must be able to
assess the possible consequences. Construction standards
are not of much use, since they are written around what it
is possible for a good workman to produce under reason-
ably good working conditions. For example, BS 4153 and
BS 5500 allow intermittent undercut at the edge of welds
up to 0.5 mm deep. The new surveyor will have been
taught that fatigue cracks often originate from the toe of
a weld, so he must be cautious in distinguishing between
harmless undercut and an incipient fatigue crack. This is
a simple example, which will almost certainly have been
thoroughly covered during training, but it illustrates the
importance both of experience and of having the backing
of NDT specialists who will settle the doubtful cases.

There is no doubt that the judgement as to whether a
defect is harmless or may lead to a failure is the most dif-
ﬁcult type of decision that any engineer, be he an engineer
surveyor or not, is asked to make. His ﬁrst judgement will
be whether the defect was created during original manu-
facture. If it has developed during operation, he must then
assess what has caused it and whether this causative fac-
tor is still active. Unless he is certain that defect growth
has stopped, he can only assume that it will continue to
grow at approximately the same rate. If the surveyor has
examined the plant previously and knows its history he
will be better placed to estimate the growth rate and to
decide whether he can allow the plant to operate until the
next examination is due or until some future date which
he agrees with the plant owner. Some theoretical knowl-
edge of stresses and of the mechanisms of defect growth
is valuable, but experience of similar defects is likely to
be the best basis for a judgement.

An engineer surveyor employed by an insurance com-
pany will often be used to investigate claims, and each
claim investigation adds something to his experience of
failures. At the same time, he must observe strict conﬁ-
dentiality. To quote from a quality assurance manual:

An essential part of the Engineer Surveyor’s role is
the detection of defects in plant or of operating prac-
tices, which could lead to a dangerous occurrence. This
knowledge is part of his experience. Nevertheless he
will never disclose to another client or to a third party
the sources of his experience in such a way that breach
of conﬁdentiality could result.

All surveyors need a database of technical information,
which should include reports of accidents or of defects
that could lead to accidents derived from other sources.
He also needs a regular supply of technical documentation
from his head ofﬁce that keeps him abreast of technical
developments. If his company operates an effective qual-
ity assurance system, they will periodically check that he
is keeping these data properly and they may control the
indexing of them.

The reader may remember the brief deﬁnition of a com-
petent person, i.e. ‘he must know what to look for and how
to recognize it when he sees it’. Perhaps what has been
described in this section gives further insight as to how
appropriate this deﬁnition is.

13.6.4 Reporting

An inspecting authority should always make a written
report to its client when the inspection is completed or
progressively as it proceeds. In the case of statutory exam-
inations, the format of the report is prescribed in the
legislation. The authority must clearly identify both itself
and the individual who is responsible for the contents
of the report. This will usually be the engineer surveyor
who has made the inspection in his capacity as ‘compe-
tent person’. Forms 55 and 55A that are prescribed for
examination of steam boilers (required at intervals not
exceeding 14 months) are interesting because they cover
a two-part examination. These are the cold or ‘thorough’
examination with the boiler shut down and prepared for
examination and the supplementary or ‘working’ exami-
nation, when the boiler is under operating conditions. As
a matter of interest, the 14-month interval starts from the
date of the supplementary examination, provided this is
done within two months of the cold examination, so a
total of 16 months is possible.

Report forms act as checklists to ensure that

the
essential aspects are covered. However, these aspects will
change from one type of plant to another. In general, the
report must state:

Identity and address of owner/operator
Location and identity of plant
Age of plant and date of last examination
Scope of examination (itemized on the form)
Parts that could not be examined
Quantitative values where possible
Description of any defects
Statement of any limitations of use
Repairs required and a limiting period for their execu-
tion
Observations not covered by the above
Identity of examiner
Countersignature of inspecting authority if required

It is the surveyor’s task to report facts, and every report
should be made ‘without fear or favor’. However, every
report also implies an opinion, which inevitably contains
a subjective element. This opinion is that the plant will be
safe to operate until the next examination is due. The plant
owner should remember that engineer surveyors are not
infallible, nor do they possess ‘second sight’. However,
their implied opinion is likely to be the most reliable view
that the owner can obtain without spending a great deal
more money. The opinion will be additionally reliable if
the surveyor has personal knowledge of the plant history.
Consequently, if the plant owner thinks of changing his
inspecting authority, he might remember that in doing so
he will jettison accumulated knowledge which the new
authority will take time to acquire.

It has to be recognized that some examiners are better
than others in their use of language, and many inspection
authorities have standard phrases, which their surveyors
are advised to use. Some use a shorthand system to facili-
tate the production of reports whereby the surveyor sends
back a string of numbers to his head ofﬁce that are then
converted into standard phrases in the report. Inevitably,

Engineer surveyors 13/169

these reports will look stilted. It should also be remem-
bered that when a surveyor reports regularly on the same
item – perhaps at three-monthly intervals on some types
of lifting equipment – a good deal of duplication from one
report to the next is inevitable. A word processor in the
surveyor’s home, connected by electronic mail to his head
ofﬁce plus an electronic signature produced by a method
that is acceptable to the Health and Safety Executive, is
therefore the engineer surveyor’s dream.

Having set out the factors that may tend to produce a
rather stilted report, we should also consider the positive
side. The last thing an inspecting authority wants is for
his client to look at the report and say ‘Why am I paying
so much money for this?’.

Most inspection contracts – whether applied to insur-
ance or not – are aimed at obtaining assurance that plant is
safe to operate. If the client needs more than this he should
therefore deﬁne his additional requirements with care and
make sure that these have been effectively communicated.
This will probably result in the inspection contract being
treated as a ‘one-off’ basis and a more personalized ser-
vice should result.

It is extremely important that the obligations on both
sides should be recognized. The owner/operator of statu-
tory plant cannot pass on his legal obligations to have his
plant properly examined on time. He can, of course, make
his inspecting authority contractually responsible for car-
rying out the examination and providing the report on
time, but that is not the same thing. The client also has
an obligation to prepare the plant for examination, and
this usually involves shutting it down and perhaps dis-
mantling some of its parts. The engineer surveyor has
normally learnt that outage time is costly to his client, and
will do his utmost to be on time on the appointed date. He
will, however, have a natural aversion to remaining inside
unpleasantly hot or exceedingly dirty equipment, and a
less effective examination may result. It is also essential
that both the client and the inspecting authority keep in
mind the requirement that ‘the engineer surveyor must be
allowed the time he considers necessary and sufﬁcient to
complete his examination in a satisfactory manner’.

When inspecting certain statutory items of plant, the
inspecting authority has a legal obligation to inform the
enforcing authority of any plant which is considered to
be dangerous. When this occurs, the surveyor makes out
a ‘site defect notice’ at the time of the examination that
is signed both by him and by the client’s representative.
The written report is then sent both to the client and to
the Factory Inspectorate branch of the Health and Safety
Executive. This is the only occasion when an inspectorate
is obliged to break conﬁdentiality with the client, and it
should be the only occasion when it does so.

Although written reports are the inspecting authority’s
end product they by no means comprise the whole of
the professional service that is supplied or is available
on request. The authority’s quality assurance objective
is likely to be on the lines of ‘client satisfaction allied
to compliance with contractual obligations’. Although
reports are almost certainly monitored,
they are a
poor indicator of the quality of the examination, and
the authority’s quality control will rely less on report

13/170 Insurance: Plant and Equipment

inspection and more on surveillance of the whole process
that
it operates. This will be done through careful
attention to:

together to meet particular circumstances, and the inspec-
tion authorities offering these services are always ready
to discuss any special inspection requirements.

Surveyor training
Surveyor aids (software and hardware)
Surveyor audits
An administration that removes obstacles, which might
prevent the surveyor performing at this best.

The authority should also take pains to promote a good
working relationship between the engineer surveyor and
the client’s representative on-site.

13.7 Technical services
The majority of the independent engineering inspection
authorities now provide a wide range of engineering
inspection services quite apart
from the in-service
inspections of insured plant. These services are available
to industry at
large and, although widely used by
presently insured clients, they are frequently employed by
organizations that have no speciﬁc insurance or inspection
involvement with the chosen engineering inspection
authority.

The inspections/services provided under the heading
of ‘Technical Services’ form either independent or com-
bined operations of the various technical department dis-
ciplines that the chosen inspection authority has to offer.
Inspections will range from lifts, cranes and other special-
ized machinery items, and include electrical inspections
of wiring, switchgear, motors, etc. Special inspections of
used plant or in-service plant are carried out for a wide
variety of clients, and the inspection of pressure plant
during construction, including design assessment prior to
manufacture, is undertaken by a department specializing
in this type of service.

inspection authorities have metallurgical and
Most
chemical
laboratories and a separate non-destructive
testing department within their head ofﬁce complex,
undertaking separate inspection/service operations as well
as providing a comprehensive support to all of the other
technical service functions. It
is a requirement under
the Health and Safety at Work, etc. Act 1974 that
designers, manufacturers, importers or suppliers of articles
or substances for use at work must ensure that, so far as
reasonably practicable, they are safe and properly used.
They must test articles for safety in use, or arrange for
this to be done by a competent authority. They must also
supply information about the use for which an article was
designed, and include any conditions of use regarding its
safety.

Anyone who installs or erects any article for use at
work must ensure that, so far as reasonably practicable, it
does not constitute a risk to health and is safe for use.

The major engineering insurance companies are rec-
ognized as competent independent inspection authorities
having a range of services, which they have developed
during many years of service to the engineering industry,
and therefore the following inspection procedures indicate
many of the standard inspection services in use. How-
ever, special inspection procedures are frequently drawn

13.7.1 Pressure plant
Pre-commissioning inspection services are designed to
examine key stages of production and witness ﬁnal tests
on completion at the manufacturer’s works and/or at site
as appropriate. It is frequently arranged for the inspec-
tion authorities personnel to attend pre-design meetings to
discuss the best and most effective inspection service suit-
able for the item or projecting being considered. The main
starting point, however, is normally the design drawing or
drawings, together with calculations, which are reviewed
to check the integrity of the design in accordance with
the speciﬁed construction code, which is often to a British
Standard.

Once the drawing is approved, the ﬁeld staff make
inspections at key stages during manufacture and follow
up on-site when necessary to inspect during prior to com-
missioning work and to witness tests. The normal stages
of inspection for pressure plant would include identiﬁca-
tion of materials of construction, weld procedures, opera-
tor performance qualiﬁcations being checked to establish
that they are relevant and up-to-date and random stage
inspection during welding continues, at intervals, during
the fabrication. These latter tests will include heat treat-
ment recording and non-destructive results being subject
to assessment.

On completion of the item, it is examined externally
while subject to hydraulic test, followed by internal exam-
ination so far as construction permits. All the inspection
stages are reported at regular intervals during construc-
tion, thus providing a prompt written account of inspec-
tions during progress of manufacture. A similar design
assessment and stage inspection procedure is available for
reinforced plastic vessels and tanks.

13.7.2 Electric passenger and goods lifts

Pre-commissioning inspection service for lifts is normally
undertaken in one of three ways:

1. At works, at site and during test
2. At site and during test
3. During test only.

It is recommended that the lift speciﬁcation should call
for compliance with British Standards, and the service
usually commences with perusal of drawings and spec-
iﬁcations. The inspection service can include machine
parts prior to assembly and a similar examination of elec-
trical components. Guide rails, brackets and supporting
structures are examined and the lift manufacturer’s shop
tests on motor-control equipment and high-voltage tests of
electrical equipment are witnessed. A car sling, safety gear
and counter-weight assembly are checked prior to dispatch
and shop tests on the governor unit are witnessed. The on-
site inspection would include supporting steelwork, the
alignment of the car and counterweight guides and the

door or gate mountings. The mechanical and electrical
parts of the lift would be examined on completion of erec-
tion. The manufacturer’s tests would be witnessed by the
engineer surveyor, including balance tests, performance
tests, round trip with 10 per cent overload, safety gear
test, limit switch tests, static testing of brake, gate/door
lock as well as earth continuity tests and insulation tests.
All these inspections are reported with the reports dis-
patched at intervals during manufacture and a ﬁnal report
is submitted on completion.

13.7.3 Cranes

The inspection of cranes has the three major categories
(1)–(3) as applicable to the lift inspection outlined above.
The service would commence with perusal of drawings
and speciﬁcations that should call for compliance with
British Standards. Inspection during manufacture would
include mechanical parts prior to assembly and selected
structural members as well as the examination of motors
and electrical equipment and the checking of test certiﬁ-
cates for electrical equipment. On completion, the engi-
neer surveyor, who would visit the site during erection,
would examine the crane. The site-erected crane would
be examined and proof-load and performance tests would
be witnessed. Test certiﬁcates for ropes and hooks would
be perused and all the inspection stages would be reported
progressively. Although the description applies to elec-
tric overhead travelling cranes and dockside portal cranes,
a similar service is available for power-driven mobile
cranes, manual overhead traveling cranes, box trolley run-
way tracks and lifting tackle.

13.7.4 Electrical inspection

Inspection services relevant to electrical plant during pro-
duction include inspection at several stages of manufac-
ture and witnessing of tests on completion. Depending
on the item concerned, examinations are carried out of
mechanical details prior to assembly and of insulating
materials, conductors, coils, supports, wedges and wind-
ings. The witnessing of tests of complete component parts
would include commutators, slip rings and brush gear.
This is followed by inspections during the winding of
motors and transformers and, on completion, witnessing
of manufacturer’s tests to determine the performance and
reliability of the items under normal working conditions.
Examination and witnessing manufacturer’s tests of auxil-
iary equipment, including control gear, is also undertaken.

13.7.5 Turbogenerators

The schedule of inspection for turbogenerators covers
key stages during manufacture and normally includes
witnessing of mechanical tests on sections from the motor
forgings and on completion of machining of mechanical
components. Insulating materials, conductors, controls,
supports, wedges, slip rings, commutators and windings
are examined at appropriate stages during progress of the
work on the stator, rotor and exciter. The tests carried out

by the manufacturer during progress and on completion
are all witnessed at the appropriate stages.

Pressure plant 13/171

13.7.6 Centrifugal pumps

The services provided could include the witnessing of
mechanical tests on specimens representing the main cast-
ings and forgings and inspection of the pump casing,
bedplates and other principal components after machining.
This would include the pump shaft, impeller, guide-vanes
and division plates. The engineer surveyor would witness
hydraulic tests on pressure-retaining parts and the test car-
ried out by the manufacturer under operating conditions.

13.7.7 Non-destructive testing

available

in all

testing engineers

industry throughout

The principal engineering insurers all now operate
NDT services with fully experienced, qualiﬁed non-
destructive
the
main centers of
the UK. These
engineers are able to undertake most forms of non-
destructive testing at short notice, being equipped with
modern ultrasonic, radiographic (X-ray and gamma-ray)
testing equipment, digital sound-velocity measurement
instruments, electromagnetic, eddy-current and spark-
testing instruments as well as a range of equipment for
all forms of magnetic particle and dye penetrant testing.
In addition, many types and forms of equipment are
used as aids to visual inspection, including closed-circuit
TV using miniaturized cameras with a facility to record
results.

13.7.8 Metallurgical testing

The prime function of the metallurgical laboratories is
to investigate failures of all descriptions and prepare
illustrated technical
reports based on their ﬁndings.
From these, the causes of any incident can be assessed
and recommendations made to minimize the possibility
of a recurrence. Equipment will
light
microscopes, both laboratory based and portable, for
site work and replication testing on-site. A scanning
electron microscope with magniﬁcation up to 200,000
and a feature enabling X-ray micro-analysis for any
particular element to be made should also feature in the
equipment available to the engineering insurers providing
these services.

include several

13.7.9 Laboratory chemical section

This is primarily engaged in analysis of boiler water treat-
ment matters and involves on-site studies of various prob-
lems and the chemical examination of corrosion products,
boiler scales, etc. It can also carry out certain types of
metallurgical, fuel and inorganic analysis. Normal wet
methods of analysis coupled with a visible ultraviolet and
atomic absorption spectrophotometer are used for a wide
range of analytical applications. Equipment in use by the
engineering insurers providing these services can include
an ion chromatograph, spectrometer equipment, atomic

13/172 Insurance: Plant and Equipment

absorption spectrophotometer, ﬂue gas analysis equipment
and testing equipment for transformer and switchgear oil.

13.7.10 Other services

Other inspection services available include the exami-
nation of steel structures (new and existing), electrical
wiring installations, containers (to meet Statutory Instru-
ment No. 1890), dangerous substances (carriage by road
in road tankers or tank containers) to meet Statutory
Instrument No. 1059, examination of second-hand plant
prior to purchase, plant undergoing repair or modiﬁca-
tion, the Control of Industrial Major Accident Hazard
Regulations (CIMAH) Statutory Instrument No. 1902 and
Control of Substances Hazardous to Health (COSHH) and
Pressure Systems Regulations.

13.8 Claims
The vigilant plant user is well informed about the terms
of the policies which cover the plant in his charge, includ-
ing any excesses that may apply. As soon as an incident
occurs which may give rise to a claim on one of the poli-
cies in force he will ensure that the insurer concerned is
notiﬁed immediately, as failure to do so many invalidate
a claim.

If the incident constitutes a ‘reportable accident’ as
deﬁned in legislation the plant engineer will also ensure
that the incident is immediately reported to the Factory
Inspectorate. The Inspectorate will decide whether they
wish to carry out an enquiry and, particularly if there has
been loss of life, the accident site may be compulsorily
isolated. Unless this is so, investigation by the insurer or
a loss adjuster acting on his behalf may proceed.

Smaller claims may be dealt with by completion of a
claim form, perhaps a report from the repairer if appro-
priate and sight of the repair or replacement invoice. For
larger claims, a visit to the site by the insurer’s represen-
tative may be necessary. If the plant is inspected by the
insurer the engineer who normally carried out the inspec-
tions will usually be asked to report on the incident. The
insurer’s representative will seek to establish the facts, the
cause, nature and extent of the physical damage and per-
haps the consequences in terms of interruption to produc-
tion. An engineer surveyor is not usually concerned with
the commercial outcome and may be expressly excluded
from any commercial negotiations. A loss adjuster, as well
as seeking to establish the facts, will also negotiate set-
tlement of the claim once it has been established that a
valid claim exists.

Both the engineer surveyor and the loss adjuster may
advise on how best to effect a repair or replacement of
the damaged item and will bear in mind the client’s need
to minimize their loss of production. If, for any reason,
there is a delay in having damaged plant examined by
the insurer’s representative the insurer will normally be
agreeable to the insured giving his own instructions for
repairs to proceed, if any damaged parts replaced are kept
for examination by the insurer with suitable protection
against further damage. The agreement of the insurer to
the insured giving his instructions for repairs to proceed

is not conﬁrmation that the incident constitutes a valid
claim. This will only be decided when the insurer’s inves-
tigations are complete.

In any case, the plant engineer has a responsibility to
keep careful account of all the costs incurred, which may
be recoverable in whole or part under the policy, and
submit appropriate invoices to the insurer. He also has an
obligation to minimize these costs insofar as this is reason-
ably compatible with achieving his objective, which will
be to restore normal production. The insurer may have
access to sources of replacement plant items or to spe-
cialist repairers of whom the plant engineer is not aware,
and advice on these matters is part of the service provided
by the insurer.

When the cause of the incident has been established
and the costs of rectiﬁcation ﬁnalized, these will be com-
pared with the insurance cover provided by the policy and
the extent of the insurer’s liability, if any, determined. The
policy will normally be one of indemnity, i.e. returning the
insured to the same position after an accident as he was
before. This may be achieved by repairing or replacing
what is damaged or by paying the amount of the damage.
It may be necessary to carry out modiﬁcations to prevent a
recurrence of the accident or desirable to up-rate the spec-
iﬁcation for better performance or the life of the machine
may have been extended by the repairs carried out. In this
case a degree of ‘betterment’ is involved which will be
reﬂected in the settlement by a contribution by the insured
to the cost of repairs.

On occasions, the amount of a claim will be found
to exceed the sum insured, and as the sum insured is the
maximum amount the insurer will pay, the insured will not
be fully compensated for his loss. It is the responsibility
of the insured, with the assistance of his broker or other
intermediary, to ensure that sums insured are adequate
and are not eroded by inﬂation. The plant engineer also
has a responsibility to inform his broker if he increases
the value of plant items, adds substantially to the total
value of items at any one location or, where items are
insured individually, takes additional items into service
or removes them from service.

13.9 Sources of information
The plant engineer may progressively become a mine of
information in his ﬁeld, but it is more important that he
knows where to ﬁnd the information when he needs it
and, equally important, that this information should be up
to date.

13.9.1 British Standards

British Standards tend to be concerned with new construc-
tion rather than with plant already in service. In general,
although there are exceptions, they are also concerned
more about minimum standards than with standards of
excellence. There are notable exceptions: for instance, BS
5500 is arguably the best guide to design and construc-
tion of pressure vessels, which has ever been produced, in
the English language. In other technical ﬁelds, the stan-
dards of other nations take pride of place. For instance,

the Americans tend to rate well in the oil and petro-
chemical sector and ANSI B.31.3 is particularly useful
for pipework.

The plant engineer should strive to make sure that,
whenever possible, his purchase orders specify compli-
ance with the correct standard. Many manufacturers can
truthfully claim that their speciﬁcations exceed the mini-
mum requirements of a material standard, in which case
they will have no objection to its inclusion in the order.
Those who protest too much that its requirements are
superﬂuous may deserve further scrutiny. Choosing the
correct speciﬁcation is not always easy, and requires
expertise in the relevant ﬁeld. This expertise is available
from consulting engineers or from an inspection author-
ity, who will also appraise the vendor’s designs and,
if required, will witness critical stages of construction
and test.

The BSI Catalogue (previously known as the BSI
Yearbook) is not an expensive investment for a company
which spends appreciable sums on purchased plant and
materials.

13.9.2 The Health and Safety Executive
The Factory Inspectorate branch of the HSE issues a
series of booklets with the preﬁx HS/E. For example,
HS/G 13, entitled The storage of LPE at ﬁxed installations,
may be considered essential reading for plant engineers
who use LPG in more than small quantities. The HS(R)
Series is another collection of booklets on safety, ranging
from HS(R) 1, Packaging and labeling of dangerous
substances,
to HS(R) 19, A guide to the Asbestos
(Licensing) Regulations 1983. The booklets in this series
are guides that often contain explanations of and quite
extensive extracts from legislation. They are highly
recommended reading.

The TDN series are Technical Data Notes, which cover
a particularly wide variety of subjects: for instance, TDN
53/3 is entitled Creep of metals at elevated temperatures.
These notes are being progressively replaced by the Plant
and Machinery (PM) series, of which PM5, Automatically
controlled boilers, is perhaps the best known.

All

the booklets issued by the Health and Safety
Executive are available from HMSO, and as the series
is continually expanding the reader is advised to obtain
an up-to-date list from the nearest Stationery Ofﬁce.

13.9.3 Publications by other organizations

Other organizations that represent groups of companies
with a common interest also issue rates, regulations and
guidance notes on subjects that come within their respec-
tive orbits. Occasionally, the HSE will advise users of a
particular type of plant, commodity or material to observe
the appropriate document(s), and the user will then ignore
this advice at his peril. Apart from this aspect, they do
not have any ofﬁcial force. At the same time, most of
them contain excellent information and guidance. A non-
exhaustive list of the organizations in alphabetical order,
together with the address last known to the author, is given
below:

Appendix 1: Glossary 13/173

The Associated Ofﬁces Technical Committee (AOTC).
St Mary’s Parsonage, Manchester M60 9AP
The Chemical Industries Association

Appendix 1: Glossary

AHEM

API

ASB

ANSI

ASME

The Association of Hydraulic Equipment
Manufacturers Limited, 192–198 Vauxhall
Bridge Road, London SW1V 1DX
American Petroleum Institute, 1271 Avenue
of the Americas, New York, USA
Association of Shell Boiler Makers, c/o
David L. Chaplin, The Meadows, Ryleys
Lane, Alderley Edge, Cheshire SK9 7UV
American National Standards Institute, 1430
Broadway, New York, NY 10018, USA
The American Society of Mechanical
Engineers, 135 East 47th Street, New York,
NY 10017, USA

BCAS

BSC

BSI

BCGA

BMEC

BI/NDT

BASEEFA British Approvals Service for Electrical
Equipment in Flammable Atmospheres,
Harper Hill, Buxton, Derbyshire
British Compressed Air Society, Leicester
House, 8 Leicester Street, London WC2H
7BN
British Mechanical Engineering
Confederation, 112 Jermyn Street, London
SW1Y 4UR
British Safety Council, 62–64 Chancellors
Road, London W6 9RS
British Standards Institution, Linford Wood,
Milton Keynes, MK14 6LE
Federation of British Electro Technical &
Allied Manufacturers Association, Leicester
Street, London WC2H 7BN
The British Institute of Non-Destructive
Testing, 53–55 London Road,
Southend-on-Sea, Essex SS1 1PF
Building Research Establishment, Building
Research Station, Garston, Watford WD2
7JR
Council of British Manufacturers of
Petroleum Equipment, 118 Southwark
Street, London SE1 0SU
Chemical Industries Association, Alembic
House, 93 Albert Embankment, London
SE1 7TU
Council of Independent Inspecting
Authorities, c/o Parklands, 825a Wilmslow
Road, Didsbury, Manchester M20 8RE
Certiﬁcation Scheme for Weldment
Inspection Personnel, Abington Hall,
Abington, Cambridge CB1 6AL
Society of Chemical Industry, 14–15
Belgrave Square, London SW1X 8PS
Department of Trade and Industry, Room
320, Kingsgate House, 66/72 Victoria
Street, London SW1E 6SW
Department of Trade, 1 Victoria Street,
London SW1H 0ET (International Trade,
Policy Division Room 450 or 455)

CBMPE

CWSIP

SCI

DTI

BRE

CIA

CIIA

DOT

13/174 Insurance: Plant and Equipment

DOE

EEMUA

EFTA

FPA

HSE

ICE

ICE

IEE

IMechE

IP

LPGITA

NRPB

PPA

RoSPA

THE

Department of Energy, Thames House
South, Millbank, London SW1P
4QJ
Engineering Equipment & Materials Users
Association, 14/15 Belgrave Square,
London SW1X 8PS
The European Free Trade Association,
9–11 Rue de Varembe, CH-1211 Geneva
20, Switzerland
Fire Protection Association, 140 Aldersgate
Street, London EC1A 4HX
Health and Safety Executive, Hugh’s House,
Trinity Road, Bootle, Merseyside L20
3QY
The Institution of Chemical Engineers,
George E. Davies Buildings, 165, 171
Railway Terrace, Rugby CU21 3HQ
The Institution of Civil Engineers, Great
George Street, London SW1
The Institution of Electrical Engineers,
Savoy Place, London WC2R 0BL
Institution of Mechanical Engineers, 1
Birdcage Walk, Westminster, London
SW1H 9JJ
Institute of Petroleum, 61 New Cavendish
Street, London W1H 8AP
Liqueﬁed Petroleum Gas Industry Technical
Association (UK), 17 Grosvenor Crescent,
London SW1X 7ES
National Radiological Protection Board,
Chilton, Dicot, Oxfordshire OX11
0RQ
Process Plant Association, Leicester
House, 8 Leicester Street, London WC2H
7BN
Royal Society for the Prevention of
Accidents, Cannon House, The Priory,
Queensway, Birmingham B4 6BS
Technical Help to Exporters, BS1, Linford
Wood, Milton Keynes MK14 6LE

Appendix 2: Statutory report forms

Title of regulation

Title of form

Statutory
form no.
F54

F55

Factory Act 1961 and
the Ofﬁces, Shops
and Railway Premises
(Hoists & Lifts)
Regulations 1968
Factory Act 1961 and
the Examination of
Steam Boiler
Regulations 1964

Report of
Examination of Hoist
or Lift

Report of
Examination of Steam
Boilers other than
Economisers,
Superheaters, Steam
Tube Ovens and
Steam Tube Hotplates
Report of
Examination of Steam
Boiler under normal
Steam Pressure
Report of thorough
Examinations and
Test and Record of
Repairs
Tests of Insulation
Resistance and
Conductivity of
Earthing Conductors
and Earth Plates of
Electrical Apparatus
Report of Periodic
Examination and Test
Certiﬁcate of
Suitability of a
carrying tank/tank
container and its
ﬁttings for the
conveyance of
dangerous substances
by road

F55A

As F55 above

A2197

Factory Act 1961 and
the Power Presses

F260 and
F262
(also
available
in book
form)

Mines and Quarries
Act 1954 and The
quarries (Electricity)
Regulations 1956

Conveyance by Road
in Road Tankers and
Tank Containers 1981
(Statutory Instrument
No. 1059)

Appendix 2: Statutory report forms 13/175

13/176 Insurance: Plant and Equipment

Appendix 2: Statutory report forms 13/177

13/178 Insurance: Plant and Equipment

Appendix 2: Statutory report forms 13/179

13/180 Insurance: Plant and Equipment

Appendix 3: Report forms-non-statutory 13/181

13/182 Insurance: Plant and Equipment

Appendix 3: Report forms-non-statutory 13/183

14/185

Insurance:
Buildings and
Risks

Risk Control Unit
Royal Insurance (UK) Ltd, Liverpool

14

Contents

14/187

14/187

14.1 Insurance
14.2 Fire insurance
14.3 Business interruption insurance
14.4 Insurance surveys
14.5 Fire protection
14.6 Extinguishers

14/187
14/188

14/187

14.6.1 Water 14/188
14.6.2 Dry powder
14.6.3 Gas 14/188
14.6.4 Installation and maintenance

14/188

14.7 Auto-sprinkler installations
14.8 Automatic ﬁre alarms 14/188
14.9 Trade hazards 14/188

14/188

14.9.1 Flammable liquids
14/189
14.9.2 Flammable gases 14/189
14.9.3 Electrical equipment
14.9.4 Management 14/189

14/189

14/187

14.21 Closed-circuit television (CCTV)
14.22 Access control

14/193

14/193

14.22.1 Security staff 14/193
14.22.2 Electronically operated access/egress

systems

14/193

14.23 Liability and liability insurance
14.24 Employer’s liability

14/193

14/193

14.24.1 Tort 14/193
14.24.2 Breach of statutory duty

14/194

14/188

14.25 Third-party liability

14/194
14.25.1 Breach of contract
14.25.2 Tort 14/194

14/194

14.26 Liability insurance
14.27 The cover provided by liability insurance

14/194

14/194

14.27.1 Employer’s liability
14.27.2 Public liability (third party)
14.27.3 Public liability (producers)

14/194

14/194
14/195

14/189

14/189

14.10 Security insurance
14.11 Theft insurance policy terms and conditions
14.12 Risk assessment 14/190
14.13 Planning for security
14.14 Security objectives
14.15 Location
14/191
14.16 Site perimeter security

14/190

14/191

14/190

14.16.1 Fences 14/191
14.16.2 Security lighting

14/191

14.17 Building fabric 14/192

14.17.1 Outer walls 14/192
14.17.2 Roofs

14/192

14.18 Doors and shutters
14.19 Windows
14/192
14.20 Intruder alarms 14/192

14/192

14.28 Points to be considered
14.29 Employee safety and employer’s liability

14/195

14/196

14/195

14/195

14.29.1 Premises/buildings
14.29.2 Machinery and plant
14.29.3 Tools
14.29.4 Electrical installations
14.29.5 Pressure equipment
14.29.6 Materials handling and storage
14.29.7 Hazardous materials 14/197
14.29.8 Hazardous processes
14/197
14.29.9 Health hazards and their control
14.29.10 Personal protective equipment
14.30 Safety of the public and public liability

14/196

14/196

14/195

14/196

14/197

14/197

14/198

(third party)
14.30.1 Pollution
14.30.2 Visitors
14.30.3 Off-site work (‘work away’) 14/198

14/198

14/198

14.1 Insurance
It is very important to understand that an insurance pol-
icy is a legal document, and insurance negotiations should
be approached on this basis. Insurance contracts have a
detailed legal background of both case law and common
law in the interpretation of their provisions. Professional
insurance advice from a reputable source, whether an
insurance company or an insurance broker, is essential
if problems are to be avoided.

It is important to understand that insurers are separate
commercial organizations in competition and each trying
to make a proﬁt. This affects the insurers’ approach to
loss prevention and it does mean that some insurers will
have different priorities in individual cases.

Insurers

trade in a competitive market. Because
insurance is such a competitive business, insurers do not
have unlimited freedom to act. They occasionally have to
accept less than the optimum in terms of safety. However,
an individual insurer can always refuse the business if it
is judged that the conditions are bad – and this is done
from time to time.

There are occasions where rather less serious problems
are encountered and the client refuses to take any action.
In these circumstances, statutory bodies like the OSHA
or the ﬁre department can enforce their views through
legislation. Insurers are not in that position. They can
and do increase premiums for bad risks, but they also
try to persuade management by commonsense argument
that changes should be made, even if this is not neces-
sarily an economic proposition from the point of view of
insurance cost.

14.2 Fire insurance
Fire is the major insurable risk to property on land. Each
industry, trade or manufacturing process has its own ﬁre
problems. There are, in addition, causes of ﬁre which are
found in all occupancies (e.g. arson, smoking, and misuse
of electricity). With such a wide ﬁeld, it is only possible
to touch lightly on the many important aspects of the
subject.

The normal ﬁre policy covers the ﬁxed assets (build-
ings, machinery and stock) of the business against loss or
damage by ﬁre, lightning and explosion. Assets consumed
by the ﬁre damage caused as a direct result of ﬁre (e.g. by
smoke or water used to extinguish the ﬁre) are included
in the cover. Damage caused by equipment overheating
or by something which is being ﬁred but is burned incor-
rectly are not covered by this type of policy. Lightning
damage is self-explanatory.

Explosion damage cover means damage resulting from
a wide variety of trade-related explosions (e.g. dust,
vapor or uncontrolled chemical reactions). The explosion
or collapse of boilers and pressure plant, in which internal
pressure is due to steam or other ﬂuids, is covered by
engineering (not ﬁre) policies.

The property owner is responsible for establishing the
ﬁgure for which the assets are insured. This must be a
realistic assessment of the value, as insurers settle claims

Fire protection 14/187

on the actual loss incurred and do not automatically pay
the ﬁgure insured in the policy.

The policy cover may be extended to include damage
to assets from extra perils if the necessary additional pre-
mium is paid. These include storm damage, ﬂoodwater,
burst water pipes or tanks, aircraft, riot, malicious dam-
age or impact by mechanical vehicles. It is also possible
to include an item to cover architects’, surveyors’ and
consultants’ fees and legal fees all incurred in the rein-
statement of the property insured, as well as a sum to
cover the costs of removing debris from the site before
rebuilding can start.

14.3 Business interruption insurance
Business interruption policies (also known as loss of prof-
its or consequential loss) are designed to cover the trading
loss due to the occurrence of the ﬁre or other insured peril.
This loss is normally identiﬁed either by a reduction in
turnover as a result of the disruption caused to the busi-
ness or by increased costs incurred to minimize the loss of
turnover, or indeed a combination of the two. The cover
under the policy does not last for an indeﬁnite period
after the loss but is restricted to a time scale expressed in
the policy as the maximum indemnity period. This time
limit is chosen by the management of the business, and
is the time they think that they would need to recover the
trading position of the company following the incident.
With ﬁre insurance, there is a limit to the amount payable,
which is the insured sum chosen by the management of
the business.

14.4 Insurance surveys
It is normal practice in insurance for surveyors employed
by the insurance company or the insurance broker to
inspect premises that are to be insured and prepare reports
for the underwriters. A major part of the survey report is
an assessment of the quality of the ﬁre protection relative
to the level of hazard in the premises. Obviously, the
business being carried on has a considerable inﬂuence on
the risk of ﬁre or explosion.

14.5 Fire protection
Every year there are a number of ﬁres costing $1,000,000
or more, but the greater part of the total annual loss is
made up from a large number of smaller ﬁres. Most ﬁres
are initially small, and if tackled manually or automati-
cally at this early stage can be put out before any serious
damage is done. Rapid action can be taken either with
portable ﬁreﬁghting equipment with hose reels or by ﬁxed
systems, which are brought into operation automatically
by the heat or smoke of a ﬁre. The type and quantity of
ﬁreﬁghting equipment necessary will vary greatly. Advice
can be obtained from the ﬁre department.

In many cases, insurers allow a discount from ﬁre insur-
ance premiums where equipment is installed providing the
equipment complies with insurance standards.

14/188 Insurance: Buildings and Risks

14.6 Extinguishers
The effectiveness of portable extinguishers is limited by
the need to keep their weight, and therefore the amount of
extinguishing agent they contain, within the limits neces-
sary for quick and easy handling. The maximum discharge
time, which can be expected from any portable extin-
guisher, is approximately 60–120 seconds.

For ﬁreﬁghting in occupied rooms with no exceptional
ﬁre risk, portable extinguishing equipment will normally
sufﬁce, if efﬁcient appliances of the right type are properly
positioned and will be handled by people trained to use
them effectively. A ﬁxed system will usually be necessary,
to ensure adequate protection in factories where there is
a real risk of ﬁre breaking out after working hours. Also
to ensure effective ﬁreﬁghting in workrooms where a ﬁre
is likely to spread too fast to be controlled by portable
extinguishers, and in parts of buildings which have an
appreciable ﬁre risk but which are not normally occupied.
Such a system should always be in addition to and not a
substitution for portable extinguishers.

It is important to provide the right type of extinguisher
for protection against a given risk. Some extinguishing
agents that are outstandingly effective against ﬁres involv-
ing certain substances may be useless or positively dan-
gerous when applied to ﬁres of another kind. Where more
than one type of extinguisher is provided, the type of ﬁre
for which each is designed should be clearly indicated and
staff instructed in the correct methods of use.

14.6.1 Water

Due to its cooling power, water is the most effective
extinguishing agent for many types of ﬁre. It is particu-
larly suitable for ﬁres in carbonaceous materials. Portable
extinguishers provide a limited quantity of water using
gas pressure. Extinguishers should have a nozzle ﬁtted so
that the direction of the jet can be properly controlled.

Hose reels connected to the public water supply have
the advantage that their supply of water is unlimited,
although the pressure may be less than that generated in
a portable extinguisher. Very large hoses are difﬁcult to
handle and lengths should not normally exceed 14 meters.
Water should be immediately available when the control
valve is opened.

14.6.2 Dry powder

A range of powders is available in portable extinguish-
ers for ﬁghting ﬁres in ﬂammable liquids and are suitable
for certain solid materials, including special metals. Dis-
charge is by gas pressure and a hose is essential.

14.6.3 Gas

Carbon dioxide and certain halon compounds have a spe-
cialized application for ﬁres in electrical equipment where
a non-conducting medium is important. All are toxic to a
degree, and operate either by smothering the ﬁre or by a
chemical reaction which inhibits combustion. Gas extin-
guishers must not be used in a conﬁned space because of
the toxic risk or the risk of asphyxiation.

14.6.4 Installation and maintenance

Equipment should be purchased from reputable manu-
facturers. They should be located at clearly deﬁned ﬁre
points. All equipment should be recharged after it has been
used. Manufacturers’ instructions for maintenance and
recharging must be followed closely. Regular inspection
and maintenance of all ﬁreﬁghting equipment is essential,
otherwise it is liable to deteriorate and prove unservice-
able when needed.

Staff who may require to use the extinguishers must
be trained both in selecting the appropriate extinguisher
and in handling it properly. There is no substitute for
actual hands-on use of extinguishers, and ﬁre brigades
are usually very pleased to help.

14.7 Auto-sprinkler installations
Automatic sprinkler systems have the great advantage that
they are comparatively simple in concept and operate
automatically, whether or not there are people present on
the premises. Water is supplied from the public mains or
tanks and pumps into a network of distribution pipes at
ceiling level, which covers the whole premises. Water is
discharged through nozzles or heads sited at regular inter-
vals in the pipework, which are normally sealed with a
heat-sensitive device.

The heat of the ﬁre actuates these devices, therefore
the system only discharges in the area of the ﬁre. The
sprinkler heads can be arranged to operate at suitable
temperatures,
taking into account ambient conditions.
Where heating is not always available, the pipework can
be charged with air during the winter months. An audible
alarm is given when the installation operates, and this can
be relayed automatically to the ﬁre brigade. As with all
ﬁre equipment, maintenance is essential, as it is not in
regular use.

14.8 Automatic ﬁre alarms
Fire alarms are intended to give an early warning of the
outbreak of ﬁre. This may take the form of a local alarm
or it may be signaled to the ﬁre department. The disadvan-
tage over, for example a sprinkler installation is that the
system does not attack the ﬁre, depending upon the human
element for any ﬁreﬁghting to take place. Their advantage
over a sprinkler installation is that it is more sensitive and
detection is quicker. This is a particular advantage if quick
action can be taken.

Various types of detectors that recognize heat and/or
smoke utilizing fused bimetallic strips, ionization cham-
bers and the interruption of a light beam by smoke or
other combustion products. It is important to select the
most appropriate form of detector for the environment.
Insurers give a modest discount from premiums if the
alarm installation complies with the insurance rules.

14.9 Trade hazards
The insurance survey referred to in Section 14.4 aims to
identify plant, processes and storage of materials that are

of signiﬁcance in terms of ﬁre hazard. Some examples
include:

extinguishing agents that are non-conductors of electricity
should be used.

Theft insurance policy terms and conditions 14/189

Drying
Dust hazards
Paint spraying and coating
Use of highly ﬂammable liquids
Waste collection and disposal

Insurance companies are particularly interested in the stan-
dards to which the plant is operated and how the haz-
ardous features are controlled.

14.9.1 Flammable liquids

Flammable liquids are widely used in many types of fac-
tories, and their misuse is responsible for many outbreaks
of ﬁre. The ﬁre risks from the ﬂammable liquids in com-
mon use such as petrol, parafﬁn, white spirit, cellulose
solutions and thinners are well known, but these are only
a few of the liquids which present hazards in industry. The
variety of ﬂammable liquids used in processes as solvents
or carriers and for other purposes is constantly extending.
Processes involving coating, spreading and printing
usually have a considerable area of exposure. If materials
that include ﬂammable liquids as solvents are sprayed,
large quantities of vapor and fume are produced.

Many ﬂammable liquids are used for a variety of pur-
poses in bench work, either in semi-closed containers or
in open trays. If spillage occurs due to breakage of appa-
ratus or plant, or carelessness in handling, the liquid is
distributed over a large area and considerable vapor is
produced. Fires due to the ignition of vapors spread with
extreme rapidity over the exposed surface of the liquid and
the amount of ﬂame and heat given off quickly increases.

14.9.2 Flammable gases

All the gases that are used for heating or lighting are easily
ignitable, and there is grave risk of ﬁre if the gas escapes
because of leakage from a container or from piping. The
only effective action against a gas ﬁre is to stop the ﬂow
of the gas. If the ﬁre is extinguished and the gas still
allowed to ﬂow, the escaping gas will form an explosive
mixture with the surrounding air and produce conditions
that are potentially far more dangerous than the ﬁre. In
addition, ﬂammable gases are almost inevitably toxic, and
hence a health hazard is produced.

Oxygen is not ﬂammable, but leakage from oxygen
supply pipes enriches the surrounding air and increases
the potential for ignition of various materials within the
enriched atmosphere. Some materials that would normally
require a source of heat for ignition become pyrophoric.
In the event of a ﬁre the supplies of all ﬂammable gases
and oxygen should be cut off as quickly as possible.

14.9.4 Management

Insurers are aware of the importance of a management
that, at all levels, is fully conscious of the ﬁre and other
hazards within its premises and consequently acts in a
highly responsible way. An opinion of the standard of
management is an important part of the insurance sur-
veyor’s report referred to earlier, and is obtained by obser-
vation of conditions in the premises and a scrutiny of the
organization and systems that are in operation.

14.10 Security insurance
While a number of different classes of insurance cover
relate to crime risks, the principal one which is sought by
most businesses is known as theft or burglary insurance.
The terms theft and burglary are deﬁned in the Theft Act
1968, but while insurers use ‘theft’, the cover provided by
this insurance is much narrower than the legal deﬁnition of
that term in that it applies only in speciﬁed circumstances.
The basic theft policy covers the property insured
against loss, destruction or damage by theft or attempted
theft involving:

1. Entry to or exit from the premises by forcible and

violent means; or

2. Actual or threatened assault or violence or use of force
at the premises (this relates to the legal deﬁnition of
robbery).

The theft policy extends to cover damage to premises
caused in furtherance of theft or attempted theft, but mali-
cious damage itself without theft is normally covered as
an extension to the ﬁre policy.

Theft by employees is another major exclusion from the
theft policy, although the insurance market is prepared to
cover this risk (subject to excess) through a ﬁdelity policy.
Theft insurance premiums vary from risk to risk. The

principal factors which insurers take into account are:

1. The geographical

location of the insured property
(experience shows that metropolitan and urban areas
have a crime incidence which is above average for the
UK); and

2. The type and value of commodity insured (some items
are particularly attractive and are always a major target
for thieves).

In all cases, however,

insurance premium
assumes that the security standards applied and put into
operation are commensurate with the theft risk.

the theft

14.9.3 Electrical equipment

In electrical equipment arcing or overheating causes ﬁres,
but continued combustion is usually due to insulation,
oil or other combustible material associated with the
installation. If the electrical apparatus remains alive, only

14.11 Theft insurance policy terms
and conditions
Under most theft insurance policies, the liability of the
insurance company is conditional on the client’s compli-
ance with any policy terms and conditions. There is a

14/190 Insurance: Buildings and Risks

Reasonable Precautions Condition under which the client
is required to take reasonable precautions to safeguard
the insured property and secure the premises, including
the installation, use and maintenance of any security pre-
cautions stipulated or agreed with the insurance company.
In some instances, special terms may be applied. For
example, where the insurance company requires the instal-
lation of an intruder alarm, the protected premises must
be attended unless the alarm is put into full operation. In
other cases, cover under the policy may apply only when
the property insured is left within agreed and designated
areas.

From these examples, it will be seen that the client’s
obligations do not end with the mere provision of secu-
rity hardware, etc. but extend to include procedures and
routines that ensure that it is used effectively.

14.12 Risk assessment
Insurance companies employ staff that have been trained
in crime-prevention techniques, and when theft insurance
is provided/requested for commercial premises, it is nor-
mal practice for the insurer to carry out a security survey
of the premises to prepare a report for the underwriters.
The report is based on the surveyor’s assessment of the
risk, which will consider the following main factors:

1. Type of property and values at risk;
2. Construction of premises;
3. Location/situation of the premises;
4. Extent and periods of non-occupancy;
5. Nature and degree of accessibility to thieves;
6. Existing protections:

(a) Locks, bars, bolts, etc.;
(b) Intruder alarms;
(c) Safes and strong rooms;
(d) Surveillance (e.g. security patrols, CCTV);
(e) Site security (perimeter fencing, security light-

ing, etc.);

7. Previous theft history of the premises.

movable assets (e.g. stock, both raw materials and ﬁn-
ished goods), plant (including vehicles, equipment and
tools) against the risk of theft. However, every indus-
trial and commercial operation may have its own security
vulnerability (e.g. arson bomb threats, fraud, informa-
tion theft, industrial espionage, malicious contamination
of products, etc.).

While the insurance company’s security requirements
against the risk of theft may go some way towards coun-
tering these other vulnerabilities, some of these issues
present signiﬁcantly different security problems and they
may require separate assessment and control. This empha-
sizes the need for a total plan to cover all aspects of
security. If planning is piecemeal, some aspect may be
overlooked and the beneﬁts (ﬁnancial and operational) of
a totally integrated approach will be lost.

Similarly, security should be a function of senior man-
agement, and it should rank alongside other management
responsibilities. This will help to demonstrate that the
company is committed to a security program that appro-
priate resources are allocated and those protective systems
and procedures are properly used and maintained.

14.14 Security objectives
The principal aims of security should be to forestall both
organized and opportunist crime by cost-effective mea-
sures. While there is considerable variety in the type of
criminal attack and skills involved, fortunately there is a
tendency for them to act in a similar way, and this enables
a common philosophy to be applied when determining
countermeasures.

Based on the initial risk assessment, it will be obvi-
ous that as the exposure (commodity, value and location)
increases so must the standard of security that is neces-
sary for the risk. It is also the case, however, that items
of comparatively low value will be stolen if they can be
easily reached and if their removal does not represent any
undue risk to the thief.

Experience has shown that thieves are strongly inﬂu-

enced by a number of factors:

The assessment will establish whether the existing secu-
rity arrangements equate to the standards normally looked
for by the insurance company for the speciﬁc theft insur-
ance exposure. If the security falls short of these stan-
dards, the insurance company will submit a list of security
items requiring improvement. Pending satisfactory com-
pletion of these items, insurers may:

1. Withhold theft cover entirely; or
2. Provide provisional cover but usually subject to some
restriction such as signiﬁcant excess or a percentage of
self-insurance being carried by the client.

14.13 Planning for security
Like all forms of asset protection, security needs to be
properly designed, planned and co-ordinated if it is to be
both effective and cost beneﬁcial. From previous com-
ments in this chapter, it will be noted that the insurance
company’s attention is largely focused on the security of

1. Thieves are mainly opportunists, so there is a greater
likelihood that they will be deterred by security that is
more apparent.

2. They wish to act quickly, so any delay will complicate
matters for them and discourage or even frustrate them.

3. They wish to remain undetected while working.

An important principle is that security must be built
in depth – otherwise known as defense in depth. In this
context, it may be helpful to think of security as a set of
concentric rings, where the target is located at the cen-
ter. Each ring represents a level of physical protection
(perimeter fence, building shell, security case) but the
number of rings and security resistance will vary relative
to the risk. The spaces between the rings may represent
other defensive measures such as closed-circuit television
(CCTV), security lighting, intruder alarm systems, etc.

It will be apparent that delay (by physical features)
and detection (by alarm, etc.) are entirely separate con-
cepts. They should not be treated as being one and the

same thing, nor should they be regarded as alternatives
when arranging security. Delay, on its own, will have
little security value unless it keeps the thief in a conspic-
uous place where there is a distinct likelihood of being
seen (detection). Similarly, detection (by alarm) of the
thief, where there are no obstacles to ensure subsequent
delay, is unlikely to deter when it is known that the nature
of property at risk may enable the removal of items of a
high value in a short time. The message is that delay and
detection, however achieved, should be used together and
then with intelligence.

By using risk assessment techniques to determine the
exposure of the property, it is possible to determine the
appropriate standard of security for a risk. The following
simple example will clarify this point.

(A) Property at risk : cigarettes
Breaking-in time

Removal
time

Escape

Timescale

(B) Property at risk : heavy/bulk non-ferrous metal

Breaking-in
time

Removal time

Escape

Timescale

In example (A), the easy transportability of cigarettes
requires a very high level of physical protection symbol-
ized by the lengthy breaking-in time. When considering
the necessary complementary alarm protection it is obvi-
ous that this must occur at the earliest possible time to
enable assistance to be summoned and to arrive while the
intruders are still on the premises but before they have
reached their target. To arrange for detection to coincide
with the beginning of removal time is much too late.

In example (B), the exposure of the property to risk
is rather less both by way of the value of the goods and
the problems posed by their transportability. While, there-
fore, it is still desirable that detection should occur as
early as possible, it will be seen that its concurrence with
the beginning of the removal time would still prevent the
intruders from being successful.

Security is intended to frustrate thinking people, and it
will be obvious that its effectiveness will be determined by
the strength of its weakest part. Care must always be taken
to ensure that there is no known vulnerable point, since
this will be exploited to the full, thereby nullifying the
security equipment otherwise provided. Once the standard
of security has been determined it must be uniformly and
intelligently applied.

Site perimeter security 14/191

location is a fait accompli, and the protection of the site
should recognize the pattern of crime in the district. This
information is normally available from the local crime
prevention ofﬁcer. It must be remembered that crime pat-
terns are never constant, and it is important to keep abreast
of local trends and, when necessary, be prepared to modify
(usually improve) security standards.

14.16 Site perimeter security
14.16.1 Fences

Perimeter
fencing may enhance the security of any
premises. Not only does the fence present an obstacle for
intruders to overcome but also it establishes the principle
of defensible space and constitutes a psychological barrier
to access. A perimeter fence, when supplemented by
gates, trafﬁc barriers and gatehouses (manned by security
personnel or some other system of access control), allows
the site operator to have control and supervision over all
vehicles and pedestrians entering and leaving the site.

There are three types of fencing suitable for security

applications. In increasing order of security, these are:

1. Chain link
2. Welded mesh
3. Steel palisade

The following features are necessary for any security
application:

1. Total vertical height must be not less than 3 m;
2. Mesh size should not exceed 50 mm2 to make footholds

difﬁcult;

3. Top edge of chain link and welded mesh should be
barred and the fence topped by three strands of barbed
wire on cranked arms extending at 45° out from the
external face of the face, where possible. Care should
be taken to ensure that any barbed wire is not a dan-
ger to pedestrians. If barbed razor type is used, notices
should be posted warning of the danger of serious
injury if climbing the fence is attempted;

4. The bottom edge of the fencing material should be
rooted into a continuous-cast concrete sill set into
the ground to prevent the material being bent up and
burrowing;

5. Gates should be designed to provide the same barrier

to intruders as the fence;

6. If a gross attack (using a vehicle to ram the fence)
is envisaged, protection can be provided either by
erecting a purpose-designed vehicle barrier or, where
ground permits, digging a trench on the exposed side.

14.16.2 Security lighting

14.15 Location
The location of any premises has a considerable inﬂuence
on the overall standard of security. With new building,
and other things being equal, the site with a low level of
local crime should be chosen. In most instances, however,

The purpose of security lighting is to deny the criminal the
cover of darkness, which he uses to conceal his activities.
In addition, strategically designed lighting can consider-
ably increase the security value of other measures, and
it can also assist the detection capabilities of surveillance
(manned or CCTV) systems.

14/192 Insurance: Buildings and Risks

Lighting need not be devoted to security, and indeed
most lighting installations have a dual role. Where secu-
rity is a required feature, the installation needs to be
very carefully speciﬁed and designed to achieve optimum
protection.

14.17 Building fabric
14.17.1 Outer walls

is essential

those resistant

The outer walls of a building should be commensurate
with the security risk. The use of robust construction
and materials (e.g.
to manual attack
and damage)
to the initial provision of
security. Criminals will exploit weaknesses in walls.
Where lightweight claddings are employed, a reinforcing
lining such as welded steel mesh can enhance security.
Where the security risk is high it may be necessary to
reinforce even brick or cinder block walls in a similar
manner.

14.17.2 Roofs

Roofs are a common means of access to criminals. Where
necessary, access can be minimized or deterred by:

1. Restricting access to the rooftop by physical barriers;
2. Applying anti-climb paint or spiked collars to access

routes such as drain pipes;

3. Use of strategic lighting of the roof area;
4. Fitting expanded metal or welded mesh below the roof
covering, sandwiched between the skins of double-
skinned roof coverings or within the roof space;

5. Roof openings, including roof lights and ventilation,
should be treated, from a security point of view, in
the same way as openings, located elsewhere in the
building fabric.

14.18 Doors and shutters
External doors and shutters are often the focus of criminal
attention. The range and construction of doors, shutters
and their securing devices is too numerous to cover but
the points which need to be considered are:

1. Siting: Wherever practicable, doors should be located

where there is some element of surveillance;

2. Numbers: These should be kept to the minimum, con-
sistent with operational requirements and any other
requirements imposed under Building Regulations and
ﬁre/health and safety legislation;

3. Construction: Preference should be given to solid
wood, steel or steel-faced doors. Glazing should be
avoided but, where necessary, should be as small as
practicable;

4. Frames: The frame should be of sound solid construc-
tion, with a substantial rebate and securely ﬁxed into
the building fabric;

5. Condition: All doors should be a good ﬁt

in the
frame with no excessive gaps, and maintained in good
condition;

6. Hinges: Outward-opening

have
exposed hinges that are vulnerable to attack. These
should be supplemented by ﬁtting hinge or dog bolts
on the back edge of the door;

normally

doors

7. Locks: There is a wide variety of locks and security
ﬁttings, many with special applications. Advice from
locksmiths or other security experts should be taken
before deciding upon a type of lock, but, wherever
practicable, only those locks that require a key to lock
and unlock them should be chosen. BS 3621 estab-
lishes a useful minimum standard but is not applicable
to all lock types;

8. Emergency exits: These doors should be identiﬁed and
the local ﬁre prevention ofﬁcer consulted before any
key-operated locks is ﬁtted.

14.19 Windows
Accessible windows are a high security risk. Wherever
practicable, storage areas in particular should have no
windows. For a variety of reasons, this is not always fea-
sible, and in these cases the following features should be
considered:

1. Windows not required to be operable should be per-

manently ﬁxed closed;

2. Where windows are required to open ﬁt limitations
(e.g. stops or cradle bars) to restrict the extent to which
the window may be opened;

3. Where there is a security risk, ﬁt internal bars or grilles
properly secured to the building fabric. Speciﬁcations
for bars and grilles are available from the local crime
prevention ofﬁcer, the insurance company or from pro-
prietary grille manufacturers.

14.20 Intruder alarms
In many cases, it is necessary to complement physical
security by the installation of an intruder alarm system
in order to achieve the standard of security commen-
surate to the risk exposure. The scope of protection to
be afforded by the alarm system depends on the security
risk, but it may embrace fences, windows, doors, roofs,
walls, internal areas, yards and external open areas, and
vehicles inside and outside buildings. There is a com-
prehensive range of detection devices, but the choice of
detector is critical to ensure that it provides the desired
level of protection and is stable in the particular environ-
ment.

Intruder alarms are designed to give a warning of
the presence of an intruder within or attempting to enter
the protected area. Alarm systems may act as a deterrent
to the casual or opportunist thief but they will do little
or nothing to prevent a determined intrusion, and to
be effective they must provoke an early response from
the appropriate authority (in most cases the police). The
warning may be a local audible device, but normally the
alarm signal is transmitted by the telephone network to
a central station operated by a security company on a
24-hour basis.

The

alarm and telephone

a
comprehensive range of facilities for the transmission and
receipt of alarm signals. The choice of signaling system
will be determined by the security risk.

companies provide

A number of alarm systems suffer from repeated false
alarms. This may be due to the poor design and selection
of detectors, inadequate standards of installation or pre-
ventative maintenance, and faulty operation of the system
by key holders. Recurrent false calls will quickly discredit
any system and may result in the withdrawal of police
response to any alarm activation.

While alarm systems may be complex, false alarms
can be minimized by the careful choice of installer, who
should:

1. Be on the current List of Approved Installers main-
tained by the National Approval Council of Security
Systems (NACOSS);

2. Be acceptable to the local police and appear on their

list of recognized companies;

3. Install and maintain the system in full conformity with
BS 4747 or, where the security risk is high, BS 7042.

14.21 Closed-circuit television (CCTV)
CCTV can make an important contribution to the secu-
rity of a site, but it should be regarded as complement-
ing and not replacing other security measures. Ideally,
it should form part of an integrated system. In particu-
lar, CCTV allows greater ﬂexibility in the deployment
of security personnel by providing the facility whereby a
single observer can remotely monitor several areas from
one location. CCTV systems are not cheap, and need to
be carefully designed by specialist CCTV engineers who
will ensure that the necessary standard of reliability is
obtained by proper planning and speciﬁcation of the type,
quality and installation of the equipment.

14.22 Access control
Although many access-control arrangements are designed
to control access and egress during business hours, they
are an essential part of a total security program. Leav-
ing aside any arrangements previously discussed, access
control is usually achieved by use of:

Employer’s liability 14/193

14.22.2 Electronically operated
access/egress systems

These systems are used in conjunction with some form of
physical barrier (e.g. door, gate, turnstile) and comprise:

1. Recognition equipment such as a token or card and

appropriate reader;

2. Electrically activated release hardware; and
3. In some systems, central computerized control and

monitoring equipment.

The choice of access-control technology depends upon
the level of security to be achieved, number of users
and trafﬁc at peak periods, etc. Proper design of the sys-
tem is critical to its performance (and user acceptance),
and reliability and expert advice should be obtained from
equipment manufacturers and system installers.

14.23 Liability and liability insurance
One of the basic requirements of society is to conduct
ourselves so that we do not injure other people or damage
their property. A business or any other undertaking is
equally subject to this requirement.

For many years, the social and legal climates have
had a growing involvement in requiring and encourag-
ing business undertakings to protect the welfare of per-
sons and their property. As a result, a body of common
law has developed and Acts of Parliament have been
passed which impose a duty of care upon any business
undertaking to conduct its activities responsibly in order
to avoid causing injury to persons, or damage to their
property.

A breach of duty under either common law or statute
that causes injury or damage may result in those respon-
sible having a legal liability to pay compensation (termed
damages) to the aggrieved party.

14.24 Employer’s liability
The liability of an employer to his or her employees in
respect of injury arising out of or in the course of their
employment usually falls for consideration under either
common law (the law of tort) or statute.

1. Security staff; or
2. Electronically operated entry/exit systems or a combi-

nation of both.

14.24.1 Tort

14.22.1 Security staff

The employment of full-time security staff either in-house
personnel or contracted out to a professional guarding
company (preferably one that is a member of the British
Security Industry Association (BSIA) Manned Services
Inspectorate) can make a signiﬁcant contribution to over-
all security. Consideration should be given to the range
of duties to be performed by security staff, their location,
and how they will interface with other security measures
and external agencies.

The common law liability of an employer to an employee
can arise, inter alia, as follows:

1. Acts of personal negligence;
2. Failure to exercise reasonable care in the selection of

competent servants (including contractors);

3. Failure to take reasonable care that the place of work

is safe;

4. Failure to take reasonable care to provide safe machin-
ery, plant and appliances and to maintain them in a
proper condition;

5. Failure to provide a safe system of working.

14/194 Insurance: Buildings and Risks

14.24.2 Breach of statutory duty

There is a wide range of legislation laying down standards
of safety and health. In the UK, the most notable and
wide ranging are the Factories Act 1961, the Health and
Safety at Work Act, 1974 and the Control of Substances
Hazardous to Health Act 1988, breach of any of which
can result in liability to civil and/or criminal action against
the offenders.

14.25 Third-party liability
Liabilities to third parties may arise from breach of con-
tract or tort.

14.25.1 Breach of contract

A breach of contract is a violation of a right created by
an agreement or promise, and an action for damages or
other recompense can normally only be brought by the
aggrieved party against the other party or parties to the
agreement.

14.25.2 Tort

Tort (which is part of common law but may be modi-
ﬁed by statute) always implies breach of duty. This may
take various forms, the most common applicable to the
engineering and production ﬁelds being as follows.

Negligence

This has been deﬁned as ‘the failure to do something a
reasonable person would do, or to do something a reason-
able person would not do’. For an action in liability to
succeed in negligence the following conditions must be
satisﬁed:

1. The defendant must have owed a duty of care to the

2. There was a breach of that duty;
3. The plaintiff sustained injury or damage as a result of

plaintiff;

that breach.

Nuisance

This has been deﬁned as ‘a wrong done to a man by unlaw-
fully disturbing him in the enjoyment of his property or
in the exercise of a common right’. Examples of this are
the emission of toxic fumes from a factory that affect
occupiers of surrounding property or of toxic efﬂuents
affecting adjacent watercourses.

14.26 Liability insurance
As previously stated, a business can be held legally liable
to pay compensation (damages) for injury or damage
caused by its activities, and a successful action against it
may result in large ﬁnancial demands upon the business.
Liability insurance ensures that, subject to satisfactory
compliance with speciﬁed conditions and procedures by
the insured, funds are available for a business if it is held

legally liable to pay damages (and associated legal costs)
which are awarded following injury to persons or damage
to property.

There is a legal requirement upon most employers
to have in force employer’s liability insurance covering
injury to their employees. Public liability insurance,
while not compulsory, is strongly recommended, both in
terms of third-party liability (arising from the effects of
corporate activities) and product liability (arising from the
effects of corporate products.

14.27 The cover provided by
liability insurance
The following provides a general summary of the cover
provided by standard liability insurance policies.

14.27.1 Employer’s liability
Indemnity for an employers’ legal liability to his employ-
ees against damages awarded for injury or disease happen-
ing during the period of insurance and arising out of and
during the course of their employment, excluding radioac-
tive contamination. An employee is deﬁned as any person
under a contract of service or apprenticeship with the
insured, or any person supplied to, or hired to or borrowed
by the insured (includes labor-only sub-contractors).

Cover normally applies to employees in the UK, North-
ern Ireland, the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands or
while persons normally resident in those territories are
temporarily engaged in the business outside of these ter-
ritories. Indemnity is unlimited in amount.

14.27.2 Public liability (third party)
Indemnity against legal liability to third parties against
damages awarded for:

1. Injury or disease;
2. Loss of or damage to property or personal effects of

visitors or employees

happening in connection with the business and during the
period of the insurance. Limited indemnity is awarded for
ﬁnancial losses not ﬂowing from injury or damage but
which result from escape or discharge of substances from
the insured’s premises or from stoppage of or interference
with pedestrian, vehicular, rail, air or waterborne trafﬁc.
Wide contractual liability cover excludes only

1. Liquidated damages, ﬁnes or penalties;
2. Injury or damage caused by products;
3. Financial loss

arising solely because of a contract.

Indemnity is awarded in respect of injury to third parties
and damage to property arising out of or in connection
with the exercise of professional engineering skill. The
following are excluded:

1. Radioactive contamination;
2. War and kindred risks;

3. Liability arising solely because of a contract for:

(a) Liquidated damages, ﬁnes or penalties;
(b) Financial loss;

4. Cost of rectifying defective work;
5. Liability arising out of the use of or caused by craft or

vehicles;

6. Deliberate acts or omissions;
7. Principal’s professional risk.

Worldwide indemnity is normally provided for injury or
damage resulting from:

1. Negligent acts in the UK, Northern Ireland, the Isle of

Man or the Channel Islands;

2. Temporary work undertaken abroad.

The limit of indemnity is selected at the time of insur-
ance or renewal thereof by the management of the insured.
It applies to any claim or number of claims arising out of
any one cause, and is unlimited in total in the period of
insurance.

14.27.3 Public liability (products)

Products mean goods (including containers and packag-
ing) not in the custody or control of the insured, sold or
supplied by the insured in connection with the business.
The cover provides indemnity against legal liability for
injury or damage happening during the period of insur-
ance and caused by products. This cover also applies in
respect of injury or design arising from the design of or
formula for products.

Exceptions to the cover are as for public liability (third

party) policies plus:

1. Financial loss caused by products;
2. Aircraft products.

It should be noted that very few standard product lia-
bility policies provide cover for liability for the costs of
repairing or replacing defective products or those, which
fail to perform as intended, nor for the costs of any nec-
essary product recall. The insurer’s liability in any one
period of insurance for injury or damage caused by prod-
ucts during that period shall not exceed the selected limit
of indemnity.

It cannot be sufﬁciently emphasized that individual lia-
bility policies do differ in detail from the general standard
policy, and reference to the policy in force in any individ-
ual set of circumstances is most strongly recommended.

14.28 Points to be considered
As stated in previous sections of this chapter, there exists
at all times a statutory and common law duty on all
employers (which includes all engineers) to maintain a
safe working environment for all their employees and
the public at large. Additionally, it is contractual obli-
gation on the insured under liability insurance policies to
maintain the best reasonable standards of working proce-
dures, equipment and the environment at all times. Con-
sequently, there is a duty on all engineers to conduct their

Employee safety and employer’s liability 14/195

professional duties at all times in a manner which does
not downgrade the safe environment of their sphere of
inﬂuence.

While not exhaustive, the following points for con-
sideration will go far towards optimizing the control of
safety and liability standards within the engineer’s sphere
of inﬂuence.

14.29 Employee safety and
employer’s liability
14.29.1 Premises/buildings
Design

Suitability for purpose/occupation?
Best ‘state of the art’ design?

Construction

Suitability for identiﬁed operating conditions?
Adequate strength of roofs and control of access
thereto?
No built-in accident traps?

Maintenance program

Schedule of maintenance relevant to the needs for the
operation?

Floors, aisles, stairs and ﬂoor openings

Evenness of ﬂoor surfaces?
Adequate provision and standards for handrails, toe-
boards and gates?
Adequate stairway capacity for number of persons
likely to use them at one time?

Lighting, ventilation and heating

Adequate for identiﬁed conditions?
Compliance with Factories Act requirements?

Roadways, pavements, yards, car parks and open
areas

Proper maintenance of surfaces?
Separation of pedestrian trafﬁc from vehicular trafﬁc
(as far as possible)?
Speed limits (speed ramps, etc.)?
Adequacy of access?
Crane headroom (overhead wires), etc.?

14.29.2 Machinery and plant
Type and design

Adequate engineering design for the duty intended?
Hazard studies (‘What if?’) carried out?

14/196 Insurance: Buildings and Risks

Power sources and transmissions

Operating procedures

Electrically safe (if applicable)?
Guarded (especially on rotating parts)?

Guarding/fencing

Compliance in all reports with Factories Act require-
ments?
No unguarded access to moving parts?
Safe provisions for maintenance, etc.?
Interlocking of guards with power supply?

Maintenance/adjustment procedures

Scheduled maintenance program?
Appointment of machinery attendants?
Isolation procedures laid down?
Adequate oil containment?

Permit to work systems

Adequate speciﬁcation for identiﬁed needs?
Responsibilities allocated for issue, receipt, etc. of
‘permits to work’?

Access, scaffolds, ladders

Correct maintenance schedules and procedures?
Designated certiﬁcation and test/inspection proce-
dures?

14.29.3 Tools

Power tools

Correct speciﬁcation/design for duty envisaged?
Adequate inspection/maintenance procedures?
Regular insulation testing?
Safe power supplies?
Power safety cut-out provisions?
Safe storage when not in use?

Hand tools

Correct speciﬁcation of duty?
Adequate maintenance?
Safe storage when not in use?

14.29.4 Electrical installations
Type and design

Correct speciﬁcation for duty envisaged?
Suitability for hazardous environment (if required)?

Adequacy of ‘lock-off’/isolation systems?
Conformity with the Electrical Regulations?
‘Permit to work’ systems for maintenance?

Overhead power lines

Maintenance of adequate clearance with satisfactory
signing of hazard?

Control of access

Adequate access control to areas of concentration of
electrical equipment?

14.29.5 Pressure equipment
Type and design

Adequately engineered for duty envisaged?
Safe working practices clearly deployed and adhered
to?
Possible abnormal ﬂuctuations in pressure identiﬁed
and allowed for in design?
Adequate design for safe relief of overpressure?

Inspection/maintenance

Inspection schedule in force in conformity with Pres-
sure Vessel Regulations?

Gas cylinders

Correct storage facilities for full/empty cylinders?
Segregation of combustible from oxidizing gases?
Compliance with HFL (highly ﬂammable liquids) Reg-
ulations where applicable?

14.29.6 Materials handling and storage
Cables, ropes, chains and slings

SWL (safe working load) marked thereon strictly
adhered to?
Certiﬁcation and retest procedures speciﬁed and imple-
mented?
Adequate and suitable storage facilities?

Lifts and hoists

Statutory inspection schedule in force?
Safe barriers/chains, etc. on teagle openings?
Runway beams tested and SWL displayed?

Cranes

SWL schedule (including operating radius variations)
displayed and adhered to?
Overload devices ﬁtted?

Maintenance

Conveyors

Schedule of maintenance and maintenance procedures
speciﬁed?
Earth testing schedules?

Adequate guarding (if powered)?
Adequate tripwires/buttons?
‘Hand-traps’ eliminated

Power/hand trucks

Correct speciﬁcation/design for duty?
Laid-down code of operation?
Full
and
operators?

correct

training/retraining/licensing

Manual lifting/handling

Training in safe techniques of lifting/handling?

Storage/piling of materials and goods

Employee safety and employer’s liability 14/197

14.29.9 Health hazards and their control
Dust and fumes

of

Optimum suppression of dust/fume at point of origin?
Enclosure of dust/fume producing processes?
Superior ventilation at point of dust/fume origin?
Priority to cleaning methods (vacuum, etc.)?
Provision of adequate respiratory equipment and
instructions on its correct use?
Correct (statutory) procedures for entry into enclosed
areas which may contain fumes?

Safe condition of pallets?
Observance of speciﬁed maximum stacking heights?
Safe conditions of stacks?

14.29.7 Hazardous materials

Flammable/explosive substances

Properties known and documented?
Compliance with Storage Regulations?
Quantities within license/regulation limits?
Tank vents safe and adequately sized?
Compatibility of materials in storage acceptable?

Toxic substances

Properties known and documented?
Compliance with storage regulations?
Quantities within license/regulation limits?
Compatibility with other materials in storage accept-
able?
Adequate personal protective equipment available for
handling and use of material speciﬁed?
Antidotes/emergency facilities available?

Corrosive materials

Properties known and documented?
Adequate emergency washing facilities available?

Disposal of hazardous waste

Regular removal?
Use of experienced/licensed removal contractors?
Conformity with Hazardous Waste Regulations?
Safe operation of site incinerators, settling lagoons,
etc.?
Adequate containment of hazardous spillage?

14.29.8 Hazardous processes

General

Hazard studies carried out
to identify normal and
abnormal hazards and circumstances leading to such
hazards?

Noise

Minimization at source?
Regular monitoring of noise levels?
Enclosure of excessive noise sources?
Provision of personnel ear protection and instructions
on its correct use?
Regular audiometry of employees at risk?

Skin disease (dermatitis)

Identiﬁcation of potential causes?
Adequate hygiene in use of dermatitic substances?
Provision of protective equipment, barrier creams, etc.
and instruction on their use?
Medical screening of employees at risk?

Carcinogenic materials

Identiﬁcation of potential causes of cancer in the work-
force?
Serious considerations of alternative materials?
Adequate containment of identiﬁed carcinogens?
Medical screening of employees at risk?

Radioactive materials and X-ray/ionizing
radiation equipment

Minimization of exposure time?
Identiﬁcation and maintenance of safe working dis-
tances between sources and employees?
Correct shielding of sources?
Adequate monitoring of exposure (ﬁlm badges,
dosimeters, etc.)?
Warning notices?

14.29.10 Personal protective equipment
Goggles/face screens, gloves/protective clothing,
ear protection, barrier creams

Risks identiﬁed and the appropriate level of protective
equipment determined?
Best available equipment speciﬁed for identiﬁed risks
with instructions on correct use?
Effects of use of safety equipment assessed apposite
possible creation of additional hazard (e.g.
loss of
ability to hear emergency signals while wearing ear
protection)?

14/198 Insurance: Buildings and Risks

14.30 Safety of the public and public
liability (third party)
In general, all points already listed under employer’s lia-
bility apply equally in public liability (third party) situa-
tions. Additionally, the following should be considered.

14.30.1 Pollution

Solid wastes

Safe means of disposal, both on-site and at the disposal
site, dump, etc. (long- and short-term effects)?
Safe and full incineration (if employed) with safe and
full treatment of off-gases?
Correct pre-treatment of waste before disposal (if need
identiﬁed)?

Liquid efﬂuents

Correct design to optimize discharges?
Containment of spillages?
Discharges within consent levels?
Adequate efﬂuent treatment plant (if need identiﬁed)?
Adequate monitoring of efﬂuent streams with relevant
recording?

14.30.2 Visitors
Contractors

Adequate advice/training on-site, hazard site rules,
etc.?
Competence assessed?
Liaison personnel appointed?

Invitees

Potential risks to visitors assessed?
Adequate advice on alarm systems, etc.?
System of escorts on-site implemented?

Trespassers

Optimization of site perimeter security and its mainte-
nance in satisfactory condition?
Security patrols off-site?
Speciﬁed policy and means of dealing with trespassers
found on premises?

14.30.3 Of-site work (‘work away’)

General

Gaseous emissions

Correct design to optimize discharge within require-
ments of consent, Regulations, etc.?
Adequate monitoring of emission quality with relevant
recording?

Adequate and competent supervision?
Adequate control of all operations involving the appli-
cation of heat?
Adequate controls of any operations (e.g. excavation)
that may cause damage to or weaken third-party
property?

Noise

Adequate provision for limitation of noise levels (by
distance or by reduction at source) at site boundary
and beyond?

15

15/199

Electricity
Generation

I G Crow and K Shippen
Davy McKee (Stockton) Ltd and ABB Power Ltd

Contents

15.1 Introduction
15.2 Generation of electrical power

15/201

15/201

15.2.1 Diesels 15/201
15.2.2 Gas turbines
15/202
15.2.3 Thermal power plant
15.2.4 Gas turbines in combined cycle

15/204

15/205

15.3 Combined heat and power (CHP)

15/208

15.3.1 Steam turbines for CHP 15/208
15.3.2 Diesels and gas turbines in combined heat and

power

15/209

15.4 Factors inﬂuencing choice

15/210

15.4.1 Available fuels 15/210
15.4.2 Electrical load proﬁle
15.4.3 Heat load
15.4.4 Power station auxiliary systems and services

15/212

15/212

15/212

15.4.5 Site conditions
15.4.6 Plant availability and maintenance
15.4.7 Environmental aspects 15/215
15.4.8 Generated voltages

15/215

15/214

15/215

15.5 The selection

15/215
15/215
15.5.1 Electrical power
15.5.2 Combined heat and power
15.5.3 Economic considerations

15/216

15/219

15.6 Plant and installation

15/220

15.6.1 Diesel power plants
15.6.2 Gas turbine power plants
15.6.3 Steam turbogenerators
15.6.4 Generators 15/229

15/220

15/222

15/226

15.1 Introduction
Electricity is one of the key energy sources for industry
and commerce. It is normally provided by the electricity
supply authorities, being generated from very large fossil
fuelled or nuclear central power stations and distributed
throughout the country via high-voltage transmission sys-
tems. It can be fair to say that the electricity supply author-
ities play a very important part in meeting the demands
of the consumer efﬁciently, reliably and at an economic
cost. However, there will always be a role for the private
generation of electrical power, either to meet the needs
for security of supply or to provide the electricity more
economically. For the latter this is particularly the case for
the concept of combined heat and power (CHP), where
the local use of a heat demand can make private genera-
tion of electricity more competitive when compared with
purchase from the local grid.

This chapter aims to convey the basic technical princi-
ples involved in electricity generation for industrial and
commercial applications, with supporting technical data
giving examples of the performance and efﬁciency of var-
ious schemes. A general guide is provided on the factors
which have a major bearing on choice of an electricity-
generating scheme with further details of the plant, its
layout and descriptions of actual installations.

15.2 Generation of electrical power
Diesels, gas turbines and steam turbines are the more com-
monly used prime movers for the generation of electrical
power. Additionally, the steam turbine can be employed in
combination with either the diesel or gas turbine for com-
bined cycle operation. The following describes the basic
operation of each of these prime movers in relation to its
associated power-generating scheme and reviews the more
signiﬁcant factors affecting performance and efﬁciency.
Further information on the actual plant and installation is
given later in Section 15.6.

15.2.1 Diesels

Diesels are used in many industrial applications (for
example,
for base-load generation in mines, cement
plants and in remote regions of the world). In addition,
they are often utilized to provide standby power for
hospitals, telecommunications, banks, computer centers
and ofﬁce complexes that must have full independent
power capability. The diesel can be started rapidly,
making it ideal for peak lopping duties to meet maximum
load demands, or for emergency use in cases of power
supply interruptions.

Manufacturers offer a very wide range of diesel engines,
all of which fall into categories depending upon crankshaft
speed. The three categories are as follows:

Low speed: below 400 revolutions per minute (RPM)
Medium speed: 400–1000 RPM
High speed: above 1000 RPM

The speed of a diesel engine dictates its cost in relation
to output. The choice is an economic consideration, taking

Generation of electrical power 15/201

into account the application of the engine and needs for
reliability and security of supply.

The diesel has a good efﬁciency of approximately 40
per cent with a ﬂat fuel consumption curve over its oper-
ating range. With a competitive capital cost this gives the
diesel a distinct advantage over its competitors.

The compression ignition cycle

The diesel is an internal combustion reciprocating engine
which operates in the compression ignition cycle. The
familiar reciprocating mechanism consists of a number of
pistons, each running in a gas-tight cylinder with con-
necting rod and crankshaft. The connecting rods are set
at angular positions so that they contribute their power
stroke in a regular sequence.

In the compression ignition cycle, the air is compressed
and the fuel is injected into the compressed air at a tem-
perature sufﬁciently high to spontaneously ignite the fuel.
The heat released is converted to mechanical work by
expansion within each cylinder and, by means of the
reciprocating motion of the piston, is converted to rotary
motion at the crankshaft.

There are two basic cycles, the two-stroke and four-
stroke, each of which is illustrated in Figures 15.1 and
15.2 with their appropriate indicator diagrams. The two-
stroke engine is mechanically simpliﬁed by the elimina-
tion of the mechanically operated valves. For the same
rotational speed, the two-stroke engine has twice the num-
ber of working strokes. This does not, however, give twice
the power. In the down-stroke of the two-stroke cycle
both the inlet and exhaust ports are cleared, which allows
some mixing of fuel air charge and exhaust gases, result-
ing in less thrust. For similar reasons, this also gives the
two-stroke engine slightly higher fuel consumption.

The overall efﬁciency, b of a reciprocating engine is
the product of the thermal efﬁciency, i and its mechanical
efﬁciency m. Thus:
b D i ð m
An engine of good mechanical design has a mechan-
ical efﬁciency of around 80–90 per cent at full load.

2

3

Air

Products

Fuel

e
r
u
s
s
e
r
P

6

4

5

1

Volume

6-1 Induction stroke
1-2 Compression stroke
2-5 Combustion and expansion stroke
5-6 Exhaust stroke

Figure 15.1 Four-stroke cycle for an internal combustion engine

15/202 Electricity Generation

3

4

e
r
u
s
s
e
r
P

Out

In

1

5

6

2

Fuel

Scavenge

air

Volume

1-3 Induction and compression stroke
3-1 Combustion, expansion and exhaust stroke

Figure 15.2 Two-stroke cycle for an internal combustion engine

The overall efﬁciency of a compression ignition engine
depends on the type, but ranges from 30 to 40 per cent.
One of the main reasons for the good performance of
the diesel, compared with alternative machines, is due to
the fact that the design is not restricted by metallurgical
considerations which, for instance, limits the higher gas
temperature in the gas turbine. This is because the cylin-
der wall is only subject to intermittent peak temperature
due to combustion and its average temperature is much
lower than the mean gas temperature. Therefore, the cyclic
temperature can be maximized.

Turbocharging

Supercharging the inlet air by use of exhaust gas turbo-
charging raises the volumetric efﬁciency above that
which can be obtained from normal aspiration. This
gives increased output without change to the speed or
capacity of the machine. The full potential of the increase
in air density is affected by the use of intercooling
placed downstream of the turbocharger. Naturally, the
use of turbocharging also improves performance at high
altitudes.

Site conditions

The site conditions can have signiﬁcant effect on the
output of the diesel engine. For example, British Stan-
dards 5514: 1987 Part I and similar Society of Automotive
Engineers (SAE) sets out the de-rating method for inter-
nal combustion engines and establishes a datum level from
which engine manufacturers relate their de-rating factors.
Most engine manufacturers will give certain percentage
reduction in power output for a certain increase in tem-
perature and altitude above datum level.

One of the most important factors is the intercooler
cooling water, which has a profound effect on air manifold
temperature. Use of a closed-cycle air-cooling system will
increase the cooling water temperature with de-rating of
output. In addition, the radiators can add signiﬁcantly to
the parasitic load. The altitude above sea level at which
the engine will be located also affects the output due to

1.0

0.9

0.8

r
o
t
c
a
f
 
n
o
i
t
c
e
r
r
o
C

200

400

800

600
Altitude m

1000

1200

Figure 15.3 Correction to diesel power output for changes in ambi-
ent conditions

lower air density. Figure 15.3 illustrates the effect upon
power output for changes in ambient conditions.

Oil consumption

One of the disadvantages of the diesel engine is its high
lubricating oil consumption which, typically for a 3.6 MW
engine, will be 0.0351/kWh. Added to this quantity must
be the oil changes at routine service intervals.

15.2.2 Gas turbines

The role of the gas turbine is more familiar to many of
us in the aircraft ﬁeld. However, since Sir Frank Whit-
tle invented the jet engine in the early pioneering years
before the Second World War there has been rapid devel-
opment in both output and efﬁciency of these machines,
and today the gas turbine is a popular choice for electricity
generation.

The gas turbine is widely used by electrical supply
authorities for peak lopping and standby generation. Addi-
tionally, it is often employed for base-load operation when
the fuel costs are low.

The major disadvantage of the gas turbine is its low
efﬁciency when compared with other systems. However,
the gas turbine is compact, is subject to short delivery
and erection period, has a competitive capital cost, and
has virtually no requirement for cooling water. It can be
started rapidly on fully automatic control.

Open-cycle operation

The basic gas turbine generates in the open-cycle mode
and Figure 15.4 illustrates this. Air is drawn into a com-
pressor and after compression passes into a combustion
chamber. At this stage, energy is supplied to the combus-
tion chamber by injecting fuel, and the resultant hot gases
expand through the turbine. The turbine directly drives the

Fuel

Combustion

chamber

2

3

Compressor

Turbine

Generator

1

Air inlet

4

Exhaust

Figure 15.4 Basic gas turbine in open-cycle mode

P2

P1

3

4′

4

e
r
u

t

a
r
e
p
m
e
T

2 2′

1

Entropy

Figure 15.5 The gas turbine, or Brayton Cycle

compressor with remaining useful work, which drives a
generator for electricity generation.

Figure 15.5 shows the ideal open cycle for the gas tur-
bine that is based on the Brayton Cycle. By assuming that
the chemical energy released on combustion is equivalent
to a transfer of heat at constant pressure to a working ﬂuid
of constant speciﬁc heat, this simpliﬁed approach allows
the actual process to be compared with the ideal, and is
represented in Figure 15.5 by a broken line. The processes
for compression 1–20 and expansion 3–40 are irreversible
adiabatic and differ, as shown from the ideal isentropic
processes between the same pressures P1 and P2:
Compressor work input D Cp(cid:5)T0
2 (cid:4) T1(cid:7)
Combustion heat input D Cp(cid:5)T3 (cid:4) T0
2(cid:7)
Turbine work output D Cp(cid:5)T3 (cid:4) T0
4(cid:7)

Generation of electrical power 15/203

Therefore
Net work output D Cp(cid:5)T3 (cid:4) T0
Thermal efﬁciency D Net work out
Heat supplied
D Cp(cid:5)T3 (cid:4) T0

4(cid:7) (cid:4) Cp(cid:5)T0

2 (cid:4) T1(cid:7)

4(cid:7) (cid:4) Cp(cid:5)T0
Cp(cid:5)T3 (cid:4) T0
2(cid:7)

2 (cid:4) T1(cid:7)

By introducing isentropic efﬁciencies of the turbine n1

and compressor nc the turbine work output is given as:
Net work output D Cp

nt(cid:4)T1(cid:5)k(cid:4)1(cid:7)nc

T3

(cid:3)

(cid:1)

(cid:2)

(cid:4)

1 (cid:4) 1
k

(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:11)(cid:4)1(cid:7)/(cid:11)

(cid:2)

where
k D

P2
P1

The efﬁciency of the gas turbine depends on the isen-
tropic efﬁciencies of the compressor and turbine, but in
practice, these cannot be improved substantially, as this
depends on blade design and manufacture. However, the
major factor affecting both efﬁciency and output of a
given machine is the turbine inlet (or combustion) temper-
ature, and this is dictated by metallurgical considerations.
The turbine blades are under high mechanical stress, and
therefore the temperature must be kept to a minimum,
taking into account the design life of the machine. The
introduction of blade cooling does allow use of higher
turbine inlet temperatures.

Factors affecting performance

1. Efﬁciency Typical performance ﬁgures for gas tur-
bines ranging in size from 3.7 MW to 25 MW are given
in Table 15.1. These demonstrate that the open-cycle
operating efﬁciency is in the region of 25–35 per cent,
depending on output. When compared with similar
rated diesel or thermal plant this efﬁciency can be
considered low. It can be seen from Table 15.1 that
this low efﬁciency is attributed to the relatively large
amount of high-grade heat in the exhaust gas that is
discharged to atmosphere at temperatures in the order
of 400–500°C.

2. Output One of the major factors affecting gas tur-
bine output is the ambient air temperature. Increasing
the air temperature results in a rapid fall in the gas
turbine output. Figure 15.6 shows a typical correction
to power output curve for changes in ambient temper-
ature. Additionally, although to a lesser degree, output
can be affected by inlet and outlet gas system pressure

Table 15.1 Typical performance data for industrial gas turbines

Engine

RSTN TB 5000

ABB STAL MARS

RB 211/COOPR

Output, kW based on ISO Ratings
Efﬁciency (%) based on NCV of fuel
Exhaust gas temp. (°C)
Exhaust gas ﬂow (kg/s)

3675

24.6
492
20.4

10 000
32
491
39.1

24 925

34.0
465
90.9

15/204 Electricity Generation

1.2

1.1

1.0

0.9

0.8

r
o
t
c
a
f
 
n
o
i
t
c
e
r
r
o
C

0.7

−10

Power
output

0

30

40

10

20

Compressor inlet air temperature °C

Figure 15.6 Correction to gas turbine power output for changes in
ambient temperature

40

30

20

10

l

e
u

f
 
f

 

.

 

 

.

o
V
C
N
n
o
d
e
s
a
b
%
 
y
c
n
e
c
i
f
f

 

such as propane. Automatic change-over facilities can be
incorporated.

15.2.3 Thermal power plant

Thermal power plant is more commonly associated with
very large central power stations. The capital cost for ther-
mal power plant, in terms of cost per installed kilowatt
of electrical generating capacity, rises sharply for outputs
of less than some 15 MW. It is for this reason that ther-
mal power plant is not usually considered for industrial
applications unless it is the combined cycle or combined
heat and power modes. However, for cases where the fuel
is of very low cost (for example, a waste product from
a process such as wood waste), then the thermal power
plant, depending on output, can offer an excellent choice,
as its higher initial capital cost can be offset against lower
running costs. This section introduces the thermal power
cycle for electrical generation only.

Condensing steam cycle

The condensing steam cycle is shown diagrammatically in
Figure 15.8. The fuel is ﬁred in a boiler that converts the
heat released from combustion to steam at high pressure
and temperature. This steam is then expanded through a
turbine for generation of electrical power.

Exhaust steam from the turbine is condensed in a heat
exchanger and then returned via the feed pumps to the
boiler. The associated Rankine Cycle is illustrated in
Figure 15.9.

The efﬁciency of the cycle, ignoring work done by
the boiler feed pumps, is given by change in enthalpy
as follows:
Efﬁciency D (cid:5)h1 (cid:4) h2(cid:7)
(cid:5)h1 (cid:4) h3(cid:7)

E

20

40

60

80

Percentage power output

100

Figure 15.7 Approximate relationship showing variation of gas
turbine efﬁciency for changes in load

losses, which would be due to inlet ﬁlters and inlet
and outlet ductwork and silencers. This fact must be
borne in mind to ensure that in development of layout
the ductwork design maintains the gas pressure losses
within limits set down by the manufacturer.

3. Part load As the gas turbine operates with a ﬁxed
inlet air volume, its efﬁciency at part load deteriorates
signiﬁcantly. Figure 15.7 shows a typical relationship
for variation in gas turbine efﬁciency for changes of
load.

Fuels

Gas turbines are capable of burning a wide variety of
fuels, both gaseous and liquid. Typical liquid fuels range
from kerosene and diesel to light crudes. They are also
capable of running on natural gas and industrial gases

and h1 to h2 represents the ideal isentropic expansion
process in the turbine. However, in practice, because of
irreversibility, this is less than unity.

This efﬁciency can be improved by the use of a feed
heating cycle whereby bled steam can be taken from the
turbine after certain stages of expansion and then used
to raise the feedwater temperature via use of feed heat
exchangers. By such means the feedwater temperature,

Superheater

1

Boiler

Heat
input

4

Feed pumps

3

Turbine

Generator

2

In
Out

Cooling
water

Condenser

Figure 15.8 The condensing steam cycle

Pressure
Biler

1

e r
e

n

s

r

u

s

e

s

d
e

n
C o
P r
2′

2

e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
T

4

3

Entropy

Figure 15.9 The Rankine Cycle with superheat

before entry to the boiler, is increased, thereby increasing
the efﬁciency as transfer of heat to the working ﬂuid
condenses the bled system within the cycle, so reducing
condenser heat rejection.

Large power stations use complex feed heating systems
before the boiler feed pumps (LP) and after the boiler feed
pumps (HP), which can give high overall thermal efﬁcien-
cies of 39 per cent. However, for the smaller machine, it
becomes uneconomic to consider multiple bleeds from the
turbine, and the ﬁnal choice is dictated by the extra cost
for the additional complexity against lower running costs
due to increased efﬁciency. As a minimum, a contact type
de-aerator is often employed which would extract a small
bleed of around 2–3 bar from the turbine.

Factors affecting performance

Table 15.2 gives performance data for typical industrial
type schemes using thermal power plant in a condensing
steam cycle. These do not operate strictly in the sim-
ple cycle mode as varying degrees of feed heating are
employed. However, overall they convey the basic cycle
conditions that the industrial user would encounter and
give efﬁciencies that can be expected.

For the condensing steam cycle, the heat rejected by
the condenser is the total energy system loss and is sig-
niﬁcant with, in some cases, overall cycle efﬁciencies
of only 25 per cent. The higher the condenser vacuum,
the lower is the saturation temperature of the condens-
ing steam in the condenser. Heat is rejected, so that the
higher the vacuum, the lower is the temperature of heat

Table 15.2 Performance of industrial steam-generating plant

Steam

conditions

Generator
output
Overall

efﬁciency

17 bar/260°C

30 bar/450°C

62 bar/510°C

2000 kW

5000 kW

10 000 kW

18.1%

21.8%

26.3%

Generation of electrical power 15/205

rejection and consequently the greater is the cycle efﬁ-
ciency at this temperature. The cooling water temperature
and economic size of condenser set the limit to the con-
densing temperature.

Closed-cycle cooling water systems employing cooling
towers give higher temperatures than direct open-cycle
cooling from river, lakes or other large water sources.

Increasing superheated steam temperature has the direct
result of increased efﬁciency. For example, an increase in
steam temperature of 55°C can give around 4 per cent
increase in efﬁciency. However, in practice the tempera-
ture is limited by metallurgical consideration with upper
limits of around 540°C. This temperature can also be inﬂu-
enced by the boiler design and the fuel used.

Steam inlet pressure also has an effect on efﬁciency,
although to a lesser extent. However, the cycle pressure
is more often dictated by design limitations of the boiler
for the application as well as the output.

Fuels

The thermal power plant uses a ﬁred boiler for conversion
of fuel to heat. It can be said that there is a design of ﬁred
boiler to suit almost all types of fuels, including wastes
and vegetable and industrial byproducts. Generally, for
oils and gases these can be more readily converted to
power in diesels or gas turbines and would not be con-
sidered for thermal power plant, unless the station was of
signiﬁcant size.

15.2.4 Gas turbines in combined cycle

As discussed in Section 15.2.2, the gas turbine’s main
disadvantage is its low efﬁciency of around 25–35 per
cent in open cycle. However, this can be signiﬁcantly
improved by the use of a heat-recovery boiler that con-
verts a good proportion of the otherwise waste heat in the
turbine exhaust gases to high-pressure superheated steam,
which, in turn, drives a conventional steam turbogenerator
for supplementary electrical power. This can increase the
overall efﬁciency to 50 per cent for no further heat input
as fuel.

The combination of the Brayton (gas turbine) and Rank-
ine (steam) cycle is known as the combined cycle. A
typical gas turbine in combined cycle is shown diagram-
matically in Figure 15.10.

Types of combined cycle

1. Fully ﬁred cycle Gas turbine exhaust contains app-
roximately 15–16 per cent oxygen by weight, and this
can be utilized to support the combustion of additional
fuel, thereby enhancing the steam-raising potential and
consequently the steam turbine output. The higher gas
temperatures impose no limitations on either steam
pressure or temperature, commensurate with current
ﬁred boiler/steam turbine practice. The heat content of
the exhaust gas can potentially be increased approxi-
mately ﬁvefold. Consequently, the steam turbine out-
put can be three to four times that of the gas turbine.
Combustion efﬁciency is high due to the degree of

15/206 Electricity Generation

Fuel in

Combustion chamber

Compressor

Turbine

Generator

Air inlet

Boiler

Generator

Steam
turbine

Exhaust

Condenser

Figure 15.10 The gas turbine in combined cycle

Feed pumps

In

cooling
water
out

Initial gas
Temperature

Final
steam
temperature

Pinch point

Final gas
temperature

Initial feedwater
temperature

Heat recovered

Figure 15.11 Heat-recovery diagram showing the pinch point

preheat in the gas turbine exhaust, and the resultant
cycle efﬁciency is much higher than that of conven-
tional steam plant.

2. Supplementary ﬁred cycle The recovery of heat from
gas turbine exhaust by the generation of steam has, as
its basic limiting factor, the approach temperature at
the pinch point (see Figure 15.11). The principal pinch
point occurs at the cold end of the evaporator and
consequently the combination of the steam-generating
pressure and the magnitude of the approach determine
the amount of steam which can actually be generated
for a given gas turbine. In single-pressure systems, the
only heat which can be recovered below the evapora-
tor pinch point is to the feedwater, and this, in turn,
now determines the ﬁnal stack temperature. If, how-
ever, a small amount of fuel is used to supplement the
gas turbine exhaust heat, then while the pinch point

occurs at the same gas temperature level, the evap-
oration is increased and hence the mount of preheat
required by the feedwater, resulting in a lower stack
temperature. For this cycle, the gas/steam power ratio
is approximately 1–1.3:1.

requirement,

larger physical size,

3. Unﬁred cycle This cycle is very similar to the supple-
mentary-ﬁred case except there is no added fuel heat
input. The approach temperature and pinch point are
even more critical, and tend to reduce steam pressures
somewhat. Similarly, the gas turbine exhaust tempera-
ture imposes further limits on ﬁnal steam temperature.
4. General The fully ﬁred cycle has been virtually
superseded by the unﬁred cycle, due to the former’s
lack of potential for increased efﬁciency, large cooling
water
increased
capital cost and construction time. Also, because of
the higher temperatures it is much less ﬂexible in
its operating capability. The supplementary-ﬁred cycle
has many of the advantages of the unﬁred cycle,
and it can be argued that it is the most ﬂexible in
its operating capabilities. However, the controls are
most complicated due to the afterburners and the
need to maintain the steam conditions over the whole
operating range. The unﬁred cycle is the simplest in
operational terms, the steam cycle simply following
the gas turbine, and consequently is highly ﬂexible
in operation, having the ability to operate on sliding
pressure at low loads. This cycle also has the greatest
potential for increased efﬁciency, albeit for higher
capital cost but without the need for extra fuel costs.

Single or dual pressure

There are two main pressure cycles applicable to com-
bined cycle scheme: single or dual pressure:

1. Single pressure A combined cycle scheme with sin-
gle pressure is shown in Figure 15.12. The waste heat
recovery boiler is made up from preheater, economizer,
evaporator and superheater sections giving single high-
pressure steam output. The limitations imposed by the
approach temperature at the pinch point, as illustrated
earlier, determine the boiler heat recovery. Lowering
of the boiler pressure increases the potential for heat
recovery. However, the performance of the steam tur-
bine will deteriorate at lower pressures, and therefore
there is an optimum where maximum output can be
achieved. The optimum pressure can be calculated, but
is usually around 15 to bar-absolute.

2. Dual pressure For comparison, a combined cycle
scheme with dual pressure is shown in Figure 15.13.
In this case,
the waste heat recovery boiler also
incorporates a low-pressure steam generator, with
evaporator and superheater. The LP steam is fed to
the turbine at an intermediate stage. As the LP steam
boils at a lower temperature than the HP steam, there
exists two pinch points between the exhaust gas and the
saturated steam temperatures. The addition of the LP
circuit gives much higher combined cycle efﬁciencies
with typically 15 per cent more steam turbine output
than the single pressure for the same gas turbine.

Generation of electrical power 15/207

LP steam for deaerator

HP Steam

Turbine

Deaerator

Boiler
feed
pumps

Exhaust

HP
drum

Condenser

Cooling
water

r
e
t
a
e
h
e
r
P

i

r
e
s
m
o
n
o
c
E
Waste heat recovery boiler

r
o
t
a
r
o
p
a
v
E

r
e
t
a
e
h
r
e
p
u
S

Gas turbine

Exhaust

Extraction

pumps

Compressor

Turbine

Air in

Figure 15.12 The single-pressure cycle diagram for a combined-cycle installation

Fuel

LP steam

HP steam

Deaerator

HP turbine

LP turbine

LP
BFP

LP
drum

HP
BFP

HP
drum

i

r
e
s
m
o
n
o
c
E
P
H

 

t

r
o
a
r
o
p
a
v
E
P
L

 

r
e

t

a
e
h
r
e
p
u
S
P
L

 

t

r
o
a
r
o
p
a
v
E
P
H

 

Exhaust

r
e
t
a
e
h
e
r
P

t

r
e
a
e
h
r
e
p
u
S
P
H

 

Condenser

Cooling
water

Gas turbine

exhaust

Extraction

pumps

Waste heat recovery boiler

Compressor

Turbine

Air in

Figure 15.13 The dual-pressure cycle diagram for a combined-cycle installation

Fuel

15/208 Electricity Generation

15.3 Combined heat and power (CHP)
The preceding section reviewed the application of popu-
lar prime movers for the generation of electrical power
only. In the conversion of fuel energy to electricity it is
shown that heat is rejected, either in the exhaust of a
diesel or gas turbine or, alternatively, in the condenser
of a thermal power plant. It can be seen that by apply-
ing these machines to provide both heat and electric-
ity the total energy recovery can be much greater and
efﬁciency thereby improved. Combined heat and power
(CHP) schemes of this nature are well-established meth-
ods of producing both heat and power efﬁciently and
economically.

15.3.1 Steam turbines for CHP

Many industrial processes require electrical power and
heat. This heat is often provided from large quantities
of low-pressure steam. In this section, it is demonstrated
that a thermal power station gives up very large quantities
of heat to the cooling water in the condenser. For this
purpose, the steam pressure in the condenser is usually at
the lowest practical pressure (around 0.05 bar-absolute)
to achieve maximum work output from the turbine.

However, if the turbine back pressure is raised to above
atmospheric pressure so that the turbine exhaust steam can
be transported to the process heat load then the steam will
give up its latent heat usefully rather than reject this to
the condenser cooling water. Although the steam turbine
output is reduced, the overall efﬁciency is increased sig-
niﬁcantly as the generated steam is used to provide both
heat and electrical power.

The alternative (but equally appropriate) logic is that
a factory may use steam from low-pressure boilers. By
increasing the steam pressure and then expanding this
through a steam turbine to the desired process pressure
additional electrical power can be provided.

An example is shown in Figure 15.14. By raising steam
at high pressure (say, 60 bar-absolute and 540°C) and
then expanding this through a turbine to the process steam
pressure requirements of 3 bara then useful work can be
done by the turbine for generation of electrical power.
For this example, each kg/s of steam gives 590 kW of
electrical power.

60 bara
@ 540 °C

Boiler

Back pressure

turbine

There are several types of steam turbine that can be
used to meet widely varying steam and power demands.
They can be employed individually or in combination with
each other.

Back-pressure turbine

The simple back-pressure turbine provides maximum
economy with the simplest installation. An ideal back-
pressure turbogenerator set relies on the process steam
requirements to match the power demand. However, this
ideal is seldom realized in practice. In most installations
the power and heat demands will ﬂuctuate widely,
with a fall in electrical demand when steam ﬂow, for
instance, rises.

These operating problems must be overcome by
selecting the correct system. Figure 15.15 shows an
arrangement that balances the process steam and electrical
demands by running the turbo-alternator in parallel with
the electrical supply utility. The turbine inlet control
valve maintains a constant steam pressure on the turbine
exhaust, irrespective of the ﬂuctuation in process steam
demand.

This process steam ﬂow will dictate output generated
by the turbo-alternator and excess or deﬁciency is made up
by export or import to the supply utility, as appropriate.
The alternative to the system in Figure 15.15 is to use
a back-pressure turbine with bypass reducing valve and
dump condenser, as shown in Figure 15.16.

On this system, the turbine is speed controlled and
passes steam, depending on the electrical demand. The
bypass-reducing valve with integral desuperheater makes
up any deﬁciency in the steam requirements and creates
an exhaust steam pressure control. Alternatively, any sur-
plus steam can be bypassed to a dump condenser, either
water or air cooled, and returned to the boiler as clear
condensate.

Pass-out condensing turbines

If the process steam demand is small when compared
with the electrical demand then a pass-out condensing

Steam from

boiler

Back pressure

turbine

d
a
o
l
 
y
r
o
t
c
a
F

Electricity

supply

3 Bara steam to
process

PC

Condensate from process

Process

Figure 15.14 The back-pressure steam turbine in CHP application

Figure 15.15 A back-pressure turbo-alternator operating in paral-
lel with the grid supply

Steam from

boiler

Steam from

boiler

Combined heat and power (CHP) 15/209

Back pressure

turbine

Pass-out condensing

turbine

Spray
water

Pressure reducing
desuperheater
station

PC

Condenser

Condensate to boiler

To dump steam

condenser

To process

Figure 15.16 A back-pressure turbine with PRDs valve and dump
condenser

L P steam to process

Figure 15.17 The pass-out condensing turbine

turbine may provide the optimum solution. Figure 15.17
illustrates a typical scheme, which consists of a back-
pressure turbine. This gives operational ﬂexibility of the
back-pressure turbine with improved power output.

Back-pressure with double pass-out

Many industries require process steam at more than
one pressure, and this can be done by use of a back-
pressure turbine supplying two process pressures (see
Figure 15.18).

15.3.2 Diesels and gas turbines in combined
heat and power

Steam from

boiler

Double pass-out

turbine

In the process of conversion of fuel to electrical power,
both the diesel and gas turbines eject large quantities of
hot exhaust gases. These gases represent a signiﬁcant
energy source that can be converted to useful heat by
the addition of a waste heat boiler (see Figure 15.19).
The boiler can be arranged to produce either steam or hot
water, depending on the process needs. This heat is pro-
duced without any further fuel input and without affecting
the performance of the generating machine. In addition,
in the case of the diesel, additional low-grade heat can be
recovered from the engine-cooling system.

The high efﬁciency of conversion of

the diesel
generator immediately restricts its potential improvement
compared with gas turbines. With the simple addition of
a boiler, the gas turbine can give a heat/power ratio of 2:1
compared with the diesel’s 0.6:1. (The diesel heat/power

L P steam to process

Medium pressure steam to process

Figure 15.18 The double pass-out turbo-alternator

ratio can be improved by 1:1 by use of the engine-cooling
services, as shown in Figure 15.19.) However, both diesel
and gas turbine exhaust gases contain excess oxygen
(12–14 per cent and 14–16 per cent, respectively). This
free oxygen can be utilized by supplementary ﬁring the
exhaust gases to produce additional steam in the heat-
recovery boiler. By supplementary ﬁring the ratio of heat
to power can theoretically rise to 15:1 for a gas turbine
and 5:1 for a diesel.

15/210 Electricity Generation

Exhaust

Table 15.3 Typical properties of fuel oils

Oil fuel

Kerosene

Diesel oil

Steam to
process

Waste heat
recovery boiler

Feedwater

heater

Diesel
engine

Return condensate
from process

Density (kg/)
Sulfur (%)
Ash (%)
Gross caloriﬁc value

Net caloriﬁc value

(MJ/kg)

(MJ/kg)

0.8
0.05
Nil
46.2

43.2

Residual
fuel oil

0.99
3.5 Max
0.04
42.5

0.85
0.5
0.001
45.5

42.7

39.8

Figure 15.19 Diesel with waste heat recovery

System

Spark Compression Gas
ignition

ignition

turbine

Table 15.4 Application of fuel oils

The chemical characteristics of the exhaust gases from
diesel engines tend to make them less attractive for use
in waste heat recovery, as they are likely to contain sig-
niﬁcant carbonaceous solid matter because of the range
of residual oils burned. Fouling by soot build-up on heat
transfer surfaces within the boiler can occur. In addition,
the gas is likely to have signiﬁcant pulsations, with a
wide variation in mass ﬂow with engine load, although
the exhaust temperature ﬂuctuation at low load is not as
signiﬁcant as for the gas turbine. However, there are many
examples of successful CHP schemes using both the diesel
and the gas turbine.

15.4 Factors inﬂuencing choice
The basic schemes for electrical power generation and
combined heat and power have been identiﬁed in the
earlier sections of this chapter. When assessing the alter-
natives to meet a speciﬁc project need, many factors will
strongly inﬂuence the size, number, and type of genera-
tor as well as its speciﬁcation and scope. While it is not
intended to cover all of these aspects, the more important
issues are discussed.

15.4.1 Available fuels

Oils

The petroleum industry is responsible for the production
of a wide range of fuel oils for industrial use. These gen-
erally range from kerosene, gas oils and diesel fuel to
residual fuel. (See Table 15.3 for typical fuel oil charac-
teristics.)

Table 15.4 shows typical applications for the range of
oil fuels for use with major prime movers. Medium/high-
speed diesel engines generally use distillate fuel oils
while medium/low-speed units generally burn residual
fuels. The gas turbine, which normally operates on liquid
distillate fuels, is capable of running on residual fuels,
although examples of these are normally associated with
crude production facilities.

In the case of residual fuel ﬁring for gas turbines it is
necessary to provide extensive fuel-preparation plant for

Motor gasoline
Middle distillates

(kerosine, gas oil, diesel fuel)

Residual fuels
Crude oil

p

p
p

p
p
p
p

the removal of vanadium, sodium, potassium, calcium and
aluminum. Generally, oil fuels have good heating values
and combustion characteristics, the main disadvantages
being their higher sulfur content and the need for heating
of the heavy fuel oils for storage and transport. Distillate
grades of oil fuels may be stored and handled at ambient
temperature. However, exposure to the cold for long peri-
ods is not advisable, and it is good practice to incorporate
heaters to maintain the oil fuel at 5°C above freezing.
Heating facilities are required for all residual grades of
oil fuels, and the following gives minimum storage and
handling temperatures:

Minimum
storage

temperature

(°C)

Minimum

temperature at
outﬂow from

storage and for
handling (°C)

High fuel oil
Medium fuel oil
Heavy fuel oil

10
25
40

10
30
50

The tanks and pipework can be heated by use of steam,
hot water, electrical heaters or a combination of these.

Gas

As a fuel, gas has many advantages in controllability
and minimal effect on the environment, and it promotes
reliable operation, longer life and residual maintenance
compared with oil fuel. Its typical properties are shown
in Table 15.5.

In many developed and developing countries, there are
now extensive natural gas supply networks, which pro-
vide secure and reliable sources of gas fuel. The user may
require some pressure reduction and metering equipment

Table 15.5 Typical properties of gas fuels

Factors inﬂuencing choice 15/211

Gas fuel

Town gas

Formulae
Speciﬁc gravity (air D 1)
Gross CV (MJ/M3)
Stoichiometric air

vol/vol
kg/kg

Spontaneous ignition
temperature (°C)

0.5
18.65

4.2
8.6

650

Natural

gas

95% CH4

0.59
37.3

9.62
14.8
660

Methane

Butane

Propane

CH4
0.55
37.1

9.52
17.2
700

C4H10
2.02
121.9

31.0
15.4
480

C3H8
1.52
93.9

23.8
15.7
500

Carbon
monoxide

CO
0.97
11.8

23.8
2.45

570

on-site, otherwise there is no requirement for storage,
and the gas can be simply distributed to the generator
by pipeline.

One of the alternatives to natural gas is an industrial
product such as propane or butane. These fuels are trans-
ported and stored in liquid form. On-site facilities are
necessary for reception, off-loading and storage.

With the trends towards conservation of energy, there
have been signiﬁcant advances in small gasiﬁcation
schemes. Here the solid fuel is partially combusted to give
a low-caloriﬁc-value gas. The gas is hot and dirty, and
contains tar and particulate matter, thereby requiring some
cleaning before being used as a fuel. While the scope
for these schemes is limited, there have been successful
examples in rural areas of developing countries where the
gas produced from fuels such as wood is used to run small
spark-ignition engines.

Coal

In many regions of the world coal reserves represent sub-
stantial indigenous resources, and for this reason coal will
always play an important role in the future of power gen-
eration. Inevitably, coal is more difﬁcult to handle and
has less appeal than other clean-burning fuels such as
gas. However, substantial progress has been made in mod-
ern efﬁcient handling techniques and combustion methods
that can give clean combustion with low emissions.

For the purposes of power generation, certain coal prop-
erties are signiﬁcant, and a coal can be generally catego-
rized by its rank, which embraces both volatile matter
and caking properties. At the lower end of the scale are
the older coals, such as anthracite with low volatile con-
tent and no caking properties. These coals are difﬁcult
to burn. As volatile content increases beyond anthracite
then so does the caking quality, and prime coking coals
are 12–30 per cent volatile matter (VM). Beyond this,
as VM increases further, caking properties decrease to
free-burning coals of approximately 40 per cent VM.

An example is the classiﬁcation scheme used by
British Coal, and is common throughout the UK. The
scheme divides coals into groups, generally as shown in
Table 15.6. The group, grading and modes of preparation
of a coal serve to indicate the usage for which the coal is
suitable for application with industrial boilers. For grading
of coal the nominal sizes are shown as follows:

Table 15.6 Classiﬁcation of coals

General
description

Volatile

matter (%)

Speciﬁc description

100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900




6–9
9–19.5
19.6–32

Over 32

Anthracites
Low-volatile, steam coals
Medium-volatile coals
Very strongly caking
Strong caking
Medium caking
Weak caking
Very weak caking
Non-caking

Through

(in)
2
1
0.5
0.75

On
(in)
1
0.5
1
0.125

Doubles
Singles
Peas
Grains

Smalls constitute the fraction which passes through a
screen of given size and which has no lower size limit.
Smalls can be washed or untreated.

The ash content of the coal is signiﬁcant, not only in
its mass but also with respect to the constituents of the
ash, the fusion temperature, the range of fusion tempera-
ture between initial deformation and actual fusion and the
amount of coal ﬁnes present.

Use of coal requires suitable storage facilities local to
the power station site. The capacity of the stockpile is a
decision of strategy and depends on the frequency and
size of the delivery loads. In addition, the site should be
carefully chosen in view of access needs for reception and
off-loading. Stored coal weighs about 4000 tons per 0.5
meters depth per hectare, which gives a rough guide on
areas for stockpile. Graded coals and ﬁnes should always
be stored separately. The large coal forms naturally, but
ﬁnes must be piled by layering and compacting to form a
well-consolidated heap.

The object of compacting the ﬁnes is to exclude air to
ensure safe storage. If proper precautions are taken then
coal can be stored safely. However, the user should be
aware of the potential dangers of spontaneous combus-
tion and the measures necessary to avoid this problem.

15/212 Electricity Generation

For sites of limited area, coal can be stored in large
vertical bins.

There is a wide range of pneumatic, vibratory, belt or
en-masse type elevators and conveyors for transfer of coal
from storage to boiler. The ﬁnal scheme depends on site
layout constraints and cost.

Other fuels

Solid fuels also encompass lignite, peat and wood. In its
ﬁnal form, wood has a much greater commercial value
as a product. However, some industrial processes (for
example, the production of paper) create waste wood in
off-cuts, bark and shavings. Here the wood is ideal as
an energy source. It has high moisture content but can be
ﬁred easily with full automation. Table 15.7 shows typical
heating values for these fuels when compared with coal.
Additionally, there are food processes where the prod-
uct is derived from vegetation and a combustible ﬁbrous
waste is produced which can be used as fuel. A good
example is the production of sugar from sugar cane with
bagasse as waste. There are many others, and their by-
products should not be overlooked in an assessment of
suitable fuel sources.

15.4.2 Electrical load proﬁle

In reviewing the size of a generating scheme, it is nec-
essary to consider the electrical load proﬁle of the site
demand, which must examine the electrical power needs
over the daily and annual cycles. The capacity of the
generator can be selected to cater for anticipated future
growth or, alternatively, the station could be designed so
that further generators could easily be added to match
future load demands. At this stage, it is worth noting that
the power station itself will require electrical power for
its auxiliaries (parasitic load), and this electrical load will
be relatively constant, despite the output modulating to
follow demand.

The load proﬁles can vary quite considerably, depend-
ing on the electrical users. For instance, for a factory
the load will depend on the shift operation with a poten-
tial low demand at night and at weekends. The load can
be inﬂuenced by seasonal changes. For instance, it may
increase towards winter with greater lighting demands.
However, the need for HVAC in computer installation

Table 15.7 Typical properties of some solid fuels

may increase the load during summer. It is important that
the power station be capable of meeting the peak capacity
while also being able to operate efﬁciently at lower loads.

15.4.3 Heat load

Earlier, we reviewed the advantages of combined heat
and power. It therefore follows that a local heat load,
where practical, should be incorporated into the electrical
scheme.

Medium- to low-pressure steam and high- and low-
temperature hot water usually supply heat loads. Steam
is the main medium used by industry for the transport
of large quantities of heat, and pressures generally range
from 3 to 16 bars. Low- and high-temperature hot water
systems are employed for heating, and they operate in
closed circulating systems with the high-temperature sys-
tem (approximately 115°C) pressurized by an external
source to prevent steam forming. Typical industrial and
commercial applications are:

Hotels: hot water, swimming pools
Schools: hot water, steam, heating, and air conditioning
Dairy: steam and hot water
Heavy manufacturing: steam, air conditioning, space
heating and hot water
Hospitals: steam, hot water
Sewage plant: hot water, sludge heating
Food industries: process steam, hot water
Chemical industries: process steam, hot water

Hot water or steam can also be used in absorption-
type chillers to provide chilled water with the reduction
in electrical power needed for the refrigeration process.

As with the electrical load proﬁle, it is also necessary
to analyze the heat load over the daily and annual cycles.
Ideally, the heat load will match the available heat from
the electrical generator (however, this is rarely the case).
There will be periods when supplementary output will be
necessary which can be achieved by, say, supplementary
ﬁring the waste heat gases of a gas turbine, or heat out-
put reduction is necessary by the introduction of bypass
stacks. For a steam turbine installation bypass pressure-
reducing valves will be necessary to supplement steam
output, while a dump condenser may be needed at low-
process steam demands. The nature of the electrical and
heat load will obviously have signiﬁcant inﬂuence in the
development of the scheme and scope of equipment.

Fuel

General-purpose Wood

coal

Peat

Lignite

15.4.4 Power station auxiliary systems and
services

Moisture (%)
Ash (%)
Carbon (%)
Hydrogen (%)
Nitrogen (%)
Sulfur (%)
Oxygen (%)
Gross CV (MJ/kg)
Net CV (M3/kg)

(cid:9)

16
8
61.3
4.0
1.3
1.7
7.7
25.26
23.98

15
–
42.5
5.1

0.9

20
4
43.7
4.2

1.5

36.5
15.83
14.37

26.6
15.93
14.5

15
5
56.0
4.0

1.6

18.4
21.5
20.21

A total power station project involves many aspects, cov-
ering civil works, fuel systems and storage, plant auxil-
iary systems and services, electrical plant and control and
instrumentation. The scope will depend on the nature and
size of the project envisaged. Table 15.8 gives a detailed
checklist for power station auxiliary components and will
provide a useful guide in developing scope. Further details
of many of the components, such as ventilation systems or
fuel oil handling, are given in other chapters of the book.

Table 15.8 Checklist of power station auxiliary components

Factors inﬂuencing choice 15/213

Fuel system

Coal:
Rail sliding
Wagon puller
Tippler
Ground hopper
Conveyor
Crusher
Screen
Sampling
Mag. separator
Stocking-out conveyor
Conveyor (reclaim)
Transfer tower
Bunker conveyor
Dust extraction
Coal feeder
Coal mills
Pneumatic transfer system

Oil:
Bulk unloading pumps
Bulk storage tanks
Tank heater
Forwarding pumps
PH and ﬁltering sets
Oil pipework
Steam pipework
Tracing elec./steam
Daily service tank
Fuel-treatment plant
Steam/gas turbine/diesel house
Boiler house
CW pump house

Ash handling
Clinker grinder
Clinker conveyor
Econ. dust conveyor
Air heater dust conveyor
Rotary valves
Dust collector dust conveyors
Rotary valves
Ash conditioner
Ash silo
Ash sluice pump
Make-up water pump
Pneumatic conveying system
Conditioned ash conveyor
Submerged ash conveyor

Water systems
Bar screen
Travelling-band screen
Wash-water system
Penstock
Intake pump/circulating pumps
Valves
Chlorination plant
Crane/lifting equipment
Cooling tower (ID/FD/natural)
Settling pond

Boiler water treatment
Base exchange
Dealkylization
Demineralization
Demin. water tank
Demin. water pump
Bulk acid and alkali storage
Neutralizing

Chemical dosing
LP dosing set
HP dosing set
CW dosing set

Miscellaneous
Air compressor (plant)
Air compressor (inst.)
Air compressor (coal pneumatic system)
Air compressor (ash pneumatic system)
Fireﬁghting equipment

Detection
Portable
Hydrant system
Springer system
Panel
Halon/CO2

Pressure-reducing set
Press. red. and desuperheating set
Ventilation

Turbine hall
Boiler house
Switchrooms
Battery room
Water-treatment room
Admin.

Air conditioning
Control room

Hydrogen-generation plant
Electroeysis
Bottle storage

Piping system
Main steam
Process steam
Feedwater
Raw water
Treated water
Potable water
Aux. cooling system
Fireﬁghting system
Clariﬁed water
Filtered water
Water-intake system
Circulating-water system
Chemical dosing
Station drains
Fuel oil
Fuel gas
Compressed air (plant)
Compressed air (inst.)

Electrical equipment
Generator
Unit auxiliaries
Station auxiliaries
Low-voltage auxiliaries
HV and LV switchgear
Generator circuit breaker
Batteries and charger
Main power cabling
Cabling and wiring
Lightning protection
Earthing
Telephones/intercom
Protection equipment
Electrical controls, inst. meters
Lighting and small power
Temporary supplies
Elec. trace heating
Generator
AVR
Generator VTs
Busbar equipment
Synchronizing equipment

Civil
Building/annexe for:

Water treatment
Feed pumps
Fuel handling/metering
Control room
Switch house
Ofﬁces
Admin. building
Gatehouse
Site fencing
Roads
Plant drains
Storm drains
Foundations for mech. and elec.
Plant and tanks
CW culverts
Cooling tower found.
Chimney found.
Crane rails
HVAC
Plumbing and sanitary ﬁttings
Domestic water supply
Tanks/reservoirs
Site investigations and ground
Loading tests
Demolition of existing plant and buildings
Connection to existing plant and buildings
Temporary works

15/214 Electricity Generation

General information relevant to electrical system design
is given in Chapter 16. Within an industrial power plant,
the following key items of electrical equipment need to
be addressed:

1. The power-evacuation circuit, including any generator
transformer and the connection with the remaining site-
supply system.

2. The supply system for the power plant auxiliaries,
including the provision of supplies to any important
drives and the provision of standby supply systems.

3. The protection and synchronizing schemes applicable

to the generator circuit.

4. The earthing arrangements of the generator neutral.
5. The control of the excitation of the generator when

operating in either isolated or parallel mode.

A typical electrical schematic for an 8 MW power station
is shown in Figure 15.20.

15.4.5 Site conditions

The site conditions play an important role in the devel-
opment of layout and scope. The more speciﬁc issues are
as follows:

1. Naturally, the site location must be as close as practical
to the electrical and heat users, thus minimizing cable
and piping runs.

2. Altitude and ambient temperature, as discussed earlier,
can have signiﬁcant effect on the performance of the
generator, and ﬂuctuations over the annual operating
cycle will similarly inﬂuence the power station output.
3. Exposure to dust or other pollutants that may exist in
certain industrial processes will dictate requirements
for such aspects as equipment enclosures and air ﬁl-
tration. For the same reasons, it may be prudent to
avoid air-cooled heat transfer surfaces.

4. Adequate area will be required for water, chemical,
fuel and ash storage with adequate access for reception
and off-loading.

5. During the erection period access will be needed for
the heavy loads, storage of equipment and for erection.
6. With the exception of the gas turbine, most generat-
ing schemes need a reliable and a good-quality water
source for cooling. Alternative large air-cooled sys-
tems can be employed, but they are expensive and
less efﬁcient. Thermal power stations using steam con-
densers can require large cooling-water ﬂows, although
the cooling water consumption can be reduced by use
of closed-cycle cooling-water systems. In these cases,

20 /6 kV
Ratio (N.L.)
10 MVA
Rating
Type
ONAN
Tap changing OLTC
Range
Vec. group
% X

−5% +10%
Yn Yn
TBA

1250   A

1250   A

1250 A

630   A

630   A

630   A

630 A

6 / 0.4 kv
1.25 MVA
Onan

Ratio (N.L.)
Rating
Type
Tap changing Off load
Range
Vec. group
% X

±2/ % ±5%
Dyn n
4.75

.

3
o
n

 

n
e
G

/
 

T

r
e
p
 
s
a

.

1
o
n
G

 

 
/
 

T

23 MW
0.8 PF
TBA %STX
276 AFLC

2

.

o
n

 

n
e
G

 
/
 

T

r
e
p
 
s
a

1

.

 

o
n
n
e
G

/
 

T

D/gen.
station
aux supplies
no.1

1

.

o
n
G

 

 
/
 

T

630   A

0.300 MW
0.8   PF
TBA  %STX
570 A.FLC

Figure 15.20 Typical electrical single-line diagrams for an 8 MW power plant

T/G 1 & 2 AUX.

T/G 3 & 4 AUX.

Type of sw'gear
Supplier
Type reference
System voltage
System freq'y
Fault ratings

Busbar rating
Closing supply
Tripping supply

VAC
NEI
YMV
6.0 MV
50 Mz
25 kA
3 secs
1250 A
110 V d.c.
110 V.d.c.

4

.

o
n

 

n
e
G

 
/
 

T

r
e
p
 
s
a

.

1
o
n
G

 

 
/
 

T

Type of sw'gear
Supplier
Type reference
System voltage
System freq'y
Fault ratings

Busbar rating
Closing supply
Tripping supply

Air breake
NEI
G80
0.38 kV
50 Hz
50 kA
3 secs
2000 A

110 V d.c.
110 V.d.c.

it is common to site the power station near a large
water source such as a river or lake. The design of
water-intake systems needs to recognize the changes
in level and quality that can occur, depending on such
aspects as time of year, rainfall and tides.

7. Boilers require very high-quality water for make-up,
and for this purpose treatment, facilities may be needed
on-site, depending on the quality of the water source.
8. Civil engineering considerations such as ground con-

ditions and drainage.

15.4.6 Plant availability and maintenance

It is prerequisite of most modern power stations that they
achieve high availability. For normal operation, it is com-
mon practice for power stations to employ standby equip-
ment that is strategically important to overall operation.
Examples are the use of 100 per cent duty standby pumps
or compressed air plant. Depending on the size of instal-
lation, 3 ð 50 per cent units can be employed with 50
per cent standby capacity and lower initial cost. For sim-
ilar reasons, security of fuel and water supplies must
be addressed. Adequate fuel storage may be necessary
to meet anticipated shortages in supply or, alternatively,
standby fuel facilities incorporated. Water storage will be
needed again to cater for periods when shortages occur.
Adequate consideration to the above will ensure that
outages are minimized and maximum availability is
achieved. However, at some stage,
the generator or
generators will be closed for maintenance, and in these
circumstances, consideration must be given to making
up the electrical supply. For essential electrical loads, an
alternative source is needed and, at a premium, this could
be supplied from the electrical supply authority or from
a standby generator. A standby generator will increase
capital cost, but in some cases, this is essential to meet
the needs of total security of supply.

For locations in the Middle East subject to wide ﬂuc-
tuations in ambient temperature it has been common to
utilize multiple gas turbines which are sized to meet the
plant demands during the hot summer months and the cold
winter. As the gas turbine output increases substantially,
there is sufﬁcient spare capacity to allow for outage of
machines without affecting the electrical power export.
However, this situation is unique to the environmental
conditions and type of equipment in service.

The plant components selected should be of proven
design supported by strong reference
installations.
Modern trends are moving towards reduction in manning
levels, and the use of central computer control and
supervisory systems also ensures maximum efﬁciency of
plant operation.

Speciﬁc details on maintenance of plant are given
later. However, in developing the station layout adequate
thought must be given to cranage, storage areas and access
for maintenance of heavy plant.

15.4.7 Environmental aspects

Local regulations and laws will control the effects of the
power station on the local environment. The signiﬁcant
considerations are:

The selection 15/215

1. Exhaust emissions of SOx, NOx and particulate matter.
2. Height of chimney.
3. Noise levels at the site boundary.
4. Treatment of boiler and water treatment plant efﬂuent.
5. Architectural features and design of buildings and

structures.

15.4.8 Generated voltages

The selection of generated voltage will be determined
by the voltages available on-site, the amount of gener-
ation envisaged and the full load and fault current ratings
of existing and proposed equipment. Following the com-
pletion of the installation, the fault levels occurring at
each point within the installation (including the equipment
within the supply authority system) must be within the
capability of the equipment, particularly the switchgear
installed.

The factors affecting the generator circuit itself are
related to the relative cost and availability of equipment to
be used in that circuit. Generators rated at up to 2 MVA,
2782 A at 415 V can be accommodated within standard
low-voltage switchgear ratings of, typically, 3000 A full
load current and 50 kA fault capacity. Generators rated
larger than 2 MVA but less than 15 mVA will be usually
operated at 11 kV, although at ratings of between 2 and
5 MVA, a lower-voltage 3.3 kV or 6.6 kV may be consid-
ered due to the capital cost of the generator.

15.5 The selection
It should be borne in mind that there is no single answer as
to which conﬁguration of equipment is best for any indi-
vidual power-generating scheme. Each alternative must
be considered on its own merits, including the use of all
available fuels.

15.5.1 Electrical power

For generation of electrical power only, the overriding
inﬂuence in the choice of generating plant is fuel avail-
ability. In this respect the following categories can be
applied:

Diesel (light and heavy fuel oils)
Gas turbine (gas and light fuel oils)
Gas turbine and combined cycle (gas and light fuel oils)
Thermal power plant (coal, lignite, wood and biomass)

For the criterion of fuel to electrical energy conversion
efﬁciency, the diesel and gas turbine are natural choices
for prime fuels such as oil and gas.

In open cycle, the diesel has the higher efﬁciency, mak-
ing it more attractive for light fuel oils. However, in
combined cycle, the gas turbine often has the highest over-
all efﬁciency, but there is the penalty associated with the
additional cost for boiler and turbine. Nevertheless, unless
the prime fuel is of low cost, the use of combined-cycle
gas turbine plant will prove to be the more economic.

For industrial or commercial applications the straight-
forward condensing thermal power plant cannot compete

15/216 Electricity Generation

with the diesel or gas turbine, as its ﬁrst, or capital, cost
is signiﬁcantly higher and its overall efﬁciency is low.
However, successful smaller thermal power plants have
been installed where the fuel is of low cost to the user.
In these cases the efﬁciency will be of less signiﬁcance,
and the much lower running costs when compared with
prime fuels such as oil makes the thermal power plant an
attractive alternative.

The overall efﬁciency of the condensing thermal cycle,
as discussed, is dictated primarily by the steam condi-
tions used. There are some small industrial stations with
outputs up to 2 MW using shell-type boilers for the gen-
eration of steam. Here the steam conditions are limited to
approximately 17 bara and 250°C. For larger installations
these conditions will rise sharply when watertube boilers
become attractive and more common steam conditions are
of above 60 bara and 540°C.

Having decided the type of generator, the next ques-
tions are the capacity and unit sizes. It is usual for the
total installed capacity to be capable of meeting the peak
demand with spare capacity to meet outages for mainte-
nance. However, consideration can be given to a supply
from the electricity supply authority for peak demands
and standby.

To meet the needs of a given output, a single gen-
erator could be provided, and this option is likely to
give the lowest initial cost. However, the alternative of
two or more machines, of the same total capacity, while
more expensive initially gives higher availability, bet-
ter ﬂexibility of operation and improved load-following
performance.

In isolated areas, it may be a requirement that at least
one unit is needed for standby to meet security of supply,
and this can be provided by 2 ð 100 per cent or, say,
3 ð 50 per cent units. Availability is maximized as the
standby unit can be brought into operation during outage
of one of the normally operating machines.

This is best

illustrated by the following example
for a rural development project. The electrical power
demand is shown in Figure 15.21 and was developed
from historical data generated from similar developments
in other regions. The operating statistics indicated that

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

 

W
M
d
a
o
L

00.00

06.00

12.00
Time

18.00

00.00

Figure 15.21 Daily load cycle for a rural development project

the maximum demand would occur at night peaking to
8 MW with a low day demand of 2 MW. Considering
these power requirements, the station must be ﬂexible
and have the ability to follow the daily load pattern.
In addition, because of the isolated location the power
station must be sized for stand-alone operation. Equally,
important factors are maximum availability and operating
efﬁciency.

The use of a local indigenous coal source dictated the
choice for thermal power plant. Considering the forecast
power demand, it is feasible for an 8 MW turbine/boiler
unit to be installed to provide the ultimate load require-
ment. However, the single power unit is not ﬂexible in
that it does not give the required security to cover for
routine and statutory shutdowns for maintenance and is
less efﬁcient at part load (see Figure 15.22). Provision of
multiple small units is the ideal solution, as it allows the
station to be operated more ﬂexibly, enabling the units to
be put into or taken out of service as the power require-
ment demands so that the operating units run close to peak
efﬁciency. From this examination, the optimum scheme
is 5 ð 2 MW units with four units providing the normal
power requirements and the ﬁfth to cover for standby.

15.5.2 Combined heat and power

As discussed earlier (Section 15.3), steam turbines pro-
viding low-pressure steam are more established for CHP.
However, for lower heat loads the diesel and gas turbine
with waste heat recovery offer an attractive alternative.

Steam turbines for CHP

The ﬁrst parameter to resolve is the process steam pressure
or pressures. These will be dictated by the process-heating

y
c
n
e
c
i
f
f

i

E

25

20

15

10

25

50

75

100

Load %

Figure 15.22 Overall efﬁciency of a typical coal-ﬁred power station
of 4.6 MW capacities

temperatures, noting that the steam will transfer its heat
at constant pressure and at saturation temperature. It is
in the interests of efﬁciency to keep the process steam
pressure as low as practical. Also inﬂuencing the process
steam pressure is the distribution pipeline from the turbine
exhaust to process. Reductions in the pipeline pressure
loss increase pipeline size and cost.

The selection is dictated by economics governing the
initial plant cost versus higher turbine output. Usually, the
turbine exhaust steam is designed to be slightly super-
heated, which is desirable, as it allows for heat loss from
the steam with minimum condensate losses. At low loads
from the turbine, the degree of superheat can rise sharply,
well in excess of the normal design conditions, and for
this purpose, desuperheaters are often employed to trim
the steam temperature at exhaust.

The choice of boiler steam inlet conditions is usually
dictated by the desire to achieve maximum output from
the process steam ﬂow. This requires high boiler steam
pressure and temperature. However, there are practical
considerations to observe. Above 40 bar more exacting
feedwater treatment is necessary, and therefore it may
be advantageous to maintain pressures below this ﬁgure.
High steam and temperatures can also inﬂuence selection
of boiler materials such as alloy steels. The upper limit
for industrial applications is around 60 bara and 540°C.
For watertube boilers it is necessary to maintain low
O2 levels, and for this purpose a de-aerator in the feed
line is required, which will also provide a degree of feed
heating. The steam supply can be taken down from the
low-pressure process steam main.

If a condenser is employed for a turbine with a condens-
ing section then it is normally chosen to provide the best
thermodynamic efﬁciency consistent with an economical
capital expenditure. The condenser exhaust vacuums are
usually 0.05 bara or higher.

Having ascertained the process steam ﬂow and devel-
oped some ideas on the boiler pressure, the following
step is to analyze the power available. Figure 15.23 pro-
vides a ready means of determining the approximate rela-
tionship between power available and process steam for
speciﬁc steam conditions. Use of this and similar charts
will allow an assessment to be made of the potential of
a CHP scheme with a backpressure turbine. The condi-
tions can be changed to give the required balance for heat
and power.

The electrical and heat analysis, as discussed in Section
15.3, will show the relationship between power and heat
and how this varies over time. It may be necessary to
use steam bypass and stations or dump condenser, as dis-
cussed in Section 15.2. The uses of dump condensers for
meeting part-load requirement is inefﬁcient and should
be avoided. It is more acceptable to reduce turbine power
output accordingly and import or top-up from an alterna-
tive supply.

Diesels and gas turbines for CHP

It is generally recognized that below around 5:1 heat ratio
the steam turbines in CHP become less suitable, and here
the diesel and gas turbines play an important role in pro-
viding heat and power. As discussed earlier, the simple

)

C
E
S
G
K

/

(
/

W
K

 
t
u
p
t
u
O

900

800

700

600

500

400

300

200

0

1

3

2
Back pressure bara

5

4

The selection 15/217

PIN  60bara
TIN 540 C

PIN 30bara
TIN 400 C

6

7

Figure 15.23 The effect of back-pressure upon steam turbine per-
formance

addition of waste heat boilers gives additional heat output
without further input of fuel to the generator.

For ﬂexibility, supplementary ﬁring of the oxygen rich
exhaust gases can give additional heat. The following
summarizes the potential of both the diesel and GT for
waste heat recovery:

Unﬁred

Diesel

Gas turbine

1:1
0.6:1 (excluding the

cooling-water services)

2:1

Supplementary

ﬁred
5:1

15:1

This gives indicative heat/power ratios only: an actual
performance will depend on the machine.

Using these guidelines, it is a simple matter of matching
the electrical and the heat loads. An example is a scheme
that was envisaged for the supply of power and heat to
a computer center using a diesel engine with waste heat
recovery. Figure 15.24 shows the proposed scheme where
heat generated provides the site demand and operates with
absorption-type chillers for chilled water production. The
use of these chillers also reduced the electrical demand.
The electrical load was a steady 2.5 MW over the year
with short duration peaks of 2.9 MW. To allow for future
growth, 2 ð 3.6 MW diesels were selected (one operat-
ing and one standby). The electrical load calculated was
21.75 ð 106 kWh/year, and applying a useful heat recov-
ery ratio of 0.6:1 (not including engine services), this
gives 13 ð 106 kWh/year of heat energy, which is steadily
available over the year. The hot water and chilled water
heat loads are shown in Figures 15.25 and 15.26. As the
site heat load and chilled water load peak at different times

15/218 Electricity Generation

Diesel
engine

Waste heat

boiler
1.5 MW

2500 KW

Diesel
engine

Waste heat

boiler
1.5 MW

2500 KW

Boiler 1
4.0 MW

Boiler 1
4.0 MW

P

P
Boiler
feed
pumps

Calorifier

Heating
system

Site
load

P

Generator Absorber

P

Cooling  water in

Cooling  water out

Absorption

chiller

Chilled
water
supply

Condenser Evaporator

Figure 15.24 Example of a small diesel-engines combined heat and power scheme

Make-up

Deaerator/storage

vessel

Dump

condenser

Peak heating load

MW

2.0

1.0

3.0

2.0

1.0

W
M

Hot water heat load for
absorption type chillers

Chilled water heat load

J F M A M J

J A S O N D

Figure 15.25 Hot water heat load. The annual heating requirement
is 5.2 ð 106 kWh

of the year, this gave a relatively steady overall heat load,
as shown in Figure 15.27.
This total heat load is given as 22.6 ð 106 kWh per
annum. Supplementary heat
is therefore necessary to
provide the additional (cid:5)22.6 (cid:4) 13(cid:7) D 9.6 ð 106 kWh per
annum. For security of supply, 4 MW boilers capable of
giving full independent supply provided this.

J

F M A M J

J A S O N D

Figure 15.26 Chilled water heat load. The annual chilled water
heat load is 13 ð 106 kWh; the annual hot water heat load for
absorption-type chillers is 17.4 ð 106 kWh (a COP of 75 per cent)

The diesel and gas turbine with waste heat recovery
are limited in terms of fuel application being suitable for
gas and oils only. Also when considering oil fuel ﬁring

Total peak power for
chilled water and heating

Hot water heat
load for the
absorption-type
chillers from
Figure 15.26

4.0

3.0

2.0

W
M

Heat available from diesel
providing 21.75 × 106 kWh of
electricity − waste heat =
21.75 × 106 × 0.6 = 106 kWh
M J

J

A S O N D

1.0

J

F M A

Figure 15.27 Total heat load. The heat available from the diesel
waste gases of 13 ð 106 kWh will provide only a proportion of the
heat required for the absorption-type chiller

careful attention must be given to the effects of sulfur
in the exhaust gases, as this will place limitations on the
boiler performance.

15.5.3 Economic considerations

An economic evaluation will ascertain the cost
for
power generation when compared with purchase of
electricity and (where applicable) generation of steam in
low-pressure boilers. This evaluation will consider the
following:

1. Capital cost This cost must cover the supply and
erection of all
including auxiliary
systems or modiﬁcations to existing as necessary,

the new plant,

The selection 15/219

electrical plant, control and instrumentation, civil
works, new buildings and demolitions if appropriate.
It will also include all payments, management and
engineering fees, insurance and inspection costs – in
other words, all the necessary costs for the completion
of the project. This may also include the initial
holding of strategic spares.

2. Fuel costs Capital cost and fuel costs are closely
interrelated. For example, within a speciﬁc industrial
range the thermal power plant can be three times more
expensive than an equivalent rated diesel. However,
thermal power plant can utilize lower cost fuels and,
when taking into account diesel costs for consumables
such as lubricating oil and maintenance spares, the
thermal power plant can be attractive over the longer
term. The fuel consumption must be established from
an analysis of the load proﬁle and overall efﬁciency
of the station at various part loads. In addition, the
analysis must also take into account the effects of
ambient air temperature changes on air intake mass
and cooling water temperatures, as these also inﬂu-
ence efﬁciency. It is prudent to add a small percent-
age to cover for load following and deterioration of
efﬁciency that may occur over a prolonged operat-
ing period. The fuel consumption should also include
any anticipated supplementary ﬁring needed on CHP
schemes.

3. Chemical consumption Chemical consumption will
be associated with boiler
feed make-up water-
treatment plant, dosing systems for feedwater and
boiler system, treatment of cooling water circuits and
efﬂuent treatment. Typical chemical requirements for
a thermal power plant are given in Table 15.9.

4. Feedwater costs Depending on the source of water
supply, there may be charges for water consumption.
This consumption will be dictated by the make-up
water needs for the station.

5. Consumables All consumables required for normal
operation should be accounted for. Typical examples
here are diesel lubricating oil consumption and oil
changes at service intervals.

6. Labor costs These will depend on the manning lev-

els and degree of automation of the plant.

7. Maintenance charges Maintenance costs as an aver-
age over the plant life (based on previous experience
and guidance) should be sought from the manufacturer.

Table 15.9 Typical chemical requirements for a 60 MW industrial steam-generating plant

Chemical

Location

Quanity

Hydrochloric acid (HCL)

Caustic ﬂake (NaOH)

Oxygen scavenger
(e.g. hydrazine)

(cid:10)

pH control (e.g. ammonia)
Phosphate
Corrosion inhibitor
Bacterial control

Water-treatment plant (cation)
Efﬂuent neutralization
Water treatment plant (anion)
Efﬂuent neutralization
LP feedwater dosing

L1 feedwater dosing
Boiler dosing
Cooling-water system

165 kg/day at 30% solution
14 kg/day at 30% solution
221 kg/day at 25% solution
14 kg/day at 25% solution
8.5 kg/day at 25% solution

24 1/kg/day
Consumption depends on blowdown rate for boiler
Consumption depends on make-up
Chemicals are used to provide adequate reserve

15/220 Electricity Generation

8. Purchased power costs Depending on the schemes
applicable,
there may also be charges for import
of electrical power. In the UK the electrical supply
authority charges a sum based on a maximum demand
charge, a unit charge and a fuel cost adjustment.
Depending on circumstances, there may also be a
ﬁxed annual charge to cover rent of the authority’s
equipment.

9. Inﬂation After economic analysis it may be neces-
sary to review how inﬂation may inﬂuence the costs
for the items purchased.

10. Erection periods Period of erection can be critical,
as this dictates when power will be available and
income earned. Depending on the size of the station
and scope, this could vary between less than 6 months
to over 2 years. For systems such as the combined
cycle it is practical to commission the gas turbines
ﬁrst in advance of the steam generators, so that useful
power is generated at the earliest possible date.

15.6 Plant and installation
In order to operate the prime movers described in the pre-
vious sections it is necessary to provide auxiliary equip-
ment for the start-up, steady operation and shutdown of
the basic equipment as well as for monitoring and control-
ling its performance. The need also arises for the mainte-
nance of the plant that invokes the provision of cranage
and lay-down areas in the engine room. The following
describes these features for the various types of prime
movers. The driven machines (i.e. the electrical gener-
ators) are also reviewed in detail so that the complete
picture of industrial generating stations can be obtained.

15.6.1 Diesel power plants

When driving a generator the diesel engine is usually
a multi-cylinder machine similar in appearance to that
shown in Figure 15.28. The ﬁgure illustrates a nominal
3 MW engine with twelve cylinders in V-formation, such
an arrangement being attractive for its compactness. The
engine will be required to operate at synchronous speed
which is, in turn, dependent upon the required frequency
(f) and the number of generator pole-pairs (p). We have
Operating speed D N D 60

revolution/minute

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

f
p

A typical block layout for a diesel engine room is given
in Figure 15.29, showing the necessary auxiliaries and
local control panels. Not shown but also necessary are
cranes and ﬁre-protection systems.

The engine room itself must additionally provide sufﬁ-
cient noise attenuation as shall be deemed necessary, and
there must also be adequate fuel storage, reception and
handling facilities.

A key issue also concerns the foundation requirements
of the generator set. Most manufacturers will provide data
on their machines’ requirements, but the detailed design
of the block and its interface with the engine bedplate
require close attention. Sometimes it is possible to provide

Figure 15.28 A Vee-12 diesel engine

a basement for the engine auxiliaries, while ventilation
considerations (excluding combustion air requirements)
should recognize that some 8 per cent of the engine’s
rating will be radiated as heat, in the absence of any heat-
recovery equipment.

The compression ignition engine can operate on a vari-
ety of liquid fuels and gas. Modern designs permit reliable
operation on up to the heaviest residual oils, so permit-
ting improved fuel ﬂexibility (providing, of course, that
an adequate fuel-handling capability is also present). The
engine may also operate in a dual-fuel mode, using a mix-
ture of gas and air with the option to revert to a liquid
fuel in the event of any interruptions to the gas supply.
Thus, a more complex control and protection system must
be provided in order to give modulation for both the oil
and gas ﬂows.

Air intake

The quality of the air supply directly affects the output,
efﬁciency and life of the engine. The requirement of the
induction system must therefore be to supply the engine
with clean dry air close to ambient temperature conditions.
Oil bath or dry (paper element) ﬁlters are adequate for low
dust concentration conditions. However, as the dust bur-
den of the air increases, centrifugal pre-cleaners become

Plant and installation 15/221

11

10

12

13

1

4

5

6

2

3

7

8

9

Figure 15.29 The layout of a typical diesel generator engine room. 1 Diesel generator set; 2 jacket water header tank; 3 lubricating oil
service tank; 4 air receiver; 5 diesel-driven compressor; 6 batteries and charger; 7 engine control panel; 8 pneumatic control panel; 9 fuel
oil control panel; 10 engine exhaust silencer; 11 charge air ﬁlter; 12 daily service fuel oil tank; 13 three-section radiator

Cooling tower

Make-up water

Charge

air

cooler

Lub. oil heat
exchanger

Jacket water

heat exchanger

Closed circuit
heat exchanger

Figure 15.30 A typical closed-circuit secondary cooling system

necessary. The combustion air requirements of a diesel
may be taken, for estimating purposes, to be 9.5 m3h(cid:4)1
per kW generator rating.

Cooling

Fan-cooled radiators (as seen in Figure 15.29) or the
system shown in Figure 15.30 are typical. As an alter-
native to the cooling tower, when a good source of raw
water is available (such as from a river) this can be used
on one side of the heat exchanger.

For small engines below 0.5 MW output, air-cooling can
be considered. However, water-cooling by circulation of
water through cylinder jackets is the method normally
used for diesel generating plants.

Engine starting

For small high-speed engines, electric start systems,
incorporating lead-acid or alkaline batteries, are practical.

15/222 Electricity Generation

For larger machines, air-start systems are normally used.
Using compressed air, starting may be effected by means
of an air-driven motor engaging the ﬂywheel or by
directing air into each cylinder, in ﬁring sequence, by
means of a camshaft-driven distributor or mechanically
operated valves. The air can be provided from receivers
charged up when the engine is running or from a small
auxiliary compressor unit. The latter system is most
common on the larger installations, while on critical
engines an internal combustion (IC) engine-driven unit
backs an electric motor-driven compressor.

Control and instrumentation

Engine speed is controlled by the use of variable-speed
governors that can be mechanical, mechanical-hydraulic
or electronic. The last option is gaining wide acceptance
for generation purposes due to its speed of response and
ready integration with other control equipment used in
fully automated installations (probably incorporating more
than one generating unit).

Stop, start, emergency stop and speed controls are
grouped adjacent
to the engine, and the machine is
usually equipped with instrumentation for monitoring its
safe operation. Very often, a centralized control room
is provided, particularly when there are a number of
units in operation. Typical signals monitored and recorded
remotely are:

Engine and turbocharger speeds
Hours run
Lubricating oil pressures and temperatures
Starting and change air pressures
Cooling-water temperatures
Exhaust temperature

Typical alarm annunciations are:

Engine cooling water: High outlet temperature
Engine lubricating oil system: Low inlet pressure
Fuel system:

Service tank: Low level
Engine inlet: Low pressure

Overspeed protection:

Engine speed: High
Emergency stop: Operated

Maintenance

The diesel engine, being a reciprocating machine,
is
mechanically complex, and in arduous environments its
wear rate can be high. Major overhauls on high-speed
engines are usually stipulated at 15,000 running hours,
which extends to 20,000 and 30,000 on medium- and
low-speed machines, respectively.

The major class of failure concerns the fuel supply and
fuel injection equipment followed by the water-cooling
system, valve systems, bearings and governors. Collec-
tively, these ﬁve categories account for some 70 per cent
of all engine stoppages. Thus, the maintenance program
must take careful cognizance of these areas together with

the manufacturer’s recommendations. Under arduous con-
ditions where fuel quality is questionable, where there
are high dust levels or where the machine is subject to
uneven and intermittent loading, enhanced maintenance
at reduced intervals must be recommended.

Lubrication clearly plays a signiﬁcant role in the reli-
able operation of the engine. In addition to the lubricant’s
primary task of reducing friction and minimizing wear
it also acts as a cooling medium, a partial seal between
the cylinders and piston rings, and a means of ﬂushing
combustion and other impurities out of the engine.

A pressurized lubrication system using an engine-
mounted pump is the choice of most manufacturers.
A sump in the crankcase or an external drain tank
together with ﬁlters and coolers complete the system. The
choice of oil should be consistent with the manufacturer’s
recommendation, and should only be varied if the engine
is to be operated in unusual or extreme conditions.

Diesel engines with heat recovery systems

As illustrated earlier (Section 15.3.2), the utilization of
heat otherwise lost in the engine exhaust (and also the
cooling water) can be put to use in providing steam for
process. Alternatively, this heat can be used for fuel pre-
heating or to power a steam turbine via a steam genera-
tor. Figure 15.31 shows a two-engine arrangement with a
waste heat-recovery system supplying superheated steam
to a small steam turbine.

In the above example, a relatively complex steam gen-
erator of the watertube type has been adopted. Where
lower-quality steam for process or fuel heating is required,
a simpler shell (or ﬁretube) design may be appropriate.
In some cases, supplementary ﬁring may be provided
for the boiler, so further increasing plant complexity and
with it the need for enhanced control and maintenance
requirements.

15.6.2 Gas turbine power plants

The combustion gas turbine is, in many respects, the most
attractive means of producing power. Today the advan-
tages of reliability, simplicity of operation and compact-
ness outweigh the disadvantages posed by the price of the
fuel required operating it. A typical land-based machine is
shown in Figure 15.32. Gas turbines are normally rated at
notional sea-level (ISO) conditions when burning a spec-
iﬁed fuel.

For land-based power-generation applications,

there
is also a signiﬁcant sub-division with the availability
of aero-derived machines and speciﬁcally developed
industrial designs. The smaller (up to some 41 500 hp)
aero-derivatives can accept load very rapidly and will
operate in remote hostile environments. Larger machines,
with sizes in excess of 140 MW, are of the industrial
type taking perhaps some 30 minutes to reach full load.
Gas turbines require a start-up drive capable of achieving
a high rotational speed so that they can become self-
sustaining. A typical start-up and stop schedule is shown
in Figure 15.33. The power consumption of the start-up
device will be between 5 and 10 per cent of the machine
rating.

Plant and installation 15/223

Superheated steam

Saturated steam

Steam drum

Steam drum

Superheater
Evaporator

Evaporator
Economiser

Superheater
Evaporator

Evaporator

Economiser

Control
dampers

Outlet
damper

TC

Silencer

Feed pumps

Exhaust

Blowdown

tank

TC

Silencer

Outlet
damper

Control
dampers

Diesel
engine

Cooling
water

Turbine

PC

Condenser

LC

Station services

Feed make-up

Diesel
engine

make-up

/ fill
tank

Condensate extraction pumps

Figure 15.31 A two-engine diesel power plant with heat recovery

Figure 15.32 The Mitsubishi MW 701 gas turbine rated at 131 MW (ISO)

As the simple (or open-cycle) gas turbine is relatively
inefﬁcient (see Table 15.1), improved efﬁciency can be
achieved at the expense of complication and ﬁrst cost
by recovering some of the heat from the exhaust. One
arrangement employing heat exchangers in a closed cir-
cuit system is shown in Figure 15.34. However, the most
popular means of recovering a signiﬁcant proportion of

the gas turbine’s utilized heat is by means of a combined-
cycle arrangement discussed in Section 15.2.4.

Combined-cycle plant

The range of sizes, plant conﬁgurations and cycle
parameters make this option extremely ﬂexible, permitting
electrical outputs of up to 100 MW to be considered

15/224 Electricity Generation

100

 

%
d
a
o
L

100

0

Rated speed

Start-up

device OFF

Breaker ON

Breaker OFF

Ignition

Start-up

Firing

 

%
d
e
e
p
S

80

60

40

20

0

Figure 15.33 Gas turbine start-up and shutdown schedule

Speed acceleration

Load up

Synchronization

Operation

at rated load

Load down

Speed deceleration

Compressor

Turbine

Generator

Heat

rejection

by

cooling
water

F
u
e
l

Figure 15.34 A closed-cycle gas turbine arrangement

Heat

exchanger

by certain industries (such as aluminum smelters). It
is now becoming common practice to consider block
conﬁgurations consisting of two or three gas turbines
plus the associated waste heat-recovery steam generators
providing steam for a single steam turbine. The 2 C 2 C 1
option has the advantage that the ratings of both the gas
turbine and the steam turbine alternators are conveniently
arranged to have the same rating. The 3 C 3 C 1 option
provides better site economy with perhaps a power density
of some 7.5 MW/m(cid:4)2 (as against 5.5 kW wm(cid:4)2 for a
2 C 2 C 1 option) but no commonality of alternators.

A typical power train for such a generating station is
shown in Figure 15.35. A further reﬁnement, capable of
improving cycle efﬁciency by several percentage points,

is the introduction of dual steam pressures. If there is no
requirement for the provision of process steam then it is
unlikely that the extra cost and complexity of introducing
supplementary ﬁring into the steam generator would be
worthwhile.

Control and instrumentation

Manufacturers now offer as standard microprocessor-
based control systems as part of their gas turbine generator
set. The set can therefore be controlled and monitored
from panels adjacent
if required,
remotely from a central control room. In combined-
cycle installations, the system would be linked into the

to the machine or,

Plant and installation 15/225

Bus duct

Turning
Gear

Lub. oil
system

Generator

EHV S/S

HV load
center

Power
center

Main

transformer

Start-up

transformer

Auxiliary

transformer

Spare

transformer

Oil

cooler

Hydrogen
gas plant

CO2

gas plant

Steam
turbine

Battery

Charger

Control
center

Auxiliary
motors

Cooling
tower

Travelling

band screen

Bar

screen

Stop log

Chemical

dosing

Cathodic
equipment

Intake

condenser

Air

intake

Filter

Silencer

Duct

Expansion

joint

Natural

gas

Gas

receiving
system

Regulator

station

Metering
device

Control
valve

Nozzle

Nozzle
purge

E.H.V S/S

Main 

transformer

Generation

Gear

Bus duct

Start-up

transformer

Auxiliary

transformer

H.V load
center

Power
center

Control
center

Auxilary
motors

Nitrogen
bonse

Nitrogen
gas plant

Heavy oil
un-loader

Storage

tank

Transfer
pump

Heater

Oil treatment

plant

Chemical
additive BO

Heater

Service

tank

Transfer
pump

Distillate

oil

un-loader

Storage

tank

Transfer
pump

Service

tank

Transfer
pump

Injection

pump

Metering
device

Control
valve

Nozzle

Compressor

Combuster

Turbine

Gas turbine

Nozzle
purge

Expansion

joint

Air

cooller

Ball cleaning
equipment

Condenser

Massel

filter

Flow clean
-ing system

LP turbine

bypass

HP turbine

bypass

Supplement
ary firing

Soot
blower

Seal air

fan

Duct

Silencer

Expansion

joint

Vacuum
pump

Discharge

Polishing

plant

L.P.
drum

Single
pressure

Dual

pressure

CP

H.P.
drum

C. C.

N.C.

Chrome
dosing
Ferric

sulphate
Fe ion
dosing

Tank

Service
water
cooler

Discharge

Fresh water

circulating pumps

Gland

condenser

Heater

Chemical

dosing

Deaerator

Deaerator
circ pump

HP - BFP

LP - BFP

HP - BCP

LP - BCP

Bypass
damper

Silencer

Bypass
stack

Isolation
damper

HRSG

Washing
system

Denox

Silencer

Damper

Atmosphere

Stack

Expansion

joint

Turning
Gear

Lub-oil

equipment

Oil

cooler

Gear

Hydro
coupling

Start-up
equipment

(Motor)

Figure 15.35 A typical combined-cycle power train

actuators

higher-level station control system. The instrumentation
may typically be expected to comprise:
ž Speed and load governing with electro-hydraulic
ž Temperature control, also via electro-hydraulic actuators
ž Temperature, pressure and vibration monitoring systems
ž Flame-detection system
ž Automatic sequential control system
A control system diagram for a gas turbine generator is
shown diagrammatically in Figure 15.36.

Maintenance

The life and necessary maintenance of a gas turbine are
heavily dependent upon both the operating regime and
the fuel quality. Continuous ﬁring on natural gas pro-
vides the optimum availability, which will be progres-
sively eroded if the plant is subject to frequent inter-
ruptions (i.e. stops and starts) from both cold and hot
conditions. With a maximum interval between inspections
of some 8000 hours, it may be anticipated that the com-
bustion section will require most attention. Every 16,000
hours (or less) the turbine section will need inspection.
While a major inspection of the entire unit will be nec-
essary every 31,500 hours. Under optimal conditions, the

average operating availability of base-load and based gas
turbine plant could exceed 95 per cent (averaged over a
4-year or 31,500-hour period).

Pollution control

In the past, gas turbine installations have suffered from
smoke emissions. However, today, with better combustor
design and combustion control, this emission has ceased
to be a nuisance. Of more concern now and resulting
from higher combustor (and therefore combustion) tem-
peratures is NOx emissions. Current legislation is tending
to demand that gas turbine installations control their nitro-
gen emissions to levels between 50 and 75 ppm. Such
targets can be achieved in several ways, but none without
some effect upon operating cost and fuel ﬂexibility.

The NOx constituent in the exhaust of machines ﬁring
natural gas is some 150 to 160 ppm, and for distillate
fuels typically 260 ppm. In order to reduce these levels
to the targets quoted above, catalytic ﬁlters can be used,
but the systems currently available are expensive. As an
alternative, certain manufacturers are developing low-NOx
burners but these limit the user to natural gas ﬁring.

The third option incorporates the injection of water or
steam into the combustion chamber(s) of the machine.
Whenever possible, steam should be selected, as it has
less effect upon machine efﬁciency than water injection.

15/226 Electricity Generation

Gas turbine generator 

control panel

Sequence controler

Fuel pressure control valve

Fuel

P

Fuel pump

Fuel throttle valve

PT

Start -Up device

Auxilary
gear unit

Generator

Inlet guide vane

control valve

Gas turbine

Bleed valve

Exhaust

Figure 15.36 A gas turbine control system

By way of example, reducing NOx emissions when ﬁring
natural gas to within a 75 ppm limit would require steam
or water injection at a rate of 60 per cent of the fuel
ﬂow rate.

Finally, noise is also becoming of increasing concern,
particularly on sites adjacent to urban areas. Acoustic
enclosures, supplied by the manufacturer, will normally
reduce noise levels to 85 dB, but if further reduction is
required, attention must be paid to the material used to
construct the buildings and enclosures; low noise levels
can be achieved only at a cost.

15.6.3 Steam turbo-generators
One of the most widely used means of generating power
both in industry and in public utilities utilizes the steam
turbine. For industrial power generation the advantages of
high availability and good machine efﬁciency have to be
balanced against relatively high ﬁrst costs and the need
for the provision of both expensive steam-generating plant
and heat-rejection equipment. However, in many instances
the recovery of waste process heat by means of a steam
cycle is economically attractive.

Alternatively, the option that a steam plant offers of the
provision of process steam coupled with power generation
may be the key element in the selection of generating
plant. The turbo-generators and their auxiliaries for use
in such applications tend therefore to be relatively unso-
phisticated, with no feed heating, except for probably
the provision of a deaerator. Again, in the turbine itself,
machine efﬁciency tends to be sacriﬁced for robustness
and the ability to accommodate varying load conditions.

Options

The single-stage, single-valve turbine is the simplest
option. Such a machine is suitable for applications
requiring powers up to 300 kW, steam conditions up
to a nominal 115 bar, 530°C and rotational speeds

it

below 5000 rev/min. A typical machine is shown in
Figure 15.37, characterized by an overhung rotor mounted
on a stiff shaft capable of being accelerated from cold
to operating speed within 10 s. The efﬁciency is low,
but so is the cost of the installation. For higher powers
and for a wider range of steam conditions incorporating
all combinations of backpressure, condensing and pass-
out systems, the multistage axial ﬂow machine is the
natural choice. However,
is possible to design a
turbine in which the steam ﬂow is radially outward
(or inward), passing through groups of blades set
in
concentric rings. Such an arrangement is known as the
Ljungstr¨om turbine (Figure 15.38). Steam leakage and
attendant machine efﬁciency deterioration have tended to
discourage operators from the selection of these machines.
In the more favored multi-stage axial ﬂow design the
bladeing is of the impulse type (known as a Rateau or
Curtis type stage) or of the reaction type. It is popular
among manufacturers to design multi-stage machines with
a combination of these two types, and the most common
combinations are:

Exhaust

Combined stop, emergency

Alternator

Steam inlet

and main control valve

Turbine

Gear box

Oil cooler

Figure 15.37 A single-stage steam turbine driving an alternator

Plant and installation 15/227

Exhaust

Boiler Steam

Boiler Steam

Exhaust to condenser

Figure 15.38 The radial-ﬂow double-motion reaction turbine (Ljungstr ¨om)

1. Velocity-compounded impulse wheels followed by sev-
eral single-row impulse wheels. This is a combination
of the Curtis and Rateau types.

2. Velocity-compounded impulse wheels followed by

impulse reaction stages (Curtis–Parsons type).

3. One or more impulse stages followed by several stages

of impulse reaction blading (Rateau–Parsons type).

A typical axial ﬂow-condensing turbine for industrial
application is shown in Figure 15.39.

The major considerations affecting turbine selection

may be listed as follows:

1. Required power output;
2. Steam conditions available (pressure and temperature);
3. Steam cost (in order to assess the value of machine

and cycle efﬁciencies);

4. Process steam requirements (to assess the relative mer-

its of pass-out and back-pressure arrangements);

5. Cooling-water (or other cooling medium) costs and

availability;

6. Control systems (ideally compatible with other process

plant instrumentation) and automation;

7. Safety features (e.g. operation in explosive environ-

ments, alarm and condition-monitoring systems).

Installation

The foundations of any turbogenerator installation play
a signiﬁcant part in the safe operation of the machine.
Industrial turbines will normally operate at above syn-
chronous speed and will drive an alternator via a reduction
gearbox. Any vibration or out of balance occurring under
both normal or abnormal operation must be accommo-
dated by the foundations, and their design should therefore
best be undertaken by a specialist organization. The layout

of the steam and water pipework, of the machine auxil-
iaries and, when required, of the condenser all tend to add
to the complexity of the turbine island.

Where an under-slung condenser has been speciﬁed,
the provision of a basement to the engine room offers
the attraction of compactness at the expense of enhanced
civil works, while alternatively, the speciﬁcation of pan-
nier condensers can obviate the need for a basement and
will simplify the foundation design, but will considerably
increase the ﬂoor area requirements. The condensing plant
itself consists essentially of banks of tubes through which
cooling water ﬂows and around which exhausted steam
from the turbine is condensed to form a vacuum. Such
tubes have traditionally been made of brass, but where
severe corrosion conditions exist, cupro-nickel is some-
times used.

Control and lubrication

The turbogenerator speed must be maintained within nar-
row limits if it is to generate power acceptably and the
control system must be capable of preventing over-speed
upon sudden loss of load. For this latter requirement, fast-
acting valves are necessary with full modulation within
0.5 s. The security of the turbine is also dependent upon
the lubrication of its bearings, and it will be found that
the control systems are closely linked with the various
lubricating systems (turbine, gearbox and alternator).

A typical high-pressure, quick-response governor and
lubricating system for a speed-governed turbine is shown
in Figure 15.40. A speed governor controls the oil pres-
sure supplied to the servo-operated control valves, which
are arranged so that they open in sequence to ensure
maximum steam economy. Other types of control sys-
tems can be incorporated with the basic speed-governed

15/228 Electricity Generation

Governor

Thrust bearing

Trip Ring on
turbine shaft

Mechanically driven
oil pump-supplies
lubricating oil system

Nozzles and diaphragms
machined and welded
construction ensures
high accuracy throat
dimensions

Casing split horizontally
for easy inspection of
internals - easy access
to joint bolts

Gland
leak-off

Blading integral with
root and spacer

Gland
leak - off

Rotor-stift design
machined from solid
forging-critical speed
at least 30% above
normal speed

Casing drain

Gland
drain

Turbine supported
by condenser

Moisture-excluding
oil baffle

Condenser

To condensate
extraction pump

Figure 15.39 Longitudinal section of a small condensing turbine

system to provide back-pressure, inlet-pressure and pass-
out pressure governing. A typical fully inter-linked control
system for a pass-out system is shown in Figure 15.41.

Oil is supplied to these systems by a pump normally
driven from the turbine rotor, with an auxiliary pump for
use when starting the turbine. The main lubricating oil
pump draws oil through a suction strainer and discharges
to the emergency valve and hence through a cooler
and ﬁlter to the lubrication system. A separate auxiliary

lubricating oil pump is ﬁtted for supplying oil to the
bearings when stopping and starting and to lift
the
emergency valve at start-up.

These systems must be inherently reliable and safe, par-
ticularly from the point of view of ﬁre protection, and
ﬁre-resistant ﬂuids can be used for control systems in
order to reduce this risk. Fire-detection and ﬁre-ﬁghting
systems should always be provided for any turbogenerator
installation.

Actuator

Control valve
(one of four)

Pressure
gauge

Modulated oil (0−17 bar)

Governor

Emergency valve

Plant and installation 15/229

Optional
back-pressure
controller

Control oil (100 bar)

Non-return
valves

Control oil
Filters

Relief valves

Oil cooler

Auxiliary
control oil
pump

Suction
strainers

Modulator

Overspeed
trip ring

Accumulators

Pressure
Gauges

Non−
return
valves

Mechanically−
driven main
control oil
pump

Relief
valve

Non−
return
valves

Suction
strainers

Relay oil (4 bar)

To turbine lubrication system

Orifice

To gear lubrication system

Emergency
governor

Solenoid
operated
trip valve
(if required)

Orifice

Turbine, alternator & gear
lubricating oil (1−2 bar)

Orifice

To alternator
lubrication system

Relief
valve

Duplex
oil filter

Oil cooler

Mechanically−driven
main lubricating oil pump

Pressure
Gauge

Auxiliary
lubricating oil pump

Relay and lubricating oil suction

Control oil tank

Control oil suction

Lubricating oil tank

Figure 15.40 A control system for a speed-governed steam turbine

15.6.4 Generators

Generators for use with the prime movers previously
described will almost invariably operate in conjunction
with an alternating current electrical system. Such a.c.
generators will operate either in parallel with other sources
of supply (i.e. a grid system or other generators) or
in isolation providing the whole electrical supply to
an installation. A.C. generators can be one of the two
main types:

1. Asynchronous generator types are, in effect, induction
machines operated at super-synchronous speed. An
asynchronous generator can be either compensated
type, in which excitation supplies are provided via
a commutator, or uncompensated type,
in which
excitation supplies are provided by the supply
system to which the generator is connected. Clearly,
uncompensated generators are only suitable for use
in parallel with other sources of supply capable
of
current
necessary. While asynchronous generators offer a low-
cost option for generation, the disadvantages of lack of
control capability and the need usually for alternative

excitation-magnetizing

providing

the

sources of supply means that they are only occasionally
utilized and rarely at ratings exceeding 5 MW.

2. Synchronous generator type is in use for all generating
applications up to the highest ratings (660 MW and
above). The machine is operated at synchronous speed
and the terminal voltage and power factors of operation
are controlled by the excitation.
Principal features of synchronous generators relate to:
(a) The method of excitation;
(b) The method of cooling;
(c) Temperature rise classiﬁcations;
(d) Insulation systems.

Since synchronous machines represent

the most
common type of generator used in power installations,
the remainder of this section is principally concerned
with this type.

Excitation

The excitation system provides the magnetizing current
necessary for the generator to operate at the desired voltage
and, when in parallel with other generators, supplies the
required amount of reactive current. In modern practice
the excitation system can be either brushless or static.

15/230 Electricity Generation

Actuator

Control valve
(one of four)

Modulated oil (0−17 bar)

Pass-through

valve

Governor

Interlinking cabinet

Emergency valve

Optional
back-pressure
controller

Modulators

Control oil (100 bar)

Trip

Non-return valve

Relay oil (4 bar)

Pneumatic positioner

Pressure air

Pass-out controller

to turbine lubrication system

Orifice

To gear lubrication system

Turbine, alternator & gear
lubricating oil (1−2 bar) 

Orifice

To alternator
lubrication system

Relief
valve

Duplex
oil filter

Pressure
gauge

Overspeed
trip ring

Accumulators

Pressure
gauges

Relief
valve

Non-
return
valves

Emergency
governor

Solenoid
operated
trip valve
(if required)

Orifice

Non-
return
valves

Mechanically-
driven main
control oil
pump

Oil cooler

Mechanically-driven
main lubricating oil pump

Auxiliary
lubricating oil pump

Suction
strainers

Relay and lubricating oil suction

Non-return
valves
Control oil
filters

Relief valves

Oil cooler

Auxiliary
control oil
pump

Control oil suction

Suction
strainers

Figure 15.41 A control system for a pass-out steam turbine

Control oil tank

Lubricating oil tank

In a brushless system an a.c. exciter with a rotating
armature and stationary ﬁeld system is provided. The volt-
age applied to the stationary ﬁeld system is varied, thus
changing the output of the rotating armature. This output
is rectiﬁed via shaft-mounted diodes to produce a direct
current (D.C.) supply that is connected to the main gen-
erator ﬁeld.

The excitation system is generally designed such that
failure of a single diode within the rectifying bridge does
not affect the capability of the generator to provide full
load. Measuring the amount of alternating current (A.C.)
ripple induced within the A.C. exciter ﬁeld winding and
an alarm or trip provided can monitor diode failure. In
operation, however, diode failure rates are extremely low.
is supplied to the generator
ﬁeld winding via slip rings, the D.C. being produced
from diode cubicles supplied from rectiﬁer transformers
fed from the generator output. In general, static systems
are capable of producing a faster response time than
brushless systems and are typically used on larger (above
70 MW) sets.

In static systems D.C.

Cooling
Cooling of generators is classiﬁed according to the nature
of the coolant, the arrangement of the cooling circuit and
the method of supplying power to circulate the coolant.
For air-cooled machines, a simpliﬁed coding designation
is widely used to describe the cooling system. In this sys-
tem, the ﬁrst characteristic numeral signiﬁes the cooling
circuit arrangement (e.g. inlet duct ventilated or integral
heat exchanger) while the second signiﬁes the method
of supplying power to circulate the coolant (e.g. self-
circulation or from an integral mounted independently
powered fan). For machines with more than one cooling
system (e.g. a primary and a secondary cooling circuit) a
complete coding system is used. This includes the nature
of the coolant within each cooling system and the means
of circulating the coolant and of removing heat from the
machine.

Insulation type and temperature rise
The winding insulation must remain intact with respect
to both electrical insulating properties and mechanical

the life of

strength for
the machine. Operation of
insulation at temperatures higher than the design will
affect the life of the insulation.

Temperature-rise limitations above an assumed ambient
temperature (dependent upon location) are used to specify
the requirements of the insulation. Classiﬁcations utilized
for generators are typically:

Class A
Class B
Class F
Class H

105°C
130°C
155°C
180°C

Typically,
insulation limited to Class B and Class F
temperature rises will employ inorganic materials (e.g.

Plant and installation 15/231

mica or glass ﬁber) bonded with a thermosetting synthetic
resin. Class H type insulation may also include silicone
elastomers.

Connections
The connection of the generator to associated switchgear
may be from a cable box located on the side of the
generator or exposed terminals usually placed below the
machine. When the terminals are the exposed type a cable
connection can still be made by utilizing cable-sealing
ends or by phase-insulated or phase-segregated busbars.
Typically, cable boxes will be provided for machines rated
up to 10 MVA while for generators rated above 30 MVA,
phase-isolated busbars are generally used.

16/233

Electrical
Distribution and
Installation

I G Crow and R Robinson
Davy McKee (Stockton) Ltd and The Boots Co. PLC

16

Contents

16.1 Introduction
16.2 Bulk supply

16/235
16/235

16.2.1 Voltage and frequency 16/235
16.2.2 Load requirements 16/235
16.2.3 Fault level 16/235
16.2.4 Industrial maximum demand tariffs 16/235
16.2.5 Access 16/236

16.3 Distribution systems
16.4 Switchgear
16/237

16/236

16/237

16.4.1 Bulk oil 16/237
16.4.2 Minimum oil
16.4.3 Air 16/237
16.4.4 Sulfur hexaﬂuoride gas (SF6) 16/238
16.4.5 Vacuum 16/238
16.4.6 Range
16.4.7 Construction
16/238
16.4.8 Mechanisms 16/238

16/238

16.5 Transformers 16/239

16/239

16/239

16.5.1 Cooling
16.5.2 Types
16.5.3 Temperature rise 16/240
16.5.4 Tests 16/240
16.5.5 Fittings

16/240

16.8 Motors and motor control

16/248

16.8.1 Functions
16.8.2 Types of starter 16/248
16.8.3 Motor-starting equipment

16/248

16.9 Standby supplies

16/249

16/249

16.9.1 Deﬁnitions
16.9.2 Battery systems
16.9.3 UPS-A.C. systems
16.9.4 Standby diesel generators

16/249

16/250

16/249

16/250

16.10 Grounding

16/251

16.10.1 General 16/251
16.10.2 Earth electrode
16.10.3 Neutral grounding
16.10.4 Grounding in substations
16.10.5 Types of system grounding

16/251

16/252

16/252

16/252

16.11 Cables

16/253

16.11.1 Conductors
16.11.2 Insulation
16.11.3 Selection

16/253

16/253
16/253

16/242
16/242

16.6 Protection systems
16.6.1 Objectives
16.6.2 Discrimination
16.6.3 Testing
16.6.4 Relay types
16.6.5 Applications

16/242

16/242
16/243

16/242

16.7 Power factor correction 16/243

16/243

16.7.1 Background
16.7.2 Methods of achieving correction 16/243
16.7.3 Types of control
16.7.4 Potential problems

16/247

16/246

16.1 Introduction
This chapter introduces the basic items of design and
speciﬁcation for the principal systems and components
of an electrical industrial installation. Electrical supply
systems are discussed with regard to interface with the
supply authorities and the characteristics. Salient features
of switchgear, transformers, protection systems, power
factor correction, motor control equipment and standby
supplies are identiﬁed and discussed together with ref-
erence to the relevant codes of practice and standards.
The equipment and systems described are appropriate to
industrial plant installations operating at typically 11 kV
with supply capacities of around 20 MVA.

16.2 Bulk supply
The majority of industrial installations will receive all
or part of their electrical energy from an area electric-
ity board supply authority. The factors that will affect
the way in which this energy is imported to the site and
subsequently controlled are:

1. The voltage and frequency
2. The load requirements
3. The fault level
4. The tariff
5. Access to equipment

The key parameters for each of these factors are discussed
below.

16.2.1 Voltage and frequency

The voltage of the supply will depend upon the load
requirements of the site and the relative capability of
the local supply system. Voltages typically available are
33 kV, 11 kV, 6.6 kV, 4.16 kV, 415 V and 380 V. For some
larger installations, 132 kV (or higher) voltage supplies
may be provided.
Statutory regulations imposed upon the supply author-
ities will normally limit variations in supply voltage to š
6 per cent and in frequency to š 1 per cent. In order to
maintain supply systems within these limits supply author-
ities may, in certain cases, impose restrictions upon the
starting of large motors in terms of either current drawn
at start-up or of frequency of start-up. Alternatively, the
supply may be arranged so that the point of common cou-
pling with other consumers is at a higher voltage system
where source impedance will be lower.

The increasing usage of semiconductor equipment, par-
ticularly for variable-speed drives, has caused more atten-
tion to be given to the problem of distorting loads and the
harmonics, currents and voltages they create within the
supply system. The presence of harmonic voltages and
currents within a supply system will affect induction and
synchronous motors, transformers, power factor correc-
tion capacitors, energy metering and devices relying upon
a pure sine wave for operation.

Bulk supply 16/235

16.2.2 Load requirements
The load imposed upon the supply system will need to be
analyzed for load proﬁle, i.e.:
1. Is the load constant?
2. Does the load vary signiﬁcantly on a regular hourly,

daily or annual cycle?

3. Is the load likely to increase as the installation

expands?

4. Will the characteristics of the load affect the system

supplying it?
The factors that then need to be considered are potential
unbalanced loading, transient occurrences and harmonic
distortion. Unbalanced loading will cause an unequal dis-
placement of the voltages, producing a negative phase
sequence component in the supply voltage. Such negative
phase-sequence voltages will cause overheating, partic-
ularly in rotating plant. The starting of large motors or
the operation of electric arc furnaces are two examples
of loading which draw large amounts of reactive current
from the supply system. These currents, ﬂowing through
the largely reactive supply system, will result in ﬂuctu-
ations in the supply voltage, and these ﬂuctuations will
affect other consumers (e.g. causing lighting to ﬂicker).

16.2.3 Fault level
The fault level at the point of supply to the installation
requires consideration. The minimum fault level which
can occur will affect the operation of the installation, par-
ticularly with regard to voltage regulation when starting
motors, while the maximum fault level will determine
the ratings of equipment installed. All supply systems
develop with time, and the switchgear and other equip-
ment installed at an installation must be chosen to be
suitable if the external supply system expands.

The contribution of the installation itself to fault level
at the point of common coupling is another important
consideration. Rotating plant, either generators or motors,
will contribute to both make and break fault levels. The
contribution of synchronous machines to fault current can
be calculated from sub-transient and transient reactance
values, and although similar calculations can be carried
out for induction motors, accurate data are not gener-
ally readily available for groups of small motors operating
together, as in a typical industrial installation. Generally,
induction motor contribution to make fault levels is taken
as being equivalent to motor starting current and to break
levels as twice-motor full-load currents.

16.2.4 Industrial maximum demand tariffs
The exact details of industrial maximum demand tariffs
vary between supply authorities. However, the salient fea-
tures of most tariffs are as follows:

1. Fixed charge: This is typically a ﬁxed cost per month
plus a charge for each kVA of agreed capacity. It
is important to realize that any change in the opera-
tion of a particular site may affect the supply capacity
required. The supply capacity charge, although related
to, is not dependent on the rating of the equipment
installed at the site.

16/236 Electrical Distribution and Installation

2. Maximum demand: These charges are related either to
kVA or to kW of maximum demand. If they are of the
kW type then a separate power factor charge will be
made. The charges depend upon whether the supply is
provided at high or low voltage and the time of year.
They are higher if the supply is provided at low voltage
since the supply authority will seek to recover the cost
of the equipment and losses incurred in providing a
low-voltage supply. Within the Northern Hemisphere,
demand charges are highest for the months of January
and December and generally reduced for February and
November. They may also apply for March but are not
normally incurred during the remainder of the year.

3. Unit charge: This is related to actual energy consump-
tion, and two options are generally available; a rate
applicable for 24 hours or a split day and night rate,
with, typically, a 7-hour night period duration. In per-
unit terms these costs will be:
24 hours D 1 per unit.
Day/night D 17-hours day, 1.04 per unit
7-hours night 0.51 per unit

Some authorities offer reduced rates as energy usage
increases.

4. Power factor adjustment: Although related to the aver-
age power factor of the load, the method of calculation
may be based directly on measured power factor or on
the measurement of reactive kVA over the period.
Values at which power factor charges are incurred vary
from 0.8 to 0.95 lag.

16.2.5 Access
The switchgear provided at the installation for the pro-
vision of the supply by the supply authority will be the
property of that authority. That provided for the distri-
bution of the electricity around the installation will be
the property of the consumer, while metering for tariff
purposes will be located on or supplied from the supply
authority switchgear.

It is normal for the supply authority switchgear to be
separate from the consumers’ switchgear and frequently
located in a separate room within the same building. The
supply authority may insist that access to this equipment
or room is limited to their own personnel.

16.3 Distribution systems
The object of any electrical power distribution scheme
is to provide a power supply system that will convey
power economically and reliably from the supply point
to the many loads throughout the installation. The stan-
dard method of supplying reliable electrical supplies to
a load center is to provide duplicated 100 per cent rated
supplies. However, there are a number of ways in which
these supplies can be provided.

The standard approach for a secure supply system is to
provide duplicated transformer supplies to a switchboard
with each transformer rated to carry the total switchboard
load. Both transformers are operated in parallel, and the
loss of single incoming supply will not therefore affect
the supply to the load feeders. With this conﬁguration the

supply switchboard must be able to accept the fault cur-
rent produced when both transformers are in parallel. The
system must, however, be designed for the voltage reg-
ulation to remain within acceptable limits when a single
transformer supplies the load.

If the two incoming supplies are interlocked to prevent
parallel operation, the power ﬂow, fault current ﬂow and
a single transformer governs voltage regulation supply in-
feed. This conﬁguration has the disadvantage that the loss
of a single in-feed will cause a temporary loss of supply to
one set of load until re-switching occurs. The advantage is
that each incoming transformer can be rated higher than
the ﬁrst, and thus a higher concentration of loads can
be supplied.

A third alternative is to rate the transformer in-feeds
for single supplies but to arrange for automatic switching
of the bus section and two incomers in the event of loss
of supply to one section. A rapid transfer switching to the
remaining supply in the event of loss of single supply can
prevent the total loss of motor loads. In such a situation,
the effect of the current taken by motors to which the
supply has been restored must be taken into account.

Since a group of motors re-accelerating together will
draw an increased current from the supply, this current
will affect voltage regulation and must be recognized
when selecting protection relay settings. Figure 16.1

2 × 100% rated transformers

Loads

Loads

(a)

Bus section switch, normally closed

2 out of 3 closed interlock 

Loads

Loads

(b)

Bus section switch, normally open

Figure 16.1 Transformer arrangement. (a) Parallel operations; (b)
2 out of 3 interlock

Table 16.1 Load supply capabilities and single and parallel transformer combinations

Source
Voltage

KV

33
11
11

Load

Load circuit breaker

Max. supply transformer rating (MVA)

Fault
level
MVA

1428
476
476

Voltage

kV

11
3.3
0.415

630

12
3.6
–

Full load, rating

2000
MVA

38.1
11.4
1.4

A

3000

–
–
2.2

Fault
rating

kA(MVA)

25 (476)
25 (143)
50 (35.9)

6

21
6.1
12

Rectance (%)
10
6

Parallel

10

Single

35.7
10.2
1.9

38.1
11.4
2.2

38.1
11.4
2.2

Switchgear 16/237

illustrates these arrangements of transformer operation.
The effect of these combinations upon the loads that
can be supplied is summarized in Table 16.1 for two
typical supply voltages and fault levels, circuit breaker
capabilities and transformer reactance.

In the case of parallel operation the maximum trans-
former rating is limited by the fault rating of the switch-
gear, while for a single transformer in-feed the limitation
is by the full-load current rating of the switchgear.

Table 16.1 takes into account only the fault contribution
from the supply system. The contribution from rotating
plant within an installation must also be considered when
specifying switchgear and transformer ratings.

If a fully duplicated supply system is thought to be
necessary, the transformer reactance can be increased in
order to limit the fault level when operating in parallel
mode. However, this will increase the initial capital cost,
and voltage regulation with a single transformer in circuit
will still need to be maintained within acceptable limits.

16.4 Switchgear
Switchgear is a general term covering circuit-interruption
devices, the assemblies that enclose them and associated
equipment such as current transformers, voltage trans-
formers, disconnects switches, grounding switches and
operating mechanisms. The circuit breaker is the inter-
rupting device within the switchgear capable of closing
onto, carrying and breaking those currents which can ﬂow
under healthy or fault conditions.

Switchgear is frequently described by the medium used
in the interrupting device and method of mounting. The
principal types of medium presently in operation are bulk
oil, minimum oil, air, sulfur hexaﬂuoride gas (SF6) and
vacuum. The most common mounts for indoor industrial
switchgear are cubicle and metal clad. The main features
of and the perceived advantages and disadvantages of
the different types of medium are reviewed below, while
international standards applicable to switchgear are listed
in Table 16.2.

16.4.1 Bulk oil

The fact that oil was effective for the extinction of the arc
formed between the opening contacts of a circuit breaker
was discovered towards the end of the nineteenth cen-
tury. In a bulk oil circuit breaker the oil is used both as
the medium for arc extinction and as the insulating mate-
rial of the contacts. The contacts are contained within a

Table 16.2 British Standards applicable to switchgear

BS 5311, High voltage alternating current circuit breaker
BS 6867, Code of Practice for maintenance of electrical

switchgear for voltages above 36 kV

BS 158, Insulating oil for transformers and switchgear
BS 5622, Insulation co-ordination
BS 5227, A.C. metal enclosed switchgear and control gear of

rated voltage above 1 kV

BS 4752, Switchgear and control gear for voltages up to and

including 1000 V a.c. and 1200 V d.c

BS 3938, Current transformers

small chamber within the oil-ﬁlled breaker tank. When
the circuit breaker contacts open an arc is formed which
decomposes the oil, creating gases. These form a bubble
that forces oil across the arc path, causing rapid extinction
of the arc. Bulk oil circuit breakers have been used for
many years, and it is probable that about 70 per cent of
the high-voltage circuit breakers installed are of this type.
The principal advantages of bulk oil circuit breakers

are

1. Simplicity
2. Robustness in construction
3. Familiarity to users
4. Low capital cost

The disadvantages are:

1. Potential ﬁre risk
2. Short-circuit contact life
3. Maintenance costs
4. Possible re-strike problems with capacitor switching

16.4.2 Minimum oil

In a minimum oil circuit breaker only the arc control
device is enclosed within an oil-ﬁlled housing. This hous-
ing is supported and insulated separately to provide the
necessary phase clearances between phase connections
and earth.

16.4.3 Air

Air circuit breakers can be either air break types (which
utilize atmospheric air) or air blast (which use compressed
air). Air-break type breakers extinguish the arc by high-
resistance interruption, the arc being controlled within an

16/238 Electrical Distribution and Installation

arc chute. As the arc resistance increases, the current is
reduced until at current zero arc extinction occurs.

Air-blast circuit breakers operate on the low-resistance
principle; the arc length is minimized and a blast of air
is directed across the arc to cool and remove ionized gas.
Air break circuit breakers are now used extensively at
medium voltages while air blast circuit breakers have been
employed up to the highest voltages.

For use at normal industrial distribution voltages the

principal advantages are:

1. Suitability for all types of switching
2. Good fault ratings
3. No ﬁre risk
4. Low maintenance costs

The main disadvantages are:

1. Capital cost
2. Physical size

16.4.4 Sulfur hexaﬂuoride gas (SF6)
Sulfur hexaﬂuoride gas
(SF6) has a high thermal
conductivity and a high electronegative attraction for
ions. It has insulating properties similar to oil and arc-
interruption properties comparable to compressed air at
4826 kN/m2. Recent switchgear design utilizes SF6 at a
relatively low pressure for insulation, with compression
occurring via a piston activated by the opening mechanism
of the contacts.

Principal advantages of SF6 circuit breakers are:

1. Good arc-extinction properties
2. Low maintenance
3. Size and few disadvantages are perceived.

16.4.5 Vacuum
As a replacement for bulk oil circuit breakers for dis-
tribution purposes, vacuum is a rival to SF6. The contact
interruption chamber is a sealed unit with a small contact-
separation distances (typically, 16 mm for 24 kV). Choice
of contact material is critical since the material affects:

1. The electrical and mechanical conductivity;
2. The production of metal vapor upon arc interruption
necessary to control current chopping and permit volt-
age recovery; and

3. The provision of consistent contact wear and separa-

tion.

Principal advantages of vacuum circuit breakers are:

1. Minimum maintenance
2. Less operating energy required
3. Size

Its disadvantages are:

1. Possible restriction on fault capability
2. Possible switching over-voltages

16.4.6 Range

Distribution voltage switchgear is designed for the range
of full-load current and fault-current capabilities shown in
Table 16.3.

16.4.7 Construction

A.C. metal enclosed switch gear and control gear between
the voltages of 1 and 72.5 kV can be manufactured to three
basic designs: metal enclosed, metal clad and cubicle.

In metal-enclosed assemblies, the equipment is con-
tained within a grounded metal enclosure. In metal-clad
types, separate compartments are provided for the circuit
interrupter, the components connected to one side of the
interrupter (e.g. the cable box) and those connected to the
other side of the interrupter (e.g. the busbar chamber and
the control equipment).

Cubicle-type switchgear may have non-metallic compo-
nents for separation between compartments, no segrega-
tion between compartments housing different components
or they may be of a more open type of construction.
Frequently access to cubicle-type switchgear is via doors
interlocked to prevent access to energized parts. The other
feature of construction of switchgear concerns the circuit
breaker itself, which can be either ﬁxed type or remov-
able. In a ﬁxed construction, the switchgear will be ﬁtted
with isolating and grounding switches so that access to the
circuit breaker is only possible when the circuit breaker
is safely isolated from the supply.

In a removable design, the circuit breaker is mounted on
either a truck or a swing-out frame. The circuit breaker is
arranged so that isolation from the busbars is only possible
when the circuit breaker is open. Connections between
the removable circuit breaker and the ﬁxed assembly are
either by a plug and socket arrangement or by secondary
isolating contacts. Figure 16.2 illustrates a truck-mounted,
vertically isolated, metal-clad, SF6 circuit breaker design
as marketed by a UK manufacturer.

16.4.8 Mechanisms

Operating mechanisms for switchgear can be either stored-
energy or dependent-energy closing. Stored-energy clos-
ing is frequently achieved by means of a spring, which
is either manually charged (type QM) or charged by an
electrical motor. Dependent-energy closing is by use of a
solenoid.

Table 16.3 Capability of distribution voltage switchgear

Full-load current

(A)

Medium

Typical

Bulk oil
Minimum oil
Air
SF6
Vacuum

1200
1600
2500
2000
2000

Max.

2000
4000
5000
3150
2000

Fault current

(kA)

Typical

Max.

26.4
26.4
26.4
25
25

43.72
50
52
50
40

Transformers 16/239

mineral oil also augments the removal of heat from the
windings.

In power transformer manufacture the case of paper
insulation and oil used in combination is well established.
Both materials can be operated safely at the same max-
imum temperature (105°C) and this combination of use
seems unlikely to be phased out in the near future.

For transformer windings immersed in oil, hydrocarbon
oil
is the most widely used, whereas in areas where
ﬁre risk is a problem, then air-cooled transformers (AN)
or synthetic silicon-based liquid cooling (SN) can be
speciﬁed. Silicon-based liquids do not have any of the
disadvantages identiﬁed with the chlorinated biphenyls.
Air-cooled transformers can be provided with Class C
insulation or be cast resin insulated. The relative costs
per unit of each type are:

1.25-1.5

1

1.8
2.0

Mineral oil
Silicon ﬁlled
Class C
Cast resin

16.5.2 Types
ONAN

Oil-immersed air-cooled transformers cover the majority
of units installed of up to 5 MVA rating. Fins or corru-
gations of the tank or by tube banks provide cooling of
the oil. For ONAN transformers of above 5 MVA rating
radiator banks of elliptical tubes or banks of corrugated
radiators are often provided.

ONAF

In oil-immersed air-forced transformers, a direct blast of
air from banks of fans is provided to the radiators, which
increases the rate of heat dissipation. This arrangement
has no effect upon the size of the transformer itself but
less space for external coolers is required.

Figure 16.2 NEI Reyrolle SF6 switchgear

The selection of operating mechanism will depend upon
the control regime required for the circuit breaker. If
the circuit breaker is to be operated locally (i.e. at the
switchgear itself) then the manually charged spring option
will be acceptable. If it is to be operated from a remote
location then either motor-wound spring or solenoid oper-
ation will be required.

This choice will depend upon circuit breaker avail-
ability required, since a motor-wound spring has a ﬁnite
spring-wind time. A solenoid operation will impose a sig-
niﬁcant load upon the D.C. supplies while a motor-wound
spring will require a supply to the spring-wind motor.

16.5 Transformers
Transformers are classiﬁed by their method of cooling,
winding connection arrangement and temperature-rise
classiﬁcations. Each of these parameters is applicable,
irrespective of the voltage ratio and rating required. Core-
type transformers are used for almost all power systems
applications. In core-type transformers the primary and
secondary windings are arranged concentrically around
the core leg of substantially circular cross section.
International standards applicable to transformers are
listed in Table 16.4.

16.5.1 Cooling

OFAN

Mineral oil provides greater insulation strength than air for
any given clearance. When used in a power transformer

Oil-immersed air natural circulation is an uncommon arr-
angement, and is useful only if the coolers are situated
away from the transformer.

Table 16.4 British Standards applicable to transformers and
their components

OFAF

BS 171, Power transformers:

Part 1, General
Part 2, Temperature rise
Part 3, Insulation levels and preelectric tests
Part 4, Tappings and connections
Part 5, Ability to withstand short circuit

BS 158, Insulating oil for transformers and switchgear
BS 2757, Thermal classiﬁcation of electrical insulation
BS 223, Bushings for alternating voltages above 1000 V
BS 5622, Insulation co-ordination
BS 2562, Cable sealing boxes for oil-immersed transformers

Most larger-rated transformers are oil-forced air-forced
cooled. Oil-forced circulation improves the heat dissipa-
tion around the windings, thus reducing the size of the
transformer itself and air blast cooling of the radiators
decreases the size of the cooling surfaces. Thermostatic
control of both oil forcing and air blast is usually pro-
vided so that each is brought into service at a different oil
temperature. The ONAN rating of an OFAF transformer
is typically 50 per cent of the OFAF rating, although any
value can be designed when required.

16/240 Electrical Distribution and Installation

AN

These are solidly insulated transformers using typically
cast resin insulation. They are particularly useful when
an indoor installation is necessary, since they represent a
very low ﬁre risk and oil leakage and drainage does not
need to be considered. AN transformer maximum ratings
are typically of the order of 1500 kVA. Forced cooling
(AF) can be added in the same way as that of the oil-
immersed transformers, permitting increased output from
the same size of unit.

16.5.3 Temperature rise

Temperature classes for transformers A, E, B, F, H and
C are generally recognized. All classes are applicable to
both oil-immersed and air-cooled transformers. Classes A,
B, H and C are most commonly used but the use of Class
F is increasing.

For windings immersed in either hydrocarbon oil or
synthetic liquids the coil insulation is usually a Class
A material. For oil-immersed transformers BS 171 spec-
ify two maximum oil temperatures: 60°C for sealed-type
transformers for those ﬁtted with conservators and 55°C
for transformers without either. In the case of air-insulated,
air-cooled transformers, the class of insulation used, i.e,
limits the maximum permitted temperature rise:

Class A
Class B
Class C

60°C
90°C
150°C

Table 16.5 Rated withstand voltage transformers

High voltage

(kV)

Rated short-duration

power frequency
withstand voltage

Rated lighting impulse

withstand voltagea

(kV)

(kV)

(Peak)

3.6
7.2
12
24
36

10
20
28
50
70

20
40
60
95
145

40
60
75
125
170

aChoice of rated lighting impulse withstand voltage depends on
exact site conditions and duties.

with tapings, the impedance is conventionally expressed
in terms of the rated voltage for the tapping concerned.

16.5.5 Fittings

In selecting the ﬁttings to be provided, the speciﬁers of a
transformer have a wide choice. The most common types
and their purpose are as follows.

Oil-level indicator

This is usually mounted on the transformer tank, provid-
ing a visual indication of the transformer oil level.

Thermometer pockets

These temperature rises apply above a maximum ambient
temperature of 40°C and a daily average temperature of
30°C is assumed.

These measure oil temperature from a separate tempera-
ture indicator.

16.5.4 Tests

BS 171 deﬁnes both routine and type tests for transform-
ers. Routine tests comprise the following:

1. Ratio measurement, polarity check and phase relation-

ship;

2. Measurement of winding resistance;
3. Measurement of insulation resistance;
4. Measurement of load loss and impedance voltage;
5. Measurement of core loss and magnetizing current;
6. High-voltage withstand tests. The rated withstand volt-
ages applicable to transformers of up to 36 kV are
shown in Table 16.5.

The measurement of impedance voltage is deﬁned as
the voltage required circulating full-load current in one
winding with the other windings short-circuited. It is com-
mon practice to express the leakage impedance, Z, of a
transformer as a percentage (or per unit) value. The per
unit value is:
V
IZ
Where V and I refer to full-load current and rated voltage
and IZ is the voltage measured at rated current during a
short-circuit test transformer. In the case of a transformer

Tap changing

The range and duty (i.e. off-load/on-load) can be speciﬁed
to suit each particular installation. For standard distribu-
tion transformers of up to 3.15 MVA rating for use purely
as load supplies, off-load tap changing for a š 5 per cent
voltage range is normal.

Breather/conservator/gas and oil relay

This is speciﬁed where the transformer is of the breathing
type. The gas- and oil-actuated relay will be ﬁtted with
contacts for remote alarm or tripping.

Pressure-relief device

This is essential on a sealed transformer and optional on
a breathing unit. It can be ﬁtted with contacts for remote
alarm/tripping.

Disconnecting chambers

These are ﬁtted between the cable boxes and the trans-
former windings and are accessible through a secured
cover. Disconnecting chambers can be employed as a
method of isolation, but their most common usage is to
facilitate phase-to-phase testing of the connected cables.

Vector
symbols

Line terminal markings

and vector diagram
of induced voltage

HV winding LV winding

Yy0

C2

A2

B2

A2

A

c2

a2

b2

a2

c

a

A1
B1
C1

A 2 A 2
B 2 B 2
C2 C2

A1 A2
B1

A2

B2 B2

a2
b2
c2

a2

b2

c2

a2
b2
c2

a1
b1
c1

a2

b2

a1

b1

c2

c1

B2

c2

B
A2

b2

C1

C2 C2
n

Dd0

Dz0

Zd0

C

C2

C

A

B2

A
C

B4

B
A4
B

C2

C
C4

A

B

b
a4
a
c

b

a

a2

b

c
c4

b4

A1

B1

A2

A2

a4

a4

a3

a2

B2 B2

b4

b4

b3

b2

C1

C2 C2 c4

c4

c3

c2

a1

b1
c1

N

c

c2

a

b

b2

A1 A2 A3 A4 A4

B1 B2

B3

B4 B4

a1
a2 a2
b2 b2 b1

C1

C2 C3 C4 C4 c2 c2

c1

Yy6

C2

A2

B2

A

B2

B
A2

C

C2

C

A

C2

B

A4
B

C
C4

A

B2
A
C

B4

B

Dd6

Dz6

Zd6

c1

c1

a1
b

b1

a

c

a1

a

b
a3
b

c3
c

c1

b
b3

c
a

b1

a

c

a1

A1
B1
C1

A1

B1

C1

A1

B1

C1

A 2 A 2
B 2 B 2
C2 C2

A2 A2

B2 B2

C2 C2

n

A2 A2

B2 B2
C2 C2
N

A1 A2 A3 A4 A4
B4 B4

B1 B2

B3

a1 a2
b1 b2
c1 c2

a1 a2
b1 b2
c1
c2

a1

b1
c1

a1

b1

c1

a3

b3

a4
b4

c3

c4

a1
b1

a3
b3

c3

a1

a2
b2 b1

c2

c1

a2

b2

c2

a1
b1

c1

C1 C2 C3 C4 C4 c1

Group No. 4 : Phase displacement = Plus 30° 
Line terminal markings

Group No. 1 : Phase displacement =  0° 

Group No. 2 : Phase displacement = 180° 

Transformers 16/241

Winding connections

N

n

Vector
symbols

Line terminal markings

and vector diagram
of induced voltage

HV winding LV winding

Winding connections

A2

b1

N

n

Group No. 3 : Phase displacement = Minus 30° 

Vector
symbols

Line terminal markings

and vector diagram
of induced voltage

HV winding LV winding

Winding connections

Vector
symbols

Dy 1

Yd 1

Yz 1

Zy 1

A2

B

c2

a2

A

C2

B2

C
A2

C2

B2

A2

C2

A

B

C4
C

B2

A4
C
A

B
B4

b2
a2

a

b2
a4
a

c

b4
a2

b2

c

b

b

a
b

c2

c
c4

c2

A1
B1

C1

A1
B1
C1

n

A 2

A 2
B 2

B 2
C2 C2

N

A2 A2
B2 B2
C2 C2
N

n

a2
b2
c2

a2
b2
c2

a2
b2
c2

a1
b1
c1

a2
b2
c2

a1
b1
c1

A1
B1
C1

A2
B2
C2

a3
b3
c3

a2
a1
b2 b1
c2
c1

a4
a4
b4 b4
c4

A2
B2
C2 c4
n
N

A1 A2

B1 B2

C1 C2

a2

A
3 A4 A4
B
b2
3
C
3 C4 C4 c2

B4 B4

a2

b2

c2

a1

b1

c1

Dy11

Yd11

Yz11

Zy11

and vector diagram
of induced voltage

HV winding LV winding

A2

a2

C

A

C2

B2

B
A2

C2

B2

c2
a2

a

c2

b

c

A2

a

a4

c
a
c

C2

B2

A4
B
A

C
C4

A
C

B4

B

b

c4
a2

c2

b2

b2

b
b4

b2

Winding connections

A1

B1

C1

A1
B1

C1

A1
B1
C1

n

A 2 A 2

a2

a2

a1

B 2 B 2

C2 C2
N

b2
c2

b2
c2

A2 A2
B2 B2

C2 C2
N

a2

b2
c2
n

a2

b2

c2

b1
c1

a1

b1
c1

A2 A2
B2 B2
C2 C2 c4

a4
a4
b4 b4
c4
n

N

a3
b3
c3

a2
a1
b2 b1
c2
c1

A1 A2 A3 A4 A4

a2

a2 a1

B3

B4 B4

b2
B1 B2
C1 C2 C3 C4 C4 c2

b2 b1

c2 c1

All transformers from any one group may
be operated in parallel with other transformers
from the same group.
Phase displacement applies for counter
clockwise phase rotation.

Figure 16.3 Typical transformer vector groupings and connection arrangements

16/242 Electrical Distribution and Installation

Connection

Figure 16.3 illustrates the most commonly used trans-
former, grouping and winding arrangements and phase
displacements.

16.6 Protection systems
The analysis and understanding of the operation of protec-
tion systems and the application of protective devices to
power systems is wide ranging and complex. This section
considers only the objectives of protection systems, dis-
crimination and its importance to protection, and describes
the most common types of relay used in industrial power
systems. Many publications covering the subject of pro-
tection systems are available (e.g. Power System Protec-
tion, edited by the Electricity Council).

16.6.1 Objectives
All electrical systems must be provided with protection
equipment,
the purpose of which is to isolate faulty
electrical equipment from the electrical supply system as
rapidly as possible. This can be achieved by use of devices
which respond directly to the current ﬂowing (e.g. fuses),
or by protective relays which respond to fault current ﬂow
and are used to initiate the tripping of other devices (e.g.
circuit breakers).

So that only the faulty equipment

is isolated from
the supply, the protective devices provided throughout
a power system must discriminate between faulty and
healthy equipment. This discrimination of protective
equipment is a key element in the design of electrical
systems and the selection of protection devices for use
within them. Each electrical system must be provided
with an adequate number of suitably rated disconnecting
devices located correctly throughout the power system.
These must be so arranged that only appropriate devices
operate to remove the faulty equipment from the supply.

16.6.2 Discrimination
The methods of achieving discrimination most commonly
found in industrial power systems are as follows:

1. By time: Protective relays are provided with time delay
features such that the device closest to the fault will
operate ﬁrst.

2. By magnitude: In different parts of power system fault

currents of different magnitude can ﬂow.

3. By time/direction: Protective devices responsive to the
direction of current ﬂow. These are necessary for par-
allel feeders or closed ring-main supplies.

4. By comparison: The currents ﬂowing into and out of a
circuit are compared. In a healthy circuit, or in a cir-
cuit in which through fault current is ﬂowing, the two
currents should be equal and the protective device does
not operate. (Compensation for any transformation is
necessary.) If the two currents differ, the protective
device operates.

In selecting discriminating time margins between
protective devices connected in series the following

should be taken into account. Full discrimination is
achieved between fuses of different rating when the lower
rated or minor fuse without affecting the higher rated or
major fuse clears the fault. In order to achieve this, the
total let-through energy of the minor fuse must be less
than the let-through energy necessary to cause pre-arching
of the major fuse.

16.6.3 Testing

Tests carried out on protection systems comprise factory
tests, on-site commissioning tests and maintenance checks.
Those made on individual relays will demonstrate the
compliance of the equipment with speciﬁcation and the
veriﬁcation of its operation under simulated conditions,
while tests carried out on-site prior to the equipment being
put into service ensure that the full protection scheme and
associated equipment operate correctly. These on-site tests
must be comprehensive and should include:

1. Performance tests on current and voltage transform-
ers to verify ratio and polarity. These may include the
injection of current into the primary load circuit (pri-
mary injection).

2. Sensitivity and stability checks on each protective
device. These tests may be carried out either by
primary injection or by the injection of voltage into
the CT secondary circuit (secondary injection).

3. Wiring checks, including insulation resistance and any

pilot cables.

4. Operational checks on all tripping and alarm circuits.
5. Calibration checks on all relevant relays.

On-site commissioning tests of protection equipment
must be carried out in a planned logical manner, and
arranged so that the disturbance of tested equipment is
minimized.

16.6.4 Relay types

The main relay types found within an industrial power
system can be:

1. Instantaneous in operation;
2. Deﬁnite time; or
3. Inverse, in which the time of operation is dependent
upon the magnitude of the current, and such relays
can be arranged to protect equipment in one of the
following ways:
(a) Unrestricted: The protection device will operate in
response to any fault current ﬂowing through the
circuit.

(b) Restricted: The protection device will operate in
response to any fault current ﬂowing within a zone
restricted by the location of the current transform-
ers. Such protection is normally applied to a single
winding of a power transformer.

(c) Differential: The protection device will operate in
response to a fault current ﬂowing within a zone
bounded by current transformers located at each
end of the protected circuit.

Such protection can be used on a power transformer, a
motor or generator, or a single feeder. In addition, other
types of relay are used for particular applications (e.g.
transformer Buchholz gas, neutral voltage displacement
and over-voltage).

16.6.5 Applications
Figures 16.4 and 16.5 show typical protection schemes
for two circuits of a 60 MW generator, a generator trans-
former with tripping logic and a 2 MVA transformer. The
ﬁgures illustrate the protection devices provided the cur-
rent and voltage transformers supplying them and the
tripping scheme associated with each.

16.7 Power factor correction
16.7.1 Background
Power factor in an alternating current circuit is deﬁned
as the ratio of actual circuit power in watts (W) to the
apparent power in voltage amperes (VA). The need for
correction arises from fact that the majority of A.C. elec-
trical loads take from the supply a lagging quadruple
current (voltage amperes reactive, var) and thus operates
at a lagging power factor due to the reactive (rather than
capacitive) nature of their construction.

Most industrial installations comprise a combination of

one or more of the following electrical loads:

1. A.C. motors (induction)
2. Furnaces (electric arc, induction)
3. Fluorescent or discharge lighting
4. Power transformers
5. Thyristor drive equipment (for either A.C. or D.C.

drives)

6. Welding machines

All these types of load fall into the above category and
operate at a lagging power factor.

Since the electrical supply system carries the full
apparent power (VA), a current higher than is theoretically
necessary to supply the power demand needs to be
supplied. Equipment must therefore be rated to carry the
full apparent power plus the losses of the supply system,
which are proportional to the square of the current.

A supply system operating at a low power factor will be
inefﬁcient due to the overrating of the supply components
and to the losses incurred, and supply authorities will seek
to recover the costs of this inefﬁcient operation by introduc-
ing cost penalties for consumers operating at a low power
factor. In practice, these penalties are incurred on the basis
of either the maximum demand of the apparent power in
kVA of the load or of charges initiated if the power factor
falls below a set trigger point (typically, 0.95 lag). The lat-
ter charges are monitored by measuring either the power
factor directly or by the relative current drawn by the load
and comparing it with the actual power drawn.

Within any particular installation, in instances where no
ﬁnancial penalties are incurred from the supply author-
ity the power factor of individual circuits will inﬂuence
both the losses within the installation and the system’s
voltage regulation. Therefore, power factor correction is

Power factor correction 16/243

considered necessary in order to achieve one or more of
the following objectives:
1. A direct reduction in the charges made by the supply

authority;

2. A reduction in the losses within a system with conse-

quent savings in charges;

3. An improvement in the voltage regulation of a system.
Figure 16.6 illustrates the phasor diagram applicable to
power factor correction.

16.7.2 Methods of achieving correction
The power factor of an installation can be improved by
the use of either A.C. synchronous machines or of static
capacitor banks. An A.C. synchronous machine will either
draw current from the supply or contribute current to the
supply, depending on whether the machine is operating:
1. As a generator, driven by a prime mover, contributing

active power;

2. As a motor-driving load, drawing active power;
3. Over-excited, contributing reactive var; or
4. Under-excited, drawing reactive var.
Figure 16.7 illustrates these four modes of operation.

When an A.C. synchronous machine operating as a
motor in parallel with other loads and an external supply
system is over-excited the machine will contribute reac-
tive kvar to the supply. The net effect of this will be to
reduce the amount of reactive current drawn from the sup-
ply, and this will improve the overall system power factor.
When an A.C. synchronous machine operating as a gen-
erator in parallel with other loads and external supply
system is over-excited the net effect will still be to reduce
the amount of reactive current drawn from the supply.

However, the power factor of the current drawn from
the supply will only improve if the power factor of the
generated current is less than that of the parallel loads,
since the active power drawn from the supply will also
be reduced by the amount of actual power generated. In
each case increasing the excitation so that the power fac-
tor of the current drawn from the supply can improve to
unity or become leading can increase the reactive current
produced by the synchronous machine within the capabil-
ities of the machine. In this case, the installation becomes
a net exporter of lagging reactive current to the supply.
Figure 16.8 illustrates these two cases.

The second method of improving the power factor of
an installation is to provide static capacitor banks. These
can be installed as a single block at the point of sup-
ply busbar, as a set of switchable banks or as individual
units connected to speciﬁc loads. For an installation where
no synchronous machines are installed for other purposes
(i.e. as prime movers or generators) then static capacitor
banks are almost invariably the most cost-effective way
of improving the power factor.

The amount of power factor correction capacitors
necessary in order to correct from an initial power factor
cos phi ((cid:6)) to a target power factor cos (cid:6)1 is given by:
Initial reactive requirement (cid:6) D P tan (cid:6)
Final reactive requirement (cid:6)1 D P tan (cid:6)1

Correction required D P(cid:8)tan (cid:6) (cid:3) tan (cid:6)1(cid:9)

16/244 Electrical Distribution and Installation

 

V
S
M

 

n
e
p
O

e
s
o
C

l

l

o
r
t

n
o
C

t

n
e
v
 
l
i

o

S
T
M

,

y
g
r
e
m
E

p
i
r
t

i

e
c
v
e
d

r
e
v
e

l
 

p
i
r
t
 

i

e
n
b
r
u

t
 
l

a
c
o
L

p
i
r
t
 

d
e
e
p
s
r
e
v
O

d
e
e
p
s
r
e
v
o
p
u
-
k
c
a
B

 

n
o

i
t

a
r
b
v
 

i

g
n
i
r
a
e
B

t
l

u
a

f
 

n
o

i
t

a

t
i
c
x
E

l

d
e
F

i

h
c
t
i

w
s

.

n
e
G

.

.

B
C

Urgent trips

Urgent trips

d
r
a
w
r
o

f

r
e
w
o
p

)

P
L
(

w
o
L

Non-urgent trips

h
g
h

i

 
l

e
v
e

l
 
l
l

t

e
w
o
h
e

 

t

a
s
n
e
d
n
o
C

h
g
h

i

 
l

e
v
e

l
 
t

o
p
e

 

t

a
s
n
e
d
n
o
C

 

r
a
e
w
g
n
i
r
a
e
b

 
t
s
u
r
h
T

h
g
h

i

 

p
m
e

t
 
t
s
u
a
h
x
E

l
i

o

 

b
u

l
 
f

o
 
s
s
o
L

m
u
u
c
a
v
 
w
o
L

.

B
P.
 
y
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

e
n
o
z
 
r
a
b
s
u
B

)
T
D
C
O

(

)
F
E
R

(

)
F
E
B
S

(

)

D
B

(

)
T
W

(

)
T
O

(

)

B

(

)

S
P
N

(

)

P
R

(

)

C
C

(

 
t
l

u
a

f
 

h

t
r
a
e
d
e

 

t
c
i
r
t
s
e
r
 

V
k
3
3

t

n
e
r
r
u
c
r
e
v
o
V
k
3
3

 

t
l

u
a

f
 

h

 

t
r
a
e
V
k
3
3

s
a
g

l

 
z
o
h
h
c
u
B

p
m
e

t
 

i

g
n
d
n
W

i

p
m
e

t
 
l
i

O

t

n
e
r
r
u
c
 

g
n

i
t

l

a
u
c
r
i
c
 
l
l

a
r
e
v
O

e
c
n
e
u
q
e
s
 

e
s
a
h
p

 

e
v
i
t

a
g
e
N

 

r
e
w
o
p
e
s
r
e
v
e
R

l

a

i
t

n
e
r
e

f
f
i

 

d
d
e
s
a
B

i

 

)
T
D
C
O
V

(
 
t

n
e
r
r
u
c
r
e
v
o

 

i

d
e
n
a
r
t
s
e
r
 
e
g
a

t
l

o
V

)
T
D
E
L
(

)
T
E

I

(

)
T
D
V
O

(

)
F
U

(

n
o

i
t

a

t
i
c
x
e

 
f

o
 
s
s
o
L

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
f
 
r
e
d
n
U

e
g
a

t
l

o
v
 
r
e
v
O

t
l

u
a

f
 

h

t
r
a
E

p
i
r
t
 
t
l

u
a

j

f
 
r
o
a
m
C
H
E

 

Turbine & boiler

Switchgear

33kV

Generator transformer

Generator

B

T
W

T
O

 

V
O

 

T
D

D
B

 

 

C
O

 

T
D

F
E
R

B
S

 

F

 
 

E

C
C

 

P
 
L

F
U

S
P
N

 

P
R

C
O
V

T
D

E
 
L

 

T
D

I

T
E

l

a

i
t

n
e
r
e

f
f
i

D

t

n
e
r
r
u
c
r
e
v
O

e
n
o
z
 
s
u
B

T
W

B

T
D

r
e
w
o
p
w
o
L

 

t

n
e
r
r
u
c

t

n
e
r
r
u
c
r
e
v
O

g
n

i
t

l

a
u
c
r
i

C

l

a

i
t

n
e
r
e

f
f
i

g
n

i
t

l

a
u
c
r
i

D

C

t

n
e
r
r
u
c

t
l

u
a

f
 

h

t
r
a
E

r
o
t
a
r
e
n
e
g
 
e
n
b
r
u

i

t
 

m
a
e

t
s
 
.
W
M
0
6

i

 
c
g
o

l
 

i

g
n
p
p
i
r
t
 

d
n
a

 

n
o

i
t
c
e

t

o
r
p

 
t

n
e
m
e
g
n
a
r
r
a

 
l

i

a
c
p
y
T

 
 
r
o
t
a
r
e
n
e
g
 
e
n
b
r
u

i

t
 

m
a
e
t
s
 
.
W
M
0
6

 

a

 
r
o

i

f
 
c
g
o

l
 

i

g
n
p
p
i
r
t
 

d
n
a

 

n
o

i
t
c
e

t

o
r
P
4

 

.

1
2

 

e
r
u
g
F

i

r
o
t
a
r
e
n
e
g
e
n
b
r
u
t

i

m
a
e
t
s

W
M
0
6

a
r
o
f

c
i
g
o

l

i

g
n
p
p
i
r
t
d
n
a
n
o
i
t
c
e
t
o
r
P

.

4
6
1

e
r
u
g
F

i

Power factor correction 16/245

11kV, 1250A, 25KA

Breaker rating
type of closing mech.

630 A

Motor wound spring

O/C & E.F.
Protection

Instrument

100 / 1
Class X

100 / 1A

15 VA class 1.0

A

B

OT

2MVA

OT

B

TH

TCS

20C
HS

30C
IT
E

INST

A

20C
IT

E
DT

REF

E.F. Prot n
`

3000 / 1A

15VA Class 5P10

O/C Prot n
`

& inst

`
Ref prot n

3000 / 1A

15VA Class 5P10

3000 / 1
Class X

Breaker rating

3100 Amp

Type of closing mech.
Motor wound spring

Figure 16.5 Protection and tripping logic for a 2 MVA transformer

Where: (cid:6) D cos(cid:3)1 (PF). The correction required is:
P[tan cos(cid:3)1(cid:8)initial PF)] (cid:3) [tan cos(cid:3)1 (ﬁnal PF)]
Figure 16.9 illustrates
factor
correction required per 100 kW of load to correct from
one power factor to another.

the amount of power

The degree of correction necessary for any particu-
lar installation will depend upon the circumstances. In

economic terms the costs and prospective beneﬁts can be
simply set out as:

Capital
Capital cost

Running
Maintenance

Installation costs

Depreciation

Savings
Reduction in of
equipment demand
charges
Reduction in losses

16/246 Electrical Distribution and Installation

Actual power, watts, p

φ′

φ

Apparent power S1,
after correction

Apparent power s

Amount of power
factor correction Q 2
to correct from
cos φ to cos φ′ = Q − Q′

Figure 16.6 Power factor correction

Under excited

Motor operating at
lagging power factor

Generator operating at
leading power factor

Motor mode,
drawing active power

Generator mode,
contributing active power

Motor operating at
leading power factor

Generator operating at
lagging power factor

Figure 16.7 Synchronous machine operating modes

Over excited

Supply system

16.7.3 Types of control

(P + P′) − j (Q − Q′)

P′ + jQ′

M

Supply system

(P − P′) − j (Q − Q′)

P′ − jQ′

G

P − j Q

Load

(a)

P − j Q

Load

(b)

Figure 16.8 Synchronous machine operation. (a) Synchronous
machine acting as a motor (over-excited); (b) synchronous ma-
chine acting as a generator (over-excited)

Capacitors as bulk units can be connected to the supply
busbar via a fuse switch, molded-case circuit breaker of
air circuit breaker. In this type of installation control is
purely manual, and in cases of a reasonably constant load
and where the amount of power factor correction is lim-
ited such a manually controlled system is perfectly ade-
quate. The supply authority may, however, require to be
informed that a capacitor bank is permanently connected
to the supply. Capacitors are more generally connected
either in banks controlled from a VAR sensitive relay or
across individual loads (e.g. motors).

When connected as switchable banks the rating of each
step of the capacitor bank must be selected with care. It
is important that the control relay settings are matched
to the ratings of each capacitance step in order to pre-
vent hunting (i.e. continuously switching in and out at a
particular load point). When capacitors are connected to
one particular load (usually a motor) the capacitor bank
can be located at the motor, adjacent to but separate from
the control switchgear or within the control switchgear
itself.

When located at the motor the capacitor bank will be
normally cabled from the motor terminal box, so that the
size of the motor cable can then be selected on the basis
of the reduced-power factor corrected current drawn by

Power factor correction 16/247

Amount of power factor correction
required per 100 kw of load to
correct from an initial value to
final target power factor.

Target
power
factor

1.0

0.98

0.95

0.92

0.90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

d
a
o
l
 

w
k
 
0
0
 1
/
 
 

R
A
V
K
 
d
e
r
i
u
q
e
r
 
n
o

i
t
c
e
r
r
o
C

0.80 0.81 0.82 0.83 0.84 0.85 0.86 0.87 0.88

0.89 0.90 0.91 0.92 0.93 0.94 0.95 0.96 0.97 0.98 0.99 1.0

Figure 16.9 Amount of power factor correction required

Initial power factor

the motor/capacitor combination. However, whenever a
capacitor is connected across an individual motor circuit,
by whatever means, the setting of the motor overload
device must be chosen to take account of the corrected
current rather than the uncorrected motor full-load current.

device is a high-voltage circuit breaker, capacitor man-
ufacturers frequently recommend a maximum between
initial current makes and ﬁnal contact closure (typically,
10 m/s).

16.7.4 Potential problems

Control devices

Capacitors, circuit breakers and HRC fuses must be selec-
ted with care for use with capacitor circuits, with contrac-
tors chosen on the basis that the capacitor current can rise
by 25 per cent above nominal line current. Equally, HRC
fuses for capacitor applications should be de-rated by a
factor of 1.5.

When choosing high-voltage circuit breakers for capac-
itor control it is necessary to select the full-load current
of the breaker, taking into account variations in supply
voltage, tolerance on rating manufacture and harmonic
currents. Again, a de-rating factor of 1.5 is usually con-
sidered adequate. The capacitor manufacturers will insist
that the control device is re-strike free and that the control
device has been tested to IEC 56, Part 4. When the control

Motor circuits

In instances where a capacitor is connected directly across
the terminal of the motor, the capacitor can act as a source
of excitation current after the control device is opened. In
order to prevent this the capacitor rating should not exceed
90 per cent of the motor no-load magnetizing current.

Harmonics

reducing impedance
A capacitor bank will represent
increasing frequency. Such reducing
to currents of
if matched with a similarly increasing
impedance,
inductance impedance of a transformer or a supply
system, can cause a resonant condition. In plants where
equipment produces harmonic current, a full survey of
the installation is recommended prior to installation of
the capacitors.

16/248 Electrical Distribution and Installation

16.8 Motors and motor control
16.8.1 Functions

The principal functions that have to be met by any type
of motor control gear are:

1. Provision of a means of starting the motor, taking into
account the requirements of torque, acceleration, load,
frequency of operation and safety;

2. When required, to limit the current drawn from the

3. When necessary, to provide means of speed control,

supply and starting;

reversing, braking, etc.;

4. Provision of protection for the motor itself in the case
of faults and for the equipment controlling it (e.g. the
contactor).

Motors used in industrial operations are predominantly
of the induction type. The voltage at which they will be
supplied will depend on the rating of the motor, the volt-
ages available on-site and the capital cost of equipment.
In general, the following voltage/load ranges apply:

Up to 185 kW
185 kW to 2 MW
1–15 MW

415 V
3.3 kV
11 kV

Squirrel-cage induction motor

The principal advantages of the squirrel-cage induction
motor are its simplicity of design and robust construc-
tion. Its torque/speed and current/speed characteristics are
such that, on starting, a torque of typically twice full-load
torque is produced but a large current (typically, six to
eight times full-load current) is drawn from the supply.
It is this latter aspect of the current drawn upon starting
which is important in deciding upon the type of starting
equipment needed for a squirrel-cage motor because

1. The drawing of a large current from the supply will
cause a corresponding voltage drop at the point of com-
mon coupling with other consumers. This will affect
other drives within the installation or consumers fed
from the same supply authority.

2. If the motor drives plant of high inertia (e.g. fans)
the time during which the large current is drawn may
be extended. Such a current ﬂowing for an extended
period may cause the unwanted operation of over-
load or over-current protection relays within the supply
system.

In order to overcome (1) it is often necessary to intro-
duce a form of assisted starting, which can also help in
overcoming problem (2). However, modiﬁcation of the
overload protection device characteristics may also be
necessary.

16.8.2 Types of starter

For starting an induction motor, the following types of
starter are available:

1. Direct-on-line: Full voltage is applied to the motor;
2. Start/delta, auto transformer, primary resistance: Re-

duced voltage is applied to the motor;

3. Electronic soft-start: The voltage and frequency

applied to the motor is controlled;

4. Stator/rotor: Full voltage is applied with external rotor

resistance.

The principal features of each type are as follows.

Direct-on-line

The equipment and connections are simple and the starter
is robust. The basic equipment will comprise an isola-
tor, high rupturing capacity fuses, a contactor, overload
devices and control switches.

Star/delta starting

This is the most common form of reduced-voltage starting
used in the UK. Both ends of the motor winding are cabled
back to the starter. On starting, the windings are con-
nected in star conﬁguration, and thus the voltage applied
to each winding is 57.7 per cent of normal and the cur-
rent taken from the supply is one third of that taken when
started direct-on-line.

Changeover from star- to delta-connection takes place
automatically by means of a timer. At changeover, the
motor is momentarily disconnected from the supply and
the delta contactor is then closed. The closure of the delta
contactor can cause a further surge of current to occur.
The magnitude of the surge will depend on the speed of
the motor at changeover, but it can be comparable to that
taken when started direct on line.

An auto transformer

is used to
Auto-transformer
provide a reduced voltage to the motor on start-up. The
exact voltage applied to the motor can then be chosen,
taking into account any limitation on starting current
and motor torque. In an induction motor both starting
current and motor torque are approximately proportional
to the square of the applied voltage. Therefore for a
motor which produces twice full-load torque and draws
eight times full-load current on start-up, if the voltage is
reduced to 75 per cent by use of an auto transformer
the starting torque D 0.752 ð 2 D 1.125 times full-load
torque and starting current D 0.752 ð 8 D 4.5 times full-
load current.

Primary resistance A resistance is inserted into the sup-
ply to the motor. This reduces the voltage available at
the motor terminals on starting, and this voltage increases
gradually as the motor current falls when the motor speeds
up. Once the motor has reacted at a predetermined speed
the resistance banks are short-circuited.

Depending on the value of the resistor, the motor will,
in general, draw a heavier current then when started using
star-delta or auto-transformer methods. The resistors must
be rated to carry the limited motor starting current for the
time they are in circuit.

Electronic soft-start

The most recent development in the starting of squirrel-
cage induction motors is the introduction of the electronic
soft-start. This principle has been derived from variable-
frequency speed controllers using switched Thyristor or
power transistor bridges. The supply sine wave is chopped
so that a reduced voltage and frequency is applied to the
motor.These are gradually increased so that the motor
speed rises in a controlled manner, with the starting cur-
rent limited to any chosen value.

Stator/rotor

With this technique the motor has a wound rotor brought
out to slip rings and an external resistance is connected
into the rotor circuit. This resistance usually consists of a
series of resistor banks, which are switched out progres-
sively in a number of steps as the motor accelerates. The
number and rating of each step is chosen so that starting
current and motor torque are within requirements.

16.8.3 Motor-starting equipment

Each component within a motor starting circuit must be
selected to be suitable for the operation of the motor as it
is required and for use on the electrical system from which
the motor is to be operated. It must also be compatible
with the other elements within the circuit. The principal
components comprise:

Isolator
HRC fuses
Contactor
Overload device
Cable

5. Short-time capability of contactor, overload, cable and

isolator.

Standby supplies 16/249

Contactor

A contactor must have full-load rating and be coordinated
to proven capability with a selected fuse.

Overload device

Overload devices in current use are typically thermal
overload relays to BS 4941, motor starters for voltages
up to and including 1000 V A.C. and 1200 V D.C. or
BS 142 electrical protection relays. Relays to BS 4941
generally provide overload and single-phasing protection.
Those complying with BS 142 are also frequently ﬁtted
with instantaneous earth fault and over-current trips.

While applications vary from one industry to another,
relays complying with BS 142 are typically speciﬁed for
all motors larger than 45 kW.

Cable

The cable must be selected on the basis of full-load current
rating, voltage drop on both running and start-up, and
short-time current rating.

16.9 Standby supplies
16.9.1 Deﬁnitions

Standby supply systems within an electrical installation
provide supplies to critical loads on loss of normal power
supplies. In an installation one or more of the following
types of standby supply systems are likely to be found:

The main parameters to be considered for each component
are as follows.

1. Battery systems (either d.c. or inverted);
2. Un-interruptible (UPS) A.C. power systems;
3. Standby diesel generating sets.

Isolator

This must be:

1. Rated to close onto a fault at the rated fault level of

2. Able to carry starter rated full-load current continu-

the switchboard;

ously;

3. Capable of breaking a stalled motor current.

Fuses

Fuse manufacturers’ catalogues give suggested fuse sizes
for all 415 V motors. However, the following parameters
all affect the fuse rating:

1. The starting current drawn by the motor, including all

2. The starting time of the drive under worst-case condi-

3. Full-load current, including efﬁciency and power fac-

tolerances;

tions;

tor;

4. Number of consecutive starts;

Each system type is utilized to satisfy different needs, and
these and the salient points relevant to each type are as
follows.

16.9.2 Battery systems
D.C. systems

These provide supplies to equipment that requires a D.C.
supply both during normal operating conditions and when
A.C. supplies have been lost. The loads can comprise:

1. Essential instruments
2. Control schemes
3. Switchgear closing and tripping
4. Telecommunications
5. Protection schemes
6. Interlocking
7. Alarms
8. Emergency lighting
9. Emergency drives (e.g. rundown lube oil pumps)
10. Standby diesel starting systems

16/250 Electrical Distribution and Installation

Voltages in use range from 24 to 250 V. A D.C. instal-
lation will comprise a charger (capable of both ﬂoat and
boost charging), the battery itself and a distribution outlet.
The charger is normally arranged so that boost charging
is carried out off-load, and should be designed to recharge
the battery, after an emergency discharge has occurred,
within a quarter to a half of the normal charting time.
When the charger is operating in ﬂoat charge mode it
must be rated to supply the D.C. load requirements as
well as ﬂoat charging the battery.

Chargers can be ﬁtted with an integral voltage-sensing
device measuring circuit voltage at the charger output
terminals. In the event that the terminal voltage rises sig-
niﬁcantly above the normal ﬂoat voltage of the battery,
the circuit will be arranged to trip the charger and provide
an alarm. A separate alarm will be provided during boost
charging. Alarms normally ﬁtted comprise:

Charger failures
Rectiﬁer failures
Battery earth fault
Battery boost charge
Battery low volts

Battery types are either lead–acid or nickel–cadmium
cells. Lead–acid types have been used for a long time
and, when correctly maintained, have a working life of
25 years. Nickel–cadmium batteries offer the same work-
ing life as lead–acid but are smaller in weight and volume,
generally with a higher initial capital cost. Loads applied
to D.C. systems can be categorized into three types:

1. Standing levels: Loads, which impose a consistent and

continued load upon the battery (e.g. alarm facias).

2. Emergency loads: Loads that are only applied on loss
of normal supplies. These are usually supplied only for
a ﬁxed period of time (e.g. turbine emergency rundown
lube oil pump).

3. Switching loads: Loads imposed by the operation of

both opening and closing of switchgear.

These loads, the expected duration of emergency loads
and the required switching regime and number of opera-
tions must be speciﬁed at the time of order placement.

16.9.3 UPS-A.C. systems

A.C. un-interruptible supply systems are used for the pro-
vision of supplies to those loads which:

1. Are required for post-incident monitoring and record-

ing following a loss of normal supplies;

2. Require a high-quality supply in terms of voltage, fre-
quency and waveform. These comprise loads, which
would not give an adequate standard of reliability if
operated directly from the normal A.C. supply system;
3. Are necessary to monitor plant, particularly generating
plant, during a shutdown operation or loads necessary
to assist in a rapid restart.

A UPS installation will typically comprise a rectiﬁer/
battery, charger, storage battery, static inverter and static

bypass switch. With a UPS installation the output, which
is derived from the battery via the static inverter, is com-
pletely unaffected by variations of either a steady state or
transient nature in the A.C. supply (Figure 16.10).

UPS units are generally categorized by the design of
the static inverter used to produce the A.C. output. The
principal types used are:

1. Ferroresonant: The D.C. is switched via thyristors to

produce a square wave output.

2. Phase controlled: A single pulse of variable time is

produced per half-cycle.

3. Step wave: The output waveform is switched more fre-

quently, producing a step waveform.

4. Pulse width modulation: Each half-cycle of output
is made up of pulses of varying duration but equal
magnitude.

The main problem in specifying UPS equipment is that
of inadequately identifying the characteristics of the loads
which the UPS is to supply, and the following must be
speciﬁed:

Steady-state voltage regulation
Acceptable transitent voltage variation
Non-linearity characteristics of load current
Percentage distortion in voltage
Frequency tolerance
Power factor of load
Inrush upon switch-on

16.9.4 Standby diesel generators

The electrical load and the standard engine frame sizes
available govern the selection of a diesel generator. In
specifying a diesel generator for use, as a standby sup-
ply the electrical load must be analyzed in terms of ﬁnal
running load, load proﬁle, starting characteristics of indi-
vidual motor loads and required operating time. Chapter
15 gives a full description of the types of diesel-driven
time movers available. Electrical characteristics to be con-
sidered include:

1. Type of generator;
2. Type of excitation (brushless or static);
3. Transient performance (the capability of the generator
to maintain the output voltage when a load is applied).
It must be remembered that the impedance of the gen-
erator will be greater than that of the supply system
which it has replaced;

4. Method of alternator cooling (the heat gain to the build-
ing housing the diesel generator must be taken into
account);

5. Method of neutral grounding;
6. Method of testing. If the diesel is to be tested, it may be
necessary for it to operate in parallel with the supply
system in order to apply load. Synchronizing facili-
ties will be needed and the fault levels during parallel
operation must be assessed.

7. Electrical protection schemes. The installation should
be carried out in accordance with Electricity Coun-
cil Engineering Recommendation G26, The installation
and operational aspects of private generating plant.

Static bypass

Grounding 16/251

Mains supply

Load output

Charger

Inverter

(a)

Battery

Typical UPS block diagram

Ferroresonant

Phase controlled

Step wave

P.W.M.

(b)

Type of UPS output

Figure 16.10 (a) UPS block diagram; (b) typical output waveforms

16.10 Grounding
16.10.1 General

Electrical supply systems and equipment are grounded
in order to maintain the voltage at any part of the sys-
tem at a known potential relative to true earth and to
provide a path for current ﬂow under earth fault con-
ditions so that protective devices operate correctly. The
connection to earth should be such that the ﬂow of fault
current to earth does not cause voltages or voltage gra-
dients to be of sufﬁcient magnitude or duration likely to
cause danger.

An electrical earth system comprises the provision on
the supply system of an earth connection to facilitate
earth fault current ﬂow, the connecting of all exposed
metalwork within the installation to a common grounding
terminal and the connection of this terminal to earth. For
a complete installation the principal factors which need to
be considered, are:

The earth electrode
Neutral grounding
Substation grounding
Supply system grounding
Bonding

16.10.2 Earth electrode

The connection to earth can be made utilizing earth rods,
earth plates, earth lattices or grids, or buried strip conduc-
tors. Selection depends on the locality and type of ground
conditions at the site. The effectiveness of the earth con-
nection is, in turn, dependent on the resistivity of the soil
at the site, the type of soil and climatic conditions have a
direct effect upon the resistance of the connection made.
Typical values of resistivity ((cid:10) (cid:3) m) for different types
of soil are:

Garden loam
Chalk
Clay
Sand
Rock

4–150
30–200
5–100
50–800

Above 1000

The resistivity of the soil in any particular location will be
a function of moisture content, soil temperature and pres-
ence of dissolved salts. At a site where climatic conditions
vary considerably throughout the year, earth electrodes
should be buried at a depth where such changes will
not affect the resistivity. Grounding rods are generally
made of copper bonded onto a steel core. The copper pro-
vides a good connection to earth and offers a high corro-
sion resistance, while the steel core gives the mechanical

16/252 Electrical Distribution and Installation

strength necessary to allow the rods to be driven to the
required depth.

Grounding plates or lattices made of pure copper, while
displaying good current-carrying capacities, do not pro-
vide a particularly low resistance due to the depth at which
they can be buried. The third alternative is to bury lengths
of copper tape around the installation. The use of rein-
forced concrete foundations for grounding electrodes has
also recently been considered.

Formulae for calculation of the resistance to earth of

each type are as follows:
Single rod(cid:8)R(cid:9) D P
2(cid:12)L

ln

8L
υ

(cid:1)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)
Plate(cid:8)R(cid:9) D e
(cid:2)
8r
Grid(cid:8)R(cid:9) D P

r

(cid:3)
2.5h C r
1
C 1
4r
L

(cid:3)

(cid:4)
(cid:3) 1
(cid:3)
C 1

p

Where:
R D resistance,
e D resistivity,
L D rod or conductor length,
υ D rod diameter,
r D radius of plate; for a rectangular plate or grid
r D
h D depth of plate,
P D soil resistivity.
The earth electrode system must be designed to be capable
of carrying without damage to the full earth fault current
of the supply system.

a
(cid:12)

16.10.3 Neutral grounding

A ground can be established on an electrical supply sys-
tem by the connection to earth of the neutral point of the
supply transformers, or generators or the use of intercon-
nected star-wound grounding transformers. The grounding
must be arranged to ensure that an earth is provided on
the supply system at all times and that the resistance of
the connection to earth must be such that earth fault pro-
tection operates correctly. In instances where generators
are to be run in parallel with each other or in parallel
with a grid supply the neutral grounding arrangements
will require special consideration.

16.10.4 Grounding in substations

The earth systems associated with high-voltage substa-
tions must satisfy the following conditions:

1. The resistance of the system to earth must be low
enough to ensure that earth fault protection equipment
operates correctly.

2. In the event of an earth fault the difference in poten-
tial between a person’s feet (step potential) should not
reach dangerous levels.

3. In the event of an earth fault the difference in poten-
tial between any point which may be touched and the
ground (touch potential) should not reach dangerous
levels.

4. The substation and its environment should not be con-
nected to metal objects such that the voltages arising
within the substation under fault conditions can be
transferred to a point remote from the substation.

5. The grounding conductors must be capable of carrying
maximum earth fault current without overheating or
causing mechanical damage.

16.10.5 Types of system grounding

The IEE Regulations for Electrical Installations recognize
the following designations of grounding systems using a
two-, three- or four-letter code as follows:

First letter (denoting the grounding arrangement at the

source)

T–Direct connection of one or more points to earth;
I–All live parts isolated from earth or one point con-
nected to earth through impedance.

Second letter (denoting the relationship of the exposed
conductive parts of the installation to earth)

T–Direct connection of the exposed conductive parts to
earth, independently of the grounding of any point of the
source of energy;
N–Direct electrical connection of the exposed conduc-
tive parts to the earthed point of the source of energy
(usually the neutral).

The designation TN is subdivided, depending on the arran-
gement of neutral and protective conductors. S indicates
that separate conductors and C that neutral and protec-
tive functions are provided by a single conductor provide
neutral and protective functions.

Examples of these designations and their usage are as

follows:

1. TN-C system: Neutral and protective functions com-

bined in a single conductor throughout the system.

2. TN-S system: Separate neutral and protective conduc-

tors throughout the system;

3. TN-C-S system: Neutral and protective functions com-

bined in a single conductor in a part of the system;

4. TT system: All exposed conductive parts of an instal-
lation are connected to an earth electrode, which is
electrically independent of the source earth.

The following publications contain further information

on and expansion of the factors relating to grounding.

Electricity Council Engineering Recommendation G26,
The installation and operational aspects of private gen-
erating plant
BS Code of Practice CP1013, Grounding
IEE Regulations for Electrical Installations

Cables 16/253

Table 16.6 Comparison of parameters for 1900/3300 V XLPE insulated, armoured, three-core cable

Nominal area
of conductor

(cid:8)mm2(cid:9)

50
70
95
185
240

Current-carrying

capacity

Copper
Weight

(kg/1000 m)

Overall diameter

(mm)

Current-carrying

capacity

Aluminium

Weight

(kg/1000 m)

Overall diameter

(mm)

(A)

210
265
325
495
580

2850
3625
4500
8075
10375

34.7
38.0
41.4
51.9
56.9

(A)

160
200
245
370
440

2075
2450
2875
4650
5625

33.0
36.0
39.1
48.7
53.2

16.11 Cables

Electrical power distribution within an industrial instal-
lation is most often at a voltage up to and including
33 kV. This section describes the types of cable suitable
for power circuits for use up to 33 kV and considers the
factors, which will inﬂuence the current-carrying capacity
of such cables.

The principal components of a power distribution cable
are the conductors and the insulators. The cable is com-
pleted by the provision of armoring, overloads and other
features designed to protect the cable within its installed
environment.

16.11.1 Conductors

the design of the cables, making them easier to handle
and install. The excellent dielectrics of properties of cross-
linked polyethylene, together with the fact that XLPE does
not soften at elevated temperatures, means that XLPE
cables can operate with high continuous operating tem-
peratures and short-circuit temperatures. The maximum
operating temperature of XLPE is 90°C, with a maximum
under short-circuit conditions of 250°C. Table 16.7 gives
a comparison of the full-load capabilities of a range of
cable sizes.

16.11.3 Selection

In selecting a cable for a particular installation, the fol-
lowing factors need to be considered:

Material used for conductors comprise copper or alu-
minum in either stranded or solid form. Copper is the
most common type of conductor due to its good con-
ductivity and ease of working. Despite having a con-
ductivity of only 61 per cent of that copper, aluminum
can be used as the conductor material. The lower density
of aluminum results in the weight of an aluminum cable
offsetting, to a certain extent, that of the additional mate-
rial necessary to achieve the required current-carrying
capacity.

Although aluminum cable has a proven record of
satisfactory operation, the problems of terminating such
cables must be recognized at the time of specifying. Since
an aluminum cable will be larger than an equivalent
copper cable of
the same current-carrying terminal,
enclosures and cable support systems must be designed
to suit. Table 16.6 illustrates current-carrying capacity,
overall diameter and weight
range of
3.3 kV cables.

for a typical

16.11.2 Insulation

Insulation materials used at voltages up to 33 kV comprise
paper, PVC and polyethylene (XLPE). Paper-insulated
cables have been used for the complete voltage range up
to 33 kV throughout this century, although today they are
limited in general to 6.6 kV and above. Paper cable is
usually designed to operate at a conductor temperature
not exceeding 80°C and PVC cable has largely replaced
paper cables at voltages up to 3.3 kV. The relative imper-
viousness of PVC to moisture has contributed greatly to

1. The steady-state voltage drops of the circuit;
2. The voltage drop in starting if the cable is for a motor

3. The current-carrying capacity under full-load condi-

circuit;

tions;

duration.

4. The maximum fault current, which can ﬂow, and its

For (3) and, to a certain extent, (4) the exact details of the
cable installation will have a direct bearing on the cable
chosen.

Table 16.7 Comparison of full-load capabilities for paper, PVC
and XLPE insulated copper cable

Cable
size
(cid:8)mm2(cid:9)

16
35
50
95
185
240

Papera

PVCb

XLPEc

Current-carrying capacity in air

91
150
180
280
430
510

(A)

87
142
172
268
407
480

105
170
205
320
490
580

a600/1000 V: Three-core, belted, paper-insulated,
lead-sheathed, stranded-copper conductor.
b600/1000 V: Three-core, PVC-insulated, SWA, PVC,
stranded-copper conductor.
c600/1000 V: Three-core, XLPE-insulated,
PVC-sheathed, SWA-stranded copper conductor.

16/254 Electrical Distribution and Installation

The ambient temperature of the installation will affect
the cable rating, and account should be taken of any local
high temperatures caused by proximity of process plant,
the presence of and location of other cables and any ther-
mal insulation, which may prevent or inhibit heat dis-

sipation. Cable ratings applicable to a variety of cable-
installation techniques, together with the correction factors
applicable, are given in a number of sources, including
manufacturers’ catalogues, the IEE Wiring Regulations
and reports published by ERA Technology and IEC.

17/255

Electrical
Instrumentation

H Barber
Loughborough University of Technology

17

Contents

17.1 Introduction
17.2 Electricity supply metering 17/257

17/257

17.2.1 Metering requirements 17/257
17.2.2 Energy meters 17/257
17.2.3 Error limits 17/258
17.2.4 Three-phase metering 17/258
17.2.5 Maximum-demand metering 17/258
17.2.6 Summation metering 17/258

17.11 Spectrum analyzers 17/270
17.12 Bridge measurements 17/270
17.13 Data recording
17.14 Acoustic measurements 17/271
17.15 Centralized control

17/271

17/270

17.3 Power factor correction

17/259

17.3.1 Equipment
17.3.2 Power factor measurement 17/260

17/259

17.4 Voltage and current transformers 17/260

17.4.1 Voltage transformers 17/260
17.4.2 Current transformers 17/261

17.5 Voltmeters and ammeters 17/261

17.5.1 Moving coil 17/261
17.5.2 Moving magnet 17/262
17.5.3 Moving iron 17/262
17.5.4 Electrodynamic instruments
17.5.5 Thermocouple
17/263
17.5.6 Electrostatic voltmeter

17/263

17/263

17.6 Frequency measurement 17/263
17.7 Electronic instrumentation

17/264

17.7.1 Analogue voltmeters
17/264
17.7.2 Digital multi-meters 17/264

17/265

17.8 Instrument selection
17.9 Cathode ray oscilloscopes
17/266

17.9.1 Storage
17.9.2 Sampling oscilloscopes
17.9.3 Use of oscilloscope

17/265

17/266

17/267

17.10 Transducers 17/267

17.10.1 Temperature 17/267
17.10.2 Force

17/269

17.1 Introduction
The plant engineer needs to know the circumstances under
which the plant for which he is responsible is operating.
Hence, he needs to be able to measure the inputs to the
plant and the power inputs to the individual sectors. It
will also be necessary to measure the plant outputs. In
most cases, the instrumentation uses electrical or elec-
tronic techniques, i.e. it measures either electrical quanti-
ties per se or quantities such as temperature or pressure,
which have been converted to electrical signals by means
of transducers. The degree of accuracy to which these
measurements are required will vary, depending on their
purpose. In the case where the measurement is used as
a direct basis for charging for energy then the accuracy
must be very high. This is also the case where precise
process control is involved.

In other instances, it is sufﬁcient for the plant engineer
to have a less accurate measurement of what is going
on. As well as being technically suitable for the purpose,
the instrument chosen will reﬂect these considerations. In
the case of process control, the instrumentation must be
reliable and it must yield information, often over very long
periods of time, which represents the state of the plant
or the process and its history. It is on the basis of this
information that the plant engineer will make decisions,
many of which will affect the economic viability of the
process and some of which will have a direct impact on
the safe operation of the plant.

Most plants will be supplied either directly or through
the factory distribution system from the electricity sup-
ply authority. This supply is usually A.C. at a frequency
of 50 Hz and at a voltage depending on circumstances,
but which in the case of large power demands, can be
11, 000 V or even higher. Thus meters are required to
measure these and related quantities. A variety of trans-
ducers is available for the measurement of physical quan-
tities. These either give a direct readout to the operator or
initiate some form of control action. In addition, there
is a requirement for test and diagnostic equipment to
determine if the measurement and control equipment is
operating correctly and, if failures occur, to aid in tracing
the source of the problem.

The plant engineer will need to familiarize himself with
what is available in all these categories so that he may
make the most appropriate equipment selection. He will
also need to be familiar with what to expect from his
instrumentation both in terms of accuracy and in order to
know how to interpret the information correctly.

17.2 Electricity supply metering
17.2.1 Metering requirements

The electricity supply to the factory is usually obtained
from the public supply authority, who will need to install
metering in order to be able to assess the charges due in
accordance with the agreed tariff. This metering will be
the responsibility of the energy supplier but, in order to
ensure that the rights of the customer are protected, the
design of this instrumentation, and the accuracy limits

Electricity supply metering 17/257

within which it must operate, are controlled by statute.
The customer will usually either have visual access to this
instrumentation in order to conﬁrm the readings or will
install his own, duplicate, instrumentation as a check.

In any event, in most plants, the plant engineer will
have a need to monitor the electricity consumed by the
various sectors on the site and he will need similar instru-
mentation to do this. The normal method of charging for
electrical energy is based on two components. The ﬁrst
component includes the total amount of primary (e.g. coal,
nuclear) energy and the costs of converting it to electri-
city. The second component is the cost of providing the
necessary plant to carry out the conversion as well as to
transport the electrical energy to the customer (the max-
imum demand charge). The ﬁrst of these is primarily a
function of the energy (kWh) supplied while the second
is a function of the maximum value of the electric cur-
rent drawn at any time from the supply and the voltage
at which it is supplied. Thus, two forms of instrumenta-
tion are needed, an energy (kWh) meter and a maximum
demand (kVA) meter.

17.2.2 Energy meters

Energy is usually measured using an induction-integrating
meter. In the case of a single-phase load the arrangement
is as shown in Figure 17.1, this consists essentially of
two electromagnets, mounted one above the other, with a
light-weight aluminum disc free to rotate between them,
as shown in the ﬁgure. The upper electromagnetic is ener-
gized by the system voltage (V), or a voltage proportional
to it, and a current proportional to the system current (I)
ﬂows through the coil on the lower magnet. The elec-
tromagnetic ﬂux created by the two magnets interacts in
the disc in which a torque is produced proportional to the
product of the two multiplied by the cosine of the phase
angle between them. Thus, this torque is proportional to
(VI cos), the electrical power supplied to the system, and
the speed of rotation of the disc is proportional to the
torque. Hence, the number of revolutions made by the
disc in an hour is a measure of the energy used, i.e.

System
voltage
(V)

System
current
(I)

Upper
magnet

Pivot

Disc

Lower
magnet

Figure 17.1 Schematic diagram of an induction meter

17/258 Electrical Instrumentation

the watt-hours (Wh) or, more usually, the kilowatt-hours
(kWh).

The number of rotations of the disc is registered and can
be recorded on a dial. As noted above, the voltages and
currents energizing the coils are the normal system voltages
unless these are too large for convenience, in which case
voltage and current transformers are used as appropriate.
A high degree of accuracy is required over a very wide
range of input currents. At very low loads (i.e. very low
input currents) this accuracy can be affected by pivot fric-
tion, but this can be allowed for in the instrument design.
The disc rotation is converted to a dial reading using a
gear train (the ‘register’) and this reading is then used as a
basis for charging under the tariff arrangements in use. In
some cases two-part tariffs are involved, the simplest form
being that in which kWh (units) above a certain number
are charged at a different rate. This adjustment can be
made after the reading is taken. In other cases, units used
during speciﬁc periods of the day are charged at a rate dif-
ferent from that in force during the remainder of the time.
Incorporating a time switch into a meter with two sets of
registers can cater for this. At the appropriate time, the
switch operates and an electromagnet changes the drive
to the second register. Alternatively, an entirely separate
instrument can be used, with the changeover again being
controlled by the time switch.

17.2.3 Error limits
In general, the error must not exceed š2 per cent over
the working range, although in practice the accuracy is
usually much higher than this. Temperature changes are
compensated for in the design and the instrument is likely
to be unaffected by variations in voltage and frequency
if these are within the limits (š4 per cent in voltage
and š0.2 per cent for frequency). Very low voltages and
reduced supply frequencies will both cause the instrument
to read high if the load has a high power factor. If the
power factor is low and the load is predominantly induc-
tive then the frequency effect is reversed.

17.2.4 Three-phase metering
For
three-phase meter is necessary. In these cases,

large loads supplied with three phases,

then a
three

rotor

single-phase units with their
torque combined
mechanically are used, the whole being contained in one
case. If the load current is above 150 A per phase then it is
common to use instruments which combine the measuring
elements, each with their own current transformer (see
below) so that the combination can be calibrated as one
unit (Figure 17.2).

17.2.5 Maximum-demand metering

As noted above, the tariff may also contain a component
based on the maximum demand taken from the supply in
a given period. In this case, a separate maximum-demand
meter is required. This is a modiﬁed energy meter, which
has a special register such that after a given period (usu-
ally half an hour) the dials are disconnected. During the
next half-hour the register mechanism still operates but
the clutch driving the dials is only energized if the total
exceeds that already on the meter. This continues for the
whole of the recording period, and thus, at the end, the
reading on the meter is the maximum obtained during any
one of the half-hour periods. This value is then doubled
to yield the maximum kW taken in any half-hour.

It should be noted that this is not necessarily the actual
instantaneous maximum demand. The quantity measured
on this meter is, of course, the maximum kW demand,
but some forms of tariff are based on the maximum kVA
demand in order to encourage power factor improvement
(see below).

17.2.6 Summation metering

In some instances, it is required to measure the sum of the
energy supplied along several feeders. This is the case,
for example, when a factory site is fed by more than
one cable and the tariff is based on the overall energy
and maximum demand used. The usual method of doing
this is to summate the currents in the individual feeders
by installing separate current transformers in each and
connecting their secondaries in parallel (Figure 17.3).

The current transformers must have identical ratios. The
assumption is that all the feeders have voltages which are
equal in magnitude and phase. If the feeders are physi-
cally close together, it may be possible to use one current

Current
transformers

Mechanical
coupling

Supply
phases

Neutral

Figure 17.2 Three-phase meters

Feeder 1

Feeder 2

Power factor correction 17/259

I′

P.F. Correction

capacitor

I

IC

Supply

V

Load

2

1
3
Current coils

Figure 17.3 Summation current transformers

transformer as a summation unit. The current transformer
has a number of primary windings, each carrying the
current of one feeder. The magnetic ﬂuxes due to the
individual currents are summed in the transformer core
and the output is obtained from a single secondary wind-
ing. An alternative is to use impulsing techniques whereby
each meter incorporates a device which generates pulses
at a rate depending on the energy being used. The pulses
are transmitted to a single instrument in which they are
recorded to give the total energy used over the whole
group.

Electronic techniques can generate a larger number of
pulses in a speciﬁed time and are therefore more accurate
than mechanical devices. At the receiving end, the pulses
are used to determine the state of a series of bi-stable
networks. These are scanned and reset sequentially and
the total number of pulses recorded.

17.3 Power factor correction
Electricity is normally charged for on the basis of power
(kilowatts) and the supply authority must install plant
whose rating (and therefore cost) is a function of the volt-
age of the system and the current which the consumer
takes (i.e. kilo-volt-amps). The relationship between the
two is: kW D kVA ð cos (cid:3) where: cos (cid:3) is the power fac-
tor and is less than 1.0. In the case of loads which have
a low power, factor the supply authority is involved in
costs for the provision of plant which are not necessarily
reﬂected in the kWh used. A penalty tariff may then be
imposed which makes it economically worthwhile for the
consumer to take steps to improve his power factor. Low
power factors occur when the load is predominantly either
inductive or capacitive in nature (as opposed to resistive).
In most industrial circumstances where the load includes
a preponderance of motors, the load is inductive (and the
power factor is therefore lagging). Consequently, if the
power factor is to be brought nearer to unity the most
obvious method is to add a signiﬁcant capacitive compo-
nent to the load.

It is important to ensure that, as far as possible, this
additional equipment is purely capacitive, i.e. that it has
no resistive component, and otherwise the customer will
face an increase in his energy bill. The circuit and pha-
sor diagrams of Figure 17.4 illustrate the situation. In the

(a)  Circuit diagram

φ

φ′

I′

IC

I

V

(b)  Phasor diagram

Figure 17.4 Power factor correction

ﬁgure V represents the system voltage, I is the current
drawn from the supply before the addition of power fac-
tor correction equipment and cos (cid:3) is the associated power
factor. If a capacitance, C, is connected in parallel with
the load, then this will introduce an additional current
component Ic. The resultant total current drawn from the
supply is I0 and it will be seen from the ﬁgure that the
new power factor is cos (cid:3)0, where cos (cid:3)0 > cos (cid:3).

Even if the power factor correction capacitance con-
sumes no energy it will need capital investment, and there-
fore the consumer must balance the capital charges of this
equipment against the savings which it produces in the
energy bill. It is not normally economic to correct the
power factor to its theoretically maximum value of unity,
and a value of 0.9–0.95 is more usual.

17.3.1 Equipment

For relatively small loads, the power factor correction
equipment usually takes the form of static capacitors. In
larger installations, it may be more economic to install an
A.C. synchronous motor that, if its excitation is adjusted
correctly, can be made to draw a leading current from
the supply. In most industrial plants, the load is variable,
and to gain the maximum beneﬁt from the power fac-
tor correction plant this must be varied to suit the load
conditions.

If static capacitors are employed this can be achieved by
using several capacitors arranged in units (banks) which
can be switched in or out as required. This variation can
only be carried out in discrete steps. In the case of the
A.C. machine (the synchronous condenser), it is possi-
ble to obtain a continuous variation. The switching of the
equipment can be carried out by an operator or automati-
cally in response to the output from a power factor-sensing
instrument.

17/260 Electrical Instrumentation

Fixed coils

17.4.1 Voltage transformers

Supply

Moving
coils

L

R

Load

Figure 17.5 Schematic diagram of power factor meter

17.3.2 Power factor measurement

Instruments are available to measure power factor. One
form is an electrodynamics instrument employing the
same basic principle referred to above but with two
coils mounted at right angles to each other on the same
shaft (Figure 17.5). These coils are situated in a ﬁeld
produced by a third coil carrying the line current. One
of the coils on the moving element carries a current
derived from the supply voltage and is connected in
series with a pure resistance. The second carries a similar
current, but in this case, a pure inductance is connected
in series. The torque produced by each coil is a function
of the current, which it carries and therefore depends
on the impedance of the particular coil circuit. There
is also a third torque component due to the mutual
inductive effects between the ﬁxed and moving coils.
The net result is that the moving element is displaced
by an amount which is a function of the phase angle
between the system current and the system voltage. This
form of instrument is suitable for low frequencies only,
and electronic measuring techniques are used for higher
frequencies.

17.4 Voltage and current transformers
The instruments discussed above (and many of the oth-
ers which follow) act in response to the system voltage
and/or current. In most cases, the values of these two
parameters are very high, which presents problems in the
design of the insulation and current-carrying capabilities
of the instrument. In these instances, the instrument is
supplied with a known fraction of the measured quantity
using a voltage transformer or a current transformer, as
appropriate.

The important factor in the design of these transform-
ers is that the ratio between the actual quantity and that
at the output of the transformer must be maintained accu-
rately over the complete range of values, which the unit is
required to measure. In general terms, the degree of accu-
racy required when the instrument is used for metering
purposes is higher than when a straightforward indication
of the quantity is needed. In both cases, the accuracy must
conform to the relevant British Standard.

There are fundamental differences between the behaviors
of the two types of transformer. The voltage transformer is
shown diagrammatically in Figure 17.6. The system volt-
age Vp is applied across the primary winding, which has
Np turns. The secondary voltage Vs is:
Vs D Vp(cid:9)Ns/Np(cid:10)
neglecting errors. These errors are small and constant pro-
vided that the transformer is used over a small voltage
range as speciﬁed by the manufacturer and the loading
imposed by the measuring instrument connected to the
secondary winding is between 10 and 200 VA.

Voltage transformers are classiﬁed into types AL, A,
B, C and D, in descending order of accuracy. The ratio
errors for small voltage changes (within (š10 per cent of
the rating) vary between 0.25 per cent and 5 per cent and
the phase errors between (š10 minutes and (š60 minutes.
For all but the highest voltages, the construction of
the voltage transformer is very similar to that of a normal
power transformer at voltages of magnitudes normally met
with in plant engineering. However, at primary voltages
of 100 kV and above it may be necessary to use alternative
means. The type of voltage transformer described above is
suitable for relatively low alternating frequency supplies.
It cannot be used at D.C. and there is a possibility of large
errors occurring at high frequencies. In these instances,
some form of voltage divider is necessary. The arrange-
ment is as shown in Figure 17.7. The two impedances,
Z1 and Z2, are connected across the supply with the indi-
cating instrument connected across Z2. Then (referring to
the ﬁgure):
Vs D Vp

(cid:1)

(cid:2)

Z2

(cid:9)Z1 C Z2(cid:10)

The load (or instrument) impedance is connected in
parallel with Z2 and should be very much larger than Z2 if
accuracy is to be maintained. If D.C. voltages are involved
then the impedances can be purely resistive and, in the
steady state, any leakage inductance or capacitance has no

Nautral

Supply
leads

Up

Np

Ns

Vs

Meter

Figure 17.6 Voltage transformer

line

Meter

Z1

Z2

Figure 17.7 Voltage divider

effect. At high A.C. frequencies, however, it is important
that they are non-reactive and that stray inductance and
capacitance to ground, etc. are taken into account.

17.4.2 Current transformers

The current transformer is arranged with its primary wind-
ing in series with the supply (Figure 17.8). It thus carries
the load current. The measuring instrument is connected
across the secondary as shown. The ideal theoretical rela-
tionship between the currents and the number of turns on
the primary and secondary is:
Is D Ip(cid:9)Np/Ns(cid:10)
The voltage appearing across the secondary terminals is:
Vs D IsZs
where Zs is the impedance of the measuring instrument
connected to the secondary terminals (burden).

Is

Meter
Zs

Vs

Ip

Ns

Np

Supply

Load

Figure 17.8 Current transformer

Voltmeters and ammeters 17/261

If this impedance is high then so also is this voltage.
The primary of the device should therefore never be ener-
gized when the secondary is open circuit, since in that
case Zs, and therefore Vs, is inﬁnite. Standard secondary
current ratings are 1 A and 5 A, and the preferred range
of values for the burden is between 1.5 VA and 30 VA.

Ratio and phase angle errors also occur due to the need
for a portion of the primary current to magnetize the core
and the requirement for a ﬁnite voltage to drive the current
through the burden. These errors must be small. Current
transformers are classiﬁed (in descending order of accu-
racy) into types AL, AM, BM, C and D. Ratio errors
in class AL must be within the limits of (š0.1 per cent
for AL and (š5 per cent for D, while the phase error
limit on class A1 is (š5 minutes to (š2 minutes in types
CM and C.

Again, there are problems both at D.C. and at high
frequencies. In the former case connecting a very low
resistance, Rs, in series with the load and using a voltmeter
to measure the voltage across it obtain a current sample.
This voltage is equal to IsRs and, provided Rs is known,
then Is is speciﬁed.

At very high frequencies, the current is measured by
assessing one of the effects that it produces. Several tech-
niques are possible, e.g. (1) measuring the temperature
rise when the current ﬂows through a known resistance
or (2) using a Hall-effect probe to measure the electro-
magnetic ﬁeld created by the current.

17.5 Voltmeters and ammeters
These are manufactured according to several different
principles, each being suitable for a particular application.
The more common types are discussed brieﬂy below.

17.5.1 Moving coil

This consists of a coil mounted between the poles of a
permanent magnet. When a current ﬂows through the coil
a magnetic ﬁeld is created and the interaction of this ﬁeld
with that of the magnet produces a torque, proportional
to the current in the coil, which causes the coil to rotate
against the action of a spring. A pointer is attached to the
coil that gives an indication of the magnitude of the coil
current (Figure 17.9).

Unlike most other electrical measuring instruments, the
scale is inherently linear. The moving parts of the instru-
ment must be as light in weight and as free from friction
as possible in order to preserve accuracy. This implies
that the coil is capable of carrying only small currents.
If higher currents are to be measured, it is necessary
to employ a shunt to divert some of the main current
away from the instrument. The arrangement is as shown
in Figure 17.10, where Rm is the resistance of the meter
and Rs that of the shunt. The relationship between the
total system current (I) and that in the instrument (Im) is:
Im D

IRs

(cid:9)Rm C Rs(cid:10)

17/262 Electrical Instrumentation

Suspension

Magnet

Current

Supply

Coil

Figure 17.9 Moving-coil instrument

Shunt

Rs

Coil

Rm

I

Im

Figure 17.10 Use of shunt

Many commercial instruments have the shunt incor-
porated into the unit, and the user need only concern
himself with the full-scale deﬂection as shown on the
scale. General-purpose instruments with a range of built-
in shunts are available and the user then selects the appro-
priate range. The instrument is delicate and easily dam-
aged by excess currents. Connecting it in the circuit with
reversed polarity can also damage it. The instrument may
also be used as a voltmeter by connecting it, in series
with a large resistor, across the supply, and in most com-
mercial instruments the resistor is incorporated into the
case.

The direction of rotation depends on the direction of
the current in the coil, and thus the instrument is only
suitable for D.C. It is, however, possible to incorporate
a full-wave rectiﬁer arranged as shown in Figure 17.11
in order to allow the instrument to measure A.C. quan-
tities. The quantity measured is the RMS value only if
the waveform of the current is truly sinusoidal. In other
cases, a considerable error may result. In principle, the
scale is linear but, if required, it can be made non-linear
by suitably shaping the poles of the permanent magnet.
The instrument reading is affected by the performance of
the rectiﬁer, which is a non-linear device, and this results
in the scale also being non-linear. The error when mea-
suring D.C. quantities can be as low as š0.1 per cent
of full-scale deﬂection and instruments are available for
currents between microamperes and up to 600 A.

I

Meter

Figure 17.11 Full-wave rectiﬁcation

17.5.2 Moving magnet

This is a cheap but inaccurate instrument suitable for use
only in D.C. circuits. In this case, the coil is wound on a
small vane situated in the magnet ﬁeld.

17.5.3 Moving iron

The current to be measured is used to energize a coil. This
creates a magnetic ﬁeld and a moving vane is repelled
by, or in some case attracted into, this ﬁeld to a degree
depending on the current magnitude (Figure 17.12). The
vane is restrained by a spring and attached to an indicating
pointer. A square law is involved and thus the scale is
inherently non-linear, although this can be modiﬁed by a
suitable selection of materials and shape for the vane.

The square law relationship also implies that the instru-
ment measures RMS values. It can be used on either A.C.
(up to the lower audio range if special compensating cir-
cuits are employed) or D.C. The instrument reading can be

Pointer

I

Pivot

Iron

Coil

Figure 17.12 Moving-iron principle

affected by stray magnetic ﬁelds and should be shielded
as far as possible. It is usually designed (and calibrated)
for single-frequency operation, but it will continue to give
accurate results (in terms of root-mean-square (RMS val-
ues) even if the waveform contains high-frequency har-
monics. The smallest units are capable of measuring a few
milliamps and the upper limit is ﬁxed only by the current-
carrying capacity of the coil. Shunts can, of course, be
incorporated for different current ranges. This type of
instrument is cheap and robust.

17.5.4 Electrodynamics instruments

These incorporate an electromagnet in place of the perma-
nent magnet of the moving-coil instrument (Figure 17.13).
The current ﬂow through both the moving and ﬁxed coils
and a torque is produced on the former which carries the
pointer and which is restricted by a spring. Again, the
deﬂection obeys a square law and the scale is cramped at
the lower end. Since with A.C. the current in both coils
changes direction, this instrument can be used on either
D.C. or A.C. Although with A.C. the meter actually mea-
sures the mean of the square of the current, the scale is
usually calibrated in terms of the rms value. With the
appropriate modiﬁcations, this type of instrument can be
used as a wattmeter, a VAR meter, a power factor meter
or a frequency meter.

17.5.5 Thermocouple

This instrument was developed from the ‘hot-wire’
ammeter, some examples of which can still be found. In
the modern equivalent, the current to be measured (or a
known proportion of it) ﬂows through a small element
that heats a thermocouple, so producing a rms voltage
at its terminals, which is a function of the current. This
voltage then supplies a current to a permanent magnet,
moving-coil movement.

The instrument measures the true rms values and units
are available to cover the frequency range from D.C.
to 100 MHz. The major drawback is the susceptibility
to damage by overloads (even those of short duration)
unless appropriate protection is provided. The accuracy
can also be affected by ambient temperature changes.

Frequency measurement 17/263

Since the instrument responds to a heating effect, it is
slow to respond to changes in the measured quantity.

17.5.6 Electrostatic voltmeter

This consists of a pair of plates, one ﬁxed and the other
moving, mounted parallel to each other. When a voltage
is applied across the pair the ﬁxed plate moves against
the action of a retaining spring. Again, the characteristic
is square law. It has an inherently high level of insulation,
due to the air gap between the plates, and can be used to
measure voltages up to 15 kV. It consumes no power and
therefore has extremely high impedance.

17.6 Frequency measurement
Low frequencies can be measured using an electrome-
chanical moving-coil instrument. Current from the supply
ﬂows through two parallel ﬁxed coils and then through a
moving coil mounted between them (Figure 17.14). The
two ﬁxed coils are tuned to slightly different frequencies
and the resulting ﬁelds set up a torque which is propor-
tional to frequency.

The nominal frequency at which the instrument can be
used depends on the tuning of the coils and the instrument
is only accurate to within plus or minus a few per cent of
this frequency. A ratiometer (Figure 17.15) can be used
at higher frequencies up to 5 kHz or so. This consists of
two moving coils arranged at right angles and mounted
between the poles of a permanent magnet. The system
current is fed into the two coils through separate phase-
shifting networks and the result is to produce a torque
proportional to frequency.

At frequencies higher than this, a solid-state counter
must be used. This is based on a stable oscillator and,
in effect, counts the pulses generated during one cycle
of the supply frequency. The range and accuracy of the
instrument depends on the master oscillator frequency, but
units capable of use over the whole range up to 600 MHz

Fixed coils

Moving coil

I

Moving
coils

Pivot

Fixed coils.

Supply

I

L1

L2

Tuning
inductors

Figure 17.13 Schematic diagram of electrodynamics instrument

Figure 17.14 Frequency meter

17/264 Electrical Instrumentation

Permanent
magnet

Moving
coils

Supply

C

R

Figure 17.15 Frequency ratio meter

are available, although some discrimination is likely to be
lost at the lower end.

17.7 Electronic instrumentation
Electronic instrumentation is available for the measure-
ment of D.C. and A.C. voltage, current and power as
well as impedance. Such instruments usually have higher
sensitivities, operating frequencies and input impedance
than is normally found in the electromechanical instru-
mentation described above. However, they may need to
incorporate ampliﬁers and they invariably need power to
operate the ﬁnal display. Hence, an independent power
source is needed. Both mains and battery units are avail-
able. The accuracy of measurement is very dependent on
the ampliﬁer, and bandwidth and adequate gain are impor-
tant qualities.

17.7.1 Analogue voltmeters

fed through
The A.C. voltage to be measured is
an ampliﬁer which supplies some form of indicating
devices. Moving-coil
instruments and digital displays
are available, and in some circumstances (for example,
when true rms values are required) the ampliﬁer supplies
a thermocouple as described above. The thermocouple
output, with further ampliﬁcation if necessary, drives
a D.C. display. The reading,
for a given measured
voltage, depends on the input/output characteristics of the
complete system, especially on the ampliﬁer/attenuator
and any rectiﬁers incorporated to allow a D.C. ﬁnal
instrument to be used when measuring A.C.

The unit can, however, be designed to read the rms,
the average or the peak of the input waveform. The input
impedance is high, which means that the instrument has
little modifying effect on the voltage which is being mea-
sured, and it can be used up to 1 GHz, although stray
capacitance at these very high frequencies may present a
problem.

It should be noted that the input impedance of the meter
changes when the range is switched. A large amount

of spurious electronic signals (‘noise’) may be present
in some systems. This is a potential source of error in
the instrument reading, especially when small signals are
involved. It can be improved by the use of suitable ﬁl-
ters which may be built into the instrument, although the
penalty is a reduction in the frequency bandwidth over
which the instrument can be used.

An important point to be considered when the instru-
ment is used for A.C. voltage measurement is the terminal
connections. One terminal will be clearly designated as
the high-potential connection, and this should be adhered
to. The HT terminal will have a low value of capaci-
tance to other bodies and to earth while the corresponding
capacitance of the other is high. If the instrument is in a
metallic case this should be connected to the mains earth
as a safety precaution. In some cases, the low-voltage ter-
minal is also connected to the metallic case. If this is so,
the instrument will effectively earth the circuit under test,
which may give rise to problems.

Instruments with a balanced input circuit are available
for measurements where both input terminals are normally
at a potential other than earth. Further problems arise
due to common-mode interference arising from the pres-
ence of multiple earth loops in the circuits. In these cases
the instrument may need to be isolated from the mains
earth. Finally, high-frequency instruments, unless prop-
erly screened, may be subject to radiated electromagnetic
interference arising from strong external ﬁelds.

17.7.2 Digital multi-meters

A number of different types are available but they all share
the common characteristic of very high input impedance,
which means that they are suitable for measuring voltages
with minimal interference to the actual circuit. They are
used whenever accuracy, good resolution and high levels
of stability are important. As their name implies, these
instruments are capable of measuring both A.C. and D.C.
voltages and currents as well as resistance, and incorpo-
rate a wide range of scales. When used with A.C. the input
signal is divided down to a level suitable for the input to
an analogue to digital converter. This needs to be preceded
by other function converters and range-switching units.
In some instruments of this type, the range is selected
automatically by sensing the level of the input signal and
selecting the appropriate range electronically.

The analogue-to-digital converter has a ﬁxed range,
usually either 0–200 mV or 0–2 V, and the input divider
network is used to obtain a signal within this range.
This implies that there may be considerable differences
in input impedance between different ranges. When used
to measure alternating voltage the appropriate function
converter may be a transformer followed by rectiﬁcation
and smoothing. This produces a direct voltage equivalent
to the average value of the A.C. voltage and, provided
the input signal is purely sinusoidal, the indicator is then
calibrated in rms values.

More sophisticated instruments use special circuitry to
obtain the rms values of non-sinusoidal signals. The cur-
rent converter usually consists of low-value resistors in
the input, and one of these is chosen as a shunt resistor

(depending on the scale chosen) and the instrument mea-
sures the voltage developed across this. Resistance is mea-
sured by using the resistive chain at the input as a ref-
erence. When a voltage is applied across this and the
unknown resistor, the two voltage drops are proportional
to the respective resistance values. The voltage across the
unknown resistor is applied to the analog-to-digital (A–D)
converter followed by that across the known resistor with
which it is compared and the ratio is used to determine
the value of the former. It should be noted that the instru-
ment is essentially a sampling device. The input signal is
periodically sampled and the result processed using one
of a number of techniques, examples of which are given
below:

1. The linear ramp instrument uses a linear time-base
to determine the time taken for an internally gener-
ated voltage to reach the unknown voltage, V. The
limitations are due to small non-linearity in the ramp,
instability of the electronic components and a lack of
noise rejection.

2. The charge balancing voltmeter employs a pair of dif-
ferential input transistors used to charge a capacitor,
which is then discharged in small increments. The indi-
vidual discharges are then sensed and the total number,
which is a function of the measured voltage, stored.
It has improved linearity and high sensitivity as well
as a reduced susceptibility to ‘noise’. In addition to
its use as a straightforward voltmeter, it can be inter-
faced directly with other measurement devices such as
thermocouples and strain gauges.

3. The potentiometer principle is used in the successive
approximation instrument, where the unknown voltage
is compared with a succession of known voltages until
balance is obtained. The total time for measurement
and display is about 5 ms.

4. In the voltage-frequency unit the unknown voltage is
used to derive a signal at a frequency proportional to it.
This frequency is then applied to a counter, the output
of which is thus a measure of the voltage input.

5. The dual-slope instrument incorporates an integrator
operated in conjunction with a time difference unit, and
this is one of a range of units employing a combination
of the above techniques designed to take advantage
of the favorable characteristics of each. It is subject
to the same limitations as the linear ramp instrument
described above but it does have the advantage of
inherent noise rejection.

17.8 Instrument selection
The selection of the instrument for a speciﬁc purpose
should take account of the following points:

1. Use no more precision (i.e. no more digits) than is

necessary in order to keep the cost to a minimum.

2. Make sure that the input impedance is adequate in the
circuit in which the instrument is used. This applies
not only to the normal (or static) input impedance but
also to the dynamic impedance which occurs when the

Cathode ray oscilloscopes 17/265

instrument is subjected to transient surges with sig-
niﬁcant components at frequencies other than that at
which the measurement is desired.

3. Take adequate steps to achieve noise rejection both
by the choice of a suitable instrument and by using
external networks if necessary.

4. Ensure that the instrument has appropriate output ports
to drive other devices such as storage and computa-
tional facilities. Wherever possible, these ports should
conform to the IEEE interface standards.

Most instruments of this type incorporate built-in self-
checking facilities but the check can only be as accurate as
the internal reference which, itself, will only be accurate
over a speciﬁc range. The instrument should be calibrated
against a reference source at periodic intervals.

Modern electronic instruments are much more than sim-
ple but accurate methods of measuring and can include
many additional facilities such as:

1. Variable reading rate from one reading per hour up to

several hundred per second;

2. Storage capability allowing many hundreds of separate
readings to be stored internally and recalled subse-
quently, if necessary, at a different rate;

3. The ability to perform calculations on the readings and

to display the derived result;

4. The ability to indicate if speciﬁc read values are out-
side pre-set limits and to store (and subsequently recall)
maximum and minimum readings.

5. Self-calibration and/or testing according to predeter-

mined programming.

17.9 Cathode ray oscilloscopes
The cathode ray oscilloscope (CRO) is an extremely
versatile instrument
for monitoring electrical signals,
for diagnostic testing and for studying time-varying
phenomena. A stream of electrons is produced from a
heated cathode and accelerated through an electron ‘gun’
towards a ﬂuorescent screen (Figure 17.16). The stream
passes through a coil which focuses it into a beam which
then passes between pairs of vertical and horizontal plates.
Electric ﬁelds are created between these plates which
cause the beam direction to change in response to them.
In the simplest form the vertical plates are supplied
with a voltage which is a linear function of time, and, in
the absence of a signal on the horizontal plates, the beam
will move horizontally from left to right across the screen.
The speed of movement is controlled by the rate at which

Screen

Electron
beam

Anode

Cathode

Grid

Deflection plates

Figure 17.16 Principle of CRO

17/266 Electrical Instrumentation

the voltage applied to the vertical plates is increased, and
at the end of its travel the beam ﬂies back to its starting
point.

If now a second, time varying, voltage is applied to the
horizontal plates, this will cause a vertical deﬂection of the
beam, and the result is a trace on the screen, which corre-
sponds to the variation of this second voltage with time.
The action of the beam on the screen causes a ﬂuorescent
trace to appear on the screen as the beam is deﬂected.
The time for which this trace persists is a function of the
electron density in the beam and the material with which
the screen is coated.

The accuracy of the device is limited by the linear-
ity of the circuit which moves the beam horizontally in
response to time (i.e. the ‘time base’) and the response
of the input circuit. The ‘time base’ is generated by a
sweep circuit which is triggered to instigate the start of
the movement. The triggering signal may be derived from
the voltage that is being measured or it may be obtained
from an entirely separate source. This can cause difﬁcul-
ties in some applications. If it is required to examine a
voltage pulse then the simplistic approach is to allow the
pulse itself to trigger the signal. This is unsatisfactory, if
it is the leading edge of the pulse which is of interest, and
therefore a delay is built into the instrument which allows
the trace to be triggered immediately the pulse is applied
but which delays the application of the signal to the ver-
tical deﬂection plates for a short time in order to enable
the pulse to be displayed in the middle of the screen.

The velocity with which the spot moves from left to
right across the screen is adjustable, enabling single or
multiple cycles of an A.C. signal to be observed. Typi-
cal instruments can be used to measure a wide range of
voltages on a series of different scales. The input sig-
nal may be either A.C. or D.C. and in the latter case,
the operation of the appropriate switch on the front panel
short-circuits the input capacitor. In each case, the voltage
needs to be ampliﬁed before it is applied to the plates. A
different ampliﬁer is used for each scale range and more
sophisticated instruments may include a range of plug-in
ampliﬁers in addition to those built into the instrument.
The important ampliﬁer characteristics are the gain, the
bandwidth, and the amplitude of signal, which can be
handled without distortion and the input impedance. Since
the inherent sensitivity of a typical oscilloscope is likely
to be of the order of 50 mV/cm the ampliﬁer gain must
be large enough to give an acceptable deﬂection when the
input signal amplitude is very small. On the other hand, if
high input signals are involved then an attenuator, rather
than an ampliﬁer will be needed (see below).

Reproducibility of the input signal is all-important, and
therefore the ampliﬁer must be capable of handling the
input signal magnitude involved. Frequency response is
also important and the ampliﬁer in use must have a
bandwidth sufﬁcient to accommodate the frequency of
the input signal. The input impedance should be high in
order to avoid loading the circuit under test. As with the
ampliﬁer, the attenuator must produce a known degree
of change (in this case a reduction) in the input signal
within the speciﬁed frequency band. It must have high
input impedance which should not alter when the input

sensitivity switch setting is changed. The oscilloscope
is normally connected directly to the circuit under test.
However, this may not be possible in all cases and a
probe may have to be used. The probe may simply
serve as an isolator, so avoiding problems caused by, for
example, shunt capacitance in the measuring leads or it
may contain built-in ampliﬁers (or attenuator) to extend
the range of the instrument. The probe should be matched
to the instrument and the use of a probe produced by one
manufacturer in conjunction with an oscilloscope from
another is not recommended.

Many variants of the basic type are possible and some

of the more usual are listed below:

1. Low frequency (up to around 30 MHz): typical deﬂec-
tion sensitivities are between 0.1 mV/cm and 10 V/cm.
This is a general-purpose instrument and can incor-
porate a second trace energized by a voltage different
from the ﬁrst and using the same or different deﬂec-
tion speeds for the time base. An alternative is to use
a single beam but to apply a chopped signal to the
deﬂection plates. Sampling the two separate signals
for brief intervals of time and applying each in turn to
the plates derives the applied signal. The luminescent
persistence of the screen then results in two continuous
traces (one corresponding to each of the two applied
voltages) to be observed.

2. Medium frequency (up to 100 MHz): The features
described above (with the exception usually of the
chopped-signal variant) are available but the time base
components and ampliﬁers are designed for much
wider frequency bands.

3. High frequency (up to 400 MHz): Again, the difference
between this and the above is the use of higher-quality
components and circuits to give linearity over a much
wider frequency range.

17.9.1 Storage

Most of the types described above have the facility for
single-shot operation if it is necessary to measure single
‘events’ (i.e. transients). In these cases, the timebase is
triggered by the start of the transient. The limitation is
the persistence of the screen luminescence since the event
only occurs once, rather than a repetitive series of events,
as happens with a periodic waveform where the trace is, in
effect, overwritten during each operation of the timebase.
It is possible to sample and store the input transient in
digital form by frequent sampling of the input waveform.
These data can be retrieved (repetitively if necessary)
from the store and displayed on the screen at the oper-
ator’s leisure. The frequency range over which this type
of instrument can be used depends on the sampling net-
work, and is usually limited to a few MHz. Waveforms
and transients corresponding to much higher frequencies
can be stored and displayed in this way, with the storage
being carried out by optical methods.

17.9.2 Sampling oscilloscopes

These are used for very high-frequency work. The wave-
form of the applied signal, which must be periodic in

nature, is sampled at intervals that bear a deﬁnite relation-
ship to some reference point on the wave. These samples
are stored and subsequently used to reconstruct a display
of the actual signal on the oscilloscope screen.

The non-storage oscilloscope can be found in most
electronic test situations, from sophisticated research labo-
ratories to production engineering plants. The storage unit
is most widely used in medical work and in electrome-
chanical applications, particularly where very high-speed
transients need to be recorded, while, as noted above,
the sampling type ﬁnds its main use in the evaluation of
ultra-high-frequency equipment.

Appropriate connections must be used to pick up the
required signal from the circuit under investigation. This
can be done directly for low- and medium-voltage appli-
cations and, if a measurement of current is required, by
measuring the voltage across a resistor of known value.
However, for accurate work it is important that neither
the impedance across which the leads are connected nor
the impedance of the leads themselves affects the result.
It is also important to avoid errors being introduced, par-
ticularly in high-frequency work, from spurious signals
induced in the leads if they are situated in electromag-
netic ﬁelds. The latter can be overcome in most cases by
using co-axial leads with the outer screening connected
to the case of the instrument and thence to earth. The
former problem can be more difﬁcult to deal with, since
it implies that the load across the oscilloscope terminals,
including the effects of the leads, must be matched to the
input impedance of the instrument.

These problems can be minimized in the great majority
of cases by using specially designed probes. The user will
need to know the frequency range (i.e. the bandwidth)
over which the probe can be used satisfactorily and the
scaling factor introduced by the probe.

17.9.3 Use of oscilloscope

The cathode ray oscilloscope is a multi-purpose instru-
ment with several ranges, switching between which is
carried out by controls on the unit. The required values
are obtained by measuring the height of the trace of the
screen or the time between different events in the hor-
izontal deﬂection of the beam. These measurements are
then converted to the required values using the scale val-
ues obtained from the control switch settings. It is thus
of paramount importance to make sure that the scale set-
tings are recorded. The vertical scale will normally be
calibrated in volts (or fractions of a volt) per centime-
ter and the horizontal scale in seconds (or fractions of
a second) per centimeter. The accuracy of the measure-
ment will then depend on (1) the accuracy with which
the beam deﬂection can be measured on the screen and
(2) the accuracy of the built-in attenuators and ampliﬁers
applicable to the range in use.

A graticule is normally provided on the screen to assist
in the measurement. Parallax errors can cause problems
unless this graticule is actually engraved on the screen
itself, and the ﬁnal accuracy will depend on the degree of
beam focusing which can be achieved. Accuracy of better
than 1.5 per cent should be possible in most cases.

Transducers 17/267

As noted above, the operator will select a convenient
range that will allow for the whole of the signal he wishes
to observe to be displayed on the screen. It is important
that the internal circuits so selected are linear over this
range and again, with most instruments, values of better
than 1 per cent should be achievable.

17.10 Transducers
Many of the quantities required to be measured in process
plant operation are not, in themselves, electrical, and if
electrical or electronic instrumentation is to be used then
these need to be converted to electrical signals using a
transducer. The transducer is a physical object and its
presence will have an effect on the quantity being sensed.
Whether or not this effect is signiﬁcant will depend on
the particular application. In all cases, it is advisable to
consider carefully the balance between the requirement
that the transducer should, on the one hand, cause the
minimum interference with the quantity being measured
and, on the other, that it should be intimately associated
with the effect being measured.

Temperature measurement is a case in point. A large
transducer in close contact with the body whose tem-
perature is being measured will act as a heat sink and
consequently produce a localized reduction at the point
where the temperature is being measured. On the other
hand, if an air gap exists between the transducer and the
hot surface then the air (rather than the surface) temper-
ature will be measured.

impedance and,

The important characteristics of a transducer used in
conjunction with an electronic measurement system are
accuracy, susceptibility, frequency,
if
appropriate, the method of excitation. The transducer is
likely to be the least accurate component in the system,
and it should be calibrated (and recalibrated) at frequent
intervals. It is likely to be subject to a range of different
physical conditions, some of which it is there to detect
and others by which it should remain unaffected (for
example, a pressure transducer should be unaffected by
any changes in temperature which it might be called
upon to experience). Some types of transducer are not
suitable for use under D.C. conditions and all will have an
upper limit of frequency at which accuracy is acceptable.
Many types of transducer are also affected by stray
electromagnetic ﬁelds.

The impedance of the transducer is important if it pro-
vides an output signal to an electronic device (an ampli-
ﬁer, for example) and the impedance of the two must
be matched for accurate measurement. Some transduc-
ers (thermocouples, for example) generate their output by
internal mechanisms (i.e. they are self-excited). Others
such as resistance thermometers need an external source
and an appropriate type must be available. Transducers
used in the measurement of the more common physical
quantities are discussed below.

17.10.1 Temperature

There are several instruments for measuring temperature
as follows.

17/268 Electrical Instrumentation

Resistance thermometers

These utilize the fact that the resistance of most materials
changes with temperature. In order to be useful for this
purpose this change must be linear over the range required
and the thermal capacity must be low. Although the above
implies a high resistivity and temperature coefﬁcient, lin-
earity and stability are the paramount considerations, and
suitable materials are platinum, nickel and tungsten.

The sensor usually consists of a coil of wire made
from the material that is wound on a former and the
whole sealed to prevent oxidization, although a ﬁlm of
the metal deposited on a ceramic substrate can also be
used. The resistor is connected in a Wheatstone bridge
network (Figure 17.17), using ﬁxed resistors in the other
three arms. The instrument connected across the bridge is
calibrated directly in terms of temperature. The range is
limited by the linearity of the device and the upper tem-
perature, which can be measured, must be well below the
melting point of the material.

Thermocouples

These are active transducers in the sense that they act as
a generator of EMF whose magnitude is a function of the
temperature of the junction of two dissimilar metals. Rare-
metal combinations are used for high accuracy and at high
temperatures, but for most engineering applications one of
the following is suitable, depending on the temperature:

Copper/constantan
Iron/constantan
Chromel/constantan
Chromel/alumel

(up to 670 K)
(up to 1030 K)
(up to 1270 K)
(up to 1640 K)

If the instrument is to be direct reading, the second (or
‘cold’) junction must be kept at a constant reference tem-
perature. If high temperatures are to be measured then the
terminals of the detector can be used as the cold junction
without an unacceptable loss of accuracy.

The voltage output of the more common types of ther-
mocouple is of the order of 50 V/C and the output is
either read on a sensitive moving-coil meter or on a dig-
ital voltmeter. The reading is converted to temperature
using a calibration chart supplied with the thermocouple.
Some commercial units are available in which the thermo-
couple and instrument is supplied as an integral unit with
the scale directly calibrated in temperature. If a separate
instrument is to be used then it should be noted that the
thermocouple resistance is only of the order of 10 (cid:13) and

Supply

R1

R3

R2

R1, R2, R3 - standard resistors
RM - measuring resistor  
D - detector

D

Figure 17.17 Resistance temperature measurement

RM

for maximum sensitivity the meter resistance should be
matched to this.

The commercial units have a very low thermal capac-
ity and very high response speeds. Some are available
with several independent channels and a common ‘cold’
junction. Each channel is scanned in turn by the instru-
ment, and the readings either displayed or stored for future
recovery. Accuracies of better than 0.2 per cent are pos-
sible. Thermocouples are available to cover a very wide
range of temperatures, their cost is low and they have a
small mass, so minimizing the intrusive effect on the sur-
face at the point where the temperature is being measured.
The output characteristics (output voltage versus tempera-
ture) are reasonably linear but the measurement accuracy
is not particularly high.

Thermistors

These are semiconductor devices, which have a high resis-
tivity and a much larger temperature/resistance coefﬁ-
cient than the materials available for resistance thermome-
ters. However, there is a temperature limitation of around
550K and the characteristics are excessively non-linear,
although it is possible to obtain matched pairs to measure
differential temperatures. Thus, for example, they can be
used to measure airﬂow in ducts. The change in resistance
is again detected using a Wheatstone bridge network. The
materials used are manufactured from sintered compounds
of copper, manganese, nickel and cobalt. Conventional
semiconductor diodes in the form of p–n junctions can
also be used in this way.

Although thermistors with a positive temperature char-
acteristic are available, the negative characteristic types
are more common. Devices which are physically small
have low power-handling capabilities and some form of
output ampliﬁcation is usually needed. They do, however,
have a fast response. Larger units are available in which
ampliﬁcation can be dispensed with but the response is
much slower. These are used for indication (rather than
control) purposes.

Pyrometers

These are non-contact instruments for measuring tem-
perature, and, as such, their thermal mass is relatively
unimportant. They can be used for very high tempera-
tures. Radiation pyrometers focus the infrared radiation
emitted by the body onto a thermocouple contained within
the instrument. The voltage produced by the thermocou-
ple is then read on a dial calibrated directly in terms
of temperature. If required, this voltage can be ampli-
ﬁed and used as a control signal. The actual tempera-
ture measured is that integrated over the whole of the
surface seen by the pyrometer and the reading may be
affected by infrared absorption in the medium between
the hot surface and the instrument. This also applies to
optical pyrometers, which are usually of the disappearing-
ﬁlament type. The instrument contains a lamp the ﬁlament
of which is viewed against the background of the hot
body. The current through the lamp is adjusted, so vary-
ing the brightness of the ﬁlament until it merges into
the background. The current required to achieve this is

measured and converted into a temperature reading on
the dial.

17.10.2 Force

For the present purposes, this includes the measurement
of pressure, acceleration and strain.

Piezoelectric crystals

These use crystalline materials in which the electrical
properties of the material are changed when it under-
goes slight deformation by, for example, the application
of mechanical pressure. The principal effect is to cause a
change in the frequency at which the material resonates.
This change in resonant frequency can be detected and
measured, so giving an indication of the change in pres-
sure.

Quartz is a natural crystalline material which exhibits
this form of behavior, although its relevant properties
are highly temperature dependent and synthetic materi-
als have been developed which, although fundamentally
less accurate, are more stable under varying temperature
conditions.

One application is the accelerometer,

in which the
acceleration force of a mass is made to increase (or
decrease) the pressure produced on the crystal by a spring.
This, in turn, produces the required electrical change, the
effect of which is ampliﬁed. It is important to select units
appropriate for the expected changes, which should be
within the frequency range from almost zero to the natural
frequency of the crystal.

Strain gauges

These units are rigidly attached to a surface. Any small
deformation in that surface due to the application of an
external force changes the dimension of the strain gauge,
and this change is then detected to give a value of the
applied force or the strain in the material. Resistance strain
gauges consist of a grid resistance wire cemented between
two ﬁlms. This resistance element is connected in one
arm of a measurement bridge with a similar, compen-
sating, gauge in a second arm. The bridge is rebalanced
when the strain is applied, and the changes required to
do this are measured and converted, using the calibration
information, to the quantities required.

Modern techniques use thin-ﬁlm resistors deposited
directly on the area and semiconductor units are available
which are considerably more sensitive than the resistive
type. Dynamic measurements can also be made. The
change in resistance unbalances the bridge, causing a
voltage to appear across the detector terminals. This
voltage is then ampliﬁed and applied to a CRO or the
information can be stored digitally for future retrieval.

Strain gauges can also be used to measure pressure by
bonding the gauge to a diaphragm in the wall of a liquid or
gas container, acceleration, by sensing the relative change
along one or more sensing axes, and torque (by sensing
angular strain).

Temperature-sensing devices may also be used to mea-
sure ﬂow in pipes or ducts and for level indication of

Transducers 17/269

liquid in a tank. The device is indirectly heated; using a
separate heating ﬁlament, and the ﬂow of liquid cools the
sensor at a rate which is a function of the velocity of the
ﬂow. Thus by incorporating the device into a bridge cir-
cuit, it is possible, after appropriate calibration, to obtain
a direct measurement of the ﬂow velocity. Similarly, sev-
eral such devices can be placed one above the other, in a
tank, containing liquid. The liquid acts as a heat-transfer
medium, those devices below the surface are cooled as
the liquid level falls and the temperature and therefore the
resistance of the devices increases. This can be detected,
and the whole chain is thus used as a level detector.

Impedance transducers

Strictly, the strain gauges referred to above come into this
category, since in such cases the change in the measured
quantity causes a corresponding change in the resistance
of the element. However, the principle has a much wider
application, using changes in either the inductive or capac-
itive reactance of electrical circuit elements.

The inductance of an iron-cored inductor varies with
any air gap included in the iron core. Thus, physical
movement can be detected by allowing this movement
to displace part of the core, so changing the width of the
gap. The detection of very small movements is possible
in this way, and instruments based on the principle are
used to measure acceleration, pressure, strain, thickness
and a variety of other changes.

The effects usually need to be ampliﬁed, and in some
cases, signal processing is necessary in order to obtain
the derived information. Two electrical conductors at dif-
ferent potentials exhibit the property of capacitance (i.e.
energy storage) between them. The value of this capac-
itance changes when the relative position of the plates
alters or when the medium between them is changed. Such
changes can be detected by employing the capacitor in an
oscillatory circuit. The resonant frequency of this circuit is
proportional to the capacitance that it contains and there-
fore the detection of such a frequency change allows the
original quantity to be determined.

This technique can be used to measure displacement
where, in effect, the two electrodes are connected to the
two bodies. It has also other applications (for example,
in moisture meters where the presence of water vapor
between the electrodes causes the capacitance change).

Photo-sensors

Photovoltaic sensors are semiconductor devices and have
the property that when light falls on them an electrical
voltage is produced across them high enough to drive
a current through a resistive load. Banks of these units
(solar cells) can be used to produce signiﬁcant amounts
of electrical power, but the technique can also be used for
measurement purposes, optical tracking and reading bar
codes and punched tape.

Photoresistive sensors are essentially inactive devices,
but they have the property of exhibiting a change in resis-
tance when light falls on them. This change is detected
by an appropriate circuit and is used to measure the light
falling on the unit (e.g. in photography exposure meters)

17/270 Electrical Instrumentation

or to trigger a control action (for instance, in intruder
alarm systems).

Photoemission is the property of some materials to emit
electrons when light falls on them. These materials are
used as a cathode and an anode collects the electrons.
One application is in the photomultiplier unit that is used
in counters.

Photovoltaic cells are independent of an electrical sup-
ply but, in general, they lack sensitivity as compared with
photoemissive units.

17.11 Spectrum analyzers
Much present electronic equipment deals with signals
which are not sinusoidal and which may not even be
periodic in nature. However, these signals can be divided
into a series of components, each of a single speciﬁc
frequency, and each can then be studied in turn in order to
determine its characteristics. Where plant instrumentation
is concerned, this technique can be particularly useful for
diagnostic purposes.

The instrument required is a spectrum analyzer that
must be capable of operating over a wide range of fre-
quencies to cope with all those present in the input signal.
Some of these signals may be close together in frequency
and they may have widely varying magnitudes. The real-
time technique utilizes a series of ﬁxed ﬁlters designed
to separate contiguous frequency bands. Each supplies its
own detector, and the outputs of these are then scanned to
produce individual traces on an oscilloscope. The resolu-
tion is governed by the bandwidths of the individual ﬁlters
and the instrument can be used from D.C. to a few kHz.
The Fourier transform analyzer uses digital techniques
in order to carry out the frequency separation. This can
cope with signals up to several hundred kilohertz and
swept-tuned analyzers employ a tuned ﬁlter technique.
From the user’s point of view the desirable characteristics
are high stability (much higher than the frequency being
analyzed) and good resolution (the ability to distinguish
between different signals which are close together in fre-
quency). It must also be able to detect small signals (i.e.
its sensitivity must be adequate) while at the same time
have an adequate dynamic range. The latter is the ratio
of the largest to the smallest signal that can be detected
without distortion in either. Good modern instruments of
this type incorporate a considerable degree of automation
whereby inherent accuracy can be corrected, the control
settings are recorded and the data manipulated to yield
additional information as required, all with the aid of a
desktop computer.

former) are also used as stand-alone units for such diverse
purposes as fault detection and the determination of the
parameters of electronic components. The accuracy of the
measurement is governed by the accuracy to which the
value of the components against which the comparison
is made is known, and the care which is taken in the
measurement process. Brief descriptions of some of the
more common methods are given below together with
their applications. The theory of operation may be found
in the many textbooks on the subject.

In its simplest form, the Wheatstone bridge is used on
D.C. for the measurement of an unknown resistance in
terms of three known resistors. Its accuracy depends on
that of the known units and the sensitivity of the detec-
tor. It is also used for sensing the changes which occur
in the output from resistance strain-gauge detectors. The
latter instruments can be made portable and can detect
variations of less than 0.05 per cent.

The Kelvin double bridge is a more sophisticated
variant used for the measurement of very low resistance
such as ammeter shunts or short lengths of cable. This is
also operated on D.C. In industrial terms the digital D.C.
low-resistance instruments are more convenient although
somewhat less accurate.

A.C. bridges suffer from the complication that they
must allow for stray inductance and capacitance in the cir-
cuit and that the measurements are, in general, frequency
dependent. Inductance is measured by the Maxwell bridge
and its development, the Wien bridge, the commercial
variants of which operate at frequencies up to 10 kHz with
accuracy of better than 1 per cent. The corresponding unit
for capacitance is the Schering bridge. The major prob-
lems in the latter case are usually concerned with stray
capacitance to ground. In order to overcome these, the
Wagner earth system is used.

for

The Wayne–Kerr bridge employs a modiﬁed principle
involving the balancing of the output between from
two windings of a transformer. It can be used up to
high frequencies (100 MHz)
the measurement of
impedance. However, at these frequencies it is now more
usual to make use of the resonance principle, whereby a
variable-frequency source is used to supply the unknown
impedance. The frequency is adjusted until resonance is
obtained and the value of this frequency together with
the amplitude of the signal
is used to determine the
impedance. This is the principle used in the Q-meter,
and is the basis of many of the automatic impedance-
measuring instruments now commercially available.

17.13 Data recording

17.12 Bridge measurements
Reference has been made above to the simple Wheat-
stone bridge. This and the developments arising from it
are an essential component in many of the instruments
already referred to. These bridges (whose operation basi-
cally depends on comparing an unknown quantity with a
known series of quantities in order
to measure the

There are many industrial applications in which perma-
nent records (extending over long periods of time) of
the instrument readings are required. Chart recorders of
various forms are available for this purpose. The most
common general-purpose unit is the digital strip chart
recorder, in which the input signal is used to drive the
movement of a recording arm that passes over a paper
chart in the y-direction. At the same time, the chart is

being driven forward at a known speed in the x-direction.
A stylus on the end of the arm marks a series of dots
on the paper, using either electrostatic or thermal means,
and thus a continuous record of the signal is obtained.
The recorder, as its name implies, operates digitally but
the internal analog-to-digital converters can deal with ana-
logue signals in the instrument. It is possible to cope with
several independent inputs by using a number of record-
ing arms and these instruments can be used up to about
25 kHz, although the quality of the trace suffers at these
high frequencies.

The digital chart recorder is now gradually replacing the
x –y chart recorder which, although the basic principle is
similar, is analogue in operation and uses a pen on the
end of the recorder arm to mark the paper. The response
of these instruments is relatively slow, which limits their
application to low-frequency work. The mechanical move-
ment of the recording arm imposes the underlying lim-
itations on accuracy and frequency of both this and the
digital recorder. Higher speeds can be obtained with ultra-
violet recorders, in which the input signals are fed to coils
mounted in a magnet ﬁeld and which therefore deﬂect in
response to the signal. The coil suspension also carries a
lightweight mirror that deﬂects a beam of ultraviolet light
onto photosensitive paper. Thus, a light beam replaces the
inertia of the moving parts.

17.14 Acoustic measurements
The plant engineer is often concerned with the measure-
ment of noise arising from the operation of machinery;
especially since permissible noise levels are closely spec-
iﬁed in current OSHA legislation. The measurement of
noise involves the use of a pressure transducer. This is
a microphone in which the change of pressure on the
diaphragm causes a corresponding change in its electrical
impedance, which can be detected by using appropriate
circuitry. The output signal is ampliﬁed, rectiﬁed and
applied to a D.C. meter to give an indication of the rms
value and therefore of the power independently of the
waveform.

17.15 Centralized control
In many applications, especially where process plant is
concerned, the measurement information is required to be
conveyed to a central point, which may be a control room
manned by operators or a computer which carries out
the control functions automatically. The connecting link
between the various measurement points and the central
control is usually a telemetry system, although in some
cases the distances involved are so large that radio links
need to be used.

The measurement data are derived from some form of
detector or transducer, the output of which is an electrical
signal that must then be conditioned to a value suitable for
the input to the telemetry system (typically, of the order
of 10 V). In some cases, ampliﬁcation is required and in
others, attenuation is needed.

Further reading 17/271

The signals transmitted over the network will have a
value corresponding to the output from the individual
source, and it must be possible to identify the origin of
the signals at the receiving end. On the other hand, a
discrete connection between each source and the control
center may be prohibitively expensive, and there is a
requirement to use a single channel for many separate
inputs in such a way that the channel can be monitored
and the individual inputs separated from each other. This
involves the use of some form of multiplexing. Earlier
systems used frequency modulation (FM) techniques in
which each measurement signal is used to modulate the
output from an oscillator operating over a dedicated part
of the frequency spectrum. All signals are transmitted
simultaneously over the network, and at the receiving end,
the signals at the different frequencies are separated out,
using a demodulator, to give the individual measurement
information.

The requirement for a different frequency band for
each measurement channel is restrictive, and later systems
make use of some form of time-division multiplexing,
where all channels use the same part of the frequency
spectrum but not at the same time. The channels are
sampled in sequence and an instantaneous value of the
signal is obtained from each. Obviously, the sampling
rate must be extremely high (many times per second)
and the sampling at the various channel inputs must be
synchronized exactly with the corresponding sampling
of the output at
the control center. Pulse amplitude
modulation systems (PAM) use analogue signals while
in pulse code modulation (PCM) systems the signals are
converted to digital form. At present, the choice usually
lies between the FM and the PCM systems. Generally, the
former are the cheaper but the latter give a much better
accuracy.

Further reading
Baldwin, C. T., MethodsofElectricalMeasurement, Blackie, Glas-

gow (1953).

Bibby, G. L., ‘Electrical methodology and instrumentation’, in Elec-
tricalEngineersReferenceBook, Butterworth-Heinemann, Lon-
don (1985).

Coombs, C. (ed.), Basic Electronic Instrumentation Handbook,

McGraw-Hill, New York (1972).

Cooper, W. D., Basic Electronic Instrumentation Handbook,

Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ (1972).

Dalglish, R. L., An Introduction to Control and Measurement
withMicrocomputers, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
(1987).

Drysdale, A. C., Jolley, A. C. and Tagg, G. V., ElectricalMeasuring

Instruments, Chapman & Hall, London (1952).

Golding, E. W. and Widdis, F. C., Electrical Measurements and

MeasuringInstruments, Pitman, London (1963).

Hnatek, E. R., AUser’sHandbookofD/AandA/DConverters, John

Wiley (Interscience), New York (1976).

Lion, K. S., ElementsofElectricalandElectronicInstrumentation,

McGraw-Hill, New York (1975).

Neubert, H. K., InstrumentTransducers, Oxford University Press,

Oxford (1975).

Norton, H. N., HandbookofTransducersforElectronicMeasuring

Systems, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ (1969).

Ott, H. W., Noise Reduction Techniques in Electrical Systems,

John Wiley, New York (1976).

17/272 Electrical Instrumentation

Rudkin, A. M. (ed.), ElectronicTestEquipment, Granada, St Albans

de Sa, A., PrinciplesofElectronicInstrumentation, Edward Arnold,

(1981).

London (1990).

Stout, M. B., BasicElectricalMeasurements, Prentice-Hall, Engle-

Strock, O. J., Introduction to Telemetry,

Instrument Society of

wood Cliffs, NJ (1960).

America, New York (1987).

Tagg, G. F., Electrical Indicating Instruments, Butterworth-Heine-

mann, London (1974).

Usher, M. J., SensorsandTransducers, Macmillan, London (1985).
Van Erk, R., Oscilloscopes, McGraw-Hill, New York (1978).
Wobschal, D., Circuit Design for Electronic Instrumentation, Mc-

Graw-Hill, New York (1987).

Wolf, S., GuidetoElectronicMeasurementsandLaboratoryPrac-

tice, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ (1983).

18/273

18

Oil

Roland Gibson
W.S. Atkins Consultants Ltd

Contents

18.1 Distribution and delivery

18/275

18.1.1 Road delivery vehicles
18.1.2 Rail tank cars 18/275
18.1.3 River and coastal tankers

18/275

18/275

18.2 Storage tanks

18/275

18/275
18/275

18.2.1 Type of tanks
18.2.2 Construction
18.2.3 Capacities 18/275
18.2.4 Tank supports
18.2.5 Tank ﬁttings
18.2.6 Heating requirements 18/277

18/276

18/276

18.3 Location of tanks

18/280

18/280

18.3.1 Siting
18.3.2 Underground storage
18.3.3 Buried tanks
18/280
18.3.4 Bund area 18/280
18/280

18.4 Pipework systems

18/280

18.4.1 General 18/280
18.4.2 Handling temperatures 18/280
18.4.3 Handling equipment
18.4.4 Filters 18/280
18.4.5 Fire valves
18.4.6 Types of system 18/281
18.4.7 Pipe sizing

18/281

18/283

18/280

18.1 Distribution and delivery
Crude oil is processed at oil reﬁneries, generally located
around coastal areas, and then transferred to a nationwide
network of oil fuel terminals, from where it is distributed
to customers. Road delivery vehicles, rail tank wagons or
coastal tankers – depending on the location of the cus-
tomer’s storage installation – can make fuel supplies to
the customer.

18.1.1 Road delivery vehicles

Vehicles make deliveries of oil fuels by road with capac-
ities ranging from 11,800 to 28 700 liters (2600 to 6300
gallons). The vehicles discharge fuel into customers’ stor-
age by pump or compressed air at rates up to 1050 liters
(230 gal) per minute, and can deliver to a height of 10.7
meters (35 ft) above the vehicle.

There are occasions where the noise of vehicle dis-
charge needs to be minimized, examples being night dis-
charge at hospitals, hotels and adjacent to residential areas
where there are parking restrictions on daytime deliveries
or where a customer agrees to a 24-hour delivery ser-
vice. In such cases, the customer can install a take-off
suction pump as part of his storage facilities, thus elim-
inating the use of the vehicle engine for vehicle pump
operation.

There must, in all cases, be safe road access to sites
where tanks are situated and suitable hard standing pro-
vided for the vehicle during delivery.

Storage tanks 18/275

18.1.3 River and coastal tankers

Where a customer has suitable berthing facilities and sat-
isfactory arrangements can be made, deliveries can be by
either river or coastal tanker. River tankers currently in
use are of 1860 tons capacity but may be larger if con-
ditions permit. The customer is responsible for supplying
oil hose and/or discharge arms capable of discharging the
full contents of the barge under low-water conditions.

Coastal tankers are available up to 2000 tons capacity,
equipped with pumps for discharging into customer’s stor-
age. The size of the vessels to be used will depend upon
local conditions and the depth of water in the approaches.

18.2 Storage tanks
18.2.1 Type of tanks

There are four main types of storage tank available for
industrial and commercial fuel oils, namely:

Mild steel welded
Mild steel sectional
Cast iron sectional
Reinforced concrete

Of these four, the mild steel welded tank is the most
popular and is widely used for every type of application.
The majority of storage tanks are of the horizontal cylin-
drical type, as shown in Figure 18.1. Where ground space
is a limiting factor, vertical cylindrical tanks may be used.

18.1.2 Rail tank cars

18.2.2 Construction

The capacities of rail tank cars are generally 45 tons gross
laden weight (approx. 30 tons payload) or 100 tons gross
laden weight (approximately. 70 tons payload). Cars for
carrying heated fuel oil are insulated with ﬁberglass lag-
ging covered with galvanized sheeting, and are equipped
with ﬁnned tubes for steam heating.

A customer’s steam supply must be capable of pro-
viding an adequate amount of heat to discharge a full
trainload of oil. Considering individual rail tank cars, a
100 tons gross laden weight (glw) car requires 385 kg/h
(850 lb/h) and a 45 t glw car requires 154 kg/h (350 lb/h)
of steam. Because of the risk of contamination by oil, the
condensate should be drained from the outlet connection
and run to waste.

Rail

tank cars have bottom outlets terminating in
a quick-acting coupling, and are designed for pump
off-loading only. A ﬂow indicator should be inserted
between the terminal outlet and the ﬁll line. Flexible
connections for steam and oil lines should be provided
for the maximum number of cars that will be discharged
simultaneously.

A block train consists of a series of rail tank cars
of either 45 tons glw or 100 tons glw (or a mixture
of both) coupled for movement from source to destina-
tion and back as a unit. The size of the trains will be
determined by contractual agreement, but will never be
less than 300 tons payloads, and will normally be 500
tons.

Basic design criteria which need to be taken into consid-
eration when designing a storage tank will include:

1. Geographical location of tank (e.g. indoors/outdoors,
height above ground level, available space, accessi-
bility, etc.);

2. Principal dimensions or capacity;
3. Type of roof (e.g. ﬁxed or ﬂoating, cone, dome, mem-

brane, pontoon, etc.);

4. Properties of ﬂuid;
5. Minimum and maximum design temperatures;
6. Requirement for heating elements;
7. Design vapor pressure and/or vacuum conditions;
8. Minimum depth of ﬂuid;
9. Maximum ﬁlling/emptying rates;
10. Venting arrangements;
11. Connections/manhole requirements;
12. Access ladders;
13. Corrosion allowance;
14. Number and type of openings;
15. Type of support or foundation;
16. Internal/external coating or lagging.

18.2.3 Capacities

The capacity of storage tanks for oil-ﬁred installations
is an important consideration. The minimum net storage
capacity should be calculated either by taking:

18/276 Oil

1. Three weeks’ supply of oil at the maximum rate of

consumption; or

2. Two weeks’ supply at the maximum rate of consump-
tion, plus the usual capacity ordered for one delivery,
whichever is the larger.

Where the maximum weekly off-take is less than 200
gallons (1810 liters) the capacity should still not be less
than 650 gal (21850 l) in order to accept a standard 500-
gal (2270-l) tanker delivery. In some circumstances, it
may be desirable to provide more than one tank, each of
sufﬁcient capacity to accept at least a full delivery.

18.2.4 Tank supports

Horizontal cylindrical tanks should be installed on brick
or reinforced concrete cradles with a downward slope of
1 in 50 from the draw-off end towards the drain valve,
as shown in Figure 18.1. Cradles should be constructed
on foundations adequate for the load being supported and
the type of soil. A reinforced concrete raft equal to the
plan area of the tank, and of adequate thickness to bear
the load, is normally suitable for all but the weakest soils.
Cradles should not be placed under joints or seams of
the tank plates and a layer of bituminized felt should be
interposed between the cradle and tank. The height of
the tank supports should provide at least 450 mm space
between the drain valve and ground level to allow access
for painting or draining the tank.

18.2.5 Tank ﬁttings

Oil-level indicators

A brass dipstick is recommended as a cheap and reliable
means of determining the contents of a storage tank. A

dipstick, when required, is usually provided ready cal-
ibrated by the tank manufacturer before installation of
the tank.

In many cases it is inconvenient to use a dipstick, due to
the position or location of the tank, and there are a variety
of direct and remote contents gauges available, including
gauge glasses, ﬂoat and weight, ﬂoat and swing arm, ﬂoat
and indicator, hydrostatic, electrical capacitance, etc.

Filling connection

Filling pipes should be as short as possible and free from
sharp bends. The terminal should be in a convenient posi-
tion to allow easy coupling of the vehicle hose connec-
tion, wherever possible within 5 meters (15 ft) of the hard
standing for vehicle delivery. The most suitable height for
a ﬁlling pipe is about 1 m (3 ft) above ground level and
clear of all obstructions.

A non-ferrous dust cap with chain should be provided
to close the end of the ﬁlling pipe and protect the thread
when not in use. When the ﬁlling pipe is not self-draining
into the tank a gate valve should be ﬁtted as close as pos-
sible to the hose coupling. Where there is any possibility
of damage or misuse of the terminal equipment a lockable
ﬁll cap should be ﬁtted and, if considered necessary, the
terminal enclosed in a lockable protective compartment.
All ﬁlling lines should be self-draining. Where this is
not possible with residual fuel installations, trace heating
and lagging should be applied, and this is particularly
important in exposed positions. This will ensure that any
oil fuel remaining in the ﬁlling pipe will be at pumping
viscosity when delivery is made.

The ﬁlling pipe should enter at the top of most horizon-
tal storage tanks. For vertical tanks up to 3 meters (10 ft)
diameter the ﬁlling pipe should be ﬁtted at the top and
then bend through 180°. This directs the incoming oil fuel
down one side of the tank and minimizes air entrainment.

Manhole cover with provision
for dipstick

Vent pipe

Filling line

Five valve wire

Semi-rotary
pump

Catchpit

Filling point

Oil draw-offline

Bund wall

Sump  Drain valve

Tank supports

Outlet valve

Filter

Fire valve

Oil-tight lining

Figure 18.1 Typical storage tank for a distillate fuel oil

In larger vertical storage tanks containing residual fuels,
bottom inlet ﬁlling may sometimes be used. A non-return
valve must be ﬁtted in the ﬁlling line as close to the tank
as possible. The entry position of the ﬁlling pipe into the
tank in relation to the position of the draw-off connection
must be carefully selected to avoid air entrainment into
the oil-handling system.

Where delivery vehicles do not have access adjacent to
the storage area a permanent extended ﬁlling pipe should
be provided from the tank to a position where the vehicle
can stand in safety. In cases where the length of this pipe
will exceed 30 meters (100 ft), careful attention should be
paid to draining requirements. Where lines are not self-
draining, a drain valve should be situated at the lowest
point in that section. Provision should be made for lag-
ging and tracing to be applied to extended ﬁll lines that
will carry residual grades of industrial oil fuel. Careful
attention should also be paid to the use of correctly sized
pipe diameters. Where the storage tank is not visible from
the ﬁlling point, an overﬁll alarm should be ﬁtted.

Ullage

The air space between the oil surface and the top of the
tank is known as ullage; there should always be a small
ullage remaining when the contents gauge registers full.
This prevents the discharge of oil from the vent pipe due
to any frothing and surging of the liquid during delivery.
The ullage should provide not less than 100 mm (4 in)
between the oil surface and the top of the tank or be
equivalent to 5 per cent of the total contents, whichever
is the greater.

Vent pipes

A vent pipe must be ﬁtted at the highest point of every
storage tank. Wherever possible, it should be visible from
the ﬁlling point and terminate in the open air, in a position
where any oil vapor will not be objectionable and, in the
event of an overﬂow, there will be no damage to property,
ﬁre risk of contamination of drains.

The vent pipe bore must be equal to or greater than
the bore of the ﬁlling pipe, and never less than 50 mil-
limeters (2 in) diameter. It should be as short as possible
and free from sharp bends. It should terminate in a return
bend or ‘goose neck’ ﬁtted with a wire cage for protective
purposes (ﬁne gauze must never be used for this purpose).
Where, of necessity, the vent pipe rises to a consider-
able height, excessive internal pressure on the tank may
result, due to the pressure head of oil should an overﬂow
occur. To prevent any possible tank failure due to such
an occurrence a vent pipe pressure-relief device must be
provided. It should be self-draining to reduce the risk of
blockage, particularly when using heavy oil fuel. Codes
require that these devices should not place any restriction
on oil ﬂow and must discharge within the bund area.

Storage tanks 18/277

facilities are not provided, the lowest point of the draw-
off connection should never be less than 75 mm (3 in)
above the bottom of the tank. For tanks ﬁtted with heating
elements, it is essential that these and their associated
thermostatic control probes should always remain below
the oil surface.

To enable the contents of the tank to be isolated a
screw-down gate valve should be ﬁtted adjacent to the
draw-off connection. Since stresses may be applied to
valves during any tank settlement or movement of pipe-
work, cast-iron valves should not be used for this purpose.

Drain valve

A screw-down gate valve with a bore similar to that of
the draw-off connection should be installed at the lowest
point on every storage tank to permit complete draining.
The valve should be readily accessible with a clear space
below to facilitate its use. Extension pipes to or from drain
valves should be avoided if possible, but where these are
necessary, the pipe should be lagged and, if necessary,
traced to ensure that residual grades of oil will ﬂow during
adverse weather conditions. Valves and extension pipes
should be ﬁtted with a plug or blank ﬂange to prevent
inadvertent discharge of the tank contents.

Tanks containing heated grades of oil fuel require reg-
ular draining. This is due to the small amount of moisture
which accumulates over a period, by condensation formed
on the sides of the tank. The quantity of moisture formed
will be dependent upon the relative humidity conditions,
the amount of breathing which takes place, and the time
allowed for settling. It is recommended that the tank be
checked for accumulated water prior to a fuel delivery.

With storage tanks which are ﬁlled from the bottom
such as large vertical tanks, the stirring action of incoming
oil will carry any water (which would normally settle out)
into the oil-handling system. In these circumstances, any
daily service tank used in the system should receive reg-
ular inspection to ensure that water has not accumulated.
Any oil/water mixtures should be drained into suitable
containers and subsequently removed for disposal into a
separator or interceptor.

Manhole

Every storage tank must have a manhole in an accessible
position, preferably on top. It may be circular, oval or
rectangular, and not less than 460 mm (18 in) diameter if
circular or 460 mm (18 in) long and 410 mm (16 in) wide if
oval or rectangular. The manlid must be securely ﬁxed by
bolts, studs or setscrews, and have a liquid and vapor-tight
joint. Close-woven proofed asbestos, graphited on both
sides, is a suitable jointing compound for this purpose.

Vertical

tanks over 3.65 meters (12 ft) high should
have a further manhole ﬁtted near the bottom to provide
access for cleaning and maintenance of any storage-
heating facilities.

Draw-off connection

18.2.6 Heating requirements

The draw-off connection to the oil-burning plant should
be at the raised end of horizontal tanks. Where heating

Distillate grades of oil fuel may be stored, handled and
atomized at ambient temperatures, and do not require

18/278 Oil

heating facilities to be provided in storage tanks and han-
dling systems. However, exposure to extreme cold for
long periods should be avoided, since oil ﬂow from the
tank may become slightly restricted. This is particularly
important for storage serving stand-by diesel generating
plant where summer cloud point speciﬁcation fuel may be
in both storage and oil feed lines during the most severe
winter weather. In very exceptional conditions, even win-
ter cloud point speciﬁcation fuel may present occasional
problems in unlagged storage and handling systems. Such
systems should be lagged and, if necessary, traced to
ensure faultless starting.

Heating facilities are required for all residual grades
of oil fuels, such as Light Fuel Oil, Medium Fuel Oil,
and Heavy Fuel Oil. Table 18.1 gives the recommended
minimum storage and handling temperatures for residual
oil fuels (from BS 28618: 11870).

Where oil is to be maintained at minimum storage tem-
perature, an outﬂow heater will be necessary to raise the
temperature of the oil leaving the tank to that required
for handling. It is not good practice to store oil fuel
at unnecessarily high temperatures, and the temperature
given under the column ‘Minimum temperature at outﬂow
from storage and for handling’ should not be exceeded by
more than 16.7°C (30°F). This is particularly important in
relation to Light Fuel Oil. Maximum heat losses from
storage tanks can be determined from Figure 18.2. These
losses can be translated into maximum steam consump-
tion rates of the heating coils from knowledge of the latent
heat of steam appropriate to the steam pressure used in
a given installation. The tank heating arrangements must
be capable of maintaining the oil storage temperature with
the appropriate rate of heat loss.
is

that concerning the
occasional requirement for heating the oil from ambient
temperature. A heat
times greater than
that required to maintain handling temperatures will be
necessary, depending on the minimum time stipulated for
heat-up. Tank heating arrangements should therefore be
capable of providing this heat input if the contingency is
a possibility.

important point

input several

Another

Heating methods

Storage tanks can be heated with thermostatically con-
trolled steam coils, hot-water coils, electric immersion
heaters or a combination of these. The elements and their

Table 18.1 Recommended storage and handling temperatures
for residual fuel oils (based on BS 28618: 11870)

Grade of oil

BS

classiﬁcation

Minimum
storage

temperature

Minimum
temperature
at outﬂow

from storage

and for
handling

Light Fuel Oil
Class E
Medium Fuel Oil Class F
Heavy Fuel Oil
Class G

10°C (50°F)
25°C (77°F)
35°C (95°F)

10°C (50°F)
30°C (86°F)
45°C (113°F)

thermostats should be positioned below the level of the oil
draw-off line, so that they are always covered during nor-
mal operation. The temperature-sensitive element of the
thermostat should always be situated above and to one
side of the heating element. The heating elements should
be spaced evenly over the bottom of the tank or concen-
trated towards the draw-off end. A combination of steam
and electric heating can be used for installations where
periods may occur during which steam is not available.

Where a residual oil fuel is stored in tanks with outﬂow
heaters provision should also be made to maintain the oil
at or above the minimum storage temperature shown in
Table 18.1. Excessive heating is not recommended, partic-
ularly for Light Fuel Oil, and will increase running costs
unnecessarily. Additional heating to outﬂow heaters can
be provided by using a steam, hot water or electric heater
running along the bottom of the tank. With electric heat-
ing, additional separate heating elements may be required.
Heating elements should be readily removable for repair
if necessary and consequently careful note should be taken
of possible external obstructions to this operation. The
steam supply to the heating coils should be dry satu-
rated. It is not generally necessary for the pressure to
exceed 3.45 bar (50 lbf/in2). The temperature of the heat-
ing medium should not exceed 177°C (350°F), and electric
element loading should not exceed 1.24 W/cm2 (8 W/in2).
Steam and hot-water coils should be constructed of
seamless steel tube and preferably be without joints within
the tank. These coils can be either plain or ﬁnned tube.
However, due to their greater surface area, ﬁnned tubes
generally have a higher rate of heat transfer than plain
tubes. On the basis of cost per unit surface area, ﬁnned
tubes are less expensive than conventional tubes. There is
also an advantage of weight saving, and complete cover-
age of the base area is not necessarily required to achieve
speciﬁed temperatures.

Where joints are unavoidable, they should be welded.
Steam coils should drain freely from inlet to outlet. Steam
traps, usually of the bucket type, should also be provided.
Condensate from steam coils should be drained to waste,
unless adequate provision is made to drain trace quanti-
ties before return to the hotwell. Where hot-water coils
are used, the water supply should be heated through a
caloriﬁer. These recommendations will avoid any risk of
oil reaching the boiler plant.

Where storage facilities comprise several tanks, the con-
tents of stand-by tanks may remain unheated. In such
cases, the heating facilities should be capable of raising
the contents to the required storage temperature as soon
as possible from cold.

The
Heating requirements for warming storage tanks.
hourly heat requirement (Hr) to raise the temperature of
a storage tank can be calculated from:
Hr D C ð h ð tr
where
C D total weight of contents when full (kg (lbs)),
h D mean speciﬁc heat of fuel oil,
tr D temperature rise required per hour (°C (°F)).

Storage tanks 18/279

Heavy fuel oil−exposed tank
Heavy fuel oil−sheltered tank

350

75

300

250

50

200

150

25

100

50

k
n
ta
d

tank

oil−expose
e diu m fueloil−Sheltered

fuel
Medium

M

p

x

e

c

e

s

o

s   e

d   s

u rf a

d  t o   a ir

Light fuel oil−exposed tank
Light fuel oil−sheltered tank
l   g r a d e s − s u r f a c e s   n o t   e x p o s e d   t o   a i r   ( ` l a g g e d     o r d i n a t e   n o t   a p p l

n   o il- w

A ll  g r a

e tt e

o

n

s −

e

d

`

A l

i c a b l e )

0

0

5

10

15
Temperature of oil fuel (°C)

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

Figure 18.2 Heat losses from storage tanks plotted against oil fuel temperature

The following values should be used for the mean spe-
ciﬁc heat:
Class of fuel Mean speciﬁc heat 0–100°C (kJ/kg°C)
D
E
F
G

1.1818
1.1818
1.187
1.185

The rate of temperature rise (tr) will depend on the
particular circumstances of the installation and on how

quickly the contents of the tank must be brought up to
temperature.

Lagging

Various types of lagging are available. The major advan-
tage of its use is a considerable reduction in heat losses
from both storage tanks and pipework. The materials most
suitable for application to storage tanks are asbestos in the
form of blankets or molded sections, glass silk blankets

18/280 Oil

of 85 per cent magnesia or slagwool. When applied, these
materials should provide a lagging efﬁciency of approx-
imately 75 per cent. All lagging should be reinforced
with wire netting, either incorporated into the blanket or
secured to anchor points on the tank surface. A weather-
proof surface ﬁnish should ﬁnally be applied to the lag-
ging. This can be either two-ply bitumen felt or, if neces-
sary, sheets of galvanized steel or aluminum with sealed
joints.

When the use of lagging is being considered, cost-
beneﬁt analysis
should be made to determine the
minimum running costs when either (1) fuel is stored at
the minimum recommended storage temperature with an
outﬂow heater to raise the temperature to the minimum
handling temperature, or (2) fuel is stored at handling
temperature, thus requiring no outﬂow heater.

The temperature of heated fuel when delivered into cus-
tomer’s storage will depend upon the length of time in
transit, or the measures of preheat given to a rail tank
car to assist discharge. These heat sources should not be
overlooked in calculations.

18.3 Location of tanks
18.3.1 Siting

Storage tanks should, wherever possible, be installed
above ground. The site selected should not be in an
unduly exposed position. Clearance must be allowed for
the withdrawal from the tank of ﬁttings such as immersion
heaters and steam coils. Where tanks are installed inside
buildings, they should generally be located within a tank
chamber, although in some industrial installations such
as steelworks and foundries, a tank chamber may not
be necessary. The requirements of insurance companies
and local authorities should be considered when designing
these installations.

18.3.2 Underground storage

Where underground installation of a storage tank is un-
avoidable, it should preferably be housed in a specially
constructed brick or concrete chamber, allowing easy
access to the drain valve and other ﬁttings. Wherever
possible,
the tank chamber should be located in dry
ground and the ﬁnished structure made watertight. A
sump must be provided in the ﬂoor of the chamber at
one end to collect any water that may enter the chamber
in exceptional circumstances, and the ﬂoor should slope
slightly downwards towards the sump. Water collected
in the sump can be removed by using a semi-rotary
pump. The lower part of the chamber should form an oil-
resistant catch pit, as with the more usual aboveground
storage tank.

described, adequate corrosion protection must be applied
to all exterior surfaces of the tank, ﬁttings and pipework.

18.3.4 Bund area

Where overﬁlling or
leakage from the tank would
contribute to a ﬁre hazard, cause damage to property
or contaminate drains or sewers, a bund wall should be
constructed around the tank. This should be of brick or
concrete with an oil-tight lining, and sealed to the concrete
base under the tank supports. The capacity of the bunded
area should be at least 10 per cent greater than that of the
storage tanks contained within it.

The bund walls must be oil proof and be capable of
withstanding considerable liquid pressure in the event of
an overﬂow or other emergency. No permanent drain must
be incorporated into a bund area, but suitable facilities
should be provided to remove rainwater that may accu-
mulate. A sump and semi-rotary hand pump are suitable
for this purpose.

18.4 Pipework systems
18.4.1 General

Oil fuel pipeline systems transfer oil from storage to the
oil burner at speciﬁed conditions of pressure, viscosity,
temperature and rate of ﬂow. There can be considerable
variety in the choice of system, but its design (particu-
larly correct pipe sizing and temperature control) is most
important if it is to function satisfactorily.

18.4.2 Handling temperatures

Distillate grades are usually handled at ambient tempera-
tures provided these are not below the cloud point when
using gas oil. Residual grades, on the other hand, are
handled at temperatures above ambient. The recommen-
dations of Table 18.1 should always be followed regarding
minimum recommended handling temperatures. Residual
grades can also be handled at temperatures above those
recommended as minimum handling levels in order to
reduce oil viscosity, improve regulation and control of oil
ﬂow, reduce friction losses in pipelines and, when neces-
sary, provide oil at the correct atomizing temperature for
the oil-burning equipment.

18.4.3 Handling equipment

Two items of equipment should always be inserted in the
handling system as close to the storage tank as possible.
These are a ﬁlter and a ﬁre valve.

18.4.4 Filters

18.3.3 Buried tanks

It is recommended that storage tanks should not be buried
directly in contact with soil, since it is almost impos-
sible to avoid corrosive attack. Where, for some reason,
it is not possible to provide a tank chamber as already

To prevent foreign matter from damaging components and
choking valves or atomizer oriﬁces, ﬁlters must be incor-
porated into the handling system. There are usually two
stages of ﬁltration. The ﬁrst provides protection for pumps
and ﬁre valves which handle oil at temperatures below
those required at the oil-burning equipment. Second-stage

ﬁltration protects the atomizer oriﬁce and burning equip-
ment, and is sometimes incorporated as part of the burner
assembly.

For distillate grades of fuel oil, the ﬁrst-stage ﬁlter
should protect pumps and valves and can be placed in
the draw-off line from the storage tank. Paper ﬁlters can
be used where appropriate, providing ﬁlter apertures are
not less than 0.1 mm (0.004 in). The paper element should
be regularly replaced when necessary. For residual grades
of oil, ﬁrst-stage ﬁlters should be placed in the draw-off
line as near to the storage tank as possible, and incor-
porate a ﬁltering medium equivalent to a circular hole
2.5–0.75 mm (0.1–0.03 in) diameter. Fine ﬁltration must
not be employed at the ﬁrst stage, since pressure drop
across the ﬁlter may be excessive due to the higher vis-
cosity of these grades at low temperatures. Second-stage
ﬁltration is usually incorporated into the oil burner assem-
bly, often in the hot oil line after the preheater so that it
ﬁlters the oil at atomizing temperature.

Reliable enclosed ﬁlters of ample effective ﬁltering area
should be used for both stages. The ﬁlter design should
not allow the pressure drop to exceed 7 kN/m2 (1 lbf/in2)
across second-stage ﬁne ﬁlters in clean conditions. Filters
should preferably be of the duplex or self-cleaning type,
and installed so that oil spillage will not occur during
operation.

They must be readily accessible for cleaning, which
should be carried out as frequently as necessary to ensure
that pressure drop across the ﬁlter does not affect nor-
mal oil ﬂow rates. The ﬁltering medium should be of
corrosion-resistant material such as Monel metal, phos-
phor-bronze or stainless steel. All ﬁrst-stage ﬁlters should
be provided with isolating valves.

18.4.5 Fire valves

A valve that closes in case of ﬁre should be inserted in
the oil fuel line to the oil-burning equipment and ﬁtted
as close to the tank as possible. It may be held open
mechanically, pneumatically or electrically. Temperature-
sensitive elements should be arranged to close the valve
at a ﬁxed maximum temperature, and sited close to the
oil-ﬁred plant and well above ﬂoor level. The operat-
ing temperature of the heat-sensitive elements should not
be greater than 68°C (155°F) except where ambient tem-
peratures in the vicinity of the plant may exceed 418°C
(120°F), in which case the operating temperatures may be
183°C (200°F).

Where an electric circuit is employed the valve should
close on breaking, not making, the circuit and be reset
manually. A warning device should be included to indi-
cate that resetting is necessary, to cover the eventuality
of temporary electrical failure.

Where a valve is closed by the action of a falling
weight, a short free fall should be allowed before the
weight begins to close the valve. This assists in over-
coming any tendency for the valve to stick in the open
position.

Fire valves should preferably be of glandless construc-
tion. If a gland is incorporated into the system, it should
be of a type that cannot be tightened to an extent which

Pipework systems 18/281

would prevent the correct functioning of the valve. A
manual release should be installed on all ﬁre valves so
that they may be tested regularly.

18.4.6 Types of system

There are two main types of oil-handling system in com-
mon use. These are gravity and ring main.

Gravity systems

Gravity systems are of three basic types: gravity, pump-
assisted gravity and sub-gravity. A gravity system is one
in which the oil ﬂows directly from the storage or service
tank through gravity feed pipeline. The static head on the
feed line will vary with the depth of oil in the tank, and the
system should therefore only be used for burners which
will operate satisfactorily between such limits.

A pump-assisted gravity system is one in which oil
ﬂows by gravity from the storage or service tank to a
pump. The pump supplies oil to the combustion equip-
ment through a pipeline passing only the quantity required
to feed the oil-ﬁring equipment. The inclusion of a pump
in this system will not reduce the static head due to the
fuel supply in the tank. The working pressure required
at the oil-burning equipment should therefore be greater
than the maximum static head available when the storage
or service tank is full.

A sub-gravity system is one in which a pump associated
with the oil-burning equipment is used to suck the oil from
a tank in which the level of the oil can be below the level
of the pump.

Gravity systems in general will handle distillate grades
at ambient temperatures, and residual oils at pumping
or atomizing temperatures. Lagging and tracing will be
required with residual grades to prevent cooling of the oil
to below handling temperatures.

Ring main systems

A ring main system draws oil from storage and circulates
it to each consuming point in turn, the balance of the oil
being returned either to the suction side of the circulating
pump or to storage. A diagram of a typical hot oil ring
main system is shown in Figure 18.3.

Each take-off point

is connected to the burner it
supplies by a branch line. Pressure conditions are
maintained approximately constant at each take-off point
by a pressure-regulating valve situated after the last take-
off point, and circulating a quantity of oil one and
a half to three times the maximum take-off from the
circuit. By this means, stopping take-off at one consuming
point will not have a marked effect on the pressure at
other consuming points. Pressure conditions should be
calculated at each consuming point for all conditions of
operation and take-off. The bore of the ring main should
be such that pressure variations are not excessive for the
equipment served. If these variations at each take-off point
are likely to be critical, they can be accommodated by
the use of individual pressure-regulating valves on each
branch.

18/282 Oil

Hot filter

Pressure gauges

Burners

Air vent

Heaters

Pumps

Thermometers

Filling line

Cold filter

Fire valve

Figure 18.3 Typical hot oil ring main layout

Ring main systems are of three types: hot oil, warm
oil and cold oil. Hot oil ring mains circulate oil at atom-
izing temperature, warm oil ring mains at a temperature
between minimum pumping and atomizing temperature,
and cold oil ring mains at ambient temperature.

Hot oil ring mains

This is the most important of the three types of ring main
system, since it offers economies of installation and run-
ning costs. The smallest pipe sizes and ﬁttings can be used
with low-viscosity high-temperature oil, and the number
of line heaters is minimized. The oil is circulated at atom-
izing temperatures and in consequence, the system is less
liable to be affected by pressure ﬂuctuations due to vari-
ations in viscosity, or small changes in the viscosity of
the oil as delivered. The system should usually be con-
sidered as the ﬁrst possibility and only discarded in favor
of warm or cold oil systems where these will give some
real advantage.

Where there is a large temperature difference between
a hot oil line and ambient temperature conditions, partic-
ularly in the long ring main system, lagging will prevent
excessive heat loss. Electric or steam tracing, in addition,
will balance the heat loss from the pipeline. Residual oils
should not be allowed to drop below their minimum han-
dling temperature at any time. Where it is necessary to
shut down any part of the plant, such as when servicing
pumps and other equipment, a drain valve and air vent
must be provided at the lowest point in the system to
prevent cold oil becoming static.

With some installations, it is possible to maintain cir-
culation during periods when the oil-ﬁring plant is not
required to operate. The oil is circulated at reduced tem-
perature to minimize the heat loss from the ring main and,
consequently, the amount of heat required to compensate
for this loss. The reduced temperature should be such that
the increased oil viscosity does not result in an excessive
increase in pressure.

Warm oil ring mains

This system is similar to a cold oil ring main but includes
provision for heaters in the circuit to maintain oil temper-
ature between minimum handling and atomizing levels.
This provides a reduction in oil viscosity and reduces
pipe friction. The circulation temperature of the oil should

Pressure regulating valve

be chosen to give the minimum pressure drop consistent
with the system design when circulating one-and-a-half
to three-times the maximum take-off and using a suitable
pipe diameter. This circulation temperature should allow
a reasonable margin below the speciﬁed atomizing tem-
perature to facilitate the selection of the necessary line
heaters for branch lines between the ring main and the
oil-burning equipment.

The volumetric capacity is adjustable to provide uni-
form heat transfer to the oil passing through. Heaters are
ﬂexible in operation down to about 50 per cent of their
designed temperature rise, when the quantity of oil pass-
ing through is approximately double. Where the temper-
ature level required with a reduced throughput is outside
this range, the heater manufacturer should be consulted.

Cold oil ring mains

This system is used mainly where different atomizing
temperatures are required at various consuming points or
where a branch line would be unacceptably long. The
system should only be used where the length of pipeline
involved and the quantity of oil circulated will not cause
an excessive pressure drop due to friction. When design-
ing a cold oil ring main system, care must be taken to
ensure that the pressure variation between take-off points,
due to changes in the oil consumption rate, do not affect
burner performance. Circulating one-and-a-half to three-
times the maximum take-off required achieves this. The
system is widely used with distillate grades but rarely with
residual grades.

Sub-circulating loops

Where it is not possible or convenient to arrange for the
ring main to be carried near the burners an alternative to
using a warm oil ring main with branch heaters is hot oil
ring main with sub-circulating loops. The branch line from
the high-pressure leg of the ring main is extended past
the burners and returned into the low-pressure or return
side after the pressure-regulating valve. This ensures that
circulation of hot oil is maintained past the consuming
point. The amount circulated through the sub-circulating
loop must be carefully regulated to avoid the pressure-
regulating valve becoming inoperative by short-circuiting
too high a percentage of the oil in the ring main.

A secondary pressure-regulating valve situated after the
last oil burner served by the loop controls the regulation
of oil ﬂow in a sub-circulating loop. Alternatively, a ﬁxed
oriﬁce or regulating valve, either hand-controlled or of the
lock shield type, may be used. With the former method, it
is sometimes difﬁcult to obtain balance between the pri-
mary and secondary regulating valves. The latter method
is generally satisfactory providing the take-off rate of the
burners does not ﬂuctuate appreciably, and ample time can
be allowed to establish stable pressure/temperature condi-
tions in the sub-circulating loop after a shutdown period.

Branch lines

Branch lines transfer oil from a ring main circuit to the
oil-burning equipment. Where a residual oil fuel is to be
used, there will be some cooling of the oil immediately
adjacent to the pipe surfaces and this will show as a small
increase in viscosity. To keep this variation to a minimum
and so prevent any difﬁculties in atomization at the oil
burner, care should be taken over the length and diame-
ter of branch lines. Provision should always be made to
isolate and drain branch lines.

18.4.7 Pipe sizing

When a ﬂuid is ﬂowing through a pipe, resistance to ﬂow
is caused by friction. The pipe bore selected for each
section must be such that under any operating conditions,
the initial head, either static head of oil in the supply tank
or the pump delivery pressure, will be adequate to ensure
the required ﬂow rate. Additionally, any change of ﬂow
rate and consequent variation in loss of head must not
adversely affect the operation of the associated oil-burning
equipment.

The following factors must be taken into account when

assessing pressure drop.

Viscosity

Pressure drop is directly proportional to viscosity. The
effect of heat loss from pipelines and consequent increase
in viscosity should also be considered.

Pipework systems 18/283

Flow conditions

The handling system should be designed to provide
streamline ﬂow at all times when steady and predictable
pressure conditions are essential.

Flow rate

Pressure drop under streamline ﬂow conditions is directly
proportional to the quantity of oil ﬂowing. The effect of
reduced ﬂow rate after take-off points, as compared with
full ﬂow rate throughout the full length of the pipeline
when there is no take-off, should be taken into account
to ensure that variation in pressure is within the speci-
ﬁed pump output. Special consideration is necessary with
gravity and ring main systems serving several take-off
points.

Length of pipeline

Pressure drop is directly proportional to the length of
the pipeline. All ﬁttings used in the system should
be included in the determination of ‘effective pipeline
length’. Table 18.2 should be used to determine the
equivalent length to be added to the actual length of the
pipeline for various types of ﬁtting. The resulting ﬁgure
is the total ‘effective length’ of the system.

The following empirical formula for estimating pres-
sure drop under streamline ﬂow conditions may be used:

Hf D 1.2 ð 105VT

d4

D 0.0765VT

d4

Metric (SI)

Imperial

100 ft) effective length of pipeline ((m) (ft)),

where
Hf D loss of head in meters per 100 meters (feet per
V D oil fuel viscosity at handling temperature
d D internal diameter of pipe (mm (in)),
T D oil ﬂow rate (tons/hour (ton/h)).
Note: The ﬂow is normally streamline when

(Redwood I scale),

Table 18.2 Equivalent length of pipeline ﬁttings

Nominal
pipe bore
(mm (in))

25 (1)
32 (1.25)
40 (1.5)
50 (2)
65 (2.5)
80 (3)
100 (4)
150 (6)
200 (8)
250 (10)

Equivalent length of ﬁtting

Elbow
(m (ft))

Tee

(m (ft))

Easy bend
(m (ft))

Gate valve

(m (ft))

0.9 (3)
1.1 (3.5)
1.2 (4)
1.5 (5)
1.8 (6)
2.4 (8)
3.0 (10)
4.6 (15)
5.5 (18)
6.7 (22)

1.8 (6)
2.1 (7)
2.4 (8)
3.0 (10)
3.7 (12)
4.9 (16)
6.1 (20)
9.1 (30)
11.0 (36)
13.4 (44)

0.5 (1.5)
0.6 (1.75)
0.6 (2)
0.9 (3)
1.2 (4)
1.5 (5)
1.6 (6)
2.4 (8)
3.0 (10)
3.7 (12)

0.3 (0.8)
0.3 (1)
0.4 (1.2)
0.5 (1.7)
0.6 (2.1)
0.8 (2.5)
1.0 (3.3)
1.5 (5)
2.1 (7)
2.7 (9)

Non-return

valve
(m (ft))

0.6 (2)
0.8 (2.5)
0.9 (3)
1.2 (4)
1.5 (5)
1.8 (6)
2.4 (8)
3.0 (10)
3.7 (12)
4.3 (14)

18/284 Oil

< 2000 D (cid:15)30T < dV(cid:16)

4Q
dV

Metric (SI)

Imperial

where
Q D oil ﬂow rate (m3/s),
d D internal diameter of pipe (m),
V D kinematic viscosity at handling temperature.
When it is necessary to estimate the pressure drop in a
pipeline where turbulent ﬂow conditions exist, the follow-
ing formula will give an approximation:

Hf D 7.89 ð 104G2

d5

Metric (SI)

D G2
6.4d5
Imperial

where
Hf D loss of head in meters per 100 meters (feet
per 100 ft) of effective pipe run,
G D oil ﬂow rate (l/min (gal/min)),
d D internal pipe diameter (mm (in)).

Branch lines

Branch lines transfer oil from a ring main circuit to the
oil-burning equipment. Where a residual oil fuel is to be
used, there will be some cooling of the oil immediately
adjacent to the pipe surfaces and this will show as a small
increase in viscosity. To keep this variation to a minimum
and so prevent any difﬁculties in atomization at the oil
burner, care should be taken over the length and diameter
of branch lines. In general, the following empirical for-
mula should be used when designing branch lines for hot
residual oils:
Length D 7L <

D L <

(cid:1)

p

M
Imperial

M

Metric (SI)

(Table 18.2),

where
L D ‘equivalent’ length of branch line in m (ft)
M D minimum oil consumption (l/h (gal/h)).
Internal diameter D < 10.4L(cid:15)D < L/8(cid:16) where D is in mm
(in). Provision should always be made to isolate and drain
branch lines.

19/285

19

Contents

Gas

Peter F Fleming
British Gas plc

19.1 Selection and use of gas as a fuel 19/287

19.1.1 Advantages of gas 19/287
19.1.2 Availability
19.1.3 Metering 19/287
19.1.4 Contracts
19/287
19.1.5 Range of uses of gas

19/287

19/288

19.2 Theoretical and practical burning and

heat transfer 19/288

19.2.1 Types of burner
19/288
19.2.2 Turndown ratio 19/288
19.2.3 Heat transfer 19/288
19.2.4 Water vapor in products of combustion

19.3 Pressure available to user

19/289

19.3.1 Low-pressure supply
19.3.2 Boosters and compressors

19/289

19/289

19.4 Energy conservation

19/289

19.4.1 Reduction of energy used
19.4.2 Heat recovery 19/290

19/289

19.5 Clean Air Acts associated with gas burning

19/292

19.5.1 EC Directives on emissions from large

combustion plant

19/292

19.5.2 UK legislation

19/293

19.6 Chimney requirements: codes of practice and

environmental considerations
19.6.1 Functions of a ﬂue
19.6.2 Operating principles
19.6.3 Design procedure
19.6.4 New ﬂue systems
19.6.5 Dual-fuel installations
19.6.6 Flue dampers 19/297

19/293
19/293
19/293

19/295
19/295

19/296

19.7 Health and safety in the use of gas

19/297

19/297

19.7.1 Legislation
19.7.2 Potential hazards in the use of gas 19/297
19.7.3 Safety procedures
19.7.4 Maintenance

19/298

19/298

19.8 Pressure control

19/298

19.8.1 Governors
19/298
19.8.2 Pressure-relief valve
19.8.3 Slam-shut valves
19.8.4 Non-return valves

19/299

19/299
19/299

19.9 Gas speciﬁcation and analysis

19/300

19.9.1 Caloriﬁc value
19/300
19.9.2 Wobbe number
19/300
19.9.3 Analysis of natural gas
19.9.4 Properties of natural gas
19.9.5 Standard reference conditions

19/300
19/300

19/300

19/289

19.10 Control of efﬁciency 19/301

19.10.1 Monitoring of combustion
19.10.2 Control of combustion
19.10.3 Process controls

19/303

19/301

19/302

19.11 Automation

19/305

19.11.1 Requirements for automatic burners
19.11.2 Automatic burner sequence
19/305
19.11.3 Burner Standards and

Codes of Practice 19/305

19.11.4 Standards to be applied

19/306

19/305

19.12 Fire and explosion hazards

19/306

19.12.1 Limits of ﬂammability
19.12.2 Flame speed and ﬂame traps
19.12.3 Fire valves
19.12.4 Explosion reliefs 19/307

19/307

19/306

19/306

19.13 Maintenance

19/307

19/307

19.13.1 Need for maintenance
19.13.2 Thermal efﬁciency 19/308
19.13.3 Reliability
19.13.4 Safety 19/308
19.13.5 Training of maintenance staff 19/308
19.13.6 Manufacturers’ instructions

19/308

19/308

19.14 Statutory requirements 19/308
19.15 Testing

19/309

19.15.1 Soundness testing

19/309

19.15.2 Purging procedures
19.15.3 Commissioning
19.15.4 In-situ testing

19/310

19/310

19/309

19.16 The gas grid system and distribution networks

19/310

19.16.1 Storage of gas
19.16.2 Distribution networks
19/312

19.17 Emergency procedures

19/310

19/312

19.17.1 Emergency control valve
19.17.2 Normal shutdown procedures
19.17.3 Instruction and training

19/313

19/312

19/313

19.18 Pipework

19/313

19.18.1 Design criteria 19/313
19.18.2 Materials 19/313
19.18.3 Jointing
19/313

19.18.4 Pipes in ducts
19.18.5 Pipe supports
19.18.6 Corrosion protection and identiﬁcation

19/314
19/314

19/314

19.18.7 Flexible connections and tubes
19.18.8 Purge joints
19.18.9 Syphons and condensate traps 19/315
19.18.10 Commissioning

19/315

19/315

19/314

19.19 Flow charts for use with gas 19/315

19.19.1 Need for ﬂow charts 19/315
19.19.2 Theory of pressure loss
19.19.3 Practical methods of sizing pipework

19/315

19/316

19.19.4 Discharge through oriﬁces 19/318

19.20 Conversion factors 19/318

Note on the text: This chapter provides an overview of
proper installation and use of gas as an energy source. In
the USA, these practices are governed by OSHA Regula-
tions (Standards 29CFR). Plant engineers working in the
USA should refer to 29CFR for speciﬁc guidance.

19.1 Selection and use of gas as a fuel
19.1.1 Advantages of gas

The advantages of gas can be summarized as:

1. Reliable fuel of constant composition;
2. Used as required (does not have to be ordered in

advance or stored on the users’ premises);

3. Clean fuel-emissions are low compared with combus-

tion of most other fossil fuels.

19.1.2 Availability

Mains gas is widely available throughout the mainland of
the United States. Thinly populated rural areas do not have
access to mains gas although liquid petroleum gas from
a central supply may be available. All major industrial
areas are within the gas supply area, and less than 15 per
cent of domestic dwellings are outside this area.

19.1.3 Metering

Payment for gas consumed is made based on the con-
sumption as registered on a meter. Meters used for billing
purposes are checked for accuracy and badged by the
Department of Energy. These meters are known as pri-
mary meters. Those used by the user for monitoring the
consumption of plant, etc. are known as check meters
(often erroneously referred to as secondary meters).

calculated in therms; 1 therm (195.506 MJ)

The meter registers in cubic feet and gas consumption
is
is
190,000 Btu. The meter location should be located as
close as is sensibly practicable to the site boundary
adjacent to the gas main. It is generally preferable for
all but small
low-pressure installations to be located
in a separate purpose-built structure or compound and,
wherever possible, away from the main buildings.
Installations should be protected from the possibility of
accidental damage, hazardous substances and extremes of
temperature or vibration.

With the exception of certain very large loads which
may use such metering devices as oriﬁce plates, metering
will be by means of diaphragm, rotary displacement or
turbine meters.

Diaphragm meters

These are the traditional gas meter that
incorporates
diaphragms contained within a steel case. The diaphragms
are alternately inﬂated and then deﬂated by the presence
of the gas. The movement of the diaphragms is linked to
valves that control the passage of gas into and out of the
four measuring compartments.

These meters are suitable for low-pressure applications
(<75 mbar) and low ﬂow rates. Meters rated at up to

Selection and use of gas as a fuel 19/287

16 m3 per hour (5650 ft3 per hour) are available but it is
not usual to use them above about 85 m3 per hour (3000 ft3
per hour). An important consideration is that the meters
are physically large for their rating.

Rotary positive displacement meters

These meters incorporate two ‘ﬁgure-of-eight’ impellers
rotating in opposite directions inside a casing. The
impellers are made of either cast iron or aluminum. RPD
meters are available with ratings from about 22 cm3/h
(800 ft3/h) upwards but are not normally used as primary
meters below about 85 m3/h (3000 ft3/h).

Turbine meters

These meters are only used for large loads which also have
nearly constant gas consumption. The gas ﬂow impinges
on a specially shaped turbine and is streamlined by the
contour of the casing on either side of the turbine. Turbine
meters are very small for their rating. Disadvantages are
that long lengths of straight pipework upstream are nec-
essary to ensure the correct ﬂow proﬁle, and a ﬂuctuating
load will cause inaccuracies in registration.

Correction

are 60°F, 30 inHg,

Meters are accurate within close limits as legislation
demands. However, gas is metered on a volume basis
rather than a mass basis and is thus subject to variation
with temperature and pressure. The Imperial Standard
saturated (15.56°C,
Conditions
1913.7405 mbar, saturated). Gas Tariff sales are not
normally corrected, but sales on a contract basis are.
Correction may be for pressure only on a ‘ﬁxed factor’
basis based on Boyle’s Law or,
loads,
over 190,000 therms per annum for both temperature
and pressure using electronic (formerly mechanical)
correctors. For high pressures, the compressibility factor Z
may also be relevant. The current generation of correctors
corrects for pressure on an absolute basis taking into
account barometric pressure.

larger

for

19.1.4 Contracts

For annual loads of up to 25,000 therms per annum gas
is sold subject to published tariffs. Above this, the price
of gas is subject to contract of which there are two types:

1. Firm contract. The gas sale is on a ﬁrm basis, that
is, there is a ﬁrm commitment to supply gas under all
except the most exceptional circumstances.

2. Interruptible contract. There is an obligation for the
user to provide an alternative standby fuel to be used
at the request of the gas supplier. The maximum period
of ‘interruption’ is one of the conditions agreed in the
contract. The advantage to the user is that he or she
can obtain a more favorable gas price. The advantage
to the supplier is that at times of peak demand, such
as a cold winter, he can balance supply and demand
without investing in excessive storage capacity.

19/288 Gas

19.1.5 Range of uses of gas

Gas is used for a diverse range of applications in the
domestic, commercial and industrial sectors. Commer-
cially, the main uses are space heating, water heating and
catering, together with some chilling. In larger premises
such as hospitals, etc. there may be large central boiler
plant. Industrially, there will be applications similar to
those in commerce. In addition, there are many process
applications. These may be high-temperature kilns and
furnaces (ceramics, metal reheating, metal melting, glass,
etc.) or low-temperature (drying, baking, paint stoving,
etc.).

The theoretical ﬂame temperature is 1930°C, but in
practice this is not obtainable, and a maximum process
temperature of perhaps 1300°C is realistic without recu-
peration. Gas is used for ‘working ﬂames’ in such pro-
cesses as ﬂame hardening and glass bulb manufacture. In
industrial process, heating either direct or indirect heating
(i.e. using a heat exchanger) may be used according to
the process requirements. Gas can be used as a chemi-
cal feedstock. On a small scale, this can be to produce
protective atmospheres by controlled partial combustion,
on a large scale as a base for ammonia production, etc.
Gas is, however, sold as a source of heat and not as a
chemical of constant quality. It is suitable for the produc-
tion of shaft power from either reciprocating engines or
turbines.

The cleanliness of the products of combustion is such
that the use of heat-recovery equipment is possible with-
out the risk of corrosion. This has led to the development
of combined heat and power packages where the overall
efﬁciency is high.

Small reciprocating engines from 15 kW upwards can
be used,
the heat being recovered from the engine
coolant and exhaust. Large reciprocating engines normally
exhaust into a waste-heat boiler.

Gas turbines are available with power outputs of 1 MW
upwards, and the exhaust is used to ﬁre waste-heat boilers.
The high oxygen content of the exhaust enables supple-
mentary ﬁring to be used to increase the heat/power ratio
as desired.

19.2 Theoretical and practical burning
and heat transfer
19.2.1 Types of burner

Efﬁcient combustion of gas under varying conditions
demands the use of a wide variety of burners. However,
these can all be categorized as natural draft or forced draft.
The majority of domestic burners, together with a large
number of commercial and many industrial burners, are of
the natural-draft type. In these, the gas passes through a jet
situated in a venturi such that primary air is mixed with the
gas. The resulting mixture passes through the burner noz-
zle where mixing with secondary (and, in some designs,
tertiary) air takes place together with ignition and com-
bustion. Such burners have the advantage of simplicity
but have a limited turndown ratio and their poor mixing
characteristics lead to a rather low efﬁciency. Indeed, to
ensure that complete combustion takes place without the

formation of soot or carbon monoxide it is necessary to
allow a ‘margin’ of excess air well above that strictly
needed for combustion.

The low gas pressure available at the injector (typically,
17.5 mbar) allows a primary aeration of only about 40
per cent. The resulting ﬂame envelope is rather large and
the intensity of combustion low. It is possible to increase
the degree of primary aeration, producing a more intense
ﬂame, if a higher gas pressure is used. To produce com-
plete primary aeration a gas pressure of the order of 1 bar
will be needed.

For some processes, a burner in which there is no
primary aeration may produce a ﬂame. These ‘laminar’
ﬂames have a very low intensity of combustion and a
luminous appearance.

The majority of larger industrial burners, including fur-
nace and boiler applications, are of the forced-draft type.
These employ a combustion air fan to provide all the air
needed for complete combustion. The burners are usu-
ally sealed into the combustion chamber so that there is
no access to secondary air from the atmosphere as with
natural-draft burners. Forced-draft burners may be of the
premix type, where air and gas are mixed prior to the
burner, or, more commonly, of the nozzle mix type, where
the mixing takes place within the burner.

A refractory quarl is usually an integral part of forced-
draft burners. Suitable design of burner and quarl can
determine the ﬂame characteristics. Long, short, pencil or
even ﬂat ﬂames are possible.

For general purposes, including ﬁring hot water boil-
ers and warm air space heaters, ‘package’ burners are
commonly used. In these, the burner is ready assembled
together with all its controls and air fan. To install such
a burner it is only necessary to connect up to gas and
electric supplies and controls (thermostats, etc.).

19.2.2 Turndown ratio

The turndown ratio is an indication of the ability of the
burner to maintain a stable ﬂame at lower ﬁring rates,
and is a ratio of the maximum and minimum ﬁring rates.
Turndown can be low for average burners of both natural-
and forced-draft burners, 3 : 1 being a typical ﬁgure with
5 : 1 a maximum although up to 40 : 1 is possible with
special burners.

It is important to remember that although a burner can
be ﬁred at low rates it is probable that the efﬁciency at
low ﬁre will be reduced because the excess air is invari-
ably higher at turndown. This will affect the selection of
controls (e.g. on/off or modulating).

19.2.3 Heat transfer

The carbon/hydrogen ratio of gas is considerably lower
than oil or coal, which results in a ﬂame of very low
luminosity. Radiation from the ﬂame is therefore low and
furnace design must allow for heat transfer to be primarily
by convection and conduction, together with re-radiation
from hot surfaces.

Burners can be designed to produce a luminous ﬂame
by means of laminar mixing and partial cracking of the

gas, but the radiation is still low. A typical forced-draft
burner used for boiler ﬁring will be essentially trans-
parent.

19.4.1 Reduction of energy used
Air/gas ratio

Energy conservation 19/289

19.2.4 Water vapor in products of combustion

The high hydrogen/carbon ratio of gas means that the
quantity of water vapor in the products of combustion is
greater than most other fossil fuels. The latent heat of this
cannot be released in conventional appliances leading to
a low net/gross ratio of caloriﬁc value of 90 per cent. (It
is normal practice to quote gross CV; in Europe net CV
is often used. If net CV is quoted, efﬁciencies of over 190
per cent are possible.)

The cleanliness of products of combustion from gas
enable recovery of latent heat by means of condensing
appliances in which the products are cooled below the
dewpoint of 55°C. The condensate is only weakly acidic
and a suitable choice of materials of manufacture permit
it to be dealt with. Most other fuels produce a conden-
sate which is too acidic to allow condensing appliances
to be used.

19.3 Pressure available to user
19.3.1 Low-pressure supply

The majority of users are supplied with gas at low pres-
sure, and the categories are deﬁned as:

Low pressure
Medium pressure
High pressure

(<75 mbar)
(75 mbar to 7 bar)
(>7 bar)

Normal supply pressure to industrial and commercial users
is 21 mbar. Allowing for pressure losses in the system,
at least 17.5 mbar should be available at the point of
use. Higher pressures can often be supplied by agree-
ment where available. There may be process advantages
in having a higher pressure.

It is not normal practice to supply direct from a high-
pressure transmission main rather than a local distribution
system (known in the USA as ‘farm taps’).

19.3.2 Boosters and compressors

If a pressure higher than that available is wanted then
a booster or compressor will be required. Boosters are
normally considered as adaptations of centrifugal fans
and raise pressure by typically 75 mbar for a single-stage
machine. Higher pressures require a compressor which
will be a positive displacement or screw type. The use
of a booster should not be regarded as a substitute for
the correct design and engineering of pipework within
a site.

19.4 Energy conservation
Energy use can be minimized by a combination of vari-
ous measures. These can be categorized as those reducing
energy used and those recovering heat from a process.

Any process using a fossil fuel will involve the rejection
of the products of combustion following heat transfer.
These ﬂue products will contain sensible heat that is lost
and represents inefﬁciency in the process. Unless some
form of recuperation is practiced, the ﬂue products must
be at a higher temperature than the process, and this can-
not be reduced. The amount of excess air can, however,
is controlled.

Figure 19.1 indicates the ﬂue losses to be expected
for different temperatures and excess air. It is seen that
considerable savings can be made, particularly at higher
temperatures, by reducing excess air levels to a practical
minimum. It is also evident that a reduction in air/gas
ratio to below stoichiometric will cause a rapid deteriora-
tion in efﬁciency caused by the energy remaining in the
incomplete combustion of fuel.

The ideal air/gas ratio is that which is marginally higher
than stoichiometric. It is not possible to run a burner with
no excess air for various reasons (e.g. changing ambient
temperature, a slight change in caloriﬁc value, variation
in barometric pressure, wear of control equipment, etc.).
All of these and other factors dictate that the burner is
operated with sufﬁcient excess air to avoid the production
of carbon monoxide in any quantity.

Figure 19.2 shows how the production of CO can vary
with excess air for two typical burners. It is seen that
to limit CO to, say, 50 ppm with burner B, 3 per cent
oxygen in the ﬂue is needed, and with burner A, which
exhibits better mixing characteristics, only 0.75 per cent
excess oxygen is required. It is also seen that the ‘heel’
in the curve is more pronounced with burner A such that

)

%

(
 
s
e
s
s
o

l
 

e
u

l
f
 
s
s
o
r
G

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

1400°C

1200°C

1000°C

800°C

600°C

400°C

200°C
Flue gas temp

−20

0

40

20
60
Excess air (%)

80 100

Figure 19.1 Gross ﬂue losses versus excess air

19/290 Gas

2200

2000

1800

1600

1400

1200

1000

800

600

400

200

0

)

m
p
p
(
 
s
a
g
 
e
u
l
f
 
n
i
 

O
C
 
d
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

Burner B

Burner A

3.0
1.0
Measured O2 in flue gas (%)

2.0

3.5

insulation is not economically viable. Careful analysis of
the properties of insulation materials is necessary to pre-
vent, for example, the adding of more insulation to the
cold face of a furnace wall, causing the maximum service
temperature of intermediate insulation to be exceeded.

Modern low-density insulation such as those based on
ceramic ﬁbers can be used to save energy in plant oper-
ating on a batch basis. The low thermal mass permits a
rapid heating and cooling period that can save a substan-
tial amount of energy. With continuously operating plant
the advantages are not so pronounced.

Procedures

Energy can be conserved by operation of plant in such a
way as to minimize part loading. Various practices can be
adopted that can be described as ‘good housekeeping’. In
addition to maintenance, this will include such factors as
the avoidance of plant operating in the standby mode for
long periods, operation at correct temperature, ensuring
doors are closed where applicable, etc.

For production plant,

the energy used per unit
produced is lowest when operated at design capacity.
At low throughputs, the energy used increases markedly
because the standing losses are constant, irrespective of
throughput.

For plant such as boilers, operating in parallel controls
should ensure that one boiler acts as a ‘lead’ to minimize
part-load operation. As far, as is possible, plant should be
sized to meet the load and oversizing should be avoided.

Figure 19.2 Measured percentage of O2 in ﬂue gas. Range of CO
versus O2 for a variety of burners

19.4.2 Heat recovery

a reduction in oxygen below the heel will have a pro-
nounced effect on CO production.

Figure 19.2 illustrates a burner at a ﬁxed ﬁring rate. In
practice, many burners will have a varying ﬁring rate with
inferior performance at turndown, mainly because of poor
mixing caused by reduced kinetic energy of both air and
gas. To allow for this, the control system must provide
for an increasing excess air with turndown.

To minimize ﬂue losses it is important to keep excess
air to a minimum, but the practicalities of the burner must
be considered and a safe operating margin incorporated.

Maintenance

Combustion equipment can be set to give optimum efﬁ-
ciency at the time of commissioning but this condition
will not be maintained. Wear and tear on control valves,
partial blockage of ﬁlters, sooting of surfaces, etc. will all
cause a fall in efﬁciency. To counter this, regular mainte-
nance is desirable, and must include routine ﬂue analysis
and burner adjustment.

Insulation

Sensible heat losses from thermal plant should be kept
to a realistic minimum by the use of correctly speciﬁed
insulation. There will be a point beyond which further

General points

to recover heat

from processes
Technology exists
operating at all temperatures, from regenerators on high-
temperature plant to heat pumps using low-temperature
efﬂuent as a heat source. The problem in many cases is
to ﬁnd a use for the heat recovered. The best solution is
to recycle the heat within the same plant, as the supply
will always be matched to the demand. An alternative is
to use the heat recovered in associated plant (for example,
the heat recovered from a melting furnace can be used to
dry feedstock for the furnace).

In general, ‘high grade’ recovered heat is more valu-
able than ‘low grade’. The latter can often take the form
of large quantities of warm water for which there is a
ﬁnite need.

Recuperation

Figure 19.1 shows the heat carried away in ﬂue gases,
particularly for high-temperature processes. For example,
for a furnace operating at 800°C with no excess, air losses
are 40 per cent. Recovery of a proportion of these losses
is possible by means of recuperation.

The simplest form of recuperation is load recuperation,
but this is not suited to retroﬁt and is incorporated at
the design stage. Flue products from the highest temper-
ature zone are used to preheat incoming stock on the

counter-ﬂow heat exchanger principle. Such techniques
are well established in pottery tunnel kilns, etc.

In many processes, load recuperation is not practicable,
and combustion air is preheated in a heat exchanger by
means of the outgoing ﬂue products. Figure 19.3 gives an
indication of the savings to be made for different operating
temperatures. It is not normally considered economic to
operate a recuperator at ﬂue temperatures below about
750°C.

The recuperator can be positioned in the ﬂue of the
furnace or be integral with the burner (i.e. a recuperative
burner). The separate recuperator is usually less costly,

)

%

i

(
 
g
n
v
a
s
 
l
e
u
F

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

200

Furnace gas
temperatures

1400°C

1200°C

1000°C

800°C

600°C

400

600

800

1000 1200 1400

Air preheat temperature (°C)

Figure 19.3 Fuel saving versus air preheat temperature (stoichio-
metric conditions)

Energy conservation 19/291

particularly on a multi-burner furnace. The recuperative
burners avoid the need for lagging pipework, and reduce
the risks of leakage upsetting the air/gas ratio. The ﬂow
pattern of hot gases in the furnace may, however, be dis-
rupted, as the ﬂue gases must exit through the burner.

Regenerators

Recuperators are limited in their performance, partly by
problems with materials operating for long periods at
elevated temperatures and by the efﬁciency of simple gas-
to-gas heat exchangers. For high-temperature applications,
a regenerator has advantages.

Regenerators have long been established in such pro-
cesses as steel melting in open-hearth furnaces and glass-
melting tanks. They consist of checkerwork brickwork,
which act as a heat sink for the high-temperature ﬂue
gases. On reversing the cycle, this brickwork acts as a heat
source for the incoming cold air. The regenerator is ther-
mally efﬁcient but only suited to very large, intensively
used plant.

Regenerative burners have been developed to widen the
range of application of the regenerator principle. They
consist of a pair of gas burners each with its own regen-
erator consisting of a bed packed with refractory balls.
Regular cycling between the two burners, only one of
which ﬁres at a time, gives high efﬁciency with up to
90 per cent of the heat in the ﬂue products recoverable.
Figure 19.4 shows typical performance ﬁgures for these
burners.

Heat exchangers

There is a wide range of heat exchangers available to cater
for most temperature ranges and for gas/gas, gas/liquid or
liquid/liquid, as appropriate. High exhaust temperatures

)

%

(
 

i

g
n
v
a
s
 
l

e
u
F

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

0.9

1400°C

0.8

0.7

1200°C

0.6

0.5

1000°C

Target
performance

800°C

e

c
a t r e
c tiv
e ff e

H

e r y
s
e

s

v

n

o

e

0.3

0.4

0.2

600°C

Typical available
performance

Flu e g a s

p erature

m

te

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1400

Air preheat temperature (°C)

Figure 19.4 Fuel saving versus air preheat temperature

19/292 Gas

normally involve the use of a recuperator or regenerator
and lower temperatures use other heat exchangers.

Gas/gas

These can be of the parallel
Simple heat exchangers.
ﬂow, cross-ﬂow or counter-ﬂow pattern and constructed
of materials to suit the temperature.

These consist of a slowly
Rotary heat exchangers.
revolving wheel of diameter 0.6–4 m driven by an electric
motor. The wheel consists of a metallic matrix, which
absorbs sensible heat (and, in some designs, latent heat)
from the outgoing stream and transfers it to the in-going
stream. With these exchangers 75–90 per cent efﬁciency
is possible.

The use of heat pipes involves the incoming
Heat pipes.
cold air stream and the outgoing warm air stream being
immediately adjacent and parallel, and between the two is
a battery of heat pipes. These contain a liquid and operate
on the thermal siphon principle. The liquid takes in latent
heat and evaporates and the vapor travels to the cold end
of the tube where condensation releases the latent heat.
Generally, heat pipes are restricted to 400°C, and effec-
tiveness can be up to 70 per cent.

Run-around coils. Where the incoming and outgoing
air streams are remote it is necessary to use a run-around
coil to couple them. A pumped liquid to a heat exchanger
in the cold stream connects a heat exchange coil in the
warm exhaust. The effectiveness can be up to 60 per cent.

Gas/liquid

a

is

The

economizer

tubular heat
Economizer.
exchanger used to recover heat from the exhaust gases
from boilers or some processes. It is used in boilers to
recover much of the sensible heat for use in preheating
the boiler feedwater. An increase in boiler efﬁciency of
4–6 per cent is typical. The design and materials of
construction depend on the application.

The efﬁciency of a hot water cen-
Condensing boiler.
tral heating boiler is limited in part by the latent heat of
vaporization in the water vapor in the ﬂue products. If a
secondary heat exchanger is added to the boiler, it is pos-
sible to cool the ﬂue gases sufﬁciently to release this latent
heat, provided that the return temperature is sufﬁciently
low (i.e. below about 55°C). This is the principle of the
condensing boiler. The secondary heat exchanger must
be constructed of a resistant material such as anodized
aluminum or austenitic stainless steel to withstand the
condensate, which is weakly acidic with a pH 3.3–3.8.
The condensing boiler concept is not applicable to oil or
coal, which normally have a more acidic condensate. Fuel
savings of from 14 to 18 per cent can be achieved.

The principle of the spray recuper-
Spray recuperator.
ator is similar to that of the condensing boiler, and again
is restricted to gas ﬁring. In this case, the condensation

takes place by direct contact of a water spray with the ﬂue
gases. The resultant water is at temperatures up to 50°C
and is recycled through a heat exchanger. If a suitable use
can be found for the low-grade heat (e.g. boiler feedwa-
ter preheating) then fuel savings of up to 17 per cent can
be made.

Waste-heat boilers. Waste-heat boilers can be designed
to accept any grade of waste heat to produce steam or hot
water. Designs can be based on water-tube boilers, shell
and tube boilers, or a combination of the two.

Both the source and sink of heat pumps
Heat pumps.
can be gas or liquid. The particular feature of the heat
pump is that the source is at a lower temperature than
the sink and is ‘upgraded’ by the heat pump. To obtain
a reasonable efﬁciency it is essential that heat is required
at a low temperature and the source and sink are close in
temperature.

Liquid/liquid

Various designs of liquid/liquid heat exchanger are widely
used. Choice is partly inﬂuenced by the cleanliness of the
liquids and the need for regular cleaning. A compact and
commonly used type is the plate heat exchanger.

19.5 Clean Air Acts associated with gas
burning
The combustion of gas produces little in the way of nox-
ious substances. Ideal combustion will produce only water
vapor, carbon dioxide and nitrogen. In practice, there may
well be very small amounts of hydrogen, carbon monox-
ide and unburned hydrocarbons, notably methane.

Relevant additional substances referred to in legislation

include:

1. Sulfur oxides (SOX) – the sulfur content

in gas is
very low (measured in ppm) and the SOX is therefore
negligible.

2. Nitrogen oxides (NOX) – thermal NOX is formed with
gas as with other fuels, particularly if air preheat is
practiced. There is very little fuel nitrogen compared
with other fossil fuels so that the total NOX emissions
are lower.

3. Dust – as gas is in the gaseous state and does not com-
bust via the route of droplets or particles the formation
of dust is unlikely.

Nevertheless, gas is subject to legislation.

19.5.1 EC Directive on emissions from large
combustion plant

This legislation was formally adopted on 26 November
1988. It applies to plant for the production of energy
(effectively, boiler plant and similar) and speciﬁcally
excludes heating furnaces, drying plant, etc. The Directive
applies to plant of thermal input 50 MW and over. If two
or more separate plants are in close proximity such that

Chimney requirements: codes of practice and environmental considerations 19/293

they could share a common ﬂue then if their total input is
50 MW or over then they are also subject to the Directive.
The Directive applies to new plant (deﬁned as that
planned after 1 July 1987) with provision for retroﬁtting
existing plant. Limits for new plant are:

products from the combustion chamber to the terminal of
the ﬂue. A secondary function is, by means of suitably
locating the ﬂue terminal, to ensure adequate dispersion
of the products of combustion.

Sulfur dioxide:
NOx:
Dust:

35 mg/N m3
350 mg/N m3
5 mg/N m3

19.5.2 UK legislation

UK legislation referring to emissions from gas-ﬁred plant
is currently rather limited. The most important is The
Health and Safety (Emissions into the Atmosphere) Reg-
ulations 1983 (SI No. 943, 1983). In Schedule 2 is listed
substances deemed to be noxious, which include combus-
tion products, dust, etc.

Schedule 1 lists those works covered by the regula-
tions. The only categories which concern the combustion
products of gas are:

1. Electricity works

(excluding compression-ignition
engines burning distillate fuel with a sulfur content
of <1 per cent);

2. Boilers with an aggregate not less than 200 tons per
hour of steam being used wholly or in part for elec-
tricity generation.

It is clear that very few gas-ﬁred installations will fall
within these categories. Notes on the Best Practicable
Means for meeting the requirements were published by
HM Inspectorate of Pollution in 1988.

For gas-ﬁred plant large boilers and furnaces 50–700 MW

thermal:

NOX limit of 190 ppm v/v (measured at 6 per cent oxy-
gen 15°C and 1 bar without correction for water vapor),
(approx. 200 mg/m3);
Chimney efﬂux velocity not less than 15 m/s at MCR;
Temperature of gases entering chimney not less than
120°C.

For large boilers and furnaces >700 MW thermal:

Chimney efﬂux velocity not less than 18 m/s at MCR;
Temperature of gases entering chimney not less than
80°C.
(NB: There is no limit for NOX for gas-ﬁred plant. In prac-
tice, little or no such plant currently exists. The conditions
for measurement of NOX are clearly deﬁned.)

19.6 Chimney requirements: codes of
practice and environmental
considerations
19.6.1 Functions of a ﬂue

The overriding function of the ﬂue is to remove the prod-
ucts of combustion. This involves the creation of sufﬁ-
cient draft, either mechanical or thermal, to move the ﬂue

19.6.2 Operating principles

To operate effectively, the ﬂue has to apply a pressure
differential sufﬁcient to overcome the system resistance
and enable the products of combustion to ﬂow from the
combustion chamber to the terminal. This pressure differ-
ential can be mechanical (by forced or induced draft or
a combination of the two) or thermal, possibly combined
with mechanical.

The natural-draft ﬂue operates on the thermal principle.
The pressure differential is caused by the difference in
density between the column of hot gases within the ﬂue
and a column of air of the same height. Within limits,
the taller the ﬂue, the greater the draft, but the upward
movement is opposed by the resistance to ﬂow inherent
in the geometry and friction of the ﬂue.

Successful ﬂue design involves the balancing of the
draft against the resistance, possibly for a range of thermal
inputs, the avoidance of condensation, and a location of
the terminal that ensures unrestricted dispersion of the ﬂue
products.

Factors affecting ﬂue performance

Raising the height of a ﬂue increases the
Flue height
ﬂue draft but also adds to the pressure loss due to friction.
The net effect is that increasing height is very beneﬁcial
for short ﬂues but has progressively less effect as the
height is increased. With very tall ﬂues, there can be a
reduction in ﬂow rate due to excessive heat loss. The
point where an increase in height produces no additional
ﬂow rate depends on many factors. In the case of small
commercial-size appliances, an increase beyond 6–9 m
will normally produce no beneﬁt.

There is a direct relationship
Cross-sectional area
between ﬂue ﬂow and the cross-sectional area. The draft
is unaffected by the cross-sectional area but the frictional
losses decrease as the area is increased, resulting in greater
ﬂow. Too great an area, however, will lead to a low
velocity with its attendant problems of down-wash and
possible condensation.

The ﬂue draft rises with temperature but
Thermal input
the pressure losses increase because of the greater volume
of the ﬂue gases. The net result is that increased temper-
ature leads to a greater ﬂow rate, but only up to about
260°C, beyond which the ﬂow is reduced.

If the heat input from a given appliance is increased,
both the temperature and ﬂow rate of the gases entering
the ﬂue will rise. The net result is that an increased heat
input leads to a greater ﬂow rate, but this is more notice-
able at low heat inputs. There is a limit to the rate that
can be vented into a given ﬂue before the pressure losses
overcome the ﬂue draft and ‘spillage’ (failure of the ﬂue
products to be satisfactorily cleared) occurs.

19/294 Gas

The only parts of

the ﬂue route that
Flue route
contribute to ﬂue draft are the vertical sections. All
sections, however, contribute to the pressure losses. It
follows therefore that to increase the effectiveness of the
ﬂue it is important to adhere as closely as possible to a
vertical route and to have a minimum of bends, changes
of section, and horizontal runs.

It

Heat losses Heat losses through the fabric of the ﬂue
will lower the mean temperature of the ﬂue gases, causing
both the ﬂue draft and the pressure losses to be reduced.
The net effect is quite small (perhaps a 10 per cent dif-
ference between a well-insulated and an unlagged ﬂue).
to avoid condensation.
Although the condensate from gas combustion is generally
considered non-acidic, if the ﬂue has not been designed
for conditions of continual wetting condensation should
be avoided.
Intermittent condensation under start-up
conditions can usually be tolerated.

is, however,

important

The dewpoint for the ﬂue products from gas is a maxi-
mum of 60°C and will, in most cases, be lower because of
excess air. There is no acid dewpoint because the sulfur
content is negligible. It would be thought that condensa-
tion would be most unlikely, and this is so for the bulk ﬂue
gases. However, the temperature gradient across the ﬂue
wall can be such that the ‘skin temperature’ at the inside
wall can be considerably less than the bulk temperature,
and condensation will take place.

To minimize the possibility of condensation it is desir-

able to:

1. Keep the ﬂue as short as possible;
2. Avoid the use of bends and horizontal runs;
3. Insulate the ﬂue;
4. Keep the surface area as small as possible.

These features must be consistent with the other design
parameters as far as possible.

Termination A suitable design and location of the ﬂue
terminal is essential for optimum performance. This is
primarily to counter adverse wind effects.

The wind effect may assist or oppose the natural-draft
ﬂue, causing increased draft up the ﬂue, or downdraft.
For this reason, it is important to minimize their effects

by careful attention to the terminal position. In general,
this means a position at least 0.25 m above any nearby
obstacle.

For smaller appliances, ﬂue terminals are necessary.

These have the main functions of:

1. Keeping the resistance as low as possible;
2. Preventing blockage;
3. Being unaffected by wind of any speed or direction.

Proprietary terminals are available up to 200 mm, but
above this are not used, a ‘Chinese hat’ terminal being
considered adequate to keep out rain and larger foreign
bodies. For large ﬂues, particularly forced draft, terminals
are not used.

Any ﬂue should be designed as
Downdraft diverters
far as possible to produce a constant draft. If the draft is
insufﬁcient then spillage of combustion products will take
place, and if too great, then excess air will be induced,
leading to an unnecessary loss of efﬁciency.

A typical downdraft diverter used with natural-draft
ﬂues is shown in Figure 19.5. This consists of a bafﬂe
plate mounted at the top of the primary ﬂue. There are
three modes of operation:

1. Normal conditions – the products of combustion mix
with dilutant air at the diverter and diluted products
pass up the secondary ﬂue.

2. Adverse conditions with down draft – the down draft
mixes with the products of combustion and diluted
products enter the room for the brief period that the
downdraft persists. The draft in the primary ﬂue (and
hence the performance of the appliance) is unaffected.
3. Adverse conditions with up draft – the additional draft
in the secondary ﬂue causes excess air to be pulled
through the diverter from the room. The bafﬂe plate
prevents the draft
in the primary ﬂue from being
affected.

For small appliances, the down draft diverter is often
incorporated into them; for larger appliances, it is external.
In larger appliances, the use of a down draft diverter
can be impractical if only because of size, and a draft
stabilizer may then be used. This will protect against up

Diluted products

Down-draft air

Diluted products

Diluent
air

Products
and air

Extra
diluent

Products of combustion

Productions of combustion

Products of combustion

Normal conditions
with correct flow

Adverse conditions
with flow reversed

Adverse conditions with
increased up-draft

Figure 19.5 The function of the draft diverter

Chimney requirements: codes of practice and environmental considerations 19/295

draft by opening to allow air to be pulled in directly from
the room. If it is of the double-swing type it will protect
against down draft by opening to relieve the down draft
into the room.

19.6.4 New ﬂue systems

Various ﬂue systems have been developed to overcome
the need for a conventional ﬂue, the provision for which
can be both difﬁcult and expensive in some locations.

The above design parameters are rel-
Forced-draft ﬂues
evant to natural-draft ﬂues. With forced-draft ﬂues, it is
possible by choice of a fan – either forced or induced
draft – to overcome system resistance so that the ﬂue will
still clear the products. A crude rule-of-thumb is to allow
1 mm2 of ﬂue area for each 2.2–3.7 kW for natural draft
and for 4.5–13.6 kW for each forced draft.

19.6.3 Design procedure

The design procedure will vary with the type of ﬂue, but
the basic procedure will not change. It is necessary to con-
sider the relevant parameters discussed above and decide
on ﬂue dimensions and materials of construction to satisfy
them. The parameters to consider are:

1. Type of ﬂue to be used;
2. Pressure needed at inlet to ﬂue for correct operation of

appliance;

3. Diameter of ﬂue (or dimensions if rectangular);
4. Length of ﬂue and route taken;
5. Materials of construction (this will inﬂuence both heat

transfer and ﬂow characteristics);

6. Heat input and efﬁciency of the appliance, together
with the ﬂue temperature and excess air. A considera-
tion of all or some of these allows the ﬂue gas volume
to be assessed;

7. Termination position.

This design procedure is detailed in the British Gas
publication Flues for Commercial and Industrial Gas
Fired Boilers and Air Heaters (IM/11). This publication
addresses itself to:

1. Chimney heights;
2. Natural-draft ﬂues;
3. Induced-draft ﬂues;
4. Modular boiler systems;
5. Fan-diluted ﬂues.

Other relevant aids to design include:

BS 5440: 1, Code of practice for ﬂues and air supply for

gas appliances of input not exceeding

60 kW: ﬂues

This is only applicable to small appliances.

BS 5854, Code of practice for ﬂues and ﬂue structures in

buildings

This applies to larger appliances of 45 kW output and
above but does not cover ﬂues that are not integral to a
building.

Balanced ﬂue

In the balanced ﬂue, which may be natural draft or fan-
assisted, the ﬂue outlet and combustion air inlet are inte-
gral in a housing to be mounted on an outside vertical
wall. As the ﬂue and the inlet are subject to the same out-
side pressure, they are unaffected by it and are in balance.
No provision for ventilation is needed and the appliance
is room-sealed.

Balanced ﬂues are only available for low ratings (up
to 60 kW input). Possible locations for the terminal are
restricted as shown in Figure 19.6.

Balanced compartment

This can be regarded as an extension of the balanced ﬂue
principle to larger plant. A conventional chimney is used
for clearing ﬂue products, and the air inlet to the boiler
house is integral with this so that the inlet and outlet are
balanced. It is important for correct operation that there is
no additional ventilation and that the room is sealed with
all doors closed.

Fan-diluted ﬂues

If the products of combustion can be diluted so that the
carbon dioxide content is not greater than 1 per cent it is
permissible to discharge them at ground level. This is the
principle of the system shown in Figure 19.7, in which
fresh air is drawn in to dilute the ﬂue products which
are discharged preferably on the same wall as the inlet
to balance against wind effects. It is essential to interlock
the airﬂow switch with the burner controls.

The volume ﬂow rate of the fan (Q) is given by:

Q D 9.7 ð (Rated input in kW of boiler)/3600 m2/s

Additional points to note are:

1. The rating of the plant must not exceed 6 MW.
2. The emission velocity must be at least 75/F m/s. (F is
the fan dilution factor, deﬁned as F D V/V0, where V
is the actual ﬂue gas volume and V0 is the stoichio-
metric combustion volume, 0.26Q m3/s for gas.)

3. The outlet must not be within 50U/F of a fan-assisted
intake (except for intakes for combustion air or fan
dilution air).

4. The outlet must not be within 20U/F of an operable

window.

60U/F.

5. The distance to the nearest building must be at least

6. The outlet must be at least 3 m above the ground,
except if the input is less than 1 MW, where 2 m is
permissible.

7. The outlet must be directed at an angle above the hor-

izontal (preferably at 30°) and not under a canopy.

19/296 Gas

(a)

(b)

Figure 19.6 Balanced ﬂue terminal positions for appliances with a maximum heat input of (a) 3 kW and (b) 60 kW

8. The outlet should not discharge into an enclosed (or

almost totally enclosed) ‘well’ or courtyard.

Dilution air inlet

Discharge

Flues for condensing systems

Boilers and air heaters can be designed to operate in the
condensing mode, that is, the outlet temperature of the
products entering the ﬂue can be at or close to the dew-
point. The usual design criteria for ﬂues which attempt
to avoid condensation are no longer applicable and it is
necessary to incorporate additional features. These will
include:

Combustion

air inlet

Ventilation
air outlet

Fan
Air flow
switch

Boilers

1. Provision must be made to drain off and dispose of the
condensate, which is produced at a rate of up to 0.15 l/h
for every kilowatt of input. This is slightly acidic, and
plastic is the most suitable for the pipework.

2. The ﬂue will be wetted by the condensate, and should
be constructed of a suitable material such as stainless
steel, aluminum or suitable plastic.

3. All sockets in the ﬂue should face upwards and the

4. The low temperature of the ﬂue products will con-

joints sealed.

tribute little ﬂue draft.

terminal.

5. The ﬂue gases will readily form a plume at the ﬂue

Additional guidance in the design of ﬂues for con-
densing systems is given in the British Gas publication
Installation Guide for High Efﬁciency (Condensing) Boil-
ers – Industrial and Commercial Applications (IM/22).

Figure 19.7 A typical arrangement of a fan-diluted ﬂue system

19.6.5 Dual-fuel installations
In a dual-fuel installation, the alternative fuel will usually
have higher sulfur content than gas, and it is the alterna-
tive fuel which will usually dictate the chimney height,
materials of construction, etc. In a changeover situation,
that is, where plant previously ﬁred by another fuel is
changed over to gas, chimneys or ﬂues that have been

satisfactory on oil or solid fuel will also be satisfactory
on gas ﬁring, unless condensing or direct contact boilers
are to be ﬁtted. The chimney should be checked to ensure
that there is no restriction, that no leakage is occurring,
and that on the previous fuel draft was adequate. In some
cases it may be necessary to reduce an excessive draft
with double-swing draft stabilizers, etc.

It is permissible to ﬁre with other fuels into the same

chimney provided that:

1. The other fuel is not solid fuel;
2. The common ﬂue is of adequate size and construction;
3. The burner system of the gas- and oil-burning boil-
ers are operating under similar draft conditions and
preferably in the same room;

4. The burner-control equipment for both oil and gas is

to the current standard for this type of equipment.

19.6.6 Flue dampers

The use of ﬂue dampers may be considered as a means of
energy conservation by preventing ventilation of the boiler
in the non-ﬁring state. There is a possible safety haz-
ard if the damper remains closed when the burner ignites
and ﬁres. Safe operation with ﬂue dampers is covered
in the British Gas publication Automatic Flue Dampers
for Use with Gas Fired Space Heating and Water Heat-
ing (IM/19). An assessment of the fuel savings to be
expected from the use of ﬂue dampers has been made
by Dann, R. G., Lovelace, D. E. and Page, M. W., ‘The
effect of ﬂue dampers on natural ventilation heat losses
from boilers’, The Heating and Air Conditioning Journal
(May 1984).

19.7 Health and safety in the use of gas
19.7.1 Legislation

Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974

This has relevance to the supply of gas and plant burning
gas, in particular section 6, as amended by the Consumer
Protection Act 1987.

Gas Act 1986

This is the primary legislation concerning the gas indus-
try in the UK, together with certain section of the Gas
Act 1972 and the Gas Act 1965 which have not been
repealed. The Gas Act does not have great relevance to
safety aspects of gas utilization. However, speciﬁc regu-
lations can be published under this enabling Act.

An exception is Schedule 5, Public Gas Supply Code,
which deals with meter installation, use of anti-ﬂuctuators
and valves, reconnection of gas supplies, escapes of
gas, etc.

Gas Safety (installation and use) Regulations 1984
(SI 1984, No. 1358)

These Regulations cover the safe use of gas in users’
premises. They apply to domestic and commercial

Health and safety in the use of gas 19/297

premises but not to industrial, although it is practice to
apply the intent of the Regulations to such premises.
The Regulations cover most aspects of installation and
safety, including gas ﬁttings, meters, installation pipes,
gas appliances, ventilation and ﬂueing. They use the term
‘competent person’ but do not deﬁne it. It is probable that
in the near future the term will be deﬁned as one who has
undergone a training course that complies with the HSE
Approved Code of Practice on Standards of Training in
Safe Gas Installation.

Gas Safety Regulations 1972 (SI 1972, No. 1178)

These Regulations were largely repealed by the later 1984
Regulations. Certain sections were retained, however,
notably Part II, which deals with service pipes (i.e. the
pipes to carry gas from the main to the user’s property).

Gas Quality Regulations 1983 (SI 1983, No. 363)

These Regulations concern the purity and distinctive smell
of gas, the uniformity of caloriﬁc value, and the mini-
mum pressure, which must be made available. For service
pipes with an internal diameter of 50 mm or more, this is
12.5 mbar.

Gas (Meters) Regulations 1983 (SI 1983, No. 684)

These deal with the accuracy of meters together with fees
for testing, etc.

Gas (Declaration of Caloriﬁc Value) Regulations
1972 (SI 1972, No. 1878)

These cover the declared caloriﬁc value and the methods
of making known changes in its value.

Gas Safety (Rights of Entry) Regulations 1983 (SI
1983, No.1575)

These concern the rights of an ‘ofﬁcer authorized by the
relevant authority’ to enter premises for purposes con-
nected with safety of ﬁttings and appliances.

The Building Regulations 1985

Approved Document J, Section 2, deals with gas appli-
ances of rated input up to 60 kW. It should therefore be
noted that most commercial and industrial plant is not
covered by these Regulations.

19.7.2 Potential hazards in the use of gas
Properties

Natural gas is a colorless gas to which has been added
a distinctive odor. It is composed principally of methane
(88–95 per cent) together with small proportions of higher
hydrocarbons (ethane, propane, and butane), and nitrogen
and/or carbon dioxide. It has a caloriﬁc value generally
in the range 38–39 MJ/m3 and is lighter than air with a
speciﬁc gravity (with regard to air) of 0.59–0.64.

19/298 Gas

Health hazard data

Natural gas does not in itself constitute a hazard to health.
However, exposure to concentrations in excess of approx-
imately 10 per cent in air may cause dizziness and nausea.
Higher concentrations may lead to asphyxiation.

Exposure to carbon monoxide resulting from inade-
quate ventilation and/or leakage of combustion products
may cause headaches, chronic tiredness or muscular weak-
ness. High concentrations or long-term exposure may be
fatal. Normal resuscitation methods and medical advice
should be sought for those suffering from these effects.

Safety hazard data

Natural gas forms ﬂammable mixtures with air in the con-
centration range 5–15 per cent in air. In the event of a
natural gas ﬁre, steps should be taken to shut off the gas
supply, and the local ﬁre brigade and the gas supplier
notiﬁed.

Handling

Natural gas must always be contained in appropriate pipes
or vessels and precautions taken to ensure that leakage
cannot occur. If a gas leak does occur, the main gas supply
should be shut off, the area ventilated and the gas sup-
plier informed. Electrical switches should not be turned
on or off, portable electrical appliances including hand-
held torches should not be operated and all other possible
sources of ignition removed or rendered inoperable and
the affected area ventilated. In circumstances of excessive
leakage, the building should be evacuated.

Application

Appliances and other equipment intended to be used with
natural gas should be purpose designed and built to rec-
ognized safety standards, installed in properly ventilated
locations and supplied with the necessary ﬂueing sys-
tems or other means of disposal of combustion products.
Lack of adequate ventilation and/or leakage of combus-
tion products into the workspace may give rise to car-
bon monoxide poisoning. In this event, affected personnel
should be evacuated from the area, the gas supply shut off,
the supplier informed and medical advice sought. Atten-
tion is drawn to the Gas Safety (Installation and Use)
Regulations, relevant British Standards and appropriate
British Gas Standards, codes of practice and guidance
notes, all of which deal with the design, application and
safe use of gas and gas-ﬁred equipment.

19.7.3 Safety procedures

These have been partly covered in Section 19.7.2. All gas-
ﬁred equipment should be designed to ignite, operate and
shut down in a safe manner. Instructions to this effect
should be clearly displayed. This is a requirement of the
Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974. In addition, such
plant should comply with all relevant standards.

In the event of an incident occurring, it is essential
in the ﬁrst instance to shut off the gas supply. This is

recognized in the Gas Safety (Installation and Use) Reg-
ulations by the need for an ‘emergency control valve’
sited close to the entry to a building. In smaller premises,
this may be the meter control valve. In larger premises it
is a requirement of the Regulations that for every build-
ing with a gas supply of 50 mm or more, and more than
one self-contained area, then a valve must be installed at
the position where the gas enters the building. In such
premises, a line diagram of the pipe layout should also
be prominently displayed, at least close to the primary
meter. Such a diagram, indicating all emergency con-
trol valves and all pipework of internal diameter 25 mm
or more, can be used to locate areas to be isolated in
an emergency.

It

is additionally recommended in the British Gas
publication Guidance Notes on the Installation of Gas
Pipework, Boosters and Compressors in Customers’
Premises (IM/16) that for buildings containing plant over
2 MW total heat input and being supplied with gas at
pressures above 1 bar, a remotely operable valve shall be
ﬁtted in the gas supply to the building. In the case of large
boiler houses, provision for remote operation of the valves
shall be provided both inside and outside the building.

19.7.4 Maintenance

Competent personnel
in conjunction with the manu-
facturer’s maintenance instructions improve safe oper-
ation of all plant by means of regular maintenance.
Re-commissioning in a safe manner should always fol-
low this. It is particularly important that valves such as
safety shut-off valves, non-return valves, etc. are regularly
checked for soundness.

19.8 Pressure control
19.8.1 Governors

Constant-pressure governors are required at various stages
of the gas supply within the user’s premises from the
ﬁrst pressure reduction from distribution pressure to sup-
ply pressure at the meter installation to the appliance
governor. The complexity and design of the governor
installation depends on pressure, throughput, duty, etc.
In addition to governors, pressure-relief, slam-shut and
non-return valves may be relevant in some installations.
Low-pressure governors used for smaller appliances
and smaller pressure-regulation installations should com-
ply with BS 6448: 1, Speciﬁcation for pressure governors
with nominal connection size up to 50 mm for gas appli-
ances with inlet pressures up to and including 200 mbar.
For larger installations, but still low pressures, governors
should comply with BS 3554: 2, Speciﬁcation for gas
governors: independent governors for inlet pressures up
to 350 mbar.

Pressure-regulating installations

Detailed requirements for pressure-regulating stations
are contained in two Institution of Gas Engineering
publications:

TD/9: Offtakes and Pressure-regulating Installations for

Inlet Pressures between 7 and 190 bar

TD/19: Pressure-regulating Installations for Inlet Pres-

sures between 75 mbar and 7 bar

These references give details of the requirements for
safely maintaining a constant pressure outlet over a wide
range of ﬂow rates. It should be noted that ‘governor’ and
‘regulator’ are largely interchangeable terms.

Requirements become more demanding as the pressure
at the inlet rises. A governor alone has its characteristics
which include a pressure ‘droop’ at high throughputs and
an increase above set point at very low throughputs. In
many cases, there must additionally be protection against
the failure of a governor. This can be provided by:

1. ‘Active and monitor’ governors (deﬁned as two gover-
nors in series whose settings are stepped so as to allow
the active governor to control the outlet pressure and
the monitor governor to assume control in the event of
failure of the active governor to the open position);

2. Pressure-relief valve (this will vent

to atmosphere
when a predetermined maximum pressure is attained);
3. Slam-shut valve, this will close quickly in the event of
an abnormal pressure (usually excess) being detected.

The essential requirements for lower-pressure installa-
tions can be summarized as below. In most cases, the
governor installation is incorporated with the metering
installation.

1. Inlet pressure not exceeding 75 mbar. The only require-
ment is for a single governor and a single stream,
although twin streams will be advantageous for larger
loads.

2. Inlet pressures 75 mbar to 2 bar. A single or multi-

stream installation including:
(a) Single-stage governor with internal valves open at

rest;

(b) Relief valve with capacity not more than 1 per cent

of the stream fault capacity;

(c) Slam-shut valve.

3. Inlet pressures 2–7 bar, governor of 50 mm bore or less
and stream fault ﬂow rates less than 300 m3/h. As in
(2) above or duplicate streams, each having two-stage
governing and a slam-shut valve;
(a) A monitor override pilot governor to be ﬁtted to
the ﬁrst-stage governor impulsed from the outlet
of the second-stage governor;

(b) A relief valve of capacity not more than 1 per cent
the fault stream capacity to be included in each
stream.

4. Inlet pressures 2–7 bar, larger ﬂow rates. Duplicate
streams with two-stage governing as in (3) above or
duplicate streams each having monitor and active gov-
ernors and a slam-shut valve;
(a) The monitor governor to be upstream of the active

governor;

(b) A relief valve of capacity not more than 1 per
cent, the fault stream capacity to be included in
each stream.

Pressure control 19/299

Legal requirements

The Gas Safety (Installation and Use) Regulations require
that the gas supply to the meter be governed in all premises
other than mines, quarries and factories (Regulation 13).
It is practice to govern all premises, but exceptions may
be made in categories where it is permissible, and there
is advantage in so doing.

19.8.2 Pressure-relief valve

The pressure-relief valve has the physical appearance of a
pressure governor. It operates in the reverse manner to a
governor, that is, on exceeding the set pressure, the valve
lifts off its seat, rather than being forced onto its seat, as
in a governor. Gas is therefore allowed to ﬂow through
the valve.

The main function of the relief valve is to act as a
back up to a pressure governor to prevent the pre-set
downstream pressure being exceeded. In particular, it will
relieve the small amount of ‘creep’ that will occur by
slippage past the valve seating in a governor.

Safe venting of the gas relieved is of great impor-
tance. The British Gas publication Guidance Notes on the
Installation of Gas Pipework, Boosters and Compressors
in Customers’ Premises (IM/16) gives guidance on this.
The main requirements are:

1. Vents must be terminated in a safe place, preferably
in the open air above roof level, remote from possible
sources of ignition.

2. Vents must not be manifolded together.
3. Terminals must be designed to minimize the risk of

blockage and ingress of water.

4. The vent pipe, particularly if over 20 m in length, must
be designed to minimize back pressure. Certain pres-
sure governors have integral vent valves.

19.8.3 Slam-shut valves

The slam-shut valve cuts off the gas supply in the event
of predetermined pressure criteria being exceeded. It must
be manually reset, having made safe the downstream
pipework and the cause of
the abnormal pressure
removed.

It consists of a spring-loaded cut-off valve which is
held open in the open position under normal conditions.
Should the pressure deviate sufﬁciently, the diaphragm
will move and disengage the trigger mechanism, releasing
the latch on the valve, which will close under the force
of the spring.

Slam-shut valves are usually set to operate under con-
ditions of high downstream pressure. They can be used
for low pressures, and combined high and low. Although
they normally protect the supply pressure to premises
using gas, slam-shut valves are sometimes used on pro-
cess plant.

19.8.4 Non-return valves

It is a requirement of the Gas Act 1986, Schedule 5, that
where ‘air at high pressure’ or ‘any gaseous substance

19/300 Gas

not supplied by the supplier’ is used, it is necessary to
install an ‘appliance’ to prevent the admission of that gas
into the supplier’s gas main. This requirement is usually
met by means of a non-return valve installed at the meter
outlet, where it will protect the supplier’s mains. There
are advantages to the user in having the non-return valve
installed close to the point of use so that, in the event of
a gas at higher pressure entering the gas supply, the non-
return valve will check it at an early stage rather than
diffusing throughout the user’s installation pipework. A
non-return valve should meet the requirements of British
Gas Standard for Non-Return Valves (IM/14).

It is important to note that the requirements of this
standard are speciﬁc to gas, and include a low-pressure
differential under forward-ﬂow conditions. It is unlikely
that a non-return valve suitable for compressed air, etc.
will be acceptable for gas.

Reverse-pressure requirements speciﬁed in IM/14 are:

Up to 25 mm:
25–150 mm:
Over 150 mm:

7 bar
2 bar
1 bar

In the particular case of oxygen, valves shall be resistant
to exposure for up to 12 h at all pressures up to 2 bar at
20°C. Requirements for non-return valves for oxygen are
also discussed in the British Gas publication Guidance
Notes on the Use of Oxygen in Industrial Gas Fired Plant
and Working Flame Burners (IM/1).

It is essential for the safe operation of a non-return
valve that it be regularly checked and be shown to be
resistant to reverse pressures. To enable this check to be
carried out, the non-return valve should be installed with
a manual isolation valve at both inlet and outlet.

19.9 Gas speciﬁcation and analysis
Natural gas as distributed in the UK is obtained from vari-
ous sources. These comprise primarily the southern North
Sea basin, northern North Sea ﬁelds (both British and Nor-
wegian), Morecambe Bay from the Irish Sea (used primar-
ily for winter peaks) and gas from world sources imported
in small quantities as liqueﬁed natural gas (LNG). Gas
from the different ﬁelds is of very consistent quality, and
further blending, conditioning, etc. allows a gas of very
consistent quality and speciﬁcation to be distributed.

19.9.1 Caloriﬁc Value

The caloriﬁc value is constantly monitored, and it is a con-
dition of the Gas (Declaration of Caloriﬁc Value) Regula-
tions 1972 that alterations in the declared caloriﬁc value
(CV) are publicly made known. It is customary to quote
the gross (upper) CV rather than the net (lower) CV. The
difference between the two represents the heat contained
in the latent heat of vaporization of the water vapor in
the products of combustion that can only be recovered in
condensing appliances.

The ratio of net/gross CV is about 90 per cent, reﬂecting
the high hydrocarbon/carbon ratio for gas. The range of

declared CV (gross) is 38–39 MJ/m3 with a typical value
of 38.63 MJ/m3. This latter ﬁgure represents a net CV of
34.88 MJ/m3.

19.9.2 Wobbe number

The Wobbe number of gas is deﬁned as ‘The heat release
when a gas is burned at a constant gas supply pressure’.
It is represented by:
Wobbe no. D

Gross CV

Square root of relative density of gas

The relative density (with respect to air) has no units,
so that the units of the Wobbe number are the same as
caloriﬁc value. The value for gas is 49.79 MJ/m3.

The Wobbe number is of interest because it represents
the heat released at a jet. A gas of varying CV but constant
Wobbe number would give a constant heat release rate.

19.9.3 Analysis of natural gas

The analyses of various gases from the North Sea are
shown in Table 19.1. It is seen that the analysis is very
constant, with methane being the dominant constituent at
91–96 per cent.

19.9.4 Properties of natural gas

The main properties of gas and its combustion products
are shown in Table 19.2. For comparison, the properties
of propane and butane are included. It can be seen that
the caloriﬁc values of these three fuels on a mass basis
are very similar.

The properties of natural gas are dominated by those of
methane, notably a low maximum ﬂame speed of 0.33 m/s.
This strongly inﬂuences burner design, which must ensure
that the mixture velocity is sufﬁciently low to prevent
‘blow-off’. ‘Light-back’, on the contrary, is very unlikely
with such a low ﬂame speed.

The range of satisfactory operation for a gas burner,
deﬁned by light-back, blow-off and incomplete combus-
tion is limited. The variation in gas analyses, particularly
higher hydrocarbons and inerts, can inﬂuence the range
of operation. This has led to the deﬁnition of different
groups of natural gas. A practical effect is that burners
designed for the European continent may not be suitable
for the UK without adjustment. This does not apply to
forced-draft burners.

19.9.5 Standard reference conditions

If properties are being accurately quoted it is important
that the reference conditions are deﬁned, as these can vary.
This also has implications for metering. The main refer-
ence conditions are:

1. Metric standard reference conditions

15.0°C, 1913.25 mbar, dry
Symbols: MSC, m3 (st)

Table 19.1 Analysis of natural gas

Composition (vol per cent)
Nitrogen (cid:9)N2(cid:10)
Helium (He)
Carbon dioxide (cid:9)CO2(cid:10)
Methane (cid:9)CH4(cid:10)
Ethane (cid:9)C2H6(cid:10)
Propane (cid:9)C3H8(cid:10)
Butanes (cid:9)C4H10(cid:10)
Pentanes (cid:9)C5H12(cid:10)
Higher hydrocarbons
Composition (wt per cent)
Nitrogen (cid:9)N2(cid:10)
Helium (He)
Carbon dioxide (cid:9)CO2(cid:10)
Methane (cid:9)CH4(cid:10)
Ethane (cid:9)C2H6(cid:10)
Propane (cid:9)C3H8(cid:10)
Butanes (cid:9)C410(cid:10)
Pentanes (cid:9)C5H12(cid:10)
Higher hydrocarbons
Ultimate composition (wt per cent)
Carbon
Hydrogen
Nitrogen
Oxygen

Control of efﬁciency 19/301

Mean

North Sea

Bacton

Easington

Theddlethorpe

St Fergus

2.72
–
0.15
92.21
3.6
0.9
0.25
0.07
0.1

4.38
–
0.38
84.89
6.21
2.28
0.83
0.29
0.74

72.16
23.18
4.38
0.28

1.78
0.05
0.13
93.63
3.25
0.69
0.27
0.09
0.11

2.90
0.003
0.33
87.37
5.69
1.59
0.91
0.38
0.82

73.23
23.62
2.91
0.24

1.56
–
0.54
93.53
3.36
0.70
0.24
0.07
–

2.55
–
1.39
87.28
5.88
1.80
0.81
0.29
–

72.93
23.51
2.55
1.01

2.53
–
0.52
91.43
4.10
0.99
0.33
0.10
–

4.05
–
1.31
83.62
7.03
2.49
1.09
0.41
–

71.98
23.02
4.05
0.95

0.47
–
0.32
95.28
3.71
0.18
0.03
0.01
–

0.79
–
0.84
91.10
6.65
0.47
0.11
0.04
–

74.38
24.21
0.79
0.61

2. Imperial standard conditions

3. Normal temperature and pressure

60.0°F, 30 inHg, saturated with water vapor
Symbols: ISC, standard cubic foot, sft3 (src in old
references)
SI equivalent: 15.56°C, 1913.7405 mbar, saturated
0°C, 760 mmHg (at 0°C and g D 9.80665 m/s2)
Symbols: nm3, N m3, m3 (n), STP, NTP
SI equivalent: 0°C, 1913.25 mbar
Unless otherwise speciﬁed, the gas may be assumed to
be dry.
60°F, 30 in. Hg (at 32°F, g D 32.174 ft/s2) saturated
SI equivalent: 15.56°C, 1915.92 mbar, saturated
Symbols: scf, sft3

4. US gas industry ‘standard cubic foot’

19.10 Control of efﬁciency
19.10.1 Monitoring of combustion
Reference to Figure 19.1 shows how efﬁciency can be
adversely affected by deviation from the optimum air/gas
ratio. By maintaining combustion close to stoichiometric,
efﬁciency will be improved, but the practical limitations
of burners discussed above must be noted.

The quality of combustion can be measured with suit-
able instrumentation, on either a periodic or a continual
basis. If continuous analysis is practiced then there may
be feedback to continuously adjust the air/gas ratio and/or
ratio and/or record the data derived.

Flue gases analyzed
The ﬂue gases analyzed will be one or more of carbon
dioxide, carbon monoxide and oxygen. If carbon diox-
ide alone is measured, it is possible to draw erroneous
conclusions, as the level will peak at stoichiometric and
reduce in both the excess air and air deﬁciency regions. It
is essential to measure another ﬂue gas to obtain a reliable
assessment of burner performance.

Oxygen does not have this disadvantage, being, in the-
ory, zero at stoichiometry and increasing in the excess
air region. Sampling of carbon monoxide additionally is
advocated during initial commissioning, if not always on
a routine basis.

Carbon monoxide is usually sampled as the second
parameter in conjunction with carbon dioxide or oxygen.
In theory, as the optimum is usually to have near-
stoichiometric combustion without ‘CO breakthrough’
it
is the most reliable gas to sample. A problem is
that although small quantities of CO usually indicate
the need for additional air,
they can also be caused
by ﬂame chilling and careful interpretation of results is
needed.

Wet and dry analysis
The relatively high hydrogen content of gas, contained
in the methane,
leads to a water vapor content of
approximately 18 per cent by volume in the ﬂue products.
The analysis of the other constituent gases is affected by
whether or not the water vapor is included.

19/302 Gas

Table 19.2 Properties of gaseous fuels and combustion products

Properties at 1013.25 mbar (cid:9)15°C(cid:10)

Speciﬁc gravity (cid:9)air D 1(cid:10)
Gross caloriﬁc value
MJ m(cid:3)3 (st)
Btu ft(cid:3)3 (ISC) dry
MJ kg(cid:3)1
Btu lb(cid:3)1
Therms ton(cid:3)1
Btu gall(cid:3)1
MJ m(cid:3)3 (st)
Btu ft(cid:3)3 (ISC) dry
MJ kg(cid:3)1
Btu lb(cid:3)1

Net caloriﬁc value

Liquid SG (water D 1) at 60°F
Volume gas/volume liquid (at 0°C)
Wobbe No.

Theoretical air required for combustion

MJ m(cid:3)3 (st)
Btu ft(cid:3)3 (ISC) dry

(v/v)
(w/w)
m3 (st) kg(cid:3)1 of fuel
f3 (st) lb(cid:3)1 of fuel

% CO2
% H2O
% N2

Theoretical stoichiometric dry ﬂue gas CO2%
Volumetric composition of wet theoretical ﬂue gas

Dewpoint of ﬂue gas (cid:9)°C(cid:10)
Theoretical ﬂame temperature (cid:9)°C(cid:10)
Limits of ﬂammability (% by volume to form combustible mixture)
NB: Caloriﬁc Value (cid:9)saturated(cid:10) D 0.9826 ð Caloriﬁc Value (dm).

Mean

North Sea

0.602

38.63
1 036
52.41
22 530

505
–

34.88
935
47.32
20 340

–
–

49.79
1 335

9.76
16.5
13.24
212.0
11.86

9.66
18.63
71.71

59

1 930
5–15

Typical

commercial

propane

Typical

commercial

butane

1.523

93.87
2 500
50.22
21 500

480

110 040

86.43
2 310
46.24
19 800
0.51
274

76.06
2 026

23.76
15.6
12.73
203.92
13.8

11.7
15.4
72.9
55

2 000
2–10

1.941

117.75
3 270
49.41
21 200

477

124 352

108.69
3 030
45.61
19 650
0.575
233

84.52
2 347

29.92
15.3
12.50
200.23
14.1

12.0
14.9
73.1
54

2 000
1.8–9

The ‘dry’ analysis is on the basis of the water being
removed from the sample prior to analysis, and the maxi-
mum theoretical carbon dioxide content is 11.87 per cent.
Most ﬂue analyses are carried out on the dry basis.

The ‘wet’ analysis assumes that the water vapor is
present. The maximum theoretical carbon dioxide content
is 9.66 per cent. The zirconia cell method of measuring
oxygen is on the wet basis.

Instruments used

A wide range of analysis instruments, either of the
portable or permanently installed type, can be used. The
latter will frequently be recording instruments and may
have control capabilities. Various principles are employed
in analysis equipment, including:

1. Wet chemical analysis;
2. Electrolytic cell;
3. Chromatography;
4. Paramagnetism – for oxygen;
5. Non-dispersive infrared absorption;
6. Thermal conductivity.

19.10.2 Control of combustion

In the great majority of installations, ﬂue gas analysis is
carried out for monitoring reasons only. In some larger
installations, primarily boilers, a deviation in the read-
ing of the gas measured is used for control purposes.
The safety aspects of such system must be satisfactory, in
particular that the controller cannot erroneously drive the
burner to ﬁre rich under any circumstances. The controller
should be capable of being set to follow the optimum
curve for excess air with ﬁring load, which recognizes
that more excess air is needed at lower ﬁring rates, as
shown in Figure 19.8.

Much responsibility rests with the commissioning engi-
neer who must have an intimate knowledge of the burner,
the boiler, and the combination of the two. A decision
to use an accurate method of combustion control will,
in general, be based on economics. The fuel saving is
unlikely to be more than about 2 per cent and this must
be balanced against the total costs of operating the control
system. In the case of larger boilers, such an installation
can often be justiﬁed.

)

%

(
 
r
i
a
 
s
s
e
c
x
E

Practical (non-linear)

Theoretical (linear)

Load (%)

Figure 19.8 Variation of excess air with load

Oxygen trim systems

Most oxygen trim systems interpose an additional link
in the air/gas ratio controller. Others use an additional
valve. Most types are based on the zirconia cell installed
in the ﬂue, while others use paramagnetic or electrolytic
cell methods. The zirconia type has the advantage that
there is no time lag in sampling, nor is there a risk of
contamination of the sample.

If the ﬂue is operating under negative pressure, which
is often the case, care should be taken that no ‘tramp’
air is allowed to enter the ﬂue upstream of the sampling
point, as this will give erroneous measurements. The trim
system should be set to follow the practical ﬁring curve
and, in the event of a malfunction, be ‘disabled’ so that
it ceases to have any inﬂuence on the air/gas ratio, which
reverts to the normal load control only.

Carbon monoxide trim systems

There is limited application for CO trim systems which
are widely used on utility and other large water-tube boil-
ers. The principle of operation is for an infrared beam to
traverse the ﬂue from emitter to sensor. The absorption of
the infrared radiation is proportional to the CO content.
For gas-ﬁred shell boilers it is difﬁcult to justify these
trim controllers on an economic basis. Equally important,
the position to control based on CO in such a boiler is
ideally in the reversal chamber and not the ﬂue. However,
the temperature and stratiﬁcation of ﬂue products here
make it impracticable.

Control without trim systems

Most combustion equipment is not controlled by means
of a feedback from ﬂue gas analysis but is preset at the
time of commissioning and preferably checked and reset
at intervals as part of a planned maintenance schedule. It
is difﬁcult to set the burner for optimum efﬁciency at all
ﬁring rates and some compromise is necessary, depending
on the control valves used and the control mode (e.g.
on/off, fully modulating, etc.).

Control of efﬁciency 19/303

In the absence of a trim system with feedback, it is
likely to prove cost-effective to use a simple portable
‘efﬁciency monitor’ on a regular basis, perhaps weekly
for small boilers. The change of reading is as important as
the actual value of the reading. A deviation from what is
known to be a good post-commissioning setting will indi-
cate a drift from ratio and the need for remedial action.

Types of air/gas ratio control
of air/gas ratio device commonly used, including:

There are various types

1. Linked butterﬂy valves. This simple technique is only

suited to high/low controls.

2. Linked square port valve. This system has a more lin-
ear relationship between ﬂow rate and rotation than
butterﬂy valves. There is no backlash, as the air and
gas valves are on a common spindle and ﬁne-tuning is
possible.

3. Linked characterized valves. The relationship between
angular rotation of the valve spindle and open area of
the valve can be adjusted over different portions of the
ﬂow range using a series of screws. In this way, the
air/gas ratio can be characterized to any desired proﬁle
over the whole ﬁring range. These valves are suited to
fully modulating systems and are commonly used on
steam boilers.

4. Balanced pressure-control systems. Various control
systems are based on the balanced pressure principle
in which the air pressure (or a portion of it) is applied
to the diaphragm of a zero governor in the gas supply.
As the air pressure is varied, so is the gas pressure
in proportion, as shown in Figure 19.9. The air/gas
ratio is set by means of an adjustable oriﬁce valve
in the gas supply. The pressure divider system will
maintain air/gas ratio over much of the turndown ratio.
At very low ﬁring rates there is a need for excess air to
maintain satisfactory combustion, and this is achieved
by means of tensioning the spring within the governor
to give an offset (Figure 19.9). The effect of this offset
is considerable at very low rates but insigniﬁcant at
higher ones. The pressure divider principle is exploited
in more complex multi-diaphragm controllers. In these,
the pressures balanced are differential pressures across
oriﬁces, enabling the ratio to be maintained under
conditions of varying back-pressure.

5. Electronic ratio controller. In this type of controller, a
proportion of both gas and air is diverted through a by-
pass in which a thermistor sensor measures the ﬂow.
The air and gas ﬂows can be compared and the ratio
calculated and displayed. A ratio control valve in the
air or gas supply, depending on whether the mode of
operation is gas- or air-led, will automatically restore
a deviation from the pre-set ratio. The electronic con-
troller maintains ratio over a 19 : 1 turndown. The prin-
ciple of operation is based on mass ﬂow, so that it can
be used with preheated air in recuperative systems.

19.10.3 Process controls
The choice of the mode of control of heating plant can
have a considerable effect on the efﬁciency of the process.
The process itself may dictate the controls. For example,

19/304 Gas

Pa = M.Pg + C

)
a

P

(
 
e
r
u
s
s
e
r
p
 
r
i

A

C

p ri n
v
o

S

g

M

si o

n   o f  z
o r  a lt e r s   o ff s
g  t e
e r n

n

e r o
e t  C

Ratio setting valve
alters gradient M

Gas pressure (Pg)

Figure 19.9 Relationship between air and gas pressures for cross-
loaded governor system

a simple high/low temperature controller is unlikely to
satisfy a process tolerance requirement of within a few
degrees Centigrade. Similarly, a more complex process
controller cannot be coupled with a burner only capable
of ﬁring high/low.

Types of process control
This may be on/off in certain appli-
High/low control
cations. Control is crude, with the burner moving to high
ﬁre at a point somewhere below the nominal set point
and returning to low ﬁre somewhere above it. The result
is a sine wave control pattern with a band rather than a
point of control. This is, however, still an adequate control
mode for many purposes.

Most burners are efﬁcient at high ﬁre but less so at
intermediate rates and particularly at low ﬁre. An on/off
burner is therefore apparently efﬁcient from an energy-
utilization viewpoint. However, when the burner is called
on to ﬁre, in the case of forced-draft burners a purge is
usually necessary which will both cool down the process
and cause a delay in response, and in the case of natural
draft there will be heat losses due to ventilation in the
‘off’ period.

In general, a fully modulating burner will be thermally
more efﬁcient, particularly if it maintains air/gas ratio
accurately at intermediate rates. For natural-draft burners
this may not be the case, as, in general, the air is not
modulated, leading to progressively more excess air at
lower rates.

This avoids the cycling effect
Proportional-only control
of high/low control by setting the burner rate in proportion
to the deviation from the set point (i.e. the burner rate
decreases as the set point is approached). In theory, this
meets requirements and avoids overshoot. However, the
set point is approached but not reached, leaving an offset.
Using a high gain in the control can minimize this, but
this will lead to excessive cycling or ‘hunting’.

This improves on the proportional-only
Integral mode
control by repeating the proportional action within a unit
time while a deviation from set point exists. The regulat-
ing unit is only allowed to be at rest when set point and

measured point are coincident. Integral action will move
the regulating unit until the desired and measured values
are coincident, even if this means moving the regulating
unit to the fully open or closed position.

This improves on the proportional-
Derivative mode
only control by responding solely to the rate of change
of the deviation but not in any way to the actual value
of the deviation. Derivative action is always used with
proportional control.

Pro-
Proportional plus integral plus derivative action
portional action provides a controller output proportional
to the error signal. Integral action supplies a controller
output which changes in the direction to reduce a con-
stant error. Derivative action provides a controller output
determined by the direction and rate of change of the devi-
ation. When all these are combined into one controller
(three-term or PID), there is an automatic control facility
to correct any process changes.

Controls for space heating in buildings

The selection of controls for space heating a building
shows how the overall efﬁciency of the process can be
improved. Whether or not it is cost effective to do this
must be examined in detail. At its most basic, such a sys-
tem might include one or more LPHW boilers, a single
thermostat in the heated space controlling the circulating
pump on/off, and domestic hot water from a caloriﬁer.

Boiler selection Although not directly concerned with
controls, the sizing of boilers is very important. There is
a tendency for oversizing with consequent unnecessary
cycling. Controls should ensure that if more than one
boiler is installed then one boiler should act as ‘lead’.
Consideration should be given to a higher-efﬁciency
boiler, possibly a condensing type.

In most cases, splitting the heating and domestic hot
water loads will be advantageous. This avoids the inefﬁ-
cient use of a large boiler solely to heat a caloriﬁer in the
summer months.

The selection of controls will be
Controls selection
inﬂuenced to an extent by the characteristics of the build-
ing, particularly the insulation material and the number
and disposition of windows. Control options to be con-
sidered include:

1. Zone control valves. In most buildings, different areas
will be subject to varying levels of solar gain, occu-
pancy, etc. Dividing the building into different zones
each with its own thermostat and control valve will be
beneﬁcial.

2. Compensating controller. The heat requirements for a
building vary according to the outside conditions, par-
ticularly the outside air temperature. The compensating
controller measures the outside air temperature and,
together with other parameters, including the thermal
response of the building, adjusts the circulating water
temperature to meet the demand.

3. Three-port mixing valves. The valve takes hot water
from the boiler and mixes it with the cooler return
water to provide a circulation of mixed water of sufﬁ-
ciently high temperature to meet the heating demand.
The system operates with a constant ﬂow rate and vari-
able temperature. In the case of condensing boilers, the
return water should pass through the condensing heat
exchange of the boiler prior to ﬂowing to the mixing
valve. An alternative for condensing boilers that does
not use a mixing valve is to set the boiler ﬂow temper-
ature, by means of an outside air temperature sensor
and compensating control box, in inverse proportion
to the outside air temperature. Both these alternatives
cause the boiler to operate in its efﬁcient condensing
mode for the maximum period.

4. Optimum start controller. Any building will heat up
more quickly on a warm day: to start the heating sys-
tem unnecessarily early is uneconomic. The optimum
start controller monitors the outside and inside temper-
atures and computes the start time that will just bring
the temperature up to design by the start of occupancy.
The controller is only used during the preheat period
during which other modulating controls are not oper-
ative. Some versions are available with a self-learning
capability, which corrects the initial program until it
matches the building responses, and an optimum off
control, which takes account of the allowable drop in
space temperature at the end of occupancy.

5. Building management systems. These can monitor and
control most of the building services by means of sen-
sors in the various building service plants for collecting
data and carrying out control functions.

19.11 Automation
19.11.1 Requirements for automatic burners
Process or heating plant may have controls ranging from
manual operation with some processes supervised by inter-
locks to semi-automatic and fully automatic operation.
Deciding factors will include temperature of operation,
frequency of ignition, degree of operator supervision, and
rating of the plant. For example, boiler plant, both steam
and water, will invariably have automatic control whereas
tunnel kilns operated continuously at high temperature are
unlikely to require it.

The deﬁnition of an automatic burner is: ‘A burner
where, when starting from the completely shut-down con-
dition, the start-gas ﬂame is established and the main gas
safety shut-off valves are activated without manual inter-
vention.’ This means that a burner is only automatic if it
is ignited by means of a remote interlock (e.g. thermostat,
timeswitch, etc.) closing. A burner is not automatic if it
has a pilot burner that remains ignited in the ‘off’ con-
dition. Nor is a burner strictly automatic if a start button
needs to be pushed, even though the controls may comply
with all requirements for automatic burners.

19.11.2 Automatic burner sequence
The sequence of operation for automatic burners is based
on that which a knowledgeable, conscientious and alert

Automation 19/305

operator would perform. This involves checks at stages
to ensure that no hazard has developed. This sequence
can be summarized as:

1. Check that the ﬂame detector (ultraviolet or ﬂame
rectiﬁcation) is not giving a spurious signal. This is
continuous throughout the purge period.

2. Check that the safety shut-off valves are in the closed

position (where applicable).

3. Check that the airﬂow detector is not giving a false

indication.

4. Start the combustion air fan.
5. Prove the combustion air ﬂow (at high rate, if variable).
6. Purge for a predetermined period (sufﬁcient to give
ﬁve volume changes of the combustion chamber and
associated ﬂue ways).

7. Modulate the combustion airﬂow to the low ﬁre rate

(where applicable).

8. Prove the burner throughput control valves to be in

the low ﬁre position (where applicable).

9. Energize the ignition source.
10. Energize the start gas safety shut-off valve(s).
11. De-energize the ignition source.
12. Check that the ﬂame detector is registering the pres-

ence of a ﬂame.

13. Energize the main gas safety shut-off valves.
14. In the case of an interrupted pilot, de-energize the

safety shut-off valves.

15. Check that the ﬂame detector is registering the pres-
ence of a ﬂame. This is continuous until the burner
is shut down.

16. Release the burner controls to modulation so that
the burner can be driven to high ﬁre, according to
demand.

In the event of any of the checks not being satisfactory

the burner is shut down or locked out, as appropriate.

19.11.3 Burner standards and codes of practice
Codes of Practice

Gas burners should comply with the relevant Codes of
Practice, depending on whether the plant is low or high
temperature. Low-temperature plant
is deﬁned as that
having a normal working temperature insufﬁcient to ignite
the fuel, that is, below 750°C at the working temperature
walls. The British Gas Codes of Practice are:

Code of Practice for the Use of Gas in High Temperature
Plant (IM/12)
Code of Practice for the Use of Gas in Low Temperature
Plant (IM/18)

Automatic Burner Standards

British Standards exist for automatic burners, i.e. those
requiring no manual intervention to be ignited. The Stan-
dard is:

BS 5885, Automatic gas burners
Part 1. Speciﬁcation for burners with input rating 60 kW
and above (1988)

19/306 Gas

Part 1. Speciﬁcation for packaged burners with input
rating 7.5 kW up to but excluding 60 kW (1987)
Part 2 deals only with packaged burners while Part 1
covers all types.

The number and quality of the safety shut-off valves
required is speciﬁed in the relevant Standards and Codes
of Practice. These are usually electrically operated valves
conforming to class 1 or class 2 as deﬁned in BS 5963,
Speciﬁcation for electrically-operated automatic gas shut-
off valves (1981). This speciﬁes forward pressures and
reverse pressures that the valve must withstand in the
closed position together with closing times.

For start gas supplies two safety shut-off valves are
needed on all but the smallest burners. For automatic
burners the main gas safety shut-off valve requirements
are:
From 60 kW up to 600 kW: One class 1 and one

class 2

check

system

Above 600 kW up to 1 MW: Two class 1
Above 1 MW up to 3 MW:

Two class 1 with a system

Above 3 MW:

Two class 1 with proving

Closed-position indicators on the valves usually satisfy
a ‘system check’. These show that the valves are nomi-
nally in the closed position but do not actually prove that
there is no leakage. A ‘proving system’ can be met by var-
ious systems which prove the soundness of the upstream
and downstream safety shut-off valves by sequential pres-
surization, evacuation, mechanical over-travel with limit
switches and a normally open vent valve, or other means.
Valves other than electrically operated (e.g. pneumat-
ically operated ball valves) are equally acceptable if
the pressure and closing time requirements of BS 5963
are met.

19.11.4 Standards to be applied
Automatic or semi-automatic

The amount of process plant that can be deﬁned accurately
as automatic is relatively small, and manual intervention
is often involved at some stage. The relevant design cri-
teria are therefore often IM/12 or IM/18. In practice, fully
automatic burner controllers tested and certiﬁed by British
Gas are available that comply with the requirements of
BS 5885. Although these have features which may not be
applicable to non-automatic plant, it may be more appro-
priate to use such a controller, particularly as its safety is
well proven. It may also be less expensive than buying and
installing separate timers, relays, etc. For some processes
(for example, those that do not need and cannot tolerate
a long purge) such controllers may not be appropriate.

BS 5978, Safety and performance of gas-ﬁred hot water
boilers (60 kW to 2 MW input) (1983)
BS 5990, Speciﬁcation for direct gas ﬁred forced con-
vection air heaters for space heating (60 kW to 2 MW
input) (1981)
BS 5991, Speciﬁcation for indirect gas ﬁred forced con-
vection air heaters for space heating (60 kW to 2 MW
input) (1983)

19.12 Fire and explosion hazards
19.12.1 Limits of ﬂammability

Gas will form a ﬂammable and explosive mixture with
air or oxygen and the band within which this will happen
will vary with pressure and temperature. At atmospheric
pressure and 15°C the properties are:

Lower explosive

Upper explosive

limit

limit

(LEL) (% gas)

(HEL) (% gas)

In air
In oxygen

5
5

15
61

In the combustion chamber, it is essential to purge down
to below the LEL before initiating the ignition source.
The usual criterion is 25 per cent LEL.

Outside the combustion chamber, there should be no
gas under any circumstances. Such a presence will indi-
cate an uncontrolled leakage into the building. A gas level
of 20 per cent LEL is normally sufﬁcient grounds for
evacuating the building.

The human nose is often considered the best gas sensor,
as the odor contained in the gas permits detection at levels
as low as 190 ppm or 0.01 per cent in air. Gas detectors
are, however, sometimes used to give additional warnings
of any leaks. The following points should be borne in
mind when considering such an application:

1. Location is of the greatest importance. It is not known
from where a gas leak will emanate and such a leak
will disperse rapidly. In general, a high-level location
should be chosen, as gas is lighter than air. More than
one detector will usually be advisable.

2. Detectors should comply with BS 6020, Instruments
for the detection of combustible gas, speciﬁcally Parts
4 and 5.

3. Detectors may respond to other gases and vapors giv-

ing a false reading.

4. Detectors will require frequent maintenance and cali-

bration to perform accurately.

5. The use of gas detectors should not be regarded as a

substitute for proper ventilation.

Appliance Standards

19.12.2 Flame speed and ﬂame traps

In most cases, Codes of Practice or British Standards
should be applied as appropriate. A few industrial and
commercial gas appliances have relevant British Stan-
dards and these should take precedence over codes that
are more general and standards. These include:

The ﬂame speed of gas in air is 0.338 m/s. This is lower
than most common ﬂammable gases and is an indication
of the low propensity for light-back of natural gas.

In certain applications a ﬂame trap may be required, and
further guidance is given in HSE publication HS(G)11,

Flame Arrestors and Explosion Reliefs. The ﬂame trap
is constructed of strips of corrugated and ﬂat steel rib-
bon wound in a spiral. It breaks up a ﬂame in the very
small passages between the corrugations where the ﬂame
is quenched and extinguished.

A ﬂame trap is employed where premixed air and gas
is used in combustion equipment and prevents the ﬂame
passing upstream into the pipe system. Flame traps should
be situated as near as possible to the gas burner. This is
so that the ﬂame does not have a long pipe run in which it
might accelerate to such a speed as to form a detonation
wave and make the trap useless.

Thermocouple elements can be incorporated into the
ﬂame trap so that a ﬂame that has lit back to the ﬂame
trap element and continued to burn there without being
quenched can be detected. This sensor can be used to close
an upstream safety shut-off valve. Flame traps will be the
cause of a signiﬁcant pressure drop for which allowances
must be made in low-pressure systems.

Typical applications for ﬂame traps include:

1. The outlet pipework from premix machines, but not
fan-type mixers as they may adversely affect the oper-
ation of such machines;

2. Vents from pressure-relief systems and governor vents;
3. Purge outlet pipes.

19.12.3 Fire valves

Unlike oil burners, there is no requirement to install a
ﬁre valve. With oil burners, this is usually met by having
a fusible link sited over the burner and connected in a
tensioned wire, which holds open a weighted valve in the
oil supply so that the valve closes if the link melts.

The use of automatically closing valves operated from
gas-, ﬁre- or smoke-detection systems is not normally
required for gas installations. The reasons for this are:

1. There are very few recorded instances of ﬁre caused

by gas in installations such as boiler houses;

2. A leak in the oil supply will cause oil to collect on
the ﬂoor fuelling a ﬁre in a predictable location, most
probably at the burner itself. With gas, a leak is possi-
ble at any joint, but such a leak will rapidly disperse.
A predictable location is not possible, and a ﬁre is not
likely.

3. Gas can feed a ﬁre caused by other sources. The
integrity of pipework should withstand an external ﬁre
for sufﬁcient time for an external emergency control
valve to be operated.

4. Gas does not have the lubricant qualities of fuel oil.
Consequently, whereas a drop-weight valve in the oil
supply can be expected to close when called upon,
this is not the case with a relatively large-bore gas ball
valve or plug valve used for gas.

However, if it is desired to protect a self-contained area
such as a boiler house against ﬁre the best method is to use
suitably located fusible links as interlocks in the controls
of the burners, designed to BS 5885. The burner valves
should be to BS 5963 and mounted in a non-vulnerable
position.

Maintenance 19/307

If an automatic isolation valve is speciﬁed, the selection
of the valve and its operating system must be carefully
considered, particularly with respect to the design and
methods of restoring the gas supply in those cases where
appliances do not incorporate automatic ﬂame safeguards.
Where possible, valves should be to BS 5963 and systems
in compliance with the British Gas publication Weep By-
Pass Pressure Proving Systems (IM/20).

19.12.4 Explosion reliefs

HSE publication HS(G) 16, Evaporating and Other
Ovens, gives guidance on the use of explosion reliefs in
plant where ﬂammable solvent is present as a potential
source of explosion. Consideration should also be given
to utilizing explosion reliefs in other plant, particularly
low-temperature ones and where recirculation is practiced.
Correctly designed controls will minimize the risk of an
explosion but explosion reliefs will reduce to a minimum
adverse effect from such an incident. Further guidance
on the use of explosion reliefs is given in the HSE
publication HS(G) 11, Flame Arrestors and Explosion
Reliefs.

The main requirements of a relief are:

1. If obstructions exist in the plant the relief should be
located in a plane which allows an unobstructed ﬂow
of gases to the relief vent (e.g. if there are horizontal
shelves the relief should be in a side, not the roof).

2. The relief size should be as large as possible, ide-
ally occupying the whole of one side, and minimum
vent area D 60 ð area of side/Pmax(cid:9)m2) (where Pmax is
the pressure that the plant can withstand without dam-
age – if unknown, assume 140 mbar).

3. The relief should be as light as possible (the weight

per unit area should not exceed 24 kg/m3).

4. The relief should be held in position with the minimum

of force.

5. There must be sufﬁcient space around the plant to
allow gases to vent freely and not impair the effec-
tiveness of the relief.

6. Reliefs must not form dangerous missiles when called

upon to operate.

7. The thermal resistance of the structure should not be

signiﬁcantly altered by the relief.

19.13 Maintenance
19.13.1 Need for maintenance

It is desirable that plant is regularly maintained to ensure
that:

1. Thermal efﬁciency remains at an optimum.
2. Availability and reliability is at a maximum, with no

avoidable unplanned downtime.

3. Safety devices are reliable.

The time intervals for maintenance will obviously vary
widely. In all cases, the work should be part of a clearly
determined schedule.

19/308 Gas

19.13.2 Thermal efﬁciency

Combustion equipment, when ﬁrst commissioned, can be
set to operate at its optimum efﬁciency. With time, how-
ever, there will be a deterioration due to blockage of air
ﬁlters and breather holes, wear in valve linkages, etc. Such
changes may have safety implications if gas-rich ﬁring is
a consequence.

Regular checking of measured parameters and compar-
ison with commissioning data will enable adjustments to
be made to optimize efﬁciency. Replacement of items
subject to wear, ﬁlters, etc. and items subject to ther-
mal distortion such as some burner components will be
necessary.

19.13.3 Reliability

To ensure that plant is not subject to breakdown, it is
important that there are no unnecessary ‘failures to safety’,
that is, that correctly operating safety equipment only
operates because of exceptional circumstances, not avoid-
able faults. Safety shutdown will occur for various rea-
sons, i.e.:

1. No ﬂame or shrinkage of ﬂame during operation;
2. Failure to ignite ﬂame initially;
3. Failure of any interlock, leading to (1) or (2).

Preventative maintenance that can be carried out that
will minimize the chance of nuisance shutdowns includes:

1. Attention to air ﬁlters;
2. Cleaning of all burner ports liable to blockage;
3. Replacement of mechanical and electrical components
known to have a ﬁnite life. For example, the average
service life of an ultraviolet ﬂame detector may be
19,000 h, and much less if used above its recommended
temperature.

After any maintenance work involving replacement or
adjustment of components it is essential that the plant be
re-commissioned in a safe way, including ‘dry runs’ with
the gas turned off to ensure that ﬂame failure devices
operate correctly and pilot turndown tests to ensure that
if the pilot can energize the ﬂame detector then it can also
smoothly ignite the main burner.

19.13.4 Safety
When initially commissioned all safety devices should be
proved to be operating correctly. At intervals, these should
be checked to ensure that no undetected failure has taken
place. Checks that are necessary include:

1. Visual examination of ignition of pilot burner and main

2. All interlocks checked for correct setting and opera-
tion. These will include thermostats, pressurestats, limit
switches, pressure switches, process interlocks, etc.;

3. Condition of ﬂame sensor and its location with relation

to pilot burner and main burner;

4. Soundness of non-return valve with regard to reverse

burner;

ﬂow;

5. Soundness of safety shut-off valves in the closed posi-
tion for both forward and reverse ﬂow. Note that this
should be done with the valve in situ and without dis-
mantling it, by means of a bubble leak detector, etc.
The valve should not be dismantled to check for swarf
on the seat, etc.

After modifying the controls in any way during main-
tenance, it is essential to carry out a re-commissioning of
the plant as outlined in Section 19.13.3 above.

19.13.5 Training of maintenance staff
All staff involved with maintaining gas-ﬁred equipment
should be capable of doing so in a safe and responsible
manner. The term ‘competent’ has not yet been deﬁned
in this context, but personnel should be qualiﬁed by both
training and experience to carry out work on any plant
which they are to maintain.

A code of practice outlining the training program that
should be undergone by persons carrying out work on gas-
ﬁred plant is Approved Code of Practice on Standards of
Training in Safe Gas Installation. The Code offers guid-
ance on the standards of training to produce competence
in gas installation.

19.13.6 Manufacturer’s instructions
For much plant the manufacturers will provide detailed
maintenance schedules which should be followed at all
times. This may necessitate the use of spares and tools
speciﬁc to that appliance. Attention is drawn to Regulation
25(7) of the Gas Safety (Installation and Use) Regulations,
which states that ‘No person shall carry out any work in
relation to a gas appliance which bears an indication that it
conforms to a type approved by any person as complying
with safety standards in such a manner that the appliance
ceases to comply with those standards’.

19.14 Statutory requirements
The most important statutory requirements concerning gas
distribution and utilization are:

Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 Gas Act 1986
Gas Act 1972
Gas Act 1965
Gas Safety (Installation and Use) Regulations 1984 (SI
1984, No. 1358)
Gas Safety Regulations 1972 (SI 1972, No. 1178)
The Building Regulations 1985
Gas Safety (Rights of Entry) Regulations 1983 (SI 1983,
No. 1575)
Gas Quality Regulations 1983 (SI 1983, No. 363)
Gas (Meters) Regulations 1983 (SI 1983, No. 684)
Gas (Declaration of Caloriﬁc Value) Regulations 1972
(SI 1972, No. 1878)
Oil and Gas (Enterprise) Act 1982
Control of Pollution Act 1974
Health and Safety (Emissions into the Atmosphere)
Regulations 1983 (SI 943 of 1983)
Consumer Protection Act 1987
Reporting of Injuries, Diseases and Dangerous Occur-
rences Regulations 1985 (SI 2023 of 1985)

19.15 Testing
19.15.1 Soundness testing
It is essential that gas is not admitted to an installation
pipe which is newly installed or has had work carried
out on it unless the pipe is proved to be sound. This is a
requirement of the Gas Safety (Installation and Use) Reg-
ulations, speciﬁcally Regulation 21. A suitable procedure
is set out in the British Gas publication Soundness Testing
Procedures for Industrial and Commercial Gas Installa-
tions (IM/5). This recognizes that there is a difference
between new installations, which must be sound within
practical limitations of measurement, and existing instal-
lations, which may have inherent small leakages at, for
example, valve glands. It is important that any paint which
may provide temporary seals to leaks is applied after the
testing procedure.

An allowance has to be made for temperature, as an
increase in temperature will cause a rise in pressure of an
enclosed volume of pipework. In practice, this will mean
avoiding the effects of direct sunlight and allowing an
adequate time for stabilization.

Soundness testing procedure
For both new and existing installation the soundness test-
ing procedure would normally consist of:

1. Estimation of the system volume;
2. Establishment of the test procedure;
3. Selection of a pressure gauge. The sensitivity of the
pressure gauge will determine the minimum leak rate
detectable;

4. Determination of the permitted leak;
5. Determination of test period;
6. Carrying out the test.

Testing 19/309

3. Existing installations may not meet the requirements
laid down for new installations because of minor leaks
that have developed. It is necessary to relate such leak
rates to the pipe environment.

4. Permitted leak rates are determined by installation

location:
(a) Potentially hazardous areas: no leakage is permit-

(b) Occupied

areas:

ted; all joints in the area must be tested.
leakage

is
0.75 dm3/h per cubic meter of space. But in no case
shall the permitted leak rate be taken as greater
than 30 dm3/h.

permitted

rate

(c) Large open work areas and exposed pipes outside:
leak rates in excess of those in (b) may be accept-
able from the safety point of view.

(d) Buried pipes: The measured leak rate must be
assessed in the light of ground conditions. In par-
ticular, special consideration shall be given to the
proximity of cellars, ducts, cable runs, sewers, etc.

19.15.2 Purging procedures

After testing for soundness it will be necessary to safely
introduce gas into the pipework displacing the air or inert
gas that is in it. Similarly, if pipework is decommissioned
for any reason fuel gas must be displaced by air or inert
gas. This is a requirement of the Gas Safety (Installa-
tion and Use) Regulations, Regulation 21. Guidance on
recommended procedures is given in the British Gas pub-
lication Purging Procedures for Non-Domestic Gas Instal-
lations (IM/2).

Purging can be deﬁned as:

1. The displacement of air or inert gas by fuel gas;
2. The displacement of fuel gas by air or inert gas;
3. The displacement of one fuel gas by another fuel gas.

New installations and new extensions

Important requirements for purging include:

1. There should be no perceptible drop in pressure as
shown by the test gauge, although a small leakage rate
is deﬁned which allows for testing technique limita-
tions.

2. Air or inert gas should be used and not fuel gas.
3. The test pressure should be 50 mbar or 1.5 times the
working pressure or the maximum pressure likely to
occur under fault conditions, whichever is the greater.
It is assumed that the pipework has been designed and
installed to withstand the test pressure to which it is to
be subjected.

4. Decide on the permitted leak rate. This is taken to be

0.0014 dm3/h.

5. Calculate the test period. On large installations it may

be necessary to section the system.

1. A full knowledge of the pipework layout;
2. Adequate provision of vent points and their termination

in a safe location;

3. Preferably a written procedure, appropriate to the insta-

llation, should be prepared and followed;

4. Ignition sources should be prohibited from within 3 m

of vents and test points.

Purge volumes

For pipework the purge volume may be taken as 1.5 times
the pipework volume. For diaphragm meters the purge
volume may be taken as 5 revolutions of the meter. For
other meters the purge volume may be taken as 1.5 times
the volume of a length of pipe equal to a ﬂange-to-ﬂange
dimension of the meter.

Existing installations

Purging methods

1. Existing installations may be tested with fuel gas or
inert gas. Air may also be used subject to correct purg-
ing procedures.

2. The test pressure is as with new installations.

Purging may be by either the direct or slug method, and
may involve the use of an intermediate inert gas purge.
At all stages, the vent point is sampled and the purge is
deemed satisfactory when certain criteria are met.

19/310 Gas

This refers to the displacement of an
Direct purge
air/gas mixture with fuel gas. The purge is complete with:

Oxygen less than 4 per cent
Combustibles levels greater than 90 per cent

This refers to the displacement of fuel gas
Inert purging
or air with inert gas (complete displacement) or the forma-
tion of a barrier of inert gas (less than 4 per cent oxygen)
between fuel gas and air during purging (slug purging):

Gas to inert, purge complete with: combustibles levels
less than 7 per cent.
Inert to air, purge complete with: oxygen level greater
than 16 per cent.
Air to inert, purge complete with: oxygen level less than
4 per cent.
Inert to gas, purge complete with: combustible levels
greater than 90 per cent.

Slug purging is appropriate only for long
Slug purging
pipe runs. It should not be used to purge installations with
branches unless each one can be (and is) valved off and
purged separately.

Air purging
gas/air mixture with air. The purge is complete with:

This refers to the displacement of gas or

Oxygen level greater than 20.5 per cent
Combustibles levels less than 40 per cent LEL.

The purge may be carried
Fuel gas to fuel gas purging
out by burning the gas under supervision on an appliance
or appliances. If the two fuel gases have different burning
characteristics and Wobbe numbers, correct burner selec-
tion is important.

isolated from the combustion space until the live run
commences.

3. Operation period. Final adjustments are made and
checks carried out to ensure satisfactory operation of
the plant, including acceptance trials.

4. Completion period. Operating staff are instructed. A
report including details of operating levels is prepared
and the user takes direct control of the plant.

19.5.4 In-situ testing

Regular in-situ testing of various parameters can be an aid
to maintaining plant in an optimum condition regarding
both efﬁciency and safety. Commissioning data, which
should be on record, must be compared with measure-
ments made on a regular basis for such parameters as gas
and air pressures, pressure switch settings, limit switch
settings, timer settings, ﬂue gas analyses, etc. Adjustments
should be made as necessary.

The period between such tests will depend on the main-
tenance schedule for the plant, which should also include
the in-situ soundness testing of non-return valves and
safety shut-off valves by bubble leak detectors, etc.

19.16 The gas grid system and
distribution networks
19.16.1 Storage of gas

The rate of use of gas varies considerably both on a sea-
sonal and on a diurnal basis. The gas supplier must ensure
that the supply meets the demand under all foreseeable
conditions. To an extent, this is achieved by the rates at
which gas is taken into the NTS, which is determined
by contracts specifying daily consumption throughout the
year. Additional ﬂuctuations must be taken up by storage.

19.15.3 Commissioning

Methods of storage

After soundness testing and purging, a competent person
must commission the item of plant. It is a requirement of
the Gas Safety (Installation and Use) Regulations, Regu-
lation 33, that an appliance is fully commissioned at the
time that gas is made available to it or that it is isolated
in such a manner that it cannot be used.

Commissioning sequence

Commissioning procedures will be speciﬁc to particular
plant, but the basic procedure is general to all. There are
four consecutive stages:

1. Inspection period. All relevant documents, the instal-
lation and its components are visually and physically
examined, with all energy sources isolated. The com-
missioning program is ﬁnalized.

2. Activation period. This is in two parts, the dry run and
the live run, the change between the two being when
fuel is made available to the combustion space. The
activation period commences with all energy sources
isolated from the plant. These are gradually made
available as the dry run progresses. Fuel must be

These are the conventional cylin-
Low-pressure holders
drical multi-stage gas holders. They operate at low pres-
sure and are usually water-sealed. The storage capacity is
low for the large physical size and fewer of these hold-
ers are used now as their storage capacity can be met by
other means.

A relatively small number of
High-pressure holders
high-pressure holders are in use. These ‘bullets’ operate at
pressures of up to 30 bar and consequently have a higher
storage capacity for their size.

LNG is stored at certain locations
Liqueﬁed natural gas
as a means of ‘peak-shaving’. Advantages are that the
liquid gas occupies a volume equal to 600 volumes of
gas under standard conditions. The main disadvantage is
that it is necessary to lower the temperature to (cid:3)162°C
to liquefy the gas. It is also necessary to maintain the gas
at this low temperature, usually in insulated aluminum
vessels.

Salt cavities Where the geological formation is favor-
able, it is possible to leach out salt to create underground

Installations

s exporting and BG reception terminal

Compressor station
LNG storage with liquefaction plant
Underground storage (salt cavity)
,
Producer
Pipelines−national transmission system
Mainland
Sub-marine
Gas producting fields
Contracted

The gas grid system and distribution networks 19/311

MAGNUS

THISTLE

WESTERN
LEG
FIELDS

MURCHISON

STATF JORD
BRENT

NORTH ALWYN

COIN

NORTH-EAST FRIGG

FRIGG

EAST FRIGG

Fraserburgh

St Forgus

SCOTLAND

Aberdeen

Sunden

Glasgow

Edinburgh

PIPER

TARTAN

FULMAR

SOUTH MORECAMBE

Carlisle

Barrow

Heyshan

NORTH
EASTERN
Hull

Leeds

NORTH
WESTERN
Liver pool

Manchester EAST

Wrexham

WEST

MIDLANDS

MIDLANDS

Lincoln

Derby

Leicester

Birmingham

Newcastle

FORBES

NORTHERN

GORDON

Middlesbrough

ESMOND

RAVENSPURM
SOUTH

CLEETON

ROUGH

WEST SOLE

ALDREY

Easington
VALLANT NORTH
VALLANT SOUTH

VULOAN

Theddlethorpe
HEWETI

VIKING

VANGUARD
VICTOR

INDEFATIGABLE

SEAN NORTH
SEAN SOUTH

THAMES

Norwich

Bacton

LEMAN

Great Yarmouth

WALES/CYMRU

EASTERN

Swansea
Cardiff

Bristol

Oxford

NORTH THAMES
London

Canvey

SOUTH

SOUTHERN

EASTERN

S o u t h a m p t o n

Brighton

SOUTH

WESTERN

Exeter

Plymouth

Figure 19.10 Gas supply and transmission

19/312 Gas

impermeable cavities in which gas can be stored at high
pressure. These can be likened to large underground high-
pressure holders.

The Rough gas ﬁeld is a largely depleted
Rough storage
ﬁeld in the southern North Sea basin, which is now used
as a storage facility. Gas from other ﬁelds is re-injected
into the Rough ﬁeld during the summer period of low
demand and drawn on during periods of peak demand.

The Morecambe Bay ﬁeld is a recently
Morecambe Bay
developed gas ﬁeld in the Irish Sea connected to the NTS
by means of a gas pipeline to Barrow terminal. While it
is possible to operate this ﬁeld throughout the year, it is
currently being drawn on only in the winter months as a
form of peak-shaving.

Interruptibles As outlined in Section 19.1.4, some users
are offered interruptible contracts. A condition of these is
that the user must provide a standby fuel and that, when
requested, he or she must switch to this fuel. Under peak
demand conditions, the large quantity of gas that would
be burnt (typically, for steam raising) is available for use
by ﬁrm contract and tariff users.

The NTS,

together with the regional
Line packing
transmission systems, constitute a considerable length
of pipework operating at pressures of up to 70 bar.
Design and minimum pressures set maximum pressures by
operational constraints. Between these two, the pressure
can be permitted to ﬂuctuate.

When it

is considered that

the volume of 1 km of
900 mm pipe is 636 dm3, and if the pressure is allowed
to fall from 42 bar to 19 bar, the equivalent volume of
gas at standard conditions is 14,628 dm3, then this should
be compared to the capacity of a low-pressure gas holder
of typically 28,320 dm3 (1 million ft3). Two kilometers of
pipeline operated under these conditions is therefore the
equivalent of one gas holder.

Line packing is generally practiced by building up the
pressure during the night and reducing it during the day.

19.16.2 Distribution networks

The NTS is used for the conveyance of gas from the
terminals to regions sited in different parts of the country.
Regional transmission systems are used to convey gas
across each region. For local conveyance of gas to the
ﬁnal points of use, the distribution system is used.

at high pressures

The primary difference between transmission and
distribution systems is one of pressure. Transmission
(>7 bar) while
systems operate
distribution systems operate at
low (<75 mbar) and
medium (75 mbar to7 bar) pressures. The functions are
also different
the transmission system is used
to convey gas over distances and store it, while the
distribution system is used to convey gas to the user over
a local network. The pipe that conveys gas from the main
of the distribution system to the meter control valve of
the user is the service.

in that

Operating pressures

Distribution systems can be operated at pressures up to
7 bar but it is practice to operate at as low a pressure as
is consistent with supplying users with the agreed supply
pressure, which is 21 mbar at the meter inlet in many
cases. Pressure reduction takes place at take-offs from
the transmission system, at ‘district’ governor installations
serving a large number of users within a geographical area
and, for many larger users, at the users’ premises.

Pressure-regulating installations will incorporate reg-
ulators, pressure-relief valves, slam-shut valves, etc. as
necessary and as outlined above. They should comply
with the requirements of the Institution of Gas Engi-
neers recommendations:

TD/9: Offtakes and Pressure-Regulating Installations

for Inlet Pressures between 7 and 190 bar

TD/19: Pressure-Regulating Installations for Inlet Pres-

sures between 75 mbar and 7 bar

Pipework design criteria

1. Transmission pipelines operating at high pressures are
always constructed of welded steel. Recommendations
are contained in the Institution of Gas Engineers pub-
lication TD/1, Steel Pipelines for High Pressure Gas
Transmission.

2. Distribution mains may be constructed of steel, ductile
iron, polyethylene depending on operating pressure,
etc. Recommendations are contained in the Institu-
tion of Gas Engineers publication TD/3, Distribution
Mains.

3. Services may be constructed of steel, ductile iron or
polyethylene depending on operating pressure, etc.
Recommendations are given in the Institution of Gas
Engineers publication TD/4, Gas Services.

Requirements for gas services are also covered by the Gas
Safety Regulations 1972, Part 2.

19.17 Emergency procedures
Emergency procedures will be called upon following any
abnormal occurrence such as an explosion, ﬁre, release of
unburned gas or production and release of toxic products
of combustion. It is essential to carry out an emergency
shutdown procedure in a safe way that prevents the hazard
continuing.

19.17.1 Emergency control valve

It is a requirement of the Gas Safety (Installation and
Use) Regulations that an emergency control valve is pro-
vided to which there is adequate access (Regulation 8).
In addition, it is stipulated (Regulation 23) that for large
users such a valve must be employed for every separate
self-contained unit where the gas service is of 50 mm or
more and that a line diagram be provided to show their
location. By means of such emergency control valves, it
is possible to safely isolate the gas supply to any building
in the event of an emergency.

In addition to the use of such manual valves, automati-
cally operated valves may be considered as an additional
safeguard in certain installations. These can be connected
to (among other interlocks) panic buttons sited within the
building, which they are protecting. This is a recommended
requirement for buildings containing plant of over 2 MW
total heat input and supplied with gas at above 1 bar.

19.17.2 Normal shutdown procedures

All gas-ﬁred plant should be provided with operating
instructions for shutting down as well as starting up.
Such instructions will ensure that the correct sequence of
operations is carried out to both avoid a hazard during the
shutdown and to leave the plant in a safe condition. These
procedures should also contain instructions for actions to
be carried out in emergencies. Such actions may differ
from the normal shutdown.

19.17.3 Instruction and training

It is essential that relevant staff receive adequate training
for the start-up and shutdown of plant for which they are
responsible. This will include emergency procedures.

19.18 Pipework
19.18.1 Design criteria

Gas pipework in a user’s premises serves the function of
transporting the gas from the meter to the point of use in a
safe way and without incurring an avoidable pressure loss.
For low-pressure installations, the permitted pressure loss
is only 1 mbar from the meter to the plant manual isolat-
ing valve at maximum ﬂow rate. The pipework must be
sized adequately to allow for this. Boosters are sometimes
used to overcome pressure losses, but the use of a booster
should never be considered a satisfactory substitute for
correct design of pipe sizes. Where gas is available at
higher pressures it may be permissible to tolerate pressure
losses of more than 1 mbar.

Guidance on pipework in users’ premises is given
in the British Gas publication Guidance Notes on the
Installation of Gas Pipework, Boosters and Compressors
(IM/16). Certain Institution
in Customers’ Premises
of Gas Engineers publications are also of relevance,
particularly TD/3, Distribution Mains and TD/4, Gas
Services.

19.18.2 Materials

Materials used for gas pipework will depend on applica-
tion, location, environment and operating pressure. Gen-
eral guidelines are as below.

Polyethylene

Pipework 19/313

Copper

Copper may be used above ground and for buried
pipework at pressures up to 75 mbar and outside diameters
of 67 mm. If utilized for buried pipework it must be
factory sheathed and should not be attached to buried steel
pipe and ﬁttings.

Ductile iron

This may be used for buried pipework, in ducts and above
ground at pressures up to 2 bar. Not to be used for plant
pipework. Ductile iron pipe and ﬁttings shall be to BS
4772, Speciﬁcations for ductile iron pipes and ﬁttings.

Steel

Steel may be used in all applications. The working pres-
sure is related to the speciﬁcation and grade used. How-
ever, pipe to BS 1387 heavy (up to 150 mm) and to BS
3601 (150 mm and above) is suitable for applications up
to 7 bar.

19.18.3 Jointing

The method of jointing will depend on the material, the
pipe size, the operating pressure and the location. General
guidelines are given below.

Spigot and socket connections

This is to be used for ductile iron in all applications and
must be of a type suitable for rubber jointing rings to
BS 2494. Where the working pressure is over 75 mbar,
the connections shall be anchored by means of purpose-
designed anchor blocks or self-anchoring joints.

Fusion welding

This method to be used for polyethylene pipes only by
companies and persons specializing in this ﬁeld.

Capillary joints

These can be used for copper in all applications and must
be to BS 864, Part 2, or BS 2051, Part 1. In ducts, all such
joints must be accessible within the duct or chase. Not to
be used within vertical ducts in high-rise buildings.

Compression joints

These can be used for copper in all applications where the
joints are accessible and are not therefore recommended
for underground use. In ducts, all such joints must be
accessible within the duct or chase. Not to be used within
vertical ducts in high-rise buildings.

For polyethylene pipe, compression couplings may be
used provided they comply with British Gas Speciﬁca-
tion PS/PL3.

This is to be used only for buried pipework or in ducts, as
it is adversely affected by ultraviolet radiation and its use
inside buildings is prohibited by the Gas Safety (Installa-
tion and Use) Regulations. For pressures up to 4 bar.

Screwed and welded jointing for steel pipework

The type of jointing may be restricted by the grade of
pipe used. For example, some grades of steel pipe are

19/314 Gas

not suitable for the application of screwed threads to BS
21 or ISO R7. The use of welded pipework is based on
a combination of pipe size and pressure. Up to 25 mm
screwed connections are permitted at all pressures up to
5 bar, whereas above 190 mm pipe must be welded at all
pressures.

Other points to consider include:

1. Where pipework is welded, the number of ﬂanged
joints should be kept to a minimum and such ﬂanges
shall be welded to the pipe.

2. Where pipework is welded,

the minimum standard
shall be: up to 2 bar: BS 2971 or BS 2640; above
2 bar up to 5 bar: BS 2971 with 10 per cent of welds
subjected to non-destructive testing, or BS 2640 with
inspection and 10 per cent of welds subjected to non-
destructive testing.

3. For screwed connections, jointing materials meeting

the following speciﬁcations shall be used:
BS 1560, 1832, 2815
BS 5292 – Type A up to 0.7 bar or Type C
with the exception of vulcanized ﬁber and rubber rein-
forced jointing, which shall not be used.

With screwed joints of 50 mm and above it is recog-
nized that, in addition to a jointing paste, the use of hemp
may be necessary to ensure a sound joint. However, hemp
should never be used in conjunction with PTFE tape.

19.18.4 Pipes in ducts

1. It is not permissible to install an installation pipe in an
unventilated shaft, void or duct (Regulation 18(5) of
the Gas Safety (Installation and Use) Regulations).

2. Adequate ventilation is provided by means of openings
at the top of high points and the bottom of low points.
These openings shall have a free open area of 1/150 of
the cross-section area of the duct or 0.05 m2, whichever
is the greater.

3. For ducts smaller than 0.05 m2, the openings shall be

not less than 3000 mm2.

4. In exceptional circumstances if it is not possible to

ventilate the duct then:
(a) The pipe shall be continuously sleeved through the
duct with the sleeve ventilated at one or both ends
into a ventilated area; or

(b) The unventilated duct or void shall be ﬁlled with a
crushed inert inﬁll to reduce to a minimum the vol-
ume of any gas, which may accumulate. Suitable
material is crushed slate chippings or dry washed
sand.

19.18.5 Pipe supports

Pipe in whatever plane shall be adequately supported. Ref-
erence should be made to the relevant parts of BS 3974,
Part 1. In some instances, short vertical lengths in other-
wise horizontal pipe runs may be self-supporting.

Pipe supports shall be provided throughout the length of
the pipe and in such a way as to allow thermal movement

without causing damage to any corrosion protection that
may be on the pipe.

19.18.6 Corrosion protection and identiﬁcation

Buried pipework must be protected against accidental and
physical damage from sharp material, etc. and chemi-
cal action from corrosive soils, etc. It must be protected
against corrosion by means of wrapping, catholic protec-
tion, etc. for metal pipes. Above-ground pipework should
be protected with suitable paint after preparation.

Pipework should be easily identiﬁable in accordance
with BS 1719. Where the normal pressure in the pipe
exceeds 75 mbar, consideration should be given to label-
ing the pipe with the normal operating pressure. In build-
ings in which there are no other piped ﬂammable gas
supplies it is sufﬁcient to paint the pipe yellow ochre or
to band it with appropriately colored adhesive tape. In
large complex installations, it is desirable to identify pipe
contents more precisely, and in those instances, the base
color should be supplemented with a secondary code band
of yellow and/or its name or chemical symbol.

19.18.7 Flexible connections and tubes

instances where it

is known or expected that
In all
pipework will be subjected to vibration, expansion
or strain,
the use of ﬂexible connections should be
considered. However, ﬂexible connections should not be
used where there is a practical alternative.

Attention is drawn to Regulation 4(2) of the Gas Safety
(Installation and Use) Regulations, which prohibits the
use of non-metallic materials for gas pipework other than
for small portable appliances such as Bunsen burners and
lighting torches.

Types of ﬂexible connections

Various types of ﬂexible connections are available for
different purposes. Careful consideration is needed for
suitability for purpose. General comments on connections
available can be made. All connections should:

1. Be readily available for inspection;
2. Be kept to the minimum length;
3. Be protected from mechanical damage and the effects

of the environment;

4. Not pass through walls, etc.

Semi-rigid couplings and ﬂange adapters Restraints are
needed to prevent separation of the pipes when installed
above ground and to prevent angularity.

The pipework either side of a bellows joint
Bellows
shall be supported so that the bellows itself is not sup-
porting any of the weight of the attached pipework.

The axis of rotation of the swivel must
Swivel joints
be accurately aligned on both sides of the joint and the
joint should have lateral freedom and be free from side
bending moments.

The coupling shall be of the
Quick-release couplings
type having self-sealing valves in both the plug and the
body with a ﬂexible tube ﬁtted to the downstream connec-
tion, which shall be the male plug section. A manual valve
shall be ﬁtted immediately upstream of the coupling.

Flexible tubes Metallic tubes complying with BS 669,
Part 2 or BS 6501 shall be used other than with small
portable appliances or with domestic-type appliances, in
which case they shall comply with BS 669 Part 1. A
manual valve shall be ﬁtted on the inlet side in close
proximity to the tube. The pipework shall be adequately
supported such that the tube does not support the weight
of the attached pipework. Tubes shall be installed so that
they are neither twisted nor subjected to torsional strain,
have ﬂexing in one plane only, and are not subject to
sharp bends near end ﬁttings.

19.18.8 Purge points

Purge points shall be ﬁtted at section isolation valves, at
the end of pipe runs and at other suitable positions to
facilitate the correct purging of pipes. Pressure test points
should be ﬁtted at the outlet of each section-isolating
valve.

19.18.9 Siphons and condensate traps

These are not normally required. Where wet gas is sup-
plied, it will be necessary to ﬁt a vessel at low points in the
installation to collect any condensate or ﬂuid. This ves-
sel shall be in a readily accessible position and a valve,
suitably plugged or capped, shall be ﬁtted to its drain
connection. In the exceptional case where hydraulic pres-
sure testing is to be carried out, similar provisions must
be made.

19.18.10 Commissioning

After pipework has been installed, it is essential that it
be tested for soundness and purged, as required by Reg-
ulation 21 of the Gas Safety (Installation and Use) Regu-
lations. Detailed procedures for these two operations are
given in the British Gas publications Purging Procedures
for Non-Domestic Gas Installations (IM/2) and Soundness
Testing Procedures for Non-Domestic Gas Installations
(IM/5).

19.19 Flow charts for use with gas
19.19.1 Need for ﬂow charts

It is essential when designing the pipe layout for gas dis-
tribution that unavoidable pressure losses are not incurred.
For low-pressure gas, the pressure available at the meter
inlet will be only 21 mbar, and the allowable pressure loss
to the point of use only 1 mbar, although higher pressures
may be available in some circumstances. If such a low-
pressure loss is not to be exceeded it is essential that the
pipework be sized correctly. It is preferable to oversize
pipework rather than undersize, particularly as this allows

Flow charts for use with gas 19/315

scope for future expansion. For routine purposes, the use
of ﬂow charts is much to be preferred to formulae based
on ﬁrst principles.

19.19.2 Theory of pressure loss

The theory of pressure losses can be established by devel-
oping Bernoulli’s theorem for the case of a pipe in which
the work done in overcoming frictional losses is derived
from the pressure available. For a ﬂuid ﬂowing in a pipe,
the pressure loss will depend on various parameters. If
L D length of pipe,
D D diameter of pipe,
S D speciﬁc gravity of gas,
Q D ﬂow rate of gas,
f D friction factor,
P D pressure loss

then P is proportional to L

1/D5
S
Q2
f

For a particular material of pipeline construction, the fric-
tion factor can be assumed. This allows a simple formula
to be derived:
P D kQ2SL
D5

where k is a constant taking into account the friction fac-
tor, units of length, units of pressure, etc. This is the Pole
equation, and is frequently expressed in the form:

(cid:1)

Q D k

PD5
SL

Forms of this equation have been drawn up for use with
different units (SI or Imperial). Typical assumptions are:

1. Flow is fully turbulent with Re>3500 (the transition

from laminar ﬂow starts at about Re D 2000);

2. Viscosity is known and allowed for in k;
3. Pressure is <25 mbar;
4. If SG is known this can be incorporated into k;
5. Pipe is assumed to be to BS 1387. This determines f,

which can be incorporated into k.
For uniform circular pipe the Fanning equation can be

used:

(cid:2)

4f

P D

(cid:3)

L
D
2g

U2

where
U D linear velocity,
g D gravitational constant.

The Fanning friction factor (f in the above equation)
varies with Reynolds number and relative roughness of

19/316 Gas

Table 19.3 Gas ﬂow through pipes and ﬁttings
Flow in a straight horizontal steel pipe (to BS 1387, Table 2, Medium) with 1.0 mbar differential pressure between the ends, for gas
of relative density 0.6 (air D 1)

Nominal size
mm (in)

3

6

9

12

Length of pipe (m)

15
Discharge (cid:9)m3/h(cid:10)

20

25

30

40

50

6 ( 1
8 )
4 )
8 ( 1
8 )
10 ( 3
2 )
15 ( 1
4 )
20 ( 3
25 (1)
4 )
32 (1 1
40 (1 1
2 )
50 (2)
2 )
65 (2 1
80 (3)
100 (4)

0.29
0.80
2.1
4.3
9.7
18
39
59
110
220
340
690

0.14
0.53
1.4
2.9
6.6
12
27
40
76
150
230
470

0.09
0.49
1.1
2.3
5.3
10
21
32
61
120
190
380

0.07
0.36
0.93
2.0
4.5
8.5
18
27
52
100
160
330

0.05
0.29
0.81
1.7
3.9
7.5
16
24
46
92
140
290

–
0.22
0.70
1.5
3.3
6.3
14
21
39
79
120
250

–
0.17
0.69
1.4
2.9
5.6
12
18
34
70
110
220

–
0.14
0.57
1.3
2.6
5.0
11
16
31
63
97
200

–
0.11
0.43
1.2
2.2
4.3
9.2
14
26
54
83
170

–
0.08
0.34
1.0
1.9
3.7
8.1
12
23
47
73
150

Flow in a straight horizontal copper tube (to BS 2871, Part 1, Table X) with 1.0 mbar differential pressure between the ends, for gas
of relative density 0.6 (air D 1). Tube sizes given below are outside diameters

Nominal size
mm (in)

Length of pipe (m)

3

6

9

12

15

20

25

30

40

50

Discharge (cid:9)m3/h(cid:10)

6
8
12
15
22
28
35
42
54
76
108

0.12
0.52
1.5
2.9
8.7
18
32
54
110
280
750

0.06
0.26
1.0
1.9
5.8
12
22
37
75
190
510

–
0.17
0.85
1.5
4.6
9.4
17
29
60
150
410

–
0.13
0.82
1.3
3.9
8.0
15
25
51
130
350

–
0.10
0.69
1.1
3.4
7.0
13
22
45
120
310

–
0.02
0.52
0.95
2.9
5.9
11
18
38
98
260

–
0.06
0.41
0.92
2.5
5.2
9.5
16
33
86
230

–
0.05
0.34
0.88
2.3
4.7
8.5
15
30
78
210

–
–
0.26
0.66
1.9
3.9
7.2
12
26
66
180

–
–
0.20
0.52
1.7
3.5
6.3
11
23
58
160

Note: 1m3/h D 1000dm3/h. For smaller rates of ﬂow it may be more convenient to use dm3/h.
The effects of elbows, tees or bends inserted in a run of pipe (expressed as the approximate additional lengths to be allowed)

Nominal size

Cast iron or mild steel

Up to 25 mm (1 in)

Stainless steel or copper

Up to 28 mm (1 in)

Elbows
Tees
90° bends

0.5 m (2 ft)
0.5 m (2 ft)
0.3 m (1 ft)

in to 1 1
2

32 mm to 40 mm
in)
(1 1
4
35 mm to 42 mm
in to 1 1
in)
(1 1
2
4
1.0 m (3 ft)
1.0 m (3 ft)
0.3 m (1 ft)

50 mm
(2 in)
54 mm
(2 in)
1.5 m (5 ft)
1.5 m (5 ft)
0.5 m (2 ft)

80 mm
(3 in)
76 mm
(3 in)
2.5 m (8 ft)
2.5 m (8 ft)
1.0 m (3 ft)

the internal surface of the pipe. This variation is plotted
in the Moody diagram.
The relative roughness is expressed as E/D, where E D
the surface roughness and D D the internal pipe diameter.
Typical values of E/D are 0.0015 for drawn tubing, 0.046
for commercial steel and 0.12 for asphalted cast iron.

19.19.3 Practical methods of sizing pipework

The use of formulae derived from ﬁrst principles is time
consuming and cannot normally be justiﬁed in comparison
with approximate methods, which have a sufﬁcient degree
of accuracy. It is necessary to know:

Table 19.4 Allowances for ﬁttings and entrance and exit losses in pipes

Flow charts for use with gas 19/317

S

Additional
velocity
heads

Additional length
pipe diameters

f= 0.025

Fitting

Elbows of various angles

90° bends

Standard tee 90°, equal areas:

From barrel to branch
From branch to barrel
Through barrel

(third leg stagnant in each case)

Close return bend, 180°
Globe valve, full often
Angle valve, 45° open
Flap non-return valve
Gate valve, full open

4 open by area
3
2 open by area
1
4 open by area
1

Square entrance from a tank
Bell mouth entrance from a tank
Re-entrant (Borda) mouthpiece
Pipe discharge into a tank

˛ D 90°
60
45
30
15

r/D D 0.5
1.0
2.0
4.1

r/D D 1.0

1.0
0.36
0.18
0.07
0.02
1.0
0.6
0.4
0.3

1.2
1.5
0.25

2.0
10
5
2
0.15
0.8
4.5

28

0.5
0.05
0.8
1.0

40
14
7
3
1
40
24
16
12

48
60
10

80
400
200
80
6
32
180
1120
20
2
32
40

3"

2"

11/2"
11/4"

1"

3/4"

1/2"

100 000
80 000
60 000

40 000

6 "

o r e   1

al  b

m in

o

N

4 ''

1

2 ''

1

0 "

1

9 "

8 "

7 "

6 "

4 "

)
h
/
3
t
f
(
 
e
a
r
 
s
a
G

t

20 000

10 000
8 000
6 000

4 000

2 000

1 000
800
600

400

Re = 3500

200

Extrapolation in this zone
is not recommended

This chart is correct for town
gas specific gravity 0.5

100

0.001 0.002

0.006 0.01

0.02

0.06 0.1

0.2

0.4 0.6 1.0

2.0

0.004 0.008

0.04

0.08

0.8

6.0

10

4.0

8.0

Pressure drop (in wg per 10 ft length)

Figure 19.11 Chart for ﬂow of town gas in pipes

19/318 Gas

1. Flow rate;
2. Pressure loss;
3. Pipe diameter;
4. Pipe length;
5. Pipe material (if this is not known, an assumption that

it is steel will normally be sufﬁciently accurate).

Using these parameters, there are three main ways of

expressing the relationships between them:

1. A tabulated form as in Table 19.3. This shows ﬂows
versus pipe length and diameter for both copper and
steel. Such tables are included in British Gas IM/16
and British Standard BS 6891. Note that Table 19.3
includes allowances for elbows,
tees and bends.
Allowances, equivalent to numbers of pipe diameters,
must be made for all pipe ﬁttings, which cause an
additional pressure loss. Further details for allowances
to be made for pipeﬁttings, including valves and non-
return valves, are given in Table 19.4.

2. A graphical representation as shown in Figure 19.11.
This is drawn in the logarithm–logarithm format and
allows a rapid estimate of pressure loss to be expected.
Note that this particular chart is in imperial units and is
drawn for use with town gas. A correction for speciﬁc
gravity would be needed for natural gas.

3. Flow calculators. These are available in the form of
plastic concentric discs which can be rotated against
each other.

The parameters of pipe bore, ﬂow, length of pipe, and
speciﬁc gravity can be used to determine pressure loss.
The calculators are versatile in that they can be used
for pressure losses of under 1 mbar and for up to 50 bar.
Scales for both cast iron and steel pipe are available for
greater accuracy.

19.19.4 Discharge through oriﬁces
The Bernoulli theorem can be used as the basis for a
means of determining the ﬂow through an oriﬁce. The
equation will be of the form:

(cid:4)

P
S

Q D kCdD2

where
Cd D coefﬁcient of discharge,
D D diameter of the oriﬁce

This equation can be used for an oriﬁce plate introduced
into pipework as a measuring, throttling or balancing
device, and for a jet discharging gas into the injector of a
burner at atmospheric or sub-atmospheric pressure.

The major unknown is the value of the coefﬁcient of
discharge. In the case of the oriﬁce plate, this will be of
the order of 0.6. With the jet, this may be as low as 0.6
but can be up to 0.9 for jets with proﬁled entries.

Tables are available for discharges from jets for differ-
ent diameters and pressures, both on a general basis and
for proprietary jets.

19.20 Conversion factors
SI units are widely used in the gas industry. Imperial units
are also employed, particularly for measuring gas and for
its caloriﬁc value. In some areas SI and Imperial units can
co-exist, particularly thermal ratings, this can equally be
expressed in kW and MW or in Btu/h and therm/h.

American combustion equipment is frequently used.
This tends to use Imperial units as well as degrees Fahren-
heit and ounces per square inch pressure.

European combustion equipment utilizes metric units
but these are frequently non-SI. For example, heat and
power ratings often use calories and kilocalories/h instead
of joules and watts.

It is not intended to include a comprehensive set of
conversion factors, but rather those, which are frequently
to be found in the energy industries.

Pressure
Non-SI unit
bar
inch of Hg
inch of water
Pascal
millibar
pound-force/in2 (psi)
ton-force/in2
torr
ounce-force/in2
Linear
Non-SI unit
foot
inch
yard
mile
Volume and capacity
Non-SI unit
cubic foot
gallon
gallon (US)
Heat and energy
Non-SI unit
British thermal unit
calorie
therm
thermie
Power
Non-SI unit
Btu/h
therm/h

Conversion factor to N/m2
100 000
3386.39
249.089
1
100
6894.76
15 444.3
133.322
430.9225

Conversion factor
0.3048 m
25.4 mm
0.9144 m
1.60934 km

Conversion factor
0.0283168 m3
4.54609 dm3
3.78541 dm3

Conversion factor
1.05506 kJ
4.1868 J
195.506 MJ
4.1855 MJ

Conversion factor
0.293071 W
29.3071 kW

kilocalorie/h
horse power
ton of refrigeration
frigorie
cal/s
Caloriﬁc value
Non-SI unit
Btu/ft3
Btu/lb
therm/gal
Temperature
Non-SI unit
degree Fahrenheit
degree Rankine
degree Celsius

1.163 W
745.700 W
3516.85 W
1.1626 W
4.1868 W

Conversion factor
37.2589 kJ/m3
2326 J/kg
23.208 GJ/m3

Conversion factor
T (cid:3) 32(cid:10)5/9°C
5/9 K
(cid:9)T C 273.15(cid:10)K

Conversion factors 19/319

Thermal conductivity
Non-SI unit
Btu in/ft2h°F
Btu in/ft2s°F
Btu/ft2h
Btu/ft2h°F
Btu ft/ft2h°F
Thermal resistivity
Non-SI unit
ft2h°F/Btu in
ft2h°F/Btu ft

Conversion factor
0.144228 W/mK
519.220 W/mK
3.15459 W/m2
5.67826 W/m2K
1.73073 W/mK

Conversion factor
6.93347 m K/W
0.57789 m K/W

20

20/321

Liqueﬁed
Petroleum Gas

R H Shipman
Liqueﬁed Petroleum Gas Industry Technical
Association

Contents

20.1 Introduction
20.2 Composition
20.3 Requirements

20/323
20/323
20/323

20.3.1 General 20/323
20.3.2 Water content
20.3.3 Odor
20/323

20/323

20.4 Typical properties of LPG 20/324

20/324

20/324

20.4.1 Vapor pressure
20.4.2 Gross caloriﬁc value
20.4.3 Sulfur content
20/325
20.4.4 Relative density – liquid
20.4.5 Relative density – vapor
20.4.6 Limits of ﬂammability
20.4.7 Coefﬁcient of expansion
20.4.8 Other physical characteristics 20/326

20/325
20/325

20/326

20/326

20/326

20/330
20/330

20.5 Transport and storage
20.6 Cylinder storage
20.7 Safety in storage
20.8 Uses of gaseous fuels
20.9 Safety and legislation
20.10 British Standards
20.11 Codes of Practice and Guidance Notes

20/331
20/333

20/333

20/333

20.1 Introduction
Liqueﬁed petroleum gases (often referred to as LPG or
LPGas) are a constituent of crude oil or the condensate of
natural gas ﬁelds (NGL). They are the C3 and C4 hydro-
carbons, propane and butane, respectively, which have
the property of being gases at normal ambient tempera-
ture but can be liqueﬁed and kept in the liquid state by
quite moderate pressure. Gases released from crude oil are
called associated gases while those found without heav-
ier hydrocarbons are known as unassociated gases. The
North Sea gas wells are good examples of the latter.

Methane is the major constituent of both associated and
unassociated gas at source. There will be higher (heav-
ier) hydrocarbons in varying amounts present in the gas,
associated gas having more than unassociated gas.

from those released from crude oil or

When crude oil is reﬁned, some of the processes yield
additional gaseous products. The C3 and C4 constituents
differ
from
NGLs, which are saturated hydrocarbons. Reﬁnery gases
are high in unsaturates, e.g. propane (propylene) and
butane (butylenes). These unsaturated hydrocarbons are
a valuable source of chemical process intermediates and
enjoy a large market alongside naphtha.

The following molecular diagrams show the major con-

stituents of LPG:

H

C3H8 Propane

Saturated

H

C4H10 Butane

Saturated

H

C

H

H

C

H

H

H

C

H

H

C4H10 ISO Butane

Saturated

H

C

H

H

C

H

H

C

C

H

H

H

H

C

H

H

C

H

H

H

H

C

H

H

H

C

H

H

C

H

H

C

H

C

H

C

H

H

C

H

H

C

H

C3H6 Propene

(Propylene)

Unsaturated

H

C4H8 Butene

(Butylene)

Unsaturated

No doubt the most successful exploitation of the pecu-
liar properties of LPG has been its use as a fuel gas.
Originally used predominantly in reﬁneries for process

Requirements 20/323

heating, its value as a fuel was ﬁrst realized before the
Second World War, when it was sold in small portable
containers. From primarily domestic use this spread after
the war to commercial and industrial utilization and the
introduction of bulk storage on-site. In order to develop
such a market it was necessary to reﬁne the product to
an agreed standard. Today, LPG sold into the commercial
fuel gas market meets the requirements for automotive
LPG. The Standard sets the limits of the constituents for
commercial propane and commercial butane since they
are always mixtures of C3 and C4 with one or the other
predominating.

20.2 Composition
This product shall consist of a
Commercial butane.
hydrocarbon mixture containing predominantly butanes
and/or butanes.

This product shall consist of a
Commercial propane.
hydrocarbon mixture containing predominantly propane
and/or propane.

20.3 Requirements
20.3.1 General

When tested in accordance with the methods given in
Table 20.1 the properties of the commercial butane and
commercial propane shall be in accordance with the lim-
iting requirements given in that table. For gauge vapor
pressure, either the direct measurements method described
in BS 3324 or the calculation procedure described in
Appendix C of this standard shall be used.

20.3.2 Water content

Commercial butane and commercial propane shall not
contain free or suspended water on visual inspection.
Additionally, for commercial propane,
the content of
dissolved water shall not be such as to cause failure when
tested in accordance with the valve freeze method.

Note: The addition of up to 0.125 per cent (v/v) of
methanol to commercial propane will normally ensure that
it complies with the speciﬁed limit for water content.

20.3.3 Odor

When tested in accordance with the procedure described
in Appendix B, the odor of the gas shall be distinctive
and unpleasant, and the odor in a gas/air mixture shall be
such that it is detectable down to a concentration of 20
per cent of the concentration corresponding to the lower
limit of ﬂammability for the hydrocarbon mixture con-
cerned.

Note: Odorants such as ethanediol, tetrahydrothiophene
or dimethyl sulﬁde may be added so that the gas complies
with the speciﬁed requirements for odor.

20/324 Liqueﬁed Petroleum Gas

Table 20.1 General requirements for commercial butane and commercial propane

Property

Limit

Test method

Commercial

butane

Commercial

propane

British Standard

Gauge vapour pressure, at 40°C (measured

or calculated) (in kPa), max. (see E.1)

Total sulfur content (in mg/kg), max.
Mercaptan sulfur content (in mg/kg), max.
Hydrogen sulﬁde content (in cm3/m3),

max. (see E.2)

Copper corrosion, 1 h at 40°C
Tendency to freeze in valves
Dienes content, mole %, max.
Ethylene content, mole %, max.
Alkynes content, mole %, max.
C4 and higher hydrocarbons content, mole

C5 and higher hydrocarbons content, mole

%, max.

%, max.

505

200
50
0.5

Class I

–

10.0

–
0.5
–

2.0

1560

200
50
0.5

Class I
Pass

–
1.0
0.5
10.0

2.0

BS 3324 or appendix C

BS 5379
BS 2000: Part 272
Appendix A

BS 6924a
Appendix D
BS 3156: Part 4
BS 3156: Part 4
BS 3156: Part 4
BS 3156: Subsection 11.1.1

BS 3156: Subsection 11.1.1

aBS 6924 is in preparation. Pending its publication, the identical International Standard, ISO 6251, should be used.

Technically
equivalent to
IP method

–

–

IP 272

–

–
–
–
–
–
–

–

20.4 Typical properties of LPG
Typical properties are shown in Table 20.2. These are
important in setting the requirements for the storage, han-
dling and use of LPG and require further elaboration.

20.4.1 Vapor pressure

This is one of the most important properties of LPG
since it determines the pressure that will be exerted by
the gas at ambient temperature, and therefore affects the
requirements for handling and the design working pres-
sures of storage vessels. It constitutes the main difference
in physical characteristics between commercial propane
and butane. The vapor pressure is the pressure at which
a liquid and its vapor are in equilibrium at any given
temperature. The boiling point of a liquid is, in fact, the
temperature at which the vapor pressure is equal to the
external ambient pressure.

Commercial propane and butane often contain sub-
stantial proportions of the corresponding unsaturated ana-
logues and smaller amounts of near-related hydrocarbons,
as well as these hydrocarbons themselves. Figure 20.1
shows vapor pressure/temperature curves for commercial
propane and commercial butane. Due to its lower boiling
point, higher rates of vaporization for substantial periods
are obtainable from propane than from butane, and at the
same time, appreciable pressures are maintained even at
low ambient temperatures.

)
e
g
u
a
g

 
r
a
b
(
 

e
r
u
s
s
e
r
P

25

23

21

19

17

15

13

11

9

7

5

3

1
0
−1

)
e
g
u
a
g
 
2
n

i
/
f

b

I
(
 
e
r
u
s
s
e
r
P

360
340
320
300
280
260
240
220
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

Vapour pressure for
commercial propane

−20 −40

−20

−60

−20

°C

°F

Vapour
pressure for
commercial
butane
60

80

0

20

40

40

32

80

120

160

Temperature

20.4.2 Gross caloriﬁc value

Figure 20.1 Vapor pressure/temperature curves for commercial
propane and commercial butane

This is deﬁned as the amount of heat liberated when unit
volume (or unit mass) of the gas is burned at a standard
temperature and pressure. It is usually expressed in terms
of megajoules per cubic meter at 15°C and 1016 mbar,
i.e. MJ/s m3 dry or megajoules per kilogram. Typical

caloriﬁc values of LPG and other gaseous fuels are shown
in Table 20.3 and allow a comparison of their heating
values to be made.

Table 20.2 Properties of commercial propane and butane

Typical properties of LPG 20/325

Relative density of liquid at 15°C (60°F)
Imperial gallons/ton at 60°F
Liter /ton at 15°C
Relative density of gas compared with air at 15°C (60°F)

and 1016 mbar (30 in Hg)

Volume of gas (ft3) per lb of liquid at 60°C and 30 inHg
Volume of gas (litres) per kg of liquid at 15°C

and 1016 mbar

Ratio of gas volume to liquid volume at 15°C (60°F)

and 1016 mbar (30 inHg)

Boiling point at atmospheric pressure

°C (approx.)
°F (approx.)

Latent heat of vaporization (Btu/lb) at 60°F
Latent heat of vaporization (kJ/kg) at 15°C
Speciﬁc heat of liquid at 60°F (Btu/lb °F)
Speciﬁc heat of liquid at 15°C (kJ/kg °C)
Sulfur content, % weight
Limits of ﬂammability (percentage of volume of gas

in a gas–air mixture to form a
combustible mixture)

Caloriﬁc values

Gross

Net

Btu/s ft3 dry
MJ/s m3 dry
Btu/lb
MJ/kg

Btu/s ft3 dry
MJ/s m3 dry
Btu/lb
MJ/kg

Therm/ton (gross CV)
GJ/ton
Air required for combustion

ft3 to burn 1 ft3 of gas at STP
m3 to burn 1 m3 of gas at STP

Propane

0.50–0.51
439–448
1965–2019

1.40–1.55
8.6–8.7

537–543

274
(cid:1)45
(cid:1)49
154
358
0.60
2.512
Negligible to 0.02

Upper 10.0
Lower 2.2

2500
93.1
21 500
50.0

2310
86.1
19 900
46.3
482
50.0

24
24

Butane

0.57–0.58
385–393
1723–1760

1.90–2.10
6.5–6.9

406–431

233
(cid:1)2
28
160
372
0.57
2.386
Negligible to 0.02

Upper 9.0
Lower 1.8

3270
121.8
21 200
49.3

3030
112.9
19 700
45.8
475
49.3

30
30

Table 20.3 Typical gross caloriﬁc values of fuel gases

Gas

MJ/s m3

dry

Btu/s ft3 MJ/kg

dry

btu/lb

that is strictly controlled within tight speciﬁcation limits.
This makes LPG a particularly useful fuel where the prod-
ucts of combustion are intended to be released directly
into living accommodation.

Commercial propane
Commercial butane
Producer gas (cold)
Town gas
Natural gas
Acetylene

93.1
121.8
4.7–6.1
14–20.5
31.6–46.6

56

2500
3270
125– 165
375– 550
850–1250
1500

50.0
49.3

21 500
21 200

–
–
–

–
–
–

49.9

21 460

The great advantage of LPGs is that they are stored
as a liquid. However, they are usually used as a gas. One
volume of liquid propane when released at STP gives 274
volumes (233 for butane) of high caloriﬁc value fuel gas.

20.4.3 Sulfur content

Compared to most other widely available fuels with the
exception of natural gas, LPG has very low sulfur content

20.4.4 Relative density — liquid

The density of liquid butane and propane is about half
that of water, and as such is much lower than other liquid
fuels.

20.4.5 Relative density — vapor

This is the one major property where there is an important
difference between LPG vapor and natural gas. Natural
gas is lighter than air; propane and butane vapors are,
respectively, one and half times and twice as heavy as
air. This is important in two areas. First, when converting
equipment running on natural gas to run on propane or
butane the amount of gas which issues from a ﬁxed oriﬁce
at a ﬁxed pressure is inversely proportional to the square

Codes require sufﬁcient stench to be added so that the
odor of the gas can be detected in air at concentrations
down to one-ﬁfth of the lower limit of ﬂammability, i.e.
about 0.4 per cent gas in air.

Neither propane nor butane is toxic, but they do pos-
sess anaesthetic properties. There is a threshold limiting
value for LPG at 1000 ppm given as an occupational expo-
sure standard in OSHA regulations, for an 8-hour time-
weighted average.

Liquid propane and butane will vaporize rapidly if
released into the open air, and if they come into contact
with bare skin will cause painful freeze burns. Therefore
gloves and goggles should always be worn if there is a
danger of liquid LPG being released or spilt.

20.5 Transport and storage
The great advantage of LPG is that for use it can be
regarded as a gas, but for conveyance it can be treated as
a liquid. It is therefore transported by road or rail in a man-
ner similar to liquid fuels. Thus, the most usual method
is by road tanker (up to 17 tons of product) or rail tank
wagon (from 20 tons to 100 tons per wagon). Figure 20.2
shows a typical 15-ton capacity propane road tanker. In
order to maintain the product in its liquid state, however,
it has to be kept under pressure and the tanks are therefore
pressure vessels. This pressure must be maintained during
all activities, from storage at the reﬁnery, to transfer into
the road tanker or rail tank wagon, and then in the storage
vessel at the users’ premises.

In addition to the modes of distribution described above
there is also the transportable container, which is now a
familiar feature in all kinds of activity. These vary from
tiny disposable cartridges of less than 100 g to the larger
reﬁllable steel or aluminum alloy cylinders ranging up

20/326 Liqueﬁed Petroleum Gas

root of its density. Second, if there is a leak of LPG vapor
it will collect at ground level or in depressions, drains or
cellars if appropriate precautions are not taken. This is a
major safety consideration when designing or installing
LPG systems.

20.4.6 Limits of ﬂammability

When mixed with air, LPG can form a ﬂammable mix-
ture. The ﬂammable range at ambient temperature and
pressure extends between approximately 2 per cent of the
vapor in air at its lower limit and approximately 10 per
cent of the vapor in air at its upper limit. Outside this
range, any mixture is either too weak or too rich to prop-
agate ﬂame. However, over-rich mixtures resulting from
accidental releases can become hazardous when diluted
with air. At pressures greater than atmospheric, the upper
limit of ﬂammability is increased but the increase with
pressure is not linear.

The limits of ﬂammability for propane and butane are
much narrower than most other gaseous fuels, making
LPG safer in this respect.

20.4.7 Coefﬁcient of expansion

This is deﬁned as the increase in volume of unit volume of
a substance when its temperature is raised by one degree.
It is important in that the coefﬁcient of expansion of LPG
in its liquid form is relatively high, so that when ﬁlling
a storage vessel adequate space must always be provided
to allow for possible thermal expansion of the liquid.

20.4.8 Other physical characteristics

LPG is both colorless and odorless. However, a distinctive
odor is added to aid detection in the case of leakage.

Figure 20.2 LPG road tanker. (Courtesy of BP Oil Ltd)

to around 5 kg of product. These are ﬁlled at purpose-
designed ﬁlling plants and distributed by road or rail trans-
port to the retail outlet.

At the other end of the scale there is also the trans-
port and storage of LPG in a refrigerated state. Large
international sea transport cargoes are usually refriger-
ated, while refrigerated land storage is only economically
justiﬁed for storage measured in thousands of tons and for
import/export terminals, as illustrated by Figure 20.3. For
design, construction and installation of refrigerated stor-
age, references are given to the Institute of Petroleum, and
the Engineering Equipment and Materials Users Associa-
tion (EEUMA) at the end of this chapter.

Thus for most inland transport and storage the liquid
is held at ambient temperature under pressure. The pres-
sure is simply created by the natural vapor pressure of
the product, which varies with its temperature. Butane
has a lower vapor pressure than propane. The carrying
vessels, whether road tankers, static storage, cylinders or
cartridges, must be designed to accept the highest pres-
sure likely to occur in service. Knowledge of the highest
ambient temperature and the grade of product are thus
essential.

This illustrates the need for an agreed national stan-
dard for product speciﬁcation, which provides assurance
of the highest pressure likely to be attained in service from
knowledge of ambient conditions. Against this knowledge,

Transport and storage 20/327

Codes of Practice can safely recommend the pressures,
which should be used for the design of storage vessels
both for static use and for road/rail tankers. Guidance on
the design parameters is given in the LPGITA (UK) Code
of Practice No. 1, Installation and Maintenance of Bulk
LPG Storage at Consumer’s Premises and Code of Prac-
tice No. 2, Safe Handling and Transport of LPG in Bulk
by road.

Storage vessels for LPG range from those for major
industrial users and reﬁneries of 1000 tons capacity or
more down to small industrial or commercial users of
1 ton. Even smaller vessels down to 380 liters designed
for on-site reﬁlling are used for domestic purposes, i.e.
heating and cooking. Similar vessels are used for per-
manent caravan sites and holiday homes. Figures 20.4
and 20.5 illustrate a storage installation for industrial and
domestic use, respectively.

Deliveries to these installations are usually by road
tanker. The tanker carries its own off-loading pump driven
by the vehicle engine and the transfer is by a ﬂexible hose
which is connected to the receiving vessel by a gas-tight
coupling.

LPG storage vessels have to be designed as pressure
vessels to a recognized standard. The design limits for
static storage are based on a maximum product temper-
ature in service of 38°C, which gives a design pressure
for propane of not less than 14.5 bar gauge. Those for

Figure 20.3 Refrigerated LPG storage at ‘Flotta’. (Courtesy of the Motherwell Bridge Group)

20/328 Liqueﬁed Petroleum Gas

Figure 20.4 Typical industrial LPG storage installation. (Courtesy of Esso Petroleum Co. Ltd)

However, in the case of bulk storage of butane, the
vapor pressure is generally too low for this simple method,
and use is made of a liquid feed from the bottom of the
storage vessel via a pump to a vaporizer. The vapor-
izer is simply a heat exchanger either using hot water,
steam, electricity or even direct ﬂame as the source of
heat. Figure 20.6 shows a typical vaporizer.

A glance at the vapor pressure curve for butane will,
however, reveal that in winter there is a possibility of
butane vapor liquefying after the vaporizer if the temper-
ature is allowed to fall in the pipeline, even at moderate
pressure. For this reason, such pipework is usually heated,
either by electrical tapes or, if available, by steam or hot-
water lines.

There is an alternative to using neat butane vapor, how-
ever, which overcomes the need for pipework heating.
This is to use a gas–air mixture. A special gas–air mixer
is used which ensures that a preset ratio is maintained at
all demand rates. The ratio chosen must be well outside
the ﬂammable limits. A typical LPG–air-mixing plant is
illustrated by Figure 20.7.

The effect of the air is to depress the vapor dew point
temperature. A further advantage is that the physical prop-
erties of the gas can be made to ‘simulate’ another gas,
e.g. natural gas or manufactured town gas. Such a sim-
ulated gas will produce the same heat release through a
burner if the supply pressure is the same. This is charac-
terized by a term known as the Wobbe number (W):

W D

p

Caloriﬁc value

Speciﬁc gravity of gas(cid:6)air D 1(cid:7)

The gas–air ratio is therefore chosen to achieve the
desired Wobbe number. However, the use of a simulated
gas for plant conversion may not entirely avoid burner

Figure 20.5 LPG storage vessel for a domestic installation. (Cour-
tesy of the Calor Group Plc)

transport storage are deﬁned in BS 5355 which, for barrels
greater than 5 m3, sets a temperature of 42.5°C, giving a
design pressure for propane of 16.75 bar gauge.

It is apparent from the vapor pressure curves that to
obtain a gas supply from a storage vessel, or from a cylin-
der, it is only necessary to release it from the top vapor
space. Propane can usually be supplied from storage to
the plant by this natural vaporization, without any pumps
or compressors, throughout the year.

Transport and storage 20/329

Figure 20.6 Hot-water heated LPG vaporizers. (Courtesy of Esso Petroleum Co. Ltd)

Figure 20.7 An LPG-air mixing unit. (Courtesy of John Wigfull & Co. Ltd)

20/330 Liqueﬁed Petroleum Gas

adjustment or modiﬁcation if other properties differ
markedly (e.g. ﬂame speed).

The supply of gas from storage or vaporizer to plant is
usually governed down to a medium pressure of around
1.5 bar, for ﬁnal reduction to 28 mbar for butane or
37 mbar for propane. However, the versatility of LPG
is such that plant and combustion equipment designers
can, for specialized purposes, select virtually whatever
pressures are most suitable for their requirements.

An unusual but successful alternative system has been
applied for some very large high-energy consuming
plants. This involves using liquid-phase LPG right up to
the burner.

20.6 Cylinder storage
The earliest market for LPG was developed by the use of
small transportable cylinders ﬁlled at purpose-built ﬁll-
ing plants and returned there for reﬁlling. This market
has grown steadily over its 50-year or more lifetime.
Cylinders are available for either commercial propane or
commercial butane, and in a variety of sizes from easily
portable ones with a capacity of around 20 liters to the
largest with a capacity of around 108 liters.

In parallel with the reﬁllable cylinder market, the non-
reﬁllable cylinder has emerged to supply the needs of
the leisure market and the DIY enthusiast, to name but
two. These are broadly divided into those with a valve
outlet and the pierceable cartridge. Both are designed to
be disposed of when ﬁnally exhausted.

Both the reﬁllable and non-reﬁllable cylinders must, of
course, be designed for the internal pressure conditions
likely to be experienced during their lifetime. Welded
steel cylinders are designed based upon a maximum liq-
uid temperature of 55°C and the associated vapor pressure

of 22.13 bar gauge for propane and 7.52 bar gauge for
butane.

It is now common practice to design all reﬁllable cylin-
ders to propane standards. Furthermore, the use of safety
relief valves has been introduced for all cylinders carrying
over 3 kg of LPG.

The outlet valves of reﬁllable butane cylinders are
different from those of reﬁllable propane cylinders. The
valve for propane is a handwheel type, with a female 5/8
in BSP LEFT-HAND thread for a POL metal-to-metal
connector. A compatible half-coupling must always be
used to ensure a leak-free joint.

Butane cylinders, which are so widely used for domes-
tic service, are now provided with a self-sealing clip-on
valve. The pressure regulator, which is normally attached
directly onto the cylinder outlet, is ﬁtted by a simple push-
on or snap-on action and is provided with a lever, which
will open or shut the cylinder valve.

There are a number of different clip-on valve designs
used by LPG distributors and care is necessary to ensure
that only the correct mating regulator is employed.

20.7 Safety in storage
Safe storage and handling of LPG is of paramount impor-
tance, whether it is in bulk or in cylinders. This is achieved
by ensuring the mechanical integrity of the storage ves-
sels or cylinders and by strict observance of the recom-
mended separation distances between storage and build-
ings or boundaries. This passive protection has to be sup-
plemented by rigorous observance of operational proce-
dures. Both the LPGITA (UK) and the Health and Safety
Executive have issued codes of practice on the subject.
The separation distances for bulk LPG vessels are shown
in Table 20.4.

Table 20.4 Location and spacing for vessels

Maximum water capacity

Minimum separation distances

Of all vessels

in a group

Above-ground vessels

Buried or mounded vessels

Between From buildings, Between
vessels
vessels

etc. to

Valve

assembly

Vessel

(d)

m
2.5
3
7.5
7.5
11

(e)

m
0.3
1
3
3
3

(f)

m
0.3
1.5
1.5
1.5
–

15

3

–

(c)

m
1
1
1
1.5
4 of
1
sum of
the dia.
of two
adjacent
vessels

–

Of any single vessel in a group

Liters

Gallons

Nominal

LPG

capacity
(tonnes)

150–500
>500–2500
>2500–9000
>9000–135 000

28–100 0.05–0.25
100–500
0.25–1.1
500–2000
2000–30 000
>135 000–337 500 30 000–75 000

1.1–4
4–60
60–150

From buildings With

Liters

Gallons

boundary,

ﬁrewall

property line
or ﬁxed source

of ignition

(a)

330
1 500
1 650
7 500
27 000
6 000
450 000 100 000
1 012 500 225 000

m (ft)
2.5 (8)
3 (10)
7.5 (25)
15 (50)
22.5 (75)

(b)

m
0.3
1.5
4
7.5
11

>337 500

>75 000

>150

2 250 000 500 000

30 (100)

15

Perhaps the most serious hazard to LPG storage is that
of accidental ﬁre. The safety distances are intended to
separate the storage from possible adjacent ﬁres so that the
risk of a ﬁre affecting the storage is very low. However,
this residual risk has to be catered for. The mechanical
integrity needs to be assured under severe ﬁre attack. For
this reason, the vessels are provided with relief valves
designed to cope with ﬁre engulfment. The heat from such
a ﬁre may raise the stored pressure until the relief valve
opens. The discharge capacity of the relief valve when
fully open is required to meet or exceed the following:
Q D 10.6552A0.82

where
A is the total surface area of the vessel (m3), and
Q is the discharge (m3/min) of air reduced to 15°C

and 1 atm.
The heat transfer to the liquid from an engulfment ﬁre
has been estimated at around 100 kW/m2, and the above
formula equates this to the vapor produced from this input
as latent heat. The exponential is an area exposure factor,
which recognizes that large vessels are less likely to be
completely exposed to ﬂames.

The safety relief valve will protect the liquid-wetted
areas of the storage vessel. The metal temperature will not
signiﬁcantly exceed the liquid temperature, which will be
absorbing the latent heat of vaporization. However, above
the liquid line no such cooling will take place. The metal
temperature at the top of the vessel could therefore exceed
safe limits.

The usual protection for large installations is to provide
a water-spray system. For small bulk storage, ﬁre hoses
or monitors are often adequate. However, for installa-
tions over 50 tons of storage (and all major cylinder-ﬁlling
plants) it is accepted that a ﬁxed water-spray system needs
to be provided which is automatically initiated by a sys-
tem capable of detecting a ﬁre threatening the vessels

Uses of gaseous fuels 20/331

and/or the adjacent tanker loading or unloading area. The
deluge rate to provide protection against ﬁre engulfment
is 9.8 l/min/m2 of vessel surface area, and this should be
capable of being sustained for at least 60 min. The spray
pattern adopted for a ﬁxed installation normally includes
four longitudinal spray bars, two at the upper quadrants
and two at the lower quadrants of horizontal cylindrical
vessels, with nozzles spaced to give uniform coverage.

An alternative means of avoiding the hazard from ﬁre is
to bury the vessels or to employ the increasingly popular
method of mounding. In either case, acknowledgment of
the reduced hazard is indicated by the reduced separation
distances (see Table 20.4). Since both burial and mound-
ing preclude the possibility to monitor continuously the
external condition of the vessels, very high-quality corro-
sion protection needs to be applied, often supplemented
by cathodic protection, depending on soil conditions.

The use of burial or mounding is sometimes employed
to overcome visual environmental objections since the
mounding, for instance, can be grassed over. Indeed, this
is the method often adopted to prevent erosion of the
mounding material. A typical mounded storage is seen in
Figure 20.8.

Codes of practice also provide guidance on the stor-
age of LPG in cylinders. Again, it is based on the ade-
quate separation of stacks of cylinders from buildings and
boundaries. These distances depend on the total tonnage
stored or the tonnage in the largest stack in the storage
area. The codes also provide guidance on width of gang-
ways, height of stacks and storage within buildings.

20.8 Uses of gaseous fuels
LPG has many advantages over the alternative liquid
fuels, and is regarded as a ‘premium fuel’. Some of the
premium characteristics are:

Very low sulfur
Easy ignition

Figure 20.8 Mounded LPG storage. (Courtesy of Southern Counties Gas)

20/332 Liqueﬁed Petroleum Gas

Simplicity of burner design
Versatility (e.g. very small ﬂames, localized heating)
Wide turndown of burners
Clean combustion gases
Ease of control

These properties apply equally to natural gas as for
LPG. However, since LPG can be used anywhere in
the country which is accessible by road or rail it is not
subject to the geographic limitations of a piped supply.
The versatility of gaseous fuels has resulted in much
development work in the design of burners for a wide
range of applications. Some are highly specialized. Much
of this development has been primarily for natural gas
since its introduction to the UK in the late 1960s. The
properties of LPG and natural gas are different, which
means that LPG cannot be used in an appliance or
burner designed for natural gas. However, a key property,
ﬂame speed, is of the same order, unlike the very high
ﬂame speed of coal gas. This similarity means that most
natural gas appliances or burners can be adapted for
use with LPG with minor modiﬁcations to allow for
the much higher caloriﬁc value and higher gas density.
Aeration needs attention, but for a given heat input rate
the majority of gaseous fuels require approximately the
same amount of air for combustion. Of course, in the
domestic and leisure use of LPG particular appliances
have been developed quite speciﬁcally for use with LPG.
Thus, LPG equipment and appliances are available for all
the gas-ﬁred applications in commercial, industrial and
domestic use.

When drawing off LPG vapor from storage, whether
from bulk storage, cylinders or even non-reﬁllable
cartridges, the liquid will begin to vaporize but will need
latent heat to do so. It will take this heat from itself, and
the container, and both will cool. As the LPG liquid cools
its pressure must fall. Equilibrium will be obtained when
the heat ﬂow from the ambient air equals the demand for
latent heat.

This,

together with the natural variations of vapor
pressure with the climatic conditions, results in a source of
gas with quite wide variations in supply pressure. Except
for some small heating appliances, which are designed
to attach directly to a small cylinder or cartridge, this
pressure variation needs to be eliminated as far as the
appliance is concerned. Therefore, a pressure regulator
is used. For permanent installations, two-stage pressure
regulation is recommended. The ﬁrst is usually located
immediately at
the outlet from the storage vessel or
cylinder.

LPG cylinders are ﬁlled only at purpose-designed
ﬁlling plants and (if reﬁllable) are returned there when
exhausted. To provide a continuous gas supply,
two,
four or more cylinders are connected to a changeover
valve so those empty cylinders can be exchanged without
interrupting the supply. Automatic changeover devices
are available, which switch to the reserve supply when
necessary, and indicate that they have done so. A typical
wall-mounted ACD is illustrated in Figure 20.9.

Codes of practice restrict the use of LPG cylinders
indoors for commercial and domestic use to commercial

butane. Propane cylinders should always be located out-
side the premises except for special industrial purposes.
A typical four-cylinder pack is shown in Figure 20.10.

The use of propane as a motor vehicle fuel has been
highly developed in some countries, particularly in the
USA, Holland and Italy. It is, of course, an entirely lead-
free fuel. Very high efﬁciencies can be obtained using a
gaseous fuel in spark-ignition engines since intimate mix-
ing of the fuel and air is much more easily achieved than
with a liquid fuel. This results in a much cleaner exhaust,
with considerable reductions in CO and hydrocarbons.

The low level of harmful exhaust emissions has, for
instance, been one of the spurs to the wide use of LPG
as a forklift truck engine fuel in all countries because
of their wide use inside buildings such as warehouses,
railway station forecourts, etc. Another advantage is the
high power continuously available compared with electric

Figure 20.9 Wall-mounted automatic changeover device. (Cour-
tesy of Sperryn & Co. Ltd)

Figure 20.10 A 2 ð 2 LPG cylinder pack supply domestic premises.
(Courtesy of the Calor Group Plc)

battery-driven equivalents. Similar arguments favor its use
for other engine-driven workhorses such as mechanical
sweepers, in large warehouses, railway stations, etc.

Vehicle ﬂeet owners often have their cars and/or vans
converted to run on LPG and have an on-site bulk stor-
age vessel installed complete with a dispensing pump.
This is an attractive economic proposition for taxis, ambu-
lances, local authority ﬂeets, etc. Virtually any spark-
ignition engine can be converted to run on LPG. It can
therefore be considered for any engine-driven machinery.

Codes of practice and guidance notes 20/333

The conveyance of LPG by road is also subject to con-
trol via a number of Regulations aimed at potentially haz-
ardous substances. There are the Dangerous Substances
(Conveyance by Road in Road Tankers and Tank Con-
tainers) Regulations 1981 and the Road Trafﬁc (Carriage
of Dangerous Substances in Packages, etc.) Regulations
1986.

20.10 British standards

20.9 Safety and legislation
Safety in the supply and use of LPG, as with all forms of
energy supply, is of paramount importance. The guidance
given by the LPGITA (UK) and the Health and Safety
Executive needs to be fully appreciated and observed.
Following the requirements on storage and plant layout,
plant design, system design, operational procedures, main-
tenance and periodic inspection procedures, and manage-
ment control maximizes safety for industrial plants. The
LPGITA (UK) has produced a series of codes of practice,
which provides the basis for safe storage, handling, and
use of LPG in the UK. A list of current issues is given at
the end of this chapter.

There are many statutory requirements which impose
on the design, installation and operation of the LPG plants.
There are the general duties under the Health and Safety
at Work Act, of course, but speciﬁcally, the storage of
LPG at ‘factories’ as deﬁned in the Factories Act 1961 are
required to comply with the Highly Flammable Liquids
and Liqueﬁed Petroleum Gas Regulations. This requires
suitable storage vessels, and their marking with the words
‘LPG Highly Flammable’. The design of LPG cylinders
is also covered in these Regulations.

For new sites with 50 tons or more of LPG the Con-
trol of Major Accident Hazards Regulations 1984 apply.
For sites which will have 300 tons or more (shortly to be
reduced to 200 tons or more) these Regulations impose
additional duties on site operators which include the prior
submission of a ‘safety report’. This report has to set out
the potential hazards of the plant and the means by which
the risks are reduced to an acceptable level. The LPGITA
has produced a Guide to the Writing of LPG Safety Reports
which supplements the general guidance in the HSE book-
let HS(R)21.

Consumer installations which supply LPG to more
than one user (e.g. metered estates, holiday home parks,
caravan sites) require the gas supplier (i.e.
the site
owner/operator, not the LPG supplier) to obtain prior
consent from the Ofﬁce of Gas Supply (Ofgas) and, for
the necessary pipework installation, from the Department
of Energy, Pipelines Inspectorate.

Shortly to be introduced is the need to obtain Hazardous
Substances Consent under the Housing and Planning Act
1986 from the local authority for any site intended to hold
25 tons or more of LPG. This will be in addition to any
requirement for planning consent and to the need to notify
the HSE under the Notiﬁcation of Installations Handling
Hazardous Substances Regulations 1982.

BS 4250 Liqueﬁed petroleum gas

Part 1: Speciﬁcation for commercial butane and
propane
Part 2: Speciﬁcation for automotive LPG

BS 5500 Unﬁred fusion welded pressure vessels
BS 7122 Welded steel tanks for the road transport of liq-

ueﬁable gases

BS 5355 Filling ratios and developed pressures for lique-

ﬁable and permanent gases

BS 5045 Transportable gas containers

Part 2: Steel containers up to 450 liters water
capacity with welded seams

BS 4329 Non-reﬁllable metallic containers up to 1.4 liters

capacity for liqueﬁed petroleum gases

20.11 Codes of practice and guidance
notes
HSE

Guidance Note HS(G)34, The storage of LPG at ﬁxed
installations
Guidance Note CS4, The keeping of LPG in cylinders
and similar containers
Guidance Note HS(R)21, A guide to the Control of Indus-
trial Major Accident Hazards Regulations 1984

LPGITA (UK)

An Introduction to Liqueﬁed Petroleum Gas Code of
Practice No. 1, Installation and Maintenance of Fixed
Bulk LPG Storage at Consumer’s Premises

Part 1: Design and Installation
Part 2: Small Bulk Installations for Domestic

Purposes

Part 3: Periodic Inspection and Testing.

Code of Practice No. 2, Safe Handling and Transport of
LPG in Bulk by Road
Code of Practice No. 3, Prevention and Control of Fire
Involving LPG
Code of Practice No. 4, Safe and Satisfactory Opera-
tion of Propane-Fired Bitumen Boilers, Mastic Asphalt
Cauldrons/Mixers, and Hand Tools
Code of Practice No. 7, Storage of Full and Empty LPG
Cylinders and Cartridges
Code of Practice No. 9, LPG–Air Plants
Code of Practice No. 10, Recommendations for Safe
Handling of LPG in Small Trailer Mounted Vessels,
Skid Tanks and Small Bulk Storage Vessels Permanently
Attached to Mobile Gas-ﬁred Equipment

20/334 Liqueﬁed Petroleum Gas

Code of Practice No. 10, Part 1 (ﬁrst stage of revision),
Containers Attached to Mobile Gas-ﬁred Equipment
Code of Practice No. 20, Safe handling of LPG used as
an Internal Combustion Engine Fuel for Motor Vehicles
Code of Practice No. 12, Safe ﬁlling of LPG cylinders
at depots
Code of Practice No. 14, Hoses for the transfer of LPG
in bulk. Installation, inspection, testing and maintenance.
Code of Practice No. 15, Valve for LPG cylinders.
Part 1. Safety valves for LPG cylinders. Part 2. Outlet
valves for butane cylinders – quick coupling types
Code of Practice No. 17, Purging LPG vessels and sys-
tems
Code of Practice No. 18, Safe use of LPG as propulsion
fuel for boats, yachts and other craft
Code of Practice No. 19, Liquid-measuring systems for
LPG

Code of Practice No. 20, Automotive LPG refueling
facilities
Code of Practice No. 21, Guidelines for caravan venti-
lation and ﬂueing checks
Code of Practice No. 22, LPG piping system design and
installation

Institute of petroleum
Model Code Safe Practice Part 9, Large bulk pressure
storage and refrigerated LPG

Engineering Equipment and Materials Users
Association (EEMUA)
Recommendations for the design and construction of
refrigerated liqueﬁed gas storage tanks

22/353

22

Contents

Steam
Utilization

Albert Armer
Spirax Sarco Ltd

22.1 Introduction
22.2 What is steam? 22/355

22/355

22.2.1 Working pressure in the boiler and mains 22/358

22.3 The steam load

22/359

22.4 Draining steam lines

22/360

22/360

22/360

22.3.1 Sizing the steam lines
22.3.2 Sizing on velocity
22.3.3 Sizing on pressure drop
22/360
22.4.1 Waterhammer 22/360
22.4.2 Steam line drainage
22/361
22.4.3 Heat-up method–supervised
22.4.4 Heat-up method–automatic
22.4.5 Sizing steam traps for warm-up 22/363
22.4.6 Drain point layout
22/364
22.4.7 Air venting the steam lines

22/361
22/362

22/364

22.7 Condensate return systems

22/373
22.7.1 Drain lines to traps 22/373
22.7.2 Trap discharge lines
22/376
22.7.3 Pumped return line
22/376
22.7.4 Condensate pumping
22.7.5 Allowance for expansion
22.7.6 Full loop
22.7.7 Horseshoe or lyre loop
22.7.8 Sliding joint
22.7.9 Bellows

22/386

22/385

22/385

22/377

22/381

22/385

22.5 Low-pressure systems

22/364
22.5.1 Safety relief valve sizing
22.5.2 Parallel and series operation of reducing

22/366

valves

22/366

22/368

22.5.3 Series installations
22.5.4 Bypasses
22/368
22.5.5 Selecting control valves for steam 22/368
22.5.6 Draining condensate from heat exchangers
22.5.7 Air venting

22/369

22/369

22.6 Flash steam 22/369

22/370

22.6.1 The release of ﬂash steam 22/369
22.6.2 Flash steam utilization
22.6.3 Proportion of ﬂash steam released 22/370
22.6.4 Sub-coded condensate
22.6.5 Making use of ﬂash steam 22/371
22.6.6 Space heating
22.6.7 The general case 22/371
22.6.8 Steam traps

22/371

22/371

22/371

22.1 Introduction
The use of steam provides an ideal way to deliver just the
right amount of heat energy to a point of use, to help with
product manufacture or to provide an acceptable environ-
ment. The story of steam efﬁciency begins at the boiler
but it does not end until the energy carried by the steam is
transferred appropriately and the resulting hot condensate
is returned to the boiler. Control of steam is necessary
throughout the plant if the performance designed into the
system is to be achieved and maintained. However, the
natural laws which steam obeys are few in numbers and
are easy to understand. Following them allows efﬁcien-
cies to be achieved that would be envied with most other
energy-distribution systems.

Two of the laws of thermodynamics and two of the
laws of motion will cover almost all needs. In the simplest
terms, it can be said that:

1. Energy is not destructible. It can always be accounted
for, and if it disappears at point A then it reappears in
equal amount at point B. This ensures that the world
is a consistent place and that energy does not mysteri-
ously appear from or disappear to nowhere. In addition
it ensures that the steam tables can be relied on always
to provide information on the properties of steam.

2. Heat ﬂows

from higher-temperature

lower-
temperature objects without any help. It follows that
the rate of ﬂow will vary directly with temperature
differences, and inversely with any resistances to this
ﬂow. A temperature difference is necessary for heat to
ﬂow!

to

3. Any matter tends to move in the direction in which
it is pushed, and, in particular, because of the effects
of friction, any ﬂuid will only ﬂow from high-pressure
to lower-pressure regions. Again, the rate of ﬂow will
vary directly with pressure differences, and inversely
with any resistances to this ﬂow.

4. Gravity acts downwards! The denser constituents in a
mixture often tend to move to the bottom of a space,
unless other forces acting on them oppose such motion.

If these basic laws can be accepted it is easy to build
up an understanding of steam systems and the way that
steam behaves. The ground rules for an effective (and efﬁ-
cient) steam system then quickly become apparent. Spe-
ciﬁc heats and weights for various solids, liquids, gases
and vapors, as well as pipeline capacities, are shown in
Tables 22.1–22.4.

22.2 What is steam?
The datum point, when considering the steam/water sub-
stance, is usually taken as water at the temperature of
melting ice, at normal atmospheric pressure and so at a
temperature of 0°C. Adding heat energy raises its temper-
ature; some 419.04 kJ will raise 1 kg to 100°C, when any
further addition of heat evaporates some of the water. If
2257 kJ are added to each kg of water, then all the water
becomes the dry gas, steam. Equally, if only part of this
extra energy is added – say, 90 per cent – then 90 per
cent of the water evaporates and the other 10 per cent

Table 22.1 Speciﬁc heats and weights of various solids

What is steam? 22/355

Material

Aluminum
Andalusite
Antimony
Apatite
Asbestos
Augite
Bakelite, wood ﬁller
Bakelite, asbestos ﬁller
Barite
Barium
Basalt rock
Beryl
Bismuth
Borax
Boron
Cadmium
Calcite, 32–100°F
Calcite, 32–212°F
Calcium
Carbon
Carborundum
Cassiterite
Cement, dry
Cement, powder
Charcoal
Chalcopyrite
Chromium
Clay
Coal
Cobalt
Concrete, stone
Concrete, cinder
Copper
Corundum
Diamond
Dolomite rock
Fluorite
Fluorspar
Galena
Garnet
Glass, common
Glass, crystal
Glass, plate
Glass, wool
Gold
Granite
Hematite
Hornblende
Hypersthene
Ice, (cid:1)112°F
Ice, (cid:1)40°F
Ice, (cid:1)4°F
Ice, 32°F
Iridium
Iron, cast
Iron, wrought
Labradorite
Lava
Lead
Limestone
Magnetite

Speciﬁc
gravity

2.55–2.8

2.1–2.8

4.5
3.5

2.7–3.2

9.8

1.7–1.8

2.32
8.65

4.58

1.8–2.1

1.8–2.6
0.64–0.93

7.1

8.9

8.8–8.95

3.51
2.9

2.4–2.8
2.9–3.0
2.45–2.72

19.25–19.35

2.4–2.72

5.2
3.0

21.78–22.42
7.03–7.13
7.6–7.9

11.34

2.1–2.86

3.2

Btu per lb
per °F

0.26–0.37

0.22
0.17
0.05
0.20
0.20
0.19
0.33
0.38
0.11
0.07
0.20
0.20
0.03
0.24
0.31
0.06
0.19
0.20
0.15
0.17
0.16
0.09
0.37
0.20
0.24
0.13
0.12
0.22

0.11
0.19
0.18
0.09
0.10
0.15
0.22
0.22
0.21
0.05
0.18
0.20
0.12
0.12
0.16
0.03
0.19
0.16
0.20
0.19
0.35
0.43
0.47
0.49
0.03
0.12
0.12
0.19
0.20
0.03
0.22
0.16

(continued overleaf )

22/356 Steam Utilization

Table 22.1 (continued)

Material

Magnesium
Malachite
Manganese
Marble
Mercury
Mica
Molybdenum
Nickel
Oligloclose
Orthoclose
Plaster of paris
Platinum
Porcelain
Potassium
Pyrexglass
Pyrolusite
Pyroxylin plastics
Quartz, 55–212°F
Quartz, 32°F
Rock salt
Rubber
Sandstone
Serpentine
Silk
Silver
Sodium
Steel
Stone
Stoneware
Talc
Tar
Tellurium
Tin
Tile, hollow
Titanium
Topaz
Tungsten
Vanadium
Vulcanite
Wood
Wool
Zinc blend
Zinc

Speciﬁc
gravity

1.74

2.6–2.86

7.42

13.6

10.2
8.9

21.45

0.86

2.5–2.8

2.0–2.6
2.7–2.8

10.4–10.6

0.97
7.8

2.6–2.8

1.2

6.0–6.24
7.2–7.5

4.5

19.22
5.96

0.35–0.99

1.32

3.9–4.2
6.9–7.2

Acetone
Alcohol, ethyl, 32°F
Alcohol, ethyl, 104°F
Alcohol, methyl, 40–50°F
Ammonia, 32°F
Ammonia, 104°F
Ammonia, 176°F
Ammonia, 212°F
Ammonia, 238°F
Anilin
Benzol
Calcium chloride
Castor oil
Citron oil
Diphenylamine
Ethyl ether
Ethylene glycol
Fuel oil
Fuel oil
Fuel oil
Fuel oil
Gasoline
Glycerine
Kerosene
Mercury
Naphthalene
Nitrobenzole
Olive oil
Petroleum
Potassium hydrate
Sea water
Sesame oil
Sodium chloride
Sodium hydrate
Soybean oil
Toluol
Turpentine
Water
Xylene

0.25
0.18
0.11
0.21
0.03
0.21
0.06
0.11
0.21
0.19
1.14
0.03
0.26
0.13
0.20
0.16

0.19
0.17
0.22
0.48
0.22
0.26
0.33
0.06
0.30
0.12
0.20
0.19
0.21
0.35
0.05
0.05
0.15
0.14
0.21
0.04
0.12
0.33

0.33
0.11
0.09

0.34–0.38

0.32–0.48

Table 22.2 Speciﬁc heats and weights of various liquids

Btu per lb
per °F

Liquid

Speciﬁc
gravity

0.790
0.789
0.789
0.796
0.62

1.02

1.20

1.16

6.96
0.91
0.86
0.81

1.26

13.6
1.14

0.91–0.94

1.24
1.0235

1.19
1.27

0.866
0.87
1

0.861–0.881

Btu per lb
per °F

0.51
0.55
0.65
0.60
1.10
1.16
1.29
1.48
1.61
0.52
0.42
0.73
0.43
0.44
0.46
0.53
0.53
0.40
0.44
0.45
0.50
0.53
0.58
0.48
0.033
0.41
0.36
0.47
0.51
0.88
0.94
0.39
0.79
0.94
0.47
0.36
0.41
1.00
0.41

remains liquid. The speciﬁc volume of steam at atmo-
spheric pressure is 1.673 m3/kg, so the mixture of 90 per
cent steam and 10 per cent water would occupy a vol-
ume of (cid:3)0.9 ð 1.673(cid:4) m3 plus (cid:3)0.1 ð 0.001(cid:4) m3. Clearly,
almost all the volume of this 1 kg of steam and water
is occupied by the steam, at 1.5057 m3, and the mix-
ture would be described as steam with a dryness fraction
of 0.9.

If the water is kept at a pressure above atmospheric,
its temperature can be raised above 100°C before boiling
begins. At 100 psig, for example, boiling point is at about
184.1°C. The extra energy needed to convert water at
this pressure and temperature into steam (the enthalpy of
evaporation) is now rather less at 2000.1 kJ/kg, while the
volume of 1 kg of pure steam is only 0.177 m3. These

ﬁgures are all recorded in the steam tables at the end of
this chapter.

When steam at the saturation temperature contacts a
surface at a lower temperature, and heat ﬂows to the
cooler surface, some of the steam condenses to supply the
energy. With a sufﬁcient supply of steam moving into the
volume that had been occupied by the steam now con-
densed, the pressure and temperature of the steam will
remain constant. Of course, if the condensate ﬂows to a
zone where it is no longer in contact with the steam it can
cool below steam temperature while supplying heat to a
cooler surface.

Equally, if steam at the saturation temperature were
to contact a surface at a higher temperature, as in some
boilers, its temperature could be increased above the evap-
orating temperature and the steam would be described
as superheated. Superheated steam is very desirable in
turbines, where its use allows higher efﬁciencies to be
reached, but it is much less satisfactory than saturated

Table 22.3 Gases and vapors

Gas or vapour

Acetone
Air, dry, 50°F
Air, dry, 32–392°F
Air, dry, 68–824°F
Air, dry, 68–1166°F
Air, dry, 68–1472°F
Alcohol, C2H5OH
Alcohol, CH3OH
Ammonia
Argon
Benzene, C6H6
Bromine
Carbon dioxide
Carbon monoxide
Carbon disulphide
Chlorine
Chloroform
Ether
Hydrochloric acid
Hydrogen
Hydrogen sulphide
Methane
Nitrogen
Nitric oxide
Nitrogen tetroxide
Nitrous oxide
Oxygen
Steam, 1 psia, 120–600°F
Steam, 14.7 psia, 220–600°F
Steam, 150 psia, 360–600°F
Sulfur dioxide

Speciﬁc heat,

Btu per lb
per °F

at constant
pressure

Speciﬁc heat,

volume

Btu per lb
per °F

at constant

0.35
0.24
0.24
0.25
0.25
0.26
0.45
0.46
0.54
0.12
0.26
0.06
0.20
0.24
0.16
0.11
0.15
0.48
0.19
3.41
0.25
0.59
0.24
0.23
1.12
0.21
0.22
0.46
0.47
0.54
0.15

0.315
0.172
0.173
0.178
0.184
0.188
0.398
0.366
0.422
0.072
0.236
0.047
0.150
0.172
0.132
0.82
0.131
0.466
0.136
2.410
0.189
0.446
0.170
0.166
1.098
0.166
0.157
0.349
0.359
0.421
0.119

What is steam? 22/357

steam in heat exchangers. It behaves as a dry gas, giving
up its heat content rather reluctantly as compared with
saturated steam, which offers much higher heat transfer
coefﬁcients.

The condensate produced within the heat exchangers,
as also within the steam lines, is initially at the satura-
tion temperature and carries the same amount of energy as
would boiler water at the same pressure. If it is discharged
to a lower pressure, through a manual or automatic drain
valve (steam trap) or even through a leak, it then con-
tains more energy than water is able to hold at the lower
pressure if it is to remain liquid. If the excess of energy
amounted to, say, 5 per cent of the enthalpy of evapora-
tion at the lower pressure, then 5 per cent of the water
would be evaporated. The steam released by this drop in
pressure experienced by high-temperature water is usually
called ﬂash steam. Recovery and use of this low-pressure
steam, released by ﬂashing, is one of the easiest ways of
improving the efﬁciency of steam-utilization systems.

It

is equally true that condensate, even if

it has
been released to atmospheric pressure, carries the same
419.04 kJ/kg of heat energy that any other water at the
same temperature would hold. Allowing condensate to
drain to waste, instead of returning it to the boiler feed
tank or de-aerator, makes no economic sense. Condensate
is a form of distilled water, requiring little chemical feed
treatment or softening, and it already holds energy, which
may amount to 15 per cent of the energy, which would
have to be supplied to cold make-up feedwater, even
in relatively low-pressure systems. An installation that
makes good use of both ﬂash steam and condensate will
see the beneﬁts on the bottom line! To summarize:

1. Saturated steam provides a heat source at a temperature

that is readily controlled, by the control of pressure;

Table 22.4 Pipeline capacities at speciﬁc velocities (metric SI units)

Pressure

(bar)

Velocity

(m/s)

15 mm

20 mm

25 mm

32 mm

40 mm

50 mm

65 mm

80 mm

100 mm

125 mm

150 mm

kg/h

0.4

0.7

1.0

2.0

3.0

4.0

15
25
40
15
25
40
15
25
40
15
25
40
15
25
40
15
25
40

7
10
17
7
12
18
8
12
19
12
19
30
16
26
41
19
30
49

14
25
35
16
25
37
17
26
39
25
43
64
37
56
87
42
63
116

24
40
64
25
45
68
29
48
71
45
70
115
60
100
157
70
115
197

37
62
102
40
72
106
43
72
112
70
112
178
93
152
250
108
180
295

52
92
142
59
100
167
65
100
172
100
162
275
127
225
357
156
270
456

99
162
265
109
182
298
112
193
311
182
295
475
245
425
595
281
450
796

145
265
403
166
287
428
182
300
465
280
428
745
385
632
1 025
432
742
1 247

213
384
576
250
430
630
260
445
640
410
656
1 010
535
910
1 460
635
1 080
1 825

394
675
1 037
431
716
1 108
470
730
1 150
715
1 215
1 895
925
1 580
2 540
1 166
1 980
3 120

648
972
1 670
680
1 145
1 712
694
1 160
1 800
1 125
1 755
2 925
1 505
2 480
4 050
1 685
2 925
4 940

917
1 457
2 303
1 006
1 575
2 417
1 020
1 660
2 500
1 580
2 520
4 175
2 040
3 440
5 940
2 460
4 225
7 050

(continued overleaf )

22/358 Steam Utilization

Table 22.4 (continued)

Pressure

(bar)

Velocity

(m/s)

15 mm

20 mm

25 mm

32 mm

40 mm

50 mm

65 mm

80 mm

100 mm

125 mm

150 mm

kg/h

5.0

6.0

7.0

8.0

10.0

14.0

15
25
40
15
25
40
15
25
40
15
25
40
15
25
40
15
25
40

22
36
59
26
43
71
29
49
76
32
54
84
41
66
104
50
85
126

49
81
131
59
97
157
63
114
177
70
122
192
95
145
216
121
195
305

87
135
225
105
162
270
110
190
303
126
205
327
155
257
408
205
331
555

128
211
338
153
253
405
165
288
455
190
320
510
250
405
615
310
520
825

187
308
495
225
370
595
260
450
690
285
465
730
372
562
910
465
740
1 210

352
548
855
425
658
1 025
445
785
1 210
475
810
1 370
626
990
1 635
810
1 375
2 195

526
885
1 350
632
1 065
1 620
705
1 205
1 865
800
1 260
2 065
1 012
1 530
2 545
1 270
2 080
3 425

770
1 265
1 890
925
1 520
2 270
952
1 750
2 520
1 125
1 870
3 120
1 465
2 205
3 600
1 870
3 120
4 735

1 295
2 110
3 510
1 555
2 530
4 210
1 815
3 025
4 585
1 990
3 240
5 135
2 495
3 825
6 230
3 220
5 200
8 510

2 105
3 540
5 400
2 525
4 250
6 475
2 765
4 815
7 560
3 025
5 220
8 395
3 995
6 295
9 880
5 215
8 500
13 050

2 835
5 150
7 870
3 400
6 175
9 445
3 990
6 900
10 880
4 540
7 120
12 470
5 860
8 995
14 390
7 390
12 560
18 630

2. It carries very large amounts of heat as enthalpy of
evaporation or latent heat in relatively small weights
of steam;

content is usually simple and effective.

3. It supplies heat, by condensing, at a constant temper-
ature and with high heat transfer coefﬁcients, so it
maximizes the effectiveness of heat exchangers;

4. Recovery and re-use of the condensate and its heat

LP

HP

22.2.1 Working pressure in the boiler and mains

Where steam is generated as a source of energy for tur-
bines or engines the boiler pressure is usually high and
often the steam is superheated. Steam for process use
or for heating may then be supplied through pressure-
reducing valves or be available at pass-out pressures from
the engine or at the exhaust pressure. In other cases where
steam is wanted for process or heating use only, use of
a packaged boiler, or sometimes a single-pass watertube
steam generator is almost universal. The most suitable
operating pressure for the boiler has then to be decided.
It should be said that boilers operating at or close to their
designed working pressure provide steam of the best qual-
ity. When the steam is to be used at a lower pressure, then
pressure-reducing valves or other control valves may be
utilized, close to the steam-using points.

The reason for this becomes clear when the speciﬁc
volume of steam at varying pressures is noted from the
steam tables and Figure 22.1 is considered. This shows
a boiler operating at either high or lower pressure while
producing the same weight of steam from the same energy
input. Energy ﬂows through the outer surface of the tubes
into the boiler water, and when this water is at saturation
temperature any addition of energy means the formation
of steam bubbles. These bubbles rise to the surface and
break, releasing steam into the steam space.

Figure 22.1 Boiler operation at low or high pressure

The volume of a given weight of steam contained in
these bubbles is inversely related to the pressure at which
the boiler operates. If this pressure is lower than the
design pressure, the volume in the bubbles is increased.
This raises the apparent water level in the boiler, reduc-
ing the volume of the steam space. The greater volume
of the bubbles enlarges the turbulence at the surface,

and as the bubbles burst, splashing of droplets into the
steam space increases. The larger volume of steam, ﬂow-
ing towards the boiler crown valve through the reduced
steam space volume, moves at higher velocity. All these
factors increase the carry-over of water droplets with the
steam into the distribution system.

There is much to be said in favor of carrying the steam
to the points where it is to be used, at a pressure close
to that of the boiler. The use of a high-distribution pres-
sure means that the size of the steam mains is minimized.
The smaller mains have lower heat losses, so that better-
quality steam at the usage points is more readily achieved
and the smaller pipes are often much lower in capital cost.
Pressure reduction to the levels needed by the steam-
using equipment can then be achieved by the use of
pressure-reducing stations located close to the steam users
themselves. The individual reducing valves will tend to
be smaller in size than would valves at the supply end,
will give closer control of the reduced pressures and emit
less noise. Problems which may arise if a whole section
of a plant were dependent on a single reducing valve
are avoided. The effects on the steam-using equipment
of pressure drops in the pipework, varying in amount at
different loads, are eliminated.

22.3 The steam load
Before selecting the size of a steam-control valve, a sup-
ply main or even a steam boiler it is necessary to know at
least approximately (or better) how much steam is to be
supplied. Where steam is to be used as the energy source
for heat exchangers this is the same as knowing the heat
load that is to be met.

Almost all heat loads fall into one of two categories.
Either some material is to be heated from a lower tem-
perature to a higher one or it is to be maintained at a high
temperature while heat is supplied at a rate sufﬁcient to
balance the heat losses. In the ﬁrst case the amount of heat
needed to produce the change in temperature is given by
Q D W ð Sp ð υt

where
Q D heat load (kJ),
W D weight of material (kg),
Sp D speciﬁc heat (cid:3)kJ/kg°C(cid:4),
υt D temperature rise (cid:3)°C(cid:4).
More usefully, since the steam ﬂow rate is sought rather

than the weight of steam,
q D Q
h

D W ð Sp ð υt

h

where
q D heat ﬂow (kJ/h),
h D time available (h).
Then if hfg D enthalpy of evaporation of the steam at
the pressure involved,
Ws D W ð Sp ð υt
hfg ð h

(22.1)

The steam load 22/359

where
Ws D ﬂow rate of steam (kg/h),
hfg D enthalpy of evaporation (kJ/kg).

surface involved (kJ/m2 °C h),
(°C),

The second case is the supply of heat at a rate, which
balances the heat losses, and here the heat load is given by
q1 D UAt
(22.2)
where
q1 D heat ﬂow (kJ/h)
U D heat transfer coefﬁcient for heat ﬂow through the
t D temperature difference across surface involved
A D area of surface involved (m2).
It must be said that heat transfer coefﬁcients are affected
by so many variables that
they are best regarded as
approximations, unless measurements have been made
on identical equipment under similar conditions. Further,
it will be noticed that Equations (22.1) and (22.2) each
include a temperature difference term, t or υt, but
two different quantities are meant. To avoid confusion,
it is useful to construct a diagram of the temperatures
around the heat exchanger, as shown in Figure 22.2.
line represents the
At
temperature of steam within the exchanger. Points T2 and
T3 are the inlet and outlet temperatures of the heated
material (or initial and ﬁnal
temperatures). A line is
drawn from T2 to T3, and the difference between T2
and T3 is the temperature increase of the material, υt in
Equation (22.1). The midpoint of the line T2 to T3 gives
the arithmetic mean of the material temperatures, Tm, and
the difference between Tm and T1 is then the arithmetic
mean temperature difference υt in Equation (22.2). Note
that although theoretical considerations lead to the use of
logarithmic means in heat transfer calculations, arithmetic
means are usually sufﬁciently accurate when sizing steam
supply equipment.

temperature T1 a horizontal

Some typical speciﬁc heats are listed in the tables, and
a few examples of heat load calculations may be useful.

1. An air heater battery raises 2 m3/s of air from 5°C to
30°C using steam at a gauge pressure of 6 bar. What
is the hourly steam load? 2 m3/s D 2 ð 3600 m3/h D
2 ð 3600/0.76 kg/h D 9474 kg/h (0.76 m3 of air at 5°C
weighs approximately 1 kg)
Ws D 9474 ð 1.0 ð (cid:3)30 C 5(cid:4)

(cid:3)from equation (cid:3)22.1(cid:4)(cid:4)

2066 ð 1

D 160.5kg/h(cid:3)1 kg of air is heated through 1°C by 1.0 kJ(cid:4).

t°

T2

Figure 22.2

T1

T3

dt

∆t

Tm

22/360 Steam Utilization
2. A caloriﬁer holding 2000 l is heated from 10°C to 60°C
in 2 h using steam at a gauge pressure of 3 bar. What
is the hourly steam load?
Ws D W ð Sp ð υt
hfg ð h

D 98.1 kg/h

D 2000 ð 4.186 ð (cid:3)60 (cid:1) 10(cid:4)

2133.4 ð 2

3. A caloriﬁer has a heating surface area of 2 m2 and is
required to heat a ﬂow of water from 65°C to 80°C. The
U value has been found to be 1250 W/m2 °C, and steam
can be supplied at a gauge pressure of 2 bar in the
steam chest. What rate of water ﬂow can the caloriﬁer
handle (see Figure 22.3). From Equation (22.2):
q D UAt
D 1250 ð 2 ð 61.2
D 153000 W
D 550800 kg/h
(This heat ﬂow implies the condensing of some 550000/
2163.3 or 254.6 kg/h of steam.) From Equation (22.1):
550000 D W ð 4.186 ð (cid:3)80–65(cid:4)

W D 8772 kg/h of water

22.3.1 Sizing the steam lines

The appropriate size of pipe to carry the required weight
of steam at the chosen pressure must be selected, remem-
bering that undersized pipes mean high-pressure drops and
high velocities, noise and erosion. Conversely, when pipe
sizing is unduly generous, the lines become unnecessarily
expensive to install and the heat lost from them will be
greater than it need be.

Steam pipes may be sized so that the pressure drop
along them is within an acceptable limit, or so that veloc-
ities along them are not too high. It is convenient and
quick to size shorter mains and branch lines on a velocity
basis, but the pressure drops along longer runs should also
be checked to verify that sufﬁcient pressure is available
at the delivery points.

22.3.2 Sizing on velocity

In lines carrying saturated steam, reasonable maximums
for velocities are often taken at up to 40 m/s in larger pipes

Ts (2 bar) = 133.7°C

∆t = 61.2°C

80

65

Tm = 72.5°C

Figure 22.3

and at higher pressures. However, 25 m/s may be more
appropriate in the middle ranges and even 15 m/s with
small-size lines and lower pressures. Carrying capacities
of pipes may be read from a table of sizes and pressures,
or if the speciﬁc volume v is read from the steam tables,
then Wkg/h D 0.002827 D2V/v where D D pipe diameter
(mm), V D velocity (m/s), v D speciﬁc volume (cid:3)m3/kg(cid:4).
Velocities higher than 40 m/s may be accepted in the very
large-diameter lines which some process or power indus-
tries use, especially when superheated steam is carried (up
to 60 m/s or even more).

22.3.3 Sizing on pressure drop

In anything other than lines of only a very few meters
in length, it is usual to choose sizes so that the pressure
drop is not above, say, 0.3 bar/100 meter run. Sizing with
greater ﬂow rates in a given size of pipe (and correspond-
ingly higher velocities) will increase the pressure drop in
much more than linear proportion, and can soon lead to
the pipe becoming quite unable to pass the required ﬂow.
Calculation of pressure drops in steam lines is a time-
consuming task and requires the use of a number of
somewhat arbitrary factors for such functions as pipe
wall roughness and the resistance of ﬁttings. To simplify
the choice of pipe for given loads and steam pressures,
Figure 22.4 will be found sufﬁciently accurate for most
practical purposes.

22.4 Draining steam lines
Draining of condensate from steam mains and branch lines
is probably the most common application for steam traps.
It is important for reasons of safety and to help achieve
greater plant efﬁciency that water is removed from steam
lines as quickly as possible. A build-up of water can, in
some cases, lead to slugs of water being picked up by
the steam ﬂow and hurled violently at pipe bends, valves
or other ﬁttings, a phenomenon described graphically as
waterhammer. When carried into heat exchangers, water
simply adds to the thickness of the condensate ﬁlm and
reduces heat transfer. Inadequate drainage leads to leaking
joints, and is a prime cause of wire drawing of control
valve seating faces.

22.4.1 Waterhammer

Waterhammer may occur when water is pushed along a
pipe by the steam instead of being drained away at the
low points and is suddenly stopped by impact on a valve,
pipe tee or bend. The velocities which are achieved by
such slugs of water can be very high, especially on start-
up, when a pipe is being charged with steam. When these
velocities are destroyed the kinetic energy of the water
is converted into pressure energy and a pressure shock
is applied to the obstruction. Usually, there is a banging
noise, and perhaps movement of the pipe. In severe cases
the ﬁtting may fracture with an almost explosive effect
and consequent loss of live steam at the fracture.

Fortunately, waterhammer may be avoided completely
if steps are taken to ensure that water is drained away

Steam flow (kg/h)

Draining steam lines 22/361

2000

3000

4000

10 000

20 000

30 000

50 000

5000

000
100

000
150
000
200
000
300

0.05 bar/100 m
0.1 bar/100 m
0.2 bar/100 m
0.3 bar/100 m
0.4 bar/100 m
0.5 bar/100 m

10

20

40 50 70100

200

300

400

500

1000

0

1

3
5

10
15

25

500
400
300
200
150
100
65

40

25
15
10

)
g

 
r
a
b
(
 
e
r
u
s
s
e
r
p
m
a
e
S

 

t

)

m
m

i

(
 
e
z
s
 
e
p
p

i

 
l

i

a
n
m
o
N

Figure 22.4 Pressure drop in steam lines

before it accumulates in sufﬁcient quantity to be picked
up by the steam. Avoiding waterhammer is a better alter-
native than attempting to contain it by choice of materials
and pressure ratings of equipment.

The steam traps (used to drain water from a separa-
tor where this is ﬁtted, perhaps to deal with carry-over
from a boiler, or to drain condensate from collecting legs
at intervals of not more than, say, 50 meters along the
steam line) clearly must have adequate capacity. For the
separator at the boiler off-take or at a header supplied
from the boiler(s) and itself supplying the steam mains, it
may be necessary to have capacity in the trap(s) of 10 per
cent or even more of the boiler rating. On the steam lines
themselves it is rare for a trap larger than 1
2 inch or 15 mm
size to be needed. Very often, the low-capacity versions
of the 1

2 -inch steam trap are more than adequate.

The capacity of any steam trap will depend on the
difference in pressure between its inlet and outlet connec-
tions. Under system start-up conditions the steam pressure
in the line will at ﬁrst be only marginally above atmo-
spheric. If the trap discharge line rises to a higher level,
or delivers to a pressurized return pipe, no condensate
will ﬂow through the trap until the line pressure exceeds
the back pressure. It is important that steam traps which
can drain by gravity, with zero back pressure, are ﬁtted

if condensate is to be removed as the system is being
heated from cold. Where this means that the start-up con-
densate can only be drained to waste, additional steam
traps connected to the return line may also be ﬁtted to
enable recovery of the condensate to be made during nor-
mal running.

22.4.2 Steam line drainage

The use of oversized steam traps giving very generous
‘safety factors’ does not ensure safe and effective steam
line drainage. A number of points must be considered if
a satisfactory installation is to be achieved, including:

1. The heat-up method employed;
2. The provision of suitable collecting legs or reservoirs

3. Provision of a minimum differential pressure across

for the condensate;

the trap;

4. Choice of steam trap type and size;
5. Proper installation of the trap.

22.4.3 Heat-up method — supervised

In this case a manual drain valve is ﬁtted at each
drain point on the steam system, bypassing the trap

22/362 Steam Utilization

and discharging to atmosphere. These manual drains are
opened fully, either at the previous shutdown so that
residual condensed steam is drained or at least before
any steam is re-admitted to the system. When the ‘heat-
up’ condensate has been discharged and the line pressure
begins to increase, the manual valves are closed. The
condensate formed under operating conditions is then
discharged through the steam traps. These need to be
sized only to handle the loads corresponding to the losses
from the lines under operating conditions as indicated in
Table 22.5.

This heat-up procedure is most often adopted in large
installations where start-up of the system is an infrequent
(perhaps only an annual) occurrence. Large heating sys-
tems and chemical processing plants are typical examples.
The procedure can be made more automatic by using a
temperature-sensitive liquid expansion steam trap in place
of the manual valve. Such an arrangement is a com-
promise between supervised start-up and the automatic
start-up discussed below.

22.4.4 Heat-up method — automatic

One traditional method of achieving automatic start-up is
simply to allow the steam boiler to be ﬁred and brought
up to pressure with the crown valve wide open. Thus
the steam main and branch lines come up to operating
pressure without supervision, and the steam traps must
be arranged so that they can discharge the condensate
as it is formed. This method is usually conﬁned to the
smaller installations that are regularly and frequently shut
down and started up again. Typically, the boilers in many
laundries and dry-cleaning plants often are shut down each
night and restarted each morning.

In anything but the smallest installations the ﬂow of
steam from the boiler into the cold pipes at start-up (while
the boiler pressure is still very low) will lead to excessive
carry-over of boiler water with the steam. Such carry-
over may be enough to overload a separator at the boiler
take-off point or its steam trap (Figure 22.5). Great care

Table 22.5 Heat emission from pipes (metric SI units)

(and even good fortune) is necessary if problems are to
be avoided.

Modern steam practice calls for an automatic valve to
be ﬁtted in the steam supply line, arranged so that the
valve remains closed until a sufﬁcient pressure is attained
in the boiler. The valve can then be made to open over a
timed period, so that steam is admitted to the pipe work
at a controlled rate. The pressure within the boiler may
be climbing quickly but the slow opening valve protects
the pipe work.

Where these valves are used, the time available to warm
up the pipe work will be known, as it is set on the valve
control. In other cases, details of the start-up procedure
must be known so that the time may be estimated. Thus
boilers started from cold may be ﬁred for a short time,
shut off for a period while temperatures equalize, and then
ﬁred again. Boilers may be protected from undue stress
by these short bursts of ﬁring, which extend the warm-up
time and reduce the rate at which the condensate in the
mains must be discharged at the traps.

Separator

Steam

Feedwater

Blowdown

Figure 22.5 Boiler with separator at steam take off

Temperature difference

steam to air (°C)

15

20

25

32

40

50

65

80

100

150

Pipe size (mm)

56
67
78
89
100
111
125
139
153
167
180
194

54
68
83
99
116
134
159
184
210
241
274
309

65
82
100
120
140
164
191
224
255
292
329
372

79
100
122
146
169
198
233
272
312
357
408
461

103
122
149
179
208
241
285
333
382
437
494
566

W/m

132
168
203
246
285
334
394
458
528
602
676
758

108
136
166
205
234
271
321
373
429
489
556
634

155
198
241
289
337
392
464
540
623
713
808
909

188
326
298
346
400
469
555
622
747
838
959
1080

233
296
360
434
501
598
698
815
939
1093
1190
1303

324
410
500
601
696
816
969
1133
1305
1492
1660
1852

Heat emission from bare horizontal pipes with ambient temperature between 10°C and 21°C and still air conditions.

22.4.5 Sizing steam traps for warm-up

Whatever automatic start-up method is adopted, steam
will only ﬂow into the mains and discharge air from the
air vents at a pressure at least a little above atmospheric.
It then reaches the pipe and condenses on the cold metal,
and at ﬁrst the condensate temperature will be well below
100°C (212°F). This means that the steam traps will have
a greater capacity than their normal rating when handling
saturated condensate. If the traps are ﬁtted to a collect-
ing leg, at about 700 mm below the main, then ﬁlling of
the collecting leg will provide a hydraulic head of about
0.07 bar or 1 lb/in2 in addition to the line pressure.

Sizing the traps requires an estimate of the conden-
sate produced in bringing the main up to temperature and
then determining the hourly rate of ﬂow by allowing for
the time available for this warm-up. Suitable traps can
then be chosen to give at least this rate with a total pres-
sure difference of, say, 0.15 bar or 2 lb/in2 across the trap.
Warm-up loads for the most common pipe sizes and pres-
sures are listed in Table 22.6. The maximum condensation
rate occurs when the mains are cold and the pressure (of
the air/steam mixture) within them is still, say, 0.07 bar
(1 lb/in2). As the mains have been heated to some tem-
perature below the corresponding saturated steam mixture,
the amount of condensate formed will not have reached
the values shown in Table 22.3. Further, although some of
the condensate is ﬂowing through the trap, the remainder

Table 22.6 Warm-up load in kg of steam per 30 m of steam main

Draining steam lines 22/363

is ﬁlling the collecting leg. It seems reasonable to take
the Table 22.6 value and to subtract the volume of the
collecting leg, and to use steam traps capable of passing
this net amount in the available time with a pressure dif-
ference of 0.15 bar (2 lb/in2). This may be clariﬁed by an
example.

A length of 150 mm (6 in) main carries steam at 17 bar
(250 lb/in2). Drain points are located at 45 meters (150
feet) intervals, with collecting legs 100 mm (4 inches)
diameter ð 700 mm (28 inches) long. The main is brought
up to pressure from 21°C (70°F) in 30 minutes.
Warm-up load to:100°C D approx. 21.7 kg/45

meters: 212°F

D 31.9 lb/100 ft
D 47.8 lb/150 ft
Capacity of collecting D approx. 5.7 kg

leg D 12.7 lb

Net condensate to be discharged D 16.0 kg D 35.1 lb

Temperature rise to D 207° (cid:1) 21° D 186°C

17 bar D 406 (cid:1) 70 D 336°F

Temperature rise to D 79°C
D 142°F

Steam pressure
(bar)

50

65

80

100

125

150

200

250

300

350

400

450

500

Main size (mm)

(cid:1)18°C
correction

factor

2.8
3.1
3.4
3.7
4.0
4.3
4.7
5.0
5.3
5.5
5.8
6.1
6.6
6.9
7.3
8.6
10.0
11.3
12.2
13.1
14.8
18.0
21.3
23.5
28.8

4.4
5.0
5.4
5.9
6.4
6.9
7.5
8.0
8.4
8.8
9.2
9.6
10.5
11.0
11.5
13.5
15.5
17.4
18.8
20.1
22.7
27.6
32.5
36
44

5.8
6.4
7.0
7.6
8.1
9.0
9.8
10.4
11.0
11.5
12.1
12.7
13.6
14.4
15.0
17.8
20.6
23.3
25.1
26.9
30.5
37
43
48
59

8.3
9.2
10.0
10.8
11.8
12.8
13.9
14.8
15.6
16.4
17.2
18.0
19.5
20.5
21.4
25.6
29.8
34.0
37.0
39.0
44.0
54
63
70
86

0
0.33
0.67
1.00
1.5
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0
10.0
12.0
14.0
16.0
18.0
20.0
25.0
30.0
40.0
60.0
80.0
100.0
125.0
Ambient temperature 20°C. For outdoor temperature (cid:1)18°, multiply load value in table by correction factor. Loads based on ANSI
Schedule 40 pipe for pressures up to 16 bar. Schedule 80 pipe for pressures above 16 bar, except Schedule 120 above 40 bar in sizes
125 mm and over.

11.2
12.4
13.6
14.8
16
17.3
18.9
20.1
21.1
22.2
23.3
24.1
26.4
27.8
30.0
36.0
42
47
51
55
62
98
115
127
159

21.8
24.1
26.4
28.7
30.3
32
37
39.0
41
43
45
47
51
54
57
71
85
98
106
114
129
230
257
284
347

1.5
1.44
1.41
1.36
1.35
1.34
1.32
1.29
1.28
1.27
1.26
1.25
1.24
1.22
1.21
1.21
1.20
1.20
1.19
1.18
1.16
1.145
1.14
1.135
1.27

31
35
38
42
43
45
52
55
58
61
65
68
73
77
80
102
124
146
158
169
191
338
378
418
510

41
45
49
53
58
64
70
74
78
82
85
89
96
102
106
138
170
201
217
232
263
476
532
588
718

49
54
59
64
69
75
82
87
91
96
100
105
114
120
126
165
203
241
259
278
315
569
638
707
863

14.5
16.2
17.6
19.1
20.7
22.4
24.4
26.0
27.4
28.8
30.2
31.6
34.0
36.0
38
47
56
65
70
75
85
131
154
171
208

94
104
114
124
135
146
159
169
178
187
196
205
221
233
263
334
404
474
511
548
620
1120
1255
1390
1700

64
71
77
83
90
98
107
114
120
126
132
138
149
158
164
212
261
309
333
357
405
728
815
902
1100

80
89
97
105
114
124
135
144
151
159
166
173
188
199
223
276
333
388
418
448
507
923
1034
1145
1400

22/364 Steam Utilization

Time to reach 100°C D 79
186
D 142
336

ð 30 min D 12.7 min

ð 30 D 12.7

min
h

ð 60

Trap discharge rate D 16.0 kg
12.7 min
D 35.1
ð 60
12.7
D 75.6 kg/h
D 166 pph

The capacity of a 1

2 in TD trap at 0.15 bar differential
(2 lb/in2) is about 115 kg/h (255 pph) and this trap would
have ample capacity.

It is clear that in most cases other than very large dis-
2 in TD traps are sufﬁciently large. With
tribution mains, 1
shorter distances between drain points, or smaller diam-
2 in low-capacity traps more than meet even
eters, then 1
start-up loads. On very large pipes it may be worth ﬁt-
2 in traps in parallel. Low-pressure
ting 3
mains often are drained through ﬂoat/thermostatic steam
traps, and these traps are now available for use at much
higher pressures than formerly, where it is known that
waterhammer will not be present.

4 in traps, or two 1

22.4.6 Drain point layout

Condensate-collecting legs can be of the same diameter
as the main, up to, say, 100 mm (4 in) size. Larger pipes
can have collecting legs two or three sizes smaller than
the main but not less than 100 mm (4 in) size. The length
of the collecting legs used with automatic start-up is usu-
ally 700 mm (28 in) or more, to give a hydraulic head
of 0.15 bar (1 lb/in2). With supervised start-up, the length
of the legs can be 1.5 pipe diameters but not less than
about 200 mm (8 in). The spacing between the drain points
often is greater than is desirable. On a long horizontal run,
drain points should be provided at intervals of about 45 m
(150 ft) with a maximum of, say, 60 m (200 ft). Longer
lengths should be split up and additional drain points ﬁt-
ted. Any low points in the system, such as the foot of
risers and in front of shut-off or control valves, must also
be drained.

In some cases, the ground contours are such that a
steam main can only be run uphill. This will mean that
the drain points should be closer together over the uphill
section (say, 15 m (50 ft) apart) and the size of the main
increased so that the steam velocity is not more than
about 15 m/s (50 ft/s). The lower steam velocity may then
allow condensate to drain in the direction opposite to the
steam ﬂow.

22.4.7 Air venting the steam lines

Air venting of steam mains is of paramount importance
and is far too often overlooked. Air is drawn into the
pipes when the steam supply is shut off and the residual
steam condenses. A small amount of air is dissolved in
the feedwater entering the boiler, and even if this amounts

Automatic
air vent

End of
main

Steam
trap
set

Figure 22.6 Draining and venting mains

to only a few parts per billion, the gas can accumulate
in the steam spaces since it is non-condensable. Further,
unless the feedwater is demineralized and decarbonated,
carbonates can dissociate in the boiler and release carbon
dioxide into the steam supply. Automatic air vents ﬁtted
above any possible condensate level at the ends of the
steam mains and branches will allow discharge of these
non-condensable gases, so promoting high heat transfer
rates in the exchangers and helping to minimize corrosion
(Figure 22.6).

22.5 Low-pressure systems
With steam generated at or close to the boiler design pres-
sure it is inevitable that some of the steam-using equip-
ment will have to be supplied at a lower pressure. In some
cases the plant items themselves have only been designed
to withstand a relatively low pressure. Sometimes a reac-
tion will only proceed when the steam is at a temperature
below a certain level or an unwanted reaction will occur
above a certain level. For these and similar reasons, steam
often is distributed at a relatively high pressure which
must then be lowered, close to the point of use. Pressure-
reduction stations incorporating pressure-reducing valves
are ﬁtted to perform this function.

Pressure-reducing valves may be either of the sim-
ple, direct acting pattern or be pilot operated (sometimes
described as relay operated) (Figures 22.7 and 22.8). In
the simple type, the force produced by the pressure down-
stream of the valve seat acting on a diaphragm or bellows
is balanced by a control spring. When this force exceeds
that of the spring at a given setting the diaphragm or bel-
lows moves, compressing the spring further until balance
is regained at a higher spring load – and at the same time
moving the valve disc towards its seat. At the new balance
point the steam ﬂow through the valve is lessened and
the downstream pressure is a little higher than the initial
setting. Equally, at higher demand rates the downstream
pressure falls by a small amount. A new balance point is
reached when the lower pressure balances the spring force
at a lower compression, with the valve disc now further
away from the seat. The pressure downstream of a sim-
ple reducing valve must vary, then, from a maximum at
no-load with the valve closed to a lower value on-load
with the valve open. The change in reduced pressure may

Low-pressure systems 22/365

Spring
adjustment

Control
spring

Diaphragm

Inlet

Main valve

Figure 22.7 Direct-acting reducing valve

be called ‘droop’ or sometimes ‘accuracy of regulation’.
Simple valves are used to supply fairly small loads, or
loads which are fairly steady at all times, to minimize
the droop effect or where the reducing valve is followed
by a temperature control valve which can compensate for
the droop.

In other cases of larger and varying loads the droop
of a large valve of simple pattern may be unacceptable.
A very small valve of simple pattern can then be used
as a pilot or relay valve to operate a much larger valve.
The combination then has the droop characteristic of the
2 in (15 mm) simple
very small pilot valve. Typically, a 1
reducing valve might pass full ﬂow with a droop of 20 per
cent of the reduced pressure, while a 3 in (80 mm) pilot-
operated valve can have a droop of only 0.2 bar (3 lb/in2).
It is a mistake to install even the best of pressure-reducing
valves in a pipeline without giving some thought to how
best it can be helped to give optimal performance. First,

the valve chosen must have a large enough capacity that
it can pass the required steam ﬂow, but oversizing should
be avoided. The weight of steam to be passed in a given
time must be calculated or estimated, and a valve selected
which can cope with this ﬂow from the given upstream
pressure to the required downstream pressure. The size of
the valve is usually smaller than either the upstream or
downstream pipe size because of the very high velocities
which accompany the pressure drop within the valve.

Second, any valve which has been designed to operate
on steam should not be expected to work at its best when
supplied with a mixture of steam, water and dirt. A separa-
tor, drained through a steam trap, will remove virtually all
the water from the steam entering the pressure-reducing
set. The bafﬂe type separators are found to be effective
over a wide range of ﬂow rates.

A stop valve is needed so that the steam supply can
be shut off when necessary, and if this valve follows the

22/366 Steam Utilization

Inlet

Figure 22.8 Pilot-operated reducing valve.

separator, the steam supply will be drained even when
the valve is closed. After the valve a line size strainer is
needed. It should have a 100-mesh stainless steel screen to
catch the ﬁne dirt particles that pass freely through stan-
dard strainers. The strainer is installed in the pipe on its
side, rather than in the conventional way with the screen
hanging below the pipe. This is to avoid the screen ﬁll-
ing with condensate, which is often pumped between the
valve plug and seat of a just-opening control valve as
the ﬂow (and pressure drop) through a strainer increases.
This leads rapidly to wiredrawing of the control valve
seat faces, and it is avoided by ﬁtting the strainer horizon-
tally to be self-draining. Pressure gauges at each side of a
pressure-reducing valve both allow the downstream pres-
sure to be set initially and aid in checking the functioning
of the valve in service.

At the low-pressure side of the reducing valve it is
usually essential to ﬁt a relief or safety valve. If any of
the steam-using equipment connected to the low-pressure
range is designed to withstand a pressure below that of
the upstream steam supply, then a safety valve is manda-
tory. Further, it may be called for when it is sought to
protect material in process from over-high temperatures
(Figure 22.9).

22.5.1 Safety relief valve sizing
When selecting a safety valve the pressure at which it is
to be set must be decided. This may be sufﬁciently above

the maximum normal operating pressure, under no-load
conditions, to ensure the safety valve will reseat and not
continue to blow steam, but it must not exceed the design
pressure of the low-pressure equipment. The valve will
give its rated capacity at an accumulated pressure of 10
per cent above the set pressure. This capacity must equal
or exceed the maximum possible capacity of the pressure-
reducing valve if it should fail wide open, when passing
steam from the upstream pressure to the accumulated pres-
sure at the relief valve.

22.5.2 Parallel and series operation of reducing
valves

Parallel operation

In steam systems where load demands ﬂuctuate over a
wide range, parallel pressure control valves with com-
bined capacities meeting the maximum load perform bet-
ter than a single large valve. Maintenance needs, down-
time and lifetime total costs can all be minimized with
such an arrangement. Any reducing valve must be capa-
ble of both meeting its maximum load and modulating
down towards minimum loads when required. The load
turndown with which a given valve will satisfactorily cope
is limited. There are no rules that apply without exception,
but when the low load is less than about 10 per cent of the
maximum load, two valves should always be preferred.

Low-pressure systems 22/367

mean that the valve head can only be moved in a series
of discrete steps. The ﬂow changes resulting from these
movements are likely to be grossly in excess of the load
changes that initiate them. Turndown ratios possible with
piston-operated valves are inevitably smaller than those
available with diaphragm-operated ones.

Stable control of reduced pressures is readily achieved
by the use of two (or more) pressure-reducing valves in
parallel (Figure 22.10). At full load and loads not too
much below this level both valves are in use. As the load
diminishes, the controlled pressure begins to increase and
the valve which is set at the lower pressure begins to
close. When the load can be supplied completely by the
valve set at the higher pressure, the other valve closes.
Any further load reduction causes the remaining valve to
modulate through its proportional band.

Automatic changeover is achieved by the small dif-
ference between the pressure settings of the valves. For
example, a maximum load of 5000 kg/h at 2 bar g might

Figure 22.9 Pressure-control station

Whether a reducing valve is wide open or nearly closed,
movement of the valve head through a given distance in
relation to the seat will be in response to a given change
in the controlled pressure. This valve movement changes
the ﬂow rate by a given amount, the pressure-reducing
valve having a nearly linear characteristic. However, the
change in the controlled pressure follows from a given
percentage change in the ﬂow rate. A valve movement
which changes the steam ﬂow just enough to match the
demand change at high loads will change the ﬂow by too
much at low loads. It follows that instability of ‘hunt-
ing’ becomes more likely when a single valve is asked to
cope with a high turndown in load. A single valve then
tends to keep opening and closing, on light loads. This
leads to wear of both the seating and guiding surfaces
and reduces the life of the diaphragms that operate the
valve. Where valves make use of pistons sliding within
cylinders to position the valve head the situation is wors-
ened. Friction and sticking between the sliding surfaces

Figure 22.10 Typical installation of two reducing valves in parallel

22/368 Steam Utilization

be supplied through one valve capable of passing 1200 kg/h
and set at 2.1 bar g, and a parallel valve capable of pass-
ing 4000 kg/h set at 1.9 bar g. When the steam demand is
at any value up to 1200 kg/h the smaller valve will sup-
ply the load at a controlled pressure just below 2.1 bar g.
An increase in demand above 1200 kg/h will then lead to
the controlled pressure falling to 1.9 bar or lower, and the
second valve then opens to supplement the supply.

Equally, if the demand only rarely exceeded 4000 kg,
or fell below about 1000 kg, it would be possible to set
the larger valve at the higher pressure and supplement the
supply through the smaller valve on those few occasions
when this was necessary. Sometimes the demand pattern
is not known, except for the minimum and maximum val-
ues. Usually valves are then chosen with capacities of one
third and two thirds of the maximum. The smaller valve
is set at the slightly higher pressure.

Series operation
When the pressure reduction is through a ratio of more
than about 10:1 the use of two valves in series should be
considered. Much will depend on the valve being used,
the pressures involved and the variations in the steam
demand. Diaphragm-operated reducing valves have been
used successfully with a pressure ratio as high as 20:1.
They could perhaps be employed on a fairly steady load
to reduce from 6.8 bar g (100 lb/in2) to 0.3 bar g (5 lb/in2).
However, the same valve would probably be unstable
on a variable load reducing from 2.75 bar (40 lb/in2) to
0.22 bar g (2 lb/in2). There is no hard-and-fast rule, but
two valves in series can be expected to provide more
accurate control. The second, low-pressure, valve should
give the ‘ﬁne control’ with a modest turndown, due con-
sideration being given to valve sizes and capacities.

22.5.3 Series installations
For stable operation of the valves some appreciable vol-
ume between them is necessary. A length equal to 50
diameters of the appropriately sized pipe is often recom-
mended or the same volume of larger pipe.

The downstream pressure-sensing pipe of each valve
is connected to a straight section of pipe 10 diameters
or 1 meter downstream of the nearest tee, elbow or valve.
This sensing line should be pitched down, to drain into the
low-pressure line. If it cannot drain when connected to the
top of this line it can often be connected instead to the side
of the pipe. The pipe between the two control valves must
be drained through a steam trap, just as would the foot of
any riser downstream of the pressure-reducing station.

22.5.4 Bypasses
The use of bypass lines and valves is best avoided. Bypass
valves are often found to be leaking steam because of
wire drawing of the seating faces of valves, which have
not been tightly closed. If they are used, the capacity of
the bypass valve should be added to that of the pressure-
reducing valve when sizing relief valves. If it is thought

essential to maintain a steam supply even if a pressure-
reducing valve should be faulty, or undergoing mainte-
nance, consideration should be given to ﬁtting a reducing
valve in the bypass line. Sometimes the use of a parallel
reducing station avoids the need for bypasses.

22.5.5 Selecting control valves for steam

The choice of a suitable temperature or pressure control
valve for steam application will depend on the supply
side pressure, the downstream pressure, and the ﬂow rate
of steam to be passed. In the case of temperature control
valves the ﬁrst of these is usually known and the third can
be calculated, but the appropriate pressure drop through
the valve is often to be decided. Sometimes the maker’s
rating of a heater will specify that it transfers heat at a
certain rate when supplied with steam at a certain pres-
sure. This pressure is then the pressure downstream of the
control valve, and the valve may be selected on this basis.
If the pressure drop across the valve is to be more
than 42 per cent of the inlet absolute pressure the valve
selection is the same as if the pressure drop were only 42
per cent. With this pressure ratio the steam ﬂow through
the valve reaches a critical limit, with the steam ﬂowing
at sonic velocity, and lowering the downstream pressure
below 58 per cent of the inlet absolute pressure gives
no increase in ﬂow rate. When the heater needs a higher
pressure, or when the pressure required in the heater is
not known, it is safer to allow a smaller pressure drop
across the control valve. If the necessary heater pressure
is not known, a pressure drop across the control valve
of 10–25 per cent of the absolute inlet pressure usually
ensures sufﬁcient pressure within the heater. Of course,
in the case of pressure-reducing valves the downstream
pressure will be speciﬁed.

Valve capacities can be compared by use of the Kv (or
Cv when Imperial units are used) values. These factors
are determined experimentally, and the Kv value is the
number of cubic meters per hour of water that will ﬂow
through a valve with a pressure drop of one bar. The Cv
value is the number of gallons per minute of water that
will ﬂow through the valve with a pressure drop of one-
pound f. per square inch. As the gallon is a smaller unit
in the USA, the number of gallons passed is greater, and
the US Cv is 1.2 times the UK Cv. The Kv is about 0.97
of the UK Cv value.

The steam ﬂow through a valve at critical pressure drop
when P2, the downstream pressure, is 0.58 times P1, the
supply pressure, or P2/P1 D 0.58, is given very closely by
W D 12KvP1, where W D steam ﬂow (kg/h), Kv D ﬂow
coefﬁcient and P1 D supply pressure (bar). In the USA,
W D 1.5CvP1, where W D steam ﬂow (pph), Cv D ﬂow
coefﬁcient and P1 D supply pressure (psia). The factors
1.5 (US) and 12 (English metric) are not exactly equiv-
alent but are sufﬁciently close for practical valve sizing
purposes.

When the pressure drop ratio (cid:3)P1 – P2(cid:4)/P1 is less
than 0.42, the steam ﬂow is less than the critical ﬂow.
While BS 5793: Part 2: Section 2.2: 1981 provides an
approximate and a rigorous method of calculating ﬂows,
it
the best results are not

is found in practice that

(cid:1)
distinguishable from the empirical formula
[1 (cid:1) 5.67(cid:3)0.42 (cid:1) x(cid:4)2]
Wx D (Critical ﬂow rate)

where x is the pressure drop ratio and Wx is the corre-
sponding ﬂow rate.

22.5.6 Draining condensate from heat
exchangers

If heat exchangers are not to steadily ﬁll with conden-
sate and the ﬂow of heat to cease, then the condensate
must be drained from them, and steam traps are normally
used for this purpose. However, it is clear that a positive
pressure difference must always exist between the con-
densate within the heat exchanger and the outlet side of
the steam trap. Where the steam is supplied through a
pressure-reducing valve, to meet a steady load, and the
condensate is drained to a return line at lower level than
the outlet and running to a vented receiver, this posi-
tive differential pressure will exist. In a great number of
applications, the steam ﬂow into the exchanger must be
controlled in response to the temperature of the heated
ﬂuid, and if the heat load on the exchanger is less than
the maximum, then the steam ﬂow must be proportion-
ately reduced.

With such a reduction in steam ﬂow the steam pres-
sure within the exchanger will fall. A balance is reached
when the steam pressure is such that the steam tempera-
ture gives an appropriately lowered temperature difference
between the steam and the mean temperature of the heated
ﬂuid. Under no-load conditions, if the ﬂow of the ﬂuid
being heated were to cease or if the ﬂuid were already at
the required temperature as it entered the exchanger then
this temperature difference would have to be zero and the
steam at the same temperature as the ﬂuid leaving the
exchanger.

As a ﬁrst approximation, the expression

q1 D UAt
is used, and since A is a constant and U does not vary
very much, the temperature of the steam must fall along
a straight line from full-load steam temperature to the
control temperature, as the load on the exchanger varies
from maximum to zero. Clearly, as the steam tempera-
ture falls, the corresponding pressure in the steam space
drops, and when it equals the pressure at the outlet side
of the steam trap, condensate ﬂow will cease. If the heat
exchanger is not to ﬂood with condensate it is necessary
to ensure that the steam trap draining the exchanger is
sufﬁciently far below the condensate drain point as to pro-
vide a hydrostatic head to push the condensate through the
trap. Further, if the pressure at the outlet side of the steam
trap is that of the atmosphere, and the pressure within the
steam space is likely to fall below atmospheric, then a vac-
uum breaker is needed to admit air at a point above the
maximum possible level of any condensate so that gravity
can then clear the condensate through the steam trap.

It follows that condensate at the outlet side of the steam
trap can only be at atmospheric pressure, and if it is to
be lifted to a high-level return line, or into a return line

Flash steam 22/369

in which a positive pressure exists, then a condensate
pump is needed for this purpose. Equally, if insufﬁcient
height is available to provide the hydrostatic head in front
of the steam trap, and fall from the steam trap to the
receiver of a condensate pump, it may be possible to
allow condensate to fall directly from the exchanger to the
body of a steam-powered ‘alternating receiver’ condensate
pump, which can then under low-load low-pressure con-
ditions temporarily isolate collected condensate from the
exchanger and use high-pressure steam to push it through
the steam trap. Figure 22.11 illustrates the alternative con-
densate removal methods which are used for the differing
pressure conditions.

22.5.7 Air venting

The existence of air (using this word to cover atmospheric
air and also any other non-condensing gases) in steam
systems was mentioned in Section 22.4.7. It is even more
important that the presence of air in the heat exchangers
themselves is recognized and arrangements made for its
discharge. Air will exert its own partial pressure within
the steam space, and this pressure will be added to the
partial pressure of the steam in producing the total pres-
sure present. The actual steam pressure is lower than the
total pressure shown on a gauge by virtue of the presence
of any air. Since the temperature of saturated steam must
always be the condensing temperature corresponding with
its partial pressure, the effect of air in a steam space is
always to lower the temperature below the level which
would be expected for pure steam at the total pressure
present.

This means that thermostatic balanced pressure steam
traps which open when their element senses a temperature
somewhat below that of saturated steam at the pressure
existing within the steam space are very effective when
used as automatic air vents. They are connected to a steam
space at any location where air will collect. Usually this
means at any ‘remote point’ from the steam entry, along
the path the steam takes as it ﬁlls the steam space.

Air vents are most effective when they are ﬁtted at the
end of a length of 300 mm or 450 mm of uninsulated pipe
that can act as a collecting/cooling leg. Air is an excellent
insulating material, having a thermal conductivity about
2200 times less than that of iron. The last place where
it can be allowed to collect is in the steam space of heat
exchangers. Further, as it contains oxygen or carbon diox-
ide, which dissolve readily in any subcooled condensate
that may be present, the presence of air initiates corrosion
of the plant and the condensate return system.

22.6 Flash steam
22.6.1 Release of ﬂash steam

High-pressure condensate forms at the same temperature
as the high-pressure steam from which it condenses, as the
enthalpy of evaporation (latent heat) is transferred from it.
When this condensate is discharged through a steam trap
to a lower pressure the energy it contains is greater than
it can hold while remaining as liquid water. The excess

22/370 Steam Utilization

Flow

Vacuum
breaker

Control
valve

Exchanger

Steam
supply

Inlet

Inlet

Hydrostatic
head

Trap

Condensate
pump

Flow

Exchanger

Vacuum
breaker

Control
valve

Air
vent

Steam
supply

Condensate
pump

Trap

Figure 22.11 Lifting condensate drained from exchangers

energy re-evaporates some of the water as steam at the
lower pressure. Conventionally, this steam is referred to
as ‘ﬂash steam’, although in fact it is perfectly good steam,
even if at low pressure.

22.6.2 Flash steam utilization

In an efﬁcient and economical steam system, this so-called
ﬂash steam will be utilized on any load that can make use
of low-pressure steam. Sometimes it can be simply piped
into a low-pressure distribution main for general use. The
ideal is to have a greater demand for low-pressure steam
at all times than the available supply of ﬂash steam. Only
as a last resort should ﬂash steam be vented to atmosphere
and lost.

This means that condensate from high-pressure sources
should usually be collected and led to a ﬂash vessel which
operates at a lower pressure (but high enough to be use-
ful). Remember, the ﬂashing off does not normally take
place within the ﬂash vessel. It begins within the seat of

the steam trap and continues in the condensate line. Only
when the high-pressure steam traps are very close to the
ﬂash vessel does any ﬂashing take place within it.

Instead, the ﬂash vessel is primarily a ﬂash steam sep-
arator. Its shape and dimensions are chosen to encourage
separation of the considerable volume of low-pressure
steam from the small volume of liquid.

22.6.3 Proportion of ﬂash steam released

The amount of ﬂash steam which a given weight of con-
densate will release may be readily calculated. Subtracting
the sensible heat of the condensate at the lower pressure
from that of the condensate passing through the traps will
give the amount of heat available for use as the enthalpy
of evaporation (latent heat). Dividing this amount by the
actual enthalpy of evaporation at the lower pressure will
give the proportion of the condensate which will ﬂash off.
Multiplying by the total quantity of condensate being con-
sidered gives the weight of low-pressure steam available.

Thus if, for example, 1000 kg of condensate from a

source at 10 bar is ﬂashed to 1 bar we can say:
Speciﬁc enthalpy of water (10 bar) D 781.6
Speciﬁc enthalpy of water (1 bar) D 505.6
Energy available for ﬂashing D 276

Enthalpy of evaporation at 1 bar D 2201.1

Proportion evaporated D 276

2201.1
D 0.125

Flash steam available D 0.125 ð 1000 kg

D 125 kg

Alternatively, tables such as Table 22.7 or charts such as
that shown in Figure 22.12 will allow the proportion of
ﬂash steam available between two pressures to be read off
directly, within the more usual pressure ranges.

22.6.4 Sub-cooled condensate

Note that the method described assumes that the high-
pressure condensate has not been sub-cooled. If any sub-
cooling has taken place, then the ﬁgure taken for the
enthalpy of water at the higher pressure is reduced by
the amount of sub-cooling. The chart or table can still
be used if the upstream pressure is taken as that corre-
sponding to saturated steam at the same temperature as
the sub-cooled condensate.

In the previous example condensate sub-cooled by 20°C
would be at 164.22°C instead of 184.22°C. Steam at this
temperature would be at a pressure of some 5.83 bar, so
that the chart in Figure 22.12 would be used for a drop
from 5.83 bar to 1 bar instead of from 10 bar to 1 bar, to
allow for the sub-cooling.

22.6.5 Making use of ﬂash steam

The steam/process air heater with multiple coils typiﬁes
the kind of application on which recovery of ﬂash steam

Table 22.7 Condensate proportion released as ﬂash

Flash steam 22/371

from the condensate is most readily affected. Conden-
sate from the high-pressure coils is taken to a ﬂash steam
recovery vessel. Low-pressure steam leaving the vessel is
supplied to the ﬁrst coil at the air-inlet side of the heater
or to an extra coil acting as a pre-heater unit.

Condensate from the low-pressure coil together with
that from the ﬂash vessel will then drain to a collecting
tank, or direct to a condensate pump, for return to the
boiler plant. If the pressure of the ﬂash steam is left to
ﬁnd its own level it will often be sub-atmospheric. As the
condensate must then drain by gravity through the steam
traps these also must be sufﬁciently below the condensate
drain points to provide an appropriate hydraulic head, and
a vacuum breaker ﬁtted above the coil. The alternatives
are to allow the condensate to drain directly to a con-
densate pump, or to supply additional low-pressure steam
through a pressure-reducing valve, to maintain a positive
pressure in the coil and ﬂash vessel.

22.6.6 Space heating
Somewhat similar arrangements can be used when radiant
panels or unit heaters heat
large areas. Some 10–15
per cent of the heaters are separated from the high-
pressure steam supply and supplied instead with low-
pressure steam ﬂashed off the high-pressure condensate.
The heating demands of the whole area remain in step, so
supply and demand for the ﬂash steam are balanced.

22.6.7 The general case
In other cases, ﬂash steam is utilized on equipment, which
is completely separated from the high-pressure source.
Often the low-pressure demand does not at all times match
the availability of the ﬂash steam. A pressure-reducing
station is often needed to make up any deﬁcit and a surplus
valve is required to vent any ﬂash steam in excess of the
amount being condensed.

22.6.8 Steam traps
The wide choice of steam trap types which are available
must at ﬁrst seem confusing, and it is useful to ﬁrst deﬁne

Pressure
at traps
(bar G)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
10
15
20
25
30
40

0

0.2

0.5

0.75

1.0

2

3

4

5

6

7

10

15

Pressure in ﬂash vessel (bar G)

0.038
0.063
0.082
0.098
0.111
0.123
0.133
0.16
0.192
0.222
0.245
0.261
0.296

0.029
0.054
0.073
0.089
0.102
0.119
0.125
0.152
0.183
0.214
0.237
0.253
0.288

0.017
0.042
0.061
0.077
0.091
0.108
0.113
0.141
0.172
0.203
0.226
0.243
0.278

0.008
0.033
0.053
0.069
0.083
0.1
0.106
0.133
0.165
0.195
0.219
0.235
0.271

0
0.025
0.045
0.061
0.078
0.093
0.098
0.125
0.157
0.188
0.212
0.228
0.264

0
0.02
0.036
0.05
0.068
0.074
0.101
0.134
0.165
0.189
0.206
0.242

0
0.017
0.03
0.049
0.054
0.083
0.116
0.148
0.172
0.189
0.226

0
0.014
0.032
0.038
0.067
0.1
0.133
0.157
0.174
0.212

0
0.019
0.024
0.053
0.087
0.12
0.144
0.162
0.2

0
0.012
0.04
0.075
0.108
0.133
0.15
0.189

0
0.029
0.014
0.097
0.122
0.14
0.179

0
0.035
0.069
0.095
0.113
0.153

0
0.032
0.058
0.077
0.118

22/372 Steam Utilization

Flash steam

outlet

G

Pressure
gauge boss

E

Inlet

F

Condensate
outlet

r
a
b

 
s
p
a
r
t
 

n
o

 

e
r
u
s
s
e
r
P

15

14

13

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

2.5 bar
2.0 bar
1.5 bar
1.0 bar
0.5 bar
0.0 bar

0.02

0.06

Flash
steam
pressure

l

e
p
m
a
x
E

0.10

0.14

0.22
kg Flash per kg condensate

0.18

Figure 22.12 Flash vessels

the term ‘steam trap’. In practice, a steam trap has two
separate elements. The ﬁrst of these is a valve and seat
assembly, which can provide a variable oriﬁce through
which the condensate can be discharged at such a rate as
to match the rate of condensation in the equipment being
drained. The opening may be modulated continually to
provide a continuous ﬂow of condensate, or may operate
in an on/off fashion so that the average rate over a period
of time matches the condensation rate.

The second element is a device which will open or
close the valve by measuring some parameter of the ﬂuid
reaching it and ‘deciding’ whether this may or may not
be discharged. It would be found that the controlling ele-
ments mainly fall into one of three categories. The steam
trap can decide automatically whether to open or to close
to the ﬂuid reaching it on the basis of:

1. The density of the ﬂuid, by using a ﬂoat, which will

ﬂoat in water or sink in steam;

2. By measuring the temperature of the ﬂuid, closing the
valve at or near to steam temperature, and opening it
when the ﬂuid has cooled to a temperature sufﬁciently
far below that of steam;

3. By measuring the kinetic effects of the ﬂuid in motion,
since at a given pressure drop, low-density steam will
move at a much greater velocity than will high-density
condensate, and the conversion of pressure energy into
kinetic energy can be used to position a valve.

The groupings then may be described as mechanical,
which will include both ball ﬂoat and inverted bucket
steam traps; thermostatic, which will include both bal-
anced pressure and bimetallic elements; and thermody-
namic or disc pattern traps (Figure 22.13). Each type of
trap has its own characteristics, and these will make one
pattern of trap more suitable for use on a given applica-
tion than another. In practice, it is usual to ﬁnd that the
applications in any given plant fall into a small number
of categories, and it often is possible to standardize on a
quite small number of trap types.

Thus the requirements for draining condensate from the
steam mains are that the trap should discharge condensate
at a temperature very close to that of steam to ensure that
it is in fact drained from the collecting pockets and not
held back because it is not cooled to a sufﬁciently low
temperature; that the trap is not physically large yet has
adequate capacity; that the trap is robust enough to with-
stand severe operating conditions, such as waterhammer
in inadequately drained lines or freezing conditions when
installed outdoors. The thermodynamic trap is very widely
used for this application and is capable of giving excellent
results.

In a similar way, many small jacketed pans, steam radi-
ators and convectors, and some steam tracer lines can
operate most economically if the condensate is retained
within the steam space until it has sub-cooled a little, mak-
ing thermostatic pattern traps the most suitable for these

Condensate return systems 22/373

Ball float steam trap

Inverted bucket steam trap

Balanced-pressure steam trap

Thermodynamic steam trap

Figure 22.13 Steam traps

applications. On the other hand, many heat exchangers
are required to give their maximum output. This requires
that the condensate be removed immediately it forms, or
perhaps, as in air heater batteries, any holding back of
condensate will lead to corrosion. In these cases the use
of a mechanical trap such as the ball ﬂoat pattern or per-
haps the inverted bucket trap becomes essential. Care is
needed when inverted bucket traps are chosen for jobs
where the steam control valve may at times close down,
lowering the pressure in the steam space. This can lead to
re-evaporation of the water seal in an inverted bucket trap,
which would then blow steam. Further, on many heater
exchangers it is important to provide air-venting capacity
at the trap. Float thermostatic traps incorporate a suitable
air vent at the ideal location, just above the water level,

while if inverted bucket traps are used, then separate air
vents must be ﬁtted in bypasses around the trap. Many
steam users prefer to draw up a selection guide list such
as the one shown in Table 22.8.

22.7 Condensate return systems
No single set of recommendations can cover condensate
return systems. These divide naturally into at least three
sections, each with its own requirements.

22.7.1 Drain lines to traps

In the ﬁrst section the condensate ﬂows from the
condensing surface to the steam trap. Since the heat

22/374 Steam Utilization

Table 22.8 Selecting steam traps

Application

CANTEEN

EQUIPMENT

Boiling

pans–ﬁxed

Boiling

pans–tilting

Boiling

pans–pedestal
Steaming ovens
Hot plates
FUEL OIL

HEATING

Bulk/oil storage

tanks

Line heaters
Outﬂow heaters
Tracer lines and
jacketed pipes

HOSPITAL

EQUIPMENT
Autoclaves and

sterilizers

INDUSTRIAL

DRYERS
Drying coils

(continuous)

Drying coils

(grid)

Drying cylinders
Multi-bank pipe

dryers

Multi-cylinder

sizing
machines
LAUNDRY

EQUIPMENT
Garment presses
Ironers and
calenders

Solvent recovery

units

Tumbler dryers
PRESSES
Multi-platen

presses
(parallel
connections)

Multi-platen

presses (series
connections)

Tire presses

Spirax Sarco Spirax Sarco Spirax Sarco

FT range

(ﬂoat/

thermostatic)

IB range
(inverted
bucket)

TD range
(thermo-
dynamic)

Spirax Sarco
BPT (balanced

pressure

thermostatic

Spirax Sarco Spirax Sarco Spirax Sarco Spirax Sarco

SM

(bimetallic)

No. 8 (liquid FT/TV/SLR
expansion)

(ﬂoat/

FT/SLR

(ﬂoat/steam

thermostatic
with steam
lock release)

lock

release)

B

B

B

B

A

B

B

B

A

A

A

B

B1

B1

B1

B1

B1

B1

B1

B1

B1

A

B

B

A
B

B

B

B
A

B

B
B

A

A

B

B1

B1

B

A
B1

B

A

A1

B

A1

B1
A1

B

A

B1

B1
B1

B1

B
B1

B

B1

B

B1

A

B

B

A2

A2
A2

A3

A

B

A

B

B

B

Table 22.8 (continued)

Condensate return systems 22/375

Application

PROCESS

EQUIPMENT

Boiling

Boiling

pans–ﬁxed

pans–tilting

Brewing coppers
Digesters
Evaporators
Hot tables
Retorts
Bulk storage
tanks
Vulcanizers
SPACE

HEATING
EQUIPMENT

Caloriﬁers
Heater batteries
Radiant panels

and strips

Radiators and
convention
cabinet heaters

Overhead pipe

coils

STEAM MAINS
Horizontal runs
Separators
Terminal
Shutdown drain

(frost
protection)
TANKS AND

VATS

Process vats

(rising
discharge pipe)

Process vats

(discharge pipe
at base)

Small coil-heated

tanks (quick
boiling)

Small coil-heated

tanks (slow
boiling)

Spirax Sarco Spirax Sarco Spirax Sarco

FT range

(ﬂoat/

thermostatic)

IB range
(inverted
bucket)

TD range
(thermo-
dynamic)

Spirax Sarco
BPT (balanced

pressure

thermostatic

Spirax Sarco Spirax Sarco Spirax Sarco Spirax Sarco

SM

(bimetallic)

No. 8 (liquid FT/TV/SLR
expansion)

(ﬂoat/

FT/SLR

(ﬂoat/steam

thermostatic
with steam
lock release)

lock

release)

B

A

B

B

B
B
B

B1

B

B1

B1

B1
B1
B1

A

A
A
A

A

B

A
A
A

B

B

B
A
B

B

A

A

B1

B1

B

B1

B1

A
B
A1

A

B

B1
B1
B1

B1
A1

A1

B1
B1
B1

B1

B
B
B1

B

B

B

B

A

A

A

B1
B2
B2
B3

B

B

B

B

A

A

A D best choice
B D acceptable alternative
1. With air vent in parallel.
2. At end of cooling leg. Minimum length 1 m (3 ft).
3. Use special tracing traps which offer ﬁxed temperature discharge option.

22/376 Steam Utilization

exchanger steam space and the traps are at the same
pressure, gravity is relied on to induce ﬂow. When the
traps are vertically below the drainage points, or are
close to them, it may be satisfactory to use a line of the
same size as the inlet connection of the trap. However,
if the trap must be located a little further away from the
drainage point, then the line between the trap point and
the trap can be laid with a slight fall (say, 1 in 250),
and Table 22.9 shows the water-carrying capacities of the
pipes with such a gradient. It is important to allow for the
passage of incondensables to the trap and for the extra
water which is carried during cold-start conditions. In
most cases it is sufﬁcient to size these pipes on twice
the full running load.

22.7.2 Trap discharge lines

At the outlet side of the traps, the ‘condensate’ lines have
to carry both the condensate and any non-condensable
gases, together with the ﬂash steam released from the con-
densate. Wherever possible, these pipes should drain by
gravity from the traps to the condensate receiver, whether
this is a ﬂash recovery vessel or the vented receiver of
a pump. With atmospheric pressure in the return line,
and pressures upstream of the traps of up to about 4 bar
(60 lb/in2), the sizing method described above is more
than adequate. At higher upstream pressures the volume
of the ﬂash steam released from the condensate becomes
signiﬁcant and must be given due consideration. If the
pressure at the discharge side of the traps is above atmo-
spheric pressure, then sizing these lines on twice the full
running load may still be adequate even with pressures
well above 4 bar (60 lb/in2) at the inlet side. The chart
shown in Figure 22.14 allows the lines to be sized as
ﬂash steam lines, since the volume of the condensate is
so much less than that of the steam released. Draining con-
densate from traps that serve loads at differing pressures to
a common condensate return line is a concept that is often
found difﬁcult. Many users assume that the high-pressure
condensate will prevent the low-pressure condensate from
passing through the low-pressure traps and give rise to
water logging of the low-pressure systems. However, the
terms ‘high pressure’ and ‘low pressure’ can only apply
to the conditions on the upstream side of the seats in the

Table 22.9 Water-carrying capacity of pipes (SI units)
(approximate frictional resistance in mbar per m of travel)

Steel
tube
(mm)

15
20
25
32
40
50
65
80
100

0.3

(30 Pa)

0.5

(50 Pa)

0.6

(60 Pa)

0.8

(80 Pa)

1.0

(100 Pa)

1.4

(140 Pa)

95
220
410
980
1 360
2 630
5 350
8 320
17 000

130
290
540
1 180
1 790
3 450
6 950
10 900
22 200

140
320
600
1 300
2 000
3 810
7 730
12 000
24 500

160
370
690
1 500
2 290
4 390
8 900
13 800
28 200

180
420
790
1 700
2 590
4 990
10 150
15 650
31 900

220
500
940
2 040
3 100
6 000
12 100
18 700
38 000

steam traps. At the downstream or outlet side of the traps
the pressure must be the common pressure in the return
line. This return line pressure will be the sum of at least
three components:

1. The pressure at the end of the return line, either atmo-
spheric or of the vessel into which the line discharges;
2. The hydrostatic head needed to lift the condensate up

any risers in the line;

3. The pressure drop needed to carry the condensate and

any ﬂash steam along the line.

Item 3 is the only one likely to give rise to any prob-
lems if condensate from sources at different pressures
enters a common line. The return should be sufﬁciently
large to carry all the liquid condensate and the varying
amounts of ﬂash steam associated with it, without requir-
ing excessive line velocities and excessive pressure drop.
If this is accepted, then the total return line cross-sectional
area will be the same, whether a single line is used or if
two or more lines are ﬁtted with each taking the con-
densate from a single pressure source. Return lines may
become undersized, requiring a high pressure at the trap
discharges and restricting or even preventing discharge
from the low-pressure traps, if it is forgotten that the
pipe must carry ﬂash steam as well as water and that
ﬂash steam is released in appreciable quantity from high-
pressure condensate.

22.7.3 Pumped return line

Finally, the condensate is often pumped from the receiver
to the boiler house. Pumped condensate lines carry only
water, and rather higher water velocities can often be used
to minimize pipe sizes. The extra friction losses entailed
must not increase back pressures to the point where pump
capacity is affected. Table 22.10 can be used to help esti-
mate the frictional resistance presented by the pipe.

Condensate pumps usually operate with an on/off act-
ion, so that the instantaneous ﬂow rate during the ‘on’
period is greater than the average rate of ﬂow of conden-
sate to the pump receiver. This increased instantaneous
ﬂow rate must be kept in mind when sizing the deliv-
ery lines.

Where long delivery lines are used, the water ﬂowing
along the pipe as the pump discharges attains a consider-
able momentum. At the end of the discharge period when
the pump stops, the water tends to keep moving along
the pipe and may pull air or steam into the delivery pipe
through the pump outlet check valve. When this bubble
of steam reaches a cooler zone and condenses, the water
in the pipe is pulled back towards the pump. When the
reverse ﬂow reaches and closes the check valve, water-
hammer often results. This problem is greatly reduced by
adding a second check valve in the delivery line some 5
or 6 m from the pump. If the line lifts to a high level as
soon as it leaves the pump then adding a generously sized
vacuum breaker at the top of the riser is often an extra
help. However, it may be necessary to provide means of
venting from the pipe at appropriate points the air that
enters through the vacuum breaker.

)
r
a
b
(
 

p
a
r
t
 

n
o

 

e
r
u
s
s
e
r
P

20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

250
300
400
500

1000

2000

5000

)
h

/

g
k
(
 

d
a
o

l
 

e

t

a
s
n
e
d
n
o
C

10,000

15,000

20,000

Return line pressure (bar)

7 6 5 4 3 2 1.5 1

Condensate return systems 22/377

A

B

300 250 200

150 125 100

80 65

D

50

40 35 25
Return line size (mm)

300 m/s
25 m/s
20 m/s

C

Return line pressure (bar)

0

0.5

1.51

2 3 4 5 6 7

Figure 22.14 Condensate line sizing chart where pressure at traps is above 4 bar (SI units). 1. From pressure upstream of trap move
horizontally to pressure in return line (A). 2. Drop vertically to condensate load in kg/h (B). 3. Follow curve to RH scale and across to same
return line pressure (C). 4. Move upward to return line ﬂash velocity – say, 25 m/s maximum (D). 5. Read return line size.

The practice of connecting additional trap discharge
lines into the pumped main is usually to be avoided.
The ﬂash steam which is released from this extra conden-
sate can lead to waterhammer. Preferably, the trap should
discharge into a separate gravity line which carries the
condensate to the receiver of the pump. If this is impos-
sible, one may arrange for the condensate and associated
ﬂash steam to enter the pumped main through a small
‘sparge’ or diffuser ﬁtting so that the ﬂash steam can be
condensed immediately in the pumped water.

22.7.4 Condensate pumping
In nearly all steam-using plants condensate must be
pumped back to the boilerhouse from the location where it

is formed, and even in those cases where gravity drainage
to the boilerhouse is practical, often the condensate must
be lifted into a boiler feed tank. Where de-aerators are
used they usually operate at a pressure of about 0.3 bar
above atmospheric, and again a pump is needed to
lift condensate from atmospheric pressure to de-aerator
pressure.

Most pump units comprise a receiver

tank that
conventionally is vented to atmosphere and one or more
motorized pumps. It
is important with these units to
make sure that the maximum condensate temperature as
speciﬁed by the manufacturer is not exceeded, as well
as that the pump has sufﬁcient capacity to handle the
load. Condensate temperature usually presents no problem

22/378 Steam Utilization

Figure 22.15 Condensate recovery unit

with returns from low-pressure heating systems. There,
the condensate is often below 100°C even as it leaves the
traps, and a little further sub-cooling in the gravity return
lines and in the pump receiver itself means that there
is little difﬁculty in meeting the maximum temperature
limitations.

On higher-pressure systems, the gravity return lines
often contain condensate at a little above 100°C, together
with some ﬂash steam. The cooling effect of the piping is
limited to condensing a little of the ﬂash steam, and the
remainder passes through the vent at the pump receiver.
The water must remain in the receiver for an appreciable
time if it is to cool sufﬁciently, or sometimes the pump
discharge may be throttled down to reduce the pump’s
capacity if cavitation is to be avoided.

The absolute pressure at the inlet to the pump is usu-
ally the atmospheric pressure in the receiver, plus the
static head from the water surface to the pump inlet and
minus the friction loss through the pipes, valves and ﬁt-
tings joining the pump to the receiver. If his absolute
pressure exceeds the vapor pressure of water at the tem-
perature at which it enters the pump, then a net positive
suction hand (NPSH) exists. If this NPSH is above the
value speciﬁed by the pump manufacturer, the water does
not begin to boil as it enters the pump suction and cav-
itation is avoided. If the water entering the pump is at a
higher temperature, its vapor pressure is increased and a
greater hydrostatic head over the pump suction is needed
to ensure that the necessary NPSH is obtained.

However, since in most cases pumps are supplied cou-
pled to receivers and the static head above the pump inlet

is already ﬁxed by the manufacturer, it is only neces-
sary to ensure that the pump set has sufﬁcient capacity at
the water temperature expected at the pump. Pump man-
ufacturers usually have a set of capacity curves for the
pump when handling water at different temperatures, and
these should be consulted. Where steam systems operate
at higher pressures than those used in low-pressure space
heating systems, as in process work, condensate tempera-
tures can be 100°C, or more when positive pressures exist
in the return lines. Electric pumps are then used only if
their capacity is down rated by partial closure of a valve at
the pump outlet; by using a receiver mounted well above
the pump to ensure sufﬁcient NPSH; or by sub-cooling
the condensate through a heat exchanger of some type.

All these difﬁculties are avoided by the use of steam-
powered alternating receiver pumps of the type illustrated
in Figure 22.16. These pumps are essentially alternating
receivers that can be pressurized using steam (or air or
other gas). The gas pressure displaces the condensate
(which can be at any temperature up to and including
boiling point) through a check valve at the outlet from the
pump body. At the end of the discharge stroke, the internal
mechanism changes over to close the pressurizing inlet
valve and open the exhaust valve. The pressurizing gas
is then vented to atmosphere, or to the space from which
the condensate is being drained. When the pressures are
equalized, condensate can ﬂow by gravity into the pump
body to reﬁll it and complete the cycle. As the pump ﬁlls
only by gravity, there can be no cavitation and pumps
of this type readily handle boiling water or other liquids
compatible with the materials of construction.

Table 22.10 Flow of water at 75°C in black steel pipes

Condensate return systems 22/379

D equivalent length of pipe (cid:3)(cid:28) D 1(cid:4) m
D velocity

M D mass ﬂow rate
le
p1 D pressure loss per unit length
v
Ł(cid:3)Re(cid:4) D 2000
†(cid:3)Re(cid:4) D 3000

kg/s

Pa/m
m/s

(continued overleaf )

22/380 Steam Utilization

Table 22.10 (continued)

Most often,

the pump uses steam as the operating
the end of the
medium. This steam is exhausted at
discharge stroke to the same pressure as the space from
which the condensate is being drained. It is often possible
where the larger condensate loads are being handled to
dedicate a single pump to each load. The pump exhaust
line can then be directly connected to the steam space of

the heat exchanger, with condensate draining freely to the
pump inlet and with any steam trap at the pump outlet.

During the discharge stroke, the inlet check valve is
closed. Condensate draining from the steam space then
ﬁlls the inlet piping. Unless the piping is sufﬁciently
large or contains a receiver section (reservoir), condensate
could back up into the steam space being drained.

Table 22.10 (continued)

Condensate return systems 22/381

(continued overleaf )

A similar reservoir is desirable where multiple loads
discharge through individual steam traps to a common
pump. Provision should then be made for venting non-
condensables and ﬂash steam which reach the reservoir.
The exhaust line from the pump can then be connected to
the same vent line.

22.7.5 Allowance for expansion

All pipes will be installed at ambient temperature. Pipes
used to carry hot ﬂuids, whether water, oil or steam,
operate at higher temperatures. It follows that they expand
(especially in length) with the increase from ambient to

working temperatures. The amount of the expansion is
readily calculated or read from charts, and Table 22.11
may are helpful.

The piping must be sufﬁciently ﬂexible to accommo-
date the movements of the components as it heats up. In
many cases, the piping has enough natural ﬂexibility, by
virtue of having reasonable lengths and plenty of bends
that no undue stresses are set up. In other installations
it is necessary to build in some means of achieving the
required ﬂexibility.

Where the condensate from a steam main drain trap
is discharged into a return line running alongside the
steam line the difference between the expansions of the

22/382 Steam Utilization

Table 22.10 (continued)

two lines must be remembered. The steam line may be
at a temperature very much above that of the return
line, and the two connection points can move in relation
to each other during system warm-up. Some ﬂexibility
should be incorporated into the steam trap piping so that
branch connections do not become overstressed, as in
Figure 22.17.

The amount of movement to be taken up by the piping
and any device incorporated into it can be reduced by
the use of ‘cold draw’. The total amount of expansion
is ﬁrst calculated for each section between ﬁxed anchor
points. The pipes are left short by half this amount, and
stretched cold, as by pulling up bolts at a ﬂanged joint, so
that at ambient temperature the system is stressed in one

Condensate return systems 22/383

Figure 22.16 Spirax Ogden packaged unit

Table 22.11 Expansion of pipes

Final temperature
(cid:3)°F(cid:4)

(cid:3)°C(cid:4)

Expansion per 30 m

(mm)

(100 ft)

(in)

66
93
121
149
177
204
232
260

150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500

19
29
41
50
61
74
84
97

0.75
1.14
1.61
1.97
2.4
2.91
3.3
3.8

direction. When warmed through half the total tempera-
ture rise, and having expanded by half the total amount,
the piping is unstressed. At working temperature and hav-
ing fully expanded, the piping is stressed in the opposite
direction. The effect is that instead of being stressed from
zero to Cf units, the piping is stressed from (cid:1) 1
2 f to
C 1
2 f. In practical terms the piping is assembled with
a spacer piece, of length equal to half the expansion,
between two ﬂanges. When the piping is fully installed

C o n d e n s a t e   m a i n

S t e a m   m a i n

Spiratec
chamber

Trap

Check
valve

Figure 22.17 Flexible trapping arrangements

and anchored the spacer is removed and the joint pulled
up tight (Figure 22.18). The remaining part of the expan-
sion, if not accepted by the natural ﬂexibility of the piping,
will call for the use of an expansion ﬁtting. These can take
several forms.

L

Position after
cold draw

Neutral position

Hot position

Spacer piece

Half calculated expansion
over length L

Figure 22.18 Cold draw

22/384 Steam Utilization

Steam Tables (metric SI units)

Pressure

absolute

gauge

kPa

30.0
50.0

75.0
95.0
0

10.0
20.0
30.0
40.0
50.0
60.0
70.0
80.0
90.0
100.0
110.0
120.0
130.0
140.0
150.0
160.0
170.0
180.0
190.0
200.0
220.0
240.0
260.0
280.0
300.0
320.0
340.0
360.0
380.0
400.0
450.0
500.0
550.0
600.0
650.0
700.0
750.0
800.0
850.0
900.0
950.0
1000.0
1050.0
1100.0
1150.0
1200.0
1250.0
1300.0
1350.0
1400.0
1450.0
1500.0

bar

0.30
0.50

0.75
0.95
0

0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
0.90
1.00
1.10
1.20
1.30
1.40
1.50
1.60
1.70
1.80
1.90
2.00
2.20
2.40
2.60
2.80
3.00
3.20
3.40
3.60
3.80
4.00
4.50
5.00
5.50
6.00
6.50
7.00
7.50
8.00
8.50
9.00
9.50
10.00
10.50
11.00
11.50
12.00
12.50
13.00
13.50
14.00
14.50
15.00

Temperature

°C

Speciﬁc enthalpy

Water (cid:3)hf(cid:4)

kJ/kg

Evaporation (cid:3)hfg(cid:4)

kJ/kg

Steam (cid:3)hg(cid:4)

kJ/kg

Speciﬁc volume

steam
m3/kg

69.10
81.33

91.78
98.20
100.00

102.66
105.10
107.39
109.55
111.61
113.56
115.40
117.14
118.80
120.42
121.96
123.46
124.90
126.28
127.62
128.89
130.13
131.37
132.54
133.69
135.88
138.01
140.0
141.92
143.75
145.46
147.20
148.84
150.44
151.96
155.55
158.92
162.08
165.04
167.83
170.50
173.02
175.43
177.75
179.97
182.10
184.13
186.05
188.02
189.82
191.68
193.43
195.10
196.62
198.35
199.92
201.45

289.23
340.49

384.39
411.43
419.04

430.2
440.8
450.4
459.7
468.3
476.4
484.1
491.6
498.9
505.6
512.2
518.7
524.6
530.5
536.1
541.6
547.1
552.3
557.3
562.2
571.7
580.7
589.2
597.4
605.3
612.9
620.0
627.1
634.0
640.7
656.3
670.9
684.6
697.5
709.7
721.4
732.5
743.1
753.3
763.0
772.5
781.6
790.1
798.8
807.1
815.1
822.9
830.4
837.9
845.1
852.1
859.0

2336.1
2305.4

2278.6
2261.8
2257.0

2250.2
2243.4
2237.2
2231.3
2225.6
2220.4
2215.4
2210.5
2205.6
2201.1
2197.0
2192.8
2188.7
2184.8
2181.0
2177.3
2173.7
2170.1
2166.7
2163.3
2156.9
2150.7
2144.7
2139.0
2133.4
2128.1
2122.9
2117.8
2112.9
2108.1
2096.7
2086.0
2075.7
2066.0
2056.8
2047.7
2039.2
2030.9
2022.9
2015.1
2007.5
2000.1
1993.0
1986.0
1979.1
1972.5
1965.4
1959.6
1953.2
1947.1
1941.0
1935.0

2625.3
2645.9

2663.0
2673.2
2676.0

2680.4
2684.2
2687.6
2691.0
2693.9
2696.8
2699.5
2702.1
2704.5
2706.7
2709.2
2711.5
2713.3
2715.3
2717.1
2718.9
2720.8
2722.4
2724.0
2725.5
2728.6
2731.4
2733.9
2736.4
2738.7
2741.0
2742.9
2744.9
2746.9
2748.8
2753.0
2756.9
2760.3
2763.5
2766.5
2769.1
2771.7
2774.0
2776.2
2778.1
2780.0
2781.7
2783.3
2784.8
2786.3
2787.6
2788.8
2790.0
2791.1
2792.2
2793.1
2794.0

5.229
3.240

2.217
1.777
1.673

1.533
1.414
1.312
1.225
1.149
1.083
1.024
0.971
0.923
0.881
0.841
0.806
0.773
0.743
0.714
0.689
0.665
0.643
0.622
0.603
0.568
0.536
0.509
0.483
0.461
0.440
0.422
0.406
0.389
0.374
0.342
0.315
0.292
0.272
0.255
0.240
0.227
0.215
0.204
0.194
0.185
0.177
0.171
0.163
0.157
0.151
0.148
0.141
0.136
0.132
0.128
0.124

Steam Tables (continued)

Pressure

bar

15.50
16.00
17.00
18.00
19.00
20.00
21.00
22.00
23.00
24.00
25.00
26.00
27.00

kPa

1550.0
1600.0
1700.0
1800.0
1900.0
2000.0
2100.0
2200.0
2300.0
2400.0
2500.0
2600.0
2700.0

Temperature

°C

202.92
204.38
207.17
209.90
212.47
214.96
217.35
219.65
221.85
224.02
226.12
228.15
230.14

Condensate return systems 22/385

Speciﬁc enthalpy

Speciﬁc volume

Water (cid:3)hf(cid:4)

kJ/kg

Evaporation (cid:3)hfg(cid:4)

kJ/kg

Steam (cid:3)hg(cid:4)

kJ/kg

865.7
872.3
885.0
897.2
909.0
920.3
931.3
941.9
952.2
962.2
972.1
981.6
990.7

1928.8
1923.4
1912.1
1901.3
1890.5
1880.2
1870.1
1860.1
1850.4
1840.9
1831.4
1822.2
1813.3

2794.9
2795.7
2797.1
2798.5
2799.5
2800.5
2801.4
2802.0
2802.6
2803.1
2803.5
2803.8
2804.0

steam
m3/kg

0.119
0.117
0.110
0.105
0.100
0.0949
0.0906
0.0868
0.0832
0.0797
0.0768
0.0740
0.0714

Figure 22.19 Full loop

Figure 22.20 Horseshoe loop

Figure 22.21 Sliding joint

22.7.6 Full loop (Figure 22.19)

This is simply one complete turn of the pipe and should
preferably be ﬁtted in a horizontal rather than a vertical
position to prevent condensate building up. The down-
stream side passes below the upstream side and great care
must be taken that it is not ﬁtted the wrong way round.

Figure 22.22 Bellows

When full loops are to be ﬁtted in a conﬁned space, care
must be taken in purchasing; otherwise, wrong-handed
loops may be supplied.

The full loop does not produce a force in opposition to
the expanding pipe work as in some other types but with
steam pressure inside the loop, there is a slight tendency
to unwind, which puts an additional stress on the ﬂanges.

22.7.7 Horseshoe or lyre loop (Figure 22.20)
Where space is available, this type is sometimes used. It
is best ﬁtted horizontally so that the loop and main are
all in the same plane. Pressure does not tend to blow the
ends of the loop apart but there is a very slight straight-
ening out effect. This is due to the design but causes no
misalignment of the ﬂanges. In other cases, the ‘loop’ is
fabricated from straight lengths of pipe and 90° bends.
This may not be as effective and requires more space but
it meets the same need. If any of these arrangements are
ﬁtted with the loop vertically above the pipe then a drain
point must be provided on the upstream side.

22.7.8 Sliding joint (Figure 22.21)
These are often used because they take up little room
but it is essential that the pipeline is rigidly anchored

22/386 Steam Utilization

Lug

Strap

Lug

Figure 22.23 Expansion ﬁtting

and guided. This is because steam pressure acting on the
cross-sectional area of the sleeve part of the joint tends to
blow the joint apart in opposition to the forces produced
by the expanding pipe work. Misalignment will cause the
sliding sleeve to bend, while regular maintenance of the
gland packing is also needed

22.7.9 Bellows (Figure 22.22)
A simple bellows has the advantage that it is an in-line
ﬁtting and requires no packing, as does the sliding joint

Figure 22.24 Anchor points

type. But it does have the same disadvantage as the slid-
ing joint in that pressure inside tends to extend the ﬁtting
so that anchors and guides must be able to withstand
this force.

The bellows can, however, be incorporated into a prop-
erly designed expansion ﬁtting as shown in Figure 22.23,
which is capable of absorbing not only axial movement
of the pipeline but some lateral and angular displacement
as well.

If expansion ﬁttings are to work as intended, it is essen-
tial that the steam line is properly anchored at some point
between the expansion ﬁttings. Guiding is also important
to ensure that any movement does not interfere with the
designed fall towards the drain points.

Detailed design is clearly outside the scope of this
section but Figure 22.24 shows some typical anchor points
utilizing pipe ﬂanges or lugs welded onto the pipe.

23/387

Industrial Boilers

E Walker and R J Blaen
Senior Green Limited

23

Contents

23.1 Terminology

23/389

23/389

23/389
23/389

23/389
23/389

23/389

23.1.1 Shell boiler
23.1.2 Watertube boiler
23.1.3 Dryback boiler
23.1.4 Wetback boiler
23.1.5 Economic boiler
23.1.6 Packaged boiler
23.1.7 Evaporation
23/389
23.1.8 Factor of evaporation
23.1.9 Availability
23/389
23.1.10 Priming
23/389
23.1.11 Thermal storage
23.1.12 Accumulator
23.1.13 Cavitation

23/390

23/390

23/389

23/389

23.2 Heat transfer in industrial boilers

23/390

23.3 Types of boiler

23/390

23/390

23/390

23.2.1 Conduction
23.2.2 Radiation
23.2.3 Convection
23.2.4 Furnace heat transfer 23/391
23.2.5 Boiler tube convection heat transfer
23.2.6 Water-side conditions
23.2.7 Further reading
23/393

23/393

23/392

23/393

23/393

23/393
23/393

23.3.1 Cast iron sectional boilers
23.3.2 Steel boilers
23.3.3 Electrode boilers
23.3.4 Steam generators
23.3.5 Vertical shell boilers
23.3.6 Horizontal shell boilers
23/396
23.3.7 Watertube boilers
23.3.8 Waste-heat boilers
23/397
23.3.9 Fluid-bed boilers 23/397
23/397

23/393

23/394

23.4 Application and selection
23.5 Superheaters 23/398
23.6 Economizers 23/399
23.7 Water-level control
23.8 Efﬁciency 23/400

23/400

23/401

23.9 Boiler installation
23.10 Boiler house pipework
23.11 Feedwater requirements
23.12 Feedwater supply and tanks
23.13 Blowdown requirements, control and tanks
23.14 Clean Air Act requirement for chimneys and ﬂue designs

23/401
23/402

23/402

23/404

23/405
23/405

23/405
23.14.1 Introduction
23.14.2 Gas velocity
23.14.3 Chimney height
23.14.4 Type and combustion
23.14.5 Connecting ducts
23.14.6 Grit and dust emissions

23/406

23/406

23/406

23/406

23.15 Steam storage

23/406

23.15.1 Thermal storage
23.15.2 The accumulator

23/406
23/407

23/391

23.16 Automatic controls on boilers
23.16.1 Combustion appliance
23.16.2 Water level 23/407
23.16.3 Blowdown
23/408

23/407
23/407

23.17 Automatic boiler start 23/408
23.18 The automatic boiler house
23.19 Safe operation of automatic boiler plant
23.20 Energy conservation

23/410

23/408

23.20.1 Plant installation
23.20.2 Operation and maintenance
23/410

23/410

23.21 Noise and the boiler house
23.22 Running costs
23.23 Management and operation

23/412

23/412

23/409

23/410

23.1 Terminology
The following explain some of the more fundamental
terms encountered when considering boilers.

23.1.1 Shell boiler

The products of combustion or hot gases pass through a
series of tubes surrounded by water in this boiler. All are
contained in an outer shell.

23.1.2 Watertube boiler

In a watertube boiler, water circulates through small-bore
tubes constructed in banks and connected to drums or
headers. The external surfaces of the tubes are exposed to
the products of combustion or hot gases.

23.1.3 Dryback boiler

This is a horizontal shell boiler where the gas-reversal
chamber from the combustion tube to the ﬁrst pass of
tubes is external to the rear tube plate and is formed by a
refractory lined steel chamber.

23.1.4 Wetback boiler

A wetback boiler is a horizontal shell boiler where the
gas-reversal chamber from the combustion tube to the
ﬁrst pass of tubes is integral within the boiler shell and
surrounded by water.

23.1.5 Economic boiler

This is a term applied to the early freestanding shell boil-
ers of two- and three-pass construction. Originally, they
were dry back and later wet back. These boilers super-
seded the brickset boilers. The earliest economic boilers
were also brickset. The gases from the front smokebox
returning across the lower external part of the shell were
contained within the brick setting to form a third pass.

23.1.6 Packaged boiler

A packaged boiler is a concept of a factory-built and
assembled shell boiler complete with its combustion appli-
ance, feedwater pump and controls, valves, base frame
and insulation. Before this, the economic boiler was deliv-
ered to site as a bare shell and assembled in situ. Orig-
inally, in the early 1960s package boilers were designed
to make them as compact as possible, resulting in some
inherent faults. Since then, design criteria have greatly
improved and the present packaged boiler is constructed
to acceptable commercial standards.

23.1.7 Evaporation

This is the quantity of steam produced by the boiler at
temperature and pressure. It may be quoted as actual
evaporation or evaporation from and at 100°C. Actual
evaporation is the quantity of steam passing through the

Terminology 23/389
crown valve of the boiler. Evaporation from and at 100°C
is a ﬁgure taken for design purposes, and is based on the
actual evaporation per pound of fuel multiplied by the
factor of evaporation.

23.1.8 Factor of evaporation

This is the ﬁgure obtained by dividing the total heat of
steam at working condition by the latent heat of steam at
atmospheric condition (i.e. 2256 kJ/kg). Then
factor of evaporation D H (cid:2) T

2256

where

H D Total heat in 1 kg of steam at working pressure
T D Heat in feedwater (kJ/kg).

above 0°C taken from steam tables in kJ/kg.

2256 D the latent heat of steam at atmospheric

conditions.

23.1.9 Availability

The period of time that a boiler is expected or required
to operate before being shut down for cleaning or main-
tenance. This will vary with the type of boiler, the fuel
being used and the operating load on the boiler.

23.1.10 Priming

This is when the water surface in the boiler shell becomes
unstable. Vigorous surging will occur and this may cause
the boiler to go to low water and cut out or possibly lock
out. This, in turn, will exacerbate the condition.

There are two possible causes. The ﬁrst could be incor-
rect control of water treatment and blowdown. This can
result in excessive levels of suspended solids in the boiler
water, organic matter in the boiler water or high alkalinity.
The second can be mechanical. If the boiler is operated
below its designed working pressure it will increase the
efﬂux velocity of the steam leaving the water surface
area to a point where it may lift the water surface and
drop the water level. It is important therefore to give
due consideration to the steam load required from the
boiler.

23.1.11 Thermal storage

Thermal storage is a method of supplying a steam load
in excess of the maximum continuous rating of the boiler
for short periods. The boiler shell diameter is increased to
provide a greater height of water than normal above the
top line of heating surface to the normal working water
level. When an excess load is then imposed on the boiler,
it allows this extra water to ﬂash to steam while lowering
the working pressure in the boiler. Safety-level controls
protect the boiler against an excessive draw-off of steam.
As the load decreases, the boiler maintains its maximum
ﬁring rate and allows the extra water to return to the nor-
mal (higher) working water level and the higher working
pressure regained.

23/390 Industrial Boilers

23.1.12 Accumulator

This may be likened to an unﬁred boiler. Steam is
generated in the boilers at a pressure higher than that
required for the process and fed to the process through
pressure-reducing valves. This higher-pressure steam is
also supplied to the accumulator, where it heats and
pressurizes the water in the accumulator. When a steam
load in excess of the boiler maximum ﬁring rate occurs,
steam may be supplied from the accumulator until the
load may be met from the boilers. As the steam load
falls away, the accumulator will recharge from the boilers.
This system enables boilers to be installed with ratings to
match an average load while the peaks will be met from
the accumulator.

23.1.13 Cavitation

This is a condition which occurs when the feedwater pump
is unable to deliver feedwater to the boiler although the
feed tank has water available. The temperature of the feed-
water coupled with the possible suction effect from the
feedwater pump in the line between the feed tank and
the pump effectively drops the pressure, causing the feed-
water to ﬂash to steam. The pump then loses its water
supply.

In most cases, this condition may be avoided by arrang-
ing a sufﬁcient heat of water and by correct sizing of the
feedwater pipework. Clean ﬁlters must also be maintained.

23.2 Heat transfer in industrial boilers
Heat is transferred from the hot products of combustion
to the boiler heating surfaces through the plate and tube
walls and to the water by various mechanisms, which
involve conduction, radiation and convection.

23.2.1 Conduction

The Fourier law gives the rate at which heat is transferred
by conduction through a substance without mass transfer.
This states that the heat ﬂow rate per unit area, or heat
ﬂux, is proportional to the temperature gradient in the
direction of heat ﬂow. The relationship between heat ﬂux
and temperature gradient is characterized by the thermal
conductivity which is a property of the substance. It is
temperature dependent and is determined experimentally.
For a plate of area A (m2), thickness e (m) and with
hot and cold face temperatures of T1 and T2 (°C), respec-
tively, the normal heat ﬂux (cid:5) and heat transfer rate Q are
given by:
(cid:5) D Q
A
where K D thermal conductivity (W/mK).

D k(cid:8)T1 (cid:2) T2(cid:9)

(cid:8)Wm2(cid:9)

e

ideal or black body-radiating surface is proportional to the
fourth power of the absolute temperature of the surface.
The constant of proportionality is the Stefan–Boltzmann
constant, which has a value of 5.6696 ð 108 (W/m2K4).
The heat ﬂux radiated from a real surface is less than
that from an ideal black body surface at the same temper-
ature. The ratio of real to black body ﬂux is the normal
total emissivity. Emissivity, like thermal conductivity, is
a property which must be determined experimentally.

Although the rate of emission from a surface is indepen-
dent of the condition of the surroundings, the net overall
exchange of radiant heat between surfaces at different
temperatures depends on a number of factors. The con-
tinuous interchange of energy is a result of the recipro-
cal processes of radiation and absorption, and these are
dependent on geometrical relationships, emissivity differ-
ences and the presence of any absorbing and emitting
gases in the intervening space.

23.2.3 Convection

Convective heat transmission occurs within a ﬂuid, and
between a ﬂuid and a surface, by virtue of relative move-
ment of the ﬂuid particles (that is, by mass transfer). Heat
exchange between ﬂuid particles in mixing and between
ﬂuid particles and a surface is by conduction. The over-
all rate of heat transfer in convection is, however, also
dependent on the capacity of the ﬂuid for energy storage
and on its resistance to ﬂow in mixing. The ﬂuid proper-
ties which characterize convective heat transfer are thus
thermal conductivity, speciﬁc heat capacity and dynamic
viscosity.

Convection is classiﬁed according to the motivating
ﬂow. When the ﬂow takes place because of density
variations caused by temperature gradients, the motion is
called natural convection. When it is caused by an external
agency such as a pump or a fan the process is called forced
convection.

At a convection heat transfer surface the heat ﬂux (heat
transfer rate per unit area) is related to the temperature
difference between ﬂuid and surface by a heat transfer
coefﬁcient. Newton’s law of cooling deﬁnes this:

(cid:5) D Q
A

D hcTm

where

(cid:5) D heat ﬂux (W/m2),
Q D heat transfer rate (W),
A D surface area (m2),

Tm D mean temperature difference
between ﬂuid and surface (K),

hc D convective heat transfer
coefﬁcient (W/m2 K).

23.2.2 Radiation

Thermal radiation takes place by the emission of electro-
magnetic waves, at the velocity of light, from all bodies at
temperatures above absolute zero. The heat ﬂux from an

The heat transfer coefﬁcient is correlated experimen-
tally with the ﬂuid transport properties (speciﬁc heat,
viscosity, thermal conductivity and density), ﬂuid veloc-
ity and the geometrical relationship between surface and
ﬂuid ﬂow.

23.2.4 Furnace heat transfer

Heat transfer in the furnace is mainly by radiation, from
the incandescent particles in the ﬂame and from hot
radiating gases such as carbon dioxide and water vapor.
The detailed theoretical prediction of overall radiation
exchange is complicated by a number of factors such
as carbon particle and dust distributions, and temperature
variations in three-dimensional mixing. This is overcome
by the use of simpliﬁed mathematical models or empirical
relationships in various ﬁelds of application.

For industrial boilers the mean gas temperature at the
furnace exit, or at the entrance to the convection section
of the boiler, may be calculated using the relationship:
T D k

(cid:2)0.25

(cid:1)

H
A

where
T D gas temperature (°C),
H D heat input rate (W) based on the net caloriﬁc
A D effective (projected) water-cooled absorption
K D a constant which depends on the fuel and the

surface area (m2),

value of the fuel,

excess air in the combustion products.

The value of k is determined experimentally by gas tem-
perature measurement. The measurement error of a simple
pyrometer can be 250 to 300 K, due to re-radiation to
water-cooled surroundings, and the values given below
are based on measurement by a ‘Land’ multi-shielded
high-velocity suction pyrometer. Typical values for nor-
mal excess air at or near full boiler load are:
Natural gas
Gas oil
Heavy fuel oil
Coal

k D 52.4
k D 49.1
k D 48.3
k D 40.3

In calculating the smoke tube inlet gas temperature of a
shell boiler, A includes the effective water-cooled surface
in the reversal chamber. In coal-ﬁred boilers, any water-
cooled surface below the grate is excluded from A.

The total furnace heat absorption may be estimated by
using the calculated furnace exit gas temperature and anal-
ysis to determine the enthalpy (excluding the latent heat
of water vapor) and thus deducting the heat rejection rate
from the net heat input rate.

23.2.5 Boiler tube convection heat transfer

The radiant section of an industrial boiler may typically
contain only 10 per cent of the total heating surface,
yet, because of the large temperature difference, it can
absorb 30–50 per cent of the total heat exchange. The
mean temperature difference available for heat transfer
in the convective section is much smaller. To achieve a
thermally efﬁcient yet commercially viable design it is
necessary to make full use of forced convection within
the constraint of acceptable pressure drop.

Forced convection heat

transfer has been measured
under widely differing conditions, and using the dimen-
sionless groups makes correlation of the experimental

Heat transfer in industrial boilers 23/391

results:
Nusselt number Nu D hcD
k
Reynolds number Re D GD
(cid:22)
Prandtl number Pr D Cp(cid:22)
k

where
hc D heat transfer coefﬁcient (W/m2 K),
D D characteristic dimension (m),
K D thermal conductivity (W/m K),
G D gas mass velocity (kg/m2s),
(cid:22) D dynamic viscosity (kg/m s),
Cp D speciﬁc heat at constant pressure (J/kg K).

In applying the correlation, use is made of the con-
cept of logarithmic mean temperature difference across
the boundary layer. For a boiler section, or pass, this is
given by:

(cid:3)

Tm D (cid:8)T1Tw(cid:9) (cid:2) (cid:8)T2 (cid:2) Tw(cid:9)
(cid:8)T1 (cid:2) Tw(cid:9)
(cid:8)T2 (cid:2) Tw(cid:9)

logn

(cid:4) (cid:8)K(cid:9)

where
T1 D inlet gas temperature (°C),
T2 D outlet gas temperature (°C),
Tw D tube wall temperature (°C).

The difference in temperature between the tube wall
and the water is small, typically less than 10 K in the
convection section. Therefore, little error is introduced by
using the water temperature as Tw in the evaluation of the
gas transport properties.

The representative gas temperatures used in the corre-
lation are the bulk temperature and the ﬁlm temperature.
These are deﬁned as:
Bulk temperature
Film temperature

For longitudinal ﬂow in the tubes of shell boilers the
mean heat transfer coefﬁcient may be determined from:

Tb D Tw C Tm
Tf D (cid:8)Tb C Tw(cid:9)/2
(cid:1)

(cid:2)0.7

1 C D
L

Nu D 0.023 Re0.8 Pr0.4

where D/L is the tube inside diameter-to-length ratio and
the characteristic dimension in Nu and Re is the tube
inside diameter. Gas properties are evaluated at the ﬁlm
temperature.

Correlations for

forced convection over

tubes in
crossﬂow are complicated by the effect of the tube bank
arrangement. For the range of Reynolds numbers likely
to be encountered in industrial boilers the following
equations may be used:

In-line arrays
Staggered arrays

Nu D 0.211 Re0.651Pr0.34F1F2
Nu D 0.2233 Re0.635Pr0.34F1F2

In these cases gas properties are evaluated at the bulk
temperature, the characteristic dimension in Nu and Re

23/392 Industrial Boilers

is the tube outside diameter, and the Reynolds number is
based on the mass velocity through the minimum area for
ﬂow between tubes. F1 is a correction factor for wall to
bulk property variation, which can be calculated from the
relationship:
F1 D Pr0.26
b
Prw

where Prb and Prf are Prandtl numbers at the bulk and
wall temperatures, respectively.

F2 is a correction factor for the depth of the tube bank
in the direction of ﬂow. For bank depths of 10 rows or
more, F2 D 1. For smaller bank depths the following val-
ues of F2 may be used:

Gas transport properties for the products of combustion
of the common fuels, ﬁred at normal excess air at or near-
full boiler load, may be obtained from Tables 23.1–23.4.
Non-luminous gas radiation has a small overall effect in
the convective section, typically 2–5 per cent of total con-
vection. It may therefore be neglected for a conservative
calculation.

Table 23.3 Transport properties: heavy fuel oil products of
combustion

Temp.
(°C)

Spec. heat
(J/kg K)

Viscosity

(kg/m s ð 106)

Conductivity
(W/m K ð 103)

Sp. vol.
(m3/kg)

100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400

1054
1088
1121
1152
1181
1207
1232
1255
1276
1294
1311
1326
1339
1351

20.37
24.34
27.93
31.21
34.25
37.09
39.44
42.3
44.71
47.01
49.22
51.35
53.40
55.38

27.22
34.37
41.17
47.66
53.82
59.69
66.09
70.51
75.47
80.15
84.51
88.59
92.38
95.86

1.05
1.332
1.613
1.895
2.176
2.458
2.87
3.02
3.302
3.583
3.865
4.146
4.428
4.709

Table 23.4 Transport properties: bit coal products of
combustion

Table 23.1 Transport properties: natural gas products of
combustion

Temp.
(°C)

Spec. heat
(J/kg K)

Viscosity

(kg/m s ð 106)

Conductivity
(W/m K ð 103)

Sp. vol.
(m3/kg)

Temp.
(°C)

Spec. heat
(J/kg K)

Viscosity

(kg/m s ð 106)

Conductivity
(W/m K ð 103)

Sp. vol.
(m3/kg)

100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400

1098
1133
1166
1198
1227
1255
1281
1305
1328
1348
1367
1384
1400
1413

20.01
23.97
27.55
30.83
33.89
36.74
39.44
41.99
44.43
46.75
48.98
51.13
53.2
55.2

27.27
34.45
41.34
47.94
54.25
60.29
66.09
71.61
76.86
81.86
86.6
91.08
95.31
99.25

1.1
1.395
1.69
1.985
2.28
2.575
2.87
3.164
3.459
3.754
4.049
4.344
4.639
4.934

100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400

1031
1065
1096
1125
1152
1177
1201
1222
1242
1259
1275
1289
1301
1311

20.82
24.83
28.44
31.73
34.78
37.63
40.3
42.83
45.24
47.55
49.75
51.87
53.92
55.89

23.2.6 Waterside conditions

27.43
34.63
41.39
47.78
53.8
59.5
64.88
69.93
74.68
79.11
83.23
87.05
90.56
93.77

1.034
1.312
1.589
1.866
2.143
2.421
2.698
2.975
3.252
3.53
3.807
4.084
4.361
4.638

Table 23.2 Transport properties: gas oil products of combustion

Temp.
(°C)

Spec. heat
(J/kg K)

Viscosity

(kg/m s ð 106)

Conductivity
(W/m K ð 103)

Sp. vol.
(m3/kg)

100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400

1061
1096
1128
1159
1188
1215
1240
1263
1284
1303
1320
1336
1349
1361

20.32
24.29
27.88
31.16
34.2
37.05
39.72
42.26
44.67
46.98
49.19
51.32
53.37
55.35

27.24
34.4
41.22
47.73
53.92
59.81
65.42
70.71
75.73
80.46
84.89
89.02
92.88
96.43

1.058
1.342
1.625
1.909
2.192
2.476
2.76
3.043
3.327
3.61
3.894
4.177
4.461
4.745

In the radiant section of a boiler the fourth power of the
wall temperature is typically less than 2 per cent of the
fourth power of the mean ﬂame and gas temperature. The
effects of waterside conditions and wall thickness on the
heat transfer rate are therefore negligible.

it also indicates that

Even the presence of a dangerous layer of waterside
scale reduces the heat ﬂux only by a few per cent.
Although this means that scale has little effect on radiant
section performance,
the metal
temperature escalation due to the presence of scale is not
self-limiting but is almost proportional to scale thickness.
The thermal conductivity of an average boiler scale
is 2.2 (W/m K) and that of complex silicate scales is
0.2–0.23 (W/m K). Since the furnace peak wall ﬂux can
be over 300,000 (W/m2) it may readily be seen that a
small thickness of scale can raise the metal temperature
into the creep region, resulting in very expensive repairs.
In the convective section, the gas-side heat transfer
coefﬁcient controls the heat ﬂux distribution since the

waterside coefﬁcient and the thermal conductance of the
tube walls are very large in comparison. For this rea-
son, it is usually satisfactory to make an allowance by
adding 10 K to the water temperature in steam boilers.
In hot water generators, the allowance should be about
20 K, because sub-cooled nucleate boiling generally takes
place only on the radiant walls and in shell boilers on the
reversal chamber tubeplate. Waterside heat transfer on the
major part of the convective heating surface in these units
is by convection without boiling.

23.2.7 Further reading

A good introduction to the extensive literature on the
science and technology of heat transfer, with 87 further
references, is given in Rose, J. W. and Cooper, J. R.,
Technical Data on Fuel, 7th edition, British National Com-
mittee, World Energy Conference, London, p. 48 (1977).

23.3 Types of boiler
As this covers industrial boilers, only units of 500 kg/h
of steam, or equivalent hot water, and above will be con-
sidered. There are nine categories of boiler available. In
order of evaporation these are:

Cast iron sectional boilers
Steel boilers
Electrode boilers
Steam generators
Vertical shell boilers
Horizontal shell boilers
Watertube boilers
Waste heat boilers
Fluid bed boilers

23.3.1 Cast iron sectional boilers

These are used for hot water services with a maximum
operating pressure of 5 bar and a maximum output in the
order of 1500 kW. Site assembly of the unit is necessary
and will consist of a bank of cast iron sections. Each
section has internal waterways.

The sections are assembled with screwed or taper nip-
ples at top and bottom for water circulation and sealing
between the sections to contain the products of combus-
tion. Tie rods compress the sections together. A standard
section may be used to give a range of outputs depen-
dent upon the number of sections used. After assembly
of the sections, the mountings, insulation and combustion
appliance are ﬁtted. This system makes them suitable for
locations where it is impractical to deliver a package unit,
e.g. basements where inadequate access is available or
rooftop plant rooms where sections may be taken up using
the elevator shafts. Models available use liquid, gaseous
and solid fuel.

Types of boiler 23/393

the pressure vessel. They may be of either vertical or hor-
izontal conﬁguration, depending upon the manufacturer.
In their vertical pattern, they may be supplied for steam
raising.

23.3.3 Electrode boilers

These are available for steam raising up to 3600 kg/h and
manufacture is to two designs. The smaller units are ele-
ment boilers with evaporation less than 500 kg/h. In these,
an immersed electric element heats the water and a set
of water-level probes positioned above the element con-
trols the water level being interconnected to the feedwater
pump and the element electrical supply.

Larger units are electrode boilers. Normal working
pressure would be 10 bar but higher pressures are
available. Construction is a vertical pattern pressure shell
containing the electrodes (Figure 23.1). The lengths of
the electrodes control the maximum and minimum water
level. The electrical resistance of the water allows a
current to ﬂow through the water, which, in turn, boils and
releases steam. Since water has to be present within the
electrode system, lack of water cannot burn out the boiler.
The main advantage with these units is that they may be
located at the point where steam is required and, as no
combustion fumes are produced, no chimney is required.
Steam may also be raised relatively quickly, as there is
little thermal stressing to consider.

23.3.4 Steam generators

While the term ‘steam generator’ may apply to any ves-
sel raising steam, this section is intended to cover coil
type boilers in the evaporative range up to 3600 kg/h of
steam. Because of the steam pressure being contained
within the tubular coil, pressures of 35 bar and above are
available, although the majority are supplied to operate
at up to 10 bar. They are suitable for ﬁring with liquid
and gaseous fuels, although the use of heavy fuel oil is
unusual.

The coiled tube is contained within a pressurized
combustion chamber and receives both radiant and
convective heat. A control system matches the burner-
ﬁring rate proportional to the steam demand. Feedwater
is pumped through the coil and partially ﬂashed to steam
in a separator. The remaining water is recirculated to
a feedwater heat exchanger before being run to waste.
Because there is no stored water in this type of unit, they
are lighter in weight and therefore suitable for siting on
mezzanine or upper ﬂoors adjacent to the plant requiring
steam. Also, as the water content
is minimal, steam
raising can be achieved very quickly and can respond to
ﬂuctuating demand within the capacity of the generator.
It must be noted that close control of suitable water
treatment is essential to protect the coil against any build-
up of deposits.

23.3.2 Steel boilers

23.3.5 Vertical shell boilers

These are similar in rated outputs to the cast iron sectional
boiler. Construction is of rolled steel annular drums for

This is a cylindrical boiler where the shell axis is vertical
to the ﬁring ﬂoor. Originally, it comprised a chamber at

23/394 Industrial Boilers

Three-phase four-wire supply

L1

L2 L3

N

Electronic
control
unit

Ammeter

Pressure gauge
Pressure modulator

Electro-
magnetic
valve

Pump

Feed
tank

Figure 23.1 Diagrammatic layout of electrode boiler

Electrodes

Neutral
shield
Boiler

Steam outlet

Maximum
water level
Minimum
water level

Blowdown

the lower end of the shell which contained the combustion
appliance. The gases rose vertically through a ﬂue sur-
rounded by water. Large-diameter (100 mm) cross tubes
were ﬁtted across this ﬂue to help extract heat from the
gases which then proceeded to the chimney. Later ver-
sions had the vertical ﬂue replaced by one or two banks
of small-bore tubes running horizontally before the gases
discharged to the chimney. The steam was contained in a
hemispherical chamber forming the top of the shell.

The present vertical boiler is generally used for heat
recovery from exhaust gases from power generation or
marine applications. The gases pass through small-bore

vertical tube banks. The same shell may also contain
an independently ﬁred section to produce steam at such
times, as there is insufﬁcient or no exhaust gas available.

23.3.6 Horizontal shell boilers
This is the most widely used type of boiler in industry.
The construction of a single-ﬂue three-pass wetback shell
is illustrated in Figure 23.2. As a single-ﬂue design boiler
evaporation rates of up to 16,300 kg/h F and A100°C
are normal on oil and gas and 9000 kg/h F and A100°C
on coal.

Figure 23.2 A three-pass wetback shell

In twin-ﬂue design, these ﬁgures are approximately
double. Normal working pressures of 10–17 bar are
available with a maximum working pressure for a shell
boiler at 27 bar. The outputs of larger boilers will be
limited if high pressures are required.

The boilers are normally dispatched to site as a pack-
aged unit with the shell and smokeboxes fully insulated,
painted, and mounted on a base frame. The combustion
appliance and control panel will be ﬁtted together with the
feedwater pump, water-level controls, gauges, and a full
complement of boiler valves. Additional equipment may
be speciﬁed and incorporated during construction. Larger
boilers may have to have certain items ﬁtted at site due
to site restriction or weight.

Some variations of

the three-pass wetback design
exist. The most common is the reverse ﬂame boiler,
and Figure 23.3 illustrates this shell. In this design, the
combustion appliance ﬁres into a thimble-shaped chamber
in which the gases reverse back to the front of the boiler
around the ﬂame core. The gases are then turned in a front
smokebox to travel along a single pass of smoketubes
to the rear of the boiler and then to the chimney. In
order to extract heat from these gases,
turbulators or
retarders are ﬁtted into these tubes to agitate the gases
and help produce the required ﬂue gas outlet temperature.
Evaporative outputs up to 4500 kg/h F and 100°C on
liquid and gaseous fuels are available.

Other variations of the three-pass wetback design are
the two-pass, where only one pass of smoketubes follows
the combustion tube, and the four-pass, where three passes
of smoketubes follow the combustion tube. Neither of
these is as widely used as the three-pass design.

Dryback boilers are still occasionally used when a high
degree of superheat is required, necessitating a rear cham-
ber to house the superheater too large for a semi-wet-back
chamber. A water-cooled membrane wall chamber would
be an alternative to this.

With twin-ﬂue design boilers, it is usual to have com-
pletely separate gas passes through the boiler with twin
wetback chambers. It is then possible to operate the boiler
on one ﬂue only, which effectively doubles its turndown
ratio. For example, a boiler rated at 20,000 kg/h F and
A100°C may reasonably be expected to operate down to
2500 kg/h F and A100°C on oil or gas providing suitable
combustion equipment and control is incorporated. If pro-
longed periods of single-ﬂue operation become necessary,

Figure 23.3 A reverse ﬂame shell

Types of boiler 23/395

it is good practice to alternate, on a planned time scale,
the single-ﬂue load.

Shell boilers are supplied with controls making them
suitable for unattended operation, although the insurance
companies to comply with safety recommendations call
for certain operations such as blowdown of controls.

Oil-, gas- and dual-ﬁred boilers are available with a
range of combustion appliances. The smaller units have
pressure jet-type burners with a turndown of about 2:1
while larger boilers may have rotary cup, medium pres-
sure air (MPA) or steam-atomizing burners producing a
turndown ratio of between 3:1 and 5:1, depending upon
size and fuel. The majority has rotary cup-type burners,
while steam- or air-atomizing burners are used where it
is essential that the burner ﬁring is not interrupted even
for the shortest period.

For coal-ﬁred boilers, chain grate stokers, coking stok-
ers and underfeed stokers are supplied. An alternative to
these is the ﬁxed-grate and tipping-grate boiler with coal
being fed through a drop tube in the crown of the boiler
(Figure 23.4). With the ﬁxed grate, de-ashing is manual
while with the tipping grate a micro-sequence controller
signals sections of the grate to tip, depositing the ash
below the grate, where it is removed to the front by a drag-
link chain conveyor and then to a suitable ash-disposal
system.

It is possible to have boilers supplied to operate on
liquid, gaseous and solid fuels, although there may be a
time penalty of two or three days when converting from
solid to liquid and gaseous fuels and vice versa.

Access to both waterside and ﬁreside surfaces of the
boiler is important. All boilers will have an inspection
opening or manway on the top of the shell with inspection
openings in the lower part. Some larger boilers will have
a manway in the lower part of the shell or end plate. With
a three-pass wetback boiler all tube cleaning and mainte-
nance is carried out from the front. The front smokebox
doors will be hinged or ﬁtted with davits. On most sizes
of boilers bolted-on access panels are sufﬁcient on the
real smokebox. As the majority of shell boilers operate
under forced-draft pressurized combustion, steam raising
is relatively quick. While good practice could require a
cold boiler to come up to pressure over a period of several
hours once it is hot, it may be brought up to pressure in
minutes, not hours.

For hot water shell boilers the above still applies. The
shells would be slightly smaller for equivalent duties due
to the absence of steam space. There are three accepted
operated bands for hot water boilers. Low-temperature
hot water (LTHW) refers to boilers having a mean water
temperature (between ﬂow and return) of below 95°C;
medium-temperature hot water (MTHW) would cover the
range 95 to 150°C; high-temperature hot water (HTHW)
covers applications above 150°C.

The ﬂow and return connections will be designed to
suit the ﬂow rates and temperature differentials required.
The water-return connection will be ﬁtted with either an
internal diffuser or a venturi nozzle to assist mixing of
the water circulating within the shell and prevent water
stratiﬁcation. The ﬂow connection will incorporate the

23/396 Industrial Boilers

Piped coal feed
from storage

Under
grate air

Figure 23.4 A ﬁxed-grate coal-ﬁred boiler

temperature control stat to signal control of the ﬁring rate
for the burner.

corrosion than steam boilers due

Hot water boilers are potentially more susceptible
to gas-side
to
the lower temperatures and pressures encountered on
low- and medium-temperature hot water boilers. With
low-temperature hot water especially,
the water-return
temperature may drop below the water dewpoint of 50°C,
causing vapor in the products of combustion to condense.
This, in turn, leads to corrosion if it persists for long
periods. The remedy is to ensure that adequate mixing of
the return water maintains the water in the shell above
65°C at all times. Also, if medium or heavy fuel oil is to
be used for low- or medium-temperature applications it is
desirable to keep the heat transfer surfaces above 130°C,
this being the approximate acid dewpoint temperature of
the combustion gases. It may be seen, therefore, how
important it is to match the unit or range of unit sizes
to the expected load.

23.3.7 Watertube boilers

Originally, watertube boilers would have been installed
for evaporation of 10,000 kg/h of steam with pressures
as low as 10 bar. At that time, this would have been the
maximum evaporation expected from a shell-type boiler.
Now shell boilers are available at much greater duties
and pressures as described in Section 23.3.6. It may be
appreciated that there will be an overlap of types of boiler
in this area, with watertube covering ﬁrst for high-pressure
applications and ultimately the larger duties. Figure 23.5
illustrates a stoker-ﬁred unit.

Generally, outputs up to 60 MW from a single unit
may be considered for industrial
installations. Higher
duties are available if required. Watertube boilers supplied
for national power generation will have outputs up

Figure 23.5 A stoker-ﬁred watertube boiler of 36,300 kg/h steam
capacity at 28 bar and 385°C (from British Coal Publication, Boiler
House Design for Solid Fuel, 1980, and kind permission from
College of Fuel Technology)

to 900 MW, pressures of 140 bar and ﬁnal
steam
temperatures of 500°C. For the smaller industrial unit
we are considering,
the maximum pressure would be
65 bar with ﬁnal steam temperature up to 500°C. This
is the maximum temperature and pressure likely to
be required for small
turbine-driven generating units,
although turbines are available to operate at much lower
pressures of, say, 17 bar.

Construction is a water-cooled wall combustion cham-
ber connected to a steam drum at high level. The bottoms
of the walls are connected to headers. Sometimes a bot-
tom or mud drum is incorporated, but improved water
treatment now available does not always necessitate this.
The chamber is externally insulated and clad. Combus-
tion equipment for solid fuel may be spreader or traveling-
grate stokers or by pulverized fuel or ﬂuid bed. Oil and
gas burners may be ﬁtted either as main or auxiliary ﬁr-
ing equipment. The boilers will incorporate superheaters,
economizers and, where necessary, air preheaters, grit
arresters, and gas-cleaning equipment to meet clean air
legislation.

Where watertube boilers are used to recover waste heat
(for example, exhaust gases from reciprocating engines)
lower gas temperatures may be involved, and this, in turn,
could obviate the need for water-cooled walls. In this case,
tube banks may be contained within a gas-tight insulated
chamber.

There are two basic types of watertube boilers: assisted
and natural circulation. Assisted circulation might apply
where heat is from convection rather than a radiation
source such as a waste heat application. Natural circu-
lation is more suited where radiant heat and high gas
temperatures are present.

Depending upon the required duty and the site, units
may be shop assembled or of modular construction. Site-
erected units may be designed to have their main compo-
nents arranged to ﬁt in with the space available.

23.3.8 Waste-heat boilers

These may be horizontal or vertical shell boilers or
watertube boilers. They would be designed to suit
individual applications
from
furnaces, incinerators, gas turbines and diesel exhausts.
The prime requirement
the waste gases must
contain sufﬁcient usable heat to produce steam or hot
water at the condition required.

ranging through gases

is that

Supplementary ﬁring equipment may also be included
if a standby heat load is to be met and the waste-gas
source is intermittent. Waste-heat boilers may be designed
to use either radiant or convected heat sources. In some
cases, problems may arise due to the source of waste
heat, and due consideration must be taken of this, with
examples being plastic content in waste being burned in
incinerators, carry-over from some type of furnaces caus-
ing strongly bonded deposits and carbon from heavy oil
ﬁred engines. Some may be dealt with by maintaining
gas-exit temperatures at a predetermined level to prevent
dewpoint being reached and others by sootblowing. Cur-
rently, there is a strong interest in small combined heat
and power (CHP) stations, and these will normally incor-
porate a waste-heat boiler.

23.3.9 Fluid-bed boilers

The name derives from the ﬁrebed produced by con-
taining a mixture of silica sand and ash through which
air is blown to maintain the particles in suspension. The
beds are in three categories, shallow bed, deep bed and

Application and selection 23/397

recirculating bed. Shallow beds are mostly used and are
about 150–250 mm in depth in their slumped condition
and around twice that when ﬂuidized. Heat is applied to
this bed to raise its temperature to around 600°C by aux-
iliary oil or gas burners. At this temperature coal and/or
waste is fed into the bed, which is controlled to operate at
800–900°C. Water-cooling surfaces are incorporated into
this bed connected to the water system of the boiler.

The deep bed, as its name implies, is similar to the
shallow bed but in this case may be up to 3 meters deep in
its ﬂuidized state, making it suitable only for large boilers.
Similarly, the recirculating ﬂuid bed is only applicable to
large watertube boilers.

Several applications of the shallow-bed system are
available for industrial boilers; the two most used being
the open-bottom shell boiler and the composite boiler.
With the open-bottom shell, the combustor is sited below
the shell and the gases then pass through two banks of
horizontal tubes.

In the composite boiler, a watertube chamber directly
connected to a single-pass shell boiler forms the combus-
tion space housing the ﬂuid bed. In order to ﬂuidize the
bed the fan power required would be greater than that
with other forms of ﬁring equipment.

To its advantage, the ﬂuid bed may utilize fuels with
high ash contents, which affect the availability of other
systems. It is also possible to control the acid emissions
by additions to the bed during combustion. They are also
less selective in fuels and can cope with a wide range of
solid-fuel characteristics.

23.4 Application and selection
Figure 23.6 illustrates the selective bands for various types
of boilers. The operating pressure will govern the steam
temperature except where superheaters are used. For hot
water units the required ﬂow temperature will dictate the
operating pressure. It is important that when arriving at
the operating pressure for hot water units due allowance
is made for the head of the system, an anti-ﬂash steam
margin of 123°C and a safety-valve margin of 1.5 bar. In
arriving at a decision to install one or more boilers, the
following should be considered. The ﬁrst choice (provid-
ing the load is within the duty range of the boiler) will be
a single unit. This is economically the most attractive in
capital cost, providing account is taken of the following:

1. If there is a breakdown on the boiler, will production

be seriously affected immediately?

2. Will adequate spare parts for the boiler be held in stock
or be available within an acceptable time, and will
labor be available to carry out the repair work?

3. Will time be available to service the boiler?
4. The duty will preferably fall within the modulating

ﬁring rate of the burner.
5. Prolonged periods of

avoided.

6. Is there an existing standby unit?

intermittent operation are

If any or all of these points are not accepted, then the next
consideration for a shell boiler could be a twin-ﬂue unit

23/398 Industrial Boilers

40

30

20

10

)
r
a
b
(
 
e
r
u
s
s
e
r
P

)
l
i

o
c
(
 
s
r
o
t
a
r
e
n
e
g
 
m
a
e
t
S

Cast
iron

Watertube boilers

Shell boilers

)
s
a
g
/
l
i

o
(
 
e
u
l
f
-
e
g
n
S

l

i

)
s
a
g
/
l
i

o
(
 
e
u
l
f
-
n
w
T

i

)
l
a
o
c
(
 
e
u
l
f
-
e
g
n
S

i

l

)
l
a
o
c
(
 
e
u
l
f
-
n
w
T

i

Figure 23.6 Guide to boiler capacities

10

20

Evaporation (kg/h × 1000)

30

40

suitable for single-ﬂue operation. This has the advantage
of using less space than two smaller boilers and having
only one set of services.

Moving now to two boilers, the heat load may comprise
two elements. One may be a production process whose
interruption would cause problems and the other, say, a
heating load where any interruption would not be noticed
immediately. Assuming the two elements were of equal
duty, it would be reasonable to install two boilers each
50–50 per cent of the total load. One boiler would then
be able to cover the process load.

An extension to this is to install two boilers, each capa-
ble of handling the total combined load. Depending upon
the boiler size, there may be only a relatively small differ-
ence in total capital cost between the above two schemes.
Further options involving three or more boilers must
take into account minimum and maximum loads in order
to run the plant efﬁciently. When considering hot water
it may be advantageous to consider units in a range of
outputs. This will help in operation, so that a unit may
be brought into duty to match the load and thus avoid
low-load conditions and consequent danger of dewpoints.
Also, if the plant is ﬁred on solid fuel it will help in
maintaining a more even ﬁring rate and a clean stack.

23.5 Superheaters
Steam produced from a boiler is referred to as dry
saturated, and its temperature will correspond with the
working pressure of
In some instances,
particularly with shell boilers, this is perfectly acceptable.
There are occasions, however, where it is desirable to
increase the temperature of the steam without increasing
the pressure. A superheater performs this function. Steam
from the drum or shell of the boiler is passed through
a bank of tubes whose external surfaces are exposed to

the boiler.

the combustion gases, thus heating the steam while not
increasing the pressure.

Where a superheater is ﬁtted, the boiler working pres-
sure must be increased to allow for the pressure drop
through the elements. This will be between 0.3 and 1.0 bar.
In a watertube boiler the superheater is a separate bank
of tubes or elements installed in the area at the rear or
outlet of the combustion chamber. Saturated steam tem-
perature may be increased by 200°C with a ﬁnal steam
temperature of up to 540°C.

For shell boilers, superheaters may be one of three
types, depending upon the degree of superheat required.
The ﬁrst and simplest is the pendant superheater installed
in the front smokebox (Figure 23.7). The maximum
degree of superheat available from this would be around
45°C. The second pattern is again installed in the front
smokebox but with this, the elements are horizontal ‘U’
tubes which extend into the boiler smoketubes. The degree
of superheat from this pattern is around 80°C. Third, a
superheater may be installed in the reversal chamber of
the boiler. A wetback chamber presents problems with
lack of space, and therefore a semi-wetback, dryback or
water-cooled wall chamber may be considered. Maximum
degree of superheat would be around 100°C.

Superheater elements are connected to inlet and out-
let headers. The inlet header receives dry saturated steam
from the steam drum of a watertube boiler or the shell
of a horizontal boiler. This steam passes through the ele-
ments where its temperature is raised and to the outlet
header which is connected to the services. A thermometer
or temperature recorder is ﬁtted to the outlet header.

It should be appreciated that a steam ﬂow must be main-
tained through the elements at all times to prevent them
burning away. If a single boiler is used then provision
to ﬂood the superheater during start-up periods may be
required.

Crown
valve

Superheated steam
outlet header

Steam space

Superheater
elements

Smoke tubes

Saturated steam
inlet header

Furnace

Insulated front
smoke box

Figure 23.7 Front smokebox pendant superheater (with permis-
sion of Senior Thermal Engineering Ltd)

Superheated steam may be needed where steam dis-
tribution pipework in a plant is over extended distances,
resulting in a loss of heat and increase in wetness of the
steam. Another case may be where a process requires
a temperature above the working pressure of the plant.
The third case is where steam is used for turbines. Here
it improves the performance of the turbine, where for
every 6°C increase in steam temperature it can produce a
saving of about 1 per cent reduction in steam consump-
tion. Superheaters may also be supplied as independently
ﬁred units. These may be used when either the amount of
superheated steam required is much less than the boiler
evaporation or is only needed on an intermittent basis.

23.6 Economizers
Economizers are installed in the exhaust gas ﬂow from
the boiler. They take heat from the ﬂue gases, which they

Economizers 23/399

transfer via extended surface elements to the feedwater
immediately prior to the water entering the boiler. They
therefore increase the efﬁciency of the boiler and have the
added advantage of reducing thermal shock. In watertube
boilers, they may be incorporated within the structure of
the boiler or supplied as a freestanding unit. With shell
boilers, they will be a separate unit ﬁtted between the
boiler ﬂue gas outlet and the chimney.

Figure 23.8 is a schematic illustration of such a unit. It
is desirable for each boiler to have its own economizer.
Where one economizer is installed to take the exhaust
gases from more than one boiler special considerations
must be taken into account. These will include gas-tight
isolation dampers. Consideration must be made of ﬂue-gas
pressures at varying loads and maximum and minimum
combined heat load to match economizer and a pumped
feedwater ringmain. Economizers may be used for both
forced-draft and induced-draft boilers, and in both cases,
the pressure drop through the economizer must be taken
into account when sizing the fans.

Economizers are ﬁtted to most watertube boilers. An
exception is on a waste-heat application, where it may be
desirable, due to the nature of the products being burned,
to maintain a relatively high gas outlet temperature to
prevent corrosive damage to the boiler outlet, ductwork
and chimney.

With watertube boilers economizers may be used when
burning coal, oil or gas. The material for the economizer
will depend on the fuel, and they may be all steel, all
cast iron or cast iron protected steel. All steel would be
used for non-corrosive ﬂue gases from burning natural
gas, light oil and coal. Cast iron may be used where the
feedwater condition is uncertain and may attack the tube
bore. Fuels may be heavy fuel oil or coal, and there is a
likelihood of metal temperatures falling below acid dew-
point. Cast iron protected steel is used when heavy fuel oil
or solid fuel ﬁring is required and feedwater conditions are
suitably controlled. As cast iron can withstand a degree
of acid attack, these units have the advantage of being

From boiler

To chimney

Modulating
control
valve

Economizer

Feed tank

Thermostatic
bypass

Feed
pump

Figure 23.8 Schematic illustration of an installed economizer

23/400 Industrial Boilers

able to operate without a gas bypass, where interruptible
natural gas supplies are used with oil as standby.

With shell boilers, economizers will generally only be
ﬁtted to boilers using natural gas as the main fuel and
then only on larger units. It would be unlikely that a rea-
sonable economic case could be made for boilers of less
than 4000 kg/hF and A100°C evaporative capacity. The
economizer will incorporate a ﬂue gas bypass with iso-
lating dampers to cover for periods when oil is used and
for maintenance. The dampers require electric interlocks
to the selected fuel.

The majority of shell boilers operate in the pressure
range 7 to 10 bar, the ﬂue gas outlet temperature will
be in the range of 190 to 250°C. Therefore, it may be
appreciated from this that the boiler needs to operate at
50–100 per cent of its maximum continuous rating for
most of the working day to produce an economic return.
Where an economizer is installed it is essential to have
water passing through the unit at all times when the burn-
ers are ﬁring to prevent boiling. Therefore, boilers ﬁtted
with economizers will have modulating feedwater control.
Even then, it is possible that the water ﬂow requirement
can become out of phase with the burner-ﬁring rate. To
prevent damage, a temperature-controlled valve allows a
spillage of water back to the feedwater tank, thus main-
taining a ﬂow of water through the unit. Each economizer
will be ﬁtted with a pressure-relief safety valve.

Due to the amount of water vapor produced when nat-
ural gas is burned, it is important not to allow the exhaust
gas temperature to fall below 80°C, otherwise the water
dewpoint will be reached. Not only the economizer but
also the ductwork and chimney must be considered and
provision incorporated for drainage.

In the event of a separate use for low-grade hot water
being available, it is sometimes practical to install a sec-
ondary condensing economizer. With this, the material of
which the economizer is constructed allows condensate
to form and drain away without excessive attack from
corrosion.

A recent development in heat recovery has been the
heat tube. This is a sealed metal tube which has been
evacuated of air and contains a small quantity of liquid
which, for boiler applications, could be water. When heat
from the ﬂue gases is applied to one end of the heat pipes
the water in the tube boils, turning to steam and absorbing
the latent heat of evaporation. The steam travels to the
opposite end of the tube which is surrounded by water,
where it gives up its latent heat, condenses and returns to
the heated end of the tube. Batteries of these tubes can be
arranged to form units, usually as a water jacket around
a section of a ﬂue.

With watertube boilers, the control of the water level
needs to be precise and sensitive to ﬂuctuating loads due
to the high evaporative rates and relatively small steam
drums and small water content. Control will be within
C10 mm on the working water level and will be two- or
three-element control. Two-element control will comprise
modulating feedwater control with ﬁrst low water alarm
and high–low control with low water cutout and alarm.
The second element will be monitoring of the steam ﬂow
to give early indication of any increase in steam demand.
This signal may then be linked to the ﬁring rate of the
burners and the feedwater-modulating valve. The third
element senses a drop in feedwater demand, which would
signal the ﬁring rate of the burners to modulate down.

Shell boilers will have two external level controls each
independently attached to the shell. Boilers up to about
9000 kg/hF and A100°C will have a dual control and
either a single or high–low control. The dual control insti-
gates the feedwater pump, which operates on an on–off
cycle over a water level band of C15 mm and operates the
ﬁrst low-water alarm. The single or high–low control will
incorporate a second low-water alarm with burner lockout
and with the high–low control also an indication of high
water, which may be linked to shut down the feedwater
pump with automatic restart when the water level drops
to normal.

Boilers of larger evaporations will have modulating and
high–low control. The modulating level control monitors
the working water level in the shell and operates a control
valve in the feedwater line, allowing water to enter the
boiler from a continuously running feed pump. It will
also incorporate the ﬁrst low-water alarm. The high–low
control operates as before.

The advantage of modulating control is that it maintains
a constant working water level and therefore the boiler
is always in its best condition to supply steam for peak
loading. These controls may also be ﬁtted to boilers below
9000 kg/hF and A100°C particularly if severe loads are
present or when the working pressure is above 10 bar.

With water-level controls, it is important to check they
are functioning correctly, and they will be operated daily
to simulate low-water condition. On shell boilers, this is
invariably a manual operation but may be motorized on
watertube boilers.

Shell boilers may be ﬁtted with internal level controls.
Here controls are mounted on the crown of the boiler with
the ﬂoats or probes extending to the water surface through
the steam space. To check the operating function of these,
it is necessary to drop the water level in the boiler, or,
alternatively, a separate electronic testing device can be
ﬁtted. With fully ﬂooded hot water boilers, a single level
control or switch is ﬁtted to protect against low-water
condition.

23.7 Water-level control
Water-level controls continuously monitor the level of
water in a steam boiler in order to control the ﬂow of
feedwater into the boiler and to protect against a low
water condition which may expose the heating surfaces
with consequent damage. The controls may be either ﬂoat
operated or conductivity probes.

23.8 Efﬁciency
This is the ratio of heat input to the useful heat output
of the boiler, taking account of heat losses in the ﬂue
gases, blowdown and radiation. It is covered in BS 845:
Part 1, which fully details the concise or losses method
of determining the efﬁciency of a boiler.

23.9 Boiler installation
Figure 23.9 illustrates
a
boiler. The individual items are covered separately in
other sections and only the general concept
is being
considered here.

required for

services

the

If boilers are being replaced it is reasonable to expect
that existing services will be available, apart from pos-
sible upgrading in some areas. For new installations, a
new building is likely to be required, and it will ﬁrst
be necessary to determine the overall size and type of
construction.

Starting with the boiler(s), these will be set out giving
due consideration to space between boilers and other items
of plant in order to give adequate access to all equipment,
valves and controls for operation and maintenance. For
small- to medium-sized boilers 1 meter may be considered
a reasonable space between items of plant where access
is required. With large boilers (including watertube), this
may be increased up to 3 m. The width of ﬁring aisle will
be dependent upon the size and type of boiler.

Having now established the space requirement for the
boilers, we must consider the other items of plant to be
housed in the same structure. These may include water-
treatment plant, heat-recovery system, tanks and pump,
instrument and controls. With oil- and gas-ﬁred instal-
lations, there is little additional plant to consider within
the boiler house. With solid fuel then the handling, dis-
tribution and perhaps storage could also form part of the
building with provision for ash handling and removal.

Access for air into the boiler house must be considered.
Air for combustion will be drawn in through purpose-
made louvers and care should be taken that this air does
not create a hostile environment to personnel in the build-
ing. Also, passage of air across cold water pipes should be
avoided, as in cold weather this may aggravate freezing
in the pipes.

Ventilation will also be required. With gas-ﬁred instal-
lations, this is mandatory, and speciﬁed free areas must
be provided.

The fabric of the building may range from a basic frame
and clad structure offering minimum weather protection to

Boiler house pipework 23/401

a brick and concrete construction. While it is possible to
weatherproof boilers for outside installation, it should be
remembered that the occasion may arise when someone
is going to carry out maintenance or service work, and if
weather conditions are inclement, this may prove imprac-
tical. Two instances where outdoor installation may be
considered are where the climatic conditions of the coun-
try permit and in the case of waste-heat boilers where
controls are minimal.

Foundations and trenches will be formed prior to boiler
delivery. The boiler house structure may be erected before
or after delivery of the boilers, dependent upon site con-
ditions and the type of boiler. Due consideration will be
given to access openings and doorways and provision
for lifting any items of plant once the boiler house is
complete.

Noise may be considered in two areas, one being an
unacceptable level of noise to adjacent areas and the other
an excessive noise level for personnel inside the boiler
house. With the ﬁrst, the type of construction of the build-
ing together with position of openings and the ﬁtting of
acoustic louvers for air ingress will all help to reduce
external noise. As an extension to this and to reduce noise
for personnel within the building, all items of plant gen-
erating noise may be considered. These will generally be
forced-draft fans and feedwater pumps. Various degrees
of silencing are available for combustion appliances and
feed pumps may be housed in a separate enclosure within
the building.

External to the boiler house, provision for the storage
and handling of solid and liquid fuel is required with
access for delivery vehicles. With some small boilers such
as electrode or steam-coil generators, where the boiler
only serves a single item of plant or process, it is practi-
cal to install them immediately adjacent to that process.
The electrode boiler is eminently suitable here as no com-
bustion gases are produced.

23.10 Boiler house pipework
Pipework layout should be designed so that it does not
restrict access to the plant or building. Walkways and

Fuel: Delivery
         Storage
         Handling

Superheater
(if required)

Steam

Water:  Treatment plant
          Feed tank
          Condensate returns
          Pumps

Figure 23.9 Boiler services

Boiler

Blowdown
heat recovery

Economizer
Gas cleaning
Air heaters          Chimney

Depending upon type
of boiler and fuel

23/402 Industrial Boilers

gantries should be considered when deciding on pipe ser-
vice routes.

Where pipework is subject to temperature such as steam
and hot water mains a means for expansion must be
included to prevent undue stresses to valves and building
structure. Balancing the steam ﬂow from a range of boilers
is important, particularly if the load may include peaks of
more than one boiler capacity. To achieve this balance, the
pressure drop in each steam line from the boiler crown
valve to the distribution manifold should be the same,
so that any imposed load will be shared between all on-
line boilers. Failure to provide balanced steam headers
may give rise to the lead boiler losing pressure, priming
and locking out, thus aggravating the situation for the
remaining on-line boilers.

Steam lines from the boiler should always drain away
from the boiler crown value to prevent condensate build-
ing up against the valve. Careless opening of this valve
to allow steam to pass when the line is ﬂooded can result
in splitting the valve and pipework. If the steam line rises
from the crown valve a tee trap must be installed and
ﬁtted with a steam trap and drain valve. The drain valve
must be operated to check that the steam line is clear of
water before the crown valve is opened.

Safety-valve vent pipework should be run on the short-
est possible route. Where bends or long runs occur, the
pipe size may have to be increased to prevent back pres-
sure on the safety valve during operation.

Feedwater pipework will normally be gravity head suc-
tion from the hotwell or feed tanks to the pumps and at a
pressure in excess of the boiler working pressure from the
pumps to the boiler. Few problems occur on the pipework
between pumps and boilers. However, inadequately sized
suction lines can give rise to cavitation at the feed pump
with subsequent boiler shutdown. The feed tank should
always be positioned to suit the temperature of the feed-
water and the pipework sized to give free ﬂow at that
head, taking account of bends, valves and ﬁlters.

Fuel lines should be run where they will not be sub-
ject to high temperatures and must include protection with
automatic and manual shut-off ﬁre valves at the perime-
ter of the boiler house. Individual boilers should also be
capable of isolation from this supply. Local requirements
may vary on fuel supply systems, and these should be
ascertained before installation.

Blowdown and drains may be taken to either a sump or
blowdown tank prior to discharging into the drains. The
purpose of this is to reduce the temperature by dilution
and dissipate the pressure to prevent damage to the drains.
All pipework must be installed to the appropriate stan-
dard and codes of practice. The degree of insulation will
be suitable for the temperature of the pipework, although
the ﬁnish may vary, depending upon site preferences.
Valve boxes are recommended, although on some low-
pressure installations these are not always included.

23.11 Feedwater requirements
Poor or unsuitable water can be a major factor where
failure in a boiler occurs. There are four problem areas

Table 23.5 Recommended water characteristics for shell boilers

For pressures up to 25 bara
Total hardness in feedwater,
mg/l in terms of CaCO3 max.
Feedwater
pH value
Oxygen
Total solids, alkalinity, silica
Organic matter
Boiler water
Total hardness, mg/l in terms of
CaCO3 max.
Sodium phosphate, mg/l as
Na3PO4
Caustic alkalinity, mg/l in
terms of CaCO3 min.
Total alkalinity, mg/l in terms
of CaCO3 max.
Silica, mg/l as SiO2 max.

c

Sodium sulﬁte, mg/l as Na2SO3
or
Hydrazine, mg/l as N2H4
Suspended solids, mg/l max.
Dissolved solids, mg/l max.

2

20

40

7.5–9.5
b
b
b

7.5–9.5
b
b
b

7.5–9.5
b
b
b

ND

ND

ND

50–100

50–100

50–100

350

1200

300

700

200

700

Less than 0.4 of the caustic
alkalinity
30–70

30–70

30–70

0.1–1.0
50
3500

0.1–1.0
200
3000

0.1–1.0
300
2000

– : Not applicable.
ND: Not detectable.
a1 bar D 105 N/m2 D 100 kPa D 14.5 lb/in2.
bNumerical values depend upon circumstances but the comments
are relevant.
cPhosphate is usually added as sodium phosphate but determined
as phosphate (PO4
Based on Table 2 of BS 2486: 1978, by permission of BSI.

3); Na3PO4 D 1.73 ð PO43.

for which feedwater needs suitable treatment and control.
These are sludge, foam, scale and corrosion.

Boiler feedwater may be from various supplies. If it
is from a main water supply, further ﬁltering prior to
treatment is unlikely, but for other supplies such as bore-
hole, lakes, rivers and canals, ﬁlters may be required.
Impurities in water may be classed as dissolved solids,
dissolved gases and suspended matter and suitable treat-
ment is required.

Table 23.5 shows the recommended water character-
istics for shell boilers and Table 23.6 the water quality
guidelines for industrial watertube boilers. Due to the
wide parameters encountered in the quality of feedwater,
it is not possible to be speciﬁc and to deﬁne which treat-
ment suits a particular type and size of boiler. The quality
of make-up and percentage of condense returns in a sys-
tem will both have to be taken into consideration.

23.12 Feedwater supply and tanks
The design, size and siting of the boiler feed tank or
hotwell must be compatible with the boiler duty capacity
and system temperatures. They should be installed giving
sufﬁcient space for access to controls, valves and man-
ways.

The tanks will normally be of fully welded construction
from mild steel with the internal surfaces shot blasted and
a protective plastic coating applied. It is important that all

Table 23.6 Water-quality guidelines recommended for reliable,
continuous operation of modern industrial watertube boiler’s

Boiler feedwater

Drum
pressure
(lb/in2 g)

0–300
301–450
451–800
601–750
751–900
901–1000
1001–1500
1501–2000

Boiler water

Drum
pressure
(lb/in2 g)

0–300
301–450
451–600
601–750
751–900
901–1000
1001–1500
1501–2000

Iron

(ppm Fe)

Copper
(ppm Cu)

Total

hardness

(ppm CaCO3)

0.100
0.050
0.030
0.025
0.020
0.020
0.010
0.010

0.050
0.025
0.020
0.20
0.015
0.015
0.010
0.010

0.300
0.300
0.200
0.200
0.100
0.050
NDd
NDd

Silica

(ppm SiO2)

Total

alkalinitya
(ppm CaCO3)

Speciﬁc

conductance
((cid:22)mho/cm)

150
90
40
30
20
8
2
1

350b
300b
250b
200b
150b
100b
NSs
NSc

3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
150
100

aMinimum level of hydroxide alkalinity in boilers 1000 lb/in2 must
be individually speciﬁed with regard to silica solubility and other
components of internal treatment.
bMaximum total alkalinity consistent with acceptable steam purity.
If necessary, the limitation on total alkalinity should override con-
ductance as the control parameter. If make-up is demineralized
water at 600–1000 lb/in2 g, boiler water alkalinity and conductance
should be shown in the table for the 1001–1500 lb/in2 g range.
cNS (not speciﬁed) in these cases refers to free sodium- or
potassium-hydroxide alkalinity. Some small variable amount of
total alkalinity will be present, and measurable with the assumed
congruent control or volatile treatment employed at these high-
pressure ranges.
dNone detectable.

connections together with any additional future connec-
tions be included before the coating is applied to prevent
breaking the surface, thus giving a source of future cor-
rosion. The tank should have a sealed top with adequate
bolt-on access covers. This will keep out foreign bod-
ies and protect the water surface from the atmosphere,
where it would absorb oxygen. Adequate venting must be
included to prevent any build-up of pressure from either
heating or condense returns.

Alternative materials may be used, including stainless
steel and plastic. Sectional tanks may be installed for con-
venience in restricted places, but great care must be taken
if they are subject to temperature variations, which can
give rise to joint problems.

The following connections will be required in addition

to the vent already referred to:

Feedwater supply and tanks 23/403

1. Feedwater take-off. This will be from the bottom of
the tank and preferably from the base with a weir
pipe extending 50–100 mm up into the tank. If the
take-off is from the side of the tank the bottom of the
pipe bore must be a similar dimension up from the
base. This allows sludge to remain in the tank, which
should be inspected and cleaned as required.

2. Drain pipework will be directly from the bottom of

the tank.

3. Overﬂow pipework should be sized to meet the sup-
ply quantity to the tank and run so that visible evi-
dence is obvious of an overﬂow condition.

4. Condense returns. Where returns arrive at the feed
tank from several sources, it is desirable to bring
them together with a collection manifold at the top
of the tank. The manifold then has a dip pipe extend-
ing down into the tank terminating in a sparge pipe.
This method reduces the risk of entraining air in the
returns and helps to promote mixing of the water in
the tank.

5. Make-up water. A semi-sealed section within the main
tank will feed water from the treatment plant to the
main tank either through a separate make-up tank or.
In either case, the water level will be the same in
both sections, excluding the ullage left for condense
returns. Control of the make-up water level may be
by ﬂoat valve, ﬂoat switches or conductivity probes.
These methods allow water to ﬂow through the treat-
ment plant, although conductivity probes or switches
permit a positive ﬂow and avoid the risk of slippage.
6. Chemical dosing. This is a connection into the tank
with an internal diffuser for any corrective treatment
required for the water.

7. Level indicator. This may be either visual or electrical

or both.

Additional connections may also be required for the fol-
lowing:

8. Flash steam. This will result from the blowdown heat
recovery referred to in Section 7.13. Flash steam is
introduced into the tank through a dip pipe termi-
nating in a distribution manifold near the bottom of
the tank.

9. Tank heating. This is referred to in detail later in this

section.

10. Thermometer.

Connections

should be arranged to avoid short-
circuiting between the tank supply and take-off to the
boiler feed. Also, adequate mixing within the tank is
required to prevent stratiﬁcation. With the capacity of
the feed tank, if there is an adequate supply of water
either from mains or local storage, a 1 h supply should
be considered a minimum. This would be based on a
continuous supply of make-up water being available such
as from a duplex treatment plant. If the supply of make-up
is not continuous then the tank capacity must be increased.
For example, a base exchange plant will take about 75 min
to regenerate, and in that case, the tank capacity should be
able to sustain a supply of water to the boiler for 90 min
in order to give a safety margin. The treatment plant then

23/404 Industrial Boilers

Plain lid

50 mm lagging
(90% eff.)

91 W/m2

Bare tank

905 W/m2

Figure 23.10 Heat losses from a feedwater tank operating at 93°C with ambient 21°C

59 W/m2

588 W/m2

has to supply a quantity of water in excess of the boiler
demand rate in order to replenish the tank. On top of this
capacity a volume has to be allowed for condense returns
when the system starts in order to prevent wastage of
heat and water. As steam capacities increase, the feed tank
becomes correspondingly larger, and it may be considered
that on steam outputs in excess of 20,000 kg/h a duplex
treatment plant should be installed in order to keep the
feed tank to a reasonable size.

In areas where the water demand of the plant may
exceed the supply capacity of the local mains, it will be
necessary to install additional storage tanks. It is likely
that if the local supply is subject to low ﬂow rates addi-
tional storage is already available for services such as ﬁre
protection.

Feedwater to the boiler should not be cold, as this can
cause harmful thermal stresses to the boiler. A minimum
feedwater temperature of 70–80°C should be designed
into the system. This increased temperature has the added
advantage that it accelerates some water-treatment reac-
tions and helps to remove oxygen and other gases from
the feedwater. Once the system is working, this higher
temperature may be achieved from the condense returns,
but this condition is not effective until the plant has been
running for some time. A tank heating system should
therefore be installed. This is best achieved by direct
steam injection into the feed tank. Steam is taken from
the boiler and reduced in pressure to 1–2 bar to reduce
noise in the tank. Passing through a thermostatic control
valve, the steam mixes with the water in the tank through
a sparge pipe or steam nozzle.

With watertube boilers economizers are normally used,
therefore the situation of cold feed to the boiler would
not apply. However, the feed to the economizer should
be treated similarly to that to a boiler to reduce thermal
shock.

With the feedwater being raised in temperature it is
necessary to avoid cavitation at the inlet to the boiler

feed pump. One method of reducing this problem is to
elevate the feed tank to give an adequate positive head at
the pump. The following are recommended heights to the
minimum water level in the tank at various temperatures:

88°C – 1.6 m
93°C – 3.1 m
99°C – 4.6 m
100°C – 5.2 m

The feed tank should always be insulated to reduce heat
loss to a minimum. Figure 23.10 illustrates typical heat
losses from a feed tank operating at 93°C in an ambient
temperature of 21°C with and without 50 mm of insulation.

23.13 Blowdown requirements, control
and tanks
In order to maintain the level of dissolved and suspended
solids within the boiler as recommended in Section 23.11
it is necessary for the boiler to be blown down. This is an
operation where a quantity of water is drained from the
boiler while the boiler is operating at pressure and may
be achieved by various methods.

The simplest and that applied to small boilers is for the
main bottom blowdown valve to be opened for a set period
at regular intervals (e.g. 20 seconds every 8 hours). This
method may also extend to larger boilers where conditions
are such that there is little build-up of solids. Such con-
ditions could be high condense returns and good-quality
make-up feedwater.

The second method could be automatic intermittent
blowdown. With this, a timer-controlled valve is installed
at the bottom of the boiler prior to the main blowdown
valve. A program is then designed to operate this valve
in short bursts, which disperses any sludge and controls
the levels of solids. This method is preferred for boilers
having internal treatment.

The third method would be continuous blowdown
through a regulating or micrometer valve. The take-off
position for this should preferably be about 250 mm below
the working water level and may either be on the side of
the shell or on the crown with a dip pipe down to the
correct level. If a connection is not available, it is possible
to install the valve on the bottom connection prior to the
main blowdown valve.

All these methods will require careful monitoring ini-
tially to set up and determine the correct rate of blowdown
once the plant is operating. In order to take the neces-
sary sample from the boiler the boiler(s) should be ﬁtted
with a sample cooler. To automate the continuous blow-
down a conductivity-controlled system may be installed.
Here a controller continuously compares the boiler water
electrical conductivity with a value set in the controller.
Depending on whether this is above or below the set rate,
it will automatically adjust the blowdown ﬂow rate.

While the above methods control the level of dissolved
and suspended solids in the boiler, it will still be an insur-
ance requirement to operate the main blowdown valve
periodically.

The minimum amount of blowdown may be calculated

B (cid:2) F

ð 100%

as a percentage of the evaporation rate by:
Blowdown rate D F
where F D the total dissolved solids content of the feed
in parts per million allowing for the mixture of make-up
and condensate plus any chemical treatment and B D the
maximum recommended solids content for boiler water in
parts per million.

While vitally necessary, blowdown can be expensive in
terms of lost heat. Therefore a point will be reached when
it is economical to install a blowdown heat recovery sys-
tem. Generally, the heat content in the blowdown water
for a shell boiler will represent only about 25 per cent of
the heat content in the same percentage of steam. There-
fore, if a blowdown rate of 10 per cent is required this
represents an approximate heat loss of 2.5 per cent from
the boiler capacity. This differential reduces and even-
tually becomes insigniﬁcant on high-pressure watertube
boilers.

The blowdown from the boiler(s) will be run to a ﬂash-
steam vessel mounted adjacent to the feed tank. Flash
steam will be introduced into the feed tank through a
dip pipe terminating in a distribution manifold. The drain
from the ﬂash vessel may then be taken to a residual
blowdown heat exchanger. Any remaining heat is then
transferred to the make-up water to the tank before the
blowdown runs to drain.

Blowdown from the boiler(s) should always be taken
to either a blowdown sump or blowdown vessel before
discharging into drains. Both should be adequately sized
to give cooling by dilution and be ﬁtted with vent pipes
to dissipate pressure safely. The boiler(s) should have
independent drain lines for the main manually operated
blowdown valve and the drains from a continuous blow-
down system. Where more than one boiler is connected
to either system the line should be ﬁtted with a check or
secondary valve capable of being locked.

Clean Air Act requirement for chimneys and ﬂue designs 23/405

Blowdown sumps should be constructed from brick
and/or concrete and the blowdown lines should drain
under gravity. Where the blowdown lines enter the sump
they should turn to discharge downwards and the bottom
of the sump should be protected below this area with a
cast iron tray to prevent erosion. The drain or overﬂow
from the pit should be at such a level to produce a weir
effect, thus holding water for dilution.

With a blowdown vessel, these may be installed at
ground level, and thus the water in them can be above
the boiler blowdown valve. In this case, a drain valve
for maintenance purposes must be installed at the lowest
point in the line between the boiler and the vessel.

23.14 Clean Air Act requirement for
chimneys and ﬂue designs
23.14.1 Introduction

The function of a chimney is to discharge in a manner to
give adequate dispersal to the products of combustion in
accordance with the third edition of the 1956 Clean Air
Act Memorandum on Chimney Heights. The scope of the
memorandum is as follows:

1. The publication provides for the use of local authori-
ties, industry and others who may need to determine
the height appropriate for certain new chimneys a rel-
atively simple method of calculating the appropriate
height desirable in normal circumstances.

2. Heights determined by these methods should be
regarded as a guide rather than as a mathematically
precise decision. The conclusions may need to be
modiﬁed in the light of particular local circumstances
such as valleys, hills and other topographical features.
3. The advice given is applicable only to chimneys of
fuel burning plant with a gross heat input of between
0.15 MW and 150 MW,
including stationary diesel
generators. It does not deal with direct-ﬁred heating
systems which discharge into the space being heated,
gas turbines or incinerators (which require separate
treatment, depending on the pollutants emitted).

4. The main changes from the second edition are the
inclusion of a method dealing with very low sulfur fuel
and extensions of the methods for taking into account
the height of nearby buildings and of the range of the
size of furnace included.

23.14.2 Gas velocity

In order to maximize the chimney height, the efﬂux veloc-
ity of the gases leaving the chimney should be designed
on 12 m/s at maximum continuous rating (MCR) of the
boiler. On some very small boilers, this may be impracti-
cal to achieve, but a target velocity of not less than 6 m/s
at MCR should be aimed for. With boilers at the top end of
the range a velocity of 15 m/s at MCR is required. Some
inner-city authorities may stipulate higher efﬂux velocities
and some plants have been installed with gas velocities
of 22 m/s.

23/406 Industrial Boilers

23.14.3 Chimney height

Originally, the height of the chimney was designed to
produce a draft sufﬁcient to produce induced-draft air for
combustion. With modern boiler plant, forced-draft and/or
induced-draft fans are used. This allows for the greater
degree of control of the air to be designed into the com-
bustion appliance. The chimney is therefore only required
to disperse the gases.

When using gaseous fuel it is normally sufﬁcient to
terminate the chimney 3 m above the boiler house roof
level, subject to there being no higher buildings adjacent
to the boiler house. In such cases, these buildings may
need to be considered.

On medium-sized boiler plant where gas is to be the
main fuel, it may have oil as a secondary standby fuel. In
this case, the chimney height must be based on the grade
of fuel oil capable of being burned.

The methods of calculating proposed chimney height
are clearly laid out in the Clean Air Act Memorandum,
and will be based on:

1. Quantity of fuel burned;
2. Sulfur content of fuel burned;
3. District category;
4. Adjacent buildings;
5. Any adjacent existing emissions.

Application for approval of the proposed chimney
height should be made to the appropriate authority at an
early stage of a project in order to ascertain their approval
or other height
they may require. Failure to do this
can result in an embarrassing situation where insufﬁcient
ﬁnance has been allocated due to their requiring a larger
chimney than was included in the planned costing.

Where waste products are being incinerated, special
consideration may have to be given to the resulting ﬂue
gases. This may involve having to arrive at a chimney
height in conjunction with HM Inspectorate of Factories
for Pollution.

23.14.4 Type and combustion

Where a multi-boiler installation is being considered
a multi-ﬂue chimney is preferred. This is where the
required number and size of ﬂues are enclosed in a single
windshield. It is preferred by planning ofﬁces and has
the advantage of a greater plume rise than from separate
stacks.

Several boilers discharging into a single-core chimney
are to be avoided. At times of low load the efﬂux velocity
will be very low, which, in turn, will allow the chimney
to cool. This may then drop to dewpoint temperatures
and, where sulfur is present in the fuel, acid will form.
If the chimney is unprotected steel, it will suffer rapid
corrosion. Even worse, as the boilers increase their load
the efﬂux velocity will increase and start to discharge the
acid droplets, which quickly fall out and cause damage to
surrounding property.

Construction of chimneys for industrial boilers will
mainly be of steel, being either single or multi-ﬂue.
A single-core chimney should be suitably insulated in

order to maintain a maximum temperature at the chimney
outlet to prevent corrosion and will be ﬁnish clad with
aluminum sheet. A multi-ﬂue chimney will have each ﬂue
suitably insulated and enclosed in an outer windshield.
Provision for drainage should be incorporated at the base
of each ﬂue. Large watertube boilers may have concrete
windshields containing internal ﬂues.

23.14.5 Connecting ducts
The duct between the boiler outlet and the chimney con-
nection should be designed to have a gas velocity no
greater than the chimney ﬂue, be complete with insula-
tion, and cladding, access openings and expansion joints.
It should have the least number of bends and changes of
section possible and should preferably not fall between
the boiler outlet and the chimney connection.

With the use of multi-ﬂue chimneys, dampers are not
required in each ﬂue as they were for boiler isolation when
several boilers discharge into a common duct or chimney.
This should not be confused with the ﬁtting of dampers
for heat conservation in a boiler during off-load periods.

23.14.6 Grit and dust emissions
Solids emissions from solid and liquid fuel ﬁred plant are
covered in the HMSO publication Grit and dust–The mea-
surement of emissions from boiler and furnace chimneys.
This states levels of emissions which should be achieved
in existing plant and speciﬁed for new plant. Suitable
sampling connections should be incorporated into the ﬂue
ducting for the use of test equipment if permanent moni-
toring is not included.

23.15 Steam storage
Most boilers built now, together with their combustion
equipment, are quick to respond to local ﬂuctuations.
Occasionally, where very rapid load changes occur, the
ﬁring rate of a gas or oil burner can be virtually
instantaneous by the use of special control equipment.
This control will have to work in conjunction with the
boiler, and therefore the boiler should have adequate
steam space and water surface area to help accommodate
the rapid changes in steam demand. Good water treatment
is especially important here in order to reduce the risk
of priming during peak draw-off periods. A boiler with a
large shell will have an advantage over one with a smaller
shell, assuming equal heating surfaces, but it will give no
more than a slight buffer against severe loads.

Most boiler plants can be installed using one or more
boilers, which can accommodate minimum to maximum
loads. Occasionally, heavy peak loads occur for only rel-
atively short periods, and here there may be an advantage
on economic running grounds to install boilers whose ﬁr-
ing rate will not meet these peaks. In these cases, there are
two methods which may be used: one is thermal storage
and the other is with an accumulator.

23.15.1 Thermal storage
This is brieﬂy described in Section 23.1.11. Its principle
is based on a special feedwater control system, which

allows the water level in the shell to fall during periods
of steam demand in excess of the maximum ﬁring rate.
Conversely, during periods of low steam demand the con-
trol system allows the water level to re-establish itself.
This is achieved using a constant burner-ﬁring rate that
should match the average steam demand, thus allowing
maximum efﬁciency. It is claimed it is possible with this
system to control the limits of boiler working pressure to
within š0.07 bar.

23.15.2 The accumulator

This was brieﬂy described in Section 23.1.12. Unlike
thermal storage, it depends upon differential pressures,
and it is suited to a situation where both high- and low-
pressure steam systems are required (for example, 17 bar
and 7 bar). Alternatively, if no high-pressure steam is
required then the boilers must be designed to operate at a
higher pressure with all steam supplies going to process
through a pressure-reducing station. Any high-pressure
surplus then goes to the accumulator to help meet peak
loads. Figure 23.11 shows the layout of an accumulator.
The storage vessel is ﬁlled to around 90 per cent of its
volume with water and the pressure of the boilers controls
the overﬂow valve. On rising steam pressure (indicating
that the boilers are producing more steam than the process
requires), a signal to the overﬂow valve allows all surplus
high-pressure steam to ﬂow into the accumulator via a
non-return valve and internal distribution header. Here it
is condensed and its thermal energy stored. If a peak load
develops on the high-pressure system, controls will close
the overﬂow valve and allow steam to discharge from
the accumulator through the pressure-reducing valve set
to meet the low-pressure steam requirement. Similarly, if
the peak develops on the low-pressure system, then high-
pressure steam may pass directly to the pressure-reducing
set to supplement steam from the accumulator.

Every accumulator will be designed to meet its speci-
ﬁed duty. It will be appreciated that the greater the dif-
ferential pressure, the smaller the vessel will need to be.

Automatic controls on boilers 23/407

23.16 Automatic controls on boilers
Whether the boiler is ﬁred on oil, gas or solid fuel, it
may be expected that it will operate automatically. When
boiler plant is not run continuously initial start-up may
be manual, time clock or through an energy-management
system. Manual attendance may be limited to maintenance
functions dictated by the type and size of plant. Automatic
controls will cover three areas:

1. Combustion appliance
2. Water level
3. Blowdown

23.16.1 Combustion appliance

When using oil or gas this may operate in one of three
modes. On/off, high/low/off or modulating. Only small
units will have on/off operation and usually all units of
4000 kg/h evaporation and above will have modulating
control. The burners will have safety systems incorporated
to prove satisfactory fuel supply before ignition takes
place, ﬂame proving at point of ignition and continuous
ﬂame monitoring thereafter.

High/low burners will have between 2:1 and 3:1 turn-
down on the maximum ﬁring rate while a modulating
burner will give between 3:1 and 5:1, depending upon
the unit size and the fuel used. A higher turndown ratio is
available from some burners, but if the above-mentioned
ratios are exceeded care must be taken to consider the
effect on the ﬁnal gas temperature leaving the boiler. Dew-
point temperatures are to be avoided. Coal-ﬁred units by
nature of the fuel will have modulating control whether
chain or traveling grate, underfeed or ﬁxed/tipping grate.

23.16.2 Water level

The control of feedwater into the boiler is automatic.
Feedwater will be delivered from a pump with on–off
operation or from a continuously running pump deliver-
ing water through a modulating feed control valve. In both

NRV

Safety
valve

NRV

Figure 23.11 Diagrammatic layout of a steam accumulator

LP to
plant

Pressure-
reducing
valve

Overflow
valve

HP from 
boilers

23/408 Industrial Boilers

cases, the water requirement is continuously monitored by
level controls directly connected to the shell or drum of
the boiler.

In addition to controlling the feedwater, the level con-
trols will also monitor low- and high water conditions.
It is essential that all heated surfaces are always fully
immersed; therefore, two stages of low-water alarms are
ﬁtted on two independently mounted controls. The ﬁrst
low water will give audible and visual indication and
shut down the combustion appliance. If normal water
level is automatically restored it will allow the boiler
to go back to ﬁring mode. If the second low water is
reached again, audible and visual alarms are instigated,
but now the boiler will go to lockout condition, requir-
ing manual restart after the problem has been resolved.
Watertube boilers may have additional monitoring con-
trols to give early indication of load changes as referred
to in Section 23.7.

23.16.3 Blowdown

Blowdown on a boiler is mandatory. On small boilers,
the required operation of the main blowdown valve may
be sufﬁcient to control the quality of water within the
boiler. On medium and large plants, additional systems
are employed.

The simplest is a preset continuous blowdown valve
to maintain a suitable water quality in the boiler. It is
necessary for water quality to be checked frequently and
the rate of continuous blowdown adjusted as may be found
necessary.

A second method is a time-controlled valve allowing
regular intermittent blowdown of the boiler. Again, reg-
ular checks need to be carried out to monitor the quality
of water in the boiler.

The

automatic

third and most

the
conductivity-controlled blowdown. This constantly mea-
sures the level of solids in the water and instigates an
automatic variable blowdown on a continuous or inter-
mittent basis.

system is

23.17 Automatic boiler start
In order to control the operating times of a boiler it is a
simple matter to ﬁt each with time clock control. Alter-
natively, they may be controlled through a central energy
management system. Either way, a boiler or boilers may
be shut down at the end of each day and programed to
restart the following day or when required. Special consid-
erations need to be made if standing periods are extended,
allowing a boiler to go cold.

With hot water units, time clock control can operate
satisfactorily as automatic bypass valves built into the
distribution system will help the heater to achieve its
working temperature quickly. With steam boilers, it is
important that the boiler reaches a reasonable working
pressure before steam is allowed into the distribution sys-
tem. For example, if boilers are left open to a system
for an extended length of time while not ﬁring they will
quickly lose their pressure. This is not only wasteful of
energy but eventually creates a problem on start-up. To

start a boiler on a zero-pressure system with all valves
open will undoubtedly cause the boiler to prime and go
to lock-out condition, but not before condensate has at
least partly ﬂooded the system.

Therefore, where a time clock is incorporated it is rec-
ommended that the crown valve(s) be closed at the end
of each working day and only opened after the boiler
has reached working pressure the next time it is required.
This operation can be automated by the use of motor-
ized or similar valves. These valves may be ﬁtted to each
steam, supply line from a manifold adjacent to the boil-
ers and, provided adequate safeguards are incorporated
to protect the boilers, the on-line boiler(s) may be left
open to the manifold. Alternatively, each boiler may have
its own automatic motorized start-up valve. Figure 23.12
illustrates a valve suitable for either system.

Each valve would have a control panel incorporating a
timer. This may initially be set to a ‘crack’ position timed
to open after the boiler has started to ﬁre and is already
building up pressure. This will allow gentle warm-up of
the system while enabling the boiler to achieve working
pressure. After this, the valve may be set to open in timed
adjustable steps to its fully open position. At the end of
a timed period, coinciding with the time clock ﬁtted to
the boiler, the valve automatically closes at the end of
the working cycle. Where multiple valves are used, their
control may be incorporated into a single panel or, alter-
natively, become part of an energy-management system.

23.18 The automatic boiler house
As described in Section 23.16, the boiler will operate
automatically and we saw in Section 23.17 that it can
be programed to operate to suit various cycles. There are,
however, other areas within the boiler house which still
require a degree of attendance.

The ﬁrst of these is blowdown control. If control of the
water quality within the boiler is being carried out by a
separate system, we are left with the main blowdown and
blowdown of the water-level controls and gauge glasses.
It is possible to automate these valves but it is unusual.
Before proceeding, the advice of the insurance company
must be sought and agreement reached on the operation
of the valves. When blowing down the level controls it
should take the boiler to lockout. If this, in turn, is overrid-
den, a further proving system will need to be incorporated
to prove correct functioning of the level control. In addi-
tion to the above, it will still be necessary to carry out an
evaporation test on the boiler to prove correct operation
of the level controls at deﬁned periods.

The second area will be feedwater pumps. It is normal
to have a duplicate standby feedwater pump. Sometimes
this may be two for each boiler or one duplicate pump to
serve any selected boiler. These will usually require man-
ual changeover in the even of failure of the duty pump.
It is practical to automate this changeover by using pres-
sure sensors and motorized valves. The same can apply to
oil-circulating pumps, gas boosters, water-treatment plant
and any other valves and motors. It is possible to do most
things, but in the end there is the cost to be considered. An

Safe operation of automatic boiler plant 23/409

Auto

Open

Close

Switchgear panel
Contractor
Timer-adjustable
to control speed of
opening sequence
of valve
Auto open/close
switch

24-hour timer
Adjustable setting
for predetermined
opening and closing
times of valve

Electric actuator
has hand-wind
for authorized
manual override

Electrically operated stop valve
1. Valve opens to intermediate position
2. Rest period to allow warm-up of system
3. Gradual opening in stages to full open
4. Valve closes by timer at end of working
    period or on boiler close-down

From boiler or main header

Distribution

Figure 23.12 Diagram of electrically operated automatic steam stop valve (with permission of Hopkinsons Valves Ltd, Huddersﬁeld, UK)

energy-management system coupled to a suitable mainte-
nance program can still prove the best option for the great
majority of installations.

23.19 Safe operation of automatic
boiler plant
The most frequent cause of damage and even explosion
in boilers is a low-water condition. This will expose the
heating surfaces, which ultimately overheat and rupture
under the operating pressure. Experience has shown that
since the introduction of controls for unattended automatic
operation of boilers the accident rate has increased. Inves-
tigation invariably shows that lack of maintenance has
been the main contributing factor. It is therefore imper-
ative that personnel responsible for the running of the
boiler plant be fully trained and conversant with its safe
operation.

The minimum recommended requirements for auto-
matic controls for boilers not under continuous supervi-
sion are:

1. Automatic water-level controls arranged to positively
control the ﬂow of water into the boiler and maintain
a set level between predetermined limits;

2. Automatic ﬁring controls arranged to control the sup-
ply of fuel and air to the combustion appliance. A
shutdown will occur in the event of one or more of
the following occurring:
(a) Flame/pilot ﬂame failure on oil- or gas-ﬁred
boilers. The control should be of the lock-out type
requiring manual reset;

(b) Failure to ignite fuel on oil- or gas-ﬁred boilers
within a set time. Again, lock-out type with manual
reset;

(c) At a preset high pressure (or temperature in the
case of hot water) at or below the safety valve
setting;

(d) When the water level falls to a preset point below
the normal working water level. This control will
operate on audible alarm but will automatically go
back to ﬁring mode once the water level is re-
established;

(e) Failure of combustion air fans or automatic ﬂue

dampers;

3. An independent overriding second low-water control.
This will be set below the level control in (2). It will
give an audible alarm on shutting off the fuel and air
supply and require manual reset before the boiler may
be brought back into operation;

4. All electrical equipment for the water-level and ﬁring
controls should be designed so that any fault will cause
the boiler to shutdown and require manual resetting
before the boiler may be restarted.

For hot water boilers the burner controls will be similar
but controlled by a combination of pressure and temper-
ature signals. A single overriding level control will be
ﬁtted to the ﬂooded boiler to protect against any acciden-
tal low-water condition.

In order to monitor the safe operation of the boiler a
daily and weekly program of tests should be drawn up
and log sheets completed as veriﬁcation of the tests being
carried out. Items checked should include:

23/410 Industrial Boilers

Boiler pressure;
Water level gauges–visual and blowdown;
Sequence valves opened and level controls operated;
Feedwater pump operating;
Operate main blowdown valve;
First low-water alarm and burner off;
Second low-water alarm and burner lock-out.

When a boiler may not be shut down for maintenance
of the level control chambers isolating valves can be ﬁtted
between the water-level control and the steam space. In
this instance, the valves must be capable of being locked
in the open position and the key retained by a responsible
person. When these valves are closed during maintenance
periods the boiler must be under manual attendance. Fit-
ting of these valves should only be with the agreement of
the insurance company responsible for the boiler. Drains
from the water-level controls and level gauges should be
collected at a manifold or sealed tundish before running
to the blowdown vessel.

As the boilers are designed for unattended operation, it
follows that if a fault occurs and an alarm activated this
alarm may need to be duplicated at a secondary location
where it will be intercepted and acted upon.

Safety valves should be trouble-free. No attempt should
be made to alter the set relief pressure without reference
to the insurance company and the boiler manufacturer.

With waste-heat boilers ﬁtted to incinerators care must
be taken not to over-ﬁre. It is possible to introduce addi-
tional heat either by increasing the quantity of waste or by
a change in the composition of the waste. The resultant
increase in gas volume and/or temperature is then capa-
ble of imparting more heat to the waste-heat boiler. As
the boiler will have been designed for a speciﬁed duty it
could be possible to raise an amount of steam in excess
of that which may be safely controlled.

Sometimes it is not practical to blowdown the level
controls and shut down the incinerator. In this case, the
situation should be discussed with the insurance company
and the boiler supplier. It is possible to include for an extra
high working water level giving a safety margin above the
heating surfaces. The controls may then be blown down
and checked for satisfactory operation with a predeter-
mined time delay before it shuts down the incinerator or
operates a bypass in the event of a fault.

23.20 Energy conservation
Energy conservation in the boiler house can be consid-
ered in two areas. One is the selection and installation of
suitable equipment and the other is good operation and
management.

23.20.1 Plant installation

The boiler, ﬂues and chimney, pipework and hotwell,
where installed, should all be insulated to adequate stan-
dards and ﬁnish. Valves should be enclosed in insulated
boxes, although on small installations this can prove dis-
proportionately expensive. The boilers may be ﬁtted with

either inlet or outlet air-sealing dampers. These will pre-
vent the ﬂow of ambient air through the boiler during
off-load and standby periods, thus helping to maintain the
heat already in the boiler.

Economizers may be installed, particularly if gas is the
main fuel. It is unlikely that an economic case can be
made for a single boiler if there is less than 4000 kg/h
evaporation. An economizer can produce fuel savings of
4–5 per cent, but it must be remembered that this will be
at MCR, and if the load factor of the installation is lower,
the savings will also be proportionately lower.

Combustion controls such as oxygen trim help to
maintain optimum operating conditions, especially on
gaseous fuels. Instrumentation can give continuous visual
and recorded information of selected boiler and plant
functions. To be effective, it must be maintained and the
data assessed and any required action taken before the
information is stored.

Energy-management systems will form an important
part of a multi-boiler installation, whether on steam or
hot water. Boiler(s) for base load will be selected and
further boilers brought on- or taken off-line as required.
The important feature of these systems is that the selec-
tion of boilers coming either on- or off-line will be ahead
of the load and programed to anticipate rising or falling
demands.

Computer monitoring and control systems have recently
been introduced. These are designed to operate in place
of conventional instrumentation. Using intelligent inter-
face outstations connected to a desktop computer, many
plant functions may be programed into the computer and
controlled centrally.

23.20.2 Operation and maintenance

As most boiler plants installed today are designed for
unattended operation it is even more important that early
action is taken in the event of the boiler requiring adjust-
ment of combustion or other maintenance. If full instru-
mentation is not installed then a portable test kit should be
used and the plant checked and logged daily or weekly.
Perhaps the most obvious waste to look for after steam
leaks is a rise in the ﬂue-gas outlet temperature. The boiler
will progressively have deposits adhering to its heating
surfaces, but at an increase in temperature of no more
than 16°C above its design outlet temperature it should be
cleaned. The time between cleaning will vary according
to the type of fuel and operational load.

Comparatively small air leaks into the combustion
spaces of a boiler can produce localized problems. All
access opening seals and sight glasses and seals must be
monitored to prevent this.

23.21 Noise and the boiler house
Noise can constitute a danger to health, and therefore ade-
quate precautions must be taken to protect personnel who
are required to be in such an environment. The Health
and Safety at Work, etc. Act 1974 has the power to con-
trol noise emissions, but the subject is complex. If it is
anticipated that noise will exceed acceptable levels then

specialist knowledge should be employed at an early stage
in the design and layout of the plant.

As a guide, Figure 23.13 shows a noise-rating curve for
everyday noises. At the lower sound levels these may be
considered acceptable, and it will be found that to produce
overall sound levels below this will prove costly. Alter-
natively, sound levels exceeding the upper ﬁgures need
careful consideration if personnel are required to be in that
environment. For some machinery, such as reciprocating
engines, turbines and compressors, it is not practical to
contain the noise at source and then ear protection has
to be utilized. Generally, however, industrial boilers and
their associated plant can be designed to meet acceptable
noise levels.

It is generally the case that small boiler plants will
create less noise than large ones. Nevertheless, due to the
practice of siting small boilers close to working areas, the
matter of noise must not be overlooked. Noise sources
within the boiler house will be from the following:

Combustion appliance, including forced- and induced-
draft fans;
Feedwater pumps;
Oil pumps;
Gas boosters;
Water-treatment plant;
Steam lines and PRV stations;
Safety valve vent pipes;
Gas lines;
Flue ducting.

Noise and the boiler house 23/411

Small oil and gas burners are generally supplied with-
out any form of silencing. Some may be enclosed within
an acoustic hood and air inlet silencers are normally avail-
able if speciﬁed. Oil and gas burners ﬁtted to boilers of
outputs above 3000 kg/h evaporation can be supplied with
progressive degrees of silencing equipment. Figure 23.14
illustrates sound-pressure levels of one burner manufac-
turer when ﬁtting three basic types of silencing. The use of
variable-speed motor drive for the combustion air fan can
also reduce the overall noise level, speciﬁcally when the
unit is not operating at maximum continuous rating. Coal-
ﬁred plant will normally be quieter than oil- or gas-ﬁred
plant, although, where ﬁxed grate boilers are employed,
the same criteria will apply to the forced-draft fans as for
oil and gas.

Feedwater pumps will not normally constitute a noise
problem unless the area is particularly sensitive. Two
alternatives are then available. One is to install reduced-
speed pumps and the other is to site the pumps in a
separate acoustic enclosure within the boiler house. Oil-
circulating pumps are usually low speed and, as such, do
not cause a noise problem.

Gas boosters may be ﬁtted with motor enclosures or
designed to operate at lower rotating speeds. Alterna-
tively, they may be housed in an acoustic enclosure within
the boiler house. The booster and drive unit can be sup-
plied with anti-vibration mountings to isolate it from the
ﬂoor or steelwork and ﬂexible bellows ﬁtted to the gas
inlet and outlet connections.

)
2
m
c
/

e
n
y
d

 

2
0
0
0

,

0
(
 
2
m
c
/

e
n
y
d
 
4
−

0
1
 
×
 

2
o

 

t
 

e
v
i
t

l

a
e
r
 

B
d

140

130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
−10

Noise-rating number
130

120

110

100
90
85
80
75
70
65
60

50

40

30

20

Airliner take-off at 100 ft

Underground train
Factory machine shop
Very noisy restaurant
Heavy engineering works
Mechanized office
Light engineering works

Typing pools, busy offices

Restaurants, large offices

Empty church, conference

Recording studio (soft whisper at 5 ft)

63 125 500 1000

10
5
0
4000 8000

Mid-frequency of octave 
band in Hertz (c/s)

Figure 23.13 Noise-rating curves for some everyday sounds (with permission of Saacke Ltd, Portsmouth, UK)

23/412 Industrial Boilers

100

90

80

70

)

A

(
 

B
d
 
l
e
v
e
l
 
e
r
u
s
s
e
r
p
-
d
n
u
o
S

)
r
e
n
r
u
b
 
f
o
 
t
n
o
r
f
 
n
i
 

m
 
2
 
t
a
 
d
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

(

60

0

U n s i

l e n c e d
W i t h   n o r m a l   F D   f a n   s i

W i t h   h i g h - a t t e n u a t i o n   F D   f a n   s i
W i t h   h i g h - a t t e n u a t i o n   F D   f a n
l e n c e r   a n d   F D   f a n   m o t o r   m u f f

s i

l e n c e r

l e n c e r

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90 100 110 120

135

150

Burner unit size

Actual position in band depends on FD fan size and acoustics of boiler house

Figure 23.14 Sound-pressure levels for Saacke rotary cup burners (with permission of Saacke Ltd, Portsmouth, UK)

Water-treatment plant may include one or more elec-
tric motors driving feedwater pumps or dosing pumps.
Dosing pumps are usually very small and will not cause
noise problems. Water pumps may be considered as for
the feedwater pumps already described.

Steam transmission will produce noise. Low steam
velocity will help to reduce this. One speciﬁc noise area
will be if a pressure-reducing valve set
is employed.
Therefore it is desirable to have this within the boiler
house or other building and not outside. Some types of
pressure-reducing valves operate at lower sound levels
than others, and therefore if environmental noise could
be a problem then this should be investigated. Insulated
valve boxes will also help to contain any noise.

Safety valve venting is noisy. It should only happen
infrequently and therefore may be acceptable. If the loca-
tion is near to ofﬁces or housing, it may be advisable
to ﬁt silencer heads. Noise levels from gas lines and
meters should not normally prove a problem on industrial
premises.

Flue gas ductwork will be insulated, which helps to
reduce any transmitted combustion noise. Where large
rectangular ﬂue ductwork is used, it must be adequately
stiffened and insulated to reduce any risk of reverberation
being set up from the combustion system.

Finally, if the boiler house is to be within an industrial
complex and there is no adjacent residential development,
the building need only be suitable for adequate weather-
prooﬁng of the plant and for maintenance. Alternatively,
if it is sited adjacent or near to housing or ofﬁces then the
building structure should take account of this.

Ideally, the walls should be of brick or concrete with
an insulated roof. Large areas of glass should be avoided.
It is desirable that all routine maintenance and operating
functions can be carried out without having to open door-
ways. Openings and access to the boilerhouse should be
away from sensitive areas. Free areas for air for both com-
bustion and ventilation should be through acoustic louver

panels and preferably again away from sensitive areas.
Discharge points for vehicles that deliver fuel should be
carefully considered so as causing the minimum nuisance.

23.22 Running costs

With the wide range of boiler types and outputs being
considered together with the ever-changing costs for fuel,
it is difﬁcult to arrive at a speciﬁc ﬁgure, which can relate
running costs to the installed plant. In order to arrive at
a guide in this area several case studies were carried out.
It quickly became apparent that few operators maintain
separate costs relating to the boiler plant and only keeps
overall factory maintenance costs. Fortunately, sufﬁcient
information was obtainable to arrive at an overall pattern
of costs.

On an annual basis, with running costs covering fuel,
operation, electricity, water treatment and maintenance,
fuel can account for 90 per cent on a plant operating 168 h
per week and 80 per cent on a plant running 40–80 h per
week, the remaining 10–20 per cent covering the other
items. These proportions were consistent for modern plant
burning coal, oil or natural gas. With the recent increase
in natural gas tariffs for large consumers, it will now mean
that natural gas will account for a larger percentage of the
annual ﬁgure.

An alternative cost also became apparent from the case
studies. If the mean hourly steaming rate in kilograms is
multiplied by 2.25, it produces a ﬁgure roughly equivalent
to the annual operating costs in pounds, excluding the cost
of fuel.

23.23 Management and operation

The boiler plant, regardless of its size, is an essential
part of the plant; otherwise it would not be there. Hav-
ing established this, it should be covered by a planned

Table 23.7 Recommended maintenance procedure

Operation

Oil

Gas

Coal

Fuel

Blowdown

Main
Water-level controls
Water-level gauges

Visual check
Check/clean burner
Water-treatment check
Combustion check
Water-level control operational check
Inspect refractories
Open ﬁre side and clean
Open water side for inspection

1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
3
3
4

1
1
1
1
3
2
2
2
3
4
4

1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
3
3
4

1: Daily.
2: Weekly.
3: 6–12 weeks.
4: Annually.

maintenance schedule to produce maximum availability.
Most boiler plant is supplied for unattended operation, but
certain procedures still need to be carried out. The extent

Management and operation 23/413

of this program will depend upon the size of the plant and
the fuel used.

Table 23.7 outlines brieﬂy the extent of operations
which need to be undertaken. This is intended only as a
guide, as in the majority of installations a program will be
evolved to suit individual cases. In certain instances (for
example, where electrical power generation is involved)
the boilers may not shut down on a daily, weekly or
monthly basis, and all controls are then fully automated.
Also, watertube boilers may operate for longer periods
before ﬁreside shutdown is necessary.

Internal personnel will normally undertake boiler plant
operation. Maintenance work may be by either internal
personnel or outside contractors. Service contracts will be
available from equipment suppliers covering all items of
the boiler plant. Recently, companies have started offer-
ing contract energy-management schemes. These may be
designed to suit individual applications and will be tailored
to customer requirements. They may take over the oper-
ation of an existing plant or, if necessary, include for a
new replacement plant. They will usually operate over
a 3–10-year contract period. Dependent upon the terms
of contract, all fuels, electricity, repairs and replacements
may be covered.

24/415

24

Combustion
Equipment

Colin French
Saacke Ltd

Contents

24.1 Introduction
24.2 Oil burners

24/417
24/417

24/417

24.2.1 Vaporizing burners
24.2.2 Pressure-jet atomizers 24/417
24.2.3 Spill return atomizers 24/418
24.2.4 Twin-ﬂuid atomizers 24/419
24.2.5 Rotary cup atomizers 24/419

24.3 Gas burners

24/419

24.3.1 Non-aerated types
24.3.2 Aerated types
24.3.3 Nozzle-mix types

24/419

24/420

24/419

24.4 Burner design considerations

24/421

24.4.1 Atomizer 24/421
24.4.2 Register/combustion head
24.4.3 Airbox/fan arrangement 24/422
24.4.4 Air/fuel ratio control
24.4.5 Burner management system 24/423

24/422

24/423

24.5 Future developments
24.6 Coal burners
24/424

24/423

24.6.1 Underfeed stoker
24.6.2 Fixed-grate burner
24.6.3 Chain grate 24/424
24.6.4 Coking stoker
24.6.5 PF burners 24/426
24.6.6 Fluidized-bed ﬁring
24.7 Dual- and triple-fuel ﬁring

24/425

24/424
24/424

24/426
24/428

24.1 Introduction
A burner is a device for liberating heat by the combus-
tion of fuel. Fuels are predominantly hydrocarbons that
release their heat exothermically when oxidized in a con-
trolled manner. The most freely available oxidant is air,
which contains only 21 per cent oxygen, the remaining
79 per cent being nitrogen which does not contribute to
the process. The nitrogen, because it is heated at the same
time, reduces the maximum ﬂame temperature that would
have been possible with a pure oxidant. Similarly, the
combustion products, when discharged from the process,
contain nitrogen which increases the volume of the gases,
and hence the sensible heat loss.

A burner comprises a means to inject the fuel, a fan
to provide the air for the combustion reaction, a register
or stabilizer assembly that provides for the mixing of air
and fuel and the stability of the ﬂame, and a means for
controlling the air–fuel ratio and fuel input. In addition,
on automatic burners, a management system is necessary
to ensure programed start-up and shut-down together with
supervision while ﬁring via a ﬂame-detection system and
interlocks to prove that certain parameters are maintained
such as air and fuel pressure. An almost inﬁnite number
of types of burner have developed over the years, but
broad categories exist characterized by the type of fuel
being burnt, the principle of the fuel injection and mix-
ing system, and often the application for which they were
designed.

Although some integration has taken place where the
appliance or boilermaker has assumed responsibility for
the combustion system, overall, specialist manufacturers
of combustion equipment who have developed products
for each application such as boilers, furnaces, kilns and
dryers, etc. serve the market. The burner makers have
manufactured products which provide a packaged solu-
tion to the combustion requirement, looking after not just
the burners and controls but also the fuel supply system,
which may involve pumping, heating of the fuel, ﬁltration
and other peripheral equipment and functions.

24.2 Oil burners
With the exception of the vaporizing burner, these are
normally characterized by the method of atomizing, which
itself is dependent on the grade of fuel being combusted.

24.2.1 Vaporizing burners

This principle is conﬁned to domestic applications
where kerosene or premium gas oil is concerned. The
simplest type uses a number of concentrically arranged
wicks which promote vaporization of kerosene into an
air/vapor mixing zone enclosed within a perforated drum
arrangement. Normally, these burners obtain their air by
natural draft.

Another type utilizes a pot and may have natural draft
or a fan. The pot burner is essentially an open-topped
drum into which fuel is fed at constant head. The vapor
rising from the surface is mixed with air being discharged
from a perforated drum or pot (Figure 24.1). A further

Oil burners 24/417

Oil in

Air in

Figure 24.1 Vaporizing pot burner

development is the wall ﬂame burner in which a central
rotating distributor that is driven from the forced-draft fan
motor throws the fuel against the wall of the pot.

24.2.2 Pressure-jet atomizers
Oil is fed at high pressure to a nozzle in which the oil
passage is positioned to feed oil radially inward via a
number of slots which are arranged at a tangent to the
swirl chamber. The high rotational velocity given to the
oil as it exits at high pressure through the central dis-
charge hole provides the means for droplet disintegration
via a conical sheet formed at discharge. Limitations of
this principle include restriction to gas oil for small sizes
and poor turndown caused by a limited range of pres-
sures over which the atomization is satisfactory. There is
a choice of spray pattern, notably solid, semi-hollow and
hollow cone, and a reasonable range of spray angles is
available (Figure 24.2), often used in a two-nozzle head
conﬁguration to improve the turndown ratio from 1.4:1
for a single nozzle to 2:1 using two nozzles at constant

Body

Filter

Insert with channels to provide high
velocity swirl motion at nozzle exit

Figure 24.2 Pressure-jet nozzle

24/418 Combustion Equipment

Low fire
oil nozzle

Ignition
electrode

Blast
tube

Throat

Fan
case

High fire
oil nozzle

Oil supply in

Figure 24.3 Combustion head pressure-jet burner

pressure. The orthodox arrangement for the combustion
head is shown in Figure 24.3. The simplex pressure-jet
atomizer is also used in power station boilers ﬁring heavy
fuel oils in arrays of up to 60 burners.

24.2.3 Spill return atomizers

These partially overcome the weakness of the simplex
pressure jet regarding turndown ratio by spilling back the
unconsumed fuel at part load. In this way, the swirl veloc-
ity in the exit chamber is maintained constant but the
diameter of the exit hole remains the same. A further

advantage is that it is possible to add a central shut-
off needle through the atomizer, which is actuated by
fuel pressure on a servo piston. This allows fuel to be
circulated right up to the atomizer tip prior to starting
the burner. An improved light-up result on medium and
heavy fuel oils is due to pre-warming of the nozzle and
feed pipework. In addition, it provides a further mode of
safety on shutdown acting as a shut-off valve as well as
preventing dribbling of the atomizer, which would lead to
poor atomization caused by nozzle fouling. This type of
atomizer is shown in Figure 24.4. The combustion head
conﬁguration remains similar to simplex atomizers.

Cap nut

Oil in

Oil return

Swirl chamber

Tip shut-off needle

Filter

Actuating pushrod

Figure 24.4 Spill return nozzle with tip shut-off needle

24.2.4 Twin-ﬂuid atomizers

Atomiser gun

Igniter

Gas burners 24/419

Gas spud

Atomization in these types is partly caused by fuel pres-
sure, but this is enhanced by the kinetic energy provided
by another ﬂuid that is normally air or steam. At present,
this secondary ﬂuid is at a medium or high pressure, the
low-pressure method being largely superseded. Pressures
are around 1–2 bar for those categorized as medium pres-
sure and 6–10 bar for high-pressure types. Oil pressures
are also typically 6–12 bar.

Steam is the preferred atomizing medium, since it is
more economic than compressed air. Steam consumption
is typically less than 0.5 per cent of the fuel burnt on
a mass basis, although this rises in direct proportion to
turndown ratio. On very large burners, the steam ﬂow is
modulated in proportion to fuel burnt. Turndown ratios
range from about 5:1 for small shell boilers to 12:1 in
watertube applications, making this one of the most ver-
satile burners. The steam condition is important in that
it must be dry saturated or slightly superheated at the
nozzle to avoid condensate formation. On small or non-
continuously running plant where no steam is available
for start-up a compressed air supply must be provided
until steam becomes available from the boiler.

Possibly the best-known version of this principle is the
Y-jet atomizer developed by Babcock Energy, in which
between four and ten exit holes are arranged circum-
ferentially, each consisting of two converging passages
arranged in a Y formation. Possible limitations of the
principle in spray angle and pattern have restricted its
use to larger boilers and watertube types. A cross section
of this nozzle is shown in Figure 24.5 and a typical reg-
ister arrangement is given in Figure 24.6 for a dual-fuel
burner.

24.2.5 Rotary cup atomizers

A shaft rotating at 4000–6000 rev/min carries a primary
air fan and an atomizing cup. The cup, typically of about
70–120 mm diameter, is tapered by a few degrees to
increase in diameter at the exit. A stationary distributor
which projects oil onto the smaller-diameter end of the
cup feeds oil to the inner surface. The oil, inﬂuenced by
centrifugal force, forms a thin ﬁlm, which passes towards
the cup lip. Atomization occurs as the oil leaves this lip.
In addition, a primary air supply, normally in the range of
5–12 per cent of stoichiometric (chemically correct) air,

Oil

Steam

Oil

Figure 24.5 Steam-atomizing nozzle

Gas

Atomiser

tip

Figure 24.6 Steam-atomizing burner register

is arranged to exit over the cup outer surface, at a velocity
of about 50–90 m/s. The primary air is swirled to oppose
the rotation of the cup. Droplets shattered by the com-
bined centrifugal action of the cup and the primary air
blast are propelled axially into the furnace.

Advantages of this type include an ability to burn all
fuels including those containing solid particles, good turn-
down ratio (4 to 10:1 typically) and an insensitivity to oil
conditions such as pressure and temperature. It is widely
used in shell boilers, and the only real limitation is that
the cup surface has to be cleaned daily. The most common
atomizer layout is shown in Figure 24.7. Variants include
direct driven cup and separate mounting of the primary
air fan.

24.3 Gas burners
Industrial gas burners are mainly of the nozzle mix
conﬁguration. Beneath industrial burners, which are used
for raising steam and hot water in the power and process
industries, lies a large array of types and principles. The
most common types are normally characterized as to
whether they are aerated or non-aerated.

24.3.1 Non-aerated types

Otherwise known as diffusion ﬂame or post-aerated, these
normally comprise a simple nozzle supplying gas at a
controlled pressure into a chamber where air is made
available via entrainment into the ﬂame by natural draft.
Common types are the Bray jet, Aeromatic and Drew jet
(Figure 24.8).

24.3.2 Aerated types

These are otherwise known as atmospheric or premix
burners. Primary air is entrained into the gas stream prior
to exit from the nozzle. The best known of these types
is the Bunsen burner, and the most common is the ring-
type domestic cooker hob arrangement. Both aerated and
non-aerated types are often found in a bar conﬁguration.
Typical applications are heating of tanks and process uses
involving direct heating of the product. Figure 24.9 shows
a typical aerated bar burner.

24/420 Combustion Equipment

Burner
motor

Burner
housing

Primary air

fan

Cup

shroud

Atomizing

cup

Oil

distributor

Figure 24.7 Section through rotary cup atomizer

Primary

air

Drew jet

Bray jet

Gas in

Gas in

Figure 24.8 Non-aerated burners

24.3.3 Nozzle-mix types

Utilizing a forced-draft fan, the burner has a gas head
arranged to mix the fuel and air in a blast tube which con-
trols the stability and shape of the ﬂame. Gas exits from
nozzles or holes in the head and is mixed partly in the
high-velocity air stream and partly allowed to exit into an
area downstream of a bluff body. Behind the bluff body,
a relatively quiescent zone forms which provides a means
for ﬂame stability. Many conﬁgurations exist, but the most

frequent are those which are designed around the most
common types of oil burner. This allows the burner to eas-
ily be converted to oil or dual-fuel (gas and oil) ﬁring. As
gas is a relatively easy fuel to burn, the design is strongly
inﬂuenced by the optimum oil burner conﬁguration. Two
typical types are shown in Figures 24.10 and 24.11 based,
respectively, around pressure-jet and rotary cup atomiz-
ers.

Performance on gas is normally limited in dual-
fuel applications to that of the oil burner. In gas-only

Burner ports

Burner design considerations 24/421

Aeration adjusting disc

Gas in

Venturi

Air inlet

Control valve

Figure 24.9 Aerated bar burner

Ignition
Electrode

Air
plate

Ignition

gas

Throat

Fan case

Flame
plate

Oil

nozzle

Blast
tube

Oil
in

Gas
in

Figure 24.10 Dual-fuel burner based on pressure-jet conﬁguration

applications, the performance is better, notably in lower
excess air factors and better turndown ratios (3:1 small
burners, 15:1 very large burners).

Problems can occur with highly rated boilers converted
to gas ﬁring where tube end and tube plate cracking can
occur due to overheating. This can normally be overcome
by modifying the tube attachment arrangement. Another
problem that is quite common is resonance or pulsation,
where the burner acoustically couples with the natural
resonant frequency of the combustion chamber. This is
normally easily overcome by modifying the burner head
to change the rate of mixing.

24.4 Burner design considerations

24.4.1 Atomizer

atomizers

Characteristics of various
are given in
Table 24.1. Primary considerations are selecting the
best principle for the type of fuel,
the size of the
burner/boiler and the type of application. Other important
characteristics are ability to operate with the minimum of
excess air, turndown ratio and questions of durability and
maintenance.

24/422 Combustion Equipment

Secondary air

Air register unit

Tertiary air

Flame baffle

Atomizer housing

Primary air

Gas supply

Air Box

Figure 24.11 Dual-fuel burner based on rotary cup conﬁguration

Table 24.1 Summary of burner characteristics

24.4.2 Register/combustion head
This is often ﬁxed for the type of atomizer. Stability is
either one of two basic principles: bluff body with some
aeration/cooling, and swirler types which are generally
conﬁned to twin ﬂuid atomizers of large size. The stabi-
lization process is achieved in both cases by recirculation
of vortices spilling off the bafﬂe in the case of bluff bodies
and by a full recirculation ﬂow pattern in swirl stabiliz-
ers. Important items also ﬁtted to the register are ignition
system (most commonly high-voltage spark in the case of
pressure-jet burners and gas/electric in all other types) and
the ﬂame-supervision system. This is normally infrared
for oil burners and ultraviolet light sensitive in the case
of gas and dual-fuel burners. Smaller gas burners utilize
the ﬂame-rectiﬁcation principle.

24.4.3 Airbox/fan arrangement
Generally,
this is a compromise in monobloc burners
incorporating a fan and burner head within one casting.

Oil burners
Type

Size range

Dual-fuel
capability

Fuel type

Atomizing
pressure

(bar)

Atomizing
viscosity

(cS)

Turndown ratio

Flame

characteristics

Main applications

Vaporizing

10–40 kW

No

Kerosene, gas oil

–

On/off

Normally blue

Central heating

30 kW–3 MW Larger sizes

Gas oil (class D)

6–12

10–50 MW

Possible but gas
not burnt on
utility boilers

Heavy oil (classes

20–40

G and H)

<5

<5

¾20

On/off or <1.5:1

by pressure
control

On/off or <1.5:1
by pressure
control

1–10 MW

Yes

All types (mainly

1–4

¾20

<5:1

class G)

Pressure jet

commercial
market

Pressure jet

utility boilers

Twin-ﬂuid
medium
pressure

High pressure

2–50 MW

Yes

All types (mainly

6–20

classes G and
H)

Rotary cup

1–40 MW

Yes

All types (mainly

2–3

class G)

¾20

¾60

3:1 to 15:1

3:1 to 12:1

Mainly wide-angle

ﬂame

Soft yellow and
radiant fairly
wide-angle
spray

Highly radiant

low excess air
operation

Wide range of

shapes mainly
used for process
applications

sprays in WT
boilers, low
excess
operation

Medium intensity,
shape varied by
register design

Flame

Characteristics

Semi-luminous
lambent, low
intensity

Non-luminous

shape depends
on application

Domestic and

commercial hot
water boilers

Power station and

large
petrochemical
watertube
boilers

Kilns, furnaces,

processes
requiring
special ﬂame
characteristics
Large shell boiler
and watertube
boiler process
applications

Very popular for

all sizes of shell
boiler. Some
use on process
and WT boilers

Main applications

Pilot ﬂame and

domestic
applications

Wide use in

heating and
direct-contact
process
applications

Wide use in
packaged
burners of all
sizes. Common
in hot water and
steam boilers of
all sizes

Gas burners
Type

Size

Dual-fuel

Fuel type

Gas pressure

Turndown ratio

Non-aerated

0.01 kW–50 kW

No

N gas, LP gas

5 mbar–75 mbar

<2:1

Aerated

0.5 kW–150 kW

Larger sizes (yes)

N gas, LP gas

20 mbar–1 bar

<20:1

Nozzle mix

30 kW–40 MW

Yes

All gases

15 mbar–1.5 mbar

<20:1 depends on

Normally

oil turndown
when dual-fuel

nonluminous
shape depends
on burner and
register
conﬁguration

Table 24.1 (Continued)

Coal burners

Type

Size range

(MW)

Fuels

Grate thermal

loading (mW/m2)

Bed thickness

Turndown ratio

Ashing system

Main applications

Future developments 24/423

Underfeed

Fixed grate

0.3–2

0.6–7

600–900 Rank

singles and
doubles

600–900 Rank

singles

Chain grate

1–30

500–900 Rank

normally
washed smalls,
but other types
possible
including high
ash

Coking stoker

1–4.5

300–900 Rank

Pulverized fuel

burners

Fluidized beds

1–50

washed or
untreated smalls
and singles

1–50

All types

including
anthracite
lignite and
bituminous

All types of coal
and waste solid
fuels

1.0

2.7

1.7

1.4

–

3.0

Depends on retort

On/off

depth

Manual or side

screw automatic

25 mm live on up
to 200 mm ash

2:1 to 5:1

Manual or

automatic
tipping grate or
robot rake

Small hot water

and steam
boilers

Hot water and
steam shell
boilers

80–150 mm

3:1 to 8:1

Manual drop tube

Shell and water

boiler or drag
link

boilers

250–350 mm

5:1

Manual drop tube
in boiler or drag
link

Shell boilers

–

<15:1

None

0.3–1.0 m

2:1 and then by
bed sectoring

Removal and

clean-up from
bed

Limited use in
shell boilers
mainly kilns
and power
stations

Special vertical
shell boilers
and watertubes

On larger burners utilizing a separate airbox (or windbox,
as it
is sometimes called) the air-distribution quality
is important to maintain low excess air operation and
good ﬂame shape throughout the turndown range. Two
approaches are common: designs utilizing a constant
velocity approach, the alternative being a large plenum
chamber in which low velocities provide an equalization
effect. The shape of the ﬂame can deteriorate at part load
due to the register pressure reducing on a square law with
turndown.

24.4.4 Air/fuel ratio control

This is often the Achilles’ heel of burners, since poor
design can lead to hysteresis. Correct sizing of the con-
trol valves and fan size is essential to maximize damper
travel/backlash ratios and give good linearity throughout
the ﬁring range. Robust characterization cams and link-
ages are essential.

24.4.5 Burner management system

Small monobloc burners usually have a proprietary con-
trol box/photo cell ampliﬁer system. Larger burners may
have a dedicated system speciﬁc to the application and
may utilize self-checking photocell systems.

24.5 Future developments
Oxygen trim

The development of reliable zirconia cells which can
measure the gas analysis
recourse
to gas-sampling techniques has led to systems which
provide feedback to the air/fuel ratio control system.

in situ without

Compensation is made for variations in ambient air
pressure and temperature, caloriﬁc value, boiler resistance
due to fouling and burner performance drift by trimming
the air damper with a separate servo motor.

Electronic air/fuel ratio control

Electronic air/fuel
ratio characterization is becoming
available. By driving gas and oil valves and the air damper
separately via individual servo motors, electronic units
can supervise the relative positions of the motors and
provide characterization of air/fuel relationships utilizing
an almost inﬁnite number of set points to give close
repeatable control.

Emulsion techniques

These are particularly applicable to burners ﬁring the
heavier grades of oil which contain long-chain molecules
called asphaltines. The superheating of the water in the
emulsiﬁed fuel droplet enhances atomization. The effect
is to provide secondary atomization to the droplet as the
steam is formed.

Additives

In addition to the traditional additives that suppress
dewpoint corrosion, future developments are likely to
aid atomization by reducing droplet surface tension and
stimulating combustion catalytically.

Air and exhaust gas sealing dampers

These positively shut off the draft that naturally occurs
due to chimney buoyancy when the burner is in its
off cycle,
thereby reducing standby losses. Burners

24/424 Combustion Equipment

incorporating shut-off dampers are becoming increasingly
common.

extraction by a screw. A typical underfeed stoker is shown
in Figure 24.12.

Emission control

24.6.2 Fixed-grate burner

Future legislation will stimulate burner development in
the areas of carbon monoxide, NOx and particulate
generation. Techniques will include ﬂue-gas recirculation,
staged combustion, and additives to reduce the NOx
and more sophisticated controls. Controls over the sulfur
generated do not affect burner design greatly since the
sulfur dioxide is a natural product of combustion and can
only be reduced by lower fuel sulfur contents or sulfur
removal from the exhaust gases.

24.6 Coal burners
the
Coal burners demand design consideration in all
aspects mentioned under gas and oil burners, but,
in
addition, need attention to the aspect of ash removal. The
extent to which ash removal plays a part in the combustion
system design often determines the ability of the burner
to burn speciﬁc coals, particularly those with a high ash
content. Principal types are as follows.

24.6.1 Underfeed stoker

Mainly applied to sectional and small shell boilers, this
principle is limited to doubles or singles coal. Simple in
construction, it consists of a hopper normally mounted
close to the appliance, which feeds via an Archimedean
screw to a retort where the combustion takes place. Coal
is fed up through the retort where the coal is burned pro-
gressively until the residue is mainly clinkers and ash. The
tapering nature of the retort allows sufﬁcient residence
time in the combustion zone before the ash overﬂows
from the top of the retort into a surrounding area of dead-
plates from which the ash is removed periodically. The
double-walled construction of the retort allows combus-
tion air to be fed into the combustion zone through holes
in the internal walls. These holes are known as tuyeres,
and are sometimes supplemented by secondary air jets
which transfer air from the retort via vertical tubes onto
which are mounted nozzles to direct this over-ﬁre air onto
the top of the bed. Recent improvements have allowed
auto de-ashing by arranging for the ash and clinker to
fall down to one side of the retort only, so allowing

Very popular in the main industrial shell boiler market, the
ﬁxed-grate stoker utilizes a bed of ﬁrebars which allow
primary air to be fed through from underneath while not
allowing coal or ash to fall through. This is achieved via
a special ash-retaining pocket. Part of the grate at the
front and rear comprises dead bars which prevent air pass-
ing through. Two types of coal feed predominate, both
fed with coal, which is transported by air after metering
by a variable-speed screw. The coal is propelled along a
pipe normally of 80–100 mm diameter by air travelling
at about 20 m/s. This air is discharged over the grate to
form part of the secondary air supply. In one principle,
the coal is spread on the grate via a deﬂecting nozzle that
is characterized electronically to provide an even bed. The
other type uses a drop tube, which has a ﬁxed deﬂector
cone to spread the coal. Nozzles are arranged to provide
secondary air over the bed.

De-ashing is achieved by stopping the burner and man-
ually raking the ash off the bed after ﬁrst moving the live
coal onto the deadplates. This live coal is re-spread onto
the live grate after de-ashing. Recent developments have
included a tipping version of the grate to discharge the
ash and an automatic system using a robot to rake ash off
the grate.

Using the front-feed system, it is possible to retroﬁt
this principle onto boilers designed for oil and gas with
some de-rating. Performance in terms of turndown ratio,
response rate, etc. can be as good as gas and oil. Best
performance is achieved using 600–900 Rank coals con-
taining 3–8 per cent ash. Figures 24.13 and 24.14 illus-
trate the two feed arrangements common with ﬁxed-grate
stokers.

24.6.3 Chain grate

This is a very versatile stoker common in shell boilers
and is used with modiﬁcation in watertube boilers as the
traveling-grate stoker. In shell boilers, the air supply is
via forced- and induced-draft fans in combination with a
balanced or slightly negative condition in the furnace.

Coal is fed from a front-feed hopper onto the mov-
ing grate through a guillotine door, which controls bed
thickness. Nowadays a ﬁrebreak system is arranged in the

Clinker & ash displaced
by fresh fuel

Combustion zone

Retort

Coal feed screw

Coal

Figure 24.12 Underfeed stoker

Overfire secondary
air jets

Volatile release
Coal preheated as it
rises up the retort

Front and rear secondary
air nozzles

Coal burners 24/425

From coal transport
system

Grit recycle
injection

Figure 24.13 Fixed-grate coal burner with front feed

Drop tube assembly

Coal transport pipe

Distribution cone

Grit return to burner

Live grate bars

Underbed igniter

Figure 24.14 Fixed-grate coal burner with top feed

hopper to prevent burn-back, which was relatively com-
mon. This is achieved via a rotating vane feeder. The
grate comprises hundreds of links arranged into a chain
over the whole width of the stoker, so forming a contin-
uous, ﬂexible mat. Driven via sprockets arranged across
the width of the bed, the bed is supported on an airbox
which supplies the air to the grate via slots in the indi-
vidual links. The air in the airbox is staged via dampers
and/or bafﬂes to be released as required down the length
of the grate.

An important principle is that the coal becomes ignited
from the fuel which is on top of it and further down the
grate. This reduces carry-over of small-unburned parti-
cles, as the burning coal on top ﬁlters them out. Volatiles
released from the fresh coal are also ignited and con-
sumed in the burning layer. This minimizes smoke for-
mation which is caused by incomplete combustion of the
volatiles.

Ash removal can be accomplished via a drop tube
through the boiler shell. Suitable fuels include most
singles and washed or unwashed ﬁnes up to a top size
of about 25 mm, but not anthracite or strongly caking
coals. Ash content must be sufﬁciently high to protect
the grate bars (>6 per cent) and the coal should contain
free moisture. An important speciﬁcation criterion is the
material of the chain links, particularly with low-ash coals
and with variable loads. Figure 24.15 illustrates the main
features of a chain-grate stoker.

24.6.4 Coking stoker

Less popular nowadays, the coking stoker resembles the
chain-grate stoker in many respects. Coal is fed from
a hopper onto the coking plate via a reciprocating ram.
Transformation into the coke phase on these plates takes
place by the release of volatiles.

24/426 Combustion Equipment

Hopper

Rotary valve
fire break
system

Guillotine
door

Refractory
arch

Secondary
air

Unignited
fuel

Ignited
fuel

Ash

Ash
plate

Variable
speed
drive

Primary
air

Deadplate

Air distribution
dampers

Figure 24.15 Chain-grate stoker

The ignited coke then passes further down the grate via
the reciprocating action of the grate bars, which extend
longitudinally for the full length of the grate. Cams formed
in a shaft that is driven via an electric motor and gearbox
drive the grate bars sequentially. This stoker is capable of
burning a wide range of coals, and ash can be removed
without stopping the combustion process. Air supply is
via an induced-draft fan. The coking stoker is shown in
Figure 24.16.

economic, using ball, roller or impact mills. Small appli-
cations can utilize pre-milled coal delivered to site, but
the choice of suppliers is very limited.

Initial preheating of the combustion chamber by gas or
oil is normally required in order to provide the necessary
temperature environment to release the volatiles that pro-
vide the stabilization in the base of the ﬂame. Some small
PF systems have used another fuel for ﬂame support, but
this compromises the economics. A typical pulverized fuel
burner is shown in Figure 24.17.

24.6.5 PF burners

These types are most common in power station-sized boil-
ers and process industries such as cement and gypsum,
where the residual ash is absorbed in the process. As their
application is at the larger end of the combustion ﬁeld,
on-site milling and preparation is technically feasible and

24.6.6 Fluidized-bed ﬁring

This is normally a very integrated system of combustion
which has received considerable development in the last
few years. The combustion chamber is arranged to allow
combustion of the coal within a ﬂuidized bed of inert

Hopper

Ignition arch

Ignited fuel

Unignited fuel

Reciprocating
ram

Top coking
plate

Figure 24.16 Coking stoker

Bottom coking
plate

Manual deashing
door
Reciprocating bars

Coal burners 24/427

Mixture of pulverized
coal & primary air

Fuel gas

Photo-electric
cell

Ignition burner

Ignition gas

Ignition air

Core air

Secondary air II

Secondary air I

Rotary body/core air

Figure 24.17 Pulverized fuel burner

Secondary air I & II

Steam outlet

Steam
drum

Gas
outlet

Bed
A

Bed
B

Mud
drum

Air inlet

Spreader
coal feeders
(TYP)

Light up
and auxillary
fuel burner

Air distribution
grid level

Bed material
drain (TYP)

Figure 24.18 Fluid-bed combustion system with sectioned bed

mineral matter, normally sand. The sand is maintained
in a ﬂuidized state by an air supply from beneath the
bed via nozzles or distributors. Rapid combustion is
ensured via the vigorous bubbling of the bed, which
is an ideal combustion environment. To avoid sintering
of the bed material, it is necessary to prevent the bed
from exceeding the ash-fusion temperature of the coal.
This requires the bed temperature to be maintained in the
range of 900–1000°C. As the temperature of the products

of combustion would be about 1400°C naturally, it is
fundamental that heat be removed with in-bed cooling
tubes to suppress the temperature to less than 1000°C. The
turbulent nature of the bed provides for high convective
heat transfer rates, so minimizing the surface area. A
number of developments have taken place with ﬂuid
bed systems that have included deep-bed technology,
recirculating beds and reduction of emissions by in-bed
additives such as limestone and dolomite to retain sulfur.

24/428 Combustion Equipment

Problem areas are ash removal, which takes place by
recirculating some material from the bed for clean up
and erosion. Positive attributes include the ability to burn
virtually any solid combustible material. Figure 24.18
illustrates the principle.

24.7 Dual- and triple-fuel ﬁring

This is very common nowadays to allow bargaining on
fuel price or to arrange an interruptible gas tariff, which
is backed up at times of peak demand with a stored oil
supply. Most types of oil and gas burner are available in
dual-fuel form, normally with gas burner design ‘wrapped
around’ the arrangement for oil ﬁring. This is usually the
more difﬁcult fuel to burn, particularly in the case of resid-
ual heavy oils. Fuel selection is normally by a switch on
the burner control panel after isolation has taken place of
the non-ﬁred fuel. To avoid the cost and complexity of
the fuel preheating on oil ﬁring, smaller systems use gas
oil as the standby fuel.

Multi-fuel operation with coal-ﬁring equipment is more
difﬁcult to achieve, partly because the grate obscures some
of the boiler heating surfaces and partly due to the volume
that it also occupies. Systems do exist for this requirement,
but changeover is not as instant as oil and gas, as it
is normally necessary to remove part of the coal-ﬁring
equipment.

PF burners and ﬂuid beds best meet requirements for
dual- and triple-fuel ﬁring including solid fuel as one
option. PF burners are particularly suitable, as no static
grate exists to compromise the design. They also have a
combustion geometry which is similar to gas and oil, and
therefore the ﬂame can be arranged to allow full develop-
ment of ﬂame shape and maximum radiant heat transfer
surface utilization.

Fluid beds can be ﬁred with gas and oil across the top of
the slumped bed since sufﬁcient freeboard exists with coal
ﬁring to prevent particle elutriation. Oil, gas or dual-fuel
burners so arranged could also provide the means for bed
preheating, especially if the ﬂame is redirected down to
the ﬂuidization zone.

25/429

25

Economizers

Colin French
Saacke Ltd

Contents

25/431

25/431

25.1 Introduction
25.2 Oil and coal applications
25.3 Gas-ﬁred economizers 25/431
25.4 Design
25.5 Installation
25.6 Condensing economizers 25/435

25/435

25/432

25.1 Introduction
Economizers for boilers have been available for over
150 years, almost as long as boilers themselves. For shell
boilers, increasing efﬁciencies have made it increasingly
difﬁcult to justify the use of an economizer, the ﬁnal
decision being based in terms of payback period, which is
also heavily dependent on fuel prices. Watertube boilers,
on the other hand, need an economizer section in the
gas passes in order to obtain satisfactory efﬁciency. For
this reason, the economizer is integrated into the overall
design, normally between the convective superheater and
the air heater if ﬁtted.

In shell boilers with a working pressure of between 7
and 17 bar the temperature of the mass of water in the
boiler is typically in the range of 170–210°C. Allowing
for, say a temperature difference of 30–50°C between
the exhaust gases and the water temperature, the boiler
exit gas temperature cannot be practically reduced beneath
about 200–260°C, dependent on the operating pressure.
It becomes necessary therefore to modify the process on
principles to achieve further heat utilization and recov-
ery. In the case of economizers conducting the feedwater
supply via an economizer wherein the exhaust gas passes
over tubes carrying the feedwater does this. The feed-
water, normally at temperatures between 30° and 100°C,
represents a further cooling medium for the exhaust gases
and provides the potential for the extra heat utilization.
This is shown in Figure 25.1.

25.2 Oil and coal applications
Although it would be possible to design for an economizer
gas exit temperature of 30–50°C above the feedwater tem-
perature, this would result in a temperature too close to
the acid dewpoint of the gases. The acid dewpoint is the
temperature at which acidic gases begin to condense out
of the exhaust gas mixture. This is principally sulfuric acid
due to the sulfur contained in the oil or coal. Although the
bulk gas temperature may be satisfactory, in practice, the

2000

1000

C
°

 

t

e
r
u
a
r
e
p
m
e
T

100

10

Gas temp.

Boiler water

r

d   w a t e

e

e

F

Combustion

1st convective

2nd convective

chamber

pass

pass

Boiler

Economiser

Figure 25.1 Temperatures in three-pass boilers and economizers

Gas-ﬁred economizers 25/431

surfaces close to the tube wall will be nearly at water tem-
perature due to the high conductivity of the metal tube.
This limits the minimum practical gas exit temperature
from the economizer to, 170–180°C, remembering, of
course, that at low ﬁre this will have fallen closer still
to the acid dewpoint. This is typically in the range of
125–140°C, dependent on the excess air and fuel sulfur
content. The cold temperature of the heat transfer surface
gives rise to heavy corrosion which would reach a peak
at about 95°C.

The potential to recover heat from the gases of an oil- or
coal-ﬁred boiler is therefore limited to a temperature drop
from 240°C to 170°C. This results in a 3 per cent saving.
The average saving would be somewhat lower than this
since fouling of the economizer surface is inevitable from
the carbonaceous emissions of the ﬁring equipment.

The design of the economizer must be robust enough to
survive occasional excursions beneath the acid dewpoint
and the effects of the methods used to clean the econ-
omizer periodically. This may take the form of rapping
equipment to shake off deposits, sootblowing by steam or
air and water washing with lances.

Average savings of 2–3 per cent combined with the
cost necessary for a robust design have therefore limited
the use to times when fuel prices are high or special appli-
cations where the boiler exit temperature is higher than
usual. Developments using an additive to suppress the
dewpoint are worth consideration, since this extends the
heat-saving potential but, of course, there is an additional
burden with the cost of the additive. Magnesium oxide is
the most commonly used suppressant and this is injected
into the gas stream to combine with the sulfuric acid to
form magnesium sulfate (which also has to be removed
regularly in addition to the soot).

25.3 Gas-ﬁred economizers
Far greater potential exists for gas-ﬁred economizers,
since the gas is virtually free of sulfur. The limitation
on gas temperature is the ability of the water to extract
the heat, although the water vapor in the gas caused
by the combustion of hydrogen does give rise to a
water dewpoint at 55°C. This should be avoided, since
general corrosion can take place in the latter rows of the
economizer and in the exhaust gas ducts and chimney.
Normally,
this only occurs for short periods during
starting from cold, but it should be minimized.

Since no serious problems exist with corrosion, the
materials of construction can be cheaper and the thick-
nesses reduced. Fouling coefﬁcients do not need to be
incorporated into the design calculations, as the surfaces
remain clean indeﬁnitely. This in itself provides a sec-
ondary beneﬁt in that the pitching of ﬁns may be reduced
without the risk of reducing ﬂow.

A saving of

(typically) 5 per cent can be made
with gas-ﬁred economizers, and as this is related to the
boiler output
it represents a saving of 6.25 per cent
in fuel consumed. Gross heat-saving potential related to
feedwater temperature and excess air level are shown in
Figure 25.2.

25/432 Economizers

i

)
s
s
a
b

 
s
s
o
r
g
(
 
s
s
o

l
 
s
a
g

 

e
u

l
f
 

%

30
29
28
27
26
25
24
23
22
21
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10

0
4

0
6

0
8

n=1.5
n=1.4
n=1.3
n=1.2
n=1.15
n=1.1
n=1.0

25.4 Design
The driving force for heat transfer is temperature differ-
ence, and this is maximized through the economizer by
arranging for concurrent ﬂow through the passages. In
other words, the colder feedwater is made available to
the coolest gases. This gives the highest overall average
temperature difference throughout the length of the econo-
mizer, and is characterized by the logarithmic temperature
difference Tlm:
Tlm D

(cid:5)Tg1 (cid:2) Tw2(cid:8) (cid:2) (cid:5)Tg2 (cid:2) Tw1(cid:8)

log n[(cid:5)Tg1 (cid:2) Tw2(cid:8) ł (cid:5)Tg2 (cid:2) Tw1(cid:8)]

The amount of heat (Qt) that may be transferred is con-
trolled by:
Qt D Tlm ð U ð A
where U D overall heat transfer coefﬁcient and A D heat
transfer area. To achieve a cost-effective design of econo-
mizer it is necessary to maximize the overall heat transfer
coefﬁcient and the surface area within the economizer.

The heat transfer coefﬁcient, U, can be maximized
by the highest practical velocities that can be achieved
for both the water and the gas. Waterside pressure loss
is limited by the available spare pressure rise from the

0
0
1

0
2
1

0
2
2

0
4
2

0
6
2

0
8
2

0
0
3

0
2
3

0
4
3

0
4
1

0
6
1

0
8
1

0
0
2

Flue gas temp. °C (based on 20°C ambient temp.)

Figure 25.2 Total heat in gas-ﬁred boiler exhaust

(a) Wound on - plain fin

(b) Wound on - with turbulence

  inducing segments

(c) Lamel fin - square or rectangular

(d) Lamel fin - non continuous

continuous

Figure 25.3 Common ﬁn types

Design 25/433

(a) Cast iron finned

(b) L type resistance welded

(c) I type resistance welded

(d) Ploughed and grooved

(e) Crimped on fin

(f) Integrally finned

Figure 25.4 Fin attachment methods

Economizer
frame

Tube stack

Water out

Water in

Water in

Water out

Heat exchanger
(tube nest)

Duct work

Exhaust
gases

Duct work

Exhaust
gases

Economizer
frame

Figure 25.5 Economizer – typical designs

25/434 Economizers

Modulating
feed
control
valve

Boiler

By-pass duct

Figure 25.6 Typical installation layout

By-pass/trim damper

Isolating
damper

Relief valve

Economizer

Isolating
damper

TC
By-pass

Heat exchanger

Automatic temp
Control valve

Hot
well

Feed
pump

Orifice

Notes: 1. Fuel-Natural gas

2. Combustion @ n=1.15

Dew point 54.97°C

20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

H2O wet

CO2 dry

CO2 wet

O2 dry

O2 wet

l

 

e
m
u
o
v
 
y
b
%
 
s
s
y
a
n
a

i

l

 
s
a
G

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

i

)
s
s
a
b

 
s
s
o
r
g
(
 
s
s
o

l
 
s
a
g

 

e
u

l
f
 

%

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

Flue gas temp. °C (Based on 20°C Ambient temp.)

0
100

90

Figure 25.7 Sensible and latent heat savings potential and gas analysis with condensing economizers

feed pump. This is often limited to 0.2–1.0 bar, as it is
not generally economic to replace the feed pump. The
available spare fan head from the burner generally limits
gas-side velocities. Once again, it is not normally eco-
nomic to replace this in the case of retroﬁtted economizers
or, for that matter, to install an induced-draft fan down-
stream of the economizer. In addition to maximizing ﬂuid
velocities, careful design to promote turbulence by stag-
gered pitching enhances the heat transfer coefﬁcient.

The heat transfer area, A, can be greatly increased by
using ﬁnned tubes, but care must be taken to ensure good
conduction of heat away from the ﬁn into the tube and
subsequently into the water. Some common ﬁn types are
shown in Figure 25.3 while Figure 25.4 shows some of
the attachment methods employed to ensure satisfactory
ﬁn to tube heat transfer.

25.5 Installation
Due to interruptible gas tariffs, it is often necessary to
adopt gas as the primary fuel and burn oil in periods
of peak loads. This means that the economizer has to
be arranged so that when oil ﬁring, the ﬂue gases are
bypassed around the economizer. The bypass duct must
also contain a damper to simulate the economizer gas
resistance so that the burner back pressure remains the
same for both fuels. Figure 25.6 shows a typical installa-
tion layout.

Condensing economizers 25/435

25.6 Condensing economizers
The restrictions on feedwater temperature, dictated by
condensate rates and the need to minimize oxygen corro-
sion, limit further development of the performance of con-
ventional economizers. As mentioned earlier, it becomes
necessary to revise the whole philosophy if enhanced heat
recovery is desired. If the gas can be reduced in tem-
perature to beneath the water dewpoint of approximately
55°C there exists a potential heat saving due to the latent
heat of condensation of the water vapor as well as the
sensible heat also contained in the exhaust gases. This
quantity of water vapor is considerable (in the case of
natural gas ﬁring of the order of 1 ton per hour for a
10 tons per hour steam boiler). Once again, the poten-
tial can only be realized provided a requirement exists for
such heat. This heat is of relatively low grade and there-
fore requires a large mass ﬂow rate of water to absorb
it. A typical ﬁgure might be of the order of twice the
boiler feedwater ﬂow rate and at a temperature of main
water. This precludes the use of the boiler feedwater,
and therefore special low-temperature processes must be
integrated into condensing economizer applications. The
temperature rise of this water would probably be about
45°C. Assuming the exhaust gases are cooled from, say,
230°C to 40°C, the gross heat saving would be approx-
imately 13 per cent, yielding a fuel saving of over 15
per cent.

Damper
isolating/
oil firing

Existing exhaust
gas duct

250°C

Main
chimney

r
a
e

Boiler R

x
o
b
e
k
o
m
s

Damper
isolating/
draft
control

Draft
controller

40°C

Induced
draft fan

Water

out

Water

in

Auxilary
chimney

Figure 25.8 Condensing economizer layout

Condensate
to drain

25/436 Economizers

The term fuel saving needs to be qualiﬁed, since the use
of the heat in the water will be given to a process which
may be unrelated to boiler demand. Examples of suitable
applications occur in laundries, agricultural soil heating,
food industries, abattoirs and swimming pool heating.

The success of such schemes is highly dependent on
matching supply and demand together with a basic low-
grade heat requirement. The total heat remaining in the
exhaust gases of the boiler are shown in Figure 25.7 illus-
trating the potential savings.

Condensing economizers are constructed from corros-
ion-resistant materials (notably aluminum or stainless
steel), since the condensed water vapor in the gas is
slightly acidic (typically, with a pH of 3–5). This is

because some carbonic and nitric acid is formed in
the condensing of the products of combustion and also
as a result of chloroﬂuorocarbon propellants in the
atmosphere. Provided the correct choice of materials is
made, corrosion life should not become problematic.

A typical arrangement of a condensing economizer
is shown in Figure 25.8. Note that an induced-draft fan
is almost mandatory, since a high pressure loss is in-
evitable with such low-grade heat recovery. The design
of such economizers often takes the form of a large shell
and tube heat exchanger, but the conventional econo-
mizer construction of watertubes is quite feasible. Con-
densate from the exhaust gases is normally discharged to
drains.

26

26/437

Heat Exchangers

Brian R Lamb
APV Baker Ltd

Contents

26.1 The APV Paraﬂow 26/439

26.1.1 Comparative plate arrangements 26/439
26.1.2 Plate construction
26/439
26.1.3 Gasket materials 26/440
26.1.4 Thermal performance

26/440

26.2 Comparing plate and tubular exchangers

26/441

26.2.1 Ten points of comparison
26/441
26.2.2 Heat transfer coefﬁcients 26/442
26.2.3 Mean temperature difference 26/442

26.3 Duties other than turbulent liquid ﬂow 26/442

26/442

26.3.1 Beyond liquid/liquid
26.3.2 Condensing
26/442
26.3.3 Pressure drop of condensing vapor
26.3.4 Gas cooling
26.3.5 Evaporating
26.3.6 Laminar ﬂow 26/443

26/443
26/443

26/442

26.4 The problem of fouling

26/444

26.4.1 The fouling factor 26/444
26.4.2 Six types of fouling
26.4.3 A function of time
26.4.4 Lower resistance

26/444
26/444

26/445

26.1 The APV Paraﬂow
While the original idea for the plate heat exchanger was
patented in the latter half of the nineteenth century, Dr
Richard Seligman, founder of APV, introduced the ﬁrst
commercially successful design in 1923. Initially, a num-
ber of cast gunmetal plates were enclosed within a frame
in a manner quite similar to a ﬁlter press. The early
1930s, however, saw the introduction of plates pressed in
thin-gauge stainless steel. While the basic design remains
unchanged, continual reﬁnements have boosted operating
pressures from about 1 to 20 kgf/cm2 in current machines.
The plate heat exchanger consists of a frame in which
closely spaced metal plates are clamped between a head
and follower. The plates have corner ports and are sealed
by gaskets around the ports and along the plate edges. A
double seal forms pockets open to atmosphere to prevent
mixing of product and service liquids in the rare event of
leakage past a gasket.

The plates are grouped into passes with each ﬂuid
being directed evenly between the paralleled passages
in each pass. Whenever the thermal duty permits, it is
desirable to use single-pass, counterﬂow (Figure 26.1)
for an extremely efﬁcient performance. Since the ﬂow
is purely counterﬂow, correction factors required on the
LMTD approach unity. With all connections on the head
of the unit, the follower is free for very quick access
to cleaning and maintenance. The effect of multi-pass
operation will be discussed later in this chapter.

26.1.1 Comparative plate arrangements

Clariﬁcation of plate arrangements with those for a tubu-
lar exchanger is detailed in Figure 26.2. Essentially, the
number of passes on the tube size of a tubular unit can
be compared with the number of passes on a plate heat
exchanger. The number of tubes per pass can also be
equated with the number of passages per pass for the
plate heat exchanger. However, the comparison with the
shell side is usually more difﬁcult, since with a plate-type
heat exchanger the total number of passages available for
the ﬂow of one ﬂuid must equal those available for the
other ﬂuid to within š1. The number of cross passes on
a shell, however, can be related to the number of plate
passes, and since the number of passages/pass for a plate
is an indication of the ﬂow area, this can be equated to
the shell diameter. This is not a perfect comparison but it
does show the relative parameters for each exchanger.

Figure 26.1 Single-pass operation

The APV Paraﬂow 26/439

Shell and tube

Number 
of passes
Number of
tubes/pass
Number of

cross-passes
(number of
baffles + 1)

Tube
side

Shell
side

Plate

equivalent

Number 
of passes
Number of

passages/pass

Number 
of passes

Shell diameter

Number of

passages/pass

Side
one

Side
two

Figure 26.2 Comparison of pass arrangement: plate versus
tubular

An important, exclusive feature of

the plate heat
exchanger is that by the use of special connector plates it
is possible to provide connections for alternate ﬂuids so
that a number of duties can be done in the same frame.

26.1.2 Plate construction

Plates are pressed from stainless steel, titanium, Hastel-
loy or any material ductile enough to be formed into
a pressing. The specious design of the trough pattern
strengthens the plates, increases the effective heat transfer
area and produces turbulence in the liquid ﬂow between
plates. Plates are pressed in materials between 0.5 and
1.2 mm and the degree of mechanical loading is impor-
tant. The more severe case occurs when one process liq-
uid is operating at the highest working pressure and the
other at zero pressure. The maximum pressure differential
is applied across the plate and results in a considerable
unbalanced load. There are two alternative trough forms,
one using deep corrugations to provide contact points for
about every 650–1950 mm2 of heat transfer surface, the
other crisscross shallow troughs with support maintained
by corrugation/corrugation contact. Alternate plates are
arranged so that corrugations cross to provide a contact
point for every 100–600 mm2 of area. The plate then can
handle large differential pressures and the cross pattern
forms a tortuous path that promotes substantial liquid tur-
bulence and a very high heat transfer coefﬁcient. The net
result is high rates with moderate pressure drop.

Plates are available with effective heat transfer area
from 0.03 to 3.5 m2 and up to 700 can be contained
within the frame of the largest plate-type heat exchanger,
providing over 2400 m2 of surface area. Flow ports and
associated pipework are sized in proportion to the plate
area and control the maximum liquid throughput.

Figure 26.3 shows the relationship between port diam-
eter and ﬂuid velocity at 4 and 7 m/s and highlights the
nominal maximum velocities for various plates. As the
ﬂow through the machine increases, the entry and exit
pressure losses also increase. The nominal maximum ﬂow
rate for a plate heat exchanger limits these losses to an
acceptable proportion of the total pressure losses, and is
therefore a function not only of the port diameter but

26/440 Heat Exchangers

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

Flow rate × 106 kg/h

7 m/s

R23

4 m/s

Port 
diameter

R14

R6 and R10

SR9
R8

R4

R5

HMB

100

200

300 (mm)

Figure 26.3 Throughput versus port diameter

also of the nature of the plate which has been empirically
determined.

These velocities seem, at ﬁrst, rather high compared to
conventional pipework practice, but they are very local-
ized in the exchanger and are progressively reduced as
distribution into the ﬂow passages occurs from the port
manifold.

26.1.3 Gasket materials

As detailed in Table 26.1, various gasket elastomers are
available which have chemical and temperature resistance
coupled with good sealing properties. The temperatures
shown are maximum;
therefore possible simultaneous
chemical action must be taken into account.

26.1.4 Thermal performance

Data on thermal performance are not readily available
on all heat exchangers because of the proprietary nature
of the machines. To exemplify typical thermal data, heat
transfer can best be described by a Dittus–Boelter type
equation:
Nu D A(cid:5)Re(cid:8)n(cid:5)Pr(cid:8)m

(cid:2)x

(cid:1)

(cid:13)
(cid:13)w

m D 0.30–0.45
x D 0.05–0.20

Reported values of the constant and exponents are
A D 0.15–0.40
n D 0.65–0.85
where
Nu D hd
d

Pr D Cp(cid:13)
k

Re D Vdp
u

d is the equivalent diameter deﬁned in the case of the
plate heat exchanger as 2 ð the mean gap.

Table 26.1 Gasket materials, operating temperatures and
applications

Gasket material

Approx. maximum
operating temp.
°C

°F

Application

Paracril
(medium nitrile)

E.P.D.M.

135

150

275

300

Resistant to fatty

materials

High temperature

resistance for a wide
range of chemicals

Paratherm
(resin cured

butyl)
Paradur
(ﬂuorocarbon

rubber base)

150

300

177

350

Aldehydes, ketones and

some esters

Mineral oils, fuels,

vegetable and animal
oils

Typical velocities in plate heat exchangers for water-
like ﬂuids in turbulent ﬂow are 0.3–0.9 meters per second
(m/s) but true velocities in certain regions will be higher
by a factor of up to 4 due to the effect of the corruga-
tions. All heat transfer and pressure drop relationships are,
however, based on either a velocity calculated from the
average plate gap or on the ﬂow rate per passage.

Figure 26.4 illustrates the effect of velocity for water
at 16°C on heat transfer coefﬁcients. This graph also plots
pressure drop against velocity under the same conditions.
The ﬁlm coefﬁcients are very high and can be obtained
for a moderate pressure drop.

One particularly important feature of the plate heat
exchanger is that the turbulence induced by the troughs
reduces the Reynolds number at which the ﬂow becomes
laminar. If the characteristic length dimension in the
Reynolds number is taken as twice the average gap
between plates, the Re number at which the ﬂow becomes
laminar varies from about 100 to 400, according to the
type of plate.

To achieve these high coefﬁcients it is necessary to
expend energy. With the plate unit, the friction factors

Film coefficient × 103
∆

kcal/m2 h°C

Pressure loss

kgf/cm2 
∆

20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2

1.1
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

Flow rate/passage kg/h

0

1000

2000

3000

4000

Figure 26.4 Performance details: plate exchanger

1.0

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0

r
o
t
c
a
t
 
n
o
i
t
c
e
r
r
o
c
 
D
T
M
L

Comparing plate and tubular exchangers 26/441

1/1

2/1

2/2

4/4

3/3

3/1

4/1

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

Number of heat transfer units (HTU)

Figure 26.5 LMTD correction factor

normally encountered are in the range of 10 to 400 times
those inside a tube for the same Reynolds number. How-
ever, nominal velocities are low and plate lengths do not
exceed 2.3 m, so that the term V2L/2g in the pressure drop
equation is very much smaller than one would normally
encounter in tubulars. In addition, single-pass operation
will achieve many duties, so that the pressure drop is efﬁ-
ciently used and not wasted on losses due to ﬂow direction
changes.
The friction factor is correlated with:
p D f ð LpV2
2g ð d

f D B
Rey

where y varies from 0.1 to 0.4 according to the plate and
B is a constant characteristic of the plate. If the overall
heat transfer equation H D UST is used to calculate the
heat duty it is necessary to know the overall coefﬁcient
U (sometimes known as the K factor), the surface area S
and the mean temperature difference T.

The overall coefﬁcient U can be calculated from
D rfh C rfc C rw C rdh C rdc

1
U
The values of rfh and rfc (the ﬁlm resistances for the
hot and cold ﬂuids, respectively) can be calculated from
the Dittus–Boelter equations previously described and the
wall metal resistance rw from the average metal thick-
ness and thermal conductivity. The fouling resistances of
the hot and cold ﬂuids rdh and rdc are often based on
experience, but a more detailed discussion of this will be
presented later in this chapter.

The value taken for S is the developed area after press-
ing. That is, the total area available for heat transfer and
due to the corrugations will be greater than the projected
area of the plate, i.e. 0.17 m2 versus 0.14 m2 for an APV
HX plate.

The value of T is calculated from the logarithmic mean
temperature difference multiplied by a correction factor.
With single-pass operation, this factor is about 1 except
for plate packs of less than 20, when the end effect has a

signiﬁcant bearing on the calculation. This is due to the
fact that the passage at either end of the plate pack only
transfers heat from one side and therefore the heat load is
reduced.

When the plate unit is arranged for multiple-pass use a
further correction factor must be applied. Even when two
passes are counter-current to two other passes, at least
one passage must experience co-current ﬂow. This cor-
rection factor is shown in Figure 26.5 against a number
of heat transfer units (HTU D temperature rise of the pro-
cess ﬂuid divided by the mean temperature difference). As
indicated, whenever unequal passes are used, the correc-
tion factor calls for a considerable increase in area. This
is particularly important when unequal ﬂow conditions
are handled. If high and low ﬂow rates are to be used,
the necessary velocities must be maintained with the low
ﬂuid ﬂow rate by using an increased number of passes.
Although the plate unit is most efﬁcient when the ﬂow
ratio between two ﬂuids is in the range of 0.7–1.4, other
ratios can be handled with unequal passes. This is done,
however, at the expense of the LMTD factor.

26.2 Comparing plate and tubular
exchangers
26.2.1 Ten points of comparison

In forming a comparison between plate and tubular heat
exchangers there are a number of guidelines which will
generally assist in the selection of the optimum exchanger
for any application. In summary, these are:

1. For liquid/liquid duties, the plate heat exchanger will
usually give a higher overall heat transfer coefﬁcient
and in many cases the required pressure loss will be
no higher.

2. The effective mean temperature difference will usu-

ally be higher with the plate heat exchanger.

3. Although the tube is the best shape of ﬂow conduit for
withstanding pressure it is entirely the wrong shape

26/442 Heat Exchangers

for optimum heat transfer performance since it has
the smallest surface area per unit of cross-sectional
ﬂow area.

4. Because of the restrictions in the ﬂow area of the
ports on plate units it is usually difﬁcult (unless a
moderate pressure loss is available) to produce eco-
nomic designs when it is necessary to handle large
quantities of low-density ﬂuids such as vapours and
gases.

5. A plate heat exchanger will usually occupy far less

ﬂoor space than a tubular for the same duty.

6. From a mechanical viewpoint, the plate passage is not
the optimum and gasketed plate units are not made
to withstand operating pressures much in excess of
20 kgf/cm2.

7. For most materials of construction, sheet metal for
plates is less expensive per unit area than tube of the
same thickness.

8. When materials other than mild steel are required, the
plate will usually be more economical than the tube
for the application.

9. When mild steel construction is acceptable and when
a closer temperature approach is not required, the
tubular heat exchanger will often be the most eco-
nomic solution since the plate heat exchanger is rarely
made in mild steel.

10. Plate heat exchangers are limited by the necessity that

the gasket be elastomeric.

26.2.2 Heat transfer coefﬁcients

Higher overall heat transfer coefﬁcients are obtained with
the plate heat exchanger compared with a tubular for a
similar loss of pressure because the shell side of a tubu-
lar exchanger is basically a poor design from a thermal
point of view. Considerable pressure drop is used without
much beneﬁt in heat transfer efﬁciency. This is due to the
turbulence in the separated region at the rear of the tube.
Additionally, large areas of tubes even in a well-designed
tubular unit are partially bypassed by liquid and low heat
transfer areas are thus created.

Bypassing in a plate-type exchanger is less of a problem
and more use is made of the ﬂow separation which occurs
over the plate troughs since the reattachment point on the
plate gives rise to an area of very high heat transfer.

For most duties, the ﬂuids have to make fewer passes
across the plates than would be required through tubes
or in passes across the shell. Since a plate unit can carry
out the duty with one pass for both ﬂuids in many cases,
the reduction in the number of required passes means less
pressure lost due to entrance and exit losses and conse-
quently more effective use of the pressure.

26.2.3 Mean temperature difference

A further advantage of the plate heat exchanger is that the
effective mean temperature difference is usually higher
than with the tubular unit. Since the tubular is always a
mixture of cross and contra-ﬂow in multi-pass arrange-
ments, substantial correction factors have to be applied to
the log mean temperature difference (LMTD). In the plate

heat exchanger where both ﬂuids take the same number
of passes through the unit, the LMTD correction factor is
usually in excess of 0.95.

26.3 Duties other than turbulent liquid
ﬂow
26.3.1 Beyond liquid/liquid

The plate heat exchanger, for example, can be used in
laminar ﬂow duties, for the evaporation of ﬂuids with rel-
atively high viscosities, for cooling various gases, and for
condensing applications where pressure-drop parameters
are not excessively restrictive.

26.3.2 Condensing

For those condensing duties where permissible pressure
loss is less than 0.07 kpf/cm2 there is no doubt but that
the tubular unit is most efﬁcient. Under such pressure-
drop conditions only a portion of the length of a plate
heat exchanger plate would be used and a substantial
surface area would be wasted. However, when less restric-
tive pressure drops are available the plate heat exchanger
becomes an excellent condenser, since very high heat
transfer coefﬁcients are obtained and the condensation can
be carried out in a single pass across the plate.

26.3.3 Pressure drop of condensing vapor

The pressure drop of condensing steam in the passages
of plate heat exchangers has been investigated experi-
mentally for a series of different plate conﬁgurations. As
indicated in Figure 26.6, which provides data for a typical
unit, the drop obtained is plotted against steam ﬂow rate
per passage for a number of inlet steam pressures.

It is interesting to note that for a set steam ﬂow rate
and a given duty the steam pressure drop is higher when
the liquid and steam are in countercurrent rather than

0.45

0.40

0.35
0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05
0

Pressure drop
kgf/cm2

0.70 kgf/cm2

1.10
 kgf/cm2

0.35 kgf/cm2

100

50
Steam condensation rate kg/h

150

200

250

Figure 26.6 Steam-side pressure drop

Counter-current
Co-current

Steam

Process

Process

Steam

e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
T

Plate length

Figure 26.7 Temperature proﬁle during condensation of steam

co-current ﬂow. This is due to differences in temperature
proﬁle.

From Figure 26.7 it can be seen that for equal duties
and ﬂows the temperature difference for countercurrent
ﬂow is lower at the steam inlet than at the outlet, with
most of the steam condensation taking place in the lower
half of the plate. The reverse holds true for co-current
ﬂow. In this case, most of the steam condenses in the top
half of the plate, the mean vapor velocity is lower and
a reduction in pressure drop of between 10–40 per cent
occurs. This difference in pressure drop becomes lower
for duties where the ﬁnal approach temperature between
the steam and process ﬂuid becomes larger.

The pressure drop of condensing steam is therefore
a function of steam ﬂow rate, pressure and temperature
difference. Since the steam pressure drop affects the sat-
uration temperature of the steam, the mean temperature
difference, in turn, becomes a function of steam pressure
drop. This is particularly important when vacuum steam
is being used, since small changes in steam pressure can
give signiﬁcant alterations in the temperature at which the
steam condenses.

26.3.4 Gas cooling

Plate heat exchangers also are used for gas cooling. The
problems are similar to those of steam heating since the
gas velocity changes along the length of the plate due
either to condensation or to pressure ﬂuctuations. Designs
usually are restricted by pressure drop, therefore machines
with low-pressure drop plates are recommended. A typical
allowable pressure loss would be 0.035 kgf/cm2 with low
gas velocities giving overall heat transfer coefﬁcients in
the region of 244 kcal/m2h°C.

26.3.5 Evaporating

The plate heat exchanger can also be used for evaporation
of highly viscous ﬂuids when the evaporation occurs in
plate or the liquid ﬂashes after leaving the plate. Applica-
tions generally have been restricted to the soap and food
industries. The advantage of these units is their ability to
concentrate viscous ﬂuids of up to 50 poise.

Duties other than turbulent liquid ﬂow 26/443

26.3.6 Laminar ﬂow

Most plate heat exchanger designs fall into the viscous
ﬂow range. Considering only Newtonian ﬂuids since most
chemical duties fall into this category, in laminar ducted
ﬂow the ﬂow can be said to be one of three types:

1. Fully developed velocity and temperature proﬁles (i.e.

the limiting Nusselt case);

2. Fully developed velocity proﬁle with developing tem-

perature proﬁle (i.e. the thermal entrance region); or

3. The simultaneous development of the velocity and tem-

perature proﬁles.

The ﬁrst type is of interest only when considering ﬂuids
of low Prandtl number, and this does not usually exist
with normal plate heat exchanger applications. The third
is relevant only for ﬂuids such as gases which have a
Prandtl number of about one. Therefore, let us consider
type two.

As a rough guide for plate heat exchangers, the rate of
the hydrodynamic entrance length to the corresponding
thermal entrance length is given by

D 1.7Pr

lTH
lHYD
Correlations for heat transfer and pressure drop in laminar
ﬂow are:
Nu D e

Re ð Pr ð d

(cid:2)1/3(cid:1)

(cid:2)n

(cid:1)

L

(cid:13)
(cid:13)w

where

Nu D Nusselt number (Ld/k),
Re D Reynolds number (vdf/(cid:13)),
Pr D Prandtl number (cp(cid:13)/k),
L D nominal plate length,
D D equivalent diameter (2 ð average gap),
c D construct for each plate (usually in the range
n D index varying from 0.1–0.2, depending on

(cid:13)/(cid:13)w D Sieder Tate correction factor,

1.86–4.50),

plate type.

Pressure drop

For pressure loss in a plate, the friction factor can be
taken as
f D a
Re

where a is a characteristic of the plate.

It can be seen that for heat transfer, the plate heat
exchanger is ideal because the value of d is small and
the ﬁlm coefﬁcients are proportional to d(cid:5)2/3.
Unfortunately, the pressure loss is proportional to d(cid:5)4, and
pressure drop is sacriﬁced to achieve the heat transfer.

From these correlations it is possible to calculate the
ﬁlm heat transfer coefﬁcient and the pressure loss for
laminar ﬂow. This coefﬁcient, combined with that of the
metal and the calculated coefﬁcient for the service ﬂuid
together with the fouling resistance, is then used to pro-
duce the overall coefﬁcient. As with turbulent ﬂow, an

26/444 Heat Exchangers

allowance has to be made to the LMTD to allow for either
end-effect correction for small plate packs and/or concur-
rency caused by having concurrent ﬂow in some passes.
This is particularly important for laminar ﬂow since these
exchangers usually have more than one pass.

since the metals used in these units are non-corrosive. The
other four types of fouling, however, are most important.
With certain ﬂuids such as cooling-tower water, fouling
can result from a combination of crystallization, sedimen-
tation and organic material growth.

26.4 The problem of fouling
26.4.1 The fouling factor

In view of its complexity, variability and the need to carry
out experimental work on a long-term basis under actual
operating conditions, fouling remains a neglected issue
among the technical aspects of heat transfer. However,
the importance of carefully predicting fouling resistance in
both tubular and plate heat exchanger calculations cannot
be overstressed. This is well illustrated by the following
examples.

Note that for a typical water/water duty in a plate heat
exchanger it would be necessary to double the size of the
unit if a fouling factor of 0.0001 was used on each side of
the plate (i.e. a total fouling of 0.0002). Although fouling
is of great importance, there are relatively few accurate
data available, and the rather conservative ﬁgures quoted
in Kern (Process Heat Transfer) are used all too fre-
quently. It also may be said that many of the high fouling
resistances quoted have been obtained from poorly oper-
ated plants. If a clean exchanger, for example, is started
and run at the designed inlet water temperature, it will
exceed its duty. To overcome this, plant personnel tend to
turn down the cooling water ﬂow rate and thereby reduce
turbulence in the exchanger. This encourages fouling, and
even though the water ﬂow rate is eventually turned up
to design, the damage will have been done. It is probable
that if the design ﬂow rate had been maintained from the
onset, the ultimate fouling resistance would have been
lower. A similar effect can happen if the cooling-water
inlet temperature falls below the design ﬁgure and the
ﬂow rate is turned down again.

26.4.2 Six types of fouling

Types of fouling can be divided into six distinct cat-
egories. The ﬁrst is crystallization – the most common
type of fouling, which occurs in many process streams,
particularly cooling-tower water. Frequently linked with
crystallization is sedimentation, which is usually caused
by deposits of particulate matter such as clay, sand or rust.
A build-up of organic products and polymers is often a
result of chemical reaction and polymerization. The sur-
face temperature and presence of reactants, particularly
oxygen, can have a very signiﬁcant effect. Coking occurs
on high-temperature surfaces and is due to hydrocarbon
deposits. Organic material growth is usually linked with
crystallization and sedimentation and is common to sea
water systems. Corrosion of the heat transfer surface itself
produces an added thermal resistance as well as a surface
roughness.

In the design of the plate heat exchanger, fouling due to
coking is of no signiﬁcance, since the unit cannot be used
at such high temperatures. Corrosion is also irrelevant,

26.4.3 A function of time

From Figure 26.8 it is apparent that the fouling process is
time dependent, with zero fouling initially. Fouling then
builds up quite rapidly and in most cases, levels off at
a certain time to an asymptotic value as represented by
curve A in the ﬁgure. At this point the rate of deposition
is equal to that of removal. Not all fouling levels off,
however, and curve B shows that at a certain time the
exchanger would have to be taken off-line for cleaning.
In the case of crystallization and suspended solid foul-
ing, the process is usually of type A. However, when the
fouling is of the crystallization type with a pure compound
crystallizing out, the fouling approaches type B and the
equipment must be cleaned at frequent intervals.

Biological growth can present a potentially hazardous
fouling, since it can provide a stickier surface with which
to bond other fouling sources. In many cases, however,
treatment of the ﬂuid can reduce the amount of biological
growth. The use of germicides or poisons to kill bacteria
can help.

e
c
n
a

i

t
s
s
e
r
 
g
n

i
l

u
o
F

B

A

Figure 26.8 Build-up of fouling resistance

Time

Tubular
PHE

0.61 m/sec.
1.52 m/sec.

2.43 m/sec.

e
c
n
a
t
s
s
e
r
 
g
n

i

i
l

u
o
F

Figure 26.9 Effect of velocity and turbulence

Time

26.4.4 Lower resistance

It generally is considered that resistance due to fouling
is lower with plate heat exchangers than with tubular
units. This is the result of four advantages of plate-type
exchangers:

1. There is a high degree of turbulence, which increases
the rate of foulant removal and results in a lower
asymptotic value of fouling resistance.

2. The velocity proﬁle across a plate is good. There are
no zones of low velocity compared with certain areas
on the shell side of tubular exchangers.

3. Corrosion is maintained at an absolute minimum.

The problem of fouling 26/445

4. A smooth heat transfer surface can be obtained. If nec-

essary, the plate can be electro-polished.

The most important of these is turbulence. HTRI (Heat
Transfer Research Incorporated) has shown that for tubu-
lar heat exchangers, fouling is a function of low velocities
and friction factor. Although ﬂow velocities are low with
the plate heat exchanger, friction factors are very high,
and this results in lower fouling resistance. The effect
of velocity and turbulence is plotted in Figure 26.9. The
lower fouling characteristic of the plate heat exchanger
compared to the tubular has been conclusively proved.

Tests have been carried out which tend to conﬁrm that
fouling varies for different plates, with the more turbulent
type of plate providing the lower fouling resistances.

27

Heating

G E Pritchard
Chartered Engineer

Contents

27/447

27/451

27/449
27/449

27/449
27.1 Introduction
27.2 Statutory regulations
27.3 Buildings regulations
27.4 Estimation of heat losses from buildings
27.5 Allowance for height of space
27/451
27.6 Characteristics of heat emitters 27/452
27/452
27.7 Central plant size
27.8 Selective systems
27/452
27.9 Multiple-boiler installations
27.10 Heating systems

27/452

27/453

27.10.1 Warm and hot water heating systems
27.10.2 Design water ﬂow temperature 27/454
27.10.3 Maximum water velocity
27.10.4 Minimum water velocity
27.10.5 System temperature drop
27.10.6 Use of temperature-limiting valves on emitters

27/454
27/454
27/455

27/453

27/455

27/455
27/455

27.10.7 Miscellaneous components
27.10.8 Distribution system design
27.10.9 Sealed heating systems
27.10.10 Maintenance of water heating systems 27/457
27.10.11 Steam heating systems
27.10.12 High-temperature thermal ﬂuid systems
27.10.13 Warm air heating systems
27.10.14 Reducing the effect of temperature stratiﬁcation

27/456

27/457

27/458

27/457

27.10.15 High-temperature high-velocity warm air heat-

27/458

ing systems

27/458

27.11 Heating equipment – attributes and applications

27/458

27.11.1 Water system heating equipment
27.11.2 Electric heating equipment
27/458
27.11.3 Gas- and oil-ﬁred heating equipment

27/458

27/458

space heating,

27.1 Introduction
The past ﬁfty years have seen signiﬁcant advances
in every aspect of
resulting from
increased demands for the provision within buildings of
more closely controlled environments and services of
progressively increasing complexity. Although it remains
impossible in a chapter of this size to cover adequately
the extent of the subjects associated with these services,
hopefully it will provide a useful reference.

27.2 Statutory regulations
Except for some deﬁned types of accommodation, the use
of fuel or electricity to heat premises above a temperature
of 19°C is prohibited by the Fuel and Electricity (Heating)
(Control) Order 1980. The current Order is an amendment
to an earlier Regulation, which limited the temperature
to a maximum of 20°C, and although 19°C is generally
taken to refer to air temperature the Order does not specify
this. The minimum temperature was laid down in the Fac-
tories Act 1961 and should be reached one hour after the
commencement of occupation.

27.3 Building regulations
Unfortunately, the optimum results in cutting down space
heating energy usage can often be obtained only when
a building is at the design stage. Insulation, draft exclu-
sion and the best possible heating system can then be
built in at minimum cost. It is usually more expensive to
add to (or modify) an existing building. Space heating is
probably the largest usage of energy in buildings, so this
section considers what can be done to improve insulation
and other thermal properties. When energy was relatively
cheap, little thought was given to conservation, and these
omissions now have to be rectiﬁed.

In 1957, the Thermal Insulation (Industrial Buildings)
Act laid down standards of insulation for roofs of new
buildings. This ﬁrst attempt to minimize heat losses did
not cover walls, ﬂoors or windows. However, in 1978,
Amendments to the Building Regulations rectiﬁed this
by specifying standards for walls and windows. At this
point, it is necessary to deﬁne the terms ‘U-value’, or
the insulation characteristic of the building material. This
measures the rate at which energy ﬂows through the mate-
rial when there is a temperature difference of 1°C between
the inside and outside faces, and this value is measured
in watts (the unit of energy) per square meter of surface
area, i.e. W/m2°C or W/m2 K.
Symbol ‘K’ D °C temperature difference.
The amendments can brieﬂy be summarized in Table 27.1.
The U values for walls, roofs and ﬂoor are intended as
average ﬁgures, so it is permissible to have some areas of
the structure under insulated (i.e. with higher U values)
providing other areas have sufﬁcient extra insulation to
bring the average of all areas down to (or below) the
Regulation values.

Limits are also imposed on window areas and apply to
all buildings above 30-m2 ﬂoor area. For the ﬁrst group,

Building regulations 27/449

Table 27.1

Industrial and commercial buildings
External walls of building enclosing heated spaces, internal
walls exposed to unheated ventilated spaces, ﬂoors where the
under-surface is exposed to outside air or an unheated ventilated
space, and roofs over heated spaces (including the cases of
ceilings with an unheated ventilated space above them).
Maximum average U value
For factories and storage buildings, such as warehouses, the U
value is laid down to be 0.7. For shops, ofﬁces, institutional
buildings and places of assembly, such as meeting halls,
theatres, etc., the maximum average U value is to be 0.6

industrial and commercial buildings, these limits apply
both to roof lights and to windows in the walls. These
percentages for windows or roof lights assume single glaz-
ing, and somewhat larger values can be used if double or
triple glazing is to be ﬁtted. However, calculations must be
produced to show that the total heat loss from such units
would be no greater than the single-glazed unit complying
with the set limits (Table 27.2). In most single- and two-
story buildings, the largest proportion of heat loss from the
building structure is usually through the roof. (In build-
ings of three stories or more, the losses through walls and
windows may overtake the roof loss.) If we ﬁrst consider
typical roofs, the methods of insulation break down into
four groups:

1. Under-drawing,

involving the ﬁtting of

insulation
below the existing roof, as rigid self-supporting
slabs, semi-rigid sheets supported by framing or a
combination of an insulating blanket on top of sheets.
This insulating blanket could be of mineral or glass
ﬁber or a ﬂexible foamed plastic.

2. External, where insulation is added on top of the exist-
ing roof. This can be done with sheets or slabs of
insulating material ﬁnished with some waterprooﬁng
layer or very conveniently for corrugated or shaped
rooﬁng sheets by using a spray system to apply both
the insulation and ﬁnal waterprooﬁng layer.

Table 27.2

Type of building

Factories and storage
Ofﬁces, shops and places

residential

of assembly

Institutional, including

Maximum permitted glazed area
As rooﬂights
In walls as
as percentage
percentage of
wall area
of roof area

15

35

25

20

20

20

Note: Where ﬁgures for both rooﬂights and windows in walls
are given, these really apply as a combined total. If the full wall
window allowance is not used the balance can be reallocated to
roof light areas and vice versa. For example, a factory with only
10% of wall area as windows could add the other 5% of wall area
as an increase to the permitted 20% of roof area that could be roof
lights.

27/450 Heating

3. Where there is a ceiling below the actual roof, to place
insulation above this ceiling. Where there are wooden
ceiling joists, the insulation can be a ﬂexible blanket
laid between joists or loose granular ﬁll spread between
them. Alternatively, an overall quilt or blanket can be
laid over the ceiling, taking care to check that the ceil-
ing and its supports can safely carry the extra weight.
4. Possibly in a small minority of cases, it could be advan-
tageous to install a false ceiling, which could be of
insulating sheets or panels. This can reduce the vol-
ume to be heated, particularly with steeply pitched
roofs. Obviously, this idea could not be recommended
where valuable daylight was available from roof lights
and where this daylight signiﬁcantly reduced the artiﬁ-
cial illumination necessary. Often such a false ceiling
unfortunately conﬂicts with the existing architecture.
5. New Building Regulations for the Conservation of Fuel
and Power for England and Wales came into operation
on 1 April 1990. The new maximum U values of the
elements (W/m2 K) are shown in Table 27.4.

Table 27.3 gives some of the insulation properties for
various building materials. The property given is for the
rate at which energy would pass through a unit area of
the material. In the standard units it becomes the number
of watts that would be transferred through a square meter
of the material of normal thickness in the form it would
be used, if the air at either side of the material shows a
temperature difference of 1°C. In SI units this becomes
W/m2°C, which, in this case, is commonly known as the
U value. The larger the U value, the more energy it will
transfer, so the worse are its insulation properties.

Table 27.3 U values

Roofs
Pitch covered with slates or tiles, rooﬂing felt
underlay, foil-backed plasterboard ceiling
Pitched covered with slates or tiles and rooﬁng
felt underlay, foil-backed plasterboard ceiling with
100 mm glass-ﬁber insulation between joists
Corrugated steel or asbestos cement rooﬁng sheets
Corrugated steel or asbestos cement cladding with
75 mm ﬁbreglass lightweight liner
Corrugated steel or asbestos cement rooﬁng
sheets with cavity and aluminium foil-backed
10 mm plasterboard lining
Corrugated double-skin asbestos cement sheeting
with 25 mm glass-ﬁber insulation between with
cavity and aluminium foil-backed 10 mm
plasterboard lining; ventilated air space
Steel or asbestos cement rooﬁng sheets, no lining
with rigid insulating lining board 75 mm
Asphalt 19 mm thick or felt/bitumen layer on
solid concrete 150 mm thick
Asphalt 19 mm thick or felt/bitumen layer on
150 mm autoclaved aerated concrete roof slabs
Flat roof, three layers of felt on chipboard or
plasterboard
Flat roof, three layers of felt on rigid insulating
board 100 mm thick
Timber roof with zinc or lead covering and
25 mm plaster ceiling

1.5

0.35

6.1–6.7
0.38

1.9–2.0

0.8

0.4

3.5

0.9

1.54

0.29

0.96

Table 27.3 (continued)

5.3–5.7
0.37

0.4

3.3
1.7
1.9

1.4
0.5
1.0–1.1

0.62

Double glazing

Walls
Steel or asbestos cement cladding
Steel or asbestos cement cladding 75 mm ﬁber
glass lightweight liner
Steel or asbestos cement cladding with plaster-board
lining and 100 mm ﬁber insulating roll
Solid brick wall unplastered 105 mm
Solid brick wall unplastered 335 mm
Solid brick wall 220 mm thick with 16 mm
lightweight plaster on inside face
Brick/cavity/brick (260 mm total thickness)
260 mm brick/mineral ﬁber-ﬁlled cavity/brick
260 mm brick/cavity/load-density block
Brick/expanded polystyrene board in cavity/low-density 0.5
block/inside face plastered
Weather boarding on timber framing with 10 mm
plasterboard lining, 50 mm glass-ﬁber insulation
in the cavity and building paper behind the
boarding
Glazing
Single glazing

4.3
5.6
2.5
3.2
Triple glazing
2.0
Roof skylights
6.6
Floors
20 mm intermediate wood ﬂoor on 100 mm ð 50 mm 1.5
joists 10 mm plasterboard ceiling allowed for 10%
bridging by joists
150 mm concrete intermediate ﬂoor with 150 mm
screed and 20 mm wood ﬂooring
The heat loss through ﬂoors in contact with the
earth is dependent upon the size of the ﬂoor and the
amount of edge insulation. Insulating the edge of a
ﬂoor to a depth of 1 m can reduce the U value by
35%. Following are some typical U values for ground
ﬂoors. Effectively, most of the heat loss is around
the perimeter of the ﬂoor.
Solid ﬂoor in contact with the earth with four
exposed edges:
150 m ð 50 m
60 m ð 60 m
15 m ð 60 m
15 m ð 15 m
7.5 m ð 15 m
3 m ð 3 m

Wood frame
Metal frame
Wood frame
Metal frame

1.8

0.11
0.15
0.32
0.45
0.62
1.47

Suspended timber ﬂoors directly above ground. Bare
or with linoleum, plastic or rubber tiles:
150 m ð 60 m
60 m ð 60 m
15 m ð 60 m
15 m ð 15 m
7.5 m ð 15 m
3 m ð 3 m

Suspended timber ﬂoors directly above ground with
carpet or cork tiles:
150 m ð 60 m
60 m ð 60 m
15 m ð 60 m
15 m ð 15 m
7.5 m ð 15 m
3 m ð 3 m

0.14
0.16
0.37
0.45
0.61
0.05

0.14
0.16
0.34
0.44
0.59
0.99

Table 27.4

Building type

Industrial storage
and other buildings,
excluding dwellings

Ground Exposed
ﬂoors walls and

ﬂoors

Semi-exposed Roofs

walls and

ﬂoors

0.45

0.45

0.60

0.45

Note: An exposed element is exposed to the outside air; a semi-
exposed element separates a heated space from a space having
one or more elements which are not insulated to the levels in the
table.
Maximum window areas for single glazing in buildings other than
dwellings will be unchanged.

A very poor insulating material can be detected very
simply. If the material is at normal room conditions and
a hand placed upon its surface feels cold, heat is being
conducted away from it as the U value is very high. A
low U value is shown by no cooling affect. To try this, if
one places a hand on a window and a wooden table there
should be a notable difference between the two showing
a difference in the U value. Wood’s U value is about
1 W/m2°C and glass has a value of over 5.5W/m2°C. The
U values are given in W/m2°C for various building mate-
rials under normal weather conditions. There will always
be slight variations around these values, dependent on par-
ticular manufacturers of the materials. With any insulation
that is being ﬁtted, advice should be sought regarding the
ﬁre risk and condensation problems.

27.4 Estimation of heat losses from
buildings
The normal procedure in estimating the heat loss from
any building is as follows:

1. Decide upon the internal air temperature to be main-

tained at the given external air temperature.

2. Decide the heat transmission coefﬁcient (U values) for
the outside walls and glass, roof and bottom ﬂoor, and
the inside walls, ceilings, or of heated spaces adjacent
to non-heated spaces.

3. Measure up the area of each type of surface and com-
pute the loss through each surface by multiplying the
transmission coefﬁcient by the measured area by the
difference between the inside and the outside temper-
atures.

4. Calculate the cubic contents of each room and, using
the appropriate air change rate, the amount of heat
required to warm the air to the desired temperature
by multiplying the volume of air by the difference
between the inside and outside temperatures and the
speciﬁc heat of air.

The above calculations will give the heat losses after
the building has been heated. Under conditions in which
the heating system will operate continuously, satisfactory
results will be obtained if the heating system is designed
to provide heat equivalent to the amount calculated above.
Suitable allowance must be made for losses from mains.

Allowance for height of space 27/451

When, however, operation is intermittent, safety mar-
gins are necessary. These are, of course, speculative, but
the following suggestion has frequently proved satisfac-
tory. When it is necessary to operate after a long period of
vacancy, as may happen in certain types of substantially
built buildings, it is necessary to add up to 30 per cent to
the ‘steady state’ heat transmissions. In buildings of light
construction, this margin may be reduced. In selecting
the appropriate U values we must pay due regard to the
exposure and aspect of the room. It appears reasonable to
make allowance for the height of a room, bearing in mind
that warm air raises towards the ceiling. Thus in a room
designed to keep a comfortable temperature in the lower
1.5 or 2 meters, a higher temperature must exist nearer the
ceiling, which will inevitably cause greater losses through
the upper parts of windows, walls and roof. This effect is
greatest with a convective system, i.e. one that relies on
the warming of the air in the room for the conveyance of
heat. This would occur in the case of conventional radi-
ators, convectors and warm air systems. In the case of
radiant heated rooms, this does not occur, and a much
more uniform temperature exists from ﬂoor to ceiling.

loss

calculations,

27.5 Allowance for height of space
a uniform temperature
In heat
throughout the height of the heated space is assumed,
although certain modes of heating cause vertical
temperature gradients which lead to increased heat losses,
particularly through the roof. These gradients need to be
taken into account when sizing appliances. Additions to
the calculated heat loss to allow for this are proposed
these percentages should not
in Table 27.5. However,
be added to replacement heat
in air
mechanically exhausted from process plant. Attention
is also drawn to the means of reducing the effect of
temperature stratiﬁcation, discussed in Section 27.10.13.

to balance that

Table 27.5 Allowances for height of heated space

Method of heating and type
or disposition of heaters

Mainly radiant
Warm ﬂoor
Warm ceiling
Medium- and high-temperature
downward radiation from
high level

Mainly convective

Natural warm air convection

Forced warm air

Cross ﬂow at low level
Downward from high level
Medium and high-temperature
cross radiation from intermediate
level

aNot appropriate to this application.

Percentage addition for

following heights of heated

space (m)

5

5–10

>10

Nil
Nil
Nil

Nil
0–5
Nil

Nil
a

0–5

Nil

0–5

a

0–5
0–5
Nil

5–15
5–10
0–5

15–30
10–20
5–10

27/452 Heating

27.6 Characteristics of heat emitters
Designers will need to decide whether it is necessary to
add a margin to the output of heat emitters. During the
warm-up cycle with intermittently operated heating sys-
tems, emitter output will be higher than design because
space temperatures are lower. Also, boost system temper-
atures may be used to provide an emission margin dur-
ing warm-up. The need for heat emitter margins to meet
extreme weather conditions will depend on the design
parameters used in determining heat losses.

Although the addition of a modest margin to heat emit-
ter output would add little to the overall system cost and a
margin on the heat generator or boiler output can only be
utilized if the appropriate emitter capacity is available, the
decision should be based on careful discrimination rather
than using an arbitrary percentage allowance. In general,
for buildings of traditional construction and for the inci-
dence of design weather in normal winters in the UK an
emitter margin in excess of, say, 5 per cent or 10 per cent
is unlikely to be justiﬁed. However, for well-insulated
buildings the heat loss reduces in signiﬁcance relative to
the heat stored in or needed to warm up the structure.
For such applications, a larger heating system margin is
required, and the emitter margin provided would need to
be considered accordingly.

27.7 Central plant size
In estimating the required duty of a central plant for a
building, it should be remembered that the total net inﬁl-
tration of outdoor air is about half the sum of the rates
for the separate rooms. This is because, at any one time,
inﬁltration of outdoor air takes place only on the wind-
ward part of the building, the ﬂow in the remainder being
outwards. When intermittent heating is to be practiced
the pre-heating periods for all rooms in a building will
generally be coincident. The central plant rating is then
the sum of the individual room heat demands, modiﬁed to
take account of the net inﬁltration. If heating is to be con-
tinuous, some diversity between the several room heating
loads can be expected. The values listed in Table 27.6
are suggested. When mechanical ventilation is combined
with heating, the heating and the ventilation plant may
have different hours of use, and the peak loads on the two
sections of the plant will often occur at different times.

Table 27.6 Diversity factors for central plant (continuous heating

Space of building served by plant

Single
Single building or zone, central control
Single building, individual room control
Group of buildings, similar type and use
Group of buildings, dissimilar usesa

Diversity

factor

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.8
0.7

aThis applies to group and district heating schemes where there
is substantial storage of heat in the distribution mains, whether
heating is continuous or intermittent.

The central plant may also be required to provide a domes-
tic hot water supply and/or heat for process purposes.
These loads may have to be added to the net heating load
to arrive at the necessary plant duty, but careful design
may avoid the occurrence of simultaneous peaks. In large
installations, the construction of boiler curves may indi-
cate whether savings in boiler rating can be made. In many
cases, little or no extra capacity may be needed for the
hot water supply, its demands being met by ‘robbing’ the
heating circuits for short periods.

27.8 Selective systems
In some cases the various rooms of a building do not all
require heating at the same time of day and here a so-
called ‘selective system’ may be used. The supply of heat
is restricted to different parts of the building at different
times of the day; the whole building cannot be heated at
one time. A typical application is in dwellings where the
demands for heat in living spaces and bedrooms do not
normally coincide.

In a selective system the individual room appliances
must be sized as indicated above, to provide the appropri-
ate output according to heat loss, gains and intermittency.
The central plant need only be capable of meeting the
greatest simultaneous demands of those room units which
are in use at the same time. This will generally lead to a
large power being available to meet the demands of those
units which form the lesser part of the load. These units
may then be operated with a high degree of intermittency.

27.9 Multiple-boiler installations
Load variation throughout the season is clearly large, and
consideration should be given to the number of boilers
required in the system. Operation at low loads leads to
corrosion and loss inefﬁciency and should be avoided.
On the other hand, a number of smaller boilers give an
increase in capital costs. It has been shown that when
boilers are chosen which have a fairly constant and good
efﬁciency over a working range of 30–100 per cent, then
the effects on overall costs (running C capital) of varying
the number and relative sizes of boilers in the system is
less than 5 per cent. The optimum number depends on the
frequency of occurrence of low loads.

Under these circumstances,

the engineer is free to
choose the number of boilers in the system based
on practical rather than economic considerations. The
following procedure is recommended:

1. Choose a type of boiler with a fairly constant and high
efﬁciency over its full turndown range. Obtain its efﬁ-
ciency curve.

2. On the basis of avoiding acid corrosion and obtain-
ing required standby choose the number of boilers
required and their relative sizes. Equally sized boilers
should be used except where the provision of domes-
tic hot water in summer requires one smaller boiler.
Table 27.7 gives suggested relative sizes based on turn-
down to 30 per cent.

Table 27.7 Appropriate boiler size ratios assuming turndown to 30% of full load

Number
of
boilers

Installed

plant
ratioa

Heating only

Heating plus domestic hot water

Remarks

Installed boiler

size ratios

Lowest
load
(%)

Load if
largest
fails
(%)

Installed boiler

size ratios

Lowest
load
(%)

Load if
largest
fails
(%)

Heating systems 27/453

1

2

3

4

5

1.0

1.0

1.0
1.0
1.25
1.5
1.0
1.25
1.50
1.67
1.0
1.25
1.50
1.33
1.0
1.25
1.50

0.5/0.5
0.33/0.67
0.3/0.7
0.25/0.75
0.33/0.33/0.33
0.2/0.4/0.4
0.2/0.4/0.4
0.2/0.4/0.4
0.25/0.25/0.25/0.25
0.25/0.25/0.25/0.25
0.1/0.3/0.3/0.3
0.25/0.25/0.25/0.25
0.2/0.2/0.2/0.2/0.2
0.2/0.2/0.2/0.2/0.2
0.2/0.2/0.2/0.2/0.2

30

15
10
11.3
11.3
10
7.5
9
10
7.5
9.4
4.3
10
6
7.5
9.0

0

50
33
37
37
67
75
90
100
75
94
105
100
80
100
120

–

–

–

–
0.30/0.70
0.25/0.75
–
0.2/0.4/0.4
0.2/0.4/0.4
0.2/0.4/0.4
0.2/0.4/0.4
0.25/0.25/0.25/0.25
0.1/0.3/0.3/0.3
0.1/0.3/0.3/0.3
0.1/0.3/0.3/0.3
0.2/0.2/0.2/0.2/0.2
0.2/0.2/0.2/0.2/0.2
0.2/0.2/0.2/0.2/0.2

–
9
9.4
–
6
7.5
9
10
7.5
3.7
4.5
4
6
7.5
9.0

–
30
31
–
60
75
90
100
75
87
105
93
80
100
120

is seldom <30%.

No standby
Impossible to gain

Use only if load

reasonable
standby and
meet low loads

aInstalled plant ratio D

Total installed boiler capacity

Design maximum heat requirement

3. The boilers should be controlled in sequence,

the
switching points for bringing boilers on line occurring
whenever an additional boiler makes the system more
efﬁcient (for an evaluation of this see Figure 27.1). Full
boiler load is not usually the most economic switching
point, but switching points too close to full turndown

100

Actual switching points

)

%

(
 
y
c
n
e
c
i
f
f

i

e

 
l

a
m
r
e
h
T

Theoretical switching points

80

60

40

20

Boiler size ratio = 0.2/0.4/0.4

0

0

20

40
Installed load (%)

60

80

100

Figure 27.1 Evaluation of optimum boiler control

should also be avoided. At any given system load the
boilers on-line should share the load between them in
proportion.

27.10 Heating systems
27.10.1 Warm and hot water-heating systems

Warm water or low-, medium- or high-temperature hot
water systems are categorized in Table 27.8. Warm water
systems may use heat pumps, fully condensing boilers or
similar generators, or reclaimed heat. In many cases the
system design may incorporate an alternative heat genera-
tor for standby purposes or for extreme whether operation.
Under such circumstances the system may continue to
function at warm water temperatures or could operate at
more conventional LTHW ones.

LTHW systems are usually under a pressure of static
head only, with an open expansion tank, in which case
the design operating temperature should not exceed 83°C.
Where MTHW systems operating above 110°C are pres-
surized by means of a head tank, an expansion vessel
should be incorporated into the feed and expansion pipe.
This vessel should be adequately sized to take the volume
of expansion of the whole system so that boiling will not
occur in the upper part of the feed pipe. On no account
should an open vent be provided for this type of sys-
tem. MTHW and HTHW systems require pressurization
such that the saturation temperature at operating pressure
at all points in the circuit exceeds the maximum system
ﬂow temperature required. A margin of 17 K (minimum)

27/454 Heating

Table 27.8 Design water temperature for warm and hot water
heating systems

Category

Warm
LTHW
MTHW
HTHW

System design water temperatures

(cid:5)°C(cid:6)

40–70
70–100
100–120
Over 120

Note: Account must be taken of the margin necessary between
the maximum system operating temperature and saturation tem-
perature at the system operating pressure.

is recommended and is based on the use of conventional
automatic boiler plant and includes an allowance for tol-
erances on temperature set points for the automatic con-
trol of heat-generation output. A check must be made on
actual tolerance used in the design of a control system to
ensure that this allowance is adequate. When selecting the
operating pressure, allowance must be made for the effect
of static head reduction at the highest point of the sys-
tem and velocity head reduction at the circulating pump
section, to ensure that all parts of the system are above sat-
uration pressure within an adequate anti-ﬂash temperature
margin. Additionally, the margin on the set point of the
high-temperature cutout control should be 6 K, except for
boilers ﬁred with solid fuel automatic stokers, where it
should be at least 10 K. Medium- and high-temperature
systems should be fully pressurized before the operat-
ing temperature is achieved and remains fully pressurized
until the temperature has dropped to a safe level. In all
systems, the heat generator or boiler must be mechani-
cally suitable to withstand the temperature differentials,
and the return temperature to the boiler must be kept high
enough to minimize corrosion. Automatic controls may
be used to achieve this.

27.10.2 Design water ﬂow temperature

low-temperature heating systems using natural
For
convective or
radiant appliances the normal design
water ﬂow temperature to the system is 83°C (see
temperatures may be used
also Table 27.8). Boost
on modulated-temperature
the
changes in heat output characteristics with varying
temperatures. Additionally, comfort aspects must be borne
in mind, as forced convective emitters operating on
modulated temperature systems can deliver air streams
at unacceptably low temperatures.

systems because of

For MTHW and HTHW systems, heat emitters may
be as for LTHW systems, except that, for safety reasons,
units with accessible surfaces at water temperature would
not normally be employed. Embedded panel coils may
be used in conjunction with a MTHW or HTHW dis-
tribution system, with insulating sleeves around the coil
piping to reduce the heat ﬂow. Alternatively, the coils can
be operated as reduced temperature secondary systems by
allowing only a small, carefully controlled proportion of
ﬂow temperature water to be mixed with the water circu-
lating in the coils.

Design arrangements for

reduced-temperature sec-
ondary systems (sometimes referred to as injection cir-
cuits) include ﬁxed provisions for minimum dilution rates.
Conventional system-balancing devices with three-port
automatic modulating valves to regulate mixed water
temperatures and, hence, heat output are used. Auto-
matic safety controls must prevent excessive temperatures
occurring in the coil circuits, as ﬂoor fabrics or ﬁnishes
could be damaged very rapidly.

27.10.3 Maximum water velocity

Noise generation and erosion/corrosion considerations
limit the maximum water velocity in pipework systems.
Noise is caused by the free air present in the water, sudden
pressure drops (which, in turn, cause cavitation or the
ﬂashing of water into steam), turbulence or a combination
of these.

Noise will therefore be generated at valves and ﬁttings
where turbulence and local velocities are high, rather than
in straight pipe lengths. A particular noise problem can
arise where branch circuits are close to a pump and where
the regulating valve used for ﬂow-rate balancing may give
rise to considerable pressure differences.

Oversizing regulating valves should be avoided, as this
will result in poor regulation characteristics; the valve
operating in an almost shut position and creating a very
high local velocity.

High water velocities can result in erosion or corrosion
due to the abrasive action of particles in the water and the
breakdown of the protective ﬁlm which normally forms
on the inside surface of the pipe. Erosion can also result
from the formation of ﬂash steam and from cavitation
caused by turbulence. Publishing data on limiting water
velocities are in conclusive. Table 27.9 summarizes the
available information.

27.10.4 Minimum water velocity

Minimum water velocities should be maintained in the
upper ﬂoors of high-rise buildings where air may tend to
come out of solution because of reduced pressures. High
velocities should be used in down-return mains feeding
into air-separation units located at a low level in the sys-
tem. Table 27.10 can be taken as a guide. Water velocities
shown in Tables 27.9 and 27.10 are indicative parame-
ters only; on the one hand, to limit noise problems and

Table 27.9 Limiting water velocities in pipework

Pipe diameter
(mm)

50 and below
Above 50
Large distribution
mains with long
lengths of straight
pipe

Steel pipework

Non-corrosive
water (m/s)

Corrosive

water
(m/s)

Copper
pipework

(m/s)

1.5
3
4

1
1.5
2

1
1.5
–

Table 27.10 Minimum water velocities

27.10.7 Miscellaneous components

Heating systems 27/455

Pipe diameter
(mm)

50 and below
Above 50

Minimum water velocity

(m/s)

0.75
1.25

erosion and, on the other, to try to ensure air entrain-
ment. Within these parameters, the design engineer will
need to discriminate on the selection of water velocities
in a distribution system based on other considerations. It
is particularly necessary to bear in mind the effect of low
water velocities on ﬂow-measuring components used in
balancing ﬂow rates in systems.

27.10.5 System temperature drop

British practice on LTHW systems uses a typical system
temperature drop of 11 K and a maximum system temper-
ature of 17 K. European practice has tended to use higher
drops (up to 40 K). An advantage of a higher system tem-
perature drop is the reduction in water ﬂow rates. This
will result in reduced pipe sizes with savings in capital
cost and distribution heat losses and a reduced pump duty,
with savings in running costs. A disadvantage of higher
system temperature drops is the need for larger and con-
sequently more expensive heat emitters. However, if it
is possible to raise the system ﬂow temperature so that
the mean water temperature remains the same, then with
certain types of emitter only a small increase in size is
required. With large system temperature drops the aver-
age water temperature in a radiator tends to fall below the
mean of ﬂow and return temperature and, thus, a larger
surface is needed. Furthermore, on one-pipe circuits the
progressive reduction in temperature around the circuit
may lead to excessively large heat emitters. Higher system
temperature drops can be used with MHTW and HTHW
systems since the mean temperature of the heat emitters
will be correspondingly higher. Additionally, these media
are well suited to use for primary distribution systems,
conveying heat over long distances. Precautions should be
taken to prevent the danger of injury from contact with
hot surfaces. The safe temperature for prolonged contact
is relatively low and reference should be made to BS 4086
and other sources.

27.10.6 Use of temperature-limiting valves on
emitters

On some group and district heating schemes, outlet-
limiting valves which permit ﬂow only when the water
temperature has dropped to a speciﬁed low level are
used. This procedure minimizes the water quantity to be
pumped and permits indicative heat metering by water
quantity alone. In such cases, care must be taken to size
emitters to suit the available water temperatures. The
effect of low water velocities through the emitter must
also be taken into consideration, since the heat output of
some convective appliances is greatly reduced under such
conditions.

Data regarding relief valves, feed and expansion cisterns,
etc. are given in Tables 27.11 and 27.12. Cistern sizes
shown in Table 27.12 are based on typical system designs
and are approximate only. An estimate of the water con-
tent of the particular system should always be made where
there is any doubt regarding these typical data, to ensure
that the cistern capacity is adequate to contain the expan-
sion volume.

27.10.8 Distribution system design

The design of pipework distribution systems must allow
for the following:

1. Future extensions, where required, by the provision of

valved, plugged or capped tee connections.

2. Provision for isolation for maintenance. Where it is
necessary to carry out maintenance on a ‘live’ system,
valves must be lockable and may need to be installed
in tandem.

3. Thermal expansion.
4. Provision for distribution ﬂow rate balancing for initial
commissioning or re-balancing to meet changed oper-
ational requirements. Typical provisions for balancing
comprise the following:
(a) A measuring station – which may be an oriﬁce
plate, a venturi, an oriﬁce valve or other propri-
etary device – provided with a pair of tapings to
permit the measurement of upstream and down-
stream system dynamic pressures.

(b) An associated regulating valve – preferably a
double-regulating valve or other arrangement,
which permits the required setting to remain
undisturbed by closure.

5. Provision for drainage, including drainage after pre-
commission ﬂushing; water circulation during ﬂushing
must be in excess of design ﬂow rates and, in order
to discharge the ﬂushing efﬂuent effectively, drainage
connections must be full diameter.

6. Removal of air from the system by provision of:

(a) Air separators, one form of which uses the
force to separate the
lighter

principle of centrifugal
heavier

constituent

(water)

from the

Table 27.11 Hot water heating boilers – recommended sizes of
relief valves

Rated output of boiler
(kW)

Minimum clear bore

of relief valve

Up to 250
250–350
350–450
450–500
500–750
750–1000

(mm)

20
25
32
40
50
65

Equivalent

area
(cid:5)mm2(cid:6)

310
490
800
1250
1960
3320

Note:The above sizes apply to boilers ﬁred with solid fuel. For oil-
and gas-ﬁred boilers the relief valve should be one size larger.

27/456 Heating

Table 27.12 Approximate sizes of feed and expansion cisterns for low-pressure hot water heating systems

Boiler or water-heating
(kW)

Cistern size

(1)

Ball-valve size

(mm)

Cold-feed size

(mm)

Open-vent size

(mm)

Overﬂow size

(mm)

15
22
30
45
60
75
150
225
300
400
450
600
750
900
1200
1500

18
18
36
36
55
68
114
159
191
227
264
318
455
636
636
910

15
15
15
15
15
15
15
20
20
20
20
25
25
25
25
25

20
20
20
20
20
25
25
32
32
40
40
40
50
50
50
50

25
25
25
25
25
32
32
40
40
50
50
50
65
65
65
65

25
32
32
32
32
32
32
40
40
40
50
50
50
50
80
80

Notes:(1) Cistern sizes are actual.
(2) Cistern sizes are based on radiator-heating systems and are approximate only.
(3) The ball-valve sizes apply to installations where an adequate mains water pressure is available at the ball-valve.

results are
one (non-condensable gases). Best
achieved by locating the separator at the highest
temperature point of the system where air has
a greater tendency to come out of solution. The
velocity of
the medium requires being above
the minimum stated by the manufacturer (usually
about 0.25 m/s).

(b) Automatic air vents for systems operating at tem-

peratures below atmospheric boiling point.

(c) Air bottles with manually operated needle valves
to release accumulated air, for systems operating
at temperatures in excess of atmospheric boiling
point.

7. Provision of test points for sensing temperature and

pressure at selected locations.

27.10.9 Sealed heating systems

Pressurization of medium- and high-temperature hot water
sealed heating systems referred to above may take the
following forms.

Pressurization by expansion of water

The simplest form of pressurization uses the expansion
of the water content of the system to create a sufﬁcient
pressure in an expansion vessel to provide an anti-ﬂash
margin of, say, 17°C at the lowest pressure (highest point)
of the system. The main disadvantage of a naturally pres-
surized expansion vessel is the ability of water to absorb
air and the consequent risk of oxygen corrosion.

A diaphragm expansion vessel is divided into two com-
partments by a special membrane or diaphragm of rubber
or rubber composition, which prevents the water being
exposed to the air. On one side of the diaphragm, the ves-
sel is ﬁlled with air or nitrogen at the required pressure.

The other section of the vessel is connected directly to
the water system. A correctly positioned air separator will
assist in de-aerating the water in the system.

Pressurization of elevated header tanks
Given very careful attention to design, installation and
commissioning, MTHW systems may be operated with
the necessary system pressure provided by an elevated
feed and expansion tank. Where the system operating tem-
perature exceeds 110°C an expansion vessel should be
sized to absorb the volume of expansion for the complete
system, thus preventing water at operating temperatures
entering the feed and expansion tank and causing boiling.
On no account should an open vent be provided for this
type of system.

Gas pressurization with spill tank
This form consists of a pressure cylinder maintained partly
ﬁlled with water and partly with gas (usually nitrogen),
which is topped up from pressure bottles. Water expansion
is usually arranged to discharge from the system through a
pressure-control valve into a spill tank open to atmosphere
or to a closed cylinder lightly pressurized with nitrogen.
A pump is provided to take water from the spill tank
and return it under pressure to the system as cooling-
down results in a pressure drop. A system pressure sensor
regulates the pump operation.

Hydraulic pressurization with spill tank
In this form, a continuously running centrifugal pump
maintains the pressure. A second pump under the control
of a pressure switch is provided to come into operation at
a predetermined pressure differential and as an automatic
standby to the duty pump. Surplus water is delivered to or
taken from a spill tank or cylinder as described previously.

Example of pressure differential
Assume system ﬂow temperature of 120°C
Allow 17 K anti-ﬂash margin – 137°C
Corresponding absolute pressure
Assume static absolute pressure on system
Minimum absolute pressure at cylinder
Allow operating differential on pressure cylinder,
0.5 bar
say -
Minimum operating absolute pressure of system 5.9 bar

3.4 bar
2.0 bar
5.4 bar

Example of water expansion

200 000 liters

Assume water capacity of system
Assume ambient temperature of 10°C
Assume system maximum ﬂow temperature of 120°C
Assume system minimum return temperature of 65°C
Increase in volume from 10°C to 65°C
D 3916 liters
200, 000
Increase in volume from 65°C to 120°C
D 7931 liters
200, 000
Total increase in volume D 11847 liters

(cid:5)980.5 (cid:4) 943.1(cid:6)

(cid:5)999.7 (cid:4) 980.5(cid:6)

943.1

980.5

27.10.10 Maintenance of water heating systems

A common practice in many hot water heating instal-
lations is to drain the complete system during summer
months. This practice, involving a complete change of
raw water every year, is to be deprecated. It introduces
additional hardness salts and oxygen to the system, result-
ing in very signiﬁcant increases in scaling and corrosion.
Where it is necessary to drain the boiler or heat generator
or other parts of the system for inspection or maintenance
purposes, isolating valves or other arrangements should
be used to ensure that the section drained is kept to a
minimum.

27.10.11 Steam heating systems

These are designed to use the latent heat of steam at
the heat emitter. Control of heat output is generally by
variation of the steam saturation pressure within the emit-
ter. For heating applications with emitters in occupied
areas, low absolute pressures may be necessary in order
to reduce the saturation temperature to safe levels.

The presence of non-condensable gases in steam sys-
tems (e.g. air and CO2) will reduce the partial pressure of
the steam, and hence its temperature, thus affecting the
output of the appliance. A further adverse effect is the
presence of a non-condensable gas at the inside surface
of a heat emitter. These impede condensation and, hence,
heat output. It is therefore imperative that suitable means
are provided to prevent formation of CO2 and to evacuate
all gases from the system.

Superheat, which must be dissipated before condensa-
tion occurs, can be used to reduce condensation in the
distribution mains.

On–off control of steam systems can result in the for-
mation of a partial vacuum, leading to condensate locking

Heating systems 27/457

or back feeding, and inﬁltration of air, which subsequently
reduces the heat transfer.

When using modulating valves for steam, heat emitter
output must be based on the steam pressure downstream
of the valve, which often has a high-pressure drop across
it, even when fully open.

Steam traps must be sized to cope with the maximum
rate of condensation (which may be on start-up) but must
perform effectively over the whole operational range, min-
imizing the escape of live steam.

Partial waterlogging of heater batteries can lead to early
failure due to differential thermal expansion. Steam trap
selection should take account of this.

Where high temperatures are required (e.g. for pro-
cess work) and lower temperatures for space heating, it
is desirable to use ﬂash steam recovery from the high-
temperature condensate to feed into the low-temperature
system, augmented as required by reduced pressure live
steam.

Steam as a medium for heating is now seldom used. Hot
water, with its ﬂexibility to meet variable weather condi-
tions and its simplicity, has supplanted it in new com-
mercial buildings. Steam is, however, often used for the
heating of industrial buildings where steam-raising plant
occurs for process or other purposes. It is also employed
as a primary conveyor of heat to caloriﬁers such as in hos-
pitals, where again steam boiler plant may be required for
sundry duties such as in kitchens, laundry and for steriliz-
ing. Heating is then by hot water served from caloriﬁers.

27.10.12 High-temperature thermal ﬂuid
systems

Where high operating temperatures are required, high-
temperature thermal ﬂuid systems may be used instead of
pressurized water or steam systems. These systems oper-
ate at atmospheric pressure using non-toxic media such as
petroleum oil for temperatures up to 300°C or synthetic
chemical mixtures where temperatures in excess of this
are required (up to 400°C). Some advantages and disad-
vantages of thermal ﬂuid or heat transfer oil systems are
listed below.

Advantages

No corrosion problems.
Statutory inspections of boilers/pressure vessels not
required.
No scale deposits.
No need for frost protection of system.
Cost of heat exchangers/heat emitters less, as only atmo-
spheric pressures are involved.
Better energy efﬁciency than steam systems.
Operating temperature can be increased subsequent to
design without increasing operating pressure.

Disadvantages

Medium more expensive than water (but no treatment
costs).
Medium is ﬂammable under certain conditions.

27/458 Heating

Heat transfer coefﬁcient is inferior to that of water.
Care necessary in commissioning and in heat-up rates
due to viscosity changes in medium.
Circulating pump necessary (not required for steam sys-
tems).
Air must be excluded from the system.
In the event of leakage the medium presents more prob-
lems than water.

27.10.13 Warm air-heating systems

These may be provided with electric or indirect oil- or
gas-ﬁred heaters or with a hot water heater or steam
battery supplied from a central source. Because the radi-
ant heat output of warm-air systems is negligible, the
space air temperature will generally need to be higher for
equivalent comfort standards than for a system with some
radiant output. This will increase energy use, and legisla-
tive standards for limiting space temperatures should be
considered. Attention is drawn to the vertical tempera-
ture gradient with convective systems and, when used for
cellular accommodation, the likelihood of some spaces
being overheated due to the difﬁculty of controlling such
systems on a room-by-room basis.

27.10.14 Reducing the effect of temperature
stratiﬁcation

As with all convective systems, warm air heating
installations produce large temperature gradients in the
spaces they serve. This results in the inefﬁcient use of
heat and high heat losses from roofs and upper wall
areas. To improve the energy efﬁciency of warm air
systems, pendant-type punkah fans or similar devices may
be installed at roof level in the heated space. During the
operational hours of the heating system, these fans work
either continuously or under the control of a roof-level
thermostat and return the stratiﬁed warm air down to
occupied levels.

The energy effectiveness of

these fans should be
assessed, taking into account the cost of the electricity
used to operate them. The following factors should also
be borne in mind:

1. The necessary mounting height of fans to minimize

drafts;

2. The effect of the spacing of fans and the distance of

the impeller from the roof sofﬁt;

3. Any risk to occupants from stroboscopic effects of

blade movements;

4. The availability of multi- or variable-speed units.

Punkah fans may also be operated during summer
months to provide air movement and offer a measure of
convective cooling for occupants.

27.10.15 High-temperature high-velocity warm
air heating systems

These systems, best suited to heating large, single spaces,
may use indirect heating by gas or oil or direct gas

heating. Relatively small volumes of air are distributed
at high temperature (up to 235°C) and high velocity
(30–42.5 meters per second from heater unit) through
a system of well-insulated conventional ductwork. Air
outlets are in the form of truncated conical nozzles
discharging from the primary ductwork system into
purpose-designed diffuser ducts. The high-velocity dis-
charge induces large volumes of secondary air to boost the
outlet volume and reduces the outlet temperature deliv-
ered to the space, thereby reducing stratiﬁcation. Allow-
ing free movement absorbs most of the ductwork ther-
mal expansion and long, drop-rod hangers are used for
this purpose. Light, ﬂexible, axial-bellows with very low
thrust loads can also be employed where free expansion
movement is not possible. Specialist manufacturers gen-
erally handle system design and installation as a package
deal.

27.11 Heating equipment — attributes
and applications
27.11.1 Water system-heating equipment

The range of heat emitters may be divided into three
generic groups:

1. Radiant
2. Natural convective
3. Forced convective

Table 27.13 lists the principal types of appliance in each
group, together with descriptive notes. Typical emission
ranges are quoted for each type over its normal span of
working temperatures. These are intended as a guide only
and manufacturers’ catalogues should be consulted for
detailed performance values.

27.11.2 Electric heating equipment

Where electric heating equipment is installed within the
space to be heated the total electrical input is converted
into useful heat. There are two categories of electric heat-
ing equipment, direct acting and storage heating. The two
types of electric heating can be used independently or
to complement one another to meet particular heating
requirements. Table 27.14 gives a brief description of the
different types of electric heating.

27.11.3 Gas- and oil-ﬁred heating equipment

Where gas or oil appliances are used for heating and
installed within the heated space, between 70 per cent and
90 per cent of the total energy content of the fuel input will
be converted into useful heat. Table 27.15 gives particu-
lars of some gas-ﬁred equipment types and Table 27.16
gives similar details for some oil-ﬁred heaters. The ﬁrst
three types of equipment detailed in Table 27.15 and the
ﬁrst two in Table 27.16 are usually used for local warming
of individuals rather than to provide a particular temper-
ature throughout the space.

Table 27.13 Characteristics of water system heating equipment

Heating equipment – attributes and applications 27/459

Description

Advantages

Disadvantages

Emission range

Consists of steel tube or cast-iron
waterways attached to a radiating
surface. Back may be insulated to
reduce rear admission or may be
left open to give added convective
emission. Particularly useful for
spot heating and for areas having
high ventilation rates (e.g. loading
bays), the radiant component
giving a degree of comfort in
relatively low ambient air
temperatures.
Consists of one or more pipes
attached to an emissive radiant
surface. Is normally assembled in
long runs to maintain high water
ﬂow rates. The back may be
insulated to reduce rear emission.
When using steam, adequate
trapping is essential together with
good grading to ensure that tubes
are not ﬂooded. Multiple-tube
types should be fed in parallel to
avoid problems due to differential
expansion. Hanger lengths should
be sufﬁcient to allow for expansion
without lifting the ends of the strip.
Heating media may be steam, hot
water or hot oil.

Despite their name, 70% of the
emission from these devices is
convective. Three basic types are
available; column, panel, and high
output, the last incorporating
convective attachments to increase
emission. Panel radiators offer the
least projection from the wall but
emission is higher from column
and high-output units.

In application they should be set
below windows to offset the major
source of heat loss and minimize
cold down-drafts.
Compact units with high emissions.
Often ﬁtted with damper to reduce
output when full emission not
required, usually to about 30% of
full output. Heat exchangers
normally ﬁnned tube. Units may be
built into wall of building.

No moving parts, hence
little maintenance
required; may be
mounted at considerable
height or, in
low-temperature
applications, set ﬂush
into building structure.

Slow response to
control; must be
mounted high enough to
avoid local high
intensities of radiation
(e.g. onto head).

350 W/m2 to
15 kW/m2 of
which up to
60% may be
radiant.

No moving parts, hence
little maintenance
required; may be
mounted at considerable
height or, in
low-temperature
applications, set ﬂush
into building structure.

Slow response to
control; must be
mounted high enough to
avoid local high enough
to avoid local high
intensities of radiation
(e.g. onto head).

150 W/m to
5 W/m of
which radiant
emission may
be up to 65%
of total.

Cheap to install; little
maintenance required.

May be used on
high-temperature hot
water or low-pressure
steam without casing
temperature becoming
dangerously high: fairly
rapid response to
control.
Take up relatively little
space; give even
distribution of heat in
room. May be used with
medium-temperature hot
water or low-pressure
steam without casing
temperatures

Fairly slow response to
control. With steel panel
radiators there is a risk
of corrosive attack in
areas having aggressive
water, which may be
accentuated by copper
swarf left in the radiator.
This leads to rapid
failure unless a suitable
inhibitor is used. Not
suitable for
high-temperature water
or steam.

Take up more ﬂoor
space than radiators.
Likelihood of fairly
high-temperature
gradients when using
high-temperature heating
media.

May produce large
temperatures gradients
on high-temperature
heating media if poorly
sited.

450–750 W/m2.

200 W to
20 kW.

500 W/m to
4 kW/m.

(continued overleaf )

Type

Radiant
Radiant panel

Radiant strip

Natural convective
Radiators

Natural convectors

Continuous convectors Comprise single-or double-ﬁnned

tube high-output emitters in
factory-made sill-height sheet
metal casings or builders’ work
enclosures which may be designed
to ﬁt wall to wall. Can be ﬁtted
with local output damper control,
which reduces the emission to

27/460 Heating

Table 27.13 (continued)

Type

Description

Advantages

Disadvantages

Emission range

approximately 30% of the full
output. They should be placed at
the point of maximum heat loss,
usually under windows. The wall
behind the unit should be well
insulated.

For long-run applications
distribution of ﬂow water must be
provided to modular sections of the
unit to ensure that input remains
reasonably consistent over full
length of unit. For builders’ work
casings inlet and outlet apertures
must have the free-area
requirement stipulated by the
manufacturer.
Finned-tube emitters in a single or
double skirting height sheet metal
casing, usually with provision for a
return pipe within the casing.
Applications and distribution of
ﬂow water similar to continuous
convectors.

These units give a high heat output
for volume of space occupied by
the unit, together with the ability to
distribute the heat over a
considerable area using directional
grilles.

May be used to bring in heated
fresh air for room ventilation.

Leaving air temperatures should be
above 35°C to avoid cold drafts.
Where mixed systems of radiators
and fan convectors are installed it
is advisable to supply fan-assisted
units on a separate
constant-temperature circuit to
avoid the above problems. To
minimize stratiﬁcation, leaving air
temperature above 50°C should be
avoided.

Must not be used on single-pipe
systems. Care must be taken at
design stage to avoid unacceptable
noise levels.

Control by speed variation or
on/off regulation of fan.
A unit with a large propeller or
centrifugal fan to give high air
volume and wide throws. Louvers
direct the air ﬂow in the direction
required. May be ceiling mounted,
discharging vertically or
horizontally or ﬂoor mounted. Can
be used with fresh air

Skirting heating

Forced convective
Far convectors

Unit heaters

becoming dangerously
high. Return pipework
may be concealed within
casing.

May be used on water
or low-pressure steam.
Give low-temperature
gradients in the room.
All pipework concealed.

Relatively low output
per metre of wall. More
work involved when
installing in existing
building as existing
skirting has to be
removed.

300 W/m to
1.3 kW/m.

Electric supply required
to each individual unit.

2 to 25 kW.

Rapid response to
control by individual
thermostat. By use of
variable speed motors
rapid warm-up available
in intermittent systems;
ﬁltered fresh air inlet
facility.

Electric supply required
for each individual unit.

3 to 300 kW.

Rapid response to
control by individual
thermostat; by use of
multi-speed motors
rapid warm-up available
on intermittent systems;
ﬁltered fresh air inlet
facility.

Table 27.13 (continued)

Type

Description

Advantages

Disadvantages

Emission range

Heating equipment – attributes and applications 27/461

supply to ventilate buildings. Large
units may be mounted at a
considerable height above the ﬂoor
to clear traveling cranes, etc. May
be used with steam or hot water
but care should be taken to restrict
leaving air temperature, usually
40–55°C to avoid reduction of
downward throw and large
temperature gradients in the
building. The air ﬂow from the
units should be directed towards
the points of maximum heat loss.
Control as for fan convectors.

Table 27.14 Electric heating equipment

Description

Advantages

Disadvantages

Emission range

Fast response time.
Little regular
maintenance required.
May be mounted at
considerable height.

Must be mounted
sufﬁciently high to
avoid local high
intensities of radiation
(e.g. onto head).

0.5 to 6 kW
per heater.

Quartz lamp heaters
have improved beam
accuracy allowing
higher mounting heights.
Especially suitable for
spaces with high air
movement.
No regular maintenance
required. Set ﬂush into
building structure and
unobtrusive.

Slow response time.

Up to
200 W/m2.

No regular maintenance
required.

Not intermittent.
Limited control of heat
charging and output.

Storage
element sizes
1.4 to 3.4 kW.

No regular maintenance
required. Cheap to
install. Suitable for low
heat loss applications.
Fast response time for
intermittent operation.

High surface
temperatures.
High-temperature
gradients if poorly sited.

0.5 to 3 kW
output.

(continued overleaf )

Type

Radiant
High-intensity
radiant heaters

Consist of high-temperature
elements mounted in front of
polished reﬂector.

Element can be silica or metal
sheathed wire (up to 900°C) or
quartz lamp (up to 2200°C)

Low-temperature
radiant panels

Consist of low-temperature
elements (300°C and below)
mounted behind a radiating surface.

Natural
convective
Storage heater

Panel heaters,
convectors or
skirting heaters

Thermal insulation behind the
elements minimizes heat loss. Very
low-temperature elements (cid:5)40°C(cid:6)
used in ceiling heating applications.

Consists of a thermal storage
medium which is heated during
off-peak electricity periods. A
casing and insulation around the
medium enables the heat to be
gradually released throughout the
day. Manual or automatic damper
control allows 20% of heat output
to be controlled.
Consist of a heating element within
a steel casing with air grilles
allowing the natural convection of
air across the element. Generally
controlled by an integral room
thermostat.

27/462 Heating

Table 27.14 (continued)

Type

Description

Advantages

Disadvantages

Emission range

Forced
convective
Storage fan
heaters/electricaire

Fan convectors

Downﬂow fan
convectors

These storage heaters have
increased core thermal insulation
and contain a fan which distributes
warm air to the space to be heated.
The fan is usually controlled by a
room thermostat. Storage fan
heaters are single room units but
can heat an adjacent room with a
stub duct. Electricaire units are
larger and can be ducted to servce
several areas. Up to 80%
controllable heat.
These wall-mounted or
free-standing units incorporate a
fan which forces air over the
heating elements into the space.
High output rate relative to size.
Can incorporate integral room
thermostat control

These units are forced air
convectors mounted to direct the
heated air downwards. High air
ﬂow and heat output. Often used to
provide a hot air curtain over
entranced doorways.

Use off-peak electricity.
Suitable for intermittent
operation.

Heavyweight.

For storage
heaters: 3 to
6 kW.

Electricaire 6
to 15 kW.

Industrial
models up to
100 kW.

2 to 3 kW.

Low maintenance. Fast
response. Accurate
temperature control.
Suitable for highly
intermittent heating
applications. Low
surface temperatures.
Fan-only operation for
summer use.
Suitable for localized
heating.

Can be noisy.

3 to 18 kW.

Table 27.15 Direct gas-ﬁred heating equipment

Type of heater

Usual rating

(kW)

Surface

temperature (cid:5)°C(cid:6)

Flue system

Notes

Radiant convector gas
Overhead radiant heaters
Overhead tubular radiant

4.4–7.3
3.1–41
10–15

1100 at radiant tips
850–900
315 mean

Convector heaters

2.5–16.7

Fan convectors

Make-up air heatersb
Unit air heatersb

1.4–3.7

49–250
17–350

–

–

–
–

Conventional
Fluelessa
Conventional or
fan-assisted ﬂue
or ﬂue or
ﬂue-lessa
Convectional or
balanced ﬂue or
ﬂuelessa
Balanced ﬂue or
fan-assisted ﬂue
Fluelessa
Flued or ﬂuelessa

Wall mounted or at low level
High level or ceiling mounted
High level or ceiling mounted

Wall mounted or at low level

Wall mounted or at low level

Mounted at high level and fan assisted
Mounted at high level and fan assisted

aThe use of ﬂueless appliances should be discouraged, since they discharge much moisture into the heated spaced.
bThe installation of ﬂueless appliances in excess of 44 kW is not permitted by the Building Regulation (1985) and application should be
made to the local authority for the necessary waiver where installations of this size are contemplated.

Acknowledgement
The author wishes to thank the Chartered Institute of
Building Services Engineers for permission to reproduce
data from the Heating and Plant Capacity Sections of the

CIBSE Guide (Figure. A9.3, Tables A9.10, A9.11, B1.3,
B1.12, B1.13, B1.27, B1.15, B1.16, B1.23, B1.24, B.125,
B1.26) and Formecon Services Limited for their kind per-
mission to reproduce data from The Businessman’s Energy
Saver data book (Tables 1–3).

Acknowledgement 27/463

Table 27.16 Direct oil-ﬁred heating equipment

Type of heater

Usual rating

(kW)

Surface

temperature (cid:5)°C(cid:6)

Flue system

Notes

Radiant kerosene heaters
Flued radiant convector heaters
Convective kerosene heaters
Air heaters
Blown air heaters
Warm air heaters
Make-up air heaters

1.5

8.5–10.9

1–4

8.5–13.5
10.7–16.7
50–450
90–450

Less than 121b
Less than 121b
Less than 121b
Less than 121b
Less than 121b
Maximum 60c
Maximum 60c

Fluelessa
Conventional
Fluelessa
Conventional
Conventional
Flued
Flued

Mounted at low of ﬂoor level
Mounted at low of ﬂoor level
Mounted at low of ﬂoor level
Mounted at low of ﬂoor level
Mounted at low of ﬂoor level
Floor mounted or overhead
Can be ﬂueless
Floor or overhead mounted

aThe use of ﬂueless appliances should be discouraged since they discharge much moisture into the heated space.
bSee BS 799.
cSee BS 4256.

28/465

28/469

28

Ventilation

P D Compton
Colt International Limited

Contents

28.1 Introduction

28/467

28.1.1 Reasons for ventilation
28.1.2 Deﬁnitions

28/467

28/467

28.2 Ventilation systems and controls

28/467

28.2.1 Natural ventilation
28.2.2 Powered (mechanical) ventilation
28/470

28.3 Powered ventilation equipment

28/467

28/471

28.3.1 Fans 28/470
28.3.2 Roof extract units
28.3.3 Roof inlet units
28.3.4 Ducted systems
28.3.5 Local extract systems 28/471
28.3.6 Air cleaners 28/472
28.4 Natural ventilation equipment

28/471
28/471

28/473

28.4.1 Fixed ventilation
28.4.2 Controllable ventilation

28/473

28/473

28.5 System design

28/475

28/476

28/475

28.5.1 Overheating
28.5.2 Fume dilution
28.5.3 Prevention of condensation
28.5.4 Local extract 28/477
28.5.5 Smoke ventilation
28/478

28/477

28.6.1 Commissioning and testing
28.6.2 Maintenance
28.6.3 Running costs

28/4796

28/479

28.6 After installation

28/476

28/478

28.1 Introduction
Any building, even with all windows and doors shut, will
have a degree of ventilation (referred to as natural inﬁl-
tration) by virtue of pressure differences across cracks or
permeable materials in the structure causing air to ﬂow
through the structure. The degree of inﬁltration is governed
by the quality of design and builds of the structure and by
the pressures generated by wind and thermal buoyancy.

This fortuitous inﬁltration is essential

in otherwise
unventilated buildings, since it allows ingress of air
providing oxygen for us to breathe and for combustion
equipment to burn. The inﬁltration is, however, effectively
uncontrolled, and is often insufﬁcient
in quantity, at
the wrong temperature or too contaminated to maintain
satisfactory internal environmental conditions.

We must therefore be able to deﬁne the conditions we
need and to design, install and operate systems to provide
them. These systems cover three main areas: heating, ven-
tilation and air conditioning. Heating and air conditioning
are dealt with in Chapters 27 and 29. This chapter cov-
ers ventilation systems, deﬁned as systems providing air
movement through a space without artiﬁcially heating or
cooling the air. It must be said, however, that, in practice,
there is often a large degree of overlap, since ofﬁce ven-
tilation systems often provide heating in winter and com-
plex ducted ventilation systems share much equipment
and design procedures with air-conditioning systems.

This chapter is intended to provide guidance towards
deﬁning needs, assessing whether ventilation is the correct
solution and selecting equipment and systems to match
these requirements in as economic a manner as possible.

28.1.1 Reasons for ventilation

Ventilation is used to maintain a satisfactory environment
within enclosed spaces. The environmental criteria con-
trolled may be:

Temperature: Relief from overheating
Humidity: Prevention of condensation or fogging
Odor: Dilution of odor from smoking, body odor, pro-
cesses, etc.
Contamination: Dilution or removal of dangerous or
unpleasant fumes and dust

The required values for these criteria will depend upon
the reason the space is being ventilated. It may be for the
beneﬁt of people, processes, equipment, materials, live-
stock, horticulture, building preservation or any combina-
tion of these. CIBSE1 and ASHRAE4. provide guidance
on selection of these values.

28.1.2 Deﬁnitions

Ventilation systems and controls 28/467

Coefﬁcient (entry or discharge): The ratio of aerody-
namic (effective) area to the measured area of an open-
ing. The value for a square-edged hole of 0.61 is used
for most building openings.
Capture velocity: The air velocity needed to capture
a contaminant at source, overcoming any opposing air
currents.
Automatic ﬁre ventilation: See Smoke ventilation.
Dilution ventilation: A ventilation strategy whereby con-
taminants are allowed to escape into the ventilated space
and are then diluted to an acceptable level by means of
the ventilation system.
Industrial ventilation: A term used to cover any ventila-
tion system designed to remove contaminants. Its use is
sometimes restricted to local extract systems.
Inﬁltration: Movement of air through a space with no
speciﬁc ventilation openings by natural forces.
Local extract: A ventilation strategy whereby heat, steam
or contaminants are captured at source and ducted to
discharge outside the space.
Maximum Exposure Limit (MEL): Maximum limits of
concentration of airborne toxic contaminants, listed by
the Health and Safety Executive18 which must not be
exceeded.
Mechanical ventilation: See Powered ventilation.
Natural ventilation: A ventilation system in which
air movement
is produced through purpose-designed
openings by natural forces (wind and thermal buoyancy).
Occupational Exposure Standards (OES): Limits of con-
centration of airborne toxic contaminants, listed by the
Health and Safety Executive18 which are regarded as safe
for prolonged exposure for 8 hours per day.
Powered ventilation: A ventilation system in which air
movement
is induced by mechanical means, almost
invariably a fan.
Smoke logging: The ﬁlling of a space with smoke in the
event of ﬁre.
Smoke ventilation: A ventilation system designed to
remove smoke and heat in the event of ﬁre to prevent or
delay smoke logging allowing personnel to escape and
ﬁreﬁghters to attack the ﬁre.
Spot cooling: A ventilation strategy whereby the space
temperature is allowed to rise and air movement
is
induced locally to provide comfort conditions within a
limited area.
Threshold Limit Value (TLV): Maximum values of
concentrations of airborne toxic contaminants, listed by
the American Conference of Governmental Industrial
Hygienists5 (ACGIH), regarded to be safe for 8 hours
per day exposure.
Transport velocity: The air velocity required in a duct
to transport a contaminant without
it falling out of
suspension.

Aerodynamic area: The effective theoretical open area
of an opening. It is related to the measured area by the
coefﬁcient of entry or discharge (Cd).
Air-handling unit: A self-contained package incorporat-
ing all equipment needed to move and treat air, requiring
only connection to ductwork and services to provide a
complete ventilation system.

28.2 Ventilation systems and controls
28.2.1 Natural ventilation
How natural ventilation works
Natural ventilation operates by means of airﬂows gen-
erated by pressure differences across the fabric of the

28/468 Ventilation

building. Airﬂow will occur wherever there is a crack,
hole or porous surface and a pressure difference.

For the relatively large openings in which we are inter-
ested, the ﬂow rate can be found from the velocity of
airﬂow generated through the aerodynamic area of the
opening from the formula:

(cid:1)

V D

2P

(cid:5)

Where:
V D velocity (m/s),
 D pressure difference (Pa),
(cid:5) D density (kg/m3).
Then ﬂow rate:
˙V D ACdV
Where:
˙V D volumetric ﬂow rate (m3/s),
A D measured area of opening (m2),
Cd D coefﬁcient of opening.

(28.1)

(28.2)

For purpose-built ventilators the manufacturer will be
able to provide values of Cd. For other openings it is
conventional to use the value for a sharp-edged square
oriﬁce of 0.61.

The pressure can be generated by three mechanisms:

1. Powered ventilation equipment (see equation (28.3));
2. Buoyancy (temperature difference);
3. Wind.

In still air conditions, the source of pressure difference
to drive ventilation is buoyancy due to the decrease in
density of heated air. In any occupied building, there will
be a higher temperature inside than outside due to heat
gains from people, plant and solar radiation. The lighter
heated air will try to rise, causing an increase in internal
pressure at high level and a reduction at low level with
a neutral plane between the two conditions. Any open-
ing above the neutral plane will therefore exhaust air and
any opening below the neutral plane will provide inlet
air. Under steady heat load conditions, a balance will be
achieved with a throughput of air dependent upon the heat
load and the size and location of the openings. Conditions
at this balance point can be readily calculated using one
of the following formula:
For more than one opening (inlets all at one height,
exhausts all at one height)

(cid:2)

For a single opening

˙V D AeCe
(cid:2)

˙V D ACd
3

2gHt

T

ght

T

(28.3)

(28.4)

where

g D acceleration due to gravity (m/s2),

outlet openings (m),

H D height between center lines of inlet and
t D temperature difference between inside and
T D average of inside and outside temperatures
h D height of single opening (m),

outside (°C),

(absolute) (K),

CeAe D overall effective opening size calculated
1

from
1

1

(cid:12)CvAv(cid:13)2

(cid:12)CiAi(cid:13)2
(subscript i denotes inlet opening, subscript
v exhaust opening).

D

(cid:12)CeAe(cid:13)2

C

Under wind conditions, a complex system of pressures
is set up on the external surfaces of the building, which
will vary with wind speed and direction. Pressure coef-
ﬁcients Cp6,7 deﬁne the relationship according to the
formula:
˙V D AeCeUr

(cid:12)Cp(cid:13)

(cid:3)

(28.5)

where

Cp D difference between coefﬁcients

Ur D reference wind speed,
at ventilation openings.

The coefﬁcients Cp will vary across each surface of
the building and, except for very simple shapes, can only
be found by model or full-scale test. Since the coefﬁcients
will change with wind direction, complete calculation of
wind-induced ventilation is very unwieldy, needing com-
puter analysis.

When both wind and temperature difference act on
ventilation openings, the result is very complex, but a rea-
sonable approximation of ﬂow rate is made by taking the
higher of the two individual ﬂow rates. This means that
we can, for ventilation design purposes, generally ignore
wind effects and design on temperature difference only,
since wind effects can be assumed only to increase the
ventilation rate.

Advantages and disadvantages

Advantages
Quiet
Virtually no running cost
Self-regulation (ﬂow rate

Disadvantages
Variable ﬂow rate and

direction dependent upon
wind conditions

increases with heat load) Filtration is generally

Low maintenance cost
Provides daylight when

open (roof vent)

Psychological appeal of
clear sky (roof vent)

Easy installation

impractical

Limited ducting can be

tolerated

Effectiveness depends on
height and temperature
difference

When to use natural ventilation

Natural ventilation is used in a number of situations:

1. Shallow-plan ofﬁces – by opening windows to remove

heat and odor;

2. Large single-story spaces (factories, warehouses, sports
halls, etc.) – by roof and wall ventilators – to remove
heat, contaminants, smoke, steam;

3. Plant rooms.

It is not suitable in situations where:

1. Dust, toxic or noxious contaminants must be removed

at source;

2. Unfavorable external conditions exist requiring treat-

ment to incoming air – e.g. noise, dust, pollution;

3. A steady controlled ﬂow rate is required – e.g. hospi-

tals, commercial kitchens;

4. Existing mechanical ventilation will affect the ﬂow

5. Abnormal wind effects can be anticipated due to sur-

rounding higher buildings;

6. The space is enclosed to have no suitable source of

adversely;

inlet air.

In many of
these situations, a system of natural
inlet/powered exhaust or powered inlet/natural exhaust
will be the best option.

Control

Low-level ventilation openings, whether windows, doors
or ventilators, are generally manually operated for
simplicity and economy, allowing personnel to control
their own environment. High-level openings can also be
manually controlled by means of rod or cable operation,
although this has generally lost favor (except in the case
of simple windows) and automatic operation is preferred.
Automatic operation may be by means of compressed
air, operating a pneumatic cylinder, or electricity. Pneu-
matics is generally favored for industrial applications and
electricity for commercial premises. Economy of installa-
tion is normally the deciding factor, since running costs
are low for either system.

Automatic control allows a number of options to be
considered to provide the best form of control for the
circumstances. Generally, available controls offer the fol-
lowing features:

1. Local control by personnel;
2. Automaticthermostaticcontrol(singleormultiplestage);
3. Fire override to open ventilators automatically by
means of a connection to the ﬁre-detection system
or ﬁreman’s switch. This normally overrides all other
control settings;

4. Timeswitch control to shut ventilators during unoccu-

5. Weather override to close ventilators during rain or

pied periods;

snow;

6. Wind override to shut high-level exhaust ventilators on
windward walls (mainly used for smoke ventilation).

28.2.2 Powered (mechanical) ventilation

How powered ventilation works9
By deﬁnition, a powered ventilation system includes a
mechanical means of inducing airﬂow using an external

Ventilation systems and controls 28/469

power source. This is invariably an electrically driven fan.
When a fan blade rotates it does work on the air around
it, creating both a static pressure increase (Ps) and an
airﬂow across the fan. The airﬂow has a velocity pressure
associated with it, deﬁned as Pv D 1/2(cid:5)V2 and the fan
can be described as producing a total pressure PT D Ps C
PV. The pressure generated is used to overcome pressure
losses (resistances) within the ventilation system.

Each fan has a unique set of characteristics which are
normally deﬁned by means of a fan curve produced by
the manufacturer which speciﬁes the relationship between
airﬂow, pressure generation, power input, efﬁciency and
noise level (see Figure 28.1). For geometrically similar
fans, the performance can be predicted for other sizes,
speeds, gas densities, etc. from one fan curve using the
fan laws set out below.

For a given size of fan and ﬂuid density:

PV1PV2

P1
P2

W1
W2

1.

2.

3.

D N1
(cid:4)
N2
(cid:4)

D

N1
N2

D

N1
N2

Volume ﬂow is directly proportio-
nal to fan speed
Total pressure and static pressure
are directly proportional to the
square of the fan speed

(cid:5)2
(cid:5)2 Air power and impeller powers

are directly proportional to the
cube of the fan speed

For changes in density:

4.

P1
P2

D W1
W2

(cid:5)1
(cid:5)2

Pressure and power are directly
proportional to density and there-
fore for a given gas are inversely
proportional to absolute temperature

For geometrically similar fans operating at constant speed
and efﬁciency with constant ﬂuid density:

kW
7.0
6.5
6.0
5.5
100

80%

h
60

40

20

e
r
u
s
s
e
r
p
n
a
F

 

500

400

300

200

100

W

Ps

PT

PV

h

PV

4

8

12
m3/s

16

20

Figure 28.1 Typical fan curve for an axial fan

28/470 Ventilation

PV1PV2

P1
P2

W1
W

5.

6.

7.

D

D

D

(cid:4)
(cid:4)
(cid:4)

D1
D2
D1
D2

(cid:5)3 Volume ﬂow is directly proportio-
(cid:5)2
(cid:5)5 Air power and impeller powers

nal to the cube of fan size
Total pressure and static pressure
are directly proportional to the
square of fan size

are directly proportional to the
ﬁfth power of fan size

D1
D2

where
˙V D volumetric ﬂow (m3/s),
P D pressure (kN/m2),
W D power (W),
D D size parameter (diameter) (mm).
In passing through the fans gases are compressed
slightly due to the increase in pressure. For absolute
accuracy note should be taken of
this effect using
the gas compressibility factor which will affect ﬂow
rate, static and total pressure and power. However, in
most fan systems the effect
is very small, since the
pressure increase through the fan is insigniﬁcant compared
to atmospheric pressure. By convention, compressibility
effects are therefore normally ignored.

Since the pressure generated by most fans is far in
excess of pressure differences due to buoyancy and
wind, the performance of a powered ventilation system
is effectively independent of
these, and ﬂow rates
and directions can be conﬁdently predicted and will
be constant regardless of conditions. The high-pressure
generation also allows resistive components such as heater
batteries, ﬁlters and attenuators to be used within the
system.

Advantages and disadvantages

Advantages
Weatherproof
Predictable constant
performance
Air treatment can be
incorporated
Fresh air can be delivered
at optimum volume,
velocity and temperature

Disadvantages
Fixed air ﬂow – not self-
regulating
Running costs (electrical
and maintenance)
Noise

When to use powered ventilation

Powered ventilation is essential in some instances:

1. Local extract;
2. When pre-treatment of incoming air is required;
3. When a steady controlled airﬂow is required;
4. When there are no suitable external walls or roof for

natural ventilation;

5. In deep-plan ofﬁces or large industrial spaces to pro-

vide positive air movement in central zones.

It can also be used in any situation where natural ven-
tilation is suitable, generally becoming more economic

as the roof height lowers, subject to noise levels being
acceptable.

Control

A starter or contactor with manual push-button or
thermostatic operation to start and stop the fan normally
controls simple systems. More complex systems that
incorporate components that need control or monitoring
are normally operated from purpose-built central control
panels. The most common functions provided are fan
motor stop, start and speed control, damper control,
ﬁlter-condition indication and heater battery control. For
optimum control,
the system should be automatically
controlled from thermostats or other sensors and a
timeswitch.

28.3 Powered ventilation equipment
This falls into two basic groupings: supply air systems
and extract systems. The equipment used for both is sim-
ilar, comprising, as a minimum, a fan and weatherproof
cowl, plus ducting, air-treatment equipment and grilles as
required.

28.3.1 Fans
Five main types of fan are used in ventilation systems as
described below.

Centrifugal
In this type, air enters the impeller axially and is dis-
charged radially into a volute casing. The airﬂow there-
fore changes direction through 90°, which can make this
type of fan difﬁcult to use within a ducted system. Two
blade types are used; backward curved providing high-
pressure at low volume ﬂow and forward curved providing
medium-pressure and volume ﬂow. Typical static efﬁcien-
cies are 70–75 per cent and 80–85 per cent, respectively.

Axial
Air enters and leaves the fan axially giving a straight-
through conﬁguration. Duties are usually high-
to
medium-volume ﬂow rates at medium to low pressures.
In its simplest form there is an impeller and its drive
motor only mounted within the cylindrical casing, and
the discharge ﬂow usually contains a fairly pronounced
element of rotational swirl which may, if not corrected,
materially increase the resistance of the downstream part
of the system. More sophisticated versions include either
downstream or upstream guide vanes to correct the swirl.
Typical static efﬁciencies are 60–65 per cent or 70–75
per cent with guide vanes.

Propeller

This is really a simple form of axial fan but with its
impeller mounted in a ring or diaphragm which permits
it to discharge air with both axial and radial components.
Duties covered are high volume and low pressure. Static
efﬁciency is normally under 40 per cent.

Mixed ﬂow

A fan in which the air path through the impeller is inter-
mediate between the axial and centrifugal types giving the
beneﬁt of increased pressures but capable of being con-
structed to provide either axial or radial discharge. Static
efﬁciency is typically 70–75 per cent.

Cross ﬂow

This type normally has a long cylindrical impeller hav-
ing a relatively large number of shallow forward-curved
blades. Due to the shape of the casing surrounding this
impeller, air enters all along one side of the cylindrical
surface of the impeller and leaves on another side. Static
efﬁciency is typically 40–50 per cent.

In general, axial fans are used for roof extract units,
small-ducted systems, and centrifugal fans for large-
ducted systems.

28.3.2 Roof extract units

These are the most commonly used powered ventilators
in large open buildings such as factories, warehouses and
sports halls. Mounted directly onto the roof or wall, they
comprise an axial fan, a safety grille and a weatherproof
casing. Two forms are normally available, the vertical-
discharge type which tends to have a complex casing
arrangement but which throws the exhaust clear of the
building, and the low-discharge type, which has a simple
casing but directs the exhaust onto the roof of the build-
ing. Vertical discharge is essential when smoke or fumes
are being exhausted (Figures 28.2 and 28.3).

These ventilators can normally be used with limited
ducting or accessories. A variation, ﬁtted with a centrifu-
gal fan, is available for more extensive ducting and is
often used for duties such as toilet extract in commercial
buildings.

Figure 28.2 Vertical discharge powered roof ventilator

Powered ventilation equipment 28/471

Figure 28.3 Low discharge powered roof ventilator

28.3.3 Roof inlet units

This specialized form of supply air system is often used
in large open industrial spaces. It comprises a modular
system of components that can be built up into simple
systems. A typical system might have a roof inlet cowl,
a recirculation damper, a heater battery, a fan, one or
two outlet grilles and short sections of connecting duct-
work, and would handle airﬂows up to 3–4 m3/s, depend-
ing on size. A number of individual systems would be
used to provide the total airﬂow required in the space
(Figure 28.4). Systems are normally manufactured with
aluminum casings to reduce the roof load.

28.3.4 Ducted systems10,11
Larger ducted ventilation systems, as used in ofﬁces and
commercial premises using a central air-handling unit
and fabricated distribution ductwork, are akin to air-
conditioning systems but with less treatment to the air
at the AHU (see Chapter 29).

28.3.5 Local extract systems12
Local extract systems are designed speciﬁcally to remove
fumes, dust, mists, heat, etc. at source from machinery
and fume cupboards. The main design considerations are
capture of the contaminant, which will normally involve
special hoods or cabins, and extract at sufﬁcient velocity

28/472 Ventilation

Figure 28.4 Roof inlet system

to satisfactorily transport the contaminant. Ductwork must
be manufactured to resist abrasion or corrosion and sufﬁ-
ciently well sealed to prevent leakage. Welded ductwork
is often needed. The fan may also need protection and
the motor may need to be ﬂameproof or out of air stream
if the contaminant is ﬂammable or corrosive. Treatment
of the exhaust may be required to reduce pollution and
nuisance and to comply with legislation.

28.3.6 Air cleaners

A wide range of types of air cleaners is available to match
the number of contaminants needing removal from air.
Figure 28.5 shows typical particle size ranges and the
range of operation of each type of air cleaner.

Filters

Filters are a type of air cleaner in which a membrane of
some kind is placed across the duct so that all airﬂow has
to pass through it. In passing through, the particles can be
separated.

There are three main types of ﬁlter: viscous, dry and
HEPA. Viscous ﬁlters are normally a coarse weave of
glass, plastic or metal strands coated with oil. As the
air passes through the ﬁlter, particles impact against the
material and are held in the oil. The panels are normally
washable and can be re-used after re-oiling. Viscous ﬁlters
provide good general ﬁltration for air inlet to buildings.
Dry ﬁlters are normally a ﬁner-weave fabric or ﬁbrous
material and will separate smaller particles than viscous
ﬁlters, typically down to 0.5 µm. They may be thrown
away or washed when dirty, depending upon type.

HEPA (or absolute) ﬁlters provide the greatest degree of
air cleaning. These ﬁlters, which are akin to paper or felt,
will capture particles down to 0.01 µm with efﬁciencies of
up to 99.995 per cent. They are generally used for clean
room applications and are expensive.

0.01

0.1

Particle size (µm)
1
100

10

1000 10 000

Solids

Liquid

Organic

Smoke

Fume

Dust

Grit

Fog Mist

Rain

Virus Tobacco Bacteria Pollen

smoke

HEPA filters

Electrostatic

Dry filters

Viscous filters

Cyclones

s
t

n
a
n
m
a

i

t

n
o
C

s
r
e
n
a
e
C

l

Figure 28.5 Typical particle sizes

If a high degree of ﬁltration is required it is normal
practice to have several grades of ﬁlter in series so that
the coarser, cheaper ﬁlters can take most of the dust load,
extending the life of the more expensive ﬁlters. Filters
add a high resistance to the ducting system, increasing
the energy use and running cost of the system, and they
require regular maintenance.

Electrostatic precipitators

In these devices,
the incoming air is passed through
an ionizer that gives each particle a positive charge
(C6000 V) and then through a collector that has a negative
charge ((cid:4)6000 V). The positively charged particles are

attracted to the collector walls. Regular washing is
required to remove the collected particles.

Very small particles can be collected but large ones
(above 5 µm) can cause arcing across
the narrow
gap between collector plates. A coarse ﬁlter should
ﬁrst remove these large particles. Precipitators are not
normally suitable for wet environments since excessive
moisture can cause electrical
tracking and failure.
Resistance to airﬂow is negligible.

Activated carbon ﬁlters

These are used to provide adsorption of gases and vapors,
most commonly to remove odors from extracts from
kitchens or industrial processes. An efﬁciency of 95 per
cent is obtainable and the carbon has a long life since
heating can reactivate it.

Cyclones

A vortex is generated by the high-velocity tangential inlet
airﬂow in these dynamic setting chambers. Centrifugal
force holds particles close to the wall where they col-
lect and drain down if wet or spiral down if dry. The
contaminant is collected at the bottom and the cleaned
air is exhausted through the top. They range in size from
small 200-mm diameter units used to collect oil mist from
machinery to the large units seen outside paper and wood-
working factories.

28.4 Natural ventilation equipment
The natural ventilation equipment commercially available
can be split into two basic groups, ﬁxed and controllable.
The ﬁxed ventilation, normally a weathered louver sys-
tem, is used in applications where ventilation is constantly
needed, winter and summer, with no need for control
to maintain human comfort conditions. Typical examples
are plant rooms and building block drying rooms. Lou-
ver systems are also often used for inlet or exhaust to
powered ventilation or air-conditioning systems and for
architectural cladding. A number of years ago, before
energy efﬁciency became important, many factories had
uncontrollable ridge vents of various types, but most have
now been replaced. Controllable ventilation, which may
be weatherproof if required, is used in buildings which
are normally occupied and where waste process heat is
not sufﬁcient to heat a ventilated building in winter (i.e.
most buildings).

28.4.1 Fixed ventilation

Natural ventilation equipment 28/473

Figure 28.6 Fixed louver system

With all louvers, there is a balance between their weath-
erprooﬁng qualities and their airﬂow, and it is impor-
tant to select a louver with the correct balance for each
application. No louver can be guaranteed to be 100 per
cent waterproof under all conditions, but the best ones
approach this standard under normal ﬂow and wind con-
ditions.

Louvers can be supplied in various materials and ﬁn-
ishes, the most common being anodized or painted alu-
minum, since this provides good corrosion resistance and
light weight. Other options are galvanized steel or, for
more rigorous conditions, stainless steel.

Most louver systems have a pitch between 30 mm and
100 mm. Where noise control is required, louvers can be
supplied either in the form of acoustic louver with a pitch
of 300 mm and acoustic material in the louver blade or
as standard louver with an attenuator section behind it. A
bird or insect guard (as applicable) is normally mounted
behind the louver.

Fixed ventilation has to be weatherproof to some degree.
If it were not, then a simple hole in the wall or roof
would be sufﬁcient. The normal form of ﬁxed ventilator
is the louver panel. At its simplest, this may be a number
of slats of wood mounted at 45–60° in a door or wall
opening, and at its most sophisticated an aerodynamically
designed two- or three-bank chevron of roll-formed or
extruded aluminum (Figure 28.6).

28.4.2 Controllable ventilation

Controllable ventilation is normally provided by one of
three types of ventilator:
louvered, opening ﬂap and
weathered. The most common is the louvered ventilator
which has a number of center hinged louver blades
controlled from a pneumatic ram or electric actuator
which can be fully opened when ventilation is needed

28/474 Ventilation

and fully closed to a weatherproof condition when it
is not. These may normally be roof or wall mounted
(Figure 28.7).

Opening ﬂap ventilators have one or two hinged ﬂaps
(opaque or glazed) which are normally held closed but
which may be opened to between 45° and 90°, depending
upon design. Control is normally pneumatic or electric.
Speciﬁc designs are available for roof or wall mounting
(Figure 28.8).

Weathered ventilators need to have a complex air path
in order to prevent rain entry so they therefore provide a
restricted airﬂow. To overcome this, multifunctional ven-
tilators are often used providing a direct air path during
dry weather and a restricted one during rainfall.

These ventilators are normally only roof mounted

(Figure 28.9).

Most ventilators are powered in one direction with
spring return. Thus, a pneumatic ventilator might be
described as pressure to open or pressure to close. With
the pressure to open type the ventilator will fail to the
closed position under the inﬂuence of the return spring,
ensuring the building remains weatherproof. Where
ventilators are installed mainly as smoke ventilators it is
important that they fail to the open position, so pressure
to close ventilators should be used. A fusible link is
normally ﬁtted into the controls so that in the event of
ﬁre, affected ventilators will open automatically to release
smoke and heat.

Most ventilators are made of aluminum because of its
good corrosion resistance and lightweight. On industrial
premises they are normally left
in mill ﬁnishes and
allowed to oxidize. On commercial premises, a poly-
powder paint ﬁnish is normally speciﬁed for aesthetic
reasons. To reduce energy losses during the heating

Figure 28.8 Flap type roof ventilator

Figure 28.7 Louvered roof ventilator

Figure 28.9 Weathered roof ventilator

season many ventilators are available either as standard
or optionally with polypropylene pile or rubber seals to
reduce leakage, and with insulated surfaces.

A limited range of accessories may be provided, nor-
mally bird guard, insect guard or attenuators, but since
airﬂow through the ventilators is driven by very small
pressure differences (perhaps 5 Pa), great care has to be
taken to ensure the ventilation remains effective.

28.5 System design
28.5.1 Overheating

Overheating can be due to a number of causes, but is
usually from solar gain and machinery heat losses. If ven-
tilating to provide thermal comfort in a space for humans
or animals there are a number of considerations apart from
simply air temperature:

1. Air temperature
2. Mean radiant temperature
3. Radiant temperature asymmetry
4. Air velocity
5. Humidity

Thus, someone working near a window will receive hot
solar radiation through the window in summer and cold
radiation from the cold window surface in winter, causing
uncomfortable radiant asymmetry even if the room tem-
perature is perfect for personnel working away from the
window. Ventilation will not be the correct solution for
this problem – sun shading and double-glazing would be
more effective.

It is therefore important when considering ventilation
design to consider the whole thermal environment and
not to simply assume that reduction of air temperature to
20–22°C will cure all problems.

Factories, warehouses, etc.

Two methods of preventing overheating are available:
either general ventilation to provide fairly even conditions
over the whole space at working level or local ventilation
to give spot cooling for localized hot spots.

General ventilation is designed to keep air tempera-
tures within a few degrees Centigrade of the outside shade
temperature over the majority of the ﬂoor area. The ven-
tilation rate required, which is not directly related to the
space ﬂoor area or volume, is calculated from the formula:
˙V D QT
Cpt

m3/second

(28.6)

where
˙V D ventilation rate required (m3/s),
QT D total heat load in the building (W),
Cp D speciﬁc heat of air
t D temperature difference between inlet (°C) and

extract air.

The heat load (QT) includes all sources of heat in the
building – electrical equipment, furnaces, people, solar
gain, etc. The temperature difference (t) is selected to
give the most economical design without compromising
comfort and is generally found by allowing a 1.8°C
temperature rise per meter height between inlet and

System design 28/475

extract ventilators. For natural ventilation the inlet and
extract areas required can then be calculated from
equation (28.3). Either powered or natural ventilation may
be used. See Section 28.3 for a discussion of the beneﬁts
of each system.

The positioning of equipment is important to ensure
that the whole space is ventilated without any signiﬁcant
dead spots of stagnant air. Generally, extract ventilators
should be positioned as high as possible and spread evenly
over the roof area with no more than 28 meters between
adjacent units. In smaller buildings, the inlet is usually
provided through existing openings such as loading-bay
doors unless security precludes this. In larger buildings,
inlets should be provided on at least two sides and, if
any area is more than 20 meters from an outside wall,
consideration should be given to providing some local
powered inlet to provide a positive airﬂow in that area.

If the heat load in the building is high enough for venti-
lation to be needed in autumn and spring, then the design
must either ensure that airspeeds through the inlets are not
high enough to be felt as cold drafts. This limits veloc-
ity to around 1 m/s, or provides for some heating of the
inlet air to raise it to an acceptable temperature. (Partial
recirculation can achieve this economically.)

Local ventilation is used where conditions in most areas
are acceptable or unimportant but a small area or areas
require cooling, generally because a workstation is close
to a source of heat. In this situation, there are three
methods of treatment:

1. Reduce heat output or provide shielding. Radiant heat
can be reduced by several methods such as insulat-
ing the equipment’s hot surfaces, painting it with alu-
minum paint to reduce heat emission or by installing
a screen (two layers of expanded metal) between the
workstation and the equipment.

2. Provide local air movement. Creating local air move-
ment, even with warm air, provides a reduction in
effective temperature and is inexpensive. A ‘punkah’
type fan may be used, although this can have the effect
of drawing down warmer air from a high level, or a
portable ‘fan in a box’. It is advisable to have a multi-
speed fan to allow the effect to be adjusted by the
operator for maximum comfort.

3. Provide fresh air. For maximum effect, a ducted fresh-
air inlet system will provide cool air in summer and,
if ﬁtted with a recirculation unit, allow a ﬂow of tem-
pered or warm air in winter. The air outlet should be
positioned to ensure that the airﬂow does not cause a
draft on the back of the neck.

Ofﬁces and public spaces

In factories, air movement can be generated by unso-
phisticated equipment, since there is generally reasonable
scope for equipment location and noise levels are often not
critical. In ofﬁces and public spaces, the space, esthetic,
noise and air movement criteria tend to be much tighter,
and additional natural ventilation above that already pro-
vided by windows is normally impractical. The ventilation
rate needed can still be calculated using equation (28.6),

28/476 Ventilation

although the acceptable temperature difference will be
much lower (typically, 5°C).

It is generally only practical to ventilate ofﬁce spaces by
means of a ducted system. If sufﬁcient opening window
area is available, either an inlet or extract system alone
may be satisfactory, but if optimum control of conditions
is required, then both mechanical inlet and extract should
be provided.

Inlet systems should incorporate heating if winter ven-
tilation is needed and air ﬁltration if the ambient air is
not clean enough, as is common in city centers. Extract
grilles are normally at high level and inlet may be high
or low level. The design and position of the grilles or dif-
fusers is critical for successful ventilation to avoid drafts
and stagnant areas, and ﬂow patterns will vary, depending
upon whether the airﬂow is heating or cooling. ISO 7730
recommends that for light sedentary work the mean air
velocity in the occupied area should not exceed 0.25 m/s
in summer and 0.28 m/s in winter, and temperature gradi-
ents should not exceed 3°C between the ankle and neck.
Two design methods are commonly used: displacement
ventilation, where clean air is introduced at low velocity
at low level, picking up heat and odor as it passes through
the room and rising by buoyancy up to ceiling extracts;
and diffusion ventilation, whereby clean incoming air at
higher velocity is mixed with the air in the space, with
the resulting mixture extracted at ceiling level.

28.5.2 Fume dilution
Factories, warehouses, etc

Dilution of fumes in these areas is generally required
for one of two reasons: either to reduce the level of
harmful (toxic or irritant) fumes to a safe level, normally
below the OES18 (Occupational Exposure Standard) or to
dilute offensive odors. Care must be taken with the lat-
ter to ensure that the problem is not merely passed on to
neighbors. If it is, then a local extract with air-cleaning
equipment will be preferred if it is practical. Indeed, a
local extract system is always preferable, since it removes
the problem at source, resulting in a cleaner environment
within the building.

The starting point for design of a dilution ventilation
scheme is normally a hygiene survey in which levels of
pollutants and the ventilation rate are measured under
worst conditions. The required ventilation rate is then cal-
culated by ratio of level of contamination measured and
required, where
PVm ð Cm

(28.7)

˙V D

m3/s

Cr

where
˙Vr D ventilation rate required (m3/s),
˙Vm D ventilation rate measured
Cr D contamination level required,
Cm D contamination level measured.

(m3/s),

the building as clean as possible. However, this form of
ventilation does little for operatives working at the source
of contamination.

Normal ventilation equipment can be used unless the
fumes are corrosive or ﬂammable. Powered equipment
is normally employed to ensure that a steady airﬂow is
provided. Since the ventilation will be needed in both
summer and winter, there will be an energy penalty for
the high level of airﬂow, and either the inlet airﬂow must
be pre-heated or additional space heating will be required.
The extra heat requirement is given by
Q D 1.2 ð
where
Q D extra heat input needed (kW),
tc D winter room temperature (°C).

(cid:6) PVr (cid:4) PVm

ð (cid:12)tc (cid:4) (cid:4)1(cid:13)kW

(28.8)

(cid:7)

Ofﬁces and public spaces

In these areas fume dilution is normally required to reduce
body and tobacco odors. CIBSE1 gives current UK recom-
mendations for fresh air requirements for various rooms
to overcome these, varying from 5 to 25 1/s per person.
These ﬁgures give a balance between energy loss and air
purity, and higher levels of ventilation may be needed if
a clean atmosphere is of overriding importance. In older
ofﬁces, the natural ventilation achieved by inﬁltration is
sufﬁcient to provide reasonable conditions, but areas of
high occupancy such as conference rooms, theatres, bars
and restaurants normally require mechanical ventilation.
Sufﬁcient ventilation must be provided to match the high-
est demand, whether for odor dilution or summer over-
heating.

An alternative to ventilation to clear tobacco smoke is
the use of electrostatic air cleaners that clean and recir-
culate air within a room. These provide smoke dilution
without the energy penalty of extra ventilation but require
frequent cleaning to keep operating at maximum efﬁ-
ciency.

28.5.3 Prevention of condensation

Condensation occurs whenever moist air encounters a sur-
face, which is colder than the ‘dewpoint’ of the air. The
dewpoint is the minimum temperature at which the air
can contain the amount of moisture within it, and it will
vary with moisture content. Condensation can also occur
in the air when warm moist air meets cold air, when it is
known as fogging.

Condensation will appear on the inside surface of
porous or impervious materials, forming ﬁrst on the
worst insulated surfaces (normally glazing or steelwork).
On porous surfaces condensation can occur within the
material or at an internal boundary. This is known as
interstitial condensation, and it is especially dangerous,
since it is often not known about until it has caused
noticeable damage. Condensation can be avoided or
reduced by several methods:

The ventilation should be designed so that airﬂow is
directed from clean to dirty areas to keep the majority of

1. Insulation: Increase the insulation of surfaces to raise
their temperature above the dewpoint of the internal

air. This should be treated with care, since insulation
of one surface may merely shift condensation to the
next worst insulated surface, or cause interstitial con-
densation.

2. Reduce moisture emission: If practical, this is always
the best method of avoiding condensation. It can be
achieved by good housekeeping, reducing steam leaks,
covering open tanks when not in use or by chang-
ing working practices or modifying equipment either
to contain the moisture more efﬁciently or remove it
directly from the space.

3. Ventilation: Increasing the ventilation rate through
a space while keeping the air
temperature high
will reduce the moisture content of the air without
lowering surface temperatures and, by reduction of the
dewpoint, will limit or avoid condensation. The hot,
moist air exhausted takes a lot of energy with it, which
it may be practical to recover using a heat-recovery
system.

4. Dehumidiﬁcation:

Increasing the ventilation rate
through a building has
a high-energy penalty.
Dehumidiﬁers do not increase the ventilation rate but
recirculate air while removing the moisture from it by
a refrigeration process. Their electrical cost is high,
but since most of the energy is released into the room
as heat, the overall running costs can be signiﬁcantly
lower than for a ventilation system.

Calculation for condensation problems is complex but

is covered in the CIBSE Guide1 in some depth.

28.5.4 Local extract

Local extract is used to remove contaminants directly
from a process to the exterior without passing through
personnel breathing zones. It thus provides a high degree
of safety and because small volumes of air are extracted
relative to a dilution ventilation system it is energy efﬁ-
cient.

Where dusts, grits, sawdust or other large particles are
being extracted it is normally mandatory to include an
air-cleaning device before the air is exhausted. Unless
they are toxic or odorous fumes can normally be simply
exhausted into the atmosphere at a suitable location well
away from anywhere with normal personnel access.

The design of a system can be broken into three main
areas: capture, transport and cleansing. Capture of the con-
taminant is of paramount importance. Depending upon the
source of the contaminant, capture may be via a hood,
slot, booth or enclosure, with the airﬂow designed to
take the contaminant from the source into the duct sys-
tem without passing through the operatives’ breathing
zone. Some typical examples of good design are shown in
Figure 28.10. To capture the contaminant, a minimum air
velocity, referred to as the capture velocity, is needed at
the source. The value of the capture velocity depends upon
the type of source, enclosure and local air movement. Typ-
ical values are given in Table 28.1. Full guidance in the
design of capture systems is given by the ACGIH12.

Once captured, the contaminant has to be carried along
a duct system. If the duct velocity is too low, particles

System design 28/477

Table 28.1 Capture velocities

Condition of dispersion
of contaminant

Examples

Released with practi-

cally no velocity
into quiet air

Evaporation from tanks;

degreasing, etc.

Released at low velocity

into moderately still
air

Spray booths; inter-
mittent container
ﬁlling; welding; plating

Active generation into

Spray painting in

zone of rapid air
motion

shallow booths; barrel
ﬁlling

Capture
velocity
(m/s)

0.25–0.5

0.5–1.0

1.0–2.5

will tend to drop out of suspension and collect in or fall
back down the duct. It is therefore essential that a suitable
minimum duct velocity, referred to as the transport veloc-
ity, is maintained. Typical values are given in Table 28.2.
Nothing is gained by velocities far in excess of the rec-
ommended transport velocity, and in some cases as much
is lost, since abrasion of particles on the duct can cause
premature erosion and failure.

Removal of particles from the air stream is generally
carried out in a cyclone, positioned outside the building
and taking particles from all sources in the building. Care
should be taken to position cyclones away from noise-
sensitive areas since both ducts and cyclones can be noisy,
especially if grits or chips are being carried.

Selection of fans and ducting for local extract must
be more rigorous than for other systems. The fan must
be capable of withstanding abrasion or corrosion from
the contaminants, and if they are ﬂammable must have a
ﬂameproof or out-of-air stream motor. The ducting also
must be able to withstand abrasion or corrosion and must
be fully sealed to prevent escape of contaminants within
the building. For specialist applications such as fume cup-
board extract, ducting and fans are often of plastic con-
struction.

28.5.5 Smoke ventilation

Smoke-ventilation systems are designed to clear smoke
and heat from a building in the event of ﬁre. In large open
spaces it is impossible to ‘smother’ a ﬁre (as is often rec-
ommended in domestic situations) by closing doors and
windows. The aim of smoke ventilation is to minimize
damage due to smoke staining and heat and to assist evac-
uation and ﬁreﬁghting by providing a layer of clear air

Table 28.2 Transport velocities

Contaminant

Typical transport velocity (m/s)

Vapours, gases
Fumes
Light dusts
Dusts
Industrial dusts
Heavy or moist dusts

5
7–10
10–12
12–17
17–20
20C

28/478 Ventilation

Total enclosure

Partial enclosure

Air inlet

Extract
slot

Hinged
access
lid

Component
feed and 
air inlet

Overhead canopy

Side canopy

Angle not
less than 30°

0.4 x

x

Working region

Push-pull system

Figure 28.10 Typical local extract hoods and enclosures

below the smoke. Without smoke ventilation a space can
become ‘smoke logged’ from ceiling to ﬂoor in only a
few minutes.

The actual design of a smoke-ventilation system is
very complex, and although much published guidance
is available14 – 17 it should be left to experts, and a ﬁre-
prevention ofﬁcer should approve the design.

In discussing design or vetting tenders, there are a num-

ber of important points to consider:

1. Design ﬁre size: An accurate assessment is needed of
the maximum size of ﬁre that is likely and which can
be designed for. Since the whole design is based upon
this value it is essential that this be carefully consid-
ered.

2. Interaction with sprinklers: The likely size of ﬁre will
be smaller in buildings with sprinklers and the temper-
ature of the smoke produced will be lower since the
smoke is cooled by the sprinkler ﬂow.

3. Fire detection: For efﬁcient operation, control of the
ventilation must be linked to a ﬁre-detection system or
sprinkler ﬂow switch to ensure that the ventilators are
operated as early as possible. Natural ventilators must

incorporate a fusible link or bulk as a back-up fail-safe
device, but this should not be considered as the main
form of emergency operation.

4. Fire resistance: Fans, motors, cabling and controls
which are expected to operate under ﬁre conditions
must be suitably rated for the temperature expected.

5. Air inlet: A suitable low-level inlet ventilation area
must be provided for the expected airﬂow rate. Where
personnel escape routes will be used for inlet, the inlet
velocity must be low enough not to impede progress.

Smoke ventilation is not intended to replace other forms
of ﬁre prevention and control but to work as an important
component in an overall scheme.

28.6 After installation
28.6.1 Commissioning and testing

Once any system has been installed it is important that
it is properly commissioned to ensure that everything is
working satisfactorily and to speciﬁcation. A guide to
commissioning ducted systems is available from BSRIA.

Commissioning of other systems should be in accordance
with the manufacturers’ recommendations, but
typical
commissioning lists are shown below.

task due to the limited usage. Typical annual maintenance
for systems is shown below.

Natural ventilation systems

Natural ventilation systems

After installation 28/479

5. Operate ventilators and check that all open and close

6. Check that all controls operate correctly.

1. Check incoming electrical supplies to isolators.
2. Check pneumatic and electrical connections between

panels and ventilators.

3. Check ventilators and ensure that any transport closure
pieces and packing are removed and ventilators are
correctly installed.

4. Commission compressor (if ﬁtted) according to manu-

facturer’s instructions.

correctly.

6. Check operation of all controls.
7. Check pneumatic system for leakage.

Powered ventilation systems

1. Check incoming electrical supplies to isolators.
2. Check electrical connections between panel and fans.
3. Check that fan blades rotate freely and ventilators are

correctly installed.

4. Operate ventilators and ensure that all run correctly

and in the correct direction.

5. Check full load current on all phases on all ventilators.
6. Check operation of all controls.

Once a system is installed, no speciﬁc regular testing
of day-to-day ventilation systems is required unless they
are installed to comply with COSHH Regulations. This
testing would normally be carried out in conjunction with
annual maintenance.

Smoke-ventilation systems must be regularly tested,
since failure in an emergency cannot be allowed. The
system must be fully tested in accordance with the man-
ufacturer’s instructions at intervals of not more than 1
month or as agreed with the ﬁre authorities. Any faults
found must be rectiﬁed immediately.

28.6.2 Maintenance

Most simple ventilation systems require only annual main-
tenance unless some form of air cleaning or ﬁltration is
incorporated, although where systems are pneumatically
operated the compressor will need weekly checking. Air
cleaners or ﬁlters will need regular emptying, cleaning or
replacement to maintain efﬁciency and prevent clogging
up. This can either be carried out on a regular schedule
(based on the manufacturer’s guidance and site experi-
ence) or when indicated by a pressure differential gauge
or alarm. Savings in maintenance costs easily repay the
cost of a gauge by maximizing intervals between clean-
ing or replacement. The task of maintenance can be made
easier by taking care in design to provide good access.

Compressors will need a weekly oil level and receiver
auto drain check and oil changes and ﬁlter cleaning at
(typically) 500-hour intervals, although for compressors
used only to operate ventilation this can be only an annual

1. Clean ventilators with a soft brush or cloth and remove
any debris (leaves, moss, etc.) from rain channels or
drainage holes.

2. Check security of ﬁxings.
3. Check operation of ventilators and, if necessary, clean

4. Examine hinges, pulleys, cables, anchors, etc. for wear.
5. Check pneumatics for air leaks and fully service com-

or oil linkages.

pressor.

Powered ventilation systems

1. Clean ventilators with a soft brush or cloth and remove

any debris from rain channels or drainage holes.

2. Check security of ﬁxing.
3. Check that fan impeller turns freely.
4. Check electrical connections to fan.
5. Check operation of moving components (other than

fan). Clean, oil or adjust as appropriate.

6. Run fan and check current against data plate.
7. Check that all controls operate correctly.
8. Check and clean ﬁlters, heater batteries, etc.

28.6.3 Running costs

Running costs of ventilation systems can be broken down
into three main areas:

1. Maintenance costs;
2. Electrical costs;
3. Heat loss due to ventilation use during heating season.

Maintenance costs

Regular service checks such as ﬁlter cleaning and com-
pressor oil level are normally carried out in-house and
time can be allocated for these tasks once some expe-
rience has been gathered. Annual maintenance may be
carried out in-house or by specialist service engineers
employed either by manufacturers or HVAC service com-
panies. A service contract can often include breakdown
cover, which has the advantage of reducing risk of unex-
pected bills and ensuring that prompt repairs are effected
at the cost of a higher annual premium.

Electrical costs

The only signiﬁcant electrical cost involved in ventilation
systems is operation of fans. Other electrical equipment
such as dampers, compressors, etc. generally run for such
short periods that costs are negligible.

Electrical costs for fans can be estimated from the fol-

lowing formula:
C D V ð (cid:23) ð A ð fuel cost ð hours run

(28.9)

28/480 Ventilation

where

C D cost per annum ($),
V D motor voltage per phase (V),
(cid:23) D number of phases,
A D operating current (A),

Fuel cost D cost of electricity (in $/kWh),
Hours run D total running hours per annum.

Heat loss
Where a ventilation system is required to run during peri-
ods when heating is provided then there is an energy cost
associated with the heated air being exhausted from the
building. This is related to the extra heat input needed
from the heating system to balance the heat loss through
the extra ventilation. A calculation method is available in
section B18 of the CIBSE Guide2.

References

1. CIBSE Guide, Volume A, DesignData(1986).
2. CIBSE Guide, Volume B, Installation and Equipment Data

(1986).

3. ASHRAE Handbook, Fundamentals(1989).
4. ASHRAE Handbook, HVACSystemsandApplications(1987).
5. Threshold Limit Values and Biological Exposure Indices for
1988–1989, American Conference of Governmental Industrial
Hygienists.

6. BRE Digest 119, AssessmentofWindLoads(July 1970).
7. BRE Digest 210, Principles of Natural Ventilation (B. B. Daly)

8. BRE Digest 346 (7 parts), The Assessment of Wind Loads

9. Daly, B. B., WoodsPracticalGuidetoFanEngineering, Woods

(February 1978).

(1989).

of Colchester Ltd (1978).

Contractors Association).

work.

10. DuctworkSpeciﬁcationDW142, HVCA (Heating and Ventilation

11. CIBSE Technical Memorandum TM8, Design Notes for Duct-

12. Industrial Ventilation, A Manual of Recommended Practice,
20th edition, American Conference of Governmental Industrial
Hygienists (1984).

13. ISO 7730: 1984, Modern thermal environments – determination
of the PMV and PPD indices and speciﬁcation of the conditions
for thermal comfort.

14. Fire Paper 7, ‘Investigations into the ﬂow of hot gases in roof
venting’, HMSO (now available from Colt International Ltd)
(1963).

15. Fire Paper 10, ‘Design of roof venting systems for single story
buildings’, HMSO (now available from Colt International Ltd)
(1964).

16. BS 7346, Components for smoke and heat control systems.
Part 1: Speciﬁcation for natural smoke and heat exhaust venti-
lators.

17. BS 7346, Components for smoke and heat control systems.
Part 2: Speciﬁcation for powered smoke and heat exhaust
ventilators.

18. EH 40/89 Occupational Exposure Limits, Health and Safety

Commission (1989).

29/481

Air Conditioning

J Bevan

29

Contents

29.8 Humidiﬁcation

29.7.4 Standards required 29/498
29.7.5 Clean room 29/498
29.7.6 Filter life
29.7.7 General 29/498
29/498

29/498

29/498
29/498

29.8.1 Humidiﬁer capacity
29.8.2 Types of humidiﬁer
29.8.3 Pan humidiﬁer
29.8.4 Steam jet 29/499
29.8.5 Spray humidiﬁers
29.8.6 Air washers 29/499
29.8.7 Humidiﬁer run time 29/499

29/498

29/499

29.9 Test procedure for air-conditioning systems

29/499

29/499

29.9.1 Object and application
29.9.2 Conduct of the tests
29/499
29.9.3 Pre-test performance 29/500
29.9.4 Recorders and alarms 29/500
29.9.5 Air balance
29.9.6 Background heaters 29/501
29.9.7 Heating and humidiﬁcation
29.9.8 Cooling and dehumidiﬁcation
29.9.9 Limits and interlocks
29/502

29/500

29/501

29/501

29.1 Basic principles and terms 29/483

29/483

29.1.1 Abbreviations
29.1.2 Terms 29/483
29.1.3 The plant
29.1.4 The air-handling plant
29.1.5 The refrigeration plant
29.1.6 Controls
29.1.7 The load on the plant

29/487

29/484

29/484
29/486

29/487

29/490

29/490

29/492

29.2 The air quantity required 29/488

29.2.1 Air change rate 29/488
29/489

29.3 Heat losses and gains

29/489

29.3.1 Heat losses
29.3.2 Internal gains
29.3.3 Heat gains
29.3.4 Heat of outside air intake

29/490

29/489

29.4 Air conditioning for computers
29/490

29.4.1 The computer
29.4.2 Air supply
29/491
29.4.3 Air extract 29/491
29.4.4 Chilled water 29/491
29.4.5 Computer heat 29/491
29.4.6 Telecommunications

29/492
29.5 Air distribution and system resistance

29/492
29.5.1 Duct sizing
29.5.2 Duct design
29/492
29.5.3 System pressure drop
29.5.4 Ventilated ceilings

29/492

29/493

29.6 Fans

29/495

29/496

29/495

29.6.1 Fan selection
29.6.2 Types
29.6.3 Multiple arrangements 29/496
29.6.4 Fan laws 29/497
29.6.5 Volume regulation
29.7 Dust control and ﬁltration

29/497
29/497

29.7.1 Dust control
29.7.2 Electrostatic ﬁlters 29/497
29.7.3 Tests

29/497

29/497

29.1 Basic principles and terms
29.1.1 Abbreviations

In addition to the abbreviations used in SI, the following
are employed in air conditioning work:
db
wb
dp
rh
kg/kg

Dry bulb temperature
Wet bulb temperature
Dewpoint temperature
Relative humidity
Kilograms water vapor per kilogram dry
air (absolute moisture content)
Total heat
Sensible heat
Latent heat
Sensible heat ratio
The condition of air or water entering or
leaving a coil or heat exchanger
Tons of refrigeration capacity
Tons of refrigeration capacity extracted
Tons refrigeration rejected (at ﬁnal
cooler)
High pressure (refrigerant)
Low pressure (refrigerant)
Direct expansion cooling
Temperature difference
Air changes (room volumes) per hour
Air-handling unit
Static water gauge
Noise rating. One of a series of curves
relating noise level and frequency to
speech interference
Noise criteria. Similar to NR, but
differing, particularly at the
low-frequency end

TH
SH
LH
SHR
ON OFF

TR
TRE
TRR

HP
LP
DX
T
ach
ahu
swg
NR

NC

29.1.2 Terms

Mechanical ventilation

Basic principles and terms 29/483

Air

Atmospheric air is a mixture of gases, mainly nitrogen
and oxygen together with water vapor. It normally carries
many millions of dust particles per cubic meter.

Temperature

A measure of the average energy of the molecules of a
substance. The heat intensity.

Heat

A form of energy which, when given to a body, raises
its temperature or changes its state from solid to liquid or
liquid to gas.

Heat ﬂow

Heat ﬂows from a body at one temperature to a body
at a lower temperature. Materials have the property of
resistance to the rate of heat ﬂow. It differs from material
to material.

Sensible heat

The heat energy causing a change in temperature, as in
raising a kettle of water from cold to boiling point.

Latent heat

The heat necessary to change the state of a substance from
solid to liquid or from liquid to gas, or the heat given up
during the reverse process. There is no change in temper-
ature during these processes. For example, continuing to
boil a kettle of water previously raised to 100°C to steam
requires the addition of latent heat, but there is no change
in temperature if the pressure remains constant.

Total heat

The movement of air by fan, conveying outside air into
the room or expelling air or both. Filtration, heating and
control of the distribution pattern may be included. It is
not cooling in the sense of temperature reduction but can
be used to limit temperature rise when the outside air is
below that of the space being treated.

The sensible heat plus latent heat in such a mixture as
moist air. In air-conditioning work it is referred to a base
a little below 0°C, not absolute zero.

Sensible heat ratio

Sensible heat ﬂow divided by the total heat ﬂow.

Full air conditioning

Enthalpy

This necessitates plant capable of control of temperature
by being able to add or subtract heat from the air and con-
trol of humidity by being able to add or subtract moisture.
The system also comprises fan(s), ﬁltration, and a distri-
bution system and may include noise control. Other terms
such as ‘cooling’ or ‘comfort cooling’ may be met and
these can be taken to mean an ability to lower the tem-
perature of the air by refrigeration but without full control
of humidity. Moisture may be removed as an incidental
characteristic of the cooling coil. The term ‘air condition-
ing’ is sometimes used where control of humidity is not
included. It is essential to employ clear speciﬁcations of
performance.

The heat content of a substance per unit mass.

Dry bulb temperature

The temperature of air as indicated by a dry sensing ele-
ment such as a mercury-in-glass thermometer.

Psychrometrics

The study of moist air. The psychrometric chart shows
the relationship between the various properties of moist
air in graphical form and can be used for the solution of
problems.

29/484 Air Conditioning

Wet bulb temperature

The temperature of air as indicated by a thermometer
when a water-wet wick encloses its bulb. If the surround-
ing air is not saturated water will evaporate, taking the
latent necessary latent heat from the thermometer bulb
which then gives a lower reading than a dry bulb in the
same air. The depression in wet bulb temperature is pro-
portional to the amount of moisture in the air.

Normal practice is to arrange a ﬂow of air over the wick
by using a sling (whirling) or fan-assisted instrument. If
the thermometer is stationary, an area of higher saturation
builds up around the wick but the reading may be referred
to tables for screen instead of sling readings.

Partial pressure

The contribution by each constituent gas to the total air
pressure. Standard air pressure is 1013 mbar.

Vapor

(see Section 29.5). The term ‘resistance’ is often used
erroneously when pressure drop is meant.

Upstream, downstream

Used to denote positions earlier or later in the system
relative to the direction of air ﬂow.

Condensing unit

A refrigeration compressor and condenser on one chassis
complete with controls.

Split system

As above but with a remote condenser.

Chiller

A compressor, water-chilling evaporator and condenser
on one chassis.

A gas that is below its critical temperature and which can
therefore be turned to liquid by an increase in pressure.

29.1.3 The plant

These divide broadly into two types:

Saturation

There is a limit to the amount of water vapor air can hold.
It is higher at higher dry bulb temperatures. At the limit,
air is saturated.

Relative humidity

This compares the amount of moisture in a sample of air
with the amount it would contain if saturated. More accu-
rately, relative humidity is the partial pressure of vapor
present divided by saturation vapor pressure ð100 per
cent. Saturation D 100 per cent relative humidity.

Dewpoint

1. The direct expansion plant where the air-cooling coil

is fed with cold refrigerant;

2. The chilled water plant where the cold refrigerant ﬁrst
chills water (or other liquor), which is fed to the air-
cooling coil.

A block diagram of the DX system is shown in
Figure 29.1. It has two main circuits – the air circuit and
the refrigerant circuit. In the chilled-water system, there
are additional circuits:

1. Of chilled water between the refrigerant and the air-

2. Of water carrying heat from the refrigerant to the heat-

cooling coil;

rejecting device.

The temperature to which a sample of air has to be
reduced to bring it to saturation. The moisture content
of the air sample ﬁxes it.

Figure 29.2 shows a block diagram of the system.

A temperature difference must exist between each stage
to cause a heat ﬂow from one to the other. The air and
refrigeration sides are described in further detail below.

Absolute humidity

This measures the quantity of water in a sample of air in
kg moisture per kg air. The relative humidity then depends
on the air-dry bulb temperature. Air at 25°C containing
0.01 kg/kg is at 50 per cent relative humidity (rh).

If now cooled to 14°C the air would be at its dewpoint
(i.e. saturated). If cooled further, moisture is condensed
out, the sample remaining saturated as it cools. If now
reheated back to 25°C its rh would be lower than 50 per
cent. If cooling had not been continued to condense mois-
ture its rh would return to 50 per cent at 25°C.

System resistance

The resistance to airﬂow which causes static pressure
drop. It is similar to electrical resistance and voltage drop

29.1.4 The air-handling plant

The plant may comprise one or more complete factory-
made units or may be built up on-site from subassemblies.
There can be variations from the arrangements discussed
below and shown in Figure 29.3. The condition or quan-
tity of air input to the conditioned space (referred to below
as the room) must be varied such that after it has gained
or lost heat or moisture by the applied load its condition
and therefore the room condition is as speciﬁed.

Outside air intake

The quantity is discussed in Section 29.2. Its purpose is
to keep the room fresh and to pressurize it against the
ingress of unconditioned air. Its psychrometric condition

Air
loss

Cooled
room

Air

Cool

Refrigerant

Cool

Basic principles and terms 29/485

Rejected
heat

Air-
handling
plant

Cooling coil

Refrigeration
plant

Warm

Outside
air
make-up

Warm

Figure 29.1 Heat ﬂow paths in a direct expansion system

Cooler

Rejected
heat

Cooler
water
circuit

Air
circuit

Chilled-
water
circuit

Cooling coil

Make-up
air

Water chiller

Refrig-
erant

Refrigeration plant

Room air return

Air
loss

Cooled
room

Figure 29.2 Heat ﬂow paths in a chilled-water system

Supply to
rooms.
Volume
control
dampers

Humidifier

Fan

+

−

After-
filter if
fitted

Heater
battery

Cooling
coil

Primary
filter

Mixing
chamber

Outside
air intake

Figure 29.3 Airﬂow path in an air-conditioning system

29/486 Air Conditioning

during most of the year will differ from that required. It
can be introduced into a chamber, mixing it for treatment
with return air from the room. Alternatively, it can be
treated in a separate plant before being introduced to the
system, but care then has to be exercised in design, since
the sometimes small quantity of air has to control the
full humidity load. An advantage is that corrosive wet
processes are kept out of the main plant.

Mixing chamber

This is where the outside air intake and recirculated air
are brought together before proceeding to the next stage of
treatment. As shown in Figure 29.3, it is a low-pressure
area, which will induce outside air without the use of
another fan if the route has low resistance.
When two samples of air are brought

together the
condition of the mixture may be arrived at arithmetically
by adding the heat ﬂow of each and dividing by
the total mass ﬂow; and similarly for
the moisture
ﬂow. Alternatively, plot the condition of each onto a
psychrometric chart. The mixed condition lies on a
straight line between the two in a position proportional
to the two quantities.

Pre-ﬁlter

Where a high degree of cleanliness is not required, it could
be the only ﬁlter in the system. The subject is covered in
more detail in Section 29.7.

The cooling coil

This is the exchanger where heat ﬂows from the room
return or mixed air to cold refrigerant or to chilled water.
It is an arrangement of ﬁnned tubes normally of aluminum
ﬁns on copper tubes, but copper ﬁns can be speciﬁed
for corrosive atmosphere. Performance characteristics are
controlled by ﬁn and tube spacing. If the room rh is high,
dehumidiﬁcation may be brought into use by operating
the coil or one of a number of parallel coils at a low
temperature. If the room’s sensible heat load is low reheat
must be allowed to operate at the same time.

Dehumidiﬁcation can be achieved by partially bypass-
ing the coil such that the remaining air travels through
the coil at low velocity. This can also be inherent in the
full-load design operation of the coil.

Heater battery

This is used when (1) the room needs heating instead of
cooling or (2) for reheat as described above. It is vital
in close control systems that its capacity is sufﬁcient to
maintain room temperature under these conditions, other-
wise the system may fall into a loop, with the controls
continuing to see high rh due to temperature. Using only
part of the cooling coil for dehumidiﬁcation will allevi-
ate this situation. A heater capacity of the sensible heat
extracted during dehumidiﬁcation plus half the peak win-
ter fabric loss is recommended where the room load could
be nil in winter such as a start-up situation.

Separate reheat batteries may be placed in branch ducts
where one plant supplies both a main area calling for
cooling and an auxiliary room without heat load. Correct
rh in the auxiliary rooms’ results (only) if it is correctly
controlled in the main room and they require the same dry
bulb temperature. While wasteful of energy, it simpliﬁes
the plant design and may be found to use fewer resources.

The fan

This drives the air around the system against its resistance
(see Section 29.6).

Humidiﬁer

The humidiﬁer is a means of increasing the absolute
humidity of the air although usually controlled from a
relative humidity sensor. It should be positioned where
shown so that it can correct any over-dehumidiﬁcation by
the cooling coil (see Section 29.8).

Air ﬂow
The quantity supplied must be matched to the load on
the plant (see Section 29.2). After leaving the plant, it is
distributed to match loads of the rooms or zones to be
served.

29.1.5 The refrigeration plant
The basic circuit is shown in Figure 29.4 and the principal
items are described below.

Evaporator
This is the device where the air or water being cooled
gives up its heat to provide the latent heat of evaporation
to the refrigerant. Superheat is also added to the refriger-
ant at this point to prevent damaging liquid forming on
the way to the compressor.

Compressor
A compressor circulates the refrigerant around the sys-
tem, raising its pressure such that the refrigerant can be
condensed by removal of latent heat. It may also be con-
sidered as raising the temperature of the refrigerant above
that of the ﬁnal cooling medium to which heat is rejected.
Lubricating oil is contained in the crankcase but, being
miscible in the refrigerant, is carried around the system
and returned.

Condenser
This is the vessel where the refrigerant rejects its heat to
waste or reclaim, turning back to liquid in the process.
Sub-cooling is practiced by the removal of further heat.
This prevents liquid ﬂashing back to vapor on return to
the evaporator.

Expansion valve
A reduction in pressure and hence in temperature takes
place across this item before the refrigerant re-enters the
cooling coil via distributor pipes.

High-pressure
liquid

Condenser

Coolant (air
or water)

Hot high-
pressure gas

Basic principles and terms 29/487

Air or water
being cooled

Evaporator

LP
gas

LP
liquid

Expansion
valve

Compressor

Drive
motor

Figure 29.4 Refrigerant ﬂow path in a cooling system

Heat load

29.1.6 Controls

Room condition

Dry bulb temperature

A thermostat in the conditioned space or in the return
duct senses this. Where under ﬂoor air return is used,
it is strongly recommended that the sensor be placed
close under a return grille to prevent changes of condition
occurring between the room and the sensing position. In
large rooms, separate thermostats can be arranged to give
an average signal but individual zones of control each
separately treated are much better.

Dry bulb sensors may be bi-metal strips, thermistors or
refrigerant-ﬁlled phials or bellows responding to pressure
differences caused by temperature change. These, in turn,
provide an electrical or mechanical signal. The mechan-
ical items are used to alter the value of potentiometers
or make-or-break contacts. The signals are transmitted
to ampliﬁers, which respond to the degree of error. An
important feature is the proportional band of tempera-
ture over which the controls call for up to full plant
capacity.

Humidity

Humidity sensors may be animal or plastic skins varying
in length with changes in rh or lithium chloride coating
changing in electrical resistance. The former is prone to
lose calibration. Other comments above apply equally to
rh control.

Control at the evaporator

A phial senses the temperature of the outlet suction line to
the compressor and controls the expansion valve opening
to maintain a constant temperature in the coil.

Control at chilled water coil

A three-way motorized valve is modulated between full
ﬂow to the coil and full bypass to satisfy the room
thermostat.

Control of water-chilling compressors

Being large multi-cylinder machines, the chilling capacity
is controlled in steps by rendering cylinder valves inopera-
tive. Control is initiated by sensing water temperature in a
storage buffer tank or by sensing return water temperature
from the air-cooling coil. Small (DX) compressors are run
on a start–stop basis on call from the room thermostat.
Safety devices associated with compressors include:

High (gas) pressure cutout;
Low (gas) pressure cutout;
Oil differential cutout (oil feed pressure to be above the
crankcase pressure);
Freeze thermostat (low water temperature limit);
Single-phase protection (preventing attempts to start with
loss of one phase of a three-phase electrical supply);
Time out (preventing too-frequent starting and motor
burn).

Until all the switches in the interlock train are satisﬁed and
closed, the compressor will not start or will not continue
to run.

29.1.7 The load on the plant

The unit of heat is the watt. However, the imperial unit
should be understood, as it will still be met, particu-
larly outside Europe. The ton of refrigeration is derived
from an ability to remove sufﬁcient heat from a short ton
(2000 lbs) of water at 32°F to turn it to ice at the same
temperature in the course of 24 hours. This amounts to a
heat extraction rate of 3.517 kW.

29/488 Air Conditioning

The load presented by the room is ﬁrst transmitted to
the room air, which, in turn, passes it to the cooling coil.
Other gains will occur as detailed below. The total load
is best considered in two parts – sensible and latent.

input to the motor) increases the amount of heat to be
rejected by the ﬁnal cooler or available for heat recovery.
It is uneconomic to operate refrigeration plant at unnec-
essarily high temperatures in order to assist recovery.

Machine heat

Pump heat

All electrical energy fed to the room will appear as heat.
This presents a load to the plant unless power is con-
veyed out of the room by cable or hot items are physically
removed. Parts of some large computers are cooled by a
direct supply of chilled water presenting a load on the
refrigeration plant but reducing the load on the airside.
Cold outside conditions will result in some of the internal
load being met by fabric loss.

Fabric losses or gains

In winter in cold climates, heat will be lost through fab-
ric of the building. This will be advantageous at times
of high internal load but will need to be considered as a
heater battery duty at times of low internal load. In win-
ter, there can be considerable loads for humidiﬁers if the
structure is not adequately vapor sealed. Weather-tightness
is insufﬁcient. For example, a computer room in the UK
held at normal conditions may experience up to 100-mm
water gauge vapor pressure difference, forcing moisture
out. During high summer in temperate and hot climates,
the external water vapor pressure will be higher than in
the conditioned space.

Personnel

People give off both sensible and latent heat. During light
work such as in a computer suite or laboratory they emit
110 W sensible 30 W latent and while seated, 90 W sen-
sible 20 W latent.

Air ducts

A duct carrying cool air through a warm space such
as a loft will gain heat before entering the conditioned
room, contributing to the load on the plant. Ducts passing
through the conditioned space do not add to the load.
Similarly, there will be losses in winter if they carry warm
air through cold spaces and moisture gains and losses if
leaky. Insulation and vapor-tight joints are necessary.

Fan heat

The power fed to the fan shaft (or the total electrical power
fed to the motor if within the duct) appears as sensible heat
in the system. During a heating cycle this is useful. As
a rule of thumb, fan shaft power is 17 ð ﬂow m3 ð mm
swg watts. This commonly lies between 2 per cent of the
cooling duty for small systems to 10 per cent for large
systems.

Compressor heat

Friction (or, if within the refrigerant path, as in hermeti-
cally sealed or semi-hermetic machines, the whole of the

In chilled-water systems, pump shaft power adds to the
heat of the circulating water. Similarly, if the chiller has
a water-cooled condenser pump heat is added to that han-
dled by the ﬁnal cooler. Power is proportional to the ﬂow
and pressure:
102 ð 1/s ð meters head

Efﬁciency

watts

Efﬁciency can vary between 35 per cent for very small
pumps and 80 per cent for large ones, and may be found
to lie between 3 per cent for small heating circuits and 10
per cent of the heat conveyed for large systems.

29.2 The air quantity required
29.2.1 Air change rate

Change rates (room volumes per hour) can be used to
calculate the quantity to be supplied or extracted by a
mechanical ventilation system. These ﬁgures also apply
to parts of an air-conditioning system where stale air must
not be recirculated.

Volume to be supplied

For the design of close control systems or where large
amounts of heat are to be removed, the mass ﬂow to be
employed must be calculated. Use is made of the speciﬁc
heat of air which for normal room conditions may be taken
as 1.02 kJ/kg°C. 1.02 kW raises a ﬂow of 1 kg/s by 1°C
and pro rata. The volume of a given mass of air varies
with change in temperature but supply volume is often
more convenient to consider. Taking the speciﬁc volume
to be 0.82 m3/kg then 0.1 m3/s will convey 1 kW with a
temperature rise of 8°C and pro rata. A subsequent fall of
8°C across the cooling coil is suitable for areas controlled
to 21°C 50 per cent rh. A smaller air quantity would be
too close to the limiting temperature to hold the neces-
sary moisture when leaving the coil. Greater temperature
differences may be used if the rh is to be controlled to a
lower level or not controlled at all. A maximum temper-
ature difference of 10°C supply to room is recommended
where occupants are close to supply points. For comfort,
larger volumes are preferable to low temperature.

In ventilation systems the temperature rise calculated
on the basis of speciﬁc heat alone will be pessimistic by
one or two degrees because of the effect of building mass.
Unless an extract is speciﬁcally designed to remove heat
from hot spots or lights, the extract and room temperature
can be taken to be the same.

Outside air intake

When temperature limitation is more important than close
control of conditions, a considerable economy of refrig-
eration plant operation results from arranging to draw

in outside air when it is sufﬁciently cool and rejecting
this back to outside after having gained heat from the
room. However, where close control of temperature and
humidity is required accuracy and economy ensue from
minimizing the outside air intake. The quantity may be
based on the number of occupants using 0.008 m3/s mini-
mum per person. Alternatively, if larger, use 0.002 m3/sm2
ﬂoor area, which is sufﬁcient in a good quality building
to keep the room pressurized to one or two mm swg.
Because air loss is a function of the building surface,
this is preferred to the basis of a proportion of the sup-
ply air volume, which is a function of load. If the later is
used for applications such as computer rooms it is seldom
necessary to use more than 2.5 per cent.

General considerations

Outlets should not be provided in constantly recirculating
systems, particularly where close control of humidity is
required. The overpressure developed is far less than that
exerted by the wind, and for this reason any system which
does have both intake and discharge ducts should have
them on the same face of the building. While care is nec-
essary to prevent short-circuiting, this alleviates problems
arising from the considerable wind pressure difference
that can develop on opposite sides of a building.

Air-lock entries should be used where close control of
conditions is required and for clean rooms, but conven-
tional doors with close ﬁt and self-closures are sufﬁcient.
Fire authorities may stipulate pressurization of certain
areas such as stairways and may require smoke-extract
systems to be brought into operation automatically in the
event of a ﬁre. They should be consulted at an early stage
of the design.

29.3 Heat losses and gains
29.3.1 Heat losses

Heat transfer through a partition is a function of resis-
tance to heat ﬂow, the temperature difference driving the
heat through and the surface area. The function of heat-
ing systems is to provide the heat lost in maintaining the
temperature difference. Thus
Heat ﬂow (watts) is U ð TD ð area

where U is a coefﬁcient for the partition in watts per
m2 °C. For each room served the loss through each wall,
ceiling and ﬂoor should be calculated and for each part of
those surfaces where differences occur, such as windows
in walls or cantilevered structures of upper ﬂoors.

The U values of many partitions or composite con-
structions can be found in standard references but others
may have to be calculated where no data are available or
changes are contemplated. The resistivity (r) of each ele-
ment of the partition encountered by the heat in passing
through must be found and multiplied by the thickness
in meters. Manufacturers are usually able to give resis-
tivities. The sum (R total) of all the elements, including
the inner and outer surface resistances and the resistance

Heat losses and gains 29/489

of any interleaf air gap, is found. The U value is the
reciprocal of R total. For example, for a wall:

Outer surface (normal exposure)
112 mm brick skin 0.12 ð 0.112
50 mm un-insulated air gap
150 mm lightweight block skin 5.88 ð 0.15
15 mm rendering 2.5 ð 0.015
Inner surface
R total D
U D 1/R D
If this is insufﬁcient for the purpose (e.g. the external wall
of a dwelling house) the problem could be reworked using
insulation in the interleaf gap.

0.055
0.01344
0.180
0.882
0.0375
0.123
1.29094
0.775

The temperature at any intermediate point is propor-
tional to the R total to that point. This may be used to
decide whether that point is above or below the dewpoint
of penetrating air.

In maritime climates such as the UK and coastal US,
the lowest external temperatures are not sustained for long
periods. The mass of the structure has a slugging effect,
and it is safe to use a relatively high external design tem-
perature. These ﬁgures do not apply to an outside air
intake where the full effect of low temperature is felt
immediately nor to lightweight structures. When choos-
ing a design temperature difference, one must take into
account that adjacent rooms may not always be heated to
their design temperature. Heat bridges, which are weak
points in the insulation, must also be considered in pro-
portion to their areas.

Cold outside air introduced to the system by inﬁltration
or by design of the plant will require heat to be added by
the plant or directly in the room to maintain the room
temperature. The heat required is
kg/s ð 1.02 ð °C TD kW
For inﬁltration, it is convenient to use m3/h ð 0.33 ð
°C TD watts, but where air conditioning is employed,
inﬁltration should not be allowed. Air lost from the space
by pressurization carries heat away but this is not an
additional load beyond that mentioned above.

The available heating capacity should exceed the calcu-
lated ﬁgure, this being sufﬁcient only to balance the losses
under steady conditions. A 25–50 per cent excess capac-
ity is recommended to provide warm-up from cold and
good response to controls but without excess overshoot.
It is important in close control air-conditioning design to
have sufﬁcient heating capacity to raise the room tem-
perature from cold following plant stoppage. If the room
is cold, the controls will see high rh and call for dehu-
midiﬁcation upon restarting. Unless this is countered by
sufﬁcient reheat the control of conditions will not recover
automatically.

29.3.2 Internal gains

Any heat liberated within the room reduces the heat-
ing effort required by the plant. At any time these gains
exceed the loss more than marginally, cooling is required.
Heat sources are:

29/490 Air Conditioning

1. The total electrical input to the room unless power is
carried away by cable or heat by pipe. This includes
lighting and it should be remembered that the input
to ﬂuorescent ﬁttings is greater than the tube ratings.
Some luminaires are designed as air-extract ﬁttings, in
which case their heat is a load on cooling plant, but
does not contribute to room heating unless the plant is
in a non-cooling recycling mode;

2. Heat from other processes unless carried away by pipe

or items are taken out of the room;

3. Heat from personnel (see Section 29.1);
4. There should be no space heating within air-
conditioned rooms but some gains may arise from hot
water pipes passing through to other areas;

5. Gains from adjacent spaces held at a higher temperature;
6. Heat gains into ducts where these pass through warm

areas en route;

7. The shaft power of fans will appear in the system as
heat. Where the drive motor is in the air stream the
whole of the motor input will appear as heat.

29.3.3 Heat gains

The calculation of heat gains through the building fab-
ric is more complicated than for heat losses, taking into
account the gains from both the air-temperature difference
and from solar intensity. The gain varies during the day
with the movement of the sun and changes in air temper-
ature. Heavily glazed buildings are susceptible to large
gains from low sun elevations at all times of year and
here building orientation can have a considerable effect
on plant loads.

A structure with a large mass will result in the peak
gain appearing on the inside some hours after the external
peak, and the gain will be attenuated since the outside
condition will be reduced before that time. The time of
peak gain will differ for each of the enclosing surfaces,
so it is necessary to calculate each for several hours to
ﬁnd the peak for one room and to repeat this for each
room to ﬁnd the peak load on a plant serving several
rooms. Computer packages of varying merit are available
to undertake this laborious task but the broad method is
shown below.

To avoid temperature shock and for economy, the con-
trol of comfort air conditioning may be allowed to drift
with extremes of external temperature. However, where
the design is to maintain speciﬁed internal conditions
under virtually all-external conditions data may need to
be adjusted upwards.

Gains through walls
(cid:7)A ð U ð (cid:7)M (cid:3) T(cid:10)(cid:10) C (cid:7)A ð U ð F ð (cid:7)P (cid:3) M(cid:10)(cid:10) watts

where
A D area (m),
U D W/m°C,
M D mean solair temperature (°C) (solair temperature is
a composite temperature taking into account
outside dry bulb temperature and solar radiation),

T D ﬁxed room temperature (°C),

F D factor depending on wall thickness (varies from 1
at zero thickness to approximately 0.05 at 0.5 m
thick),

P D solair intensity at the sun time considered.
The delayed time at which this gain is manifest depends
on the structure thickness and density and varies from
zero for zero thickness to 15 hours for 0.5-m thickness.

Gains through windows
A ð (cid:7)(cid:7)C ð I(cid:10) C U ð (cid:7)O (cid:3) T(cid:10)(cid:10) watts
where
A D area (m),
U D W/m°C,
C D solar gain factor,
I D direct radiation intensity,
T D room temperature (°C),
O D outside temperature (°C).
The gain is immediate.

29.3.4 Heat of outside air intake

In close control air conditioning, the condition of the out-
side air is rarely as required for passing forward to the
controlled space. Therefore, it contributes to the cooling,
heating, humidiﬁcation or dehumidiﬁcation loads on the
plant. Whether computer rooms, laboratories, etc. with
their sparse population are considered or auditoria where
there is a larger ventilation requirement, the peak latent
heat load caused by treating the outside air is greater than
that from the personnel. The heat from personnel is given
in Section 29.1.

The calculation of the heat of intake air is in two parts:
Mass ﬂow kg/s ð change in latent heat kJ/kg (from tables
or psychrometric chart) (kW); plus
Mass ﬂow kg/s ð change in sensible heat kJ/kg (kW).

29.4 Air conditioning for computers
29.4.1 The computer

In the context of this section, a computer is a large main-
frame machine standing in its own room. The machine
is housed in cabinets 1–2 m high with a meter or so
clearance all round. Some items are purely electronic;
others handle magnetic tape, magnetic discs or paper.
The function may be printed output following calcula-
tions, information storage and retrieval or electronic con-
trol of a remote process. In the largest conﬁgurations
output printers and communications equipment may be
housed in their own adjacent rooms but with similar envi-
ronmental control. Other associated rooms which require
air conditioning if included in the suite are: Job Assem-
bly, Operations Control Room, Magnetic Media Store,
Computer Engineer’s room, Ready-Use Stationary Store.
The main stationary stores and store for master tapes are
not normally conditioned although they are heated in cool
weather. The items can be conditioned in the Job Assem-
bly room before use. Reserve master magnetic media can

be housed in a remote building or room where, in tem-
perate and warm climates, conditions are maintained by
building mass.

The computer will dissipate large amounts of heat
which have to be removed to prevent temperature rise.
There is usually a contractual requirement
to provide
conditions within close limits to ensure reliability and to
allow handling media at high speed. The requirements are
speciﬁed by the computer manufacturer, and are typically
21°C š 2°C and 50 per cent rh š5 per cent together with
a ﬁlter performance of 80 per cent average arrestance
Euro 4/5 or 80 per cent average efﬁciency Euro 4/5,
at least in the outside air intake (see Section 29.7). The
control should center on the speciﬁed ﬁgures and only
touch limits (if at all) with changes of load. In spite of
developments in design, heat concentrations tend to rise
and conﬁgurations expand.

Modern telecommunications equipment is very similar,
but environmental tolerances are normally much wider,
with particular emphasis on reliability.

29.4.2 Air supply

Cooling air to the cabinets is normally introduced from
the room at low-level front or back with fan-assisted dis-
charge to the rear or top. The normal practice is to intro-
duce room-cooling air at high level. This mixes with rising
hot air to give a near-uniform condition in the occupied
levels. The distribution of cooling air must be carefully
matched to heat load around the room. A large room (say,
over 300m2) should have separate zones of control with
their own sensors. The ceiling void should nevertheless
be common. The recirculation of air will conﬁne itself to
the zones fed by individual units when all are running but
will be redistributed by a ventilated ceiling in the event
of partial failure of plant modules.

The easiest and most ﬂexible method of introducing air
is by a ventilated false ceiling. A great advantage of a
ventilated ceiling supply is that the layout of the com-
puter or indeed its make and heat pattern may not be
known at the time of air-conditioning design, and will
most certainly alter during the life of the plant. The dis-
tribution of supply air can be altered to match the load
providing sufﬁcient cooling capacity and air volume are
installed.

Upward airﬂow is also practiced. The cable void formed
by the raised ﬂoor is used to supply air which enters
the room via ﬂoor grilles. These can be moved to meet
the pattern of heat distribution and are normally placed
close to the computer cabinets, but consideration must be
given to changing air conditions, intended to meet chang-
ing room load, entering the computer compartments. Care
has to be taken to avoid the updraft lifting dust into the
occupied space.

The extracts may be in the ceiling with the advantage
of taking up the heat of lights without it passing to the
room. Greater use can thus be made of a given airﬂow.
Care has to be taken in the choice of grilles if trolley
trafﬁc is going to be present. Low supply temperatures
may cause discomfort to staff.

Air conditioning for computers 29/491

29.4.3 Air extract

Air extract can be at one wall or extract grilles can be
interleaved. The normal for all but the smallest comput-
ers is to use the under ﬂoor cable void as a return path.
This void is formed by proprietary 600 mm or 2 ft square
interchangeable tiles standing on corner jacks. Some of
these may be perforated or they may be ﬁtted with grilles.
A maximum velocity of 2.5 m/s over the grille face or
through perforations is recommended. Depending on the
detail of the tile chosen, a pressure drop of about 10 Pa
can be expected, but in the case of carpet-covered tiles
where the holes tend to become obstructed, a down rating
to 70 per cent is recommended.

29.4.4 Chilled water

Some very large machines have a direct supply of chilled
water to a heat exchanger in the central processor or its
store, the ﬁnal distribution within the machine being part
of its design. The user’s responsibility is the provision
of half couplings (often Hanson, USA) and the chilled
water supply rate, temperature, pressure, pH and other
analyses. Welded pipe and vapor-sealed insulation are
essential. End-stop valves should be installed and consid-
eration should be give to ﬁtting bypasses to compensate
for changes in demand and to allow one computer (if there
is more than one) to be fed while another is uncoupled.
Consideration should also be given to the installation of
moisture detectors under ﬂoor.
The plant should be replicated for reliability and to
allow maintenance (say, 3 ð 50 per cent capacity). Pro-
prietary units are available speciﬁcally for this function.
The ﬁnal connection to the computer is by ﬂexible pipe,
but it is still necessary to coordinate with others to know
the position to terminate and, in due course, which ﬂoor
tile is to be cut and precisely how. This can be expected
to entail extra ﬂoor jacks.

29.4.5 Computer heat

Ideally, the air-conditioning designer is given the heat
loads to be catered for at the outset. However, in the fast-
moving ﬁeld of computers this may not always be the
case. Also, the life of the plant is likely to outlast more
than one computer conﬁguration but need not itself require
more than re-zoning. Particularly where a computer has
a number of peripherals, it is unlikely to dissipate fully
to the maker’s data at any one time, but it is strongly
recommended that further diversity on that for individual
items given at the maker is not allowed in the design
of the cooling capacity of the plant. It is unwise not
to allow for expansion of the computer conﬁguration.
An initial design on a basis of an overall heat dissipa-
tion (say, 500 w/m2 overall average) unevenly distributed
about the room is not unreasonable for large computer
halls. In this ﬁeld the design engineer should not be afraid
to question his brief if the client is to be well served.
Flexibility to cater for changes has already been covered
above.

29/492 Air Conditioning

29.4.6 Telecommunications

Much telecommunications equipment is designed for over-
head cabling, which can be very extensive and dense. Any
modern equipment which relies on cooling to function
should have breaks in the cabling layout partly to allow
cool air to fall. In the case of naturally ventilated racks
the air discharge should be directed down gangways (the
racks being arranged in long suites) and not directly over
the racks. A ventilated ceiling supply can be conﬁned to
the racked area to allow other services to pass without
breaking the ceiling. Except in smaller cases, for modern
systems duct and diffuser designs may be insufﬁciently
ﬂexible and may not be able to meet the concentrations of
heat without discomfort to attendants. However, in small
installations (150 m2) air-handling units may be employed
directing air freely over the top of the cabling.

While the air distribution must match the heat distribu-
tion, the position of extracts is not important. Direct return
to air-handling units mounted around the room in numbers
necessary for reliability is common practice. In the event
of loss of one or more cooling modules a well-designed
ventilated ceiling adds to reliability by distributing the
reduced amount of air in the same proportions throughout
the room.

29.5 Air distribution and system
resistance
29.5.1 Duct sizing

Ducts convey conditioning air from point to point at a
variety of speeds. Slow speeds result in large ducts, costly
in themselves and in building space. High speeds result
in noise and the need for high fan powers. A good basis
for air conditioning is 6–7 m/s adjacent to the plant but,
as discussed below, less at distant points.

When we refer here to static pressure we mean the
difference between internal and external pressure causing
air to tend to ﬂow into or out of ducts. Velocity pressure
is that due to the air’s forward movement. The sum of the
two is total pressure.

29.5.2 Duct design

Simple runs of a few meters may be designed for a con-
stant velocity. A supply duct is thus reduced in steps at
each outlet or a return or exhaust duct similarly increased
in section in the direction of ﬂow.

A large system with branches, several inlets or outlets
and some tens of meters long will be more easily con-
trolled at the end distant from the plant if velocities are
reduced as we progress down the length of the duct. If air
is slowed in a controlled way with the duct sides diverging
at not more than 15° included angle its velocity pressure
will reduce and (ideally, without loss) its static pressure
will rise to maintain a constant total head to compen-
sate for pressure loss as the air progresses down the duct.
However, at least by manual methods, design for static
regain is laborious and the duct shape unconventional. It
is seldom practiced.

A method commonly used is that of equal surface fric-
tion per unit run. If rectangular ducts are being considered
their equivalent circular diameter must be found. This may
be obtained by
1.3 ð [(cid:7)w ð d(cid:10)Ð625]/[(cid:7)w C d(cid:10)Ð25(cid:10)]

Here w and d are width and depth and the units may be
meters or millimeters. Alternatively, the diameter may be
found from published charts. Using Figure 29.5 a pres-
sure gradient (Pa/m) is chosen and with each change of
volume ﬂow a new diameter is found. This is converted to
a convenient rectangular section equivalent to the round
section. It will be seen that the velocity reduces.

Where practicable, the large surface area of wide shal-
low ducts should be avoided to keep pressure gradients
to a minimum. There can be no hard-and-fast rule, 4:1
being a suggested limit. The system may, of course, be
designed to use only round-section ducts.

29.5.3 System pressure drop

The point of interest is the path of highest pressure drop
or index leg. Other parallel branches can be designed of
appropriate size to pass the required amount of air, those
of lower resistance than the index leg being throttled by
dampers. The pressure drop is the sum of the drops caused
by the following and is calculated to determine the pres-
sure against which the fan must operate:
Surface friction of duct as discused above (Pa/m ð
length);
Changes in section;
Bends;
Branches;
Obstructions;
Grilles, meshes, etc.
Pressure drop is calculated by k ð velocity pressure,
where k is the resistance factor for the above items
other than duct friction and is found from Table 29.1
or similar
references. Velocity pressure is found by
2 density ð velocity2, taking standard density at 1.2 kg/m3,
1
or from Table 29.2.

Plant resistance

In the design of tailor-made plant it is necessary to cal-
culate the above as they occur within the plant and add
the pressure drop of all other items such as air ﬁlters at
their dirty conditions, coils, etc. In the case of proprietary
units it is normal for the manufacturers to quote an exter-
nal pressure against which they will deliver the speciﬁed
air quantity.

Duct resistance

The basis of good duct design is to arrange gradual change
to section and direction. It is sometimes necessary to
construct a 90° elbow with no inside radius. The pres-
sure drop and noise generation can be greatly reduced
by incorporating turn vanes which split the air into a

Air distribution and system resistance 29/493

0
1
×

 

1
×

 

/

m
a
P

1

.

0
×

 

9
7

9
7

9
7

1
8

6
5
4
3

2

1
8

6
5
4
3

2

1
8

6
5
4
3

2

m)

Diameter (m

150

15 m/s

300

10 m/s

450

600

6 m/s

4 m/s

3 m/s

750

900

1050

1020

1500

2000

1
0.1

0.2

0.3 0.40.5

0.7 0.9

0.6 0.8 1.0

2

3 4 5 6 7 8 910

20

30 40 50 60

80 100

70 90

Volume flow (m/s)

Figure 29.5 Pressure gradient in circular steel ducts

number of near-parallel paths. The information given in
Table 29.3 assumes simple (non-airfoil) turn vanes (see
also Figure 29.6).

29.5.4 Ventilated ceilings

A ventilated ceiling is an alternative to ducts, diffusers
and grilles as a means of distributing air within a room. It
is suspended below the structural ceiling forming a shal-
low void. One type consists of perforated metal trays
or tiles. Each is supplied with a bagged acoustic pad,
which is removed from those trays or tiles which are to
ventilate. Another consists of tiles with single-row slot
openings at intervals between runs of tiles, the open-
ings being controlled by dampers integral with the slots.
Any type of tile which can shed dust or is combustible
should be avoided. Rising hot air and descending cold
air mix a few hundred millimeters below the ceiling,
giving a near-uniform condition in the occupied levels.

The availability of very small areas of control can be
advantageous where electronic apparatus with mild chim-
ney effect would have its natural cooling upset by strong
downdrafts, by conﬁning air supply to gangways.

The method is useful where large quantities of air are
to be introduced without drafts; where the distribution of
heat load is unknown at the time of design or is likely to
alter; and where, as a measure of reliability, it is required
to redistribute the remaining air in the original proportions
in the event of partial failure of the plant.

Ventilated ceilings can cater for 1 kW load per square
meter and in excess of 100 ach. Lighting and power tracks
can be incorporated and ﬁre-detection heads ﬁtted. In
computer suites (see Section 29.4) it is normal to combine
a ventilated ceiling supply with an under ﬂoor extract,
which is then not critical as to layout of grilles and assists
any heating mode. The pressure and slot velocity are, for
all practical purposes, uniform throughout the ceiling area,
and the air pattern is ﬁnally set by checking the room

29/494 Air Conditioning

temperature from point to point. Pressure drops are of the
order of 20 Pa. Void depths are seldom critical, being a
function of the throw required and the presence of obstruc-
tions such as beams or pipes. Depths of 200–1000 mm
are common, with throws from the entry point of up to
20 times void depth.

The air supply is introduced by stub ducts penetrating
the void by 0.5 m or less and simply cut off square. How-
ever, where there are obstructions across the void it can
be advantageous to convey a proportion of the air to or
past this by extended ducts. Equally, it can be advanta-
geous to duct air part-way if it is to double back round

a corner. In general, however, the system is very toler-
ant, including positioning air entries about the room. Stub
velocities should be 3.5–5 m/s but individual manufactur-
ers will give their own requirements.

Unless beams are present at the entry the stubs should
be close to the structural ceiling. Beam fairing may be
used where the void has to be shallow and this can reduce
the risk of re-entrainment due to local high-velocity pres-
sure. Zone barriers are ﬁtted within the void where sepa-
rate rooms are to be fed. The ceiling need not cover the
whole room.

Table 29.1 Resistance factors

Table 29.1 (continued)

Fans 29/495

Table 29.2 Velocity pressure (Pa)

m/s

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

0.0
0.01
0.02
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.22
0.29
0.38
0.49

0.6
0.73
0.86
1.01
1.18
1.35
1.54
1.73
1.94
2.17

2.4
2.65
2.90
3.17
3.46
3.75
4.06
4.37
4.7
5.05

5.4
5.77
6.14
6.53
6.94
7.35
7.78
8.21
8.66
9.13

9.6
10.09
10.58
11.09
11.62
12.15
12.7
13.25
13.52
14.41

15.0
15.61
16.22
16.85
17.5
18.15
18.82
19.49
20.15
20.89

21.6
22.33
23.06
23.81
24.58
25.35
26.14
26.93
27.74
28.57

29.4
30.25
31.1
31.97
32.86
33.75
34.66
35.57
36.5
37.45

38.4
39.37
40.34
41.33
42.34
43.35
44.38
45.41
46.46
47.53

48.6
49.69
50.78
51.89
53.02
54.15
55.30
56.45
56.62
58.81

60.10
61.21
62.42
63.65
64.90
66.15
67.42
68.69
69.98
71.29

Table 29.3 Where to place splitters

Duct width

(m)

0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
k factors:
If none
1.25

If one split

r1

(mm)

110
155
190
226
255

0.65

If two
r1 r2
(mm)

65,190
85,280
100,380
110,470
115,540

If three
r1 r2 r3

(mm)

50,110,230
60,150,380
65,190,520
70,230,660
75,255,790

0.5

0.45

29.6 Fans
29.6.1 Fan selection

Fans propel the air through the system, and must be cho-
sen to be capable of delivering the required volume ﬂow
against the calculated system static pressure, advisedly
with a small margin.

Individual fans are capable of operating over a range
of volumes and pressures which are interrelated,
the
performance being shown in manufacturers’ tables and
curves. Venturing outside the recommended area of
operation may, depending on the type of fan, result in
motor overload, motor under-cooling, vibration or stall.

29/496 Air Conditioning

R3

R2

R1

Figure 29.6 Splitters in miter bends

Selection should be made for minimum power input,
which is also likely to be the quietest fan for the duty.
Performance is usually quoted for a standard condition
of 1.2 m3/kg. Calculations of system resistance are best
carried out at the same condition. The user may ﬁnd only
the static pressure quoted. If total or velocity pressure
are also quoted or the outlet velocity can be calculated
the designer can calculate how much pressure can be
recovered after the exit. Any mismatch due to difﬁculty
in calculating system resistance will cause the volume to
rise or fall, to settle on the fan characteristic curve.

29.6.2 Types

The broad range of types used in air conditioning is:

1. Centrifugal
2. Axial
3. Propeller
4. Cross ﬂow

The centrifugal fan has an inlet on the axis of rotation
and outlet from a scroll casing 90° from the inlet. The
centrifugal fan is not reversible. The characteristics of the
fan are determined by blade shape, i.e.:

1. Straight blades or paddle wheel: Low efﬁciency; used

for conveying particle-laden air.

2. Forward-curved blades: Moves large volumes for a
given size; the driving power-required rises markedly
with increased volume, necessitating an adequately
rated drive motor.

3. Back-curved

blades: Highest

the
group; more stable characteristic of volume against
pressure; capable of developing higher pressures; non-
overloading, i.e. the power does not rise to a peak as
the ﬂow tends to zero or free ﬂow.

efﬁciency

of

4. Many developments of the centrifugal fan exist, the
most commonly employed being the double-width
double-inlet fan moving twice the volume for a given

wheel diameter. It
is possible in large tailor-made
plants to arrange for the drive motor (and hence its
efﬁciency losses) to be external to the air stream.

Axial fans have a cylindrical casing and the fan blades
are mounted on an extension of the shaft on the centerline.
The blades are normally of airfoil section. Axial fans are
available with adjustable blade angles which allow dif-
ferent characteristics from one construction or alteration
on-site by specialists. The power characteristic is usu-
ally non-overloading. In the working range the developed
pressure increases with reduced volume. Stall is said to
occur when the fan can no longer develop the pressure to
deliver the required air volume. This is a feature of high
blade-angle fans. It is best not to attempt to use such a
fan to deliver too small a volume.

They are reversible with varying degrees of efﬁciency.
Air leaves the blades with rotary motion and can be
straightened by downstream vanes, leading to increased
pressure development. Two-stage contra-rotating fans
develop more than twice the pressure of a single stage.
Further staging may be arranged.

When using conventional induction motors the ﬁxed-
supply frequency and the number of ﬁeld poles in the
motor restrict the available range of speeds. It should be
noted that, outside Europe, supply frequencies other than
50 Hz are used, resulting in induction motors operating at
proportionally different speeds, and that this applies to all
types of fan.

Special versions are available, such as hazard-proof
and for high-pressure operation, but these are not nor-
mally applicable to the ﬁeld of air conditioning. Fans are
available with fewer blades (part-solidity) to allow the
use of smaller higher-speed motors. There are also fans
with short casings having a length little more than that to
accommodate the blades for use in conﬁned spaces.

Propeller fans are of low capital cost for the volume
moved but are used in applications where the resistance
is very small such as non-ducted openings through parti-
tions. The power required increases with resistance. Their
pressure–volume characteristic changes with the relative
position of the blades and mounting plate.

Cross-ﬂow fans have a blade arrangement similar to that
of a back-ﬂow centrifugal fan but the casing arrangement
allows the incoming air to enter along the width of the
blades, avoiding the 90° turn. Long narrow shapes can
be arranged, making them suitable for use in small air-
handling units, fan heaters or air curtains.

29.6.3 Multiple arrangements

Fan may be operated in parallel but are best of similar
characteristic to avoid stalling. In the event of failure of
one the effect of reduced pressure drop in the system is
to give a ﬂow of about two thirds that of two. Non-return
dampers should be ﬁtted.

Fans may also be operated in series. Axial-ﬂow fans
are available having two (contra-rotating) impellers and
motors in the one casing. Further staging may be arranged.
If one stage fails or is switched off it will idle round with
loss, but since similar losses in centrifugal fans are much

higher, these are not usually operated in series. However,
supply and extract fans in a recirculating system effec-
tively in series may differ.

29.6.4 Fan laws

The laws quoted here are selected as those appropriate to
the practicable applications of fans:

Volume ﬂow varies as the speed of rotation;
Pressure varies as the square of speed of rotation;
Power varies as the cube of the speed of rotation;
At constant speed a fan delivers constant volume (m3/s)
into a ﬁxed system in spite of change in density;
Pressure and power absorbed vary as change in density.

29.6.5 Volume regulation

This falls under two headings:

1. Where a permanent change is found to be needed dur-
ing commissioning or change of duty. The volume may
be changed:
(a) By variation of system resistance by damper action.
Care is needed to prevent axial fan motors over-
heating or reaching the stall point;

(b) By changing the speed of the drive. In centrifugal
fans the common practice is to change or adjust
belt drive pulleys, taking care not to exceed the
power capability of the motor. In axial fans the
pitch of the blades may be adjustable by swivel
mountings on the hub.

2. Where frequent change is required in the normal oper-

ation of the plant:
(a) By switching motors in multi-stage fans;
(b) By speed control of motors electrically (e.g. by
pole changing), varying the circuit resistance of
wound rotor motors, or thyristor part-cycle discon-
nection;

(c) By damper modulation;
(d) By bypass (fan recirculation) dampers;
(e) By axial fans with pitch variable while running.

Mounting

It is common practice to support the fan on anti-vibration
mountings and connect the fan casing to the duct by short
lengths of ﬂexible non-combustible material. Care should
be taken during installation to see that these are aligned
to prevent entry turbulence and noise generation.

29.7 Dust control and ﬁltration
29.7.1 Dust control

Dust is continually being introduced to the conditioned
space by clothing ﬁbers, skin particles, shoe dirt, room
processes and the outside air make-up. Dust particle
sizes range from 1 µm to 75 µm, smaller particles being
described as smoke. In an apparently clean ofﬁce there
may be as many as 30 million particles per cubic meter.

Dust control and ﬁltration 29/497

Control is by ﬁltration in the plant but smoke can be

removed by local recirculation through fan ﬁlter units.

For Clean Rooms (rooms of a very high standard) dust
count per unit volume will be speciﬁed, but other spec-
iﬁcations for room cleanliness are usually in terms of
ﬁltration performance against a standard test dust. Other
important features are resistance to air ﬂow and dust-
holding capacity, leading to the fan energy required and
ﬁlter life.

By number count the great majority of particles in the
outside air are likely to be less than 1 µm. By weight, these
small particles will account for a very small proportion of
the sample. A ﬁlter with a high efﬁciency measured by
weight of particles trapped may be almost transparent to
the small ones. Very high counts can be found in rural
areas from pollen or agricultural activities.

Where a high cleaning efﬁciency is required it is sound
practice to install a ﬁlter of lower performance upstream
to trap the larger particles and prolong the life of the more
expensive High Efﬁciency Particulate (HEPA) Air Filter.
Two ﬁlters of equal merit placed in series will not be
materially more efﬁcient than one.

The action of most ﬁlters is mechanical. These are nor-
mally scrapped when fully loaded but may, for lower
efﬁciencies, be washable. Another type uses electrostatic
charges.

29.7.2 Electrostatic ﬁlters

These are usually provided with a mechanical pre-ﬁlter to
remove the larger particles and serve to even out the ﬂow
over the face. The air then passes between plates posi-
tively charged at 10 or more kV and the dust thus ionized
is attracted to downstream plates charged at a lower volt-
age negatively. A mechanical after-ﬁlter may also be ﬁtted
in case electric ﬂashover at the plates releases dirt. Clean-
ing is by hot water wash, necessitating drying procedures,
or by mechanical agitation. Their resistance to airﬂow is
low and their efﬁciency good against small particles. They
are not often employed in general air-conditioning work.

29.7.3 Tests

Different
test methods produce numerically different
results and comparisons should only be made of results
using the same test method. Tests fall into three categories:
gravimetric tests, which measure ability to trap and retain
dust; those which measure staining power of contaminants
before and after ﬁltration; and those measuring the
concentration of a test aerosol either side of the ﬁlter by
photoelectric methods. The tests which will be met most
often are as follows.

BS 2831 has been withdrawn. The No. 1 test for high-
grade ﬁlters has been superseded by BS 3928 for absolute
ﬁlters (those having an efﬁciency of better than 99.9 per
cent in that or similar tests) and by ASHRAE 52–76.

ASHRAE 52–76

This forms the basis of Eurovent 4/5. There are two tests.
The atmospheric dust spot efﬁciency test, assessing the

29/498 Air Conditioning

reduction of staining power of atmospheric dust, is gener-
ally used for the higher efﬁciencies as well as the synthetic
dust weight arrestance test, using an artiﬁcial dust. In both
cases averages are quoted from a series of tests.

Filters are classiﬁed in BS 6540: Part 1 – Eurovent 4/5
but without statements of airﬂow rate or ﬁnal pressure
drop. From the lower performance upwards:
Average arrestances (Am) EU1 <65%; EU2 ½ 65 to
<80%; EU3 ½ 80% to <90%; EU4 >90%
Average efﬁciencies (Em) EU5 ½ 40% to <60%; EU6
½ 60% to <80%; EU7 ½ 80% to <90%; EU8 ½ 90%
to <95%; EU9 >95%

Higher cleaning ability is tested to Eurovent 4/4.

BS 3928

This test uses a cloud of sodium chloride particles. The
size distribution is from below 0.1 µm to approximately
2.0 µm and a ﬁgure for percentage penetration is obtained.
Since the test does not materially load the ﬁlter, it can be
used to assess the quality of each unit before dispatch.
This test forms the basis of Eurovent 4/4, which differs a
little in procedure.

29.7.4 Standards required

For many applications, ﬁlters with an average arrestance
of 80 per cent against Eurovent 4/5 will serve, but in
situations that are more critical and, for example, in the
outside air intake of computer rooms or laboratories 80
per cent average efﬁciency would be chosen.

29.7.5 Clean rooms

The dust count to be achieved may be speciﬁed in terms
of US Federal Standard 209b. There are three standards:
100, 10,000 and 100,000, which are the maximum counts
per cubic foot of 0.5 µm and larger particles. Maxima for
5 µm particles are also given. BS 5295 has four classes:
1 is the most stringent and calls for a marginally lower
count than US Federal Standard 209b, class 100. It carries
details for a range of particle sizes, room construction and
airﬂow pattern. Laminar ﬂow is required for the cleanest
areas, which can be achieved when the ceiling or one wall
of the room is composed of a louvered ﬁlter bank. Filter
efﬁciencies ranging from 70 per cent to 99.995 per cent
are recommended.

29.7.6 Filter life

Filter life varies with make and type, and may be limited
by the ability of the fan to operate against pressure drop.
It is a function of the dirtiness of the air and the amount
of material packed into the ﬁlter bank. Life may be quoted
in terms of dust held in g/m2 face area. For fan selection
knowledge of pressure drop is required. Typically, a panel
ﬁlter might be quoted as operating from, say, 75 Pa ini-
tially at 2.5 m/s face velocity to 250 Pa when loaded and
a HEPA might operate up to 700 Pa. The pressure drop

across a bank of ﬁlters is kept within bounds by changing
a proportion in rotation.

29.7.7 General

Care should be taken during installation to see that there
is no edge leakage. For tailor-made plants, it is best if ﬁl-
ters are kept sealed in their delivery containers until after
the plant has been completed and vacuumed out. Unﬁn-
ished duct ends should be covered during the progress
of other work, since cleaning will be almost impossible,
except by the expedient of blowing through and physically
disturbing them.

Filters should meet at least the requirements of (in the
UK) BS 2963 and in some cases be non-combustible to
BS 476: Part 4, although construction methods render this
difﬁcult.

29.8 Humidiﬁcation
The ability to add moisture to the air to raise humidity
is an essential part of close control air conditioning. The
need may be brought about by a change in the condition
of the outside air, fabric losses or a change in the gains
within the room or in plant operation.

29.8.1 Humidiﬁer capacity

The humidiﬁer is sized to meet the load of the outside
air intake quantity. It is necessary to know the rh to be
achieved, outside air intake rate (kg/s) and its lowest win-
ter moisture content (kg/kg).

Since the capacity will be reduced by blowdown time,
allowance is necessary for control, and there will be leaks
from the plant and building fabric, an addition of about
30 per cent above the calculated value is recommended.

29.8.2 Types of humidiﬁer

These may be direct (i.e. installed within the conditioned
room) or indirect (i.e. installed in the conditioning plant).
Water may be introduced (a) as a spray or mist or (b) as
steam generated separately or by a device within the plant.
In most air-conditioning work, the humidiﬁer will be
indirect. The psychrometric operation of various types is
described below.

29.8.3 Pan humidiﬁer

The steam is generated in a pan of water by electric ele-
ments. High-temperature hot water or steam coils could
also be used. About 30 per cent of the input appears as
waste sensible heat, giving a sensible heat ratio of 0.3.

Where the pan is in the air stream the condition down-
stream of the pan has increased moisture content (kg/kg)
found from the airﬂow and moisture input. On a psychro-
metric chart, this will lie on a line of sensible-to-total heat
ratio of 0.3. Thus, the psychrometric plot shows a steep
rise in moisture content with a small rise in dry bulb
temperature. The latter is a disadvantage when cooling is

required. Regular blowdown is needed, preferably con-
trolled by a timer, to prevent furring when mains water
is used, and open pans should not be utilized where the
conditioned space is to be dust controlled. A small water
volume is an aid to quick response.

29.8.4 Steam jet

Where it is available the source can be a separate boiler
plant, but common practice is to employ purpose-made
electrode boilers within or adjacent to the plant. The latter
reduces sensible gains to the plant but, being essentially
saturated steam, condensate return pipes are required. In
addition to the rise in moisture content of the air (kg/kg)
being dependent on airﬂow and steam-injection rates,
there is a very small increase in dry bulb temperature
by the cooling of the vapor to the air temperature. The
rise in total heat is: total heat of steam (kJ/kg) ð quantity
supplied per kg air.

Proprietary units are supplied with automatic blow-
down cycles and can be matched to the broad water anal-
ysis. Cylinders have a limited life.

29.8.5 Spray humidiﬁers

Water is injected into the air stream in a ﬁne mist by
pumped jets or spinning disc. For practical purposes, the
psychrometric plot follows a wet bulb line. The air pro-
vides the latent heat of evaporation, resulting in a fall
in dry bulb temperature. If water were to be supplied
at up to 100°C the humidiﬁed condition would be at a
correspondingly higher total heat of 420 kJ per kg water
supplied.

Where dust control is important the system should only
be used with a supply of demineralized water to avoid
solids being passed into the conditioned space. The tem-
perature of the air must be sufﬁcient to hold the quantity
of moisture being supplied, any excess being deposited in
the duct. Unless drained away, this can give rise to corro-
sion and to incorrect control by re-evaporation when the
humidiﬁer is switched off under control.

29.8.6 Air washers

Banks of sprays discharge water into the air stream to
achieve saturation of the whole air ﬂow. Excess water
falls into the base tank of the washer, from which it is
pumped back to the sprays. Downstream eliminator plates
entrap any remaining free moisture, acting best within a
speciﬁed velocity range. Cleanliness is essential to avoid
bacterial growth. A constant bleed and make-up is nor-
mally arranged to control the accumulation of waterborne
solids, but this, in turn, dilutes bactericides and inhibitors.
The washer does not fully wash the air in the normal sense
but does have the cleaning efﬁciency of a low-grade ﬁlter.
If the temperature of the water is not controlled it
will come to the wet bulb temperature of the air pass-
ing through. Ignoring pump heat, the process is adiabatic.
The psychrometric plot follows a wet bulb line.

If heat is added to the water, the condition for 100 per
cent saturation takes the new wet bulb temperature of the
incoming air.

Test procedure for air-conditioning systems 29/499

If the water is chilled, cooling of the supply air takes
place together with control of dewpoint and hence humid-
ity of the room treated. Saturation efﬁciency is given by:
Entering air db (cid:3) leaving air db
Entering air db (cid:3) entering air wb
Due to bypass, a single bank of sprays might achieve 60
per cent saturation and a capillary washer (one where the
air passes through a wetted mat) might achieve 95 per
cent.

ð 100%

29.8.7 Humidiﬁer run time

Humidiﬁcation is an expensive process and it is useful
to be able to assess energy costs when considering its
inclusion in a plant. It is possible from meteorological
records for any particular area to ﬁnd the time in hours
per year and extent to which the external moisture content
is, on average, at or below a required absolute value. As
an example, in the southern UK humidiﬁcation would be
required in varying degrees for 6700 hours per year if
21°C 50 per cent relative humidity was to be maintained.
If the characteristic of cooling coils is to dehumidify when
only sensible cooling is required then the humidiﬁer load
will be greater.

29.9 Test procedure for air-conditioning
systems
29.9.1 Object and application

This is an on-site test following installation. The proce-
dure is designed to ﬁnd any weaknesses in the plant and
its implementation, while not cheap, is worthwhile where
performance is important or in doubt. It is essential to
have contractually agreed its use, which is to make the
various provisions and what action is to be taken if any
faults are shown and to allow sufﬁcient time for testing
and any remedial work.

It is recommended that a contractor demonstrating to a
client should have tested the plant previously and should
not use the test to supplant commissioning. The accep-
tance that individual items of plant have the necessary
capacity does not necessarily mean that the whole will
perform as required. Indeed, the test can ﬁnd proprietary
items lacking.

29.9.2 Conduct of the tests

The necessary skills should be on-site to attend to any
minor faults but must not be allowed to alter settings from
one test to another, except as required by the test proce-
dure. Dummy loads should be ready for use. If sensitive
equipment is to be present (as might be the case in upgrad-
ing computer room plant) then the interested parties must
agree limits previously. This may also apply to parts of the
plant itself such as humidity-detecting elements. The latter
can be protected physically. The job speciﬁcation should
state which parts of the procedure apply (if not all).

The plant

is tested to hold limits in the speciﬁed
external conditions and is not (unless exceptionally so

29/500 Air Conditioning

agreed) tested beyond them. The plant should not be over-
designed just to pass the test. For the duration of the test
external conditions can never span those for which it is
designed. To fully load the plant in cool weather it may be
necessary to dissipate twice the design process load. The
dummy load should simulate the design load, and in the
case of electronic equipment rooms, arranging fan heaters
directed upwards and in the same layout as the equipment
may best do this. Ideally, simulation of the heat of outside
air make-up should be in the intake duct. If impractical,
then it may be placed in the room close to a return grille.
Room-temperature readings should not be taken near to
dummy loads, and in heavily loaded rooms it may be
necessary to conﬁne readings to extract positions. Except
in test houses, it is not possible to apply the full range
of external conditions at the ﬁnal cooler. It will therefore
be appreciated that a plant should easily pass its test on
a cold day. Resort could be made to certify performance
curves if a doubt exists.

Misleading results can be obtained from tests of limit
statistics and sensors if their set point is adjusted to the
current conditions to bring about operation. The con-
trol points should be set and conditions adjusted until
operation occurs, opportunities arising during the test
procedure.

The following is an outline of the test procedure:

1. Pre-test performance. An assessment of whether the

plant is ready for a full test.

2. Recorders and alarms. Continues 1 and checks the cal-

ibration of recorders and alarms.

3. Air balance. To check overpressure and outside air

intake.

back-up heating.

4. Background heaters. Checks control and capacity of

5. Heating and humidiﬁcation. The plant is called upon

to perform at its maximum winter design capacity.

6. Cooling and dehumidiﬁcation. The plant is required to

perform at its maximum summer capacity.

7. Limits, interlocks and inspection. Cut-outs,

limiting

controls and interlocks are tested.

large amounts of humidiﬁcation when the requirement as
indicated by external readings is for dehumidiﬁcation, this
perhaps being due to incorrect SHR of the cooling coil.
Periodic excursions may be found and these are often
caused by external inﬂuences, which might be identiﬁed
by their time of occurrence.

Make no excuse for checking whether the sun shines on
the thermostats or someone has washed the ﬂoor. Another
common occurrence is that while the room is not being
controlled as speciﬁed, the plant appears to be operating
correctly. Here a series of simultaneous readings of air
ﬂows and wet and dry bulb temperatures should be taken
around the whole of the air circuit – on and off coil, con-
dition after fan, condition at inlet grilles, etc. Referring
these to a psychrometric chart will usually indicate where
the fault or leak lies.

29.9.4 Recorders and alarms

These are important, since they may be used in part using
the remainder of the procedure and may be the only indi-
cation for future operatives as to whether conditions are
correct.

1. With the plant still operating as for test 1. With hand
instruments, check conditions as close as possible to
the recorder’s heads:

Recorder no.

Time

Date

DB

WB
–

RH

Recorder reading
Test sling (or other)
Note that some recorders have a clock time difference
between the dry bulb and rh to allow for pen overlap.
2. Where this can be done, moving the alarm-indicating
arms to the room condition will indicate whether the
alarms operate but much more satisfactory results are
obtained by causing the controlled condition to swing
beyond the alarm points and at the rate that would be
expected in practice.

Compliance with speciﬁed details and good practice are
checked.

Recorder no.

29.9.3 Pre-test performance

Allow the plant
to run automatically for a period of
some days either with no artiﬁcial load or with a small
one of ﬁxed value. If no means of recording are built
into the plant then recorders should be introduced and
placed in representative positions in the various zones
for the duration of the tests. Periodically examine the
traces or monitor printouts. These will give an indica-
tion as to whether the plant is controlling correctly on
light load.

Observations of external wet bulb and dry bulb air tem-
peratures or similar assessment of other forms of load
may be combined with simple observations of what the
plant is doing. If it were using its refrigeration capacity
under cold no-load conditions then clearly something is
wrong. A common fault is ﬁnding the plant calling for

Time

DB

Date

RH

WB
–

–

Recorder reading
Test sling (or other)
Alarm occurred

29.9.5 Air balance

Room overpressure can conveniently be tested during this
period. Produce a single line sketch of the conditioned
space(s) including doorways. Test for air-ﬂow direction
with hand smoke tubes, both at the top and bottom of
closed doors, and record the direction of ﬂow. Crack the
doors open if fully sealed.

Measure the outside air make-up quantity, taking a pat-

tern of readings across the area of the duct or grille:
Average ﬂow velocity m/s ð area m2 D m3/s

29.9.6 Background heaters

The function of these is to prevent the room becoming
cold and humid in the event of the main plant being off
for any reason other than power failure. For a small input
they can protect the conditioned space to a large degree
and greatly reduce reconditioning time upon restoration
of the main plant. They would require a comparatively
small input from a standby generator.

With the main plant switched off:

1. Set the humidistat (if ﬁtted) downwards and note when
the heater(s) come on. As before, results that are more
accurate are obtained by swinging room conditions,
but (a) we will have ascertained that the direction of
operation is correct and (b) the method is sufﬁcient for
the relatively coarse control required. Reset.

2. Set the thermostat upwards noting when the heater(s)
come on and continue to the limit of the thermostat.
Take a set of readings.

Room

Time

Date

Dry bulb temperature

Assuming the heaters are electric (i.e. have a high
surface temperature) and the conditioned space is uni-
formly surrounded by rooms or the outside then the
temperature that should be achieved is the design lift in
temperature from the surrounds to room temperature,
above whatever the surrounding temperature happens
to be on the day of the test.

If there is a mix of external walls, heated or cold
surrounding rooms and rooms under similar control to
the one being tested the temperature elevation of the
tested room (°C) should be:
Design heat
(surface con-
stants ðTD to outside at
for each
test)
surfaceł sum of constants for all other (outside) sur-
faces
where the surface constant is U value ðarea.

(watts) C sum of
time of

input

3. Since any background heaters must now be allowed
to operate during the cooling cycle their control must
be set below the lower limit for the conditioned space.
Interlock with the main plant may be included. These
features should be checked and noted at this time.

29.9.7 Heating and humidiﬁcation

The plant should be able to hold the room at the desired
temperature when heat is not being dissipated in the room.
The plant should also be able to raise the temperature of
the room from cold under winter conditions (e.g. after
a power failure or an outage). In considering the tem-
perature to be achieved under test the comments given
in test 2 of Section 29.9.6 also apply here. If hot water
heating is used, full temperature elevation will not be
achieved because high return air temperatures will reduce
the coil output. For instance, where the design rise was
22°C above an external of (cid:3)1°C; 19°C, 29°C and 14°C
are satisfactory with ambient of 5°C, 10°C and 15°C,
respectively.

Test procedure for air-conditioning systems 29/501

If it is variable, set the outside air intake quantity to
the winter value. Set the desired temperature up to a
maximum, leaving the humidity setting alone. It will be
appreciated that as the room temperature rises during the
heating test the rh tends to fall. However, since the humid-
ity setting remains unaltered the humidifying system will
be called upon to operate until at one condition it is
working at peak winter rate. Due to the faster charac-
teristic of heaters, the rh will be found to fall but absolute
moisture should be found to steadily rise. The duration
of the test is normally about 3 h and ﬁnal conditions
should be held for half an hour to prove the moisture
source.

Calculation of test condition kg/kg
Absolute moisture in the room at design temperature
and humidity;
Absolute moisture content of winter outside air intake at
design condition;
Design difference to be made up by humidiﬁer D Add
absolute moisture content outside
at time of test; D Room moisture content to be achieved
in test.
(Neglect gains from test personnel)

Date

DB

Room

Time

WB

D kg/kg

Under steady conditions the plant should be able to
hold the design room rh up to the temperature given in
psychrometric tables or a chart where the design room rh
and test absolute moisture content (kg/kg) coincide. At
the end of the test restore the temperature set point to
the design value and any control of outside air volume to
automatic. Observe that operation.

If the plant is now shut down for a period of 1 or
2 h with the conditioned space remaining closed, a slow
reduction in absolute moisture content will be observed.
A rapid fall will indicate a signiﬁcant leak in the building
or plant, would account for any difﬁculty in achieving
the test result and should be investigated. The design
vapor pressure difference may amount to several tens
of millimeters water gauge acting on the vapor sealing
and equally leads to moisture ingress during summer
conditions.

29.9.8 Cooling and dehumidiﬁcation

The test load must be calculated and is applied in two
parts. The lights should be as in normal use and all plant
controls normal and automatic. The background heaters
(if installed) can be called as load but it is essential that
thermostats and overloads do not reduce the applied load
unobserved. Electrical measurements should be taken, par-
ticularly at the full-load condition, and for this purpose,
trust not put in rating plates.

29/502 Air Conditioning

Room

Date

Supply Sens. load
Air

kW

Lat. load
kW

Position 1
Dry Wet RH

Position 2
Dry Wet RH

Position 3
Dry Wet RH

Time
the remainder of the test load which represents the missing summer building gains is now applied.
Design sensible heat of outside air intake kg/s ð kJ/kg
kg/s ð kJ/kg
Less actual on day of test
Room design conducted heat gain

(cid:7)design gain(cid:10) ð actual TD

less:

design TD

Design solar gain less actual gain (under site conditions this will have to be estimated)

Plus
Design outside air moisture content (kg/kg)
Less actual moisture content on day (kg/kg) ð
air ﬂow (kg/s) D kg water/s
(it will be found that kg water per hour ð2/3 closely approximates
to the power in kW of test load kettles required).

kW

kW

kW
Total kW

The test load:

Sensible equipment or process heat;
Sensible heat of personnel;
(Less number present)
Latent heat of process;
Latent heat of personnel;

watts

In the case of electronic equipment rooms there will be
no call for a latent test load at this stage.

Starting from zero, take a set of readings, then increase
the load in increments of about 20 per cent, repeating at
15-min intervals. Note that if the supply air passes over
a structural slab its elevated temperature from test 29.9.7
will brieﬂy add load.

To avoid unnatural conditions the latent load is applied
in steps with the sensible load until full summer conditions
are simulated. This should be held or 1 h or more. If
the pattern of temperature readings around the space is
satisfactory we have a check on the suitability of the air
distribution. If any doubt exists as to the duty achieved,
simultaneous readings of air ﬂow and wet and dry bulb
temperatures across the cooling coil or supply to extract
can be taken and the duty calculated.

that

Observations should be made that the plant is not being
manually coaxed,
is not humidifying and that
the compressors have not tripped but are cycling under
part-load conditions. Instruments should be indicating
correctly. In cases where it is impractical to fully load the
plant, ascertain that an appropriate amount of refrigeration
is being employed. This situation is best avoided, as much
of the plant is not being demonstrated to full capacity.

it

29.9.9 Limits and interlocks

The items for test under this group will vary from plant to
plant and with speciﬁed requirements. It is assumed that
the clerk of works is satisﬁed with the following:
Interior of plant clean before run;

Interior of ducts clean before running or blown out to bags;
Ducts sealed;
Lagging sound, non-combustible, no loose material in
airstream;
Vapor sealing sound;
Filters of correct grade;
Filters kept clean before installation;
Filters installed without leaks;
Water circuits leak tested;
Water circuits ﬂushed;
Water circuits dosed;
Refrigerant circuits vacuumed and dry;
Refrigerant circuits leak tested;
Crank case oil level correct;
Plant room ventilated;
Humidiﬁer drainage and deep U-trap correct.

Test
For each compressor:

HP cut out;
HP cut in;
LP cut out;
LP cut in;
Oil differential cut out;
Oil return functioning (sight glass);
Low water temperature cut out;
Recycling timer;
Loss of phase protection;
High room humidity override;
High room temperature override;
Plant heat high temperature cut out;
Plant low air temperature cut out;
Air ﬂow interlock;
Automatic changeovers;
Room emergency power off buttons
Emergency power off buttons reset
manually operated).

(only when so

30

Energy
Conservation

M G Burbage-Atter
Heaton Energy Services

Contents

30/505

30.1 The need for energy conservation
30.2 Energy purchasing

30/506

30.2.1 Industrial coal
30.2.2 Oil 30/506
30.2.3 Gas 30/506
30.2.4 Electricity 30/506

30/506

30/506

30.3 The energy audit
30.4 Energy management 30/507
30.5 Energy monitoring
30.6 Energy targeting 30/508
30.7 Major areas for energy conservation

30/508

30/509

30.7.1 Boiler plant
30.7.2 Furnaces 30/512
30.7.3 Fans 30/512
30.7.4 Pumps
30/512
30.7.5 Air compressors
30.7.6 Space heating
30.7.7 Insulation
30.7.8 Controls
30.7.9 Heat recovery 30/513
30.7.10 Lighting

30/512

30/512

30/513

30/513

30/512

30/509

30.8 The justiﬁcation for energy-conservation

measures 30/513

30.9 The mathematics of the presentation

30/514

30.9.1 Simple payback
30.9.2 Return on capital employed
30/514
30.9.3 Discounted cash ﬂow (DCF) 30/514

30/514

30.10 Third-party energy management and ﬁnance
30.11 Motivation
30.12 Training

30/515

30/516

30/503

30/515

30.1 The need for energy conservation

Energy conservation has often been referred to as the ‘ﬁfth
fuel’, the other four being the so-called primary or ‘fossil’
fuels of coal (solid), oil (liquid), gas and nuclear/hydro-
electricity. This emphasizes the importance of reducing
the amount of energy used, not only nationally but also
internationally.

The simple fact is that the world’s reserves of fossil
fuels will eventually run out, depending on the rate of
use, and therefore, if the consumption of these forms of
energy are reduced, the existing reserves will last longer.
Research and experimentation could lead to those reserves
currently available but uneconomic to recover and use
being rendered economic, thus extending further the num-
ber of years before these non-renewable sources of energy
do eventually run out.

The amount of worldwide energy reserves and life is
variable according to the source of information used,
but the position is of the order shown in Table 30.1.
Thus at some time in the not too distant future (less
than 100 years) oil, gas and uranium will no longer be
available. Every effort is required to reduce the world’s

The need for energy conservation 30/505

energy demand to cater for this event. In the case of the
UK, the situation is very similar.1
The economically recoverable coal reserves are of the
order of 4.2 ð 109 tce, which, with an annual consump-
tion of around 111 ð 106 tce, gives a life of 38 years.
However, the recoverable coal reserves are much greater,
at 30 ð 109 tce or 270 years’ supply.
Recoverable oil reserves are given as 1.23 ð 109 toe.
The UK consumption is only 70 ð 106 toe, some 60 ð 106
toe being exported from the total annual production of
130 ð 106 toe. At this total production level there is only
10 years’ supply (but the cessation of exports would vir-
tually double the life). Gas reserves are similarly limited,
and are said to be equivalent to about 40 years.

Hydroelectric sources of power are being exploited to
the full in both the US and UK, and the contribution of
nuclear power is subject both to the supply of uranium
ore and to environmental problems. At present, nuclear
generation only contributes around 7 per cent of the total
UK energy consumption.

The major problem in energy conservation is, how-
ever, not the concept but the economics. Saving money by

Table 30.1 World energy reserves

Present reserves:

Lowest
Highest

Life at:
1971 consumptiona,e rate:

1984 consumption rate:

1971 future view:

New future rate:

Future reserves:

Lowest
Highest

Life at:
1984 consumption:

1971 future view:

New future rate:

Lowest
Highest
Lowest
Highest
Lowest
Highest
Lowest
Highest

Lowest
Highest
Lowest
Highest
Lowest
Highest

Oil
(109t)

Coal
(109t)

Natural

gas

(1012t)

89
96

32
36
31
34
16
18
30
32

200
350

70
125
30
40
67
116

480b
630

60
1000
150
190
30
190
120
160

7000b
10 000c

>2000
>3000
150
250
>1700
>2500

77
96

33
45
49
62
15
19
40
50

185
295

120
190
25
40
95
150

Uranium
(106t)

2.0
2.2

–
–
64
70
16

37
38

50–100d

1.2
1.4

20 (cid:4)50–100(cid:5)d
37 (cid:4)50–100(cid:5)d

38
45

21
24

Shale oil and

tar sands

(109t)

80
90

39
48
28
32

Extend oil by 9
Extend oil by 11
Extend oil by 25
Extend oil by 30

370
1300

130
>450

Extend oil by 10
Extend oil by 17
Extend oil by 120
Extend oil by 430

Notes:
Units: Oil, shale oil and tar sands are expressed in billion (109) tonnes of oil.

Coal is expressed in billion tonnes of coal (multiply by 0.66 to give billion tonnes of oil equivalent).
Natural gas is expressed in trillion (1012) cubic metres (multiply by 0.86 to give billion tonnes of oil equivalent).
Uranium is expressed in million (106) tonnes of uranium (multiply by 0.245 to give billion tonnes of oil equivalent).
Life is in year.

aData taken from EnergyfromtheFuture.
bExcludes lignite.
cIncludes 2400 billion tonnes lignite.
dFigure takes into account fast reactors. It is stated in original document that predictions are ‘particularly speculative’.
e1971 consumption rates were taken as oil 2500 Mtoe; gas 900 Mtoe; coal 1500 Mtoe.

30/506 Energy Conservation

energy conservation is preferred to saving energy unless
the energy saving occurs with the main effect required of
cost saving. Hopefully, the energy manager will be able
to persuade colleagues that both ﬁnancial economy and
energy reduction go together, hand in hand. He must take
positive action within his organization at all levels, from
the board of directors to the shop ﬂoor to achieve the
stated objectives.

30.2 Energy purchasing
The major energy cost-reduction exercise which can be
undertaken prior to an energy audit is that of ensuring
that energy is purchased at the most economical price.
This is a relatively simple matter, and can be under-
taken by the energy manager and his staff, if they have
the expertise. An alternative is to use the fuel suppliers,
such as the local electricity companies who undertake
such work free of charge in the case of their own tar-
iff investigations, or by independent energy consultants.
In the case of the latter, fees will be payable, generally
based on a percentage of the cost saving achieved over a
period of time. These fees can vary from 50 per cent of
the annual savings for a period of ﬁve years down to 50
per cent of the actual savings for a twelve-month period
only. When using consultants the energy manager should
inquire around in order to ﬁnd the practice that bests suits
his needs.

30.2.1 Industrial coal

The basic price of coal at the pit is based on the coal
gross caloriﬁc value, with allowances then made for the
ash, sulfur and chlorine contents. The haulage charges
depend on the distance from the pit to the site and on the
method of delivery. Tipper-vehicle deliveries are cheaper
than conveyor vehicles which, in turn, are cheaper than
the pneumatic (blower) vehicles. The method of delivery
will obviously be decided by a combination of space and
cleanliness factors. In the case of certain customers, spe-
cial agreements may be available at special rates where the
annual coal consumption is large and the supplier wishes
to retain the market.

30.2.2 Oil

interruptible one by a quite signiﬁcant ﬁgure. The energy
manager considering a change of fuel source to gas should
maintain his options by installing dual-fuel plant rather
than a single-fuel-ﬁred plant in order to gain advantage
from the ﬂuctuating fuel price market.

30.2.4 Electricity

Regular meter readings are required to ascertain the
breakdown of the total load and these will form a useful
basis for the energy audit. Regular readings throughout the
working week (say, at hourly or even half-hourly intervals
for a week or fortnight around periods of peak energy
consumption) along with details of the plant in use give
an indication of the possibilities for peak lopping in order
to reduce the maximum demand. Alternatively, suitable
monitoring equipment with printout facilities would be of
great beneﬁt in many cases, especially where ﬂuctuating
loads are concerned. It should be remembered that the
highest maximum demand incurred applies not only for
the relevant monthly account but also for the availability
charge for the next twelve months unless exceeded, when
the new, higher, ﬁgure applies.

Maximum demand alarms are available for individual
organizational use and these can be made to shut down
non-essential plant in order to maintain a lower actual
maximum demand. Where automatic shutdown is not in
use alarms can be used to trigger a manual shutdown
procedure.

30.3 The energy audit
The basic energy facts must be established in an
organization’s
energy conservation campaign. Any
organization will purchase energy, even if this is limited
solely to electricity. Thus, as a start, the actual energy
accounts are available for use. These will have been
employed already in determining the most economical
purchase price (see Section 30.2). The accounts, however,
only indicate the total site consumption, generally during
the last
three months, or monthly, depending on the
plant size.

In order to gain an accurate picture of the site energy

usage it is necessary to:

The prices of the various grades of oil are highly competi-
tive due to the relatively low cost of crude oil as compared
to the situation a few years ago. Oil is available in two
grades: gas oil (35 secs) and heavy fuel oil (3500 secs)
as compared to the four previous grades.

The basic prices of the two grades of oil are interrelated
to the prices of general tariff gas (non-interruptible) and
contract gas (interruptible). The price also varies accord-
ing to location, generally being lower around the coast or
close to oil reﬁneries.

30.2.3 Gas

Variations in contract gas prices are due to the availability
of the fuel. A non-interruptible supply costs more than an

1. Provide metering facilities for each energy source for
each major cost area (e.g. the boiler house or a partic-
ular production process);

2. Read these metering facilities regularly. This can best
be undertaken weekly and, at worst, monthly, but the
frequency will depend on the load pattern and level of
consumption.

On the basis of these regular readings, energy con-
sumption and costs can be allocated to particular cost
centers, items of plant or process. The energy audit can
be undertaken by using the organization’s staff, such as
the energy manager and his department. As an alternative,
an energy consultant can be called in. It is suggested that
costs and levels of consumption should, where possible,

Energy management 30/507

5565 GJ

226 GJ

3 GJ

115 GJ

5016 GJ

385 GJ

Boiler losses

Steam main 
losses

Gas process
losses
Space heating

Lighting

Production
19 760 GJ

Trade effluent

9153 GJ

10 760 GJ Losses

Oil

28679 GJ

Boiler
plant

28 794 GJ

Steam heating
4901 GJ

Hot
water

12 984 GJ

115 GJ

Gas 13 GJ

Electricity 2303 GJ

1 GJ = 1 × 109 J

115 GJ

Direct process

5078 GJ

Figure 30.1 A typical Sankey diagram for a dyehouse

be in some way related to production output, operating
hours or process requirements.

The energy consultant may be better employed in inves-
tigating a speciﬁc cost center, as detailed investigation
could be required such as energy readings every hour, or
half an hour or even every few minutes (e.g. a boiler test).
Because of an energy audit, it should be possible to build
up the pattern of energy usage of the whole site, or a par-
ticular cost center. This can be expressed in energy terms
in a Sankey diagram (Figure 30.1). The ﬁgure shows the
uses made of the various energy sources purchased, and
where this energy is eventually lost from the site to waste.
It is essential to maintain a regular monitoring system,
recording energy consumption and costs. The use of com-
puters provides a ready-made facility for this and software
packages are available (see Section 30.5).

30.4 Energy management
Energy management will cost money whether the staff
are employed by the organization or outside consultants
are used. Large organizations, which already employ their
own engineering staff, probably add energy management
duties to an existing member of staff, or may appoint a
specialist in such matters. Extra staff may be appointed,
depending on the nature of the business.

In this case, there is an on-going cost, and this must be
borne in mind when embarking on an energy-conservation
campaign. Within a large organization with a large number
of buildings, 80 per cent of the energy consumption takes
place in 20 per cent of the buildings, and initially there
are major savings to be made. However, when the ini-
tial and obvious energy-conservation schemes have been
implemented then there only remains the effort to main-
tain the results achieved and to investigate any possible
new schemes.

Within a large organization there may well be
team of

sufﬁcient continuous work to keep a small

energy-conservation engineers busy. However, in many
cases, once the initial work has been completed then
perhaps only one or, at most, two persons are required.
If this is likely to be the case then the use of energy
consultants may prove attractive for the investigation of
individual areas of energy conservation, as there is no
problem of long-term employment costs. In the case of
small organizations, unless there is a very high energy
consumption then full-time company employment cannot
be justiﬁed.

It may be possible to employ a suitable engineer on
a part-time basis, but perhaps the best alternative is to
use either an energy consultant as and when required, or
a suitable student from a technical college or university
during the vacations or during their year out of college on
industrial placement. The advantage of the latter is that an
eminently suitable student may then be offered full-time
employment upon successful completion of their course,
which could include further energy work. The ﬁnancial
arrangements could be in the form of:

1. Energy consultant:

An agreed hourly rate or day rate within a speciﬁed
period;
An annual retainer with a lower hourly or day rate;
A percentage of
involved;
A percentage of any savings obtained.

the capital cost of

the scheme

2. A student:

An agreed hourly or weekly rate for the speciﬁed
period;
An agreed salary.

Continuous energy management is required and the per-
son so employed must have access to the organization’s
highest management or be a member of that team.

Many excellent energy-conservation schemes have
failed or been altered by senior management due to
inadequate representation from the energy-conservation

30/508 Energy Conservation

staff concerned. The approach to energy conservation
and energy management must be whole-hearted and
enthusiastic. Only then can the best results be achieved.

30.5 Energy monitoring
Reference has been made earlier to the need for energy
monitoring as part of the energy audit (Section 30.3). The
monitoring system used can be as simple or as sophisti-
cated as required. In its simplest form, energy monitoring
consists of recording the billing details of the various
energy suppliers and comparing these bills by reference
to the previous bill or to the previous bill for the period
twelve months earlier. Such comparisons are not the best
basis for commenting on the performance of the plant con-
cerned. Changes in plant and equipment, and the use of
that plant and equipment, may give rise to large variations
in energy consumption, hence costs.

Thus for the best comparisons not only must

the
energy usage be monitored more frequently, but at weekly
intervals (monthly at worst), with other parameters being
recorded. These could include the following:

Plant/equipment
Period of time and times in use, each day of the week;
Load factor on that plant – goods produced;
Conditions of the plant – pressure, temperature, etc.;
The identity of the plant operator.

Buildings
Period of occupancy each day;
Internal environmental temperature and humidity;
Number of occupants;
Nature of the building construction;
Internal heat gains from lighting, machinery, etc.;
External heat gains from the sun;
Climatic conditions such as cloud cover, wind speed,
external air temperature and humidity.

From this information it should be possible to ascertain
the basic standing loads and the variable production loads
which make up the total site load.

It is necessary to record many data, which is time con-
suming when undertaken by individual members of staff.
Meters are available for the direct measurement of such
energy sources as oil, gas and electricity and for the mea-
surement of water, steam and air ﬂows. Steam can also
be measured in the absence of any metering by diverting
the condensate into a drum of water and weighing the
drum prior to and after the test, noting the actual time
for the test. Any steam system will have steam traps,
and in order to check that these are working correctly,
sight glasses should be provided after the trap. Solid fuel
such as coal, coke and wood can best be measured by
weighing the fuel on an appropriate system such as a
belt-weighing machine for large quantities of fuel down
to a simple spring balance and small drum for small
amounts.

Many of these parameters can be easily measured and
recorded by modern devices, utilizing a minimum of man-
power. A large variety of modern computer-based energy

management systems will monitor, record and store the
required data. Some will also control the required param-
eters within closely deﬁned limits.

Energy management systems can vary in cost from low
to high ($100,000–$200,000) for the system itself. In
addition, energy controls may have to be provided either
to replace existing controls which are not compatible or
which are not operating correctly or have never been pro-
vided in the past.

This additional cost to facilitate and implement the
energy management system can vary from $200,000 to
$600,000. In the long term, the centralization of energy
monitoring can yield large ﬁnancial savings, coupled with
a considerable reduction in energy consumption.

With such systems, it is possible to obtain individual
room space heating and humidity control without the need
to dispatch an engineer to check every room in the build-
ing. Manpower costs can be reduced, with the staff being
required for checking and maintenance purposes only.
The cost of an energy management system can be recov-
ered in a relatively short period of time (of the order of
2–3 years).

The cost of an energy management system at one site
in the north of England was of the order of $1,000,000
and the payback period was just over 2 years. In view of
the high cost of such systems, it may be possible to obtain
a system on a loan basis, the system being rented from
the installer or by lease purchase. All options should be
considered before entering into a contract.

A further advantage of an energy-management system
is that the quantity of production can be included for pro-
cess plant and a correlation made between the product and
the energy required producing it. Such a ﬁgure is useful
in comparing similar processes within the same organiza-
tion and in comparison with similar ones. It also allows
the energy cost per unit of production to be calculated.

30.6 Energy targeting
Having initially ascertained the basic energy data, energy
targeting is the next logical step. It is desirable to know
if the energy consumption of a particular site or piece
of equipment can be reduced without detriment to the
product or personnel involved.

The easiest way is to alter the parameters downwards
and note the effect, while monitoring the plant condi-
tions and energy consumption. The result of this is that
eventually the product will become useless and/or the
personnel aggrieved at the change in environmental con-
ditions. This method is frequently used by making any
downward adjustment small and monitoring the effect,
adjusting downwards again after a short period of time.
It is possible to undertake theoretical calculations to
ascertain the amount of energy required for the operation
and to compare this with the actual consumption. To do
this requires the knowledge of a large number of param-
eters but it can be undertaken, especially if an energy
management system is installed.

The amount of energy required for space heating in a
particular space can be estimated from the various param-
eters and compared with the actual energy consumption.

The difference indicates the scope for further improve-
ment. The following is a typical case of a warehouse used
for the storage of goods only but with access by staff for
goods movement:

Warehouse size – 91.5 meters long by 61.0 meters wide
by an average height of 8.13 m, giving a total ﬂoor area
of 5582 m2 and a volume of 45,400 m3.
Modern construction with a wall and roof U-value of
0.50 W/m2C.
Internal environmental temperature required D 15°C.
External air temperature D (cid:3)3°C.
Natural air inﬁltration rate D 1
2

air change per hour

D 22,700 m3/h

Calculated heat losses – Building fabric loss D 146,000 W
Air inﬁltration loss D 152,000 W
Total loss D 298,000 W

at

per

Type of heating in use – Thirteen downdraft-type steam
unit heaters, controlled by an optimizer and internal air
thermostats.
Hours of occupancy – Five days per week, 16 hours
per day.
steam requirement D 692,000 kg
Calculated annual
(1,525,000 lb)
Calculated
D $13,400.00.
In this case, the actual annual steam consumption that was
metered was 1,906,000 kg (4,202,000 lb).

steam cost

1000 kg

$19.00

In the case of a process, such a basic estimate is
harder to achieve, but this can be undertaken. The heat
requirement for most chemical reactions is known and this
method can be used in most manufacturing processes to
determine the energy requirement.

In a series of chemical process vessels where heating
of each vessel takes place it may be possible to reduce
this amount of heating by ensuring that the product from
the ﬁrst vessel is hot enough for the next. This can be
achieved by alteration to the liquid boiling point by varia-
tion in the vessel pressure. A reduction in pressure reduces
the boiling point. The rescheduling of production may also
lead to economies.

The dyeing of cloth is a good example. The dye master
of old always insisted that the dyeing process in all the
required vessels be started at the same time. This process
began with the boiling of large quantities of cold water in
the dye vessels by the direct injection of steam through
50-mm diameter pipes, the steam load being extremely
high. To meet this load it was customary to install a bat-
tery of boilers. After 30 minutes, the steam load reduced
to a minimum, as all the vessels were boiling. Fours hours
later this same process would be repeated. The additional
cost of the boiler capacity and of the fuel to keep the
boilers alight between successive loads was excessive. A
simple alteration to the production schedules by stagger-
ing this boiling of water and the introduction of steam
accumulators reduced costs signiﬁcantly.

Major areas for energy conservation 30/509

Many computer software packages are available for
energy-targeting purposes, but care should be taken in
specifying the requirements and insisting on performance
satisfaction and testing before ﬁnal payment. Such soft-
ware packages may be expensive and could require mod-
iﬁcations for actual use.

There are many building space heating/humidity energy
usage programs available. A large number assume the
building ventilation or wind speed rates. In most build-
ings, the major factor in any discrepancy between the
theoretical and actual energy consumptions is due to the
variation in wind speed. This is highlighted in the example
of the warehouse above. The large discrepancy between
the theoretical and actual steam consumption was inves-
tigated in detail, and it was found that one of the large
doors giving access into the warehouse was open for most
of the time the warehouse was in use by the staff, and that
this door was subject to the prevailing wind. In order to
reduce the steam consumption a rapid-opening door was
installed, with the result that the steam consumption was
halved. The energy target set must be realistic and capable
of achievement.

30.7 Major areas for energy conservation
For most organizations, the major energy use is for build-
ing space heating, ventilation, air conditioning, domestic
hot water purposes and lighting. Where energy is used for
process, this may be secondary energy generated from a
primary fuel (e.g. steam generated in a fossil fuel-ﬁred
boiler plant).

30.7.1 Boiler plant

Boiler plants are a major user of energy. The combustion
efﬁciency of a boiler plant can easily be set at the opti-
mum, and Table 30.2 suggests the parameters for this for
various fossil fuels:
Exit ﬂue gas temperature D 200°C
Ambient air temperature D 15°C
Close control of the amount of excess air is possible by
the use of oxygen trim control equipment. Such equipment
will control the ﬂue gas oxygen content within the range
of 2.0–3.0 per cent as compared to the normal 3.0–5.0
per cent. The improvement in boiler plant efﬁciency is of
the order of 1.0–2.0 per cent.

Table 30.2

Coal Oil

Natural gas

Excess air (%)
Dry ﬂue gas CO2 content (%)
Dry ﬂue gas O2 content (%)
Dry ﬂue gas loss (%)
Moisture in the ﬂue gas loss (%)
Unburnt/ash loss (%)
Radiation and other losses (%)
Total losses (%)
Inferred boiler plant efﬁciency (%)

30
12.0
7.5
13.2
4.9
1.3
3.1
22.5
77.5

20
13.3
3.5
7.4
6.5
Nil
3.1
17.0
83.0

10
10.5
2.3
6.1
11.3
Nil
3.1
20.5
79.5

30/510 Energy Conservation

The combustion conditions suggested above should be
achieved bearing in mind the fact that the lower the ﬂue
gas oxygen content, the greater the risk of incomplete
combustion, while the higher the oxygen content, the
greater the ﬂue gas losses (see Figures 30.2–30.6). Poor
overall boiler performance outside these parameters is due
to the radiation and other loss factors.

)

%

(
 
n
e
g
y
x
O

22

20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

Coal

Heavy
fuel
oil

Natural
gas

Gas
oil

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Carbon dioxide (%)

Figure 30.2 The relationship between oxygen and carbon dioxide
in the products of combustion for various fuels

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

)

%

(
 
)

V
C
 
s
s
o
r
g
(
 
s
s
o
l
 
s
a
g
 
e
u
F

l

3.0% 4.0% 5.0% 6.0%

7.0%

8.0%

9.0%

10.0%
11.0%
12.0%

(No XS air)

s
s
o
l
 
e
r
u
t
s
o
M

i

n
e
g
o
r
d
y
h
 
o
t
 
e
u
d

Dry flue gas loss
for various CO2 contents
Air temp. = 15°C

100 150 200 250 300 350

50
Actual flue gas temperature (°C)

Dry flue gas loss
for various CO2
contents

4.0%

5.0%

6.0%

7.0%

8.0%

9.0%

10.0%

11.0%
12.0%

13.0%
14.0%
15.0%
15.45%

(No XS air)

Moisture loss
due to hydrogen

Air temp. = 15°C

20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

 
)

%

(
 
)

V
C
 
s
s
o
r
g
(
 
s
s
o

l
 
s
a
g
e
u
F

 

l

50

100

150

200
Actual flue gas temperature (°C)

200

250

350

Figure 30.4 Flue gas losses – gas oil

Dry flue gas loss
for various CO2
contents

20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

 
)

%

(
 
)

V
C
 
s
s
o
r
g
(
 
s
s
o

l
 
s
a
g

 

e
u
F

l

4.0%
5.0% 6.0%7.0%

8.0%

9.0%

10.0%

11.0%

12.0%

13.0%
14.0%
15.0%
16.0%
16.15%

(No XS air)

Moisture loss
due to hydrogen

Air temp. = 15°C

50

150

100

200
Actual flue gas temperature (°C)

200

250

350

Figure 30.3 Flue gas losses – natural gas

Figure 30.5 Flue gas losses – heavy fuel oil

Major areas for energy conservation 30/511

Dry flue gas loss
for various CO2
contents

50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

)

%

(
 
)

V
C
 
s
s
o
r
g
(
 
s
s
o
l
 
s
a
g
 
e
u
l
f
 
y
r

D

4.0%

5.0%

6.0%

7.0%

8.0%
9.0%
10.0%
11.0%
13.0%
15.0%
17.0%
18.0%
18.6%
(No XS air)

12.0%
14.0%
16.0%

Air temp. = 15°C

100

50
250
Actual flue gas temperature (°C)

150

200

300

350

Figure 30.6 Flue gas losses – coal (Glasshoughton washed singles)

The surface loss from a boiler is ﬁxed once the physical
size, insulation and boiler working conditions are known.
The usual radiation loss ﬁgure provided is that for a boiler
operating at least at 80 per cent maximum continuous
rating (MCR) or more. In this case, the surface loss is
relatively low in percentage terms (around 3–5 per cent).
Experience of boiler loadings have indicated that very few
boilers work at such high loads during their periods of use.
Typical annual boiler load factors are only around 40 per
cent. As the boiler load factor decreases, the radiation loss
becomes a much higher factor, and at 20 per cent boiler
load amounts to 25 per cent and at 10 per cent load factor
to a loss of 50 per cent (see Figure 30.7).

Many boilers do operate at low load factors and con-
sequent poor annual efﬁciencies. This can be avoided by
providing boiler plant with little or no margin over the
actual required capacity and by installing multi-boilers
or two or three smaller boilers. Boilers of this modular
type are available for low-pressure hot water (LPHW)
purposes, but obviously cost more than a single boiler.
This will also increase the maintenance, number of exam-
inations and the labor costs. Such an increase should be
more than offset by the reduction in fuel costs due to the
much higher annual boiler plant efﬁciency, which should
be of the order of 20–30 per cent.

A further problem with heating boilers is that the boiler
liquid temperature control thermostat (an immersion water
thermostat in most cases) maintains the boiler liquid tem-
perature at the set level, irrespective of the actual boiler
load. The boiler, even though insulated, loses heat to the

60

50

40

30

20

10

)

%

(
 
s
e
s
s
o

l
 
r
e
h

t

o

 

d
n
a

 

n
o

i
t

i

a
d
a
R

10 20 30

40

50 60 70

80 90 100

Boiler load (% MCR)

Figure 30.7 The variation in percentage radiation and other losses
with the percentage boiler load factor

surrounding space through radiation and convection. The
actual boiler load could reduce during the day such that
the maintenance of the set boiler liquid temperature is
not required continuously. Thus, the boiler liquid could
be allowed to cool down with the consequent reduction
in the radiation and convection losses (the standing loss).
Boiler controls are now available to avoid maintaining the
boiler liquid temperature at the thermostat control setting
and consequently the unnecessary operation of the burner
(‘dry’ cycling).

The cost of the supply and installation of such controls
is of the order of $500–600. Energy reductions of 10–15

30/512 Energy Conservation

per cent can be achieved, with a cost-recovery period of
3 years down to a few months, depending on the actual
annual energy consumption.

Condensing boilers are now available for both gas- and
oil-ﬁred plant, the advantage of these being that the ﬂue
gases are further cooled down to below 100°C so that
the latent heat available in the ﬂue gas water vapor is
recovered. The condensate has to be removed and the
boiler capital cost is higher than for conventional plant.
However, the boiler plant efﬁciency is increased to the
order of 90 per cent, based upon the fuel gross caloriﬁc
value. Where the ﬂue gas exit temperatures are in excess
of 200°C a further economy can be obtained by the pro-
vision of a spray recuperator in the case of gas and ﬂue
gas economizers for oil and coal.

30.7.2 Furnaces

Furnaces are large users of energy, and in order to reduce
costs, such equipment should be well insulated, used to
maximum capacity and most of the waste heat in both the
ﬂue gases and product recovered. It should be possible to
recover the waste heat in the ﬂue gases down to at least
200°C. Specialist equipment for such waste heat recovery
is available in the form of recuperators and regenerators.

30.7.3 Fans

Large fans are required for boiler plant, furnaces and large
air-handling units. These fans can now be ﬁtted with
variable-speed motors to reduce electricity consumption
and maximum power, albeit at additional cost.

30.7.4 Pumps

Pumps are a common feature in most heating and process
applications. Where one pump only is provided this is
sized for the maximum load (which may occur rarely).
Two smaller pumps could be installed such that one pump
carries the load for most of the time while the second is
used at times of peak demand.

30.7.5 Air compressors

Compressed air systems should be checked frequently for
air leakage, as the loss of air is frequently unnoticed due
to the noise of escaping air being masked by other pro-
duction noises. Modern air compressor systems composed
of multi-compressors produce much heat, and it is now
possible to recover this for space heating purposes.

30.7.6 Space heating

The provision of space heating, especially in large non-
compartmented buildings, can be reduced by:

1. The installation of direct gas-ﬁred units, where the
products of combustion are discharged into the space
but are so diluted as to be harmless. The efﬁciency of
these units is thus 95–100 per cent, depending on the
siting of the actual unit.

2. The provision of overhead radiant heating instead
of convective heating. In this case the building heat
requirements are some 15 per cent lower for radiant
heating than convective, with the consequent saving in
both capital and running costs. It is also believed that
the comfort conditions are improved with less drafts.
Radiant heating is also beneﬁcial in buildings that are
sparsely occupied, such heating being provided only in
the area of the occupants.

3. The provision of ceiling-mounted fans to recirculate
the warm air at ceiling level to the ground. These fans
can vary from the small three-bladed slow speed fan
up to much larger units, recirculating large quantities
of air. The operation of these fans can be thermostat-
ically controlled and fuel savings of 10–15 per cent
are quoted.

30.7.7 Insulation

Buildings should be insulated to as high a standard as pos-
sible, as should any part of energy-using equipment. As
a guide to buildings, the following overall heat transfer
coefﬁcients (or U-values) are suggested, which are cur-
rently of lower value than the requirements of the UK
Building Regulations:

Roofs
Walls
Windows
Exposed ﬂoors
The current Building Regulations (1990) call for:

0.20 W/m2°C
0.30 W/m2°C
2.90 W/m2°C
0.30 W/m2°C

Roofs

0.25 W/m2K (dwellings)
0.45 W/m2K (other buildings)
0.45 W/m2K (all buildings)
0.45 W/m2K (all buildings)

Walls
Ground ﬂoors
In order to improve the standards of existing building
insulation the following methods are available.

Pitched roofs

Provide a blanket of 200 mm thickness of ﬁberglass or
mineral wool insulation on top of the ceiling plaster.

Flat roofs

Provide a similar blanket of insulation on top of any sus-
pended ceiling which is 300 mm below the ﬂat roof or an
external hot liquid spray-on type of insulation to the roof
ﬁnish.

Cavity walls

Fill the existing wall cavity with a suitable insulant such
as ﬁberglass, rock wool, polystyrene beads or foam. The
greater the thickness of the cavity, the lower the U-value.

Solid walls

Solid walls can only be improved either by removing the
internal plaster layer and providing suitable blanket insu-
lation ﬁxed to battens and then covering with the required

new internal ﬁnish or by applying an external insulant to
the wall and a new external ﬁnish.

Windows

Double or triple glazing may be provided in this case, the
main criterion being that the cavity thickness between the
layers of glass must be at least 20 mm.

Exposed ﬂoors

If access is available to the area below the ﬂoor, provide
50 mm of rigid insulation between the ﬂoor joists, leaving
an air gap between the insulation and the underside of the
ﬂoorboards.

Air inﬁltration

Provide good draft-prooﬁng strip around the door and
operable window frames,
fresh air
ingress for any combustion appliances.

leaving sufﬁcient

On completion of such measures, the use of thermogra-
phy should be considered as a survey undertaken when the
building is in use and heated will highlight hot spots. Any
hot spots may be due to poor workmanship or unnoticed
building faults and can then be rectiﬁed.

30.7.8 Controls

In order to achieve optimum energy usage (hence maxi-
mum energy conservation) it is essential to provide accu-
rate controls designed to suit the application and for those
controls to be correctly installed. It is no use providing
insulation and highly efﬁcient energy or heat generators
if that energy or heat generated is simply lost in the sys-
tem by providing better standards of comfort than those
required. In the absence of such controls on space heat-
ing, the provision of building insulation simply increases
the internal temperature conditions and results in windows
and doors being opened to lose this heat.

Controls are expensive and quickly become outdated by
the increase in technology. They are also the items that
are omitted or their quality is reduced if the total project
cost becomes excessive. The difference in the quality of
the controls against cost can be determined and should be
included as part of the project budget or application.

A typical example is the provision of a single room-
air thermostat to provide whole building control of space
heating. It will work, but far greater economy can be
achieved by providing building zonal controls or, bet-
ter still, individual room heating control. Zonal control is
available in the form of either two- or three-port motor-
ized valves which open or close in conjunction with an
internal air thermostat. Individual room heating control is
in the form of individual thermostatic radiator valves and
in internal air thermostats controlling on/off or three-port
motorized valves.

Individual room temperature control is difﬁcult with
warm air systems, as any temperature control damper is
likely to pass air at all times. Air thermostats are not accu-
rate detectors of temperatures and temperature overshoot
occurs, with consequent increases in energy consumption

The justiﬁcation for energy-conservation measures 30/513
and costs. The typical limits of these thermostats is š1°C,
and as the air in the thermostat is not at the temperature
of the air in the room because the thermostat is remotely
sited (usually on an internal wall) the actual air temper-
ature in the room can be 1.5–2.0°C above the desired
temperature. Modern temperature detectors are accurate
to š0.5°C and give much closer and better control.

Steam ﬂow to vessels can be controlled by motorized
valves, allowing timed control of the valve. Such valves
can also be made to modulate rather than on/off operation.

30.7.9 Heat recovery

All the heat used to supply heating in buildings (and much
of that provided in any process) is ultimately lost from
the building. Recovery of as much waste heat as possi-
ble reduces the need to purchase fresh energy from the
suppliers. Much waste heat is produced in the form of
contaminated hot moist air and in process liquids that
require cooling.

There are many ways of recovering the waste heat from

these sources and the following should be considered:

The heat wheel
The heat pipe
The run-round coil
The heat pump

The great beneﬁt of the heat pump is the possibility of
upgrading the heat as compared to the other methods,
and is popular in swimming-pool applications, where the
heat recovered from the exhaust air can be used to heat
the incoming fresh air and the pool water and to provide
hot water for showers and washing purposes.

30.7.10 Lighting

Artiﬁcial lighting is used throughout the US and Europe
and energy-efﬁcient lamps that give high lumens per watt
can now provide this. A new range of ﬂuorescent lamps
is available and similarly high-efﬁciency lamps have been
developed to replace the conventional tungsten lamp.

The problem of lamps being left on when not required
could be solved by provision of automatic switching, of
which there are a number of systems available. These
can be time switch controlled with manual override at the
point of use.

30.8 The justiﬁcation for
energy-conservation measures
In many cases, areas of obvious energy conservation are
not considered simply because a process or some space
heating has always been undertaken that way. In order
to persuade the organization’s management to embark
on such energy-conservation measures overwhelming
evidence is required that the theoretical results suggested
can be achieved. However, most energy-conservation
measures do offer large ﬁnancial savings with very short
payback periods and lead to increased organizational
proﬁtability. The cost of such schemes has to compete

30/514 Energy Conservation

with others for new capital equipment and their success
could depend on the effect of energy costs on the total
organization costs.

It is obvious that a scheme to reduce energy costs by,
say, 10 per cent may fail if the total energy bill is only 3 or
4 per cent of the organization’s costs when compared to,
say, a new production machine costing ten times as much
but which reduces the organization’s production costs by
10 per cent.

If an energy-conservation scheme is to succeed it must
be well prepared and presented to senior management. In
the project application and budgets, the objectives of the
scheme must be clearly deﬁned and the capital costs fully
detailed. This may involve preparing several budget costs
from various equipment manufacturers and contractors.
In such cases, it is necessary to read and note the ‘small
print’, as any comparison has to be on a similar basis.
This is extremely difﬁcult to achieve, as both manufac-
turers and contractors omit certain items which may be
required to be added later. The estimated energy and cost
savings have to be identiﬁed as accurately as possible,
and this is very difﬁcult in view of the large number of
parameters involved.

In formulating these savings,

the parameters used
should be clearly deﬁned so that the estimates can be
revised for any alterations. Indeed,
in some cases a
computer program can be utilized which allows such
changes to be evaluated very quickly (e.g.
the TAS
package for buildings). In the end, the submission will
stand or fall on the overall impact on the organization, so
that it is essential to get it right ﬁrst time. That saving on
the bottom line is the major item.

A further factor to be considered is that of the national
energy situation. Fortunately, in the short term there are
available sufﬁcient reserves of gas, oil and coal to meet the
national need, so supplies should not be a problem. How-
ever, the prices of these fuels are subject to international
as well as national policies. Currently, there is a relation-
ship between heavy fuel oil and coal and between gas and
gas oil (see Section 30.2). In the long term, as supplies
of oil and gas are reduced it is likely that increases in the
price of gas will outstrip those of oil.

30.9 The mathematics of the
presentation
Any presentation to the organization’s senior manage-
ment, besides giving the technical details, should include
a ﬁnancial appraisal, which could be on a simple pay-
back basis. However, other methods are available, such
as return on capital employed and discounted cash
ﬂow (DCF).

30.9.1 Simple payback

This method of comparing the initial capital cost
against the annual energy/cost savings is relatively easy.
Unfortunately, it does not take into account certain factors
such as:

1. The life of the project;
2. Any beneﬁts after the payback period.

Normally, as the required payback period is short (i.e. 2 or
3 years maximum) and the length of life of the equipment
is much longer than this, on the simple payback basis there
are usually large ﬁnancial beneﬁts in the long term.

Let us consider two projects both costing $40,000 with

the following savings:

Project 1: Annual saving $20,000,

Project 2: Annual saving $16,000,

10 years

15 years

life of equipment

life of equipment

In terms of simple payback, project 1 has an excellent pay-
back of only 2.0 years, while project 2 has a payback of
2.5 years. Thus, it is likely that project 1 will be selected.
However, project 1 has a life of 8 years after the initial
payback period, the ﬁnancial saving being $160,000, the
equipment then requiring replacement.

Project 2 has a life of 12.5 years after the initial pay-
back period, giving a total ﬁnancial saving of $200,000.
Therefore, project 2 is the better case in the long term.

30.9.2 Return on capital employed

This method compares the initial capital cost with the
cash ﬂow over the life of the project. Thus, in this case
an accurate estimate of the equipment life is required.
When a project has a long life (considerably longer than
the simple payback period) the results can be different.

Return on capital employed can be expressed in four

ways:

1. Gross return on capital employed;
2. Net return on capital employed;
3. Average gross annual rate of return;
4. Average net annual rate of return.

In this method each year’s savings need to take account
of the fact that, as the equipment gets older, the cost of
maintenance and repairs is likely to increase. The effect of
inﬂation can also be allowed for in assuming the annual
cash ﬂows through the life of the equipment.

Using the two projects in Section 30.9.1 as an example,
the returns shown in Table 30.3 are likely. Of the four
methods, the net return is generally favored to the gross
return as the loss of capital is a major factor.

30.9.3 Discounted cash ﬂow (DCF)

This method, which is favored by many accountants
today, takes into account the concept that money has a
time value. This is because $2000 in 10 years’ time is not
the same as $2000 now. Similarly, if a project earns $2000
in 10 years’ time this is not the same as $2000 spent now
to help ﬁnance the project. If, instead of spending this
$2000, it had been invested at compound interest, then
in 10 years’ time it would have become a much larger

Table 30.3

Method

Gross return on capital

employed

Net return on capital

Average gross annual

return on capital
employed

Average net annual
return on capital
employed

Project 1
1000 000 ð 10 ð 100

20 000
D 500%

20 000
D 400%

(cid:4)10 000 ð 10(cid:5) ð 100
(cid:4)10 ð 20 000(cid:5)

D 50%

[(cid:4)10 000 ð 10(cid:5)(cid:3)20 000] ð 100

(cid:4)10 ð 20 000(cid:5)

D 40%

[(cid:4)10 000 ð 10(cid:5)20 000] ð 100

[(cid:4)8000 ð 15(cid:5) (cid:3) 20 000] ð 100

Motivation 30/515

Project 1

Ratio

8000 ð 15 ð 100

20 000
D 600%

20 000
D 500%

(cid:4)8000 ð 15(cid:5) ð 100
(cid:4)15 ð 20 000(cid:5)

D 40%

(cid:4)15 ð 20 000(cid:5)

D 33.3%

[(cid:4)8000 ð 15(cid:5) (cid:3) 20 000] ð 100

1:1.2

1:1.25

1:0.30

1:0.83

amount than $2000, depending on the interest rates in the
prevailing period. The way that this is taken into account
is called ‘discounting’. Trading income produced for each
future year by the project is discounted after allowing for
maintenance and repairs, giving present values for that
income.

There are various ways of discounting, i.e. ‘net present
value’ (NPV) or ‘internal rate of return’ (IRR). Discount-
ing should ideally be carried out over the whole life of the
project but generally, after 10 years, the discount factors
are small and make little difference.

The selection of the discount factor depends on the
ﬁnancial policy of the business, but is usually 2–3 per
cent above the current interest rates. Use of discounting
methods will determine whether the project cost will pro-
duce a better return than by simply investing the capital
involved at the highest compound interest rate or, if the
capital cost has to be borrowed, whether the rate of return
is much higher than the cost of borrowing.

30.10 Third-party energy management
and ﬁnance

As indicated in Section 30.7, energy-conservation mea-
sures cost money, and in spite of the likely results indi-
cated by any of the methods available (simple payback,
discounted cash ﬂow, etc.) it is possible that the organi-
zation’s funds are not available for such schemes. Alter-
natives that should be considered are:

1. Leasing;
2. Hire purchase.

Many organizations now have their energy requirements
managed by a heat service company.
In this case,
the company will provide and operate all the energy-
producing equipment on the organization’s site. This
could include space heating, air conditioning, combined
heat and power (CHP), steam boiler plant and other
services.

The contractor will purchase all the fuel required and
provide all labor, repairs and maintenance, thus relieving

the organization of all responsibility. In return, the con-
tractor will require a contract (generally of up to 10 years)
with the fees charged comprising a monthly ﬁxed standing
charge and a monthly variable charge, depending on the
amount of energy used. Such an arrangement is useful for
obtaining new equipment when ﬁnance is not available
within the organization itself.

A variation of the heat management service is to have
contract energy management (CEM). In this case, the
energy contractor will generally survey the existing plant
and equipment and take it over, running it for the orga-
nization. As equipment becomes due for replacement the
contractor will undertake this part of the contract.

The contract is usually for a period ranging from 3 to
9 years, but in this case the amount payable to the contrac-
tor is the same or similar to the costs prior to contractor
take-over. A further clause is added such that a propor-
tion of the savings made by the contractor are returned to
the client (perhaps 2–10 per cent of the previous annual
costs). It may also be possible for any further large sav-
ing to be shared in agreed proportions between the two
parties involved.

It is essential to have any agreement properly drawn
up in conjunction with the organization’s legal section
and to use reputable and busy heat service companies. It
is important to lay down strict details of the period of the
contract and of the services to be provided so that future
legal difﬁculties can be avoided.

30.11 Motivation
Energy conservation will succeed if all
the parties
involved wish it to succeed. It only requires ill will on one
person’s behalf to negate all the positive efforts made.

Typical problems that can occur are:

1. The unauthorized alteration of internal air thermostats

2. The use of supplementary heating (e.g. electric ﬁres

and time switches;

without permission).

The unauthorized alteration of set parameters is the most
common problem and it is possible to install tamperproof

30/516 Energy Conservation

equipment, albeit at additional cost. There is also the
problem of the relationship with the existing management
(e.g. the senior manager who views the growth and suc-
cess of the energy management team as a threat to the
supervisor or department manager).

There are a variety of methods to avoid this, and the
more senior the management structure that takes an inter-
est in energy matters, the greater the success. Ideally, this
should start with the chairman, managing director or chief
executive. Once they believe in it, then their staff will
follow suit.

These people are extremely busy with the overall orga-
nization’s objectives and time for energy matters may
be very limited. They should therefore delegate this to
a senior ofﬁcer. Energy matters may be left to the works
engineer as an additional duty. Consideration should be
given to the appointment of an energy manager who is
qualiﬁed for the post and provided with a suitable job
description and objectives. Such a job description could
be based on the following:

1. The energy manager will be responsible for the total

energy function of the organization.

2. He will be responsible to the chief executive and
will achieve the objectives laid down by senior
management.

3. The duties consist of (a) the most economic purchase
of all
forms of energy – in conjunction with the
purchasing section; (b) the optimum use of all forms
of energy for both process and building environment
use – in conjunction with the various departmental and
engineering managers.

4. The energy manager needs to form a team – an energy
committee – to help him and this could comprise the
managers of each department, whether production or
otherwise, and other suitable people. The team must
be small to be effective (less than 10 persons). Each
department could then have its own energy committee.

Hopefully, the enthusiasm for energy conservation will
spread downwards to all employees. Their help can be
obtained by the use of competitions and suggestions.

30.12 Training
Few senior staff, works engineers or even junior staff have
had training in energy matters. When energy was cheap,
this was a small company cost (say, 1 per cent) so that any
cost-reduction measures were directed at other areas. Uni-
versities and colleges now include energy management as
part of the curriculum in engineering and related courses.
Newly appointed staff will be energy orientated.

For those staff who have never had the beneﬁt of educa-
tion and training in energy matters there are courses both
by part-time attendance at college and by correspondence.
Details of the courses can be obtained from the Secretary,
the Institution of Plant Engineers. Throughout the US and
Europe, there are a large number of energy management
groups where the members (who are nearly all energy
managers) meet regularly to discuss energy matters. Thus,
it is possible to obtain training at all levels required.

Reference

1. Pattern of Energy Usage–Energy for the Future, Institute of

Energy, London (1986).

31/517

31/524

31

Contents

Water and
Efﬂuents

George Solt

31.6 Speciﬁed purities for process use
31.7 Water-puriﬁcation processes

31/527

31/527

31.7.1 Filtration
31.7.2 Sand ﬁlters 31/527
31.7.3 Coagulation
31/527
31.7.4 Membrane ﬁltration
31.7.5 Water softening
31.7.6 Ion-exchange processes: general

31/527

31/527

31.1 Introductory warning
31.2 Requirements for water 31/519
31.3 Water chemistry 31/519

31/519

31.3.1 Units of measurement 31/519
31.3.2 Hardness and alkalinity
31.3.3 Total dissolved solids (TDS) 31/520
31.3.4 Silica
31.3.5 Types of water 31/520

31/520

31/520

31.4 Building services

31/521

31.4.1 Potable water 31/521
31.4.2 Domestic efﬂuent 31/521
31.4.3 Domestic water 31/522
31.4.4 Closed circuits
31/522
31.4.5 Open cooling-water systems

31/522

31.5 Boilers

31/523

31/523

31.5.1 Water for steam raising
31.5.2 Managing the steam-water circuit 31/523
31.5.3 Condensate return 31/524
31/524
31.5.4 Raw water quality
31.5.5 Oxygen scavenging
31/524
31.5.6 Blowdown
31/524
31.5.7 External water treatment 31/524

31/528

31.8 Membrane processes

31/529

31.8.1 Reverse osmosis (RO) 31/529
31.8.2 Ultra-ﬁltration 31/530
31.8.3 Electrodialysis (ED) 31/530
31.8.4 Retroﬁt of membrane processes 31/530

31.9 Efﬂuents 31/530

31/530
31.9.1 Domestic sewage
31.9.2 Surface drainage
31/530
31.9.3 Noxious efﬂuent 31/531
31.9.4 Charges for efﬂuent 31/531
31.9.5 Efﬂuent management 31/531
31.9.6 Efﬂuent treatment 31/531
31.9.7 Water economy and re-use

31/532

31.1 Introductory warning
Water is an essential service to any facility. The amount
and quality needed vary considerably between different
plants, but the essential fact important to all engineers
who have to deal with water technology is that the sub-
ject of water quality and treatment is highly specialized. It
deals with chemistry and microbiology, and even within
those ﬁelds the technology is specialized and in the hands
of experts. It is therefore a ﬁeld in which plant engi-
neers cannot be expert, and are forced to take advice from
specialists. These are usually suppliers of plant or chem-
icals, or professional consultants. These specialists are in
a position of great responsibility, because plant engineers
are so dependent on their advice. In these circumstances
it is possible for ‘cowboy’ organizations to thrive. Past
and present experience shows that these are too common.
Plant engineers must not automatically accept the lowest
offer for materials or advice in this ﬁeld but must ﬁrst be
satisﬁed with the specialists’ competence and integrity.

There are many sad examples of installations that have
gone disastrously wrong, and these are by no means lim-
ited to small facilities or those in which water is a rela-
tively unimportant service. For example, manufacture of
microchips is wholly dependent on a supply of highly
puriﬁed water. In recent years two of the largest UK man-
ufacturers, sited at opposite ends of the country, have had
to shut down and send the workforce home because their
puriﬁed water facility had failed.

The golden rule, therefore, is to deal only with consul-
tants, contractors, plant suppliers and water-conditioning
experts whose experience and standing are known to be
good. If there is any doubt, references should be sought
and followed up. Water and efﬂuent installations are a rel-
atively minor cost item in any plant, but their failure can
be disastrous. It is foolish to make false economies on so
essential a service.

31.2 Requirements for water
Any plant will need water for domestic purposes: in most
cases this can be provided by public supply and dis-
charged to the public sewer. Most plants have some steam-
raising equipment for space heating, and steam is often
required for other purposes. Steam raising always requires
water conditioning and usually external treatment of some
kind. Many operations require water of a speciﬁed quality,
which varies over a wide range: from cooling and wash-
ing water to softened or demineralized and (in extreme
conditions) ultra-pure water.

For food and drink, medical, pharmaceuticals and cos-
metics production the microbiological quality of the water
becomes paramount. Even in applications where biologi-
cal quality is not directly important, uncontrolled growth
can be a damaging nuisance. Warm-water systems and
cooling circuits in particular are a potential hazard (e.g.
from Legionella). Some water treatment or conditioning
is commonly required.

Water from public supply costs money, as does that
discharged to the public sewer. Except for water which
is incorporated into the product of the plant or evapo-
rated to the atmosphere, any water which enters the plant

Water chemistry 31/519

is returned to the environment as an efﬂuent. It may be
necessary to improve the quality of this before disposal
to surface water or into a public sewer, and for accep-
tance into the public sewer the sewerage authority may
levy a charge dependent on the quality. This is levied
per cubic meter of water discharged, and this volume, in
turn, is normally estimated on the basis of the metered
incoming mains supply ﬂow, minus some agreed factor
for water retained in the product or lost by evaporation.
There is therefore a double ﬁnancial incentive to reduce
the plant’s water consumption.

31.3 Water chemistry
Raw water analyses are normally obtained from the local
water supply organization. Water analysis is a specialized
trade, and analysts who do not routinely carry this out
can prove unreliable. It is also important to ascertain the
seasonal and long-term variations to be expected.

For conventional factory boilers, most of the many
items normally shown on a water supplier’s analysis sheet
are unimportant. The ones to look for are listed below.

31.3.1 Units of measurement

Analyses usually give concentrations in milligrams per
liter (mg/l) or parts per million (ppm). For practical pur-
poses these units are the same.

Most minerals in water exist as ions – electrically
charged particles that give them an electrical conductivity.
The different
that measure their
concentration can cause much confusion. For any
calculation involving adding different ions to one another
it is vital to use one of two systems of equivalents.

systems of units

The traditional British method is to calculate the con-
centration equivalent to calcium carbonate and give the
results as ‘mg/l as CaCO3’. A more modern unit, widely
used throughout Europe, is the milligram equivalent or
milliVal, abbreviated as meq/l or mVal. This gives the
same information as mg/l as CaCO3 but the values are
one-ﬁftieth of those expressed as CaCO3. Explaining these
systems is lengthy, and usually increases the non-
chemists’ confusion. The system mg/l as CaCO3 is used
below and the rules are as follows:
1. Concentrations of individual constituents, such as cal-
cium, ‘hardness’ or ‘alkalinity’ should be brought to
mg/l as CaCO3 for any comparisons or calculations.

2. There should be a statement on the analysis sheet that
makes it clear what system of units has been used.
Hardness and alkalinity are often given as CaCO3,
which makes life simple.

3. Alternatively, the analysis may state that concentra-
tions are given as the ion or as such, or each individual
constituents may say (for example) calcium as Ca. In
that case one must use the following conversion table:

To convert from
mg/l as such
Calcium (Ca)
Magnesium (Mg)
Bicarbonate (HCO3)

To mg/l as CaCO3

multiply by

To meq/l
multiply by

2.5
4.31
0.82

0.050
0.083
0.016

31/520 Water and Efﬂuents

4. Total dissolved solids (TDS) and silica (SiO2) are nor-
mally given as such and do not require any conversion.

31.3.2 Hardness and alkalinity

Many analyses quote total hardness. Some give temporary
hardness (or carbonate hardness) and permanent hard-
ness (or non-carbonate hardness), usually in consistent
units so that the values can be added together to give the
total hardness. The total hardness is actually the quantity
of calcium (Ca) C magnesium (Mg) in the water. If the
total is not given directly, the values given for these two
constituents must be added, after conversion to mg/l as
CaCO3 if necessary.

Hardness in water varies widely, and as an arbitrary

classiﬁcation:

Hardness less than 50 mg/l as CaCO3
50–200 mg/l as CaCO3
More than 200 mg/l as CaCO3

Soft
Medium
Very hard

Temporary hardness

Temporary or carbonate hardness and alkalinity frequen-
tly, but not always, mean the same thing (see below).
Bicarbonate or hydrogen carbonate is a more scientiﬁc
term since alkalinity is actually the concentration of the
bicarbonate (HCO(cid:2)

3 ) ion in the water.

If acid is dosed into water-containing bicarbonate, the
ion becomes converted to carbon dioxide (CO2) gas, while
the water becomes only slightly acidic. (Sodium bicarbon-
ate taken against acid stomach uses this property.) The
drop in pH from a given acid dose is much smaller than
would result from the same amount of acid dosed into
water containing no bicarbonate. When enough acid has
been added to convert all the bicarbonate to CO2, fur-
ther acid dosing leads to the sharp drop in pH, which is
expected from water containing no bicarbonate.

Another reaction of bicarbonate is that in boiling water
it combines with any hardness present to produce scale,
while releasing CO2 into the steam. This hardness is
called the temporary hardness. Its concentration therefore
depends on the lessor amounts of either hardness or
bicarbonate. Most waters contain more hardness than
bicarbonate, so that the temporary hardness is usually
equal to the bicarbonate content. The temporary hardness
quoted in analyses is often the only information available
on the bicarbonate content of the water.

Permanent hardness

After the temporary hardness has been removed, any cal-
cium and magnesium which remains is still capable of
forming a scum with soap, and can also react to form
boiler scale. This is called the permanent hardness.

CO2 release
When the steam is condensed, any CO2 released in the
boiler re-dissolves in the condensate, making it slightly
acidic and corrosive. Normally, boiler feedwater is soft-
ened and the boiler water pH is raised by addition of

caustic soda. Both these measures reduce the degree to
which bicarbonate breaks down and releases CO2. Even
so, very large amounts of bicarbonate entering the boiler
should be avoided.

31.3.3 Total dissolved solids (TDS)

Water contains various other salts which are generally
unimportant in medium-pressure boilers, except for the
contribution they make to the total solids in the boiler
water. They can therefore be grouped together, and since
dosing water-conditioning chemicals also contributes to
the boiler contents, even the total need not be known
exactly. Most analyses give a ﬁgure for TDS in mg/l,
but analytical methods differ and the result is not always
particularly reliable. TDS is usually given as the actual
weight of dissolved materials, which is 10–15 per cent
higher than the TDS measured ‘as mg/l CaCO3’.

Another method of estimating TDS is to measure the
electrical conductivity of the water, which is usually
reported as ‘µho’ or ‘µS’. This ﬁgure is roughly double
the TDS in mg/l as CaCO3.

For many years water costs have been rising faster than
inﬂation, and are set to rise even faster in the future. The
belief that water is ‘free’ must be combated: it is usually
possible to make more economical use of water. In most
factories the water bills are paid centrally, and there is no
system for debiting the cost to the actual water users. This
makes for wasteful practices which would be improved if
there were a system for monitoring where the water costs
are incurred within the facility.

In some cases sensible design can lead to re-use of
water, which reduces both water and efﬂuent costs. This
is best achieved by intelligent routing of the water rather
than by treatment before re-use. Efﬂuent treatment is best
avoided wherever possible. For example, very slightly
contaminated process wash water can be recovered for
washing down ﬂoors. This reduces charges for both
incoming water and efﬂuent.

31.3.4 Silica

The silica content of water only becomes important if it
is a large proportion, i.e. more than 10 per cent, of the
TDS. This is unusual in normal water supplies, but can
result from external water treatment (see below).

31.3.5 Types of water

Most natural waters contain more hardness than bicarbon-
ate. Only a few sources in the UK, usually from wells in
sandstone strata, contain more alkalinity than hardness.
In most cases the temporary hardness greatly exceeds the
permanent hardness. This is especially true of the hard
alkaline waters, which come from chalk and limestone
measures.

Many waters from mountainous uplands such as Wales,
Scotland, Yorkshire, or the moors of southwest England
are surface runoff and have not percolated through mineral
strata. They are low in minerals generally, and hardness
and alkalinity in particular, though even there the hardness

will be greater than the alkalinity. Their main characteris-
tic is their high content of organic matter, which may give
them a faint yellowish tinge, and a low pH. Many such
soft and peaty supplies have lime added at the waterworks
to make them less corrosive.

Some potable supplies are treated surface waters from
rivers, etc. These originally derive from any of the above,
but will also contain the products of human activities,
which lead to increased mineral contents and possibly
some undesirable materials such as detergents.

Potable water is not (and should not) be sterile. In fact,
potable water mains always have a layer of living matter
clinging to the walls. Any change in the ﬂow, temper-
ature or chemical quality of the water passing through
the pipe will cause some of this to become detached.
Quite large living organisms (such as freshwater shrimps,
waterﬂies and even leeches) can occasionally be found
in a potable supply. They are esthetically disturbing but
usually unimportant.

The important quality criterion is absence of pathogens,
a term which covers all disease-bearing bacteria. This cri-
terion is usually determined by test for Eschericia coli,
a species of bacteria so common in the gut that it is a
reliable indicator of any pathogenic contamination.

Some plants have to rely on a private supply, usu-
ally taken from a borehole. A competent authority ﬁrst
must test the water. Water analysis is a specialized pro-
cedure and is preferably undertaken by an analyst who
does this regularly, such as a local water supplier’s labo-
ratory. Water from a spring or a deep well, which appears
potable, is usually found to be of reasonable quality, but
it may occasionally contain some constituents (e.g. iron
or manganese) in unacceptable concentrations. The nitrate
content of groundwaters is generally rising throughout the
UK, and if it is found to be near the legal limit, further
samples should be analyzed at, say, six-monthly intervals.

31.4 Building services
31.4.1 Potable water

Most plant sites have access to a public supply of
water. Until recently this was legally required to be no
more than ‘wholesome and palatable’. Water suppliers
are now responsible for meeting the EC’s Directives (see
Table 31.1). Wherever possible, all drinking-water taps
should be served directly from the incoming main, and
the plant engineer’s sole responsibility is to ensure that
no deterioration takes place within his system.

The water supply authorities normally insist that (for
uses other than drinking-water taps) their main should dis-
charge into a break-pressure vessel, after which the water
quality becomes the consumers’ responsibility. The water
tank should be covered against tramp dirt and access by
birds, etc., and it must be shielded from sunlight to avoid
the growth of algae. Nevertheless, access must be main-
tained for easy inspection. The distribution pipework is
preferably all plastic and lead must be avoided altogether.
The use of copper is doubtful with some corrosive waters,
and soldered joints in it can lead to unacceptable concen-
trations of lead in the water.

Table 31.1 Drinking-water quality standards (EC, 1980)

Building services 31/521

Colour
Turbidity
Threshold odour no.
Anionic detergents
Pesticides
PAH
Phenols
Aluminium
Ammonia
Arsenic
Barium
Calcium
Cadmium
Chloride
Chromium
Copper
Cyanide
Fluoride
Hydrogen sulphide
Iron
Lead
Magnesium
Manganese
Mercury
Nitrate
Selenium
Sodium
Sulfate
Zinc
Coliforms
Coliforms

Pt/Co
JTU

mg/l Manoxol
mg/l
µg/l
µg/l
mg/l Al
mg/l NH4
mg/l As
mg/l Ba
mg/l Ca
mg/l Cd
mg/l Cl
mg/l Cr6C
mg/l Cu
mg/l CN
mg/l F
mg/l H2S
mg/l Fe
mg/l Pb
mg/l Mg
mg/l Mn
mg/l Hg
mg/l NO3
mg/l Se
mg/l Na
mg/l SO4
mg/l Zn

20
4
3
0.2
0.5
0.2
0.5
0.2
0.5
0.05
0.1

100

200

0.005

0.05
0.1
0.05
1.5
–
0.2
0.05
50
0.05
0.001
50
0.01

(GL)
(GL)

(GL)

150
250

5.0

Zero in 95%
of samples

GL = Guide Level

(i.e. no MAC applies)

The removal of such impurities is relatively simple at a
waterworks, but a typical plant cannot provide the chemi-
cal expertise needed to keep the process in good working
order. Treatment should therefore be avoided if there is
any reasonable economical alternative.

If the water is found ﬁt for consumption, with respect
to both its mineral and biological content, the problem of
sanitization can still arise. Public supply invariably has
a very small residual chlorine level. This suppresses bio-
logical growth and maintains water quality even when
the line is stagnant. As with other forms of treatment, the
scale of private supply is usually too small to allow good
control of chlorinating equipment.

One method of operating a non-chlorinated supply
safely is to ensure that the line runs constantly to waste,
as do very old drinking fountains. This avoids biological
growth that can accumulate in stagnant water. Dead legs
in the piping system are always undesirable, especially in
such cases.

31.4.2 Domestic efﬂuent

All plants produce domestic efﬂuent, which is preferably
discharged into the public sewer. If no sewer is avail-
able the plant needs a septic tank or a similar device
sized for the probable demand, which is based on the
number of people whom it will serve. Architects and

31/522 Water and Efﬂuents

competent building contractors are familiar with rules of
thumb which apply to the design and sizing of these. Sep-
tic tanks need regular pumping out of sludge and access
must be provided. Many industrial efﬂuents interfere with
the biological activity of a septic tank and must therefore
be kept separate and discharged by other means.

31.4.3 Domestic water

Domestic hot and cold water, for hand washing, etc., will
normally be supplied within a factory from the break-
pressure tank fed by the incoming water main or pri-
vate supply. Although these supplies do not need to con-
form to potable water quality standards they can provide
a breeding ground for a variety of bacteria, including
Legionella. As a precaution, many plant engineers dose
sodium hypochlorite into the break tank to maintain about
0.2–0.5 mg/l of free chlorine in these supplies. Bacteria
breed most proliﬁcally at temperatures between 10° and
60°C and, wherever possible, hot water should be main-
tained above and cold water below this range. If the raw
water is hard then consideration should be given to soft-
ening at least the hot water to prevent scale formation in
caloriﬁers, pipework and sanitary ware.

31.4.4 Closed circuits

Closed water circuits, such as chilled water, or medium-
and high-pressure hot water systems, should be initially
ﬁlled with the best quality water available – de-ionized
for preference but at least softened. They should then be
conditioned by dosing with suitable corrosion-inhibiting
chemicals and biocides. Make-up to closed systems is usu-
ally very small and raw water will often sufﬁce, although,
of course, higher-purity water is better. Routine sampling
to check on inhibitor levels and bacterial growth is vital
to the operation of such circuits, and most reputable con-
ditioning chemical suppliers will undertake this work on
a contract basis.

31.4.5 Open cooling-water systems

Although direct air-cooled systems are now preferred
there are still many evaporative cooling towers in
operation, and open systems of this type represent the
most difﬁcult of all the water-treatment situations the
plant engineer is likely to meet. The systems work as
follows: heat from the heat exchanger is taken up by the
circulating water which is then sprayed into the top of
a packed cooling tower with a forced or natural draft
of air ﬂowing through it. Some of the water evaporates,
taking in latent heat from the bulk of the water, which,
consequently, cools down. The cooled water collects in
a sump below the tower and is pumped back to the heat
exchanger. When water evaporates, it leaves behind any
dissolved salts and other contaminants, which, as a result,
become more concentrated. A certain amount of water
is also lost from the tower in the form of ‘windage’
or spray. To compensate for these losses a make-up
supply of water is required. The concentration effect is
most important because, if it is not properly controlled,

salts – especially hardness salts – may become over-
concentrated and deposit as scale in the pipework, in the
heat exchanger and on the tower packing, where it causes
blocking, and its added weight can lead to mechanical
failure. To control the build-up of dissolved salts a bleed-
off of concentrated water is necessary, and this must also
be replaced by make-up water.

The circulating water comes into contact, in the cooling
tower, with large volumes of atmospheric air and washes
from it a variety of airborne contaminants, including pol-
lutant gases such as oxides of sulfur and nitrogen, dust and
soot particles and spores of bacteria, fungi and algae. The
dissolved gases may give rise to acidic conditions which
contribute to corrosion, algae can grow in the sump where
warmth and sunlight provide ideal conditions while fungi
may appear on the dead algae. Aerobic bacteria, including
Legionella, grow in the circulating water and contribute,
with algae and fungi, to the formation of slimes which not
only cause physical blocking of plant but also set up areas
of differential aeration around the system, which can pro-
mote intense corrosion. This process is aggravated by the
deposition of scale and corrosion products below which
corrosion takes place and anaerobic bacteria multiply.

Water losses

The rate of evaporation from a cooling tower is approxi-
mately 1 per cent of the circulation rate for each 5°C drop
in temperature across the tower, or about 7 liters/h per ton
of refrigeration. Windage losses will obviously depend on
the prevailing wind conditions and the design of the tower
with regard to spray elimination but, typically, these are
about 0.2 per cent of the circulation rate.

The amount of bleed-off required would depend on the
nature of the make-up water and the type of conditioning
chemicals used. The specialist tower manufacturer, con-
ditioning chemical supplier or water-treatment consultant
will advise the maximum concentration factor (the ratio
of circulating water concentration to make-up water con-
centration) which can be allowed. The necessary bleed-off
is then given by:
B D

E

(cid:6)C (cid:2) 1(cid:7) (cid:2) W

where
E D evaporation rate,
C D concentration factor (typically 1–5),
W D windage.
A simple manual valve running continuously to drain or
by an automatic valve controlled by the conductivity of
the circulating water may set the bleed-off.

Make-up water

The required make-up water, M, is given by:
M D S C W

Or
M D (cid:6)E ð C(cid:7)
(cid:6)C (cid:2) 1(cid:7)

Many towers operate with hard water make-up, and scale-
inhibiting chemicals are dosed to prevent the formation
of hard, adherent scale. Hardness salts do precipitate in
these systems but in the form of a mobile sludge, which
is easily removed. A more satisfactory solution is to use
make-up water, which should, ideally, be softened or de-
alkalized. However, naturally soft or artiﬁcially softened
water tends to be corrosive in the conditions encountered
in open cooling systems, and it is necessary to dose a
corrosion-inhibiting chemical to protect metal surfaces.
In either case, the accurate control of chemical dosing
is absolutely critical to the reliability and integrity of
the cooling system. The selection of the correct condi-
tioning chemical(s) and operating regime will depend on
many factors, including the make-up water quality, con-
centration, and materials of construction of the system and
environmental conditions. It is a task for a specialist, and
chemicals should only be purchased from reputable sup-
pliers who will provide a continuing service of monitoring
and control.

Biocides

Biocides are added to cooling water to control the growth
of bacteria, fungi and algae in the system. Chlorine,
dosed in the form of sodium hypochlorite, is probably
the best broad-spectrum biocide and, at residual levels
of 0.5 mg/l, chlorine is effective against most bacteria,
including Legionella. However, a re-circulatory system
means that bacteria are exposed continuously to the same
chemical conditions and resistant strains, with a natural
immunity to the biocide, will eventually appear and
colonize the system. To prevent this, a regular shot dose
of an alternative biocide is advisable, and most chemical
suppliers have a range of biocides, both broad spectrum
and speciﬁc, for this purpose.

Filtration

Insoluble suspended matter either picked up from the
atmosphere or formed by deposition and corrosion within
the system, together with slimes will, if not removed,
cause blocking and abrasion problems. The build-up of
such material can be controlled by side stream ﬁltration,
in which about 2–5 per cent of the circulating water ﬂow
is ﬁltered continuously. A sand ﬁlter is commonly used
for this type of duty.

31.5 Boilers
31.5.1 Water for steam raising

Most plants have boilers producing steam for space heat-
ing: many need steam for other purposes as well. Boiler
water requirements for boilers have changed radically over
recent years. The old ‘Lancashire’ and ‘Economic’ boil-
ers had large heating surfaces and low heat transfer rates:
scale deposits would do no more harm than reduce their
thermal efﬁciency.

Modern packaged boilers use the heat transfer surfaces
much more intensively, and are endangered by scale. The
boiler water acts as a coolant without which the metal

Boilers 31/523

of the tube overheats. Thin ﬁlms of scale can obstruct
heat transfer sufﬁciently to bring about tube failure in this
way – especially if the scale deposit is siliceous, which
is a particularly good insulator. Alternatively, the scale
deposit may slow down heat transfer from the hot com-
bustion gases to such an extent that the temperature at the
back of the boiler rises excessively and causes tube plate
cracking.

Boilermakers now recognize that their heat transfer
rates had become too high, which made control of the
boiler water quality unacceptably critical. They have
reverted to slightly lower heat transfer rates, but poor
boiler water quality remains the main single cause of
boiler failure. Good water-treatment plant and boiler-
water conditioning and control are still vital not only to
the boiler’s performance but also to its integrity.

31.5.2 Managing the steam-water circuit

Most industrial installations have a boiler of some kind:
this boiler and its steam user form a circuit in which
water and steam circulates. Loose use of nomenclature
sometimes leads to confusion, and it is therefore useful to
deﬁne the various waters in it:

Raw water: The mains supply or other external source
used to prepare make-up.
Treated water: The water leaving the external treatment
plant, if there is one.
Make-up: The amount of raw or treated water added to
the feed.
Condensate: The water returning from the steam user(s).
Feedwater: The water entering the boiler feed heating
system, which will normally be a blend of treated water
and condensate.
Boiler water: The contents of the boiler.
Blowdown: The water blown down from the boiler in
order to maintain its total dissolved level below the spec-
iﬁed limit.

In order to maintain good boiler operation, the most

important rules to follow are:

1. The boiler water should be within the limits speci-
ﬁed for that type of boiler by British Standards, DIN
and similar standards. In a conventional shell type fac-
tory boiler the most important criteria are that hardness
should be present only in very small concentrations,
and the TDS should be below 3000 mg/l.

2. The boiler water must at all times contain a positive
residual of oxygen scavenger (usually sodium sulﬁte).
3. The water-containing chemicals should include phos-

phate or tannin to counter any residual hardness.

4. The boiler water pH must be raised to about 9 or over
to avoid corrosion, to maintain silica in solution, and
to reduce the release of CO2 into the steam.

5. The bicarbonate content of feed should be moderate
to avoid excessive liberation of carbon dioxide in the
boiler.

Clearly, these matters are interdependent.

31/524 Water and Efﬂuents

31.5.3 Condensate return
Condensate normally contains no hardness and is very low
in dissolved solids. Unless it has been excessively exposed
to the atmosphere, condensate is also very low in dis-
solved oxygen. Therefore it represents the ideal feedwater,
and the higher the proportion of recovered condensate
in the feed, the easier it will be to maintain the boiler
water within the desired limits. The percentage conden-
sate return is thus basic to all considerations of water
management for the boiler circuit.

In some process applications condensate becomes con-
taminated: in sugar reﬁning it may contain sugar, in paper
manufacture and some other processes it may be contami-
nated with raw water, and where it feeds turbines or other
machinery it is liable to contain oil or grease. In all these
cases the condensate may still provide a better source of
boiler feed than the available raw water, but it may need
condensate ﬁltration or softening plant before re-use.

31.5.4 Raw water quality
This varies widely within temperate zones, and even more
so in hot countries. A wide range of possibilities therefore
exists: high hardness, high alkalinity, and/or high TDS
need correction. However, the degree to which this is
necessary is also dictated by the percentage of conden-
sate return – if it is high, the need for external treatment
is accordingly reduced. The processes used for external
treatment are described below.

31.5.5 Oxygen scavenging
Water at ambient temperature in contact with air contains
about 10 mg/l of oxygen. To avoid corrosion, boiler water
must contain no oxygen, and have an excess of oxygen-
scavenging chemical (usually catalyzed sodium sulﬁte) to
ensure this. Ideally, sulﬁte is dosed into the feed heating
system with the feedwater to give the hot well, etc. some
protection, with a second dosing point into the boiler itself
to ensure that the residual is actually maintained.

The removal of each milligram of oxygen requires
about 8 mg of sodium sulﬁte, so that the dose should be
adjusted to suit the amount of oxygen introduced, which
corresponds roughly to 80 mg/l of cold make-up. A high
level of condensate return therefore reduces the scavenger
demand, and this is not only an economy in itself but
can also mean a considerable reduction in the amount of
total dissolved solids introduced into the boiler with the
feedwater.

Oxygen can also be removed from feedwater by ther-
mal de-aeration, or partially removed by skilful design of
the feed heating system and blowdown recovery. These
processes run without cost to the operator, but save chem-
icals, and, by reducing the required dose of sulﬁte into the
system, decrease the amount of non-volatile solids added
into the boiler.

31.5.6 Blowdown
All non-volatile impurities entering the boiler must build
up in the boiler water. This includes the TDS in the feed,
plus most of the conditioning chemicals, of which the

sodium sulﬁte used as oxygen scavenger is usually the
major contributor. To maintain the boiler water within its
permitted limits some boiler water must be blown down.
The rate (as a percentage of the steaming rate) is calcu-
lated by:
x D f ð 100%
b (cid:2) f

where f is the concentration of an impurity in the feed-
water and b is its permitted concentration in the boiler
water. This calculation should be made for each individual
impurity speciﬁed. In practice, the TDS is usually the con-
trolling factor in blowdown but if the make-up is treated
by partial de-ionization, silica may be more important.

Blowdown costs money in terms of heat, water and
chemicals, and should therefore be minimized. Control
of blowdown and recovery of heat from it are important
aspects of boiler operation.

Where sodium sulﬁte addition is a large contributor to
the non-volatiles in the boiler, thermal means of reducing
the oxygen can make a signiﬁcant improvement in the
overall operation.

it

31.5.7 External water treatment
In an ideal case the condensate return is high, and the raw
water low in dissolved solids, hardness and alkalinity. It is
then possible to operate the boiler without external water
treatment, relying on conditioning of the boiler water with
phosphates, tannins or other chemicals to cope with the
small amount of hardness introduced with the raw water.
is
considered essential at
to soften the raw water.
Conventional softeners do not, however, remove hardness
completely but allow a very small concentration to pass
through.

In practice, especially with modern boilers,

least

Where the feed contains a large proportion of treated
water, softening is a minimum requirement and the raw
water quality dictates whether a more sophisticated form
of external treatment would be preferable. If the water
has a high alkalinity it calls for de-alkalization and base
exchange. De-ionization is the ideal water treatment, but is
usually avoided if possible because of its cost and use of
corrosive chemicals. Membrane processes giving partial
de-ionization are not normally installed at present, but
are certain to become important in the future.

External treatment process plant should be installed
only after a specialist’s advice has indicated the best pro-
cess, and plant should only be purchased from reputable
manufacturers. The operational characteristics of the dif-
ferent processes are described below.

31.6 Speciﬁed purities for process use
Various processes need waters of a quality better than the
public supply, or whatever source is available. Demands
vary widely. Pharmaceutical and cosmetics production
generally requires good biological quality. So do food and
drink manufacture, but brewing and soft drink manufac-
ture often requires a speciﬁed mineral content as well. In
brewing it is becoming common for water to be largely

Speciﬁed purities for process use 31/525

de-ionized and wholly synthetic water to be reconstituted
by chemical dosing. Membrane processes such as reverse
osmosis and electro-dialysis, which do not completely de-
ionize the water, are increasingly used. Table 31.2 gives
details of the BEWA Water Quality Classiﬁcation and
Table 31.3 shows typical water characteristics.

Textile products are particularly sensitive to iron, which
discolors the product. Many washing operations, as in
metal ﬁnishing, require softened water to avoid staining

of the product. Others are much more sensitive and use
de-ionized water.

De-ionized water is required for high-pressure boiler
make-up and in many chemical process applications.
Where a process has a large-scale steam demand, high-
pressure turbine generators are often installed to generate
power before providing the process with pass-out steam,
thus making the most efﬁcient use of the fuel. If the
process does not return the steam as condensate,
the

Table 31.2 BEWA Water Quality Classiﬁcation

Class

Type

Typical applications

General notes

Relevant standards

Natural
water

Potable
water

Softened
water

De-ionized
water

Once-through cooling systems
Outside wash down
Irrigation
Fisheries
Fireﬁghting
Recreational
Natural mineral waters
Drinking
Domestic use
Food and soft drinks
Cooling systems
Irrigation
Fireﬁghting
Recirculatory cooling systems
Low-pressure boilers
Laundries
Bottle washing
Closed recirculatory systems
Domestic use

Recirculatory cooling systems
Brewing
Food and soft drinks
Medium-pressure boilers
Humidiﬁers
Renal dialysis
Glass washing
Battery top-up
Laboratories
Plating industry
Spirit reduction

De-alkalized Medium-pressure boilers
water

Puriﬁed
water

Pharmaceuticals
Cosmetics
Laboratories
Chemical manufacturing

Apyrogenic
water

Vial washing
Parenteral solutions
Tissue culture

High-purity
water

High-pressure boilers
Laboratories

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Level of salinity may restrict use for

irrigation and ﬁsheries

Brackish water has TDS up to 10 000
Seawater has TDS up to 50 000
All characteristics highly variable

Dept of Environment (DoE)
Circular 18/85
EC Directive 75/440/EEC
EC Directive 78/659/EEC
EC Directive 79/923/EEC
EC Directive 76/160/EEC
EC Directive 80/777/EEC
WHO (ISBN 92 4 154 168 7)
EC Directive 80/778/EEC
DoE Circ 20/82
DoE Circ 25/84

Industrial Water Society (IWS)
BS 2486: 1978
BS 1170: 1983
BEWA: COP.01.85

IWS
BS 2486: 1978

For renal dialysis aluminium must

be less than 0.01 mg/l as Al

Silica removal may be required for

some applications

United States Pharmaceopeia (USP)

also speciﬁes pH D 7.0

BP insists on distillation for water
for injection. USP allows reverse
osmosis also

De-aeration may be required

BS 2489: 1978
BS 4974: 1975
BS 3978: 1966
American Society for Testing and

Materials (ASTM)

EEC Draft 85/C 150/04
Association for the Advancement

of Medical Instrumentation

(AAMI)
British Pharmacopoeia (BP)
European Pharmaceopoeia (EP)
USP
US Food and Drug Administration

(FDA)

BS 3978: 1966
BP, 1980
EP
USP
FDA
BS 2486: 1978
BS 3978; 1966
National Committee of Clinical

Laboratories Standards
(NCCLS) PSC-3

Ultra-pure
water

Microelectronics
Supercritical boilers
Nuclear applications
Analytical instrumentation

De-aeration may be required
Readily picks up contamination from

pipework and environment

BS 2486: 1978
Integrated Circuit Manufacturers

Consortium Guidelines (ICMC)

ASTM D 1193-77

31/526 Water and Efﬂuents

Table 31.3 Typical characteristics of water

m
c
–
(cid:14)
M

.
t
s
i
s
e
R

m
c
/
s
µ

.
t
c
u
d
n
o
C

750

S
D
T

H
p

I
S
L

s
s
e
n
d
r
a
H

y
t
i
n
i
l
a
k
l
A

e
t
a
r
t
i

N

m
u
i
d
o
S

s
l
a
t
e
m
y
v
a
e
H

a
c
i
l
i
S

s
d
i
l
o
s

d
e
d
n
e
p
s
u
S

t
n
u
o
c

e
l
c
i
t
r
a
P

y
t
i
d
i
b
r
u
T

I

D
S

Max. 6.5
to
500
8.5

More Max. Max. Less
than
than
30
0.1

150

50

Less Max.
than
1.0

5

s
n
e
g
o
r
y
P

s
m
s
i
n
a
g
r
o
-
o
r
c
i
M

Less

5
100

A
O

C
O
T

Max.

5

s
s
a
l
C

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

(cid:2)1 Less
to
than
C1
20
(cid:2)1
to
C1

Less
than
30

20

5

5

0.1

0.06

1

10

0.05 Max. 5.0
to
9.5
0.2 Max. 6.0
to
8.5
0.2 Max. 6.0
to
8.5
6.5
to
7.5

0.5

10

1

18

0.005

5

0.5

0.1

0.1

than
0.5

Max.
0.1

Less Less Less
than
than
0.1
Less
than
0.1
Less
than
0.1
0.02 Less
than
0.1
0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.002 ND

Max.
0.1

Less
than

Less
than

0.1

3

3

Less
than
0.1
Less
than
0.1

1

Less
than
10
Less Less
than
than
0.25

1

Less
than

1

0.05 Less Less
than
0.25

than

1

1

Less
than
1.0
Less 0.1
than
0.5

Deﬁnitions
Conductivity: the electrical conductivity of the water measured in
microSiemen/cm is the traditional indicator for mineral impurities.
Resistivity: the reciprocal of conductivity, measured in Megohm-
cm. It is used in some industries instead of conductivity particularly
for ultra-pure water.
TDS: total dissolved solids determined by evaporating the water
and weighing the residue. Units are mg/l.
pH: the acidity or alkalinity of the water expressed on a scale of 0
(acid) to 14 (alkaline). pH 7 is considered neutral.
LSI (Langelier Saturation Index): an indication of the corrosive
(negative) or scale-forming (positive) tendencies of the water.
Hardness: the total dissolved calcium and magnesium salts in
water. Compounds of these two elements are responsible for
most scale deposits. Units are mg/l as CaCO3.
Alkalinity: the total concentration of alkaline salts (bicarbonate,
carbonate and hydroxide) determined by titration with acid to pH
4.5. Units are mg/l as CaCO3.
Nitrateconcentration is in mg/l as NO(cid:2)
3 .
Sodiumconcentration is in mg/l as NaC.
Heavymetals: the total of chromium, lead, copper and other toxic
metals expressed in mg/l.
Silica: soluble or ‘reactive’ silica concentration in mg/l as SiO2.
Suspended solids: the concentration of insoluble contaminants
in mg/l.
Turbidity: a measure of the colloidal haze present in Nephelomet-
ric Turbidity Units (NTU).
SDI: the Silt Density Index, a measure of the rate at which the
water blocks a 0.45 µm ﬁlter.
Particlecount: the number of particles greater than 0.5 µm in 1 ml
of water (maximum particle size is 1 µm).

OA(Oxygen Absorbed): a measure of organic contaminants deter-
mined in a 4-hour test at 27°C and measured in mg/l as O2. (Other
indicative tests could be Permanganate Value (PV) or Chemical
Oxygen Demand (COD).)
TOC(Total Organic Carbon): another way of expressing organics,
in this case in mg/l as C.
Microorganisms: used here to mean the number of colony-
forming units of total bacteria present in 1 ml of water.
Pyrogens: the endotoxins responsible for febrile reaction on injec-
tion, determined either by the rabbit test or the LAL test. Units are
Endotoxin unit/ml (EU/ml).
Note: There are many different tests and different versions of the
same test for water analysis. If there is any doubt as to method or
interpretation consult a reputable water-treatment supplier. The
letters ND in the table indicate not detectable. Parts per million
(ppm) are also commonly used to express concentration and are
essentially identical to mg/l.

Standard tests for water analysis
For further information including test procedures the following
are recommended.

BS 2486, Treatment of water for land boilers.
BS 2690, Methods of testing water used in industry.
MethodsfortheExaminationofWatersandAssociatedMaterials,
HMSO.
ASTM Standards, Vols 1101 and 1102 (1983)
American Public Health Association, Standard Methods for the
ExaminationofWaterandWasteWater, 16th edn.

boiler feed will be entirely treated water. This means
that the external water-treatment plant has to handle an
unusually large ﬂow whose quality of make-up is critical.
The world’s largest de-ionization plants have been built
to serve this kind of system.

De-ionized water itself has a wide range of grades.
The lowest is that obtained by a simple cation–anion
unit, which may contain up to 5 mg/l TDS. The highest
grade is ultra-pure water, which is necessary for making
microchips and has maximum total contents three orders
of magnitude lower. The speciﬁcations for suspended and
dissolved matter in ultra-pure water are always at the
limits of detection, and are steadily becoming more strin-
gent as chemists devise more sophisticated methods of
analysis.

The plant engineer should not be expected to select
the correct process for any of these: good professional
advice must be taken – and followed. The account below
of the processes available therefore concentrates largely
on external process characteristics which affect the gen-
eral operation of the facility.

31.7 Water-puriﬁcation processes
31.7.1 Filtration

This deals with all equipment used for the removal of
particulate matter and represents a wide range of possi-
bilities. Several books cover this subject and only a few
typical examples are quoted here.

Simple strainers remove gross materials. These should
not normally occur in public supply, but strainers are
sometimes ﬁtted to protect sensitive equipment or pro-
cesses against breaks in the main, etc. The commonest
form contains a stainless-steel wedge wire screen and is
piped with a bypass so that the screen element can be
isolated and removed for cleaning when necessary. If the
load on the ﬁlter makes this kind of cleaning burdensome
a self-ﬂushing ﬁlter can be used. These can incorporate
strainer elements down to 50 µm.

Smaller particles can be removed by cartridge ﬁlters,
which can be rated for various particle sizes down to
10 µm. These are typically candle ﬁlters whose ﬁlter ele-
ments are bobbins of nylon or similar string wound onto
a former. When clogged, they must be replaced.

31.7.2 Sand ﬁlters

Sand ﬁlters are widely used in water puriﬁcation and
remove suspended matter by a completely different mech-
anism. Instead of the water passing through small oriﬁces
through which particles cannot pass, it runs through a bed
of ﬁlter medium, typically 0.75 mm sand 750 mm deep.
The oriﬁces between such sand particles are relatively
large, but dirt is adsorbed onto the large surface area pre-
sented by the medium. The pressure loss rises as the dirt
builds up and the ﬁlter must be cleaned when it reaches
about 3 m WC, otherwise the dirt can be pushed right
through the ﬁlter.

Filter back washing normally needs low-pressure com-
pressed air and a ﬂow of ﬁltered water about ten times the

Water-puriﬁcation processes 31/527

rated ﬁlter throughput. These back-washing arrangements
are critical, and providing the large ﬂow of backwash
water, as well as drainage for its disposal, can often cre-
ate difﬁculties. Given good backwash arrangements, and
on water low in suspended matter, sand ﬁlters are simple,
reliable, cheap and have low operating costs.

Sand ﬁlters vary in sophistication. A simple ﬁlter will
remove most particles down to 5 µm. Multi-media ﬁl-
ters which use sand and anthracite, and possibly a third
medium, in discrete layers, can yield very efﬁcient ﬁltra-
tion down to 2 µm. Granular activated carbon can be used
instead of sand to add some measure of organic removal
to the ﬁltration process. The quality produced by any ﬁlter
depends largely on the efﬁciency of the backwash. Sand
ﬁlters in some form provide a satisfactory solution for the
majority of water-ﬁltration problems.

31.7.3 Coagulation

Still smaller particles and some of the organic matter in
water can, if necessary, be removed by coagulation, in
which a chemical coagulant is dosed into the water before
the ﬁlter. Unlike simple ﬁltration, this process requires
chemicals and careful control. Dosing directly before the
ﬁlter will only cope with small concentrations of dirt.
Larger amounts of dirt require coagulation to be followed
by sedimentation and then ﬁltration. It is a difﬁcult process
and is to be avoided if at all possible, especially on small
ﬂows. When coagulation processes go wrong, they can
severely damage downstream equipment.

31.7.4 Membrane ﬁltration

Microﬁltration and ultraﬁltration have recently been intro-
duced for the removal of particles down to any desired
size. Their capital cost is relatively high. Experience with
them is limited, and a short trial with a small-scale pilot
element is advisable. Prediction of full-scale performance
from such trials is normally quite reliable.

Dead-end ﬁltration through membrane ﬁlters is com-
mon in some industries where high purity is imperative.
When clogged, the membrane has to be replaced. The
water is ﬁrst puriﬁed, and the ﬁlters serve as a ﬁnal pol-
isher. They are unsuitable for applications where they
have to remove any signiﬁcant concentration of partic-
ulate matter, as the cost of membrane replacement can
become very high.

31.7.5 Water softening

Traditional water-softening processes add lime, or lime
and soda ash, to the water. This produces a precipitate
in the form of a sludge, which must be settled out and
the clariﬁed water ﬁltered in a sand ﬁlter. The chemicals
are cheap, but the problems of handling solid chemicals
and of sludge disposal have made the processes obso-
lete. They are, however, simple and robust, suitable for
low-technology supervision, and cope well with chang-
ing water analyses. They should not be forgotten when
considering projects in underdeveloped countries.

31/528 Water and Efﬂuents

31.7.6 Ion-exchange processes: general

Ion-exchange units physically resemble sand pressure ﬁl-
ters, and are almost as effective in removing, and therefore
accumulating, suspended matter. As they are back-washed
much less vigorously they must not be fed with water
containing more than about 2 mg/l of suspended matter
or they will become progressively fouled and with sus-
pended material. Public supply quality is usually (but not
always) good enough for the water to be put directly onto
ion exchange.

Ion exchangers are synthetic resins in the form of
beads – small spheres of 0.5 to 1.0 mm in diameter. Good
back-washing of the bed is important to obtain a uniform
bed in which the different sizes are graded to give the
minimum pressure loss. The resins have a limited life.
Cation resins, used in softening and also in the ﬁrst stage
of deionization, can last for 10 or even 20 years, but anion
resins used in de-ionization rarely give more than 3–5
years of use.

If the unit becomes badly fouled with suspended matter
(for example, after a pipe brake has introduced excessive
suspended matter into the system) it must be taken out
of service and cleaned. This is done with an extended
backwash, possibly at higher ﬂow rates. If this does not
remove the dirt, the manhole should be opened and the
resin agitated with an air lance. Non-ionic detergents can
be used, but not at the same time as the air lance or the
resulting froth will be impossible to control.

Ion exchangers in general and cation resins in particular
are liable to chemical attack by chlorine. The very small
residual of chlorine in public supply (typically, 0.2 mg/l)
has only a mineral effect, but if more chlorine has been
added it must be removed (e.g. with an activated carbon
ﬁlter) before ion exchange.

The anion resins used in de-ionization are prone to
fouling if the water contains organic matter. The soft
peaty waters mentioned above are particularly bad in this
respect, and, at worst, can reduce resin life to a few weeks.
The handling, storage, measuring and dilution of
regeneration chemicals requires serious consideration,
especially in de-ionization, which requires strong acid and
alkali. For dilution and pumping the actual regeneration
solution most systems use ejectors, which avoids moving
parts in corrosive solutions.

All ion-exchange processes produce wastewater from
backwash, regeneration and rinse. The proportion of waste
depends on the concentration of hardness or to TDS being
removed, and can be as high as 15 per cent of the product
ﬂow. Any pretreatment has to take this additional ﬂow
into account.

the TDS remains substantially unchanged. The softened
water is at the same pH as the incoming water but is rather
more corrosive to steel.

There is no difﬁculty in handling or storage of corro-
sive chemicals or efﬂuents. Salt is easily purchased and
handled in bulk, and can be discharged directly into a
standard commercial salt saturator.

The run and regeneration cycle on small to medium-size
units is normally governed by a multi-port valve, which
is the only moving part required. There have been many
cases where this has failed and brine was injected directly
into the boiler. A conductivity meter on the make-up line
would guard against this.

The operation of a base exchanger is chemically inefﬁ-
cient, and the spent regenerant contains large amounts of
excess salt which may occasionally be difﬁcult to dispose
of. Factory softeners make a major contribution to the
chloride content of the UK’s industrial rivers, and in the
longer term there will be heavy pressure from environ-
mentalists to reduce the amount of salt being discharged.

De-alkalization/base exchange

This three-stage process is used for waters of high alka-
linity and hardness. It actually removes most of the tem-
porary hardness and so reduces the TDS of the water.
However, in the process it increases the proportion of
silica in the remainder. Any residual temporary hardness
and the permanent hardness are softened in a conventional
softener.

The effect is best illustrated by a numerical example
(Table 31.4). Let us take the case of hard and alkaline
deep well water such as that found to the north of Lon-
don, whose main characteristics are shown in the ﬁrst
column of Table 31.4. The second column shows its qual-
ity after de-alkalization has removed nine-tenths of the
temporary hardness and converted it into CO2 gas. This
is removed from the water by stripping it with air in a
packed ‘degassing’ column, and the product then soft-
ened in the third stage to yield the product shown in the
third column.

The raw water silica is 22 mg/l as SiO2, and there-
fore becomes a major constituent of the treated water.
Silica scale must now be avoided by raising the boiler
water pH and letting silica rather than the TDS control
the necessary blowdown. Silica scale not only has a tenth
of the heat conductivity of calcium carbonate scale but
it is glassy, adherent, and extremely resistant to boiler-
cleaning chemicals.

De-alkalization resins are regenerated with sulfuric or
hydrochloric acid. Sulfuric acid is cheaper and easier to

Base-exchange softening

This is the simplest and commonest ion-exchange pro-
cess. It uses only cation resins which are regenerated
with strong brine to remove calcium and magnesium ions
from water in exchange for sodium ions. Well-designed
standard plant is available in a wide range of sizes and
operates with a minimum of supervision. Conventional
softeners allow 1–3 per cent of the incoming hardness to
leak through. As the hardness is exchanged for sodium

Table 31.4

Total
Hardnessa
Alkalinitya
TDSa

Raw water

De-alkalized

Base exchanged

290
265
334

50
25
94

1
25
94

aAll as mg/l CaCO3.

store and handle, but its dilution with water are poten-
tially dangerous and must be carefully engineered. The
regenerant solution must be extremely dilute to avoid the
precipitation of calcium sulfate, which would clog the
unit. This leads to long regeneration times and a high
production of wastewater. Hydrochloric acid is usually
preferred on the smaller scale, where easier operation is
more important than the annual cost of chemicals.

De-alkalization resins must not be over-regenerated or
the product water becomes strongly acidic. The system
therefore needs some measure of skilled supervision, and
may depend on a pH meter – an instrument that, in turn,
needs regular and skilled maintenance.

The acid regeneration is very efﬁcient, and the amount
of free acid going to drain is small. Given a reasonable
amount of dilution, it may be unnecessary to take special
precautions against it. Although acids are more expensive
than salt, the efﬁciency with which they are used means
that the operating cost of a de-alkalization/base exchange
plant is similar to that of a simple softener. The capital
cost, on the other hand, is much higher and of the same
order as that of a simple de-ionizer.

The tower in which CO2 is stripped out must run into
a break-pressure tank with subsequent re-pumping. It will
load the water with any dust, and living organisms or
other particles in the atmosphere, which leads to trouble
in dirty environments or in pharmaceutical works.

The de-alkalized and degassed water has a pH of 4–5
and (having just passed through an air-blown tower) is
laden with oxygen and extremely corrosive. Normal prac-
tice is to dose NaOH into the degasser tower sump, at a
level sufﬁcient to approach to desired boiler water pH. If
this dosing fails, severe corrosion in the degassed water
pump, the softener and the feed system will result.

De-ionization

De-ionization is a two-stage process which removes all the
dissolved ions from water. First, the water passes through
a bed of cation-exchange resin, regenerated with sulfuric
or hydrochloric acid, where all the cations are removed in
exchange for hydrogen and dissolved salts are thus con-
verted into their equivalent mineral acids. The resulting
acidic water is passed through a bed of anion-exchange
resin, regenerated with caustic soda, which removes all the
anions in exchange for hydroxyl. The resulting water con-
tains, except for a small leakage of dissolved salts (typ-
ically less than 1–5 mg/l), only hydrogen and hydroxyl
ions that, together, form water. On large plants, above
about 20 m3/h, it is quite common to include a degassing
tower between the cation and anion exchange stages. This
is a purely economic measure; it removes carbon diox-
ide, which would otherwise have to be removed on the
anion resin, and consequently reduces the amount of caus-
tic soda needed for regeneration.

While it produces very pure water, de-ionization is an
expensive process to operate. It uses acid and caustic for
regeneration and produces an efﬂuent which may need
neutralization before it can be discharged. On the other
hand, all sizes of de-ionization plants are available with
fully automatic operation and control so that the plant

Membrane processes 31/529

operator’s involvement can be limited to ensuring that
there are adequate supplies of regenerant chemicals.

31.8 Membrane processes
Membrane processes are not yet used widely for indus-
trial water processing, but will become more important
in future. At present, they are generally more expensive
than the older processes which they promise to replace,
but costs are falling. Their main advantage lies in the fact
that they add little or no chemicals to the aqueous envi-
ronment but return to it only the material taken from the
raw water.

Ion exchange, in contrast, creates an efﬂuent that con-
tains between two and ﬁve times the mass of inorganic
material removed from the product water. Coagulation
with aluminum or iron salts creates a sludge, which cre-
ates a disposal problem. ‘Green’ pressure, especially in
Switzerland and mid-west USA, which lie in the middle
of large land masses, has started to force industrialists
to install alternative membrane processes to avoid these
discharges.

31.8.1 Reverse osmosis (RO)

In reverse osmosis water is forced by pressure through
a very ﬁne-pore membrane, which has the property of
rejecting dissolved salts. The process thus removes both
particulate and dissolved matter. Generally, the ﬂux of
water is extremely slow, so that large membrane areas
have to be installed to achieve the desired output. Dif-
ferent grades of membrane show different rejections and
ﬂuxes.

A ‘tight’ membrane will remove over 99 per cent of
dissolved salts but requires pressures of the order of 30
bar or more to function economically. A ‘loose’ mem-
brane may only take out 90 per cent of the salts but
will function at around 5 bar or even less. Both types
of membrane will remove all particulate matter and large
molecules. Small, non-associated molecules such as silica
and dissolved gases (i.e. oxygen and CO2) pass through
unchanged.

The ability to remove particulates has made RO indis-
pensable in the production of ultra-pure water for micro-
chip washing. Its ability to remove large molecules enables
it to produce pyrogen-free water for the pharmaceuticals
industry. In the USA and elsewhere RO is permitted for
producing the water used in making up injectable prepa-
rations. The European Pharmacopoeia still insists on dis-
tillation for this, but the larger amounts of water needed
for ampoule washing, etc. are often puriﬁed by RO.

For conventional water puriﬁcation, RO may be eco-
nomical for removing the bulk of the dissolved salts in
water before ion exchange, but only if the raw water
has a high dissolved solids content. In practice, substi-
tuting two processes for one is unattractive except for
large throughputs.

Recently developed ‘softening’ membranes reject most
of the hardness in water while passing sodium salts, and
operate at pressures of about 5 bar. This can be used
to provide substantially softened make-up water for shell

31/530 Water and Efﬂuents

boilers. About 5–10 per cent of the raw water hardness
remains in the water but, for example, if there is a sufﬁ-
ciently high condensate return to the system this residual
hardness may be acceptable.
RO has some intrinsic disadvantages:

1. The water wastage tends to be high, especially on
small plants where a complex water-saving ﬂow sheet
is inappropriate.

2. RO membranes are very sensitive to fouling by partic-
ulates, colloids and macromolecules. The Silt Density
Index test for raw water is an empirical test which
shows the rate at which a 0.45 µm ﬁlter disc becomes
plugged, and gives a good indication of the fouling
properties of the water. An experienced person should
carry it out. Seasonal and other variations which might
lead to fouling must also be considered. Pretreatment
to avoid fouling is always complicated and risky: if
it fails, rapid fouling of the whole membrane com-
plement of a plant will result. Cleaning procedures
are ineffective against severe fouling and membrane
replacement is very expensive. On bad fouling waters
RO should be avoided unless, for example, its use is
essential to produce ultra-pure water.

3. Some anti-scaling treatment

is necessary on most
waters, using, for example, pH reduction, hexameta-
phosphate, phosphonates or polyacrylic inhibitors. The
action of the various compounds available is not
yet fully understood, so this can be a hit-and-miss
technique.

4. As CO2 passes through the membrane, while bicarbon-
ate is rejected, the product water tends to be acidic and
may need pH correction.

31.8.2 Ultra-ﬁltration

As RO membranes become ‘looser’ their salt rejection
falls (see Section 31.8.1). Eventually a point is reached
at which there is no rejection of salts, but the membrane
still rejects particulates, colloids and very large molecules.
The membrane pore size can be tailored to a nominal
molecular weight cut-off. The resulting ﬁltering process
is called ultra-ﬁltration.

In this process good hydrodynamics on the membrane
surface are required to scour away the accumulated solids
and prevent the membrane being blinded. This cannot be
totally effective, and in practice the nominal membrane
cut-off is often masked by the tendency of particulates to
form a thin layer on the membrane surface whose effective
pore size may be smaller.

The process is used mostly for industrial separations,
such as the removal of yeast from beer or the recovery
of emulsiﬁed cutting oils. It has been proposed as a pre-
treatment to RO for fouling waters, but the economics do
not yet look attractive.

31.8.3 Electrodialysis (ED)

This process uses membranes which remove salts from
water by passing an electrical current through it. It was
originally developed for the conversion of brackish water

to potable (i.e. for a product of 300–500 mg/l). As the
salts are removed, the conductivity of the water falls, the
power used in the process increases and the cost rises. It is
therefore potentially economical primarily for pre-treating
highly mineralized water (say, 300 mg/l or more) before
ion-exchanger de-ionization.

Unlike RO, which is essential for producing ultra-pure
water, there is little experience of ED in this ﬁeld. The
process has some potential advantages over RO: it is
less liable to fouling and it can be engineered to waste
much less water. Like RO, its costs fall sharply at higher
temperatures, but the prospects of improved engineering
making this a reality are better than for RO. It offers some
prospects particularly where the product water has to be
heated in any case (e.g. boiler make-up).

A variant of ED has

recently appeared on the
market:
the cells between the membranes are ﬁlled
with ion-exchange resin to reduce electrical resistance
when producing water of high purity. This makes
possible the production of good-quality de-ionized water
without
regeneration chemicals. On the small scale
(e.g.
laboratories or pharmaceutical production)
the convenience of avoiding dangerous chemicals and
corrosive efﬂuent outweighs the relatively high costs of
this technique.

for

31.8.4 Retroﬁt of membrane processes

As with RO, de-ionization by ED before ion exchange is
rarely feasible because of the complication of two pro-
cesses instead of one. A different situation arises where
an existing ion exchange installation is overloaded, either
because the plant needs to treat more water or because
the TDS in the raw water have risen above the original
design level. In such cases the simplest and most econom-
ical solution can be to install RO or ED to take up a large
part of the ionic load and allow the existing ion-exchange
plant to be up rated.

31.9 Efﬂuents
Industrial efﬂuents are a particularly difﬁcult problem to
discuss in general terms: their nature is very diverse, pos-
sible methods of treatment vary correspondingly and their
acceptability depends as much on the receiving body as on
their ﬂow and contents. There are, however, some com-
mon factors which are worth mentioning.

31.9.1 Domestic sewage

Industrial plants also discharge domestic sewage. It is vital
to keep this separate from any industrial efﬂuent which
may have to be treated, so that it can then be disposed
of by conventional means (to the public sewer, septic
tank, etc.).

31.9.2 Surface drainage

Most of the surface drainage due to rain falling on roofs,
roadways, etc. will be normal, acceptable ﬂoodwater and

can run off to a soakaway, storm drain, etc. in a conven-
tional manner. Surface drainage from areas contaminated
with spillage or with material deposited from a locally
polluted atmosphere creates a particularly difﬁcult efﬂu-
ent problem, characterized by unpredictable and violent
variations in ﬂow and concentration of pollutant. The best
approach to this is to avoid conditions in which the area
becomes loaded with contaminant.

Alternatively, the contaminated surface drainage must
be segregated from the normal storm water drains and
may, for example, be led into a balancing tank. This
tank must be large enough to even out the variations and
to allow the contents to be added to the works efﬂuent
(treated or untreated) over a period of time. Provision
must be made for periodically removing the inevitable
accumulation of silt in the bottom of the tank.

31.9.3 Noxious efﬂuent

Almost any impurity added to water leaving a works can,
in certain circumstances, become noxious, and with some
of these impurities it is not immediately obvious that they
are unacceptable. The main examples are:
ž Corrosive conditions – not only high or low pH, but
also high levels of sulfate, which is corrosive to cement
and therefore unacceptable in the public sewers. High
temperatures can be unacceptable;
ž Toxic constituents such as heavy metals, cyanides, etc.;
ž Organic materials whose decay consumes oxygen,
which includes various harmless materials (e.g. all
vegetable matter, milk wastes, cellulose, sugars, etc.);
ž Inert material, which may settle to the bottom of a body
of water and coat its beds (clay, alum sludge, etc.). Also
dyestuffs which discolor the water and are esthetically
unacceptable.

Unlike potable and industrial waters, for which quality
speciﬁcations are laid down, there can be no universal
regulation as to the concentration or degree to which any
of these is acceptable. The receiving body, which has to
use its judgement in each case, will lay down allowable
limits.

A sewerage authority must decide on the level of con-
tamination, which it is prepared to accept into its sewer.
The amount of sulfate and of biodegradable matter, which
can be allowed, will depend, ﬁrst, on the quantity and
quality of the ﬂow already in the sewer and available to
dilute the efﬂuent. The second decision concerns the lim-
its of contaminants which are acceptable into the sewage
works.

If the efﬂuent is within acceptable limits, the authority
is entitled to make a charge for receiving and treating
it (see below). The river authority has similar decisions
to make if the efﬂuent is to be discharged directly into
the environment. The acceptable limits will, of course, be
much lower but no charge will be levied.

The receiving body is entitled to take samples of efﬂu-
ent at all times to ensure that the conditions under which
they have agreed to receive it are being met. They may
insist on some kind of continuous or regular monitoring by
the discharger, but as analytical methods for almost every

Efﬂuents 31/531

kind of efﬂuent are difﬁcult to automate and standardize,
this is always an unsatisfactory aspect of the system.

31.9.4 Charges for efﬂuent
Sewerage authorities normally levy a charge on indus-
trial efﬂuent. The conventional system of charging uses a
formula which takes into account the volume, its concen-
tration of suspended solids and its oxygen consumption
(which is a measure of the load it will put on the treatment
works). Typical ﬁgures for the ﬂow and quality of the dis-
charge are ascertained and agreed between the sewerage
authority and the plant.

The ﬂow of efﬂuent is often calculated on the assump-
tion that, say, 90 per cent of the incoming water (metered
by the water authority) will re-emerge as efﬂuent. This is,
of course, not the case at a brewery, for example, where
direct metering or different methods are used to ascertain
the efﬂuent ﬂow. Direct metering of the ﬂow is, however,
always difﬁcult and therefore uncommon.

31.9.5 Efﬂuent management
If a works produces any efﬂuent liable to be unacceptable,
or liable to raise an efﬂuent charge, it is important that the
whole efﬂuent system should be properly managed. This
means knowing where the drains run and in which of them
each efﬂuent ﬂows. This information is often unavail-
able and is difﬁcult to ascertain. Good management often
means that if treatment or tankage is required, different
ﬂows should be segregated from one another. Diluting a
noxious efﬂuent with another of a different type, or with
a non-noxious one, generally aggravates the problem.

31.9.6 Efﬂuent treatment
Where the efﬂuent is outside the limits acceptable for
discharge it has to be treated ﬁrst by the works. Gen-
erally, efﬂuent treatment is an unsatisfactory operation
because it requires skills different from those available
on the works, and because it is a nuisance and is not seen
to be productive.

Efﬂuent-treatment plants fail most commonly because
the design is based on an inadequate or faulty deﬁnition
of the efﬂuent problem. In an existing works it may take
months of painstaking research to establish the true pat-
terns of ﬂow and contamination. Predicting these for a
new project can be extremely difﬁcult, and serious mis-
takes are common.

Treatment processes vary widely, and in themselves are
reasonably well understood, but even if the nature and
pattern of efﬂuent is properly deﬁned, problems often arise
from wide variations in contents and ﬂow of the efﬂuent.
An efﬂuent plant tends to impose limitations on the main
process – for example, it may be seriously affected by
rapid dumping of the contents of a tank. These limitations
are often ﬂouted through ignorance or negligence.

The best solution to any efﬂuent problem is to avoid
treatment by the works altogether. Even if it appears ini-
tially to be more costly, it will save trouble and expense
in the long term.

If the process cannot be modiﬁed to avoid the efﬂuent
the sewerage authority may be persuaded to take over its

31/532 Water and Efﬂuents

treatment. Various ﬁnancial arrangements have been made
for this over the years, from a charge based on the vol-
ume ﬂow to a capital contribution towards an extension
to the sewage works capacity. By this means the respon-
sibility is handed over to an organization whose purpose
and technical skills are devoted to the subject.

31.9.7 Water economy and re-use

Water is historically thought to be free, and is still so
cheap that its wastage is not felt to raise a serious cost.
This commonly leads to pointless waste. It is unusual for
a works to meter the water usage of different operations
on one site, and so the cost of waste is not made clear to
those who are immediately responsible for it. Occasional
spot estimates of water usage (which may be possible

without installing meters), with direct debiting of water
cost to the operation, can do much towards water econ-
omy. In such an exercise it is important to add the cost
of efﬂuent discharge to that of water intake.

Much lip service is paid to water re-use, which, on the
whole, is more fashionable than practicable. Better oppor-
tunities arise from simple economy in water consumption
at each point of use. Water reuse after efﬂuent treatment
is not often practicable. It appears, if at all, most favor-
able in the re-use of slightly contaminated water for some
low-grade purpose such as washing down.

Acknowledgement

The author is grateful to the BEWA for the use of their
Water Quality Classiﬁcation as Tables 31.2 and 31.3.

32

Pumps and
Pumping

Keith Turton
Loughborough University of Technology

Contents

32.1 Pump functions and duties
32/535
32.2 Pump principles

32/535

32.2.1 Rotodynamic pumps
32.2.2 Scaling laws and speciﬁc speed 32/536
32.2.3 Positive displacement pump principles

32/535

32/533

32/540

32.3 Effects of ﬂuid properties on pump behavior
32.4 Flow losses in systems 32/543
32/543

32.4.1 Friction losses
32.4.2 Losses in bends, valves and other

features 32/546

32.4.3 Presentation of system loss

32/547

32.5 Interaction of pump and system 32/549

32.5.1 Steady-state matching of pump and

system 32/549

32.5.2 Flow control
32/549
32.5.3 Multiple-pump layouts
32.5.4 Suction systems

32/550

32/550

32.6 Cavitation

32/550

32.6.1 Net positive suction head (NPSH)

32/541

32/552

32.7 Priming systems
32.8 Seals: selection and care 32/556

32/555

32.8.1 Centrifugal pump and rotary pump seal

systems 32/556

32.8.2 Reciprocating pump seal systems

32/559

32.9 Pump and drive selection

32/559

32.9.1 Pump selection
32.9.2 Drive selection
32.9.3 Economics of pump selection and running

32/559
32/560

maintenance

32/560

32.9.4 Reliability considerations

32/563

32.10 Pump testing

32/563

32.10.1 Factory tests 32/563
32.10.2 Scale-model testing

32/563

32.1 Pump functions and duties
Pumps impart energy to the liquids being transferred by
mechanical means using moving parts. They can be clas-
siﬁed as rotodynamic or positive displacement. Rotody-
namic pumps cause continuous ﬂow, and the ﬂow rate
and discharge pressure are effectively constant with time.
Positive displacement pumps deliver ﬁxed quantities at a
rate determined by driving speed. The main types of pump
commonly used are listed in Figure 32.1.

Pumps are used to transfer liquids, such as moving
blood and other biological ﬂuids; delivering measured
quantities of chemicals; in ﬁreﬁghting; in irrigation; mov-
ing foods and beverages; pumping pharmaceutical and
toilet products; in sewage systems; in solids transport;
in water supply and in petrochemical and chemical plant.
They are utilized in power transfer, braking systems, ser-
vomechanisms and control, as well as for site drainage,
water-jet cutting, cleaning and descaling. Pumps thus give
a wide range of pressure rises and ﬂow rates with pumping
liquids that vary widely in viscosity and constituency.

32.2 Pump principles
32.2.1 Rotodynamic pumps

Taking a typical centrifugal pump (Figure 32.2) the Euler
in
equation can be written, at best efﬁciency ﬂow,

Pumps

Pump principles 32/535

u cos ˇ1

2 (cid:2) Q
A2

the form:
gH D u2
(32.1)
where u2 D ωD2/2, A2 D (cid:9)D2b2, Q is ﬂow rate and
H is head rise. This ignores ﬂow losses, so that
actual performance is less than the Euler (Figure 32.3).
Figures 32.4–32.6 give typical pump performance curves
for a constant driver speed. The inﬂections in the mixed
and axial ﬂow curves are due to ﬂow instability over
blades and through impeller passages.

The hydraulic efﬁciency

H D gHActual
gHIdeal

and
0 D Hydraulic power
Input power

or
0 D mgH
PIN

D (cid:14)QgH
PIN

(32.2)

(32.3)

Typical pump cross-sections are shown in Figures 32.7–
32.10. Figure 32.11 illustrates a multi-stage design where
identical stages are assembled in a pressure casing as in
a boiler feed pump.

Dynamic

Positive displacement

Centrifugal

Axial

Single stage

Multi-stage

Mixed flow

Radial flow

Single suction
Self-priming
Non-priming
Single stage
Double stage

Double suction
Self-priming
Non-priming
Single stage
Double stage

Peripheral

Fixed
pitch
Variable
pitch

Open
impeller
Semi-
open
impeller
Closed
impeller

Open
impeller
Semi-
open
impeller
Closed
impeller

Reciprocating

Piston or
plunger

Single
acting

Double
acting
Diaphragm

Simplex

Duplex

Rotary

Single
rotor

Multiple
rotor

Simplex
Duplex
Triplex
Multiplex

Fluid
operated

Mechanically
operated

Vane
Piston
Flexible member
Screw
Peristaltic

Gear
Lobe
Piston
Screw

Figure 32.1 Pump family trees

32/536 Pumps and Pumping

2

b2

Line of tangent
at 2

b

1

b1

D1

Suction
diameter

Line of
tangent
at 1

D2

w

Rotor or
impeller

Figure 32.2 A simple centrifugal pump

gH

Equation (32.1)
‘Actual’

Losses

H

P

h

Figure 32.3 A pump’s ideal and actual characteristics

Q

Figure 32.5 Mixed ﬂow (bowl pump)

h

H

P

Q

H

P

h

Figure 32.4 Centrifugal

Figure 32.6 Axial ﬂow

Q

Q

32.2.2 Scaling laws and speciﬁc speed

If a simple pump is considered, it is possible to state
that there must be a working relation between the power
input, and the ﬂow rate, pressure rise, ﬂuid properties,
and size of the machine. If a dimensional analysis is per-
formed, it can be shown that a working relation may exist

(cid:1)

P

(cid:14)ω3D5 D f

Q

(cid:17)1(cid:19)

(cid:17)2(cid:19)

(cid:17)3(cid:19)

(cid:17)4(cid:19)

between groups of non-dimensional quantities in the fol-
lowing equation:

(cid:2)
Ð ÐÐÐ

ωD3 ð gH

ω2D2 ð (cid:14)ωD2

(cid:16)

(cid:17)32.4(cid:19)

Pump principles 32/537

Figure 32.7 A monoblock design

Figure 32.8 A back pull-out design

Term (1) is a power coefﬁcient, which does not carry any

conventional symbol.

Term (2) can easily be shown to have the shape V/U and
is called a ﬂow coefﬁcient (the usual symbol
being (cid:22)).

Term (3) similarly can be shown to be gH/U2 and is usu-
ally known as a head coefﬁcient (or speciﬁc
energy coefﬁcient)  .

Term (4) is effectively a Reynolds number with the veloc-
ity the peripheral speed and the characteristic
dimension being usually the maximum impeller
diameter.

Since these groups

system are non-
dimensional, they can be used to present the results of
tests of pumps in a family of pumps that are geometrically
and dynamically similar. This may be done as shown in

in the SI

P

Figures 32.12 and 32.13, and Figure 32.14 shows how the
effect of changing speed or diameter of a pump impeller
may be predicted, using the scaling laws:
(cid:14)ω3D5 D const
ωD3 D const
D const

(cid:17)32.5(cid:19)

Q

gH
ω2D

The classical approach to the problem of characterizing
the performance of a pump without including its dimen-
sions was discussed by Addison,1 who proposed that a
pump of standardized size will deliver energy at the rate
of one horsepower when generating a head of one foot

32/538 Pumps and Pumping

Figure 32.9 A double-suction design

when it is driven at a speed called the Speciﬁc Speed:
Ns D K

p

N
Q
H3/4

The constant K contains ﬂuid density and a correction
factor, and it has been customary to suppress K and use:
Ns D N

(32.6)

p

Q
H3/4

Caution is needed in using data, as the units depend
on the system of dimensions used, variations being
liters/minute, cubic meters/second, and gallons per minute
or US gallons per minute as well as meters or feet.
A plot of efﬁciency against speciﬁc speed are in all
textbooks based upon the classic Worthington plot,
and Figure 32.15, based on this information, has been
prepared using a non-dimensional statement known as the
characteristic number
ks D ω

(32.7)

p
Q
(cid:17)gH(cid:19)3/4

Figure 32.10

This is based on the ﬂow and speciﬁc energy produced
by the pump at its best efﬁciency point of performance
following the approach stated by Wisclicenus: ‘Any ﬁxed
value of the speciﬁc speed describes a combination of
operating conditions that permits similar ﬂow conditions
in geometrically similar hydrodynamic machines.’

Pump principles 32/539

Figure 32.11 A multi-stage pump

gH
P

h

h

P

Q

N1

N2

gH

gH1
gH2

P2

P1

Figure 32.12 A pump’s characteristic at ﬁxed speed

Q2

Q1

Q

Figure 32.14 Prediction of speed change using equation (32.5)

j

Power coeff

Figure 32.13 A non-dimensional plot

f

Figure 32.16 presents on the basis of the characteristic
number the typical
impeller proﬁles, velocity triangle
shapes, and characteristic curves to be expected from the
machine ﬂow paths shown. This indicates the use of the
number as a design tool for the pump engineer.

The scaling laws (Equation (32.5)) may be used to
the performance from change of speed, as
predict
the pump
indicated in Figure 32.14. In many cases,
engineer may wish to modify the performance of the pump
by a small amount. The common solution is to slightly
reduce the impeller diameter. Figure 32.17 illustrates
how small changes in impeller diameter can affect the
performance. The ﬁgure in its original form appeared in

h (%)

90

80

70

60

50

40

6.3 Is−1

31.5 Is−163 Is−1
12.6 Is−1

189 Is−1

631 Is−1

0.1

1.0

2

4

6

kS

Radial

Mixed flow

Axial

Figure 32.15 Variation of overall efﬁciency with non-dimensional
speciﬁc speed3

Karrasik et al.2 and has been modiﬁed to appear in metric
form. The role used is often called the Scaling Laws,

32/540 Pumps and Pumping

Non-dimensional Ks Impeller profiles Velocity triangles

Characteristics

0.188−

0.567

0.567−

0.944

0.944−

1.511

1.511−

2.833

d2

d0

d2/d0 = 3.5 − 2.0

d2

d0

d2/d0 = 2.0 − 1.5

d2

d0

d2/d0 = 1.5 − 1.3

d2

d0

d2/d0 = 1.2 − 1.1

V2

Vu2

V2

Vu2

V2

u2

u2

Vu2

u2

V2

Vu2

u2

Figure 32.16 Flow path shapes, velocity diagrams and characteristics

written in the form:

D

(cid:3)
(cid:3)
D
(cid:4)

D

P2
D1
Q2
Q1
P2
P1




gH2
gH1
gH2
gH1
gH2
gH1

(cid:5)3/2

(32.8)

Other methods of adjusting the output while keeping the
speed constant consist of modifying the proﬁles of the
blades at the maximum diameter of the impeller. This
technique has been used for a long time and is often used
to obtain a small energy rise when the pump is down
on performance when tested. The reader is referred to
reference 2.

32.2.3 Positive displacement pump principles

Whether the pump is a reciprocator or a rotary design, liq-
uid is transferred from inlet to outlet in discrete quantities
deﬁned by the geometry of the pump. For example, in a
single-acting piston pump (Figure 32.18), the swept vol-
ume created by piston movement is the quantity delivered
by the pump for each piston stroke, and total ﬂow rate is
related to the number of strokes per unit time. Similarly,
the spur-gear pump (Figure 32.19) traps a ﬁxed quantity
in the space between adjacent teeth and the casing, and
total ﬂow rate is related to the rotational speed of the
gear wheels.

H

100
80

0
H

100
70

0
H

100
55

0

H

100
60

P

H

130
100

100 170 Q/Q design

P

110
100

H

100 165 Q/Q design
P

100
80

H

100 155 Q/Q design

P

H

100
70

0

100 140 Q/Q design

The maximum possible ﬂow rate,

Q0 D displacement ð speed
as shown in Figure 32.20. The actual ﬂow is reduced by
leakage, ﬂow QL,
Q D Q0 (cid:2) QL
The volumetric efﬁciency
v D Q
Q0

D 1 (cid:2) QL
Q0

(32.9)

and
0 D (cid:14)QgH
PD C PL

(32.10)

PD and PL are deﬁned in Figure 32.20. Table 32.1 gives
typical values of v and 0 for a number of pump types.

Table 32.1 Some values of v and 4

pump

Precision gear
Screw
Vane
External gear
Radial–multi-piston
Axial–multi-piston

v(cid:17)%(cid:19)
!98
–

85–90

–

>95
>98

(cid:17)%(cid:19)
!95
75–85
75–80
20–60
>90
>90

Effects of ﬂuid properties on pump behavior 32/541

D =

Crank

Connecting
rod

Discharge

Plunger

415 nm

384 nm

385 nm

Crosshead
guide

Take-up Packing Cylinder

Suction

Figure 32.18 Plunger pump

355 nm

D =

415 nm

384 nm

D =

415 nm

384 nm

355 nm

Trapped
volume

Figure 32.19 External gear pump

80

60

40

20

90

70

50

)

%

(
 
h

)

m

(
 
d
a
e
H

30

200

175

150

125

100

75

)

W
k
(
 
r
e
w
o
P

0.1

0.2
Q m3/s

0.3

Figure 32.17 Scaling laws applied to diameter change (after Karas-
sik etal2.)

Since discrete quantities are trapped and transferred,
the delivery pressure and ﬂow varies, as shown in
Figure 32.21, which also illustrates how increasing the
number of cylinders in a reciprocating pump reduces
ﬂuctuations. In the case of lobe and gear pumps the
ﬂuctuations are minimized by speed of rotation and
increasing tooth number, but where, for control or process
reasons, the ripple in pressure is still excessive, means of
damping pulsations has to be ﬁtted. Often a damper to
cope with this and pressure pulses due to valve closure is
ﬁtted, and two types are shown in Figure 32.22.

The capacity of the accumulator is important, and one
formula based on experience for sudden valve closure is

QA D QP2(cid:17)0.016L (cid:2) T(cid:19)

P2 (cid:2) P1

ð 0.25

(32.11)

Figure 32.20 Typical characteristic at constant N

Here QA is the accumulator volume (cid:17)m3(cid:19), Q is ﬂow rate
(cid:17)m3/S(cid:19), L is pipe length (m), T is valve closure time(s), P1
is the pressure in the pipeline (cid:17)N/m2(cid:19) and P2 is the maxi-
mum pressure desired in the line. (cid:17)N/m2(cid:19) (P2 D 1.5P1 in
many cases).

32.3 Effects of ﬂuid properties on pump
behavior
Two effects on pump performance must be discussed:
viscosity and gas content. Figures 32.23 and 32.24
illustrate the effects of viscosity change on centrifugal and

32/542 Pumps and Pumping

One complete revolution

of crankshaft

Time

Time

Single crank

Two cranks 180° out of phase

Resulting flow pattern (separated for clarity)

e

t

a
r
 

w
o
F

l

e

t

a
r
 

w
o
F

l

e

t

a
r
 

w
o
F

l

Figure 32.21 Reciprocating pump: variation of ﬂow rate with numbers of cylinders

Time

Three cranks 120° out of phase

Figure 32.22 Accumulator designs

Increasing viscosity

Gas pressure
on free
surface

Throttle
brush often
fitted

Gas

Diaphragm

QP

P
N
B

ν increasting

Q

y
c
n
e
c
i
f
f

i

d
a
e
H

e

Water
performance

H−Q

Increasing
viscosity

Efficiency

Capacity

Figure 32.23 Effect of viscosity on centrifugal pump performance

P

∆p

Figure 32.24 Effect of
performance

viscosity on positive displacement

positive displacement pumps, respectively. Figure 32.23
shows the deterioration of centrifugal pump performance,
and it may be noted that
than
100 centistokes, water performance must be corrected.
Figure 32.24 indicates that
in a positive displacement

if v is greater

Table 32.2 Effect of ﬂuid viscosity

Type of pump

Significanta
viscosity levels

Effect of viscosity level

Treatment and/or notes

Flow losses in systems 32/543

Centrifugal

20

–

20–100

Above 100

Lowering of H-Q curve

increase in input hp

Marked loss of head

Regenerative

Above 100

Marked loss of performance

Reciprocating

Up to 100

Little

Above 100

Above 1000

Plunger
Sliding vane

–

Above 100

External gear

None

Internal gear

None

Lobe rotor

Single-screw
Twin- or
multiple-screw

250
Above 250
None
Up to 500
Above 500

aViscosity in centistokes.

Performance maintained but

power input increased
Flow through valves may

become critical factor

–

Sliding action impaired: slip

increased

Power input and heat

generated increases with
increasing viscosity

Power input and heat

generated increases with
increasing viscosity

None
Cavitation may occur

–
Little or none
Increasing power input

required

Performance maintained similar to water performance up

to this level

General lowering of efﬁciency but may be acceptable

Considerable reduction in efﬁciency, but high

efﬁciencies may still be attainable from large pumps
Pumps of this type would not normally be considered
for handling ﬂuids with a viscosity greater than 100
centistokes

Performance generally maintained. Some reduction in

speed may be advisable to reduce power input
required

Speed is generally reduced to avoid excessive power

inputs and ﬂuid heating
Larger pump size selection run at reduced speed–e.g.
3 ð size at 1000 centristokes running at one-third
speed. Modiﬁcation of valve design may be desirable
for higher viscosities

For very high-pressure deliveries only
Not generally suitable for use with other than light

viscosity ﬂuids

May be suitable for handling viscosities up to 25 000
centristokes without modiﬁcation. For high viscosities:
(a) Clearances may be increased
(b) Speed reduced
(c) Number of gear teeth reduced
For higher viscosities:
(a) Speed may be reduced
(b) Number of gear teeth reduced
(c) Lobe-shaped gears employed
(a) Speed may have to be reduced
(b) Modiﬁed rotor form may be preferred
Nitrile rubber stator used with oil ﬂuids

Speed may be reduced to improve efﬁciency

–

pump the volumetric efﬁciency improves and power
requirement increases (with increasing viscosity).

Table 32.2 summarizes the effects of liquid changes
(effectively, viscosity and density changes) on pump per-
formance and Figure 32.25 presents material presented by
Sterling,5 which illustrates how efﬁciency falls away with
viscosity for two pumps working at the same duty point,
graphically showing the rapid fall-off of efﬁciency as (cid:16)
increases in a centrifugal pump.

Figure 32.26 demonstrates a well-known method of
correcting for ﬂuid change from water for a centrifugal
pump. This allows an engineer to predict change in
performance if the kinematic viscosity of the liquid to be
pumped is known and the water test data are available.

Gas content is another important effect. It is well known
that centrifugal pumps will not pump high gas content
mixtures, as ﬂow breaks down (the pump loses ‘prime’)
when the gas/liquid ratio rises beyond 15 per cent.

Figure 32.27 shows how a centrifugal pump is affected,
particularly at low ﬂow rates, and the behavior is typical
of conventional centrifugal pumps. Figures 32.28 and
32.29 present well-known information on the effects of
dissolved and entrained gas on the volumetric efﬁciency
of a positive displacement pump.

32.4 Flow losses in systems
32.4.1 Friction losses

The most common method of friction loss estimation is
based on the D’Arcy Weisbach equation:
(cid:17)gH(cid:19)friction D f

(32.12)

L
D

V2
2

The friction factor f is plotted in Figure 32.30 against
the Reynolds number, based on the pipe inner diameter D

32/544 Pumps and Pumping

Figure 32.25 Effect of (cid:16) on screw pump and centrifugal pump
compared (after Sterling5)

for circular pipes and the hydraulic diameter (cid:17)D 4 ð ﬂow
area/wetted perimeter) for non-circular pipes. Table 32.4
gives typical surface roughness. Figure 32.30 is thus used
to ﬁnd f as follows:

Mean velocity 7 meters per second (m/s), mean diameter
50 mm, water kinematic viscosity, therefore UD D 0.35
Re D 3 ð 105
Roughness for galvanized pipe = 0.152, therefore
k
D

D 3 ð 10(cid:2)3

Figure 32.26 Viscosity correction curves (adapted from Hydraulic Institute Standards, 12th edition, Hydraulic Institute, Cleveland,
Ohio, 1969)

Flow losses in systems 32/545

Figure 32.27 The effect of air content on pump behavior

Figure 32.28 Effect of dissolved gas on liquid displacement

Figure 32.29 (a) Effect of entrained gas on liquid displacement;
(b) solubility of air in oil. Example: At 5 in Hg with 3% gas entrain-
ment by volume, pump capacity is reduced to 84 per cent of
theoretical displacement

Figure 32.30 Friction factor f plotted against Re(after Miller6(cid:19)

32/546 Pumps and Pumping

Figure 32.31 Bend loss coefﬁcients6

Hence in Figure 32.30 the lines drawn illustrate f D
0.016

32.4.2 Losses in bends, valves and other features

Loss factor method of estimating losses

A common method of estimating losses is to use a factor
K, so that energy loss for a feature is given by
(cid:17)gH(cid:19) D K

(32.13)

v2
2

Figures 32.31 through 32.33 give loss factors for a range
of common ﬁttings. Most ﬁttings do not occur in close
proximity to one another, but bends frequently do. The
effect of putting bends close together is presented in terms
of the spacing between bends and a correction factor Kp.
The equation used is for two bends:

(cid:11)

(cid:10)

(cid:17)gH(cid:19) D

Kp

K1

V2
2

C K2

V2
2

(cid:17)bend 1 loss(cid:19) C (cid:17)bend 2 loss(cid:19)

(32.14)

Figures 32.34–32.36 give information on Kp values for
the conﬁgurations shown in Figure 32.37.

Equivalent-length method

Figure 32.32 Gate valve losses6

As the name suggests, the loss a feature causes is replaced
by the loss due to a length of straight line, which gives the

same value of energy loss. Table 32.3 gives typical values
of LE, which are then added to the D’Arcy Weisbach

Flow losses in systems 32/547

32.4.3 Presentation of system loss
The ﬂow loss in a system varies as (velocity)2 or
(ﬂow rate)2, so the total loss imposed by a system on
a pump can be shown to vary with ﬂow rate in the way
shown in Figure 32.38(a). Figures 32.38(b) and 32.38(c)
illustrate how system curves vary with the proportions of
static and dynamic losses.

Figure 32.33 Some typical valve loss characteristics6

equation to give

V2
2

(pipe length

Total loss in energy D f
D
C sum of LE components)

(cid:17)32.15(cid:19)
Thus for a simple line 100 m long with a bend (cid:17)LE D 30(cid:19)
a valve (cid:17)LE D 13(cid:19) the total loss D (cid:17)fv2/D2(cid:19)(143).

32/548 Pumps and Pumping

Figure 32.34 Interaction coefﬁcient: combination bends (after
Miller6)

Table 32.3 Some equivalent lengths for typical ﬁttings (clean
water)

Gate valve (wedge:disc:plug disc)

Ball and plug valves
Conventional swing check valve
Footvalve with strainer (hinged ﬂap)
Butterﬂy valve (200 mm up)
90° Standard elbow
90° Long-radius elbow

Fully open
Half open
Quarter open
Fully open
Fully open
Fully open
Fully open

LE
D

13
160
900
3
135
75
40
30
20

Figure 32.35 Interaction coefﬁcient: 320° combination (after Miller6)

Figure 32.36 Interaction coefﬁcient: S-bend combination (after Miller6)

Interaction of pump and system 32/549

Figure 32.37 The combinations shown in Figures 32.33–32.36

Table 32.4 Hydraulic roughness of commercial pipes

Type of pipe

Hydraulic roughness

K(mm)

Coated cast iron
Uncoated cast iron
Galvanized steel
Uncoated steel
Coated steel
Asbestos cement (uncoated)
Spun bitumen and concrete lined
Drawn brass, copper, aluminium
Glass plastic
Concrete cast on steel forms
Spun concrete
Riveted steel–four transverse rows

Single transverse rows of rivets
All welded
Flexible pipes

of rivets and six longitudinal
Two transverse rows of rivets,

longitudinal seams welded

0.127
0.203
0.152
0.051
0.076
0.013

0.203
0.076
4.064

0.127

0.508
0.076
Roughness varies

considerably with
construction. Smooth
rubber hose corresponds
approximately with steel
pipe. Head loss when
curved can be 30%
higher than when straight

Figure 32.38 System loss characteristics

Figure 32.39 Matching constant-speed pumps to a system

32.5 Interaction of pump and system
32.5.1 Steady-state matching of pump and
system

If the constant speed characteristic of a pump is super-
imposed on a system curve, there is usually one intersec-
tion point, shown in Figure 32.39. If a ﬂat system curve
is being matched with a mixed or axial ﬂow machine
there can be ﬂow instability, as illustrated in Figure 32.40,
which is only corrected by changing pump speed or the
static lift, or selecting a different pump.

32.5.2 Flow control

The simplest ﬂow control is by valving (Figure 32.41).
Either opening or closing a valve in the line changes the
dynamic loss. The valve could be pressure controlled,
a method much used in boiler feed systems because it

Figure 32.40 Combination of a ﬂat system curve and an inﬂected
pump curve

ensures full ﬂow through the pump and thus reduces risk
of vapor locking in the bypass (Figure 32.42). In this
case, the pump supplies the system and bypass ﬂow, so
match point ﬂow is higher than system demand and power
demand is higher. A third control commonly used for
PD machines (and increasingly for centrifugals as prices
reduces), is speed control (Figure 32.43). If Figure 32.44

32/550 Pumps and Pumping

Figure 32.41 Valve control

Figure 32.43 Speed control

32.5.3 Multiple-pump layouts

If the ﬂow range in a system is larger than can be achieved
with a single machine, several similar pumps may be
installed in parallel. Figure 32.45 illustrates possible lay-
outs for centrifugal pumps and match points on a system
curve for one, two or three pumps operating. Non-return
valves must be installed as shown to avoid pump inter-
action. Note that three pumps do not give three times
single-pump ﬂow, due to the square law nature of the
system curve.

Figure 32.46 demonstrates how variable-speed drives
will give a wide range of ﬂows. Systems supplied by
positive displacement pumps do not usually need wide
ﬂow ranges, but the same principle of parallel operation
will apply.

Dissimilar pumps may be used. As Figure 32.47 shows,
the resulting combined curve indicates that pump 2 will
not begin to deliver until the speciﬁc energy from pump
1 drops below its shut-valve energy rise, therefore if the
non-return valve for pump 2 does not seat, pump 1 can
cause it to turbine.

32.5.4 Suction systems

Poor intake layout can give rise to pump problems, unsta-
ble running, losing prime, and cavitation. If the pump is
drawing water from a sump, the position of the intake
and the shape of the sump must be chosen to avoid vortex
formation and resultant air ingestion and pump instability.
Figure 32.48 shows the proportions for PD and centrifugal
pump suctions and Figure 32.49 gives details of bafﬂes
that can be ﬁtted in tanks to reduce vortexing. If large ﬂow
rates and numbers of pumps are involved it is advisable
to commission model tests to ensure that pump behavior
is not affected for all ﬂow rates and pump combinations.

32.6 Cavitation
Cavitation is the term to used to describe the formation
of bubbles in liquid ﬂow when the local pressure falls
to around vapor pressure. Two effects are experienced
in the pump: a reduction in ﬂow rate (accompanied,

Figure 32.42 Bypass control

is considered, achieving 90 per cent of designed ﬂow by
speed control will happen with little sacriﬁce in efﬁciency
and probably 25 per cent power reduction. Valve control
will result in a 3 to 4 per cent reduction in pump efﬁciency
(and probably 7 or 8 per cent increase in pump head),
bypass will probably require 15 per cent more ﬂow, the
pump efﬁciency will drop 7 or 8 per cent, and the pump
may also cavitate.

Cavitation 32/551

Figure 32.44 Comparison of speed, bypass and discharge regulation. (a) Speed control: (b) bypass or throttle

Figure 32.45 (a) Pumps in series and parallel; (b) three identical pumps running in parallel

32/552 Pumps and Pumping

Figure 32.46 Variable-speed pumps in parallel

Figure 32.47 Dissimilar pumps in parallel

particularly in centrifugal pumps, by additional noise)
and in surface damage and material removal. In general,
cavitation occurs in the suction region of a pump or the
inlet port and valve area of a positive displacement pump.
Figure 32.50 shows how reduction of suction pressure
(which gives rise to cavitation) affects the characteristic
of a typical centrifugal pump.

32.6.1 Net positive suction head (NPSH)

When drawing liquid through suction a pump generates
a low pressure in the suction area, which, if it reaches
vapor pressure, gives rise to gas coming out of solution
and causing bubbles to form. An estimate of the margin
above vapor pressure, used for many years, is net positive
suction head. Two forms are used: NPSH-available and
NPSH-required.

NPSH available (NPSHA)
NPSHA D Total head at suction ﬂange (cid:2) vapor pressure head
Figure 32.51 illustrates how system NPSH or NPSH-
available is calculated for the usual suction systems
outlined. For a centrifugal pump,
the basic NPSH is
calculated from7
NPSHA D hs (cid:2) ht

C Pi (cid:2) Pv

(32.16)

(cid:5)

(cid:4)

10.2

(cid:14)

B

1000

Figure 32.48 Suction bay and tank proportions (based on
reference 7). Possible suction arrangements: (a)–(c) open suction
layouts commonly used; (d) tank intake system (recommended
(cid:17)H/D(cid:19) > [(cid:17)V2/3(cid:19) C 1.5];
limits: 3 > (cid:17)S/D(cid:19) > 1; 2/3 > (cid:17)C/D(cid:19) > 1/2;
[(cid:17)L(cid:2) S(cid:19)/D] > 5; (e) single suction cell in plan (cid:17)5 > (cid:17)B/D(cid:19) > 2; (f)
double section cell in plan (cid:17)4<(cid:17)B/D(cid:19)<10(cid:19)

where
hf D ﬂow losses in suction system (m),
B D minimum barometric pressure (mbar) (use 0.94 of
PI D minimum pressure on free surface (bar gauge),
Pv D vapor pressure at maximum working temperature

mean barometer reading),

(bar absolute).

In the process industries hf is calculated for the maximum
ﬂow rate and the NPSH at normal ﬂow allowed for by
using the formula
NPSHA D 0.8(cid:17)NPSHbasic(cid:19) (cid:2) 1(cid:19)

(32.17)

Cavitation 32/553

Figure 32.50 Effect of suction pressure on pump performance

In general,

This gives a ‘target’ value to the pump supplier that
is worst condition.
for cold water duty
equation (32.16) can be used for the duty ﬂow required.
Equation (32.16) is employed for reciprocating and rotary
positive displacement machines with allowance made for
acceleration effects.

In reciprocators hf is calculated at peak instantaneous
ﬂow, including maximum loss through a dirty ﬁlter, and
an additional head ‘loss’ to allow for pulsation accelera-
tion is used:
hA D 700NQ

(32.18)



L
d2

Z

Figure 32.49 Vortex-prevention devices for tanks

and
NPSH D NPSHA (cid:2) hA

(32.19)

Figure 32.51 Visualization of NPSHA (with acknowledgements to Girdlestone Ltd)

32/554 Pumps and Pumping

(cid:4)

For metering pumps:
NPSHbasic D hs

10.2

B

(cid:14)

1000

(cid:5)

C Pi (cid:2) Pv

(32.20)

hf is as for the reciprocating pump based on peak instan-
taneous ﬂow and
hA D 6υPi
(cid:14)
υPi D pressure pulsation at pump inlet (bar)

(cid:17)32.21(cid:19)

D K1(cid:14)CQ/D2

where
K1 D 40 for simplex, 20 for duplex, 3 for
C D velocity of sound in liquid ms(cid:2)1 (for

triplex, 1 for quintuplex,

water at normal temperature
C D 1000 ms(cid:2)1)
NPSHA D basic NPSH (cid:2)

f C h2
h2

(cid:13)1/2 (cid:2) 1

(cid:12)

A

for simplex and duplex pumps and
NPSHA D basic NPSH (cid:2) (cid:17)hf C hA(cid:19) (cid:2) 1
for triplex and quintuplex pumps.
For rotary pumps:
hA D υP
(cid:14)

D K2(cid:14)Q/D2,

where
υP D pressure pulsation at pump inlet bar
K2 D 2 for three-lobe pumps
5 for two-lobe pumps,
5 for a monopump,
1 for a spur-gear pump,
5 for a vane pump,
10 for a peristaltic roller-type pump,
0 for a screw pump.

NPSH required (NPSHR)
This is a statement of the NPSH that the pump can sustain
by its own operation, so that the operating requirement
is that NPSHR > NPSHA. NPSHR is more difﬁcult than
NPSHA to determine. Reference 7 suggests working rela-
tions for positive displacement machines that are outlined
below.

For reciprocating metering pumps, NPSHR is related to

C 5 ð 105 (cid:14)Q2
Z2d4
v

valve loading, as shown in Figure 32.52:
A D 24vQ(cid:14)
(32.25)
Zd3
v
(where dv D nominal valve size (mm)) for single valves,
and
A D 80vQ(cid:14)
Zd3
v

C 1.5 ð 105 (cid:14)Q2
Z2d4
v

(32.26)

for double valves. It is recommended that for hydraulically
operated diaphragm pumps the extra losses imposed by

(32.22)

(32.23)

(32.24)

Figure 32.52 NPSHrequired for a reciprocating metering pump7

the diaphragm and support plate are treated as a single
unloaded valve.

For other reciprocators
NPSHR D 5U2 C 0.12(cid:17)Pd(cid:19)0.75

(cid:14)

(32.27)

where
U D mean plunger speed (ms(cid:2)1),
Pd D discharge pressure bar (dbs).

For the centrifugal pump, two terms are in common use,
the Thoma cavitation number 0 and the suction speciﬁc
speed SN:
0 D

NPSHR

(32.28)

Pump head rise

Q

N

p

K(cid:17)NPSHR(cid:19)3/4

Figure 32.53 gives a typical plot of 0 against ks that may
be used as a ﬁrst ‘design’ estimate of NPSHR, but in many
applications, test data are required
SN D
(32.29)
where K is a constant D 175 if g D 9.81ms(cid:2)2, Q is in
1/s, N is in revolutions/second and NPSHR is meters of
liquid. NPSHR here is usually based on a 3 per cent head
drop, deﬁned in Figure 32.54, for the pump tested with
cold water at design ﬂow rate and rotational speed.

Priming systems 32/555

Figure 32.53 Variation of Thoma’s cavitation parameter with spe-
ciﬁc speed for pumps3

Figure 32.55 Priming tank arrangement

applications, the pump is above the suction vessel or main,
and the static pressure at the take-off point is too low to
provide the static lift required. In these cases centrifugal
and positive displacement pump suction lines are often
provided with non-return valves so that, once ﬁlled they
do not
lose liquid on shutdown. If their operation is
intermittent, a priming tank is provided (Figure 32.55) to
allow priming to take place. This is only possible with
small machines because of the sizes needed. It is general
practice that no pump should be started or run dry to avoid
metal-to-metal contact and seizure. The only exceptions to
this are pumps designed to provide priming – self-priming
machines, used in installations where the suction line
empties, as in tanker-unloading bays or site-dewatering
applications.

Positive displacement pumps are self-priming by their
normal operating action and are designed to cope with
running dry. Centrifugal pumps are not inherently self-
priming, and need to be provided with assistance in the
form of ejectors, as in Figure 32.56 or dry vacuum pump
systems. In these systems, a dry vacuum pump allows air
to be drawn out and where an automatic valve prevents

Figure 32.54

32.7 Priming systems
If the suction level is above the pump there is usually
no problem in priming (that is, ensuring that the pump
suction system is full of liquid) unless it is pumping
a volatile and vapor locks when stationary. In many

Figure 32.56 An ejector priming system

32/556 Pumps and Pumping

liquid entering the pump, or wet vacuum pumps, such
as the liquid ring pump (Figures 32.57 and 32.58), may
be used to extract the air. Such devices are common on
portable ﬁre pumps, the liquid ring pump being driven
from the pump main driver in such a way as to allow dis-
connection when the pump is fully priming, thus avoiding
extra power loss during normal operation.

Self-priming centrifugal pumps do not rely on any
assisting system, but are provided with a special casing
system that allows liquid retained in the pump on
shutdown to recirculate to draw air from the suction line
until that is full of liquid and the pump is primed. There
are several designs which will pull suction lifts up to
7 m with cold water. All the designs impose a penalty of
lower efﬁciency when in the normal pumping mode, but
are effective alternative solutions to an auxiliary priming
system which do not require additional equipment as bolt-
on extras requiring maintenance.

One class of self-priming pumps which are rotodynamic
but not centrifugal in operation are the side-channel or
peripheral pump (Figure 32.59). The circulating motion
results in a transfer of energy from the liquid leaving
to the stator. Then as the ﬂuid proceeds
the rotor
to ‘corkscrew’
round the periphery from suction to
discharge, energy builds up so that it is claimed that the
pressure rise is 2.5 times that produced by a conventional
centrifugal pump with the same peripheral velocity,
although efﬁciency is much lower (up to 50 per cent).

Figure 32.58 Principle of liquid ring pump

32.8 Seals: selection and care

Static seals are standard provision from many suppliers;
therefore seals for the moving elements in pumps will be
discussed. For centrifugal pumps, both stufﬁng box and
mechanical seals will be considered and the discussion
will be extended to reciprocating and rotary machines.

32.8.1 Centrifugal pump and rotary pump seal
systems

The stufﬁng box, or packed gland, has been used for
many years, typical layouts being shown in Figure 32.60.
Usually, since a very smooth shaft surface is needed a

Figure 32.59 Peripheral pump layout and operating principle (after
Addison1)

sleeve of hard bronze or chrome plated is used for water
services ﬁnished to 0.8 µm. For normal duties soft packing

Figure 32.57 Schematic of a liquid ring pump

Priming systems 32/557

Figure 32.60 Stufﬁng box details

Figure 32.61 Soft packings – temperature range

are selected to deal with both seal surface speed and
temperature. Figures 32.61 and 32.62 give typical mate-
rials and their capacities, and manufacturers’ data sheets
should be consulted when selecting the number of rings
and the compression needed. When properly adjusted and
‘run in’, the leakage rate on a cold-water duty could be
about 1 liter/day, which may be lost as vapor.

Over-tightening the packing can give rise to overheat-
ing and shaft failure or seizure. Typically, a four-ring
gland will seal 3.5 to 4 bars, and absorb about 0.15 kW
when run in and ﬁtted to a 50-mm shaft.

The mechanical seal is now a standard ﬁtting of high
reliability and tends to be ﬁtted instead of a packed gland.
A typical mechanical seal is shown in Figure 32.63. The

32/558 Pumps and Pumping

Figure 32.62 Soft packing – speed range

Figure 32.63 A typical mechanical seal installation. 1 Seal chamber; 2 seal plate; 3 spring sleeve; 4 seat; 5 seal ring; 6 spring; 7 dynamic
secondary seal; 8 static secondary seal; 9 ﬂush connection

conventional design has a spring, rotating with the shaft,
which holds a rotating seal ring against a stationary ring
to provide a sealing interface. Stationary ﬂuid seals are
provided as shown. For water and general non-corrosive
duties, the design is internal, so that the liquid being sealed
both cools and provides a supply for the ﬁlm, which sep-
arates the rotating and static seal rings.

Simple seals are by design either balanced or unbalan-
ced. Referring to Figure 32.64, it can be seen that a bal-
anced seal will give a lower closing hydraulic force and
thus lower contact pressure; therefore, a higher sealed
pressure can be sustained. Too little load, and the seal will
leak, and too large will reduce life. An unbalanced seal
gives a simpler shaft or sleeve design, and will seal up to

Pump and drive selection 32/559
to within 0.5 µm, shaft run-out should not exceed 0.005
inch or 0.125 mm, and shaft ﬁnish where the seal ring has
to pass should be 0.4 µm to avoid damage.

If a mechanical seal or a packed gland is ﬁtted properly,
a good life can be expected if the liquid is clean. If grit is
in suspension, the seal manufacturer should be consulted
about appropriate materials and system design.

32.8.2 Reciprocating pump seal systems

The comments on packed glands apply for shaft and rod
seals. Piston-to-cylinder seals may be arranged like the
packed gland, but are provided with end rings, which
locate and prevent the sealing rings from extrusion. Sur-
face ﬁnishes for rod or piston will be the same as those
given above with leakage rates of the same order.

32.9 Pump and drive selection
32.9.1 Pump selection

Since pumps are the essential element in a ﬂow system,
the selection of the correct machine is crucial to the suc-
cess of a plant. It must be constructed from the appropriate
materials, run at the right speed, be compatible hydrauli-
cally with the system at all ﬂows, economical in ﬁrst cost
and in operation, and ‘user-friendly’.

To place the process of pump selection in the plant
decision tree it is necessary to follow the iterative way a
complete plant evolves.

From the initial statement of need, a preliminary design
brief evolves containing ﬂow rates and attendant com-
ponent pressures and temperatures. From this an initial
design layout is produced, the pressure losses and prob-
able inlet and outlet pressures and attendant ﬂows for all
pumps needed estimated, and a ﬁrst assessment of possi-
ble pumps made. Considerations of cavitation and perhaps
a need to rationalize on pump designs lead to a second
look at the systems. A revision of ﬂow schedules, pres-
sures and temperatures results, and, by iteration, a ‘ﬁnal’
design layout appears from which pump and equipment
speciﬁcations begin to be formulated and initial inquiries
are made to suppliers. Pump manufacturers will check
possibilities and tender if their pumps will give the duties
speciﬁed or, if invited tendering is used, will propose
changes to suit their pumps.

In the consultant’s design ofﬁce, the selection of pumps
(and hence of makers) to tender must be done at the
project design stage, and considerations of cost, complex-
ity and suitability will inﬂuence the choices made. An
important consideration at this stage is that the design
point speciﬁed is the correction one. A common practice
is the ‘add a bit for aging, add a bit for the unknowns’
at the early design stage and then the next engineer in
the process also ‘adds a bit’ since they may be on the
low side, and thus a margin of ﬂow is added. This pro-
cess can sometimes ensure that the pump size is such that,
even though the design point is that quoted, the pump will
be running at low ﬂow when the system is commissioned,
and this may be in a region of instability, giving running
problems on the plant. It cannot be too much emphasized

Figure 32.64 Seal balance arrangements. SD Sliding diameter or
effective sealing diameter; AD hydraulic piston area of sliding
ring; BD face contact area. (a) All area B is outside effective
sealing diameter and areas A and B are equal. Average face
contact pressure equals product pressure, i.e. seal is 100% out of
balance. (b) Unbalanced seal. All area Bis outside effective sealing
diameter and area Ais greater than area B. Average face contact
pressure is greater than product pressure, i.e. seal is more than
100% out of balance, depending on the relative area ratios. This
condition exists in most unbalanced seals. (c) Balanced seal. Here
part of the face contact area, B1, is outside. The sliding diameter
S carries the product pressure acting on area A. The face contact
area, however, equals B1 C B2, and so the unit face loading will be
less than product pressure, in accordance with the area ratio, i.e.

B

D A
B1 C B2
B
Balance D A
B

Generally,0.2–0.35

147 psi gauge (10 bar), and above this, balanced seals
are requested. Materials often used for standard water
duties are carbon for the face and ceramic and, if con-
densate, carbon with a nickel-iron static seat could be
ﬁtted. The seal manufacturer will quote the appropriate
materials, and will usually suggest circulation as shown
in Figure 32.63. The mating sealing surfaces are lapped

32/560 Pumps and Pumping

Figure 32.65 Pump range chart (courtesy Nederlandse Aardolie MIJ BV)

that accurate estimation of the duty ﬂow and head will
assist pump application and life.

Examination of Figure 32.65 will reveal that in many
cases the choice of centrifugal or positive displacement
pump is dictated by the head and ﬂow speciﬁed. Where,
however, the choice may be either type, other considera-
tions must enter the selection process. For example, ﬁrst
cost is an important factor. Sterling5 has demonstrated
that a screw pump and a centrifugal would give the same
duty. The screw pump would have an NPSHR less than
the centrifugal, and have a lower fall-off in efﬁciency as
ﬂuid viscosity increased, but would cost more than twice
the centrifugal and be more expensive to maintain. He
concluded by stating the centrifugal as being the most
preferred for price and maintenance in 80 per cent of
pumping duties.

A probable selection procedure could take the following

form:

If possible, a standard centrifugal pump shall be
selected, but
the effect of high viscosity must be
considered (see Table 32.2). If ﬂow is low remember
the efﬁciency fall-off, and look at alternative designs.
If ﬂow rate is important, metering pumps should be
preferred, as centrifugal pumps will not give accuracy.
If solids are in suspension consider working clearances,
need to avoid blockage and the ﬂushing for seals.

A drive speed of 2900 rpm is preferred to give higher
efﬁciency and smaller size and ﬁrst cost (but remember
noise risks). Appropriate codes (API 610, for example)
should be observed.

If a centrifugal is not suitable, select a rotary positive
displacement pump. The design usually selects itself,

but for ﬂow rates in the centrifugal pump range, screw
pumps, mono-pumps and wide-tooth gear pumps may
be considered. Remember that if particles are present
the screw pump will lose volumetric efﬁciency, and the
monotype of machine should be selected.

If the duty is metering, piston or diaphragm pumps

should be selected.

32.9.2 Drive selection
For most centrifugal pumps
the drive will be a
synchronous motor, running at 2900 rpm for 50 Hz supply
to minimize pump size and cost. Large boiler feed
pumps use steam turbines, which give economic output
regulation since steam is available.
In most plants,
variable-speed drives may be used to give economic
ﬂow control. A wide range of possibilities is available
(Table 32.5). Bower8 writing from the viewpoint of a
pump designer has given some comparative costs. He
commented that a 10 kW drive pump running for 10 h
per day would cost more than the ﬁrst cost of the unit
in a year. He showed that if a 75 kW pump running at
2900 rpm is to run at half ﬂow, a variable-speed drive
giving 1450 rpm will use 39kW if supplying a low static
lift system, where ﬂow losses are important. There is thus
an economic argument for a higher ﬁrst-cost pump plus
drive if such savings are possible.

32.9.3 Economics of pump selection and
running maintenance

With the operating economics of pumping system, such
as the water industry networks receiving attention, it is of

Pump and drive selection 32/561

r
o
f

d
e
r
i
u
q
e
r

r
e
g
n
a
h
c
x
e

t
a
e
H

.

d
e
e
p
s

d
e
c
u
d
e
r

p
i
l
S

.
s
r
e
w
o
p

r
e
h
g
i
h

.

x
a
m
p
m
u
p

s
e
c
u
d
e
r

.
e
v
i
s
n
e
p
x
e

c
i
t
a
m
o
t
u
A

.

d
e
e
p
s

l
o
r
t
n
o
c

r
o
f

e
v
i
s
n
e
p
x
E

s
r
e
w
o
p
w
o
l

)

f
a
e
l
r
e
v
o

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

e
f
i
l

g
n
i
r
a
e
b

d
e
c
u
d
e
R

.

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

e
d
i
s
t
u
o

r
o
f

e
l
b
a
t
i
u
s

t
o
N

.
e
c
a
p
s

r
o
o
ﬂ

d
e
s
a
e
r
c
n
I

t
f
a
h
s

k
c
a
j

f
i

d
e
s
u

t
o
n

s
e
g
n
a
h
c

d
e
e
p
s

f
i

t
n
e
u
q
e
r
f
n
i

e
r
a

y
t
i
l
i
b
i
s
s
o
p

t
s
o
c
w
o
L

d
e
c
u
d
e
r

e
v
i
g

t
u
b

s
t
l
e
b
V
o
t

r
a
l
i

m
i
S

y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e

r
e
t
a
e
r
g

d
n
a

g
n
i
d
a
o
l

t
f
a
h
s

e
c
n
a
n
e
t
n
i
a
m

t
c
e
r
r
o
C

e
c
n
a
t
r
o
p
m

i

l
o
r
t
n
o
c

c
i
t
a
m
o
t
u
A

d
e
t
i

m
L

i

.
t
l
u
c
ﬁ
f
i
d

.
e
g
n
a
r

r
e
w
o
p

d
e
t
i

m
L

i

e
f
i
l

t
l
e
b

t
a

y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
w
o
L

r
e
t
a

W

.

d
e
e
p
s

r
o
f

d
e
r
i
u
q
e
r

d
e
c
u
d
e
r

g
n
i
l
o
o
c

n
i
-
p
i
l
S

.
s
r
e
w
o
p

r
e
h
g
i
h

p
m
u
p

s
e
c
u
d
e
r

e
v
i
r
d

y
l
n
O

.

d
e
e
p
s

m
u
m
i
x
a
m

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r

d
e
e
p
s

e
l
b
i
s
s
o
p

d
e
e
p
s

e
v
i
r
d

.
t
n
e
m
e
r
i
u
q
e
r

g
n
i
h
c
t
a
m

p
m
u
p

o
t

.
e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
a

r
e
w
o
p

y
n
A

t
n
e
u
q
e
r
f
n
i

r
o
f

e
v
i
r
d

r
o
f

r
o

s
e
g
n
a
h
c

t
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
E

t
c
a
p
m
o
c

,
t
s
u
b
o
r

A

t
l
e
b
-
d
e
s
u
o
H

.
t
s
o
c
w
o
L

s
n
o
i
s
r
e
v

e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
a

c
i
t
a
m
o
t
u
A

.

d
o
o
g

e
f
i
l

d
n
a

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
i
l
e
R

y
s
a
e

l
o
r
t
n
o
c

t
a

y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
w
o
L

.

d
o
o
g

e
f
i
l

d
n
a

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
i
l
e
R

h
g
i
h

y
r
e
v

o
t

e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
A

y
e
h
t

h
c
i
h
w

t
a

s
r
e
w
o
p

t
s
o
c

e
r
o
m
e
m
o
c
e
b

e
v
i
t
c
e
f
f
e

e
m
a
s

r
o
t
o
m

h
t
i

w
3
.
0

e
m
a
s

r
o
t
o
m

h
t
i

w
3
0

.

e
m
a
s

r
o
t
o
m

h
t
i

w
3
0

.

9
0

.

9
0

.

9
0

.

5
6

0
7

5
7

5
7

3
.
0

9
0

.

.

.

A
N

0
4

5
4

0
5

0
5

0
4

0
8

5
8

7
8

7
8

0
7

5
7

0
8

0
8

0
9
–
5
8

5
9
–
0
9

s
t
l
e
b

s
t
l
e
b

C
5
9

C
5
9

’

V

‘

t
a
l
F

1
:
8

1
:
9

s
t
i
n
u
d
r
a
d
n
a
t
s

t
u
b

,

y
n
A

n
w
o
d

p
e
t
s

y
l
l
a
u
s
u

d
e
t
i

m

i
l

r
e
w
o
p

t
a

0
0
0
6

d
e
t
i

m

i
l

r
e
w
o
p

t
a

0
0
0
5

0
5
7

o
t

p
U

t
a
ﬂ

r
o

s
t
l
e
b

s
t
l
e
b

’

V

‘

0
5
3

o
t

p
U

s
t
l
e
b

g
n
i
m
T

i

y
n
A

x
o
b

r
a
e
G

5
2
1

o
t

p
U

d
e
e
p
s
-
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
V

s
y
e
l
l
u
p

0
0
5
1

o
t

p
U

t
n
e
r
r
u
c

y
d
d
E

g
n
i
l
p
u
o
c

5
3
0

.

9
0

.

5
3

5
2

7
8

0
8

0
5
–
5
4

6
9

e
v
o
b
A

1
:
0
1

t
l
e
b

h
t
i

w

e
v
i
r
d

0
0
2
4

o
t

p
U

.

.

A
N

0
7

0
9
–
5
8

d
t
S

1
:
4

0
0
5
4

o
t

p
U

d
e
t
i

m

i
l

r
e
w
o
p

t
a

t
u
b

5
3
0

.

9
0

.

5
3

4
2

7
8

0
8

0
5
–
5
4

5
9

1
:
4

d
t
S

0
0
5
3

0
0
0
2
1

o
t

5
1

s
g
n
i
l
p
u
o
c

d
i
u
l
F

s
n
o
i
t
a
t
i

m
i
L

s
e
g
a
t
n
a
v
d
A

f
l
a
H

d
e
e
p
s

.
x
a
M

d
e
e
p
s

d
e
e
p
s

f
l
a
H

d
e
e
p
s

.
x
a
M

W
k
0
5
1

W
k
4

W
k
0
5
1

W
k
4

f
l
a
H

d
e
e
p
s

m
u
m
i
x
a
M

d
e
e
p
s

o
i
t
a
R

m
p
r

.
x
a
M

s
e
v
i
r
d

p
m
u
p

o
t

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

n
i
a
M

d
e
t
a
l
e
r

r
o
t
c
a
f

r
e
w
o
P

)

%

r
o
t
o
m
g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n
i

(

y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e

l
l
a
r
e
v
O

)

%

(
y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
e
v
i
r
D

s
d
e
e
p
S

e
g
n
a
r

r
e
w
o
P

)

W
k
(

e
v
i
r
d

f
o

e
p
y
T

8
s
p
m
u
p

l

a
g
u
f
i
r
t
n
e
c
o
t
d
e
t
a

l

e
r

s
e
v

i

i
r
d
g
n
g
n
a
h
c
d
e
e
p
s

f
o
s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
n
a
M

i

5

.

2
3

e
l
b
a
T

32/562 Pumps and Pumping

.
e
c
n
a
n
e
t
n
i
a
m

s
e
s
a
e
r
c
n
i

e
v
i
s
n
e
p
x
e
C
F
E
T

e
l
b
a
v
o
M

.
e
v
i
s
n
e
p
x
e

r
a
e
g

h
s
u
r
b

e
v
i
s
n
e
p
x
e
C
F
E
T

.
e
v
i
s
n
e
p
x
e

e
c
n
a
n
e
t
n
i
a
m

l
u
f
e
r
a
C

e
g
n
a
r

r
e
w
o
p

d
e
t
i

m
L

i

e
f
i
L

.
l
a
i
t
n
e
s
s
e

s
n
o
i
t
a
t
i

m

i
l

l
a
i
t
n
e
s
s
e

e
c
n
a
n
e
t
n
i
a
m

d
n
a

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
r
b
u
l

l
u
f
e
r
a
C

.
e
f
i
l

d
e
t
i

m
L

i

.
e
g
n
a
r

r
e
w
o
p

d
e
t
i

m
L

i

.
e
v
i
s
n
e
p
x
e

d
e
e
p
s

h
g
i
H

n
o
i
t
a
r
e
n
e
g

s
c
i
n
o
m
r
a
H

.

n
o
i
t
a
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
c

s
d
e
e
n

e
c
n
a
n
e
t
n
i
a
m
e
r
o
M

s
r
o
t
o
m
n
o
i
t
c
u
d
n
i

n
a
h
t

.
e
v
i
s
n
e
p
x
E
C
F
E
T

y
l
n
O

t
a

y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
w
o
L

.

d
e
e
p
s

d
e
c
u
d
e
r

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r

d
e
e
p
s

s
e
r
i
u
q
e
R

.
e
l
b
i
s
s
o
p

r
o
t
o
m

f
o

%
0
3

g
n
i
t
a
r
e
d

t
s
a
e
l

t
a

.
e
g
n
a
r

r
e
w
o
p

d
e
t
i

m
L

i

e
s
a
e
r
c
n
i

d
e
e
p
S

e
l
b
i
s
s
o
p

e
s
a
e
r
c
n
i

d
e
e
p
S

e
l
b
i
s
s
o
p

d
o
o
g

d
e
e
p
s

y
l
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
R

d
e
e
p
s
w
o
l

.

y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e

c
i
t
a
m
o
t
u
A

y
s
a
e

l
o
r
t
n
o
c

.
e
g
n
a
r

d
o
o
G

l
o
r
t
n
o
c

c
i
t
a
m
o
t
u
A

.
r
o
t
o
m
n
o
i
t
c
u
d
n
i

e
s
u

n
a
C

e
g
a
c

l
e
r
r
i
u
q
s

.
t
s
o
c
w
o
L

y
s
a
e

l
o
r
t
n
o
c

c
i
t
a
m
o
t
u
A

d
n
a

y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e

d
o
o
G

e
s
a
e
r
c
n
i

.
r
o
t
c
a
f

r
e
w
o
p

d
e
e
p
S

e
l
b
i
s
s
o
p

r
o
t
o
m
e
g
a
r
h
c
S

d
e
s
a
e
r
c
n
i

e
h
t

d
n
a

s
e
g
a
t
l
o
v

y
l
p
p
u
s

y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e

d
o
o
G

.
e
l
b
i
s
s
o
p

l
o
r
t
n
o
c

c
i
t
a
m
o
t
u
A

r
e
v
o

e
f
i
l

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

4
0

.

9
0

.

0
7

5
4

0
9

0
8

y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e

l
l
a
r
e
v
o
e
e
S

1
:
0
1

o
t

p
u

0
0
0
2

0
0
5
2

o
t

p
U

C
A
d
e
f
-
r
o
t
a
t
S

r
o
t
a
t
u
m
m
o
c

r
o
t
o
m

s
s
e
l

d
n
a
(

n
a
h
t

x
e
l
p
m
o
c

)
?
e
l
b
a
i
l
e
r

s
e
p
y
t

r
e
h
t
o

e
r
o
m

s
c
i
n
o
r
t
c
e
l
E

.
t
s
o
c

h
g
i
H

r
o
t
c
a
f

r
e
w
o
p

d
o
o
G

.

g
n
i
t
a
r
e
d

l
a
m
i
n
i
m

.
)
s
n
g
i
s
e
d

t
s
o
m
h
t
i

w

(

e
s
a
e
r
c
n
i

d
e
e
p
S

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
n
i

e
g
a
c

h
t
i

w
s
r
o
t
o
m

e
l
b
i
s
s
o
p

l
e
r
r
i
u
q
s

e
s
u

n
a
C

.

3
0
/
5
9
0

.

5
9
0

.

5
6

0
4

7
8

5
7

y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e

l
l
a
r
e
v
o
e
e
S

1
:
0
1

0
0
0
5

0
0
0
2

d
t
S

l
a
i
c
e
p
s

5
7

o
t

p
U

f
o

l
o
r
t
n
o
c

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
n
i

r
o
t
o
m

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

s
n
o
i
t
a
t
i

m
i
L

s
e
g
a
t
n
a
v
d
A

f
l
a
H

d
e
e
p
s

.
x
a
M

d
e
e
p
s

d
e
e
p
s

f
l
a
H

d
e
e
p
s

.
x
a
M

W
k
0
5
1

W
k
4

W
k
0
5
1

W
k
4

f
l
a
H

d
e
e
p
s

m
u
m
i
x
a
M

d
e
e
p
s

o
i
t
a
R

m
p
r

.
x
a
M

s
e
v
i
r
d

p
m
u
p

o
t

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

n
i
a
M

d
e
t
a
l
e
r

r
o
t
c
a
f

r
e
w
o
P

)

%

r
o
t
o
m
g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n
i

(

y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e

l
l
a
r
e
v
O

)

%

(

y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e

e
v
i
r
D

s
d
e
e
p
S

e
g
n
a
r

r
e
w
o
P

)

W
k
(

e
v
i
r
d

f
o

e
p
y
T

d)
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c

(

5

.

2
3

e
l
b
a
T

3
0

.

9
0

.

A
N

.

5
4

.

A
N

0
7

0
9
–
5
8

1
:
0
1

3
0

.

9
0

.

.

A
N

.

0
4

.

A
N

0
7

5
8
–
5
8

5
9
–
5
8

1
:
2
1

o
t

p
U

.

3
0

9
0

.

5
6

5
4

0
9

0
8

y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e

l
l
a
r
e
v
o
e
e
S

1
:
0
3

o
t

p
U

d
e
t
i

m

i
l

t
a

t
u
b

r
e
w
o
p

0
0
5
5

o
t

p
U

0
2
1

o
t

p
U

s
e
v
i
r
d

n
i
a
h
c

y
l
e
t
i
n
ﬁ
n
i

e
l
b
a
i
r
a
v

e
v
i
t
i
s
o
P

W
k
0
1

t
a

0
0
2
4

t
a

0
0
6
2

W
k
5
7

5
7

o
t

p
U

l
a
c
i
n
a
h
c
e

s
r
o
t
a
i
r
a
v

M

.
l
i
a
v
a

0
0
5
3

-
r
e
h
g
i
h

l
a
i
c
e
p
s

d
t
S

0
0
5
1

0
0
5
2

o
t

p
U

r
o
t
s
i
r
y
h
t

e
g
a
t
l
o
v

l
o
r
t
n
o
c

d
n
a

r
o
t
o
m
C
D

3
0

.

9
0

.

.

.

A
N

5
2

.

.

A
N

0
8

y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e

l
l
a
r
e
v
o
e
e
S

1
:
4

0
0
0
3

0
5

o
t

p
U

5
0

.

5
9
0

.

0
7

5
4

0
9

0
8

y
c
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e

l
l
a
r
e
v
o
e
e
S

d
t
S

1
:
4

o
t

p
u

1
:
0
2

0
0
5
2

0
0
5

o
t

p
U

f
o

l
o
r
t
n
o
c

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
n
i

r
o
t
o
m

e
g
a
t
l
o
V

r
o
t
a
t
u
m
m
o
c

C
A
e
g
a
r
h
c
S

r
o
t
o
m

interest to note that recent work9 makes two points: pump
performance does fall off with time and there should be
consideration of the economics of refurbishment as part of
system pricing. Cullen reported a study of basing ﬁgures
on 50 per cent utilization and a 3p (5 cents) per kilowatt-
hour tariff. One case involving 12 pumps, capital value
$216.000, with an efﬁciency fall-off of 5 to 9 per cent,
could be refurbished for about $86,400 to give 5 per cent
efﬁciency uplift and show electricity saving of $24,120
per year and a return on investment of 35 per cent per
year. A further example covering eight pump sets, capital
value $144,000 with a serious efﬁciency fall-off of 15–19
per cent, could be refurbished at cost of $201,600 to give
an uplift of 15 per cent, resulting in a $56,160 per year
saving and an annual investment of 25 per cent. These
examples and others emphasize that traditional oversizing
is expensive in running cost, that pump mismatch should
be avoided and that pump replacement or refurbishment
can be economic in large installations.

32.9.4 Reliability considerations
As a further consideration of the overall system design,
it is necessary to examine the choice of the number of
pumps installed. In the petrochemical and process indus-
tries availability is an important factor in plant operation.
The Institution of Mechanical Engineers suggests several
classes of pumps linked to availability:7
1. A Class 1 installation achieves high availability using
a single pump upon which the system is completely
dependent is in a single process stream where pump
outage means a large loss of output. The process here
demands that continuous operation is possible for at
least three years without enforced halts for inspection
or correction and where components must have a life
expectancy of more than 100,000 hours.

2. A Class 2 system is as Class 1 but with process
recovery short after shutdown, infrequent pump outage
can be tolerated and an interval of about of about
4000 hours for continuous operation can be tolerated.
3. If in Class 1 and 2 installation deterioration in pump
operations can be tolerated or easily corrected by oper-
ators it may be categorized as Class 3.

4. A Class 4 installation is different from the ﬁrst three
by having standby pumps that can take over immedi-
ately a pump fails. Main pump and the standby need
not be identical but should both have life expectancies
exceeding 25,000 hours.

5. A Class 5 installation follows the Class 4 concept, but
is characterized by having pumps operating with iden-
tical spares and have one or more pumps operating in
plant bays where product storage gives time to assess
the problem and to take action to get the pump back
on-line.

6. A further Class 6 is suggested for pumps intended for
batch or intermittent duty. (If high availability is essen-
tial, the machine should be placed in Class 4.)

For many process pumps the L10 life is less than
8000 hours, so they usually fall in Classes 4, 5, and 6. A
typical system use a running pump rated at 100 per cent

References 32/563

duty with an identical spare either installed or carried in
store. This consideration affects the total system design if
installed spares are to be used as well as the overall cost
of the installation.

32.10 Pump testing

Pump tests are needed to establish the performance of a
machine before delivery to the user so that contract condi-
tions may be satisﬁed. They are also required to establish
the health of the pump at intervals in its service life. When
a new pump is delivered, the pump manufacturer will sup-
ply data required either as a set of performance points or a
plot as a certiﬁcate of suitability. Ideally, the pump should
be tested in the system conﬁguration that it is intended to
supply, but usually tests are performed in the test bay in
a standardized manner laid down by national and interna-
tional codes. When a pump is installed, a simple test may
be performed to establish a performance point in a sim-
ilar way to periodic tests to establish how the machine’s
performance is being affected.

32.10.1 Factory tests

Factory tests establish the pressure head, power, efﬁciency
and NPSH over the complete ﬂow range the pump can
deliver running at design speed. British Standard, DIN
standard or ANSI standard codes or national variations
from such main codes lay down the manner of test proce-
dure, and a minimum requirement is quite often deﬁned
by industry codes such as API 610. This is not the place
to discuss instrument accuracy, as the codes lay down
the limits possible from conventional instruments. There
are two main classes of test: the commercial require-
ments normally possible in the maker’s test plant and
high-accuracy tests that are only possible by using ‘sub-
standard’ instruments and very sophisticated techniques.

32.10.2 Scale-model testing

Scale-model testing is used with very large pumps such
as water feed pumps for thermal power stations. The
problems posed by such tests in establishing the full-
size machine performance are well discussed in a paper
contributed by workers studying pumps for the Central
Electricity Board10.

This is a specialized area of work covered by ISO codes
of practice, and any engineer wishing to study these must
check the current codes.

References

1 Addison, H., CentrifugalandotherRotodynamicPumps, Chap-

man and Hall, London (1955).

2 Karassik etal., PumpHandbook, McGraw-Hill, New York (1976).
3 Turton, R. K., Principles of Turbomachinery, E. & F. N. Spon,

London (1984).

4 HydraulicsHandbook, Trade and Technical Press.
5 Sterling, L., ‘Selection of pump type to match systems’, Paper

B3, BPMA 5th Tech. Conference., Bath (1977).

32/564 Pumps and Pumping

6 Miller, D. S., InternalFlowSystems, BHRA Fluid Engineering,

Cranﬁeld (1978).

7 Davidson, J.

(ed.), Process Pump Selection–A Systems

Approach, I. Mech. E., London (1986).

8 Bower, J. R., ‘The economics of operating centrifugal pumps
with variable speed drives’, Proc. I. Mech. E., Paper C108/81
(1981).

9 Cullen, N., ‘Energy cost management in water supply’, BPMA

11th Conference, April (1989).

10 Nixon, R. A. and Cairney, W. D., ‘Scale effects in centrifugal
cooling water pumps for thermal power stations’, NELReport
505(1972).

11 Summers-Smith, J. D. (ed.), Mechanical Seal Practice for Im-

provedPerformance, I. Mech. E., London (1988).

33/565

33

Centrifugal
Pump
Installation

R. Keith Mobley
The Plant Performance Group

Contents

33/567

33/567

33.1 Foundation
33.2 Piping support
33.3 Inlet piping conﬁguration
33.4 Discharge piping conﬁguration
33.5 Rules for proper installation
33.6 Summary 33/570

33/568

33/568

33/568

More pumps fail as a direct result of improper installation
than any other single factor. The predominant reasons for
these failures include starvation, caused by inadequate
or
inconsistent suction conditions; distortion, caused
by pipe strain or improper foundation; and turbulent
that
results from piping or entrained gas problems.
Centrifugal pump installation must
follow Hydraulic
Institute Standards, which provide speciﬁc guidelines to
prevent these installation and performance problems. This
chapter will address the fundamental requirements for
proper installation.

33.1 Foundation

Centrifugal pumps require a rigid foundation that prevents
torsional or linear movement of the pump and its base-
plate. In most cases, this type of pump is mounted on a
concrete pad or pedestal having enough mass to securely
support the baseplate, pump and its driver. The following
general rules apply to foundation design.

First, the mass of the concrete foundation should be
at least ﬁve times greater than the total mass of the sup-
ported equipment. This ratio provides sufﬁcient mass to
absorb both the dynamic and static forces created by the
pump and driver. Well-designed pump foundations and
baseplates should have the rigidity required to withstand
the axial, transverse and torsional loading of the rotat-
ing machines. For pumps less than 500 horsepower, the
top of the foundation should be at least 3 inches wider
and longer than the baseplate and at least 6 inches wider
for larger pumps. In addition, the foundation should have
sufﬁcient width to fully support and dissipate the energy
generated by the pumping equipment. To determine the
bottom width of the foundation, draw imaginary lines
from the center of rotation downward at 30° angles. These
lines should pass through the bottom of the foundation and
not its sides (Figure 33.1).

Baseplate design signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the reliabil-
ity of rotating equipment, such as centrifugal pumps. It
must be rigid enough to avoid ﬂexing or twisting at its
center under the normal dynamic loads generated by the

Base plate

Epoxy grout

Grade elevation

Foundation

30˚

˚

0

3

Figure 33.1 Foundation

Piping support 33/567

motor and pump. Torsional ﬂexing can cause separation
of the base and grout and result in a dramatic increase in
resonance and vibration as well as misalignment of the
driver and pump.

The baseplate must be absolutely level and securely
bolted and grouted to the concrete foundation. The base-
plate understructure should provide a means for the grout
to rigidly afﬁx it to the foundation when all live loading
occurs. Baseplate ﬂatness and level installation are major
factors in maintaining proper shaft alignment between
the pump and its driver. It should have an installed sur-
face coplanar ﬂatness within 0.062 inches per foot overall
for Groups I and II pumps and 0.015 inches per foot
for Group III pumps. These tolerances allow for reason-
able alignment capabilities without dramatically increas-
ing baseplate manufacturing costs.

Baseplates must be secured to concrete foundations
with epoxy or cementitious grout. Ideally, vibration gen-
erated by the rotating pump is transmitted through the
baseplate to the foundation and down through the subsoil
where it can be absorbed. This transmission of dynamic
energy is solely dependent on an absolute mechanical
link from the rotating mass to the subsoil. The com-
bination of proper bolting and grout provide this link-
age. Properly installed, an epoxy grout will bond to a
concrete foundation with a tensile strength of 2000 psi,
which is signiﬁcantly greater than that of concrete. The
bonded baseplate is therefore effectively transformed into
a monolithic structure that includes the concrete foun-
dation. The single-block monolith signiﬁcantly dampens
vibration resulting from resonance with the natural fre-
quency of the baseplate.

33.2 Piping support
Pipe strain causes the pump casing to deform and results
in premature wear and/or failure. Therefore, both suction
and discharge piping must be adequately supported to pre-
vent strain. In addition, ﬂexible isolator connectors should
be used on both suction and discharge pipes to ensure
proper operation. Care in fabricating and aligning pip-
ing avoids problems that may require re-cutting, ﬁtting,
re-welding and re-testing the pipe or lead to premature
pump failure. Good system design supports piping loads
and forces along spring hangers and bracing that do not
have to be removed during normal maintenance. The sys-
tem should be fabricated starting at the pump ﬂanges,
working toward the pipe rack.

The most common piping fabrication error and the one
that produces the greatest piping strain is non-parallel
ﬂange faces. For example, during installation of a circu-
lating water pump, suction piping was installed with mis-
aligned mating ﬂanges. The resulting strain distorted the
pump’s casing to the point where the shaft and impeller
would not turn. Distortions can result in premature wear,
loss of performance, or catastrophic failure. The following
should be evaluated as part of a root cause failure anal-
ysis: foundation, piping support, and inlet and discharge
piping conﬁgurations.

33/568 Centrifugal Pump Installation

33.3 Inlet piping conﬁguration
Contrary to popular opinion, a centrifugal pump cannot
function without both consistent adequate volume and
suction pressure. Therefore, suction piping must be con-
ﬁgured to assure that both of these conditions are met.
First, the reservoir or source of liquid must have a sus-
tained volume that is sufﬁcient to meet the hydraulic
requirements of the pump and its discharge system. This
reservoir must be ﬁtted with vortex prevention devices
that will assure a constant supply of liquid that is free
from entrained air and gases. Second, the inlet or suction
piping must have adequate size to prevent excessive fric-
tion loss or other ﬂow restrictions that would reduce the
effective suction head at the impeller’s eye. Generally, the
suction piping should be at least 1.5 times larger than the
pump’s inlet diameter. In addition, inlet or suction veloc-
ity should not exceed 5 feet per second. Higher velocities
will adversely affect pump performance and may lead to
chronic reliability problems.

Centrifugal pumps are highly susceptible to turbulent
ﬂow. The Hydraulic Institute provides guidelines for pip-
ing conﬁgurations that are speciﬁcally designed to ensure
laminar ﬂow of the liquid as it enters the pump. As a rule,
the suction pipe should provide a straight, unrestricted run
that is six times the inlet diameter of the pump.

Installations that have sharp turns, shut-off, ﬂow-
control valves, or undersized pipe on the suction-side of
the pump are prone to chronic performance problems.
Such deviations from good engineering practices result
in turbulent suction ﬂow and cause hydraulic instability
that severely restricts pump performance.

The ﬁnal consideration in suction piping design is the
method used to reduce the pipe diameter (i.e. 1.5 or greater
than the pump’s inlet ﬂange) so that it can be attached to
the pump. Care must be taken to ensure that the reduction
method does not cause a void where air can be trapped or
a low spot that will permit buildup of solid contaminates.
Concentric reducers should not be used to reduce suc-
tion piping diameter to that of the pump’s inlet ﬂange.
This type of reducer may create an air pocket in the top
of the piping and could lead to loss of pump performance
resulting from air entrainment. Eccentric reducers should
be installed with the straight side on top. This will reduce
the potential for air pocket in the piping or the introduction
of air or gas into the pump.

33.4 Discharge piping conﬁguration
The restrictions on discharge piping are not as critical
as for suction piping, but using good engineering prac-
tices ensures longer life and trouble-free operation of the
pump. The primary considerations that govern discharge-
piping design are friction losses and total vertical lift or
elevation change. The combination of these two factors is
called total system head or TSH and represents the total
force that the pump must overcome to perform properly.
If the system is designed properly, the total dynamic head
(TDH) of the pump will equal the TSH at the desired
ﬂow rate.

In most applications, it is relatively straightforward to
conﬁrm the total elevation change of the pumped liquid.
Measure all vertical rises and drops in the discharge pip-
ing, then calculate the total difference between the pump’s
centerline and the ﬁnal delivery point.

Determining the total friction loss, however, is not as
simple. Friction loss is caused by a number of factors and
all depend on the ﬂow velocity generated by the pump.
The major sources of friction loss include: friction between
the pumped liquid and the sidewalls of the pipe; valves,
elbows, and other mechanical ﬂow restrictions or other ﬂow
restrictions, such as back-pressure created by the weight of
liquid in the delivery storage tank or resistance within the
system component that uses the pumped liquid.

There are a number of reference books, like Ingersoll-
Rand’s Cameron Hydraulics Databook, that provide the
pipe-friction losses for common pipes under various ﬂow
conditions. Generally, data tables deﬁne the approximate
losses in terms of speciﬁc pipe lengths or runs. Fric-
tion loss can be approximated by measuring the total run
length of each pipe size used in the discharge system,
dividing the total by the equivalent length used in the
table, and multiplying the result by the friction loss given
in the table.

Each time the ﬂow is interrupted by a change of direc-
tion, a restriction caused by valving, or a change in pipe
diameter there is a substantial increase in the ﬂow resis-
tance of the piping. The actual amount of this increase
depends on the nature of the restriction. For example,
a short-radius elbow creates much more resistance than
a long-radius elbow; a ball valve’s resistance is much
greater than a gate valve’s; and the resistance from a
pipe-size reduction of four inches will be greater than
for a one-inch reduction. Reference tables are available
in hydraulics handbooks that provide the relative values
for each of the major sources of friction loss. As in the
friction tables mentioned above, these tables often provide
the friction loss as equivalent runs of straight pipe.

In some cases, friction losses are difﬁcult to quantify.
If the pumped liquid is delivered to an intermediate stor-
age tank, the conﬁguration of the tank’s inlet determines
if it adds to the system pressure. If the inlet is on or
near the top, the tank will add no back pressure. How-
ever, if the inlet is below the normal liquid level, the total
height of liquid above the inlet must be added to the total
system head.

In applications where the liquid is used directly by
one or more system components,
the contribution of
these components to the total system head may be
difﬁcult to calculate. In some cases, the vendor’s manual
or the original design documentation will provide this
information. If these data are not available,
then the
friction losses and back pressure need to be measured
or an over-capacity pump selected for service based on a
conservative estimate.

33.5 Rules for proper installation
Rule 1: Provide sufﬁcient NPSH

Every impeller requires a minimum amount of pressure
energy in the liquid being supplied in order to perform

without cavitation difﬁculties. This pressure energy is
referred to as net positive suction head required.

The NPSH available is supplied from the system. It
is solely a function of the system design on the suction
side of the pump. Consequently, it is in the control of the
system designer. To avoid cavitation, the NPSH available
from the system must be greater than the NPSH required
by the pump, and the biggest mistake that can be made
by a system designer is to succumb to the temptation to
provide only the minimum required at the rated design
point. This leaves no margin for error on the part of the
designer, or the pump, or the system. Giving in to this
temptation has proved to be a costly mistake on many
occasions.

Rule 2: Reduce the friction losses

When a pump is taking its suction from a tank, it should
be located as close to the tank as possible in order to
reduce the effect of friction losses on the NPSH available.
Yet the pump must be far enough away from the tank
to ensure that correct piping practice can be followed.
Using a larger diameter line to limit the linear velocity to
a level appropriate to the particular liquid being pumped
can usually reduce pipe friction. Many industries work
with a maximum velocity of about 5 feet per second, but
this is not always acceptable.

Rule 3: No elbows on the suction ﬂange

There is always an uneven ﬂow in an elbow, and when
one is installed on the suction of any pump, it introduces
that uneven ﬂow into the eye of the impeller. This can
create turbulence and air entrainment, which may result
in impeller damage and vibration. When the elbow is
installed in a horizontal plane on the inlet of a double suc-
tion pump, uneven ﬂows are introduced into the opposing
eyes of the impeller, upsetting the hydraulic balance of the
rotating element. Under these conditions, the overloaded
bearing will fail prematurely and regularly if the pump is
packed. If the pump is ﬁtted with mechanical seals, the
seal will usually fail instead of the bearing – but just as
regularly and often more frequently.

A well-established and effective method of ensuring
a laminar ﬂow to the eye of the impeller is to provide
the suction of the pump with a straight run of pipe in a
length equivalent to 5–10 times the diameter of that pipe.
The smaller multiplier would be used on the larger pipe
diameters and vice versa.

Rule 4: Stop air or vapor entering the suction
line

Any high spot in the suction line can become ﬁlled with
air or vapor, which, if transported into the impeller, will
create an effect similar to cavitation, and with the same
results. Services that are particularly susceptible to this
situation are those where the pump volume contains a
signiﬁcant amount of entrained air or vapor, as well as
those operating on a suction lift, where it can also cause
the pump to lose its prime. A concentric reducer can cause
a similar effect. The suction of a pump should be ﬁtted

Rules for proper installation 33/569

with an eccentric reducer positioned with the ﬂat side
uppermost.

If a pump is taking its suction from a sump or tank, the
formation of vortices can draw air into the suction line.
Providing sufﬁcient submergence of liquid over the suc-
tion opening can usually prevent this. A bell-mouth design
on the opening will reduce the amount of submergence
required. This submergence is completely independent of
the NPSH required by the pump.

Rule 5: Correct piping alignment

In

high

applications,

Piping ﬂanges must be accurately aligned before the bolts
are tightened and all piping, valves and associated ﬁttings
should be independently supported, to place no strain on
the pump. Stress imposed on the pump casing by the pip-
ing reduces the probability of satisfactory performance.
Under certain conditions, the pump manufacturer may
identify some maximum levels of forces and moments
which may be acceptable on the pump ﬂanges.
some

piping
temperature
is inevitable owing to thermal growth
misalignment
during the operating cycle. Under
these conditions,
thermal expansion joints are often introduced to avoid
transmitting piping strains to the pump. However, if the
end of the expansion joint closest to the pump is not
anchored securely, the object of the exercise is defeated as
the piping strains are simply passed through to the pump.
Piping design is one area where the basic principles
involved are regularly ignored, resulting in hydraulic
instabilities in the impeller which translate into additional
shaft
loading, higher vibration levels and premature
failure of the seal or bearings. Because there are many
other reasons why pumps could vibrate, and why seals
and bearings fail, the trouble is rarely traced to incorrect
piping.

The suction side of a pump is much more important
than the piping on the discharge. If any mistakes are made
on the discharge side, increasing the performance capa-
bility from the pump can usually compensate for them.
Problems on the suction side, however, can be the source
of ongoing and expensive difﬁculties which may never be
traced back to that area.

Rule 6: Use the right pipe ﬁttings

The number of turbulence or pressure drop producing
ﬁttings in the pump suction line should be kept to a mini-
mum. Because of the excessive turbulent and friction loss
that they produce, globe valves should not be used in the
pump suction line. When NPSH or turbulence is a prob-
lem, a turbulence-reducing device should be used. This
device should be located as near the pumps suction ﬂange
as possible.

A ﬂow straightener should be installed just downstream
of any elbows installed in the pump’s suction piping to
reduce turbulence and prevent ﬂow separation. Only long-
radius elbows should be used for pump suction appli-
cations. Without a ﬂow straightener, uncontrolled ﬂow
through an elbow will separate the ﬂuid into two stream
regions, creating local high velocities and turbulence.

33/570 Centrifugal Pump Installation

Check valves should not be used in the suction piping.
Foot valves should not be utilized in the suction piping
when the pump is operating against a high static head.
Even though foot valves are recommended if suction lift
is low and priming help is required, they often fail to
fully close and may cause pump failure. If static head is
high and the driver fails, a partially closed foot valve will
permit the pumped liquid to rush backwards and in some
cases cause excessive water hammer.

Rule 7: Adequate foundation

Centrifugal pumps, as do most other mechanical equip-
ment, generate dynamic forces that must be absorbed by
their foundation. The foundation should have a mass that
is at least ﬁve times that of the installed pump and driver.
In addition, the pump assembly must be properly afﬁxed

to the foundation. Baseplates must be bolted and grouted
to the concrete foundation so that a positive, uniform bond
is created.

33.6 Summary
Very few pump installations follow Hydraulic Institute
recommendations. A minority of installations fail to fol-
low reasonable engineering practices or even common
sense. Therefore, it should not be a surprise that centrifu-
gal pump applications often exhibit chronic reliability and
maintenance problems.

Many of these chronic problems are the direct result
of improper installation. The guidelines provided in this
chapter are not all encompassing, but they provide the
basic elements that will assure long-term, trouble-free
operation of pumping systems.

34

34/571

Cooling Towers

John Neller
Film Cooling Towers Ltd

Contents

34/573

34/573

34.1 Background
34.2 Theory
34.3 Design techniques
34.4 Design requirements 34/574
34.5 Materials and structure design
34.5.1 Counterﬂow 34/574
34.5.2 Crossﬂow 34/575

34/573

34/574

34/575

34.6 Speciﬁcation
34.7 Water quality and treatment 34/576
34.8 Operation
34.9 Modiﬁcations – retroﬁts 34/577
34.10 Consultation
34.11 Environmental considerations

34/577

34/577

34/579

34/582

34.12.1 Installation
34.13 Summary 34/583
Appendix 34.1 Theoretical calculations
34/584
Appendix 34.2 Evaluation of the MDF 34/585
Appendix 34.3 Technical requirements 34/586

34.11.1 Esthetic
34.11.2 Noise

34/580
34.12 Problem areas 34/582

34/579

34.1 Background
The use of water as a cooling medium has been long
established, but its importance, in an industrial sense,
was emphasized with the introduction of steam power.
Cooling ponds are still widely used and spray ponds,
which incorporate a degree or so of evaporative cooling,
can be found, but the increasing requirement for control
on water-cooling temperatures heralded the development
of the modern cooling tower. The cost of land and the
increasing expense of abstracting and of returning water,
as well as its availability, ensured that the engineering and
design techniques employed were sufﬁcient to satisfy the
economic factors imposed by these constraints.

The state of the art in cooling tower design is being con-
stantly improved. Correctly designed, installed and main-
tained, today’s cooling tower still remains the optimum
selection in the great majority of cases where heat dissi-
pation is required.

Historically, the ﬁrst pack designs were random tim-
ber, to be followed rapidly by ordered timber splash bars.
The concept of ﬁlming water, as opposed to splash or
concrete, originated in England in the 1930s. The intro-
duction of plastic packing dates from the 1950s, but this
was conﬁned to mechanical-draft towers until the 1970s,
when experiments started with plastic packs in natural-
draft cooling towers. Asbestos cement in ﬂat sheets, cor-
rugated sheets and ﬂat bars, although widely used in the
past, are now out of favor on health grounds in most
developed countries. Plastic-impregnated paper is used in
certain eastern countries in air-conditioning towers, but
has been unsuccessful in the West. In most cases the
changes have been due to economics, but water quality
and type of process can signiﬁcantly affect the selection
in individual cases.

34.2 Theory
Water-cooling in towers operates on the evaporative prin-
ciples, which are a combination of several heat/mass trans-
fer processes. The most important of these is the transfer
of liquid into a vapor/air mixture, as, for example, the
surface area of a droplet of water. Convective transfer
occurs as a result of the difference in temperature between
the water and the surrounding air. Both these processes
take place at the interface of the water surface and the
air. Thus it is considered to behave as a ﬁlm of satu-
rated air at the same temperature as the bulk of the water
droplet.

Finally, there is the transfer of sensible heat from the
bulk of the water to the surface area. This is so slight
in terms of resistance that it is normally neglected. Radi-
ant heat transfer is also ignored for all practical design
purposes.

Thus the two main processes are evaporation of water
and convective cooling. The ﬁrst is based on the differ-
ence in partial vapor pressure and the second upon the
temperature difference.

Merkel’s analysis in 1924/5 demonstrated that for pure
counterﬂow it
is possible to combine these processes
into a single term by using the enthalpy difference as a

Design techniques 34/573

driving force. Experience over many years supports this,
and cooling tower design in counterﬂow is universally
represented by temperature–enthalpy diagrams.

For crossﬂow designs the additional factor of the hor-
izontal depth of packing has to be included in the basic
calculations. The accuracy of the design is directly related
to the number of calculations in the selection program.
Whereas counterﬂow can be dealt with as a single entity,
crossﬂow has to cope with the changes that occur at every
level of pack, both vertically and horizontally.

34.3 Design techniques (see
Appendix 34.1)
The performance of any cooling tower can be assessed
against the following:

KaV

L

D C(cid:1)
(cid:2)n

L
G

where KaV/L is normally given as the performance index
or is quoted as KaV/L demand. L/G D water/dry air mass
ratio and, taking n as average value 0.6, the constant
C is proportional to the height of packing. This would
cover most design requirements. Excessive temperatures
and extremely high air rates will require further factors
which are not necessary in the great majority of cases.

The Cooling Tower Institute (CTI) publishes sets of
graphs that give demand in terms of three design tempera-
tures and L/G. The CTI graph ﬁrst published in 1967 gives
KaV/L demand plotted against L/G with the approach tem-
perature as a parameter. Each curve applies to a speciﬁed
combination of wet bulb temperature and cooling range.
Each cooling tower pack has its own KaV/L and respon-
sible suppliers will supply performance graphs similar to
those of the CTI.

Having selected a type and height of pack, the above
equation can be plotted to intersect with the required
demand curve to obtain the L/G. With the L/G and the
given amount of water to be cooled, the air requirement
can be calculated for:
Air D Design water ﬂow

L
G

The following steps should then be:

1. Correct calculated air volume to conditions at the fan.
2. Select the air rate and calculate the plan area of the

tower.

3. Select a fan and calculate the power requirements from
the known air volume and the pressure drop character-
istics of the selected pack.

4. Assess the cost factors applicable, in terms of fan,
pump cost, price of land, maintenance and treatment
costs.

5. Optimize all known factors in terms of efﬁciency and

then economy.

34/574 Cooling Towers

34.4 Design requirements
The factors which should be applied at the design stage
cover the water ﬂow rate, the design wet bulb ﬁgure, the
required return temperature at the design point, the cost of
power and land, and the water analysis. Water ﬂow is nor-
mally determined by the equipment that the cooling tower
is serving (for example, heat exchangers). Process design-
ers historically leave the cooling tower until last (it is, after
all, the ﬁnal heat sink). When water costs were negligible,
this was acceptable, but with the increase in costs and, in
certain cases, the restrictions on availability of water, this
approach has had to be modiﬁed. Greater consideration
must be given to the overall system. Experience in the last
ten years has shown that economic optimization can lead to
a more efﬁcient cooling tower, with a corresponding drop
in the cost of heat exchanger. This is particularly true in
power generation and industrial processes.

Design wet bulbs can be determined from published
meteorological data for the area concerned. The difﬁculty
is deciding how to relate the annual coverage to the tower
performance at any given time.

For some years it was common practice to quote three
different ﬁgures, based on the tower’s performance as a
percentage of the year. For example, in air conditioning
it could be shown that the tower would achieve its design
for 95 per cent of the year. Alternatively, a tower costing
15 per cent less could obtain its design parameter for
85–90 per cent of the year. Only the operator would know
whether the 85–90 per cent or less was acceptable, while
the economists would welcome the saving of ﬁnancial
capital.

The frequent

failures to achieve even the quoted
reduced percentage ﬁgures led to a reappraisal, and
current design is more accurate. In some respects this is
also due to the improvement in pack designs, particularly
in the European and American markets. However, it must
be said again that in optimizing cooling tower selection
the designer must be advised of all appropriate factors.
Discussions with cooling tower designers at the outset
can save time and money in the future.

Water quality is important, not only from an environ-
mental point of view but also in relation to the type
of packing to be speciﬁed. Analysis of the circulating
water is simple to obtain, but it is very seldom offered
to the cooling tower designer. The quality, or lack of it,
will determine the type of pack to be used, the selection
of structural materials and whether the tower should be
induced or forced draft, counterﬂow or crossﬂow. Water
treatment, in the shape of chemicals to control pH and to
act as counter-corrosion agents or as biocides, all has a
bearing on tower selection.

The ‘Legionella syndrome’ has resulted in health
authorities
in the US and UK applying statutory
regulations, which are directly reﬂected in terms of capital
cost and tower material selection. To safeguard against
this, responsible designers have already produced cooling
tower designs which not only meet the regulations but
also anticipate future, more stringent, legislation.

The following list of information factors should be made
available to any supplier so that discussions on the technical

requirements can be carried out prior to optimization (see
Appendices 34.1 and 34.2).

34.5 Materials and structure design
The great majority of towers available fall into one of
two categories: counterﬂow or crossﬂow (co-current ﬂow
is available but is seldom used) (see Figure 34.1).

34.5.1 Counterﬂow

Counterﬂow designs are used throughout the entire design
ﬁeld, i.e.:

Natural draft – hyperbolic concrete shells
Mechanical draft – induced draft
Forced draft

Figure 34.1 Counter- and crossﬂow modes

Speciﬁcation 34/575

Mechanical draft – induced, single and double sided and
circular
Forced draft
Advanced fan-assisted natural draft.

Axial or centrifugal fans can be applied in most cases and
are signiﬁcant factors in the ﬁnal selection and optimiza-
tion (Figures 34.2 and 34.3).

Hybrid towers, combining wet and dry cooling, are
designs to meet speciﬁc problems and require expertise
from specialist suppliers. Structural materials include con-
crete, timber, various forms of metal (including galva-
nized and alloys), GRP, PVC and combinations of those
along with asbestos cement, asbestos cement replacement
(ACR) and, again, variations and combinations of other
materials. Packing materials have an almost similar pat-
tern but must include compressed paper and compressed
asbestos cement paper, but the great majority of towers
currently employ plastic, in some form or another, unless
the water conditions are such that timber (or even con-
crete) must be used as alternatives.

34.6 Speciﬁcation
The purchase of the cooling tower is, in most cases, a
once in a decade operation. Where towers are bought on
a regular basis, speciﬁcations are determined either by
the user or by the consultant, incorporating their experi-
ence of operation and any changes required as a result of
production/process alterations.

In air conditioning circles, the tower normally repre-
sents the ﬁnal heat sink in a turnkey package which would
include compressors/condensers, pipework, ducting, fans,
pumps, control gear, etc. Where consultants and experi-
enced contractors are concerned, the tower speciﬁcation
is well deﬁned and the purchases based upon economics
related to efﬁciency.

Where a tower is to be purchased for a one-off situation,
it is worth considering the various factors which can affect
the ﬁnal choice:

Figure 34.2 Basic cross ﬂow units

Figure 34.3 Improved design of crossﬂow unit (note easy-removal
panel)

34.5.2 Crossﬂow

Crossﬂow designs are also used throughout the entire
ﬁeld, i.e.:

Natural draft – hyperbolic concrete shells

34/576 Cooling Towers

Figure 34.4 Architect-designed tower (note water pattern in basin). Chemicals in carry-over affect the ofﬁce windows

Location (both geographically and in elevation)
Restrictions (i.e. planning, structural, physical and envi-
ronmental)
Design wet bulb
Design dry bulb
Water ﬂow rate
Water quality
Water treatment to be used/cycles of concentration?
Process
Constant or cyclic heat load
Criticality of return temperature
Noise restrictions
Additional local environmental factors
Water discharge regulations (quantity and quality)

For the periodic or once-off buyer it is essential to obtain
advice from a reputable supplier or a consultant with expe-
rience of cooling towers usage (Figure 34.4).

As an example, the reputable cooling tower designer
would establish most of the above parameters from his
own experience. In addition, he could determine with
his client the economic factors which could inﬂuence his
selection, i.e. low capital cost with high running costs, or
a higher capital cost with more acceptable power costs
(a 12-month or a 5-year payback period). Turnkey con-
tractors often understandably ignore this particular factor,
and end users should always obtain alternative designs to
make their own selection.

The costs of water, energy and land are all contributing
factors in economic assessment. The emphasis placed on
each differs from the varying viewpoints, but it is the end
user that has to ’foot the bill’. It is therefore in his interests

to acquire some knowledge of the cooling towers being
offered.

34.7 Water quality and treatment
As, in most cases, the circulating water in any system
incorporating a cooling tower is recycled (the loss being
made up as a percentage of total ﬂow), the subsequent
concentration will affect the water condition. This, in turn,
determines the type of treatment required to maintain pH
and to control any potential biological growth. Acidic or
alkaline waters pose their own problems in terms of corro-
sion and material attack. The larger users probably employ
their own chemical specialists, while others rely on con-
sultants to determine the type of treatment the system
requires. However, the majority of tower users have very
little knowledge of the chemistry involved and depend on
water-treatment organizations.

The following deﬁnitions are useful for reference to
familiarize the end user with the terminology currently
employed:

pH The acidity or alkalinity of the water expressed as
a scale of 0 (acid) to 14 (alkaline). pH 7 is regarded as
neutral.
TDS Total dissolved solids, expressed as ppm (parts
per million) or as mg/l (milligrams per liter). Evaporate
the water from a sample and the residue can be weighed.
TSS Total suspended solids: expressed in similar terms
to TDS but representing a concentration of insoluble
particles.
Conductivity Used as a measure of mineral impurities.

LSI Langelier Saturation Index: indicates the corrosive
(negative) or scale-forming (positive) characteristics.
Hardness Expressed as CaCO3, this is the total cal-
cium and magnesium salts in the water. Hardness ﬁgures
given as ppm or mg/l are important, as the compounds
of these two elements are responsible for most scale
deposition.
Alkalinity Expressed as CaCO3, this is the total con-
centration of alkaline salts (i.e. bicarbonate, carbonate
and hydroxide).
BOD Biological oxygen demand: expressed as ppm or
mg/l, it is used as a measure of pollution.
COD Chemical oxygen demand: as above, but related
to chemical impurities.
Oxygen sag The level of oxygen in a polluted water
system. Normally shown in graph form.
Fouling factor This is generally applied to plastic
packs in natural-draft towers but can relate to larger
mechanical draft and to the biological fouling that can
occur. It also reﬂects on the thermal performance of
the packing (CEGB published fouling factors for certain
high-density packs where the supply of water was prone
to seasonal biological growth and silt deposition, along
with calcium hardness deposition).

While other terms are, of course, employed, the above can
be useful for most end users.

34.8 Operation
Having selected and purchased a cooling tower, it needs
regular maintenance, as does any other part of the plant.
This is true of every cooling tower, from the largest
natural-draft tower to the smallest packaged unit.

Maintenance logs should be kept. In air-conditioning
installations, with the experience of Legionella, it is now
mandatory to keep such a log, as well as a record of
hygiene testing to determine the non-existence of bacteria.
Chlorine dosing, as recommended by certain local author-
ities, is essential. Tower materials have to be assessed
in regard to chlorine residuals, which can be damaging
to galvanized metals and timber. Mechanical equipment
requires regular checks, apart from the common sense
ordinary maintenance (it is surprising how often this is
ignored).

The fault-ﬁnding chart (Figure 34.5) was originally pro-
duced by the Cooling Water Association (which subse-
quently became the Industrial Water Society), and it is
practical and simple to follow. Water treatment checks
(apart from the Legionella requirements referred to ear-
lier) must be carried out and water samples should be
analyzed on a regular basis. How frequently this takes
place depends on the criticality of the tower for the end
user. Cooling towers are water-conservation tools as well
as heat dissipaters: with water costs increasing, continuous
tower performance is essential. In any case, a downtime
caused by lack of maintenance is costly and careless.

Remember that outside inﬂuence (for example, new
building work in the vicinity of the installation) can
increase air-based pollution, such as cement dust entering
the tower at air inlet levels or via the forced-draft fan.

Consultation 34/577

Extra cleaning of the tower pack and distribution system
should be undertaken under these circumstances and close
checks kept on the efﬁciency of the overall system.

Changes of process or modiﬁcation to the product
can introduce new design parameters, which can affect
the tower. Overloading the tower in both a thermal
and hydraulic sense may be acceptable, as a temporary
measure, but
is the critical word. Too
long exposure to an increased temperature can affect
plastic packing, unless they have been designed to
withstand such an increase. (Remember to discuss future
predicted problems with the cooling tower designer before
installation.)

‘temporary’

Excessive water loads can lead to malfunction of the
distribution system. Higher loading in one area can lead
to pack collapse and rapid fall-off in performance.

In the majority of cases common sense, combined with
basic engineering principles, should be sufﬁcient to ensure
good service from the tower on a continuous basis. The
reputable supplier will always be ready to help and advise.
If the advice is sought in time, many of the problems
associated with the changes mentioned need never arise.

34.9 Modiﬁcations and retroﬁts
Changes in circumstances will frequently require mod-
iﬁcations to an existing cooling tower. Additional heat
loads may be needed, and changes in the end process
may cause the return temperature to increase, necessitat-
ing a new thermal load on the tower. Most frequently it
is a requirement for an increase in hydraulics.

34.10 Consultation
All too often, the supplier is not consulted at the planning
stage, with the inevitable result of a tower failure, not only
in performance but also in pack collapse, structural fail-
ures and total shutdown. The original tower was supplied
against a design water and thermal load, and changes to
those parameters will affect the performance. It is possi-
ble to change existing towers. Not only is it possible, it
is well-established practice. The successful amendments
are those where the tower designer has been advised (in
advance) of the proposed changes. He knows the limita-
tions of his product and can advise on what can or cannot
be done.

There is one area where improvements can be achieved,
namely the increase in thermal performance by changing
to a more advanced design of packing. Care has to be
taken to ensure that the new pack conﬁguration is com-
patible with the quality of water as well as its quantity.
The water treatment conditions could change, and almost
certainly the distribution system will need amendments.
The beneﬁts to be obtained can be listed as follows:

1. Improvement in thermal load.
2. Possible reduction in pumping head (e.g. the change
from a splash pack to a high-density ﬁlm-type pack
can save power by installing the new pack at the bot-
tom of the former splash area and lowering the pump
inlet). If the correct design is used it may be possible to

34/578 Cooling Towers

i

t
r
a
h
c
g
n
d
n
ﬁ
-
t
l
u
a
F

.

5
4
3

e
r
u
g
F

i

Environmental considerations 34/579

leave existing fans, thus incurring no additional power
penalty. Even if fan changes are required, the eco-
nomics have to be studied, but in most cases such
changes will be beneﬁcial.

Changes to a distribution system can be of assistance
in minor improvements. Nozzle designs are under con-
stant review but it is in the context of pack changes that
amendments are important.

34.11 Environmental considerations
The principal areas where cooling design is affected by
environmental requirements are visual and audible (i.e.
aesthetic (plume) and noise).

34.11.1 Esthetic

impact

Planning regulations can be rigid in their attitude to
the visual
that a cooling tower may have on
the surrounding area. This is not, however, conﬁned
to air-conditioning installations. Certain industrial areas,
within the UK and elsewhere, limit the number of towers,
their height and conﬁguration in relation to the existing
background situation. While this is understandable in
environmental amenity terms, it leads to major design
difﬁculties on the part of the supplier.

A consultation with all interested parties is essential
at the planning stage. Solutions can normally be found,
but the cooling tower designer must be included in these
discussions. Towers can always be designed to meet
the planning regulators and the demands of architects.
Low towers, tall narrow towers, circular towers, multi-
faceted towers,
into the buildings, even
towers installed under ground, are all practical examples
of modern installations (Figures 34.6–34.8). Obviously,
the design characteristics have to be reassessed. Hence the
emphasis on cooling tower designers’ involvement from
the outset.

towers built

As cooling towers operate on the evaporative princi-
ple, at certain temperature conditions the discharged heat
vapor will appear as a plume. The amount of the pluming
can be accurately assessed against the temperature condi-
tions (both inside and outside the tower), the volume of
air and the velocity of the discharge. The extent to which
this can be classiﬁed as a ‘nuisance’ depends entirely on
the location of the tower and its proximity to sensitive
areas (i.e. housing, ofﬁce blocks, etc.). One variation is
the natural-draft tower, where geographical location may
cause the plume to affect ambient conditions downwind,
such as moisture deposition on roads (Figure 34.9) or, in
one instance in Switzerland, where the plume from a large
natural-draft tower located in a narrow valley restricted
sunlight on the farming area downwind. (The predicted 7
per cent restriction was accurate.) The drift can normally
be conﬁned within more than acceptable limits by the use
of efﬁcient drift eliminators.

The height of the discharge is important, and in air-
conditioning projects, it can be critical in relation to sur-
rounding buildings. Consideration has to be given to the
volume of discharge, the possibility of entrainment of

Figure 34.6 Cooling plant, including towers, installed as a sepa-
rate unit on a supermarket satisﬁes the architect, town planners
and the end-user

water-treatment chemicals in the drift (these can cause
‘etching’ on glass windows), the siting of the tower in
relation to the fresh air inlets to the building and the visual
impact, in architectural and esthetic terms.

Eliminator design can vary from the non-existent to
an efﬁciency which can limit drift to 0.00005 per cent of
ﬂow. In other words, drift can be almost undetectable, but
the difference is obviously in the economics involved.

Pressure groups in the environmentally aware political
parties can make excessive demands. Often good public
relations meetings can meet these, but the more reputable
cooling tower suppliers can be invaluable in dealing with
such matters.

Plume abatement is possible, even to the point of ‘invis-
ible plumes’. While this is not a problem in hot countries,
the temperate zones (for example, Europe and the USA),
will always have seasons when the plume is normally
visible. To change this situation to a non-plume effect
is again possible but it is expensive. As an example,
one installation in the center of a North American city,
where non-pluming throughout the year was a mandatory
clause in the planning permission, resulted in the tower
cost being increased by a factor of 3! (A not-insigniﬁcant
amount in the overall cost of the project.) Plume control
can be achieved at the expense of larger installations and
possible changes in the temperature levels, all of which
require prior consultation with the designer.

The other source of possible drift or precipitation from
cooling towers is caused by windage or blowout from

34/580 Cooling Towers

Figure 34.7 Design requested by architect – low plume, no splash
(note catchment tray), clear of ofﬁce block

Figure 34.8 Cranes can be eliminated!

the air inlets, noticeably under strong or gusty conditions.
This can occur in both mechanical- and natural-draft cool-
ing towers, but the effect is normally localized to the
immediate tower area. In the natural-draft cooling tower
the extent of the problem varies according to the design
of the packing.

In the case of pure counterﬂow packing, where the
entire packing is positioned above the air inlet, the large

Figure 34.9 Congested site. Restrictions on air inlet, increased
pressure and air velocity results in drift deposition on road

air inlet opening can give rise to discharge of water by
air entering the air inlet on the windward side, then being
sucked out
in the vortex depression, which generally
occurs at approximately 90° to the wind direction. The
resulting spray is carried as a fairly narrow band for
a distance of perhaps 20 to 30 meters downwind of
the tower. In mixed-ﬂow packing, where the cooling
tower packing extends down into the air inlet, there is
considerable resistance to the free passage of air through
the air inlet. Therefore the depressed area of the vortex
is reduced and the resulting spray tendency is likely to
be restricted to a ﬁne spray, literally being blown off
the peripheral pack laths. Various techniques have been
adopted to minimize this effect, such as external radial
bafﬂes, internal bafﬂes and louvers. All of these will,
of course, incur additional cost and some of them may
also increase the pressure drop through the air inlet and
thus affect the thermal performance. Additionally, they
can increase the overall dimensions of the installation.

Mechanical-draft cooling towers are normally supplied
with either central bafﬂes or inlet louvers. This depends on
the tower dimensions. On these towers the wind or spray
blowout is generally conﬁned to relatively small single-
cell units where an inlet may be provided on all four
faces. In this case the major remedy is to provide internal
diagonal bafﬂes to prevent crossﬂow of air through the
air inlets.

On larger multi-celled mechanical-draft towers of both
counterﬂow and crossﬂow variety, the air inlets are con-
ﬁned to the two opposing faces and windage or drift loss is
unlikely to occur, except under exceptionally high wind
conditions. Here again, remedial work, depending upon
the location, can be applied but at additional cost (see
Figure 34.10).

34.11.2 Noise

Perhaps the most common environmental requirement in
modern cooling tower installations is that of noise. The
fan equipment and the falling water generate cooling
tower noise. In large mechanical- or natural-draft cooling

Environmental considerations 34/581

Figure 34.10 Conﬁgurations of cooling tower airﬂows

towers, the water noise could exceed the noise generated
by the fan equipment (particularly if steps have been
taken to reduce fan noise to a minimum). In the case of
smaller cooling towers the prediction of noise intensity
at a distance in excess of between 30 and 50 meters
can be taken as a hemispherical radiation from a point
source, i.e. a reduction in the level of 6 dB for every
doubling of the distance. However, with the large multi-
cell mechanical- and natural-draft cooling towers the noise
is radiating from a considerably larger area, and therefore
the sound pressure level falls by only 3 dB for every
2 d D pond
doubling of the distance up to 1
diameter of the hyperbolic shell in a natural-draft tower
or the tower length for the multi-cell mechanical-draft
type). For distances greater than 1
2 d the sound pressure
will then fall by 6 dB for every further doubling of the
distance.

2 d (where 1

Fan noise is likely to be more obtrusive than the so-called
‘white sound’ emitted by falling water due to the pres-
ence of discrete frequencies arising from blade-passing
frequency, tooth frequency on the gearboxes bearing and
rumble from the gearboxes and motors and other electrical
noises. It can, of course, be minimized by correct choice of
fan. In general, the use of broad-cord multi-bladed fans
enables the fan to be operated at a minimum possible
speed compatible with the duty performance. Reduction
of bearing noise in gearboxes can be eliminated, as far
as possible, by careful design in the mounting system and
motor noise can always be shielded by acoustic enclosures.
For extremely quiet operation on mechanical-draft towers
recourse may have to be made to the use of silencers or
attenuators on the air inlets to the cooling tower to minimize
the water noise, radiation and mechanical noise break-out,
with further acoustic attenuators on the fan discharge.

34/582 Cooling Towers

Any acoustic treatment on the fan discharge is required
to operate under potentially corrosive conditions, with
warm moist air passing through the attenuators. Precau-
tions are needed to ensure that these are adequately treated
to prevent risk of condensation and that the structural
media are also protected against water pick-up and poten-
tial damage.

In the case of natural-draft towers the total noise source
is very considerable and has to be assessed as a large-
area source relating from the whole diameter, through
the entire height of the air inlet. Falling water noise in
that situation can be as high as 85 dB. The noise level at
70 m reduces to 66 dB and at 480 m it is approximately
46–47 dBA. On the largest natural-draft towers the ﬁgures
increase. For example, at the pond level and at the side
of the tower they can be in excess of 91 dBA and can
actually reach 55 dB at 500 meters.

Sound is deﬁned as any pressure variation that the
human ear can detect. This variation can occur in air,
water and other media. To determine noise, it is neces-
sary to assess the frequency of the variation that, in turn,
can be related to the speed. For most applications, the
speed of sound is expressed at 340 meters per second

(m/s). Speed and frequency give the wavelength, i.e. the
physical distance in air from one wave to the next. For
example, at 20 Hz this gives 17 m while at 20 kHz one
wavelength is 1.7 cm.

For convenience, the usual measurement of sound is
expressed in decibels (dB), and ratings go from ‘threshold
of hearing’ to ‘threshold of pain’ (135 dB). Figure 34.11
illustrates the common noise criteria, which can be
expressed in sound-pressure levels (SPL). The human ear
can detect 1 dB but 6 dB represents a doubling of the SPL,
although it would need a 10 dB increase to make it ‘sound’
twice as loud.

In assessing the noise emanating from a cooling tower it
is necessary to measure the main points of emission – the
fan, the motor, the gearbox and the falling water. As noise
bounces and can be absorbed by certain materials, it is
usual, where noise restrictions apply, to map the area and
calculate the SPL at a large number of points, taking into
consideration interference, bounce and absorption. The
number of points measured is reﬂected in the accuracy
of the resultant topography.

Remember also to take background noise into your cal-
culation. Too frequently, speciﬁcations are made which
ignore this, with the result that equipment is applied to a
more rigid design than is absolutely necessary.

The siting, as well as the selection of type of tower, can
be critical. Rotating the tower, shielding the motor, use
of bafﬂes can all help in meeting environmental noise
requirements. If in doubt, consult your cooling tower
designer.

34.12 Problem areas
34.12.1 Installation

Cooling towers have been called the Cinderella of the
plant scene – usually unnoticed (if not even unseen),
forgotten and sadly ignored. While cooling tower
designers may have other ideas, they generally recognize
this as being true in many cases. Designers therefore try to
achieve the impossible, i.e. to build a piece of mechanical
equipment that can be left alone and perform its function
without fuss and attention.

While designers can claim some degree of success,
there are many occasions when their products are
improper installation.

Don’ts

the user’s beneﬁt. Ensure that

Mix products – placing a forced-draft tower beside an
induced-draft one causes problems for both designs
(Figure 34.12).
Place access panels incorrectly – the access panel
for
Figure 34.13).
Starve the air inlets – insufﬁcient air results in poor per-
formance (Figure 34.14).
Ignore the bleed – inadequate bleed means concentration
of salts, change of pH and pack fouling.
Forget about make-up – water starvation means poor
performance, vortexing, pump and motor failure.

is
is accessible

it

Figure 34.11 Threshold ratings for sound

Summary 34/583

Figure 34.14 An attempt to conceal tower and reduce noise, result-
ing in starvation of air and failure in performance

Fail to check on water treatment – inadequate treatment
and haphazard slug dosing can lead to poor performance,
damage to associated equipment and failure to meet dis-
charge requirements.
Forget to install safety cutouts, for overload and ambient
changes – ice damage can be disastrous (Figure 34.15).
Allow corrosion to develop – metal failure can be costly
and, at times, dangerous (Figure 34.16).

Do’s

Ensure maintenance checks are carried out.
Check on power consumption, water usage, water costs.
Carry out monthly inspection – inside and out, where
possible.
Check water analysis;
the frequency depends on
individual cases but it should be no less than quarterly.
Check mechanical equipment (i.e. fans, motors, drives).
(Remember to check belt tensions where applicable.)
Check for vibration, both mechanically and structurally.
Ensure that access panels are used and replaced
correctly.
Make certain that repairs, when necessary, are carried
out efﬁciently and quickly.
If it in doubt, call the cooling tower designer.

34.13 Summary
While the majority of cooling tower installations work
efﬁciently, the normal requirements of maintenance and
good efﬁciency practice have still to be applied. This
may not always be the case. Time for maintenance is
limited, and plant engineers have other pressing problems
or, as is well known, forget about the towers! With the
increasing economic and environmental pressures on the
use of water, this situation must change.

It may be appropriate to quote the old engineering term
of ‘KISS’ (Keep It Simple, Stupid!) and, recognizing that
the cooling tower designer does his utmost to comply, it
is the responsibility of the operator to ‘co-operate’!

Figure 34.12 Mixing forced draft with induced. The overloaded
forced-draft tower with excess plume results in elevated wet bulb
at air inlets on new tower. Removing the forced draft and adding
one more cell to the induced draft resolved the problem

Figure 34.13 Cyclic heat load using small tower and large water
storage. This is a good idea and sound engineering, but the access
panel is on the wrong side (30 ft drop to ground level)

34/584 Cooling Towers

Figure 34.15 Ice on natural-draft tower (no de-icing ring ﬁtted)

Figure 34.17 Demand curve

Regular checks and an efﬁcient

logging system
will ensure that
the cooling tower, correctly planned,
efﬁciently installed and adequately maintained, will give
valuable service for many years. The economic returns
justify a little more thought and attention than has been
given to the subject in the past.

Appendix 34.1 Theoretical calculations
LdT D KadV(cid:11)hL (cid:2) hG(cid:13)
where
K D the coefﬁcient of heat transfer for the packing in
a D the effective transfer surface area per unit pack
V D depth of packing,
hL D enthalpy of boundary air layer in contact with and

question,

volume,

at the same temperature as the water, and
hG D enthalpy of bulk air passing through the
packing.

the full depth of packing,

Integrating this for
expression becomes:
L ð T D KaV ð hm
where hm is the mean enthalpy difference, other-
wise known as the mean driving force (MDF)
(see
Appendix 34.2).

the

This can be rearranged as:

KaV

L

D T
MDF

which is the form in which it usually appears. KaV/L is
commonly called the tower characteristic.

Now let us refer to the right-hand side of the above
expression. The mean driving force varies with the
speciﬁed design temperatures and also the ratio of
water/air loading (L/G). If we take a low airﬂow, the air
soon rises in temperature and tends to reach equilibrium
conditions with the boundary layer. Thus the driving force
is reduced. On the other hand, excess air is unnecessary.
Therefore, one must adjust the airﬂow that supply just
meets demand. A plot of L/G versus T/MDF is shown
in Figure 34.17. This is known as a demand curve.

Figure 34.16 The effects of corrosion. Structural failure is visible
(holes in fan casing)

The left-hand side of the above expression is a measure
of the quality and quantity of the packing being used, and
has been shown empirically to obey the law (cid:11)KaV/L(cid:13) D
c(cid:11)L/G(cid:13)(cid:2)n for counterﬂow applications only.

Cooling in the crossﬂow mode requires an incremental
‘trial and error’
technique, best suited to computer
analysis. The tower characteristic KaV/L can then be
plotted against varying L/G ratios, and this gives a
measure of the ability of the packing to effect the transfer
(Figure 34.18).

We have already equated KaV/L with T/MDF,
therefore we can superimpose the ‘supply’ curve over the
‘demand’, the intersect being the optimum L/G ratio for
the packing being considered for the duty (Figure 34.19).
It is interesting now to examine the effect of using
greater or lesser depths of packing, and to consider their
suitability for duties of different degrees of difﬁculty. In
Figure 34.20 we can see the effect of using three different
pack depths on a moderately easy duty. By changing from
pack depth (1) to pack depth (2) we are able to use a
much higher L/G ratio (which, in turn, means less air
and/or a smaller tower). The increment from depth (2)
to depth (3) gives a less signiﬁcant increase in L/G, and
therefore suggests that the optimum depth has perhaps
been exceeded.

Figure 34.18

Evaluation of the MDF 34/585

Figure 34.20

Now let us examine the same pack depths but applied
to a more difﬁcult duty (Figure 34.21). The increase in
L/G is almost constant from (1) to (2) and from (2) to
(3), showing that the optimum depth has not been passed,
and may not yet have been reached.

Thus, there is an optimum depth of packing for each
individual duty and, in practice, it is usually found that
an intersection near the knuckle on the demand curve
produces the most economic selection.

Appendix 34.2 Evaluation of the MDF
Several methods for the evaluation of the MDF have
been put forward, notably that processed by Tchebycheff,
which gives a high degree of accuracy in the case of large
cooling ranges. In the form in which it is most commonly
used, it reads:
MDF D 4/(cid:11)1/h1 C 1/h2 C 1/h3 C 1/h4(cid:13)

Where
h1 D value of hL (cid:2) hG at T2 C 0.1T,
h2 D value of hL C hG at T2 C 0.4T
h3 D value of hL C hG at T1 C 0.4T
h4 D value of hL C hG at T1 C 0.1T

Figure 34.19

Figure 34.21

34/586 Cooling Towers

Figure 34.22

Graphically, this can be represented as in Figure 34.22.
The expression for determining KaV/L is
(cid:11)I/4(cid:13)(cid:11)1/h1 C 1/h2 C 1/h3 C 1/h4(cid:13).

Appendix 34.3 Technical requirements

Location
Meteorological data
Wind rose

Water ﬂow rate
Temperature to tower (T1)
Temperature from tower (T2)
Cooling range
Approach
Design wet bulb
Design dry bulb
Water analysis – circulating

– make-up

Cycles of concentration
Blowdown/purge rate
Power cost analysis
Drift loss requirement
Local authority requirements
Discharge qualities
Structural speciﬁcations
Pack speciﬁcations
Mechanical speciﬁcations (if applicable)
Noise speciﬁcation
Impedance by adjoining structures (if applicable)

Acknowledgements

The author wishes to thank the following for
their
considerable input: Mr Richard Clark and Mr Anthony
Kunesch (FCT Ltd), The Cooling Water Association (now
The Industrial Water Society), Mr John Hill (Director of
BEWA) and the many understanding people who gave
permission for publication of the photographs.

35

35/587

Compressed Air
Systems

British Compressed Air Society

Contents

35.1 Assessment of a plant’s air consumption

35/589

35.1.1 Operating pressure
35/589
35.1.2 Maximum and average load
35.1.3 Use factor
35.1.4 Future expansion
35/592
35.1.5 Allowance for air leakage
35/592

35/589

35.2 Compressor installation

35/589

35/592

35.2.1 Type of installation
35.2.2 Compressor siting
35.2.3 Compressor intake
35.2.4 Compressor discharge
35/595
35.2.5 Cooling-water system 35/595
35.2.6 Ventilation

35/592
35/592
35/594

35/596

35.3 Overpressure protection
35.4 Selection of compressor plant

35/596

35/596

35.4.1 Air compressors
35.4.2 Capacity and pressure limitations
35.4.3 Output control
35.4.4 Selection of compressor prime movers

35/596

35/598

35/597

35/599

35.1 Assessment of a plant’s air
consumption
The main consideration in the selection of a compressor
plant is the production of an adequate supply of com-
pressed air at the lowest cost consistent with reliable ser-
vice. The installation of a compressed air system, as with
all forms of power transmission, calls for capital invest-
ment with consequent operating and maintenance costs.
The information on which the selection of plant is based
should be as accurate as possible. Important factors to be
considered are the following.

35.1.1 Operating pressure

Most compressed air equipment operates at about 6 bar
(gauge) and it is usual for the compressor to deliver air
into the mains at 7 bar (gauge) in order to allow for trans-
mission losses (see Tables 35.1–35.4). If some of the
air is to be used at a lower pressure (for example, for
instrument control) the pressure is reduced by means of a
pressure regulator to the required line pressure.

All equipment connected to the system shall either have
a design pressure greater than the maximum output pres-
sure of the compressor or special precautions shall be
taken to ensure that, if its design pressure is lower than
the output pressure of the compressor, it cannot be sub-
ject to excessive pressure (see Section 35.3.1). If there is
a requirement for a large volume of air at a higher or
lower pressure, it may be more economical to install a
separate compressor to deal solely with that.

35.1.2 Maximum and average load

Ideally, the total capacity would be based on exact knowl-
edge of the equipment or process requirements. If this is
underestimated, the compressor plant will be too small,
and will be unable to maintain the required pressure in the

Assessment of a plant’s air consumption 35/589

Table 35.1 Maximum recommended ﬂow through main linesa

Nominal bore

(mm)

Actual bore

(mm)

6
8
10
15
20
25
32
40
50
65
80
100
125
150

6
9
12
16
22
27
36
42
53
69
81
100
130
155

Rate of air ﬂow

at 7 bar

(l/s)

1
3
5
10
17
25
50
65
100
180
240
410
610
900

Velocity of airﬂow must be restricted to less than 6 m/s as shown
if carry over of moisture past drain legs is to be avoided.
aMedium-weight steel tube to BS 1387, table 2, or ISO 65.

system. Conversely, if the total air consumption is greatly
overestimated, there may be excessive capital investment.
Furthermore, any arrangement which results in signiﬁcant
off-load running wastes energy. However, it is safer to
err on the high side with slight over-estimates, as in most
installations the use of compressed air will increase and
soon take up any surplus capacity.

35.1.3 Use factor

Before deciding the capacity of the compressor required
it is necessary to calculate the air consumption expected.
It is recommended that reference is made to Table 35.5
and Figure 35.1, which show typical ’use factors’ for var-
ious types of pneumatic equipment. In some cases, where

Table 35.2 Maximum recommended ﬂow through branch lines of steel pipea

Applied gauge
pressure barb

Nominal standard pipe size (nominal bore) (mm)

6

0.3
0.4
0.5
0.8
1.1
1.7
2.5
3.1
3.9
4.8
6.1
7.6

8

0.6
0.9
1.2
1.7
2.5
3.7
5.7
7.1
8.8
10.9
13.8
17.1

10

1.4
1.9
2.8
3.8
5.5
8.3
12.6
15.8
19.5
24.1
30.6
38.0

15

2.6
3.5
4.9
7.1
10.2
15.4
23.4
29.3
36.2
44.8
56.8
70.6

20

4
5
7
11
15
23
35
44
54
67
85
105

25

7
10
14
20
28
44
65
83
102
127
160
199

32

15
20
28
40
57
89
133
168
208
258
327
406

40

25
30
45
60
85
135
200
255
315
390
495
615

50

45
60
80
120
170
260
390
490
605
755
955
1185

65

69
90
130
185
265
410
620
780
965
1195
1515
1880

80

120
160
230
330
470
725
1085
1375
1695
2110
2665
3315

0.4
0.63
1.0
1.6
2.5
4.0
6.3
8.0
10.0
12.5
16.0
20.0

aMaximum recommended airﬂow (l/s free air) through medium series steel pipe for branch mains not exceeding 15 meters in length (see
BS 1387). The ﬂow values are based on maximum recommended peak ﬂows. Normal steady air consumption should not exceed 80 per
cent of these ﬁgures in pipe sizes 20 mm nominal bore and above.
bApplied pressures selected from ISO 2944: Fluid Power Systems – nominal pressures.

35/590 Compressed Air Systems

Table 35.3 Pressure loss through steel ﬁttings – equivalent pipe lengths

Item

Equivalent pipe length (m)

Gate valve fully open
half closed

Diaphragm valve fully open
Angle valve fully open
Globe valve fully open
Ball valve (full bore) fully open
Ball value (reduced bore) fully open
Swing check valve fully open
Bend R D 2d
Bend R D d
Miter bend 90°
Run of tree
Side outlet tee
Reducer

15

0.1

0.6
1.5
2.7
0.5
3.4

0.1
0.2
0.6
0.2
0.6

20

0.2
3.2
1.0
2.6
4.8
0.2
4.9
1.3
0.2
0.3
1.0
0.3
1.0
0.3

25

0.3
5
1.5
4
7.5
0.2
2.4
2.0
0.3
0.4
1.5
0.5
1.5
0.5

40

0.5
8
2.5
6
12
0.4
2.2
3.2
0.5
0.6
2.4
0.8
2.4
0.7

Inner pipe diameter (mm)

50

80

100

0.6
10
3.0
7
15
0.3
5.0
4.0
0.6
0.8
3.0
1.0
3.0
1.0

1.0
16
4.5
12
24
0.4
2.6
6.4
1.0
1.3
4.8
1.6
4.8
2.0

1.3
20
6
13
30
0.3
4.1
8.0
1.2
1.6
6.0
2.0
6.0
2.5

125

1.6
25
8
18
38
0.5
3.3
10
1.5
2.0
7.5
2.5
7.5
3.1

150

1.9
30
10
22
45
0.6
12.1
12
1.8
2.4
9
3
9
3.6

200

2.6
40

30
60
0.6
22.3
16
2.4
3.2
12
4
12
4.8

The table shows the length of pipe with equivalent pressure loss in a given size and type of ﬁtting.

Table 35.4 Pressure loss through ABS ﬁtting – equivalent pipe lengths

Pipe outside diameter

Equivalent pipe length (m)

90° elbow
45° elbow
90° bend
180° bend
Adaptor union
Tee in line ﬂow
Tee in line branch ﬂow
Reducer

16

0.34
0.16
0.1
0.28
0.14
0.123
0.77
0.22

25

0.5
0.24
0.16
0.41
0.21
0.19
1.17
0.31

32

0.65
0.32
0.22

–

0.25
0.23
1.47
0.37

50

1.0
0.52
0.34

–
0.4
0.36
2.21
0.51

63

1.26
0.63
0.44
–
0.5
0.45
2.98
0.80

75

90

110

1.5
0.75
0.56

–
–

0.56
3.68
1.11

1.88
0.95
0.75

–
–

0.69
4.57
1.34

2.58
1.33
1.00

–
–

0.95
6.00
1.58

The table shows the length of pipe with equivalent pressure loss in a given size and type of ﬁtting. For example, a 50 mm
90° elbow has a pressure loss equal to 1.0 m of 50 mm ABS pipe.

Table 35.5 Air consumption of pneumatic equipment ExampleofcalculationThe following calculation is typical of a medium-sized
engineering workshop including a foundry, where a high degree of mechanization is to be carried out by means of compressed
air-driven machines and tools. Listed in the table are the tools and other pneumatic devices which are expected to be included in the
installation at full production capacity. The use factor of the different tools is calculated in connection with production planning and thus
it is possible to establish the average total air consumption.

Machine or tool

Foundry
Core-shop (I)
Core blowers
Bench rammers

Machine moulding (II)
Moulding machines
Blow guns
Air hoist (cid:2)500 kg

Hand moulding (III)
Rammers
– medium

Air consumption

per unit

(l/s)

Quantity

Maximum air
consumption

(l/s)

Use factor

Average air
consumption

(l/s)

11
4

12
8
33

6

3
2

5
5
2

1

33
10
43

60
40
66
166

6

0.50
0.20

0.30
0.10
0.10

0.20

16.5
2.0
18.5

18.0
4.0
6.6
28.6

1.2

Table 35.5 (Continued)

Machine or tool

– heavy
Blow guns
Air hoist (cid:2) 500 kg

Cleaning shop (IV)
Chipping hammers
– light
– medium
– heavy
Grinders
– 75 mm
– 150 mm
– 200 mm
– medium
– heavy
Sandblast units
– light
– heavy

Total for foundry
Workshop
Machine shop (V)
Blow guns
Operating cylinders for

jibs, ﬁxtures and chucks

Sheet metal shop (VI)
Drills
– light
– medium
– 12 mm
– angle
– screwfeed
Tapper
Screwdrivers
Impact wrench
– 20 mm
– 22 mm
Grinders
– 150 mm
– 200 mm
– medium
– heavy
Riveting hammers
– medium
– heavy
Chipping hammers
– light
– medium
– heavy
Air hoist – 5 ton
Blow guns

Assembly shop (VII)
Drills
– light
– medium
– 12 mm
– angle
– heavy

Air consumption

per unit

(l/s)

9
8
33

6
8
13

9
25
40
23
42

32
53

8

6
8
15
8
52
8
8

15
23

25
40
23
42

18
22

6
8
13
97
8

6
8
15
8
22

Assessment of a plant’s air consumption 35/591

Quantity

Maximum air
consumption

(l/s)

Use factor

Average air
consumption

(l/s)

2
3
1

2
3
2

2
3
1
2
2

1
1

10

1
1
2
1
1
1
2

1
1

2
1
2
1

1
1

2
2
1
1
1

3
5
6
2
1

18
24
33
81

12
24
26

18
75
40
46
84

32
53
410
700

80

12
92

6
8
30
8
52
8
16

15
23

50
40
46
42

18
22

12
16
13
97
16
538

18
40
90
16
22

0.20
0.10
0.10

0.35
0.35
0.20

0.30
0.45
0.20
0.10
0.10

0.50
0.50

0.05

0.10

0.20
0.10

0.20
0.10

0.30
0.20
0.30
0.20

0.10
0.05

0.20
0.20
0.10
0.05
0.10

0.20
0.30
0.35
0.10
0.10

3.6
2.4
3.3
10.5

4.2
8.4
5.2

5.4
33.8
8.0
4.6
8.4

16.0
26.5
120.5
178.0

4.0

1.2
5.2

1.6
1.6
9.0
1.6
2.6
1.6
1.6

3.0
2.3

15.0
8.0
13.8
8.4

1.8
1.1

2.4
3.2
1.3
16.2
1.6
97.3

3.6
12.0
31.5
1.6
2.2

(continued overleaf )

35/592 Compressed Air Systems

Table 35.5 (Continued)

Machine or tool

– heavy
Tappers
Screwdrivers
Impact wrenches
– light
– 20 mm
– 22 mm
Grinders
– 75 mm
– 150 mm
– medium
Air hoists
– 500 kg
– 1 ton
Blowguns

Painting shop (VIII)
Grinders and polishers
– angle
– medium
Sandblast unit
Blow guns
Air hoist – 5 ton
Spray painting guns

Total for the workshop

Air consumption

per unit

(l/s)

33
8
8

6
15
23

9
25
23

33
33
8

8
23
38
8
97
5

Quantity

Maximum air
consumption

(l/s)

Use factor

Average air
consumption

(l/s)

1
2
2

1
2
1

2
1
2

1
1
5

1
1
1
1
1
2

33
16
16

6
30
23

18
25
46

33
33
40
505

8
23
38
8
97
10
184
1319

0.10
0.10
0.20

0.20
0.20
0.10

0.20
0.10
0.20

0.10
0.10
0.05

0.20
0.30
0.50
0.10
0.05
0.50

3.3
1.6
3.2

1.2
6.0
2.3

3.6
2.5
9.2

3.3
3.3
2.0
92.4

1.6
6.9
19.0
0.8
4.9
5.0
38.2
233.1

there is experience of a similar installation, plotting data
obtained from past activity can make an accurate analysis.

35.1.4 Future expansion
Future expansion should always be taken into account
when installing new plant. Increasing compressor capacity
presents no problem if the rest of the plant installation has
been planned accordingly.

35.1.5 Allowance for air leakage
Experience has shown that the initial estimate of the total
compressor capacity should include an allowance for leak-
age. Leakage in the pipelines can be overcome by proper
installation practice. A large proportion of the total leak-
age occurs at hoses, couplings and valves.

For installations with regular inspection and mainte-
nance, a factor of 5 per cent minimum should be adequate.
The importance of this is obvious when one remembers
that while a tool or appliance may use a considerable
amount of air, it is only working intermittently, whereas
any leakage, even from a small hole, is both continuous
and signiﬁcant.

compressor plant or a number of separate compressors
near the main points of use. The following comments can
be no more than general. In order to select the type and
size of installation that will be adequate for both immedi-
ate and future requirements it is advisable to consult the
supplier. Points to be considered are as follows.

Centralized installation

1. Lower total installed compressor capacity and, per-

2. Possibly a higher efﬁciency, and thus lower power cost,

haps, lower initial cost;

due to larger units;

3. Lower supervision cost.

Decentralized installation

1. Output and/or pressure can be varied to suit each par-

2. Pipe sizes can be reduced, thus minimizing leakage

ticular plant section.

and cost.

3. Compressors and/or associated equipment can be shut
down during periods of low demand or for preventative
maintenance with only a localized effect.

35.2 Compressor installation
35.2.1 Type of installation
When planning a compressor installation one of the ﬁrst
matters to be decided is whether there should be a central

35.2.2 Compressor siting
The requirements for a compressor site will be affected
by location and climate as well as by the equipment to be
installed. The following aspects should be considered.

e
n

i
l
 

e
c
n
e
r
e
e
R

f

.001

.002

25

25

.005

30

.005

.01

50

50

m
m

 
-
 
s
e
k
o
r
t
s
 
d
r
a
d
n
a
t
S

80

100

125

160

200

Example 1

E x a m p l e   1

.01

.02
.03
.04
.05

e
k
o
r
t
s
 
r
e
p

.1

.2

.3
.4
.5

1

2
3
4
5

70

80

90

 
3

m
µ
 
-
 

D
A
F
n
o

 

100

i
t

p
m
u
s
n
o
c
 
r
e
d
n

i
l

150

y
c
 
g
n
i
t
c
a
-
e
g
n
S

i

l

200

10

250

250

300

320

400

400

500

500

B

20

30
40
50

100

200
300
400
500

.02

.03
.04
.05

.1

.2

.3
.4
.5

1

2
3
4
5

10

20
30
40
50

e
k
o
r
t
s
 
r
e
p

 
3

m
c
 
-
 

D
A
F
n
o

 

i
t

p
m
u
s
n
o
c
 
r
e
d
n

i
l

y
c
 
g
n
i
t
c
a
-
e
b
u
o
D

l

100

200

300
400
500

1000

m
m

 
-
 
s
e
k
o
r
t

S

1000

2000

D

)
e
g
u
a
g
(
 
r
a
b
 
-
 
e
r
u
s
s
e
r
p
 
e
n
L

i

0.5

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

15

20

A

Compressor installation 35/593

E x a m ple 2

8

10

12

16

20

25

32

40

50

63

80

100

125

160

m
m

 
-
 
s
e
r
o
b
 
r
e
d
n

i
l

i

y
c
 
f
o
 
s
e
z
s
 
d
r
a
d
n
a
t
S

8

10

12

16

(18)*

20
(22)*

26

(28)*

32

(36)*

(45)*

(56)*

63

m
m

 
-
 
s
d
o
r
 
r
e
d
n

i
l

y
c
 
f

o

i

 
s
e
z
s
 
d
r
a
d
n
a
t
S

80

100

10

15

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90
100

m
m

 
-
 
e
r
o
b
 
r
e
d
n

i
l

y
C

(  )* Non-preferred sizes

150

200

200

250

300

250

320

C

Figure 35.1 Air consumption of cylinders (metric) How to use the nomogram First, connect line pressure (A) to stroke (B); then from
the point where this cuts the reference line, connect across to cylinder bore size (C). Read off consumption where this line cuts the
consumption scale (D). Figures on the left of this scale are for single-acting cylinders. Figures on the right are for double-acting cylinders,
neglecting the effect of the rod. This is accurate enough for most purposes. However, if the correct (theoretical) consumption is required
for double-acting cylinders, go back to the point on the reference line and connect across to the rod diametersize, entered on the ’cylinder
bore’ scale. This ﬁgure should then be deduced from the consumption arrived at with the ﬁrst solution.

Example 1: Find the (nominal) consumption of a double-acting 100 mm bore cylinder with a stroke of 180 mm operating at 8 bar line
pressure.
Answer: 25.4 l per stroke.

Example2: The cylinder above has a 25 mm diameter rod. Find the true (theoretical) consumption. Connection from the same point on
the reference scale to the rod diameter size on the bore scale gives a single-acting cylinder consumption ﬁgure of 0.8 l per stroke. Deduce
this from the solution found in Example 1 to give the true consumption ﬁgure, i.e. 25.4 (cid:2) 0.8 D 35.6 l per stroke

35/594 Compressed Air Systems

Foundations

The compressor plant should be located in a place with
good ground conditions. In some cases, the compressor
foundation may have to be isolated from that of the main
building so that vibration is not transmitted from compres-
sor to the building structure, and from heavy plant to the
compressor. Where the vibrations are slight, resilient pads
may be used to advantage. Receiver-mounted units should
always be either freestanding or mounted on resilient pads.
If in doubt, the suppliers should be consulted.

Servicing facilities

For small and medium compressors lifting gear is neces-
sary only for installation or re-siting, no special hoisting
equipment being normally needed when overhauling the
units provided individual components do not exceed 16 kg
in weight. On larger units, lifting equipment is essential;
the manufacturer or supplier must state the maximum
hoisting load. Sufﬁcient access and headroom must be
provided around the compressor for servicing.

Weather protection

Adequate protection from the weather must be provided.

Ventilation

Heat generated by the compressor and prime mover must
be dispersed. For air-cooled units sited in enclosed rooms
this heat must be removed in order to limit the temperature
rise. It is sometimes possible to recover this heat for use
elsewhere. Intake openings should be located so that dust
and other foreign matter do not enter with the air.

Noise

Noise from a compressor plant arises at different sources,
and each source has its own pattern of sound pressure
levels. Noise levels can be divided into two groups, the
low-frequency pulsating air intake sound and the higher-
frequency machine noise from compressor, prime mover
and fans. Local statutory regulations on noise levels
should be determined, and action taken by the supplier to
ensure that the noise levels do not exceed those stipulated.

35.2.3 Compressor intake

General

The compressor intake air must be clean and free from
solid and gaseous impurities; abrasive dust and corrosive
gases are particularly harmful. Exhaust fumes present a
hazard if compressed air is required for breathing pur-
poses. The possibility of contamination of the intake by
discharge from pressure-relief devices of other plant must
be taken into consideration and changes of wind direction
must not be overlooked.

For maximum efﬁciency, the intake air should be as
cold as possible. A temperature decrease of 3°C will
increase the volume of the delivered air by 1 per cent.

The air intake system should be sized to give a minimum
pressure drop. Each compressor should have its own
intake ﬁlter.

Intake silencing

The reciprocating compressor inspires air in a series of
pulsations which causes an equivalent variation in pres-
sure in the intake system. Dependent on the length of
the intake pipe, resonance may occur; this can decrease
the compressor output and produce disturbing noise lev-
els and stresses sufﬁcient to cause damage. By ﬁtting a
pulsation dampener or changing the length of the intake
pipe, its natural resonant frequency can be changed, and
any related vibration, noise and interference (with the air-
ﬂow) will be diminished. The inherent pulsation noise can
be removed by the use of a suitably designed silencer.

Intake ﬁlter

An air intake for a compressor should have a high capac-
ity to remove abrasive materials, including those of small
particle size, and good accumulating ability, that is, to col-
lect large quantities of impurities without any signiﬁcant
decrease in ﬁltering efﬁciency and air ﬂow.

Normally the ﬁlter should be placed as close as possi-
ble to the compressor. When an intake silencer is ﬁtted,
it should be ﬁtted between the intake ﬁlter and the com-
pressor.

The ﬁlter should also be placed in such a way that it is
easily accessible for inspection and cleaning or replace-
ment. The most common types of ﬁlter in use are:

1. Paper
2. Oil-wetted labyrinth
3. Woolen cloth
4. Oil-bath

Any of these may be incorporated into or be used in com-
bination with suitable silencers.

For installations in areas of heavy contamination, such
as quarries or cement works, additional ﬁltration or auto-
matic self-cleaning is required; otherwise, the air ﬁlter will
clog up rapidly. Filter condition indicators are available
and are recommended.

Intake ducts

The air intake of a compressor should be sited so that,
as far as possible, cool, clean, dry air is inspired. When
located outdoors the air intake should be protected against
the weather. The air intake should be designed and sited
so that noise is reduced to the necessary level.

If large compressor plant requires clear headroom for
cranes, air intakes may have to run through under ﬂoor
piping or ducting. Intake ducts must be of a cross-sectional
area sufﬁciently large to avoid excessive pressure drop,
and the number of bends should be kept to a minimum.
The ducts should be of non-corrosive material and care
should be taken that extraneous material cannot enter the
duct. The duct should be cleaned thoroughly before con-
nection to the compressor.

Intake pipes may be subject to pulsations and should
be too rigidly attached to walls or ceilings, since vibration
may be transmitted to the building structure.

to where the discharge pipe enters the common manifold
feed pipe. A safety valve is ﬁtted on the compressor side
of the isolation valve, upstream of the aftercooler.

Corrosive intake gases

Non-return valves

Compressor installation 35/595

In certain plants, especially in the chemical industry or in
the neighborhood of such plants, the air is often polluted
with acidic and corrosive gases that can cause corrosion
in the compressor and the compressed air system. Special
ﬁltration methods and/or materials may have to be used
and the supplier should be consulted.

35.2.4 Compressor discharge
Discharge pipe speciﬁcation and siting

The diameter of the compressor discharge pipe should not
normally be smaller than the compressor outlet connection
and should be arranged with ﬂanged ﬁttings or unions to
permit easy access to the compressor and components at
any time. The possibility of vibration should be taken into
account. The compressor discharge pipe will attain a high
temperature and precautions must be taken to prevent this
being a source of danger.

The interior of the pipelines through which the dis-
charge air passes to the aftercooler or air receiver should
be cleaned regularly so that a build-up of combustible oily
carbon deposits is avoided. All the piping should slope
downwards in the direction of airﬂow to a suitable drain
point at the lowest point of the pipeline.

Discharge pipes can be located in trenches covered by
ﬂoor plants, and there is no technical reason against laying
the pipes directly on the ground, but provision must be
made for drainage.

Any pocket unavoidably formed after the compressor
discharge shall be provided with a drain valve or trap at
the lowest point so that any oil and condensate can be
removed.

Under certain conditions of installation and operation,
pulsations may be set up in the compressor discharge
lines. It is essential to consult the suppliers for their rec-
ommendations.

Thermoplastics shall not be used for a compressor dis-
charge pipe and inﬂammable materials shall be kept away
from it.

Isolating valve

Where an isolating valve is installed in the discharge
pipework the pipeline on the compressor side of the valve
shall be protected by a suitable safety valve. This safety
valve must be of sufﬁcient size to pass the full output of
the compressor without the pressure rising more than 10
per cent above the maximum allowable working pressure.

Multiple compressors

Where two or more compressors feed into a single air
line, the discharge line from each compressor shall be
ﬁtted with a non-return valve and isolation valve at the
furthest point from the compressor or outlet, just prior

Non-return valves used in compressor delivery lines must
be designed to withstand the pressure, temperature and
pulsations of compressed air.

35.2.5 Cooling-water system

General

Where water is used as a cooling medium for compressor
and ancillary equipment it should be within the temper-
ature and pressure levels prescribed by the compressor
supplier and should be free from harmful impurities. The
cooling water should have a low inlet temperature in
order to assist in achieving a high volumetric efﬁciency
in the compressor and to cool the air passing through the
aftercooler to a temperature adequate for effective con-
densation of water vapor.

Overcooling

The compressor should not be overcooled to cause con-
densation in and on the compressor.

Water quality

Good-quality cooling water is essential.

Re-cooling the cooling water

In order to achieve economy in the use of water it will
have to be re-cooled. This is achieved by transferring heat
to the ambient air by means of cooling ponds, towers,
tanks or mechanical coolers. Temperature regulators may
assist control and conserve energy.

Mechanical coolers

The cost of cooling water is an important factor and
mechanical coolers are in most cases more economical
than allowing the water to run to waste. A forced-draught
type of cooler consists of a casing with a water header at
the top and a sump at the bottom. A series of cooling ele-
ments is provided which offers a large area for the transfer
of heat between the water to be cooled and the cooling
air. The hot water enters the top header and runs through
the elements to a sump from which it is pumped through
the compressor plant. A fan forces the colder ambient air
through the elements to absorb the heat from the water as
it passes through the elements.

Where this type of cooler is installed inside a building, it
is essential to duct away the warm air discharged by the fan.
Consideration must be given to protection against frost.

Cooling towers

These operate by setting the cooling air in motion over a
surface of water. Either natural convection or a fan can do

35/596 Compressed Air Systems

this. In order to provide a good transfer between water and
air, towers usually have internal arrangements for spread-
ing the water as a thin ﬁlm. With cooling towers a ﬁnal
water temperature of about 5°C above the ambient air
temperature can be expected. In general, good cooling
can be obtained even at relatively high ambient tempera-
tures, since the relative humidity is, in such a case, usually
low. However, extreme tropical climates are an excep-
tion. The amount of water that is lost as vapor during
re-cooling must be replaced by the addition of ‘make-up’
water. This quantity is considerably smaller than that con-
sumed in open-ﬂow cooling. Cooling towers should not
be used in heavily contaminated atmospheres.

Cooling ponds

A cooling-water pond is the simplest form of cooling
arrangement. The pond should be located so that an unre-
stricted air circulation is obtained. Vaporizing ability is
improved if the hot water is returned to the pond by some
kind of sprinkler device. Most of the cooling effect is
caused by vaporization and the water thus lost must be
replaced. Cooling ponds should not be used in heavily
contaminated atmospheres.

Cooling tanks

A cooling tank is, in effect, a small cooling pond. How-
ever, because of the difﬁculty in keeping the water clean,
this method is not recommended.

Keeping the cooling system clean

Cooling water should be free from solid impurities that
could damage pumps and cause blockages and ﬁltered,
with ﬁlters cleaned regularly. The whole cooling system
should be inspected and cleaned regularly. Sand, sludge,
rust, etc. can be removed by ﬂushing against the nor-
mal direction of ﬂow. Lime deposits are more difﬁcult to
remove. Such deposits can usually be avoided by keeping
the water outlet temperature at a low level. If excessive
deposits do occur, a specialist should be called in to clean
the system by chemical methods.

35.2.6 Ventilation

In compressor operation, part of the heat given off by the
compressor and motor is transmitted to the surrounding
air. For plants located in closed rooms, this heat must be
removed to limit the rise in temperature of the ambient
air. Some of the heat dissipates through walls, windows,
ﬂoor and roof, but this heat removal is seldom sufﬁ-
cient. The compressor room should be ventilated and the
heat removed with the ventilating air. Sometimes the heat
can be recovered and used for heating purposes. In an
entirely water-cooled compressor installation, the heat to
be removed by ventilation is relatively small, since the
cooling water takes the major part away.

Insufﬁcient ventilation shortens the life of the electric
motor. In installations where the intake air is drawn from
the compressor room, poor ventilation may also damage
the compressor, as the temperature of the discharge air

increases in proportion to that of the intake air. The com-
pressor room should always be placed so that ventilation
air is available without the need for long ducts. The intake
should be sited low down on the coldest wall, whereas
the ventilation air outlet should be situated high up on the
opposite wall in order to avoid temperature stratiﬁcation.
Modern completely air-cooled compressor plants have
aftercoolers with fans. The aftercooler should be arranged
so that it assists in the ventilation of the room. For the
major part of the year the aftercooler fan will handle room
ventilation. Extra fans may be needed only during hot
months in the summer.

35.3 Overpressure protection

1. If any equipment having a design pressure lower than
the maximum output pressure of the compressor is
used, or if an increase of pressure above normal oper-
ating pressure will cause a malfunction, it shall be
protected against overpressure by suitable means.

2. Any relief valve or safety valve shall have a design
ﬂow capacity such that when subjected to the maxi-
mum output pressure and ﬂow of the compressor, and
taking into account the ﬂow restriction caused by the
upstream pipework and ﬁttings, it will prevent the pres-
sure in that part of the system exceeding the design
pressure of the equipment. This requirement may, in
certain circumstances and depending upon compressor
pressure and design pressure of the equipment, imply
the need for a relief valve having a port size at least
twice the nominal diameter of the pipework and pres-
sure regulator feeding the equipment.

3. An alternative method of protection is the use of a
smaller relief valve in conjunction with an automatic
isolating valve, which shuts off the air supply to the
equipment if the pressure rises more than 20 per cent
above the blow-off pressure of the relief valve. If this
method is used it is essential to ensure that sudden
cessation of air supply to the equipment cannot cause
a hazard.

35.4 Selection of compressor plant
35.4.1 Air compressors

The principal types of compressors and their basic char-
acteristics are outlined below (see also Figure 35.2).

Positive displacement compressors

Positive displacement units are those in which succes-
sive volumes of air are conﬁned within a closed space
and elevated to a higher pressure. The capacity of a pos-
itive displacement compressor varies marginally with the
working pressure.

Reciprocating compressors

The compressing and displacing element
(piston or
diaphragm) has a reciprocating motion. The piston

Compressors

Dynamic

Displacement

Selection of compressor plant 35/597

Ejector

Radial

Axial

Rotary

Reciprocating

One rotors

Two rotors

Vane

Liquid ring

Screw

Screw

Roots

Trunk

Crosshead

Labyrinth Diaphragm

Figure 35.2 Basic compressor types

compressor is available in lubricated and non-lubricated
construction.

Helical and spiral-lobe compressors (screw)

Rotary, positive displacement machines in which two
intermeshing rotors, each in helical conﬁguration displace
and compress the air; available in lubricated and non-
lubricated construction; the discharge air is normally free
from pulsation; high rotation speed.

Sliding-vane compressors

Rotary, positive displacement machines in which axial
vanes slide radially in a rotor mounted eccentrically within
a cylindrical casing. Available in lubricated and non-
lubricated construction; the discharge air is normally free
from pulsation.

Two impeller straight-lobe compressors and
blowers

Rotary, positive displacement machines in which two
straight, mating but non-touching lobed impellers trap
the air and carry it from intake to discharge. Non-
lubricated; the discharge is normally free from pulsation;
low pressure; high rotation speed.

Dynamic compressors

Dynamic compressors are rotary continuous-ﬂow machi-
nes in which the rapidly rotating element accelerates

the air as it passes through the element, converting
the velocity head into pressure, partially in the rotating
element and partially in stationary diffusers or blades.
The capacity of a dynamic compressor varies considerably
with the working pressure.

Centrifugal compressors

Acceleration of the air is obtained through the action of
one or more rotating impellers; non-lubricated; the dis-
charge air is free from pulsation; very high rotation speed.

Axial compressors

Acceleration of the air is obtained through the action of a
bladed rotor, shrouded at the blade ends; non-lubricated;
very high rotation speed; high-volume output.

Speciﬁc power consumption

This varies with the size and type of compressor; consul-
tation with the supplier is advised.

35.4.2 Capacity and pressure limitations

Figure 35.3 shows the approximate capacity and pressure
limitations of each type of compressor. There are areas
where more than one type of compressor will provide
the required capacity and pressure. In such cases, other
characteristics such as those given above and the type
and pattern of use will govern the selection. Consultation
with the supplier is advised.

35/598 Compressed Air Systems

10000

1000

100

r
a
b
−
e
r
u
s
s
e
r
P

 

10

1

0.1

0

Reciprocating

Centrifugal

Rotary

Axial

Blower

100

1,000

10,000

100,000

1,000,000

Compressor capacity−liters/second

compressor operating ranges

Figure 35.3 Compressor types – approximate capacity and pressure limitations

Compressor standby capacity

35.4.3 Output control

On many installations, it is normal to plan the number
of compressor units and their output so that there is a
standby capacity to permit one unit to be shut down for
servicing. Where a constant supply of air is essential to
operations, standby compressors are a necessity.

Load splitting

In all installations, consideration should be given to hav-
ing at least two compressors to allow for conditions of
light load and for maintenance.

Closed-loop systems

The same general considerations listed above apply to
two-level closed-loop systems but
the required input
power to the compressor will be considerably reduced or
a smaller compressor can be used.

A wide range of controls is available to match compressor
output to demand. Consultation with the equipment sup-
plier is essential. The output of a compressor can be con-
trolled by several methods as outlined below. Pneumatic,
hydro-pneumatic and electronic devices can perform the
following functions:

1. Reciprocating compressors:

(a) Intermittent operation using automatic stop/start

mechanism;

(b) Constant speed running with inlet valve blocking
or intake throttling or external bypass or inlet valve
unloading or clearance pocket;

(c) Variable speed;
(d) Combinations of (a) through (c) above.

2. Rotary sliding-vane compressors:

(a) Intermittent operation using automatic stop/start

mechanism;

(b) Constant-speed running with inlet valve blocking

or intake throttling or external bypass;

(c) Variable speed; minimum rotational speed must be
high enough to ensure that the blades remain in
full contact with the stator.

3. Rotary screw compressors:

(a) Constant speed running with external bypass or
intake throttling coupled with blow-off to atmo-
sphere;

(b) Variable speed.

4. Dynamics:

(a) Constant-speed running with intake throttling cou-

pled with blow-off to atmosphere;

(b) Variable speed.

Advice should be sought from the supplier as to the best
type of control to suit a particular application.

35.4.4 Selection of compressor prime movers

An important factor in obtaining an economical plant is
the selection of an appropriate compressor drive. The most
common power units are:

Electric motor
Engine (diesel, petrol, gas, etc.)
Turbine (gas, steam, etc.)

Among the advantages of electric motor drive are com-
pactness and ease of control. The internal combustion
engine is preferred for mobile units, emergency standby
units, or where electric power is not available.

A turbine drive is preferred where it helps balance the
energy system of a plant or where the steam or gas can be

Selection of compressor plant 35/599

further used. This type of drive permits easy speed control
and conserves energy.

Regardless of the type of prime mover, professional
advice should be taken in matching prime mover to com-
pressor.

Application requirements

To avoid delays in the preparation of estimates and
unnecessary expense for both buyer and supplier it is
important that all necessary data should be available and
recorded. The parameters that must be established are
outlined below.

Compressor output conditions

1. Volume of free air required (1/s); including an allo-

wance for future expansion;

2. Minimum discharge pressure required to maintain an

acceptable working pressure at the point of use;

3. Quality of air; degree of cleanliness required;
4. The purpose for which the air is to be used;
5. The pattern of demand for air; continuous or inter-

mittent consumption;

6. Estimated operating hours per day/week;
7. Type of control;
8. The need for an air receiver;
9. Any special conditions, which the compressor must

satisfy;

10. Requirements for ancillary equipment, for example,
water pumps, valves, piping, anti-vibration mount-
ings, aftercoolers, dryers, intake ﬁlters and silencers,
etc.).

36

36/601

Compressors

R Keith Mobley
The Plant Performance Group

Contents

36.1 Centrifugal compressors

36/603

36.1.1 Conﬁguration
36/603
36.1.2 Performance 36/604
36.1.3 Installation
36/606
36.1.4 Operating methods

36/606
36.2 Positive displacement compressors

36.2.1 Conﬁguration
36/606
36.2.2 Performance 36/609
36.2.3 Installation
36/609
36.2.4 Operating methods
36.3 Reciprocating compressors

36/609
36/610

36.3.1 Conﬁguration
36/610
36.3.2 Performance 36/612
36.3.3 Installation
36/612
36.3.4 Operating methods

36/614

36/606

A compressor is a machine that is used to increase the
pressure of a gas or vapor. They can be grouped into two
major classiﬁcations: centrifugal and positive displace-
ment. This section provides a general discussion of these
types of compressors.

36.1 Centrifugal compressors
In general, the centrifugal designation is used when the
gas ﬂow is radial and the energy transfer is predominantly
due to a change in the centrifugal forces acting on the
gas. The force utilized by the centrifugal compressor is
the same as that utilized by centrifugal pumps.

In a centrifugal compressor, air or gas at atmospheric
pressure enters the eye of the impeller. As the impeller
rotates, the gas is accelerated by the rotating element
within the conﬁned space that is created by the volute of
the compressor’s casing. The gas is compressed as more
gas is forced into the volute by the impeller blades. The
pressure of the gas increases as it is pushed through the
reduced free space within the volute.

As in centrifugal pumps, there may be several stages
to a centrifugal air compressor. In these multi-stage units,
a progressively higher pressure is produced by each stage
of compression.

36.1.1 Conﬁguration

The actual dynamics of centrifugal compressors are deter-
mined by their design. Common designs are: overhung or
cantilever, centerline, and bullgear.

Overhung or cantilever

The cantilever design is more susceptible to process insta-
bility than centerline centrifugal compressors. Figure 36.1
illustrates a typical cantilever design.

The overhung design of the rotor (i.e., no outboard
bearing) increases the potential for radical shaft deﬂec-
tion. Any variation in laminar ﬂow, volume, or load of the

Centrifugal compressors 36/603

inlet or discharge gas forces the shaft to bend or deﬂect
from its true centerline. As a result, the mode shape of
the shaft must be monitored closely.

Centerline

Centerline designs (i.e., horizontal and vertical split-case)
are more stable over a wider operating range, but should
not be operated in a variable-demand system. Figure 36.2
illustrates the normal airﬂow pattern through a horizon-
tal split-case compressor. Inlet air enters the ﬁrst stage
of the compressor, where pressure and velocity increases
occur. The partially compressed air is routed to the sec-
ond stage where the velocity and pressure are increased
further. Adding additional stages until the desired ﬁnal
discharge pressure is achieved can continue this process.
Two factors are critical to the operation of these com-
pressors: impeller conﬁguration and laminar ﬂow, which
must be maintained through all of the stages.

The impeller conﬁguration has a major impact on sta-
bility and operating envelope. There are two impeller
conﬁgurations: in-line and back-to-back, or opposed. With
the in-line design, all impellers face in the same direction.
With the opposed design, impeller direction is reversed in
adjacent stages.

In-line

A compressor with all impellers facing in the same direc-
tion generates substantial axial forces. The axial pressures
generated by each impeller for all the stages are additive.
As a result, massive axial loads are transmitted to the ﬁxed
bearing. Because of this load, most of these compressors
use either a Kingsbury thrust bearing or a balancing piston
to resist axial thrusting. Figure 36.3 illustrates a typical
balancing piston.

All compressors that use in-line impellers must be
monitored closely for axial thrusting. If the compressor

Figure 36.1 Cantilever centrifugal compressor is susceptible to
instability

Figure 36.2 Airﬂow through a centerline centrifugal compressor

36/604 Compressors

To discharge

Balancing line

to suction

Shaft seal

Figure 36.3 Balancing piston resists axial thrust from the in-line impeller design of a centerline centrifugal compressor

Balancing piston

is subjected to frequent or constant unloading, the axial
increase due to this thrusting cycle.
clearance will
Ultimately,
lead to
catastrophic failure of the compressor.

this frequent

loading will

thrust

Opposed

By reversing the direction of alternating impellers, the
axial forces generated by each impeller or stage can be
minimized. In effect, the opposed impellers tend to cancel
the axial forces generated by the preceding stage. This
design is more stable and should not generate measurable
axial thrusting. This allows these units to contain a normal
ﬂoat and ﬁxed rolling-element bearing.

Bullgear

The bullgear design uses a direct-driven helical gear to
transmit power from the primary driver to a series of
pinion-gear-driven impellers that are located around the
circumference of the bullgear. Figure 36.4 illustrates a
typical bullgear compressor layout.

The pinion shafts are typically a cantilever-type design
that has an enclosed impeller on one end and a tilting-pad
bearing on the other. The pinion gear is between these
two components. The number of impeller-pinions (i.e.
stages) varies with the application and the original equip-
ment vendor. However, all bullgear compressors contain
multiple pinions that operate in series.

Atmospheric air or gas enters the ﬁrst-stage pinion,
where the pressure is increased by the centrifugal force
created by the ﬁrst-stage impeller. The partially com-
pressed air leaves the ﬁrst stage, passes through an inter-
cooler, and enters the second-stage impeller. This process
is repeated until the fully compressed air leaves through
the ﬁnal pinion-impeller, or stage.

Most bullgear compressors are designed to operate with
a gear speed of 3600 rpm. In a typical four-stage compres-
sor, the pinions operate at progressively higher speeds.
A typical range is between 12,000 rpm (ﬁrst stage) and
70,000 rpm (fourth stage).

Because of their cantilever design and pinion rotating
speeds, bullgear compressors are extremely sensitive to
variations in demand or down-stream pressure changes.
Because of this sensitivity, their use should be limited to
base load applications.

Bullgear compressors are not designed for, nor will
they tolerate, load-following applications. They should
not be installed in the same discharge manifold with
positive-displacement compressors, especially reciprocat-
ing compressors. The standing-wave pulses created by
many positive-displacement compressors create enough
variation in the discharge manifold to cause potentially
serious instability.

In addition, the large helical gear used for the bullgear
creates an axial oscillation or thrusting that contributes to
instability within the compressor. This axial movement is
transmitted throughout the machine-train.

36.1.2 Performance
The physical laws of thermodynamics, which deﬁne their
efﬁciency and system dynamics, govern compressed-air
systems and compressors. This section discusses both the
ﬁrst and second laws of thermodynamics, which apply to
all compressors and compressed-air systems. Also apply-
ing to these systems are the ideal gas law and the concepts
of pressure and compression.

First law of thermodynamics
This law states that energy cannot be created or destroyed
during a process, such as compression and delivery of air

First-stage

diffuser

First-stage
intercooler

Condensate

separator

Centrifugal compressors 36/605

First-stage
rotor

Bull
gear

Fourth-stage
rotor

Second-
stage
inlet

First-
stage
inlet

Third-
stage
inlet

Aftercooler

Figure 36.4 Bullgear centrifugal compressor

or gas, although it may change from one form of energy
to another. In other words, whenever a quantity of one
kind of energy disappears, an exactly equivalent total of
other kinds of energy must be produced. This is expressed
for a steady-ﬂow open system such as a compressor by
the following relationship:

Net energy added to
system as heat and
work

C Stored energy of
mass entering
system

(cid:2) Stored energy of
mass leaving
system

D0

Second law of thermodynamics

The second law of thermodynamics states that energy
exists at various levels and is available for use only if
it can move from a higher to a lower level. For example,
it is impossible for any device to operate in a cycle and
produce work while exchanging heat only with bodies at
a single ﬁxed temperature. In thermodynamics, a mea-
sure of the unavailability of energy has been devised
and is known as entropy. As a measure of unavailabil-
ity, entropy increases as a system loses heat, but remains
constant when there is no gain or loss of heat as in an adi-
abatic process. It is deﬁned by the following differential
equation:
dS D dQ
T

Fourth-
stage
inlet

Discharge

where
T D Temperature (Fahrenheit)
Q D Heat added (BTU)

Pressure/volume/temperature (PVT) relationship

Pressure, temperature, and volume are properties of gases
that are completely interrelated. Boyle’s law and Charles’
law may be combined into one equation that is referred to
as the ideal gas law. This equation is always true for ideal
gases and is true for real gases under certain conditions.

P1V1
T1

D P2V2
T2

For air at room temperature, the error in this equation is
less than 1 per cent for pressures as high as 400 psia. For
air at one atmosphere of pressure, the error is less than 1
per cent for temperatures as low as (cid:2)200°F. These error
factors will vary for different gases.

Pressure/compression

In a compressor, pressure is generated by pumping quan-
tities of gas into a tank or other pressure vessel. Progres-
sively increasing the amount of gas in the conﬁned or
ﬁxed-volume space increases the pressure. The effects of

36/606 Compressors

pressure exerted by a conﬁned gas result from the force
acting on the container walls. This force is caused by
the rapid and repeated bombardment from the enormous
number of molecules that are present in a given quantity
of gas.

Compression occurs when the space is decreased
that
between the molecules. Less volume means
each particle has a shorter distance to travel,
thus
proportionately more collisions occur in a given span of
time, resulting in a higher pressure. Air compressors are
designed to generate particular pressures to meet speciﬁc
application requirements.

Other performance indicators

The same performance indicators as centrifugal pumps or
fans govern centrifugal compressors.

36.1.3 Installation

Dynamic compressors seldom pose serious foundation
problems. Since moments and shaking forces are not
generated during compressor operation,
there are no
variable loads to be supported by the foundation. A
foundation or mounting of sufﬁcient area and mass to
maintain compressor level and alignment and to assure
safe soil loading is all that is required. The units may be
supported on structural steel if necessary. The principles
deﬁned in Section 32.3 for centrifugal pumps also apply
to centrifugal compressors.

It is necessary to install pressure-relief valves on most
dynamic compressors to protect them due to restrictions
placed on casing pressure, power input, and to keep out of
its surge range. Always install a valve capable of bypass-
ing the full-load capacity of the compressor between its
discharge port and the ﬁrst isolation valve.

36.1.4 Operating methods

The acceptable operating envelope for centrifugal com-
pressors is very limited. Therefore, care should be taken
to minimize any variation in suction supply, back-pressure
caused by changes in demand, and frequency of unload-
ing. The operating guidelines provided in the compressor
vendor’s O&M manual should be followed to prevent
abnormal operating behavior or premature wear or failure
of the system.

Centrifugal compressors are designed to be base loaded
and may exhibit abnormal behavior or chronic reliability
problems when used in a load-following mode of oper-
ation. This is especially true of bullgear and cantilever
compressors. For example, a 1-psig change in discharge
pressure may be enough to cause catastrophic failure of
a bullgear compressor. Variations in demand or back-
pressure on a cantilever design can cause the entire rotat-
ing element and its shaft to ﬂex. This not only affects
the compressor’s efﬁciency, but also accelerates wear and
may lead to premature shaft or rotor failure.

All compressor types have moving parts, high noise
levels, high pressures, and high-temperature cylinder and
discharge-piping surfaces.

36.2 Positive displacement compressors
Positive-displacement compressors can be divided into
two major classiﬁcations: rotary and reciprocating.

Rotary

The rotary compressor is adaptable to direct drive by
the use of induction motors or multi-cylinder gasoline or
diesel engines. These compressors are compact, relatively
inexpensive, and require a minimum of operating atten-
tion and maintenance. They occupy a fraction of the space
and weight of a reciprocating machine having equivalent
capacity.

36.2.1 Conﬁguration

Rotary compressors are classiﬁed into three general
groups: sliding vane, helical lobe, and liquid-seal ring.

Sliding vane

The basic element of the sliding-vane compressor is the
cylindrical housing and the rotor assembly. This compres-
sor, which is illustrated in Figure 36.5, has longitudinal
vanes that slide radially in a slotted rotor mounted eccen-
trically in a cylinder. The centrifugal force carries the
sliding vanes against the cylindrical case with the vanes
forming a number of individual longitudinal cells in the
eccentric annulus between the case and rotor. The suction
port is located where the longitudinal cells are largest.
The size of each cell is reduced by the eccentricity of
the rotor as the vanes approach the discharge port, thus
compressing the gas.

Cyclical opening and closing of the inlet and discharge
ports occurs by the rotor’s vanes passing over them. The
inlet port is normally a wide opening that is designed
to admit gas in the pocket between two vanes. The port
closes momentarily when the second vane of each air-
containing pocket passes over the inlet port.

When running at design pressure, the theoretical opera-
tion curves (see Figure 36.6) are identical to a reciprocat-
ing compressor. However, there is one major difference
between a sliding-vane and a reciprocating compressor.
The reciprocating unit has spring-loaded valves that open
automatically with small pressure differentials between
the outside and inside cylinder. The sliding-vane com-
pressor has no valves.

The fundamental design considerations of a sliding-
vane compressor are the rotor assembly, cylinder housing,
and the lubrication system.

Housing and rotor assembly

Cast iron is the standard material used to construct the
cylindrical housing, but other materials may be used if
corrosive conditions exist. The rotor is usually a continu-
ous piece of steel that includes the shaft and is made from
bar stock. Special materials can be selected for corrosive
applications. Occasionally, the rotor may be a separate
iron casting keyed to a shaft. On most standard air com-
pressors, the rotor-shaft seals are semi-metallic packing in

Positive displacement compressors 36/607

A

B

Rotor with non-metallic
sliding vanes.

Inta k e

C

C

o

m
p
r
e
s

sio
n

Gas is gradually compressed
as pockets get smaller.

D

As rotor turns, gas is trap-
in pockets formed by vanes.

Compressed gas is pushed out
through discharge port.

Discharge

Figure 36.5 Rotary sliding-vane compressor

Design pressure
(discharge)

Operation at
design pressure

Volume

Discharge pressure
design pressure

Volume

Design pressure
discharge pressure

Operation above
design pressure

Operation below
design pressure

e
r
u
s
s
e
r
P

e
r
u
s
s
e
r
P

e
r
u
s
s
e
r
P

Volume

Figure 36.6 Theoretical operation curves for rotary compressors
with built-in porting

a stufﬁng box. Commercial mechanical rotary seals can
be supplied when needed. Cylindrical roller bearings are
generally used in these assemblies.

Vanes are usually asbestos or cotton cloth impregnated
with a phenolic resin. Bronze or aluminum also may be

used for vane construction. Each vane ﬁts into a milled
slot extending the full length of the rotor and slides radi-
ally in and out of this slot once per revolution. Vanes are
the most maintenance prone part in the compressor. There
are from 8 to 20 vanes on each rotor, depending upon
its diameter. A greater number of vanes increase com-
partmentalization, which reduces the pressure differential
across each vane.

Lubrication system

A V-belt-driven, force-fed oil lubrication system is used
on water-cooled compressors. Oil goes to both bearings
and to several points in the cylinder. Ten times as much
oil is recommended to lubricate the rotary cylinder as is
required for the cylinder of a corresponding reciprocating
compressor. The oil carried over with the gas to the line
may be reduced 50 per cent with an oil separator on the
discharge. Use of an aftercooler ahead of the separator
permits removal of 85 to 90 per cent of the entrained oil.

Helical lobe or screw

The helical
lobe, or screw, compressor is shown in
Figure 36.7. It has two or more mating sets of lobe-type
rotors mounted in a common housing. The male lobe, or
rotor, is usually direct-driven by an electric motor. The
female lobe, or mating rotor, is driven by a helical gear
set that is mounted on the outboard end of the rotor shafts.
The gears provide both motive power for the female rotor
and absolute timing between the rotors.

The rotor set has extremely close mating clearance (i.e.,
about 0.5 mils) but no metal-to-metal contact. Most of

36/608 Compressors

Discharge

A

B

B

Inlet

A

Discharge

A

Inlet

B

Discharge

A

B

Inlet

C

Discharge

B

A

Inlet

Figure 36.7 Helical lobe, or screw, rotary air compressor

these compressors are designed for oil-free operation. In
other words, no oil is used to lubricate or seal the rotors.
Instead, oil lubrication is limited to the timing gears and
bearings that are outside the air chamber. Because of this,
maintaining proper clearance between the two rotors is
critical.

This type of compressor is classiﬁed as a constant vol-
ume, variable-pressure machine that is quite similar to
the vane-type rotary in general characteristics. Both have
a built-in compression ratio.

Helical-lobe compressors are best suited for base-load
applications where they can provide a constant volume
and pressure of discharge gas. The only recommended
method of volume control is the use of variable-speed
motors. With variable-speed drives, capacity variations
can be obtained with a proportionate reduction in speed. A
50 per cent speed reduction is the maximum permissible
control range.

Helical-lobe compressors are not designed for frequent
or constant cycles between load and no-load operation.
Each time the compressor unloads, the rotors tend to
thrust axially. Even though the rotors have a substantial
thrust bearing and, in some cases, a balancing piston to
counteract axial thrust, the axial clearance increases each
time the compressor unloads. Over time, this clearance
will increase enough to permit a dramatic rise in the
impact energy created by axial thrust during the transient
from loaded to unloaded conditions. In extreme cases,
the energy can be enough to physically push the rotor
assembly through the compressor housing.
Compression ratio and maximum inlet

temperature
determine the maximum discharge temperature of these
compressors. Discharge temperatures must be limited
to prevent excessive distortion between the inlet and
discharge ends of the casing and rotor expansion. High-
pressure units are water-jacketed in order
to obtain
uniform casing temperature. Rotors also may be cooled
to permit a higher operating temperature.

D

Liquid-seal ring

If either casing distortion or rotor expansion occur, the
clearance between the rotating parts will decrease and
metal-to-metal contact will occur. Since the rotors typ-
ically rotate at speeds between 3600 and 10,000 rpm,
metal-to-metal contact normally results in instantaneous,
catastrophic compressor failure.

Changes in differential pressures can be caused by vari-
ations in either inlet or discharge conditions (i.e., temper-
ature, volume or pressure). Such changes can cause the
rotors to become unstable and change the load zones in
the shaft-support bearings. The result is premature wear
and/or failure of the bearings.

Always install a relief valve that is capable of bypassing
the full-load capacity of the compressor between its dis-
charge port and the ﬁrst isolation valve. Since helical-lobe
compressors are less tolerant to over-pressure operation,
safety valves are usually set within 10 per cent of absolute
discharge pressure, or 5 psi, whichever is lower.

The liquid-ring or liquid-piston compressor is shown in
Figure 36.8. It has a rotor with multiple forward-turned
blades that rotate about a central cone that contains inlet
and discharge ports. Liquid is trapped between adjacent
blades, which drive the liquid around the inside of an
elliptical casing. As the rotor turns, the liquid face moves
in and out of this space due to the casing shape, creating
a liquid piston. Porting in the central cone is built-in and
ﬁxed and there are no valves.

Compression occurs within the pockets or chambers
between the blades before the discharge port is uncovered.
Since the port location must be designed and built for a
speciﬁc compression ratio, it tends to operate above or
below the design pressure.

Liquid-ring compressors are cooled directly rather than
by jacketed casing walls. The cooling liquid is fed into
the casing where it comes into direct contact with the gas
being compressed. The excess liquid is discharged with
the gas. The discharged mixture is passed through a con-
ventional bafﬂe or centrifugal-type separator to remove
the free liquid. Because of the intimate contact of gas

Inlet
port

Discharge

port

Discharge

Inlet

Discharge

port

Inlet
port

Rotation is clockwise

Figure 36.8 Liquid-seal ring rotary air compressor

and liquid, the ﬁnal discharge temperature can be held
close to the inlet cooling water temperature. However,
the discharge gas is saturated with liquid at the discharge
temperature of the liquid.

The amount of liquid passed through the compressor is
not critical and can be varied to obtain the desired results.
The unit will not be damaged if a large quantity of liquid
inadvertently enters its suction port.

Lubrication is required only in the bearings, which are
generally located external to the casing. The liquid itself
acts as a lubricant, sealing medium, and coolant for the
stufﬁng boxes.

36.2.2 Performance

Performance of a rotary positive-displacement compressor
can be evaluated using the same criteria as a positive-
displacement pump. As constant-volume machines, per-
formance is determined by rotation speed, internal slip,
and total back-pressure on the compressor.

The volumetric output of rotary positive-displacement
compressors can be controlled by speed changes. The
slower the compressor turns, the lower its output volume.
This feature permits the use of these compressors in load-
following applications. However, care must be taken to
prevent sudden radical changes in speed.

Internal slip is simply the amount of gas that can ﬂow
through internal clearances from the discharge back to the
inlet. Obviously, internal wear will increase internal slip.
Discharge pressure is relatively constant regardless of
operating speed. With the exceptions of slight pressure
variations caused by atmospheric changes and back-
pressure, a rotary positive-displacement compressor will
provide a ﬁxed discharge pressure. Back-pressure, which
is caused by restrictions in the discharge piping or demand
from users of the compressed air or gas, can have a serious
impact on compressor performance.

If back-pressure is too low or demand too high, the
compressor will be unable to provide sufﬁcient volume
or pressure to the down-stream systems. In this instance,
the discharge pressure will be noticeably lower than
designed.

If the back-pressure is too high or demand too low,
the compressor will generate a discharge pressure higher
than designed. It will continue to compress the air or gas
until it reaches the unload setting on the system’s relief
valve or until the brake horsepower required exceeds the
maximum horsepower rating of the driver.

36.2.3 Installation

Installation requirements for rotary positive-displacement
compressors are similar to any rotating machine. Review
the installation requirements for centrifugal pumps and
compressors for foundation, pressure-relief, and other
requirements. As with centrifugal compressors, rotary
positive-displacement compressors must be ﬁtted with
pressure-relief devices to limit the discharge or inter-stage
pressures to a safe maximum for the equipment served.

In applications where demand varies, rotary positive-
displacement compressors require a down-stream receiver

Positive displacement compressors 36/609

tank or reservoir that minimizes the load-unload cycling
frequency of the compressor. The receiver tank should
have sufﬁcient volume to permit acceptable unload fre-
quencies for the compressor. Refer to the vendor’s O&M
manual for speciﬁc receiver-tank recommendations.

36.2.4 Operating methods

All compressor types have moving parts, high noise
levels, high pressures, and high-temperature cylinder and
discharge-piping surfaces.

Rotary positive-displacement compressors should be
operated as base loaded units. They are especially
sensitive to the repeated start-stop operation required by
load-following applications. Generally, rotary positive-
displacement compressors are designed to unload about
every six to eight hours. This unload cycle is needed to
dissipate the heat generated by the compression process.
If the unload frequency is too great, these compressors
have a high probability of failure.

There are several primary operating control inputs for
rotary positive-displacement compressors. These control
inputs are: discharge pressure, pressure ﬂuctuations, and
unloading frequency.

Discharge pressure

This type of compressor will continue to compress the air
volume in the down-stream system until: (1) some compo-
nent in the system fails, (2) the brake horsepower exceeds
the driver’s capacity, or (3) a safety valve opens. There-
fore, the operator’s primary control input should be the
compressor’s discharge pressure. If the discharge pressure
is below the design point, it is a clear indicator that the
total down-stream demand is greater than the unit’s capac-
ity. If the discharge pressure is too high, the demand is too
low and excessive unloading will be required to prevent
failure.

Pressure ﬂuctuations

Fluctuations in the inlet and discharge pressures indi-
cate potential system problems that may adversely affect
performance and reliability. Pressure ﬂuctuations are gen-
erally caused by changes in the ambient environment,
turbulent ﬂow, or restrictions caused by partially blocked
inlet ﬁlters. Any of these problems will result in perfor-
mance and reliability problems if not corrected.

Unloading frequency

The unloading function in rotary positive-displacement
compressors is automatic and not under operator control.
Generally, a set of limit switches, one monitoring internal
temperature and one monitoring discharge pressure, are
used to trigger
the
limit switch that monitors the compressor’s internal
temperature is the primary control. The secondary control,
or discharge-pressure switch,
is a fail-safe design to
prevent overloading the compressor.

the unload process. By design,

Depending on design,

rotary positive-displacement
compressors have an internal mechanism designed to min-
imize the axial thrust caused by the instantaneous change

36/610 Compressors

from fully-loaded to unloaded operating conditions. In
some designs, a balancing piston is used to absorb the
rotor’s thrust during this transient. In others, over-sized
thrust bearings are used.

Regardless of the mechanism used, none provide com-
plete protection from the damage imparted by the transi-
tion from load to no-load conditions. However, as long as
the unload frequency is within design limits, this damage
will not adversely affect the compressor’s useful operating
life or reliability. However, an unload frequency greater
than that accommodated in the design will reduce the use-
ful life of the compressor and may lead to premature,
catastrophic failure.

Operating practices should minimize, as much as pos-
sible, the unload frequency of these compressors. Instal-
lation of a receiver tank and modiﬁcation of user-demand
practices are the most effective solutions to this type of
problem.

36.3 Reciprocating compressors
Reciprocating compressors are widely used by industry
and are offered in a wide range of sizes and types. They
vary from units requiring less than 1 Hp to more than
12,000 Hp. Pressure capabilities range from low vacuums
at intake to special compressors capable of 60,000 psig or
higher.

Reciprocating compressors are classiﬁed as constant-
volume, variable-pressure machines. They are the most
efﬁcient type of compressor and can be used for partial-
load, or reduced-capacity, applications.

Because of the reciprocating pistons and unbalanced
rotating parts, the unit tends to shake. Therefore, it is
necessary to provide a mounting that stabilizes the instal-
lation. The extent of this requirement depends on the type
and size of the compressor.

Because reciprocating compressors should be supplied
with clean gas, inlet ﬁlters are recommended in all appli-
cations. They cannot satisfactorily handle liquids entrained
in the gas, although vapors are no problem if condensa-
tion within the cylinders does not take place. Liquids will
destroy the lubrication and cause excessive wear.

Reciprocating compressors deliver a pulsating ﬂow of
gas that can damage downstream equipment or machinery.
This is sometimes a disadvantage, but pulsation dampers
can be used to alleviate the problem.

36.3.1 Conﬁguration

Certain design fundamentals should be clearly understood
before analyzing the operating condition of reciprocating
compressors. These fundamentals include frame and run-
ning gear, inlet and discharge valves, cylinder cooling,
and cylinder orientation.

Frame and running gear

Two basic factors guide frame and running gear design.
The ﬁrst factor is the maximum horsepower to be trans-
mitted through the shaft and running gear to the cylinder
pistons. The second factor is the load imposed on the

frame parts by the pressure differential between the two
sides of each piston. This is often called pin load because
this full force is directly exerted on the crosshead and
crankpin. These two factors determine the size of bear-
ings, connecting rods, frame, and bolts that must be used
throughout the compressor and its support structure.

Cylinder design

Compression efﬁciency depends entirely upon the design
of the cylinder and its valves. Unless the valve area is
sufﬁcient to allow gas to enter and leave the cylinder
without undue restriction, efﬁciency cannot be high. Valve
placement for free ﬂow of the gas in and out of the
cylinder is also important.

Both efﬁciency and maintenance are inﬂuenced by
the degree of cooling during compression. The method
of cylinder cooling must be consistent with the service
intended.

The cylinders and all the parts must be designed to
withstand the maximum application pressure. The most
economical materials that will give the proper strength
and the longest service under the design conditions are
generally used.

Inlet and discharge valves

Compressor valves are placed in each cylinder to permit
one-way ﬂow of gas, either into or out of the cylinder.
There must be one or more valve(s) for inlet and discharge
in each compression chamber.

Each valve opens and closes once for each revolution
of the crankshaft. The valves in a compressor operating
at 700 rpm for 8 hours per day and 250 days per year
will have cycled (i.e., opened and closed) 42,000 times
per hour, 336,000 times per day, or 84 million times in a
10 of a second to open,
year. The valves have less than 1
let the gas pass through, and to close.

They must cycle with a minimum of resistance for mini-
mum power consumption. However, the valves must have
minimal clearance to prevent excessive expansion and
reduced volumetric efﬁciency. They must be tight under
extreme pressure and temperature conditions. Finally, the
valves must be durable under many kinds of abuse.

There are four basic valve designs used in these com-
pressors: ﬁnger, channel, leaf, and annular ring. Within
each class, there may be variations in design, depending
upon operating speed and size of valve required.

Finger

Figure 36.9 is an exploded view of a typical ﬁnger valve.
These valves are used for smaller, air-cooled compressors.
One end of the ﬁnger is ﬁxed and the opposite end lifts
when the valve opens.

Channel

The channel valve shown in Figure 36.10 is widely used
in mid- to large-sized compressors. This valve uses a
series of separate stainless steel channels. As explained in

Reciprocating compressors 36/611

Head

Valve
plate

Inlet
valve

Discharge

valve

Cylinder

B-7543

Figure 36.9 Finger valve conﬁguration

the ﬁgure, this is a cushioned valve, which adds greatly
to its life.

Leaf

The leaf valve (see Figure 36.11) has a conﬁguration
somewhat like the channel valve. It is made of ﬂat-strip
steel that opens against an arched stop plate. This results
in valve ﬂexing only at its center with maximum lift. The
valve operates as its own spring.

Annular ring

Figure 36.12 shows exploded views of typical inlet and
discharge annular-ring valves. The valves shown have a
single ring, but larger sizes may have two or three rings.
In some designs, the concentric rings are tied into a single
piece by bridges.

The springs and the valve move into a recess in the stop
plate as the valve opens. Gas that is trapped in the recess
acts as a cushion and prevents slamming. This eliminates
a major source of valve and spring breakage. The valve
shown was the ﬁrst cushioned valve built.

Cylinder cooling
Cylinder heat is produced by the work of compression
plus friction, which is caused by the action of the piston
and piston rings on the cylinder wall and packing on the
rod. The amount of heat generated can be considerable,
particularly when moderate to high compression ratios are
involved. This can result in undesirably high operating
temperatures.

Most compressors use some method to dissipate a por-
tion of this heat to reduce the cylinder wall and discharge
gas temperatures. The following are advantages of cylin-
der cooling:

Figure 36.10 Channel valve conﬁguration
ž Lowering cylinder wall and cylinder head temperatures
reduces loss of capacity and horsepower per unit vol-
ume due to suction gas preheating during inlet stroke.
This results in more gas in the cylinder for compression.
ž Reducing cylinder wall and cylinder head temperatures
removes more heat from the gas during compression,
lowering its ﬁnal temperature and reducing the power
required.
ž Reducing the gas temperature and that of the metal
surrounding the valves results in longer valve service
life and reduces the possibility of deposit formation.

ž Reduced cylinder wall

resulting in longer

lubrication,
maintenance.

temperature promotes better
life and reduced
ž Cooling, particularly water cooling, maintains a more
even temperature around the cylinder bore and reduces
warpage.

Cylinder orientation
Orientation of
in a multi-stage or
multi-cylinder compressor directly affects the operating

cylinders

the

36/612 Compressors

Figure 36.11 Leaf spring conﬁguration

Inlet

Discharge

Figure 36.12 Annular-ring valves

dynamics and vibration level. Figure 36.13 illustrates a
typical three-piston, air-cooled compressor. Since three
pistons are oriented within a 120° arc,
this type of
compressor generates higher vibration levels than the
opposed piston compressor illustrated in Figure 36.14.

Figure 36.13 Three-piston compressor generates higher vibration
levels

Figure 36.14 Opposed-piston compressor balances piston forces

36.3.2 Performance

Reciprocating-compressor performance is governed al-
most exclusively by operating speed. Each cylinder of
the compressor will discharge the same volume, exclud-
ing slight variations caused by atmospheric changes, at
the same discharge pressure each time it completes the
discharge stroke. As the rotation speed of the compressor
changes, so does the discharge volume.

The only other variables that affect performance are
the inlet-discharge valves, which control ﬂow into and
out of each cylinder. Although reciprocating compressors
can use a variety of valve designs, it is crucial that the
valves perform reliably. If they are damaged and fail to
operate at the proper time or do not seal properly, overall
compressor performance will be substantially reduced.

36.3.3 Installation

A carefully planned and executed installation is extremely
important and makes compressor operation and mainte-
nance easier and safer. Key components of a compressor
installation are: location, foundation, and piping.

Location

The preferred location for any compressor is near the
center of its load. However, the choice is often inﬂuenced

by the cost of supervision, which can vary by location.
The on-going cost of supervision may be less expensive
at a less-optimum location, which can offset the cost of
longer piping.

A compressor will always give better, more reliable
service when enclosed in a building that protects it from
cold, dusty, damp, and corrosive conditions. In certain
locations, it may be economical to use a roof only, but
this is not recommended unless the weather is extremely
mild. Even then, it is crucial to prevent rain and wind-
blown debris from entering the moving parts. Subjecting
a compressor to adverse inlet conditions will dramatically
reduce reliability and signiﬁcantly increase maintenance
requirements.

Ventilation around a compressor

is vital. On a
motor-driven, air-cooled unit, the heat radiated to the
surrounding air is at least 65 per cent of the power input.
On a water-jacketed unit with an aftercooler and outside
receiver, the heat radiated to the surrounding air may be
15 to 25 per cent of the total energy input, which is still a
substantial amount of heat. Positive outside ventilation
is recommended for any compressor room where the
ambient temperature may exceed 104°F.

Reciprocating compressors 36/613

4. The foundation must have sufﬁcient mass and weight-
bearing area to prevent its sliding on the soil due to
unbalanced forces.

5. Foundation temperature must be uniform to prevent

warping.

Bulk is not usually the complete solution to foundation
problems. A certain weight is sometimes necessary, but
soil area is usually of more value than foundation mass.
Determining if two or more compressors should have
separate or single foundations depends on the compressor
type. A combined foundation is recommended for recip-
rocating units since the forces from one unit usually will
partially balance out the forces from the others. In addi-
tion, the greater mass and surface area in contact with the
ground damps foundation movement and provides greater
stability.

Soil quality may vary seasonally and such conditions
must be carefully considered in the foundation design. No
foundation should rest partially on bedrock and partially
on soil; it should rest entirely on one or the other. If placed
on the ground, make sure that part of the foundation does
not rest on soil that has been disturbed. In addition, pilings
may be necessary to ensure stability.

Foundation

Piping

Because of the alternating movement of pistons and other
components, reciprocating compressors often develop a
shaking that alternates in direction. This force must be
damped and contained by the mounting. The foundation
also must support the weight load of the compressor and
its driver.

There are many compressor arrangements and the
net magnitude of the moments and forces developed
can vary a great deal among them. In some cases,
they are partially or completely balanced within the
compressors themselves. In others, the foundation must
handle much of the force. When complete balance is
possible, reciprocating compressors can be mounted on a
foundation just large and rigid enough to carry the weight
and maintain alignment. However, most reciprocating
compressors require larger, more massive foundations
than other machinery.

Depending upon size and type of unit, the mounting
may vary from simply bolting to the ﬂoor to attaching
to a massive foundation designed speciﬁcally for the
application. A proper foundation must: (1) maintain the
alignment and level of the compressor and its driver
at the proper elevation, and (2) minimize vibration and
prevent its transmission to adjacent building structures
and machinery. There are ﬁve steps to accomplish the
ﬁrst objective:

1. The safe weight-bearing capacity of the soil must not

be exceeded at any point on the foundation base.

2. The load to the soil must be distributed over the entire

area.

3. The size and proportion of the foundation block must
be such that the resultant vertical load due to the com-
pressor, block, and any unbalanced force falls within
the base area.

Piping should easily ﬁt the compressor connections with-
out needing to spring or twist it to ﬁt. It must be supported
independently of the compressor and anchored, as neces-
sary, to limit vibration and to prevent expansion strains.
Improperly installed piping may distort or pull the com-
pressor’s cylinders or casing out of alignment.

Air inlet

The intake pipe on an air compressor should be as short
and direct as possible. If the total run of the inlet piping is
unavoidably long, the diameter should be increased. The
pipe size should be greater than the compressor’s air-inlet
connection.

Cool inlet air is desirable. For every 5°F of ambient
air temperature reduction, the volume of compressed air
generated increases by 1 per cent with the same power
consumption. This increase in performance is due to the
greater density of the intake air.

It is preferable for the intake air to be taken from out-
doors. This reduces heating and air conditioning costs and,
if properly designed, has fewer contaminants. However,
the intake piping should be a minimum of 6 feet above
the ground and be screened or, preferably, ﬁltered. An air
inlet must be free of steam and engine exhausts. The inlet
should be hooded or turned down to prevent the entry of
rain or snow. It should be above the building eaves and
several feet from the building.

Discharge

Discharge piping should be the full size of the compres-
sor’s discharge connection. The pipe size should not be
reduced until the point along the pipeline is reached where
the ﬂow has become steady and non-pulsating. With a

36/614 Compressors

Intercooler

Compressor

Receiver

Aftercooler

Safety valve

Demister

Figure 36.15 Safety valve function

reciprocating compressor, this is generally beyond the
aftercooler or the receiver. Pipes to handle non-pulsating
ﬂow are sized by normal methods and long-radius bends
are recommended. All discharge piping must be designed
to allow adequate expansion loops or bends to prevent
undue stresses at the compressor.

Drainage

Always install a relief valve that is capable of bypassing
the full-load capacity of the compressor between its dis-
charge port and the ﬁrst isolation valve. The safety valves
should be set to open at a pressure slightly higher than
the normal discharge-pressure rating of the compressor.
For standard 100 to 115 psig two-stage air compressors,
safety valves are normally set at 125 psig.

The pressure-relief safety valve is normally situated on
top of the air reservoir and there must be no restriction
on its operation. The valve is usually of the ‘huddling
chamber’ design in which the static pressure acting on its
disk area causes it to open. Figure 36.15 illustrates how
such a valve functions. As the valve pops, the air space
within the huddling chamber between the seat and blow
down ring ﬁlls with pressurized air and builds up more
pressure on the roof of the disk holder. This temporary
pressure increases the upward thrust against the spring,
causing the disk and its holder to fully pop open.

Once a predetermined pressure drop (i.e., blow down)
occurs, the valve closes with a positive action by trap-
ping pressurized air on top of the disk holder. Raising or
lowering the blowdown ring adjusts the pressure-drop set
point. Raising the ring increases the pressure-drop setting,
while lowering it decreases the setting.

Before piping is installed, the layout should be analyzed
to eliminate low points where liquid could collect and to
provide drains where low points cannot be eliminated. A
regular part of the operating procedure must be the peri-
odic drainage of low points in the piping and separators,
as well as inspection of automatic drain traps.

Pressure-relief valves

All reciprocating compressors must be ﬁtted with pres-
sure relief devices to limit the discharge or inter-stage
pressures to a safe maximum for the equipment served.

36.3.4 Operating methods

Compressors can be hazardous to work around because
they have moving parts. Ensure that clothing is kept away
from belt drives, couplings, and exposed shafts. In addi-
tion, high-temperature surfaces around cylinders and dis-
charge piping are exposed. Compressors are notoriously
noisy, so ear protection should be worn. These machines
are used to generate high-pressure gas so, when working
around them, it is important to wear safety glasses and to
avoid searching for leaks with bare hands. High-pressure
leaks can cause severe friction burns.

38/623

38

Mixers and
Agitators

R Keith Mobley
The Plant Performance Group

Contents

38.1 Conﬁguration
38.2 Performance
38.3 Installation
38.4 Operating methods

38/626

38/625
38/626

38/626

Conﬁguration 38/625

Figure 38.2 Side-entering propeller-type mixer

Mixers are devices that blend combinations of liquids and
solids into a homogenous product. They come in a variety
of sizes and conﬁgurations designed for speciﬁc applica-
tions. Agitators provide the mechanical action required to
keep dissolved or suspended solids in solution.

Both operate on the same principles, but variations
in design, operating speed, and applications divide the
actual function of these devices. Agitators generally work
just as hard as mixers and the terms are often used
interchangeably.

38.1 Conﬁguration
There are two primary types of mixers: propeller/paddle
and screw. Screw mixers can be further divided into two
types: batch and mixer-extruder.

Propeller/paddle

Propeller/paddle mixers are used to blend or agitate liquid
mixtures in tanks, pipelines, or vessels. Figure 38.1 illus-
trates a typical top-entering propeller/paddle mixer. This
unit consists of an electric motor, a mounting bracket,
an extended shaft, and one or more impeller(s) or pro-
peller(s). Materials of construction range from bronze to
stainless steel, which are selected based on the particular
requirements of the application.

The propeller/paddle mixer is also available in a side-
entering conﬁguration, which is shown in Figure 38.2.
This conﬁguration is typically used to agitate liquids

Figure 38.3 Mixer can use either propellers (a) or paddles (b) to
provide agitation

in large vessels or pipelines. The side-entering mixer is
essentially the same as the top-entering version except for
the mounting conﬁguration.

Both the top-entering and side-entering mixers may use
either propellers, as shown in the preceding ﬁgures, or
paddles, as illustrated by Figure 38.3 (b). Generally, pro-
pellers are used for medium- to high-speed applications
where the viscosity is relatively low. Paddles are used in
low-speed, high-viscosity applications.

Screw

The screw mixer uses a single- or dual-screw arrangement
to mix liquids, solids, or a combination of both. It comes

Figure 38.1 Top-entering propeller-type mixer

Product quality

The primary indicator of acceptable performance is the
quality of the product delivered by the mixer. Although
there is no direct way to measure this indicator, feedback
from the quality assurance group should be used to verify
that acceptable performance levels are attained.

Brake horsepower

Variation in the actual brake horsepower required to oper-
ate a mixer is the primary indicator of its performance
envelope. Mixer design, whether propeller- or screw-type,
is based on the viscosity of both the incoming and ﬁnished
product. These variables determine the brake horsepower
required to drive the mixer, which will follow variations
in the viscosity of the products being mixed. As the vis-
cosity increases so will the brake horsepower demand.
Conversely, as the viscosity decreases, so will the horse-
power required driving the mixer.

38.3 Installation
Installation of propeller-type mixers varies greatly,
depending on the speciﬁc application. Top-entering mixers
utilize either a clamp- or ﬂange-type mounting. It
is
important that the mixer be installed so the propeller
or paddle placement
is at a point within the tank,
vessel, or piping that assures proper mixing. Vendor
recommendations found in O&M manuals should be
followed to ensure proper operation of the mixer.

Mixers should be mounted on a rigid base that assures
level alignment and prevents lateral movement of the
mixer and its drive-train. While most mixers can be bolted
directly to a base, care must be taken to ensure that it
is rigid and has the structural capacity to stabilize the
mixer.

38.4 Operating methods
There are only three major operating concerns for mixers:
setup, incoming-feed rate, and product viscosity.

Mixer setup

Both propeller and screw mixers have speciﬁc setup
requirements.
case of propeller/paddle-type

In the

38/626 Mixers and Agitators

Figure 38.4 Batch-type mixer uses single or dual screws to mix
product

in two basic conﬁgurations: batch and combination mixer-
extruder.

Batch

Figure 38.4 illustrates a typical batch-type screw mixer.
This unit consists of a mixing drum or cylinder, a single-
or dual-screw mixer, and a power supply.

The screw conﬁguration is normally either a ribbon-
type helical screw or a series of paddles mounted on
a common shaft. Materials of construction are selected
based on the speciﬁc application and materials to be
mixed. Typically, the screws are either steel or stainless
steel, but other materials are available.

Combination mixer-extruder

The mixer-extruder combination unit shown in Figure 38.5
combines the functions of a mixer and screw conveyor.
This type of mixer is used for mixing viscous products.

38.2 Performance
Unlike centrifugal pumps and compressors, few criteria
can be used directly to determine mixer effectiveness
and efﬁciency. However, product quality and brake
horsepower are indices that can be used to indirectly
gauge performance.

Figure 38.5 Combination mixer-extruder

the primary factor

mixers,
the
propellers or paddles within the tank or vessel. Vendor
recommendations should be followed to assure proper
operation of the mixer.

the position of

is

If the propellers or paddles are too close to the liquid
level, the mixer will create a vortex that will entrain air
and prevent adequate blending or mixing. If the propellers
are set too low, compress vortexing may occur. When
this happens, the mixer will create a stagnant zone in
the area under the rotating assembly. As a result, some
of the product will settle in this zone and proper mixing
cannot occur. Setting the mixer too close to a corner or
the side of the mixing vessel can also create a stagnant
zone that will prevent proper blending or mixing of the
product.

For screw-type mixers, proper clearance between the
rotating element and the mixer housing must be main-
tained to vendor speciﬁcations. If the clearance is improp-
erly set, the mixer will bind (i.e., not enough clearance)
or fail to blend properly.

Operating methods 38/627

Feed rate

Mixers are designed to handle a relatively narrow band
of incoming product ﬂow rate. Therefore, care must be
exercised to ensure that the actual feed rate is maintained
within acceptable limits. The O&M manuals provided by
the vendor will provide the feed-rate limitations for vari-
ous products. Normally, these rates must be adjusted for
viscosity and temperature variations.

Viscosity

Variations in viscosity of both the incoming and ﬁnished
products have a dramatic effect on mixer performance.
Standard operating procedures should include speciﬁc
operating guidelines for the range of variation that is
acceptable for each application. The recommended range
should include adjustments for temperature, ﬂow rates,
mixing speeds, and other factors that directly or indirectly
affect viscosity.

39/629

39

Gears and
Gearboxes

R Keith Mobley
The Plant Performance Group

Contents

39/631

39/631
39/633

39/634

39.1 Conﬁguration

39/631

39.1.1 Spur gears
39.1.2 Helical gears
39.1.3 Herringbone
39.1.4 Bevel
39/633
39.1.5 Straight or plain
39.1.6 Zerol
39/634
39/634
39.1.7 Spiral
39.1.8 Miter
39/635
39.1.9 Hypoid
39/635
39.1.10 Worm 39/635

39/636

39.2 Performance
39.3 Installation
39.4 Operating methods

39/637

39/637

Conﬁguration 39/631

Figure 39.2 Example of an internal spur gear

Figure 39.3 Rack or straight-line gear

heat and yields high mechanical efﬁciency, often up to
99 per cent.

An internal spur gear, in combination with a standard
spur-gear pinion, provides a compact drive mechanism
for transmitting motion between parallel shafts that rotate
in the same direction. The internal gear is a wheel that
has teeth cut on the inside of its rim and the pinion is
housed inside the wheel. The driving and driven members
rotate in the same direction at relative speeds inversely
proportional to the number of teeth.

39.1.2 Helical gears

Helical gears, which are shown in Figure 39.4, are formed
by cutters that produce an angle that allows several teeth

A gear is a disc or wheel with teeth around its periph-
ery – either on the inside edge (i.e., internal gear) or on
the outside edge (i.e., external gear). A gear is used to
provide a positive means of power transmission, which is
effected by the teeth on one gear meshing with the teeth
on another gear or rack (i.e., straight-line gear).

Gear drives are packaged units used for a wide range
of power-transmission applications. They are used to
transmit power to a driven piece of machinery and
to change or modify the power
is transmitted.
Modiﬁcations include reducing speed and increasing
output torque, increasing speed, changing the direction
of shaft rotation, or changing the angle of shaft operation.

that

39.1 Conﬁguration
There are several different types of gears used in indus-
try. Many are complex in design and manufacture and
several have evolved directly from the spur gear, which
is referred to as the basic gear. Types of gears are: spur,
helical, bevel, and worm. Table 39.1 summarizes the char-
acteristics of each gear type.

39.1.1 Spur gears

The spur gear is the least expensive of all gears to manu-
facture and is the most commonly used. It can be manu-
factured to close tolerances and is used to connect parallel
shafts that rotate in opposite directions. It gives excellent
results at moderate peripheral speeds and the tooth load
produces no axial thrust. Because contact is simultaneous
across the entire width of the meshing teeth, it tends to
be noisy at high speeds. However, noise and wear can be
minimized with proper lubrication.

There are three main classes of spur gears: external
tooth, internal tooth, and rack-and-pinion. The external
tooth variety shown in Figure 39.1 is the most common.
Figure 39.2 illustrates an internal gear and Figure 39.3
shows a rack or straight-line spur gear.

The spur gear is cylindrical and has straight teeth cut
parallel to its rotational axis. The tooth size of spur gears
is established by the diametrical pitch. Spur-gear design
accommodates mostly rolling, rather than sliding, contact
of the tooth surfaces and tooth contact occurs along a line
parallel to the axis. Such rolling contact produces less

Figure 39.1 Example of a spur gear

Figure 39.4 Typical set of helical gears

39/632 Gears and Gearboxes

Table 39.1 Gear characteristics overview

Gear type

Spur, external

Spur, internal

Helical, external

Helical, double
(also referred to
as herringbone)

Helical, cross

Bevel

Bevel, straight

Bevel, zerol

Bevel, Spiral

Bevel, miter

Bevel, hypoid

Planetary or
epicyclic

Worm,
cylindrical

Worm, double-
enveloping

Characteristics

Attributes/Positives

Negatives

Connects parallel shafts that rotate in opposite
directions, inexpensive to manufacture to
close tolerances, moderate peripheral speeds,
no axial thrust, high mechanical efﬁciency
Compact drive mechanism for parallel shafts
rotating in same direction
Connects parallel and non-parallel shafts;
superior to spur gears in load-carrying
capacity, quietness, and smoothness; high
efﬁciency
Connects parallel shafts, overcomes high-end
thrust present in single-helical gears, compact,
quiet and smooth operation at higher speeds
(1000 to 12,000 fpm or higher), high
efﬁciencies
Light loads with low power transmission
demands
Connects angular or intersecting shafts

Peripheral speeds up to 1000 fpm in
applications where quietness and maximum
smoothness not important, high efﬁciency
Same ratings as straight bevel gears and use
same mountings, permits slight errors in
assembly, permits some displacement due to
deﬂection under load, highly accurate,
hardened due to grinding
Smoother and quieter than straight bevel
gears at speeds greater than 1000 fpm or
1000 rpm, evenly distributed tooth loads,
carry more load without surface fatigue, high
efﬁciency, reduces size of installation for
large reduction ratios, speed-reducing and
speed-increasing drive
Same number of teeth in both gears, operate
on shafts at 90°
Connects non-intersecting shafts, high pinion
strength, allows the use of compact straddle
mounting on the gear and pinion,
recommended when maximum smoothness
required, compact system even with large
reduction ratios, speed-reducing and
speed-increasing drive
Compact transmission with driving and driven
shafts in line, large speed reduction when
required
Provide high-ratio speed reduction over wide
range of speed ratios (60:1 and higher from a
single reduction, can go as high as 500:1),
quiet transmission of power between shafts at
90°, reversible unit available, low wear, can
be self-locking
Increased load capacity

Noisy at high speeds

Higher friction than spur gears, high end
thrust

Narrow range of applications, requires
extensive lubrication
Gears overhang supporting shafts resulting in
shaft deﬂection and gear misalignment
Thrust load causes gear pair to separate

Limited to speeds less than 1000 fpm due to
noise

High tooth pressure, thrust loading depends
on rotation and spiral angle

Lower efﬁciency, difﬁcult to lubricate due to
high tooth-contact pressures, materials of
construction (steel) require use of
extreme-pressure lubricants

Lower efﬁciency; heat removal difﬁcult,
which restricts use to low-speed applications

Lower efﬁciencies

Source: The Plant Performance Group.

Conﬁguration 39/633

Angle

Angle

Hub on
left side

Hub on
right side

Figure 39.7 Helix angle of the teeth – the same no matter from
which side the gear is viewed

Helix
Angle

Figure 39.5 The angle at which the teeth are cut

N

o
r

m

al cir

c

ula
r 
pitc

h

A ddendu m
W hole depth

m
e   d i a .

r c l e   d i a .

t c h   c i

P i

Transverse circular

pitch

Base pitch
Normal pitch
Base circle dia.

e d e n d u
u t s i d

O

D

Figure 39.6 Helical gear and its parts

to mesh simultaneously. Helical gears are superior to spur
gears in their load-carrying capacity and quietness and
smoothness of operation, which results from the sliding
contact of the meshing teeth. A disadvantage, however,
is higher friction and wear that accompanies this sliding
action.

Single helical gears are manufactured with the same
equipment as spur gears, but the teeth are cut at an angle
to the axis of the gear and follow a spiral path. The angle
at which the gear teeth are cut is called the helix angle,
which is illustrated in Figure 39.5. This angle causes the
position of tooth contact with the mating gear to vary at
each section. Figure 39.6 shows the parts of a helical gear.
It is very important to note that the helix angle may be
on either side of the gear’s centerline. Or, if compared to
the helix angle of a thread, it may be either a ‘right-hand’
or a ‘left-hand’ helix. Figure 39.7 illustrates a helical gear
as viewed from opposite sides. A pair of helical gears
must have the same pitch and helix angle, but must be of
opposite hand (one right hand and one left hand).

39.1.3 Herringbone

The double-helical gear, also referred to as the herring-
bone gear (Figure 39.8), is used for transmitting power

Figure 39.8 Herringbone gear

between parallel shafts. It was developed to overcome
the disadvantage of the high-end thrust that is present
with single-helical gears.

The herringbone gear consists of two sets of gear teeth
on the same gear, one right hand and one left hand. Hav-
ing both hands of gear teeth causes the thrust of one set
to cancel out the thrust of the other. Thus, another advan-
tage of this gear type is quiet, smooth operation at higher
speeds.

39.1.4 Bevel
Bevel gears are used most frequently for 90° drives, but
other angles can be accommodated. The most typical
application is driving a vertical pump with a horizontal
driver.

Two major differences between bevel gears and spur
gears are their shape and the relation of the shafts on
which they are mounted. A bevel gear is conical in shape,
while a spur gear is essentially cylindrical. Figure 39.9
illustrates the bevel gear’s basic shape. Bevel gears trans-
mit motion between angular or intersecting shafts, while
spur gears transmit motion between parallel shafts.

Figure 39.10 shows a typical pair of bevel gears. As
with other gears, the term ‘pinion and gear’ refers to the
members with the smaller and larger numbers of teeth in
the pair, respectively. Special bevel gears can be manu-
factured to operate at any desired shaft angle, as shown
in Figure 39.11.

As with spur gears, the tooth size of bevel gears is
established by the diametrical pitch. Because the tooth
size varies along its length, measurements must be taken

39/634 Gears and Gearboxes

Figure 39.9 Basic cone shape of bevel gears

Figure 39.10 Typical set of bevel gears

referred to as an overhung load. It may result in shaft
deﬂection and gear misalignment, causing poor tooth con-
tact and accelerated wear.

39.1.5 Straight or plain

Straight-bevel gears, also known as plain bevels, are the
most commonly used and simplest type of bevel gear
(Figure 39.12). They have teeth cut straight across the
face of the gear. These gears are recommended for periph-
eral speeds up to 1000 feet per minute in cases where
quietness and maximum smoothness are not crucial. This
gear type produces thrust loads in a direction that tends
to cause the pair to separate.

39.1.6 Zerol

Zerol-bevel gears are similar to straight-bevel gears, carry
the same ratings, and can be used in the same mountings.
These gears, which should be considered as spiral-bevel
gears having a spiral angle of zero, have curved teeth that
lie in the same general direction as straight-bevel gears.
This type of gear permits slight errors in assembly and
some displacement due to deﬂection under load. Zerol
gears should be used at speeds less than 1000 feet per
minute because of excessive noise at higher speeds.

39.1.7 Spiral

Spiral-bevel gears (Figure 39.13) have curved oblique
teeth that contact each other gradually and smoothly
from one end of the tooth to the other, meshing with a
rolling contact similar to helical gears. Spiral-bevel gears
are smoother and quieter in operation than straight-bevel
gears, primarily due to a design that incorporates two or
more contacting teeth. Their design, however, results in
high tooth pressure.

Shaft angle

Figure 39.12 Straight or plain bevel gear

Figure 39.11 Shaft angle, which can be at any degree

at a speciﬁc point. Note that, because each gear in a
bevel-gear set must have the same pressure angle, tooth
length, and diametrical pitch, they are manufactured and
distributed only as mated pairs. Like spur gears, bevel
gears are available in pressure angles of 14.5° and 20°.

Because there generally is no room to support bevel
gears at both ends due to the intersecting shafts, one
or both gears overhang their supporting shafts. This is

Figure 39.13 Spiral bevel gear

Conﬁguration 39/635

that can withstand the high contact pressures and rubbing
speeds.

Despite its demand for special lubrication, this gear
type is in widespread use in industrial and automotive
applications. It is used extensively in rear axles of automo-
biles having rear-wheel drives and is increasingly being
used in industrial machinery.

39.1.10 Worm

The worm and gear, which are illustrated in Figure 39.16,
are used to transmit motion and power when a high-ratio
speed reduction is required. They accommodate a wide
range of speed ratios (60:1 and higher can be obtained
from a single reduction and can go as high as 500:1). In
most worm-gear sets, the worm is most often the driver
and the gear the driven member. They provide a steady,
quiet transmission of power between shafts at right angles
and can be self-locking. Thus, a torque on the gear will
not cause the worm to rotate.

The contact surface of the screw on the worm slides
along the gear teeth. Because of the high level of rubbing
between the worm and wheel teeth, however, slightly less
efﬁciency is obtained than with precision spur gears. Note
that large helix angles on the gear teeth produce higher
efﬁciencies. Another problem with this gear type is heat
removal, a limitation that restricts their use to low-speed
applications.

One of the major advantages of the worm gear is low
wear, which is due mostly to a full-ﬂuid lubricant ﬁlm. In
addition, friction can be further reduced using metals hav-
ing low coefﬁcients of friction. For example, the wheel is
typically made of bronze and the worm of highly ﬁnished
hardened steel.

Most worms are cylindrical in shape with a uniform
pitch diameter. However, a variable pitch diameter is used
in the double-enveloping worm. This conﬁguration is used
when increased load capacity is required.

This type of gear is beginning to supersede straight-
bevel gears in many applications. They have the advan-
tage of ensuring evenly distributed tooth loads and carry
more load without surface fatigue. Thrust loading depends
on the direction of rotation and whether the spiral angle
of the teeth is positive or negative.

39.1.8 Miter

Miter gears are bevel gears with the same number of teeth
in both gears, operating on shafts at 90°, as shown in
Figure 39.14. Their primary use is to change direction in a
mechanical drive assembly. Since both the pinion and gear
have the same number of teeth, there is no mechanical
advantage generated by this type of gear.

39.1.9 Hypoid

Hypoid-bevel gears are a cross between a spiral-bevel gear
and a worm gear (Figure 39.15). The axes of a pair of
hypoid-bevel gears are non-intersecting and the distance
between the axes is referred to as the ‘offset’. This con-
ﬁguration allows both shafts to be supported at both ends
and provides high strength and rigidity.

Although stronger and more rigid than most other types
of gears, they are less efﬁcient and extremely difﬁcult to
lubricate because of high tooth-contact pressures. Further
increasing the demands on the lubricant is the material of
construction as both the driven and driving gears are made
of steel. This requires the use of special extreme-pressure
lubricants that have both oiliness and anti-weld properties

90˚

Figure 39.14 Miter gear shaft angle

Figure 39.15 Hypoid bevel gear

Figure 39.16 Worm gear

39/636 Gears and Gearboxes

39.2 Performance

With few exceptions, gears are one-directional power
transmission devices. Unless a special bi-directional
is speciﬁed, gears have a speciﬁc direction
gear set
of rotation and will not provide smooth,
trouble-free
power transmission when the direction is reversed. The
reason for this one-directional
limitation is that gear
manufacturers do not ﬁnish the non-power side of the
tooth proﬁle. This is primarily a cost-savings issue and
should not affect gear operation.

The primary performance criteria for gear sets include:
efﬁciency, brake horsepower, speed transients, startup,
backlash, and ratios.

Efﬁciency

Gear efﬁciency varies with the type of gear used and the
speciﬁc application. Table 39.2 provides a comparison of
the approximate efﬁciency range of various gear types.
The table assumes normal operation where torsional loads
are within the gear set’s designed horsepower range. It
also assumes that startup and speed change torques are
acceptable.

Brake horsepower

All gear sets have a recommended and maximum horse-
power rating. The rating varies with the type of gear set,
but must be carefully considered when evaluating a gear-
box problem. The maximum installed motor horsepower
should never exceed the maximum recommended horse-
power of the gearbox. This is especially true of worm
gear sets. The soft material used for these gears is easily
damaged when excess torsional load is applied.

speciﬁcations or

The procurement

the vendor’s
engineering catalog will provide all of the recommended
horsepower
ratings needed for an analysis. These
recommendations assume normal operation and must be
adjusted for the actual operating conditions in a speciﬁc
application.

Table 39.2 Gear efﬁciencies

Gear type

Efﬁciency range, %

Bevel gear, hypoid
Bevel gear, miter
Bevel gear, spiral
Bevel gear, straight
Bevel gear, zerol
Helical gear, external
Helical gear–double, external (herringbone)
Spur gear, external
Worm, cylindrical
Worm, double-enveloping

Not available

Not available

90–98

97–99
97–99

97–99
97–99
97–99
50–99
50–98

Speed transients

Applications that require frequent speed changes can
have a severe, negative impact on gearbox reliability.
The change in torsional
load caused by acceleration
and deceleration of a gearbox may exceed its maximum
allowable horsepower
rating. This problem can be
minimized by decreasing the ramp speed and amount of
braking that is applied to the gear set. The vendor’s O&M
manual and/or technical speciﬁcations should provide
detailed recommendations that deﬁne the limits to use in
speed-change applications.

Startup

Start–stop operation of a gearbox can accelerate both gear
and bearing wear and may cause reliability problems. In
applications like the bottom discharge of storage silos,
where a gear set drives a chain or screw conveyor system
and startup torque is excessive, care must be taken to
prevent over-loading the gear set.

Backlash

Gear backlash is the play between teeth measured at the
pitch circle. It is the distance between the involutes of the
mating gear teeth, as illustrated in Figure 39.17.

Backlash is necessary to provide the running clearance
needed to prevent binding of the mating gears, which can
result in heat generation, noise, abnormal wear, overload,
and/or failure of the drive. In addition to the need to
prevent binding, some backlash occurs in gear systems
because of the dimensional tolerances needed for cost-
effective manufacturing.

During the gear-manufacturing process, backlash is
achieved by cutting each gear tooth thinner by an amount
equal to one-half of the backlash dimension required for
the application. When two gears made in this manner
are run together (i.e., mate), their allowances combine to
provide the full amount of backlash.

The increase in backlash that results from tooth wear
does not adversely affect operation with non-reversing
drives, or drives with continuous load in one direction.
However, for reversing drives and drives where timing is
critical, excessive backlash that results from wear usually
cannot be tolerated.

Backlash

Pitch
line

Source: Adapted by Integrated Systems, Inc. from ‘Gears and Gear
Drives,’ 1996 Power. Transmission Design, Penton Publishing Inc.,
Ohio, pp. A199–A211.

Figure 39.17 Backlash

Ratios

Ratios used in deﬁning and specifying gears are gear-
tooth ratio, contact ratio, and hunting ratio. The gear-tooth
ratio is the ratio of the larger to the smaller number
of teeth in a pair of gears. The contact ratio is a mea-
sure of overlapping tooth action which is necessary to
assure smooth, continuous action. For example, as one
pair of teeth passes out of action, a succeeding pair of
teeth must have already started action. The hunting ratio
is the ratio of the number of gear and pinion teeth. It is a
means of ensuring that each tooth in the pinion contacts
every tooth in the gear before it contacts any gear tooth
a second time.

39.3 Installation
Installation guidelines provided in the vendor’s O&M
manual should be followed for proper installation of the
gearbox housing and alignment to its mating machine-
train components.

Gearboxes must be installed on a rigid base that pre-
vents ﬂexing of its housing and the input and output
shafts. Both the input and output shaft must be prop-
erly aligned, within 0.002 inch, to their respective mating
shafts. Both shafts should be free of any induced axial
forces that may be generated by the driver or driven units.
Internal alignment is also important. Internal alignment
and clearances of new gearboxes should be within the
vendor’s acceptable limits, but there is no guarantee that
this will be true. All internal clearances (e.g., backlash
and center-to-center distances) and the parallel relation-
ship of the pinion and gear shafts should be veriﬁed for
any gearbox that is being investigated.

Operating methods 39/637

39.4 Operating methods
Two primary operating parameters govern effective oper-
ation of gear sets or gearboxes: maximum torsional power
rating and transitional torsional requirements.

Each gear set has a speciﬁc maximum horsepower rat-
ing. This is the maximum torsional power that the gear
set can generate without excessive wear or gear damage.
Operating procedures should ensure that the maximum
horsepower is not exceeded throughout the entire operat-
ing envelope. If the gear set was properly designed for
the application, its maximum horsepower rating should
be suitable for steady-state operation at any point within
the design-operating envelope. As a result, it should be
able to provide sufﬁcient torsional power at any set point
within the envelope.

Two factors may cause over-load on a gear set: exces-
sive load or speed transients. Many processes are sub-
jected to radical changes in the process or production
loads. These changes can have a serious effect on gear-set
performance and reliability.

Operating procedures should establish boundaries that
limit the maximum load variations that can be used in
normal operation. These limits should be well within the
acceptable load rating of the gear set.

The second factor, speed transients, is a leading cause
of gear-reliability problems. The momentary change in
torsional load created by rapid changes in speed can have
a dramatic, negative impact on gear sets. These transients
often exceed the maximum horsepower rating of the gears
and may result in failure. Operating procedures should
ensure that torsional power requirements during startup,
process-speed changes, and shutdown do not exceed the
recommended horsepower rating of the gear set.

40

Hydraulic
Fundamentals

R Keith Mobley
The Plant Performance Group

Contents

40.1 Introduction
40.2 Basic hydraulics

40/641

40/642

40.2.1 States of matter 40/643
40.2.2 Development of hydraulics
40.2.3 Use of hydraulics
40/643
40.2.4 Operation of hydraulic components

40/643

40/639

40/644

40.3 Forces in liquids

40/644

40.3.1 Liquids at rest (hydrostatics)
40.3.2 Liquids in motion (hydraulics)
40.3.4 Transmission of force through liquids
40.3.5 Pressure and force in hydraulic systems
40.3.6 Multiplication of force 40/651

40/644

40/647

40/651

40/651

40.4 Hydraulic pumps

40/653
40.4.1 Operation 40/653
40.4.2 Performance 40/653

40.5 Hydraulic ﬂuids

40/654

40/654

40.5.1 Purpose of ﬂuid
40.5.2 Properties 40/655
40.5.3 Contamination
40.5.4 Contamination control
40.5.5 Hydraulic ﬂuid sampling

40/660

40/662

40/662

40.6 Reservoirs, strainers, ﬁlters and accumulators 40/663

40.6.1 Reservoirs 40/663
40.6.2 Accumulators 40/664
40.6.3 Filtration
40.6.4 Heat exchangers

40/665

40/665

40.7 Actuators

40/666

40.7.1 Hydraulic cylinders

40.8 Control valves

40/670

40.8.1 Valve classiﬁcation

40/666

40/670

40.9 Lines, ﬁttings and seals 40/673

40.9.1 Types of lines
40.9.2 Types of ﬁttings and connectors

40/673

40/678

40.1 Introduction
The study of hydraulics deals with the use and characteris-
tics of liquids and gases. Since the beginning of time, man
has used ﬂuids to ease his burden. Earliest recorded his-
tory shows that devices such as pumps and water wheels
were used to generate useable mechanical power.

Fluid power encompasses most applications that use
liquids or gases to transmit power
in the form of
mechanical work, pressure and/or volume in a system.
This deﬁnition includes all systems that rely on pumps or
compressors to transmit speciﬁc volumes and pressures of
liquids or gases within a closed system. The complexity
of these systems range from a simple centrifugal pump
used to remove casual water
to
complex airplane control systems that rely on high-
pressure hydraulic systems.

from a basement

Fluid power systems have been developing rapidly over
the past thirty-ﬁve years. Fluid power ﬁlled a need during
World War II for an energy transmission system with mus-
cle, which could easily be adapted to automated machin-
ery. Today, ﬂuid power technology is seen in every phase
of man’s activities. Fluid power is found in areas of man-
ufacturing such as metal forming, plastics, basic metals,
and material handling. Fluid power is evident in trans-
portation as power and control systems of ships, airplanes,
and automobiles. The environment is another place ﬂuid
power is hard at work compacting waste materials and
controlling ﬂoodgates of hydroelectric dams. Food pro-
cessing, construction equipment and medical technology
are a few more areas of ﬂuid power involvement. Fluid
power applications are only limited by imagination.

There are alternatives to ﬂuid power systems. Each
system, regardless of the type, has its own advantages
and disadvantages. Each has applications where it is best
suited to do the job. This is probably the reason you
won’t ﬁnd a ﬂuid power wristwatch or hoses carrying
ﬂuid power replacing electrical power lines.

Advantages of ﬂuid power

If a ﬂuid power system is properly designed and used,
it will provide smooth, ﬂexible, uniform action without
vibration, and is unaffected by variation of load. In case
of an overload, an automatic release of pressure can be
guaranteed, so that the system is protected against break-
down or excessive strain. Fluid power systems can pro-
vide widely variable motions in both rotary and linear
transmission of power and the need for manual control
can be minimized. In addition, ﬂuid power systems are
economical to operate.

Fluid power includes hydraulic, hydro-pneumatic and
pneumatic systems. Why are hydraulics used in some
applications, pneumatics in others or combination sys-
tems, in still others? Both the user and the manufacturer
must consider many factors when determining which type
of system should be used in a speciﬁc application.

In general, pneumatic systems are less expensive to
manufacture and operate, but there are factors that pro-
hibit their universal application. The compressibility of
air, as any gas, limits the operation of pneumatic sys-
tems. For example, a pneumatic cylinder cannot maintain

Introduction 40/641

the position of a suspended load without a constant sup-
ply of air pressure. The load will force the air trapped
within the cylinder to compress and allow the suspended
load to creep. This compressibility also limits the motion
of pneumatic actuators when under load.

Pneumatic systems can be used for applications that
require low to medium pressure and only accurate control.
Applications that require medium pressure, more accurate
force transmission and moderate motion control can use
a combination of hydraulics and pneumatics, or hydro-
pneumatics. Hydraulics systems must be used for applica-
tions that require high pressure and/or extremely accurate
force and motion control.

The ﬂexibility of ﬂuid power, both hydraulic and pneu-
matic elements, present a number of problems. Since ﬂu-
ids and gases have no shape of their own, they must be
positively conﬁned throughout the entire system. This is
especially true in hydraulics where leakage of hydraulic
oil can result in safety or environmental concerns. Spe-
cial consideration must be given to the structural integrity
of the parts of a hydraulic system. Strong pipes, tub-
ing and hoses, as well as the containers must be pro-
vided. Leaks must be prevented. This is a serious problem
with the high pressure obtained in many hydraulic system
applications.

Fluid power systems vs. mechanical systems

Some desirable characteristics of ﬂuid power systems
when compared with mechanical systems. A ﬂuid power
system is often a simpler means of transmitting energy.
There are fewer mechanical parts than in an ordinary
industrial system. Since there are fewer mechanical
parts, a ﬂuid power system is more efﬁcient and more
dependable. In the common industrial system, there is no
need to worry about hundreds of moving parts failing,
with ﬂuid or gas as the transmission medium.

With ﬂuid or gas as the transmission medium, vari-
ous components of a system can be located at convenient
places on the machine. Fluid power can be transmitted and
controlled quickly and efﬁciently up, down, and around
corners with few controlling elements.

Since ﬂuid power is efﬁciently transmitted and con-
trolled, it gives freedom in designing a machine. The
need for gear, cam, and lever systems is eliminated. Fluid
power systems can provide inﬁnitely variable speed, force
and direction control with simple, reliable elements.

Fluid power vs. electrical systems

Mechanical force can be more easily controlled using ﬂuid
power. The simple use of valves and rotary or linear actu-
ators control speed, direction and force. The simplicity
of hydraulic and pneumatic components greatly increases
their reliability. In addition, components and overall sys-
tem size are typically much smaller than comparable elec-
trical transmission devices.

Special problems

The operation of the system involves constant movement
of the hydraulic ﬂuid within its lines and components.

40/642 Hydraulic Fundamentals

This movement causes friction within the ﬂuid itself and
against the containing surfaces. Excessive friction can
lead to serious losses in efﬁciency or damage to system
components. Foreign matter must not be allowed to accu-
mulate in the system, where it will clog small passages
or score closely ﬁtted parts. Chemical action may cause
corrosion. Anyone working with hydraulic systems must
know how a ﬂuid power system and its components oper-
ate, both in terms of the general principles common to
all physical mechanisms and of the peculiarities of the
speciﬁc arrangement at hand.

The word hydraulics is based on the Greek word for
water, the ﬁrst used form of hydraulic power transmis-
sion. Initially, hydraulics covered the study of the phys-
ical behavior of water at rest and in motion. It has been
expanded to include the behavior of all liquids, although
it is primarily limited to the motion or kinetics of liquids.

Hazards

Any use of a pressurized medium, such as hydraulic ﬂuid,
can be dangerous. Hydraulic systems carry all the hazards
of pressurized systems and special hazards related directly
to the composition of the ﬂuid used.

When using oil as a ﬂuid in a high-pressure hydraulic
system, the possibility of ﬁre or an explosion exists. A

severe ﬁre hazard is generated when a break in the high-
pressure piping occurs and the oil is vaporized into the
atmosphere. Extra precautions against ﬁre should be prac-
ticed in these areas.

If oil is pressurized by compressed air, an explosive
hazard exists. If high-pressure air encounters the oil, it
may create a diesel effect, which may result in an explo-
sion. A carefully followed preventive maintenance plan is
the best precaution against explosions.

40.2 Basic hydraulics
Fluid power systems have developed rapidly over the past
thirty-ﬁve years. Today, ﬂuid power technology is used
in every phase of human existence. The extensive use of
hydraulics to transmit power is due the fact that prop-
erly constructed ﬂuid power systems possess a number
of favorable characteristics. They eliminate the need for
complicated systems of gears, cams, and levers. Motion
can be transmitted without the slack or mechanical loose-
ness inherent in the use of solid machine parts. The ﬂuids
used are not subject to breakage as are mechanical parts,
and the mechanisms are not subjected to great wear.

The operation of a typical ﬂuid power system is illus-
trated in Figure 40.1. Oil from a tank or reservoir ﬂows
through a pipe into a pump. An electric motor, air motor,

Cylinder

Piston

Piston rod

Push to move a

given load

Pressure
control

Directional

control

Driving
means

Pump

Functional

control

(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
QQQQQQQQQQQ
¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
QQQQQQQQQQQ
¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
QQQQQQQQQQQ
¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
QQQQQQQQQQQ
¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
QQQQQQQQQQQ
¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
QQQQQQQQQQQ
¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
QQQQQQQQQQQ
¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
QQQQQQQQQQQ
¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
QQQQQQQQQQQ
¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
QQQQQQQQQQQ
¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
QQQQQQQQQQQ
¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
QQQQQQQQQQQ
¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
QQQQQQQQQQQ
¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
QQQQQQQQQQQ
¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
QQQQQQQQQQQ
¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
QQQQQQQQQQQ
¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢

Filter

Figure 40.1 Basic hydraulic system

gas or steam turbine, or an internal combustion engine can
drive the pump. The pump increases the pressure of the
oil. The actual pressure developed depends on the design
of the system.

The high-pressure oil ﬂows in piping through a control
valve. The control valve changes the direction of oil ﬂow.
A relief valve, set at a desired, safe operating pressure,
protects the system from an over pressure condition. The
oil that enters the cylinder acts on the piston, with the
pressure acting over the area of the piston, developing
a force on the piston rod. The force on the piston rod
enables the movement of a load or device.

40.2.1 States of matter

The material that makes up the universe is known as mat-
ter. Matter is deﬁned as any substance that occupies space
and has weight. Matter exists in three states: solid, liquid,
and gas. Each has distinguishing characteristics. Solids
have a deﬁned volume and a deﬁnite shape. Liquids have
a deﬁnite volume, but take the shape of their containing
vessels. Gases have neither a deﬁnite shape nor volume.
Gases not only take the shape of the containing vessel,
but also expand to ﬁll the vessel, regardless of its vol-
ume. Examples of the states of matter are iron, water,
and air.

Matter can change from one state to another. Water is
a good example. At high temperatures, above 212°F, it is
in a gaseous state known as steam. At moderate temper-
atures, it is liquid, and at low temperatures, below 32°F,
it becomes ice, a solid. In this example, the temperature
is the dominant factor in determining the state that the
substance assumes.

Pressure is another important factor that will affect
changes in the state of matter. At pressures higher than
atmospheric, 14.7 psi, water will boil and thus change to
steam at temperatures below 212°F. Pressure is also a
critical factor in changing some gases to liquids or solids.
Normally, when pressure and chilling are both applied to
a gas, the gas assumes a liquid state. Liquid air, which
is a mixture of oxygen and nitrogen, is produced in this
manner.

In the study of ﬂuid power, we are concerned primar-
ily with the properties and characteristics of liquids and
gases. However, you should keep in mind that the prop-
erties of solids also affect the characteristics of liquids
and gases. The lines and components, which are solids,
enclose and control the liquid or gas in their respective
systems.

Basic hydraulics 40/643

After the breakup of the ancient world, there were few
new developments for many centuries. Then, over a com-
paratively short period, beginning near the end of the sev-
enteenth century, Italian physicist, Evangelista Torricelle,
French Physicist, Edme Mariotte and later Daniel Ber-
noulli conducted experiments to study the force generated
by the discharge of water through small openings in the
sides of tanks and through short pipes. During the same
period, Blaise Pascal, a French scientist, discovered the
fundamental law for the science of hydraulics. Pascal’s
law states that an increase in pressure on the surface of
a conﬁned ﬂuid is transmitted throughout the conﬁning
vessel or system without any loss of pressure.

the transmission of

Figure 40.2 illustrates

forces
through liquids. For Pascal’s law to become effective for
practical applications, a piston or ram conﬁned within a
close tolerance cylinder was needed. It was not until the
latter part of the eighteenth century that methods were
developed that could make the snugly ﬁtted parts required
making hydraulic systems practical.

This was accomplished by the invention of machines
that were used to cut and shape the necessary closely ﬁt-
ted parts and, particularly, by the development of gaskets
and packing. Since that time, components such as valves,
pumps, actuating cylinders and motors have been devel-
oped and reﬁned to make hydraulics one of the leading
methods of transmitting power.

40.2.3 Use of hydraulics

The hydraulic press, invented by an Englishman, John
Brahmah, was one of the ﬁrst workable machines that
used hydraulics in its operation. It consisted of a plunger
pump piped to a large cylinder and a ram. This press found
wide use in England because it provided a more effective
and economical means of applying large, uniform forces
in industrial uses.

Today, hydraulic power

is used to operate many
different tools and mechanisms. In a garage, a mechanic
raises the end of an automobile with a hydraulic jack.
Dentists and barbers use hydraulic power to lift and
position their chairs. Hydraulic doorstops keep heavy
doors from slamming. Hydraulic brakes have been
standard equipment on automobiles since the 1930s. Most
automobiles are equipped with automatic transmissions

Force 1 = 100 lbs.

Force 2 = 100 lbs.

40.2.2 Development of hydraulics

The use of hydraulics is not new. The Egyptians and
people of ancient Persia, India and China conveyed water
along channels for irrigation and other domestic purposes.
They used dams and sluice gates to control the ﬂow and
waterways to direct the water to where it was needed.
The ancient Cretins had elaborate plumbing systems.
Archimedes studied the laws of ﬂoating and submerged
bodies. The Romans constructed aqueducts to carry water
to their cities.

Figure 40.2 Transmission of forces

40/644 Hydraulic Fundamentals

that are hydraulically operated. Power steering is another
application of hydraulic power. Construction workers
depend upon hydraulic power for their equipment. For
example, the blade of a bulldozer is normally operated by
hydraulic power.

40.2.4 Operation of hydraulic components

To transmit and control power through pressurized ﬂuids,
an arrangement of interconnected components is required.
Such an arrangement is commonly referred to as a sys-
tem. The number and arrangement of the components
vary from system to system, depending on the particu-
lar application. In many applications, one main system
supplies power to several subsystems, which are some-
times referred to as circuits. The complete system may
be a small, compact unit or a large, complex system that
has components located at widely separated points within
the plant. The basic components of a hydraulic system are
essentially the same regardless of the complexity of the
system. Seven basic components must be in a hydraulic
system. These basic components are:

Reservoir or receiver

This is usually a closed tank or vessels that hold the vol-
ume of ﬂuid required supporting the system. The vessels
normally provide several functions in addition to holding
ﬂuid reserves. The major functions include ﬁltration of
the ﬂuid, heat dissipation, and water separation.

Hydraulic pump

This is the energy source for hydraulic systems. It converts
electrical energy into dynamic, hydraulic pressure. In
almost all cases, hydraulic systems utilize positive
displacement pumps as their primary power source. These
are broken down into two primary sub-classiﬁcations:
constant-volume or variable-volume. In the former, the
pumps are designed to deliver a ﬁxed output (i.e. both
volume and pressure) of hydraulic ﬂuid. In the later, the
pump delivers only the volume or pressure required for
speciﬁc functions of the system or its components.

Control valves

The energy generated by the hydraulic pump must be
directed and controlled so that the energy can be used.
A variety of directional and functional control valves are
designed to provide a wide range of control functions.

Actuating devices

Relief valves

Most hydraulic systems use a positive displacement pump
to generate energy within the system. Unless the pres-
sure is controlled, these pumps will generate excessive
pressure that can cause catastrophic failure of system com-
ponent. A relief valve is always installed downstream of
the hydraulic pump to prevent excessive pressure and to
provide a positive relief should a problem develop within
the system. The relief valve is designed to open at a pre-
set system pressure. When the valve opens, it diverts ﬂow
to the receiver tank or reservoir.

Lines (pipe, tubing or ﬂexible hoses)

All systems require some means to transmit hydraulic
ﬂuid from one component to another. The material of
the connecting lines will vary from system to system or
within the system.

Hydraulic ﬂuid

The ﬂuid provides the vehicle that transmits input power,
such as from a hydraulic pump to the actuator device or
devices that perform work.

40.3 Forces in liquids
The study of liquids is divided into two main parts: liquids
at rest, hydrostatics; and liquids in motion, hydraulics. The
effect of liquids at rest can often be expressed by simple
formulas. The effects of liquids in motion are more difﬁ-
cult to express due to frictional and other factors whose
actions cannot be expressed by simple mathematics.

Liquids are almost incompressible. For example, if a
pressure of 100 pounds per square inch, psi, is applied to
a given volume of water that is at atmospheric pressure,
the volume will decrease by only 0.03 per cent. It would
take a force of approximately 32 tons to reduce its volume
by 10 per cent; however, when this force is removed, the
water immediately returns to its original volume. Other
liquids behave in about the same manner as water.

Another characteristic of a liquid is the tendency to
keep its free surface level. If the surface is not level,
liquids will ﬂow in the direction which will tend to make
the surface level.

40.3.1 Liquids at rest (hydrostatics)

In the study of ﬂuids at rest, we are concerned with the
transmission of force and the factors which affect the
forces in liquids. Additionally, pressure in and on liquids
and factors affecting pressure are of great importance.

The energy within a hydraulic system is of no value
until it is converted into work. Typically, this is accom-
plished by using an actuating device of some type. This
actuating device may be a cylinder, which converts the
hydraulic energy into linear mechanical force; a hydraulic
motor, that converts energy into rotational force; or a vari-
ety of other actuators designed to provide speciﬁc work
functions.

Pressure and force

The terms force and pressure are used extensively in the
study of ﬂuid power. It is essential that we distinguish
between these terms. Force is the total pressure applied
to or generated by a system. It
is the total pressure
exerted against the total area of a particular surface and
is expressed in pounds or grams.

(a)

14.7 lb/in2

Forces in liquids 40/645

14.7

14.7

14.7

14.7

14.7

14.7

(b)

14.7

14.7 lb/in2

Pressure is the amount of force applied to each unit area
of a surface and is expressed in pounds per square inch,
lb/in2 (psi) or grams per square centimeter, gm/cm2. Pres-
sure may be exerted in one direction, in several directions,
or in all directions.

A formula is used in computing force, pressure, and
area in ﬂuid power systems. In this formula, P refers to
pressure; F indicates force, and A represents area. Force
equals pressure times area. Thus, the formula is written:
F D P ð A
Pressure equals force divided by area. By rearranging the
formula, this statement may be condensed to:
P D F
A

Since area equals force divided by pressure, the formula
is written:
A D F
P

Atmospheric pressure

The atmosphere is the entire mass of air that surrounds
the earth. While it extends upward for about 500
miles, the section of primary interest is the portion that
rests on the earth’s surface and extends upward for about
2 miles. This layer is called the troposphere.
7 1
If a column of air 1-inch square extended to the ‘top’
of the atmosphere could be weighed,
this column of
air would weigh approximately 14.7 pounds at sea level.
Thus, atmospheric pressure, at sea level, is approximately
14.7 pounds per square inch or psi.

Atmospheric pressure decreases by approximately
1.0 psi
for every 2343 feet of elevation. Elevations
below sea level, such as in excavations and depressions,
atmospheric pressure increases. Pressures under water
differ from those under air only because the weight of
the water must be added to the pressure of the air.

Atmospheric pressure can be measured by any of sev-
eral methods. The common laboratory method uses a mer-
cury column barometer. The height of the mercury column
serves as an indicator of atmospheric pressure. At sea
level and at a temperature of 0° Celsius (C), the height
of the mercury column is approximately 30 inches, or
76 centimeters. This represents a pressure of approxi-
mately 14.7 psia. The 30-inch column is used as a ref-
erence standard.

Atmospheric pressure does not vary uniformly with alti-
tude. It changes more rapidly at lower altitudes because
of the compressibility of air, which causes the air lay-
ers close to the earth’s surface to be compressed by the
air masses above them. This effect, however, is partially
counteracted by the contraction of the upper layers due
to cooling. The cooling tends to increase the density of
the air.

Atmospheric pressures are quite large, but

in most
instances, practically the same pressure is present on all
sides of objects so that no single surface is subjected to a
greater load. Atmospheric pressure acting on the surface
of a liquid, Figure 40.3 view (a), is transmitted equally

Figure 40.3 Effects of atmospheric pressure

throughout the liquid to the walls of the container, but
is balanced by the same atmospheric pressure acting on
the outer walls of the container. In view (b), Atmospheric
pressure acting on the surface of one piston is balanced
by the same pressure acting on the surface of the other
piston. The different areas of the two surfaces make no
difference, since for a unit of area, pressures are balanced.
D 62.4 lbs
1 ft2

Pascal’s law

The foundation of modern hydraulics was established with
Pascal’s discovery that pressure in a ﬂuid acts equally in
all directions. This pressure acts at right angles to the
containing surfaces. If some type of pressure gauge, with
an exposed face, is placed beneath the surface of a liquid,
Figure 40.4, at a speciﬁc depth and pointed in different
directions, the pressure will read the same. Thus, we can
say that pressure in a liquid is independent of direction.
Pressure due to weight of a liquid, at any level, depends
on the depth of the ﬂuid from the surface. If the exposed
face of the pressure gauge, Figure 40.4, is moved closer
to the surface of the liquid, the indicated pressure will
be less.

When the depth is doubled, the indicated pressure is
also doubled. Thus, the pressure in a liquid is directly
proportional to the depth. Consider a container with ver-
tical sides, Figure 40.5, that is 1 foot high and 1 foot wide.

40/646 Hydraulic Fundamentals

1 foot high, having a cross-sectional area of 1 square inch,
is 0.433 pounds. If the depth of the column is tripled, the
weight of the column will be 3 ð 0.433 or 1.299 pounds
and the pressure at the bottom will be 1.299 lb/in2 (psi),
since the pressure is equal to the force divided by the area.
Thus, the pressure at any depth in a liquid is equal to the
weight of the column of liquid at the depth divided by
the cross-sectional area of the column at that depth. The
volume of a liquid that produces the pressure is referred
to as the ﬂuid head of the liquid. The pressure of a liquid
due to its ﬂuid head is also dependent on the density of
the liquid.

If we let A equal any cross-sectional area of a liquid
column and h equal the depth of the column, the volume
becomes Ah. Using the equation D D W/V, the weight of
the liquid above area A is equal to AhD, or:
D D W
Ah

W D Ah ð D

Figure 40.4 Pressure of a liquid is independent of direction

Let it be ﬁlled with water 1 foot deep, thus providing 1 ft3
of water. We learned earlier in this chapter that 1 ft3 of
water weighs 62.4 pounds. Using this information and the
equation for pressure, we can calculate the pressure on
the bottom of the container.
P D F
A

P D 62.4
144

D 0.433 lbs/inch2

Since there are 144 square inches in 1 square foot, this
can be stated as follows: the weight of a column of water

Since pressure is equal to the force per unit area, set A
equal to 1. Then the formula for pressure becomes:
P D hD
It is essential that h and D be expressed in similar units.
That is, if D is expressed in pounds per cubic foot, the
value of h must be expressed in feet. If the desired pres-
sure is to be expressed in pounds per square inch, the
pressure formula becomes:
P D hD
144

Pascal was also the ﬁrst to prove by experiment that the
shape and volume of a container in no way alters pressure.
Thus in Figure 40.6, if the pressure due to the weight of
the liquid at a point on horizontal line H is 8 psi, the
pressure is 8 psi everywhere at level H in the system.

Water weight

62.4 lb

Water pressure

62.4 lb/ft2

0.433 lb/in2

Figure 40.5 Water pressure in a 1-cubic foot container

Forces in liquids 40/647

A

H

Surface

H
e
a
d

Figure 40.6 Pressure relationship with shape

40.3.2 Liquids in motion (hydraulics)

In the operation of ﬂuid power systems, there must be
ﬂow of ﬂuid. The amount of ﬂow will vary from system to
system. To understand ﬂuid power systems, it is necessary
to understand some of the characteristics of liquids in
motion.

Liquids in motion have characteristics different from
liquids at rest. Frictional resistances within the ﬂuid, vis-
cosity, and inertia contribute to these differences. Inertia,
which means the resistance a mass offers to being set
in motion, will be discussed later in this section. Other
relationships of liquids in motion you must be familiar
with. Among these are volume and velocity of ﬂow; ﬂow
rate, and speed; laminar and turbulent ﬂow; and more
importantly, the force and energy changes which occur
in ﬂow.

Volume and velocity of ﬂow

The volume of a liquid passing a point in a given time is
known as its volume of ﬂow or ﬂow rate. The volume of
ﬂow is usually expressed in gallons per minute (gpm) and
is associated with the relative pressures of the liquid, such
as 5 gpm at 40 psig. The velocity of ﬂow or velocity of
the ﬂuid is deﬁned as the average speed at which the ﬂuid
moves past a given point. It is usually expressed in feet
per minute (fpm) or inches per second (ips). Velocity of
ﬂow is an important consideration in sizing the hydraulic
piping and other system components.

Volume and velocity of ﬂow must be considered
together. With other conditions unaltered, the velocity of

ﬂow increases as the cross-section or size of the pipe
decreases, and the velocity of ﬂow decreases as the cross-
section or pipe size increases. For example, the velocity
of ﬂow is slow at wide parts, yet the volume of liquid
passing each part of the stream is the same.

In Figure 40.7, if the cross-sectional area of the pipe is
16 square inches at point A and 4 square inches at point
B, we can calculate the relative velocity of ﬂow using the
ﬂow equation:
Q D vA
Where Q is the volume of ﬂow, v is the velocity of ﬂow
and A is the cross-sectional area of the liquid. Since the
volume of ﬂow at point a, Q1, is equal to the volume of
ﬂow at point B, Q2, we can use this equation to determine
the ratio of the velocity of ﬂow at point A, v1, to the
velocity of ﬂow at point B, v2. Since
Q1 D Q2, then A1v1 D A2v2
From Figure 40.7:
A1 D 16 square inches , A2 D 4 square inches
Substituting:
16v1 D 4v2 or v2 D 4v1
Therefore, the velocity of ﬂow at point B is four times
greater than the velocity of ﬂow at point A.

Volume of ﬂow and speed

When you consider the cylinder volume that must be ﬁlled
and the distance that the piston must travel, you can relate

40/648 Hydraulic Fundamentals

16 in2

A

Vel = 1

4 in2

B

Vel = 4

Figure 40.7 Volume and velocity of ﬂow

the volume of ﬂow to the speed of the piston. The volume
of the cylinder is found by multiplying the piston area by
the length the piston must travel. This length is known as
stroke.

Suppose you have determined that two cylinders have
the same volume and that one cylinder is twice as long
as the other. In this case, the cross-sectional area of the
longer tube will be half of the cross-sectional area of the
other tube. If ﬂuid is pumped into each cylinder at the
same rate, both pistons will reach their full travel at the
same time. However, the piston in the smaller cylinder
must travel twice as fast because it has twice as far to go.
There are two ways of controlling the speed of the piston,
(1) by varying the size of the cylinder and (2) by varying
the volume of ﬂow (gpm) to the cylinders.

obstructions, the degree of curvature of bends, and the
number of bends in the pipe. In setting up or maintaining
ﬂuid power systems, care should be taken to eliminate or
minimize as many causes of turbulence as possible, since
energy consumed by turbulence is wasted.

While designers of ﬂuid power equipment do what they
can to minimize turbulence, it cannot be avoided. For
example, in a 4-inch pipe at 68°F, ﬂow becomes turbu-
lent at velocities over approximately 6 inches per second
(ips) or about 3 ips in a 6-inch pipe. These velocities are
far below those commonly encountered in ﬂuid power
systems, where velocities of 5 feet per second (fps) and
above are common. In laminar ﬂow, losses due to friction
increase directly with velocity. With turbulent ﬂow, these
losses increase much more rapidly.

Streamline and turbulent ﬂow

Factors involved in ﬂow

At low velocities or in tubes of small diameter, ﬂow
is streamlined. This means that a given particle of ﬂuid
moves straight forward without bumping into other parti-
cles and without crossing their paths. Streamline ﬂow is
often referred to as laminar ﬂow, which is deﬁned as a
ﬂow situation in which ﬂuid moves in parallel lamina or
layers. An example of streamline ﬂow is an open stream
ﬂowing at a slow, uniform rate with logs ﬂoating on its
surface. The logs represent particles of ﬂuid. As long as
the stream ﬂows at a slow, uniform rate, each log ﬂoats
downstream in its own path, without crossing or bumping
into the others.

the velocity will

If the stream narrows and the volume of ﬂow remains
the same,
increase. If the velocity
increases sufﬁciently, the water becomes turbulent. Swirls,
eddies, and cross-motions are set up in the water. As
this happens, the logs are thrown against each other and
against the banks of the stream, and the paths followed
by different logs will cross and re-cross.

Particles of ﬂuid ﬂowing in pipes act

in the same
manner. The ﬂow is streamlined if the ﬂuid ﬂows slowly
enough, and remains streamlined at greater velocities if
the diameter of the pipe is small. If the velocity of ﬂow
or size of pipe is increased sufﬁciently, the ﬂow becomes
turbulent.

While a high velocity of ﬂow will produce turbulence
in any pipe, other factors contribute to turbulence. Among
these are the roughness of
the pipe,

the inside of

An understanding of the behavior of ﬂuids in motion,
or solids for that matter, requires an understanding of
the term inertia. Inertia is the term used by scientists to
describe the property possessed by all forms of matter that
make it resist being moved when it is at rest and to resist
any change in its rate or motion when it is moving.

The basic statement covering inertia is Newton’s ﬁrst
law of motion. His ﬁrst law states: A body at rest tends
to remain at rest, and a body in motion tends to remain in
motion at the same speed and direction, unless acted on by
some unbalanced force. This simply says what you have
learned by experience – that you must push an object to
start it moving and push it in the opposite direction to
stop it again.

A familiar illustration is the effort a pitcher must exert
to make a fast pitch and the opposition the catcher must
put forth to stop the ball. Similarly, the engine to make an
automobile begin to roll must perform considerable work;
although, after it has attained a certain velocity, it will roll
along the road at uniform speed if just enough effort is
expended to overcome friction, while brakes are necessary
to stop its motion. Inertia also explains the kick or recoil
of guns and the tremendous striking force of projectiles.

Inertia and force

To overcome the tendency of an object to resist any
change in its state of rest or motion, some force that

is not otherwise canceled or balanced must act on
the object. Some unbalanced force must be applied
whenever ﬂuids are set in motion or increased in velocity;
while conversely, forces are made to do work elsewhere
whenever ﬂuids in motion are retarded or stopped.

There is a direct relationship between the magnitude
of the force exerted and the inertia against which it acts.
This force depends on two factors: (1) the mass of the
object and (2) the rate at which the velocity of the object
is changed. The rule is that the force, in pounds, required
to overcome inertia is equal to the weight of the object
multiplied by the change in velocity, measured in feet
per second (fps) and divided by 32 times the time, in
seconds, required to accomplish the change. Thus, the
rate of change in velocity of an object is proportional to
the force applied. The number 32 appears because it is
the conversion factor between weight and mass.

Five physical factors act on a ﬂuid to affect its behavior.
All of the physical actions of ﬂuids in all systems are
determined by the relationship of these ﬁve factors to each
other. Summarizing, these ﬁve factors are:

1. Gravity, which acts at all times on all bodies, regard-

less of other forces.

2. Atmospheric pressure, which acts on any part of a sys-

tem exposed to the open air.

3. Speciﬁc applied forces, which may or may not be
present, but which are entirely independent of the pres-
ence or absence of motion.

4. Inertia, which comes into play whenever there is a
change from rest to motion, or the opposite, or when-
ever there is a change in direction or in rate of motion.
5. Whenever there is motion, friction is always present.

Kinetic energy

An external force must be applied to an object in order to
give it a velocity or to increase the velocity it already has.
Whether the force begins or changes velocity, it acts over
a certain distance. Force acting over a certain distance
is called work. Work and all forms into which it can be
changed are classiﬁed as energy. Obviously then, energy
is required to give an object velocity. The greater the
energy used, the greater the velocity will be.

Disregarding friction, for an object to be brought to
rest or for its motion to be slowed down, a force opposed
to its motion must be applied to it. This force also acts
over some distance. In this way, energy is given up by the
object and delivered in some form to whatever opposed
its continuous motion. The moving object is therefore a
means of receiving energy at one place and delivering it
to another point. While it is in motion, it is said to contain
this energy, as energy of motion or kinetics energy.

Since energy can never be destroyed, it follows that
if friction is disregarded the energy delivered to stop the
object will exactly equal the energy that was required to
increase its speed. At all times, the amount of kinetic
energy possessed by an object depends on its weight and
the velocity at which it is moving.

The mathematical relationship for kinetic energy is
stated in the rule. Kinetic energy, in foot-pounds, is equal
to the force, in pounds, which created it, multiplied by the

Forces in liquids 40/649

distance through which it was applied, or to the weight
of the moving object, in pounds, multiplied by the square
of its velocity, in feet per second, and divided by 64.

The relationship between inertia forces, velocity, and
kinetic energy can be illustrated by analyzing what hap-
pens when a gun ﬁres a projectile against the armor of
an enemy ship. The explosive force of the powder in the
breach pushes the projectile out of the gun, giving it a
high velocity. Because of its inertia, the projectile offers
opposition to this sudden velocity and a reaction is set up
that pushes the gun backwards. The force of the explosion
acts on the projectile throughout its movement in the gun.
This is force acting through a distance producing work.
This work appears as kinetic energy in the speeding pro-
jectile. The resistance of the air produces friction, which
uses some of the energy and slows down the projectile.
When the projectile hits the target, it tries to continue
moving. The target, being relatively stationary, tends to
remain stationary because of inertia. The result is that a
tremendous force is set up that either leads to the penetra-
tion of the armor or the shattering of the projectile. The
projectile is simply a means to transfer energy from the
gun to the enemy ship. This energy is transmitted in the
form of energy in motion or kinetic energy.

A similar action takes place in a ﬂuid power system
in which the ﬂuid takes the place of the projectile. For
example, the pump in a hydraulic system imparts energy
to the ﬂuid, which overcomes the inertia of the ﬂuid at
rest and causes it to ﬂow through the lines. The ﬂuid
ﬂows against some type of actuator that is at rest. The
ﬂuid tends to continue ﬂowing, overcomes the inertia of
the actuator, and moves the actuator to do work. Friction
uses up a portion of the energy as the ﬂuid ﬂows through
the lines and components.

Relationship of force, pressure, and head

In dealing with ﬂuids, forces are usually considered in
relation to the areas over which they are applied. As pre-
viously discussed, a force acting over a unit area is a
pressure, and pressure can alternately be stated in pounds
per square inch or in terms of head, which is the ver-
tical height of the column of ﬂuid whose weight would
produce that pressure.

All ﬁve of the factors that control the actions of ﬂuids
can be expressed either as force or in terms of equivalent
pressures or head. In either situation, the different factors
are referred to in the same terms.

Static and dynamic factors

Gravity, applied forces, and atmospheric pressure are
examples of static factors that apply equally to ﬂuids at
rest or in motion. Inertia and friction are dynamic forces
that apply only to ﬂuids in motion. The mathematical sum
of gravity, applied forces, and atmospheric pressure is the
static pressure obtained at any one point in a ﬂuid system
at a given point in time. Static pressure exists in addition
to any dynamic factors that may also be present at the
same time.

Remember that Pascal’s law states that a pressure set up
in a ﬂuid acts equally in all directions and at right angles

40/650 Hydraulic Fundamentals

to the containing surfaces. This covers the situation only
for ﬂuids at rest. It is true only for the factors making up
static head. Obviously, when velocity becomes a factor,
it must have a direction of ﬂow. The same is true of the
force created by velocity. Pascal’s law alone does not
apply to the dynamic factors of ﬂuid power systems.

The dynamic factors of inertia and friction are related
to the static factors. Velocity head and friction head are
obtained at the expense of static head. However, a portion
of the velocity head can always be reconverted to static
head. Force, which can be produced by pressure or head
when dealing with ﬂuids, is necessary to start a body
moving if it is at rest, and is present in some form when
the motion of the body is arrested. Therefore, whenever
a ﬂuid is given velocity, some part of its original static
head is used to impart this velocity, which then exists as
velocity head.

Bernouli’s principle

Review the system illustrated in Figure 40.8. Chamber A
is under pressure and is connected by a tube to chamber
B, which is also under pressure. The pressure in chamber
A is static pressure of 100 psi. The pressure at some point
(X) along the connecting tube consists of a velocity pres-
sure of 10 psi exerted in a direction parallel to the line of
ﬂow, plus the unused static pressure of 90 psi. The static
pressure (90 psi) follows Pascal’s law and exerts equal
pressure in all directions. As the ﬂuid enters chamber B,
it slows down and its velocity is reduced. As a volume of
liquid moves from a small, conﬁned space into a larger
area, the ﬂuid will expand to ﬁll the greater volume. The
result of this expansion is a reduction of velocity and a
momentary reduction in pressure.

In the example, the force required to absorb the ﬂuid’s
inertia equals the force required to start the ﬂuid moving
originally, so that the static pressure in chamber B is equal
to that in chamber A.

This example disregards friction. Therefore, it would
not be encountered in actual practice. Force or head is also
required to overcome friction. Unlike inertia, this force
cannot be recovered. Even though the energy required

overcoming friction still exists, it has been converted to
heat. In an actual system, the pressure in chamber B would
be less than that in chamber A. The difference would be
the amount of pressure used to overcome friction within
the system.

At all points in a system, the static pressure is always
to the original static pressure less any velocity
equal
head at a speciﬁc point
in the system and less the
friction head required to reach that point. Since both
the velocity head and friction head represent energy and
energy cannot be destroyed, the sum of the static head,
the velocity head, and the friction head at any point in
the system must add up to the original static head. This
is known as Bernoulli’s principal, which states: For the
horizontal ﬂow of ﬂuids through a tube, the sum of the
pressure and the kinetic energy per unit volume of the
ﬂuid is constant. This principle governs the relationship
of the static and dynamic factors in hydraulic systems.

Minimizing friction

Fluid power equipment is designed to reduce friction as
much as possible. Since energy cannot be destroyed, some
of the energy created by both static pressure and velocity
is converted to heat energy as the ﬂuid ﬂows through
the piping and components within a hydraulic system. As
friction increases, so does the amount of dynamic and
static energy that is converted into heat.

To minimize the loss of useable energy lost to its con-
version to heat energy, care must be taken in the design,
installation and operation of hydraulic system. As a min-
imum the following factors must be considered:

Proper ﬂuid must be chosen and used in the system. It
must have the best viscosity, operating temperature range
and other characteristics that are conducive to proper oper-
ation of the system and lowest possible friction component.
Fluid ﬂow is also critical for proper operation of a
hydraulic system. Turbulent ﬂow should be avoided as
much as possible. Clean, smooth pipe or tubing should
be used to provide laminar ﬂow and the lowest friction
possible within the system. Sharp, close radius bends and
sudden changes in cross-sectional area are avoided.

Force 1=
20 lbs.

Input
piston
2 in2

Force 2 =
200 lbs.

Output
piston
20 in2

Chamber

A

Pressure
10 lb/in2

Chamber

B

1inch

1
10 inch

Figure 40.8 Relation of static and dynamic factors

System components, such as pumps, valves and gauges,
create both turbulent ﬂow and high friction components.
Pressure drop, or a loss of pressure, is created by a com-
bination of turbulent ﬂow and friction as the ﬂuid ﬂows
through the unit. System components that are designed to
provide minimum interruption of ﬂow and pressure should
be selected for the system.

40.3.4 Transmission of force through liquids

When the end of a solid bar is struck, the main force of the
blow is carried straight through the bar to the other end
(Figure 40.9, view A). This happens because the bar is
rigid. The direction of the blow almost entirely determines
the direction of the transmitted force. The more rigid the
bar, the less force is lost inside the bar or transmitted
outward at right angles to the direction of the blow.

When a force is applied to the end of a column of con-
ﬁned liquid (Figure 40.9, view B), it is transmitted straight
through to the other end. It is also equal and undimin-
ished in every direction throughout the column – forward,
backward and sideways – so that the containing vessel is
literally ﬁlled with the added pressure.

So far, we have explained the effects of atmospheric
pressure on liquids and how external forces are distributed
through liquids. Let us now focus our attention on forces
generated by the weight of liquids themselves. To do this,
we must ﬁrst discuss density, speciﬁc gravity and Pas-
cal’s law.

40.3.5 Pressure and force in hydraulic systems

According to Pascal’s law, any force applied to a conﬁned
ﬂuid is transmitted uniformly in all directions throughout

Forces in liquids 40/651

the ﬂuid regardless of the shape of the container. Consider
the effect of this in the system shown in Figure 40.10.

If there is a resistance on the output piston and the input
piston is pushed downward, a pressure is created through
the ﬂuid which acts equally at right angles to surfaces in
all parts of the container. If force 1 is 100 pounds and
the area of the input piston is 10 square inches, then the
pressure in the ﬂuid is 10 psi.

100 lbs

10 square inches

Note: Fluid pressure cannot be created without resistance
to ﬂow. In this case, the equipment to which the out-
put piston is attached provides resistance. The force of
resistance acts against the top of the output piston. The
pressure is created in the system, by the input piston push-
ing on the underside of the output piston with a force of
10 pounds per square inch.

In this case,

the ﬂuid column has a uniform cross
section, so the area of the output piston is the same as the
area of the input piston, or 10 square inches. Therefore,
the upward force on the output piston is 100 pounds and
is equal to the force applied to the input piston. All
that was accomplished in this system was to transmit
the 100 pounds of force around the bend. However, this
principle underlies practically all mechanical applications
of hydraulics or ﬂuid power.

At this point, you should note that since Pascal’s law
is independent of the shape of the container, it is not
necessary that the tube connecting the two pistons has
the same cross-sectional area of the pistons. A connec-
tion of any size, shape or length will do, as long as an
unobstructed passage is provided. Therefore, the system
shown in Figure 40.11, with a relatively small, bent pipe
connecting two cylinders will act the same as the system
shown in Figure 40.10.

40.3.6 Multiplication of force

Unlike the preceding discussion, hydraulic systems can
provide mechanical advantage or a multiplication of input
force. Figure 40.12 illustrates an example of an increase
in output force. Assume that the area of the input piston
is 2 square inches. With a resistant force on the output
piston, a downward force of 20 pounds acting on the input

Force 1 = 100 lbs.

Force 2 = 100 lbs.

Input
piston
10 in2

Output
piston
10 in2

Pressure 10 lb/in2

(A)

(B)

Figure 40.9 Transmission of force: (A) solid; (B) ﬂuid

Figure 40.10 Force transmitted through ﬂuid

40/652 Hydraulic Fundamentals

Force 1 = 100 lbs.

Force 2 = 100 lbs.

Input
piston
10 in 2

Output
piston
10 in 2

Pressure 10 lb/ in 2

Figure 40.11 Transmitting force through small pipe

2 or 10 psi in the ﬂuid.
piston will create a pressure of 20
Although this force is much smaller than the force applied
in Figures 40.10 and 40.11, the pressure is the same. This
is because the force is applied to a smaller area.

This pressure of 10 psi acts on all parts of the ﬂuid
container, including the bottom of the output piston. The
upward force on the output piston is 200 pounds (10 psi ð
piston area). In this case, the original force has been mul-
tiplied tenfold while using the same pressure in the ﬂuid
as before. In any system with these dimensions, the ratio
of output force to input force is always 10 to 1, regard-
less of the applied force. For example, if the applied force
of the input piston is 50 pounds, the pressure in the sys-
tem will be 25 psi. This will support a resistant force of
500 pounds on the output piston. The system works the
same in reverse.

If we change the applied force and place a 200-pound
force on the output piston, Figure 40.12, making it the
input piston, the output force on the input piston will be
one-tenth the input force, or 20 pounds. Therefore, if two
pistons are used in a ﬂuid power system, the force acting
on each piston is directly proportional to its area, and the
magnitude of each force is the product of the pressure and
the area of each piston.

Differential areas

Figure 40.13 is a simple example of differential pressure.
The ﬁgure illustrates a single piston, with a surface area
of 6 in2, attached to a piston rod, with an area of 2 in2.
Without any external force applied to the end of the piston
rod, an equal force, 20 psig, is applied to both sides of the
piston, and will cause the piston to move to the right. This
motion is the result of differential forces. Even though the
input force, 20 psig, is applied to both sides of the piston
the difference in area, 6 in2 on the left face and 2 in2 on
the right face, will cause the piston to move. The opposed
faces of the piston behave like two pistons acting against
each other. The area of one face is the full cross-sectional
area of the cylinder or 6 in2, while the area of the opposing
face is the area of the piston minus the area of the piston
rod, or 2 in2. This leaves an effective area of 4 in2 on the
piston rod side of the piston.
The force acting on the left side of the piston is equal
to 20 psi ð 6 in2 or 120 pounds. The opposing force gen-
erated by the right side of the piston is 20 psi ð 4 in2 or
80 pounds. Therefore, there is a net unbalanced force of
40 pounds (120 (cid:3) 80) acting the right, and the piston will
move in that direction.

Force 1=
100 lbs.

Force 2 =
200 lbs.

20 lb/in2

Input
piston
2 in2

Output
piston
20 in2

Pressure
10 lb/in2

Piston

Cylinder

Piston rod

40 lb

1inch

1
10 inch

Area 6 in2

Area 2 in2

Figure 40.12 Multiplication of forces

Figure 40.13 Differential areas on a piston

Volume and distance factors

You have learned that if a force is applied to a system
and the cross-sectional areas of the input and output are
equal, the force on the input piston will support an equal
resistant force on the output piston. The pressure of the
liquid at this point is equal to the force applied to the
input piston divided by the piston’s area. Let us now look
at what happens when a force greater than the resistance
is applied to the input piston.

In the system illustrated in Figure 40.10, assume that
the resistant force on the output piston is 100 pounds. If
a force slightly greater than 100 pounds is applied to the
input piston, the pressure in the system will be slightly
greater than 10 psi. This increase in pressure will over-
come the resistant force on the output piston. If the input
piston is forced downward 1 inch, the movement displaces
10 in3 of ﬂuid. The ﬂuid must go somewhere. Since the
system is closed and the ﬂuid is practically incompress-
ible, the ﬂuid will move the right side of the system.
Because the output piston also has a cross-sectional area
of 10 in2, it will move upward 1 inch to accommodate the
10 in3 of ﬂuid. You may generalize this by saying that if
two pistons in a closed system have equal cross-sectional
areas and one piston is pushed and moved, the other pis-
ton will move the same distance in the opposite direction.
This is because a decrease in volume in one part of the
system is balanced by an equal increase in volume in
another part of the system.

Apply this reasoning to the system is Figure 40.11. If
the input piston is pushed down a distance of 1 inch, the
volume in the left cylinder will decrease by 2 in3. At the
same time, the volume in the right cylinder will increase
by 2 in2. Since the diameter of the right cylinder cannot
change, the piston must move upward to allow the volume
to increase. The piston will move a distance equal to the
volume increase divided by the surface area of the piston.
In this example, the piston will move one-tenth of an inch
(2 in3/20 in2).

This leads to the second basic rule for ﬂuid power sys-
tems that contain two pistons: The distances the pistons
move are inversely proportional to the areas of the pistons.
Or more simply, if one piston is smaller than the other,
the smaller piston must move a greater distance than the
larger piston any time the pistons move.

40.4 Hydraulic pumps
The purpose of a hydraulic pump is to supply the ﬂow
of ﬂuid required by a hydraulic system. The pump does
not create system pressure. System pressure is created by
a combination of the ﬂow generated by the pump and
the resistance to ﬂow created by friction and restrictions
within the system.

As the pump provides ﬂow, it transmits a force to the
ﬂuid. When the ﬂow encounters resistance, this force is
changed into pressure. Resistance to ﬂow is the result of
a restriction or obstruction in the ﬂow path. This restric-
tion is normally the work accomplished by the hydraulic
system, but there can also be restrictions created by the
lines, ﬁttings or components within the system. Thus, the

load imposed on the system or the action of a pressure-
regulating valve controls the system pressure.

Hydraulic pumps 40/653

40.4.1 Operation

A pump must have a continuous supply of ﬂuid available
to its inlet port before it can supply ﬂuid to the system.
As the pump forces ﬂuid through the outlet port, a partial
vacuum or low-pressure area is created at the inlet port.
When the pressure at the inlet port of the pump is lower
than the atmospheric pressure, the atmospheric pressure
acting on the ﬂuid in the reservoir must force the ﬂuid into
the pump’s inlet. This is called a suction lift condition.

40.4.2 Performance

Pumps are normally rated by their volumetric output and
discharge pressure. Volumetric output is the amount of
ﬂuid a pump can deliver to its outlet port in a certain
period of time and at a given speed. Volumetric output is
usually expressed in gallons per minute (gpm).

Since changes in pump speed affect volumetric output,
some pumps are rated by their displacement. Pump dis-
placement is the amount of ﬂuid the pump can deliver per
cycle or complete rotation. Since most pumps use a rotary
drive, displacement is usually expressed in terms of cubic
inches per revolution.

While pumps do not directly create pressure, the system
pressure created by the restrictions or work performed by
the system has a direct affect on the volumetric output of
the pump. As the system pressure increases, the volumet-
ric output of the pump decreases. This drop in volumetric
output is the result of an increase in the amount of leakage
within the pump. This leakage is referred to as pump slip-
page or slip. A factor must be considered in all hydraulic
pumps.

Pump ratings

Pumps are generally rated by their maximum operating
pressure capability and their output in gallons per minute
(gpm) at a given operating speed.

Pressure

The manufacturer based on reasonable service life
expectancy under speciﬁed operating conditions deter-
mine the pressure rating of a pump. It is important to
note that there is no standard industry-wide safety factor
in this rating. Operating at higher pressure may result in
reduced pump life or damage that is more serious.

Displacement

The ﬂow capacity of a pump can be expressed as its
displacement per revolution or by its output in gallons
per minute (gpm). Displacement is the volume of liquid
transferred in one complete cycle of pump operation. It is
equal to the volume of one pumping chamber multiplied
by the number of chambers that pass the outlet during one
complete revolution or cycle. Displacement is expressed
in cubic inches per revolution.

40/654 Hydraulic Fundamentals

Most pumps that are used in hydraulic applications have
a ﬁxed displacement which cannot be changed except by
replacing certain components. However, in some, it is
possible to vary the size of the pumping chamber and
thereby the displacement by means of external controls.
Some unbalanced vane pumps and many piston units can
be varied from maximum to zero delivery or even to
reverse ﬂow without modiﬁcation to the pump’s internal
conﬁguration.

Volumetric efﬁciency

In theory, a pump delivers an amount of ﬂuid equal to
its displacement each cycle or revolution. In reality, the
actual output is reduced because of internal leakage or
slippage. As pressure increases, the leakage from the out-
let to the inlet or to the drain also increases and the
volumetric efﬁciency decreases.

Volumetric efﬁciency is equal

to the actual output
divided by the theoretical output. It is expressed as a
percentage.

Efﬁciency D Actual output

Theoretical output

ð 100

For example,
if a pump theoretically should deliver
10 gpm by delivers only 9 gpm at 1000 psig, its volumetric
efﬁciency at that pressure is 90 per cent.

Efﬁciency D 9 gpm
10 gpm

ð 100 D 90%

40.5 Hydraulic ﬂuids
Selection and care of the hydraulic ﬂuid for a machine will
have an important effect on how it performs and on the life
of the hydraulic components. During the design of equip-
ment that requires ﬂuid power, many factors are consid-
ered in selecting the type of system to be used-hydraulic,
pneumatic, or a combination of the two. Some of the
factors required are speed and accuracy of operation, sur-
rounding atmospheric conditions, economic conditions,
availability of replacement ﬂuid, required pressure level,
operating temperature range, contamination possibilities,
cost of transmission lines, limitations of the equipment,
lubricity, safety to the operators, and expected service life
of the equipment.

After the type of system has been selected, many
of these same factors must be considered in selecting
the ﬂuid for the system. This chapter is devoted to
hydraulic ﬂuids.
Included in it are sections on the
properties and characteristics desired of hydraulic ﬂuids;
types of hydraulic ﬂuids; hazards and safety precautions
for working with, handling, and disposing of hydraulic
liquids; types and control of contamination; and sampling.

40.5.1 Purpose of the ﬂuid

As a power transmission medium, the ﬂuid must ﬂow easily
through lines and component passages. Too much resis-
tance to ﬂow creates considerable power loss. The ﬂuid
also must be as incompressible as possible so that action is
instantaneous when the pump is started or a valve shifts.

If the discharge pressure is increased, the amount of
slippage will
increase. If we increase the pressure in
the above example, to 1500 psig, the actual output may
drop to 8 gpm. Therefore, the volumetric efﬁciency will
decrease to 80 per cent at 1500 psig.

Lubrication

In most hydraulic components, the hydraulic ﬂuid provides
internal lubrication. Pump elements and other wear parts
slide against each other on a ﬁlm of ﬂuid, Figure 40.14.

2. Inside its body...

1. A typical sliding
valve spool moves
back and forth...

3. On a thin film of
hydraulic fluid (shown
greatly exaggerated).

Figure 40.14 Fluid lubricates working parts

4. If this passage is under
pressure, the fluid film
seals it from adjacent
passage.

For long component life, the oil must contain the nec-
essary additives to ensure high anti-wear characteristics.
Not all hydraulic oils contain these additives.

In equation form, this is written as:
D D W
V

Hydraulic ﬂuids 40/655

Sealing

the only
In many applications, hydraulic ﬂuid is
seal against pressure inside system components.
In
Figure 40.14, there is no seal ring between the valve
spool and body to prevent
leakage from the high-
pressure passage to the low-pressure passage. The close
mechanical ﬁt and viscosity of
the hydraulic ﬂuid
determine leakage rate.

Cooling

the hydraulic oil

Circulation of
through lines, heat
exchangers and the walls of the reservoir, Figure 40.15,
gives up heat that is generated within the system. Without
this cooling, the heat generated by the hydraulic pump and
mechanical work performed by system actuators would
build to a point that damage of system components could
cause premature failure of the system.

40.5.2 Properties

If ﬂuidity,
the physical property of a substance that
enables it to ﬂow and incompressibility were the only
properties required, any liquid that is not too thick might
be used in a hydraulic system. However, a satisfactory
liquid for a particular system must possess a number of
other properties. The most important properties and some
characteristics are discussed in the following paragraphs.

Density and speciﬁc gravity

The density of a substance is its weight per unit of volume.
The unit of volume in the English system of measurement
is 1 cubic foot or 1 f3. To ﬁnd the density of a substance,
you must know its weight and volume. You then divide its
weight by its volume to ﬁnd the weight per unit volume.

Example: The liquid that ﬁlls a certain container weighs
1496.6 pounds. The container is 4 feet long, 3 feet wide
and 2 feet deep. Its volume is 24 cubic feet (4 ft ð 3 ft ð
2 ft). If 24 ft3 of this liquid weighs 1497.6 pounds, then 1
cubic foot weighs:
D D 1, 497.6

24

or 62.4 pounds. Therefore, the density of the liquid is
62.4 pounds per cubic foot or 62.4 lbs/ft3. This is the den-
sity of water at 40°C and is usually used as the standard
for comparing densities of other substances. The tempera-
ture of 40°C was selected because water has its maximum
density at this temperature. This standard temperature is
used whenever the density of liquids and solids is mea-
sured. Changes in temperature will not change the weight
of a substance but will change the volume of the substance
by expansion or contraction, thus changing the weight per
unit volume, density.

In physics, the word speciﬁc implies a ratio. Weight is
the measure of the earth’s attraction for a body, which is
called gravity. Thus, the ratio of the weight of a unit vol-
ume of some substance to the weight of an equal volume
of a standard substance, measured under standard pres-
sure and temperature, is called speciﬁc gravity. The terms
speciﬁc weight and speciﬁc density are also sometimes
used to express this ratio.
Speciﬁc gravity, Sp.Gr. D

Weight of the substance

Weight of an equal volume of water
or, the speciﬁc gravity of water is 1.0 or a density of
62.4 lbs/ft3. If a cubic foot of a liquid weighs 68.64 pounds,
then its speciﬁc gravity is 1.1 or
68.64
62.4

Sp.Gr. D Density of the substance

Density of water

From hydraulic system

To hydraulic system

Pump

3. Heat generated in the
system is given off into
the atmosphere.

1. As the hydraulic fluid
circulates through lines...

Figure 40.15 Circulating oil cools system

2. And the reservoir...

40/656 Hydraulic Fundamentals

Thus, the speciﬁc gravity of the liquid is the ratio of its
density to the density of water. If the speciﬁc gravity of
a liquid or solid is known, the density can be obtained by
multiplying its speciﬁc gravity by the density of water.
For example, if a hydraulic ﬂuid has a speciﬁc gravity of
0.8, 1 ft3 of the ﬂuid weighs 0.8 times the weight of water
(62.4 pounds) or 49.92 pounds.

Speciﬁc gravity and density are independent of the size
of the sample and depend only on the substance of which
it is made.

Viscosity

Viscosity is one of the most
important properties of
hydraulic ﬂuids. It is a measure of a ﬂuid’s resistance
to ﬂow. A liquid such as gasoline which ﬂows easily
has a low viscosity, and a liquid such as tar which ﬂows
slowly has a high viscosity. The viscosity of a liquid is
affected by changes in temperature and pressure. As the
temperature of liquid increases, its viscosity decreases.
That is, a liquid ﬂows more easily when it is hot than
when it is cold. The viscosity of a liquid will increase as
the pressure on the liquid increases.

A satisfactory liquid for a hydraulic system must be
thick enough to give a good seal at pumps, motors, valves,
and so on. These components depend on close ﬁts for
creating and maintaining pressure. Any internal leakage
through these clearances results in loss of pressure, instan-
taneous control, and pump efﬁciency. Leakage losses are
greater with thinner liquids (low viscosity). A liquid that
is too thin will also allow rapid wearing of moving parts,
or of parts that operate under heavy loads. On the other
hand, if the liquid is too thick, viscosity too high, the
internal friction of the liquid will cause an increase in
the liquid’s ﬂow resistance through clearances of closely
ﬁtted parts, lines, and internal passages. This results in

pressure drops throughout the system, sluggish operation
of the equipment, and an increase in power consumption.

Measurement of viscosity

Viscosity is normally determined by measuring the time
required for a ﬁxed volume of a ﬂuid, at a given tempera-
ture, to ﬂow through a calibrated oriﬁce or capillary tube.
The instruments used to measure the viscosity of a liquid
are known as viscosimeters.

In decreasing order of exactness, methods of deﬁn-
ing viscosity include absolute (poise) viscosity; kinematic
viscosity in centistokes; relative viscosity in Saybolt uni-
versal seconds (SUS); and SAE numbers.

Absolute viscosity

The resistance when moving one layer of liquid over
another is the basis for the laboratory method of mea-
suring absolute viscosity. Poise viscosity is deﬁned as the
force (pounds) per unit of area, in square inches, required
to move one parallel surface at a speed of one centimeter-
per-second past another parallel surface when the two
surfaces are separated by a ﬂuid ﬁlm one centimeter thick,
Figure 40.16. In the metric system, force is expressed in
dynes and area in square centimeters. Poise is also the
ratio between the shearing stress and the rate of shear of
the ﬂuid.
Absolute viscosity D Shear stress
Rate of shear

(cid:1)

(cid:2)

1 poise D 1 ð

Dyne second

Square centimeter

A smaller unit of absolute viscosity is the centipoise,
which is one-hundredth of a poise or 1 centipoise D 0.01
poise.

1. If this moving surface is one square
centimeter in area and moves at a velocity
of one centimeter per second on...

Oil 1 cm.

2. A film of fluid one
centimeter thick...

Figure 40.16 Measuring absolute viscosity

3. And a force of 1 dyne is
required to move the surface,
the viscosity is equal to one 
poise.

Kinematic viscosity

The concept of kinematic viscosity is the outgrowth of
the use of a head of liquid to produce a ﬂow through a
capillary tube. The coefﬁcient of absolute viscosity, when
divided by the density of the liquid is called the kinematic
viscosity. In the metric system, the unit of viscosity is
called the stoke and it has the units of centimeters squared
per second. One one-hundredth of a stoke is a centistoke.
The relationship between absolute and kinematic vis-

cosity can be stated as:
Centipoise D Centistoke ð Density
or,
Centistoke D Centipoise
Density

SUS viscosity

For most practical purposes, it will serve to know the rela-
tive viscosity of the ﬂuid. Relative viscosity is determined
by timing the ﬂow of a given quantity of the hydraulic
ﬂuid through a standard oriﬁce at a given temperature.
There are several methods in use. The most acceptable
method in the United States is the Saybolt viscosimeter,
Figure 40.17.

The time it takes for the measured quantity of liquid
to ﬂow through the oriﬁce is measured with a stopwatch.
The viscosity in Saybolt universal seconds (SUS) equals
the elapsed time.

Obviously, a thick liquid will ﬂow slowly, and the SUS
viscosity will be higher than for a thin liquid, which ﬂows

Hydraulic ﬂuids 40/657

faster. Since oil becomes thicker at low temperatures and
thins when warmed, the viscosity must be expressed as
a speciﬁc SUS at a given temperature. Tests are usually
conducted at either 100°F or 210°F.

For industrial applications, hydraulic oil viscosity is
typically approximately 150 SUS at 100°F. It is a general
rule that the viscosity should never go below 45 SUS or
above 4000 SUS, regardless of temperature. Where tem-
perature extremes are encountered, the ﬂuid should have
a high viscosity index.

SAE number

SAE numbers have been established by the Society of
Automotive Engineers to specify ranges of SUS viscosi-
ties of oils at SAE test temperatures. Winter numbers (5W,
10W, 20W) are determined by tests at 0°F. Summer num-
bers (20W, 30W, etc.) designate the SUS range at 210°F.
Table 40.1 is a chart of the temperature ranges.

The following formulas may be used to convert centis-
tokes (cSt units) to approximate Saybolt universal seconds
(SUS units). For SUS values between 32 and 100:
cST D 0.226 ð SSU (cid:3) 195
SSU

For SUS values greater than 100:
cST D 0.220 ð SSU (cid:3) 135
SSU

Although the viscometers discussed above are used in lab-
oratories, there are other viscometers in the supply system
that are available for local use. These viscometers can be

1. A measured quantity
of oil is heated to the
test temperature...

Thermometer

2. By a surrounding oil bath...

Heating
element

3. And then allowed to drain
through an orifice of a
particular size.

60 ml.

4. The elapsed time in
seconds equals the
viscosity in SSU.

Figure 40.17 Saybolt viscosimeter

40/658 Hydraulic Fundamentals

Table 40.1 SAE viscosity numbers for crankcase oils

SAE

number

Viscosity
unitsa

Viscosity rangeb

At 0°F

At 210°F

Minimum

Maximum

Minimum

Maximum

5W

10W

20W

20

30

40

50

Centipoise
Centistokes

SUS

Centipoise
Centistokes

SUS

Centipoise
Centistokes

SUS

Centistokes

Centistokes

Centistokes

Centistokes

SUS

SUS

SUS

SUS

–
–
–

1,200c
1,300
6,000

2,400d
2,600
12,000

–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

Less than
1,200
1,300
6,000
Less than
2,400
2,600
12,000
Less than
9,600
10,500
48,000
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

–
–
–

–
–
–

–
–
–
5.7
45
9.6
58
12.9
70
16.8
85

–
–
–

–
–
–

–
–
–

58

70

85

110

Less than 9.6

Less than 12.9

Less than 16.8

Less than 22.7

aThe ofﬁcial values in this classiﬁcation are based upon 210°F viscosity in centistokes (ASTM D 445)
and 0°F viscosities in centipoise (ASTM D260-2). Approximate values in other units of viscosity are
given for information only. The approximate values at 0°F were calculated using an assumed oil
density of 0.9 gm/cc at that temperature.
bThe viscosity of all oils included in this classiﬁcation shall not be less than 3.0 centistokes at 210°F
(39 SUS).
cMinimum viscosity at 0°F may be waived provided viscosity at 210°F is not below 4.2 centistokes
(40 SUS).
dMinimum viscosity at 0°F may be waived provided viscosity at 210°F is not below 5.7 centistokes
(45 SUS).

used to test the viscosity of hydraulic ﬂuids either prior
to their being added to a system or periodically after they
have been in an operating system for a while.

Viscosity index

The viscosity index, VI, of oil is a number that indi-
cates the effect of temperature changes on the viscosity
of the oil. A low VI signiﬁes a relatively large change
of viscosity with changes of temperature. In other words,
the oil becomes extremely thin at high temperatures and
extremely thick at low temperatures. On the other hand,
a high VI signiﬁes relatively little change in viscosity
over a wide temperature range. Figure 40.18 illustrates
the relative change of viscosity with changes in oil
temperature.

Ideal oil for most purposes is one that maintains a
constant viscosity throughout temperature changes. The
importance of the VI can be shown easily by consider-
ing automotive lubricants. Oil having a high VI resists
excessive thickening when the engine is cold and, conse-
quently, promotes rapid starting and prompt circulation;
it resists excessive thinning when the motor is hot and
thus provides full lubrication and prevents excessive oil
consumption.

Another example of the importance of the VI is the need
for a high viscosity index hydraulic oil for military air-
craft, since hydraulic control systems may be exposed to
temperatures ranging from below (cid:3)65°F at high altitudes
to over 100°F on the ground. For the proper operation
of the hydraulic control system, the hydraulic ﬂuid must
have a sufﬁciently high VI to perform its functions at the
extremes of the expected temperature range.

Liquids with a high viscosity have a greater resistance
than low viscosity liquids, which have been
to heat
derived from the same source. The average hydraulic
liquid has a relatively low viscosity. Fortunately, there is
a wide choice of liquids available for use in the viscosity
range required of hydraulic liquids.

The VI of oil may be determined if its viscosity at any
two temperatures is known. Tables based on a large num-
ber of tests are issued by the American Society for Testing
and Materials (ASTM). These tables permit calculation of
the VI from known viscosity.

Pour point

Pour point is the lowest temperature at which a ﬂuid will
ﬂow. If the hydraulic system will be exposed to extremely
low temperatures, it is a very important speciﬁcation. For

Hydraulic ﬂuids 40/659

2. At zero degrees,
the 50 VI oil is
thicker

1. Both oils have
the same viscosity
at 100˚f

50,000

12,000
8,000

150

50

43
41
40

y
t
i
s
o
c
s
V

i

U
S
S
 
n

i

0˚F

100˚F

210˚F

3. And at 210˚F,
the 50 VI oil is thinner.

Figure 40.18 Viscosity Index (VI) is a relative measure of viscosity change with temperature change

a rule of thumb, the pour point should be 20°F below the
lowest temperature to be encountered.

Lubricating power

If motion takes place between surfaces in contact, friction
tends to oppose the motion. When pressure forces the liq-
uid of a hydraulic system between the surfaces of moving
parts, the liquid spreads out into a thin ﬁlm which enables
the parts to move more freely. Different liquids, including
oils, vary greatly not only in their lubricating ability but
also in ﬁlm strength. Film strength is the capability of a
liquid to resist being wiped or squeezed out from between
the surfaces when spread out in an extremely thin layer.
A liquid will no longer lubricate if the ﬁlm breaks down,
since the motion of part against part wipes the metal clean
of liquid.

Lubricating power varies with temperature changes;
therefore the climatic and working conditions must enter
into the determination of the lubricating qualities of a
liquid. Unlike viscosity, which is a physical property, the
lubricating power and ﬁlm strength of a liquid is directly
related to its chemical nature. Lubricating qualities and
ﬁlm strength can be improved by the addition of certain
chemical agents.

Chemical stability

Chemical stability is another property which is exceed-
ingly important in the selection of a hydraulic liquid. It
is deﬁned as the liquid’s ability to resist oxidation and

deterioration for long periods. All liquids tend to undergo
unfavorable changes under severe operating conditions.
This is the case, for example, when a system operates for
a considerable period at high temperatures.

Excessive temperatures, especially extremely high tem-
peratures, have a great effect on the life of a liquid. The
temperature of the liquid in the reservoir of an operating
hydraulic system does not always indicate the operat-
ing conditions throughout the system. Localized hot spots
occur on bearings, gear teeth, or at other points where
the liquid under pressure is forced through small oriﬁces.
Continuous passage of the liquid through these points may
produce local temperatures high enough to carbonize the
liquid or turn it into sludge, yet the liquid in the reservoir
may not indicate an excessively high temperature.

Liquids may break down if exposed to air, water, salt,
or other impurities, especially if they are in constant
motion or subjected to heat. Some metals, such as
zinc, lead, brass, and copper, have undesirable chemical
reactions with certain liquids.

These chemical reactions result in the formation of
sludge, gums, carbon, or other deposits, which clog open-
ings, cause valves and pistons to stick or leak, and give
poor lubrication to moving parts. Once a small amount
of sludge or other deposits is formed, the rate of forma-
tion generally increases more rapidly. As these deposits
are formed, certain changes in the physical and chemi-
cal properties of the liquid take place. The liquid usually
becomes darker, the viscosity increases and damaging
acids are formed.

40/660 Hydraulic Fundamentals

The extent to which changes occur in different liq-
uids depends on the type of liquid, type of reﬁning, and
whether it has been treated to provide further resistance
to oxidation. The stability of liquids can be improved by
the addition of oxidation inhibitors. Inhibitors selected
to improve stability must be compatible with the other
required properties of the liquid.

Freedom from acidity

An ideal hydraulic liquid should be free from acids that
cause corrosion of the metals in the system. Most liquids
cannot be expected to remain completely non-corrosive
under severe operating conditions. When new, the degree
of acidity of a liquid may be satisfactory; but after use,
the liquid may tend to become corrosive as it begins to
deteriorate.

Many systems are idle for long periods after operating
at high temperatures. This permits moisture to condense in
the system, resulting in rust formation. Certain corrosion-
and rust-preventive additives are added to hydraulic liq-
uids. Some of these additives are effective only for a
limited period. Therefore, the best procedure is to use the
liquid speciﬁed for the system for the time speciﬁed by
the system manufacturer and to protect the liquid and the
system as much as possible from contamination by foreign
matter, from abnormal temperatures, and from misuse.

Flashpoint

Flashpoint is the temperature at which a liquid gives off
vapor in sufﬁcient quantity to ignite momentarily or ﬂash
when a ﬂame is applied. A high ﬂashpoint is desirable
for hydraulic liquids because it provides good resistance
to combustion and a low degree of evaporation at normal
temperatures. Required ﬂashpoint minimums vary from
300°F for the lightest oils to 510°F for the heaviest oils.

Firepoint

Fire point is the temperature at which a substance gives
off vapor in sufﬁcient quantity to ignite and continue to
burn when exposed to a spark or ﬂame. Like ﬂashpoint, a
high ﬁre point is required of desirable hydraulic liquids.

Minimum toxicity

Toxicity is deﬁned as the quality, state, or degree of being
toxic or poisonous. Some liquids contain chemicals that
are a serious toxic hazard. These toxic or poisonous chem-
icals may enter the body through inhalation, by absorption
through the skin, or through the eyes or the mouth. The
result is sickness and, in some cases, death. Manufacturers
of hydraulic liquids strive to produce suitable liquids that
contain no toxic chemicals and, as a result, most hydraulic
liquids are free of harmful chemicals. Some ﬁre-resistant
liquids are toxic, and suitable protection and care in han-
dling must be provided.

a ﬂuid with a speciﬁc gravity greater than one can be tol-
erated. Where avoidance of detection by military units is
desired, a ﬂuid that sinks rather than rises to the surface
of the water is desirable. Fluids having a speciﬁc grav-
ity greater than 1.0 are desired, as leaking ﬂuid will sink,
allowing the vessel with the leak to remain undetected.

Under extreme pressure, a ﬂuid may be compressed up
to 7 per cent of its original volume. Highly compressible
ﬂuids produce sluggish system operation. This does not
present a serious problem in small, low-speed operations,
but it must be considered in the operating instructions.

Foaming tendencies

Foam is an emulsion of gas bubbles in the ﬂuid. In a
hydraulic system, foam results from compressed gases
in the hydraulic ﬂuid. A ﬂuid under high pressure can
contain a large volume of air bubbles. When this ﬂuid
is depressurized, as when it reaches the reservoir, the
gas bubbles in the ﬂuid expand and produce foam. Any
amount of foaming may cause pump cavitation and pro-
duce poor system response and sponge control. Therefore,
defoaming agents are often added to ﬂuids to prevent
foaming. Minimizing air in ﬂuid systems is discussed later
in this chapter.

Cleanliness

Cleanliness in hydraulic systems has received consider-
able attention recently. Some hydraulic systems, such as
aerospace hydraulic systems, are extremely sensitive to
contamination. Fluid cleanliness is of primary importance
because contaminants can cause component malfunction,
prevent proper valve seating, cause wear in components,
and may increase the response time of servo valves. Fluid
contaminants are discussed later in this chapter.

The inside of a hydraulic system can only be kept as
clean as the ﬂuid added to it. Initial ﬂuid cleanliness can
be achieved by observing stringent cleanliness require-
ments (discussed later in this chapter) or by ﬁltering all
ﬂuid added to the system.

40.5.3 Contamination

Hydraulic ﬂuid contamination may be described as any
foreign material or substance whose presence in the ﬂuid
is capable of adversely affecting system performance or
reliability. It may assume many different forms, includ-
ing liquids, gases, and solid matter of various compo-
sition, sizes, and shapes. Solid matter is the type most
often found in hydraulic systems and is generally referred
to as particulate contamination. Contamination is always
present to some degree, even in new, unused ﬂuid, but
must be kept below a level that will adversely affect sys-
tem operation. Hydraulic contamination control consists
of requirements, techniques, and practices necessary to
minimize and control ﬂuid contamination.

Density and compressibility

Classiﬁcation

A ﬂuid with a speciﬁc gravity of less than 1.0 is desired
when weight is critical, although with proper system design,

There are many types of contaminants which are harm-
ful to hydraulic systems and liquids. These contaminants

may be divided into two different classes – particulate and
ﬂuid.

This class of contaminants
Particulate contamination
includes organic, metallic solid, and inorganic solid con-
taminants. These contaminants are discussed in the fol-
lowing paragraphs.

Organic Wear, oxidation, or polymerization produces
organic solids or semisolids found in hydraulic systems.
Minute particles of O-rings, seals, gaskets, and hoses are
present, due to wear or chemical reactions. Synthetic prod-
ucts, such as neoprene, silicones, and hypalon, though
resistant to chemical reaction with hydraulic ﬂuids, pro-
duce small wear particles. Oxidation of hydraulic ﬂuids
increases with pressure and temperature, although antiox-
idants are blended into hydraulic ﬂuids to minimize such
oxidation. The ability of a hydraulic ﬂuid to resist oxida-
tion or polymerization in service is deﬁned as its oxida-
tion stability. Oxidation products appear as organic acids,
asphaltics, gums, and varnishes. These products combine
with particles in the hydraulic ﬂuid to form sludge. Some
oxidation products are oil soluble and cause the hydraulic
ﬂuid to increase in viscosity; other oxidation products are
not oil soluble and form sediment.

Metallic contaminants are usually
Metallic solids
present
in a hydraulic system and will range in size
from microscopic particles to particles readily visible to
the naked eye. These particles are the result of wearing
and scoring of bare metal parts and plating materials,
such as silver and chromium. Although practically all
metals commonly used for parts fabrication and plating
may be found in hydraulic ﬂuids,
the major metallic
materials found are ferrous, aluminum, and chromium
particles. Because of their continuous high-speed internal
movement, hydraulic pumps usually contribute most
of
in
hydraulic systems. Metal particles are also produced by
other hydraulic system components, such as valves and
actuators, due to body wear and the chipping and wearing
away of small pieces of metal plating materials.

the metallic particulate contamination present

This contaminant group includes dust,
Inorganic solids
paint particles, dirt, and silicates. Glass particles from
glass bead peening and blasting may also be found as
contaminants. Glass particles are very undesirable con-
taminants due to their abrasive effect on synthetic rub-
ber seals and the very ﬁne surfaces of critical moving
parts. Atmospheric dust, dirt, paint particles, and other
materials are often drawn into hydraulic systems from
external sources. For example, the wet piston shaft of
a hydraulic actuator may draw some of these foreign
materials into the cylinder past the wiper and dynamic
seals, and the contaminant materials are then dispersed
in the hydraulic ﬂuid. Contaminants may also enter the
hydraulic ﬂuid during maintenance when tubing, hoses,
ﬁttings, and components are disconnected or replaced. It
is therefore important that all exposed ﬂuid ports be sealed
with approved protective closures to minimize such con-
tamination.

Hydraulic ﬂuids 40/661

Fluid contamination

Air, water, solvent, and other foreign ﬂuids are in the class
of ﬂuid contaminants.

Air Hydraulic ﬂuids are adversely affected by dissolved,
entrained, or free air. Air may be introduced through
improper maintenance or because of system design. Any
maintenance operation that involves breaking into the
hydraulic system, such as disconnecting or removing a
line or component, will invariably result in some air being
introduced into the system. This source of air can and
must be minimized by pre-ﬁlling replacement components
with new ﬁltered ﬂuid prior to their installation. Failing
to pre-ﬁll a ﬁlter-element bowl with ﬂuid is a good
example of how air can be introduced into the system.
Although pre-ﬁlling will minimize introduction of air, it
is still important to vent the system where venting is
possible.

Most hydraulic systems have built-in sources of air.
Leaky seals in gas-pressurized accumulators and reser-
voirs can feed gas into a system faster than it can be
removed, even with the best of maintenance. Another
lesser-known but major source of air is air that is sucked
into the system past actuator piston rod seals. This occurs
when the piston rod that is stroked by some external
means while the actuator itself is not pressurized.

Water Water is a serious contaminant of hydraulic sys-
tems. Hydraulic ﬂuids are adversely affected by dissolved,
emulsiﬁed, or free water. Water contamination may result
in the formation of ice, which impedes the operation of
valves, actuators, and other moving parts. Water can also
cause the formation of oxidation products and corrosion
of metallic surfaces.

Solvent contamination is a special form of
Solvents
foreign ﬂuid contamination in which the original con-
taminating substance is a chlorinated solvent. Chlorinated
solvents or their residues may, when introduced into a
hydraulic system, react with any water present to form
highly corrosive acids.

Chlorinated solvents, when allowed to combine with
minute amounts of water often found in operating
hydraulic systems, change chemically into hydrochloric
acids. These acids then attack internal metallic surfaces in
the system, particularly those that are ferrous, and produce
a severe rust-like corrosion.

Foreign ﬂuids other than water and chlo-
Foreign-ﬂuids
rinated solvents can seriously contaminate hydraulic sys-
tems. This type of contamination is generally a result of
lube oil, engine fuel, or incorrect hydraulic ﬂuid being
introduced inadvertently into the system during servicing.
The effects of such contamination depend on the contam-
inant, the amount in the system, and how long it has been
present.

Note: It is extremely important that the different types
of hydraulic ﬂuids are not mixed in one system. If dif-
ferent types hydraulic ﬂuids are mixed, the characteristics
of the ﬂuid required for a speciﬁc purpose are lost. Mix-
ing the different types of ﬂuids usually results in a heavy,

40/662 Hydraulic Fundamentals

gummy deposit that will clog passages and require a major
cleaning. In addition, seals and packing installed for use
with one ﬂuid are usually not compatible with other ﬂuids
and damage to the seals will result.

40.5.4 Contamination control

Maintaining hydraulic ﬂuid within allowable contamina-
tion limits for both water and particulate matter is crucial
to the care and protection of hydraulic equipment. Fil-
ters will provide adequate control of the particular con-
tamination problem during all normal hydraulic system
operations if the ﬁltration system is installed properly and
ﬁlter maintenance is performed properly. Filter mainte-
nance includes changing elements at proper intervals.

Control of

the size and amount of contamination
entering the system from any other source is the
responsibility of the personnel who service and maintain
the equipment. During installation, maintenance, and
repair of hydraulic equipment, the retention of cleanliness
of the system is of paramount importance for subsequent
satisfactory performance.

The following maintenance and servicing procedures
should be adhered to at all times to provide proper con-
tamination control:

1. All tools and the work area (workbenches and test
in a clean, dirt-free

equipment) should be kept
condition.

2. A suitable container should always be provided to
is spilled during

receive the hydraulic liquid that
component removal or disassembly.
Note: The reuse of drained hydraulic liquid is prohib-
ited in most hydraulic systems. In some large-capacity
systems the reuse of ﬂuid is permitted. When liquid is
drained from these systems for reuse, it must be stored
in a clean and suitable container. The liquid must be
strained and/or ﬁltered when it is returned to the system
reservoir.

3. Before hydraulic lines or ﬁttings are disconnected, the
affected area should be cleaned with an approved dry-
cleaning solvent.

4. All hydraulic lines and ﬁttings should be capped or

plugged immediately after disconnection.

5. Before any hydraulic components are assembled, their
parts should be washed with an approved dry-cleaning
solvent.

6. After the parts have been cleaned in dry-cleaning
solvent, they should be dried thoroughly with clean,
low-lint cloths and lubricated with the recommended
preservative or hydraulic liquid before assembly.
Note: Only clean, low-lint type II or I cloths as appro-
priate should be used to wipe or dry component parts.
7. All packing and gaskets should be replaced during the

assembly procedures.

8. All parts should be connected with care to avoid strip-
ping metal slivers from threaded areas. All ﬁttings
and lines should be installed and torqued according
to applicable technical instructions.

9. All hydraulic servicing equipment should be kept clean

and in good operating condition.

Some hydraulic ﬂuid speciﬁcations contain particle
contamination limits that are so low that the products
are packaged under clean room conditions. Very slight
amounts of dirt, rust, and metal particles will cause them
to fail the speciﬁcation limit for contamination. Since
these ﬂuids are usually all packaged in hermetically sealed
containers, the act of opening a container may allow more
contaminants into the ﬂuid than the speciﬁcation allows.
Therefore, extreme care should be taken in the handling of
these ﬂuids. In opening the container for use, observation,
or tests, it is extremely important that the container be
opened and handled in a clean environment. The area
of the container to be opened should be ﬂushed with
ﬁltered solvent (petroleum ether or isopropyl alcohol),
and the device used for opening the container should be
thoroughly rinsed with ﬁltered solvent. After the container
is opened, a small amount of the material should be
poured from the container and disposed of prior to pouring
the sample for analysis. Once a container is opened, if the
contents are not totally used, the unused portion should be
discarded. Since the level of contamination of a system
containing these ﬂuids must be kept low, maintenance
on the system’s components must be performed in a
clean environment commonly known as a controlled
environment work center.

40.5.5 Hydraulic ﬂuid sampling

The condition of a hydraulic system, as well as its prob-
able future performance, can best be determined by ana-
lyzing the operating ﬂuid. Of particular interest are any
changes in the physical and chemical properties of the
ﬂuid and excessive particulate or water contamination,
either of which indicates impending trouble.

Excessive particulate contamination of the ﬂuid indi-
cates that the ﬁlters are not keeping the system clean.
This can result from improper ﬁlter maintenance, inade-
quate ﬁlters, or excessive ongoing corrosion and wear.

1. All samples should be taken from circulating systems,
or immediately upon shutdown, while the hydraulic
ﬂuid is within 5°C(cid:13)9°F(cid:14) of normal system operating
temperature. Systems not up to temperature may
provide non-representative samples of system dirt and
water content, and such samples should either be
avoided or so indicated on the analysis report. The
ﬁrst oil coming from the sampling point should be
discarded, since it can be very dirty and does not
the system. As a rule, a volume of oil
represent
equivalent
to one to two times the volume of oil
contained in the sampling line and valve should be
drained before the sample is taken.

2. Ideally,

the sample should be taken from a valve
installed speciﬁcally for sampling. When sampling
valves are not installed the taking of samples from
locations where sediment or water can collect, such
as dead ends of piping, tank drains, and low points
of large pipes and ﬁlter bowls, should be avoided
if possible. If samples are taken from pipe drains,
sufﬁcient ﬂuid should be drained before the sample is
taken to ensure that the sample actually represents the
system. Samples are not to be taken from the tops of

reservoirs or other locations where the contamination
levels are normally low.

3. Unless otherwise speciﬁed, a minimum of one sam-
ple should be taken for each system located wholly
within one compartment. For ship’s systems extending
into two or more compartments, a second sample is
required. An exception to this requirement is subma-
rine external hydraulic systems, which require only one
sample. Original sample points should be labeled and
the same sample points used for successive sampling.
If possible, the following sampling locations should be
selected:
(a) A location that provides a sample representative of

ﬂuid being supplied to system components;

(b) A return line as close to the supply tank as practical

but upstream of any return line ﬁlter;

(c) For systems requiring a second sample, a location

as far from the pump as practical.

Operation of the sampling point should not introduce
any signiﬁcant amount of external contaminants into
the collected ﬂuid.

40.6 Reservoirs, strainers, ﬁlters and
accumulators
systems must have a sufﬁcient and
Fluid power
continuous supply of uncontaminated ﬂuid to operate

Reservoirs, strainers, ﬁlters and accumulators 40/663

efﬁciently. This chapter covers: hydraulic reservoirs;
various types of strainers and ﬁlters; and accumulators
that are typically installed in ﬂuid power systems.

40.6.1 Reservoirs

A hydraulic system must have a reserve of ﬂuid in
addition to that contained in the pumps, actuators, pipes
and other components of the system. This reserve ﬂuid
must be readily available to make up losses of ﬂuid from
the system, to make up for compression of ﬂuid under
pressure, and to compensate for the loss of volume as the
ﬂuid cools. This extra ﬂuid is contained in a tank usually
called a reservoir. A reservoir may sometimes be referred
to as a sump tank, service tank, operating tank, supply
tank or base tank.

In addition to providing storage for the reserve ﬂuid
needed for the system, the reservoir acts as a radiator for
dissipating heat from the ﬂuid. It also acts as a settling
tank where heavy particles of contamination may settle
out of the ﬂuid and remain harmlessly on the bottom until
removed by cleaning or ﬂushing the reservoir. Also, the
reservoir allows entrained air to separate from the ﬂuid.
Most reservoirs have a capped opening for ﬁlling, an
air vent, an oil level indicator or dipstick, a return line
connection, a pump inlet or suction line connection, a
drain line connection, and a drain plug (see Figure 40.19).

breather

Air

and
filler

Mounting plate
for electric motor

and pump

Drain
return

Pump
inlet
line

Return line

Sealed flange

Sight glass

Clean-out

plate – both ends

Figure 40.19 Non-pressurized reservoir

Strainer

Drain
plug

Baffle
plate

40/664 Hydraulic Fundamentals

The inside of the reservoir generally will have bafﬂes
to prevent excessive sloshing of the ﬂuid and to put
a partition between the ﬂuid return line and the pump
suction or inlet line. The partition forces the returning
ﬂuid to travel farther around the tank before being drawn
back into the active system through the pump inlet line.
This aids in settling the contamination and separating air
entrained in the ﬂuid.

Large reservoirs are desirable for cooling. A large
reservoir also reduces re-circulation, which helps settle
contamination, and separates entrained air. As a rule of
thumb, the ideal reservoir should be two to three times the
pump outlet per minute. However, due to space limitations
in mobile and aerospace systems, the beneﬁts of a large
reservoir may have to be sacriﬁced. But they must be
large enough to accommodate thermal expansion of the
ﬂuid and changes in ﬂuid level due to system operation.

40.6.2 Accumulators

An accumulator is a pressure storage reservoir in which
hydraulic ﬂuid is stored under pressure from an external
source. The storage of ﬂuid under pressure serves several
purposes in hydraulic systems.

In some hydraulic systems, it is necessary to maintain
the system pressure within a speciﬁc pressure range for
long periods. It is very difﬁcult to maintain a closed
system without some leakage, either external or internal.
Even a small
leak can cause a decrease in pressure.
By using an accumulator, leakage can be compensated
for and the system pressure can be maintained within
acceptable range for extended periods. Accumulators also
compensate for thermal expansion and contraction of the
liquid due to variations in temperature or generated heat.
A liquid ﬂowing at a high velocity in a pipe will create
a backward surge when stopped suddenly. This sudden
stoppage causes an instantaneous pressure 2 to 3 times
the operating pressure of the system. These pressures or
shocks produce objectionable noise and vibrations, which
can cause considerable damage to piping, ﬁttings and
components. The incorporation of an accumulator enables
such shocks and surges to be absorbed or cushioned by
the entrapped gas, thereby reducing their effects. The
accumulator also dampens pressure surges caused by
pulsing delivery from the pump.

There are times when hydraulic systems require large
volumes of liquid for short periods. This is due to either
the operation of a large cylinder or the necessity of
operating two or more circuits simultaneously. It is not
economical to install a pump of such large capacity in
the system for only intermittent usage, particularly if
there is sufﬁcient time during the working cycle for an
accumulator to store enough liquid to aid the pump during
these peak demands. The energy stored in accumulators
may be also used to actuate hydraulically operated units
if normal hydraulic system failure occurs.

Accumulator sizing

Most accumulator systems should be designed to operate
at a maximum oil pressure of 3000 psi. This is the rating

of most accumulators and will give the maximum effect
for the least cost. Also, 3000 psi is the maximum rating
for most hydraulic valves.

A rule of thumb for the nitrogen pre-charged level is
one-half the maximum oil pressure. This is acceptable for
most applications. The pre-charge should be replenished
when it falls to one-third the maximum hydraulic oil
pressure. On a 3000-psi hydraulic system, initial pre-
charge should be 1500 psi and replenishment level of
1000 psi. Most applications will tolerate a wide variation
in pre-charge pressure.

Accumulators are catalog-rated by gas volume when
all oil is discharged and usually rated in quarts or gallons
(i.e. 1 US gallon D 231 in3). The amount of oil which can
be stored is approximately half the gas volume. Only a
part of the stored oil can be used each cycle because the
oil pressure decreases as oil is discharged. The problem
in selecting accumulator size is to have sufﬁcient capacity
so system pressure, at the end of the discharge, does not
fall below a value which will do the job.

For illustration, we are using an application on which
accumulator oil will be used on the extension stroke of a
cylinder to supplement the oil delivery from a pump, to
increase speed. Retraction will be by pump volume alone.
A fully charged accumulator system pressure of 3000 psi
is assumed.

First, select cylinder bore for sufﬁcient force not only at
3000 psi but also at some selected lower pressure to which
it will be allowed to fall during discharge. Next, calculate
the number of cubic inches of oil required to ﬁll the
cylinder cavity during its extension stroke. Using the time,
in seconds, allowed for the full extension stroke, calculate
the cubic inches of oil which can be obtained for the
pump alone. Subtract the calculated pump volume from
the cylinder volume to ﬁnd the volume of oil required
from the accumulator. Use Table 40.2 to ﬁnd how many
cubic inches of oil would be supplied from a 1-gallon
size accumulator before its terminal pressure dropped
below the minimum acceptable pressure level. A 5-gallon
accumulator would supply 5 times this volume. Finally,
divide this ﬁgure into the total cubic inches needed for
the application. This is the minimum rated gallon size
of accumulator capacity. Select at least the next larger
standard size for your application.

To solve for oil recovery from any size accumulator,
under any system pressure and any pre-charge level, use
the formula:
D D (cid:13)0.95 ð P1 ð V1 ł P2(cid:14) (cid:3) (cid:13)0.95 ð P1 ð V1 ł P3(cid:14)
Where D is cubic inches of oil discharge; P1 is pre-charge
pressure in psi; P2 is system pressure after Volume D has
been discharged; P3 is maximum system pressure at full
accumulator charge; V1 is catalog rated gas volume, in
cubic inches; and 0.95 is assumed accumulator efﬁciency.
As oil is pumped into the accumulator, compressing
the nitrogen, the nitrogen temperature increases (Charles’
law). Therefore, the amount of oil stored will not be quite
as much as calculated with Boyle’s law unless sufﬁcient
time is allowed for the accumulator to cool to atmospheric
temperature. Likewise, when oil
the
expanding nitrogen is cooled. So, the discharge volume

is discharged,

Table 40.2 Accumulator selection table

Minimum acceptable system

PSI

Cubic inch discharge

2700
2600
2500
2400
2300
2200
2100
2000
1900
1800
1700
1600
1500

12
17
22
27
33
40
46
55
63
73
84
96
109

will not be quite as high as calculated with Boyle’s law.
In Table 40.2 and the formula above, an allowance of
5 per cent has been included as a safety factor. After
making a size calculation from the table, allow enough
extra capacity for contingencies.

40.6.3 Filtration

Clean hydraulic ﬂuid is essential for proper operation and
acceptable component life in all hydraulic systems. While
every effort must be made to prevent contaminants from
entering the system, contaminants that do ﬁnd their way
into the system must be removed. Filtration devices are
installed at key points in ﬂuid power systems to remove
the contaminants that enter the system along with those
that are generated during normal operations of the system.
The ﬁltering devices used in hydraulic systems are
commonly referred to as strainers and ﬁlters. Since they
share a common function,
the terms are often used
interchangeably. Generally, devices used to remove large
particles of foreign matter from hydraulic systems are
referred to as strainers, while those used to remove the
smallest particles are called ﬁlters.

Strainers

Strainers are used primarily to catch only very large
particles and will be found in applications where this
type of protection is required. Most hydraulic systems
have a strainer in the reservoir at the inlet to the suction
line of the pump. A strainer is used in lieu of a ﬁlter to
reduce its chance of being clogged and starving the pump.
However, since this strainer is located in the reservoir, its

Table 40.3 Heat and power equivalents

Reservoirs, strainers, ﬁlters and accumulators 40/665

maintenance is frequently neglected. When heavy dirt and
sludge accumulate on the suction strainer, the pump soon
begins to cavitate. Pump failure follows quickly.

Filters

The most common device installed in hydraulic systems
to prevent foreign particles and contaminations from
remaining in the system are referred to as ﬁlters. They
may be located in the reservoir, in the return line, in the
pressure line, or in any other location in the system where
the designer of the system decides they are needed to
safeguard the system against impurities.

Filters are classiﬁed as full-ﬂow or proportional ﬂow.
In full-ﬂow types of ﬁlters, all of the ﬂuid that enters
the ﬁlter passes through the ﬁltering element, while in
proportional
types only a portion of the ﬂuid passes
through the element.

Filter elements

Filter elements may be divided into two classes: surface
and depth. Surface ﬁlters are made of closely woven fabric
or treated paper with a uniform pore size. Fluid ﬂows
through the pores of the ﬁlter material and contaminants
are stropped on the ﬁlter’s surface. This type of ﬁlter
element is designed to prevent the passage of a high
percentage of solids of a speciﬁc size.

Depth ﬁlters on the other hand are composed of layers of
fabric or ﬁbers, which provide many tortuous paths for the
ﬂuid to ﬂow through. The pores or passages must be larger
than the rated size of the ﬁlter if particles are to be retained
in the depth of the media rather than on the surface.

Filter elements may be of the 5-micron, woven mesh,
micronic, porous metal, or magnetic type. The micronic
and 5-micron elements have non-cleanable ﬁlter media
and are disposed of when they are removed. Porous metal,
woven mesh and magnetic ﬁlter elements are usually
designed to be cleaned and reused.

40.6.4 Heat exchangers

The conversion of hydraulic force to mechanical work
generates excessive heat. This heat must be removed from
the hydraulic ﬂuid to prevent degradation of the ﬂuid and
possible damage to system components.

Heat goes into the hydraulic oil at every point

in
the system where there is a pressure loss due to oil
ﬂow without mechanical work being produced. Examples
are pressure relief and reducing valves, ﬂow control
valves, and ﬂow resistance in plumbing lines and through
components. Hydraulic pumps and motors also produce
heat at about 15 per cent of their working horsepower.
Power loss and heat generation due to the above causes
can be calculated with one of the following formulae:

Horsepower heat D PSI ð GPM

1714

or HP D PSI ð GPM ð .000583

1 Horsepower (HP)
1 Horsepower (HP)
1 British thermal unit
per hour (BTU/hr)
1 British thermal unit

per minute (BTU/min)

2545 BTU per hour
42.4 BTU per minute

0.000393 HP or 0.293 watts

0.0167 BTU/hr or 17.6 watts

BTU/Hr of heat generation D 1.5 ð PSI ð GPM

40/666 Hydraulic Fundamentals

The pressure (PSI) for calculating heat generation in a
ﬂow control valve, for example, is the inlet minus the
outlet pressure, or the pressure drop across the valve.

Sometimes power

loss and heat generation occur
intermittently and to ﬁnd the average amount of heat
that will go into the oil, the average power loss should
be calculated. Usually,
taking an average over a 1-
hour period should be sufﬁcient. Therefore, hydraulic
systems should include a positive means of heat removal.
Normally, a heat exchanger is used for this purpose.

The exact size of a heat exchanger needed on a
new system cannot be accurately calculated because of
too many unknown factors. On existing systems, by
making tank measurements and measuring air and oil
temperatures, a rather accurate calculation can be made
of the heat exchanger capacity needed to reduce the
maximum oil temperature.

The theoretical maximum cooling capacity of a heat
exchanger for a hydraulic system will never have to
be greater than the input horsepower to the system.
Usually its capacity can be considerably less, based on the
calculated input horsepower. A rule of thumb is to provide
a heat exchanger removal capacity of about 25 per cent of
the input horsepower. Rarely, even on inefﬁcient systems,
would a capacity of more than 50 per cent be required.

When ordering a heat exchanger

the information
furnished to your supplier must include the maximum rate
of oil ﬂow, in GPM, through the heat exchanger, and the
horsepower or BTU per hour of heat to be removed. On
water-cooled models, state the maximum rate of water
ﬂow that will be available. For best water usage, the water
ﬂow should be approximately one-half of the oil ﬂow.
Specify the temperature of the cooling water.

Heat load

load on the waterside of a shell and tube heat

Heat
exchanger can be calculated as:
BTU per hour D GPM ð 500 ð Temperature differential

The temperature differential is the difference between the
inlet and outlet oil temperature in degrees Fahrenheit.

Heat load on the shell side of the exchanger can also

be calculated by:
BTU per hour D GPM ð 210 ð Temperature differential

40.7 Actuators
One of the outstanding features of ﬂuid power systems is
that force, generated by the power supply, controlled and
directed by suitable valving, and transported by lines, can
be converted with ease to almost any kind of mechanical
motion. Either linear or rotary motion can be obtained by
using a suitable actuating device.

An actuator is a device that converts ﬂuid power
into mechanical force and motion. Cylinders, hydraulic
motors, and turbines are the most common types of
actuating devices used in ﬂuid power systems. This
chapter describes various types of actuating devices and
their applications.

40.7.1 Hydraulic cylinders

An actuating cylinder is a device that converts ﬂuid
power into linear, or straight-line, force and motion. Since
linear motion is back-and-forth motion along a straight
line, this type of actuator is sometimes referred to as
a reciprocating, or linear motor. The cylinder consists
of a ram, or piston, operating within a cylindrical bore.
Actuating cylinders may be installed so that the cylinder
is anchored to a stationary structure and the ram or piston
is attached to the mechanism to be operated, or the piston
can be anchored and the cylinder attached to the movable
mechanism.

Piston rod column strength

Long, slim piston rods may buckle if subjected to too
heavy a push load. Table 40.4 suggests the minimum
diameter piston rod to use under various conditions of
load and unsupported rod length. It should be used in
accordance with the instructions in the next paragraph.
There must be no side load or bending stress at any point
along the piston rod.

Exposed rod length is shown along the top of the table.
This is usually somewhat longer than the actual stroke of
the cylinder. The vertical scale, Column 1, shows the load
on the cylinder, and is expressed in English tons, i.e. 1
ton equals 2,000 pounds. If both the end of the rod and
the front end of the cylinder barrel are rigidly supported a
smaller rod may have sufﬁcient column strength and you
may use as exposed length of piston rod that is one-half
of the actual total rod length. For example, if the actual
rod length is 80 inches, and if the cylinder barrel and rod
end are supported as described, you could enter the table
in the column marked 40. On the other hand, if hinge
mounting is used on both cylinder and rod, you may not
be safe in using actual exposed rod length. Instead, you
should use about twice the actual rod length. For example,
if the actual rod length is 20 inches, you should enter the
table in the 40-inch column.

When mounted horizontally or at any angle other than
vertical, hinge mounted cylinders create a bending stress
on the rod when extended. In part, this bending stress is
created by the cylinder’s weight. On large bore and/or
long stroke hinge-mounted cylinders, a trunnion mount
should be used in instead of tang or clevis mounts.
In addition, the trunnion should be positioned so that
the cylinder’s weight is balanced when the rod is fully
extended.

Hydraulic cylinder forces

Tables 40.5 and 40.6 provide the mechanical forces,
both extension and retraction,
that can be generated
by hydraulic cylinders. The tables are divided into the
two principal operating pressure ranges associated with
hydraulic applications.

Values in bold type show the extension forces, using the
full piston area. Values in italic type are for the retraction
force for various piston rod diameters. Remember that
force values are theoretical, derived by calculation.
Experience has shown that probably 5 per cent but

Table 40.4 Minimum recommended piston rod diameter

Actuators 40/667

Load in
tons

10

20

1
2
3
4
1
1 1
2
2
3
4
5
7 1
2
10
15
20
30
40
50
75
100
150

5
8
11
16
3
4
7
8
1
1 1
8
1 1
4
1 7
16
1 3
4
2
2 7
16
2 3
4
3 1
8
3 3
4
4 3
8
5 3
8

13
16
15
16
1
1 3
16
1 3
8
1 11
16
2
2 3
8
2 3
4
3 1
8
3 3
4
4 3
8
5 3
8

Exposed length of piston rod, inches

40

3
4
13
16
7
8
15
16
1
1 1
8
1 3
16
1 5
16
1 7
16
1 5
8
1 7
8
2 1
8
2 1
2
2 7
8
3 1
4
3 7
8
4 3
8
5 3
8

60

1
1 1
16
1 1
8
1 3
16
1 3
16
1 3
8
1 1
2
1 9
16
1 3
4
1 7
8
2 1
8
2 3
8
2 3
4
3
3 3
8
4
4 1
2
5 1
2

70

80

100

120

1 1
4
1 3
8
1 7
16
1 9
16
1 5
8
1 3
4
1 7
8
2
2 1
4
2 1
2
2 3
4
3
3 1
2
4
4 3
4
5 1
2

1 3
8
1 1
2
1 9
16
1 5
8
1 3
4
1 7
8
2
2 1
8
2 3
8
2 5
8
2 7
8
3 1
4
3 1
2
4 1
8
4 3
4
5 1
2

1 13
16
1 7
8
2
2 1
8
2 1
4
2 7
16
2 11
16
2 7
8
3 1
4
3 1
2
3 3
4
4 3
8
4 7
8
5 3
4

2 1
4
2 3
8
2 1
2
2 3
4
3
3 1
4
3 1
2
3 3
4
4
4 1
2
5
6

certainly no more than 10 per cent additional pressure
will be required to make up cylinder losses.

For pressures not shown, the effective piston areas
in the third column can be used as power factors.
Multiply effective area by pressure to obtain cylinder
force produced. Values in two or more columns can be
added for a pressure not listed, or, force values can be
obtained by interpolating between the next higher and the
next lower pressure columns.

Pressure values along the top of each table are
differential pressures across the two cylinder ports. This is
the pressure to just balance the load and not the pressure
that must be produced by the system pump. There will
be circuit ﬂow losses in pressure and return lines due
to oil ﬂow and these will require additional pressure.
When designing a system, be sure to allow sufﬁcient pump
pressure, about 25 per cent to 30 per cent, to supply both
the cylinder and to satisfy system ﬂow losses.

Hydraulic motors

A ﬂuid power motor is a device that converts ﬂuid power
energy into rotary motion and force. The function of a
motor is opposite that of a pump. However, the design
and operation of ﬂuid power motors are very similar to
pumps. Therefore a thorough knowledge of pumps will
help you understand the operation of ﬂuid power motors.
Motors have many uses in ﬂuid power systems.
In hydraulic power drives, pumps and motors are
combined with suitable lines and valves to form hydraulic
transmissions. The pump commonly referred to as the
A-end is driven by some outside source, such as an

electric motor. The pump delivers pressurized ﬂuid to the
hydraulic motor, referred to as the B-end. The hydraulic
motor is actuated by this ﬂow and through mechanical
linkage conveys rotary motion and force to do work.

Fluid motors may be either ﬁxed or variable displace-
ment. Fixed-displacement motors provide constant torque
and variable speed. Controlling the amount of input ﬂow
varies the speed. Variable-displacement motors are con-
structed so that the working relationship of the internal
parts can be varied to change displacement. The major-
ity of the motors used in ﬂuid power systems are the
ﬁxed-displacement type.

Although most ﬂuid power motors are capable
of providing rotary motion in either direction, some
applications require rotation in only one direction. In these
applications, one port of the motor is connected to the
system pressure line and the other port to the return line.
The ﬂow of ﬂuid to the motor is controlled by a ﬂow
control valve, a two-way directional control valve or by
starting and stopping the power supply. Varying the rate
of ﬂuid ﬂow to the motor may control the speed of the
motor.

In most ﬂuid power systems, the motor is required
to provide actuating power in either direction. In these
applications, the ports are referred to as working ports,
alternating as inlet and outlet ports. Either a four-way
directional control valve or a variable-displacement pump
usually controls the ﬂow to the motor.

Fluid motors are usually classiﬁed according to the
type of internal element which is directly actuated by the
pressurized ﬂow. The most common types of elements
are gears, vanes and pistons. All three of these types are

40/668 Hydraulic Fundamentals

Table 40.5 Hydraulic cylinder force, low pressure range 500 to 1500 psi

Bore

diameter

(in)

1 1
2

2

2 1
2

3

3 1
4

4

5

6

7

8

10

12

14

Rod

diameter

(in)

None

5
8
1

None

1
1 3
8
None

1
1 3
8
1 3
4
None

1
1 3
8
1 3
4
None
1 3
8
1 3
4
2

None
1 3
4
2
2 1
2
None

2
2 1
2
3
3 1
2
None
2 1
2
3
3 1
2
4

None

3
3 1
2
4
4 1
2
5

None
3 1
2
4
4 1
2
5
5 1
2
None
4 1
2
5
5 1
2
7

None
5 1
2
None

7

Effective

area
(cid:13)in2(cid:14)

1.77
1.46
0.982
3.14
2.36
1.66
4.91
4.12
3.42
2.50
7.07
6.28
5.58
4.66
8.30
6.81
5.89
5.15
12.57
10.16
9.43
7.66
19.64
16.49
14.73
12.57
10.01
28.27
23.37
21.21
18.65
15.71
38.49
31.42
28.87
25.92
22.58
18.85
50.27
40.64
37.70
34.36
30.63
26.51
78.54
62.64
58.91
54.78
40.06
113.1
89.34
153.9
115.5

500
psi

884
730
491
1571
1178
828
2454
2062
1712
1252
3534
3142
2792
2332
4148
3405
2945
2577
6284
5081
4713
3829
9818
8247
7363
6283
5007
14,137
11,683
10,603
9326
7854
19,243
15,708
14,432
12,960
11,291
9425
25,133
20,322
18,850
17,181
15,315
13,254
39,270
31,318
29,453
27,391
20,028
56,550
44,671
76,970
57,728

Pressure differential across cylinder ports

750
psi

1325
1095
736
2356
1767
1243
3682
3092
2568
1878
5301
4712
4188
3497
6222
5108
4418
3866
9425
7621
7069
5744
14,726
12,370
11,045
9425
7510
21,206
17,524
15,094
13,990
11,781
28,864
23,562
21,648
19,439
16,936
14,138
37,699
30,483
28,274
25,771
22,973
19,880
58,905
46,977
44,179
41,087
30,041
84,825
67,007
115,455
86,591

1000
psi

1767
1460
982
3142
2356
1657
4909
4123
3424
2503
7069
6283
5584
4663
8298
6811
5891
5154
12,567
10,162
9425
7658
19,635
16,493
14,726
12,566
10,014
28,274
23,365
21,205
18,653
15,708
38,485
31,416
28,864
25,910
22,581
18,850
50,265
40,644
37,699
34,361
30,630
26,507
78,540
62,636
58,905
54,782
40,055
113,100
89,342
153,940
115,455

1250
psi

2209
1825
1227
3927
2945
2071
6136
5154
4280
3129
8836
7854
6980
5829
10,370
8514
7363
6443
15,709
12,702
11,782
9573
24,544
20,617
18,408
15,708
12,517
35,343
29,207
26,507
23,316
19,635
48,106
39,271
36,080
32,399
28,226
23,563
62,831
50,805
47,124
42,951
38,288
33,134
98,175
78,295
73,631
68,478
50,069
141,375
111,678
192,425
144,319

1500
psi

2651
2190
1473
4712
3534
2485
7363
6188
5136
3755
10,603
9425
8376
6995
12,444
10,216
8836
7731
18,851
15,243
14,138
11,487
29,453
24,740
22,089
18,850
15,021
42,411
35,048
31,808
27,979
23,562
57,728
47,125
43,296
38,879
33,872
28,275
75,398
60,966
56,549
51,542
44,945
39,761
117,810
93,954
88,358
82,172
60,083
169,650
134,013
230,910
173,183

Table 40.6 Hydraulic cylinder force, high pressure range 2000 to 5000 psi

Actuators 40/669

Bore

diameter

(in)

Rod

diameter

(in)

Effective

area
(cid:13)in2(cid:14)

1 1
2

2

2 1
2

3

3 1
4

4

5

6

7

8

10

12

14

None

5
8
1

None

1
1 3
8
None

1
1 3
8
1 3
4
None

1
1 3
8
1 3
4
None
1 3
8
1 3
4
2

None
1 3
4
2
2 1
2
None

2
2 1
2
3
3 1
2
None
2 1
2
3
3 1
2
4

None

3
3 1
2
4
4 1
2
5

None
3 1
2
4
4 1
2
5
5 1
2
None
4 1
2
5
5 1
2
7

None
5 1
2
None

7

1.77
1.46
0.982
3.14
2.36
1.66
4.91
4.12
3.42
2.50
7.07
6.28
5.58
4.66
8.30
6.81
5.89
5.15
12.57
10.16
9.43
7.66
19.64
16.49
14.73
12.57
10.01
28.27
23.37
21.21
18.65
15.71
38.49
31.42
28.87
25.92
22.58
18.85
50.27
40.64
37.70
34.36
30.63
26.51
78.54
62.64
58.91
54.78
40.06
113.1
89.34
153.9
115.5

Pressure differential across cylinder ports

2000
psi

3534
2921
1963
6283
4712
3313
9817
8247
6848
5007
14,137
12,567
11,167
9327
16,592
13,622
11,781
10,308
25,134
20,323
18,851
15,317
39,270
32,987
29,453
25,133
20,028
56,548
46,731
42,411
37,306
31,416
76,970
62,833
57,728
51,838
45,162
37,700
100,530
81,288
75,398
68,722
61,260
53,014
157,080
125,272
117,810
109,564
80,110
226,200
178,684
307,880
230,910

2500
psi

4418
3651
2454
7854
5890
4142
12,271
10,308
8560
6259
17,672
15,708
13,959
11,658
20,740
17,027
14,726
12,886
31,418
25,404
23,564
19,146
49,088
41,234
36,816
31,416
25,035
70,685
58,413
53,014
46,632
39,270
96,213
78,541
72,160
64,798
56,453
47,125
125,663
101,610
94,248
85,903
76,575
66,268
196,350
156,590
147,263
136,955
100,138
282,750
223,355
384,850
288,638

3000
psi

5301
4381
2945
9425
7069
4970
14,726
12,370
10,271
7510
21,206
18,850
16,751
13,990
24,837
20,433
17,672
15,463
37,701
30,485
28,276
22,975
58,905
49,480
44,179
37,699
30,042
84,822
70,096
63,616
55,959
47,124
115,455
94,249
86,592
77,757
67,743
56,550
150,795
121,932
131,097
103,083
91,890
79,521
235,620
187,908
176,715
164,346
120,165
339,300
268,026
461,820
346,365

4000
psi

7068
5841
3927
12,566
9425
6627
19,635
16,493
13,695
10,014
28,274
25,133
22,335
18,653
33,183
27,244
23,562
20,617
50,268
40,647
37,702
30,633
78,540
65,974
58,905
50,266
40,056
113,090
93,461
84,822
74,612
62,832
153,940
125,666
115,456
103,676
90,324
75,400
201,060
162,576
150,796
137,444
125,520
106,028
314,160
250,544
235,620
219,128
160,220
452,400
357,368
615,760
461,820

5000
psi

8836
7302
4909
15,708
11,781
8283
24,544
20,617
17,119
12,517
35,343
31,416
27,919
23,317
41,479
34,055
29,453
25,771
62,835
50,809
47,127
38,292
98,175
82,467
73,632
62,832
50,070
141,370
116,827
106,027
93,265
78,540
192,425
157,082
144,320
129,595
112,905
94,250
251,325
203,220
188,495
171,805
153,150
132,535
392,700
313,180
294,525
273,910
200,275
565,500
446,710
769,700
577,275

40/670 Hydraulic Fundamentals

adaptable for hydraulic systems, but only the vane-type is
used on pneumatic systems.

4.8 Control valves
It is impossible to design a practical ﬂuid power system
without some means of controlling the volume and
pressure of the ﬂuid, and directing that ﬂow to the proper
operating units. This is accomplished by the inclusion of
control valves in the hydraulic circuit.

A valve is deﬁned as any device by which the ﬂow
of ﬂuid may be started, stopped, regulated or directed
by a movable part that opens or obstructs passage of
the ﬂuid. Valves must be able to accurately control ﬂuid
ﬂow, system pressure and to sequence the operation of all
actuators within a hydraulic system.

Hydraulic control values can utilize a variety of
actuators that activate their function. Normally these
actuators use manual, electrical, mechanical or pneumatic
power sources.

4.8.1 Valve classiﬁcation

Valves are classiﬁed by their intended use: ﬂow control,
pressure control, and direction control. Some valves
have multiple functions that fall
into more than one
classiﬁcation.

Flow control valves

Flow control valves are used to regulate the ﬂow of ﬂuids.
Control of ﬂow in hydraulic systems is critical because the
rate of movement of ﬂuid-powered machines or actuators
depends on the rate of ﬂow of the pressurized ﬂuid.

Pressure control

The safe and efﬁcient operation of ﬂuid power systems,
system components and related equipment requires a
means to control pressure within the system. There are
many types of automatic pressure control valves. Some of
them merely provide an escape for excess pressures; some
only reduce the pressure; and some keep the pressure
within a pre-set range.
Some ﬂuid power

systems, even when operated
normally, may temporarily develop excessive pressure.
For example, when an unusually strong work resistance is
encountered, system pressure may exceed design limits.
Relief valves are used to control this excess pressure.

Relief valves are automatic valves, used on system lines
and equipment to prevent over-pressurization. Most relief
valves simply open at a preset pressure and shut when the
pressure returns to normal limits. They do not maintain
ﬂow or pressure at a given amount, but prevent pressure
from rising above a speciﬁed level.

Main system relief valves are generally installed
between the pump or pressure source and the ﬁrst system
isolation valve. The valve must be large enough to allow
the full output of the hydraulic pump to be delivered back
to the reservoir. This design feature, called a full-ﬂow
bypass, is essential for all hydraulic systems. The location

of the valve is also critical. If the valve were installed
downstream from the system isolator valve, the pump
could be deadheaded when the system was shutdown.

Smaller relief valves are often used in isolated parts
of the system where a check valve or directional control
valve prevents pressure from being relieved through the
main system relief valve or where pressures must be
relieved at a speciﬁc set point lower than the main system
pressure. These small relief valves are also used to relieve
pressures caused by thermal expansion of ﬂuids.

Figure 40.20 shows a typical

relief valve. System
pressure simply acts under the valve disk at the inlet of
the valve. When the system pressure exceeds the pre-load
force exerted by the valve spring, the valve disk will lift
off of its seat. This will allow some of the system ﬂuid to
escape through the valve outlet. Flow will continue until
the system pressure is reduced to a level below the spring
force.

All relief valves have an adjustment for increasing or
decreasing the set relief pressure. Some relief valves are
equipped with an adjusting screw for this purpose. This
adjusting screw is usually covered with a cap, which must
be removed before an adjustment can be made.

Pressure regulators

Pressure regulators, often referred to as unloading valves,
are used in ﬂuid power systems to regulate pressure. In
hydraulic systems, the pressure regulator is used to unload
the pump and to maintain or regulate system pressure at
the desired values.

All hydraulic

systems do not

require pressure
regulators. The open-center system does not require a
pressure regulator. Many systems are equipped with
variable-displacement pumps, which contain a pressure-
regulating device.

Pressure regulators are made in a variety of types.
However, the basic operating principles of all regulators
are similar to the one illustrated in Figure 40.21.

Cap

Compression

screw
Bonnet

Stem
Disk

Gag screw
Upper spring step

Retaining ring

Spring

Body

Lower spring

step

Lever

Yoke

Shaft

Figure 40.20 Cutaway of relief valve

Pilot valve spring

Ball

(a)

Stem passage

Valve

chamber

Piston
passage

Pilot valve

Adjusting

screw

Main valve spring

Piston

High-pressure

line

Stem

To reservoir

(b)

(c)

Figure 40.21 Hydraulic pressure regulator

A regulator is open when it is directing ﬂuid under
pressure into the system, Figure 40.21, view (a). In the
closed position, Figure 40.21, view (b), the ﬂuid in the
part of the system beyond the regulator is trapped at the
desired pressure and the ﬂuid from the pump is bypassed

Control valves 40/671

into the return line and back to the reservoir. To prevent
constant opening and closing (chatter), the regulator is
designed to open at pressure somewhat lower than the
closing pressure. This difference is known as differential
or operating range. For example, assume that a pressure
regulator is set to open when the system pressure drops
below 600 psi and close when the pressure rises above
800 psi. The differential or operating range is 200 psi.

Referring to Figure 40.21, assume that the piston has an
area of 1 in2, the pilot valve has a cross-sectional area of
4 in2 and the piston spring provides 600 pounds of force
1
that pushes the piston against its seat. When the system
pressure is less than 600 psi, ﬂuid from the pump will
enter the inlet port, ﬂow to the top of the regulator and
then to the pilot valve. When the system pressure at the
valve inlet increases to the point where the force it creates
against the front of the check valve exceeds the force
created against the back of the check valve, the check
valve opens. This allows ﬂuid to ﬂow into the system and
to the bottom of the regulator against the piston. When
the system force exceeds the force exerted by the spring,
the piston moves up, causing the pilot valve to unseat.
Since the ﬂuid will take the path of least resistance, it
will pass through the regulator and back to the reservoir
through the bypass line.

When the ﬂuid from the pump is suddenly allowed a
free path to return, the pressure on the input side of the
check valve drops and the check valve closes. The ﬂuid
in the system is then pressurized until a power unit is
actuated or until pressure is slowly lost through normal
internal leakage within the system.

When the system pressure decreases to a point slightly
below 600 psi, the spring forces the piston down and
closes the pilot valve. When the pilot valve is closed, the
ﬂuid cannot ﬂow directly to the return line. This causes
the pressure to increase in the line between the pump
and the regulator. This pressure opens the check valve,
causing ﬂuid to enter the system.

In summary, when the system pressure decreases, the
pressure regulator will open, sending ﬂuid to the system.
When the system pressure increases, the regulator will
close, allowing the ﬂuid from the pump to ﬂow through
the regulator and back to the reservoir. The pressure
regulator takes the load off of the pump and regulates
system pressure.

Sequence valves

Sequence valves control
the sequence of operation
between two branches in a hydraulic circuit. In other
words, they enable one component within the system
to automatically set another component into motion. An
example of the use of a sequence valve is in an aircraft
landing gear actuating system.

In a landing gear actuating system, the landing gear
doors must open before the landing gear starts to extend.
Conversely, the landing gear must be completely retracted
before the doors close. A sequence valve installed in each
landing gear actuating line performs this function.

A sequence valve is somewhat similar to a relief valve
except that, after the set pressure has been reached, the

40/672 Hydraulic Fundamentals

sequence valve diverts the ﬂuid to a second actuator
or motor to do work in another part of the system.
Figure 40.22 shows an installation of two sequence valves
that control the sequence of operation of three actuating
cylinders. Fluid is free to ﬂow into cylinder A. The ﬁrst
sequence valve (1) blocks the passage of ﬂuid until the
piston in cylinder A moves to the end of its stroke. At
this time, sequence valve 1 opens, allowing ﬂuid to enter
cylinder B. This action continues until all three pistons
complete their strokes.

Pressure reducing valves

Pressure reducing valves provide a steady pressure into a
part of the system that operates at a pressure lower that
normal system pressure. A reducing valve can normally be
set for any desired downstream pressure within its design
limits. Once the valve is set, the reduced pressure will be
maintained regardless of changes in the supply pressure
and system load variations.

Cylinder C

Cylinder B

Cylinder A

Sequence
valves

2

1

To

return

Fluid
supply

Figure 40.22 Installation of sequence valve

There are various designs and types of pressure-
regulating valves. The spring-loaded reducer and the pilot-
controlled valve are the most common.

Directional control valves

Directional control valves are designed to direct the ﬂow
of ﬂuid, at the desired time, to the point in a ﬂuid power
system where it will do work. The driving of a ram
back and forth in its cylinder is an example of when a
directional control valve is used. Various other terms are
used to identify directional valves, such as selector valve,
transfer valve, and control valve. This manual will use the
term directional control valve to identify these valves.

Directional control valves for hydraulic and pneumatic
systems are similar in design and operation. However,
there is one major difference. The return port of a
hydraulic valve is ported through a return line to the
reservoir. Any other differences are pointed out in the
discussion of these valves.

Directional control valves may be operated by
differences in pressure acting on opposite sides of
the valve elements or may be positioned manually,
mechanically, or electrically. Often two or more methods
of operating the same valve will be used in different
phases of its action.

Directional control valves may be classiﬁed in several
ways. Some of the different ways are by the type of
control, the number of ports in the valve housing, and
the speciﬁc function that the valve performs. The most
common method is by the type of valving element used in
the construction of the valve. The most common types of
valving elements are the ball, cone, sleeve, poppet, rotary
spool, and sliding spool. The basic operating principles
of the poppet, rotary spool, and sliding spool types are
discussed in this text.

The poppet ﬁts into the center bore of the seat,
Figure 40.23. The seating surfaces of the poppet and the
seat are lapped or closely machined so that the center
bore will be sealed when the poppet is seated (shut). The
action of the poppet is similar to that of the valves in an

Pilot

pressurized

Exhaust
open

Supply
closed

Cylinder

Cylinder

Exhaust
closed
Supply
Open to
cylinder

Figure 40.23 Operation of a simple poppet valve

Closed

Open

automobile engine. In most valves, the poppet is held in
the seated position by a spring.

The valve consists primarily of a movable poppet,
which closes against the valve seat. In the closed position,
ﬂuid pressure on the inlet side tends to hold the valve
tightly closed. A small amount of movement from a force
applied to the top of the poppet stem opens the poppet
and allows ﬂuid to ﬂow through the valve.

The rotary spool directional control valve, Figure 40.24,
has a round core with one or more passages or recesses in
it. The core is mounted within a stationary sleeve. As the
core is rotated within the stationary sleeve, the passages
or recesses connect or block the ports in the sleeve. The
ports in the sleeve are connected to the appropriate lines
of the ﬂuid system.

The operation of a simple sliding spool directional
control valve is shown in Figure 40.25. The valve is so
named because of the shape of the valving element that
slides back and forth to block or open ports in the valve
housing. The sliding element is referred to as the spool or
piston. The inner piston areas, or lands, are equal. Thus,
ﬂuid under pressure, which enters the valve from the inlet
ports, acts equally on both inner piston areas, regardless of
the position of the spool. Sealing is usually accomplished
by a very closely machined ﬁt between the spool and
the valve body or sleeve. For valves with more ports,
the spool is designed with more pistons or lands on a
common shaft. The sliding spool is the most common
type of directional control valves.

4.9 Lines, ﬁttings and seals
The control and application of ﬂuid power would be
impossible without suitable means of transferring the
hydraulic ﬂuid between the reservoir, the power source,
and the points of application. Fluid lines are used to
transfer the hydraulic ﬂuid, ﬁttings are used to connect
lines to system components, and seals are used in all
components to prevent leakage. This chapter is devoted
to these critical system components.

Fixed sleeve

Core

Passages

Ports

Figure 40.24 Parts of a rotary spool valve

Lines, ﬁttings and seals 40/673

Out

Reservoir

In

Reservoir

Open

Out

Reservoir

In

Reservoir

Closed

Figure 40.25 Two-way sliding spool valve

4.9.1 Types of lines

Three types of lines are used in ﬂuid power systems: pipe
(rigid), tubing (semi-rigid), and hoses (ﬂexible). A number
of factors are considered when the type of line is selected
for a particular application. These factors include the type
of ﬂuid, the required system pressure, and the location of
the system. For example, heavy pipe might be used for
a large, stationary system, but comparatively lightweight
tubing must be used in mobile applications. Flexible hose
is required in installations where units must be free to
move relative to each other.
Pipe and tubing
There are three important dimensions of any tubular
product: outside diameter (OD), inside diameter (ID) and
wall thickness. Sizes of pipe are listed by the nominal, or
approximate, ID and the wall thickness. The actual OD
and the wall thickness list sizes of tubing.

Selection
The material, inside diameter (ID) and wall thickness are
the three primary considerations in the selection of lines
for a particular ﬂuid power system. The ID of the line is
important because it determines how much ﬂuid can pass
through the line without loss of power due to excessive
friction and heat. The velocity of a given ﬂow is less
through a large opening than through a small opening.
If the ID of the line is too small for ﬂow, excessive
turbulence and friction will cause unnecessary power loss
and overheat the hydraulic ﬂuid.

Sizing
Pipes are available in three different weights: Standard
(STD), or Schedule 40; Extra Strong (XS), or Schedule

40/674 Hydraulic Fundamentals

1

80; and Double Extra Strong (XXS). The schedule number
range from 10 to 160 and cover 10 distinct sets of wall
thickness, see Table 40.7. Schedule 160 wall thickness is
slightly thinner than the double extra strong.

As mentioned earlier, the nominal inside diameter (ID)
determines the size of pipes. For example, the ID for a
4 -inch Schedule 40 pipe is 0.364 inch, and the ID for a
1
2 -inch Schedule 40 pipe is 0.622 inch.

It is important to note that the IDs of all pipes of the
same nominal size are not equal. This is because the OD
remains constant and the wall thickness increases as the
schedule number increases. For example, a nominal 1-
inch Schedule 40 pipe has a 1.049-inch ID. The same size
Schedule 80 pipe has a 0.957-inch ID, while Schedule 160
pipe has 0.815-inch ID. In each case, the OD is 1.315-inch
and the wall thickness varies. The actual wall thickness
is the difference between the OD and ID divided by 2.

8 -inch tubing has an OD of 5

Tubing differs from pipe in its size classiﬁcation.
Its actual outside diameter (i.e. OD) designates tubing.
8 -inch. As indicated
Thus, 5
in Table 40.7, tubing is available in a variety of wall
thickness. The diameter of tubing is often measured and
8 -inch OD,
indicated in 1
No. 8 tubing is 8

16 ths. Thus, No. 6 tubing is 6
2 -inch, and so forth.

The wall thickness, material used, and ID determines
the bursting pressure of a line or ﬁtting. The greater
the wall thickness in relation to the ID and the stronger
the metal, the higher the bursting pressure. However, the
greater the ID for a given wall thickness, the lower the
bursting pressure. This is because force is the product of
area and pressure.

16 or 1

16 or 3

Materials

The pipe and tubing used in ﬂuid power systems are
commonly made from steel, copper, brass, aluminum,
and stainless steel. Each of these metals has its distinct
advantages and disadvantages in certain applications.

Steel pipe and tubing are relatively inexpensive and are
used in many hydraulic and pneumatic applications. Steel
is used because of its strength, suitability for bending
and ﬂanging and adaptability to high pressures and

Table 40.7 Wall thickness schedule designation for pipe

Nominal

Pipe OD

Inside diameter (ID)

Size

1
8
1
4
3
8
1
2
3
4
1
1 1
4
1 1
2
2

Schedule

40

Schedule

80

Schedule

160

0.405
0.540
0.675
0.840
1.050
1.315
1.660
1.900
2.375

0.269
0.364
0.493
0.622
0.824
1.049
1.380
1.610
2.067

0.215
0.302
0.423
0.546
0.742
0.957
1.278
1.500
1.939

0.466
0.815
0.815
1.160
1.338
1.689

temperatures. Its chief disadvantage is its comparatively
low resistance to corrosion.

Copper pipe and tubing are sometimes used for ﬂuid
power lines. Copper has high resistance to corrosion and
is easily drawn or bent. However, it is unsatisfactory for
high temperatures and has a tendency to harden and break
due to stress and vibration.

Aluminum has many of the characteristics and qualities
required for ﬂuid power lines. Is has high resistance to
corrosion and is easily drawn or bent. In addition, it
has the outstanding characteristic of lightweight. Since
weight elimination is a vital factor in the design of aircraft,
aluminum alloy tubing is used in the majority of aircraft
ﬂuid power systems.

An improperly piped system can lead to serious power
loss and possible harmful ﬂuid contamination. Therefore,
in maintenance and repair of ﬂuid power system lines,
the basic design requirements must be kept in mind. Two
primary requirements are as follows:

1. The lines must have the correct ID to provide the
required volume and velocity of ﬂow with the least
amount of
turbulence during all demands on the
system.

2. The lines must be made of the proper material and
have the wall thickness to provide sufﬁcient strength
to both contain the ﬂuid at the required pressure and
withstand the surges of pressure that may develop in
the system.

Preparation

Fluid power systems are designed as compactly as
possible, to keep the connecting lines short. Every section
of line should be anchored securely in one or more places
so that neither the weight of the line nor the effects of
vibration are carried on the joints. The aim is to minimize
stress throughout the system.

Lines should normally be kept as short and free
of bends as possible. However,
tubing should not be
assembled in a straight line, because a bend tends to
eliminate strain by absorbing vibration and compensates
for
thermal expansion and contraction. Bends are
preferred to elbows, because bends cause less loss of
power. Some of the correct and incorrect methods of
installing tubing are illustrated in Figure 40.26.

Bends are described by their radius measurements. The
2 to 3 times the ID, as shown in
ideal bend radius is 2 1
Figure 40.27. For example, if the ID of a line is 2 inches,
the radius of the bend should be between 5 and 6 inches.
While friction increases markedly for sharper curves
than this, it also tends to increase up to a certain point for
gentler curves. The increases in friction in a bend with a
radius of more than 3 pipe diameters result from increased
turbulence near the outside edges of the ﬂow. Particles of
ﬂuid must travel a longer distance in making the change
in direction. When the radius of the bend is less than
2 pipe diameters, the increased pressure loss is due to
2 1
the abrupt change in the direction of ﬂow, especially for
particles near the inside edge of the ﬂow.

Lines, ﬁttings and seals 40/675

Right

Right

Right

Wrong

Wrong

Wrong

Figure 40.26 Correct and incorrect methods of installation

D

Tube cutting and deburring

The objective of cutting tubing is to produce a square
end that is free from burrs. Tubing may be cut using
a standard tube cutter, Figure 40.28, or a ﬁne-toothed
hacksaw. When you use the standard tube cutter, place
the tube in the cutter with the cutting wheel at the point
where the cut is to be made. Apply light pressure on the
tube by tightening the adjusting knob. Too much pressure
applied to the cutting wheel at one time may deform the
tubing or cause excessive burrs. Rotate the cutter, adjust
the tightening knob after each complete rotation.

After the tubing is cut, remove all burrs and sharp edges
from the inside and outside of the tube with a deburring
tool, Figure 40.29. Clean out the tubing. Make sure no
foreign particles remain.

Cut

Tube

Clean cut

2 1

2

 to 3 

D

Figure 40.27 Ideal bend radius

t er

t

u

Cutting
a tube

side of c
open
ard
w
o
t
e
t
a
t
o
R

Figure 40.28 Tube cutting

40/676 Hydraulic Fundamentals

Tube bending

The objective in tube bending is to obtain a smooth bend
without ﬂattening the tube. Tube bending is usually done
with either a hand tube bender or a mechanically operated
bender.

The hand tube bender shown in Figure 40.30, consists
of a handle, a radius block, a clip, and a slide bar. The
handle and slide bars are used as levers to provide the
mechanical advantage necessary to bend the tubing. The
radius block is marked in degrees or bend ranging from 0
to 180°. The slide bar has a mark which is lined up with
the zero mark on the radius block. The tube is inserted
in the tube bender and after the marks are lined up, the
slide bar is moved around until the mark on the slide bar
reaches the desired degree of bend on the radius block.

Tube ﬂaring

Tube ﬂaring is a method of forming the end of a tube into
a funnel shape so a threaded ﬁtting can hold it. When a
ﬂared tube is prepared, a ﬂare nut is slipped onto the tube
and the end of the tube is ﬂared. During tube installation,
the ﬂare is seated to a ﬁtting with the inside of the ﬂare
against the cone-shaped end of the ﬁtting, pulling the
inside of the ﬂare against the seating surface of the ﬁtting.
Either of two ﬂaring tools in Figure 40.31 may be used.
One gives a single ﬂare and the other gives a double ﬂare.
The ﬂaring tool consists of a split die block that has holes
for various sizes of tubing. It also has a clamp to lock the
end of the tubing inside the die block and a yoke with a
compressor screw and cone that slips over the die block
and forms the 45° ﬂare on the end of the tube. A double
ﬂaring tube has adapters that turn in the edge of the tube
before a regular 45° double ﬂare is made.

To use the single ﬂaring tool, ﬁrst check to see that the
end of the tubing has been cut off squarely and has had
the burrs removed for both the inside and outside. Slip
the ﬂare nut onto the tubing before you make the ﬂare.
Then, open the die block. Insert the end of the tubing into
the hole corresponding to the OD of the tubing so that
the end protrudes slightly above the top face of the die
blocks. The amount by which the tubing extends above
the blocks determines the ﬁnished diameter of the ﬂare.
The ﬂare must be large enough to seat properly against the
ﬁtting, but small enough that the threads of the ﬂare nut

will slide over it. Close the die block and secure the tool
with the wing nut. Use the handle of the yoke to tighten
the wing nut. Then place the yoke over the end of the
tubing and tighten the handle to force the cone into the
end of the tubing. The completed ﬂare should be slightly
visible above the face of the die blocks.

Flexible hose

Rubber

hoses

are

designed

Shock-resistant, ﬂexible hose (Figure 40.32) assemblies
are required to absorb the movements of mounted
equipment under both normal operating conditions and
extreme conditions. They are also used for their noise-
attenuating properties and to connect moving parts
of certain equipment. The two basic hose types are
synthetic rubber and polytetraﬂuoroethylene (PTFE), such
as DuPont’s Teﬂon ﬂuorocarbon resin.
for

speciﬁc ﬂuid,
temperature, and pressure ranges and are provided in
various speciﬁcations. Rubber hoses consist of a minimum
of three layers: a seamless synthetic rubber tube reinforced
with one or more layers of braided or spiraled cotton, wire,
or synthetic ﬁber; and an outer cover. The inner tube is
designed to withstand the attack of the ﬂuid that passes
through it. The braided or spiraled layers determine the
strength of the hose. The greater the number of layers,
the greater is the pressure rating. Hoses are provided in
three pressure ranges: low, medium and high. The outer
cover is designed to withstand external abuse and contains
identiﬁcation markings.

Sizing

The size of a ﬂexible hose is identiﬁed by the dash ( – )
number, which is the ID of the hose expressed in 16ths of
an inch. For example, the ID of a (cid:3)64 hose is 4 inches.
For a few hose styles this is the nominal and not the
true ID.

Cure date

Synthetic rubber hoses will deteriorate from aging. A cure
date is used to ensure that they do not deteriorate beyond
material and performance speciﬁcations. The cure date
is the quarter and year the hose was manufactured. For
89 means the hose was made during
example, 1Q89 or

1

A

A

Section A — A

Figure 40.29 Properly burred tubing

1

Raise slide-bar
upward.

Slide-bar

Lines, ﬁttings and seals 40/677

2

Place tubing
in block.

Tubing

0

4
5

9
0

1
3
5

1
8
0

Radius
block

3

Prepare to raise clip over tubing.

Clip

Handle

4

Drop clip
over tubing.

6

Remove bent tubing
by lifting slide bar
and raising clip.

Zero mark coincides
with mark on block

0 4

5

9

0

1

3

1

5

8

0

5

Bend tubing to
desired angle.

0 4

5

9

0

1

3

5

1
8
0

90˚ Mark

A bend of 90˚
done as shown
in above steps.

Figure 40.30 Bending tubing with hand-operated tube bender

40/678 Hydraulic Fundamentals

T-handle

Die block

Clamp

Screw

1

Inches

2

3

4

5

6

Yoke

Cone

Single flaring tool

Figure 40.31 Flaring tools

the ﬁrst quarter of 1989. The cure date limits the length
of time a rubber hose can be safely used in ﬂuid power
applications. The normal shelf life of rubber hose is
4 years.

Application

As mentioned earlier, ﬂexible hose is available in three
pressure ranges: low, medium and high. When replacing
hoses, it is important to ensure that the replacement hose
is a duplicate of the one removed in length, OD, material,
type and contour. In selecting hose, several precautions
must be observed. The selected hose must:

1. Be compatible with the system ﬂuid,
2. Have a rated pressure greater than the design pressure

of the system,

3. Be designed to give adequate performance and service
for infrequent transient pressure peaks up to 150 per
cent of the working pressure of the hose, and

4. Have a safety factor with a burst pressure at a

minimum of 4 times the rated working pressure.

There are temperature restrictions applied to the use of
hoses. Rubber hose must not be used where the operating
temperature exceeds 200°F. PTFE hoses in high-pressure
air systems must not be used where the temperature
exceeds 350°F.

Installation

Flexible hose must not be twisted during installation. This
will reduce the life of the hose and may cause the ﬁttings
to loosen. You can determine whether a hose is twisted
by looking at the layline that runs along the length of the
hose. If the layline does not spiral around the hose, the
hose is not twisted. If the layline does spiral around the
hose, the hose is twisted and must be untwisted. Flexible

Handle

Die block

Cone

Adaptors

Yoke

Double flaring tool

hose should be protected from chaﬁng by using a chafe-
resistant covering wherever necessary.

The minimum bend radius for ﬂexible hose varies
according to the size and construction of the hose and
the pressure under which the system operates. Current
applicable technical publications contain tables and graphs
showing the minimum bend radii for the different types
of installations. Bends that are too sharp will reduce the
bursting pressure of ﬂexible hose considerably below its
rated valve.

Flexible hose should be installed so that it will be
subjected to a minimum of ﬂexing during operation.
Support clamps are not necessary with short installations;
but
for hose of considerable length (48 inches for
example), clamps should be placed not more than 24
inches apart. Closer supports are desirable and in some
cases may be required.

A ﬂexible hose must never be stretched tightly between
two ﬁttings. About 5 to 8 per cent of the total length must
be allowed as slack to provide freedom of movement
under pressure. When under pressure, ﬂexible hose
contracts in length and expands in diameter. Examples
of correct and incorrect installations of ﬂexible hose are
illustrated in Figure 40.33.

40.9.2 Types of ﬁttings and connectors

Some type of connector or ﬁtting must be provided to
attach the lines to the components of the system and to
connect sections of line to each other. There are many
different types of connectors and ﬁttings provided for
this purpose. The type of connector or ﬁtting required
for a speciﬁc system depends on several factors. One
determining factor is the type of ﬂuid line (pipe, tubing or
ﬂexible hose) used in the system. Other determing factors
are the type of ﬂuid medium and maximum operating

Wire braid

Cotton cord braid

Lines, ﬁttings and seals 40/679

SAE 100R1 rubber hose.

Wire braid

Cotton cord

Fiber braid

SAE 100R2. Type A. rubber hose.

Fiber braid

Spiral wire

Friction layer

SAE 100R2. Type B. rubber hose.

Wire braid

SAE 100R3 rubber hose.

Spiral braid

Friction layer

SAE 100R9 rubber hose.

SAE 100R4 rubber hose.

SAE 100R7 and 100R8 thermoplastic hoses.

Nylon-covered single-fiber braid (left).
Four-spiral ply (right).

Figure 40.32 Types of ﬂexible hose

40/680 Hydraulic Fundamentals

Right

Wrong

Right

Right

(a)

(b)

(c)

Wrong

Wrong

Figure 40.33 Correct and incorrect installation of ﬂexible hose

1. The tapered male
thread on the
section of pipe...

2. Screws into the
female thread in the
fitting or hydraulic
component. This
thread also is tapered.

3. As the joint is tightened,
an interference occurs between
the threads, sealing the joints.

4. In standard pipe threads,
the flanks come in contact
first.

5. There can be a
spiral clearance around
the threads.

6. In dry-seal threads,
the roots and crests
engage first, eliminating
spiral clearance.

Figure 40.34 Threaded connectors

pressure of the system. Some of the most common types
of ﬁttings and connectors are described in the following:

Pipes and tubing

High-pressure pipe or
tubing can also be used for
hydraulic circuits. In these applications, special threading
or ﬁttings are required to connect circuit components.

There are several different types
Threaded connectors
of threaded connectors. In the type discussed in this
section, both the connector and the end of the ﬂuid line are
threaded. These connectors are used in some low-pressure
ﬂuid power systems and are usually made of steel, copper,
and brass is available in a variety of designs.

Threaded connectors (Figure 40.34) are made with
standard pipe threads cut on the inside surface (female).
The end of the pipe is threaded with outside threads
(male). Standard pipe threads are tapered slightly
taper
to ensure tight connections. The amount of
foot of
is approximately 3
4
thread.

inch in diameter per

Metal is removed when pipe is threaded, thinning the
pipe and exposing new and rough surfaces. Corrosion

Screw

Weld

Pipe

Lines, ﬁttings and seals 40/681

agents work more quickly at such points than elsewhere.
If pipes are assembled with no protective compounds on
the threads, corrosion sets in at once and the two sections
stick together so that the threads seize when disassembly
is attempted. The result is damaged threads and pipes. To
prevent seizing, a suitable pipe thread compound is some-
times applied to the threads. The two end threads must be
kept free of compound so that it will not contaminate the
hydraulic ﬂuid. Pipe compound, when improperly applied,
may get inside the lines and damage pumps, control equip-
ment and other components of the system.

Another material used on pipe threads is sealant tape.
This tape, which is made of Teﬂon, provides an effective
means of sealing pipe connections and eliminates the
necessity of torquing connections to excessively high
values in order to prevent leaks. It also provides for ease
of maintenance whenever it is necessary to disconnect
pipe joints. The tape is applied over the male threads,
leaving the ﬁrst thread exposed. After the tape is pressed
ﬁrmly against the threads, the joint is connected.

Bolted ﬂange connectors, Figure 40.35, are
Flanged
suitable for most pressures now in use. The ﬂanges are
attached to the piping by welding, brazing, tapered threads

Lock washer

‘O’ ring

Socket weld pipe connections

straight type

Flange

Screw

Lock washer

‘O’ ring

Figure 40.35 Four types of bolted ﬂange connectors

Flange

40/682 Hydraulic Fundamentals

or rolling and bending into recesses. Those illustrated
are the most common types of ﬂange joints used. The
same types of standard ﬁtting shapes, i.e. tee, cross, elbow
and so forth, are manufactured for ﬂange joints. Suitable
gasket material must be used between the ﬂanges.

Welded Welded joints connect the subassemblies of
some ﬂuid power systems, especially in high-pressure
systems that use pipe for ﬂuid lines. The welding is
done according to standard speciﬁcations that deﬁne the
materials and techniques.

Silver-brazed connectors are commonly used
Brazed
for
joining non-ferrous piping in the pressure and
temperature range where their use is practical. Use of
this type of connector is limited to installations in which
the piping temperature will not exceed 425°F and the
pressure in cold lines will not exceed 3000 psi. Heating
the joint with an oxyacetylene torch melts the alloy.
This causes the alloy insert
the few
thousandths of an inch annular space between the pipe
and ﬁtting.

to melt and ﬁll

are

connectors

commonly used in ﬂuid
Flared
power systems containing lines made of tubing. These
connectors provide safe, strong, dependable connections
without the need for threading, welding or soldering the
tubing. The connector consists of a ﬁtting, a sleeve, and
a nut, Figure 40.36.

The ﬁttings are made of steel, aluminum alloy, or
bronze. The ﬁtting used in a connection should be made
of the same material as that of the sleeve, the nut and
the tubing. For example, use steel connectors with steel
tubing and aluminum alloy connectors with aluminum
alloy tubing. Fittings are made in union, 45° and 90°
elbows, tee, and various other shapes, Figure 40.37.

For connecting to tubing, the ends of the ﬁttings are
threaded with straight machine threads to correspond with

are

Tees,

crosses,

and elbows

self-explanatory.
Universal and bulkhead ﬁttings can be mounted solidly
with one outlet of the ﬁtting extending through a bulkhead
and the other outlet(s) positioned at any angle. Universal
means the ﬁtting can assume the angle required for the
speciﬁc installation. Bulkhead means the ﬁtting is long
enough to pass through a bulkhead and is designed so it
can be secured solidly to the bulkhead.

(a)  37˚ Flare fitting

Standard

Inverted

(b)  45˚ Flare fitting

(c)  Straight thread ‘O’

ring connector

(d)  Ferrule compression

fitting

(e)  ‘O’ ring compression

fitting

(f)  Sleeve compression

fitting

Figure 40.36 Flared tube ﬁtting

Lines, ﬁttings and seals 40/683

Elbow

Elbow

Elbow

Flared tube and
pipe thread 90˚

Flared tube and
pipe thread 45˚

Flared tube 90˚

Tee

Tee

Tee

Flared tube

Flared tube

pipe thread on side

Flared tube

pipe thread on run

Cross

Union

Nipple

Flared tube

Flared tube

Flared tube and

pipe thread

Union

Elbow

Tee

Flared tube

bulkhead and universal

Flared tube

bulkhead universal 90˚

Flared tube

bulkhead and universal

Figure 40.37 Flared tube ﬁttings

the female threads of the nut. In some cases, however,
one end of the ﬁtting may be threaded with tapered pipe
threads to ﬁt threaded ports in pumps, valves, and other
components. Several of these thread combinations are
shown in Figure 40.37.

Tubing used with ﬂare connectors must be ﬂared
prior to assembly. The nut ﬁts over the sleeve and,
it draws the sleeve and tubing ﬂare
when tightened,
tightly against
the male ﬁtting to form a positive
seal.

40/684 Hydraulic Fundamentals

The male ﬁtting has a cone-shaped surface with the
same angle as the inside of the ﬂare. The sleeve supports
the tube so vibration does not concentrate at the edge of
the ﬂare and distributes the shearing action over a wider
area for added strength.

Correct and incorrect methods of installing ﬂared-tube
connectors are illustrated in Figure 40.38. Tubing nuts
should be tightened with a torque wrench to the values
speciﬁed in applicable technical publications.

If an aluminum alloy ﬂared connector leaks after
being tightened to the required torque, it must not be
tightened further. Over-tightening may severely damage
or completely cut off the tubing ﬂare or may result in
damage to the sleeve or nut. The leaking connection must
be disassembled and the fault corrected.

If steel tube connection leaks, it may be tightened 1
16
turn beyond the speciﬁed torque in an attempt to stop the
leakage. If the connection continues to leak, it must be
disassembled and the problem corrected.

Connectors for ﬂexible hose

There are various types of end ﬁttings for both piping
connection side and hose connection side of hose ﬁttings.
Figure 40.39 shows commonly used ﬁttings.

Figure 40.38 Correct and incorrect method of installing ﬂared ﬁttings

Quick-disconnect couplings

Self-sealing, quick-disconnect couplings, Figure 40.40,
are used at various points in many ﬂuid power systems.
These couplings are installed at locations where frequent
uncoupling of the lines is required for inspection, test,
and maintenance. Quick-disconnect couplings are also
commonly used in pneumatic systems to connect sections
of air hose and to connect
tools to the air pressure
lines. This provides a convenient method of attaching
and detaching tools and sections of lines without losing
pressure.

Quick-disconnect couplings provide a means

for
quickly disconnecting a line without the loss of ﬂuid
from the system or the entrance of foreign matter into
the system. Several types of quick-disconnect couplings
have been designed for use in ﬂuid power systems.
Figure 40.40 illustrates a coupling that
is used with
portable pneumatic tools. The male section is connected
to the tool or to the line leading from the tool. The female
section, which contains the shutoff valve,
is installed
in the line leading from the pressure source. These
connectors can be separated or connected by very little
effort on the part of the operator.

The most common quick-disconnect coupling for
hydraulic systems consists of two parts, held together by a

Do not deflect into place;
replace tube assembly

Incorrect − will damage
flare or threads, or cause
sleeve to crack under
vibration if tightened

Incorrect − may pull off or
distort flare if tightened

Correctly fitted
and tightened

0.025 clearance between
flare and shoulder
before tightening

Nipple threads

‘O’-ring seal union

(a) Solid socket

Hose

Hose

(b) Bolt-together socket

Hose

(c) Ring and band socket

End fitting ‘O’-ring seal union to (a), (b) or (c)

Tail piece for split clamp

Split clamp

(a) Solid socket

Hose

37˚

Hose

Lines, ﬁttings and seals 40/685

Nipple

(a) Solid socket

Hose

Hose

Flange

(b) Bolt-together socket

Hose

End fitting flange (a), (b) or (c)

(c) Ring and band socket

(a) Solid socket

Hose

Hose

(b) Bolt-together socket

Hose

Hose nipple split clamp

(b) Bolt-together socket

Hose

Nipple
threads

J.I.C. 37˚ flare

(c) Ring and band socket

(c) Ring and band socket

Figure 40.39 End ﬁttings and hose ﬁttings

union nut. Each part contains a valve which is held open
when the coupling is connected, allowing ﬂuid to ﬂow
in either direction. When the coupling is disconnected, a
spring in each part closes the valves, preventing the loss
of ﬂuid and entrance of foreign matter.

Manifolds

Some ﬂuid power systems are equipped with manifolds
in the pressure supply and/or return lines. A manifold is
a ﬂuid conductor that provides multiple connection ports.
Manifolds eliminate piping, reduce joints, which are often
a source of leakage and conserve space. For example,
manifolds may be used in systems that contain several

Figure 40.40 Quick-disconnect coupling

subsystems. One common line connects the pump to the
manifold.

There are outlet ports in the manifold to provide
connections to each subsystem. A similar manifold may
be used in the return system. Lines from the control
valves of the subsystem connect to the inlet ports of the
manifold, where the ﬂuid combines into one outlet line
to the reservoir. Some manifolds are equipped with check
valves, relief valves, ﬁlters and so on, required for the
system. In some cases, the control valves are mounted on
the manifold in such a manner that ports of the valves are
connected directly to the manifold.

Manifolds are usually one of three types: sandwich,
cast, or drilled. The sandwich type is constructed of three
or more ﬂat plates. The center plate, or plates, is machined
for passages and the required inlet and outlet ports are
drilled into the outer plates. The plates are then bonded
together to provide a leak-proof assembly. The cast type
of manifold is designed with cast passages and drilled
ports. The casting may be iron, steel, bronze or aluminum,
depending on the type of system and ﬂuid medium. In the

Outlet ports

7

6

5

4

3

T

1

2

40/686 Hydraulic Fundamentals

Relief valve
return port

P

Pressure
inlet port

Figure 40.41 Fluid manifold

Outlet ports

Return in

port

Return
out port

Return in

port

Return in

port

Return in

port

Return in

port

Pressure
Return

Pressure out

port

Check
valve

Relief
valve

Pressure out

port

Pressure in

port

Pressure out

port

Pressure out

port

Pressure in

port

(plugged on-1 assy)

Figure 40.42 Fluid manifold ﬂow diagram

Pressure in

port

drilled type manifold, all ports and passages are drilled in
a block of metal.

A simple manifold is illustrated in Figure 40.41. This
manifold contains one pressure inlet port and several
pressure outlet ports that can be blocked off with threaded
plugs. This type of manifold can be adapted to systems
containing various numbers of subsystems. A thermal relief
valve may be incorporated in this manifold. In this case,
the port labeled T is connected to the return line to provide
a passage for the relieved ﬂuid to ﬂow to the reservoir.

Figure 40.42 shows a ﬂow diagram in a manifold that
provides both pressure and return passages. One common
line provides pressurized ﬂuid to the manifold, which
distributes the ﬂuid to any one of ﬁve outlet ports.
The return side of the manifold is similar in design.
This manifold is provided with a relief valve, which is
connected to the pressure and return passages. In the event
of excessive pressure, the relief valve opens and allows
the ﬂuid to ﬂow from the pressure side of the manifold
to the return side.

41

41/687

Pneumatic
Fundamentals

R. Keith Mobley
The Plant Performance Group

Contents

41.1 Introduction
41.2 Characteristics of compressed air
41/689

41/689

41/689

41.2.1 Thermodynamics
41.2.2 Combined effect of pressure, volume and tempera-

ture

41/691
41.2.3 Gas and vapor
41.2.4 Changes of state
41.2.5 Changes of state and vapor pressure
41.2.6 Critical gas conditions

41/692

41/692

41/692

41/692

41.3 Generation of pressure
41.4 Compressors
41/694

41/693

41.4.1 Lubrication system 41/694
41.4.2 Compressor selection

41/695

41.5 Air dryers

41/696

41.5.1 Problems caused by water in

compressed air

41/697

41.6 Dried air systems

41/698

41.6.1 Drying methods
41.6.2 Dry air distribution system 41/701

41/699

41.7 Air reservoir (receivers)
41.8 Safety valves
41/704
41.9 Coolers

41/705

41/703

41.1 Introduction
The purpose of pneumatics is to do work in a controlled
manner. The control of pneumatic power is accomplished
using valves and other control devices that are connected
together in an organized circuit. The starting point in this
organized circuit is the air compressor, where the air is
pressurized.

The pressurized air goes to an air receiver for storage
and then is processed for use by passing through ﬁlters,
dryers and, in some cases, lubricators. This pressurized air
is normally classiﬁed as instrument air when it is used in
control systems. This air must be moisture and oil free to
prevent the control devices from clogging up.

nants.

The law states that any pressurized air system must
be ﬁtted with a pressure relief valve. This valve prevents
the system from being over pressurized and becoming
a hazard to personnel or damaging equipment. A pres-
sure switch is an electro/pneumatic control device that is
installed on the air receiver to regulate the output of the air
compressor. When the air pressure reaches its maximum
set point, the regulator is activated and transmits a signal
to a solenoid valve on the air compressor. This solenoid
valve opens to direct lubricating oil to hydraulically keep
the suction valves shut on both the low and high-pressure
cylinders on the air compressor. The air compressor will
remain in this mode until the pressure drops to the lower
set point and deactivates the pressure regulator. This, in
turn, de-energizes the solenoid valve on the air compres-
sor causing it to release the lubricating oil pressure on
the low- and high-pressure suction valves. The air com-
pressor returns to normal operation pumping air into the
receiver until the maximum pressure set point is reached;
when this happens, the control cycle starts again. Using a
pressure switch prevents the air compressor from running
continuously.

Figure 41.1 shows a typical compressed air supply sys-
tem. The following describes the functions of the system
components:
ž Compressor – Compresses the air.
ž Pressure switch – Turns the air compressor on and off.
ž Pressure relief valve – Relieves air pressure at 110 per
cent of the operating maximum pressure. This device
is ﬁtted to the receiver by law.
ž Check valve – Permits the compressed air to ﬂow away
from the compressor and will not allow any air to return
to the compressor.
ž Air receiver – The receiver stores the pressurized air.
By law, it must have the following ﬁtting installed on
it:
(a) Pressure relief valve.
(b) Pressure gage.
(c) Access hand-hole.
(d) Drain valve.

ž Pressure regulator – Controls the system pressure to the
ž Pressure gage – Indicates internal pressure of the sys-
ž Filter – This device cleans the air of dirt and contami-

tem. Must be ﬁtted by law.

manifold.

Characteristics of compressed air 41/689
ž Lubricator – This device adds a small amount of oil to

the air in order to lubricate equipment.
Note: This is only installed when needed. Most systems
are oil-free.
ž Pressure manifold – This distributes the air to the var-
ž Needle valves – Control the airﬂow to the various sys-

ious pressure ports.

tems that are to be operated.

Hazards of compressed air

People often lack respect for the power in compressed air
because air is so common, and it is viewed as harmless.
At sufﬁcient pressures, compressed air can cause dam-
age if an accident occurred. To minimize the hazards
of working with compressed air, all safety precautions
should be followed closely. Reasons for general precau-
tions follow.

Small leaks or breaks in the compressed air system
can cause minute particles to be blown at surprisingly
high speeds. Always wear safety glasses when working
in the vicinity of any compressed air system. Goggles in
place of glasses are recommended if contact lenses are
worn.

Compressors can make an exceptional amount of noise
while running. The noise of the compressor, in addition
to the drain valves lifting, creates noise to require hearing
protection. The area around compressors should always
be posted as a hearing protection zone.

Pressurized air can do the same type of damage as pres-
surized water. Treat all operations on compressed air sys-
tems with the same care taken on liquid systems. Closed
valves should be slowly cracked open and both sides
allowed to equalize prior to opening the valve further.

41.2 Characteristics of compressed air
Pascal’s law states that the pressure of a gas or liquid
exerts force equally in all directions against the walls of its
container. The force is measured in terms of force per unit
area (pounds per square inch - psi). This law is for liquids
and gasses at rest and neglects the weight of the gas or
liquid. It should be noted that the ﬁeld of ﬂuid power is
divided into two parts, pneumatics and hydraulics. These
two have many characteristics in common. The difference
is hydraulic systems use liquids and pneumatics use gases,
usually air. Liquids are only slightly compressible and in
hydraulic systems, this property can often be neglected.
Gases, however, are very compressible.

Three properties of gases must be well understood
in order
to gain an understanding of pneumatic
power systems. These are its temperature, pressure,
and volume. Physical
laws that deﬁne their efﬁciency
and system dynamics govern compressed air systems and
compressors. These laws include:

41.2.1 Thermodynamics

Both the ﬁrst and second laws of thermodynamics apply to
all compressors and compressed air systems. These laws
state:

41/690 Pneumatic Fundamentals

X

Multiple
outlet
branch
system

Auxiliary

air

receiver

Air dryer

Note: An air dryer will save piping instal-

lation costs by eliminating need for pipe
sloping, overhead take offs, drain legs
or automatic drain traps.

Wide pattern return bend

Pitch 1" :10'

Branch
main

Shut-off valve

Feeder hose

Flexible hose whip

Drain

Lubricator

Water leg
OR TRAP

y

Loop system

Z

Single
outlet
branch

Single,
heavy,

intermittent

air use

Figure 41.1 Typical compressed air supply

First law

Second law

This law states that energy cannot be created or destroyed
during a process, such as compression and delivery of air
or gas, although it may change from one form of energy
to another. In other words, whenever a quantity of one
kind of energy disappears, an exactly equivalent total of
other kinds of energy must be produced.

This more abstract and can be stated in several ways:
ž Heat cannot, of itself, pass from a colder to a hotter
ž Heat can be made to go from a body at lower temperature
to one at higher temperature only if external work is done.

body.

ž The available energy of the isolated system decreases
ž Heat or energy, like water, of itself, will ﬂow only

in all real processes.

downhill.

These statements say that energy exists at various levels
and is available for use only if it can move from a higher
to a lower level. In thermodynamics, a measure of the
unavailability of energy has been devised and is known
as entropy. It is deﬁned by the differential equation:
dS D dQ
T

Entropy, as a measure of unavailability, increases as a
system loses heat, but remains constant when there is no
gain or loss of heat, as in an adiabatic process.

Boyle’s law

If a ﬁxed amount of gas is placed in a container of variable
volume (such as a cylinder ﬁtted with a piston), the gas
will ﬁll completely the entire volume, however large it
may be. If the volume is changed, the pressure exerted
by the gas will also change. As the volume decreases, the
pressure increases. This property is called Boyle’s law
and can be written as:
P1 ð V1 D P2 ð V2
Where:
P1 D initial absolute pressure
V1 D initial volume of air or gas
P2 D ﬁnal pressure (psia)
V2 D ﬁnal volume of air or gas

According to Boyle’s law, pressure of a gas is inversely
proportional to the volume, if the temperature is held con-
stant. For example, 2 ft3 at 4 psi would exert only 1 psi if
allowed to expand 8 ft3.
4 psia ð 2 cubic feet D P2 ð 8 ft3

P2 D 4 psia ð 2 ft3
P2 D 1 psia

8 ft3

In calculations that involve gas pressure and volume,
absolute pressure or pounds per square inch absolute
(psia) must be used.

Charles’ law

If a ﬁxed quantity of gas is held at a constant pressure
and heated or cooled, its volume will change. According
to Charles’ law, the volume of a gas at constant pressure
is directly proportional to the absolute temperature. This
is shown by the following equation:

V1
V2

D T1
T2

It is important to remember that absolute temperature
must be considered not temperature according to normal

Characteristics of compressed air 41/691

Fahrenheit or Centigrade scales. The absolute Fahrenheit
scale is called Rankine and the absolute Centigrade is
called Kelvin. For conversion:
0°Fahrenheit D 460°Rankin
0°Centigrade D 273°Kelvin
Thus gas at 700°F would be 530° on Rankin scale.

41.2.2 Combined effect of pressure, volume and
temperature

Pressure, temperature, and volume are properties of gases
that are completely interrelated. Boyle’s law and Charles’
law may be combined into the following ideal gas law,
which is true for any gas:

P1V1
T1

D P2V2
T2

According to this law, if the three conditions of a gas are
known in one situation, then if any condition is changed
and the effect on the others may be predicted.

Dalton’s law

This states that the total pressure of a mixture of ideal
gases is equal to the sum of the partial pressures of the
constituent gases. The partial pressure is deﬁned as the
pressure each gas would exert if it alone occupied the
volume of the mixture at the mixture’s temperature.

Dalton’s Law has been proved experimentally to be
somewhat inaccurate, the total pressure often being higher
than the sum of the partial pressures. This is especially
true during transitions as pressure is increased. However,
for engineering purposes it is the best rule available and
the error is minor.

When all contributing gases are at the same volume and

temperature, Dalton’s law can be expressed as:
p D pa C pb C pc C ÐÐÐ

Amagat’s law

This is similar to Dalton’s law, but states that the volume
of a mixture of idea gases is equal to the sum of the partial
volumes that the constituent gases would occupy if each
existed alone at the total pressure and temperature of the
mixture. As a formula this becomes:
V D Va C Vb C Vc C ÐÐÐ

Perfect gas formula

Starting with Charles’ and Boyle’s laws, it is possible to
develop the formula for a given weight of gas:
pV D WR1T
Where W is weight and R1 is a speciﬁc constant for the gas
involved. This is the perfect gas equation. Going one step
further, by making W, in pounds, equal to the molecular
weight of the gas (one mole), the formula becomes:
pV D R0T

41/692 Pneumatic Fundamentals

In this very useful form, R0 is known as the universal
gas constant, has a value of 1545 and is the same for all
gases. The speciﬁc gas constant (R1) for any gas can be
obtained by dividing 1545 by the molecular weight. R0
is only equal to 1545 when gas pressure (p) is in PSIA;
volume (V) is expressed as cubic feet per pound mole; and
temperature (T) is in Rankine or absolute, i.e. °F C 460.

Avogadro’s law

Avogadro states that equal volumes of all gases, under the
same conditions of pressure and temperature, contain the
same number of molecules. This law is very important
and is applied in many compressor calculations.

The mole is particularly useful when working with gas
mixtures. It is based on Avogdro’s law that equal volumes
of gases at given pressure and temperature (pT ) conditions
contain equal number of molecules. Since this is so, then
the weight of these equal volumes will be proportional to
their molecular weights. The volume of one mole at any
desired condition can be found by the use of the perfect
gas law.
pV D R0T or pV D 1545 T

41.2.3 Gas and vapor

By deﬁnition, a gas is that ﬂuid form of a substance in
which it can expand indeﬁnitely and completely ﬁll its
container. A vapor is a gasiﬁed liquid or solid or a sub-
stance in gaseous form. These deﬁnitions are in general
use today.

All gases can be liqueﬁed under suitable pressure
and temperature conditions and therefore could be called
vapors. The term gas is most generally used when
conditions are such that a return to the liquid state, i.e.
condensation, would be difﬁcult within the scope of the
operations being conducted. However, a gas under such
conditions is actually a superheated vapor.

41.2.4 Changes of state

Any given pure substance may exist in three states: as a
solid, as liquid or as vapor. Under certain conditions, it
may exist as a combination of any two phases and changes
in conditions may alter the proportions of the two phases.
There is also a condition where all three phases may exist
at the same time. This is known as the triple point. Water
has a triple point at near 32°F and 14.696 psia. Carbon
dioxide may exist as a vapor, a liquid and solid simul-
taneously at about minus 69.6°F and 75 psia. Substances
under proper conditions may pass directly from a solid to
a vapor phase. This is known as sublimation.

41.2.5 Changes of state and vapor pressure

As liquid physically changes into a gas, their molecules
travel with greater velocity and some break out of the
liquid to form a vapor above the liquid. These molecules
create a vapor pressure that, at a speciﬁed temperature, is
the only pressure at which a pure liquid and its vapor can

exist in equilibrium. If in a closed liquid-vapor system,
the volume is reduced at constant temperature, the pres-
sure will increase imperceptibly until condensation of part
of the vapor into liquid has lowered the pressure to the
original vapor pressure corresponding to the temperature.
Conversely, increasing the volume at constant tempera-
ture will reduce the pressure imperceptibly and molecules
will move from the liquid phase to the vapor phase until
the original vapor pressure has been restored. For every
substance, there is a deﬁnite vapor pressure corresponding
to each temperature.

The temperature corresponding to any given vapor pres-
sure is obviously the boiling point of the liquid and also
the dew point of the vapor. Addition of heat will cause the
liquid to boil and removal of heat will start condensation.
The three terms, saturation temperature, boiling point, and
dew point all indicate the same physical temperature at a
given vapor pressure. Their use depends on the context in
which they appear.

41.2.6 Critical gas conditions

There is one temperature above which a gas will not liq-
uefy due to pressure increase. This point is called the
critical temperature. The pressure required to compress
and condense a gas at this critical temperature is called
the critical pressure.

Relative humidity

Relative humidity is a term frequently used to represent
the quantity of moisture or water vapor present in a mix-
ture although it uses partial pressures in so doing. It is
expressed as:
RH(cid:11)%(cid:12)

Actual partial vapor pressure ð 100

p(cid:13)

Saturated vapor pressure at existing mixture temperature

D
D pv ð 100
Relative humidity is usually considered only in connec-
tion with atmospheric air, but since it is unconcerned with
the nature of any other components or the total mixture
pressure, the term is applicable to vapor content in any
problem. The saturated water vapor pressure at a given
temperature is always known from steam tables or charts.
It is the existing partial vapor pressure which is desired and
therefore calculable when the relative humidity is stated.

Speciﬁc humidity

Speciﬁc humidity used in calculations on certain types of
compressors is a totally different term. It is the ratio of
the weight of water vapor to the weight of dry air and
is usually expressed as pounds, or grains, of moisture per
pound of dry air. Where pa is the partial air pressure,
speciﬁc humidity can be calculated as:
SH D Wv
Wa

SH D 0.622pv
ppv

D 0.622pv

pa

Degree of saturation

The degree of saturation denotes the actual relationship
between the weight of moisture existing in a space and
the weight that would exist if the space were saturated.
Degree of saturation(cid:11)%(cid:12) D SHactual ð 100

SHsaturated

A great many dynamic compressors handle air. Their
performance is sensitive to density of the air, which
varies with moisture content. The practical application
of partial pressures in compression problems centers to
a large degree on the determination of mixture volumes
or weights to be handled at the intake of each stage
of compression, the determination of mixture molecular
weight, speciﬁc gravity, and the proportional or actual
weight of components.

Psychrometry

Psychrometry has to do with the properties of
the
air–water vapor mixtures found in the atmosphere.
Psychrometry tables, published by the US Weather
Bureau, give detailed data about vapor pressure, relative
humidity and dew point at the sea-level barometer of 30 in
Hg, and at certain other barometric pressures. These tables
are based on relative readings of dry bulb and wet bulb
atmospheric temperatures as determined simultaneously
by a sling psychrometer. The dry bulb reads ambient
temperature while the wet bulb reads a lower temperature
inﬂuenced by evaporation from a wetted wick surrounding
the bulb of a parallel thermometer.

Compressibility

All gases deviate from the perfect or ideal gas laws
to some degree. In some cases the deviation is rather
extreme. It is necessary that these deviations be taken
into account in many compressor calculations to prevent
compressor and driver sizes being greatly in error.

Compressibility is experimentally derived from data
about the actual behavior of a particular gas under pVT
changes. The compressibility factor, Z, is a multiplier in
the basic formula. It is the ratio of the actual volume
at a given pT condition to ideal volume at the same pT
condition. The ideal gas equation is therefore modiﬁed to:
pV D ZR0T or Z D pV
R0T

In the above equation, R0 is 1545 and p is pounds per
square foot.

41.3 Generation of pressure
Keeping with the subject of pressure, the basic concepts
will be treated in the working sequence: pressure genera-
tion, transmission, storage, and utilization in a pneumatic
system.

Pumping quantities of atmospheric air into a tank
or other pressure vessel produces pressure. Pressure is
increased by progressively increasing the amount of air

Generation of pressure 41/693

in a conﬁned space. The effects of pressure exerted by
a conﬁned gas result from the average of forces acting
on container walls caused by the rapid and repeated
bombardment from an enormous number of molecules
present in a given quantity of air. This is accomplished
in a controlled manner by compression, a decrease in
the space between the molecules. Less volume means
that each particle has a shorter distance to travel, thus
proportionately more collisions occur in a given span
of time, resulting in a higher pressure. Air compressors
are designed to generate particular pressures to meet
individual application requirements.

Basic concepts discussed here are atmospheric pressure;
vacuum; gage pressure; absolute pressure; Boyle’s law
or pressure/volume relationship; Charles’ law or temper-
ature/volume relationship; combined effects of pressure,
temperature and volume; and generation of pressure or
compression.

Atmospheric pressure

In the physical sciences, pressure is usually deﬁned as the
perpendicular force per unit area, or the stress at a point
within a conﬁned ﬂuid. This force per unit area acting on
a surface is usually expressed in pounds per square inch.
The weight of the earth’s atmosphere pushing down
on each unit of surface constitutes atmospheric pressure,
which is 14.7 psi at sea level. This amount of pressure
is called one atmosphere. Because the atmosphere is not
evenly distributed about earth, atmospheric pressure can
vary, depending upon geographic location. Also, obvi-
ously, atmospheric pressure decreases with higher alti-
tude. A barometer using the height of a column of mercury
or other suitable liquid measures atmospheric pressure.

Vacuum

It is helpful to understand the relationship of vacuum
to the other pressure measurements. Vacuums can range
from atmospheric pressure down to ‘zero absolute pres-
sure’, representing a ‘perfect’ vacuum (a theoretical con-
dition involving the total removal of all gas molecules
from a given volume). The amount of vacuum is measured
with a device called a vacuum gage.

Vacuum is a type of pressure. A gas is said to be under
vacuum when its pressure is below atmospheric pressure,
i.e. 14.7 psig at sea level. There are two methods of stating
this pressure, but only one is accurate in itself.

A differential gage that shows the difference in the
system and the atmospheric pressure surrounding the
system usually measures vacuum. This measurement is
expressed as:
Millimeters of mercury (cid:6) Vacuum (mm Hg Vac)
Inches of mercury (cid:6) Vacuum (in Hg Vac)
Inches of water (cid:6) Vacuum (in H2O Vac)
Pounds per square inch (cid:6) Vacuum (psi Vac)

Unless the barometric or atmospheric pressure is also
given, these expressions do not give an accurate speciﬁ-
cation of pressure. Subtracting the vacuum reading from

41/694 Pneumatic Fundamentals

the atmospheric pressure will give an absolute pressure
which is accurate. This may be expressed as:
Inches of mercury (cid:6) Absolute
Millimeters of mercury (cid:6) Absolute
Pounds per square inch (cid:6) Absolute
The word absolute should never be omitted, otherwise
one is never sure whether a vacuum is expressed in dif-
ferential or absolute terms.

(mm Hg Abs)
(psia)

(in Hg Abs)

Perfect vacuum

A perfect vacuum is space devoid of matter. It is abso-
lute emptiness. The space is at zero pressure absolute. A
perfect vacuum cannot be obtained by any known means,
but can be closely approached in certain applications.

Gage pressure

Gage pressure is the most often used method of measuring
pneumatic pressure. It is the relative pressure of the com-
pressed air within a system. Gage pressure can be either
positive or negative, depending upon whether its level is
above or below the atmospheric pressure reference. Atmo-
spheric pressure serves as the reference level for the most
signiﬁcant types of pressure measurements. For example,
if we inﬂate a tire to 30 psi, an ordinary tire-pressure gage
will express this pressure as the value in excess of atmo-
spheric pressure, or 30 psig (‘g’ indicates gage pressure).
This reading shows the numerical value of the difference
between atmospheric pressure and the air pressure in the
tire.

Absolute pressure

A different reference level, absolute pressure,
is used
to obtain the total pressure value. Absolute pressure is
the total pressure,
i.e., gage and atmospheric, and is
expressed as psia or pounds per square inch absolute.
To obtain absolute pressure, simply add the value of
atmospheric pressure (14.7 psi at sea level) to the gage
pressure reading.

Absolute pressure (psia) values must be used when
computing the pressure changes in a volume and when
pressure is given as one of the conditions deﬁning the
amount of gas contained within a sample.

41.4 Compressors
A compressor must operate within a system that
is
designed to acquire and compress a gas. These systems
must
include the following components regardless of
compressor type:

41.4.1 Lubrication system

The lubrication system has two basic functions: to lubri-
cate the compressor’s moving components and to cool the
system by removing heat from the compressor’s moving
parts. While all compressors must have a lubrication sys-
tem, the actual design and function of these systems will
vary depending on compressor type.

The lubricating system for centrifugal or dynamic com-
pressors is designed to provide bearing lubrication. In
smaller compressors, the lubrication systems may con-
sist of individual oil baths located at each of the main
shaft bearings. In larger compressors, such as a bullgear
design, a positive system is provided to inject oil into the
internal, tilting-pad bearings located at each of the pinion
shafts inside the main compressor housing.

In positive lubrication systems, a gear-type pump is
normally used to provide positive circulation of clean oil
within the compressor. In some cases, the main compres-
sor shaft directly drives this pump. In others, a separate
motor-driven pump is used.

Positive displacement compressors use their lubrication
system to provide additional functions. The lubrication
system must inject sufﬁcient quantities of clean ﬂuid to
provide lubrication for the compressor’s internal parts,
such as pistons and lobes, and to provide a positive seal
between moving and stationary parts.

The main components of a positive displacement com-
pressor’s lubrication system consist of an oil pump, ﬁlter,
and heat exchanger. The crankcase of the compressor acts
as the oil sump. A lockable drain cock is installed at the
lowest end of the crankcase to permit removal of any
water accumulation that has resulted from sweating of
the crankcase walls. The oil passes through a strainer
into the pump. It then ﬂows through the heat exchanger,
where it is cooled. After the heat exchanger, the cooled
oil ﬂows directly to the moving parts of the compressor
before returning to the crankcase sump. A small por-
tion is diverted to the oil injector if one is installed.
The oil that is injected into the cylinder seals the space
between the cylinder wall and the piston rings. This pre-
vents compressed air from leaking past the pistons, and
thus improves the compressor’s overall efﬁciency.

Lube pump

The oil pump is usually gear driven from the crankshaft so
that it will start pumping oil immediately on start-up of the
compressor. In compressors that work in an oil-free sys-
tem, oil injectors are not used. Oil separators are installed
on the discharge side after leaving the aftercooler.

Oil separator

The basic purpose of an oil separator is to clean the
pressurized air of any oil contamination, which is highly
detrimental to pneumatically controlled instrumentation.
A separator consists of an inlet, a series of internal baf-
ﬂe plates, a wire mesh screen, a sump, and an outlet.
The pressurized air enters the separator and immediately
passes through the bafﬂe plates. As the air impinges on
the bafﬂe plates it is forced into making sharp direc-
tional changes as it passes through each bafﬂe section.
As a result, the oil droplets separate from the air and col-
lect on the bafﬂes before dropping into the separator’s
sump.

After the air clears the bafﬂe section, it then passes
through the wire mesh screen where any remaining oil is
trapped. The relatively oil-free air continues to the air
reservoir for storage. The air reservoir acts as a ﬁnal

Outlet

Wire mesh

screen

Baffle
plates

Inlet

Figure 41.2 Basic oil separator system

Sump

separator where moisture and oil is eventually removed.
The air reservoir has drain traps installed at its lowest
point where any accumulated moisture/oil is automatically
discharged.

As a part of any routine maintenance procedure, these
discharge traps should periodically be manually bypassed
to ensure that the trap is functioning, and no excessive
water accumulation is evident.

41.4.2 Compressor selection

Air power compressors generally operate at pressures
of 500 psig or lower, with the majority in the range of
125 psig or less. All major types of compressors (i.e.
reciprocating, vane, helical lobe and dynamic, are used
for this type of service. Choice is limited somewhat by
capacity at 100 psig of about 10,500 ft3 per minute but
can be built to approximately 28,000 cfm. The vane-type
rotary has an upper listed size of 3700 cfm as a twin
unit and the helical lobe rotary can be used to nearly
20,000 cfm. The centrifugal can be built to very large
sizes. It is currently offered in the proven, moderate speed
designs starting at a minimum of about 5000 cfm.

Selection criteria

The following guidelines should be used for the selection
process. While the criteria listed are not all inclusive, they
will provide deﬁnition of the major considerations that
should be used to select the best compressor for a speciﬁc
application.

Application

The mode of operation of a speciﬁc application should
be the ﬁrst consideration. The inherent design of each
type of compressor deﬁnes the acceptable operating enve-
lope or mode of operation that it can perform with rea-
sonable reliability and life cycle costs. For example, a
bullgear-type centrifugal compressor is not suitable for
load-following applications but will prove exceptional ser-
vice in constant-load and volume applications.

Load factor is the ratio of actual compressed air output,
while the compressor is operating, to the rated full-load

Compressors 41/695

output during the same period. It should never be 100
per cent, a good rule being to select an installation for
from 50 to 80 per cent load factor, depending on the size,
type and number of compressors involved. Proper use of
load factor results in: more uniform pressure, a cooling-
off period, less maintenance, and ability to increase use
of air without additional compressors.

Load factor is particularly important with air-cooled
machines where sustained full-load operation results in an
early build-up of deposits on valves and other parts. This
build-up increases the frequency of maintenance required
to maintain compressor reliability. Intermittent operation
is always recommended for these units. The frequency and
duration of unloaded operation depends on the type, size,
operating pressure of the compressor. Air-cooled com-
pressors for higher than 200-psig-pressure application are
usually rated by a rule that states that the compressing
time shall not exceed 30 minutes or less than 10 minutes.
Shutdown or unloaded time should be at least equal to
compression time or 50 per cent.

Rotary screw compressors are exceptions to this 50
per cent rule. Each time a rotary screw compressor
unloads, both the male and female rotor instantaneously
shifts axially. These units are equipped with a balance
piston or heavy-duty thrust bearing that
is designed
to absorb the tremendous axial forces that result from
this instantaneous movement, but they are not able to
the compressor or its components. The
fully protect
compressor’s design accepted the impact
loading that
results from this unload shifting and incorporated enough
axial strength to absorb a normal unloading cycle. If this
type of compressor is subjected to constant or frequent
unloading, as in a load-following application, the cycle
frequency is substantially increased and the useful life
of the compressor is proportionally reduced. There have
been documented cases where either the male or female
rotor actually broke through the compressor’s casing as a
direct result of this failure mode.

The only compressor that is ideally suited for load-
following applications is the reciprocating type. These
units have an absolute ability to absorb the variations in
pressure and demand without any impact on either relia-
bility or life cycle cost. The major negative of the recip-
rocating compressor is the pulsing or constant variation
in pressure that is produced by the reciprocating compres-
sion cycle. Properly sized accumulators and receiver tanks
will resolve most of the pulsing.

Life cycle costs

All capital equipment decisions should be based on the
true or life cycle cost of the system. Life cycle cost
includes all costs that will be incurred beginning with
speciﬁcation development before procurement
to ﬁnal
the end of the compressor’s
decommissioning cost at
the only consideration is
useful
the actual procurement and installation cost of
the
compressor. While these costs are important,
they
represent less than 20 per cent of the life cycle cost of the
compressor.

life. In many cases,

The cost evaluation must include the recurring costs,
such as power consumption, maintenance, etc. that are

41/696 Pneumatic Fundamentals

an integral part of day-to-day operation. Other costs
that should be considered include training of operators
and maintenance personnel who must maintain the
compressor.

41.5 Air dryers
Air entering the ﬁrst stage of any air compressor car-
ries with it a certain amount of native moisture. This
is unavoidable, although the quantity carried will vary
widely with the ambient temperature and relative humid-
ity. Figure 41.3 shows the effect of ambient temperature
and relative humidity on the quantity of moisture in atmo-
spheric air entering a compressor at 14.7 psia. Under any
given condition, the amount of water vapor entering the
compressor per 1000 ft3 of mixture may be approximated
from these curves.

In any air–vapor mixture, each component has its own
partial pressure and the air and the vapor are each indif-
ferent to the existence of the other. It follows that the
conditions of either component may be studied without
reference to the other. In a certain volume of mixture,

each component ﬁlls the full volume at its own partial
pressure. The water vapor may saturate this space or it
may be superheated.

As this vapor is compressed, its volume is reduced
while at the same time the temperature automatically
increases. As a result, the vapor becomes superheated.
More pounds of vapor are now contained in one cubic
foot than when originally entering the compressor.

Under the laws of vapor, the maximum quantity of a
particular vapor a given space can contain is dependent
solely upon the vapor temperature. As the compressed
water vapor is cooled, it will eventually reach the tempera-
ture at which the space becomes saturated, now containing
the maximum it can hold. Any further cooling will force
part of the vapor to condense into its liquid form – water.
The curves contained in Figure 41.4 show what hap-
pens over a wide range of pressures and temperatures.
However, these are saturated vapor curves based on start-
ing with 1000 ft3 of saturated air. If the air is not satu-
rated at the compressor’s inlet, and it usually is not, use
Figure 41.5 to obtain the initial water vapor weight enter-
ing the system per 1000 ft3 of compressed air. By reading
left on Figure 41.6 from the juncture of the ﬁnal pressure

i

)
a
s
p
 
7
.
4
1
 
t
a
 
e
r
u
t
x
m

i

 
r
o
p
a
v
–
r
i
a
 
f
o
 
3
t
f
0
0
0
1
(
 
e
r
u

i

t
s
o
m

 
f

o

 
s
d
n
u
o
P

3.0

2.8

2.6

2.4

2.2

2.0

1.8

1.6

1.4

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

30

Saturated
80 % R H
60 %  R H
0 %   R

H

4

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Inlet air temperature (°F)

27–K

Figure 41.3 Effects of ambient temperature and relative humidity

Pounds moisture

at 0 lbs. gage

Air dryers 41/697

9
5
.
1

3
1
.
2

9
8
.
2

6
7
.
3

1
9
.
4

4
3
.
5

d
e
t
a
r
u
t
a
s
 
f
o
 
3
t
f
0
0
0
1
 
r
e
p
 
e
r
u
t
s
o
m

i

 
f

o

 
s
d
n
u
o
P

.
n
w
o
h
s
 
.
p
m
e
t
 
d
n
a
 
.
s
b
a
 
.
b
l
 
7
.
4
1
 
t
a
 
s
a
g

 
r
o

 
r
i
a

 

e
e
r
f

1.2

1.1

1.0

.9

.8

.7

.6

.5

.4

.3

.2

.1

0

1

3

0°
F

1

2

0°
F1

1

0°
F1

0

0°
F

9

0°
F

8

0°
F

7

0°
F6

0°
F5

0°
F40°

F

3

0°
F

0

20

40

60

80

100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 280 300 320

Pressure (lb/in2 gage)

Figure 41.4 Moisture remaining in saturated air or gas when compressed isothermally to pressure shown

and ﬁnal temperature, obtain the maximum weight of
vapor that this same 1000 ft3 can hold after compression
and cooling to saturation. If the latter is less than the
former, the difference will be condensed. If the latter is
higher, there will be no condensation. It is evident that
the lower the temperature and the greater the pressure of
compressed air, the greater will be the amount of vapor
condensed.

41.5.1 Problems caused by water in compressed
air

Few plant operators need to be told of the problems
caused by water
in compressed air. They are most
apparent to those who operate pneumatic tools, rock drills,
automatic pneumatic powered machinery, paint and other
sprays, sandblasting equipment, and pneumatic controls.
However, almost all applications, particularly of 100-psig
power, could beneﬁt from the elimination of water carry-
over. The principal problems might be summarized as:

1. Washing away of required lubrication.
2. Increase in wear and maintenance.
3. Sluggish and inconsistent operation of automatic valves

and cylinders.

4. Malfunctioning and high maintenance of control instru-

ments.

5. Spoilage of product by spotting in paint and other types

of spraying.

6. Rusting of parts that have been sandblasted.
7. Freezing in exposed lines during cold weather.
8. Further condensation and possible freezing of mois-
ture in the exhaust of those more efﬁcient tools which
expand the air considerably.

A fact to remember is that water vapor, as vapor, does
no harm in most pneumatic systems. It is only when the
vapor condenses and remains in the system as a liquid that
problems exist. The goal, therefore, is to condense and
remove as much of the vapor as is economically possible.
In conventional compressed air systems, vapor and liq-
uid removal is limited. Most two-stage compressors will
include an intercooler between stages. On air-cooled units
for 100 to 200 psig service, the air between stages is
not cooled sufﬁciently to cause substantial liquid drop
out and provision is not usually made for its removal.
Water-cooled intercoolers used on larger compressors will
usually cool sufﬁciently to condense considerable mois-
ture at cooler pressure. Drainage facilities must always

41/698 Pneumatic Fundamentals

Pressure 350 psig

250
160
100
70
40
25
15
5

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

+10

0

–10

–20

–30

–40

)
F

°

(
 
e
r
u
s
s
e
r
p

 

d
e

t

a
v
e
e

l

 
t

a

 
t

i

 

n
o
p
w
e
D

–50

–100

–80

–60

–40

–20

0

+20

40

60

27-M
80

Dew point at 14.7 psia (°F)

Figure 41.5 Dew point conversion chart

be provided and used. Automatic drain traps are normally
included to drain condensed water vapor.

All compressed air systems should always include
a water-cooled aftercooler between the compressor
and receiver tank. Properly designed and maintained
aftercoolers, in normal summer conditions, condense at
100 psig, up to 70 per cent of the vapor entering the
system. Most of this condensation will collect
in the
aftercooler or the receiver tank. Therefore, both must be
constantly drained.

The problem with a conventional system that relies on
heat exchangers (i.e. aftercoolers) for moisture removal
is temperature. The aftercooler will remove only liquids
that have condensed at a temperature between the com-
pressed air and cooling water temperature. In most cases,
this differential will be about 20 to 50° lower than the
compressed air temperature or around 70 to 90°F. As
long as the compressed air remains at or above this tem-
perature range, any remaining vapor that it contains will
remain in a vapor or gaseous state. However, when the
air temperature drops below this range, additional vapor
will condense into water.

41.6 Dried air systems
This system involves processing the compressed air or
gas after the aftercooler and receiver to further reduce
moisture content. This requires special equipment, a
higher ﬁrst cost and a higher operating cost. These

costs must be balanced against the gains obtained. They
may show up as less wear and maintenance of tools
and air-operated devices, greater reliability of devices
and controls, and greater production as a result of
fewer outages for repairs. In many cases, reduction or
elimination of product spoilage or a better product quality
may also result.

The degree of drying desired will vary with the pneu-
matic equipment and application involved. The aim is to
eliminate further condensation in the airlines and pneu-
matic tools or devices. Prevailing atmospheric conditions
also have an inﬂuence on the approach that is most effec-
tive. In many 100-psig installations, a dew point at line
pressure of from 500°F to 350°F is adequate. Other appli-
cations, such as instrument air systems, will require dew
points of minus 500°F.

Terminology involves drier outlet dew point at the line
pressure or the pneumatic circuit. This is the saturation
temperature of the remaining moisture contained in the
compressed air or gas. If the compressed gas temperature
is never reduced below the outlet dew point beyond the
drying equipment, there will be no further condensation.
Another value sometimes involved when the gas pres-
sure is reduced before it is used is the dew point at that
lower pressure condition. A major example is the use of
100 psig (or higher) gas reduced to 15 psig for use in pneu-
matic instruments and controls. This dew point will be
lower because the volume involved increases as the pres-
sure is decreased. The dew point at atmospheric pressure

l

e
m
u
o
v
 
e
r
u
t
x
m

i

e
r
u
s
s
e
r
p
 
g
n
i
t
s
x
e
 
t
a

i

 
l
a
u
t
c
a
 
3
t
f
 
0
0
0
1
 
/
 
r
o
p
a
v
 

b
L

Dried air systems 41/699

2.00
1.50

1.00

0.70

0.50
0.40
0.30

0.20
0.150

0.100

0.070

0.050
0.040

0.030

0.020
0.015

0.010

0.007

0.005
0.004

–40

–20

0

20

40

60

80

Saturation temperature (°F)

27–N

Figure 41.6 Moisture in air at any pressure for 100 ft3 of actual volume at existing pressures

is often used as a reference point for measurement of
drying efﬁciency. This is of little interest when handling
compressed air or gas.

Figure 41.7 enables one to determine dew point at
reduced pressure. The left scale shows the dew point at the
elevated pressure. Drop from the intersection of this value
and the elevated pressure line to the reduced pressure line
and then back to the left to read the dew point at the
reduced pressure.

Figure 41.8 shows graphically the amount of moisture
remaining in the vapor form when the air–vapor mixture
is conditioned to a certain dew point. This curve is based
on a volume of 1000 ft3 or an air–vapor mixture at its
total pressure. For example, 1000 ft3 at 100-psig air at
50°F and 1000 ft3 of 15-psig air at 50°F will hold the same
vapor at the dew point. However, 1000 ft3 at 100 psig and
50°F reduced to 15 psig will become 3860 ft3 at 50°F. As a
result, it now capable of holding 3.86 times as much vapor
and the dew point will not be reached until the mixture
temperature is lowered to its saturation temperature.

41.6.1 Drying methods

There are three general methods of drying compressed
air: chemical, adsorption, and refrigeration. In all cases,

aftercooling and adequate condensation removal must be
done ahead of this drying equipment. The initial and oper-
ating costs and the results obtained vary considerably.

These methods are primarily for water vapor removal.
Removal of lubricating oil
is secondary, although all
drying systems will reduce its carry-over. It should be
understood that complete elimination of lubricating oil,
particularly in the vapor form, is very difﬁcult and that
when absolutely oil-free air is required, some form of
non-lubricated compressor is the best guaranteed method.

Chemical dryers

Chemical dryers are materials which combine with or
absorb moisture from air when brought into close con-
tact. There are two general types. One, using deliquescent
material in the form of pellets or beads, is reputed to
obtain a dew point, with 700°F inlet air to the dryer, of
between 35°F and 50°F depending on the speciﬁc type of
deliquescent material. The material turns into a liquid as
the water vapor is absorbed. This liquid must be drained
off and the pellets or beads replaced periodically. Entering
air above 900°F is not generally recommended.

The second type of chemical dryer utilizes an ethy-
lene glycol liquid to absorb the moisture. Standard dew

41/700 Pneumatic Fundamentals

Pressure 350 psig

250
160
100
70

40
25
15
5

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

+10

0

–10

–20

–30

–40

)
F
°

(
 
e
r
u
s
s
e
r
p
 
d
e
t
a
v
e
e
 
t
a
 
t
n
o
p
 
w
e
D

i

l

–50

–100

–80

–60

–40

Figure 41.7 Dewpoint conversion chart

–20

0

Dewpoint at 14.7 psia (°F)

+20

40

60

27–M

80

point reduction claimed is 400°F, but greater reductions
are said to be possible with special equipment. The gly-
col is regenerated (i.e. dried) in a still using fuel gas or
steam as a heating agent. The released moisture is vented
to atmosphere. The regenerated glycol is re-circulated by
a pump through a water-cooled heat exchanger that low-
ers the glycol temperature before returning to the dryer
vessel.

desired from the dryer. Heating the activating air prior
to its passing through the desiccant bed, or heating the
bed itself, is often done to improve the efﬁciency of
the regeneration process. This requires less diverted air
since each cubic foot of diverted air will carry much
more moisture out of the system. Other modiﬁcations are
also available to reduce or even eliminate the diverted air
quantity.

Adsorption

Adsorption is the property of certain extremely porous
materials to hold vapors in the pores until the desiccant is
either heated or exposed to a drier gas. The material is a
solid at all times and operates alternately through drying
and reactivation cycles with no change in composition.
Adsorbing materials in principal use are activated Alu-
mina and silica gel. Molecular sieves are also used. Atmo-
spheric dew points of minus 1000°F are readily obtained
using adsorption.

Reactivation or regeneration is usually obtained by
diverting a portion of the already dried air through
a reducing valve or oriﬁce, reducing its pressure to
atmospheric, and passing it through the wet desiccant
bed. This air, with the moisture it has picked up from
the saturated desiccant bed, is vented to atmosphere. The
diverted air may vary from 7 to 17 per cent of the
mainstream ﬂow, depending upon the ﬁnal dew point

Refrigeration

Refrigeration for drying compressed air
is growing
rapidly. It has been applied widely to small installations,
sections of larger plants, and even to entire manufacturing
plant systems. Refrigerated air dryers have been applied
to the air system both before and after compression. In
the before compression system, the air must be cooled
to a lower temperature for a given ﬁnal line pressure
dew point. This takes more refrigeration power for the
same end result. Partially offsetting this is a saving
in air compressor power per 1000 ft3 per minute (cfm)
of atmospheric air compressed due to the reduction in
volume at the compressor inlet caused by the cooling
and the removal of moisture. There is also a reduction
in discharge temperature on single-stage compressors that
may at time have some value. As atmospheric (inlet) dew
point of 350°F is claimed.

l

e
m
u
o
v
 
e
r
u
t
x
m

i

 
l
a
u
t
c
a
 
3
t
f
0
0
0
1
 
/
 
r
o
p
a
v
 

b
L

e
r
u
s
s
e
r
p
 
g
n
i
t
s
x
e
 
t
a

i

2.00

1.50

1.00

0.70

0.50
0.40

0.30

0.20

0.150

0.100

0.070

0.050
0.040

0.030

0.020

0.015

0.010

0.007

0.005
0.004

–40

–20

Dried air systems 41/701

40

60

27–N

80

0

20

Saturation temperature (°F)

Figure 41.8 Moisture in air at any pressure

is

When air

refrigerated following compression,
two systems have been used. Flow of air through directly
refrigerated coils is used predominately in the smaller
and moderate-sized
generally
standardized for cooling to 350°F, which is the dew
point obtained at
line pressure. Figure 41.9 diagrams
the equipment furnished in a small self-contained direct-
refrigeration dryer.

systems. These

are

The larger systems chill water that is circulated through
coils to cool the air. A dew point at line pressure of
about 500°F is obtainable with this method. Figure 41.10
illustrates a typical system of a chiller-dryer unit. The
designs shown are regenerative since the incoming air is
partially cooled by the outgoing air stream. This reduces
the size and ﬁrst cost of the refrigeration compressor and
exchanger. It also reduces power cost and reheats the air
returning to the line. Reheating of the air after it is dried
has several advantages: the air volume is increased and
less free air is required; chance of line condensation is
still further reduced; and sweating of the cold pipe leav-
ing the dryer is eliminated. Reheating dryers seldom need
further reheating.

Combination systems

The use of a combination dryer should be investigated
when a very low dew point is necessary. Placing a refrig-
eration system ahead of an adsorption dryer will allow the
more economical refrigeration unit to remove most of the
vapor and reduce the load on the desiccant.

41.6.2 Dry air distribution system

Most plants are highly dependent upon their compressed
air supply and it should be assured that the air is in at least
reasonable condition at all times, even if the drying system
is out of use for maintenance or repair. It is possible that
the line condensation would be so bad that some air appli-
cations would be handicapped or even shut down if there
were no protection. A vital part of the entire endeavor to
separate water in the conventional compressed air system
is also the trapping of dirt, pipe scale and other contami-
nates. This is still necessary with a dried air system. As a
minimum, all branch lines should be taken off the top of
the main and all feeder lines off the top of branch lines.

41/702 Pneumatic Fundamentals

Precooler

Air in

Air out

Thermal mass

exchanger

Aluminum
granules

Trap

Evaporator coil

Starter

Freon-12 compressor

Condenser

Fan

Separator

Temperature
sensing bulb

Expansion valve actuated by
thermometer bulb sensing
evaporator outlet temperature

Figure 41.9 Diagram of equipment furnished in small self-contained direct-refrigeration dryer

70°

Air out

95°

Air in

Air−air  exch.

75°F

Air−water exch.

50°

Condensate out

Water chiller

Chilled water

Circ. pump

Freon compressor

Freon condenser

Plant cooling

water

Figure 41.10 Diagram of a typical regenerative chiller-dryer

Absolute prevention of line freezing can be obtained
only when the dew point of the line air is below any
temperature to which it may be exposed. Freezing is
always possible if there is line condensation. For example
when air lines are run outdoors in winter weather or pass
through cold storage rooms, the ambient temperatures will
change the dew point and cause any moisture in the air
to condense and freeze.

The dryer unit has an air inlet, an air outlet, a waste air
outlet, two heater coils, and two 4-way reversing valves.
Although the illustration shows the two tanks in a func-
tioning mode, they are universal in operation. By this, we
mean that this changes the tanks over when the active
tank becomes totally saturated, and the tank that was on
the regeneration cycle then becomes the active unit.

With this process, there will always be one tank in
active service, and one on regeneration or stand-by. A
timer governs the changeover process. The timer changes
the position of the 4-way, or reversing, valves. This oper-
ation reverses the airﬂow through the tanks; the tank that
was regenerated will now dry the air, while the saturated
tank will be regenerated.

41.7 Air reservoir (receivers)
Air receivers, being simple volume tanks, are not often
thought of as highly engineered items, but the use of
simple engineering with receivers can reduce equipment
costs. A pertinent example not infrequent in industry is the
intermittent requirement for fairly large volume of air at
moderate pressure for a short period of time. Some boiler
soot blowing systems are in this class. The analysis nec-
essary to arrive at the most economical equipment often
involves the storage of air at high pressure to supplement
the compressor’s output when the demand requires. The
following example is somewhat extreme, but emphasizes
the need for proper receiver selection.

Sizing a receiver tank

This application requires 1500 ft3 per minute (cfm) of
free air at 90 psig for 10 minutes each hour. This
cycle of 10 minutes at 1500 cfm and 50 minutes with
zero demand repeats hourly. Alternates obviously are
possible; (A) install a 100-psig compressor and standard
accessories large enough for
the maximum demand
requirements; or, (B) install a smaller compressor, but for
a higher pressure and store the air in receivers during the
off or no demand period. At least two storage pressures
should be considered. In all cases commercial compressor
sizes are to be used. For (B1) assume 350 psig and for
(B2), 500 psig.

The 100-psig machine for at least 1500-cfm output,
unit (A) has 1660 actual capacity and requires 309 brake
horsepower (bhp) at full load. The minimum capacity for
units B1 and B2 must be calculated, since these can be
compressing the full 60 minutes each hour.

Total ft3per hour D 1,500 ð 10 D 15, 000

Minimum compressor capacity D 15,000

60

D 250 cfm

Air reservoir (receivers) 41/703

Compressor (B1), for 350-psig discharge, is found to
have a capacity of 271 cfm and a required brake horse-
power of 85. Compressor (B2), for 500 psig, is found to be
a standard size with a capacity of 310 cfm and requires
112 bhp. All selections provide some extra capacity for
emergency and losses are economical two-stage designs.
Air compressed to 100 psig, to be used at 90 psig, pro-
vides no possibility of storage. Storage is practical at the
other pressures selected. Compressor units B and C will
operate at full load at their rated or lower pressures. Since
the receiver pressure will fall during the 10 minutes when
air is used faster than the compressor can replenish it,
the unit will be operating at full capacity and will supply
some of the demand. The full demand need not be stored.

Cfm to be stored

D Total ft3/hour (cid:6) Compressor cfm ð Minutes of demand

The cubic feet of air to be stored represents the free air,
at 14.7 psia, that must be packaged into the receiver above
the minimum pressure required by the demand. In this
case, the demand pressure is 90 psig, but an allowance for
line losses and the necessary reducing valve pressure drop
would prevent the use of any air stored below 110 psig.
The receiver has a volume of (V) expressed in cubic feet.
Useful free air stored D V ð Pressure drop

14.7

V D Useful free air stored ð 14.7

Pressure drop

This receiver volume may be in one or several tanks,

the most economical number being chosen.

the ﬁrst cost of

The ﬁnal selection can be made only after consideration
of
the compressor, motor, starter,
aftercooler and receiver. The cost of installation, including
foundations, piping and wiring as well as the operating
power cost must also be considered. In the example,
Table 41.3 provides a basic comparison of the three
options.

Table 41.1 Comparison of receiver options

Unit

Capacity (cfm)
Demand period (minutes)
Total cubic feet required
Delivered during demand period
Cubic feet to be stored

B1

271
10
15,000
2,710
12,290

Table 41.2 Receiver volume required

Unit

Storage pressure (psig)
Minimum pressure (psig)
Pressure drop (psi)
Free air to be stored (ft3)
Receiver volume (V)

B1

350
110
240
12,290
752

B2

310
10
15,000
3,100
11,900

B2

500
110
390
11,900
448

41/704 Pneumatic Fundamentals

Table 41.3 Economic comparison

Unit

Pressure (psig)
Installed cost
Fixed charges
Power cost
Oil, water, attendance

A

100
100%
100%
100%
100%

B1

350
52%
52%
64%
100%

B2

500
63%
63%
93%
100%

Not all problems of this nature will result in the selec-
tion of the intermediate storage pressure. Although few
will favor the 100-psig level, many will be more eco-
nomical at the 500-psig level. Experience indicates that
there is seldom any gain in using a higher storage pres-
sure than 500 psig since larger receivers required become
very expensive above this level and power cost increases.
Air reservoirs are classiﬁed as pressure vessels and have
to conform to the ASME Pressure Vessel Codes. As such,
the following attachments must be ﬁtted:
ž Safety valves
ž Pressure gages
ž Isolation valves
ž Manhole or inspection ports
ž Fusible plug

Air reservoirs are designed to receive and store pres-
surized air. Pressure regulating devices are installed to
maintain the pressure within operational limits. When the
air reservoir is pressurized to the maximum pressure set-
point, the pressure regulator causes the air compressor to
off-load compression by initiating an electrical solenoid
valve to use lubricating oil to hydraulically hold open the
low pressure suction valve on the compressor.

As the compressed air is used, the pressure drops in
the reservoir until the low-pressure set point is reached.
At this point, the pressure regulated solenoid valve is de-
energized. This causes the hydraulic force to drop off on
the low-pressure suction valve, restoring it to the full com-
pression cycle.

This cycling process causes drastic variations in noise
levels. These noises should not be regarded as problems,
unless accompanied by severe knocking or squealing
noises. Figure 41.11 shows a typical hydraulic unloader
and its location on the compressor.

41.8 Safety valves
All compressed air systems that use a positive displace-
ment compressor must be ﬁtted with a pressure relief or
safety valve that will limit the discharge or inter-stage
pressures to a safe maximum limit. Most dynamic com-
pressors must have similar protection due to restrictions
placed on casing pressure, power input and/or keeping out
of surge range.

Two types of pressure relief devices are available, safety
valves and relief valves. Although these terms are often
used interchangeably, there is a difference between the
two. Safety valves are used with gases. The disk over-
hangs the seat to offer additional thrust area after the
initial opening. This fully opens the valve immediately,
giving maximum relief capacity. These are often called
pop-off safety valves.
With relief valves,

the disk area exposed to over-
pressure is the same whether the valve is open or closed.
There is a gradual opening, the amount depending upon
the degree of over-pressure. Relief valves are used with
liquids where a relatively small opening will provide
pressure relief.

Positive-displacement machines use safety valves.
There are ASME standards of materials, sizing, and only
ASME stamped valves should be used. The relieving
capacity of a given size of safety valve varies materially
with the make and design. Care must be taken to assure
proper selection.

An approved safety valve is usually of the ‘huddling
chamber’ design. In this valve the static pressure acting on
the disk area causes initial opening. As the valve pops, the
air space within the huddling chamber between seat and
the blowdown ring ﬁlls with pressurized air and builds
up more pressure on the roof of the disk holder. This
temporary pressure increases the upward thrust against

Unloader
connecting

rod

Air inlet

Unloader

piston

Inlet valve

Pressure
sensing

line

Figure 41.11 Typical hydraulic unloader and its location on the compressor

Intercooler

Compressor

Receiver

Aftercooler

Safety
   valve

Coolers 41/705

Demister

Figure 41.12 Illustrates how a safety valve functions

Water outlet

Air
inlet

Figure 41.13 Compressor air cooler

the spring, causing the disk and its holder to lift to full
pop opening.

After a predetermined pressure drop, which is referred
to as blowdown, the valve closes with a positive action
by trapping pressurized air on top of the disk holder. The
pressure drop is adjusted by raising or lowering the blow-
down ring. Raising the ring increases the pressure drop
while lowering it decreases the drop.

Most state laws and safe practice require a safety relief
valve ahead of the ﬁrst stop valve in every positive dis-
placement compressed air system. It is set to release at
1.25 times the normal discharge pressure of the compres-
sor or at the maximum working pressure of the system,
whichever is lower. The relief valve piping system some-
times includes a manual vent valve and/or a bypass valve
to the suction to facilitate startup and shutdown opera-
tions. Quick line sizing equations are (1) line connection,
d/l.75; (2) bypass, d/4.5; (3) vent, d/6.3; and (4) relief
valve port, d/9.

The safety valve is normally situated atop the air reser-
voir. There must be no restriction on all blow-off points.
Compressors can be hazardous to work around because
they do have moving parts. Ensure that clothing is kept
away from belt drives, couplings and exposed shafts.

In addition, high temperature surfaces around cylinders
and discharge piping are exposed. Compressors are
notoriously noisy. For this reason, ear protection should be
worn. When working around high-pressurized air systems,
wear safety glasses and do not search for leaks with

Water inlet

Air

discharge

bare hands. High-pressure leaks can cause severe friction
burns.

41.9 Coolers
The amount of moisture that air can hold is inversely pro-
portional to the pressure of the air. As the pressure of the
air increases, the amount of moisture that air can hold
decreases. The amount of moisture air can hold is also
proportional to the temperature of the air. As the temper-
ature of the air decreases, the amount of moisture it can
hold decreases. The pressure change of compressed air is
larger than the temperature change of the compressed air.
This causes the moisture in the air to condense out of the
compressed air. The moisture in compressed air systems
can cause corrosion, water hammers, and freeze damage.
Therefore, it is important to avoid moisture in compressed
air systems. Coolers are used to address the problems by
moisture in compressed air systems.

Coolers are frequently used on the discharge of a com-
pressor. These are called aftercoolers, and their purpose
is to remove the heat generated during the compression
of the air. The decrease in temperature promotes the con-
densing of any moisture present in the compressed air.
This moisture is collected in condensate traps that are
either automatically or manually drained.

If the compressor is of the multi-stage type, there may
be an intercooler, which is located after the ﬁrst stage
discharge and second stage suction. The principle of the
intercooler is the same as the principle of the aftercoolers,

41/706 Pneumatic Fundamentals

and the result is drier, cooler compressed air. The structure
of the individual cooler depends on the pressure and
volume of the air it cools. Figure 41.13 illustrates a typical
compressor air cooler.

The combinations of drier compressed air (which helps
prevent corrosion) and cooler compressed air (which
allows more air to be compressed for a set volume) is
the reason the air coolers are worth the investment.

42/707

42/719

42

Contents

Noise and
Vibration

Roger C Webster
Environmental Consultant

42.8 Practical applications

42/717

42.8.1 Acoustic enclosures
42.8.2 Building insulation
42.8.3 Control of noise in ducts
42/718
42.8.4 Anti-vibration machinery mounts

42/717
42/717

in practice 42/718

42/718

42.8.5 Mounts
42.8.6 Rubber mounts
42.8.7 Steel spring mounts
42.8.8 Positioning of anti-vibration mounts
42.8.9 Installation

42/719

42/719

42/718

42.1 Introduction: basic acoustics

42/709

42/709

42/709

42.1.1 Sound intensity
42.1.2 Sound power
42.1.3 Addition and subtraction of decibels
42.1.4 Addition of decibels: graph method
42.1.5 The relationship between SPL, SIL and SWL 42/710
42.1.6 Frequency weighting and human response to sound

42/709
42/710

42/710

42.1.7 Noise indices
42.1.8 Noise-rating curves 42/711

42/711

42.2 Measurement of noise
42.3 Vibration

42/712

42/712

42.3.1 Effects of vibration on people
42/713

42.4 Noise and vibration control

42/712

42/713

42/713

42.4.1 Noise nuisance
42.4.2 Legislation
42.4.3 Environmental Protection Act 1990, Section 80
42.4.4 The assessment of nuisance
42.4.5 Offences and higher court action
42.4.6 Noise-abatement zones
42/714
42.4.7 Planning application conditions

42/714

42/714

42/714

42/713

42.5 Avoiding physical injury to workers 42/714
42.6 Avoidance of damage to plant/machinery/building struc-

tures

42/715

42.7 Noise-control engineering

42/715

42.7.1 Noise-reduction principles
42/715
42.7.2 Insulation
42.7.3 Absorbers
42/716
42.7.4 Vibration isolation

42/717

42/715

42.1 Introduction: basic acoustics
Sound can be deﬁned as the sensation caused by pressure
variations in the air. For a pressure variation to be known
as sound it must occur much more rapidly than those of
barometric pressure and the degree of variation is much
less than atmospheric pressure.

Audible sound has a frequency range of approximately
20 Hertz (Hz) to 20 kilohertz (kHz) and the pressure
ranges from 20 ð 10(cid:2)6 N/M to 200 N/M. A pure tone
produces the simplest type of wave form, that of a sine
wave (Figure 42.1). The average pressure ﬂuctuation is
zero, and measurements are thus made in terms of the
root mean square (rms) of the pressure variation. For the
sine wave the rms is 0.707 times the peak value.
Since rms pressure variations have to be measured in
the range 20 ð 10(cid:2)6 N/M to 200 N/M (a range of 107)
it can be seen that an inconveniently large scale would
have to be used if linear measurements were adopted.
Additionally, it has been found that the ear responds to
the intensity of a sound (/ P2) in a logarithmic way.
The unit that has been adopted takes these factors into
account and relates the measured sound to a reference
level. For convenience, this is taken as the minimum
audible sound (i.e. 20 ð 10(cid:2)6 N/M) at 1 K.

The logarithm (to the base 10) of the ratio of the
perceived pressure (squared) to the reference pressure
(squared) is known as the Bell, i.e.

B D log

P2

P2

reference

Since this would give an inconveniently small scale (it
would range from approximately 0 to 14 for a human
response) the bell is divided numerically by 10 to give
the decibel. The equation therefore becomes:

dB D 10 log

P2
P2
ref

Figure 42.1 Sine wave

Introduction: basic acoustics 42/709

42.1.1 Sound intensity

Sound intensity is a measure of energy, and its units are
watts per meter. Intensity is proportional to the square of
pressure:

(cid:1)

(cid:2)2

D

I
Io

P
P

Sound intensity level is deﬁned in a similar manner to
sound pressure level. In this case the equation is:
(dB) (Sound intensity level) D 10 log

I
Iref

Iref, the reference level, is taken as: 10(cid:2)12 W
M2

42.1.2 Sound power

The power of a source (measured in watts) can be sim-
ilarly expressed in terms of decibels (in this case, called
the sound power level):
(dB) (Sound power level) D 10 log

W
Wref

where Wref is taken as 10(cid:2)12 W.

It can thus be seen that it is important not only to
express the unit but also to state sound pressure level,
sound intensity level or sound power level.

42.1.3 Addition and subtraction of decibels

For coherent sound waves addition of values is possible.
It will be apparent that as the scale is logarithmic, values
cannot merely be added to one another. Intensities can,
however, be added and thus the equation becomes:
SIL (total) D 10 log
i.e. 70 dB C 73 dB
70 D 10 log

I1 C I2
Iref

I1
Iref
I D Antilog 7

Iref
73 D 10 log

I2
Iref
I D Antilog 7.3

Iref

SIL (total) D 10 log(cid:7)Antilog 7 C Antilog 7.3(cid:8)

D 10 log(cid:7)107C1.99526ð107(cid:8)10 log(cid:7)2.99526ð107(cid:8)
D 74.76 dB

The square of individual pressures must be added, and
thus the equation in this case must utilize:
P(cid:7)total(cid:8) D

(cid:3)

1 C P2
(cid:7)P2
2(cid:8)

42/710 Noise and Vibration

42.1.4 Addition of decibels: graph method

These equations are:

It is possible to use a graph to calculate the addition
of decibels, even in the case of multiple additions
(Figure 42.2). The graph is used in the following way:

1. In the case of addition of two levels. The difference
between the higher and the lower levels is plotted on
the lower scale of the graph. The correction is then
read from the vertical scale by projecting a horizontal
line across to this scale from the point on the graph.
The correction is added to the highest original level to
give the total level.

2. In the case of the subtraction of levels. The difference
between the total sound level and the one to be sub-
tracted is plotted onto the graph and the correction
obtained as above. In this case the correction is sub-
tracted from the total level to give the remaining sound
level.

3. In the case of multiple additions. If there are more lev-
els to be added, the ﬁrst two levels are added using
the graph and then the third is added to the resultant
using the same method.

42.1.5 Relationship between SPL, SIL and SWL

The total acoustic power of a source can be related to
the sound pressure level at distance r by the following
equation (assuming spherical propagation):
W D P2
(cid:10)ð4(cid:11)r2
where (cid:10) D density of the medium and C D velocity of
sound in the medium. By substituting this back into the
SPL equation we obtain:
SPL D SWL-20 log r (cid:2) 11(cid:7)spherical propagation(cid:8)

c

It is also possible to derive equations for the other com-

mon situations, i.e.

Point source on a hard reﬂecting plane
Line source radiating into space
Line source on a hard reﬂecting plane

SPL D SWL-20 log r (cid:2) 8(cid:7)hemispherical propagation(cid:8)
SPL D SWL-10 log r (cid:2) 8(cid:7)line source in space(cid:8)
SPL D SWL-10 log r (cid:2) 5(cid:7)line source radiating on a plane(cid:8)

The above equations are useful for calculating distance-
attenuation effects.

If the sound pressure level at a distance r0 is known it is
possible to calculate the sound pressure level at positions
r1 quite easily:

SPL0 (cid:2) SPL1 D 20 log
SPL0 (cid:2) SPL1 D 20 log r1 (cid:2) 20 log r0

r1
ro

dB

If r1 is double r0 it will be seen that SPL0 (cid:2) SPL1 will
be approximately equal to 6 dB (20 log 2). This gives us
the principle of a decrease in level of 6 dB per doubling
of distance (inverse square law). For the line source the
same calculation produces a difference of only 3 dB per
doubling of distance.

42.1.6 Frequency weighting and human
response to sound

In practice, noises are not composed of one single pure
tone but are usually very complex in nature. It is essential
that more than the overall noise level (in dB) is known
in order to appreciate the loudness of a noise, as the ear
does not respond uniformly to all frequencies.

As previously stated, the ear can respond from 20 Hz to
200 kHz, and this response can be demonstrated by equal-
loudness contours (Figure 42.3). It can be seen from the
ﬁgure that there is a loss in sensitivity (compared to 2 kHz)
of approximately 60 dB at the low-frequency end of the

Figure 42.2 Noise-level addition graph

Figure 42.3 Equal-loudness contours

Introduction: basic acoustics 42/711

42.1.7 Noise indices

All the previous discussions have concerned steady-state
noise. It will, however, be apparent
that most noises
change in level with time. It may therefore be necessary
to derive indices which describe how this happens. The
most common of these are percentiles and equivalent
continuous noise levels.

Percentiles are expressed as the percentage of time (for
the stated period) during which the stated noise level was
exceeded, i.e. 5 min L90 of 80 dB(A) means that for the 5-
min period of measurement for 90 per cent of the time the
noise exceeded 80 dB(A). Therefore L0 is the maximum
noise level during any period and L100 is the minimum.
Leq (the equivalent continuous noise level) is the level
which, if it were constant for the stated period, would
have the same amount of acoustic energy as the actual
varying noise level.

42.1.8 Noise rating curves

These are a set of graphs that are used as a speciﬁcation
for machinery noise. They are similar to noise criteria
curves (used in the USA to specify noise from ventilation
systems). The rating of a noise under investigation is the
value of the highest noise-rating curve intersected by the
readings when plotted on the graphs (Figure 42.5).

chart. It will also be noted that all the curves are approx-
imately parallel, but there is a tendency towards linearity
at the higher noise levels. In order to produce meaning-
ful readings it is therefore important to state the sound
pressure level in decibels and the frequency of the noise.
Weighting can be imposed on noise readings, which
corresponds to the inverse of the equal-loudness contours.
If this weighting is used, all readings that are numerically
equal will sound equally loud, regardless of frequency.

Originally, three networks were proposed (A, B, and C)
and it was suggested that these be used for low, medium
and high noise levels, respectively. It was shown in prac-
tice that this introduced numerous difﬁculties, particularly
with a rapidly changing noise when a change of ﬁlter net-
work was necessary. It was also found that at all noise lev-
els the weighting network corresponded well to annoyance
levels. It was therefore decided that the weighting would
be used as the norm for noise readings concerning human
response. Another weighting network (the D network) is
used for aircraft noise measurement (Figure 42.4).

If it is necessary for engineering purposes to know the
tonal make-up of a noise, several approaches are possible.
A bandpass ﬁlter can process the noise. The most com-
mon ﬁlters are octave band ﬁlters, and the agreed center
frequencies are as follows:

31 63 142 420 500 1 K 2 K 4 K 8 K 16 K (Hz)

If further resolution is necessary one-third octave ﬁlters
can be used but the number of required measurements is
most unwieldy. It may be necessary to record the noise
onto tape loops for the repeated re-analysis that is nec-
essary. One-third octave ﬁlters are commonly used for
building acoustics, and narrow-band real-time analysis
can be employed. This is the fastest of the methods and is
the most suitable for transient noises. Narrow-band anal-
ysis uses a VDU to show the graphical results of the fast
Fourier transform and can also display octave or one-third
octave bar graphs.

Figure 42.4 Weighting networks

Figure 42.5 Noise-rating curves

42/712 Noise and Vibration

42.2 Measurement of noise
The simplest sound level meter consists of a microphone,
an ampliﬁer and a meter of some type. Sound level meters
are graded according to British and international stan-
dards, and the most common type used for accurate mea-
surement purposes it known as the Precision Grade or
Type 1 meter. In practice, a basic sound level meter will
incorporate weighting networks with either in-built octave
ﬁlters or provision for connecting an external ﬁlter set
(Figure 42.6).

The meter will also have a control for the time constant
for the display (i.e. the speed of the meter response), and
the two common time constants are ‘Fast’ and ‘Slow’.
Others may have an impulse and peak hold facility. More
complex meters incorporate Leq-measuring devices, and
these are also available as hand-held Type 1 meters with
ﬁlters as in the basic meter.

Outputs are available in either analogue (D.C. or A.C.)
or digital form. Digital output may connect the meter to
computers (either portable or ofﬁce based) for more com-
plex calculations or to produce larger graphical displays.
Portable sound level meters are also available which
can measure percentiles. These either hold the results in a
memory which can be separately interrogated or may be
connected to a computer for a printout. Larger machines
(known as environmental noise analyzers) are available
which can record percentiles and Leq readings and pro-
duce a printout. These are resistant to weather and can be
left on-site for up to a week.

Computers may be used for noise analysis when
connected to dedicated hardware devices. One machine
incorporates a narrow-band analyzer, octave and one-third
octaves with all the features of an environmental noise
analyzer. These devices cost much less than purchasing
all the dedicated instruments separately. They may be
obtained in portable form but are rarely weatherproofed
for outdoor use.

42.3 Vibration
This may be deﬁned as the oscillatory movement of a
mechanical system, and it may be sinusoidal or non-
sinusoidal (also known as complex). Vibration can occur
in many modes, and the simplest is the single freedom-of-
movement system. A mass/spring diagram (Figure 42.7)
can explain the vibration of a system.

The displacement of the object from its rest position

can be derived from
X D Xpeak sine (cid:7)ωt(cid:8)
where X D displacement at time t, Xpeak D peak displace-
ment and ω D angular velocity (2(cid:11)f). The velocity of
the object is proportional to displacement and frequency
and its acceleration is proportional to the displacement
and the square of frequency. There is a phase angle of
90° between displacement and velocity and a further 90°
between velocity and acceleration. The units of measure-
ment may be made directly, i.e.

Displacement in meters
Velocity in meters per second
Acceleration in square meters per second

Vibration may also be expressed in decibels, and the

standard reference levels used are:

10 m(cid:2)8/s for velocity
10 m(cid:2)5/s2 for acceleration
In practice, measurements are made with the use of
an accelerometer. This device is connected to a sound
level meter and may make measurements of acceleration
in terms of decibels (or by changing scales or use of a
device similar to a slide rule, in direct terms). An inte-
grator can be connected between the accelerometer and
the meter to express the results in terms of velocity or
displacement.

42.3.1 Effects of vibration on people

If a body is vibrating at a frequency within the audible
range, sound will be radiated. Vibration may be trans-
mitted considerable distances through buildings, ground

Figure 42.6 Schematic diagram of a sound level meter

Figure 42.7 Mass/spring diagram

Noise and vibration control 42/713

structures or rock strata, and then re-radiated as noise at
the receiver position. For example, low-frequency noise
nuisance has been caused at a residence on the banks of
the River Thames, by vibration from a pump on the oppo-
site bank. In this case the vibration passed under the river
along a curved layer of harder rock.

Vibration can be perceived from a frequency of approx-
imately 3 Hz. The lower frequencies appear to cause the
most discomfort. At high levels (above 120 dB) vibration
can be physically damaging to people, and resonance of
the human body occur at the following frequencies:

to complain to a magistrate’s court about a noise nui-
sance. If convinced, the magistrate may issue an Order
telling the person causing the nuisance to cease the activ-
ity. This section may be used where the local authority
cannot detect the nuisance. Under Section 60/61 of the
Control of Pollution Act 1974 the local authority may
issue a notice to a person carrying out construction work.
This may require the person to adopt the best practical
means of minimizing the noise from the site. (There is
no reference to the noise having to be a nuisance in this
section.) Section 62 relates to noise in the street.

3.6 Hz:
20–30 Hz:
60–90 Hz:

Thorax, abdomen
Head, neck
Skull

High vibration levels at these frequencies can therefore
be the most disturbing.

Various sources publish data of permissible vibration
levels for employees (usually as a graph of acceleration
against frequency). These are designed to avoid injury
and cannot be used as a guide to the degree of distur-
bance caused by vibration. Vibration caused by neighbor-
ing industrial premises when received at a residence as
vibration (i.e. no noise implications) has been considered
a nuisance when it is just perceptible.

42.4 Noise and vibration control
Noise and vibration must be controlled in order to avoid

1. Nuisance;
2. Physical injury to workers;
3. Damage to plant/machinery/building structures.

42.4.1 Noise nuisance

Nuisance is not deﬁned as such. Common-law nuisance
is used as a guide and is divided into two types, public
and private. Private nuisance relates to premises, and is a
tort that can be deﬁned as ‘the unlawful interference or
annoyance, which causes damage to an occupier or owner
in respect to his use and enjoyment of his land’. Public
nuisance is an unlawful act or omission to discharge a
legal duty which can endanger the life, safety, health or
comfort of the public or some section of it, or by which
act the public are denied some common right. It should be
noted that more than one person must be affected. Public
nuisance is a criminal offence and, as such, may be tried
on indictment in the Crown Court. The Attorney General
may initiate an action in the High Court.

42.4.2 Legislation

Noise nuisance is controlled primarily by the Environ-
mental Protection Act 1990. Section 79 of the Act places
a duty on a local authority to inspect their area for nui-
sances. Section 80 places a duty on a local authority to
serve a legal notice on persons responsible for a situa-
tion when a nuisance has occurred and is likely to recur,
or where, in the opinion of the local authority, the nui-
sance is likely to occur. Section 82 enables an individual

42.4.3 Environmental Protection Act 1990,
Section 80

A notice may be served where a nuisance has occurred
or the local authority think a nuisance may occur. Noise
nuisance is not deﬁned as such, but includes vibration.
The notice may not be speciﬁed and may merely require
the abatement of the nuisance. A notice may, however,
require the carrying out of works or specify permissi-
ble noise levels. The time period for compliance is not
speciﬁed in the Act, but must be reasonable.

Appeals against a Section 80 notice must be made to
the magistrate’s court within 21 days of the serving of the
notice. The grounds of appeal are given in the Statutory
Nuisance (Appeals) Regulations 1990 and are as follows:

1. That the notice is not justiﬁed by the terms of Section
80. The most common reason for this defense is that
the nuisance had not already occurred, and that the
local authority did not have reasonable grounds to
believe that the nuisance was likely to occur.

2. That there had been some informality, defect or error
in, or in connection with, the notice. It may be that the
notice was addressed to the wrong person or contained
other faulty wording.

3. That

the authorities have refused unreasonably to
accept compliance with alternative requirements or
that
the requirements of the notice are otherwise
unreasonable in character or extent, or are unnecessary.
This defense is self-explanatory. The local authorities
are only permitted to ask for works that will abate
the noise nuisance. Other works (perhaps to comply
with legislation) should not be speciﬁed in the notice.
They may, however, be contained in a letter separate
from the notice. An example of this would be where
the ﬁtting of acoustic enclosures to food-manufacturing
machines breached food hygiene requirements. Readily
cleanable enclosures may be a requirement of the Food
Hygiene Regulations, but it should not be contained in
a Section 58 Control of Pollution Act notice.

4. That the time (or, where more than one time is spec-
iﬁed, any of the times) within which the requirement
of the notice are to be complied with is not reasonably
sufﬁcient for the purpose.

5. Where the noise to which the notice relates is that
caused by carrying out a trade or business, that the best
practicable means have been used for preventing or for
counteracting the effects of the noise. ‘Best practicable
means’ incorporates both technical and ﬁnancial pos-
sibility. The latter may be related to the turnover of

42/714 Noise and Vibration

a company. Therefore a solution that may be the best
practicable means for one company may not be so for
another.

6. That the requirements imposed by the notice are more
onerous than those for the time being in force in
relation to the noise to which the notice relates of
(a) Any notice under Section 60 or 66; or (b) Any
consent given under Section 61 or 6 or
(c) Any
determination made under Section 67. Section 60
relates to a construction site notice. Section 61 is
consent for construction works. Sections 65–67 relate
to noise-abatement zones (see below).

7. That the notice might lawfully have been served on
some person instead of the appellant, being the person
responsible for the noise.

8. That the notice might lawfully have been served on
some person instead of, or in addition to, the appel-
lant, being the owner or occupier of the premises from
which the noise is emitted or would be emitted, and
that it would have been equitable for it to have been
so served.

9. That the notice might lawfully have been served on
some person in addition to the appellant, being a person
also responsible for the noise, and that it would have
been equitable for it to have been so served.

42.4.4 The assessment of nuisance

In assessing whether a certain noise is a nuisance the local
authority may make use of BS 4142, Method of rating
industrial noise affecting mixed residential and industrial
areas. This standard forms the basis of local authorities’
assessment of nuisance, and relates the background level
(i.e. the noise that would pertain if not for the offending
noise) to the measured noise. If the background cannot
be found a method is given for deriving a notional back-
ground. However, the use of this notional background has
fallen into disuse due to its unreliability.

The standard rates the offending noise according to its
nature: 5 dB(A) is added where the noise has a deﬁnite
continuous note and a further 5 dB(A) added for noise of
an intermittent nature. The number of occasions that hap-
pen in an 8-hour period is then plotted on a graph and the
correction for intermittency is derived. When these calcu-
lations have been performed, the noise level is compared
to the background level. The standard states that where
the noise exceeds the background by 5 dB or more, the
nuisance is to be classed as marginal, and where the back-
ground is exceeded by 10 dB(A) or more, complaints are
to be expected.

It is stressed in this standard that it is not intended to
be a criterion but most local authorities tend to use it as a
guide. Other methods are available or may have value for
individual circumstances. Particular problems occur when
a noise is of a very tonal nature or contains discernible
information (i.e. music or voice). It is quite possible for
music to become a nuisance at no more than 3 dB(A)
above ambient background level.

By inference, if BS 4142 were used as a guide to nui-
sance, 5 dB(A) above background would not be cause for
serving a notice. If this were permitted in areas where

there were several sources of noise a ‘creeping’ ambient
problem can occur. If this is the case, the local authority
may have to control noise levels such that no increase in
ambient is allowed. This may be particularly severe for
a large developer in an already noisy area, but is nec-
essary. If no addition is permitted the design noise level
for the new development must be at least 10 dB(A) below
background.

If there are tonal noise problems the local authority may
use more complex measurements to specify the required
reduction. Noise rating may be used or octave or one-third
octave band levels speciﬁed.

42.4.5 Offences and higher court action

It is an offence to cause a noise nuisance while in breach
of a notice. Proceedings in the magistrate’s court can
result in a ﬁne of up to £2000 for each offence. It is
also possible that the court may impose a daily penalty
for continuing nuisances.

If the authority are of the opinion that magistrate’s
court action will not give an adequate remedy a com-
plaint may be made to the High Court. This court will
issue an injunction prohibiting the repeat of the nuisance.
Non-compliance with an injunction constitutes contempt
of court and penalties include imprisonment.

42.4.6 Noise-abatement zones

Local authorities are empowered by the Control of Pollu-
tion Act 1974 to designate areas as noise-abatement zones.
Within these areas noise levels are measured and entered
into a register. It is an offence to increase noise levels
beyond register levels unless consent is obtained. If the
local authorities are of the opinion that existing noise lev-
els are too high, noise-reduction notices can be served.

In the case of new premises the local authority will
determine noise levels which it considers acceptable, and
these will be entered into the noise level register. Appeals
against notices or decisions can be made to the Secretary
of State.

42.4.7 Planning application conditions

Local authorities are empowered to impose conditions
on planning applications to protect environmental ameni-
ties of neighbors. Noise is commonly controlled by plan-
ning conditions, which are designed to avoid reduction in
amenity of neighbors. This may mean that a process has
to be almost inaudible (particularly in the case of light
industrial consents). Appeals against planning conditions
may be made to the Secretary of State. Local authorities
may ask for more onerous controls on planning conditions
than the mere avoidance of nuisance.

42.5 Avoiding physical injury to workers
Noise levels between 85 and 120 dB(A) affect the hearing
of exposed workers on a dose-related basis. The Leq of the
noise is calculated and compared to the criterion currently
employed. Under Section 2 of the Health and Safety at

Work, etc. Act 1974 an employer has to take all steps,
as far as is reasonably practicable, to ensure the health,
safety and welfare of his workers. Permissible noise levels
are deﬁned by codes of practice, and the ﬁgure permitted
for employee exposure is 90 dB(A) 8-hour Leq.

Low-frequency noise (in the range 3–50 Hz) may have
other injurious effects on the body. Research has also indi-
cated that a type of fatigue caused by low-frequency noise
has a similar effect to that caused by alcohol. Infrasound
(low-frequency sound) also has a synergistic effect with
alcohol. Low-frequency noise is particularly important in
the case of workers operating machinery (e.g. vehicles,
cranes, etc.). It must also be remembered that very high
power levels may be generated at low frequency and may
not be readily detected by the ear. Attenuation of low-
frequency noise is very difﬁcult (see Section 42.7).

42.6 Avoidance of damage to
plant/machinery/building structures
Plant and machinery may be directly affected by exces-
sive vibration but may also be damaged due to operator
fatigue (caused by working in high noise-level areas) or
to operators not being able to hear unusual noises from
machines before it is too late. Vibration may be caused
either by direct transmission or by excitation. Damage to
machines may occur in many ways, including the acci-
dental impact of surfaces on one another and the fatigue
of shafts, etc. caused by bending moments.

In extreme cases building structures can be damaged
by vibration. Damage can be caused either directly to the
structure or by settlement of foundations due to vibration.
It is possible to calculate the effects of the former (graphs
are obtainable from various sources) but not the settlement
effect. However, this will occur only on certain strata and
in extreme cases.

42.7 Noise-control engineering
Before attempting noise control it is important to consider
the nature of the problem:
Source of sound energy ! Transmission pathway ! Receiver

There are many proprietary systems available for con-
trolling noise and it is easy to become blinded in one’s
approach to noise control.

The ﬁrst consideration is the source of the noise itself.
In the case of a new project the ﬁrst option must be to
select the quietest machine available that will perform the
required task. With an existing problem this may still be
the cheapest option, particularly in the case of a machine
which is coming to the end of its useful life. Spin-offs may
include more efﬁcient operation (less fuel costs), greater
reliability or quieter operating conditions.

If the decision is made to retain the original machine
the design of the noise-control devices to be employed
should be considered. These may affect:

Noise-control engineering 42/715

Heat build-up
Safety, etc.

In nearly all cases noise control at source is the best

option. Typical examples are:

1. Presses: Is the degree of impact necessary? Can it be

adjusted? Can the press operate by pressure alone?

2. Air discharge – use of air tools and nozzles: The turbu-
lence in the boundary layer of air between the rapidly
moving air stream and the atmosphere is heard as
noise. Can the air stream be diffused (silencers ﬁtted
to the exhaust)? Nozzles used for cleaning can have
devices ﬁtted which give a gradual transition from the
rapidly moving air to atmosphere by the use of an
annular ring of small nozzles round the central nozzle.
These silence with very little loss in efﬁciency.

3. Reciprocating compressors: These cause very high
noise levels at
low frequency (typically, below
420 Hz). The low-frequency noises are very difﬁcult
to attenuate, and the most popular solution is to use
rotary (vane type) compressors. These are inherently
quieter and have the further advantage that the noise
they generate is at high frequency (typically, above
1 kHz) and is therefore easy to attenuate.

4. Cutting machines: Modiﬁcations can be made to the
method of restraining material being cut to reduce ring-
ing (i.e. reducing free lengths of material).

42.7.1 Noise-reduction principles

There are many noise-control devices. All, however, rely
on one or more of the three basic noise-control principles:
insulation, absorption and isolation.

42.7.2 Insulation

The simplest insulator is a sheet of material placed in
the sound-transmission pathways. Sound energy reaches
the surface in the form of a pressure wave. Some energy
passes into the partition and the rest is reﬂected.

Energy that passes into a partition may be partially
absorbed and transformed into heat. This is likely to be
very small in a plain partition. The remainder of the
energy will then pass through the partition by displace-
ment of molecules and pass as sound in the same way that
sound travels in air. This can then pass to the edge of the
partition and be re-radiated as sound from other elements
of the structure. This is known as ﬂanking transmission. In
a thin partition by far the greatest amount of energy will
pass through the partition by actually causing the partition
to vibrate in sympathy with the incident sound and hence
re-radiating the sound onto the opposite side. The amount
of sound transmission through a partition is represented by
the ratio of the incident energy to the transmitted energy.
This factor, when expressed as decibels, is known as the
sound-reduction index (SRI):
SRI D

10 log

Transmission coefﬁcient dB

Access to machine (may hinder cleaning, tool chang-
ing, etc.)

The moment of the panel (and hence its resistance to the
passage of sound) is controlled by a number of factors:

42/716 Noise and Vibration

Figure 42.8 Typical insulation characteristics of a partition

1. The surface mass affects the inertia of panel. Greater
mass causes a corresponding greater inertia and hence
more resistance to movement. At high frequencies this
becomes even more signiﬁcant. The mass law can be
expressed as
SRI D 20 log mf (cid:2) 43 dB.
Where m is the superﬁcial weight (kg/m2) and f the
frequency (Hz).

2. At very low frequencies the movement of the panel
will be controlled by the stiffness, as inertia is a
dynamic force and cannot come into effect until the
panel has measurable velocity. Stiffness controls the
performance of the panel at
low frequencies until
resonance occurs. As the driving frequency increases,
the resonance zone is passed and we enter the mass-
controlled area. The increase in the sound-reduction
index with frequency is approximately linear at this
point, and can be represented by Figure 42.8.

3. A panel will have a bending mode when a wave travels
along the length of the sheet of material. The fre-
quency of this bending mode is known as the critical
frequency. This mode of bending will be introduced by
sound incident at angles greater than 0°. At the criti-
cal frequency coincidence will only occur for a sound
wave with a grazing incidence (90°). At greater fre-
quencies the partition will still be driven, but in this
case by progressively lower angles of incidence. There-
fore, the coincidence dip is not a single dip, but will
result in a loss of SRI at progressively higher frequen-
cies. The desirable insulation panel will therefore be
very large but not stiff.

42.7.3 Absorbers
Porous
As sound passes through a porous material, energy is lost
by friction within the material. The material is usually
attached to various surfaces in a room. The absorber will
have the highest efﬁciency when positioned where the air
molecules are moving the fastest (and hence more energy

is absorbed). At the wall surface the molecules are station-
ary. If we plot a single-frequency graph we ﬁnd that the
maximum particulate velocity occurs at (cid:19)/4 (one-quarter
wavelength) from the surface. In practice, incident sound
is rarely of single frequency, but the principle can be
observed that the absorber must be one quarter of the
wavelength away from the wall (for the frequency of the
sound to be absorbed). This can be arranged either by hav-
ing a thickness greater than (cid:19)/4 for the lowest frequency
to be absorbed or by mounting the absorber on a frame
some distance away from the wall so that the center of
the absorber is at (cid:19)/4 for the frequency to be absorbed.

Resonant

The simplest resonant absorber is known as the Helmholtz
resonator. This consists of a chamber connected to the
duct (or whatever area is to be controlled) by a narrow
neck. The volume of air in the chamber will resonate at a
frequency determined by the volume of the chamber, the
length of the neck and the cross-sectional area of the neck:

(cid:4)
Fres D 55
where S D cross-sectional area (m), I D length of neck
(m) and V D volume of enclosure (m). As the chamber
resonates, air is forced through the narrow neck and hence
energy is absorbed in overcoming the resistance.

S
IV

(cid:7)Hz(cid:8)

The degree of attenuation at the critical frequency can
be very large, but this type of silencer has a very nar-
row bandwidth. This device may be suitable when the
machine being dealt with emits sound predominantly of
a single wavelength. Lining the chamber with absorbers
can expand the absorber bandwidth of a Helmholtz res-
onator, but this has the effect of reducing the efﬁciency.
The perforated absorber, which forms the basis of many
acoustic enclosures and silencers, is a development of the
resonator principle.

As stated previously, packing the chamber with an
absorber may broaden the bandwidth, but this lowers
efﬁciency.
It may be overcome by using multiple
absorbers in the sound path, and placing a perforated
sheet some distance away from the rigid outer wall of
the enclosure and ﬁlling the cavity with absorber can do
this. It is not necessary to use cross walls between the
‘chambers’ so formed. In this case the equation becomes:
Fres D 5000
where I D depth of airspace, t D thickness of panel, d D
diameter of holes and p D percentage open area of panel.

I(cid:7)t C 0.8d(cid:8)

Hz

P

Panel

This absorber is basically a panel attached to a structural
wall that is designed to absorb energy. The absorber is
therefore frequency dependent and has an absorption peak
at its resonant frequency. This type of absorber is not
commonly used.

42.7.4 Vibration isolation

Vibration in machinery or plant can be induced in a num-
ber of ways, e.g.:

Out-of-balance forces on shafts;
Magnetic forces in electrical apparatus;
Frictional forces in sliding objects.

The ﬁrst course of action in vibration isolation is reduc-
tion at source. Balancer shafts in engines, stiffer coils in
electrical apparatus or better lubrication between adjacent
sliding surfaces may achieve this.

When all possible vibration reduction has been
obtained, the machine must be isolated from the structure.
Some form of spring mounting achieves this. Spring
mounts have a resonant frequency dependent on the
stiffness of the spring and the weight of the object placed
on it. It will be apparent that the static deﬂection of the
spring will also be proportional to the resonant frequency.
As the driving force of the mass/spring increases from
zero up to the resonant frequency, the amount of transmis-
sion of the vibration increases until resonance is reached
and the transmission becomes inﬁnitely large. As the res-
onant point is passed, the transmission begins to reduce
until at some point the transmissibility falls below one
(see Figure 42.9), i.e. isolation occurs.

In practice, however, spring systems have some in-
built damping, and this will have the effect of reducing
the amplitude of the resonance below inﬁnity. This is
very necessary in real systems to avoid excessive excur-
sions of mounted machinery. A damped mounting will
follow the second curve on the graph in Figure 42.9,
and it will be noted that the vibration isolation at high-
frequency ratios is less than that for undamped systems. It
is important therefore to use the lowest degree of damping
necessary.

Figure 42.9 Performance of anti-vibration mounting

Practical applications 42/717

42.8 Practical applications
42.8.1 Acoustic enclosures
Panels of multi-resonator material are made from
perforated plate sandwiched with solid plate and an
intermediate absorber layer between them. These panels
can be built up in enclosures, taking care to seal all
junctions adequately. Typically, these enclosures are made
to surround small machines (e.g. compressors). They
may be ﬁtted together with spring catches to allow for
dismantling for maintenance purposes.

Ventilation may be a problem but can be dealt with in

several ways:

1. Acoustic louvers constructed of the absorbent panel
material (suitable for a small degree of noise reduction
only);

2. A silencer ﬁtted to the ventilation duct (see below);
3. Bafﬂed enclosures to the ventilation duct.

42.8.2 Building insulation
Single-panel insulators have been described above, but
in buildings it is usual to provide double insulation. In
theory, if the insulation panels had no interconnection it
should be possible arithmetically to add the sound reduc-
tion of the two elements of the structure. In practice, it
will be found that there is bridging, by the structure, wall
ties or ﬂanking transmission or by the air between the
two elements acting as a spring. If the two elements of
the wall were in rigid connection the insulation would be
3 dB more than the single element alone (mass law), and
if totally separated it would be the sum of the ﬁgures.
In practice, a cavity wall with ties and a 50-mm cavity
gives approximately 10 dB more reduction compared to a
single-skin wall of half the surface mass.

Double-glazed windows work on the same principle.
It is important to avoid the coincidence of the resonant
frequencies of the two elements, and hence it is usual to
arrange for the glazing panels to have different thickness
(and hence a different resonant frequency). This is not
necessary if one element is sub-divided by glazing bars
to give different-size panes to its opposing element.

The reveals of a double-glazed window should be lined
with acoustically absorbent material to damp the sound
within the cavity. The width of the cavity should not be
less than 150 mm.

If insulation panels are not of uniform construction (as
in the case of a wall containing a window) the average
sound-insulation value must be derived for use in calcula-
tions. The total transmission coefﬁcient for the composite
panel will equal the sum of the individual coefﬁcient times
their respective areas divided by the total area. Thus:

taverage D t1s1 C t2s2 C t3s3

etc.

stot

(cid:2)

(cid:1)

and the SRI of the total panel is derived from
SRI D 10 log

dB

1
tavg

42/718 Noise and Vibration

42.8.3 Control of noise in ducts

Fans produce the least noise when operating at their max-
imum efﬁciency. It is therefore important to select the
correct fan for the airﬂow and pressure characteristics
required. It is also important to remember that the noise
generated within the system (as opposed to at the fan) is
a factor of air velocity, and hence, for a required airﬂow
rate, a larger cross-section duct (with a correspondingly
lower velocity) will give quieter results. It will also have
other advantages when providing extra noise attenuation
and ﬁtting silencers.

In the design of systems it is most important to elimi-
nate as much turbulence as possible, and to achieve this
the fans should be mounted some distance away from
bends (at least one and a half duct diameters). Junctions
between pipes and connectors should present a smooth
internal proﬁle and inlets to systems must be tapered and
not plain. Outlet grills should be of larger diameter than
the duct and have aerodynamically smooth proﬁles where
possible.

If it is necessary to add extra attenuation to a duct it
is essential to decide on the required amount. If only a
relatively small degree of absorption is required, ﬁrst a
part of the duct must be lined with absorber. The length
of duct to be lined will be determined by the degree of
attenuation required and the thickness by the noise fre-
quency. Data for these factors are available from many
sources and are usually published as tables.

For further attenuation it is necessary to provide a
center-pod-type attenuator (Figure 42.10). This increases
the area of the absorber and also aids low-frequency
attenuation. For further low-frequency attenuation an in-
line splitter silencer is employed (Figure 42.11). These
are capable of providing a high degree of attenuation,
dependent on the width between the elements. The smaller
the gap,
the major
manufacturers publish performance tables. In order to
decide on the design of the silencer to be installed it
is necessary to know the required attenuation (and the
frequency/noise level proﬁle) and the permitted pressure
loss in the system. Manufacturers’ data can then be

the higher the attenuation. Again,

Figure 42.10 Center-pod silencer

Figure 42.11 Splitter silencer

consulted. Splitter silencers are also available in bent
shapes, and these can provide even higher degrees of
attenuation as well as aiding installation. Silencers should
ideally be ﬁtted in systems as near to the noise source
as possible to avoid noise break-out from the duct. Other
obstructions in the duct must, however, be considered, as
they may generate further aerodynamic noise which, if it
occurs after the silencer, will not be attenuated.

42.8.4 Anti-vibration machinery mounts in
practice

Again, the characteristics of the system need to be con-
sidered. The weight of the machine and the frequency
will determine the static and dynamic deﬂections of the
mounts and hence the material of which the mount is to be
constructed. At very high frequencies mats may be placed
under machinery, and these may consist of rubber, cork
or foam. At middle frequencies it is usual to use rubber
in-shear mounts. At low frequencies metal spring mounts
are employed.

42.8.5 Mounts

Anti-vibration mats are very useful for frequencies above
42 Hz. They have the disadvantage of being liable to
attack by oils and, if they become saturated or deterio-
rated, they will compress and lose their efﬁciency.

42.8.6 Rubber mounts

Although these are loosely termed rubber mounts, they
are often composed of synthetic rubbers, which are not
readily attacked by oils and can operate over a much wider
temperature range. Typical maximum static deﬂections are
12.5 mm.

42.8.7 Steel spring mounts
Steel springs have the disadvantage of transmitting the
high frequencies along the length of the spring. It is usual
to mount the spring with a rubber or neoprene washer
under its base. Steel spring mounts are also most vulnera-
ble to resonance problems, and the solution is to build in
a damper device. This has the disadvantage of reducing
the isolator’s efﬁciency.

42.8.8 Positioning of anti-vibration mounts
Machinery must be positioned so that all mounts are
equally loaded, and failure to do so will result in the
possibility of a rocking motion developing. This may

Practical applications 42/719

require mounting the machine on a sub-frame. If this is
not possible, the load should be assessed at each mounting
point and mounts of different stiffness used.

42.8.9 Installation

Mounts should be installed so that the whole machine
is isolated from the structure. Services (e.g. power,
hydraulics, etc.) should also be mounted ﬂexibly. Bridging
is the most common fault when providing vibration
isolation to machines and building structures, and should
be carefully avoided. Services should be designed to
withstand the degree of movement permitted by the
anti-vibration mounts without suffering damage.

43

43/721

Vibration
Fundamentals

R Keith Mobley
The Plant Performance Group

Contents

43.1 Introduction
43.2 Vibration analysis applications

43/723

43.2.1 Vibration analysis overview 43/724

43/723

43/727
43/728

43.3 Interpretation of vibration data
43.4 Vibration measuring equipment
43.5 Vibration sources 43/728

43.5.1 Rotating machinery 43/728
43.5.2 Reciprocating and/or linear-motion

machinery 43/729

43/730

43.6 Vibration theory
43.7 Measurable parameters 43/733
43.8 Measurement classiﬁcations
43.9 Common elements of curves
43.10 Machine dynamics
43/735
43.11 Degrees of freedom 43/740
43.12 Vibration data types and formats 43/742

43/734
43/734

43/742

43.12.1 Data types
43.12.2 Data formats 43/745
43.12.3 Data acquisition
43.12.4 Data measurements 43/749
43.12.5 Transducer mounting techniques

43/746

43/749

43.13 Acquiring data
43.14 Vibration analysis techniques

43/750

43/751

43.14.1 Trending
43.14.2 Comparative analysis
43.14.3 Signature analysis

43/751

43/751

43/752

43.1 Introduction
All mechanical equipment in motion generates a vibration
proﬁle, or signature, that reﬂects its operating condition.
This is true regardless of speed or whether the mode
of operation is rotation, reciprocation, or linear motion.
Vibration analysis is applicable to all mechanical equip-
ment, although a common – yet invalid – assumption is
that it is limited to simple rotating machinery with running
speeds above 600 revolutions per minute (rpm). Vibration-
proﬁle analysis is a useful tool for predictive maintenance,
diagnostics, and many other uses.

Predictive maintenance has become synonymous with
monitoring vibration characteristics of rotating machinery
to detect budding problems and to head off catastrophic
failure. However, vibration analysis does not provide the
data required for analyzing electrical equipment, areas of
heat loss, the condition of lubricating oil, or other param-
eters typically evaluated in a maintenance management
program. Therefore, a total plant predictive maintenance
program must include several techniques, each designed
to provide speciﬁc information on plant equipment.

43.2 Vibration analysis applications
The use of vibration analysis is not restricted to predic-
tive maintenance. This technique is useful for diagnostic
applications as well. Vibration monitoring and analysis
are the primary diagnostic tools for most mechanical sys-
tems that are used to manufacture products. When used
properly, vibration data provide the means to maintain
optimum operating conditions and efﬁciency of critical
plant systems. Vibration analysis can be used to evaluate
ﬂuid ﬂow through pipes or vessels, to detect leaks, and to
perform a variety of non-destructive testing functions that
improve the reliability and performance of critical plant
systems.

Some of the applications that are discussed brieﬂy
in this section are predictive maintenance, acceptance

Vibration analysis applications 43/723

testing, quality control, loose part detection, noise control,
leak detection, aircraft engine analyzers, and machine
design and engineering. Table 43.1 lists rotating, or
centrifugal, and non-rotating equipment, machine-trains,
and continuous processes typically monitored by vibration
analysis.

Predictive maintenance

The fact that vibration proﬁles can be obtained for all
machinery having rotating or moving elements allows
vibration-based analysis techniques to be used for pre-
dictive maintenance. Vibration analysis is one of several
predictive maintenance techniques used to monitor and
analyze critical machines, equipment, and systems in a
typical plant. However, as indicated before, the use of
vibration analysis to monitor rotating machinery to detect
budding problems and to head off catastrophic failure is
the dominant predictive maintenance technique used with
maintenance management programs.

Acceptance testing

Vibration analysis is a proven means of verifying the
actual performance versus design parameters of new
mechanical, process, and manufacturing equipment. Pre-
acceptance tests performed at the factory and immediately
following installation can be used to ensure that new
equipment performs at optimum efﬁciency and expected
life-cycle cost. Design problems as well as possible
damage during shipment or installation can be corrected
before long-term damage and/or unexpected costs occur.

Quality control

Production-line vibration checks are an effective method
of ensuring product quality where machine tools are
involved. Such checks can provide advanced warning that
the surface ﬁnish on parts is nearing the rejection level.
On continuous process lines such as paper machines,

Table 43.1 Equipment and processes typically monitored by vibration analysis

Centrifugal
Pumps
Compressors
Blowers
Fans
Motor/generators
Ball mills
Chillers
Product rolls
Mixers
Gearboxes
Centrifuges
Transmissions
Turbines
Generators
Rotary dryers
Electric motors
All rotating machinery

Reciprocating
Pumps
Compressors
Diesel engines
Gasoline engines
Cylinders
Other machines

Machine-trains

Boring machines
Hobbing machines
Machining centers
Temper mills
Metal working machines
Rolling mills, and most machining

equipment

Continuous process
Continuous casters
Hot and cold strip lines
Annealing lines
Plating lines
Paper machines
Can manufacturing lines
Pickle lines
Printing
Dyeing and ﬁnishing
Rooﬁng manufacturing lines
Chemical production lines
Petroleum production lines
Neoprene production lines
Polyester production lines
Nylon production lines
Flooring production lines
Continuous process lines

Source: The Plant Performance Group

43/724 Vibration Fundamentals

steel-ﬁnishing lines, or rolling mills, vibration analysis can
prevent abnormal oscillation of components that result in
loss of product quality.

theory to allow the concept of vibration proﬁles and their
analysis to be understood before beginning the more in-
depth discussions in the later sections of this chapter.

Loose or foreign parts detection

Theoretical vibration proﬁles

Vibration analysis is useful as a diagnostic tool for locat-
ing loose or foreign objects in process lines or vessels.
This technique has been used with great success by the
nuclear power industry and it offers the same beneﬁts to
non-nuclear industries.

Noise control

Federal, state, and local regulations require serious atten-
tion be paid to noise levels within the plant. Vibration
analysis can be used to isolate the source of noise gen-
erated by plant equipment as well as background noises
such as those generated by ﬂuorescent lights and other
less obvious sources. The ability to isolate the source of
abnormal noises permits cost-effective corrective action.

Leak detections

Leaks in process vessels and devices such as valves are a
serious problem in many industries. A variation of vibra-
tion monitoring and analysis can be used to detect leak-
age and isolate its source. Leak-detection systems use an
accelerometer attached to the exterior of a process pipe.
This allows the vibration proﬁle to be monitored in order
to detect the unique frequencies generated by ﬂow or
leakage.

Aircraft engine analyzers

Adaptations of vibration analysis techniques have been
used for a variety of specialty instruments, in particular
portable and continuous aircraft engine analyzers. Vibra-
tion monitoring and analysis techniques are the basis of
these analyzers, which are used for detecting excessive
vibration in turbo-prop and jet engines. These instruments
incorporate logic modules that use existing vibration data
to evaluate the condition of the engine. Portable units have
diagnostic capabilities that allow a mechanic to deter-
mine the source of the problem while continuous sensors
alert the pilot of any deviation from optimum operating
condition.

Machine design and engineering

Vibration data has become a critical part of the design
and engineering of new machines and process systems.
Data derived from similar or existing machinery can be
extrapolated to form the basis of a preliminary design.
Prototype testing of new machinery and systems allows
these preliminary designs to be ﬁnalized, and the vibration
data from the testing adds to the design database.

43.2.1 Vibration analysis overview

Vibration theory and vibration proﬁle, or signature, anal-
ysis are complex subjects that are the topic of many text-
books. The purpose of this section is to provide enough

A vibration is a periodic motion or one that repeats
itself after a certain interval of time. This time interval
is referred to as the period of the vibration, T. A plot,
or proﬁle, of a vibration is shown in Figure 43.1, which
shows the period, T, and the maximum displacement or
amplitude, Xo. The inverse of the period, 1
T , is called the
frequency, f, of the vibration, which can be expressed in
units of cycles per second (cps) or Hertz (Hz). A harmonic
function is the simplest type of periodic motion and is
shown in Figure 43.2, which is the harmonic function
for the small oscillations of a simple pendulum. Such a
relationship can be expressed by the equation:
X D Xo sin(cid:3)ωt(cid:6)
where:
X D Vibration displacement (thousandths of an
Xo D Maximum displacement or amplitude (mils)
ω D Circular frequency (radians per second)
t D Time (seconds)

inch, or mils)

Actual vibration proﬁles

The process of vibration analysis requires gathering com-
plex machine data and deciphering it. As opposed to the
simple theoretical vibration curves shown in Figures 43.1
and 43.2, the proﬁle for a piece of equipment is extremely
complex. This is true because there are usually many
sources of vibration. Each source generates its own curve,
but these are essentially added together and displayed as a
composite proﬁle. These proﬁles can be displayed in two
formats: time-domain and frequency-domain.

Time domain

Vibration data that is plotted as amplitude versus time
is referred to as a time-domain data proﬁle. Some simple
examples are shown in Figures 43.1 and 43.2. An example
of the complexity of this type of data for an actual piece
of industrial machinery is shown in Figure 43.3.

Time-domain plots must be used for all linear and recip-
rocating motion machinery. They are useful in the overall
analysis of machine-trains to study changes in operating
conditions. However, time-domain data are difﬁcult to
use. Because all the vibration data in this type of plot are
added together to represent the total displacement at any
given time, it is difﬁcult to directly see the contribution
of any particular vibration source.

The French physicist and mathematician Jean Fourier
determined that non-harmonic data functions such as the
time-domain vibration proﬁle are the mathematical sum
of simple harmonic functions. The dashed-line curves in
Figure 43.4 represent discrete harmonic components of
the total, or summed, non-harmonic curve represented by
the solid line.

Vibration analysis applications 43/725

X0

Time t

X

i

 
t
n
e
m
e
c
a
p
s
D

l

T

Figure 43.1 Periodic motion for bearing pedestal of a steam turbine

x

X0

t

T

Figure 43.2 Small oscillations of a simple pendulum, harmonic function

43/726 Vibration Fundamentals

3.00

0.00

)
s

l
i

m

(
 
t
n
e
m
e
c
a
p
s
D

i

l

–3.00
3.00

0.00

–3.00

0

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

Time (sec)

Figure 43.3 Example of a typical time-domain vibration proﬁle for a piece of machinery

Figure 43.4 Discrete (harmonic) and total (non-harmonic) time-domain vibration curves

This type of data, which is routinely taken over the
life of a machine, is directly comparable to historical
data taken at exactly the same running speed and load.
However, this is not practical because of variations in
day-to-day plant operations and changes in running speed.
This signiﬁcantly affects the proﬁle and makes it impos-
sible to compare historical data.

Frequency domain

From a practical standpoint, simple harmonic vibration
functions are related to the circular frequencies of the
rotating or moving components. Therefore, these frequen-
cies are some multiple of the basic running speed of
the machine-train, which is expressed in revolutions per
minute (rpm) or cycles per minute (cpm). Determining
these frequencies is the ﬁrst basic step in analyzing the
operating condition of the machine-train.

Frequency-domain data are obtained by converting
time-domain data using a mathematical technique referred
to as Fast Fourier Transform (FFT). FFT allows each
vibration component of a complex machine-train spectrum
to be shown as a discrete frequency peak. The frequency-
domain amplitude can be the displacement per unit time
related to a particular frequency, which is plotted as the
Y-axis against frequency as the X-axis. This is opposed
to time-domain spectrums that sum the velocities of all
frequencies and plot the sum as the Y-axis against time

Interpretation of vibration data 43/727

as the X-axis. An example of a frequency-domain plot or
vibration signature is shown in Figure 43.5.

Frequency-domain data are required for equipment
operating at more than one running speed and all rotating
applications. Because the X-axis of the spectrum is
frequency normalized to the running speed, a change
in running speed will not affect the plot. A vibration
component that is present at one running speed will still be
found in the same location on the plot for another running
speed after the normalization, although the amplitude may
be different.

43.3 Interpretation of vibration data
The key to using vibration signature analysis for pre-
dictive maintenance, diagnostic, and other applications is
the ability to differentiate between normal and abnormal
vibration proﬁles. Many vibrations are normal for a piece
of rotating or moving machinery. Examples of these are
normal rotations of shafts and other rotors, contact with
bearings, gear-mesh, etc. However, speciﬁc problems with
machinery generate abnormal, yet identiﬁable, vibrations.
Examples of these are loose bolts, misaligned shafts, worn
bearings, leaks, and incipient metal fatigue.

Predictive maintenance utilizing vibration signature
analysis is based on the following facts, which form the
basis for the methods used to identify and quantify the
root causes of failure:

Display

of

spectrum
acquired

05–Jan–80

02:41

RPM = 1775
Load = 100%

Total

in/sec RMS

0.1490

Machine:

Coal boiler

ID fan

MPT–A02

Station – Frankfort plant

0.10

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

)

S
M
R
 
c
e
s
/
n
i
(
 
e
d
u
t
i
l

p
m
A

0

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

Frequency (Hz)

Figure 43.5 Typical frequency-domain vibration signature

43/728 Vibration Fundamentals

1. All common machinery problems and failure modes
have distinct vibration frequency components that can
be isolated and identiﬁed.

2. A frequency-domain vibration signature is generally
used for the analysis because it is comprised of discrete
peaks, each representing a speciﬁc vibration source.

3. There is a cause, referred to as a forcing function,
for every frequency component in a machine-train’s
vibration signature.

4. When the signature of a machine is compared over
time, it will repeat until some event changes the vibra-
tion pattern (i.e., the amplitude of each distinct vibra-
tion component will remain constant until there is a
change in the operating dynamics of the machine-train).

While an increase or a decrease in amplitude may indi-
cate degradation of the machine-train, this is not always
the case. Variations in load, operating practices, and a
variety of other normal changes also generate a change
in the amplitude of one or more frequency components
within the vibration signature. In addition, it is important
to note that a lower amplitude does not necessarily indi-
cate an improvement in the mechanical condition of the
machine-train. Therefore, it is important that the source
of all amplitude variations be clearly understood.

43.4 Vibration measuring equipment
Vibration data are obtained by the following procedure:
(1) mounting a transducer onto the machinery at various
locations, typically machine housing and bearing caps,
and (2) using a portable data-gathering device, referred
to as a vibration monitor or analyzer, to connect to the
transducer to obtain vibration readings.

Transducers

The transducer most commonly used to obtain vibration
measurements is an accelerometer. It incorporates piezo-
electric (i.e., pressure-sensitive) ﬁlms to convert mechan-
ical energy into electrical signals. The device generally
incorporates a weight suspended between two piezoelec-
tric ﬁlms. The weight moves in response to vibration and
squeezes the piezoelectric ﬁlms, which sends an electrical
signal each time the weight squeezes it.

Portable vibration analyzers

The portable vibration analyzer incorporates a micropro-
cessor that allows it to mathematically convert the electri-
cal signal to acceleration per unit time, perform a FFT, and
store the data. It can be programmed to generate alarms
and displays of the data. The data stored by the analyzer
can be downloaded to a personal or a more powerful com-
puter to perform more sophisticated analyses, data storage
and retrieval, and report generation.

43.5 Vibration sources
All machinery with moving parts generates mechanical
forces during normal operation. As the mechanical con-
dition of the machine changes due to wear, changes in

the operating environment, load variations, etc., so do
these forces. Understanding machinery dynamics and how
forces create unique vibration frequency components is
the key to understanding vibration sources.

Vibration does not just happen. There is a physical
cause, referred to as a forcing function, and each compo-
nent of a vibration signature has its own forcing function.
The components that make up a signature are reﬂected as
discrete peaks in the FFT or frequency-domain plot.

The vibration proﬁle that results from motion is the
result of a force imbalance. By deﬁnition, balance occurs
in moving systems when all forces generated by, and act-
ing on, the machine are in a state of equilibrium. In real-
world applications, however, there is always some level of
imbalance and all machines vibrate to some extent. This
section discusses the more common sources of vibration
for rotating machinery, as well as for machinery under-
going reciprocating and/or linear motion.

43.5.1 Rotating machinery

rotors.

A rotating machine has one or more machine elements
that turn with a shaft, such as rolling-element bearings,
impellers, and other
In a perfectly balanced
machine, all rotors turn true on their centerline and all
forces are equal. However, in industrial machinery, it is
common for an imbalance of these forces to occur. In
addition to imbalance generated by a rotating element,
vibration may be caused by instability in the media
ﬂowing through the rotating machine.

Rotor imbalance

Mechanical imbalance is not the only form of imbalance
that affects rotating elements. It is the condition where more
weight is on one side of a centerline of a rotor than on the
other. In many cases, rotor imbalance is the result of an
imbalance between centripetal forces generated by the rota-
tion. The source of rotor vibration also can be an imbalance
between the lift generated by the rotor and gravity.

Machines with rotating elements are designed to gen-
erate vertical lift of the rotating element when operating
within normal parameters. This vertical lift must over-
come gravity to properly center the rotating element in its
bearing-support structure. However, because gravity and
atmospheric pressure vary with altitude and barometric
pressure, actual lift may not compensate for the downward
forces of gravity in certain environments. When the devi-
ation of actual lift from designed lift is signiﬁcant, a rotor
may not rotate on its true centerline. This offset rotation
creates an imbalance and a measurable level of vibration.

Flow instability and operating conditions

subject

Rotating machines
to imbalance caused by
turbulent or unbalanced media ﬂow include pumps, fans,
and compressors. A good machine design for these units
incorporates the dynamic forces of the gas or liquid
in stabilizing the rotating element. The combination
of these forces and the stiffness of the rotor-support
system (i.e., bearing and bearing pedestals) determine
the vibration level. Rotor-support stiffness is important

because unbalanced forces resulting from ﬂow instability
can deﬂect rotating elements from their true centerline,
and the stiffness resists the deﬂection.

Deviations from a machine’s designed operating enve-
lope can affect ﬂow stability, which directly affects the
vibration proﬁle. For example, the vibration level of a
centrifugal compressor is typically low when operating at
100 per cent load with laminar airﬂow through the com-
pressor. However, a radical change in vibration level can
result from decreased load. Vibration resulting from oper-
ation at 50 per cent load may increase by as much as 400
per cent with no change in the mechanical condition of
the compressor. In addition, a radical change in vibration
level can result from turbulent ﬂow caused by restrictions
in either the inlet or discharge piping.

Turbulent or unbalanced media ﬂow (i.e., aerodynamic
or hydraulic instability) does not have the same quadratic
impacts on the vibration proﬁle as that of load change, but
it increases the overall vibration energy. This generates a
unique proﬁle that can be used to quantify the level of
instability present in the machine. The proﬁle generated
by unbalanced ﬂow is visible at the vane or blade-pass
frequency of the rotating element. In addition, the proﬁle
shows a marked increase in the random noise generated
by the ﬂow of gas or liquid through the machine.

Mechanical motion and forces

A clear understanding of the mechanical movement of
machines and their components is an essential part of
vibration analysis. This understanding, coupled with the
forces applied by the process, are the foundation for diag-
nostic accuracy.

Almost every unique frequency contained in the vibra-
tion signature of a machine-train can be directly attributed
to a corresponding mechanical motion within the machine.
For example, the constant endplay or axial movement of
the rotating element in a motor-generator set generates
elevated amplitude at the fundamental (1ð), second har-
monic (2ð), and third harmonic (3ð) of the shaft’s true
running speed. In addition, this movement increases the
axial amplitude of the fundamental (1ð) frequency.

Forces resulting from air or liquid movement through
a machine also generate unique frequency components
within the machine’s signature. In relatively stable or
laminar-ﬂow applications,
the movement of product
through the machine slightly increases the amplitude
at
the vane or blade-pass frequency. In more severe,
turbulent-ﬂow applications, the ﬂow of product generates
a broadband, white noise proﬁle that can be directly
attributed to the movement of product through the machine.
Other forces, such as the side-load created by V-
belt drives, also generate unique frequencies or modify
existing component frequencies. For example, excessive
belt tension increases the side-load on the machine-train’s
shafts. This increase in side-load changes the load zone
in the machine’s bearings. The result of this change is
a marked increase in the amplitude at
the outer-race
rotational frequency of the bearings.

Applied force or induced loads can also displace the
the machine’s

shafts in a machine-train. As a result

Vibration sources 43/729

shaft will rotate off-center which dramatically increases
the amplitude at the fundamental (1ð) frequency of the
machine.

43.5.2 Reciprocating and/or linear-motion
machinery

This section describes machinery that exhibits reciprocat-
ing and/or linear motion(s) and discusses typical vibration
behavior for these types of machines.

Machine descriptions

Reciprocating linear-motion machines incorporate com-
ponents that move linearly in a reciprocating fashion
to perform work. Such reciprocating machines are bi-
directional in that the linear movement reverses, returning
to the initial position with each completed cycle of oper-
ation. Non-reciprocating linear-motion machines incorpo-
rate components that also generate work in a straight line,
but do not reverse direction within one complete cycle of
operation.

Few machines involve linear reciprocating motion exclu-
sively. Most incorporate a combination of rotating and
reciprocating linear motions to produce work. One example
of such a machine is a reciprocating compressor. This unit
contains a rotating crankshaft that transmits power to one
or more reciprocating pistons, which move linearly in per-
forming the work required to compress the media.

Sources of vibration

Like rotating machinery, the vibration proﬁle generated by
reciprocating and/or linear motion machines is the result
of mechanical movement and forces generated by the
components that are part of the machine. Vibration pro-
ﬁles generated by most reciprocating and/or linear motion
machines reﬂect a combination of rotating and/or linear
motion forces.

However, the intervals or frequencies generated by these
machines are not always associated with one complete rev-
olution of a shaft. In a two-cycle reciprocating engine, the
pistons complete one cycle each time the crankshaft com-
pletes one 360° revolution. In a four-cycle engine, the crank
must complete two complete revolutions, or 720°, in order
to complete a cycle of all pistons.

Because of the unique motion of reciprocating and linear
motion machines, the level of unbalanced forces generated
by these machines is substantially higher than those gener-
ated by rotating machines. As an example, a reciprocating
compressor drives each of its pistons from bottom-center
to top-center and returns to bottom-center in each complete
operation of the cylinder. The mechanical forces generated
by the reversal of direction at both top-center and bottom-
center result in a sharp increase in the vibration energy of
the machine. An instantaneous spike in the vibration proﬁle
repeats each time the piston reverses direction.

Linear-motion machines generate vibration proﬁles
similar to those of reciprocating machines. The major
difference is the impact that occurs at the change of
direction with reciprocating machines. Typically, linear-
motion-only machines do not reverse direction during

Figure 43.6 illustrates the periodic motion time-domain
curve of a steam turbine bearing pedestal. Displacement
is plotted on the vertical, or Y-axis, and time on the
horizontal, or X-axis. The curve shown in Figure 43.6
is the sum of all vibration components generated by
the rotating element and bearing-support structure of the
turbine.

Harmonic motion

The simplest kind of periodic motion or vibration, shown
in Figure 43.7,
is referred to as harmonic. Harmonic
motions repeat each time the rotating element or machine
component completes one complete cycle.

The relation between displacement and time for har-

monic motion may be expressed by:
X D X0 sin(cid:3)ωt(cid:6)

43/730 Vibration Fundamentals

each cycle of operation and, as a result, do not generate
the spike of energy associated with direction reversal.

43.6 Vibration theory
techniques allow us to quantify total
Mathematical
displacement caused by all vibrations,
the
displacement measurements to velocity or acceleration, to
separate this data into its components using FFT analysis,
and to determine the amplitudes and phases of these
functions. Such quantiﬁcation is necessary if we are to
isolate and correct abnormal vibrations in machinery.

to convert

Periodic motion

Vibration is a periodic motion, or one that repeats itself
after a certain interval of time called the period, T.

2P

P

x

X0

Figure 43.6 Typical periodic motion

2P

t

P

T

Vibration theory 43/731

X

b

d

f

wt

Figure 43.7 Simple harmonic motion

The maximum value of the displacement is Xo, which
is also called the amplitude. The period, T, is usually
measured in seconds; its reciprocal is the frequency of
the vibration, f, measured in cycles per second (cps) or
Hertz (Hz).
f D 1
T

Another measure of frequency is the circular frequency,
ω, measured in radians per second. From Figure 43.8, it
is clear that a full cycle of vibration (ωt) occurs after 360°
or 2(cid:8) radians (i.e., one full revolution). At this point, the
function begins a new cycle.
ω D 2(cid:8)f

For rotating machinery, the frequency is often expressed

in vibrations per minute (vpm) or
VPM D ω
(cid:8)

By deﬁnition, velocity is the ﬁrst derivative of displace-
ment with respect to time. For a harmonic motion, the
displacement equation is:
X D Xo sin(cid:3)ωt(cid:6)
The ﬁrst derivative of this equation gives us the equation
for velocity:
v D dX
dt

D X D ωXo cos(cid:3)ωt(cid:6)

Consider two frequencies given by the expression X1 D
a sin(cid:3)ωt(cid:6) and X2 D b sin(cid:3)ωt C (cid:14)(cid:6), which are shown in
Figure 43.9 plotted against ωt as the X-axis. The quantity,
(cid:14), in the equation for X2 is known as the phase angle
or phase difference between the two vibrations. Because
of (cid:14), the two vibrations do not attain their maximum
ω seconds behind
displacements at the same time. One is (cid:14)
the other. Note that these two motions have the same
frequency, ω. A phase angle has meaning only for two
motions of the same frequency.

Non-harmonic motion

In most machinery,
there are numerous sources of
vibrations; therefore, most time-domain vibration proﬁles
are non-harmonic (represented by the solid line in
Figure 43.10). While all harmonic motions are periodic,
not every periodic motion is harmonic. In Figure 43.10,
the dashed lines represent harmonic motions.

Figure 43.10 is the superposition of two sine waves
having different frequencies. These curves are represented
by the following equations:
X1 D a sin(cid:3)ω1t(cid:6)
X2 D b sin(cid:3)ω2t(cid:6)

The total vibration represented by the solid line is the
sum of the dashed lines. The following equation repre-
sents the total vibration:
X D X1 C X2 D a sin(cid:3)ω1t(cid:6) C b sin(cid:3)ω2t(cid:6)

This relationship tells us that the velocity is also har-
monic if the displacement is harmonic and has a maximum
value or amplitude of (cid:3)ωXo.

By deﬁnition, acceleration is the second derivative of
displacement (i.e., the ﬁrst derivative of velocity) with
respect to time:
a D d2X

dt2 D X D (cid:3)ω2Xo sin(cid:3)ωt(cid:6)

This function is also harmonic with amplitude of ω2Xo.

Any periodic function can be represented as a series of

sine functions having frequencies of ω, 2ω, 3ω, etc.:
f(cid:3)t(cid:6) D A0 C A1 sin(cid:3)ωt C (cid:14)1(cid:6) C A2 sin(cid:3)2ωt C (cid:14)2(cid:6)

C A3 sin(cid:3)3ωt C (cid:14)3(cid:6) C ÐÐÐ

The above equation is known as a Fourier series, which
is a function of time or f(cid:3)t(cid:6). The amplitudes (Al, A2, etc.)
of the various discrete vibrations and their phase angles
(cid:3)(cid:14)1, (cid:14)2, (cid:14)3 . . .(cid:6) can be determined mathematically when

43/732 Vibration Fundamentals

b

X

a

Figure 43.8 Illustration of vibration cycles

X

b

d

f

wt

wt

Figure 43.9 Two harmonic motions with a phase angle between them

the value of function f(cid:3)t(cid:6) is known. Note that these data
are obtained using a transducer and a portable vibration
analyzer.

The terms, 2ω, 3ω, etc., are referred to as the harmonics
of the primary frequency, ω. In most vibration signatures,

the primary frequency component is one of the running
speeds of the machine-train (1ð or 1ω). In addition, a
signature may be expected to have one or more harmonics,
for example, at two times (2ð), three times (3ð), and
other multiples of the primary running speed.

Measurable parameters 43/733

wt

commonly expressed in cycles per second (cps) or Hertz
(Hz).

Note that for simplicity, a machine element’s vibra-
tion frequency is commonly expressed as a multiple of
the shaft’s rotation speed. In the above example, the fre-
quency would be indicated to be 4ð, or four times the
running speed. In addition, because some malfunctions
tend to occur at speciﬁc frequencies, it helps to segregate
certain classes of malfunctions from others.

Note, however, that the frequency/malfunction relation-
ship is not mutually exclusive and a speciﬁc mechanical
problem cannot deﬁnitely be attributed to a unique fre-
quency. While frequency is a very important piece of
information with regard to isolating machinery malfunc-
tions, it is only one part of the total picture. It is necessary
to evaluate all data before arriving at a conclusion.

Amplitude

Amplitude refers to the maximum value of a motion or
vibration. This value can be represented in terms of dis-
placement (mils), velocity (inches per second), or accel-
eration (inches per second squared), each of which is

b

X

a

Figure 43.10 Non-harmonic periodic motion

43.7 Measurable parameters
As shown previously, vibrations can be displayed graph-
ically as plots which are referred to as vibration pro-
ﬁles or signatures. These plots are based on measurable
parameters (i.e., frequency and amplitude). Note that the
terms ‘proﬁle’ and ‘signature’ are sometimes used inter-
changeably by industry. In this chapter, however, ‘pro-
ﬁle’ is used to refer either to time-domain (also may
be called time trace or waveform) or frequency-domain
plots. The term ‘signature’ refers to a frequency-domain
plot.

Frequency

Frequency is deﬁned as the number of repetitions of a
speciﬁc forcing function or vibration component over a
speciﬁc unit of time. Take for example a four-spoke wheel
with an accelerometer attached. Every time the shaft com-
pletes one rotation, each of the four spokes passes the
accelerometer once, which is referred to as four cycles per
revolution. Therefore, if the shaft rotates at 100 rpm, the
frequency of the spokes passing the accelerometer is 400
cycles per minute (cpm). In addition to cpm, frequency is

43/734 Vibration Fundamentals

discussed in more detail in Maximum vibration measure-
ment, below.

Amplitude can be measured as the sum of all

the
forces causing vibrations within a piece of machinery
(broadband), as discrete measurements for the individual
forces (component), or for individual user-selected forces
(narrowband). Broadband, component, and narrowband
are discussed in Section 43.8 Measurement classiﬁcations.
Also discussed in this section are the common curve
elements: peak-to-peak, zero-to-peak, and root-mean-
square.

Maximum vibration measurement

The maximum value of a vibration, or amplitude,
is
expressed as displacement, velocity, or acceleration. Most
of the microprocessor-based, frequency-domain vibration
systems will convert the acquired data to the desired form.
Since industrial vibration-severity standards are typically
expressed in one of these terms, it is necessary to have a
clear understanding of their relationship.

Displacement

Displacement is the actual change in distance or position
of an object relative to a reference point and is usually
expressed in units of mils, 0.001 inch. For example,
displacement is the actual radial or axial movement of
the shaft in relation to the normal centerline usually using
the machine housing as the stationary reference. Vibration
data, such as shaft displacement measurements acquired
using a proximity probe or displacement
transducer,
should always be expressed in terms of mils peak-to-peak.

Velocity

Velocity is deﬁned as the time rate of change of displace-
ment (i.e., the ﬁrst derivative, dX/dt or X) and is usually
expressed as inches per second (ips). In simple terms,
velocity is a description of how fast a vibration compo-
nent is moving rather than how far, which is described by
displacement.

Used in conjunction with zero-to-peak (PK) terms,
velocity is the best representation of the true energy gen-
erated by a machine when relative or bearing cap-data
are used. (Note: Most vibration monitoring programs
rely on data acquired from machine housing or bearing
caps.) In most cases, peak velocity values are used with
vibration data between 0 and 1000 Hz. These data are
acquired with microprocessor-based, frequency-domain
systems.

expressed in terms of g-RMS or g-PK. These are the best
measures of the force generated by a machine, a group of
components, or one of its components.

43.8 Measurement classiﬁcations
There are at least three classiﬁcations of amplitude mea-
surements used in vibration analysis: broadband, narrow-
band, and component.

Broadband or overall

The total energy of all vibration components gener-
ated by a machine is reﬂected by broadband, or over-
all, amplitude measurements. The normal convention for
expressing the frequency range of broadband energy is
a ﬁltered range between 10 to 10,000 Hz, or 600 to
600,000 cpm. Because most vibration-severity charts are
based on this ﬁltered broadband, caution should be exer-
cised to ensure that collected data are consistent with
the charts.

Narrowband

Narrowband amplitude measurements refer to those that
result from monitoring the energy generated by a user-
selected group of vibration frequencies. Generally, this
amplitude represents the energy generated by a ﬁltered
band of vibration components, failure mode, or forcing
functions. For example, the total energy generated by ﬂow
instability can be captured using a ﬁltered narrowband
around the vane or blade-passing frequency.

Component

The energy generated by a unique machine component,
motion, or other forcing function can yield its own ampli-
tude measurement. For example, the energy generated by
the rotational speed of a shaft, gear set meshing, or similar
machine components generate discrete vibration compo-
nents and their amplitude can be measured.

43.9 Common elements of curves
All vibration amplitude curves, which can represent
displacement, velocity, or acceleration, have common
elements that can be used to describe the function.
These common elements are peak-to-peak, zero-to-peak,
and root-mean-square, each of which are illustrated in
Figure 43.11.

Acceleration

Peak-to-peak

Acceleration is deﬁned as the time rate of change of
velocity (i.e., second derivative of displacement, d2X/dt2
or X) and is expressed in units of inches per second
squared (in/sec2). Vibration frequencies above 1000 Hz
should always be expressed as acceleration.

Acceleration is commonly expressed in terms of
the gravitational constant, g, which is 32.17 ft/sec2. In
vibration analysis applications, acceleration is typically

As illustrated in Figure 43.11, the peak-to-peak ampli-
tude (2A, where A is the zero-to-peak) reﬂects the total
amplitude generated by a machine, a group of compo-
nents, or one of its components. This depends on whether
the data gathered is broadband, narrowband, or compo-
nent. The unit of measurement is useful when the analyst
needs to know the total displacement or maximum energy
produced by the machine’s vibration proﬁle.

Machine dynamics 43/735

A = Pk

2A = Pk/Pk

x

wt

0.5A = avg.

0.707A = RMS

x = A sin wt
.
x = Aw cos wt
..
x = –Aw2 sin wt

Displ.

Velocity

Accel.

Figure 43.11 Relationship of vibration amplitude

Technically, peak-to-peak values should be used in
conjunction with actual shaft-displacement data, which
are measured with a proximity or displacement transducer.
Peak-to-peak terms should not be used for vibration data
acquired using either relative vibration data from bearing
caps or when using a velocity or acceleration transducer.
The only exception is when vibration levels must be
compared to vibration-severity charts based on peak-to-
peak values.

Zero-to-peak

Zero-to-peak (A), or simply peak, values are equal to
one half of the peak-to-peak value. In general, relative
vibration data acquired using a velocity transducer are
expressed in terms of peak.

Root-mean-square

43.10 Machine dynamics
The primary reasons for vibration-proﬁle variations are
the dynamics of the machine, which are affected by mass,
stiffness, damping, and degrees of freedom. However,
care must be taken as the vibration proﬁle and energy
levels generated by a machine may vary depending on
the location and orientation of the measurement.

Mass, stiffness, and damping

The three primary factors that determine the normal
vibration energy levels and the resulting vibration proﬁles
are mass, stiffness, and damping. Every machine-train is
designed with a dynamic support system that is based
on the following: the mass of the dynamic component(s),
speciﬁc support system stiffness, and a speciﬁc amount of
damping.

Root-mean-square (RMS) is the statistical average value
of the amplitude generated by a machine, one of its
components, or a group of components. Referring to
Figure 43.11, RMS is equal
the zero-
to-peak value, A. Normally, RMS data are used in
conjunction with relative vibration data acquired using
an accelerometer or expressed in terms of acceleration.

to 0.707 of

Mass Mass is the property that describes how much
material is present. Dynamically, the property describes
how an unrestricted body resists the application of an
external force. Simply stated, the greater the mass the
greater the force required accelerating it. Mass is obtained
by dividing the weight of a body (e.g., rotor assembly) by
the local acceleration of gravity, g.

43/736 Vibration Fundamentals

The English system of units is complicated compared
to the metric system. In the English system, the units of
mass are pounds-mass (lbm) and the units of weight are
pounds-force (lbf). By deﬁnition, a weight (i.e., force) of
one lbf equals the force produced by one lbm under the
acceleration of gravity. Therefore, the constant, gc, which
has the same numerical value as g (32.17) and units of
lbm-ft/lbf-sec2, is used in the deﬁnition of weight:
Weight D Mass ð g

gc

Therefore,
Mass D Weight ð gc

g

Therefore,
Mass D Weight ð gc

g

ð lbm ð ft
lbf ð sec2 D lbm

D lbf
ft
sec2

Stiffness is a spring-like property that describes
Stiffness
the level of resisting force that results when a body under-
goes a change in length. Units of stiffness are often given
as pounds per inch (lbf/in). Machine-trains have more than
one stiffness property that must be considered in vibration
analysis: shaft stiffness, vertical stiffness, and horizontal
stiffness.

Shaft stiffness Most machine-trains used in industry
have ﬂexible shafts and relatively long spans between
bearing-support points. As a result,
these shafts tend
to ﬂex in normal operation. Three factors determine
the amount of ﬂex and mode shape that these shafts
have in normal operation: shaft diameter, shaft material
properties, and span length. A small-diameter shaft with a
long span will obviously ﬂex more than one with a larger
diameter or shorter span.

The rotor-bearing support structure of
Vertical stiffness
a machine typically has more stiffness in the vertical
plane than in the horizontal plane. Generally, the structural
rigidity of a bearing-support structure is much greater in
the vertical plane. The full weight of and the dynamic
forces generated by the rotating element are fully sup-
ported by a pedestal cross-section that provides maximum
stiffness.

In typical rotating machinery, the vibration proﬁle gen-
erated by a normal machine contains lower amplitudes in
the vertical plane. In most cases, this lower proﬁle can
be directly attributed to the difference in stiffness of the
vertical plane when compared to the horizontal plane.

Horizontal stiffness Most bearing pedestals have more
freedom in the horizontal direction than in the vertical.
In most applications, the vertical height of the pedestal
is much greater than the horizontal cross-section. As a
result, the entire pedestal can ﬂex in the horizontal plane
as the machine rotates.

This lower stiffness generally results in higher vibration
levels in the horizontal plane. This is especially true when

the machine is subjected to abnormal modes of operation
or when the machine is unbalanced or misaligned.

Damping is a means of reducing velocity
Damping
through resistance to motion, in particular by forcing an
object through a liquid or gas, or along another body.
Units of damping are often given as pounds per inch
per second (lbf/in/sec, which is also expressed as lbf-
sec/in).

The boundary conditions established by the machine
design determine the freedom of movement permitted
within the machine-train. A basic understanding of this
concept is essential for vibration analysis. Free vibration
refers to the vibration of a damped (as well as undamped)
system of masses with motion entirely inﬂuenced by their
potential energy. Forced vibration occurs when motion is
sustained or driven by an applied periodic force in either
damped or undamped systems. The following sections
discuss free and forced vibration for both damped and
undamped systems.

Free vibration – undamped

To understand the interactions of mass and stiffness, con-
sider the case of undamped free vibration of a single
mass that only moves vertically, which is illustrated in
Figure 43.12. In this ﬁgure, the mass, M, is supported
by a spring that has a stiffness, K (also referred to as
the spring constant), which is deﬁned as the number of
pounds tension necessary to extend the spring one inch.
The force created by the static deﬂection, Xi, of the
spring supports the weight, W, of the mass. Also included
in Figure 43.12 is the free-body diagram that illustrates
the two forces acting on the mass. These forces are the
weight (also referred to as the inertia force) and an equal,
yet opposite force that results from the spring (referred to
as the spring force, Fs).

The relationship between the weight of mass M and the
static deﬂection of the spring can be calculated using the
equation: W D KXi. If the spring is displaced downward
some distance, Xo, from Xi and released, it will oscil-
late up and down. The force from the spring, Fs, can
be written as follows, where a is the acceleration of the
mass:
FS D (cid:3)KX D Ma
gc

It is common practice to replace acceleration, a, with
d2X/dt2, the second derivative of the displacement, X, of
the mass with respect to time, t. Making this substitution,
the equation that deﬁnes the motion of the mass can be
expressed as:

M
gc

d2X
dt2 D (cid:3)KX or

M
gc

d2X
dt2 C KX D 0

Motion of the mass is known to be periodic in time.
the displacement can be described by the

Therefore,
expression:
X D Xo cos(cid:3)ωt(cid:6)

Spring

Static deflection (Xi)

Mass

Machine dynamics 43/737

Fs

Mass

Weight (W)

Figure 43.12 Undamped spring-mass system

resonant frequency)

Where:
X D Displacement at time t
Xo D Initial displacement of the mass
ω D Frequency of the oscillation (natural or
t D Time
If this equation is differentiated and the result inserted
into the equation that deﬁnes motion, the natural fre-
quency of the mass can be calculated. The ﬁrst derivative
of the equation for motion given above yields the equation
for velocity. The second derivative of the equation yields
acceleration.

Velocity D dX
dt
Acceleration D d2X

D X D (cid:3)ωXo sin(cid:3)ωt(cid:6)

dt2 D X D (cid:3)ω2Xo cos(cid:3)ωt(cid:6)

Inserting the above expression for acceleration, or

d2X/dt2, into the equation for Fs yields the following:

d2X
dt2 C KX D 0
ω2Xo cos(cid:3)ωt(cid:6) C KX D 0

M
gc
(cid:3) M
gc
ω2X C KX D (cid:3) M
(cid:3) M
gc
gc
(cid:1)

ω D

Kgc
M

ω2 C K D 0

Solving this expression for ω yields the equation:

Where:
ω D Natural frequency of mass
K D Spring constant
M D Mass

Note that, theoretically, undamped free vibration per-
sists forever. However, this never occurs in nature and all
free vibrations die down after time due to damping, which
is discussed in the next section.

Free vibration – damped

A slight increase in system complexity results when a
damping element
is added to the spring-mass system
shown in Figure 43.13. This type of damping is referred
to as viscous damping. Dynamically, this system is the
same as the undamped system illustrated in Figure 43.12,
except for the damper, which usually is an oil or air
dashpot mechanism. A damper is used to continuously
decrease the velocity and the resulting energy of a mass
undergoing oscillatory motion.

The system is still comprised of the inertia force due
to the mass and the spring force, but a new force is intro-
duced. This force is referred to as the damping force and
is proportional to the damping constant, or the coefﬁcient
of viscous damping, c. The damping force is also propor-
tional to the velocity of the body and, as it is applied, it
opposes the motion at each instant.

In Figure 43.13, the non-elongated length of the spring
is Lo and the elongation due to the weight of the mass is
expressed by h. Therefore, the weight of the mass is Kh.
Figure 43.13(a) shows the mass in its position of stable
equilibrium. Part (b) shows the mass displaced downward
a distance X from the equilibrium position. Note that X
is considered positive in the downward direction.

Figure 43.13(c) is a free-body diagram of the mass,
which has three forces acting on it. The weight (Mg/gc),
which is directed downward,
is always positive. The
damping force (cid:3)cdX/dt(cid:6), which is the damping constant
times velocity, acts opposite to the direction of the
velocity. The spring force, K(cid:3)X C h(cid:6), acts in the direction
opposite to the displacement. Using Newton’s equation
of motion, where F D Ma,
the sum of the forces

43/738 Vibration Fundamentals

L0

h

m

Equilibrium

position

(a)

(b)

L0+h

X= 0

X

+

m

dx
dt

X = 0

+

(c)

k (X + h)

X

c

dx
dt

mg
gc

Figure 43.13 Damped spring-mass system

acting on the mass can be represented by the following
equation, remembering that X is positive in the downward
direction:

Dividing by M/gc:
d2X
dt2 D (cid:3) cgc

dX
dt

M

(cid:3) KgcX
M

M
gc

M
gc

M
gc

d2X
dt2 D Mg
gc
d2X
dt2 D Kh (cid:3) c
d2X
dt2 D (cid:3)c

dX
dt

(cid:3) c

(cid:3) K(cid:3)X C h(cid:6)

dX
dt

(cid:3) KX (cid:3) Kh

dX
dt

(cid:3) KX

In order to look up the solution to the above equation in
a differential equations table (such as in CRC Handbook of
Chemistry and Physics) it is necessary to change the form
of this equation. This can be accomplished by deﬁning
the relationships, cgc/M D 2(cid:29) and Kgc/M D ω2, which
converts the equation to the following form:
d2X
dt2 D (cid:3)2(cid:29)

(cid:3) ω2X

dX
dt

Note that for undamped free vibration, the damping

constant, c, is zero and, therefore, (cid:29) is zero.
d2X
dt2 D (cid:3)ω2X
d2X
dt2 C ω2X D 0
The solution of this equation describes simple harmonic

motion, which is given below:
X D A cos(cid:3)ωt(cid:6) C B sin(cid:3)ωt(cid:6)
Substituting at t D 0, then X D Xo and dX/dt D 0, then
X D Xo cos(cid:3)ωt(cid:6)

dX
dt

(cid:3) ω2X

This shows that free vibration is periodic and is the
solution for X. For damped free vibration, however, the
damping constant, c, is not zero.
d2X
dt2 D (cid:3)2(cid:29)
or
d2X
dt2 C 2(cid:29)
or
D2 C 2(cid:29)D C ω2 D 0

C ω2X D 0

dX
dt

which has a solution of:
X D Aed1t C Bed2t

(cid:2)
(cid:2)

where:
d1 D (cid:3)(cid:29) C
d2 D (cid:3)(cid:29) (cid:3)

(cid:29)2 (cid:3) ω2
(cid:29)2 (cid:3) ω2

There are different conditions of damping: critical, over-
damping, and under-damping. Critical damping occurs
when (cid:29) D ω. Over-damping occurs when (cid:29) > ω. Under-
damping occurs when (cid:29) < ω.

The only condition that results in oscillatory motion
and, therefore, represents a mechanical vibration is under-
damping. The other two conditions result
in periodic
motions. When damping is less than critical ((cid:29) < ω), then
the following equation applies:
e(cid:3)(cid:29)t(cid:3)˛1 cos ˛1t C (cid:29) sin ˛1t(cid:6)
X D Xo
˛1
(cid:2)
where:
˛1 D

ω2 (cid:3) (cid:29)2

Forced vibration – undamped

The simple systems described in the preceding two
sections on free vibration are alike in that
they are
not forced to vibrate by any exciting force or motion.
Their major contribution to the discussion of vibration
fundamentals is that they illustrate how a system’s natural

Machine dynamics 43/739

or resonant frequency depends upon the mass, stiffness,
and damping characteristics.

The mass-stiffness-damping system also can be
disturbed by a periodic variation of external forces applied
to the mass at any frequency. The system shown in
Figure 43.12 is increased in complexity by the addition
of an external force, Fo, acting downward on the mass.
In undamped forced vibration, the only difference in the
equation for undamped free vibration is that instead of the
equation being equal to zero, it is equal to Fo sin(cid:3)ωt(cid:6):

M
gc

d2X
dt2 C KX D Fo sin(cid:3)ωt(cid:6)
Since the spring is not

initially displaced and is
‘driven’ by the function Fo sin(cid:3)ωt(cid:6), a particular solution,
X D Xo sin(cid:3)ωt(cid:6),
is logical. Substituting this solution
into the above equation and performing mathematical
manipulations yields the following equation for X:
X D C1 sin(cid:3)ωnt(cid:6) C C2 cos(cid:3)ωnt(cid:6) C

Xst

1 (cid:3) (cid:3)ω/ωn(cid:6)2 sin(cid:3)ωt(cid:6)

where:

X D Spring displacement at time, t
Xst D Static spring deﬂection under
constant load, Fo
ω D Forced frequency
ωn D Natural frequency of the oscillation
t D Time

C1 and C2 D Integration constants determined from

speciﬁc boundary conditions

the ﬁrst

In the above equation,

two terms are
the undamped free vibration, while the third term
is the undamped forced vibration. The solution, contain-
ing the sum of two sine waves of different frequencies, is
itself not a harmonic motion.

Forced vibration – damped

In a damped forced vibration system such as the one
shown in Figure 43.14, the motion of the mass M has two
parts: (1) the damped free vibration at the damped natural
frequency and (2) the steady-state harmonic motions at
the forcing frequency. The damped natural frequency
component decays quickly, but the steady state harmonic
associated with the external force remains as long as the
energy force is present.

With damped forced vibration, the only difference in
its equation and the equation for damped free vibration is
that it is equal to Fo sin(cid:3)ωt(cid:6) as shown below instead of
being equal to zero.

M
gc

dX
dt

C KX D Fo sin(cid:3)ωt(cid:6)

d2X
dt2 C c
With damped vibration, the damping constant, c, is not
equal to zero and the solution of the equation gets quite
complex assuming the function, X D Xo sin(cid:3)ωt (cid:3) (cid:14)). In
this equation, (cid:14) is the phase angle, or the number of
degrees that the external force, Fo sin(cid:3)ωt(cid:6), is ahead of the
displacement, Xo sin(cid:3)ωt (cid:3) (cid:14)). Using vector concepts, the

43/740 Vibration Fundamentals

Spring

–kX

–C

dX
dt

Mass

Mass

F0 sin (wt)

Figure 43.14 Damped forced vibration system

following equations apply, which can be solved because
there are two equations and two unknowns:

Vertical vector component: KXo (cid:3) M
gc
Horizontal vector component: cωXo (cid:3) Fo sin (cid:14) D 0

ω2Xo (cid:3) Fo cos (cid:14) D 0

Solving these two equations for the unknowns Xo and (cid:14):

Xo D

D

(cid:3)

(cid:4)

Fo
K (cid:3) M
gc

(cid:5)2

ω2

(cid:3)cω(cid:6)2 C

(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:9)

1 (cid:3) ω2
ω2
n

(cid:10)2

(cid:4)

Fo
K
C

(cid:5)2

ð ω
ωn

2

c
cc
ð ω
2
ωn
1 (cid:3) (cid:3)ω2/ω2
n(cid:6)

c
cc

tan (cid:14) D

D

cω
K (cid:3) M
gc

ω2

Where:

c D Damping constant
cc D Critical damping D 2
c/cc D Damping ratio
Fo D External force
Fo/K D Deﬂection of the spring under load, Fo (also

M
gc

ωn

called static deﬂection, Xst)

ω D Forced frequency
ωn D Natural frequency of the oscillation
ω/ωn D Frequency ratio

(cid:11)

(cid:11)

For damped forced vibrations, three different frequen-
cies have to be distinguished: the undamped natural fre-
quency, ωn D
Kgc/M; the damped natural frequency,
Kgc/M (cid:3) (cid:3)cgc/2M(cid:6)2; and the frequency of maxi-
q D
mum forced amplitude, sometimes referred to as the res-
onant frequency.

43.11 Degrees of freedom
In a mechanical system, the degrees of freedom indicate
how many numbers are required to express its geometrical
position at any instant. In machine-trains, the relationship
of mass, stiffness, and damping is not the same in all
directions. As a result, the rotating or dynamic elements
within the machine move more in one direction than in
another. A clear understanding of the degrees of freedom
is important in that it has a direct impact on the vibration
amplitudes generated by a machine or process system.

One degree of freedom

If the geometrical position of a mechanical system can
be deﬁned or expressed as a single value, the machine
is said to have one degree of freedom. For example, the
position of a piston moving in a cylinder can be speciﬁed
at any point in time by measuring the distance from the
cylinder end.

A single degree of freedom is not limited to simple
mechanical systems such as the cylinder. For example, a
12-cylinder gasoline engine with a rigid crank shaft and
a rigidly mounted cylinder block has only one degree of
freedom. The position of all its moving parts (i.e., pistons,
rods, valves, cam shafts, etc.) can be expressed by a single
value. In this instance, the value would be the angle of
the crankshaft.

However, when mounted on ﬂexible springs, this engine
has multiple degrees of freedom. In addition to the move-
ment of its internal parts in relationship to the crank, the
entire engine can now move in any direction. As a result,
the position of the engine and any of its internal parts
require more than one value to plot its actual position in
space.

The deﬁnitions and relationships of mass, stiffness, and
damping in the preceding section assumed a single-degree
of freedom. In other words, movement was limited to a
single plane. Therefore, the formulas are applicable for
all single degree of freedom mechanical systems.

The calculation for torque is a primary example of
a single degree of freedom in a mechanical system.
Figure 43.15 represents a disk with a moment of inertia,
I, that is attached to a shaft of torsional stiffness, k.

Torsional stiffness is deﬁned as the externally applied
torque, T, in inch-pounds needed to turn the disk one
radian (57.3°). Torque can be represented by the following
equations:

 Torque D Moment of inertia ð angular acceleration D I

d2(cid:14)
dt2

D I

..
(cid:14)

In this example,

there are three torques acting on
the disk: the spring torque, damping torque (due to the
viscosity of the air), and external torque. The spring torque
is minus (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:6)k(cid:14), where (cid:14) is measured in radians. The
damping torque is minus (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:6)c
.
(cid:14), where c is the damping
constant. In this example, c is the damping torque on the
disk caused by an angular speed of rotation of one radian
per second. The external torque is To sin(cid:3)ωt(cid:6).
I(cid:14) D  Torque D (cid:3)c(cid:14) (cid:3) k(cid:14) C To sin(cid:3)ωt(cid:6)
or
I(cid:14) C c(cid:14) C k(cid:14) D To sin(cid:3)ωt(cid:6)

k

I

φ

)

0  s i n   ( w t

T

Two degrees of freedom

Degrees of freedom 43/741

The theory for a one-degree-of-freedom system is use-
ful for determining resonant or natural frequencies that
occur in all machine-trains and process systems. How-
ever, few machines have only one degree of freedom.
Practically, most machines will have two or more degrees
of freedom. This section provides a brief overview of
the theories associated with two degrees of freedom. An
undamped two-degree-of-freedom system is illustrated in
Figure 43.16.

This diagram consists of two masses, M1 and M2, that
are suspended from springs, K1 and K2. The two masses
are tied together, or coupled, by spring, K3, so that they
are forced to act together. In this example, the movement
of the two masses is limited to the vertical plane and,
therefore, horizontal movement can be ignored. As in the
single-degree-of-freedom examples, the absolute position
of each mass is deﬁned by its vertical position above or
below the neutral, or reference, point. Since there are two
coupled masses, two locations (i.e., one for M1 and one
for M2) are required to locate the absolute position of the
system.

To calculate the free or natural modes of vibration, note
that there are two distinct forces acting on mass, M1: the
force of the main spring, K1, and that of the coupling
spring, K3. The main force acts upwards and is deﬁned
as (cid:3)K1X1. The shortening of the coupling spring is equal
to the difference in the vertical position of the two masses,
X1 (cid:3) X2. Therefore, the compressive force of the coupling
spring is K3(cid:3)X1 (cid:3) X2(cid:6). The compressed coupling spring
pushes the top mass, M1, upward so that the force is
negative.

As these are the only tangible forces acting on M1, the

equation of motion for the top mass can be written as:

X1 D (cid:3)K1X1 (cid:3) K3(cid:3)X1 (cid:3) X2(cid:6)

X1 C (cid:3)K1 C K3(cid:6)X1 (cid:3) K3X2 D 0

M1
gc
or
M1
gc

k1

M1

k3

k2

M2

X1

X2

Figure 43.15 Torsional one degree-of-freedom system

Figure 43.16 Undamped two-degree-of-freedom system with a
spring couple

43/742 Vibration Fundamentals

The equation of motion for the second mass, M2,
is derived in the same manner. To make it easier to
understand, turn the ﬁgure upside down and reverse the
direction of X1 and X2. The equation then becomes:
M2
gc
or
M2
gc

X2 C (cid:3)K2 C K3(cid:6)X2 (cid:3) K3X1 D 0

X2 D (cid:3)K2X2 C K3(cid:3)X1 (cid:3) X2(cid:6)

If we assume that the masses, M1 and M2, undergo
harmonic motions with the same frequency, ω, and with
different amplitudes, A1 and A2, their behavior can be
represented as:
X1 D A1 sin(cid:3)ωt(cid:6)
X2 D A2 sin(cid:3)ωt(cid:6)

By substituting these into the differential equations, two

equations for the amplitude ratio, A1/A2, can be found:
A1
A2

(cid:3)K3

D

ω2 (cid:3) K1 (cid:3) K3

M1
gc

and

D

A1
A2

M2
gc

ω2 (cid:3) K2 (cid:3) K3

(cid:3)K3

For a solution of the form we assumed to exist, these

two equations must be equal:

(cid:3)K3

ω2 (cid:3) K1 (cid:3) K3

ω2 (cid:3) K2 (cid:3) K3

M2
gc

D

(cid:3)K3
(cid:13)

M1
gc
or
ω4 (cid:3) ω2

(cid:12)

K1CK3
M1/gc

C K2CK3
M2/gc

C K1K2 C K2K3 C K1K3

D 0

M1M2

g2
c

This equation, known as the frequency equation, has
two solutions for ω2. When substituted in either of the
preceding equations, each one of these gives a deﬁnite
value for A1/A2. This means that there are two solutions
for this example, which are of the form A1 sin(cid:3)ωt(cid:6) and
A2 sin(cid:3)ωt(cid:6). As with many such problems, the ﬁnal answer
is the superposition of the two solutions with the ﬁnal
amplitudes and frequencies determined by the boundary
conditions.

Many degrees of freedom

When the number of degrees of freedom becomes greater
than two, no critical new parameters enter into the prob-
lem. The dynamics of all machines can be understood
by following the rules and guidelines established in the
one and two degree(s)-of-freedom equations. There are as
many natural frequencies and modes of motion as there
are degrees of freedom.

43.12 Vibration data types and formats
There are several options regarding the types of vibra-
tion data that can be gathered for machine trains and
systems and the formats in which it can be collected.
However, selection of type and format depends on the
speciﬁc application.

There are two major data-type classiﬁcations: time-
domain and frequency-domain. Each of these can be fur-
ther divided into steady state and dynamic data formats.
In turn, each of these two formats can be further divided
into single-channel and multi-channel.

43.12.1 Data types

Vibration proﬁles can be acquired and displayed in one of
two data types: (1) time-domain or (2) frequency-domain.

Time-domain

Most of the early vibration analysis was carried out using
analog equipment, which necessitated the use of time-
domain data. The reason for this is that it was difﬁcult
to convert time-domain data to frequency-domain data.
Therefore, frequency-domain capability was not available
until microprocessor-based analyzers
incorporated a
straightforward method (i.e., Fast Fourier Transform,
FFT) of transforming the time-domain spectrum into its
frequency components.

Actual time-domain vibration signatures are commonly
referred to as time traces or time plots (see Figure 43.17).
Theoretical vibration data are generally referred to as
waveforms (see Figure 43.18).

Time-domain data are presented with amplitude as the
vertical axis and elapsed time as the horizontal axis. Time-
domain proﬁles are the sum of all vibration components
(i.e., frequencies, impacts, and other transients) that are
present in the machine-train and its installed system. Time
traces include all frequency components, but the individ-
ual components are more difﬁcult to isolate than with
frequency-domain data.

The proﬁle shown in Figure 43.17 illustrates two dif-
ferent data acquisition points, one measured vertically
and one measured horizontally, on the same machine and
taken at the same time. Because they were obtained con-
currently, they can be compared to determine the operat-
ing dynamics of the machine.

In this example, the data set contains an impact that
occurred at 0.005 seconds. The impact is clearly visible
in both the vertical (top) and horizontal (bottom) data
set. From these time traces, it is apparent that the verti-
cal impact is stronger than the horizontal. In addition, the
impact repeated at 0.015 and 0.025 seconds. Two conclu-
sions can be derived from this example: (1) the impact
source is a vertical force and (2) it impacts the machine-
train at an interval of 0.010 seconds, or frequency of
1/0.010 seconds D 100 Hz.

The waveform in Figure 43.18 illustrates theoretically
the unique frequencies and transients that may be present
in a machine’s
illustrates
the complexity of such a waveform by overlaying

signature. Figure 43.18(a)

Vibration data types and formats 43/743

3.00

0.00

)
s

l
i

M

(
 
t
n
e
m
e
c
a
p
s
D

i

l

–3.00

3.00

0.00

–3.00

0

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

Time (sec)

Figure 43.17 Typical time-domain signature

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 43.18 Theoretical time-domain waveforms

(e)

43/744 Vibration Fundamentals

frequencies. The discrete waveforms

numerous
that
make up Figure 43.18(a) are displayed individually in
Figures 43.18(b) through 43.18(e). Note that two of the
frequencies (c and d) are identical, but have a different
phase angle ((cid:14)).

With time-domain data, the analyst must manually sep-
arate the individual frequencies and events that are con-
tained in the complex waveform. This effort is complicated
tremendously by the superposition of multiple frequen-
cies. Note that, rather than overlaying each of the discrete
frequencies as illustrated theoretically in Figure 43.18(a),
actual time-domain data represents the sum of these fre-
quencies as was illustrated in Figure 43.17.

In order to analyze this type of plot,

the analyst
must manually change the time scale to obtain discrete
frequency curve data. The time interval between the
recurrences of each frequency can then be measured. In
this way, it is possible to isolate each of the frequencies
that make up the time-domain vibration signature.

For routine monitoring of machine vibration, however,
this approach is not cost effective. The time required to man-
ually isolate each of the frequency components and transient
events contained in the waveform is prohibitive. However,
time-domain data has a deﬁnite use in a total plant predictive
maintenance or reliability improvement program.

Machine-trains or process systems that have speciﬁc
timing events (e.g., a pneumatic or hydraulic cylinder)

must be analyzed using time-domain data format. In addi-
tion, time-domain data must be used for linear and recip-
rocating motion machinery.

Frequency-domain

Most rotating machine-train failures result at or near a
frequency component associated with the running speed.
Therefore, the ability to display and analyze the vibra-
tion spectrum as components of frequency is extremely
important.

The frequency-domain format eliminates the manual
effort required to isolate the components that make up
a time trace. Frequency-domain techniques convert time-
domain data into discrete frequency components using
a mathematical process called Fast Fourier Transform
(FFT). Simply stated, FFT mathematically converts a
time-based trace into a series of discrete frequency
components (see Figure 43.19). In a frequency-domain
plot,
the X-axis is frequency and the Y-axis is the
amplitude of displacement, velocity, or acceleration.

With frequency-domain analysis, the average spectrum
for a machine-train signature can be obtained. Recurring
peaks can be normalized to present an accurate represen-
tation of the machine-train condition. Figure 43.20 illus-
trates a simpliﬁed relationship between the two methods
(i.e., time-domain and frequency-domain).

Display

of

spectrum
acquired

05–Jan–80

02:41

RPM = 1775
Load = 100%

Total

in/sec RMS

0.1490

Machine:

Coal boiler

ID fan

MPT–A02

Station – Frankfort plant

0.10

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

S
M
R
 
c
e
s
/

n

i
 

n

i
 

e
d
u
t
i
l

p
m
A

0

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

Frequency (Hz)

Figure 43.19 Typical frequency-domain signature

Vibration data types and formats 43/745

e
d
u
t
i
l

p
m
A

Time

c y

n

e

u

q

F r e

Figure 43.20 Relationship between time domain and frequency domain

The real advantage of frequency-domain analysis is the
ability to normalize each vibration component so that a
complex machine-train spectrum can be divided into dis-
crete components. This ability simpliﬁes isolation and
analysis of mechanical degradation within the machine-
train.

In addition, it should be noted that frequency-domain
analysis can be used to determine the phase relationships
for harmonic vibration components in a typical machine-
train spectrum. Frequency-domain normalizes any or all
running speeds, where time-domain analysis is limited to
true running speed.

Mathematical theory shows that any periodic function
of time, f(cid:3)t(cid:6), can be represented as a series of sine func-
tions having frequencies ω, 2ω, 3ω, 4ω, etc. Function f(cid:3)t(cid:6)
is represented by the following equation, which is referred
to as a Fourier series:
f(cid:3)t(cid:6) D Ao C A1 sin(cid:3)ωt C (cid:14)1(cid:6) C A2 sin(cid:3)2ωt C (cid:14)2(cid:6)

C A3 sin(cid:3)3ωt C (cid:14)3(cid:6) C ÐÐÐ

where:
Ax D Amplitude of each discrete sine wave
ω D Frequency
(cid:14)x D Phase angle of each discrete sine wave
Each of these sine functions represents a discrete com-
ponent of the vibration signature discussed previously.
The amplitudes of each discrete component and their
phase angles can be determined by integral calculus when
the function f(cid:3)t(cid:6) is known. Because the subject of inte-
gral calculus is beyond the scope of this chapter, the math
required to determine these integrals are not presented. A
vibration analyzer and its associated software perform this
determination using FFT.

43.12.2 Data formats

Both time-domain and frequency-domain vibration data
can be acquired and analyzed in two primary formats:
(1) steady-state or (2) dynamic. Each of these formats has
strengths and weaknesses that must be clearly understood
for proper use. Each of these formats can be obtained as
single- or multi-channel data.

Steady-state

Most vibration programs that use microprocessor-based
analyzers are limited to steady-state data. Steady-state
vibration data assumes the machine-train or process sys-
tem operates in a constant, or steady-state, condition. In
other words, the machine is free of dynamic variables such
as load, ﬂow, etc. This approach further assumes that all
vibration frequencies are repeatable and maintain a con-
stant relationship to the rotating speed of the machine’s
shaft.

Steady-state analysis techniques are based on acquir-
ing vibration data when the machine or process system is
operating at a ﬁxed speed and speciﬁc operating parame-
ters. For example, a variable-speed machine-train is eval-
uated at constant speed rather than over its speed range.
Steady-state analysis can be compared to a still pho-
tograph of the vibration proﬁle generated by a machine
or process system. Snapshots of the vibration proﬁle are
acquired by the vibration analyzer and stored for analysis.
While the snapshots can be used to evaluate the rela-
tive operating condition of simple machine-trains, they
do not provide a true picture of the dynamics of either
the machine or its vibration proﬁle.

Steady-state analysis totally ignores variations in the
vibration level or vibration generated by transient events

43/746 Vibration Fundamentals

such as impacts and changes in speed or process parame-
ters. Instruments used to obtain the proﬁles contain elec-
tronic circuitry which are speciﬁcally designed to elimi-
nate transient data.

In the normal acquisition process, the analyzer acquires
multiple blocks of data. As part of the process, the micro-
processor compares each block of data as it is acquired. If a
block contains a transient that is not included in subsequent
blocks, the block containing the event is discarded and
replaced with a transient-free block. As a result, steady-
state analysis does not detect random events that may have
a direct, negative effect on equipment reliability.

Dynamic

While steady-state data provide a snapshot of the machine,
dynamic or real-time data provide a motion picture. This
approach provides a better picture of the dynamics of both
the machine-train and its vibration proﬁle. Data acquired
using steady-state methods would suggest that vibration
proﬁles and amplitudes are constant. However, this is
not true. All dynamic forces, including running speed,
vary constantly in all machine-trains. When real-time data
acquisition methods are used, these variations are captured
and displayed for analysis.

Single-channel

it

Most microprocessor-based vibration monitoring pro-
grams rely on single-channel vibration data format.
Single-channel data acquisition and analysis techniques
are acceptable for routine monitoring of simple, rotat-
ing machinery. However,
that single-
channel analysis be augmented with multi-channel and
dynamic analysis. Total reliance on single-channel tech-
niques severely limits the accuracy of analysis and the
effectiveness of a predictive maintenance or reliability
improvement program.

is important

With the single-channel method, data are acquired in
series or one channel at a time. Normally, a series of data
points are established for each machine-train and data are
acquired from each point in a measurement route. While
this approach is more than adequate for routine moni-
toring of relatively simple machines, it is based on the
assumption that the machine’s dynamics and the resul-
tant vibration proﬁle are constant throughout the entire
data acquisition process. This approach hinders the abil-
ity to evaluate real-time relationships between measure-
ment points on the machine-train and variations in process
parameters such as speed, load, pressure, etc.

Multi-channel

Multi-channel data provide the best picture of the rela-
tionship between measurement points on a machine-train.
Data are acquired simultaneously from all measurement
points on the machine-train. With this type of data, the
analyst can establish the relationship between machine
dynamics and vibration proﬁle of the entire machine.

In most cases, a digital tape recorder is used to acquire
data from the machine. Since all measurement points are
recorded at the same time, the resultant data can be used

to compare the tri-axial vibration proﬁle of all measure-
ment points. This capability greatly enhances the analyst’s
ability to isolate abnormal machine dynamics and to deter-
mine the root cause of deviations.

43.12.3 Data acquisition

It is important for predictive maintenance programs using
vibration analysis to have accurate, repeatable data. In
addition to the type and quality of the transducer, three
key parameters affect data quality: the point of measure-
ment, orientation, and transducer-mounting techniques.

In a predictive and reliability maintenance program, it
is extremely important to keep good historical records of
key parameters. How measurement point locations and
orientation to the machine’s shaft were selected should
be kept as part of the database. It is important that every
measurement taken throughout the life of the maintenance
program be acquired at exactly the same point and ori-
entation. In addition, the compressive load, or downward
force, applied to the transducer should be the same for
each measurement.

Vibration detectors: transducers and cables

There are variety of monitoring, trending, and analysis
techniques that can and should be used as part of a total
plant vibration-monitoring program. Initially, such a pro-
gram depends on the use of historical trends to detect
incipient problems. As the program matures, however,
other techniques such as frequency-domain signature anal-
ysis, time-domain analysis, and operating dynamics anal-
ysis are typically added.

An analysis is only as good as the data; therefore, the
equipment used to collect the data is critical and deter-
mines the success or failure of a predictive maintenance
or reliability improvement program. The accuracy as well
as proper use and mounting determines whether valid data
are collected.

Three basic types of vibration transducers that can be
used for monitoring the mechanical condition of plant
machinery are: displacement probes, velocity transduc-
ers, and accelerometers. Each has limitations and speciﬁc
applications for which its use is appropriate.

Displacement probes

Displacement, or eddy-current, probes are designed to
measure the actual movement, or displacement, of a
machine’s shaft relative to the probe. Data are normally
recorded as peak-to-peak in mils, or thousandths of an
inch. This value represents the maximum deﬂection or
displacement from the true centerline of a machine’s
shaft. Such a device must be rigidly mounted to a
stationary structure to obtain accurate, repeatable data. See
Figure 43.21 for an illustration of a displacement probe
and signal conditioning system.

Permanently mounted displacement probes provide the
most accurate data on machines having a rotor weight that

Vibration data types and formats 43/747

Magnetic

field

Noncontact

pickup

Gap

Pickup

coil

Shaft

Oscillator

Detector

Amplifier

D.C.

Signal
sensor

Gap
meter

Figure 43.21 Displacement probe and signal conditioning system

Pickup

tip

Displacement
signal – to
analyzer or
monitor

is low relative to the casing and support structure. Tur-
bines, large compressors, and other types of plant equip-
ment should have displacement transducers permanently
mounted at key measurement locations.

The useful frequency range for displacement probes is
from 10 to 1000 Hz, or 600 to 60,000 rpm. Frequency
components above or below this range are distorted and
therefore unreliable for determining machine condition.

The major limitation with displacement or proximity
probes is cost. The typical cost for installing a single
probe, including a power supply, signal conditioning, etc.,
averages $1000. If each machine to be evaluated requires
ten measurements, the cost per machine is about $10,000.
Using displacement transducers for all plant machinery
dramatically increases the initial cost of the program.
Therefore, key locations are generally instrumented ﬁrst
and other measurement points are added later.

Velocity transducers

are

electro-mechanical

Velocity transducers
sensors
designed to monitor casing, or relative, vibration. Unlike
displacement probes, velocity transducers measure the
rate of displacement rather than the distance of movement.
Velocity is normally expressed in terms of inches per
second (ips) peak, which is perhaps the best method
of expressing the energy caused by machine vibration.
Figure 43.22 is a schematic diagram of a velocity
measurement device.

Like displacement probes, velocity transducers have an
effective frequency range of about 10 to 1000 Hz. They
should not be used to monitor frequencies above or below
this range.

1

6

5

2

4

3

Sensitive axis

Figure 43.22 Schematic diagram of velocity pickup (1) Pickup case
(2) Wire out (3) Damper (4) Mass (5) Spring (6) Magnet

The major limitation of velocity transducers is their sen-
sitivity to mechanical and thermal damage. Normal use
can cause a loss of calibration and, therefore, a strict re-
calibration program is required to prevent data errors. At
a minimum, velocity transducers should be re-calibrated
every six months. Even with periodic re-calibration, how-
ever, velocity transducers are prone to provide distorted
data due to loss of calibration.

Accelerometers

the best method of deter-
Acceleration is perhaps
mining the force resulting from machine vibration.
Accelerometers use piezoelectric crystals or ﬁlms to
convert mechanical energy into electrical signals and
Figure 43.23 is a schematic of such a device. Data
acquired with this
transducer are relative

type of

43/748 Vibration Fundamentals

4

2

3

i

s
x
a
 
e
v
i
t
i
s
n
e
S

Figure 43.23 Schematic diagram of accelerometer
(2) Piezoelectric crystals (3) Mass (4) Case

1

acceleration expressed in terms of the gravitational con-
stant, g, in inches/ second/second.

The effective range of general-purpose accelerometers
is from about 1 Hz to 10,000 Hz. Ultrasonic accelerome-
ters are available for frequencies up to 1 MHz. In general,
vibration data above 1000 Hz, or 60,000 cpm, should be
taken and analyzed in acceleration or g’s.

A beneﬁt of the use of accelerometers is that they do not
require a calibration program to ensure accuracy. How-
ever, they are susceptible to thermal damage. If sufﬁcient
heat radiates into the piezoelectric crystal, it can be dam-
aged or destroyed. However, thermal damage is rare since
data acquisition time is relatively short (i.e. less than thirty
seconds) using temporary mounting techniques.

(1) Base

Cables

Most portable vibration data collectors use a coiled cable
to connect to the transducer (see Figure 43.24). The cable,
much like a telephone cord, provides a relatively compact
length when relaxed, but will extend to reach distant

Movement

Movement

Figure 43.24 Types of coiled cables

measurement points. For general use, this type of cable is
acceptable, but it cannot be used for all applications.

The coiled cable is not acceptable for low-speed (i.e.,
less than 300 rpm) applications or where there is a strong
electromagnetic ﬁeld. Because of its natural tendency to
return to its relaxed length, the coiled cable generates a
low level frequency that corresponds to the oscillation rate
of the cable. In low-speed applications, this oscillation
frequency can mask real vibration that is generated by
the machine.

A strong electro-magnetic ﬁeld, such as that generated
by large mill motors, accelerates cable oscillation. In these
instances, the vibration generated by the cable will mask
real machine vibration.

In these and other applications where the coiled cable
distorts or interferes with the accuracy of acquired data, a
shielded coaxial cable should be used. While these non-
coiled cables can be more difﬁcult to use in conjunction
with a portable analyzer, they are essential for low-speed
and electromagnetic ﬁeld applications.

43.12.4 Data measurements

Most vibration monitoring programs
rely on data
acquired from the machine housing or bearing caps.
The only exceptions are
require
direct measurement of actual shaft displacement
to
obtain an accurate picture of the machine’s dynamics.
This section discusses the number and orientation of
measurement points required to proﬁle a machine’s
vibration characteristics.

applications

that

The fact

that both normal and abnormal machine
dynamics tend to generate unbalanced forces in one or
more directions increases the analyst’s ability to determine
the root-cause of deviations in the machine’s operating
condition. Because of this, measurements should be taken
in both radial and axial orientations.

Radial orientation

the analyst
Radially oriented measurements permit
relationship of vibration levels
to understand the
generated by machine components where the forces are
perpendicular to the shaft’s centerline.

For example, mechanical imbalance generates radial
forces in all directions, but misalignment generally results
in a radial force in a single direction that corresponds
with the misaligned direction. The ability to determine the
actual displacement direction of the machine’s shaft and
other components greatly improves diagnostic accuracy.
Two radial measurement points located 90° apart are
required at each bearing cap. The two points permit the
analyst to calculate the actual direction and relative ampli-
tude of any displacement that is present within the machine.
Figure 43.25 illustrates a simple vector analysis where
the vertical and horizontal radial readings acquired from
the outboard bearing cap indicate a relative vertical
vibration velocity of 0.5 inches per second peak (IPS-PK)
and a horizontal vibration velocity of 0.3 IPS-PK. Using
simple geometry,
the amplitude of vibration velocity
(0.583 IPS-PK) in the actual direction of deﬂection can
be calculated.

Vibration data types and formats 43/749

0.5 ips-pk

0.583 ips-pk

0.3 ips-pk

Figure 43.25 Resultant shaft velocity vector based on radial vibra-
tion measurements

Axial orientation

Axially oriented measurements are used to determine the
lateral movement of a machine’s shaft or dynamic mass.
These measurement points are oriented in-line or parallel
with the shaft or direction of movement.

At least one axial measurement is required for each
shaft or dynamic movement. In the case of shafts with a
combination of ﬂoat and ﬁxed bearings, readings should
be taken from the ﬁxed or stationary bearing to obtain the
best data.

43.11.5 Transducer mounting techniques
For accuracy of data, a direct mechanical link between
the transducer and the machine’s casing or bearing cap
is necessary. This makes the method used to mount the
transducer crucial to obtaining accurate data. Slight devi-
ations in this link will induce errors in the amplitude of
vibration measurement and may create false frequency
components that have nothing to do with the machine.

Permanent
The best method of ensuring that the point of measure-
ment, its orientation, and the compressive load are exactly
the same each time is to permanently or hard mount
the transducers, which is illustrated in Figure 43.26. This
guarantees accuracy and repeatability of acquired data.
However, it also increases the initial cost of the pro-
gram. The average cost of installing a general-purpose
accelerometer is about $300 per measurement point or
$3000 for a typical machine-train.

Quick disconnect

To eliminate the capital cost associated with permanently
mounting transducers, a well designed quick-disconnect
mounting can be used instead. With this technique, a
quick-disconnect stud having an average cost of less than
$5 is permanently mounted at each measurement point. A
mating sleeve built into the transducer is used to connect
with the stud. A well-designed quick-disconnect mounting
technique provides almost the same accuracy and repeata-
bility as the permanent mounting technique, but at a much
lower cost.

43/750 Vibration Fundamentals

Glue pad for accelerometer

Stud mounted accelerometer

Double stud mount

Figure 43.26 Permanent mounts provide best repeatability

Magnets

For general-purpose use below 1000 Hz, a transducer can
be attached to a machine by a magnetic base. Even though
the resonant frequency of the transducer/magnet assem-
bly may distort the data, this technique can be used with
some success. However, since the magnet can be placed
anywhere on the machine, it is difﬁcult to guarantee that
the exact location and orientation is maintained with each
measurement. Shows common magnetic mounts for trans-
ducers.

Hand held

Another method used by some plants to acquire data is
hand-held transducers. This approach is not recommended
if it
is possible to use any other method. Hand-held
transducers do not provide the accuracy and repeatability
required to gain maximum beneﬁt from a predictive
maintenance program. If this technique must be used,
extreme care should be exercised to ensure that the same
location, orientation, and compressive load are used for
every measurement. Illustrates a hand-held device.

43.13 Acquiring data
Three factors must be considered when acquiring vibra-
tion data: settling time, data veriﬁcation, and additional
data that may be required.

Settling time

All vibration transducers require a power source that
is used to convert mechanical motion or force to an
electronic signal. In microprocessor-based analyzers, this

power source is usually internal to the analyzer. When
displacement probes are used, an external power source
must be provided.

When the power source is turned on, there is a momen-
tary surge of power into the transducer. This surge distorts
the vibration proﬁle generated by the machine. Therefore,
the data-acquisition sequence must include a time delay
between powering up and acquiring data. The time delay
will vary based on the speciﬁc transducer used and type
of power source.

Some vibration analyzers include a user-selected time
delay that can automatically be downloaded as part of the
measurement route. If this feature is included, the delay
can be pre-programmed for the speciﬁc transducer that
will be used to acquire data. No further adjustment is
required until the transducer type is changed.

In addition to the momentary surge created by energiz-
ing the power source, the mechanical action of placing
the transducer on the machine creates a spike of energy
that may distort the vibration proﬁle. Therefore, the actual
data-acquisition sequence should include a ten- to twenty-
second delay to permit decay of the spike created by
mounting the transducer.

Data veriﬁcation

A number of equipment problems can result in bad or dis-
torted data. In addition to the surge and spike discussed
in the preceding section, damaged cables, transducers,
power supplies, and other equipment failures can cause
serious problems. Therefore, it is essential to verify all
data throughout the acquisition process.

Most of the microprocessor-based vibration analyzers
include features that facilitate veriﬁcation of acquired data.

For example, many include a ‘low-level alert’ that auto-
matically alerts the technician when acquired vibration
levels are below a pre-selected limit. If these limits are
properly set, the alert should be sufﬁcient to detect this
form of bad data.

Unfortunately, not all distortions of acquired data result
in a low-level alert. Damaged or defective cables or trans-
ducers can result in a high level of low-frequency vibra-
tion. As a result, the low-level alert will not detect this
form of bad data. However, the vibration signature will
clearly display the abnormal proﬁle that is associated with
these problems.

In most cases, a defective cable or transducer generates
a signature that contains a ski-slope proﬁle, which begins
at the lowest visible frequency and drops rapidly to the
noise ﬂoor of the signature. If this proﬁle is generated by
defective components, it will not contain any of the normal
rotational frequencies generated by the machine-train.

With the exception of mechanical rub, defective cables
and transducers are the only sources of this ski-slope pro-
ﬁle. When mechanical rub is present, the ski slope will
also contain the normal rotational frequencies generated
by the machine-train. In some cases, it is necessary to turn
off the auto-scale function in order to see the rotational
frequencies, but they will be evident. If no rotational com-
ponents are present, the cable and transducer should be
replaced.

Additional data

Data obtained from a vibration analyzer are not all that
are required to evaluate machine-train or system condi-
tion. Variables such as load have a direct effect on the
vibration proﬁle of machinery and must be considered.
Therefore, additional data should be acquired to augment
the vibration proﬁles.

Most microprocessor-based vibration analyzers are
capable of directly acquiring process variables and other
inputs. The software and ﬁrmware provided with these
systems generally support pre-programmed routes that
include almost any direct or manual data input. These
routes should include all data required to effectively
analyze the operating condition of each machine-train and
its process system.

43.14 Vibration analysis techniques
Techniques used in vibration analysis are: trending, both
broadband and narrowband; comparative analysis; and sig-
nature analysis.

43.14.1 Trending

Most vibration monitoring programs rely heavily on his-
torical vibration-level amplitude trends as their dominant
analysis tool. This is a valid approach if the vibration
data are normalized to remove the inﬂuence of variables,
such as load, on the recorded vibration energy levels.
Valid trend data provides an indication of change over
time within the monitored machine. As stated in preceding
sections, a change in vibration amplitude is an indication

Vibration analysis techniques 43/751

of a corresponding change in operating condition that can
be a useful diagnostic tool.

Broadband

Broadband analysis techniques have been used for moni-
toring the overall mechanical condition of machinery for
more than twenty years. The technique is based on the
overall vibration or energy from a frequency range of zero
to the user-selected maximum frequency, FMAX Broad-
band data are overall vibration measurements expressed
in units such as velocity (PK), acceleration (RMS), etc.
This type of data, however, does not provide any indi-
cation of the speciﬁc frequency components that make
up the machine’s vibration signature. As a result, speciﬁc
machine-train problems cannot be isolated and identiﬁed.
The only useful function of broadband analysis is long-
term trending of the gross overall condition of machinery.
Typically, sets of alert/alarm limits are established to mon-
itor the overall condition of the machine-trains in a pre-
dictive maintenance program. However, this approach has
limited value and, when used exclusively, severely limits
the ability to achieve the full beneﬁt of a comprehensive
program.

Narrowband

Like broadband analysis, narrowband analysis also moni-
tors the overall energy, but for a user-selected band of fre-
quency components. The ability to select speciﬁc groups
of frequencies, or narrowbands, increases the usefulness
of the data. Using this technique can drastically reduce
the manpower required to monitor machine-trains and
improve the accuracy of detecting incipient problems.

Unlike broadband data, narrowband data provide the
ability to directly monitor,
trend, and alarm speciﬁc
machine-train components automatically by the use of a
microprocessor for a window of frequencies unique to
speciﬁc machine components. For example, a narrowband
window can be established to directly monitor the energy
of a gear set that consists of the primary gear mesh
frequency and corresponding side bands.

43.14.2 Comparative analysis

Comparative analysis directly compares two or more data
sets in order to detect changes in the operating condition
of mechanical or process systems. This type of analysis
is limited to the direct comparison of the time-domain
or frequency-domain signature generated by a machine.
The method does not determine the actual dynamics of
the system. Typically, the following data are used for this
purpose: (1) baseline data, (2) known machine condition,
or (3) industrial reference data.

Note that great care must be taken when comparing
machinery vibration data to industry standards or baseline
data. The analyst must make sure the frequency and
amplitude are expressed in units and running speeds that
are consistent with the standard or baseline data. The
use of a microprocessor-based system with software that
automatically converts and displays the desired terms
offers a solution to this problem.

43/752 Vibration Fundamentals

Baseline data

Reference or baseline data sets should be acquired for
each machine-train or process system to be included in
a predictive maintenance program when the machine is
installed or after the ﬁrst scheduled maintenance once the
program is established. These data sets can be used as
a reference or comparison for all future measurements.
However, such data sets must be representative of the
normal operating condition of each machine-train. Three
criteria are critical to the proper use of baseline compar-
isons: reset after maintenance, proper identiﬁcation, and
process envelope.

Reset after maintenance

The baseline data set must be updated each time the machine
is repaired, rebuilt, or when major maintenance is per-
formed. Even when best practices are used, machinery
cannot be restored to as-new condition when major mainte-
nance is performed. Therefore, a new baseline or reference
data set must be established following these events.

Proper identiﬁcation

Each reference or baseline data set must be clearly and
completely identiﬁed. Most vibration-monitoring systems
permit the addition of a label or unique identiﬁer to any
user-selected data set. This capability should be used to
clearly identify each baseline data set.

In addition, the data-set label should include all infor-
mation that deﬁnes the data set. For example, any rework
or repairs made to the machine should be identiﬁed. If a
new baseline data set is selected after the replacement of
a rotating element, this information should be included in
the descriptive label.

Process envelope

Since variations in process variables, such as load, have
a direct effect on the vibration energy and the resulting
signature generated by a machine-train, the actual oper-
ating envelope for each baseline data set must also be
clearly identiﬁed. If this step is omitted, direct compar-
ison of other data to the baseline will be meaningless.
The label feature in most vibration monitoring systems
permits tagging the baseline data set with this additional
information.

Known machine condition

Most microprocessor-based analyzers permit direct com-
parison to two machine-trains or components. The form
of direct comparison, called cross-machine comparison,
can be used to identify some types of failure modes.

When using this type of comparative analysis, the analyst
compares the vibration energy and proﬁle from a sus-
pect machine to that of a machine with known operating
condition. For example, the suspect machine can be com-
pared to the baseline reference taken from a similar machine
within the plant. Or, a machine proﬁle with a known defect,

such as a defective gear, can be used as a reference to
determine if the suspect machine has a similar proﬁle and
therefore a similar problem.

Industrial reference data

One form of comparative analysis is direct comparison
of the acquired data to industrial standards or reference
values. The International Standards Organization (ISO)
established the vibration severity standards presented in
Table 43.2. These data are applicable for comparison with
ﬁltered narrowband data taken from machine-trains with
true running speeds between 600 and 12,000 rpm. The val-
ues from the table include all vibration energy between
a lower limit of 0.3ð true running speed and an upper
limit of 3.0ð. For example, an 1800-rpm machine would
have a ﬁltered narrowband between 540 (1800 ð 0.3) and
5400 rpm (1800 ð 3.0). A 3600-rpm machine would have
a ﬁltered narrowband between 1,080 (3600 ð 0.3) and
10,800 rpm (3600 ð 3.0).

43.14.3 Signature analysis

The phrase ‘full Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) signature’
is usually applied to the vibration spectrum that uniquely
identiﬁes a machine, component, system, or subsystem
at a speciﬁc operating condition and time. It provides
speciﬁc data on every frequency component within the
overall frequency range of a machine-train. The typical
frequency range can be from 0.1 to 20,000 Hz.

In microprocessor systems,

the FFT signature is
formed by breaking down the total frequency spectrum
into unique components, or peaks. Each line or peak
represents a speciﬁc frequency component that, in turn,

Table 43.2 Vibration severity standardsŁ (inches/second-peak)

Condition

Good operating condition
Alert limit
Alarm limit
Absolute fault limit

I

0.028
0.010
0.156
0.260

Machine classes

II

III

0.042
0.156
0.396
0.400

0.100
0.255
0.396
0.620

IV

0.156
0.396
0.622
1.000

ŁApplicable to a machine with running speed between 600 to
12,000 rpm.
Narrowband setting: 0.3ð to 3.0ð running speed.

Machine class descriptions:

Class I Small machine-trains or individual components integrally
connected with the complete machine in its normal
operating condition (i.e., drivers up to 20 horsepower).

Class II Medium-sized machines (i.e., 20-

to 100-horsepower
special

drivers

on

drivers
and
foundations.

400-horsepower

Class III Large prime movers (i.e., drivers greater than 100

horsepower) mounted on heavy, rigid foundations.

Class IV Large prime movers (i.e., drivers greater than 100
lightweight

horsepower) mounted on relatively soft,
structures.

Source: Derived by Integrated Systems, Inc. from ISO Standard
2372.

represents one or more mechanical components within the
machine-train. Typical microprocessor- based predictive
maintenance systems can provide signature resolutions
of at least 400 lines and many provide up to 12,800
lines.

Full-signature spectra are an important analysis tool,
but
require a tremendous amount of microprocessor
memory. It is impractical to collect full, high-resolution
spectra on all machine-trains on a routine basis. Data
management and storage in the host computer is extremely
difﬁcult and costly. Full-range signatures should be
collected only if a conﬁrmed problem has been identiﬁed
on a speciﬁc machine-train. This can be triggered
automatically by exceeding a preset alarm limit in the
historical amplitude trends.

Broadband and full signature

Systems that utilize either broadband or full signature
measurements have limitations that may hamper
the
usefulness of
the program. Broadband measurements
usually do not have enough resolution at running speeds
to be effective in early problem diagnostics. Full-signature
measurement at every data point requires a massive data
acquisition, handling, and storage system that greatly
increases the capital and operating costs of the program.
Normally, a full-signature spectrum is needed only
when an identiﬁed machine-train problem demands
further investigation. Please note that while full signatures
generate too much data for routine problem detection,
they are essential for root-cause diagnostics. Therefore,
the optimum system includes the capability to utilize all
techniques. This ability optimizes the program’s ability to
trend, do full root-cause failure analysis, and still maintain
minimum data management and storage requirements.

Narrowband

Typically, a machine-train’s vibration signature is made
up of vibration components with each component
associated with one or more of
the true running
speeds within the machine-train. Because most machinery
problems show up at or near one or more of the running
speeds, the narrowband capability is very beneﬁcial in
that high-resolution windows can be preset to monitor the
running speeds. However, many of the microprocessor-
based predictive maintenance systems available do not
have narrowband capability. Therefore, care should be
taken to ensure that the system utilized does have this
capability.

Appendix 43.1 List of Abbreviations
A
A
cpm

Acceleration
Zero-to-peak amplitude
Cycles per minute or

cps

f
f(cid:3)t(cid:6)

cycles/minute

Cycles per second or

cycles/second

Frequency
Function of time

Glossary 43/753

F
FFT
FMAX
FMIN
Fo
Fs
g

h

Hz
in
ips

ips-PK
ISI
k
K
lbf
lbm
Lo
M
MHz
PK
RMS
Rpm

sec2
T
T
To
VPM

W
X
Xi
Xo
1ð, 2ð, 3ð

Force
Fast Fourier Transform
Maximum frequency
Minimum frequency
External force
Spring force
Gravitational constant,

32.17 ft/sec2

of the mass

Hertz
Inches
Inches per second or

inches/second

Elongation due to the weight

Inches per second, zero-to-peak
Integrated Systems, Inc.
Torsional stiffness
Spring constant or stiffness
Pounds force
Pounds mass
Unelongated spring length
Mass
Megahertz
Zero-to-peak
Root-mean-square
Revolutions per minute or

revolution/minute

Seconds squared
Time
Period or torque
External torque
Vibrations per minute or

vibrations/minute

Weight
Displacement
Static displacement
Amount of displacement from Xi
1 times, 2 times, 3 times

Appendix 43.2 Glossary

Accelerometer

Acceleration

Amplitude

Axial

Bearing cap

Transducer used to measure
acceleration. Incorporates a
piezoelectric crystal or ﬁlm to
convert mechanical energy into
electrical signals.
The rate of change of velocity with
respect time (ft/sec2) or (in/sec2).
The magnitude or size of a quantity
such as displacement, velocity,
acceleration, etc., measured by a
vibration analyzer in conjunction with
a displacement probe, velocity
transducer, or accelerometer.
Of, on, around, or along an axis
(straight line about which an object
rotates) or center of rotation.
The protective structure that covers
bearings.

43/754 Vibration Fundamentals

Boundary
condition

Displacement

Dynamics,
operating

Fast fourier
transform

Force

Forcing
function

Frequency

Frequency,
circular
Frequency,
natural

Frequency,
primary

Gravitational
constant

Harmonic
motion

Mathematically deﬁned as a
requirement to be met by a solution
to a set of differential equations on a
speciﬁed set of values of the
independent variables.
The change in distance or position of
an object relative to a reference point,
usually measured in mils.
Deals with the motion of a system
under the inﬂuence of forces,
especially those that originate outside
the system under consideration.
A mathematical technique used to
convert a time-domain plot into its
unique frequency components.
That inﬂuence on a body that causes
it to accelerate. Quantitatively, it is a
vector equal to the body’s time rate
of change of momentum.
The cause of each discrete frequency
component in a machine-train’s
vibration signature.
Frequency, f, is deﬁned as the
number of repetitions of a speciﬁc
forcing function or vibration
component over a speciﬁc unit of
time. It is the inverse of the period,
1/T, of the vibration and can be
expressed in units of cycles per
second (cps) or Hertz (Hz). For
rotating machinery, the frequency is
often expressed in vibrations per
minute (vpm).
Another measure of frequency
measured in radians (ω D 2(cid:8)f).
All components have one or more
natural frequencies that can be
excited by an energy source that
coincides with, or is in close
proximity to, that frequency. The
result is a substantial increase in the
amplitude of the natural frequency
vibration component, which is
referred to as resonance. Higher
levels of input energy can cause
catastrophic, near instantaneous
failure of the machine or structure.
The base frequency referred to in a
vibration analysis that includes
vibrations that are harmonics of the
primary frequency.
The constant of proportionality in the
English system of units, gc, which
causes one pound of mass produces
one pound of force under the
acceleration of gravity, equal to
32.17 lbm-ft/lbf-sec2.
A periodic motion or vibration that is
a sinusoidal function of time, that is,
motion along a line given by equation
x D a cos(cid:3)ωt C (cid:14)(cid:6), where t is time, a

Harmonics

Hertz

Imbalance

Machine
element

Machine-
train
Maintenance
management
program

Maximum
frequency

Mil

Moment of
inertia

Oscillate

Periodic
motion
Phase angle

and ω are constants, and (cid:14) is the
phase angle. (e.g., X D Xo sin(cid:3)ωt C (cid:14))
where X is the displacement, Xo is
the amplitude, ω is the circular
frequency, and (cid:14) is the phase angle.)
Multiples of the primary frequency
(e.g., 2ð, 3ð, etc.).
Unit of frequency; a periodic
oscillation has a frequency of n hertz
if in one second it goes through n
cycles.
A condition that can result from a
mechanical and/or a force imbalance.
Mechanical imbalance is when there
is more weight on one side of a
center line of a rotor than on the
other. Force imbalance can result
when there is an imbalance of the
centripetal forces generated by
rotation and/or when there is an
imbalance between the lift generated
by the rotor and gravity.
Rotating-machine components, such
as rolling-element bearings, impellers,
and other rotors, that turn with a
shaft.
A series of machines containing both
driver and driven components.
A comprehensive program that
includes predictive maintenance
techniques to monitor and analyze
critical machines, equipment, and
systems in a typical plant. Techniques
include vibration analysis, ultrasonics,
thermography, tribology, process
monitoring, visual inspection, and
other non-destructive analysis
methods.
Broadband analysis techniques, which
are used to monitor the overall
mechanical condition of machinery,
are based on the overall vibration or
energy from a frequency range of
zero to the user-selected maximum
frequency (FMAX).
One one-thousandth of an inch (0.001
inch).
The sum of the products formed by
multiplying the mass of each element
of a body by the square of its
distance from a speciﬁed line. Also
known as ‘rotational inertia.’
To move back and forth with a steady
uninterrupted rhythm.
A motion that repeats after a certain
interval of time.
The difference between the phase of a
sinusoidally varying quantity and the
phase of a second quantity that varies
sinusoidally at the same frequency.
Also known as ‘phase difference.’

Piezoelectric

Predictive
maintenance

Proﬁle

Quadratic
Radial

Radian

Reciprocation

Signature
Spring
constant

Thermography

Torque

Transducer

Describes a crystal or ﬁlm having the
ability to generate a voltage when
mechanical force is applied, or to
produce a mechanical force when a
voltage is applied.
The practice of using actual operating
conditions of plant equipment and
systems to optimize total plant
operation. Relies on direct equipment
monitoring to determine the actual
mean-time-to-failure or loss of
efﬁciency for each machine-train and
system in a plant. This technique is
used in place of traditional
run-to-failure programs.
Refers to either time-domain (also
may be called time trace or
waveform) or frequency-domain
vibration curves.
Any second-degree expression.
Extending from a point or center in
the manner of rays (as the spokes of
a wheel are radial).
The central angle of a circle
determined by two radii and an arc
joining them, all of the same length.
A circle is comprised of 2(cid:8) radians.
The action of moving back and forth
alternately.
A frequency-domain vibration curve.
The number of pounds tension
necessary to extend the spring one
inch. Also referred to as ‘stiffness’
‘spring modulus.’
Use of heat emissions of machinery
or plant equipment as a monitoring
and diagnostic predictive maintenance
tool. For example, temperature
differences on a coupling indicate
misalignment and/or uneven
mechanical forces.
A moment/force couple applied to a
rotor such as a shaft in order to
sustain acceleration/load
requirements. A twisting load
imparted to shafts as the result of
induced loads/speeds.
Any device or element that converts
an input signal into an output signal
of a different form.

References 43/755

Science of rotor-bearing-support
system design and operation.
Predictive maintenance technique that
uses spectrographic, wear particle,
ferrography, and other measurements
of the lubricating oil as a diagnostic
tool.
Motion of ﬂuids in which local
velocities and pressures ﬂuctuate
irregularly, in a random manner.
Predictive maintenance technique that
uses principles similar to those of
vibration analysis to monitor the
noise generated by plant machinery
or systems to determine their actual
operating condition. Ultrasonics is
used to monitor the higher
frequencies (i.e., ultrasound) that
range between 20,000 Hertz and 100
kiloHertz.
A quantity that has both magnitude
and direction, and whose components
transform from one coordinate system
to another in the same manner as the
components of a displacement.
The time rate of change of position of
a body. It is a vector quantity having
direction as well as magnitude.
A continuing periodic change in a
displacement with respect to a ﬁxed
reference. The motion will repeat
after a certain interval of time.
Vibration analysis monitors the noise
or vibrations generated by plant
machinery or systems to determine
their actual operating condition. The
normal monitoring range for vibration
analysis is from less than 1 to 20,000
Hertz.

Tribology

Turbulent
Flow

Ultrasonic
analysis

Vector

Velocity

Vibration

Vibration
analysis

References

1 AdvancedDiagnosticsandAnalysis, R. Keith Mobley, Technol-

ogy for Energy Corp., (1989).

2 Introduction to Dynamics, Donald E. Hardenbergh, Holt, Rine-

hart and Winston, New York (1963).

3 Introduction to Predictive Maintenance, R. Keith Mobley, Van

Nonstrand-Reinhold, New York (1990).

4 MaintenanceEngineering Handbook, Higgins & R. Keith Mob-

ley, McGraw-Hill, New York (1995).

5 Vibration Fundamentals, R. Keith Mobley, Butterworth –

Heinemann (1999).

44

44/757

Vibration
Monitoring and
Analysis

R Keith Mobley
The Plant Performance Group

Contents

44.1 Introduction

44/759

44.1.1 Advantages
44/759
44.1.2 Limitations 44/759

44.2 Machine-train monitoring parameters 44/761

44.2.1 Drivers 44/761
44.2.2 Intermediate drives 44/763

44/766
44/766

44.3 Driver components
44.3.1 Compressors
44.3.2 Fans 44/770
44.3.3 Generators 44/771
44.3.4 Pumps

44/772
44.4 Database development

44/773

44.4.1 Machine and process data collection
44.4.2 Database setup

44/774

44/773

44.5 Vibration data acquisition

44/780

44.5.1 Transducers 44/780
44.5.2 Measurement orientation
44.5.3 Measurement locations

44/781

44/781

44.6 Trending analysis

44/787

44.6.1 Types of trends

44/787

44.7 Evaluation methods

44/788

44.7.1 Comparison to reference values
44.7.2 Mode shape (shaft deﬂection)
44.7.3 Cross-machine comparisons

44/789

44/791

44/792

44.8 Limitations 44/793

44.8.1 Number of values
44.8.2 Data normalization

44/793
44/793

44.9 Failure mode analysis

44/793
44.9.1 Common failure modes

44/794

44.10 Failure modes by machine-train component

44.10.1 Bearings: rolling element 44/803
44.10.2 Bearings: sleeve (Babbitt)
44/804
44.10.3 Chains and sprockets
44.10.4 Gears 44/805
44.10.5 Jackshafts and spindles

44/810

44/805

44/803

44.1 Introduction

This chapter provides the basic knowledge and skills
required to implement a computer-based vibration-
monitoring program.
It discusses the following top-
ics:
(1) typical machine-train monitoring parameters,
(2) database development, (3) data-acquisition equipment
and methods, and (4) data analysis.

Although each of the commercially available computer-
based vibration monitoring systems has unique features
and formats, the information contained in this chapter is
applicable to all of the systems. However, the manual pro-
vided by the vendor should be used in conjunction with
this chapter to ensure proper use of the microprocessor-
based data collection analyzer and the computer-based
software.

Over the past ten years, vibration monitoring and anal-
ysis instrumentation has improved dramatically. During
this period, a number of new microprocessor-based sys-
tems have been introduced that greatly simplify the collec-
tion, data management, long-term trending, and analysis
of vibration data. While these advancements permit wider
use of vibration monitoring as a predictive-maintenance
tool, use is generally limited to relatively simple, steady
state rotating machinery. Typically, these systems collect
single-channel, frequency-domain data.

44.1.1 Advantages

The automatic functions provided by most of the new
systems have greatly reduced the time and manpower
required to monitor critical plant equipment. These func-
tions have virtually eliminated both the human errors and
the setup time normally associated with older vibration-
monitoring techniques.

Simpliﬁed data acquisition and analysis

With the combined power of the data collector and sys-
tem software, data acquisition has been reduced to simple
measurement routes that require limited operator input.
The technician’s role is to temporarily mount a transducer
at the proper measurement point and push a button. The
microprocessor automatically acquires conditions, evalu-
ates, and stores the vibration data.

Introduction 44/759

advantages and disadvantages. Other limitations arise
because only single-channel, steady state,
frequency-
domain data greater than 600 cycles per minute (cpm)
or 10 Hertzx (Hz) can be collected. Note that cpm also is
referred to as revolutions per minute (rpm).

Simpliﬁed data acquisition and analysis

While providing many advantages, simpliﬁed data acqui-
sition and analysis also can be a liability. If the database
is improperly conﬁgured, the automated capabilities of
these analyzers will yield faulty diagnostics that can allow
catastrophic failure of critical plant machinery.

is

Because technician involvement

reduced to a
minimum level, the normal tendency is to use untrained
or partially trained personnel for this repetitive function.
Unfortunately,
in less
awareness and knowledge of visual and audible clues that
can, and should be, an integral part of the monitoring
program.

training results

the lack of

Single-channel data

Most of the microprocessor-based vibration monitoring
systems collect single-channel, steady-state data that can-
not be used for all applications. Single-channel data are
limited to the analysis of simple machinery that operates
at relatively constant speed.

While most of the microprocessor-based instruments
are limited to a single input channel, in some cases, a
second channel is incorporated in the analyzer. However,
this second channel generally is limited to input from a
tachometer, or a once-per-revolution input signal. This
second channel cannot be used for vibration-data capture.
This limitation prohibits the use of most microprocessor-
based vibration analyzers for complex machinery or machi-
nes with variable speeds. Single-channel data-acquisition
technology assumes the vibration proﬁle generated by
a machine-train remains constant throughout the data-
acquisition process. This is generally true in applications
where machine speed remains relatively constant (i.e.,
within 5 to 10 rpm). In this case, its use does not severely
limit diagnostic accuracy and can be effectively used in a
predictive-maintenance program.

Automated data management

Steady-state data

Before computer-based systems were developed, a major
limitation of vibration monitoring programs was the labor
required to manage, store, retrieve, and analyze the mas-
sive amount of data generated. However, the computer-
based systems in use today virtually eliminate this labor
requirement. These systems automatically manage data
and provide almost instant data retrieval for analysis.

44.1.2 Limitations

There are several
the computer-based
systems and some system characteristics, particularly
simpliﬁed data acquisition and analysis, provide both

limitations of

the microprocessor-based instruments

Most of
are
designed to handle steady-state vibration data. Few have
the ability to reliably capture transient events such as rapid
speed or load changes. As a result, their use is limited in
situations where these occur.

In addition, vibration data collected with a micropro-
cessor-based analyzer is ﬁltered and conditioned to elim-
inate non-recurring events and their associated vibration
proﬁles. Anti-aliasing ﬁlters are incorporated into the ana-
lyzers speciﬁcally to remove spurious signals such as
impacts. While the intent behind the use of anti-aliasing
ﬁlters is valid, however, their use can distort a machine’s
vibration proﬁle.

44/760 Vibration Monitoring and Analysis

Station:    Process plant

Machine:    A–C pump

Measurement point:    V03

)
k
a
e
p
 
c
e
s
/
n
i
(
 
e
d
u
t
i
l

p
m
A

0.13

0.12

0.11

0.10

0.09

0.08

0.07

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

.

7
9
9
1
 
,
1
 
y
a
M

M
P.
 
1
0
:
0
0
:
2
1

K
P
−
S
P

I
 

5
1

.

0

 
 
:

L
A
0

)
s
t
a
e
b
(
 
e
d
u
t
i
l

p
m
a
 
n
i
 
n
o

i
t

a
i
r
a
V

0

600

1200

1800

2400

3000

3600

Figure 44.1 Vibration is dynamic and amplitudes constantly change

Frequency (CPM)

Because vibration data are dynamic and the ampli-
tudes constantly change as shown in Figure 44.1, most
predictive-maintenance-system vendors strongly recom-
mend averaging the data. They typically recommend
acquiring three to twelve samples of the vibration pro-
ﬁle and averaging the individual proﬁles into a composite
signature. This approach eliminates the variation in vibra-
tion amplitude of the individual frequency components
that make up the machine’s signature. However, these
variations, referred to as beats, can be a valuable diag-
nostic tool. Unfortunately, they are not available from
microprocessor-based instruments because of averaging
and other system limitations.

Frequency-domain data

rely almost
Most predictive-maintenance programs
exclusively on frequency-domain vibration data. The
microprocessor-based analyzers gather time-domain data
and automatically convert it using Fast Fourier Transform
(FFT) to frequency-domain data. A frequency-domain
signature shows the machine’s individual
frequency
components, or peaks.

While frequency-domain data analysis is much easier to
learn than time-domain data analysis, it does not provide
the ability to isolate and identify all incipient problems
within the machine or its installed system. Because of this,

additional techniques (e.g., time-domain, multi-channel,
and real-time analysis) must be used in conjunction with
frequency-domain data analysis to obtain a complete diag-
nostic picture.

Low-frequency response

Many of the microprocessor-based vibration monitoring
analyzers cannot capture accurate data from low-speed
machinery or machinery that generates low-frequency
vibration. Speciﬁcally,
commercially
available analyzers cannot be used where frequency
components are below 600 cpm or 10 Hz.

some of

the

Two major problems restricting the ability to acquire
accurate vibration data at low frequencies are electronic
noise and the response characteristics of the transducer.
The electronic noise of the monitored machine and the
‘noise ﬂoor’ of the electronics within the vibration ana-
lyzer tend to override the actual vibration components
found in low-speed machinery.

Analyzers especially equipped to handle noise are
required for most industrial applications. There are at
least three commercially available microprocessor-based
analyzers capable of acquiring data below 600 cpm. These
systems use special ﬁlters and data-acquisition techniques
to separate real vibration frequencies from electronic

noise. In addition, transducers with the required low-
frequency response must be used.

V01

V02

V03

H03

Machine-train monitoring parameters 44/761

V04

H04

A04

44.2 Machine-train monitoring
parameters

This section discusses normal failure modes, monitoring
techniques that can prevent premature failures, and the
measurement points required for monitoring common
machine-train components. Understanding the speciﬁc
location and orientation of each measurement point is
critical to diagnosing incipient problems.

The frequency-domain, or FFT, signature acquired at
each measurement point is an actual representation of the
individual machine-train component’s motion at that point
on the machine. Without knowing the speciﬁc location
and orientation, it is difﬁcult – if not impossible – to cor-
rectly identify incipient problems. In simple terms, the
FFT signature is a photograph of the mechanical motion
of a machine-train in a speciﬁc direction and at a speciﬁc
point and time.

The vibration-monitoring process requires a large quan-
tity of data to be collected,
temporarily stored, and
downloaded to a more powerful computer for perma-
nent storage and analysis. In addition, there are many
aspects to collecting meaningful data. Data collection
generally is accomplished using microprocessor-based
data-collection equipment referred to as vibration ana-
lyzers. However, before analyzers can be used, it is nec-
essary to set up a database with the data-collection and
analysis parameters. The term ‘narrowband’ refers to a
speciﬁc frequency window that is monitored because of
the knowledge that potential problems may occur due
to known machine components or characteristics in this
frequency range.

The orientation of each measurement point is an impor-
tant consideration during the database setup and during
analysis. There is an optimum orientation for each mea-
surement point on every machine-train in a predictive-
maintenance program. For example, a helical gear set
creates speciﬁc force vectors during normal operation. As
the gear set degrades, these force vectors transmit the
maximum vibration components. If only one radial read-
ing is acquired for each bearing housing, it should be
oriented in the plane that provides the greatest vibration
amplitude.

For continuity, each machine-train should be set up on
a ‘common-shaft’ with the outboard driver bearing desig-
nated as the ﬁrst data point. Measurement points should
be numbered sequentially starting with the outboard driver
bearing and ending with the outboard bearing of the ﬁnal
driven component. This is illustrated in Figure 44.2. Any
numbering convention may be used, but it should be con-
sistent, which provides two beneﬁts:

1. Immediate identiﬁcation of the location of a particular

data point during the analysis/diagnostic phase.

2. Grouping the data points by ‘common shaft’ enables
the analyst to evaluate all parameters affecting each
component of a machine-train.

H01

H02

logic. AO D
Figure 44.2 Recommended measurement point
axial orientation, HO D horizontal orientation, VO D vertical
orientation

44.2.1 Drivers

All machines require some form of motive power, which
is referred to as a driver. This section includes the moni-
toring parameters for the two most common drivers: elec-
tric motors and steam turbines.

Electric motors

Electric motors are the most common source of motive
power for machine-trains. As a result, more of them are
evaluated using microprocessor-based vibration monitor-
ing systems than any other driver. The vibration frequen-
cies of the following parameters are monitored to evaluate
operating condition. This information is used to establish
a database.
ž Bearing frequencies,
ž Imbalance,
ž Line frequency,
ž Loose rotor bars,
ž Running speed,
ž Slip frequency, and
ž V-belt intermediate drives.

Bearing frequencies

Electric motors may incorporate either sleeve or rolling-
element bearings. A narrowband window should be estab-
lished to monitor both the normal rotational and defect
frequencies associated with the type of bearing used for
each application.

Imbalance

Electric motors are susceptible to a variety of forcing
functions that cause instability or imbalance. The narrow-
bands established to monitor the fundamental and other
harmonics of actual running speed are useful in identify-
ing mechanical imbalance, but other indices also should
be used.

One such index is line frequency, which provides indi-
cations of instability. Modulations, or harmonics, of line
frequency may indicate the motor’s inability to ﬁnd and
hold magnetic center. Variations in line frequency also
increase the amplitude of the fundamental and other har-
monics of running speed.

44/762 Vibration Monitoring and Analysis

Axial movement and the resulting presence of a third
harmonic of running speed is another indication of insta-
bility or imbalance within the motor. The third harmonic
is present whenever there is axial thrusting of a rotating
element.

Line frequency

Many electrical problems, or problems associated with the
quality of the incoming power and internal to the motor,
can be isolated by monitoring the line frequency. Line
frequency refers to the frequency of the alternating cur-
rent being supplied to the motor. In the case of 60-cycle
power, monitoring of the fundamental or ﬁrst harmonic
(60 Hertz), second harmonic (120 Hz), and third harmonic
(180 Hz) should be performed.

Loose rotor bars

Loose rotor bars are a common failure mode of electric
motors. Two methods can be used to identify them.

The ﬁrst method uses high-frequency vibration com-
ponents that result from oscillating rotor bars. Typically,
these frequencies are well above the normal maximum fre-
quency used to establish the broadband signature. If this is
the case, a high-pass ﬁlter such as high-frequency domain
can be used to monitor the condition of the rotor bars.

The second method uses the slip frequency to monitor
for loose rotor bars. The passing frequency created by this
failure mode energizes modulations associated with slip.
This method is preferred since these frequency compo-
nents are within the normal bandwidth used for vibration
analysis.

Running speed

The running speed of electric motors, both alternating cur-
rent (AC) and direct current (DC), varies. Therefore, for
monitoring purposes, these motors should be classiﬁed as
variable-speed machines. A narrowband window should
be established to track the true running speed.

Slip frequency

Slip frequency is the difference between synchronous
speed and actual
the motor. A
running speed of
narrowband ﬁlter
should be established to monitor
electrical line frequency. The window should have enough
resolution to clearly identify the frequency and the
modulations, or sidebands, that represent slip frequency.
Normally, these modulations are spaced at the difference
between synchronous and actual speed, and the number
of sidebands is equal to the number of poles in the motor.

V-belt intermediate drives

Electric motors with V-belt intermediate drive display the
same failure modes as those described previously. How-
ever, the unique V-belt frequencies should be monitored
to determine if improper belt tension or misalignment is
evident.

In addition, electric motors used with V-belt intermedi-
ate drive assemblies are susceptible to premature wear on

the bearings. Typically, electric motors are not designed
to compensate for the sideloads associated with V-belt
drives. In this type of application, special attention should
be paid to monitoring motor bearings.

The primary data-measurement point on the inboard
bearing housing should be located in the plane opposing
the induced load (sideload), with the secondary point at
90°. The outboard primary data-measurement point should
be in a plane opposite the inboard bearing with the sec-
ondary at 90°.

Steam turbines

There are wide variations in the size of steam turbines,
which range from large utility units to small package
units designed as drivers for pumps, etc. The following
section describes in general terms the monitoring guide-
lines. Parameters that should be monitored are bearings,
blade pass, mode shape (shaft deﬂection), and speed (both
running and critical).

Bearings

Turbines use both rolling-element and Babbitt bearings.
Narrowbands should be established to monitor both the
normal rotational frequencies and failure modes of the
speciﬁc bearings used in each turbine.

Blade pass

Turbine rotors are comprised of a series of vanes or blades
mounted on individual wheels. Each of the wheel units,
which is referred to as a stage of compression, has a differ-
ent number of blades. Narrowbands should be established
to monitor the blade-pass frequency of each wheel. Loss
of a blade or ﬂexing of blades or wheels is detected by
these narrowbands.

Mode shape (shaft deﬂection)

Most
turbines have relatively long bearing spans and
highly ﬂexible shafts. These factors, coupled with
variations in process ﬂow conditions, make turbine rotors
highly susceptible to shaft deﬂection during normal
operation. Typically, turbines operate in either the second
or third mode and should have narrowbands at the second
(2ð) and third (3ð) harmonics of shaft speed to monitor
for mode shape.

Speed

All turbines are variable-speed drivers and operate near
or above one of the rotor’s critical speeds. Narrowbands
should be established that track each of the critical speeds
deﬁned for the turbine’s rotor. In most applications, steam
turbines operate above the ﬁrst critical speed and in some
cases above the second. A movable narrowband window
should be established to track the fundamental (1ð), sec-
ond (2ð), and third (3ð) harmonics of actual shaft speed.
The best method is to use orders analysis and a tachometer
to adjust the window location.

Normally, the critical speeds are determined by the
mechanical design and should not change. However,

changes in the rotor conﬁguration or a build-up of calcium
or other foreign materials on the rotor will affect them.
The narrowbands should be wide enough to permit some
increase or decrease.

For example:
Chain speed D 25 teethð100 rpm

250 links

D 2500
250

D 10 cpm D 10 rpm

Machine-train monitoring parameters 44/763

44.2.2 Intermediate drives

to a driven unit or units.

Intermediate drives transmit power from the primary
driver
Included in this
classiﬁcation are chains, couplings, gearboxes, and V-
belts.

Chains

In terms of its vibration characteristics, a chain-drive
assembly is much like a gear set. The meshing of the
sprocket teeth and chain links generates a vibration proﬁle
that is almost identical to that of a gear set. The major
difference between these two machine-train components is
that the looseness or slack in the chain tends to modulate
and amplify the tooth-mesh energy. Most of the forcing
functions generated by a chain-drive assembly can be
attributed to the forces generated by tooth-mesh. The
typical frequencies associated with chain-drive assembly
monitoring are those of running speed, tooth-mesh, and
chain speed.

Running speed

Chain-drives normally are used to provide positive power
transmission between a driver and driven unit where direct
coupling cannot be accomplished. Chain-drives generally
have two distinct running speeds: driver or input speed
and driven or output speed. Each of the shaft speeds is
clearly visible in the vibration proﬁle and a discrete nar-
rowband window should be established to monitor each
of the running speeds.

These speeds can be calculated using the ratio of the
drive to driven sprocket. For example, where the drive
sprocket has a circumference of 10 inches and the driven
sprocket a circumference of 5 inches, the output speed will
be two times the input speed. Tooth-mesh narrowband
windows should be created for both the drive and driven
tooth-meshing frequencies. The windows should be broad
enough to capture the sidebands or modulations that this
type of passing frequency generates. The frequency of the
sprocket-teeth meshing with the chain links, or passing
frequency, is calculated by the following formula:
Tooth-mesh frequencyDNumber of sprocket teethðShaft speed
Unlike gear sets, there can be two distinctive tooth-mesh
frequencies for a chain-drive system. Since the drive and
driven sprockets do not directly mesh, the meshing fre-
quency generated by each sprocket is visible in the vibra-
tion proﬁle.

Chain speed

The chain acts much like a driven gear and has a speed
that is unique to its length. The chain speed is calculated
by the following equation:
Chain Speed D Number of drive sprocket teeth ð Shaft speed

Number of links in chain

Couplings

Couplings cannot be monitored directly, but they gen-
erate forcing functions that affect the vibration proﬁle
of both the driver and driven machine-train component.
Each coupling should be evaluated to determine the spe-
ciﬁc mechanical forces and failure modes they generate.
This section discusses ﬂexible couplings, gear couplings,
jackshafts, and universal joints.

Flexible couplings Most ﬂexible couplings use an elas-
tomer or spring-steel device to provide power transmis-
sion from the driver to the driven unit. Both coupling
types create unique mechanical forces that directly affect
the dynamics and vibration proﬁle of the machine-train.
The most obvious force with ﬂexible couplings is end-
play or movement in the axial plane. Both the elastomer
and spring-steel devices have memory which forces the
axial position of both the drive and driven shafts to a
neutral position. Because of their ﬂexibility, these devices
cause the shaft to move constantly in the axial plane. This
is exhibited as harmonics of shaft speed. In most cases,
the resultant proﬁle is a signature that contains the funda-
mental (1ð) frequency and second (2ð) and third (3ð)
harmonics.

Gear couplings When properly installed and main-
tained, gear-type couplings do not generate a unique
forcing function or vibration proﬁle. However, excessive
wear, variations in speed or torque, or over-lubrication
results in a forcing function.

Excessive wear or speed variation generates a gear-
mesh proﬁle that corresponds to the number of teeth in
the gear coupling multiplied by the rotational speed of the
driver. Since these couplings use a mating gear to pro-
vide power transmission, variations in speed or excessive
clearance permit excitation of the gear-mesh proﬁle.

Some machine-trains use an extended or
Jackshafts
spacer shaft, called a jackshaft, to connect the driver and
a driven unit. This type of shaft may use any combination
of ﬂexible coupling, universal joint, or splined coupling
to provide the ﬂexibility required making the connection.
Typically, this type of intermediate drive is used either
to absorb torsional variations during speed changes or
to accommodate misalignment between the two machine-
train components.

Because of the length of these shafts and the ﬂexi-
ble couplings or joints used to transmit torsional power,
jackshafts tend to ﬂex during normal operation. Flexing
results in a unique vibration proﬁle that deﬁnes its oper-
ating mode shape.

In relatively low-speed applications, the shaft tends to
operate in the ﬁrst mode or with a bow between the two
joints. This mode of operation generates an elevated vibra-
tion frequency at the fundamental (1ð) turning speed of
the jackshaft. In higher-speed applications, or where the

44/764 Vibration Monitoring and Analysis

ﬂexibility of the jackshaft increases, it deﬂects into an ‘S’
shape between the two joints. This ‘S’ or second mode
shape generates an elevated frequency at both the fun-
damental (1ð) frequency and the second harmonic (2ð)
of turning speed. In extreme cases, the jackshaft deﬂects
further and operates in the third mode. When this hap-
pens, it generates distinct frequencies at the fundamental
(1ð), second harmonic (2ð), and third harmonic (3ð) of
turning speed.
As a rule, narrowband windows should be established
to monitor at least these three distinct frequencies, i.e. 1ð,
2ð, and 3ð. In addition, narrowbands should be estab-
lished to monitor the discrete frequencies generated by
the couplings or joints used to connect the jackshaft to
the driver and driven unit.

There are a variety of universal joints
Universal joints
used to transmit torsional power. In most cases, this type
of intermediate drive is used where some misalignment
between the drive and driven unit is necessary. Because of
the misalignment, the universal’s pivot points generate a
unique forcing function that inﬂuences both the dynamics
and vibration proﬁle generated by a machine-train.

Figure 44.3 illustrates a typical double-pivot universal
joint. This type of joint, which is similar to those used in
automobiles, generates a unique frequency at four times
(4ð) the rotational speed of the shaft. Each of the pivot-
point bearings generates a passing frequency each time
the shaft completes a revolution.

Gearboxes

Gear sets are used to change speed or rotating direction
of the primary driver. The basic monitoring parameters
for all gearboxes include bearings, gear-mesh frequencies,
and running speeds.

Bearings

A variety of bearing types is used in gearboxes. Nar-
rowband windows should be established to monitor the
rotational and defect frequencies generated by the speciﬁc
type of bearing used in each application.

Special attention should be given to the thrust bearings,
which are used in conjunction with helical gears. Because
helical gears generate a relatively strong axial force, each
gear shaft must have a thrust bearing located on the back-
side of the gear to absorb the thrust load. Therefore, all
helical gear sets should be monitored for shaft run-out.

The thrust, or positioning, bearing of a herringbone or
double-helical gear has little or no normal axial loading.
However, a coupling lockup can cause severe damage to
the thrust bearing. Double-helical gears usually have only
one thrust bearing, typically on the bull gear. Therefore,
the thrust-bearing rotor should be monitored with at least
one axial data-measurement point.

The gear mesh should be in a plane opposing the
preload creating the primary data-measurement point on
each shaft. A secondary data-measurement point should
be located at 90° to the primary point.

Gear-mesh frequencies

Each gear set generates a unique proﬁle of frequency
components that should be monitored. The fundamental
gear-mesh frequency is equal to the number of teeth in
the pinion or drive gear multiplied by the rotational shaft
speed. In addition, each gear set generates a series of
modulations, or sidebands, that surround the fundamental
gear-mesh frequency. In a normal gear set, these modu-
lations are spaced at the same frequency as the rotational
shaft speed and appear on both sides of the fundamental
gear mesh.

A narrowband window should be established to monitor
the fundamental gear-mesh proﬁle. The lower and upper
limits of the narrowband should include the modulations
generated by the gear set. The number of sidebands will
vary depending on the resolution used to acquire data.
In most cases, the narrowband limits should be about
10 per cent above and below the fundamental gear-mesh
frequency.
A second narrowband window should be established to
monitor the second harmonic (2ð) of gear mesh. Gear
misalignment and abnormal meshing of gear sets result
in multiple harmonics of the fundamental gear-mesh pro-
ﬁle. This second window provides the ability to detect
potential alignment or wear problems in the gear set.

Running speeds

A narrowband window should be established to monitor
each of the running speeds generated by the gear sets
within the gearbox. The actual number of running speeds
varies depending on the number of gear sets. For example,
a single-reduction gearbox has two speeds: input and out-
put. A double-reduction gearbox has three speeds: input,
intermediate, and output. Intermediate and output speeds
are determined by calculations based on input speed and
the ratio of each gear set. Figure 44.4 illustrates a typical
double-reduction gearbox.

If the input speed is 1,800-rpm, the intermediate and

output speeds are calculated using the following:

Figure 44.3 Typical double-pivot universal joint

Intermediate speed

D Input speed ð Number of input gear teeth

Number of intermediate gear teeth

Output speed

D Intermediate speed ð Number of intermediate gear teeth

Number of output gear teeth

50 Teeth

Table 44.1 Belt Drive Failure: Symptoms, Causes, and
Corrective Actions

Machine-train monitoring parameters 44/765

Input shaft

1800 RPM

100 Teeth

Intermediate shaft

900 RPM

200 Teeth

Symptom
High 1ð rotational

frequency in radial
direction.

High 1ð belt frequency

with harmonics.
Impacting at belt
frequency in waveform.
High 1ð belt frequency.
Sinusoidal waveform
with period of belt
frequency.
High 1ð rotational
frequency in axial
plane. 1ð and possibly
2ð radial.

Cause

Corrective action

Unbalanced or

eccentric sheave.

Defects in belt.

Balance or
replace
sheave.

Replace belt.

Unbalanced belt.

Replace belt.

Loose, misaligned,

or mismatched
belts.

Align sheaves,
retension or
replace belts
as needed.

Output shaft

450 RPM

Source: Integrated Systems, Inc.

Figure 44.4 Double-reduction gearbox

V-belts

V-belts are common intermediate drives for fans, blowers,
and other types of machinery. Unlike some other power-
transmission mechanisms, V-belts generate unique forcing
functions that must be understood and evaluated as part
of a vibration analysis. The key monitoring parameters
for V-belt-driven machinery are fault frequency and run-
ning speed.

Most of the forcing functions generated by V-belt drives
can be attributed to the elastic or rubber band effect of
the belt material. This elasticity is needed to provide the
traction required transmitting power from the drive sheave
(i.e., pulley) to the driven sheave. Elasticity causes belts
to act like springs, increasing vibration in the direction
of belt wrap, but damping it in the opposite direction. As
a result, belt elasticity tends to accelerate wear and the
failure rate of both the driver and driven unit.

Fault frequencies

Belt-drive fault frequencies are the frequencies of the
driver, the driven unit, and the belt. In particular, frequen-
cies at 1ð the respective shaft speeds indicate faults with
the balance, concentricity, and alignment of the sheaves.
The belt frequency and its harmonics indicate problems
with the belt. Table 44.1 summarizes the symptoms and
causes of belt-drive failures, as well as corrective actions.

Running speeds

Belt-drive ratios may be calculated if the pitch diameters
(see Figure 44.5) of the sheaves are known. This coefﬁ-
cient, which is used to determine the driven speed given

r
e
t
e
m
a
d
 
h
c
t
i

i

P

Center distance

Figure 44.5 Pitch diameter and center-to-center distance between
belt sheaves

the drive speed, is obtained by dividing the pitch diame-
ter of the drive sheave by the pitch diameter of the driven
sheave. These relationships are expressed by the following
equations:

Drive reduction D Drive sheave diameter
Driven sheave diameter

Driven speed (rpm) D Drive speed (rpm)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

ð

ð

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

Drive speed (rpm) D Driven speed (rpm)

Drive sheave diameter
Driven sheave diameter

Driven sheave diameter
Drive sheave diameter

Using these relationships, the sheave rotational speeds
can be determined. However, obtaining the other com-
ponent speeds requires a bit more effort. The rotational
speed of the belt cannot directly be determined using the
information presented so far. To calculate belt rotational
speed (rpm), the linear belt speed must ﬁrst be determined
by ﬁnding the linear speed (in/min) of the sheave at its

44/766 Vibration Monitoring and Analysis

pitch diameter. In other words, multiply the pitch circum-
ference (PC) by the rotational speed of the sheave, where:

systems that are typically included in a microprocessor-
based vibration-monitoring program.

Pitch circumference (in) D (cid:1) ð Pitch diameter (in)
Linear speed (in/min) D Pitch circumference (in)
ð Sheave speed (rpm)

To ﬁnd the exact rotational speed of the belt (rpm), divide
the linear speed by the length of the belt.
Belt rotational speed (rpm) D Linear speed (in/min)

Belt length (in)

To approximate the rotational speed of the belt, the linear
speed may be calculated using the pitch diameters and the
center-to-center distance (see Figure 44.5) between the
sheaves. This method is accurate only if there is no belt
sag. Otherwise, the belt rotational speed obtained using
this method is slightly higher than the actual value.

In the special case where the drive and driven sheaves
have the same diameter, the formula for determining the
belt length is as follows:
Belt length D Pitch circumference C (cid:2)2 ð Center distance(cid:3)

The following equation is used to approximate the belt
length where the sheaves have different diameters:
Belt length D Drive PC + Driven PC

C (cid:2)2 ð Center distance)

2

44.3.1 Compressors

There are two basic types of compressors: (1) centrifugal
and (2) positive displacement. Both of these major classi-
ﬁcations can be further divided into sub-types, depending
on their operating characteristics. This section provides an
overview of the more common centrifugal and positive-
displacement compressors.

Centrifugal

There are two types of commonly used centrifugal com-
pressors: (1) in-line and (2) bullgear.

In-line

The in-line centrifugal compressor functions in exactly
the same manner as a centrifugal pump. The only differ-
ence between the pump and the compressor is that the
compressor has smaller clearances between the rotor and
casing. Therefore, in-line centrifugal compressors should
be monitored and evaluated in the same manner as cen-
trifugal pumps and fans. As with these driven components,
the in-line centrifugal compressor is comprised of a single
shaft with one or more impeller(s) mounted on the shaft.
All components generate simple rotating forces that can
be monitored and evaluated with ease. Figure 44.6 shows
a typical in-line centrifugal compressor.

44.3 Driven components
This module cannot effectively discuss all possible com-
binations of driven components that may be found in a
plant. However, the guidelines provided in this section can
be used to evaluate most of the machine-trains and process

Bullgear

The bullgear centrifugal compressor (Figure 44.7) is a
multi-stage unit that utilizes a large helical gear mounted
on the compressor’s driven shaft and two or more pin-
ion gears, which drive the impellers. These impellers act

X

Z
Y

Figure 44.6 Typical in-line centrifugal compressor

First-stage

diffuser

First-stage
intercooler

Condensate

separator

Driven components 44/767

First-stage
rotor

Bull
gear

Fourth-stage
rotor

Aftercooler

Discharge

Second-
stage
inlet

First-
stage
inlet

Third-
stage
inlet

Fourth-
stage
inlet

Figure 44.7 Cut-away of bullgear centrifugal compressor

in series, whereby ﬂow channels within the compressor’s
housing to the second-stage inlet direct compressed air or
gas from the ﬁrst-stage impeller discharge. The discharge
of the second stage is channeled to the inlet of the third
stage. This channeling occurs until the air or gas exits the
ﬁnal stage of the compressor.

Generally, the driver and bullgear speed is 3600 rpm
or less and the pinion speeds are as high as 60,000 rpm
(see Figure 44.8). These machines are produced as a pack-
age with the entire machine-train mounted on a common
foundation that also includes a panel with control and
monitoring instrumentation.

Positive displacement

Positive-displacement compressors, also referred to as
dynamic-type compressors, conﬁne successive volumes
of ﬂuid within a closed space. The pressure of the ﬂuid
increases as the volume of the closed space decreases.

Reciprocating

Reciprocating compressors
are positive-displacement
types having one or more cylinders. Each cylinder is
ﬁtted with a piston driven by a crankshaft through a
connecting rod. As the name implies, compressors within

this classiﬁcation displace a ﬁxed volume of air or gas
with each complete cycle of the compressor.

that directly affect

Reciprocating compressors have unique operating
dynamics
their vibration pro-
ﬁles. Unlike most centrifugal machinery, reciprocating
machines combine rotating and linear motions that gener-
ate complex vibration signatures.

Crankshaft frequencies

All
reciprocating compressors have one or more
crankshaft(s) that provide the motive power to a series
of pistons, which are attached by piston arms. These
crankshafts rotate in the same manner as the shaft
in a centrifugal machine. However, their dynamics are
somewhat different. The crankshafts generate all of the
normal frequencies of a rotating shaft (i.e., running speed,
harmonics of running speed, and bearing frequencies), but
the amplitudes are much higher.
In addition, the relationship of the fundamental (1ð)
frequency and its harmonics changes. In a normal rotating
machine, the 1ð frequency normally contains between 60
and 70 per cent of the overall, or broadband, energy gen-
erated by the machine-train. In reciprocating machines,
however, this proﬁle changes. Two-cycle reciprocating
machines, such as single-action compressors, generate a
high second harmonic (2ð) and multiples of the second

44/768 Vibration Monitoring and Analysis

Tilting pad bearings (Typ)

3rd stage 45,000 RPM

Babbitt bearing (Typ)

4th stage 60,000 RPM

2nd stage 30,000 RPM

Helical bullgear

Helical pinion gear (Typ)

1st stage 12,000 RPM

Helical pinion gear

Tilting pad bearing

Impeller

Figure 44.8 Internal bullgear drives’ pinion gears at each stage

harmonic. While the fundamental (1ð) is clearly present,
it is at a much lower level.

Frequency shift due to pistons

The shift in vibration proﬁle is the result of the linear
motion of the pistons used to provide compression of the
air or gas. As each piston moves through a complete cycle,
it must change direction two times. This reversal of direc-
tion generates the higher second harmonic (2ð) frequency
component.

In a two-cycle machine, all pistons complete a full
cycle each time the crankshaft completes one revolution.
Figure 44.9 illustrates the normal action of a two-cycle, or
single-action, compressor. Inlet and discharge valves are
located in the clearance space and connected through ports
in the cylinder head to the inlet and discharge connections.
During the suction stroke, the compressor piston starts
its downward stroke and the air under pressure in the
clearance space rapidly expands until the pressure falls
below that on the opposite side of the inlet valve (Point B).
This difference in pressure causes the inlet valve to open
into the cylinder until the piston reaches the bottom of its
stroke (Point C).

During the compression stroke, the piston starts upward,
compression begins, and at point D has reached the same
pressure as the compressor intake. The spring-loaded inlet
valve then closes. As the piston continues upward, air
is compressed until the pressure in the cylinder becomes
great enough to open the discharge valve against the pres-
sure of the valve springs and the pressure of the discharge
line (Point E). From this point, to the end of the stroke
(Point E to Point A), the air compressed within the cylin-
der is discharged at practically constant pressure.

The impact energy generated by each piston as it
changes direction is clearly visible in the vibration proﬁle.
Since all pistons complete a full cycle each time the
crankshaft completes one full revolution, the total energy
of all pistons is displayed at the fundamental (1ð) and
second harmonic (2ð) locations.
two complete revolutions
(720°) are required for all cylinders to complete a
full cycle.

In a four-cycle machine,

Piston orientations

Crankshafts on positive-displacement reciprocating com-
pressors have offsets from the shaft centerline that provide

Suction stroke

Compression stroke

Driven components 44/769

Suction
valve

Discharge

valve

e
c
n
a
r
a
e
C

l

e
c
a
p
s

A

B

i

n
o
s
n
a
p
x
E

E

r
o

 
y
r
e
v

i
l

e
D

e
g
r
a
h
c
s
d

i

D

n
o

i
t
c
u
S

C

i

n
o
s
s
e
r
p
m
o
C

Piston at top
dead center

Piston at bottom

dead center

Figure 44.9 Two-cycle, or single-action, air compressor cylinders

the stroke length for each piston. The orientation of the
offsets has a direct effect on the dynamics and vibration
amplitudes of the compressor. In an opposed-piston com-
pressor where pistons are 180° apart, the impact forces as
the pistons change directions are reduced. As one piston
reaches top dead center, the opposing piston also is at top
dead center. The impact forces, which are 180° out-of-
phase, tend to cancel or balance each other as the two
pistons change directions.

Another conﬁguration, called an unbalanced design,
has piston orientations that are neither in-phase nor 180°
out-of-phase. In these conﬁgurations, the impact forces
generated as each piston changes direction are not bal-
anced by an equal and opposite force. As a result, the
impact energy and the vibration amplitude are greatly
increased.

Horizontal reciprocating compressors (see Figure 44.10)
should have X–Y data points on both the inboard and
outboard main crankshaft bearings, if possible, to monitor
the connecting rod or plunger frequencies and forces.

Screw

Screw compressors have two rotors with interlocking
lobes and act as positive-displacement compressors (see
Figure 44.11). This type of compressor is designed for
baseload, or steady state, operation and is subject
to
extreme instability should either the inlet or discharge
conditions change. Two helical gears mounted on the
outboard ends of the male and female shafts synchronize
the two rotor lobes.

Analysis parameters should be established to monitor
the key indices of the compressor’s dynamics and fail-
ure modes. These indices should include bearings, gear
mesh, rotor passing frequencies, and running speed. How-
ever, because of its sensitivity to process instability and
the normal tendency to thrust, the most critical monitor-
ing parameter is axial movement of the male and female
rotors.

Figure 44.10 Horizontal, reciprocating compressor

Bearings

Screw compressors use both Babbitt and rolling-element
bearings. Because of the thrust created by process insta-
bility and the normal dynamics of the two rotors, all screw
compressors use heavy-duty thrust bearings. In most cases,
they are located on the outboard end of the two rotors, but
some designs place them on the inboard end. The actual
location of the thrust bearings must be known and used
as a primary measurement-point location.

Gear mesh

The helical timing gears generate a meshing frequency
equal to the number of teeth on the male shaft multiplied

44/770 Vibration Monitoring and Analysis

Figure 44.11 Screw compressor – steady-state applications only (Ref. 1)

by the actual shaft speed. A narrowband window should
be created to monitor the actual gear mesh and its modu-
lations. The limits of the window should be broad enough
to compensate for a variation in speed between full load
and no load.

The gear set should be monitored for axial thrusting.
Because of the compressor’s sensitivity to process insta-
bility, the gears are subjected to extreme variations in
induced axial loading. Coupled with the helical gear’s
normal tendency to thrust, the change in axial vibration
is an early indicator of incipient problems.

Rotor passing
The male and female rotors act much like any bladed
or gear unit. The number of lobes on the male rotor
multiplied by the actual male shaft speed determines the
rotor-passing frequency. In most cases, there are more
lobes on the female than on the male. To ensure inclusion
of all passing frequencies, the rotor-passing frequency of
the female shaft also should be calculated. The passing
frequency is equal to the number of lobes on the female
rotor multiplied by the actual female shaft speed.

Running speeds
The input, or male, rotor in screw compressors generally
rotates at a no-load speed of either 1800 or 3600 rpm.
The female, or driven, rotor operates at higher no-load

speeds ranging between 3600 to 9000 rpm. Narrowband
windows should be established to monitor the actual run-
ning speed of the male and female rotors. The windows
should have an upper limit equal to the no-load design
speed and a lower limit that captures the slowest, or fully
loaded, speed. Generally, the lower limits are between 15
and 20 per cent lower than no-load.

44.3.2 Fans

fans

fall

into

industrial applications and
Fans have many different
all
two
designs
vary. However,
major categories: (1) centerline and (2) cantilever. The
centerline conﬁguration has the rotating element located
at the mid-point between two rigidly supported bearings.
The
rotating
two ﬁxed bearings.
element
Figure 44.12 illustrates the difference between the two
fan classiﬁcations.

cantilever or overhung fan has

located outboard of

the

The following parameters are monitored in a typical
predictive-maintenance program for fans: aerodynamic
instability, running speeds, and shaft mode shape, or shaft
deﬂection.

Aerodynamic instability

Fans are designed to operate in a relatively steady-state
condition. The effective control range is typically 15 to 30

Figure 44.12 Major fan classiﬁcations

Centerline

Cantilever

per cent of their full range. Operation outside of the effec-
tive control range results in extreme turbulence within
the fan, which causes a marked increase in vibration. In
addition, turbulent ﬂow caused by restricted inlet airﬂow,
leaks, and a variety of other factors increases rotor insta-
bility and the overall vibration generated by a fan.

Both of these abnormal forcing functions (i.e., turbulent
ﬂow and operation outside of the effective control range)
increase the level of vibration. However, when the insta-
bility is relatively minor, the resultant vibration occurs at
the vane-pass frequency. As it become more severe, there
also is a marked increase in the broadband energy.

A narrowband window should be created to monitor the
vane-pass frequency of each fan. The vane-pass frequency
is equal to the number of vanes or blades on the fan’s rotor
multiplied by the actual running speed of the shaft. The
lower and upper limits of the narrowband should be set
about 10 per cent above and below (š10 per cent) the cal-
culated vane-pass frequency. This compensates for speed
variations and it includes the broadband energy generated
by instability.

Running speeds

Fan running speed varies with load. If ﬁxed ﬁlters are used
to establish the bandwidth and narrowband windows, the
running speed upper limit should be set to the synchronous
speed of the motor, and the lower limit set at the full-load
speed of the motor. This setting provides the full range of
actual running speeds that should be observed in a routine
monitoring program.

Driven components 44/771

to prevent wear. However, these bearings are subjected
to abnormal wear each time a generator is shut off
or started. In these situations, the entire weight of the
rotating element rests directly on the lower half of the
bearings. When the generator is started, the shaft climbs
the Babbitt liner until gravity forces the shaft to drop
to the bottom of the bearing. This alternating action of
climb and fall is repeated until the shaft speed increases
to the point that a ﬂuid-ﬁlm is created between the shaft
and Babbitt liner.

Sub-harmonic frequencies (i.e., less than the actual shaft
speed) are the primary evaluation tool for ﬂuid-ﬁlm bear-
ings and they must be monitored closely. A narrowband
window that captures the full range of vibration frequency
components between electronic noise and running speed
is an absolute necessity.

Casing and shaft

Most generators have relatively soft support structures.
Therefore, they require shaft vibration monitoring mea-
surement points in addition to standard casing measure-
ment points. This requires the addition of permanently
mounted proximity, or displacement, transducers that can
measure actual shaft movement.
The third (3ð) harmonic of running speed is a critical
monitoring parameter. Most, if not all, generators tend to
move in the axial plane as part of their normal dynamics.
Increases in axial movement, which appear in the third
harmonic, are early indicators of problems.

Shaft mode shape (shaft deﬂection)

Line frequency

The bearing-support structure is often inadequate for
proper shaft support because of its span and stiffness. As a
result, most fans tend to operate with a shaft that deﬂects
from its true centerline. Typically, this deﬂection results
in a vibration frequency at the second (2ð) or third (3ð)
harmonic of shaft speed.
A narrowband window should be established to mon-
itor the fundamental (1ð), second (2ð), and third (3ð)
harmonic of shaft speed. With these windows, the energy
associated with shaft deﬂection, or mode shape, can be
monitored.

44.3.3 Generators

As with electric-motor rotors, generator rotors always seek
the magnetic center of their casings. As a result, they tend
to thrust in the axial direction. In almost all cases, this
axial movement, or endplay, generates a vibration proﬁle
that includes the fundamental (1ð), second (2ð) and third
(3ð) harmonic of running speed. Key monitoring parame-
ters for generators include bearings, casing and shaft, line
frequency, and running speed.

Bearings

Large generators typically use Babbitt bearings, which
are non-rotating, lined metal sleeves (also referred to
as ﬂuid-ﬁlm bearings) that depend on a lubricating ﬁlm

Many electrical problems cause an increase in the ampli-
tude of line frequency, typically 60 Hz, and its harmonics.
Therefore, a narrowband should be established to monitor
the 60, 120, and 180 Hz frequency components.

Running speed

Actual running speed remains relatively constant on most
generators. While load changes create slight variations in
actual speed, the change in speed is minor. Generally, a
narrowband window with lower and upper limits of š10
per cent of design speed is sufﬁcient.

Process rolls

Process rolls are commonly found in paper machines
and other continuous process applications. Process rolls
generate few unique vibration frequencies. In most cases,
the only vibration frequencies generated are running speed
and bearing rotational frequencies.

However, rolls are highly prone to loads induced by
the process. In most cases, rolls carry some form of prod-
uct or a mechanism that, in turn, carries a product. For
example, a simple conveyor has rolls that carry a belt,
which carries product from one location to another. The
primary monitoring parameters for process rolls include
bearings, load distribution, and misalignment.

44/772 Vibration Monitoring and Analysis

Bearings

Both non-uniform loading and roll misalignment change
the bearing load zones. In general, either of these failure
modes results in an increase in outer-race loading. This is
caused by the failure mode forcing the full load onto one
quadrant of the bearing’s outer race.

Therefore, the ball-pass outer-race frequency should be
monitored closely on all process rolls. Any increase in this
unique frequency is a prime indication of a load, tension,
or misaligned roll problem.

Load distribution

By design, process rolls should be uniformly loaded across
their entire bearing span (see Figure 44.13). Improper track-
ing and/or tension of the belt, or product carried by the rolls,
will change the loading characteristics.

The loads induced by the belt increase the pressure
on the loaded bearing and decrease the pressure on the
unloaded bearing. An evaluation of process rolls should
include a cross-comparison of the overall vibration lev-
els and the vibration signature of each roll’s inboard and
outboard bearing.

Misalignment

Misalignment of process rolls is a common problem. On a
continuous process line, most rolls are mounted in several
levels. The distance between the rolls and the change in
elevation make it extremely difﬁcult to maintain proper
alignment.

In a vibration analysis, roll misalignment generates
a signature similar to classical parallel misalignment. It
generates dominant frequencies at the fundamental (1ð)
and second (2ð) harmonic of running speed.

44.3.4 Pumps

The wide variety of pumps used by industry can be group-
ed into two types: centrifugal and positive displacement.
Pumps are highly susceptible to process-induced or

installation-induced loads. Some pump designs are more
likely to have axial- or thrust-induced load problems.
Induced loads created by hydraulic forces also are a
serious problem in most pump applications.

Recommended monitoring for each type of pump is
essentially the same, regardless of speciﬁc design or
manufacturer. However, process variables such as ﬂow,
pressure, load, etc. must be taken into account.

Centrifugal
Centrifugal pumps can be divided into two basic types:
end-suction and horizontal split-case. These two major
classiﬁcations can be broken further into single-stage and
multi-stage. Each of these classiﬁcations has common mon-
itoring parameters, but each also has unique features that
alter their forcing functions and the resultant vibration pro-
ﬁle. The common monitoring parameters for all centrifu-
gal pumps include axial thrusting, vane-pass, and running
speed.

Axial thrusting
End-suction and multi-stage pumps with in-line impellers
are prone to excessive axial thrusting. In the end-suction
pump,
inlet conﬁguration is the
primary source of thrust. Restrictions in the suction
piping, or low suction pressures, create a strong imbalance
that forces the rotating element toward the inlet.

the centerline axial

Multi-stage pumps with in-line impellers generate a
strong axial force on the outboard end of the pump.
Most of these pumps have oversized thrust bearings (e.g.,
Kingsbury bearings) that restrict
the amount of axial
movement. However, bearing wear caused by constant
rotor thrusting is a dominant failure mode. Monitoring of
the axial movement of the shaft should be done whenever
possible.

Hydraulic instability (vane pass)

Hydraulic or ﬂow instability is common in centrifugal
pumps. In addition to the restrictions of the suction and

Figure 44.13 Rolls should be uniformly loaded

(a)

(b)

discharge discussed previously, the piping conﬁguration
in many applications creates instability. Although ﬂow
through the pump should be laminar, sharp turns or
other restrictions in the inlet piping can create turbulent
ﬂow conditions. Forcing functions such as these result
in hydraulic instability and displace the rotating element
within the pump.

In a vibration analysis, hydraulic instability is displayed
at the vane-pass frequency of the pump’s impeller. Vane-
pass frequency is equal to the number of vanes in the
impeller multiplied by the actual running speed of the
shaft. Therefore, a narrowband window should be estab-
lished to monitor the vane-pass frequency of all centrifu-
gal pumps.

Running speed

Most pumps are considered constant speed, but the true
speed changes with variations in suction pressure and
back-pressure caused by restrictions in the discharge pip-
ing. The narrowband should have lower and upper limits
sufﬁcient to compensate for these speed variations. Gen-
erally, the limits should be set at speeds equal to the
full-load and no-load ratings of the driver.

There is a potential for unstable ﬂow through pumps,
which is created by both the design-ﬂow pattern and the
radial deﬂection caused by back-pressure in the discharge
piping. Pumps tend to operate at their second-mode shape
or deﬂection pattern. This mode of operation generates a
unique vibration frequency at the second harmonic (2ð)
of running speed. In extreme cases, the shaft may be
deﬂected further and operate in its third (3ð) mode shape.
Therefore, both of these frequencies should be monitored.

Positive displacement

There are a variety of positive-displacement pumps
commonly used in industrial applications. Each type
has unique characteristics that must be understood and
monitored. However, most of
types have
common parameters that should be monitored.

the major

With the exception of piston-type pumps, most of
the common positive-displacement pumps utilize rotating
elements to provide a constant-volume, constant-pressure
output. As a result, these pumps can be monitored with
the following parameters: hydraulic instability, passing
frequencies, and running speed.

Hydraulic instability (vane pass)

Positive-displacement pumps are subject to ﬂow instabil-
ity, which is created either by process restrictions or by
the internal pumping process. Increases in amplitude at the
passing frequencies, as well as harmonics of both shafts’
running speed and the passing frequencies, typically result
from instability.

Passing frequencies

With the exception of piston-type pumps, all positive-
displacement pumps have one or more passing frequencies
generated by the gears, lobes, vanes, or wobble-plates

Database development 44/773

used in different designs to increase the pressure of the
pumped liquid. These passing frequencies can be calcu-
lated in the same manner as the blade or vane-passing fre-
quencies in centrifugal pumps (i.e., multiplying the num-
ber of gears, lobes, vanes, or wobble plates times the
actual running speed of the shaft).

Running speeds

All positive-displacement pumps have one or more rotat-
ing shafts that provide power transmission from the pri-
mary driver. Narrowband windows should be established
to monitor the actual shaft speeds, which are in most cases
essentially constant. Upper and lower limits set at š10 per
cent of the actual shaft speed is usually sufﬁcient.

44.4 Database development
Valid data are an absolute prerequisite of vibration
monitoring and analysis. Without accurate and complete
data taken in the appropriate frequency range,
is
impossible to interpret the vibration proﬁles obtained from
a machine-train.

it

a

that

This

database

is especially true in applications

that use
microprocessor/computer-based systems. These systems
require
the monitoring
parameters, measurement routes, analysis parameters, and
a variety of other information. This input is needed to
acquire, trend, store, and report what is referred to as
‘conditioned’ vibration data.

speciﬁes

The steps in developing such a database are (1) col-
lection of machine and process data and (2) database
setup. Input requirements of the software are machine
and process speciﬁcations, analysis parameters, data ﬁl-
ters, alert/alarm limits, and a variety of other parameters
used to automate the data-acquisition process.

44.4.1 Machine and process data collection

Database development can be accelerated and its accuracy
improved by ﬁrst creating detailed equipment and process
information sheets that fully describe each machine and
system to be monitored.

Equipment information sheets

The ﬁrst step in establishing a database that deﬁnes the
operating condition of each machine-train or production
system is to generate an equipment information sheet
(EIS) for each machine-train. The information sheet must
contain all of the machine-speciﬁc data such as type of
operation and information on all of the components that
make up the machine-train.

The EIS should deﬁne the type of
Type of operation
operation (i.e., constant speed or variable speed) that best
describes the normal operation of each machine-train.
This information allows the analyst to determine the best
method of monitoring and evaluating each machine.

Few, if any, machines found
Constant-speed machinery
in a manufacturing or production plant are truly constant

44/774 Vibration Monitoring and Analysis

speed. While the nameplate and speciﬁcations may
indicate that a machine operates at a ﬁxed speed, it will
vary slightly in normal operation.

The reason for speed variations in constant-speed
machinery is variation of process load. For example, a
centrifugal pump’s load will vary due to the viscosity of
the ﬂuid being pumped or changes in suction or discharge
pressure. The pump speed will change because of these
load changes.
As a rule,

the speed variation in a constant-speed
machine is about 15 per cent. For an electric motor,
the actual variation can be determined by obtaining the
difference between the amperage drawn under full-load
and no-load. This difference, taken as a percentage of
full-load amperage draws, provides the actual percentage
of speed-range variation that can be expected.

For machinery and process
Variable-speed machinery
systems that have a wide range of operating speeds, the
data sheet should provide a minimum and maximum speed
that can be expected during normal operation. In addition,
a complete description of other variables (e.g., product
type) that affect the machine’s speed should be included.
For example, a process line may operate at 500 feet per
minute with product A and 1000 feet per minute with
product B. Therefore, the data sheet must deﬁne all of the
variables associated with both product A and product B.

Constant versus variable load As with constant-speed
machines, true constant-load machines are rare. For the
few that may be speciﬁed as having constant load, there
are factors that cause load changes to occur. These fac-
tors include variations in product, operating conditions,
and ambient environment. These variations will have a
direct, and often dramatic, impact on a machine’s vibra-
tion proﬁle.

Variations in load, no matter how slight, alter the vibra-
tion proﬁle generated by a machine or system. The rela-
tionship between load and the vibration energy generated
by a machine can be a multiple of four. In other words, a
10 per cent change in load may increase or decrease the
vibration energy by 40 per cent.

When using vibration data as a diagnostic tool, you
must always adjust or normalize the data to the actual
load that was present when the data set was acquired.

The EIS should provide infor-
Machine components
mation on all components (e.g., bearings, gears, gear-
boxes, electric motors, pumps, etc.) that make up the
machine-train. Since these components generate vibration
energy and unique frequency components, this informa-
tion is essential for proper analysis. At a minimum, the
information sheet must include detailed bearing informa-
tion, passing frequencies, and nameplate data.

All bearings in a machine-train must be
Bearings
identiﬁed. For example,
rolling-element bearing data
must include the manufacturer’s part number, bearing
geometry, and the unique rotational frequencies that it
will generate. Rotational frequencies can be determined
by using the bearing part number to look them up in

the database that is included in most vibration monitoring
software programs. They also can be obtained from the
bearing vendor. Babbitt or sleeve bearing data must
include type (e.g., plain,
tilting-pad, etc.), as well as
manufacturer and part number.

All components that generate a
Passing frequencies
passing frequency must be included on the information
sheet. Such components include:
fan or compressor
blades, vanes on pump impellers, rotor bars in electric
motors, and gear teeth on both the pinion and bullgear in
a gear set. The number of vanes, blades, and gear teeth
must be recorded on the information sheet. The passing
frequency is the number of vanes, blades, etc. times the
rotation speed of the shaft on which they are mounted.

Each machine-train component has a
Nameplate data
vendor’s nameplate permanently attached to its housing.
The EIS should include all nameplate data,
including
the serial number that uniquely identiﬁes a machine or
component.

Knowing the serial number allows detailed informa-
tion on a machine or component to be obtained. This is
possible because machinery manufacturers must maintain
records for their products. These records, which are usu-
ally identiﬁed by serial number, contain complete design
and performance data for that speciﬁc unit. For example,
it is possible to obtain a performance curve or complete
bill of materials for each pump found in a plant.

Process information sheets

A process information sheet (PIS) should be developed
for each machine-train and production process that is to
be included in a predictive-maintenance program. These
data sheets should include all process variables that affect
the dynamics and vibration proﬁles of the monitored
components.

Many production and process systems handle a wide
range of products. They typically have radically differ-
ent machine and system operating parameters, as well as
variable speeds and loads for each of the products they
process.

Each process parameter directly affects both the
machinery dynamics and the vibration proﬁles. For
example, the line tension, strip width, and hardness of
the incoming strip radically affect the vibration proﬁle
generated by a continuous process line in a steel mill. With
few exceptions, process variations such as these must be
considered in the vibration analysis.

44.4.2 Database setup

The input-data requirements and steps needed to set up
the database for a computer-based vibration-monitoring
program vary depending on the analyzer/software vendor
and the system’s capabilities. This section discusses the
input required for such a database. However, this infor-
mation should be used in conjunction with the vendor’s
user manual to ensure proper implementation.

The key elements of database setup discussed in this
section are: analysis parameter sets, data ﬁlters (i.e., band-
widths, averaging, and weighting), limits for alerts and
alarms, and data-acquisition routes.

Analysis parameter sets

Database development 44/775

Analysis type As discussed previously, data-collection
analyzers incorporate analysis parameter sets that allow
the user to control the data-gathering process. APSs pro-
vide the option of selecting either frequency analysis for
ﬁxed-speed machinery or orders analysis for variable-
speed machinery.

The software used to manage the data incorporates what
are referred to as analysis parameter sets (APSs). APSs
deﬁne and specify machine dynamics, components, and
failure modes to be monitored.

Most microprocessor-based systems permit a maximum
of 256 APSs per database. This limit could be restrictive
if the analyst wishes to establish a unique APS for each
machine-train. To avoid this problem, APSs should be
established for classes of machine-trains. For example, a
group of bridle gearboxes that are identical in both design
and application should share the same APS.

This approach provides two beneﬁts. One is that it
simpliﬁes database development since one parameter set
is used for multiple machine-trains. Therefore, less time
is required to establish them. The other is that
this
approach permits direct comparison of multiple machine-
trains. Since all machine-trains in a class share a common
APS, the data can be directly compared. For example, the
energy generated by a gear set is captured in a narrowband
window established to monitor gear mesh. With the same
APS, the gear mesh narrowbands can be used to compare
all gear sets within that machine-train classiﬁcation.

Data ﬁlters

When selecting the bandwidth frequency range to use
for data collection in a vibration-monitoring system, one
might be tempted to select the broadest range available.
If enough computing power was available, we could sim-
ply gather data over an inﬁnite frequency range, ana-
lyze the data, and be assured that no impending failures
were missed. However, practicalities of limited computing
power prevent us from taking this approach.

Therefore, it is necessary to ‘ﬁlter’ or screen the data
we collect using our knowledge of the machinery being
monitored. This is necessary to make collection, storage,
and analysis of the data manageable with the equipment
available. Electronic ﬁlters screen the quantity and quality
of data that is collected. Mathematical ﬁltering techniques
such as resolution, averaging, and weighting are used on
the data that is collected.

frequency analysis

Constant-speed
Constant speed:
machinery generates a relatively ﬁxed set of frequency
components within its signature. Therefore, speciﬁc
APSs can be established to monitor using frequency
analysis. Since speed is relatively constant, the location
of speciﬁc frequency components (e.g., running speed)
will not change greatly. Therefore, the broadband and
each narrowband window can be established with a
constant minimum and maximum frequency limit, which
are referred to as ﬁxed ﬁlters.

The position of these ﬁxed ﬁlters should be set to assure
capture of information that is needed. The ﬁlter settings
are determined from the speed range (i.e., no-load to full-
load) of the primary driver. In addition, the lower and
upper limits of each ﬁlter should be adjusted by 10 to 15
per cent to allow for slight variations in speed.

In a variable-speed
Variable speed: orders analysis
machine, the unique frequencies generated by components
such as bearings and gear sets do not remain constant. As
the speed changes, the unique frequency components vary
in direct proportion to the speed change. For this type of
machinery, the analyzer’s orders analysis option is used
to automatically adjust each of the ﬁlters used to set the
bandwidth and narrowbands for each data set to the true
machine speed.

The analyzer automatically moves the ﬁlters that
designate the lower and upper limits of each narrowband
window to correspond with the actual running speed at the
time the data are collected. To activate this function, the
technician must either manually enter the running speed
or use a tachometer input to trigger data acquisition.

the

The frequency
Boundary conditions and resolution
boundary conditions and resolution for the full FFT
signature depends on the speciﬁc system being used.
Typically,
various
predictive-maintenance systems has a lower frequency
limit of 10 Hz and an upper limit of 10 to 30 kHz. A
few special low-frequency analyzers have a lower limit
of 0.1 Hz, but retain the upper limit of 30 kHz. Typical
resolutions are 100 to 12,800 lines.

capability of

full-signature

Bandwidth frequency range settings are
Bandwidth
crucial
to obtaining meaningful data for a vibration-
based predictive-maintenance program. Because of limits
inherent with computer-based data collection and analysis
systems (i.e., limited storage and data-handling capacity),
these settings must be properly speciﬁed to obtain
frequency data in the range generated by machine
components where failures occur. Improper settings will
likely yield data in frequency ranges where problems do
not exist and miss critical clues to serious problems with
the machinery.

The dynamics of each machine-
Maximum frequency
train determines the maximum frequency, FMAX,
that
should be used for both data acquisition and analysis. The
frequency must be high enough to capture and display
meaningful data, but not so high that resolution is lost
and meaningful data ﬁltered out. Generally, when setting
FMAX, it is necessary to take into account the harmonics
of running speed and frequencies of components such as
rolling-element bearings and gear mesh. Therefore, FMAX
should be set to the maximum frequency encountered in
any of these.

44/776 Vibration Monitoring and Analysis

The bandwidth should include at least the
Gear mesh
second harmonic of the calculated gear-mesh frequency.
This permits early detection of misalignment, gear wear,
and other abnormal operating dynamics. If excessive axial
thrusting is expected, the third harmonic of gear mesh
also should be included. For example, helical gears are
prone to generate axial movement that increases as the
gears wear.

The ability to monitor rolling-
Rolling-element bearings
element or anti-friction bearing defects requires the inclu-
sion of multiples of their rotating frequency. For example,
with ball-pass inner-race bearings, the bandwidth should
include the second harmonic (2ð).

Running-speed harmonics When setting bandwidth, at
least three harmonics of running speed should be included
to ensure the ability to quantify the operating-mode shape
of the shaft. This is accomplished by setting FMAX to at
least three times the running speed.

Generally, shafts deﬂect from their true centerline dur-
ing normal as well as abnormal operation. In normal oper-
ation, this deﬂection is slight and results in a ‘ﬁrst mode’
that creates a frequency component at the actual running
speed, or ﬁrst harmonic (1ð). As instability increases, the
shaft deﬂects more and more. Under abnormal operating
conditions, the shaft typically deforms into either the ‘sec-
ond mode’ or ‘third mode’. This deﬂection creates unique
frequencies at the second (2ð) and third (3ð) harmonics
of running speed. In addition, some failure modes (e.g.,
parallel misalignment) increase the energy level of one or
all three of these frequencies.

The data-collection hardware and
Minimum frequency
software permit the selection of the minimum frequency,
FMIN, or the low-frequency cut-off below which no data
are acquired and stored during the monitoring process.
In most applications, however, this option should not
be used.

Selecting a low-frequency cut-off does not improve
resolution and is strictly an arbitrary omission of visi-
ble frequency components within a vibration signature.
The FFT is calculated on a bandwidth having a lower
limit of zero and an upper limit equal to the maximum
frequency, FMAX, which is selected by the user. The only
reason for selecting a minimum frequency other than zero
is to remove unneeded low-frequency components from
the signature display.

Resolution Resolution is the degree of spacing of visible
frequency components in the vibration signature and is
proportional to the bandwidth. The equation for resolution
is given below:
Resolution D

D FMAX (cid:6) FMIN

Bandwidth

Lines of resolution

Lines of resolution

pertinent frequency components and that they are visible
in the signature.

For routine monitoring, 800 lines of resolution are
recommended. Higher resolution may be needed for
root-cause analysis, but this requires substantially more
memory in both the analyzer and host computer. While
the latter is not a major problem, higher resolution reduces
the number of measurement points that can be acquired
with an analyzer without transferring acquired data to the
host computer. This can greatly increase the time required
to complete a measurement route and should be avoided
when possible.

the unique frequency components that

The combination of bandwidth and lines of resolution
selected for each machine-train must effect separation
of
represent
a machine’s operating dynamics. Resolution can be
improved by reducing FMAX,
increasing the lines of
resolution, or a combination of both.

For example, if the analyzer can provide a 400-line
FFT, the resolution of a signature taken with a bandwidth
of 0 to 20,000 Hz will be 50 Hz, or 3,000 rpm, for each
displayed line. The same 400-line FFT will provide a res-
olution of 2.5 Hz, or 150 rpm, with an FMAX of 1,000 Hz.
It is important to remember that the ﬁrst two and last
two lines of resolution are lost when the FFT is calculated.
In the example described above (FMAX D 1,000 Hz), the
ﬁrst visible speed is 450 rpm and the highest visible speed
is 59,700 rpm. Since the FFT always drops the ﬁrst two
and last two lines of resolution, the ﬁrst visible frequency
is three times the calculated resolution (3 ð 150 D 450)
and the highest visible frequency is lowered by two lines
(59,700 is visible, but 59,850 and 60,000 are not shown).

Narrowbands Analysis using narrowbands is based on
specifying a series of ﬁltered windows for a machine com-
ponent or failure mode. The analyst can establish up to
twelve narrowbands for each measurement point on each
machine-train.

This concept reduces the manual analysis required for
each data set. The analyst can scan the documentation that
is generated (i.e., the exception report and trend charts) for
each of the selected narrowbands to determine if further
analysis is required.

Before implementing the analyzer’s narrowband capa-
bility, the analyst should ﬁrst understand the dynamics
of each machine-train. Once this is done, establish nar-
rowbands that bracket each of the bandwidths identifying
each of the major components. At a minimum, establish
a narrowband window around the following:
ž Each primary running speed
ž Each gearmesh frequency (including sidebands)
ž Each set of bearing frequencies
ž Each blade/vane-pass frequency
ž Each belt frequency.

From this equation, it apparent that the bandwidth should
be as small as possible to minimize the spacing and avoid
missing important data. The typical number of lines of
resolution is 100 to 12,800, but it is important to make
sure that the selected bandwidth and resolution include all

If a machine-train operates
Constant-speed machinery
at constant speed, the best method is to set the windows
using the FMIN and FMAX frequencies associated with the
speciﬁc component. For example, a narrowband window
could be established to monitor the energy generated

Database development 44/777

determination is the amount of time that can be spent at
each measurement point.

In general, three to four samples are acceptable for
good statistical averaging and keeping the time required
per measurement point within reason. Exceptions to this
include low-speed machinery, transient-event capture, and
synchronous averaging.

Overlap averaging Many of the microprocessor-based
vibration monitoring systems offer the ability to increase
their data-acquisition speed. This option is referred to as
overlap averaging.

While this approach increases speed, it is not generally
recommended for vibration analysis. Overlap averaging
reduces the accuracy of the data and must be used with
caution. Its use should be avoided except where fast tran-
sients or other unique machine-train characteristics require
an artiﬁcial means of reducing the data-acquisition and
processing time.

When sampling time is limited, a better approach is
to reduce or eliminate averaging altogether in favor of
acquiring a single data block, or sample. This reduces the
acquisition time to its absolute minimum. In most cases,
the single-sample time interval is less than the minimum
time required to obtain two or more data blocks using
the maximum overlap-averaging sampling technique. In
addition, single-sample data are more accurate.

Table 44.2 describes overlap-averaging options. Note
that the approach described in this table assumes that the
vibration proﬁle of monitored machines is constant.

Table 44.2 Overlap Averaging Options

Overlap, %

Description

by a gear set by deﬁning the minimum and maximum
frequencies bounding the gear mesh. The bandwidth of
the narrowband should be broad enough to include the
modulations, or sidebands, generated by the meshing.
For example, a gear with 50 teeth generates a gear
mesh at 50 times the running speed of its shaft (50ð).
If the shaft turns at 100 rpm, the gear mesh frequency is
5000 cpm (also rpm). The modulations of a normal gear
will occur at multiples of shaft speed (100 rpm). There-
fore, in order to capture ﬁve sidebands on each side of
the gear mesh frequency, the narrowband window should
be established with ﬁlters set at 4500 cpm and 5500 cpm
[5000 š (cid:2)5 ð 100(cid:3)].

In actual practice, the narrowband ﬁlters should be
somewhat greater
than those in the example. Since
constant-speed machines tend to have a slight variation
in speed due to load variations, the narrowbands should
be adjusted to compensate for these variations. In the
example given previously, the limit of the lower ﬁlter
should be decreased by 10 per cent and the upper limit
rose by 5 per cent to compensate for speed variation.

Variable-speed machine-
Variable-speed machinery
train narrowband windows should be converted to their
relationship to the running speed (1ð). For example, if
the frequency of the ball-pass inner-race rolling-element
bearing is calculated to be 5.9 times the primary shaft
running speed, then the narrowband window should be
set as 5.3ð to 6.2ð. This allows the microprocessor to
track the actual bearing rotational frequency regardless of
the variation in running speed.

As a rule, the bandwidth of each narrowband should
be just enough to capture the energy generated by the
monitored component. Since orders analysis automatically
adjusts the ﬁlters used to acquire narrowband energy data,
these windows can be somewhat tighter than those in
frequency analysis.

Vibration data collected with
Anti-aliasing ﬁlters
a microprocessor-based analyzer can be ﬁltered and
conditioned to eliminate non-recurring events and their
associated vibration proﬁles. Anti-aliasing ﬁlters are
incorporated into data-collection analyzers speciﬁcally to
remove spurious signals such as impacts. While the intent
behind the use of anti-aliasing ﬁlters is valid, their use can
distort a machine’s vibration proﬁle.

All machine-trains are subject to random,
Averaging
non-recurring vibration as well as periodic vibration.
Therefore,
is advisable to acquire several sets of
data and average them to eliminate the spurious signals.
Averaging also improves the repeatability of the data since
only the continuous signals are retained.

it

Typically, a minimum of three
Number of averages
samples should be collected for an average. However,
the factor that determines the actual number is time. One
sample takes three to ﬁve seconds, a four-sample aver-
age takes 12 to 20 seconds, and a 1000-sample average
takes 50 to 80 minutes to acquire. Therefore, the ﬁnal

0

25

50

75

90

No overlap. Data trace update rate is the same as
the block processing rate. This rate is governed
by the physical requirements that are internally
driven by the frequency range of the requested
data.

Terminates data acquisition when 75% of each

block of new data is acquired. The last 25% of
the previous sample (of the 75%) will be added
to the new sample before processing is begun.
Therefore, 75% of each sample is new. As a
result, accuracy may be reduced by as much as
25% for each data set.

The last 50% of the previous block is added to a

new 50% or half-block of data for each sample.
When the required number of samples is
acquired and processed, the analyzer averages
the data set. Accuracy may be reduced to 50%.
Each block of data is limited to 25% new data and

the last 75% of the previous block.

Each block contains 10% new data and the last

90% of the previous block. Accuracy of average
data using 90% overlap is uncertain. Since each
block used to create the average contains only
10% of actual data and 90% of a block that was
extrapolated from a 10% sample, the result
cannot be representative of the real vibration
generated by the machine-train.

Source: Integrated Systems, Inc

44/778 Vibration Monitoring and Analysis

The
Window selection: weighting or signal conditioning
user can select the type of signal conditioning, or weight-
ing used to display the vibration signature. For routine
monitoring, the Hanning window should be selected. The
ﬂat-top window should be used for waterfall analysis,
which modiﬁes the proﬁle of each frequency component
so that the true amplitude is displayed.

The Hanning correction provides the best cap-
Hanning
ture of the individual frequency components of a signa-
ture. However, this weighting factor may distort the actual
amplitude of the frequency components. Nevertheless, it
is used for routine monitoring using FFT analysis.

Flat-top weighting provides the best represen-
Flat-top
tation of the actual amplitude of each frequency com-
ponent. However, it may distort the actual location (i.e.,
frequency) of each component.

Flat-top weighting is useful when doing waterfall
analysis. Even though the actual
location of each
frequency component may be slightly out of position,
the proﬁle is more visible when closely packed into a
waterfall display. However, it is not normally used for
single-channel FFT analysis.

Alert/alarm limits

All microprocessor-based predictive-maintenance systems
are designed to automatically evaluate degradation of the
machine-train by monitoring the change in amplitude of
vibration using trending techniques. By establishing a
series of alert/alarm limits in the database, the system
can automatically notify the analyst that degradation is
occurring. At least three levels of alert/alarms should
be established: (1) low-limit alert, (2) maximum rate of
change, and (3) absolute fault.

The ﬁrst alert (i.e., low-limit alerta)
Low-limit alert
should be set at the lowest vibration amplitude that will
be encountered from a normally operating machine-train.
This value is needed to ensure that valid data are taken
with the microprocessor. If this minimum amplitude is not
reached, the system alerts the operator, who can retake or
verify the data point. Low-limit selection is arbitrary, but
should be set slightly above the noise ﬂoor of the speciﬁc
microprocessor used to acquire data.

The second alert (i.e.,
Maximum rate of change alert
maximum rate of change alert) is used to automatically
notify the operator that based on statistical data;
the
rate of degradation has increased above the pre-selected
norm. Since the vibration amplitudes of all machine-trains
increase as normal wear occurs, the statistical rate of this
normal increase should be trended. A drastic change in
this rate is a major indication that a problem is developing.
The system should be able to establish the norm based
on trends developed over time. However, the analyst must
establish the level of deviation that triggers the alarm.
The level of deviation in rate depends on the mechanical
condition of each machine-train. For a new machine in
good operating condition, the limit is typically set at two

times the norm. However, this must be adjusted based on
the actual baseline of the machine. Note that it is better
to set the limit too low initially and adjust it later.

The third limit (absolute-fault
Absolute-fault alarm
alarm) is the most critical of the alert/alarm limits. When
this limit is reached, the probability of catastrophic failure
within 1000 operating hours is greater than 90 per cent.
Absolute-fault limits are typically based on industrial
standards for speciﬁc classiﬁcations of machinery. Gen-
erally, these standards are based on a ﬁltered broadband
limit and are not adjusted for variables such as speed, load
or mounting conﬁguration. However, vibration amplitude
and its severity depend on speed and load. Therefore,
alert/alarm limits must be adjusted for variations in both
of these critical factors.

Affect of speed on limit Vibration-severity charts, such
as the Rathbone chart illustrated in Figure 44.14, provide
a basis for establishing the absolute-fault limit for machin-
ery. Note, however, that the Rathbone chart does not
adjust the maximum limit for speed – something that can
cause a serious problem in most industrial applications.

A 2-mil shaft displacement at 600 rpm is acceptable for
most applications, but the same displacement at 1800 rpm
is considered severe. Therefore, alert/alarm limits must
be established based on the actual speed range of each
machine-train. When casing severity is used (i.e., data
are taken from the bearing caps rather than actual shaft
displacement), the limits can be grouped into three basic
speed ranges: less than 299 rpm, 300 to 1199 rpm, and
1200 through 3600 rpm. Tables 44.3 through 44.5 provide
the alert/alarm limits for each speed range.

Load has a direct impact on
Effect of load on limit
the vibration energy generated by a machine-train. For
example, a centrifugal compressor operating at full load
will have a lower level of vibration than the same com-
pressor operating at 50 per cent load. This change in
vibration energy is the direct result of a corresponding
change in the spring stiffness of the rotating element under
varying load conditions.

The rated, or design, load of a machine establishes the
following elements: (1) spring constant, (2) stiffness of
the rotating element, and (3) damping coefﬁcient of its
support system. Therefore, when load varies from design,

Table 44.3 Alarm Limits for 1200 rpm and Higher

Bandwidth

Alert

Alarm

Absolute Fault

Overall
1ð narrowband 0.10 ips-peak 0.20 ips-peak
2ð narrowband 0.05 ips-peak 0.10 ips-peak
3ð narrowband 0.04 ips-peak 0.08 ips-peak
1ð gear mesh
0.05 ips-peak 0.10 ips-peak
Rolling-element 0.05 ips-peak 0.10 ips-peak

0.15 ips-peak 0.30 ips-peak 0.628 ips-peak
0.40 ips-peak
0.20 ips-peak
0.15 ips-peak
0.2 ps-peak
0.2 ps-peak

bearing

Blade/vane pass 0.05 ips-peak 0.10 ips-peak

0.2 ps-peak

Source: Integrated Systems, Inc.

Vibration frequency (cpm)

Database development 44/779

0
0
0
,
1

0
0
2
,
1

0
0
8
,
1

0
0
0
,
2

0
0
0
,
3

0
0
6
,
3

0
0
0
,
4

0
0
0
,
5

0
0
0
,
0
1

0
0
0
,
0
2

0
0
0
,
0
3

0
0
0
,
0
4

0
0
0
,
0
5

0
0
0
,
0
0
1

Values shown are for
filtered readings taken
on the machine structure
or bearing cap.

0
0
3

0
0
4

0
0
5

V

e
r
y r

R

o

u

g

h

o

u

g

h

Slig

F

airG

htly r

o

u

g

h

V

e
r
y g

o

o

d

S

m

o

o

d

E

xtr

e

m

V

e
r
y s

o

oth

m

ely s

m

o

oth

o

oth

0
0
2

,

1

0
0
8

,

1

0
0
6

,

3

0.6
2

8 in/s
e
c.

0.3
1

0.1
5

4 in/s
e
c.
7 in/s
e
c.
0.0
7

0.0
8

0.0
1

9

0.0
0

9

8

9

5 in/s
e
c.
2 in/s
e
c.
6 in/s
e
c.
8 in/s
e
c.

9 in/s
e
c.

0.0
0

4

)
k
a
e
p

 
c
e
s
/

n
i
(
 
y
t
i
c
o
e
v
 

l

n
o

i
t

a
r
b
V

i

0
0
2

0
0
1

10.00
8.00
6.00
4.00
3.00
2.00

1.00
0.80
0.60
0.40
0.30
0.20

0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.03
0.02

0.01
0.008
0.006
0.004
0.003
0.002

0.001

)
k
a
e
p
-
o
t
-
k
a
e
p
 
s
m

l

(
 
 
t
n
e
m
e
c
a
p
s
d

l

i

 

n
o

i
t

a
r
b
V

i

Figure 44.14 Rathbone Chart

Table 44.4 Alarm Limits for 300 rpm to 1199 rpm

Table 44.5 Alarm Limits for 300 rpm and Below

Bandwidth

Alert

Alarm

Absolute Fault

Bandwidth

Alert

Alarm

Absolute Fault

Overall
0.10 ips-peak 0.15 ips-peak
1ð narrowband 0.05 ips-peak 0.10 ips-peak
2ð narrowband 0.02 ips-peak 0.05 ips-peak
3ð narrowband 0.01 ips-peak 0.03 ips-peak
1ð gear mesh
0.02 ips-peak 0.04 ips-peak
Rolling-element 0.03 ips-peak 0.05 ips-peak

bearing

0.30 ips-peak
0.20 ips-peak
0.10 ips-peak
0.06 ips-peak
0.08 ips-peak
0.10 ips-peak

0.10 ips-peak

Overall
0.05 ips-peak 0.10 ips-peak
1ð narrowband 0.03 ips-peak 0.06 ips-peak
2ð narrowband 0.01 ips-peak 0.03 ips-peak
3ð narrowband 0.01 ips-peak 0.02 ips-peak
1ð gear mesh
0.02 ips-peak 0.03 ips-peak
Rolling-element 0.02 ips-peak 0.03 ips-peak

bearings

0.20 ips-peak
0.12 ips-peak
0.06 ips-peak
0.04 ips-peak
0.05 ips-peak
0.05 ips-peak

0.05 ips-peak

Blade/vane pass 0.03 ips-peak 0.05 ips-peak

Blade/vane pass 0.02 ips-peak 0.03 ips-peak

Source: Integrated Systems, Inc.

Source: Integrated Systems, Inc.

the stiffness of the rotor and the rotor-support system also
must change.

This change in vibration energy can be clearly
observed in trend data acquired from machine-trains. A
sawtooth trend is common to most predictive-maintenance
programs, which can be directly attributed to variations in
load. The only way to compensate for load variations is
to track the actual load associated with each data set.

Indus-
Mounting conﬁguration and operating envelope
trial standards, such as the rathbone severity chart, assume
that the machine is rigidly mounted on a suitable concrete
foundation. Machines mounted on deck-plate or on ﬂexi-
ble foundations have higher normal vibration proﬁles and
cannot be evaluated using these standards.

In addition, industrial standards assume a normal oper-
ating envelope. All machines and process systems have a

obtain data. Limits are cost, weight restrictions, and the
fact that they are generally designed for a technician
to manually take a series of
single measurements
directly from individual machine-trains or machine-train
components. Therefore, this discussion is limited to the
best practices for acquiring single-channel, frequency-
domain data using portable, hand-held analyzers.
It
does not address multi-channel or other non-serial data-
acquisition techniques.

Data-acquisition and vibration-detection equipment
(i.e., analyzers and transducers) are critical factors that
determine the success or failure of a vibration monitoring
and analysis program. Their accuracy, proper usage,
and mounting determine if valid data are collected.
An optimum program is based on the accuracy and
repeatability of the data, both of which are negatively
affected by the use of the wrong transducer or mounting
technique.

44.5.1 Transducers

Three basic types of transducers that can be used for
monitoring the mechanical condition of plant machin-
ery: displacement probes (measures movement), veloc-
ity transducers (measures energy due to velocity), and
accelerometers (measures force due to acceleration). Each
has speciﬁc applications in a monitoring program, while
each also has limitations.

44/780 Vibration Monitoring and Analysis

ﬁnite operating range and must be operated accordingly.
Deviations from either the design operating envelope or
from best operating practices will adversely affect the
operating condition and vibration level of the machine.

Data-acquisition routes

to be established as part of

Most computer-based systems require data-acquisition
routes
the database
setup. These routes speciﬁcally deﬁne the sequence of
measurement points and, typically, a route is developed
for each area or section of the plant. With the exception of
limitations imposed by some of the vibration monitoring
systems, these routes should deﬁne a logical walking route
within a speciﬁc plant area. A typical measurement is
shown in Figure 44.15.

Most of the computer-based systems permit rearrange-
ment of the data-acquisition sequence in the ﬁeld. They
provide the ability to skip through the route until the
appropriate machine, or the measurement point of a
machine, is located. However, this manual adjustment of
the pre-programmed route is time consuming and should
be avoided whenever possible.

44.5 Vibration data acquisition
Limitations on data acquisition arise due to the use of
portable hand-held, microprocessor-based analyzers to

Figure 44.15 Typical measurement route

44.5.2 Measurement orientation

Most vibration-monitoring programs rely on data acquired
from machine housings or bearing caps. The only excep-
tions are applications that require direct measurement of
actual shaft displacement to gain an accurate picture of
the machine’s dynamics. Transducers used to acquire the
data are mounted either radially or axially.

44.5.3 Measurement locations

Each measurement point, typically located on the bearing
housing or machine casing, should provide the shortest
direct mechanical link to the shaft. Figure 44.16 illustrates
such a location oriented in both the axial and radial planes.
If a transducer is not mounted in an appropriate location,
the data will be distorted by noise such as ﬂuid ﬂow in
the bearing reservoir or through the machine.

Measurement locations should be permanently marked
to ensure repeatability of data. If transducers are perma-
nently mounted, the location can be marked with a center
punch, paint, or any other method that identiﬁes the point.
The following sections give the recommended locations
and orientations of measurement points for the follow-
ing common machines or machine components: compres-
sors, electric motors, fans and blowers, gearboxes, process
rolls, and pumps.

Compressors

In most cases, measurement-point locations for compres-
sors are identical to those of pumps and fans. If a compres-
sor is V-belt driven, the belts on the inboard and outboard
bearings should in a plane opposing the sideload create the
primary measurement point. The secondary point should
be at 90° to the primary point.

At least one axial measurement point should be located
on each compressor shaft. Axial data are helpful in iden-
tifying and quantifying thrust (i.e., induced) loads created

Radial measurement

Vibration data acquisition 44/781

by both the process and any potential compressor-element
problems, such as imbalance, cracked blade, etc.

In applications where numerous compressors are in
close proximity, an additional measurement point on the
base is useful for identifying structural resonance or cross-
talk between the units.

There are two major types of centrifugal
Centrifugal
compressors used in industrial applications: in-line and
bullgear.

In-line centrifugal Measurement locations for in-line
centrifugal compressors should be based on the same logic
as discussed for pumps. Impeller design and orientation,
as well as the inlet and discharge conﬁgurations, are the
dominant reasons for point location. Figure 44.17 illus-
trates a typical multi-stage, in-line compressor.

The in-line impeller conﬁguration generates high axial
thrusting, which increases the importance of the axial (Z-
axis) measurement point. That point should be on the ﬁxed
bearing and oriented toward the driver.

In addition, this type of compressor tends to have both
the suction and discharge ports on the same side of the
compressor’s housing. As a result, there is a potential
for aerodynamic instability within the compressor. Orien-
tation of the primary (X-axis) radial measurement point
should be opposite the discharge port and oriented toward
the discharge. The secondary (Y-axis) radial point should
be in the direction of shaft rotation and 90° from the
primary radial point.

Bullgear compressors

Because of the large number of these machines being
manufactured, proper locations for displacement, or prox-
imity, the various machine manufacturers have established
probes. Nearly all of these compressors are supplied by
the original-equipment manufacturer (OEM) with one or

Axial measurement

X

Z
Y

Figure 44.16 Measurement points should provide shortest direct
mechanical link to shaft

Figure 44.17 Multi-stage in-line compressors

44/782 Vibration Monitoring and Analysis

two proximity probes already mounted on each pinion
shaft and, sometimes, one probe on the bullgear shaft.
These probes can be used to obtain vibration data with the
microprocessor-based portable analyzers. However, they
must be augmented with casing measurements acquired
from suitable accelerometers. This is necessary because
there are two problems with the proximity data.

First, most of the OEM-supplied data-acquisition sys-
tems perform signal conditioning on the raw data acquired
from the probes. If the conditioned signal is used, there is
a bias in the recorded amplitude. This bias may increase
the raw-data signal by 30 to 50 per cent. If data from the
proximity probes are to be used, it is better to acquire
it before signal conditioning. This can be accomplished
by tapping into the wiring between the probe and dis-
play panel.

The second problem is data accuracy. The pinions
on most bullgear compressors rotate at speeds between
20,000 and 75,000 rpm. While these speeds, for the most
part, are within the useful range of a proximity probe (600
to 60,000 rpm), the frequencies generated by common
components (i.e., tilting-pad bearings and impeller vane-
pass) are well outside this range. In addition, proximity
probes depend on a good sight picture, which means a
polished shaft that has no end-play or axial movement.
Neither of these conditions are present
in a bullgear
compressor.

Primary (X-axis) and secondary (Y-axis) radial mea-
surements should be acquired from both bearings on the
bullgear shaft. If the shaft has Babbitt bearings, it is a
good practice to periodically acquire four radial readings,
one at each quadrant of the bearing, to determine the load
zones of the bearing. Normal vertical and horizontal loca-
tions are acceptable for the routine readings, but primary
(X-axis) measurement points should be in the horizontal
plane (i.e., 90° from vertical in the direction of rotation).
For clockwise rotation, the primary should be on the right
side and for counterclockwise on the left.

Because a bullgear compressor incorporates a large
helical gear, the shaft displays moderate to high axial

thrusting. Therefore, an axial (Z-axis) measurement point
should be acquired from the thrust (outboard) bearing
oriented toward the driver.

The pinion shafts in this type of compressor are inside
the housing. As a result, it is difﬁcult to obtain radial
measurements directly. A cross-sectional drawing of the
compressor is required to determine the best location and
orientation for the measurement points.

Two major types of positive-
Positive displacement
displacement compressors are used in industrial applica-
tions: reciprocating and screw.

Limitations of

the frequency-domain
Reciprocating
analysis prevent total analysis of reciprocating compres-
sors. It is limited to the evaluation of the rotary forces
generated by the main crankshaft. Therefore, time-domain
and phase analysis are required for complete diagnostics.
The primary (X-axis) radial measurement point should
be located in a plane opposite the piston and cylinder.
Its orientation should be toward the piston’s stroke. This
orientation provides the best reading of the impacts and
vibration proﬁle generated by the reversing linear motion
of the pistons. The secondary (Y-axis) radial measure-
ment point should be spaced at 90° to the primary point
and in the direction of rotation at the main crankshaft.
This conﬁguration should be used for all accessible main
crankshaft bearings. Figure 44.18 provides a typical cross-
section of a reciprocating compressor, which will assist in
locating the best measurement points. Similar drawings
are available for most compressors and can be obtained
from the vendor. There should be little axial thrusting of
the main crankshaft, but an axial (Z-axis) measurement
point should be established on the ﬁxed bearing, oriented
toward the driver.

If the vibration analyzer permits acquisition of time-
domain data, additional time-waveform data should be
obtained from the intermediate guide as well as the inlet
and discharge valves. The intermediate guide is located

Figure 44.18 Typical cross-section of a reciprocating compressor

Vibration data acquisition 44/783

Figure 44.19 Single-stage screw compressor

where the main crankshaft lever arm connects to the piston
rod. Time waveforms from these locations detect any bind-
ing or timing problems than may exist in the compressor.

Figure 44.19 illustrates a typical single-stage
Screw
should be
screw compressor. Radial measurements
acquired from all bearing locations in the compressor.
The primary bearing locations are the inboard, or ﬂoat,
bearings on the driver side of the compressor housing
and the ﬁxed bearing located on the outboard end of
each shaft.

In most cases, the outboard bearings are not directly
accessible and measurement points must be located on
the compressor’s casing. Extreme care must be taken to
ensure proper positioning. A cross-sectional drawing facil-
itates selection of the best, most direct mechanical link to
these bearings.

The primary (X-axis) radial measurement point should
be located opposite the mesh of the rotors and oriented
toward the mesh. In the illustration, the primary point is on
the top of the housing and oriented in the downward direc-
tion. The secondary (Y-axis) radial measurement point
should be in the direction of rotation and 90° from the
primary.

Because of the tendency for screw compressors to gen-
erate high axial vibration when subjected to changes in
process conditions, the axial (Z-axis) measurement point
is essential. The ideal location for this point is on the out-
board, or ﬁxed, bearing and oriented toward the driver.
Unfortunately, this is not always possible. The outboard
bearings are fully enclosed within the compressor’s hous-
ing and an axial measurement cannot be obtained at these
points. Therefore, the axial measurement must be acquired
from the ﬂoat, or inboard, bearings. While this position
captures the axial movement of the shaft, the recorded lev-
els are lower than those acquired from the ﬁxed bearings.

Electric motors

Both radial (X- and Y-axis) measurements should be
taken at
the inboard and outboard bearing housings.

The anticipated induced load created by the driven units
determines orientation of the measurements. The primary
(X-axis) radial measurement should be positioned in the
same plane as the worst anticipated shaft displacement.
The secondary (Y-axis) radial should be position at
90°
in the direction of rotation to the primary point
and oriented to permit vector analysis of actual shaft
displacement.

Horizontal motors rely on a magnetic center generated
by its electrical ﬁeld to position the rotor in the axial (Z-
axis) plane between the inboard and outboard bearings.
Therefore, most electric motors are designed with two
ﬂoat bearings instead of the normal conﬁguration incor-
porating one ﬂoat and one ﬁxed bearing. Vertical motors
should have an axial (Z-axis) measurement point at the
inboard bearing nearest the coupling and oriented in an
upward direction. This data point monitor the downward
axial force created by gravity or an abnormal load.

Electric motors are not designed to absorb side loads,
such as those induced by V-belt drives. In applications
where V-belts or other radial loads are placed on the
motor, the primary radial transducer (X-axis) should be
oriented opposite the direction of induced load and the
secondary radial (Y-axis) point should be positioned at
90° in the direction of rotation. If, for safety reasons,
the primary transducer cannot be positioned opposite the
induced load, the two radial transducers should be placed
at 45° on either side of the load plane created by the
side load.

Totally enclosed,

fan-cooled, and explosion-proof
motors create some difﬁculty in acquiring data on the
outboard bearing. By design, the outboard bearing housing
is not accessible. The optimum method of acquiring data
is to permanently mount a sensor on the outboard-bearing
housing and run the wires to a convenient data-acquisition
location. If this is not possible, the X–Y data points
should be as close as possible to the bearing housing.
Ensure that
there is a direct mechanical path to the
outboard bearing. The use of this approach results in some
loss of signal strength from motor-mass damping. Do not
obtain data from the fan housing.

44/784 Vibration Monitoring and Analysis

Fans and blowers

If a fan is V-belt driven, the belts on the inboard and
outboard bearings should in a plane opposing the side-
load create the primary measurement point. The secondary
point should be at 90° degrees to the primary in the direc-
tion of rotation.

Bowed shafts caused by thermal and mechanical effects
create severe problems on large fans, especially overhung
designs. Therefore, it is advantageous to acquire data from
all four quadrants of the outboard bearing housing on
overhung fans to detect this problem.

At least one axial measurement point should be located
on each fan shaft. This is especially important on fans
that are V-belt driven. Axial data are helpful in identify-
ing and quantifying thrust (induced) loads created by the
process and any potential fan element problems such as
imbalance, cracked blade, etc.

In applications where numerous fans are in close prox-
imity, an additional measurement point on the base is
useful for identifying structural resonance or cross-talk
between the fans.

Gearboxes

set.

Gearbox measurement-point orientation and location
should be conﬁgured to allow monitoring of the normal
In most cases,
forces generated by the gear
the separating force, which tends to pull
the gears
apart, determines the primary radial measurement-point
location. For example, a helical gear set generates a
separating force that is tangential to a centerline drawn
through the pinion and bullgear shafts. The primary (X-
axis) radial measurement point should be orientated to
monitor this force and a secondary (Y-axis) radial should
be located at 90° to the primary. The best location for
the secondary (Y-axis) radial is opposite the direction of
rotation. In other words, the secondary leads the primary
transducers.

With the exception of helical gears, most gear sets
should not generate axial or thrust loads in normal oper-
ation. However, at least one axial (Z-axis) measurement
point should be placed on each of the gear shafts. The
axial point should be located at the ﬁxed, or thrust, bear-
ing cap and oriented toward the gearbox.

In complex gearboxes, it may be difﬁcult to obtain
radial measurements from the intermediate or idler shafts.
In most cases, these intermediate shafts and their bearings
are well inside the gearbox. As a result, direct access to
the bearings is not possible. In these cases, the only option
is to acquire axial (Z-axis) readings through the gearbox
housing. A review of the cross-sectional drawings allows
the best location for these measurements to be determined.
The key is to place the transducer at a point that will
provide the shortest, direct link to the intermediate shaft.

is even more critical for process rolls than for some of the
other machine components.

The loading on each roll is generated by the belt, wire
mesh, and/or transported product. The amount and distri-
bution of the load varies depending on the wrap of the
carried load. Wrap refers to the angular distance around
the roll that touches the belt, wire mesh, or product. In
most conveyor systems, the load is relatively uniform
and is in a downward direction. In this case, the tradi-
tional vertical, horizontal, and axial mounting positions
are acceptable.

Figure 44.20 represents a typical process-roll conﬁgu-
ration. The arrows indicate the force vectors generated by
the wire, belt, or product wrap around these rolls. The left
roll has a force vector at 45° down to the left; the right
roll has a mirror image force vector; and the bottom roll
has a vertical vector.

The primary (X-axis) radial measurement for the bot-
tom roll should be in the vertical plane with the transducer
mounted on top of the bearing cap. The secondary radial
(Y-axis) measurement should be in the horizontal plane
facing upstream of the belt. Since the belt carried by the
roll also imparts a force vector in the direction of travel,
this secondary point should be opposite the direction of
belt travel.

The ideal primary (X-axis) point for the top right roll
is opposite the force vector. In this instance, the primary
radial measurement point should be located on the right
of the bearing cap facing upward at a 45° angle. Theo-
retically, the secondary (Y-axis) radial point should be at
90° to the primary on the bottom-left of the bearing cap.
However, it may be difﬁcult, if not impossible, to locate
and access a measurement point here. Therefore, the next
best location is at 45° from the anticipated force vector on
the left of the bearing cap. This placement still provides
the means to calculate the actual force vector generated
by the product.

Pumps

Appropriate measurement points vary by type of pump.
In general, pumps can be classiﬁed as centrifugal or pos-
itive displacement, and each of these can be divided into
groups.

Centrifugal

The location of measurement points for centrifugal pumps
depends on whether the pump is classiﬁed as end suction
or horizontal split-case.

Process rolls

Process rolls are widely used by industry. As with other
machine components, two radial (X- and Y-axis) and one
axial (Z-axis) measurements should be acquired from each
roll. However, the orientation of these measurement points

Figure 44.20 Typical process-roll conﬁguration and wrap-force
vectors

Vibration data acquisition 44/785

greatly improves the hydraulic-ﬂow characteristics within
the pump and improves its ability to resist ﬂow-induced
instability.

The location of the primary (X-axis) radial measure-
ment point for this type of pump is in the horizontal
plane and on the opposite side from the discharge. The
secondary (Y-axis) radial measurement point should be
90° to the primary point and in the direction of rotation.
If the illustrated pump has a clockwise rotation, the mea-
surement point should be on top, oriented downward. For
a counter-clockwise rotation, it should be on bottom, ori-
ented upward.

Single-stage pumps generate some axial thrusting due
to imbalance between the discharge and inlet pressures.
The impeller design provides a means of balancing these
forces, but it cannot absolutely compensate for the dif-
ference in the pressures. As a result, there will be some
axial rotor movement. In double volute, or multi-stage,
pumps, two impellers are positioned back to back. This
conﬁguration eliminates most of the axial thrusting when
the pump is operating normally.

An axial (Z-axis) measurement point should be located
on the ﬁxed bearing housing. It should be oriented toward
the driver to capture any instability that may exist.

Multi-stage Multi-stage pumps may be either end-
suction or horizontal split-case pumps. They have two
basic impeller conﬁgurations,
in-line or opposed, as
shown in Figure 44.23. In-line impellers generate high
thrust loads.

The impeller conﬁguration does not alter the radial
measurement
locations discussed in the preceding
sections. However, it increases the importance of the axial
(Z-axis) measurement point. The in-line conﬁguration
drastically increases the axial
loading on the rotating
element and, therefore, the axial (Z-axis) measurement

Figure 44.21 illustrates a typical single-
End suction
stage, end-suction centrifugal pump. The suction inlet is
on the axial centerline, while the discharge may be either
horizontal or vertical. In the illustration, the actual dis-
charge is horizontal and is ﬂanged in the vertical down-
stream. The actual discharge orientation determines the
primary radial (X) measurement point. This point must be
oriented in the same plane as the discharge and opposite
the direction of ﬂow. In the illustration, the primary point
should be in the horizontal plane facing the discharge.

Restrictions or other causes of back-pressure in the
discharge piping deﬂect the shaft in the opposite direc-
tion. Referring back to the illustration, the shaft would
be deﬂected toward the front of the picture. If the dis-
charge were vertical and in the downward direction, the
primary radial measurement point would be at the top of
the pump’s bearing cap looking downward.

A second radial (Y-axis) measurement point should be
positioned at 90° to the primary in a plane that captures
secondary shaft deﬂection. For the pump illustrated in
Figure 44.21, the secondary (Y-axis) radial measurement
point is located on top of the pump’s bearing cap and
oriented downward. Since the pump has a clockwise rota-
tion, back-pressure in the discharge piping forces the shaft
both downward and horizontally toward the front of the
picture.

Since this type of pump is susceptible to axial thrust-
ing, an axial (Z-axis) measurement point is essential. This
point should be on the ﬁxed bearing housing oriented
toward the driver.

The ﬂow pattern through a hor-
Horizontal split-case
izontal split-case pump is radically different than that
through an end-suction pump. Inlet and discharge ﬂow
are in the same plane and almost directly opposite one
another. This conﬁguration, illustrated in Figure 44.22,

Figure 44.21 Typical end-suction, single-stage centrifugal pump

44/786 Vibration Monitoring and Analysis

Figure 44.22 Typical horizontal split-case pump

Inline configuration

point is critical. Obviously, this point must be in a location
that detects axial movement of the shaft. However, since
large, heavy-duty ﬁxed bearings are used to withstand
the high thrust loading generated by this design, direct
measurement is difﬁcult. A cross-sectional drawing of the
pump may be required to locate a suitable location for
this measurement point.

100 PSID

100 PSID

100 PSID

Positive displacement

300 PSI

100 PSI

100 PSI

100 PSID 100 PSID
Opposed configuration

Figure 44.23 In-line and opposed impellers on multi-stage pumps

Positive-displacement pumps can be divided into two
major types: rotary and reciprocating. All rotary pumps
use some form of rotating element, such as gears, vanes,
or lobes to increase the discharge pressure. Reciprocating
pumps use pistons or wobble plates to increase the
pressure.

Locations of measurement points for rotary
Rotary
positive-displacement pumps should be based on the same
logic as in-line centrifugal pumps. The primary (X-axis)
radial measurement should be taken in the plane opposite
the discharge port. The secondary (Y-axis) radial should
be at 90° to the primary and in the direction of the rotor’s
rotation.

Since most rotary positive-displacement pumps have
inlet and outlet ports in the same plane and opposed,
there should be relatively little axial thrusting. However,
an axial (Z-axis) measurement should be acquired from
the ﬁxed bearing, oriented toward the driver.

Reciprocating pumps are more difﬁcult
Reciprocating
to monitor because of
the combined rotational and
linear motions that are required to increase the discharge
pressure. Measurement-point
location and orientation
should be based on the same logic as that of reciprocating
compressors.

44.6 Trending analysis
Long-term vibration trends are a useful diagnostic
tool. Trending techniques involve graphically comparing
the total energy, which is the sum of the frequency
components’ amplitude over
some consistent, user-
selected frequency range (i.e., FMIN to FMAX), over
a long period to get a historical perspective of the
vibration pattern. Plots of this sum against time (e.g.,
days) provide a means of quantifying the relative
condition of the monitored machine (see Figure 44.24).
Most predictive-maintenance systems provide automatic-
trending capabilities for recorded data. This is not to be
confused with time-domain plots, which are instantaneous
measures of total vibration amplitude plotted against time
measured in seconds.

this

Used properly,

feature greatly enhances

a
predictive-maintenance program. The real value of
trending techniques is that they provide the capability
of automatically scanning large amounts of data (both
broadband and narrowband) and reporting any change in
pre-selected values.

44.6.1 Types of trends

There are three primary categories of trends: broadband,
narrowband, and combinations of the two.

Broadband

Most microprocessor-based vibration-monitoring systems
acquire and record a ﬁltered broadband energy level for

Trending analysis 44/787

each data point included in the program. The bandwidth of
the energy band is determined by the minimum, FMIN, and
maximum, FMAX, frequencies that were established as part
of the database setup. In most applications, the minimum
frequency should be zero, but
the maximum varies,
depending on the speciﬁc machine-train. Figure 44.25
illustrates typical broadband data.

Broadband data cannot be used to identify speciﬁc
machine components (e.g., bearing, gears, etc.) or failure
modes (e.g.,
imbalance, misalignment, etc.). The data
acquired using broadband ﬁlters are limited to the total
energy value contained within the user-selected frequency
window or bandwidth, FMIN to FMAX.

At best, broadband energy provides a gross approxi-
mation of the machine’s condition and its relative rate
of degradation. Since the only available data are over-
all energy values, broadband data do not provide enough
detail
to permit diagnosis of machine-train condition.
Without discrete identiﬁcation of the speciﬁc frequencies
that make up the overall energy, the failure mode or failing
component cannot be determined.

Narrowband

Like broadband data, narrowband data also reﬂect the total
energy, but it reﬂects a more restricted user-selected range
or window. Narrowband monitoring generally is used to
trend and evaluate one selected machine-train compo-
nent rather than several. Filtered narrowband windows
are typically set up around the unique frequency compo-
nents generated by speciﬁc machine-train components so
that the energy in each ﬁltered window can be directly
attributed to that speciﬁc machine component. However,
even though narrowband analysis improves the diagnos-
tic capabilities of a predictive-maintenance program, it is
not possible to isolate and identify speciﬁc failure modes
within a machine-train. Figure 44.26 illustrates the added
information provided by narrowband data.

Machine:   #2  Combustion fan

Trend type:  Filtered broadband

MPT:  V03

0.8

0.7

0.6
0.5
0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

)

K
P
–
S
P

I
(
 
e
d
u

t
i
l

p
m
A

Absolute Fault

Alarm

Low alert

0

30

60

90

120

150

180

210

240

270

300

330

360

390

420

Figure 44.24 Trend data are plotted versus time and provide historical trends

Time (days)

44/788 Vibration Monitoring and Analysis

V01

V02

V03

H03

H01

H02

V04

H04

A04

Point

Value (IPS-peak)

Point

Value (IPS-peak)

V01
V02
V03
V04
A04

0.12
0.15
0.15
0.12
0.14

H01
H02
H03
H04

0.11
0.12
0.10
0.09

Figure 44.25 Typical broadband measurements

V01

V02

H01

V03

H03

V04

H04

A04

H02

Point

Shaft instability

Vanepass

Bearing defects

V01
V02
V03
V04

0.10
0.10
0.13
0.11

0.09
0.09
0.10
0.09

0.001
0.002
0.002
0.010

Figure 44.26 Typical narrowband data

Figure 44.27 illustrates narrowband data trends. In
addition to the overall or broadband energy, narrowbands
trends indicate the relative energy in select machine-train
components. In effect, this type of analysis is a series of
mini-overall energy readings.

includes both broadband and
a composite trend that
narrowband data. This type of plot is quite beneﬁcial
because it permits the analyst to track the key indicators
of machine condition on one plot.

Composite trends

Most microprocessor-based systems permit composite
trending (i.e., simultaneous displays) of both ﬁltered
broadband and narrowband data. Figure 44.28 illustrates

44.7 Evaluation methods
Trend data can be used in the following ways: (1) to
compare with speciﬁc reference values, (2) mode-shape
comparisons, and (3) cross-machine comparisons.

Machine:   #2  Combustion fan

Trend type:  1X Narrowband

MPT:  V03

Evaluation methods 44/789

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

)

K
P
S
P

 

I
(
 
e
d
u
t
i
l

p
m
A

Absolute fault

Alarm

Low alert

0

30

60

90 120 150 180 210 240 270 300 330 360 390 420

Time (days)

Figure 44.27 Narrowband trends provide energy histories of speciﬁc components

)

K
P
S
P

 

I
(
 
e
d
u
t
i
l

p
m
A

0.1

0.1

0.1

0
0.1

0
0.5

0

Bearing defect

Vanepass

Instability

Mech. rub

Broadband rms

0

30

60

90 120 150 180 210 240 270 300 330 360 390

Days

Figure 44.28 Combining trends (i.e. composite) provide both broadband and narrowband data

44.7.1 Comparison to reference values

Three types of reference-value comparisons are used to
evaluate trend data: baseline data, rate of change, and
industrial standards.

operating condition of each machine-train to have value
as a reference.

Three criteria are critical to the proper use of baseline
comparisons: reset after maintenance, proper identiﬁca-
tion, and process envelope.

Baseline data

A series of baseline or reference data sets should be
taken for each machine-train included in a predictive-
maintenance program. These data sets are necessary for
future use as a reference point for trends, time traces,
and FFT signatures that are collected over time. Such
baseline data sets must be representative of the normal

Reset after maintenance

The baseline data set must be updated each time
the machine is repaired, rebuilt, or when any major
maintenance is performed. Even when best practices are
used, machinery cannot be restored to as-new condition
when major maintenance is performed. Therefore, a new

44/790 Vibration Monitoring and Analysis

baseline or reference data set must be obtained following
these events.

Proper identiﬁcation

Each reference or baseline data set must be clearly and
completely identiﬁed. Most vibration-monitoring systems
permit the addition of a label or unique identiﬁer to any
user-selected data set. This capability should be used to
clearly identify each baseline data set.

In addition, the data set label should include all deﬁning
information. For example, any rework or repairs made to
the machine should be identiﬁed. If a new baseline data set
is obtained after the replacement of a rotating element, this
information should be included in the descriptive label.

Process envelope

Since variations in process variables, such as load, have
a direct effect on the vibration energy and signature gen-
erated by a machine-train, the actual operating envelope
for each baseline data set must also be clearly identiﬁed.
If this step is omitted, direct comparison of other data to
the baseline will be meaningless. The label feature in most
vibration monitoring systems permits tagging the baseline
data set with this additional information.

Rate of change

Rate of change is the most often used trend analysis.
Since most of the microprocessor-based systems provide
the ability to automatically display broadband and nar-
rowband data trends, analysts tend to rely on this means
of comparative analysis.

Rate of change is a valid means of deﬁning the rel-
ative condition of rotating machinery. As a rule, there
must be a change in mechanical condition before there
can be a change in the vibration energy generated by a
machine. Therefore, monitoring the rate that the energy
levels change, either up or down, is a useful tool (see
Figure 44.29).

Caution: Broadband and narrowband data must be nor-
malized for changes in load before being valid. Normal
variations in machine load destroy the validity of non-
normalized trend data and little can be gained from its use.

Industrial standards

There are a number of published standards that deﬁne
acceptable levels of vibration in machinery. These stan-
dards are valuable reference tools, but they must be clearly
understood and properly used. Industrial-standard data can

Machine:   #2  Combustion fan

Trend type:  1X Narrowband

MPT:  V03

)

K
P
S
P

 

I
(
 
e
d
u

t
i
l

p
m
A

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

Absolute fault

Alarm

Low alert

0

30

60

90 120 150 180 210 240 270 300 330 360 390 420

Time (days)

Machine:   #2  Combustion fan

Trend type:  1X Narrowband

MPT:  V03

)

 

K
P
S
P

I
(
 
e
d
u
t
i
l

p
m
A

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

Absolute fault

Alarm

Low alert

0

30

60

90 120 150 180 210 240 270 300 330 360 390 420

Time (days)

Figure 44.29 Rate of change of trend data indicates condition change

be obtained from a Rathbone chart (see Figure 44.30) and
from the American Petroleum Institute.

Rathbone chart

The Rathbone chart in Figure 44.30 provides levels of
vibration severity that range from extremely smooth,
which is the best possible operating condition, to very
rough or absolute-fault limit, which is the maximum level
where a machine can operate.

This chart is useful, although it is often misused. Four

factors must be understood before using the chart:

1. Data included in the Rathbone chart are valid for
machines with running speeds between 1200 and
3600 rpm. The chart cannot be used for low-speed or
turbo-machinery.

2. The data presented in the chart are relative vibration
levels (i.e., taken from a bearing pedestal using either
an accelerometer or velocity probe) in inches per sec-
ond (ips) peak.

3. Data are peak values of velocity (ips) for a ﬁltered

broadband from 10 to 10,000 Hz.

4. The severity levels are relative, not absolute. For
example, when a machine reaches the absolute-fault
limit, it has a 90 per cent probability of failure within
its next 1000 hours of operation (i.e., it is not going to
fail tomorrow).

American petroleum institute

The American Petroleum Institute (API) has established
standards for vibration levels. Unlike the Rathbone
chart, which presents relative vibration data,
the API
standards are actual shaft displacement as measured with
a displacement probe. Based on the API data, acceptable
vibration can be deﬁned by:
Vibration severity D

mils, peak-to-peak

12, 000

(cid:3)

rpm

The API equivalent of the absolute-fault limit can be
deﬁned by:
Absolute-fault limit D 1.3 ð

mils, peak-to-peak

(cid:3)

12000
rpm

Figure 44.30 Rathbone chart – relative vibration severity

Evaluation methods 44/791

The API standards are reasonable for turbo-machinery,
but are unacceptable for lower-speed machines. The
standards are applicable for rotating machinery with
speeds above 1800 rpm; marginal for speeds between 600
and 1800 rpm; and should not be used for speeds below
600 rpmx.

44.7.2 Mode shape (shaft deﬂection)

A clear understanding of
the mode shape, or shaft
deﬂection, of a machine’s rotating element is a valuable
diagnostic tool. Both broadband and narrowband ﬁltered
energy windows can be used at each measurement point
and orientation across the machine. The resultant plots,
one in the vertical plane and one in the horizontal plane,
provide an approximation of the mode shape of the
complete machine and its rotating element.

Unfortunately, these plots must be developed manu-
ally. The microprocessor-based systems generally do not
automate this function, but they are easily constructed on
graph paper. The following are the steps to construct such
a plot:

The ﬁrst step is to draw two horizontal lines on the
graph paper. One is used to plot the vertical data and
the other to plot the horizontal. These two lines show the
location of each measurement point in inches with the
outboard motor bearing being at zero.

Next, draw vertical lines that intersect the left-hand end
of the two horizontal lines. These vertical lines form the
amplitude scale for the two plots. Establish the amplitude
scale based on the maximum energy level recorded in the
broadband or narrowband windows.

The ﬁnal step is to plot the actual measured amplitude at
each measurement point on the machine-train. Start with
the outboard motor bearing and move across the machine
until the ﬁnal data set is plotted.

Broadband plots

The overall energy from the ﬁltered broadband plotted
against measurement location provides an approximation
of the mode shape of the installed machine. Figure 44.31
illustrates a vertical broadband plot taken from a Spencer
blower. Note that the motor appears to be ﬂexing in the
vertical direction. Extremely high amplitudes are present
in the motor’s outboard bearing and the amplitudes
decrease at subsequent measurement points across the
machine.

A mode curve exhibiting this shape could indicate that
the motor mountings, or the baseplate under the motor,
are loose and that the motor is moving vertically. In fact,
in the example from which this ﬁgure was taken, this
is exactly what was happening. The blower’s baseplate
‘ﬂoats’ on a one-inch thick cork pad, which is normally
an acceptable practice. However, in this example, an inlet
ﬁlter/silencer was mounted without support directly to the
inlet located on the right end of the machine. The weight
of the ﬁlter/silencer compressed the cork pad under the
blower, which lifted the motor-end of the baseplate off
of the cork pad. In this mode, the motor has complete
freedom of movement in the vertical plane. In effect, it

44/792 Vibration Monitoring and Analysis

Figure 44.31 Vertical broadband mode shape for Spencer blower
indicates potential failure

acts like a tuning fork and creates the high overall energy
recorded on the mode plot.

Narrowband plots

Narrowband plots permit the same type of evaluation for
major vibration components such as fundamental running
speed (1ð) or gear mesh. The plots are constructed in the
same way as for the broadbands, except that the amplitude
values are for user-selected windows, or bands.
Using the previously mentioned example of the Spencer
blower, Figure 44.32 is a plot of the fundamental (1ð)
frequency of the motor-blower shaft versus measurement
location. Note that the vertical mode (see Figure 44.31)
appears to be relatively normal, except for the motor
looseness problem.

The horizontal plot seems to indicate that the shaft is
being severely deﬂected from its true centerline. In addi-
tion, the plot suggests that the deﬂection is outboard (i.e.,
toward the rotor) from the two blower-support bearings.
This outboard deﬂection eliminates misalignment between
the motor and blower as a possible source of the deﬂec-
tion. We must now determine what could cause the rotor
to be deﬂected and why only in the horizontal direction.
The Spencer blower in this example provides air to
a drying process in a metal-coating line. Its conﬁgura-
tion includes an end-suction inlet that is in-line with the
shaft and a horizontal discharge that is perpendicular to
the shaft. In this particular example, the source of the
shaft deﬂection observed in the mode plot is aerodynamic
instability.

The reason for this instability is that the blowers are
incorrectly sized for the application and are running well
outside their performance curve. In effect, the blowers
have no back-pressure and are operating in a run-out con-
dition. The result of operating in this condition is that the
design load intended to stabilized the rotor is no longer
present. This causes the shaft to deﬂect or ﬂex, gen-
erating the high amplitudes observed in the horizontal
mode plot.

The problem is eliminated by restricting the discharge
air ﬂow from the blowers. By increasing the back-
pressure, the blowers are able to operate within their
normal envelope and the shaft deﬂection disappears.

44.7.3 Cross-machine comparisons

Cross-machine comparison is an extremely beneﬁcial tool
to the novice analyst. Most vibration monitoring systems
permit direct comparison of vibration data, both ﬁltered
window energy and complete signatures, acquired from
two machines. This capability permits the analyst
to
directly compare a machine that is known to be in good
operating condition with one that is perceived to have

Machine: #2 Combustion fan

Trend type: Filtered broadband

MPT: VO3

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

)

K
P
−
S
P

I
(
 

e
d
u

t
i
l

p
m
A

Absolute fault

Alarm

Low alert

0

30

60

90

120

150

180

210

240

270

300

330

360

390

420

Figure 44.32 Horizontal narrowband (1ð) mode shape indicates shaft deﬂection

Time (days)

a problem. There are several ways that cross-machine
comparisons can be made using microprocessor-based
systems: multiple plots, ratio, and difference.

44.8 Limitations
Although quite valuable when used properly, trends do
not allow the analyst to conﬁrm that a problem exists
or to determine the cause of incipient problems. Another
limitation is the limited number of values the system can
handle. Further, the data needs to be normalized for speed,
load, and process variables.

44.8.1 Number of values

Some of the vibration-monitoring systems limit the num-
ber of data sets and duration of data that can be auto-
matically trended. In most systems, the number of values
that can be trended is limited to eight to twelve data sets.
Although this limitation prevents trending the machine
over its useful life, it does not eliminate trending as a
vibration-monitoring tool.

44.8.2 Data normalization

Trend data that are not properly normalized for speed,
load, and process variables are of little value. Since load
and process-variable normalization requires a little more
time during the data-acquisition process, many programs
do not perform these adjustments. If this is the case, it is
best to discontinue the use of trends altogether.

As an example, Figure 44.33 illustrates the impact of
load on vibration trends. The solid line represents the
recorded raw broadband vibration levels. The dashed line
is the same data adjusted for changes in load.

Failure mode analysis 44/793

Trend data also must be adjusted for maintenance and
repair activities. Figure 44.34 illustrates an average trend
curve that indicates a sharp rise in vibration levels. It also
reﬂects that, after repair, the levels drop radically. At this
point, all baseline and reference values should be reset. If
this does not occur, the automatic trending capabilities of
the computer-based system do not function properly.

44.9 Failure mode analysis
All of the analysis techniques discussed to this point have
been methods to determine if a potential problem exists
within the machine-train or its associated systems. Failure-
mode analysis is the next step required to speciﬁcally pin-
point the failure mode and identify which machine-train
component is degrading.

U

U

U

In-phase imbalance

In-phase imbalance

e
d
u

t
i
l

p
m
A

1x

Speed

Figure 44.34 Baselines must be reset following repair

Machine: #2 Combustionfan

Trend type: Filtered broadband

MPT: VO3

K
P
−
S
P

I
 

n

i
 

e
d
u

t
i
l

p
m
A

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

Absolute fault

Alarm

Low alert

0

30

60

90

120

150

180

210

240

270

300

330

360

390

420

Time (days)

Figure 44.33 Trends must be adjusted or normalized for load changes

44/794 Vibration Monitoring and Analysis

Although failure-mode analysis identiﬁes the number
and symptoms of machine-train problems, it does not
always identify the true root cause of problems. Root
cause must be veriﬁed by visual inspection, additional
testing, or other techniques such as operating dynamics
analysis.

Failure-mode analysis is based on the assumption that
certain failure modes are common to all machine-trains
and all applications. It also assumes that the vibration
patterns for each of these failure modes, when adjusted for
process-system dynamics, are absolute and identiﬁable.

Two types of information are required to perform
failure-mode analysis: (1) machine-train vibration signa-
tures, both FFTs and time traces; and (2) practical knowl-
edge of machine dynamics and failure modes. A num-
ber of failure-mode charts are available that describe
the symptoms or abnormal vibration proﬁles that indi-
cate potential problems exist. An example is the fol-
lowing description of the imbalance failure mode, which
was obtained from a failure-mode chart: Single-plane
imbalance generates a dominant fundamental (1ð) fre-
quency component with no harmonics (2ð, 3ð, etc.).
Note, however, that the failure-mode charts are simplis-
tic since many other machine-train problems also excite,
or increase the amplitude of, the fundamental (1ð) fre-
quency component. In a normal vibration signature, 60 to
70 per cent of the total overall, or broadband, energy is
contained in the 1ð frequency component. Any deviation
from a state of equilibrium increases the energy level at
this fundamental shaft speed.

44.9.1 Common failure modes

Many of the common causes of failure in machinery com-
ponents can be identiﬁed by understanding their relation-
ship to the true running speed of the shaft within the
machine-train.

Table 44.6 is a vibration troubleshooting chart

that
identiﬁes some of the common failure modes. This table
provides general guidelines for interpreting the most
common abnormal vibration proﬁles. These guidelines,
however, do not provide positive veriﬁcation or
identiﬁcation of machine-train problems. Veriﬁcation
requires an understanding of the failure mode and how
it appears in the vibration signature.

The sections to follow describe the most common
machine-train failure modes: critical speeds, imbalance,
mechanical looseness, misalignment, modulations, pro-
cess instability, and resonance.

Critical speeds

All machine-trains have one or more critical speeds that
can cause severe vibration and damage to the machine.
Critical speeds result from the phenomenon known as
dynamic resonance.

Critical speed is a function of the natural frequency of
dynamic components such as a rotor assembly, bearings,
etc. All dynamic components have one or more natural
frequencies that can be excited by an energy source that
coincides with, or is in close proximity to, that frequency.

For example, a rotor assembly with a natural frequency
of 1800 rpm cannot be rotated at speeds between 1782
and 1818 rpm without exciting the rotor’s natural fre-
quency.

Critical speed should not be confused with the mode
shape of a rotating shaft. Deﬂection of the shaft from its
true centerline (i.e., mode shape) elevates the vibration
amplitude and generates dominant vibration frequencies
at the rotor’s fundamental and harmonics of the running
speed. However, the amplitude of these frequency com-
ponents tends to be much lower than those caused by
operating at a critical speed of the rotor assembly. Also,
the excessive vibration amplitude generated by operating
at a critical speed disappears when the speed is changed.
Vibrations caused by mode shape tend to remain through
a much wider speed range or may even be independent
of speed.

The unique natural frequencies of dynamic machine
components are determined by the mass, freedom of
movement, support stiffness, and other factors. These
factors deﬁne the response characteristics of the rotor
assembly (i.e.,
rotor dynamics) at various operating
conditions.
Each critical speed has a well-deﬁned vibration pattern.
The ﬁrst critical excites the fundamental (1ð) frequency
component; the second critical excites the secondary (2ð)
component; and the third critical excites the third (3ð)
frequency component.

The best way to conﬁrm a critical-speed problem is to
change the operating speed of the machine-train. If the
machine is operating at a critical speed, the amplitude of
the vibration components (1ð, 2ð, or 3ð) will immedi-
ately drop when the speed is changed. If the amplitude
remains relatively constant when the speed is changed,
the problem is not critical speed.

Imbalance

The term balance means that all forces generated by, or
acting on, the rotating element of a machine-train are in a
state of equilibrium. Any change in this state of equilib-
rium creates an imbalance. In the global sense, imbalance
is one of the most common abnormal vibration proﬁles
exhibited by all process machinery.

Theoretically, a perfectly balanced machine that has
no friction in the bearings would experience no vibration
and would have a perfect vibration proﬁle – a perfectly
ﬂat, horizontal line. However, there are no perfectly bal-
anced machines in existence. All machine-trains exhibit
some level of imbalance, which has a dominant frequency
component at the fundamental running speed (1ð) of
each shaft.

An imbalance proﬁle can be excited due to the com-
bined factors of mechanical imbalance, lift/gravity dif-
ferential effects, aerodynamic and hydraulic instabilities,
process loading, and, in fact, all failure modes.

It is incorrect to assume that mechanical
Mechanical
imbalance must exist to create an imbalance condition
within the machine. Mechanical imbalance, however, is
the only form of imbalance that is corrected by balancing

Table 44.6 Vibration Trouble Shooting Chart

Nature of fault

Rotating

members out
of Balance

Misalignment &

bent shaft

Damaged rolling

element
bearings (ball,
roller, etc.)

Frequency of Dominant
Vibration (Hz D rpm 60)
1 ð rpm

Usually 1 ð rpm Often
2 ð rpm Sometimes
3&4 ð rpm

Impact rates for the
individual bearing
componentsŁ

Also vibrations at very high

frequencies (20 to
60 kHz)

Failure mode analysis 44/795

Direction

Remarks

Radial

A common cause of excess vibration in

machinery

Radial & axial

A common fault

Radial & axial

Uneven vibration levels, often with shocks.

ŁImpact Rates:

Conuct angle

Impact Rates 1 (Hz)

Ball dia IBDI 

For Outer Race Defect 1(Hz) =

For Inner Race Defect 1(Hz) =

n f, 11−
2
n f, 11−
2

BD
PD
BD
PD

Pitch
Dia
IBDI 

n = number of balls or rollers
 = relative rev./s between
    inner & outer races

For Ball Defect 1(Hz) =

BD
PD

BD-2
(1 -        )
PD

f, 

Looseness may only develop at operating

speed and temperature (e.g.
turbomachines).

Applicable to high-speed (e.g. turbo)

machines.

Vibrations excited when passing through

critical shaft speed are maintained at higher
shaft speeds. Can sometimes be cured by
checking tightness of rotor components

Sidebands around tooth meshing frequencies

indicate modulation (e.g. eccentricity) at
frequency corresponding to sideband
spacings. Normally only detectable with
very narrow-band analysis.

Journal bearings

Loose in
Housings

Oil ﬁlm whirl or
whip in journal
bearings

Hysteresis whirl

Sub-harmonics of shaft rpm,
exactly 1/2 or 1/3 ð rpm

Primarily radial

Slightly less than half shaft

speed (42% to 48%)

Primarily radial

Shaft critical speed

Primarily radial

Tooth meshing frequencies
(shaft rpm ð number of
teeth) and harmonics

2 ð rpm
1, 2, 3 & 4 ð rpm of belt
1 ð rpm and/or multiples

for higher order
unbalance

Radial & axial

Radial
Primarily radial

Damaged or
worn gears

Mechanical
looseness

Faulty belt drive
Unbalanced

reciprocating
forces and
couples
Increased

turbulence

Electrically
induced
vibrations

Blade & Vane passing

frequencies and
harmonics

1 ð rpm or 1 or 2 times
sychronous frequency

Radial & axial

Increasing levels indicate increasing

turbulence.

Radial & axial

Should disappear when turning off the power.

Source:PredictiveMaintenanceforProcessMachinery, R. Keith Mobley, Technology for Energy Corp. (1988).

the rotating element. When all failures are considered, the
number of machine problems that are the result of actual
mechanical rotor imbalance is relatively small.

Single-plane mechanical imbalance excites
Single-plane
the fundamental (1ð) frequency component, which is typ-
ically the dominant amplitude in a signature. Since there
is only one point of imbalance, only one high spot occurs

as the rotor completes each revolution. The vibration
signature also may contain lower-level frequencies reﬂect-
ing bearing defects and passing frequencies. Figure 44.35
illustrates single-plane imbalance.

Because mechanical imbalance is multi-directional, it
appears in both the vertical and horizontal directions at the
machine’s bearing pedestals. The actual amplitude of the
1ð component generally is not identical in the vertical and

44/796 Vibration Monitoring and Analysis

U

U

U

U

U

U
Out-of-phase

Out-of-phase

U

Out-of-phase

e
d
u
t
i
l

p
m
A

1X

2X

3X

4X

Speed

Figure 44.35 Single-plane imbalance

horizontal directions and both generally contain elevated
vibration levels at 1ð.

The difference between the vertical and horizontal val-
ues is a function of the bearing-pedestal stiffness. In most

U

cases, the horizontal plane has a greater freedom of move-
ment and, therefore, contains higher amplitudes at 1ð than
the vertical plane.

Multi-plane Multi-plane mechanical imbalance gener-
ates multiple harmonics of running speed. The actual num-
ber of harmonics depends on the number of imbalance
points, the severity of imbalance, and the phase angle
between imbalance points.

Figure 44.36 illustrates a case of multi-plane imbalance
in which there are four out-of-phase imbalance points. The
resultant vibration proﬁle contains dominant frequencies
at 1ð, 2ð, 3ð, and 4ð. The actual amplitude of each of
these components is determined by the amount of imbal-
ance at each of the four points, but the 1ð component
should always be higher than any subsequent harmonics.

Lift, which is designed into a
Lift/gravity differential
machine-train’s rotating elements to compensate for the
effects of gravity acting on the rotor, is another source
of imbalance. Because lift does not always equal grav-
ity, there is always some imbalance in machine-trains.
The vibration component due to the lift/gravity differen-
tial effect appears at the fundamental or 1ð frequency.

In fact, all failure modes create some form of
Other
imbalance in a machine, as do aerodynamic instability,

1/2 Revolution

1 Revolution

e
d
u

t
i
l

p
m
A

0.5x 1x 1.5x

2x

2.5x

3x 3.5x 4x 4.5x

Orders of running speed

Figure 44.36 Multi-plane imbalance generates multiple harmonics

hydraulic instability, and process loading. The process
loading of most machine-trains varies, at least slightly,
during normal operations. These vibration components
appear at the 1ð frequency.

Looseness, which can be present
Mechanical looseness
in both the vertical and horizontal planes, can create a
variety of patterns in a vibration signature. In some cases,
the fundamental (1ð) frequency is excited. In others, a
frequency component at one-half multiples of the shaft’s
running speed (0.5ð, 1.5ð, 2.5ð, etc.) is present. In
almost all cases, there are multiple harmonics, both full
and half.

Failure mode analysis 44/797

Bearings

Shaft

Internal misalignment

Offset misalignment

Vertical Mechanical looseness in the vertical plane gen-
erates a series of harmonic and half-harmonic frequency
components. Figure 44.37 is a simple example of a verti-
cal mechanical looseness signature.

In most cases, the half-harmonic components are about
one-half of the amplitude of the harmonic components.
They result from the machine-train lifting until stopped
by the bolts. The impact as the machine reaches the
upper limit of travel generates a frequency component
at one-half multiples (i.e., orders) of running speed. As
the machine returns to the bottom of its movement, its
original position, a larger impact occurs that generates
the full harmonics of running speed.

The difference in amplitude between the full harmon-
ics and half-harmonics is caused by the effects of grav-
ity. As the machine lifts to its limit of travel, gravity
resists the lifting force. Therefore, the impact force that
is generated as the machine foot contacts the mounting
bolt is the difference between the lifting force and grav-
ity. As the machine drops, the force of gravity com-
bines with the force generated by imbalance. The impact
force as the machine foot contacts the foundation is the
sum of the force of gravity and the force resulting from
imbalance.

Horizontal movement (flexing)

e
d
u

t
i
l

p
m
A

1X

2X

Orders of speed

Figure 44.37 Vertical mechanical looseness has a unique vibration
proﬁle

Angular misalignment

Figure 44.38 Horizontal looseness creates ﬁrst and second har-
monics

Figure 44.38 illustrates horizontal mechan-
Horizontal
ical looseness, which is also common to machine-trains.
In this example, the machine’s support legs ﬂex in the
horizontal plane. Unlike the vertical looseness illustrated
in Figure 44.37, gravity is uniform at each leg and there
is no increased impact energy as the leg’s direction is
reversed.
Horizontal mechanical looseness generates a combina-
tion of ﬁrst (1ð) and second (2ð) harmonic vibrations.
Since the energy source is the machine’s rotating shaft,
the timing of the ﬂex is equal to one complete revolution
of the shaft, or 1ð. During this single rotation, the mount-
ing legs ﬂex to their maximum deﬂection on both sides
of neutral. The double change in direction as the leg ﬁrst
deﬂects to one side then the other generates a frequency
at two times (2ð) the shaft’s rotating speed.

There are a multitude of other forms of mechan-
Other
ical looseness (besides vertical and horizontal movement
of machine legs) that are typical for manufacturing and
process machinery. Most forms of pure mechanical loose-
ness result in an increase in the vibration amplitude at
the fundamental (1ð) shaft speed. In addition, looseness
generates one or more harmonics (i.e., 2ð, 3ð, 4ð, or
combinations of harmonics and half-harmonics).

However, not all looseness generates this classic pro-
ﬁle. For example, excessive bearing and gear clearances
do not generate multiple harmonics. In these cases, the
vibration proﬁle contains unique frequencies that indicate
looseness, but the proﬁle varies depending on the nature
and severity of the problem.

With sleeve or Babbitt bearings, looseness is displayed
as an increase in sub-harmonic frequencies (i.e., less than
the actual shaft speed, such as 0.5ð). Rolling-element
bearings display elevated frequencies at one or more
of their rotational frequencies. Excessive gear clearance
increases the amplitude at the gear-mesh frequency and
its sidebands.

44/798 Vibration Monitoring and Analysis

Other forms of mechanical looseness increase the noise
ﬂoor across the entire bandwidth of the vibration sig-
nature. While the signature does not contain a distinct
peak or series of peaks, the overall energy contained in
the vibration signature is increased. Unfortunately, the
increase in noise ﬂoor cannot always be used to detect
mechanical looseness. Some vibration instruments lack
sufﬁcient dynamic range to detect changes in the signa-
ture’s noise ﬂoor.

Misalignment

This condition is virtually always present in machine-
trains. Generally, we assume that misalignment exists
between shafts that are connected by a coupling, V-belt, or
other intermediate drive. However, it can exist between
bearings of a solid shaft and at other points within the
machine.

How misalignment appears in the vibration signature
depends on the type of misalignment. Figure 44.39 illus-
trates three types of misalignment (i.e., internal, offset,
and angular). These three types excite the fundamental
(1ð) frequency component because they create an appar-
ent imbalance condition in the machine.
Internal (i.e., bearing) and offset misalignment also
excite the second (2ð) harmonic frequency. Two high
spots are created by the shaft as it turns though one
complete revolution. These two high spots create the ﬁrst
(1ð) and second harmonic (2ð) components.

Angular misalignment can take several signature forms
and excites the fundamental (1ð) and secondary (2ð)
It can excite the third (3ð) harmonic
components.
frequency depending on the actual phase relationship of
the angular misalignment. It also creates a strong axial
vibration.

Modulations

Modulations are frequency components that appear in a
vibration signature, but cannot be attributed to any spe-
ciﬁc physical cause, or forcing function. Although these
frequencies are, in fact, ghosts or artiﬁcial frequencies,
they can result in signiﬁcant damage to a machine-train.
The presence of ghosts in a vibration signature often leads
to misinterpretation of the data.

Ghosts are caused when two or more frequency com-
ponents couple, or merge, to form another discrete fre-
quency component in the vibration signature. This gener-
ally occurs with multiple-speed machines or a group of
single-speed machines.

Note that the presence of modulation, or ghost peaks,
is not an absolute indication of a problem within the
machine-train. Couple effects may simply increase the
amplitude of the fundamental running speed and do little
damage to the machine-train. However, this increased
amplitude will amplify any defects within the machine-
train.

Coupling can have an additive effect on the modulation
frequencies, as well as being reﬂected as a differential or

STATION:  Process plant

Machine:  Helical gearbox

MPT:  VO3

)
k
a
e
p

 
c
e
s
/

n
i
(
 

e
d
u

t
i
l

p
m
A

0.13

0.12

0.11

0.10

0.09

0.08

0.07

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

d
e
e
p
s
 
t

u
p

t

u
o
X 
1

d
e

t

l

 

a
u
d
o
m
d
e
e
p
s
 
t
s
o
h
g
X 
1

May 1, 1997
12:00:01 P.M.

OAL: 0.15 IPS−PK

h
s
e
m
r
a
e
g
X 
1

h
s
e
m
r
a
e
g

 
t
s
o
h
g

d
e
e
p
s
 
t

u
p
n
X 
1

i

d
e

t

l

a
u
d
o
m

0

5

10

20

40

80

160

320

640

Frequency (CPM)

Figure 44.39 Three types of misalignment

multiplicative effect. These concepts are discussed in the
sections to follow.

Take as an example the case of a 10-tooth pinion gear
turning at 10 rpm while driving a 20-tooth bullgear having
an output speed of 5 rpm. This gear set generates real
frequencies at 5, 10, and 100 rpm (i.e., 10 teeth ð 10 rpm).
This same set also can generate a series of frequencies
(i.e., sum and product modulations) at 15 rpm (i.e.,
10 rpm C 5 rpm) and 150 rpm (i.e., 15 rpm ð 10 teeth). In
this example, the 10-rpm input speed coupled with the
5-rpm output speed to create ghost frequencies driven by
this artiﬁcial fundamental speed (15 rpm).

This type of modulation, which is described in
Sum
the example above, generates a series of frequencies that
include the fundamental shaft speeds, both input and out-
put, and fundamental gear-mesh proﬁle. The only differ-
ence between the real frequencies and the ghost is their
location on the frequency scale. Instead of being at the
actual shaft-speed frequency, the ghost appears at fre-
quencies equal to the sum of the input and output shaft
speeds. Figure 44.40 illustrates this for a speed-increaser
gearbox.

In this case, the resultant ghost, or modula-
Difference
tion, frequencies are generated by the difference between
two or more speeds (see Figure 44.41). If we use the
same example as before, the resultant ghost frequencies
appear at 5 rpm (i.e., 10 rpm (cid:6) 5 rpm) and 50 rpm (i.e.,
5 rpm ð 10 teeth).

Failure mode analysis 44/799

Note that the 5-rpm couple frequency coincides with
the real output speed of 5 rpm. This results in a dramatic
increase in the amplitude of one real running-speed com-
ponent and the addition of a false gear-mesh peak.

This type of coupling effect

is common in single-
reduction/increase gearboxes or other machine-train
components where multiple running or rotational speeds
are relatively close together or even integer multiples
of one another. It is more destructive than other forms
of coupling in that
it coincides with real vibration
components and tends to amplify any defects within the
machine-train.

Product With product modulation, the two speeds cou-
ple in a multiplicative manner to create a set of artiﬁcial
frequency components (see Figure 44.42). In the previ-
ous example, product modulations occur at 50 rpm (i.e.,
10 rpm ð 5 rpm) and 500 rpm (i.e., 50 rpm ð 10 teeth).

Beware that this type of coupling often may go unde-
tected in a normal vibration analysis. Since the ghost
frequencies are relatively high compared to the expected
real frequencies, they are often outside the monitored fre-
quency range used for data acquisition and analysis.

Process instability

Normally associated with bladed or vaned machinery such
as fans and pumps, process instability creates an unbal-
anced condition within the machine. In most cases, it
excites the fundamental (1ð) and bladepass/vanepass fre-
quency components. Unlike true mechanical imbalance,

STATION:  Process plant

Machine:  Helical gearbox

MPT:  VO3

d
e
e
p
s
 
t

u
p

t

u
o
X 
1

d
e

t

l

a
u
d
o
m

)
k
a
e
p

 
c
e
s
/

n
i
(
 

e
d
u
t
i
l

p
m
A

0.13

0.12

0.11

0.10

0.09

0.08

0.07

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

d
e
e
p
s
 
t

u
p
n
X 
1

i

d
e

t

l

a
u
d
o
m

May 1, 1997
12:00:01 P.M.

OAL: 0.15 IPS–PK

h
s
e
m
r
a
e
g
X 
1

h
s
e
m
r
a
e
g

 
t
s
o
h
g

0

5

10

20

40

80

160

320

640

Frequency (CPM)

Figure 44.40 Sum modulation for a speed-increaser gearbox

44/800 Vibration Monitoring and Analysis

STATION:  Process plant

Machine:  Helical gearbox

MPT:  VO3

d
e
e
p
s
 
t

u
p

t

u
o
X 
1

d
e

t

l

a
u
d
o
m

)
k
a
e
p

 
c
e
s
/

n
i
(
 

e
d
u

t
i
l

p
m
A

0.13

0.12

0.11

0.10

0.09

0.08

0.07

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

d
e
e
p
s
 
t

u
p
n
X 
1

i

d
e

t

l

a
u
d
o
m

d
e
e
p
s
 
t
s
o
h
g
X 
1

h
s
e
m
r
a
e
g
X 
1

h
s
e
m
r
a
e
g

 
t
s
o
h
G

May 1, 1997
12:00:01 P.M.

OAL: 0.15 IPS–PK

0

5

10

20

40

80

160

320

640

Frequency (CPM)

Figure 44.41 Difference modulation for a speed-increaser gearbox

Rmax

Rmax
2

∆ ω

ωn

Figure 44.42 Product modulation for a speed-increaser gearbox

In most cases,

the bladepass and vanepass frequency components are
broader and have more energy in the form of sideband
frequencies.
this failure mode also excites the
third (3ð) harmonic frequency and creates strong axial
vibration. Depending on the severity of the instability and
the design of the machine, process instability also can
create a variety of shaft-mode shapes. In turn, this excites
the 1ð, 2ð, and 3ð radial vibration components.

Resonance

Resonance is deﬁned as a large-amplitude vibration
caused by a small periodic stimulus having the same, or

nearly the same, period as the system’s natural vibration.
In other words, an energy source with the same, or
nearly the same, frequency as the natural frequency
of a machine-train or structure will excite that natural
frequency. The result
increase in the
amplitude of the natural frequency component.

is a substantial

The key point to remember is that a very low amplitude
energy source can cause massive amplitudes when its
frequency coincides with the natural frequency of a
machine or structure. Higher levels of input energy
can cause catastrophic, near instantaneous failure of the
machine or structure.

Every machine-train has one or more natural frequen-
cies. If one of these frequencies is excited by some com-
ponent of the normal operation of the system, the machine
structure will amplify the energy, which can cause severe
damage.

An example of resonance is a tuning fork. If you acti-
vate a tuning fork by striking it sharply, the fork vibrates
rapidly. As long as it is held suspended, the vibration
decays with time. However, if you place it on a desktop,
the fork could potentially excite the natural frequency of
the desk, which would dramatically amplify the vibration
energy.

The same thing can occur if one or more of the run-
ning speeds of a machine excites the natural frequency
of the machine or its support structure. Resonance is a
very destructive vibration and, in most cases, it will cause
major damage to the machine or support structure.

There are two major classiﬁcations of

resonance
found in most manufacturing and process plants: static

Failure mode analysis 44/801

bearing-support pedestals, and structural members such
as beams, piping, etc.

Since static resonance is a non-dynamic phenomenon, it
is generally not associated with the primary running speed
of any associated machinery. Rather, the source of static
resonance can be any energy source that coincides with
the natural frequency of any stationary component. For
example, an I-beam support on a continuous annealing
line may be energized by the running speed of a roll.
However, it also can be made to resonate by a bearing
frequency, overhead crane, or any of a multitude of other
energy sources.

The actual resonant frequency depends on the mass,
stiffness, and span of the excited member. In general
terms, the natural frequency of a structural member is
inversely proportional to the mass and stiffness of the
member. In other words, a large turbo-compressor’s cas-
ing will have a lower natural frequency than that of a
small end-suction centrifugal pump.

Figure 44.43 illustrates a typical structural-support sys-
tem. The natural frequencies of all support structures,
piping, and other components are functions of mass, span,
and stiffness. Each of the arrows on Figure 44.43 indicates
a structural member or stationary machine component
having a unique natural frequency. Note that each time a
structural span is broken or attached to another structure,
the stiffness changes. As a result, the natural frequency
of that segment also changes.

While most stationary machine components move dur-
ing normal operation, they are not always resonant. Some
degree of ﬂexing or movement is common in most station-
ary machine-trains and structural members. The amount
of movement depends on the spring constant or stiff-
ness of the member. However, when an energy source
coincides and couples with the natural frequency of a
structure, excessive and extremely destructive vibration
amplitudes result.

Dynamic When the natural frequency of a rotating, or
dynamic, structure (e.g., rotor assembly in a fan) is ener-
gized, the rotating element resonates. This phenomenon
is classiﬁed as dynamic resonance and the rotor speed at
which it occurs is referred to as the critical. In most cases,

and dynamic. Both types exhibit a broad-based, high-
amplitude frequency component when viewed in a
FFT vibration signature. Unlike meshing or passing
frequencies,
the resonance frequency component does
not have modulations or sidebands. Instead, resonance is
displayed as a single, clearly deﬁned peak.

As illustrated in Figure 44.42, a resonance peak repre-
sents a large amount of energy. This energy is the result
of both the amplitude of the peak and the broad area
under the peak. This combination of high peak amplitude
and broad-based energy content is typical of most res-
onance problems. The damping system associated with
a resonance frequency is indicated by the sharpness or
width of the response curve, ωn, when measured at the
half-power point. RMAX is the maximum resonance and
RMAX/
2 is the half-power point for a typical resonance-
response curve.

p

Static When the natural frequency of a stationary, or
non-dynamic, structure is energized, it will resonate. This
type of resonance is classiﬁed as static resonance and
is considered to be a non-dynamic phenomenon. Non-
dynamic structures in a machine-train include casings,

Natural frequencies

Figure 44.43 Resonance response

270˚

180˚

90˚

t
f
i

h
s
 

e
s
a
h
P

e
d
u

t
i
l

p
m
A

Figure 44.44 Typical discrete natural frequency locations in structural members

600

1200

1800

Rpm

44/802 Vibration Monitoring and Analysis

dynamic resonance appears at the fundamental running
speed or one of the harmonics of the excited rotating ele-
ment. However, it also can occur at other frequencies. As
in the case of static resonance, the actual natural frequen-
cies of dynamic members depend on the mass, bearing
span, shaft and bearing-support stiffness, as well as a
number of other factors.

In most cases, the occurrence of
Conﬁrmation analysis
dynamic resonance can be quickly conﬁrmed. When mon-
itoring phase and amplitude, resonance is indicated by
a 180° phase shift as the rotor passes through the reso-
nant zone. Figure 44.44 illustrates a dynamic resonance
at 500 rpm, which shows a dramatic amplitude increase
in the frequency-domain display. This is conﬁrmed by
the 180° phase shift in the time-domain plot. Note that
the peak at 1200 rpm is not resonance. The absence of a
phase shift, coupled with the apparent modulations in the
FFT, discount the possibility that this peak is resonance-
related.

Vibration analysts often confuse
Common confusions
resonance with other failure modes. Since many of the
common failure modes tend to create abnormally high
vibration levels that appear to be related to a speed change,
analysts tend to miss the root cause of these problems.
Dynamic resonance generates abnormal vibration pro-
ﬁles that tend to coincide with the fundamental (1ð)
running speed, or one or more of the harmonics, of a
machine-train. This often leads the analyst to incorrectly

Representative range of stiffness values for
complete bearing assemblies

l

)
e
a
c
s
 

g
o
l
(
 

d
e
e
p
s
 
r
o
o
R

t

diagnose the problem as imbalance or misalignment. The
major difference is that dynamic resonance is the result
of a relatively small energy source, such as the funda-
mental running speed, that results in a massive ampliﬁca-
tion of the natural frequency of the rotating element (see
Figure 44.45).

The high amplitudes at the rotor’s
Function of speed
natural frequency are strictly speed dependent. If the
energy source, in this case speed, changes to a frequency
outside the resonant zone, the abnormal vibration will
disappear.

In most cases, running speed is the forcing function that
excites the natural frequency of the dynamic component.
As a result, rotating equipment is designed to operate at
primary rotor speeds that do not coincide with the rotor
assembly’s natural frequencies. Most low- to moderate-
speed machines are designed to operate below the ﬁrst
critical speed of the rotor assembly.

Higher-speed machines may be designed to operate
between the ﬁrst and second, or second and third, critical
speeds of the rotor assembly. As these machines accel-
erate through the resonant zones or critical speeds, their
natural frequency is momentarily excited. As long as the
ramp rate limits the duration of excitation, this mode of
operation is acceptable. However, care must be taken to
ensure that the transient time through the resonant zone
is as short as possible.

Figure 44.46 illustrates a typical critical-speed or
dynamic-resonance plot. This ﬁgure is a plot of the

3rd mode (3rd critical)

2nd mode (2nd critical)

1st mode (1st critical)

Representative range of
stiffness values for bearings
in rigid support structures

Figure 44.45 Dynamic resonance phase shift

Rotor stiffness (log scale)

Failure modes by machine-train component 44/803

l

a
g
u
f
i
r
t
n
e
C

e
c
r
o
f

R

o

t

a

t
i

o

n

Undeflected
shaft axis

c
i
t
s
a
E

l

g
n
i
r
o

t
s
e
r

e
c
r
o

f

Entrained

          fluid flow

                        direction    

Figure 44.46 Dynamic resonance plot

relationship between rotor-support stiffness (X-axis) and
critical
rotor speed (Y-axis). Rotor-support stiffness
depends on the geometry of the rotating element (i.e.
shaft and rotor) and the bearing-support structure. These
are the two dominant factors that determine the response
characteristics of the rotor assembly.

44.10 Failure modes by machine-train
component
In addition to identifying general failure modes that are
common to many types of machine-train components,
failure-mode analysis can be used to identify failure
modes for
speciﬁc components in a machine-train.
However, care must be exercised when analyzing
vibration proﬁles, because the data may reﬂect induced

problems. Induced problems affect the performance of a
speciﬁc component, but are not caused by that component.
For example, an abnormal outer-race passing frequency
may indicate a defective rolling-element bearing.
It
also can indicate that abnormal
loading caused by
misalignment, roll bending, process instability, etc., has
changed the load zone within the bearing. In the latter
case, replacing the bearing does not resolve the problem
and the abnormal proﬁle will still be present after the
bearing is changed.

44.10.1 Bearings: rolling element

Bearing defects are one of the most common faults identi-
ﬁed by vibration monitoring programs. Although bearings
do wear out and fail, these defects are normally symptoms

44/804 Vibration Monitoring and Analysis

of other problems within the machine-train or process sys-
tem. Therefore, extreme care must be exercised to ensure
that the real problem is identiﬁed, not just the symptom.
In a rolling-element, or anti-friction, bearing vibration
proﬁle, three distinct sets of frequencies can be found:
natural, rotational, and defect.

Natural frequency

Natural frequencies are generated by impacts of the inter-
nal parts of a rolling-element bearing. These impacts are
normally the result of slight variations in load and imper-
fections in the machined bearing surfaces. As their name
implies, these are natural frequencies and are present in a
new bearing that is in perfect operating condition.

The natural frequencies of rolling-element bearings
are normally well above the maximum frequency
range, FMAX, used for routine machine-train monitoring.
As a result,
they are rarely observed by predictive-
maintenance analysts. Generally, these frequencies are
between 20 KHz and 1 MHz. Therefore, some vibration-
monitoring programs use special high-frequency or
ultrasonic monitoring techniques such as high-frequency
domain (HFD). Note, however, that little is gained from
monitoring natural frequencies. Even in cases of severe
bearing damage, these high-frequency components add
little to the analyst’s ability to detect and isolate bad
bearings.

Rotational frequency

rotational

There are four normal
frequencies associ-
ated with rolling-element bearings: fundamental train fre-
quency (FTF), ball/roller spin, ball-pass outer-race, and
ball-pass inner-race. The following are deﬁnitions of
abbreviations that are used in the discussion to follow.
BD D Ball or roller diameter
PD D Pitch diameter
ˇ D Contact angle (for roller D 0)
n D Number of balls or rollers
fr D Relative speed between the inner and outer race

(rps).

Fundamental train frequency

The bearing cage generates the FTF as it rotates around
the bearing races. The cage properly spaces the balls or
rollers within the bearing races, in effect, by tying the
rolling elements together and providing uniform support.
Some friction exists between the rolling elements and the
bearing races, even with perfect lubrication. This friction
is transmitted to the cage, which causes it to rotate around
the bearing races.

Because this is a friction-driven motion, the cage turns
much slower than the inner race of the bearing. Generally,
the rate of rotation is slightly less than one-half of the shaft
speed. FTF is calculated by the following equation:

(cid:5)

(cid:4)
1 (cid:6) BD
PD

FTF D 1
2

fr

Ball-spin frequency

Each of the balls or rollers within a bearing rotates around
its own axis as it rolls around the bearing races. This spin-
ning motion is referred to as ball spin, which generates
a ball-spin frequency (BSF) in a vibration signature. The
speed of rotation is determined by the geometry of the
bearing (i.e., diameter of the ball or roller, and bearing
races) and is calculated by:

(cid:6)

(cid:1)

(cid:7)

(cid:2)2 ð cos2 ˇ

BD
PD

BSF D 1
2

PD
BD

ð fr

1 (cid:6)

Ball-pass outer-race

The ball or rollers passing the outer race generate the ball-
pass outer-race frequency (BPFO), which is calculated by:
BPFO D n
2

1 (cid:6) BD
PD

ð cos ˇ

ð fr

(cid:1)

(cid:2)

Ball-pass inner-race

the ball/roller

The speed of
rotating relative to the
inner race generates the ball-pass inner-race rotational
frequency (BPFI). The inner race rotates at the same speed
as the shaft and the complete set of balls/rollers passes at
a slower speed. They generate a passing frequency that is
determined by:
BPFI D n
ð fr
2

1 C BD
PD

ð cos ˇ

(cid:2)

(cid:1)

Defect frequencies

Rolling-element bearing defect frequencies are the same
as their rotational frequencies, except for the BSF. If there
is a defect on the inner race, the BPFI amplitude increases
because the balls or rollers contact the defect as they rotate
around the bearing. The BPFO is excited by defects in the
outer race.

When one or more of the balls or rollers have a defect
such as a spall (i.e., a missing chip of material), the defect
impacts both the inner and outer race each time one revo-
lution of the rolling element is made. Therefore, the defect
vibration frequency is visible at two times (2ð) the BSF
rather than at its fundamental (1ð) frequency.

44.10.2 Bearings: sleeve (Babbitt)

In normal operation, a sleeve bearing provides a uni-
form oil ﬁlm around the supported shaft. Because the
shaft is centered in the bearing, all forces generated by
the rotating shaft, and all forces acting on the shaft, are
equal. Figure 44.47 shows the balanced forces on a nor-
mal bearing.

Lubricating-ﬁlm instability is the dominant

failure
mode for sleeve bearings. This instability is typically
caused by eccentric, or off-center, rotation of the machine
shaft resulting from imbalance, misalignment, or other
machine or process-related problems. Figure 44.48 shows
a Babbitt bearing that exhibits instability.

Failure modes by machine-train component 44/805

Higher
fluid

pressure

Lower
fluid

pressure

l

a
g
u

f
i
r
t

n
e
C

e
c
r
o

f

R

o

t

a

t
i

o

n

External
damping

Undeflected
shaft axis

c
i
t
s
a
E

l

g
n
i
r
o

t
s
e
r

e
c
r
o

f

Entrained

          fluid flow

                        direction    

Figure 44.47 A normal Babbitt bearing has balanced forces

1

3

1

4 ,

3 ,

8 , etc.) of

fractions (i.e.,

When oil-ﬁlm instability or oil whirl occurs, frequency
components at
the
fundamental (1ð) shaft speed are excited. As the severity
of the instability increases, the frequency components
become more dominant in a band between 0.40 and 0.48
of the fundamental (1ð) shaft speed. When the instability
becomes severe enough to isolate within this band, it is
called oil whip. Figure 44.49 shows the effect of increased
velocity on a Babbitt bearing.

44.10.4 Gears

All gear sets create a frequency component referred to
as gear mesh. The fundamental gearmesh frequency is
equal to the number of gear teeth times the running speed
of the shaft. In addition, all gear sets create a series of
sidebands or modulations that are visible on both sides of
the primary gear mesh frequency.

Normal proﬁle

44.10.3 Chains and sprockets

Chains drive function in essentially the same basic man-
ner as belt drives. However, instead of tension, chains
depend on the mechanical meshing of sprocket teeth with
the chain links.

In a normal gear set, each of the sidebands are spaced by
exactly the 1ð running speed of the input shaft and the
entire gear mesh is symmetrical as seen in Figure 44.50.
In addition, the sidebands always occur in pairs, one
below and one above the gear mesh frequency, and the
amplitude of each pair is identical (Figure 44.51).

44/806 Vibration Monitoring and Analysis

Velocity increases

Velocity decreases

Instability
component

l

t
r
o
p
p
u
S

t

n
e
n
o
p
m
o
c

e
c
r
o

f

Undeflected
shaft axis

Entrained
fluid flow
direction

Figure 44.48 Dynamics of Babbitt bearing instability

a
g
u

f
i
r
t

n
e
C

e
c
r
o

f

R

o

t

a

t
i

o

n

c
i
t
s
a
E

l

g
n
i
r
o
t
s
e
r

e
c
r
o
f

Fluid

pressure
resultant

h
s
e
m
r
a
e
G

e
d
u

t
i
l

p
m
A

Modulations (sidebands)

Figure 44.49 Increased velocity generates an unbalanced force

Frequency

If we split the gearmesh proﬁle for a normal gear by
drawing a vertical
line through the actual mesh (i.e.,
number of teeth times the input shaft speed), the two
halves would be identical. Therefore, any deviation from
a symmetrical proﬁle indicates a gear problem. However,

care must be exercised to ensure that the problem is
internal to the gears and not induced by outside inﬂuences.
External misalignment, abnormal induced loads, and a
variety of other outside inﬂuences destroy the symmetry
of a gearmesh proﬁle. For example, a single-reduction

Failure modes by machine-train component 44/807

h
s
e
m
r
a
e
G

e
d
u
t
i
l

p
m
A

Figure 44.50 Normal gear set proﬁle is symmetrical

Frequency

Station:    Process plant

Machine:    Helical gearbox

MPT:    V03

)
k
a
e
p

 
c
e
s
/

n
i
(
 

e
d
u

t
i
l

p
m
A

0.13

0.12

0.11

0.10

0.09

0.08

0.07

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

.

M
P.
1
0

 

:

7
9
9
1

 
,

1

 
y
a
M

0
0

:

2
1

d
e
e
p
s
 
t

u
p

t

u
o
X 
1

d
e
e
p
s
 
t

u
p
n
X 
1

i

h
s
e
m
r
a
e
g
X 
1

h
s
e
m
r
a
e
g
X 
2

h
s
e
m
r
a
e
g
X 
3

K
P
–
S
P

I
 

5
1
0

.

 
 
:

L
A
0

0

5

10

20

40

80

160

320

640

Frequency (CPM)

Figure 44.51 Sidebands are paired and equal

44/808 Vibration Monitoring and Analysis

gearbox used to transmit power to a mold-oscillator
system on a continuous caster drives two eccentric cams.
The eccentric rotation of these two cams is transmitted
directly into the gearbox, creating the appearance of
eccentric meshing of the gears. However, this abnormal
induced load actually destroys the spacing and amplitude
of the gearmesh proﬁle.

Defective gear proﬁles

If the gear set develops problems, the amplitude of the
gearmesh frequency increases and the symmetry of the
sidebands changes. The pattern illustrated in Figure 44.52
is typical of a defective gear set, where OAL is the broad-
band, or total, energy. Note the asymmetrical relationship
of the sidebands.

Excessive wear

Figure 44.53 is the vibration proﬁle of a worn gear set.
Note that the spacing between the sidebands is erratic
and is no longer evenly spaced by the input shaft speed

frequency. The sidebands for a worn gear set tend to occur
between the input and output speeds and are not evenly
spaced.

Cracked or broken teeth

Figure 44.54 illustrates the proﬁle of a gear set with a
broken tooth. As the gear rotates, the space left by the
chipped or broken tooth increases the mechanical clear-
ance between the pinion and bullgear. The result is a low
amplitude sideband to the left of the actual gear-mesh
frequency. When the next (i.e., undamaged) teeth mesh,
the added clearance results in a higher energy impact.
The sideband to the right of the mesh frequency has a
much higher amplitude. As a result, the paired sidebands
have a non-symmetrical amplitude, which is due to the
disproportional clearance and impact energy.

Improper shaft spacing
In addition to gear-tooth wear, variations in the center-to-
center distance between shafts creates erratic spacing and

e
d
u

t
i
l

p
m
A

Figure 44.52 Typical defective gearmesh signature

h
s
e
m
r
a
e
G

Frequency

h
s
e
m
r
a
e
G

e
d
u
t
i
l

p
m
A

Cracked or broken tooth

Figure 44.53 Wear or excessive clearance changes the sideband spacing

Frequency

Failure modes by machine-train component 44/809

h
s
e
m
r
a
e
G

Unloaded

Loaded

e
d
u
t
i
l

p
m
A

Figure 44.54 A broken tooth will produced an asymmetrical sideband proﬁle

Frequency

8  6–1/2"

10–1/2'

10–1/2'

Rise = 1 degree 28 minutes

Rise = 0 degrees

12–1/2'

10–1/2'

Figure 44.55 Unloaded gear has much higher vibration levels

44/810 Vibration Monitoring and Analysis

amplitude in a vibration signature. If the shafts are too
close together, the sideband spacing tends to be at input
shaft speed, but the amplitude is signiﬁcantly reduced.
This condition causes the gears to be deeply meshed (i.e.,
below the normal pitch line), so the teeth maintain contact
through the entire mesh. This loss of clearance results
in lower amplitudes, but it exaggerates any tooth-proﬁle
defects that may be present.

If the shafts are too far apart, the teeth mesh above
the pitch line, which increases the clearance between
teeth and ampliﬁes the energy of the actual gear-mesh
frequency and all of
the
load-bearing characteristics of the gear teeth are greatly
reduced. Since the force is focused on the tip of each tooth
where there is less cross-section, the stress in each tooth is
greatly increased. The potential for tooth failure increases
in direct proportion to the amount of excess clearance
between the shafts.

its sidebands. In addition,

Load changes

The energy and vibration proﬁles of gear sets change
with load. When the gear is fully loaded, the proﬁles
exhibit the amplitudes discussed previously. When the
gear is unloaded, the same proﬁles are present, but the
amplitude increases dramatically. The reason for this
change is gear-tooth roughness. In normal practice, the
backside of the gear tooth is not ﬁnished to the same
smoothness as the power, or drive, side. Therefore, there
is more looseness on the non-power, or back, side of the
gear. Figure 44.55 illustrates the relative change between
a loaded and unloaded gear proﬁle.

44.10.5 Jackshafts and spindles

Another form of intermediate drive consists of a shaft
with some form of universal connection on each end
that directly links the prime mover to a driven unit (see
Figures 44.56 and 44.57). Jackshafts and spindles are
typically used in applications where the driver and driven
unit are misaligned.

Most of the failure modes associated with jackshafts
and spindles are the result of lubrication problems or
fatigue failure resulting from overloading. However, the
actual failure mode generally depends on the conﬁguration
of the ﬂexible drive.

Lubrication problems

Proper lubrication is essential for all
spindles. A critical
for

failure point

jackshafts and
spindles
(see

Uniform loading

Unequal loading

Figure 44.56 Typical gear-type spindles

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

Figure 44.57 Typical universal-type jackshaft

Figure 44.56)
is in the mounting pod that provides
the connection between the driver and driven machine
components. Mounting pods generally use either a spade-
and-slipper or a splined mechanical connector. In both
cases, regular application of a suitable grease is essential
for prolonged operation. Without proper lubrication, the
mating points between the spindle’s mounting pod and the
machine-train components impact each time the torsional
power varies between the primary driver and driven
component of the machine-train. The resulting mechanical
damage can cause these critical drive components to fail.
In universal-type jackshafts like the one illustrated in
Figure 44.57, improper lubrication results in non-uniform
power transmission. The absence of a uniform grease ﬁlm
causes the pivot points within the universal joints to bind
and restrict smooth power transmission.

The typical result of poor lubrication, which results in
an increase in mechanical looseness, is an increase of
those vibration frequencies associated with the rotational
speed. In the case of gear-type spindles (Figure 44.56),
there will be an increase in both the fundamental (1ð) and
second harmonic (2ð). Since the resulting forces gener-
ated by the spindle are similar to angular misalignment,
there also will be a marked increase in the axial energy
generate by the spindle.

The universal-coupling conﬁguration used by jackshafts
(Figure 44.57) generate an elevated vibration frequency at
the fourth (4ð) harmonic of its true rotational speed. This
failure mode is caused by the binding that occurs as the
double pivot points move through a complete rotation.

Fatigue

Spindles and jackshafts are designed to transmit torsional
power between a driver and driven unit that are not in the
same plane or that have a radical variation in torsional
power. Typically, both conditions are present when these
ﬂexible drives are used.

Both the jackshaft and spindle are designed to absorb
transient increases or decreases in torsional power caused
by twisting. In effect, the shaft or tube used in these
designs winds, much like a spring, as the torsional power
increases. Normally, this torque and the resultant twist
of the spindle are maintained until the torsional load is

reduced. At that point, the spindle unwinds, releasing the
stored energy that was generated by the initial transient.
Repeated twisting of the spindle’s tube or the solid shaft
used in jackshafts results in a reduction in the ﬂexible
drive’s stiffness. When this occurs, the drive loses some
of its ability to absorb torsional transients. As a result,
damage may result to the driven unit. Unfortunately, the
limits of single-channel, frequency-domain data acquisi-
tion prevents accurate measurement of this failure mode.
Most of the abnormal vibration that results from fatigue
occurs in the relatively brief time interval associated with
startup, when radical speed changes occur, or during shut-
down of the machine-train. As a result, this type of data
acquisition and analysis cannot adequately capture these

References 44/811

transients. However, the loss of stiffness caused by fatigue
increases the apparent mechanical looseness observed in
the steady-state, frequency-domain vibration signature. In
most cases, this is similar to the mechanical looseness.

References

1 CompressedAirandGasData, Charles W. Gibbs, Ingersoll-Rand

Company (1971).

2 Maintenance Engineering Handbook, Higgins & R. Keith

Mobley, McGraw-Hill, New York (1995).

3 PredictiveMaintenanceforProcessMachinery, R. Keith Mobley,

Technology for Energy Corp. (1988).

4 Vibration Analysis, R. Keith Mobley, Butterworth–Heinemann

(1998).

45

Air Pollution

Roger C Webster
Consultant

Contents

45/813

45/815

45.1 Introduction
45.2 Effect on plants, vegetation, materials and buildings

45/815

45.2.1 Vegetation 45/815
45.2.2 Materials and buildings
45.3 Effects on weather/environment
45.4 Legislation on air pollution of concern to the

45/815
45/815

45.4.4 Health and Safety at Work, etc. Act 1974
45.4.5 Control of Pollution Act 1974
45.4.6 Chimney height calculations: Third Edition of the

45/817

45/817

1956 Clean Air Act Memorandum 45/818

45/815

plant engineer
45.4.1 Alkalis and Works Regulations Act 1906
45.4.2 The Clean Air Acts 1956 and 1968
45.4.3 Relation of the Clean Air Acts to the

45/816

45/815

Alkalis Acts 45/817

This chapter is provided for general guidance. US readers
should refer to Clear Air Act for speciﬁc guidance.

45.1 Introduction

A pollutant may be deﬁned as any substance or condition
which, when present in a sufﬁcient concentration, may
have a detrimental effect on the Earth’s biosphere. Thus
pollution may take place in the form of gases, vapors, par-
ticulates or temperature variations (these may be directly
or indirectly caused).

It should be noted that these are in terms of short-
or long-term exposure levels and are based on an aver-
age working week’s exposure and an average working
life. They do not directly relate to exposure outside the
workplace.

It is an accepted practice when assessing the environ-
mental effects of pollution on man and his place of abode
to use a divisor of 40 (some agencies may divide by 30)
against the long-term exposure level in the Occupational
Health and Safety Act (OSHA). Much lower exposure
limits are necessary due to the much longer term of expo-
sure in the domestic situation. The section of the pop-
ulation most likely to spend long periods of time in the
home are those most susceptible to the detrimental effects
of pollutants, i.e. the young, the elderly or the inﬁrm. For
short-term exposure the known data can be used directly
from the list or from animal-exposure data.

45.2 Effects on plants, vegetation,
materials and buildings

45.2.1 Vegetation

Plants have evolved and adapted to suit the atmospheric
conditions in which they ﬁnd themselves. This atmosphere
may contain traces of gases which we would classify
as pollutants. However,
in many cases these may be
necessary for the plants’ existence. Near to industrial
centers, the relative concentrations of the various gases
change, and this can have an adverse effect on the plants’
development.

The effects of acid rain on vegetation have perhaps
received the greatest publicity in recent times and form an
interesting case study. Numerous agencies have reported
damage to forests caused by acid rainfall, but experi-
ments have revealed that the direct impingement of acidic
material on the plant cannot produce the effects as noted.
Rather, it may be the result of the combination of other
environmental factors, along with acid rainfall, which is
responsible. It is known that calcium and magnesium are
more readily leached out of the soil under acidic con-
ditions and that this can affect aluminum levels in the
plants (primarily pine forests), causing them to die. Unfor-
tunately, these effects are very long term, and as the
chemistry is most complex the problem is only just begin-
ning to be understood, and it may already be too late to

Legislation on air pollution of concern to the plant engineer 45/815

save many forests both in the US and elsewhere. Acid rain
also may cause heavy metals to enter man’s food chain
via ﬁsh or water supplies.

45.2.2 Materials and buildings

Acid rain erodes buildings, particularly those constructed
from limestone. It has been reported that the Acropolis
in Athens has suffered more deterioration in the last
20 years than in the previous 2000. Acidic gases are
produced directly by the combination of oxides of sulfur
and oxides of nitrogen with water and also by more
complex processes involving unburned hydrocarbons and
ozone in the atmosphere.

It has been found that particulate pollution, while
causing soiling of materials, may also be responsible for
increasing corrosion levels (compared to the corrosion that
would be caused by the same level of acid impingement
alone) by a process of adsorption. Also, particulates can
react synergistically with the acid deposition to cause
much greater damage.

45.3 Effects on weather/environment

By far the most serious effect under consideration today is
the greenhouse effect. The combustion of fossil fuels has
resulted in an increase in the carbon dioxide content of the
atmosphere. Carbon dioxide has the effect of insulating
the Earth against the loss of heat, and hence the mean
temperature is in part dependent on carbon dioxide levels.
It has been predicted that the carbon dioxide level may
double in the next 50 years and produce a global warming
of up to 3°C. Scientists currently disagree as to the rate
of this warming, but all agree that the situation is very
serious.

Ozone forms a layer around the Earth that insulates
against thermal radiation. This layer is being destroyed
by pollutants (principally ﬂuorocarbons). The effect of the
depletion of the ozone layer is to warm the Earth (and
hence exacerbate the greenhouse effect) and may also lead
to an increase in the incidence of skin cancers.

45.4 Legislation on air pollution of
concern to the plant engineer

45.4.1 Alkalis and Works Regulations Act 1906

This Act has been much amended and now forms a
‘relevant statutory provision’ for the Health and Safety
at Work, etc. Act 1974. Originally it provided for the
registration and control of certain classes of chemical
works. The Act has now been amended and the classes
of premises, the ‘scheduled works’, are now included
in the Health and Safety (Emission into Atmosphere)
Regulations 1983 (amended 1989). There are 62 main
categories of works, and in some cases only certain
processes within a category are covered:

45/816 Air Pollution

Acetylene works
Acrylates works
Aldehyde works
Aluminum works
Amines works
Ammonia works
Anhydride works
Arsenic works
Asbestos works
Benzene works
Beryllium works
Bisulfate works
Bromine works
Cadmium works
Carbon disulﬁde works
Carbonyl works
Caustic soda works
Cement works
Ceramic works
Chemical fertilizer works
Chlorine works
Chromium works
Copper works
Di-isocyanate works
Electricity works
Fiber works
Fluorine works
Gas liquor works
Gas and coke works
Hydrochloric acid works
Hydroﬂuoric acid works
Hydrogen cyanide works
Incineration works
Iron works and steel works

Large combustion works
Large glass works
Large paper pulp works
Lead works
Lime works
Magnesium works
Manganese works
Metal recovery works
Mineral works
Nitrate and chloride or iron

works

Nitric acid works
Parafﬁn oil (kerosene) works
Petrochemical works
Petroleum works
Phosphorus works
Picric acid works
Producer gas works
Pyridine works
Selenium works
Smelting works
Sulfate of ammonia works
and chloride of ammonia
works

Sulﬁde works
Sulfuric acid (Class I)

Uranium works
Vinyl chloride works
Zinc works

Sulfuric acid (Class II)

Tar works and bitumen

works

works

works

45.4.2 The Clean Air Acts 1956 and 1968
The Clean Air Act 1956
These Acts control smoke from chimneys and open sites.
‘Smoke’ is not deﬁned but includes soot, ash, etc. The
emission of dark smoke (as dark or darker than shade 2
on the Ringleman chart) from chimneys and open sites is
made an offence (exceptions are provided for short peri-
ods of time).

New furnaces have to be constructed (as far as is prac-
ticable) so as to operate smokelessly. Chimney heights
are controlled (see below). Smoke Control Orders can be
introduced (to control domestic smoke) and grants are
available to convert ﬁreplaces to burn authorized fuels.
Smoke (other than dark smoke, which is already con-
trolled) is dealt with by Section 16 of the 1956 Act and
is, for the purposes of Part III of the 1936 Public Health
Act, to be considered as a statutory nuisance.

Railway engines are dealt with in the same way as
premises for the purposes of Section 1 of this Act (which
controls dark smoke) except that the owner of the engine
is to be held responsible. Other Sections of the Act do not
apply.

Exemptions from the terms of the Clean Air Act are
possible, on application to the local authority, for appli-
ances used for the purposes of investigation and research.

New furnaces shall be ﬁtted with plant to arrest grit and

dust if they burn

1. Pulverized fuel; or
2. Solid fuel (or solid waste) at a rate of 1 ton per
hour or more. This plant should be approved by the
local authority prior to installation (this Section is now
replaced by the Clean Air Act 1968, Section 3).

In the case of large installations (burning pulverized
fuel, or solid fuel at a rate of 100 lb or more per hour
or liquid or gaseous fuel at a rate of 1.25 million BTUs
or more) local authorities may serve notice to direct that
Regulations shall apply concerning the measurement of
grit and dust. These Regulations (the Clean Air (Mea-
surement of Grit and Dust from Furnaces) Regulations
1971) require the owner of a furnace to make measure-
ments and keep records of the grit and dust emissions from
the furnace. Local authorities have the power to require
information concerning furnaces and the fuel consumed
to enable them to perform functions under this Act.

Chimney heights on new buildings are controlled by
this Act. However, Section 10 was repealed by the 1968
Act (see below) as far as chimneys serving furnaces are
concerned. This Section of the Act does not apply to
domestic chimneys or shops or ofﬁces.

The Clean Air Act 1968

Section 1 of the Act prohibits dark smoke from trade
premises (the 1956 Act only controlled smoke from chim-
neys). Bonﬁres are thus now included. Section 2 controls
the rate of grit and dust emission from furnaces and the
Minister may make Regulations. These are known as the
Clean Air (Emission of Grit and Dust from Furnaces)
Regulations 1971 and the Clean Air (Emission of Grit
and Dust from Furnaces) (Scotland) Regulations 1971.

A breach of these emission levels is an offence under
Section 2(2) of this Act. Best practicable means may be
used as a fence against this action, and the Regulations
prescribe to which classes of appliance they apply.
Schedule 1 furnaces are rated by heat output and are
boilers or indirect heating appliances where the material
heated is a gas or a liquid. The maximum continuous
rating concerned are from 825,000 to 475 million BTUs.
Schedule 2 furnaces are rated by heat input and are
indirect heating appliances or appliances in which the
combustion gases are in contact with the material being
heated (but the material does not contribute to the grit and
dust). These are a heat input in the range 1.25 to 575 mil-
lion BTUs. Tables of permissible grit and dust emission
rates are given.

Subject

to Section 4 (which allows for
Section 3
exemptions to Section 3) any furnace to which Section 2
applies shall be ﬁtted with grit and dust arrestment plant
if burning

1. Pulverized fuel;
2. Solid fuel at a rate greater than 100 lb or more per

hour;

3. Any liquid or gaseous matter at a rate of 1.25 million

BTUs or more.

Section 6 of the 1956 Act shall not apply to furnaces if
covered by this Section.

Approval is given by the local authority (in writing)
to plants installed under this Section. It is an offence to
use plant which does not have approved grit and dust
arresters. If a local authority refuses approval, an appeal
is to be made within 28 days of refusal of consent.

The Minister may make Regu-
Section 4 – Exemptions
lations to exempt furnaces of certain classes. These Reg-
ulations are known as the Clean Air (Arrestment Plant)
(Exemption) Regulations 1969 (and similarly for Scot-
land). The exemptions are:

1. Mobile furnaces while providing a temporary source
of heat or power during building operations, or for the
purpose of investigation or research, or for the pur-
poses of agriculture;

2. Furnaces other than those burning solid fuel at a rate of
greater than one ton per hour – the following classes,
used for any purpose other than the incineration of
refuse:
(a) Burning liquid or gases;
(b) Hand-ﬁred sectional burning solid matter at not

more than 25 lb/h/ft2 of grate surface;

(c) Magazine-type grate furnaces burning less than

25 lb/h/ft2 of grate surface;

(d) Underfed stokers less than 25 lb/h/ft2 plan area of

(e) Chain grate stokers less than 25 lb/h/ft2 of grate

stoker;

surface;

(f) Coking stokers less than 25 lb/h/ft2 of ﬁre bars

excluding area of the solid coking plate.

Under sub-Section 2 of the Act the local authority may
grant exemptions on application provided that the fur-
nace will not give rise to a nuisance or be prejudicial to
health if permitted to operate without arrestment plant.
The exemption must specify the purpose for which the
furnace is permitted to be used.

Section 5 empowers the Minister to make Regulations
to substitute new ratings for the requirement to measure
grit and dust and fumes from furnaces under Section 7 of
the 1956 Act. The Minister is not empowered to reduce
the rate without approval of both Houses of Parliament.
Sub-Section 3 enables an owner to serve a notice on the
local authority requiring them to take the measurements
that he would be required to obtain under Section 7 of the
1956 Act. The ratings of such furnaces shall be less than
one ton per hour of solid fuel other than pulverized fuel
or liquid or gaseous-fuelled furnaces with a rating of less
than 28 million BTUs.

This Section expands on Section 10 of the
Section 6
1956 Act. Under this Section, the local authorities must
approve chimney heights for all furnaces with ratings as
per Section 3(1).

Section 10 of the principal Act shall cease to have
effect as respect chimneys serving furnaces. This Section

Legislation on air pollution of concern to the plant engineer 45/817

applies to all new furnaces and chimneys to furnaces
which have had the combustion space increased and to
installations which have replacement furnaces of greater
ratings than that previously installed. The method speci-
ﬁed in the Chimney Heights, Third Edition of the 1956
Clean Air Act Memorandum is used to determine chimney
heights (see below).

Section 7 enables the Minister (Secretary of State for the
Environment) to apply certain Sections of the Act to fumes
by the making of Regulations. None have yet been made.

45.4.3 Relation of the Clean Air Acts to the
Alkalis Acts

Section 11 of the 1968 Act states that Sections 1–10 of
the 1956 Act and Sections 1–16 of the 1968 Act shall
not apply to works subjected to the Alkalis Act (those
premises now listed in the Health and Safety (Emission
into Atmosphere Regulations)). These premises are there-
fore subject to enforcement by HMIP. However, sub-
Section 3 of Section 11 does contain a proviso for the
local authority, upon application to the Minister, to ask
for an Order applying the Acts to the whole or part of the
schedule works. If an Order is made, best practical means
is applied to all (alkali) works whether or not provided
for in the two Clean Air Acts.

HMIP publish sets of Guidance Notes, which relate to
activities they control. These notes are known as Best
Practicable Means (BPM) Notes. BPM is explained in
Note BPM 1/88, Best Practicable Means. General Princi-
ples and Practices. Copies of these notes may be obtained
from the Department of the Environment Publications
Sales Unit, Building 1, Victoria Road, South Ruislip, Mid-
dlesex HA4 0NZ, telephone: 020 8841 3425.

It has been proposed that a set of scheduled works may
be assigned to local authorities. This class of works has
been discussed in documents published by the Department
of the Environment Air Quality Division and legislation
came into force on 1 April 1991. It is proposed that these
schedule (B) works will be licensed in much the same way
as the existing scheduled works and that prior consent will
be needed before operations of this type commence. This
will give local authorities a much stronger hand in pollution
abatement, and they will be able to avoid the establish-
ment of premises in unsuitable areas or without adequate
pollution-abatement equipment. At present, local authori-
ties rely on planning conditions or nuisance provisions.

45.4.4 Health and Safety at Work, etc. Act 1974

Section 5 of this Act places a duty on persons having con-
trol of premises to take the ‘best practicable means’ to
prevent the emission into the atmosphere of noxious or
offensive substances. This Section is used by HMIP in
the enforcement of best practical means for the scheduled
processes.

45.4.5 Control of Pollution Act 1974

this Act

Under
the local authorities may undertake
research relevant to the problem of air pollution. The

45/818 Air Pollution

authority may obtain information concerning this subject
by serving a notice requiring this information. If they
so do, they should specify the information they require
and the regularity of the measurements. The authority are
not entitled to ask for returns of less than three-monthly
intervals and they may not ask for information covering
more than one year on any one notice.

If such a notice is received, an occupier may serve
a counter-notice on the local authority requesting them
to carry out the measurements themselves. The converse
may also happen, in that the local authority may serve a
notice which empowers them to enter premises to take
measurements (after 21 days’ notice). If this notice is
received an owner can (by notice) require the local author-
ity to allow him to carry out the measurements himself.

45.4.6 Chimney height calculations: Third
Edition of the 1956 Clean Air Act Memorandum

The Memorandum is published to help local authorities
and industry to derive an approximate height for chim-
neys. It is stated that the Memorandum should not be
used as an absolute criterion but merely as a guide. Val-
leys, hills and other geographical features will modify the
height as derived from the Memorandum.

The Memorandum covers furnaces with a gross heat
input in the range of 0.15–150 MW. (The 1968 Clean
Air Act, Section 6, requires chimney height approvals for
furnaces for burning fuel at a rate greater than 1.25 million
BTUs per hour. This is equivalent to 0.375 MW.)

The method is designed to ensure the adequate dis-
persal of sulfur dioxide (and hence a different method is
used for very low-sulfur fuels). It assumes certain efﬂux
velocities, i.e.

For boilers up to 2.2 MW–6 m/s (full load)
For boilers up to 9 MW–7.5 m/s (full load)
For boilers where the rating is greater than 135 MW–
15 m/s
Between 9 and 135 MW–pro rata.

The Memorandum does accept that the ﬁgure of 6 m/s
may be difﬁcult to achieve with small installations.

Very low-sulfur fuels

The ﬁrst stage of the calculation is the uncorrected chim-
ney height. This is obtained from
U D 1.36Q0.6[1 (cid:2) (cid:4)4.7 ð 10(cid:2)5Q1.69(cid:5)]

(For heat inputs less than 30 MW the part of the equation
in brackets may be omitted.) Q may be obtained from
Q D WB/3600 where Q is the heat input (MW), W is
the maximum rate of combustion of fuel (kg/h for mass
or m3/h for volume) and B is the gross caloriﬁc value
(MJ/kg or MJ/m3).

Other fuels

The rate of emission of sulfur dioxide is ﬁrst calculated
from

Oil ﬁring: R D 0.020 WS
Coal ﬁring: R D 0.018 WS
where R is the rate of sulfur dioxide (kg/h), W is the
maximum rate at which fuel is burned (kg/h) and S is the
sulfur content of the fuel (per cent). The equations are
different, as it is assumed that in the case of coal ﬁring a
certain amount of sulfur will be retained in the ash.

The area in which the chimney is situated is then con-

sidered. The classes are:

A: underdeveloped area where development is unlikely
B: partially developed area with scattered houses
C: a built-up residential area
D: an urban area of mixed industrial and residential devel-

opment

E: a large city or an urban area of mixed heavy industrial

and dense residential development.

The uncorrected chimney height is then calculated by plot-
ting the emission rate and the classiﬁcation on a graph
supplied in the Memorandum or by the multiplication of
factors supplied:

Type of district

A
B
C
D
E

Factor
0.55
0.78
1.00
1.30
1.60

The uncorrected chimney height (U) is calculated from
the sulfur dioxide emission rate (Ra) as previously:
If Ra is less than 10 kg/h: U D 6R0.5
If Ra is from 10 to 100 kg: U D 12R0.2
If Ra is from 100 to 800 kg/h: U D R0.5

a (cid:2) 0.9R0.67

a

a

a

Corrected chimney heights

A procedure is given to take account of tall buildings
near to the stack or if the building to which the stack is
attached is less than 2.5 U. The Memorandum suggests
that 5 U should be used as a radius around the chimney
as the deﬁnition of ‘near’, but in practice, interpretation
and local knowledge may expand this circle.

In the simplest case with one tall building near to the

stack (wider than it is tall) the simple equation is
C D H C 0.6 U
where C D corrected chimney height and H D building
height. In other cases (with more than one building, for
instance) a more complicated procedure is necessary.

All buildings within 5 U of the stack should be mea-
sured and the height and width recorded. The following
factors are then determined:

Hm – the largest value of the building height
K – for each building, the lesser of building height or
building width
T – each building (T D H C 1.5 K)
Tm – largest value of T

If U is greater than Tm then U becomes the corrected
chimney height. If not, calculate C from
C D Hm C U(cid:4)1 (cid:2) Hm/Tm(cid:5)
When C is derived certain overriding factors are applied:

1. A chimney should not be less than 3 m from any area
where there is access (i.e. ground level, roof areas or
operable windows).

2. C should never be less than U.
3. A chimney should never be lower than the attached

building within 5 U.

Fan dilution

This is also known as air dilution, and is a common pro-
cedure for gas-ﬁred boilers. It is allowed for any very
low-sulfur fuels (less than 0.04 per cent sulfur) or for
fuels in the range 0.04–0.2 per cent S where the VLS
fuels chimney heights calculation gives a lower value of
U than the ‘other fuels’ calculations. In these cases, the
ﬂue may terminate at the uncorrected height U so long as:

1. The ﬂue gas is diluted with air at a ratio that is known
as F, i.e. V/V0, where V D actual ﬂue gas volume and
V0 D the stoichiometric combustion volume.

2. The actual value of F is a compromise and may be in
the order of 20-1. F is used to determine other factors.

3. The emission velocity must be at least 75/F m/s.
4. The outlet must not be within 50 U/F of a fan-assisted
air intake (except for intakes of combustion and/or
dilution air for the boiler in question).

5. The outlet must not be within 20 U/F of an operable

window on the emitting building.

6. The distance to the nearest building must be greater

than 60 U/F.

7. The lower edge of the outlet should be at least 2 m
high for boilers related below 1 MW or 3 m for others.
8. The outlet should be directed at an angle above the
horizon (preferably about 30°) and must not be under
a canopy, or emit into an enclosed wall or courtyard.

The measurement of ‘smoke’: the Ringleman chart

This chart was devised in the nineteenth century and con-
sists of a white card with black cross-hatching. The per-
centage of hatching increases by divisions of 20 per cent
each Ringleman number. Therefore 0 D white, 1 D 20 per
cent, 2 D 40 per cent, 3 D 60 per cent, 4 D 80 per cent
5 D black.

When placed at a distance from the observer’s eye the
crosshatch lines merge and appear as a uniform shade of
gray. There is a standard size for this chart (BS 2742C:
1957), and this has the ﬁve shades from 0 to 4. The chart
is usually viewed from a distance of 15 meters and hence
has to be mounted on a tripod, which should not shadow
the card. The chart should be set up in such a position that
the smoke being measured has the same sky background
as the chart. It should not be placed so that the sun is
either directly behind the chart or directly in front of it.
Comparisons can then be made between the shade of the
smoke and that on the card.

Legislation on air pollution of concern to the plant engineer 45/819

It will be noted that the chart may be impractical to use
on a regular basis and thus two other Ringleman charts
are used:

1. The miniature smoke chart: This does not have
crosshatched lines but rather shades of gray, which
correspond to the numbers. The chart can be viewed
from approximately 1.5 m.

2. The micro Ringleman: This is a photographically
reduced Ringleman (i.e. with cross-hatching). It has
a slot in the middle through which the smoke can be
viewed at arm’s length.

Instruments have been developed through which the
smoke can be viewed and a shaded ﬁlter superposed on
part of the image. By far the most common of these is the
telesmoke. This device can be carried in the Inspector’s
pocket and most local authorities possess at least one of
these.

While the use of a Ringleman chart is to be encouraged,
it is not necessary to show, in any legal action, that a chart
was used as a reference. Section 34(2) of the 1956 Act
states ‘for the avoidance of doubt, it is thereby declared
that, in proceedings brought under or by virtue of Section
1 or Section 16 of this Act, the Court may be satisﬁed that
smoke is or is not dark smoke as herein before deﬁned
[i.e. as dark or darker than Shade 2] notwithstanding that
there has been no actual comparison thereof with a chart
of the said type’. This would also apply to the 1968 Act
as the expression ‘dark smoke’ is referred back to the
1956 Act. Interestingly, the expression ‘black smoke’ is
not deﬁned in either Act; it is only described in the Dark
Smoke (Permitted Periods) Regulations 1958, where it is
deﬁned as ‘as dark or darker than Shade 4’. Section 34(2)
of the 1956 Act would not therefore apply and, strictly,
reference to a Ringleman chart should be necessary for
any court action to succeed.

Deﬁnition of the terms fume, smoke, dust and grit

The most common air-pollution descriptor is the expres-
sion ‘smoke’. For the purposes of the 1956 and 1968 Acts,
smoke includes soot, ash, grit and gritty particles emitted
in smoke. Smoke is intended to mean the visible products
of combustion and not the invisible ones (CO2, SO2, NOx,
etc.) and is used to indicate the degree of completeness
of combustion (if combustion is 100 per cent ‘smoke’ is
produced).

Smoke is taken as having a particle size of less than one
µm. Dust consists of particles 1–76 µm in diameter. Grit
can be interpreted as particles larger than dust. These def-
initions were taken from the Beaver Report of November
1954 which formed the basis for the 1956 Act.

Fumes are deﬁned in the 1956 Act as being smaller
than dust and thus are a constituent of smoke if visible
and smaller than 76 µm. However, fumes are traditionally
classiﬁed as being smaller than 1 µm (see Table 45.1).

Deﬁnition of the term nuisance

Statutory nuisance While certain occurrences are
declared to constitute statutory nuisances, there has never

45/820 Air Pollution

Table 45.1 Deﬁnition of terms

(cid:1)
(cid:1)

Smoke (1956 Act)

(cid:2)(cid:3)

Fumes (1956 Act)

(cid:2)(cid:3)

(cid:4)

(cid:4)

Thus if new houses are built near to a factory the own-
ers of the houses will still have a right to complain about
any nuisance caused.

Smoke
Fumes

(cid:16)m 0

Dust

Grit

1

76

500

been a formal statutory deﬁnition of the term ‘nuisance’.
The term has been in use since the thirteenth century, and
no doubt the legislators felt that there was no need to
explain a well-understood concept.

‘Nuisance’ covers a great variety of areas but it must
involve activities, which interfere with the activities of
one’s neighbors or denies the public their rights. It can
involve the blocking of highways or allowing one’s ani-
mals to escape onto neighboring premises. The two main
types of nuisance are private and public.

Private nuisance is related to the own-
Private nuisance
ership of land and has been deﬁned as ‘where a person is
unlawfully annoyed, prejudiced or disturbed in the enjoy-
ment of their land, whether by physical damage to the
land or by other interference with the enjoyment of land
or with his health, comfort or convenience as occupier’.
The degree of disturbance must be examined. If physical
damage to structures or to health can be shown, nuisance
is likely to be proven. To interfere with comfort, substan-
tial interference must occur. The amount of occurrences is
important, and case law has stated that a single occurrence
does not constitute a nuisance.

Also, the area under question must be considered. Air-
pollution levels on a general industrial estate may be
considered acceptable, but those same levels may not be
so in a residential area. In one case (Sturgess v. Bridgam
(1879)) the judge stated that ‘what would be a nuisance in
Belgrave Square would not necessarily be so in Bermond-
sey’.

Sensitivity on the part of the recipient is not consid-
ered, even though actual damage may result. Another legal
quote is often used: ‘Ought this inconvenience to be con-
sidered, not merely according to elegant or dainty modes
of habit or living, but according to plain and simple and
sober notions amongst English people?’ (Walter v. Selfe
(1851)).

Prescriptive right is also important in private nuisance.
The law of prescription states that if things are done to the
knowledge of the occupier of land (likely to be affected)
for 20 years a right may exist. It is important to note
that the person ‘suffering’ the nuisance must be aware
of the nuisance. In Sturgess v. Bridgam (1879) this was
contested. A doctor had built a consulting room at the end
of his garden and was affected by the noise of machinery
from his neighbors’ house. However, while his neighbor
claimed prescriptive right as the noise had been made for
more than 20 years, this was refused. As the doctor had
not been aware of the nuisance, the right could not exist.

Public nuisance is the interference with
Public nuisance
the lawful activities of Her Majesty’s subjects or a sub-
stantial section of them. One person cannot suffer a public
nuisance. Public nuisance is a crime and is actionable by
the Attorney General or (under Section 2.2.2 of the Local
Government Act 1972) by the local authority. There is no
prescriptive right to commit a public nuisance.

Air pollution other than smoke

EC Directive levels for SO2, NOx and lead have
recently been incorporated into UK legislation in the form
of the Air Quality Standards Regulations 1989. SO2 is
generated when high-sulfur fossil fuels are burned. It
is thus a factor of the amount of coal and heavy oil
(predominantly) being burned.

The recent tendency towards burning more gas and light
oils has tended to reduce the industrial emission of SO2,
although power stations remain the major source. Euro-
pean pressure is leading to the reduction of SO2 from large
plant. Existing power stations are to be ﬁtted with ﬂue-gas
desulfurization plant and other new plants are likely to use
low-SO2 technology (e.g. pressurized ﬂuidized bed, etc.).
Flue-gas desulfurization is unlikely to be a viable propo-
sition for medium-sized plant. It is possible that the new
regulation limits may be approached in certain parts of
the UK and if this happens, plant design will have to take
account of permitted sulfur-emission ﬁgures. Designers of
any medium-sized plant should consult the local authority
at an early stage (before chimney heights application) to
discuss this possibility.

NOx levels are particularly disturbing in some large
towns and cities in the UK and are increasing. Whereas
SO2 is generated from sulfur contained within the fuel,
NOx is primarily a combination of atmospheric nitro-
gen and oxygen, and is generated at a greater level in
high-temperature combustion conditions. As the efﬁciency
of furnaces/engines increases, so does the rate of NOx
emission. Levels (other than at roadsides) are less likely
to approach regulation levels currently, but are on the
increase. A major source of NOx generation is the internal
combustion engine.

NOx measurement is much more difﬁcult than that of
SO2 and levels seem to vary considerably, depending on
the position of the measuring apparatus. SO2 measure-
ments are much more consistent.

Gas turbines and power stations are particularly prone
to generate NOx and the search for the ‘low-NOx’ burner
that will operate at high efﬁciency (i.e. with low hydrocar-
bon emissions) continues. The principle of the low-NOx
burner is to slow the rate of combustion by dividing it into
several stages by the gradual mixing of the combustion
gases with the stoichiometric air volume.

Steam or water injection may also be used, and under
some circumstances this can reduce NOx emissions with-
out lowering plant efﬁciency. Such injection seems to
operate in two ways. First, it cools the combustion and
hence slows its rate (therefore acting in the same manner

as a low-NOx burner) and, second, it converts NOx into
nitric acid, which is emitted from the chimney as acidic
vapor.

Atmospheric dispersion theory

Fumes and vapors discharged to the environment via a
chimney form a plume, which is approximately cone
shaped. Mathematical modeling of dispersal
rates is
possible. The Gaussian dispersion model is commonly
used to calculate the concentration of pollutants at
coordinate positions X, Y and Z. (The coordinates are
measured from the plume centerline.) The equation used
is:
C(cid:4)x,y,z(cid:5) D

(cid:6)

exp

Q

(cid:5)
(cid:2) 1
y
(cid:6)
2
y0
2 (cid:2) He

(cid:7)(cid:8)2
(cid:11)
(cid:7)2

(cid:22)z

Cexp

2(cid:21)(cid:22)y(cid:22)zu

(cid:9)

ð

exp

(cid:10)
(cid:2) 1
2

(cid:6)

(cid:10)
(cid:2) 1
2

2 C He

z

(cid:11)(cid:12)

(cid:7)2

where
C D concentration at points x, y, z (µg/m),
Q D pollutant emission rate,
U D mean wind speed affecting plume (m),
z D standard deviation of plume concentration in
y D standard deviation of plume concentration in
the horizontal at distance X (m),
X, Y and Z are the coordinates with the base
of the stack as the origin,
He is the effective stack height (see below).

the vertical at distance X (m),

The equation simpliﬁes considerably when we consider
only ground-level concentrations directly in line with the
plume, i.e. X and Z are equal to zero:

(cid:10)

(cid:6)

(cid:11)

(cid:7)2

C(cid:4)X(cid:5) D

Q

(cid:21)(cid:22)y(cid:22)zu

exp

(cid:2) 1
2

He
(cid:22)z

Effective height (cid:4)He(cid:5)
The amount by which a plume rises above the top of a
chimney can be derived mathematically.

s

h H0.4/u

Hot buoyant plume
H D 20.5Q0.6
where
Qh D rate of sensible heat emission from the
U D wind speed at the top of the stack,
Hs D actual chimney height,
He D Hs C H

chimney (MW),

if W/u ½ 4

Cold plume
H D 3W/ud
where
W D efﬂux velocity of plume at chimney top (m/s)
d D internal diameter of top of chimney (m).

Legislation on air pollution of concern to the plant engineer 45/821

Table 45.2 Pasquill’s stability categories

Day

Incoming solar radiation

Strong

Moderate

Slight

<2
2–3
3–5
5–6
>6

A–B

A

B
C
C

A–B

B

B–C
C–D

D

B
C
C
D
D

Night

>4/8

Low cloud

–
E
D
D
D

<3/8
Cloud

G
F
E
D
D

A and B are the most unstable, G is the most stable and D is
neutral.

If W/u < 4, plume rise above top of chimney should be
ignored. Again, He D Hs C H.

Atmospheric stability

Atmospheric stability and mechanical turbulence (impor-
tant near to the ground) are used to derive the vertical
and horizontal dispersion coefﬁcients. Table 45.2 shows
Pasquill’s stability categories used to derive the coefﬁ-
cients by reference to standard graphs.

The dispersal of the plume at X, Y and Z is deter-
mined by the values of (cid:22)y and (cid:22)z. Small-scale eddies can
affect dispersal near to the source and larger-scale ones
are needed before effects are noted at greater distances
from the source. Y and Z thus have large orders of mag-
nitude furthest from the source and increase if a larger
time period is used for sampling. It is thus important to
state the sampling period used. The trend towards changes
in (cid:22)y and (cid:22)z are thus

Near to stack – ground turbulence dominates (coefﬁ-
cients much greater in urban areas);
Far distance – coefﬁcients much smaller with stable con-
ditions.

Other models (or combinations of them) are often
employed when computers are used to analyze dispersal.
These can give an acceptable degree of accuracy when
combined with detailed weather data. Short-exposure
modeling is the most difﬁcult and is liable to the greatest
degree of error. It is for this reason that such models
are not accurate when dealing with odor nuisances. The
problem of modeling odor dispersal is dealt with below.
Other special atmospheric conditions can interfere with
the modeling process and the most common of these
is temperature inversion. This condition is so called
because the air temperature increases with height above
the ground, the converse of the situation that pertains for
most of the time.

Temperature inversions

There are two common types of inversion as follows.

Ground base inversions On clear nights when there is
strong radioactive cooling of the ground, the inversion
starts at ground level and extends upwards to 100 m or
more.

45/822 Air Pollution

Elevated inversions begin at some
Elevated inversions
height above the ground. Inversions affect ﬂue gas dis-
persal in the following ways:

1. Ground based: Upward dispersal is very slow. Hori-
zontal dispersal proceeds normally. For low chimneys,
ground-based concentrations can be high, especially
when the ground is heated in the mornings and eddies
are caused which bring down plume gases.

2. Elevated: Plumes can be trapped either above or below
the base of the inversion and held in a horizontal plane.
Again, these can be brought down to ground level by
eddies. This process is known as ‘fumigation’ and can
result in short-term high-level concentrations.

Odor dispersal

Odors may be detected for a very short exposure period,
perhaps less than one second. It is thus necessary to deter-
mine the likely one-second peaks knowing the concentra-
tions derived from the Gaussian equation. This is based
on 10-minute average period. The equation to convert the
time-averaging period is:

to
t

C1 D C10
where p D 0.17–0.2. Therefore in this case

(cid:7)p

(cid:6)

(cid:6)

(cid:7)0.17 D C10 ð 2.96

C1 D C10

600
1

We must thus multiply the Gaussian concentrations by
approximately three to obtain the short-term peaks. Other
sources have suggested that the multiplication factor may
be higher.

If the chimney were designed to avoid ground-level
concentrations exceeding the nuisance level based on the
Gaussian equation, we would ﬁnd short-term peaks that
would produce nuisance. To avoid nuisance for a 5:1 ratio
of 10 minutes to peak exposure we would need to double
the chimney height from that derived for the Gaussian
equation.

Nuisance levels for odors are not absolute, but are
related to the minimum detectable level for 50 per cent of
the population. These levels have been explored by War-
ren Spring Laboratories, who have concluded that ﬁve
times the minimum detectable level is likely to give rise
to complaint.

The maximum ground-level concentration calculated on
a 10-minute basis for no nuisance should therefore be
equal to the detection threshold, i.e.

D 5 ð 10-minute level
Peak
Nuisance D 5 ð detection level
Therefore for no nuisance, 10-minute level D detection
level.

Note that the ground-level concentrations do not depend
on the ﬂue gas concentrations but rather on the amount
of pollutant emitted. It is therefore not worth diluting the
ﬂue gases with fresh air (other than to raise the efﬂux
velocity).

46

46/823

Dust and Fume
Control

Brian Auger
J. B. Auger (Midlands) Ltd

Contents

46/825

46.1 Introduction
46.2 The nature of dusts and fumes 46/825
46.3 Control of dusts and fumes 46/825

46/825

46.3.1 Hoods
46.3.2 Ducting
46.3.3 Fans 46/828
46.3.4 Collectors

46/827

46/829

46.4 System design and application
46.5 Testing and inspections 46/835

46/831

46.1 Introduction
Dusts and fumes have been a part of industrial life for
many years and the hazards associated with them are well
known. The diseases and respiratory disorders found in
foundries, potteries and cotton works are examples that
are familiar to many. These need not occur with a bet-
ter understanding of control measures and more efﬁcient
equipment.

Attitudes to dusts and fumes have changed over the
years. It is no longer either permissible or tolerated for
workers to be subjected to unhealthy or unsafe condi-
tions at work. Society as a whole is demanding a cleaner
environment, and this has led to new legislation being
enacted. The effect of these changes on the plant engi-
neer has resulted in a great increase in the burden of
work and in the content and level of knowledge of the
subject. He now has to take account of the workings and
activities within the plant and its effect on people and sur-
roundings outside it. To ensure that dust and fume control
is effective in meeting its objectives it is imperative that
those responsible for the speciﬁcation and running of the
plant are well versed in the nature of dusts and fumes,
methods of entrainment, available equipment and test and
inspection techniques.

46.2 The nature of dusts and fumes
Dust can be said to be a solid broken down into powder,
and the form that it takes will have different effects on the
body. Fibrous dusts can attack tissue directly while others
may be composed of poisons, which are absorbed into
the bloodstream. For the purpose of this chapter, fumes
can be regarded as very small particles resulting from the
chemical reaction or condensation of vapor, which can
have the same two effects. It is not necessary for plant
engineers to have an in-depth knowledge of pathology,
only that they must be aware of the possible results of
exposure to dusts and fumes.

The standard unit normally used for measuring dust
particles is the micron (µm: one-thousandth of a milli-
meter). The smallest particle visible to the unaided eye
is between 50 and 100 µm and the most dangerous sizes
are between 0.2 and 5 µm. Particles larger than this are
usually unable to penetrate the lung defenses and smaller
ones settle out too slowly. Some dusts can be both toxic
and ﬁbrous (e.g. asbestos) and are therefore harmful even
outside these parameters. It may therefore be assumed that
dusts which are visible (i.e. between 50 and 100 µm), are
quite safe. However, this is not the case, as dust clouds
never consist solely of particles of one size. Analysis
would show percentages of all sizes, and it is for this rea-
son that special care is needed in measuring dust clouds
and concentrations.

The next most important factor to consider when assess-
ing dust clouds is the actual amount of dust present. This
is known as the concentration, and is deﬁned as follows.
A substantial concentration of dust should be taken as
concentration of 10 mg/m3 8-hour time-weighted average
of total inhalable dust or 5 mg/m3 8-hour time-weighted
average of respirable dust where there is no indication

Control of dusts and fumes 46/825

of the need of a lower value. There are now many lists
available for consultation which set out the safety limits as
they are known at present. If a substance is not listed this
is not always an indication that it is safe, and the general
rule should be applied that dust in any substantial concen-
tration is hazardous. Even with dusts and fumes that are
listed and have set limits it must be borne in mind that
our knowledge is always growing, and that the standards
of today may be obsolete tomorrow.

Clearly, the assessment of dust clouds and concentra-
tions cannot be left to the casual practitioner, and this has
now become the specialist ﬁeld of the industrial hygienist.

46.3 Control of dusts and fumes
The purpose of the control plant is to maintain a working
environment that is acceptable in terms of any statutory
regulations and the custom and practice within an indus-
try. The effectiveness of a control system is measured by
the amount of dust or fumes it controls. Efﬁciency, on the
other hand, is measured by the amount of power it takes
to do the work. It is the job of the dust-control engineer to
produce the most effective plant in the most efﬁcient way,
and the techniques of control will vary from one industry
to another. All control plants will have either four or ﬁve
elements, as shown in Figure 46.1, i.e. hoods, ducting,
fan, collector and disposal.

The collector is not always used, as many systems
still discharge untreated air to atmosphere. The growing
awareness of environmental matters will, in time, see all
such systems having collectors or treatment plants.

46.3.1 Hoods

This is the inlet into the system, and will be the single
most important element in determining the effectiveness
of the control plant. A study of the dust- or fume-
producing process is necessary to ensure that the twin
aims of effectiveness and efﬁciency are met. Hoods that
totally enclose the process for maximum effectiveness
may, however, prevent the operator from carrying out the
process for which the control was needed in the ﬁrst place.
There are four rules for the design of effective hoods,

irrespective of the process:

1. The hood should be as close to the source of generation

as possible.

2. The location and shape of the hood is such that the

contaminant is thrown into the hood.

3. The air ﬂowing past the source and into the hood has
a velocity at the origin greater than the velocity of
escape of the contaminant.

4. The hood is located so that the operator is never bet-

ween the source and the hood.

With these rules four types of hoods have evolved.

Total enclosures

These ensure that the process is totally enclosed, which
prevents any leakage to the workplace. It is rarely used

46/826 Dust and Fume Control

Figure 46.1 Horizontal duct with adequate carrying velocity. Ducting of increasing size to accommodate increasing airﬂow

except for very dangerous materials such as radioactive
particles in the nuclear industry or biological particles in
the drugs industry. The enclosure is subject to negative
pressure, and because the source is inside, manipulators
must carry out any work done on the source. A modi-
ﬁcation of the total enclosure is one where part of the
enclosure is removed for manipulation of loading. In this
case the velocities across the open faces of the hood
must be sufﬁciently high to prevent emissions or escape.
This technique is used on bucket elevators, conveyors and
holding bins.

Booths

These are really enclosures with one whole side removed
where the source is deep within the booth. They are par-
ticularly suitable where the particles are not moving at
high speed (e.g. ﬁlling and weighing operations). When
the booth is used where high-speed particle generation
occurs (e.g. grinding and fettling) careful thought must be
given to the depth. As booths tend to be large, the restrain-
ing velocities across the open face must only be sufﬁcient
for control, otherwise the efﬁciency of the plant would be
low with very high velocities and hence volumes.

A development of the simple booth is the laminar ﬂow
system, which uses a nominal velocity at the face of
0.5 m/s. As the airﬂow is laminar, all parts of the booth
are subjected to its effect.

Captor hoods

In many processes it is not possible to use enclosures or
booths without imposing unacceptable operational rest-
raints (see Figure 46.2). The hood must be placed at some
distance from the source. The natural projection of the

Figure 46.2 Captor-type claw hood for a furnace

particles will not necessarily be into the hood, and may
indeed be in the opposite direction. To be effective, these
hoods require high face velocities to give control (e.g.
up to 10 m/s). Hoods for controlling fumes fall into this
category, especially on tanks and vats.

Receptor hoods

These derive their name from the method of entrainment.
The hood is placed in the path of the particle and uses
the momentum of the particle to assist in control. It is
important to have a clear understanding of the process, the
direction particles take and the movement of air created by
the process. Grinding wheels release dust downwards and
over the top of the wheels, and considerable air movement

Control of dusts and fumes 46/827

Glass

        window

Roughing

filter

Air
lock

Door

Glove
ports

A i r
l o c k

Self

closing
door

(a)

(b)

Paint dip

Figure 46.3 Types of hoods. (a) Enclosure; (b) receptor; (c) captor

(c)

is generated by the process. These are ideally suited to
control by receptor hoods (see Figure 46.3).

There are many machines which arrive on the factory
ﬂoor with correctly designed and tested hoods supplied by
the machine manufacturers. This is a trend that has grown
over the years, and is one to be encouraged. Hoods sup-
plied in this way can have the volume speciﬁed, which,
in turn, will ensure that the control meets with the appro-
priate regulations.

46.3.2 Ducting

The purpose of the ducting is to convey the entrained
contaminants away from the sources to a collection or dis-
posal point. It is very often a neglected part of the system.

Different processes require different speciﬁcations, and
the following will act as a guide in selecting which type
of ducting is necessary:

1. The gauge of ducting should take account of the nature
of the particles and the operating pressures of the
system.

2. The methods of construction usually encountered
are (a) lock-formed, (b) welded, (c) slip jointed and
(d) ﬂanged.

3. The construction materials should be selected to with-
stand the operating conditions and the condition of
the pollutants. Galvanized sheet steel and black mild
steel are the most common for general work. Corro-
sion or heat applications will have ducting constructed
in stainless steel or plastic.

46/828 Dust and Fume Control

4. The standard gauges (mm) for various works are:

General dust work
0–450
1.0
Bends
1.5
450 and over
1.5
Bends
2.0
All ducts over 450 ﬂanged
Foundry work
1.5
0–450
2.0
Bends
2.0
450 and over
Bends
3.0
All ducts over 450 ﬂanged

Light-duty work

0.8
0.8
1.0
1.0

Oily and wet fumes

1.0
1.0
1.5
1.5

5. The design of the ductwork must ensure that the plant
is both effective and efﬁcient. Sharp bends and abrupt
entries of branches into mains cause unnecessary pres-
sure losses. Incorrectly sized ducts result in high pres-
sure losses or blockages due to fallout from velocities
being too low.

6. The ducting should be adequately supported and ﬁtted

with inspection doors or ports.

7. The termination point in any system is the discharge

cowl, and many designs are used.

46.3.3 Fans

Fan engineering is a basic technology, with its origins in
ancient times. It was developed from the wheel and pump
as the need grew for continuous quantities of moving air
at low pressures. By the nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries much of the design and research had been done,
resulting in an unsophisticated but reliable air mover. Fans
are capable of operating over a wide range of duties, albeit
with varying degrees of efﬁciency, and this has led to their
misapplication and abuse in dust- and fume-extraction
work. Without the fan a system will not function and
it is therefore necessary to select the fan to ensure both
effective and efﬁcient running of the plant. A selection
of fan types together with application data is shown in
Figures 46.4 and 46.5 and Table 46.1.

Fan performance and laws

In selecting a fan for a system the two most important
characteristics to consider are volume and pressure. This
can be said to be the movement of air (cid:2)m3/h(cid:3) against
the system resistance (mm water). As the majority of
these systems operate at near-normal temperatures and
altitude, density is usually ignored. If the system is to
work at temperatures and altitudes other than 25°C and
at sea level
then density must be considered in the
selection. Air movement is not a precise science and fans
selected for systems rarely operate at the exact design
duty. Furthermore, the system can change, and the fan
performance will also need to change to meet the new
conditions. If the performance varies by no more than
5–10 per cent it is seldom necessary for remedial action.
To alter the performance of a fan without changing the
geometry the fan speed must be increased or decreased.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 46.4 Axial-ﬂow fans.
(c) bifurcated

(a) Axial

ﬂow;

(b) propeller;

Outlet

Inlet

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 46.5 Centrifugal types of fan. (a) Centrifugal; (b) paddle or
radial bladed; (c) forward curve; (d) backward curve

When the speed is changed it is prudent to check the
performance from the following fan laws:
Fan speed varies – size and density constant

1. Volume ﬂow varies directly as fan speed:

Volume 1
Volume 2

D Speed 1
Speed 2

Pressure
volume

2.5 in w.g. high
volume

0.4 in w.g. high
volume

1.0 in w.g. up to
approx. 10 000
CFM

12 in w.g. up to
approx. 30 000
CFM

6.0 in w.g. very
high volume

20 in w.g. high
volume

Type

Axial

Propeller

Bifurcated

Paddle

Forward

Backward

Blowers

Very high

H and V

Direct

Low

H and V

Direct

Medium

Fume

Direct

Medium

Dust and fume

Vee and direct

High

H and V

Vee and direct

High

Dust and fume

Vee and direct

General use for ventilation, heating
and minor fume work on
low-pressure systems

Usually applied on free air work,
such as input and output units for
buildings due to pressure
limitations

Motor not in air-stream. Used on
explosive fume, wet fume,
high-temperature work and severe
applications

General dust and fume. Will
handle air containing dust and
chippings. Wide application in
wood-waste extraction plants

Will only handle clean air.
Compact and quiet running. Used
on heating, ventilation and
air-conditioning work

General dust and fume.
High-pressure systems and on
dust-collector plants. Will handle
some dusty air

Furnace blowing, cooling,
conveying and where there is a
need for high pressures

Table 46.1 Application data for fans

Control of dusts and fumes 46/829

Efﬁciency

Industry

Normal
drive

Application

42 in w.g. usually
low volume

Medium

General

Direct

2. Pressure varies as the square of the fan speed:

Pressure 2
Pressure 1

D (cid:2)Speed 2(cid:3)2
(cid:2)Speed 1(cid:3)2

3. Power varies as the cube of the fan speed:

Power 2
Power 1

D (cid:2)Speed 2(cid:3)3
(cid:2)Speed 1(cid:3)3

A typical example will illustrate their use. A 600 mm
diameter paddle-bladed centrifugal fan delivers 5100 m3/h
against a resistance of 200 mm water and absorbs 5.16 kW
when running at 1665 rev/min. The motor for driving the
fan is 7.5 kW at 2-pole speed through v-belts and pulleys.
What would be the new speed, pressure and power
required for the volume to be increased to 7000 m3/h?

1665

7000
5100

D New speed
New speed D 7000 ð 1665
5100
D (cid:2)2285.29(cid:3)2
(cid:2)1665(cid:3)2

New pressure

200

D 2285.29 rpm

New pressure D 376.77 mm
D (cid:2)2285.29(cid:3)3
New power
(cid:2)1665(cid:3)3
New power required D 13.32 kW

5.16

For the fan to operate within the same duct system at the
increased duty to give the new volume an up-rated drive
motor of at least 11 kW is required. Care must always be
exercised in using the above laws so as not to exceed the
drive capacity of the motor or the critical speed of the fan.
No absolute guidelines can be given to cover all fans at
all speeds due to the wide range of designs and materials
used. If, on recalculation, the new fan speed at the blade
tip exceeds 76 m/s no action should be taken without
consulting the manufacturer. In the above example the
tip speed is 71.8 m/s and would, in most circumstances
(depending on the condition of the fan), be safe to run.

46.3.4 Collectors

The function of the collector is to separate the entrained
dust or fume from the air stream and deposit it in a
convenient form for ultimate disposal. The four most

46/830 Dust and Fume Control

common collectors are: cyclones,
fabric ﬁlters, wet
collectors and electrostatic ﬁlters. Each of the above types
has been developed to meet the needs of industry and a
brief description here will enable the plant engineer to
make a start in the selection of a particular application.

Cyclones

There are two basic designs in use. The ﬁrst
is the
general-purpose large-diameter cyclone, traditionally used
in metal polishing and wood-waste extraction. The second
is the so-called high-efﬁciency small-diameter cyclone,
used in groups for pre-separation or in metal grinding
exhausts. If the cyclone is to remain in use it will be
conﬁned to those operations where further collection of
ﬁnes is part of the overall system. This is because they
are relatively inefﬁcient on the smaller particle sizes and
release an unacceptable amount of discharge into the
atmosphere.

Wet collectors

There are two types: self-induced spray and pressure
spray. Many designs have been developed to suit speciﬁc
dust or fume problems, and it is now possible to use wet
collectors on the treatment of solids and fumes down to
very small particle sizes.

This is the most com-
Self-induced spray wet collectors
mon type, and relies on its separating action by the indu-
ced air from the fan pulling the contaminated air through
a curtain of water, It is simple in operation with no pumps
or moving parts except for the fan, which is set on the
clean side of the collector. The scrubbing action is depen-
dent on the pressure drop across the collector. When set,
this is constant and is determined by the water level within
the collector. The removal of sludge is either by automatic
ejection or manual drag-out.

This type of collector has found wide application in
general engineering and very high collection efﬁciencies
are possible, but at the expense of considerable power
requirements. General-purpose collectors at pressure drops
across the collector of 150 mm will have collection efﬁ-
ciencies of 98 per cent at 10 µm and above. Units with
pressure drops of 800 mm and efﬁciencies of more than
99 per cent on sub-micron particles are available.

In this system water is sprayed
Spray-type collectors
or cascaded onto the contaminated air directly or through
packed towers, and the fumes or dust are washed away
by absorption. These collectors are used extensively on
the treatment of fumes of all types and have low pres-
sure drops and hence low power requirements compared
to induced spray. A development of this collector is the
venturi scrubber, which injects high-pressure water into
a venturi through which the fume-laden air is passing.
The intimate contact of the two ensures absorption and
removal from the air stream. These collectors are used in
fume removal and have efﬁciencies of more than 99 per
cent on sub-micron particles.

The general rule with wet collectors is that the higher
the collection efﬁciency, the greater the pressure drop and
hence the power absorbed.

Fabric ﬁlters

Fabric ﬁlters are capable of separation efﬁciencies appro-
aching 100 per cent if correctly applied. The ideal ﬁlter
is permeable to the air stream but not to the dust requir-
ing separation. Separation occurs by impacting of the dust
particles upon fabric ﬁbers, resulting in a dust cake form-
ing on the fabric. Although aiding ﬁltration, this cake
does increase the resistance to airﬂow. If allowed to go
unchecked it would result in a reduction of the total air
being exhausted in the system.

Two methods are used to remove the dust cake, both of
which require interruption of the airﬂow. The difference in
dust-cake removal conveniently divides ﬁlters into inter-
mittent and continuous rating. In the intermittent type the
pressure increases (with time) up to a pre-arranged level.
The airﬂow is then stopped and the fabric is mechanically
shaken. In the continuously rated ﬁlter the pressure drop
rises to a low set point, after which it remains constant
across the ﬁlter as a whole. The cleaning is done by isolat-
ing a part of the ﬁlter from the air stream and that section
is cleaned.

Intermittent ﬁlters are best suited to small applications
which will allow the process to be stopped at intervals.
The interval used is 4 h (i.e. a morning or afternoon shift).
Mechanical shaking is done by either hand or electric
motor. The application of these ﬁlters is limited to the
incoming dust burden of the order of 5 g/m3 and is known
as nuisance dust.

Continuously rated ﬁlters have whole sections of the
ﬁlter shut off from the airﬂow and then those sections
are shaken or cleaned. Shaking is carried out in sequence,
usually by electric motor. Where the ﬁlter is cleaned it is
done by a jet of compressed air being blown in reverse
to the airﬂow through the fabric. This system does not
require whole sections to be shut down, as the reverse
blow is carried out when the ﬁlter is on-stream. The time
of blow is very small and is measured in parts of a second
rather than in minutes, as in the case of shaking ﬁlters. The
application of these ﬁlters is in continuous processes and
where the dust burdens are high (in excess of 100 g/m3).
The shaking and continuous ﬁlters are regenerative, but
there is a third group usually associated with ventilation
work rather than dust and fume. These are throwaway
ﬁlters, which, as the name implies, means that when they
become too caked with dust to operate correctly the ﬁlters
are removed and replaced with new ones. They will only
handle low incoming dust burdens, but their efﬁciencies are
the highest of any ﬁlter. Typical applications are fresh air
input plants, clean-room ﬁltration and nuclear processes.

Electrostatic precipitators

These remove particles by means of applied electrical
forces, and are used extensively on cement and ﬂy ash
removal from air streams. The particles are ﬁrst given an
electric charge and are then passed through an electric

ﬁeld to apply a precipitation to them. They are then cap-
tured on the collecting surface (normally an electrode).
The collection surface is the cleaned by rapping or water
wash and the dust collected in a hopper below. The efﬁ-
ciencies achieved are 99 per cent at particle sizes above
1 µm. They are cheap to run but the capital costs are high,
especially for large collectors. In recent years small units
have been developed to control oil and welding fumes.

Disposal

Many control plants fail in their objective when the col-
lected waste is removed from the inlet. The practice of
dropping dust into sealed bins at the base of the collec-
tor is both sensible and practical. It is when the bins are
to be emptied that a secondary dust problem arises. If
the waste is simply put into a larger container with no
control, dust will be released back into the workplace. If
dangerous dusts are being collected, sealed inner liners to
the dustbins can be used, thereby preventing this release.
On the larger installations the collected dust is retained
under sealed conditions at all times and the discharge from
collectors is by rotary valve and screw conveyor. These
will feed into bulk containers for further processing. In
the case of fumes these are collected by absorption into
liquors, and these liquors are treated in an efﬂuent plant
separate from the fume plant.

1. The problem must be surveyed under actual working
conditions and data collected and recorded in a logical
manner. The survey must establish:

(a) Origin of the dust or fume and its nature. Is it toxic,

explosive or hazardous in any way?

(b) The process which produces the contaminant. Is it

(c) Whether the problem can be solved by elimination

wet or dry?

of the process;

(d) Source or sources of the problem. Does it occur at

more than one point?

(e) Do any special regulations apply to the hazard and
are the materials being handled listed in any pub-
lished form as having control limits?

(f) Is a control system in use at the time of the survey?

Having completed the survey, the next stage is to draw
the system showing the sources of dust and the duct runs.
An assessment must then be made on the air volumes and
velocities required giving control. This is largely a matter
of experience, as air-entrainment rates are derived empir-
ically. It is possible to calculate the rates but is unusual
in general engineering. There are published lists for air
rates and many companies have their own standards.

Table 46.2 shows rates for metalworking machines.
When the total air volume has been established the
collector and fan can be sized. The total air volume

46.4 System design and application
In selecting the best system to control the hazard the fol-
lowing should be noted:

Wire mops
Cut-off machines
Abrasive discs
Abrasive discs

and the type of dust will determine the size and type
of collector to be used. Table 46.3 shows the types of
collector for various applications.

System design and application 46/831

Table 46.2

Type of machine

Size (mm)

Air volume

(m3/h)

Grinders (double end)
Grinders (double end)
Grinders (double end)
Grinders (double end)
Grinders (double end)
Grinders (double end)
These ﬁgures are for
bottom connections
only and average duties

Toolroom grinders

(double ends)
Cutter grinders
(single end)

Banding machines
Horizontal
Horizontal
Horizontal
Backstands
Backstands
Backstands
Backstands
Backstands
Double-end

hand-polishing machines

Table 46.3

Application

Sand foundry dusts
Magnesium and aluminum

working

Hot applications
Sparks from grinding
Heat treatment
Small grinding machines,

polishing machines
Batch operations (e.g.

ﬁlling, tipping, mixing)

Process plant
Heavy dust burdens
Difﬁcult dusts (e.g. carbon

black sugar dust)
Cement and ﬂy ash

production

Woodworking and initial

separation

200–250
280–406
430–455
480–560
585–762
787–915

Up to 200

Up to 150

Up to 100
125–200
38 belt
50 belt
75 belt
100 belt
125 belt
150 belt

Up to 150
178–225
250–355
Up to 200

Up to 405
430–610

680
1189
1495
1870
2720
3738

510

510

595
1019
595
866
1053
1257
1699
2243

1019
1359
2209
1699

934
1699

Type of collector

Self-induced wet collectors
Self-induced wet collectors

Self-induced wet collectors

Self-contained intermittent

Self contained intermittent

ﬁlters

ﬁlters

Continuously rated ﬁlters
Continuously rated ﬁlters
Continuously rated ﬁlters

Electrostatic precipitators

Cyclones

46/832 Dust and Fume Control

Figure 46.6 A typical assessment sheet

System design and application 46/833

Figure 46.6 (continued)

46/834 Dust and Fume Control

Figure 46.6 (continued)

To size the fan it is necessary to know the total air vol-
ume and the pressures in the system. These are calculated
from the losses in the system on the longest or index
leg, and begin with the hood. The hood entry loss can
be expressed as 0.6 of the velocity head and is accurate
enough for ﬁrst estimates. The losses are then calculated
on the velocities in the ducts. Each change of direction
means a small loss in each length of duct. Added to
the pressure drop loss across the collector and the out-
let losses, these give the total static pressure required in
the system.

The formula used in the calculation of system losses

for ﬁrst estimates favored here is:

Loss in water (mm)/length of duct (m)

D (cid:2)Velocity (m/s)(cid:3)2 ð 1.243

Diameter of duct (mm)

Velocity head or velocity pressure is the pressure required
to accelerate the following mass from rest to its ﬂowing
velocity:
Velocity pressure in water (mm) D (cid:2)Velocity (m/s)(cid:3)2

(cid:2)4.04(cid:3)2

Static pressure is the pressure to overcome resistance and
is expressed in millimeters of water. Total pressure is the
sum of velocity and static pressures.

The basic formula for airﬂow under all conditions is:

Q D A ð V
where Q D volume (cid:2)m3/s(cid:3), A D area (cid:2)m2(cid:3) and V D velo-
city (m/s). The nominal velocities used in dust and fume
control depend on the materials being handled, but the
following will sufﬁce for most work:

Metalworking
Woodworking and

light dust

Gases and vapors

Ducts 23 m/s

Branches 20 m/s

Ducts 20 m/s
Ducts 10 m/s

Branches 18 m/s
Branches 9 m/s

Testing and inspections 46/835

It is now possible to calculate the total system resistance
and select a suitable fan and collector. The following will
illustrate the use of the formula.

A simple duct system of length 50-m serving a double-
end grinding machine requires an exhaust volume of
6000 m3/h. The duct velocity would be 23 m/s, giving a
diameter of 300 mm and a velocity pressure of 32.41 mm.

The hood loss D 0.6 ð 32.41 D 19.45 mm

Duct losses in 50 meters D (cid:2)23(cid:3)2 ð 1.243

D 109.59 mm

300 mm

The total pressure D VP C SP D 32.41 C 109.59 C 19.45

D 161.45 mm

To this ﬁgure must be added the pressure drop across the
collector, which in this case would be a wet unit having
a drop of 150 mm.

The fan would then be selected to handle 6000 m3/h at
a total pressure of 311.45 mm water. As this is a high-
pressure fan, it would be a centrifugal backward lami-
nar type.

46.5 Testing and inspections

After the plant has been installed, it will require a test to
determine whether the design meets the original objec-
tives. In this assessment the effectiveness of the plant
must be established and at the same time a record made
showing the engineering parameters. A typical assessment
sheet is shown in Figure 46.6.

The precise nature of the test will depend on the parti-
cles being controlled. The simple observation tests carried
out by Tyndall lights and smoketubes will sufﬁce for the
majority of dust and fume systems. It is only where the
contaminants are listed and known to be dangerous that
special testing needs to be done. This work requires on-
site monitoring of the workplace using air samplers and
the expert services of an industrial hygienist.

47

47/837

Dust Collection
Systems

R Keith Mobley
The Plant Performance Group

Contents

47.1 Introduction
47.2 Baghouses

47/839

47/839
47.2.1 Conﬁguration
47/839
47.2.2 Performance 47/841
47.2.3 Installation
47/841
47.2.4 Operating methods

47/842

47.3 Cyclone separators 47/842

47.3.1 Conﬁguration
47/842
47.3.2 Performance 47/843
47.3.3 Installation
47/843
47.3.4 Operating methods

47/843

47.1 Introduction
The basic operations performed by dust-collection devices
are: (1) separating particles from the gas stream by depo-
sition on a collection surface, (2) retaining the deposited
particles on the surface until removal, and (3) removing
the deposit from the surface for recovery or disposal.

The separation step requires: (1) application of a force
that produces a differential motion of the particles rela-
tive to the gas, and (2) sufﬁcient gas-retention time for
the particles to migrate to the collecting surface. Most
dust-collections systems are comprised of a pneumatic-
conveying system and some device that separates sus-
pended particulate matter from the conveyed air stream.
The more common systems use either ﬁlter media (e.g.,
fabric bags) or cyclonic separators to separate the partic-
ulate matter from air.

47.2 Baghouses
Fabric-ﬁlter systems, commonly called bag-ﬁlter or bag-
house systems, are dust-collection systems in which dust-
laden air is passed through a bag-type ﬁlter. The bag
collects the dust in layers on its surface and the dust layer
itself effectively becomes the ﬁlter medium. Because the
bag’s pores are usually much larger than those of the dust-
particle layer that forms, the initial efﬁciency is very low.
However, it improves once an adequate dust-layer forms.
Therefore, the potential for dust penetration of the ﬁlter
media is extremely low except during the initial period
after startup, bag change, or during the fabric-cleaning,
or blow-down, cycle.

The principal mechanisms of disposition in dust collec-
tors are: (1) gravitational deposition, (2) ﬂow-line inter-
ception, (3) inertial deposition, (4) diffusional deposition,
and (5) electrostatic deposition. During the initial oper-
ating period, particle deposition takes place mainly by
inertial and ﬂow-line interception, diffusion, and gravity.
Once the dust layer has been fully established, sieving is
probably the dominant deposition mechanism.

47.2.1 Conﬁguration

A baghouse system consists of the following: pneumatic-
conveyor system, ﬁlter media, a back-ﬂush cleaning sys-
tem, and a fan or blower to provide airﬂow.

Pneumatic conveyor

The primary mechanism for conveying dust-laden air to a
central collection point is a system of pipes or ductwork
that functions as a pneumatic conveyor. This system gath-
ers dust-laden air from various sources within the plant
and conveys it to the dust-collection system.

Dust-collection system

Baghouses 47/839

to the discharge manifold. Inside the vessel is an inlet
manifold that directs the incoming air or gas to the dirty
side of the ﬁlter media or bag. A plenum, or divider plate,
separates the dirty and clean-side of the vessel.

Filter media, usually long cylindrical tubes or bags,
are attached to the plenum. Depending on the design, the
dust-laden air or gas may ﬂow into the cylindrical ﬁlter
bag and exit to the clean-side or it may ﬂow through the
bag from its outside and exit through the tube’s opening.
Figure 47.1 illustrates a typical baghouse conﬁguration.

Fabric-ﬁlter designs fall into three types, depending
(1) shaker-cleaned,

on the method of cleaning used:
(2) reverse-ﬂow-cleaned, and (3) reverse-pulse-cleaned.

Shaker-cleaned ﬁlter

The open lower ends of shaker-cleaned ﬁlter bags are
fastened over openings in the tube sheet that separates the
lower, dirty-gas inlet chamber from the upper clean-gas
chamber. The bags are suspended from supports, which
are connected to a shaking device.

The dirty gas ﬂows upward into the ﬁlter bag and the
dust collects on the inside surface. When the pressure drop
rises to a predetermined upper limit due to dust accumu-
lation, the gas ﬂow is stopped and the shaker is operated.
This process dislodges the dust, which falls into a hopper
located below the tube sheet.

For continuous operation, the ﬁlter must be constructed
with multiple compartments. This is necessary so that
individual compartments can be sequentially taken off-
line for cleaning while the other compartments continue
to operate.

Bag support
and shaking
mechanism

Clean gas side

Dirty gas side

Design and conﬁguration of the dust-collection system
varies with the vendor and the speciﬁc application. Gener-
ally, a system consists of either a single large hopper-like
vessel or a series of hoppers with a fan or blower afﬁxed

Dust Discharge

Figure 47.1 A typical baghouse

47/840 Dust Collection Systems

Ordinary shaker-cleaned ﬁlters may be cleaned every
ﬁfteen minutes to eight hours, depending on the service
conditions. A manometer connected across the ﬁlter is
used to determine the pressure drop, which indicates when
the ﬁlter should be shaken. Fully automatic ﬁlters may be
shaken every two minutes, but bag maintenance is greatly
reduced if the time between shakings can be increased to
15 to 20 minutes.

The determining factor in the frequency of cleaning
is the pressure drop. A differential-pressure switch can
serve as the actuator in automatic cleaning applications.
Cyclone pre-cleaners are sometimes used to reduce the
dust load on the ﬁlter or to remove large particles before
they enter the bag.

It is essential to stop the gas ﬂow through the ﬁlter dur-
ing shaking in order for the dust to fall off. With very ﬁne
dust, it may be necessary to equalize the pressure across
the cloth. In practice, this can be accomplished without
interrupting continuous operation by removing one section
from service at a time. With automatic ﬁlters, this opera-
tion involves closing the dirty-gas inlet dampers, shaking
the ﬁlter units either pneumatically or mechanically, and
reopening the dampers. In some cases, a reverse ﬂow of
clean gas through the ﬁlter is used to augment the shaker-
cleaning process.

The gas entering the ﬁlter must be kept above its
dewpoint to avoid water-vapor condensation on the bags,
which will cause plugging. However, fabric ﬁlters have
been used successfully in steam atmospheres, such as
those encountered in vacuum dryers. In these applications,
the housing is generally steam-cased.

Reverse-ﬂow-cleaned ﬁlter

except

Reverse-ﬂow-cleaned ﬁlters are similar to the shaker-
cleaned design,
shaker mechanism is
eliminated. As with shaker-cleaned ﬁlters, compartments
are taken off-line sequentially for cleaning. The primary
use of reverse-ﬂow cleaning is in units using ﬁberglass-
fabric bags at temperatures above 150°C (300°F).

the

After the dirty-gas ﬂow is stopped, a fan forces clean
gas through the bags from the clean-gas side. The superﬁ-
cial velocity of the gas through the bag is generally 1.5 to
2.0 feet per minute, or about the same velocity as the dirty-
gas inlet ﬂow. This ﬂow of clean gas partially collapses
the bag and dislodges the collected dust, which falls to the
hopper. Rings are usually sewn into the bags at intervals
along their length to prevent complete collapse, which
would obstruct the fall of the dislodged dust.

Reverse-pulse-cleaned ﬁlter

In the reverse-pulse-cleaned ﬁlter, the bag forms a sleeve
drawn over a cylindrical wire cage, which supports the
fabric on the clean-gas side (i.e., inside) of the bag. The
dust collects on the outside of the bag.

A venturi nozzle is located in the clean-gas outlet from
each bag, which is used for cleaning. A jet of high-
velocity air is directed through the venturi nozzle and into
the bag, which induces clean gas to pass through the fabric
to the dirty side. The high-velocity jet is released in a short
pulse, usually about 100 milliseconds, from a compressed

air line by a solenoid-controlled valve. The pulse of air
and clean gas expand the bag and dislodge the collected
dust. Rows of bags are cleaned in a timed sequence by
programmed operation of the solenoid valves. The pres-
sure of the pulse must be sufﬁcient to dislodge the dust
without cessation of gas ﬂow through the baghouse.

It is common practice to clean the bags on-line without
stopping the ﬂow of dirty gas into the ﬁlter. Therefore,
reverse-pulse bag ﬁlters are often built without multiple
compartments. However, investigations have shown that a
large fraction of the dislodged dust re-deposits on neigh-
boring bags rather than falling to the dust hopper.

As a result, there is a growing trend to off-line clean
reverse-pulse ﬁlters by using bags with multiple compart-
ments. These sections allow the outlet-gas plenum serving
a particular section to be closed off from the clean-gas
exhaust, thereby stopping the ﬂow of inlet gas. On the
dirty-side of the tube sheet, the isolated section is sepa-
rated by partitions from the neighboring sections where
ﬁltration continues. Sections of the ﬁlter are cleaned in
rotation as with shaker and reverse-ﬂow ﬁlters.

Some manufacturers design bags for use with rela-
tively low-pressure air (i.e., 15 psi) instead of the normal
100 psi air. This allows them to eliminate the venturi
tubes for clean-gas induction. Others have eliminated the
separate jet nozzles located at the individual bags in favor
of a single jet to pulse air into the outlet-gas plenum.

Reverse-pulse ﬁlters are typically operated at higher
ﬁltration velocities (i.e., air-to-cloth ratios) than shaker
or reverse-ﬂow designs. Filtration velocities may range
from 3 to 15 feet per minute in reverse-pulse applications,
depending on the dust being collected. However, the most
the commonly used range is 4 to 5 feet per minute.

The frequency of cleaning depends on the nature and
concentration of the dust. Typical cleaning intervals vary
from about 2 to 15 minutes. However, the cleaning action
of the pulse is so effective that the dust layer may be
completely removed from the surface of the fabric. Con-
sequently, the fabric itself must serve as the principal ﬁlter
media for a substantial part of the ﬁltration cycle, which
decreases cleaning efﬁciency. Because of this, woven fab-
rics are unsuitable for use in these devices and felt-type
fabrics are used instead. With felt ﬁlters, although the
bulk of the dust is still removed, an adequate level of
dust collection is provided by the fabric until the dust
layer reforms.

Cleaning system

As discussed in the preceding section, ﬁlter bags must be
periodically cleaned to prevent excessive build-up of dust
and to maintain an acceptable pressure drop across the
ﬁlters. Two of the three designs discussed, reverse-ﬂow
and reverse-pulse, depend on an adequate supply of clean
air or gas to provide this periodic cleaning. Two factors
are critical in these systems: the clean-gas supply and the
proper cleaning frequency.

Clean-gas supply

Most applications that use the reverse-ﬂow cleaning sys-
tem use ambient air as the primary supply of clean gas.

A large fan or blower draws ambient air into the clean
side of the ﬁlter bags. However, unless the air is prop-
erly conditioned by inlet ﬁlters, it may contain excessive
dirt loads that can affect the bag life and efﬁciency of the
dust-collection system.

In reverse-pulse applications, most plants rely on plant-
air systems as the source for the high-velocity pulses
required for cleaning. In many cases, however, the plant-
air system is not sufﬁcient for this purpose. Although
the pulses required are short (i.e., 100 milliseconds or
less), the number and frequency can deplete the supply.
Therefore, care must be taken to ensure that both sufﬁ-
cient volume and pressure are available to achieve proper
cleaning.

Cleaning frequency

Proper operation of a baghouse, regardless of design,
depends on frequent cleaning of the ﬁlter media. The
system is designed to operate within a speciﬁc range
of pressure drops that deﬁnes clean and fully-loaded
ﬁlter media. The cleaning frequency must assure that the
maximum recommended pressure drop is not exceeded.
This can be a real problem for baghouses that rely on
automatic timers to control cleaning frequency. The use
of a timing function to control cleaning frequency is not
recommended unless the dust load is known to be con-
sistent. A better approach is to use differential-pressure
gages to physically measure the pressure drop across the
ﬁlter media to trigger the cleaning process based on pre-
set limits.

Fan or blower

All baghouse designs use some form of fan, blower,
or centrifugal compressor to provide the dirty-air ﬂow
required for proper operation. In most cases, these units
are installed on the clean-side of the baghouse to draw
the dirty air through the ﬁlter media.

Since these units provide the motive power required
to transport and collect the dust-laden air, their operating
condition is critical to the baghouse system. The type and
size of air-moving unit varies with the baghouse type and
design.

47.2.2 Performance

The primary measure of baghouse-system performance is
its ability to consistently remove dust and other particu-
late matter from the dirty-air stream. Pressure drop and
collection efﬁciency determine the effectiveness of these
systems.

Pressure drop

The ﬁltration, or superﬁcial face, velocities used in fab-
ric ﬁlters are generally in the range of 1 to 10 feet per
minute, depending on the type of fabric, fabric supports,
and cleaning methods used. In this range, pressure drops
conform to Darcy’s law for streamline ﬂow in porous
media, which states that the pressure drop is directly pro-
portional to the ﬂow rate. The pressure drop across the

Baghouses 47/841

fabric media and the dust layer may be expressed by:
p D K1Vf C K2ωVf
Where:
p D Pressure drop (inches of water)
Vf D Superﬁcial velocity through ﬁlter (feet/minute)
ω D Dust loading on ﬁlter (lbm/ft2)
K1 D Resistance coefﬁcient for conditioned fabric
K2 D Resistance coefﬁcient for dust layer
(inches of water/lbm/foot/minute)

(inches of water/foot/minute)

1

Conditioned fabric maintains a relatively consistent
dust-load deposit following a number of ﬁltration and
cleaning cycles. K1 may be more than 10 times the value
of the resistance coefﬁcient for the original clean fabric.
If the depth of the dust layer on the fabric is greater than
16 inch (which corresponds to a fabric dust loading
about
on the order of 0.1 lbm/ft2), the pressure drop across the
fabric, including the dust in the pores, is usually negligible
relative to that across the dust layer alone.

In practice, K1 and K2 are measured directly in ﬁltration
experiments. These values can be corrected for tempera-
ture by multiplying by the ratio of the gas viscosity at
the desired condition to the gas viscosity at the original
experimental condition.

Collection efﬁciency

Under controlled conditions (e.g., in the laboratory), the
inherent collection efﬁciency of fabric ﬁlters approaches
100 per cent. In actual operation, it is determined by sev-
eral variables, in particular the properties of the dust to be
removed, choice of ﬁlter fabric, gas velocity, method of
cleaning, and cleaning cycle. Inefﬁciency usually results
from bags that are poorly installed, torn, or stretched from
excessive dust loading and excessive pressure drop.

47.2.3 Installation

Most baghouse systems are provided as complete assem-
blies by the vendor. While the unit may require some
ﬁeld assembly, the vendor generally provides the struc-
tural supports, which in most cases are adequate. The
only controllable installation factors that may affect per-
formance are the foundation and connections to pneumatic
conveyors and other supply systems.

Foundation

The foundation must support the weight of the baghouse.
In addition, it must absorb the vibrations generated by the
cleaning system. This is especially true when using the
shaker-cleaning method, which can generate vibrations
that can adversely affect the structural supports, founda-
tion, and adjacent plant systems.

Connections

Efﬁciency and effectiveness depends on leak-free connec-
tions throughout the system. Leaks reduce the system’s

47/842 Dust Collection Systems

ability to convey dust-laden air to the baghouse. One
potential source for leaks is improperly installed ﬁlter
bags. Because installation varies with the type of bag and
baghouse design, consult the vendor’s O&M manual for
speciﬁc instructions.

47.2.4 Operating methods

The guidelines provided in the vendor’s O&M manual
should be the primary reference for proper baghouse
operation. Vendor-provided information should be used
because there are not many common operating guidelines
among the various conﬁgurations. The only general
guidelines that are applicable to most designs are cleaning
frequency and inspection and replacement of ﬁlter media.

Cleaning

As previously indicated, most bag-type ﬁlters require a
pre-coat of particulates before they can effectively remove
airborne contaminates. However, particles can completely
block air ﬂow if the ﬁlter material becomes overloaded.
Therefore, the primary operating criterion is to maintain
the efﬁciency of the ﬁlter media by controlling the clean-
ing frequency.

Most systems use a time-sequence to control the clean-
ing frequency. If the particulate load entering the bag-
house is constant, this approach would be valid. However,
the incoming load generally changes constantly. As a
result, the straight time-sequence methodology does not
provide the most efﬁcient mode of operation.

the

Operators

differential-pre-
should monitor
ssure gauges
that measure the total pressure drop
across the ﬁlter media. When the differential pressure
reaches the maximum recommended level (data provided
by the vendor), the operator should over-ride any auto-
matic timer controls and initiate the cleaning sequence.

Inspecting and replacing ﬁlter media

Filter media used in dust-collections systems is prone to
damage and abrasive wear. Therefore, regular inspection
and replacement is needed to ensure continuous, long-
term performance. Any damaged,
torn, or improperly
sealed bags should be removed and replaced.

One of the more common problems associated with
baghouses is improper installation of ﬁlter media. There-
fore, it is important to follow the instructions provided
by the vendor. If the ﬁlter bags are not properly installed
and sealed, overall efﬁciency and effectiveness are signif-
icantly reduced.

47.3 Cyclone separators
A widely used type of dust-collection equipment is the
cyclone separator. A cyclone is essentially a settling
chamber in which gravitational acceleration is replaced
by centrifugal acceleration. Dust-laden air or gas enters
a cylindrical or conical chamber tangentially at one or
more points and leaves through a central opening. The
dust particles, by virtue of their inertia, tend to move
toward the outside separator wall from where they are

led into a receiver. Under common operating conditions,
the centrifugal separating force or acceleration may range
from ﬁve times gravity in very large diameter,
low-
resistance cyclones to 2500 times gravity in very small,
high-resistance units.

Within the range of their performance capabilities,
cyclones are one of the least expensive dust-collection
systems. Their major
limitation is that, unless very
small units are used, efﬁciency is low for particles
smaller than ﬁve microns. Although cyclones may be
used to collect particles larger than 200 microns, gravity-
settling chambers or simple inertial separators are usually
satisfactory and less subject to abrasion.

47.3.1 Conﬁguration

The internal conﬁguration of a cyclone separator
is
relatively simple. Figure 47.2 illustrates a typical cross-
section of a cyclone separator, which consists of the
following segments:
ž Inlet area that causes the gas to ﬂow tangentially,
ž Cylindrical transition area,
ž Decreasing taper that increases the air velocity as the
ž Central return tube to direct the dust-free air out the

diameter decreases,

discharge port.

Particulate material

is forced to the outside of the
tapered segment and collected in a drop-leg located at the
dust outlet. Most cyclones have a rotor-lock valve afﬁxed
to the bottom of the drop-leg. This is a motor-driven valve
that collects the particulate material and discharges it into
a disposal container.

Clean-gas outlet

Dust shave-off

Pattern of dust stream
(principally the finer
particles) following
eddy current

Shave-off-dust
channel

Inlet for
dust-laden gases

Shave-off-reentry
opening

Pattern of coarser
dust mainstream

Dust outlet

Figure 47.2 Flow pattern through a typical cyclone separator

47.3.2 Performance

Performance of a cyclone separator is determined by ﬂow
pattern, pressure drop, and collection efﬁciency.

Flow pattern

The path the gas takes in a cyclone is through a double
vortex that spirals the gas downward at the outside and
upward at the inside. When the gas enters the cyclone, the
tangential component of its velocity, Vct, increases with
the decreasing radius as expressed by:
Vct ³ r(cid:5)n

In this equation, r is the cyclone radius and n is depen-
dent on the coefﬁcient of friction. Theoretically, in the
absence of wall friction, n should equal 1.0. Actual mea-
surements, however, indicate that n ranges from 0.5 to
0.7 over a large portion of the cyclone radius. The spiral
velocity in a cyclone may reach a value several times the
average inlet-gas velocity.

Pressure drop

The pressure drop and the friction loss through a cyclone
are most conveniently expressed in terms of the velocity
head based on the immediate inlet area. The inlet velocity
head, hvt, which is expressed in inches of water, is related
to the average inlet-gas velocity and density by:
hvt D 0.0030(cid:10)V2
Where:
hvt D Inlet-velocity head (inches of water)
(cid:10) D Gas density (lb/ft3)
Vc D Average inlet-gas velocity (ft/sec)

c

The cyclone friction loss, Fcv, is a direct measure of
the static pressure and power that a fan must develop. It
is related to the pressure drop by:

(cid:1)

(cid:2)2

Fcv D pcv C 1 (cid:5)

4Ac
(cid:13)D2
e

Where:
Fcv D Friction loss (inlet-velocity heads)
pcv D Pressure drop through the cyclone

(inlet-velocity heads)

Ac D Area of the cyclone (ft2)
De D Diameter of the gas exit (feet)

Cyclone separators 47/843

The friction loss through cyclones may range from 1 to
20 inlet-velocity heads, depending on its geometric pro-
portions. For a cyclone of speciﬁc geometric proportions,
Fcv and pcv, are essentially constant and independent of
the actual cyclone size.

Collection efﬁciency

Since cyclones rely on centrifugal force to separate par-
ticulates from the air or gas stream, particle mass is the
dominant factor that controls efﬁciency. For particulates
with high densities (e.g., ferrous oxides), cyclones can
achieve 99 per cent or better removal efﬁciencies, regard-
less of particle size. Lighter particles (e.g., tow or ﬂake)
dramatically reduce cyclone efﬁciency.

These devices are generally designed to meet speciﬁc
pressure-drop limitations. For ordinary installations oper-
ating at approximately atmospheric pressure, fan limita-
tions dictate a maximum allowable pressure drop corre-
sponding to a cyclone inlet velocity in the range of 20
to 70 feet per second. Consequently, cyclones are usually
designed for an inlet velocity of 50 feet per second.

Varying operating conditions change dust-collection
efﬁciency only by a small amount. The primary design
factor
that controls collection efﬁciency is cyclone
diameter. A small-diameter unit operating at a ﬁxed
pressure drop has a higher efﬁciency than a large-diameter
unit. Reducing the gas-outlet duct diameter also increases
the collection efﬁciency.

47.3.3 Installation

As in any other pneumatic-conveyor system, special atten-
tion must be given to the piping or ductwork used to con-
vey the dust-laden air or gas. The inside surfaces must be
smooth and free of protrusions that affect the ﬂow pattern.
All bends should be gradual and provide a laminar-ﬂow
path for the gas.

47.3.4 Operating methods

Cyclones are designed for continuous operation and must
be protected from plugging. In intermittent applications,
the operating practices must include speciﬁc steps to purge
the entire system of particulates prior to shutdown.

Pressure drop is the only factor that can be effectively
controlled by an operator. Using the fan dampers, the
operator can increase or decrease the cyclone’s load by
varying the velocity of the entering dirty air.

48

48/845

Maintenance
Management in
UK

George Pitblado
Support Services

Contents

48.1 Introduction
48.2 A ‘planned’ maintenance program 48/847

48/847

48.2.1 Maintenance systems

48/847

48.3 A manual planned maintenance system 48/848

48/848

48.3.1 Assets register
48.3.2 Maintenance and repair record
48.3.3 Guidance notes
48.3.4 Planning schedule
48.3.5 Week tasks
48.3.6 Work dockets
48.3.7 Year visual aid
48.3.8 Comments

48/850
48/851

48/850

48/849

48/849

48/849

48/853

48/851
48.4 Computer system 48/852

48/854
48/854

48.4.1 Computer system checklist
48.4.2 Comment
48.5 Life-cycle costing
48.6 Training
48/854
48.7 Health and safety
48.8 Information
48.9 Conclusion

48/855
48/855

48/855

Appendix: Elements of a planned maintenance system 48/855

48.1 Introduction
The implementation of a program for
the effective
management of a company’s assets has never been
more important
than now. Chief engineers, group
engineers, works engineers, building services managers,
and facilities managers – the list is never ending with
respect to job title and designation. While the individual’s
title may change, the responsibilities rarely alter, in that
it is from the person in these positions upon whom the
employer depends so much. Company assets must be
maintained in the most sound, safe and economical way
to ensure that the client or user is provided with the
appropriate goods, materials and working environment, as
all these fall within the responsibility of the engineering
maintenance department.

In a constantly changing work environment, with
the introduction of new techniques, work practices and
legislation the engineering department must ensure that
they maintain an adequate level of continuous educational
training. Quality assurance,
the introduction of more
speciﬁc legislation, codes of practice, guidance notes for
health and safety, and the standards being introduced
by such bodies as the Occupational Safety and Health
Act
(OSHA) – all are to improve the end product,
service, etc., but they place an additional demand on
existing resources that cannot be ignored. Therefore, in
an endeavor to minimize these demands, and in so doing
to maximize the beneﬁts from available resources, a
‘planned’ maintenance program should be implemented.

A ‘planned’ maintenance program 48/847

difﬁcult to establish adequate economic grounds to dupli-
cate these items to the same degree (although this may
be done in a computer environment due to the high costs
involved in downtime).

Planned maintenance programs are an essential weapon
in a department’s armory to ensure that the services it is
called on in meeting its responsibilities are fully met. The
traditional method of working from pieces of paper or
individuals’ ‘own’ notebooks as to when maintenance is
to be carried out or when the insurance representative
is due to visit to carry out an inspection are no longer
satisfactory. This is especially the case when the skilled
resources necessary to carry out the work are more difﬁ-
cult to obtain.

It is therefore essential that a planned maintenance
program be established, which can encompass all (or
elements of)
the different maintenance methods of
establishing the frequency and/or work to be carried
out. This programming requires skills that,
in most
instances, can have only been gained by experience
in the ﬁeld of maintenance and operation. Operation
must play an important part in the programming. If the
planned maintenance program is prepared without due
consideration of the demands placed on the operation
element, the program would probably collapse when the
plant’s equipment could not be released (i.e. switched off)
when the maintenance technician arrived at the plant to
carry out his duties indicated on his work docket.

Maintenance procedures that should be considered
when preparing the planned maintenance program
include:

48.2 A ‘planned’ maintenance program
The development of any program must take into consid-
eration the maintenance tasks that need be carried out
and the resources available, thereby ensuring that product
quality and personnel safety standards are met. It follows
that operational demands, whether they be from a service
utility installation, a production line, a mainframe com-
puter or an ofﬁce environment, will play a major part
in reaching the decision as to what type of maintenance
program requires implementation.

Plant and equipment

that provides a service or is
required to operate for 24 hours a day, 7 days a
week presents a different proposition to the maintenance
programming requirements. For example, a heating pump
with a standby, which is required for a heating installation
in an ofﬁce with a set number of working hours from
Monday to Friday. Alternative methods of maintenance
programming may require the planner to allow for total
replacement on plant failure or have available replacement
units, so that when an item of plant or equipment fails, it
is removed and a replacement installed.

The ideal method would be that all plant or equipment
units have a duplicate or redundant standby that on fail-
ure would automatically be brought into service. This is
satisfactory when considering small, less expensive units,
which are installed to ensure that the services they are
providing are not disrupted (this could also include auxil-
iary items on major plant and equipment). However, due
to the capital costs of the major unit itself, it would be

1. Carrying out repairs needed when plant or equipment

breaks down;

2. Predicting, from a history of breakdowns,

the life
expectancy of parts, bearings, etc., the tasks to be
carried out and the frequency to be established;

3. Checking the condition throughout the plant of equip-
ment, its running hours, readings of different responses
(e.g. vibration, temperatures, current, etc.);

4. Monitoring the operating cycle and, where appropriate,
seasonal shutdowns of plant, equipment (e.g. produc-
tion process, 24-hour duty, etc.).

48.2.1 Maintenance systems

The beneﬁts to be accrued from the implementation of a
program of planned maintenance can be found in the efﬁ-
cient and economical operation of the plant and equipment
and the utilization of resources (i.e. plant and equipment
and manpower) while also maintaining a sound standard
of safe working and environmental conditions for opera-
tors, other occupants and employees within the workplace.
Maintenance systems vary, depending on the location of
the plant and equipment and/or company policy. Systems
can range from the complete maintenance of plant and
equipment using all available methods to their replace-
ment on failure. To meet the company’s requirements it
is then necessary to decide on the maintenance system
that provides the most satisfactory beneﬁts overall.

The most commonly maintenance systems in use are
planned, preventive, scheduled, corrective and emergency.

48/848 Maintenance Management in UK

Planned maintenance is work having beneﬁted from
information issued by manufacturers and suppliers, the
experience and knowledge of the service department staff,
and reports and records from previous service visits.

Preventive maintenance is work to be carried out at
a speciﬁc frequency as indicated by potential failures or
known reduction in efﬁciency of the plant and equipment,
thereby avoiding failures or a decrease in performance.

Scheduled maintenance is work based on known infor-
mation, such as number of operations, hours run, mileage,
etc., and can therefore be carried out at a predetermined
time interval.

Corrective maintenance is work carried out following
the failure of the plant and equipment, and is so designed
to return the component to its normal operating condition.
Emergency maintenance is that work which is required
to be performed without delay due to a failure of a com-
ponent which, if not implemented, would lead to further
failures or even permanent damage, resulting in the total
loss of the plant and equipment. Plant and equipment in
such a condition may also be dangerous to personnel.

As planned maintenance encompasses all types covered
within the preventive or scheduled systems, this can be
examined in more detail. In preparing a planned main-
tenance system, all the available sources of information
should be used. These include manufacturers’ and suppli-
ers’ literature, trade associations, professional institutions,
knowledge and experience from within the department
and history and feedback from previous work for the spe-
ciﬁc type of equipment.

Condition monitoring, life cycle costing and predictive
maintenance procedures should all be considered during
the preparation of the planned maintenance system.

Planned maintenance systems should not be compli-
cated. The simpler the system is to meet the requirements
of the department and company, the more likelihood of it
being used with satisfactory results. This aspect is of the
greatest importance when, due to the size of the organiza-
tion, engineers may be transferred from one department to
another to gain a greater knowledge of the total company.
This may cause the implemented planned maintenance
system to fail or not be used to its full effect, due to the
incoming engineer not understanding it fully.

In preparing a planned maintenance system the oppor-
tunity should be taken to involve the whole department.
This can be achieved by using the operatives who will
subsequently action the work to carry out the initial sur-
vey of plant and equipment.

48.3 A manual planned maintenance
system
The planned maintenance program forms the basis of a
system whereby an in-house department may prepare and
implement its own maintenance program or introduce a
trial system along similar lines. This would be prior to
seeking the assistance of a consultant to provide guidance
on the system that would satisfy the demands placed on
the department by others and yet remain under the depart-
ment’s control. Irrespective of whether it is a manual or
a computer system that is introduced, the elements of its

composition vary little. Depending on the reports required
from the implementation planned maintenance program,
the more satisfactory method of obtaining this result, both
in quantity and quality of information, is by running the
program on a computer.

To assist engineers to implement a manual planned main-
tenance system that can be of beneﬁt to the department it is
important that a program be set with respect to the system’s
implementation. Items that should be considered are:

1. Departments to be covered;
2. Plant and equipment to be included;
3. Technician and craftsmen trades available;
4. Person responsible for preparation and implementation

of the system;

5. Time scale for preparation and implementation;
6. Administrative support.

It should be noted that initial interest in the preparation
and implementation of planned maintenance systems can
gradually decrease if only one person (preferably an expe-
rienced engineer) is given the responsibility to ensure that
the proposal is carried out to its satisfactory conclusion.
It is essential that the nominated person is given adequate
support when necessary, to ensure that the planned main-
tenance system’s introduction into the working operation
of the department meets with success.

A suitable planned maintenance system, irrespective of
the location or type of business, is complied from a num-
ber of standard elements (see the appendix at the end of
this chapter):

1. Assets register;
2. Maintenance and repair record;
3. Technician and craftsmen guidance notes;
4. Planning schedule;
5. Week tasks;
6. Work dockets;
7. Year visual aid plan.

48.3.1 Assets register

Each item of plant and equipment is allocated a speciﬁc
asset number. This number can be either for a complete
boiler (with associated equipment) or a speciﬁc asset num-
ber for the boiler and individual asset numbers for the
associated equipment. It is advisable to restrict this num-
bering sequence to a minimum while ensuring that it
meets the speciﬁc needs of the company and location.
Care must be exercised in determining the asset number-
ing during this manual phase if it is envisaged that, on
completing a satisfactory trial period, the planned main-
tenance system will be transferred onto a computer.

To assist in the numbering of the assets, each type of
plant and equipment can be given a predetermined plant
code reference number. In this case, the boiler and all its
associated equipment are given the same asset number.
The asset number is built up from certain elements, e.g.:

Location: Plant Code: Plant/equipment number
e.g.
Plant room 1: Boiler: No. 1 Boiler = PR1-01-01

Pump units, including valves, gages, etc., are classiﬁed as
individual assets. To enable the asset number to signify
the different process that the pump is serving, the Plant
Code 05 is sufﬁxed, e.g.:

Roof Plant Room: Heating Circulating Pump: No. 1 =
RPR-05/02-01

(02 indicates that the pump is installed in the heating
system).

Items of equipment such as emergency lights may be
grouped as one asset, supported by a checklist, which
details the numbers, types and locations of the individual
units in a predetermined area, e.g.:

First Floor: Emergency Lights = F1-34-01

(01 indicates it is No. 1 in the series of emergency lights
assets).

General area services such as lighting, heating, hot and
cold water and air conditioning can be registered in a way
similar to that of emergency lights.

In designing the asset register format for the speciﬁc
location items such as manufacturer/supplier, purchase
price and date, order no., cost code, function, parts/spares,
guidance note reference and insurance inspections should
be catered for. While carrying out the survey for the asset
register, all the information found on plant and equipment
nameplates should be recorded as, during their life, these
tend to be lost or painted over.

To simplify this task it is an advantage if there is a set
format prepared on the survey forms for speciﬁc types of
plant and equipment. This enables the surveyor to enter
the relevant information against the appropriate elements
(e.g. manufacturer; volts; amps; bearings; etc.).

48.3.2 Maintenance and repair record

This is designed to record all work carried out and parts
ﬁtted on each asset item of plant and equipment. Service
visits by contractors and insurance inspections are also
entered. This record, which provides the history of the
asset, may either be placed on the reverse of the asset
record (thereby ensuring that all relevant information on
a speciﬁc asset can be found in one place) or it may be
an individual assets record form inserted within the asset
register, next to the speciﬁc asset record.

To reduce the amount of information entered in the
record, predetermined work of a planned maintenance
nature can be entered in code form, while additional work
or breakdowns may be more fully detailed.

As the maintenance and repair record indicates the cost
of maintenance for the speciﬁc item of plant and equip-
ment, a simple system may be used to provide recognition
of the different methods by which the work has been car-
ried out, e.g.

Planned maintenance work is entered in black pen.
Planned or corrective work is entered in blue.
Emergencies (i.e. breakdowns) are entered in red.

From this method of entry, the engineer can observe at
a glance if the planned maintenance program is effective

A manual planned maintenance system 48/849

with respect to corrective work or emergencies. Further
examination of the operation of the asset and its records
are necessary in determining if the frequency of planned
maintenance is correct or whether the plant and equipment
should be replaced.

48.3.3 Guidance notes

The guidance notes can be produced either as a compos-
ite handbook containing task instructions for all types of
plant and equipment for each trade group, or as speciﬁc
task/advice notes for each asset of the service require-
ments of the plant equipment. When used, the handbook
method provides the necessary work instructions for all
similar types of plant and equipment throughout the loca-
tion. This method of operation reduces the number of
task/advice notes issued and therefore the system’s work-
load, as well as the demands placed on the administration
of the system. Either method eliminates the requirement of
entering work instructions, etc. on the work docket/advice
notes before they are issued.

The handbook can be prepared either for a speciﬁc trade
or for all the trades involved in the maintenance of the
plant and equipment. Its contents are as follows:

1. Health and Safety: Stresses the importance of carrying

out the work in a safe and responsible manner.

2. Introduction: Details how the handbook contents and
the individual’s responsibility in the application of his
skills are to be implemented.

3. Plant Code, Frequency of Services and Work Tasks:
Details the work to be carried out, and at what fre-
quency, as indicated by the instruction on the work
docket.

4. Plant Code: Lists the plant codes for the plant and
equipment covered by the handbook, preﬁxed by the
appropriate trade reference (e.g. Mechanical D M).

The handbook is designed in a loose-leaf format so that
additional entries and amendments can be made as and
when relevant.

To enable the maximum input and experience of the
craftsmen to be introduced into the system the pages of
the handbook should not be encapsulated thereby enabling
the craftsman to enter additional information and com-
ments that could increase the performance of the plant and
equipment as well as amended instructions in the guidance
notes. These amendments can then be issued to all staff
in a similar trade.

48.3.4 Planning schedule

It is at this stage in the preparation of the planned main-
tenance that the engineer’s knowledge and experience of
maintenance is essential. In preparing the planned main-
tenance schedule it may be found that information on
maintenance received from the manufacturer and supplier
is no longer available. Technicians and craftsmen’s knowl-
edge can play a major role in this planning stage.

Experience indicates that when preparing the planning
schedule this should be carried out for each trade group.

48/850 Maintenance Management in UK

Prior to entering any asset detail on the planning schedule,
items such as holiday periods and seasonal or shutdown
programs should be indicated. This can be done by the
use of highlighter pens on the calendar weeks that require
speciﬁc attention to loading of the relevant work tasks.

In scheduling the assets and work tasks to be carried
out it is recommended that the plant room and department
that require the greatest resources (i.e. man-hours) should
be entered on the planning schedule ﬁrst. The scheduling
for each item of plant and equipment follows the same
pattern in that the location (e.g. boiler-house) is entered
as a heading, then the assets and their asset numbers are
entered for each speciﬁed location.

Planning the frequency, work tasks and man-hours for
each asset then follows. Choose the week in which the
least-frequency service is to be undertaken (e.g. yearly;
enter a ‘Y/’). Other frequencies can then be entered (e.g.
quarterly, ‘Q/’; monthly, ‘M/’). To complete the planning
scheduled for the speciﬁc asset the hours required to carry
out the work at the nominated frequencies are then entered
(e.g. ‘Y/12’; ‘Q/4’; ‘M/1’, etc.). (Note: It is recommended
that this scheduling be done in pencil so that amendments
can be easily made.)

Plant and equipment that require a service on comple-
tion of a certain speciﬁed period of hours may, through
experience, be catered for on a ﬁxed frequency basis. If
employed, this method avoids the need to record running
hours (or, in the case of transport, mileage) on a daily
or weekly basis to schedule the relevant planned mainte-
nance. If it is essential that the maintenance of the plant
and equipment be carried out on the completion of a cer-
tain number of operating hours or mileage, then this must
be allowed for in the allocated work hours of the relevant
trade group.

Peaks and troughs in the man-hours allocated weekly
for planned maintenance can be avoided if hours entered
are added up for each week after a number of assets have
been scheduled. Treating each plant room or department
in this way provides the number of man-hours required for
the respective plant room and/or department. All assets to
be covered by the planned maintenance system are sched-
uled in the same format, thereby providing the engineer
responsible for allocating the work tasks with total man-
hours for each trade group.

There are two methods of entering man-hours:

1. The actual hours necessary to carry out the planned

maintenance work task;

2. The total hours to complete the planned maintenance
work task (including non-productive hours). Non-
productive hours would include such items
as
collecting spares, tea breaks, discussions, etc.

The planned maintenance system most commonly used is
that indicated in (2), whereas the method of calculating
the hours as in (1) is preferred if there is a productivity
scheme in operation.

Service contractors’ visits can also be indicated in the
planning schedule (with ‘C’ for contractors or another
symbol indicating a different contractor). To highlight dif-
ferent grades of service visits (e.g. yearly) ‘Y/C’ can be
entered.

A major beneﬁt of carrying out this planning schedule
phase for all the plant and equipment is that the numbers
of each trade required are known. Also, having carried out
the exercise for all plant and equipment, if the decision is
to be made as to which is to be covered by the scheme
or contracted out, a complete picture of the total planned
maintenance requirements for the department/company is
available.

48.3.5 Week tasks

The information required to compile this form is obtained
from the planning schedule. To minimize ‘administrative’
tasks in preparing the work dockets, the information con-
tained on the week task forms is presented in a format
that enables that information to be easily transferred onto
the work dockets, e.g.:

Location/Area: Plant/Equipment: Plant/Equipment No.:
Job Code: Check List

Week task forms are completed for each week. They may
be designed as a separate form for each trade or as one
covering all trades. The latter will, of course, depend on
the number of tasks per week for the individual trades.

Tasks that are of a weekly nature (e.g. visual inspec-
tion) are entered onto a separate week task form. To avoid
issuing work dockets for such inspections, the week task
form may then be used as a work docket, a tick being
placed against the tasks when they are completed.

Week task forms should only require amending when
either additional plant and equipment is introduced or the
frequency of planned maintenance tasks is being adjusted
to meet revised operational or maintenance demands.
Departments in which work is to be carried out may
be issued a copy of their department’s week tasks four
weeks in advance. This then enables them to program their
operation, where necessary, so that the maintenance work
can be carried out without disruption to the department’s
output. Alternatively, on receipt of this prior notice the
departmental head can contact the engineer controlling
the work to discuss departmental matters that may affect
the proposed planned maintenance. This may, in some
instances, require the engineer to reschedule the planned
maintenance programmed for that department.

48.3.6 Work dockets

On examining the week task form for the forthcoming
week the engineer will decide on the work dockets that
are to be prepared for issue. To enable the engineer to
carry out this function satisfactorily, knowledge of man-
power resources and operational demands on the plant and
equipment is essential.

It is at this stage that, having the information above, a
decision can be made on which planned maintenance tasks
are to be carried out and which may be postponed or can-
celled. This may be due either to insufﬁcient resources
(e.g. man-hours or a forthcoming planned shutdown) or
planned maintenance that need not be carried out for
another reason.

Recourse to the maintenance and repair records or a
visual aid enables the engineer to establish if the planned
maintenance tasks that are not to be carried out had been
maintained either during the previous scheduled visit or,
when next due, a planned maintenance visit. If not carried
out as programmed, the engineer must ensure that the
period over which no planned maintenance is proposed
does not exceed any known maintenance/operational
requirement.

The engineer or supervisor responsible for planned
maintenance may issue the work dockets on an individual,
daily or weekly basis. When issued on a weekly basis, the
technician/craftsman responsible for a speciﬁc plant room
or departmental area can then plan how the work should
be programmed throughout
the week, having gained
experience in identifying which plant and equipment and
also in which area planned maintenance can be worked
on or at speciﬁc periods of the week.

The work dockets would be normally issued on Fri-
days for the following week. This enables the techni-
cian/craftsman to plan his work for the forthcoming week.
All completed work dockets should be returned to the
engineer’s ofﬁce daily.

Work dockets partially completed (i.e. with the work
task incomplete) should be discussed with the engineer.
This then enables the engineer to make a decision on how
or when the outstanding items on the work docket may
be performed.

Work dockets that have not been performed should also
be returned for the engineer’s attention, with comments
on why they have not been performed. The engineer may
then decide on whether the work need be rescheduled.

The engineer controlling the planned maintenance
function within the department ensures that all work
dockets are returned. Any comments entered on the work
dockets are noted and, where further action is required,
plans are prepared accordingly. (Note: A copy of the
week tasks will sufﬁce in maintaining a record of work
dockets issued. If necessary, the technician/craftsman’s
initials can be entered on the week task form as
a reminder
to whom the work docket was issued.)
Technicians/craftsmen should be advised of any matter
that delays implementation of action required, as reported
in the returned work docket, so that, if no corrective
action has taken place on their next scheduled visit they
understand why.

Further to the engineer’s examination of the returned
work dockets, purchase requisitions can be placed for
parts, specialist contractors’ attendance, etc. On comple-
tion of all the technical aspects of the process, the infor-
mation regarding the service carried out on the plant and
equipment can then be entered in the maintenance and
repair record by the administration.

48.3.7 Year visual aid

Visual aids are developed from the planning schedule, in
that assets and asset numbers are repeated and service
visits indicated by a symbol. Hence, the estimated man-
hours for the speciﬁc task per frequency are not displayed
for general review.

A manual planned maintenance system 48/851

The beneﬁt to be gained by the engineer and techni-
cian/craftsmen from the visual aid is that it provides them
with a visual picture of the full year’s program, covering
all the recorded assets and their associated work tasks.
The format of this visual aid depends on the number of
assets within the system, and each visual aid may cover
approximately 100 assets.

If there are not a large number of assets, a visual aid can
be prepared for each trade, whereas when there is a greater
number (e.g. 400+) a visual aid that covers all trades suf-
ﬁces. Indication markers on the aid in this instance would
signify the least frequent service of the collective trades
(e.g. mechanical: monthly visit and electrical: quarterly
visit). The last would be indicated.

Visual aids can be purchased on which the information
regarding assets and service visits would be afﬁxed or, as
in the examples shown in the Appendix, a negative can
be drawn covering all the assets. Draft copies can then be
printed for each trade’s planning schedule.

The year visual aid visits indicated by color spots relat-
ing to frequency is covered by a ﬁrm plastic sheet, so that
the issue and return of work dockets can be indicated on
the plastic by a chinagraph pencil (e.g. ‘/’: docket issued;
‘X’: work completed).

48.3.8 Comments

The above planned maintenance manual system provides
a ﬁrm basis on which a computer-planned maintenance
system may be developed. Having such knowledge and
experience from working the manual system, the beneﬁts
that can be accrued from planned maintenance systems
compared to the corrective or other non-planned methods
previously used are numerous. It can be found that, due to
the large amount of assets to be managed by the adminis-
tration, it would be beneﬁcial for the planned maintenance
system to be transferred onto a computer system. A major
non-technical weekly task is one of producing work dock-
ets for issue and the subsequent entry into the maintenance
records on completion of the work task.

Technical beneﬁts are also obtained more readily from a
computer system in that if sound identiﬁcation of assets is
established through their asset number, codes etc., similar
assets can be examined in the event of a failure of any
similar asset, and spares can be held in stock to cover the
range of assets for which they are required, rather than
for each individual asset. In preparing the asset register
and respective work tasks, these can also be more easily
duplicated with respect to similar assets than is possible
with a manual system.

Scheduling of work tasks and therefore labor utilization
can be carried out in a number of different methods on a
computer, depending on the software system purchased.
These methods can be similar to the manual system or
they may take the form of automatic scheduling. That is,
the work tasks are entered into the computer system with
the appropriate hours and trades and the software program
automatically schedules the hours evenly over the weeks
of the year. In implementing such scheduling care has
to be taken to ensure that such items as weekends, statu-
tory holidays, annual leave, annual shutdown and seasonal

48/852 Maintenance Management in UK

requirements are all considered prior to loading the asset
information onto the computer system.

Many engineering maintenance departments allocate
more hours to new or extra works than they do to
maintenance. Therefore, the introduction of either type
of planned maintenance system highlights this matter to
both the department and the company generally when
appropriate.

When considering a computer system, aspects that
require attention are hardware and software (planned
maintenance system). During the initial
inquiry as to
which hardware and software would best serve the
company or department both must be considered.

If there is no restriction placed on the proposal by
having to use the current in-house computer system, the
choices of hardware/software packages are numerous. The
software must be user friendly, complementary to exist-
ing systems to avoid duplication of asset registering, etc.,
and have the facility to expand (i.e. have other programs
(modules) that enable greater use be made of the infor-
mation held within the system). The program should also
be compatible with any in-house computer system where
possible.

The hardware should be dedicated to the maintenance
department, as they then have access to the maintenance
programs as and when necessary. Systems are imple-
mented whereby the software is loaded onto the com-
pany in-house hardware, which can lead to periods when
access is limited by other demands on computer time (e.g.
accounts departments). The ideal situation would be for
the maintenance department to have their own computer,
with the back-up facility provided by the in-house com-
puter, thereby ensuring that copy is held.

It follows that if the planned maintenance system is to
be shown as effective, the number of breakdowns reported
must reduce, irrespective as to whether it be a manual or
computer system. A satisfactorily installed system allows
the engineer to plan his department’s work and, when
necessary, action emergency items or additional work,
without their being detrimental to the department’s overall
performance.

The beneﬁts from a planned maintenance system can-
not be achieved without the commitment of the person
responsible for its implementation. To ensure that the sys-
tem operates to the satisfaction of operators and users,
discussions should take place during the initial decision-
making and with the relevant departments when the plan-
ning schedules are being prepared.

48.4 Computer system
Before committing the company or department to a system
of planned maintenance, it is essential that there is a com-
plete overview of the total demand on plant, equipment
and resources and the beneﬁts from the implementation
of such a system, manual or computerized. Varying sys-
tems and/or part systems exist in almost every engineer-
ing maintenance department, which are due to company
policy, changes in departmental staff or workforce, com-
mitment of persons responsible, or, as is the situation in
a number of instances, a previous breakdown, which the

planned system did not prevent. In this case the system is
then often abandoned as unworkable.

On reaching the decision that there are beneﬁts to be
obtained from a planned system and that the system that
will be most beneﬁcial to the company generally is to
be computer based, then the following aspects must be
examined more fully:

1. Has the company or department the necessary knowl-
edge of the computer system to prepare and imple-
ment a planned maintenance program by this method?
The beneﬁts to be gained from the use of comput-
ers requires sufﬁcient understanding of both computers
and maintenance to foresee the advantages over those
obtained from the manual system.

2. Has a budget cost been established on hardware and

software?

Questions to be raised include:

requires that

1. Is the program to be run on the company’s main
computer or is the department to be given its own
hardware? While assessing this, consideration must
be given to which computer program is to be
given priority (e.g. ﬁnance, purchasing, deliveries or
maintenance). It is generally found that maintenance
is given the lowest priority. The decision to ‘go it
alone’ (i.e. purchase hardware speciﬁcally for the
maintenance program)
the following
details of the system’s implementation be examined:
(a) Will there be only one terminal and printer?
(b) Due to the complexity of the company premises
(e.g. dispersed locations, a number of large depart-
ments and operation and maintenance sections) it
may be that although there is only one main com-
puter source for information and records there are a
number of terminals and printers distributed around
the other demand areas. To ensure that records and
information are not corrupted or destroyed it is nor-
mal practice for the remote terminals to have access
only to information. This enables the information
held within the program to be interrogated by autho-
rized persons with respect to history, spare parts,
inventory, etc. It could be considered good policy
to implement the maintenance program with only
one workstation (i.e. a central computer and printer)
initially to gain experience of its operation before
extending it into other departments. This method
enables bugs to be ironed out before the system
becomes too large for any necessary modiﬁcations
to be introduced.

2. Are there skills within the company or organization
that can develop a cost-effective program speciﬁcally
for the respective department, or would it be more eco-
nomical in terms of costs and the proposed timetable
for implementation of the program to purchase an ‘off-
the-shelf package’? Caution on which route should be
taken must be exercised in that in-house staff may be
available in the initial programming stages but as the
system becomes more developed, they may not be free
due to other priorities discussed above.

3. Who will prepare and then implement/operate the pro-
gram? What resources will be made available (e.g.
facilities, resources, accommodation and administra-
tion assistance)? To implement the proposal the staff
forming the team will need to include a computer-
literate operator (i.e. someone who can correct the
faults that develop during the planning and program-
ming stages), a person knowledgeable in the program-
ming of the engineering tasks (e.g. an engineer) and
also staff to inspect the plant and equipment and enter
all the information into the computer’s maintenance
program. If there are not the skills available as men-
tioned above, it is imperative that the engineer respon-
sible for the implementation of the computer program
be given adequate training in the speciﬁc system to be
purchased. If this is not done, substantial costs could
be increased in continual recourse to the suppliers for
assistance.

4. What assets, departments, etc. are to be included within
the proposed program? This plays a major part in the
decision to be reached on to what hardware and soft-
ware is to be purchased. To support a system covering
a number of areas and departments it will be necessary
to consider network systems. Therefore, the computer
maintenance system to be purchased must accommo-
date such arrangements.

5. What details must be sought from the suppliers of both
hardware and software packages? How can the com-
puter best meet the department’s current requirements
and how can it be added to if and when necessary
(e.g. increased demand from planned maintenance)?
How can it be extended to cover other departments
(network)? Energy consumption input from condition
monitoring, stores inventory, project work and pos-
sible interaction with space allocation must also be
considered.

48.4.1 Computer system checklist

A checklist of items that may assist the intended purchaser
of a computer system would include:

Costs

1. Computer and printer;
2. Maintenance package (i.e. number of modules

required to provide a satisfactory system);

3. Modiﬁcations of maintenance package to meet user

demands;

4. Modiﬁcations of computer so that it is compatible

with the company’s main computer;

5. Other possible add-on packages (list);
6. Network system, and installation costs (ensure com-
patibility with computer and maintenance package);
7. Stationery (include cost for modifying supplied mate-

rial to meet user demands);

8. Maintenance agreement for computer;
9. Support from suppliers included in initial package;
10. Support from suppliers during operation;
11. Training;
12. Input of information into system;

Computer system 48/853

13. Cover for staff involved in implementation of system;
14. Additional administration staff required for the sys-

tem’s operation.

Software package

1. Is it compatible with the company’s main computer?
2. Is the total package user friendly or will it require a

3. Does it require modiﬁcations to meet

the depart-

large amount of support?

ment’s requirements?

4. Does it have the facility to copy information/details of
similar assets, thereby reducing initial input of these?
5. Does it have the facility to copy information/details
of common work tasks, thereby reducing initial input
of these? (This would include labor requirement.)

6. Does it have the facility to search out similar assets

(by manufacturer, duty, task etc.)?

7. To what extent is asset information held? Is there a
limitation on the amount of information that can be
stored in a readily useable format (e.g. history, costs,
spare parts, etc.)?

8. Is there adequate help when entering information into

the program (i.e. simple keyboard entries)?

9. When entering information, does it require to be

entered in a number of different ﬁelds?

10. Is labor scheduling by a team or individual trades?
11. When loaded automatically, are work tasks scheduled

to ensure an even weekly output?

12. How does the program cater for seasonal work (e.g.

heating boilers, air condition)?

13. How does the program cater for seasonal work (e.g.

plant shutdowns, holidays)?

14. How is scheduling of work tasks handled (e.g. differ-

ent frequencies)?

15. Does the system only produce work dockets of the
least frequent service (i.e. when yearly and quarterly
service visits are due, will the quarterly visits also be
printed)?

16. Is it easy to carry out simple corrections when incor-

rect information has been entered by mistake?

17. How is breakdown work handled? Is there a simple
entry format so that a work docket can be issued
without going through a lengthy keyboard process?
18. Is there a suitable format within the process to view
pending work (e.g. job ﬁle) for a speciﬁc forthcoming
period? Is it available in print?

19. Is there a facility for viewing the job ﬁle on the screen
indicating docket status (e.g. work overdue, work due,
work in progress, etc.)?

20. Is there a facility for viewing the job ﬁle on the screen
indicating docket status (e.g. work overdue, work due,
work in progress, etc.)?

21. Are the keyboard instructions simple with respect
to the printing of work dockets and the entering of
history relevant to these dockets on completion/part
completion or cancellation of work?

22. Does the system require ‘tidying’ (e.g. transferring

information from ‘working ﬁle’ to ‘history ﬁle’)?

23. Is there a facility to enter ‘free format’ information

into e.g. history ﬁle, breakdown work dockets?

48/854 Maintenance Management in UK

24. If purchasing a stores/spare parts module, does it have
the facility to link similar parts for all assets to reduce
stock holding? Does it automatically enter into the
issue of these?

25. What reports can be produced (e.g. labor in trade
speciﬁc assets, departmental,

for

26. Can a bonus system be incorporated into the labor

groups and/or
premises)?

element?

27. What facility is there for evaluation (e.g. life-cycle
costing, capital write-off/replacement, design, relia-
bility)?

28. Is the cost module compatible with the company’s

cost procedures?

29. Can the reports be produced in chart or table form?

If, after assessing the various computer and software
packages, the decision is made to implement the proposed
maintenance system on computer rather than by manual
methods caution must be exercised. Irrespective of the
above-mentioned beneﬁts, the use of a computer does not
increase work output but it does provide the department
with a very sound method of improving the management
of the company’s assets and resources.

In establishing a sound maintenance program, budget
costs for both operation of the department and associated
costs of the user department’s assets will be readily
obtained.

The proposed maintenance program could be likened
to a car. Both manual and automatic models can take one
from A to B, and although the automatic may be easier
to drive, both still require a driver (in the case of the
maintenance program, the engineer) to manage them.

48.4.2 Comment

Irrespective of the method of planned maintenance to
be implemented, beneﬁts to either will be accrued if
all possible information/methods/systems, supported by
the appropriate training, are also considered. Much will
depend on the demands placed on the plant and equipment
and what method is to be adopted in establishing the most
economical means of maintaining their life. It is only
when the speciﬁc plant and equipment is known that the
appropriate maintenance program can be implemented.

48.5 Life-cycle costing
This is the method of establishing the cost of the plant and
equipment over its recognized life cycle. In maintenance
situations the design and speciﬁcation elements may be
ignored, but those that must be considered in establishing
the life-cycle cost of plant and equipment will include:

Purchase
Installation
Commissioning
Trials and tests
Operation
Maintenance
Replacement

For production plants and equipment, life-cycle costs are
important in that the revenue from a product must cover
all aspects of expenditure. For plant and equipment such
as boilers and air-conditioning units, establishing life-
cycle costs can play a major part in assessing when these
items should be replaced. For plant and equipment such
as self-contained units (e.g. pumps with sealed bearings,
etc.), life-cycle costing may be used to determine their
replacement date.

The information on life-cycle costs gained with certain
items of plant and equipment need not be true for a similar
item in another location, as speciﬁc details on operating
hours, and maintenance attendance can vary markedly.
Also, it may be an auxiliary part (e.g. an electric motor) of
a major component. Therefore, it may have an entirely dif-
ferent set of parameters. An important element that must
be examined in detail when establishing life-cycle costs
of a speciﬁc item of plant and equipment is the demand
placed on energy resources by them.

To establish costs with regards to a speciﬁc item of
plant, sound feedback must be an element of the com-
pany’s program and subsequent records must be main-
tained. To be worthwhile these must include all costs: if
not, the assumed life-cycle cost over a number of years
could be misleading.

It follows that any maintenance program introduced for
speciﬁc plant and equipment must be designed so that all
maintenance costs are recorded. This would then be taken
into consideration when the life-cycle cost of the item is
assessed, as it should be added to the loss of production
if this has occurred due to any maintenance malfunction.
Care must be taken when presenting the life-cycle cost to
ensure that all elements within the cost cycle have been
effective.

Life cycle costing must be considered when purchasing
or taking over new plant or equipment and include all
aspects as listed above.

48.6 Training
A major concern within maintenance departments and
service contractors is the lack of experienced mainte-
nance technicians and craftsmen. This has been allowed
to occur through cutbacks in stafﬁng levels accompa-
nied by a reduction in training. A few companies provide
maintenance training, and it could be said that these are
progressive in that they acknowledge that, by providing
training for their workforce, they will not ﬁnd themselves
in the situation of searching for the limited skilled labor
now available.

Planned maintenance can reduce the demand for highly
experienced craftsmen in that, if the instructions issued in
work docket and advice/guidance notes are adequate, a
less-skilled person should be able to perform the work
task correctly. It follows that adequate training must be
provided to ensure that, irrespective of the degree of the
operative’s skills and experience, the work task given will
be carried out to the required standard.

There are a number of suitable training establishments
available, but for the speciﬁc plant and equipment within
the organization, in-house training would provide a better

result. Carrying out in-house training reduces costs and
ensures that the subject matter is relevant. Support in this
training can be complemented by the use of manufac-
turers, suppliers or specialists (e.g. control and/or service
engineers). It will be found that such companies encour-
age this method, as it helps to reduce the demand on their
own highly skilled staff. Trained operatives can carry out
basic fault ﬁnding either alone or by telephone.

With the changing face of technology, it is imperative
that service departments keep up to date with the latest
practices. Training should not be restricted to any spe-
ciﬁc individual but should include engineers, technicians,
craftsmen and, where appropriate, semi-skilled staff.

48.7 Health and safety
No maintenance task can be issued without the person
responsible for controlling the workforce establishing that
the work is to be carried out safely. Areas where this is
essential would include boilers, pressure systems, electri-
cal systems, conﬁned spaces, hot work, deep sumps/shafts,
tanks, and lone working.

To reduce the hazard from any of the above the risk
to the individual must be assessed and, where necessary,
a safe working system/procedure prepared and/or a per-
mit to work issued. It follows that, whatever procedure is
adopted, it can only be effective if closely monitored.

48.8 Information
Information on maintenance is available from a large num-
ber of sources. The initial one is that of the manufac-
turer/supplier for new plant and equipment. Where this
plant and equipment forms a part of a process, the party
responsible for the overall design must prepare the appro-
priate operation and maintenance and instructions. These
should be supported by technical manuals, which should
include spare parts lists, control measures, and, where pos-
sible, faultﬁnding charts.

Problems arise in older plant and equipment, as there
may have been no information supplied when the plant
was ﬁrst installed. Alternatively, the information may have
been lost through the passage of time or by changes in
department location and/or staff.

For an inquiring mind (which is an essential tool in the
ﬁeld of maintenance), sources of information outside the
service department are available and include manufactur-
ers, suppliers, trade associations, engineering institutions
(e.g. plant, mechanical, electrical, etc.), consultants, and
suppliers of maintenance systems, libraries, and technical
journals and the Internet.

Appendix: Elements of a planned maintenance system 48/855

endeavors of all those involved, the system will not pro-
duce the required results.

On setting out on the planned maintenance route, if the
percentage of the work to be carried out under the plan
is not sufﬁcient (say, 80 per cent), the department will
continue to operate as before (i.e. ﬁreﬁghting) with the
control of that department being in the hands of others.
Any planned maintenance system is a tool. It cannot do
the work itself but, employed correctly, the sound man-
agement results will prove that the efforts involved in
setting up the system were worthwhile.

Appendix: Elements of a planned
maintenance system
Plant codes
Plant code Plant/equipment

01
02
03
05
06
10
12
13
15
31
33
34
41
44
45
46
70

Boilers
Heating systems
Domestic hot and cold water
Pumps
Water treatment
Ventilation
Chiller/refrigeration
Chilled water systems
Cooling water systems
Electrical distribution
Electrical lighting and power
Batteries/emergency lighting
Kitchen equipment
Fixed equipment
Portable equipment
Laundry equipment
Lifts

Guidance notes
Health and safety

Health and safety is everyone’s responsibility.
Plant and equipment must be made safe before any work
is carried out.
A permit to work may be required for certain work tasks.
Protective clothing/equipment should be used when nec-
essary.
Defective tools or access equipment must not be used.
All safety rules and regulations must be adhered to.
On completion of a work task, the plant/equipment must
be left in a safe and operable condition.
Safety guards, where ﬁtted, must be replaced and secured.

Technicians’/craftsman’s responsibility

48.9 Conclusion
This chapter should be sufﬁcient to guide the engineer or
manager through the initial stages of introducing a sound
and effective planned maintenance system. However, as
in any establishment – production, administration or (as
in this case) engineering – without the commitment and

The instructions given in these guidance notes do not
cover every component part, but the technician/craftsmen
is expected to carry out any necessary maintenance in
accordance with their normal trade practice.

Manufacturers’ maintenance handbooks, when available,
should be followed with respect to recommendations for
work to be carried out and at which frequency.

48/856 Maintenance Management in UK

Work tasks

Heating Systems Plant Code E02.
Half-yearly (H) Service.
5. Fan Assisted Heaters.
Blow out motor windings, lubricate as necessary.
Check insulation resistance and test earth continuity.

Examine apparatus for general mechanical condition,
including guards and other safety devices.
Test mechanical action and polarity of equipment switch.
Clean and test switches, pilot lamps, thermostats and
timing devices.
Ensure that writing and terminal connections are secure.
Test under normal running conditions.

50/867

50

Predictive
Maintenance

R Keith Mobley
The Plant Performance Group

Contents

50/869

50.1 Introduction
50.2 Beneﬁts of predictive maintenance
50.3 Predictive maintenance techniques

50/869
50/871

50/871

50/872

50.3.1 Vibration monitoring
50.3.2 Thermography
50.3.3 Tribology
50.3.4 Process parameters 50/876
50.3.5 Visual inspection
50.3.6 Ultrasonic monitoring
50.3.7 Other techniques

50/877

50/876

50/873

50/876

50.4 Selecting a predictive maintenance system 50/877
50.5 Establishing a predictive maintenance program 50/881

50.5.1 Goals, objectives and beneﬁts
50.5.2 Database development
50.5.3 Getting started 50/886
50.5.4 Maintaining the program 50/886
50.5.5 Additional training

50/883

50/888

50/881

50.1 Introduction
Maintenance costs are a major part of the total operating
costs of all manufacturing or production plants. Depend-
ing on the speciﬁc industry, maintenance costs can rep-
resent between 15 and 40 per cent of the costs of goods
produced. For example in food related industries, the aver-
age maintenance cost represents about 15 per cent of the
cost of goods produced; while in iron and steel, pulp and
paper and other heavy industries maintenance represents
up to 40 per cent of the total production costs.

Recent surveys of maintenance management effective-
ness indicate that one-third, 33 cents out of every dollar,
of all maintenance costs is wasted as the result of unnec-
essary or improperly carried out maintenance. When you
consider that US industry spends more than $200 billion
dollars each year on maintenance of plant equipment and
facilities, the impact on productivity and proﬁt that is rep-
resented by the maintenance operation become clear.

is the fact

The result of ineffective maintenance management
represents a loss of more than $60 billion dollars
each year. Perhaps more important
that
our ineffective management of maintenance dramatically
impacts our ability to manufacture quality products
that are competitive in the world market. The loss of
production time and product quality that results from
poor or inadequate maintenance management has had
a dramatic impact on our ability to compete with
Japan and other countries that have implemented more
advanced manufacturing and maintenance management
philosophies.

The dominant reason for this ineffective management is
the lack of factual data that quantiﬁes the actual need for
repair or maintenance of plant machinery, equipment and
systems. Maintenance scheduling has been, and in many
instances, is predicated on statistical trend data or on the
actual failure of plant equipment.

Until recently, middle and corporate level management
have ignored the impact of the maintenance operation on
product quality, production costs and more importantly on
bottom-line proﬁt. The general opinion has been ‘Main-
tenance is a necessary evil’ or ‘Nothing can be done
to improve maintenance costs’. Perhaps these were true
statements ten or twenty years ago.

However,

the developments of microprocessor or
computer-based instrumentation that can be used to
monitor
the operating condition of plant equipment,
machinery and systems have provided the means to
manage the maintenance operation. They have provided
the means to reduce or eliminate unnecessary repairs,
prevent catastrophic machine failures, and reduce the
negative impact of the maintenance operation on the
proﬁtability of manufacturing and production plants.

50.2 Beneﬁts of predictive maintenance
Predictive maintenance is not a substitute for
the
more traditional maintenance management methods. It
is, however, a valuable addition to a comprehensive,
total plant maintenance program. Where traditional
maintenance management programs
rely on routine

Beneﬁts of predictive maintenance 50/869

servicing of all machinery and fast response to unexpected
failures, a predictive maintenance program schedules
speciﬁc maintenance tasks, as they are actually required
by plant equipment.
totally eliminate the
continued need for either or both of the traditional
programs, i.e. run-to-failure and preventive. Predictive
maintenance can reduce the number of unexpected failures
and provide a more reliable scheduling tool for routine
preventive maintenance tasks.

It cannot

The premise of predictive maintenance is that regular
monitoring of the actual mechanical condition of machine-
trains and operating efﬁciency of process systems will
ensure the maximum interval between repairs; minimize
the number and cost of unscheduled outages created by
machine-train failures and improve the overall availabil-
ity of operating plants. Including predictive maintenance
in a total plant management program will provide the
ability to optimize the availability of process machinery
and greatly reduce the cost of maintenance. In reality,
predictive maintenance is a condition-driven preventive
maintenance program.

the types of

A survey of 500 plants

that have implemented
predictive maintenance methods indicates substantial
improvements in reliability, availability and operating
costs. The successful programs included in the survey
include a cross-section of industries and provide an
overview of
that can
be expected. Based on the survey results, major
improvements can be achieved in: maintenance costs,
unscheduled machine failures, repair downtime, spare
parts inventory, and both direct and in-direct overtime
premiums. In addition, the survey indicated a dramatic
improvement in: machine life, production, operator safety,
product quality and overall proﬁtability.

improvements

Based on the survey, the actual costs normally asso-
ciated with the maintenance operation were reduced by
more than 50 per cent. The comparison of maintenance
costs included the actual labor and overhead of the main-
tenance department. It also included the actual materials
cost of repair parts, tools and other equipment required
to maintain plant equipment. The analysis did not include
lost production time, variances in direct labor or other
costs that should be directly attributed to inefﬁcient main-
tenance practices.

The addition of regular monitoring of the actual condi-
tion of process machinery and systems reduced the num-
ber of catastrophic, unexpected machine failures by an
average of 55 per cent. The comparison used the fre-
quency of unexpected machine failures before implement-
ing the predictive maintenance program to the failure rate
during the two year period following the addition of con-
dition monitoring the program. Projections of the survey
results indicate that reductions of 90 per cent can be
achieved using regular monitoring of the actual machine
condition.

Predictive maintenance was shown to reduce the actual
time required to repair or rebuild plant equipment. The
average improvement in mean-time-to-repair, MTTR, was
a reduction of 60 per cent. To determine the average
improvement, actual repair times before the predictive
maintenance program were compared to the actual time

50/870 Predictive Maintenance

to repair after one year of operation using predictive
maintenance management techniques. It was found that
the regular monitoring and analysis of machine condition
identiﬁed the speciﬁc failed component(s)
in each
machine and enabled the maintenance staff to plan each
repair. The ability to predetermine the speciﬁc repair
parts, tools and labor skills required provided the dramatic
reduction in both repair time and costs.

The ability to predict machine-train and equipment fail-
ures and the speciﬁc failure mode provided the means to
reduce spare parts inventories by more than 30 per cent.
Rather than carry repair parts in inventory, the surveyed
plants had sufﬁcient lead-time to order repair or replace-
ment parts as needed. The comparison included the actual
cost of spare parts and the inventory carrying costs for
each plant.

Prevention of catastrophic failures and early detection
of incipient machine and systems problems increased the
useful operating life of plant machinery by an average of
30 per cent. The increase in machine life was a projection
based on ﬁve years of operation following implementa-
tion of a predictive maintenance program. The calculation
included: frequency of repairs, severity of machine dam-
age, and actual condition of machinery following repair. A
condition-based predictive maintenance program prevents
serious damage to machinery and other plant systems.
This reduction in damage severity increases the operating
life of plant equipment.

A side beneﬁt of predictive maintenance is the auto-
matic ability to monitor the mean-time-between-failures,
MTBF. This data provides the means to determine the
most cost-effective time to replace machinery rather than
continue to absorb high maintenance costs. The MTBF
of plant equipment is reduced each time a major repair
or rebuild occurs. Predictive maintenance will automati-
cally display the reduction of MTBF over the life of the
machine. When the MTBF reaches the point that contin-
ued operation and maintenance costs exceed replacement
cost, the machine should be replaced.
In each of the surveyed plants,

the availability of
process systems was increased following implementation
of a condition-based predictive maintenance program.
The average increase in the 500 plants was 30 per
cent. The reported improvement was based strictly on
machine availability and did not include improved process
efﬁciency. However, a full predictive program that
includes process parameters monitoring can also improve
the operating efﬁciency and therefore productivity of
manufacturing and process plants. One example of this
type of improvement is a food manufacturing plant that
made the decision to build additional plants to meet peak
demands. An analysis of existing plants, using predictive
maintenance techniques,
indicated that a 50 per cent
increase in production output could be achieved simply
by increasing the operating efﬁciency of the existing
production process.

The survey determined that advanced notice of
machine-train and systems problems had reduced the
potential
for destructive failure, which could cause
personal injury or death. The determination was based
on catastrophic failures where personal injury would be

most likely to occur. Several insurance companies offering
reduction in premiums for plants that have a condition-
based predictive maintenance program in effect have
supported this beneﬁt.

Several other beneﬁts can be derived from a viable
predictive maintenance management program: veriﬁcation
of new equipment condition, veriﬁcation of repairs and
rebuild work and product quality improvement.

Predictive maintenance techniques can be used during
site acceptance testing to determine the installed condition
of machinery, equipment and plant systems. This provides
the means to verify the purchased condition of new
equipment before acceptance. Problems detected before
acceptance can be resolved while the vendor has reason
(the invoice has not been paid), to correct any deﬁciencies.
Many industries are now requiring that all new equipment
include a reference vibration signature be provided with
purchase. The reference signature is then compared
with the baseline taken during site acceptance testing.
Any abnormal deviation from the reference signature
is grounds for rejection, without penalty of the new
equipment. Under this agreement, the vendor is required
to correct or
replace the rejected equipment. These
techniques can also be used to verify the repairs or
rebuilds on existing plant machinery.

Vibration analysis, a key predictive maintenance tool,
can be used to determine whether or not the repairs cor-
rected existing problems and/or created addition abnormal
behavior before the system is re-started. This eliminates
the need for the second outage that many times is required
to correct improper or incomplete repairs.

Data acquired as part of a predictive maintenance
program can be used to schedule and plan plant outages.
Many industries attempt to correct major problems or
schedule preventive maintenance rebuilds during annual
maintenance outages. Predictive data can provide the
information required to plan the speciﬁc repairs and other
activities during the outage. One example of this beneﬁt is
a maintenance outage scheduled to rebuild a ball mill in an
aluminum foundry. The normal outage, before predictive
maintenance techniques were implemented in the plant,
to completely rebuild the ball mill was three weeks and
the repair cost averaged $300,000.

The addition of predictive maintenance techniques as
an outage-scheduling tool reduced the outage to ﬁve days
and resulted in a total savings of $200,000. The predic-
tive maintenance data eliminated the need for many of
the repairs that would normally have been included in
the maintenance outage. Based on the ball mill’s actual
condition, these repairs were not needed. The additional
ability to schedule the required repairs, gather required
tools and plan the work reduced the time required from
three weeks to ﬁve days.

The overall beneﬁts of predictive maintenance man-
agement have proven to substantially improve the overall
operation of both manufacturing and process plants. In all
surveyed cases, the beneﬁts derived from using condition-
based management have offset the capital equipment cost
required to implement the program within the ﬁrst three
months. Use of microprocessor-based predictive mainte-
nance techniques has further reduced the annual operating

cost of predictive maintenance methods so that any plant
can achieve cost-effective implementation of this type of
maintenance management program.

50.3 Predictive maintenance techniques
A variety of technologies can and should be used as part of
a comprehensive predictive maintenance program. Since
mechanical systems or machines account for the major-
ity of plant equipment, vibration monitoring is generally
the key component of most predictive maintenance pro-
grams. However, vibration monitoring cannot provide all
of the information that will be required for a successful
predictive maintenance program. This technique is lim-
ited to monitoring the mechanical condition and not other
critical parameters required for maintaining reliability and
efﬁciency of machinery. Therefore, a comprehensive pre-
dictive maintenance program must include other monitor-
ing and diagnostic techniques.

These techniques

include (1) vibration monitoring
(2) thermography, (3) tribology, (4) process parameters,
(5) visual inspection and (5) other nondestructive testing
techniques. This chapter will provide a description of
each of the techniques that should be included in a full
capabilities predictive maintenance program for typical
plants.

50.3.1 Vibration monitoring

Vibration analysis is the dominant technique used for
predictive maintenance management. Since the greatest
population of typical plant equipment is mechanical, this
technique has the widest application and beneﬁts in a total
plant program. This technique uses the noise or vibration
created by mechanical equipment and in some cases by
plant systems to determine their actual condition.

Using vibration analysis to detect machine problems
is not new. During the 1960s and 70s, the US Navy,
petrochemical and nuclear electric power generating indus-
tries invested heavily in the development of analysis tech-
niques based on noise or vibration that could be used to
detect and identify incipient mechanical problems in crit-
ical machinery. By the early 1980s, the instrumentation
and analytical skills required for noise-based predictive
maintenance were fully developed. These techniques and
instrumentation had proven to be extremely reliable and
accurate in detecting abnormal machine behavior. How-
ever, the capital cost of instrumentation and the expertise
required to acquire and analyze noise data precluded gen-
eral application of this type of predictive maintenance. As
a result, only the most critical equipment in a few select
industries could justify the expense required to implement
a noise-based predictive maintenance program.

Recent advancements in microprocessor technology
coupled with the expertise of companies that specialize
in machinery diagnostics and analysis
technology,
have evolved the means to provide vibration-based
predictive maintenance that can be cost-effectively used
in most manufacturing and process applications. These
microprocessor-based systems simplify data acquisition,
automate data management, and minimize the need for

Predictive maintenance techniques 50/871

vibration experts to interpret data. Commercially available
systems are capable of routine monitoring,
trending,
evaluation and reporting the mechanical condition of
all mechanical equipment in a typical plant. This type
of program can be used to schedule maintenance on
all rotating, reciprocating and most continuous process
mechanical equipment.

Monitoring the vibration from plant machinery can
provide direct
correlation between the mechanical
condition and recorded vibration data of each machine
in the plant. Any degradation of
the mechanical
condition within plant machinery can be detected
using vibration-monitoring techniques. Used properly,
vibration analysis can identify speciﬁc degrading machine
components or the failure mode of plant machinery before
serious damage occurs. Most vibration-based predictive
maintenance programs rely on one or more monitoring
techniques. These techniques include broadband trending,
narrowband trending, or signature analysis.

Broadband trending

This technique acquires overall or broadband vibration
readings from select points on a machine-train. This data
is compared to either a baseline reading taken from a new
machine or to vibration severity charts to determine the
relative condition of the machine. Normally an unﬁltered
broadband measurement that provides the total vibration
energy between 10 and 10,000 Hertz is used for this type
of analysis.

Broadband or overall RMS data is strictly a gross
value or number that represents the total vibration of
the machine at the speciﬁc measurement point where the
data was acquired. It does not provide any information
pertaining to the individual frequency components or
machine dynamics that created the measured value.

Narrowband trending

Narrowband trending, like broadband, monitors the total
energy for a speciﬁc bandwidth of vibration frequencies.
Unlike broadband, narrowband analysis utilizes vibration
frequencies that represent speciﬁc machine components
or failure modes.

This method provides the means to quickly monitor the
mechanical condition of critical machine components, not
just the overall machine condition. This technique pro-
vides the ability to monitor the condition of gear sets,
bearings and other machine components without manual
analysis of vibration signatures.

Signature analysis

Unlike the two trending techniques, signature analysis
provides visual representation of each frequency compo-
nent generated by a machine-train. With training, plant
staff can use vibration signatures to determine the speciﬁc
maintenance required by plant machinery.

Most vibration-based predictive maintenance programs
use some form of signature analysis in their program.
However, the majority of these programs rely on compar-
ative analysis rather than full root-cause techniques. This

50/872 Predictive Maintenance

failure limits the beneﬁts that can be derived from this
type of program.

The capital cost for implementing a vibration-based
predictive maintenance program will range from about
$8,000 to more than $50,000. Your costs will depend on
the speciﬁc techniques desired.

Training is critical for predictive maintenance programs
based on vibration monitoring and analysis. Even
programs that rely strictly on the simpliﬁed trending
or comparison techniques require a practical knowledge
of vibration theory so that meaningful
interpretation
of machine condition can be derived. More advanced
techniques, i.e. signature and root-cause failure analysis,
require a working knowledge of machine dynamics and
failure modes.

The chapters on establishing and maintaining a
total plant predictive maintenance program will provide
the practical knowledge required implementing a cost-
effective vibration-based program that will provide
maximum beneﬁts.

50.3.2 Thermography

Thermography is a predictive maintenance technique that
can be used to monitor the condition of plant machinery,
structures and systems. It uses instrumentation designed
to monitor the emission of infrared energy, i.e. tempera-
ture, to determine their operating condition. By detecting
thermal anomalies, i.e. areas that are hotter or colder than
they should be, an experienced surveyor can locate and
deﬁne incipient problems within the plant.

Infrared technology is predicated on the fact that all
objects having a temperature above absolute zero emit
energy or radiation. Infrared radiation is one form of
this emitted energy. Infrared emissions, or below red,
are the shortest wavelengths of all radiated energy and
are invisible without special instrumentation. The inten-
sity of infrared radiation from an object is a function of
its surface temperature. However, temperature measure-
ment using infrared methods is complicated because there
are three sources of thermal energy that can be detected
from any object: energy emitted from the object itself,
energy reﬂected from the object, and energy transmitted
by the object. Only the emitted energy is important in a
predictive maintenance program. Reﬂected and transmit-
ted energies will distort raw infrared data. Therefore, the
reﬂected and transmitted energies must be ﬁltered out of
acquired data before a meaningful analysis can be made.
The surface of an object inﬂuences the amount of emit-
ted or reﬂected energy. A perfect emitting surface is called
a ‘blackbody’ and has an emissivity equal to 1.0. These
surfaces do not reﬂect. Instead, they absorb all external
energy and re-emit as infrared energy. Surfaces that reﬂect
infrared energy are called ‘graybodies’ and have an emis-
sivity less than 1.0. Most plant equipment falls into this
classiﬁcation. Careful consideration of the actual emis-
sivity of an object improves the accuracy of temperature
measurements used for predictive maintenance. To help
users determine emissivity, tables have been developed
to serve as guidelines for most common materials. How-
ever, these guidelines are not absolute emissivity values
for all machines or plant equipment.

Variations

in surface

for plant equipment.

thermographic techniques must also consider

condition, paint or other
protective coatings and many other variables can affect
the actual emissivity factor
In
the user
addition to reﬂected and transmitted energy,
of
the
atmosphere between the object and the measurement
instrument. Water vapor and other gases absorb infrared
radiation. Airborne dust, some lighting and other variables
in the surrounding atmosphere can distort measured
infrared radiation. Since the atmospheric environment
is constantly changing, using thermographic techniques
requires extreme care each time infrared data is acquired.
Most infrared monitoring systems or instruments pro-
vide special ﬁlters that can be used to avoid the negative
effects of atmospheric attenuation of infrared data. How-
ever the plant user must recognize the speciﬁc factors that
will affect the accuracy of the infrared data and apply the
correct ﬁlters or other signal conditioning required negat-
ing that speciﬁc attenuating factor or factors.

Collecting optics, radiation detectors and some form of
indicator are the basic elements of an industrial infrared
instrument. The optical system collects radiant energy and
focuses it upon a detector, which converts it into an elec-
trical signal. The instrument’s electronics ampliﬁes the
output signal and process it into a form which can be
displayed. There are three general types of instruments
that can be used for predictive maintenance: infrared ther-
mometers or spot radiometers line scanners and imaging
systems.

Infrared thermometers

Infrared thermometers or spot radiometers are designed
to provide the actual surface temperature at a single, rel-
atively small point on a machine or surface. Within a
predictive maintenance program, the point-of-use infrared
thermometer can be used in conjunction with many of
the microprocessor-based vibration instruments to moni-
tor the temperature at critical points on plant machinery
or equipment. This technique is typically used to monitor
bearing cap temperatures, motor winding temperatures,
spot checks of process piping temperatures and similar
applications. It is limited in that the temperature repre-
sents a single point on the machine or structure. However
when used in conjunction with vibration data, point-of-use
infrared data can be a valuable tool.

Line scanners

This type of infrared instrument provides a single dimen-
sional scan or line of comparative radiation. While this
type of instrument provides a somewhat larger ﬁeld of
view, i.e. area of machine surface, it is limited in predic-
tive maintenance applications.

Infrared imaging

Unlike other infrared techniques,
thermal or infrared
imaging provides the means to scan the infrared emissions
of complete machines, process or equipment in a very
short time. Most of the imaging systems function much
like a video camera. The user can view the thermal

emission proﬁle of a wide area by simply looking
through the instrument’s optics. There are a variety of
thermal imaging instruments on the market ranging from
relatively inexpensive, black and white scanners to full
color, microprocessor-based systems. Many of the less
expensive units are designed strictly a scanners and do not
provide the capability of store and recall thermal images.
The inability to store and recall previous thermal data will
limit a long-term predictive maintenance program.

Point-of-use infrared thermometers are commercially
available and relatively inexpensive. The typical cost
for this type of infrared instrument is less than $1,000.
Infrared imaging systems will have a price range between
$8,000 for a black and white scanner without storage
capability to over $60,000 for a microprocessor-based,
color imaging system.

Training is critical with any of the imaging systems.
The variables that can destroy the accuracy and repeata-
bility of thermal data must be compensated for each time
infrared data is acquired. In addition, interpretation of
infrared data requires extensive training and experience.
Inclusion of thermography into a predictive mainte-
nance program will enable you to monitor the thermal efﬁ-
ciency of critical process systems that rely on heat transfer
or retention; electrical equipment; and other parameters
that will improve both the reliability and efﬁciency of
plant systems. Infrared techniques can be used to detect
problems in a variety of plant systems and equipment,
including electrical switchgear, gearboxes, electrical sub-
stations,
transmissions, circuit breaker panels, motors,
building envelopes, bearings, steam lines, and process sys-
tems that rely on heat retention or transfer.

50.3.3 Tribology

term that

refers to design
Tribology is the general
and operating dynamics of
the bearing-lubrication-
rotor support structure of machinery. Several tribology
techniques can be used for predictive maintenance:
lubricating oils analysis, spectrographic analysis, and
ferrography and wear particle analysis.

Lubricating oil analysis, as the name implies, is an anal-
ysis technique that determines the condition of lubricating
oils used in mechanical and electrical equipment. It is not
a tool for determining the operating condition of machin-
ery. Some forms of lubricating oil analysis will provide
an accurate quantitative breakdown of individual chemical
elements, both oil additive and contaminates, contained
in the oil. A comparison of the amount of trace metals
in successive oil samples can indicate wear patterns of
oil wetted parts in plant equipment and will provide an
indication of impending machine failure.

Until recently, tribology analysis has been a relatively
slow and expensive process. Analyses were conducted
using traditional laboratory techniques and required exten-
sive, skilled labor. Microprocessor-based systems are now
available which can automate most of the lubricating oil
and spectrographic analysis, thus reducing the manual
effort and cost of analysis.

The primary applications for spectrographic or lubri-
cating oil are: quality control, reduction of lubricating oil

Predictive maintenance techniques 50/873

inventories, and determination of the most cost-effective
interval for oil change. Lubricating, hydraulic and dielec-
tric oils can be periodically analyzed, using these tech-
niques to determine their condition. The results of this
analysis can be used to determine if the oil meets the lubri-
cating requirements of the machine or application. Based
on the results of the analysis, lubricants can be changed
or upgraded to meet the speciﬁc operating requirements.
In addition, detailed analysis of the chemical and phys-
ical properties of different oils used in the plant can, in
some cases, allow consolidation or reduction of the num-
ber and types of lubricates required to maintain plant
equipment. Elimination of unnecessary duplication can
reduce required inventory levels and therefore mainte-
nance costs.

As a predictive maintenance tool, lubricating oil and
spectrographic analysis can be used to schedule oil change
intervals based on the actual condition of the oil. In mid
to large plants, a reduction in the number of oil changes
can amount to a considerable annual reduction in mainte-
nance costs. Relatively inexpensive sampling and testing
can show when the oil in a machine has reached a point
that warrants change.

The full beneﬁt of oil analysis can only be achieved
by taking frequent samples trending the data for each
machine in the plant. It can provide a wealth of informa-
tion on which to base maintenance decisions. However,
major payback is rarely possible without a consistent pro-
gram of sampling.

Lubricating oil analysis

Oil analysis has become an important aid to preventive
maintenance. Laboratories recommend that samples of
machine lubricant be taken at scheduled intervals to deter-
mine the condition of the lubricating ﬁlm that is critical
to machine-train operation. Typically eleven tests are con-
ducted on lube oil samples:

1. Viscosity is one of the most important properties of
lubricating oil. The actual viscosity of oil samples
is compared to an unused sample to determine the
thinning of thickening of the sample during use.
Excessively low viscosity will reduce the oil ﬁlm
strength, weakening its ability to prevent metal-to-
metal contact.

Excessively high viscosity may impede the ﬂow of
oil to vital locations in the bearing support structure,
reducing its ability to lubricate.

2. Contamination of oil by water or coolant can cause
major problems in a lubricating system. Many of the
additives now used in formulating lubricants contain
the same elements that are used in coolant additives.
Therefore, the laboratory must have an accurate anal-
ysis of new oil for comparison.

3. Fuel dilution of oil in an engine weakens the oil ﬁlm
strength, sealing ability, and detergency. Improper
operation,
ignition problems,
improper timing, or other deﬁciencies may cause it.
Fuel dilution is considered excessive when it reaches
a level of 2.5 to 5 per cent.

fuel system leaks,

50/874 Predictive Maintenance

4. Solids content is a general test. All solid materials
in the oil are measured as a percentage of the sam-
ple volume or weight. The presence of solids in a
lubricating system can signiﬁcantly increase the wear
on lubricated parts. Any unexpected rise in reported
solids is cause for concern.

5. Fuel soot

is an important indicator for oil used in
diesel engines and is always present to some extent.
A test to measure fuel soot in diesel engine oil is
important since it indicates the fuel burning efﬁciency
of the engine. Most tests for fuel soot are conducted
by infrared analysis.

6. Oxidation of lubricating oil can result

in lacquer
deposits, metal corrosion, or thickening of the oil.
Most lubricants contain oxidation inhibitors. However
when additives are used up, oxidation of the oil itself
begins. The quantity of oxidation in an oil sample is
measured by differential infrared analysis.

7. Nitration results from fuel combustion in engines.
The products formed are highly acidic and they may
leave deposits in combustion areas. Nitration will
accelerate oil oxidation. Infrared analysis is used to
detect and measure nitration products.

8. Total acid number (TAN) is a measure of the amount
of acid or acid-like material in the oil sample. Because
new oils contain additives that affect the TAN num-
ber, it is important to compare used oil samples with
new, unused, oil of the same type. Regular anal-
ysis at speciﬁc intervals is important to this eva-
luation.

9. Total base number (TBN) indicates the ability of an
oil to neutralize acidity. The higher the TBN, the
greater is its ability to neutralize acidity. Typical
causes of low TBN include using the improper oil for
an application, waiting too long between oil changes,
overheating and using high sulfur fuel.

10. Particle count

tests are important

to anticipating
potential system or machine problems. This is
especially true in hydraulic systems. The particle
count analysis made a part of a normal
lube
oil analysis is quite different from wear particle
analysis. In this test, high particle counts indicate that
machinery may be wearing abnormally or that failures
may occur because of temporarily or permanently
blocked oriﬁces. No attempt is made to determine
the wear patterns, size and other factors that would
identify the failure mode within the machine.

11. Spectrographic analysis allows accurate, rapid mea-
surements of many of the elements present in lubri-
cating oil. These elements are generally classiﬁed as
wear metals, contaminates, or additives. Some ele-
ments can be listed in more than one of these clas-
siﬁcations. Standard lubricating oil analysis does not
attempt to determine the speciﬁc failure modes of
developing machine-train problems. Therefore, addi-
tional techniques must be used as part of a compre-
hensive predictive maintenance program.

12. Wear particle analysis is related to oil analysis only
in that the particles to be studied are collected through
drawing a sample of lubricating oil. Where lubri-
cating oil analysis determines the actual condition

of the oil sample, wear particle analysis provides
direct information about the wearing condition of the
machine-train. Particles in the lubricate of a machine
can provide signiﬁcant information about the con-
dition of the machine. This information is derived
from the study of particle shape, composition, size
and quantity. Wear particle analysis is normally con-
ducted in two stages.

The ﬁrst method used for wear particle analysis is
routine monitoring and trending of the solids content
of machine lubricant. In simple terms the quantity,
composition and size of particulate matter in the lubri-
cating oil is indicative of the mechanical condition of
the machine. A normal machine will contain low lev-
els of solids with a size less than 10 microns. As the
machine’s condition degrades, the number and size
of particulate matter will increase.

The second wear particle method involves analy-
sis of the particulate matter in each lubricating oil
sample. Five basic types of wear can be identiﬁed
according to the classiﬁcation of particles: rubbing
wear, cutting wear, rolling fatigue wear, combined
rolling and sliding wear and severe sliding wear. Only
rubbing wear and early rolling fatigue mechanisms
generate particles predominantly less than 15 microns
in size.

(a) Rubbing wear is the result of normal sliding wear
in a machine. During a normal break-in of a
wear surface, a unique layer is formed at the
surface. As long as this layer is stable, the surface
wears normally. If the layer is removed faster
than it is generated, the wear rate increases and
the maximum particle size increases. Excessive
quantities of contaminate in a lubrication system
can increase rubbing wear by more than an order
of magnitude without completely removing the
shear mixed layer. Although catastrophic failure
is unlikely, these machines can wear out rapidly.
Impending trouble is indicated by a dramatic
increase in wear particles.

(b) Cutting wear particles are generated when one
surface penetrates another. These particles are
produced when a misaligned or fractured hard
surface produces an edge that cuts into a softer
surface, or when abrasive contaminate become
embedded in a soft surface and cut an opposing
surface. Cutting wear particles are abnormal and
are always worthy of attention. If they are only a
few micron long and a fraction of a micron wide,
the cause is probably a contaminate. Increasing
quantities of longer particles signal a potentially
imminent component failure.

(c) Rolling fatigue is associated primarily with
rolling contact bearings and may produce three
distinct particle types: fatigue spall particles,
spherical particles, and laminar particles. Fatigue
spall particles are the actual material removed
when a pit or spall opens up on a bearing
surface. An increase in the quantity or size
of these particles is the ﬁrst
indication of an
abnormality. Rolling fatigue does not always

generate spherical particles and they may be
generated by other sources. Their presence is
important in that they are detectable before any
actual spalling occurs. Laminar particles are very
thin and are formed by the passage of a wear
particle through a rolling contact. They frequently
have holes in them. Laminar particles may be
generated throughout the life of a bearing, but
at
the onset of fatigue spalling the quantity
increases.

(d) Combined rolling and sliding wear results from
the moving contact of surfaces in gear systems.
These larger particles result from tensile stresses
on the gear surface, causing the fatigue cracks
to spread deeper into the gear tooth before pit-
ting. Gear fatigue cracks do not generate spheres.
Scufﬁng of gears is caused by too high a load or
speed. The excessive heat generated by this con-
dition breaks down the lubricating ﬁlm and causes
adhesion of the mating gear teeth. As the wear
surfaces become rougher, the wear rate increases.
Once started, scufﬁng usually affects each gear
tooth.

(e) Severe sliding wear is caused by excessive loads
or heat in a gear system. Under these conditions,
large particles break away from the wear surfaces,
causing an increase in the wear rate. If the stresses
applied to the surface are increased further, a sec-
ond transition point is reached. The surface breaks
down and catastrophic wear ensures.

Normal spectrographic analysis is limited to particu-
late contamination with a size of 10 microns or less.
Larger contaminants are ignored. This fact can limit
the beneﬁts that can be derived from the technique.

Ferrography

This technique is similar to spectrography but there are
two major exceptions. First, ferrography separates partic-
ulate contamination by using a magnetic ﬁeld rather than
burning a sample as in spectrographic analysis. Because
a magnetic ﬁeld is used to separate contaminants, this
technique is primarily limited to ferrous or magnetic
particles.

The second difference is that particulate contamination
larger than 10 microns can be separated and analyzed.
Normal ferrographic analysis will capture particles up to
100 microns and provides a better representation of the
total oil contamination than spectrographic techniques.

There are three major limitations with using tribology
analysis in a predictive maintenance program: equipment
costs, acquiring accurate oil samples and interpretation
of data.

The capital cost of spectrographic analysis instrumenta-
tion is normally too high to justify in-plant testing. Typical
cost for a microprocessor-based spectrographic system is
between $30,000 and $60,000. Because of this, most pre-
dictive maintenance programs rely on third party analysis
of oil samples.

Simple lubricating oil analysis by a testing laboratory
will range from about $20 to $50 per sample. Standard

Predictive maintenance techniques 50/875

analysis will normally include: viscosity, ﬂash point, total
insolubles, total acid number (TAN), total base number
(TBN), fuel content, and water content.

More detailed analysis, using spectrographic or
ferrographic techniques, that include metal scans, particle
distribution (size), and other data can range to well over
$150 per sample.

A more severe limiting factor with any method of
oil analysis is acquiring accurate samples of the true
lubricating oil inventory in a machine. Sampling is not
a matter of opening a port somewhere in the oil line and
catching a pint sample. Extreme care must be taken to
acquire samples that truly represent the lubricant that will
pass through the machine’s bearings. One recent example
is an attempt
to acquire oil samples from a bullgear
compressor. The lubricating oil ﬁlter had a sample port
on the clean, i.e. downstream, side. However, comparison
of samples taken at this point and one taken directly
from the compressor’s oil reservoir indicated that more
contaminates existed downstream from the ﬁlter than in
the reservoir. Which location actually represented the oil’s
condition? Neither sample was truly representative of the
oil condition. The oil ﬁlter had removed most of the
suspended solids, i.e. metals and other insolubles, and was
therefore not representative of the actual condition. The
reservoir sample was not representative since most of the
suspended solids had settled out in the sump.

Proper methods and frequency of sampling lubricating
oil are critical to all predictive maintenance techniques
that use lubricant samples. Sample points that are
consistent with the objective of detecting large particles
should be chosen. In a re-circulating system, samples
should be drawn as the lubricant returns to the reservoir
and before any ﬁltration. Do not draw oil from the bottom
of a sump where large quantities of material build up
over time. Return lines are preferable to reservoir as
the sample source, but good reservoir samples can be
obtained if careful, consistent practices are used. Even
equipment with high levels of ﬁltration can be effectively
monitored as long as samples are drawn before oil enters
the ﬁlters. Sampling techniques involve taking samples
under uniform operating conditions. Samples should not
be taken more than 30 minutes after the equipment has
been shut down.

Sample frequency is a function of the mean time
to failure from the onset of an abnormal wear mode
to catastrophic failure. For machines in critical service,
sampling every 25 hours of operation is appropriate.
However, for most industrial equipment in continuous
service, monthly sampling is adequate. The exceptions
to monthly sampling are machines with extreme loads. In
this instance, weekly sampling is recommended.

Understanding the meaning of analysis results is
perhaps the most serious limiting factor. Most often
results are expressed in terms that are totally alien to
plant engineers or technicians. Therefore, it is difﬁcult
for them to understand the true meaning, in terms of oil
or machine condition. A good background in quantitative
and qualitative chemistry is beneﬁcial. As a minimum,
plant staff will require training in basic chemistry and
speciﬁc instruction on interpreting tribology results.

50/876 Predictive Maintenance

50.3.4 Process parameters

systems
Many plants do not consider machine or
the maintenance responsibility.
efﬁciency as part of
is not operating within
However, machinery that
acceptable efﬁciency parameters
the
productivity of many plants. Therefore a comprehensive
predictive maintenance program should include routine
monitoring of process parameters.

severely limits

As an example of the importance of process parameters
monitoring, consider a process pump that may be
critical
to plant operation. Vibration-based predictive
maintenance will provide the mechanical condition of the
pump and infrared imaging will provide the condition
of the electric motor and bearings. Neither provides
any indication of the operating efﬁciency of the pump.
Therefore, the pump can be operating at less than 50 per
cent efﬁciency and the predictive maintenance program
would not detect the problem.

Process inefﬁciencies,

like the example, are often
the most serious limiting factor
in a plant. Their
negative impact on plant productivity and proﬁtability
is often greater than the total cost of the maintenance
operation. However, without
regular monitoring of
process parameters, many plants do not recognize this
unfortunate fact.

If your program included monitoring of the suction
and discharge pressures and amp load of the pump, then
you could determine the operating efﬁciency. The brake-
horsepower formula

Brake horsepower

D Flow (GPM) ð Speciﬁc gravity ð Total dynamic head (TDH)

3960 ð Efﬁciency

could be used to calculate operating efﬁciency of any
pump in the program. By measuring the suction and dis-
charge pressure, the total dynamic head (TDH) can be
determined. Using this data, the pump curve will pro-
vide the ﬂow and the amp load the horsepower. With this
measured data, the efﬁciency can be calculated.

Process parameters monitoring should include all
machinery and systems in the plant process that can
affect its production capacity. Typical systems include
heat exchangers, pumps, ﬁltration, boilers, fans, blowers,
and other critical systems.

Inclusion of process parameters in a predictive main-
tenance can be accomplished in two ways: manual or
microprocessor-based systems. However, both methods
will normally require installing instrumentation to mea-
sure the parameters that indicate the actual operating con-
dition of plant systems. Even though most plants have
installed pressure gages, thermometers and other instru-
ments that should provide the information required for
this type of program, many of them are no longer func-
tioning. Therefore including process parameters in your
program will require an initial capital cost to install cali-
brated instrumentation.

Data from the installed instrumentation can be
periodically recorded using either manual
logging or
with a microprocessor-based data logger. If the latter
is selected, many of the vibration-based, microprocessor

systems can also provide the means of acquiring process
data. This should be considered when selecting the
vibration monitoring system that will be used in your
program. In addition, some of the microprocessor-based
predictive maintenance systems provide the ability to
calculate unknown process variables. For example, they
can calculate the pump efﬁciency used in the example.
This ability to calculate unknowns based on measured
variables will enhance a total plant predictive maintenance
program without increasing the manual effort required.
In addition, some of these systems include non-intrusive
transducers that can measure temperatures, ﬂows and
the necessity of installing
other process data without
permanent
reduces the
initial cost of
including process parameters in your
program.

instrumentation. This further

50.3.5 Visual inspection

Regular visual inspection of the machinery and systems
in a plant is a necessary part of any predictive main-
tenance program. In many cases, visual inspection will
detect potential problems that will be missed using the
other predictive maintenance techniques.

Even with the predictive techniques discussed, many
potentially serious problems can remain undetected. Rou-
tine visual inspection of all critical plant systems will
augment the other techniques and insure that potential
problems are detected before serious damage can occur.
Most of the vibration-based predictive maintenance sys-
tems include the capability of recording visual obser-
vations as part of the routine data acquisition process.
Since the incremental costs of these visual observations
are small, this technique should be incorporated in all
predictive maintenance programs.

All equipment and systems in the plant should be visu-
ally inspected on a regular basis. The additional infor-
mation provided by visual inspection will augment the
predictive maintenance program regardless of the primary
techniques used.

50.3.6 Ultrasonic monitoring

This predictive maintenance technique uses principles
similar to vibration analysis. Both monitor the noise
generated by plant machinery or systems to determine
their actual operating condition.

Unlike vibration monitoring, ultrasonics monitors the
higher frequencies, i.e. ultrasound, produced by unique
dynamics in process systems or machines. The normal
monitoring range for vibration analysis is from less than
1 Hertz to 20,000 Hertz. Ultrasonics techniques monitor
the frequency range between 20,000 and 100 kHz.

The principal application for ultrasonic monitoring is
in leak detection. The turbulent ﬂow of liquids and gases
through a restricted oriﬁce, i.e. leak, will produce a high
frequency signature that can easily be identiﬁed using
ultrasonic techniques. Therefore, this technique is ideal
for detecting leaks in valves, steam traps, piping and other
process systems.

Two types of ultrasonic systems are available that can
be used for predictive maintenance: structural and air-
borne. Both provide fast, accurate diagnosis of abnor-
mal operation and leaks. Airborne ultrasonic detectors
can be used in either a scanning or contact mode. As
scanners, they are most often used to detect gas pres-
sure leaks. Because these instruments are sensitive only
to ultrasound, they are not limited to speciﬁc gases as are
most other gas leak detectors. In addition, they are often
used to locate various forms of vacuum leaks.

In the contact mode, a metal rod acts as a waveguide.
When it touches a surface, it is stimulated by the high
frequencies, ultrasound, on the opposite side of the sur-
face. This technique is used to locate turbulent ﬂow and
or ﬂow restriction in process piping.

Some of the ultrasonic systems include ultrasonic trans-
mitters that can be placed inside plant piping or vessels.
In this mode, ultrasonic monitors can be used to detect
areas of sonic penetration along the container’s surface.
This ultrasonic transmission method is useful in quick
checks of tank seams, hatches, seals, caulking, gaskets or
building wall joints.

Most of the ultrasonic monitoring systems are strictly
a scanner that does not provide any long-term trending or
storage of data. They are in effect a point-of-use instru-
ment that provides an indication of the overall amplitude
of noise within the bandwidth of the instrument. There-
fore, the cost of this type of instrument is relatively low.
Normal cost of ultrasonic instruments will vary from less
than $1,000 to about $8,000. Used strictly for leak detec-
tion, little training is required to utilize ultrasonic tech-
niques. The combination of low capital cost, minimum
training required to use the technique and potential impact
that leaks may have on plant availability provide a pos-
itive cost-beneﬁt for including ultrasonic techniques in a
total plant predictive maintenance program.

However, care should be exercised in applying this
technique in your program. Many ultrasonic systems are
sold as a bearing condition monitor. Even though the
natural frequencies of rolling element bearings will fall
within the bandwidth of ultrasonic instruments, this is
not a valid technique for determining the condition of
rolling element bearings. In a typical machine, many other
machine dynamics will also generate frequencies within
the bandwidth covered by an ultrasonic instrument. Gear
meshing frequencies, blade pass and other machine com-
ponents will also create energy or noise that cannot be
separate from the bearing frequencies monitored by this
type of instrument. The only reliable method of deter-
mining the condition of speciﬁc machine components,
including bearings, is vibration analysis. The use of ultra-
sonics to monitor bearing condition is not recommended.

Selecting a predictive maintenance system 50/877

are used as the means of conﬁrming failure modes iden-
tiﬁed by the predictive maintenance techniques identiﬁed
in this chapter.

Other techniques that can support predictive mainte-
nance include acoustic emissions, eddy-current, magnetic
particle, residual stress and most of the traditional nonde-
structive methods.

If you need speciﬁc information on the techniques that
are available, the American Society of Nondestructive
Testing (ANST) has published a complete set of hand-
books that provide a comprehensive database for most
nondestructive testing techniques.

50.4 Selecting a predictive maintenance
system
After developing the requirements for a comprehensive
predictive maintenance program, the next step is to select
the hardware and software system that will most cost-
effectively support your program. Since most plants will
require a combination of techniques, i.e. vibration, ther-
mography, tribology, etc., the system should be able to
provide support for all of the required techniques. Since a
single system that will support all of the predictive main-
tenance is not available, you must decide on the speciﬁc
techniques that must be used to support your program.
Some of the techniques may have to be eliminated to
enable the use of a single predictive maintenance sys-
tem. However, in most cases, two independent systems
will be required to support the monitoring requirements
in your plant.

Most plants can be cost-effectively monitored using a
microprocessor-based system designed to use vibration,
process parameters, visual inspection and limited infrared
temperature monitoring.

Plants with large populations of heat transfer systems
and electrical equipment will need to add a full thermal
imaging system in order to meet the total plant require-
ments for a full predictive maintenance program. Plant
with fewer systems that require full infrared imaging may
elect to contract this portion of the predictive maintenance
program. This will eliminate the need for an additional
system. A typical microprocessor-based system will con-
sist of four main components: a meter or data logger,
host computer, transducers, and a software program. Each
component is important, but the total capability must be
evaluated to get a system that will support a successful
program. The ﬁrst step in selecting the predictive mainte-
nance system that will be used in your plant is to develop
a list of the speciﬁc features or capabilities the system
must have to support your program. As a minimum, the
total system must have the following capabilities:

50.3.7 Other techniques

Numerous other nondestructive techniques can be used to
identify incipient problems in plant equipment or systems.
However, these techniques either do not provide a broad
enough application or are too expensive to support a pre-
dictive maintenance program. Therefore, these techniques

The premise of
User-friendly software and hardware
predictive maintenance is that existing plant staff must be
able to understand the operation of both the data logger
and software program. Since plant staff normally have lit-
tle, if any, computer or microprocessor background, the
system must use simple, straightforward operation of both
the data acquisition instrument and software. Complex

50/878 Predictive Maintenance

systems, even if they provide advanced diagnostic capa-
bilities, may not be accepted by plant staff and therefore
will not provide the basis for a long-term predictive main-
tenance program.

The object of using
Automated data acquisition
microprocessor-based systems is to remove any potential
for human error, reduce manpower and to automate as
much as possible the acquisition of vibration, process
and other data that will provide a viable predictive
maintenance database. Therefore the system must be able
to automatically select and set monitoring parameters
without user input. The ideal system would limit user
input to a single operation. However this is not totally
possible with today’s technology.

The amount
Automated data management and trending
of data required to support a total plant predictive main-
tenance program is massive and will continue to increase
over the life of the program. The system must be able
to store, trend and recall the data in multiple formats that
will enable the user to monitor, trend and analyse the con-
dition of all plant equipment included in the program. The
system should be able to provide long-term trend data for
the life of the program. Some of the microprocessor-based
systems limit trends to a maximum of 26 data sets and
will severely limit the decision-making capabilities of the
predictive maintenance staff.

Limiting trend data to a ﬁnite number of data sets eli-
minates the ability to determine the most cost-effective
point to replace a machine rather than let it continue in
operation.

Flexibility Not all machines or plant equipment are the
same, nor are the best methods of monitoring their condi-
tion. Therefore, the selected system must be able to sup-
port as many of the different techniques as possible. As a
minimum, the system should be capable of obtaining, stor-
ing, and presenting data acquired from all vibration and
process transducers and provide accurate interpretation of
the measured values in user-friendly terms. The mini-
mum requirement for vibration monitoring systems must
include the ability to acquire: ﬁlter broadband, select nar-
rowband, time traces and high-resolution signature data
using any commercially available transducer. Systems that
are limited to broadband monitoring or to a single type of
transducer cannot support the minimum requirements of
a predictive maintenance program.

The added capability of calculating unknown values
based on measured inputs will greatly enhance the system
capabilities. For example, the neither fouling factor nor
efﬁciency of a heat exchanger can be directly measured.
A predictive maintenance system that can automatically
calculate these values based on the measured ﬂow, pres-
sure and temperature data would enable the program to
automatically trend, log and alarm deviations in these
unknown, critical parameters.

The selected hardware and software must
Reliability
be proven in actual ﬁeld use to ensure it’s reliability. The

introduction of microprocessor-based predictive mainte-
nance systems is still relatively new and it is important
that you evaluate the ﬁeld history of a system before
purchase.

Ask for a users list and talk to the people who are
already using the systems. This is a sure way to evaluate
the strengths and weakness of a particular system before
you make a capital investment.

Accuracy Decisions on machine-train or plant system
condition will be made based on the data acquired and
reported by the predictive maintenance system. It must
be accurate and repeatable. Errors can be input by the
microprocessor and software as well as the operators.
The accuracy of commercially available predictive main-
tenance system varies. While most will provide at least
minimum acceptable accuracy, some are well below the
acceptable level.

It will be extremely difﬁcult for the typical plant user to
determine the level of accuracy of the various instruments
that are available for predictive maintenance. Vendor lit-
erature and salesmen will assure the potential user that
their system is the best, most accurate, etc. The best way
to separate fact from ﬁction is a comparison of the var-
ious systems in your plant. Most vendors will provide a
system on consignment for periods up to thirty days. This
will provide sufﬁcient time for your staff to evaluate each
of the potential systems before purchase.

Training and technical
Training and technical support
support is critical to the success of your predictive main-
tenance program. Regardless of the techniques or systems
selected, your staff will have to be trained. This training
will take two forms: system users training and applica-
tion knowledge for the speciﬁc techniques included in
your program. Few, if any, of the existing staff will have
the knowledge base required implementing the various
predictive maintenance techniques discussed in preced-
ing chapters. None will understand the operation of the
systems that are purchased to support your program.

Many of the predictive systems manufacturers are
strictly hardware and software oriented. Therefore, they
offer minimal
training and no application training or
technical support. Few plants can achieve minimum
training
beneﬁts from predictive maintenance without
and some degree of technical support. It
is therefore
imperative that the selected system or system vendors
provide a comprehensive support package that includes
both training and technical support.

Cost should not be the primary deciding
System cost
factor in system selection. The capabilities of the various
systems vary greatly and so does the cost. Care should be
taken to ensure a fair comparison of the total system capa-
bility and price is made before selection of your system.
For example, vibration-based systems are relatively
less
competitive
spread is
than $1,000 for a complete system. However,
the
capabilities of these systems are not comparable. A
system that provides minimum capability for vibration
monitoring will be about
the same price as one that

in price. The general

provides full vibration monitoring capability and provides
process parameter, visual
inspection and point-of-use
thermography.

The real cost of implementing and main-
Operating cost
taining a predictive maintenance program is not the initial
system cost. Rather it is the annual labor and overhead
costs associated with acquiring, storing, trending and ana-
lyzing the data required to determine the operating con-
dition of plant equipment. This is also the area where a
predictive maintenance system has the greatest variance
in capability. Systems that fully automate data acquisi-
tion, storing, etc. will provide the lowest operating costs.
Manual systems and many of the low-end microprocessor-
based systems require substantially more manpower to
accomplish the minimum objectives required by predic-
tive maintenance. The users list will again help you deter-
mine the long-term cost of the various systems. Most users
will share their experience, including a general indication
of labor cost.

The microprocessor

The data logger or microprocessor selected by your pre-
dictive maintenance program is critical to the success of
the program. There is a wide variety of systems on the
market that range from handheld overall value meters to
advanced analyzers that can provide an almost unlim-
ited amount of data. The key selection parameters for a
data acquisition instrument should include the expertise
required to operate, accuracy of data, type of data, and
manpower required to meet the program demands.

input

require user

One of the objectives
Expertise required to operate
for using microprocessor-based predictive maintenance
systems is to reduce the expertise required to acquire
error-free, useful vibration and process data from a
large population of machinery and systems within a
plant. The system should not
to
establish: maximum amplitude, measurement bandwidths,
ﬁlter settings, or allow free-form data input. All of
these functions force the user to be a trained analyst
and will
increase both the cost and time required to
routinely acquire data from plant equipment. Many of
the microprocessors on the market provide easy, menu-
driven measurement routes that lead the user through
the process of acquiring accurate data. The ideal system
should require a single key input to automatically acquire,
analyze, alarm and store all pertinent data from plant
equipment. This type of system would enable an unskilled
user to quickly and accurately acquire all of the data
required for predictive maintenance.

The microprocessor should be capa-
Accuracy of data
ble of automatically acquiring accurate, repeatable data
from equipment included in the program. The elimination
of user input on ﬁlter settings, bandwidths and other mea-
surement parameters would greatly improve the accuracy
of acquired data. The speciﬁc requirements that determine
data accuracy will vary depending on the type of data. For
example, a vibration instrument should be able to: average

Selecting a predictive maintenance system 50/879

data, reject spurious signals, auto-scale based on measured
energy, and prevent aliasing.

The basis of

the rotational

that we monitor

frequency-domain vibration analysis
assumes
frequency
components of a machine-train. If a single block of
data is acquired, non-repetitive or spurious data can be
introduced into the database. The microprocessor should
be able to acquire multiple blocks of data, average the
total and store the averaged value. This approach will
enable the data acquisition unit to automatically reject any
spurious data and provide reliable data for trending and
analysis. Systems that rely on a single block of data will
severely limit the accuracy and repeatability of acquired
data. They will also limit the beneﬁts that can be derived
from the program. The microprocessor should also have
electronic circuitry that automatically checks each data
set and block of data for accuracy and reject any spurious
data that may occur. Auto-rejection circuitry is available
in several of the commercially available systems. Coupled
with multiple block averaging, this auto-rejection circuitry
assures maximum accuracy and repeatability of acquired
data. A few of the microprocessor-based systems require
the user to input the maximum scale that is used to
acquire data. This will severely limit the accuracy of
data. Setting the scale too high will prevent acquisition
of factual machine data. A setting that is too low will
not capture any high-energy frequency components that
may be generated by the machine-train. Therefore, the
microprocessor should have auto-scaling capability to
ensure accurate data. Vibration data can be distorted by
high frequency components that fold-over into the lower
frequencies of a machine’s signature. Even though these
aliased frequency components appear real, they do not
exist in the machine. Low frequency components can also
distort the mid-range signature of a machine in the same
manner as high frequency. The microprocessor selected
for vibration should include a full range of anti-aliasing
ﬁlter to prevent the distortion of machine signatures. The
features illustrated in the example also apply to non-
vibration measurements. For example, pressure readings
require the averaging capability to prevent spurious
readings. Slight ﬂuctuations in line or vessel pressure
are normal in most plant systems. Without the averaging
capability, the microprocessor cannot acquire an accurate
reading of the true system pressure.

The microprocessor should
Alert and alarm limits
include the ability to automatically alert
the user to
changes in machine, equipment or system condition. Most
of the predictive maintenance techniques rely on a change
in the operating condition of plant equipment to identify
an incipient problem. Therefore, the system should be able
to analyze data and report any change in the monitoring
parameters that were established as part of the database
development.

Predictive maintenance systems use two methods of
detecting a change in the operating condition of plant
equipment: static and dynamic. Static alert and alarm
limits are pre-selected thresholds that are downloaded
into the microprocessor. If the measurement parameters
exceed the pre-set
limit, an alarm is displayed. This

50/880 Predictive Maintenance

type of monitoring does not consider the rate of change
or historical trends of a machine and therefore cannot
anticipate when the alarm will be reached.

The second method uses dynamic limits that monitor
the rate of change in the measurement parameters. This
type of monitoring can detect minor deviations in the rate
that a machine or system is degrading and anticipate when
an alarm will be reached. The use of dynamic limits will
greatly enhance the automatic diagnostic capabilities of
a predictive maintenance system and reduce the manual
effort required to gain maximum beneﬁts.

The microprocessor must be able to
Data storage
acquire and store large amounts of data. The memory
capacity of the various predictive maintenance systems
varies. As a minimum, the system must be able to store
a full eight hours of data before transferring it to the host
computer. The actual memory requirements will depend
on the type of data acquired. For example, a system used
to acquire vibration data would need enough memory to
store about 1000 overall reading or 400 full signatures.
Process monitoring would require a minimum of 1000
readings to meet the minimum requirements.

The data acquisition unit will not be
Data transfer
used for long-term data storage. Therefore, it must be
able to reliability transfer data into the host computer.
The actual time required to transfer the microprocessor’s
data into the host computer is the only non-productive
time of the data acquisition unit. It cannot be used for
acquiring additional data during the data transfer oper-
ation. Therefore, the transfer time should be kept to a
minimum. Most of the available systems use an RS 232
communications protocol that will allow data transfer at
rates of up to 19,200 baud. The time required to dump
the full memory of a typical microprocessor can be 30
minutes or more.

Some of the systems have incorporated an indepen-
dent method of transferring data that eliminates the dead
time altogether. These systems transfer stored data from
the data logger into a battery-backed memory bypassing
the RS 232 link. Using this technique, data can be trans-
ferred at more than 350,000 baud and will reduce the
non-productive time to a few minutes.

The microprocessor should also be able to support
modem communication with remote computers. This
feature will enable multiple plant operation and direct
access to third party diagnostic and analysis support.
Data can be transferred anywhere in the world using this
technique. Not all predictive maintenance systems use a
true RS 232 communications protocol or support modem
communications. These systems can severely limit the
capabilities of your program. The various predictive
maintenance techniques will add other speciﬁcations for
an acceptable data acquisition unit.

The host computer

The host computer provides all of the data management,
storage, report generation, and analysis capabilities of the
predictive maintenance program. Therefore, care should

be exercised during the selection process. This is espe-
cially true if multiple technologies will be used within the
predictive maintenance program. Each predictive mainte-
nance system will have a unique host computer speciﬁca-
tion that will include: hardware conﬁguration, computer
operating system, hard disk memory requirements and
many others. This can become a serious if not catastrophic
problem. You may ﬁnd that one system requires a special
printer that is not compatible with other programs to pro-
vide hard copies of reports or graphic data. One program
may be compatible with PC-DOS, while another requires
a totally different operating program.

Therefore, you should develop a complete computer
speciﬁcation sheet for each of the predictive maintenance
systems that will be used. A comparison of the list will
provide a compatible computer conﬁguration that will
support each of the techniques. If this is not possible,
you may have to reconsider your choice of techniques.

Computers,

like plant equipment,

fail. Therefore,
is
include:

the use of a commercially available computer
recommended. The
availability of repair parts and local vendor support.

considerations

critical

Most of the individual predictive maintenance tech-
niques will not require a dedicated computer. Therefore
there is usually sufﬁcient storage and computing capacity
to handle several, if not all, of the required techniques
and still leave room for other support programs, i.e. word
processing, database management, etc. Use of commer-
cially available PCs provides the user with the option
of including these auxiliary programs in the host com-
puter. The actual conﬁguration of the host computer will
be dependent on the speciﬁc requirement of the predictive
maintenance techniques that will be used.

The software

The software program provided with each predictive
maintenance system is the heart of a successful program.
It is also the hardest to evaluate before purchase. The
methodology used by vendors of predictive maintenance
systems varies greatly. Many appear to have all of the
capabilities required to meet
the demands of a total
plant predictive maintenance program. However on close
inspection, usually after purchase, they are found to be
lacking.

Software is also the biggest potential limiting factor of
a program. Even though all vendors use some form of
formal computer language, i.e. FORTRAN, Cobol, basic,
etc., they are normally not interchangeable with other pro-
grams. The apparently simple task of having one computer
program communicate with another can often be impossi-
ble. This lack of compatibility between various computer
programs prohibits transferring a predictive maintenance
database from one vendor’s system into a system man-
ufactured by another vendor. The result is that once a
predictive maintenance program is started, a plant cannot
change to another system without losing the data already
developed in the initial program.

As a minimum the software program should provide:
automatic database management, automatic trending, auto-
matic report generation and simpliﬁed diagnostics. As in

the case of the microprocessor used to acquire data, the
software must be user-friendly.

compatible units and display changes in machine param-
eters, i.e. vibration, process, etc.

Establishing a predictive maintenance program 50/881

The software program should
User-friendly operation
be menu-driven with clear on-line user instructions. The
program should protect the user form distorting or deleting
stored data. Some of the predictive maintenance systems
are written in DBASE software shells. Even though these
programs provide a knowledgeable user with the ability
to modify or customize the structure of the program, i.e.
report formats, etc., they also provide the means to distort
or destroy stored data. A single key entry can destroy
years of stored data. Protection should be built into the
program to limit the user’s ability to modify or delete data
and to prevent accidental data base damage.

The program should have a clear, plain language user’s
manual that provides the logic and speciﬁc instructions
required to set up and use the program.

The software program should be
Automatic trending
capable of automatically storing all acquired data and
updating the trends of all variables. This capability should
include multiple parameters not just a broadband or single
variable. This will enable the user to display trends of all
variables that affect plant operations.

Report generation will be
Automatic report generation
an important part of the predictive maintenance program.
Maximum ﬂexibility in format and detail is important to
program success. The system should be able to automat-
ically generate reports a multiple levels of detail. As a
minimum, the system should be able to report:
ž A listing of machine-trains or other plant equipment
that have exceeded or are projected to exceed one or
more alarm limits. The report should also provide a
projection to probable failure based on the historical
data and last measurement.
ž A listing of missed measurement points, machines
overdue for monitoring and other program management
information. These reports act as reminders to ensure
that the program is maintained properly.

ž A listing of visual observations. Most of

the
microprocessor-based systems support visual observa-
tions as part of their approach to predictive mainte-
nance. This report provides hard copies of the visual
observations as well as maintaining the information in
the computer’s database.
ž Equipment history reports should also be available.
These reports provide long-term data on the condition
of plant equipment and are valuable for analysis.

Identiﬁcation of speciﬁc failure
Simpliﬁed diagnostics
modes of plant equipment requires manual analysis of data
stored in the computer’s memory. The software program
should be able to display, modify and compare stored
data in a manner that simpliﬁes the analysis of the actual
operating condition of the equipment.

As a minimum, the program should be able to directly
compare data from similar machines, normalize data into

Transducers

The ﬁnal portion of a predictive maintenance system is
the transducer that will be used to acquire data from plant
equipment. Since we have assumed that a microprocessor-
based system will be used, we will limit this discussion
to those sensors that can be used with this type of system.
Acquiring accurate vibration and process data will
require several types of transducers. Therefore, the system
must be able to accept input from as many different types
of transducers as possible. Any limitation of compatible
transducers can become a serious limiting factor. This
should eliminate systems that will accept inputs from a
single type of transducer. Other systems are limited to a
relatively small range of transducers that will also prohibit
maximum utilization of the system. Selection of the
speciﬁc transducers required to monitor the mechanical
condition, i.e. vibration, and process parameters, i.e. ﬂow,
pressure, etc., will also deserve special consideration and
will be discussed latter.

50.5 Establishing a predictive
maintenance program
The decision to establish a predictive maintenance
management program is the ﬁrst step toward controlling
maintenance costs and improving process efﬁciency
in your plant. Now what do you do? Numerous
predictive maintenance programs can serve as models
for implementing a successful predictive maintenance
program. Unfortunately, more were aborted within the
ﬁrst
three years because a clear set of goals and
objectives were not established before the program
was implemented. Implementing a total plant predictive
maintenance program is expensive. In addition to the
initial capital cost, there is a substantial recurring labor
cost required to maintain the program.

To be successful, a predictive maintenance program
must be able to quantify the cost-beneﬁt generated by the
program. This can be achieved if the program is properly
established, uses the proper predictive maintenance tech-
niques and has measurable beneﬁts. The amount of effort
expended to initially establish the program plant is directly
proportional to its success or failure. Proper implementa-
tion of a predictive maintenance program must include
the items listed in Sections 50.5.1–50.5.5.

50.5.1 Goals, objectives and beneﬁts

Constructive actions issue from well-established purpose.
It is important that the goals and objectives of a predictive
maintenance program be fully developed and adopted by
the personnel who perform the program and upper man-
agement of the plant. A predictive maintenance program is
not an excuse to buy sophisticated, expensive equipment.
Neither is the purpose of the program to keep a number of
people busy measuring and reviewing data from the var-
ious machines, equipment and systems within the plant.

50/882 Predictive Maintenance

The purpose of predictive maintenance is to minimize
unscheduled equipment failures, maintenance costs and
lost production. It is also intended to improve the pro-
duction efﬁciency and product quality in the plant. This
is accomplished by regular monitoring of the mechani-
cal condition, machine and process efﬁciencies and other
parameters that deﬁne the operating condition of the plant.
Using the data acquired from critical plant equipment,
incipient problems are identiﬁed and corrective actions
taken to improve the reliability, availability and produc-
tivity of the plant.

Speciﬁc goals and objectives will vary from plant to
plant. However, we will provide an example that will
illustrate the process. Before goals and objectives can be
developed for your plant, you must determine the existing
maintenance costs and other parameters that will estab-
lish a reference or baseline dataset. Since most plants do
not track the true cost of maintenance, this may be the
most difﬁcult part of establishing a predictive maintenance
program.

As a minimum, your baseline data set should include
the labor, overhead, overtime premiums and other pay-
roll costs of the maintenance department. It should also
include all maintenance related contract services, exclud-
ing janitorial, and the total costs of spare parts invento-
ries. The baseline should also include the percentage of
unscheduled maintenance repairs versus scheduled; actual
repair costs on critical plant equipment; and the annual
availability of the plant.

This baseline should include the incremental cost for
production created by catastrophic machine failures and
other parameters. If they are available or can be obtained,
they will help greatly in establishing a valid baseline.

The long-term objectives of a predictive maintenance

program are to:
ž Eliminate un-necessary maintenance
ž Reduce lost production caused by failures
ž Reduce repair parts inventory
ž Increase process efﬁciency
ž Improve product quality
ž Extend operating life of plant systems
ž Increase production capacity
ž Reduce overall maintenance costs
ž Increase overall proﬁts.
However just stating these objectives will not make it hap-
pen nor will it provide the means of measuring the success
of the program. Establish speciﬁc objectives, i.e. reduce
un-scheduled maintenance by 20 per cent, or increase pro-
duction capacity by 15 per cent. In addition to quantifying
the expected goals, deﬁne the methods that will be used
to accomplish each objective and the means that can be
used to measure the actual results.

Management support

Implementing a predictive maintenance program will
require an investment
in both capital equipment and
manpower. If a program is to get started and survive
to accomplish its intended goals, management must
be willing to commit
the necessary resources. They

investment

must also insist on the adoption of vital record-keeping
and information exchange procedures that are critical
to program success and are outside the control of
the maintenance department. In most aborted programs,
management committed to the initial
for
capital equipment but did not invest the resources required
for training, consulting support and in-house manpower
that are essential
to success. A number of programs
have been aborted during the time between 18 and 24
months following implementation. They were not aborted
because the program failed to achieve the desired results.
They failed because upper management did not clearly
understand how the program works. During the ﬁrst 12
months, most predictive maintenance programs identify
numerous problems in plant machinery and systems.
Therefore, the reports and recommendations for corrective
actions generated by the predictive maintenance group are
highly visible. After the initial 12 to 18 months, most of
the serious plant problems have been resolved and the
reports begin to show little need for corrective actions.
Without a clear understanding of this normal cycle and the
means of quantifying the achievements of the predictive
maintenance program, upper management often concludes
that the program is not providing sufﬁcient beneﬁts to
justify the continued investment in manpower.

Dedicated and accountable personnel

All successful programs are built around a full time pre-
dictive maintenance team. Some of these teams may cover
multiple plants and some monitor only one. However,
every successful program has this dedicated team that can
concentrate their full attention to achieving the objectives
established for the program. Even though a few successful
programs have been structured around part-time person-
nel, this approach cannot be recommended. All too often,
the part-time personnel will not or cannot maintain the
monitoring and analysis frequency that is critical to a
successful program.

The accountability expected of the predictive mainte-
nance group is another factor that is critical to program
effectiveness. If measures of program effectiveness are not
established, neither management nor program personnel
can determine if the program’s potential is being achieved.

Efﬁcient data collection and analysis procedures

Efﬁcient procedures can be established if adequate instru-
mentation is available and the monitoring tasks are struc-
tured to emphasize program goals. A well-planned program
should not be structured so that all machines and equip-
ment in the plant receive the same scrutiny. Typical predic-
tive maintenance programs will monitor from 50 to 500
machine-trains in a given plant. Obviously some of the
machine-trains are more critical to the continued, efﬁcient
operation of the plant than others. The predictive main-
tenance program should be set up with this in mind and
concentrate the program’s efforts in the areas that will
provide maximum results. The use of microprocessor and
personal computer-based predictive maintenance systems
will greatly improve the data collection and data manage-
ment functions required for a successful program. They can

also provide efﬁcient data analysis. However procedures
that deﬁne the methods, schedule and other parameter of
data acquisition, analysis and report generation must be
included in the program deﬁnition.

Viable database

The methods and systems that you choose for your pro-
gram and the initial program development will largely
determine the success or failure of predictive maintenance
in your plant.

Proper implementation of a predictive maintenance pro-
gram is not easy. It will require a great deal of thought
and perhaps for the ﬁrst time a complete understanding
of the operation of the various systems and machinery in
your plant.

The initial database development required to success-
fully implement a predictive maintenance program will
require man-months of effort. The extensive labor required
to properly establish a predictive database often results in
either a poor or incomplete database. In some cases, the
program is discontinued because of staff limitations. If
the extensive labor required establishing a database is not
available in-house, there are consultants available that will
provide the knowledge and labor required to accomplish
this task.

The ideal situation would be to have the predictive
systems vendor establish a viable database as part of the
initial capital equipment purchase. This service is offered
by a few of the systems vendors. Unfortunately, many
predictive maintenance programs have failed because
these important ﬁrst critical steps were omitted or
ignored. There are a variety of technologies and predictive
maintenance systems that can be beneﬁcial. How do you
decide which method and system to use?

A vibration-based predictive maintenance program is
the most difﬁcult to properly establish and will require
much more effort than any of the other techniques. It will
also provide the most return on investment. Too many of
the vibration-based programs fail to use the full capabil-
ity of the predictive maintenance tool. They ignore the
automatic diagnostic power that is built into most of the
microprocessor-based systems and rely instead on manual
interpretation of all acquired data.

The ﬁrst step is to determine the types of plant equip-
ment and systems that are to be included in your pro-
gram. A plant survey of your process equipment should
be developed that lists every critical component within
the plant and its impact on both production capacity and
maintenance costs. A plant process layout is invaluable
during this phase of program development. It is very easy
to omit critical machines or components during the audit.
Therefore, care should be taken to ensure that all compo-
nents that can limit production capacity are included in
your list.

The listing of plant equipment should be ordered into
the following classes depending on their impact on pro-
duction capacity or maintenance cost: essential, critical,
serious, others.

Class I or essential machinery or equipment must be
on-line for continued plant operation. Loss of any one

Establishing a predictive maintenance program 50/883

of these components will result in a plant outage and
total loss of production. Plant equipment that has exces-
sive repair costs or repair parts lead-time should also be
included in the essential classiﬁcation.

Class II or critical machinery would severely limit
production capacity. As a rule-of-thumb, loss of critical
machinery would reduce production capacity by 30 per
cent or more. Also included in the critical classiﬁcation
are machines or systems with chronic maintenance
histories or that have high repair or replacement costs.

Class III or serious machinery include major plant
equipment
that do not have a dramatic impact on
production but that contribute to maintenance costs. An
example of the serious classiﬁcation would be a redundant
system. Since the inline spare could maintain production,
loss of one component would not affect production.
However,
impact on
maintenance cost.

the failure would have a direct

other

include

Class IV machinery would

plant
equipment that has a proven history of impacting either
production or maintenance costs. All equipment in this
classiﬁcation must be evaluated to determine whether
routine monitoring is cost-effective.
In some cases,
replacement costs are lower than the annual costs required
to monitor machinery in this classiﬁcation.

The completed list should include every machine, sys-
tem or other plant equipment that has or could have a
serious impact on the availability and process efﬁciency
of your plant.

The next step is to determine the best method or tech-
nique for cost-effectively monitoring the operating condi-
tion of each item on the list. To select the best methods
for regular monitoring, you should consider the dynamics
of operation and normal failure modes of each machine
or system to be included in the program.

A clear understanding of the operating characteristics
and failure modes will provide the answer to which pre-
dictive maintenance method should be used.

Most predictive maintenance programs will use vibra-
tion monitoring as the principal technique. The inclusion
of visual inspection, process parameters, ultrasonics and
limited thermographic techniques should also be added
to the in-house program. The initial cost of systems and
advanced training required by full thermographic and tri-
bology techniques prohibit their inclusion into in-house
programs. Plants that require these techniques normally
rely on outside contractors to provide the instrumentation
and expertise required to provide these monitoring and
diagnostic techniques.

50.5.2 Database development

The next
step required to establish a predictive
maintenance program is the creation of a comprehensive
database.

Establishing data acquisition frequency

During the implementation stage of a predictive mainte-
nance program, all classes of machinery should be moni-
tored to establish a valid baseline data set. Full vibration

50/884 Predictive Maintenance

signatures should be acquired to verify the accuracy of the
database setup and determine the initial operating condi-
tion of the machinery.

Since a comprehensive program will include trending
and projected time-to-failure, multiple readings are
required on all machinery to provide sufﬁcient data for
the microprocessor to develop trend statistics. Normally
during this phase, measurements are acquired every
two weeks.

After the initial or baseline of the machinery,

the
frequency of data collection will vary depending on
the classiﬁcation of the machine-trains. Class I machines
should be monitored on a two to three week cycle; Class II
on a three to four week cycle; Class III on a four to six
week cycle and Class IV on a six to ten week cycle.
This frequency can, and should, be adjusted for the actual
condition of speciﬁc machine-trains. If the rate of change
of a speciﬁc machine indicates rapid degradation, you
should either repair it or at least increase the monitoring
frequency to prevent catastrophic failure.

The recommended data acquisition frequencies are the
maximum that will ensure prevention of most catastrophic
failures. Less frequency monitoring will limit the abil-
ity of the program to detect and prevent un-scheduled
machine outages.

To augment the vibration-based program, you should
also schedule the non-vibration tasks. Bearing cap, point-
of-use infrared measurements, visual
inspections and
process parameters monitoring should be conducted in
conjunction with the vibration data acquisition.

Full infrared imaging or scanning on the equipment
included in the vibration-monitoring program should be
conducted on a quarterly basis. In addition, full thermal
scanning of critical electrical equipment, i.e. switch gear,
circuit breakers, etc., and all heat transfer systems, i.e. heat
exchangers, condensers, process piping, etc., that are not
in the vibration program should be conducted quarterly.
Lubricating oil samples from all equipment included in
the program should be taken on a monthly basis. As a
minimum, a full spectrographic analysis should be con-
ducted on these samples. Wear particle or other analysis
techniques should be made on an ‘as-needed’ basis.

Setting up analysis parameters

The next step in establishing the program’s database is to
set up the analysis parameters that will be used to rou-
tinely monitor plant equipment. Each of these parameters
will be based on the speciﬁc machine-train requirements
that we have just developed.

Normally for non-mechanical equipment the analysis
parameter set will consist of the calculated values derived
from measuring the thermal proﬁle or process parameters.
Each classiﬁcation of equipment or system will have its
own unique analysis parameter set.

Boundaries for signature analysis

All vibration monitoring systems have ﬁnite limits on the
resolution, or ability to graphically display the unique fre-
quency components that make up a machine’s vibration
signature. The upper limit (FMAX) for signature analysis

should be set high enough to capture and display enough
data so that the analyst can determine the operating con-
dition of the machine-train but no higher.

To determine the impact of resolution, calculate the
display capabilities of your system. For example, a
vibration signature with a maximum frequency (FMAX)
of 1000 Hertz taken with an instrument capable of 400
lines of resolution would result in a display in which each
displayed line will be equal to 2.5 Hertz or 150 rpm. Any
frequencies that fall between 2.5 and 5.0, i.e. the next
displayed line, would be lost.

Deﬁne alert and alarm limits

The method of establishing and using alert/alarm limits
varies depending on the particular vibration monitoring
system that you select. Normally these systems will use
either static or dynamic limits to monitor, trend and alarm
measured vibration. We will not attempt to deﬁne the dif-
ferent dynamic methods of monitoring vibration severity
in this book. We will however provide a guideline for the
maximum limits that should be considered acceptable for
most plant mechanical equipment.

The systems that use dynamic alert/alarm limits base
their logic on the rate of change of vibration amplitude.
Any change in the vibration amplitude is a direct indica-
tion that there is a corresponding change in the machine’s
mechanical condition. However, there should be a maxi-
mum acceptable limit, i.e. absolute fault.

The accepted severity limit for casing vibration is 0.628
ips-peak (velocity). This is an un-ﬁltered broadband value
and normally represents a bandwidth between 10 and
10,000 Hertz. This value can be used to establish the abso-
lute fault or maximum vibration amplitude for broadband
measurement on most plant machinery. The exception
would be machines with running speeds below 1200 rpm
or above 3600 rpm.

Narrowband limits, i.e. discrete bandwidth within the
broadband, can be established using the following guide-
line. Normally 60 to 70 per cent of the total vibration
energy will occur at the true running speed of the machine.
Therefore, the absolute fault limit for a narrowband estab-
lished to monitor the true running speed would be 0.42
ips-peak. This value can also be used for any narrow-
bands established to monitor frequencies below the true
running speed.

Absolute fault limits for narrowbands established to
monitor frequencies above running speed can be ratioed
using the 0.42 ips-peak limit established for the true run-
ning speed. For example, the absolute fault limit for a
narrowband created to monitor the bladepassing frequency
of fan with 10 blades would be set at 0.042 or 0.42/10.

Narrowband designed to monitor high-speed compo-
nents, i.e. above 1000 Hertz, should have an absolute fault
of 3.0 g’s-peak (acceleration).

Rolling element bearings, based on factor recommenda-
tions, have an absolute fault limit of 0.01 ips-peak. Sleeve
or ﬂuid-ﬁlm bearings should be watched closely. If the
fractional components that identify oil whip or whirl are
present at any level, the bearing is subject to damage and
the problem should be corrected.

Non-mechanical equipment and systems will normally
have an absolute fault limit that speciﬁes the maximum
recommended level for continued operation. Equipment
or systems vendors will, in most cases, be able to provide
this information.

Transducers

The type of transducers and data acquisition techniques
that you will use for the program is the ﬁnal critical factor
that can determine the success or failure of your pro-
gram. Their accuracy, proper application and mounting
will determine whether valid data will be collected.

The optimum predictive maintenance program devel-
oped in earlier chapters is predicated on vibration analysis
as the principle technique for the program. It is also the
most sensitive to problems created by the use of the wrong
transducer or mounting technique.

Three basic types of vibration transducers can be
used for monitoring the mechanical condition of plant
machinery: displacement probe, velocity transducer and
accelerometers. Each has speciﬁc applications within the
plant. Each also has limitations.

Displacement probes

Displacement or eddy-current probes are designed to
measure the actual movement,
i.e. displacement, of
a machine’s shaft
relative to the probe. Therefore,
the displacement probe must be rigidly mounted to a
stationary structure to gain accurate, repeatable data.

Permanently mounted displacement probes will pro-
vide the most accurate data on machines with a low rotor
weight, relative to the casing and support structure. Tur-
bines, large process compressors, and other plant equip-
ment should have displacement transducers permanently
mounted at key measurement locations to acquire data for
the program.

The useful frequency range for displacement probes is
from 10 to 1000 Hertz or 600 to 60,000 rpm. Frequency
components below or above this range will be distorted
and therefore unreliable for determining machine con-
dition.

The major limitation with displacement or proximity
probes is cost. The typical cost for installing a single
probe, including a power supply, signal conditioning, etc.,
will average $1,000. If each machine in your program
requires ten measurements, the cost per machine will be
about $10,000. Using displacement transducers for all
plant machinery will dramatically increase the initial cost
of the program.

Displacement data is normally recorded in terms of
mils or 0.001 inch, peak-to-peak. This valve expresses
the maximum deﬂection or displacement off the true cen-
terline of a machine’s shaft.

Velocity transducers

Velocity transducers are an electro-mechanical sensor
designed to monitor casing or relative vibration. Unlike
the displacement probe, velocity transducers measure the
rate of displacement not actual movement. Velocity data is

Establishing a predictive maintenance program 50/885

normally expressed in terms of ips or inches-per-second
peak and is perhaps the best method of expressing the
energy created by machine vibration.

Velocity transducers, like displacement probes, have an
effective frequency range of about 10 to 1000 Hertz. They
should not be used to monitor frequencies below or above
this range.

The major limitation of velocity transducers is their sen-
sitivity to mechanical and thermal damage. Normal plant
use can cause a loss of calibration and therefore a strict
re-calibration program must be used to prevent distortion
of data. As a minimum, velocity transducers should be
re-calibrated at least every six months. Even with peri-
odic re-calibration, programs using velocity transducers
are prone to bad or distorted data that results from loss of
calibration.

Accelerometers

Accelerometers use a piezoelectric crystal
mechanical energy into electrical signals.

to convert

Data acquired with this type of transducers are relative
vibration, not actual displacement, and are expressed in
terms of g’s or inches/second/second. Acceleration is per-
haps the best method of determining the force created by
machine vibration.

Accelerometers are susceptible to thermal damage. If
sufﬁcient heat is allowed to radiate into the crystal it
can be damaged or destroyed. However since the data
acquisition time, using temporary mounting techniques, is
relatively short, i.e. less than thirty seconds, thermal dam-
age is rare. Accelerometers do not require a re-calibration
program to insure accuracy.

The effective range of general-purpose accelerometers
from about 1 Hertz to 10,000 Hertz. Ultrasonic
frequencies up to

is
accelerometers are available for
1 MHertz.

Machine data above 1,000 Hertz or 60,000 rpm should

be taken and analyzed in acceleration or g’s.

Mounting techniques

Predictive maintenance programs using vibration analy-
sis must have accurate, repeatable data to determine the
operating condition of plant machinery. In addition to the
transducer, three factors will affect data quality: measure-
ment point, orientation and compressive load.

Key measurement point locations and orientation to
the machine’s shaft were selected as part of the database
setup to provide the best possible detection of incipient
machine-train problems. Deviation from the exact point
or orientation will affect the accuracy of acquired data.
Therefore, it is important that every measurement through-
out the life of the program be acquired at exactly the same
point and orientation. In addition, the compressive load or
downward force applied to the transducer should also be
the same for each measurement.

For accuracy of data, a direct mechanical link to the
machine’s casing or bearing cap is necessary. Slight devi-
ations in this load will induce errors in the amplitude of
vibration and may create false frequency components that
have nothing to do with the machine.

50/886 Predictive Maintenance

The best method of ensuring these three factors are the
same each time is to hard mount vibration transducers
to the selected measurement points. This will guaran-
tee accuracy and repeatability of acquired data. It will
also increase the initial cost of the program. The average
cost of installing a general-purpose accelerometer will be
about $300 per measurement point or $3000 for a typical
machine-train.

To

the

cost

capital

eliminate

associated with
permanently mounting transducers a well-designed quick-
disconnect mounting can be used. This mounting
technique permanently mounts a quick-disconnect stud,
cost of
with an average
each
location. A mating sleeve, built
measurement point
into a general-purpose accelerometer,
is then used to
acquire accurate, repeatable data. A well-designed quick-
disconnect mounting technique will provide the same
accuracy and repeatability as the permanent mounting
technique but at a much lower cost.

than $5,

less

at

The third mounting technique that can be used is a mag-
netic mount. For general purpose use, below 1000 Hertz, a
transducer can be used in conjunction with a magnetic base.
Even though the transducer/magnet assembly will have a
resonant frequency that may provide some distortion to
acquired data, this technique can be used with marginal
success. Since the magnet can be placed any where on the
machine, it will not guarantee that the exact location and
orientation is maintained on each measurement.

The ﬁnal method used by some plants to acquire vibra-
tion data is hand held transducers. This approach is not
recommended if any other method can be used. Hand held
transducers will not provide the accuracy and repeatability
required to gain maximum beneﬁt from a predictive main-
tenance program. If this technique must be used, extreme
care should be exercised to ensure that the exact point,
orientation and compressive load is used for every mea-
surement point.

50.5.3 Getting started

The steps we have deﬁned will provide the guideline for
establishing a predictive maintenance database. The only
steps remaining to get the program started are to establish
measurement routes and take the initial or baseline mea-
surements. Remember, the predictive maintenance system
will need multiple data sets to develop trends on each
machine. With this database, you will be able to moni-
tor the critical machinery in your plant for degradation
and begin to achieve the beneﬁts that predictive mainte-
nance can provide. The actual steps required to implement
a database will depend on the speciﬁc predictive main-
tenance system selected for your program. The system
vendor should provide the training and technical support
required to properly develop the database with the infor-
mation developed in the preceding sections.

Training

Successful completion of this critical phase of creating a
total plant predictive maintenance program will require
a ﬁrm knowledge of the operating dynamics of plant

machinery,
systems and equipment. Normally some
if not all of this knowledge exists within the plant
staff. However, the knowledge may not be within the
staff selected to implement and maintain the predictive
maintenance program.

In addition, a good working knowledge of the pre-
dictive maintenance techniques and systems that will be
included in the program is necessary. This knowledge in
all probability will not exist within existing plant staff.
Therefore training, before attempting to establish a pro-
gram, is strongly recommended. The minimum recom-
mended level of training includes: user’s training for each
predictive maintenance system that will be used, a course
on machine dynamics, and a basic theory course on each
of the techniques, i.e. vibration, infrared, etc., that will
be used.

In some cases, the systems vendors can provide all of
these courses. If not, there a number of companies and
professional organizations that offer courses on most non-
destructive testing techniques.

Technical support

The labor and knowledge required to properly establish
a predictive maintenance program is often too much for
plant staff to handle. To overcome this problem, the initial
responsibility for creating a viable, total plant program can
be contracted to a company that specializes in area.

There are companies that provide full consulting and
engineering services directed speciﬁcally toward predic-
tive maintenance. These companies have the knowledge
required and years of experience. They can provide all of
the labor required to fully implement a full plant program
and normally can reduce total time required to get the
program up and running.

Caution should be used in selecting a contractor to pro-
vide this startup service. Check references very carefully.

50.5.4 Maintaining the program

The labor-intensive part of predictive maintenance
management
is complete. A viable program has been
established, the database is complete and you have begun
to monitor the operating condition of your critical plant
equipment. Now what?

Most programs stop right here. The predictive main-
tenance team does not continue their efforts to get the
maximum beneﬁts that predictive maintenance can pro-
vide. Instead, they rely on trending, comparative analysis
or in the case of vibration-based programs simpliﬁed sig-
nature analysis to maintain the operating condition of their
plant. This is not enough to gain the maximum beneﬁts
from a predictive maintenance program.

In this section, we will discuss the methods that can
be used to ensure that you gain the maximum beneﬁts
from your program and at the same time improve the
probability that the program will continue.

Trending techniques

The database that was established for your program
included broadband, narrowband and full
signature

vibration data.
It also included process parameters,
bearing cap temperatures, lubricating oil analysis, thermal
imaging and other critical monitoring parameters. What
do we do with this data?

The ﬁrst method required to monitor the operating con-
dition of plant equipment is to trend the relative condition
over time. Most of the microprocessor-based systems will
provide the means of automatically storing and recalling
vibration and process parameters trend data for analysis
or hard copies for reports. They will also automatically
prepare and print numerous reports that quantify the oper-
ating condition at a speciﬁc point in time. A few will
automatically print trend reports that quantify the change
over a selected time frame. All of this is great, but what
does it mean?

Monitoring the trends of a machine-train or process sys-
tem will provide the ability to prevent most catastrophic
failures. The trend is similar to the bathtub curve used to
schedule preventive maintenance. The difference between
the preventive and predictive bathtub curve is that the lat-
ter is based on the actual condition of the equipment, not
a statistical average.

The disadvantage of relying on trending as the only
means of maintaining a predictive maintenance program
is that it will not tell you the reason a machine is degrad-
ing. One good example of this weakness is an aluminum
foundry that relied strictly on trending to maintain their
predictive maintenance program. In the foundry are 36
cantilevered fans that are critical to plant operation. The
rolling element bearings in each of these fans are changed
on average every six months. By monitoring the trends
provided by their predictive maintenance program, they
can adjust the bearing change out schedule based on the
actual condition of the bearings in a speciﬁc fan. Over
a two-year period, there were no catastrophic failures or
loss of production that resulted from the fans being out
of service.

Did the predictive maintenance program work? In their
terms, the program was a total success. However, the
normal bearing life should have been much greater than
six months. Something in the fan or process created the
reduction in average bearing life. Limiting their program
to trending only, they were unable to identify the root-
cause of the premature bearing failure. Properly used, your
predictive maintenance program can identify the speciﬁc
or root-cause of chronic maintenance problems. In the
example, a full analysis provided the answer. Plate-out or
material buildup on the fan blades constantly increased
the rotor mass and therefore forced the fans to operate
at critical speed. The imbalance created by operation at
critical speed was the forcing function that destroyed the
bearings. After taking corrective actions, the plant now
gets an average of three years from the fan bearings.

Analysis techniques

All machines have a ﬁnite number of failure modes. If you
have a thorough understanding of these failure modes and
the dynamics of the speciﬁc machine, you can learn the
vibration analysis techniques that will isolate the speciﬁc
failure mode or root-cause of each machine-train problem.

Establishing a predictive maintenance program 50/887

The following example will provide a comparison of

various trending and analysis techniques.

Broadband analysis

The data acquired using broadband data is limited to a
value that represents the total energy that is being gen-
erated by the machine-train at the measurement point
location and in the direction opposite the transducer. Most
programs trend and compare the recorded value at a sin-
gle point and disregard the other measurement points on
the common-shaft.

Rather than evaluate each measurement point sepa-
rately, plot the energy of each measurement point on
a common shaft. First, the vertical measurements were
plotted to determine the mode shape of the machine’s
shaft. This plot indicates that the outboard end of the
motor shaft is displaced much more than the remain-
ing shaft. This limits the machine problem to the rear of
the motor. Based strictly on the overall value, the prob-
able cause is loose motor mounts on the rear motor feet.
The second step was plotting the horizontal mode shape.
This plot indicates that the shaft is deﬂected between
the pillow block bearings. Without additional informa-
tion, the mode shaft suggests a bent shaft between the
bearings.

Even though we cannot identify the absolute failure
mode, we can isolate the trouble to the section of the
machine-train between the pillow block bearings.

Narrowband analysis

The addition of unique narrowbands that monitor speciﬁc
machine components or failure modes add more diagnos-
tic information.

If we add the narrowband information acquired from
the Hoffman blower, we ﬁnd that the vertical data is pri-
marily at the true running speed of the common shaft.
This conﬁrms that a deﬂection of the shaft exists. No other
machine component or failure mode is contributing to the
problem. The horizontal measurements indicate that the
bladepass, bearing defect and misalignment narrowbands
are the major contributors.

As we discussed, fans and blowers are prone to aero-
dynamic instability. The indication of abnormal vanepass
suggests that this may be contributing to the problem. The
additional data provided by the narrowband readings help
to eliminate many of the possible failure modes that could
be affect the blower. However, we still cannot conﬁrm the
speciﬁc problem.

Root cause failure analysis

A visual inspection of the blower indicated that the dis-
charge is horizontal and opposite the measurement point
location. By checking the process parameters recorded
concurrent with the vibration measurements, we found
that the motor was in a no-load or run-out condition and
that the discharge pressure was abnormally low. In addi-
tion, the visual inspection showed that the blower sits

50/888 Predictive Maintenance

on a cork pad and is not bolted to the ﬂoor. The dis-
charge piping, 24 inch diameter schedule 40 pipe, was
not isolated from the blower nor did it have any pipe sup-
ports for the ﬁrst 30 feet of horizontal run. With all of
these clues in hand, we concluded that the blower was
operating in a ‘run-out’ condition, i.e. it was not generat-
ing any pressure, and was therefore unstable. This part of
the machine problem was corrected by reducing, i.e. par-
tially closing, the damper setting and forcing the blower
to operate within acceptable aerodynamic limits. After
correcting the damper setting, all of the abnormal hori-
zontal readings were within acceptable limits. The vertical
problem with the motor was isolated to improper instal-
lation. The weight of approximately 30 feet of discharge
piping compressed the cork pad under the blower and
forced the outboard end of the motor to elevate above the
normal centerline. In this position, the motor became an
unsupported beam and resonated in the same manner as a
tuning fork. After isolating the discharge piping from the
blower and providing support, the vertical problem was
eliminated.

50.5.5 Additional training

The initial user’s training and basic theory will not be
enough to gain maximum beneﬁts from a total plant pre-
dictive maintenance program. You will need to continue
the training process throughout the life of the program. A
variety of organizations, including predictive maintenance
systems vendors, provide training programs in all of the
predictive maintenance techniques. Caution in selecting
both the type of course and instructor is strongly rec-
ommended. Most of the public courses are in reality sales
presentations. They have little practical value and will not
provide the knowledge base required to gain maximum
beneﬁt from your program.

Practical or application oriented courses are available
that will provide the additional training required to gain
maximum diagnostic beneﬁts from your program. The
best way to separate the good from the bad is to ask
previous attendees. Request a list of recent attendees and
then talk to them. If reputable ﬁrms present the courses,
they will gladly provide this information.

51

51/889

Planning and
Scheduling
Outages

Ricky Smith
Life Cycle Engineering, Inc.

Contents

51.1 Introduction

51/891

51.1.1 Deﬁnition of shutdown
51.1.2 Shutdown life cycle
51.1.3 Outage planning and management 51/891

51/891

51/891

51.4 Outage planning

51/893

51.4.1 Project parameters 51/893
51.4.2 Planning the project parameters 51/893
51.4.3 Planning the quality dimension
51/893
51.4.4 Planning the time dimension
51/896

51/894

51.5 Project shutdown planning

51.5.1 Gantt chart 51/898
51.5.2 PERT diagram 51/898

51.6 Planning the cost dimension

51/899
51.6.1 Potential budgeting problems

51/899

51.7 The outage plan

51/901

51.8 Implementing the plan

51.7.1 Developing a work plan
51/905
51.8.1 Daily review 51/905
51.8.2 Monitoring the outage schedule

51/901

51/905

51.9 Updating the schedule
51.10 Taking corrective action 51/909

51/906

51.10.1 What to do when falling behind
51.10.2 Negotiating for materials, supplies and

51/909

services 51/910

51.11 Completing the project 51/912
51.12 A model for successful project management 51/914

Defining the

Planning the

Completing the

project

project

Implementing the plan

project

Introduction 51/891

51.1 Introduction
The concept of shutdown or outage management as a dis-
cipline was developed for use in managing the US space
program in the early 1960s. Its practice has expanded
rapidly into government, the military, and industry. Today
you will ﬁnd these principles are also being used under
the names of project, program, product development, and
construction management.

51.1.1 Deﬁnition of shutdown

l

e
v
e

l
 
y
t
i
v
i
t
c
A

The main objective of a shutdown is to accomplish, at
the lowest possible costs, the maximum quality and quan-
tity of work that can be completed within a limited time,
deﬁned as the outage. Shutdown activities should be con-
centrated on work that can only be performed during
shutdown or when production systems are idle. A well-
organized and adequately planned and scheduled shut-
down is the best insurance for lower maintenance and
high reliability of equipment.

Many organizations assume they do planning and sche-
duling because they do shutdown maintenance and project
work. What typically gets ignored is the daily or weekly
planning and scheduling process. Everyone is ﬁxated on
shutdown work. The problem is that most organizations
spend the majority of their maintenance hours perform-
ing daily or weekly maintenance and not shutdowns or
project work. In some organizations, the mix is 75 per
cent routine and 25 per cent shutdown maintenance, mir-
roring the classic 80/20 rule of daily/weekly maintenance
hours versus shutdown/project hours.

This fact is not designed to take away from the impor-
tance of either one. The good news is that the mechan-
ics of planning and scheduling is the same for either
daily/weekly or shutdown/project maintenance. Well plan-
ned work orders are the fundamental requirement of both
routine and outage maintenance. Many organizations lose
sight of this fact.

The following sections provide a list of best practices.
This list represents an overview of the best approaches
used to effectively manage shutdowns and project work.
The mechanics behind these practices is explained in the
balance of this chapter.

51.1.2 Shutdown life cycle

Each outage or shutdown moves through a predictable
life cycle of four phases with each phase calling for dif-
ferent skills from the project planner and outage manager.
All projects, including maintenance outages or shutdowns,
can be broken down into four distinct phases. Figure 51.1
illustrates the typical activity level associated with each
of these phases. Typically, the man-hours of effort are
relatively low during the initial phases, at their peak dur-
ing the implementation phase and decline with the ﬁnal
evaluation.

51.1.3 Outage planning and management

The following is intended to serve as a guideline to assist
in the development of your own process.

Figure 51.1 Typical activity levels during outage

Time

Master shutdown schedule

Most companies, as part of their annual business plan,
develop an outage schedule that is based on anticipated
business cycle or precieved maintenance requirements.
This outage schedule contains all shutdown dates for criti-
cal production systems. Unfortunately, most of these plans
do not consider the impact on capacity. An effective out-
age schedule should be conﬁgured to minimize lost of pro-
duction capacity, product quality and the potential increase
in overall operating cost that can result from poorly coor-
dinated outage schedules. Care should be taken to assure
minimal, negative impact from this schedule.

Shutdown management team

Effective shutdown management depends on absolute
adherence to prescribed standards that deﬁne what type
of work will be done during scheduled shutdowns. These
decisions can not be made by the maintenance planner
alone. To aid in the selection, planning and implementa-
tion of outage tasks, a management team is a fundamental
requirement. This team should be composed of:
ž Maintenance manager(s)
ž Maintenance planner(s)
ž Production manager(s)
ž Production planner(s)
ž Operations supervisors
ž Engineering liasion
ž Contract liaison (if needed)
ž Material/storeroom representative
ž Purchasing representative.

When the nucleus of the project team is assembled, its
ﬁrst order of business is to clarify the project and arrive
at agreement among team members about the project’s
deﬁnition and scope, as well as the basic strategy for car-
rying it out. An orderly process can guide you through
these steps. The following sequence of activities will get
your project smoothly under way:

51/892 Planning and Scheduling Outages

1. It is critical for the team to spend adequate time at the
beginning to study, discuss, and analyze the project.
This establishes a clear understanding of what you are
dealing with. It may be necessary to research how sim-
ilar projects structured their approach, or what other
patterns of experience can contribute to project plan-
ning. The purpose of this activity is to be sure you
are addressing the right problem or pursuing the real
opportunity.

2. When you are conﬁdent that you have a ﬁrm grasp of
the situation, work up a preliminary project deﬁnition.
This preliminary deﬁnition will be subject to revision
as additional information and experience is acquired.
3. Now, using this project deﬁnition, state the end-results

objective of the project.

4. Then, list both the imperatives and desirables to be
present in the results. That is, list the outcomes that
must be present for the project to be considered suc-
cessful, and list the outcomes that are not essential but
that would add to the project’s success.

5. Now you are ready to generate alternative strategies
that might lead you to your objective. To generate these
alternatives, try brainstorming with your project team.
6. Next, evaluate the alternative strategies you have gen-
erated. Be sure that your criteria for evaluation are
realistic and reﬂect the end results objective.

7. Evaluation allows you to choose a course of action that
will meet both your project deﬁnition and end-results
objective.

Good objectives

Effective outage planning and management is dependent
on well-deﬁned objectives. Everyone, beginning with the
planner, must have a universal understanding of the spe-
ciﬁc objectives that are to be achieved during the outage.
The fundamental requirements of good objectives include:

Speciﬁc A good objective says exactly what you want to
accomplish. The deﬁnition must be both clear and concise.

Measurable
measurable.

Being speciﬁc helps make your objective

Action-oriented When writing objectives, use statements
that have action-tense verbs and are complete sentences.

Realistic Good objectives must be attainable yet should
present a challenge.

Set a speciﬁc time by which to achieve

Time-limited
the objective.

Brainstorming

Brainstorming is a free-form process that taps into the
creative potential of a group through association of ideas.
Association works as a two-way current: when a group
member voices an idea, this stimulates ideas from oth-
ers, which in turn leads to more ideas from the one who
initiated the idea.

standing.

Brainstorming procedures
ž List all ideas offered by group members.
ž Do not evaluate or judge ideas at this time.
ž Do not discuss ideas at this time except to clarify under-
ž Welcome ‘blue sky’ ideas. It’s easier to eliminate ideas
ž Repetition is okay. Don’t waste time sorting out dupli-
ž Encourage quantity. The more ideas you generate, the
ž Don’t be too anxious to close the process. When a
plateau is reached, let things rest and then start again.

greater your chance of ﬁnding a useful one.

cation.

later.

The management team will participate in the following
activities:

Initial shutdown meeting

Ninety days prior to beginning shutdown, the shutdown
management team should meet to determine the boundary
conditions for the upcoming outage. These initial deci-
sions will provide the basic knowledge required to begin
the planning process. The outcome of this initial meeting
should:

Careful evaluation of work re-
Select shutdown tasks
quests is essential for effective shutdown performance.
All requested tasks should not be automatically included
in the outage plan. Each request must be evaluated to
determine its real strategic value and real value added.

Each of the tasks or
Question past shutdown practices
projects requested for the outage should be evaluated to
determine whether or not it should be included in the out-
age. The management team should include the following
questions in this evaluation:
ž Always ask ‘Why?’
ž Does this really need to be done?
ž Has a pattern of failures developed?
ž Has a failure-related downtime been a factor?
ž Comments from craftspeople.
ž Comments from operators.

The outage management
Develop the shutdown policies
team should also establish clear, concise guidelines that
will be used to plan and manage the shutdown. These
criteria should include:
ž Establish cut-off work order dates:

– Implement a two-week frozen schedule.
– No work orders added/received two weeks prior to

start of shutdown.

ž Establish add-on work order policy:

– If we add work orders . . . what gets backed out?
– Require high level of approval to add on work

orders.

Separate pre-shutdown work from regular shutdown work
Focus on work that can be performed without shutting
down equipment:

ž Pipe layout
ž Electrical panel setups
ž Wiring runs
ž Pre-fabricate, sub-assemblies and components
ž Laying foundations and footings
ž Pump placements
ž Pre-cleaning work-site and equipment.

The management team
Develop timetable for shutdown
should establish a macro-level schedule for the outage.
Without complete planning, a deﬁnitive timeline can not
be established, but the team should establish speciﬁc mile-
stones that must be met.

51.4 Outage planning
Effective planning is the next step in the outage manage-
ment process. Like all other maintenance activities, each
task included in the outage plan must be fully planned.
However, the ﬁnite time frame associated with a ﬁxed-
duration shutdown also requires effective scheduling to
assure success.

51.4.1 Project parameters

During a project’s life, planners and management should
focus on three basic parameters: quality, time and cost; see
Figure 51.2. A successfully planned and managed project
is one that is completed at the speciﬁed level of quality,
on or before the deadline, and within budget.

Each of these parameters is speciﬁed in detail during
the planning phase of the project. These speciﬁcations
then form the basis for control during the implementation
phase.

What are the pitfalls, and how can they be
avoided?

A project’s initiator is usually unclear about important
aspects of the project. Project personnel tend to stress
their own points of view during the stage of deﬁning and
structuring the project. If this set of personal biases and
interests is left unchecked, disaster can result. However,
such disaster can be avoided by full discussion between
the project manager, client, and staff at the project’s incep-
tion. With a clear understanding of what is expected,
the project manager is now ready to begin deﬁning the
project.

Project parameters

Quality

Cost

Time

Specifications

Budget

Schedule

Figure 51.2 Project parameters

Outage planning 51/893

The ﬁrst phase is a clear deﬁnition of the scope of
work that is to be performed during the shutdown or
maintenance outage. This deﬁnition must be more than
a macro-level listing of the major tasks that are to be
performed. Instead, each of these major or macro-level
tasks must be fully deﬁned. The purpose of this procedure
is to provide an effective method of planning, material
control, and follow-up of repetitive, non-repetitive, and
capital shutdown work.

51.4.2 Planning the project parameters

Planning is crucial in shutdown and project management.
Planning means listing in detail what
is required to
successfully complete the project along the three critical
dimensions of quality,
time, and cost. Each of these
dimensions will be considered in the following pages,
along with a variety of tools and techniques.

Planning steps

1. Establish the project objective.
2. Choose a basic strategy for achieving the objective.
3. Break the project down into discrete tasks or steps.
4. Determine the performance standards for each task.
5. Determine how much time is required to complete

each task.

6. Determine the proper sequence for completing the
tasks and aggregate this information into a schedule
for the total project.

7. Determine the cost of each task and aggregate costs

into the project budget.

8. Design the necessary staff organization, including the
number and kind of positions, and the duties and
responsibilities of each.

9. Determine what training, if any, is required for project

team members.

10. Develop the necessary policies and procedures.

51.4.3 Planning the quality dimension

Planning for quality requires attention to detail. The goal
of quality planning is to assure that the outputs of the
project will perform – that it will do what it is supposed
to do. The quality plan also establishes the criteria of
performance by which the project output will be measured
when it is completed.

In planning the quality dimension, include speciﬁca-
tions for the quality and types of materials to be used, the
performance standards to be met, and the means of verify-
ing quality such as testing and inspection. Two techniques
facilitate planning for quality: a work breakdown struc-
ture and project speciﬁcations. Both are described on the
next few pages.

Creating a work breakdown structure (WBS)

A work breakdown structure is the starting place for plan-
ning all three parameters of a project: quality, cost, and
time. It is a technique based on dividing a project into
tasks, or work packages. Because all elements required to

51/894 Planning and Scheduling Outages

complete the project are identiﬁed, you reduce the chances
of neglecting or overlooking an essential step.

A work breakdown structure is typically constructed
with two or three levels of detail, although more levels
may be required for very complex projects. Start by iden-
tifying logical subdivisions of the project, then break each
of these down further. As you construct a work breakdown
structure, keep in mind that the goal is to identify a unit of
work that is discrete and that advances the project toward
its completion.

Case study: Centrifugal pump installation

Figure 51.3 provides an example of a typical work break-
down structure. The major divisions deﬁne speciﬁc, log-
ical task groupings as well as the cost-accounting classi-
ﬁcations. In the example, cost should be acquired for the
preparation of the foundation, installation and ﬁnal com-
misioning of the pump and motor. In addition, each of
the sub-tasks that comprise these classiﬁcations are log-
ical groups of tasks that must be completed in sequence
and by different work classiﬁcations.

Project speciﬁcations

From the work breakdown structure (WBS), speciﬁcations
can be written for each task of the project. Speciﬁcations
include all relevant requirements to meet the project’s
quality dimension – materials to be used, standards to
be met, tests to be performed, etc. Use extreme care in
writing speciﬁcations, because they become the control-
ling factor in meeting project performance standards, and
directly affect both budget and schedule.

51.4.4 Planning the time dimension

The objective when planning the time dimension is to
determine the shortest time necessary to complete the
project. Begin with the work breakdown structure and
determine the time required to complete each task. Next,
determine in what sequence tasks must be completed, and
which ones may be under way at the same time. From
this analysis, you will have determined the three most
signiﬁcant time elements:

Add 4 offices to

building #7

Foundation

Exterior

Layout

Form

Frame and

install windows

Pour

and finish

Install
siding

Interior

Finish

Heating/air
conditioning

Electrical

Paint

Insulate

Dry wall

Floor

covering

Roof

Paint

Electrical
fixtures

Cleanup

Doors
and trim

Figure 51.3 Sample work breakdown structure

Outage planning 51/895

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

T0

Tm

Te

Tp

Figure 51.4 Probability table for mathematical estimating

ž The duration of each step
ž The earliest time at which a step may be started
ž The latest time at which a step must be started.

Planning the time dimension can only be done by peo-
ple who have experience with the same or similar activ-
ities. If you personally do not know how long it takes to
do something, you will need to rely on someone else who
does have the requisite experience.

Many project managers ﬁnd it realistic to estimate time
intervals as a range rather than as a precise amount. Ano-
ther way to deal with the lack of precision in estimating
time is to use a commonly accepted formula for that task.
Or, if you are working with a mathematical model, you
can determine the probability of the work being com-
pleted within the estimated time by calculating a standard
deviation of the time estimate.

Using a mathematical model to estimate time

of similar projects are completed

1% of similar projects are completed

One method of estimating the time required to complete
a speciﬁc task is to use probability tables or calcuations
to deﬁne the appropriate interval.
Tm D The most probable time
To D The optimistic (shortest) time within which only
Tp D The pessimistic (longest) time within which 99%
Te D The calculated time estimate
Te D To C 4Tm C Tp
(cid:3) D Standard deviation
(cid:3) D Tp (cid:4) To
ž 68.26% of the time the work will be completed within
ž 95.44% of the time the work will be completed within

the range of Te š 1 standard deviation.
the range of Te š 2 standard deviations.

6

6

ž 99.73% of the time the work will be completed within

the range of Te š 3 standard deviations.

Critical path method

This section is devoted to using critical path method (CPM)
as a tool for the scheduling and sequencing of work for
shutdowns and project work.

Although this section looks intimidating and the process
quite manual, the reader is encouraged to become familiar
with the basic concept and process behind using CPM as
a tool. The good news is that the manual process can
be automated via computers. Several excellent computer
programs are available that automate and recalculate the
tedious manual process of developing and using CPM.
The essential beneﬁts of these computerized programs are
highlighted below:

1. Review leveling can be planned and scheduled ahead
of the need date. The advantage is that nothing hap-
pens without your telling the CPM software program
to schedule it.

2. A built-in calendar module allows you to establish a
‘look ahead’ regarding work hours and days. The user
is able to see the impact on ‘what if’ and how the
situation under review impacts the entire shutdown or
project.

3. Most are built around precedent logic. This is explained

in the text.

4. The critical path is highlighted which indicates the

proper or recommended path to follow.

5. Conﬁrmed changes or ‘what if’ scenarios are easy to
‘plug in’ and a new time line or critical path can be
printed.

With time duration determined for each task of the
project, the next step is to determine the earliest and latest
starting times for each task. There are two commonly used
methods for charting the project: Gantt charts and PERT
diagrams. The details of these two methods are discussed
on the following pages.

51/896 Planning and Scheduling Outages

History of CPM

The CPM was developed for the express purpose of apply-
ing computers to construction planning. However, it is
equally as effective when used manually. This method has
been well tested and it works. The CPM utilizes the con-
tractor’s knowledge, experience and practical ability in a
common-sense manner to plan and schedule construction.
The traditional method of planning is the bar chart. It
evolved from the Gantt chart, made popular by Mr Henry
L. Gantt and Frederick W. Taylor in the early 1900s. The
work of Mr Gantt and Mr Taylor was the ﬁrst scientiﬁc
consideration given to the problem of work scheduling.
The bar chart was and is an excellent graphic method
of scheduling. All levels of management and supervision
easily understand it.

A question often asked is, ‘If the bar chart is so well
suited to maintenance, why change?’ The bar chart is lim-
ited in what it can do. If a bar chart is carefully prepared,
the planner/scheduler goes through the same thinking pro-
cess as the CPM planner does. However, the bar chart
does not show the interrelationships in the sequence of
work nor in the restraints and control the activities have
upon each other.

Network analysis had its beginning in 1956 with a joint
effort between Dupont, UNIVAC, and Remington-Rand.
The network technique which resulted was ﬁeld tested
by Dupont in 1958, and the results were published in
1959. The Special Projects Ofﬁce of the Navy Bureau of
Ordinance, the ﬁrms of Booz, Allen, and Hamilton, and
Lockheed began development of a management system
called Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT)
in 1958 to control and monitor the 3000 plus contrac-
tors and agencies working on the Polaris missile program.
Both CPM and PERT, the outgrowths of the efforts of the
two groups, have since gained wide acceptance as network
models which graphically simulate the dynamic nature of
the work process for a wide spectrum of project types.

Potential of CPM

integrated with time.

The potential of CPM is unlimited. If the logic of the CPM
is correct, you can develop the following information:
ž Projected expenditures, both material and labor.
ž A planned purchasing schedule in dollars graphically
ž Cost control information showing a clear picture of
ž Total manpower projection curves, by craft.
ž The CPM can also be broken down into smaller and
simpler work schedules to be given to maintenance
supervision so that they are aware of the sequence and
schedule required for the shutdown.

over-runs and under-runs by activity.

Critical path method networks are classiﬁed as either
activity-on-arrow or activity-on-node networks. Although
there are many versions of these two basic networks, the
fundamental logic diagram procedures remain the same.
The arrow diagram and precedence diagram will be dis-
cussed later in this session. The Bar chart will be dis-
played along with the other two types of diagrams to show
the similarly to the principles of CPM planning.

Planning critical path development

CPM or basically arrow diagramming is the same the-
ory as PERT, except it provides a lot more deﬁnition to
the task to be implemented. PERT is event driven where
CPM is activity driven. CPM is the networking technique
best utilized in maintenance planning and scheduling. It
points out ways in which duration can be shortened and
will let you weigh the cost of expediting against cost of
lost production. The purpose is not to encroach on the
management function, but to provide the tools necessary
for it to perform effectively. Efﬁcient planning of jobs is
the difference between on-time and late, and it can mean
the difference between success and failure.

Justiﬁcations

What happens if the duration estimates turn out to be
wrong or inaccurate? Arrow diagramming will pinpoint
all the activities (events) that are affected and the degree
to which they are affected. It will tell you whether any
re-planning, rescheduling, or other remedial action is
necessary.

51.5 Project shutdown planning
Project shutdown planning establishes the duration of the
project, the resources needed to complete each activity,
and the required sequence of performance of each job.

Leveling

Assigning resources in the most effective manner possible,
leveling is accomplished by taking advantage of the fact
that there is often a difference between when a job may
start and when it must start. This variation, where it exists,
is called total ﬂoat.

Rules of arrow diagraming

One and only one arrow is used to represent
the
operation/activity to be performed. Length and direction
in which it points have no signiﬁcance unless it is time
scaled. Arrows are connected to form a model of the
project by answering, for each operation/activity,
the
questions: ‘What immediately precedes this activity?’ and
‘What immediately follows this activity?’

The third question to be answered is: ‘What can be
done concurrently?’ Although this question implies that
we would be doing more than one activity at the same time,
this is not necessarily true. What we really mean is that
both tasks depend on the completion of the same operation.
Concurrently indicates a common need for prior work.
Start all diagrams with an arrow marked lead-time and
show all actual work starting after it. (Lead-time – pre-
paration time to undertake a project.)

Junctions of arrows are called events or nodes. These
are points in time and consume no time. They are num-
bered to provide a convenient numeric sequential desig-
nation for all activities.

Dummies (restraints) are jobs that have no duration or
cost. They are introduced to keep the logic correct and to

Project:  Remodel building #7 to provide four additional offices by the

end of the third quarter at a cost not to exceed $17,500.

Project shutdown planning 51/897

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.
6.

7.

8.
9.
10.

11.

12.
13.

14.
15.
16.

17.

7/1

7/15

7/31

8/15

8/31

9/15

9/30

Steps in project with time estimates

1.  Draw working plans

2.  Obtain building permit

3.  Form/pour foundation

4.  Frame walls and roof

5.  Install roofing

6.  Install windows

7.  Install exterior siding

8.  Paint exterior

9.  Install electrical wiring

15

16

5

5

5

1

10

3

10

10.  Install heating / air conditioning

11.  Insulate

12.  Install sheetrock

13.  Install interior doors, trim

14.  Paint interior

15.  Install electrical fixtures

16.  Cleanup

17.  Install floor covering

5

5

5

5

3

2

3

2

Figure 51.5 Example of a Gantt chart

Event

Preceding
activity
(start event)

Figure 51.6 PERT diagram

Activity

Event

Following
activity
(finish event)

51/898 Planning and Scheduling Outages

3

5

1

2

7

8

Non-activity

4

6

Slack time

0

5

10

15
20
Time (in days)

25

30

35

Figure 51.7 PERT diagram with timeline

keep unique the numeric designation for event numbers
at the tail and head of each arrow. If more resources are
applied (crashing) to reduce the project duration, the jobs
must be selected from the critical path.

51.5.1 Gantt chart

A Gantt chart is a horizontal bar chart that graphically
displays the time relationship of the steps in a project. It
is named after Henry Gantt, the industrial engineer who
introduced the procedure in the early 1900s. A line placed
on the chart in the time period when it is to be undertaken
represents each step of a project. When completed, the
Gantt chart shows the ﬂow of activities in sequence as
well as those that can be under way at the same time.

To create a Gantt chart, list the steps required complet-
ing a project and estimating the time required for each
step. Then list the steps down the left side of the chart
and time intervals along the bottom. Draw a line across
the chart for each step, starting at the planned beginning
date and ending on the completion date of that step.

Some parallel steps can be carried out at the same time
with one taking longer than the other; this allows some
ﬂexibility about when to start the shorter step, as long as
the plan has it ﬁnished in time to ﬂow into subsequent
steps. This situation can be shown with a dotted line con-
tinuing on to the time when the step must be completed.
When your Gantt chart is ﬁnished, you will be able
to see the minimum total time for the project, the proper
sequence of steps, and which steps can be under way at
the same time.

You can add to the usefulness of a Gantt chart by also
charting actual progress. This is usually done by drawing
a line in a different color below the original line to show

the actual beginning and ending dates of each step. This
allows you to quickly assess whether or not the project is
on schedule.

Gantt charts are limited in their ability to show the
interdependencies of activities. In projects where the steps
ﬂow in a simple sequence of events, they can portray
adequate information for project management. However,
when several steps are under way at the same time and
a high level of interdependency exists among the various
steps, PERT diagrams are a better choice.

51.5.2 PERT diagram

PERT is an acronym for Program Evaluation and Review
Technique. It is a more sophisticated form of planning
than Gantt charts, and is appropriate for projects with
many interactive steps. There are three components of a
PERT diagram: circles or other convenient, closed ﬁgures
represent events; arrows connecting the circles represent
activities; and non-activities connecting two events are
shown as dotted-line arrows. (A non-activity represents
a dependency between two events for which no work is
required.)

PERT diagrams are most useful if they show the time
scheduled for completing an activity on the activity line.
Time is recorded in a unit appropriate for the project,
with days being most common, and hours, weeks, or
even months occasionally used. Some diagrams show two
numbers for time estimates – a high estimate and a low
estimate.

The most sophisticated PERT diagrams are drawn on
a time scale, with the horizontal projection of connecting
arrows drawn to represent the amount of time required
for their activity. In the process of diagramming to scale,

some connecting arrows will be longer than completion
of that task requires. This represents slack time in the
project and is depicted by a heavy dot at the end of the
appropriate time period, followed by a dotted-line arrow
connecting with the following event.

51.6 Planning the cost dimension
There are many reasons to do careful planning for project
costs. To begin with, if you overestimate costs you may
lose the job before you begin because you are not compet-
itive. A good plan includes the identiﬁcation of sources of
supplies and materials, and this careful research assures
that the costs are realistic. The main function of a good
budget is to monitor the costs of a project while it is in
progress, and to avoid cost overruns.

Some inaccuracies in the budget are inevitable, but they
should not be the consequence of insufﬁcient work on the
original plan. The goal is to be as realistic as possible. You
cannot estimate the cost of your project until you know
how long it will take, since the time of labor is typically
the most signiﬁcant cost item. Therefore, use your work
breakdown structure and project schedule as the starting
point for developing your project budget.

Typical costs components

The typical cost classiﬁcations or components for all out-
ages or maintenance tasks include:

The wages that are paid to all staff directly work-
Labor
ing on or supporting the project for the time spent on it.

The cost of payroll taxes and fringe beneﬁts
Overhead
for everyone directly working on the project for the time
spent on it. Usually calculated as a percentage of direct
labor cost.

The cost of items purchased for use in the
Materials
project. Includes such things as lumber, cement, steel,
nails, screws, rivets, bolts, and paint.

The cost of tools, equipment, ofﬁce supplies,
Supplies
etc., needed for the project. If something has a useful life
beyond the project, its cost should be calculated pro rata.

The cost of renting equipment such as
Equipment rental
scaffolding, compressors, cranes, bulldozers, trucks, etc.,
for use on the project.

The cost of management
General and administrative
and support services such as purchasing, accounting, sec-
retarial, etc., for time dedicated to the project. These costs
are usually calculated as a percentage of project cost.

With the cost components identiﬁed and the project bro-
ken down into tasks, create a worksheet to tally the costs
for the total project. Note that costing a task is some-
times simpliﬁed if it is to be subcontracted. Costing then
includes bidding the task, selecting a contractor, and then
using the contract price as your cost.

Planning the cost dimension 51/899

51.6.1 Potential budgeting problems

and subcontractors.

Some of the potential problems that may distort or limit
the accuracy of outage budgets include:
ž Failure to obtain ﬁrm price commitments from suppliers
ž Poorly prepared work breakdown structures that lead to
ž ‘Fudge factors’ built into internal support group esti-
ž Estimates based on different methods of costing, i.e.,

incomplete budgets.

mates.

hours versus dollars.

Assigning responsibility

Determining who will have responsibility for completing
each task or step of a project should be done as early
as possible, so that they can participate in the planning
of both schedules and budgets. This participation leads to
a greater commitment to achieve the project within time
and cost limitations.

The number of people involved in a project varies with
its size and scope. Not every project has a different per-
son responsible for each task. To make the best use of
your resources when deciding who is responsible for a
portion of your project, broaden your point of view to
include subcontractors and service departments as well as
members of the project team.

Controlling work in progress

Controlling is the central activity during implementation.
The most important tool in this process is the plan that
was developed to deﬁne the three parameters of the pro-
ject – speciﬁcations, schedule, and budget. Performance
is measured against these standards. Controlling involves
three steps:

1. Establishing standards

Standards for the project were set in the detailed project
speciﬁcations created in the planning stage. The project
manager must constantly refer to these speciﬁcations and
make sure the project team is also referencing them. If
the project deviates from the original speciﬁcations, there
is no guarantee that the success predicted by the feasibil-
ity studies will actually happen – the product or project
outcome might fail to meet performance standards.

There are a number of tools available to help project
managers control the project and make sure that the para-
meters deﬁned in the speciﬁcations for quality, time, and
budget are actually being met. A Gantt chart or PERT
diagram designed at the planning stage is a great device
for tracking how the time dimension of the project is
proceeding in relationship to the plan.

2. Control point identiﬁcation charts

A helpful technique for controlling a project is to invest
some time to think through what is likely to go wrong in
each of the three project parameters. Then identify when

51/900 Planning and Scheduling Outages

and how you will know that something is amiss and what
you will do to correct the problem if it occurs. This will
help minimize the times you will be caught by surprise as
well as save time in responding to the problem. A control
point identiﬁcation chart, as shown in Table 51.1, is an
easy way to summarize this information.

3. Shutdown work initiation

Shutdown work is classiﬁed three ways: (1) repetitive,
(2) non-repetitive, or (3) capital projects. All three require
operations supervisor’s approval. All shutdown work
is sent directly to the maintenance central planning
department.

This type of work is devel-
Repetitive shutdown work
oped by experienced maintenance and operations supervi-
sion based on prior shutdown experience, job knowledge,
and required shutdown preventive maintenance tasks. Each
agreed-upon job is assigned an annual work order num-
ber frequency, established, work order plans written, and
is entered in the work order log. The handling of repetitive
work orders will be the same as non-repetitive work orders,
except one copy of the work plan will be substituted for
the ﬁrst copy of the work order.

Completed work plans and any signed-off work orders
should be submitted by the supervisor to their respective
maintenance supervisor no later than the day after the job
is completed. The maintenance supervisor should examine
these documents for completeness and accuracy.

This type of work is gen-
Non-repetitive shutdown work
erated by maintenance problems requiring unit shutdown
that are not covered by repetitive shutdown work sched-
ules. Work requests are written by operations and approved
by the operations supervisor.

If the work as called for on the work order is done in its
entirety including steam tracing, insulation, clean up, etc.,
then the work order should be signed off. The supervisor
should return the signed-off work order and the work plan
to his supervisor who forwards them to planning.

If for any reason the work as deﬁned by the work
order cannot be completed during the shutdown period,
the work order should not be signed off. Instead, it should

be returned to the supervisor. The reason for not complet-
ing the job should be thoroughly explained on the work
plan.

If the work as called for on the work order is not
completed due to lack of insulation, clean-up,
tie-ins
only being made, etc., but
the shutdown portion of
the work has been completed,
then the ﬁrst copy of
the work order should be retained by the supervisor.
The supervisor should then return the work plan to his
supervisor denoting the reason for not completing work,
explanation of variance, etc. The planning ofﬁce will
prepare a list of incomplete work following the shutdown
and forward this list and a copy of the work orders to the
appropriate maintenance supervisor for follow-up.

The work that is required to complete the work orders
will be resumed the next working day following the shut-
down unless higher priority work prevents continuation
of this work. In the event of tie-in work, completion of
the capital and other special engineering projects will be
done as priorities dictate.

This type of work is generated
Capital shutdown work
by engineering and requires that all or portions of the
job are done during a shutdown period. As this work is
received, it is entered in the shutdown log the same as
routine expense work request.

Deﬁning scope of work

Most outages are comprised of multiple wish lists that
are generated by operations, plant engineering and main-
tenance. In most cases, these lists contain poorly deﬁned
tasks with little or no attempt to prioritize them. These
lists must be consolidated, prioritized and a universally
acceptable scope of work deﬁned. The steps required to
create this scope of work include:

Shutdown work request log When the planning depart-
ment receives a shutdown work order, it is immediately
recorded in the shutdown work request
log. The
maintenance clerk should verify that the item number
assigned agrees with the next sequential number on the
maintenance work order log. Work requests forwarded to
shutdown planning should indicate equipment number and

Table 51.1 Example control point identiﬁcation chart

Control
element

Quality

Cost

Timeliness

What is likely
to go wrong?

How and when
will I know?

What will I
do about it?

Workmanship or
craftsman might be less
than desired.
Cost of any task of
project may exceed
budget.
Time to complete any
tasks of project may
exceed schedule.

Upon personal inspection of
each stage of project.

Have sub-standard work re-done.

When purchase agreements
are made.

First, seek alternative suppliers,
then, consider alternative materials.

By closely monitoring
actual progress against
schedule along critical path.

Look for ways to improve
efﬁciency, attempt to capture time
from later steps, authorize overtime
if budget permits

service as directed by the maintenance procedures. Also,
the assigned planner is responsible for recording in the
work order log the date that repetitive work orders were
completed so that a history of repair might be established
for the particular pieces of equipment.

The outcome of the initial
Request all work requests
outage management team meeting will generate a com-
plete list of all approved maintenance tasks that are to
be included in the outage plan. To complete the process,
the planner should request any other tasks that may be
included. This request should:
ž Occur well in advance.
ž Be directed to operations, maintenance, and engineer-
ž Include an add-on policy and cut-off date.
ž Specify routing.
ž Demand a realistic priority.
ž The purpose of work orders is:

ing.

– To establish a backlog and aid in deﬁning the scope
and duration, essential to resource allocation, pri-
oritization and establishment of the rules.

– To add lead-time for planning and material pro-

curement.

sonnel and equipment rental.

– To allow time for mobilization of contractor per-
ž A lack of importance and management support placed
on this part of the decision cycle will result in less than
desirable results including:
– Improper resource levels.
– An unacceptable level of add-on jobs.
– Possible increased overtime, wasted time, and in-

creased labor cost.

– Conﬂicting schedules with equipment such as lift-
ing devices, safety apparatus, and mobile equip-
ment.

– Lengthened duration of the shutdown.
– Loss of market share due to production losses.
– Loss of job stability.

51.7 The outage plan
The fundamental requirement of an efffective outage plan
is well-deﬁned work orders for each task that must be
performed during the available time interval. Too many
plants fail to fully plan each of the tasks that are to be
performed. Instead, they rely on a master schedule that
deﬁnes the sequence of events that must occur in order
to complete all of the tasks included in the scope of
work.

While this detailed schedule or timeline is essential,
it does not replace or eliminate the need for complete
planning of each task or a comprehensive work order
package.

51.7.1 Developing a work plan

The assigned planner develops the work plan. He seg-
ments the job into manageable activities, and identiﬁes

The outage plan 51/901

job requirements, which includes materials and parts pur-
chases, tools and equipment requirements, and support
required. Materials ordered and expedited by the planner
will include major parts, materials, and tools as required.
Upon completion of the work plan, planning will order
necessary stock and non-stock materials for delivery to
the appropriate staging area. They then will enter the work
order plan into the system.

Shutdown work schedule

By the use of the critical path scheduling method, com-
munications with operations and other affected functional
groups, the daily work schedule is developed. A shut-
down list indicating scheduled start and completion dates
is then typed indicating assignments by supervisor. Each
work order will be scheduled by central planning.

Initial work order development

maintenance included with the work order?

When work orders are written for a shutdown, several
situations need to be carefully analyzed. These include:
ž Does the work really require a shutdown?
ž Is engineering assistance required?
ž Is all necessary information for engineering and/or
ž Is there an existing work order for the work being
ž Taking a few extra minutes to research these questions
will minimize wasted time for the originator, planner,
engineer, and all involved in shutdown meetings. Con-
sidering all of the personnel involved in handling a
work order chances for misunderstanding are greater.
They could and usually will include:

requested?

1. Originator
2. Approval authority
3. Mail clerk
4. Engineer
5. Planning clerk
6. Data entry clerk

7. Planner
8. Chief planner
9. Production supervisor
10. Maintenance supervisor
11. Contractors

Not only will these people have to devote time to
individual planning, but also collectively in shutdown
meetings.

Material requirements

To ensure materials are available several systems can be
used, assuming that all materials are planned and require-
ments are known in advance by stock number or requisi-
tion number. Some method of identifying these needs to
a work order is required. The best method is through a
computer, but manual systems can be used even though
they require extra paperwork and manpower effort. The
following systems and considerations are to be taken into
account:
ž Bagging system – by area and work order
ž Tag system – by work order
ž Delivery system and staging areas
ž Stock material allocation

51/902 Planning and Scheduling Outages
ž Non-stock material handling
ž Non-stock items purchased by engineering
ž Equipment rental
ž Contracts
ž Use of receiving reports
ž Expediting.

Manpower requirements

Deﬁnitive effort-hour estimating data is used to develop
speciﬁc detail estimates. Composite effort-hour data is
presented as a guide for quick estimating methods. All
material quantities have been consolidated into an aver-
age for a given amount of material and do not include any
specialty items. All effort-hour units and material quanti-
ties are based on a typical installation, and each material
type should be reviewed carefully for various differences.
In order to analyze job requirements, duration, and
cost, labor estimates must be performed. Without a labor
estimate by skill and in sequence, it is difﬁcult, if not
impossible, to develop a realistic work schedule.

The ﬁrst step in making labor estimates is to break the
job down into activities in a logical sequence. Example:
work order #123 Work description – Repair ball valve,
Leaking.

Based upon information from the ﬁeld tour and knowl-
edge of facility piping speciﬁcations, the planner will have
most of the data to plan this job. He should already know
the pipe size, insulation and material requirements (seats,
bonnet, gasket, stem seals). However, he does not know
the extent of damage, if any, to the ball.

Assuming the piping is insulated, the steps would be

broken down as follows:

planning the skill for the job, but also when breaking
the job into steps. Estimating personnel for each step is
described by method in the following paragraphs:

Planner experience Depending upon the background of
the planner, experience is usually the best method of esti-
mating a non-repetitive job. Historical actuals are usually
better for repetitive jobs. In order to utilize experience, it
is desirable that the planner has done the work before or
experienced execution of similar work as a craftsperson,
supervisor, engineer, or planner.

Planner experience can also include knowledge of how
or where to get the best estimate. This is particularly true in
multi-discipline jobs. Absence of experience or the inabil-
ity to draw upon reliable expertise would force a planner
to rely on another method of obtaining an estimate.

Engineering standards can be
Engineering standards
utilized to estimate jobs when data is available and applies
to the work to be performed. Standards provide an average
time to complete a job, but special situations or adverse
conditions are not considered.

What is an engineering standard? Webster’s New Inter-
national Dictionary contains the following deﬁnition:
‘Standard: That which is established by authority, custom,
or general consent, as a model or example, criteria, text.’
In general, a deﬁnitive level, degree, material, character,
quality, or the like, viewed as that which is proper and
adequate for a given purpose.

To assist in clariﬁcation for the reader, the following

speciﬁc deﬁnition is submitted:

Step
1.
2.
3.

Description

Remove insulation
Remove/rebuild/replace valve
Replace insulation

The breakdown of the job into steps is based upon per-
sonal experience of the planner or from history or standard
job plans. Depending upon the job and skill level of the
craftsman, it may require one activity or one hundred.
Highly skilled mechanics may require a higher degree of
instruction in the plan or how to complete the job, as well
as closer supervision and support during job execution.

The second step is to estimate the effort-hours by skill
needed to perform each activity. Determination of which
skill to perform the work will depend upon available
resources. During an outage in a chemical plant, insula-
tors were used to re-tray a 300-foot tall dehydration tower
because of a lack of millwrights; to perform the work. The
insulators were available during the outage because insu-
lation removal could be performed prior to the shutdown,
and replacement would be performed after start-up. In this
particular case, the insulators were also willing, and there
was no demarcation line between trades. The most inter-
esting point was that the tower job was on the critical
path, determining duration of the outage.

However, under normal circumstances, the proper skill
should be planned for the job. Barriers between skills,
contract restrictions, should be considered not only when

‘An engineered labor standard represents the amount
of time required by an average qualiﬁed craftsperson
to perform a given task at a pace he can maintain
day after day without affecting his health or quality of
workmanship. The engineered labor standard includes
allowances for personal needs, fatigue, and miscella-
neous delays.’

Historical averages While average times for the same
repetitive job can be used for control purposes, the time
does not represent an engineered standard.

Estimates are guesses, some better than oth-
Guesses
ers, and should remain in that category. Various forms of
estimating, such as incremental estimating, are attempts
to improve the quality of estimates, but do not result in
engineered labor standards.

Control of maintenance labor involves the basic fact
that an engineered labor standard represents the time it
should take to do a job. This amount of time is similar to
1 meter which never changes in length; that is, it is always
39.37 inches, or one ten-millionth part of the distance
along a meridian from the equator to the pole. If we accept
this logic, then it follows that an engineered standard time
for a given task will always be the same. We can relate
the actual performance of different craftspeople to this
standard time in the same as that we can relate a given
distance to a meter or a golfer against par.

Labor

standards used for
Evolution of standards
maintenance management and control are relatively new
in concept. Although labor standards have been used in
production with ever-increasing application since late in
the nineteenth century, serious application to maintenance
probably dates back to someplace between 1940 and
1950. While the tools and techniques are in existence
today,
the application is still probably minor when
compared to the potential. As a matter of fact most
maintenance controls today are based on elementary
management concepts, such as estimates or historical
averages.

Considering the wide scope of work performed by main-
tenance craftspeople, the development of engineered labor
standards represents a major effort, almost prohibitive
from a cost standpoint for a single company or a single
facility.

Historical data Historical data is an improvement over
the basic estimating approach in that it does represent the
average time required for repetitive jobs. The method for
development of data is rather simple in that work orders
are assembled for repetitive maintenance work and aver-
age times are derived for various categories or natural
groupings of work. This could be for jobs of short dura-
tion, or the technique could be applied to the same type
of jobs, such as pump overhauls.

This method is an improvement over estimating and

offers the following advantages:

1. A fair degree of consistency is obtained.
2. Administrative costs are relatively low after the initial

historical data is developed.
3. Training is relatively simple.
4. Repetitive work is covered.

The disadvantages are:

1. Historical average time values reﬂect what has hap-

pened rather than what should happen.

2. Alternative methods are difﬁcult to compare.
3. There is very little application to new work.
4. Past inadequacies become part of the system.

The same industrial
Industrial engineering techniques
engineering techniques used in production are used in
maintenance for determining the standard time value.
These techniques range from motion time values based
on technical analysis of the work performed to time
study using stopwatch or motion picture techniques for
developing standard time. Since maintenance is highly
variable and largely non-repetitive, a great deal of
technical study is required before the standard assembled
represents sufﬁcient coverage of work so that control can
be obtained. This is a complex and difﬁcult task; however,
some of
the larger companies (some governmental
agencies and some consulting ﬁrms) have established
engineering labor standards for most maintenance work.
It only seems natural that the responsibility for the
development of engineering standards would rest with
management consulting ﬁrms who have access to the work
done by various clients and who can pool the data and

The outage plan 51/903

expand on it until rather more complete engineering labor
standards are developed. In addition, some governmental
units, such as the US Navy, have pioneered in application
of engineering standards to maintenance work.

Another difﬁculty involved in the use of maintenance
standards is in the rather complex operation of applying
these standards. The simpliﬁed approach developed by
A-Kearney, Inc. has been to segregate the standards into
direct work and auxiliary work for ease of application for
maintenance planners. Direct work can be deﬁned as the
work elements that are easily identiﬁed after the work is
completed. In an example of pipeﬁtting work, the cutting,
threading, and joint installations can be readily identiﬁed.
These operations would require the same standard time
regardless of the location of the operation. Figure 51.8
shows a typical page of standard data for pipe-ﬁtting cov-
ering the operation ‘Cut pipe with pipe machine’. The
normal minutes per cut are identiﬁed by pipe size and the
various portions of the job that are included in the time per
cut are shown on the sheet. These include cut pipe, place
in chuck, measure and loosen jaws, and dispose of scrap.

Estimates Most maintenance operations are managed
and controlled using an estimate to determine the probable
man-hours required performing work. A simple deﬁnition
of a labor estimate would be that the estimate represents
the probable time required to perform a job based upon
the best judgement of the person making the estimate.
The personal experience, knowledge, and ability of the
estimator is involved in determining the quality of the
estimate. The advantages in using this technique are:

1. Estimates are easy to develop.
2. Administrative cost of estimating is low.

Department: Pipe ﬁtting

Operation No.: 2-1

Nominal pipe
size (inches)

Pipe IID in AM

Normal minutes

per cut

1/2
1
1 1
2
2
2 1
2
3
4
5
6
8

15.9
26.6
40.9
52.4
62.7
77.9
102.2
141.3
154.0
202.7

1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.8
3.8
4.9
6.9

Includes pickup pipe, place in chuck, and tighten chuck jaws.
Measure pipe for cut and positions carriage. Hand feed parting
tool to cup piece off pipe. Hand feed parting tool to remove
burrs. Loosen chuck jaws, remove pipe from chuck, and set aside.
Dispose of scrap or set aside unused pieces.

Figure 51.8 Page of standard date

51/904 Planning and Scheduling Outages

Sample deﬁnitive estimate

Quantity

1. 100 L.F.

2. 5 Ea.

3. 8 Ea.

4. 12 Ea.

Pipe

5. 100 L.Y.

6. 10 Ea.

Pipe insulation

Material & description

400 Schedule. 40 C/S, B,.W.,
Seamless
400 Schedule. 40 C/S, B.W.,
45 Degree Ells. L.R.
400 Tees, Schedule. 40, C/S
B.W.
400 pipe hangers (Hot)
Total effort-hours

Pipe Insulation, Calcium
Silicate, 100 thick, Alum.
ﬁn.
Insulate pipe ﬁtting, 100
(each ﬁtting D 3.5 L.F.)
Total man-hours

Total Deﬁnitive man-hour estimate 192. 7

Unit MHs

Total MHs

0.57

4.60

7.10

2.4

0.31

0.31

57.0

23.0

56.0

28.8

164.8

31.0

1.9

32.9

Sample deﬁnitive estimate

Material & description

Unit MHs

Total MHs

400 Schedule. 40 C/S, BW., pipe
with ﬁttings

1.80

Total effort-hours
Insulate 400 pipe and ﬁt with
calcium silicate, V thick,
alum ﬁn.

180.0

180.0

53.0

53.0

Quantity

100 L.F.

Pipe

100 L.F.

Pipe insulation

Total effort-hours

Total conceptual man-hour estimate 233.0

Figure 51.9 Axiliary work

3. All jobs can be estimated; thus, complete coverage is

obtained.

The disadvantages include:

1. Estimates are inconsistent.
2. Estimates vary in accuracy between different estima-

tors.

3. Training of estimators is very difﬁcult.
4. Method comparisons are difﬁcult.
5. Veriﬁcation and audit of accuracy is impossible.

Since estimating leaves much to be desired, some man-
agers have resorted to analysis of work that has been done
and which is repetitive in nature and have evolved histori-
cal data which sometimes is misrepresented as a standard.

Example: The auxiliary functions in Figure 51.9 are iden-
tiﬁed as those work elements performed by the craftsper-
son which are part of the job, but which are not apparent
after the work is completed. These include such functions
as job planning by the craftsman, travel time, obtain-
ing materials, and miscellaneous get-ready and clean-up
work. The auxiliary time is affected by the physical facil-
ities involved, such as facility layout, location of shops,
degree of material delivery, and so forth. If sufﬁcient stud-
ies are taken, the auxiliary work can be related to the
direct work and ratios determined for each craft by type
of work.

Figure 51.9 shows a typical relationship of auxiliary
work to direct work for pipe-ﬁtters doing a job that re-
quires them to leave the shop and perform the operation
in the ﬁeld.

This meeting is held at
Shutdown assignment meeting
least three working days prior to the shutdown with the
appropriate maintenance supervisor, engineering, planning
supervisor, operations supervisor and planners. The ﬁnal
outage schedule and list of tasks to be preformed are
reviewed and work orders and works plans distributed
to the assigned superintendent. The maintenance planning
supervisor or senior planner should facilitate this meeting.
On emergency shutdowns or any outage with less than
ﬁve days planning time, planning should prepare a rough
estimate (RE) for the job and issue a blank work plan
with the appropriate work orders. Planning will not order
miscellaneous parts, materials, tools, etc.; this will be the
responsibility of the assigned supervisor and area planner.
If a work request is received that requires an outside
contractor, the work order should immediately be assigned
and issued to the contract maintenance liaison supervi-
sor or other designated representative once the shutdown
is approved. Do not hold until the outage assignment
meeting.

Following the assignment meeting, each supervisor
assigned work in the shutdown should review each work
plan and his work schedule and advise planning of any
problems. He should also arrange for common parts, tools,
and materials that have not been listed. He should work
with planning for ordering and expediting materials, tools,
etc., found necessary after job assignment. He should also
report back to the planner if there is any reason that he
couldn’t do the jobs according to the established plan or
schedule. Other major problems should also be reported.
Add-on work after the assignment meeting should be
directed to central planning where crew assignment will
be determined. This work will be handled like emergency
shutdown work.

51.8 Implementing the plan
The implementation phase is comprised of the actual out-
age duration. During this period, all of the tasks included
in the scope of work are scheduled for completion.

51.8.1 Daily review

The progress of large shutdowns will be evaluated daily,
or as deemed necessary by the maintenance-planning
supervisor. This meeting will identify shutdown problems,
and see that measures are taken to solve these problems.
Also, action will be taken to compensate for off-schedule
conditions. The maintenance-planning supervisor should
facilitate this meeting.

Each maintenance supervisor involved in the shutdown
should attend and be ready to quickly report the progress
of each job as planned and scheduled for that day. In
addition, the add-on list should be quickly reviewed daily.
The shutdown critical path schedule will be reviewed and
updated to track the progress made to date.

The plan is not complete until all data from the out-
age are collected, evaluated and the outage plan closed.
For non-recurring tasks, no further action is required. For
each of the tasks included in the scope of work that will
be repeated at some point in the future, the planner must

Implementing the plan 51/905

evaluate, in detail, the actual performance during the out-
age. These data are used to modify the outage plan so that
deﬁciencies or errors that may have been present in the
original plan are corrected. This step is essential to assure
that future outages will not incur the same difﬁculties.

Daily progress meeting

A daily progress meeting should be conducted to report
progress and discuss any problems that have a potential
impact on the schedule. Supervisors and planners should
make a ﬁeld tour (know ﬁrst hand what is being worked)
before attending the meeting. Items that are typically dis-
cussed are as follows:

1. Review status of each schedule for that day.
2. Review problem areas.
3. Update the CPM as to actual work completed.
4. Review non-stocked materials (PO).
5. Issue next shift work order and schedules.
6. Weekly control analysis.

51.8.2 Monitoring the outage schedule

After an outage schedule has been made, the implemen-
tation, communication and monitoring of the schedule is
most important. Often when a CPM network has been
drawn, it is tacked on the wall in the outage ofﬁce and
forgotten. A CPM schedule must be continually monitored
if maximum beneﬁt is to be derived.

It is important that all major parties whose work, mate-
rials, etc. affect the outage be aware of the schedule. It
may not be necessary to forward a copy of the CPM dia-
gram to each party since it increases the possibility that
inevitable change in the network will not be incorporated
on every schedule.

ing the number of men needed for each time period.

It is possible to derive a variety of schedules from a
CPM network to assist in shutdown control. It may be
necessary, for better communications, to develop a bar
chart based on the CPM network. Also the bar chart is
useful when developing other possible schedules such as:
ž Labor schedules developed for separate crews and show-
ž Equipment schedules developed for separate types and
sizes of equipment and showing the number of units
required for time period.
ž Material and service schedules for important items of
material or installed equipment indicating deadlines for
such steps as preparation of shop drawings or sam-
ples, beginning of fabrication, date of shipment and
date needed at the job site.
ž Financial schedules indicating on a time scale the cumu-
lative cost to date and cost remaining to complete the
outage.

This kind of information generated from the CPM sche-
dule can be most useful in analyzing the consumption of
resources and maintaining outage control.

51/906 Planning and Scheduling Outages

Schedule progress

It is important that careful attention be given to updating
the schedule and indicating progress. This responsibility
should be assigned to one person, usually the chief planner
or supervisor of planning.

The CPM diagram provides a useful tool for document-
ing change and management reporting. Many changes
occur throughout the duration of an outage, and the CPM
network should reﬂect these changes. The network should
show any changes in activity duration, starting date, com-
pletion dates, or change in logic. The network should
reﬂect completed events and events in progress. This in-
formation should be entered on the network daily or as
changes occur.

Status reporting

The possible status for a given event and the information
for status are as follows:
ž Completed
ž In progress
ž Not started

– Logically eligible
– Not yet logically eligible to start
ž None
ž Estimate of time remaining duration
ž Estimated start date
ž Revised duration estimate
ž Revised duration estimate.
Notice that the required information for events that are
in progress is an estimate of the remaining duration, not
an estimate of percent completion. There are two reasons
for religiously avoiding the popular percent completion
terminology.

A percentage is the result of the progress of divid-
ing the numerator of a fraction by the denominator. It
is almost never clear what the numerator or the denom-
inator of the completion percentage is. More often than
not, the percentage is an indication of the amount of work
completed dividing the total amount of work involved in
the event. For a number of reasons, however, the amount
of time already consumed in the event may be far more
or less than the total duration. The rate of progress may
not be uniform due to problems that arise during the
event, increases in skill, or changes in operating condi-
tions. What is needed for scheduling purposes is a direct
estimate of remaining duration regardless of work progress
to date.

The other reason for not using percent completion is
that it involves no commitment on the part of individuals
responsible for the event to ﬁnish at any particular time.
To report that you are X per cent complete on an event
is a subjective evaluation of history, not a statement of
future plans and intentions. Thus, we often experience the
phenomenon of completion percentages that increase by
ever-smaller amounts and never quite reach 100 per cent.
In addition to reporting the status of each event, the
remaining portion of the outage network should be re-
viewed for the following possible changes:

Table 51.2 Example of milestone chart

Milestone

Scheduled
Completion Completion

Actual

Foundation completed
Framing completed
Exterior ﬁnished
Electrical wiring completed
Heating and air conditioning installed
Interior ﬁnished

8/5/99
8/10/99
8/20/99
8/25/99
8/25/99
9/22/99

8/2/99
8/7/99
8/22/99

necessary.

ž Elimination of events which are now known to be un-
ž Addition of events not previously included.
ž Alteration of precedence relationships among events.

51.9 Updating the schedule
The process of updating the schedule is basically the same
as that used in planning the shutdown. It is simply based
on new information and deals only with the remaining
portion of the shutdown. In some very large shutdowns, it
may be desirable to perform time–cost trade-off analysis,
resource leveling, etc., each time the shutdown CPM is
updated. In many cases, however, the update will involve
only the basic forward, backward and slack computations.
These calculations will allow for development of a revised
schedule. They will also identify the critical path that is
likely to change over the course of the shutdown.

The mechanical aspects of updating the shutdown net-
work can vary considerably depending upon the type of
network and equipment used. The update may involve
using color-coded symbols to indicate progress on a paper
copy of the original network, or, for the sake of clarity,
the remaining portion of the network may be completely
redrawn. Commercially available planning boards with
movable symbols may be employed. If a computer is used,
the updated schedule may appear on printouts, and the
original network would serve only as a reference.

Project control charts

Another helpful tool is a project control chart, which uses
budget and schedule plans in a quick status report of the
project. It compares actual to plan, calculates a variance
on each task completed, and tallies a cumulative variance
for the project.

To prepare a project control chart, refer to the work
breakdown structure and list all of the tasks of the project.
Then, use the schedule to list the time planned to complete
each task, and use the budget to list the expected cost of
each task.

As each project task is completed, record the actual time
and actual cost. Calculate variances and carry the cumula-
tive total forward. This technique can easily be put into a
spreadsheet format on your personal computer. Some large
projects may be able to create this format for a report that
uses cost and schedule data that is routinely captured by the
company’s computerized accounting system. Figure 51.10
illustrates a typical project control chart.

Cost

Schedule

Project steps Budget Actual

Variance

Total

Planned

Actual

Variance

Total

Updating the schedule 51/907

Figure 51.10 Project control chart

Project costing chart

Project: Remodel Building #7 to provide four additional
ofﬁces by the end of the 3rd quarter at a cost not to exceed
$17,500. If you prefer over budget and schedule amounts
to be negative numbers, subtract actual from budget and
planned. Under budget and schedule amounts will then be
positive numbers.

Milestone charts
A milestone chart presents a broad-brush picture of
a project’s schedule and control dates. It
lists those
key events that are clearly veriﬁable by others or that
require approval before the project can proceed. If this is
done correctly, a project will not have many milestones.
Because of this lack of detail, a milestone chart
is

not very helpful during the planning phase when more
information is required. However, it is particularly useful
in the implementation phase because it provides a concise
summary of the progress of the project.

Budget control charts
Budget control charts are generally of two varieties. One
is a listing of the tasks of a project with actual costs
compared to budget. They are similar to project con-
trol charts, discussed earlier, and can be either hand or
computer-generated. The other kind is a graph of budgeted
costs compared to actual. Either bar or line graphs may be
used. Bar graphs usually relate budgeted and actual costs
by project tasks, while line graphs usually relate planned
cumulative project costs to actual costs over time.

51/908 Planning and Scheduling Outages

Solid line—Budget
Dotted line—Actual

$18000
16500
15000
13500
12000
10500
9000
7500
6000
4500
3000
1500
0

July 1

July 15

July 31

Aug.15

Aug. 31

Sept. 15 Sept. 30

Time

Figure 51.11 Example of budget control chart

Another helpful approach to budget control is to com-
pare percentage of budget spent to percentage of project
completed. Either listing or graphing can compare these
data. While percentage of budget spent is a precise ﬁgure,
someone familiar with the project and its progress esti-
mates percentage of project completed.

Monitoring performance

The heart of the control process is monitoring work in
progress. It is your way of knowing what is going on
and how actual compares to plan. With effective moni-
toring, you will know when corrective action is required.
Common ways to keep abreast of project progress are:

Inspection is probably the most common
Inspection
way to monitor project performance. It is handled by
trained inspectors as well as by the project manager. Get
out into the area where the work is performed and observe
what is going on. Inspection is an effective way to see
whether project speciﬁcations are being met, as well as
whether there is an unnecessary waste or unsafe work
practice. Inspections should be unannounced and on a
random schedule. However, they should also be open and
direct. Ask questions and listen to explanations.

Reviews are communications
Interim progress reviews
between the project manager and those responsible for
the various tasks of a project. Progress reviews can be
in a group or on an individual basis, and either face-to-
face or by telephone. Alternatively, progress reports can
be submitted in writing. Progress reviews typically occur
on a ﬁxed time schedule – daily or weekly – or keyed to
the completion of project tasks. These scheduled reviews
are typically augmented by reviews called by either the
project manager or the one responsible for the work.

Interim progress
Conducting interim progress reviews
reviews typically occur on a ﬁxed time schedule, such
as daily or weekly. They may also occur when some
problem in performance is observed or at the comple-
tion of a signiﬁcant step toward the accomplishment of
the project.

Your role during an interim progress review is to achieve
your objectives of knowing the status of operations and
inﬂuencing the course of future events as necessary. Dur-
ing the discussion, you may have any of the following
roles:

Listen as the individual updates you on progress,
deviation from plan, problems encountered, and solu-
tions proposed. Listen not only to what
is said, but
also to how things are said. Is the person excited, frus-
trated, discouraged? Help clarify what is being said by
asking questions, and verify what you think is being
said by restating your understanding of both facts and
feelings.

In many interim reviews, progress is in line with plans.
However, you will occasionally have problems to deal
with. When this occurs, you can contribute to their solu-
tion by directing the other person toward possible courses
of action. Use your knowledge and experience as neces-
sary to move the project forward.

An important role of project managers is to integrate the
individual parts of a project into a compatible whole. Is
something being neglected? Is there duplication of effort?
How can the people available be best deployed?

Perhaps the most important role for the project manager
is that of leader. Through a variety of techniques, you
must keep the team’s effort directed toward the common
goal of completing the project according to speciﬁca-
tions, on time, and within budget. You must conﬁrm and
recognize good performance, correct poor performance,
and keep interest and enthusiasm high.

Taking corrective action 51/909

Project Manager's role during

interim progress reviews

Listener

Integrator

Figure 51.12 Outage manager’s role

51.10 Taking corrective action
As a project progresses and you monitor performance,
there will be times when actual does not measure up to
plan. This calls for corrective action. However, don’t be
too quick to take action. Some deﬁciencies turn out to
be self-correcting. It is unrealistic to expect steady and
consistent progress day after day. Sometimes you’ll fall
behind and sometimes you’ll be ahead, but in a well-
planned project, you will probably ﬁnish on schedule and
within budget.

When quality is not according to speciﬁcation, the cus-
tomary action is to do it over according to plan. However,
this needs to be more closely examined in some instances.
For example, if the work or material exceeds speciﬁca-
tions, you may choose to accept it. If it falls short, you
need to consider how much it deviates from speciﬁca-
tions and whether the deﬁciency will cause the project
to fail its performance evaluation. The ﬁnal decision may
be to have the work redone, but that is not an automatic
outcome.

When the project begins to fall behind in schedule,
three alternatives may correct the problem. The ﬁrst is
to examine the work remaining to be done and decide
whether the lost time can be recovered in the next steps.
If this is not feasible, consider offering an incentive for
on-time completion of the project. The incentive could
be justiﬁed if you compare this expenditure to potential
losses due to late completion. Finally, consider deploying
more resources. This too will cost more, but may offset
further losses from delayed completion.

When the project begins to exceed budget, consider the
work remaining and whether or not cost overruns can be
recouped on work yet to be completed. If this isn’t prac-
tical, consider narrowing the project scope or obtaining
more funding from your client.

Contributor

Leader

51.10.1 What to do when falling behind

Providing feedback

Project managers ﬁnd many opportunities to provide feed-
back to those who have a hand in completing the project.
Through feedback, individuals learn about the effect their
behavior has on others and on the project’s success. It
serves to maintain good performance and correct poor
performance. To be effective, however, feedback must be
handled properly. This illustration shows the continuous
loop that exists when there is good feedback:

The most important guideline when providing feedback
is to deal only with what you can observe. This limits your
conversation to actions and results, because you cannot
observe someone’s intentions.

When offering positive feedback, describe the actions
and results in a straightforward way and include an appro-
priate statement of your reaction. For example, you might
tell someone, ‘By staying late last night and ﬁnishing the
work you were doing, the project was able to move for-
ward on schedule. I appreciate your putting out the extra
effort.’

Negative feedback can be handled in the same manner,
but an important element is missing: how the team mem-
ber should deal with similar situations in the future. The
following sequence should prove more effective:

1. Describe the observed actions and results.
2. Ask the individual if those were his or her intended

results.

3. With a typical ‘No’ response, ask what different actions

would likely produce the desired results.

4. Discuss different alternative courses of action.
5. Agree upon a way to handle similar situations if they

should occur in the future.

51/910 Planning and Scheduling Outages

Table 51.3 Project delay: Possible corrective actions

Action

Cost Schedule

Renegotiate: Discuss with your client the
prospect of increasing the budget for the project
or extending the deadline for completion.
Recover during later steps: If you begin to
fall behind in early stages of a project,
re-examine budgets and schedules for later
stages. Perhaps you can save on later stages so
the overall budget and/or schedule is met.
Narrow project scope: Perhaps non-essential
elements of the project can be eliminated,
thereby reducing costs and/or saving time.
Deploy more resources: You may need to put
more people or machines on the project to meet
a critical schedule. Increased costs must be
weighed against the importance of the deadline.
Accept substitution: When something is not
available or is more expensive than budgeted,
substituting a comparable item may solve your
problem.
Seek alternative sources: When a supplier
can’t deliver within budget or schedule, look
for others who can. You may choose to accept
a substitute rather than seek other sources.
Accept partial delivery: Sometimes a supplier
can deliver a partial order to keep your project
on schedule and complete the delivery later.
Offer incentives: Go beyond the scope of the
original contract and offer a bonus or other
incentive for on-time delivery.
Demand compliance: Sometimes demanding
that people do what they agreed to do gets the
desired results. You may have to appeal to
higher management for backing and support.

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Check your feedback style
Rate yourself by placing a check mark ((cid:1)) in front of
each action that is typical of how you handle giving feed-
back. The ones you don’t check represent opportunities
for development.

(cid:1) Describe rather than evaluate. By describing observed
action and results, the individual is free to use or not use
the information. By avoiding evaluation, you reduce the
likelihood of a defensive reaction.

(cid:1) Be speciﬁc rather than general. Avoid using ‘always’
and ‘never’. Rather, discuss speciﬁc times and events.
Avoid generalized conclusions such as ‘you’re too do-
minating’. Rather, be speciﬁc by saying, ‘When you
don’t listen to others, you may miss a valuable idea’.
(cid:1) Deal with behavior that can be changed. Frustration is
increased when you remind someone of a shortcoming
over which he or she has no control.

(cid:1) Be timely. Generally, feedback is most useful at the

earliest opportunity after the behavior.

(cid:1) Communicate clearly. This is particularly important
when handling negative feedback. One way to ensure

clear communication is to have the receiver rephrase
the feedback to see if it corresponds to what you had
in mind.

51.10.2 Negotiating for materials, supplies and
services

Negotiating is an important process that takes up as much
as 20 per cent of a planner’s or project manager’s time.
Negotiating is one way to resolve differences, and it can
contribute signiﬁcantly to the success of your project.
The ideas presented here will prepare you to negotiate
effectively.

Ten guidelines for effective negotiation

Prepare Do your homework. Know what outcome you
want and why. Find out what outcome the other party
wants. Avoid negotiating when you are not prepared – ask
for the time you need. As part of your preparation, ﬁgure
out what you will do if you are unable to come to an agree-
ment. Your power in negotiation develops from attractive
alternatives – the greater your ability to walk away, the
stronger your bargaining position.

The way you see some-
Minimize perceptual differences
thing can be quite different from how the other party sees
it. Don’t assume you know the other person’s view: ask
questions to gain understanding, and restate your under-
standing so it can be conﬁrmed or corrected by the other
party.

Listen Active, attentive listening is mandatory to effec-
tive negotiation. Let the other side have an equal share
of the airtime. (If you’re talking more than 50 per cent
of the time, you are not listening enough.) In the process,
respect silence. Occasionally people need to collect their
thoughts before moving ahead. Don’t try to ﬁll this time
with talking.

Take notes You need to know where you are – what has
been agreed to, what remains to be resolved. Don’t rely on
memory. Take notes and then summarize your agreement
in a memorandum.

Early closure and criticism stiﬂe creative
Be creative
thinking. Be willing to set some time aside to explore
different and unusual ways to solve your problem. Dur-
ing this time, do not permit criticism of ideas offered.
All negotiations can beneﬁt from nonjudgmental creative
thinking.

Help the other party Good negotiators recognize that
the other party’s problem is their problem as well. Put
yourself in the other’s position and work to ﬁnd a solution
that meets everyone’s needs. After all, no agreement will
hold up unless both parties support it.

Make trade-offs Avoid giving something for nothing.
At least get some goodwill or an obligation for future
payback. The basic principle to follow is to trade what is

cheap to you but valuable to the other party for what is
valuable to you but cheap to the other party.

Be quick to apologize An apology is the quickest, surest
way to de-escalate negative feelings. It need not be a
personal apology. An apology for the situation you’re in
can be just as effective. Also, don’t contribute to hostility
by making hostile remarks. Hostility takes the discussion
away from the issues and shifts it to a defense of self
where the goal is to destroy the opponent.

Avoid ultimatums An ultimatum requires the other party
to either surrender or ﬁght it out. Neither outcome will
contribute to future cooperation. Also, avoid boxing some-
one in. This happens when you offer only two alternatives,
neither of which is desirable to the other person.

Set realistic deadlines Many negotiations continue too
long because no deadline exists. A deadline requires both
sides to be economical in their use of time. It permits you
to question the value of certain discussion and encourages
both sides to consider concessions and trade-offs in order
to meet deadline.

Resolving differences What is best for one department
or group won’t necessarily be best for others. Out of these
differences can come creative solutions when the situation
is handled properly. Skill in resolving differences is an
important quality of successful project managers.

Consider the model in 5.13. Differences can be resolved
my way, your way, or our way. As a result, four strategies
emerge. The strategy one chooses to resolve differences

Taking corrective action 51/911

tends to result from interplay of assertiveness and coop-
eration. This process can be clouded by emotion at times,
and when this happens, it is difﬁcult to achieve a satisfac-
tory outcome. Therefore, when you sense that either you
or the other person’s thinking is clouded by emotion, ask
to delay discussion a while.

The following issues inﬂuence assertiveness and co-

operation:

important to them.

Assertiveness
ž People tend to be more assertive when an issue is
ž People tend to be more assertive when they are conﬁ-
ž People tend to be more assertive when things are going
ž People tend to be less assertive when they feel they are

dent of their knowledge.

against them.

at a power disadvantage.

the other person.

Cooperation
ž People tend to be more cooperative when they respect
ž People tend to be more cooperative when they value
ž People tend to be more cooperative when they are
dependent on the other person to help carry out the
decision.

the relationship.

Given the interplay of assertiveness and cooperation,
resolving

the following strategies are common for
differences:

h
g
H

i

Demanding

s
s
e
n
e
v
i
t
r
e
s
s
A

"
y
a
w
 
y
m

"
 
s
e
c
n
e
r
e

f
f
i

d

 

Problem
solving

"O ur way"

Bargaining

i

l

g
n
v
o
s
e
R

Resolving
differences

w
o
L

Low

Resolving differences "your way"

Giving in

Cooperation

High

Figure 51.13 Model for resolving differences

51/912 Planning and Scheduling Outages

Demanding Demanding is high in assertiveness and low
in cooperation. It suggests conﬁdence and that the issue
is important coupled with a lack of concern for the rela-
tionship and no dependency on the other person.

As you work at controlling costs against the
Costs
approved project budget, you will often encounter con-
ﬂict with suppliers who feel a need to increase costs over
their original commitment.

Problem solving is high in assertive-
Problem solving
ness, coupled with high cooperation. It suggests that the
issue is important, and that there is the need for an ongo-
ing relationship with the other person.

Bargaining is moderate in both assertive-
Bargaining
ness and cooperation. It suggests that equally powerful
parties are addressing an important issue. Each must be
willing to give a little to reach agreement. Bargaining is
also an appropriate backup strategy when joint problem
solving seems unattainable.

Giving in Giving in is low in assertiveness and high in
cooperation. The issue may be unimportant to you, you
may lack knowledge, or you simply want to go along
with the other person’s proposal in order to build up the
relationship between you.

Each strategy has its place. However, too few people
recognize the conditions that support each strategy. Many
people adopt one approach for resolving differences and
use it in all situations. Obviously, it will be ineffective in
many cases. Learn to distinguish among the various types
of situations and adopt an approach that has the greatest
chance of success in the long run. Don’t overlook the
importance of maintaining cooperative relationships.

Common sources of differences

Conﬂicts will always occur during the four phases of the
outage. These differences must be quickly and effectively
resolved to assure success. The more common sources of
conﬂicts are:

Allocation of human resources With limited personnel,
project managers often have different views than others
have on how staff will be assigned.

Project managers often
Use of equipment and facilities
differ with others over the use of equipment and facilities
that must be shared.

Phase I
Defining

·Determine objectives
·Select strategy

Phase II
Planning

·Write specifications
·Develop schedule
·Develop budget

Figure 51.14 Four phases of project management

Technical opinions
opinions on how something ought to be done.

Frequently there will be different

Administrative procedures
Administrative procedures
often become points of difference, especially when not
followed.

There will be occasions when more
Responsibilities
than one person claims an area of responsibility and other
occasions when no one wants to accept responsibility.

Scheduling Differences will develop around schedules
and deadlines. Others you are depending on will not deli-
ver on their commitments.

There will be differences about which of sev-
Priorities
eral things is more important and therefore should be
handled ﬁrst.

51.11 Completing the project
is to obtain client
The goal of project management
acceptance of the project result. This means that
the
client agrees that the quality speciﬁcations of the project
parameters have been met. In order to have this go
smoothly, the client and project manager must have well-
documented criteria of performance in place from the
beginning of the project. This is not to say that nothing
can change, but when changes are made, the contract must
be amended to list the changes in speciﬁcations along with
any resulting changes in schedule and budget.

Objective, measurable criteria are always best, while
subjective criteria are risky and subject to interpretation.
There should be no room for doubt or ambiguity, although
this is often difﬁcult to achieve. It is also important to be
clear about what the project output is expected to accom-
plish. For instance, these three outcomes may produce
entirely different results; the project/product performs the
speciﬁed functions; it was built according to approved
design; or it solves the client’s problem.

The project may or may not be complete when results
are delivered to the client. Often there are documenta-
tion requirements such as operation manuals, complete

Phase III

Implementing

·Monitor performance
·Take corrective action
·Provide feedback
·Negotiate for materials,
·Resolve differences

  supplies, and services

Phase IV

Completing

·Deliver output
·Wrap up administrative
·Evaluate the experience

  details

drawings, and a ﬁnal report, which usually follow deliv-
ery. There may also be people to be trained to operate the
new facility or product, and a ﬁnal audit is common.

Finally, project team members need to be reassigned;
surplus equipment, materials, and supplies disposed of;
and facilities released.

The ﬁnal step of any project should be an evaluation
review. This is a look back over the project to see what
was learned that would contribute to the success of future
projects. This review is best done by the core project team
and typically in a group discussion.

Project completion checklist

(cid:1) 1. Test project output to see that it works.
(cid:1) 2. Write operations manual.
(cid:1) 3. Complete ﬁnal drawings.
(cid:1) 4. Deliver project output to client.
(cid:1) 5. Train client’s personnel to operate project output.
(cid:1) 6. Reassign project personnel.
(cid:1) 7. Dispose of surplus equipment, materials, and sup-

(cid:1) 8. Release facilities.
(cid:1) 9. Summarize major problems encountered and their

plies.

solution.

(cid:1) 10. Document technological advances made.
(cid:1) 11. Summarize recommendations for future research

and development.

(cid:1) 12. Summarize lessons learned in dealing with inter-

(cid:1) 13. Write performance evaluation reports on all project

(cid:1) 14. Provide feedback on performance to all project

faces.

staff.

staff.

(cid:1) 15. Complete ﬁnal audit.
(cid:1) 16. Write ﬁnal report.
(cid:1) 17. Conduct project review with upper management.
(cid:1) 18. Declare the project complete.

Project evaluation form

1. How close to scheduled completion was the project

2. What did we learn about scheduling that will help us

actually completed?

on our next project?

3. How close to budget was ﬁnal project cost?
4. What did we learn about budgeting that will help us

on our next project?

5. Upon completion, did the project output meet client

speciﬁcations without additional work?

6. If additional work was required, please describe:
7. What did we learn about writing speciﬁcations that

will help us on our next project?

8. What did we learn about stafﬁng that will help us on

our next project?

9. What did we learn about monitoring performance that

will help us on our next project?

10. What did we learn about taking corrective action that

will help us on our next project?

11. What

technological advances were made on this

project?

Completing the project 51/913

12. What tools and techniques were developed that will

be useful on our next project?

13. What recommendations do we have for future re-

search and development?

14. What lessons did we learn from our dealings with

service organizations and outside vendors?

15. If we had the opportunity to do the project over, what

would we do differently?

1.  Define the project.

2.  Select a strategy.

3.  Develop specifications.

4.  Develop a schedule.

5.  Develop a budget.

6.  Organize the project team.

7.  Assign duties and responsibilities.

8.  Train new team members.

9.  Monitor progress.

10.  Take corrective action.

11.  Provide feedback.

12.  Test final outcome.

13.  Deliver outcome to client.

14.  Write operations manual.

15.  Train client personnel.

16.  Reassign project staff.

17.  Dispose of surplus equipment, materials, 
       and supplies.

18.  Release facilities.

19.  Evaluate project performance.

20.  Complete final audit.

21.  Complete project report.

22.  Review project with management.

Figure 51.15 Project manager’s check list

51/914 Planning and Scheduling Outages

51.12 A model for successful project
management
Projects are temporary undertakings that have a deﬁnite
beginning and end. This quality distinguishes them from
the ongoing work of an organization. There are four phases
in any successful project: deﬁning, planning, implementing,
and completing. Figure 51.14 summarizes these phases.

It is imperative to the success of a project that it be
clearly deﬁned before it is undertaken. Any deﬁnition
should include the criteria for determining successful com-
pletion of the project. It is reasonable to expect changes
to occur once the project is under way, but these changes
should be documented along with any resulting impact on
schedule and budget.

A successful project produces an outcome that performs
as expected, by deadline, and within cost limits. Thus, the
three parameters by which a project is planned and con-
trolled are established. Quality is deﬁned by speciﬁcations,
time is deﬁned by schedule, and costs are deﬁned by a
budget.

To carry out

the work of the project, a temporary
team is usually assembled. This necessitates developing
an organization, assigning duties and responsibilities, and
training people in their duties. Frequently, policies and
procedures are required to clarify how the team is to
function during the project.

When work on the project begins, the project manager
has many responsibilities. The work of different individ-
uals and groups must be coordinated so that things run
smoothly, and the progress of the project must be moni-
tored and measured against plans. When deviations occur,
corrective action must be taken. Also, project managers
are expected to provide feedback to team members; nego-
tiate for materials, supplies, and services; and help resolve
differences that occur.

The goal of the project is to deliver an outcome to
the client. When that day ﬁnally arrives, there are still
things to be done before the project is complete. This
includes writing operations manuals; training client per-
sonnel on the use of the project output; reassigning project
personnel; disposing of surplus equipment materials, and
supplies; evaluating the experience; completing a ﬁnal
audit; writing a project report; and conducting a project
review with upper management.

Not every project requires the same attention to each
of these activities. It will depend upon the type of project
you are undertaking, its size and scope, and the type of
organization you are afﬁliated with. Use your own judg-
ment in selecting the steps important to the success of
your project.

Best of luck in the projects you undertake. Success can

be yours if you use the concepts presented here.

52/915

52

Contents

Lubrication

Stuart McGrory
BP Oil UK Ltd

52/917

52.1 Introduction
52.2 Lubrication – the added value
52.3 Why a lubricant?

52/917

52.3.1 Types of lubrication

52/917

52/917

52.4 Physical characteristics of oils and greases 52/918

52/918

52.4.1 Viscosity
52.4.2 Viscosity Index (VI) 52/919
52.4.3 Pour point
52.4.4 Flash point
52.4.5 Penetration of grease 52/919
52.4.6 Drop point of grease
52/919

52/919
52/919

52.5 Additives

52/919

52/920

52.5.1 Anti-oxidants
52.5.2 Anti-foam 52/920
52.5.3 Anti-corrosion
52.5.4 Anti-wear 52/920
52.5.5 Extreme pressure
52.5.6 Detergent/dispersant
52.5.7 Viscosity Index improves

52/920

52/920

52/920

52/920

52.6 Lubricating-oil applications
52.7 General machinery oils
52.8 Engine lubricants

52/921

52/921

52/920

52.8.1 Frictional wear 52/921
52.8.2 Chemical wear 52/921
52.8.3 Products of combustion and fuel dilution

52/921

52/922

52.8.4 Oxidation
52.8.5 The SAE viscosity system 52/922
52.8.6 Multigrades
52/922
52.8.7 Performance ratings
52.8.8 The API service classiﬁcations

52/923

52/923

52.9 Gear lubricants

52/926

52.9.1 Gear characteristics 52/926
52.9.2 Hypoid gears 52/927
52.9.3 Worm gears 52/928
52.9.4 Gear materials 52/929
52.9.5 Operating temperature 52/929

52/929

52/930

52/932

52/930

52/930

52/929

52/931
52/932

52.9.6 Surface speed
52.9.7 Loading
52.9.8 Speciﬁcations
52/929
52.9.9 Performance 52/929
52.9.10 AGMA speciﬁcations
52.9.11 Other speciﬁcations
52.9.12 Method of lubrication
52.9.13 Splash lubrication
52.9.14 Forced circulation
52.9.15 Oil-mist lubrication
52.9.16 Semi-ﬂuid lubrication
52.9.17 Spur, helical and bevel gears 52/933
52.9.18 Worm gears 52/933
52.9.19 Oil or grease?
52/933
52.9.20 Automatic transmissions
52/933
52.9.21 Open and shielded gears 52/934
52.9.22 Environment
52.9.23 Gear wear and failure 52/934
52.9.24 Manufacture 52/934
52.9.25 Materials 52/935
52.9.26 Operation 52/935
52.9.27 Surface damage
52/935

52/932

52/935

52/934

52/936

52/936

52.10.1 Viscosity
52.10.2 Viscosity Index 52/936
52.10.3 Effects of pressure
52.10.4 Air in the oil
52.10.5 Oxidation stability
52.10.6 Fire-resistant ﬂuids
52.10.7 Types of ﬂuid
52.10.8 High water-based hydraulic ﬂuids
52.10.9 Care of hydraulic oils and systems

52/936
52/936

52/936

52/937

52/937
52/937

52.10 Hydraulic ﬂuids

52.11 Machine tools

52/938

52/938

52.11.1 Bearings
52.11.2 Roller bearings
52.11.3 Plain journal bearings
52.11.4 Multi-wedge bearings
52.11.5 Hydrostatic bearings
52.11.6 Slideways
52/939

52/938

52/938
52/938
52/938

52/939

52/939

52/939

52/939

52.11.7 Plain slideways
52.11.8 Hydrostatic slideways
52.11.9 Ball and roller slideways
52.11.10 Lead screws and nuts
52.11.11 Recirculating-ball leadscrews 52/939
52.11.12 Gears 52/939
52.11.13 Hydraulics
52/939
52.11.14 Tramp oil 52/939
52.11.15 Lubrication and lubricants
52.11.16 Circulatory lubrication systems 52/940
52.11.17 Loss-lubrication systems
52.11.18 Manual lubrication
52.11.19 Rationalizing lubricants

52/940

52/940

52/939

52/940

52.12 Cutting ﬂuids

52/940

52/940

52/945

52/943

52.12.1 Functions of a cutting ﬂuid
52.12.2 Beneﬁts of a coolant
52/943
52.12.3 Types of coolant
52.12.4 Selection of cutting ﬂuid
52.12.5 Workpiece material 52/945
52.12.6 Machining operations
52.12.7 Tool material 52/945
52.12.8 Ancillary factors 52/945
52.12.9 Grinding
52.12.10 Storage
52.12.11 Water quality
52.12.12 Cutting ﬂuids in service

52/946
52/946

52/946

52/945

52/946

52.13 Compressor

52/947

52.13.1 Quality and safety 52/947
52.13.2 Speciﬁcations
52.13.3 Oil characteristics 52/948

52/947

52.14 Turbines

52/950

52.14.1 Steam 52/950
52.14.2 Gas 52/950
52.14.3 Performance standards

52/950

52.15 Transformers and switchgear

52.15.1 Performance standards
52.15.2 Testing
52.16 Greases 52/951

52/951

52/951

52/951

52.16.1 Types of grease
52.16.2 Selecting a grease
52.16.3 Grease application

52/951

52/953
52/953

52.17 Corrosion prevention

52/953

52.17.1 Categories of temporary corrosion

preventives

52/953

52.17.2 Selection of a corrosion preventive

52/954

52.18 Spray lubricants
52.19 Degreasing agents
52.20 Filtration
52/954

52/954

52/954

52.20.1 Types of ﬁlter
52/956

52.21 Centrifuging
52.22 Shaft seals 52/956

52/955

52.22.1 Seal materials 52/956
52.22.2 Packing materials 52/956

52/957

52.23 Centralized lubrication
52.24 Storage of lubricants
52.25 Reconditioning of oil
52.26 Planned lubrication and maintenance management

52/957
52/958

52/958

52.27 Condition monitoring
52.28 Health, safety and the environment

52/958

52.28.1 Health 52/959
52.28.2 Safety 52/959
52.28.3 Environment

52/959

52/959

52.1 Introduction
This chapter examines the need for lubrication and the
types of lubricant available. Various applications are
considered, including engines gears, hydraulic equipment,
machine
cutting and working ﬂuids,
compressors,
turbines and electrical oils. The care of
lubricants on-site, application of planned lubrication and
inclusion within overall maintenance management are
examined.

tools, metal

The plant engineer’s objective must be to ensure that
plant operates at a proﬁt. If overall efﬁciency of oper-
ation is to be achieved, and the working costs of plant
kept within acceptable bounds, time must be set aside
for the control and application of lubrication. The evolu-
tion of lubricants and their application has continued ever
since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, and as
the pattern of industry becomes increasingly more com-
plex, the standard of performance of lubricants becomes
progressively more important.

52.2 Lubrication — the added value
All machines depend for their accuracy on the strength
of their component parts, their bearings and on the type
and efﬁciency of their lubrication systems. Many machine
bearings are subjected to extremely heavy shock loads, or
intermittent loads, or exposure to unfavorable environ-
mental conditions, yet in spite of this they must always
maintain their setting accuracy.

Accuracy and reproducibility are of vital importance to
industry. Quite apart from the effect of these factors on the
ﬁnal product, several plant items are frequently links in a
continuous chain of production processes. A sizing error
in one machine, for example, could overstress and damage
the succeeding machinery. Similarly, an error in a press
may increase stress on the tool and could necessitate an
additional operation to remove excessive ‘ﬂash’. Wear in
a material preparation unit could allow oversize material
to be passed to a molding machine, creating an overload
situation with consequent damage.

The reduction of friction is only one of the functions of
a lubricant. It must remove heat (often in large amounts),
protect bearings from damage and preserve the working
accuracy and alignment of the structure. It must also pro-
tect bearings, gears and other parts against corrosion, and
must it be non-corrosive. Sometimes it may be required to
seal shafts and bearings against moisture and the ingress
of contaminating particles. The lubricant must be of the
correct viscosity for its application and may need addi-
tives to meet speciﬁcation requirements. It must also be
non-toxic, and both chemically and physically stable.

Lubrication plays a vital role in the operation of indus-
trial plant. For example, in a heavy rolling mill the lubri-
cation system, though mostly out of sight in the oil cellar,
may have a capacity of many thousands of gallons and
exceed in bulk the mill itself. Lubrication systems of this
size and complexity are usually fully automatic, with many
interlocks and other safety features. Even with the smallest
machines, automatic lubrication is becoming more popu-
lar. Where an automatic system would be impracticable or

Why a lubricant? 52/917

uneconomical, it is nevertheless important that lubrication
be carried out in accordance with a planned schedule.

It can be seen therefore that heavy demands are made
on the plant concerned, and hence on the lubricants requi-
red for its efﬁcient operation. The importance of the cor-
rect selection and application of lubricants, in the correct
amount and at the right time, will be readily appreciated.
The cost of providing high-quality lubrication is negli-
gible compared with the material return it will bring in
terms of longer working life, higher output of work and
reduced maintenance costs.

52.3 Why a lubricant?
When the surfaces of two solid bodies are in contact a
certain amount of force must be applied to one of them if
relative motion is to occur. Taking a simple example, if
a dry steel block is resting on a dry steel surface, relative
sliding motion will not start until a force approximately
equal to one ﬁfth the weight of the steel block is applied.
In general, the static friction between any two surfaces of
similar materials is of this magnitude, and is expressed
as a coefﬁcient of friction of 0.2. As soon as the initial
resistance is overcome, a very much smaller force will
keep the slider moving at uniform velocity. This second
frictional condition is called dynamic friction. In every
bearing or sliding surface, in every type of machine, these
two coefﬁcients are of vital importance. Static friction
sets the force required to start the machine and dynamic
friction absorbs power that must be paid for in terms of
fuel consumed. Also, friction resistance of non-lubricated
surfaces causes heating, rapid wear and even, under severe
conditions, actual welding together of the two surfaces.

Lubrication, in the generally accepted sense of the word,
means keeping moving surfaces completely separated by
means of a layer of some liquid. When this is satisfacto-
rily achieved, the frictional resistance no longer depends
on the solid surfaces but solely on the internal friction of
the liquid, which, in turn, is directly related to its viscos-
ity. The more viscous the ﬂuid, the greater the resistance,
but this is never comparable with that existing between
non-lubricated surfaces.

52.3.1 Types of lubrication

Lubrication exists in one of three conditions:

1. Boundary lubrication
2. Elastohydrodynamic lubrication
3. Full ﬂuid-ﬁlm lubrication

Boundary lubrication

Boundary lubrication is perhaps best deﬁned as the lubri-
cation of surfaces by ﬂuid ﬁlms so thin that the friction
coefﬁcient is affected by both the type of lubricant and the
nature of the surface, and is largely independent of viscos-
ity. A ﬂuid lubricant introduced between two surfaces may
spread to a microscopically thin ﬁlm that reduces the slid-
ing friction between the surfaces. The peaks of the high
spots may touch, but interlocking occurs only to a limited
extent and frictional resistance will be relatively low.

52/918 Lubrication

A variety of chemical additives can be incorporated in
lubricating oils to improve their properties under boundary
lubrication conditions. Some of these additives react with
the surfaces to produce an extremely thin layer of solid
lubricant, which helps to separate the surfaces and prevent
seizure. Others improve the resistance of the oil ﬁlm to
the effect of pressure.

Elastohydrodynamic lubrication

This type of lubrication provides the answer to why many
mechanisms operate under conditions that are beyond the
limits forecast by theory. It was previously thought that
increasing pressure reduced oil ﬁlm thickness until the
aspirates broke through, causing metal-to-metal contact.
Research has shown, however, that the effect on min-
eral oil of high contact pressure is a large increase in the
viscosity of the lubricant. This viscosity increase com-
bined with the elasticity of the metal causes the oil ﬁlm
to act like a thin solid ﬁlm, thus preventing metal-to-metal
contact.

Full ﬂuid-ﬁlm lubrication

This type can be illustrated by reference to the conditions
existing in a properly designed plain bearing. If the two
bearing surfaces can be separated completely by a ﬂuid
ﬁlm, frictional wear of the surface is virtually eliminated.
Resistance to motion will be reduced to a level governed
largely by the viscosity of the lubricating ﬂuid.

To generate a lubricating ﬁlm within a bearing, the
opposed surfaces must be forced apart by pressure gener-
ated within the ﬂuid ﬁlm. One way is to introduce the ﬂuid
under sufﬁcient pressure at the point of maximum loading,
but this hydrostatic method, although equally effective at
all speeds, needs considerable power and is consequently
to be avoided whenever a satisfactory alternative exists.
Above a certain critical speed, which depends mainly
on the size and loading of the bearing and the viscosity
of the lubricant, hydrodynamic forces are set up which
part the surfaces and permit full ﬂuid-ﬁlm lubrication. At
rest, the ﬂuid ﬁlm has been squeezed from beneath the
shaft, leaving only an absorbed ﬁlm on the contacting
surfaces. As the shaft starts to revolve, friction between
the journal and the bearing bore causes the shaft to climb
up the inside of the bearing until torque, together with the
increased thickness of lubricant ﬁlm, overcomes frictional
resistance and the shaft starts to slip at the point of contact.
The rotating shaft then takes up its equilibrium position,
where it is supported on a ﬂuid ﬁlm drawn beneath it by
viscous friction (see Figure 52.1).

52.4 Physical characteristics of oils and
greases
Reference will be made to the physical characteristics of
lubricants as they affect their selection for various applica-
tions. These terms are well known to the lubricant supplier
but are not always fully understood by the user. Brief
descriptions of these characteristics are therefore given so
that their signiﬁcance may be appreciated.

AT REST

STARTING UP

EQUILIBRIUM

W

A

W

B

W

C

Figure 52.1 Journal positions during start-up while a hydro-
dynamic oil ‘wedge’ is being established

52.4.1 Viscosity

This is the most important physical property of lubricating
oil; it is a measure of its internal friction or resistance to
ﬂow. In simple terms, it provides a measure of the thick-
ness of lubricating oil at a given temperature; the higher
the viscosity, the thicker the oil. Accurate determination
of viscosity involves measuring the rate of ﬂow in capil-
lary tubes, the unit of measurement being the centistoke
(cSt). As oils become thinner on heating and thicker on
cooling a viscosity ﬁgure must always be accompanied
by the temperature at which it was determined.

The number of commercial viscosity systems can be
confusing, and as kinematic viscometers are much more
sensitive and consistent, there is a growing tendency to
quote kinematic viscosities. The International Standards
Organization (ISO) uses kinematic viscosity in its viscos-
ity grade classiﬁcation (Table 52.1). Most oil companies
in their industrial lubricant nomenclature use these ISO
grade numbers. This provides the user with a simple ver-
iﬁcation of conformity regarding viscosity between plant
manufacturer and oil supplier recommendations and in the
monitoring of correct oil usage on his plant.

Table 52.1 ISO viscosity grade chart

ISO
viscosity
grade

Mid-point
kinematic
viscosity

Kinematic viscosity limits

cSt at 40° C(cid:2)104° F(cid:4)

min.

max.

2
3
5
7
10
15
22
32
46
68
100
150
220
320
460
680
1000
1500

2.2
3.2
4.6
6.8
10
15
22
32
46
68
100
150
220
320
460
680
1000
1500

1.98
2.88
4.14
6.12
9.00
13.5
19.8
28.8
41.4
61.2
90.0
135
198
288
414
612
900
1350

2.42
3.52
5.06
7.48
11.0
16.5
24.2
35.2
50.6
74.8
110
165
242
352
506
748
1100
1650

Additives 52/919

52.4.2 Viscosity index (VI)

This is a way of expressing the rate of change of vis-
cosity with temperature. All oils become less viscous as
the temperature increases. The rate of change of viscos-
ity varies with different oils and is mainly dependent on
the type of crude from which the oil is derived and the
reﬁning method. The higher the VI ﬁgure, the lower is
the variation in viscosity relative to temperature. The VI
of oil is an important property in applications where the
operating temperature is subject to considerable change.

52.4.3 Pour point

This is a rough measure of a limiting viscosity. At tem-
perature above 2.5°C (6.5°F), oil ceases to ﬂow when the
vessel in which it has been cooled is held horizontally for
5 seconds. The pour point is a guide to behavior and care
should always be taken that the operating temperatures
are above the ﬁgure speciﬁed by the oil manufacturer as
the pour point of a given oil.

52.4.4 Flash point

The ﬂash point of an oil is the temperature at which it
gives off, under speciﬁed conditions, sufﬁcient vapor to
form a ﬂammable mixture with air. This is very different
from the temperature of spontaneous combustion. The test
is an empirical one and the result depends upon the instru-
ment used and the prescribed conditions. For example,
the ﬂash point may be ‘closed’ or ‘open’, depending on
whether the test apparatus has a lid or not. As far as
lubricating oils are concerned, the test is of limited sig-
niﬁcance, although it can be indicative of contamination
(for example, the dilution of crankcase oil by fuel).

Figure 52.2 Grease penetrometer

Table 52.2 NLGI consistency classiﬁcation for
greases

NLGI number

ASTM worked penetration

at 77° F

000
00
0
1
2
3
4
5
6

455–475
400–435
355–385
310–340
265–295
220–250
175–205
130–160
85–115

52.4.5 Penetration of grease

52.4.6 Drop point of grease

important physical property of

The most
lubricating
grease is its consistency, which is analogous to the
viscosity of a liquid. This is determined by an indentation
test in which a weighted metal cone is allowed to sink into
the grease for a speciﬁed time. The depth to which the
cone penetrates, in tenths of a millimeter, is a measure of
the consistency. There is a widely accepted scale, that
of the American National Lubricating Grease Institute
(NLGI), that relates penetration to a consistency number
(Figure 52.2).

The penetration test

is used mainly to control
manufacture and to classify greases and is, within limits,
a guide to selection. Penetrations are often qualiﬁed by
the terms ‘worked’ and ‘un-worked’. As greases are
they soften because of shear but
thixotropic,
harden again after shearing has stopped,
the worked
penetration for particular grease may be appreciably
greater than the un-worked penetration. The difference
between these two ﬁgures may be a useful guide to the
selection of greases for operating conditions that involve
much churning – as small a difference as possible being
desirable (see Table 52.2).

that

is,

The drop point of grease is an indication of change from a
soft solid to a viscous ﬂuid; its value depends completely
on the conditions of test, particularly the rate of heating.
The grease sample, which is held in a small metal cup
with an oriﬁce, is heated at a predetermined rate. The drop
point is the temperature at which a drop of the sample falls
from the cup.

The drop point is of limited signiﬁcance as far as the
user is concerned, for it gives no indication of the con-
dition of the grease at lower temperatures, or of change
in consistency or structure with heat. It is a very rough
indication of grease’s resistance to heat and a guide to
manufacture. The difference between the highest temper-
ature at which grease can be used and the drop point varies
very much between types. It is at its maximum with some
soda greases and much smaller with multi-purpose lithium
products and modern complex greases.

52.5 Additives
Much highly stressed modern machinery runs under con-
ditions in which a straight mineral oil is not adequate.

52/920 Lubrication

Even the highest quality mineral oil can be unsatisfactory
in response of its resistance to oxidation and its behav-
ior under pure boundary conditions, but it is possible to
improve these characteristics by the addition of relatively
small amounts of complex chemicals. This use of addi-
tives resembles in many ways the modiﬁcation of the
properties of steel by the addition of small amounts of
other chemicals. It will be of value to have some knowl-
edge of the effect of each type of additive.

52.5.1 Anti-oxidants

When mixed with oxygen,
lubricating oil undergoes
chemical degradation resulting in the formation of acidic
products and sludge. This reaction, which is affected by
temperature, the presence of catalysts such as copper and
the composition of the oil, can be delayed by the inclusion
of suitable additives.

Anti-oxidants are the most extensively used additives
and will be found in oils and greases which are expected to
operate for considerable periods or under conditions that
would promote oxidation. Typical examples are crankcase
oils and bearing greases.

52.5.2 Anti-foam

The entrainment of air in lubricating oil can be brought
about by operating conditions (for example, churning) and
by bad design such as a return pipe that is not submerged.
The air bubbles naturally rise to the surface, and if they do
not burst quickly, a blanket of foam will form on the oil
surface. Further air escape in thus prevented and the oil
becomes aerated. Oil in this condition can have an adverse
affect on the system that, in extreme cases, could lead to
machine failure. The function of an anti-foam additive is
to assist in the burst of air bubbles when they reach the
surface of the oil.

52.5.3 Anti-corrosion

The products of oil oxidation will attack metals, and this
can be prevented by keeping the system free from pro-
oxidative impurities and by the use of anti-oxidants. These
additives will not, however, prevent rusting of ferrous sur-
faces when air and water are present in the mineral oil.
The presence of absorbed air and moisture is inevitable
in lubricating systems and therefore the oil must be inhib-
ited against rusting. These additives, which are homoge-
neously mixed with the oil, have an afﬁnity for metal,
and a strongly absorbed oil ﬁlm is formed on the metal
surface, which prevents the access of air and moisture.

52.5.4 Anti-wear

The increasing demands being made on equipment by the
requirement for increased output from smaller units create
problems of lubrication, even in systems where full-ﬂuid
ﬁlm conditions generally exist. For instance, at start-up,
after a period of rest, boundary lubrication conditions can
exist and the mechanical wear that takes place could lead
to equipment failure. Anti-wear additives, by their polar

nature, help the oil to form a strongly absorbed layer on
the metal surface, which resists displacement under pres-
sure, thereby reducing friction under boundary conditions.

52.5.5 Extreme pressure

Where high loading and severe sliding speeds exist bet-
ween two metal surfaces, any oil ﬁlm present is likely
to be squeezed out. Under these conditions, very high
instantaneous pressures and temperatures are generated.
Without the presence of extreme pressure additives, the
asperities would be welded together and then torn apart.
Extreme pressure additives react at these high temper-
atures with the metal or other oil components to form
compounds, which are more easily deformed and sheared
than the metal itself, and so prevent welding. Oils con-
taining extreme pressure additives are generally used in
heavily loaded gearboxes, which may also be subjected
to shock loading.

52.5.6 Detergent/dispersant

The products of combustion formed in internal combus-
tion engines, combined with water and unburned fuel,
will form undesirable sludge which can be deposited in
the engine and so reduce its operation life and efﬁciency.
Detergent/dispersant additives prevent the agglomeration
of these products and their deposition in oil ways by keep-
ing the ﬁnely divided particles in suspension in the oil.
They are used in engine-lubricating oils where, when com-
bined with anti-oxidants, they prevent piston ring sticking.
They are essential for high-speed diesels, and desirable for
gasoline engines.

52.5.7 Viscosity index improvers

When mineral oils are used over an extended tempera-
ture range it is frequently found that the natural viscos-
ity/temperature relationship results in excessive thinning
out in the higher-temperature region if the desired ﬂuidity
is to be maintained at the lower region. The addition of
certain polymers will, within limits, correct this situation.
They are of particular value in the preparation of lubricat-
ing oils for systems sensitive to changes in viscosity such
as hydraulic controls. They are also used in multigrade
engine oils.

52.6 Lubricating-oil applications
There is a constant effort by both the supplier and con-
sumer of lubricants to reduce the number of grades in use.
The various lubricant requirements of plant not only limit
the extent of this rationalization but also create the con-
tinuing need for a large number of grades with different
characteristics.

It is not possible to make lubricants directly from crude
oil that will meet all these demands. Instead, the reﬁnery
produces a few basic oils and these are then blended in
varying proportions, together with additives when nec-
essary, to produce oil with the particular characteristics

required. In some instances, the continued increase in
plant performance is creating demands on the lubricant
which are at the limit of the inherent physical character-
istics of mineral oil. Where the operational beneﬁt jus-
tiﬁes the cost, the use of synthetic base stocks is being
developed.

Where these are considered for existing plant, seal and
paint compatibility needs to be reviewed before such prod-
ucts are introduced. The problems which face the lubricant
supplier can best be illustrated by looking at the require-
ments of certain important applications.

52.7 General machinery oils
These are lubricants for the bearings of most plant, where
circulating systems are not involved. These are hand, ring,
bottle or bath lubricated bearings of a very wide range of
equipment; line shafting, electric motors, many gear sets
and general oil-can duties. The viscosity of these oils will
vary to suit the variations in speed, load and temperature.
While extreme or arduous usage conditions are not met
within this category, the straight mineral oils which are
prescribed must possess certain properties. The viscosity
level should be chosen to provide an adequate lubricant
ﬁlm without undue ﬂuid friction, though this may also be
inﬂuenced by the method of application. For instance, a
slightly higher viscosity might be advisable if intermittent
hand oiling has to be relied upon. Although anti-oxidants
are not generally required, such oils must have a reason-
able degree of chemical stability (Figure 52.3).

52.8 Engine lubricants
The type of power or fuel supply available will inﬂuence
the decision on prime mover to be used. This is often
electric power, but many items of plant such as compres-
sors, generators or works locomotives, will be powered by
diesel engines, as will most of the heavy goods vehicles
used in and outside the works.

The oils for these engines have several functions to
perform while in use. They must provide a lubricant ﬁlm
between moving parts to reduce friction and wear, hold
products of combustion in suspension prevent the forma-
tion of sludge and assist in cooling the engine. Unless
the lubricant chosen fulﬁls these conditions successfully,

Engine lubricants 52/921

deposits and sludge will form with a consequent undesir-
able increase in wear rate and decrease in engine life.

52.8.1 Frictional wear

If the effects of friction are to be minimized, a lubri-
cant ﬁlm must be maintained continuously between the
moving surfaces. Two types of motion are encountered in
engines, rotary and linear. A full ﬂuid-ﬁlm between mov-
ing parts is the ideal form of lubrication, but in practice,
even with rotary motion, this is not always achievable. At
low engine speeds, for instance, bearing lubrication can
be under boundary conditions.

The linear sliding motion between pistons, piston rings
and cylinder walls creates lubrication problems that are
some of the most difﬁcult to overcome in an engine. The
ring is exerting a force against the cylinder wall while
at the same time the ring and piston are moving in the
cylinder with a sliding action. Also, the direction of pis-
ton movement is reversed on each stroke. To maintain full
ﬂuid oil ﬁlm on the cylinder walls under these conditions
is difﬁcult and boundary lubrication can exist. Frictional
wear will occur if a lubricant ﬁlm is either absent or
unable to withstand the pressures being exerted. The lubri-
cant will then be contaminated with metal wear particles,
which will cause wear in other engine parts as they are
carried round by the lubricant.

52.8.2 Chemical wear

Another major cause of wear is the chemical action asso-
ciated with the inevitable acidic products of fuel com-
bustion. This chemical wear of cylinder bores can be
prevented by having an oil ﬁlm which is strongly adher-
ent to the metal surfaces involved, and which will rapidly
heal when a tiny rupture occurs. This is achieved by the
use of a chemical additive known as a corrosion inhibitor.

52.8.3 Products of combustion and fuel dilution

As it is not possible to maintain perfect combustion condi-
tions at all times, contamination of the oil by the products
of combustion is inevitable. These contaminants can be
either solid or liquid.

When an engine idles or runs with an over-rich mix-
ture the combustion process is imperfect and soot will

Rotation

Load

Figure 52.3 Ring oiled bearings

52/922 Lubrication

be formed. A quantity of this soot will pass harmlessly
out with the exhaust but some will contaminate the oil
ﬁlm on the pistons and cylinders and drain down into the
crankcase. If there is any water present, these solids will
emulsify to form sludge which could then block the oil
ways. Filters are incorporated into the oil-circulation sys-
tem to remove the solid contaminants together with any
atmospheric dust, which bypasses the air ﬁlters.

One of the liquid contaminants is water, the presence
of which is brought about by the fact that when fuel is
burnt it produces approximately its own weight in water.
When the engine is warm, this water is converted into
steam, which passes harmlessly out of the exhaust. How-
ever, with cold running or start-up conditions this water is
not converted and drains into the sump. Having dissolved
some of the combustion gases, it will be acidic in nature
and will form sludge.

Another liquid contaminant is unburned fuel. A poor-
quality fuel, for example, may contain high boiling point
constituents that will not all burn off in the combustion
process and will drain into the sump. The practice of
adding kerosene to fuel to facilitate easy starting in very
cold weather will eventually cause severe dilution of the
lubricating oil. Excessive use of over-rich mixture in cold
weather will mean that all the fuel is not burnt because
of the lack of oxygen and again, some remains to drain
into the sump.

Poor vaporization of the fuel will also produce oil dilu-
tion. Generally, this fuel will be driven off when the
engine becomes warm and is running at optimum con-
ditions. However, severe dilution of the oil by fuel could
have serious results, as the viscosity of the oil will be
reduced to an unacceptable level.

52.8.4 Oxidation

The conditions of operation in an engine are conducive to
oil oxidation, and this is another problem to be overcome
by the lubricant. In the crankcase, the oil is sprayed from
various components in the form of an oil mist, which is
in contact with a large quantity of air and at a fairly high
temperature. Oxidation produces complex carbonaceous
products and acidic material and these, combined with
fuel contaminants, will form stable sludge. In the com-
bustion chamber, where the temperatures are very much
higher, the oil is scraped up the cylinder walls by the pis-
ton ascending at very high speeds and is again present
in the form of an oil mist. A form of carbon deposit is
produced by a combination of heat decomposition and
oxidation. Some of this deposit will remain, but some
will pass into the sump. The effect of oxidation adds to
the problem of oil contamination by the products of com-
bustion, resulting in the formation of a resin-like material
on the pistons and hot metal parts known as lacquer and
acidic material which will attack bearing metals such as
copper-lead.

These problems of engine lubrication can be overcome
by using highly reﬁned oil. The resistance to oxidation is
further enhanced by the use of anti-oxidants. The addition
of corrosion-inhibitors counters acidic materials produced
by combustion at low engine temperatures.

Detergent-dispersant additives are incorporated so that
the carbonaceous matter produced by imperfect combus-
tion is retained in suspension in the oil, preventing it from
being deposited on the engine surfaces. Such an oil is
known as a fully detergent-type lubricant. All these addi-
tives are gradually consumed during operation and the rate
of decline in their usefulness will determine the oil-change
period. This rate is, in turn, inﬂuenced by the conditions
of operation.

52.8.5 The SAE viscosity system

This classiﬁcation was devised by the Society of Automo-
tive Engineers (SAE) in America by dividing the viscosity
span into four and giving each of the divisions a num-
ber – SAE 20, 30, 40 and 50. The thinnest (SAE 20),
for example, covered the range 5.7–9.6 cSt speciﬁed at
210°F, which was considered to be a temperature typical
of a hot engine. (The SAE originally speciﬁed temper-
atures in °F, because they were the convention. Today,
temperatures are quoted in °C.)

Later, the SAE series was extended to include much
thinner oils because of the growing demand for easier
winter starting. The viscosities of the three new grades
were speciﬁed at °F (typical of cold morning tempera-
tures) and each was given the sufﬁx W for winter – SAE
5W, 10W and 20W. Later still, grades of 0W, 15W and
25W were added to satisfy the more precise requirements
of modern engines (Table 52.3).

52.8.6 Multi-grades

All oils become thinner when heated and thicker when
cooled, but some are less sensitive than others to these
viscosity/temperature effects. The degree of sensitivity is
known as Viscosity Index (VI). Oil is said to have high
VI if it displays a relatively small change of viscosity for
a given change of temperature.

In the 1950s, development in additive technology led
to the production of engine oils with unusually high VIs,
known as multigrade oils. A multigrade oil’s high resis-
tance to temperature change is sufﬁcient to give it the

Table 52.3 Viscosity chart

Maximum
viscosity cP borderline pumping
temperature (cid:2)°C(cid:4)b

Maximum

at °Ca

0W 3250 at (cid:1)30
5W 3500 at (cid:1)25
10W 3500 at (cid:1)20
15W 3500 at (cid:1)15
20W 4500 at (cid:1)10
25W 6000 at (cid:1)5
20
30
40
50

–
–
–
–

(cid:1)35
(cid:1)30
(cid:1)25
(cid:1)20
(cid:1)20
(cid:1)10
–
–
–
–

Viscosity (cSt) max.

at 100°C

min.

3.8
3.8
4.1
5.6
5.6
9.3
5.6
9.3
12.5
16.3

–
–
–
–
–
–
9.3
12.5
16.3
21.9

aAs measured in the Cold Cranking Simulator (CCS).
bAs measured in the Mini Rotary Viscometer (MRV).

Viscosity cSt

10 000

1000
500

100

50

20

10

5

2

–20

0

20

Engine lubricants 52/923

SAE 10W-40 Multigrade

SAE 50
SAE 40
SAE 30
SAE 20
SAE 10W
SAE 5W

100 120

140 160 180 200

40

60

80
Temperature ˚C

Figure 52.4 Multi-grade chart

combined virtues of a thin grade at low (starting) temper-
atures and a thick one at running temperatures. An SAE
20W-40 multigrade, for example, is an thin at (cid:1)20°C
((cid:1)68°F) as a 20W oil, but as thick at 100°C (212°F)
as an SAE 40 oil. Thus, the multigrade combines full
lubrication protection at working temperatures with sat-
isfactorily easy starting on frosty mornings. Figure 52.4
is a viscosity-temperature graph for six mono-grade oils
and a 10W-40 multigrade, showing how the multigrade
has the high-temperature properties of SAE 40 oil and
the low-temperature properties of an SAE 10W. Thus,
the multigrade is suitable for all-year-round use.

52.8.7 Performance ratings

The SAE numbering system refers purely to the viscosity
of the oil, and is not intended to reﬂect lubricating per-
formance (there is no such thing as ‘SAE quality’ oil, for
example). Engine oils are marketed in a range of perfor-
mance levels, and need to be classiﬁed according to the
severity of service conditions in which they are designed
to operate. Accordingly, the American Petroleum Insti-
tute (API) has drawn up a coding system in which oils
are subjected to a series of classifying bench-tests known
as the ‘Sequence’ tests.

52.8.8 The API service classiﬁcations

In the API system the least demanding classiﬁcation for
a petrol engine was originally designated SA. The most
demanding is, at present, SG. (The S stands for Service

Station.) Constant development of both engines and oils
means that from time to time the highest ratings are super-
seded by even higher ratings. The API system also clas-
siﬁes diesel engine oils by their severity of service. Here
the categories have the preﬁx C, which stands for Com-
mercial.

Petrol engines

SA Service typical of engines operated under mild condi-
tions. This classiﬁcation has no performance require-
ments.

SB Service typical of engines operating in conditions
such that only minimum protection of the type affor-
ded by additives is desired. Oils designed for this
service have been used since the 1930s; they pro-
vide only anti-scuff capability and resistance to oil
oxidation and bearing corrosion.

SC Service typical of petrol engines in 1964–1967 cars
and trucks. Oils designed for this service provide con-
trol of high- and low-temperature deposits, wear, rust
and corrosion.

SD Service typical of 1967–1970 petrol engines in cars
and some trucks; but it may apply to later models.
Oils designed for this service provide more protection
than SC against high- and low-temperature deposits,
wear, rust and corrosion; and may be used where SC
is recommended.

SE Service typical of petrol engines

in cars and
some trucks in 1972–1979. Oils designed for this
service provide more protection against oxidation,

52/924 Lubrication

high-temperature deposits, rust and corrosion than SD
or SC, and may be used where those classiﬁcations
are recommended.

SF Service typical of petrol engines in cars and some
trucks from 1980. Oils developed for this service
provide better oxidation stability and anti-wear per-
formance than SE oils. They also provide protec-
tion against engine deposits, rust and corrosion. Oils
meeting SF may be used wherever SE, SD or SC is
recommended.

SG Service typical of petrol engines in present cars,
vans and light trucks. Oils developed for this service
provide improved control of engine deposits, oil
oxidation and engine wear relative to oils develo-
ped for previous categories. Oils meeting SG may
be used wherever SF, SE, SF/CC or SE/CC are
recommended.

Diesel engines

CA Service typical of diesel engines operated in mild
to moderate duty with high-quality fuels. Occasion-
ally this category has included petrol engines in
mild service. Oils designed for this service were
widely used in the late 1940s and 1950s; they pro-
vided protection from bearing corrosion and light-
temperature deposits.

CB This category is basically the same as CA, but
improved to cope with low-quality fuels. Oils desig-
ned for this service were introduced in 1949.

CC Service typical of

lightly supercharged diesel
engines operated in moderate to severe duty. Has
included certain heavy-duty petrol engines. Oils
designed for this service are used in many trucks
and in industrial and construction equipment and
farm tractors. These oils provide protection from
high-temperature deposits in lightly supercharged
diesels and also from rust, corrosion and low-
temperature deposits in petrol engines.

CD Service typical of supercharged diesel engines in
high-speed high-output duty requiring highly effec-
tive control of wear and deposits. Oils designed for
this service provide protection from bearing corro-
sion and high-temperature deposits in supercharged
diesel engines running on fuels of a wide quality
range.

CDII Service typical of two-stroke cycle diesel engines
requiring highly effective control over wear and
deposits. Oils designed for this service also meet
all the requirements of CD.

CE Service typical of certain turbocharged or super-
charged heavy-duty diesel engines operating under
both low speed-high load and high speed-low load
conditions. Oils designed for this service must also
meet the requirements speciﬁed for CC and CD
classiﬁcations.

Before an oil can be allocated any given API perfor-
mance level it must satisfy requirements laid down for
various engine tests. In the SG category, for example, the
engine tests are as follows:

Service IID measures the tendency of the oil to rust or
corrode the valve train and to inﬂuence the valve lifter
operation.
Sequence IIIE measures high-temperature oil oxidation,
sludge and varnish deposits, cam-and-tappet wear, cam
and lifter scufﬁng and valve lifter sticking.
Sequence VE evaluates sludge deposits, varnish deposits,
oil-ring clogging and sticking, oil-screen plugging and
cam wear.
Caterpillar IH2 determines the lubricant effect on ring
sticking, ring and cylinder wear, and accumulation of
piston deposits.
CRC L-38: the characteristics assessed are resistance to
oxidation, bearing corrosion, tendency to formation of
sludge and varnish, and change of viscosity.

In the CE category the tests are:

Caterpillar IG2: the lubricant characteristics determined
are ring sticking, ring and cylinder wear, and accumu-
lation deposits under more severe test conditions than
those for Caterpillar IH2.
Cummins NTC-400 measures crownland and piston
deposits, camshaft roller follower pin wear and oil
consumption.
Mack T6 assesses oil oxidation, piston deposits, oil con-
sumption and ring wear.
Mack T7 evaluates oil thickening.
CRC L-38 (as above).

Other speciﬁcations

Various authorities and military bodies issue speciﬁcations
relating to the service performance of engine oils. In some
instances the ratings are almost identical with those of the
API, but most of them are not precisely parallel because
they cover performance factors encountered in particular
engines and particular categories of service.

The most common of the other speciﬁcations are those
with the preﬁx MIL, issued by the US military authori-
ties. MIL-L-2104E approximates to the API CE rating for
diesel lubricants, although it also relates to petrol engines
that require API SE performance. MIL-L-46152D covers
oils for both diesel and petrol engines, and approximates
to API SG/CC (Figure 52.5).

CCMC ratings

Another important set of performance speciﬁcations is
produced by the European Vehicle Manufacturers’ Asso-
ciation, known by its initials CCMCŁ. The CCMC rating
G-1 corresponds roughly to API SE, and G-2 to API SF.
G-3 (comparable to MIL-L-46152B, for petrol engines
only) covers fuel-efﬁcient and light-viscosity lubricants

ŁComit´e des Constructeurs d’Automobiles du March´e Commun
represents joint industry opinion on factors such as lubricant
speciﬁcations, emissions, vehicle design and safety standards.
With regard to crankcase lubricants, CCMC deﬁnes sequences
of engine tests, and the tests themselves are deﬁned by CEC
(Coordinating European Committee for the Development of Per-
formance Tests for Lubricants and Engine Fuels: a joint body of
the oil and motor industries).

Engine type

Oil quality

Conditions

High

Severe

Gasoline

Diesel

Low

Mild

Low

Mild

High

Severe

API

SG

SF

SE

SD

SC

SB

SA

CA

CB

CC

CD

CE

Engine lubricants 52/925

US Military
test procedures

MIL-L-2104

D
E

A

B

C

MIL-L-45199

B

MIL-L-46152

A

B/C

D

G1
G2
G3

G4

G5

CCMC
specifications

Delisted – 1.1.90
Withdrawn Jan 90
Withdrawn Jan 90

D1

SHPD

Withdrawn Jan 90

Additive
treatment level

High

Low

Nil

Low

SHPD  =  Super High Performance Diesel
PD       =  Passenger (Car) Diesel

Figure 52.5 Approximate relationship between classiﬁcations and test procedures

D2

D3

D4

D5

PD1
PD2

High

blended from special high-quality base oils. CCMC also
issues speciﬁcations for diesel lubricants: D-1 equates
approximate to API CC, D-2 to API CD and MIL-L-
2104D, and D-3 to API CE and MIL-L-2104E.

To qualify for the CCMC categories G and D, oil must
meet the requirements of the following tests in addition
to the relevant API classiﬁcation tests.

Noack Test, to measure the weight loss due to evapora-
tion of the oil.
High shear/high temperature viscosity test, to assess the
oil’s capability for resisting shear, and so retaining its
viscosity, at high temperatures.
Tests for oil/seal compatibility and oil consumption are
still to be established.

For the G category

For the D category

Ford Kent, which evaluates cold ring sticking, piston
skirt varnish, oil thickening and consumption.
Fiat 132, to evaluate the tendency of the oil to cause
pre-ignition.
Daimler Benz OM 616 to evaluate wear of cylinders and
cams.
Bosch Injector Rig measuring the mechanical stability of
the oil to assess its shear stability.

Bosch Injector Rig, Noack and D-B O M 616 tests as
above together with:

For D1 and D2 only, MWM-B evaluating varnish, carbon
deposits, and ring-sticking;
For D3 only, D-B OM 352A bore polishing and piston
cleanliness;
For PD1 only, VW 1.6L to evaluate ring sticking and
piston cleanliness.

52/926 Lubrication

52.9 Gear lubricants
There are few engineering applications in which gears do
not play an essential part. They can be used to reduce or
increase speed, transmit power and change the direction
or position of a rotating axis. There are several types of
gears to suit these varying operational conditions, such as
spur, helical, plain and spiral bevels, hypoid, worm and
wheel (Figure 52.6).

Extremely high pressures are developed between mesh-
ing teeth as, in theory, they only have point or line contact.
Together with the sliding between mating surfaces, which
is always present, it is clear that, if there is metal-to-metal
contact, rapid wear will occur. The function of the lubri-
cant is to provide and maintain a separating ﬁlm under all
the variations in speed, load and temperature. It must also
act as a coolant and protect the gears against corrosion.

The lubrication of gears is not a simple matter, because
of their shape and variability of motion. Fundamental fac-
tors which affect their lubrication are gear characteristics,
materials, temperature, speed, loading, method of apply-
ing the lubricant and environment.

52.9.1 Gear characteristics

Spur, bevel, helical and spiral bevel gears

Providing the speed is sufﬁcient and the load does not
squeeze out the lubricant, the effect of rotating these gears
is to produce a hydrodynamic wedge of a relatively thick
lubricating ﬁlm between the meshing surfaces. If the load
is increased, the pressure within the contact zone increases,
causing a reduction in ﬁlm thickness until the high spots
on meshing teeth begin to touch; wear will then occur.

Worm &
worm wheel

Hypoid

Spur

Figure 52.6 Gear types

Gear lubricants 52/927

Rack &
pinion

Helical

Face

Figure 52.6 (continued)

Double helical

At low speeds, when the high spots make contact due
to load, the sliding velocities are not sufﬁcient to generate
the heat necessary to cause welding. The wear, which can
be quite rapid, is caused by the abrasive action of the teeth
on each other.

At medium speeds, contact of the high spots will cause
incipient melting and surface welding. The rise in surface
temperature will encourage the breakdown of the lubricant
ﬁlm and the resultant scoring which is distinctive will
cause rapid wear.

At high speeds, however, a position can be reached
in which the load-carrying capacity increases with speed.
The explanation is thought to be that when the teeth are in
contact for such a short time, the oil ﬁlm is not squeezed
out and a separating ﬁlm is therefore maintained.

52.9.2 Hypoid gears

The sliding and loading effect of these gears is such that
they generally operate outside the limiting conditions for

52/928 Lubrication

Skew

Bevel

Figure 52.6 (continued)

hydrodynamic lubrication. Additional protection against
scoring is given by incorporating suitable extreme pres-
sure additives into the lubricant. These react with the
metal surfaces at or near scoring temperature, to provide a
low-friction lubricant ﬁlm. This delays the onset of scor-
ing, although this ﬁlm will eventually break down under
much higher loads. Since these extreme pressure additives
usually react with the gear surface they can cause corro-
sive wear, but this can be contained within reasonable
limits by careful choice of oil and additives.

52.9.3 Worm gears

As worm gears tend to slide along their lines of contact,
it is virtually impossible to maintain a hydrodynamic oil

Internal

Spiral bevel

wedge so boundary lubrication conditions nearly always
exist. Correct meshing of worm gears is most important in
preserving an oil ﬁlm. Too small a contact area can result
in a rupture of the ﬁlm and consequent abrasive wear,
whereas if the contact area extends to the entry edge of
the worm wheel, lubricant can be scraped from the worm
by the tooth edges.

they are not

An important point to remember with over-slung worm
gears is that
immersed in the lubricant
and the oil must be fed to the point of contact. The
viscosity of the oil is important here, as it must not
drain too quickly from the contact area. Manufacturers
because of the particular lubrication problems involved
with worm gears often prefer a mineral oil compounded
with fatty oil.

52.9.4 Gear materials

These have an important inﬂuence on both lubrication
and wear. At the same speed, steel gears require higher
viscosity oil than cast iron or bronze, because they can
carry higher loads. Where straight oils are concerned, it
is usually true to say that the harder the gear steel, the
higher the viscosity needed.

52.9.5 Operating temperature

When selecting a lubricant, both the temperature at the
contact area and the ambient temperature at important fac-
tors to be considered. Measuring the peak contact temper-
ature is very difﬁcult. The maximum rise in temperature
of the oil leaving the gears and the maximum oil temper-
ature are speciﬁed for various types of gears. For spur,
bevel, helical and spiral level gears, the temperature rise
should not normally exceed 30°C (86°F) with a maximum
oil temperature of 70°C (158°F).

Worm and hypoid gears produce higher oil tempera-
tures because they generate a greater amount of frictional
heat. An oil temperature rise of 40°C (104°F) and a maxi-
mum oil temperature of 95°C (203°F) is acceptable. With
EP oils, it should not exceed 75°C (167°F).

52.9.6 Surface speed

It is generally true to say that, as speed increases, the
oil viscosity decreases, that is, if hydrodynamic condi-
tions exist. Relatively low viscosity oil will allow the oil
to spread rapidly over the tooth surfaces before meshing
and, in the case of forced lubrication, ease circulation. In
the case of bath lubrication, it will eliminate the oil drag
effect.

52.9.7 Loading

If a gear is subjected to shock loading, the high pres-
sures that are rapidly applied may rupture the oil ﬁlm.
These peak pressures are of greater importance than aver-
age tooth loading. To prevent sudden wear of the teeth it
is essential to maintain a lubricant ﬁlm, and using extreme
pressure additives does this. Continuous and severe over-
loading may cause the oil ﬁlm to break down with disas-
trous results.

52.9.8 Speciﬁcations

The lubrication requirements of gears vary considerably
and create the need for speciﬁcally formulated products.
This, combined with the diversity of automotive and indus-
trial gear types, has led to the introduction of several
speciﬁcations for gear lubricants (see Figure 52.7).

52.9.9 Performance

In 1969, the API drew up a range of service designa-
tions to deﬁne the protective qualities of gear oils – the
higher the number, the more strenuous the service con-
ditions. API GL-1, GL-2 and GL-3 oils are speciﬁed by

Gear lubricants 52/929

40

38

36

34

32

30

28

26

24

22

20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

C
˚
0
0
1

 
t

a

 
)
t

S
c
(
 
s
e
k
o

t
s
i
t

n
e
C

C
˚
0
4

 
t

a

 
t

S
c

775

700

625

550

500

450

400

365

315

280

240

205

175

140

115

85

60

40

20

10

0

140

90

85W

80W

75W

50

40

30

20

10W
5W

Gear oils Engine oils

Figure 52.7 The SAE numbering systems for engine oils and gear
oils are not related and must not be confused. This ﬁgure illustrates
the differences

some manufacturers, but their use is dying out. At one
time, manufacturers used GL-3 oils for factory-ﬁll pur-
poses only, to cover the running-in stage during which
gears are not subjected to severe conditions. That prac-
tice is now largely obsolete, and GL-4 oils are used almost
universally for both factory ﬁll and service reﬁll.

GL-5 oils and formulated primarily for hypoid axles
operating at high speeds and loads, and likely to suffer
shock loads. The GL-6 classiﬁcation was introduced
to cover a Ford requirement for special hypoid gears
operating in high-performance conditions at high speeds.
In the event, however,
the Lotus Elan was virtually
the only European car to require this category. GL-6
is now regarded as obsolete, but oils meeting its
requirements may still be used to overcome isolated
service difﬁculties.

Manufacturers and other bodies have issued their own
designations, which may be encountered occasionally.
Most important is the US Military speciﬁcation MIL-
L-2105D (which replaced MIL-L-2105C) corresponding
to API GL-5, and introduced approval for multi-grade
gear oils.

52/930 Lubrication

52.9.10 AGMA speciﬁcations

For industrial gears and circulating oils there is a spec-
iﬁcation published by the American Gear Manufacturers
Association, which expresses the viscosities correspond-
ing to the AGMA Lubricant Numbers in Saybolt Universal
Seconds only. The approximate viscosities in centistokes
are provided in Table 52.4 for convenience. The recom-
mendations in Tables 52.5 and 52.6 are intended as a guide
for lubricant selection.

52.9.11 Other speciﬁcations

Among other speciﬁcations that the plant user will encoun-
ter are those issued by the German DIN 51517, and indi-
vidual suppliers’ recommendations on the grades of oil to
be used in their units.

52.9.12 Method of lubrication

The method of application, whether splash, spray, jet or
mist, will have an effect on the lubricant. If oil is atom-
ized, its surface area is increased and it is much more eas-
ily oxidized. The frictional heat generated by the meshing
teeth will increase the rate of oxidation. The dissipation of

Table 52.4 AGMA lubricant numbering system

Rust and oxidation
inhibited oils

AGMA
lubricant
number
1
2
3
4
5
6
7 compc
8 comp
8A comp

EP

lubricantsa

AGMA
lubricant
number

2 EP
3 EP
4 EP
5 EP
6 EP
7 EP
8 EP

Viscosity
(cid:2)40°C(cid:4)b

Kinematic
cSt

41.4–50.6
61.2–74.8
90–110
135–165
198–242
228–352
414–506
612–748
900–1100

aEP lubricants should be used only when recommended by the
gear manufacturer.
bAs per ASTM 2422 (also BS 4231).
cOils marked ‘comp’ are compounds with 3–10% fatty or synthetic
fatty oils.

the heat absorbed by the oil is important and this will be
inﬂuenced by the lubrication system. The length of pipe

Table 52.5 Lubrication of industrial enclosed gear drives. AGMA Lubricant Number recommendations for helical, herringbone, straight
bevel, spiral bevel and spura

Centre distances: main gear, low speed

Parallel shaft (single reduction):

Up to 8 in (200 mm)
Over 8 in (200 mm) and up to 20 in (510 mm)
Over 20 in (510 mm)

Parallel shaft (double reduction):

Up to 8 in (200 mm)
Over 8 in (200 mm) and up to 20 in (510 mm)
Over 20 in (510 mm)

Parallel shaft (triple reduction):

Up to 8 in (200 mm)
Over 8 in (200 mm) and up to 20 in (510 mm)
Over 20 in (510 mm)

Planetary gear units:

Outside dia. of housing up to 16 in (410, mm)
Outside dia. of housing over 16 in (410 mm)

Spiral or straight bevel gear units:

Cone distance up to 12 in (300 mm)
Cone distance over 12 in (300 mm)

Geared motors and shaft-mounted units

Ambient temperaturesb

((cid:1)40 to 78°C)
Other lubricants

Automatic
transmission ﬂuid
or similar
producte

((cid:1)28.9 to (cid:1)3.9°C)

Engine oil SAE
10W-30, or similar
producte

((cid:1)9.4–15.6°C)

(10–51.7°C)

AGMA lubricant numberc,d

2–3
2–3
3–4

2–3
3–4
3–4

2–3
3–4
4–5

2–3
3–4

2–3
3–4
2–3

3–4
4–5
4–5

3–4
4–5
4–5

3–4
4–5
5–6

3–4
4–5

4–5
5–6
4–5

aDrives incorporating over-running clutches as backstopping devices should be referred to the clutch manufacturers, because certain
types of lubricants may adversely affect clutch performance.
bThe pour point of the lubricant should be at least 10°C lower than the expected minimum ambient starting temperature. If the ambient
starting temperature approaches the pour point, sump heaters may be required to ease starting and ensure adequate lubrication.
cViscosity ranges are provided to allow for variations such as surface ﬁnish, temperature rise, loading and speed.
dAGMA viscosity number recommendations listed above refer to R & O (rust and oxidation) inhibited gear oils, which are widely used
for general bearing, turbine and gear lubrication systems. EP gear lubricants in the corresponding viscosity grades may be substituted,
where they are deemed necessary by the gear drive manufacturer.
eWhere they are available, good-quality industrial oils having similar properties are preferred to the automotive oils. The recommendation
of automotive oils for use at ambient temperature below (cid:1)10°C is intended only as a guide pending widespread development of
satisfactory low-temperature industrial oils. It is advisable to consult the gear manufacturer.
High-speed units are those operating at speeds above 3600 rev/min or pitch line velocities above 1520 m/min. (Refer to Standard AGMA
for High Speed Helical and Herringbone Gear Units for detailed lubrication recommendations.)

Table 52.6 Enclosed cylindrical and double enveloping worm-gear drives

Gear lubricants 52/931

Worm centre distance

Up to and including 6 in (150 mm):

Cylindrical worm
Double-enveloping worm

Over 6 in (150 mm) and up to 12 in (300 mm):

Cylindrical worm
Double-enveloping worm

Cylindrical worm
Double-enveloping worm

Cylindrical worm
Double-enveloping worm

Over 24 in (610 mm):

Cylindrical worm
Double-developing

Over 12 in (300 mm) and up to 18 in (460 mm):

Over 18 in (460 mm) and up to 24 in (610 mm):

Worm
speeds
(rev/min)

up to

700
700

450
450

300
300

250
250

200
200

Ambient temperatures
15–60°F

50–125°F
(10–51.7°C)

((cid:1)9.4–15.6°C)

AGMA lubricant no.

Worm
speeds
(rev/min)

up tob

7 comp
8 comp

7 comp
8 comp

7 comp
8 comp

7 comp
8 comp

7 comp
8 comp

8 comp
8A comp

8 comp
8A comp

8 comp
8A comp

8 comp
8A comp

8 comp
8A comp

700
700

450
450

300
300

250
250

200
200

Ambient temperatures
15–60°F

50–125°F
(10–51.7°C)

((cid:1)9.4–15.6°C)

AGMA lubricant no.

7 comp
8 comp

7 comp
8 comp

7 comp
8 comp

7 comp
8 comp

7 comp
8 comp

8 comp
8 comp

7 comp
8 comp

7 comp
8 comp

7 comp
8 comp

7 comp
8 comp

aThe pour of the oil used should be less than the minimum ambient temperature expected. Consult the gear manufacturer for
recommendations regarding ambient temperatures below (cid:1)10°C.
bWorm gears of either type operating at speeds above 2400 rev/min or 610 m/min rubbing speed may require force-feed lubrication. In
general, a lubricant of lower viscosity than recommended in the above the table may be used with a force-feed system.
Warning: Worm gear drives operate satisfactorily on R & O gear oils, sulfur phosphorus EP oils or lead naphthenate EP oils. These oils,
however, should be used only with the approval of the gear manufacturer.

run, the temperature and size of bearings, pumps, other
surfaces with which the oil comes into contact, whether
ﬁlters and oil coolers are ﬁtted, all affect the heat content
of the oil.

52.9.13 Splash lubrication

Some enclosed gears are lubricated by oil splashing at
random within the casing. If the pitch-line speeds are low
(say, less than 328 ft/min), paddles and scrapers attached
to the gear wheels may be needed to pick up the required
amount of oil. If the speed is excessively high, however,
the lubricant may be ﬂung off the gears before it reaches
the meshing zone, while churning may overheat that in the
reservoir portion. The upper speed limit is usually about
2625 ft/min, but this can sometimes be exceeded where
shields are close to gear peripheries.

Although a gear train may comprise wheels of markedly
different diameters, as in multiple-reduction sets,
the
degrees of immersion in the trough must be approximately
constant. If not, the smallest or highest wheel may have
adequate pick-up while the largest
is over-immersed.
The trough should therefore be stepped or the bearing-
lubrication system extended to lubricate the smaller or
higher gears.

Optimum depth of immersion depends on pitch-line
low speeds
speed. Deep immersion is permissible at
because power losses from churning are low, but at
moderate speeds the immersion depth should not be
more than three times the tooth height. At the highest
speeds, only the addenda of the teeth need be submerged
(Figure 52.8).

Figure 52.8 In a splash-fed gear the depth of immersion must be
reasonably constant for all the gears, therefore the casing should
incorporate stepped troughs for the oil

When gears are rotating inside a casing some oil is
being carried around by them and some is adhering to the
walls, so the oil in the trough is lower than when at rest.
The sight-glass or dipstick should therefore be calibrated
when the gears are in motion. With bevel, hypoid and
worm sets, the relative positions of the various elements
can vary so much that the ‘correct’ oil level cannot always
be accurately deﬁned.

In splash lubrication, the oil absorbs heat, which is
transmitted to the casing. Gearbox designers sometimes
augment the cooling effect by ﬁnning the casing to increase
the area of metal exposed to atmosphere. In some designs,
a fan is mounted on the driving shaft, to force cooling air
over the casing. At the installation stage, intelligent siting
can sometimes facilitate the cooling of gear units.

52/932 Lubrication

52.9.14 Forced circulation

Circulation by pumping is, of course, more expensive than
simple splash lubrication, but the expense is usually jus-
tiﬁed. Some of the many advantages are as follows:
ž Oil supplied to each meshing area can be metered to
provide the optimum ﬂow for lubrication and cooling.
ž Heat exchangers can be installed to minimize changes
of temperature. This means that the user can select vis-
cosity solely on the grounds of conditions at the tooth
face, and can virtually ignore other requirements. Thin
oil, for example, can be cooled to prevent it becoming
too thin during continuous circulation through mesh-
ing zones, or to prevent overheating; thick oil can be
heated to encourage rapid initial ﬂow through feeder
lines.
ž Filtration units can be incorporated into circulation lines,
thus ensuring that clean oil is fed to gears and bearings.
ž Gear casings can be small, since their oil reservoirs can
be sited remotely. In most rolling mills, for instance,
oil cellar houses storage tanks, pumps, heat exchangers
and ﬁlters.

Oil is fed to meshing zones by wide jets or sprayers,
and uniform distribution across the tooth faces is neces-
sary to avoid local distortion. Clearly, the rate of ﬂow
is important; the effects of too little oil are easily imag-
ined. A sound practice is to position an extra jet on the
‘exit’ or disengagement side of a meshing zone, where
the teeth are at their highest temperature. If gears run in
either direction, sprayers must be installed on both sides.
Formulae exist for calculating the optimum rates of
ﬂow, based on considerations of the heat to be removed –
which calls for more oil ﬂow than does lubrication alone –
but they are complex and require data that may not be
available at the design stage. A reasonable estimate is
0.05–0.10 l/min for each millimeter of tooth width.

Heat from bearings is an important fraction of the total
heat to be dissipated from a gear system, and must be
taken into account in calculations of cooling requirements.
Excessive churning of oil causes unnecessary loss of power,
and the resultant combination of high temperature and
atomization of the oil raises the rate of oxidation. Careful
attention to the design and siting of sprayers minimizes
these effects, keeps the oil cooler and prolongs its service
life (Figure 52.9).

52.9.15 Oil-mist lubrication

Although not widely used for gears, oil-mist lubrication
is nevertheless worth mentioning here. It is a ‘total loss’
technique in which the oil is supplied in the form of ﬁne
droplets carried by compressed air. Two virtues are that
the lubricant can be carried long distances through pipes
without severe frictional losses, and that no oil pumps
are needed since the motive power is provided by fac-
tory compressed-air lines. However, unless such systems
are totally enclosed, the exhaust can create a build-up
of oil-mist in the atmosphere. In order to maintain good
standards of industrial hygiene, it is recommended that

Figure 52.9 Oil is fed to some gears by jet or spray, so that the full
beneﬁts of lubrication and cooling are obtained precisely where
they are needed. An extra jet at the ‘exit’ side of a meshing zone
ensures that the teeth are cooled where the temperature is highest

the concentration of oil-mist in the working environment
should not exceed 5 mg/m3.

52.9.16 Semi-ﬂuid lubrication

Gear oils possess most of the attributes required in the
lubricating function, but the need for an alternative lubri-
cant is encountered in some industrial applications. One
such need rises from the leakage caused by slight wear of
oil-seals – which is inevitable in any gear unit. Oil escap-
ing past seals seeps along input and output shafts, from
where it is probably thrown onto adjacent walls, ﬂoors or
machinery. Loss of lubricant is particularly undesirable
in a geared motor, where leakage from the reduction-gear
section may have rapid and disastrous effects on electrical
components.

Industrial maintenance engineers are, unhappily, famil-
iar with the problem of leaking gear units that have to run
at a high factor of utilization, since interruptions or down-
time for ﬁlling, checking and repair can seriously retard a
production program. Such checks are made necessary, of
course, by the risk of drying up and gear failure. Leakage
is annoying in units that operate in conventional horizontal
attitudes, but it can be of serious concern to maintenance
staff if the gear units are operating in unusual orientations
or are part of machinery that changes angular position
during a work cycle.

In the past, greases have been used to eliminate leakage
from a few small and lightly loaded gear units, but orthodox
greases do not possess the full range of properties required
in the more demanding applications. However, develop-
ment has produced excellent semi-ﬂuid gear lubricants,
which are ﬁnding their way into an ever-widening range of
applications. A gearbox lubricated by a modern special-
purpose semi-ﬂuid lubricant can operate for very long
periods without the need of maintenance. The semi-ﬂuid

lubricants formulated for gear lubrication include a mineral
based for spur, helical, bevel gears, and synthetic based for
worm gears.

usually incorporated, and they are carefully selected to
be compatible with both the poly-alkaline and the grease-
thickener system.

Gear lubricants 52/933

52.9.17 Spur, helical and bevel gears

52.9.19 Oil or grease?

The latest mineral-base grease is thickened, not by a metal-
lic soap, but by a polymer, and its additives include an anti-
oxidant and a modern EP agent of the sulfur/phosphorus
type. Such grease has ﬂow characteristics that vary with
shearing conditions. It is like a gear oil in the tooth-contact
regions, where shearing is severe, but is more resistant
to ﬂow in regions of low shear – as in oil seals. Conse-
quently, the grease resists leakage at the seals and joints,
and the lubrication function is fulﬁlled, especially in heav-
ily loaded steel gears. Another important virtue is that the
product does not readily drain from metallic surfaces: dry
starts are thus avoided (Figure 52.10).

52.9.18 Worm gears

As already mentioned, the severe loading and sliding con-
ditions at the tooth faces of worm gears generate a great
deal of heat. EP or anti-weld additives are ineffective
in these circumstances, and can even be harmful. Con-
sequently, the synthetic oils that have been developed
speciﬁcally for worm gears are incorporated into semi-
ﬂuid grease formulations for applications in which leakage
must be avoided. One of their primary requirements, of
course, is high shear stability.

Several of the current synthetic semi-ﬂuid lubricants for
worm gears are based on a poly-alkaline glycol – which
possesses ’slipperiness’. Oxidation and rust-inhibitors are

Log. apparent viscosity

Oil

Grease

Shear stress

In summary, it can be said that the best choice of lubricant
for a gearbox depends on the service conditions. If leak-
age is a problem, or if, during shutdown, the maintenance
of a thick ﬁlm of lubricant is necessary to inhibit cor-
rosion and prevent ‘dry-state’ operation, greases show to
advantage. If generation of heat and consequent excessive
temperatures are a problem, users will ﬁnd it better to use
liquid lubricants, which have the advantage of high rates
of heat transfer.

52.9.20 Automatic transmissions

Frictional behavior

Satisfactory gear changing in an automatic transmission
unit is a compromise between smooth slippage during
take-up and ﬁrm grip during drive. The frictional prop-
erties of an ATF can be adjusted with friction-modifying
additives during the formulation stages to ensure care-
ful matching with the requirements of transmission man-
ufactures. Two kinds of frictional behavior have to be
considered in combination:

1. Static friction, which exists when sliding motion starts

from rest;

2. Dynamic friction, which comes into effect when the

mating surfaces are in motion.

The transition stage from one to the other is critical,
and is the point at which any problem of noise or chat-
tering occurs. Some transmission designs have a take-up
characteristic best suited by low static friction and some
by a high static friction. On no account should the wrong
ATF be employed when a transmission unit is being com-
pletely ﬁlled, but a limited degree of topping up with the
wrong ﬂuid is permissible in most cases. (The need for
ﬂuids of high static friction is receding now that related
designs are being phased out.)

Automatic transmission ﬂuids (ATFs)

An ATF has to satisfy several requirements. It must:

1. Lubricate the gears in the gearbox;
2. Fill the torque converter (or ‘automatic clutch’) and

thus convey power from the engine to the gearbox;

3. Act as hydraulic medium by conveying signals from
the valves in the control unit to the internal clutches/
brakes that engage the gears;

4. Ensure smooth but rapid take-up of power between the

friction faces of the oil-immersed clutches/brakes;

5. Remove frictional heat and cool the whole transmis-

sion unit.

Figure 52.10 Comparison of the apparent viscosities of a gear oil
and a gear grease. The grease ﬂows readily in the tooth-contact
region, where shear stress is high, but resists leakage at seals and
joints

An ATF requires high lubrication performance, high
levels of oxidation stability to withstand the locally high
operating temperatures, a degree of ﬂuidity that ensures

52/934 Lubrication

easy operation in cold weather, stable viscosity properties,
closely controlled frictional behavior to ensure quiet, con-
sistent and chatter-free take-up of power in the internal
brakes and clutches. It must preserve all these properties
throughout its service life, to maintain consistent lubrica-
tion performance and gear-change characteristics.

Over the years, GM and Ford have progressively raised
their levels of demand for oxidative/thermal stability,
to cater for cars with higher power and thus greater
likelihood of high transmission temperatures. GM’s
latest designation is Dexron IID, and the latest Ford
speciﬁcation is M2C 33-G, commonly referred to as the
Ford G ﬂuid. The Daimler-Benz requirement is that a
ﬂuid should retain its frictional characteristics throughout
its life (in other words, throughout the life of the car).
Additive systems have been developed with properties
acceptable to Daimler-Benz, however, and a ‘universal’
ATF can now be blended.

52.9.21 Open and shielded gears

In general, the lubricant for open or partly enclosed gears
is used on a ‘total loss’ basis – it is neither recirculated
nor recovered. Rates of application must be minimal, both
for economy and because the accumulation of used lubri-
cant creates problems. A distinguishing feature of this cat-
egory is that separate provision must be made for lubricat-
ing the bearings – by grease cups, oil bottles or mechan-
ical lubricators.

Open gears usually run at low pitch-line speeds, below,
say, 492 ft/min, and are not machined to high standards
of accuracy. If their lubricant is to be applied intermit-
tently by hand, the most satisfactory results are obtained
with special high-viscosity ‘residual’ oils that have strong
properties of adhesion. Very viscous and heavy lubricants
may be heated and spread over the gear teeth, which must
be clean and dry, with a brush or paddle. In this case, the
oil must not be heated so that it becomes too ﬂuid, for
although it will then be easier to apply there will be con-
siderable wastage. It is equally important not to use too
much oil, for the excess will immediately be ﬂung off
when the gears are in motion. In addition, over-oiling can
lead to the formation of hard pads of lubricant at the bot-
tom of the teeth, which could stress or distort the shaft or
cause wear in the shaft bushes. To make heating unneces-
sary, the lubricant may be supplied in a suitable solvent
that evaporates after cold application to the gears.

Under better conditions, mechanical lubrication may
be used. Force-feed lubricators can be installed that will
provide a continuous and measured supply of oil to the
meshing teeth or by spraying atomized lubricant onto the
gears.

Thinner oils, particularly those operating in relatively
clean conditions, can lubricate some slow-running shielded
gears. In that case, the teeth of the largest wheel can dip
into a ‘slush pan’ and carry oil to the rest of the gear train.

52.9.22 Environment

While gear oil will protect the metal surfaces against cor-
rosion appreciable amounts of corrosive contaminants will

affect the properties of the lubricant. Water is particularly
troublesome in this respect. Different oils, while quite
suitable for gear lubrication under normal conditions, may
react very differently when contaminated with water. With
active extreme pressure type oils, water leads to severe
corrosion problems.

All these factors have to be borne in mind when blend-
ing gear oils. The oil must have a viscosity capable of
maintaining a hydrodynamic lubricating ﬁlm under, as
far as possible, all working conditions. Its viscosity index
should be high enough to maintain the viscosity within
permitted limits at any operating temperature. It must be
adhesive enough when on the gear teeth to resist removal
by wiping or centrifugal force and not rupture under heavy
or shock loads. The chemical stability of the oil must
be such that it will not break down under the action of
temperature, oxidizing agents and contaminants. It must
provide protection against rusting and corrosion. It should
not foam in service and should have the ability to separate
from any water that may enter the system.

52.9.23 Gear wear and failure

A gearbox can be regarded as having four main compo-
nents – gears, casing, bearings and lubricant – and failure
can be caused by shortcomings in any one of them. Gear
teeth that are inaccurate through design or manufacture
can cause poor meshing, noisy running, overheating or
surface failure due to overloading. Excessive ﬂexing of
the casing would allow misalignment of the gear shafts,
which would also lead to surface failure due to overheat-
ing. Unsuitable or badly ﬁtted bearings may fail because
of their own surface damage, and this creates shaft mis-
alignments and produces debris that can quickly damage
the gear teeth. Lubrication failure can arise from unsuit-
able lubricant or from the inability (through bad design)
of the lubricant to get where it is needed.

52.9.24 Manufacture

The makers of gear units have quite a choice of gear-
cutting and gear-forming techniques at
their disposal,
including hobbing, shaping, grinding, broaching, milling
and rolling. Every production process is inevitably a
compromise between ease of machining, good surface
ﬁnish, proﬁle accuracy, speed of output and economic
production. All metal-removal operations leave minute
ridges and scratches, caused by tool shapes or by the
motion of rotary cutters; perfect proﬁles and ﬁnishes are
not obtainable with normal industrial processes. Tooling
marks and deep scratches act as stress raisers, which
occasionally lead to fatigue failure and tooth breakage.
Such a failure almost invariably starts in the ﬁllet radius
at the root of a tooth, and may be caused by the use of a
cutting tool with too small a radius.

Most gears beneﬁt from careful running in under light
load, since in this way the teeth acquire the surface ﬁnish
needed for good lubrication and smooth running. In effect,
they are given a ﬁnal production operation, without which
the process of surface failure might be initiated as soon
as service operation begins.

Poor assembly can also limit the life of a gear. If a
pinion is clumsily pressed onto a shaft, for example, it
is likely to operate in an overstressed condition and fail
at an early stage, even through running well within its
designated rating.

52.9.25 Materials

Gear failure is rarely attributable to the type of material
selected. More often, it is the result of defects such as
cracks, casting inclusions and poor heat-treatment. Badly
casehardened steel might fail by the ﬂaking of its hard
outer layers and a through-hardened gear might have hard
or soft patches. Distortions due to sub-standard harden-
ing can modify tooth proﬁles to such an extent that load
concentrations will break the ends of teeth.

The term ‘failure’ is relative, because severe operating
conditions affect different materials in different ways. An
example of this might be seen in a high-reduction gear
unit whose pinion is very small and is therefore made of
harder material, to avoid premature wear relative to the
larger gear. In arduous running, the two gears might not
display the same kind of wear pattern.

52.9.26 Operation

The three most likely types of operational service misuse
are overloading, incorrect lubrication and the presence of
contaminants. Overloading is primarily due to the use of
too small or too weak a gear unit, and this may be the
result of false economy (installing an available unit for an
application beyond its capacity) or failure to cater for the
effects of shock loads in calculations of power rating.

Incorrect lubrication can take many forms. One exam-
ple is the use of oil that is too thick or too thin, or is
incompatible with the metal of the gears. Others include
unsuitable methods of application, bad ﬁltration, inade-
quate maintenance, ﬁlling to the wrong level, and poor
standards of storage and handling.

the

Ideally,

lubricant

should remain free

from
contaminants that might cause rust, abrasion or chemical
attack; contamination may be caused by the presence of
machining swarf, casting sand or even small items of
rubbish left in the casing during manufacture. During
service, dust and dirt can enter through the breathers,
through neglected inspection covers or in additions of
poorly maintained lubricant. Again, other contaminants
have their origin inside the unit – rust particles, ﬁne metal
dust produced during the wearing process, and substances
that result from the lubricant’s gradual deterioration.
Thick layers of sludge inside the casing can hinder the
dissipation of heat, and thereby cause overheating; thick
layers of dirt outside the casing can have exactly the same
effect.

52.9.27 Surface damage

The types of wear and failure that occur in metallic gears
are distinctive and have been subjected to close analysis
over many years. The more common types of failure are
abrasion, scufﬁng, pitting, corrosion, plastic yielding and

Hydraulic ﬂuids 52/935

fracture. Often the original cause, which may be misalign-
ment, shock loading, faulty lubrication or one of numerous
other possibilities, can be traced from the appearance of
the gear teeth. It is important, also, that various kinds of
wear may be combined in a single failure, making inter-
pretation more difﬁcult.

52.10 Hydraulic ﬂuids

The wide application of hydraulic systems has
undoubtedly been stimulated by the increasing use of
fully automatic controls for sequences of operations
where the response to signals must be rapid and the
controls themselves light and easily operated. These needs
are met by hydraulic circuits that, in addition, provide
inﬁnitely variable speed control, reversal of high-speed
parts without shock, full protection against damage from
overhead and automatic lubrication.

Over the years the performance standards of hydraulic
equipment have risen. Whereas a pressure of about
1000 psi used to be adequate for industrial hydraulic
systems, nowadays systems operating with pressures of
2000–3500 psi are common. Pressures above 5000 psi are
to be found in applications such as large presses for
which suitable high-pressure pumps have been developed.
Additionally, systems have to provide increased power
densities, more accurate response, better reliability and
increased safety. Their use in numerically controlled
machine tools and other advanced control systems creates
the need for enhanced ﬁltration. Full ﬂow ﬁlters as ﬁne as
1–10 micron retention capabilities are now to be found
in many hydraulic systems.

With the trend toward higher pressures in hydraulic
systems, the loads on unbalanced pump and motor com-
ponents become greater and this, coupled with the need
for closer ﬁts to contain the higher pressures, can intro-
duce acute lubrication problems. Pumps, one of the main
centers of wear, can be made smaller if they can run at
higher speeds or higher pressures, but this is only possi-
ble with adequate lubrication. For this reason, a ﬂuid with
good lubrication properties is used so that ‘hydraulics’ is
now almost synonymous with ‘oil hydraulics’ in general
industrial applications. Mineral oils are inexpensive and
readily obtainable while their viscosity can be matched to
a particular job.

The hydraulic oil must provide adequate lubrication in
the diverse operating conditions associated with the com-
ponents of the various systems. It must function over an
extended temperature range and sometimes under bound-
ary conditions. It will be expected to provide a long,
trouble-free service life; its chemical stability must there-
fore be high. Its wear-resisting properties must be capable
of handling the high loads in hydraulic pumps. Addition-
ally, the oil must protect metal surfaces from corrosion
and it must both resist emulsiﬁcation and rapidly release
entrained air that, on circulation, would produce foam.

Mineral oil alone, no matter how high its quality, can-
not adequately carry out all the duties outlined above and
hence the majority of hydraulic oils have their natural
properties enhanced by the incorporation of four different
types of additives. These are: an anti-oxidant, an anti-wear

52/936 Lubrication

agent, a foam-inhibitor and an anti-corrosion additive.
For machines in which accurate control is paramount, or
where the range of operating temperatures is wide – or
both – oils will be formulated to include a VI improving
additive as well.

52.10.1 Viscosity

Probably the most important single property of hydraulic
oil is its viscosity. The most suitable viscosity for a hydra-
ulic system is determined by the needs of the pump and
the circuit; too low a viscosity induces back-leakage and
lowers the pumping efﬁciency; while too high a viscos-
ity can cause overheating, pump starvation and possibly
cavitation.

52.10.2 Viscosity index

It is desirable that a ﬂuid’s viscosity stays within the
pump manufacturer’s stipulated viscosity limits, in order
to accommodate the normal variations of operating tem-
perature. Oil’s viscosity falls as temperature rises; certain
oils, however, are less sensitive than others to changes
of temperatures, and these are said to have a higher VI.
Hydraulic oils are formulated from base oils of inher-
ently high VI, to minimize changes of viscosity in the
period from start-up to steady running and while circulat-
ing between the cold and hot parts of a system.

52.10.3 Effects of pressure

Pressure has the effect of increasing oil’s viscosity. While
in many industrial systems the working pressures are not
high enough to cause problems in this respect, the trend
towards higher pressures in equipment is requiring the
effect to be accommodated at the design stage. Reactions
to pressure are much the same as reactions to tempera-
ture, in that an oil of high VI is less affected than one
of low VI. Typical hydraulic oil’s viscosity is doubled
when its pressure is raised from atmospheric to 5000 psi
(Figure 52.11).

52.10.4 Air in the oil

In a system that is poorly designed or badly operated, air
may become entrained in the oil and thus cause spongy
and noisy operation. The reservoir provides an opportu-
nity for air to be released from the oil instead of accu-
mulating within the hydraulic system. Air comes to the
surface as bubbles, and if the resultant foam were to
become excessive, it could escape through vents and cause
loss of oil. In hydraulic oils, foaming is minimized by the
incorporation of foam-breaking additives. The type and
dosage of such agents must be carefully selected, because
although they promote the collapse of surface foam they
may tend to retard the rate of air release from the body
of the oil.

52.10.5 Oxidation stability

Hydraulic oils need to be of the highest oxidation stabil-
ity, particularly for high-temperature operations, because

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

Ratio of viscosities

Low-VI oil

High-VI oil

100

200

300

Pressure, atmospheres ABS

Figure 52.11

oxidation causes sludge and lacquer formation. In hydraulic
oils, a high level of oxidation stability is ensured by the
use of base oils of excellent quality, augmented by a very
effective combination of oxidation inhibitors.

A very approximate guide to an oil’s compatibility with
rubbers commonly used for seals and hoses is given by
the Aniline Point, which indicates the degree of swelling
likely to arise; a high ﬁgure indicates a high level of
compatibility. This system has been superseded by the
more accurate Seal Compatibility Index (SCI), in which
the percentage volume swell of a ‘standard’ nitrile rubber
is determined after an immersion test in hot oil.

52.10.6 Fire-resistant ﬂuids

Where ﬁre is a hazard, or could be extremely damaging,
ﬁre-resistant hydraulic ﬂuids are needed. They are referred
to as ‘ﬁre resistant’ (FR) so that users should be under no
illusions about their properties. FR ﬂuids do not extin-
guish ﬁres: they resist combustion or prevent the spread
of ﬂame. They are not necessarily ﬁreproof, since any
ﬂuid will eventually decompose if its temperature rises
high enough. Nor are they high-temperature ﬂuids, since
in some instances their operating temperatures are lower
than those of mineral oils. FR ﬂuids are clearly essential in
such applications as electric welding plants, furnace-door
actuators, mining machinery, die-casters, forging plant,
plastics machinery and theatrical equipment. When leak-
age occurs in the pressurized parts of a hydraulic system
the ﬂuid usually escapes in the form of a high-pressure
spray. In the case of mineral oils, this spray would catch
ﬁre if it were to reach a source of ignition, or would set up
a rapid spread of existing ﬂame. FR ﬂuids are therefore
formulated to resist the creation of ﬂame from a source
of ignition, and to prevent the spread of an existing ﬁre.

Four main factors enter into the selection of a ﬁre-

resistant ﬂuid:

1. The required degree of ﬁre-resistance;
2. Operational behavior in hydraulic systems (lubrication
performance, temperature range and seal compatibility,
for example);

3. Consideration of hygiene (toxicological, dermatologi-

cal and respiratory effects);

4. Cost.

52.10.7 Types of ﬂuid

The ﬂuids available cover a range of chemical constituents,
physical characteristics and costs, so the user is able to
choose the medium that offers the best compromise for
operational satisfaction, ﬁre-resistance and cost effective-
ness. Four basic types of ﬂuid are available and are shown
in Table 52.7.

In a fully synthetic FR ﬂuid, the ﬁre resistance is due
to the chemical nature of the ﬂuid; in the others, it is
afforded by the presence of water. The other main dis-
tinction between the two groups is that the fully synthetic
ﬂuids are generally better lubricants and are available for
use at operating temperatures up to 150°C (272°F), but are
less likely to be compatible with the conventional sealing
materials and paints than are water-based products.

When a water-based ﬂuid makes contact with a ﬂame
or a hot surface its water component evaporates and forms
a steam blanket that displaces oxygen from around the hot
area, and this obviates the risk of ﬁre. Water-based prod-
ucts all contain at least 35% water. Because water can be
lost by evaporation, they should not be subjected to oper-
ating temperatures above about 60°C (140°F). Table 52.8
shows a comparison of oil and FR ﬂuids.

52.10.8 High water-based hydraulic ﬂuids

For a number of years HF-A oil-in-water emulsions have
been used as a ﬁre-resistant hydraulic medium for pit
props. Concern over maintenance costs and operational
life has created interest in a better anti-wear type ﬂuid.
Micro-emulsions are known to give better wear protection

Table 52.7 CETOP classiﬁcations of ﬁre-resistant hydraulic
ﬂuids

Class

HF-A

HF-B

HF-C

HF-D

Description

Oil-in-water emulsions containing a maximum of
20% combustible. These usually contain 95%
water
Water-in-oil emulsions containing a maximum of
60% combustible material. These usually contain
40–45% water
Water–glycol solutions. These usually contain at
least 35% water
Water-free ﬂuids. These usually refer to ﬂuids
containing phosphate esters, other organic esters
or synthesized hydrocarbon ﬂuids

CETOP: Comit ´e European des Transmissions Oleohydrauliques
et Pneumatiques.

Table 52.8 Comparison of oil and FR ﬂuids

Hydraulic ﬂuids 52/937

Mineral Water-in-oil Water– Phosphate

oil

emulsion

glycol

ester

Poor
0.87

High
Low

No
No

Very good

Fair
0.94

High
High

Partly

No
Good

Excellent

1.08

Good
1.14

High
High

Partly
Yes
Fair

Low
Low

Yes
Yes
Fair

Fire resistance
Relative

density

Viscosity Index
Vapor

pressure

Special seals
Special paints
Rust

protection

than the normal oil-in-water emulsions. At the same time,
the car industry, in attempts to reduce costs especially
from leakage on production machinery, has evaluated the
potential for using HWBHF in hydraulic systems. As a
result, in many parts of industry, not only those where ﬁre-
resistant hydraulic ﬂuids are needed, there is a increasing
interest in the use of HWBHF.

Such ﬂuids often referred to as 5/95 ﬂuid (that being the
ratio of oil to water), have essentially the same properties
as water with the exception of the corrosion character-
istics and the boundary lubrication properties, which are
improved by the oil and other additives. The advantages of
this type of ﬂuid are ﬁre resistance, lower ﬂuid cost, no
warm-up time, lower power consumption and operating
temperatures, reduced spoilage of coolant, less depen-
dence on oil together with reduced transport, storage,
handling and disposal costs, and environmental beneﬁts.
the user should not
overlook the constraints in using such ﬂuids. They can
be summarized as limited wear and corrosion protection
(especially with certain metals), increased leakage due to
its low viscosity, limited operating temperature range and
the need for additional mixing and in-service monitoring
facilities.

In considering these beneﬁts,

Because systems are normally not designed for use with
this type of ﬂuid, certain aspects should be reviewed with
the equipment and ﬂuid suppliers before a decision to use
such ﬂuids can be taken. These are compatibility with
ﬁlters, seals, gaskets, hoses, paints and any non-ferrous
metals used in the equipment. Condensation corrosion
effect on ferrous metals, ﬂuid-mixing equipment needed,
control of microbial infection together with overall main-
taining and control of ﬂuid dilution and the disposal of
waste ﬂuid must also be considered. Provided such atten-
tion is paid to these designs and operating features, the
cost reductions have proved very beneﬁcial to the overall
plant cost effectiveness.

52.10.9 Care of hydraulic oils and systems

Modern additive-treated oils are so stable that deposits and
sludge formation in normal conditions have been almost
eliminated. Consequently, the service life of the oils which
is affected by oxidation thermal degradation and moisture
is extended.

52/938 Lubrication

Solid impurities must be continuously removed because
hydraulic systems are self-contaminating due to wear of
hoses, seals and metal parts. Efforts should be made to
exclude all solid contaminants from the system altogether.
Dirt is introduced with air, the amount of airborne impu-
rities varying with the environment. The air breather must
ﬁlter to at least the same degree as the oil ﬁlters.

It is impossible to generalize about types of ﬁlter to
be used. Selection depends on the system, the rate of
contamination build-up and the space available. However,
a common arrangement is to have a full-ﬂow ﬁlter unit
before the pump with a bypass ﬁlter at some other conve-
nient part of the system. Many industrial systems working
below 2000 psi can tolerate particles in the order of 25–50
microns with no serious effects on either valves or pumps.
Provided that the system is initially clean and ﬁtted
with efﬁcient air ﬁlters, metal edge-strainers of 0.005-
inch spacing appear to be adequate, although clearances
of vane pumps may be below 0.001-inch. It should be
remembered that an excessive pressure drop, due to a
clogged full-ﬂow ﬁne ﬁlter, could do more harm to pumps
by cavitation than dirty oil.

If ﬂushing is used to clean a new system or after over-
haul, it should be done with the hydraulic oil itself or one
of lighter viscosity and the same quality. As the ﬂush-
ing charge circulates it should pass through an edge-type
paper ﬁlter of large capacity. It is generally preferable to
use a special pump rather than the hydraulic pump sys-
tem, and the temperature of the oil should be maintained
at about 40°C without local overheating.

52.11 Machine tools
Lubricants are the lifeblood of a machine tool. Without
adequate lubrication, spindles would seize, slides could
not slide and gears would rapidly disintegrate. However,
the reduction of bearing friction, vital though it is, is by
no means the only purpose of machine-tool lubrication.
Many machines are operated by hydraulic power, and one
type of oil may be required to serve as both lubricant and
hydraulic ﬂuid. The lubricant must be of correct viscos-
ity for its application, must protect bearings, gears and
other moving parts against corrosion, and, where appro-
priate, must remove heat to preserve working accuracy
and alignments. It may additionally serve to seal the bear-
ings against moisture and contaminating particles. In some
machine tools, the lubricant also serves the functions of
cutting oil, or perhaps needs to be compatible with the
cutting oil. In other tools, an important property of the
lubricant is its ability to separate rapidly and completely
from the cutting ﬂuid. Compatibility with the metals, plas-
tics, sealing elements and tube connections used in the
machine construction is an important consideration.

In machine-tool operations, as in all others, the wisest
course for the user is to employ reputable lubricants in the
manner recommended by the machine-tool manufacturer
and the oil company supplying the product. This policy
simpliﬁes the selection and application of machine tool
lubricants. The user can rest assured that all the consid-
erations outlined above have been taken into account by
both authorities.

The important factors from the point of view of lubrica-
tion are the type of component and the conditions under
which it operates, rather than the type of machine into
which it is incorporated. This explains the essential simi-
larity of lubricating systems in widely differing machines.

52.11.1 Bearings

As in almost every type of machine, bearings play an
important role in the efﬁcient functioning of machine tools.

52.11.2 Roller bearings

There is friction even in the most highly ﬁnished ball or
roller bearing. This is due to the slight deformation under
load of both the raceway and the rolling components, the
presence of the restraining cage, and the ‘slip’ caused
by trying to make parts of different diameter rotate at the
same speed. In machine tools, the majority of rolling bear-
ings are grease-packed for life, or for very long periods,
but other means of lubrication are also used (the bear-
ings may be connected to a centralized pressure-oil-feed
system, for instance). In other cases, oil-mist lubrication
may be employed both for spindle bearings and for quill
movement. In headstocks and gearboxes, ball and roller
bearings may be lubricated by splash or oil jets.

52.11.3 Plain journal bearings

Plain bearings are often preferred for relatively low-speed
spindles operating under constant loads, and for the spin-
dles of high-speed grinding wheels. These bearings ride
on a dynamic ‘wedge’ of lubricating oil. Precision plain
bearings are generally operated with very low clearances
and therefore require low-viscosity oil to control the rise
of temperature. Efﬁcient lubrication is vital if the oil tem-
perature is to be kept within reasonable limits, and some
form of automatic circulation system is usually employed.

52.11.4 Multi-wedge bearings

The main drawback of the traditional plain bearing is its
reliance on a single hydrodynamic wedge of oil, which
under certain conditions tends to be unstable. Multi-wedge
bearings make use of a number of ﬁxed or rocking pads,
spaced at intervals around the journal to create a series
of opposed oil wedges. These produce strong radial, sta-
bilizing forces that hold the spindle centrally within the
bearing. With the best of these, developed especially for
machine tools, deviation of the spindle under maximum
load can be held within a few millionths of a centimeter.

52.11.5 Hydrostatic bearings

To avoid the instabilities of wedge-shaped oils ﬁlms, a
lubricating ﬁlm can be maintained by the application of
pressurized oil (or, occasionally, air) to the bearing. The
hydrostatic bearing maintains a continuous ﬁlm of oil
even at zero speed, and induces a strong stabilizing force
towards the center that counteracts any displacement of
the shaft or spindle. Disadvantages include the power

required to pressurize the oil and the necessary increase
in the size of the ﬁlter and circulatory system.

52.11.6 Slideways

Spindles may be the most difﬁcult machine-tool compo-
nents to design, but slideways are frequently the most
troublesome to lubricate. In a slideway, the wedge-type
of ﬁlm lubrication cannot form since, to achieve this, the
slideway would need to be tilted.

52.11.7 Plain slideways

Plain slideways are preferred in the majority of
applications. Only a thin ﬁlm of lubricant is present,
so its properties – especially its viscosity, adhesion and
extreme-pressure characteristics – are of vital importance.
If lubrication breaks down intermittently, a condition
is created known as ‘stick-slip’, which affects surface
ﬁnish, causes vibration and chatter and makes close
limits difﬁcult to hold. Special adhesive additives are
incorporated into the lubricant to provide good bonding
of the oil ﬁlm to the sliding surfaces, which helps to
overcome the problems of table and slideway lubrication.
On long traverses, oil may be fed through grooves in the
underside of the slideway.

52.11.8 Hydrostatic slideways

The use of hydrostatic slideways – in which pressurized
oil or air is employed – completely eliminates stick-slip
and reduces friction to very low values; but there are
disadvantages in the form of higher costs and greater com-
plication.

52.11.9 Ball and roller slideways

These are expensive but, in precision applications, they
offer the low friction and lack of play that are character-
istics of the more usual rolling journal bearings. Grease
or adhesive oil usually effects lubrication.

52.11.10 Leadscrews and nuts

The lubrication of leadscrews is similar in essence to that
of slideways, but in some instances may be more critical.
This is especially so when pre-load is applied to elimi-
nate play and improve machining accuracy, since it tends
to squeeze out the lubricant. Leadscrews and slideways
often utilize the same lubricants. If the screw is to oper-
ate under high unit stresses – due to pre-load or actual
working loads – extreme-pressure oil should be used.

52.11.11 Re-circulating-ball leadscrews

This type was developed to avoid stick-slip in heavily
loaded leadscrews. It employs a screw and nut of special
form, with bearing balls running between them. When
the balls run off one end of the nut they return through
an external channel to the other end. Such bearings are
usually grease-packed for life.

Machine tools 52/939

52.11.12 Gears

The meshing teeth of spur, bevel, helical and similar
involute gears are separated by a relatively thick
hydrodynamic wedge of lubricating oil, provided that the
rotational speed is high enough and the load light enough
so as not to squeeze out the lubricant. With high loads or
at low speeds, wear takes place if the oil is not able to
maintain a lubricating ﬁlm under extreme conditions.

Machine-tool gears can be lubricated by oil-spray, mist,
splash or cascade. Sealed oil baths are commonly used, or
the gears may be lubricated by part of a larger circulatory
system.

52.11.13 Hydraulics

The use of hydraulic systems for the setting, operation
and control of machine tools has increased signiﬁcantly.
Hydraulic mechanisms being inter-linked with electronic
controls and/or feedback control systems. In machine tools,
hydraulic systems have the advantage of providing step-
less and vibration-less transfer of power. They are par-
ticularly suitable for the linear movement of tables and
slideways, to which a hydraulic piston may be directly
coupled.

One of the most important features for hydraulic oil
is a viscosity/temperature relationship that gives the best
compromise of low viscosity (for easy cold starting) and
minimum loss of viscosity at high temperatures (to avoid
back-leakage and pumping losses). A high degree of oxi-
dation stability is required to withstand high temperatures
and aeration in hydraulic systems. Oil needs excellent
anti-wear characteristics to combat the effects of high
rubbing speeds and loads that occur in hydraulic pumps,
especially in those of the vane type. In the reservoir,
the oil must release entrained air readily without causing
excessive foaming, which can lead to oil starvation.

52.11.14 Tramp oil

sequent reduction in the ﬂuid life

Tramp oil is caused when heat slideway, gear, hydraulic
and spindle lubricants leak into water-based cutting ﬂuids
and can cause problems such as:
ž Machine deposits
ž Reduced bacterial resistance of cutting ﬂuids and sub-
ž Reduced surface ﬁnish quality of work pieces
ž Corrosion of machine surfaces
All these problems directly affect production efﬁciency.
Recent developments have led to the introduction of syn-
thetic lubricants that are fully compatible with all types of
water-based cutting ﬂuids, so helping the user to achieve
maximum machine output.

52.11.15 Lubrication and lubricants

The hydraulic ﬂuid continuously lubricates the compo-
nents of a hydraulic system, which must, of course, be
suitable for this purpose. Many ball and roller bearings
are grease-packed for life, or need attention at lengthy

52/940 Lubrication

intervals. Most lubrication points, however, need regular
replenishment if the machine is to function satisfactorily.
This is particularly true of parts subjected to high temper-
atures.

With the large machines, the number of lubricating
points or the quantities of lubricants involved makes any
manual lubrication system impracticable or completely
uneconomic. Consequently, automatic lubrication systems
are often employed.

Automatic lubrication systems may be divided broadly
into two types: circulatory and ‘one-shot’ total-loss. These
cover, respectively, those components using relatively large
amounts of oil, which can be cooled, puriﬁed and re-
circulating, and those in which oil or grease is used once
only and then lost. Both arrangements may be used for
different parts of the same machine or installation.

52.11.16 Circulatory lubrication systems

The circulatory systems used in association with machine
tools are generally conventional in nature, although occa-
sionally their exceptional size creates special problems.
The normal installation comprises a storage tank or reser-
voir, a pump and ﬁlter, suitable sprays, jets or other distri-
bution devices, and return piping. The most recent designs
tend to eliminate wick feeds and siphon lubrication.

Although ﬁltration is sometimes omitted with non-criti-
cal ball and roller bearings, it is essential for most gears
and for precision bearings of every kind. Magnetic and
gauze ﬁlters are often used together. To prevent wear of
highly ﬁnished bearing surfaces the lubricant must contain
no particle as large as the bearing clearance.

Circulatory systems are generally interlocked electri-
cally or mechanically with the machine drive, so that the
machine cannot be started until oil is ﬂowing to the gears
and main bearings. Interlocks also ensure that lubrica-
tion is maintained as long as the machine is running. Oil
sight-glasses at key points in the system permit visual
observations of oil ﬂow.

52.11.17 Loss-lubrication systems

There are many kinds of loss-lubrication systems. Most
types of linear bearings are necessarily lubricated by this
means. An increasingly popular method of lubrication is
by automatic or manually operated one-shot lubricators.
With these devices, a metered quantity of oil or grease
is delivered to any number of points from a single reser-
voir. The operation may be carried out manually, using
a hand-pump, or automatically, by means of an electric
or hydraulic pump. Mechanical pumps are usually con-
trolled by an electric timer, feeding lubricant at preset
intervals, or are linked to a constantly moving part of the
machine.

On some machines both hand-operated and electrically
timed one-shot systems may be in use, the manual system
being reserved for those components needing infrequent
attention (once a day, for example) while the automatic
systems feeds those parts that require lubrication at rela-
tively brief intervals.

52.11.18 Manual lubrication

Many thousands of smaller or older machines are lubri-
cated by hand, and even the largest need regular reﬁlls
or topping up to lubricant reservoirs. In some shops, the
operator may be fully responsible for the lubrication of
his own machine, but it is nearly always safer and more
economical to make one individual responsible for all
lubrication.

52.11.19 Rationalizing lubricants

To meet the requirements of each of the various compo-
nents of a machine the manufacturer may need to recom-
mend a number of lubricating oils and greases. It follows
that, where there are many machines of varying origins, a
large number of lubricants may seem to be needed. How-
ever, the needs of different machines are rarely so differ-
ent that slight modiﬁcation cannot be made to the speciﬁed
lubricant schedule. It is this approach which forms the
basis for BS 5063, from which the data in Table 52.9
have been extracted. This classiﬁcation implies no qual-
ity evaluation of lubricants, but merely gives information
as to the categories of lubricants likely to be suitable for
particular applications.

A survey of the lubrication requirements, usually car-
ried out by the lubricant supplier, can often be the means
of signiﬁcantly reducing the number of oils and greases in
a workshop or factory. The efﬁciency of lubrication may
well be increased, and the economies affected are likely
to be substantial.

52.12 Cutting ﬂuids
New machining techniques are constantly being intro-
duced. Conventional workpiece materials have improved
progressively through close control of manufacturer and
heat treatment, and new materials have been fostered by
the aeronautic and space industries. The results have been
ever improving output, dimensional control and surface
ﬁnish. The continuous development of cutting ﬂuids has
enabled these increasingly severe conditions to be accom-
modated.

52.12.1 Functions of a cutting ﬂuid

The two main functions of a cutting ﬂuid are to cool and
to lubricate. During a machining operation, the cutting
tool induces a continuous wave of dislocations, which
travel ahead of the cutting edge, deforming and shearing
the workpiece metal into continuous scarf or broken chips.
The energy required for this deformation is converted into
heat, and simultaneously frictional heat is created at the
points where the tool rubs against the newly exposed sur-
face of the workpiece and the chip rubs against the top
face of the advancing tool.

These combined effects raise the temperature of the
tool, workpiece and chip to a level that would be unac-
ceptable in most operations if it were not for the presence
of cutting ﬂuid. Since the cooling effect is the greatest
beneﬁt, cutting ﬂuids are widely known as ‘coolants’. In

r
o
f

d
e
s
u

e
b

y
a
m
8
6
B
C

d
n
a

2
3

B
C

8
6

B
C
y
b

d
e
c
a
l
p
e
r

e
b

y
a

M

2
3
M
H
y
b

d
e
c
a
l
p
e
r

e
b

y
a
m
8
6

B
C

d
n
a

2
3

B
C

;
s
e
h
c
t
u
l
c

d
e
l
l
o
r
t
n
o
c

y
l
l
a
c
i
n
a
h
c
e
m
d
e
t
a
c
i
r
b
u
l
-
d
o
o
ﬂ

8
6
M
H
d
n
a

d
n
a

r
o

l
a
u
n
a
m

r
o
f

d
e
s
u

d
a
e
l

f
o

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
r
b
u
l

e
b

o
s
l
a

y
a

M

s
w
e
r
c
s

d
e
e
f

d
e
z
i
l
a
r
t
n
e
c

Cutting ﬂuids 52/941

d
n
a

y
a
m
2
3
G
H
d
e
r
i
u
q
e
r

s
i

d
a
e
l
–
s
t
r
a
p

g
n
i
d
i
l
s

l
l
a

f
o

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
r
b
u
l

h
t
i

w
s
r
a
e
g
m
r
o
w
d
e
d
a
o
l

y
l
t
h
g
i
l

s
t
e
h
c
t
a
r

,
s

m
a
c

,
s
w
e
r
c
s

d
e
e
f

d
n
a

d
n
a

r
e
w
o
l

a

f
i

;
e
c
i
v
r
e
s

t
n
e
t
t
i

m
r
e
t
n
i

y
t
i
s
o
c
s
i
v

.

d
e
s
u

e
b

d
i
o
p
y
h

d
n
a
m
r
o
w
d
e
d
a
o
l

,
s
r
a
e
g

f
o

s
e
p
y
t

l
l
a

d
n
a

s
g
n
i
r
a
e
b

y
l
l
a
m
r
o
n

g
n
i
l
l
o
r

r
o

n
i
a
l
p

f
o

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
r
b
u
l

e
h
t

r
o
f

d
e
s
u

e
b

o
s
l
a

y
a

M

e
h
t

r
o
f

d
e
s
u

e
b

o
s
l
a

y
a

M

s
g
n
i
r
a
e
b

c
i
t
a
t
s
o
r
d
y
h

d
n
a
X
3
M
H

,

d
e
t
p
e
c
x
e

s
r
a
e
g

2
3
B
C
e
c
a
l
p
e
r

y
a
m
8
6
M
H

y
l
e
v
i
t
c
e
p
s
e
r

,

8
6

B
C

s
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

r
o
f

d
e
s
u

e
b

y
t
i
s
o
c
s
i
v
-
w
o
l

y
l
r
a
l
u
c
i
t
r
a
p

,
s

m

s
i
n
a
h
c
e
m
e
n
ﬁ

c
i
t
a
m
u
e
n
p
-
o
r
d
y
h

c
i
t
e
n
g
a
m
-
o
r
t
c
e
l
e

d
n
a

s
r
o
t
a
c
i
r
b
u
l

e
n
i
l

s
a

r
o

s

m

r
i
a

o
s
l
a

y
a

M

g
n
i
r
i
u
q
e
r

h
c
u
s

,
s
l
i
o

c
i
l
u
a
r
d
y
h

s
i
n
a
h
c
e
m

,
s
e
h
c
t
u
l
c

s
g
n
i
r
a
e
b

d
e
i
l
l
a

s
r
a
e
g

f
o

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
r
b
u
l

h
t
a
b

d
n
a

e
r
u
s
s
e
r
P

d
e
s
o
l
c
n
e

e
r
a

y
n
a

s
d
a
o
l

n
e
h
w

.
c
t
e

f
o

e
b

n
a
c

s
r
a
e
g

,
s
e
g
a
i
r
r
a
c

;
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m

,
s
e
x
o
b

,
s
k
c
o
t
s
d
a
e
h

f
o

d
n
a

d
e
e
f

d
i
o
p
y
h

d
n
a
m
r
o
w
n
a
h
t

r
e
h
t
o

,
e
p
y
t

f
o

r
e
h
t
o

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
r
b
u
l

,
e
p
y
t

y
n
a

h
t
a
b

d
n
a

f
o

s
r
a
e
g

e
r
u
s
s
e
r
P

d
e
s
o
l
c
n
e

,

h
g
i
h

e
r
a

s
d
a
o
l

n
e
h
w
s
g
n
i
r
a
e
b

d
e
i
l
l
a

d
n
a

,
s
r
a
e
g

d
i
o
p
y
h

n
a
h
t

C
°

0
7

e
v
o
b
a

t
o
n

s
i

e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
t

g
n
i
t
a
r
e
p
o

t
a
h
t

d
e
d
i
v
o
r
p

f
o

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
r
b
u
l

h
t
a
b

d
n
a

e
r
u
s
s
e
r
P

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
r
b
u
l

s
s
o
l
-
l
a
t
o
T

t
a

g
n
i
t
a
t
o
r

s
g
n
i
r
a
e
b

g
n
i
l
l
o
r

r
o

d
e
e
p
s

n
i
a
l
p

h
g
i
h

e
n
i
h
c
a
m

f
o

s
e
p
y
t

l
l
a

f
o

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
r
b
u
L

;
s
y
a
w
e
d
i
l
s

g
n
i
r
a
e
b
-
n
i
a
l
p

l
o
o
t

w
o
l

t
a

d
e
r
i
u
q
e
r

y
l
r
a
l
u
c
i
t
r
a
p

a

t
n
e
v
e
r
p

o
t

s
d
e
e
p
s

e
s
r
e
v
a
r
t

)
p
i
l
s
-
k
c
i
t
s
(

e
l
b
a
t

e
h
t

f
o

g
n
i
d
i
l
s

t
n
e
t
t
i

m
r
e
t
n
i

r
o

s
u
o
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
s
i
d

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
r
b
u
l

l
a
r
e
n
e
g
–
s
r
a
e
g

d
e
s
o
l
c
n
E

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
r
b
u
l

l
a
r
e
n
e
G

s
m
r
o
w
d
n
a

s
r
a
e
g

d
e
d
a
o
l

y
l
i
v
a
e
H

s
r
a
e
g

s
e
l
d
n
i
p
S

s
y
a
w
e
d
i
l

S

c
i
l
u
a
r
d
y
h

l
a
r
e
n
e
g

f
o

n
o
i
t
a
r
e
p
O

s
m
e
t
s
y
s

s
m
e
t
s
y
s

c
i
l
u
a
r
d
y
H

8
6

2
3

8
6

0
5
1

0
2
3

0
1

2
2

8
6

0
2
2

2
3

8
6

d
o
o
g

h
t
i

w

)
d
e
t
i
b
i
h
n
i

r
o

t
h
g
i
a
r
t
s
(

e
c
n
a
m
r
o
f
r
e
p

n
o
i
t
a
d
i
x
o
-
i
t
n
a

s
l
i
o

l
a
r
e
n
i
m
d
e
n
ﬁ
e
r

y
l
h
g
i
H

s
l
i
o

l
a
r
e
n
i
m
d
e
n
ﬁ
e
R

y
t
i
l
i
b
a

g
n
i
y
r
r
a
c
-
g
n
i
d
a
o
l

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

h
t
i

w
s
l
i
o

l
a
r
e
n
i
m
d
e
n
ﬁ
e
r

y
l
h
g
i
H

h
t
i

w
s
l
i
o

l
a
r
e
n
i
m
d
e
n
ﬁ
e
r

n
o
i
s
o
r
r
o
c
-
i
t
n
a

y
l
i
v
a
e
H

r
o
i
r
e
p
u
s

e
c
n
a
m
r
o
f
r
e
p

n
o
i
t
a
d
i
x
o
-
i
t
n
a

t
n
e
v
e
r
p

h
c
i
h
w
d
n
a

,
e
c
n
a
m
r
o
f
r
e
p

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

h
t
i

w
s
l
i
o

s
s
e
n
i
k
c
a
t

d
n
a

l
a
r
e
n
i
M

y
t
i
c
i
r
b
u
l

p
i
l
s
-
k
c
i
t
s

h
t
i

w
s
l
i
o

l
a
r
e
n
i
m
d
e
n
ﬁ
e
r

y
l
h
g
i
H

r
a
e
w

-
i
t
n
a

d
n
a

,

n
o
i
t
a
d
i
x
o
-
i
t
n
a

,

n
o
i
s
o
r
r
o
c
-
i
t
n
a

r
o
i
r
e
p
u
s

e
c
n
a
m
r
o
f
r
e
p

N
A

B
C

C
C

X
F

G

M
H

s
k
r
a
m
e
R

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

d
e
l
i
a
t
e
D

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

l
a
c
i
p
y
T

y
t
i
s
o
c
s
i
V

.

o
n

e
d
a
r
g

)
1
3
2
4

S
B
(

s
t
n
a
c
i
r
b
u

l

f
o
n
o
i
t
a
c
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
C

l

9

.

2
5

e
l
b
a
T

t
n
a
c
i
r
b
u
l

f
o

s
e
p
y
T

s
s
a
l
C

52/942 Lubrication

f
o

n
i

r
o

n
u
g

d
n
a
h

r
o

p
u
c

y
b

h
c
u
s

s
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

d
e
k
c
a
p
e
r
p

s
g
n
i
r
a
e
b

n
i

d
e
s
u

y
l
l
a
m
r
o
N

r
o
t
o
m
c
i
r
t
c
e
l
e

s
a

s

m
e
t
s
y
s

s

m
e
t
s
y
s

d
e
z
i
l
a
r
t
n
e
C

d
e
s
n
e
p
s
i
D

d
e
z
i
l
a
r
t
n
e
c

:
1
M
X

:
2
M
X

:
3
M
X

s
g
n
i
r
a
e
b

g
n
i
l
l
o
r

d
n
a

n
i
a
l
P

s
t
r
a
p

s
u
o
e
n
a
l
l
e
c
s
i
m

f
o

g
n
i
s
a
e
r
g

l
a
r
e
n
e
g

d
n
a

1

2

3

n
o
i
t
a
d
i
x
o
-
i
t
n
a

r
o
i
r
e
p
u
s

h
t
i

w
s
e
s
a
e
r
g

e
s
o
p
r
u
p
-
i
t
l
u
m
y
t
i
l
a
u
q
m
u
i
m
e
r
P

s
e
i
t
r
e
p
o
r
p

n
o
i
s
o
r
r
o
c
-
i
t
n
a

d
n
a

y
c
n
e
t
s
i
s
n
o
c

e
s
e
h
T

.

A
S
U

e
h
t

f
o

)
I

G
L
N

(

e
t
u
t
i
t
s
n

I

e
s
a
e
r
G

g
n
i
t
a
c
i
r
b
u
L

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
N

e
h
t

y
b

d
e
s
o
p
o
r
p
m
e
t
s
y
s

e
h
t

h
t
i

w
e
c
n
a
d
r
o
c
c
a

n

i

,
s
r
e
b
m
u
n

y
c
n
e
t
s
i
s
n
o
c

o
t
n

i

i

i

d
e
d
v
d
-
b
u
s

s
i

X

e
s
a
e
r
g

e
h
T

.
s
e
c
i

v
e
d
g
n

i
l

a
e
s
h
t
i

w
y

l

l
r
a
u
c
i
t
r
a
p
d
n
a

,
s
l
o
o
t
e
n
h
c
a
m

i

f
o
n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
c

e
h
t
n

i

d
e
s
u
s
l

a

i
r
e
t
a
m
e
h
t
h
t
i

l

w
e
b
i
t
a
p
m
o
c
e
r
a

s
t
n
a
c
i
r
b
u

l

t
a
h
t

l

a

i
t
n
e
s
s
e

s
i

t
I

e:
t
o
N

:
s
w
o

l
l

o
f

s
a
s
e
s
a
e
r
g
e
h
t

f
o
s
e
g
n
a
r
n
o
i
t
a
r
t
e
n
e
p
d
e
k
r
o
w
e
h
t
o
t
d
e
t
a
e
r

l

e
r
a
s
r
e
b
m
u
n

.

6
9
2
5
S
B
n

i

d
e
b
i
r
c
s
e
d
d
o
h
t
e
m
n
o
i
t
a
r
t
e
n
e
p
-
e
n
o
c
e
h
t

i

y
b
d
e
n
m
r
e
t
e
d
s
i

n
o
i
t
a
r
t
e
n
e
p
d
e
k
r
o
W

e
g
n
a
r
n
o
i
t
a
r
t
e
n
e
p
d
e
k
r
o
W

0
4
3
–
0
1
3

5
9
2
–
5
6
2

0
5
2
–
0
2
2

r
e
b
m
u
n
y
c
n
e
t
s
i
s
n
o
C

1

2

3

l
i
o

n
a

n
e
h
w

,
s
y
a
w
e
d
i
l
s

f
o

n
o
i
t
a
c

-
i
r
b
u
l

e
h
t

r
o
f

d
e
s
u

e
b

o
s
l
a

y
a
M

d
e
r
i
u
q
e
r

s
i

y
t
i
s
o
c
s
i
v

s
i
h
t

n
i
a
l
p

d
n
a

c
i
l
u
a
r
d
y
h

d
e
n
i
b
m
o
c

h
t
i

w

s

m
e
t
s
y
s

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
r
b
u
l

d
n
a

,
s
g
n
i
r
a
e
b

s
e
n
i
h
c
a
m

r
o
f

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

c
ﬁ
i
c
e
p
S

t
n
e
t
t
i

m
r
e
t
n
i

r
o

s
u
o
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
s
i
d

s
i

d
e
e
p
s
w
o
l

t
a

)
p
i
l
s
-
k
c
i
t
s
(

e
r
e
h
w

g
n
i
d
i
l
s

d
e
t
n
e
v
e
r
p

e
b

o
t

s
y
a
w
e
d
i
l
s

d
n
a

c
i
l
u
a
r
d
y
h

d
e
n
i
b
m
o
C

s
m
e
t
s
y
s

2
3

e
p
y
t

M
H

f
o

s
l
i
o

l
a
r
e
n
i
m
d
e
n
ﬁ
e
R

s
e
i
t
r
e
p
o
r
p

p
i
l
s
-
k
c
i
t
s
-
i
t
n
a

h
t
i

w

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

d
e
l
i
a
t
e
D

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

l
a
c
i
p
y
T

y
c
n
e
t
s
i
s
n
o
C

r
e
b
m
u
n

t
n
a
c
i
r
b
u
l

f
o

e
p
y
T

s
k
r
a
m
e
R

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

d
e
l
i
a
t
e
D

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

l
a
c
i
p
y
T

y
t
i
s
o
c
s
i
V

.

o
n

e
d
a
r
g

)
1
3
2
4

S
B
(

t
n
a
c
i
r
b
u
l

f
o

s
e
p
y
T

s
s
a
l
C

)

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c

(

9

.

2
5

e
l
b
a
T

G
H

s
s
a
l
C

M
X

1300˚C

800˚C

700˚C

600˚C

500˚C

Temperature distribution
in single-point cutting tool

Figure 52.12 Heat is generated both by deformation of workpiece
material and by the friction of the chip across the tool tip. A
cutting ﬂuid acts as a lubricant to reduce frictional heat and
simultaneously cools the whole cutting zone

practice, the coolant cannot penetrate to the extreme tip
of the tool, of course, because the tip is so well shrouded
by the metal being cut from the workpiece. Nevertheless,
the coolant performs its function successfully because it
enters a zone some way back from the tip, where the chip
is passing over the tool at high rubbing velocity and where
most of the frictional heat arises (Figure 52.12).

52.12.2 Beneﬁts of a coolant

Cutting ﬂuids provide beneﬁts such as extended tool life,
dimensional accuracy and good surface ﬁnish, all of which
contribute to high rates of production. Almost invariably,
the coolant that adheres to workpieces is relied on to pro-
tect ferrous components against corrosion while they are
waiting further machining or assembly operations.

The beneﬁts to be obtained by the correct selection and
application of coolant are considerable. The cost is hardly
a major factor in production operations, however, because,
on average, the price of coolant amounts to about 1 per
cent of the ﬁnished cost of a machined component.

52.12.3 Types of coolant

Water-based emulsions

Water, of course, is the cheapest cooling medium gener-
ally available. Its high speciﬁc heat makes it particularly
effective as a coolant and its low viscosity allows high
rates of ﬂow through the coolant system and so enables
it to penetrate the cutting zone and make contact with
hot metal surfaces. Unfortunately, it corrodes most of the
ferrous and some of the non-ferrous metals (a process has-
tened by high temperatures), and therefore is unsuitable
in most machining.

However, its cooling properties can be utilized when
other materials are added to improve machining perfor-
mance. One of the most common water-based cutting
ﬂuids is the so-called ‘soluble’ oil, which, in fact, is not a
true solution but an oil-in-water emulsion in which very
ﬁne droplets of oil are suspended in water. Such a ﬂuid has
very effective cooling power and the petroleum oil and its
additives provide its lubricating and protective properties.

Cutting ﬂuids 52/943

The proportion of oil may be as low as 2 per cent, but is
normally between 5 and 10 per cent.

Water-based coolants, as diluted and used in service, are
much cheaper than neat oils, and they offer remarkable
economic beneﬁts in the applications to which they
are best suited.
(Neat oils, however, are preferred
for
involving
severe operations – where they give overall production
economies and reduced machine-tool maintenance.)

processes – usually

some machining

Soluble oils are delivered, ‘concentrated’, to the user
and contain an emulsifying agent to ensure that a stable
emulsion forms when added to water. This additive does
not mix readily with mineral oil, however, so to overcome
this a ‘coupling’ agent is included in the formulation.

The performance of soluble oils is made possible not
only by their high speciﬁc heat and thermal conductivity
but by their low viscosity, which permits good pene-
tration into the very ﬁne clearances around the cutting
zone. Consequently, these ﬂuids are used mainly where
cooling is the primary requirement. Lubricating proper-
ties can be improved by polar additives, which are agents
that enhance the ‘oiliness’ or anti-friction characteristics.
Further improvements can be effected by EP (extreme-
pressure) additives, which are usually compounds of sul-
fur or chlorine.

Some of the recently developed high-performance EP
soluble oils have a cutting performance that almost mat-
ches that of additive-type neat oils, and they are particu-
larly suitable for demanding operations in machine tools
whose design allows the use of water-based ﬂuids.

Water-based solutions

In recent years another kind of water-based coolant, the
‘synthetic’ or non-petroleum cutting ﬂuid, has been used
increasingly. Coolants of this kind contain agents that pro-
vide the necessary lubricating and anti-corrosion proper-
ties. They were originally introduced to satisfy the special
demands of grinding operations, but now they have been
developed to a state where they can cope with general
machining requirements. Their use in CNC machines and
ﬂexible manufacturing systems is a signiﬁcant result of
this development.

Because the synthetic ﬂuid is transparent, operators can
see the cutting area at all times – a feature particularly
useful for intricate machining and grinding operations.
Workpieces, gauges and tools in the vicinity of the cut-
ting zone do not become coated with an oily ﬁlm, which
is a pleasing feature for tool setters who have to handle
spanners and precision tools in conﬁned spaces. Occa-
sionally a transparent dye is included in the formulation
of a synthetic cutting ﬂuid, both for identiﬁcation and to
give a pleasant appearance.

Synthetic cutting ﬂuids are suitable for a wider range
of uses than any other single cutting ﬂuid, and can be
employed in any machine designed for operation with
water-based ﬂuids. Applications include turning, milling,
drilling and screw cutting on all but the toughest materi-
als; and cylindrical, surface and center-less grinding. Most
metals can be machined effectively; cast iron, which is
prone to rusting when machined with conventional sol-
uble oils, shows negligible signs of corrosion when the

52/944 Lubrication

synthetic ﬂuid is used. Copper-base alloys may display
a slight degree of staining if workpieces are not washed
immediately after the machining operation.

Bacteria

Machine operators working with emulsions can become
susceptible to skin infections because of the combination
of the de-fatting effect of soluble-oil emulsiﬁers and the
abrasive action of metallic scarf, but bacteria in cutting
ﬂuids are seldom the source of such infections. High stan-
dards of personal hygiene and the use of barrier creams
should prevent such problems. A more difﬁcult situation
arises when a soluble-oil emulsion becomes infected with
bacteria capable of utilizing the emulsiﬁer and mineral-
oil components in the system. Even in clean conditions,
untreated soluble-oil emulsions and solutions cannot re-
main completely sterile for any length of time.

The more common bacteria found in infected soluble
oil systems can degrade the inhibitors, emulsiﬁers and
mineral oil components. They cause a loss of anticorro-
sion properties, increase of acidity and deterioration of the
emulsion. These bacteria thrive in well-aerated systems,
and are termed aerobic.

When a system becomes infected with sulfate-reducing
bacteria it develops the obnoxious smells associated with
putrefaction. Bacteria of the species mainly responsible
for such conditions thrive in the absence of oxygen, and
are described as anaerobic. The foul smells of hydrogen
sulﬁde are produced mainly in stagnant soluble-oil sys-
tems, particularly where the emulsion has a surface layer
of oil that tends to exclude oxygen. The hydrogen sul-
ﬁde arises from chemical reduction of either the inorganic
sulfates that can give water its hardness or the petroleum
sulfonate component of the soluble oil.

Bacterial examination could be used to conﬁrm the
presence of (and perhaps identify) the species. Where sol-
uble oil is being degraded, or where a noticeable loss of
anti-corrosion properties has been detected, a check on
the pH (alkalinity/acidity) of the system would be advan-
tageous.

Cleanliness and good housekeeping in machine shops
do much to avoid bacterial infection, and their impor-
tance cannot be overstressed. Various techniques such as
heat treatment, centrifuging and ﬁltration can be used to
advantage, although economic considerations may restrict
their use to systems containing large volumes of soluble
oil. Chemical sterilization with bactericides can be more
convenient.

Bactericides are substances that destroy bacteria, and
they can be used in various ways. They may be incor-
porated into the soluble-oil concentrate, either at concen-
trations suitable to protect the oil in storage, or at levels
sufﬁcient to provide a persistent bactericidal effect on the
emulsion in service. The cost of providing sufﬁcient bac-
tericide to cover the use of the soluble oil at a high dilution
might prove prohibitive. Continued use of the same bac-
tericide may produce resistant strains of bacteria.

Bactericides can be added to the soluble-oil system as a
shock treatment when infection occurs, but the user must
bear in mind that a badly infected and degraded emulsion
cannot later be reclaimed. The bactericidal treatment may

have to be repeated periodically thereafter, and the effect
of the bactericide must be monitored.

Studies of systems infected with bacteria show that a
process of continued re-infection occurs from the residual
oil left in the system whenever the ﬂuid is changed. As far
as possible, the system should be designed to avoid traps
that might retain coolant. An effective treatment however,
is the use of a bactericide in the form of a detergent
sterilizing solution to cleanse the system. All traces of it
must be removed from the system before a new charge of
coolant is introduced, otherwise emulsion instability may
develop in the fresh coolant. Thorough cleansing, com-
bined with the use of a suitable bactericide in the fresh
charge of soluble oil, should overcome most problems of
bacterial infection.

Neat oils

Two factors militate against the universal use of water-
based ﬂuids. Very severe machining operations call for
a lubrication performance that is beyond the capacity of
such ﬂuids, and the design of some machine tools means
that water cannot be used because of the risk of cross-
contamination with machine lubricants. In these instances,
‘neat’ cutting oil is the only ﬂuid that can provide the
required performance.

Neat oil is the name given to an orthodox petroleum
cutting ﬂuid, whether or not it contains additives, to en-
hance cutting properties. Oils of this sort are available in a
very wide variety, and many combinations of work piece
material, machining characteristics and tooling require-
ment justify special formulations. The neat oils have lower
speciﬁc heat than water, so they have to be fed to the
cutting zone in copious amounts to provide the optimum
cutting effect.

The viscosity of neat cutting oil is chosen to suit the
machining application. Some operations need a very light
oil, others a heavier viscosity because of its better load-
carrying capacity. Oils are therefore available in a wide
selection of viscosities. Most general-purpose cutting oils
have viscosities of about 20 cSt at 40°C (ISO 20 at 104°F),
but a lighter viscosity is used in operations such as broach-
ing and deep-hole boring/drilling, when chips have to be
ﬂushed away from the conﬁned areas around the tool.
Whereas for machining – such as some milling, turning
and gear cutting – heavier viscosities, up to 64 cSt at 40°C
(ISO 64 at 104°F), are preferred.

Additives in neat oils

The increasing diversity of operations, new materials and
processes and the constant demand for improved produc-
tion efﬁciency can only be met by various additives and
compounding agents being blended into the oil to enhance
its performance. Additives tend to be expensive and the
selection of enhanced cutting ﬂuid is only justiﬁed by
overall production economies.

Fatty oils

Small additions of fatty oils improve the ‘oiliness’ or
anti-friction characteristics, and cutting oils reinforced in

this way are known as compounded oils. Such oils are
particularly useful in the machining of difﬁcult yellow
metals and aluminum alloys, giving excellent tool life and
good ﬁnish without staining yellow metals.

52.12.5 Workpiece material

A general guide to metals and their difﬁculty of machin-
ing, beginning with the most difﬁcult, could be listed as:

Cutting ﬂuids 52/945

EP oils

For the more difﬁcult operations, neat oils containing EP
(extreme-pressure) additives have to be used. The EP
cutting oils usually contain additives based on sulfur or
chlorine, or combinations of them. The sulfur in EP oil
can be present in two forms. In the inactive ﬂuid, it is
chemically combined with a fatty-oil additive, which is
blended with mineral oil to produce sulfured fatty oil. The
active version, on the other hand, contains sulfur in ele-
mental form, dissolved in mineral oil; the ﬂuid is known
as sulfured mineral oil. Chlorine is usually present only
as chlorinated parafﬁn, which is blended sometimes singly
with mineral oils and sometimes in combination with fatty
oils and sulfured additives.

Combinations of additives

Combinations of sulfur and chlorine additives are emplo-
yed because the chlorine-based agents react at a lower
temperature than do the sulfur-based ones, and in some
applications,
this progressive action is advantageous.
ccasionally two kinds of additives, when used in
combination, have a greater effect than the sum of their
individual contributions. This phenomenon is known as a
‘synergistic’ effect, and it gives the lubricant technologist
more scope for matching the properties of the cutting ﬂuid
to the requirements of the machining operation.

Electro discharge machining (EDM) oils

Electro discharge (spark erosion) techniques rely heavily
on the ability of EDM oil to act as an electrical insu-
lant, to dissipate heat from the electrode, and to ﬂush
away erosion debris from the workpiece. EDM oils also
are suitable for all die-sinking spark erosion operations.
They should have low aromatic levels, good ﬁlterability,
low fuming, high dielectric strength, excellent oxidation
resistance and low color level.

A low-viscosity grade helps provide maximum ﬂushing
and cooling for delicate work and close tolerances. When
rough and ﬁnishing machining is combined, a medium
viscosity is recommended for the good ﬂushing needed. In
roughing operations, high-viscosity oil enables fast metal
removal rates to be achieved.

52.12.4 Selection of cutting ﬂuid

Selection of the correct ﬂuid is essential if the maximum
beneﬁt is to be obtained for the user. In some machining
operations and with some workpiece metals, of course,
the choice is straightforward, but in the majority of cases,
selection is inevitably a compromise in which several
factors have to be weighed. The two most important con-
siderations are the workpiece material and the type of
machining operation (which, in turn, involves considera-
tions of the tool material).

1. Titanium
2. Nimonic alloys
3. Inconel
4. Nickel
5. Stainless steel
6. Monel metal
7. High-tensile steel
8. Wrought iron and cast alloys
9. High-tensile bronze
10. Copper
11. Medium- and low-carbon steels
12. Free-cutting mild steel
13. Aluminum alloys
14. Brass
15. Bronze
16. Zinc-based alloys
17. Free-cutting brass
18. Magnesium alloys

52.12.6 Machining operations

Operations vary in severity, but the following list gives a
general indication of how they compare, starting with the
most severe:

Broaching (internal and surface)
Gear cutting and shaving
Deep-hole boring (ejector drill or gun drilling)
Tapping and threading
Multi- and single-spindle automatics
Capstan lathes, central lathes
Milling and drilling
Sawing

52.12.7 Tool material

A third important factor in the economies of machining is
the material of the cutting tool. This largely determines the
rates of metal removal, the standards of surface ﬁnish and
the frequency at which the tool needs to be reground – all
of which are interrelated. These can be broadly grouped
in three categories, each separated by a factor of 10 in
terms of performance.

1. Ceramic-coated disposable inserts,

including silicon
nitride, boron nitride, titanium nitride (TIN), titanium
carbide (TIC) and sintered synthetic diamond;

2. Tungsten carbide, usually in the form of tipped tooling;
3. High-speed steel.

52.12.8 Ancillary factors

Although the three sets of
just given can
be considered singly or in combination, and although
a coolant-selection chart can be used as a guide,
is not always
the most obvious choice of coolant
satisfactory from every aspect. Among other
(and

factors

52/946 Lubrication

probably overriding) considerations are the economics
of production, scope for reclaiming the coolant, health
and safety requirements, and ﬁnally the suitability of the
machine’s design – because of possible incompatibility
of the coolant and the machine’s lubricant. In time,
moreover, the performance of any chosen coolant can
be seriously affected by variations of cutting speed, feed
rate, tool-setting accuracy and even the condition of the
machine. Incorrect tool geometry and inaccurate grinding
may have their own adverse effects.

The chosen ﬂuid, to be most effective, must be kept
in good condition, supplied in the correct quantity and
directed accurately towards the cutting area. If its pressure
and rate of ﬂow are too high, the resultant splattering
causes wastage of coolant and untidy splashes around the
machine and may well lead to overheating in the cutting
zone because insufﬁcient ﬂuid is reaching it. The ﬂuid
must be applied where it is most effective – pointed either
directly at the tip of the tool or ﬂooding the complete
cutting zone. Too often, the ﬂow is directed vaguely at the
workpiece, only to be deﬂected by the workpiece itself or
by ancillary parts of the machine.

Poor maintenance practices lead to dirty and degraded
coolant, which affects tool life, surface ﬁnish and perhaps
the welfare of the operator. Proper ﬁltration is vital, and
care must be taken that contamination from other coolants
or machine lubricants is kept to a minimum.

52.12.9 Grinding

Although primarily regarded as a ﬁnishing process, grind-
ing has also been developed for heavy stock removal. In
effect, the grinding wheel is a multi-point machining tool
because many fragments of very hard material (the grit)
embedded in a softer matrix (the bond) cut the metal. Each
cutting edge requires a lubricant for clean cutting and a
coolant for the dissipation of heat. Clearly, the cutting
ﬂuid must satisfy the requirements of both the workpiece
material and the grinding wheel, and before a grinding
ﬂuid is selected, a check must be made that the correct
grade of wheel is being used for the operation.

The cutting ﬂuid has to cool and lubricate without allow-
ing grinding debris to clog (or load) the surface of the
wheel. This could produce a burnished surface rather than
a ground one – which might appear satisfactory but would
be metallurgically unsound.

For many grinding operations, translucent soluble oils
or synthetic solutions give the best results. Synthetic
solutions are especially favored for their very high clarity
on intricate internal grinding. On the more complex
and heavy-duty operations involving form grinding, more
importance is attached to lubricating properties, so EP
neat oils are favored. The level of EP activity required is
determined by the severity of the form being ground.

52.12.10 Storage

Extremes of temperature should be avoided, particularly in
the storage of coolants that contain water, because the bal-
ance of constituents can be upset. High temperatures lead
to evaporation of water. Low temperatures can cause the

separation of some of the components in additive oils; in
particular, the natural fatty oils are susceptible to coagula-
tion. Soluble oil, as supplied in concentrated form, usually
contains a small amount of water for ensuring rapid dis-
persion during subsequent dilution. If this water freezes,
it does not re-blend when the temperature rises again, and
subsequently the oil proves very difﬁcult to mix.

52.12.11 Water quality

Water from towns’ main supplies is usually suitable for
the preparation of water-based cutting ﬂuids. That from
factory bore holes is also generally suitable, although
occasionally it contains excessive amounts of corrosive
salts. Water from rivers, canals and ponds usually contains
undesirable contaminants, and should be tested before use.
A good ﬁrst test is to mix a small quantity of emulsion
and allow it to stand for 24 hours: in this time, no more
than a trace of the oil should separate. If serious separa-
tion occurs, the water should be analyzed to indicate the
sort of remedial treatment required.

A laboratory check is normally desirable to assess the
amounts of organic and mineral acids present, and a check
on hardness is usually necessary in any case. Hardness in
water is due to dissolved salts – mainly of calcium, mag-
nesium and iron, and occasionally of aluminum. Softening
may be required if the water is extremely hard, because
the salts react with the emulsiﬁer in the soluble oil to
form an insoluble scum that ﬂoats on the surface of the
emulsion. The scum may not in itself be harmful, but its
formation uses up some of the emulsiﬁer and causes the
emulsion to be unstable.

52.12.12 Cutting ﬂuids in service

Neat oils

During service, neat cutting oils suffer negligible deteri-
oration of quality; their service life is almost indeﬁnitely
long, provided they are kept clean and free from contam-
ination. They suffer very little depletion of their additives
through cutting action, and quality is adequately main-
tained by additions of new oil to make up for ‘drag-out’
losses (those caused by oil adhering to both the scarf and
the work). Serious leakage of hydraulic ﬂuid or lubricat-
ing oil into the coolant system can have a diluting effect,
which reduces additive concentration and hence the per-
formance of the cutting oil.

Water-based ﬂuids

As long as they are kept clean and maintained at the cor-
rect concentration, water-based ﬂuids have a long service
life. The concentration of an emulsion can be affected in
two ways: by evaporation of water and by drag-out of
the oil content. In many cases, the effects counteract each
other, so the top-up ﬂuid is given the same concentration
as the working ﬂuid. Solutions, on the other hand, tend
to become more concentrated during service because they
suffer from evaporation of water but not from drag-out
losses of the other constituents, so top-up solutions are
generally weaker than working solutions.

It is advisable to monitor water-based ﬂuids at frequent
intervals so that their water content can be brought to
within tolerance before the machining operation is affected.
Maintenance of the correct concentration ensures that cut-
ting performance and rust-preventive properties stay at the
required level. A simple technique makes use of the fact
that a ﬂuid’s density inﬂuences its refractive index. In this
method, a very small amount of the ﬂuid is viewed in a
pocketsize instrument called a refractometer, and the den-
sity is indicated by the edge of a dark shadow falling on a
graduated line. The line gives a ﬁgure that, in some cases,
is a direct reading of dilution, but in others, it may have
to be correlated with dilution on a graph drawn for the
particular ﬂuid.

The strength of a solution or emulsion is, of course,
corrected by additions of stronger or weaker ﬂuid. The
percentage concentration of make-up ﬂuid is calculated
by the formula:
C D Ce
Qr

(cid:2)Cr (cid:1) Ce(cid:4) C Cf

where
Cf D required ﬁnal concentration,
Ce D existing concentration,
Qe D existing quantity,
Qr D quantity required of make-up ﬂuid.

Cleaning procedures

Although some neat cutting ﬂuids can be used almost
indeﬁnitely if well maintained, most ﬂuids eventually reach
the end of their useful life, so the system has to be drained
and reﬁlled with new ﬂuid. On such occasions, the system
should be thoroughly cleaned out before the new charge
is poured in. The nature of cleaning depends on the type
of cutting ﬂuid.

Normally a system containing neat oil requires only
manual cleaning because the debris contained is likely to
be mainly metallic, but water-based ﬂuids call for more
searching treatment. Caustic soda and proprietary solu-
tions are available for ﬂushing away slimy deposits. If
there is evidence of bacterial degradation, however, bacte-
ricides must be introduced. These tend to persist in remote
pockets and in the more stagnant parts of a coolant sys-
tem, and manual cleaning by itself is inadequate. The risk
of persistence can be signiﬁcantly minimized at the plan-
ning stage if the system is designed to be free of regions
to trap stagnant ﬂuid.

52.13 Compressors
Compressors fall into two basic categories: positive dis-
placement types, in which air is compressed by the ‘squash-
ing’ effect of moving components; and dynamic (turbo)-
compressors, in which the high velocity of the moving air
is converted into pressure. In some compressors, the oil
lubricates only the bearings, and is not exposed to the air;
in some, it serves an important cooling function; in some,
it is in intimate contact with the oxidizing inﬂuence of
hot air and with moisture condensed from the air. Clearly,

Compressors 52/947

there is no such thing as typical all-purpose compressor oil:
each type subjects the lubricant to a particular set of con-
ditions. In some cases good engine oil or turbine-quality
oil is suitable, but in others, the lubricant must be special
compressor oil (Figure 52.13).

52.13.1 Quality and safety

Over the years, the progressive improvements in compres-
sor lubricants have kept pace with developments in com-
pressor technology, and modern oils make an impressive
contribution to the performance and longevity of industrial
compressors. More recently, a high proportion of research
has been directed towards greater safety, most notably in
respect of ﬁres and explosions within compressors. For a
long time the causes of such accidents were a matter of
surmise, but it was noticed that the trouble was almost
invariably associated with high delivery temperatures and
heavy carbon deposits in delivery pipes. Ignition is caused
by an exothermic (heat-releasing) oxidation reaction with
the carbon deposit, which creates temperatures higher than
the spontaneous ignition temperature of the absorbed oil.
Experience indicates that careful selection of base oils
and anti-oxidation additives considerably reduce such
deposits. Nevertheless,
is no
guarantee against trouble if maintenance is neglected. For
complete safety, both the oil and the compressor system
must enjoy high standards of care.

the use of top-class oil

52.13.2 Speciﬁcations

covering mineral-oil

reciprocating compressors are set out

the International Standards
The recommendations of
lubricants
Organization (ISO)
in ISO
for
DP 6521, under
the ISO-L-DAA and ISO-L-DAB
classiﬁcations. These cover applications wherever air-
discharge temperature are, respectively, below and above
160°C (329°F). For mineral-oil lubricants used in oil-
ﬂooded rotary-screw compressors the classiﬁcations ISO-
L-DAG and DAH cover applications where temperatures
respectively, below 100°C (212°F) and in the
are,
100–110°C range. For more severe applications, where
synthetic lubricants might be used, the ISO-L-DAC and
DAJ speciﬁcations cover both reciprocating and oil-
ﬂooded rotary-screw requirements.

For the general performance of compressor oils, there
is DIN 51506. This speciﬁcation deﬁnes several levels
of performance, of which the most severe – carrying the
code letters VD-L – relates to oils for use at air-discharge
temperatures of up to 220°C (428°F).

The stringent requirements covering oxidation stability
are deﬁned by the test method DIN 51352, Part 2, known
as the Pneurop Oxidation Test (POT). This test simulates
the oxidizing effects of high temperature, intimate expo-
sure to air, and the presence of iron oxide, which acts
as catalyst – all factors highly conducive to the chemi-
cal breakdown of oil, and the consequent formation of
deposits that can lead to ﬁre and explosion.

Rotary-screw compressor mineral

oxidation
resistance is assessed in a modiﬁed Pneurop oxidation
test using iron naphthenate catalyst at 120°C (250°F)

oils

52/948 Lubrication

Compressor

Dynamic (turbo)

Positive displacement

Axial flow

Centrifugal

Rotary

Reciprocating

Crosshead

Trunk

One rotor

Two rotors

Sliding
vane

Liquid
ring

SIngle
screw

Lobe
(roots)

Screw

Figure 52.13 Compressor types

for 1000 hours. This is known as the rotary-compressor
oxidation test (ROCOT).

52.13.3 Oil characteristics
Reciprocating compressors

In piston-type compressors, the oil serves three functions
in addition to the main one of lubricating the bearings
and cylinders. It helps to seal the ﬁne clearances around
piston rings, piston rods and valves, and thus minimizes
blow-by of air (which reduces efﬁciency and can cause
overheating). It contributes to cooling by dissipating heat
to the walls of the crankcase and it prevents corrosion that
would otherwise be caused by moisture condensing from
the compressed air.

In small single-acting compressors the oil to bearings
and cylinders is splash-fed by ﬂingers, dippers or rings,
but the larger and more complex machines have force-feed
lubrication systems, some of them augmented by splash-
feed. The cylinders of a double-acting compressor cannot
be splash lubricated, of course, because they are not open
to the crankcase. Two lubricating systems are therefore
necessary – one for the bearings and crosshead slides and

one feeding oil directly into the cylinders. In some cases
the same oil is used for both purposes, but the feed to the
cylinders has to be carefully controlled, because under-
lubrication leads to rapid wear and over-lubrication leads
to a build-up of carbon deposits in cylinders and on valves.
The number and position of cylinder-lubrication points
varies according to the size and type of the compressor.
Small cylinders may have a single point in the cylinder
head, near the inlet valve; larger ones may have two or
more. In each case, the sliding of the piston and the tur-
bulence of the air spread the oil.

In the piston-type compressor the very thin oil thin has
to lubricate the cylinder while it is exposed to the heat of
the compressed air. Such conditions are highly conducive
to oxidation in poor-quality oils, and may result in the
formation of gummy deposits that settle in and around the
piston-ring grooves and cause the rings to stick, thereby
allowing blow-by to develop.

Rotary compressors – vane type

The lubrication system of vane-type compressors varies
according to the size and output of the unit. Compressors
in the small and ‘portable’ group have neither external

cooling nor intercooling, because to effect all the neces-
sary cooling the oil is injected copiously into the incoming
air stream or directly into the compressor chamber. This
method is known as ﬂood lubrication, and the oil is usu-
ally cooled before being recirculated. The oil is carried
out of the compression chamber by the air, so it has to
be separated from the air; the receiver contains bafﬂes
that ‘knock out’ the droplets of oil, and they fall to the
bottom of the receiver. Condensed water is subsequently
separated from the oil in a strainer before the oil goes
back into circulation.

Vane-type pumps of higher-output are water-jacketed
and inter-cooled: the lubricant has virtually no cooling
function so it is employed in far smaller quantities. In
some units, the oil is fed only to the bearings, and the
normal leakage lubricates the vanes and the casing. In
others, it is fed through drillings in the rotor and perhaps
directly into the casing. This, of course, is a total-loss
lubrication technique, because the oil passes out with the
discharged air.

As in reciprocating units, the oil has to lubricate while
being subjected to the adverse inﬂuence of high tem-
perature. The vanes impose severe demands on the oil’s
lubricating powers. At their tips, for example, high rub-
bing speeds are combined with heavy end-pressure against
the casing.

Each time a vane is in the extended position (once per
revolution) a severe bending load is being applied between
it and the side of its slot. The oil must continue to lubricate
between them, to allow the vane to slide freely. It must
also resist formation of sticky deposits and varnish, which
lead to restricted movement of the vanes and hence to
blow-by and, in severe cases, to broken vanes.

Rotary compressors – screw type

The lubrication requirements for single-screw type com-
pressors are not severe, but in oil-ﬂooded rotary units, the
oxidizing conditions are extremely severe because ﬁne
droplets of oil are mixed intimately with hot compressed
air. In some screw-type air compressors, the rotors are
gear driven and do not make contact. In others, one rotor
drives the other. The heaviest contact loads occur where
power is transmitted from the female to the male rotor:
here the lubricant encounters physical conditions similar
to those between mating gear teeth. This arduous com-
bination of circumstances places a great demand on the
chemical stability, and lubricating power, of the oil.

Other types

Of the remaining designs, only the liquid-piston type deli-
vers pressures of the same order as those just mentioned.
The lobe, centrifugal and axial-ﬂow types are more accu-
rately termed ‘blowers’, since they deliver air in large
volumes at lower pressures. In all four cases only the
‘external’ parts – bearings, gears or both – require lubri-
cation. Therefore, the oil is not called upon to withstand
the severe service experienced in reciprocating and vane-
type compressors. Where the compressor is coupled to
a steam or gas turbine a common circulating oil system
is employed. High standards of system cleanliness are

Compressors 52/949

necessary to avoid deposit formation in the compressor
bearings.

Refrigeration compressors

The functions of a refrigerator compressor lubricant are
the same as those of compressor lubricants in general.
However, the close association between refrigerant and
lubricant does impose certain additional demands on the
oil. Oil is unavoidably carried into the circuit with refrig-
erant discharging from the compressor. In many installa-
tions, provision is made for removal of this oil. However,
several refrigerants, including most of the halogen refrig-
erants, are miscible with oil and it is difﬁcult to separate
the oil that enters the system, which therefore circulates
with the refrigerant. In either case the behavior of the oil
in cold parts of the systems is important, and suitable
lubricants have to have low pour point and low wax-
forming characteristics.

Effects of contamination

The conditions imposed on oils by compressors – parti-
cularly by the piston type – are remarkably similar to
those imposed by internal combustion engines. One major
difference is, of course, that in a compressor no fuel or
products of combustion are present to ﬁnd their way into
the oil. Other contaminants are broadly similar. Among
these are moisture, airborne dirt, carbon and the products
of the oil’s oxidation. Unless steps are taken to combat
them, all these pollutants have the effect of shortening the
life of both the oil and the compressor, and may even lead
to ﬁres and explosions.

Oxidation

High temperature and exposure to hot air are two inﬂu-
ences that favor the oxidation and carbonization of min-
eral oil. In a compressor, the oil presents a large surface
area to hot air because it is churned and sprayed in a ﬁne
mist, so the oxidizing inﬂuences are very strong – especia-
lly in the high temperatures of the compressor chamber.
The degree of oxidation is dependent mainly on tempera-
ture and the ability of the oil to resist, so the problem can
be minimized by the correct selection of lubricant and by
controlling operating factors.

In oxidizing, oil becomes thicker and it deposits car-
bon and gummy, resinous substances. These accumulate
in the piston-ring grooves of reciprocating compressors
and in the slots of vane-type units, and as a result, they
restrict free movement of components and allow air leak-
age to develop. The deposits also settle in and around
the valves of piston-type compressors, and prevent proper
sealing.

When leakage develops, the output of compressed air is
reduced, and overheating occurs due to the recompression
of hot air and the inefﬁcient operation of the compres-
sor. This leads to abnormally high discharge temperatures.
Higher temperature leads to increased oxidation and hence
increased formation of deposits, so adequate cooling of
compressors is very important.

52/950 Lubrication

Airborne dirt

In the context of industrial compressors, dust is a major
consideration. Such compressors have a very high through-
put of air, and even in apparently ‘clean’ atmospheres, the
quantity of airborne dirt is sufﬁcient to cause trouble if
the compressor is not ﬁtted with an air-intake ﬁlter. Many
of the airborne particles in an industrial atmosphere are
abrasive, and they cause accelerated rates of wear in any
compressor with sliding components in the compressor
chamber. The dirt passes into the oil, where it may accu-
mulate and contribute very seriously to the carbon deposits
in valves and outlet pipes. Another consideration is that
dirt in oil is likely to act as a catalyst, thus encouraging
oxidation.

Moisture

in a compression chamber

Condensation occurs in all compressors, and the effects
are most prominent where cooling takes place – in
intercoolers and air-receivers, which therefore have to
be drained at frequent intervals. Normally the amount
of moisture present
is
not sufﬁcient to affect lubrication, but relatively large
quantities can have a serious effect on the lubrication
of a compressor. Very wet conditions are likely to occur
when the atmosphere is excessively humid, compression
pressures are high, or the compressor is being overcooled.
During periods when the compressor is standing idle,
the moisture condenses on cylinders walls and casings,
and if the oil does not provide adequate protection, this
leads to rusting. Rust may not be serious at ﬁrst sight, and
it is quickly removed by wiping action when the compres-
sor is started, but the rust particles act as abrasives, and
if they enter the crankcase oil they may have a catalytic
effect and promote oxidation. In single-acting piston-type
compressors, the crankcase oil is contaminated by the
moisture.

52.14 Turbines
52.14.1 Steam

Although the properties required of a steam-turbine lubri-
cant are not extreme, it is the very long periods of con-
tinuous operation that creates the need for high-grade oils
to be used. The lubricating oil has to provide adequate
and reliable lubrication, act as a coolant, protect against
corrosion, as a hydraulic medium when used in governor
and control systems, and if used in a geared turbine pro-
vide satisfactory lubrication of the gearing. The lubricant
will therefore need the following characteristics.

For a directly coupled turbine for power
Viscosity
generation, a typical viscosity would be in the range
of 32–46 cSt at 40°C (ISO 32–46 at 104°F). Geared
units require a higher viscosity to withstand tooth loading
typically within the range of 68–100 cSt at 40°C (ISO
68–100 at 104°F).

The careful blending of turbine
Oxidation resistance
oils, using components which, by selective reﬁning, have

a reduced tendency to oxidize, produces the required
long-term stability. The high temperatures and pressures
of modern designs add to these demands, which are
combated by the incorporation of suitable anti-oxidant
additives.

The ability of the lubricant to separate
Demulsibility
readily and completely from water, in either a centrifuge
or a settling tank, is important in a turbine lubricant.
Otherwise, the retained water will react with products of
oxidation and particle contaminants to form stable emul-
sions. These will increase the viscosity of the oil and
form sludge that can result in a failure. Careful and selec-
tive reﬁning ensures a good demulsibility characteristic.
Inadequate storage and handling can seriously reduce this
property.

Corrosion resistance Although the equipment is desig-
ned to keep the water content at a minimum level, it is
virtually impossible to eliminate it. The problem of rusting
is therefore overcome by using corrosion inhibitors in the
lubricant formulation.

Turbine oils must be resistant to
Foaming resistance
foaming, since oil-foam reduces the rate of heat transfer
from the bearings, promotes oxidation by greatly extend-
ing the area of contact between air and oil. It is also an
unsatisfactory medium for the hydraulic governor con-
trols. Careful reﬁning is the primary means of achieving
good resistance to foaming. Use of an anti-foam additive
may seem desirable but this should be approached with
caution. If it is used in quantities higher than the optimum,
it can in fact assist air entrainment in the oil by retarding
the release of air bubbles.

52.14.2 Gas

The lubricants generally speciﬁed for conventional gas
turbines invariably fall within the same classiﬁcation as
those used for steam turbines and are often categorized
as ‘turbine oils’. In those cases where an aircraft type gas
turbine has been adapted for industrial use the lubricant is
vitally important to their correct operation. Speciﬁcations
have been rigidly laid down after the most exhaustive
tests, and it would be unwise, even foolhardy, to depart
from the manufacturers’ recommendations. No economic
gain would result from the use of cheaper, but less efﬁ-
cient, lubricants.

52.14.3 Performance standards

In the USA, there is the ASTM standards and the well-
known General Electric requirements. The total useful life
of turbine oil is its most important characteristic. ASTM
method D943 (IP 157) measures the life indirectly by
assessing the useful life of the oxidation inhibitor con-
tained in the formulation and are often referred to as
the TOST ‘life’ of the oil. Rust prevention is generally
assessed by the ASTM D665 (IP 135) method.

There are many other speciﬁcations designed by equip-
ment builders, military and professional societies, as well

as users. Care always needs to be taken when purchas-
ing turbine oil to speciﬁcation. The cheapest oil, albeit
conforming to the speciﬁcation, may not necessarily be
the best within that speciﬁcation for the particular pur-
pose. For instance, the additive package is rarely (if ever)
deﬁned, so that unexpected reactions can occur between
oils, which could affect overall performance.

52.15 Transformers and switchgear
The main requirement for power-transmission equipment
oil is that it should have good dielectric properties. Oil
used in transformers acts as a coolant for the windings;
as an insulant to prevent arcing between parts of the
transformer circuits; and prevents the ionization of minute
bubbles of air and gas in the wire insulation by absorb-
ing them and ﬁlling the voids between cable and wrap-
ping. In switchgear and circuit breakers, it has the added
function of quenching sparks from any arc formed dur-
ing equipment operation. Oils for use in power transmis-
sion equipment should have the following properties: high
electric strength, low viscosity, high chemical stability and
low carbon-forming characteristics under the conditions of
electric arc.

52.15.1 Performance standards

The efﬁciency of transformer oils as dielectrics is mea-
sured by ‘electric strength’ tests. These give an indication
of the voltage at which, under the test conditions, the oil
will break down. Various national standards exist that all
measure the same basic property of the oil. There is an
international speciﬁcation, IEC 296/1982, which may be
quoted by equipment manufacturers in their oil recom-
mendations.

52.15.2 Testing

How frequently the oil condition should be tested depends
on operating and atmospheric conditions; after the com-
missioning sample, further samples should be taken at
three months and one year after the unit is ﬁrst ener-
gized. After this, under normal conditions, testing should
be carried out annually. In unfavorable operating condi-
tions (damp or dust-laden atmospheres, or where space
limitations reduce air circulation and heat transfer) testing
should be carried out every six months.

Testing should include a dielectric strength test to con-
ﬁrm the oil’s insulation capability and an acidity test,
which indicates oil oxidation. While acid formation does
not usually develop until the oil has been in service for
some time when it does occur the process can be rapid.
If acidity is below 0.5 mg KOH/g no action would seem
necessary. Between 0.5 and 1 mg KOH/g, increased care
and testing is essential. Above 1 the oil should be removed
and either reconditioned or discarded. Before the unit is
ﬁlled with a fresh charge of oil it should be ﬂushed.

Sludge observations will show if arcing is causing car-
bon deposits which, if allowed to build up will affect heat
transfer and could inﬂuence the oil insulation. There is
also a ﬂash point test, in which any lowering of ﬂash

Greases 52/951

point is an indication that the oil has been subjected to
excessive local heating or submerged arcing (due to over-
load or an internal electrical fault). A fall in ﬂash point
exceeding 16°C (61°F) implies a fault, and the unit should
be shut down for investigation of the cause. Lesser drops
may be observed in the later stages of oil life, due to oxi-
dation effects, but are not usually serious. A ‘crackle’ test
is a simple way of detecting moisture in the oil. Where
water is present, the oil should be centrifuged.

52.16 Greases
Grease is a very important and useful lubricant when used
correctly, its main advantage being that it tends to remain
where it is applied. It is more likely to stay in contact
with rubbing surfaces than oil, and is less affected by the
forces of gravity, pressure and centrifugal action. Eco-
nomical and effective lubrication is the natural result of
this property and a reduction in the overall cost of lubri-
cation, particularly in all-loss systems, is made possible.
Apart from this, grease has other advantages. It acts
both as a lubricant and as a seal and is thus able, at the
same time as it lubricates, to prevent the entry of contam-
inants such as water and abrasive dirt. Grease lubrication
by eliminating the need for elaborate oil seals can simplify
plant design.

Because a ﬁlm of grease remains where it is applied for
much longer than a ﬁlm of oil, it provides better protection
to bearing and other surfaces that are exposed to shock
loads or sudden changes of direction. A ﬁlm of grease
also helps to prevent the corrosion of machine parts that
are idle for lengthy periods.

Bearings pre-packed with grease will function for exten-
ded periods without attention. Another advantage is the
almost complete elimination of drip or splash, which can
be a problem in certain applications. Grease is also able
to operate effectively over a wider range of temperatures
than any single oil.

There are certain disadvantages as well as advantages in
using grease as a lubricant. Greases do not dissipate heat
as well as ﬂuid lubricants, and for low-torque operation
tend to offer more resistance than oil.

52.16.1 Types of grease

The general method of classifying greases is by reference
to the type of soap that is mixed with mineral oil to pro-
duce the grease, although this has rather less practical sig-
niﬁcance nowadays than it had in the past. One example
of this is the multi-purpose grease that may replace two
or three different types previously thought necessary to
cover a particular ﬁeld of application. Nevertheless, there
are unique differences in behavior between greases made
with different metal soaps, and these differences are still
important in many industrial uses, for technical and eco-
nomic reasons.

Calcium-soap greases

The lime-soap (calcium) greases have been known for
many years but are still probably the most widely used.

52/952 Lubrication

They have a characteristic smooth texture, thermal sta-
bility, good water resistance and are relatively inexpen-
sive. The softer grades are easily applied, pump well and
give low starting torque. Their application is limited by
their relatively low drop points, which are around 100°C
(212°F). This means that, in practice, the highest operating
temperature is about 50°C (122°F).

Nevertheless, they are used widely for the lubrication
of medium-duty rolling and plain bearings, centralized
greasing systems, wheel bearings and general duties. The
stiffer varieties are used in the form of blocks on the older-
type brasses. Modiﬁcations of lime-base grease include
the graphited varieties and those containing an extreme
pressure additive. The latter are suitable for heavily loaded
roller bearings such as in steel-mill applications.

Sodium-soap greases

The soda-soap (sodium) greases were, for some consid-
erable time, the only high-melting-point greases avail-
able to industry. They have drop points in the region
of 150°C (302°F) and their operating maximum is about
80°C (176°F). These greases can be ‘buttery’, ﬁbrous or
spongy, are not particularly resistant to moisture and are
not suitable for use in wet conditions. Plain bearings are
very frequently lubricated with soda-based greases.

For rolling-contact bearings, a much smoother texture
is required, and this is obtained by suitable manufacturing
techniques. Modiﬁed grades may be used over the same
temperature range as that of the unmodiﬁed grade and,
when they are correctly formulated, have a good shear
resistance and a slightly better resistance to water than
the unmodiﬁed grades.

Lithium-soap greases

These products, unknown before the Second World War,
were developed ﬁrst as aircraft lubricants. Since then,
the ﬁeld in which they have been used has been greatly
extended and they are now used in industry as multipur-
pose greases. They combine the smooth texture of the
calcium-based greases with higher melting points than
soda-soap greases, and are almost wholly manufactured
in the medium and soft ranges. Combined with suitable
additives, they are the ﬁrst choice for all rolling-contact
bearings, as they operate satisfactorily up to a tempera-
ture of 120°C (250°F) and at even higher for intermittent
use. Their water resistance is satisfactory and they may be
applied by all conventional means, including centralized
pressure systems.

Non-soap thickened greases

These are generally reserved for specialist applications,
and are in the main more costly than conventional soap-
based greases. The most common substances used as non-
soap thickeners are silica and clays prepared in such a way
that they form gels with mineral and synthetic oils. Other
materials that have been used are carbon black, metal
oxides and various organic compounds.

The characteristic of these non-soap greases which dis-
tinguishes them from conventional greases is that many of
them have very high melting points; they will remain as
greases up to temperatures in the region of 260°C (500°F).
For this reason, the limiting upper usage temperature is
determined by the thermal stability of the mineral oil or
synthetic ﬂuid of which they are composed. Applications
such as those found in cement manufacturing, where high-
temperature conditions have to be met, require grease
suitable for continuous use at, say, 204°C (400°F).

Although it is difﬁcult to generalize, the non-soap prod-
ucts have, overall, been found to be somewhat less effec-
tive than the soap-thickened greases as regards lubricating
properties and protection against corrosion, particularly
rusting. Additive treatment can improve non-soap grades
in both these respects, but their unique structures render
them more susceptible to secondary and unwanted effects
than is the case with the more conventional greases.

Filled greases

The crude types of axle and mill grease made in the early
days frequently contained large amounts of chemically
inert, inorganic powders. These additions gave ‘body’ to
the grease and, possibly, helped to improve the adher-
ence of the lubricating ﬁlm. Greases are still ‘ﬁlled’ but
in a selective manner with much-improved materials and
under controlled conditions. Two materials often used for
this purpose are graphite and molybdenum disulﬁde.

Small amounts (approximately 5 per cent) of ﬁller
have little or no effect on grease structure, but large
amounts increase the consistency. However, the materials
mentioned are lubricants in themselves and are sometimes
used as such. Consequently, it is often claimed that when
they are incorporated into the structure of the grease
the lubricating properties of the grease are automatically
improved. A difference of opinion exists as to the validity
of this assumption, but it is true that both molybdenum
disulﬁde and graphite are effective where shock loading
or boundary conditions exist, or when the presence of
chemicals would tend to remove conventional greases.

Other metal-soap greases

Mixing greases

Greases are also made from soaps of strontium, barium
and aluminum. Of these, aluminum-based grease is the
most widely used. It
is insoluble in water and very
adhesive to metal.
Its widest application is in the
lubrication of vehicle chassis. In industry, it is used for
rolling-mill applications and for the lubrication of cams
and other equipment subject to violent oscillation and
vibration, where its adhesiveness is an asset.

The above comments on the properties of the various types
of grease have shown that very real differences exist.
Each one has its own particular type of structure, calls
for individual manufacturing processes and has its own
advantages and disadvantages. It is because of these dis-
tinct differences that the mixing of greases should never be
encouraged. If greases of different types are mixed indis-
criminately there is a risk that one or other of them will

suffer, the resulting blend being less stable than either of
the original components and the blend may even liquefy.

2. Charge the bearing housing one-half to two-thirds full

of grease.

Corrosion prevention 52/953

52.16.2 Selecting a grease

A few brief notes on the fundamental factors that inﬂu-
ence a choice of grease may be found helpful. The ﬁrst
essential is to be clear about the limitations of the dif-
ferent types, and to compare them with the conditions
they are to meet. Table 52.10 gives the characteristics of
high-quality greases.

Greases with a mixed base are not shown in the table
because, in general, they are characterized by the predom-
inant base; for example, a soda-lime grease behaves like
a soda grease. The required length of service may modify
temperature limits. Thus, if soda grease requires having
only a short life, it could be used at temperatures up to
120°C (250°F).

When the type most suitable for a particular application
has been chosen, the question of consistency must be con-
sidered. The general tendency over the last two decades
has been towards softer grease than formerly used. Two
factors have probably contributed to this trend; the growth
of automatic grease dispensing and the use of more vis-
cous oils in grease making.

In practice, the range of grease consistency is quite
limited. For most general industrial applications, a No.2
consistency is satisfactory. Where suitability for pumping
is concerned, a No. 1; for low temperatures, a No. 0; and
for water pumps and similar equipment, a No. 3 may be
better selections.

52.16.3 Grease application

In applying lubricating grease, the most important aspect
is how much to use. Naturally, the amount varies with the
component being serviced, but some general rules can
be laid down. All manufacturers agree that anti-friction
bearings should never be over-greased. This is particu-
larly true of high-speed bearings, in which the churning of
excess lubricant leads to overheating. The rise in temper-
ature of a bearing as the amount of grease increases has
been recorded. With the bearing housing one-third full,
the temperature was 39°C (102°F); at two-thirds full the
temperature rose to 42°C (108°F); and with a full charge
of grease it went up to 58°C (136°F).

The general recommendations for grease packing are:

1. Fully charge the bearing itself with grease ensuring that
it is worked around and between the rolling elements.

Table 52.10 Characteristics of high-quality greases

Grease
(type of soap) maximum operating
temperature (°C)

Recommended

Water

resistance

Mechanical

stability

Lime
Soda
Lithium
Aluminum

50
80
120
50

Good
Poor
Good
Fair

Good
Good
Good
Moderate

Churning, and its attendant high temperature, may
change the structure of the grease permanently, in which
event softening may result in leakage and stiffening in
lubricant starvation. There is no ﬁxed rule for the period
between re-greasing, since this depends on the operating
conditions. Most recommendations suggest
inspection
and possible replenishment every six or twelve months,
though the general tendency as grease quality improves
has been to extend this period. The higher the temperature
of a machine, the more frequently it must be greased
because of possible losses of softened lubricant or changes
in its structure.

It is not always incorrect to over-grease. With a sleeve
bearing, for instance, gun pressure may be maintained
until old grease exudes from the ends of the bearing,
and the same is true of spring shackles. For the sake of
economy and cleanliness, however, this should never be
overdone.

52.17 Corrosion prevention
Most plant has to work under adverse conditions, in all
sorts of weather, and subject to contamination by various
agents. However, as long as it is in use it can be rea-
sonably sure of receiving at least a minimum amount of
regular maintenance and attention, and this will reduce
the likelihood of working parts being attacked by corro-
sion when plant is in service. However, when plant has to
be laid up until required, no matter how carefully matters
have been planned, corrosion is always a serious possibil-
ity. Modern machinery, with highly ﬁnished surfaces, is
especially susceptible to atmospheric attack. The surfaces
of components also require protection during transport and
storage.

Even today, rusting of industrial plant and material is
accepted by some as an inevitable operating expense.
There is no necessity for this attitude, however, as the
petroleum industry has evolved effective, easily applied
temporary protectives against corrosion, which are well
suited to the conditions met in practice.

52.17.1 Categories of temporary corrosion
preventives

Temporary corrosion preventives are products designed
for the short-term protection of metal surfaces. They are
easily removable, if necessary, by petroleum solvents or
by other means such as wiping or alkaline stripping. Some
products for use in internal machine parts are miscible and
compatible with the eventual service lubricant, and do not,
therefore, need to be removed.

The major categories of temporary corrosion preven-

tives are:

Soft-ﬁlm protectives

Dewatering ﬂuids giving soft/medium ﬁlms
Non-dewatering ﬂuids giving soft ﬁlms

52/954 Lubrication

Hot-dip compounds
Greases

Hard-ﬁlm protectives

Oil-type protectives
General-purpose
Engine protectives

The development of products in these categories has
been guided by known market demands and many manu-
facturers have made use of established speciﬁcations for
temporary protectives.

52.17.2 Selection of a corrosion preventive

Temporary corrosion preventives are in some cases requi-
red to give protection against rusting for periods of only
a few days for inter-process waiting in factories. Where
the protected components are not exposed to the weather,
protection can be given for up to a year or more for stored
components in internal storage conditions. On the other
hand, components may require protection for a few days
or even weeks under the most adverse weather conditions.
Some components may have to be handled frequently
during transit or storage. In general, therefore, the more
adverse the conditions of storage, the longer the protective
periods, and the more frequent the handling, the thicker
or more durable the protective ﬁlm must be.

Because of the wide variation in conditions of exposure,
it
is not possible to deﬁne the length of protection
period except in general terms. Solvent-deposited soft
ﬁlms will give protection from a few days to months
indoors and some weeks outdoors; a solvent-deposited
medium ﬁlm will give long-term protection indoors and
medium-term protection outdoors. Hot-dip compounds
and cold-applied greases give ﬁlms that can withstand
considerable handling and will give medium to long
protection. Solvent-deposited hard-ﬁlm protectives will
give long-term protection but are difﬁcult
to remove.
Oil protectives give short- to medium-term protection of
parts not subject to handling and are much used for the
preservation of internal working parts; they need not be
removed and can in some instances serve as lubricating
oils.

Short term, medium term and long term are expres-
sions that are not rigorously deﬁned but are generally
accepted as meaning of the order of up to 6 months,
12 months and 18 months, respectively, in temperate cli-
mates. Where local conditions are more severe (in hot,
humid climates, for example) the protection periods are
less. These protection periods are related to the preventive
ﬁlm alone, but where transit or storage conditions call for
wrapping or packaging then longer protection periods can
be obtained.

The distinction between a simple part and a complex
assembly is an important factor in selecting a temporary
protective. The solvent-containing protectives may not be
suited to treating assemblies, because:

1. Assemblies may contain non-metallic parts (rubber, for

example) that could be attacked by the solvent;

2. The solvent cannot evaporate from enclosed or shiel-
ded spaces and the intended ﬁlm thickness will not be
obtained;

3. Evaporated solvent could be trapped and could then

leach away the protective ﬁlm.

Hence, the hot-dip compounds, or greases smeared cold,
are better for assemblies with non-metallic parts masked
if necessary. Solvent-containing protectives therefore ﬁnd
greater application in the protection of simple parts or com-
ponents. The available means of application, the nature of
any additional packaging and the economics and scale of
the protective treatment are further factors that inﬂuence
the choice of type of temporary corrosion preventive.

52.18 Spray lubricants
There are several applications where the lubrication requi-
rement is specialized and very small, needing precise app-
lications where access is limited because of equipment
design or location. In these instances, lubricant application
by aerosol is the most suitable method. Extreme-pressure
cutting ﬂuid for reaming and tapping, etc., conveyor and
chain lubricant, anti-seize and weld anti-spatter agents,
release agents, electrical component cleaner and de-
greasing agents are examples of the ever widening range
of products available in aerosol packs.

52.19 Degreasing agents
Often, before any maintenance work starts it is necessary
(and desirable) to remove any oil, grease and dirt from
the equipment concerned. It may also be necessary to
clean replacement components before their installation.
Solvents, emulsions and chemical solutions are three
broad types of degreasing agents. The method of
degreasing (direct onto the surface, by submersion,
through degreasing equipment or by steam cleaners),
component complexity and the degree of contamination
will all have to be taken into account when selecting the
type of product to be used.

52.20 Filtration
Some 70–85 per cent of failures and wear problems in
lubricated machines are caused by oil contamination. Clean
oil extends machine and oil life and gives greater relia-
bility, higher productivity and lower maintenance cost.
Hence, some type of ﬁlter is an essential part of virtually
all lubrication systems.

Cleaning of oil in service may be accomplished quite
simply or with relatively complex units, depending on
the application and the design of the system. Thus for
some operations it is enough to remove particles of fer-
rous metal from the oil with a magnetic system. In a
closed circulatory system, such as that of a steam turbine,
the nature of the solids and other contaminants is far more
complex, and the treatment has therefore to be more elab-
orate. In an internal-combustion engine, both air and fuel
are ﬁltered as well as crankcase oil.

The efﬁciency of ﬁltration must be matched to the needs
of the particular application, and, this is true both quan-
titatively (in relation the anticipated build-up of solids in
the ﬁlters) and qualitatively (in relation to the compo-
sition of the contaminants and their size). Dirt build-up
varies considerably, but it is probably at its maximum with
civil engineering equipment. In this ﬁeld, diesel engines in
trucks will steadily accumulate something like 10 ounces
of solids in the crankcase oil within a month.

Particle size is naturally important. It is generally assu-
med that particles of less than 3 microns in diameter are
relatively harmless. However, this is on the assumption
that the oil ﬁlm is itself of this, or greater, thickness; in
other words, that full ﬂuid-ﬁlm hydrodynamic lubrication
persists during the whole working cycle of the machine.
This is seldom the case, for there are either critical areas
or critical phases at or during which mixed or even wholly
boundary conditions prevail – when, in fact, the oil ﬁlm
is less than 3 microns thick. The tendency of modern
industrial equipment to operate at higher speeds and under
greater pressures leads to higher wear rates. Increased
pump capacity, as in hydraulic circuits, coupled with a
decreased oil volume means a relatively greater amount
of contamination. All in all, much more is demanded of
the ﬁlter today, whatever the application, than at any time
in the past.

52.20.1 Types of ﬁlter

The terms ‘ﬁlter’ and ‘strainer’ are in common use and
may lubricant systems contain both. The word ‘strainer’
is often associated with the removal of large particles, and
though it is true that in the majority of cases a strainer is in
fact employed to remove coarse particles, the fundamental
difference between it and a ﬁlter is not one of porosity
but purely one of geometry. In a strainer, the liquid passes
through in a straight line, but in a ﬁlter, a far more devious
route is followed.

Strainers are usually made from woven wire gauze,
like a sieve, and though today the pre-size can be made
very small indeed (BSI 300 mesh gauze separates par-
ticles of roughly 50 microns) they are mainly included
for the exclusion of large particles. Filters deal with the
removal of very much smaller particles.

Naturally from the above deﬁnition there is some un-
avoidable overlapping, and a ﬁne strainer of, say, stainless
steel ‘cloth’ is regarded as a ﬁlter. There are ﬁve main
types of ﬁltering units as follows.

Surface ﬁlms

These are usually constructed of woven metal gauze,
paper or cloth. The paper ﬁlter may have the working
surface enlarged by pleating and the paper impregnated
and strengthened. As an example, one proprietary pleated
model gives, from an element 4.500
in
external diameter, a ﬁltering surface of some 504 in2. This
type, sometimes described as a radial-ﬁn unit, has a good
throughput and is easy to clean or replace. Filters in this
class generally have porosity from 100 microns down to
10 or, in extreme cases, even down to 2 microns.

long and 3.5200

Filtration 52/955

Edge ﬁlters

A typical unit comprises a pack of metal or paper discs
with a washer between each, the gauge of the latter gov-
erning the degree of ﬁltration. The oil ﬂows from the
outside and is discharged through a central channel. Some
designs can be cleaned without dismantling or interrupting
the ﬂow.

An alternative method of manufacturing is to employ a
coil of ﬂat metal ribbon as the element, each turn spaced
from the next by small lateral protuberances. The principle
of ﬁltration is the same. Porosity of both types are iden-
tical and cover a wide range, usually from 100 microns
down to 0.5 microns.

Depth ﬁlters (absorption-type ﬁlters)

1. Chemically inactive: These are made from a variety of
materials that include wound yarn, felt, ﬂannel, cot-
ton waste, wood pump, mineral wool, asbestos and
diatomaceous earth. The solid particles are trapped and
retained within the medium. Certain types will remove
water, as well as large and small particles of solids
in a range down to 10 microns. Ceramics are some-
times employed for depth ﬁltration, as also are special
sintered metals.

2. Chemically active: These ﬁlters are similar in design to
the non-active depth units but the ﬁltering media used
are so chosen that contaminants adhere by chemical
attraction. Thus there is a dual action, mechanical and
chemical. The materials used include various activated
clays, Fuller’s earth, charcoal and chemically treated
paper. Their cleansing action is much more thorough
than that of the purely mechanical devices, for they
are capable of removing matter actually in solution in
the oil.

Magnetic and combined magnetic ﬁlters

In its simplest form,

the magnetic ﬁlter comprises
a non-magnetic outer casing with an inner permanent
magnetic core round which the liquid ﬂows. Because of
the magnetic anisotropy of the ﬁeld, the ferrous particles
are continuously diverted to the area of strongest attraction
coinciding with the direction of ﬂow. A more elaborate
design of magnetic clariﬁer has its elements mounted in a
rotating disc. The dirty ﬂuid ﬂows through the chamber in
which the disc dips, and ferrous particles adhering to the
magnetized areas are removed by the action of scrapers
and collected in containers. The capacity of one such disc
has been given as 600 g/h with a range of sludge removal
as high as 10 oz/h. Combined units may have the magnet
located within a coil of wire that forms the permeable,
mechanical ﬁlter.

For its specialized application (cleaning the coolants
used for metal-machining operations such as grinding
and honing), the magnetic ﬁlter is easily maintained and
cleaned. It has a high throughput and will remove ferrous
particles as small as 1 micron. Some of the non-magnetic
material is associated with the ferrous particles suspended
in the ﬂuids and this is removed with them.

52/956 Lubrication

The centrifugal ﬁlter

This is a specialized design and is, in effect, a true cen-
trifuge of small size that operates on the reaction turbine
principle, an oil-circulating pump providing the necessary
power. One advantage claimed for this type is that it oper-
ates at a steady ﬂow rate, whereas the ﬂow rate through a
felt or paper element diminishes as the bed of dirt is built
up. The centrifugal ﬁlter has been successfully applied to
diesel engines where the greater part of the dirt particles
is under 2 microns in diameter.

52.21 Centrifuging
The centrifugal separation of solid impurities is adopted
either as an alternative to ﬁltration or combined with it.
For example, having ﬁxed-element ﬁlters that arrest larger
particles, and a centrifuge system that removes the ﬁner
solids in suspension together with any water contained in
the oil can clean a lubricant circulating system.

The centrifuge is a powerful tool. The magnitude of
the available centrifugal force – the product of the mass
of the particle and its acceleration – is easily appreciated
when the speeds and dimensions of a commercial unit are
considered. A vessel with a diameter of 1000 spinning at
1700 rev/min gives acceleration at the centrifuge wall of
some 14 oz. In terms of settling this means that centrifug-
ing a crude oil for 30 seconds is at least equivalent to
simple gravitational settling over a 24-hour period.

The advantage of the modern continuous centrifuge is
the rapidity with which it will separate both solids and
emmiscible liquids. Another stems from the larger volume
of oil it can handle in a given time.

52.22 Shaft seals
Both physical and process-material considerations inﬂu-
ence the choice and use of shaft seals in the industry. It
is essential that the seal material is compatible with any
process material and the operating variables.

52.22.1 Seal materials

Nitrile rubbers, including ﬁber-reinforced varieties, are
used both as radial shaft-seal materials and as molded
packing for reciprocating shafts. They have excellent resis-
tance to a considerable range of chemicals, with the excep-
tion of strong acids and alkalis, and are at the same time
compatible with petroleum-based lubricants. Their work-
ing temperature range is from (cid:1)1°C to 107°C (30°F to
225°F) continuously and up to 150°C (302°F) intermit-
tently. When used on hard shafts with a surface ﬁnish of,
at most, 0.00038 mm root mean square (RMS), they have
an excellent resistance to abrasion.

Polyacrylic resins, which have similar chemical resis-
tance to the nitriles, can be used for slightly higher tem-
perature conditions, but because their abrasion resistance
is not as good as that of the nitriles, they need continuous
lubrication.

Leather is a useful material in association with a whole
range of organic liquids and oils. It retains its sealing

properties very well over a temperature range of (cid:1)45°C
to 93°C ((cid:1)49°F to 200°F). Its abrasion resistance is good
and it will tolerate low speeds on 0.00076 mm RMS shafts
with only intermittent lubrication.

Silicone rubber as a shaft seal and backing material has
a number of special applications. It can be used over a
temperature range of (cid:1)60°C to 260°C ((cid:1)76°F to 500°F) in
air or suitable ﬂuids. Its abrasion resistance is good with
hard shafts having a 0.000254 mm RMS surface ﬁnish.
Commercial grades of silicone rubber are compatible with
most industrial chemicals up to 260°C (500°F). In lubri-
cating oils, the limiting temperature is 120°C (250°F), but
special types have been developed for use up to 200°C
(392°F).

Face-seal materials can be chosen from ﬁlled, molded
or reinforced resins with which water, hydraulic ﬂuids,
mineral oils or synthetic oils are all compatible. Their
maximum temperature in service depends on the brittle
point of the resin but, generally, the range is from (cid:1)50°C
to 100°C (122°F to 212°F). Abrasion resistance is gener-
ally good but, as far as possible, resins are not used in the
presence of foreign solids.

Carbon is an excellent material, being unaffected by
most industrial chemicals including corrosives, oils, sol-
vents, water and steam. It has a temperature range of up to
260°C (500°F), coupled with a high resistance to abrasion
in clean ﬂuids.

Ceramics are highly resistant to wear, chemical attack
and high temperatures and, consequently, have many appli-
cations. They are frequently bonded to metal in making
seal components or applied as a coating for shafts where
seal elements introduce wear.

Metal can cover many requirements in seal design;
it may be used for faces and other parts such as rings
and bellows. The speciﬁcation of the metal depends on
the degree of corrosion resistance necessary, the thermal
expansion and the material of the mating face.

Rubber bellows casings and sealing rings are vulnerable
to temperature and are thus limited to a range of between
0°C to 100°C (32°F to 212°F). Rubber is compatible with
most industrial chemicals and is particularly useful in the
presence of solids.

Sealing rings that are inert to most chemical corrosives
and solvents are usually manufactured from PTFE or one
of the synthetic elastomers.

52.22.2 Packing materials

Nitrile and polyacrylic materials have temperature ranges
of (cid:1)34°C to 107°C ((cid:1)29°F to 225°F) and (cid:1)34°C to 177°C
((cid:1)29°F to 350°F), respectively. Both require continuous
lubrication.

Silicone rubber is not recommended for use with hot
organic materials. If, for speciﬁc reasons, its use is con-
templated, the manufacturer should be consulted regard-
ing its possible use for a particular application.
Neoprene, a well-proved packing material, has a tem-
perature range of (cid:1)60°C to 107°C ((cid:1)76 to 225°F) but
because it is unsuitable for use with many organic liq-
uids, it is normally used only with aqueous solutions.
It possesses good resistance to abrasion, which makes it

particularly useful with slurries or where there is abrasive
contamination.

Metallic packings of aluminum, copper and lead cover
a very wide temperature range up to 540°C (1000°F). They
should be matched to the shaft material, since shaft ﬁn-
ish and tolerance are critical factors in overall efﬁciency.
The great limiting factor in the use of metallic packing is
the difﬁculty of ensuring corrosion resistance with all the
likely process materials.

The textile ﬁbers have a limited range of application.
They may be used with hot or cold water, steam, oils and
ammonia up to a maximum temperature of 100°C (212°F).
Asbestos ﬁber is more versatile, can be used as compres-
sion packing material with hot water, super-heated steam,
hot oils and gases up to 310°C (590°F).

52.23 Centralized lubrication
Manual application of lubricants has the inherent risk of
failure due to omission. With the increasing complexity
of plant, the costs of lost production and of manpower to
try to prevent such omissions are becoming unacceptable.
Mechanized methods of pumping oil and grease to bear-
ings and other components are becoming increasingly uti-
lized. Some of these systems are fundamentally suited to
either oil or grease, but others, including all those where
continuous circulation is involved, are suitable only for oil.
Built-in mechanized grease lubrication is nearly always
of the centralized ‘one-shot’ variety, in which a single
pump stroke supplies grease simultaneously to a num-
ber of bearings. Suitable valves or adjustable metering
oriﬁces regulate the amount supplied to each station. The
pump may be manually operated or connected to a suitable
machine component, whereby grease is fed only when
the machine is actually running and at controlled tem-
peratures. Pneumatic or electric pumps are also used, set
in operation at regular intervals by an automatic timing
device.

One-shot metered lubrication is eminently suited to oil-
ing systems and can be employed either in an ‘all-loss’
arrangement or as part of a circulatory system. Sight-
glasses or other indicators should be incorporated; since
such lubricating mechanisms are nowadays so reliable that
a blockage or other failure might not be suspected until
too late.

Circulatory systems often use an intermediate header
tank, from which the bearings are supplied by gravity. The
complete system may comprise, in addition and according
to the size of the installation, heat exchangers or cool-
ers, ﬁlters, strainers, settling tanks, centrifuges and other
purifying equipment.

Oil mist feeds are used less for plain bearings than for
lubricating some other types of machine parts, but appli-
cations are increasing in number. A stream of dry com-
pressed air is used both to generate the mist and to carry
it to the bearing. The atomized oil droplets are released
from air suspension at points of turbulence around bear-
ings, gears and other moving components or in a spe-
cial re-classifying ﬁtting at the end of the supply line.
Re-classiﬁers are generally employed when plain bear-
ings are to be lubricated by oil mist, but the method is

Storage of lubricants 52/957

fundamentally unsuited for bearings requiring hydrody-
namic thick-ﬁlm lubrication.

Special precautions must be taken with oil-mist feeds
to ensure that the compressed air, which greatly enhances
the rate of heat dissipation, can escape from the housing.
If vents or other outlets become blocked, the back pressure
may stop the ﬂow of lubricant.

52.24 Storage of lubricants
It cannot be emphasized too strongly that dirt and correct
lubrication are incompatible. The lubricant manufacturer
has a comprehensive system of classiﬁcation, ﬁltration
and inspection of packages, which ensures that all oils
and greases leaving his plant are free from liquid and
solid contaminants. It is in his own interests that the user
should take the same care to ensure that the lubricant
enters his machinery in as clean a condition as that in the
bulk tank or barrel. The entry of abrasive dust, water and
other undesirable matter into bearings and oilways may
result if lubricants are handled carelessly.

The conditions in a plant are often far from ideal and
usually storage facilities are limited. This, however, should
serve as a constant reminder of the need for continual care,
the adoption of suitable dispensing equipment, organized
storekeeping and efﬁcient distribution methods. Further-
more, local organization and facilities will govern the
arrangements on any particular site. Technical person-
nel from lubricant suppliers are available to assist and
advise plant management on the best methods for a par-
ticular site. The general recommendations given about the
care of lubricants consist of elementary precautions, which
are mainly self-evident and yet, unfortunately, are often
ignored.

The modern steel barrel is reasonably weatherproof in
its original condition, but if stored out of doors and water
is allowed to collect in the head, there may, in time, be
seepage past the bung due to the breathing of the pack-
age. Exposure may also completely obliterate the grade
name and identiﬁcation numbers, as is evidenced by the
frequent requests made to sample and test lubricants from
full packages that have been neglected on-site because
no other method of identiﬁcation is possible. Unless it is
unavoidable, packages should never be stored in the open
and exposed to all weather. Even an elementary cover
such as a sheet of corrugated iron or a tarpaulin may
provide valuable protection.

However rudimentary the oil stores, the ﬁrst essential
is cleanliness; the second is orderliness. These two essen-
tials will be easily achieved if maximum possible use is
made of bulk storage tanks. In the case of bulk stor-
age of soluble oils, the need for moderate temperatures
is vital, and the tanks should be housed indoors to protect
their contents against frost. There are several other ben-
eﬁts to be derived from the use of tanks, i.e. reduction
in storage area, handling of packages and, possibly, and
bulk-buying economics. All barrels should be mounted on
a frame of suitable height, ﬁtted with taps and the grade
name clearly visible. The exterior surfaces of both tanks
and barrels should be kept scrupulously clean and each
container provided with its own drip tray or can.

52/958 Lubrication

The storage and handling of grease presents more prob-
lems than are encountered with ﬂuid lubricants, as the
nature of the material and design of the conventional pack-
ages make contamination easier. Lids of grease kegs must
be kept completely free from dust and dirt, and should be
replaced immediately after use. The most common way
in which solids enter a grease package is by the user care-
lessly placing lid either on the ground or on some other
unsuitable surface. Fortunately, there are available today
a number of simple dispensing units which can entirely
obviate this danger and which can be adapted to all types
of packages.

Wherever manual distribution has to be adopted, con-
tainers should be reserved for the exclusive use of speciﬁc
units and their operators and, as far as possible, for a par-
ticular grade. When not in use they must be stored away
from all possible sources of contamination. To promote
economy and reduce waste due to spillage, their shape
and proportions must be suited to the application.

While it is impossible to describe a system of store-
keeping and distribution suitable for every site, there are
certain essential principles which should be adhered to
if cleanliness, order and economy are to be maintained.
How these principles should be applied is for individual
management to decide. The keynote, however, should be
simplicity. A storekeeper familiar with both grades and
needs should control distribution. While the lubrication
schedule for any particular unit is generally the concern
of the operator, the storekeeper must equally be aware of it
and have a comprehensive list of the different grades, their
applications, quantities, daily and other periodic needs. On
such a basis he will be able to requisition and store the
necessary lubricants in the most convenient and economic
quantities and packages, and ensure that supplies are used
on a ‘ﬁrst in, ﬁrst out’ basis.

Care and good housekeeping at every stage from han-
dling, stacking and storage, right through to dispensing
and application will:
ž Ensure that the correct product reaches the point of
ž Help towards maximum efﬁciency in the use of lubri-
cants and the equipment in which they are employed;
ž Avert accidents and ﬁre hazards arising from mis-
ž Prevent any adverse effects on people, equipment and

application and is free from contamination;

handling;

the environment.

52.25 Reconditioning of oil
Reconditioning is the removal of contaminants and oxida-
tion products (at least in part) but not previously incorpo-
rated additives. It may also involve the addition of new oil
and/or additives to adjust the viscosity and/or performance
level. This process is sometimes referred to as ‘launder-
ing’ or ‘reclamation’. The method treats used lubricating
oil to render it suitable for further service, either in the
original or a downgraded application. Two types of treat-
ment are generally employed.

1. Filtration to remove contaminants followed by the addi-
tion of new oil and/or additives to correct performance
level;

2. A simple ﬁltration process to remove contaminants.

In practice, treatment (1) usually involves a contractor
collecting a segregated batch of oil, reconditioning and
returning it for re-use. A contractor can carry out the sim-
ple ﬁltration process, but it is more usually done on-site.
Re-reﬁning is the removal of contaminants and oxidation
products and previously incorporated additives to recover
the lube base stock for new lubricant or other applications.

52.26 Planned lubrication and
maintenance management
Having the correct lubricant in each application will only
give the maximum beneﬁt if and when it is applied at
the correct frequency and quantity. With the increasing
complexity of plant this is becoming more vital and, at
the same time, more difﬁcult to achieve. The solution to
this problem is planned lubrication maintenance, which,
in essence, is having the right lubricant in the right place
at the right time in the right amount.

Most oil companies offer a planned lubrication main-
tenance (PLM) service that will meet these requirements
with the minimum of effort on the part of the customer.
These schemes provide logical routing for the lubrication
operative, balanced workloads and clear instructions to
those responsible for speciﬁc tasks associated with lubri-
cation and fault-reporting facilities. Many schemes are
now designed for computer operation, which also accom-
modate plant and grade changes, operation costs and man-
power planning. It is essential that any such scheme should
be adaptable to individual requirements.

A few computerized PLM schemes are dynamic sys-
tems and can be integrated into an overall maintenance
management information system. These contain mainte-
nance; inventory and purchase order modules and go far
beyond ‘just another work order system’. They provide
the necessary information to control complex maintenance
environments, thereby improving productivity and reduc-
ing operational costs.

52.27 Condition monitoring
Condition monitoring is an established technique which
has been used by capital-intensive or high-risk indus-
tries to protect their investment. The concept has devel-
oped radically in recent years largely due to advances
in computerization, which offer greater scope for sophis-
ticated techniques. These fall into three types of moni-
toring: vibration, performance and wear debris. The last
monitors particulate debris in a ﬂuid such as lubricating
oil, caused by the deterioration of a component.

Oil-related analysis encompasses a variety of physi-
cal and chemical tests such as viscosity, total acid num-
ber and particulate contamination. This is often extended
to include the identiﬁcation of wear debris, as an early
warning of component failure, by either spectrographic

analysis or ferrography. The former is commonly used in
automotive and industrial application for debris up to 10
microns and the latter mainly for industry users covering
wear particles over 10 microns. Ferrography is relatively
expensive compared with many other techniques, but is
justiﬁed in capital-intensive areas where the cost is readily
offset by quantiﬁable beneﬁts such as longer machinery
life, reduced loss of production, less downtime, etc.

52.28 Health, safety and the
environment
There are a wide variety of petroleum products for a
large number of applications. The potential hazards and
the recommended methods of handling differ from prod-
uct to product. Consequently, the supplier must provide
use of protective clothing, ﬁrst aid and other relevant
information advice on such hazards and on the appro-
priate precautions. Where there is risk of repeated con-
tact with petroleum products (as with cutting ﬂuids and
some process oils) special working precautions are obvi-
ously necessary. The aim is to minimize skin contact, not
only because most petroleum products are natural skin-
degreasing agents but also because with some of them
prolonged and repeated contact in poor conditions of per-
sonal hygiene may result in various skin disorders.

52.28.1 Health

It is important that health factors are kept in proper per-
spective. What hazards there may be in the case of oil
products are avoided or minimized by simple precautions.
For work involving lubricants (including cutting ﬂuids
and process oils) the following general precautions are
recommended:
ž Employ working methods and equipment that minimize
ž Fit effective and properly positioned splash guards;
ž Avoid unnecessary handling of oily components;
ž Use only disposable wipes;
ž Use soluble oils or synthetic ﬂuids at their recommended
dilutions only, and avoid skin contact with their ‘con-
centrates’.

skin contact with oil;

In addition to overalls, adequate protective clothing
should be provided. For example, a PVC apron may be
appropriate for some machining operations. A cleaning
service for overalls should be provided and overalls should
be cleaned regularly and frequently. Normal laundering
may not always be sufﬁcient to remove all traces of oil
residues from contaminated clothing. In some instances,
dry cleaning may be necessary. Where this applies to
cotton overalls they should ﬁrst be dry-cleaned, then laun-
dered, and preferably starched, in order to restore the fab-
ric’s oil repellency and comfort. Generally, dry cleaning
followed by laundering is always preferable to minimize
the risk of residual contamination wherever heavy, fre-
quent contamination occurs, and when the type of fabric
permits such cleaning.

Overalls or personal clothing that become contaminated
with lubricants should be removed as soon as possible –

Health, safety and the environment 52/959

immediately if oil soaked or at the end of the shift if con-
taminated to a lesser degree. They should then be washed
thoroughly or dry cleaned before re-use.

Good washing facilities should be provided, together
with hot and cold running water, soap, medically approved
skin-cleansers, clean towels and, ideally, showers. In addi-
tion, reconditioning creams should be available. The provi-
sion of changing rooms, with lockers for working clothes,
is recommended.

Workers in contact with lubricants should be kept fully
informed by their management of the health aspects and
the preventive measures outlined above. Any available
government leaﬂets and/or posters should be prominently
displayed and distributed to appropriate workers.

It should be made clear to people exposed to lubricants
that good standards of personal hygiene are a most effec-
tive protection against potential health hazards. However,
those individuals with a history of (or thought to be par-
ticularly predisposed to) eczema or industrial dermatitis
should be excluded from work where, as in machine-tool
operation, contact with lubricants is virtually unavoidable.
Some industrial machining operations generate a ﬁne
spray or mist of oil, which forms an aerosol – a suspen-
sion of colloidal (ultra-microscopic) particles of oil in air.
Oil mist may accumulate in the workshop atmosphere, and
discomfort may result if ventilation is inadequate. Inhala-
tion of high concentrations of oil mist over prolonged
periods may give rise to irritation of the respiratory tract,
and in extreme cases to a condition resembling pneumo-
nia. It is recommended that the concentration of oil mist
in the working environment (as averaged over an 8-hour
shift) be kept below the generally accepted hygiene stan-
dard of 5 mg/m3. This standard does, however, vary in
some countries.

52.28.2 Safety

In the event of accident or gross misuse of products, var-
ious health hazards could arise. The data provided by the
supplier should outline these potential hazards and the
simple precautions that can be taken to minimize them.
Guidance should be included on the remedial action that
should be taken to deal with medical conditions that might
arise. Advice should be obtained from the supplier before
petroleum products are used in any way other than as
directed.

52.28.3 Environment

Neat oils and water-based coolants eventually reach the
end of their working lives, and then the user is faced with
the problem of their correct disposal. Under no circum-
stances should neat oils and emulsions be discharged into
streams or sewers. Some solutions can, however, be fed
into the sewage system after further dilution – but only
where permitted.

There are many companies offering a collection service
for the disposal of waste lubricating oil. The three main
methods employed are:

1. Collection in segregated batches of suitable quality for

use by non-reﬁners

52/960 Lubrication

2. Blending into fuel oil
3. Dumping or incineration

Acknowledgements
The author is grateful to BP Oil UK Ltd for their help in
writing this chapter and for their permission to reproduce
the ﬁgures and tables.

Further reading
BP publications

Industrial lubrication
Machine tools and metal cutting
Lubricants for heavy industry
Gear lubrication
Hydraulic ﬂuids
Machine shop lubricants
Cutting ﬂuids
Compressor lubrication
Greases

Temporary corrosion preventives
Degreasants
Storage and handling of lubricants
Aerosols
Health, safety and environmental data sheets

Further information on lubrication can be obtained from:

Booklets and leaﬂets published by most oil suppliers
Libraries of Institute of Plant Engineers
Institution of Production Engineers
Institute of Petroleum
Institution of Electrical Engineers
Institution of Mechanical Engineers
Literature published by additive companies
Literature published by the American Society of Lubri-
cation Engineers
Libraries of universities

With such a wide and important subject it is not possible
to provide a full list but the above will indicate some
initial contact points. The author hopes that no offence is
caused by any omission.

53

Contents

Corrosion

Michael J Schoﬁeld
Cortest Laboratories Ltd

53/961

53/981

53.7 Corrosion-control techniques

53/981

53.7.1 Painting
53.7.2 Cathodic protection
53.7.3 Anodic protection
53.7.4 Corrosion inhibitors

53/982

53/982

53/983

53.8 Corrosion monitoring

53/983

53.8.1 Physical examination
53.8.2 Exposure coupons and electrical resistance

53/983

probes

53/984

53.8.3 Electrochemical corrosion monitoring
53.8.4 Thin-layer activation

53/984

53/984

53.1 Corrosion basics

53/963

53.1.1 Deﬁnitions of corrosion
53.1.2 Electrochemical corrosion
53.1.3 Cracking mechanisms 53/967
53.1.4 Non-electrochemical corrosion
53/969

53.2 The implications of corrosion

53/963

53/963

53/968

53.2.1 Economics
53.2.2 Safety 53/969
53.2.3 Contamination of product

53/969

53/970

53.3 Materials selection

53/970

53.3.1 Sources of information
53.3.2 Aqueous systems
53.3.3 Non-aqueous processes
53/972
53.3.4 High-temperature environments
53/972
53.3.5 Inﬂuence of process variables on material

53/970

53/970

selection

53/973

53.3.6 Inﬂuence of external environment

53/975

53/976

53.4 Design and corrosion
53.4.1 Shape
53/976
53.4.2 Stress 53/977
53.4.3 Fabricational techniques
53.4.4 Design for inspection

53/977

53/978

53.5 Uses and limitations of constructional materials 53/978

53/978

53.5.1 Steels and cast irons
53.5.2 Stainless steels 53/978
53.5.3 Nickel alloys
53.5.4 Copper alloys
53.5.5 Miscellaneous metallic materials 53/979
53.5.6 Linings and coatings

53/979
53/979

53/980

53.6 Specifying materials 53/980

53.6.1 Compositional aspects 53/980
53.6.2 Mechanical properties
53/981
53.6.3 Certiﬁcation
53/981

53.1 Corrosion basics
53.1.1 Deﬁnitions of corrosion

Corrosion is generally taken to be the waste of a metal by
the action of corrosive agents. However, a wider deﬁni-
tion is the degradation of a material through contact with
its environment. Thus, corrosion can include non-metallic
materials such as concrete and plastics and mechanisms
such as cracking in addition to wastage (i.e. loss of mate-
rial). This chapter is primarily concerned with metallic
corrosion, through a variety of mechanisms.

In essence, the corrosion of metals is an electron trans-
fer reaction. An uncharged metal atom loses one or more
electrons and becomes a charged metal ion:
M (cid:1)(cid:2) MC C electron
In an ionizing solvent, the metal ion initially goes into
solution but may then undergo a secondary reaction, com-
bining with other ions present in the environment to form
an insoluble molecular species such as rust or aluminum
oxide. In high-temperature oxidation, the metal ion be-
comes part of the lattice of the oxide formed.

53.1.2 Electrochemical corrosion

The most important mechanism involved in the corrosion
of metal is electrochemical dissolution. This is the basis
of general metal loss, pitting corrosion, microbiologically
induced corrosion and some aspects of stress corrosion
cracking. Corrosion in aqueous systems and other cir-
cumstances where an electrolyte is present is generally
electrochemical in nature. Other mechanisms operate in
the absence of electrolyte, and some are discussed in
Section 53.1.4.

Corrosion basics 53/963

Figure 53.1 depicts a metal such as iron, steel or zinc
immersed in electrolyte such as sodium chloride solution.
The fundamental driving force of the corrosion reaction
is the difference in the potential energies of the metal
atom in the solid state and the product, which is formed
during corrosion. Thus, corrosion may be considered the
reverse of extractive metallurgy. Metals are obtained by
the expenditure of energy on their ores. The greater the
energy that is required, the more thermodynamically un-
stable is the metal and the greater its tendency to revert
to the ore or any other oxidized form. Thus, gold is found
native (i.e. as the metal) and it resists corrosion. Iron,
aluminum and most metals exist naturally combined as
oxides or sulﬁdes and, once reduced to the metallic state,
they attempt to revert to the combined state by corrosion.
In the systems illustrated in Figure 53.1, the anodic
reaction has to be electrically balanced by the cathodic
reaction, since electrical charge cannot build up at any
location. A continuous electrical circuit is required thro-
ugh the metal (for electron conduction) and the environ-
ment (for ionic conduction).

There are four main aspects to the corrosion chemistry

of this solution:

1. The presence of dissolved ions facilitates the passage

of an ionic current through the solution.

2. Certain anions, especially chloride, penetrate the pro-
tective ﬁlms, which are naturally present on some met-
als (e.g. aluminum and its alloys and stainless steels).
This process is an initiator for corrosion, especially for
localized corrosion.
3. The pH of the solution is a measure of the availability
of one of the two most important cathodic agents, HC
(the other being dissolved oxygen, see below). It is

Aqueous environment
Metal

Aqueous environment

M+

OH–

M

ANODE

Electrons

M+

(a)

H2

M

ANODE

Electrons

(b)

O2

H+

CATHODE

CATHODE

Figure 53.1 (a) Anodic, (b) Cathodic corrosion

53/964 Corrosion

also largely responsible for determining whether the
metal surface will be active or passive (see below).

4. Dissolved oxygen (and even water) can passivate cer-
tain metals such as titanium, aluminum and stainless
steels, thereby rendering them, to varying degrees, corr-
osion resistant. Because oxygen is a strong cathodic
agent it stimulates corrosion of many metals, espe-
cially those such as iron and zinc, which tend not to
form stable, adherent oxides.

Thus in the system depicted in Figure 53.1, for any
metal which is thermodynamically unstable with respect
to its dissolved ions in the solution (and this includes most
metals of industrial importance) corrosion will occur. The
rate of corrosion is determined by several factors:

the cathodic reaction, and, since anodic area is limited,
this can result in intense local attack leading to pitting
corrosion at bare areas.

5. The effect of temperature is generally to increase cor-
rosion rate as temperature rises. This is a chemical-
kinetic effect and can sometimes be overridden by
physical effects such as deposition of scales. The solu-
bility of oxygen in a saline solution decreases from
approximately 8–10 ppm at 5°C to virtually zero near
the boiling point. Thus in a system in which dissolved
oxygen is the only cathodic agent corrosion rates would
pass through a maximum and decrease to very low lev-
els as temperature is increased and the availability of
cathodic agent is diminished.

1. The conductivity of the environment; low conductivity
hinders the ionic current ﬂow hence distilled water is
less corrosive than a solution of sodium chloride with
the same pH and dissolved oxygen content.
2. The presence of cathodic agents; dissolved oxygen and
HC promote corrosion of most metals in an electrolyte
solution (see Figure 53.2).

3. The supply of cathodic agents to the metal surface:
stirring a solution or increasing the ﬂow rate in a pipe
will increase corrosion rates in systems that are under
diffusion control. As soon as corrosion initiates in the
system depicted in Figure 53.1 there is a local deple-
tion of cathodic agent and a build-up of metal ions.
In stagnant conditions, this soon reduces the corro-
sion rate, and the diffusion of these species governs
the overall corrosion rate. The system is then under
diffusion control.

4. The build-up of scales or other deposits on the
metal surface can stiﬂe corrosion. The reaction of
anodically generated MC with cathodically generated
OH(cid:2) can, depending on MC, be an insoluble product.
It may or may not adhere to the metal surface. If
it does adhere strongly it can stiﬂe corrosion. Other
deposits can form, in addition to corrosion products.
The locally high pH at the cathode can precipitate
insoluble carbonates. With complete coverage of the
cathodic surface corrosion is generally stiﬂed, since
the cathodic reaction cannot usually occur through the
deposit. However, some cathodic scales (e.g. magnetite
(Fe3O4)) and some forms of iron sulﬁdes can support

Aluminum
Zinc
Steel

In Figure 53.1 the region from which metal is lost is
the anode. The atoms of the metal are ionized and release
electrons:
M ! MnC C ne(cid:2)
where M denotes metal, MnC its ion and e(cid:2) is an electron.
This reaction can proceed to a signiﬁcant extent only if
the electrons that are released are consumed by a cathodic
reaction. The commonest cathodic reactions are essen-
tially:
O2 C 2H2O C 2e(cid:2) ! 4OH(cid:2)
as shown in Figure 53.1(a), in which oxygen is consumed,
and
HC C e(cid:2) ! H atoms ) H2 gas
in which hydrogen is liberated (Figure 53.1(b)).

Which cathodic reaction is preferred for any combi-
nation of metal and environment depends on the relative
amounts of O2 and HC available, and kinetics of O2 reduc-
tion and HC reduction on the metal surface.

The thermodynamic driving force behind the corrosion
process can be related to the corrosion potential adopted
by the metal while it is corroding. The corrosion poten-
tial is measured against a standard reference electrode.
For seawater, the corrosion potentials of a number of
constructional materials are shown in Table 53.1. The list-
ing ranks metals in their thermodynamic ability to cor-
rode. Corrosion rates are governed by additional factors
as described above.

Stainless steels each appear twice in the list. The more
active potentials are those which the metal adopts when
corroding as in a pit. The more cathodic potential is that
adopted by the bare surface around the pit. The potential
difference constitutes a signiﬁcant driving force, analo-
gous to the situation where the coupling of dissimilar
metals such as copper and iron promotes the corrosion
of the more anodic of the two (see below).

2

4

6

8

10

12

pH

Figure 53.2 Variation in corrosion rate with pH

Pitting corrosion

Pitting is a form of localized corrosion in which part of
a metal surface (perhaps 1 per cent of the exposed area)
is attacked. Rates of pitting penetration can be very high;
type 316 stainless steel in warm seawater can suffer pit
penetration rates of 10 mm per year. This is a natural

Table 53.1 Galvanic series in sea watera

Metal

Magnesium and alloys
Zinc
Aluminum alloys
Steel (incl. low alloys)
Stainless steels (316, 321, 410, 430)
Stainless steels (316, 317)
Copper
Bronzes (Si, Sn)
Stainless steels (410, 430)
Lead
Copper nickel alloys
Bronze (Ni–Al)
Nickel
Stainless steels (304, 321, 316, 317)
Titanium
Platinum, graphite

Corrosion

potential b (V)
(cid:2)1.6
(cid:2)1.0
(cid:2)0.8/(cid:2)1.0
(cid:2)0.55/ (cid:2) 0.75
(cid:2)0.5c
(cid:2)0.4c
(cid:2)0.35/(cid:2)0.2
(cid:2)0.35/(cid:2)0.25
(cid:2)0.3/(cid:2)0.2d
(cid:2)0.25e
(cid:2)0.25
(cid:2)0.15
(cid:2)0.15
(cid:2)0.1 (cid:2) 0d
0/(cid:2)0.1
C0.2/0.3

aThese values are roughly constant across a range of electrolyte
environments except where noted but the variations between
alloys, heat treatment conditions, etc. creates a range for each
metal. For some metals such as iron and steel the range is low
(š100 mV), but for lead, nickel, stainless steels a range is given.
bThe corrosion potential is reported with respect to the saturated
calomel reference electrode.
cWhen active, as in a pit or a crevice or when depassivated by
mechanical damage of oxide ﬁlm or chemical removal in non-
oxidizing acid.
e(cid:2)0.5 V in environments low in chloride ion content.

consequence of the low ratio of anodic area to cathodic
area, coupled with the self-acidiﬁcation processes that
occur in some metals.

Figure 53.3 illustrates a pit in a stainless steel such
as type 534 or 316 austenitic alloy. Pitting starts at het-
erogeneity in the steel surface, such as an outcropping
sulﬁde inclusion, the shielded region beneath a deposit or
even a discontinuity in the naturally present oxide ﬁlm
caused by a scratch or embedded particle of abrasive grit.
This initiation phase of pitting corrosion may take seconds

Corrosion basics 53/965

or weeks to develop into a feature large enough to be
recognized as a pit. Oxidizing conditions facilitate initi-
ation. Thus hypochlorite ions are particularly aggressive
towards stainless steels since they raise the potential of
the steel to such a high level that the protective oxide
layer breaks down, allowing localized attack.

The second phase of pitting corrosion is propagation.
Because of the geometry of the small pit that has been
created, oxygen diffusion to the corroding region is hin-
dered. This creates a potential difference between the pit
and the surrounding region. The solution in the pit acidi-
ﬁes through hydrolysis of the Fe2C and Cr2C ions present.
The pH in the pit falls to very low values (0.6 in the
case of 316 stainless steel), regardless of the bulk solu-
tion conditions, which may be neutral or even alkaline.
This enhances corrosion by dissolving the pit walls and
ensures that the pit walls cannot be re-passivated. The
surrounding metal surface is passive (i.e. is covered with
an adherent oxide ﬁlm of mixed Fe2O3 Ð Cr2O3 oxide).
This is dissolved in strongly acidic conditions such as
those prevailing in the pit. Because the conditions in the
pit promote self-acidiﬁcation, pit penetration rates often
increase with time.

A third phase is sometimes identiﬁed in pitting cor-
rosion, i.e. termination. Pits can become stiﬂed by the
build-up of insoluble corrosion products at their mouths.
Removal of these mounds of corrosion products, either
mechanically or through some change in the environ-
mental chemistry, can allow the pits to restart growth.

Crevice corrosion

Crevice corrosion of stainless steels (Figure 53.4(a)) has
a similar mechanism to pitting corrosion. The initiation
phase is assisted by the creation of a crevice-suitable
geometry. Crevices are formed by certain fabricational
processes including riveted seams,
incompletely fused
welds, interference ﬁts, O-rings, gasketed joints and even
paints markings of components. The solution in the
crevice becomes acidiﬁed and locally the metal surface
anodic compared with the surrounding bare metal, as

Aqueous environments
containing chloride ions
and dissolved oxygen

Stainless steel

Fe2+

OH–

O2

Fe

Fe2+

CI–Fe2+

Fe2+

e−

Fe

Surface of stainless steel
is normally passive, i.e.
covered  with natural oxide
film

Walls of pit are depassivated, i.e.
bare of protective oxide film

Hemispherical shape of pit
is often distorted by
microstructural effects

Figure 53.3 Pitting corrosion of stainless steel

53/966 Corrosion

Metal or non-metal

Aqueous environment

Metal such as
stainless steel

CATHODE

O2 OH–

Width of crevice

typically 0.01 – 0.5mm

ANODE
Fe
Cr

Fe2+ +2e–
Cr2+ +2e–

(a)

Metal or non-metal

Aqueous environment

Width of crevice

Copper alloy

CATHODE

ANODE

typically 0.01 – 0.5mm

2e– + Cu2+

Cu

Cu

Cu+ + e–

Figure 53.4 Crevice corrosion driven by (a) a differential aeration cell and (b) a differential metal ion concentration cell

(b)

described above. Crevice initiation is largely dependent
on the geometry of the crevice that is present: shorter
initiation times are brought about by tighter crevices, since
the primary effect is the limitation on inward diffusion of
oxygen to maintain passivity. The lower limit of crevice
width that will permit crevice corrosion is the point at
which the crevice is watertight.

Crevice corrosion of copper alloys is similar in princi-
ple to that of stainless steels, but a differential metal ion
concentration cell (Figure 53.4(b)) is set up in place of the
differential oxygen concentration cell. The copper in the
crevice is corroded, forming CuC ions. These diffuse out
of the crevice, to maintain overall electrical neutrality, and
are oxidized to Cu2C ions. These are strongly oxidizing
and constitute the cathodic agent, being reduced to CuC
ions at the cathodic site outside the crevice. Acidiﬁcation
of the crevice solution does not occur in this system.

Galvanic corrosion

Galvanic corrosion is the enhanced corrosion of one metal
by contact with a more noble metal. The two metals
require only being in electrical contact with each other and
exposing to the same electrolyte environment. By virtue
of the potential difference that exists between the two met-
als, a current ﬂows between them, as in the case of copper
and zinc in a Daniell cell. This current dissolves the more
reactive metal (zinc in this case), simultaneously reducing
the corrosion rate of the less reactive metal. This principle
is exploited in the cathodic protection (Section 53.7.2) of
steel structures by the sacriﬁcial loss of aluminum or zinc
anodes.

The metal that corrodes in any couple is that which has
the most negative corrosion potential in the galvanic series
in that environment. As guidance, Table 53.1 is of general
but not universal applicability. Thus in the case of copper

and aluminum the aluminum corrodes unless corrosion
inhibitors are employed. Copper and aluminum are there-
fore not generally used in close contact with each other,
but copper ions in solution from the corrosion of copper
pipework can plate out onto aluminum items (including
saucepans) downstream in the system. Rapid corrosion of
the aluminum occurs in the region of the copper deposits.
The conductivity of the environment and the potential dif-
ference between the metals involved determine whether
the corrosion is localized by a small region at the inter-
face between the metals, or spread across a larger region.
The exposed areas of the two metals together with the
length of the conductance path in the electrolyte deter-
mine the intensity of the attack. Other conditions, such as
the ﬂow regime and the polarization behavior of the two
metals, inﬂuence galvanic corrosion.

Potential reversal is a complicating factor in galvanic
corrosion. Zinc is usually anodic to steel and hence it
is used to protect steel sacriﬁcially. Galvanized steel is
steel coated with zinc. The zinc protects any steel that is
exposed (such as cut ends of sheet) and scratches through
the zinc layer. At temperatures above 80°C, in low-con-
ductivity water (e.g. condensation) the metals undergo a
reversal of polarity. The steel corrodes in preference to
the zinc, and this causes rapid loss of the zinc in sheets
as corrosion proceeds along the steel surface undermining
the zinc. Tin is usually more corrosion resistant than steel,
hence its use in tinplate (tin-plated steel). In some organic
acids, including some of those encountered in fruit juices,
the relative potentials of tin and steel are reversed and the
tin corrodes, contaminating foodstuffs with tin corrosion
products.

The corrosion potentials of metals and alloys are tem-
perature dependent. The potential of a steel distillation
column, heat exchanger or other item of plant varies in the
temperature zones in which it is operating. Under some

circumstances, it is possible to create galvanic corrosion
cells between different areas of one item fabricated from
one material. This causes localized corrosion problems.

To avoid galvanic problems, different materials of con-
struction may have to be electrically isolated or at least
the electrical resistance between them increased to a level
sufﬁcient to reduce the corrosion current to an acceptable
value. In some instances it is more practical to paint or
otherwise coat the more cathodic of the two parts of the
couple. The anodic material should not be coated, since
even more rapid penetration would occur at any breaks in
the coating.

Microbial induced corrosion

Various bacteria are involved in corrosion processes. Of
these, the most important are some Thiobacillus types
(these generate sulfuric acid which dissolves concrete) and
sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB). SRB are ubiquitous but
only create signiﬁcant corrosion problems in conditions
suitable for rapid growth. They ﬂourish best in anaero-
bic conditions, with a supply of sulfate ions and a carbon
source. Anaerobic conditions are created in stagnant areas
of chemical plant, under slime in industrial cooling sys-
tems and soils and seabed mud. Sulfate ions are widely
available, especially in the sea and some chemical pro-
cesses. Suitable carbon sources include organic materials
such as acetic acid. SRB produce sulﬁde ions from sul-
fate ions. In conditions such as beneath a colony of these
bacteria corrosion processes as illustrated in Figure 53.5
occur. Many metals are susceptible to this form of attack,
including steel, stainless steels, copper alloys and alu-
minum alloys. Localized pitting rates in excess of 10
millimeters per year are possible on steel in some circum-
stances. Some Cladosporium fungi cause pitting attack
on aluminum alloys. Gallionella bacteria thrive in solu-
tions containing Fe2C and produce deposits under which
anaerobic processes can occur.

53.1.3 Cracking mechanisms

Cracking mechanisms in which corrosion is implicated
include stress corrosion cracking, corrosion fatigue,
hydrogen-induced cracking and liquid metal embrittle-
ment. Purely mechanical forms of cracking such as brittle
failure are not considered here.

Corrosion basics 53/967

Stress corrosion cracking

The conjoint action of a tensile stress and a speciﬁc cor-
rodent on a material results in stress corrosion cracking
(SCC) if the conditions are sufﬁciently severe. The tensile
stress can be the residual stress in a fabricated structure,
the hoop stress in a pipe containing ﬂuid at pressures
above ambient or in a vessel by virtue of the internal
hydraulic pressure created by the weight of its contents.
Stresses result from thermal expansion effects, the tor-
sional stresses on a pump or agitator shaft and many more
causes.

The corrosive environments which cause SCC in any
material are fairly speciﬁc, and the more common com-
binations are listed in Table 53.2. In the case of chlo-
ride stress corrosion cracking of the 530 series austenitic
stainless steels it is generally considered that the risk is

Table 53.2 Stress corrosion cracking

Metal

Steels

Austenitic stainless steels

Copper alloys

Nickel alloys

Titanium alloys

Magnesium alloys
Aluminum alloys

Agent

Nitrate ion
Strong alkali
Carbonate/bicarbonate
Liquid ammoniaa
Hydrogen sulﬁde (aqueous)b
Cyanide ion
Chloride (and other halide) ion
Polythionic acids
High-temperature water
Hydrogen sulﬁde (aqueous)
Ammonia/amines
Nitric acid/nitrate fumes
Strong alkali
Polythionic acids
Chloride ion
Alcoholsa,b
Nitric acid plus nitrogen oxides
Chloride ionc
Chloride ionc
Organics
High-purity hot water

Environments are aqueous unless speciﬁed otherwise.
aInhibited by 1000 ppm of water.
bSometimes considered to be a form of hydrogen-induced crack-
ing.
cIn oxidizing conditions.

HS−

H2S

Anaerobic environment
containing H2S

Iron sulfide

Steel

Fe2+

Fe

Anode

Cathode

Electrons

Figure 53.5

53/968 Corrosion
minimal below approximately 60°C. Above this thresh-
old, if the chloride ion content of the environment is
low a higher tensile stress can be tolerated without SCC
developing, and vice versa. It is difﬁcult to design for the
control of SCC since it is the local stress and corrodent
concentration rather than average or bulk values that is
relevant.

The essential feature of most SCC mechanisms is the
rupture of the protective ﬁlm on the metal (passive oxide
layer in the case of stainless steels and aluminum alloys),
which allows the corrodent to reach the bare surface of the
metal. Cracking is the result of intense corrosion, concen-
trated by the tensile stress. In austenitic stainless steels,
chloride SCC is transgranular in nature and the cracks
are typically high branched. In ferrite materials, cracking
is largely due to a hydrogen embrittlement mechanism
brought about by hydrogen created during corrosion.

Corrosion fatigue
Many metals suffer fatigue, which is the result of the
application of an alternating stress. Corrosion fatigue
results from the exposure of a metal, which is subjected
to alternating stress, in a corrosive environment. Unlike
stress corrosion cracking, corrosion fatigue does not
require a speciﬁc corrosive environment for any metal.
Moist air is adequate in many cases, thus the majority of
fatigue failures are actually corrosion fatigue in nature.
The alternating stress pattern requires only a small tensile
component. This tensile stress may be small relative to the
metal’s ultimate tensile strength and millions of cycles of
the stress pattern may be required to cause failure.

Hydrogen-induced cracking
Hydrogen-induced cracking (HIC) is most commonly en-
countered in steels but other metals are susceptible, as
shown in Table 53.3. The presence of hydrogen atoms in
a metal degrades some of its mechanical properties, espe-
cially its ductility, leading in some cases to embrittlement.

Table 53.3 Hydrogen-induced cracking

Metal

Steel

Martensitic

stainless steels

Copper alloys
Nickel alloys

Titanium alloys
Zirconium alloys

Agent

Hydrogen gas
Atomic hydrogena
Hydrogen sulﬁde-containing aqueous

environmentsb

Waterc
Hydrogen sulﬁde-containing aqueous

environments

Sea waterd
Hydrogen sulﬁde-containing aqueous

environments

Anhydrous alcohols
High-temperature water

aCreated by overprotection during cathodic protection, evolved
during electroplating or pickling processes and during welding
with wet welding consumables.
bSteels of strength in excess of 550 MPa.
cSteels of strength in excess of 900 MPa.
dHigh-strength alloys, cathodically protected.

Additionally, hydrogen atoms diffuse through metals and
coalesce to form hydrogen molecules at certain preferred
locations such as inclusions.

Hydrogen atoms are soluble in ferrite (which is the
major phase of most steel). At discrete inclusions in the
steel (e.g. manganese sulﬁde, which is present in many
steels), the hydrogen atoms combine to form hydrogen
molecules. Hydrogen molecules are insoluble in the steel
lattice and these molecules associate, producing high ten-
sile stresses, which can initiate hydrogen cracking. When
laminations are present in the steel, hydrogen molecules
form at the interface between them, creating blisters. At
high temperatures hydrogen atoms can react with carbides
in the steel producing methane gas. Methane is insoluble
and causes blistering or cracking. In clean steels con-
taining none of these features the hydrogen atoms pass
straight through the steel, causing no damage. Hydrogen
can originate from several sources:

1. Electroplating (e.g. cadmium or hard chromium plat-

ing);

2. Acid pickling (e.g. prior to galvanizing);
3. Cathodic protection, especially if overprotected, thro-
4. Corrosion, where HC reduction is a cathodic reaction

ugh inadequate potential control;

(Section 53.1.2);

5. The process inside the plant.

The amount of the hydrogen that is liberated on or near a
metal surface, which then enters the metal, varies accord-
ing to the environment and condition of the metal. The
main factor that promotes the entry of hydrogen into a
metal is the presence on the metal of a surface poison
such as sulﬁde or other species, which inhibit the hydro-
gen recombination reaction.

Liquid metal embrittlement
The corrodent is a liquid metal in this form of stress corro-
sion cracking. Mercury at ambient temperature and metals
including zinc (from galvanized steel-work) and copper
(from electric cables) when melted during welding or in
a ﬁre cause rapid failure of certain metals.

Steels and austenitic stainless steels are susceptible to
molten zinc, copper, lead and other metals. Molten mer-
cury, zinc and lead attack aluminum and copper alloys.
Mercury, zinc, silver and others attack nickel alloys. Other
low-melting-point metals that can attack common con-
structional materials include tin, cadmium, lithium, in-
dium, sodium and gallium.

53.1.4 Non-electrochemical corrosion
Although all the types of corrosion discussed in this sec-
tion result in the oxidation of metal and some involve
direct electron transfer, they can be understood without
reference to electrochemistry.

Oxidation
In oxidizing atmospheres (i.e. in the presence of oxygen
or a source of oxygen from which oxygen can be derived,

Table 53.4 Oxidation in air

Steels
Low-alloy steels
Ferritic stainless steel (type 410)
Austenitic stainless steel (type 316)
Nickel-based superlloys
Superaustenitic stainless steel (type 310)
Cobalt-based superalloys

480°C
560°C
650°C
900°C
1100°C
1150°C
>1150°C

1. Temperatures the those above which oxidation is generally too
rapid to permit the metal’s safe or economic use.
2. Atmospheres contaminated with acid or halogen gases reduce
these values.
3. The mechanical properties including strength, ductility and
creep resistance can be affected below these temperature.

the most

such as water vapor), most metals are unstable with
respect to their oxides. Oxidation to create the metal
oxide depends on several factors,
important
being temperature (and hence the thermodynamics of
the process), availability of oxygen and the protective
action of any oxide that is created. Oxygen can migrate
through the oxide, where it reacts with the metal. In
other metal-oxide systems, metal ions migrate outwards
through the oxide. The structure and the stability of
the oxide, together with its semiconducting properties,
control the mechanism of oxide. Oxidation rates can be
linear, parabolic (tending to a steady state oxide thickness)
or exponential (termed catastrophic, because the rate
increases with time). Table 53.4 gives an indication of
the temperature limits for some metals through oxidation
in a cleaned atmosphere.

Sulﬁdation is analogous, but catastrophic sulﬁdation is
common because of the generally lower melting points of
sulﬁdes than corresponding oxide. This is especially true
in the case of nickel alloys, when a nickel/nickel sulﬁde
eutectic is formed.

Fretting corrosion

lateral movement

Fretting corrosion occurs because of oscillating relative
motion between touching surfaces. As little as 3 ð 10(cid:2)9
meter
is required. The amount of
damage increases as the normal force between the surfaces
is increased. In dry conditions, the corrosion product is
usually the oxide. In the case of steel, this is wustite.
This is otherwise the high-temperature form of the oxide,
which infers that locally high temperatures are created on
the fretting surfaces. The surfaces weld together in the
high stress conditions at points of contact and are torn
apart by the relative motion of fretting surfaces.

Materials with hard oxides, including stainless steels
and aluminum and titanium alloys, are particularly
susceptible to this form of attack. In steel, it is also known
as false Brinelling because of the high surface hardness
that can be created in work-hardening grades.

Molten salt corrosion

Any salt that is present on a hot metal surface can cause
corrosion of that surface. This mechanism is often rapid
and is due to straightforward dissolution of the metal and

The implications of corrosion 53/969

any oxide which may be present on the surface. The
mechanism is similar to that of aqueous corrosion. The
high rate of attack is a consequence of the high activities
of the ions present in the molten salt. The problem is
greatest for salts of low melting point, since these are
present over a wide temperature range and can be very
ﬂuid. Low melting-point salts include many chlorides,
sulﬁdes and sulfates.

53.2 The implications of corrosion
53.2.1 Economics

The principal economic implications of corrosion of a
plant are the initial cost of construction,
the cost of
maintenance and replacement, and the loss of production
through unplanned shutdowns. The initial cost of the
plant is inﬂuenced by material selection, and a choice of
material that is more corrosion resistant than is necessary
for the safe operation of the plant over its design life is a
very expensive error. This cost involves initial outlay of
money, and plants have been built which could never be
proﬁtable because of the inappropriate materials selection.
Maintenance costs arising from corrosion can also prove
to be unacceptably high. For plant that requires regu-
lar maintenance for other reasons (e.g. de-sludging or
batch operation) it is often accepted that certain items are
expendable, and annual or even monthly repair or replace-
ment with low-cost materials is preferable to the use of
expensive ones. Plant handling hot, strong hydrochloric
acid is often regarded in this way, since the only possible
construction materials that have acceptably low corrosion
rates are too expensive to use. Plant which requires to
be run continuously or maintenance-free for long periods
necessitates high-integrity design and hence the use of
more reliable corrosion-resistant materials.

Signiﬁcant savings can be achieved by optimum mate-
rial selection (guidance is given in Section 53.3), by con-
sidering corrosion at the design stage (Section 53.4), by
employing corrosion-control
techniques (Section 53.7)
and corrosion monitoring (Section 53.8). In the industrial-
ized countries of the Western world, corrosion is estimated
to cost some 4 per cent of a country’s GNP. This repre-
sents $6 billion per annum, of which a signiﬁcant propor-
tion could be saved by the use of existing knowledge. It
cannot all be saved, since the gradual deterioration of a
plant over its operational life is one of the costs incurred
in the process.

53.2.2 Safety

The failure of plant by corrosion can be gradual or catas-
trophic. Gradual failure has few implications for safety
providing it
is monitored. Direct corrosion-monitoring
techniques are described in Section 53.8. Indirectly, the
correct interpretation of records relating to metal con-
tamination of products or the loss of efﬁciency of heat
exchangers, etc. can provide useful information.

Sudden or catastrophic failure of plant through corro-
sion can result in the loss of product at high velocity
from a failed reactor vessel, high-energy steam from steam

53/970 Corrosion

line, toxic or inﬂammable materials from storage vessels.
Incidents of this nature from plants around the world have
led to the death and injury of plant operatives and nearby
householders. The majority of serious incidents in the
chemical process industry, however, have been attributed
to mechanical failure of plant.

53.2.3 Contamination of product

The metal lost from the inside of pumps, reaction ves-
sels, pipework, etc. usually contaminates the product. The
implications of this depend upon the product. Ppb levels
of iron can discolor white plastics, though at this level
the effect is purely cosmetic. Ppm levels of iron and other
metals affect the taste of beer. Products sold to compo-
sitional requirements (such as reagent-grade acids) can
be spoiled by metal pick-up. Pharmaceutical products for
human use are often white tablets or powders and are
easily discolored by slight contamination by corrosion
products.

53.3 Materials selection
The materials selection procedure for new or replacement
plant is crucial to the safe and economic operation of that
plant. There is no one correct way to select the appropriate
construction material, since for small plant handling toxic
or inﬂammable products the integrity of the plant is high
in priority, whereas large plant producing bulk material in
a competitive market is more likely to be made of cheaper
constructional materials, and the occasional leak or failure
may have fewer safety implications.

Wherever possible, items should be made from mate-
rials which have proved themselves in similar service.
Essential items of plant for which long delivery times are
expected should be considered most carefully. The pos-
sible interactions between items fabricated from different
materials should be considered. Section 53.1.2 discusses
galvanic corrosion.

53.3.1 Sources of information

The ﬁrst source of information for the behavior of a mate-
rial in the proposed service environment is the potential
supplier of the item of plant. Except for new (or signiﬁ-
cantly modiﬁed) processes, specialist suppliers or fabrica-
tors have relevant information and service experience. The
supplier should be provided with all process or environ-
mental details that are of possible relevant to corrosion.
The most important are listed below:

1. Environmental chemistry: including complete typical
and worst-case compositional analyses, pH, redox
potential, dissolved gas content;

2. Physical conditions: temperature ranges in bulk and at
surface, heat transfer, mass ﬂow, ﬂuid velocities, the
presence of entrained particles and gases;

3. Operating cycles: commissioning procedures, heating,
cooling and pressure cycling, stagnant periods, clean-
ing procedures;

4. External environment: corrosive gases, humidity tem-

5. Mechanical aspects: the presence of tensile or cyclic

perature;

stresses.

If the potential suppliers cannot provide documented ser-
vice performance for similar plant on similar duties, mate-
rials suppliers should be consulted.

For all materials other than basic constructional steels
and cast irons, reputable suppliers have information bases
and applications laboratories from which information can
be obtained. Trade organizations representing categories
of materials suppliers are excellent sources of information;
some are listed at the end of this chapter. The mate-
rials suppliers should be consulted in conjunction with
equipment suppliers in order to ensure that the informa-
tion generated is fully applicable to the end use to which
the material is to be put. Fabrication techniques should
be agreed between the two types of suppliers, since some
materials cannot be cast or welded and forging cannot
make some items.

For some new or modiﬁed processes, it will not be
possible to obtain sufﬁcient good information to permit
material selection to be made. The following guidance is
intended as a checklist for general use, since there is no
universal, deﬁnitive guide to the selection of materials.
It is based on corrosion and not on mechanical prop-
erty requirements such as strength, toughness, hardness
or fatigue resistance.

53.3.2 Aqueous systems

Water supply

For the purpose of corrosion, water is scaling or non-
scaling. Scaling water tends to deposit generally protec-
tive hardness scales. Soft water does not scale and hence
is potentially more corrosive; especially when it contains
dissolved gases such as oxygen, carbon dioxide, ammonia
and sulfur oxides.

For drinking water, copper has now replaced the use
of lead. The local water authority provides information
including analytical data. Stainless steels are being intro-
duced especially for domestic systems.

For process water, steel pipes are used unless iron pick-
up is to be minimized. Plastic pipes (polyethylene and
polyvinylchloride) are used but they sometimes need ex-
ternal protection from solvents present in industrial atmo-
spheres, ultraviolet radiation (including sunlight), freezing
and mechanical damage.

For ﬁrewater, steel pipes are used but corrosion prod-
ucts can block sprinklers. Cement asbestos pipes are uti-
lized but pressure limitations restrict their use. For critical
applications, including offshore oil installations, cupro-
nickel alloys and even duplex stainless steels are used.
Fire-retardant grades of ﬁber-reinforced plastics are now
available.

Borehole waters are generally very hard and cast iron
pipes are still used because of the low internal corro-
sion rates permitted by the scaling which occurs naturally.
Acidic waters cause graphitic attack on cast irons.

Boiler water, steam and condensate

The water supply for boilers is usually treated. Treat-
ment depends on the quality of the water supply, the
pressure of the boiler, the heat ﬂux through the tube
walls and the steam quality required. Most waters require
de-alkalization. The water produced in this process is non-
scaling and potentially corrosive (see above).

The quality of water thus produced is generally ade-
quate for low-pressure boilers, but de-oxygenation is usu-
ally achieved through the addition of sodium sulﬁte in a
feedwater tank. This should be designed to prevent further
ingress of oxygen, employing a nitrogen blanket if nec-
essary. Pipework from the feedwater tank (or ‘hot well’
if condensate is returned to it) to the boiler is steel, since
the water is low in corrosivity.

For higher-pressure boilers demineralization is neces-
sary to minimize total dissolved solids in the boiler. This
water is normally carried in steel pipework, but if conden-
sate is returned and the condensate has become contami-
nated (for example, with carbon dioxide or copper ions)
more corrosion-resistant materials such as copper are re-
quired. Downstream of the boiler, steam pipework is usu-
ally steel with steel or stainless steel expansion bellows.
The presence of corrosive species in steam, however,

creates the following corrosion problems:

1. Oxygen renders the steam corrosive towards steel. If
the feed is not deoxygenated, a corrosion allowance
should be added to the steam piping wall thickness,
an oxygen scavenger such as hydrazine can be used
or a volatile corrosion inhibitor could be employed.
Candidate inhibitors include ﬁlming amines such as
ethoxylated soya amines. Some amine-based inhibitors
can break down and cause corrosion of copper in the
steam or condensate system. Some products such as
hydrazine are toxic or carcinogenic and cannot be used
in food-processing plant, breweries and steam steriliz-
ing equipment for hospitals.

2. Carbon dioxide, from the decomposition in the boiler
of temporary hardness salts present in some waters,
causes corrosion of steel steam pipework and cast iron
valves and traps. Corrosion inhibitors may be used, but
the choice of inhibitor must take into account the other
materials in the system. Neutralizing amines such as
morpholine or cyclohexylamine are commonly used.

3. Condensate returns lines are often copper. Copper has
good corrosion resistance to oxygen and carbon diox-
ide individually. When both gases are present in the
condensate, copper is susceptible to corrosion. Copper
picked up in the condensate system and returned to the
boiler causes serious corrosion problems in the boiler
and any steel feedwater and steam pipework. Boiler
tubes should last for 25 years but can fail within one
year in a mismanaged or ill-designed boiler system
suffering from these faults.

4. Boiler salts can contain chloride ions. When carried
over into the steam (e.g. during priming) this can result
in chloride stress corrosion cracking of austenitic stain-
less steel expansion bellows. In steam systems where
freedom from chloride cannot be guaranteed, bellows

Materials selection 53/971

can be supplied in 9 per cent Cr. steel or austenitic
alloys containing 40 per cent nickel.

Aqueous processes

The principal corrosive species as described in Section
53.1.2, combined with the reducing or oxidizing nature of
the environment, can be used to select candidate materials
for any aqueous system. The process variables discussed
in Section 53.3.5 must also be considered.

Steel is the most common constructional material, and
is used wherever corrosion rates are acceptable and prod-
uct contamination by iron pick-up is not important. For
processes at low or high pH, where iron pick-up must
be avoided or where corrosive species such as dissolved
gases are present, stainless steels are often employed.
Stainless steels suffer various forms of corrosion, as des-
cribed in Section 53.5.2. As the corrosivity of the environ-
ment increases, the more alloyed grades of stainless steel
can be selected. At temperatures in excess of 60°C, in
the presence of chloride ions, stress corrosion cracking
presents the most serious threat to austenitic stainless
steels. Duplex stainless steels, ferritic stainless steels and
nickel alloys are very resistant to this form of attack.
For more corrosive environments, titanium and ultimately
nickel-molybdenum alloys are used.

The following brief summary of materials for acid duty
is very simpliﬁed, and further guidance should be obtained
from the sources of information outlined in Section 53.3.1:

1. Sulfuric acid: Plain carbon steel is used at strengths
in the range 70–100% at temperatures up to 80°C. In
ﬂowing conditions the corrosion rate increases, thereby
rendering steels unsuitable for pumps. Storage tanks
for sulfuric acid require care in design to prevent the
possible ingress of water vapor. This creates a layer
of dilute acid on top of the bulk acid, creating rapid
attack at the ﬁll line. At strengths below 70°C chemical
lead is the preferred material for tanks but at tempera-
tures above 120°C corrosion becomes signiﬁcant. For
castings such as pumps, valves, ﬁttings and some heat
exchangers cast iron containing 15% silicon is used at
strengths up to 100%, at temperatures up to the boiling
point. Where iron pick-up must be avoided, conven-
tional stainless steels can be used in certain ranges
of strength and temperature. Anodically protected tita-
nium is used at 70% (60°C) and 40% (up to 90°C). For
higher temperatures and strengths above 100%, nickel-
based alloys were molybdenum is used. Glass, gold
and platinum are required for speciﬁc combinations of
acid strength and temperature.

2. Hydrochloric acid: The selection of materials for han-
dling hydrochloric is exceptionally difﬁcult because of
the sensitivity of corrosion to minor impurities. Oxi-
dizing hydrochloric acid is highly corrosive; dissolved
oxygen or trace levels of metal ions in high oxidation
states (especially ferric or cupric) ions are the common
oxidizing species. Dilute hydrochloric acid (2% at up
to 70°C or 10% at 20°C) is handled by copper, nickel
and some of their alloys. Moderate-strength acid (up
to 10% at up to 70°C, up to 53% and 53°C and up
to 40% at 15°C) requires the use of more resistant

53/972 Corrosion

materials. These materials include cast iron alloyed
with silicon and molybdenum or, in the absence of
oxidizing agents, silicon bronze. Strong hydrochloric
acid at moderate temperatures (below 70°C) can be
handled by some of the nickel-molybdenum alloys or
non-metallic linings such as rubber. At higher tem-
peratures silver, platinum, zirconium and tantalum are
suitable across the whole range of acid strength.

3. Nitric acid: Stainless steels are the most commonly
used materials for nitric acid duty. Because molyb-
denum is widely considered to be detrimental to cor-
rosion behavior in nitric acid, type 304 is generally
preferred to type 316L. It is used at temperatures up to
100°C and acid strengths up to 70%. At 100% strength
the temperature limitation is 53°C. Higher alloys, based
on 20% Cr, 25% Ni, extend the temperature range to
nitric acid’s boiling point at concentrations up to 50%.
An austenitic stainless steel containing 18% chromium,
10% nickel and 2–3% silicon was developed speciﬁ-
cally for this service. Cast iron with 15% silicon is used
for valves, pumps, etc. in acid strengths of 0–40% (up
to 70°C) and 40–80% (up to 110°C). Some aluminum
alloys may be used for nitric acid above 80% strength
at temperatures up to 35%. Titanium gold, platinum
and tantalum are used to extend the temperatures range
where required.

For alkaline duty, steel can sometimes be used up to
approximately pH 11. Zinc, aluminum and similar metals
and their alloys have limited use in alkaline conditions
because they dissolve, giving complex anions. Iron and
steel react in this way above about pH 12. Approximate
limits of use for zinc are pH 6–12 and aluminum alloy
pH 4–8. Stainless steels, including the lower grades, can
be used even in the presence of chloride ions at pH levels
of approximately In the absence of halides they can be
used up to about pH 13.

Materials selection cannot be based on any simple com-
bination of common corrosive species. There are many
complicating factors, including the harmful or beneﬁcial
effects of contaminants at the ppm level, the relative pro-
portion in which certain combinations of species are pre-
sent (HC and Cl(cid:2) are often synergistic in their effect,
whereas SO2(cid:2) and Cl(cid:2) often counter each other) and the
presence of naturally occurring corrosion inhibitors.

53.3.3 Non-aqueous processes

Solvent systems

Most organic solvents, except for alcohol, have reasonably
low ionic conductivity and hence do not support electro-
chemically corrosion to any signiﬁcant extent. Steel is
commonly used except in systems in which water can
separate and where the conductivity is sufﬁcient to permit
the ﬂow of ionic current.

Dry gases

Standard materials for handling dry gases include: for
chlorine, UNS N10276 (type stainless steel is used for liq-
uid chlorine); for bromine, UNS N10276 (below 60°C);

for ﬂuorine, copper; for hydrogen chloride, UNS N10276;
for hydrogen sulﬁde (sulfur dioxide and trioxide), type
316 stainless steel. The presence of water in even trace
quantities changes this signiﬁcantly.

53.3.4 High-temperature environments
Chimneys, ﬂues and ducts

The main corrosion processes that occur in these items
arise from condensing liquids on the internal surface. Al-
though often lagged, heat loss frequently causes internal
skin temperatures to fall below the dewpoint of one or
more components of the gas stream, albeit locally, such as
at support points. Even at temperatures above its dewpoint
a gas can dissolve in condensed water. Rapid corrosion
can then occur in this thin ﬁlm of corrosive liquid.

Condensing species of relevance to corrosion include
water and all acid gases. The dewpoint of water is obtained
from standard tables, requiring only the water content (i.e.
relative humidity) of the gas stream. Above the water
dewpoint, corrosion problems include condensing acids
(Section 53.3.2), dry acid gases (Section 53.3.3) and ero-
sion. Below the water dewpoint acid gases dissolve in the
water ﬁlm to create an acidic solution, including:

1. Carbon dioxide produces a solution of carbonic acid
(as in boiler condensate, see Section 53.3.2). Carbon
steel is often employed but corrosion rates of up to
1 mm/yr can be encountered. Coatings and non-metallic
materials may be employed up to their temperature
limits (Section 53.5.6). Basic austenitic stainless steels
(type 534) are suitable up to their scaling temperatures.
2. Sulfur oxides produce sulphurous/sulfuric acid. Be-
cause oxygen and halides are often also present, high-
nickel alloys are required.

Current practice for some ﬂue gas desulfurizer ducts
operating in the temperature range 60–120°C involves
lining the steel structure with 2-mm thick UNS N10276
or UNS N06022. Non-metallic linings, including glass
ﬂake epoxy materials, have limited application in the
lower part of the temperature range.

Other acid gases such as hydrogen chloride and oxides
of nitrogen produce similar corrosion problems. The cor-
rosion effects produced by acid condensate are ampliﬁed
by the motion of the gas stream (typically 20–53 m/s) and
erosion effects due to entrained solids and impingement
at bends, damper plates, reheaters, etc.

In the complete absence of acid gases, steel or gal-
vanized ducting can be suitable but 80°C is often the
operational temperature limit for galvanized steel).

Furnaces

Table 53.4 gives scaling data for classes of heat-resisting
alloys in air. Mechanical properties, particularly creep
strength, may be reduced signiﬁcantly at temperatures
well below scaling temperatures. In addition to scaling
and loss of mechanical properties the third major factor
in material performance in furnaces is the detailed chem-
ical environment. Speciﬁc problems are encountered with
the following:

1. Oxygen or steam in reformer tubes (typically up to
1000°C), steam superheater tubes (700–900°C), regen-
erators, etc. promote oxidation. Catastrophic oxidation
occurs in some materials including molybdenum-bear-
ing stainless steels because of the volatility of MoO3.
Alloys containing 25% Cr and 20% Ni are used up to
1100°C but it is sometimes necessary to employ 35%
Cr, 25% Ni or even 45% Cr, 25% Ni types. Type 316
austenitic stainless steel can suffer catastrophic oxi-
dation at temperatures as low as 760°C, although it is
often used up to nearly 900°C provided that a free ﬂow
of gas is achieved over the entire surface.

2. Sulfur compounds, whether organic or inorganic in
nature, cause sulﬁdation in susceptible materials. The
sulﬁde ﬁlm, which forms on the surface of much con-
struction materials at low temperatures, becomes fri-
able and melts at higher temperatures. The presence of
molten sulﬁdes (especially nickel sulﬁde) on a metal
surface promotes the rapid conversion to metal sul-
ﬁdes at temperatures where these sulﬁdes are thermo-
dynamically stable. High-alloy materials such as 25%
Cr, 20% Ni alloys are widely used, but these repre-
sent a compromise between sulﬁdation resistance and
mechanical properties. Aluminum and similar diffusion
coatings can be of use.

loss

3. Carbon sources permit carbonization.

in rapid metal

In cracker
furnaces, ethylene pyrolysis tubes, etc. carbonization
results
in the temperature
range 850–1100°C. A lower-temperature form of
this mechanism (sometimes termed ‘metal dusting’)
in the range 400–800°C in the carbon
occurs
monoxide/carbon dioxide/hydrogen/hydrocarbon gas
streams. Preferred materials include HK40 (25% Cr,
20% Ni, 0.4%C) or higher alloys (35% Ni, 25% Cr
or 53% Cr, 53% Ni), depending on the severity of the
environment.

4. Nitrogen containing compounds, including ammonia
and amines, cause nitriding in susceptible materials.
Ammonia synthesis (500–600°C, 250–400 bar pres-
sure) requires the use of austenitic stainless steels or
nickel alloys. The rate of penetration of nitriding,
which causes severe embrittlement, can be 0.2 mm/year
in basic austenitic grades (e.g. type 304), falling by
more than an order of magnitude for 40% Ni base
alloys.

5. Molten salts promote rapid corrosion of many
constructional materials at relatively low temperatures.
Low–melting-point salts include sodium salts from
saline atmospheres, ﬁreside ash, silicate insulation,
contaminants in the feed, etc. Corrosion rates of several
mm/year can be observed at temperatures as low as
520°C. High chromium- and nickel-containing alloys
up to 50% Cr/50% Ni are employed.

Materials selection 53/973

53.3.5 Inﬂuence of process variables on material
selection

Flow

The main effects of ﬂow on corrosion of most materi-
als are deleterious. Increasing ﬂow through the laminar
region serves to create a thinner hydrodynamic bound-
ary layer on the metal surface. This increases the rates of
diffusion of cathodic species and anodic products, gen-
erally increasing corrosion rates. Protective deposits and
scales are removed or prevented from forming. Damage
is caused at locations such as those shown in Figure 53.6.
The most important exception to this is the behavior
of stainless steels in sea water. Grades which are suscep-
tible to pitting or crevice corrosion, including types 534
and 316, are liable to greatest pitting attack in stagnant
conditions where debris settles onto upward-facing hori-
zontal surfaces. In conditions of higher ﬂow (greater than
1 m/s), the debris is less likely to settle and thus pitting
(Section 53.5.2) is less likely.

If ﬂow becomes turbulent, the corrosion rate increases
even more rapidly. In practice, most engineering materials
have a critical velocity above which the corrosion rate
is unacceptably high. This does not correspond with the
laminar-to-turbulence transition. Surface roughness is an
important consideration.

Impingement attack (sometimes termed erosion cor-
rosion) is a result of the combined effect of ﬂow and
corrosion on a metal surface and it occurs when metal
is removed from the surface under conditions where pas-
sivation is insufﬁciently rapid. It is a function of ﬂow,
corrosion and passivation.

At higher ﬂow rates cavitation is a serious degradation
mechanism, where vapor bubbles created by pressure ﬂuc-
tuations brought about by the ﬂow of liquid past the sur-
face collapse on the metal surface with tremendous force.
This damages any protective oxide which may be present,
leading to pitting corrosion. It also causes mechanical
damage to the metal.

The corrosive and mechanical effects of ﬂow are obser-
ved in pipes, especially at bends and downstream of ﬂow
disturbances, tube and shell heat exchangers, valves and
pumps. More corrosion and/or harder materials are used
in such areas. Austenitic stainless steels work harden and
hence are superior in ﬂowing conditions to ferritic stain-
less steels of otherwise similar corrosion resistance. Hard

FLOW

Other detrimental factors which should to be taken into
account in the materials selection process include temper-
ature cycling and the presence of halide gases. Specialist
alloys containing rare earth element additions such as
cerium, lanthanum and yttrium have been developed for
use in certain environments up to 130°C.

Figure 53.6 Areas affected by erosion corrosion

53/974 Corrosion

facings, such as hard chromium electroplate or cobalt
based alloys, are used for local improvement of ﬂow-
assisted corrosion resistance where it is not required, prac-
tical or economic to fabricate the complete item of high
resistant material. Hard facing by cobalt-based alloys can
be achieved by weld overlay and plasma spray techniques.
Correct choice of alloy is important to optimize corrosion
resistance, though the resistance of most of the alloys in
use is superior to the more common grades of stainless
steel. Hard chromium plating contains micro cracks; this
allows corrodents to gain access to the substrate. Layers
of copper and/or nickel are often required to prevent the
corrosion of underlying steel.

The alternative option for counteracting cavitation dam-
age is the use of a resilient material such as rubber. The
mechanical forces attendant on collapse of the bubbles are
absorbed by elastic deformation of the resilient material.

Intermittent operation

This is generally harmful to plant, since deposits can form
in periods of stagnation. The common grades of stain-
less steel, such as types 304 and 316 and other materials
(including aluminum alloys and some copper alloys), are
susceptible to under-deposit attack and are at risk in cir-
cumstances where the process liquid is left to stagnate
in between operation cycles. Evaporation can also take
place, creating more aggressive conditions than occur dur-
ing operation.

Condensation can form on vessel walls, roofs and sup-
port points, as heat is lost. This condensation can absorb
corrosive gases, creating localized corrosion effects of
greater severity than the bulk environment that is normally
present.

In rare circumstances, however, intermittent operation
is beneﬁcial. Plant that would pit if operated continuously
can be operated successfully if the operational cycle is
shorter than the initiation period for pitting attack and it
is cleaned between batches. This is mainly the case for
stainless steel plant operating with high enough chloride
levels (or a low pH or high temperature) to initiate pitting
if operated continuously. The cleaning regime between
batches promotes re-passivation; hot water, steam, chlo-
ride-free caustic or sodium orthophosphate solution may
be required to achieve the required rate of passivation.
Plant is rarely designed on this principle, but a signiﬁcant
number of cooking vessels, especially in the food and
drink industries, operate this way.

Commissioning

The ﬁrst use of new plant, or start-up after a shutdown,
poses corrosion hazards additional to those encountered in
normal operation. New plant such as boilers requires spe-
cial water treatment, involving boil-out, passivation and
possible chemical cleaning. Actual requirements depend
on the boiler type, the proposed service, the quality of
water available during commissioning and the internal
condition of the boiler. The condition of the boiler depends
on for how long and in what conditions it has been stored.
The presence of any salts, dirt or rust is harmful. An
adherent, protective layer of magnetite in normal operation

covers boiler internals. To create an intact layer of mag-
netite of the correct thickness, crystal type and morphol-
ogy all debris must be removed from the boiler, manually
or by means of a vacuum cleaner. If rusting is more than
superﬁcial, or if mill scale is present on the steel of the
boiler tubes or shell, chemical cleaning is necessary. Such
techniques are based on inhibited acids (e.g. citric acids).
The most appropriate technique is determined by a num-
ber of factors, and the most important include the nature
of deposits to be removed (i.e. rust, hardness scales, mill
scale and metallic copper).

Degreasing may be necessary, especially on new plant.
For optimum boiler life, passivation treatment is recom-
mended.

Reliable contractors should carry out all boiler treat-
ment and cleaning. Boilers are ﬁred pressure vessels and
are subject to mandatory insurance inspections. Signif-
icant beneﬁts in safe and economic operation, particu-
larly by reducing unnecessary chemical treatment, can be
achieved by monitoring the condition of boilers.

Items of plant fabricated from stainless steels should
be inspected before ﬁrst use and after any maintenance
work or unplanned shutdown. All materials that rely for
their corrosion resistance on the presence of an oxide or
similar passive layer are susceptible to localized attack
where that layer is absent or damaged. Damage is most
commonly caused by scratching, metallic contamination
(nearby grinding or touching with ferrous tools), embed-
ding of grit and weld spatter.

Serious damage of this nature should be rectiﬁed before
the plant is used. Scratches, embedded grit and weld splat-
ter can be removed by careful grinding. All grinding and
abrading on stainless steel must be carried out using alu-
mina or a similar abrasive, rather than silicon carbide
consumables. Wire brushes must be stainless steel, rather
than carbon steel. Local dressing should be ﬁne-ﬁnish,
since coarse scratches provide sites for the initiation of
pitting attack.

In critical applications, if stainless steel is to be used
near its limit (in terms of corrosion), and for cases such as
welds, where a good ﬁnish cannot be otherwise achieved,
additional passivation is required. Nitric acid (10–15 per
cent by volume) is the best passivator. It also dissolves
iron contamination. In circumstances where the use of
nitric acid is not possible for safety or physical reasons
(such as the underside of vessel roofs) passivation paste
is appropriate. Both materials are used at ambient tem-
perature and require a contact time of approximately 30
minutes. They must be removed by thorough rinsing with
low chloride-content water.

New plant can be contaminated with corrosive species
such as sea salt if it has been transported by sea as deck
cargo. Corrosive species present on building sites can gain
ingress into items of plant. Many metallic materials, par-
ticularly aluminum, zinc alloys and galvanized steel, are
susceptible to attack by alkaline cement dust and acid ﬂoor
cleaners. Signiﬁcant corrosion can occur by any of these
agents before or during commissioning. Titanium and, to
a lesser extent, tantalum are at risk of hydrating attack
when contaminated by iron smears (see Section 53.5.5).

The materials selection procedure should take into acc-
ount the commissioning requirements of all parts of the
plant in order not to include any materials that cannot
safely be degreased or chemically cleaned.

Heat transfer

During the materials selection procedure isothermal cor-
rosion testing may indicate the suitability of a material
for handling a corrosive process ﬂuid. In many cases
where heat transfer is involved the metal wall temperature
experienced in service is higher than the bulk process ﬂuid
temperature. This, and the actual heat transfer through the
material, must be taken into account since both factors can
increase corrosion rates signiﬁcantly.

Liquid line

The corrosion conditions can be different at the ﬂuid line
from the bulk condition. Aqueous liquids have a concave
meniscus, which creates a thin ﬁlm of liquid on the vessel
wall immediately above the liquid line. Some corrosion
processes, particularly the diffusion of dissolved gases,
are more rapid in these conditions. Additionally, the con-
centration of dissolved gases is highest near the liquid
surface, especially when agitation is poor. Locally high
corrosion rates can therefore occur at the liquid line, lead-
ing to thinning in a line around the vessel. This effect is
reduced if the liquid level in the vessel varies with time.
Any corrosion tests undertaken as part of the materials
selection procedure should take this effect into account.

53.3.6 Inﬂuence of external environment

The external environment experienced by plant can be
more corrosive than the internal process stream. Any con-
struction material must be chosen to withstand or be able
to be protected from external corrosive agents.

Corrosive atmospheres

Corrosive species in the atmospheres include water, salts
and gases. Clean atmospheres contain little other than
oxygen, nitrogen, water vapor and a small quantity of
carbon dioxide. These species are virtually non-corrosive
to any of the common constructional materials for plant
at normal temperatures. Steel is susceptible to corrosion
in even fairly clean air where water can exist as liquid.
For plant operating at temperatures up to approximately
100°C coatings are employed to protect steel if required.
In clean air corrosion rates are low, and corrosion is pri-
marily a cosmetic problem, although it may be necessary
to prevent rust staining of nearby materials.

Organic coatings (i.e. anti-corrosion paints) are used.
Above 100°C the steel will be dry provided it is sheltered
from rain. It is also likely to be lagged and therefore fur-
ther protection from corrosion is not needed. Few organic
coatings are suitable for use in this temperature range, but
epoxy-based coatings are used up to 120°C and vinylesters
up to 160°C. Silicones and inorganic and metallic coatings
can be used at higher temperatures. At temperatures above
480°C, oxide scaling is a serious problem for steel, and

Materials selection 53/975

alternative materials such as stainless steels or nickel-base
alloys are required.

Contaminated atmospheres create additional corrosion
problems. In marine environments (e.g. coastal power sta-
tions, offshore oil platforms and above the splash zone on
ships) the chief corrosive agents is sea salt. The chlo-
ride content of sea salt precludes the use of stainless steel
and bare steel or aluminum in these areas. Steel requires
to be coated as described in the previous section. Any
coating scheme used for the protection of steel must be
properly selected and applied. BS 5493 contains guide-
lines for coating systems for a variety of environments.
The most common reasons for coating failure are incor-
rect application and inadequate surface preparation. The
use of an independent coating inspector, as discussed in
Section 53.7, is recommended. Aluminum alloys can be
coated with plastics, such as U-PVC, epoxy ﬁnishes or
conventional paints, with the correct etch primer where
applicable to ensure adhesion. Some alloys are suitable
for anodizing, but the corrosion protection afforded by
anodizing is variable and requires tight speciﬁcation and
control to ensure correct anodized ﬁlm thickness and seal-
ing efﬁciency. The lower grades of stainless steels are not
suitable for external exposure in marine atmospheric con-
ditions unless they are cleaned regularly with fresh water.
Higher grades of stainless steel, nickel alloys and most
copper alloys do not normally beneﬁt from additional pro-
tection. The development of the colored patina on copper
alloys can, however, be avoided by coating with inhibited
lacquer.

Industrial environments can be contaminated with sul-
fur oxides, other acid gases, ammonia, hydrogen sulﬁde,
nitrogen oxides, chlorine, etc. Most of these are corrosive
towards steel, which is normally protected as outlined
above. Copper alloys are corroded by hydrogen sulﬁde
at levels above 60 ppb although the corrosion product
is generally stable and adherent and further protection
is not usually required. Corroded in this way, copper is
unsightly and the functioning of electronic equipment is
affected. Ammonia corrodes and causes stress corrosion
cracking of some copper alloys and if it is present in
signiﬁcant quantities, most alloys require protection by
coating. Chlorine and most acid gases are sufﬁciently cor-
rosive towards aluminum alloys and the lower grades of
stainless steel that protection is required. Coatings are the
only practical solution if these gases are present at high
enough levels.

Corrosion under lagging

Thermal insulation of vessels and pipework usually emp-
loys glass ﬁber or foamed polyurethane products. In their
pure forms these pose little corrosion risk. Generally,
they are contaminated with leachable acids and/or chlo-
ride ions. Chloride-free lagging can be speciﬁed and this
should be used for contact with metals which are suscep-
tible to chloride pitting or chloride-induced stress corro-
sion cracking. The lower-grade austenitic stainless steels,
including types 304, 321, 347, 316, 317 and their low-
carbon variants, are at greatest risk. If the lagging remains
dry, there is no corrosion problem. Lagging can become

53/976 Corrosion

wet through rain ingress at damage sites, spillage around
entry ports or leakage from steam coils or the lagged
vessel wall. Chloride leached from the lagging or intro-
duced with the water tends to concentrate on the pipe or
the vessel, and even trace quantities create serious cor-
rosion problems. If chloride-free lagging is not used, or
the risk of water ingress cannot be removed, the vessel
can be coated prior to lagging. Any barrier coating can
be used but if it is damaged it will not prevent corro-
sion. Aluminum, in the form of foil, is used to prevent
chloride-induced stress corrosion cracking of austenitic
stainless steels. Applied to the vessel or pipe prior to lag-
ging, it acts as a barrier to water and possibly by slight
cathodic protection.

Corrosion in concrete

Intact, good-quality, void-free concrete creates an alka-
line environment and protects embedded steelwork such
as reinforcing steel. Penetration by chloride ions, carbon
dioxide, oxygen and other corrosive species reduces this
protection. Voids in the concrete created by inadequate
compaction at the time of application accelerate this pen-
etration. Carbon dioxide reacts chemically with the con-
crete, reducing its alkalinity. Chloride and oxygen reach
the steel and initiate corrosion. The corrosion products
occupy a greater volume than the steel from which they
were formed. This expansion of some three to fourteen
times creates a pressure greater than the tensile strength
of the concrete. Spalling of the concrete allows further
corrosion to take place. Footings for structural steelwork
and vessel supports disintegrate and blocks of detached
concrete fall off the roofs and walls of buildings. For
reinforced concrete vessel bases, especially where acidic
or chloride- or sulfate-containing spillage are anticipated,
the following options should be considered at the materi-
als selection process. Acid- and sulfate-resisting concrete
are available or specialty coatings can be applied to con-
crete to prevent the ingress of species that would attack
the concrete or corrode the reinforcing steel. In addition,
these modiﬁcations will protect the process vessel that
is encased in the concrete and reinforcing material can
be galvanized steel, stainless steel or plastic coated; rein-
forced steel can be cathodically protected.

Corrosion in soil

Pipework is the item of plant that is most usually buried
in soil. In addition to the internal environment, the soil
can present a signiﬁcant corrosion hazard.

Light, sandy, well-drained soil of high electrical resis-
tivity is low in corrosivity and coated steel or bare stain-
less steels can be employed. It is unlikely that the whole
pipe run would be in the same type of soil. In heavier
or damp soils, or where the quality of back ﬁlling cannot
be guaranteed, there are two major corrosion risks. Steel,
copper alloys and most stainless steels are susceptible
to sulﬁde attack brought about by the action of sulfate-
reducing bacteria in the soil. SRB are ubiquitous but thrive
particularly well in the anaerobic conditions which per-
sist in compacted soil, especially clay. The mechanism of
corrosion where SRB are involved is described in Section

53.1.2. Cathodic protection alone, described in Section
53.7.2, is not completely effective against this type of
corrosion. Where SRB activity is likely or the resistivity
of the soil is less than 4000 (cid:8) cm the pipeline should be
coated. Anti-corrosion paint systems at a minimum thick-
ness of 0.2 mm and rubber, plastic or bituminous coatings
are preferred protection systems. Close control of back-
ﬁll quality is necessary to ensure that sharp stones do not
damage the coating, and full on-site inspection is required
to ensure defect-free application of site-applied coatings
and ﬁeld joints. It is usually the case that a combination
of coating and cathodic protection is the most economic
alternative. For critical application or the upgrading of old
pipes, cathodic protection is generally suitable. Whether
or not cathodic protection is used, care is required to avoid
stray current corrosion problems through interaction with
nearby cathodic protection or other electrical systems such
as electric railways.

Corrosion in timber

Metals in contact with or in the proximity of timber can
suffer enhanced corrosion attack. Some species of tim-
ber, especially oak and Douglas ﬁr, contain high levels
of acetic acid. These are volatile and cause corrosion of
nearby metals, especially iron, steel and lead alloys.

Metals in contact with timber can be corroded by the
acetic acid of the timber and by treatment chemicals pre-
sent in it. Treatment chemicals include ammonium sul-
fate and ammonium phosphate ﬂame-retardants. These are
particularly corrosive towards steel, aluminum and copper
alloys. Preservative treatments include copper salts which,
at high timber moisture contents, are corrosive towards
steel, aluminum alloys and zinc-coated items.

53.4 Design and corrosion
The design of a plant has signiﬁcant implications for its
subsequent corrosion behavior. Good design minimizes
corrosion risks whereas bad design promotes or exacer-
bates corrosion.

53.4.1 Shape

The shape of a vessel determines how well it drains
(Figure 53.7). If the outlet is not at the very lowest point
process liquid may be left inside. This will concentrate
by evaporation unless cleaned out, and it will probably
become more corrosive. This also applies to horizontal
pipe runs and steam or cooling coils attached to vessels.
Steam heating coils that do not drain adequately collect
condensate. This is very often contaminated by chloride
ions, which are soon concentrated to high enough levels
(10–100 ppm) to pose serious pitting and stress corro-
sion cracking risks for 300-series austenitic stainless steel
vessels and steam coils.

Flat-bottomed storage tanks tend to suffer pitting cor-
rosion beneath deposits or sediments which settle out.
Storage tanks may be emptied infrequently and may not
experience sufﬁcient agitation or ﬂow to remove such
deposits.

Design and corrosion 53/977

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

(cid:0)
(cid:0)

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)

(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
QQQQQQQQ
¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
QQQQQQQQ
¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
QQQQQQQQ
¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢

Liquids can concentrate
and deposits can form

Water can penetrate
lagging and cladding

Figure 53.7 Details of design creating corrosion problems

Flange face areas experience stagnant conditions. Addi-
tionally, some gasket materials, such as asbestos ﬁber,
contain leachable chloride ions. This creates crevice and
stress corrosion cracking problems on sealing surfaces.
Where necessary, ﬂange faces that are at risk can be over-
laid with nickel-based alloys. Alternatively, compressed
asbestos ﬁber gaskets shrouded in PTFE may be used.

Bends and tee-pieces in pipework often create locally
turbulent ﬂow. This enhances the corrosivity of the pro-
cess liquid. These effects should be minimized by the use
of ﬂow straighteners, swept tees and gentle bends. Flow-
induced corrosion downstream of control valves, oriﬁce
plates, etc. is sometimes so serious that pipework requires
lining with resistant material for some twelve pipe diam-
eters beyond the valve.

53.4.2 Stress
The presence of tensile stress in a metal surface renders
that surface more susceptible to many kinds of corrosion
than the same material in a non-stressed condition. Sim-
ilarly, the presence of compressive stress in the surface
layer can be beneﬁcial for corrosion behavior.

Tensile stresses can be residual, from a forming or
welding operation, or operational from heating–cooling,
ﬁlling–emptying or pressurizing–depressurizing cycles.
The presence of a tensile stress from whatever origin
places some materials at risk from stress corrosion crack-
ing, as described in Section 53.1.3. Some items of plant
can be stress-relieved by suitable heat treatment, but this
cannot prevent operational stress arising.

Cyclic stresses can also give rise to fatigue or corrosion
fatigue problems. Information relating to the fatigue life
of the material that in the service environment is required,
together with the anticipated number of stress cycles to
be experienced by the item over its operational life. The
fatigue life (the number of cycles to failure) or the fatigue
strength (the design strength below which it does not
exhibit fatigue problems) is then used in the design.

The presence of stress raisers, including sharp corners
and imperfect welds, produces locally high stress levels.
These should be avoided where possible or taken into
account when designing the materials for use in environ-
ments in which they are susceptible to stress corrosion
cracking or corrosion fatigue.

Rivet joint

Spot weld

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

Heat exchanger tube
expanded into tube
plate

Figure 53.8 Details of jointing processes creating additional cor-
rosion risks (crevices and stress concentrations)

53.4.3 Fabrication techniques

Most fabrication techniques have implications for corro-
sion performance. Riveted and folded seam construction
creates crevices as shown in Figure 53.8. Those materials
that are susceptible to crevice corrosion should be fab-
ricated using alternative techniques (e.g. welding). Care
should be taken to avoid lack of penetration or lack of
fusion, since these are sites for crevice corrosion to
initiate.

Welding should be continuous, employing ﬁllets where
possible, since tack welds create locally high stresses and
leave crevice sites. Welding consumables should be cho-
sen to create weld metals of similar corrosion resistance
to the parent material. This often requires the use of a
slightly over-alloyed consumable, to allow for loss of
volatile alloying elements during the welding process and
to compensate for the inherently poorer corrosion resis-
tance of the weld metal structure. Strongly over-alloyed
weld consumables can create galvanic corrosion problems
if the weld metal is signiﬁcantly more noble than the
parent material. In all welds, the heat-affected zone is
at risk. The new structure which forms because of the
thermal cycle can be of lower corrosion resistance, in
addition to the often poorer mechanical properties, than
parent material. Austenitic steels such as type 304 and
316 are also susceptible to sensitization effects in the heat-
affected zone. In these materials carbide precipitation dur-
ing the welding thermal cycle denudes the parent material
of chromium. This creates areas of signiﬁcantly dimin-
ished corrosion resistance, resulting in knife-line attack in
many corrosive environments. This is avoided by the use
of the low-carbon equivalents (304L, 316L, etc.) or grades
such as type 321 or 347 which are stabilized against sen-
sitization. With correct welding techniques, however, this
should be necessary only with thick sections (5 mm for
304 and 8 mm for 316). Some materials, particularly cer-
tain aluminum alloys, duplex stainless steels in certain
reducing environments and most steel plate, are suscep-
tible to end-grain attack. Penetration along the end grain
can be very rapid, with corrosion exploiting the potential
differences that exist between inclusions and ferrite crys-
tals in steel and between austenitic and ferrite grains in
duplex stainless steel. Where end-grain attack is signiﬁ-
cant, this should not be exposed to the corrosive environ-
ment. It can be covered by a ﬁllet weld if necessary.

53/978 Corrosion

53.4.4 Design for inspection

Unseen corrosion can be the most damaging type of attack.
Items should be designed to permit periodic inspection.
This involves the provision of sufﬁciently large manways,
the installation of inspection pits, the placing of ﬂat-bot-
tomed vessels on beams instead of directly onto concrete
bases and the facility for removal of thermal insulation
from vessel walls.

53.5 Uses and limitations of
constructional materials
53.5.1 Steels and cast irons

Steel is essentially iron with a small amount of carbon.
Additional elements are present in small quantities. Con-
taminants such as sulfur and phosphorus are tolerated at
varying levels, depending on the use to which the steel
is to be put. Since they are present in the raw mate-
rial from which the steel is made it is not economic to
remove them. Alloying elements such as manganese, sil-
icon, nickel, chromium, molybdenum and vanadium are
present at speciﬁed levels to improve physical properties
such as toughness or corrosion resistance.

Steels are used primarily for their strength and other
mechanical properties rather than for corrosion resistance.
The corrosion rates of steels are very low only in a
few environments, i.e. clean or hard water, certain non-
electrolytes, clean atmospheres and properly constituted
and compacted ordinary Portland cement. The economics
of any high-volume chemical processes,
including oil
and gas production and transport systems, permits the
widespread use of steels. By incorporating a corrosion
allowance into the design of a plant, corrosion rates
of up to 1 millimeter per year can be accommodated,
particularly for plant designed for an operational life of
only a few years. Steels generally corrode in a uniform
manner. This is beneﬁcial, since localized attack, as
experienced by stainless steels, is very difﬁcult to allow
for in plant design. The use of corrosion inhibitors
(Section 53.7.4) extends the economic range of use of
steels. Steel is also available coated with zinc (galvanized)
or aluminum-zinc.

Limitations on the use of steels include:

1. Acidic solutions below about pH 5 due to general cor-

rosion;

2. Alkaline solutions above about pH 11 due to general

dissolution and caustic cracking;

3. Marine and industrial atmospheres (without the use of
protective coatings), because of high corrosion rates;
4. Atmospheric exposure at temperatures in excess of

480°C, because of oxide scaling;

5. Certain environments containing nitrate, cyanide, car-
bonate, amines, ammonia or strong caustic, due to
the risk of stress corrosion cracking. Temperature is
an important factor in assessment of each cracking
environment;

6. Solutions of hydrogen sulﬁde, because of hydrogen-
induced cracking. Grades of steel are available for cer-
tain ranges of pH and hydrogen sulﬁde partial pressure.

Cast irons are iron with high levels of carbon. Heat
treatments and alloying element additions produce gray
cast iron, malleable iron, ductile iron, spheroidal cast iron
and other grades. The mechanical properties vary signiﬁ-
cantly. Nickel-containing cast irons have improved hard-
ness and corrosion resistance. Copper or molybdenum
additions improve strength.

Chromium, silicon and other alloying elements are used
to create cast irons for corrosion resistance in speciﬁc
environments. Silicon-containing cast irons are used for
sulfuric acid duty.

Limitations on the use of cast irons are similar to those
for steel, since in many environments most cast iron has
poor corrosion resistance. Most grades are also suscep-
tible to graphitization (the loss of iron, leaving a weak
structure of graphite) in acidic environments below a pH
of approximately 5.5. This attack occurs in soils.

53.5.2 Stainless steels

Stainless steels are iron-based alloys, which contain at
least 11 per cent chromium. Hundreds of grades of stain-
less steel are available with alloying elements including
nickel, molybdenum, manganese and copper. Stainless
steels are not electrochemically inert, but are protected
by a thin layer of oxide. This passive layer is unstable in
oxidizing and reducing environments. If lost completely,
the underlying steel corrodes rapidly in corrosive (particu-
larly acidic) environments. Where the oxide is lost locally,
pitting, crevice corrosion or stress corrosion cracking can
proceed at rates of several millimeters per year. Chemi-
cal species including the halide ions assist in the break-
down of the passive ﬁlm in even mild conditions such
as neutral sodium chloride solution. For satisfactory ser-
vice, stainless steels should be passivated continuously
(or intermittently, see Section 53.3.5) with a suitable oxi-
dizing species. The redox potential of an environment is
of prime importance in the selection of a stainless steel.
In reducing conditions, the protective oxide cannot form,
and general corrosion takes place; in strongly oxidizing
conditions, pitting corrosion is possible.

Stainless steels are used in a wide variety of applica-
tions and are most often selected because steel or cast iron
would corrode at an unacceptably high rate or produce
high levels of iron contamination in the proposed service
environment. The main limitations on their uses are:

1. The

lower grades of

austenitic stainless

steels
suffer chloride-induced stress corrosion cracking at
temperatures in excess of 60°C. Grades containing
high levels of nickel are more resistant. Sensitization
(Section 53.4.3) occurs near welds in certain non-
stabilized grades. The maximum hardness limitations
described in NACE MR-01-75 are necessary to prevent
sulﬁde stress corrosion cracking in hydrogen sulﬁde-
containing environments.

2. Ferritic stainless steels have inferior corrosion resis-
tance compared with austenitic grades of equivalent
chromium content, because of the absence of nickel.
Stress corrosion cracking can occur in strong alkali.

3. Martensitic stainless steels are of limited use in chem-
ical environments because of their inferior corrosion

resistance compared with ferritic and austenitic grades.
Their mechanical properties allow them to be used
where high hardness is required, but they are suscep-
tible to hydrogen embrittlement.

4. Duplex stainless steels are mostly composed of alter-
nate austenite and ferrite grains. Their structure
improves resistance to chloride-induced stress corro-
sion cracking. In certain reducing acids, such as acetic
and formic, preferential attack of the ferrite is a serious
problem.

In all categories, the lower grades suffer pitting and
crevice corrosion in even low-chloride environments. As
the chloride content or temperature increases, or the pH
falls, higher grades are required. Reducing acids, includ-
ing acetic and formic, attack most grades, particularly
at elevated temperatures. Free-cutting grades, containing
deliberate additions of sulfur or selenium, have signiﬁ-
cantly poorer corrosion resistance than the corresponding
standard grade.

53.5.3 Nickel alloys

i.e.

Commercially pure nickel has good corrosion resistance
to a variety of aggressive environments and is specially
used for hot caustic service. It has moderate resistance
to acid attack but cannot be used in oxidizing acidic
conditions,
in oxidizing acids or acidic media
containing oxidizing agents. Nickel is widely used for
electroplating steel. Electroless nickel plating is used,
especially for items of complex shape that cannot be suc-
cessfully electroplated. As with all coatings, the presence
of defects such as pores allow the corrosive environ-
ment to reach the substrate. Since nickel is more noble
than steel, rapid, galvanically assisted pitting of the sub-
strate steel occurs at defect sites. Nickel is not resistant
in the combined presence of ammonium compounds and
oxidizing agents.

Nickel is usually alloyed with elements including cop-
per, chromium, molybdenum and then for strengthening
and to improve corrosion resistance for speciﬁc appli-
cations. Nickel-copper alloys (and copper-nickel alloys;
see Section 53.5.4) are widely used for handling water.
Pumps and valve bodies for fresh water, seawater and
mildly acidic alkaline conditions are made from cast Ni-
30% Cu type alloys. The wrought material is used for
shafts and stems. In seawater contaminated with sulﬁde,
these alloys are subject to pitting and corrosion fatigue.
Ammonia contamination creates corrosion problems as for
commercially pure nickel.

Nickel-chromium alloys can be used in place of
austenitic stainless steels where additional corrosion
resistance is required. These alloys are still austenitic but
are highly resistant to chloride-induced stress corrosion
cracking when their nickel content exceeds 40 per cent.
Molybdenum-containing nickel alloys (the Hastel-
loysTM) are a family of alloys which include grades for
handling hot hydrochloric, sulfuric, oxidizing, reducing
and organic acids. Some grades are susceptible to attack
in ammonia- or sulﬁde-containing environments.

Uses and limitations of constructional materials 53/979

53.5.4 Copper alloys

resistance to some corrosive
Copper has excellent
environments,
including fresh waters and ﬂuoride-
containing atmospheres. Alloying is necessary to achieve
good strength, but copper limiting with steel for strength
is an alternative (BS 5624). Copper and some of its alloys
are susceptible to crevice corrosion, but the mechanism is
different from that which affects stainless steels.

Alloying with zinc produces brasses. Brasses are
generally suitable for
fresh and potable waters but
dezinciﬁcation is a problem for grades containing more
than 12 per cent zinc, especially in acidic/alkaline
conditions. The addition of small amounts of tin, with
arsenic or phosphorus, prevents dezinciﬁcation and is
particularly necessary for seawater applications. For
handling ﬂowing seawater or other corrosives, copper-
nickel alloys are favored. Brasses are susceptible to
stress corrosion cracking in the presence of ammonia or
ammonium compounds. This includes lavatory ﬁttings.

Copper-aluminum alloys (aluminum bronze) have good
general corrosion resistance but de-aluminiﬁcation is pos-
sible in some grades in certain environments. Copper-
nickel alloys are used where ﬂow-related corrosion is a
problem, particularly in seawater heat exchanger tubes.
The grades containing a small iron addition have the high-
est critical velocity. These alloys are all susceptible to
pitting by sulﬁdes (created in stagnant conditions in sea
water systems), especially in the presence of chlorine and
stress corrosion cracking in the presence of ammonia. To
minimize their susceptibility to sulﬁde attack in estuar-
ine or other polluted waters it can be advisable to pre-
passivate and, if necessary, inhibit with ferrous sulfate.

53.5.5 Miscellaneous metallic materials

Aluminum alloys

Commercially pure aluminum has good resistance to
atmospheric corrosion, except where chloride is present in
signiﬁcant quantities, i.e. within 1–2 km of the coast and
in the vicinity of chemical plants. To achieve reasonable
strength, alloying additions of silicon, manganese, zinc
and copper are made. Aluminum-copper alloys have
poor corrosion resistance and should not be used in
corrosive environments. The other aluminum alloys have
good corrosion resistance to most near-neutral media but
are attacked in acidic and alkaline conditions. They are
susceptible to pitting corrosion, especially where deposits
form. Chloride ions also induce pitting of these alloys;
chloride is often generated by the hydrolysis of chloride
containing organic chemicals. Other organic materials can
be handled safely when dry, except alcohols. Metal ions
such as copper, which may be introduced by the corrosion
of other plant, storage vessels or pipework, can plate
out onto the aluminum and create a galvanic cell which
produces intense pitting.

The use of anodic ﬁlms on aluminum alloys is only
applicable to some mildly corrosive environments, includ-
ing architectural purposes and where abrasion resistance
is required.

53/980 Corrosion

The presence of liquid mercury poses a liquid metal
embrittlement problem for many alloys. This occurs by
the spillage of mercury in aircraft and the condensation of
mercury vapor
in cryogenic
applications.

from mercury pumps

Titanium

Titanium is available unalloyed in several grades of purity,
and alloyed. Each grade or alloy has speciﬁc uses. Gen-
erally, titanium has excellent resistance to seawater and
oxidizing conditions, including acids and concentrated
hypochlorite solution. It is susceptible to corrosion in
reducing acids, rapid attack in dry chlorine gas, cracking
in alcohols and embrittlement by hydriding. Hydriding
is possible when titanium or a metal with which it is
in contact corrodes, liberating hydrogen. For this reason,
titanium plant should be inspected carefully for traces
of metallic contamination (e.g. scratch marks from steel-
nailed boots). Titanium can be used in the anodized form;
a thick anodic coating greatly reduces hydrogen absorp-
tion. It is used with anodic protection for handling 40–70
per cent strength sulfuric acid and 36 per cent hydro-
chloric acid.

Inspection techniques are available for speciﬁc coating
and lining systems. Proper bonding to substrate is nec-
essary to avoid blistering and disbonding in case of a
vacuum being created in the vessel.

Resins

Epoxy, polyester, phenolic and other resins are used as
coatings and linings with or without reinforcement. Glass
ﬁber, silica, carbon and many other materials can be used
as ﬁlters or reinforcement to produce materials with spe-
ciﬁc properties of strength, ﬂexibility, wear resistance and
electrical conductivity.

Plastics

A large range of man-made polymeric materials is avail-
able, from polyethylene, which is attacked by most organic
chemicals, to ﬂuorinated products such as polytetraﬂuoro-
ethylene and polyethyletherketones, which have excep-
tional resistance to virtually all chemicals. All polymers
have their own adhesive, welding and fabrication limi-
tations which must be taken into account in the design
of the coated item. These materials can also be used in
solid form.

Other metals

Elastomers

Other metals are available which have very speciﬁc uses.
Their cost is very high but their use is often justiﬁed
in certain processes such as ﬁne chemical manufacture.
They are generally used as thin cladding or loose lining
supported by steel or stainless steel.

Elastomers are used for their ﬂexibility in seals, gaskets
and hoses and to resist abrasion (through absorption of
the kinetic energy of the impinging particles). The range
of materials includes natural and synthetic rubbers and
modern elastomers with chemical resistance.

1. Gold is resistant to many strong acids, but not cyanides
or high levels of ﬂuoride, hydrogen ﬂuoride and chlo-
rine.

2. Platinum is resistant to strong acids and most halogen

gases.

3. Silver has reasonable resistance to inorganic and org-
anic acids (not strongly oxidizing acids), hot alkaline
conditions and some ﬂuoride-containing environments.
It tarnishes in the presence of sulﬁdes.

4. Tantalum is inert

to many environments including
hydrochloric acid at strengths up to 25 per cent at
90°C. It is attacked by ﬂuorine, hydroﬂuoric acid, fum-
ing sulfuric acid containing free sulfur trioxide, and
many alkalines. Above 300°C it reacts with many gases
including air. It is subject to hydrogen embrittlement
in a similar manner to titanium.

53.5.6 Linings and coatings

Many materials with good corrosion resistance have inad-
equate strength or other mechanical properties to enable
their fabrication or economic use. Organic linings and
coatings are used in a range of plant. Organic materials
are generally susceptible to organic solvents and have use
only within limited ranges of temperature. All coatings
and linings must be applied in a manner to control defects
within them, since the substrate on which they are applied
will be corroded by any contact with the process ﬂuid.

Glass

Glass-lined reactor vessels are widely used in pharma-
ceutical and ﬁne-drug manufacturing processes in which
metallic contamination of the products has to be mini-
mal. Most glasses are susceptible to attack in strong acid
and alkali media. Manufacture and design of glass-lined
vessels is a very specialized area. Such vessels require
periodic inspection to ensure the integrity of the lining,
which is susceptible to mechanical damage and repair is
difﬁcult.

53.6 Specifying materials
Having selected the appropriate material for an item of
plant, it is imperative that this material is used in the
required state of heat treatment, surface ﬁnishes, etc. for
its construction.

53.6.1 Compositional aspects

1. National standards: British Standards, DIN (Deutsche
Industries Normung, from Germany) and ASTM/AISI
(American Society for Testing of Materials/American
Iron and Steel Institute) are those in most common use
for metallic materials. It is always preferable to select
a material for which national or international speciﬁ-
cations exist. Many materials, including steels and the

300-series austenitic stainless steels, have wide ranges
of chemical composition. If an alloy or a grade of stain-
less steel is to be used in a marginal duty (i.e. where
relatively small variations in alloying element content,
heat treatment or surface condition could markedly
affect its corrosion behavior) this should be taken into
account when the material is speciﬁed. For stainless
steels and some other materials of construction it is
possible to purchase, at a premium rate, the material
with speciﬁed minimums of alloying elements. Type
316 stainless steel, when supplied to AISI speciﬁca-
tion, can have 10–14 per cent nickel, 16–18 per cent
chromium and 2–3 per cent molybdenum. This wide
speciﬁcation produces material across a range of corro-
sion resistance. It also creates latitude for mechanical
and physical properties, including strength and mag-
netic permeability. For demanding applications, but
where the more resistant type 317 material is not jus-
tiﬁed, type 316 with a minimum molybdenum content
may be speciﬁed.

2. Proprietary alloy designation: Many alloys are the sub-
ject of patents and are the registered trademark of the
producer. When produced by the holder of the patent,
these alloys are generally of the highest standard, with
tight control of composition, and exhibit consistent cor-
rosion behavior. They are mostly originally developed
for a speciﬁc corrosive service, but are subsequently
marketed more widely. These materials can also be
manufactured under license or, when the patent has
expired, by other producers using a generic name.

Produced in this way, these materials can be less
reliable, with the introduction of unwanted tramp ele-
ments. Where proving tests have indicated the suitabil-
ity of a proprietary alloy for speciﬁc application, the
same source of material should be used for construc-
tion. Published compositional data are typical values;
cast
critical
applications.

requested for

should be

analyses

3. Government standards: These are developed by gov-
ernment departments, especially the military, and are
primarily for aerospace and marine service materials.
4. In-house speciﬁcations: End users requiring larger
amounts of material and fabricators of specialty
plant beneﬁt
from preparing their own in-house
speciﬁcations. These are often based on existing
national standards modiﬁed to include additional
requirements. They include tighter compositional
ranges of alloying elements, mechanical properties
such as strength and surface ﬁnish, inspection and
certiﬁcation. These speciﬁcations must be written by
experts in order to satisfy the users’ real requirements
without compromising any aspect of the materials’
performance.

53.6.2 Mechanical properties

Many available standards, particularly national standards,
either do not cover the material, physical and mechani-
cal properties or leave the user to specify from a range of
options. The aspects of mechanical and physical properties

Corrosion-control techniques 53/981

which have speciﬁc implications for a material’s corrosion
behavior include:

1. Strength, particularly where the material will be sub-
jected to fatigue loading or is susceptible to degrading
mechanisms such as hydrogen-induced cracking;

2. Hardness, including surface hardness, especially for
materials for sour service or environments in which
stress corrosion cracking is expected. It is also impor-
tant where erosion corrosion is likely;

3. Surface ﬁnish, since good surface ﬁnish retards the
onset of certain types of corrosion attack, including
pitting and stress corrosion cracking.

All relevant physical and mechanical property require-
ments should be included in the material speciﬁcation.

53.6.3 Certiﬁcation

All aspects of the material’s chemical, mechanical and
physical properties which are included in the speciﬁcation
should be capable of measurement and certiﬁcation. For
critical duties all material supplied should be fully tested
and certiﬁed by competent approved, independent test lab-
oratories. All items of plant should be purchased with
material certiﬁcation. Additional certiﬁcation is required
in cases where the fabricator, in manufacturing an item of
plant, used techniques such as welding or heat treatment
which may affect the corrosion behavior of the construc-
tion materials.

All bought-in items of plant, especially those supplied
without adequate materials certiﬁcation, should be subject
to random inspection. Portable instruments are available
for many types of non-destructive examination, chemi-
cal analysis and mechanical testing of fabricated items
of plant.

53.7 Corrosion-control techniques
Economic reasons may dictate the use of an inexpensive
constructional material (i.e. steel protected by one of the
methods discussed below) in place of a more resistant
but more expensive material. Although all these corrosion
control techniques could be used on a variety of materi-
als, with appropriate design and safeguards, they are only
rarely employed to protect any material other than steel.

53.7.1 Painting

Paints are complex formulations of polymeric binders with
additives including anti-corrosion pigments, colors, plas-
ticizers, ultraviolet absorbers, ﬂame-retardant chemicals,
etc. Almost all binders are organic materials such as resins
based on epoxy, polyurethanes, alkyds, esters, chlorinated
rubber and acrylics. The common inorganic binder is the
silicate used in inorganic zinc silicate primer for steel.
Speciﬁc formulations are available for application to alu-
minum and for galvanized steel substrates.

Because of their generally poor resistance to solvents,
acids, alkalis and other corrosive agents, paints are not
normally used to protect plant internals handling anything

53/982 Corrosion

other than waters. Even clean (i.e. potable or better) water
is damaging to most epoxy-based coatings. Limitations on
the use of paint systems include:

Power supply

+–

1. Erosion resistance: The mechanical properties of paints
prevent their use in conditions where impingement or
erosion by entrained solids is expected.

2. Solvent resistance: This varies from very poor (for
chlorinated rubbers) to good (for polyurethanes). All
paint binders have speciﬁc susceptibilities and the pres-
ence of small quantities of the appropriate solvent in
the atmosphere in the region of an item of plant can
cause rapid failure.

3. Saponiﬁcation: Paints are most commonly used to
protect steel from corrosion by seawater in marine
applications and soil in the case of buried structures.
Additional protection is often supplied by the appli-
cation of cathodic protection to the steel. Any paint
coating used in conjunction with cathodic protection
must be resistant to the alkali which is produced on the
steel at defect sites in the coating. The amount of alkali
generated depends on the potential to which the steel
is polarized. Some paint binders such as alkyds and
vinyl ester are very susceptible to saponiﬁcation, and
should not be used on cathodically protected structures.
Cathodic disbondment testing should be undertaken if
the relevant information is not available.

4. Temperature: Thermal breakdown of the binder lim-
its the service temperature for painted items to 70°C
(e.g. chlorinated rubbers and polyvinylacetates), 120°C
(many epoxies) and 160°C (for vinylesters). The
commonest reason for coating failure is incorrect appli-
cation. This is a skilled task, involving surface prepa-
ration (usually by grit blasting) and a tight control
over environmental factors (temperature and relative
humidity of the local atmosphere), the cleanliness of
the steel. All coating should be supervised by an inde-
pendent, qualiﬁed inspector certiﬁed to a recognized
standard such as the National Association of Corrosion
Engineers International Coating Inspector Training and
Certiﬁcation Scheme.

The selection of an anti-corrosion paint-coating scheme

should be undertaken by a qualiﬁed expert.

53.7.2 Cathodic protection

Cathodic protection (CP) is an electrochemical technique
of corrosion control in which the potential of a metal
surface is moved in a cathodic direction to reduce the
thermodynamic tendency for corrosion. CP requires that
the item to be protected be in contact with an electrolyte.
Only those parts of the item that are electrically coupled
to the anode and to which the CP current can ﬂow are
protected. Thus, the inside of a buried pipe is not capable
of cathodic protection unless a suitable anode is placed
inside the pipe. The electrolyte through which the CP
current ﬂows is usually seawater or soil. Fresh waters
generally have inadequate conductivity (but the interiors
of galvanized hot water tanks are sometimes protected
by a sacriﬁcial magnesium anode) and the conductivity

Electrolyte (soil or water)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
Anode

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)
Anode

Sacrificial anode system
(reactive metal anode)

Impressed current system
(inert metal anode)

Figure 53.9 Cathodic protection

of air is far too low to permit the cathodic protection of
buildings or vehicles.

The operating principle of CP is shown in Figure 53.9.
For buried pipelines, the power source is most frequently
D.C. voltage derived from a rectiﬁed mains power supply,
or in suitable climates such as Australia and the Mid-
dle East, solar cells. Such systems operate by ‘impressed
current’ and suitable anodes are platinized titanium or nio-
bium wire, cast iron, and graphite. They are not consumed,
but can be damaged by the chlorine generated in seawater
CP systems. Reinforcing steel in concrete jetties, bridge
and car park decks and some offshore structures are gen-
erally protected by means of impressed current systems.
Sacriﬁcial anode systems operate without external
power source. The anodes are reactive metals such as
magnesium and zinc or aluminum alloys. The energy for
the process is derived from the anode material. Care-
ful design is required to match the output and lifetime
of the anodes with the polarization and life-expectancy
requirements of the plant. Sacriﬁcial anode CP is used
for offshore platforms, sub-sea pipelines and the inside of
ballast tanks on tanker ships.

Correct design is necessary to achieve full protection
without overprotection and to minimize wastage of power
or anode materials. Overprotection is undesirable because
alkali is generated at the cathode (this degrades many
plant systems) and hydrogen can be evolved. Hydrogen
is deleterious to some mechanical properties of steels and
pipelines have failed through this mechanism. Steel is also
susceptible to cracking in carbonate-containing environ-
ments in certain potential ranges. A reduction in the power
requirements of a CP system can usually be achieved by
coating the protected structure.

Stainless steel pipes (buried in the ground) and the
interiors of stainless steel heat exchangers have been suc-
cessfully cathodically protected, but CP is rarely used for
materials other than steel. The protection potential usu-
ally adopted for steel is (cid:2)850 mV to the saturated calomel
reference electrode. This varies with temperature and the
presence of other aggressive species in the environment.

53.7.3 Anodic protection

Anodic protection is possible only for material-environ-
ment combinations that exhibit
fairly wide passive

regions. Examples include type 304 stainless steel in phos-
phoric acid and titanium in sulfuric acid, steel and stain-
less steels in 98 per cent sulfuric acid. The effect of the
anodic polarization is to shift the steel into a region of pas-
sivity. This promotes the formation of a protective ﬁlm
on the steel surface, preventing general corrosion. Inade-
quate or over-polarization creates corrosion and hydrogen
evolution problems. As with CP, only wetted surfaces can
be protected; this excludes condensed ﬁlms or droplets on
vessel roofs and walls above the liquid line. Such areas
are subject to rapid corrosion attack.

53.7.4 Corrosion inhibitors

The use of cheap constructional materials such as steel can
be tolerated in certain instances where corrosion inhibition
is possible:

1. Boilers and steam systems: Steel steam lines can be
inhibited by the use of a volatile amine-based inhibitor
such as ammonia, morpholine or cyclohexylamine
introduced with the feedwater. It passes through the
boiler and into the steam system, where it neutralizes
the acidic conditions in pipework. The inhibitor is
chemically consumed and lost by physical means.
Film-forming inhibitors such as heterocyclic amines
and alkyl sulphonates must be present at
levels
sufﬁcient to cover the entire steel surface, otherwise
localized corrosion will occur on the bare steel.
Inhibitor selection must take into account the presence
of other materials in the system. Some amine products
cause corrosion of copper. If copper is present and at
risk of corrosion it can be inhibited by the addition of
benzotriazole or tolutriazole at a level appropriate to
the system (see also Section 53.3.2).

2. Cooling waters: Once-through cooling systems cannot
usually be inhibited because of the expense of the
chemicals required and the problems of the disposal
of the treated water. Open recirculating systems lose
water by evaporation from the tower and pick up atmo-
spheric dust and other detritus. Inhibition of such water
is part of the overall water treatment in which scaling
tendency and other factors are also controlled. Phos-
phates and phosphonates together with zinc ions are
commonly used. Biocide additions are also required
and algal growth control in the case of systems into
which sunlight penetrates. Closed recirculating sys-
tems, including those in motor vehicles, can be treated
with the most efﬁcient inhibitors such as chromates.
Disposal problems have restricted the use of these
chemicals, but borates, benzoates and nitrites are used.
If there is copper in the system, this must be inhib-
ited also. If aluminum is in the system, nitrite poses
a pitting problem in certain pH ranges. Nitrite is also
aggressive towards lead–tin soldered joints and is inef-
fective as an inhibitor for zinc and its alloys. Alu-
minum is only properly protected by benzoate in acidic
solutions; in alkaline conditions, it is not fully effective
(borates are preferred). The compatibility of all mate-
rials, including stainless steels and galvanized steel,
must be ascertained before any corrosion-inhibition
system is employed.

Corrosion monitoring 53/983

3. Heating systems: Where they are virtually sealed except
for a make-up tank (as in the case of domestic central
heating) systems can be treated as for closed recirculat-
ing cooling systems, and benzoates, nitrites and borates
are used. In a correctly designed system such that oxy-
gen ingress is minimal and little make-up is required
the oxygen content diminishes as corrosion proceeds
and the system can require no inhibitor treatment. The
use of certain toxic corrosion inhibitors is not permitted
in hospitals, food-manufacturing plant and breweries,
where a leak could result in contamination of food or
exposure of people to the chemical.

4. Vapor phase inhibitors: These are used for the tem-
porary protection of new plant in transit or prior to
commissioning. Volatile corrosion inhibitors such as
cyclohexylamine derivatives are used. The plant must
be sealed or contained to prevent rapid loss of the
inhibitor. Sachets of these materials are placed in pack-
ing cases. Papers impregnated with them are available
for wrapping steel items. These inhibitors are used pri-
marily to protect steel.

53.8 Corrosion monitoring

Once a plant is in operation it is important to monitor
the progress of any corrosion that might be taking place.
The four approaches described below vary in sophisti-
cation and cost. The most appropriate for any plant is
determined by a number of factors, including the mech-
anisms of corrosion that are anticipated and the impli-
cations of catastrophic or unexpected failure. Key areas
of the plant require closer monitoring than ready replace-
able items. The measures described below do not replace
the mandatory inspections of pressure vessels, etc. for
insurance purposes. The overall philosophy of corrosion
monitoring is to improve the economics of the plant’s
operation by allowing the use of cheaper materials and
generally reducing over-design that goes into plant to
combat corrosion.

53.8.1 Physical examination

Full records of all constructional materials that are used in
the plant should be maintained and updated when repairs
are undertaken. The exteriors of all parts of the plant
should be subjected to frequent visual examination and the
results reported and stored for future reference. This max-
imizes the warning time before corrosion failures occur,
since the majority of failure mechanisms cause leaks
before bursting. Key items of plant, those in which some
degree of corrosion is anticipated and those which might
suffer catastrophic failure, should be examined in detail.
Internal visual inspection during shutdowns is sufﬁcient
to identify most corrosion effects. Cracking can usually be
seen with the naked eye but where cracking is considered
a possible mechanism an appropriate non-destructive test
method should be employed. In items of plant which are
shut down only infrequently (relative to the time scale
of possible corrosion or cracking failure) external non-
destructive testing is often possible.

53/984 Corrosion

Candidate non-destructive test methods include:

1. Ultrasonic techniques: Wall thickness can be measured
to monitor the progress of general corrosion, cracks
can be detected and hydrogen blisters identiﬁed. Cer-
tain construction materials such as cast iron cannot be
examined by ultrasound. Skilled operators and special-
ist equipment is required. Plant can be examined in situ
except when it is above 80°C.

2. Magnetic particle inspection: Surface emergent and
some sub-surface cracking can be detected in ferro-
magnetic materials. The technique must be used on
the side of the material in contact with the corrodent.
3. Dye penetration inspection: This is a simple technique,
requiring a minimum of operator training. In the hands
of a skilled operator, it is capable of detecting ﬁne
cracks such as chloride stress corrosion cracks in
austenitic stainless steels and fatigue cracks.

53.8.2 Exposure coupons and electrical
resistance probes

If changes have been made to the process (e.g. if incoming
water quality cannot be maintained or other uncertainties
arise concerning the corrosion behavior of the construc-
tion materials) it is possible to incorporate coupons or
probes of the material into the plant and monitor their
corrosion behavior. This approach may be used to assist
in the materials selection process for a replacement plant.
Small coupons (typically, 25 ð 50 mm) of any material
may be suspended in the process stream and removed at
intervals for weight loss determination and visual inspec-
tion for localized corrosion. Electrical resistance probes
comprise short strands for the appropriate material electri-
cally isolated from the item of plant. An electrical connec-
tion from each end of the probe is fed out of the plant to a
control box. The box senses the electrical resistance of the
probe. The probe’s resistance rises as its cross-sectional
area is lost through corrosion.

The materials should be in the appropriate form (i.e.
cast/wrought/welded, heat treatment and surface condi-
tion). Metal coupons should be electrically isolated from
any other metallic material in the system. They should
be securely attached to prevent their being dislodged and
causing damage downstream. Simple coupons and probes
cannot replicate the corrosion effects due to heat transfer
but otherwise provide very useful information. It should
be noted that any corrosion they have suffered represents
the integrated corrosion rate over the exposure time. Cor-
rosion rates often diminish with time as scaling or ﬁlming
takes place, thus short-term exposures can give values
higher than the true corrosion rate.

53.8.3 Electrochemical corrosion monitoring

A number of corrosion-monitoring techniques based on
electrochemical principles are available. These give an
indication of the instantaneous corrosion rate, which is
of use when changing process conditions create a variety
of corrosion effects at different times in a plant. Some

techniques monitor continuously, others take a ﬁnite time
to make a measurement.

1. Polarization resistance: The current-potential behavior
of a metal, externally polarized around its corrosion
potential, provides a good indication of its corrosion
rate. The technique has the advantage of being well
established and hence reliable when used within cer-
tain limitations. This technique can only be used for
certain metals, to give general corrosion rate date in
electrolytes. It cannot be employed to monitor local-
ized corrosion such as pitting, crevice corrosion or
stress corrosion cracking, nor used in low-conductivity
environments such as concrete, timber, soil and poor
electrolytes (e.g. clean water and non-ionic solvents).
Equipment is available commercially but professional
advice should be sought for system design and location
of probes.

2. Impedance spectroscopy: This technique is essentially
the extension of polarization resistance measurements
into low-conductivity environments, including those
listed above. The technique can also be used to moni-
tor atmospheric corrosion, corrosion under thin ﬁlms of
condensed liquid and the breakdown of protective paint
coatings. Additionally, the method provides mechanis-
tic data concerning the corrosion processes, which are
taking place.

3. Electrochemical noise: A variety of related techniques
are now available to monitor localized corrosion. No
external polarization of the corroding metal is required,
but the electrical noise on the corrosion potential of the
metal is monitored and analyzed. Signatures character-
istic of pit initiation, crevice corrosion and some forms
of stress corrosion cracking is obtained.

53.8.4 Thin-layer activation

This technique is based upon the detection of corrosion
products, in the form of dissolved metal ions, in the pro-
cess stream. A thin layer of radioactive material is created
on the process side of an item of plant. As corrosion
occurs, radioactive isotopes of the elements in the con-
struction material of the plant pass into the process stream
and are detected. The rate of metal loss is quantiﬁed and
local rates of corrosion are inferred. This monitoring tech-
nique is not yet in widespread use but it has been proven
in several industries.

Further reading

Dillon, C. P., Corrosion Control in the Chemical Process

Industries, McGraw-Hill, New York (1986).

Fontana, M. G. and Greene, N. D., Corrosion Engineer-

ing, 2nd edn, McGraw-Hill, New York (1978).

The Forms of Corrosion Recognition and Prevention, Cor-
rosion Handbook No. 1, NACE, Houston, Texas (1982).
Lees, F. P., Loss Prevention in the Process Industries, 2nd

edn, Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford (1992).

Shreir, L. L.

(ed.), Corrosion, 3rd edn, Butterworth-

Heinemann, Oxford (1994).

Journals

British Corrosion Journal.

Industrial Corrosion is the main journal of the Institu-
tion of Corrosion Science and Technology, PO Box 253,
Leighton Buzzard, LU7 7WB.

Corrosion is the scientiﬁc journal of the National Asso-
ciation of Corrosion Engineers, PO Box 21840, Houston,
Texas, USA.

Materials Performance is the engineering journal of the

National Association of Corrosion Engineers.

Further reading 53/985

54

54/987

Shaft Alignment

R Keith Mobley
The Plant Performance Group

Contents

54/989

54.1 Introduction
54.2 Alignment fundamentals
54.3 Coupling alignment versus shaft alignment 54/990

54/989

54.3.1 Alignment conditions
54.3.2 Alignment planes
54.3.3 Actions to be taken before alignment 54/992
54.3.4 Correcting for indicator sag

54/994

54/992

54/990

54/995

54.4 Dual-indicator methods
54.5 Alignment methods

54/996
54.5.1 Reverse-dial indicator
54.5.2 Rim-and-face 54/997
54.5.3 Optical or laser
54.6 Alignment procedures
54.7 Computations, adjustments, and plots

54/997
54/998

54/996

54.7.1 Adjustments for thermal growth

54.8 Graphical plotting

54/1005

54/1004

54/1004

54.1 Introduction
Shaft alignment is the proper positioning of the shaft
centerlines of the driver and driven components (i.e.,
pumps, gearboxes, etc.) that make up the machine drive
train. Alignment is accomplished either through shimming
and/or moving a machine component. Its objective is to
obtain a common axis of rotation at operating equilibrium
for two coupled shafts or a train of coupled shafts.

Shafts must be aligned as perfectly as possible to
maximize equipment reliability and life, particularly for
high-speed equipment. Alignment is important for directly
coupled shafts, as well as coupled shafts of machines
that are separated by distance – even those using ﬂexible
couplings. It
is important because misalignment can
introduce a high level of vibration, cause bearings to run
hot, and result in the need for frequent repairs. Proper
alignment reduces power consumption and noise level,
and helps to achieve the design life of bearings, seals,
and couplings.

Alignment procedures are based on the assumption that
one machine-train component is stationary, level, and pro-
perly supported by its baseplate and foundation. Both
angular and offset alignment must be performed in the
vertical and horizontal planes, which is accomplished by
raising or lowering the other machine components and/or
moving them horizontally to align with the rotational cen-
terline of the stationary shaft. The movable components
are designated as ‘machines to be moved,’ or MTBM, or
‘machines to be shimmed,’ or MTBS. MTBM generally
refers to corrections in the horizontal plane while MTBS
generally refers to corrections in the vertical plane.

Too often, alignment operations are performed randomly
and adjustments are made by trial and error, resulting in
a time-consuming procedure.

54.2 Alignment fundamentals
This section discusses the fundamentals of machine align-
ment and presents an alternative to the commonly used
method,
trial-and-error. This section addresses exactly
what alignment is and the tools needed to perform it, why
it is needed, how often it should be performed, what is
considered to be ‘good enough,’ and what steps should
be taken prior to performing the alignment procedure.
It also discusses types of alignment (or misalignment),
alignment planes, and why alignment is performed on
shafts as opposed to couplings.

What is alignment?

Shafts are considered to be in alignment when they are
colinear at the coupling point. The term ‘colinear’ refers
to the condition when the rotational centerlines of two
mating shafts are parallel and intersect (i.e., join to form
one line). When this is the case, the coupled shafts operate
just like a solid shaft. Any deviation from the aligned
or colinear condition, however, results in abnormal wear
of machine-train components such as bearings and shaft
seals.

Variations in machine-component conﬁguration and
thermal growth can cause mounting-feet elevations

Alignment fundamentals 54/989

and the horizontal orientations of individual drive-train
components to be in different planes. Nevertheless, they
are properly aligned as long as their shafts are colinear at
the coupling point.

Note that it is important for ﬁnal drive-train alignment
to compensate for actual operating conditions because
machines often move after start up. Such movement is
generally the result of wear, thermal growth, dynamic
loads, and support or structural shifts. These factors must
be considered and compensated for during the alignment
process.

Tools most commonly used for alignment procedures
are dial
taper gauges,
feeler gauges, small-hole gauges, and outside micrometer
calipers.

indicators, adjustable parallels,

Why perform alignment and how often?

Periodic alignment checks on all coupled machinery are
considered one of the best ‘tools’ in a preventive main-
tenance program. Such checks are important because the
vibration effects of misalignment can seriously damage
a piece of equipment. Misalignment of more than a few
thousandths of an inch can cause vibration that signiﬁ-
cantly reduces equipment life.

Although the machinery may have been properly alig-
ned during installation or during a previous check, mis-
alignment may develop over a very short period of time.
Potential causes include: foundation movement or settling,
accidentally bumping the machine with another piece of
equipment, thermal expansion, distortion caused by con-
nected piping, loosened hold-down nuts, expanded grout,
rusting of shims, etc.

Indications of misalignment in rotating machinery are
shaft wobbling, excessive vibration (in both radial and
axial directions), excessive bearing temperature (even if
adequate lubrication is present), noise, bearing wear pat-
tern, and coupling wear.

Trial-and-error versus calculation

Many alignments are done by the trial-and-error method.
Although this method may eventually produce the correct
answers, it is extremely time consuming and, as a result,
it is usually considered ‘good enough’ before it really
is. Rather than relying on ‘feel’ as with trial-and-error,
some simple trigonometric principles allow alignment to
be done properly with the exact amount of correction
needed either measured or calculated, taking the guess-
work out of the process. Such accurate measurements and
calculations make it possible to align a piece of machinery
on the ﬁrst attempt.

What is good enough?

This is a difﬁcult question to answer because there are
vast differences in machinery strength, speed of rotation,
type of coupling, etc. It also is important to understand
that ﬂexible couplings do not cure misalignment prob-
lems – a common myth in industry. Although they may
somewhat dampen the effects, ﬂexible couplings are not
a total solution.

54/990 Shaft Alignment

An easy (perhaps too easy) answer to the question of
what is good enough is to align all machinery to com-
ply exactly with the manufacturers’ speciﬁcations. How-
ever, the question of which manufacturers’ speciﬁcations
to follow must be answered, as few manufacturers build
entire assemblies. Therefore, an alignment is not consid-
ered good enough until it is well within all manufacturers’
tolerances and a vibration analysis of the machinery in
operation shows the vibration effects due to misalignment
to be within the manufacturers’ speciﬁcations or accepted
industry standards. Note that manufacturers’ alignment
speciﬁcations may include intentional misalignment dur-
ing ‘cold’ alignment to compensate for thermal growth,
gear lash, etc. during operation.

54.3 Coupling alignment versus shaft
alignment
If all couplings were perfectly bored through their exact
center and perfectly machined about their rim and face,
it might be possible to align a piece of machinery simply
by aligning the two coupling halves. However, coupling
eccentricity often results in coupling misalignment. This
does not mean, however, that dial indicators should not be
placed on the coupling halves to obtain alignment mea-
surements. It does mean that the two shafts should be
rotated simultaneously when obtaining readings, which
makes the couplings an extension of the shaft centerlines
whose irregularities will not affect the readings. There-
fore, this chapter primarily addresses shaft alignment.

Although alignment operations are performed on cou-
pling surfaces because they are convenient to use, it is
extremely important that these surfaces and the shaft ‘run
true’. If there is any runout (i.e., axial or radial loose-
ness) of the shaft and/or the coupling, a proportionate
error in alignment will result. Therefore, prior to making
alignment measurements, the shaft and coupling should
be checked and corrected for runout.

54.3.1 Alignment conditions

There are four alignment conditions: perfect alignment,
offset or parallel misalignment, angular or face misalign-
ment, and skewed or combination misalignment (i.e., both
offset and angular).

Perfect alignment

Two perfectly aligned shafts are colinear and operate as a
solid shaft when coupled. This condition is illustrated in
Figure 54.1. However, it is extremely rare for two shafts
to be perfectly aligned without an alignment procedure

being performed on them. In addition, the state of align-
ment should be monitored on a regular basis in order to
maintain the condition of perfect alignment.

Offset or parallel misalignment

Offset misalignment, also referred to as parallel misalign-
ment, refers to the distance between two shaft centerlines,
and is generally measured in thousandths of an inch. Off-
set can be present in either the vertical or horizontal plane.
Figure 54.2 illustrates offset, showing two mating shafts
that are parallel to each other, but not colinear. Theoreti-
cally, offset is measured at the coupling centerline.

Angular or face misalignment

A sound knowledge of angular, also called face, misalign-
ment is needed for understanding alignment conditions
and performing the tasks associated with machine-train
alignment, such as drawing alignment graphics, calculat-
ing feet corrections, specifying thermal growth, obtaining
target speciﬁcations, and determining spacer-shaft align-
ment.

Angular misalignment refers to the condition when the
shafts are not parallel, but are in the same plane with no
offset. This is illustrated in Figure 54.3. Note that with
angular misalignment, it is possible for the mating shafts
to be in the same plane at the coupling-face intersection,
but to have an angular relationship such that they are not
colinear.

Angularity is the angle between the two shaft center-
lines, which generally is expressed as a ‘slope,’ or ‘rise
over run,’ of so many thousandths of an inch per inch
(i.e., unit less), rather than as an angle in degrees. It must
be determined in both the vertical and horizontal planes.
Figure 54.4 illustrates the angles involved in angular mis-
alignment.

From a practical standpoint, it is often difﬁcult or unde-
sirable to position the stems of the dial indicators at 90°
angles to the rim and/or face surfaces of the coupling
halves. For this reason, brackets are used to mount the
devices on the shaft or a non-movable part of the cou-
pling to facilitate taking readings and to insure greater
accuracy. This is a valid method because any object that

Offset

Figure 54.2 Offset misalignment

No offset

Angle

Figure 54.1 Perfect alignment

Figure 54.3 Angular misalignment (no offset)

Coupling alignment versus shaft alignment 54/991

an angle and is actually the tangent of ‘Angle A’:
‘Angle A’ D a
b

D rise
run

Figures 54.6 and 54.7 illustrate the concept of rise and
run. If one assumes that line O–A in Figure 54.6 repre-
sents a true, or target, shaft centerline, then side ‘a’ of
the triangle represents the amount of offset present in the
actual shaft, which is referred to as the rise.

Note that this ‘offset’ value is not the true theoretical
offset. It is actually the theoretical offset plus one-half of
the shaft diameter (see Figure 54.5) because the indicator
dial is mounted on the outside edge of the shaft as opposed
to the centerline. However, for the purposes of alignment
calculations, it is not necessary to use the theoretical offset
or the theoretical run that corresponds to it. Figure 54.7
illustrates why this is not necessary.

Figure 54.7 illustrates several rise/run measurements
for a constant ‘Angle A’. Unless ‘Angle A’ changes, an
increase in rise results in a proportionate increase in run.
This relationship allows the alignment calculations to be
made without using the theoretical offset value and its
corresponding run.

Therefore, the calculation of ‘Angle A’ can be made

with any of the rise/run measurements:
D rise4
‘Angle A’ D rise1
run1
run4

D rise2
run2

D rise3
run3

12.000 D 0.042

For example: If the rise at a machine foot is equal to 0.5
inches with a run of 12 inches, ‘Angle A’ is:
‘Angle A’ D 0.500
If the other machine foot is 12 inches away (i.e., run =
24 inches), the following relationship applies:
0.042 D X

24.000 , where X or rise D 1 inch

B

A

B

A

B

A

B

A

Figure 54.4 Angles are equal at the coupling or shaft centerline

is securely attached and rotated with the shaft or coupling
hub becomes a radial extension of the shaft centerline and
can be considered an integral part of the shaft. However,
this somewhat complicates the process and requires right-
triangle concepts to be understood and other adjustments
(e.g., indicator sag) to be made to the readings.

Compare the two diagrams

in Figure 54.5. Fig-
ure 54.5(a) is a common right triangle and Figure 54.5(b)
is a simpliﬁed view of an alignment-measuring apparatus,
or ﬁxture, which incorporates a right triangle.

The length of side ‘b’ is measured with a tape mea-
sure and the length of side ‘a’ is measured with a device
such as a dial indicator. Note that this diagram assumes
the coupling is centered on the shaft and that its center-
line is the same as the shaft’s. Angle ‘A’ in degrees is
calculated by:
A D tan(cid:2)1 a
b

This formula yields the angle ‘A’ expressed in degrees,
which requires the use of a trigonometric table or a cal-
culator that is capable of determining the inverse tangent.
While technically correct, however, alignment calcula-
tions do not require the use of an angle value in degrees.
Note that it is common industry practice to refer to the
following value as ‘Angle A’, even though it is not truly

A

c

b

(a)

(b)

a

O

90˚

c

Angle A

b = run

a = rise

90˚

Figure 54.6 Concept of rise and run

O

c

rise 1

Angle A

rise 2

rise 3

rise 4

run 1

run 2

run 3

run 4

Figure 54.5 Common right triangle and simpliﬁed alignment-mea-
suring apparatus

Figure 54.7 Rise/run measurements for constant angle

54/992 Shaft Alignment

Combination or skewed misalignment

Combination or skewed misalignment occurs when the
shafts are not parallel (i.e., angular), nor do they inter-
sect at the coupling (i.e., offset). Figure 54.8 shows two
shafts that are skewed, which is the most common type
of misalignment problem encountered. This type of mis-
alignment can occur in either the horizontal or vertical
plane, or in both the horizontal and vertical planes.

For comparison, see Figure 54.3, which shows two
shafts that have angular misalignment, but are not
offset. Figure 54.9 shows how an offset measurement
for non-parallel shafts can vary, depending upon where
the distance between two shaft centerlines is measured.
Again, note that
the
coupling face.

theoretical offset

is deﬁned at

54.3.2 Alignment planes

There are two misalignment planes to correct: vertical
and horizontal. Therefore, in the case where at least two
machines make up a machine train, four types of mis-
alignment can occur: vertical offset, vertical angularity,
horizontal offset, and horizontal angularity. These can
occur in any combination and, in many cases, all four
are present.

Vertical

Both angular misalignment and offset can occur in the
vertical plane. Vertical misalignment, which is corrected

Offset

Angle

Figure 54.8 Offset and angular misalignment

Offset

Offset

Offset

+5

+1

+6

Figure 54.9 Offset measurement for angularly misaligned shafts

Stationary

M.T.B.M

(Machine to be moved)

Figure 54.10 Vertical misalignment

Stationary

M.T.B.M

(Machine to be moved)

Figure 54.11 Horizontal misalignment

by the use of shims, is usually illustrated in a side-view
drawing as shown in Figure 54.10.

Horizontal

Both offset and angular misalignment can occur in the
horizontal plane. Shims are not used to correct for hor-
izontal misalignment, which is typically illustrated in a
top-view drawing as shown in Figure 54.11. This type
of misalignment is corrected by physically moving the
machine to be moved (MTBM).

54.3.3 Actions to be taken before alignment

It is crucial that alignment procedures be performed cor-
rectly, regardless of what method is used. Actions to be
taken before alignment are discussed in the following
sections, which cover the preparatory steps as well as
two major issues (i.e., soft-foot and indicator sag cor-
rections) that must be resolved before alignment can be
accomplished. This section provides procedures for mak-
ing these corrections as well as the proper way to tighten
hold-down nuts, an important procedure needed when cor-
recting soft-foot.

Preparatory steps

The following preparatory steps should be taken before
attempting to align a machine train:

1. Before placing a machine on its base, make sure that
both the base and the bottom of the machine are clean,
rust free, and do not have any burrs. Use a wire brush
or ﬁle on these areas if necessary.

2. Common practice is to position, level, and secure the
driven unit at the required elevation prior to adjusting
the driver to align with it. Set the driven unit’s shaft
centerline slightly higher than the driver.

3. Make all connections, such as pipe connections to a
pump or output shaft connections on a reducer, to the
driven unit.

4. Use only clean shims that have not been ‘kinked’ or

that have burrs.

5. Make sure the shaft does not have an indicated runout.
6. Before starting the alignment procedure, check for

‘soft-foot’ and correct the condition.

7. Always use the correct tightening sequence procedure

8. Determine the amount of indicator sag before starting

on the hold-down nuts.

the alignment procedure.

9. Always position the stem of the dial indicator so that
it is perpendicular to the surface against which it will
rest. Erroneous readings will result if the stem is not
placed at a 90° angle to the surface.

10. Avoid lifting the machine more than is necessary to

add or remove shims.

11. Jacking bolt assemblies should be welded onto the
bases of all large machinery. If they are not provided,
add them before starting the alignment procedure. Use
jacking bolts to adjust for horizontal offset and angu-
lar misalignment and to hold the machine in place
while shimming.

Correcting for soft-foot

Soft-foot is the condition when all four of a machine’s feet
do not support the weight of the machine. It is important to
determine if this condition is present prior to performing
shaft alignment on a piece of machinery. Not correcting
soft-foot prior to alignment is a major cause of frustration
and lost time during the aligning procedure.

The basis for understanding and correcting soft-foot and
its causes is the knowledge that three points determine a
plane. As an example, consider a chair with one short leg.
The chair will never be stable unless the other three legs
are shortened or the short leg is shimmed. In this example,
the level ﬂoor is the ‘plane’ and the bottom tips of the
legs are the ‘points’ of the plane. Three of the four chair
tips will always rest on the ﬂoor. If a person is sitting
with their weight positioned above the short leg, it will
be on the ﬂoor and the normal leg diagonally opposite the
short leg will be off the ﬂoor.

As in the chair example, when a machine with soft-foot
is placed on its base, it will rest on three of its support
feet unless the base and the bottoms of all of the feet
are perfectly machined. Further, because the feet of the
machine are actually square pads and not true points, it
is possible that the machine can rest on only two support
feet, ones that are diagonally opposite each other. In this
case, the machine has two soft-feet.

Causes

Possible sources of soft-foot are shown in Figure 54.12.

Consequences

Placing a piece of machinery in service with uncorrected
soft-foot may result in the following:

Coupling alignment versus shaft alignment 54/993

1

4

2

5

3

6

Figure 54.12 Diagrams of possible soft-foot causes (Ref. 3)
1. Loose foot, 2. Cocked foot, 3. Bad shims, 4. Debris under foot,
5. Irregular base surface, 6. Cocked foot

ž Dial-indicator readings taken as part of the alignment
procedure can be different each time the hold-down
nuts are tightened, loosened, and retightened. This can
be extremely frustrating because each attempted correc-
tion can cause a soft-foot condition in another location.
ž The nuts securing the feet to the base may loosen,
resulting in either machine looseness and/or misalign-
ment. Either of these conditions can cause vibration,
which can be dangerous to personnel as well as to the
machine.
ž If the nuts do not loosen, metal fatigue may occur at
the source of soft-foot. Cracks can develop in the sup-
port base/frame and, in extreme cases, the soft-foot may
actually break off.

Initial soft-foot correction

down nuts.

The following steps should be taken to check for and
correct soft-foot:
ž Before setting the machine in place, remove all dirt,
rust, and burrs from the bottom of the machine’s feet,
the shims to be used for leveling, and the base at the
areas where the machine’s feet will rest.
ž Set the machine in place, but do not tighten the hold-
ž Attempt to pass a thin feeler gauge underneath each of
the four feet. Any foot that is not solidly resting on the
base is a soft-foot. (A foot is considered ‘soft’ if the
feeler gage passes beneath most of it and only contacts
a small point or one edge.)
ž If the feeler gage passes beneath a foot, install the
necessary shims beneath that foot to make the ‘initial’
soft-foot correction.

Final soft-foot correction

The following procedure describes the ﬁnal soft-foot cor-
rection:
ž Tighten all hold-down nuts on both the stationary ma-
ž Secure a dial-indicator holder to the base of the sta-
tionary machine and the MTBS. The stem of the dial

chine and the machine to be shimmed (MTBS).

54/994 Shaft Alignment

indicator should be in a vertical position above the foot
to be checked. A magnetic-base indicator holder is most
suitable for this purpose.
ž Set the dial indicator to zero. Completely loosen the
hold-down nut on the foot to be checked. Watch the dial
indicator closely for foot movement during the loosen-
ing process.
ž If the foot rises from the base when the hold-down nut
is loosened, place beneath the foot an amount of shim
stock equal to the amount of deﬂection shown on the
dial indicator.
ž Retighten the hold-down nut and repeat the entire pro-
ž Move the dial indicator and holder to the next foot to be
checked and repeat the process. Note: The nuts on all
of the other feet must remain securely tightened when
a foot is being checked for a soft-foot condition.

cess once again to ensure that no movement occurs.

ž Repeat the above process on all of the feet.
ž Make a three-point check on each foot by placing a
feeler gage under each of the three exposed sides of the
foot. This determines if the base of the foot is cocked.

Tightening hold-down nuts

Once soft-foot is removed, it is important to use the cor-
rect tightening procedure for the hold-down nuts. This
helps ensure that any unequal stresses that cause the mach-
ine to shift during the tightening procedure remain the
same throughout the entire alignment process. The fol-
lowing procedure should be followed:
ž After eliminating soft-foot, loosen all hold-down nuts.
ž Number each machine foot in the sequence in which
the hold-down nuts will be tightened during the align-
ment procedure. The numbers (1, 2, 3 and 4) should be
permanently marked on, or near, the feet.
ž It is generally considered a good idea to tighten the nuts
in an ‘X’ pattern as illustrated in Figure 54.13. Always
tighten the nuts in the sequence in which the positions
are numbered (1, 2, 3 and 4).
ž Loosen nuts in the opposite sequences (4, 3, 2 and 1).
ž Use a torque wrench to tighten all nuts with the same
ž A similar procedure should be used for baseplates.
ž Always tighten the nuts as though the ﬁnal adjustment
has been made, even if the ﬁrst set of readings has not
been taken.

amount of torque.

54.3.4 Correcting for indicator sag

Indicator sag is the term used to describe the bending
of the mounting hardware as the dial indicator is rotated

it

from the top position to the bottom position during the
alignment procedure. Bending can cause signiﬁcant errors
in the indicator readings that are used to determine verti-
cal misalignment, especially in rim-and-face readings. The
degree to which the mounting hardware bends depends on
the length and material strength of the hardware.

To ensure that correct readings are obtained with the
alignment apparatus,
is necessary to determine the
amount of indicator sag present in the equipment and to
correct the bottom or 6 o’clock readings before starting
the alignment process.

Dial indicator mounting hardware consists of a bracket
clamped to the shaft, which supports a rod extending
beyond the coupling. When two shafts are perfectly alig-
ned, the mounting rod should be parallel to the axis of
rotation of the shafts. However, the rod bends or sags
by an amount usually measured in mils (thousandths of
an inch) due to the combined weight of the rod and the
dial indicator attached to the end of the rod. Figure 54.14
illustrates this problem.

Indicator sag is best determined by mounting the dial
indicator on a piece of straight pipe of the same length as
in the actual application. Zero the dial indicator at the 12
o’clock, or upright, position and then rotate 180° to the
6 o’clock position. The reading obtained, which will be a
negative number, is the measure of the mounting-bracket
indicator sag for 180° of rotation and is called the sag
factor.

All bottom or 6 o’clock readings should be corrected

by subtracting the sag factor.
Example 1: Assume that the sag factor is (cid:2)0.006 inch.
If the indicator reading at 6 o’clock equals C0.010 inch,
then the true reading is:
Indicator reading (cid:2) sag factor
(cid:13)C0.01000(cid:14) (cid:2) (cid:13)(cid:2)0.00600(cid:14) D C0.01600

Example 2: If the indicator reading at 6 o’clock equals
(cid:2)0.01000, then the true reading is:
(cid:13)(cid:2)0.01000(cid:14) (cid:2) (cid:13)(cid:2)0.00600(cid:14) D (cid:2)0.00400

As shown by the above examples, the correct use of
positive (C) and negative ((cid:2)) signs is important in shaft
alignment.

4

1

2

3

Sag

Figure 54.13 Correct bolting sequence for tightening nuts (Ref. 3)

Figure 54.14 Dial indicator sag

Alignment equipment and methods

There are two primary methods of aligning machine trains:
dial indicator alignment and optical, or laser, alignment.
This section provides an overview of each, with an empha-
sis on dial-indicator methods.

Dial-indicator methods (i.e., reverse-dial indicator and
the two variations of the rim-and-face method) use the
same type of dial indicators and mounting equipment.
However, the number of indicators and their orientations
on the shaft are different. The optical technique does not
use this device to make measurements, but uses laser
transmitters and sensors.

While the dial-indicator and optical methods differ in
the equipment and/or equipment setup used to align ma-
chine components, the theory on which they are based
is essentially identical. Each method measures the offset
and angularity of the shafts of movable components in
reference to a pre-selected stationary component. Each
assumes that the stationary unit is properly installed and
that good mounting, shimming, and bolting techniques are
used on all machine components.

54.4 Dial-indicator methods
There are three methods of aligning machinery with dial
indicators. These methods are: (1) two-indicator method
with readings taken at the stationary machine, (2) two-
indicator method with readings taken at the machine to
be shimmed, and (3) indicator reverse method. Methods
1 and 2 are often considered to be one method, which is
referred to as rim-and-face.

Method selection

Although some manufacturers insist on the use of the
reverse indicator method for alignment or, at least, as a
ﬁnal check of the alignment, two basic factors determine
which method should be used. The determining factors in
method selection are: (1) end play and (2) distance versus
radius.

End play or ﬂoat

Practically all machines with journal or sleeve bearings
have some end play or ﬂoat. It is considered manage-
able if sufﬁcient pressure can be applied to the end of
the shaft during rotation to keep it ﬁrmly seated against
the thrust bearing or plate. However, for large machin-
ery or machinery that must be energized and ‘bumped’
to obtain the desired rotation, application of pressure on
the shaft is often difﬁcult and/or dangerous. In these cases,
ﬂoat makes it impossible to obtain accurate face readings;
therefore, the indicator reverse method must be used as
ﬂoat has a negligible affect.

Distance versus radius

If ﬂoat is manageable, then there is a choice of which
of the methods to use. When there is a choice, the best
method is determined by the following rule:

Dial-indicator methods 54/995

If the distance between the points of contact of the two
dial indicators set up to take rim readings for the indicator
reverse method is larger than one-half the diameter of
travel of the dial indicator set up to take face readings for
the two-indicator method, the indicator reverse method
should be used.

This rule is because misalignment is more apparent
(i.e., dial indicator reading will be larger) under these
circumstances and, therefore, corrections will be more
accurate.

Equipment

Dial indicators and mounting hardware are the equipment
needed to take alignment readings.

Figure 54.15 shows a common dial indi-
Dial indicators
cator, which is also called a runout gage. A dial indicator
is an instrument with either jeweled or plain bearings,
precisely ﬁnished gears, pinions, and other precision parts
designed to produce accurate measurements. It is possi-
ble to take measurements ranging from one-thousandth
(0.001 inch or one mil) to 50 millionths of an inch.

The point that contacts the shaft is attached to a spindle
and rack. When it encounters an irregularity, it moves.
This movement is transmitted to a pinion, through a series
of gears, and on to a hand or pointer that sweeps the dial of
the indicator. It yields measurements in (C) or ((cid:2)) mils.
Measurements taken with this device are based on a
point of reference at the ‘zero position,’ which is deﬁned
as the alignment ﬁxture at the top of the shaft – referred
to as the 12 o’clock position. In order to perform the
alignment procedure, readings also are required at the 3,
6, and 9 o’clock positions.

It is important to understand that the readings taken
with this device are all relative, meaning they are depen-
dent upon the location at which they are taken. Rim read-
ings are obtained as the shafts are rotated and the dial
indicator stem contacts the shaft at a 90° angle. Face read-
ings, which are used to determine angular misalignment,
are obtained as the shafts are rotated and the stem is par-
allel to the shaft centerline and touching the face of the
coupling.

Figure 54.15 Common dial indicator

54/996 Shaft Alignment

Mounting hardware Mounting hardware consists of the
brackets, posts, connectors, and other hardware used to
attach a dial indicator to a piece of machinery. Dial indi-
cators can easily be attached to brackets and, because
brackets are adjustable, they can easily be mounted on
shafts or coupling hubs of varying size. Brackets eliminate
the need to disassemble ﬂexible couplings when checking
alignments during predictive maintenance checks or when
doing an actual alignment. This also allows more accurate
‘hot alignment’ checks to be made.

The brackets are designed so that dial indicators can
easily be mounted for taking rim readings on the move-
able machine and the ﬁxed machine at the same time.
This facilitates the use of the indicator reverse method of
alignment. If there is not enough room on the shafts, it is
permissible to attach brackets to the coupling hubs or any
part of the coupling that is solidly attached to the shaft.
Do not attach brackets to a movable part of the coupling,
such as the shroud.

Note that misuse of equipment can result in costly
mistakes. One example is the improper use of magnetic
bases, which are generally designed for stationary service.
They are not designed for direct attachment to a shaft
or coupling that must be rotated to obtain the alignment
readings. The shift in forces during rotation can cause
movement of the magnetic base and erroneous readings.

54.5 Alignment methods
There are three primary methods of aligning machine
trains with dial indicators: reverse-dial indicator method,
also called indicator-reverse method, and two variations
of the rim-and-face method.

With all three of these methods, it is usually possible
to attach two dial indicators to the machinery in such a
manner that both sets of readings can be taken simultane-
ously. However, if only one indicator can be attached, it is
acceptable to take one set of readings, change the mount-
ing arrangement, and then take the other set of readings.
There are advantages with the reverse-dial indicator
method over the rim-and-face method – namely accuracy
and the fact that the mechanic is forced to perform the
procedure ‘by the book,’ as opposed to being able to use
‘trial and error’. Accuracy is much better because only
rim readings are used. This is because rim readings are
not affected by shaft ﬂoat or end play as are face read-
ings. In addition, the accuracy is improved compared with
rim-and-face methods because of the length of the span
between indicators.

54.5.1 Reverse-dial indicator

is

Reverse-dial indicator method (also referred to as indica-
tor-reverse method)
the most accurate form of
mechanical alignment. This technique measures offset at
two points and the amount of horizontal and vertical
correction for offset and angularity is calculated. Rim
readings are taken simultaneously at each of the four
positions (12, 3, 6, and 9 o’clock) for the movable
machine (MTBS/MTBM) and the stationary machine. The

Figure 54.16 Typical reverse dial indicator ﬁxture and mounting

measuring device for this type of alignment is a dual-
dial indicator and the most common conﬁguration is that
shown in Figure 54.16.

Mounting conﬁguration and readings

Dual runout gages are rigidly mounted on special ﬁxtures
attached to the two mating shafts. The runout gages are
mounted so that readings can be obtained for both shafts
with one 360° rotation.

When the reverse-dial ﬁxture is mounted on mating
shafts, the dials initially should be adjusted to their zero
point. Once the dials are zeroed, slowly rotate the shafts in
90° increments. Record runout readings from both gages,
being sure to record the positive or negative sign, when
the ﬁxture is at the 12, 3, 6, and 9 o’clock positions.

Limitations

There are potential errors or problems that limit the accu-
racy of this alignment technique. The common ones in-
clude data recording errors, failure to correct for indicator
sag, mechanical looseness in the ﬁxture installation, and
failure to properly zero and/or calibrate the dial indicator.

Data recording One of the most common errors made
with this technique is reversing the 3 and 9 o’clock read-
ings. Technicians have a tendency to reverse their ori-
entation to the machine train during the alignment pro-
cess. As a result, they often reverse the orientation of the
recorded data.

To eliminate this problem, always acquire and record
runout readings facing away from the stationary machine
component. In this orientation, the 3 o’clock data is taken
with the ﬁxture oriented at 90° (horizontal) to the right of
the shafts. The 9 o’clock position is then horizontal to the
left of the shafts.

The reverse dial indicator ﬁxture is com-
Indicator sag
prised of two mounting blocks, which are rigidly ﬁxed
to each of the mating shafts. The runout gages, or dial
indicators, are mounted on long, relatively small diameter
rods, which are held by the mounting blocks. Because of
this conﬁguration, there is always some degree of sag or
deﬂection in the ﬁxtures

Mechanical looseness As with all measurement instru-
mentation, proper mounting techniques must be followed.
Any looseness in the ﬁxture mounting or at any point
within the ﬁxture will result in errors in the alignment
readings.

It is very important that the
Zeroing and calibrating
indicator dials be properly zeroed and calibrated before
use. Zeroing is performed once the ﬁxture is mounted on
the equipment to be aligned at the 12 o’clock position. It
is accomplished either by turning a knob located on the
dial body or by rotating the dial face itself until the dial
reads zero. Calibration is performed in the instrument lab
by measuring known misalignments. It is important for
indicator devices to be calibrated before each use.

Alignment methods 54/997

Figure 54.17 Typical conﬁguration of a rim-and-face ﬁxture (Ref. 2)

The shafts are slowly rotated in a clockwise direction
in 90° increments. Measurements, including positive and
negative signs, should be recorded at the 12, 3, 6 and 9
o’clock positions.

54.5.2 Rim-and-face

Limitations

There are two variations of the rim-and-face methods.
One requires one rim reading and one face reading at
the stationary machine, where the dial indicator mount-
ing brackets and posts are attached to the machine to
be shimmed. The other method is identical, except that
the rim and face readings are taken at the machine to be
shimmed, where the dial indicator mounting brackets and
posts are attached to the stationary machine.

As with the reverse dial indicator method, the measur-
ing device used for rim-and-face alignment is also a dial
indicator. The ﬁxture has two runout indicators mounted
on a common arm as opposed to reverse-dial ﬁxtures,
which have two runout indicators mounted on two sepa-
rate arms.

The rim-and-face gages measure both the offset and
angularity for the movable machine train component only
(as compared to the reverse-dial method, which measures
offset and calculates angularity for both the stationary and
movable components). With the rim-and-face method, one
dial indicator is mounted perpendicular to the shaft, which
deﬁnes the offset of the movable shaft. The second indi-
cator is mounted parallel to the shaft, which registers the
angularity of the movable shaft. Figure 54.17 illustrates
the typical conﬁguration of a rim-and-face ﬁxture.

Mounting

As with the reverse dial alignment ﬁxture, proper mount-
ing of the rim-and-face ﬁxture is essential. The ﬁxture
must be rigidly mounted on both the stationary and mov-
able shafts. All mechanical linkages must be tight and
looseness held to an absolute minimum. Any ﬁxture move-
ment will distort both the offset and angularity readings
as the shafts are rotated through 360°.

Rim-and-face measurements are made in exactly the
same manner as those of reverse-dial indicator methods.

Rim-and-face alignment is subject to the same errors as
those of the reverse-dial indicator system. As with that
system, care must be taken to insure proper orientation
with the equipment and accurate recording of the data.

Note that rim-and-face alignment cannot be used when
there is any end play, or axial movement, in the shafts
of either the stationary or movable machine-train compo-
nents. Since the dial indicator that is mounted parallel to
the shaft is used to measure the angularity of the shafts,
any axial movement or ‘ﬂoat’ in either shaft will distort
the measurement.

54.5.3 Optical or laser

Optical or laser alignment systems are based on the
same principles as the reverse-dial method, but replace
the mechanical components such as runout gages and
cantilevered mounting arms with an optical device such
as a laser. As with the reverse-dial method, offset is
measured and angularity is calculated.

A typical system, which is shown in Figure 54.18, uses
two transmitter/ sensors rigidly mounted on ﬁxtures simi-
lar to the reverse-dial apparatus. When the shaft is rotated
to one of the positions of interest (i.e., 12 o’clock, 3
o’clock, etc.), the transmitter projects a laser beam across
the coupling. The receiver unit detects the beam and the
offset and angularity are determined and recorded.

Advantages

systems offer

Optical-alignment
several advantages.
Because laser ﬁxtures eliminate the mechanical linkage
and runout gages, there is no ﬁxture sag. This greatly
increases the accuracy and repeatability of
the data
obtained using this method.

54/998 Shaft Alignment

Figure 54.18 Typical optical or laser alignment system

Most of the optical-alignment systems incorporate a
micro-processing unit, which eliminates recording errors
commonly found with reverse-dial indicator and rim-and-
face methods. Optical systems automatically maintain the
proper orientation and provide accurate offset and angu-
larity data, virtually eliminating operator error.

These microprocessor-based systems automatically cal-
culate correction factors. If the ﬁxtures are properly moun-
ted and the shafts are rotated to the correct positions, the
system automatically calculates and displays the appropri-
ate correction for each foot of the movable machine-train
component. This feature greatly increases the accuracy of
the alignment process.

Disadvantages

light,

Since optical-alignment systems are dependent on the
transmission of a laser beam, which is a focused beam
of
they are susceptible to problems in some
environments. Heat waves, steam, temperature variations,
strong sunlight, and dust can distort the beam. When this
happens, the system will not perform accurately.

One method that can be used to overcome most of the
environment-induced problems is to use plastic tubing to
shield the beam. This tubing can be placed between the
transmitter and receiver of the optical-alignment ﬁxture. It
should be sized to permit transmission and reception of the
light beam, but small enough to prevent distortion caused
by atmospheric or environmental conditions. Typically, 2-
inch, thin-wall tubing provides the protection required for
most applications.

54.6 Alignment procedures
This section discusses the procedures for obtaining the
measurements needed to align two classes of equipment:
(1) horizontally installed units and (2) vertically installed
units. The procedures for performing the initial alignment
check for offset and angularity and for determining how
much correction to make is presented.

Prior to taking alignment measurements, however, re-
member that it is necessary to remove any soft-foot that is

present, making sure that the proper nut-tightening proce-
dure is followed, and to correct for indicator sag (except
when using the optical-alignment method).

Horizontal units

There are two parts to making alignment measurements
on horizontally mounted units, which are typically taken
using the reverse-dial indicator method. The ﬁrst part of
the procedure is to perform an initial alignment check by
obtaining readings for the stationary and movable machi-
nes. The second part is to compare these values to the
manufacturer’s (i.e., desired) tolerances and to compute
the difference between the actual readings and the desired
readings.

The difference in the vertical readings is the amount of
shim required to align the machine at the coupling for both
vertical offset and angularity. The difference in the hori-
zontal readings is the distance at the coupling to move the
MTBM. These distances, however, must be converted to
corrections to be made at the machine feet, computations
that are made using rise and run concepts.

Initial alignment check

It is necessary to ﬁrst obtain a complete set of indica-
tor readings with the machines at ambient temperature,
or non-operating condition. Figure 54.19 shows a hypo-
thetical set of readings (i.e., top or 12 o’clock, right or
3 o’clock, bottom or 6 o’clock, and left or 9 o’clock)
taken for the stationary machine shaft, ‘A,’ and the mov-
able shaft, ‘B’. The following is the procedure to be
followed for obtaining these readings.
ž The indicator bar either must be free of sags or com-

pensated for in the readings.

O

T1

O

T2

+12

L1

A

+24

R1

L2

–26

B

–22

R2

+36

B1

–48

B2

T2

B

L2

R2

B2

M a c h i n e   B   M o v e a b l e

T1

L1

A

R1

B1

M a c h i n e   A   S t a t

i o n a r y

Figure 54.19 Hypothetical present state, or actual, dial-indicator
readings

replace the coupling.

as indicated in Figure 54.19.

ž Check the coupling for concentricity. If not concentric,
ž Zero the dial at top of the coupling.
ž Record the readings at 90° increments taken clockwise
ž For any reading on a shaft, the algebraic sum of the left
and right (9 o’clock and 3 o’clock) must equal the top
and bottom (12 o’clock and 6 o’clock). The calculations
below are for the example illustrated in Figure 54.19, in
which shafts A and B are out of alignment as illustrated
by the difference in the sums of the (L C R) readings
for shafts A and B and the difference in the sums of
the (T C B) readings for A and B.

Shaft A:
L1 C R1 D C12
C (cid:13)C24(cid:14) D C36
T1 C B1 D 0
C (cid:13)C36(cid:14) D C36

Shaft B:
L2 C R2 D (cid:2)26
C (cid:13)(cid:2)22(cid:14) D (cid:2)48
T2 C B2 D 0
C (cid:13)(cid:2)48(cid:14) D (cid:2)48

Note, however, that this difference, which represents
the amount of misalignment at the coupling, is not the
amount of correction needed to be performed at the
machine feet. This must be determined using rise and
run concepts.
ž The dial indicator should start at mid-range and not
exceed the total range. In other words, do not peg the
indicator. If misalignment exceeds the indicator span, it
will be necessary to roughly align the machine before
proceeding.

Determining corrections or amount of shim

With horizontally mounted units, it is possible to cor-
rect both angularity and offset with one adjustment. In
order to compute the adjustments needed to achieve the
desired alignment, it is necessary to establish three hori-
zontal measurements. These measurements are critical to
the success of any alignment and must be accurate to
16 inch (see Figure 54.20). Again, the procedure
within 1
described here is for the reverse dial indicator method
(see Figure 54.16).

1. Determine the distance, D1, between the dial indicators.

Machine A

Machine A
stationary

Indicator planes

D1

8"

D1 12"

Mounting feet

centerline

Machine B

Machine B
moveable

D3 24"

Alignment procedures 54/999

2. It is also necessary to know the distance from the indi-
cator plane of the stationary machine, or Machine ‘A’,
to the near adjustment plane of the MTBM, or Machine
‘B’. This is the distance between the indicator plane
of Machine ‘A’ to the near foot (Nf) of Machine ‘B’
and is referred to as D2.

3. The distance between the indicator plane of Machine
‘A’ to the far adjustment plane is needed. This distance
is referred to as D3 and is the distance between the
indicator plane of Machine ‘A’ to the far foot (Ff) of
Machine ‘B’.

The vertical and horizontal adjustments necessary to
move Machine ‘B’ from the actual position (Figure 54.19
readings) to the desired state of alignment (Figure 54.21
readings) are determined using the equations below. Note
that the desired state of alignment is obtained from man-
ufacturer’s tolerances. (When using manufacturer’s tol-
erances, it is important to know if they compensate for
thermal growth.)

For example: The shim adjustment at the near foot (Nf)
and far foot (Ff) for the readings in Figures 54.19 and
54.21 can be determined by using the vertical movement
formulas shown below. Since the top readings equal zero,
only the bottom readings are needed in the calculation.

2

V1 D B3 (cid:2) B1
V2 D B4 (cid:2) B2
Nf D V2 ð D2
Ff D V2 ð D3

D1

2

2

D (cid:13)(cid:2)10(cid:14) (cid:2) (cid:13)C36(cid:14)
D (cid:2)23
C V1 D (cid:13)C20(cid:14) (cid:2) (cid:13)(cid:2)48(cid:14)
(cid:2) V1 D (cid:13)C11(cid:14) ð (cid:13)C12(cid:14)
(cid:2) V1 D (cid:13)C11(cid:14) ð (cid:13)C24(cid:14)

2

8

D1

8

C (cid:13)(cid:2)23(cid:14) D C11

(cid:2) (cid:13)(cid:2)23(cid:14) D C40

(cid:2) (cid:13)(cid:2)23(cid:14) D C56

For Nf, at near foot of ‘B’, add 0.040-inch (40 mil) shims.
For Ff, at the far foot of ‘B’, add 0.056-inch (56 mil)
shims.

For example: The side-to-side movement at Nf and Ff
can be determined in the horizontal movement formula:

H1 D (cid:13)R3 (cid:2) L3(cid:14) (cid:2) (cid:13)R1 (cid:2) L1(cid:14)

2

2

D [(cid:13)(cid:2)15(cid:14) (cid:2) (cid:13)C5(cid:14)] (cid:2) [(cid:13)C24(cid:14) (cid:2) (cid:13)C12(cid:14)]

H2 D (cid:13)R4 (cid:2) L4(cid:14) (cid:2) (cid:13)R2 (cid:2) L2(cid:14)

C H1

D [(cid:13)C6(cid:14) (cid:2) (cid:13)C14(cid:14)] (cid:2) [(cid:13)(cid:2)22(cid:14) (cid:2) (cid:13)(cid:2)26(cid:14)]

D (cid:2)16

C (cid:13)(cid:2)16(cid:14) D (cid:2)22

2

2

O

T1

O

T2

+12

L1

A

+24

R1

L2

–26

B

–22

R2

+36

B1

–48

B2

1

2

3

4

Figure 54.20 Reverse-dial indicator alignment setup

Figure 54.21 Desired dial indicator state readings at ambient con-
ditions

54/1000 Shaft Alignment

Nf D H2 ð D2
Ff D H2 ð D3

D1

D1

(cid:2) H1 D (cid:13)(cid:2)22(cid:14) ð (cid:13)C12(cid:14)
(cid:2) H1 D (cid:13)(cid:2)22(cid:14) ð (cid:13)C24(cid:14)

8

8

(cid:2) (cid:13)(cid:2)16(cid:14) D (cid:2)17

(cid:2) (cid:13)(cid:2)16(cid:14) D (cid:2)50

For Nf, at near foot of ‘B’, move right 0.017 inch.
For Ff, at far foot of ‘B’, move right 0.050 inch.

Vertical units

The alignment process for most vertical units is quite dif-
ferent than that used for aligning horizontally mounted
units. The major reason is that most vertical units are not
designed to allow realignment to be performed under the
assumption that they will always ﬁt together perfectly.
Field checks, however, have proven this assumption to be
wrong in a vast majority of cases. Although it is quite
difﬁcult to correct misalignment on a vertical unit, it is
essential that it be done to increase reliability and decrease
maintenance costs.

Initial alignment check

The following procedure can be used on vertical units to
obtain angularity and offset values needed to compare
with recommended manufacturer’s (i.e., desired) toler-
ances in order to determine if a unit is out of alignment.
Perform an alignment check on the unit using the reverse-
dial indicator method.
ž Install brackets and dial
indicators as illustrated in
ž Check the alignment in two planes using the following
directional designators: ‘north/south’ and ‘east/west’.

Figure 54.22.

Consider the point of reference nearest to you as being
‘south,’ which corresponds to the ‘bottom’ position of
a horizontal unit. Note: Indicator sag does not occur
when readings are taken as indicated below.
ž Perform the ‘north/south’ alignment checks by setting
the indicator dials to ‘zero’ on the ‘north’ side and take
the readings on the ‘south’ side.
ž Perform the ‘east/west’ alignment checks by setting the
indicator dials to ‘zero’ on the ‘west’ side and take the
readings on the ‘east’ side.
ž Record the distance between the dial indicator center-
ž Record the distance from the centerline of the coupling
ž Record ‘zero’ for the distance, D2, from the Indicator
ž Record the distance, D3, from Indicator A to the ‘bot-
ž Set the top dial indicator to ‘zero’ when it is in the

A to the ‘top foot’ of the movable unit.

tom foot’ of the movable unit.

to the top dial indicator.

lines, D1.

‘north’ position.

position and obtain a reading.

North/south alignment check
ž Rotate shafts 180° until the top indicator is in the ‘south’
ž Rotate shafts 180° again and check for repeatability of
‘zero’ on the ‘north’ side, then another 180° to check
for repeatability of reading obtained on the ‘south’ side.
Note: If results are not repeatable, check bracket and
indicators for looseness and correct as necessary. If
repeatable, record the ‘south’ reading.
ž Rotate the shafts until the bottom dial indicator is in
ž Rotate the shafts 180° and record ‘south’ side reading.

the ‘north’ position and set it to ‘zero’.

Check for repeatability.

Top view

North

Side view

Dial indicators
(for rim readings)

West

Motor

East

Motor

South

Distance from
coupling C to
dial indicator C
L

L

Distance
between
indicator
readings

Motor flange

Base plate

Dial indicator A

Motor shaft

Flexible coupling
Pump shaft

Dial indicator B

Bracket (typ) C  IMS 1984

Figure 54.22 Proper dial indicator and bracket positioning when performing a vertical pump alignment

‘west’ position and set it to ‘zero’.

East/west alignment check
ž Rotate the shafts until the top dial indicator is in the
ž Rotate the shafts 180° and obtain the reading on the
ž Rotate the shafts until the bottom dial indicator is in
ž Rotate the shafts 180° and again obtain the reading on

the ‘west’ position and set it to ‘zero’.

‘east’ side. Check for repeatability.

the ‘east’ side. Check for repeatability.

Determining corrections

If the unit must be realigned, with vertical units it is nec-
essary to use the rim-and-face method to obtain offset and
angularity readings. Unlike horizontally mounted units, it
is not possible to correct both angularity and offset with
one adjustment. Instead, we must ﬁrst correct the angular
misalignment in the unit by shimming, and then correct
the offset by properly positioning the motor base ﬂange
on the baseplate.

Because most units are designed in such a manner that
realignment is not intended, it is necessary to change this
design feature. Speciﬁcally, the ‘rabbet ﬁt’ between the
motor ﬂange and the baseplate is the major hindrance to
realignment.

Therefore, before proceeding with the alignment me-
thod, one should consider that the rabbet ﬁt is designed
to automatically ‘center’ the motor during installation. In
theory, this should create a condition of perfect alignment
between the motor and the driven-unit shafts. The rabbet
ﬁt is not designed to support the weight of the unit or
resist the torque during start-up or operation; the motor
ﬂange and hold-down bolts are designed to do this. Since
the rabbet ﬁt is merely a positioning device, it is quite
permissible to ‘by-pass’ it. This may be accomplished by
either of the following:

Alignment procedures 54/1001

ž Machining off the entire male portion.
ž Grinding off the male and/or female parts as necessary.

Angularity correction

There are three steps to follow when correcting for angu-
larity. The ﬁrst step is to obtain initial readings. The next
step is to obtain corrected readings. The third step is to
shim the machine.

The following procedure is for

Step 1: Initial readings
obtaining initial readings.
ž Change the position of the bottom dial indicator so that
it can obtain the ‘face readings’ of the lower bracket
(see Figure 54.23).
ž Looking from the ‘south’ side, identify the hold-down
bolt at the ‘north’ position and label it #1. Proceeding
clockwise, number each hold-down bolt until all are
numbered (see Figure 54.24).
ž Determine the largest negative reading, which occurs at
the widest point, by setting the bottom dial indicator to
‘zero’ at point #1. This should be in line with centerline
of hold-down bolt #1. Record the reading.
ž Turn the shafts in a clockwise direction and record the
data at each hold-down bolt centerline until readings
have been taken at all positions.
ž Use Figure 54.25 as an example of how the readings
are taken. Remember that all readings are taken from
the position of looking down on the lower bracket.

Note: We will always be looking for the largest negative
((cid:2)) reading. If all readings are positive (C), the initial
set point of zero will be considered the largest negative
((cid:2)) reading. In Figure 54.25, the largest negative reading
occurs at point #7.

Key
X = Bolt circle radius
Y = Radius of dial indicator travel

Shaft
CL

CL

X

Motor shaft

Dial indicator B

(for face readings)

Used for angularity

correction

Figure 54.23 Bottom dial indicator in position to obtain ‘‘face readings’’ (Ref. 1)

Y

Hold-down bolt (typ)
Mounting flange
Machine base

Dial indicator A
(for rim readings)

Used for offset correction

Flexible coupling
Pump shaft

54/1002 Shaft Alignment

Base plate

Motor flange

Bracket

Shafts
Hold-down bolt

7

8

6

1

5

2

4

3

Dial indicator

Note:  Dial indicator B will be set up for taking face readings off of the lower bracket
(as indicated by       ).  Readings will then be taken at positions indicated by      .

Figure 54.24 Diagram of a baseplate with hold-down bolts numbered

1st reading (0)

(set indicator to "0")

2nd reading (+7)

3rd reading (+16)

4th reading (+8)

7

7

8

6

8

6

1

5

5th reading (+1)

1

5

2

4

2

4

3

7

3

7

8

6

8

6

1

5

6th reading (–8)

1

5

2

4

2

4

3

7

8

6

1

5

7th reading (–16)

3

7

8

6

1

5

2

4

2

4

3

7

3

7

8

6

8

6

1

5

8th reading (–9)

1

5

2

4

2

4

3

3

Figure 54.25 Determining the largest negative reading and the widest point

Step 2: Corrected readings Obtain corrected readings
with the following procedure.
ž Rotate the shafts until the indicator is again at the point
ž Set the dial indicator to ‘zero’ at this point and take
another complete set of readings. Using Figure 54.25
as an example, set the dial indicator to ‘zero’ at point

where the largest negative reading occurs.

#7 (in line with centerline of bolt #7). The results of
readings at the other hold-down bolt centerlines are as
follows:

#1
#2
#3
#4

C16
C23
C32
C24

#5
#6
#7
#8

C17
C8
0
C7

Alignment procedures 54/1003

they are being made. ‘North/south’ and ‘east/west’ desig-
nations are used to describe the positioning of the unit.

North/south correction

Perform shimming with the following

Step 3: Shimming
procedure:
ž Measure the hold-down bolt circle radius and the radius
ž Compute the shim multiplier, X/Y, where:

of dial indicator travel as shown in Figure 54.26.

X D Bolt circle radius
Y D Radius of indicator travel
For example: If X D 900 and Y D 400, the shim multi-
plier is 9/4 D 2.25. The necessary shimming at each
bolt equals the shim multiplier (2.25) times the bolt’s
corrected reading:

#1
#2
#3
#4
#5
#6
#7
#8

–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

2.25 ð 16 D 36 mils D 0.036 inch
2.25 ð 23 D 52 mils D 0.052 inch
2.25 ð 32 D 72 mils D 0.072 inch
2.25 ð 24 D 54 mils D 0.054 inch
2.25 ð 17 D 38 mils D 0.038 inch
2.25 ð 8 D 18 mils D 0.018 inch
2.25 ð 0 D 0 mils D 0.000 inch
2.25 ð 7 D 16 mils D 0.016 inch

Offset correction

Once the angularity has been corrected by making the nec-
essary shim adjustments at each of the hold-down bolts, it
is necessary to correct the offset by sliding the moveable
unit (i.e., motor in this example) on the baseplate. The
top dial indicator is used to monitor the movements as

position. Set it to ‘zero’.

the ‘south’ position) and record the reading.

The following is the procedure for making the ‘north/
south’ corrections.
ž Rotate shafts until the top dial indicator is in the ‘north’
ž Rotate the shafts 180° (until the top dial indicator is in
ž Determine movement necessary to correct the offset in
this plane by dividing the reading by 2. This is the
amount of movement (in mils) required. Direction of
movement can be determined by the following rule: If
the sign of the reading is positive (C), the motor must
be moved toward the ‘north’. If negative ((cid:2)), it must
be moved toward the ‘south’.

East/west correction

‘west’ position. Set it to ‘zero’.

the ‘east’ position) and record the reading.

The following is the procedure for making the ‘east/west’
corrections.
ž Rotate the shafts until the top dial indicator is in the
ž Rotate the shafts 180° (until the top dial indicator is in
ž Determine movement necessary to correct the offset
in this plane by dividing the reading by 2. This value
will be the amount of movement (in mils) required.
Direction of movement can be determined by the fol-
lowing rule: If the sign of the reading is positive (C),
the moveable unit (motor) must be moved toward the
‘west’. If negative ((cid:2)), it must be moved toward the
‘east’.

Key
X = Bolt circle radius
Y = Radius of dial indicator travel

Shaft
CL

CL

X

Motor shaft

Dial indicator B
(for face readings

Figure 54.26 Determining bolt circle radius and radius of dial indicator travel

Y

CL

CL

Hold-down bolt (typ)
Mounting flange
Machine base
Dial indicator A
(for rim readings)

Flexible coupling

Pump shaft

54/1004 Shaft Alignment

Making the offset corrections

After the amounts and directions of required offset adjust-
ments have been obtained, the next step is to actually align
the equipment. This is accomplished using two dial indi-
cators with magnetic bases, which are installed on the
south (or north) and west (or east) sides of the mounting
ﬂange of the moveable unit or motor. See Figure 54.27 for
an illustration of this setup. It is important to zero both
dial indicators before making adjustments and to watch
both dial indicators while moving the unit.

Note: The motor position on the baseplate must be
adjusted in order to align the equipment, which may re-
quire machining or grinding of the rabbet ﬁt. Remember,
however, the rabbet ﬁt is only a positioning device and is
not a structural support.

54.7 Computations, adjustments, and
plots

Once initial alignment readings are obtained, they must
be adjusted for changes in the machine train, which can
be caused by process movement, vibration, or thermal
growth. These adjustments must be made in order to
achieve proper alignment at normal operating conditions.
Once readings are obtained, the use of graphical plotting
helps the technician visualize misalignment and the
necessary corrections that must be made and to catch
computation errors.

54.7.1 Adjustments for thermal growth

Thermal growth generally refers to the expansion of mate-
rials with increasing temperature. For alignment purposes,
thermal growth is the shaft centerline movement associ-
ated with the change in temperature from the alignment
process, which is generally performed at ambient condi-
tions, to normal operating conditions. Such a temperature
difference causes the elevation of one or both shafts to

change and misalignment to result. Temperature changes
after alignment produce changes that may affect both off-
set and angularity of the shafts and can be in the vertical
plane, horizontal plane, or any combination.

Proper alignment practices, therefore, must compensate
for thermal growth. In effect, the shafts must be misaligned
in the ambient condition so they will become aligned when
machine temperatures reach their normal operating range.
Generally, manufacturers supply dial indicator readings at
ambient conditions, which compensate for thermal move-
ment and result in colinear alignment at normal service
conditions. When thermal rise information is supplied by
the manufacturer or from machine history records, the
necessary compensation may be made during the initial
alignment procedure.

However, information concerning thermal rise is not
available for all equipment. Generally, manufacturers of
critical machinery, such as centrifugal air compressors and
turbines, will include information relating to thermal rise in
their installation manuals in the section dealing with align-
ment. When not available, the only method to determine
the exact amount of compensation necessary to correct for
thermal rise is referred to as a ‘hot alignment check’.

Thermal compensation targets

A simple procedure for determining thermal compensa-
tion targets is to calculate the movement of the shaft due
to temperature change at the bearings or feet, whichever
is more convenient. Note that calculated thermal growth
is highly dependent upon the accuracy of the temperature
assumptions and is useful only for initial alignment esti-
mates. Therefore, the targets developed from the follow-
ing procedure should be revised when better data becomes
available.

The formula for this calculation is very simple and very
accurate. It requires three factors: (1) the difference in
temperature of the machine housing between the feet and
shaft bearings, (2) the distance between the shaft cen-
terline and the feet, and (3) the coefﬁcient of thermal
expansion of the machine housing material. The thermal

Motor

Dial indicators should
be placed against the
base of the motor flange
to monitor the movement
in both north/south &
east/west planes while
making offset corrections

South

Figure 54.27 Placement of dial indicators to monitor offset corrections

Mounting bolt

Mounting flange

growth between any two points of any metal can be pre-
dicted by the formula:
Growth D T ð L ð C
Where:
T D Temperature difference between the feet and shaft
L D Length between points (often the vertical distance
from the shim plane to the shaft centerline), inches
C D Growth factor (coefﬁcient of thermal expansion)
Growth factors (mils/inch/°F) for common materials are:

bearings, °F

Aluminum
Bronze
Cast iron, gray
Stainless steel
Mild steel, ductile iron

0.0126
0.0100
0.0059
0.0074
0.0063

Note: The thermal growth formula is usually applied only
to the vertical components of the machine. While the for-
mula can be applied to horizontal growth, this direction
is often ignored.

For vertical growth, L is usually taken as the vertical
height from the bottom of the foot where shims touch
the machine to the shaft centerline. In the case where
the machine is mounted on a base that has signiﬁcant
temperature variations along its length, L is the vertical
distance from the concrete or other constant temperature
baseline to the shaft centerline.

Hot alignment check

A hot alignment check is performed exactly like an ambi-
ent alignment check with the added safety precautions
required for hot machinery. The accuracy of a hot align-
ment check depends on how soon after shutdown dial
indicator readings can be taken. Readings may be taken
within a few minutes with the use of shaft-mounted brack-
ets that span a ﬂexible coupling. To speed up the process,
assemble the brackets to the fullest extent possible prior
to shutdown so that they need only be bolted to the shafts
once the machine stops rotating.

54.8 Graphical plotting
The graphical plotting technique for computing initial
alignment can be performed with any of the three types of
measurement ﬁxtures (i.e. reverse dial indicator, rim-and-
face, or optical). The following steps should be followed
when plotting alignment problems:

1. Determine the following dimensions from the machine

component

train, which are illustrated in Figure 54.28:
FBS D Front-foot to back-foot of stationary train
CFS D Front-foot to coupling of stationary train
CF D Coupling to front-foot of movable train
FB D Front-foot to back-foot of movable train
CD D Coupling or working diameter

component

component

component

Graphical plotting 54/1005

CD

FBS

CFS

CF

FB

Figure 54.28 Graphical plotting measurements

2. On graph or grid paper, pick a horizontal line to be
used as the baseline (also referred to as reference line
or zero-line). This line usually crosses the center of
the page from left to right and represents the rotational
centerline of the stationary machine-train component.
3. Determine the number of inches or mils that each
block on the graph paper represents by ﬁrst ﬁnding
the distance from the back-foot of the stationary com-
ponent to the back-foot of the movable component.
Then determine the inches or mils per square that will
spread the entire machine train across the graph paper.

4. Plot inches or mils horizontally from left to right.
5. Plot mils from top to bottom vertically. As a rule,
assign 0.5, 1, 2, 5, 10 mils to each vertical step. Note
that this scale may need to be changed in cases where
excessive misalignment is present.

Known foot correction values

The following steps should be followed to plot mis-
alignment when foot correction values are known (see
Figure 54.29):

1. On the baseline, start at the left end and mark the
stationary back-foot. From the back-foot and moving
right, count the number of squares along the baseline
corresponding to FFS. Mark the stationary front-foot
location.

2. Starting at the stationary front-foot and moving right,
count the number of squares along the baseline corre-
sponding to CFS and mark the coupling location.

3. Continue this process until the entire machine train is

indicated on the graph.

4. To plot misalignment, locate the CFS or coupling on
the horizontal baseline. From that point, count up or
down on the vertical axis until the amount of offset
is located on the mils scale. Mark this point on the
graph. Use care to insure that the location is accurately
located. Positive values should be above the horizontal
baseline and negative values below the line.

5. Locate the FBM or back-foot of the movable compo-
nent. Move either up or down vertically on the scale
to the point of the offset measurement. Mark this point
on the graph. Remember, positive values are above the
horizontal baseline and negative values below the line.
6. Draw a line from the back-foot (FBM) of the mov-
able component or MTBM through the front-foot of
the movable component toward the vertical line where
the stationary coupling is located. Draw a short ver-
tical line at the coupling end of the line. Finish the

54/1006 Shaft Alignment

+5.0

+2.0

+1.0

+0.5

s

l
i

M

FBs

FFs

1

6

FFM

3

5

FBM

3

4

CFs

2

–0.5

–1.0

–2.0

–5.0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

65

Figure 54.29 Graphical plotting of known foot correction

Inches

s

l
i

M

+5.0

+2.0

+1.0

+0.5

–0.5

–1.0

–2.0

–5.0

3

1

2

CFs

CD

4

5

FFM

4

6

FBM

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

65

Figure 54.30 Graphical plotting of known coupling results

Inches

MTBM by drawing little squares to represent the feet,
darkening the line from the back-foot to coupling, and
darkening the coupling line.

Known coupling results
When plotting coupling misalignment, use the following
steps instead of those from the preceding section (see
Figure 54.30).

1. Start at the stationary coupling location and, moving
up or down the vertical axis (mils), count the number
of squares corresponding to the vertical or horizontal
offset. Move up for positive offset and down for nega-
tive offset. Mark a point, which is the MTBM coupling
location.

2. Start at the MTBM coupling center and, moving right
on the horizontal line, count the number of squares
corresponding to the CD dimension (see Figure 54.28)
and lightly mark the point. From this point, move up
or down vertically on the mils scale the number of
squares corresponding to the total mils of angularity
per diameter (CD) and mark lightly.

Graphical plotting 54/1007

3. From the MTBM coupling center, draw a line through
the point marked in the preceding step and extending
past the MTBM back-feet location. This line is the
MTBM centerline.

4. Now place the MTBM feet. Starting at the MTBM
coupling and moving right along a horizontal line,
count the number of squares corresponding to CF (see
Figure 54.28). Then move straight vertically to the
MTBM centerline and mark the location of the front-
foot. Then starting at the MTBM front-foot and moving
right, count the number of squares corresponding to
FB. From this point, move vertically to the MTBM
centerline and mark the location of the MTBM back-
foot.

5. Draw a short line perpendicular to the shaft centerline
to mark the MTBM coupling. Finish the MTBM by
drawing little squares to represent the feet, and dark-
ening the line from the back-foot to the coupling.

6. Correction of the MTBM machine-train component can
now be measured directly from the graph. Locate the
appropriate MTBM foot location and read the actual
correction from the vertical or mils scale.

55

Rotor Balancing

R Keith Mobley
The Plant Performance Group

Contents

55.1 Introduction
55.2 Sources of vibration due to mechanical imbalance

55/1011

55.2.1 Assembly errors 55/1011

55/1009

55/1011

55.3 Theory of imbalance

55/1012

55.3.1 Static
55.3.2 Dynamic

55/1012

55.4 Points of imbalance
55.5 Coupled imbalance
55.6 Balancing
55/1013

55/1012

55/1013
55/1013

55/1014
55.6.1 In-place balancing
55.6.2 Precision balancing
55/1014
55.6.3 Techniques using phase shift

55/1015

55.7 Balancing standards

55/1015

55.1 Introduction
Mechanical imbalance is one of the most common causes
of machinery vibration and is present to some degree
on nearly all machines that have rotating parts or rotors.
Static, or standing, imbalance is the condition when there
is more weight on one side of a centerline than the other.
However, a rotor may be in perfect static balance and not
be in a balanced state when rotating at high speed.

If the rotor is a thin disc, careful static balancing may be
accurate enough for high speeds. However, if the rotat-
ing part is long in proportion to its diameter, and the
unbalanced portions are at opposite ends or in different
planes, the balancing must counteract the centrifugal force
of these heavy parts when they are rotating rapidly.

This section provides information needed to understand
and solve the majority of balancing problems using a
vibration/balance analyzer, a portable device that detects
the level of imbalance, misalignment, etc., in a rotating
part based on the measurement of vibration signals.

55.2 Sources of vibration due to
mechanical imbalance
Two major sources of vibration due to mechanical im-
balance in equipment with rotating parts or rotors are:
(1) assembly errors and (2) incorrect key length guesses
during balancing.

55.2.1 Assembly errors

Even when parts are precision balanced to extremely close
tolerances, vibration due to mechanical imbalance can
be much greater than necessary due to assembly errors.
Potential errors include relative placement of each part’s
center of rotation, location of the shaft relative to the bore,
and cocked rotors.

Center of rotation

Assembly errors are not simply the additive effects of tol-
erances, but also include the relative placement of each
part’s center of rotation. For example, a ‘perfectly’ bal-
anced blower rotor can be assembled to a ‘perfectly’ bal-
anced shaft and yet the resultant imbalance can be high.
This can happen if the rotor is balanced on a balancing
shaft that ﬁts the rotor bore within 0.5 mil (0.5 thou-
sandths of an inch) and then is mounted on a standard
cold-rolled steel shaft allowing a clearance of over 2 mils.
Shifting any rotor from the rotational center on which
it was balanced to the piece of machinery on which it
is intended to operate can cause an assembly imbalance
four to ﬁve times greater than that resulting simply from
tolerances. For this reason, all rotors should be balanced
on a shaft having a diameter as nearly the same as the
shaft on which it will be assembled.

For best results, balance the rotor on its own shaft rather
than on a balancing shaft. This may require some rotors
to be balanced in an overhung position, a procedure the
balancing shop often wishes to avoid. However, it is better
to use this technique rather than being forced to make

Sources of vibration due to mechanical imbalance 55/1011

too many balancing shafts. The extra precision balance
attained by using this procedure is well worth the effort.

Method of locating position of shaft relative to bore

Imbalance often results with rotors that do not incorporate
setscrews to locate the shaft relative to the bore (e.g.,
rotors that are end clamped). In this case, the balancing
shaft is usually horizontal. When the operator slides the
rotor on the shaft, gravity causes the rotor’s bore to make
contact at the 12 o’clock position on the top surface of the
shaft. In this position, the rotor is end-clamped in place
and then balanced.

If the operator removes the rotor from the balancing
shaft without marking the point of bore and shaft contact,
it may not be in the same position when reassembled.
This often shifts the rotor by several mils as compared
to the axis on which it was balanced, thus causing an
imbalance to be introduced. The vibrations that result are
usually enough to spoil what should have been a precision
balance and produce a barely acceptable vibration level.
In addition, if the resultant vibration is resonant with some
part of the machine or structure, a more serious vibration
could result.

To prevent this type of error, the balancer operators and
those who do ﬁnal assembly should follow the follow-
ing procedure. The balancer operator should permanently
mark the location of the contact point between the bore
and the shaft during balancing. When the equipment is
reassembled in the plant or the shop, the assembler should
also use this mark. For end-clamped rotors, the assembler
should slide the bore on the horizontal shaft, rotating both
until the mark is at the 12 o’clock position and then clamp
it in place.

Cocked rotor

If a rotor is cocked on a shaft in a position different from
the one in which it was originally balanced, an imbal-
anced assembly will result. If, for example, a pulley has
a wide face that requires more than one setscrew, it could
be mounted on-center, but be cocked in a different posi-
tion than during balancing. This can happen by reversing
the order in which the setscrews are tightened against a
straight key during ﬁnal mounting as compared to the
order in which the setscrews were tightened on the bal-
ancing arbor. This can introduce a pure couple imbalance,
which adds to the small couple imbalance already existing
in the rotor and causes unnecessary vibration.

For very narrow rotors (e.g., disc-shaped pump impel-
lers or pulleys), the distance between the centrifugal forces
of each half may be very small. Nevertheless, a very high
centrifugal force, which is mostly counterbalanced stat-
ically by its counterpart in the other half of the rotor,
can result. If the rotor is slightly cocked, the small axial
distance between the two very large centrifugal forces
causes an appreciable couple imbalance, which is often
several times the allowable tolerance. This is due to the
fact that the centrifugal force is proportional to half the
rotor weight (at any one time, half of the rotor is pulling
against the other half) times the radial distance from the
axis of rotation to the center of gravity of that half.

55/1012 Rotor Balancing

this,

To prevent

the assembler should tighten each
setscrew gradually – ﬁrst one, then the other, and back
again – so that the rotor is aligned evenly. On ﬂange-
mounted rotors such as ﬂywheels, it is important to clean
the mating surfaces and the bolt holes. Clean bolt holes
are important because high couple imbalance can result
from the assembly bolt pushing a small amount of dirt
between the surfaces, cocking the rotor. Burrs on bolt
holes also can produce the same problem.

Other

Other assembly errors can cause vibration. Variances in
bolt weights when one bolt is replaced by one of a differ-
ent length or material can cause vibration. For setscrews
that are 90° apart, the tightening sequence may not be
the same at ﬁnal assembly as during balancing. To pre-
vent this, the balancer operator should mark which was
tightened ﬁrst.

Key length

With a keyed-shaft rotor, the balancing process can intro-
duce machine vibration if the assumed key length is dif-
ferent from the length of the one used during operation.
Such an imbalance usually results in a mediocre or ‘good’
running machine as opposed to a very smooth running
machine.

For example, a ‘good’ vibration level that can be obta-
ined without following the precautions described in this
section is amplitude of 0.12 in/sec. (3.0 mm/sec). By fol-
lowing the precautions, the orbit can be reduced to about
0.04 in/sec (1 mm/sec). This smaller orbit results in longer
bearing or seal life, which is worth the effort required to
make sure that the proper key length is used.

When balancing a keyed-shaft rotor, one half of the
key’s weight is assumed part of the shaft’s male portion.
The other half is considered part of the female portion that
is coupled to it. However, when the two rotor parts are
sent to a balancing shop for re-balancing, the actual key is
rarely included. As a result, the balance operator usually
guesses at the key’s length, makes up a half key, and then
balances the part. (Note: A ‘half key’ is of full-key length,
but only half-key depth.)

In order to prevent an imbalance from occurring, do not
allow the balance operator to guess the key length. It is
strongly suggested that the actual key length be recorded
on a tag that is attached to the rotor to be balanced. The tag
should be attached in such a way that another device (such
as a coupling half, pulley, fan, etc.) cannot be attached
until the balance operator removes the tag.

55.3 Theory of imbalance
Imbalance is the condition when there is more weight on
one side of a centerline than the other. This condition
results in unnecessary vibration, which generally can be
corrected by the addition of counterweights. There are
four types of imbalance: (1) static, (2) dynamic, (3) cou-
ple, and (4) dynamic imbalance combinations of static and
couple.

55.3.1 Static

Static imbalance is single-plane imbalance acting through
the center of gravity of the rotor, perpendicular to the
shaft axis. The imbalance also can be separated into two
separate single-plane imbalances, each acting in-phase or
at the same angular relationship to each other (i.e., 0°
apart). However, the net effect is as if one force is act-
ing through the center of gravity. For a uniform straight
cylinder such as a simple paper machine roll or a multi-
grooved sheave, the forces of static imbalance measured
at each end of the rotor are equal in magnitude (i.e., the
ounce-inches or gram-centimeters in one plane are equal
to the ounce-inches or gram-centimeters in the other).

In static imbalance, the only force involved is weight.
For example, assume that a rotor is perfectly balanced
and, therefore, will not vibrate regardless of the speed of
rotation. Also, assume that this rotor is placed on fric-
tionless rollers or ‘knife edges.’ If a weight is applied on
the rim at the center of gravity line between two ends,
the weighted portion immediately rolls to the 6 o’clock
position due to the gravitational force.

When rotation occurs, static imbalance translates into
a centrifugal force. As a result, this type of imbalance
is sometimes referred to as ‘force imbalance’ and some
balancing machine manufacturers use the word ‘force’
instead of ‘static’ on their machines. However, when the
term ‘force imbalance’ was just starting to be accepted as
the proper term, an American standardization committee
on balancing terminology standardized the term ‘static’
instead of ‘force.’ The rationale was that the role of the
standardization committee was not to determine and/or
correct right or wrong practices, but to standardize those
currently in use by industry. As a result, the term ‘static
imbalance’ is now widely accepted as the international
standard and, therefore, is the term used in this chapter.

55.3.2 Dynamic

Dynamic imbalance is any imbalance resolved to at least
two correction planes (i.e., planes in which a balancing
correction is made by adding or removing weight). The
imbalance in each of these two planes may be the result
of many imbalances in many planes, but the ﬁnal effects
can be characterized to only two planes in almost all
situations.

An example of a case where more than two planes
are required is ﬂexible rotors (i.e., long rotors running at
high speeds). High speeds are considered to be revolu-
tions per minute (rpm) higher than about 80 per cent of
the rotor’s ﬁrst critical speed. However, in over 95 per
cent of all run-of-the-mill rotors (e.g., pump impellers,
armatures, generators, fans, couplings, pulleys, etc.), two-
plane dynamic balance is sufﬁcient. Therefore, ﬂexible
rotors are not covered in this document because of the
low number in operation and the fact that balancing oper-
ations are almost always performed by specially trained
people at the manufacturer’s plant.

In dynamic imbalance, the two imbalances do not have
to be equal in magnitude to each other, nor do they have
to have any particular angular reference to each other. For

example, they could be 0 (in-phase), 10, 80, or 180° from
each other.

Although the deﬁnition of dynamic imbalance covers
all two-plane situations, an understanding of the compo-
nents of dynamic imbalance is needed so that its causes
can be understood. Also, an understanding of the compo-
nents makes it easier to understand why certain types of
balancing do not always work with many older balancing
machines for overhung rotors and very narrow rotors. The
primary components of dynamic imbalance include: num-
ber of points of imbalance, amount of imbalance, phase
relationships, and rotor speed.

55.4 Points of imbalance
The ﬁrst consideration of dynamic balancing is the num-
ber of imbalance points on the rotor, as there can be
more than one point of imbalance within a rotor assem-
bly. This is especially true in rotor assemblies with more
than one rotating element, such as a three-rotor fan or
multi-stage pump.

Amount of imbalance

The amplitude of each point of imbalance must be known
to resolve dynamic balance problems. Most dynamic bal-
ancing machines or in situ balancing instruments are able
to isolate and deﬁne the speciﬁc amount of imbalance at
each point on the rotor.

Phase relationship

The phase relationship of each point of imbalance is the
third factor that must be known. Balancing instruments
isolate each point of imbalance and determine their phase
relationship. Plotting each point of imbalance on a polar
plot does this. In simple terms, a polar plot is a circu-
lar display of the shaft end. Each point of imbalance is
located on the polar plot as a speciﬁc radial, ranging from
0 to 360°.

Rotor speed

Rotor speed is the ﬁnal factor that must be considered.
Most rotating elements are balanced at their normal run-
ning speed or over their normal speed range. As a result,
they may be out of balance at some speeds that are not
included in the balancing solution. As an example, the
wheel and tires on your car are dynamically balanced for
speeds ranging from zero to the maximum expected speed
(i.e., 80 miles per hour). At speeds above 80 miles per
hour, they may be out of balance.

55.5 Coupled imbalance
Couple imbalance is caused by two equal non-colinear
imbalance forces that oppose each other angularly (i.e.,
180° apart). Assume that a rotor with pure couple imbal-
ance is placed on frictionless rollers. Because the imbal-
ance weights or forces are 180° apart and equal, the rotor
is statically balanced. However, a pure couple imbalance

Balancing 55/1013

occurs if this same rotor is revolved at an appreciable
speed.

Each weight causes a centrifugal force, which results
in a rocking motion or rotor wobble. This condition can
be simulated by placing a pencil on a table, then at one
end pushing the side of the pencil with one ﬁnger. At
the same time, push in the opposite direction at the other
end. The pencil will tend to rotate end-over-end. This end-
over-end action causes two imbalance ‘orbits,’ both 180°
out of-phase, resulting in a ‘wobble’ motion.

Dynamic imbalance combinations of static and
couple

Visualize a rotor that has only one imbalance in a single
plane. Also, visualize that the plane is not at the rotor’s
center of gravity, but is off to one side. Although there
is no other source of couple, this force to one side of the
rotor not only causes translation (parallel motion due to
pure static imbalance), but also causes the rotor to rotate
or wobble end-over-end as from a couple. In other words,
such a force would create a combination of both static
and couple imbalance. This again is dynamic imbalance.
In addition, a rotor may have two imbalance forces
exactly 180° opposite to each other. However, if the forces
are not equal in magnitude, the rotor has a static imbalance
in combination with its pure couple. This combination is
also dynamic imbalance.

Another way of looking at it is to visualize the usual
rendition of dynamic imbalance – imbalance in two sep-
arate planes at an angle and magnitude relative to each
other not necessarily that of pure static or pure couple.

For example, assume that the angular relationship is
80° and the magnitudes are 8 units in one plane and 3
units in the other. Normally, you would simply balance
this rotor on an ordinary two-plane dynamic balancer and
that would be satisfactory. But for further understanding
of balancing, imagine that this same rotor is placed on
static balancing rollers, whereby gravity brings the static
imbalance components of this dynamically out-of-balance
rotor to the 6 o’clock position.

The static imbalance can be removed by adding coun-
ter-balancing weights at the 12 o’clock position. Although
statically balanced, however, the two remaining forces
result in a pure couple imbalance. With the entire static
imbalance removed, these two forces are equal in magni-
tude and exactly 180° apart. The couple imbalance can be
removed, as with any other couple imbalance, by using a
two-plane dynamic balancer and adding counterweights.
Note that whenever you hear the word ‘imbalance,’
mentally add the word ‘dynamic’ to it. Then when you
hear ‘dynamic imbalance,’ mentally visualize a ‘combi-
nation of static and couple imbalance.’ This will be of
much help not only in balancing, but in understanding
phase and coupling misalignment as well.

55.6 Balancing
Imbalance is one of the most common sources of major
vibration in machinery. It is the main source in about

55/1014 Rotor Balancing

40 per cent of the excessive vibration situations. The vib-
ration frequency of imbalance is equal to one times the
rpm (l ð rpm) of the imbalanced rotating part.

Before a part can be balanced using the vibration ana-

lyzer, certain conditions must be met:
ž The vibration must be due to mechanical imbalance,
ž Weight corrections can be made on the rotating com-

and

ponent.

In order to calculate imbalance units, simply multiply
the amount of imbalance by the radius at which it is act-
ing. In other words, one ounce of imbalance at a one-inch
radius will result in one oz-in of imbalance. Five ounces
2 oz-ins of imbal-
at one-half inch radius results in 2 1
ance. (Dynamic imbalance units are measured in ounce-
inches, oz-in, or gram-millimeters, g-mm.) Although this
refers to a single plane, dynamic balancing is performed
in at least two separate planes. Therefore, the tolerance
is usually given in single-plane units for each plane of
correction.

Important balancing techniques and concepts to be dis-
cussed in the sections to follow include: in-place balanc-
ing, single-plane versus two-plane balancing, precision
balancing, techniques that make use of a phase shift, and
balancing standards.

55.6.1 In-place balancing

In most cases, weight corrections can be made with the
rotor mounted in its normal housing. The process of bal-
ancing a part without taking it out of the machine is called
in-place balancing. This technique eliminates costly and
time consuming disassembly. It also prevents the pos-
sibility of damage to the rotor, which can occur dur-
ing removal, transportation to and from the balancing
machine, and reinstallation in the machine.

Single-plane versus two-plane balancing

The most common rule of thumb is that a disc-shaped
rotating part usually can be balanced in one correction
plane only, whereas parts that have appreciable width
require two-plane balancing. Precision tolerances, which
become more meaningful for higher performance (even
on relatively narrow face width), suggest two-plane bal-
ancing. However, the width should be the guide, not the
diameter to width ratio.

For example, a 20-inch wide rotor could have a large
enough couple imbalance component
in its dynamic
imbalance to require two-plane balancing. (Note: The
couple component makes two-plane balancing important.)
Yet, if the 20-inch width is on a rotor of large diameter to
qualify as a ‘disc-shaped rotor,’ even some of the balance
manufacturers erroneously would call for a single-plane
balance.

It is true that the narrower the rotor, the less the chance
for a large couple component and, therefore, the greater
the possibility of getting by with a single-plane balance.
For rotors over 4 to 5 inches in width, it is best to check
for real dynamic imbalance (or for couple imbalance).

Unfortunately, you cannot always get by with a static-
and couple-type balance, even for very narrow ﬂywheels
used in automobiles. Although most of the ﬂywheels are
only 1 inch to 1 1
2 inches wide, more than half have enough
couple imbalance to cause excessive vibration. This obvi-
ously is not due to a large distance between the planes
(width), but due to the fact that the ﬂywheel’s mount-
ing surface can cause it to be slightly cocked or tilted.
Instead of the ﬂywheel being 90° to the shaft axis, it may
be perhaps 85 to 95°, causing a large couple despite its
narrow width.

This situation is very common with narrow and disc-
shaped industrial
rotors such as single-stage turbine
wheels, narrow fans, and pump impellers. The original
manufacturer often accepts the guidelines supplied by
others and performs a single-plane balance only. By ob-
taining separate readings for static and couple, the manu-
facturer could and should easily remove the remaining
couple.

An important point to remember is that static imbalance
is always removed ﬁrst. In static and couple balancing,
remove the static imbalance ﬁrst and then remove the
couple.

55.6.2 Precision balancing

Most original-equipment manufacturers balance to com-
mercial tolerances, a practice that has become accept-
able to most buyers. However, due to frequent customer
demands, some of the equipment manufacturers now pro-
vide precision balancing. Part of the driving force for pro-
viding this service is that many large mills and reﬁneries
have started doing their own precision balancing to toler-
ances considerably closer than those used by the original-
equipment manufacturer. For example, the International
Standards Organization (ISO) for process plant machin-
ery calls for a G6.3 level of balancing in its balancing
guide (refer to Table 55.1). This was calculated based on
rotors running free in space with a restraint vibration of
6.3 mm/sec (0.25 in/sec) vibration velocity.

can be

Precision balancing requires a G2.5 guide number,
which is based on 2.5 mm/sec (0.1 in/sec) vibration
velocity. As
seen from this, 6.3 mm/sec
(0.25 in/sec) balanced rotors will vibrate more than the
2.5 mm/sec (0.1 in/sec) precision balanced rotors. Many
vibration guidelines now consider 2.5 mm/sec (0.1 in/sec)
‘good,’ creating the demand for precision balancing.
Precision balancing tolerances can produce velocities of
0.01 in/sec (0.3 mm/sec) and lower.

It is true that the extra weight of non-rotating parts (i.e.,
frame and foundation) reduces the vibration somewhat
from the free-in-space amplitude. However, it is possible
to reach precision balancing levels in only two or three
additional runs, providing the smoothest running rotor.
The extra effort to the balance operator is minimal because
he already has the ‘feel’ of the rotor and has the proper
setup and tools in hand. In addition, there is a large ﬁnan-
cial pay off for this minimal extra effort due to decreased
bearing and seal wear.

55.6.3 Techniques using phase shift

If we assume that there is no other source of vibration
other than imbalance (i.e., we have perfect alignment, a
perfectly straight shaft, etc.), it is readily seen that pure
static imbalance gives in-phase vibrations and pure couple
imbalance gives various phase relationships. Compare the
vertical reading of a bearing at one end of the rotor with
the vertical reading at the other end of the rotor to deter-
mine how that part is shaking vertically. Then compare the
horizontal reading at one end with the horizontal read-
ing at the other end to determine how the part is shaking
horizontally.

If there is no resonant condition to modify the resultant
vibration phase, then the phase for both vertical and hor-
izontal readings are essentially the same even though the
vertical and horizontal amplitudes do not necessarily cor-
respond. In actual practice, this may be slightly off due to
other vibration sources such as misalignment. In perform-
ing the analysis, what counts is that when the source of
the vibration is primarily from imbalance, then the verti-
cal reading phase differences between one end of the rotor
and the other will be very similar to the phase differences
when measured horizontally. For example, vibrations 60°
out of phase vertically would show 60° out of phase hor-
izontally within 20 per cent.

However, the horizontal reading on one bearing will
not show the same phase relationship as the vertical read-
ing on the same bearing. This is due to the pickup axis
being oriented in a different angular position, as well
as the phase adjustment due to possible resonance. For
example, the horizontal vibration frequency may be below
the horizontal resonance of various major portions of mac-
hinery, whereas the vertical vibration frequency may be

Balancing standards 55/1015

above the natural frequency of the ﬂoor supporting the
machine.

First, determine how the rotor is vibrating vertically
by comparing ‘vertical only’ readings with each other.
Then, determine how the rotor is vibrating horizontally.
If, the rotor is shaking horizontally and vertically and the
phase differences are relatively similar, then the source
of vibration is likely to be imbalance. However, before
coming to a conclusion, be sure that other l ð rpm sources
(e.g., bent shaft, eccentric armature, misaligned coupling)
are not at fault.

55.7 Balancing standards

The ISO has published standards for acceptable limits
for residual imbalance in various classiﬁcations of rotor
assemblies. Balancing standards are given in oz-ins or
lb-ins per pound of rotor weight or the equivalent in
metric units (g-mm/kg). The oz-ins are for each correc-
tion plane for which the imbalance is measured and cor-
rected.

Caution must be exercised when using balancing stan-
dards. The recommended levels are for residual imbal-
ance, which is deﬁned as imbalance of any kind that
remains after balancing.

Figure 55.1 and Table 55.1 are the norms established
for most rotating equipment. Additional information can
be obtained from ISO 5406 and 5343. Similar standards
are available from the American National Standards Insti-
tute (ANSI) in their publication ANSI S2.43-1984.

So far, there has been no consideration of the angular
positions of the usual two points of imbalance relative
to each other or the distance between the two correction

)
b

l
/
.

n
i
-
b
l
(
 
t

i

h
g
e
w

 
r
o

t

o
r
 
f

o

 
t
i

n
u

 
r
e
p

 

l

e
c
n
a
a
b
n
u

 
l

a
u
d
s
e
r
 

i

l

e
b
a

t

p
e
c
c
A

1

0.1

0.01

0.001

0.0001

0.000010

Balancing of rotating machinery

G 830
G 250

G 100
G 40

G16

G 6.3

G 2.5
G 1

G 04

100

1000

10,000

Speed (RPM)

100,000

10,000

1,000

1,00

10

1

0.1

Figure 55.1 Balancing standards: residual imbalance per unit rotor weight (Ref. 5)

)
g
k
/
m
m
m
g
(
 
t

 

i

h
g
e
w

 
r
o

t

o
r
 
f

o

 
t
i

n
u

 
r
e
p

 

l

e
c
n
a
a
b
n
u

 
l

a
u
d
s
e
r
 

i

l

t

e
b
a
p
e
c
c
A

55/1016 Rotor Balancing

Table 55.1 Balance Quality Grades for Various Groups of Rigid Rotors

Balance quality
grade

Type of rotor

G4,000

G1,600
G630

G250
G100

G40

G16

G6.3

G2.5

G1
G0.4

Crankshaft drives of rigidly mounted slow marine diesel engines with uneven number of
cylinders.
Crankshaft drives of rigidly mounted large two-cycle engines.
Crankshaft drives of rigidly mounted large four-cycle engines; crankshaft drives of
elastically mounted marine diesel engines.
Crankshaft drives of rigidly mounted fast four-cylinder diesel engines.
Crankshaft drives of fast diesel engines with six or more cylinders; complete engines
(gasoline or diesel) for cars and trucks.
Car wheels, wheel rims, wheel sets, drive shafts; crankshaft drives of elastically
mounted fast four-cycle engines (gasoline and diesel) with six or more cylinders;
crankshaft drives for engines of cars and trucks.
Parts of agricultural machinery; individual components of engines (gasoline or diesel)
for cars and trucks.
Parts or process plant machines; marine main-turbine gears; centrifuge drums; fans;
assembled aircraft gas-turbine rotors; ﬂy wheels; pump impellers; machine-tool and
general machinery parts; electrical armatures.
Gas and steam turbines; rigid turbo-generator rotors; rotors; turbo-compressors;
machine-tool drives; small electrical armatures; turbine-driven pumps.
Tape recorder and phonograph drives; grinding-machine drives.
Spindles, disks, and armatures of precision grinders; gyroscopes.

Source: ‘Balancing Quality of Rotating Rigid Bodies,’ Shock and Vibration Handbook,
S2.19-1975.

ISO 1940-1973; ANSI

planes. For example, if the residual imbalances in each
of the two planes were in-phase, they would add to each
other to create more static imbalance.

Most balancing standards are based on a residual imbal-
ance and do not include multi-plane imbalance. If they
are approximately 180° to each other, they form a couple.
If the distance between the planes is small, the result-
ing couple is small; if the distance is large, the couple is
large. A couple creates considerably more vibration than
when the two residual imbalances are in-phase. Unfor-
tunately, there is nothing in the balancing standards that
considers this.

Another problem could also result in excessive im-
balance-related vibration even though the ISO standards
were met. The ISO standards call
for a balancing
grade of G6.3 for components such as pump impellers,
normal electric armatures, and parts of process plant
machines. This results in an operating speed vibration

velocity of 6.3 mm/sec (0.25 in/sec) vibration velocity.
However, practice has shown that an acceptable vibration
velocity is 0.1 ins/sec and the ISO standard of G2.5 is
required. Because of these discrepancies, changes in the
recommended balancing grade are expected in the future.

References

1. Block, H. P. and Geitner, F. K., IntroductiontoMachineryRelia-

bilityAssessment, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York (1990).

2. Block, H. P. and Geitner, F. K., MachineryFailureAnalysisand
Troubleshooting, Gulf Publishing Company Book Division, Hou-
ston, (1986).

3. Oberg, E., Jones, F. D., Horton, H. L. and Ryffel, H., Machinery’s
Handbook25, 25th edn, Industrial Press Inc., New York (1996).
4. Nelson, C. A., Millwrights and Mechanics Guide, Macmillan

Publishing Company, New York (1986).

5. Harris, C. M., ShockandVibrationHandbook, 3rd edn, McGraw-

Hill Book Company (1988).

56/1017

56

Packing and
Seals

R Keith Mobley
The Plant Performance Group

Contents

56.1 Introduction
56.2 Seal fundamentals

56/1019

56/1019

56.2.1 Shaft seal requirements 56/1019
56.2.2 Sealing devices
56/1019
56.2.3 Components and assembly
56.2.4 How to prevent leakage
56.2.5 Sealing area and lubrication
56.2.6 Advantages and disadvantages

56/1021

56/1020

56/1021

56/1021

56.3 Mechanical seal design

56/1021

56.3.1 Single-coil spring seal 56/1021
56.3.2 Positive drive seal 56/1022

56.4 Installation procedures

56/1022

56.4.1 Packed stufﬁng box
56.4.2 Mechanical seals

56/1022

56/1025

56.1 Introduction
All machines such as pumps and compressors that handle
liquids or gases must include a reliable means of seal-
ing around their shafts so that the ﬂuid being pumped
or compressed does not leak. To accomplish this, the
machine design must include a seal located at various
points to prevent leakage between the shaft and hous-
ing. In order to provide a full understanding of seal and
packing use and performance, this chapter discusses fun-
damentals, seal design, and installation practices.

56.2 Seal fundamentals
Shaft seal requirements and two common types of seals,
packed stufﬁng boxes and simple mechanical seals, are
described and discussed in this section. A packed box
typically is used on slow- to moderate-speed machin-
ery where a slight amount of leakage is permissible. A
mechanical seal is used on centrifugal pumps or other
type of ﬂuid handling equipment where shaft sealing is
critical.

Seal fundamentals 56/1019

ﬂuid from the pump and allows a centrifugal pump to
move ﬂuids to considerable heights above the centerline
of the pump.

This highly pressurized ﬂuid also ﬂows around the im-
peller to a lower pressure zone where, without an adequate
seal, the ﬂuid will leak along the drive shaft to the outside
of the pump housing. The lower pressure results from a
pump design intended to minimize the pressure behind
the impeller. Note that this design element is speciﬁcally
aimed at making drive shaft sealing easier.

Reducing the pressure acting on the ﬂuid behind the
impeller can be accomplished by two different methods,
or a combination of both, on an open-impeller unit. One
method is where small pumping vanes are cast on the
backside of the impeller. The other method is for balance
holes to be drilled through the impeller to the suction eye.
In addition to reducing the driving force behind shaft
leakage, decreasing the pressure differential between the
front and rear of the impeller using one or both of the
methods described above greatly decreases the axial thrust
on the drive shaft. This decreased pressure prolongs the
thrust bearing life signiﬁcantly.

56.2.1 Shaft seal requirements

56.2.2 Sealing devices

Figure 56.1 shows the cross-section of a typical end-suc-
tion centrifugal pump where the ﬂuid to be pumped enters
the suction inlet at the eye of the impeller. Due to the
relatively high speed of rotation, the ﬂuid collected within
the impeller vanes is held captive because of the close
tolerance between the front face of the impeller and the
pump housing.

With no other available escape route, the ﬂuid is passed
to the outside of the impeller by centrifugal force and
into the volute where its kinetic energy is converted into
pressure. At the point of discharge (i.e., discharge nozzle),
the ﬂuid is highly pressurized compared to its pressure at
the inlet nozzle of the pump. This pressure drives the

Discharge

Housing

Suction

Back-head

Impeller

Shaft

Balancing holes
Pumping vanes

Figure 56.1 Cross-section of a typical end-suction centrifugal
pump (Ref. 3)

Two sealing devices are described and discussed in this
section: packed stufﬁng boxes and simple mechanical
seals.

Packed stufﬁng boxes

Before the development of mechanical seals, a soft pliable
material or packing placed in a box and compressed into
rings encircling the drive shaft was used to prevent leak-
age. Compressed packing rings between the pump housing
and the drive shaft, accomplished by tightening the gland-
stufﬁng follower, formed an effective seal.

Figure 56.2 shows a typical packed box that seals with
rings of compressed packing. Note that if this packing
is allowed to operate against the shaft without adequate
lubrication and cooling, frictional heat eventually builds
up to the point of total destruction of the packing and
damage to the drive shaft. Therefore, all packed boxes
must have a means of lubrication and cooling.

Lubrication and cooling can be accomplished by allow-
ing a small amount of leakage of ﬂuid from the machine
or by providing an external source of ﬂuid. When leakage
from the machine is used, leaking ﬂuid is captured in col-
lection basins that are built into the machine housing or
baseplate. Note that periodic maintenance to recompress
the packing must be carried out when leakage becomes
excessive.

Packed boxes must be protected against ingress of dirt
and air, which can result in loss of resilience and lubricity.
When this occurs, packing will act like a grinding stone,
effectively destroying the shaft’s sacriﬁcial sleeve, and
cause the gland to leak excessively. When the sacriﬁcial
sleeve on the drive shaft becomes ridged and worn, it
should be replaced as soon as possible. In effect, this
continuing maintenance program can readily be measured
in terms of dollars and time.

56/1020 Packing and Seals

A. Packing chamber
or box

B. Packing rings

Simple mechanical seal

Mechanical seals, which are typically installed in appli-
cations where no leakage can be tolerated, are described
and discussed in this section. Toxic chemicals and other
hazardous materials are primary examples of applications
where mechanical seals are used.

56.2.3 Components and assembly

Figure 56.3 shows the components of a simple mechanical
seal, which is made up of the following:
ž Coil spring;
ž ‘O’ ring shaft packing;
ž Seal ring.

The seal ring ﬁts over the shaft and rotates with it. The
spring must be made from a material that is compatible
with the ﬂuid being pumped so that it will withstand cor-
rosion. Likewise, the same care must be taken in material
selection of the ‘O’ ring and seal materials. The insert and
insert ‘O’ ring mounting are installed in the bore cavity
provided in the gland ring. This assembly is installed in
a pump-stufﬁng box, which remains stationary when the
pump shaft rotates.

A carbon graphite insertion ring provides a good bear-
ing surface for the seal ring to rotate against. It is also
resistive to attack by corrosive chemicals over a wide
range of temperatures.

Figure 56.4 depicts a simple seal that has been installed
in the pump’s stufﬁng box. Note how the coil spring sits
against the back of the pump’s impeller, pushing the pack-
ing ‘O’ ring against the seal ring. By doing so, it remains
in constant contact with the stationary insert ring.

As the pump shaft rotates, the shaft packing rotates with
it due to friction. (In more complex mechanical seals, the
shaft-packing element is secured to the rotating shaft by
Allen screws.) There is also friction between the spring,

C. Gland follower
    or stuffing gland

Figure 56.2 Typical packed stufﬁng box

Uneven pressures can be exerted on the drive shaft due
to irregularities in the packing rings, resulting in irregular
contact with the shaft. This causes uneven distribution of
lubrication ﬂow at certain locations, producing acute wear
and packed-box leakages. The only effective solution to
this problem is to replace the shaft sleeve or drive shaft
at the earliest opportunity.

Rotating ring

Stationary ring

Pressure
chamber

Force

Rotating shaft

Force

Static seal point
Stationary unit

to housing

Static seal point
Rotating unit

to shaft

Rotary seal point
Mating ring faces

in contact

Figure 56.3 Simple mechanical seal

Point B

Point C

Point D

Point E

Point A

Figure 56.4 Pump stufﬁng box seal

the impeller, and the compressed ‘O’ ring. Thus, the whole
assembly rotates together when the pump shaft rotates.
The stationary insert ring is located within the gland bore.
The gland itself is bolted to the face of the stufﬁng box.
This part is held stationary due to the friction between the
‘O’ ring insert mounting and the inside diameter (ID) of
the gland bore as the shaft rotates within the bore of the
insert.

56.2.4 How to prevent leakage

Having discussed how a simple mechanical seal is assem-
bled in the stufﬁng box, we must now consider how the
pumped ﬂuid is stopped from leaking out to the atmo-
sphere.

In Figure 56.4, the path of the ﬂuid along the drive shaft
is blocked by the ‘O’ ring shaft packing at Point A. Any
ﬂuid attempting to pass through the seal ring is stopped by
the ‘O’ ring shaft packing at Point B. Any further attempt
by the ﬂuid to pass through the seal ring to the atmo-
spheric side of the pump is prevented by the gland gasket
at Point C and the ‘O’ ring insert at Point D. The only
other place where ﬂuid can potentially escape is the joint
surface around Point E, which is between the rotating car-
bon ring and the stationary insert. (Note: The surface areas
of both rings must be machined-lapped perfectly ﬂat, mea-
sured in light bands with tolerances of one-millionth of
an inch.)

56.2.5 Sealing area and lubrication

The efﬁciency of all mechanical seals is dependent upon
the condition of the sealing area surfaces. The surfaces
remain in contact with each other for the effective working
life of the seal and are friction-bearing surfaces.

As in the compressed packing gland, lubrication also
must be provided in mechanical seals. The sealing area
surfaces should be lubricated and cooled with pumped
ﬂuid (if it is clean enough) or an outside source of clean
ﬂuid. However, much less lubrication is required with this
type of seal because the frictional surface area is smaller

Mechanical seal designs 56/1021

than that of a compressed packing gland and the contact
pressure is equally distributed throughout the interface. As
a result, a smaller amount of lubrication passes between
the seal faces to exit as leakage.

In most packing glands there is a measurable ﬂow of
lubrication ﬂuid between the packing rings and the shaft.
With mechanical seals, the faces ride on a microscopic
ﬁlm of ﬂuid that migrates between them, resulting in leak-
age. However, leakage is so slight that if the temperature
of the ﬂuid is above its saturation point at atmospheric
pressure, it ﬂashes off to vapor before it can be visually
detected.

56.2.6 Advantages and disadvantages

Mechanical seals offer a more reliable seal than com-
pressed packing seals. Because the spring in a mechanical
seal exerts a constant pressure on the seal ring, it auto-
matically adjusts for wear at the faces. Thus, the need for
manual adjustment is eliminated. Additionally, because
the bearing surface is between the rotating and stationary
components of the seal, the shaft or shaft sleeve does not
become worn. Although the seal will eventually wear out
and need replacing, the shaft will not experience wear.

However, much more precision and attention to detail
must be given to the installation of mechanical seals com-
pared to conventional packing. Nevertheless, it is not un-
usual for mechanical seals to remain in service for many
thousands of operational hours if they have been properly
installed and maintained.

56.3 Mechanical seal designs
Mechanical seal designs are referred to as friction drives,
or single-coil spring seals, and positive drives.

56.3.1 Single-coil spring seal

The seal shown back in Figure 56.4 depicts a typical fric-
tion drive or single-coil spring seal unit. This design is
limited in its use because the seal relies on friction to
turn the rotary unit. Because of this, its use is limited to
liquids such as water or other non-lubricating ﬂuids. If
this type of seal is to be used with liquids that have natu-
ral lubricating properties, it must be mechanically locked
to the drive shaft.

Although this simple seal performs its function satis-
factorily, two drawbacks must be considered. Both draw-
backs are related to the use of a coil spring that is ﬁtted
over the drive shaft.
ž One drawback of the spring is the need for relatively
low shaft speeds because of a natural tendency of the
components to distort at high surface speeds. This makes
the spring push harder on one side of the seal than the
other, resulting in an uneven liquid ﬁlm between the
faces. This causes excessive leakage and wears at the
seal.
ž The other drawback is simply one of economics. Be-
cause pumps come in a variety of shaft sizes and speeds,
the use of this type of seal requires inventorying several
sizes of spare springs, which ties up capital.

56/1022 Packing and Seals

Figure 56.5 Conversion of a simple seal to positive drive

Nevertheless, the simple and reliable coil spring seal
has proven itself in the pumping industry and is often
selected for use despite its drawbacks. In regulated indus-
tries, this type of seal design far exceeds the capabilities
of a compressed packing ring seal.

56.3.2 Positive drive seal

There are two methods of converting a simple seal to
positive drive. Both methods, which use collars secured
to the drive shaft by setscrews, are shown in Figure 56.5.
In this ﬁgure, the end tabs of the spring are bent at 90°
to the natural curve of the spring. These end tabs ﬁt into
notches in both the collar and the seal ring. This design
transmits rotational drive from the collar to the seal ring
by the spring. Figure 56.5 also shows two horizontally
mounted pins that extend over the spring from the collar
to the seal ring.

56.4 Installation procedures
This section describes the installation procedures for
packed stufﬁng boxes and mechanical seals.

56.4.1 Packed stufﬁng box

This procedure provides detailed instructions on how
to repack centrifugal pump packed stufﬁng boxes or
glands. The methodology described here is applicable to
other gland sealed units such as valves and reciprocating
machinery.

Tool list

The following is a list of the tools needed to repack a
centrifugal pump gland:
ž Approved packing for speciﬁc equipment;
ž Mandrel sized to shaft diameter;
ž Packing ring extractor tool;

ž Packing board;
ž Sharp knife;
ž Approved cleaning solvent;
ž Lint-free cleaning rags.
Precautions
The following precautions should be taken in repacking a
packed stufﬁng box:
ž Ensure coordination with operations control.
ž Observe site and area safety precautions at all time.
ž Ensure equipment has been electrically isolated and
ž Ensure machine is isolated and depressurized with suc-

suitably locked out and tagged.

tion and discharge valves chained and locked shut.

Installation
The following are the steps to follow in installing a gland:

1. Loosen and remove nuts from the gland bolts.
2. Examine threads on bolts and nuts for stretching or

damage. Replace if defective.

3. Remove the gland follower from the stufﬁng box and
slide it along the shaft to provide access to the pack-
ing area.

4. Use packing extraction tool to carefully remove pack-

ing from the gland.

5. Keep the packing rings in the order they are extracted
from the gland box. This is important in evaluating
wear characteristics. Look for rub marks and any
other unusual markings that would identify opera-
tional problems.

6. Carefully remove the lantern ring. This is a grooved,
bobbin-like spool piece that is situated exactly on
the centerline of the seal water inlet connection to
the gland (Figure 56.6). Note: It is most important
to place the lantern ring under the seal water inlet
connection to ensure the water is properly distributed
within the gland to perform its cooling and lubricating
functions.

Installation procedures 56/1023

Figure 56.6 Lantern ring or seal cage

Indicator

Figure 56.7 Dial indicator check for run-out

7. Examine the lantern ring for scoring and possible
signs of crushing. Make sure the lantern ring’s out-
side diameter (OD) provides a sliding ﬁt with the
gland box’s internal dimension. Check that the lantern
ring’s ID is a free ﬁt along the pump’s shaft sleeve.
If the lantern ring does not meet this simple criterion,
replace it with a new one.

8. Continue to remove the rest of the packing rings as
previously described. Retain each ring in the sequence
that it was removed for examination.

9. Do not discard packing rings until they have been

thoroughly examined for potential problems.

10. Turn on the gland seal cooling water slightly to ensure
there is no blockage in the line. Shut the valve when
good ﬂow conditions are established.

11. Repeat Steps 1 through 10 with the other gland box.
12. Carefully clean out the gland stufﬁng boxes with a
solvent-soaked rag to ensure that no debris is left
behind.

13. Examine the shaft sleeve in both gland areas for ex-
cessive wear caused by poorly lubricated or over-
tightened packing.
Note: If the shaft sleeve is ridged or badly scratched
in any way, the split housing of the pump may have

to be split and the impeller removed for the sleeve to
be replaced. Badly installed and maintained packing
causes this.

14. Check total indicated runout (TIR) of the pump shaft
by placing a magnetic base-mounted dial indicator
on the pump housing and a dial stem on the shaft.
Zero the dial and rotate the pump shaft one full turn.
Record reading (Figure 56.7).
Note: If the TIR is greater than š0.002 inches, the
pump shaft should be straightened.

15. Determine the correct packing size before installing

using the following method (Figure 56.8):
Measure the ID of the stufﬁng box, which is the OD
at the packing (B), and the diameter of the shaft (A).
With this data, the packing cross-section size is cal-
culated by:
Packing cross-section D B (cid:4) A
The packing length is determined by calculating the
circumference of the packing within the stufﬁng box.
The centerline diameter is calculated by adding the
diameter of the shaft to the packing cross-section that
was calculated in the preceding formula. For example,

2

56/1024 Packing and Seals

B-A
2

Cross section

Determine the correct

cross sections:

OD (A)

OD (B)–

Figure 56.8 Selecting correct packing size

a stufﬁng box with a 4-inch ID and a shaft with a 2-
inch diameter will require a packing cross-section of
1 inch. The centerline of the packing would then be
3 inches.
Therefore, the approximate length of each piece of
packing would be:
Packing length D Centerline diameter ð 3.1416

D 3.0 ð 3.1416
D 9.43 inches

The packing should be cut approximately 1
inch
4
longer than the calculated length so that the end can
be bevel cut.

16. Controlled leakage rates easily can be achieved with

the correct size packing.

17. Cut the packing rings to size on a wooden man-
drel that is the same diameter as the pump shaft.
Rings can be cut either square (butt cut) or diagonally
(approximately 30°). Note: Leave at least a 1
16 inch
gap between the butts regardless of the type of cut
used. This permits the packing rings to move under
compression or temperature without binding on the
shaft surface.

18. Ensure that the gland area is perfectly clean and is
not scratched in any way before installing the packing
rings.

19. Lubricate each ring lightly before installing in the

stufﬁng box.
Note: When putting packing rings around the shaft,
use an “S” twist. Do not bend open. See Figure 56.9.
20. Use a split bushing to install each ring, ensuring that
the ring bottoms out inside the stufﬁng box. An offset
tamping stick may be used if a split bushing is not
available. Do not use a screwdriver.

21. Stagger the butt joints, placing the ﬁrst ring butt at
12 o’clock; the second at 6 o’clock; the third at 3
o’clock; the fourth at 9 o’clock; etc., until the pack-
ing box is ﬁlled (Figure 56.10). Note: When the last
ring has been installed, there should be enough room
to insert the gland follower 1
16 inches into the
stufﬁng box (Figure 56.11).

8 to 3

Figure 56.10 Stagger butt joints

"S" Twist

Wrong

Figure 56.9 Proper and improper installation of packing

Installation procedures 56/1025

1
8

inch to        inch

3
16

Stufﬁng box space

To properly receive the seal, the radial space and depth
of the stufﬁng box must be the same as the dimensions
shown on the seal assembly drawing.

Lateral or axial shaft movement (end play)

Install a dial indicator with the stem against the shoulder
of the shaft. Use a soft hammer or mallet to lightly tap the
shaft on one end and then on the other. Total indicated
end play should be between 0.001 and 0.004 inches. A
mechanical seal cannot work properly with a large amount
of end play or lateral movement. If the hydraulic condition
changes (as frequently happens), the shaft could ‘ﬂoat,’
resulting in sealing problems. Minimum end play is a
desirable condition for the following reasons:
ž Excessive end play can cause pitting, fretting, or wear
at the point of contact between the shaft packing in
the mechanical seal and the shaft or sleeve OD. As
the mechanical seal driving element is locked to the
shaft or sleeve, any excessive end play will result in
either overloading or under-loading the springs causing
excessive wear or leaks.
ž Excessive end play as a result of defective thrust bear-
ings can reduce seal performance by disturbing both
the established wear pattern and the lubricating ﬁlm.
ž A ﬂoating shaft can cause chattering, which results
in chipping of the seal faces, especially the carbon
element. Ideal mechanical seal performance requires
a uniform wear pattern and a liquid ﬁlm between the
mating contact faces.

Radial shaft movement (whip or deﬂection)

Install the dial indicator as close to the radial bearing as
possible. Lift the shaft or exert light pressure at the impeller
end. If more than 0.002 to 0.003 inches of radial movement
occurs, investigate bearings and bearing ﬁts (especially the
bore) for the radial bearing ﬁt. An oversized radial bearing
bore caused by wear, improper machining, or corrosion
will cause excessive radial shaft movement resulting in

Figure 56.11 Proper gland follower clearance

22. Install the lantern ring in its correct location within
the gland. Do not force the lantern ring into position
(Figure 56.12).

23. Tighten up the gland bolts with a wrench to seat and

form the packing to the stufﬁng box and shaft.

24. Loosen the gland nuts one complete turn and rotate

the shaft by hand to get running clearance.

25. Retighten the nuts ﬁnger tight only. Again, rotate the
shaft by hand to make sure the packing is not too
tight.

26. Contact operations to start the pump and allow the
stufﬁng box to leak freely. Tighten the gland bolts
one ﬂat at a time until the desired leakage is obtained
and the pump runs cool.

27. Clean up the work area and account for all tools

before returning them to the tool crib.

28. Inform operations of project status and complete all

paperwork.

29. After the pump is in operation, periodically inspect
the gland to determine its performance. If it tends
to leak more than the allowable amount, tighten by
turning the nuts one ﬂat at a time. Give the packing
enough time to adjust before tightening it more. If the
gland is tightened too much at one time, the packing
can be excessively compressed, causing unnecessary
friction and subsequent burn-out of the packing.

56.4.2 Mechanical seals

A mechanical seal’s performance depends on the oper-
ating condition of the equipment where it is installed.
Therefore, inspection of the equipment before seal instal-
lation can potentially prevent seal failure and reduce over-
all maintenance expenses.

Equipment check points

The pre-installation equipment inspection should include
the following: stufﬁng box space, lateral or axial shaft
movement (end play), radial shaft movement (whip or
deﬂection), shaft runout (bent shaft), stufﬁng box face
squareness, stufﬁng box bore concentricity, driver align-
ment, and pipe strain.

56/1026 Packing and Seals

Figure 56.12 Proper lantern ring installation

shaft whip and deﬂection. Minimum radial shaft movement
is important for the following reasons:
ž Excessive radial movement can cause wear, fretting, or
pitting of the shaft packing or secondary sealing ele-
ment at the point of contact between the shaft packing
and the shaft or sleeve OD.
ž Extreme wear at the mating contact faces will occur
when excessive shaft whip or deﬂection is present due
to defective radial bearings or bearing ﬁts. The contact
area of the mating faces will be increased, resulting in
increased wear and the elimination or reduction of the
lubricating ﬁlm between the faces, further shortening
seal life.

Shaft runout (bent shaft)

A bent shaft can lead to poor sealing and cause vibration.
Bearing life is greatly reduced and the operating condi-
tions of both radial and thrust bearings can be affected.

Clamp the dial indicator to the pump housing and mea-
sure the shaft runout at two or more points on the OD

of the impeller end of the shaft. Also measure the shaft
runout at the coupling end of the shaft. If the runout
exceeds 0.002 inches, remove the shaft and straighten or
replace it.

Stufﬁng box face squareness

With the pump stufﬁng box cover bolted down, clamp the
dial indicator to the shaft with the stem against the face
of the stufﬁng box. The total indicator runout should not
exceed 0.003 inches.

When the face of the stufﬁng box is ‘out-of-square,’
or not perpendicular to the shaft axis, the result can be
serious malfunction of a mechanical seal for the following
reasons:
ž The stationary gland plate that holds the stationary
insert or seat in position is bolted to the face of the
stufﬁng box. Misalignment will cause the gland to cock,
resulting in cocking of the stationary element. This
results in seal wobble or operation in an elliptical pat-
tern. This condition is a major factor in fretting, pitting,

and wearing of the mechanical seal shaft packing at the
point of contact with the shaft or sleeve.
ž A seal that is wobbling on the shaft can also cause
wear on the drive pins. Erratic wear on the face contact
causes poor seal performance.

Stufﬁng box bore concentricity

With the dial indicator set up as described above, place
the indicator stem well into the bore of the stufﬁng box.
The stufﬁng box should be concentric to the shaft axis to
within a 0.005 inch total indicator reading.

Eccentricity alters the hydraulic loading of the seal
faces, reducing seal life and performance. If the shaft is
eccentric to the box bore, check the slop, or looseness,
in the pump bracket ﬁts. Rust, atmospheric corrosion, or
corrosion from leaking gaskets can cause damage to these
ﬁts, making it impossible to ensure a stufﬁng box that is
concentric with the shaft. A possible remedy for this con-
dition is welding the corroded area and re-machining to
proper dimensions.

Driver alignment and pipe strain

Driver alignment
is extremely important and periodic
checks should be performed. Pipe strain can also damage
pumps, bearings, and seals.

In most plants, it is customary to blind the suction and
discharge ﬂanges of inactive pumps. These blinds should
be removed before the pump driver alignment is made or
the alignment job is incomplete.

After the blinds have been removed and as the ﬂanges
on the suction and discharge are being connected to the
piping, check the dial indicator reading on the OD of the
coupling half and observe movement of the indicator dial
as the ﬂanges are being secured. Deviation indicates pipe
strain. If severe strain exists, corrective measures should
be taken or damage to the pump and unsatisfactory seal
service can result.

Seal check points

ning faces of the seal ring and insert.

and spring pins are free in the pin holes or slots.

The following are important seal check points:
ž Ensure that all parts are kept clean, especially the run-
ž Check the seal rotary unit and make sure the drive pins
ž Check the setscrews in the rotary unit collar to see
that they are free in the threads. Setscrews should be
replaced after each use.
ž Check the thickness of all gaskets against the dimen-
sions shown on the assembly drawing. Improper gasket
thickness will affect the seal setting and the spring load
imposed on the seal.
ž Check the ﬁt of the gland ring to the equipment. Make
sure there is no interference or binding on the studs or
bolts or other obstructions. Be sure the gland ring pilot,
if any, enters the bore with a reasonable guiding ﬁt for
proper seal alignment.
ž Make sure all rotary unit parts of the seal ﬁt over the

shaft freely.

Installation procedures 56/1027
ž Check both running faces of the seal (seal ring and
insert) and be sure there are no nicks or scratches.
Imperfections of any kind on either of these faces will
cause leaks.

Installing the seal

proper order.

clean and free of burrs.

The following steps should be taken when installing a
seal:
ž Instruction booklets and a copy of the assembly draw-
ing are shipped with each seal. Be sure each is available
and read the instructions before starting installation.
ž Remove all burrs and sharp edges from the shaft or
shaft sleeve, including sharp edges of keyways and
threads. Worn shafts or sleeves should be replaced.
ž Check the stufﬁng box bore and face to ensure they are
ž The shaft or sleeve should be lightly oiled before the
seal is assembled to allow the seal parts to move freely
over it. This is especially desirable when assembling
the seal collar because the bore of the collar usually
has only a few thousandths of an inch clearance. Care
should be taken to avoid getting the collar cocked.
ž Install the rotary unit parts on the shaft or sleeve in the
ž Be careful when passing the seal gland ring and insert
over the shaft. Do not bring the insert against the shaft
because it might chip away small pieces from the edge
of the running face.
ž Wipe the seal faces clean and apply a clean oil ﬁlm
before completing the equipment assembly. A clean ﬁn-
ger, which is not apt to leave lint, will do the best job
when giving the seal faces the ﬁnal wiping.
ž Complete the equipment assembly, taking care when
ž Seat the gland ring and gland ring gasket to the face of
the stufﬁng box by tightening the nuts or bolts evenly
and ﬁrmly. Be sure the gland ring is not cocked. Tighten
the nuts or bolts only enough to affect a seal at the gland
ring gasket, usually ﬁnger tight and 1
4 of a turn with
a wrench. Excessively tightening the gland ring nut or
bolt will cause distortion that will be transmitted to the
running face, resulting in leaks.
ž If the seal assembly drawing is not available, the proper
seal setting dimension for inside seals can be deter-
mined as follows:
– Establish a reference mark on the shaft or sleeve

compressing the seal into the stufﬁng box.

2 to 3

ﬂush with the face of the stufﬁng box.

– Determine how far the face of the insert will extend
into the stufﬁng box bore. This dimension is taken
from the face of the gasket.

– Determine the compressed length of the rotary unit
by compressing the rotary unit to the proper spring
gap.

– This dimension added to the distance the insert
extends into the stufﬁng box will give the seal set-
ting dimension from the reference mark on the shaft
or sleeve to the back of the seal collar.
ž Outside seals are set with the spring gap equal to the

dimension stamped on the seal collar.

56/1028 Packing and Seals
ž Cartridge seals are set at the factory and installed as
complete assemblies. These assemblies contain spacers
that must be removed after the seal assembly is bolted
into position and the sleeve collar is in place.

Installation of environmental controls

Mechanical seals are often chosen and designed to operate
with environmental controls. If this is the case, check the
seal assembly drawing or equipment drawing to ensure
that all environmental control piping is properly installed.
Before equipment startup, all cooling and heating lines
should be operating and remain so for at least a short
period after equipment shutdown.

Before startup, all systems should be properly vented.
This is especially important on vertical installations where
the stufﬁng box is the uppermost portion of the pressure-
containing part of the equipment. The stufﬁng box area
must be properly vented to avoid a vapor lock in the seal
area that would cause the seal to run dry.

On double seal installations, be sure the sealing liquid
lines are connected, the pressure control valves are prop-
erly adjusted, and the sealing liquid system is operating
before starting the equipment.

Seal startup procedures

When starting equipment with mechanical seals, make
sure the seal faces are immersed in liquid from the begin-
ning so they will not be damaged from dry operation. The
following recommendations for seal startup apply to most
types of seal installations and will improve seal life if
followed:
ž Caution the electrician not to run the equipment dry
while checking motor rotation. A slight turnover will
not hurt the seal, but operating full speed for several
minutes under dry conditions will destroy or severely
damage the rubbing faces.
ž The stufﬁng box of the equipment, especially centrifu-
gal pumps, should always be vented before startup.
Even though the pump has a ﬂooded suction, it is still
possible that air may be trapped in the top of the stufﬁng
box after the initial liquid purge of the pump.
ž Check installation for need of priming. Priming might
be necessary in applications with a low or negative
suction head.
ž Where cooling or bypass re-circulation taps are incor-
porated in the seal gland, piping must be connected
to or from these taps before startup. These speciﬁc
environmental control features must be used to pro-
tect the organic materials in the seal and to ensure its
proper performance. Cooling lines should be left open
at all times or whenever possible. This is especially true
when a hot product might be passing through standby

equipment while it is not on-line. Many systems pro-
vide for product to pass through the standby equipment
so the need for additional product volume or an equip-
ment change is only a matter of pushing a button.
ž With hot operational equipment that is shut down at the
end of each day, it is best to leave the cooling water on
at least long enough for the seal area to cool below the
temperature limits of the organic materials in the seal.
ž Face lubricated-type seals must be connected from the
source of lubrication to the tap openings in the seal
gland before startup. This is another predetermined en-
vironmental control feature that is mandatory for proper
seal function. Where double seals are to be operated, it
is necessary that the lubrication feed lines be connected
to the proper ports for both circulatory or dead-end sys-
tems before equipment startup. This is very important
because all types of double seals depend on the con-
trolled pressure and ﬂow of the sealing ﬂuid to function
properly. Even before the shaft is rotated, the sealing
liquid pressure must exceed the product pressure oppos-
ing the seal. Be sure a vapor trap does not prevent the
lubricant from reaching the seal face promptly.
ž Thorough warm-up procedures include a check of all
steam piping arrangements to be sure that all are con-
nected and functioning, as products that will solidify
must be fully melted before startup. It is advisable to
leave all heat sources on during shutdown to ensure a
liquid condition of the product at all times. Leaving the
heat on at all times further facilitates quick startups and
equipment switchovers that may be necessary during a
production cycle.
ž Thorough chilling procedures are necessary on some
installations, especially liqueﬁed petroleum gases (LPG)
applications. LPG must always be kept in a liquid state in
the seal area and startup is usually the most critical time.
Even during operation, the re-circulation line piped to
the stufﬁng box might have to be run through a cooler
in order to overcome frictional heat generated at the
seal faces. LPG requires a stufﬁng box pressure that is
greater than the vapor pressure of the product at pumping
temperature (25 to 50 psi differential is desired).

References

1. BasicPumps,PowerPlantBasics,Overseas Bechtel Inc.
2. Neale, M. J., DrivesandSeals,ATribologyHandbook, Society

of Automotive Engineers, Inc. (1994).

3. Parker, S. (ed.), EncyclopediaofEngineering, 2nd edn, McGraw

Hill, New York (1983).

4. Block, H. P. and Geitner, F. K., IntroductiontoMachineryRelia-

bilityAssessment, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York (1990).

5. Block, H. P. and Geitner, F. K., MachineryFailureAnalysisand
Troubleshooting, Gulf Publishing Company Book Division,
Houston (1986).

6. Nelson, C. A., Millwrights and Mechanics Guide, Macmillan

Publishing Company, New York (1986).

57

57/1029

Gears and Gear
Drives

R Keith Mobley
The Plant Performance Group

Contents

57.1 Introduction
57.2 Types of gears and their characteristics 57/1031

57/1031

57.2.1 Gear types
57/1031
57.2.2 Efﬁciencies 57/1037

57.3 Gear teeth

57/1037

57.3.1 Involute proﬁle
57.3.2 Pressure angle

57/1037
57/1037

57.4 Measurements and dimensions

57/1038

57.4.1 Gear tooth elements 57/1038
57.4.2 Linear and circular measurements 57/1038

57.5 Gear drives and speed reducers 57/1042

57.1 Introduction
A gear is a disc or wheel with teeth around its peri-
phery – either on the inside edge (i.e., internal gear) or on
the outside edge (i.e., external gear). A gear is used for
providing a positive means of power transmission. This
transmission is effected by the teeth on one gear meshing
with the teeth on another gear or rack (i.e., straight-line
gear). Meshing teeth formed with special cutters provide a
much more compact drive than either belts or chain drives
and can operate at higher speeds and power.

57.2 Types of gears and their
characteristics
There are several different types of gears used in indus-
try, but the spur gear is the most commonly used. Many

Table 57.1 Gear Characteristics Overview

Types of gears and their characteristics 57/1031

are complex in design and manufacture, and several have
evolved directly from the spur gear, which is commonly
referred to as the basic gear. Because gear design is ex-
tremely complex and the ﬁeld of specialized gearing is
beyond the scope of this text, only a general description
and explanation of principles are given. The commonly
used gears are discussed sufﬁciently to provide the mill-
wright or mechanic with the basic information necessary
to perform installation and maintenance work.

57.2.1 Gear types

Types of gears are: spur, helical, bevel (straight, spiral,
zerol, and hypoid), and worm, each of which is discussed
in the following sections. Table 57.1 summarizes the char-
acteristics of each gear.

Characteristics

Attributes/Positives

Helical, double (also

Connects parallel shafts, overcomes high-end thrust present in

Connects parallel shafts that rotate in opposite directions, inexpensive
to manufacture to close tolerances, moderate peripheral speeds, no
axial thrust, high mechanical efﬁciency

Compact drive mechanism for parallel shafts rotating in same direction
Connects parallel and non-parallel shafts; superior to spur gears in

load-carrying capacity, quietness, and smoothness; high efﬁciency

single-helical gears, compact, quiet and smooth operation at higher
speeds (1,000 to 12,000 fpm or higher), high efﬁciencies

Light loads with low power transmission demands

Bevel

Connects angular or intersecting shafts

Negatives

Noisy at high speeds

Higher friction than spur gears

Narrow range of applications,

requires extensive lubrication

Gears overhang supporting
shafts resulting in shaft
deﬂection and gear
misalignment

separate

Limited to speeds less than

1,000 fpm due to noise

High tooth pressure, thrust

loading depends on rotation
and spiral angle

Lower efﬁciency, difﬁcult to

lubricate due to high
tooth-contact pressures,
materials of construction
(steel) require use of
extreme-pressure lubricants

Lower efﬁciency; heat removal
difﬁcult, which restricts use
to low-speed applications

Lower efﬁciencies

Gear type

Spur, external

Spur, internal
Helical, external

referred to as
herringbone)

Helical, cross

Bevel, straight

Bevel, zerol

Bevel, spiral

Bevel, miter
Bevel, hypoid

Planetary or
epicyclic

Worm, cylindrical

Worm,

double-enveloping

Source: Integrated Systems, Inc.

Peripheral speeds up to 1,000 fpm in applications where quietness and

Thrust load causes gear pair to

maximum smoothness not important, high efﬁciency

Same ratings as straight bevel gears and use same mountings, permits

slight errors in assembly, permits some displacement due to
deﬂection under load, highly accurate, hardened due to grinding

Smoother and quieter than straight bevel gears at speeds greater than
1,000 fpm or 1,000 rpm, evenly distributed tooth loads, carry more
load without surface fatigue, high efﬁciency, reduces size of
installation for large reduction ratios, speed-reducing and
speed-increasing drive

Same number of teeth in both gears, operate on shafts at 90°
Connects non-intersecting shafts, high pinion strength, allows the use

of compact straddle mounting on the gear and pinion, recommended
when maximum smoothness required, compact system even with
large reduction ratios, speed-reducing and speed-increasing drive

Compact transmission with driving and driven shafts in line, large

speed reduction when required

Provide high-ratio speed reduction over wide range of speed ratios

(60:1 and higher from a single reduction, can go as high as 500:1),
quiet transmission of power between shafts at 90°, reversible unit
available, low wear, can be self-locking

Increased load capacity

57/1032 Gears and Gear Drives

Spur

The spur gear is the least expensive of all gears to manu-
facture and is the most commonly used. It can be manu-
factured to close tolerances and is used to connect parallel
shafts that rotate in opposite directions. It gives excellent
results at moderate peripheral speeds and the tooth load
produces no axial thrust. Because contact is simultaneous
across the entire width of the meshing teeth, it tends to
be noisy at high speeds. However, noise and wear can be
minimized with proper lubrication.

There are three main classes of spur gears: external
tooth, internal tooth, and rack-and-pinion. The external
tooth variety shown in Figure 57.1 is the most common.
Figure 57.2 illustrates an internal gear and Figure 57.3
shows a rack or straight-line spur gear. The smaller of the
pair of spur gears illustrated in Figure 57.4 is a pinion,
also called a sun gear in what is referred to as a planetary
gearing system.

A planetary system consists of three sets of gears. A
pinion meshes with two or more planet gears, which rotate
within an internal gear. The planetary gears are connected
to one shaft and the sun gear to another. This compact

Figure 57.1 Example of a spur gear

Figure 57.2 Example of an internal spur gear

Figure 57.3 Rack or straight-line gear

Figure 57.4 Typical spur gears

system achieves a large speed reduction in a limited space.
It also allows the input and output shaft to be on the same
centerline.

The spur gear is cylindrical and has straight teeth cut
parallel to its rotational axis. The diametric pitch estab-
lishes the tooth size of spur gears. Spur gear design accom-
modates mostly rolling, rather than sliding, contact of the
tooth surfaces and tooth contact occurs along a line par-
allel to the axis. Such rolling contact produces less heat
that results in high mechanical efﬁciency, often up to 99
per cent.

An internal spur gear, in combination with a standard
spur gear pinion, provides a compact drive mechanism
for transmitting motion between parallel shafts that rotate
in the same direction. The internal gear is a wheel that
has teeth cut on the inside of its rim and the pinion is
housed inside the wheel. The driving and driven members
rotate in the same direction at relative speeds inversely
proportional the number of teeth. Figure 57.5 labels the
parts of an internal spur gear.

Helical

Helical gears (shown in Figure 57.6) provide a means
of connecting non-parallel shafts as well as provide an
alternate means of connecting parallel shafts, serving the
same purpose as spur gears. Cutters that produce an angle
that allows several teeth to mesh simultaneously form
helical gears. Helical gears are superior to spur gears in
their load-carrying capacity, quietness, and smoothness
of operation, which results from the sliding contact of the
meshing teeth. A disadvantage, however, is higher friction
and wear that accompanies this sliding action.

Single helical gears are manufactured with the same
equipment as spur gears, but the teeth are cut at an angle
to the axis of the gear and follow a spiral path. The angle
at which the gear teeth are cut is called the helix angle,
which is illustrated in Figure 57.7. This angle causes the
position of tooth contact with the mating gear to vary at
each section. Figure 57.8 shows the parts of a helical gear.
It is very important to note that the helix angle may be
on either side of the gear’s centerline. Or, if compared to
the helix angle of a thread, it may be either a ‘right-hand’
or a ‘left-hand’ helix. The handedness of the helix is the
same regardless of how viewed. Figure 57.9 illustrates a
helical gear as viewed from opposite sides. Changing the

.

dia
 
t
o
o
R

Circular pitch

D

e

d

e

n

d

u

W

d

h
ole
e
pth

m

I

n

 

a

s

i

d

d

d

e

e

 

n

d

i

d

a

u

.

Root dia.

m

Pitch circle dia.
e   c ir c l e   d i a .

s

a

B

Types of gears and their characteristics 57/1033

A ddendu m
of m ating
gear

e

c

n

a r a

C l e

Helix
angle

Figure 57.7 Illustrating the angle at which the teeth are cut

N

o
r

m

Arc thickness

Chordal
addendum

m

u

d

n

e

d

d

A

Transverse circular

pitch

Chordal thickness

Figure 57.5 Parts of an internal spur gear

Base pitch
Normal pitch
Base circle dia.

e d e n d u
u t s i d

O

D

al cir

c

ula
r 
pitc

h

A ddendu m
W hole depth

m
e   d i a .

r c l e   d i a .

t c h   c i

P i

Figure 57.8 Helical gear and its parts

Angle

Angle

Hub on
left side

Hub on
right side

Figure 57.9 Helix angle of the teeth – the same no matter from
which side the gear is viewed

and helix angle, but must be of opposite handedness (one
right hand and one left hand).

When helical gears are used to connect non-parallel
shafts, they are often called ‘spiral’ or ‘crossed-axis’ heli-
cal gears. This style of helical gearing is shown in
Figure 57.10.

The double-helical gear, also referred to as the Herring-
bone gear (Figure 57.11), is used for transmitting power
between parallel shafts. It was developed to overcome

Figure 57.6 Typical set of helical gears

position of the gear cannot change the handedness of the
tooth’s helix angle. A pair of helical gears such as the
ones illustrated in Figure 57.9 must have the same pitch

57/1034 Gears and Gear Drives

Figure 57.10 Typical set of spiral gears

Figure 57.12 Basic cone shape of bevel gears

Figure 57.11 Herringbone gear

Figure 57.13 Typical set of bevel gears

the disadvantage of the high-end thrust that is present in
single-helical gears.

The herringbone gear consists of two sets of gear teeth
on the same gear, one right hand and one left hand. Having
both hands of gear teeth causes the thrust of one set to
cancel out the thrust of the other. Thus, an advantage of
this gear type is quiet, smooth operation at higher speeds.

Bevel
Bevel gears are used most frequently for 90° drives, but
other angles can be used. The most typical application is
driving a vertical pump with a horizontal driver.

Two major differences between bevel gears and spur
gears are their shape and the relation of the shafts on
which they are mounted. A bevel gear is conical in shape
while a spur gear is essentially cylindrical. Figure 57.12
illustrates the bevel gear’s basic shape. Bevel gears trans-
mit motion between angular or intersecting shafts, while
spur gears transmit motion between parallel shafts.

Figure 57.13 shows a typical pair of bevel gears. As
with other gears, the term ‘pinion and gear’ refers to the

Shaft angle

Figure 57.14 Shaft angle, which can be at any degree

members with the smaller and larger numbers of teeth in
the pair, respectively. Special bevel gears can be manu-
factured to operate at any desired shaft angle, as shown
in Figure 57.14.

As with spur gears, the tooth size of bevel gears is
established by the diametric pitch. Because the tooth size

Types of gears and their characteristics 57/1035

varies along its length, measurements must be taken at
a speciﬁc point. Note that, because each gear in a bevel
gear set must have the same angle pressure, tooth lengths,
and diametric pitch, they are manufactured and distributed
only as mated pairs. Like spur gears, bevel gears are
available in pressure angles of 14.5° and 20°.

Because there generally is no room to support bevel
gears at both ends due to the intersecting shafts, one
or both gears overhang their supporting shafts. This is
referred to as an overhung load. It may result in shaft
deﬂection and gear misalignment, causing poor tooth con-
tact and accelerated wear.

Straight or plain

Figure 57.16 Spiral bevel gear

Straight bevel gears, also known as plain bevels, are the
most commonly used and simplest type of bevel gear
(Figure 57.15). They have teeth cut straight across the
face of the gear. They are recommended for peripheral
speeds up to 1,000 feet per minute in cases where quiet-
ness and maximum smoothness are not crucial. This gear
type produces thrust loads in a direction that tends to
cause the pair to separate.

Zerol

Zerol bevel gears are similar to straight bevel gears, carry
the same ratings, and can be used in the same mountings.
Zerol bevel gears, which should be considered as spiral
bevel gears with zero spiral angles, have curved teeth that
lie in the same general direction as straight bevel gears.
This type of gear permits slight errors in assembly and
some displacement due to deﬂection under load. Zerol
gears should be used at speeds less than 1,000 feet per
minute because of excessive noise at higher speeds.

Spiral

Spiral bevel gears (Figure 57.16) have curved oblique
teeth that contact each other gradually and smoothly from
one end of the tooth to the other, meshing with a rolling
contact similar to helical gears. Spiral bevel gears are
smoother and quieter in operation than straight bevel gears,
primarily due to a design that incorporates two or more
contacting teeth. Their design, however, results in high
tooth pressure.

This type of gear is beginning to supersede straight
bevel gears in many applications. They have the advan-
tage of ensuring evenly distributed tooth loads and carry
more load without surface fatigue. Thrust loading depends
on the direction of rotation and whether the spiral angle
of the teeth is positive or negative.

Miter

Miter gears are bevel gears with the same number of teeth
in both gears, operating on shafts at right angles or at 90°
as shown in Figure 57.17.

A typical pair of straight miter gears is shown in
Figure 57.18. Another style of miter gears having spiral
rather than straight teeth is shown in Figure 57.19.

Hypoid

Hypoid bevel gears are a cross between a spiral bevel
gear and a worm gear (Figure 57.20). The axes of a pair
of hypoid bevel gears are non-intersecting and the dis-
tance between the axes is referred to as the ‘offset.’ This
conﬁguration allows both shafts to be supported at both
ends and provides high strength and rigidity.

Although stronger and more rigid than most other types
of gears, they are less efﬁcient and extremely difﬁcult to
lubricate because of high tooth-contact pressures. Further
increasing the demands on the lubricant is the material of
construction – both the driven and driving gears are made

Figure 57.15 Straight or plain bevel gear

Figure 57.17 Miter gear shaft angle

90˚

57/1036 Gears and Gear Drives

Despite its demand for special lubrication, this gear
type is in widespread use in industrial and automotive
applications. It is used extensively in rear axles of automo-
biles having rear-wheel drives and is increasingly being
used in industrial machinery.

Worm

The worm and worm gear, which are illustrated in
Figure 57.21, are used to transmit motion and power when
a high-ratio speed reduction is required. They accommo-
date a wide range of speed ratios (60:1 and higher can be
obtained from a single reduction and can go as high as
500:1). In most worm gear sets, the worm is most often
the driver and the worm gear the driven member. They
provide a steady, quiet transmission of power between
shafts at right angles and can be self-locking. Thus, a
torque on the gear will not cause the worm to rotate. A
reversible worm-gear is also available.

Figure 57.18 Miter gears with straight teeth

Figure 57.19 Miter gears with spiral teeth

The contact surface of the screw on the worm slides
along the gear teeth. Because of the high level of rubbing
between the worm and wheel teeth, however, slightly less
efﬁciency is obtained than with precision spur gears. Note
that large helix angles on the gear teeth produce higher
efﬁciencies. Another problem with this gear type is heat
removal, a limitation that restricts their use to low-speed
applications.

One of the major advantages of the worm gear is low
wear, which is due mostly to a full-ﬂuid lubricant ﬁlm. In
addition, friction can be further reduced using metals hav-
ing low coefﬁcients of friction. For example, the wheel is
typically made of bronze and the worm of highly ﬁnished
hardened steel.

Most worms are cylindrical in shape with a uniform
pitch diameter. However, a variable pitch diameter is used
in the double-enveloping worm. This conﬁguration is used
when increased load capacity is required.

Figure 57.20 Hypoid bevel gear

of steel. This requires the use of special extreme-pressure
lubricants that have both oiliness and anti-weld properties
that can withstand the high contact pressures and rubbing
speeds.

Figure 57.21 Typical set of worm gears

Table 57.2 Gear efﬁciencies

Gear type

Efﬁciency range, %

Trochoid

Involute

Gear teeth 57/1037

Bevel gear, hypoid
Bevel gear, miter
Bevel gear, spiral
Bevel gear, straight
Bevel gear, zerol
Helical gear, external
Helical gear–double,

external (herringbone)

Spur gear, external
Worm, cylindrical
Worm, double-enveloping

90–98
Not available
97–99
97–99
Not available
97–99
97–99

97–99
50–99
50–98

Fillet

Source: Adapted by Integrated Systems, Inc. from ‘Gears and Gear
Drives,’ 1996PowerTransmissionDesign, Penton Publishing Inc.,
Ohio, pp A199–A211.

Figure 57.22 Involute tooth curve generated by straight-sided gear
cutter

Like helical gears, worms and worm gears have hand-
edness, which is determined by the direction of the angle
of the teeth. The worm and worm gear must be the same
hand in order to mesh correctly.

One revolution of the worm advances the gear teeth in
direct proportion to the number of the worm threads. The
most commonly used worms have either one, two, three,
or four separate threads and are referred to as single-,
double-, triple-, and quadruple- thread worms. The num-
ber of threads is determined by counting the number of
starts or entrances at the end of the worm.

The worm thread is a major factor in worm ratios and is
an important feature in worm design. The speed-reduction
ratio is equal to the total number of worm-gear teeth
divided by the number of worm threads.

Cord

Base circle

x

57.2.2 Efﬁciencies

Table 57.2 provides a comparison of the approximate
efﬁciency range of various gear types discussed in this
chapter.

57.3 Gear teeth
Two important characteristics of gear teeth are the pro-
ﬁle and the pressure angle. In particular, special tooth
proﬁles must be used for higher gear speeds. As speeds
increase, friction increases the heat released because of
sliding contact between the teeth.

The cycloidal proﬁle provides a rolling action, which
minimizes friction. However, the gears and shafts must be
very accurately aligned and spaced. The involute proﬁle
does not provide as good a rolling action as the cycloidal
proﬁle. As a result, some sliding between teeth occurs.
However, the involute proﬁle is less sensitive to shaft
alignment and gear spacing, and is the shape most com-
monly used for gear teeth.

57.3.1 Involute proﬁle

The involute tooth curve illustrated in Figure 57.22 is gen-
erated during the machining process using gear cutters

Figure 57.23 Theoretical generation of an involute tooth curve

with straight sides. Theoretically, the curve is generated
by tracing a point on the end of a taut line that unwinds
from a circle as shown in Figure 57.23.

The larger the circle, the straighter the curvature. For a
rack, which is essentially a section of an inﬁnitely large
gear, the curve is straight or ﬂat. The involute system of
spur gearing is based on a straight- or ﬂat-sided rack and
all gears made for operation with such a rack will run
with each other.

57.3.2 Pressure angle

The sides of each gear tooth incline at an angle called the
pressure angle (Figure 57.24). For many years, the stan-
dard pressure angle was 14.5°. Today, the use of 14.5°
gearing is generally limited to replacement work, while
the 20° pressure angle is more commonly used. This
switch has occurred because a 20° pressure angle results

57/1038 Gears and Gear Drives

Pressure angle

Figure 57.24 Pressure angle

14

1˚
2

20˚

Figure 57.25 Effect of different pressure angles on gear teeth

Pressure

angle

Direction of

tooth to

tooth push

57.4.1 Gear tooth elements

The elements of gear teeth common to all gears are tooth
surface and proﬁle, ﬂank, top and bottom land, crown,
root and pitch circle, gear center, line of centers, pitch
point, line of action, line of contact, and point of con-
tact. Figure 57.27 labels many of the common gear tooth
elements. Figure 57.28 labels the common rack tooth
elements.

57.4.2 Linear and circular measurements

Linear and circular measurements that deﬁne gears and are
used in their speciﬁcation and design are center distance,
offset, pitch diameter, diametric pitch, axial pitch, base
pitch, and axial base pitch, lead, and backlash.

Pitch diameter and center distance

A pitch circle is illustrated in Figure 57.29. The imagi-
nary circle can be drawn to illustrate the motion of a gear
in operation. The diameters of these imaginary circles are
referred to as the pitch diameters of the gears. The cen-
ter distance of two correctly meshed gears, illustrated in
Figure 57.30, is equal to one half the sum of the two pitch
diameters.

Addendum

Thickness

Pitch
line

Pressure

angle

Rotation

Line ofAction

Dedendum Whole
depth

Circular

pitch

Figure 57.27 Names of gear parts

Figure 57.26 Relationship of the pressure angle to the line of
action

in a higher strength gear tooth that offers better wear-
resistance characteristics. The use of a 20° angle also
permits pinions with fewer teeth to be used.

Figure 57.25 illustrates the effect of different pressure
angles on a tooth. It is important to note that the pres-
sure angle must be the same for all mated gears that run
together.

The pressure angle of a gear is also the angle between
the line of action and the line tangent to the pitch circles
of mating gears. Figure 57.26 illustrates the relationship
of the pressure angle to the line of action and the line
tangent to the pitch circles.

Figure 57.28 Names of rack parts

Pitch circle

.

a
d

i

 

h
c
t
i

P

57.4 Measurements and dimensions
All gear types are comprised of common gear tooth ele-
ments, which can be deﬁned in terms of measurements
and dimensions (linear, circular, and angular), and ratios.

Center
distance

Figure 57.29 Pitch circle

h
c
t
i

P

i

a
d

h
c
t
i

P
 
"
4

a
d

i

h
c
t
i

P

"
1

2

8

.
a
D

i

Center

distance (C)

Figure 57.30 Pitch diameter and center distance

2

D1 D 2C (cid:3) Ds D2 D 2C (cid:3) D1

The center distance relationship also may be repre-
sented by the following equations:
C D D1 C D2
where:
C D Center distance, inches
D1 D First pitch diameter, inches
D2 D Second pitch diameter, inches

Example: Determine the center distance using the pitch
diameters given in Figure 57.31.
C D D1 C D2

D 4 C 8.5

D 6.25 inches

2

2

Pitch measurements

The size and proportion of gear teeth are designated by
a speciﬁc type of pitch. In gearing terms, there are two
types of pitch: circular and diametric.

Circular pitch is the distance from a point on
Circular
one tooth to the corresponding point on the next tooth
measured along the pitch circle as shown in Figure 57.32.
Its value is equal to the circumference of the pitch cir-
cle divided by the number of teeth in the gear. While
most common-size gears are based on diametric pitch,
large-diameter gears are frequently made to circular pitch
dimensions.

The most commonly used method of gear
Diametric
speciﬁcation is based on diametric pitch. Practically all
common-size gears are made to diametric pitch speciﬁ-
cations, which also designate the size and proportions of
gear teeth.

Measurements and dimensions 57/1039

Pitch
circle

Clearance

Addendum

P it c
c ir

h
c l e
Dedendum

Whole 
depth

Working 

depth

Thickness

Circular pitch

Figure 57.32 Circular pitch

Diametric pitch is a whole number used to specify the
ratio of the number of teeth in a gear to its pitch diam-
eter. Stated another way, it speciﬁes the number of teeth
in a gear per inch of pitch diameter. For each inch of
pitch-circle diameter, there are pi ((cid:6) D 3.1416) inches of
pitch-circle circumference. Therefore, the diametric pitch
provides the number of teeth for each 3.1416 inches of
circumference along the pitch circle.

The pitch-circle diameter and the diametric pitch of a 4-
inch pitch-circle diameter gear
illustrated in
Figure 57.33. For this 4-inch gear, there are four 3.1416-
inch circumference segments. Note that for a 3-inch gear,
there are three 3.1416-inch segments.

are

These concepts may be better visualized and dimen-
sions more easily obtained with the rack teeth presented
in Figure 57.34. This clearly shows that there are 10 teeth
in 3.1416 inches and, therefore, the rack illustrated is a
10 diametric-pitch rack.

3.1416"

3
.
1

4

1

6
"

1"

1"

1"

1"

3.1

4

1
6"

3.1 4 1 6"

Circular pitch

Figure 57.33 Pitch diameter and diametric pitch

3.1416"

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Figure 57.31 Determining center distance with known pitch dia-
meter

Figure 57.34 Number of teeth in 3.1416 inches of a rack or straight-
line gear

57/1040 Gears and Gear Drives

3.1416"

Figure 57.35 Number of teeth in 3.1416 inches on the pitch circle

5 13"
16

Figure 57.35 illustrates a similar measurement along

the pitch circle of a 10 diametric-pitch gear.

During the process of repairing a machine, a mechanic
may need to quickly determine the diametric pitch of a
gear. It is possible to do this easily without the use of
precision measuring tools, templates, or gages; a ruler
(preferably ﬂexible) is all that is required to make the
needed measurements. Because diametric pitch numbers
are usually whole numbers, measurements need not be
exact. An approximate calculation will usually result in
a value close to a whole number, which is the diamet-
ric pitch of the gear. The following three methods may
be used to determine the approximate diametric pitch of
a gear.

Method 1

Count the number of teeth in the gear, add two to this
number, and divide by the outside diameter
(see
Figure 57.36) of the gear. Rounding the gear diameter
measurement to the closest fractional increment is sufﬁ-
cient. For example, assume Figure 57.36 illustrates a gear
with 56 teeth (not all shown) and an outside diameter
16 inches. Adding 2 to 56 gives 58; dividing 58 by
of 5 13
32 , which is approximately 10. Therefore, the
16 gives 9 31
5 13
diametric pitch of the gear is 10.

Method 2

Divide the number of gear teeth by the pitch diameter,
which can be approximately measured from the root, or
bottom, of a tooth to the top of a tooth on the opposite side
of the gear. For example, assume Figure 57.37 illustrates
a gear with 56 teeth (not all shown). The pitch diameter
measured from the bottom of the tooth to the top of the
8 gives 9 15
opposite tooth is 5 5
16
inches or approximately 10. As expected, this method also
indicates that the gear is a 10 diametric-pitch gear.

8 inches. Dividing 56 by 5 5

+

5 5/8"

Figure 57.37 Using Method 2 to approximate the diametric pitch

Method 3

If a ﬂexible ruler is available, measure approximately 3 1
8
inches along the gear’s pitch line by bending the scale to
match the curvature of the gear. Position the ruler about
midway between the base and top of the teeth, the location
of the imaginary pitch line. It might be helpful to mark
this line on the gear, particularly if it is possible to rotate
the gear. The diametric pitch is determined by counting
the number of teeth in 3 1
8 inches. See Figure 57.38 for an
illustration of this method.

Calculations

This section presents the equations used to make circular
and diametric pitch calculations as well as tooth propor-
tion calculations.

Circular pitch

The mathematical relationship of the circular pitch to the
pitch-circle circumference, number of teeth, and the pitch
diameter is shown in the following equations:

P D C
N

D D PN
(cid:6)

N D C
P

where:
C D Pitch circle circumference ((cid:6)D), inches
D D Pitch diameter, inches
N D Number of teeth
p D Circular pitch, inches
(cid:6) D pi (3.1416)

3 1"

8 Approx.

Figure 57.36 Using Method 1 to approximate the diametric pitch

Figure 57.38 Using Method 3 to approximate the diametric pitch

Example 1 What is the circular pitch of a gear with 48
teeth and a pitch diameter of 6 inches?
P D (cid:6)D
N

or P D 0.3927 inches

3.1416 ð 6

3.1416

or

or

48

8

Example 2 What is the pitch diameter of a 0.500-inch
circular-pitch gear with 128 teeth?
D D PN
(cid:6)

or D D 20.371 inches

0.5 ð 128
3.1416

or

Diametric pitch
The mathematical relationship of pitch diameter, diamet-
ric pitch, and number of teeth is shown in the equations
below. As with any equation, one of the variables can be
calculated if any two are known.
P D N
D

N D D ð P

D D N
P

where:
D D Pitch diameter, inches
P D Diametric pitch, inches
N D Number of teeth

Example 1 What is the diametric pitch of a 40-tooth
gear with a 5-inch pitch diameter?
P D N
D

or P D 8 diametric pitch

or P D 40
5

Example 2 What is the pitch diameter of a 12 diametric-
pitch gear with 36 teeth?
D D N
P

or D D 3-inch pitch diameter

or D D 36
12

Example 3 How many teeth are there in a 16 diametric-
pitch gear with a pitch diameter of 3 3
N D D ð P or N D 3 3

4 ð 16 or N D 60 teeth

4 inches?

Measurements and dimensions 57/1041

Backlash

Gear backlash is the play between teeth, which is criti-
cal in preventing binding. Measured at the pitch circle, it
is the distance between the involutes of the mating gear
teeth, as illustrated in Figure 57.39.

Backlash is necessary to provide the running clearance
needed to prevent binding of the mating gears, which can
result in heat generation, noise, abnormal wear, overload,
and/or failure of the drive. In addition to preventing bind-
ing, some backlash in gear systems is to be expected
because of the dimensional tolerances needed for cost-
effective manufacturing.

During the gear manufacturing process, backlash is
tooth thinner by an
achieved by cutting each gear
amount equal
to one-half of the backlash dimension
required for the application. When two gears made in
this manner are run together (i.e., mate), their allowances
combine and provide the full amount of backlash
required.

The increase in backlash that results from tooth wear
does not adversely affect operation with non-reversing
drives or drives with continuous load in one direction.
However, for reversing drives and drives where timing is

Backlash

Pitch
line

Figure 57.39 Backlash

Tooth proportion calculations
The most commonly used gear system is referred to as
the full-depth involute. The tooth proportion formulas and
symbols for full-depth, coarse-pitch involute gears (ANSI
136.1-1968, R1974) are shown below. All units are in
inches.

Diametric pitch, P

Addendum, a D 1
P

Dedendum, b D 1.250
P

Whole depth, Wd D a C b D 2.250
P
Clearance, c D b (cid:3) a D 0.250
P

Tooth thickness, t D 1.5708

P

on the pitch line

Figure 57.40 Double-reduction single-helical drive

57/1042 Gears and Gear Drives

critical, excessive backlash that results from wear usually
cannot be tolerated.

Angular dimensions

Angular dimensions that deﬁne gears and are used in their
speciﬁcation and design are helix angle, lead angle, shaft
angle, and angular pitch.

Planet wheels

Annulus ring (fixed)

Planet carrier

Low-speed shaft

High-speed shaft

Sun wheel

(a) Planetary gear drive

Star wheels

Annulus ring

Star carrier (fixed)

Sun wheel

Annulus ring

Planet carrier

(b) Star gear drive

Planet wheels

Sun wheel (fixed)

(c) Solar gear drive

Figure 57.41 Three double helical drives

Figure 57.42 High-speed gear drive

Ratios

Ratios that are used in deﬁning and specifying gears are
gear-tooth ratio, contact ratio, and hunting ratio. The gear-
tooth ratio is the ratio of the larger to the smaller number
of teeth in a pair of gears. The contact ratio is a measure
of overlapping tooth action, which is necessary to assure
smooth, continuous tooth action. For example, as one pair
of teeth passes out of action, a succeeding pair of teeth
must have already started action. The hunting ratio is
the ratio of the number of gear and pinion teeth. It is
a means of ensuring that each tooth in the pinion will
contact every tooth in the gear before it contacts any gear
tooth a second time.

57.5 Gear drives and speed reducers
Gear drives are packaged units used for a wide range of
power-transmission applications. They are used to transmit
power to a driven piece of machinery and to change
or modify the power that is transmitted. Modiﬁcations
include reducing speed and increasing output torque, in-
creasing speed, changing the direction of shaft rotation,
or changing the angle of shaft operation.

Motorized gear drives, which are commonly called gear
motors or motor reducers, are used extensively throughout
industry. Any of the basic gear drives can be manufac-
tured as motorized units.

The following ﬁgures show typical gear-drive units.
Figure 57.40 is a double-reduction single-helical drive.
Figure 57.41 shows three types of double-helical drives.
Figure 57.42(a) shows an enclosed high-speed gearbox,
while Figure 57.42(b) shows the internal parts of this
gear drive.

References

1. Stokes, A., Gear Handbook–Design and Calculations, Butter-

worth-Heinemann, Boston (1992).

2. ‘Gears and Gear Drives,’ 1996 Power Transmission Design,

Penton Publishing Inc., Ohio, pp. A199–A211.

3. Oberg, E., Jones, F. D., Horton, H. L. and Ryffel, H. H., Mach-
inery’sHandbook25, 25th edn, Industrial Press Inc., New York
(1996).

4. Higgins, and Mobley, K. R., Maintenance Engineering Hand-

book, McGraw-Hill, New York (1995).

5. Nelson, C. A., Millwrights and Mechanics Guide, Macmillan

Publishing Company, New York (1986).

58

Flexible
Intermediate
Drives

R Keith Mobley
The Plant Performance Group

Contents

58/1045
58.1 Introduction
58.2 Belt drives 58/1045

58.2.1 Power transmission
58.2.2 Belt tensions
58.2.3 Selection of belts and pulleys

58/1045

58/1045

58/1043

58/1045

58.3 Installation

58/1048

58.3.1 Pre-installation inspections
58.3.2 Installation practices 58/1048
58.3.3 Post-installation practices 58/1049

58/1048

58.4 Problem areas 58/1051

58.4.1 Belt noise
58.4.2 Troubleshooting V-belts 58/1053

58/1051

58.5 Summary 58/1053
58.6 Chain drives and sprockets

58/1058

58.6.1 Chain drives 58/1058
58.6.2 Sprockets

58/1063

58.1 Introduction
There are two types of ﬂexible intermediate drives used
to transmit torsional power: belt drives and chain drives.
Flexible belts are used in industrial power transmission
applications primarily when the speeds of the driver and
driven shafts must be different or when the shafts must
be widely separated. The trend toward higher speed pri-
mary drivers and the need to achieve a slower, useful
driven speed are additional factors favoring the use of
belts. In addition to V-belts, there are round belts and
ﬂat belts. Chain drives are typically used in applications
where space is limited or obstructions prevent direct cou-
pling of machine-train components.

58.2 Belt drives
V-belts are the most commonly used belt in industrial
power transmission applications. In addition to V-belts,
there are round belts (e.g., O-rings) and ﬂat belts, which
are often reinforced with steel or Kevlar. Round belts are
generally used in light-duty applications while reinforced
ﬂat belts are used in high-temperature applications such
as automobiles.

Belts have numerous advantages, including overall eco-
nomy, cleanliness, no need for lubrication, low mainte-
nance costs, easy installation, dampening of shock loads,
clutching, and variable speed power transmission between
widely spaced shafts.

Belt drives 58/1045

and centrifugal tensions is referred to as the peak tension
of the belt drive system, which is calculated by:
TPeak (pounds) D TT C TB C TC

Peak tension is the dominant factor that determines belt
drive performance and service life. It should be noted that
only the working tension components, TT and TS, have
a direct impact on the pulley, shafts, and bearings of the
drive train. Bending and centrifugal tension affects the
belt, but should not transmit tension to the drive-train
system.

The tension ratio, TR, is equal to the tight-side tension
divided by the slack-side tension. As the tension ratio
increases, so does the potential for belt slippage.
TR D Tightside tension
Slackside tension

Working tension

Working tension or effective pull, TP, is the difference
between the tight-side tension and the slack-side tension:
TP (pounds) D Tightside tension (cid:4) Slackside tension

Bending tension

Bending tension, TB, occurs when the belt bends around
the pulley. The outside of the belt is in tension and the
inside is in compression. The amount of tension depends
on the belt’s construction and the pulley diameter.

58.2.1 Power transmission

Centrifugal tension

With belt drives, the force that produces work acts on the
rim of a pulley or sheave, causing it to rotate. Since a
belt on a drive must be tight enough to prevent slippage,
there is a belt-pulling force on both sides of a driven
wheel. When a drive is stationary or operating with no
power transmission, the forces on both sides of the driven
wheel are essentially equal. When the drive is transmitting
power, however, the forces are not the same. There is a
tight-side tension, TT, and a slack-side tension, TS. The
difference between these two forces (TT minus TS) is
called the working tension or effective or net pull. The
effective pull is applied at the rim of the pulley and is the
force that produces work.
Net pull (pounds) D Horsepower (Hp) ð

33, 000

Belt speed (fpm)

Belt speed is affected if the pulley or sheave diameter
is changed. When the driven-shaft speed is constant, dou-
bling the diameter of the pulley cuts the total belt speed
in half.

Very often, in high horsepower applications, designers

employ multiple belts in the drive components.

58.2.2 Belt tensions

A belt experiences three types of tension as it rotates
around a pulley: working tension, bending tension, and
centrifugal tension. The combination of tight side, bending,

Centrifugal tension, TC, occurs as the belt rotates around
the drive and is calculated by:
TC D MV2
Where:
TC D Centrifugal tension, pounds
M D Constant dependent on the belt weight and the
V D Belt velocity, feet per minute

pulley diameter

58.2.3 Selection of belts and pulleys

Belt and pulley selection is based on the design
requirements of a speciﬁc machine train and the machine
manufacturer will generally provide the belt system
speciﬁcations. The following information is the minimum
required for proper selection: horsepower requirements,
center-to-center dimensions of the drive and driven shafts,
and the process envelope.

The process envelope must deﬁne the full range of oper-
ating conditions that will be expected of the belt-drive sys-
tem. For example, will the drive operate continuously in
one direction or will it be subjected to start/stops or direc-
tion reversals? Will the drive system be subjected to radi-
cal speed changes or be used for braking the driven unit?
Such factors are important in that they help deﬁne the full
range of load dynamics that the belt system must accom-
modate. From this data, the appropriate service factor that

58/1046 Flexible Intermediate Drives

must be applied as part of the selection process can be
determined.

Belts

In the selection of V-belts, they can be completely spec-
iﬁed by deﬁning their cross-section and length. Nominal
dimensions are shown in Figure 58.1 as an aid in identi-
fying belt cross-sections.

Length

There are three ways to measure V-belt length: outside cir-
cumference (OC), datum length (DL) and effective length
(EL).

Outside circumference Outside circumference is mea-
sured by wrapping a tape measure around the outside
surface of the belt. This method is useful for obtaining
nominal dimensions, but does not give a truly accurate
measurement.

Datum length is a recent designation
Datum length
adopted by all belt manufacturers in order to retain stan-
dard belt and pulley designations. It more accurately re-
ﬂects the changes that have occurred in belt-pitch length
and pitch-line location within the belt. Standard V-belt
datum lengths are obtained from ANSI/RMA IP-20 (1988)
and are shown in Table 58.1.

The effective length is measured on a
Effective length
length-inspection machine. The machine consists of two
parallel shafts on movable centers with a scale to accu-
rately measure the center distance between shafts. Inspec-
tion pulleys of equal diameter and grooved in accordance
with industry standards are mounted on these shafts. A
belt is mounted on these pulleys and tensioned to a spec-
iﬁed force. The belt is rotated through at least three com-
plete revolutions to ensure that the tension is equalized
around the belt and that the belt is properly seated in the
grooves.

"A"

"B"

"C"

"D"

"E"

1/2

21/32

7/8

1–1/4

1–1/2

5/16

13/32

17/32

3/4

29/32

"3V"

"5V"

"8V"

Figure 58.1 Nominal cross-section dimensions

The effective length is deﬁned as the measured cen-
ter distance plus the outside circumference of one of the
inspection pulleys. This measurement method accounts
for the modulus of elasticity, or stretch ability, and dimen-
sional variations among belts with the same cross-section.

Number of belts and service factor

Few belt-drive systems use a single belt for power trans-
mission. The number of belts is determined by the horse-
power requirements of the machine train. Determination
of these requirements must be based on the full operating
range of the system. Rapid speed changes, direction rever-
sal, and other operating practices have a direct impact
on the requirements of the belt system. Therefore, the
selection process should be based on the most demanding
operating conditions.

Once the maximum horsepower required is determined,
the number of belts required for the application can be
determined by dividing the total horsepower by the cor-
rected horsepower rating of a single belt. This corrected
rating is obtained by applying a service factor to the horse-
power rating of a single belt to adjust its acceptable limit
to the variables of the process (e.g., speed and direction
changes, start/stop operation, side tension, and a variety
of other factors).

Cross-section

Always select belts to match the pulley grooves, using a
pulley-groove gage to determine the correct replacement
belt cross-section. On new applications, the design speci-
ﬁcations will indicate the proper belt size, both length and
cross-section (see Figure 58.1).

Use of matching belts in a set

In all applications, matching belts should be used in a belt
set. This practice ensures the best service life of the belts
and proper power transmission. Because of the need for
uniformity in cross-section and length, belt manufacturers
have adopted industry standards intended to assure such
uniformity. However, no two belts are ever exactly alike
due to manufacturing tolerances. Therefore, a matched set
is considered the closest match of belts available from a
manufacturer. As part of the quality control process, belt
manufacturers group them based on variations in cross-
section and length in order to provide the best possible
belt set.

For maximum service, replace V-belts with a complete
new set, even if only one belt in the set breaks. This
is important because a new V-belt will ride much higher
in the pulley groove than a worn belt. This is referred
to as ‘differential driving,’ meaning that the belts riding
higher in their respective grooves are actually traveling
faster than their lower-riding counterparts. This creates the
situation where one belt on a pulley is working against the
others. Therefore, replacing only one belt in the set will
cause the new belt to stretch much more rapidly than if the
entire set had been replaced. Note, however, that used
belts may be used in a much lighter-loaded machine
as a single belt or with belts from the same set.

Table 58.1 Classical V-belt standard datum length (ANSI/RMA PI-20, 1988)

Standard
length
designationa

Standard datum lengths

cross-section

A, AX

B, BX

C, CX

D

26
31
35
38
42
46
51
55
60
68
75
80
81
85
90
96
97
105
112
120
128
144
158
173
180
195
210
240
270
300
330
360
540
390
420
480
600
660

27.3
32.3
36.3
39.3
43.3
47.3
52.3
56.3
61.3
69.3
75.3
81.3
–
86.3
91.3
97.3
–

106.3
113.3
121.3
129.3

–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

–
–
36.8
39.8
43.8
47.8
52.8
56.8
61.8
69.8
76.8
–
82.8
86.8
91.8
–
98.8
106.8
113.8
121.8
129.8
145.8
159.8
174.8
181.8
196.8
211.8
240.3
270.3
300.3

–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

–
–
–
–
–
–
53.9
–
62.9
70.9
77.9
–
83.9
87.9
92.9
98.9
–

107.9
114.9
122.9
130.9
146.9
160.9
175.9
182.9
197.9
212.9
240.9
270.9
300.0
330.9
380
–

390.9
420.9

–
–
–

–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

123.3
131.3
147.3
161.3
176.3
183.3
198.3
213.3
240.8
270.8
300.8
330.8
360.8
540.8
390.8
420.8
480.8
600.8
660.8

Permissible
deviations
from std.
dantum
length
š0.06
š0.06
š0.06
š0.07
š0.07
š0.07
š0.07
š0.07
š0.07
š0.07
š0.07
š0.07
š0.07
š0.07
š0.08
š0.08
š0.08
š0.08
š0.08
š0.08
š0.08
š0.08
š1.0
š1.0
š1.0
š1.1
š1.1
š1.3
š1.6
š1.6
š2.0
š2.0
š3.3
š2.0
š3.3
š3.3
š3.3
š3.3

Belt drives 58/1047

Matching
limits for
one set

0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.30
0.30
0.30
0.30
0.30
0.30
0.30
0.30
0.30
0.30
0.30
0.30
0.30
0.45
0.45
0.45
0.45
0.45
0.45
0.60
0.60
0.60
0.60
0.90
0.75
0.75
0.75
0.90
0.90

Source:Machinery’sHandbook25, 25th edn, R. E. Green, editor, Industrial Press, Inc., New York, 1996.

Pulleys

Standard V-belt pulleys are speciﬁed with exact dimen-
sions as opposed to nominal. The industry adopted the
datum system in 1988 as the standard for specifying clas-
sic V-belt pulleys. Therefore, all pulley speciﬁcations
should be in datum dimensions rather than pitch. Indi-
vidual pulley dimensions are shown in Figure 58.2.

In applications where extreme vibration, belt twist, or
extreme misalignment is encountered, deep-groove pul-
leys are used to increase belt stability.

The magnitudes of the forces on a belt have signiﬁcant
impact on belt life. When a V-belt bends around a pulley,
compressive forces develop in the bottom of the belt and
tension forces develop in the top of the belt. The mag-
nitude of each force is a function of the diameter of the
pulley and the cross-section of the belt.

Forces increase with smaller diameters and larger cross-
sections. Therefore, minimum recommended diameters
were developed for each belt cross-section. These min-
imum diameters can be found in V-belt selection guides
provided by belt manufacturers. Using pulleys that are
below the recommended minimum will always result in
shorter belt life.

The National Electrical Manufacturers Association
(NEMA) has developed a standard that speciﬁes mini-
mum pulley diameters that should be used on electric
motors. Since motor bearings are speciﬁed using a rel-
atively small maximum overhung load, minimum pulley
diameters can have a dramatic effect on motor bearings.
The increase in tension that is created by smaller pul-
leys can transmit a potentially destructive side-load on
the bearings.

58/1048 Flexible Intermediate Drives

Groove
angle

W

D

X

i

.
a
d
 
h
c
t
i

P

0

.

7

˚

6

3

1

 

o

D

t
 

P

0

.

3

1

38˚

Over 17.0

P
D

Standard

section

PD

12.0 to 12.99

34˚

i

.
a
d
 
e
d
s
t
u
O

i

Figure 58.2 Typical pulley dimensions

58.3 Installation
Proper installation of V-belts is necessary to ensure trou-
ble-free operation and maximum service life of the belts.
The procedures and practices that should be followed in
a proper installation can be broken down into three major
categories: pre-installation inspections of the belt and pul-
ley, installation practices, and post-installation practices
(belt tension inspection and adjustment).

58.3.1 Pre-installation inspections

A thorough inspection of the belt-drive system compo-
nents (i.e., belt and pulleys) should be performed prior to
installing new or replacement belts and pulleys. However,
before conducting any inspection or maintenance, always
determine, understand, and follow all plant safety rules.

Safety

Before carrying out any inspections or maintenance proce-
dures on belt drives, make sure they are not in operation.
Equipment operators should electrically isolate the drive
system and lock-out and tag the machine that is to undergo
maintenance. Once this precaution has been taken, the
belts and pulleys can be removed from the machine for
inspection, cleaning, and repair.

Pulleys

Pulleys should be inspected prior to replacing belts to
ensure they are in good operating condition. Damaged,
worn, or dirty pulleys will reduce the effective lifetime
of belts signiﬁcantly. Wipe clean any oil or grease that
has accumulated on the pulley and use a stiff brush with
bristles that are softer than the pulley material to clean off
rust and dirt.

Never reinstall damaged or worn pulleys on equipment;
it is important to always repair or replace them. Always
select the proper pulley-groove gage and template for
the pulley diameter as shown in Figure 58.3. Inspect the

Figure 58.3 Illustration of a pulley groove gage

trueness of the sidewalls by inserting the gage into the
groove. Look for voids, which indicate ‘dishing’ or other
uneven and abnormal wear.
When the wear measurement reaches 0.01500, the pul-
ley is unacceptable for steel-cable-reinforced belts and at
0.02500 the pulley is unacceptable for use with any belt.

Belts

Nicks, scratches, or gouge marks on a pulley can cut into
a belt. Dirt abrades the belting material and wear grooves
cause a belt to ‘bottom-out’ in the groove, resulting in
slippage and ultimate damage to the belt.

Before installing onto a pulley, it is always a good idea
to place each belt into its pulley groove. Figure 58.4 is
an illustration of how a V-belt should sit in the pulley
16 -inch of
groove. The top of the belt should be within 1
the outer surface of the pulley. If the belt top is deeper
in the groove, the groove or belt is worn, which can
shorten the remaining belt life by as much as 50 per
cent. Figure 58.5 shows a belt gage, an alternate means
of determining belt wear, which measures belt total width
00 (i.e.,
(TW). For example, an 8V belt should measure 8
00, and a 3V belt should
8
1 inch), a 5V belt should measure 5
8
measure 3
8

00.

58.3.2 Installation practices

Although most belt manufacturers have stringent quality
assurance and control procedures in place to ensure that
belts will operate as designed, this does not guarantee their
performance if they are not properly installed and operated
under the conditions for which they are designed. There-
fore, it is important to consult and follow the installation

1/16" Max

1/32" Max
dished-out wear

Installation 58/1049

On most drives, a pulley can be moved or opened (e.g.,
a split pulley) to obtain the slack necessary to install a belt.
However, it is sometimes necessary to completely remove
a pulley from the shaft in order to perform the installation
without damaging the belt.

In addition, when installing multiple belts, it is imper-
ative that the slack side of each belt be on the same
side, either top or bottom. Tables 58.2 and 58.3 show
the minimum movement below and above the standard
center distance required between the pulleys. This move-
ment allows the center distance to be shortened for new
belt installation. It also allows the center distance to be
increased to take up the slack and to maintain proper ten-
sion as the belt stretches (Figure 58.6).

58.3.3 Post-installation practices

Post-installation practices are belt tension inspection and
adjustment.

Belt tension inspection

Figure 58.4 Illustration of how V-belts shouldsit in a pulley groove

1"

8V

5/8"

3/8"

5V

3V

Belt TW

00.

16

64 or 1 9

The following are the steps involved in checking the ten-
sion in conventional V-belt drives:
ž Measure the belt span, ‘t’.
ž Mark the center of the span, ‘t’. At the center mark,
use a tension tester and apply a force perpendicular to
the span that will be large enough to deﬂect the belt
00 for every inch of span length. For example, a 10000
1
64
span will require a deﬂection of 100
ž This is the correct deﬂection force for operating speeds
of 1000–3000 feet per minute. For belt speeds in excess
of 3000 feet per minute, reduce the deﬂection force
by 20 per cent. Check factory recommendations for
operating speeds less than 1000 fpm.
ž Compare the deﬂection force applied with the values
in the detection Tables 58.4 and 58.5. A force between
the value shown and 1.5 times (1.5ð) the value shown
should be satisfactory. A force below this value indi-
cates an under-tensioned drive, which may result in
slippage. A force above the tension value indicates an
over-tensioned drive, which may result in belt and drive
damage.
Note: A drive with newly installed belts can be tight-
ened initially to two times (2ð) the normal tension to
allow for the drop that occurs during the belt break-in
period.

Figure 58.5 Belt gage

Tension adjustments

procedure prescribed by the belt manufacturer, as well as
the one provided by the manufacturer of the equipment
on which it will be installed.

Today’s V-belts stretch as little as 1 per cent and, there-
fore, force should never be used during installation. If
belts are forced onto a pulley with a pry bar or by crank-
ing, damage will certainly occur. Therefore, if a belt fails
within the ﬁrst few hours of operation, the most probable
cause is damage during installation.

Prolonged slippage results in excessive belt surface wear,
friction burn spots, and general overheating – all of which
are very damaging to the belt. Therefore, tension should
be applied until slippage no longer occurs, which can be
veriﬁed using speed-ratio information. When the drive
is correctly set, the belts will appear snug. However,
there should be slight sag noticed on the loose side
when in motion. After the initial tension adjustment, some
additional tension should be applied to the belt in order
to partially compensate for:

58/1050 Flexible Intermediate Drives

Table 58.2 Minimum pulley center distance allowances for belt installation

Standard
length designation

Minimum allowance below standard center

distance for installation of belts

A

B

B

Torque
team

Up to and incl. 35
Over 35 to and incl. 55
Over 55 to and incl. 65

Over 65 to and incl. 112
Over 112 to and incl.144
Over 144 to and incl.180

0.7
5
0.7
5
0.7
5
1.0
0
1.0
0

Over 180 to and incl. 210
Over 210 to and incl. 240
Over 240 to and incl. 300

Over 300 to and incl. 390
Over 390

1.50
1.50
1.50

1.60
1.80
1.90

1.90
2.00
2.20

1.0
0
1.0
0
1.2
5
1.2
5
1.2
5
1.2
5
1.5
0
1.5
0
1.5
0

C

1.5
0
1.5
0

1.5
0
1.5
0
2.0
0
2.0
0
2.0
0
2.0
0
2.0
0
2.5
0

C

Torque
team

D

E

D

Torque
team

2.00
2.00

2.00
2.10
2.20

2.30
2.50
2.50

2.00
2.00

2.90
3.00

2.00
2.50
2.50

3.20
3.20
3.50

2.70
2.90

2.50
3.00

3.60
4.10

2.5
0

2.5
0
2.5
0
3.0
0
3.0
0
3.5
0

Table 58.3 Minimum pulley center distance allowances for HY-T wedge V-belt installation

Standard
length designation

Minimum allowance below standard center

distance for installation of belts

Up to and incl.475
Over 475 to and
incl. 710
Over 710 to and incl.
1060

Over 1060 to and
incl. 1250
Over 1250 to and
incl. 1700
Over 1700 to and
incl. 2000
Over 2000 to and
incl. 2360
Over 2360 to and
incl. 2650
Over 2650 to and
incl. 3000
Over 3000 to and
incl. 3550
Over 3550 to and Incl. 3750
Over 3750 to and
incl. 5000

A

0.
5
0.
8
0.
8
0.
8
0.
8

B

1.
2
1.
4
1.
4
1.
4
1.
4

B

Torque
team

1.0
1.0

1.0
1.0
1.0

1.2
1.2
1.2

C

2.1
2.1

2.1
2.1
2.1

2.4
2.4
2.4

1.2

2.4

C

Torque
team

1.5

1.5
1.5
1.8

1.8
1.8
1.8

2.0
2.0
2.0

D

3.
4

3.
4
3.
4
3.
6
3.
6
3.
6
3.
6
4.
0
4.
4.
0

Minimum allowances
above standard center
distance for maintaining
tension (all cross-sections)

1.00
1.50
2.00

2.50
3.00
3.50

4.00
4.50
5.00

6.00

1.5% or belt length

Minimum allowances
above standard center
distance for maintaining
tension (all cross-sections)

1.0
1.2
1.5

1.6
2.2
2.5

3.0
3.2
3.5

4.0
4.5
5.5

Shorter center distance for V-belt installation

Table 58.4 Deﬂection chart for V-belts (tension in pounds
force)

Problem areas 58/1051

Cross-
section

3V
3V
5V
5V
8V
8V

small

diameter

range

2.65 to 3.65
4.12 to 6.90
7.1 to 10.9
11.8 to 16.0
12.5 to 17.0
18.0 to 22.4

For

normal
tension

3.1
4.5
12
14
28
33

For
2ð
1 1
normal
tension

4.5
6.5
18
21
42
50

ž Maintain pulley alignment with a strong straightedge
tool or, at a minimum, string while tensioning V-belts
(Figure 58.8).
ž Do not over tension belts as it shortens belt and bearing
life. The ideal tension is the lowest at which the belt
will not slip under peak load conditions.
ž Inspect the V-belt drive periodically and re-tension the
ž Use a strobe light to inspect belts in operation by timing
the strobe to appear to slow-roll the drive. The belts that
are slipping will appear to be running at a slower speed
than the ones that are correctly set.
ž Keep belts free from foreign material that may cause

belts if slipping occurs.

slippage.

58.4 Problem areas
Problem areas in belt drives include noises, such as squeal-
ing and squeaking (sometimes referred to as chirping);
contamination from dirt, oil, and grease; belt damage,
such as cracking, heat damage, stretching, and added load
damage; and excessive belt whipping.

58.4.1 Belt noise

Belt noise can take the form of squeals and squeaks or
chirps, both of which are generally more annoying than

Center distance

Longer center distance for V-belt take-up

Figure 58.6 Distance required between pulleys

Belt span

Figure 58.7 Belt deﬂection force

ž Initial belt stretch, and
ž Slack caused by belt settling due to the soft rubber sur-
face of the outer envelope being abraded away, which
causes the belt to settle lower in the groove.

These changes occur during what is referred to as the
run-in period. Once run-in, the slack on the new belts
must be taken up to eliminate slippage, burning, or other
irreparable damage. The following are common sense
rules of V-belt tensioning:
ž Check the belt tension frequently during the ﬁrst 24 to

48 hours of run-in operation.

Table 58.5 Deﬂection chart for CVS, HY-T, and torque-ﬂex belts

Cross-section

A
A
A
B
B
B
C
C
D
D
E

Small

diameter

range

CVS

HY-T

Torque-ﬂex

Pounds
force for
normal

horsepower

Pounds

force for 1 1
2

normal

horsepower

Pounds
force for
normal

horsepower

Pounds
force for
normal

horsepower

Pounds
force for
normal

horsepower

Pounds

force for 1 1
2

normal

horsepower

3.0–3.5
3.8–4.8
5.0–7.0
3.4–4.2
4.4–5.6
5.8–8.6
7.0–9.0
9.5–16.0
12.0–16.0
18.0–27.0
20.0–32.0

3.2
3.8
4.4
4.6
5.8
7.1
11.5
14.4
24.4
29.5

4.5
5.2
6.0
6.1
8.0
10.0
15.4
20.0
33.9
41.8

3.6
4.3
5.0
4.9
6.5
8.2
15.5
16.9
28.1
34.7

5.2
6.2
7.2
6.9
9.3
11.8
22.1
24.3
40.9
50.4

5.0
5.9
6.7
7.1
7.7
9.6
16.9
18.8

7.0
8.4
9.6
10.1
11.0
13.8
23.6
27.4

58/1052 Flexible Intermediate Drives

Angular

Parallel

Sheave groove

NOT THIS WAY

Straight

edge

Squeaks

The following are some of the reasons for belt squeaking,
which is often described as sounding like a bird chirping:
ž Dry bearing
ž Belts working in a dusty environment
ž Misaligned idler pulley

Contamination

Common sources of belt contamination are dirt, oil, and
grease, all of which should be removed from belts and
pulleys. Dirt accelerates belt wear and belt traction is
impaired when dirt is allowed to build up.

Do not expose belt drives to oil or grease under any
circumstances! Potential sources of oil and grease include
leaking bearings, which should be repaired immediately. It
is important to avoid over-applying lubricants to bearings,
but note that under-application can contribute to early fail-
ure with resulting damage to belts due to friction build-up
and drag. If oily conditions cannot be avoided, special
oil-resistant belts should be used.

Adjust to bring faces of sheaves true

Belt damage

Pull
line
taut

Use care as line easily distorted

Figure 58.8 Proper way to tension belts

damaging. Noise commonly occurs with all types and
makes of belts. Because of this, maintenance people often
regard them as an operational noise and do not show much
concern.

Important: Squeals and squeaks are not corrected by
applying grease or oil to the surface of belts. This can
cause serious belt damage!

Squeals

Although squeals are annoying and will not cause
immediate harm to the belts, it does indicate that there
may be a problem and, therefore, they should not be
ignored. The following are some of the causes of belt
squealing.
ž Insufﬁcient belt tension. This is a common cause and
if squealing persists after belts are tensioned correc-
tly,
the drive itself should be examined for over-
loading.

ž Motors operating near or at full load
ž Motor acceleration
ž Misaligned idler pulley
ž Dry and dusty belts

Types of belt damage to watch for are cracking, which can
be caused by excessive heat and dust; stretching; added
load damage; and damage as a result of belt whipping.

Cracking can be caused by exposure to high
Cracking
temperature and/or dust. Cracking on the bottom sections
of belts does not cause a loss of strength or operating
efﬁciency, but can lead to eventual failure. Nevertheless,
there is no need to replace belts simply because bottom
cracking has been detected.

In the manufacturing process, belts are
Extreme heat
cured with scientiﬁcally controlled heat for given periods
of time. If standard belts are operated below 140°F, their
materials of construction are not affected. However, at
temperatures above 140°F, over-curing will occur and belt
life will be shortened. Therefore, the use of standard V-
belts above this temperature should be avoided. Often,
adequate shielding between the heat source and belts can
be provided.

Dust Dust can be very detrimental to belts and is often
responsible for bottom cracks. The effects of dust can be
slowed down greatly and possibly eliminated by installing
larger pulleys and larger reverse idler pulleys.

Added load damage Added loads shorten effective belt
life. Always check to see if any other load has been added
to the belt drive since original installation. Figure 58.9
illustrates the possible effects an added load may have on
the motor belt life.

Stretching All belts stretch, giving the appearance of
ﬂopping up and down when running. When this occurs,
check bearings to ensure that they are free to turn and
that there is no overload resulting from obstructions. Also

This added load

might reduce
motor belt life
to 18 months

These belts

might run this drive

for five years

Summary 58/1053

Are these belts 
overloaded now?

Figure 58.9 Added load

Figure 58.10 Belt whipping

check for pulley wear; worn pulleys create the impression
that the belts are too long.

Excessive belt whip is usually more
Excessive belt whip
common on long-center applications (applications where
the distance between the two pulley shafts is great).
Pulsating loads in the drive system can produce this

phenomenon. Damage to the system is often in the form
of belt breakage and/or bearing failure. Belt whip can
be corrected by installing an idler pulley to dampen the
vibration.

58.4.2 Troubleshooting V-belts

Several causes of V-belt failure and the action required to
correct
section.
the problem are described in this
Table 58.6 provides a troubleshooting overview.

58.5 Summary
The ﬁrst rule for long belt life is to maintain correct belt
tension. Loose belts slip, causing belt and pulley wear.
The snapping action of loose belts adds sudden stress and
often breaks the belt. To test for tension, press down ﬁrmly

Table 58.6 Troubleshooting V-belts
ž Cause of failure: Ply separation caused by substandard pulley diameter (Figure 58.11).

Figure 58.11 Failure due to substandard pulley diameter

(continued overleaf )

58/1054 Flexible Intermediate Drives

Table 58.6 (continued)
ž Action required: Redesign drive to utilize proper size pulleys.
ž Cause of failure: Rough pulley sidewalls cause the cover to wear off in an uneven pattern

(Figure 58.12).

Figure 58.12 Failure due to rough pulley sidewalls
ž Action required: File or machine out the rough spot on the pulley groove. If it is beyond
ž Cause of failure: Belt has evenly spaced deep bottom cracks from use of substandard

repair, replace the pulley.

backside idler (Figure 58.13).

Figure 58.13 Failure due to use of substandard backside idler
ž Action required: Replace backside idler with one that is in accordance with the minimum
ž Cause of failure: Back of the belt rubbing on a belt guard or other component (Figure 58.14).

size recommendation.

Figure 58.14 Failure due to belt rubbing guard
ž Action Required: Provide adequate clearance between belt and guard of other component.
ž Cause of failure: Tensile breaks caused by high shock loads, foreign objects lodged under

the belt, or damage sustained during installation (Figure 58.15).

Table 58.6 (continued)

Summary 58/1055

Figure 58.15 Failure due to tensile breaks
ž Action required: Maintain proper drive tension and installation procedures. Provide guards to
ž Cause of failure: Excessive exposure to oil or grease causing the belt to become soft and

keep foreign material from coming in contact with the drive.

swell, resulting in the bottom envelope seam splitting open (Figure 58.16).

Figure 58.16 Failure due to excessive exposure to oil or grease
ž Action required: Provide splashguards, do not over lubricate or clean belts with solvent.
ž Cause of failure: Weathering or ‘crazing’ caused by the elements and aggravated by small

pulleys (Figure 58.17).

Figure 58.17 Failure due to a combination of weathering and small pulleys

(continued overleaf )

58/1056 Flexible Intermediate Drives

Table 58.6 (continued)
ž Action required: Replace belt set and provide weather protection for the drive.
ž Cause of failure: Cut bottom and sidewall indicates that the belt was pried over the pulley

and damaged during installation (Figure 58.18).

Figure 58.18 Failure due to installation damage
ž Action required: Use the proper length of belt and move tensioning all the way ‘in’ when
ž Cause of failure: Spin burn caused by a frozen or locked driven pulley (Figure 58.19).

installing the belt.

Figure 58.19 Failure due to frozen or locked driven pulley
ž Action required: Determine that the drive components turn freely and tighten the belt if
ž Cause of failure: Worn pulley grooves allow the joined belt to ride too low thus cutting

necessary.

through to the top band (Figure 58.20).

Figure 58.20 Failure due to worn pulley grooves
ž Action required: Replace pulleys and maintain proper belt tension and pulley alignment.
ž Cause of failure: Split on side at the belt pitch-line indicates use of a pulley with a

substandard diameter (Figure 58.21).

Table 58.6 (continued)

Summary 58/1057

Figure 58.21 Failure due to use of pulley with substandard diameter
ž Action required: Redesign drive to utilize proper size pulleys.
ž Cause of failure: The load-carrying member has been broken by a shock load or damaged

during operation (Figure 58.22).

Figure 58.22 Failure due to shock load or damage during operation
ž Action required: Maintain proper tensioning and observe proper installation procedures.
ž Cause of failure: Web fabrics wear caused by improper belt and pulley ﬁt (Figure 58.23).

Figure 58.23 Failure due to improper belt and pulley ﬁt
ž Action required: Check out belt/pulley ﬁt and replace worn or out-of-spec pulleys.
ž Cause of failure: Flange wear on belt (Figure 58.24).

Figure 58.24 Failure due to ﬂange wear

(continued overleaf )

58/1058 Flexible Intermediate Drives

Table 58.6 (continued)
ž Action required: Adjust and maintain proper pulley alignment.
ž Cause of failure: Tooth shear caused by belt overload condition from improper application

or shock loads (Figure 58.25).

Figure 58.25 Failure due to belt overload
ž Action required: Consult engineering manual for proper application and maintain proper belt

tension.

on each belt. If there is proper tension, you can depress
the belt an amount equal to the thickness of the belt for
each 4 feet of center-to-center distance.

Keep pulleys aligned or excessive belt and pulley wear
will occur. Shafts that are not parallel are very common
and are the biggest contributor to early belt failure. In
such cases, belts work harder on one side than on the
other and wear faster. As a result, the entire belt set will
need to be replaced. Misalignment in the pulley only is
indicated by belt cover and pulley wear.

In addition to the need for pulleys to be aligned, pul-
ley grooves must be smooth. Dust, oil and other foreign
matter cause pitting and rust and ‘dished-out’ sidewalls
ruin belts very quickly. If a shiny pulley bottom is show-
ing, it indicates wear on the pulley groove, belt, or both.
The biggest problem with badly worn grooves is that they
cause the belt to ride lower than other belts on the same
pulley. This results in ‘differential driving,’ meaning that
the belts riding higher in their respective grooves are actu-
ally traveling faster than their lower-riding counterparts.
This creates the situation where one belt on a pulley is
working against the others.

58.6 Chain drives and sprockets
This section is an overview of ﬂexible drive chains
and sprockets. It provides the basic knowledge required
to install, operate, and service this means of power
transmission.

58.6.1 Chain drives

Like V-belts, chain drives are used to transmit power
from a driver, such as an electric motor, to a driven unit.

Typically, chain drives are used in applications where
space is limited or obstructions prevent direct coupling
of machine-train components (e.g., timing chain in an
engine).

Unlike V-belts, chain drives do not rely on friction
to deliver power. As a result, transmission of power is
positive (i.e., no slippage) and in many ways resembles
the action of gears. A chain is constructed in such a way
that it provides a connection between the teeth of the drive
pinion and driven sprockets.

Operating characteristics

Since chain drives are designed to provide positive
transmission of power from the pinion to the driven
sprocket, there is little loss of efﬁciency. When properly
installed, chain drives can approach 98 per cent efﬁciency.
However, they are somewhat limited in speed and span.

Speed limitations

The dynamics of power transmission chain drives are
not conducive to high-speed operation. Since proper
installation requires some looseness in the chain, they
tend to separate from the sprockets at higher speeds. In
general, transmission chains are limited to a maximum
sprocket speed of 3,600 revolutions per minute (rpm).

Span limitations

The span or center-to-center distance between sprock-
ets is another
to
control with long spans. Therefore,
the total distance
between sprockets must be limited to insure proper
operation.

limitation. Chain sag is difﬁcult

Horsepower

Properly designed chain drives can transmit almost
unlimited power. As a result,
this type of drive is
suitable for low- to moderate-speed applications where
the transmission of high force is needed.

Chain tension

Like V-belts, chains tend to stretch during prolonged
operation. When this occurs, excessive looseness permits
the chain to separate from the sprockets. Therefore,
periodic inspection of chain tension is essential for proper
operation of chain drives. Excessive looseness can be
corrected by removing one or more links from the chain.

Types of chains

Types of chains that will be discussed in this section are:
roller, leaf, and silent chains.

Probably the most common of all chains
Roller chains
is the roller chain, which is found in applications such as:
ž Timing drives in combustion engines
ž Machinery drives
ž Conveyor drives
ž Fork lift trucks
ž Most photocopiers
ž Bicycles and motorcycles

Because of

the versatility of

roller chain drives,
certain standards have been established. With these
standards, interchangeability of chains is possible between
one manufacturer and another. As long as chains are
identiﬁable, they can be cross-referenced easily without
any serious operational problems arising. Table 58.7
shows the standard roller chain American Standards
Association (ASA) number by pitch length for single,
double, and triple strand chains.

The roller chain uses a steel roller to engage the sproc-
ket. The rolling action between the roller and the proﬁle
of the sprocket teeth causes the roller to rotate on a
bushing, creating less friction than the traditional belt
drives. There is some axial sliding action between the
roller and bushing.

Chain drives and sprockets 58/1059

Table 58.7 Roller chain numbers by chain pitch

Chain pitch
(inches)

ASA Number

Single
strand

Double
strand

Triple
strand

1
4
3
8
1
2
1
2
5
8
3
4
1
1 1
4
1 1
2
1 3
4
2
2 1
4
2 1
2
3

25
35
40
41
50
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
240

25-2
35-2
40-2

50-2
60-2
80-2
100-2
120-2
140-2
160-2
180-2
200-2
240-2

25-3
35-3
40-3

50-3
60-3
80-3
100-3
120-3
140-3
160-3
180-3
200-3
240-3

Source: American Standards Association

As with high-horsepower belt drive applications,
chain drive designers often employ multiple chains. As
illustrated in Figure 58.26, the chains in a multiple chain
drive are all of the same size as a single roller chain (i.e.,
the pitch and roller sizes are all the same).

Roller chains are constructed by connecting two side
plates together with pins that have bushings and rollers
attached. The side plates are classiﬁed as either the pin
link or roller link. The pin links are located outside the
roller links and connect the roller links together. This
provides an alternate pin and roller link combination.

As shown in Figure 58.27, the pins extend through the
pin links. They are then usually riveted to one side plate,
passed through the roller links, and then riveted to the
outside of the other side plate. The roller link is formed by
placing the rollers onto the bushings and, ﬁnally, pressing
the roller plate links onto the bushings. This makes the
roller link a solid unit.

Leaf chains are usually not considered to
Leaf chains
be power transmission chains (see Figure 58.28). Instead,
they are most often used in applications, such as hoisting

Figure 58.26 Single and quadruple roller chains

58/1060 Flexible Intermediate Drives

Figure 58.27 Types of pins

devices on fork lift trucks, where linear force must be
transmitted.

They are designed to provide a ﬂexible link between a
power supply, such as a hydraulic cylinder, and another
machine component. Leaf chains do not have any rollers
or other sprocket-engaging device. They are designed with
connector links located at each end of the chain that can be
used to connect the drive and driven machine components.

Silent chains (Figure 58.29) are similar
Silent chains
to leaf chains in that neither
incorporate rollers to
facilitate mating to sprockets. However, a silent chain is
designed for power transmission as opposed to linear force
transmission. It has a tooth contour on its driving face that
is designed to mate with sprockets and provide positive
power
is radically
different
it
makes contact with both the leading and trailing edges

than that of the roller-type chain in that

transmission. This tooth contour

Figure 58.28 Typical leaf chain

Double guide

Non-flange
silent chain

Duplex
silent chain

Figure 58.29 Three different silent chains

of the sprocket during operation. The close tolerance
contact with the leading and trailing edges result in ‘silent’
operation as well as provide the ability for reverse driving
of a sprocket.

Drives such as pumps, fans, blowers, and many other
types of machinery commonly employ silent chains as
their prime source of power transmission. Because of their
unique design, silent chains provide the most positive
means of traction. Because of this, they often are used
in important applications such as timing drives on critical
equipment.

Silent chains are similar to roller chains in that each has
a master or connecting link to facilitate ease of installation
and removal from a machine. They are usually made
of high-carbon steel or heat-treated steel alloys. As a
result, this type of chain provides trouble-free service for
extended periods.

Chain length

Proper sizing of a chain is extremely important. The
following procedure can be used to determine the proper
chain length:
ž Remove the chain from the sprockets and lay it on a
ž To remove slack from the chain measured in a
horizontal position, use Table 58.8 and apply the

smooth, horizontal surface or suspend it vertically.

Table 58.8 Chain measuring loads

Chain Number

Link-belt

ANSI

Measuring load (pounds

per strand)

RC 35
RC 40
RC 50
RC 60
RC 80
RC 100
RC 120
RC 140
RC 160
RC 180
RC 200
RC 240

35
40
50
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
240

18
31
49
70
125
195
281
383
500
633
781
1125

Source:Original source unknown

load recommended for the chain size being checked.
To determine the measuring load for multiple-strand
chains, multiply the load from Table 58.8 by the
number of strands in the total chain width:
Measuring load D Pound/strand ð Number of strands
For example, from Table 58.8, an RC120 chain should
have a measuring load of 281 pounds per strand. There-
fore, a four-strand chain should have the following mea-
suring load:
Measuring load D 281 pound/strand ð 4 strands

D 1124 pounds

ž If the chain has to be measured on the sprockets, take
up the slack on the chain and apply enough tension
to keep it taut. See Figure 58.30 for guidance. Several
measurements will have to be made until the entire
chain is measured.
ž Now you have the measured length. To calculate the

(cid:1)

(cid:2)

proper length, L:
C n
L D 2C C N
2
2

C

N (cid:4) n
2(cid:14)

ð 1
C

Where:
L D Proper chain length in number of pitches
C D Center distance between the sprockets in

pitches

M e a s u r i n g   l e n g t h

Figure 58.30 Illustration of recommended procedure for measur-
ing chain length

Chain drives and sprockets 58/1061

N D Number of teeth in larger sprocket
n D Number of teeth in smaller sprocket

ž The length obtained by this formula should be rounded
upward to the nearest whole number. For a roller chain,
the resultant number must be raised to the nearest even
whole number of pitches or an offset link must be used
to obtain the proper installed length. The proper chain
length in inches is found by multiplying L by the pitch
for the ASA type from Table 58.7.
ž Compare the calculated proper chain length with the
measurement taken. If the measurement exceeds the
calculated proper chain length, replace the chain.

If a chain breaks or fails due to broken pins, sidebars,
or rollers, temporary emergency repairs may be required
to prevent a lengthy shutdown. Please note, however,
the entire replacement of the chain is preferred for the
following reasons:

1. If a section has broken due to fatigue, it is highly
probable that other sections will have suffered similar
fatigue and could be subject to early failure.

2. If the chain has been broken by a single high overload,
other components besides those in the immediate
region of the failure will usually be bent or severely
weakened.

Chain installation and tensioning

teeth.

If

Before installing a new chain, carefully check all
sprocket
the teeth are worn to a hooked
shape, the sprockets should be replaced to assure full-
capacity performance and satisfactory life from the new
chain. Because chain drives are not as ﬂexible as belt
drives, caution must be exercised during installation. The
following steps should be observed during installation:
ž Install the chain with a slight amount of sag on the
slack side with the driving side in tension. Chain sag
4 inch for every 10 inches of
should be approximately 1
sprocket centers.
ž Install chain guards to ensure protection of personnel.
ž Ensure that the chain is properly lubricated before start-
ž Periodically inspect the chain drive for signs of wear
ž Follow plant

and the condition of the oil.

safety guidelines

and maintenance

up.

procedures when installing a chain drive.

Tensioning

Proper tension is essential when installing a new chain.
A tight chain causes an additional load, which increases
wear on chain joints, sprocket teeth, and shaft bearings.
A slack chain produces vibration, which may result in
excessive chain wear, noise, or shock loading.

Proper chain tension is obtained by adjusting the sag
(catenary) in the unloaded span. For most horizontal and
inclined drives, the chain should be installed with a depth
of sag amounting to approximately 2 per cent of the
sprocket centers (Table 58.9).

58/1062 Flexible Intermediate Drives

Table 58.9 Various sprocket
centers and sag

Sprocket centers
(inches)

Sag

(inches)

20
30
40
60
80
100
125

0.50
0.63
0.88
1.25
1.63
2.00
2.50

Source: Original source unknown

To measure sag (Figure 58.31), pull the bottom span
of the chain taut, allowing all of the excess chain to
accumulate in the upper span. Place a straightedge on
top of the sprockets and use a scale to measure sag.

install

the chain almost

For drives on vertical centers or those subject

to
conditions such as shock loads, rotation reversals, or
dynamic braking,
is
essential
to inspect such drives regularly for correct
tension.

taut. It

Alignment

Like all drive components, proper alignment is crucial to
the smooth operation of a chain drive. If the sprockets
are not parallel and in the same plane, the chain will lose
contact with the sprocket teeth and drive-train failure will
occur.

Sprocket alignment should be veriﬁed by placing a
straightedge along the side face of both the driver and
driven sprockets. The straightedge should fully contact
the faces of both sprockets. If a gap is observed on either
face, re-align the shafts.

Figure 58.31 Proper technique to measure sag (Ref. 2)

Lubrication
With the increased speed and horsepower capabilities of
modern chain drives, the role of lubrication has increased
in importance. The precision roller chain is actually a
series of connected journal bearings and it is essential
that lubrication minimizes the metal-to-metal contact of
the pin/bushing joints of the chain. Many factors affect
lubrication performance and chain life including heat,
improper lubrication, windage, contamination, and oil
viscosity.

Indications of improper lubrication
A lubricant-starved chain drive shows a brownish or rusty
coloration around the joints and in the roller-bushing areas
when the link is disassembled and the pin inspected.
The normal highly polished surface of the pin will have
deteriorated to a roughened, grooved, or galled surface
that can eventually destroy the hardened surfaces of the
chain parts and increase wear until the drive is completely
destroyed. This also will be true if a lubricant that does
not meet the chain’s technical speciﬁcations is used.

Heat
Proper chain-drive lubrication increases drive life by
dissipating frictional heat generated in the joint area.
Heat varies according to the chain speed, horsepower
transmitted, center distance, sprocket ratio, drive size,
amount of lubricant, and viscosity. It generally ranges
from surrounding temperature to 60 to 70°F above the
ambient temperature. Normal chain drive temperatures
should not exceed 180°F.

Windage
A chain drive can run through a sump of good lubricant
and still be destroyed from lack of lubrication. This can
occur at chain speeds approaching 3,000 feet per minute
(fpm), which blows the lubricant out of the chain’s path.
In high-horsepower, high-speed drives, it is necessary
to use pressurized lubrication streams to ensure proper
lubrication of the articulating components and to dissipate
the heat generated. In this situation,
is
sprayed onto the inside of
the chain as it enters
the sprockets, allowing centrifugal force to carry the
lubricating material through the joints.

the lubricant

Contamination
Lubricants must be protected from dirt and moisture.
A ﬁltration system should be utilized to remove such
abrasive particles and minimize wear on the drive chain.

Oil viscosity
A good grade of lubricant should be used to maximize
the life of a chain drive due to wear. Lubricants
containing anti-foam, anti-rust, and/or ﬁlm-strength-
enhancing additives may be useful. It is essential that
the lubricant reach the sideplate-wearing surfaces and
pin/bushing areas. Normally, heavy oils and greases are
not recommended. The lubricant should be free-ﬂowing

Table 58.10 Lubricant recommended by temperature

Temperature (°F)

Recommended lubricant

20–40
40–100
100–120
120–140

SAE 20
SAE 30
SAE 40
SAE 50

Source:Original source unknown.

at the prevailing temperature (see Table 58.10). The type
of lubricant is dictated by the speed of the chain and the
amount of power transmitted. The choice of lubrication
method is determined by the drive itself.

58.6.2 Sprockets

There is a wide variety of commercially available
sprockets. While they may vary in design, methods of
manufacture, and materials of construction, they all have
some common features. They will all have hardened teeth
designed to mate with a speciﬁc type of chain, sufﬁcient
web strength to effectively transmit their rated horsepower
or torsional forces, and a boss or hub that can be bored
to the mating shaft’s diameter.

Sprocket types

Sprockets can be either a solid-type body or cast with
spokes. They also may be split into two halves to facilitate
easy access during maintenance activities.

References 58/1063

Sprockets can be fabricated from machined
Fabricated
parts such as hubs, webs, and rings. The actual material
used in their construction is determined by the speciﬁc
application. The teeth on most of the fabricated sprockets
are hardened after the machining process to provide longer
wear life.

The teeth on cast iron sprockets are formed in a
Cast
special pattern and chilled to create a hardened wearing
surface at the tooth area.

Mounting conﬁgurations

A variety of mounting conﬁgurations are used to attach
sprockets to their mating shafts. The most common has
a tapered keyway that acts as a wedge when the key is
driven in. No setscrews are provided with this type of key
installation.

Hub diameters are larger when keys are used to
ensure extra strength for power transmission purposes. In
addition, some hubs will have tapered bushings instead of
straight bores and key seats.

References

1. Oberg, E.,

Jones, F. D., Horton, H. L.

Ryffel, H. H.,
Machinery’sHandbook25, 25th edn, Industrial Press Inc., New
York (1996).

and

2. Nelson, C. A., Millwrights and Mechanics Guide, Macmillan

Publishing Company, New York (1986).

3. Mobley, R. K., Maintenance Fundamentals, Butterworth-

Heinemann, Woburn, MA (1999).

59

59/1065

Couplings and
Clutches

R Keith Mobley
The Plant Performance Group

Contents

59.1 Introduction
59.2 Fundamentals of couplings

59/1067

59/1067

59/1067

59.2.1 Types
59.2.2 Selection 59/1071
59.2.3 Installation
59.2.4 Lubrication and maintenance

59/1072

59/1073

59.3 Keys, keyways and keyseats

59/1074

59.3.1 Determining keyway depth and width
59.3.2 Keyway manufacturing tolerances
59/1076
59.3.3 Key stress calculations
59.3.4 Shaft stress calculations
59/1077

59/1075

59/1076

59.4 Fundamentals of clutches
59.4.1 Types of clutches
59.4.2 Maintenance

59/1079

59/1077
59/1078

Fundamentals of couplings 59/1067

59.1 Introduction
This module discusses two important drive-train compo-
nents: couplings and clutches. Each of these components
is used to connect a driver (i.e., power source) shaft to the
shaft of the driven unit. Such a connection allows torsional
force to be converted into work in the driven unit. Keys
and keyways, which are required to prevent slippage and
to guarantee positive power with such connections, are
also discussed.

Flanged A ﬂanged rigid coupling is comprised of two
halves, one located on the end of the driver shaft and the
other on the end of the driven shaft. These halves are
bolted together to form a solid connection. To positively
transmit torque, the coupling incorporates axially ﬁtted
keys and split circular key rings or dowels, which elim-
inate frictional dependency for transmission. The use of
ﬂanged couplings is restricted primarily to vertical pump
shafts. A typical ﬂanged rigid coupling is illustrated in
Figure 59.1.

Couplings

Couplings are mechanical devices used to connect the
shaft of a driver (e.g., motor, turbine, etc.) to the shaft
of a driven unit (e.g., fan, pump, etc.). The purpose of a
coupling is to transmit rotary motion and/or torque on a
continuous basis without slippage.

Clutches

Clutches are designed to transmit intermittent power to a
driven unit. Unlike a normal coupling, which maintains
constant power transmission between the driver and the
driven unit, a clutch is designed to alternately engage and
disengage. When engaged, the clutch transmits full tor-
sional power to the driven unit. When disengaged, the
clutch disconnects the driver from the driven unit.

59.2 Fundamentals of couplings
Couplings are designed to provide two functions: (1) to
transmit torsional power between a power source and
driven unit and (2) to absorb torsional variations in the
drive train. They are not designed to correct misalignment
between two shafts. While certain types of couplings pro-
vide some correction for slight misalignment, reliance on
these devices to obtain alignment is not recommended.

59.2.1 Types

The sections to follow provide overviews of the more
common coupling types: rigid and ﬂexible. Also discussed
are couplings used for special applications: ﬂoating-shaft
(spacer) and ﬂuid (hydraulic).

Rigid

A rigid coupling permits neither axial nor radial relative
motion between the shafts of the driver and driven unit.
When the two shafts are connected solidly and properly,
they operate as a single shaft. A rigid coupling is primarily
used for vertical applications, e.g., vertical pump. Types
of rigid couplings discussed in this section are ﬂanged,
split, and compression.

Flanged couplings are used where there is free access to
both shafts. Split couplings are used where access is lim-
ited on one side. Both ﬂanged and split couplings require
the use of keys and keyways. Compression couplings are
used when it is not possible to use keys and keyways
(e.g., brass shafts).

Split A split rigid coupling, also referred to as a clamp
coupling, is basically a sleeve that is split horizontally
along the shaft and held together with bolts. It is clamped
over the adjoining ends of the driver and driven shafts,
forming a solid connection. Clamp couplings are used
primarily on vertical pump shafting. A typical split rigid
coupling is illustrated in Figure 59.2. As with the ﬂanged
coupling, the split rigid coupling incorporates axially ﬁt-
ted keys and split circular key-rings to eliminate frictional
dependency in the transmission of torque.

Compression A rigid compression coupling is comprised
of three pieces: a compressible core and two encompass-
ing coupling halves that apply force to the core. The core
is comprised of a slotted bushing that has been machine
bored to ﬁt both ends of the shafts. It also has been taper
machined on its external diameter from the center outward

Figure 59.1 Typical ﬂanged rigid coupling

Figure 59.2 Typical split rigid coupling

59/1068 Couplings and Clutches

Figure 59.3 Typical compression rigid coupling

to both ends. The coupling halves are ﬁnish bored to ﬁt
this taper. When the coupling halves are bolted together,
the core is compressed down on the shaft by the two halves
and the resulting frictional grip transmits the torque with-
out the use of keys. A typical compression coupling is
illustrated in Figure 59.3.

Flexible

Flexible couplings, which are classiﬁed as mechanical
ﬂexing, material ﬂexing, or combination, allow the
coupled shafts to slide or move relative to each other.
Although clearances are provided to permit movement
within speciﬁed tolerance limits, ﬂexible couplings are not
designed to compensate for major misalignments. (Shafts
must be aligned to less than 0.002 inches for proper
operation.) Signiﬁcant misalignment creates a whipping
movement of the shaft, adds thrust
to the shaft and
bearings, causes axial vibrations, and leads to premature
wear or failure of equipment.

Mechanical ﬂexing

Mechanical-ﬂexing couplings provide a ﬂexible connec-
tion by permitting the coupling components to move or
slide relative to each other. In order to permit such move-
ment, clearance must be provided within speciﬁed limits.
It is important to keep cross-loading on the connected
shafts at a minimum. This is accomplished by providing
adequate lubrication to reduce wear on the coupling com-
ponents. The most popular of the mechanical-ﬂexing type
are the chain and gear couplings.

Chain

Chain couplings provide a good means of transmitting
proportionately high torque at low speeds. Minor shaft
misalignment is compensated for by means of clearances
between the chain and sprocket teeth and the clearance
that exists within the chain itself.

The design consists of two hubs with sprocket teeth
connected by a chain of the single-roller, double-roller,
or silent type.

Special purpose components may be speciﬁed when
enhanced ﬂexibility and reduced wear is required. Hard-
ened sprocket teeth, special tooth design, and barrel shaped
rollers are available for special needs. Light-duty drives

Coupling cover 
(½ shown)
(optional)

Roller chain
1 req'd to
join couplers

Coupling body(s)
1 req'd for each shaft

Figure 59.4 Typical chain coupling

are sometimes supplied with non-metallic chains on which
no lubrication should be used.

Gear

Gear couplings are capable of transmitting proportion-
ately high torque at both high and low speeds. The most
common type of gear coupling consists of two identical
hubs with external gear teeth and a sleeve, or cover, with
matching internal gear teeth. Torque is transmitted through
the gear teeth, whereas the necessary sliding action and
ability for slight adjustments in position comes from a
certain freedom of action provided between the two sets
of teeth.

Slight shaft misalignment is compensated for by the
clearance between the matching gear teeth. However, any
degree of misalignment decreases the useful life of the
coupling and may cause damage to other machine-train
components such as bearings. A typical example of a gear-
tooth coupling is illustrated in Figure 59. 5.

Material-ﬂexing

Material-ﬂexing couplings
that
accommodate a certain amount of bending or ﬂexing.

incorporate elements

Fundamentals of couplings 59/1069

Figure 59.5 Typical gear-tooth coupling

The material-ﬂexing group includes laminated disk-
ring, bellows, ﬂexible shaft, diaphragm, and elastomeric
couplings.

Various materials (e.g., metal, plastics, or rubber) are
used to make the ﬂexing elements in these couplings.
The use of the couplings is governed by the operational
fatigue limits of these materials. Practically all metals
have fatigue limits that are predictable, therefore, they
permit deﬁnite boundaries of operation to be established.
Elastomers such as plastic or rubber, however, usually do
not have a well-deﬁned fatigue limit. Their service life
is determined primarily by conditions of installation and
operation.

Laminated disk-ring

The laminated disk-ring coupling consists of shaft hubs
connected to a single ﬂexible disk, or a series of disks, that
allows axial movement. The laminated disk-ring coupling
also reduces heat and axial vibration that can transmit
between the driver and driven unit. Figure 59.6 illustrates
some typical laminated disk-ring couplings.

Bellows

Bellows couplings consist of two shaft hubs connected
to a ﬂexible bellows. This design, which compensates for
minor misalignment, is used at moderate rotational torque
and shaft speed. This type of coupling provides ﬂexibil-
ity to compensate for axial movement and misalignment
caused by thermal expansion of the equipment compo-
nents. Figure 59.7 illustrates a typical bellows coupling.

Flexible shaft or spring

Flexible shaft or spring couplings are generally used in
small equipment applications that do not experience high

Figure 59.6 Typical laminated disk-ring couplings

Figure 59.7 Typical bellows coupling

torque loads. Figure 59.8 illustrates a typical ﬂexible shaft
coupling.

Diaphragm

Diaphragm couplings provide torsional stiffness while
allowing ﬂexibility in axial movement. Typical construc-
tion consists of shaft hub ﬂanges and a diaphragm spool,
which provides the connection between the driver and
driven unit. The diaphragm spool normally consists of a
center shaft fastened to the inner diameter of a diaphragm
on each end of the spool shaft. The shaft hub ﬂanges
are fastened to the outer diameter of the diaphragms to
complete the mechanical connection. A typical diaphragm
coupling is illustrated in Figure 59.9.

Elastomeric

Elastomeric couplings consist of two hubs connected by
an elastomeric element. The couplings fall into two basic
categories, one with the element placed in shear and the
other with its element placed in compression. The cou-
pling compensates for minor misalignments because of
the ﬂexing capability of the elastomer. These couplings

59/1070 Couplings and Clutches

Figure 59.8 Typical ﬂexible shaft coupling

Figure 59.9 Typical diaphragm coupling

Figure 59.11 Typical metallic-grid couplings

are usually applied in light- or medium-duty applications
running at moderate speeds.

With the shear-type coupling, the elastomeric element
may be clamped or bonded in place, or ﬁtted securely to
the hubs. The compression-type couplings may be ﬁtted
with projecting pins, bolts, or lugs to connect the compo-
nents. Polyurethane, rubber, neoprene, or cloth and ﬁber
materials are used in the manufacture of these elements.
Although elastomeric couplings are practically main-
tenance free, it is good practice to periodically inspect
the condition of the elastomer and the alignment of the
equipment. If the element shows signs of defects or wear,
it should be replaced and the equipment realigned to the
manufacturer’s speciﬁcations. Typical elastomeric coup-
lings are illustrated in Figure 59.10.

Combination (metallic-grid)

The metallic-grid coupling is an example of a combina-
tion of mechanical-ﬂexing and material-ﬂexing type cou-
plings. Typical metallic-grid couplings are illustrated in
Figure 59.11.

Figure 59.10 Typical elastomeric couplings

The metallic-grid coupling is a compact unit capable
of transmitting high torque at moderate speeds. The con-
struction of the coupling consists of two ﬂanged hubs,
each with specially grooved slots cut axially on the outer
edges of the hub ﬂanges. The ﬂanges are connected by
means of a serpentine-shaped spring grid that ﬁts into
the grooved slots. The ﬂexibility of this grid provides
torsional resilience.

Special application couplings

Two special application couplings are discussed in this
section: (1) ﬂoating-shaft or spacer coupling and (2) hy-
draulic or ﬂuid coupling.

Floating-shaft or spacer coupling Regular ﬂexible cou-
plings connect the driver and driven shafts with rela-
tively close ends and are suitable for limited misalign-
ment. However, allowances sometimes have to be made
to accommodate greater misalignment or when the ends
of the driver and driven shafts have to be separated by a
considerable distance.

Such is the case, for example, with end-suction pump
designs in which the power unit of the pump assem-
bly is removed for maintenance by being axially moved
toward the driver. If neither the pump nor the driver can
be readily removed, they should be separated sufﬁciently
to permit withdrawal of the pump’s power unit. An eas-
ily removable ﬂexible coupling of sufﬁcient length (i.e.,
ﬂoating-shaft or spacer coupling) is required for this type
of maintenance. Examples of couplings for this type of
application are shown in Figure 59.12.

In addition to the maintenance application described
above, this coupling (also referred to as extension or spacer
sleeve coupling) is commonly used where equipment is
subject to thermal expansion and possible misalignment
because of high process temperatures. The purpose of this

Fundamentals of couplings 59/1071

Figure 59.12 Typical ﬂoating-shaft or spacer couplings

Figure 59.14 Typical hydraulic coupling

parts are used. After having determined the cause of fail-
ure, it is crucial to identify the correct type and size of
coupling needed. Even if practically identical in appear-
ance to the original, a part still may not be an adequate
replacement.

The manufacturer’s speciﬁcation number usually pro-
vides the information needed for part selection. If the part
is not in stock, a cross-reference guide will provide the
information needed to verify ratings and to identify a cou-
pling that meets the same requirements as the original.

A criterion that must be considered in part selection
includes: equipment type, mode of operation, and cost.
Each of these criteria are discussed in the sections to
follow.

Equipment type

it

is

important

to consider

Coupling selection should be application speciﬁc and,
therefore,
the type of
equipment, which it connects. For example, demanding
applications such as variable, high-torque machine trains
require couplings that are speciﬁcally designed to absorb
radical changes in speed and torque (e.g., metallic-
grid). Less demanding applications such as run-out table
rolls can generally get by with elastomeric couplings.
Table 59.1 lists the coupling type commonly used in a
particular application.

Mode of operation

Coupling selection is highly dependent on the mode of
operation, which includes torsional characteristics, speed,
and the operating envelope.

Torsional characteristics

Torque requirements are a primary concern during the
selection process. In all applications where variable or
high torque is transmitted from the driver to the driven
unit, a ﬂexible coupling rated for the maximum torque
requirement must be used. Rigid couplings are not desig-
ned to absorb variations in torque and should not be used.

Figure 59.13 Typical ﬂoating-shaft or spacer couplings for high-
temperature applications

type of coupling is to prevent harmful misalignment with
minimum separation of the driver and driven shaft ends.
An example of a typical ﬂoating-shaft coupling for this
application is shown in Figure 59.13.

The ﬂoating-shaft coupling consists of two support
elements connected by a shaft. Manufacturers use various
approaches in their designs for these couplings. For
example, each of the two support elements may be of
the single-engagement type, may consist of a ﬂexible half-
coupling on one end and a rigid half-coupling on the other
end, or may be completely ﬂexible with some piloting or
guiding supports.

Floating-shaft gear couplings usually consist of a stan-
dard coupling with a two-piece sleeve. The sleeve halves
are bolted to rigid ﬂanges to form two single-ﬂex cou-
plings. These, in turn, are connected by an intermedi-
ate shaft that permits the transmission of power between
widely separated drive components.

Hydraulic or ﬂuid Hydraulic couplings provide a soft
start with gradual acceleration and limited maximum tor-
que for ﬁxed operating speeds. Hydraulic couplings are
typically used in applications that undergo torsional shock
from sudden changes in equipment loads (e.g., compres-
sors). Figure 59.14 is an illustration of a typical hydraulic
coupling.

59.2.2 Selection

Periodically, worn or broken couplings must be replaced.
One of the most important steps in performing this main-
tenance procedure is to ensure that the correct replacement

59/1072 Couplings and Clutches

Table 59.1 Coupling application overview

Application

CouplingŁ Selection Recommendation

Limited misalignment compensation
Metallic-grid combination couplings
Variable, high-torque machine trains operating at moderate speeds
Elastomeric ﬂexible couplings
Run-out table rolls
Flanged rigid couplings, split rigid or clamp couplings
Vertical pump shafting
Rigid compression couplings
Keys and keyways not appropriate (e.g., brass shafts)
Transmission of proportionately high torque at low speeds
Chain couplings (mechanical-ﬂexing)
Transmission of proportionately high torque at both high and low speeds Gear couplings (mechanical-ﬂexing)
Allowance for axial movement and reduction of heat and axial vibration
Moderate rotational torque and shaft speed
Small equipment that does not experience high torque loads
Torsional stiffness while allowing ﬂexibility in axial movement
Light- or medium-duty applications running at moderate speeds
Gradual acceleration and limited maximum torque for ﬁxed operating
speeds (e.g., compressors).
Variable or high torque and/or speed transmission

Laminated disk-ring couplings (material-ﬂexing)
Bellows couplings (material-ﬂexing)
Flexible shaft or spring couplings (material-ﬂexing)
Diaphragm material-ﬂexing couplings
Elastomeric couplings (material-ﬂexing)
Hydraulic or ﬂuid couplings

Flexible couplings rated for the maximum torque
requirement

Greater misalignment compensation
1) Maintenance requiring considerable distance between the driver and
driven shaft ends. 2) Misalignment results from expansion due to high
process temperatures.

Floating-shaft or spacer couplings

ŁSee Table 59.6 for an application overview for clutches.
Note: Rigid couplings are not designed to absorb variations in torque and speed and should not be used in such applications. Maximum
in-service coupling speed should be at least 15% below the maximum coupling speed rating.
Source: Integrated Systems, Inc.

Speed

Two speed-related factors should be considered as part of
the selection process: maximum speed and speed varia-
tion.

Maximum speed When selecting coupling type and size,
the maximum speed rating must be considered, which can
be determined from the vendor’s catalog. The maximum
in-service speed of a coupling should be well below (at
least 15 per cent) the maximum speed rating. The 15 per
cent margin provides a service factor that should be sufﬁ-
cient to prevent coupling damage or catastrophic failure.

Speed variation Variation in speed equates to a corre-
sponding variation in torque. Most variable-speed appli-
cations require some type of ﬂexible coupling capable of
absorbing these torsional variations.

Operating envelope

The operating envelope deﬁnes the physical requirements,
dimensions, and type of coupling needed in a speciﬁc
application. The envelope information should include:
shaft sizes, orientation of shafts, required horsepower,
full-range of operating torque, speed ramp rates, and any
other data that would directly or indirectly affect
the
coupling.

Cost

Coupling cost should not be the deciding factor in the
selection process, although it will certainly play a part in

it. Although higher performance couplings may be more
expensive, they actually may be the cost effective solution
in a particular application. Selecting the most appropriate
coupling for an application not only extends coupling life,
but also improves the overall performance of the machine
train and its reliability.

59.2.3 Installation

Couplings must be installed properly if they are to operate
satisfactorily. This section discusses shaft and coupling
preparation, coupling installation, and alignment.

Shaft preparation

A careful inspection of both shaft ends must be made
to ensure that no burrs, nicks, or scratches are present
that will damage the hubs. Potentially damaging con-
ditions must be corrected before coupling installation.
Emery cloth should be used to remove any burrs, scratches,
or oxidation that may be present. A light ﬁlm of oil should
be applied to the shafts prior to installation. Keys and key-
ways (discussed in Section 59.3) also should be checked
for similar defects and to ensure that the keys ﬁt properly.
Properly sized key stock must be used with all keyways;
do not use bar stock or other material.

Coupling preparation

The coupling must be disassembled and inspected prior to
installation. The location and position of each component
should be noted so that it can be reinstalled in the correct
order. When old couplings are removed for inspection,

bolts and bolt holes should be numbered so that they can
be installed in the same location when the coupling is
returned to service.

Any defects, such as burrs, should be corrected before
the coupling is installed. Defects on the mating parts of
the coupling can cause interference between the bore and
shaft, preventing proper operation of the coupling.

Coupling installation

Once the inspection shows the coupling parts to be free
of defects, the hubs can be mounted on their respective
shafts. If it is necessary to heat the hubs to achieve the
proper interference ﬁt, an oil or water bath should be used.
Spot-heating using a ﬂame or torch should be avoided as
it causes distortion and may adversely affect the hubs.

Care must be exercised during installation of a new
coupling or the reassembly of an existing unit. Keys and
keyways should be coated with a sealing compound that
is resistant to the lubricant used in the coupling. Seals
should be inspected to ensure that they are pliable and
in good condition. They must be installed properly in the
sleeve with the lip in good contact with the hub. Sleeve
ﬂange gaskets must be whole, in good condition, clean,
and free of nicks or cracks. Lubrication plugs must be
cleaned before being installed and must ﬁt tightly.

The speciﬁc installation procedure is dependent on
the type and mounting conﬁguration of the coupling.
However, common elements of all coupling installations
include: spacing, bolting,
lubrication, and the use of
matching parts. The sections to follow discuss these
installation elements.

Spacing

Spacing between the mating parts of the coupling must be
within manufacturer’s tolerances. For example, an elas-
tomeric coupling must have a speciﬁc distance between
the coupling faces. This distance determines the position
of the rubber boot that provides transmission of power
from the driver to the driven machine component. If this
distance is not exact, the elastomer will attempt to return
to its relaxed position, inducing excessive axial movement
in both shafts.

Bolting

Couplings are designed to use a speciﬁc type of bolt.
Coupling bolts have a hardened cylindrical body sized
to match the assembled coupling width. Hardened bolts
are required because standard bolts do not have the ten-
sile strength to absorb the torsional and shearing loads in
coupling applications and may fail resulting in coupling
failure and machine-train damage.

Lubrication

Most couplings require lubrication and care must be taken
to ensure that the proper type and quantity is used during
the installation process. Inadequate or improper lubrica-
tion reduces coupling reliability and reduces its useful
life. In addition, improper lubrication can cause serious

Fundamentals of couplings 59/1073

damage to the machine train. For example, when a gear-
type coupling is over-ﬁlled with grease, the coupling will
lock. In most cases, its locked position will increase the
vibration level and induce an abnormal loading on the
bearings of both the driver and driven unit, resulting in
bearing failure.

Matching parts

Couplings are designed for a speciﬁc range of applications
and proper performance depends on the total design of the
coupling system. As a result, it is generally not a good
practice to mix coupling types. Note, however, that it is
common practice in some steel industry applications to
use coupling halves from two different types of couplings.
For example, a rigid coupling half is sometimes mated
to a ﬂexible coupling half, creating a hybrid. While this
approach may provide short-term power transmission, it
can result in an increase in the number, frequency, and
severity of machine-train problems.

Coupling alignment

The last step in the installation process is verifying cou-
pling and shaft alignment. With the exception of special
application couplings such as spindles and jackshafts, all
couplings must be aligned within relatively close toler-
ances (i.e., 0.001–0.002 inch).

59.2.4 Lubrication and maintenance

Couplings require regular lubrication and maintenance to
ensure optimum trouble-free service life. When proper
maintenance is not conducted, premature coupling fail-
ure and/or damage to machine-train components such as
bearings can be expected.

Determining cause of failure

When a coupling failure occurs, it is important to deter-
mine the cause of failure. Failure may result from a cou-
pling defect, an external condition, or workmanship dur-
ing installation.

Most faults are attributed to poorly machined surfaces
causing out-of-speciﬁcation tolerances, although defective
material failures also occur. Inadequate material hard-
ness and poor strength factors contribute to many prema-
ture failures. Other common causes are improper coupling
selection, improper installation, and/or excessive misalign-
ment.

Lubrication requirements

Lubrication requirements vary depending on application
and coupling type. Because rigid couplings do not require
lubrication, this section discusses lubrication requirements
for mechanical-ﬂexing, material-ﬂexing, and combination
ﬂexible couplings only.

It is important to follow
Mechanical-ﬂexing couplings
the manufacturer’s instructions for lubricating mechanical-
ﬂexing couplings, which must be lubricated internally.

59/1074 Couplings and Clutches

Lubricant seals must be in good condition and properly
ﬁtted into place. Coupling covers contain the lubricant
and prevent contaminants from entering the coupling inte-
rior. The covers are designed in two conﬁgurations, split
either horizontally or vertically. Holes are provided in the
covers to allow lubricant to be added without coupling
disassembly.

Gear couplings are one type of mechanical-ﬂexing
coupling and there are several ways to lubricate them:
grease pack, oil ﬁll, oil collect, and continuous oil ﬂow.
Either grease or oil can be used at speeds of 3,600 rpm
to 6,000 rpm. Oil
is normally used as the lubricant
in couplings operating over 6,000 rpm. Grease and oil
lubricated units have end gaskets and seals, which are
used to contain the lubricant and seal out the entry of
contaminants. The sleeves have lubrication holes, which
permit ﬂushing and re-lubrication without disturbing the
sleeve gasket or seals.

Material-ﬂexing couplings Material-ﬂexing couplings
are designed to be lubrication free.

Combination (metallic-grid)
Combination couplings
couplings are lubricated in the same manner as mecha-
nical-ﬂexing couplings.

Periodic inspections

It is important to perform periodic inspections of all me-
chanical equipment and systems that incorporate rotating
parts, including couplings and clutches.

nent wear).

To maintain coupling
Mechanical-ﬂexing couplings
reliability, mechanical-ﬂexing couplings require periodic
inspections on a time- or condition-based frequency
established by the history of the equipment’s coupling life
or a schedule established by the predictive maintenance
engineer. Items to be included in an inspection are listed
below. If any of these items or conditions are discovered,
the coupling should be evaluated to determine its
remaining operational life or should be repaired/replaced.
ž Inspect lubricant for traces of metal (indicating compo-
ž Visually inspect coupling mechanical components (rol-
ler chains and gear teeth, and grid members) for wear
and/or fatigue.
ž Inspect seals to ensure they are pliable and in good
condition. They must be installed properly in the sleeve
with the lip in good contact with the hub.
ž Sleeve ﬂange gaskets must be whole, in good condition,
ž Lubrication plugs must be clean (to prevent the intro-
duction of contaminants to the lubricant and machine
surfaces) before being installed and must be torqued to
the manufacturer’s speciﬁcations.
ž Set-screws and retainers must be in place and tightened
ž Inspect shaft hubs, keyways, and keys for cracks, breaks,
ž Under operating conditions, perform thermographic
scans to determine temperature differences on the

clean, and free of nicks or cracks.

to manufacturer’s speciﬁcations.

and physical damage.

coupling
mechanical forces).

(indicates misalignment

and/or

uneven

Material-ﬂexing couplings Although designed to be lub-
rication-free, material-ﬂexing couplings also require peri-
odic inspection and maintenance. This is necessary to
ensure that the coupling components are within acceptable
speciﬁcation limits. Periodic inspections for the following
conditions are required to maintain coupling reliability. If
any of these conditions are found, the coupling should be
evaluated to determine its remaining operational life or
repaired/replaced.
ž Inspect ﬂexing element for signs of wear or fatigue
ž Set-screws and retainers must be in place and tightened
ž Inspect shaft hubs, keyways, and keys for cracks, breaks,
ž Under operating conditions, perform thermographic
scans for temperature differences on the coupling,
which indicates misalignment and/or uneven mechani-
cal forces.

(cracks, element dust or particles).

to manufacturer’s speciﬁcations.

and physical damage.

Combination couplings Mechanical components (e.g.,
grid members) should be visually inspected for wear and/
or fatigue. In addition, the grid members on metallic-grid
couplings should be replaced if any signs of wear are
observed.

The mechanical components of rigid
Rigid couplings
couplings (e.g., hubs, bolts, compression sleeves and hal-
ves, keyways, and keys) should be visually inspected for
cracks, breaks, physical damage, wear, and/or fatigue.
Any component having any of these conditions should
be replaced.

59.3 Keys, keyways and keyseats
A key is a piece of material, usually metal, placed in
machined slots or grooves cut into two axially oriented
parts in order to mechanically lock them together. For
example, keys are used in making the coupling connection
between the shaft of a driver and a hub or ﬂange on that
shaft. Any rotating element whose shaft incorporates such
a keyed connection is referred to as a keyed-shaft rotor.
Keys provide a positive means for transmitting torque
between the shaft and coupling hub when a key is properly
ﬁtted in the axial groove.

The groove into which a key is ﬁtted is referred to as a
keyseat when referring to shafts and a keyway when refer-
ring to hubs. Keyseating is the actual machine operation
of producing keyseats. Keyways are normally made on
a keyseater or by a broach. Keyseats are normally made
with a rotary or end mill cutter.

Figure 59.15 is an example of a keyed shaft that shows
the key size versus the shaft diameter. Because of stan-
dardization and interchangeability, keys are generally pro-
portioned with relation to shaft diameter instead of tor-
sional load.

Top view

L

Keys, keyways and keyseats 59/1075

Top view

L

Rotary
cutter

End mill
cutter

Figure 59.15 Keyed shaft: key size versus shaft diameter

The effective key length, ‘L’ is that portion of key hav-
ing full bearing on hub and shaft. Note that the curved
portion of the keyseat made with a rotary cutter does
not provide full key bearing, so ‘L’ does not include this
distance. The use of an end mill cutter results in a square-
ended keyseat.

Figure 59.16 shows various key shapes: square ends,
one square end and one round end, rounded ends, plain
taper, and gib head taper. The majority of keys are square
in cross-section, which are preferred through 4 1
2 -inch dia-
meter shafts. For bores over 4 1
inches and thin wall
2
section of hubs, the rectangular (ﬂat) key is used.

The ends are either square, rounded or gib-head. The
gib-head is usually used with taper keys. If special

considerations dictate the use of a keyway in the
hub shallower
is
recommended that
the standard rectangular (ﬂat) key
be used.

than the preferred square key,

it

Hub bores are usually straight, although for some spe-
cial applications taper bores are sometimes speciﬁed. For
smaller diameters, bores are designed for clearance ﬁts
and a set screw is used over the key. The major advantage
of a clearance ﬁt is that hubs can be easily assembled and
disassembled. For larger diameters, the bores are designed
for interference ﬁts without setscrews. For rapid-reversing
applications, interference ﬁts are required.

The sections to follow discuss determining keyway
depth and width, keyway manufacturing tolerances, key
stress calculations, and shaft stress calculations.

Top Views

Side Views

59.3.1 Determining keyway depth and width

Square Ends

Square and Round

Plain Taper

The formula given below and Figure 59.17, Table 59.1
(square keys), and Table 59.2 (ﬂat keys) illustrate how
the depth and width of standard square and ﬂat keys and
keyways for shafts and hubs are determined.

Y D D (cid:4) p

D2 (cid:4) W2
2

Rounded Ends

Gib Head Taper

Figure 59.16 Key shapes

where:
C D Allowance or clearance for key, inches
D D Nominal shaft or bore diameter, inches

Shafts

H/2

Y

Hubs

W

H/2

Y

D

S

D

T

S = D – Y – H
2

T = D – Y + H + C

2

Figure 59.17 Shaft and hub dimensions

59/1076 Couplings and Clutches
Table 59.2 Standard square keys and keyways (inches)Ł

Diameter of holes (inclusive)

Keyways

Key stock

Width

Depth

16 to 7
5
16
2 to 9
1
16
8 to 7
5
8
1 5
16 to 1 1
4
1 5
16 to 1 3
8
16 to 1 3
1 7
4
1 13
16 to 2 1
4
2 5
16 to 2 3
4
2 13
16 to 3 1
4
3 5
16 to 3 3
4
3 13
16 to 4 1
2

3
32
1
8
3
16
1
4
5
16
3
8
1
2
5
8
3
4
7
8
1

3
64
1
16
3
32
1
8
5
32
3
16
1
4
5
16
3
8
7
16
1
2

32

16

16

5

1

4

3

8

1

3

32 ð 3
8 ð 1
16 ð 3
4 ð 1
16 ð 5
8 ð 3
2 ð 1
8 ð 5
4 ð 3
8 ð 7
1 ð 1

1

8

4

3

2

7

8

3

5

8

ŁSquare keys are normally used through shaft diameter 4 1
shafts normally use ﬂat keys.
Source: The Falk Corporation

2

00; larger

Table 59.3 Standard ﬂat keys and keyways (inches)

Diameter of holes (inclusive)

Keyways

Key stock

Width

Depth

2 to 9
1
16
8 to 7
5
8
1 5
16 to 1 1
4
1 5
16 to 1 3
8
1 7
16 to 1 3
4
1 13
16 to 2 1
4
2 5
16 to 2 3
4
2 13
16 to 3 1
4
3 5
16 to 3 3
4
3 13
16 to 4 1
2
4 9
16 to 5 1
2
5 9
16 to 6 1
2
16 to 7 1
6 9
2
7 9
16 to 9
16 to 11
9 1
16 to 13
11 1
16 to 15
13 1
6 to 18
15 1
16 to 22
18 1
16 to 26
22 1
16 to 30
26 1

1
8
3
16
1
4
5
16
3
8
1
2
5
8
3
4
7
8
1
1 1
4
1 1
2
1 3
4
2
2 1
2
3
3 1
2
4
5
6
7

3
64
1
16
3
32
1
8
1
8
3
16
7
32
1
4
5
16
3
8
7
16
1
2
5
8
3
4
7
8
1
1 1
4
1 1
2
1 3
4
4
5

3

4

8

7

5

1

3

5

8

8

1

3

1

4

2

16

16

32

8 ð 1
16 ð 1
4 ð 3
16 ð 1
8 ð 1
2 ð 3
8 ð 7
4 ð 1
8 ð 5
1 ð 3
4 ð 7
1 1
2 ð 1
1 1
4 ð 1 1
1 3
2 ð 1 1
2 ð 1 3
2 1
3 ð 2
2 ð 2 1
3 1
4 ð 3
5 ð 3 1

2

4

4

4

2

8

2

Source: The Falk Corporation

H D Nominal key height, inches
W D Nominal key width, inches
Y D Chordal height, inches
Note: Tables shown above are prepared for manufactur-
ing use. Dimensions given are for standard shafts and
keyways.

59.3.2 Keyway manufacturing tolerances

Keyway manufacturing tolerances (illustrated in Figure
59.18) are referred to as offset (centrality) and lead (cross
axis). Offset or centrality is referred to as Dimension ‘N’;
lead or cross axis is referred to as Dimension ‘J’. Both
must be kept within permissible tolerances, usually 0.002
inches.

59.3.3 Key stress calculations

Calculations for shear and compressive key stresses are
based on the following assumptions:

1. The force acts at the radius of the shaft.
2. The force is uniformly distributed along the key length.
3. None of the tangential load is carried by the frictional

ﬁt between shaft and bore.

The shear and compressive stresses in a key are calcu-

lated using the following equations (see Figure 59.19):
Ss D

Sc D

2T

2T

(cid:9)d(cid:11) ð (cid:9)w(cid:11) ð (cid:9)L(cid:11)

(cid:9)d(cid:11) ð (cid:9)h1(cid:11) ð (cid:9)L(cid:11)

where:

d D Shaft diameter, inches (use average diameter for
h1 D Height of key in the shaft or hub that bears

taper shafts)

against the keyway, inches. Should equal h2 for
square keys. For designs where unequal portions
of the key are in the hub or shaft, h1 is the
minimum portion.
Hp D Power, horsepower
L D Effective length of key, inches
RPM D Revolutions per minute
Ss D Shear stress, psi
Sc D Compressive stress, psi

Offset or centrality

CL
Shaft

CL
Bore

N

CL

CL
Keyseat

Lead or cross axis

C   Keyseat
L

J

t
f

a
h
S

 
 
 

L
C

d
a
e
L

t

a
e
s
y
e
K

 
 
 

L
C

J

e
r
o
B

 
 
 

L
C

d
a
e
L

Figure 59.18 Manufacturing tolerances: offset and lead

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

H

h1

h2

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

W

Clearance

d (Shaft diameter)

Figure 59.19 Measurements used in calculating shear and com-
pressive key stress

Hp ð 63000

T D Shaft torque, lb-in or
w D Key width, inches
Key material is usually AISI 1018 or AISI 1045. Table
59.4 provides the allowable stresses for these materials.

RPM

Fundamentals of clutches 59/1077

24000

20000

16000

12000

8000

B e n din g

T o r s i o n

t

)
i
s
p
(
 
h
g
n
e
r
t
s
 

e

l
i

s
n
e

t
 

l

e
b
a
w
o

l
l

A

4000

160

200

240

280

320

360

400

440

Brinell hardness

80

100

120

140

160

180

200

220

Tensile strength, 1000 psi (approx.)

Figure 59.20 Allowable stress as a function of Brinell hardness

Select a key for the following conditions: 300
00 key, 400 key

00 ð 3

4

4

Example:
Hp at 600 RPM; 300 diameter shaft, 3
engagement length.
T D Torque D Hp ð 63,000
D 2 ð 31,500
Ss D
3 ð 3
4 ð 4
D 2 ð 31,500
8 ð 4

D 300 ð 63,000
D 7,000 psi

D 14,000 psi

d ð h1 ð L

d ð w ð L

3 ð 3

Sc D

RPM

600

2T

2T

D 31,500 in-lbs

00 diameter (400 hub), the key would be 5

The AISI 1018 key can be used since it is within
allowable stresses listed in Table 59.4 (Allowable Ss D
7,500, Allowable Sc D 15,000). Note: If shaft had been
00, Ss D
2 3
9, 200 psi, Sc D 18,400 psi, and a heat-treated key of AISI
4
1045 would have been required (Allowable Ss D 15,000,
Allowable Sc D 30,000).

00 ð 5

8

8

59.3.4 Shaft stress calculations

Torsional stresses are developed when power is transmit-
ted through shafts. In addition, the tooth loads of gears
mounted on shafts create bending stresses. Shaft design,
therefore, is based on safe limits of torsion and bending.

Table 59.4 Allowable stresses for AISI 1018 and AISI 1045

Material

Heat treatment

Allowable stresses (psi)

Shear

Compressive

AISI 1018
AISI 1045

None
255-300 Bhn

7,500
15,000

15,000
30,000

Source: The Falk Corporation

To determine minimum shaft diameter in inches:

(cid:1)
Minimum shaft diameter D 3

Hp ð 321000

RPM ð Allowable stress

Example:

Hp D 300
RPM D 30

Material D 225 Brinell

From Figure 59.20 at 225 Brinell, Allowable Torsion D

8000 psi

(cid:1)
Minimum shaft diameter D 3
D 3p

300 ð 321000
30 ð 8000

402 D 7.38 inches

00

00 is 422, which is large enough.

From Table 59.5, note that the cube of 7 1
4

is 381,
which is too small (i.e., <402) for this example. The cube
of 7 1
2
To determine shaft stress, psi:
Shaft stress D Hp ð 321, 000
RPM ð d3

Example: Given 7 1
2
Shaft stress D 300 ð 321, 000

00 shaft for 300 Hp at 30 RPM
2 (cid:11)3 D 7, 600 psi

30 ð (cid:9)7 1
00 diameter shaft would be stressed to

Note: The 7 1
4
8420 psi.

59.4 Fundamentals of clutches
Many machine systems require clutches, devices that en-
gage and disengage a driven unit from its rotating power

59/1078 Couplings and Clutches

Table 59.5 Shaft diameters (inches) and their cubes (cubic
inches)

D

1
1 1
4
1 1
2
1 3
4
2
2 1
4
2 1
2
2 3
4
3
3 1
4
3 1
2
3 3
4
4
4 1
4
4 1
2
4 3
4

D3

1.00
1.95
3.38
5.36
8.00
11.39
15.63
20.80
27.00
34.33
42.88
52.73
64.00
76.77
91.13
107.2

D

5
5 1
4
5 1
2
5 3
4
6
6 1
4
6 1
2
6 3
4
7
7 1
4
7 1
2
7 3
4
8
8 1
4
8 1
2
8 3
4

D3

125.0
145
166.4
190.1
216
244
275
308
343
381
422
465
512
562
614
670

D

9
9 1
2
10
10 1
2
11
11 1
2
12
12 1
2
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

D3

729
857
1000
1157
1331
1520
1728
1953
2197
2744
3375
4096
4913
5832
6859
8000

Source: The Falk Corporation

source. While this is the primary role of clutches in ma-
chine trains, they also can be designed to accommodate
changes in axial length of the attached shaft that result
from thermal expansion or contraction.

A clutch acts like an on-demand spacer coupling. In
the disengaged position there is space between the two
shafts. When the clutch is engaged, the mechanism ﬁlls
the void to reconnect the shaft.

59.4.1 Types of clutches

There is an almost inﬁnite variety of clutches, which
are designed to cover a wide range of applications. The
more common clutch types are classiﬁed as positive and
friction. Less common types are hydraulic and electro-
magnetic. Table 59.6 lists the clutches commonly used in
a particular application.

Positive

Clutches in this classiﬁcation transmit power by means
of two mating hubs, one mounted on the driver and the

Table 59.6 Clutch Application Overview

Application

Positive intermittent power transmission,
transmitting torque in one direction,
disengaging in the opposite direction
Positive power transmission in both
directions of rotation

Clutch Selection
Recommendation

One-way positive
clutches

Two-way positive
clutches

(a)

(b)

Source: Integrated Computer Systems, Inc.

Figure 59.21 Positive clutch

other mounted on the driven shaft. The interlocking hub
teeth guarantee positive (i.e., no slippage) transmission
of power due to the direct mechanical link they create
between the drive and driven shaft.

The primary advantage of this type of clutch is its abil-
ity to transmit full torsional force without any possibility
of slip. Its major disadvantage is that the two shafts are
instantaneously coupled when the clutch engages. This
results in abrupt starts, which may cause excessive tor-
sional shock loads that damage drive-train components.
Figure 59.21 shows a positive clutch.

There are numerous positive clutch and tooth conﬁg-
uration designs, but they generally can be broken down
into two sub-classes: one- and two-way.

One-way A one-way or ﬂywheel clutch is a device that
transmits torque in one direction, but disengages in the
opposite direction. The typical design of ﬂywheel clutches
incorporates a tooth proﬁle that engages in one direction
only. If rotation of the drive shaft is reversed, the drive
hub will freewheel and cannot engage the driven hub.

The most familiar examples of one-way clutches are the
bicycle freewheel, which enables the cyclist to stop ped-
aling without stopping the bicycle, and the non-reversing
ratchet used on vertical turbine pumps.

The two-way clutch uses square or tapered
Two-way
teeth to provide positive mating between its drive and
driven halves. This tooth proﬁle provides positive power
transmission in both directions of rotation.

Friction

The primary advantage of friction clutches is their abil-
ity to minimize engaging torque. Figure 59.22 shows an
example of this type of clutch, which transmits torsional
power from a driver to a driven unit as a result of fric-
tion between two or more mating parts. By relying on
friction to transmit power, the transition from disengaged

A

A

section A–A

right-handed

left-handed

flywheel

pivot rings

pressure plate

diaphragm

spring

driven disk

release
bearing

pivot-rings
retaining bolt

cover

retracting

spring

Engaged

Disengaged

drive
plate

hub

release
spring

(a)

driven
plate

piston

drum

(b)

Figure 59.22 Friction clutch

to engaged is more gradual than with positive clutches,
which incorporate mating hubs with interlocking teeth.

Although not a design that guarantees positive power
transmission, a satisfactorily performing friction clutch
will transmit the maximum torque output of the driver
to the driven shaft without slip when fully engaged. The
automobile clutch is the most common example, transmit-
ting the maximum motor torque to the wheels.

The primary disadvantage of friction clutches is the reg-
ular maintenance and adjustment that are required: mating
parts will wear due to friction ultimately resulting in slip-
page, springs will lose memory, and other parts will need
replacement or adjustment. Although slippage caused by

References 59/1079

wear due to friction is a primary mode of failure, proper
maintenance can extend the lifetime of the clutch.

59.4.2 Maintenance

Like any other type of equipment, clutches require reg-
ular inspection and maintenance. The sections to follow
describe the general maintenance practices that are re-
quired to keep positive and friction clutches functioning
properly.

Positive clutches

Most reliability problems associated with positive clutches
fall into two categories: mechanical damage and fatigue
failures.

In applications where cycling
Mechanical damage
occurs, damage of the tooth proﬁle on the mating hubs
is a common problem with the positive clutch. Since the
hubs are designed to make near instantaneous engage-
ment, the teeth in both the male and female halves are
prone to mechanical damage. This damage is caused by
the repeated insertion of the rotating set of teeth into the
stationary set.

Regular inspection and lubrication of the teeth is an
absolute requirement when this type of clutch is used. If
tooth proﬁle damage is observed, it should be repaired
before being returned to service.

Fatigue failure While tooth proﬁle failure does occur in
positive clutches, the more common failure is the actuator
system. This system provides the means of engaging and
disengaging the mating teeth that provide power trans-
mission. Actuators range from compression springs to
hydraulic or pneumatic devices. Repeated cycling results
in fatigue failures in the actuator system components. Reg-
ular inspection and maintenance per the manufacturer’s
procedures are necessary to ensure proper operation and
to achieve system-design lifetime.

Friction clutches tend to be more complex in
Friction
design than positive clutches. Their complexity, coupled
with reliance on friction for power transmission, demands
constant care and maintenance. As a result, they require
regular adjustment and good preventive maintenance to
ensure trouble-free operation.

Clutch manufacturers generally provide complete in-
spection and maintenance instructions in their operations
and maintenance manual. These instructions should be
carefully followed.

References

1. Neale, M. J. DrivesandSeals–ATribologyHandbook, Society

of Automotive Engineers, Inc. (1994).

2. Parker, S. P. ed., EncyclopediaofEngineering, 2nd edn, McGraw

Hill Publishing, New York (1993).

3. Sax, N. I. and Lewis, Sr, J. R., Hawley’s Condensed Chemical
Dictionary, 11th edn, Van Nostrand Reinhold Co, New York
(1987).

4. Block, H. P. and Geitner, F. K., IntroductiontoMachineryRelia-

bilityAssessment, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York (1990).

59/1080 Couplings and Clutches

5. Block, H. P. and Geitner, F. K., MachineryFailureAnalysisand
Troubleshooting, Gulf Publishing Company Book Division,
Houston (1986).

6. Oberg, E., Jones, F. D., Horton, H. L. and Ryffel, H. H., Machin-
ery’s Handbook 25, 25th edn, Industrial Press Inc., New York
(1996).

7. Baumeister T. ed., Marks’StandardHandbookforMechanical

Publishing Company, New York (1986).

Engineers, 8th edn, McGraw-Hill, New York (1978).

8. McMaster-Carr Supply Co. Catalog#99(1993).
9. Nelson, C. A., Millwrights and Mechanics Guide, Macmillan

60

Bearings

R Keith Mobley
The Plant Performance Group

Contents

60.1 Introduction
60.2 Commonly used bearing types

60/1083

60.2.1 Plain bearings

60/1084

60/1084

60.3 Rolling element or anti-friction bearings

60.3.1 Grade classiﬁcations
60.3.2 Rolling element types
60.3.3 Bearing materials 60/1091

60/1087
60/1088

60/1081

60/1087

60.4 Lubrication

60/1093
60.4.1 Plain bearings
60/1093
60.4.2 Rolling element bearings

60/1093

60.5 Installation and general handling precautions

60/1094

60.5.1 Plain bearing installation
60/1094
60.5.2 Rolling element bearing installation
60.5.3 General rolling element bearing handling

60/1094

precautions

60/1096

60.6 Bearing failures, deﬁciences, and their causes
60.7 Improper bearing selection and/or installation
60.8 Operating conditions

60/1099

60/1097
60/1097

60.1 Introduction
A bearing is a machine element that supports a part, such
as a shaft, that rotates, slides, or oscillates in or on it.
There are two broad classiﬁcations of bearings: plain and
rolling element (also called anti-friction). Plain bearings
are based on sliding motion made possible through the use
of a lubricant. Anti-friction bearings are based on rolling
motion, which is made possible by balls or other types
of rollers. In modern rotor systems operating at relatively
high speeds and loads, the proper selection and design of
the bearings and bearing-support structure are key factors
affecting system life.

Types of movement

The type of bearing used in a particular application is
determined by the nature of the relative movement and
other application constraints. Movement can be grouped
into the following categories: rotation about a point, rota-
tion about a line, translation along a line, rotation in a
plane, and translation in a plane. These movements can
be either continuous or oscillating.

Table 60.1 Bearing selection guide (continuous movement)

Introduction 60/1083

Although many bearings perform more than one function,
they can generally be classiﬁed based on types of movement
and there are three major classiﬁcations of both plain and
rolling element bearings: radial, thrust, and guide. Radial
bearings support loads that act radially and at right angles to
the shaft centerline. These loads may be visualized as radi-
ating into or away from a center point like the spokes on a
bicycle wheel. Thrust bearings support or resist loads that
act axially. These may be described as endwise loads that
act parallel to the centerline towards the ends of the shaft.
This type of bearing prevents lengthwise or axial motion of
a rotating shaft. Guide bearings support and align members
having sliding or reciprocating motion. This type of bearing
guides a machine element in its lengthwise motion, usually
without rotation of the element.

Table 60.1 gives examples of bearings that are suit-
able for continuous movement; Table 60.2 shows bear-
ings that are appropriate for oscillatory movement only.
For the bearings that allow movements in addition to
the one listed, the effect on machine design is described
in the column, ‘Effect of the other degrees of freedom.’
Table 60.3 compares the characteristics, advantages, and
disadvantages of plain and rolling element bearings.

Bearing type

Accurate radial

location

Axial load capacity

as well

Low starting

torque

Silent
running

Standard parts

available

Simple

Lubrication

Plain, externally

pressurized

Plain, ﬂuid ﬁlm

Plain, porous
metal (oil
impregnated)

Plain, rubbing

1

3

2

4

2

Rolling

(non-metallic)

instances
Yes, in most
instances
Rating: 1 –Excellent, 2 –Good, 3 –Fair, 4 –Poor

No (Need separate

thrust bearing)

No (Need separate

thrust bearing)

Some

Some, in most

1

2

2

4

1

1

1

1

3

Usually
satisfactory

No

Some

Yes

Some

Yes

4 (Need special

system)

2 (Usually requires

circulation system)

1

1

2 (When grease

lubricated)

Table 60.2 Bearing selection guide (oscillatory movement)

Bearing type

High

temperature

Low

temperature

Low

friction

Wet/
humid

Knife edge pivots

2

2

Plain, porous metal
(oil impregnated)

4

Lubricant oxidizes

Plain, rubbing

Rolling element

Rubber bushings

Up to temperature
limit of material

Consult manufacturer

above 150°C

2

4

Strip ﬂexures
Rating: 1 –Excellent, 2 –Good, 3 –Fair, 4 –Poor

2

3

Friction can
be high
1

2

4

1

1

2

2
Watch corrosion
2

2

With PTFE

1

Elastically

stiff
1

2
Shaft must not

corrode

2
With seals
1

2 Watch corrosion

Dirt/
dust

2

Sealing essential

2

Sealing helps

Sealing essential

1

1

External
vibration

4

2

1

4

1

1

60/1084 Bearings

Table 60.3 Comparison of plain and rolling element bearings

Rolling element

Plain

Assembly on crankshaft is
virtually impossible, except
with very short or built-up
crankshafts
Cost relatively high
Hardness of shaft unimportant

Heavier than plain bearings

Housing requirement not
critical

Less rigid than plain bearings

Life limited by material fatigue

Lower friction results in lower
power consumption
Lubrication easy to accomplish,
the required ﬂow is low except
at high speed

Noisy operation
Poor tolerance of shaft
deﬂection
Poor tolerance of hard dirt
particles

Requires more overall space:
Length: smaller than plain

Diameter: larger than plain

Running friction:

Very low at low speeds
May be high at high speeds

Assembly on crankshaft is
no problem as split bearings
can be used

Cost relatively low
Hardness of shaft important
with harder bearings
Lighter than rolling element
bearings
Rigidity and clamping most
important housing
requirement
More rigid than rolling
element bearings
Life not generally limited
by material fatigue
Higher friction causes more
power consumption
Lubrication pressure feed
critically important,
required ﬂow is large,
susceptible to damage by
contaminants and
interrupted lubricant ﬂow
Quiet operation
Moderate tolerance of shaft
deﬂection
Moderate tolerance of dirt
particles, depending on
hardness of bearing
Requires less overall space:

Length: larger than

rolling element

Diameter: smaller than

rolling element

Running Friction:

Higher at low speeds
Moderate at usual crank

speeds

Smaller radial clearance than
plain

Larger radial clearance than
rolling element

Source: Integrated Systems, Inc.

About a point (rotational) Continuous movement about
a point is rotation, a motion that requires repeated use
of accurate surfaces. If the motion is oscillatory rather
than continuous, some additional arrangements must be
made in which the geometric layout prevents continuous
rotation.

About a line (rotational) Continuous movement about a
line is also referred to as rotation, and the same comments
apply as for movement about a point.

Along a line (translational) Movement along a line is
referred to as translation. One surface is generally long

and continuous and the moving component is usually
supported on a ﬂuid ﬁlm or rolling contact in order to
achieve an acceptable wear rate. If the translational move-
ment is reciprocation, the application makes repeated use
of accurate surfaces and a variety of economical bearing
mechanisms are available.

If the movement in
In a plane (rotational/translational)
a plane is rotational or both rotational and oscillatory, the
same comments apply as for movement about a point.

If the movement in a plane is translational or both trans-
lational and oscillatory, the same comments apply as for
movement along a line.

60.2 Commonly used bearing types
As mentioned before, major bearing classiﬁcations are
plain and rolling element. These types of bearings are dis-
cussed in the sections to follow. Table 60.4 is a bearings
characteristics summary.

Table 60.5 is a selection guide for bearings operating
with continuous rotation and special environmental con-
ditions. Table 60.6 is a selection guide for bearings oper-
ating with continuous rotation and special performance
requirements. Table 60.7 is a selection guide for oscillat-
ing movement and special environment or performance
requirements.

60.2.1 Plain bearings

All plain bearings also are referred to as ﬂuid-ﬁlm bear-
ings. In addition, radial plain bearings also are commonly
referred to as journal bearings. Plain bearings are avail-
able in a wide variety of types or styles and may be
self-contained units or built into a machine assembly.
Table 60.8 is a selection guide for radial and thrust plain
bearings.

Plain bearings are dependent on maintaining an ade-
quate lubricant ﬁlm to prevent the bearing and shaft sur-
faces from coming into contact, which is necessary to
prevent premature bearing failure. However, this is dif-
ﬁcult to achieve and some contact usually occurs during
operation. Material selection plays a critical role in the
amount of friction and the resulting seizure and wear that
occurs with surface contact. Refer to Section 60.3 for a
discussion of common bearing materials. Note that ﬂuid-
ﬁlm bearings do not have the ability to carry the full load
of the rotor assembly at any speed and must have turning
gear to support the rotor’s weight at low speeds.

Thrust or ﬁxed

Thrust plain bearings consist of ﬁxed shaft shoulders or
collars that rest against ﬂat bearing rings. The lubrication
state may be semi-ﬂuid and friction is relatively high.
In multi-collar thrust bearings, allowable service pres-
sures are considerably lower because of the difﬁculty in
distributing the load evenly between several collars. How-
ever, thrust ring performance can be improved by intro-
ducing tapered grooves. Figure 60.1 shows a mounting
half-section for a vertical thrust bearing.

Table 60.4 Bearing characteristics summary

Bearing type

Description

Plain

Lobed
Radial or journal

Cylindrical
Elliptical

Four-axial
grooved
Partial arc

Tilting pad

Thrust

Rolling element

Ball

Single-row
Radial
non-ﬁlling slot

Radial ﬁlling
slot
Angular contact
radial thrust
Ball-thrust

Double-row

Double-roll,
self-aligning

Roller

Cylindrical

Needle-type
cylindrical or
barrel

Spherical

Tapered

See Radial, elliptical.

Gas lubricated, low-speed applications.
Oil lubricated, gear and turbine

applications, stiffer and somewhat more
stable bearing.

Oil lubricated, higher-speed applications

than cylindrical.

Not a bearing type, but a theoretical
component of grooved and lobed
bearing conﬁgurations.

High-speed applications where
hydrodynamic instability and
misalignment are common problems.

Semi-ﬂuid lubrication state, relatively high

friction, lower service pressures with
multi-collar version, used at low speeds.

Radial and axial loads, moderate- to

high-speed applications.

Higher speed and lighter load applications

than roller bearings.

Also referred to as Conrad or deep-groove

bearing. Sustains combined radial and
thrust loads, or thrust loads alone, in
either direction, even at high speeds.
Not self-aligning.

Handles heavier loads than non-ﬁlling slot.

Radial loads combined with thrust loads

alone. Axial deﬂection must be limited.

Very high thrust loads in one direction

only, no radial loading, cannot be
operated at high speeds.

Heavy radial with minimal bearing
deﬂection and light thrust loads.

Moderate radial and limited thrust loads.

Handles heavier loads and shock better

than ball bearings, but are more limited
in speed than ball bearings.

Heavy radial loads, fairly high speeds, can

allow free axial shaft movement.

Does not normally support thrust loads,

used in space-limited applications,
angular mounting of rolls in double-row
version tolerates combined axial and
thrust loads.

High radial and moderate-to-heavy thrust

loads, usually comes in double-row
mounting that is inherently
self-aligning.

Heavy radial and thrust loads. Can be

preloaded for maximum system rigidity.

Radial or journal

Plain radial, or journal, bearings also are referred to as
sleeve or Babbit bearings. The most common type is
the full journal bearing, which has 360° contact with its

Commonly used bearing types 60/1085

mating journal. The partial journal bearing has less than
180° contact and is used when the load direction is con-
stant. The sections to follow describe the major types
of ﬂuid-ﬁlm journal bearings: plain cylindrical, four-axial
groove, elliptical, partial arc, and tilting-pad.

The plain cylindrical journal bearing
Plain cylindrical
(Figure 60.2) is the simplest of all journal bearing types.
The performance characteristics of cylindrical bearings
are well established and extensive design information is
available. Practically, use of the unmodiﬁed cylindrical
bearing is generally limited to gas-lubricated bearings and
low-speed machinery.

To make the plain cylindri-
Four-axial groove bearing
cal bearing practical for oil or other liquid lubricants,
it is necessary to modify it by the addition of grooves
or holes through which the lubricant can be introduced.
Sometimes, a single circumferential groove in the middle
of the bearing is used. In other cases, one or more axial
grooves are provided.

The four-axial groove bearing is the most commonly
used oil-lubricated sleeve bearing. The oil is supplied at
a nominal gage pressure that ensures an adequate oil ﬂow
and some cooling capability. Figure 60.3 illustrates this
type of bearing.

Air vent

Thrust block

Runner
Shoe

Oil
level

Oil retainer

Self aligning
equalizing

base

Oil tight

joint

Radial
bearing

Mach. frame

Figure 60.1 Half section of mounting for vertical thrust bearing

Load

Journal

Diameter D

Bearing

Clearance C

Figure 60.2 Plain cylindrical bearing

60/1086 Bearings

Table 60.5 Bearing selection guide for special environmental conditions (continuous rotation)

Bearing type

High temp.

Low temp.

Vacuum

Wet/humid

Dirt/dust

External
vibration

1 (With gas

lubrication)

4 (lubricant
oxidizes)

2

3 (May have high
starting torque)

No (Affected by
lubricant feed)

Possible with

special
lubricant

2 (Up to temp.

2

2

limit of
material)

2 (Up to temp.

limit of
lubricant)

Consult

manufacturer
above 150 °C
Effect of thermal

2 (May have high
starting torque)

2

Possible with

special
lubricant

3 (With special

lubricant)

2

2

2

2 (Shaft must

not
corrode)

2 (1 when gas
lubricated)

Seals essential

2 (Seals help)

2 (With seals and

ﬁltration

1

2

2

2

3 (With seals) Sealing essential

Corrosion

3 (Consult

manufacturers)

Fretting

Plain, externally

pressurized
Plain, porous
metal (oil
impregnated)

Plain, rubbing

(non-metallic)

Plain, ﬂuid ﬁlm

Rolling

Things to watch

Effect of thermal

with all

expansion of
ﬁts
Rating: 1–Excellent, 2–Good, 3–Fair, 4–Poor

expansion on
ﬁts

Table 60.6 Bearing selection guide for particular performance requirements (continuous rotation)

Bearing type

Plain, externally

pressurized

Plain, ﬂuid ﬁlm

Plain, porous metal

(oil
impregnated)

Plain, rubbing

(non-metallic)

Rolling

1

3

2

4

2

Accurate radial Axial load

location

capacity as well

Low starting

torque

Silent running

1

2

2

4

1

1

1

1

3

Usually

satisfactory

Standard parts Simple

Available

lubrication

No

Some

Yes

Some

Yes

4 (Need special

system)

2 (Usually requires

circulation
system)

1

1

2 (When grease
lubricated)

No (Need separate

thrust bearing

No (Need separate

thrust bearing)

Some

Some in most
instances
Yes in most
instances

Rating: 1–Excellent/very good, 2–Good, 3–Fair, 4–Poor

Table 60.7 Bearing selection guide for special environments or performance (oscillating movement)

Bearing type

High temp.

Low temp.

Low friction

Wet/humid

Dirt/dust

Knife edge pivots

2

2

4 (Lubricant
oxidizes)

3 (Friction can

be high)

Plain, porous
metal (oil
impregnated)

Plain, rubbing

Rolling

Rubber brushes
Strip ﬂexures

4
2

2 (Up to temp.

limit of
material)

Consult

manufacturer
above 150 °C

1

2

4
2

Rating: 1–Excellent, 2–Good, 3–Fair, 4–Poor

1

2

2 (Watch
corrosion)
2

2

Sealing essential

2 (With PTFE)

2 (Shaft must not

corrode)

2 (Sealing helps)

1

2 (With seals)

Sealing essential

Elastically stiff
1

1
2 (Watch
corrosion)

1
1

External
vibration

4

2

1

4

1
1

35˚

Load

35˚

Journal

Diameter D

Groove

Bearing

Clearance C

9˚

45˚

45˚

Figure 60.3 Four-axial groove bearing

The elliptical bearing is oil-lubricated
Elliptical bearing
and typically is used in gear and turbine applications. It
is classiﬁed as a lobed bearing in contrast to a grooved
bearing. Where the grooved bearing consists of a number
of partial arcs with a common center, the lobed bearing is
made up of partial arcs whose centers do not coincide. The
elliptical bearing consists of two partial arcs where the
bottom arc has its center a distance above the bearing cen-
ter. This arrangement has the effect of preloading the bear-
ing, where the journal center eccentricity with respect to
the loaded arc is increased and never becomes zero. This
results in the bearing being stiffened, somewhat improving
its stability. An elliptical bearing is shown in Figure 60.4.

Partial-arc bearings A partial-arc bearing is not a sep-
arate type of bearing. Instead, it refers to a variation of
previously discussed bearings (e.g., grooved and lobed
bearings) that incorporates partial arcs. It is necessary to
use partial-arc bearing data to incorporate partial arcs in a
variety of grooved and lobed bearing conﬁgurations. In all
cases, the lubricant is a liquid and the bearing ﬁlm is lam-
inar. Figure 60.5 illustrates a typical partial-arc bearing.

Tilting-pad bearings are widely
Tilting-pad bearings
used in high-speed applications where hydrodynamic in-
stability and misalignment are common problems. This
bearing consists of a number of shoes mounted on piv-
ots, with each shoe being a partial-arc bearing. The shoes
adjust and follow the motions of the journal, ensuring
inherent stability if the inertia of the shoes does not inter-
fere with the adjustment ability of the bearing. The load
direction may either pass between the two bottom shoes

Load

Journal radius R

Groove

R

R + C

Journal

mC
mC
R+C

Bearing

15˚

15˚

C = Clearance
m = Ellipticity

Rolling element or anti-friction bearings 60/1087

Load

Dia

m

Journal

eter D

Arc len g t

h

Figure 60.5 Partial arc bearing

Bearing

Clearance C

or it may pass through the pivot of the bottom shoe.
The lubricant is incompressible (i.e., liquid) and the lubri-
cant ﬁlm is laminar. Figure 60.6 illustrates a tilting-pad
bearing.

60.3 Rolling element or anti-friction
bearings
Rolling element anti-friction bearings are one of the most
common types used in machinery. Anti-friction bearings
are based on rolling motion as opposed to the sliding motion
of plain bearings. The use of rolling elements between
rotating and stationary surfaces reduces the friction to a
fraction of that resulting with the use of plain bearings.

Use of rolling element bearings is determined by many
factors, including load, speed, misalignment sensitivity,
space limitations, and desire for precise shaft positioning.
They support both radial and axial loads and are generally
used in moderate- to high-speed applications.

Unlike ﬂuid-ﬁlm plain bearings (discussed in Sec-
tion 60.2.1), rolling element bearings have the added abil-
ity to carry the full load of the rotor assembly at any
speed. Where ﬂuid-ﬁlm bearings must have turning gear
to support the rotor’s weight at low speeds, rolling ele-
ment bearings can maintain the proper shaft centerline
through the entire speed range of the machine.

60.3.1 Grade classiﬁcations

Rolling element bearings are available in either commer-
cial- or precision-grade classiﬁcations.

Most commercial-grade bearings are made to non-
speciﬁc standards and are not manufactured to the same
precise standards as precision-grade bearings. This limits

Load

Journal

Dia

m

eter D

ψ

Bearing housing

Tilting shoe

Clearance C

Figure 60.4 Elliptical bearing

Figure 60.6 Tilting-pad bearing

60/1088 Bearings

Table 60.8 Plain bearings selection guide (a) Journal bearings

Characteristics

Direct lined

Insert liners

Accuracy

Quality
(consistency)
Cost

Dependent upon
facilities and skill
available
Doubtful

Precision
components

Consistent

Initial cost may be lower

Ease of repair Difﬁcult and costly

Condition upon
extensive use
Materials used Limited to white metals Extensive range

Likely to be weak in
fatigue

Initial cost may be
higher
Easily done by
replacement
Ability to sustain
higher peak loads

available

6
4
3
2
10,000
8
6
4
3
2

1000
8
6
4
3
2
100
8
6
4
3
2

b
l
 
,
d
a
o
l
 
l
a
d
a
R

i

Roller bearing

S

p

e

e

d

 
l
i

m

i
t

Ball or roller bearing

Ball

(b) Thrust Bearings

Characteristics

Flanged journal

bearings

Separate thrust

washer

10

2 3 4 6 100 2 3

4 6 1000
Shaft speed, rpm

3 4 6 10,000

Figure 60.7 Guide to selecting ball or roller bearings

Cost

Costly to manufacture

Replacement

Involves whole journal/
thrust component

Materials used Thrust face materials
limited in larger sizes
Aids assembly on a
production line

Beneﬁts

Much lower initial
cost
Easily replaced
without moving
journal bearing
Extensive range
available
Aligns itself with
the housing

the speeds at which they can operate efﬁciently and given
brand bearings may or may not be interchangeable.

Precision bearings are used extensively on many machi-
nes such as pumps, air compressors, gear drives, electric
motors, and gas turbines. The shape of the rolling ele-
ments determines the use of the bearing in machinery.
Because of standardization in bearing envelope dimen-
sions, precision bearings were once considered to be inter-
changeable, even if manufactured by different companies.
It has been discovered, however, that interchanging bear-
ings is a major cause of machinery failure and should be
done with extreme caution.

60.3.2 Rolling element types

There are two major classiﬁcations of rolling elements:
ball and roller. Ball bearings function on point contact and
are suited for higher speeds and lighter loads than roller
bearings. Roller element bearings function on line con-
tact and generally are more expensive than ball bearings,
except for the larger sizes. Roller bearings carry heavy
loads and handle shock more satisfactorily than ball bear-
ings, but are more limited in speed. Figure 60.7 provides
general guidelines to determine if a ball or roller bearing
should be selected. This ﬁgure is based on a rated life of
30,000 hours.

Although there are many types of rolling elements, each
bearing design is based on a series of hardened rolling
elements sandwiched between hardened inner and outer
rings. The rings provide continuous tracks or races for the
rollers or balls to roll in. Each ball or roller is separated
from its neighbor by a separator cage or retainer, which
properly spaces the rolling elements around the track and
guides them through the load zone. Bearing size is usually
given in terms of boundary dimensions: outside diameter,
bore, and width.

Ball

Common functional groupings of ball bearings are radial,
thrust, and angular-contact bearings. Radial bearings carry
a load in a direction perpendicular to the axis of rotation.
Thrust bearings carry only thrust loads, a force parallel to
the axis of rotation tending to cause endwise motion of the
shaft. Angular-contact bearings support combined radial
and thrust loads. These loads are illustrated in Figure 60.8.
Another common classiﬁcation of ball bearings is single
row (also referred to as Conrad or deep-groove bearing)
and double row.

(a) Radial load.

(b) Thrust load.

(c) Combination load.

Figure 60.8 Three principal types of ball bearing loads

Rolling element or anti-friction bearings 60/1089

design accomodates thrust of less than 60 per cent of the
radial load.

This ball bearing
Angular contact radial thrust bearings
is designed to support radial loads combined with thrust
loads, or heavy thrust loads (depending on the contact-
angle magnitude). The outer ring is designed with one
shoulder higher than the other, which allows it to accom-
modate thrust loads. The shoulder on the other side of
the ring is just high enough to prevent the bearing from
separating. This type of bearing is used for pure thrust
load in one direction and is applied either in opposed
pairs (duplex), or one at each end of the shaft. They can
be mounted either face-to-face or back-to-back and in tan-
dem for constant thrust in one direction. This bearing is
designed for combination loads where the thrust compo-
nent is greater than the capacity of single-row deep-groove
bearings. Axial deﬂection must be conﬁned to very close
tolerances.

The ball-thrust bearing supports
Ball-thrust bearings
very high thrust loads in one direction only, but supports
no radial loading. To operate successfully, this type of
bearing must be at least moderately thrust-loaded at all
times. It should not be operated at high speeds, since cen-
trifugal force causes excessive loading of the outer edges
of the races.

Double-row

Double-row ball bearings accommodate heavy radial and
light thrust loads without increasing the outer diameter of
the bearing. However, it is approximately 60 to 80 per cent
wider than a comparable single-row bearing. The double-
row bearing incorporates a ﬁlling slot, which requires the
thrust load to be light. Figure 60.11 shows a double-row
type ball bearing.

This unit is, in effect, two single-row angular contact
bearings built as a unit with the internal ﬁt between balls
and raceway ﬁxed during assembly. As a result, ﬁt and
internal stiffness are not dependent upon mounting meth-
ods. These bearings usually have a known amount of

Single-row

Types of single-row ball bearings are: radial non-ﬁlling
slot bearings, radial ﬁlling slot bearings, angular contact
bearings, and ball thrust bearings.

This ball bearing is
Radial, non-ﬁlling slot bearings
often referred to as the Conrad-type or deep-groove bear-
ing and is the most widely used of all ball bearings (and
probably of all anti-friction bearings). It is available in
many variations, with single or double shields or seals.
They sustain combined radial and thrust loads, or thrust
loads alone, in either direction – even at extremely high
speeds. This bearing is not designed to be self-aligning,
therefore it is imperative that the shaft and the housing
bore be accurately aligned.

Figure 60.10 labels the parts of the Conrad anti-friction
ball bearing. This design is widely used and is versatile
because the deep-grooved raceways permit the rotating
balls to rapidly adjust to radial and thrust loadings, or a
combination of these loadings.

The geometry of this ball
Radial, ﬁlling slot bearings
bearing is similar to the Conrad bearing, except for the
ﬁlling slot. This slot allows more balls in the comple-
ment and thus can carry heavier radial loads. The bearing
is assembled with as many balls that ﬁt in the gap cre-
ated by eccentrically displacing the inner ring. The balls
are evenly spaced by a slight spreading of the rings and
heat expansion of the outer ring. However, because of
the ﬁlling slot, the thrust capacity in both directions is
reduced. In combination with radial loads, this bearing

Figure 60.9 Single-row radial, non-ﬁlling slot bearing

Width

Outer ring

Inner ring

Outside
diameter

Bore

Face

Corner radius

Shoulders

Corner radius

Inner ring
ball race

Separator

Outer ring
ball race

Figure 60.10 Conrad anti-friction ball bearing parts

Figure 60.11 Double row-type ball bearing

60/1090 Bearings

internal preload, or compression, built in for maximum
resistance to deﬂection under combined loads with thrust
from either direction. As a result of this compression prior
to external loading, the bearings are very effective for
radial loads where bearing deﬂection must be minimized.
Another double-row ball bearing is the internal self-
aligning type, which is shown in Figure 60.12. It com-
pensates for angular misalignment, which can be caused
by errors in mounting, shaft deﬂection, misalignment, etc.
This bearing supports moderate radial loads and limited
thrust loads.

Roller

As with plain and ball bearings, roller bearings also may
be classiﬁed by their ability to support radial, thrust, and
combination loads. Note that combination load-supporting
roller bearings are not called angular-contact bearings as
they are with ball bearings. For example, the taper-roller
bearing is a combination load-carrying bearing by virtue
of the shape of its rollers.

Figure 60.13 shows the different types of roller ele-
ments used in these bearings. Roller elements are classi-
ﬁed as cylindrical, barrel, spherical, and tapered. Note that
barrel rollers are called needle rollers when less than 1
4 -
inch in diameter and have a relatively high ratio of length
to diameter.

Cylindrical

Cylindrical bearings have solid or helically wound hollow
cylindrically shaped rollers, which have an approximate
length:diameter ratio ranging from 1 : 1 to 1 : 3. They nor-
mally are used for heavy radial loads beyond the capaci-
ties of comparably sized radial ball bearings.

Cylindrical bearings are especially useful for free axial
movement of the shaft. The free ring may have a restraining
ﬂange to provide some restraint to endwise movement in one
direction. Another conﬁguration comes without a ﬂange,
which allows the bearing rings to be displaced axially.

Either the rolls or the roller path on the races may be
slightly crowned to prevent edge loading under slight shaft
misalignment. Low friction makes this bearing type suit-
able for fairly high speeds. Figure 60.14 shows a typical
cylindrical roller bearing.

Figure 60.15 shows separable inner-ring cylindrical
roller bearings. Figure 60.16 shows separable inner-ring
cylindrical roller bearings with a different inner ring.

The roller assembly in Figure 60.15 is located in the
outer ring with retaining rings. The inner ring can be
omitted and the roller operated on hardened ground shaft
surfaces.

The style in Figure 60.16 is similar to the one in Figure
60.15, except the rib on the inner ring is different. This
prohibits the outer ring from moving in a direction toward
the rib.

Figure 60.17 shows separable inner ring-type cylindri-
cal roller bearings with elimination of a retainer ring on
one side.

The style shown in Figure 60.17 is similar to the two
previous styles except for the elimination of a retainer

Figure 60.12 Double-row internal self-aligning bearing

Width

O.D. corner

Roller

Bore corner

Shoulders

Separator

Outer ring

Inner ring

Outside
diameter

Bore

Face

Spherical

Cylindrical

Figure 60.14 Cylindrical roller bearing

Needle

Tapered

Figure 60.13 Types of roller elements

Figure 60.15 Separable inner ring-type cylindrical roller bearings

Figure 60.16 Separable inner ring-type cylindrical roller bearings
with different inner ring

Figure 60.17 Separable inner ring-type cylindrical roller bearings
with elimination of a retainer ring on one side

ring on one side. It can carry small thrust loads in only
one direction.

Needle-type cylindrical or barrel

Needle-type cylindrical bearings (Figure 60.18) incorpo-
rate rollers that are symmetrical with a length at least

Figure 60.18 Needle bearings

Rolling element or anti-friction bearings 60/1091

four times their diameter. They are sometimes referred to
as barrel rollers. These bearings are most useful where
space is limited and thrust-load support is not required.
They are available with or without an inner race. If a shaft
takes the place of an inner race, it must be hardened and
ground. The full-complement type is used for high loads
and oscillating or slow speeds. The cage type should be
used for rotational motion.

They come in both single-row and double-row mount-
ings. As with all cylindrical roller bearings, the single-
row mounting type has a low thrust capacity, but angular
mounting of rolls in the double-row type permits its use
for combined axial and thrust loads.

Spherical bearings are usually furnished in a double-
row mounting that is inherently self-aligning. Both rows
of rollers have a common spherical outer raceway. The
rollers are barrel-shaped with one end smaller to provide
a small thrust to keep the rollers in contact with the center
guide ﬂange.

This type of roller bearing has a high radial and mode-
rate-to-heavy thrust load-carrying capacity. It maintains
this capability with some degree of shaft and bearing
housing misalignment. While their internal self-aligning
feature is useful, care should be taken in specifying
this type of bearing to compensate for misalignment.
Figure 60.19 shows a typical spherical roller bearing
assembly. Figure 60.20 shows a series of spherical roller
bearings for a given shaft size.

Tapered bearings are used for heavy radial and thrust
loads. They have straight tapered rollers, which are held in
accurate alignment by means of a guide ﬂange on the inner
ring. Figure 60.21 shows a typical tapered-roller bearing.
Figure 60.22 shows necessary information to identify a
taper-roller bearing. Figure 60.23 shows various types of
tapered roller bearings.

True rolling occurs because they are designed so all
elements in the rolling surface and the raceways intersect
at a common point on the axis. The basic characteristic of
these bearings is that if the apexes of the tapered work-
ing surfaces of both rollers and races were extended, they
would coincide on the bearing axis. Where maximum sys-
tem rigidity is required, they can be adjusted for a preload.
These bearings are separable.

60.3.3 Bearing materials

Because two contacting metal surfaces are in motion in
bearing applications, material selection plays a crucial role
in their life. Properties of the materials used in bearing
construction determine the amount of sliding friction that
occurs, a key factor affecting bearing life. When two sim-
ilar metals are in contact without the presence of adequate
lubrication, friction is generally high and the surfaces will
seize (i.e., weld) at relatively low pressures or surface
loads. However, certain combinations of materials support
substantial loads without seizing or welding as a result of
their low frictional qualities.

In most machinery, shafts are made of steel. Bearings
are generally made of softer materials that have low fric-
tional as well as sacriﬁcial qualities when in contact with
steel. A softer, sacriﬁcial material is used for bearings

Figure 60.19 Spherical roller bearing assembly

60/1092 Bearings

239

230

240

231

241

222

232

213

223

4533

Figure 60.20 Series of spherical roller bearings for a given shaft size (available in several series)

because it is easier and cheaper to replace a worn bearing
as opposed to a worn shaft. Common bearing materials are
cast iron, bronze, and Babbitt. Other less commonly used
materials include wood, plastics, and other synthetics.

There are several important characteristics to consider
when specifying bearing materials, including: (1) strength

or the ability to withstand loads without plastic deforma-
tion, (2) ability to permit embedding of grit or dirt particles
that are present in the lubricant, (3) ability to elastically
deform in order to permit load distribution over the full
bearing surface, (4) ability to dissipate heat and prevent
hot spots that might seize, and (5) corrosion resistance.

Plain

As indicated above, dissimilar metals with low frictional
characteristics are most suitable for plain bearing applica-
tions. With steel shafts, plain bearings made of bronze or
Babbitt are commonly used. Bronze is one of the harder
bearing materials and is generally used for low speeds and
heavy loads.

A plain bearing may sometimes be made of a combi-
nation of materials. The outer portion may be constructed
of bronze, steel, or iron to provide the strength needed to
provide a load-carrying capability. The bearing may be
lined with a softer material such as Babbitt to provide the
sacriﬁcial capability needed to protect the shaft.

Figure 60.21 Taper-roller bearing

Bearing width

Cup width

Cup back face radius

Cup back face
Cage
Cone front face rib
Cone front face
Cone front
face radius

Cup

Roller

Cone

Cone width

r
e

t

e
m
a
d

i

 

e
d
s
t

i

u
o

 

p
u
C

Figure 60.22 Information needed to identify a taper-roller bearing

Standout

Cup front face radius

Cup front face

Cone back face rib
Cone back face
Cone back face radius

e
r
o
b

 

e
n
o
C

Load pressure
(effective)
center distance

Single row

TS

TSF

FR

Double row

TDO

TDI

TDIT

TNA

TNASWE

TNASW

Four row

TQO

Figure 60.23 Various types of tapered roller bearings

Rolling element

A specially developed steel alloy is used for an estimated
98 per cent of all rolling element bearing uses. In cer-
tain special applications, however, materials such as glass,
plastic, and other substances are sometimes used in rolling
element construction.

Bearing steel is a high-carbon chrome alloy with high
hardenability and good toughness characteristics in the
hardened and drawn state. All load-carrying members of
most rolling contact bearings are made with this steel.

Controlled procedures and practices are necessary to
ensure speciﬁcation of the proper alloy, maintain mate-
rial cleanliness, and ensure freedom from defects – all of
which affect bearing reliability. Alloying practices that
conform to rigid speciﬁcations are required to reduce ano-
malies and inclusions that adversely affect a bearing’s
useful life. Magnaﬂux inspections ensure that rolling ele-
ments are free from material defects and cracks. Light
etching is used between rough and ﬁnish grinding pro-
cesses to stop burning during heavy machining operations.

60.4 Lubrication
It is critical to consider lubrication requirements when
specifying bearings. Factors affecting lubricants include
relatively high speeds, difﬁculty in performing relubrica-
tion, non-horizontal shafts, and applications where leak-
age cannot be tolerated. This section brieﬂy discusses
lubrication mechanisms and techniques for bearings.

60.4.1 Plain bearings
In plain bearings, the lubricating ﬂuid must be replenished
to compensate for end leakage in order to maintain their
load-carrying capacity. Pressure lubrication from a pump-
or gravity-fed tank, or automatic lubricating devices such

Lubrication 60/1093

as oil rings or oil disks, are provided in self-contained
bearings. Another means of lubrication is to submerge the
bearing (in particular, thrust bearings for vertical shafts)
in an oil bath.
Lubricating ﬂuids
Almost any process ﬂuid may be used to lubricate plain
bearings if parameters, such as viscosity, corrosive action,
toxicity, change in state (where a liquid is close to its boiling
point), and in the case of a gaseous ﬂuid its compressibility,
are appropriate for the application. Fluid-ﬁlm journal and
thrust bearings have run successfully, for example, on
water, kerosene, gasoline, acid, liquid refrigerants, mercury,
molten metals, and a wide variety of gases.

Gases, however, lack the cooling and boundary-lubrica-
tion capabilities of most liquid lubricants. Therefore, the
operation of self-acting gas bearings is restricted by start/
stop friction and wear. If start/stop is performed under
load, then the design is limited to about seven pounds
per square inch (lb/in2) or 48 kilo-Newtons per square
meter (kN/m2) on the projected bearing area, depending
upon the choice of materials. In general, the materials
used for these bearings are those of dry rubbing bear-
ings (e.g., either a hard/hard combination such as ceramics
with or without a molecular layer of boundary lubricant,
or a hard/soft combination with a plastic surface).

Externally pressurized gas journal bearings have the
same principle of operation as hydrostatic liquid-lubricated
bearings. Any clear gas can be used, but many of the design
charts are based on air. There are three forms of exter-
nal ﬂow restrictors in use with these bearings: pocketed
(simple) oriﬁce, unpocketed (annular) oriﬁce, and slot.

State of lubrication
Fluid or complete lubrication, the condition where the
surfaces are completely separated by a ﬂuid ﬁlm, provides
the lowest friction losses and prevents wear.

The semi-ﬂuid lubrication state exists between the jour-
nal and bearing when a load-carrying ﬂuid ﬁlm does not
form to separate the surfaces. This ocurrs at comparatively
low speed with intermittent or oscillating motion, heavy
load, and insufﬁcient oil supply to the bearing. Semi-ﬂuid
lubrication also may exist in thrust bearings with ﬁxed
parallel-thrust collars; guide bearings of machine tools;
bearings with plenty of lubrication, but have a bent or mis-
aligned shaft; or where the bearing surface has improperly
arranged oil grooves. The coefﬁcient of friction in such
bearings may range from 0.02 to 0.08.

In situations where the bearing is well lubricated, but
the speed of rotation is very slow or the bearing is barely
greasy, boundary lubrication takes place. In this situation,
which occurs in bearings when the shaft is starting from
rest, the coefﬁcient of friction may vary from 0.08 to 0.14.
A bearing may run completely dry in exceptional cases
of design or with a complete failure of lubrication. De-
pending on the contacting surface materials, the coefﬁ-
cient of friction will be between 0.25 and 0.40.

60.4.2 Rolling element bearings
Rolling element bearings also need a lubricant to meet or
exceed their rated life. In the absence of high temperatures,

60/1094 Bearings

however, excellent performance can be obtained with a
very small quantity of lubricant. Excess lubricant causes
excessive heating, which accelerates lubricant deteriora-
tion.

The most popular type of lubrication is the sealed grease
ball-bearing cartridge. Grease is commonly used for lubri-
cation because of its convenience and minimum mainte-
nance requirements. A high-quality lithium-based NLGI
2 grease is commonly used for temperatures up to 180°F
(82°C). Grease must be replenished and relubrication inter-
vals in hours of operation are dependent on temperature,
speed, and bearing size. Table 60.9 is a general guide to
the time after which it is advisable to add a small amount
of grease.

Some applications, however, cannot use the cartridge
design, for example, when the operating environment is
too hot for the seals. Another example is when minute
leaks or the accumulation of traces of dirt at the lip seals
cannot be tolerated (e.g., food processing machines). In
these cases, bearings with specialized sealing and lubri-
cation systems must be used.

In applications involving high speed, oil lubrication is
typically required. Table 60.10 is a general guide in select-
ing oil of the proper viscosity for these bearings. For
applications involving high-speed shafts, bearing selec-
tion must take into account the inherent speed limitations

Table 60.9 Ball-bearing grease relubrication intervals (hours of
operation)

Bearing
bore, mm

Bearing speed, rpm

5,000

3,600

1,750

1,000

200

10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100

8,700
5,500
4,000
2,800

12,000
8,000
6,000
4,500
3,500
2,600

25,000
17,000
13,000
11,000
9,300
8,000
6,700
5,700
4,800
4,000

44,000
30,000
24,000
20,000
18,000
16,000
14,000
12,000
11,000
10,000

220,000
150,000
127,000
111,000
97,000
88,000
81,000
75,000
70,000
66,000

Source: Maintenance Fundamentals, R. K. Mobley, Butterworth-
Heinemann, 1999.

Table 60.10 Oil lubrication viscosity (ISO identiﬁcation
numbers)

Bearing
Bore, mm

4–7
10–20
25–45
50–70
75–90
100

Bearing speed, rpm

10,000

3,600

1,800

600

50

68
32
10
7
3
3

150
68
32
22
10
7

220
150
68
68
22
22

220
150
150
68
68

460
320
320
220
220

Source: Maintenance Fundamentals, R. K. Mobley, Butterworth-
Heinemann, 1999.

of certain bearing designs, cooling needs, and lubrica-
tion issues such as churning and aeration suppression.
A typical case is the effect of cage design and roller-
end thrust-ﬂange contact on the lubrication requirements
in taper roller bearings. These design elements limit the
speed and the thrust load that these bearings can endure.
As a result, it is important to always refer to the bearing
manufacturer’s instructions on load-carrying design and
lubrication speciﬁcations.

60.5 Installation and general handling
precautions
Proper handling and installation practices are crucial to
optimal bearing performance and life. In addition to
standard handling and installation practices, the issue of
emergency bearing substitutions is an area of critical
importance. If substitute bearings are used as an emergency
means of getting a machine back into production quickly,
the substitution should be entered into the historical records
for that machine. This documents the temporary change and
avoids the possibility of the substitute bearing becoming a
permanent replacement. This error can be extremely costly,
particularly if the incorrectly speciﬁed bearing continually
fails prematurely. It is important that an inferior substitute
be removed as soon as possible and replaced with the
originally speciﬁed bearing.

60.5.1 Plain bearing installation
It is important to keep plain bearings from shifting side-
ways during installation and to ensure an axial position
that does not interfere with shaft ﬁllets. Both of these can
be accomplished with a locating lug at the parting line.
Less frequently used is a dowel in the housing, which
protrudes partially into a mating hole in the bearing.

It

The distance across the outside parting edges of a plain
bearing are manufactured slightly greater than the housing
bore diameter. During installation, a light force is neces-
sary to snap it into place and, once installed, the bearing
stays in place because of the pressure against the hous-
ing bore.

is necessary to prevent a bearing from spinning
during operation, which can cause a catastrophic failure.
Spinning is prevented by what is referred to as ‘crush.’
Bearings are slightly longer circumferentially than their
mating housings and upon installation this excess length
is elastically deformed or ‘crushed.’ This sets up a high
radial contact pressure between the bearing and housing,
which ensures good back contact for heat conduction and,
in combination with the bore-to-bearing friction, prevents
spinning. It
that under no circumstances
should the bearing parting lines be ﬁled or otherwise
altered to remove the crush.

is important

60.5.2 Rolling element bearing installation
A basic rule of rolling element bearing installation is that
one ring must be mounted on its mating shaft or in its
housing with an interference ﬁt to prevent rotation. This
is necessary because it is virtually impossible to prevent
rotation by clamping the ring axially.

Mounting hardware
Bearings come as separate parts that require mounting
hardware or as pre-mounted units that are supplied with
their own housings, adapters, and seals.

Typical bearing mountings, which
Bearing mountings
are shown in Figure 60.24, locate and hold the shaft axi-
ally and allow for thermal expansion and/or contraction
of the shaft. Locating and holding the shaft axially is gen-
erally accomplished by clamping one of the bearings on
the shaft so that all machine parts remain in proper rela-
tionship dimensionally. The inner ring is locked axially
relative to the shaft by locating it between a shaft shoulder
and some type of removable locking device once the inner
ring has a tight ﬁt. Typical removable locking devices
are specially designed nuts, which are used for a through
shaft, and clamp plates, which are commonly used when
the bearing is mounted on the end of the shaft. For the
locating or held bearing, the outer ring is clamped axially,
usually between housing shoulders or end-cap pilots.

With general types of cylindrical roller bearings, shaft
expansion is absorbed internally simply by allowing one
ring to move relative to the other (Figure 60.24(a) and
60.24(c), non-locating positions). The advantage of this
type of mounting is that both inner and outer rings may
have a tight ﬁt, which is desirable or even mandatory if
signiﬁcant vibration and/or imbalance exists in addition
to the applied load.

Premounted bearings, referred to
Premounted bearing
as pillow-block and ﬂanged-housing mountings, are of
considerable importance to millwrights. They are particu-
larly adaptable to ‘line-shafting’ applications, which are a

Installation and general handling precautions 60/1095

Figure 60.26 Flanged bearing unit

series of ball and roller bearings supplied with their own
housings, adapters, and seals. Premounted bearings come
with a wide variety of ﬂange mountings, which permit
them to be located on faces parallel or perpendicular to
the shaft axis. Figure 60.25 shows a typical pillow block.
Figure 60.26 shows a ﬂanged bearing unit.

Inner races can be mounted directly on ground shafts or
can be adapter-mounted to ‘drill-rod’ or to commercial-
shafting. For installations sensitive to imbalance and
vibration,
the use of accurately ground shaft seats is
recommended.

Most pillow-block designs incorporate self-aligning
bearing types and do not require the precision mountings
utilized with other bearing installations.

Mounting techniques

When mounting or dismounting a roller bearing, the most
important thing to remember is to apply the mounting
or dismounting force to the side face of the ring with
the interference ﬁt. This force should not pass from one
ring to the other through the ball or roller set, as internal
damage can easily occur.

Mounting tapered-bore bearings can be accomplished
simply by tightening the locknut or clamping plate. This
locates it on the shaft until the bearing is forced the proper
distance up the taper. This technique requires a signiﬁcant
amount of force, particularly for large bearings.

Locating

Nonlocating

Locating

Nonlocating

(a)

(b)

Cold mounting

Locating

Nonlocating

 Cross-location
,,
,,

(c)

(d)

Figure 60.24 Typical bearing mounting

Figure 60.25 Typical pillow block

Cold mounting, or force ﬁtting a bearing onto a shaft or
into a housing, is appropriate for all small bearings (i.e.,
4-inch bore and smaller). The force, however, must be
applied as uniformly as possible around the side face of
the bearing and to the ring to be press-ﬁtted. Mounting
ﬁxtures, such as a simple piece of tubing of appropriate
size and a ﬂat plate, should be used. It is not appropriate
to use a drift and hammer to force the bearing on, which
will cause the bearing to cock. It is possible to apply force
by striking the plate with a hammer or by an arbor press.
However, before forcing the the bearing on the shaft, a
coat of light oil should be applied to the bearing seat on
the shaft and the bearing bores. All sealed and shielded
ball bearings should be cold mounted in this manner.

Temperature mounting

The simplest way to mount any open straight-bore bear-
ing regardless of its size is temperature mounting, which

60/1096 Bearings

entails heating the entire bearing, pushing it on its seat,
and holding it in place until it cools enough to grip the
shaft. The housing may be heated if practical for tight
outside-diameter ﬁts, however, temperatures should not
exceed 250°F. If heating of the housing is not practical,
the bearing may be cooled with dry ice. The risk of cool-
ing is that if the ambient conditions are humid, moisture
is introduced and there is a potential for corrosion in the
future. Acceptable ways of heating bearings are by hot
plate, temperature-controlled oven, induction heaters, and
hot-oil bath.

With the hot plate method, the bearing is simply laid
on the plate until it reaches the approved temperature,
using a pyrometer or Tempilstik to make certain it is not
overheated. Difﬁculty in controlling the temperature is the
major disadvantage of this method.

When using a temperature-controlled oven, the bearings
should be left in the oven long enough to heat thoroughly,
but they should never be left overnight.

The use of induction heaters is a quick method of heat-
ing bearings. However, some method of measuring the
ring temperature (e.g., pyrometer or a Tempilstik) must be
used or damage to the bearing may occur. Note that bear-
ings must be demagnetized after the use of this method.
The use of a hot-oil bath is the most practical means of
heating larger bearings. Disadvantages are that the tem-
perature of the oil is hard to control and may ignite or
overheat the bearing. The use of a soluble oil and water
mixture (10 to 15 per cent oil) can eliminate these prob-
lems and still attain a boiling temperature of 210°F. The
bearing should be kept off the bottom of the container by
a grate or screen located several inches off the bottom.
This is important to allow contaminants to sink to the
bottom of the container and away from the bearing.

Dismounting

Commercially available bearing pullers allow rolling
element bearings to be dismounted from their seats
without damage. When removing a bearing, force should
be applied to the ring with the tight ﬁt, although
sometimes it is necessary to use supplementary plates or
ﬁxtures. An arbor press is equally effective at removing
smaller bearings as well as mounting them.

Ball installation

Figure 60.27 shows the ball installation procedure for
roller bearings. The designed load carrying capacity of
Conrad-type bearings is determined by the number of balls
that can be installed between the rings. Ball installation
is accomplished by the following procedure:
ž Slip the inner ring slightly to one side.
ž Insert balls into the gap, which centers the inner ring
ž Place stamped retainer rings on either side of the balls
before riveting together. This positions the balls equi-
distant around the bearing.

as the balls are positioned between the rings.

cleanest environment available.

60.5.3 General rolling element bearing handling
precautions
In order for rolling element bearings to achieve their de-
sign life and perform with no abnormal noise, temperature
rise, or shaft excursions, the following precautions should
be taken:
ž Always select the best bearing design for the appli-
cation and not the cheapest. The cost of the original
bearing is usually small by comparison to the costs of
replacement components and the down-time in produc-
tion when premature bearing failure occurs because an
inappropriate bearing was used.
ž If in doubt about bearings and their uses, consult the
manufacturer’s representative and the product literature.
ž Bearings should always be handled with great care.
Never ignore the handling and installation instructions
from the manufacturer.
ž Always work with clean hands, clean tools, and the
ž Never wash or wipe bearings prior to installation unless
the instructions speciﬁcally state that this should be
done. Exceptions to this rule are when oil-mist lubri-
cation is to be used and the slushing compound has
hardened in storage or is blocking lubrication holes in
the bearing rings. In this situation, it is best to clean the
bearing with kerosene or other appropriate petroleum-
based solvent. The other exception is if the slushing
compound has been contaminated with dirt or foreign
matter before mounting.
ž Keep new bearings in their greased paper wrappings
ž Place unwrapped bearings on clean paper or lint-free
cloth if they cannot be kept in their original containers.
Wrap bearings in clean, oil-proof paper when not in use.
ž Never use wooden mallets, brittle or chipped tools,
or dirty ﬁxtures and tools when bearings are being
installed.
ž Do not spin bearings (particularly dirty ones) with com-
ž Avoid scratching or nicking bearing surfaces. Care must
be taken when polishing bearings with emery cloth to
avoid scratching.

until they are ready to install.

ž Never strike or press on race ﬂanges.
ž Always use adapters for mounting that ensure uniform
steady pressure rather than hammering on a drift or
sleeve. Never use brass or bronze drifts to install bear-
ings as these materials chip very easily into minute
particles that will quickly damage a bearing.
ž Avoid cocking bearings onto shafts during installation.
ž Always inspect the mounting surface on the shaft and
ž When bearings are being removed, clean housings and
shafts before exposing the bearings. Dirt is abrasive and
detrimental to the designed life-span of bearings.
ž Always treat used bearings as if they are new, espe-
ž Protect dismantled bearings from moisture and dirt.
ž Use clean ﬁltered, water-free Stoddard’s solvent or ﬂu-

housing to insure that there are no burrs or defects.

cially if they are to be reused.

pressed service air.

shing oil to clean bearings.

Improper bearing selection and/or installation 60/1097

1. The inner ring is moved to one side.

2. Balls are installed in the gap.

3. The inner ring is centered as the balls
are equally positioned in place.

4. A retainer is installed.

follow the manufacturer’s instructions.

Figure 60.27 Ball installation procedures
ž When heating is used to mount bearings onto shafts,
ž When assembling and mounting bearings onto shafts,
never strike the outer race or press on it to force the
inner race. Apply the pressure on the inner race only.
When dismantling, follow the same procedure.
ž Never press, strike, or otherwise force the seal or shield

on factory-sealed bearings.

60.6 Bearing failures, deﬁciencies, and
their causes
The general classiﬁcations of failures and deﬁciencies
requiring bearing removal are overheating, vibration,
turning on the shaft, binding of
the shaft, noise
during operation, and lubricant leakage. Table 60.11 is
a troubleshooting guide that lists the common causes for
each of these failures and deﬁciencies. As indicated by the
causes of failure listed, bearing failures are rarely caused
by the bearing itself.

improper sizing of

Many abnormal vibrations generated by actual bearing
problems are the result of
the
bearing liner or improper lubrication. However, numerous
machine and process-related problems generate abnormal
vibration spectra in bearing data. The primary contributors
to abnormal bearing signatures are:
(1) imbalance,
(2) misalignment, (3) rotor instability, (4) excessive or
abnormal loads, and (5) mechanical looseness.

Defective bearings that leave the manufacturer are very
rare and it is estimated that defective bearings contribute
to only 2 per cent of total failures. The failure is invariably
linked to symptoms of misalignment, imbalance, resonance
and lubrication – or the lack of it. Most of the problems

that occur result from the following reasons: dirt, shipping
damage, storage and handling, poor ﬁt resulting in instal-
lation damage, wrong type of bearing design, overloading,
improper lubrication practices, misalignment, bent shaft,
imbalance, resonance, and soft foot. Any one of these con-
ditions will eventually destroy a bearing – two or more of
these problems can result in disaster!

their

installed at

Although most industrial machine designers provide
adequate bearings
are
some cases where bearings are improperly designed,
manufactured, or
the factory. Usually,
the trouble is caused by one or more of
however,
the following reasons:
(1) improper on-site bearing
selection and/or
(2) incorrect grooving,
(3) unsuitable surface ﬁnish, (4) insufﬁcient clearance,
(5) faulty relining practices,
(6) operating conditions,
(7) excessive operating temperature, (8) contaminated oil
supply, and (9) oil-ﬁlm instability.

installation,

for

equipment,

there

60.7 Improper bearing selection and/or
installation
There are several things to consider when selecting and
installing bearings, including the issue of interchangeabil-
ity, materials of construction, and damage that might have
occurred during shipping, storage, and handling.

Interchangeability
Because of the standardization in envelope dimensions,
precision bearings were once regarded as interchangeable
among manufacturers. This interchangeability has since
been considered a major cause of failures in machinery
and the practice should be used with extreme caution.

60/1098 Bearings

Table 60.11 Troubleshooting guide

Overheating

Vibration

Turning on the

shaft

Binding of the shaft

Noisy bearing

Lubricant leakage

Inadequate or
insufﬁcient
lubrication

Dirt or chips in

bearing

Growth of race due

to overheating

Lubricant breakdown Lubricant breakdown Overﬁlling of

lubricant

Excessive lubrication Fatigued race or

Fretting wear

rolling elements

Grease liquiﬁcation

or aeration

Rotor unbalance

Improper initial ﬁt

Excessive shaft

deﬂection

Initial coarse ﬁnish

on shaft

Seal rub on inner

race

Oil foaming

Out-of-round shaft

Abrasion or

corrosion due to
contaminants

Housing distortion

due to warping or
out-of-round

Seal rubbing or

failure

Inadequate or

blocked scavenge
oil passages

Race misalignment

Housing resonance

Cage wear

Flats on races or

rolling elements

Inadequate bearing

clearance or
bearing preload

Race turning

Race turning

Excessive clearance

Cage wear

Corrosion

False-brinelling or

indentation of
races

Electrical arcing
Mixed rolling

element diameters
Out-of-square rolling

paths in races

Contamination by

abrasive or
corrosive materials
Housing distortion or

out-of-round
pinching bearing

Uneven shimming of
housing with loss
of clearance

Tight rubbing seals

Inadequate

lubrication

Pinched bearing

Contamination

Grease churning due

to too soft
consistency

Grease deterioration
due to excessive
operating
temperature

Operating beyond

grease life

Seal rubbing

Seal wear

Preloaded bearings

Bearing slipping on

shaft or in housing

Wrong shaft attitude

(bearing seals
designed for
horizontal
mounting only)

Flatted roller or ball Seal failure

Brinelling due to

Clogged breather

Cocked races

Loss of clearance
due to excessive
adapter tightening

Thermal shaft

expansion

assembly abuse,
handing, or shock
loads

Variation in size of
rolling elements

Thermal shaft

expansion

Variation in size of
rolling elements

Housing bore

waviness

Chips or scores

under bearing seat

Oil foaming due to

churning or air
ﬂow through
housing

Oil foaming due to

churning or air
ﬂow through
housing

Porous housing or

closure

Lubricator set at the

wrong ﬂow rate

Most of the problems with interchangeability stem from
selecting and replacing bearings based only on bore size
and outside diameters. Often, very little consideration
is paid to the number of rolling elements contained in
the bearings. This can seriously affect the operational
frequency vibrations of the bearing and may generate
destructive resonance in the host machine or adjacent
machines.

More bearings are destroyed during their installation
than fail in operation. Installation with a heavy hammer is
the usual method in many plants. Heating the bearing with
an oxy-acetylene burner is another classical method. How-
ever, the bearing does not stand a chance of reaching its

life expectancy when either of these installation practices
are used. The bearing manufacturer’s installation instruc-
tions should always be followed.

Shipping damage
Bearings and the machinery containing them should be
properly packaged to avoid damage during shipping. How-
ever, many installed bearings are exposed to vibrations,
bending, and massive shock loadings through bad han-
dling practices during shipping. It has been estimated that
approximately 40 per cent of newly received machines
have ‘bad’ bearings.

Because of this, all new machinery should be thor-
oughly inspected for defects before installation. Accep-
tance criteria should include guidelines that clearly deﬁne
acceptable design/operational speciﬁcations. This practice
pays big dividends by increasing productivity and decreas-
ing unscheduled downtime.

speeded up, or being used for a purpose not appropriate
for the system design. Improper use of lubricants can also
result in bearing failure. Some typical causes of premature
failure include:
(1) excessive operating temperatures,
(2) foreign material in the lubricant supply, (3) corrosion,
(4) material fatigue, and (5) use of unsuitable lubricants.

Operating conditions 60/1099

Storage and handling
Stores and other appropriate personnel must be made
aware of the potential havoc they can cause by their mis-
handling of bearings. Bearing failure often starts in the
storeroom rather than the machinery. Premature opening
of packages containing bearings should be avoided when-
ever possible. If packages must be opened for inspection,
they should be protected from exposure to harmful dirt
sources and then resealed in the original wrappings. The
bearing should never be dropped or bumped as this can
cause shock loading on the bearing surface.

Incorrect placement of oil grooves
Incorrectly placed oil grooves can cause bearing failure.
Locating the grooves in high-pressure areas causes them
to act as pressure-relief passages. This interferes with the
formation of the hydrodynamic ﬁlm, resulting in reduced
load-carrying capability.

Unsuitable surface ﬁnish
Smooth surface ﬁnishes on both the shaft and the bearing
are important to prevent surface variations from pene-
trating the oil ﬁlm. Rough surfaces can cause scoring,
overheating, and bearing failure. The smoother the ﬁn-
ishes, the closer the shaft may approach the bearing with-
out danger of surface contact. Although important in all
bearing applications, surface ﬁnish is critical with the use
of harder bearing materials such as bronze.

Insufﬁcient clearance
There must be sufﬁcient clearance between the journal
and bearing in order to allow an oil ﬁlm to form. An
average diametral clearance of 0.001 inches per inch of
shaft diameter is often used. This value may be adjusted
depending on the type of bearing material, the load, speed,
and the accuracy of the shaft position desired.

Faulty relining
Faulty relining occurs primarily with babitted bearings
rather than precision machine-made inserts. Babbitted
bearings are fabricated by a pouring process that should
be performed under carefully controlled conditions. Some
reasons for faulty relining are: (1) improper preparation
of
(2) poor pouring technique,
(3) contamination of Babbitt, and (4) pouring bearing to
size with journal in place.

the bonding surface,

60.8 Operating conditions
Abnormal operating conditions or neglecting necessary
maintenance precautions cause most bearing failures.
Bearings may experience premature and/or catastrophic
failure on machines that are operated heavily loaded,

Excessive temperatures
Excessive temperatures affect the strength, hardness, and
life of bearing materials. Lower temperatures are required
for thick Babbitt liners than for thin precision Babbitt
inserts. Not only do high temperatures affect bearing mate-
rials, they also reduce the viscosity of the lubricant and
affect the thickness of the ﬁlm, which affects the bear-
ing’s load-carrying capacity. In addition, high tempera-
tures result in more rapid oxidation of the lubricating oil,
which can result in unsatisfactory performance.

Dirt and contaminations in oil supply
Dirt is one of the biggest culprits in the demise of bear-
ings. Dirt makes its appearance in bearings in many subtle
ways and it can be introduced by bad work habits. It
also can be introduced through lubricants that have been
exposed to dirt, which is responsible for approximately
half of bearing failures throughout the industry.

To combat this problem, soft materials such as Babbitt
are used when it is known that a bearing will be exposed to
abrasive materials. Babbitt metal embeds hard particles,
which protects the shaft against abrasion. When harder
materials are used in the presence of abrasives, scoring
and galling occurs as a result of abrasives caught between
the journal and bearing.

In addition to the use of softer bearing materials for
applications where abrasives may potentially be present,
it is important to properly maintain ﬁlters and breathers,
which should regularly be examined. In order to avoid
oil supply contamination, foreign material that collects at
the bottom of the bearing sump should be removed on a
regular basis.

Oil-ﬁlm instability
The primary vibration frequency components associated
with ﬂuid-ﬁlm bearings problems are in fact displays of
turbulent or non-uniform oil ﬁlm. Such instability prob-
lems are classiﬁed as either oil whirl or oil whip depend-
ing on the severity of the instability.

Machine-trains that use sleeve bearings are designed
based on the assumption that rotating elements and shafts
operate in a balanced and, therefore, centered position.
Under this assumption, the machine-train shaft will oper-
ate with an even, concentric oil ﬁlm between the shaft
and sleeve bearing.

For a normal machine, this assumption is valid after
the rotating element has achieved equilibrium. When the
forces associated with rotation are in balance, the rotating
element will center the shaft within the bearing. How-
ever, several problems directly affect this self-centering
operation. First, the machine-train must be at designed
operating speed and load to achieve equilibrium. Second,
any imbalance or abnormal operation limits the machine-
train’s ability to center itself within the bearing.

60/1100 Bearings

Higher
pressure
bearing
fluid

t

n
e
n
o
p
m
o
c

g
n
i
r
a
e
b

 
f

o

t
r
o
p
p
u
S

e
c
r
o

f

Destabilizing
component
of bearing
force

B

f
l

e

p

u

a

r

r

i

d

r
i

e

e

s

s

u

s

l
t

u

a

r

e

n

t

n

g

l

a
g
u

f
i
r
t

n
e
C

e
c
r
o

f

Lower
pressure
bearing fluid

Whirl

R

o

t

a

ti

o

n

External
damping

Undeflected
shaft axis

g
n
i
r
o

t
s
e
r

c
i
t
s
a
E

l

e
c
r
o

f

E

ntrain

e

d

fluidflo
wdire
ctio

n

Figure 60.28 Oil whirl, oil whip

A typical example is a steam turbine. A turbine must
be supported by auxiliary running gear during start-up or
shut-down to prevent damage to the sleeve bearings. The
lower speeds during the start-up and shut-down phase of
operation prevent the self-centering ability of the rotating
element. Once the turbine has achieved full speed and
load, the rotating element and shaft should operate without
assistance in the center of the sleeve bearings.

In an abnormal mode of operation, the rotat-
Oil whirl
ing shaft may not hold the centerline of the sleeve bearing.
When this happens, an instability called oil whirl occurs.
Oil whirl is an imbalance in the hydraulic forces within
a sleeve bearing. Under normal operation, the hydraulic
forces such as velocity and pressure are balanced. If the
rotating shaft is offset from the true centerline of the bear-
ing, instability occurs.

As Figure 60.28 illustrates, a restriction is created by
the offset. This restriction creates a high pressure and
another force vector in the direction of rotation. Oil whirl
accelerates the wear and failure of the bearing and bearing
support structure.

The most severe damage results if the oil whirl
Oil whip
is allowed to degrade into oil whip. Oil whip occurs when
the clearance between the rotating shaft and sleeve bearing
is allowed to close to a point approaching actual metal-to-
metal contact. When the clearance between the shaft and

bearing approaches contact, the oil ﬁlm is no longer free
to ﬂow between the shaft and bearing. As a result, the
oil ﬁlm is forced to change directions. When this occurs,
the high-pressure area created in the region behind the
shaft is greatly increased. This vortex of oil increases the
abnormal force vector created by the offset and rotational
force to the point that metal-to-metal contact between the
shaft and bearing occurs. In almost all instances where
oil whip is allowed, severe damage to the sleeve bearing
occurs.

References

1. Mobley, R. K., Advanced Diagnostics and Analysis, Plant Per-

formance Group (1989).

2. Neale, M. J., Bearings–ATribologyHandbook, Society of Auto-
motive Engineers, Inc., Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, Great
Britain (1993).

3. BearingsandPowerTransmissionProductsCatalog, Bearings,

Inc., Greenville, South Carolina (1991).

4. Mobley, R. K., Introduction to Predictive Maintenance, Van

Nonstrand-Reinhold, New York (1990).

5. Higgins, and Mobley, R. K., Maintenance Engineering Hand-

book, McGraw-Hill, New York (1995).

6. T. Baumeister, ed., Marks’StandardHandbookforMechanical

Engineers, 8th edn, McGraw-Hill, New York (1978).

7. Nelson, C. A., Millwrights and Mechanics Guide, Macmillan

Publishing Company, New York (1986).

8. SKF Product Service Guide, SKF Bearing Services Co., USA

(1992).

61

61/1101

Finance for the
Plant Engineer

Leon Turrell
Financial Consultant

Contents

61/1103
61.1 Accounting
61.2 Types of organization
61.3 Deﬁnitions
61/1104

61/1103

61.3.1 Capital 61/1104
61.3.2 Capital and revenue expenditure
61.3.3 Cash ﬂow 61/1104
61.3.4 Liquidity
61/1104
61.3.5 Financial and operating ratios 61/1104

61/1104

61.4 Budgetary control

61/1106

61.4.1 Preparation 61/1106
61.4.2 Control

61/1107

61.5 Capital expenditure – appraisal methods
61.6 Control of capital expenditure
61/1109

61/1107

61.6.1 Current and post-event monitoring

61/1109

61.7 Standards and standard costing
61.8 Capital

61/1113

61.8.1 Short term 61/1113
61.8.2 Medium term 61/1113
61.8.3 Long term 61/1114

61/1109

61.9 Value added tax
61.10 Break-even charts 61/1114
61.11 Supply of steam, power, water, etc. to other

61/1114

departments
61.11.1 Computation of charges to users

61/1115

61/1116

61.12 Charges for efﬂuent and environmental services 61/1116

61.1 Accounting
Ultimately, all activities of an organization will be ex-
pressed in money, the common denominator within the
accounts of the proprietor, be it a company, a partnership
or a statutory organization. The accounting for these activ-
ities will be under the control of the ﬁnance department,
which, in turn, will be controlled, through the ﬁnancial
director, by the board of directors.

A typical

accounting organization is

shown in
Figure 61.1. These divisions, depending on the size of
the organization, may be broken down further to provide
accounting services at each plant or operating facility.
There will normally be an accountant at each plant, or, in
the case of very large organizations, at each major proﬁt or
cost center at plant level. By this means, close liaison can
be maintained with and management services information
provided for the locally based operating management,
in addition to providing the ﬂow of information and
appropriate documentation to enable the organization to
prepare timely and informative accounts.

Many of the ﬁnancial functions will tend to be central-
ized in order to enjoy economies of scale available using
specially qualiﬁed staff and/or computers.

Prompt and accurate accounting is vital for the well-
being of the organization and for the early detection of
problem areas needing corrective treatment by manage-
ment. The achievement of this promptitude and accuracy
depends largely on the cooperation and attention to detail
by staff in non-accounting departments responsible for the
recording of information (e.g. fuel and water consump-
tion, meter readings, the taking of stocks, etc.). Such staff

Financial director

Board of
directors

Internal audit

Secretarial

Financial

Costing

Statutory
Legal
Pensions
Insurances
Taxation

Setting standards
Monitoring standards
Pricing for quotations
Major projects
Ad hoc costings

Cash
Trade debtors
Credit control
Trade creditors
Payroll
Analyses
Capital expenditure control
Fixed assets registers
Management accounts
Annual accounts

Budgets
– Consolidation, monitoring

Figure 61.1 A typical accounting organization chart for a large
company

Types of organization 61/1103

may not recognize their involvement in these areas as
one of their prime concerns. Each of these departmental
chains will normally be staffed and headed by appropri-
ately qualiﬁed people.

61.2 Types of organization
The most common of the organizations operating in to-
day’s industrial scene is the joint stock company with
limited liability. In different countries there exist variants
of this format, but there is a wide spread of organizations
based upon broadly similar principles.

The partnership and sole proprietor types of organiza-
tion are suitable for businesses while they remain small
and can be managed and ﬁnanced by the owners, but as
expansion takes place and the business demands more
capital, then the ability of relatively small numbers of
proprietors to provide additional capital from their own
resources becomes increasingly difﬁcult. In the search for
additional funds recourse may be had to a variety of insti-
tutions such as banks and the specialist companies which
have been set up, often by the banks themselves in con-
junction with insurance companies and merchant banks,
to cater for this need.

These specialist lenders will often wish to take a share
in the capital or ‘equity’ of the business as part of the
arrangement by which they will advance capital. In order
to achieve this the business will normally be required to
incorporate.

The share capital of a company is expressed as a sum of
money, the authorized share capital, made up of a stated
number of shares, each of which has a ‘face’ or nominal
value.

On incorporation, a small, family-owned ﬁrm may start
with an initial capital of $10,000 divided into 10,000
shares of $1 each. A large public company, on the other
hand, may have a share capital of many millions of dol-
lars, sub-divided into many more millions of shares or
stock units, of perhaps as little as 25 cents.

Not all the shares in a company may, or need to be,
issued. By the issue of more shares, at an appropriate
stage in the company’s growth, capital may be raised
from the institutions mentioned above or, through a ﬂota-
tion on the Stock Exchange, from the investing public at
large. When this happens, the price paid per share by the
purchasers may be many times greater than the nominal
value.

Example

Company A has an authorized and issued share capital of
300,000 ordinary shares of $1 each held by ﬁve sharehold-
ers. After many years of successful trading, it is decided
to seek a listing on the Stock Exchange. The capital is
increased to $3 million and is then divided into 12 mil-
lion shares of $0.25. Of these, 8 million are offered for
sale to the public at $1 each. Subject to the costs of the
issue, this will raise $8 million of fresh capital, some of
which will be used in the business and some will go to

61/1104 Finance for the Plant Engineer

the original owners of the business.

Before the issue:

Original shareholders
After the issue:

Original shareholders
Outside shareholders

Shares of $1

No.

300,000

Value
$300,000

Shares of $0.25

No.

4 million
8 million

Value

$1 million
$2 million

The original shareholders’ ownership of the business
has declined from 100 per cent to 33.3 per cent, and it
may be necessary for the owners to accept the appoint-
ment of further directors from outside the business, pos-
sibly in a non-executive capacity.

A price for the shares will be set by the market, based
upon its assessment of the prospective performance of the
company and the perceived quality of its management,
and trading in the shares will begin. This price does not
affect the money value received by the company for the
sale of the shares at ﬂotation.

61.3 Deﬁnitions
61.3.1 Capital

Capital is variously described, but is generally taken to
be the amount of ﬁnance provided by the proprietors or
outside lenders to enable the business to operate and earn
a proﬁt, from which the lenders will expect to receive
an income. Share capital is that part which is regarded
as ﬁxed in the sense that it changes infrequently, and
is increased only when the business requires additional
permanent ﬁnance. In a limited company, the amount of
accumulated proﬁts left in the business by the proprietors
(i.e. not drawn in dividends) is grouped with the share
capital and termed shareholders’ funds. Under present-
day legislation it is also possible for a company to reduce
its share capital by buying back its own shares or, by
applying to the court to have its capital reduced to enable
a reorganization of the company’s structure to take place.
In this context, proprietors may be shareholders, stock-
holders, partners or sole traders. Capital is often termed
the equity.

61.3.2 Capital and revenue expenditure

The difference between capital and revenue expenditure
can be compared broadly with that between expenditure
on ﬁxed and current assets. Capital expenditure is incurred
in the acquisition of ﬁxed assets and positioning the orga-
nization in order to start or continue its operations. Rev-
enue expenditure relates to the purchase of goods and
materials for manufacture or resale and in bringing those
goods or materials to a condition suitable for sale, pro-
viding the facilities to bring about the sales and in the
general administration and running of the business.

61.3.3 Cash ﬂow

This is the amount of cash passing through the hands of
an organization in an accounting period. The cash ﬂow
statement analyses the sources and the disposition of cash
during a given period.

In addition to their historical use, cash ﬂow statements
are prepared as part of the budgeting process in order to
identify the effects upon the cash facilities of the proposed
activities for the period under review. A typical, simpli-
ﬁed, statement would give the following information.

Cash ﬂow statement
Operating proﬁt
Depreciation

Cash ﬂow from operations

Fixed assets bought
Fixed assets sold
Loans received
Loans repaid
Corporate taxes paid
Interest paid
Interest received
Increases in working capitalŁ
Decreases in working capitalŁ
Dividends paid

Net cash inﬂow (outﬂow)
Opening cash balances

X
X

X
(X)
X
X
(X)
(X)
(X)
X
(X)
X
(X)

X
X

Closing cash balances
ŁWorking capital normally includes stocks, trade debtors,
prepayments, trade creditors, accruals, current taxation,
etc.

X

61.3.4 Liquidity

This is usually deﬁned as the ratio that liquid assets
(cid:1)debtors C cash(cid:2) bear to current liabilities. The ratio is
a measure of the relation of short-term obligations to the
funds likely to be available to meet them.

Example

Liquid assets
Current liabilities

$300,000
$250,000

Ratio 1.2:1

Ratios well below 1 may indicate ﬁnancial problems
ahead while those substantially greater than 1 may point
to poor credit control or under-utilization of cash. This
ratio is sometimes known as the ‘acid test’. The principal
proﬁtability ratio in use is the net proﬁt before interest and
tax (NPBIT) to net assets or return on capital employed.

61.3.5 Financial and operating ratios

Ratios are widely used to compare the performance of a
business with predetermined objectives set by the business
itself, with standards used by banks and other lenders,
with other businesses in the same segment of industry
(inter-ﬁrm comparison) and by the Stock Exchange and

its attendant analysts. The principal criteria are proﬁtabil-
ity, return on capital, liquidity and growth. To undertake
growth by acquisition a high standing in the market is
required. This is often a reﬂection of the performance
against these criteria.

The ratios which follow are illustrated by reference to
the following balance sheet and proﬁt and loss account.

Balance sheet
Current assets

Cash
Stocks
Debtors and prepayments

Current liabilities

Creditors
Short-term loans
Current taxation
Dividends

Net current assets
Fixed assets

Financed by:
Share capital – Preference

– Ordinary

825
3,050Ł

Shareholders’ funds (net worth)

Reserves

Long-term loans
Deferred taxation

Ł12,200,000 shares of $0.25 each.
Proﬁt and loss account
Sales (or revenue)
Cost of sales (72%)
Net proﬁt before interest and

taxation (NPBIT)

Loan interest
Taxation
Net proﬁt after taxation (NPAT)
Dividends – Preference

– Ordinary

Retained proﬁts

1,375
47
330

$000

1,175
4,700
4,935

10,810

3,170
600
1,056
354

5,180
5,630
6,250

11,880

3,875

4,700
8,575
2,500
805

11,880

$000
22,000
15,800

2,555
200
980

377

998

1. Gearing – the ratio of ﬁxed rate capital and borrow-

ings to other capital, that is:
Preference capital C long-term loans

Ordinary capital C reserves

825 C 2500 : 3050 C 4700 D 43%.

If the gearing is high, the capacity to borrow may
be affected, since the risk to creditors is high and
the company may already be burdened with heavy
interest charges.

2. Outside liabilities to shareholders’ funds

Deﬁnitions 61/1105

Long-term loans
Taxation – deferred
Current liabilities

Shareholders’ funds
Ratio

$000
2,500
805
5,180

8,485

8,575
0.99:1

The total of capital and reserves is the amount by
which the assets can fall below the balance sheet
value without depleting the amount available for cred-
itors. A high ratio will reduce borrowing capacity.

3. Current assets to current liabilities

10,810 : 5,180 D 2.1 : 1

Shows the margin of safety available to short-term
creditors. Signiﬁcantly higher ratios than 2:1 may
indicate excess stocks, poor credit control or inad-
equate control of cash resources.
4. Stocks, debtors, creditors to sales

The ratio of the minimum net assets required sup-
porting the sales volume of the business. From these
ratios can be calculated the additional working capital
needed if sales are to be increased:
4,700 C 4,935 C 3,170 D 0.294 : 1
Stocks plus debtors minus creditors D 29.4% of sales

or

The average for manufacturing industries is usually
around 25% of sales. Changes in sales levels will give
rise to movements in the working capital required to
support them. The amounts can be calculated:
Increase in sales 15% of 22,000 D 3,300
Increase in working capital

15% of (cid:1)4,700 C 4,935 C 3,170(cid:2) D 970
or 29.4% of 3,300 D 970

5. Proﬁtability

The most widely used gage of proﬁtability is the ratio
of proﬁt
return on capital
employed):

to net assets

(or

NPBIT ð 100

Shareholders’ fundsCLong-term loansCDeferred taxation
2,555 ð 100/11,880 D 21.5%

Two ratios amalgamate to provide the proﬁtability
ratio.

Sales
Net assets
NPBIT
Return on capital
Proﬁt/Sales
Sales/Net assets

$000
22,000
11,880
2,555
255,500 : 11, 880 D 21.5%
255,500 : 22,000 D 11.6%
22,000 : 11,880 D 1.85
1.85 ð 11.6% D 21.5%

61/1106 Finance for the Plant Engineer

These two ratios indicate funds usage efﬁciency and
provide a basis for deciding the order in which im-
provements can be made.

6. Stock ratios

Expressed as a ‘Stock turn’, representing how many
times stocks are turned round in a given period and/or
as the number of days’ stock of ﬁnished goods avail-
able to meet sales demand.

Stocks – Raw materials

– Work in progress
– Finished goods
– Other

$000
1,530
1,300
1,740
130

4,700

Stock turn D Cost of sales
Finished goods

D 15,800/1,740 D 9.1 times

Days’ stock D 1,740 ð 365/15, 800 D 40 days

7. Debtors’ ratio

Expressed as days of sales outstanding or ‘debtors’
days’. Used in conjunction with prior ﬁgures for mea-
surement of credit control efﬁciency and trends:

Debtors
Sales

Ratio

4,935 ð 365

22,000

$000
4,935
22,000
D 82 days

8. Liquidity

This is sometimes reﬁned by deducting the sales for
the current period as being not yet payable and there-
fore leaving ﬁgure to represent overdue debt only.
The ratio is also known as collection period.

Liquidity can be expressed as the ratio of liquid assets
(cash plus debtors) to current liabilities. Such assets
are also known as ‘Quick assets’, i.e. capable of swift
realization.
(cid:1)1,175 C 4,935(cid:2)

D 1.2 : 1

5,180

The ratio shows the ability to settle short-term lia-
bilities and should not normally be lower than 1:1,
though it very often is! The lower the ratio, the greater
indication of possible ﬁnancial strain.

A high ratio could mean poor credit control or

underutilized cash.

9. Earnings per Share (net basis)

NPAT – Preference dividend

Number of issued shares
1,375 (cid:5) 47
12,200

D $0.109

Growth in earnings per share is used widely by
analysts as a measure of a company’s success. Adjust-
ments must be made where issues of shares have

taken place to satisfy acquisition purchase considera-
tions.
10. Yield

In this example, Advance Corporation Tax has been
calculated at 25:75.
Earnings per share ð 100/75 ð 100

Market Price
0.109 ð 100/75 ð 100

D 10.4%

1.40

This demonstrates the current return on the stock mar-
ket price.

11. Dividend yield
Dividend ð 100
Market price

D 0.036 ð 100

1.40

D 2.58%

The ratio gives the return, which the dividend pro-
vides on the market price.

12. Dividend cover

D 4.0 times

D 0.145
0.036

Gross earnings
Gross dividend
The ratio indicates by how much earnings can fall
before the dividend must be reduced and shows the
company policy towards the payment of dividends
and proﬁt retention.

13. Price/Earnings ratio (P/E ratio)

Market price
Earnings (net)

D 1.40
0.109

D 12.8

This shows the number of years’ earnings represented
by the current market price. It evidences the Stock
Market’s assessment of the company’s ability to
maintain or increase earnings. A low P/E ratio will
normally indicate a high-risk business, a high ratio a
company with potential for growth.

61.4 Budgetary control
61.4.1 Preparation

Financial data on their own provide only an historical
record of the transactions of a business. The accounts of a
company published annually are mainly of historical value
but must, by law, include comparisons with the ﬁgures for
a prior corresponding period.

Until information can be compared with similarly clas-
siﬁed data its use must be limited. In order to plan ahead,
a business will prepare a strategy or budget for the next
trading year and probably several years thereafter, with
that for the next year broken down into the business’s
scheme of accounting periods.

The ﬁnal form of the budget will include proﬁt and
loss account, balance sheet and cash ﬂow statement for
the planning periods together with such supporting state-
ments as are deemed necessary (for example, proposed
capital expenditure). These will provide management with
advance warning of points of stress upon resources, and
enable steps to be taken to ease their effects or to avoid
them altogether. The ﬁnancial controller or chief accoun-
tant will have the responsibility for bringing together the

relevant information in the ﬁnal budgets to be presented
to senior management.

Budgeting practices vary from one business to another.
Imposed budgets will be drawn up by senior manage-
ment and, as the name implies, be imposed on those
lower down the hierarchy. Participation budgets require
the input of data and information at the formative stages
by the people who will be responsible for bringing about
the achievement of the results envisaged in the budgets.
The process of compiling the budgets will start with
the preparation of estimates of the physical requirements
of the plan, be they manpower, materials, tons of fuel,
cubic meters or therms of gas, units of electricity or cubic
meters of water. These estimates will be prepared in rela-
tion to the estimates of output by manufacturing or process
departments, which, in turn, will have been based on the
quantities, or other measures forecast in the sales budgets.
It is therefore vital that detailed and accurate records
are kept by the operating and engineering departments
of the usage and consumption of fuel, water and other
services in order that performance against budget can be
properly measured and so that data are available for use
in compiling future estimates.

The budgets will also require estimates of expenditure
upon equipment of a capital nature in the plan periods.
This expenditure will normally fall into the following
categories:

1. Replacement of existing machinery and equipment at
the end of its useful life. (Straight replacement is rarely
possible, since improvements in technology will usu-
ally have taken place.)

2. Items requiring replacement because of changes in the
law (for example, those relating to ﬁre prevention,
safety measures for the protection of employees and
public).

3. Items which will improve proﬁtability by saving costs
or by carrying out processes faster or by using less
manpower (see Section 61.5).

4. Expenditure in connection with new projects or neces-

sary to provide increased throughput.

Motor vehicles can also fall within the above categories
but businesses will usually have speciﬁc policies for their
replacement.

As said elsewhere, the importance of realistic estimates
of costs cannot be over-stressed, if, in turn, realistic com-
parisons can be made as the budget periods progress.

The compilation of ﬁgures for the budget should almost
always be done from ‘the bottom up’, that is, by calcu-
lating the costs for the individual accounting periods by
taking estimated quantities and prices for each period and
summing for the whole of the budget. Thus, for example,
holiday periods and known peaks and troughs can be rec-
ognized and catered for within the ﬁgures. Estimates made
in the ﬁrst instance on an annual basis can rarely be ana-
lyzed satisfactorily to individual periods except where the
costs themselves are expressed in annual terms (e.g. rents
and rates).

The sources of information from which the data are
obtained are inﬁnitely variable, but will include manu-
facturers’ and suppliers’ price lists, direct contact with

Capital expenditure – appraisal methods 61/1107

Division A

Division B

Division C

Company A

Company B

Company C

Figure 61.2 A typical group’s proﬁt centers

Group

suppliers and long-term contracts with sources of fuel and
power.

At all times the interrelationship between budgets must
be maintained – sales with ﬁnished products – products
with consumption of materials – consumption of mate-
rials with labor using them, machine time and power.
Machine time will inﬂuence maintenance, which will have
its own content of labor, materials and work by outside
specialist contractors.

When all the budgets have been prepared they will be
consolidated by the ﬁnance department for submission to
the approving authority. In large businesses there will be
several levels at which authorization will be made before
the ﬁnal total plan for the business and its component
divisions is agreed.

group

company

organizations,

budgets will
themselves be consolidated into group form for ﬁnal
approval by the group board. A typical budget program
might be based on proﬁt centers taking the form
shown in Figure 61.2. (In multinational organizations this
consolidation will continue worldwide.)

In

61.4.2 Control

During the progress of the ﬁnancial year, budgets will
be compared at intervals with the actual performance to
enable adjustments to be made to ensure that the planned
outcome is achieved as nearly as possible. Ideally, because
of changing circumstances after the start of the budget
year, the budgets should be revised, possibly at three-
monthly intervals. In practice, particularly in large and
complex organizations, this is rarely practicable, given
limitations of staff and time. An alternative is to require to
be given a forecast of the immediately following period(s)
to be included with each report to identify areas diverging
from planned performance and to alert management to the
need for correction.

61.5 Capital expenditure — appraisal
methods
There are a number of accepted methods available for
the comparison and appraisal of the virtues of proposed

61/1108 Finance for the Plant Engineer

capital expenditure projects. Those considered here are as
follows:

1. Pay-back period. This consists of calculating how long
it will take for the proﬁts generated by the capital out-
lay to equal the outlay itself, such proﬁts usually being
calculated after taking into account tax and any grants
receivable. The defects of this method are that it takes
no account of the proﬁtability of the schemes after
the break-even point is reached and the same value is
placed upon each pound of proﬁt, whether it is earned
in year 1 or year 10. This latter shortcoming is avoided
by the use of discounted cash ﬂow assessment.

2. Rate of return. A rate of return is calculated on the
proﬁts remaining after the initial outlay has been writ-
ten off. This method suffers from the same defect
mentioned in (1) above and from the use of arbitrary
periods for the writing down of the initial expenditure
and of arbitrary rates of interest for the calculation of
the rate of return.

Table 61.1 Application of NPV. To illustrate the uses of the two
DCF methods the following example assumes the following data
relating to two competing projects

Year

Net cash ﬂows

Project A

$

(cid:5)100 000
(cid:5)15 000
20 000
25 000
35 000
40 000
50 000
(cid:5)5 000
65 000
85 000
100 000

300 000

Project B

$

(cid:5)200 000
(cid:5)50 000
5 000
10 000
25 000
40 000
75 000
75 000
90 000
110 000
130 000

310 000

Net present values at 10%

Project A

$

(cid:5)100 000
(cid:5)13 367
16 528
18 783
23 905
24 836
28 225
(cid:5)2 566
30 323
36 049
38 550

101 266

Project B

$

(cid:5)200 000
(cid:5)45 455
4 132
7 513
17 075
24 836
42 338
38 490
41 985
46 651
50 115

27 680

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Totals

Year

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Totals

Although Project B shows a greater total of net cash inﬂows over
the whole period, at net present values Project A indicates a more
satisfactory return, all other factors being ignored.

3. Discounted cash ﬂow (DCF). This method recognizes
that $1,000 income in ﬁve years’ time is worth less
than $1,000 receivable this year. The use of DCF in
appraising two or more competing projects offers two
methods of assessment: the net present value (NPV) or
DCF rate of return.

The principle of NPV is best understood by applying an
agreed discounting rate, that is, the best investment rate
obtainable by the company, to the sum to be invested. A
discounting rate of 10 per cent assumes that $100 invested
now will be worth $110 in a year’s time. Conversely, it
is assumed that $110 in a year’s time is, at 10 per cent,
worth $100 today. From these assumptions, it is possible
to construct DCF tables for varying numbers of years and
discounting rates (see Table 61.1).
To use Table 61.2, which is based on the formula
1/(cid:1)1 C i(cid:2)n, where i is the rate of interest and n is the
number of years, the relevant factor is found for the rate
and number of years and multiplied by the amount for
which the NPV is required. Thus to ﬁnd the NPV for
$1500 receivable in 5 years at 10 per cent from the table
is found the factor of 0.621 and this, multiplied by $1500,
gives an NPV of $931.5. Most spreadsheets used on per-
sonal computers include a formula for calculating NPV,
so avoiding the need to construct tables.

The use of NPV (or DCF) leaves unresolved an impor-
tant problem, that of determining the rate of interest or
return to be used. Different rates of return could alter the

Table 61.2

n

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

5%

10%

15%

20%

25%

30%

0.9524
0.9070
0.8638
0.8227
0.7835
0.7462
0.7107
0.6768
0.6446
0.6139
0.5847
0.5568
0.5303
0.5051
0.4810
0.4581
0.4363
0.4155
0.3957
0.3769
0.3589

0.9091
0.8264
0.7513
0.6830
0.6209
0.5645
0.5132
0.4665
0.4241
0.3855
0.3505
0.3186
0.2897
0.2633
0.2394
0.2176
0.1978
0.1799
0.1635
0.1486
0.1351

0.8696
0.7561
0.6575
0.5718
0.4972
0.4323
0.3759
0.3269
0.2843
0.2472
0.2149
0.1869
0.1625
0.1413
0.1229
0.1069
0.0929
0.0808
0.0703
0.0611
0.0531

0.8333
0.6944
0.5787
0.4823
0.4019
0.3349
0.2791
0.2326
0.1938
0.1615
0.1346
0.1122
0.0935
0.0779
0.0649
0.0541
0.0451
0.0376
0.0313
0.0261
0.0217

0.8000
0.6400
0.5120
0.4096
0.3277
0.2621
0.2097
0.1678
0.1342
0.1074
0.0859
0.0687
0.0550
0.0440
0.0352
0.0281
0.0225
0.0180
0.0144
0.0115
0.0092

0.7692
0.5917
0.4552
0.3501
0.2693
0.2072
0.1594
0.1226
0.0943
0.0725
0.0558
0.0429
0.0330
0.0253
0.0195
0.0150
0.0116
0.0089
0.0068
0.0053
0.0040

The cash ﬂow expected for each period is discounted by the factor
for the rate of interest chosen and the number of periods in which
the cash ﬂows will occur. The number of periods is calculated
from the commencement of the capital expenditure. The factors
are arrived at from the formula 1/(cid:1)1 C i(cid:2)n, where i is the rate of
interest expressed as a decimal and n is the number of periods.
In reality, the factors assume that the cash ﬂow passes on the last
day of each period but can be adopted where the ﬂow is roughly
even throughout the period.

ranking of the projects by changing the point at which the
returns shown by the projects are in balance. If the com-
pany’s own rate of return on capital is higher than that
revealed by the NPV calculation then the apparently more
viable scheme may not prove to be the more acceptable.
An alternative is therefore to use another method, using
the same principles, by calculating a DCF rate of return.
This has the advantage of not involving any assumptions
as to interest rates, but calculates the effective rate of
return on each project. The DCF rate of return is deﬁned
as the rate which reduces the NPV to zero. This method
is more difﬁcult to calculate in that it necessitates tak-
ing several trial values until two are found giving values
on either side of zero. A weighted average can then be
applied to ‘ﬁne tune’ the result.

Where there are constraints upon the provision of funds
then the DCF rate of return method will be the more
appropriate. Where the organization has ready access to
ﬁnance then the NPV method, using the known long-term
borrowing rate, should be used.

61.6 Control of capital expenditure
Signiﬁcant capital expenditure usually represents a
substantial commitment of the resources of a business,
both ﬁnancially and in terms of man-hours. It is therefore
incumbent upon management to ensure that proposals for
such outlays receive proper and full consideration of all
the relevant implications before implementation. Once
policies as to levels of authorization and commitment
are laid down, there should follow the formal appraisal
of
the proposal. These can
be formulated only after detailed discussion with the
appropriate departments as to all the physical, technical
and environmental factors involved in making the ﬁnal
decision. There will also be brought into consideration,
where pertinent, the marketing and sales effects.

the ﬁnancial effects of

Most organizations will have sets of forms for use in
the authorization and control of capital expenditure and
these will vary in design and content. A basic guide for
such documents would include the following:

1. Capital variation proposal (Figure 61.3). This should

embrace the following:
(a) Description;
(b) Amount for which authority is requested;
(c) Reasons for application (e.g. to increase produc-
tion, to maintain production, to reduce costs, for
the introduction of a new product, etc.);

(d) Expenditure or losses not included in the proposal,
such as staff amenities, transport requirements, self-
competition, etc.;

(e) Summary of the cost;
(f) Disposal or modiﬁcation of existing assets;
(g) Details and timing of the outlays;
(h) Extra working capital demands which will arise

from the implementation of the project;

(i) Index of the documents supporting the application.
2. DCF calculations (Figure 61.4). These will normally
be in the form of working sheets and/or graphs, the lat-
ter being used for interpolation where the calculations

Standards and standard costing 61/1109

are too numerous or too detailed for tabulation. Cal-
culations will normally be carried out using computers
but where this is not possible, DCF tables should be
utilized.

3. Calculation document (Figure 61.5). This document
provides a means of calculating the DCF rate of return
or a net present value where these are required, usually
where proﬁtability of the project is of major concern.
4. DCF rate of return graph (Figure 61.6). This may
not be necessary in all cases but would be used for
the interpolation of rates of return where a precise
answer is not obtained from the detailed DCF workings
described above.

5. Payback graph (Figure 61.7). This provides a view of
the proﬁle of the cash ﬂows emanating from the project
and forms a useful adjunct to the DCF information.

6. Summary of cash ﬂows (Figure 61.8). This document
is an essential part of every capital expenditure project
evaluation. The forecast thus provided will be needed
in the preparation of the overall cash budget.

61.6.1 Current and post-event monitoring

Large and complex projects will be monitored as the
expenditure proceeds while smaller outlays will be looked
at after completion. The purpose of such monitoring is
to provide a comparison of actual expenditure with that
estimated when the project was sanctioned. The account-
ing or internal audit departments will normally carry this
out. However, for a sensible comparison to be achieved it
is essential that the planned expenditure demonstrated in
the project be classiﬁed in the same way that the actual
expenditure will be analyzed. While somewhat obvious,
this is an area where very great difﬁculty is often met in
practice, especially where large projects are involved.

Considerable thought should be given to this aspect at
the planning stage, with consultation taking place between
the engineering and accounting functions. Apart from its
obvious use to prevent serious over-runs of expenditure,
‘post-event monitoring’ provides useful lessons for the
future preparation of capital projects.

61.7 Standards and standard costing

Standard costing is usually thought of in connection with
manufacturing production but can be used with advantage
in the measurement of the efﬁciency of supporting plant
and equipment. Most readers of this book will already
be familiar with the measurement of efﬁciencies against,
for example, manufacturers’ standards for a speciﬁc item
of equipment. The standards related to such plant will
themselves play a part in setting the production standards
mentioned above.

It is not proposed here to provide instruction in the
techniques of standard costing but merely to illustrate the
uses to which certain of the methods can be put. This can
best be shown by the use of a worked example. The fol-
lowing is the statement for a service department supplying
a factory, which uses both fuel and materials.

61/1110 Finance for the Plant Engineer

Description

Amount

$

New
Other

Total

Budgeted

Reason
New product
Cost reduction
Legal requirement

RELATED EXPENDITURE not included here
Staff amenities

Transport and distribution costs  

SUMMARY OF EXPENDITURE     $
Buildings
Other
Sub-total
Working capital

Grand total

Prepared by

ASSETS TO BE DISPOSED OF Value  $

Recommended by

Approved by Board

Date

Details of expenditure for approval

$

Comments

Timing

Details of additional working capital required
$

Stocks increase
Debtors increase

Minus creditors increase

Total

Comments

Timing

Figure 61.3 A capital variation proposal

Output units
Operating days
Cost per unit

Budget Standard
33,600
32,000
21
20
83.5c
83.5c

Actual
29,400
21
90.0c

Fuel – Consumption

– Unit price
– Cost

Materials – Consumption

– Unit price
– Cost

Labor – Hours

– Hourly rate
– Cost

200
$50
$10,000
800
$2
$1,600
80
$5
$400

210
$50

213
$49
$10,500 $10,437
700
$2.10
$1,470
105
$7
$735

840
$2
$1,680
84
$5
$420

Repairs

– Rate per output unit
– Cost

Variable overheads

– Rate per output unit
– Cost

Fixed overheads

10c
$3,200

10c
$3,360

11c
$3,234

20c
$6,400

20c
$6,720

22c
$6,468

– Rater per output unit
– Cost

16c
$5,120

Total cost
ŁActual output ð standard cost.

$26,720

14c
$4,116

16c
$4,704Ł
$27,384 $26,460

5%
NPV

Cash outflow

0%
Cash

Factor
1.0
0.952
0.907
$

Cash inflow

0.952
0.907
0.986
0.823
0.784
0.746
0.711
0.677
0.645
0.614
$

Year
0
1
2
Total $

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Total $

15%
NPV

Factor
1.0
0.909
0.826
$

0.909
0.826
0.751
0.683
0.621
0.564
0.513
0.467
0.424
0.386
$

10%
NPV

Factor
1.0
0.870
0.756
$

0.870
0.756
0.658
0.572
0.497
0.432
0.376
0.327
0.284
0.247
$

Factor
1.0
0.833
0.694
$

0.833
0.694
0.579
0.482
0.402
0.335
0.279
0.233
0.194
0.162
$

Standards and standard costing 61/1111

20%
NPV

Factor
1.0

NPV

$

$

Figure 61.4 DCF calculations

Project

Year ending

Revenue from project

Other income arising

Total income

COSTS

Operating profit (loss)

Capital allowances

Taxable profits

Tax

Figure 61.5 Proﬁt calculation

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

Variances from standards are then calculated as follows:

Fuel

Usage variance
Price variance

Materials

Usage variance
Price variance

Labor

Rate variance
Efﬁciency

Repairs

Volume variance
Price variance

Variable overheads

SP(SQ-AQ) D 50(cid:1)210 (cid:5) 213(cid:2)
AQ(SP-AP) D 213(cid:1)50 (cid:5) 49(cid:2)
SP(SQ-AQ) D 2(cid:1)840 (cid:5) 700(cid:2)
AQ(SP-AP) D 700(cid:1)2.00 (cid:5) 2.10(cid:2)
AH(SR-AR) D 105(cid:1)5 (cid:5) 7(cid:2)
SR(SH-AH) D 5(cid:1)84 (cid:5) 105(cid:2)
SC(SV-AV) D 0.10(cid:1)33,600 (cid:5) 29,400(cid:2) D 420F
AV(SC-AC) D 29,400(cid:1)0.10 (cid:5) 0.11(cid:2)

$
D 150A
D 213F
D 280F
D 70A 210F
D 210A
D 105A 315A

63F

D 294A 126F

Volume variance
Price variance
Fixed overheads

Expenditure variance
Volume efﬁciency
Yield
Capacity
Calendar variance

SC(SV-AV) D 0.20(cid:1)33,600 (cid:5) 29,400(cid:2) D 840F
D 588A 252F
AV(SC-AC) D 29,400(cid:1)0.20 (cid:5) 0.22(cid:2)
AFO-BFO D 4116 (cid:5) 5120
D 1004F
SC(AQ-SQ) D 0.16(cid:1)32,000 (cid:5) 33,600(cid:2) D 256A
SC(SY-AY) D 0.16(cid:1)32,000 (cid:5) 29,400(cid:2) D 416A
SC(RBQ-SQ) D 0.16(cid:1)33,600 (cid:5) 33,600(cid:2) D NIL
SC(RBQ-BQ) D 0.16(cid:1)33,600 (cid:5) 32,000(cid:2) D 256F

588F
924F

SC D Standard cost
SQ D Standard quantity
SP D Standard unit price
AH D Actual hours
SH D Standard hours

BQ D Budgeted quantity
AQ D Actual quantity
AP D Actual unit price
AH D Actual hours

61/1112 Finance for the Plant Engineer

Present values

3

2

1

DCF rate of return

0

Figure 61.6 Interpolation of DCF rate of return

w
o

l
f
 

h
s
a
C

+10

+8

+6

+4

+2

0

–2

–4

–6

–8

–10

1

2

3

4

5

Years from commencement

Figure 61.7 Cumulative cash ﬂow

SV D Standard volume
AFO D Actual ﬁxed overheads
SR D Standard rate per hour
SY D Standard yield
BQ D Budgeted quantity
A

D Adverse

AV D Actual volume
BFO D Budgeted ﬁxed overheads
AR D Actual rate per hour
AY D Actual yield
RBQ D Revised budgeted quantity
F

D Favorable

Fixed overheads require some ampliﬁcation. Budgeted
output for the year is 400,000 units, budgeted ﬁxed over-
heads for the year are $40,000. There are 50 working
weeks in the year with 4 weeks in the period being re-
viewed, with one extra day being worked. The actual ﬁxed
overheads for the period amounted to $4,116.

5

10

15

20

25

Interest rate (%)

It is necessary to present this information in an under-

standable way, and this may take the following form:

Budgeted cost of output
Output variances

Volume
Unit cost

Actual cost of output
Less: Standard cost of output

Fuel
Materials
Labor
Repairs
Variable overheads
Fixed overheads
Favourable variance
Analysis of variances:
Fuel

– Usage
– Price
Materials – Usage
– Price
– Rate
– Efﬁciency
– Expenditure

Labor

Repairs
Variable overhead
Fixed overhead

– Expenditure
– Volume efﬁciency
– Yield
– Calendar

2 171F
1 911A

10 500
1 680
420
3 360
6 720
4 704

150A
213F
280F
70A
210A
105A

1 004F
256A
416A
256F

$

26 720

260F
26 460

27 384
924

63F

210F

315A
126F
252F

588F
924F

Actual output for the period
Budgeted output for the period
Standard output for the period

29,400 units
32,000 units
33,600 units

Comments

(Budgeted output is 1600 (400,000/250) units per day, so
21 days’ standard output is 33,600 units.)

Fuel suffered from excessive usage, which was partly
offset by a lower unit price.

Fixed
assets

$

Working
capital
$

Other
expenses

$

Year

Operating
profit or
loss

$

Taxation

$

Net
profit or
loss
$

Cumulative
totals

$

Capital 61/1113

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Totals

Figure 61.8 Summary of cash ﬂows

than

showed lower usage but a higher

Materials
expected price was paid.
Labor both cost more per hour and were utilized longer.
Repairs and variable overheads both beneﬁted from
lower than expected expenditure.
Fixed overheads were less than forecast but this saving
was partially offset by lower volume and yields. The
extra day’s working increased the net advantage gained
from these factors.

require funds

61.8 Capital
Businesses
for day-to-day operations
(‘working capital’) and for expansion by acquisition and
for the provision of plant and machinery, buildings, etc.
Most working capital needs are normally (and should be)
met from the company’s own cash generated from its
own operations. Indeed, the need to meet this criterion
serves as a discipline upon the company’s standard of
cash management in relation to credit control, payment
of suppliers, etc.

Short-term needs will be met mainly from the
company’s own cash ﬂow and from overdraft facilities
provided by the company’s bankers. Entering into
arrangements for the hire purchase or leasing of speciﬁc
items of equipment can provide medium-term facilities.
The facilities available are many and varied. Long-term
resources will normally be met by the raising of further
capital by way of Stock Exchange placing or ﬂotation or
by the securing of loans through debentures secured upon
the assets of the company, bearing ﬁxed rates of interest
and redeemable at a date in the future.

61.8.1 Short term

The main sources include:

1. Overdrafts. Usually the least expensive;

is
charged on the daily balance usually at a premium
(often substantial) over the bank’s base lending rate.

interest

2. Factoring. Usually applied to sales invoices (effec-
tively, the debtors). Specialist ﬁnance houses provide
a service whereby the company is paid promptly a per-
centage of its sales value for a period and the ﬁnance
house then collects the full amount from the debtor.

In some cases the ﬁnance house will undertake the
invoicing of the customers direct, providing a complete
sales ledger service. Conﬁdentiality as to the arrange-
ment is lost in this case. There are many schemes with
considerable variations available.

3. Acceptance credits. These are provided mainly for
exports by the major banks and specialist accepting
houses.

61.8.2 Medium term

This may be provided by:

1. Hire-purchase. Normally for periods of up to three or
ﬁve years. The ownership of the goods remains with
the ﬁnance company until the installment payments are
complete and a ﬁnal option to buy is exercised. Pay-
ments remain ﬁxed throughout the term of the agree-
ment with a predetermined unchanging rate of interest
included.

2. Leasing. The asset

is leased for a term of years
at a ﬁxed rental. The term can then be extended

61/1114 Finance for the Plant Engineer

for secondary or tertiary periods at nominal rentals.
Recently-introduced accounting standards require that
assets acquired under contracts of this sort must appear
in the balance sheet at cost and be depreciated even
though not legally owned by the company.

3. Lease purchase. There are on offer many variants of
the two previously illustrated sources, giving choices
of both methods in combination with each other. The
underlying principles are the same.

4. Contract hire. Although not strictly a source of outside
ﬁnance, this is a method of avoiding capital outlay,
especially favored for vehicles. Again, there are many
varying systems to be found.

5. Sale and lease-back. Once considered only for land and
buildings, schemes are now available for other assets,
notably sizeable ﬂeets of vehicles.

61.8.3 Long term

The principal sources include:

1. Flotation on stock markets. This involves transferring
in whole or in part the ultimate ownership of the busi-
ness to persons outside the company and, dependent
upon the proportion sold, may leave the business vul-
nerable to takeover by competitors or unwelcome bid-
ders.

2. Share placings. Shares are issued for a consideration
to known and speciﬁc parties at an agreed price, usu-
ally through the medium of a merchant bank. This
reduces the element of vulnerability to takeover bids
but does not eliminate the possibility, should any of
the ‘placees’ be prepared to sell their holdings at a
future date.

3. Issue of debentures. These will normally carry a ﬁxed
rate of interest and have a predetermined date of
redemption, possibly at a premium. The holders of
debentures will usually require security perhaps by
means of a ﬁxed charge over speciﬁc assets (or all
the assets), and will have a right of prior payment in
the event of a liquidation. Debenture holders can also
sometimes exercise their rights on the occurrence of
certain events. Widespread security given to one class
of lender can militate against the provision of short-
term ﬁnance from other lenders who require collateral.
4. Loans from specialist companies. There is a number
of companies and institutions who specialize in pro-
viding long-term ﬁnance to industry. The forms of
loans offered vary from one deal to another and, in
some cases, will be accompanied by a request for some
degree of participation in the equity of the borrower.

61.9 Value added tax
The calculation of VAT is straightforward when the rate
at present in force is applied to a value to which it is to
be added. The formula is:
Value C (cid:1)Value ð Rate/100(cid:2)

Where the amount of value added tax included in a value
is required the calculation is as follows:
Value ð Rate/(cid:1)100 C Rate(cid:2)
Where the amount exclusive of value added tax included
in a value is required the calculation is:
Value/[(cid:1)100 C Rate(cid:2)/100]

61.10 Break-even charts
It is often useful to prepare break-even charts in order
to illustrate and give a clear picture of the position of
a business. They can be adapted to help in showing the
viability and proﬁles of individual projects.

The two most common designs of break-even charts
are shown in Figures 61.9 and 61.10. In both cases the y
(vertical) axis is used for sales (output) and costs while the
x (horizontal) axis is used for volumes, capacity or time.

Illustration

10
Output (000s)
Fixed costs
5,000
Variable @ $0.30 3,000
Sales @ $0.50

610
30
5,000
5,000
9,000 12,000 15,000 18,000
5,000 10,000 15,000 20,000 25,000 30,000

20
5,000
6,000

50
5,000

40
5,000

Angle of
incidence

Break-even
point

θ

Margin of
safety

)
s
0
0
0
$
(
 
s
t
s
o
c
 

d
n
a

 
s
e
a
S

l

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

10

20

40

30
Units of output (000s)

50

60

Figure 61.9 Break-even chart (1)

Profit

Variable
costs

Fixed
costs

Profit

Fixed costs

Variable
costs

)
s
0
0
0
$
(
 
s
t
s
o
c
 
d
n
a

 
s
e
a
S

l

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

a

n   a r e

u ti o

n tri b

o

C

10

20

30

40

50

60

Units of output (000s)

Figure 61.10 Break-even chart (2)

)
s
0
0
0
$
(
 
s
t
s
o
c
 
d
n
a
 
s
e
a
S

l

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

Profit

Variable
costs

Fixed
costs

10

20

30

40

50

60

Units of output (000s)

Figure 61.11 Break-even chart (3)

The angle of incidence, if wide, will indicate a high rate of
proﬁtability. If this is coupled with a high margin of safety
an extremely advantageous investment is demonstrated.

The position of the break-even point serves as an indi-
cator. If it is well to the right of the chart then the margin
of safety will be poor. Conversely, a position to the right
of the chart will hold out opportunities for expansion.

The guidance obtainable from break-even charts is lim-
ited and should be used only with other criteria in formu-
lating decisions. The effects of policy decisions may alter
the data used and vitiate or amend the results disclosed.
In Figure 61.10 ﬁxed costs are shown above the vari-
able costs and the non-recovery of the ﬁxed costs below
the break-even point is more clearly demonstrated. The
contribution to ﬁxed costs is of signiﬁcance in the con-
sideration of marginal costing.

In practice, costs do not increase smoothly or remain
constant. Fixed costs frequently move in a series of steps
and variable costs change unevenly. There may be several
break-even points at different levels of sales and outputs
(Figure 61.11).

61.11 Supply of steam, power, water,
etc. to other departments
The plant engineer is frequently called upon to assist and
advise on the bases for charging to other departments
within the plant or to outside purchasers where there is
a central generation plant for a variety of users, as may
occur in an industrial estate or where the plant providing
the service has a surplus. The elements to be considered
and brought together in formulating a basis for charge
can be summarized as follows, always bearing in mind
individual needs and circumstances:

1. Expenses associated with the capital cost of equipment.
Depreciation will be provided over the useful life of the
equipment, varying according to the engineer’s esti-
mate. Present-day custom is to write assets down on a
straight-line basis, but there are several accepted ways
of providing the necessary depletion of the asset value.
2. Costs relating to the space occupied by the equipment.
These will usually include rent and rates or similar

Supply of steam, power, water, etc. to other departments 61/1115

taxes, together with the upkeep of the buildings hous-
ing the machinery. Where the operator owns the build-
ings a notional rent should be included to reﬂect the
full cost of occupancy. Such costs will normally need
to be allocated to the department by reference to the
area occupied, but may require more complex calcula-
tions where the buildings on a site differ in age, or in
standards of construction or maintenance.

3. Costs of gas, electricity, etc. These are usually read-
ily ascertainable from the suppliers’ accounts, but for
charging purposes, great reliance will be placed on
results from regular meter readings. The importance of
an efﬁcient routine for reading meters has been stressed
elsewhere. It will be essential for accurate and fair
apportionment between users for there to have been a
recognition of the need for and acceptance of the cost
of metering equipment for all user departments, down
to individual machines if necessary. Where the main
source of energy is gas then it will be usual to have
a stand-by oil-ﬁred system, especially where the gas
supply is interruptible.

The tanks for this reserve will form part of the capi-
tal equipment and the oil itself will need to be included
when considering the capital employed. Where elec-
tricity is produced on site as a by-product in periods of
low demand for steam, more cheaply than that obtained
from the utility company, adjustments to the charges
on a seasonal basis will be required.

4. Water. Costs are available from the supplier’s invoices
but where the operator has reservoirs and/or licenses
for extraction from canals or rivers the annual fees and
penalties, which are sometimes taxable, should not be
forgotten. Projections of future demands will need to
be carefully considered where this type of arrangement
is made, since such contracts are often available only
on long-term bases. Water-treatment plant will produce
its own range of costs across the whole ﬁeld of depre-
ciation, materials, electricity, labor, etc. and these will
need to be apportioned to the steam cost departments
before ﬁnal allocation to the user departments.

5. Labor costs. In arriving at the total labor costs, there
must be included social security costs, pension costs
and any provisions for holiday pay. It may be desirable,
where users take steam overnight, to apportion costs
in such a way as to reﬂect the higher cost of labor
employed on night work.

6. Maintenance expenses. The nature of these is gener-
ally self-evident, but long-term maintenance contracts,
insurance inspection fees and any subsequent require-
ments arising therefrom should not be overlooked.
Inspections are commonly undertaken at weekends, at
premium labor rates.

7. Recovery of appropriate proportion of overheads. The
overhead charge to the supplying department will usu-
ally be provided by central ﬁnance in accordance with
the company’s policy for allocation of overheads.

8. Recovery of proportion of exceptional ﬁnancing and
interest charges. This will normally depend upon the
policy of individual companies and will probably have
been included,
in the general overheads
It should not be left out of
referred to in (7).

if at all,

61/1116 Finance for the Plant Engineer

consideration where provision has been made for a
particular user’s requirements involving, say, special
extension or modiﬁcation of existing plant.

61.11.1 Computation of charges to users

Assumptions

For a site operating four gas-ﬁred boilers each of 10,000-
kg/h output, operating at 70 per cent efﬁciency for 60
hours per week, employing three people directly in the
department, annual costs may be summarized as follows:

Annual cost of producing steam

Depreciation of boilers and equipment
Gas
Electricity (for steam production)
Water and water treatment
Labor for steam production
Repairs, maintenance and insurance
Stand-by oil
Proportion of site overhead
Proportion of ﬁnance overhead

$

100,000
850,000
30,000
12,500
36,000
35,000
1,500
25,000
6,000
1,096,000

These costs would then be allocated to the user
departments in proportion to actual use, using metered

records and adjusted for the incidence of peak-time usage,
overnight working, weekends or early starts.

Given that metering equipment is in place, the allocation
of the steam production costs to individual users is straight-
forward and needs no ampliﬁcation here. If the allocation
has to be made employing estimates of usage, perhaps
by using the ratings of individual pieces of equipment,
then everything will turn upon the general and continuing
acceptance of those estimates by all the users concerned.
Should these conditions not be met or maintained then the
life of the plant engineer will be an uneasy one!

61.12 Charges for efﬂuent and
environmental services
These services are now very often a signiﬁcant part of
the costs of a factory and are worth a note here. Project-
ing accurate costs can be difﬁcult, since water authorities
commonly render accounts quarterly with charges ﬂuctu-
ating from month to month in relation to both volumes and
chemical content (‘toxicity’) of the efﬂuent, all of which
can be highly variable. Monthly liaison with the author-
ity’s representative and inspection of sampling reports will
often enable more accurate information to be available,
both for the assessment of costs where charges are to be
made to individual departments and for the accruing of
costs by the management accountant.

62

62/1117

Statistical
Approaches in
Machinery
Problem Solving

Ricky Smith
Life Cycle Engineering, Inc

Contents

62.1 Introduction
62.2 Machinery failure modes and maintenance

62/1119

strategies 62/1119
62.3 Useful life concepts
62.4 Bad actor management 62/1121

62/1119

62.4.1 Bad actor identiﬁcation and tracking 62/1121
62.4.2 Hazard plotting for incomplete

failure data

62/1121

62.4.3 How to make a hazard plot
62.4.4 How to use hazard plots

62/1123

62/1126

62.5 Estimates of distribution percentiles and probabilities of

failure 62/1126
62.5.1 Exponential power estimate
62/1127
62.5.2 Weibull parameter estimates 62/1127
62.5.3 Some practical aspects of data plotting

62/1127

62.6 Concluding remarks 62/1130

62.1 Introduction
Machinery failure and distress behavior can be inﬂuenced
by appropriate design techniques. It would be wonder-
ful to verify low failure during the speciﬁcation, design,
installation, and start-up phases of each machine within
our PdM program. However, experience shows that good,
basic design alone cannot prevent failures from occurring
during the operational life span of each machine.

Failure analysis statistics have consistently shown that
many machinery components failures can be directly attri-
buted the equipment being operated outside of design
parameters or unintended conditions. Most failure analy-
sis and trouble-shooting activities are usually post-mortem
and commence after installation and start-up of the equip-
ment. The maintenance phase is now in motion, and fail-
ure analysis and trouble-shooting is now an integral part
of that phase.

The failure ﬁghting process includes all machinery main-
tenance activities, failure analysis, and trouble-shooting.
Fighting failures involves using every strategy that is app-
ropriate to the situation if the process is to be successful.
However, before any strategies can be applied, as much
information must be gathered as possible regarding fail-
ure modes and their frequencies. Appropriate statistical
approaches will accomplish this task and therefore have to
be part of the failure ﬁghting system.

62.2 Machinery failure modes and
maintenance strategies
Most plants have maintenance departments for the sole
purpose of taking care of all types of machinery. Typical
types of equipment deterioration are machinery component
failure events, their malfunctions, and system troubles.

As in most cases, maintenance departments would like
to perform machinery maintenance in a rational and plan-
ned manner. The fact that we plan our maintenance activ-
ities implies that we too behave in a rational and planned
way, and – hopefully – respond favorably to planned
maintenance actions.

However, in reality this sometimes does not always
work that way. If we are to be realistic, we must exam-
ine how machinery component failure modes appear and
behave as a function of time. To understand this fully, we
must concern ourselves with the concept of machinery
component life.

62.3 Useful life concepts
Failure is one of the ways in which engineered devices
attain the end of their useful life. Table 62.1 shows some
of the possible ways.

Usually most machinery failure analysis is performed
at component level, therefore, a deﬁnition is required to
state what constitutes life attainment in connection with
component failure. ‘Defect limit’ is a term that is used in
this context and needs to be expanded upon to understand
it fully.

Defect limit describes a parameter which we are all
familiar with. For example, when you buy original auto-
motive equipment tires there are built-in tread wear indi-
cators. These wear indicators are molded into the bottom

Useful life concepts 62/1119

of the tread grooves and appear as approximately 1
wide bands when the tire tread depth is down to 1
The wear indicators are ‘defect limits’.

2 -inch
16 inch.

Other typical examples of defect limits are clearance
tolerances of turbo-machinery assemblies, which are mea-
sured and recorded during machinery overhauls. Defect
limits are not always as obvious as those stated above.
Mechanical shaft couplings are very difﬁcult to determine
when serviceability is questionable, as they have no wear
indicators to provide guidance.

There are defect limits that are associated with ‘ran-
dom failure’ modes. For example, if there is a leak from
a mechanical seal on a pump, where do we decide that
the leakage is excessive and requires immediate mainte-
nance? Vibration analysis severity levels are also typical
examples of when do we have severe enough conditions
to warrant equipment shutdown and overhaul. In such cir-
cumstances, the defect limit is dependent upon individual
subjective judgment.

This is sometimes referred to as ‘user tolerance’ to the
distress symptoms displayed by the machine. ‘User tol-
erance’ is really a catch-phrase to describe those people
who, based upon their individual level of ‘expertise’, will
determine that the defective machine can keep on run-
ning at a level of severe vibration as opposed to those
who would take the machine out of service immediately.
Regardless of how service life is determined, the ‘life’ of
a machinery component must be deﬁned as the time interval
between putting the component into operation and the point
in time when the component reaches its defect limit.

‘Standard life’ is described as the average lifetime that
is acceptable to any plant failure analyst or troubleshooter.
Therefore, if we arrive at defect limits in machinery within
the maintenance program, we have also reached the ‘stan-
dard life’ of all the failure modes in the plant. Do we now:

1. Live with the known defects?
2. Look for improvements to the program?

These questions must be answered by setting defect limits
objectively.

If there are no baselines established, or any guidelines
upon which to improve, and allow subjective judgment
to prevail, we can guarantee some unpleasant failures
because those judgment determinations will range from
the conservative to the optimistic. The conservative app-
roach reduces component life arbitrarily and the optimistic
approach exposes the machine to unjustiﬁable high risks.
Therefore, it is highly recommended that the team of

Table 62.1 Reaching end of useful machinery life

Way in which the end of
useful life is reached

Example

Failure Slow

Sudden

Obsolescence
Completion of mission

Depletion

Mechanical seal leakage
Motor winding failure
Recip. steam pump/engine
Oil mist
Packaging
Wear pads
Electric battery

62/1120 Statistical Approaches in Machinery Problem Solving

analysts or troubleshooters set defect limits, and the ﬁnal
set points fully documented to ensure compliance.

Experience shows that some machines have more fre-
quent failures than do others. Obviously, different failure
modes have different frequencies of occurrence. This is
usually described as ‘mean-time-between-failure’ (MTBF)
and expresses the probability of machinery failure and
breakdown events as a function of time. This is of partic-
ular interest to the maintenance failure analyst and trou-
bleshooter who have to grapple with the realization that
some machinery failure modes appear slowly and pre-
dictably whilst others occur randomly and unpredictably.
In most cases, both types of failures have been en-
countered.
Predictive maintenance
While preventive maintenance is concerned with regularly
testing, and reconditioning equipment to prevent failures
in service and premature deterioration, it follows that pre-
dictive maintenance procedures are concerned with the
ability to predict when the equipment will fail and then
developing schedules to implement timely repairs. Predic-
tive maintenance does not imply that with the use of these
techniques, failure modes in equipment can be prevented;
rather, it suggests that the occurrence of failure can be
predicted and thus planned for. An appropriate example
would be the inspection and change of a major compres-
sor face-type oil seal where random heat checking (FM)
has been observed over the years.

The ideal predictive maintenance program will con-
tinuously search for defects in equipment by regularly
monitoring the condition and performance of equipment,
as well as maintaining a system for ongoing feedback.
While the implementation of a program may depend on
management philosophy, risk evaluations and cost/beneﬁt
ratios to name a few, the success of a program will depend
largely on the monitoring devices provided and the will-
ingness of operators and maintenance personnel to be
involved in the program. Unfortunately, predictive main-
tenance activities are not performed as frequently as desi-
red and usually with less sophisticated instruments such
as the observer’s sense of touch, sight, smell and sound.

Breakdown maintenance
Although there is widespread acceptance of the possibil-
ities of machinery preventive maintenance, it should not
be concluded that its concepts are without limitation.

The ﬁrst limitation is set by the nature of random failure
events. If we believe that failures occur periodically and
not with equal probability in time, the premise of PM or
periodic machinery maintenance is incorrect. Therefore,
the only alternative is continuous monitoring.

The second limitation is the life dispersion of machin-
ery components. It is difﬁcult to predict time-dependent
failure modes because even they do not occur at the exact
same operating intervals. Consider the life dispersion of
mechanical gear couplings on process compressors. Both
components are clearly subject to wear. If we conclude
that their MTBF (mean-time between failure), or mean-
time-between-reaching-of-detect-limit is 7.5 years, it is
possible to have an early failure after 3 years and another

after 15 years. The premise is that there are no undue
extraneous inﬂuences such as excessive misalignment or
lubricant loss on the machinery. Also, in this example, the
longest life span will be ﬁve times as long as the shortest
life span. Figure 62.1 describes this relationship.

Since most time-dependent failures have larger life dis-
persions, we must consider the maximum and minimum
ratios of 4:1 and 40:1. Generally, relative life dispersion
increases with the absolute value of MTBF. That is, wear
items with a relatively short life expectancy such as rider
rings on reciprocating compressors will have a compar-
atively smaller dispersion than components such as gear
tooth ﬂanks, which can be expected to remain serviceable
for long periods of time.

Finally, the third limitation of predictive maintenance in
process machinery is that downtime must be scheduled to
allow for inspection of the equipment, which in itself poses
risk. It is not an exaggeration to say that the source of the
majority of equipment failures, which were studied, began
shortly after predictive maintenance inspections made dis-
assembly of equipment necessary. Figure 62.2 shows how
trouble incident frequencies can increase contrary to expec-
tations after inspection and overhaul.

The only thing we can say for sure is that even if
the optimal combination of preventive/predictive main-
tenance were found, there would always be certain situ-
ations where breakdown maintenance would need to be
performed. For instance, lube-oil changes will have failure
modes that do not always respond to periodic servicing
and may not even be noticed through inspection or mon-
itoring. Other failure modes that are not easy to predict
are motor winding failures, the insulation breakdown of a
feeder cable for a large compressor motor driver, or pump
shaft fracture caused by fatigue.

(1) Early
      failures

(2) Random failures
     or useful life

(3) Wear-out
     failures

n
o

i
t
c
n
u

f
 

e

t

a
r
 

e
r
u

l
i

a
F

Figure 62.1 Bathtub curve

Time

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
p

 

e
r
u

l
i

a
F

Min. Mean

Max.

1

Figure 62.2 Failure probability and minimum–maximum life of
machinery components

The existence of breakdown maintenance unquestion-
able. The maintenance activity is necessary to restore
machinery equipment back to service after failure modes
developed that were:

1. Preventable but not prevented.
2. Predictable but not predicted.
3. Predicted but not acted upon.
4. Not preventable or predictable.

62.4 Bad actor management
When certain components of the process machinery con-
sistently malfunction, we call it bad actor management.

Another way to think of bad actor management is to
liken it to Pareto’s law, where 20 per cent of the compo-
nents are causing 80 per cent of the problems. Many of the
causes previously identiﬁed in connection with machinery
component failure modes lend hand to bad actor manage-
ment; however, some of the more signiﬁcant are listed as
follows:

1. Not suited for service due to:
ž wrong design assumptions
ž incorrect material
ž change in operation conditions.
ž improper repair
ž design and/or selection errors.
Bad actor management is preoccupied with the follow-

2. Maintenance:

ing necessary problem solving steps:

1. Bad actor identiﬁcation and tracking.
2. Failure analysis and documentation.
3. Follow-up.
4. Organizational aspects.

62.4.1 Bad actor identiﬁcation and tracking
Similar to reliability work, bad actors are also identiﬁed
through knowledge of the machinery MTBF by type, unit
and service. Resources are likely to be limited, which
means we will not be able to investigate all resources that
deviate from an acceptable or expected time to failure
(TTF). Therefore, the next step is to carefully choose an
acceptable TTF for machine breakdown, keeping these
limitations in mind. We don’t want to start at the top,
but it is imperative that we remember to use this process
to cover all failures, even if we feel we know all of the
bad actors. Later, the importance of this step will become
obvious because it will not be as easy for us to tell the
bad actors from acceptable actors. Figure 62.3 shows the
methodology of this process.

The third step is to proceed to the component level
because more than likely, the cause will be uncovered
here. Table 62.2 shows machinery component failure mo-
des commonly encountered in machinery failure analy-
sis together with suggested standard life values, Weibull
indices (ˇ), and responsiveness to preventable or pre-
dictable maintenance strategies. Referring to this table
will help decision-making. To assist the analyst in docu-
menting bad actor failure modes on the component level,

Bad actor management 62/1121

6 DECISION BASE
      Experience
      Result of eng. study

DECISION ROUTINE

6
Process mech. design
Process operation
Component design
Maintenance & assembly
What are the changes?

5 DECISION BASE
      Experience
      Result of econ. study

5

Yes
No

Can root cause be eliminated

economically?

4

3

No
Yes

Will FM respond to PM?**

Not acceptable

Acceptable

What was failure mode (FM)
compared with standard life?

6 DECISION BY:
   Mtc. engineer
   Analyst
   Mechanic

5 DECISION BY:
   Analyst

4 DECISION BY:
   Analyst

3 DECISION BY:
   Mechanic   
   Experience
   Analyst
   

4 DECISION BASE
      Experience

3 DECISION BASE
      Repair packet info
      Analyst's file notes
      Experience
      Statistical analysis
COMPONENT/PART

LEVEL

2 DECISION BASE
      Repair packet info
      Memory

COMPONENT/PART

LEVEL

1 DECISION BASE
      Word of mouth
      Repair packet info

EQUIPMENT/ASSEMBLY

LEVEL

2

1

Yes
No

Can primary failure mode

be identified?

2 DECISION BY:
   Mechanic (wage)   
   Analyst
   

Normal life — No
Normal life*—Yes

What is date of last repair?

(Equipment level)

1 DECISION BY:
   Mechanic (shop field)   
   Analyst
   

START

Shop/field mechanic repairs

and/or modifies

Field mechanic does PM

Results

**PM = Periodically inspect, clean, lubricate & repair
 *Normal life = Expected life for individual machine

Figure 62.3 Machinery failure analysis methodology

Figure 62.4 is provided as an example of what a typical
tracking sheet looks like.

Even though bad actor identiﬁcation and tracking can
be a complicated process, it is the ﬁrst step in an effort to
eliminate recurring and costly machinery failures. There
are many other steps which are necessary in order to iden-
tify bad actors, and we will discuss them later.

The following two sections explore the use of statistical
tools, which may help deﬁne failure experience trends in,
given machinery.

62.4.2 Hazard plotting for incomplete failure
data
In order to plot and analyze data, you must ﬁrst take into
account the form the data is in. There are two possibilities;
failure data can either be complete or incomplete. Failure
data is complete if the data consist of failure times for all
the units in the sample. However, if only the failure times
of the failed units and the running times of the unfailed
units are collected, the data are incomplete. This type of
data is also known as ‘censored,’ and the running times
are known as ‘censoring times.’ If the unfailed units all
have the same censoring time (which is greater than the
failure times), the data are singly censored. If unfailed
units have different censoring times, the data are multiply
censored.

When all units have failed, the result is complete data.
Singly-censored data result in life testing when testing
is terminated before all units fail. And multiply-censored
data result from:

1. Removal of units from use before failure.
2. Loss or failure of units due to extraneous causes.
3. Collection of data while units are still operating.

62/1122 Statistical Approaches in Machinery Problem Solving

Table 62.2 Primary machinery component failure

Failure Mode

Weibull
Index

Standard

Life

Maintenance Strategy

preventive

predictive

ž

ž
ž

ž

ž
ž

ž

Deformation
Brinelling
Cold ﬂow
Contracting
Creeping
Bending
Bowing
Buckling
Bulging
Deformation
Expanding
Extruding
Growth
Necking
Setting
Shrinking
Swelling
Warping
Yielding
Examples:
Deformation of springs
Extruding of elastomeric

seals

Force-induced deformation
Temperature-induced

deformation

Yielding
Fracture/Separation
Blistering
Brittle fracture
Checking
Chipping
Cracking
Caustic cracking
Ductile rupture
Fatigue fracture
Flaking
Fretting fatigue cracking
Heat checking
Pitting
Spalling
Splitting

1.0
1.0
2.0
2.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
2.0
2.0
3.0
1.0
1.0

1.0
1.0

1.0
2.0

1.0

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf

Inf
4.0Y

Inf
Inf

Inf

Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf

The following are examples of situations with these

reasons for multiply-censored data:

1. In some life-testing work, units are put on test at var-
ious times but are all taken off together; this is done
to terminate testing by some chosen time to meet a
schedule.

2. In medical follow-up studies on the length of survival
of patients after treatment, contact with some patients
may be lost or some may die from causes unrelated to
the disease treated. Similarly, in engineering studies,
units may be lost or fail for some reason unrelated to
the failure mode of interest; for example, a unit on test
may be removed from a test or destroyed accidentally.
3. In many engineering studies, ﬁeld data are used which
consist of failure times for failed units and differing
current running times for unfailed units. Such data arise
because units are put into service at different times and
receive different amounts of use.

Graphical analysis of failure data is most commonly plot-
ted using probability. However, in order to understand the
hazard plotting method presented here, is not necessary
to understand probability plotting. While it is difﬁcult to
utilize probability plotting for multiply-censored data, it is

BAD ACTOR TRACKING

FAILURE ANALYSIS

NO: 023

DESCRIPTION: P–101 , Hightower Feed pump

INFORMATION

FAILURE

FAILURE

FAILURE

FAILURE

80/11/05

SEAL

81/01/15

SEAL

81/05/10

SEAL

Changed
pump service

Changed
pump service

FAILURE
RESISTANCE

O–ring
material

O–ring
material

REMARKS

DATE

Same

(3) Springs

Secondary
sealing
o–ring
part # 13

?

Replaced

?

Part # 13

Swelling

1.5M

Changed to
viton

Part # 5

Breakage

5.0M

Corrected
internal
alignment

Internal Mis-
alignment due
to flange loading

Pump casting
strength

DATE: 81/05/30

DATE

COMPONENT /
PART

VENDOR DRWG. NO.

ELEMENT/PART

TTF #

CORRECTIVE
ACTION

BAD ACTOR
PART (Check)

FAILURE CAUSE

FAILURE MODE

Swelling

ANALYSED BY:

J.Pickel

REVISION

NO.

1

2

3

4

# Time–To–Failure

Figure 62.4 Bad actor tracking sheet

relatively easy to use it for complete and singly-censored
data. One simple expedient that is used to plot multiply-
censored data is to ignore all failures that occurred after the
earliest censoring time and plot only those that occurred
before the ﬁrst censoring time. This procedure may be
acceptable if there are relatively few failures after the ﬁrst
censoring time and thus little information is lost by exclud-
ing them form the plot, although considerable information
is lost if there are many failures after the earliest censoring
time. However, if the earliest censoring time is in the lower
tail of the distribution and only the failure times before that
time are used, the distribution function must be estimated
by considerable extrapolation beyond the earliest censor-
ing time. The estimate of the distribution may be in error
if you consider that a theoretical distribution, which agrees
with the data below the earliest censoring time, may differ
considerably from the true distribution function above the
earliest censoring time. You take this risk if you extrapolate
beyond the data that is there. To be as accurate as possible,
it is advisable to plot all failure times occurring both before
and after the earliest censoring time to make full use of the
information in the data.

Plotting data on hazard paper requires less effort, and at
the same time, it succeeds in using all of the failures and
gives the same information. Hazard papers are shown here
for exponential, Weibull, normal, log normal, and extreme
value distributions.

Generally, failure is described in terms of time to fail-
ure. Although in certain instances a more relevant measure
for exposure before failure is necessary such as cycles to
failure or miles to failure. It should also be noted that the
word failure is used in a general sense to indicate any spe-
ciﬁc deterioration in performance of a unit. Additionally,
if units are put into service at different times, the time in
use for each unit is ﬁgured from its starting time.

The hazard plotting method is presented in detail in the
next section followed by the step-by-step instructions on

how to make a hazard plot of multiply-censored data with
examples based on actual failure data to help illustrate
the instructions. The next section describes how to obtain
engineering information on the distribution of time to fail-
ure by using and interpreting a hazard plot. This section
also contains plots and analyses of simulated data from
different known theoretical distributions, which allows us
to assess the performance of the hazard plotting method.
Practical advice on how to use hazard paper ﬁnishes up
the section.

62.4.3 How to make a hazard plot
The following are step-by-step instructions for making a
hazard plot for multiply-censored failure data. Table 62.3
provides data to illustrate the hazard plotting method.
These data for 70 diesel generators consist of hours of
use on 12 generators at the time of fan failure, and hours
on 58 generators without a failure. Figure 62.5 shows the
ordered times to failure for the failed fans and the running
times for the unfailed fans. The engineering problem was
to determine if the failure rate of the fans was decreasing
with time. Then based on the failure rate information, a
decision by management and engineers would be made
as to whether or not the unfailed fans should be replaced
with better fans to prevent future failures. It
is also
possible that the weak fans would be removed because
of failure, and that the remaining fans would have a
failure rate low enough to be acceptable. Steps in the

Table 62.3 Generator fan failure data and hazard calculations

n(cid:3)k(cid:5)

Hours Hazard Cumulative

n(cid:3)k(cid:5)

Hours

Hazard Cumulative

Hazard

2.94

18.78

4.00

22.78

12.50

35.28

Hazard

1.43

2.90
4.39

5.03

7.75
9.60
11.49

13.62

15.84

36 (35)
37 (34)
38 (33)
39 (32)
40 (31)
41 (30)
42 (29)
43 (28)
43 (27)
45 (26)
46 (25)
47 (24)
48 (23)
49 (22)
50 (21)
51 (20)
52 (19)
53 (18)
54 (17)
55 (16)
56 (15)
57 (14)
58 (13)
59 (12)
60 (11)
61 (10)
62 (9)
62 (8)
64 (7)
65 (6)
66 (5)
67 (4)
68 (3)
69 (2)
70 (1)

43,000
46,000Ł
48,500
48,500
48,500
48,500
50,000
50,000
50,000
61,000
61,000Ł
61,000
61,000
63,000
64,500
64,000
67,000
74,500
78,000
78,000
81,000
81,000
82,000
85,000
85,000
85,000
87,500
87,500Ł
87,500
94,000
99,000
101,000
101,000
101,000
115,000

1.43

1.47
1.49

1.54

1.82
1.85
1.89

2.13

2.22

4,500Ł
1 (70)
2 (69)
4,600
3 (68) 11,500Ł
4 (67) 11,500Ł
5 (66) 15,600
6 (65) 16,000Ł
7 (64) 16,600
8 (63) 18,500
9 (62) 18,500
10 (61) 18,500
11 (60) 18,500
12 (59) 18,500
13 (58) 20,300
14 (57) 20,300
15 (56) 20,300
16 (55) 20,700Ł
17 (54) 20,700Ł
18 (53) 20,800Ł
19 (52) 22,000
20 (51) 30,000
21 (50) 30,000
22 (49) 30,000
23 (48) 30,000
24 (47) 31,000Ł
25 (46) 32,000
26 (45) 34,500Ł
27 (44) 37,500
28 (43) 37,500
29 (42) 41,500
30 (41) 41,500
31 (40) 41,500
32 (39) 41,500
33 (38) 43,000
34 (37) 43,500
35 (36) 43,000

ŁDenotes failure

Bad actor management 62/1123

hazard-plotting method follow with the fan failure data
used as an example:

1. Suppose that the failure data on n units consist of the
failure times for the failed units and the running (cen-
soring) times for the unfailed units. Order the n times
in the sample from smallest to largest without regard to
whether they are censoring or failure times. In the list
of ordered times the failures are each marked with an
asterisk to distinguish them from the censoring times.
This marking is done in Table 62.3 for the generator
fan failure data. If some censoring and failure times
have the same value, they should be put into the list
in a well-mixed order.

2. Obtain the corresponding hazard value for each fail-
ure and record it as shown in ﬁgure 62.6. The hazard
value for a failure time is 100 divided by the num-
ber K of units with a failure or censoring time greater
than (or equal to) that failure time. The hazard value
is the observed conditional probability of failure at a
failure time, that is, the percentage 100 (1/K) of the
K units that ran that length of time and failed then.
This observed conditional failure probability for a fail-
ure time is readily apparent in Figure 62.6, where the
number of units in use that length of time and sur-
viving is easily seen. If the times in the ordered list
are numbered backward with the ﬁrst time labeled n,
the second labeled n (cid:3) 1, . . . and the nth labeled 1,
then the K value is given by the label. For example,
these K values are shown in parentheses in Table 62.3.
Three-ﬁgure accuracy for K is sufﬁcient. Note that the
hazard value of a failure is determined by the number
of failure and censoring times following it; in this way,
hazard plotting takes into account the censoring times
of unfailed units in determining the plotting position
of a failure time.

3. For each failure time, calculate the corresponding cum-
ulative hazard value, which is the sum of its hazard
value and the hazard values of all preceding failure
times. This calculation is done recursively by simple
addition. For example, for the generator fan failure at
16,000 hours, the cumulative hazard value 5.93 is the
hazard value 1.54 plus the cumulative hazard value
4.39 of the preceding failure. The cumulative hazard
values are shown in Table 62.3 for the generator fan
failures. Cumulative hazard values can be larger than
100 per cent.

4. Choose a theoretical distribution of time to failure and
use the corresponding hazard paper to plot the data
on. Various hazard papers are shown in the ﬁgure. The
theoretical distribution should be chosen on the basis
of engineering knowledge of the units and their fail-
ure modes. On the vertical axis of the hazard paper,
mark a time scale that includes the range of the sample
chosen, and mark the vertical scale off from 1000 to
100,000 hours, since the range of failure times for the
data is from 4500 to 87,500 hours. This is shown in
Figure 62.6.

5. Plot each failure time vertically against its correspond-
ing cumulative hazard value on the horizontal axis of
the hazard paper. This was done for the 12 generator
fan failures and is shown in Figure 62.7.

62/1124 Statistical Approaches in Machinery Problem Solving

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

110

Hours ( × 1000)

Unit
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70

Figure 62.5 Graph of fan failure data

3 LOGARITHMIC CYCLES

Shape parameter

Failure time
Time on unfailed unit

0.01

1
9
8
7
6
5
4

3

2

1
9
8
7
6
5
4

3

2

1
9
8
7
6
5
4

3

2

1
0.01

)
s
r
u
o
h

 

0
0
0
1
(
 

e
r
u

l
i

a

f
 

o

t
 

e
m
T

i

Figure 62.6 Weibull hazard plot

1

0.1

2

1

3

4

5

Probability %

10

20

30

40 50 60 70 80 90

99 99.9 99.99

0.1

1

10

100

1000

Cumulative hazard %

6. Check whether the failure data on the hazard plot fol-
low a reasonably straight line. This can be done by
holding the paper up to the eye and sighting along the
data points. If the plot is reasonably straight, draw a
best-ﬁt straight line through the data points. This line
is an estimate of the cumulative hazard function of
the distribution that the data are from. This was done
in Figure 62.5 for the generator fan failure data. The
straight-line estimate of the cumulative hazard function
is used to obtain information on the distribution of time
to failure. It provides estimates of the cumulative dis-
tribution function and parameters of the distribution of
time to failure. If the data do not follow a reasonably
straight line, then plot the data on hazard paper for
some other theoretical distribution to see if a better
ﬁt can be obtained. Curvature of a data plot such as
shown in Figure 62.7 indicates poor ﬁt.

When plotting data on two different hazard papers, it
is possible that each will result in relatively straight plot.
Generally, it doesn’t matter which plot is used to inter-
polate within the range of data. There is an exception
however, when extrapolation beyond the given range of
data is necessary. In that case, the decision of which plot
to use will be determined by the engineer.

Figures 62.8, 62.9, 62.10 show the data for generator
fan failure plotted on exponential, normal and log nor-
mal hazard paper respectively. The exponential plot is a
reasonably straight line which indicates that the failure
rate is relatively constant over the range of the data. It
should be noted that the reason the probability scale on
the exponential hazard plot is crossed out is because that
is not the proper way to plot data. (This will be discussed
later.) The normal plot is curved concave upward which

Bad actor management 62/1125

indicates that a normal distribution is not appropriate to
the data. The log normal plot is a reasonably straight line.
The log normal (cid:9) parameter of a line ﬁtted to the data
is approximately 0.7. For (cid:9) values near 0.7, a log nor-
mal distribution has a relatively constant failure rate over
a large percentage of the distribution, particularly in the
lower tail. The exponential, Weibull, and log normal plots
are all comparable over the range of the data for predic-
tion purposes. However, the best distribution to use when
predicting times beyond the data, is a decision that should
be based on engineering knowledge.

Like all other methods for analyzing censored failure
data, the hazard plotting method is also based on a cer-
tain assumption that must be satisﬁed if we are going to
rely on the results. The assumption is that if the unfailed
units were run to failure, their failure times would be sta-
tistically independent of their censoring times. In other
words, there is no relationship or correlation between the
censoring time of a unit and the failure time. For example,

)
s
r
u
o
h
 
0
0
0
1
(
 
e
r
u

l
i

a
f
 
o
t
 
e
m
T

i

100

80

60

40

20

0

0

100

200

300

400

500

Cumulative hazard %

Figure 62.8 Normal hazard plot of generator fan failure data

0

0.01

1

0.1

Shape parameter

Probability %

2

1

3

4

5

10

20

30

40

50

60

70 80

90

99

99.9 99.99

e
r
u

l
i

a

f
 

o

t
 

e
m
T

i

10
9
8
7
6
5

4

3

2

100
90
80
70
60
50

40

30

20

10
9
8
7
6
5

4

3

2

1

0.01

0.1

1.0

10

100

1000

Cumulative hazard

Figure 62.7 Exponential hazard plot of generator fan failure data

62/1126 Statistical Approaches in Machinery Problem Solving

0.01

0.1

1.0

10

20 30 40 50 60 70 80

90

99

99.9

99.99

Percentage

100
90
80
70
60
50
40

30

20

15

10
9
8
7
6
5
4

3

2

 

)
s
r
u
o
h
0
0
0
1
(
 

e
r
u

l
i

a

f
 

o

t
 

e
m
T

i

1
0.01

0.1

1

10

100

200

300

400 500 600 700 800 9001000

Cumulative hazard %

Figure 62.9 Generator fan failure data plotted on log normal haz-
ard data

0 1020304050 60 70

80

90

99

Probability %

1000

500

e
r
u

l
i

a

f
 

o

t
 
s
r
u
o
H

0

0

100

200
300
Cumulative hazard %

400

500

Figure 62.10 Exponential hazard plot of simulated exponential
data

suppose that a certain type of unit has two competing
modes of failure, which can be identiﬁed after failure, but
there is interest in only one of them. Then failure of a unit
by the other mode might be regarded as a censoring of
the time to failure for the mode of interest. The two times
to failure that a unit potentially has may not be indepen-
dent, but correlated, for physical reasons. If this is so, the
hazard-plotting method fails to give valid results on the
distribution of time to failure for the mode of interest.

62.4.4 How to use hazard plots
The line the data supports on a hazard plot determines
engineering information relating to the distribution of time
to failure. Fan failure data and simulated data are illus-
trated here to explain how the information is obtained. The
methods provide estimates of distribution parameters, per-
centiles, and probabilities of failure. The methods that give
estimates of distribution parameters differ slightly from the
hazard paper of one theoretical distribution to another and
are given separately for each distribution. The methods
that give estimates of distribution percentiles and failure
probabilities are the same for all papers and are given ﬁrst.

62.5 Estimates of distribution
percentiles and probabilities of failure
For any distribution, the cumulative hazard function and
the cumulative distribution junction are connected by a
simple relationship. The probability scale for the cumu-
lative distribution function appears on the horizontal axis
at the top of hazard paper and is determined from that
relationship. Thus, the line ﬁtted to data on hazard paper

provided an estimate of the cumulative distribution func-
tion. The ﬁtted line and the probability scale are used to
obtain estimates of distribution percentiles and probabili-
ties of failure. This procedure is explained next.

Suppose, for example, that an estimate based on a Wei-
bull ﬁt to the fan data is desired of the ﬁfth percentile of
the distribution of time to fan failure. Enter the Weibull
plot, Figure 62.6, on the probability scale at the chosen
percentage point, 5 per cent. Go vertically down to the
ﬁtted line and then horizontally to the time scale where
the estimate of the percentile is read and is 14,000 hours.
An estimate of the probability of failure before some
chosen speciﬁc time is obtained by the following. Suppose
that an estimate is desired of the probability of fan failure
before 100,000 hours, based on a Weibull ﬁt to the fan
data. Enter the Weibull plot on the vertical time scale at
the chosen time, 100,000 hours. Go horizontally to the
ﬁtted line and then up to the probability scale where the
estimate of the probability of failure is read and is 38 per
cent. In other words, an estimated 38 per cent of the fans
will fail before they run for 100,000 hours.

Given next is an estimate of the conditional probability
that an unfailed unit of a given age will fail by a cer-
tain time. Such estimates for units operating in the ﬁeld
are useful for planning. An example of this is in the next
paragraph. Suppose that an estimate based on the Weibull
plot is desired for the probability that the unfailed fan
with 32,000 hours will fail by 40,000. Enter the Weibull
plot on the time scale at 32,000 hours. Go horizontally
to the ﬁtted line and then down to the cumulative haz-
ard scale where the value is read as a percentage and is
13 per cent. Similarly, obtain the corresponding cumu-
lative hazard value for 40,000 hours, which is 16.8 per
cent. Take the difference between the two values, that is,
16.8 (cid:3) 13 D 3.8 per cent. Enter the plot on the cumula-
tive hazard scale at the value of the difference, and go
directly up to the probability scale to read the estimate
of the conditional probability of failure, which is 3.7 per
cent . For small percentages, cumulative probabilities and
corresponding hazard values are approximately equal; this
can be seen on the hazard papers. Thus, one could use the
difference, if it is small, of the two cumulative hazard val-
ues as an approximation to the conditional probability of
failure; this is 3.8 per cent here.

Conditional probabilities of failure can be used to predict
the number of unfailed units that will fail within a speciﬁed
period on each of the units. For each unit, the estimate of the
conditional probability of failure within a speciﬁed period
of time (8000 hours here) must be calculated. If there is
a large number of units and the conditional probabilities
are small, then the number of failures in that period will
be approximately Poisson distributed (a special form of
the normal distribution), with mean equal to the sum of
the conditional probabilities, which must be expressed as
decimals rather than percentages. The Poisson distribution
allows us to make probability statements about the number
of failures that will occur within a given period of time.

It should be emphasized that the estimation methods
presented previously apply to any hazard paper and, in
addition, to a nonparametric ﬁt to the data obtained by
drawing a smooth curve through data on any hazard paper.

Estimates of distribution percentiles and probabilities of failure 62/1127

Given next are the different methods for estimating dis-
tribution parameters on exponential, Weibull, normal, log
normal, and extreme-value hazard papers. The methods
are explained with the aid of simulated data from known
distributions. Thus, we can judge from the hazard plots
how well the hazard-plotting method does.

62.5.1 Exponential parameter estimate
Simulated data are shown in Table 62.4 and are a sample
from an exponential distribution with a mean 1000 hours.
The data are failure censored, which is a special case of
multiply-censored data. That is, the data simulate a situa-
tion where 50 units were put on test at the same time and,
according to a pre-speciﬁed plan, ﬁve unfailed units were
removed from test when the ﬁfth failure occurred, ﬁve
more unfailed units were removed when the tenth failure
occurred, and so on. Unfailed units would be removed for
inspection for deterioration and to hasten the life test. A
plot of these data on exponential hazard paper is shown
in Figure 62.9. In Figure 62.9 the theoretical cumulative
hazard function for the distribution is the straight line
through the origin. On exponential hazard paper only, the
time scale must start with time zero, and the straight line
ﬁtted to the data must pass through the origin.

For the purpose of showing how to obtain from an
exponential hazard plot an estimate of the exponential
mean time to failure, assume that the straight line on
Figure 62.9 is the one ﬁtted to the data. Enter the plot at
the 100 per cent point on the horizontal cumulative haz-
ard scale at the bottom of the paper. Go up to the ﬁtted
line and then across horizontally to the vertical time scale
where the estimate of the mean time to failure is read and
is 1000 hours. The corresponding estimate of the failure
rate is the reciprocal of the mean time to failure and is
1/100 D 0.001 failures per hour.

Table 62.4 Simulated exponential data and hazard calculations

n(cid:3)k(cid:5)

Hours Hazard Cumulative

n(cid:3)k(cid:5)

Hours Hazard Cumulative

hazard

5.00
5.26
5.56
5.88
6.25

46.49
51.75
57.31
63.19
69.44

10.00
11.11
12.50
14.29
16.67

79.44
90.55
103.05
117.34
134.01

hazard

2.00
4.04
6.12
8.25
10.42

12.92
15.48
18.11
20.81
23.59

26.92
30.37
33.94
37.64
41.49

26 (25)
27 (24)
28 (23)
29 (22)
30 (21)
31 (20)Ł
32 (19)Ł
33 (18)Ł
34 (17)Ł
35 (16)Ł
36 (15)
37 (14)
38 (13)
39 (12)
40 (11)
41 (10)
42 (9)
43 (8)
44 (7)
45 (6)
46 (5)
47 (4)
48 (3)
49 (2)
50 (1)

385
385
385
385
385
391Ł
410Ł
562Ł
611Ł
621Ł
621
621
621
621
621
662Ł
884Ł
1101Ł
1110Ł
1232Ł
1232
1232
1232
1232
1232

1 (50)
2 (49)
3 (48)
4 (47)
5 (46)
6 (45)
7 (44)
8 (43)
9 (42)
10 (41)
11 (40)
12 (39)
13 (38)
14 (37)
15 (36)
16 (35)
17 (34)
18 (33)
19 (32)
20 (31)
21 (30)
22 (29)
23 (28)
24 (27)
25 (26)

3Ł
52Ł
58Ł
71Ł
77Ł
77
77
77
77
77
101Ł
130Ł
161Ł
180Ł
235Ł
235
235
235
235
235
301Ł
306Ł
309Ł
334Ł
385Ł

ŁDenotes failure

2.00
2.04
2.08
2.13
2.17

2.50
2.56
2.63
2.70
2.78

3.33
3.45
3.57
3.70
3.85

62.5.2 Weibull parameter estimates
Table 62.5 contains a randomly censored sample of 90
times from a Weibull distribution with shape parameter
equal to 0.8 and scale parameter equal to 1000 hours. The
data are randomly censored with independent censoring
times from a Weibull distribution with shape parameter
equal to 2.0 and scale parameter equal to 300 hours. The
data were obtained by generating an observation from
the failure distribution and an independent observation
from the censoring distribution. If the censoring time was
smaller than the failure time, the censoring time was used
and vice versa. Such data arise if there are independent,
competing modes of failure for a unit and the mode of
failure can be determined on a failed unit. The 20 fail-
ure times are plotted in Figure 62.11 on Weibull hazard
paper. The data follow the cumulative hazard function of
the distribution of time to failure but do not fall on a
particularly straight line.

62.5.3 Some practical aspects of data plotting
This section will cover the potential difﬁculties that may
be encountered when using hazard and probability plotting
paper. It will also look at how to use the plotting paper for
the most effective results. Much of the discussion applies
equally to both hazard or probability plotting, especially
where good plotting techniques are concerned.

To determine which hazard paper is appropriate to use
when plotting a set of multiply censored data, ﬁrst rely on
engineering experience. If that is not an option, try different
papers until you ﬁnd one that is suitable. To save time, it
may be a good idea to try plotting the sample cumulative
hazard function on exponential hazard paper, since it is just

Table 62.5 Randomly censored simulated Weibull data

Number Time Cumulative Number Time Cumulative Number Time Cumulative

hazard

29.59

34.35

hazard

1.11
2.23
3.37
4.52
5.68
6.86
8.05
9.25
10.47
11.70

12.97
14.25
15.55

17.00

18.59

1Ł
5Ł
7Ł
21Ł
37Ł
38Ł
49Ł
78Ł
85Ł
91Ł
96
98Ł
111Ł
125Ł
141
145
156
158
160
162
163
165Ł
168
176
181
182
187
188Ł
191
198

hazard

20.26

22.30

25.24

31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60

199Ł
199
200
201
205
206
207
212
213
214
217
217Ł
217
218
220
222
223
224
226
231
232
239
244
244
245
251
254Ł
256
261
262

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30

ŁDenotes failure time

61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
84
86
87
88
89
90

264
276
279
279
281
283
283
293Ł
298
301Ł
301
309
315
318
322
329
330
343
344
345
349
354
355
363
363
370
380
385
407
412

62/1128 Statistical Approaches in Machinery Problem Solving

0

0.01

1

0.1

Shape parameter

3

Probability %

2

1

4

5

10

20

30

40 50 60 70 80

90

99

99.9 99.99

e
r
u

l
i

a

f
 

o

t
 

e
m
T

i

10
9
8
7
6
5
4

3

2

100
90
80
70
60
50
40

30

20

10
9
8
7
6
5
4

3

2

0
0.01

0.1

1.0

10

100

1000

Cumulative hazard

Figure 62.11 Weibull hazard plot of simulated Weibull data

a square grid. Then compare the plot with the theoretical
cumulative hazard functions in Figures 62.12–62.15 and
choose the distribution with the cumulative hazard func-
tion that agrees most closely with the shape of the sample
cumulative hazard function over the range of cumulative
hazard values in the sample. Plot the data on the corre-
sponding hazard paper. The cumulative hazard scale on
the horizontal axis of exponential hazard paper shown runs
from 0 to 500 per cent, which may be too big a range, par-
ticularly if the data consist of some early failure times and
many censoring times and the sample cumulative hazard
values are small. Then the scale should be changed to run
from 0 to 50 per cent, say, by adding decimal points. The
probability scale then no longer corresponds to the hazard
scale and must not be used. This was done in Figure 62.7
where the probability scale has been deleted.

If a data plot on a chosen hazard paper departs signif-
icantly from a straight line by being bowed up or down,
it is an indication that the data should be re-plotted on a

 β = 4

2

3/α

2/α

1/α

)
x
(
h
n
o

 

i
t
c
n
u

f
 

d
r
a
z
a
H

1

0.5

0.5
1
2 4 = β

α

2α

3α

0

0

α

2α

3α

Time x

Time x

)
x
(
F
n
o

 

i
t
c
n
u

f
 

n
o

i
t

u
b
i
r
t
s
D

i

1.0

0.5

0

0

)
x
(
f
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
d
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

 β = 4

2

1

0.5

)

H
(
x
 
e
m
T

i

3α

2α

α

0

 β = 0.5

1

2

4

0

100

200

300

400

%

0

α

2α

3α

)
x
(
F
 
n
o
i
t
c
n
u
f
 
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
D

i

1.0

0.5

0

)
x
(
f
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
d
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

µ−2σ µ−σ

µ

µ+σ

µ+2σ

Time x 

)
x
(
h
 
n
o
i
t
c
n
u
f
 
d
r
a
z
a
H

4/σ

3/σ

2/σ

1/σ

0

µ+2σ
µ+σ
µ
µ−σ
µ−2σ

)

H
(
x
 
e
m

i
t
 
e
r
u

l
i

a
F

µ−2σ µ−σ

µ

µ+σ

µ+2σ

Time x 

µ−2σ µ−σ

µ

µ+σ

µ+2σ

0

200

400

600 %

Time x 

Cumulative hazard H 

Figure 62.13 The normal distribution

x
(
F
 
n
o
i
t
c
n
u
f
 
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
D

i

) 1.0

0.1

0.5
1.0 = σ

0.5

0

0 

µ

10

µ

2.10

µ

3.10

Time x 

)
x
(
f
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
d

 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

0.1 = σ

0.5

1.0

µ

µ

10

µ

2.10

µ

3.10

Time x 

)
x
(
h
 
n
o
i
t
c
n
u
f
 
d
r
a
z
a
H

4

3

2

1

0

)

H
(
x
 

e
m
T

I

µ

µ

3.10

2.10

µ

10

0

0

0.1 = σ

0.5
1.0

µ

10

µ

3.10

µ

2.10
Time x

 σ = 1.0 

0.5

0.1

200

100
Cumulative hazard H

300

%

Figure 62.14 Long normal distributions

Time x 

Cumulative hazard M

Figure 62.12 Weibull distributions

different hazard paper. Whether a plot of points is curved
can best be judged by laying a transparent straight edge

Estimates of distribution percentiles and probabilities of failure 62/1129

)
x
(
F
n
o

 

i
t
c
n
u

f
 

n
o

i
t

u
b
i
r
t
s
D

i

1.0

0.3

0

)
x
(
f
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
d

 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

4/a

3/a

2/a

1/a

0

b+a
b
b−a
b−2a
b−3a

)
x
(
h
n
o

 

i
t
c
n
u

f
 

d
r
a
z
a
H

)

H
(
x
 
e
m

i
t
 

e
r
u

l
i

a
F

b−4a

b−2a b b+2a

Time x 

b−4a b−2a b b+2a

Time x 

b−4a

b−2a b b+2a

Time x 

200

400
100
Cumulative hazard H

300

%

Figure 62.15 Smallest extreme-value distributions

along the points. If a plot has a deﬁnite double curvature
on exponential paper, log normal hazard paper should be
tried. If the plot is still not straight, then this may be an
indication that the units have two or more failure modes
with different distributions of time to failure. Then a mix-
ture of such data from different distributions usually will
not plot as a straight line on hazard or probability paper
but will be a line with two or more curves to it.

When a set of data does not plot as a straight line on
any of the available papers, then one may wish to draw a
smooth curve through the data points on one of the plotting
papers, and use the curve to obtain estimates of distribution
percentiles and probabilities of failure for various given
times. With such a nonparametric ﬁt to the data, it is usually
unsatisfactory to extrapolate beyond the data because it is
difﬁcult to determine how to extend how to extend the
curve. Nonparametric ﬁtting is best used only if the data
contain a reasonably large number of failures.

The behavior of the failure rate as a function of time can
be gaged from a hazard plot. If data are plotted on exponen-
tial hazard paper, the derivative of the cumulative hazard
function at some time is the instantaneous failure rate at
that time. Since time to failure is plotted as a function of the
cumulative hazard, the instantaneous failure rate is actually
the reciprocal of the slope of the plotted data, and the slope
of the plotted data corresponds to the instantaneous mean
time to failure. For the data that are plotted on one of the
other hazard papers and that give a curved plot, one can
determine from examining the changing slope of the plot
whether the true failure rate is increasing or decreasing rel-
ative to the failure rate of the theoretical distribution for
the paper. Such information on the behavior of the failure
rate cannot be obtained from probability plots.

On exponential hazard paper, if a smooth curve through
the data points clearly passes through the time axis above
the origin instead of through the origin, it is an indication
that the true distribution may have no failures before some
ﬁxed time. This may arise, for example, if time to failure is
ﬁgured from date of manufacture, and there is a minimum
possible time it takes to get a unit into service. The minimum
time is estimated as the time on the axis that the smooth
curve passes through. This minimum time is then treated
as time zero, and all times to failure is calculated from it
for purposes of plotting the data on another hazard paper.

In a data plot on exponential hazard paper, the early fail-
ure times are crowded together by the origin in the lower
left-hand corner of the plot and the later failure times are
space farther apart (see Figure 62.7, for example). Thus,
on exponential hazard paper, the later failures inﬂuence
the eye and placement of the best-ﬁt line more than the
early failures. If one is interested in the early failure part
of the distribution, which is typical of reliability work, then
the early failure should be emphasized more in the anal-
ysis. Plotting data on Weibull hazard paper can do this.
The data points are then spaced out more equally through-
out the range of the data, and the early and later failures
are weighed about equally by eye (see Figure 62.5). If an
exponential ﬁt to the data is still desired, then a best-ﬁt
line with 45° slopes should be drawn through the data
points. This gives an exponential ﬁt to the data, since the
exponential is a special case of the Weibull with the shape
parameter equal to one. If a nonparametric ﬁt to the data
such as described previously is desired that emphasizes
early times to failure, then the data should be plotted on
Weibull hazard paper and a smooth curve drawn through
the data to provide a nonparametric estimate of the cumu-
lative hazard function of the distribution. Also, percentiles
and probabilities of failure for various given times can then
be estimated from the smooth curve by the methods given
earlier.

If estimated of distribution parameters are desired from
data plotted on a hazard paper, then the straight line drawn
through the data should be based primarily on a ﬁt to the
data points near the center of the distribution the sample
is from and not be inﬂuenced overly by data points in
the tails of the distribution. This is suggested because the
smallest and largest times to failure in a sample tend to
vary considerably from the true cumulative hazard func-
tion, and the middle times tend to lie close to it. Similar
comments apply to the probability plotting.

Failure times are typically recorded to the nearest hour,
day, month, hundred miles, etc. This is so because the
method of measurement has limited accuracy or because
the data are rounded. For example, if units are inspected
periodically for failure, the exact time of failure is not
known but only the period in which the failure occurred.
For data plotting, the amount that failure times are rounded
off should be considerably smaller than the spread in the
distribution of time to failure.

A rough rule of thumb for tolerable rounding for data
plotting is that the amount of rounding should be no
greater than one-ﬁfth of the standard deviation of the
distribution. Another way of saying this is that data are
coarse if a large number of the failures are recorded
for just a few different times. If data are too coarse, a
plot on hazard or probability paper will have a staircase
appearance with ﬂat spots at those times with a number of
failures. Plots of coarse data can be misleading unless the
coarseness is taken into account; for example, estimated
of failure probabilities and distribution parameters and
percentiles can be somewhat in error if coarseness of the
data in not taken into account.

Methods for analyzing coarse data can be found in
the statistical literature where it is called grouped data.
One method of taking into account the coarseness of data

62/1130 Statistical Approaches in Machinery Problem Solving

in plotting is to plot the failures with a common failure
time at equal spaced times over the time interval asso-
ciated with that time. For example, if failure times are
recorded to the nearest 100 hours and ﬁve failures are
at 1000 hours, then the corresponding interval is 950 to
1050, and the corresponding plotting times assigned to the
ﬁve failures are 960, 980, 1000, 1020, and 1040 hours.
This smoothes the steps out of the plot and makes the
plot more accurate.

When a set of data consists of a large number of fail-
ure times, one may not wish to plot all failures but just
selected ones. This is done to reduce the labor in mak-
ing the data plot or to avoid a clutter of overlapping data
points on the plot. Any selected set of points might be
plotted. For example, one might plot every kth point, all
points in a tail of the distribution, or only some of the
points near the center of the distribution. Care must be
taken in plotting just a subset of the data to ensure that
the plot of the subset leads to the same conclusions as the
plot of the entire set. In practice, the choice of the selected
points to be plotted depends on how the plot is going to
be used. For example, if one is interested in the lower
tail of the distribution, that is, early failures, then all of
the early failures should be plotted. In general, one plots
the data points that are most relevant to the information
wanted from the data.

Ideally, no fewer than 20 failure times, if available,
should be plotted from a set of data. Often, in engineering
practice there are so few failures that all should be kept in
mind so that conclusions drawn from a plot are based on a
limited amount of information. Note that if only selected
failures from a sample are to be plotted on hazard paper,
it is necessary to use all of the failures in the sample to
calculate the appropriate cumulative hazard values for the
plotting positions. Wrong plotting positions will result if
some failures in the data are not included in the cumula-
tive hazard calculations. A similar comment applies to the
calculation of plotting positions for probability plotting.
For plots of some data, the ranges of the scales of the
available hazard and probability papers shown through-
out this chapter may not be large enough. To enlarge
the time scale on any of the papers, join two or more
pages together. To enlarge the hazard scale on Weibull
or extreme-value hazard paper to get smaller hazard and
probability values, add on extra log cycles for the lower
values, and label them in the obvious manner; the cumula-
tive hazard and cumulative probability scales are equiva-
lent for the small probabilities in the added cycles. Weibull
hazard papers with two different ranges are available to
allow a user to choose the ranges that best suit his data
(see Figures 62.5 and 62.6).

62.6 Concluding remarks
The cumulative hazard plotting method and papers pre-
sented here provide simple means for statistical analyses
of multiply censored failure data to obtain engineering
information. The hazard-plotting method is simpler to use
for multiply censored data than other plotting methods
given in the literature and directly gives failure-rate infor-
mation not provided by others.

Method to identify bad repairs from bad designs
Earlier we dealt with Weibull analysis and noticed how
data demanding that method can become. This is espe-
cially true when one wants to examine a sample of data
from a time continuum such as in an established process
plant. The sample of data may be a one-year period where
the failure pattern can be considered similar to that in
the previous year and in the succeeding year. However,
this analysis method involves only a knowledge of the
total sample population, total number of failures within
the time period, the number of units on which these fail-
ures occurred, and time intervals between failures on units
which failed more than once within the sample period. A
good analogy would be a hospital operation with a yearly
number of patients, of whom some are returning within
that period for repeated treatment. Some of the returning
patients only return once, others more than once during
that year, and so forth.

In an earlier section, we acquainted ourselves with com-
monly used reliability terms: mean time between repairs
(MTBR), mean time between failures (MTBF), etc. We
saw that these terms have similar meanings but often
include minor deviations. To avoid confusion, mean time
to failure (MTTF) will be used in the following discus-
sion. It can be expressed in terms of any time periods, i,e,
days, months, years, etc.:
MTTF D P ð t
F(cid:15)

where:
MTTF D mean time to failure

P D population
t D time periods in sample time
F(cid:15) D failures in sample time

If t is unity, F(cid:15) is failures
MTTF D P, years or other period
F(cid:15)

While such a number is very useful as an index of
performance, it gives no indication of what needs to be
done to correct the situation if the index is low.

Inherent defects in either the system or the equipment,
or ‘infant mortality’ (see below) cause a low MTTF. Inher-
ent defects will result in units failing more frequently than
is desirable. These defects can be corrected by locating
and correcting them or by taking action to reduce their
effects, thus improving machine life.

Infant mortality results in repaired units failing shortly
after their return to service. It can be corrected by
simplifying repair techniques, quality control of repairs
and repair parts, improved starting techniques, etc. Units
which have persistent abnormally short lives may have
an inherent defect which cannot be corrected by the
previous methods. However, the usual characteristic of
infant mortality is its variability. Very good pumps of last
year become the very bad ones this year and vice versa.
Any pump is a potential bad actor.

63/1131

Health and
Safety in the UK

George Pitblado
Support Services

63

Contents

63.1 Introduction
63.2 Legislation

63/1133
63/1133

63.2.1 Acts of Parliament 63/1133
63.2.2 Regulations
63.2.3 Codes of Practice 63/1133
63.2.4 Guidance notes

63/1133

63/1133

63.3 Administration of the Health and Safety at Work Act

63/1133
63.3.1 The Health and Safety Commission
63.3.2 The Health and Safety Executive
63.3.3 Local authorities
63.3.4 Fire authorities
63/1134

63/1133

63/1133

63.4 General duties

63/1133

63/1133

63.4.1 Duties of employers
63.4.2 Safety policies: organization and arrangements

63/1134

63/1134

63.4.3 Safety training and information
63.4.4 Duties to others
63.4.5 Responsibilities of the self-employed
63.4.6 Duties of manufacturers and suppliers
63.4.7 Duties of employees
63.4.8 Enforcement 63/1134

63/1134

63/1134

63/1134

63/1134
63/1134

63.5 Safety policy

63/1135

63.5.1 Policy statement 63/1135
63.5.2 Levels of responsibility
63.5.3 Safety representatives and joint safety

63/1135

committees 63/1135

63.5.4 Training and supervision
63.5.5 Hazard details
63/1135
63.5.6 Reporting accidents 63/1135
63.5.7 Policy review 63/1136

63/1135

63.6 Information 63/1136
63.7 HSE Inspectorates
63.8 The Employment Medical Advisory Service (EMAS)

63/1136

63/1136

63.9 HSE area ofﬁces 63/1136

63.10 Health and safety procedures
63.11 Fire and ﬁrst-aid instructions

63/1137
63/1138

63.11.1 Fire 63/1138
63.11.2 First-aid/medical services 63/1138

63/1138

63.12 Good housekeeping
63.13 Protective clothing and equipment
63.14 Safe working areas 63/1138
63.15 Materials handling
63/1139

63.15.1 Manual lifting
63.15.2 Mechanical lifting

63/1139

63/1139

63/1138

63.16 Portable tools and equipment
63.17 Conﬁned spaces
63.18 Electricity 63/1140
63.19 Plant and equipment

63/1139

63/1140

63/1139

63.19.1 Compressed air 63/1140
63.19.2 Steam boilers
63.19.3 Pressure systems
63.19.4 Machinery 63/1141

63/1140

63/1141

63.20 Safety signs and pipeline identiﬁcation

63/1141

63.20.1 Safety signs
63/1141
63.20.2 Pipeline identiﬁcation

63/1141

63.21 Asbestos
63/1141
63.22 COSHH 63/1142
63.23 Lead 63/1142
63.24 Other information
63.25 Assessment of potential hazards 63/1142

63/1142

63.25.1 Purpose
63.25.2 Working practices 63/1142

63/1142

63.26 Alternative method of assessing hazards

63/1143
63.26.1 Work on fuel oil tanks
63.26.2 Procedures: 1 63/1143
63.26.3 Procedures: 2 63/1143

63/1143

63.27 Permits to work 63/1144

63.27.1 Permission to Work on Electrical Systems

Certiﬁcate 63/1144

63.28 Working alone

63/1145

63.28.1 Company and contractor’s responsibilities for the

lone worker

63/1145

63.29 Safety policy for lone workers 63/1145
63.30 Contractor’s conditions and safe working practices

63/1145
63.30.1 Introduction
63.30.2 Contents

63/1145

63/1146

63.31 Safe working practices and procedures

63.31.1 Health and safety 63/1146

63/1146

63.31.2 Protecting clothing and equipment
63.31.3 Access equipment
63.31.4 Warning signs and good housekeeping

63/1148

63/1147

63/1148

63.31.5 Tools and equipment
63/1148
63.31.6 Materials/parts/spares 63/1148

63.32 Emergency procedures
63/1148

63.32.1 Fire
63.32.2 First aid 63/1148

63/1148

63.33 Contractor’s guide

63/1148

63.33.1 On arrival at company premises 63/1148
63.33.2 Prior to commencement of work 63/1148
63.33.3 Security
63.33.4 Welfare/canteen 63/1149
63.33.5 Useful contacts
63/1149

63/1149

63.1 Introduction
The initial introduction of the Health and Safety at Work
Act 1974 enabled provisions in the Act to supersede leg-
islation contained in 31 relevant Acts and 500 subsidiary
regulations in use at that time. The 1974 Act is the frame-
work which, over the years, will enable the gradual impro-
vement of existing health and safety requirements. Revis-
ing and updating current provisions in the form of regu-
lations and approved codes of practice prepared in con-
sultation with industry will achieve this. These provisions
will maintain or improve the health and safety standards
established by existing legislation. The objective of the
Act is not only that it is introduced to rationalize existing
provisions but also to ensure that standards of health and
safety are improved, thereby providing greater protection
to persons at work and to the general public.

63.2 Legislation
Health and safety legislation is in four separate categories
as follows.

63.2.1 Acts of parliament

The Factories Act 1961 and the Health and Safety at
Work, etc. Act 1974 are the result of Bills, which, after
being debated in Parliament, have received the Royal
Assent, and now from part of criminal law.

63.2.2 Regulations

The 1974 Act is all encompassing. It lays down only gen-
eral duties and grants the appropriate minister the power
to make detailed Regulations to cover relevant aspects
referred to in general legislation. That is, the Act, being
an up-to-date form of legislative control, differs from that
found in previous formats of the Factories Act 1961.

The Control of Substances Hazardous to Health Reg-
ulations 1988 (COSHH), the Noise at Work Regulations
1989, the Pressure Systems and Transportable Gas Con-
tainers Regulations 1989 and the Electricity at Work Reg-
ulations 1989 are examples of the Regulations being intro-
duced. For example, the Electricity at Work Regulations
which came into effect from 1 April 1990 revoke the
Electricity Regulations 1908 and the Electricity (Facto-
ries Act) Special Regulations 1944. Within the structure
of Regulations, provisions may be granted for exemptions
from their requirements or application in some form, with
respect to speciﬁc premises, processes or industries.

63.2.3 Codes of practice

Codes of Practice, where appropriate, will be issued to
supplement Regulations. These Codes, although having a
special legal status, are not statutory requirements but may
be used in criminal proceedings as evidence that statutory
requirements have been contravened. Prior to replacing
or amending existing Codes of Practice discussions are
normally held with interested parties before the Health
and Safety Commission approves them for use under the

Administration of the Health and Safety at Work Act 63/1133

Health and Safety at Work, etc. Act 1974. In some cases,
these discussions could be supported by comments from
interested bodies on a previously issued draft Code of
Practice.

63.2.4 Guidance notes

Guidance notes relevant to sound health and safety prac-
tices are published from time to time by the Health and
Safety Executive. They have no legal status or signiﬁ-
cance such as found in Codes of Practice. However, as
their content is normally based on a wealth of practical
experience, it would be expected by the enforcing author-
ities that employers would follow the advice contained in
them.

63.3 Administration of the Health and
Safety at Work Act
The bodies set up to ensure the satisfactory implementa-
tion and operation of the Health and Safety at Work, etc.
Act 1974 (and the Employment Medical Advisory Service
Act 1972) under Section 10 of the Act are the Health and
Safety Commission and the Health and Safety Executive.

63.3.1 The Health and Safety Commission

This consists of a chairman appointed by the Secretary
of State for Employment and a committee of not less
than six and not more than nine members. The composi-
tion of the Commission is drawn from different groups:
three members may be from employers’ organizations and
three from employees’ organizations. The three remaining
vacancies may be ﬁlled from such organizations as local
authorities and professional bodies, as the Secretary of
State considers appropriate.

63.3.2 The Health and Safety Executive

Whereas the Health and Safety Commission is responsible
for the development of policies in the health and safety
ﬁeld, the Health and Safety Executive, being a separate
statutory body appointed by the Commission, will work
in accordance with directions and guidance given by the
Commission. The Executive will provide advice on health
and safety to both sides of industry and will enforce legal
requirements.

63.3.3 Local authorities

Under the Commission’s guidance, these will enforce leg-
islation in certain areas of employment. In general, theirs
will not be industrial activities.

63.3.4 Fire authorities

The Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 gives the rele-
vant ﬁre authority the power to designate a place of work
as premises requiring a ﬁre certiﬁcate. This certiﬁcate will
indicate the measures to be taken with respect to means of
escape in the event of a ﬁre when the structural design of

63/1134 Health and Safety in the UK

the premises is taken into consideration. The ﬁre authority
in most areas has the responsibility for enforcing the pro-
visions of the Act, but the Health and Safety Executive
are responsible for issuing ﬁre certiﬁcates in certain clas-
siﬁed premises (e.g. those used for storage, manufacture
and use of highly ﬂammable liquid).

63.4 General duties
Employers and others who now have duties under the
1974 Act will have had some form of responsibilities
under previous legislation (e.g. the Factories Act 1961)
to ensure the health and safety and welfare of people at
work. However, a number of employers will be subject to
such legislation for the ﬁrst time.

Much of the earlier legislation has been retained,
although as the respective regulations are amended they
are presented within the remit of the 1974 Act, such as the
Electricity at Work Regulations 1989, which revoked the
Electricity Regulations 1908 and the Electricity (Facto-
ries Act) Special Regulations 1944. The earlier legislation,
where it remains, has been brought under the same method
of enforcement as those under the Act, and is applied
universally.

63.4.1 Duties of employers

It is the duty of employers, as far as is reasonably prac-
ticable, to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of
the people who work for them and others who may be
affected. This applies in particular to the provision and
maintenance of safe plant and equipment and methods
of work, and covers all plant, equipment and substances
used. Speciﬁc areas that require attention include:

1. Is the plant and equipment designed, installed and oper-

ated to the accepted standards?

2. Are there safe systems of work implemented during the
operation and maintenance of the plant and equipment?
(This may necessitate a permit to work to be issued by
an authorized competent person.)

3. Is the work environment monitored, as required under
the COSHH Regulations, to ensure that there is no
hazard from, for example, toxic contaminants?

4. Has the monitoring of any control measure been imple-

mented?

5. Is there a program in place whereby all equipment
and appliances found necessary to ensure the safety
and health of those likely to be affected are regularly
inspected?

6. Have the risks to health from the use, storage, handling
or transport of articles or substances been kept to the
minimum? (Expert advice should be sought in this area
if there is no sufﬁcient in-house knowledge.)

63.4.2 Safety policies: organization and
arrangements

It is a statutory requirement that an employer with ﬁve or
more employees prepares a written statement of the com-
pany’s general policy, organization and arrangements for

health and safety at work. This policy statement should
be revised at regular intervals and, where appropriate,
amended.

63.4.3 Safety training and information

Employers have a duty under the 1974 Act to provide, as
necessary, training and information to ensure that there
is no risk to the health and safety of their employees. It
may be found necessary to provide operators and mainte-
nance employees with speciﬁc training to carry out certain
processes or work tasks.

63.4.4 Duties to others

Employers must, as far as is reasonably practicable, have
regard for the health and safety of contractors’ employees
or the self-employed who may be affected by the com-
pany’s operations and for the health and safety of the
general public. This covers, for example, the emission of
noxious or offensive gases and dust into the atmosphere,
or danger from plant and equipment to which the public or
those not directly employed by the company have access.

63.4.5 Responsibilities of the self-employed

The self-employed have a similar duty to that of employ-
ers to ensure that there is no risk or danger to the health
and safety of themselves or any other persons.

63.4.6 Duties of manufacturers and suppliers

Section 6 of the Act has been amended by the Consumer
Protection Act 1987 and now imposes speciﬁc duties on
manufacturers, importers, designers and suppliers to en-
sure that articles and substance supplied for use at work
are safe and without risk to health.

To assist manufactures and suppliers attain the required
level of health and safety, the Health and Safety Commis-
sion have commenced approving standards laid down by
such bodies as the British Standards Institution.

63.4.7 Duties of employees

The Act also places a responsibility on the employees
in that they must take reasonable care to avoid injury
to themselves or to others by their work activities, and
cooperate with their employer and others in meeting all
statutory requirements. The Act also requires that employ-
ees do not interfere with or misuse anything designed to
protect their health, safety or welfare.

63.4.8 Enforcement

On ﬁnding that there has been a contravention of either an
existing Act or Regulation, or of a provision of the Health
and Safety at Work, etc. Act 1974, an inspector can:

1. Issue a prohibition notice, if there is a risk of serious
personal injury, to stop the work or process giving
rise to this risk until remedial action speciﬁed by the
inspector in the notice has been undertaken. This notice

can be served on the person carrying out the activity
or in control of it at the time the notice is served.

2. Issue an improvement notice if there is a legal con-
travention of any statutory legislation relevant to the
activity in that the activity cannot be continued until
the remedial action speciﬁed in the notice is imple-
mented. This notice can be served on the person who
is deemed to be contravening the legal provision or
who is responsible for the activity, whether they are
an employer, employee or a supplier of equipment or
materials.

3. Prosecute any person who may be contravening a rel-
evant statutory provision instead of (or in addition to)
serving a notice.

63.5 Safety policy
The safety policy for the company, although common
in most parts with the safety policy for every company,
may require being prepared in detail. This would natu-
rally cover any process, hazardous product or procedure
speciﬁc to the organization. In preparing the policy, it is
essential to ensure that parts referred to in Section 2(3) of
the 1974 Act are covered, i.e.:

1. The general policy statement;
2. The organization and arrangements for carrying out the

policy.

In large companies, these two aspects may be dealt with
separately. In larger organizations, it can be found that it
is of greater beneﬁt if the policy document is produced in
two separate sections. These would include:

1. A concise statement of the company’s general policy,
organization and arrangements in a single document.
It follows that this document can then be issued indi-
vidually to all members of staff and contractors who
work on the premises.

2. A more detailed document in the form of a health and
safety manual. This manual would include the com-
pany’s policy statement, company rules, safe working
procedures, etc., and would normally be located in a
nominated ofﬁce. It is necessary in using this method
that all staff are made aware of its contents and its
location.

63.5.1 Policy statement

The company’s general policy statement should be a dec-
laration of the employer’s intent to provide a safe and
healthy workplace for all employees and should include
the request that the employees provide the necessary sup-
port towards achieving the company’s aims.

63.5.2 Levels of responsibility

The policy statement should give the name, designation
and ofﬁce location of the nominated senior member of
the company designated as the responsible person within
the organization for ensuring that the company’s policy

Safety policy 63/1135

statement is complied with. This nominated person should
have high position within the company (e.g. director,
senior manager, company secretary).

While the overall policy responsibility for health and
safety rests with senior managers, all employees within
the organization, irrespective of their duties, have some
degree of responsibility for carrying out the policy. Where
appropriate, nominated persons with speciﬁc responsibil-
ities for health and safety should be named with a sum-
mary of their responsibilities deﬁned. It follows that there
should be a procedure established whereby deputies are
available during the nominated person’s absences.

Where specialist knowledge is required, the relevant
aspects should be clearly established and the respective
persons made aware of such. This expertise can be obtai-
ned, for example, from the company’s safety ofﬁcer,
chemist, etc. Finally, the policy statement should make
clear the level of responsibility of every employee.

63.5.3 Safety representatives and joint safety
committees

Where health and safety consultation is in place (e.g. joint
safety committees) the structure with regards to members’
representation should be described.

63.5.4 Training and supervision

The policy statement should indicate how the company
proposes to carry out training with respect to health and
safety. Equally important is the responsibility placed on
managers, supervisors, etc. to ensure that the individual
who has been given the work task has the knowledge to
carry it out without risk to themselves or others. This task
may be operating a piece of equipment on which all safety
measures must be in order or carrying out a maintenance
task where there is an acknowledged hazard. It is there-
fore equally important that managers and supervisors are
suitably trained in both the technical and safety aspects
of the work.

63.5.5 Hazard details

Many accidents occur because the operator or mainte-
nance person does not understand the hazards involved
or has not been instructed on the precautions to be taken.
The policy document should identify the main hazards
within the company with advice on which rules must be
obeyed while carrying out a hazardous task. General rules
should also be included to cover items such as untidy work
areas, replacement of guards, the use of protective cloth-
ing/equipment where appropriate, safe working practices
in handling goods and materials, etc. It is essential that
on the introduction of new products, processes, operations
or plant and equipment that any hazards associated with
these are brought to the attention of all concerned.

63.5.6 Reporting accidents

Procedures must be prepared to ensure that the report-
ing of accidents meets the requirements as set out in

63/1136 Health and Safety in the UK

the Reporting of Injuries as prescribed in the Diseases
and Dangerous Occurrences Regulations 1985. Accidents
should also be recorded in the Accident Book (Form BI
510). The procedure adopted should include a measure of
recording and reporting of accidents, which should then
form the basis of discussion by management and/or joint
safety committees, with a view to identifying any hazard
that gives rise for concern and introducing the appropriate
corrective action where necessary. The number of acci-
dents could be taken as a measure of how the organization
is performing overall with respect to the health and safety
of its workforce and others.

63.5.7 Policy review

The policy document should be reviewed at regular inter-
vals to ensure that any changes from the introduction of
new legislation (i.e. regulations, codes of practice, infor-
mation concerning safe working procedures) are imple-
mented.

63.6 Information
Health and safety information can be obtained from the
following Health and Safety Executive ofﬁces:

Public enquiry points: HSE library and information
services

St Hugh’s House
Stanley Precinct
Trinity Road
Bootle
Merseyside L20 3QY
Tel. 0151 951 4381

Broad Lane
Shefﬁeld S3 7HQ
Tel. 0870 1545500

Baynards House
1 Chepstow Place
Westbourne Grove
London W2 4TF
Tel. 020 7221 0870

Inquiries with respect to health and safety at the work-
place should be directed to the local area ofﬁce of the HSE
or the local authority’s Environmental Health Department.
The name of the authority responsible for the health and
safety in the organization should be displayed prominently
within the premises on the poster Health and Safety Law,
What You Should Know. This poster gives a brief guide to
health and safety law and speciﬁc details on key points
must be obtained from the relevant legislative documents.

63.7 HSE inspectorates
HSE inspectors systematically visit and review a wide
range of work activities, giving expert advice and guid-
ance where necessary. The Inspectorates, within the HSE,

who monitor or enforce standards and provide advice in
speciﬁc sectors of industry or employment, are as follows:

1. HM Factory Inspectorate: Manufacturing and heavy
industrial premises and processes, as well as construc-
tion activities, local authority undertakings, hospitals,
schools, universities and fairgrounds;

2. HM Agriculture Inspectorate: Farming, horticulture

and forestry;

3. HM Explosives Inspectorate: The manufacture, trans-

port, handling and security of explosives;

4. HM Mines and Quarries Inspectorate: All mines, quar-

ries and landﬁll sites;

5. HM Nuclear Installations Inspectorate: On HSE’s
behalf licenses nuclear installations ranging from nu-
clear power stations and chemical works to research
reactors.

63.8 The Employment Medical Advisory
Service (EMAS)
This is an organization of doctors and nurses based in area
ofﬁces and form the medical arm of the HSE. The EMAS
provides advice, at the request of the employer, employee,
self-employed, trade union representative or medical prac-
titioner, on the effects of work on health.

63.9 HSE area ofﬁces
The Health and Safety Executive operate from area ofﬁces
as follows.
South-West
Inter City House
Mitchell Lane
Victoria Street
Bristol BS1 6AN
Tel. 0272 290681
(Avon, Cornwall, Devon, Gloucestershire, Somerset, Isles
of Scilly)
South
Priestly House
Priestly Road
Basingstoke RG24 9NW
Tel. 0256 473181
(Berkshire, Dorset, Hampshire, Isle of Wight, Wiltshire)
South-East
3 East Grinstead House
London Road
East Grindstead
West Sussex RH19 1RR
Tel. 0342 26922
(Kent, Surrey, East Sussex, West Sussex)
London North
Maritime House
1 Linton Road
Barking
Essex IG11 8HF
Tel. 081-594 5522
(Barking and Dagenham, Barnet, Brent Camden, Ealing,
Hackney, Haringey, Harrow, Havering,
Islington,
Newham, Redbridge, Tower Hamlets, Waltham Forest)

London South
1 Long Lane
London SE1 4PG
Tel. 071-407 8911
(Bexley, Bromley, City on London, Croydon, Greenwich,
Hammersmith and Fulham, Hillingdon, Hounslow, Kens-
ington and Chelsea, Kingston, Lambeth, Lewisham, Mer-
ton, Richmond, Southwark, Sutton, Wandsworth, West-
minster)
East Anglia
39 Baddow Road
Chelmsford
Essex CM2 0H1
Tel. 0245 284661
(Essex)
Northern Home Counties
14 Cardiff Road
Luton
Beds LU1 1PP
Tel. 0582 34121
(Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Cambridgeshire, Hert-
fordshire)
East Midlands
Belgrave House
1 Greyfriars
Northampton NN1 2BS
Tel. 0604 21233
(Leicestershire, Northamptonshire, Oxfordshire, Warwick-
shire)
West Midlands
McLaren Building
2 Masshouse Circus
Queensway
Birmingham B4 7NP
Tel. 021 200 2299
(West Midlands)
Wales
Brunel House
2 Fitzalan Road
Cardiff CF2 1SH
Tel. 0222 497777
(Clywd, Dyfed, Gwent, Gwynedd, Mid-Glamorgan,
Powys, South Glamorgan, West Glamorgan)
Marches
The Marches House
Midway
Newcastle-under-Lyme
Staffs ST5 1DT
Tel. 0782 717181
(Hereford and Worcester, Shropshire, Newcastle-under-
Lyme, Staffordshire)
North Midlands
Birbeck House
Trinity Square
Nottingham HB1 4AU
Tel. 0602 470712
(Derbyshire, Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire)
South Yorkshire
Sovereign House
40 Silver Street
Shefﬁeld S1 2ES

Health and safety procedures 63/1137

Tel. 0742 739081
(Humberside, South Yorkshire)
West and North Yorkshire
8 St Pauls Street
Leeds LS1 2LE
Tel. 0532 446191
(North Yorkshire, West Yorkshire)
Greater Manchester
Quay House
Quay Street
Manchester M3 3JB
Tel. 061 831 7111
(Greater Manchester)
Merseyside
The Triad
Stanley Road
Bootle L20 3PG
Tel. 051 922 7211
(Cheshire, Merseyside)
North-West
Victoria House
Ormskirk Road
Preston PR1 1HH
Tel. 0772 59321
(Cumbria, Lancashire)
North-East
Arden House
Regent Centre
Regent Farm Road
Gosforth
Newcastle-upon-Tyne NE3 3JN
Tel. 091 284 8448
(Cleveland, Durham, Northumberland, Tyne and Wear)
Scotland East
Belford House
59 Belford Road
Edinburgh EH4 3UE
Tel. 031 225 1313
(Borders, Central, Fife, Grampian, Highland, Lothian,
Tayside, and the island area of Orkney and Shetland)
Scotland West
314 St Vincent Street
Glasgow G3 8XG
Tel. 041 204 2646
(Dumfries and Galloway, Strathclyde, and the Western
Isles)

63.10 Health and safety procedures
Note that the following procedures only provide a frame-
work in which speciﬁc health and safety procedures for
the individual works or premises may be prepared. A
senior member of the company or the person nominated
as responsible for health and safety in the organization
should write the foreword to a company’s procedure. To
emphasize its importance it should also include a part of
the company’s health and safety statement. It should be
followed by an instruction such as ‘You are required to
read the following procedures carefully and comply with
the sections relevant to your workplace’.

63/1138 Health and Safety in the UK

63.11 Fire and ﬁrst-aid instructions
63.11.1 Fire

Fire bells are installed in works or premises:

1. To alert all staff in the event of a ﬁre alarm;
2. To order complete evacuation of the works or premises
(in a number of workplaces such evacuation may not
be necessary).

On hearing the alarm all personnel should leave the build-
ing by the nearest safe ﬁre exit. They should not use the
lifts or re-enter the building until given permission by the
person controlling the incident. Staff should be aware of
all ﬁre-precaution notices and procedures (including the
ﬁre brigade’s telephone number), ﬁre call points, extin-
guishers, ﬁre exits, escape routes and assembly points.

63.11.2 First-aid/medical services

Staff should make themselves familiar with the ﬁrst-aid
procedures in the event of an accident and know the loca-
tion of the nearest ﬁrst aid ofﬁcers and the ﬁrst-aid room
(if there is one on the premises). They should also be
aware of all ﬁrst-aid/medical notices and procedures and
the telephone number to call for assistance during and
outside normal hours. (These are likely to differ unless
the works or premises operate 24 hours a day.)

63.12 Good housekeeping
Good housekeeping can play a major part in maintaining
a safe and environmentally sound place of work. Trip-
ping over material not tidied away causes many accidents.
Another source of potential injury is in the lack of secure
storage of cleaning equipment, tools, etc.

Liquids allowed to overﬂow and those not adequately
cleaned off the ﬂoor present potential hazards by persons
slipping.

General hints on keeping the workplace clean are:

1. Use waste bins. Special containers may be required for

speciﬁc hazardous waste material.

2. Return everything to its correct place.
3. Always tidy up after completing the task.
4. Keep passageways and footpaths clear at all times.
5. Store materials and equipment in a safe manner.
6. Store hazardous material in its correct location.
7. Encourage everyone to develop clean habits.

63.13 Protective clothing and equipment

1. Eye protection should comply with the Protection of
Eyes Regulations 1974 and relevant British Standard
(e.g. BS 2092, BS 1542, BS 679).

2. Safety helmets should comply with the relevant British
Standards (e.g. BS 5240, BS 4033). If engaged in con-
struction, the Construction (Head Protection) Regula-
tions 1989 must be applied.

3. The Noise at Work Regulations 1989 has set action

levels which must be complied with:
(a) Where

employees

are

exposed to between
85 dB(A) and 90 dB(A) they are entitled to ask
for ear protectors and the employer must provide
them. There is no obligation on the employer to
ensure that protectors are used or on the employee
to use them.

(b) At or above 90 dB(A) and the peak action level of
200 Pa or 140 dB re 20 µPa the employer must pro-
vide suitable ear protectors and enforce their use,
and employees are under an obligation to use them.
Hearing protectors should comply with BS 6344,
with sound-attenuation measurement to BS 5108.
(c) Where exposure is at or above 90 dB(A) the em-
ployer is required to reduce exposure to noise as
far as is reasonably practicable by means other than
ear protectors. As with other regulations, it is now
a duty of the employer to assess the noise expo-
sure and advise the employee as appropriate. In
a noisy environment, the employer may have to
seek expertise from a competent person to carry
out the necessary assessments and monitoring of
the premises.

4. Safety footwear must be worn where applicable (mov-
ing heavy objects, working with hazardous materials
(e.g. chemicals), working in wet conditions). Footwear
should comply with the following standards as appro-
priate: BS 1870, BS 4972, BS 5131, BS 5145,
BS 5451, BS 5462, BS 6159.

5. Safety belts

should comply with BS 1397 and

BS 6868.

6. Protective clothing (including gloves) must be used
where applicable (e.g. normal duties; welding/cutting
hot work; water treatment; application/use of chemi-
cals; during servicing of batteries; descaling/chemical
cleaning). Clothing should comply with BS 1542,
BS 5426, BS 2653, BS 4171, BS 6408 and BS 4724
and gloves with BS 1651, BS 697 and BS 6526.

7. Respirators should comply with BS 2091, BS 4555,
BS 4558, BS 4771 and BS 4275. (Refer
to Form
F2486, published by HSE for suppliers of respirators
suitable for use against aerosols containing Legionella.)

When in doubt as to which standard of protection is nec-
essary, consult the manufactures, suppliers, HSE, EMAS,
the local authority or the Environmental Health Ofﬁcer.

63.14 Safe working areas
It is essential when carrying out any operation or task that
cannot be undertaken standing on a ﬂoor that an appropri-
ate working platform is used. This can take many forms,
but the methods that should be used fall within the follow-
ing types: stepladders; trestles with suitable boards; towers
(mobile); proprietary scaffolding or general-access scaf-
folding. Such access equipment should be to the relevant
British Standard, e.g.

Stepladders: BS 1129, BS 2037;
Trestles: BS 1129, BS 2037, BS 1139;

Scaffolds; BS 1139, DD72, CP 5973, BS 2482,
BS 6037, BS 5974, BS 6289.

The use of access equipment should meet the accept-
able standards as laid down in the Construction (Working
Places) Regulations 1966.

Items that should be checked on access equipment be-

fore use include:

1. General condition – is there any damaged section or

parts?

2. Is it the correct access equipment to carry out the task
safely? For example, is a ladder adequate or should a
tower be used?

3. Is it positioned correctly (e.g. ladders at the correct

ratio of 4 : 1; scaffold on a sound footing)?

4. Is the ladder or scaffold secured safely?
5. What is the condition of access equipment after incle-

ment weather?

6. Is there any risk to its use in a speciﬁc area (e.g. close

to overhead power lines)?

7. Does it have handrails and toeboards ﬁtted? (Regula-
tions insist on these when working height is at 2 meters
or more. This should not preclude taking the same mea-
sures at lower heights.)

8. Does it provide a safe working area? If in doubt, seek
advice, as there are many injuries each year caused by
falls or by material dropping from heights. The wearing
of safety helmets is a secondary protection and should
not be allowed to encourage carelessness.

63.15 Materials handling
Whenever possible, lifting of excessive weights should be
by mechanical means and should only be done manually
if there is no practicable method of obtaining access for
mechanical equipment. It follows that material must only
be moved manually if it is within the capability of the
persons involved and that there is no risk of injury.

63.15.1 Manual lifting

Correct manual lifting and handling of material prevents
strains and injury and also reduces the effort required.
Persistently incorrect lifting and handling may lead to
the person suffering from permanent back strain or other
health problems. Points to consider when preparing to lift
material are:

1. Can you lift it yourself?
2. Does it have sharp corners or edges?
3. Is there any obstruction where you have to walk or

place the material?

When lifting the material:

1. Stand with your feet apart, with one foot in the direc-

tion you intend to move.

2. Grip the object with the palms of your hands.
3. Keep a straight back and, bending slightly at the knees,

use your thigh muscles to lift.

4. With elbows in and arms close to the body, slowly rise.

Conﬁned spaces 63/1139

5. Keeping your chin in and raising your head, lift the
object to the height required, adjusting the position of
your feet to ensure that you maintain your balance.

6. Take care when a hazardous substance (e.g. acid) is

lifted.

7. Always wear the correct protective clothing.
8. Get help with heavy loads.

63.15.2 Mechanical lifting

In addition to the general rules of the Health and Safety at
Work, etc. Act 1974 there are speciﬁc requirements under
the following legislation with respect to chains, ropes and
lifting tackle:

Factories Act 1961
The Construction (Lifting Operations) Regulations 1961
The Docks Regulations 1934
The Shipbuilding and Ship-Repairing Regulations 1960

Depending on the location of the workplace, the regula-
tions will indicate the frequency of tests and examination
of the equipment.

63.16 Portable tools and equipment

1. Portable electrical hand tools and equipment shall be
properly grounded and wound to operate on 110V a.c.
center tapped to earth supply, and shall only be con-
nected to the system by permanent joints or proper
connections.

2. Portable lighting, when used in wet conditions or con-
ﬁned spaces, should operate at no more than 25V a.c.
single phase, and must be ﬁtted with the correct guard.
3. Persons operating abrasive wheels (e.g. bench grinders,
machine grinders, disc grinders) should be trained in
their use. To dress or mount (change) a wheel or a
disc, the operative must have attended a training course
in compliance with the Abrasive Wheels Regulations
1970. Attendees at such course must be recorded in
the company register (F2346) for the purpose of the
Abrasive Wheels Regulations 1970.

4. It follows that with any tool or equipment that is poten-
tially dangerous or operators who may suffer injury
from its use must be protected. To meet this require-
ment, training must be provided.

63.17 Conﬁned spaces
Some plant and equipment are immediately classiﬁed as
conﬁned spaces, but extreme caution is necessary in the
assessment of other areas. Section 2 of the Health and
Safety at Work, etc. Act 1974 requires employers to ensure
the health and safety at work of their employees; this duty
is so far as is reasonably practicable. Therefore, as work
in conﬁned spaces is potentially dangerous this Section of
the Act clearly requires employers to ensure that there is
no risk to their employees when working in such an area.
Where work is to be carried out in a conﬁned space
within a factory, Section 30 of the Factories Act 1961
lays down speciﬁc requirements when work is performed

63/1140 Health and Safety in the UK

on or in a number of items of plant and equipment. No
person must enter or be in a conﬁned space unless he or
she has been authorized to do so, and all the appropriate
safety precautions have been strictly adhered to prior to
entry and while within it.

Points that must be checked prior to the issue of the
appropriate permit to work should include the following:

danger. Where appropriate, injury, unless he or she pos-
sesses such knowledge or experience, or is under such
degree of supervision as may be appropriate having regard
to the nature of the work.

Additional safety precautions

1. Are there fumes present?
2. Is there an adequate supply of maintainable oxygen?
3. Will breathing apparatus be required? Has the oper-
ative had training in its use and is there adequate
support?

4. Is there any hazardous residue in the ‘space’?
5. Has the space been tested for being clean and gas free?
6. Is there a supporting person standing by in the event

of an emergency?

7. Is there a safety harness and rope available for use
when the work is to be carried out? The operative
entering the space will wear a harness while the oper-
ative standing by the entrance will retain the free end
of the rope attached to the safety harness.

63.18 Electricity
The Electricity at Work Regulations 1989 revoke, among
others, the Electricity Regulations 1908 and the Electric-
ity (Factories Act) Special Regulations 1944, which have
been the most important electricity regulations for many
years. These regulations, effective from 1 April 1990,
place a responsibility on both employer and employee
to comply as far as it is reasonable and practicable within
their control. Major changes from the previous regulations
are as follows.

Regulation 13: Precautions for work on equipment
made dead

In order to prevent danger while work is carried out on
or near electrical equipment which has been made dead,
adequate precautions shall be taken to prevent it from
becoming electrically charged during that work if danger
may arise thereby.

Regulation 14: Work on or near live conductors

No person shall be engaged in any work activity on or
near any live conductor (other than one suitably covered
with insulating material) so that danger may arise unless:

1. It is unreasonable in all circumstances for it to be live;
2. It is reasonable in all circumstances for the person to

be at work on or near it while it is live; and

3. Suitable precautions (including, where necessary, the
provision of suitable protective equipment) are taken
to prevent injury.

Regulation 16: Persons to be competent to prevent
danger and injury

No person shall be engaged in any work activity where
technical knowledge or experience is necessary to prevent

1. You must not work on or interfere with any electrical
equipment unless you have been authorized to do so.
2. Do not use electrical equipment or switch rooms as a

storage area.

3. Assume that all electrical distribution circuits are live.
4. Obtain the necessary authority/permit to work before

commencing any work on electrical systems.

5. Do not improvize: electricity can kill.

63.19 Plant and equipment
63.19.1 Compressed air

Compressed air can be dangerous if used incorrectly:

1. Never use compressed air for cleaning. The pressure
from nozzles may blow particles of dirt and dust into
the eyes, ears or skin of the person using the nozzle
for cleaning or of others in the vicinity.

2. Do not dust yourself down with the compressed air

3. Indulging in horseplay with compressed air can have

nozzle.

disastrous results.

Persons employed to use compressed air in carrying out
a speciﬁc work task must be correctly equipped to pre-
vent injury. The minimum requirement is to wear eye
protectors, which conform to BS 2092.

63.19.2 Steam boilers

Section 38 of the Factories Act 1961 deﬁnes a steam
boiler as a ‘any closed vessel in which for any purpose
steam is generated under pressure greater than atmospheric
pressure’. Economizers used to heat water being fed to
such a vessel and superheater for heating steam are also
included. Every boiler must be ﬁtted with the recom-
mended safety measures (e.g. safety valve, stop valve,
water gauge, low-water alarms, pressure gages, etc.).

Prior to being brought into use in a factory, boilers
must have been thoroughly examined (when cold) by a
competent person in accordance with the Examination of
Steam Boilers Regulations 1964. Following subsequent
examination at the recommended frequency, the results
on the prescribed forms must be attached to the General
Register (F31) within 28 days.

Entry into boilers are controlled by Section 34 of the
Factories Act 1961, which states that no person shall enter
or be in any steam boiler which is one of a range of two
or more boilers unless:

1. All inlets through which steam or hot water might oth-
erwise enter the boiler from any part of the range are
disconnected from that part;

2. All valves or taps controlling the entry of steam or
hot water are closed and securely locked. Where the
boiler has a blow-off pipe in common with one or
more other boilers or delivering into a common blow-
off vessel or sump, the blow-off valve or tap on each
boiler is so constructed that it can only be opened by
a key which cannot be removed until the valve or tap
is closed. There can be only one key in use for that set
of blow-off valves or taps.

63.19.3 Pressure systems

The Pressure Systems and Transportable Gas Regulations
1989, effective from 1 July 1990 in parts, will be fully
effective from 1 July 1994. Aspects that became effective
from 1 July 1990 are:

1. The supply of information for new plant;
2. The proper installation of plant; and
3. The establishment of safe operating limits on existing

plants.

The Regulations relating to gas cylinders apply to sup-
pliers, importers, ﬁllers and owners of cylinders from 1
January 1991 if:

1. The plant contains a compressed gas (such as com-
pressed air or liqueﬁed gas) at a pressure greater than
0.5 bar (about 7 psi) above atmospheric;

2. If steam systems with a pressure vessel are used at

work, irrespective of the pressure;

3. Employees and/or the self-employed use the plant at
work. For full details of the requirements under these
Regulations reference should be made to the following:
The Pressure Systems and Transportable Gas Contain-
ers Regulations 1981
Approved Code of Practice, Safety of pressure systems
Approved Code of Practice, Safety of transportable gas
containers
HS(R) 30, A Guide to the Pressure Systems and Trans-
portable Gas
Containers Regulations 1989
The Approved Codes of Practice list relevant HSE
Guidance Notes.

63.19.4 Machinery

The requirement for safety precautions when operating or
working on all types of machinery cannot be overstressed,
in that the likelihood of an accident occurring on moving
machinery is invariably high. It is essential that all these
who work on such machines are adequately trained as to
the operation and the safeguards ﬁtted. Regulations that
must be complied with include:

Health and Safety at Work, etc. Act 1974, Sections 2
and 33
Factories Act 1961, Section 14
Ofﬁces, Shops and Railway Premises Act 1963,
Section 17

Other information can be found in BS 5304, Code of Prac-
tice for safety of machinery.

Asbestos 63/1141

In premises in which the Factories Act 1961 apply,
Section 15 of the Act acknowledges that certain danger-
ous parts of machinery can only be adjusted or lubricated
while in motion. Employees carrying out this work must
be properly trained and their employers must specify their
tasks in writing.

Details of the appointed persons must be entered in
Register F31. Also, such persons must be instructed in the
requirements of the Operations at Unfenced Machinery
Regulations 1938 and issued with the precautionary leaﬂet
F2487. General precautions to observe include:

1. Machines must not be used unless properly guarded (or
operatives are trained). All damaged guards/security
measures must be reported.

2. Never reach over operating machinery or wear loose

clothing when working at or on machinery.

3. Never start up a machine until you are certain that

doing so can injure no one.

4. Keep the ﬂoor area around the machine clean.
5. Do not clean the machine when it is in operation.
6. Wear appropriate protective clothing.

63.20 Safety signs and pipeline
identiﬁcation
63.20.1 Safety signs

The Safety Signs Regulations 1980 apply to signs that
give a health and safety message to people at work by
using certain shapes, colours and pictorial symbols. There
are four basic types of safety signs which the Regulations
require to conform to BS 5378: 1980, Safety signs and
colours:

1. Solid blue circle: mandatory (‘You must do’);
2. Red circle with a red band across the diameter: prohi-

4. Solid green square: information (‘Safe conditions’).

Graphic symbols may be placed in the above shapes to
give them more meaning and there may also be text afﬁxed
to them.

63.20.2 Pipeline identiﬁcation

Pipelines should be marked clearly as to the contents.
This can be achieved by marking them in accordance
with BS 1710, System (contents) and BS 4800, Colours
(indicating contents).

63.21 Asbestos
In the 1987 Regulations, asbestos is deﬁned as any of
the following minerals; crocidolite, amosite, chrysotile,
ﬁbrous anthophyllite, ﬁbrous actinolite, ﬁbrous tremolite
and any mixture containing any of these. Before carrying
out work on any substance suspected of being asbestos, a
competent person must be called to advise on its possible

3. Yellow triangle with black border: caution (‘Warning

bition (‘Do not do’);

of danger’);

63/1142 Health and Safety in the UK

composition. Such a person will advise on the measures
that must be taken to avoid any hazard to the occupants
or others likely to be affected. Companies with asbestos
on their premises should hold the appropriate documents.
Current Regulations include:

and its alloys, to compounds of lead, which will include
both organic and inorganic compounds, and to lead as
a constituent of any substance or material) when lead is
in a form in which it is liable to be inhaled, ingested or
otherwise absorbed by persons. Relevant publications are:

Asbestos (Licensing) Regulations 1983
Asbestos (Prohibitions) Regulations (amended) 1985
Control of Asbestos at Work Regulations 1987

63.22 COSHH
The Control of Substances Hazardous to Health (COSHH)
Regulations 1989 covers virtually all substances hazardous
to health. Only asbestos, lead, materials producing ion-
izing radiation and substances below ground in mines
(which all have their own legislation) are excluded. The
Regulations set out measures that employers must imple-
ment. Failure to comply with COSHH, in addition to
exposing employees and others to risk, constitutes an off-
ence and is subject to penalties under the Health and
Safety at Work Act, etc. 1974.

Substances that are hazardous to health include:

1. Those labeled as dangerous (i.e. very toxic,

toxic,

harmful, irritant or corrosive);

2. Agricultural pesticides and other chemicals used in

farming;

3. Those with occupational exposure limits;
4. Harmful microorganisms;
5. Substantial quantities of dust;
6. Any material, mixture or compound used at work, or
arising from work activities, which can harm people’s
health.

In works, premises, factories, etc. there will be substances
in use that come within the control of COSHH. Seek
advice!

The following publications give detailed information on

COSHH and its requirements:

1. Control of Substances Hazardous to Health Regula-
tions 1988, Approved Code of Practice Control of sub-
stances hazardous to health and Approved Code of
Practice Control of carcinogenic substances;

2. Occupational Exposure Limits: Guidance Note EH40

(revised and issued yearly);

3. Control of Substances Hazardous to Health Regula-
tions 1988 and Approved Code of Practice Control of
substances hazardous to health in fumigation opera-
tions;

4. Approved Code of Practice Control of vinyl chloride

at work;

5. COSHH Assessments (a step-by-step guide to assess-

ment and the skills needed for it);

6. Also available are free leaﬂets from the HSE.

63.23 Lead
The Control of Lead at Work Regulations 1980 apply to
work which exposes persons (both employees and others)
to lead as deﬁned in Regulation 2(1) (i.e. to the metal

1. Approved Code of Practice Control of lead at work;
2. Guidance Notes;

EH 28 Control of lead: air sampling techniques and
strategies
EH 29 Control of lead: outside workers
EH 30 Control of lead: pottery and related industries;

3. Also available are free leaﬂets from the HSE.

63.24 Other information
Numerous leaﬂets can be obtained from the local ofﬁces
of the Health and Safety Executive or HSE Information
Points. Remember, if you have any doubts about the health
and safety risks involved with respect to any substance
you may consider using, or any work you are planning to
undertake, seek advice. This information may be obtained
from your company safety ofﬁcer, consultants, manufac-
turer/supplier or equipment/material/substance, HSE or
local Environmental Health Ofﬁcer. Use their expertise
and knowledge. Do not be a statistic.

63.25 Assessment of potential hazards
63.25.1 Purpose

An assessment of potential hazards (APH) shall be carried
out prior to work tasks being issued to determine:

1. Physical hazards;
2. Access/exit;
3. Potentially unsafe practices likely to be implemented

in carrying out the work;
4. Safe working procedures;
5. Whether a permit to work is required.

63.25.2 Working practices

An assessment of each element of the program of work
is carried out using the Assessment of Potential Hazards
Form APH1 (see below), which is to be completed by the
person responsible for the task to be carried out. This may
include ‘hot’ work; cutting/grinding; work on electrical
systems; working alone; use of hazardous materials (e.g.
chemicals, solvents, etc.); conﬁned spaces or any other
work which may be of a hazardous nature.

In establishing potential hazards in carrying out speciﬁc
tasks, other sources may have to be consulted (e.g. manu-
facturer, supplier, HSE, environmental health ofﬁcer, con-
sultants, etc.) and protective clothing and equipment must
be considered.

Prior to implementing any APH within the Method
Statement for the task the APH and Method Statement
must ﬁrst be approved by the responsible person’s senior
and/or the manager of the department responsible for the
plant and equipment. The approved APH and Method

Statements will be brought to the attention of all persons
called upon to carry out the speciﬁc task. Copies of the
APHs will be issued to:

The department responsible for the person carrying out
work;
The department in which work is being done;
Health and safety/security departments.

APHs will be reviewed annually to ensure compliance
with current plant and equipment, procedures and changes
in health and safety recommendations.

In the event of accidents, an investigation should in-

clude examination of all aspects of the APH.

Assessment of Potential Hazards - Analysis Form APH1
Job Description/Classiﬁcation
Department Date

Task Elements

Hazards

Safe Working Practices

Completed by: . . . . . . . . . . . . . Department . . . . . . . . . . .
Approved by: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Department . . . . . . . . . . .

63.26 Alternative method of assessing
hazards
An alternative method of assessing the hazards of a spe-
ciﬁc work task may be as follows. The work task envis-
aged, to be carried out by a contractor, is that of connect-
ing an additional outlet to fuel oil tanks situated within
an oil tank room, which is located below ground level.

63.26.1 Work on fuel oil tanks

Relevant information:
Guidance Note CS1: Industrial use of ﬂammable gas
detectors (HMSO)
Guidance Note CS2: Storage of highly ﬂammable liquids
(HMSO)
Guidance Note CS15: The gas-freeing and cleaning of
tanks containing ﬂammable residues (HMSO)
Guidance Note GS5: Entry into conﬁned spaces (HMSO)
Hot Work on Tanks and Drums: IND(G)35(L) M20
(HSE)

63.26.2 Procedures: 1

1. Identify the work task.
2. Examine alternative methods for carrying out the task.

Alternative method of assessing hazards 63/1143

3. Select the appropriate method.
4. Plan how the work will be carried out.
5. Who is to carry out the work task and when?
6. Carry out the work task.
7. Continually monitor the work task and the safety mea-

sures taken.

8. Review the procedures.

63.26.3 Procedures: 2

1. Identify the work task. Can an alternative method be
suggested to the client, hence eliminating potential
hazards from the work task?
(a) Task 1: Ensure that there is no hazard from tanks,
etc. that have to be worked on or from the locality
of work (i.e. tanks have been emptied, degreased
and gas-freed and checked and tested);

(b) Task 2: As per client’s instructions (client pro-

vides Method of Work Statement).

2. Examine alternative methods for carrying out

the

task.
(a) Can the work be carried out without the use of
heat (i.e. welding, burning, electrical equipment
(arcing), cutting causing heat or sparks), assem-
bled externally and ﬂanged rather than welded?
(b) Will the work be carried out in stages, i.e. will

some of the adjacent tanks remain charged?

3. Select the appropriate method.
4. Plan how the work will be carried out.
5. Discuss with the client:

(a) The period during which work can be carried out;
(b) Their involvement and responsibility with respect
to ﬁre precautions, extinguishers, permit to work,
liaison with ﬁre brigade, ﬁre ofﬁcer attendance;
(c) Who is responsible for emptying the fuel tanks;
(d) Cleaning, degreasing and gas
freeing the

tanks;

(e) Testing for explosions or oxygen deﬁciency.

6. Nominate a person to be in charge.
7. Prepare a program of work.
8. Is training required on use of respirators, entry into
conﬁned spaces, ﬁre prevention and use of extinguish-
ers?

9. Who is to carry out the work task and when?

Task 1:
(a) Contractor;
(b) Nominated specialist contractor;
(c) Client;
Task 2:
(a) Contractor;
(b) Nominated specialist contractor.

10. Carry out the work task only when a permit to work
has been issued which states that the work area is safe
for working and details the safety checks that have
been made and precautions to be taken.

11. Continually monitor the work task and the safety

measures taken.
(a) Ensure that Task 1 has been carried out satisfac-

torily and check report/record;

(b) Continually monitor working environment for

explosion or ﬁre risk and/or oxygen deﬁciency.

63/1144 Health and Safety in the UK

12. Review the procedures.

(a) Ensure that the company’s safety ofﬁcer checks

the procedures;

(b) Have the procedures been effective or should they

be amended? If so, why?

If specialist contractors are to be engaged, a Method State-
ment should ﬁrst be requested from them on how they plan
to carry out the work.

63.27 Permits to work
Where there is a risk to the employee carrying out work,
in addition to a Method Statement a permit to work should
be used. A permit to work is a formal written means of
making sure that potentially dangerous jobs are examined
ﬁrst, before authorizing the work to commence. Its task is
twofold: it ensures that the person making the system safe

and the person who is to carry out the work have both
checked that it is safe to carry out the work task. Permits
to work cannot be transferred to other parties. If any cir-
cumstances change from the issue of the original permit
to work, it must be canceled and a new one prepared.

Permits to work can be of differing formats. Therefore,
it is essential that when a permit to work has been issued
it should be read carefully and understood and all possible
measures taken to reduce or eliminate the known danger.
Permits can be issued for a variety of work tasks (e.g.
work on high-voltage electrical systems, steam boilers,
hot work, conﬁned spaces, etc.). The permit below is an
example of differing types of work tasks.

63.27.1 Permission to Work on Electrical
Systems Certiﬁcate (not exceeding 1000 V
The authorized person and sections 1 to 3 inclusive must
always raise this certiﬁcate completed before any work is

Company

Serial No . . . . . . . . .

PERMISSION TO WORK ON ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS CERTIFICATE

(not exceeding 1000 V)

1. This Certiﬁcate is issued for the following Authorized Work. No other work may be carried out. Entrance to work

area is limited to those authorized. Tools/access equipment etc. must be approved by authorized person prior to them
being taken into the work area.

2. Work Details/Job No./Method Statement Ref. No

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3. Work Location:

4. Method of Isolation:

The equipment on which the work is to be carried out has been proven dead after isolation at:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Care must be exercised as the equipment is still live at:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Safety screening has been applied at: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . Lock-Off Key Nos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Danger Notices Posted: Y/N
Warning Signs Displayed: Y/N Safety Barriers Erected: Y/N

5. Authorized Person issuing Certiﬁcate:

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Designation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Date
Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Signature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

/

/

.

.

.

6. Person Responsible for Work being carried out:

7. Work Completed/Suspended: Date

Company/Dept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Name . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Designation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Signature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.
Person Responsible for Work being carried out:
Company/Dept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Name . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Signature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

/

/

.

.

8. Cancellation of Certiﬁcate by Authorized Person:

Receipt of Certiﬁcate indicating work is
Complete/Suspended:
Name . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Signature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Designation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Date
Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

/

/

.

.

.

On cancellation of this certiﬁcate, no other work must be carried out on the plant/ equipment without a further
certiﬁcate being issued.

carried out. A consecutive serial number must be entered
on the certiﬁcate.

Where the authorized person is to carry out the work,
he must complete section as the person responsible for
work being carried out and retain the top copy on him
throughout the period the work is being carried out. The
bottom control copy must remain in the register.

Where a competent person is to carry out the work,
he must complete section 3 as the certiﬁcate holder. The
authorized person then issues him the top copy, which
he must retain on him throughout the period the work
is being carried out. The bottom copy is retained in the
register.

On completion or suspension of the work, the respon-
sible person must return the top copy to the register, so
that the authorized person ensures that sections 7 and 8
are completed on both top and bottom copies of the cer-
tiﬁcate. The bottom copy must always be retained in the
register for record purposes. Before any suspended work
is restarted, a new certiﬁcate must be raised and processed
by the authorized person as above.

Examples of tasks that will require the issuing of the
Permission to Work on Electrical Systems Certiﬁcate are
indicated in Method Statements for Work on Electrical
Systems.
Note

1. The company nominates authorized and competent per-
sons after they have been given the appropriate training
in both the tasks to be carried out and their responsi-
bility as nominated persons.

2. The electrical engineer would normally stipulate the
tasks that require the use of Method Statements for
Work on Electrical Systems and would also prepare
the Method Statements.

3. A similar format of certiﬁcate would sufﬁce as a per-
mit to work for high-voltage systems (i.e. exceeding
1000 V).

An example of this certiﬁcate as well as a Hot Work
Permit is given below.

63.28 Working alone
63.28.1 Company and contractor’s
responsibilities for the lone worker

Managers responsible for services within works, ofﬁces
or premises have an additional task in that when engag-
ing service contractors they then have joint responsibil-
ity under the Health and Safety at Work, etc. Act 1974
for the health and safety of the contractor’s employees
while on their premises. When engaging contractors to
carry out work within the premises, systems must be
implemented by which the contractor’s employee works
in a safe manner and does not create a hazard to the
premises’ occupants or staff while carrying out this work.
This responsibility is greater when there is an employee
or service contractor working alone, as in most instances
the premises’ communications do not allow for such cir-
cumstances (e.g. the lone employee may be working in
remote areas such as plant rooms).

Contractor’s conditions and safe working practices 63/1145

To enable both company and contractor to comply with
their speciﬁc responsibilities under the Health and Safety
at Work, etc. Act 1974, a Lone Workers’ policy, supported
by a method of assessment of potential hazards relating
to the work to be carried out, should be prepared. Such a
system would prove beneﬁcial when, for any reason, the
regular lone worker cannot be found.

63.29 Safety policy for lone workers
In the Health and Safety at Work, etc. Act 1974 the fol-
lowing Sections apply:

Section 2: General duties of employers
employees
Section 4: General duties of persons concerned with
premises to persons other than their employees.

to their

Working alone presents a speciﬁc health and safety prob-
lem, and companies, department managers and contractors
must ensure that there is a safe system whereby:

1. The person working alone is adequately trained for the

work that is to be carried out;

2. Having carried out an assessment of potential haz-
ards (APH), a Method Statement (including advice on
whether a permit to work is required) is prepared;

3. The correct tools, equipment and manufacturers in-

structions are available;

4. Contact is maintained by:

(a) Means of telephone at regular intervals;
(b) Visits by others at regular intervals;
(c) Persons passing through a ‘Lone Worker’ area are

made aware of the lone worker’s presence;

(d) The intervals between contacts being made should

not exceed one hour.

A lone worker must:
1. Comply with any Method Statement or safe system

introduced for his or her health and safety;
2. Work safely at all times, and not take risks;
3. Understand the hazards/risks associated with the work

to be carried out;

4. Understand the hazards/risks when working alone;
5. Ensure, where necessary, that a permit to work has

been requested and issued.

63.30 Contractor’s conditions and safe
working practices
The use of contractors to carry out work that may in
the past have been done by direct labor or during a nor-
mal sub-contract does not relieve the company from the
responsibility of ensuring that all those working on their
premises do carry out their work in a safe manner. The fol-
lowing contractor’s conditions and safe working practices
should form a part of the company’s health and safety
policy manual.

63.30.1 Introduction

These conditions and safe working practices form part
of the contract and are to be read in conjunction with

63/1146 Health and Safety in the UK

AUTHORIZATION TO WORK ON ELECTRICAL/MECHANICAL APPARATUS CERTIFICATE

Company

Serial No . . . . .

1. This Certiﬁcate is issued for the following Authorized Work. No other work other than that detailed must be carried

out.

Work Details:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Work Location:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Method of Isolation/Making Safe:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lock-Off Key Nos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Danger Noticed Posted: Yes/No . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Warning Signs Displayed: Yes/No . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Authorized Person issuing Certiﬁcate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Designation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Date
Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

/

/

.

.

.

Person Responsible for Work being carried out:
Company . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Name . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Designation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Signature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2. Work Completed: Date

.

/

.

/

.

Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Person Responsible for Work carried out:
Company . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Name . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Designation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Signature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3. Authorized Person:

Receipt of Certiﬁcate indicating work is complete:
Designation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Date
Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Name . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Signature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

/

/

.

.

.

N.B. Copy of this Certiﬁcate to be issued to Person responsible for carrying out Work.

Signature of Receipt

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

the general conditions of the contract form. The company
reserves the right to make alterations or additions to those
conditions and practices as and when necessary. Contrac-
tors, sub-contractors or their employees must not com-
municate to persons other than the company staff any
information relating to the work being carried out by the
contractor or sub-contractors. Information, drawings, etc.
must not be removed from company premises without
prior permission from the company contact, who is the
responsible person for arranging the appropriate clearance
relating to that information.

63.30.2 Contents

Local conditions

1. On arrival at company premises
2. Prior to commencement of work
3. Attendance at company premises for more than one

day.

Safe working practices and procedures

1. Health and safety
2. Emergency procedures

63.31 Safe working practices and
procedures
63.31.1 Health and safety

1. Health and safety is each employer’s responsibility
with respect to their employees under the Health and
Safety at Work, etc. Act 1974.

2. Contractors must comply with all statutory and site

regulations.

3. It is the contractor’s responsibility to ensure that all
work is carried out safely and by competent persons.
4. Method statements as to how the work is to be car-
ried out, clearly indicating matters relating to health
and safety, must be passed for approval
to the

HOT WORK PERMIT

Safe working practices and procedures 63/1147

Required when any of the following tasks are to be carried out:
Cutting; Welding; Soldering, Brazing and also during the use of any equipment which can produce heat, naked ﬂames
or dust (i.e. dust likely to affect Detector Heads)
Period of Work:
Commence:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . hrs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . day . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . month . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . year
Completion / . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . hrs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . day . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . month . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . year
Expiry
Location of Work:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Description of Work:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Precautions:
Department in which work is to be carried out has been advised
Cutting/Welding/Brazing/Hot Work Equipment is in good order
Fire Alarm: ON/OFF Halon System: ON/OFF Sprinkler System: ON/OFF
Fire Notices Posted: YES/NO Insurance Informed YES/NO
Fire Detectors are protected
Precautions within 35 ft (10 m) of work area:
Floors and areas clear of combustibles
Walls and ﬂoor openings covered with e.g. Fire Blanket
Combustibles if not moved protected by Fire Blanket
Fire Watch will be provided for at least 30 minutes after work (incl. breaks)
Fire Watch is supplied with suitable extinguishers
Fire Watch is trained in use of extinguishers and method of raising alarm

I have examined the location of the work, checked that all precuations and preventive measures have been
implemented.
Authorizing Signature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Name . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Designation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . hrs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
I hereby declare that no work other than that stated above will be carried out.
Signed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Name . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Design’n/Company . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I hereby declare that the work has been completed and that the work and adjacent areas have been checked for ﬁre
30 minutes after the completion of the work task.
Signed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Name . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Design’n/Company . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Authorizing Signature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Name . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Designation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . hrs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90

nominated company ofﬁcer prior to the commencement
of work.

5. The successful contractor is responsible for ensuring
that all items above are brought to the attention of any
contractors to whom work is sub-contracted.

63.31.2 Protective clothing and equipment

1. Eye protection must comply with the Protection of
Eyes Regulations 1974 and BS 2092, BS 1542 and
BS 769.

2. Helmets must comply with BS 5240 and BS 4033.
3. Noise must be comply with the Noise at Work Reg-
ulations and ear protectors with BS 6344, Industrial
hearing protectors.

4. Safety footwear must be worn where applicable (e.g.
moving heavy objects; working with hazardous mate-
rials and in wet conditions). Footwear should comply
with the following as appropriate: BS 1870, BS 4792,
BS 5131, BS 5145, BS 5451, BS 5462 and BS 6159.
5. Safety belts must comply with BS 1397 and BS 6858.
6. Protective clothing (including gloves) must be used
where applicable (e.g. normal duties; welding/cutting

63/1148 Health and Safety in the UK

hot work; water treatment; application/use of chemi-
cals; during servicing of batteries; descaling/chemical
cleaning). Clothing: BS 1542, BS 5426, BS 2653,
BS 4171, BS 6408, BS 4724; Gloves: BS 1651,
BS 697, BS 6526.

7. Respirators must comply with BS 2091, BS 4555,
BS 4558, BS 4771 and BS 4275. Also refer to Form
F2486, published by HSE for suppliers of respirators
suitable for use against aerosols containing Legionella.

When in doubt, consult with manufactures, suppliers, HSE,
EMAS, the local authority or the environmental health ofﬁ-
cer.

63.31.3 Access equipment

1. Stepladders: BS 1129, BS 2037
2. Trestles: BS 1129, BS 2037, BS 1139
3. Scaffolds: BS 1139, DD72, CP 5973, BS 2482,

BS 6037, BS 5974, BS 6289

Scaffold and other access equipment should comply with
a standard as for the Construction (Working Places) Reg-
ulations 1966.

63.31.4 Warning signs and good housekeeping

All appropriate warning signs must comply with the Safety
Signs Regulations 1980 and must be displayed prior to
commencement and for the duration of the work to be car-
ried out (see BS 5378). Workplaces must be kept safe and
tidy and all access/exit areas clear of obstruction. Addi-
tional information is available from HSE publications.

63.31.5 Tools and equipment

The contractor will be responsible for the supply of all
tools and equipment, unless otherwise agreed by company
representatives:

1. Portable electrical hand tools and equipment shall be
properly grounded and wound to operate on 110V a.c.
center tapped to earth supply, and shall only be con-
nected to the system by permanent joints or proper
connections.

2. Portable lighting must operate at no more than 25V
a.c. single phase, and must be ﬁtted with the correct
guard.

3. Equipment issued by the company is provided on the
understanding that competent workers under adequate
supervision will properly use it. Also that the contrac-
tor shall be solely responsible for and indemnify the
company against loss or damage to such equipment and
all or any loss, injury, death of any person or damage
to any property whatsoever arising out of the use of
such equipment.

63.31.6 Materials/parts/spares

1. Materials used must be of the highest standard, com-
plying as necessary with the appropriate British Stan-
dard.

2. Materials supplied by the company must only be used

for the work task for which they have been issued.

63.32 Emergency procedures
63.32.1 Fire

When arriving at the Company premises and being shown
their work area the contractor’s employees must:

1. Check the location of the nearest ﬁre exit.
2. Make themselves familiar with ﬁre alarm procedures.
3. Ensure that means of escape are kept clear at all times.

63.32.2 First-aid

The contractor’s employees must:

1. Make themselves familiar with the ﬁrst-aid procedures

in the event of an accident.

2. Check the location of the nearest ﬁrst-aid persons and

the ﬁrst-aid room if there is one on the premises.

63.33 Contractor’s guide
This is to be issued to an individual on arrival at a com-
pany’s premises. All contractors’ employees must adhere
to the following procedures.

63.33.1 On arrival at company premises

1. Report to reception
2. Advise reception/ofﬁce of:

(a) Company contact who requested attendance;
(b) Work to be carried out, stating department loca-

tion;

or

3. On being signed in/issued identity badge be advised

of:
(a) Whereabouts of work location; or
(b) Be escorted to work location by member of staff;

(c) Be escorted by company contact;

4. Be issued with a copy of the Contractor’s Guide.

63.33.2 Prior to commencement of work

The company contact/coordinator will:

1. Discuss items in the Contractor’s Guide relevant to

the work to be carried out;

2. Ensure that adequate notice has been issued to all other

parties, e.g.:
(a) Members of department, including deputy;
(b) Others who may be carrying out work in that area;
(c) Contact security/loss prevention coordinator for
issue of permits to work, advice/instructions on
health and safety, speciﬁc hazards relevant to work
and work area and issue of ﬁre extinguishers/ﬁre
blankets;

3. Give permission to commence work.

63.33.3 Security

If attendance at company premises is required on more
than one day to complete the work the contractor’s em-
ployees must:

1. Sign in/out at reception/security;
2. Collect/return;

(a) Identity badge;
(b) Permits

premises);

to work (not

to be removed from

(c) Keys (not to be removed from premises).

3. Report proposed absence from/return to premises to:

(a) Contact;

Contractor’s guide 63/1149

(b) Security/loss prevention coordinator if work re-

quires a permit to work;

(c) Facilities coordinator/department head if work in-

volves general premises/site facilities/services.

63.33.4 Welfare/canteen
Contractors subject to discussion with the company con-
tact will use these facilities.

63.33.5 Useful contacts
These include the telephone numbers of contact, security,
ﬁrst-aid, etc.

64

64/1151

Regulatory
Compliance
Issues in the US

R Keith Mobley
The Plant Performance Group

Contents

64/1153

64/1153

64.1 Introduction
64.2 Recommended spill response
64.3 OSHA Process Safety Management Standard
64.4 Incident investigation requirements
64/1154
64.5 OSHA’s investigation process

64/1156

64/1154

64.1 Introduction
Regulatory compliance problems associated with work-
related incidents generally fall into the domain of safety,
which is regulated by OSHA, and environment, which
is regulated by the EPA and state (although a state may
defer to the EPA through a formal agreement) and local
governments. This section provides guidelines for inves-
tigating incidents that fall under the jurisdiction of these
regulations.

Note:
The material presented in this chapter does not
constitute legal advice and is provided for information
purposes only. Please consult the appropriate agencies
directly and seek qualiﬁed legal council for this type of
assistance.

Spill hazards

Be certain that spill hazards are reviewed as part of
the plant’s internal audit program. Audit-team members
should be trained to look for deﬁcient containers, fall
hazards that also can contribute to a spill,
improper
container labeling, and other potential hazards. Major
causes of chemical spills are:
ž Mishandling of equipment and supplies in the work
ž Mishandling during transportation (even within a
ž Leaks from process equipment such as ﬂanges or val-
ž Improperly stored containers (e.g., storage in a damp

area (e.g., use of improper containers),

facility),

ves, and

location leads to rusty, deteriorating containers).

Recommended spill response 64/1153

Workers must be properly trained to handle the respon-
sibilities assigned to them, with members of a designated
spill team undergoing more specialized training than the
average employee. All workers training should include the
basic instruction that employees not involved in cleanup
must stay away from a spill. This is important because of
risks such as inhaling chemical vapors or ﬁre or explo-
sion hazards. Another important lesson to teach workers
is how to prevent a spill or leak from becoming worse.
Proper containment can mean the difference between a
small problem and a huge, dangerous mess.

64.2 Recommended spill response
The following steps are recommended responses when a
chemical spill occurs:

1. If necessary, evacuate the area of untrained spill-res-

ponse personnel.

2. Check labels, MSDSs, and other key documentation to

identify what has spilled.

3. Assign at least two qualiﬁed individuals to the cleanup.
They may be internal staff or from an outside ﬁrm that
you have prearranged to handle this task. Two workers
are needed in case one is overcome or injured.

4. Promptly clear the spill area by ventilation.
5. If the spilled material is on ﬁre, douse the ﬂames in a

safe manner.

6. Limit the spread of the spilled substance by containing
it with a dike. Use an absorbent material appropriate
for the type of spill (e.g., polymer-type absorbents such
as spill booms, granular materials such as kitty litter,
ground corncobs, etc.).

Worker education and communication

Employers must ensure that their workers know the poten-
tial hazards of the chemicals they work with, how to
protect themselves against those hazards (e.g., safe prac-
tices, personal protection equipment, etc.), and what to
do in case of an emergency. Accordingly, OSHA has
established basic communication requirements under the
Hazard Communication Standard to inform workers about
chemicals in use in the workplace. Under this standard,
chemical makers must meet the following requirements:
ž Manufacturers must determine the physical and health
ž Users must be informed of the hazards through con-
tainer labels and Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDSs).
ž A written hazard-communication program must des-
cribe the employer’s efforts to tell employees about
the standard and how it is being implemented at the
worksite.

hazards of each chemical they produce.

Prevention

Preventive measures include everything from safe work
practices to training programs, good housekeeping, reg-
ular audits, administrative and engineering controls, and
chemical-protection equipment.

However, when absorbent materials are used, they be-
come as hazardous as the material absorbed. Therefore,
federal, state, and local regulations must be consulted
before disposing of these contaminated materials. In some
cases, a neutralizer can be used to convert one material
into another (e.g., an acid neutralized with a base produces
salt and water).

Caution: Specialized worker training is legally required
to use absorbent materials on spills because of the chem-
ical reactions that can occur. For example, organic mate-
rials should never be used on nitric acid spills because a
ﬁre will result!

Workers’ responsibilities

Employees must take most of the responsibility for pro-
tecting themselves from chemical hazards. However, ade-
quate training and frequent reminders from the employer
can help ensure that they take that responsibility. The
following are some basic chemical-safety tips to incorpo-
rate in a worker-safety-training program or to post on the
bulletin board:
ž Pay attention to training that is provided.
ž Know what hazardous chemicals are used in your work
ž Read labels and MSDSs before starting a job.
ž Do not use chemicals from unlabeled containers.

area.

equipment.

cuts.

before use.

64/1154 Regulatory Compliance Issues in the US
ž Follow manufacturers’ instructions for chemicals and
ž Follow company rules and procedures and avoid short-
ž Wear all personal protection equipment (PPE) required
by your organization and ask your supervisor if you are
not sure.

ž Keep containers closed when not in use.
ž Check containers regularly for leaks.
ž Make sure that equipment is in good working condition
ž Keep incompatible materials apart.
ž Keep ﬂammable and explosive materials away from
ž Make sure the work area is adequately ventilated.
ž Do not bring food or drinks into a work area where
ž Wash before eating or drinking.
ž Cleanse tools, equipment, and clothing that have been
exposed to hazardous materials before storing or reusing
them.

ž Dispose of contaminated materials properly.
ž Ask a supervisor what to do with old or unused chem-

chemicals are used.

heat sources.

icals in your work area.

Legislation and reporting requirements

In any industrial facility, from ofﬁces to factories and
laboratories, spills happen and create a variety of risks
to workers. Inside a plant, spills result in chemicals on
the ﬂoor, in the air, or on the workers themselves. When
releases occur outside the plant (e.g., chemical releases
from tank cars or trucks, the spread of noxious fumes
from an internal spill), the potential for harm extends far
beyond the facility, particularly with major catastrophes
such as the Bhopal chemical release, the Exxon Valdez oil
spill, New York’s Love Canal, and dioxin-contaminated
Times Beach in Missouri, have led several federal depart-
ments and agencies to enact protective regulations. These
protections are aimed at protecting a much broader range
of people, property, and the environment than most regu-
lations administered by OSHA.

Spills are covered by a variety of federal, state, and
local reporting requirements and substantial penalties can
result to a company and its employees for failing to report
certain spills. Initial release notiﬁcation is usually required
immediately or within 24 hours of the release and, in some
cases, written follow-up reports are required. Some of the
applicable legislation is listed below and Table 64.1 lists
some of the major reporting requirements for chemical
spills that are speciﬁed by these Acts. However, refer to
Hoechst Celanese’s procedures for plant-speciﬁc require-
ments.
ž OSHA’s Process Safety Management (PSM) Standard
ž OSHA’s Hazardous Waste Operations and Emergency
ž Superfund: Comprehensive Environmental Response,
ž Superfund Amendments

and Reauthorization Act
(SARA): SARA Title II contains the Emergency Plan-
ning and Community Right-to-know Act (EPCRA)

Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA)

Response (HAZWOPER)

ž Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)
ž Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA)
ž Clean Water Act (CWA)
ž Department of Transportation (DOT) Rules for packing
ž Hazardous Materials Transportation Act (HMTA)

and shipping

64.3 OSHA Process Safety Management
Standard
OSHA legislation focuses primarily on individual work-
places and is intended to prevent explosions, spills, and
other disasters. The Process Safety Management (PSM)
Standard covers large-scale makers and users of highly
hazardous chemicals and other chemical manufacturers.
However, small companies whose core business has noth-
ing to do with chemicals also are vulnerable to spills (e.g.,
cleaning products, toner for the copying machine, etc.).
Although the PSM standard does not speciﬁcally apply to
smaller chemical spills, its principles are still valid. Note
that RCRA regulations apply to these small spills. This
section summarizes the requirements for OSHA’s PSM
of Highly Hazardous Chemicals, Explosives, and Blasting
Agents procedures for incident investigation (CFR 1910,
Part 11.9, Section m).

64.4 Incident investigation requirements
The regulation states: ‘The employer shall investigate
each incident which results in, or could reasonably have
resulted in, a catastrophic release of highly hazardous
chemicals in to the workplace.’

To meet this requirement, a company must deﬁne an
incident in speciﬁc terms for their facility. This includes
an operational deﬁnition that indicates the number of
pounds of the substance used in a particular process
that would qualify as a ‘catastrophic event’. Deﬁning an
incident in site-speciﬁc terms also includes deﬁning the
terms ‘could reasonably have resulted in’. Appendix C
of the regulation provides guidelines for clarifying this
point. It includes deﬁnitions of ‘near misses’ in which
a catastrophic failure occurred, but a chemical release
did not occur. Clear guidelines should be established
that provide the employee with a quantiﬁable means of
deﬁning those incidents that require a violation report.

Table 64.2 provides examples of hazardous chemicals
that require investigation when a catastrophic release occ-
urs or when one could have happened. These OSHA
guidelines should be used in conjunction with site-speciﬁc
procedures. For a complete listing of the reportable
chemical used in your plant, refer to the site Hazardous
Materials Policy and Procedure Manual.

Required scope

OSHA 1910.119 does not mandate the speciﬁc type of
investigation a plant must conduct when a reportable inci-
dent occurs. However, it provides stipulations that must
be met for the following: investigator qualiﬁcations, time
requirements, report content, review process, and correc-
tive actions.

Table 64.1 Major Regulatory Reporting Requirements for Chemical Spills

Incident investigation requirements 64/1155

Reporting requirements

Regulation

Reference

Super/fund

40 CFR 302.4

EPCRA

40 CFR 355

RCRA

40 CFR 240–281

TSCA

40 CFR 761.120 et seq.

Section 8(e)

CWA

Oil: 40 CFR 110–114
Haz: 40 CRF 116–117

HMTA

Immediately report to the Coast Guard’s National Response Center (NRC) the release of

CERCLA hazardous substances in quantities equal to or greater than its reportable
quantity.

Report releases of a reportable quantity of a hazardous substance to the state Emergency

Response Commission (SERC) for each state likely to be affected. Also provide
notice to the local Emergency Planning Committee (LEPC) for any area affected by
the release.

Notiﬁcation to the NRC is required for releases equal to or greater than the reportable
quantity of a RCRA hazardous waste. If the waste also is on the CERCLA list, that
reportable quantity applies. If not, the reportable quantity is 100 pounds if the waste
is ignitable, corrosive, reactive, or toxic.

Immediately report by telephone to the EPA regional ofﬁce any spill of a hazardous

chemical that “seriously threatens humans with cancer, birth defects, mutation, death,
or serious prolonged incapacitation, or seriously threatens the environment with
large-scale or ecologically signiﬁcant population destruction.” A written follow-up
report is required within 15 days.

Report any oil spill that occurs into navigable waters or adjoining shorelines to your

regional EPA ofﬁce and state water pollution-control agency if it violates
water-quality standards, causes a sheen or discoloration of the water or shoreline, or
causes a sludge or emulsion to be deposited beneath the surface of the water or on the
shoreline. Immediate notiﬁcation also is required to the NRC for the release of a
designated hazardous substance in a reportable quantity during a 24-hour period if the
spill is in or alongside navigable waters.

Generally, the transporter of hazardous materials (including waters) must immediately

report to the NRC and the state response center a release during transport if the
release meets any of the following criteria: causes death or serious injury, involves
more than $50,000 in property damage, involves the release of radioactive materials
or etiological agents, requires public evacuation lasting at lease one hour, closes one
or more “major transportation artery or facility” for at least one hour, alters the ﬂight
pattern or routine of an aircraft. Even if none of these criteria are met, it should be
reported if the carrier believes a spill or incident poses “such a danger” that it should
be reported. Follow-up written reports are due within 30 days. The carrier also must
ﬁle DOT Form 5800.1.

For all releases:

Useful telephone numbers:

Always call 911 ﬁrst to assure that ﬁrst responders are dispatched to the scene to stabilize the release, render ﬁrst aid, establish a
perimeter, and extinguish/minimize the threat of ﬁre or explosion.

Coast Guard’s National Response Center (NRC): 800-424-8802
EPA’s national database of all toxic chemical release information: 800-638-8480
EPA’s Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-know Information Hotline: 800-535-0202
Community Right-to-know Act; TSCA D Toxic Substance Control Act, RCRA D Resource Conservation and Recovery Act,
HMTA D Hazardous Materials Transportation Act

CFR D Code of Federal Regulations, CWA D Clean Water Act, EPCRA D Emergency Planning and

Source:Adapted by Integrated Systems, Inc. from EnvironmentalComplianceNationalEdition(Issue No. 181, Business & Legal Reports,
Inc., Madison, CR, Dex. 1996) and other sources.

Qualiﬁed investigator
The regulation clearly deﬁnes the investigating team:
‘. . .at
least one person knowledgeable in the process
involved, including a contract employee if the incident
involved work of the contractor, and other persons with
appropriate knowledge and experience to thoroughly
investigate and analyze the incident.’

Time requirements
OSHA regulations deﬁne speciﬁc time requirements for
investigating any release or potential release of any
chemical
is within the scope of 29 CFR 1910.

that

The regulation states: ‘An incident
investigation shall
be initiated as promptly as possible, but not later than
48 hours following the incident.’ In part, the reason for
this quick response to an incident is to assure that all
pertinent evidence and facts can be preserved to facilitate
the investigation.

Report content
The regulation also deﬁnes speciﬁc topics that must be
addressed in the report. These include:
ž Date of incident,
ž Date investigation began,

64/1156 Regulatory Compliance Issues in the US

Table 64.2 Examples of OSHA-listed chemicals

Chemical name

Ammonia, anhydrous
Bromine
Chlorine
Ethylene oxide
Hydrogen chloride
Hydrogen sulﬁde
Isopropylamine
Ketene
Methylamine, anhydrous
Methyl chloride
Methyl isocyanate
Nitric acid (½94.5% by weight)
Perchloromethyl mercaptan
Perchloryl ﬂoride
Triﬂuorochloroethylene

Chemical
abstract
service

7664-41-7
7726-95-6
7782-50-5
75-21-8
7647-01-0
7783-06-4
75-31-0
463-51-4
74-89-5
74-87-3
624-83-9
7697-37-2
594-42-3
7616-94-6
79-38-9

Threshold
quantity
(pounds)

10,000
1,500
1,500
5,000
5,000
1,500
5,000
100
1,000
15,000
250
500
150
5,000
10,000

Source:OSHA 1910.119, Appendix A

ž A complete description of the incident,
ž Contributing factors, and
ž Any recommendations resulting from the investigation.

Review process

The regulation states: ‘The report must be reviewed with
all affected personnel whose job tasks are relevant to
the incident ﬁndings, including contract employees where
applicable.’ The aim of this clause is to ensure that all
affected employees understand why the incident occurred
and what actions could prevent a recurrence. While the
regulation does not speciﬁcally deﬁne the methods to
comply with this requirement, it is imperative that the
review is prompt and complete. In almost all cases, the
review requires personal meetings, either individually or
in small groups, to thoroughly review the incident and
recommend corrective actions.

Corrective actions

Regarding corrective actions, the regulation states: ‘The
employer shall establish a system to promptly address
and resolve the incident-report ﬁndings and recommen-
dations. Resolution and corrective actions shall be doc-
umented.’ The regulation does not deﬁne promptly in
deﬁnitive terms, but the intent is that all corrective actions
must be implemented immediately.

The major difference between an OSHA-mandated in-
vestigation and other RCFA is that an appropriate cor-
rective action or actions must be implemented as quickly
as possible. In the non-OSHA-mandated RCFA process, a
corrective action may or may not be implemented, depend-
ing on the results of the cost-beneﬁt analysis.

The cost of corrective actions is not a consideration in
the OSHA regulations, but it must be considered as part
of the analysis. Because of the critical timeline that gov-
erns an OSHA-mandated investigation, a full cost-beneﬁt
analysis may not be possible. However, the investigating

team should consider the cost-beneﬁt impact of potential
corrective actions. The guidelines provided in Section 3.9
should be followed as much as possible within the time
constraints of the investigation.

64.5 OSHA’s investigation process
Figure 64.1 illustrates the logic tree to follow for an
OSHA-mandated investigation. While it is similar to other
non-mandated investigations, there are distinct differences.
OSHA’s Hazardous Waste Operations and Emergency
Response (HAZWOPER) legislation protects workers who
respond to emergencies, such as serious spills, involv-
ing hazardous materials. It also covers those employed in
cleanup operations at uncontrolled hazardous waste sites
and at EPA-licensed waste treatment, storage, and disposal
facilities.

Emergency planning and community right-to-know
act

The Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-know
Act (EPCRA) is administered by the EPA and state and
local agencies. It affects virtually all facilities that manu-
facture, use, or store hazardous chemicals. The following
are the reporting requirements of the Act:
ž An inventory that includes the amount, nature, and loca-
tion of any hazardous or extremely hazardous chemical
present at a facility in an amount equal to or greater
than its assigned ‘threshold level’.
ž Reports on releases of a ‘reportable quantity’ of a listed
hazardous substance, including the total annual releases
during normal operations.

Resource conservation and recovery act

The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)
has a considerable number of regulations affecting spills
in the workplace, including training of workers who might
be expected to respond to them. The EPA administers
RCRA.

US department of transportation

Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) addres-
ses the US DOT rules for packing and shipping of haz-
ardous materials by air, road, rail, or water. CFR 49 covers
issues such as appropriate containers, labeling, truck and
rail car placarding, and providing essential information
that can aid in emergency response in case of an incident
involving hazardous materials.

Hazardous materials transportation act

The Hazardous Materials Transportation Act (HMTA) de-
ﬁnes transportation releases to be those that occur during
loading, unloading, transportation or temporary storage
of hazardous materials or waste. Releases that meet cer-
tain criteria (see Table 64.1) should be reported to the
National Response Center (NRC) and the state response
center. Most states also require calls to the local police or
response agencies (often by calling 911). Follow-up writ-

OSHA’s investigation process 64/1157

Accident or

injury

Yes

Was equipment failure

involved?

No

Was there excessive
 fatigue, impairment,

personal

problems, or

inattentiveness?

No

Was there as lack
of information to
guide a person to

a procedure?

No

Yes

Yes

Was correct

procedure used?

No

Human engineering

Supervision

Human engineering

Procedures

Supervision

Training

Equipment failure

logic tree

Preserve accident site
and failed components

Test and inspect failed
machine, components,

and installation

Is reason 

for 

failure
evident>

Yes

Conduct design

reveiw

Conduct installation

evaluation

Application evaluation

Is reason for

failure evident?

Yes

No

Request help from

reliability engineering

group.

Yes

Was procedure
suitable for the

task or

application?

Yes

Was procedure
followed properly 
and completely?

Yes

Were displays,
alarms, controls,
and equipment

identified or

operated properly:

Yes

Was work

performed in an

adverse

environment?

No

Prepare and submit
report to regulatory
agency (OSHA, EPA)

Submit report for

approval and
implementation

Write report with
recommended

corrective actions

No

Procedures

Training

No

Procedures

Supervision

Procedures

No

Human engineering

Training

Yes

Human engineering

Training

Yes

Human engineering

Supervision

Develope corrective

actions

No

Did work involve
repetitive motion,

uncomfortable positions,

vibration, or heavy

lifting?

Figure 64.1 Logic tree for an OSHA-mandated investigation

Appendix 64.1 List of abbreviations

64/1158 Regulatory Compliance Issues in the US

ten reports are due within 30 days. If the carrier is required
to report releases to the DOT, Form 5800.1 should be
completed and sent to the following address: Systems
Manager, DHM-63

Information
Research and Special Programs Administration
US Department of Transportation
Washington, DC 20590-0001

CERCLA also requires certain spills to be reported by
the owner/shipper to the NRC. To alert drivers and emer-
gency responders to this requirement, the letters ‘RQ’
must appear on shipping papers if the transporter is car-
rying, in one package, a substance on DOT’s Hazardous
Materials Table in an amount equal to or greater than the
RQ shown in the table. Two additional requirements apply
if hazardous waste is involved:
ž Attach to the report a copy of the hazardous waste
ž Include in the report an estimate of the quantity of the
waste removed from the scene, the name and address
of the facility to which it was taken, and the manner of
disposition (Section IX of DOT Form F5800.1).

manifest.

CERCLA

CFR
CWA
DOT
EPA
EPCRA

HMTA
MSDS
NRC
OSHA
PPE
PSM
RCRA

SARA

TSCA

FMEA
HAZWOPER Hazardous Waste Operations and

Comprehensive Environmental Response,

Compensation, and Liability Act

Code of Federal Regulations
Clean Water Act
Department of Transportation
Environmental Protection Act
Emergency Planning and Community
Right-to-know Act
Failure Mode and Effects Analysis

Emergency Response
Hazardous Materials Transportation Act
Material Safety Data Sheets
National Response Center
Occupational Safety and Health Act
Personal protection equipment
Process safety management
Resource Conservation and Recovery

Act

Superfund Amendments and
Reauthorization
Toxic Substances Control Act

Contents

533
32 Pumps and Pumping
565
33 Centrifugal Pump Installation
571
34 Cooling Towers
587
35 Compressed Air Systems
601
36 Compressors
615
37 Fans and Blowers
623
38 Mixers and Agitators
629
39 Gears and Gearboxes
639
40 Hydraulic Fundamentals
687
41 Pneumatic Fundamentals
707
42 Noise and Vibration
43 Vibration Fundamentals
721
44 Vibration Monitoring and Analysis 757
45 Air Pollution
813
823
46 Dust and Fume Control
837
47 Dust Collection Systems
845
48 Maintenance Management in UK
49 Effective Maintenance
857

Management

50 Predictive Maintenance
867
51 Planning and Scheduling Outages 889
915
52 Lubrication
53 Corrosion
961
987
54 Shaft Alignment
1009
55 Rotor Balancing
1017
56 Packing and Seals
57 Gears and Gear Drives
1029
1043
58 Flexible Intermediate Drives
1065
59 Couplings and Clutches
1081
60 Bearings
1101
61 Finance for the Plant Engineer
62 Statistical Approaches in
1117

Machinery Problem Solving
63 Health and Safety in the UK
64 Regulatory Compliance Issues in

the US

Index

1131
1151

1159

Foreword
Preface
ListofContributors
1 Deﬁnition and Organization of the

2
3
4

Plant Engineering Function
Plant Engineering in Britain
The Role of the Plant Engineer
Physical Considerations in Site
Selection
Plant Location
Industrial Buildings
Planning and Plant Layout

5
6
7
8 Contracts and Speciﬁcations
9
10 Lighting
11 Insulation
12 Paint Coatings for the Plant

Industrial Flooring

Engineer

13 Insurance: Plant and Equipment
14 Insurance: Buildings and Risks
15 Electricity Generation
16 Electrical Distribution and

Installation

17 Electrical Instrumentation
18 Oil
19 Gas
20 Liqueﬁed Petroleum Gas
21 Coal and Ash
22 Steam Utilization
23 Industrial Boilers
24 Combustion Equipment
25 Economizers
26 Heat Exchangers
27 Heating
28 Ventilation
29 Air Conditioning
30 Energy Conservation
31 Water and Efﬂuents

vii
ix
xi
1

7
13
17

35
43
67
85
101
111
131
147

161
185
199
233

255
273
285
321
335
353
387
415
429
437
447
465
481
503
517

List of
Contributors

A P Hyde
National Vulcan Engineering Insurance Group Ltd

H King
Thorn Lighting

B R Lamb, CEng, MIChemE
APV Baker Ltd

S McGrory
BH Oil UK Ltd

R Keith Mobley
International Consultant

R J Neller
Film Cooling Towers Ltd

Ove Arup & Partners, Industrial Division

G Pitblado, IEng, MIPlantE, DipSM
Support Services

R S Pratt, ALU, CEng, MIMfgE, MBIM, MSAE
Secretary-General, The Institution of Plant
Engineers

G E Pritchard, CEng, FCIBSE, FInstE, FIPlantE,
MASHRAE

Risk Control Unit
Royal Insurance (UK) Ltd

R Robinson, BSc, CEng, FIEE
The Boots Co. plc

M J Schoﬁeld, BSc, MSc, PhD, MICorrT
Cortest Laboratories Ltd

J D N Shaw, MA
SBD Construction Products Ltd

R H Shipman, MIMechE, MIGasE, MInstE
Liqueﬁed Petroleum Gas Industry Association

K Shippen, BSc, CEng, MIMechE
ABB Power Ltd

A Armer
Spirax Sarco Ltd

B Augur, IEng, FIPlantE, MBES
J B Augur (Midlands) Ltd

H Barber, BSc
Loughborough University of Technology

D A Bayliss, FICorrST, FTSC

J Bevan, IEng, MIPlantE

R J Blaen
Senior Green Limited

British Compressed Air Society

G Burbage-Atter, BSc, CEng, FInstE,
HonFIPlantE, FCIBSE
Heaton Energy Services

P D Compton, BSc, CEng, MCIBSE
Colt International Ltd

I G Crow, BEng, PhD, CEng, FIMechE,
FIMarE, MemASME
Davy McKee (Stockton) Ltd

R. Dunn
Editor, Plant Engineering Magazine

P Fleming, Bsc(Eng), ARSM, CEng, MInstE
British Gas plc

C Foster
British Coal

C French, CENg, FInstE, FBIM
Saacke Ltd

F T Gallyer
Pilkington Insulation Ltd

R R Gibson, BTech, MSc, CEng, FIMechE, FIMarE,
FRSA
W S Atkins Consultants Ltd

B Holmes, BSc(Tech), PhD, CEng, FIChemE, FInstE
W S Atkins Consultants Ltd

R Smith
Life Cycle Engineering, Inc.

xii List of Contributors

G Solt, FIChemE, FRSC
Cranﬁeld Institute of Technology

K Taylor, CEng, FCIBSE, FIPlantE, FIHospE,
FSE, FIOP, MASHRAE, FBIM, ACIArb
Taylor Associates Ltd

L W Turrell, FCA

K Turton, BSc(Eng), CEng, MIMechE
Loughborough University of Technology

E Walker, BSc, CEng, MIMechE
Senior Green Limited

R C Webster, BSc, MIEH
Environmental Consultant

D Whittleton, MA, CEng, MIMechE, MHKIE
Ove Arup & Partners, Industrial Division

Copyright  2001 by Butterworth-Heinemann

All right reserved.

No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission
of this publisher.

Recognizing the importance of preserving what has been written,
Butterworth-Heinemann prints its books on acid-free paper
whenever possible.

Butterworth-Heinemann supports the efforts of American Forests
and the Global ReLeaf program in its compaign for the betterment
of trees, forests, and our environment.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Plant engineer’s handbook/edited by R. Keith Mobley. – [Rev. ed.].

p.cm
Rev. ed. of: Plant engineer’s reference book. c1991.
Includes index.
ISBN 0 7506 7328 1
1 Plant engineering – Handbooks, manuals, etc.
Title: Plant engineer’s reference book.
TS184 .P58 2000
696 – dc21

I. Mobley, R. Keith, 1943-II,

00-049366

British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
Plant engineer’s handbook

1 Plant engineering – Handbooks, manuals, etc.
1 Mobley, R. Keith, 1943 –
658.2

The Publisher offers special discounts on bulk orders of this book.

For information, please contact:
Manager of Special Sales
Butterworth-Heinemann
225 Wildwood Avenue
Woburn, MA 01801 – 2041
Tel: 781-904-2500
Fax: 781-904-2620

For information on all Butterworth-Heinemann publications available,
contact our World Wide Web home page at: http://www.bh.com

1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Typeset by Laser Words, Madras, India
Printed in the United States of America

Index

Absolute humidity, 484
Accelerometers, and vibration, 747–8
Acceptance testing:

using vibration analysis, 723
vibration theory, analysis and measurement, 723

Accounting, 1103
see also Finance

Acid rain, 815
Acids, corrosion of pipes and tanks, 971–2
Acoustics, 709–12

acoustic enclosures, 717
acoustic measurement, 271
see also Noise; Sound; Vibration

Additives, to aid atomization in burners, 423
Additives, lubricating oil, 919–20

anti-corrosion, 920
anti-foam, 920
anti-oxidants, 920
anti-wear, 920
detergents/dispersants, 920
extreme pressure, 920
viscosity index improvers, 920
Agitators see Mixers and agitators
AGMA (American Gear Manufacturers Association) speciﬁcations for

gear lubricants, 930

Air access, and site selection, 20
Air cleaning equipment see under Ventilation of buildings
Air compressors/compressor systems see Compressed air systems; Com-

pressor principles and pneumatics;

Compressor types and operation

Air conditioning, 481–502

abbreviations, 483
air intake quantity, 488–9
air volume required, 488
air-handling plant:

cooling coils, 486
heater battery, 486
humidiﬁers, 486
mixing chambers, 486
outside air intake, 484–6
pre-ﬁlters, 486

air extract, 491
air supply, 491
chilled water, 491

controls:

computers (mainframe) requirements, 490–1

chilled water control, 487
dry bulb temperature, 487
humidity, 487
limits and interlocks testing, 502
recorders and alarms testing, 500

duct design/sizing, 492–5

system pressure drop calculations, 492

dust control and ﬁltration, 497–8

clean rooms, 498
electrostatic ﬁlters, 497

ﬁlter life, 498
testing to ASHRAE 52–76 and BS 3928, 497–8

fans/fan selection, 495–7

axial fans, 495
centrifugal fans, 495
cross-ﬂow fans, 495
fan laws, 497
mounting, 497
multiple arrangements, 496–7
propeller fans, 495
volume regulation, 497
full air conditioning, 483
heat from air intake, 490
heat gain sources and calculations, 489–90
heat loss calculations, 489
humidiﬁcation, 498–9

air washers, 499
humidiﬁcation capacity, 498
pan humidiﬁers, 498–9
run time, 499
spray humidiﬁers, 499
steam jet humidiﬁers, 499
plant heat ﬂow paths, 484–5
plant loads:

air ducts, 488
compressor heat, 488
fabric losses or gains, 488
fan heat, 488
machine heat, 488
personnel, 488
pump heat, 488

refrigeration plant, 486–7

compressor lubricant for, 949
compressors, 486
condensers, 486
evaporators, 486
expansion valves, 486

telecommunication requirements, 492
terminology, 483–4
testing/test procedures, 499–502

air balance, 500
background heaters, 501
cooling and dehumidiﬁcation, 501–2
heating and humidiﬁcation, 501
limits and interlocks, 502
pre-test performance, 500
recorders and alarms, 500

ventilated ceilings, 493–4
see also Ventilation of buildings

Air discharge, noise from, 715
Air ﬁlters, viscous, dry and HEPA, 472
Air handling plant, air conditioning see under Air conditioning
Air pollution, 813–22

acid rain, 815
atmospheric dispersion theory, 821
and atmospheric stability, 821

Alkalis and Works Regulations Act (1906), 815–16, 817
Clear Air Act (1956 and 1968), 816–17
Chimney height calculations, 818–22
Control of Pollution Act (1974), 817–18

1160 Index

Air pollution (cont.)

buildings affected by, 815
chemical non-smoke, 820–1
greenhouse effect, 815
legislation:

materials affected by, 815
and nuisance, 819–20
odor dispersal, 822
and plant location, 42
plume heights, 821
Ringleman’s chart, 816
temperature inversions:

elevated, 822
ground base, 821, 822

vegetation affected by, 815
weather affected by, 815
see also Dust and fume control

Air pressure vessels, inspection of, 166
Air reservoirs (receivers), 703–4
Air venting, steam pipes, 364, 369
Aircraft engine analyzers, using vibration analysis, 724
AIRPOLL computer program, 40
Alarm systems, building security, 51
Alignment of shafts see Shaft alignment
Alkaline liquids, corrosion of pipes and tanks by, 972
Alkalinity of water, for cooling towers, 577
Alkalis and Works Regulations Act (1906), 815–16, 817
Aluminum, galvanic corrosion, 966
Aluminum alloys, limitations from corrosion, 979–80
Amagat’s law, 691
American Gear Manufacturers Association (AGMA) speciﬁcations for

gear lubricants, 930

American Petroleum Institute (API):

engine lubricant service classiﬁcation:

diesel engines, 924
petrol engines, 923–4

vibration level charts, 791

American Society of Nondestructive Testing (ANST), and predictive main-

American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), viscosity tables,

tenance, 877

658

Anodic protection, 982–3
Anthracite, 337, 339
Anti-corrosion additives, lubrication oil, 920
Anti-foam additives, lubricating oil, 920
Anti-oxidants, in lubricating oil, 920
AOTC see The Associated Ofﬁces Technical Committee
API see American Petroleum Institute
Arbitration, and contracts, 98–9
Ash handling/handling equipment, 213, 350–2

chain grate burners, 424
coking stoker, 425–6
ﬁxed grate burners, 424
pneumatic handling, 351–2
submerged mechanical systems, 352
underfed stoker burners, 424
see also Coal burners

The Associated Ofﬁces Technical Committee (AOTC), 173

member companies, 167

ASTM (American Society for Testing and Materials), viscosity tables,

658

Atmospheres, corrosive, 975
Atomizers see Gas burners; Oil burners
ATPLAN computer program, 73
Automatic transmission ﬂuids (ATFs), 933–4
Avogadro’s law, 692

Bad actor management, 1121–2
Baghouses (bag-ﬁlter) systems, 839–42

bag cleaning, 842
cleaning frequency, 841

connections effectiveness, 841–2
installation, 841–2
performance measurement, 841

collection efﬁciency, 841
pressure drop, 841

pneumatic conveyors for, 839
reverse cleaning gas supply, 840–1
reverse ﬂow cleaning, 840
reverse-pulse-cleaning, 840
shaker-cleaned ﬁlters, 839–40

Balancing see Rotor balancing
Banks, rip-rap, 24
Bar chart diagrams, 95
Basements see Sub-ground pits
Bathtub curve and preventative maintenance, 860
Bearings, 1081–99

failures, deﬁciencies and their causes, 1096–7
movement types:

rotational about a line, 1083
rotational about a point, 1083
rotational/translational in a plane, 1083
translational along a line, 1083

operating considerations:

excessive temperatures, 1098
oil dirty or contaminated, 1098
oil whip, 1098–9
oil whirl, 1098–9
oil-ﬁlm instability, 1098

plain bearings:

elliptical, 1086
four-axial groove, 1086
installation, 1093–4
lubricating ﬂuids, 1092
lubricating states, 1092–3
materials for, 1092
partial-arc, 1086
plain cylindrical, 1085
radial or journal, 1085
thrust or ﬁxed, 1085
tilting-pad, 1086

rolling element/anti-friction, 1086–92

cylindrical, 1089–90
dismounting, 1095
double row, 1088–9
grade classiﬁcation, 1087
handling precautions, 1095–6
lubrication, 1093
materials for, 1092
mounting at temperature, 1095
mounting cold, 1095
mounting techniques, 1094
mountings, 1094
needle-type cylindrical or barrel spherical, 1090
needle-type cylindrical or barrel tapered, 1090–1
premounted bearings, 1094
roller, 1089
single row ball-thrust, 1088
single row radial angular contact, 1088
single row radial slot, 1087–8

selection considerations:

clearances, 1097–8
interchangeability, 1097
oil grove placement, 1097
relining faults, 1098
shipping damage, 1097
storage and handling, 1097
surface ﬁnish, 1097

selection guides:

continuous movement, 1083
continuous rotation, 1084
oscillatory movement, 1084

vibration analysis:

compressors, 769
electric motors, 761
failure mode analysis, 803–5
gearboxes, 764
power generation, 771

process rolls, 772
steam turbines, 762

Belts see V-belts
Bernoulli’s theorem/principle (hydraulics), 650

for pipework, 315, 318

Bevel gears, 632, 633–5, 1031, 1034–6

lubricating, 933

Bids see under Contracts
Bills of quantities, for contracts, 88
Biological oxygen demand (BOD), 577
Bituminous and subbitumous coal, 338, 339
Blowers see Fans and blowers
Body oxygen demand (BOD), for cooling tower water, 577
Boiler application and selection, 397–8
Boiler installation and pipework:

air access, 401
blowdown pipes, 402
blowdown vessels and sumps, 405
delivery vehicle access, 401
drains, 402
feedwater pipework, 402–3
feedwater supply and tanks, 402–4
foundations and trenches, 401
fuel lines, 402
insulation, 402
noise considerations, 401
pipework, 401–2, 403
safety vent pipework, 402
services required, 401
steam lines, 402
ventilation, 401
see also Ash handling/handling equipment; Chimneys and ﬂues; Coal

burners; Corrosion; Economizers;

Gas burners; Oil burners
Boiler operation and theory:

accumulators, 390, 407
the automatic boiler house, 408–9
automatic controls, 407–8
automatic start, 408
availability, 389
blowdown:

application and purpose, 404, 408
automatic intermittent operation, 404, 408
conductivity-controlled, 408
continuous operation, 405, 408
manual operation, 404
water purity effects, 524

cavitation, 390
combustion appliance, 407
corrosion inhibitors, 983
economizers, 399–400
efﬁciency, 400
energy conservation, 509–12

computer monitoring and control, 410
energy-management systems, 410
operation and maintenance, 410
plant installation, 410

evaporation, 389

factor of evaporation, 389

feedwater:

control, 407–8
oxygen scavenging, 524
for steam raising, 523–4
treatment, 213
water-quality guidelines, 403
water-temperature recommendations, 404

heat transfer:

boiler tube convection transfer, 391–2
conduction, 390
convection, 390
from bit coal combustion products, 292
from gas oil combustion products, 292
from heavy fuel oil combustion products, 292
from natural gas combustion products, 292
furnace heat transfer, 391
radiation, 390

inspection, 165–6, 176, 177, 183

Index 1161

maintenance procedures, 412–13
management and operation, 412–13
noise problems:

everyday sounds comparison, 411
pumps:

residential property proximity, 412
safety valve venting, 412
steam transmission, 412
turbines and compressors, 411

priming, 389
running costs, 412
safety considerations, 409–10

low water, 409
no shutdown for maintenance, 410
safety valves, 410
shutdown on fault, 408–9
unattended operation, 410
waste-heat boilers on incinerators, 410

steam storage, 406–7
superheaters, 398–9
thermal storage, 389, 406–7
waterside conditions, 392–3
working pressures, 358–9
see also Corrosion

Boiler types:

cast iron sectional boilers, 393
coil type steam generators, 393
dryback boiler, 389
economic boiler, 389
electrode boilers, 393, 394
ﬁxed grate coal-ﬁred, 396
ﬂuid-bed boilers, 397
high-temperature hot water (HTHW), 395–6
horizontal shell boilers, 394–6
low-temperature hot water (LTHW), 395–6
medium-temperature hot water (MTHW), 395–6
packaged boiler, 389
shell boilers, 389, 400
steel boilers, 393
stoker-ﬁred watertube, 396
vertical shell boilers, 393–4
waste-heat boilers, 397
watertube boilers, 389, 396–7, 398, 399, 404
wetback boiler, 389
see also Corrosion

Borehole water, corrosion by, 970
Boundary lubrication, 917–18
Boyle’s law, and compressors, 605, 691
Brainstorming procedures, shutdown planning, 892
Brayton cycle, 202–3
Breach of statutory duty, and liability insurance, 194
Breakdown maintenance, 1120–1
Bridge measurements:

A.C. bridges, 270
Kelvin double bridge, 270
Maxwell bridge, 270
Q-meters, 270
Schering bridge, 270
Wayne-Kerr bridge, 270
Wheatstone bridge, 270

BS 5422 thermal insulating materials, 139
BS 5500 pressure vessels, 172
BSI Catalogue, 173
BTEC see Business and Technician Education Council
Budget control, contracts, 96
Budgetary control, 1106–7
Building control approval, 52
Building rainwater runoff, 22
Building Regulations (1990), 137
Buildings, 43–66
basements, 63
building contract procedures, 54–5
canteens, 60–1
car parking, 66
chemical/atmospheric protection, 59
construction budgets/cost comparisons, 48, 54–5
construction organizational procedures, 49

1162 Index

Buildings (cont.)

construction schedules, 49
contaminated sites, 65
covenants, 51
decoration:

external, 64
internal, 63–4

disabled people provision, 61
elevators, 61–3
employee safety and employer’s liability, 196–7
energy monitoring, 508
energy targeting, 508–9
extending existing, 53
ﬁre detection and suppression, 53–4
ﬁrst-aid facilities, 61
foundations, 65–6
ground considerations, 65–6
high security, 51
internal layouts, 81–3
leases, 51–2
maintenance records/work/planning, 59–60
materials cost v quality, 59
materials durability, 59
mechanical impact protection, 59
noise insulation for, 717
off the shelf, 45
pollution damage, 815
procurement strategy, 47–8
rent, 51–2
repair of, 60
rest rooms, 61
security, 49–51
space heating control, 304–5
speciﬁcally designed, 45
specifying, 47–9
speculative, 45
stability of, 45
structural and services supports, 56–7
structure durability, 58–9
structure and structural materials, 45–7
sub-ground pits, 63
toilet accommodation, 60
washing facilities, 61
see also Air conditioning; Ground ﬂoors, industrial buildings; Heat loss
calculations; Insulation materials, thermal; Ventilation of buildings

Burners see Coal burners; Gas burners; Oil burners
Business and Technician Education Council (BTEC):

address of, 11
Technician Certiﬁcate, 10

Butane, 323
Butene (butylene), 323

Cables, electrical:

copper/aluminum, 253
insulation, 253
selection of, 253–4

CAFE computer program, 40–1
Calcium silicate thermal insulation, 144–5
Caloriﬁc value (CV), 300

gas, 300
SI/non-SI conversion factors, 319

Canteen equipment, steam traps for, 374
Canteens, 60–1
Capacity, SI/non-SI conversion factors, 318
Capital, 1104
Car parking, 66
Carbon dioxide, corrosion in chimneys and ﬂues, 972
Carbon dioxide ﬁre extinguishers, 188
Carbon as a shaft seal, 956
Cash ﬂow, 1104
Cast iron, limitations from corrosion, 978
Cathode ray oscilloscopes (CROs), 265–7

accuracy, 266
high frequency, 266
low frequency, 266

medium frequency, 266
principle, 265–6
sampling oscilloscopes, 266–7
storage/single shot facilities, 266
use of, 267

Cathodic protection (CP), 966, 982
Cavitation in pumps, 550–5
CCMC engine lubricating oil speciﬁcations, 924–5
CCTV (closed-circuit television), 193
Ceiling decoration see Decoration of buildings
Cellular glass thermal insulation, 145
Centralized control instrumentation, 271
Centrifugal compressors see under Compressor types and operation
Centrifugal pumps, see under Pumps/pumping
Centrifuging oil separation, 956
Ceramic ﬁber thermal insulation, 144
Ceramic as a shaft seal, 956
Cesspools, and site selection, 29–30
CFCs see Chloroﬂuorocarbons
Chain computer vibration analysis, 763

running speed, 763

Chain drives and sprockets, 1058–63

Charles’ law, and compressors, 605, 691
Chartered Engineers (CEng), 11
Chemical oxygen demand (COD), for cooling tower water, 577
Chemical wear, and engine lubricants, 921
Chimneys and ﬂues:

chimney height, 406, 818–22

Clean Air Act Memorandum on Chimney Heights (1956), 405, 818–22
corrected chimney height, 818–19
fan dilution, 819
Ringleman smoke measurement chart, 819
sulfur fuels, 818
very low-sulfur fuels, 818

connecting ducts, 406
corrosion in, 972
Flues for Commercial and Industrial Gas Fired Boilers and Air Heaters

alignment, 1062
chain length, 1060–1
chain tension, 1059
contamination, 1062
heat problems, 1062
horse power, 1059
installation, 1061
leaf chains, 1059–60
lubrication, 1062
lubrication/oil viscosity, 1062–3
operating characteristics, 1058
roller chains, 1059
silent chains, 1060
span limitations, 1058
speed limitations, 1058
sprockets types, 1063
tensioning, 1061–2
windage and lubrication, 1062

(IM/11), 295
gas ﬁred boilers:

balanced compartment ﬂues, 295
balanced ﬂues, 295, 296
design procedures, 295
downdraft diverters, 294–5
dual-fuel installations, 296–7
energy conservation, 510
fan-diluted ﬂues, 295
ﬂue cross section, 293
ﬂue dampers, 297
ﬂue function, 293
ﬂue heat losses, 294
ﬂue height, 293
ﬂue thermal input, 293–4
ﬂues for condensing systems, 296
forced-draft ﬂues, 295
natural-draft ﬂue, 293
wind effects, 294

gas velocity, 405
grit and dust emissions, 406
multi-ﬂue, 406

purpose, 405
see also Coal burners; Economizers; Gas burners; Oil burners

Chloroﬂuorocarbons (CFCs), and thermal insulation materials, 141
CHP see Combined heat and power electricity generation
Circuit breakers see Switchgear/circuit breakers
City and Guilds of London Institute, address, 11
Claims on insurance see Insurance
Clean Air Acts (1956 and 1968):

application properties, 159
coating facilities, 159
costs, 159
environmental conditions, 159
maintenance, 159
structure considerations, 159

Index 1163

Columns, layout of, 45
Combined heat and power electricity generation (CHP):

application, 208
diesel and gas turbines in CHP, 209–10, 217–19
steam turbines for, 208–9, 216–17

back-pressure with double pass-out, 209
back-pressure turbines, 208
pass-out condensing turbines, 208–9

see also Electricity power generation; Electricity power generators;

Steam turbines for electricity generation

Combustion equipment see Chimneys and ﬂues; Coal burners; Furnaces;

and air pollution, 816–17
and gas burning, 292

Clean rooms and air conditioning, 498
Closed-circuit television (CCTV), 193
Clutch fundamentals, 1077–9

fatigue failure, 1079
friction clutches, 1078–9

maintenance, 1079

mechanical damage, 1079
one-way clutches, 1078
positive clutches, 1078

maintenance, 1079

two-way clutches, 1078

Coal, 337–50

classiﬁcation by rank, 339
correlation of properties, 338
delivery, 338, 340

containerized, 340
conveyer trucks, 340
pneumatic delivery trucks, 340
for electricity generation, 211–12
and energy conservation, 511
geological origin, 337
handling equipment, 213
handling/conveying systems, 340–3, 345–50

auger reception systems, 342–3
belt conveyors, 346
belt reception systems, 342, 343
bucket elevators, 346–7
conveying rate, 345–6
costs, 346
dense-phase systems, 348
design considerations, 349–50
dumping hoppers, 341
en-mass conveyors, 347
lean-phase conveyors, 348–9
open stocking, 340
pneumatic conveyors, 347–50
push-ﬂoor, 342
screw conveyors, 342–3, 347
underground bunkers, 340–1
walking ﬂoor, 341–2

storage, 343–5

hopper design, 345, 346
safety, 345
silo extraction, 344
silo ﬁlling, 344
silo methane venting, 345
spontaneous heating, 343–4

types of:

Gas burners; Oil burners

Competent persons, deﬁnition of, 165
Compressed air systems, 587–99

air consumption assessment, 589–92

nomogram for, 593

air drying and dryers, 696–703

adsorption, 700
air vapor mixtures and saturated air, 696–7
chemical dryers, 699–700
combination systems, 701
dry air distribution, 701–3
drying methods, 699–701
refrigeration, 700–1
regenerative chiller-dryer, 702
self-contained direct-refrigeration dryer, 702
water problems, 697–8
air leakage allowance, 592
air reservoirs (receivers), 703–4
tank size calculations, 703–4

branch line recommended ﬂows, 589
capacity and pressure limitations, 597–8

closed-loop systems, 598
load splitting, 598
standby capacity, 598

centralized/decentralized installations, 592
compressor discharge:

discharge pipe speciﬁcation and siting, 595
isolating valves, 595
multiple compressors, 595
non-return valves, 595

compressor intake:

corrosive gas problems, 595
ducts, 594–5
ﬁltering, 594
silencing, 594

compressor plant selection, 596–9

capacity and pressure limitations, 597–8
output control, 598–9
prime mover selection, 599
see also Compressor types and operation

anthracite, 337, 339
bituminous and subbituminous, 338, 339
lignites, 338, 339

see also Ash handling/handling equipment

Coal burners:

chain grate, 424–5, 426
coking stoker, 425–6
dual- and triple-fuel ﬁring, 428
ﬁxed-grate burner, 424, 425
ﬂuidized-bed ﬁring, 426–8
multi-fuel operation, 428
pulverized fuel (PF) burners, 426, 427
underfed stoker, 424
see also Air pollution; Ash handling/handling equipment; Boiler types;

Chimneys and ﬂues; Economizers; Furnaces

Coastal oil tankers, 275
Coatings see Concrete coatings; Floors/ﬂooring; Paint types; Steel, surface

preparation and priming; Wood coatings; Zinc metal coatings

Coatings selection factors:

compressor siting:
foundations, 594
noise, 594
servicing facilities, 594
ventilation, 594
weather protection, 594
coolers/aftercoolers, 705–6
cooling-water systems:
cooling ponds, 596
cooling tanks, 596
cooling towers, 595–6
mechanical coolers, 595
overcooling, 595
system cleanliness, 596
water quality, 595

drainage facilities, 697–8
intercoolers, 697
main line recommended ﬂows, 589
operating pressure, 589
overpressure protection, 596

1164 Index

Compressed air systems (cont.)

pressure loss through ABS ﬁttings, 590
pressure loss through steel ﬁttings, 590
prime movers, 599
safety/relief valves, 596, 704–5
use factor, 589–93
ventilation, 596
water problems, 697–8

Compressor principles and pneumatics:

Amagat’s law, 691
atmospheric pressure, 693
Avogadro’s law, 692
Boyle’s law, 691
changes of state, 692
Charles’ law, 691
compressibility of gases, 693
critical temperature of a gas, 692
Dalton’s law, 691
degree of saturation, 693
entropy, 691
example compressed air supply, 690
gas, deﬁnition, 692
gauge pressure, 694
hazards of compressed air, 689
laws of thermodynamics, 604–6
Pascal’s law, 689
perfect gas formula, 691–2
pneumatic fundamentals, 687–706
pressure/volume/temperature (PVT) relationship, 605
psychrometry, 693
relative humidity, 692
speciﬁc humidity, 692–3
sublimation, 692
thermodynamics ﬁrst law, 690
thermodynamics second law, 690–1
triple point of a pure substance, 692
vacuum, 693–4

perfect vacuum, 694

vapor, deﬁnition, 692
vapor pressure, 692

Compressor types and operation:

air compressor selection, 596–9
air dryers see under Compressed air systems
capacity and pressure limitations, 597–8
centrifugal compressors, 597, 603–4, 781

bullgear, 604, 605, 766–7

transducer locations on, 781–2

centerline conﬁguration, 603
computer vibration analysis, 766–7
in-line conﬁguration, 603–4
installation, 606

see also compressed air systems

operating methods, 606
opposed conﬁguration, 604
overhung or cantilever conﬁguration, 603
performance, 604–6
transducer locations on, 781

energy conservation, 512
lubrication systems, 694–5, 947–50

airborne dirt, 950
contamination problems, 949
lube pump, 694
moisture, 950
oil characteristics, 948–50
oil separator, 694–5
oxidation problems, 949
Pneurop Oxidation Test (POT), 947
reciprocating compressors, 948
refrigeration compressors, 949
rotary compressors, 948–9
speciﬁcations, 947–8

noise levels from, 715
prime mover selection, 599
reciprocating positive displacement, 610–14

air inlet, 613
annular ring valves, 611–12
channel valves, 610–11

computer vibration analysis, 767–9
crankshaft frequency analysis, 767–8
cylinder cooling, 611
cylinder design, 610
cylinder orientation, 611–12
discharge piping, 613–14
drainage, 614
ﬁnger valves, 610–11
foundations, 613
frame and running gear, 610
inlet and discharge valves, 610
leaf valves, 611–12
location considerations, 612–13
oil lubricant for, 948
operating methods, 614
output control, 598
performance, 612
piping, 613
pressure-relief valves, 614
transducer locations on, 782–3
ventilation, 613

rotary positive displacement, 606–10

back pressure, 609
bearings analysis, 769
computer vibration analysis, 769–70
gear mesh analysis, 769–70
helical lobe or screw, 597, 607–8

transducer locations on, 783

housing and rotor assembly, 606–7
installation, 609

see also Compressed air systems

internal slip, 609
liquid-seal ring, 608–9
lubrication system, 607
oil lubricant for, 949
performance, 609
pressure ﬂuctuations, 609
rotor passing analysis, 770
running speed analysis, 770
sliding vane, 597, 598–9, 606–7
unloading frequency, 609–10
selection considerations, 695–6

application, 695
life cycle costs, 695–6
load factor, 695

compressors

see also Vibration computer-based analysis applications,

Computer maintenance planning, 852–4
Computer modeling see Process/site layout modeling
Computer-based vibration analysis see Vibration computer-based

analysis

Computers, mainframe, air conditioning for, 490–1
Concrete:

corrosion in, 976
ﬁre protection of, 54
Concrete coatings, 155

chlorinated rubber, 155
epoxy, two-pack, 155
epoxy, water-based, 155
vinyls, 155
see also Coatings selection factors; Floors/ﬂooring

Concrete surface preparation, 157–8

acid etching, 158
dry abrasive cleaning, 158
high-pressure water jetting, 158
wet abrasive cleaning, 158

Condensate return systems see Steam condensate return systems/piping
Condensing boilers, 292
Conductivity, of cooling tower water, 576
Conﬁrmation analysis, 802
Consents to discharge, 40
Consultants, for planning and plant layout, 83–4
Contaminated land/sites:

industrial buildings on, 65
landscaping on, 30–2

Contingency sums in contracts, 89, 96
Continuing Education and Training (CET), 11

Contractors:

selection of, 92–3
and subcontractors, 93–4

Contracts, 85–100
arbitration, 98–9
bid analysis, 92
bid documents, 88–9

bid invitations, 91–2
example of principal contractor, 90

bidder selection, 91
bills of quantities with, 88
budget control and variations, 96
bulk purchasing, 89–90
conditions check list, 88
contingency sums, 89, 96
contractor selection, 92–3
delay provision, 97
determination procedures, 97
direct contracts, 93
direct purchasing, 89–90
disputes, 98–9
estimates with, 88
interim payments, 96
legal elements of, 87, 93
letters of intent, 93
main and nominated suppliers, 93
monitoring, 95
offers/offer acceptance, 93
Practical Completion Certiﬁcates, 98
prime cost (PC) sum, 88–9
principal contracts, 93
problem avoidance, 99–100
program of works, 90–1
progress and control, 94–5
provisional sum, 89
quality control, 95–6
safety on site, 96–7
simple and under seal types, 87
and site meetings, 94
technical clauses, 88
verbal and written, 93
written and verbal, 93
see also Subcontracts

Control of Pollution Act (1974), 817–18
Conversion factors, SI and non-SI, 318–19
Coolants for machining see Cutting ﬂuids (coolants)
Cooling towers, for evaporative water cooling, 522, 571–86

airﬂow conﬁgurations, 581
consultation with supplier, 577, 579
Cooling Tower Institute (CTI), 573
counterﬂow, 574
crossﬂow, 574–5
design requirements, 574
design techniques, 573
economic optimization, 574
esthetic considerations, 579–80
fault ﬁnding chart, 578
forced draft, 574–5
hybrid towers, 575
induced/mechanical draft, 574–5
installation ‘do’s’ and ‘don’ts’, 582–3
‘Legionella syndrome’, 574, 577
mean driving force (MDF), 584

evaluation of, 585–6

modiﬁcations and reﬁts, 577
natural draft, 574–5
noise problems, 580–2
operational aspects, 577
performance index (cooling towers), 573
plume control/abatement, 579
speciﬁcations, 575–6
theory, 573

theoretical calculations, 584–5

turnkey contractors, 576
vortex control, 580
water quality and treatment, 574, 576–7

Cooling water, corrosion inhibitors, 983

Index 1165

Copper alloys:

crevice corrosion, 966
galvanic corrosion, 966
limitations from corrosion, 979

Corrective maintenance, deﬁnition, 848
Corrosion, 961–85

acid carrying pipes and tanks:

hydrochloric acid, 971–2
nitric acid, 972
sulfuric acid, 971

alkaline carrying pipes and tanks, 972
aluminum alloys, limitations in use, 979–80
anodic protection, 982–3
and boiler water supplies, 971, 983
and borehole water, 970
cathodic protection (CP), 966, 982
chimneys, 972
and commissioning plant, 974–5
in concrete, 976
copper alloys, limitations in use, 978
corrosion fatigue, 968
corrosion inhibitors, 983
corrosive atmospheres, 975
cracking mechanisms, 967–9
crevice corrosion, 965–6
deﬁnition, 963
design for inspection, 978
and design of pipework, 977
and design of shape of vessels, 976–7
and drinking water, 970
economic implications, 969
elastomers, limitations in use, 980
electrical resistance probe monitoring, 984
electrochemical corrosion, 963–7

chemistry of, 963–4
corrosion potential, 964
factors affecting rate of, 964
galvanic series in sea water, 965
types of, 964–7

electrochemical monitoring, 984
environmental aspects, 975–6
exposure coupon monitoring, 984
and fabrication techniques, 977–8
false brinelling, 969
and ﬁrewater, 971
and ﬂow in pipes, 973
ﬂues, 972
fretting corrosion, 969
furnaces, 972–3

carbonization, 973
from molten salts, 973
from nitrogen containing compounds, 973
oxygen or steam in reformer tubes, 973
sulfur compounds, 973
galvanic corrosion, 966–7
glass, limitations in use, 980
gold, limitations in use, 980
high-temperature environments, 972–3
hydrogen-induced cracking (HIC), 968
information sources, 970
and intermittent operation, 974
lagging, corrosion under, 975
liquid line problems, 975
liquid metal embrittlement, 968
of metals near timber, 976
microbial induced corrosion, 967

Cladosporium fungi, 967
Gallionella bacteria, 967
Thiobacillus bacteria, 967

molten salt corrosion, 969
monitoring, 983
nickel alloys, limitations in use, 978
non-aqueous processes, 972
non-electrochemical corrosion, 968–9
oxidation, 968–9
and painting, 981–2
physical examination, 983–4

1166 Index

Corrosion (cont.)

and pipework design, 977
pitting corrosion, 964–5
plastics, limitations in use, 980
platinum, limitations in use, 980
and process water, 970
product contamination by, 970
resins, limitations in use, 980
safety implications, 969–70
silver, limitations in use, 980
in soil, 976
specifying materials, 980–1
stainless steel, limitations in use, 978
steam problems:

from boiler salts, 971
from carbon dioxide, 971
from condensates, 971
from oxygen, 971

steel, limitations in use, 978
stress corrosion cracking (SCC), 967–8
stress effects, 977
sulﬁdation, 969
and tank shapes, 976–7
tantalum, limitations in use, 980
thin-layer activation monitoring, 984
from timber near metals, 976
titanium, limitations in use, 980
and water supplies, 970–1
and welding, 977
Couplings, 1067–74

bellows, 1069
chain, 1068
combination (metallic-grid), 1070
compression, 1067–8
computer vibration analysis, 763–4

ﬂexible couplings, 763
gear couplings, 763
jackshafts, 763–4
universal joints, 764

diaphragm, 1069
elastomeric, 1069–70
ﬂanged rigid, 1067
ﬂexible, 1068
ﬂexible shaft or spring, 1069
ﬂoating shaft or spacer, 1070–1
ﬂuid, 1071
gear, 1068
hydraulic, 1071
installation:

alignment, 1073
bolting, 1073
coupling installation, 1073
coupling preparation, 1072–3
lubrication, 1073
matching parts, 1073
shaft preparation, 1072
spacing, 1073

laminated disk-ring, 1069
lubrication, 1073–4
maintenance inspections:

combination couplings, 1074
material-ﬂexing couplings, 1074
mechanical-ﬂexing couplings, 1074
rigid couplings, 1074
material ﬂexing, 1068–9
mechanical ﬂexible, 1068
rigid, 1067
selection considerations:

cost, 1072
operating envelope, 1072
operational mode, 1071
speed, 1072
torsional characteristics, 1071

split rigid, 1067
see also Keys, keyways and keyseats
Covenants on buildings, expressed and

implied, 51

Cranes:

inspection of, 166, 171
insurance on, 166–7

Criminal action, and security, 49–50
Critical path method (CPM) for planning, 894–6
Critical temperature of a gas, 692
CROs see Cathode ray oscilloscopes
Current transformers, 261
Cutting ﬂuids (coolants), 940–7

bacteria problems, 944
beneﬁts of, 943
cleaning procedures, 947
combinations of additives, 945
electro discharge machining (EDM) oils, 945
EP (extreme-pressure) oils, 945
fatty oils, 944–5
ﬂuid selection, 945
grinding, 946
neat oils, 944, 946
storage recommendations, 946
water quality, 946
water-based emulsions, 943
water-based ﬂuids/solutions, 943–4, 946–7

Cyclone dust separators, 830, 842–3

collection efﬁciency, 843
conﬁguration, 842
ﬂow pattern, 842–3
installation, 843
operating methods, 843
performance, 843
pressure drop, 843

Dalton’s law, 691
D’Arcy Weisbach equation, 543
Data bases for vibration analysis see Vibration computer-based analysis

methods and operation

Data recording, 270–1
Debtor’s ratio, 1106
Decibels (dBs), addition and subtraction of, 709–10
Decoration of buildings:

corrosion resistance, 64
dry ﬁnishes, 63–4
external, 64
internal, 63–4
life expectancy/maintenance, 64
safety requirements, 64
wet ﬁnishes, 63
Defect limits, 1119
Degreasing agents, 954
Design synthesis:

location criteria and boundary groups, 76–9
plant activities and telecommunications, 76

Detergent/dispersant additives, in lubricating oil, 920
Diesel engines, API engine lubricant service classiﬁcation, 924
Diesel oil see Oil
Diesel powered electricity generation:

applications, 201, 215–16
compression ignition cycle, 201–2
mechanical efﬁciency, 201–2
oil consumption, 202
overall efﬁciency, 201–2
plant and installation, 220–2

air intake, 220–1
control and instrumentation, 222
cooling, 221
engine starting, 221–2
heat recovery systems, 222
maintenance, 222
site conditions, 202
as standby generators, 250
thermal efﬁciency, 201–2
turbocharging, 202
two-stroke cycle, 202
see also Combined heat and power electricity generation (CHP); Elec-

tricity power generation; Electricity power generators

Disabled people, provision in buildings, 61
Discounted cash ﬂow (DCF), 1108–9, 1109, 1110–11, 1112
Dispersant/detergent additives, in lubricating oil, 920
Disputes, and contracts, 98–9
Distribution percentile estimates, 1125–8
Dividend yield and cover, 1106
Drainage of sites:

building rainwater runoff, 22
gasoline/oil interceptors, 23, 24
gravity or pumped discharge, 23–4
subsoil drainage, 23
surface water runoff, 22–3

Drinking water, corrosion by, 970
Drop point, oils and greases, 919
Dry powder ﬁre extinguishers, 188
Ducts:

fume control, 827–8
insulation of, 139
noise control in, 718
splitter silencer for, 718

Dust, deﬁnition, 825
Dust and fume control, 823–35
with air conditioning, 497–8
ducting, 827–8
electrostatic precipitators, 830–1
fabric ﬁlters, 830
fans:

application data, 829
performance and laws, 828–9

hoods:

booths, 826
captor hoods, 826, 827
receptor hoods, 826–7
total enclosures, 825–6, 827

metalworking machines, 831
self-induced spray wet collectors, 830
spray-type collectors, 830
system design, 831, 835
tests and inspections, 832–5
waste disposal, 831
wet collectors, 830
see also Air pollution; Baghouses (bag-ﬁlter) systems; Cyclone dust

separators

Dye particle corrosion inspection, 984
Dynamic friction, and lubrication, 917

ecological studies, 42
Economies of scale, 37
Economizers:

and acid dew points, 431
boilers, 399–400
condensing economizers, 435–6
design, 432–5
ﬁn types and attachment methods, 432–3
fouling coefﬁcients, 431
gas ﬁred, 431–2
installation, 435
oil and coal, 431
typical designs, 433
typical layout, 434

Efﬂuent discharge/disposal:
accidental discharge, 22
disposal charges, 531
domestic sewage, 530
efﬂuent management, 531
efﬂuent treatment, 531–2
and the EPA, 39–40
from industrial plant, 521–2
noxious efﬂuent, 531
off-site treatment, 22
on-site treatment, 22
pipework for, 22

Earthing see Grounding electrical supply systems and equipment
EC Directive on emissions from large combustion plants, 292–3
Ecology, pollution and plant location, 40–2

see also Squirrel-cage induction motors

Electrical cables see Cables, electrical
Electrical earthing/grounding see Grounding electrical supply systems and

Index 1167

safety considerations, 22
surface drainage, 530–1
and water authorities, 22
water economy and re-use, 532
see also Water supplies/water authorities
EIA (Environmental impact assessment), 41
Elastohydrodynamic lubrication, 918
Elastomers, limitations from corrosion, 979–80
Electric heating of buildings see Heating of buildings
Electric lamps, 113–20

choice of, 130
color-appearance guide, 120
color-rendering classes, 119
color-rendering guide, 120
compact ﬂuorescent, 116

application and life, 116
control gear/ballast, 125–6
ﬂuorescent lamp MCF, 115–16

application, 116

high-pressure mercury, 118

applications and operating circuits, 118

high-pressure sodium, 116–17

applications and operating circuits, 117

incandescent lamps, 113, 114–15

application and life, 114
efﬁcacy, 114

lamp selection, 119–20
light outputs comparison, 115
linear tungsten-halogen, 117

application and life, 117
low-pressure sodium, 116

application and operating circuit, 116
low-voltage tungsten-halogen, 117–18

application, life and operating circuit, 117–18

metal halide, 119

applications and operating circuits, 119

power factor correction, 126
run-up and strike times, 121
see also Emergency lighting; Lighting, lighting design; Luminaires

Electric motors:

computer vibration analysis, 761–2

bearings, 761
imbalance, 761–2
loose rotor bars, 762
running speed, 761–2
slip frequency, 762
transducer locations with, 783
v-belt intermediate drives, 762

equipment

196–7

Electrical installations, employee safety and employer’s liability, 196,

Electrical instrumentation, 255–72

instrument selection, 265
see also Acoustics, acoustic measurement; Bridge measurements; Cath-
ode ray oscilloscopes; Centralized control instrumentation; Data
recording; Electricity supply metering; Force transducers; Fre-
quency measurement; Multimeters; Multimeters, digital; Power
factor correction (PFC); Spectrum analyzers; Temperature trans-
ducers; Voltmeters and ammeters

Electrical plant:

as ﬁre hazard, 189
inspection of, 166, 171, 179, 181, 182
insurance on, 167

Electrical power distribution, duplication of supply methods, 236–7
Electrical power factor correction see Power factor correction
Electrical standby supplies see Standby electricity supplies
Electrical switchgear/circuit breakers see Switchgear/circuit breakers
Electrical transformers see Transformers
Electricity bulk supply:

access, 236
fault levels, 235
load requirements, 235
tariffs:

ﬁxed charge, 235–6

1168 Index

Electricity bulk supply: (cont.)

maximum demand, 236
and power factor adjustment, 236
unit charge, 236

voltage and frequency, 236
see also Cables, electrical; Electricity supply metering; Grounding elec-
trical supply systems and equipment; Power factor correction;
Power factor correction (PFC); Standby electricity supplies;
Switchgear/circuit breakers; Transformers

Electricity distribution, plant layout planning, 82–3
Electricity distribution protection systems:

applications, 243, 244–5
comparison discrimination, 242
magnitude discrimination, 242
objectives, 242
testing, 242
time discrimination, 242
time/direction discrimination, 242

Electricity power generation:

auxiliary systems and services, 212–14

ash handling, 213
boiler water treatment, 213
chemical dosing, 213
civil engineering equipment, 213
coal handling, 213
electrical equipment, 213
oil handling, 213
piping systems, 213
water systems, 213

available fuels:
coal, 211–12
gas, 210–11
lignite, peat and wood, 212
oils, 210

computer vibration analysis, 771

bearings, 771
casings, 771
running speed, 771
shafts, 771

economic considerations:

capital cost, 219
chemical consumption, 219
consumables costs, 219
erection periods, 220
feedwater costs, 219
fuel costs, 219
inﬂation, 220
labor costs, 219
maintenance charges, 219
purchased power costs, 220

environmental aspects, 215
generated voltages, 215
heat load uses, 212
load proﬁle considerations, 212
plant availability and maintenance, 215
scheme type selection:

diesel and gas turbines for CHP, 217–19
electricity power only, 215–16
steam turbines for CHP, 216–17

Electricity power generators, 229–31

asynchronous, 229
cooling, 230
excitation, 229–30
insulation type and temperature rise, 230–1
synchronous, 229

Electricity supplies, plant location for, 40
Electricity supply metering:
current transformers, 261
energy meters, 257–8
error limits, 258
maximum demand metering, 258
power factor measurement, 260
requirements for, 257

site condition aspects, 214–15
see also Combined heat and power electricity generation (CHP); Diesel
powered electricity generation; Gas turbine powered electricity
generation; Thermal plant electricity generation

Employer’s liability see Employee safety; Liability insurance
Energy, SI/non-SI conversion factors, 318
Energy audits, 506–7
Energy conservation, 503–16

summation metering, 258–9
three-phase metering, 258
voltage transformers, 260–1
see also Voltmeters and ammeters

Electrostatic dust ﬁlters, 497
Electrostatic precipitators, 472–3, 830–1
Elevators:

drive systems:

electric a.c. with gearbox, 62
gearless electric d.c. motor, 62
hydraulic, 62

ﬁre precautions, 62
ﬁreﬁghting elevators, 62–3
inspection of, 166, 170–1
machine rooms, 62
planning, 61–2

Emergency lighting, 126–8
centrally powered, 127–8
escape lighting, 127
planning and testing, 128
powered locally, 128
standby lighting, 127

Emergency maintenance, deﬁnition, 848
Employee safety and employer’s liability:

electrical installations, 196
hazardous materials, 197
hazardous processes, 196
health hazards and control of, 197
machinery and plant, 195–6
materials handling and storage, 196–7
personal protective equipment, 197
premises/buildings, 195
pressure equipment, 196
tools, 196

air compressors, 512
boiler plant, 509–12
building insulation, 512–13
controls, inﬂuence of, 513
energy purchasing:

electricity, 506
gas, 506
industrial coal, 506
oil, 506
fans, 512
furnaces, 512
heat recovery, 513
justiﬁcation for, 513–14
lighting, 513
motivation for, 515–16
need for, 505–6
presentation of justiﬁcation, 514–15
pumps, 512
space heating, 512
third-party energy management, 515
training, 516
world energy reserves, 505
Energy management, 507–8
Energy meters, electrical, 257–8
Energy monitoring:

buildings, 508
plant/equipment, 508
Energy targeting, 508–9
Engine lubricants, 921–5

API service classiﬁcation, 923–4

diesel engines, 924
petrol engines, 923–4

CCMC ratings, 924–5
chemical wear, 921
frictional wear, 921
MIL speciﬁcations, 924
multi-grades, 922–3
oxidation, 922
performance ratings, 923

products of combustion and fuel dilution, 921–2
relationship between classiﬁcations, 925
SAE viscosity system, 922, 923

Engineer surveyors, 167–70

defect recognition, 168
reporting, 169–70
selection, 167
training, 167–8

The Engineering Council (EC):

address, 11
registration with, 10–11

Engineering Equipment and Materials Users Association

(EEMUA), 327

Engineering Technician (EngTech), 11
Engineers in UK, professional status of, 9
Entropy, 691
Environment, and disposal of lubricating oil, 959–60
Environmental impact assessment (EIA), 41
Environmental management, 42
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA):

and efﬂuent disposal, 39–40
and water supplies, 39

Environmental standards, and plant location, 41
EPA see Environmental Protection Agency
Estimates, for contracts, 88
European Federation of National Engineering Associations (FEANI), 11
Exfoliated vermiculite thermal insulation, 145
Expanded polystyrene thermal insulation, 145
Expert evidence, 99
Explosion, gas see Gas safety
Exponential parameter estimates, 1126
Extinguishers see Fire detection and suppression
Extruded polystyrene thermal insulation, 145–6

Fabric-ﬁlter systems see Baghouses (bag-ﬁlter) systems
Face-seal shaft seals, 956
Factor of evaporation, boilers, 389
Factories Inspectorate, 97
Failure mode analysis by vibration examination, 793–811

bearings, rolling element, 803–4

ball-pass outer/inner-race frequency, 804
ball-spin frequency, 804
defect frequencies, 804
fundamental train frequency, 804
natural frequency, 804
rotational frequency, 804

bearings, sleeve (babbitt), 804–5, 806
chains and sprockets, 805
common failure modes, 794–803
critical speeds examination, 794
gears:

cracked or broken teeth, 808
defective proﬁles, 805–8
excessive wear, 808
improper shaft spacing, 808–10
load changes, 810
normal proﬁles, 805–8
imbalance studies, 794–5

horizontal looseness, 797
lift/gravity differential, 795–6
mechanical, 794–5
mechanical looseness, 797
multi-plane, 795–6
single-plane, 795–6
vertical looseness, 797

jackshafts and spindles:

fatigue, 810–11
lubrication problems, 810

misalignment studies, 798
modulation, sum/difference/product studies, 798–9
principles of, 794
process instability, 799–800
resonance studies, 800–3

conﬁrmation analysis, 802
dynamic, 801–2

Index 1169

functions of speed, 802–3
static, 801

trouble shooting chart, 795
see also Vibration computer-based analysis applications;

Vibration computer-based analysis methods and operation

False brinelling, 969
Fan computer vibration analysis, 770–1

aerodynamic instability, 770
running speeds, 771
shaft deﬂection, 771

Fans and blowers, 615–21

for air conditioning, 495–7
air density, 620
axial fans, 617
backward-curved blades, 617–18
bearing-support structures, 620
blowers, 621
brake horsepower, 618
for building ventilation, 470–1
dampers, 621
ductwork, 620
for dust and fume control, 828–9
energy conservation, 512
fan capacity, 618
fan laws, 619–20, 828–9
fan rating, 618
fan speed, 621
ﬂow-control devices, 620–1
forward-curved blades, 618
foundations, 620
inlet-air conditions, 619
mechanical efﬁciency, 618
natural frequency, 619
outlet velocity, 618
performance calculations, 828–9
propeller fans, 617
radial blades, 618
static efﬁciency, 618
static pressure, 618
tip speed, 618
total pressure, 618
transducer locations with, 784
typical rating table, 620
velocity pressure, 619
see also Vibration computer-based analysis applications, fans
Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) for vibration data, 727, 742, 760,

761, 801

Federation of Formulators and Applicators (FERFA), 103–4
Fences, security, 191
Ferrography:

oil conditioning, 959
for predictive maintenance, 875

Filters for dust control, 497–8
Finance, 1101–16
accounting, 1103
balance sheets, 1105
break-even charts, 1114–15
budgetary control, 1106–7
capital, 1104

long term, 1114
medium term, 1113–14
short term, 1113

capital expenditure appraisal, 1107–9
capital expenditure control, 1109–13

capital variation proposal, 1109, 1110
cash ﬂow summary, 1109, 1113
DCF calculations, 1109, 1110–11, 1112
payback graph, 1109, 1112
proﬁt calculation, 1109, 1111

cash ﬂow, 1104
cross department costing:

capital, 1115
efﬂuent and environmental charges, 1116
equipment space, 1115
gas, electricity etc, 1115
labor, 1115
maintenance, 1115

1170 Index

Finance (cont.)

overheads recovery, 1115
water, 1115

current and post event monitoring, 1109
debtor’s ratio, 1106
discounted cash ﬂow (DCF), 1108–9, 1109, 1110–11
dividend yield and cover, 1106
gearing, 1105
liquidity, 1104, 1106
net present value (NPV), 1108–9
operating values, 1104–6
organization types, 1103–4
pay-back period, 1108
price/earnings ratio (P/E ratio), 1106
proﬁtability, 1105–6
rate of return, 1108
revenue expenditure, 1104
stock ratios, 1106
value added tax, 1114
yield, 1106

Fire detection and suppression:

auto-sprinkler installations, 188
automatic ﬁre alarms, 188
building design for, 54
electrical equipment, 189
elevator control considerations, 62
extinguishers:

dry powder, 188
gas, 188
installation and maintenance, 188
water, 188

ﬁreﬁghting elevators, 62–3
ﬂammable gases, 189
ﬂammable liquids, 189
insurance considerations, 54
regulations for, 53–4
smoke clearance/ventilation, 58, 477–8
structure protection, 54
systems for, 54
trade hazards, 188–9
see also Gas safety; Insurance, ﬁre

Fire safety, and insulation materials, 140
Fire valves, in oil pipework, 281
Firewater, and corrosion, 971
First-aid facilities in buildings, 61
Flammable gases, insurance for, 189
Flammable liquids, insurance for, 189
Flash point, lubricating oils and greases, 919
Flash steam see Steam, ﬂash steam
Flexible intermediate drives see Chain drives; V-belts
Floors/ﬂooring, 101–9

concrete joint ﬁllers, 103
concrete substrate requirements, 103–4
cost comparisons, 108–9
ﬂoor paints:

chlorinated rubber paints, 105
epoxy resin high build, 105
multi-coat treatments, 105
polyurethane, 105

heavy duty:

bitumen emulsion-modiﬁed cementitious ﬂoors, 106
epoxy resin mortar, 107–8
granolithic toppings, 106
industrial tiles, 108
mastic asphalt, 106
polyester resin mortars, 108
polymer-modiﬁed cementitious ﬂoor toppings, 106–7
reactive acrylic resins, 108

markings for, 156
requirement considerations, 103
seals, 156
self-leveling materials:

acrylic resin, 106
epoxy, 105–6, 156
polyester resin, 106

thin applied hardener/sealers:

epoxy resin dispersions, 105, 156

low-viscosity resin based ﬁnishes, 104
non-reactive and semi-reactive resin, 104
polymer dispersions, 104–5
reactive resin solutions, 105
silico ﬂuoride surface hardeners, 104
sodium silicate surface hardeners, 104

trowelled coatings, 156
see also Coatings selection factors; Concrete coatings; Concrete surface

Flues see Chimneys and ﬂues
Flues for Commercial and Industrial Gas Fired Boilers and Air Heaters

preparation

(IM/11), 295

Fluid-ﬁlm lubrication, 918
Fluidized-bed ﬁring, 426–8
Fluids, hydraulic see Hydraulic ﬂuids
Fluids, pressurized see Hydraulic/hydrostatic fundamentals
Foam thermal insulation, 146
Force transducers, 269–70

impedance transducers, 269
photo-sensors, 269–70
piezoelectric crystals, 269
strain gauges, 269

Fouling factor, for cooling tower water, 577
Foundations:

buildings, 65–6
centrifugal pump installations, 567

Fourier transform analyzer, 270
Frequency domain analysis, 744–5

vibration data, 727, 760, 761
Frequency measurement, 263–4
Frequency and voltage, of electricity bulk supply, 236
Frequency weighting of sound, 710–11
Fretting corrosion, 969
Friction, and lubrication, 917
Frictional wear, and engine lubricants, 921
Fuel oil see Oil
Fuel oil heating, steam traps for, 374
Full ﬂuid-ﬁlm lubrication, 918
Fumes:

deﬁnition, 819
see also Dust and fume control

Furnaces:

and air pollution, 816–17
carbon sources corrosion, 973
energy conservation, 512
mobile, and air pollution, 817
molten salts corrosion, 973
nitrogen compound corrosion, 973
oxygen problems in reformer tubes, 973
sulfur compound corrosion, 973
see also Boiler types; Chimneys and ﬂues; Coal burners; Corrosion;

Gas burners; Oil burners

Gantt charts, 896, 897
Gas, for electricity generation, 210–11
Gas analysis and composition see Gas speciﬁcation and analysis;

Liqueﬁed petroleum gas (LPG)

Gas burners:

aerated (atmospheric/premix), 419, 421, 422
air and exhaust gas sealing dampers, 423–4
air/fuel management control, 423
airbox/fan arrangement, 422–3
atomizer characteristics, 421–2
burner management systems, 423
dual- and triple-fuel ﬁring, 428
dual-fuel burners, 422
electronic air/ﬂow control, 423
multi-fuel operation, 428
non-aerated (diffusion ﬂame/post-aerated), 419, 420, 422
nozzle-mix types, 420–1, 422
oxygen trim, 423
register/combustion head, 422
see also Boiler types; Chimneys and ﬂues; Furnaces

Gas combustion monitoring and control, 301–3

appliance standards, 306

Gas compressors/compressor systems see Compressed air systems;

automatic burner sequence, 305
automatic burner standards, 305–6
automatic/semi-automatic standards, 306
burner sequence and codes of practice, 305–6
carbon monoxide trim systems, 303
control air/gas ratio without trim systems:
balanced pressure-control systems, 303
electronic ratio controller, 303
linked butterﬂy valves, 303
linked characterized valves, 303
linked square port valves, 303

ﬂue gas analysis, 301
instrumentation, 302
oxygen trim systems, 303
wet and dry analysis, 301–2

Compressor types

Gas contracts:

ﬁrm supplies, 287
interruptible supplies, 287

Gas distribution networks, 312

operating pressures, 312
pipework design, 312

Gas efﬁciency and energy conservation:

air/gas ratio, 289–90
condensing boilers, 292
equipment maintenance, 290
gas/gas heat exchangers, 292
gas/liquid economizer, 292
good housekeeping practice, 290
heat exchangers, 291–2
heat insulation, 290
heat pipes in incoming air stream, 292
heat pumps, 292
heat recovery, 290–2
liquid/liquid heat exchangers, 292
load recuperation, 290–1
regenerators/regenerative burners, 291
rotary heat exchangers, 292
run-around coils, 292
waste-heat boilers, 292
see also Economizers

Gas emergency procedures:

emergency control valves, 312–13
instruction and training, 313
normal shutdown procedures, 313

Gas equipment maintenance:

and manufacturer’s instructions, 308
need for, 307
and reliability, 308
and safety, 308
staff training, 308
and thermal efﬁciency, 308

Gas equipment testing and commissioning:

commissioning:

activation period, 310
completion period, 310
inspection period, 310
operation period, 310

in-situ testing, 310
purging procedures, 309–10

air purging, 310
direct purge, 310
fuel gas to fuel gas purging, 310
inert purging, 310
purge volumes, 309
purging methods, 309
slug purging, 310

soundness testing, 309

existing installations, 309
new installations and extensions, 309
permitted leak rates, 309

Gas ﬂow charts:

discharge through oriﬁces, 318
ﬁttings and exit allowances, 317
pipe discharge tables, 316, 317

Index 1171

Gas ﬂue/chimney requirements see Chimneys and ﬂues, gas ﬁred boilers
Gas as fuel:

pipework sizing, 316–18
pressure loss theory, 315–16

advantages, 287
applications, 288
availability, 287
burners:

forced draft burners, 288
laminar ﬂames, 288
natural draft, 288
package burners, 288
premix type, 288
turndown ratio, 288

and the clean air acts, 292
combustion products:
cleanliness of, 289
water vapor in, 289

EC Directive on emissions from large combustion plants, 292–3
heat transfer, 288–9
heat transfer properties of products of combustion, 392
low-pressure supplies, 289
pressure boosters and compressors, 289
UK legislation, 293
see also Liqueﬁed natural gas (LNG); Liqueﬁed petroleum gas (LPG)

Gas heating of buildings see Heating of buildings
Gas heating process control:

building management systems, 305
compensating controllers, 304
optimum start controllers, 305
space heating in buildings, 304–5
three-port mixing valves, 305
types of:

derivative mode control, 304
high/low control, 304
integral mode control, 304
proportional only control, 304
proportional plus integral plus derivative action control, 304

zone control valves, 304

Gas meters/metering, 287–8

correction for temperature and pressure, 287
diaphragm meters, 287
rotary positive displacement meters, 287
turbine meters, 287

Gas oil burners see Oil burners
Gas pipework:

commissioning, 315
corrosion protection and identiﬁcation, 314
design criteria, 313
ducted pipes, 314
ﬂexible connections:

bellows, 314
ﬂexible tubes, 315
quick-release couplings, 315
semi-rigid and ﬂange adapters, 314
swivel joints, 314

jointing:

capillary joints, 313
compression joints, 313
fusion welding, 313
screwed and welded jointing for steel pipework, 313–14
spigot and socket, 313

materials:

copper, 313
ductile iron, 313
polyethylene, 313
steel, 313

pipe supports, 314
purge points, 315
siphons and condensate traps, 315
see also Gas ﬂow charts

Gas pressure control:

constant pressure governors, 298–9
legal requirements, 299
low pressure governors, 298
non-return valves, 299–300
pressure-regulating installations, 298–9

1172 Index

Gas pressure control: (cont.)
pressure-relief valves, 299
slam-shut valves, 299

Gas safety:

application hazards, 298
the building regulations (1985), 297
ﬁre and explosion hazards:

explosion reliefs, 307
ﬁre valves, 307
ﬂame arrestors and explosion reliefs, 307
ﬂame speed, 306–7
ﬂame traps, 306–7
ﬂammability limits, 306

Gas Act (1986), 297
Gas (declaration of caloriﬁc value) regulations (1972), 297
gas hazardous properties, 297
Gas (meters) regulations (1983), 297
Gas quality regulations (1983), 297
Gas safety (installation and use) regulations (1984), 297
Gas safety regulations (1972), 297
Gas safety (rights of entry) regulations (1983), 297
handling hazards, 298
health hazard data, 298
Health and Safety at Work Act (1974), 297
maintenance for safety, 298, 308
safety hazard data, 298
safety procedures, 298
see also Gas emergency procedures

Gas speciﬁcation and analysis:

caloriﬁc value (CV), 300
fuels and combustion products table, 302
Gas (Declaration of Caloriﬁc Value) Regulations (1972), 300
Imperial standard conditions, 301
liqueﬁed natural gas (LNG), 300
metric standard reference conditions, 300
natural gas analysis table, 301
normal temperature and pressure, 301
US gas industry ‘standard cubic foot’, 301
Wobbe number, 300

Gas storage:

high-pressure holders, 310
and interruptible contracts, 312
line packing, 312
liqueﬁed natural gas (LNG), 310
low-pressure holders, 310
Morecambe Bay, 312
Rough storage, 312
salt cavities, 310, 312

Gas turbine lubricants, 950
Gas turbine powered electricity generation:

applications, 202, 215–16
Brayton cycle, 202–3
control and instrumentation, 224–5
efﬁciency, 203, 223
fuels, 204
maintenance, 225
open cycle operation, 202–3
part load effects, 204
plant and installation, 222–6
pollution control, 225–6
start-up requirements, 222
turbines in combined cycle, 205–7, 223–4

dual pressure cycle, 206–7
fully ﬁred cycle, 205–6
single pressure cycle, 206–7
supplementary ﬁred cycle, 206
unﬁred cycle, 206

see also Electricity power generation; Electricity power generators

Gases, materials for handling, 972
Gasoline/oil interceptors for surface water runoff, 23, 24
Gates, security, 191
Gear lubricants, 926–35

AGMA speciﬁcations, 930
automatic transmission ﬂuids (ATFs), 933–4
bevel gears, 933
DIN speciﬁcations, 930
environment considerations, 934

failure of gearboxes, 934
ﬁltration of oil, 932
forced circulation, 932
gear characteristics at low, medium and high speed, 926–7
gear materials, 929
heat exchangers, 932
helical gears, 933
hypoid gears, 927–8
loading, 929
lubrication methods, 930–2
manufacture of gears/gearboxes, 934–5
materials of gears, 935
oil or grease?, 933
oil-mist lubrication, 932
open gears, 934
operating temperature, 929
operational misuse, 935
performance, 929
semi-ﬂuid lubrication, 932–3
shielded gears, 934
speciﬁcations, 929
splash lubrication, 931
spur gears, 933
surface damage of gears, 935
surface speed, 929
wear of gearboxes, 934
worm gears, 928, 931, 933

Gear teeth, 1037–42

angular dimensions, 1042
backlash, 1041–2
calculations, 1040
center distance, 1038–9
circular pitch, 1040–1
cycloidal proﬁle, 1037
diametric pitch, 1041
involute proﬁle, 1037
measurements and dimensions, 1038
pitch diameter, 1038–9
pitch measurements, 1039–40
pressure angle, 1037–8
ratios, 1042
tooth elements, 1038
tooth proportion calculations, 1041

Gearbox computer vibration analysis, 764

bearings, 764
gear-mesh frequencies, 764
running speeds, 764
transducer locations with, 784

Gearing, ﬁnancial, 1105
Gears and gearboxes, 629–37, 1029–42

backlash, 636
bevel, 632, 633–5, 1031, 1034–6
brake horsepower rating, 636
efﬁciencies, 636, 1037
failure mode analysis by vibration monitoring, 805–10

cracked or broken teeth, 808
defective gear proﬁles, 808
excessive wear, 808
improper shaft spacing, 808–10
load changes, 810
normal proﬁles, 805–8

helical gears, 631–3, 1031, 1032–4
herringbone, 632, 633
hypoid-bevel gears, 635, 1031, 1035–6
installation, 637
milter gears, 635
miter bevel gears, 1031, 1035, 1036
operating methods, 637
ratios, 637
speed reducers, 1042
speed transients, 636
spiral-bevel gears, 634–5, 1031, 1035
spur gears, internal tooth, external tooth, rack-and-pinion, 631, 632,

1031, 1032

startup, 636
straight (plain) bevel gears, 634, 1031, 1035
types of, attributes and negatives, 632

Index 1173

Generators/generation of elecrticity see Electricity power generation;

worm and gear, 635, 1031, 1036–7
zerol-bevel gears, 634, 1031, 1035

Electricity power generators

Glass, limitations from corrosion, 979–80
Glass wool thermal insulation, 143–4
Glossary, vibration fundamentals, 753–5
Gold, limitations from corrosion, 979–80
Government inﬂuences:

monetary incentives, 38
plant location, 37–8

Governors, gas pressure control, 298–9
Grease types, 951–3
application of, 953
calcium-soap greases, 951–2
degreasing agents, 954
ﬁlled greases, 952
lithium-soap greases, 952
mixing greases, 952–3
non-soap thickened greases, 952
selection of, 953
sodium-soap greases, 952

Greases and oils see Lubrication/lubricating oils and greases
Greenhouse effect, 815
Grinding, cutting ﬂuids (coolants) for, 946
Ground ﬂoors, industrial buildings:

abrasion resistance, 65
chemical resistance, 65
dusting, 65
ﬂatness resistance, 65
ground-bearing slabs:
slip membrane, 65
structural slab, 65
sub-base, 65
sub-grade, 65
wearing surface, 65

rafts, 64

earth electrodes, 251–2
IEE Regulations code, 252
neutral grounding, 252
purpose, 251
substation grounding, 252
Guards, building security, 50

Grounding electrical supply systems and equipment:

Hardness of water, for cooling towers, 577
Harmonic motion and non-harmonic motion, 731–3
Hazard plots, 1123–5
Hazardous materials, employee safety and employer’s liability, 196,

196–7, 197

Hazardous processes, employee safety and employer’s liability,

196

Health:

197

and building control approval, 52
and working with lubricating oil, 959

Health hazards and their control, employee safety and employer’s liability,

Health and safety, in UK, 1131–49
Health and Safety at Work Act (1974):

and the Alkalis and Works Regulations Act (1906), 815
gas safety, 297

Health and Safety (Emissions into the Atmosphere) Regulations

(UK 1983), 293

Health and Safety Executive (HSE), 173

and contract sites, 96–7
and LPG safety, 333

Heat, SI/non-SI conversion factors, 318
Heat exchangers, 437–45

APV Paraﬂow, 439
for condensing purposes, 442
for evaporation of highly viscous ﬂuids, 443
ﬂuid velocity effects, 439–40
fouling problems:

fouling factor, 444
fouling as a function of time, 444

resistance with fouling, 445
six types of fouling, 444

gas cooling, 443
gasket materials, 440
heat transfer coefﬁcients, 442
laminar ﬂow, 443–4
log mean temperature difference (LMTD), 442
plate construction, 439–40
plate versus tubular, 439, 441–2
pressure drop, 443–4
pressure drop of condensing vapor, 442–3
thermal performance, 440–1
Heat loss calculations, 134–7
for Approved Document L:

building fabric, 137–8
insulation of hot water systems, 139

cylindrical surfaces, 135
forced convection, 135
glossary of terms, 134–5
multi-layer insulation, 136
natural convection:

horizontal cylinders and pipes, 135
plane surfaces, 135

radiation, 135
single-layer insulation, 135
standardized resistances, 136–7
Stefan-Boltzmann formula, 135
surface coefﬁcients, 136
surface emissivity, 136
symbols, 136
U-value calculation, 136

Heat pumps with gas burners, 292
Heat transfer:

conduction, 133
convection, 133–4
radiation, 134
see also Insulation materials, thermal

Heating of buildings, equipment attributes and applications:

electric forced convective heating equipment:

downﬂow fan convectors, 462
fan convectors, 462
storage fan heaters, 462

electric natural convective heating equipment:

panel heaters, convectors or skirting heaters, 461
storage heaters, 461

electric radiant heating equipment:

high-intensity heaters, 461
low temperature panels, 461

gas-ﬁred (direct) equipment:

convector heaters, 462
fan heaters, 462
make-up air heaters, 462
overhead radiant heaters, 462
overhead tubular radiant, 462
radiant convector, 462
unit air heaters, 462

oil-ﬁred (direct) heating equipment:

air heaters, 463
convective kerosene heaters, 463
ﬂuid radiant convector heaters, 463
radiant kerosene heaters, 463

water forced convective heating equipment:

far convectors, 460
unit heaters, 460–1

water natural convective heating equipment:

continuous convectors, 459–60
natural convectors, 459
radiators, 459
skirting heating, 460

water radiant heating equipment:

radiant panels, 459
radiant strips, 459

Heating of buildings, systems and principles, 447–63

boiler efﬁciencies on low load, 452–3
central plant size, 452
Fuel and Electricity (Heating) (Control) Order (1980), 449
heat emitter characteristics, 452

1174 Index

Heating of buildings, systems and principles (cont.)

heat loss estimates, 451

allowance for height of heated space, 451

high-temperature high-velocity warm air heating systems,

high-temperature thermal ﬂuid systems,

458

457–8

advantages/disadvantages, 457–8
multiple boiler installations, 452–3
pipework system design, 455–6
selective systems, 452
steam heating systems, 457

superheat, 457

non-condensable gas problems, 457
temperature stratiﬁcation reduction, 458
warm air-heating systems, 458
water heating systems (warm water, low-, medium and

high-temperature), 453–7

design water ﬂow temperatures, 454
feed and expansion cistern sizes, 456
gas pressurization with spill tank, 456
hydraulic pressurization with spill tank, 456–7
maintenance, 457
maximum water velocities, 454
minimum water velocities, 454–5
pressurization by elevated header tanks, 456
pressurization by expansion of water, 456
relief valve sizes, 455
sealed medium- and high-temperature systems, 456–7
system temperature drop, 455
temperature limiting valves on emitters, 455

see also Insulation of buildings

Heating systems, corrosion inhibitors, 983
Helical gears, 631–3, 1031, 1032–4

lubricating, 933

Higher National Certiﬁcate, 10
HOCUS computer program, 74
Hospital equipment, steam traps for, 374
Hot water storage vessels, insulation of, 139
HSE see Health and Safety Executive
Humidiﬁcation for air conditioning, 498–9
Humidity control in buildings, 58
Hydraulic actuators, valves and equipment, 663–86

accumulators, 664–5

accumulator selection table, 665
accumulator sizing, 664–5
actuating cylinders, 666–70

cylinder force tables, 668–9
piston rod column strength, 666, 667
recommended piston rod diameters, 667

control valves, 670–3

directional control valves, 672–3
ﬂow control valves, 670
poppet valves, 672–3
pressure control valves, 670
pressure reducing valves, 672
pressure regulators (unloading valves), 670–1
relief valves, 670
sequence valves, 671–2

ﬁlters/ﬁltration, 665–6
ﬁlter elements, 665
strainers, 665

ﬁttings and connectors, 678–86

brazed connectors, 681–2
ﬂanged connectors, 681–2
ﬂared connectors, 681–4
for ﬂexible hose, 684–5
threaded connectors, 680, 681
welded connectors, 681–2

ﬂexible hose, 676–9

application, 678
connectors for, 684–5
cure date, 676–8
installation, 678, 680
quick-disconnect couplings, 684–5
sizing, 676
types of, 679

ﬂuid motors, 667

ﬁxed displacement, 667
variable displacement, 667

heat exchangers, 665–6
cooling capacity, 666
heat load, 666
manifolds, 685–6

ﬂow diagram for, 686

pipes, 673–7

aluminum, 674
bending, 676, 677
copper, 674
cutting and deburring, 675
preparation, 674
steel, 674
tube ﬂaring, 676
wall thickness and sizing, 673–4

reservoirs, 663–4

Hydraulic ﬂuids, 654–63, 935–8

acidity, freedom from, 660
air content problems, 936
care of oils and systems, 937–8
chemical stability, 659
cleanliness, 660
compressibility, 660
contamination:

air, 661
classiﬁcation, 660–1
foreign ﬂuids, 661–2
inorganic solids, 661
metallic, 661
organic, 661
particulate, 661
solvents, 661
water, 661

contamination control, 662

ﬂuid sampling, 662–3

cooling effects, 655
density, 655–6, 660
ﬁre resistance, 936–7
ﬁrepoint, 660
ﬂashpoint, 660
foaming tendencies, 660
high water-based ﬂuids, 937
lubricating power, 659
lubricating properties, 935–8
lubrication, 654–5
oxidation stability, 936
pressure effects, 936
properties, 655–60
purpose, 654–5
sealing, 655
speciﬁc gravity, 655–6
toxicity, 660
viscosity, 656–8

absolute viscosity, 656
kinematic viscosity/the stoke, 657
measurement of, 656
Poise viscosity/the Poise, 656
Pour point, 658–9
SAE (Society of Automotive Engineers) number, 657–8
SUS (Saybolt universal seconds), 657
viscosity index (VI), 658–9, 936

Hydraulic/hydrostatic fundamentals, 639–86

application types, 643–4
atmospheric pressure, 645
Bernoulli’s principle, 650
ﬂuid power advantages, 641
ﬂuid power vs. electrical systems, 641
ﬂuid power vs. mechanical systems, 641
ﬂuids, hydraulic see Hydraulic ﬂuids
force and inertia, 648–9
force multiplication, 651–2
force over distance, 653
force, pressure and head, 649
frictional problems/minimizing, 641–2, 650
hazards, 642

history of hydraulics, 643
hydraulics (liquids in motion), 647–53
hydrostatics (liquids at rest), 644–7
inertia and force, 648–9
kinetic energy, 649
Newton’s ﬁrst law of motion, 648
Pascal’s law, 645–6, 649–50
pressure and force, 644, 651–3
pressure and shape, 647
pressure, and state of matter, 643
pump basics:

displacement rating, 653–4
operating pressure, 653
performance, 653–4
ratings, 653
volume efﬁciency, 654
see also Pumps/pumping

solids, liquids and gases, 643
static and dynamic factors, 649–50
streamline/laminar ﬂow, 648
transmission of forces, 643
turbulent ﬂow, 648
volume of ﬂow and speed, 647–8
volume and velocity of ﬂow, 647

Hydrochloric acid, corrosion of pipes and tanks by, 971–2
Hydrogen-induced cracking (HIC), 968
Hypoid bevel gears, 635, 1031, 1035–6

lubrication, 927–8

Imbalance of rotors see Rotor balancing
Impedance transducers, 269
Incorporated Engineers (IEng), 11
Induction motors see Squirrel-cage induction motors
Industrial boilers see Boiler installation and pipework; Boiler operation

and theory; Boiler types

Industrial dryers, steam traps for, 374
Industrial efﬂuent disposal see Efﬂuent discharge/disposal
Infrared imaging, for thermography, 872–3
Infrared thermometers, 872
Inspection of plant and equipment, 163–72

boiler and pressure plant, 165–6, 176, 177, 183
centrifugal pumps, 171
competent persons, 165
cranes, 166–7, 171
electrical plant, 166, 167, 171, 179, 181, 182
elevators (lifts), 166, 170–1, 175
inspection authority role, 163–5
insurance on, 166–7
laboratory chemical water examination, 171–2
mechanical plant, 166, 167
metallurgical testing, 171
non-destructive testing, 171
power presses, 178
pressure plant/vessels, steam and air, 166, 170
statutory report forms, 174–83
technical services for, 170–2
see also Engineer surveyors

The Institution of Civil Engineers, 9
The Institution of Electrical Engineers, 9
The Institution of Mechanical Engineers, 9

address of, 11

The Institution of Plant Engineers (IPlantE):

aims of, 9
courses for qualifying for, 10
history of, 9
membership requirements, 10
organizational structure, 10

Instrumentation see Acoustics, acoustic measurement; Bridge measure-
ments; Cathode ray oscilloscopes; Centralized control instrumenta-
tion; Data recording; Electricity supply metering; Force transducers;
Frequency measurement; Multimeters; Multimeters, digital; Power
factor correction (PFC)

Instrumentation see Spectrum analyzers; Temperature transducers; Volt-

meters and ammeters

Insulation, noise insulation, 140, 715–16

Index 1175

statutory regulations, 449
Thermal Insulation (Industrial Buildings) (1957), 449
walls and windows, 449–51

U values, 450–1

windows/glazing, 450–1

Insulation materials, thermal, 131–46

acoustic properties, 140
aluminum foil facings, 142
Approved Document L:

controls for space heating and hot water systems, 139
heat loss through building fabric, 137–8
insulation of hot water systems, 139

Insulation of buildings:

building regulations, 449–51
and energy conservation, 512–13
heat loss estimates, 451
roofs:

external, 449
with false ceilings, 450
U values for materials, 450
under-drawing, 449

beveled lags, 142
blowing wool, 142
BS 5422, 139
Building Regulations (1990), 137
calcium silicate, 144–5
cellular glass, 145
ceramic ﬁbers, 144
chemical resistance, 140
chloroﬂuorocarbons (CFCs), 141
density effects, 140–1
exfoliated vermiculite, 145
expanded polystyrene, 145
extruded polystyrene, 145–6
facings, 142
ﬁre safety, 140
glass cloth facings, 143
glass wool, 143–4
heat transfer:

conduction, 133, 134
convection, 133–4
radiation, 134

lamella, 142
laminate facings, 143
limiting temperatures, 139
loose ﬁll, 142
magnesia, 144
mat or blanket, 142
mattress, 142
mechanical strength, 140
mineral wool, 143
molded products, 142
paper facings, 142
phenolic foam, 146
pipe sections, 141–2
polyisocyanurate foam, 146
purpose, 133
PVC facings, 142
quilt, 142
rigid polyurethane foam, 146
robustness, 140
rock wool, 143–4
rolls, 142
slab and board, 141
sprayed foam, 142
sprayed insulation, 142
surface emissivity, 140
temperature effects, 141
thermal movement, 140
tissue facings, 142
water supply bylaws, 139
weather resistance, 140
wire netting facings, 143
see also Heat loss calculations

Insurance:

access control, 193
building fabric, 192

1176 Index

Insurance (cont.)

business interruption, 187
doors and shutters, 192
ﬁre, 187–8
intruder alarms, 192–3
plant and equipment, 161–83
boiler and pressure plant, 166
claim procedures, 172
cranes and lifting machinery, 166–7
electrical plant, 167
history, 163
inspection authority role, 163–5
legislation, 163
lifts and hoists, 167
loss adjusters, 172
mechanical plant, 167
reportable accidents, 172
statutory requirements, 164
storage tanks and contents, 166

security and theft, 189–92
windows, 192
see also Engineer surveyors; Fire detection and suppression; Inspection

of plant and equipment; Liability insurance; Security
The International Protection (IP) Code, (luminaires), 123–4
Intruder alarms, 192
ISO 9000 series of standards, 165

Jackshafts and spindles, failure mode analysis, 810–11
Just in time (JIT) manufacture, 69

Kerosene burners see Oil burners
Keys, keyways and keyseats, 1074–7

key shapes, 1075
keyway depth and width, 1075
manufacturing tolerances, 1076
shaft and hub dimensions, 1075
standard ﬂat keys and keyway, 1076
standard square keys and keyway, 1076
stress calculations:

keys, 1076–7
shafts, 1077

Labor relations, and plant location, 38
Lagging, corrosion under, 975
Lamps see Electric lamps; Luminaires
Land pollution, and plant location, 42
Landlord responsibilities, plant engineers, 5
Landscaping:

on contaminated land, 30–2
on uncontaminated land, 32–4

Langelier Saturation Index, for cooling tower water, 577
Laundry equipment, steam traps for, 374
Laws of thermodynamics, and compressors, 604–6
Laxton’s Building Price Book, 54
Layout planning see Plant layout planning
Leak detection by vibration analysis, 724
Leases:

assigning and sub-letting, 52
basic contents of, 51
covenants, 51
preparation, 51
rents, 51–2
reviews, 52

Leather shaft seals, 956
Letters of intent, and contracts, 93
Liability insurance, 193–8
breach of contract, 194
breach of statutory duty, 194
cover provided, 194–5
employer’s liability, 194–8
legal requirements, 194

negligence, 194
nuisance, 194
pollution, 198
public liability (third party), 194–5, 198
third party liability, 194
tort, 193, 194
visitors, 198
see also Employee safety and employer’s liability; Insurance

security, 192
see also Electric lamps; Emergency lighting; Luminaires

Lighting theory:

Life-cycle costing, 854
Lifts and hoists:

insurance on, 167
statutory report form for, 175
see also Elevators

Lighting, 111–30

and energy conservation, 513
lighting design, 128–30

lamp/luminaire choice, 130
local, 129–30
localized, 129
uniform/general, 128–9

color/color temperature, 113
diffusion, 113
efﬁcacy (luminous efﬁciency), 113
foot-candle, 113
frequency of light, 113
illuminance, 113
infrared (IR) radiation, 113
inverse square law, 113
lumen, 113
luminance, 113
luminosity, 113
lux, 113
nature of light, 113
reﬂection, 113
refraction, 113
ultraviolet (UV) radiation, 113

Lignites, 338, 339
Line scanners, for thermography, 872
Linear measure, SI/non-SI conversion factors, 318
Liqueﬁed natural gas (LNG), 300

storage, 310
see also Gas . . . . . .

Liqueﬁed petroleum gas (LPG), 321–34

applications, 331–3

advantages over liquid fuels, 331–2
as motor fuel, 332–3

composition and properties, 323–6

associated/unassociated gases, 323
butane, 323
butene (butylene), 323
coefﬁcient of expansion, 326
commercial butane, 323, 324–5
commercial propane, 323, 324–5
ﬂammability limits, 326
gross caloriﬁc value, 324–5
NGL (constituent of natural gas ﬁelds), 323
odor, 323
propane, 323
propene (propylene), 323
relative density, liquid, 325
relative density, vapor, 325–6
spillage hazard, 326
sulfur content, 325
toxicity, 326
vapor pressure, 324
water content, 323

safety considerations, 330–1, 333

burial and mounding, 331
LPGITA (UK) codes of practice, 333
safety legislation, 333
safety relief valves, 331
storage vessel separation distances, 330–1
water-spray systems, 331

transport and storage, 326–31

Codes of Practice, 327
cylinder storage, 330
gas-air mixture, 328–9
LPGITA (UK) Code of Practice, 327
pressure vessels for, 326–7
rail tank wagons, 326
road tankers, 326
storage vessels, 327
vaporizers, 328–30
Wobbe number, 328–9

see also Gas......

Liquid metal embrittlement, 968
Liquidity, 1104, 1106
LNG see Liqueﬁed natural gas
Location selection see Plant location; Site selection
Loss adjusters, 172
Low-pressure systems see Steam low-pressure systems
LPG see Liqueﬁed petroleum gas
LPGITA (UK) Codes of Practice, 327, 333
Lubricating oil analysis, 873–5
conditioned monitoring, 958
contamination, 873
ferrography, 959
fuel dilution, 873
fuel soot as an indicator, 874
nitration, 874
oxidation, 874
particle count tests, 874
solids content, 874
spectrographic analysis, 874
total acid number (TAN), 874
total base number (TBN), 874
viscosity, 873
wear particle analysis, 874–5

Lubrication/lubricating oils and greases, 915–60

boundary lubrication, 917–18
centralized ‘one shot’ lubrication, 957
centrifuging, 956
classiﬁcation of lubricants chart, 941–2
conditioned monitoring, 958–9
corrosion prevention, 953–4
hard-ﬁlm protectives, 954
preventive selection, 954
soft-ﬁlm protectives, 953–4
temporary corrosion categories, 953–4

degreasing agents, 954
drop point, 919
dynamic friction, 917
elastohydrodynamic lubrication, 918
environmental considerations, 959–60
ﬁltration/ﬁlter types, 954–6

centrifugal ﬁlters, 956
depth ﬁlters (absorption-type), 955
edge ﬁlters, 955
ﬁlter efﬁciency, 955
magnetic ﬁlters, 955
surface ﬁlm ﬁlters, 955

ﬂash point, 919
for friction reduction, 917
full ﬂuid-ﬁlm lubrication, 918
greases, 951–3
handling lubricants, 957–8
health of employees, 959
mechanized feed methods, 957
oil mist feeds, 957
penetration properties, 919
planned lubrication and maintenance (PLM) management, 958
pour point, 919
reconditioning processes, 958
safety of employees, 959
spray lubricants, 954
static friction, 917
storage of lubricants, 957–8
viscosity, 918
viscosity index (VI), 919
see also Additives; Bearings; Compressor types and operation, lubri-
cation systems; Cutting ﬂuids; Engine lubricants; Gear lubricants;

Index 1177

Gears and gearboxes; Grease types; Hydraulic ﬂuids; Machine tool
lubricants; Shaft seals; Steam turbine lubricants; Transformers, oil
cooled

Luminaires, 120–5

choice of, 130
and electric shock protection, 124
electrical safety, 120
explosion hazards, 124–5
ﬁnishing, 120
function, 120
heat dissipation, 120
and ingress of liquids protection, 124
The International Protection (IP) Code, 123–4
lamp protection, 120
lighting terms, 121–3
power factor correction, 126
safety and quality, 125
zonal classiﬁcation, 125
see also Electric lamps; Emergency lighting; Lighting

Machine tool lubricants, 938–40

circulatory lubrication systems, 940
classiﬁcation of lubricants chart, 941–2
gears, 939
hydraulics, 939
hydrostatic bearings, 938–9
leadsrews, 939
loss-lubrication systems, 940
lubrication methods, 939–40
manual lubrication, 940
multi-wedge bearings, 938
nuts, 939
plain journal bearings, 938
rationalizing lubricants, 940
roller bearings, 938
sideways bearings, 939
tramp oil, 939
see also Cutting ﬂuids; Lubrication/lubricating oils and greases

Machinery, oils for, 921

see also Lubrication/lubricating oils and greases

Machinery and plant, employee safety and employer’s liability, 196–7
Magnesia thermal insulation, 144
Magnetic particle corrosion inspection, 984
Maintenance of buildings, 59–60
Maintenance, predictive see Predictive maintenance
Maintenance/maintenance management, 845–56, 857–65

bad actor management, 1121–2
bathtub curve, 860
breakdown maintenance, 1120–1
computer maintenance planning, 852–4

software considerations, 853–4
system check list, 853–4

corrective maintenance, deﬁnition, 848
defect limits, 1119
distribution percentile estimates, 1125–8
effective management, 857–65
emergency maintenance, deﬁnition, 848
exponential parameter estimates, 1126
failure probability estimates, 1125–8
hazard plots, 1123–5
health and safety, 855
life-cycle costing, 854
loss of control symptoms, 864

domination of maintenance by operations, 864
excessive machine breakdowns, 864
frequent emergency work, 864
inadequate training, 864
insufﬁcient preventative maintenance, 864
lack of equipment replacement programs, 864
and regaining control, 864–5

maintenance organization evaluation, 862–4

methods to be used, 863
planning and scheduling, 862–3
safety procedures, 863

maintenance organization role, 861–2

1178 Index

Maintenance/maintenance management (cont.)

accurate records, 861–2
maximum utilization of resources, 861
minimum spares inventory, 861
optimum availablity, 861
optimum equipment life, 861
optimum operating condition, 861
rapid reaction, 862
and ‘world-class’ organizations, 863
manual maintenance planning, 848–52

assets registers, 848–9
as a basis for computer planning, 851–2
guidance notes, 84, 849
planning schedules, 84, 849–50
repair records, 849
week tasks, 850
work dockets, 850–1

mean-time-between-failures (MTBF), 860, 1120, 1121–2, 1128
mean-time-between-repairs (MTBR), 1128
mean-time-to-failure (MTTF), 859, 1128
Pareto’s law, 1121
planned maintenance, deﬁnition, 848
planned programs, 847–8
predictive maintenance management, 860–7

nondestructive techniques, 861

preventative maintenance management, 859–60

deﬁnition, 848

random failure modes, 1119
run-to-failure management, 859
scheduled maintenance, deﬁnition, 848
standard life, 1119
technicians’/craftsman’s responsibility, 855
time to failure (TTF), 1121
training, 854–5
useful life concepts, 1119–21
user tolerance, 1119
Weibull parameter estimates, 1126, 1128
see also Failure mode analysis by vibration examination; Predictive
maintenance; Preventative maintenance; Vibration computer-based
analysis applications; Vibration computer-based analysis methods
and operation

Materials, building structures, 45
Materials handling and storage, employee safety and employer’s liability,

196, 196–7

Mean-time-between-failures (MTBF), 860, 870, 1120, 1121–2, 1128
Mean-time-between-repairs (MTBR), 1128
Mean-time-to-failure (MTTF), 859, 1128
Mean-time-to-repair (MTTR), 869–70
Mechanical plant:

inspection of, 166
insurance on, 167

MES (minimum economic scale/efﬁcient size), 37
Metal coatings see Paint types; Steel, surface preparation and priming;

Zinc metal coatings
Metallurgical testing, 171
Metering electricity supply see Electricity supply metering
Meters/metering see Acoustics, acoustic measurement; Bridge measure-

ments; Cathode ray oscilloscopes;

Centralized control instrumentation; Data recording; Electricity supply

metering; Force transducers;

Frequency measurement; Multimeters; Multimeters, digital; Spectrum

analyzers

Meters/metering see Temperature transducers; Voltmeters and ammeters
Mineral wool thermal insulation, 143
Minimum economic scale/efﬁcient size (MES), 37
Miter bevel gears, 1031, 1035, 1036
Mixers and agitators, 623–7

batch-type screw mixer, 626
brake horsepower, 626
combination mixer-extruder, 626
feed rate, 627
installation, 626
mixer setup, 626–7
product quality, 626
propeller/paddle mixers, 625
screw mixers, 625–6
viscosity variation effects, 627

Modeling see Process/site layout modeling
Molten salt corrosion, 969
Motors, electric and motor control see Electric motors; Squirrel-cage

induction motors

Multi-grade lubricating oils, 922–3
Multimeters, digital, 264–5

charge balancing technique, 265
dual-slope instruments, 265
linear ramp principle, 265
successive approximation technique, 265
voltage-frequency principle, 265

Municipal sewage-treatment/efﬂuent disposal, 39–40

National Association of Corrosion Engineers (NACE), 158
National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA) standard on v-

belts, 1047

Natural gas see Gas
Neat oils, cutting ﬂuids (coolants), 944, 946
Negligence, and liability insurance, 194
Net positive suction head (NPSH), 569
Net present value (NPV), 1108–9
NGL (constituent of natural gas ﬁelds), 323
Nickel alloys, limitations in use, 979
Nitric acid, corrosion of pipes and tanks by, 972
Nitrile rubber shaft seals, 956
No-strike deals, and plant location, 38
Noise:

acoustic enclosures, 717
building insulation, 717
control in ducts, 718
from industrial boilers, 410–12
and insulation, 715–16
measurement of, 712
noise indices, 711
noise nuisance, 713

Environmental Protection Act section 80 (1990), 713–14
legislation for, 713
noise-abatement zones, 714
nuisance assessment, 714
offences and higher court action, 714
and planning applications, 714
vibration analysis detection, 724

noise rating curves, 711
noise reduction principles, 715
noise and vibration control, 713–14
noise-control engineering, 715
and physical injury to workers, 714–15
sound-reduction index (SRI), 715–16
see also Sound; Sound absorbers; Vibration

Nuisance:

and liability insurance, 194
private, 820
public, 820
statutory, 819–20
see also Noise, noise nuisance

Occupancy areas per person, 76
Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA), 345
Odor dispersal, 822
Oil:

for electricity generation, 210
handling equipment, 213
for lubrication see Lubrication/lubricating oils and greases

Oil burners:

additives, 423
air and exhaust gas sealing dampers, 423–4
air/fuel management control, 423
atomizer characteristics, 421–2
burner management systems, 423
dual- and triple-fuel ﬁring, 428
dual-fuel burners, 422
electronic air/ﬂow control, 423
emulsion techniques, 423

energy conservation, 510
multi-fuel operation, 428
oxygen trim, 423
perforated drum burners, 417
pot burners, 417
pressure-jet atomizers, 417–18, 422
rotary cup atomizers, 419, 420, 422
simplex pressure-jet atomizer, 418
spill return atomizers, 418
twin-ﬂuid atomizers, 419, 422
vaporizing burners, 417, 422
wall ﬂame burners, 417
see also Boiler types; Chimneys and ﬂues; Economizers; Furnaces

Oil distribution and delivery:

rail tank cars, 275
river and coastal tankers, 275
road delivery vehicles, 275

Oil heating of buildings see Heating of buildings
Oil, hydraulic see Hydraulic ﬂuids
Oil pipework systems, 280–4

ﬁlters, 280–1
ﬁre valves, 281
ﬂow conditions, 283
ﬂow rates, 283
gravity systems, 281
handling temperatures, 280
pipe sizing, 283–4
pressure drop and pipe length, 283
pump assisted gravity systems, 281
ring main systems, 281–3

branch lines, 283, 284
cold oil, 282
hot oil, 282
sub-circulating loops, 282–3
warm oil, 282

valve material, 281
viscosity considerations, 283

Oil storage tanks:
bund area, 280
buried tanks, 280
capacities, 275–6
construction, 275
drain valve, 277
draw-off connection, 277
ﬁlling connections, 276–7
heating requirements, 277–80

calculations for, 278–9
electric heating coils for, 278
heat loss and lagging, 279–80
hot water coil heating, 278
recommended temperatures, 278
steam coil heating, 278

manholes, 277
non-return valve in ﬁller connection, 277
oil-level indicators, 276
siting, 280
supports for, 276
types of, 275
ullage, 277
underground storage, 280
vent pipes, 277

Oils and greases see Lubrication/lubricating oils and greases
Organizational structures, plant engineering, 4–6
Organizations, types of, 1103–4
Oscilloscopes see Cathode ray oscilloscopes (CROs)
OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health Act), 345
Outages, 889–914

see also Shutdown

OXBAL computer program, 41
Oxidation, engine lubricants, 922
Oxygen sag, for cooling tower water, 577

Packing see Shaft seals
Paint constituents, 149–50
anti-skinning agents, 149

Index 1179

binders, 149
diluents, 149
extenders, 149
pigments, 149
solvents, 150
water-based corrosion inhibitor, 149

Paint types, 150–6

acrylated rubber, 151
air-oxidizing coatings, 150–1
alkyds, 150
anti-condensation, 156
asphalt, 154
bituminous, 152
chemically cured coatings, 152–3
chlorinated rubber, 151
coal tar enamel, 154
epoxies:

coal tar, 152
powder, 154
solventless, 154
two pack, 152
epoxy ester, 150
epoxy phenolic coatings, 153
heat-condensation coatings, 153
heat-resistant coatings, 154–5
non-oxidizing coatings, 154
phenolic coatings, 153
polyesters:

powder, 154
unsaturated, 154

polyurethanes, two pack, 153
silicone alkyds, 150
silicone-based aluminum paints, 155
solids (100 per cent) coatings, 153–4
solvent-dry coatings, 151–2
tung oil phenolic, 150–1
urethane alkyds, 150
urethanes:

moisture-cured, 153
solventless, 154

vinyl chloride co-polymer resins, 151
vinyl tars, 152
zinc dust graphite paint, 155
zinc silicate, 155
see also Coatings selection factors; Concrete coatings; Floors/ﬂooring;

Wood coatings

Painting:

for corrosion control:

erosion resistance, 982
saponiﬁcation, 982
solvent resistance, 982
temperature considerations, 982

for corrosion control erosion resistance, 982
economic aspects, 158
inspection, 158–9
speciﬁcations, 158

Pascal’s law:

hydraulics, 645–6, 649–50
pneumatics, 689

Performance indicators, plant layout planning:

cycle time, 81
door-to-door time, 81
stock value, 81

Periodic motion, 730–1
Personal protective equipment, employee safety and employer’s liability,

197

PERT computer program/diagrams, 83

and shutdown planning, 896–8

Petrol engines, API engine lubricant service classiﬁcation, 923–4
PFC see Power factor correction
pH of water, for cooling towers, 576
Phenolic foam thermal insulation, 146
Photo-sensors, 269–70
Piezoelectric crystal force transducers, 269
Pipework:

for centrifugal pumps, 567–8, 569–70
corrosion in soil, 976

deﬁnition, 848
see also Maintenance/maintenance management; Predictive maintenance;

1180 Index

Pipework: (cont.)

design for minimum corrosion, 977
for efﬂuent discharge, 22
insulation of, 139
leak detection by vibration analysis, 724
steam pipe sizing, 360
see also Corrosion; Gas pipework; Oil pipework systems; Steam

condensate return systems/piping;

Steam lines/pipes draining

Pipework ﬂow losses, 543–9
bend loss coefﬁcients, 546
D’Arcy Weisbach equation, 543, 546
equivalent-length estimating method, 546
friction losses, 543–6
gate valve losses, 546
interaction coefﬁcients, 548
loss factor estimating method, 546
system loss presentation, 547–9
valve loss characteristics, 546–7
see also Pumps/pumping

Planned maintenance:

Preventative maintenance

Planning see Plant layout planning
Planning and building control approval, 52
Plant engineering function, 1–6

deﬁnition, 3
engineering, 5
maintenance, 5
organizational structures, 4–6

Plant engineers:
activities, 3–4
knowledge areas, 4
professional status of, 9
responsibilities, 3

energy conservation, 15
equipment design and modiﬁcation, 15
landlord, 5
plant safety, 15
pollution control and environmental compliance, 15
process troubleshooting and optimization, 15
production, 5
services operation and maintenance, 15
system installation and speciﬁcation, 15
system speciﬁcation and selection, 15

role of, 13–15

Plant layout planning, 67–84

building utilities, 83
buildings internal layouts, 81–3
computer-aided methods, 70
consultants:

justiﬁcation for, 83–4
speciﬁcation, 84

design synthesis, 76–9

location criteria and boundary groups, 76–9
plant activities and intercommunications, 76

ease of expansion, 80
electrical distribution, 82–3
implementation, 83
location criteria and boundary groups, 76–9
material handling, 81
performance indicators, 81
plant activities and intercommunications, 76
plant data analysis, 71–2
plant data collection, 70–1
process equipment, 81
process and trafﬁc ﬂows, 79
selling the concept, 83
site constraints, 79–80
storage, 81–2
and technological development, 69
tools for, 69–70
see also Process/site layout modeling

Plant location, 35–42

baseline studies and modeling, 40–1
company image aspects, 38

corporate matters, 38
economies of scale, 37
electricity supplies, 40
environmental management, 42
and environmental standards, 41
factor costs, 37
in foreign countries, 38
government inﬂuences, 37–8
labor relations, 38
manpower resources, 38
protected markets, 37
resource planning, 41
trade efﬂuent disposal, 39–40
water supplies, 38–9
see also Site selection

Plant and machinery, employee safety and employer’s liability, 196–7
Plastics, limitations from corrosion, 979–80
Platinum, limitations from corrosion, 979–80
Plume (fumes and vapors) heights, 821
Pneumatic fundamentals see Compressor principles and pneumatics
Pneurop Oxidation Test (POT), 947
Poise viscosity, 656–7
‘Polluter pays’ policy, 40
Pollution:

and ecology, 40–2
and liability insurance, 198
see also Air pollution; Land pollution; Water pollution

Polyacrylic resin shaft seal, 956
Polyisocyanurate foam thermal insulation, 146
Positive displacement compressors see under Compressor types and oper-

ation

Pour point, oils and greases, 919
Power, SI/non-SI conversion factors, 318–19
Power factor correction (PFC):

electric lamps/luminaires, 126
electricity bulk supply, 235, 243–7, 259–60

with A.C. synchronous machines, 243, 245–6
background, 243
control device requirements, 247
harmonics, dangers of, 247
with motor circuits, 247
with static capacitor banks, 243, 245–7, 259

measurement for, 260
small loads, 259

Power line frequency computer vibration analysis, 762
Power presses, inspection report, 178
Power transformers see Transformers
Practical Completion Certiﬁcates, 98
Predictive maintenance, 867–88, 1120

American Society of Nondestructive Testing (ANST), 877
beneﬁts of, 869–71
ferrography, 875
lubricating oil analysis, 873–5
and mean-time-between-failures (MTBF), 870
and mean-time-to-repair (MTTR), 869–70
process parameter monitoring, 876–7
program establishment, 881–8

accelerometers, 885
alert and alarm limits, 884–5
analysis parameter setting, 884
analysis techniques, 887
data acquisition frequency, 883–4
database development, 883–6
dedicated and accountable personnel, 882
displacement probes, 885
efﬁcient data collection and analysis, 882–3
goals, objectives and beneﬁts, 881–3
management support, 882
mounting techniques, 885–6
root cause failure analysis, 887–8
signature analysis boundaries, 884
technical support, 886
training, 886, 888
transducer types, 885
trending techniques, 886–7
velocity transducers, 885
viable database, 883

vibration-based predictive maintenance, 883

system selection, 877–81

accuracy, 878
alert and alarm limits, 879–80
automated data acquisition, 878
automated data management and trending, 878
automatic report generation, 881
automatic trending, 881
data accuracy, 879
data storage, 880
data transfer, 880
expertise to operate, 879
ﬂexibility, 878
host computer, 880
the microprocessor, 879
operating cost, 879
reliability, 878
simpliﬁed diagnostics, 881
software, 880–1
system cost, 878–9
training and technical support, 878
transducers, 881
user friendly operation, 881
user-friendly software and hardware, 877–8

thermography, 872–3

infrared imaging, 872–3
infrared technology, 872
infrared thermometers, 872
line scanners, 872

tribology, 873–5
ultrasonic monitoring, 876–7
and vibration analysis, 723, 870

broadband trending, 871
narrowband trending, 871
signature analysis, 871–2

visual inspection, 876
see also Maintenance/maintenance management; Preventative mainte-
nance; Vibration computer-based analysis applications; Vibration
computer-based analysis methods and operation

Premises, employee safety and employer’s liability, 196–7
Presses:

noise from, 715
steam traps for, 374

Pressure, SI/non-SI conversion factors, 318
Pressure control, gas, 298–9
Pressure equipment, employee safety and employer’s liability, 196,

196–7

Pressure plant and boilers, inspection of, 165–6, 170, 176, 177, 183
Pressure reducing valves, steam low-pressure systems, 364–8
Pressure vessels, inspection of, 166
Pressure/volume/temperature (PVT) relationship, for compressors, 605
Preventative maintenance:
and bathtub curve, 860
deﬁnition, 848
management of, 859–60
when insufﬁcient, 864
see also Maintenance/maintenance management; Predictive maintenance

Prime cost (PC) sum, 88–9
Process equipment, steam traps for, 374
Process rolls, computer vibration analysis, 771–2

bearings, 772
load distribution, 772
misalignment, 772
transducer locations with, 784
Process water, corrosion by, 970
Process/site layout modeling:
computer modeling, 72–4
factory areas determination, 76
model for change, 74–6
model construction, 74
plant layout optimization, 72–3
plant sizing ﬂowsheets, 73
simulation models, 74

Production responsibilities, plant engineers, 5
Professional engineering development, 10–11
Professional engineers, in UK, 9
Proﬁtability, 1105–6

Index 1181

Project planning see Shutdown (outage)
Propane, 323
Propene (propylene), 323
Protected markets/protectionist policies, 37
Protection systems, electrical see Electricity distribution protection

Protective equipment, personal, employee safety and employer’s

systems

liability, 197

Provisional sum in contracts, 89
Psychrometrics/psychrometry, 483, 693
Public liability insurance, 194–5

see also Liability insurance
Pulleys and v-belts see V-belts
Pulverized fuel (PF) burners, 426, 427

and air pollution, 816
Pumps/pumping, 533–64

accumulator designs, 542
air content and pump behavior, 545
back pull-out design, 537
cavitation, 550–5
centrifugal pump installation:

baseplate design and securing, 567
discharge piping conﬁguration, 568
elbows on suction ﬂange avoidance, 569
foundations, 567, 570
friction loss reduction, 569
inlet piping conﬁguration, 568
net positive suction head (NPSH) requirements, 568–9
piping alignment, 569
piping support, 567
right ﬁttings usage, 569–70
rules for proper installation, 568–70
stop air in suction line avoidance, 469
total friction loss, 568
total system head (TSH), 568
transducer locations with, 784
turbulent ﬂow problems, 568
vapor in suction line avoidance, 469

centrifugal pumps operation and use, 536, 543, 550

inspection, 171
seals for, 556–9
and speed changing drives, 561–2
transducer locations with, 784–5

dissolved gas and liquid displacement, 545
double-suction design, 538
drive selection, 560–2
efﬁciency, 539

volume efﬁciency, 654
energy conservation, 512
external gear, 543
family tree of types, 535
ﬂow control, 549–50

bypass control, 549–50
valve control, 549–50

ﬂuid properties and pump behavior, 541–3
friction factor, 545
internal gear, 543
lobe rotor, 543
monoblock design, 537
multiple-pumps, 550, 551, 552

transducer locations with, 785–6

net positive suction head (NPSH), 552–5
piston/plunger pumps, 541
plunger, 543
positive displacement pumps, 540–1

transducer locations with, 786–7

priming systems, 555–6
pump range chart, 560
pump selection, 559–60
pump/system interaction/matching, 549–50
reciprocating pumps, 540–2, 543

seals for, 559
regenerative, 543
reliability considerations, 563
rotodynamic pump principles, 535–40
scaling laws, 536–40
screw/centrifugal pump comparison, 544

1182 Index

Pumps/pumping (cont.)

seals:

centrifugal and rotary pumps, 556–9
reciprocating pumps, 559
soft packings speed range, 558
soft packings temperature range, 557

self-priming systems, 555–6
single/twin/multiple-screw, 543
transducer locations on, 783

sliding vane, 543
‘Speciﬁc Speed’, 538–9
speed control, 549–50
spur (external) gear pump, 540–1
suction systems, 550, 552, 553
testing, 563

factory tests, 563
scale-model testing, 563

The Institution of Mechanical Engineers’ availability classes, 563
Thoma’s cavitation parameter, 355
variable speed, 550, 552
viscosity effects, 542–3

viscosity correction curves, 544

vortex-prevention, 553
see also Hydraulic/hydrostatic fundamentals; Pipework ﬂow losses;

Vibration computer-based analysis applications, pumps

Purchasing contracts, 89–90
Pyrometers, 268–9

pitched, 46
repairs, 60
trusses for, 46
typical constructions, 47

Root cause failure analysis, 887–8
Rotor balancing, 1009–16

balance quality grades table, 1016
coupled imbalance, 1013
dynamic/static imbalance combined, 1013
imbalance amounts, 1013
imbalance causes:

assembly errors, 1011–12
center of rotation errors, 1011
cocked rotor errors, 1011–12
key length problems, 1012
shaft/bore location errors, 1011

imbalance theory, 1012–13

dynamic imbalance, 1012–13
static imbalance, 1012

phase relationships of imbalance points, 1013
phase shift techniques, 1015
in place balancing, 1014
precision balancing, 1014
rotor speed effects, 1013
single versus two-plane balancing, 1014
standards for balancing, 1015–16

Quality control:

of contracts, 95–6
using vibration analysis, 723–4

Rail access, and site selection, 20
Rail oil tank cars, 275
Railway engines, and air pollution, 816
Rainwater runoff, 22
Rankin Cycle, 204
Rathbone chart, 791
Reciprocating compressors see under Compressor types and operation
Refrigeration plant, air conditioning see under Air conditioning
Regulatory compliance, in US, 1151–6
Relative humidity, 692
Reportable accidents, 172
Resins, limitations from corrosion, 979–80
Resistance thermometers, 269
Resource planning, 41
Rest rooms, 61
Reynolds number:

and heat exchangers, 440–1
and pump design, 537

Rigid polyurethane foam thermal insulation, 146
Ringleman smoke measurement chart, 816, 819
Rip-rap banks, 24
Risk assessment:

and crime prevention, 190

see also Security
River oil tankers, 275
Road access:

access arrangements, 21
headroom clearance, 21
maneuvering space, 21
and site selection, 20

Road markings, 156
Rock wool thermal insulation, 144
Roof insulation:
external, 449
with false ceilings, 450
U values for roof materials, 450
under-drawing, 449

Roofs:

ﬂat, 46

defect problems, 60

penetration arrangement, 47

SAE (Society of Automotive Engineers) viscosity number, 657–8

engine lubricants, 922, 923

Safety:

boiler plant, automatic, 409–10
and building control approval, 52
coal storage, 345
compressed air hazards, 689
and contracts and speciﬁcations, 96–7
corrosion considerations, 969–70
efﬂuent treatment plant, 22
gas usage, 297–8
liqueﬁed petroleum gas (LPG), 330–1, 333
luninaires, 125
and maintenance management, 863
see also Gas safety

Safety valves:
boilers, 410
compressed air systems, 596, 704–5
gas emergency control valves, 312–13
gas ﬁre valves, 307
LPG safety relief valves, 331
oil pipework ﬁre valves, 281

Salt cavities, for gas storage, 310, 312
Saturation, degree of saturation, 693
Scheduled maintenance, deﬁnition, 848
Scottish Vocational Education Council (SCOTVEC):

address, 11
Technician Certiﬁcate, 10

Sea transport access, and site selection, 20
Seals/seal materials see Pumps/pumping, seals; Shaft seals
Security:

access control, 193
alarm systems, 51

reliability and maintenance of, 51

breaking-in time, 191
closed-circuit television (CCTV), 193
cost effectiveness of, 49
criminal action, 49–50
defense in depth, 190
doors, 192
electronically operated access/egress systems, 193
entry and egress control, 50–1
fences, 191
gates, 191
high security buildings, 51
insurance aspects, 189–92
intruder alarms, 192
layers of protection, 50–1

lighting, 192
location considerations, 191
movement detection devices, 50
objectives of, 49
patrol and manual guarding, 50
planning for, 190
risk assessment, 190–1
roofs, 192
security staff, 193
shutters, 192
static detection devices, 50
trap and object detection devices, 50
walls, 192
windows, 192

SEEWHY computer program, 74
Semiconductor equipment, distorting load of, 235
Sensible heat, 483
Septic tanks, and site selection, 30
Sewage:

cesspools, 29–30
septic tanks, 30
treatment, 39
see also Efﬂuent discharge/disposal

Shaft alignment, 987–1007

angular/face misalignment, 990–1
combinational/skewed misalignment, 990–1
dial indicators, 995–6
fundamentals of alignment, 989–90
graphical plotting, 1005–7
horizontal alignment planes, 992
horizontal units procedures, 998–1000

correction determination/amount of shim, 999–1000
initial check, 998–9

hot alignment check, 1005
indicator sag correction, 994–5
machines to be moved (MTBM), 989
machines to be shimmed (MTBS), 989
offset/parallel misalignment, 990
optical/laser methods, 997–8

advantages, 997–8
disadvantages, 998
perfect alignment, 990
preparatory steps, 992–3
procedures, 998–1004
reverse-dial indicator/indicator-reverse method, 995, 996–7

data recording, 996
indicator sag, 997
limitations, 996
mechanical looseness, 997
mounting and readings, 996
zeroing and calibrating, 997
rim-and-face method, 995, 997

limitations, 997
mounting, 997

soft-foot/soft-foot correction, 993–4
thermal compensation targets, 1004
thermal growth adjustments, 1004–5
trial-and-error versus calculation, 989
two-indicator method, 995
vertical alignment planes, 992
vertical units procedures:

angularity corrections, 1001–3
corrections application, 1004
determining corrections, 1001
east/west correction, 1003
initial check, 1000
north/south check, 1000–1
north/south correction, 1003
offset correction, 1003

Shaft seals:

mechanical seals:

advantages/disadvantages, 1021
bent shaft (shaft runout), 1026
components and assembly, 1020–1
driver alignment, 1027
end play (lateral or axial shaft movement), 1025
environmental controls, 1028

Index 1183

equipment check points, 1025
installation, 1027–8
leakage prevention, 1021
lubrication, 1021
pipe strain, 1027
positive drive seal, 1022
sealing area, 1021
single-coil spring seal, 1021–2
startup procedures, 1028
whip/deﬂection (radial shaft movement), 1025–6

packed stufﬁng boxes, 1019–20
installation precautions, 1022
installation procedure, 1022–5
installation tools, 1022
stufﬁng box concentricity, 1027
stufﬁng box space, 1025
stufﬁng box squareness, 1026–7

packing materials, 956–7

metallic, 957
neoprene, 956–7
nitrile and polyacrylic materials, 956
silicone rubber, 956
textile ﬁbers, 957

pumps, 557–8
seal materials, 956

carbon, 956
ceramic, 956
face-seal materials, 956
leather, 956
metal, 956
nitrile rubbers, 956
polyacrylic resins, 956
rubber bellows, 956
sealing rings, 956
silicone rubber, 956
seal requirements, 1019

Shutdown (outage), 889–914
corrective action, 908–12

delay corrective actions, 909
feedback, use of, 909–10
negotiating for materials, supplies and services, 910–12

costs/budgeting planning, 898–900

capital shutdown work, 900
control point identiﬁcation charts, 899
non-repetitive shutdown work, 900
repetitive shutdown work, 899–900
responsibility assignment, 899
standards establishment, 899
typical cost components, 898–9
work in progress control, 899

deﬁnition, 891
life cycle of, 891
model for successful project management, 913–14
planning and management, 891–3

brainstorming procedures, 892
initial meeting, 892
master shutdown schedule, 891
objectives, 892
policy development, 892
shutdown management team, 891–2
task selection, 892
timetable development, 893

project completion, 912–13
completion check list, 913
project evaluation form, 913

project planning:

arrow diagramming, 896
critical path method (CPM), 894–6

history, 895
justiﬁcations, 896
potential, 895–6

Gantt charts, 896, 897
leveling, 896
PERT diagram, 896–8
planning steps, 893
project parameters, 893
project speciﬁcations, 894

1184 Index

Shutdown (outage) (cont.)

quality aspects, 893–4
time dimension planning, 894–6

schedule updating, 906–8

budget control charts, 907
milestone charts, 906
performance monitoring, 907–8
project control charts, 906, 907
project costing charts, 906

work plan development, 901–5
engineering standards, 902–3
estimates, 903–4
evolution of standards, 903
guesses, 903
historical averages, 903
industrial engineering techniques, 903
initial work order development, 901
manpower requirements, 901–2
material requirements, 901
planner experience, 902
shutdown assignment meeting, 904–5
work schedules, 901

work plan implementation, 905–6

daily review, 905
schedule monitoring, 905–6
schedule progress, 905
status reporting, 905–6

SI/non-SI conversion factors, 318–19
Signature analysis, and vibration, 752–3, 871–2
Silicone rubber shaft seals, 956
Site drainage see Drainage of sites
Site layout realization:

ease of expansion, 80
options, 81
process and trafﬁc ﬂows, 79
site constraints, 79–80

Site meetings, and contracts, 94
Site selection, 17–34, 37–8

and access for transport, 20–1
efﬂuent considerations, 22
landscaping on industrial/reclaimed land, 30–4
sewage treatment, 29–30
site drainage, 22–4
and site drainage, 22–4
water storage considerations, 27–9
water supply considerations, 24–6
see also Plant location; Wind considerations

Sludge disposal, 40
Smoke:

deﬁnition, 819
Ringleman measurement chart, 816, 819
see also Chimneys and ﬂues
Soil, corrosion of pipes in, 976
Solids, speciﬁc heat of, 355–6
Soot, deﬁnition, 819
Sound:

decibels (dB), 709–10
and frequency weighting, 710–11
sound intensity level (SIL), 709
sound power level (SPL), 709
sound-reduction index (SRI), 715–16
see also Noise; Sound absorbers

Sound absorbers, 716

panel, 716
porous, 716
resonant, 716

Space heating equipment, steam traps for, 374
Speciﬁc heat:

gases/vapors, 357
liquids, 356
solids, 355–6

Speciﬁcations:

buildings, 47–9
paint, 158
as parts of contracts, 87–8

Spectrographic analysis, lubricating oil, 874
Spectrum analyzers, 270

Speculative industrial buildings, 45
Spindles and jackshafts, failure mode analysis, 810–11
Spiral bevel gears, 634–5, 1031, 1035
Spon’s Architects’ and Builders’ Price Book, 54
Sprinklers, ﬁre extinguishing, 188
Sprockets see Chain drives and sprockets
Spur gears, 631, 632, 1031, 1032

lubricating, 933

Squirrel-cage induction motors:

advantages, 248
auto-transformer starting, 248
cables for, 249
contactors for, 249
direct-on-line starters, 248
electronic soft-start, 249
fuses for, 249
isolators for, 249
overload protection, 249
primary resistance starting, 248
star/delta starting, 248
stator/rotor starting, 249

Stability of buildings, 45
Stainless steel:

crevice corrosion, 965–6
limitations in use, 978–9
liquid metal embrittlement, 968
pitting corrosion, 964–5

Standard life of equipment, 1119
Standard Method of Measurement manual, 88
Standards, ISO 9000 series of standards, 165
Standby electricity supplies:

D.C. systems, 249–50
deﬁnitions, 249
standby diesel generators, 250
un-interruptible power supply (UPS) systems (A.C.):

applications, 250
principle types, 250

Static friction, and lubrication, 917
Statistics and machinery problem solving, 1117–29
Staybolt universal seconds (SUS) viscosity, 657
Steam condensate return systems/piping, 373–86

condensate line sizing chart, 377
condensate pumping, 377–81
condensate recovery unit, 378
drain lines to traps, 373, 376
expansion allowance, 381–6

bellows, 385–6
cold draw technique, 382–3
ﬂexible trapping arrangements, 383
full loops, 385
horseshoe loops, 385
lyre loops, 385
sliding joints, 385–6

pumped return lines, 376–7
Spirax Ogden packaged unit, 383
steam tables, 384
trap discharge lines, 376
water ﬂow in black steel pipes, 379–82
water-carrying capacity of pipes, 376

Steam, ﬂash steam, 357, 369–73

proportion of steam released, 370–1
release process, 369–70
for space heating, 371
steam traps, mechanical/thermodynamic/thermostatic, 372–5
and sub-cooled condensate, 371
utilization, 370, 371

Steam lines/pipes draining, 360–4

and air venting, 364
drain point layout, 364
heat-up method, 364–5
steam traps, 361–2
water hammer, 360–1

Steam low-pressure systems, 364–9

air venting, 369
bypass valves and lines, 368
heat exchanger condensate draining, 369
pressure reducing valves, 364–8

Index 1185

dependent-energy closing, 238–9
stored-energy closing, 238–9

metal enclosed, 238
minimum oil, 237
range capability, 238
sulfur hexaﬂuoride gas, 238
vacuum, 238

Tankers:

river and coastal oil delivery, 275
road oil delivery, 275

Tanks, oil storage see Oil storage tanks
Tanks and vats, steam traps for, 374
Tantalum, limitations from corrosion, 979–80
Telecommunications equipment, air conditioning for, 492
Temperature, SI/non-SI conversion factors, 319
Temperature inversions:

elevated, 822
ground base, 821, 822

Temperature transducers, 267–9

pyrometers, 268–9
resistance thermometers, 269
thermisters, 268
thermocouples, 268

Theft see Security
Thermal conductivity, 140–1

SI/non-SI conversion factors, 319

Thermal insulation see Insulation materials, thermal
Thermal plant electricity generation:

applications, 204, 215–16
condensing steam cycle, 204–5
fuels, 205
performance inﬂuences, 205
Rankin Cycle, 204
see also Electricity power generation; Electricity power generators;
Steam turbines for electricity generation; Thermal plant electricity
generation

Thermal resistivity, SI/non-SI conversion factors, 319
Thermisters, 268
Thermocouples, 268
Thermodynamics, laws of, and compressors, 604–6
Thermography, 872–3

infrared imaging, 872–3
infrared thermometers, 872
line scanners, 872

short-term exposure limit (TLV-STEL), 57
time-weighted average (TLV-TWA), 57

Time domain vibration plots/curves, 724–7, 742–4, 760
Time to failure (TTF), 1121
Tinplate (tin-plated steel), corrosion, 966
Titanium, limitations from corrosion, 979–80
Toilet accommodation in buildings, 60
Tools, employee safety and employer’s liability, 196–7
Tort, and liability insurance, 193, 194
Total acid number (TAN), lubricating oil, 874
Total base number (TBN), lubricating oil, 874
Total dissolved solids (TDS), in cooling tower water, 576
Total heat, 483
Total suspended solids (TSS), in cooling tower water, 576
Transducers, 267–70

for computer monitoring equipment, 780–7
force, 269–70
temperature, 267–9
Transformers, 239–42

air-cooled, 239
ﬁttings, 240–2
oil cooled:

mineral oil, 239
oil performance standards, 951
oil properties, 951
oil testing, 951
silicon-based liquid, 239

Stefan-Boltzmann formula, 135
Stock value performance indicator, 81
Storage and materials handling, employee safety and employer’s liability,

Third party liability and insurance, 194–5, 198

see also Liability insurance
Threshold limit values (TLV):

parallel operation, 366–8
series operation and installations, 368
valve selection, 368–9

water removal, 365–6

Steam mains, steam traps for, 374
Steam, operating principles:

boiler working pressures, 358–9
and condensate, 357
ﬂash steam, 357
and the laws of thermodynamics, 355–8
lines/pipes sizing on pressure drop, 360, 361
lines/pipes sizing on velocity, 360, 361
load calculations, 359–60
mains working pressures, 358–9
physical properties of, 355–8
superheated steam, 356

Steam pressure vessels, inspection of, 166
Steam systems, corrosion inhibitors, 983
Steam turbine lubricants, 950

corrosion resistance, 950
demulsibility, 950
foaming resistance, 950
oxidation resistance, 950
performance standards, 950–1
viscosity, 950

Steam turbine vibration analysis:

bearings, 762
blade pass, 762
mode shape (shaft deﬂection), 762
speed, 762–3

Steam turbines for electricity generation, 208–9, 216–17, 226–9

control and lubrication, 227–9
installation, 227
multi-stage axial ﬂow, 226–7
single-stage, single ﬂow, 226
see also Combined heat and power electricity generation (CHP); Elec-
tricity power generation; Electricity power generators; Thermal
plant electricity generation

Steel:

coatings for see Paint types
ﬁre protection of, 54
limitations from corrosion, 978
surface preparation and priming, 156–8

abrasive blasting, 156–7
acid pickling, 157
priming, 157
see also Zinc metal coatings

196, 196–7

Storage tanks and contents, insurance on, 166
Strain gauges, 269
Stress corrosion cracking (SCC), 967–8
Stress in materials, and corrosion, 977
Sub-ground pits waterprooﬁng:

drained cavity construction, 63
external waterproof membrane, 63
watertight concrete construction, 63

Subcontracts/subcontractors:

Sublimation, 692
Subsoil drainage, and site selection, 23
Sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB), 967
Sulfur oxides, corrosion in chimneys and ﬂues, 972
Sulfuric acid, corrosion of pipes and tanks by, 971
Superheaters, boilers, 398–9
Surface water runoff:

gasoline/oil interceptors, 23, 24
and site selection, 22–3

SUS (Staybolt universal seconds) viscosity, 657
Switchgear/circuit breakers, 237–9

air, 237–8
bulk oil, 237
cubicle type, 238
mechanisms:

main and nominated subcontracts, 93–4
principal contractor with domestic sub-contractor and supplier, 93

1186 Index

Transformers (cont.)

sludge observations, 951

temperature rise, 240
testing, 240
types:

AN (air-natural cooling), 240
OFAF (oil-immersed air-forced cooled), 239
OFAN (oil-immersed air-natural circulation), 239
ONAF (oil-immersed air-forced), 239
ONAN (oil-immersed air-cooled), 239

vector groupings and connection arrangements, 241

Transport access, and site selection, 20–1
Trap and object detection devices, security, 50
Trend of vibration analysis, 787–93

broadband, 787, 788
comparison to reference values, 789–91
composite, 788, 789
evaluation methods, 788–93
narrowband, 787–8, 789

Turbines see Combined heat and power electricity generation (CHP);
Electricity power generation; Gas turbine powered electricity gener-
ation; Steam turbines for electricity generation; Vibration computer-
based analysis applications

Turnkey building procurement, 47

UK, health and safety in, 1131–49
Ullage, in oil storage tanks, 277
Ultrasonic leak detection for predictive maintenance, 876–7
Ultrasonic wall thickness/corrosion monitoring, 984
Un-interruptible power supply systems see UPS
UPS (un-interruptible power supply) systems:

applications, 250
principle types, 250

US, regulatory compliance in, 1151–6
Useful life concepts, 1119–21
User tolerance, 1119

V-belts, 765–6, 1045–58

belt noise, 1051–3

squeaks, 1052
squeals, 1052

belt/pulley selection, 1045–8
computer vibration analysis, 765–6

fault frequencies, 765
running speeds, 765–6

contamination, 1052
cracking, 1052
cross section requirements, 1046
datum length, 1046

standard datum length chart, 1047

dust, 1052
effective length, 1046
excessive whip, 1053
extreme heat, 1052
failure reason examples, 1054–8
inspection and replacement, 1048
installation, 1048–51

good practices, 1048–9
length measurements, 1046
matching sets, need for, 1046
National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA) standard, 1047
outside circumference measurements, 1046
power transmission/tension calculations, 1045
pulley center distance allowances, 1050
pulleys for, 1047

inspection and replacement, 1048

stretching, 1052–3
tension inspection/adjustment, 1049–51
tensions, working/bending/centrifugal, 1045

Value added tax, 1114
Valves see under the applications for use
Vapor compressors/compressor systems see Compressed air systems; Com-

pressor types

vapor phase inhibitors, corrosion inhibitors, 983
Vats and tanks, steam traps for, 374
Vegetation, and air pollution, 815
Vehicle access see Road access
Ventilation of buildings, 465–80
air for fuel-burning devices, 58
commissioning and testing, 478–9
condensation prevention:

with dehumidiﬁcation, 477
with insulation, 476–7
with moisture reduction, 477
with ventilation, 477

contaminant local extraction, 477, 478
costs of running, 479–80
deﬁnitions, 467
ﬁre control/smoke clearance, 58
fresh air requirements, 57–8
fume dilution:

factories and warehouses, 476
ofﬁces and public spaces, 476

heat dissipation/cooling, 58
humidity control, 58
maintenance, 479
natural ventilation, 467–9

advantages/disadvantages, 468
applications, 468–9
automatic control, 469
commissioning and testing, 479
controllable ventilation, 473–5
ﬁxed ventilation, 473
ﬂow rate calculations, 468
maintenance, 479
manual control, 469
roof ventilators, 474
wind effects, 468

overheating:

factories and warehouses, 475
ofﬁces and public spaces, 475–6

activated carbon ﬁlters, 473
advantages/disadvantages, 470
air cleaners, 472–3
axial fans, 470
centrifugal fans, 470
commissioning and testing, 479
control methods, 470
cross ﬂow fans, 471
cyclones, 473
ducted systems, 471
electrostatic precipitators, 472–3
fan air movement calculations, 469–70
local extract systems, 471–2
maintenance, 479
mixed ﬂow fans, 471
propeller fans, 470
roof extract units, 471
roof inlet units, 471
viscous, dry and HEPA air ﬁlters, 472

powered (mechanical) ventilation, 469–70, 470–3

smoke ventilation, as part of ﬁre damage limitation, 477–8
threshold limit values (TLV) (contaminants), 57–8
usage, 56–7
see also Air conditioning

Vibration computer-based analysis applications:

advantages, 759
bearings, 764–5

rolling element, 803–4
sleeve (babbitt), 804–5

blowers, transducer locations with, 784
chains, 763, 805

running speed, 763

compressors:

bearings, 769
bullgear, 766–7, 781–2
centrifugal, 766–7, 781
crankshaft frequencies, 767–8
frequency shift due to pistons, 768
gear mesh, 769–70

piston orientations, 768–9, 782–3
positive displacement, 767–70
reciprocating, 767, 782–3
rotor passing, 770
running speeds, 770
screw compressors, 769–70, 782–3
transducer locations on, 781–3

couplings, 763
ﬂexible, 763
gear couplings, 763
jackshafts, 763–4
universal joints, 764

electric generators, 771–2

bearings, 771
casings, 771
line frequency, 771
shafts, 771

electric motors, 761–2

bearing frequency, 761
imbalance, 761–2
line frequency, 762
loose rotor bars, 762
running speed, 762
slip frequency, 762
transducer locations with, 783
v-belt intermediate drive, 762

fans, 770–1

aerodynamic instability, 770–1
running speeds, 771
shaft deﬂection, 771
transducer locations with, 784

Fast Fourier Transforms (FFT), 760, 761
gearboxes, 764
bearings, 764
gear-mesh frequencies, 764
running speeds, 764
transducer locations with, 784

gears, 805–10
intermediate drives, 763–6
jackshafts and spindles, 810–11
machine-train monitoring parameters, 761–6
process rolls, 771–2

bearings, 772
load distribution, 772
misalignment, 772
transducer locations with, 784

pumps, 772–3

axial thrusting, 772
centrifugal, 772–3
hydraulic instability (vane pass), 772–3
passing frequencies, 773
positive displacement, 773
running speed, 773
transducer locations with, 784–7
single-channel data limitations, 759
sprockets, 805
steady-state data limitations, 759–60
steam turbines, 762–3

bearings, 762
blade pass, 762
mode shape (shaft deﬂection), 762
speed, 762

time-domain data, 760

v-belts, 765–6

fault frequencies, 765
running speeds, 765–6

see also Failure mode analysis by vibration examination
Vibration computer-based analysis methods and operation:

American Petroleum Institute (API) charts, 791
cross-machine comparison, 793
data acquisition, 780–7
data normalization, 793
database development, 773–80
database setup, 774–80
alert/alarm limits, 778
analysis parameter sets, 775
analysis type, 775

Index 1187

anti-aliasing ﬁlters, 777
averaging, 777
bandwidth, 775
boundary conditions and resolution, 775
constant speed machinery, 776–7
data ﬁlters, 775
data-acquisition routes, 780
gear mesh, 776
hanning correction, 778
load effects on limit, 778–9
maximum frequency, 775
minimum frequency, 776
mounting conﬁguration, 779–80
narrowbands analysis, 776
operating envelope, 779–80
resolution, 776
roller-element bearings, 776
running-speed harmonics, 776
speed effects on limit, 778
variable speed, order analysis, 775
variable-speed machinery, 777
weighting, 778
window selection, 778

frequency-domain data, 760
industrial standards, 790–1
limitations, 759–61
low frequency response limitations, 760–1
machine and process data collection, 773–4

bearings, 774
constant speed machinery, 773–4
equipment information sheets (EIS), 773
machine components, 774
passing frequencies, 774
process information sheets (PIS), 774
variable speed machinery, 774

measurement locations on typical equipment, 781–7
measurement orientation, 781
mode shape (shaft deﬂection) analysis, 791
Rathbone chart, 791
shaft deﬂection (mode shape) examination:

broadband plots, 791–2, 871
narrowband plots, 792

transducers, 780
trending analysis, 787–9

baseline data comparison, 789
broadband, 787
composite trends, 788, 789
limitations, 793
narrowband, 787–8, 789, 871
process envelope monitoring, 790
rate of change examination, 790
reset after maintenance comparisons, 789–90

unskilled technician dangers, 759
see also Failure mode analysis by vibration examination

Vibration sources, effects and avoidance equipment:

anti-vibration mounting, 717, 718–19

installation of, 719
positioning of, 719
rubber, 718
steel spring, 719

damage to buildings from, 715
deﬁnition of, 712
effect on people, 712–13
ﬂow instability and operating conditions, 728–9
isolating from, 717
linear-motion machinery, 729–30
mechanical motions and forces, 729
reciprocating machinery, 729–30
rotating machinery, 728–9
rotor imbalance, 728
see also Noise; Rotor balancing

Vibration theory, analysis and measurement, 721–55

acceleration, 734
accelerometers, 747–8
amplitude, 734
analysis applications:

acceptance testing, 723

1188 Index

Vibration theory, analysis and measurement (cont.)

aircraft engine analyzers, 724
foreign parts detection, 724
leaks detection, 724
loose parts detection, 724
machine design and engineering, 724
noise control, 724
predictive maintenance, 723, 728
quality control, 723–4

analysis techniques, 751–3, 757–811
axial orientation measurements, 749
baseline/reference data, 752
broadband/overall measurement, 734, 751, 753
comparative analysis, 751–2
component measurement, 734
computer-based analysis:

advantages, 759
limitations, 759–61

damping, 736–40

forced damped vibration, 739–40
free damped vibration, 738–9
free undamped vibration, 737–8

data acquisition, 746–8, 750–1

cables for, 748

data formats, 745–6
data interpretation, 727–8
data measurements, 748–9
data types, 742–5
data veriﬁcation, 750–1
displacement, 734
displacement probes, 746
dynamic data, 745
Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), 727, 742
freedom:

many degrees of, 742
one degree of, 740
two degrees of, 740–2

frequency, 732–4
frequency domain format/data, 727, 744–5
full Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) signature, 752–3
harmonic and non-harmonic motion, 731–3
industrial reference data, 752
known machine condition, 752
mass, as a property of material, 736
maximum vibration measurement, 734
measuring equipment:

portable vibration analyzers, 728
transducers, 728

multi-channel data, 745–6
narrowband measurement, 734, 751, 753
peak-to-peak measurement, 735–6
periodic motion, 730–1
process envelopes, 752
proﬁles of vibration, 724
radial orientation measurements, 749
reference/baseline data, 752
resetting after maintenance, 752
root-mean-square measurement, 736
signature analysis, 752–3, 871
single-channel and multi-channel data, 745–6
steady-state data, 745
stiffness, 736
time domain plots/curves, 724–7, 742–4
transducer mounting:

hand held, 750
magnets, 749
permanent, 749
quick disconnect, 749

trending, 751
velocity, 734
velocity transducers, 747
zero-to-peak measurement, 736
see also Vibration computer-based analysis applications;

Vibration computer-based analysis methods
and operation

Viscosity, 656–8

absolute viscosity, 656

hydraulic ﬂuids, 656–8
kinematic viscosity/the stoke, 657
of lubricating oil, 873, 922
measurement of, 656
multi-grade oils, 922–3
oils and greases, 918
Poise viscosity/the Poise, 656
Pour point, 658–9
SAE (Society of Automotive Engineers) number, 657–8
SUS (Saybolt universal seconds), 657
viscosity index (VI), 658–9, 919

Viscosity index improver additives, in lubricating oil, 920
Visitors, liability insurance, 198
Visual inspection, for predictive maintenance, 876
Voltage and frequency, of electricity bulk supply, 236
Voltage transformers, 260–1
Voltmeters and ammeters:

analogue voltmeters (electronic), 264
electrodynamics instruments, 263
electrostatic, 263
moving coil, 261–2
moving iron, 262–3
moving magnet, 262
thermocouples, 263

Volume, SI/non-SI conversion factors, 318
Volumetric efﬁciency, 654

Wall insulation, 449–51

U values, 450

Walls of buildings decoration see Decoration of buildings
Water hammer in steam lines, 360–1
Water pollution, and plant location, 42
Water supplies/water authorities:

applications and standards:

apyrogenic water, 525
de-alkalized water, 525
de-ionized water, 525
high-purity water, 525
natural water, 525
potable water, 525
puriﬁed water, 525
softened water, 525
ultra-pure water, 525

availability of supplies, 38–9
for boilers:

blowdown, 524
condensate return, 524
external water treatment, 524
oxygen scavenging, 524
raw water quality, 524
for steam raising, 523
water circuit management, 523

for building services:

for closed water circuits, 522
for domestic purposes, 522
potable water, 521

byelaws, and thermal insulation, 139
consultants, contractors and experts, 519
corrosion by, 970–1
for cosmetics production, 524
draw-off regulations, 28
natural waters, 520–1
open cooling-water systems (evaporative towers), 522–3

biocides, 523
Legionella problems, 522
side stream ﬁltration, 523
water losses, 522–3

for pharmaceutical production, 524
for process use, 524, 527
puriﬁcation processes:

base-exchange softening, 528
coagulation, 527
de-alkalization exchange, 528–9
de-ionization, 529
electrodialysis (ED), 530

ion-exchange processes, 528–9
membrane ﬁltration, 527
membrane processes, 529–60
reverse osmosis (RO), 529–60
sand ﬁlters, 527
ultra-ﬁltration, 530
water softening, 527

site selection aspects, 24–6
standard pipe installations, 27–34
water chemistry, 519–21

analysis reports, 519–20
CO2 release, 520
hardness and alkalinity, 520
pathogen problems, 521
potable water, 521
silica, 520
total dissolved solids (TDS), 520
units of measurement, 519–20

water economy and re-use, 532
water storage, 27–8
see also Efﬂuent discharge/disposal

WCMs (World Class Manufacturers), 69
Wear particle analysis, lubricating oil, 874–5

cutting wear particles, 874
rolling fatigue, 874–5
rolling and sliding wear, 875
rubbing wear, 874
sliding wear, 875

Weibull parameter estimates, 1126, 1128
Welding, and corrosion, 977
Wet bulb temperature, 484

Index 1189

Wind considerations in sight selection:

design for winds, 19
directional factor, 20
diurnal winds, 19
gravity winds, 19
lee waves, 19
topography factors, 20
Wobbe number, 300, 328
Wood coatings, 156

aluminum-based primer plus alkyd ﬁnish, 156
emulsion-based primer plus alkyd ﬁnish, 156
oleo-resinous primers plus alkyd ﬁnish, 156
wood stains, 156
see also Coatings selection factors; Paint constituents; Paint types;

Painting

World Class Manufactures (WCMs), 69
World energy reserves, 505
‘World-class’ organizations, 863
Worm gears, 635, 1031, 1036–7

lubricating, 928, 931, 933

Zerol bevel gears, 634, 1031, 1035
Zinc metal coatings, 157

hot-dip galvanizing, 157
sheradizing, 157
sweep blast or brading, 157
t-wash pretreatment, 157
zinc or aluminum metal spray, 157

