Contents

Preface to the ﬁrst edition 
Preface to the second edition 

page ix
x

1  General features of the plant kingdom 

Characteristics of the living state
Autotrophic and heterotrophic nutrition
Structure of the phototrophic cell
Origin of the eukaryotic condition
Evolutionary consequences of photosynthesis
The mobility of plants
Life cycles

Life cycles of the transmigrant forms

Sexual reproduction in later terrestrial vegetation
Classiﬁcation of the chlorophyllous phototrophs

2 The subkingdom Algae: Part 1

Biological features of algae
Algae in which the chlorophyll is wholly or predominantly
chlorophyll a

Prokaryotic forms

Cyanophyta (Cyanobacteria)

Eukaryotic forms

Rhodophyta

Bangiophycidae
Florideophycidae
Life histories of the Rhodophyta
Relationships of the Rhodophyta

3 The subkingdom Algae: Part 2

Algae containing chlorophylls a and b

Prokaryotic forms
Prochlorophyta
Eukaryotic forms

Chlorachniophyta
Chlorophyta

Prasinophyceae
Chlorophyceae
Ulvophyceae
Charophyceae
Pleurastrophyceae
Evolution within the Chlorophyta

Euglenophyta

1

1
1
2
7
10
13
13
15
16
18

19

19

24
24
24
30
30
31
33
35
36

38

38
38
38
39
39
39
40
40
52
61
71
71
71

vi

CONTENTS

4 The subkingdom Algae: Part 3

Algae containing chlorophylls a and c

Chrysophyta
Xanthophyta
Bacillariophyta
Phaeophyta
Haptophyta
Dinophyta
Cryptophyta

Evolutionary trends within the algae
Aquatic habitat and evolutionary change
Antiquity of the algae
Evolution of the vegetative thallus
Evolution of sexual reproduction
Life histories of algae
Importance of the algae in the evolution of plants

5 The subkingdom Embryophyta: division Bryophyta
(mosses and liverworts)

General features of the bryophytes

Bryophyta

Marchantiopsida (liverworts)
Anthocerotopsida (hornworts)
Bryopsida (mosses)

Relationships of the bryophytes

Origin
Evolutionary relationships

6 The subkingdom Embryophyta (cont.): division
Tracheophyta, Part 1

Early fossil land plants of simple construction

“Protracheophytes” and “rhyniophytoids”
General features of the tracheophytes

Tracheophyta
Rhyniopsida

Tracheophytes with lateral sporangia (Lycophytina)

Zosterophyllopsida
Lycopodiopsida

Tracheophytes with terminal sporangia (Euphyllophytina)

Trimerophytopsida
Equisetopsida
Cladoxylopsida

75

75
75
77
80
83
93
94
96
98
98
98
98
99
100
101

102

102
102
104
115
117
131
131
133

135

135
135
138
138
139
141
141
142
161
161
162
170

CONTENTS

vii

7 The subkingdom Embryophyta (cont.): division
Tracheophyta, Part 2

Polypodiopsida (ferns)

Extinct orders of ferns
The Zygopteridales
The Coenopteridales
Existing orders of ferns

The Marattiales
The Ophioglossales
The Psilotales
The Osmundales
The Polypodiales
The Hydropteridales

8 The subkingdom Embryophyta (cont.): division
Tracheophyta, Part 3

Primitive ovulate plants and their precursors (Progymnospermopsida)

Spermatophytina (seed plants): Gymnosperms

Early radiospermic gymnosperms

Lyginopteridopsida (Pteridospermopsida)

Platyspermic gymnosperms and pine relatives

Pinopsida
Ginkgoopsida

Diversification of radiospermic gymnosperms

Cycadopsida
Gnetopsida

Gymnospermy as an evolutionary grade

9 The subkingdom Embryophyta (cont.): division
Tracheophyta, Part 4

Spermatophytina (cont.): Angiosperms (ﬂowering plants)

Magnoliopsida and Liliopsida

The emergence of the angiosperms
Evolution of morphological features within the angiosperms
Recent evolution within families and genera
The main trends of angiosperm evolution

Glossary

Suggestions for further reading

Index

172

172
173
173
176
176
176
180
183
188
189
212

218

218
219
220
220
226
226
241
244
244
259
267

269

269
269
302
307
314
315

317

327

331

1

General features of the plant kingdom

Characteristics of the living
state

The living state is characterized by instability and
change. The numerous chemical reactions, called
collectively metabolism, within a living cell both
consume  (in  the  form of  foodstuffs)  and  release
energy. Metabolism is indicative of life. Even the
apparently inert cells of seeds show some metab-
olism,  but  a  mere  fraction  of  that  which  occurs
during  germination  and  subsequent  growth.
Metabolism  depends  upon  the  interaction  of
molecules in an ordered sequence. If this order is
destroyed (for example by poisons or heat) metab-
olism ceases and the cell dies. In some instances it
is  possible  to arrest  metabolism  without  death.
With yeast and some tissue cultures, for example,
this can be achieved by very rapid freezing at tem-
peratures of ⫺160°C (⫺265°F) or lower. The cells
can then be preserved in liquid nitrogen (⫺195°C;
⫺319°F),  in  an  apparently  genuine  state  of
“suspended  animation”,  indeﬁnitely. With  yeast
up to 95 percent of cells of rapidly frozen cultures
resume metabolism and growth following careful
thawing.

The sources of energy a cell requires to main-
tain  its  dynamic  state  are  predominantly  com-
pounds  of  carbon.  In  addition  a  cell  requires
water, since much of the metabolism takes place
in the aqueous phase in the cell. Also essential are
those materials necessary for the maintenance of
its structure which it is unable to make for itself.
Prominent amongst these are the nitrogen of the
proteins,  the  commoner  minerals  (including

phosphorus),  and  certain  other  metals  and  ele-
ments which, although needed only in traces, are
essential  components  of  a  number  of  enzymes
and  associated  molecules.  Occasionally, in  iso-
lated cultures of cells, complex organic molecules
called  vitamins  or  growth factors  must  also  be
supplied from outside.

Autotrophic and heterotrophic
nutrition

It  is  useful  to divide  organisms  into  two  classes
according to the manner in which their needs for
organic  carbon  are  met.  Those  able  to utilize
simple  molecules  with  single  carbon  atoms  are
termed autotrophs; those requiring more complex
carbon compounds rich in energy (such as sugars)
are termed heterotrophs. Some organisms are able
to switch between  these  alternative  forms  of
nutrition,  depending  upon  the  environment  in
which they ﬁnd themselves. These are called mix-
otrophs.

The assimilation of simple carbon compounds
by autotrophs,  and  their  transformation  into
more  complex  molecules,  require  an  external
source of energy. This may be chemical or physi-
cal,  depending  upon  the  organism.  Very many
autotrophs  (including  the  whole  of  the  plant
kingdom) utilize the energy of light, and are con-
sequently known as photoautotrophs (or simply as
phototrophs)  and  the  process  of  assimilation  as
photosynthesis. Only the phototrophs have acquired
extensive morphological diversity. Autotrophs uti-
lizing energy from chemical sources (chemotrophs)

2

GENERAL FEATURES OF THE PLANT KINGDOM

for  the  assimilation  of  carbon  are  found  solely
amongst the bacteria.

Phototrophic  life  is  made  possible  by two
unique biological molecules, chlorophyll and bac-
teriochlorophyll.  The 
chemical  differences
between them are not profound, but their absorp-
tion  spectra  are  distinct,  as  is  their  distribution
amongst the phototrophs. Bacteriochlorophyll is
found  only  in  bacteria  and  functions  mostly
anaerobically. Photosynthetic systems based upon
bacteriochlorophyll are unable to use water as an
electron donor, and consequently there is no evo-
lution  of  oxygen  (anoxygenic photosynthesis).  Those
organisms which contain chlorophyll and which
photosynthesize aerobically with the evolution of
oxygen constitute the plant kingdom. So deﬁned
the  plant  kingdom  is  distinct  from  all  other
organisms (including the fungi).

Chlorophyll is a complex pigment. It is green
in colour, and absorbs light in the blue and to a
smaller extent in the red region of the spectrum.
The molecule is in part similar to the active group
of the blood pigment hemoglobin, but contains at
its center magnesium in place of iron. A number
of different forms are known (a, b, c, d and perhaps
e),  each  with  its  characteristic  absorption  spec-
trum. Chlorophyll a, which is present in all plants,
has the remarkable property of temporarily losing
electrons when illuminated. Chlorophyll b, which
is found in all land plants, assists in the light-har-
vesting process, but the functions of chlorophylls
c, d and e (p. 77), present in some algae, are not so
well  known.  Chlorophyll  is  always  accompanied
by accessory pigments (either carotenoids or phy-
cobilins (biliproteins), or in a few organisms both).
The light energy absorbed by these additional pig-
ments can be transferred to the chlorophyll.

As a result of the remarkable photochemical
properties of chlorophyll a the energy of the inci-
dent  light  is  transformed  into  chemical  energy.
This leads to the generation in the cell of ATP, and
reducing power in the form of NADPH⫹H⫹ (the
light  reactions).  These  two  products  then  bring
about the reductive assimilation of atmospheric
carbon dioxide in the illuminated cells, the assim-
ilation  being  initiated  by the  enzyme  ribulose
bisphosphate  carboxylase  (RUBISCO),  leading  to
the  production  of  carbohydrates  (the  dark  reac-
tions).  The  ability  to utilize  atmospheric  carbon

dioxide  in  this  photosynthetic  manner  releases
the organisms concerned from the necessity of an
external source of carbohydrate, and their nutri-
tional  demands  are  consequently  relatively
simple.

probably 

occurred 

Oxygenic photosynthesis, the deﬁning characteris-
tic  of  the  plant  kingdom,  involves  two  photo-
systems.  The  ﬁrst (photosystem  I)  leads  to the
formation of NADPH⫹H⫹, and the second (photo-
system  II)  provides  a  supply  of  electrons  to the
chlorophyll  of  photosystem  I.  Photosystem  II
involves the photolysis of water with the produc-
tion of oxygen. The evolution of oxygenic photo-
in  marine
synthesis 
photosynthetic  bacteria  inhabiting  waters  close
to oceanic thermal vents. At these sites there is a
rich supply of minerals, including manganese, a
component  of  the  enzyme  in  photosystem  II
responsible for the splitting of the water molecule
and  the  release  of  oxygen.  Photosystem  II  may
have appeared only once, or (in geological time)
more or less coincidentally at several sites. In any
event  it  was  an  innovation  of  immense  signiﬁ-
cance since it made possible the evolution of all
subsequent  oxygen-requiring  organisms,  both
plant  and  animal.  It  is  legitimate,  therefore,  to
regard the simplest organisms showing this form
of  photosynthesis,  based  upon  chlorophyll  a (as
distinct from bacteriochlorophyll), as the earliest
plants, opening up a whole new vista of evolution.
These early plants, whose living descendants are
to be  found  in  the  Cyanophyta  (p.  24),  and
Prochlorophyta (p. 38), naturally retained some of
the 
their  bacterial  origins.
Nevertheless, freed from the constraints of bacte-
rial photosynthesis, the earliest plants had an evo-
lutionary  potential  denied  to their  retarded
cousins.

features  of 

Structure of the phototrophic
cell

Chlorophyll does not occur freely in cells, but is
always  associated  with  lipoprotein  membranes.
These membranes surround ﬂattened sacs called
thylakoids.  When  the  membranes  are  seen  in
surface  view  in  the  electron  microscope  (made
possible  by the  special  technique  of  freeze-frac-

STRUCTURE OF THE PHOTOTROPHIC CELL

3

Figure 1.1. Shadowed replica of
the thylakoid membranes of the
chloroplast of Euglena exposed by
freeze-fracture. The thylakoids are
either single (“unstacked”) or paired
(“stacked”). Because in the
conditions of freeze-fracture
membranes are pulled apart, two
complementary faces (E and P) are
represented in the replica. This
reveals that the particles are
asymmetrically placed in the
membrane (cf. Fig. 1.2). There are
also differences in the frequencies of
particles in stacked (S) and
unstacked (U) membranes. The
arrow indicates where the
membranes of two adjacent
thylakoids come together to form a
stack. Scale bar 0.5 ␮m. (From
Miller and Staehelin. 1973.
Reproduced from Protoplasma 77, by
permission of Springer-Verlag,
Vienna.)

forms the basis of plant life. In
turn  the  animal  kingdom  is
entirely  dependent  upon  the
activity of this membrane, not
only  for  its  sustenance,  but
also for the oxygen of its respi-
ration.

Two distinct kinds of cellu-
lar  organization  are  found
amongst the phototrophs as a
whole.  In  the  ﬁrst,  termed
prokaryotic,  the  cell  possesses
no distinct nucleus, although
a  region  irregular  in  outline
and of differing density occurs at the center of the
cell.  This  is  referred  to as  a  nucleoid,  and  the
genetic  material  lies  therein.  In  the  electron
microscope  this  region  appears  ﬁbrillar  rather
than granular, and the ﬁbrils indicate the site of
the deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). The protoplast of
such cells is bounded by a membrane. In photo-
trophic cells this membrane invaginates into the
cytoplasm  and  forms  the  thylakoids.  Their  full
development depends upon light. If the cells are
grown  in  the  dark  the  thylakoids  disappear  or
become  very reduced.  This  primordial  kind  of

ture), it is clear that they bear closely packed par-
ticles  (Fig.  1.1).  The  larger  of  these,  about  18nm
(1 nm⫽10⫺3␮m) in diameter, are probably the site
of  the  chlorophyll  and  carotenoids  (which,  like
chlorophyll,  are  lipid  soluble).  The  anchoring  of
the chlorophyll and carotenoids in a lipoprotein
membrane ensures that they are held in a partic-
ular order (Fig. 1.2). Electrons can then ﬂow along
well-deﬁned paths to the reaction center at which
the  radiant  energy  is  converted  into  chemical
energy. The thylakoid membrane is thus the site
of  the  light  reactions  of  photosynthesis,  and

4

GENERAL FEATURES OF THE PLANT KINGDOM

Figure 1.2. The molecular architecture of the thylakoid
membrane of a higher plant. The photosystem I complexes
are conﬁned to the outer membranes of the grana and to the
stroma thylakoids. The stippled regions indicate the
appressed membranes of the granum. (From Anderson,
Chow and Goodchild. 1988. Australian Journal of Plant
Physiology 15, modiﬁed.)

phototrophic cell is found in both the photosyn-
thetic bacteria and the simplest plants. The fossil
record supports the view that the original photo-
trophs were of this prokaryotic kind. Geochemical
evidence of photosynthesis, and remains very sug-
gestive of bacteria and simple cyanophytes, some
resembling  the  living  Oscillatoria (p.  29),  come
from early Archaeozoic rocks of South Africa and
Australia  believed  to be  3.3–3.5⫻109 years  old
(Table 1.1).

In the cells of all other phototrophic plants the
nucleus,  the  photosynthetic  apparatus,  and  the
membranes incorporating the electron transport
chain  of  respiration  are  separated  from  the
remainder of the cytoplasm by distinct envelopes.
Such cells, termed eukaryotic, have evidently been
capable of giving rise to much more complicated
organisms than the prokaryotic ones. The photo-
synthetic apparatus, which consists of numerous
lamellae running parallel to one another, is con-
tained in one or more plastids. The envelope of the
plastid  consists  of  two  (in  some  algae  three  or
four) unit membranes, the inner of which invagi-
nates into the central space (stroma) and generates
the thylakoids. The thylakoids in the fully differ-

entiated plastid (chloroplast) are usually stacked. In
the chloroplasts of land plants the thylakoids are
also  fenestrated.  Consequently  numerous  small
stacks, called grana, are formed in place of a single
stack,  the  grana  being  held  together  by stroma
lamellae (Fig. 1.3). The grana appear in the light
microscope  as  green  dots,  each  about  0.5␮m  in
diameter.  Although  most  photosynthesis  takes
place in the grana, the thylakoids in the stroma
also contribute.

Plastids  contain  both  DNA  and  ribonucleic
acid  (RNA),  and  both  transcription  and  transla-
tion  may  occur  within  them.  Plastids  thus  have
some  resemblance  to phototrophic  prokaryotes,
although most plastid proteins are encoded solely
in the nuclear DNA. The enzyme RUBISCO, essen-
tial for photosynthesis and probably the common-
est protein in the world, consists of a large and a
small subunit. In the green algae (Chlorophyta, p.
39)  and  in  all  land  plants,  the  large subunit  is
encoded  in  the  plastid  DNA  and  the  smaller  in
that of the nucleus. Nevertheless, in some eukar-
yotic  algae,  namely  the  Rhodophyta  (p.  30),  the
Cryptophyta (p. 96) and the whole of the hetero-
kont algae (Table 2.1), both large and small sub-
units are coded for in the plastid genome. In the
prokaryotic algae both subunits are coded for in
the  DNA  of  the  nucleoid.  The  possibility  exists
that coding for one or both units of RUBISCO may
also be present in the DNA of a plasmid (p. 8), but
this has not been demonstrated.

In  the  commonest  form of  carbon  assimila-
tion,  atmospheric  carbon  dioxide,  having  been

STRUCTURE OF THE PHOTOTROPHIC CELL

5

Table 1.1

The geological time scale. Age estimates of Proterozoic and Archaeozoic ⫾up to 100 million years.

Eon

Era

Period

Age
(in 106 years)

First authentic
appearance

Phanerozoic Quaternary Holocene and

0–1.6

Pleistocene
Tertiary
Pliocene
(Cenozoic) Miocene

Mesozoic

Oligocene
Eocene
Paleocene
Cretaceous

Jurassic

Triassic

Paleozoic

Permian

Carboniferous

Devonian

Senonian
Gallic
Neocomian
Malm
Dogger
Lias

Zechstein
Rotliegendes
Pennsylvanian
Mississippian
Upper

Middle
Lower
Upper

Lower

Silurian

Ordovician
Cambrian
Vendian
Sturtian

Proterozoic

Sinian

Archaeozoic

Riphean
Animikean
Huronian
Randian
Swazian
Isuan

Hadean

1.6–5.2
5.2–23.3
23.3–35.4
35.4–56.5
56.5–65
65–88.5
88.5–131.8
131.8–145.6
145.6–157.1
157.1–178
178–208
208–245

245–256.1
256.1–290
290–322.8
322.8–362.5
362.5–377.4

377.4–386
386–408.5
408.5–424

424–439
439–510
510–570
570–610
610–800
800–1650
1650–2200
2200–2450
2450–2800
2800–3500
3500–3800

3800–4560

Grasses

Carpels, ﬂowers,
angiosperms
Tectate pollen

Cycadopsida,
anthophytes,
Ginkgoopsida,
Glossopterids
Pinopsida, Bryopsida,
Polypodiopsida
Seeds, fronds,
pteridosperms,
progymnosperms, early
ferns, Cladoxylopsida,
Equisetopsida,
Trimerophytopsida,
Marchantiopsida,
heterospory,
Zosterophyllopsida,
Lycopodiopsida
Rhyniopsida, vascular
plants, rhyniophytoids

Triradiate spores
Phaeophyta

Various algal groups

Stromatolites and
cyanophytes
(Cyanobacteria)

6

GENERAL FEATURES OF THE PLANT KINGDOM

Figure 1.3. Diagram showing the arrangement of the
thylakoids in the chloroplast of a higher plant. The stacked
regions (grana, G) are visible as green dots in the light
microscope. (From an original drawing by Wehrmeyer. 1964.
Planta 63, modiﬁed.)

taken in the presence of RUBISCO into a pentose
sugar  (ribulose  bisphosphate),  yields  two  mole-
cules  of  triose  phosphate.  These  are  reduced  by
the NADPH⫹H⫹ and ATP, yielding two molecules
of glycerin aldehyde. These then enter a complex
cycle of reactions (the C3, or Calvin cycle) leading
to fructose and other sugars. A mixture of fairly
simple carbohydrates probably leaves the chloro-
plast, 
further  transformations  taking  place
enzymically in the ground cytoplasm. The disac-
charide  sucrose,  for  example,  the  commonest
form in which sugar is transported in the plant, is
incapable  of  traversing  the  chloroplast  envelope
and  is  necessarily  formed  outside.  If  the  rate of
photosynthesis exceeds the rate of outﬂow of ﬁxed
carbon, condensation occurs and starch is depos-
ited in the chloroplast. This may become very con-
spicuous,  the  organelle  then  being  termed  an
amyloplast.  In  some  land  plants  (known  as  C4
plants)  atmospheric  carbon  dioxide  is  taken  ini-
tially  in  the  chloroplasts  of  the  mesophyll  cells
into  phosphoenolpyruvate  (PEP),  the  enzyme
involved in this case being PEP-carboxylase. This
leads to the formation of oxaloacetic acid, which
is  then  transformed  enzymically  into  malate  or
aspartate.  These  products  migrate to  special

chloroplasts in the bundle sheath cells, which are
distinguished  from  those  of  the  mesophyll  by
lacking grana, but they do contain RUBISCO. Here
the  malate  and  aspartate are  reconverted  into
oxaloacetic  acid.  The  carbon  dioxide  is  thereby
freed and, as in C3 plants, is assimilated into rib-
ulose  bisphosphate  and  enters  directly  into  the
Calvin cycle (Fig. 1.4). PEP-carboxylase has a higher
afﬁnity for carbon dioxide than RUBISCO, and can
withstand higher temperatures. Further, the com-
bined  C4/C3  systems  have less  need  of  water  in
relation  to the  quantity  of  carbon  assimilated.
Consequently  vegetation  of  hot  and  dry  (includ-
ing “physiologically dry”) habitats, such as deserts
and  salt  marshes,  often  contains  a  high  propor-
tion  of  C4  plants.  A  few  plants  are  ambivalent.
Eleocharis vivipara (a marsh plant), for example, is a
C4 plant under terrestrial conditions but C3 when
submerged.

The  organelle  in  eukaryotic  cells  containing
the respiratory membranes is termed a mitochon-
drion. Although there are structural and organiza-
tional  similarities  between  mitochondria  and
plastids, in most photosynthesizing cells the mito-
chondria have far less internal differentiation. So
far as carbon is concerned, the functions of these
two  organelles  are  opposed:  that  of  the  chloro-
plast  is  reductive carboxylation,  that  of  the  mito-
chondrion  oxidative decarboxylation.  In  certain
conditions (notably with a low partial pressure of
carbon  dioxide)  RUBISCO  can  act  as  an  oxidase,

ORIGIN OF THE EUKARYOTIC CONDITION

7

Figure 1.4. The essential features of C4 photosynthesis.
PEP, phosphoenolpyruvate; OAA, oxaloacetic acid; MAL,
malate; ASP, aspartate (aspartic acid is the amino acid
corresponding to malic acid); PYR, pyruvate. There are
biochemical variations between species, but the general
pattern is retained.

resulting in a loss of ﬁxed carbon (photorespira-
tion). This may have had a signiﬁcant ecological
effect at certain periods of the evolution of land
plants in geological time.

Origin of the eukaryotic
condition

Although it seems beyond doubt that the prokar-
yotic condition preceded the eukaryotic (the ﬁrst
eukaryotic algae probably appeared about 2.1⫻109
years ago), the manner in which the transition
occurred is by no means clear. A commonly
accepted, and little criticized, view (originally put
forward in 1905) is that mitochondria and plastids
are derived from prokaryotes which entered as
endosymbionts into a primordial cell, itself prokar-
yotic and presumably heterotrophic. The presence
in the cytoplasmic organelles of a nucleoid, their

possession of
transcription and translation
systemscloselyresemblingthosefoundinbacteria,
and the similarity in size between the ribosomes of
organelles and those of bacteria (the ribosomes of
eukaryotic ground cytoplasm tend to be larger)
provide strong evidence in support of this theory.
Further, organisms which appear to have arisen by
endosymbiosis are well known. In Glaucocystis (Fig.
2.9) and Cyanophora, unicellular organisms found
occasionally in shallow fresh water, for example,
the photosynthetic component of the cell is made
up of one or more units resembling blue-green
algal cells. These have accordingly been termed
“cyanelles” (p. 27). Other possible examples of
endosymbiosis are found in the Cryptophyta (p. 97).
Here the chloroplast contains a “nucleomorph”,
which, since it is surrounded by a double mem-
brane, may represent the remnant of, in this case,
a eukaryotic endosymbiont.

The  theory (in  its  modern  form)  envisages
that,  in  the  primordial  eukaryotes,  the  prokar-
yotic endosymbionts became integrated into the
physiology  of  the  composite  cell,  contributing
some of their genetic information to that in the
nucleus, and in so doing losing their individual
identity and sacriﬁcing much of their autonomy.

8

GENERAL FEATURES OF THE PLANT KINGDOM

Attractive though this theory is, it has obvious
difﬁculties. Organisms, such as Glaucocystis, which
appear  to be  undoubtedly  endosymbiotic  in
origin,  are  evidently  exploiting  successfully  an
ecological niche, and have probably done so since
early  in  the  diversiﬁcation  of  cellular  life.  They
can therefore be legitimately regarded as models
of stability, and, far from being an indication of
how the eukaryotic condition arose, are splendid
examples  of  “dead  ends”  without  evolutionary
potential. Evidence of selective pressure favoring
the complete assimilation of the invasive organ-
isms, although conceivable, is so far lacking. Also
required is a credible mechanism for the transfer
of  essential  components  of 
invaders’
genomes,  through  an  alien  cytoplasm  to the
nuclei or nucleoids of the hosts and the incorpo-
ration of this information in a (to them) foreign
DNA. Further, is the nucleus itself of endosymbi-
otic origin? There are so many unanswered ques-
tions  that  it  would  be  unjustiﬁed  to fail  to
consider alternative possibilities.

the 

code 

for  a 

speciﬁc 

The principal alternative view rests upon the
occurrence in prokaryotes of plasmids, circles of
DNA lying in the cytoplasm apart from the nucle-
oid.  The  genetic  information  in  the  plasmid  is
commonly  represented  also  in  the  DNA  of  the
nucleoid. The nucleotide sequences in a plasmid
frequently 
function.
Photosynthetic membranes, and also respiratory
membranes  (mesosomes),  are  features  of  many
prokaryotes. These membranes arise as invagina-
tions of the plasmalemma. The cyanophytes and
prochlorophytes  (or  their  antecedents),  the  only
prokaryotes  displaying  oxygenic  photosynthesis,
are  obvious  candidates  for  the  origin  of  chloro-
plasts, a view strengthened by the many molecu-
lar  similarities  between  them.  Plasmids  are
indeed  widespread  in  cyanophyte  cells  (but  not
yet  reported  in  those  of  the  prochlorophytes).
Although  it  has  not  yet  been  possible  to ascribe
any  precise  function  to the  plasmids  of  the  cya-
nophytes,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to envisage  a
plasmid  being  associated  with  a  photosynthetic
membranous  invagination  in  a  primitive  cyano-
phyte, and containing genes modulating its devel-
opment  and 
is
strengthened by the evidence for the presence of
regulatory  genes  on  a  plasmid  regularly  asso-

function.  This  possibility 

ciated with the photosynthetic membrane system
of  the  bacterium  Rhodospirillum rubrum.  If  the
peripheral  complex  of  a  cyanophyte,  similarly
endowed, were taken into the body of the cell, a
rudimentary chloroplast would result. A similar
translation  affecting  a  peripheral  respiratory
membrane  associated  with  an  appropriate
plasmid would lead to a rudimentary mitochon-
drion.  Each would  contain  genetic  information
shared wholly or partly with that in the nucleoid
or  nucleus,  a  feature  of  mitochondria  and  plas-
tids.  No substantial  transfer  of  essential  genetic
information  would  be  required  following  the
internalization of these membranous complexes
into the body of the cell. It would follow that the
correspondence between the genome of a plastid
and that of the nucleus of its cell was analogous
to that between a plasmid and the nucleoid in a
prokaryote. This relationship would represent the
persistence  of  an  ancient  feature,  not  the  emer-
gence of a new one.

Experiments with monolayers of polar lipid on
the surface of water show how movement of mem-
branous complexes from the periphery of a naked
cell to the interior might have come about. When
a lipid ﬁlm is compressed, the ﬁlm folds into the
aqueous  phase,  so  reducing  its  area.  This,
however, is an unstable situation. The folds in the
aqueous phase become instantaneously detached,
relieving  the  surface  ﬁlm  of  compression  and
restoring  its  continuity.  The  folds,  now  sub-
merged, coalesce to form spheres and cylinders,
themselves ﬁlled with water. Since both the inner
and outer faces are now clearly hydrophilic, polar
groups  must  be  exposed  on  both  surfaces.  The
lipid faces of the folds must therefore have come
together,  forming  a  bimolecular  leaﬂet.  One  of
the essential elements in the collapsing process is
seen  as  the  marked  difference  in  viscosity
between  air  and  water, allowing  air  to escape
rapidly from the folds, leading to the apposition
of the two lipid layers.

It  is  not  unreasonable  to envisage  a  natural
membrane,  forming  the  interface  between  two
phases  differing  in  viscosity  as  sharply  as  proto-
plasm  and  water, behaving,  under  compression,
in a manner analogous to that of a lipid ﬁlm. If the
folds  formed  adjacent  to,  or  around,  an  already
existing  invagination  of  the  bounding  mem-

A

a

B

C

p

b

p

p

brane, the result would be that the invagination
was carried, bounded by a double membrane, into
the  body  of  the  cell  (Fig.  1.5).  In  natural  condi-
tions,  compression  of  the  bounding  membrane
could be caused by, for example, exosmosis (if the
prokaryote were splashed into a hypertonic pool),
or  even  by mechanical  pressure  on  naked  cells
arising from turbulence as streams cascaded over
rocks.  These  conditions  probably  occurred  fre-
quently at the beginnings of cellular life.

The  nucleus  may  have arisen  in  a  similar
manner, if the DNA of the genome were associated
with an invagination of the plasmalemma, as in
some existing bacteria. Indeed, internalization of
the genome may have happened independently of
the  formation  of  plastids  and  mitochondria.
Species  of  Gemmata  and  Pirellula,  plancomycete

ORIGIN OF THE EUKARYOTIC CONDITION

9

Figure 1.5. Diagrammatic representation of how a
peripheral membrane system associated with a plasmid (p)
could have become encapsulated and internalized as a
consequence of compression of the bounding membrane. (A)
Part of the bounding membrane of a prokaryote furnished
with a photosynthetic invagination associated with a
regulatory plasmid. (B) The bounding membrane is
compressed and forms folds. Since the protoplasm adheres
strongly to the membrane and is more viscous than the
surrounding water, the membrane is dragged inward. If the
volume of the cell is shrinking as a consequence of
exosmosis, this effect would be enhanced. (C) Excess water
is expelled from the folds so that the membranes lie closely
parallel to each other, separated only by hydrated surface
molecules (possibly glycoproteins). The inner extremities of
the folds come together and fuse. Simultaneously the
bounding membrane suffers instantaneous collapse. The
margins of the folds (a, b) come together, so restoring
continuity to the surface, and at the same time releasing a
double-membraned inclusion to the interior. The area of the
surface is thereby reduced, freed from compression, and
structural stability is regained. (Based (by analogy) on
experiments by R. J. Goldacre on the collapse of surface ﬁlms
of polar lipid under compression, described in Danielli,
Pankhurst and Riddiford (eds.) 1958. Surface Phenomena in
Chemistry and Biology, pp. 278–98. Pergamon, London.)

bacteria, have been found in which the nucleoid
is  surrounded  by an  envelope.  In  Gemmata this
consists of two membranes, the outer of which is
connected with the plasmalemma, but in Pirellula
the envelope is single.

It seems likely that a naked membranous sac,
furnished  with  peripheral  invaginations  which
penetrate contents that are denser than the sur-
rounding medium, presents an unstable biophys-
ical  situation,  particularly  if  the  bounding
membrane is compressed. Stabilization, relieving
the membrane of compression, is achieved spon-
taneously by the internalization of the peripheral
complexes.  The  current  development  of  tech-
niques for the production of compound vesicular
bodies, consisting of vesicles bounded by lipoidal
membranes lying free within the parent vesicle,
raises the possibility of being able to mimic the
internalization  of  peripheral  membranous  com-
plexes in an experimental system using artiﬁcial
cells. If it proves possible to explain the origin of
the eukaryotic condition in terms of membrane
biophysics, based upon a repeatable experimental
system,  the  endosymbiotic  hypothesis,  which

10

GENERAL FEATURES OF THE PLANT KINGDOM

rests  upon  unveriﬁable  evolutionary  specula-
tions, can at last be returned to history. The encap-
internalization  of  membrane
sulation  and 
systems originally attached to the plasmalemma
may indeed have occurred many times with prim-
itive cells, unprotected by a wall or mucilage. The
emergence in evolution of ﬁrm or gelatinous cell
walls, protecting a range of the earliest cells from
the  effects  of  compression,  allowed  the  persis-
tence  of  simple  prokaryotes  with  peripheral
photosynthetic  and 
respiratory  membrane
systems into the later eukaryotic times. Although
microtubules  and  actin  microﬁlaments,  structu-
ral  proteins  of  the  cytoplasm,  are  not  found  in
bacteria, 
elements
(“rhapidosomes”), about 24nm in diameter, occur
in  the  cytoplasm  of  some  cyanophytes  (p.  29).
Although not identical with the microtubules of
eukaryotes, they may have given the cells of the
photosynthetic  prokaryotes  an  additional  stabil-
ity that ensured their survival.

proteinaceous 

tubular 

Following  the  translation  of  the  photosyn-
thetic  and  respiratory  compartments  into  the
body  of  the  cell,  these  compartments  have
retained  many  of  their  prokaryotic  features  in
subsequent evolution. The invasion of the bound-
ing  membrane  appears,  however, to  have led  to
innovations  in  the  remaining  cytoplasm.  The
endoplasmic  reticulum  (which  retains  connec-
tions  with  the  outer  membrane  of  the  nuclear
envelope) and the Golgi bodies are both membra-
nous structures, characteristic of even the small-
est  eukaryotic  cells  (e.g.,  Osteococcus,  p.  40).  The
ribosomes,  ubiquitous 
cytoplasm,
increased  in  size,  reaching  diameters  some  50
percent  greater  than  those  of  the  ribosomes  of
mitochondria  and  plastids,  and  of  prokaryotic
cells.  Concomitantly, the  DNA  of  the  genome
became organized into chromosomes, probably a
consequence of the nuclear envelope allowing a
much  closer  control  of  the  metabolism  and
assembly  of  the  proteins  (particularly  histones)
associated with the folding of the DNA. This led to
the complex known as chromatin, and its parcel-
ling into a deﬁnite number of regularly reprodu-
cible bodies, the chromosomes.

the 

in 

Evolutionary consequences of
photosynthesis

It  seems  beyond  doubt  from  the  fossil  record  of
life, and from the biological and geological infer-
ences that can be drawn from it, that life began in
water. The earliest forms of life remain conjectu-
ral,  but  were  probably  chemotrophic,  accompa-
nied  fairly  rapidly  (in  evolutionary  time)  by
heterotrophs  feeding  upon  them.  Nevertheless,
phototrophs  probably  also  appeared  relatively
early. Those which contained or acquired chloro-
phyll  (as  opposed  to bacteriochlorophyll),  and
which  further  developed  oxygenic  photosynthe-
sis,  gave rise  to the  plant  kingdom.  The  descen-
dants of these early aquatic forms, which still in
the  main  exploit  the  watery environment,  are
termed  algae  (Chapters  2,  3  and  4).  They  have
many  biochemical,  physiological,  ecological  and
structural features in common. For these reasons
they include the prokaryotic forms placed in the
Cyanophyta and Prochlorophyta, which, although
retaining  some  bacterial  features,  are  clearly
superior to these lowly forms in their possession
of oxygenic photosynthesis and their general algal
characteristics. Although some unicellular algae
have attained morphological complexity (e.g., the
dinoﬂagellates;  p.  94),  others  represent  the  sim-
plest  plants  still  in  existence.  Apart  from  the
unicellular  prokaryotes,  such  as  Prochlorococcus
(p. 38),  some  unicellular  eukaryotes  are  also
minute.  Osteococcus tauri  (p.  40),  for  example,  is
probably  the  smallest  eukaryotic  organism
known.  The  cells  do  not  exceed  1␮m  in  width,
lack a cell wall, and contain only a single plastid
and a single mitochondrion. Osteococcus has so far
been found only in the plankton of Mediterranean
lagoons, but Micromonas (Fig. 1.6), which has a sim-
ilarly simple cell but is provided with a ﬂagellum,
is  abundant  in  the  oceans.  Relatively  early,
however, even in the prokaryotes (p. 29), multicel-
lularity  appeared  in  algal  evolution,  yielding  a
diversiﬁed algal ﬂora whose descendants are still
with us today.

At some stage, possibly in the Silurian period
(Table 1.1) or even earlier, vegetation began to col-
onize the land. These early colonists, and conse-
quently  the  whole  of  our  existing  land  ﬂora,

EVOLUTIONARY CONSEQUENCES OF PHOTOSYNTHESIS

11

light  reaching  them,  and  not  by the  amount  of
carbon dioxide in the water. We can see at once
that  the  ﬁrst colonists  of  land,  emerging  on  to
bare  mineral  surfaces,  would  almost  certainly
have had  to contend  with  irradiances  strikingly
higher  than  those  experienced  by their  aquatic
ancestors.  This  would  have provided  opportu-
nities for greatly increased photosynthesis.

Another discovery of recent research, also very
relevant to the problem of the colonization of the
land,  is  the  surprising  extent  to which  algae
release  materials  derived  from  photosynthesis,
both aliphatic molecules and phenolics, into the
surrounding water. In Windermere in the English
Lake District, for example, up to 35 percent of the
total carbon ﬁxed may be lost in this way. Even in
land plants, losses of ﬁxed carbon (as soluble or
dispersible  carbohydrates  and  phenolics)  have
been detected from roots. Some estimates of losses
by this process of rhizodeposition over the growing
season  have put  it  as  high  as  30  percent.  Other
losses  from  land  plants  may  occur  from  leaves
as gaseous  hydrocarbons,  notably 
isoprene
(2-methyl-1,3-butadiene).  In  oak 
(Quercus)  and
aspen  (Populus),  isoprene  typically  amounts  to 2
percent  of  the  ﬁxed  carbon  at  30°C  (86°F).  This
loss can increase tenfold with a 10°C (18°F) rise in
temperature. Isoprene is also produced by mosses
(p. 118) and ferns, but not apparently by liverworts
or Anthoceros. Isoprene production may have been
an  adaptation  acquired  by land  plants  as  they
came on to land, possibly providing some thermal
protection in conditions of strong insolation.

Despite losses of ﬁxed carbon by land plants, it
seems  inevitable  that  as  vegetation  advanced
from estuarine ﬂats, or from littoral belts subject
to periodic  inundation,  on  to relatively  dry  sub-
strata  and  an  environment  of  freely  diffusable
carbon dioxide and generally higher irradiances,
carbon  ﬁxation  would  have been  promoted.  The
generally  high  levels  of  atmospheric  carbon
dioxide  at  the  time  of  the  landward  migration
would have depressed loss of carbon by photores-
piration  and  in  general  stimulated  ﬁxation.
Proportionately  more  of  the  ﬁxed  carbon  would
have been conserved within the plant body than
in the aqueous environment. The plants invading
the land appear to have met these environmental
challenges  not  by any signiﬁcant  change  in  the

Figure 1.6. Micromonas pusilla. Form and internal
organization. Only the central microtubules run into the
extension of the ﬂagellum. Micromonas belongs to a small
group of green algae of doubtful afﬁnity. (From electron
micrographs by Manton. 1959. Journal of the Marine Biological
Association of the United Kingdom 38.)

almost  certainly  emerged  from  that  group  of
aquatic  plants  today  represented  by the  green
algae  (Chlorophyta). The  Chlorophyta  and  the
land plants (a term which means plants adapted
to life on land and not merely plants growing on
land)  have the  same  photosynthetic  pigments,
basically the same photosynthetic apparatus, and
share many metabolic and physiological similar-
ities (pp. 131, 132).

Any consideration of the evolution of a photo-
synthesizing land ﬂora must therefore take into
account  the  physiological  features  of  the  green
algae, and how these may have been modiﬁed in
the  transition  to terrestrial  life.  Recent  research
into  algal  environments  is  yielding  much  infor-
mation relevant to this problem. It is commonly
found, for example, that from 5 to 35 percent of
the  light  striking  the  surface  of  a  lake  or  sea  is
reﬂected, the actual amount lost depending upon
the angle of incidence. The light penetrating the
water is then gradually absorbed as it advances, so
that up to 53 percent of the radiation passing the
surface may be dissipated as heat in the ﬁrst meter
(39in.). Consequently, in  warm and  temperate
regions, the rate of photosynthesis of submerged
plants  is  normally  controlled  by the  amount  of

12

GENERAL FEATURES OF THE PLANT KINGDOM

structure, composition or efﬁciency of the photo-
synthetic membrane, but by increased removal of
the ﬁxed carbon from the general metabolism. In
this way the accumulation of very large, and pos-
sibly toxic, quantities of carbohydrate in the cells
was effectively prevented. Cell walls, consisting of
cellulose  and  hemicellulose,  became  thicker.
Condensation  products  such  as  resin,  phloba-
phene and lignin became conspicuous, and have
remained  so  in  the  more  primitive  vascular
plants.  The  early  land  plants  may  also  have pro-
duced substantial quantities of mucilage (largely
highly  hydrated  polysaccharides).  This  feature  is
still  encountered  in  a  number  of  thallose  liver-
worts, such as Anthoceros, whose general morphol-
ogy  and  anatomy  may  resemble  that  of  at  least
some of the transmigrants (p. 117). Signiﬁcantly,
the  mucilage  is  often  extruded  through  pores,
each  bounded  by two cells.  The  resemblance  of
these pores to simple stomata can be so striking
that  the  identiﬁcation  of  similar  conﬁgurations
in  early  fossil  material  with  stomata  must  be
made with caution.

The progressive layering of cellulose microﬁb-
rils  on  to the  growing  cell  walls  of  land  plants
probably tended to make the angles rounder, thus
setting up the tensions which, during cell expan-
sion,  led  to the  appearance  of  air  spaces  at  the
interstices. Spaces of this kind, although found in
some of the larger brown algae, such as the kelps
(p. 89), do not appear in the “green” line of evolu-
tion  (as  represented  by living  species)  until  the
gametophytes (e.g., Marchantia, p. 105) and sporo-
phytes (e.g., Funaria, p. 126) of bryophytes. These
spaces  are  an  important  feature  of  land  plants,
ensuring  that  the  plant  body  is  ventilated  with
saturated air. Increased carbon would also facili-
tate the synthesis of the fatty acids and phenolics
which go to form cutin. In the form of the cuticle,
covering all cell–air interfaces, and with the assis-
tance of the regulatory stomata, cutin makes pos-
sible the regulation of the loss of water from the
plant body. This enables the plant body to main-
tain  a  state  of  hydration  independent  (within
limits) of the supply of soil water and the satura-
tion deﬁcit of the atmosphere, a feature known as
homoiohydry. A possible precursor of the cuticle is
seen  in  at  least  one  green  alga  (Cladophorella),
which grows on damp mud and is covered on its

upper surface by a material which, judging by its
resistance to acids and oxidizing agents (although
its composition has not yet been investigated by
modern  spectroscopic  methods),  closely  resem-
bles cutin. Compounds resistant to both chemical
degradation and natural decay, probably aliphatic
in  origin,  have been  located  in  the  cell  walls  of
other  green  algae.  Signiﬁcantly,
these  algae
belong  to the  class  Charophyceae  (p.  61),  which
contains the algae believed to be closest to those
which  gave rise  to the  land  plants  (p.  131).  A
cuticle has been a feature of land plant evolution
since at least the Ordovician (Table 1.1). 

Comparison of the green algae and the lower
land  plants  thus  reveals  interrelated  modiﬁca-
tions of the anatomy and of the utilization of the
ﬁxed carbon which facilitated the establishment
of  homoiohydry, and  allowed  the  invasion  of
land surfaces  subject  to intermittent  dryness.
Homoiohydry  also  made  possible  more  stable
growth rates with consequent ecological success.
The  gametophytes  of  the  land  plants,  however,
tended to remain small and with limited control
(poikilohydry).
over  their  degree  of  hydration 
Nevertheless,  some  mosses  (p.  121)  and  the  pro-
thalli of some lower land plants (e.g., ferns; p. 203)
are able to recover from quite severe desiccation. 
Sporopollenin (a complex polymer formed by
the condensation of aliphatic and phenolic mole-
cules),  of  doubtful  occurrence  in  green  algae,
takes on an essential rôle in land plants. Although
varying in composition with phylogenetic history,
its sealing properties remain a general character-
istic.  It  features  in  the  protective  coats  on  the
spores of land plants, and in some instances coats
membranes  within  plants  separating  reproduc-
tive regions from the surrounding somatic tissue,
as,  for  example,  the  peritapetal  membrane  in
many angiosperm anthers (p. 287).

Lignin,  of  which  the  phenolics  of  algal  cells
may have been a precursor, is a product of cells
undergoing  programmed  death.  It  is  laid  down
within cell walls and ﬁlls the spaces initially occu-
pied by water, thus both sealing and strengthen-
ing the wall. Tracheid-like cells may have evolved
from the elongated cells normally formed at the
center of axes. Selection, acting upon a genetically
controlled program of cell death at this site, could
have led to cells with thickened walls which had

LIFE CYCLES

13

both  a  structural  and  a  conducting  function.
Initially, the  rudimentary  tracheids  were  prob-
ably formed in discontinuous patches, as they are
found  today  in  the  gametophyte  of  Psilotum
(p. 187), and at that stage the conducting function
may not have been well developed.

Overall,  natural  selection  ensured  that  those
forms survived in which the various destinations
of the ﬁxed carbon were not disadvantageous to
the  growth and  reproduction  of  the  plant  as  a
whole.  The  ligniﬁcation  of  tissue,  for  example,
permitted the continued evolution of xylem, pro-
viding  both  a  skeleton  supporting  the  plant  in
space and an effective system for the transport of
water  and  solutes.  Massive  plant  bodies,  which
seem to have appeared relatively early in the evo-
lution  of  the  land  ﬂora,  also  made  possible  the
conﬁnement  of  photosynthesis  to specialized
regions, such as leaves and fronds. The amount of
assimilation  per  unit  mass  of  the  plant  was
thereby reduced. Simultaneously, the increase in
the amount of living, but non-photosynthesizing,
tissue naturally increased the call on metaboliz-
able  assimilates.  Both  factors  ensured  that  the
multicellular  colonists  of  the  land  remained  in
balance with their environment without interfer-
ence with the fundamental features of photosyn-
thesis.

In the course of evolution many complex and
bizarre  forms  of  growth have  appeared  in  land
plants, but the material from which they are fash-
ioned  has  remained  predominantly  carbon,
extracted from the atmosphere. This diversity can
be related to the tetravalent nature of carbon, and
the strength of its covalent bonding, permitting
the  formation  of  molecules  with  stable  carbon
chains and rings, and opening the possibility of a
great  range  of  organic  compounds.  Had  not  the
photosynthetic ﬁxation of this versatile element
arisen  on  the  Earth’s  surface,  plant  life,  and
animal life (which is dependent upon it), would
have been impossible. Indeed, it is difﬁcult to con-
ceive of any alternative form of life appearing in
its absence. The chain-forming properties of the
related element silicon, for example, are, in com-
parison, negligible.

The mobility of plants

Although the earliest plants were probably unicel-
lular and soon acquired motility of the kind seen
today in Chlamydomonas (Chapter 3), this appears
to have been rapidly lost in the evolution of higher
forms (although often retained in their gametes).
Multicellularity,  the  cells  remaining  cemented
together  by polysaccharides,  became  the  domi-
nant condition, cell separation being conﬁned to
sites of reproduction. Although this led, already
by the  Devonian,  to the  existence  of  large and
ﬁrmly anchored land plants, these are naturally
at  a  disadvantage,  not  shared  by the  higher
animals, at times of natural catastrophe, such as
volcanic eruption or ﬁre. Plants, however, very fre-
quently possess a remarkable mobility, or at least
a ready transportability by agencies such as wind
and  water, in  their  reproductive  bodies.  Fern
spores,  for  example,  have been  caught  in  aero-
plane  traps  in  quantity  at  1500  m  (5000ft)  and
even higher, and the hairy spikelets of the grasses
Paspalum urvillei and Andropogon bicornis have been
encountered  at  1200  m  (4000ft)  above  Panama.
Lakes, seas and the coats and feet of animals also
play their part in distributing plants. A splendid
example of oceanic distribution is provided by the
coconut  palm  (Cocos nucifera),  which  frequently
fringes tropical beaches. The nuts, dropping into
the  sea,  ﬂoat  for  long  distances  and  germinate
where  washed  ashore.  The  pan-tropical  distribu-
tion of the palm is readily accounted for in this
way. In  plants,  therefore,  the  immobility  of  the
individual  is  frequently  compensated  for  by the
mobility of the species, and devastated areas and
new 
land  surfaces  become  colonized  with
amazing rapidity and effectiveness.

Some plants (e.g., Glechoma) produce stolons
which appear to explore the neighboring ground.
Since the plantlets becoming established on richer
areas come to dominate the stand, this behavior
has been fancifully referred to as “foraging”.

Life cycles

Although developmental cycles are known in the
prokaryotic Cyanophyta (p. 28), a well-deﬁned

14

GENERAL FEATURES OF THE PLANT KINGDOM

tophytes. Each phase may also multiply itself
asexually. These various possibilities are summar-
ized in Fig. 1.7.

isomorphic

A life cycle is thus basically a nuclear cycle, and
it is not necessarily accompanied by any morpho-
logical  change.  In  the  algae  Ulva (p.  54)  and
Dictyota (p.  92),  for  example,  the  gametophyte
and sporophyte  are  superﬁcially  indistinguish-
able, and it is necessary to observe the manner of
reproduction in order to identify the phase of the
cycle to which any individual belongs. Such a life
cycle  is  termed 
(or  homologous).
Frequently, however, the two phases of the cycle
have different morphologies, one often being less
conspicuous than the other, and sometimes para-
sitic upon it. These cycles are termed heteromorphic
(or  antithetic).  Although  the  algae  show  both
isomorphic and heteromorphic life cycles, those
of  land  plants  are  exclusively  heteromorphic.
Occasionally there may be a morphological cycle
without a corresponding nuclear cycle, as in the
apogamous ferns (p. 210), but this is regarded as a
derived condition.

Gametes  are  always  uninucleate,  and,  when
motile, usually naked cells. In the simplest form
of  sexual  reproduction,  termed  isogamy,  the  two
gametes  involved  in  fusion  are  free  cells  and
morphologically identical. Nevertheless, detailed
investigations  continue  to show  that  gametes
from the same parent rarely fuse. Some measure
of  self-incompatibility,  and  hence  physiological
differentiation between the parents, appears to be
the general rule.

Isogamy was probably the most ancient condi-
tion, and this appears to have been succeeded by
anisogamy.  Here  the  gametes,  although  still  free
cells, are morphologically dissimilar, but usually
differ in little more than size. The larger, which
may also be less mobile, is called the female. The
extreme  form of  anisogamy  is  oogamy,  in  which
the  female  gamete,  now  called  an  egg  cell  or
ovum,  is  large,  non-motile,  and  ﬁlled  with food
materials. The egg cell may either ﬂoat freely in
water, as  in  the  alga  Fucus,  or  be  retained  in  a
chamber, as in some algae and all land plants. The
chamber  bears  various  names  according  to the
group of plants being considered. Since the pro-
gression  from  isogamy  is  accompanied  in  many
algal groups by an increase in somatic complexity,

Figure 1.7. The life cycle of autotrophic plants generalized.
The large circle represents sexual reproduction. Only
relatively few species display all the reproductive
potentialities shown.

cycle involving meiotic segregation of the genetic
material and its subsequent recombination by
sexual fusion is found only in eukaryotic photo-
trophs. That part of the cycle in which the
nucleus contains a single set of chromosomes is
termed haploid, and the complementary part of
the cycle in which two sets are present diploid.
The cycle is seen at its simplest in the unicellular
algae of aquatic environments (Chapters 2, 3 and
4), where haploid individuals in certain circum-
stances behave as gametes and fuse, so forming a
zygote. The zygote, which contains a diploid
nucleus, either undergoes meiosis at once, or
only after some delay, in which case the diploid
condition can be thought of as having an inde-
pendent existence. Either the haploid or the
diploid phase, or both, may be multicellular. The
multicellular plant is called a gametophyte if it
produces gametes directly, and a sporophyte if it
produces,
individual cells
(called spores or meiospores) which either behave
as gametes immediately or develop into game-

following meiosis,

LIFE CYCLES

15

Figure 1.8. The development of an archegonium as seen in
a fern: i, archegonial initial; p, primary cell of the axial row; c,
central cell; v, ventral canal cell; e, egg cell; ncc, neck canal
cell. Stage 6 indicates a mature archegonium. The neck canal
nuclei are breaking down and the ventral canal nucleus is
becoming pycnotic. The egg nucleus is enlarging and
becoming irregular in outline.

it  seems  very probable  that  this  morphological
progression is also a phylogenetic one.

In several instances of sexual reproduction it
has been shown that one or both gametes, or the
gametangia in which they are produced, liberate
traces  of  chemical  substances,  termed  phero-
mones (or gamones), which cause the appropriate
gametes to approach each other. The chemistry of
these  pheromones  varies  widely. In  some  algae
they are hydrocarbons (p. 84) and in others (p. 44)
glycoproteins. In the ferns the male gametes are
attracted to the opened egg chambers by a phero-
mone which may be malic acid, a component of
the  Krebs  cycle  of  respiratory  decarboxylation.
This substance is known to have a striking chemo-
tactic effect in vitro.

Life cycles of the transmigrant forms
The transition to a terrestrial environment clearly
presented  a  number  of  problems  in  relation  to
sexual reproduction. Although all land plants are
oogamous, and are presumably derived from oog-
amous algae, ﬂuid was still necessary in the initial
land plants to allow the motile male gametes to
reach the stationary female. This problem appears
to have  been  met  ﬁrst  by the  egg  becoming
enclosed  in  a  ﬂask-shaped  chamber,  the  archego-
nium, in the neck of which the male gametes accu-
mulate, and second by the male gamete becoming
an efﬁciently motile cell. The male gametes of the
lower  archegoniate  plants  (Chapters  5,  6  and  7),
(or  antherozoids),  are
termed 

spermatozoids

remarkable cytological objects. Each is furnished
with two or more highly active ﬂagella, and both
the cell and nucleus have an elongated snake-like
form, well suited for penetration of the archego-
nial  neck.  Dependence  upon  water  is  thus
reduced  to the  necessity  for  a  thin  ﬁlm  in  the
region of the sex organs at the time of maturity of
the gametes.

the  eggs  of 

The archegonium is common to all the lower
land  plants,  but  its  origin  remains  tantalizingly
obscure. It may have appeared immediately before
the colonization of the land, possibly as a conse-
quence  of  morphogenetic  tendencies  seen  today
in  association  with 
some
Charophyceae, and certain red algae. Regrettably,
however, the  antecedents  of  the  transmigrant
forms have left no clear representatives amongst
living  algae.  Nevertheless,  whatever  the  exact
time of the evolution of the archegonium, there
are  no  compelling  reasons  for  regarding  it  as
having been evolved more than once. The archego-
nium of the living plants has a relatively uniform
ontogeny and cytology. The initial cell lies in the
outer  layer  of  cells  (Fig.  1.8).  Two  periclinal  divi-
sions give rise to a vertical row of three cells, of
which the middle cell is the primary cell of the
axial  row. This  divides,  forming  the  central  cell
and the neck canal cell initial. The division of the
central cell yields, below, the egg cell and, above,
the  ventral  canal  cell.  The  nucleus  of  the  neck
canal cell divides a number of times (depending
upon the systematic position of the archegoniate),
but the cell itself commonly remains undivided.
The neck is formed by tiers of cells derived from
the upper cell of the initial row of three (Fig. 1.8).
The  lowermost  cell  of  this  row  gives  rise  to the
cells forming the jacket of the egg cell. The length
of the neck and the number of canal cells is sig-
niﬁcant  in  bryophytes  (p.  108),  but  negligible  in
advanced  archegoniates,  such  as  cycads  (p.  250).

16

GENERAL FEATURES OF THE PLANT KINGDOM

The  ferns  occupy  an  intermediate  position  (Fig.
1.8).  In  advanced  archegoniates,  division  of  the
central  cell  is  often  not  followed  by cytokinesis,
and  the  egg  nucleus  and  ventral  canal  nucleus
share a common cytoplasm (e.g., Ephedra, p. 266).
With a few exceptions, the fossil record indi-
cates that the most primitive forms of land plants
were probably all archegoniate. Notable amongst
the likely exceptions is Protosalvinia, an enigmatic
Devonian plant (p. 93). Its structural and morpho-
logical resemblances to dichotomously branched
fucoid algae (p. 89) suggest that algal groups other
than  the  Chlorophyta  may  also  have experi-
mented  with  life  on  land,  but  with  no  lasting
effect. There is little to challenge the view that the
successful colonization of the land was a unique
event, brought about by evolutionary progression
from the Chlorophyta, in which the perfection of
the archegonium played a cardinal rôle.

If the transmigrant forms were archegoniate,
what  was  the  nature  of  their  life  cycles?  This  is
largely a matter for conjecture. However, as will be
seen  in  later  chapters,  except  for  approaches  to
isomorphy  in  rhyniophytoid  plants  (Chapter  6),
the  living  lower  archegoniate  plants  possess
markedly heteromorphic life cycles in which the
conspicuous  phase  is  either  the  gametophyte
(Bryophyta)  or  the  sporophyte  (Lycopodiopsida,
Equisetopsida,  Polypodiopsida).  The  transmi-
grants  possibly  had  an  intermediate  position,
with  more  or  less  isomorphic  cycles,  although
there is evidence that, even as early as the Lower
Devonian, simple vascular plants had gametophy-
tes with bryophyte-like features (p. 115). The cycle
in  which  the  sporophyte  was  the  most  highly
developed phase clearly had the greater evolution-
ary potential, since it is characteristic of all forms
of higher plant life.

Sexual reproduction in later
terrestrial vegetation

An  important  step  in  the  evolution  of  sexual
reproduction on land was undoubtedly the emer-
gence in the archegoniate plants of heterospory.
This involves the production of spores of two sizes,
the larger giving rise to a wholly female gameto-
phyte and the smaller to a male. In homosporous

archegoniate plants the gametophyte commonly
passes  through  a  male  phase  before  becoming
female, although it may become male again later.
The simultaneous production of viable male and
female  gametes  is  unusual.  In  the  primitive
heterosporous plants, however, the small female
gametophyte formed on germination of the meg-
aspore produces one or a few archegonia in a very
short time. The microspore also develops rapidly,
and  spermatozoids  are  soon  liberated  from  the
diminutive male gametophyte. Further, the food
reserves  of  the  megaspore  provide  for  the  rapid
development of the embryo (in the heterosporous
fern Marsilea (p. 214), for example, the new sporo-
phyte  emerges  within  24  hours  of  fertilization,
compared with about one week in a homosporous
fern). Heterosporous reproduction is thus coupled
with a reduction of the time spent in the gameto-
phytic  phase.  The  shortening  of  the  life  cycle
increased  the  rate at  which  new  forms  could
appear, and hence promoted evolution.

In higher archegoniate plants (Chapter 8) we
see  how  sexual  reproduction  becomes  increas-
ingly independent of water. These archegoniates
are exclusively heterosporous, but the megaspore
is  retained  and  germinates  within  a  specialized
sporangium called an ovule. In some forms (Cycas,
Ginkgo),  fertilization  is  still  effected  by ﬂagellate
male  gametes,  but  the  only  ﬂuid  necessary  is  a
small  drop,  immediately  above  the  archegonia,
into which the gametes are released. Other higher
archegoniate  plants  escape  even  from  this
requirement.  The  male  gametophyte  is  ﬁlamen-
tous, and, as a consequence of its growing toward
the  female  gametophyte,  it  liberates  the  male
gametes (which now lack any specialized means of
locomotion  and  are  probably  moved  passively)
directly into an archegonium (siphonogamy). In a
few  allied  plants  (e.g.,  Gnetum),  modiﬁcations  of
the female gametophyte result in the disappear-
ance of the archegonium. Ultimately we arrive at
the  embryo sac  and  the  ﬁnely  ordered  cytology
that is characteristic of the sexual reproduction of
the  ﬂowering  plants  (Chapter  9).  Comparative
morphology  and  the  fossil  record  indicate  that
the morphological sequence we have considered
here  also  represents  the  evolutionary  develop-
ment  of  sexual  reproduction  in  land  plants.
Compared with the cytological elegance of fertil-

SEXUAL REPRODUCTION IN LATER TERRESTRIAL VEGETATION

17

Table 1.2

Sex expression in plants.

Algae
Where reproduction is sexual, sex is expressed only in the gametophytic phase.The gametophyte can
be either unisexual (as in Ectocarpus (p. 86)) or bisexual (as in Coleochaete (p. 64)).

Bryophytes
Sex is expressed only in the gametophytic phase.This phase can be either unisexual (as in dioecious
species) or bisexual (as in monoecious species). Sex may be expressed differently in different regions of
the same gametophyte (as in the moss Funaria hygrometrica (p. 130) and many other species).

Tracheophytes
Sex is expressed in the gametophytic phase, either unisexually (as in heterosporous archegoniates) or
bisexually (as in homosporous species). Sex may also be expressed in the sporophyte, as in dioecious
species of seed plants (e.g., Taxus baccata among conifers, and Lychnis dioica and many other species of
ﬂowering plants). In these plants the female produces only megaspores, and the male only microspores
(pollen). Sex may also be expressed differently in different regions of the same sporophyte, as in
diclinous species of monoecious ﬂowering plants (p. 285). It is possible that some heterosporous
pteridophytes, now extinct, had separate male and female sporophytes (p. 147).

Table 1.3

The plant kingdom: phototrophs containing chlorophyll and evolving oxygen during photosynthesis.

Subkingdom Algae
Predominantly plants of aquatic environments, or persistently damp situations exposed to saturated 
atmospheres. Unicellular, colonial or multicellular, the multicellular forms lacking a well-developed
vascular system. Reproductive mechanisms relatively unspecialized. Complex and thickened walls
associated only with resting cells. (Chapters 2, 3 and 4)

Subkingdom Embryophyta
Division Bryophyta
Terrestrial or epiphytic, some aquatic.The sporophytic phase normally determinate and partly
dependent upon the gametophyte. Multicellular, external surfaces covered with a cuticle, but that of the
gametophyte relatively permeable.Vascular systems, if present, not highly differentiated. Sexual
reproduction dependent on presence of water. Spores with exine but only in a few groups heavily
thickened and ornamented. (Chapter 5)
Division Tracheophyta
Almost entirely conﬁned to land, a few marine (“sea grasses”), aquatic forms rarely completing their life
cycle in a submerged state.The gametophytic phase relatively small or rudimentary, the sporophyte not
dependent upon it. Sporophyte often of indeﬁnite growth, regularly provided with a cuticle, normally
impermeable, and almost always with stomata and internal air spaces.Well-deﬁned vascular systems
consisting of xylem and phloem. Reproductive regions often with elaborate morphology. Spores usually
with a well-developed and acetolysis-resistant wall. Fusion of male and female gametes only in more
primitive forms dependent on extraneous water. (Chapters 6, 7, 8 and 9)

ization in an angiosperm, the clumsy spermato-
zoid of Cycas is thus not only barbarous, but also
primitive.

Following the evolution of heterospory, there
was  also  a  clear  tendency  for  sex  expression  to

appear  in  the  sporophyte,  specialized  organs  of
sporophytic  structure  (such  as  the  male  stamen
and the female ovule) housing the sites yielding
the  initial  cells  of  the  succeeding  gametophytic
generation (Table 1.2).

18

GENERAL FEATURES OF THE PLANT KINGDOM

Classiﬁcation of the
chlorophyllous phototrophs

A  classiﬁcation  provides  the  shelving  on  which
knowledge of the plant kingdom can be arranged
in an orderly fashion. The ideal is a classiﬁcation
which  arranges  plants  according  to their  level
of organization  and  in  their  natural  alliances.
In every  classiﬁcation  there  is  an  element  of
subjectivity. Consequently as knowledge expands
judgments  need  to be  modiﬁed.  The  primary
classiﬁcation  followed  in  this  book  is  shown  in

Table 1.3. The classiﬁcations of the algal subking-
dom  and  of  the  embryophyte  divisions  will  be
found subsequently at the beginnings of Chapters
2,  5  and  6.  The  aim  throughout  is  to present  a
general  view  of  the  principal  kinds  of  organiza-
tion encountered in the plant kingdom. Although
the  approach  is  systematic,  a  purely  systematic
treatment is not attempted and would be inappro-
priate.  The  lower  plants  receive  proportionately
greater  attention.  The  fossil  evidence  indicates
that they retain features present at crucial stages
in plant evolution. Familiarity with them is essen-
tial for an understanding of today’s diversity. 

2

The subkingdom Algae: Part 1

Biological features of algae

The  simplest  phototroph  imaginable  is  a  single
cell ﬂoating in a liquid medium, synthesizing its
own sugar, and reproducing at intervals by binary
ﬁssion.  Such  organisms  do  in  fact  exist  in  both
fresh  and  salt  waters.  Examples  are  provided  by
the  cyanophyte  Synechococcus
(p.  28)  and  the
minute marine Micromonas (Fig. 1.6).

These  organisms  are  examples  of  algae,  the
group of plants showing the greatest diversity of
any  major  division  of  the  plant  kingdom.  They
range  from  minute,  free-ﬂoating,  unicellular
forms  (represented  by both  prokaryotes  and
eukaryotes)  to large plants,  exclusively  marine,
several  meters  in  length.  Many  of  the  smaller
algae form a component of plankton, the commu-
nities of minute plants and animals which ﬂoat at
or  near  the  surface  of  fresh  waters  and  oceans.
Algae are responsible for a large part of the photo-
synthesis  in  the  biosphere,  the  productivity  of
some  coastal  communities  in  the  surf  of  warm
seas  exceeding  that  of  the  tropical  rain  forest.
Much of the carbon so ﬁxed enters the food chain
of the aquatic heterotrophs.

Despite the enormous range in size, the algae
remain  comparatively  simple  in  organization.
In the  smaller  multicellular  species 
(e.g.,
Merismopedia, Fig. 2.6; Pediastrum, Fig. 3.8) the cells
resemble each other in appearance and function,
and they can be regarded as forming little more
than  an  aggregate of  independent  units.  In  the
larger, however, there is morphological and cellu-
lar  differentiation,  although  usually  less  exten-

sive  than  in  most  land  plants.  The  few  hetero-
trophic 
forms,  mostly  small,  are  regarded
as derived.  Some,  even  the  smallest  (e.g.,  the
dinoﬂagellates,  p.  95),  appear  to be  composite
organisms,  incorporating  a  photosynthesizing
endosymbiont.

Many  algae  are  fully  immersed  and  ﬁrmly
attached to the substratum. Together with a few
vascular  plants  these  constitute  the  benthos,  and
contrast  with  the  ﬂoating  plankton.  The  attach-
ment may be by a disk-like holdfast, which forms
a ﬁrm union with the surface of a rock or stone,
or  branched,  penetrating  soft  material  such  as
muds. Branched root-like attachments (as in the
Charales)  may  participate  in  the  absorption  of
minerals, but any resemblance to the root system
of higher plants is distant.

The largest algae are found only in the sea. The
restriction  of  these  forms  to a marine  environ-
ment  is  perhaps  accounted  for  by the  relative
impermanence  of  inland  waters  in  geological
time, and the consequent limiting of the opportu-
nity  for  the  evolution  of  similar  complexity  in
these situations. Although marine algae are some-
times able to withstand inundation in fresh water
(e.g.,  Fucus,  p.  90),  and  occasionally  may  even
become adapted to permanently low salinity (e.g.,
Ulva and  Enteromorpha,  p.  54),  they do  not  nor-
mally survive indeﬁnitely or grow in these condi-
tions.  Presumably, fresh  waters  are  unable  to
supply  minerals  at  a  rate adequate  for  their
metabolism.  A  large alga  in  European  seas  is
Laminaria (Fig.  4.16),  some  species  of  which may
reach 4 m (13ft, 4in.) in length. Off the west coast
of  North  America  are  found  the  gigantic

20

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 1

Nereocystis and  Macrocystis,  with  thalli  commonly
extending 50m (165ft) or more. Maintaining the
integrity of a thallus of this size raises substantial
mechanical problems. Although the sea provides
considerable  supporting  upthrust,  currents  and
turbulence  cause  more  sustained  tensions  and
pressures  than  similar  movements  in  a  gaseous
medium. The toughness and hard rubbery resis-
tance to any kind of distortion found in the larger
algae are thus necessary qualities for survival in
the oceans. These attributes arise principally from
the general properties of the cell walls and of the
surface, and not from any specialized strengthen-
ing elements.

The biophysical features of photosynthesis in
the algae are the same as those in land plants, but
the  C4  pathway of  carbon  dioxide  assimilation
(p. 6) characteristic of some land plants seems not
to be represented (with the possible exception of
the coenocytic green alga Udotea, p. 58). As would
be  expected  of  a  group  exploiting  the  aquatic
habitat, many of the secondary products found in
the algae have distinctive biochemical character-
istics.  Many  algae,  for  example,  accumulate  fats
and oils rather than starch, and others polyhydric
alcohols.  The  cell  walls  of  the  eukaryotic  algae
often  contain  the  polysaccharides  mannan  and
xylan in microﬁbrillar form in addition to cellu-
lose.  The  nitrogenous  polysaccharide  chitin  is
found as an outer layer of the wall in Cladophora
prolifera and  possibly  in  Oedogonium.  Pectin,  a
polymer based on galacturonic acid, is a common
component of algal cell walls, sometimes forming
a distinct outer sheath (e.g., Scenedesmus, Fig. 3.7).
Colloids  such  as  fucin  and  fucoidin,  unknown
outside the algae, occur in the amorphous matri-
ces of the walls of brown algae. Alginic acid, which
occurs  in  quantity  in  the  middle  lamellae  and
primary walls of several brown algae, is extracted
commercially and ﬁnds a wide range of uses as an
emulsiﬁer in industry, and is a component of the
familiar  “instant  puddings”.  Complex  mucilagi-
nous polysaccharides rich in galactan sulfates are
characteristic  of  the  red  algae.  Dimethyl  sulfur
compounds assist osmoregulation in marine phy-
toplankton.  Gaseous  derivatives  of  these  escape
and contribute to the sulfur content of the atmos-
phere.  Oxidation  of  these  derivatives  leads  to
sulfur or sulfate particles in the air above oceans.

Figure 2.1. Diagram of transverse section of a eukaryotic
ﬂagellum viewed from the base. The “spokes”, radiating from
the center to the peripheral doublets, are usually
recognizable. Sometimes an ill-deﬁned sheath is present
around the central pair of tubules.

These particles are believed to give rise to aerosols
which  promote  cloud  formation.  This  in  turn
leads to cooling of the surface. Evidence is accu-
mulating  that  the  metabolic  effects  of  oceanic
phytoplankton  have a signiﬁcant  rôle  in  deter-
mining climate.

Many unicellular algae, occurring both singly
and in colonies, and the unicellular reproductive
cells of more complex algae are motile. In some
prokaryotic forms (e.g., cyanophytes, p. 26) and in
some eukaryotic ones (e.g., diatoms, p. 82), move-
ment  is  brought  about  by  directed  jets  of  muci-
lage.  The  motility  of  many  eukaryotes  however
depends upon the presence of ﬂagella. An unex-
pected  and  remarkable  discovery of  electron
microscopy  was  that  all  ﬂagella  produced  by
eukaryotic organisms have a common basic struc-
ture,  providing  a  characteristic  picture  in  trans-
verse section (Fig. 2.1). Nine pairs of microtubules,
each pair oriented tangentially, are equally spaced
around the periphery of the ﬂagellum. Although
the microtubules of each pair are similar in diam-
eter (18–25 nm), they differ in proﬁle. Viewed from
the  base  of  the  ﬂagellum  outward,  the  microtu-
bule on the right (the “A” tubule) usually appears
circular in outline, whereas that of the “B” tubule
on the left is not completely so. The portion of the
“B” tubule shared with the “A” tubule commonly
follows the curvature of the latter. In addition to
the  peripheral  microtubules  two  free  microtu-
bules  usually  lie  symmetrically  at  the  center.
These are often slightly wider than the peripheral
tubules. Usually, but not always in plant ﬂagella,

BIOLOGICAL FEATURES OF ALGAE

21

two short arms can be made out on the “A” tubule.
These  consist  of  a  special  protein,  dynein,  an
ATPase.

The microtubular system of the ﬂagellum con-
stitutes  the  axoneme.  The  microtubules  of  axo-
nemes appear to be quite similar to others in the
cell, but they are not so sensitive to colchicine. In
some instances ﬂagellogenesis may even continue
in  the  presence  of  this  anti-microtubular  drug.
Movement of the axoneme is probably caused by
the paired microtubules sliding over one another.
The  mechanism  is  not  however  entirely  under-
stood.  More  detailed  information  will  probably
come  from  the  study  of  mutants  in  which  the
structure of ﬂagella is in some way defective.

Formerly  two  classes  of  ﬂagella  were  recog-
nized, “whiplash” considered to be smooth, and
“Flimmer”  furnished  with  rows  of  minute  hairs
(mastigonemes).  It  now  seems  doubtful  whether
algal  ﬂagella  are  ever  entirely  smooth,  but
appendages are certainly much more conspicuous
in some groups than in others. Appendages other
than hairs are also known. The single ﬂagellum of
Micromonas, for example, is covered with minute
scales, and that of the related Pyramimonas with
minute scales of two distinct kinds. The electron
microscope  has  shown  that  in  many instances
these  scales  are  assembled  in  Golgi  bodies  and
transported to the surface in vesicles.

The nature of the surface, and other features
of the ﬂagella such as their number, arrangement,
and method and kind of insertion, have attracted
considerable interest, those of the biﬂagellate uni-
cells  of  the  Chlorophyta  having  received  closest
attention (Fig. 2.2). Here the ﬂagella are anchored
by four “roots”, two consisting of a bundle of four
microtubules,  and  two  of  two  microtubules.
Viewed from above the bundles reveal a cruciate
arrangement. Often the insertions of the ﬂagella
(basal  bodies)  do  not  lie  in  the  same  plane,  one
being shifted slightly in relation to the other (Fig.
2.2). If the shifting is in a clockwise direction (as
in Chlamydomonas) the arrangement is said to be “1
o’clock–7  o’clock”,  and  if  the  converse  “11
o’clock–5 o’clock”. The latter is not found in any
free-living  unicellular  forms,  but  occurs  in  the
gametes of a number of Ulvophyceae. A coplanar
arrangement  of  the  ﬂagellar  bases  is  compara-
tively rare, but is found in zoospores and gametes

Figure 2.2. Positional relationships of the basal bodies
(black) and ﬂagellar roots in biﬂagellate cells of the green
algae (Chlorophyceae), viewed from the anterior end of the
cell. (A) The basal bodies lie in the same plane (possibly an
ancestral arrangement). (B) The basal bodies are shifted in an
anticlockwise direction relative to each other (positions “11
o’clock–5 o’clock”). (C) The shifting is in a clockwise
direction (positions “1 o’clock–7 o’clock”). Comparable
relationships are found in quadriﬂagellate cells. (From Van
den Hoek, Mann and Jahns. 1995. Algae: An Introduction to
Phycology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.)

of the Chlorococcales. Flagella features have given
useful  indications  of  relationships  within  the
Chlorophyta.

The  basal  bodies  of  the  Chlorophyta  are  also
associated  with  strands  of  contractile  protein.
These strands are termed rhizoplasts and the con-
stituent protein centrin. The contraction and relax-
ation of this protein depend upon the balance of
Ca2⫹ and  ATP, and  its  activity  contributes  to the
motions of the ﬂagella. The rhizoplasts run down
into  the  cell  and  terminate  adjacent  to  the
nucleus or chloroplast.

Some  motile  gametes  and  zoospores  within
the Chlorophyta have a symmetry different from
that of Chlamydomonas. They are unilateral and a
single  microtubular  ribbon  descends  from  the
basal bodies into the body of the cell. At the ante-
rior of the ribbon, beneath the basal bodies, is a
conspicuous  multilayered  structure.  This  is  very
similar  to the  corresponding  structure  beneath
the basal bodies in the motile male gametes of the
archegoniate land plants. A splendid example is
seen  in  the  alga  Coleochaete (Fig.  3.35),  an  algal
form which has several other features of signiﬁ-
cance in relation to the origin of the earliest land
plants in the Silurian (see Chapters 3, 5 and 6). 

Attention has also been paid to the manner of
cell division in the algae, again principally in the
green  algae.  The  nuclear  envelope  may  remain
almost  intact  at  the  time  of  division,  and  the

22

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 1

Flimmer structure typical of the heterokonts, and
the characteristic chloroplast endoplasmic reticu-
lum is also present. The Rhodophyta are outstand-
ing in having no ﬂagellate forms amongst living
representatives.  A  few  unicellular  forms  belong-
ing to the Haptophyta (p. 93) have, in addition to
two  ﬂagella,  a  third  ﬂagellum-like  organ.  The
structure of this is much simpler and less regular
than that of the “9⫹2” ﬂagellum.

The  chloroplasts  of  algae  take a variety  of
shapes, for example plate-like in Mougeotia (p. 62),
stellate in desmids (p. 62) and some red algae, as
girdles close to the cell wall (Ulothrix, p. 52), in the
form of  a  spiral  ribbon  (Spirogyra,  p.  63),  cup-
shaped in Chlamydomonas (p. 40) and reticulate (as
in many Chlorococcales). Discoid chloroplasts, the
form common in land plants, are found in a few
red  algae  and  in  Chara (p.  66),  but  are  generally
rare.  Although  irregular  stacking  of  thylakoids
commonly occurs in chloroplasts of chlorophylls
“a⫹b” algae (Table 2.1) (e.g., Chlamydomonas), the
distinct  grana  characteristic  of  land  plants  are
absent. A prominent feature of many algal chloro-
plasts  is  the  pyrenoid,  a  proteinaceous  body  and
the  site  of  the  enzyme  RUBISCO  (p.  2).  In  land
plants RUBISCO is distributed in the stroma of the
plastid. The pyrenoid may also be the site of starch
formation, but not in the red algae (p. 30).

There is no evidence that the major groups of
algae have any close relationship with each other.
Nevertheless, there are sufﬁcient morphological,
physiological and ecological similarities between
these plants to make the term “alga” a useful one.
Study  of  the  structure  and  reproduction  of  the
algae  reveals  a  number  of  ways  in  which  these
simple phototrophs have increased their morpho-
logical and reproductive complexity. We shall in
the main be concerned with the illustration and
discussion  of  these  trends,  and  we shall  not
attempt a complete taxonomic or morphological
survey of any group. The general classiﬁcation of
the algae followed in this work, based upon the
nature of the chlorophylls present in the photo-
synthetic membranes, is shown in Table 2.1.

Figure 2.3. Extreme forms of cytokinesis in green algae (in
longitudinal section, diagrammatic). (A) Mitotic spindle
transient, nuclear envelope remaining largely intact
throughout. Division is completed by ingrowths of the wall
directed toward a transverse equatorial array of
microtubules (phycoplast, p). (B) Spindle persists until
telophase. Transversely oriented microtubules at equator
absent, cell plate (cp) forms within a vesicular phragmoplast
transverse to the axis of the spindle, and extends laterally,
completing the dividing wall.

spindle transient (as in Chlamydomonas) or persist-
ing until telophase. Cytokinesis may be brought
about by wall ingrowths penetrating a transverse
array  of  microtubules  (termed  a  phycoplast)  (Fig.
2.3A), or, more rarely, be initiated by a cell plate
formed within a phragmoplast at the equator of
a more  persistent  spindle,  as  in  all  land  plants
(Fig. 2.3B).  Patterns  of  cytokinesis  intermediate
between these two extremes are also encountered.
Signiﬁcantly, the  phragmoplast  type  of  division
has been observed only in those algae (members of
the Charophyceae) thought to be closest to those
from which the land plants arose.

Amongst other eukaryotic algae, the biﬂagel-
late heterokonts (Table 2.1) form a natural group.
The  two  ﬂagella  differ  in  length,  the  nature  of
their  ornamentation,  and  their  orientation.  The
longer ﬂagellum is of the “Flimmer” kind and is
directed forward. The shorter ﬂagellum is smooth
and is directed backward along the cell. The group
also has ultrastructural features in common, such
as the manner in which the plastid is enclosed in
a  fold  of  endoplasmic  reticulum  (e.g.,  Fig.  4.27).
The  Bacillariophyta  (diatoms)  (p.  80)  are  also
included  in  the  heterokont  algae:  although  the
male gamete (the only ﬂagellate stage in the life
history)  has  only  a  single  ﬂagellum,  it  has  the

Table 2.1 Classification of the subkingdom Algae.

Division

Class/subclass

Order

Algae containing wholly or predominantly chlorophyll a

Cyanophyceae

Chroococcales
Nostocales
Stigonematales

CYANOPHYTA
(Cyanobacteria)

GLAUCOPHYTA
RHODOPHYTA

PROCHLOROPHYTA
CHLORACHNIOPHYTA
CHLOROPHYTA

Rhodophyceae

Bangiophycidae
Florideophycidae

Algae containing chlorophylls a and b

Prasinophyceae

Chlorophyceae

Ulvophyceae

Charophyceae

Pleurastrophyceae

l

s
e
a
n
o
h
p
S

i

Pedinomonadales
Pyraminodales
Pterospermatales
Volvocales
Tetrasporales
Chlorococcales
Chlorosphaerales
Chaetophorales
Oedogoniales
Sphaeropleales
Ulotrichales
Ulvales
Prasiolales
Cladophorales
Siphonocladales
Codiales
Caulerpales
Dichotomosiphonales
Dasycladales
Klebsormidiales
Mesotaeniales
Desmidiales
Zygnematales
Coleochaetales
Charales
Tetraselmidales
Pleurastrales
Trentepohliales
Euglenales
Eutreptiales

l

e
a
g
a
 
t
n
o
k
o
r
e
t
e
H

Ectocarpales
Sphacelariales
Cutleriales
Laminariales
Fucales
Dictyotales

EUGLENOPHYTA

Euglenophyceae

CHRYSOPHYTA
XANTHOPHYTA
BACILLARIOPHYTA
PHAEOPHYTA

Algae containing chlorophylls a and c

Phaeophyceae

HAPTOPHYTA (Prymnesiophyta)
DINOPHYTA (Pyrrophyta)

CRYPTOPHYTA

Desmophyceae
Dinophyceae

24

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 1

Algae in which the chlorophyll
is wholly or predominantly
chlorophyll a

These algae, which embrace both prokaryotic and
eukaryotic  forms,  are  probably  the  closest
amongst the living algae to the original cellular
phototrophs.  They  are  therefore  of  particular
interest in relation to the origin of plant life.

Prokaryotic forms
Those  prokaryotic  forms  which  contain  solely
chlorophyll  a  comprise  the  well-characterized
division  Cyanophyta  (“blue-green  algae”).  Many
exist as single cells and are representative of the
simplest  phototrophs.  In  others  the  cells  are
aggregated  either  loosely  or  into  groups,  each
with  a  distinctive  morphology  (e.g.,  Gloeotrichia,
Fig. 2.11). Filamentous forms also occur, and a few
attain a multiseriate and pseudoparenchymatous
level of organization (Stigonema, p. 26).

CYANOPHYTA (CYANOB ACTERIA)
Habitat Water, swamps, soil, occasionally endo-

lithic.

Pigments Chlorophyll a; ␤-carotene; myxoxan-

thin, zeaxanthin; biliproteins (allophycocya-
nin, phycocyanin and phycoerythrin).

Food reserves Cyanophycean starch (similar to

glycogen), polyphosphate granules (volutin),
cyanophycin (a polymer of arginine and
aspartic acid).

Cell wall components Murein, hemicelluloses.
Reproduction Asexual. Genetic recombination
observed, but mechanism not clearly estab-
lished.

Growth forms Unicellular, cellular aggregates,
ﬁlamentous, a few pseudoparenchymatous.

Cytology
The cells, rarely exceeding 10 ␮m in diameter, are
not unlike those of bacteria. Indeed, despite the
presence  of  chlorophyll  a and  the  possession
of oxygenic  photosynthesis,  the  cyanophytes
are
bacteria
(“Cyanobacteria”)  instead  of  with  the  algae.  The
resemblance is enhanced by the presence of the
peptidoglucan  murein  in  the  cell  walls,  their

classiﬁed  with 

often 

the 

being subject to attack by viruses similar to the
bacteriophages, and the bearing by some of ﬁla-
mentous appendages (ﬁmbriae) otherwise found
only  in  Gram-negative  bacteria.  Some  cyanophy-
tes,  if  present  in  anaerobic  situations  rich  in
sulﬁde, are able to use hydrogen sulﬁde as an elec-
tron  donor,  producing  sulfur  or  thiosulfate  as  a
by-product.  A  similar  kind  of  photosynthesis  is
found  in  certain  bacteria.  Another  bacterial
feature is that some cyanophytes (e.g., species of
Oscillatoria and the related Microcoleus) are able, in
association  with  various  bacteria,  to metabolize
heavy hydrocarbons. Mats formed by these organ-
isms ﬁnd a practical use in cleaning up massive oil
spills (as followed the military operations in the
deserts of Kuwait).

Under the light microscope, partly because of
the small size of the cells, the photosynthetic pig-
ments  appear  dispersed  in  the  cytoplasm.  The
electron microscope reveals that this is an errone-
ous  impression,  and  that  the  cells  contain  the
same  kind  of  photosynthetic  membrane  as  that
present  in  higher  plants.  The  thylakoids,  which
arise  as,  and  may  remain,  invaginations  of  the
plasmalemma, form either loose stacks parallel to
the longitudinal axis of the cell, or a number of
concentric  whorls.  Less  commonly  they form  a
three-dimensional  reticulum,  and  in  older  cells
have been  seen  to aggregate into  a  crystalline
body about 0.3 ␮m in diameter closely resembling
the  prolamellar  bodies  of  etioplasts  of  higher
plants. Skeins of DNA, together forming the nucle-
oid,  may  be  scattered  between  the  thylakoids.
Blue-green  algae  from  hot  springs  have yielded
the  ﬁrst pure  preparations  of  the  chlorophyll  a
reaction center at which the light energy is trans-
formed into chemical (photosystem I).

Also seen in the electron microscope are small
particles about 30 nm in diameter, lying on the
outer surfaces of the thylakoids. These are the site
of  the  biliprotein  pigments  (phycobilisomes).  They
trap  the  light  energy  which  is  subsequently  uti-
lized in photosystem II, that part of photosynthe-
sis  which leads  to the  evolution  of  oxygen.
Scattered  amongst  the  thylakoids  and  skeins  of
DNA  are  polyhedral  bodies  (carboxysomes).  These
are the sites of the enzyme RUBISCO (p. 2). 

Elsewhere  in  the  cell  are  found  clusters  of
minute  cylinders,  each  bounded  by a sheet  con-

ALGAE IN WHICH THE CHLOROPHYLL IS WHOLLY OR PREDOMINANTLY CHLOROPHYLL A

25

sisting solely of protein, and containing gas (gas
vesicles). These regulate buoyancy, and collapse if
the  cells  are  subjected  to sudden  mechanical
shock.  Vacuoles  similar  to those  of  eukaryotic
cells are absent.

In many ﬁlamentous species the chains of cells
are  interrupted  by occasional  conspicuously
larger  cells  called  heterocysts (Fig.  2.4).  There  are
often indications of regularity in their spacing (in
the  ﬁlamentous  Anabaena,  for  example,  about
every tenth cell becomes a heterocyst). The mech-
anism  controlling  their  formation  is  not  wholly
known, but in Anabaena a gene has been detected
which  contributes  to the  spacing  pattern.  This
gene codes for a small peptide which prevents the
differentiation of a heterocyst between two exist-
ing heterocysts, a kind of control which is more
familiar in eukaryotic organisms. The heterocysts
contain  chlorophyll  a and  some  other  pigments
but  are  altogether  paler,  and  by contrast  may
appear  empty.  Electron  microscopy  reveals  that
they contain  an  elaborate  and  often  reticulate
membrane system. The wall of a heterocyst is con-
spicuously thickened except for a pore at one or
both  poles.  At these  sites  its  protoplast  is  separ-
ated from those of its neighbors solely by a thin
septum, in which ﬁne channels (microplasmodes-
mata) can sometimes be discerned.

is 

inactivated 

irreversibly 

Heterocysts are the sites of ﬁxation of atmos-
pheric nitrogen. The enzyme responsible, nitroge-
nase, 
in  aerobic
conditions.  It  is  signiﬁcant  that  the  heterocysts
lack  photosystem  II  and  therefore  generate  no
intracellular  oxygen.  Indeed,  their  frequently
elaborate membrane systems may indicate consid-
erable  respiratory  activity.  This  would  in  turn
promote  an  anaerobic  environment  within  the
cells, which the thickened walls (Fig. 2.4) may help
to maintain.  Those  species  able  to ﬁx  nitrogen
without heterocysts can usually do so only at very
low oxygen tensions. An exception is the ﬁlamen-
tous Trichodesmium, which can carry on photosyn-
thesis  and  ﬁx  nitrogen  at  the  same  time.  It  is
thought  that  here  photosynthetic  and  nitrogen-
ﬁxing cells, distinguishable only in function, may
be  differentiated  along  individual  ﬁlaments.
Circadian rhythms have also been detected in cya-
nophytes 
(e.g.,  Synechococcus).  Such biological
clocks (which are probably similar in principle to

Figure 2.4. Anabaena. Longitudinal section of a heterocyst.
(After Fay, in Carr and Whitton. 1973. The Biology of Blue-
Green Algae. Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications, Oxford.)

those in eukaryotic cells, but possibly involve dif-
ferent  proteins)  may  also  serve,  by modulating
gene activity, to separate in time photosynthesis
(evolving oxygen) from nitrogen ﬁxation, so pre-
venting  destructive  interference  of  the  two
systems.

In  a  few  instances  heterocysts  have been
observed to regain pigmentation and then to ger-
minate. On these grounds some have considered
them  to be  vestigial  reproductive  cells.  In  one
species  of  Anabaena,  however, differentiation  of
the heterocyst has been found to involve deletions
in the DNA. If this is a general phenomenon and
heterocysts are truly capable of regenerating the
whole organism, these deletions are presumably
reversible. The respiration of cyanophytes tends to
be  depressed  by light,  and  with  mat-forming
species bright light has also been found to inhibit
the synthesis of DNA. This may serve to reduce the
chance of damage to the DNA by UV radiation, and
be a relic of a protective mechanism dating from
Precambrian  times  when  UV  radiation  reaching
the  Earth’s  surface,  in  the  absence  of  an  ozone
shield, would have been a far greater hazard.

The  cell  walls  of  the  Cyanophyta  contain  a
layer of the peptidoglucan murein adjacent to the
plasmalemma. The walls are thus chemically and
structurally similar to those of Gram-negative bac-
teria,  and  their  formation  is  similarly  disorga-
nized by penicillin. The presence of murein also
accounts for the dissolution of the wall, as those
of bacteria, by lysozyme. The outer part of the wall
is commonly a distinct layered sheath, sometimes
pigmented,  and  frequently  consisting  largely of

26

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 1

Figure 2.5. Chroococcus. Colony held together by successive
sheets of mucilage.

Figure 2.7. Tolypothrix showing “branching”.

Figure 2.6. Merismopedia.

gelatinous or slimy hemicelluloses. The creeping
movements  of  some  species  (reaching  up  to
4␮ms⫺1)  are  caused  by localized  excretion  of
mucilage through ﬁne pores, about 4nm in diam-
eter,  in  the  wall.  Some  strains  of  Synechococcus
display a considerably greater motility, reaching
up  to 25␮ms⫺1.  No motile  apparatus  has  been
detected.  It  is  thought  that  compression  waves,
passing  over  the  surface  of  the  cell  with  a  fre-
quency of about 1000sec⫺1, produce a propelling
force in an aqueous environment.

The gelatinous material of the outer wall fre-
quently holds cell colonies together (Figs. 2.5 and
2.6).  The  morphological  integrity  of  the  more
strikingly ﬁlamentous forms often depends upon
the  cells  being  held  in  linear  sequence  by the
toughness  of  the  sheath.  The  continuity  of  the

Figure 2.8. Stigonema. Part of plant showing the
pseudoparenchymatous thallus. A segmenting apical cell can
be distinguished at the tips of the branches. Hormogonia
consisting of two or a few cells are formed at the ends of
some of the branches. (After Frémy, redrawn from Fritsch.
1945. The Structure and Reproduction of the Algae, vol. 2.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.)

sheath  is  broken  at  points  of  branching  either
“false”,  characteristic  of  Tolypothrix (Fig.  2.7),  or
“true”,  as  seen  in  the  ﬁlamentous  Mastigocladus
and  the  pseudoparenchymatous  Stigonema (Fig.
2.8).

Distribution
The Cyanophyta are widely distributed, occurring
in both soil and water, though rarely at a pH below

ALGAE IN WHICH THE CHLOROPHYLL IS WHOLLY OR PREDOMINANTLY CHLOROPHYLL A

27

4.0. Some are marine (e.g., Trichodesmium, globally
distributed and one of the organisms responsible
for  the  color  of  the  Red  Sea).  Others  are  found
under such extreme conditions as snowﬁelds and
hot springs (where they can survive temperatures
of up to 85 oC/185°F), and beneath the eroded sur-
faces of rocks in Antarctic deserts. Some species
are remarkably resistant to desiccation: a culture
of Nostoc, for example, has been obtained from the
dry soil at the base of a herbarium specimen 87
years old. A protein providing protection against
desiccation  damage,  immunologically  related  to
the “dehydrins” widely distributed in the seeds of
higher plants, has been detected in a number of
cyanophytes.  Tolerance  of  desiccation,  and  an
ability  to withstand  without  damage  cycles  of
freezing  and  thawing,  probably  account  for  the
dominance  of  cyanophytes  in  polar  aquatic  eco-
systems.

Many species occur as slimes on rocks, damp
soils and tree trunks, and as scums on stagnant
water. Some live as endosymbionts in the proto-
plasts  of  colorless  ﬂagellates  and  amoebae.  The
“cyanelles”  of  the  ﬂagellate  Cyanophora and  the
non-motile unicellular Glaucocystis (Fig. 2.9) (both
of which are currently placed in a separate divi-
sion, Glaucophyta) probably arose from endosym-
bionts of this kind. The boundary of the cyanelle
appears to retain a peptidoglycan. Cyanelles may
divide  after  being  expressed  from  the  host  cell,
but it has not been possible to culture them indeﬁ-
nitely in isolation. The DNA of cyanelles contains
less  genetic  information  than  that  of  free-living
species, so there appears to have been some loss in
response  to the  endosymbiotic  habit.  Other
species  with  (so  far  as  known)  wholly  undimin-
ished  genomes  form  colonies  in  the  tissues  of
higher plants (e.g., the presence of Anabaena in the
fern Azolla (p. 212) and associated with the roots of
the gymnosperm Cycas (p. 245)). Cyanophytes are
also  components  of  some  lichens.  One  such
lichen,  Winfrenatia,  has  been  identiﬁed  in  the
Rhynie  Chert,  a  siliceous  formation  of  Lower
Devonian age in Scotland. These symbiotic associ-
ations are probably related to the ability of many
species  to both  photosynthesize  and  ﬁx  atmos-
pheric  nitrogen,  with  the  subsequent  release  of
valuable metabolites to the host. The fertility of
many  swampy tropical  soils  (e.g.,  rice  padi)  is

Figure 2.9. Glaucocystis. Diagrammatic representation of the
ultrastructure of the cell sectioned in the median plane. The
ellipsoidal cell is symmetrical about a plane transverse to the
longer axis. The anterior pole is marked by two rudimentary
ﬂagella (F) which do not penetrate the cell wall (W). The
nucleus (N) lies to one side of the cell, and a ring of Golgi
bodies (G) lies beneath the basal bodies of the ﬂagella. A
stellate group of cyanelles (C) is situated on each side of the
nucleus. Granules of starch (S) are scattered in the cytoplasm
and less frequently lipid droplets (L). Mitochondria (M),
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and vacuoles (V) are also
present. The major diameter of the cell is of the order of
30 µm. (After Schnepf, Koch and Deichgräber. 1966. Archiv
für Mikrobiologie 55.) 

dependent  upon  nitrogen  ﬁxation  by  cyanophy-
tes.  Conversely, in  temperate  regions  they often
contaminate fresh water, particularly where these
become enriched by mineral nutrients from agri-
cultural  drainage  (eutrophication).  Some  cya-
nophytes which form “blooms” in these situations
release  toxic  substances  (often  neurotoxins)  into
the water which can endanger the lives of cattle
and  humans.  There  is  evidence  from  Southeast
Asia that domestic supplies drawn from sources
which have become contaminated by cyanophytes
(particularly the coccoid Microcystis) promote the
formation of tumors in the liver. Chlorination of
the  water  may, by  killing  the  algae,  cause  the
release  of  additional  endotoxins  into  the  water
and increase its toxicity. The toxins affecting the
liver  are  principally  small  cyclic  peptides  which
interfere  with  the  function  of  phosphatase
enzymes.

A number of species growing in mineral-rich
waters secrete calcium carbonate or silica, and so
build  up  laminated  rocks  (stromatolites).  Living

28

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 1

Figure 2.10. Nostoc, hormogonium.

examples  are  found  in  Western  Australia  and
North America, and fossil stromatolites occur as
far  back  as  the  Precambrian.  However, since
similar  laminated  structures  can  arise  from
purely  chemical  causes,  the  biological  signiﬁ-
cance of fossil stromatolites must be assessed with
caution.

Reproduction
Although  genetic  recombination  has  been
reported,  the  observed  reproduction  of  the
Cyanophyta  is  entirely  asexual,  in  its  simplest
form involving nothing more than cell division.
This,  correlated  with  the  absence  of  distinct
nuclei, is not associated with the formation of any
recognizable  mitotic  ﬁgure  or  chromosomes.  In
some  species,  mainly  those  that  are  unicellular,
the cell enlarges, and the protoplast meanwhile
divides to form many naked daughter cells termed
baeocytes. When these are eventually released they
develop a cell wall and become new individuals.
In ﬁlamentous species reproduction is frequently
by simple fragmentation. This is rarely indiscrim-
inate,  but  involves  the  ﬁlament  becoming  inter-
rupted  at  intervals  by dead  cells  (necridia).  The
necridia ultimately rupture and the intervening
fragments of ﬁlament, some 5–15 cells long and
now  termed  hormogonia (Fig.  2.10),  are  liberated.
They often show motility before developing into a
new  individual.  Many, but  not  all,  Cyanophyta
have been observed to produce akinetes in unfavor-
able conditions. These develop from single cells.
There is considerable increase in size, and an accu-
mulation  of  cyanophycin  and  polysaccharide.
Photosynthetic  activity  declines  and  ultimately
the envelope becomes massive. Akinetes probably
play  an  important  rôle  in  the  preservation  of
species.  They  appear  capable  of  surviving  pro-
longed deposition in aseptic mud, and also desic-
cation.  Germination  takes  place  rapidly 
in
favorable  conditions.  Reserve  materials  are  cata-

bolized, thylakoids are regenerated and cell divi-
sion  begins.  Local  dissolution  of  the  envelope
releases the new individual.

A form of alternation of generations is found
in  some  Cyanophyta.  In  Nostoc,  for  example,  a
heterocystous cycle can be made to alternate with
an akinete-producing cycle, light being essential
for the switch to the latter.

Representative species
The  taxonomy  of  the  cyanophytes  is  frequently
revised  as  information  becomes  available  from
sequence studies of their DNA and RNA. Four prin-
cipal  orders  can  be  recognized,  namely  the
Chroococcales, mainly single or aggregated spher-
ical  cells,  the  Pleurocapsales,  consisting  of
short stubby  ﬁlaments,  sometimes  becoming
pseudoparenchymatous  and  showing  hetero-
stichy, and the clearly ﬁlamentous Nostocales and
Stigonematales.

Although containing the simplest blue-green
algae, some of the Chroococcales are nevertheless
colonial  forms  with  a  regular  and  conspicuous
symmetry. The minute cells of Synechococcus (about
20␮m in diameter) usually occur singly or (imme-
diately  following  division)  in  pairs,  but  in
Chroococcus (Fig. 2.5) more usually, and always in
the  similar  Gloeocapsa,  the  cells  remain  held
together after division in a mucilaginous matrix.
These aggregates of indeﬁnite size and shape are
referred  to as  palmelloid forms.  In  Merismopedia
(Fig. 2.6) the cells are arranged in regular rows to
form a plate,  and  in  Coelosphaerium a  hollow
sphere. Other geometric arrangements are char-
acteristic of further genera in this order. Although
the cells in these colonial forms appear to be all of
similar status and function, there is evidence of
polarity,  since  in  vegetative  reproduction  divi-
sions appear to take place more readily in certain
directions than in others.

The Pleurocapsales contain the interesting
Hyella, a widespread heterotrichous genus found
on calcareous substrates. It occurs, for example,
on mollusk shells, forming a pseudoparenchy-
matous growth on the surface which sends
rhizoid-like ﬁlaments down into the substance
of the shell. Remains of an endolithic cyano-
phyte, which appears to be very similar to Hyella,
have been described from late Precambrian

ALGAE IN WHICH THE CHLOROPHYLL IS WHOLLY OR PREDOMINANTLY CHLOROPHYLL A

29

Figure 2.11. Gloeotrichia. (a) Single
trichome with basal heterocyst. (b)
Star-shaped cluster of trichomes.

ﬁlaments 

somes have been seen in divid-
ing proplastids in the egg cells
of ferns.
The 

of
Trichodesmium form fusiform
or  tufted  colonies.  There  are
about  100  cells 
in  each
ﬁlament  (trichome),  each  cell
5–15␮m in diameter and up to
50mm in length. Gas vesicles
are  conspicuous  and  provide
for buoyant colonies.

deposits in India. The habit of Hyella is paralleled
by that of some members of the Chaetophorales
(p. 48).

The  Nostocales  are  ﬁlamentous.  The  tri-
chomes  (the  chain  of  cells  as  distinct  from  the
sheath)  range  in  width  from  20 ␮m  to 1 ␮m.
Sometimes  the  width  diminishes  progressively
along a ﬁlament so that it ends in a ﬁne point (e.g.,
Gloeotrichia,  Fig.  2.11).  The  order  falls  into  two
groups, namely those species in which heterocysts
have never been observed and those in which they
are often conspicuous. Examples of the former are
Oscillatoria,  Spirulina and  Trichodesmium (some-
times placed in a separate order Oscillatoriales).
The ﬁlaments of Oscillatoria are straight, and the
cells often furnished with numerous gas vesicles.
Individual ﬁlaments make oscillatory movements
caused by change of curvature being propagated
along  the  ﬁlament.  The  source  of  these  move-
ments is unknown. Spirulina is a form with a char-
acteristic  spiral  ﬁlament.  It  forms  mats  in  soda
lakes  in  Central  Africa,  and  is  compressed  into
cakes used as a human food. The cells of Spirulina
(and some other cyanophytes) have been found to
contain proteinaceous tubular elements (rhapido-
somes), which, although smaller, may play a struc-
tural rôle in the cytoplasm analogous to that of
microtubules in eukaryotic cells. It is perhaps sig-
niﬁcant that tubular elements similar to rhapido-

Nostoc (Fig. 2.12) is a promi-
nent  heterocystous 
form.
Nostoc commune is common on
damp soil. Divisions occur spo-
radically along the ﬁlaments resulting in spheri-
cal  masses  of  intertwined  threads  embedded  in
gelatinous  mucilage,  the  whole  often  reaching
2 cm  (0.75in.)  or  more  in  diameter.  Anabaena is
also  ﬁlamentous.  Anabaena ﬂosaquae contains  a
powerful  neuro-muscular  poison,  and  is  a  fre-
quent component of poisonous blooms.

Clustering  of  ﬁlaments  is  characteristic  of
several Nostocales. Anabaena, for example, grown in
an agitated medium is uniformly dispersed, but if
the  shaking  is  stopped  the  ﬁlaments  soon  group
themselves into a few tight bunches. This is prob-
ably a consequence of the chance cohesion of ﬁla-

Figure 2.12. Nostoc, habit.

30

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 1

ments,  followed  by the  gliding  of  the  ﬁlaments
along each other within the coalescent mucilage.
Sometimes the clustering leads to forms with a dis-
tinct morphology. In Gloeotrichia, for example, the
trichomes radiate from a central plate formed by a
coalescence of the larger basal cells (Fig. 2.11b).

The  order  Stigonematales  contains  the  most
elaborate Cyanophyta. They are generally hetero-
cystous. Some, such as those submerged on rocks,
show  heterotrichy,  producing  two  kinds  of  ﬁla-
ments, prostrate and erect. Many members of the
order  show  true  branching,  the  branches  being
initiated  by an  oblique  division  of  a  cell  in  the
parent ﬁlament. In some species of Stigonema the
prostrate  trichomes  become  pluriseriate  and
approach  a  parenchymatous  condition  (Fig.  2.8).
The organization of these forms is no less complex
than that of many of the smaller eukaryotic algae.

Eukaryotic forms
The eukaryotic forms provided solely with chloro-
phyll  a fall  into  a  circumscribed  group  called,
since  many  are  bright  pink  in  colour,  the
Rhodophyta 
(“red  algae”).  The  pigmentation
results from the presence of the biliproteins (phy-
cobilins)  phycoerythrin  and  phycocyanin.  The
chlorophyll a is accompanied in a few members by
a small amount of an additional chlorophyll (d).

features  of 

The  chloroplasts  are  discoid  or  lobed,  and
simple in structure. The thylakoids usually lie par-
allel, but they are not stacked, and in some forms
the biliproteins are present as phycobilisome par-
ticles attached to the outside of each pair of thy-
lakoid  membranes.  These 
the
chloroplast  of  the  Rhodophyta  are  also  those  of
the  photosynthetic  region  of  the  cells  of  the
Cyanophyta  (p.  24).  Floridean  starch,  which  is
formed in the cytoplasm outside the chloroplasts,
is chemically similar to the amylopectin of higher
plant starches. Some of the soluble sugar–glycerol
storage products are peculiar to the red algae, and
have assisted  in  determining  the  afﬁnity  of  less
typical forms (e.g., Cyanidium). Halogenated secon-
dary  metabolic  products  have been  detected  in
several of the more advanced red algae.

RHODOPHYTA
Habitat Aquatic (mainly marine).
Pigments Chlorophylls a and (rarely) d; ␣- and ␤-

carotene, lutein, zeaxanthin; biliproteins
(phycoerythrin, phycocyanin, allophycocya-
nin).

Food reserves Floridean starch, soluble low

molecular weight compounds of sugars and
glycerols (e.g., ﬂoridoside, digeneaside).

Cell wall components Cellulose, hemicelluloses,

sulfated polysaccharides.

Reproduction Asexual and sexual (oogamous).
Growth forms Unicellular, ﬁlamentous, pseudo-

parenchymatous.

Flagella None.

to

the  chlorophyll  which,  at 

Although some species frequent rock pools, most
Rhodophyta live in the deep waters of warm seas,
and are most commonly seen when washed up on
beaches.  Crustose  coralline  red  algae  have been
observed from a submersible growing on rocks of
sea  mounts  at  depths  of  268m  (879ft)  off  the
Bahamas. Photosynthetically active light at these
depths is reduced to about 1/10000 of that avail-
able at the surface. This ability to live in the ocean
depths depends upon the presence of the bilipro-
teins. Light reaching these regions lies principally
at  the  middle  of  the  visible  spectrum,  and  this
coincides with the maximum absorption of phy-
coerythrin.  The  energy  is  immediately  transmit-
ted 
these
wavelengths, experiences little direct excitation.
The  bright  green  color  of  some  freshwater  red
algae probably results from the photodestruction
of phycoerythrin in higher irradiances. An organ-
ism of this kind is the unicellular Cyanidium, con-
spicuous 
in
Yellowstone National Park, USA. The presence of
ﬂoridoside as a storage product, and ultrastructu-
ral similarities, support the placing of this organ-
ism with the red algae. It thrives even in waters
which are hot to the touch and may be as acid as
pH 2. Similarly attributable to the red algae is the
minute unicellular Cyanidioschyzon, also occurring
in hot springs. Each cell, 1–5 ␮m in diameter, is
blue-green in color, and contains a single nucleus,
mitochondrion,  plastid  and  microbody.  The
plastid resembles those of the red algae; chloro-
phyll a is present and also phycocyanin and phy-
coerythrin  in  phycobilisomes.  The  DNA  of  the
nucleus is estimated to amount to 8⫻103 kilobase
pairs, the smallest amount known in eukaryotic

in  rivulets 

from  hot  springs 

ALGAE IN WHICH THE CHLOROPHYLL IS WHOLLY OR PREDOMINANTLY CHLOROPHYLL A

31

Figure 2.13. Porphyra. (a) Habit. (b) Transverse section of
portion of thallus producing clusters of monospores. ((b)
after Esser. 1976. Kryptogamen. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.)

plants. It is about twice that of the plastid in the
same cell and also about twice that in the bacte-
rium Escherichia coli.

Some species of tropical seas develop a calcar-
eous exoskeleton and contribute to the formation
of  coral  reefs.  Miocene  limestones 
(e.g.,  of
Minorca)  are  sometimes  almost  entirely of  red
algal origin. Weathering of the limestone reveals
the  remains  of  the  original  plants.  These  were
more  or  less  spherical  and  about  5cm  (2in.)  in
diameter. The hard ball-like remains are known as
“rhodoliths”.

A  number  of  species,  often  showing  reduced
pigmentation, may be true parasites on parenchy-
matous brown algae or on larger members of their
own  division.  Up to  one-quarter  of  the  extant
species  of  red  algae  have been  estimated  to be
wholly or partly parasitic.

A few red algae are of economic importance.
The marine Porphyra (Fig. 2.13), for example, has
long been used in Europe (laver bread) and in the
Far East (nori) as a foodstuff. Chondrus crispus (p. 33)
(carrageen) and Palmaria (Rhodymenia) (dulse of the
Scots and dillisk of the Irish) are similarly used to
a  lesser  extent  in  Europe.  Gelidium,  particularly
from  the  Paciﬁc,  is  the  principal  source  of  agar.
The cell walls of red algae in general are notably
mucilaginous.

and 

the 

forms  are 

found  only 

The  Rhodophyta  fall  into  two  subclasses,  the
Florideophycidae.
Bangiophycidae 
Unicellular 
in  the
Bangiophycidae,  and  this  group  also  displays
simpler sexual reproduction. There are also cyto-
logical differences, one of the most conspicuous
being the presence of well-formed pit connections
between  the  cells  in  many  Florideophycidae.
There are no motile forms. Even in sexual repro-
duction,  which  is  uniformly  oogamous,  the  dis-
persal of the male gamete is entirely passive.

Bangiophycidae
Apart  from  the  unicellular  forms,  the  simplest
Bangiophycidae, mostly epiphytes of other marine
algae, are heterotrichous with intercalary growth.
Porphyra has  a  sheet-like  thallus  resembling  the
chlorophyte Ulva (p. 53), but for the most part only
one cell thick. It develops from a ﬁlament in which
the  cells  divide  transversely  and  longitudinally,
the divisions being conﬁned to one plane. The cell
walls consist of two parts, an inner consisting of
xylan  in  a  microﬁbrillar  form and  an  outer  of
mannan;  cellulose  is  absent.  The  lamina  is  also
provided  with a cuticle,  accounting  for  about  2
percent of the thickness of the external walls, and
containing  about  80  percent  protein.  A  complex
population of plasmid-like DNA has been detected
in  the  cytoplasm  of  Porphyra,  some  strands
showing  sequence  homology  with  chloroplast,
and  others  with  mitochondrial  DNA.  The  signiﬁ-
cance of these ﬁndings is not known.

32

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 1

Figure 2.14. Porphyra. (a) Portion of thallus producing
spermatia. (b) Thallus with oogonia. (c) Spermatia beginning
to penetrate oogonia. (All after Esser. 1976. Kryptogamen.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.)

Some  species  of  Bangia frequent  estuaries
(notably B. atropurpurea) and a few members of the
class  are  found  in  fresh  water. The  thallus  of
Bangia consists of multiseriate ﬁlaments enclosed
in a gelatinous wall. The lower cells produce non-
septate rhizoids which attach the tuft to the sub-
stratum.

Reproduction
Asexual reproduction is by means of monospores.
These are formed following simple division of veg-
etative cells, one spore being formed in each cell
and each spore containing a conspicuous stellate
chloroplast.  The  spores  are  liberated  from  the
surface  or  margins  of  the  thallus,  sometimes  in
clusters  (Fig.  2.13b).  Monospores  show  bipolar
development and regenerate the parent plant.

sexual  reproduction 

in 

Details  of 

single  male  gametes 

the
Bangiophycidae are known for only a few species.
The simplest form is shown by Rhodochaete, a small
ﬁlamentous  marine  epiphyte.  Some  of  the  cells
(spermatia).
produce 
Elsewhere  in  the  same  thallus  a  cell  otherwise
indistinguishable from a vegetative cell acts as an
oogonium  (usually  in  the  Rhodophyta  termed  a
carpogonium),  containing  a  single  egg  cell.  The
coming together of the spermatium and carpogo-
nium appears to depend entirely upon water cur-
rents.  Following  fertilization  the  carpogonium
develops  into  a  carposporangium  containing  a
single  diploid  carpospore.  This  gives  rise  to  a

diploid  plant  resembling  the  haploid  gameto-
phyte. This can reproduce by monospores. Meiosis
is  believed  to occur  in  terminal  cells,  yielding
meiospores  which  resemble  monospores.  These
regenerate  the  gametophytic  phase.  The  life
history is  thus  diplohaplontic  and  isomorphic,
and  may  represent  the  most  primitive  form of
reproductive cycle in the Rhodophyta.

More is known about sexual reproduction in
Porphyra.  Here  a  group  of  cells  in  the  thallus
undergoes  repeated  divisions,  each  cell  yielding
64 or 128 compartments. Each of these liberates a
spermatium (Fig. 2.14a). The carpogonia differen-
tiate  from  vegetative  cells  and  each  contains  a
single egg cell (Fig. 2.14b). The drifting spermatia
are  trapped  and  retained  by the  mucilage  sur-
rounding  the  carpogonia.  Fertilization  takes
place  by the  protoplast  of  the  spermatium  ﬁrst
putting forth a narrow process which penetrates,
possibly  by means  of  localized  lysis,  the  mem-
brane of the carpogonium (Fig. 2.14c). The body of
the  spermatium  then  passes  entirely  into  the
female cell.

After  fertilization,  the  zygote  divides  and
releases several carpospores. The germination of
these is unipolar. They give rise to a small ﬁlamen-
tous diploid plant most commonly found growing
on  the  inside  of  oyster  and  mussel  shells.  This
phase,  initially  placed  in  a  separate  genus
Conchocelis,  differs  not  only  in  morphology,  but
also in the composition of its walls, the microﬁb-
rils being of cellulose in place of xylan. Asexual
reproduction may occur by means of monospores,
but other spores (conchospores), produced in special
sporangia,  regenerate  the  more  conspicuous
gametophyte. Surprisingly, meiosis occurs as the

ALGAE IN WHICH THE CHLOROPHYLL IS WHOLLY OR PREDOMINANTLY CHLOROPHYLL A

33

Figure 2.15. Nemalion multiﬁdum.
(a) Habit. (b) Fertile lateral branch.
(c) Formation of carpospores after
fertilization. (After Newton. 1937. A
Handbook of the British Seaweeds.
British Museum, London.)

few  members  of  the  class
found in fresh water. The vege-
tative organization is that of a
single  axis  bearing  whorls  of
branches  (“uniaxial”).  A  very
similar  organization  is  found
in  the  green  alga  Draparnal-
diopsis (p.  48).  The  ﬁlaments
are  enveloped 
in copious
mucilage;  this  together  with
the dark pigmentation of the
cells  causes  colonies  of  the
alga  in situ in  ponds  and
streams superﬁcially to resemble masses of frogs’
spawn. A more complex form of uniaxial construc-
tion is seen in Polysiphonia, common in littoral veg-
etation throughout the world. The thallus, which
consists of a central axis bearing freely branching
laterals  (Fig.  2.17a),  shows  clearly  deﬁned  apical
growth.  This  results  from  a  dome-shaped  apical
cell surmounting a central column of cells which
are  recognizable  throughout  the  thallus.  This
axial column is surrounded from well below the
summit by numerous columns of other cells pro-
duced  by oblique  divisions  in  the  apical  region.
The structure thus becomes pseudoparenchyma-
tous, and in parts, especially at the nodes, hardly
distinguishable  from  a  truly  parenchymatous
condition.

In Nemalion (Fig. 2.15a), common in the inter-
tidal zones of north temperate shores, the center
of the axis is occupied by several ﬁlaments
ascending in parallel and adhering to each other
(“multiaxial” organization). These central ﬁla-
ments are surrounded by an investment of short
and freely branched laterals enveloped in muci-
lage. The branching thallus of Chondrus crispus, a
common North Atlantic lithophyte, is also multi-
axial in structure. The branches are ﬂattened and
form a fan-like array. The manner in which in
many multiaxial forms the parallel columns of
cells diverge at the apex (but do not separate)

conchospore germinates, so that all four meiotic
products  go  to form  the  resulting  gametophyte.
Genes  segregated  at  meiosis  are  represented  in
different sectors of the mature blade.

The life history of Bangia is similar to that of
Porphyra. There are, however, frequent aberrations
in  both  genera.  Apomixis,  for  example,  is  well
known.  Although  the  life  cycle  may  appear
normal, and continue to be moderated by exter-
nal factors, such as temperature and day length,
fertilization is omitted. Also, in some forms, the
Conchocelis phase may be entirely lacking.

Also  placed 

in 

the  Bangiophycidae 

is
Porphyridium, typically consisting of an irregular
number  of  cells  embedded  in  mucilage  (the  pal-
melloid condition). The genus is widely distributed,
and  represented  by both  aquatic  and  terrestrial
species. Some are capable of a gliding motion on
solid surfaces, attributable to the unilateral extru-
sion of mucilage. The cells contain a single stellate
chloroplast  and  in  this  respect  resemble  mono-
spores.  Reproduction  is  entirely  asexual,  and
takes the form of simple cell division.

Florideophycidae
The Florideophycidae are basically ﬁlamentous in
construction.  Growth is  frequently  from  a  well-
deﬁned  apex.  Representative  of  the  simpler
Florideophycidae  is  Batrachospermum,  one  of  the

34

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 1

gives the impression of a fountain, to which the
term “fountain-like growth” (Springbrunnentypus)
is applied.

The 

cells  of 

some  of 

the  advanced
Florideophycidae,  such  as  Grifﬁthsia,  widely  dis-
tributed in warmer seas, become multinucleate.
Species of Florideophycidae have also yielded evi-
dence  of  a  “wound  hormone”,  termed  rhodomor-
phin,  which  promotes  the  healing  of  damaged
ﬁlaments. Chemically rhodomorphin proves to be
a  glycoprotein,  a  class  of  proteins  attached  to
sugars, many of which appear to have morphoge-
netic properties in plants (see, for example, pp. 54,
111). 

Reproduction
Asexual  reproduction  in  the  Florideophycidae
takes place by a variety of spores, including mono-
spores,  all  non-motile  and  in  many  instances
known  only  in  conditions  of  pure  culture.  A
curious feature of the epiphytic Centroceras is the
development  of  lateral  branches  of  4–5  cells
which are regularly abscised, and serve as a means
of vegetative reproduction.

Even in the simpler Florideophycidae, sexual
reproduction displays a number of features not
encountered in other divisions of the algae. The
male and female gametangia, in many species pro-
duced on separate plants, arise on specialized side
branches. In Nemalion (Fig. 2.15b), for example, the
antheridia are budded off from mother cells lying
at the tips of short tufted branches; as many as
four or ﬁve antheridia may come from one mother
cell. Each antheridium liberates a single sperma-
tium through an apical slit. The carpogonium,
surmounted by a long tubular, hair-like process
(the trichogyne) terminates a short carpogonial
branch. When a spermatium makes contact with
a trichogyne above an unfertilized egg, it becomes
attached, and the intervening cell walls break
down, allowing the contents of the spermatium to
pass into the carpogonium. After fertilization a
mucilaginous plug is secreted at the base of the
trichogyne. The zygote germinates almost imme-
diately and becomes surrounded by a dense tuft of
short, occasionally branching, ﬁlaments, often
with brownish pigmentation. Carpospores are cut
off from the ends of these ﬁlaments (Fig. 2.15c).
Germination leads to a branching ﬁlamentous

diploid phase. Meiosis occurs in tetrasporangia
which arise, in short-day conditions, from single
cells terminating ﬁlaments. The original nucleus
yields four haploid tetraspores. The tetraspores
pass through a ﬁlamentous stage before yielding
the multiaxial mature
The
Mediterranean Liagora is similar to Nemalion in
growth form and life history, but has a more
compact structure and is appreciably calciﬁed.

gametophyte.

Batrachospermum shows  a simpler  cycle.  The
carpospores germinate to form a small heterotri-
chous  Chantransia  stage,  which  may  reproduce
itself by monospores. There are no tetrasporangia.
Meiosis  occurs  sporadically  in  cells  toward the
tips of the erect branches. Some of the cells con-
taining haploid nuclei grow into the characteris-
tic gametophytic plant (Fig. 2.16).

In  an  advanced  member  of  the  Florideo-
phycidae,  such  as  Polysiphonia,  the  initiation  of
sexual reproduction is much as in simpler forms.
Antheridia are produced in the middle region of
short  ﬁlaments.  When  mature  the  ﬁlaments
become club-shaped, with the antheridia, almost
colorless  and  with  refractive  walls,  densely
packed at the surface.

Development  of  the  female  ﬁlament  is  more
complex. Although initially a single ﬁle of cells,
all but the tip becomes multicellular. One of the
peripheral cells in the central region gives rise to
a  carpogonial  branch  terminating  in  a  carpogo-
nium surmounted by a trichogyne. The basal cells
divide sparingly giving rise to a few auxiliary cells
all  lying  close  to the  carpogonium.  During  the
development of this carpogonial branch adjacent
peripheral  cells  divide  and  form an  urn-shaped
sheath  which  grows  up  and  ultimately  encloses
the  carpogonial  branch.  This  structure,  from
which only the trichogyne projects is termed the
pericarp.

Following  fertilization  the  trichogyne  degen-
erates and the zygote makes a pit-like connection
with  an  adjacent  auxiliary  cell.  The  diploid
nucleus then migrates into this cell and its origi-
nal haploid nucleus apparently degenerates. The
diploid  nucleus  divides  mitotically  and  a  small
branching,  ﬁlamentous  carposporophyte  is  pro-
duced.  Simultaneously, evidently  stimulated  by
fertilization, the pericarp grows into the mature
cystocarp  which  completely  encloses  the  carpos-

ALGAE IN WHICH THE CHLOROPHYLL IS WHOLLY OR PREDOMINANTLY CHLOROPHYLL A

35

Figure 2.16. Batrachospermum.
Diploid Chantransia stage
reproducing by monospores
(arrows, lower right), and generating
from haploid cells (H) two young
Batrachospermum plants of mature
form (arrows, above). Scale bar
100 µm. (From Van den Hoek,
Mann and Jahns. 1995. Algae: An
Introduction to Phycology. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.)

Life histories of the
Rhodophyta
The  red  algae  as  a  whole  are
remarkable for the diversity of
their  life  histories.  In  some
dioecious forms the male and
female  gametophytes  have
different  morphologies. 
In
Palmaria palmata, a widely dis-
tributed littoral perennial, for
example,  the  female  gameto-
phyte is crustose, but the male
has  a  blade-like  thallus.  This
species  also  has  a  peculiar
cycle, lacking the carposporo-
phyte  phase  seen 
in  Poly-
siphonia.  Instead  the  zygote
formed  at  fertilization  yields
a blade-like  tetrasporophyte,
which ultimately overshadows
the  minute  female  gameto-
phyte.  Meiosis  yields  both  male  and  female
haploid  spores,  presumably  in  equal  numbers,
although this has not been conﬁrmed. Many red
algae have been found to display apomictic cycles,
but  irregular  cycles  detected  in  laboratory  cul-
tures are not necessarily present in natural condi-
tions.

In  Grifﬁthsia,  belonging  to the  same  order  as
Polysiphonia, vegetative cells from male and female
haploid  plants  have been  fused  experimentally
(parasexual fusion). The resulting heterokaryons,
analogous to those of ascomycete and basidiomy-
cete fungi, generate plants with diploid (tetraspor-
angiate)  morphology.  Actual  nuclear  fusion,  as
occurs  in  sexual  reproduction,  is  therefore  not
essential  for  the  new  form of  growth.  Some

porophyte.  Ultimately  the  terminal  cells  of  the
carposporophyte  ﬁlaments  become  carposporan-
gia. Each liberates a single densely pigmented car-
pospore. These escape through the apical oriﬁce
(ostiole) of the cystocarp (Fig. 2.17b).

The  diploid  carpospores  germinate  directly
and give rise to plants quite similar to the gamet-
ophyte. Segments toward apices of the branches
become  fertile.  A  peripheral  cell  undergoes  a
number  of  divisions  leading  to a structure  not
unlike a carpogonial branch. In this branch one or
more  of  the  cells  give  rise  to tetrasporangia.
Meiosis leads to the formation of four tetraspores.
These escape by rupture of the sporangium (Fig.
2.17c)  and  germinate  to form  normal  gameto-
phytic plants.

36

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 1

Figure 2.17. Polysiphonia. (a) Habit. (b) Mature cystocarp
discharging carpospores. (c) Sporophyte with a
tetrasporangiate branch, some of the tetraspores escaping.

nuclear  fusion  presumably  occurs  subsequently
since  functional  tetrasporangia  have also  been
observed following parasexual plasmatic fusion.

natural 

of 

Aberrant life cycles have also been discovered
in 
advanced
Florideophycidae. In some instances nuclear divi-
sion  in  the  tetrasporangia  is  mitotic  and  not
meiotic.

populations 

Relationships of the Rhodophyta
The absence of all but a few unicellular represen-
tatives of the Rhodophyta makes the assessment
of the wider relationships of the division difﬁcult.
Motile forms are conspicuously absent.

the 

chloroplasts  of 

The similarities, both biochemical and struc-
tural,  between 
the
Rhodophyta, the “cyanelles” of the Glaucophyta,
and  the  photosynthetic  cells  of  the  Cyanophyta
are certainly striking. In all, for example, the bili-
proteins are present in some Rhodophyta as phy-
cobilisomes  lying  outside  the  paired  thylakoids.
The transition from the prokaryotic to the eukar-
yotic condition could have taken place either by
the  peripheral  intrusions  of  the  plasmalemma
forming the photosynthetic and respiratory mem-
branes  of  a  cyanophyte  having  become  internal-
ized  and  enveloped  by bounding  membranes

(Chapter 1), or by a unicellular cyanophyte invad-
ing  an  already  existing  heterotrophic  eukaryote
and ceasing to be recognizable as an individual.
Both routes are conceivable, and both are likely to
remain matters for speculation into the foresee-
able future.

Nucleotide sequence analyses made so far
have surprisingly failed to conﬁrm that the
Rhodophyta are an ancient lineage. They appear
instead to have arisen about the same time as the
Chlorophyta (p. 71). Nevertheless, the fossil history
of the rhodophytes is impressive. Fossils which can
be recognized with fair certainty as representative
of coralline red algae ﬁrst appear in the Cambrian,
and remains which closely resemble the extant
coralline genus Amphiroa are known from the
Upper Devonian. All the coralline rhodophytes
belong to the Florideophycidae. It can be assumed
that non-coralline rhodophytes have a history at
least as long or longer. Studies of RNA nucleotide
sequences indicate the primitiveness of
the
Bangiophycidae relative to the Florideophycidae.
This is supported by fossil evidence. Siliciﬁed ﬁla-
ments resembling those of Bangia are known from
mid-Proterozoic rocks (900–1200 million years
old) in arctic Canada, and ﬁlamentous fossils
resembling Conchocelis (p. 32) have been reported
from Silurian deposits. Remarkably well-pre-
served fossils from the late Proterozoic in China (c.
570 million years old) indicate the presence of red
algae of some complexity, some showing evidence

ALGAE IN WHICH THE CHLOROPHYLL IS WHOLLY OR PREDOMINANTLY CHLOROPHYLL A

37

of fountain-like growth (p. 34), and possible
Porphyra-like reproductive organs.

The Glaucophyta (p. 27) may be descendants of
distant  ﬂagellate  ancestors  of  the  red  algae,  the
ﬂagella being lost as the Rhodophyta became dis-
tinct.  The  presence  of  rudimentary  ﬂagella  in
Glaucocystis (Fig. 2.9) is in line with this view.

There is an undoubted similarity between the
reproductive  process  in  Polysiphonia and  that  in
ascomycete fungi, but, if this resemblance is any-
thing  more  than  coincidental,  it  seems  more
likely that the fungi, being heterotrophic, are the
derived forms.

3

The subkingdom Algae: Part 2

Algae containing chlorophylls
a and b

In proceeding from the “chlorophyll a” to the “a⫹
b”  algae  a  striking  difference  is  seen  in  the
arrangement  of  the  photosynthetic  thylakoids.
Thylakoids  whose  membranes  contain  only
chlorophyll a tend to be clearly separate from each
other.  In  the  presence  of  chlorophyll  b the
apposed  faces  of  the  thylakoids  are  closely
appressed,  either  generally  or  regionally. The
stacking  of  the  thylakoids  may  be  in  pairs  or  in
greater numbers. This stacking of the thylakoids
remains a feature of the land ﬂora, all of which
are “a⫹b” plants.

Prokaryotic forms
The  prokaryotic  algae  containing  chlorophylls  a
and b are placed in the Prochlorophyta. So far only
a few examples are known and the classiﬁcation is
clearly tentative.

PROCHLOROPHYTA
Habitat Symbiotic, freshwater, marine.
Pigments Chlorophylls a, b; ␤-carotene (␣-

carotene in one form); zeaxanthin.
Biliproteins absent.

Food reserves Starch (where known).
Cell wall components Probably cyanophyte-like.
Reproduction Presumably asexual.
Growth forms Unicellular, ﬁlamentous.
Flagella None.

the 

Of 
three  prochlorophytes  discovered
Prochloron is the most studied. It is a  unicellular
extracellular  symbiont  of  colonial  ascidians  of
tropical  and  subtropical  waters.  The  cells  are
10–20 ␮m  in  diameter,  and  divide  by binary
ﬁssion. The thylakoids are more or less concentric
and closely stacked. A vacuole may be present, but
this seems to be more in the nature of an inﬂated
thylakoid  than  a  discrete  sac,  as  in  eukaryotic
cells. The ribosomes are similar in size to those of
the Chlorophyta, but the ribosomal RNA is more
like that of the Cyanophyta. Another cyanophyte-
like  feature  is  the  presence  of  carboxysomes
(p. 24).

Prochlorothrix is  free-living,  ﬁlamentous  and
planktonic,  and  was  ﬁrst discovered  in  shallow
eutrophic pools in Holland. It is capable of being
grown in pure culture in mineral medium. The ﬁl-
aments  reach  a  width  of  0.7 ␮m  and  consist  of
elongated cells without a conspicuous sheath. The
thylakoids run parallel to the walls and lie close
together.  Gas  vesicles  (p.  25)  are  present  in  the
cytoplasm.

A third prochlorophyte, Prochlorococcus, also
free-living, has been discovered as a prominent
component of picoplankton (the plankton which
will pass through a 2.0 ␮m mesh). In the eastern
equatorial Paciﬁc Prochlorococcus accounts for a
notable fraction of the photosynthetic biomass,
and 13–48 percent of the total net production, the
proportion rising to as high as 80 percent locally.
The success of Prochlorococcus
in this respect
appears to follow from the presence in a popula-

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND B

39

tion of a number of strains genetically adapted to
different light levels so that the aggregate produc-
tion is maintained over a wide range of irradi-
ances. The cells measure only 0.6–0.8 ␮m in
diameter, and are thus smaller than many
coccoid Cyanophyta. The thylakoids are concen-
tric and closely stacked. The principal photosyn-
thetic pigment in addition to chlorophyll b is a
divinyl chlorophyll a. ␣- takes the place of ␤-
carotene.

RNA  sequence  studies  indicate  that  the
Prochlorophyta are a heterogeneous group, each
probably  having  originated  independently  from
cyanophyte sources. Prochloron seems to be closer
to the  cyanophytes  than  to chloroplasts.  On
balance,  there  is  little  evidence  that  “a⫹b”  pro-
karyotes  are  direct  ancestors  of  green  chloro-
plasts, and the name Prochlorophyta now seems
unfortunate.

Eukaryotic forms
The  cells  of  all  “a⫹b”  algae  other  than  the
Prochlorophyta are eukaryotic, and in respect of
the  photosynthetic  mechanism  have much  in
common with higher plants.

CHLORACHNIOPHYTA
Habitat Warm marine; planktonic.
Pigments Chlorophylls a, b. Other thylakoid pig-

ments await identiﬁcation. Biliproteins
absent.

Food reserves Possibly ␤-1,3 glucan, outside plas-

tids.

Cell wall components None, except around

cysts; chemical nature not known.

Reproduction By ﬁssion, or zoospores following

cyst formation.

Growth forms Amoeboid; cysts formed in

depleted medium.

Flagella Conﬁned to zoospores, one only,

inserted below apex and wrapped downward
around the cell. Delicately hairy.

The division Chlorachniophyta contains a single
genus, Chlorachnion. It forms ﬂoating colonies of
bright green cells, each about 10 ␮m in diameter,
entirely  naked  and  connected  by protoplasmic
extensions 
(ﬁlipodia  or  reticulopodia).  The
chloroplasts are regularly bilobed with a promi-

nent  projecting  central  pyrenoid,  and  sur-
rounded  by one  or  two  sheets  of  endoplasmic
reticulum.

Spherical walled cysts are formed in aging cul-
tures.  These  germinate  in  fresh  medium  to give
rise  directly  to the  amoeboid  stage,  or  to zoo-
spores. These bear a single lateral ﬂagellum fur-
nished with ﬁne hairs. They sometimes appear to
be  produced  in  tetrads,  but  it  is  not  known
whether meiosis is involved. On settling the zoo-
spores regenerate the amoeboid stage.

Chlorachnion has so far been found only in a few
warm marine habitats. The conspicuous manner
in which its chloroplasts are ensheathed in endo-
plasmic  reticulum  suggests  that  it  may  have
arisen in the past from a heterotrophic amoeboid
organism  which  incorporated  chloroplasts  from
another source. A pocket in the prominent pyren-
oid encloses a nodule of DNA surrounded by two
membranes.  This  structure,  possibly  retained
from an ancestral endosymbiont, is referred to as
a  nucleomorph.  Some  have considered  the  chloro-
plast and nucleomorph of the Chlorachniophyta
to have  had  a  red  algal  origin 
(see  also
Cryptophyta, p. 96). Despite the sheathing of the
chloroplast and the presence of the nucleomorph
both being heterokont features, the structure of
the  single  ﬂagellum  of 
the  zoospore  of
Chlorachnion is quite different, and a relationship
with the heterokonts seems improbable.

CHLOROPHYTA
Habitat Aquatic (mainly freshwater), terrestrial

in moist situations, a few epiphytic.

Pigments Chlorophylls a, b, ␤-carotene (␣-

carotene less prominent); lutein, violaxan-
thin, neoxanthin; other carotenoids less
widely distributed.

Food reserves Starch, rarely inulin, oils and fats.
Cell wall components Cellulose, crystalline gly-

coproteins, various hemicelluloses; occa-
sionally material resembling, but possibly
not identical with, sporopollenin.

Reproduction Asexual and sexual (isogamy,

anisogamy and oogamy).

Growth forms Flagellate, coccoid, ﬁlamentous,

rarely foliaceous or siphonaceous.

Flagella Two or four, occasionally numerous,

hairs or scales inconspicuous.

40

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 2

The Chlorophyta (green algae) in respect of metab-
olism,  photosynthetic  pigments  and  ultrastruc-
ture  show  much  in  common  with  the  vascular
plants and the bryophytes. We shall here consider
the commoner representatives and other species
of interest contained within the classes shown in
Table  2.1.  The  classiﬁcation  of  the  Chlorophyta,
initially  depending  largely upon  the  degree  of
development  of  the  thallus  and,  where  present,
the nature of the sexual reproduction, now rests
increasingly upon  ultrastructure  and  compara-
tive  biochemistry. The  shape  of  the  chloroplast
(chromatophore)  remains  however  a  useful  and
fairly readily observable feature. In some genera
they are characteristically large, and are present
singly or in very small numbers in each cell.

Prasinophyceae
This  class  consists  principally  of  unicellular
planktonic organisms, and their classiﬁcation is
often a matter of debate. The ﬂagellate represen-
tatives  include  Micromonas  (Pedinomonadales)
(Fig.  1.4)  and  Pyramimonas (Pyramimonadales).
Micromonas,  abundant  in  the  sea,  is  naked.  The
single axoneme is unusual in that the peripheral
microtubules  do  not  ascend  above the  lower
portion  of  the  ﬂagellum.  The  central  pair  of
microtubules  also  appears  to rotate  in  (when
viewed  from  the  tip)  an  anticlockwise  direction
independently  of  the  rest of  the  ﬂagellum.
Reproduction of Micromonas is by ﬁssion. Electron
micrographs reveal that the mitochondrion and
plastid  divide  at  the  same  time  as  the  cell.
Pyramimonas has four ﬂagella set in an apical pit.
Two kinds of scales are found on the ﬂagella; on
the  body  of  the  organism  they are  intermixed
with yet a third kind. The scales reach the surface
through a canal opening into the apical pit near
the  insertions  of  the  ﬂagella.  Non-motile  forms
assigned 
include
Halosphaera, whose bright green spherical cells are
frequent  in  plankton,  and  Osteococcus described
from Mediterranean meres. The latter is one of the
smallest  eukaryotes  known,  the  cells  measuring
0.8–1.1␮m⫻0.5–0.7␮m  and  containing  a  single
nucleus,  chloroplast  and  mitochondrion.  There
are no scales. The attribution of this form to the
Prasinophyceae is supported by the chlorophylls a
and b being accompanied by a chlorophyll c-like
compound, a feature of several members of this

Prasinophyceae 

to

the 

Figure 3.1. Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Longitudinal section
of cell. (From electron micrographs by Ursula W.
Goodenough.)

class.  The  Pterospermatales  are  also  non-motile
and  characteristically  thick-walled.  Despite  the
abundance of many of the prasinophytes, the life
cycles are imperfectly known. No form of sexual
reproduction has been detected.

Unicellular forms recalling prasinophyte algae
have been recorded from Proterozoic deposits in
China and the South Urals. Tasmanites, a spore-like
fossil  of  the  Devonian  and  subsequently,
is
believed to have been the resting cyst of a prasin-
ophyte.  The  wall  contains  material  originally
thought to be sporopollenin, but now known to be
aliphatic and to consist of polymerized fatty acids.
The organization of the genome of the chloro-
plast  DNA  of 
flagellate  prasinophyte
Mesostigma  viride is  remarkable  for  being  very
similar to that of the genome of chloroplast DNA
of charophytes and land plants. This has led to the
suggestion that Mesostigma may be representative
of those early green algae within which a line of
evolution  became  established  which  led  ulti-
mately to the colonizers of the land (Table 3.1).

the 

Chlorophyceae
The  Chlorophyceae  fall  into  a  number  of  well-
deﬁned orders. The Volvocales, for example, range
from unicellular to a unique multicellular form
(Volvox), but a simple biﬂagellate cell is a structu-
ral element common to the order.

Unicellular forms of the Volvocales
Representative of the unicellular forms of the
Volvocales is Chlamydomonas, numbering some 400

the site of

species, mostly freshwater. The cells, which rarely
exceed 30 ␮m in major diameter, contain a single
chloroplast, usually basin-shaped and taking up
about 40 percent of the volume of the cell, and one
or more mitochondria (Fig. 3.1). Toward one side of
the chloroplast, in which the thylakoids show
loose stacking forming irregular grana, lies a con-
spicuous pyrenoid,
the enzyme
RUBISCO. A granular stigma (“eyespot”), associated
with a bovine-like rhodopsin and carotenoid pig-
ments, also lies within the chloroplast. Although
possibly photosensitive,
this property is not
conﬁned to the stigma, since phototaxis persists in
mutants in which it is lacking. Each cell also con-
tains two pulsating vacuoles which discharge their
contents at short intervals, and so play an impor-
tant rôle in the osmoregulation of the cell. The two
ﬂagella are inserted into narrow pits at the apex of
the cell. The emergent portion is ﬁnely hairy.

The cell wall of Chlamydomonas lacks cellulose
and consists of a number of layers, some of which
take the form of a crystalline lattice made up of
glycoprotein  subunits.  The  sugars  involved  are
mannose, arabinose and galactose. Forms related
to Chlamydomonas have a similar wall, but with dif-
ferences in detail.

Cultures  of  Chlamydomonas can  be  raised  so
that  the  cells  divide  synchronously, facilitating
the  study  of  metabolic  changes  during  the  cell
cycle.  Chlamydomonas has  also  ﬁgured  promi-
nently in research into chloroplast genetics, and
an insight into the control of wall formation has
been gained from wall-less mutants. Knowledge of
the nature and regulation of ﬂagellar movement
has also come from Chlamydomonas. The whole ﬂa-
gellar apparatus, its function unimpaired, can be
isolated  and  studied  in vitro.  The  breast-stroke
motion of the ﬂagella (Fig. 3.2), which is unipla-
nar, can be reversed by increasing the concentra-
tion  of  calcium  ions  in  the  medium.  Dissection
has also shown that the natural beat of the ﬂagel-
lum adjacent to the eyespot is lower than that of
its fellow. The beat is nevertheless synchronized
in the intact cell.

On a ﬂat surface the behavior of the ﬂagella is
modiﬁed.  The  cell  shows  a gliding  motion  in
which only one ﬂagellum participates.

The basal bodies of the ﬂagella contain RNA,
but  the  presence  of  DNA,  possibly  controlling
their replication, remains disputed.

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND B

41

Figure 3.2. The beating cycle of the paired ﬂagella of
Chlamydomonas.

reproduction
Chlamydomonas multiplies  asexually  by ﬁssion.
The parent ﬂagella are resorbed and the nucleus
divides. The spindle, however, is transient and the
subsequent cytokinesis involves the formation of
a phycoplast (Fig. 2.2A). Divisions may be succes-
sive, resulting in up to eight daughter cells (apla-
nospores).  These  secrete  cell  walls  and  regenerate
ﬂagella from the replicated ﬂagella bases before
being  liberated.  On  an  agar  surface  they may
however  continue  to lack  ﬂagella  and  form pal-
melloid colonies. As the cells grow to their mature
size,  newly  synthesized  glycoprotein  enters  the
wall and the crystalline lattice is maintained.

to

vegetative 

cells,  but 

Sexual  reproduction  involves  the  production
and  fusion  of  gametes.  Gametes  are  structurally
similar 
smaller.
Gametogenesis  can  be  induced  by culturing  in
medium deﬁcient in nutrients (particularly nitro-
gen). Differentiating gametes show a partial loss
of ribosomes. Mating structures, recognizable as
slightly  protruding  areas,  differentiate  between
the ﬂagella bases.

Fusion  of  morphologically  similar  gametes
(isogamy),  the  simplest  method  of  combining
nuclear information, is found in some species of
Chlamydomonas,  but  other  species  show  anisog-
amy, and a few oogamy. Aggregation of gametes is
promoted  by agglutinins,  complexes  of  mem-
brane and glycoprotein shed from the ﬂagella of

42

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 2

Figure 3.3. Mating and zygote
formation in isogamous
Chlamydomonas.

opposed 

to lie  side  by

activated  cells.  In  the  isoga-
mous  species  studied,  two
strains (⫹ and ⫺) are present,
and  mating  is possible  only
between 
strains.
When cultures of the ⫹ and ⫺
strains are mixed there is ﬁrst animated cell move-
ment,  and  then  pairing  of  opposed  strains  (Fig.
3.3). The initial contact seems to occur by chance;
there  is  no  evidence  of  chemotactic  attraction
between the two strains. Fusion begins at the tips
of the ﬂagella (Fig. 3.3). The ﬂagella then extend
laterally  and  come 
side.
Simultaneously  a  special  enzyme  (a  metallopro-
tease)  is  activated  which  digests  the  inner  cell
wall, liberating the protoplasts from their shells.
As the cells become accurately aligned, a fertiliza-
tion tubule, rich in polymerized actin, grows out
from the mating structure of the ⫹ strain into the
cup  of  the  corresponding  structure  of  the  ⫺
strain. A protoplasmic bridge then forms between
the apposed cells and the ﬂagella simultaneously
cease  to pair.  The  bridge  now  widens  and  the
mating  cells  become  a  single  quadriﬂagellate
zygote.  Fusion  is  completed  in  15–20  minutes.
Recognition and adhesion of gametes of opposed
mating  type,  and  actual  fusion  of  the  cells,  are
under  separate  genetic  control.  Experiments
show that (⫹) mutants show defects in adhesion
and (⫺) mutants in fusion.

Zygotes continue to swim, but show negative
phototaxis and eventually settle, although in one
species  (C. variabilis)  the  swimming  phase  lasts
long enough for the zygotes to have been formerly
described as a separate organism. Settling of the
zygotes is accompanied by loss of ﬂagella and the
secretion  of  a  thickened  wall,  in  at  least  one
species containing sporopollenin-like material.

Reproduction is anisogamous in C. braunii, the
⫺ strain producing four macrogametes and the ⫹
strain eight microgametes. The oogamous state is
approached in C. coccifera in which the cells of one
strain produce a single macrogamete and those of
the other 16 or 32 microgametes. It is reasonable
to envisage anisogamy having evolved from

isogamy, and experiments with isogamous strains
have shown how this may have come about. A large
number of mitoses before gametogenesis results
in smaller gametes. Controlling the number of
mitoses in cultures of different mating types can
thus lead to gametes differing in size. Anisogamy
(and ultimately oogamy) could have resulted from
differences of this kind having become genetically
ﬁxed and linked with mating type.

Meiosis  occurs  on  germination  of  the  zygote
and four new individuals are produced. There is
2:2  segregation  of  mating  type,
indicating
Mendelian inheritance of this feature. The chloro-
plast DNA of the mt⫺ parent, however, is absent
from  the  mature  zygote,  so  inheritance  of  the
plastid DNA is uniparental. The destruction of the
mt⫺ plastid DNA following syngamy appears to be
controlled by a gene in the mt⫹ locus. How the
mt⫹ plastid  DNA  comes  to be  protected  from
digestion is not entirely clear, but methylation of
the DNA is probably involved.

Although representative of the simplest eukar-
yotic  green  plants,  Chlamydomonas clearly  pos-
sesses  features  of  structural  and  functional
complexity far more impressive than those found
in the prokaryotic algae. It would appear that the
attainment  of  the  nucleate  state  represents  an
advance  in  organization  without  which  others,
such  as  ﬂagellate  motility  and  probably  sexual
reproduction, are impossible.

o ther unicellul ar forms
An alga similar to Chlamydomonas, but lacking a cell
wall, is Dunaliella. In conditions of extreme salinity
(e.g., in salt pans and in the Dead Sea) Dunaliella
accumulates glycerol to such a high concentration
that the cells are able to resist desiccation by exos-
mosis. In these conditions the cells often become
pigmented bright orange, and appear able to toler-

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND B

43

Figure 3.4. Gonium.

Figure 3.5. Pandorina.

ate very high light intensities. Another species of
Dunaliella (D. acidophila), occurring in sulfurous vol-
canic springs, can be grown in 1 percent sulfuric
acid, if suitably illuminated and supplied with
sources of nitrogen and phosphorus. On the basis
of its structure, Polytoma, a heterotrophic form
found between rotting plant remains, is also prob-
ably related to Chlamydomonas. It lacks chlorophyll,
and the plastid, in the place of thylakoids, contains
tubules. A similar chlorophyll-less mutant of
Chlamydomonas has been obtained by UV irradia-
tion. Polytoma retains the ability to accumulate
starch.

Morphology and reproduction of motile
colonies
The Volvocales also contain motile colonies, com-
posed of identical cells, each similar in morphol-
ogy  to Chlamydomonas.  Gonium (Fig.  3.4),  for
example, has a ﬂat plate of 4 or 16 cells (depend-
ing  upon  the  species)  which  are  regularly
arranged, and held together in a tough mucilagi-
nous matrix. The 16 cone-shaped cells of Pandorina
(Fig.  3.5),  however, are  arranged  in  a  sphere.  In
both asexual reproduction (in which a single cell
gives rise to a new spherical colony) and gameto-
genesis,  all  the  cells  of  these  simple  colonies
become involved simultaneously.

In  Volvox itself  (Fig.  3.6)  there  is  evidence  of
both coordination of activity and division of labor

individually 

cells,  which 

between the constituent cells. The organism takes
the form of a hollow sphere, the number of cells
forming its surface always being a power of 2, indi-
cating  synchronized  division  during  growth.
The
resemble
Chlamydomonas,  are  held  together  by mucilage.
The refractive boundaries between the sheaths of
individual cells often give a hexagonal pattern to
the surface. The center of the sphere is ﬁlled with
less viscous mucilage. The cells remain connected
by cytoplasmic strands, a feature of signiﬁcance in
relation to the coordination of their activity. The
ﬂagella, for example, beat in unison, producing a
steady rolling motion. Despite the radial symme-
try the organism has an anterior and posterior. In
the anterior region the stigmata are more conspic-
uous  than  elsewhere.  Some  species  may  reach
diameters of almost 1mm (0.04in.).

reproduction of volvox
Asexual reproduction takes place by the enlarge-
ment and repeated longitudinal division of a veg-
etative cell so that eventually a new sphere of cells
is formed bulging into the hollow center. Initially
the cells of this daughter individual are oriented
inversely in relation to those of the mother, but at
the  completion  of  cell  division  the  new  sphere
invaginates and the orientation of the cells conse-
quently reverses. The daughter is simultaneously

44

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 2

Figure 3.6. Volvox. (a) Asexual
reproduction, three daughters lying
within the cavity of the parent. (b)
Detail of the connections between
individual cells.

liberated  into  the  cavity,  and
may  even  itself  generate  a
daughter  before  it  is  released
by the  death  of  the  original
mother. On release, the daugh-
ter  organism  expands  to its
mature volume. The mucilage
surrounding  the  colonies  of
Volvox aureus is  inhabited  by
the  bacterium  Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens.  Daughter
colonies  removed  aseptically  from  the  center  of
the parent are not viable unless supplied with the
bacterium,  an  example  of  a  symbiotic  relation-
ship probably widespread in the algae.

Sexual reproduction in Volvox, in which both
monoecious and dioecious species occur, is truly
oogamous. The gametangia may develop from any
cell or, when the distinction of anterior and poste-
rior is well marked, be conﬁned to the posterior
region. The mature oogonia are large ﬂask-shaped
cells without ﬂagella. Each is developed from a
single vegetative cell, and remains in position up
to and during fertilization. The male organ, the
antheridium, similarly develops from a vegetative
cell. Successive divisions lead to a bowl-shaped
mass of biﬂagellate spermatozoids (antherozoids).
After release, the aggregate migrates to an oogo-
nium and there, in the interior of the colony,
breaks up into individual gametes. The details of
fertilization are little known. Subsequently the
zygote forms an oospore which in some species
acquires a thickened wall and is able to survive
unfavorable conditions. Meiosis occurs at germi-
nation, but since only one ﬂagellate swarmer is
released three of the meiotic products evidently
fail to survive. Successive divisions of the swarmer
lead to a small spherical individual, but after
repeated asexual reproduction the mature size
characteristic of the species is ultimately regained.
In some dioecious species individuals entering
the sexual phase and becoming female can induce
others  still  vegetative  to become  male,  a  conse-
quence  of  a  “male  inducing  substance”  (which

appears  to  be  a  glycoprotein),  secreted  by the
female. This is only one example of such correla-
tive  systems  in  Volvox,  and  the  situation  in  the
genus as a whole is evidently complex.

transition from col ony to
multicellul ar individual in the
volvoc ales
Volvox differs from simpler Volvocales in possess-
ing somatic cells which play no part in reproduc-
tion.  These  cells  consequently  perish  when  an
individual ruptures to release a daughter, or when
its  integrity  is  destroyed  by the  liberation  of
numbers  of  oospores.  Because  of  the  evident
organization in the thallus, and the presence of
somatic cells, the term colony is inappropriately
applied to Volvox. This organism has reached the
level  of  a  multicellular 
In  the
Volvocales as a whole, the transition from colonial
forms to Volvox is a gradual one, and although the
status of Volvox is unambiguous that of many of
the intermediates is less clearly deﬁned. The term
coenobium is  often  used  for  a  colony  of  cells  in
which there is some degree of coordination.

individual. 

Despite  the  sequence  of  forms  leading  from
Chlamydomonas to Volvox,  it  would  be  wrong  to
assume that evolution of the Volvocales has taken
place  in  a  linear  fashion.  Molecular  evidence
points  to complex  intergeneric  relationships
within the order.

The Tetrasporales
The Tetrasporales are a small order of simple algae
consisting  of  Chlamydomonas-like  cells  embedded

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND B

45

in  mucilage.  The  cells  either  lack  ﬂagella,  or
possess ﬂagella which are either non-motile (e.g.,
Tetraspora)  or  move only  feebly  in  the  mucilagi-
nous  matrix.  Motility  is  usually  present  in  the
reproductive stages (zoospores and gametes). The
zoospores of some species have four ﬂagella.

The Chlorococcales
The  Chlorococcales  are  a  heterogeneous  order
of lowly green algae in which motility is conﬁned
to zoospores  and  gametes.  Although  there
are common  features 
in  reproduction,  the
Chlorococcales show much diversity, and interre-
lationships  appear  distant.  Since  rudimentary
basal  bodies  have been  detected  in  some  of  the
non-motile  unicellular  forms,  the  origin  of  the
Chlorococcales  perhaps  lay  in  some  early  ﬂagel-
late  group.  Most  living  members  of  the  order
occur in fresh waters, a few live in the oceans and
moist places on land, and others are endophytic in
the  intercellular  spaces  of  higher  plants,  symbi-
onts  with  lower  animals,  or  constituents  of
lichens. 

Chlorococcum and Chlorella are unicellular, the
latter occurring free in both soil and water, and as
the  endosymbiont  in  the  coelenterate  Hydra.
Chlorella,  one  of  the  plants  with  which  Priestley
and Ingenhousz ﬁrst demonstrated photosynthe-
sis in 1779, has been used extensively in studies of
algal metabolism. The thin cell wall contains poly-
merized fatty acids, yielding a layer with some of
the features of sporopollenin, possibly enhancing
the  water-repellent  properties  of  the  wall.
Another  unicellular  form,  Botryococcus,  is  com-
monly  planktonic,  and  sometimes  forms  water
blooms.  Up to  75  percent  of  its  dry  weight  may
consist of hydrocarbons, and the dried remains of
blooms resemble sheets of crude rubber. Oocystis,
ellipsoidal  in  shape  but  similar  to Chlorella,  has
ﬁgured prominently in studies of the manner in
which  the  layers  of  cellulose  microﬁbrils  are
deposited successively in the developing cell wall.
Prototheca, a parasite of ﬁsh, is also placed in the
Chlorococcales. Although heterotrophic and col-
orless,  the  cells  resemble  those  of  Chlorella,  and
the  plastids  accumulate  starch.  The  unicellular
(and  autotrophic)  Chlorochytrium is  found  as  an
endophyte in the cells of foliose red algae, such as
Dilsea,  not  uncommon  at  low  tide  levels  in  the

northern hemisphere. At least one other species
of Chlorochytrium is able to penetrate the leaves of
the ﬂoating angiosperm Lemna and live endophyt-
ically between the cells.

Despite  its  minute  size,  Nanochlorum eucaryo-
tum, from the Adriatic, is also tentatively placed
with the Chlorococcales. The cells do not exceed
2.0 ␮m in diameter and contain a single nucleus,
chloroplast,  Golgi  body,  and  mitochondrion.
Acetolysis-resistant material in the wall may again
consist  of  polymerized  fatty  acids  rather  than
sporopollenin.

The  unicellular  Hemichloris antarctica is  prob-
ably  also  attributable  to the  Chlorococcales.  It
forms  colonies  in  moist  crevices  in  sandstone
rocks in antarctic deserts. It is evidently capable of
withstanding repeated freezing and thawing over
long periods. The cells divide only very rarely and
some colonies are estimated to be over 1000 years
old.

Scenedesmus (Fig.  3.7)  and  Pediastrum (Fig.  3.8)
are representative of the simpler coenobial forms.
Species of Scenedesmus are fairly frequent in fresh
and brackish water, and some are able to tolerate
relatively high concentrations of copper. The iden-
tiﬁcation  of  acetolysis-resistant  material  in  the
wall  of  Scenedesmus with  sporopollenin  is  (as  in
Chlorella) now regarded as doubtful. The “lignin”
reported in the spines may be a polymerized diter-
pene,  as  in  the  dinoﬂagellates  (p.  95).  Silica  is  a
structural  component  of  the  cell  walls  of
Pediastrum. 

Hydrodictyon is  altogether  remarkable.  The
multinucleate cells, each with a reticulate chloro-
plast  containing  numerous  pyrenoids,  form a
hollow cylindrical net with closed ends (Fig. 3.9).
Individual cells may reach 5–10mm (0.2–0.4in.) in
length,  and  the  whole  coenobium  extends  to
20cm (8in.) or more. At the other extreme is the
diminutive  Protosiphon.  The  thallus  consists  of  a
single sphere, about 0.3mm (0.01in.) in diameter,
anchored to the substratum by a colorless rhizoid
which may reach a length of 1mm (0.04in.) (Fig.
3.10).  The  sphere  contains  several  nuclei,  and  a
reticulate  chloroplast  with  several  pyrenoids.
Protosiphon is  frequent  on  damp  mud  and  walls,
and some forms can withstand extremes of heat
and salinity, as in desert soils. Pure cultures have
been shown to produce bacteriostatic substances.

46

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 2

Figure 3.7. Scenedesmus
quadricauda. Section of coenobium
in the plane of the spines, based on
photo- and electron micrographs.
The middle layer of the three-
layered wall is micellar in structure,
but its chemical nature is not
certain. The spines consist of
bundles of micelles emerging from
the middle layer.

reproduction 

the  Chlorococcales. 

reproduction
Asexual 
by
simple  ﬁssion  does  not  occur
in 
In
Chlorella the  nucleus  undergoes  two  (or  more)
mitoses, and the cytoplasm is divided between the
daughter nuclei. A cell wall forms around each of
these non-motile aplanospores. They are then lib-
erated  from  the  mother  cell  and  grow to  the
mature  size.  Glaucocystis (p.  27)  reproduces  in  a
similar  way, but,  although  by some  formerly
attributed to the Chlorococcales, no such relation-
ship is currently considered credible.

In  the  coenobial  forms,  each  cell  produces
aplanospores  or  zoospores,  depending  upon
species. In Scenedesmus the aplanospores aggregate
before or immediately after release to form a new
coenobium.  In  Hydrodictyon the  multinucleate
cells become transformed into a mass of biﬂagel-
late  zoospores.  These  are  retained,  shed  their
ﬂagella, and then form a new coenobium within
the mother cell. This ordered re-assembly is prob-
ably controlled by microtubules since in the pres-
ence  of  colchicine  the  daughter  coenobium  is
deformed.  Following  rupture  of  the  mother  cell
the  young  coenobium  is  free  to expand  to its
mature size.

Sexual reproduction is isogamous or anisoga-
mous, the biﬂagellate gametes conjugating later-
ally and not at their ﬂagellate poles. Meiosis takes
place as the zygote germinates, yielding four zoo-
spores. Ultimately the zoospores settle, lose their
ﬂagella, and develop into conspicuous polyhedral
cells known as “polyeders”. Each becomes multi-
nucleate and germinates to release a rudimentary
coenobium. This then enlarges to its mature size.
In  Hydrodictyon the  young  coenobium  is  two-
layered. The individual cells enlarge and become

multinucleate, and the coenobium then acquires
its typical cylindrical form.

Reproduction  in  Protosiphon is  little  special-
ized. Simple asexual reproduction takes place by
budding, but biﬂagellate swarmers are often pro-
duced after ﬂooding. These may behave as either
zoospores or gametes. There is no evidence for the
existence of mating types since gametes from the
same plant may fuse. Germination of the zygote,
probably the occasion of meiosis, may be immedi-
ate or delayed.

The Chlorosphaerales
The Chlorosphaerales are a small order of simple
algae  consisting  of  Chlorella-like  cells.  The  cells
occur in groups or short threads. Chlorosphaera ant-
arctica occurs  on  snow. Its  pigmented  resting
stages contribute to the “red snows” of antarctic
regions.  Biﬂagellate  zoospores  are  produced  by
some species.

The Chaetophorales
A  distinct  advance  in  the  organization  of  a  ﬁla-
mentous thallus is found in the Chaetophorales
where  the  thallus  is  typically  composed  of  both
prostrate  and  erect  components,  and  is  conse-
quently  termed  heterotrichous.  The  prostrate
system is typically a ﬂat plate attached to the sub-
stratum,  from  which  arises  the  erect  branching
system bearing the reproductive organs and often
characteristic  hairs.  Although  elements  of  an
aerial  and  a  prostrate  system  are  almost  always
detectable,  many  genera  show  greater  develop-
ment of one component than of the other, some-

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND B

47

Figure 3.8. Pediastrum.

Figure 3.10. Protosiphon botryoides. (After Klebs, from
Fritsch. 1935. The Structure and Reproduction of the Algae, vol.
1. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.)

Figure 3.9. Hydrodictyon. Portion of the cylindrical reticulum
of a growing individual showing the multinucleate cells with
conspicuous pyrenoids. (After Esser. 1976. Kryptogamen.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.)

times almost to its exclusion. The maintenance of
the dominance of one system has been shown in
some  species  to depend  upon  environmental
factors.  In  Stigeoclonium (Fig.  3.11),  for  example,
magnesium  depresses  the  growth of  the  erect
system, while an excess of nitrogen inhibits that
of the prostrate component.

Environmental factors, as well as affecting the
quantitative relationships of the two systems, also
inﬂuence  the  extent  to which  the  erect  system
produces  hairs  and  branches.  Hairs  may be  con-
cerned with the absorption of mineral nutrients.
When these are deﬁcient the production of hairs
is conspicuously increased.

Figure 3.11. Stigeoclonium tenue. (a) Terminal portion of
erect system. (b) Release of gametes. (After West and
Fritsch. 1927. A Treatise on the British Freshwater Algae.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.)

48

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 2

Figure 3.12. Drapanaldia glomerata.
Portion of erect system. (After
West and Fritsch. 1927. A Treatise on
the British Freshwater Algae.
Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.)

show 

Correlated  with 

their
morphological  plasticity,  the
Chaetophorales 
a
remarkable  range  of  habitats
extending  from  the  littoral
zones  of  seas  and  lakes  to
damp  soil 
(e.g.,  Fritschiella),
tree  trunks  (e.g.,  Pleurococcus)
and, particularly in the tropics
and subtropics, the surfaces of
leaves. Sexual reproduction is
correspondingly diverse, both
isogamy  and  oogamy  being
represented.  The 
life  cycle
shows little development of the zygotic phase.

Stigeoclonium is 

representative  of 

those
members of the Chaetophorales in which both the
prostrate and erect components of the thallus are
easily recognizable, and each is more or less well
developed. The species are commonly attached to
submerged stones or woodwork, or are epiphytes
on the leaves of aquatic angiosperms. They differ
widely  in  external  morphology.  In  general  the
erect system ends in long, thin, hyaline hairs, and
is  less  branched  than  the  prostrate  system  (Fig.
3.11). The latter often forms a pseudoparenchyma-
tous sheet as a consequence of the close packing
of the branches, but detailed investigation of its
structure in natural habitats is rendered difﬁcult
by the tenacity with which it adheres to the sub-
stratum. The vegetative cells contain a peripheral
girdle-shaped chloroplast with one or more pyren-
oids.

Possibly allied to Stigeoclonium is the terrestrial
alga  Fritschiella in  which  the  prostrate  system,
buried  in  damp  mud,  produces  nodules  of  cells
which serve as perennating organs.

The  polarity  of  the  thallus  appears  to  be
inverted in species of Gomontia, frequent on shells
of freshwater and marine mollusks. The pseudo-
parenchymatous  prostrate  system  grows  on  the
surface, but the ﬁlaments emerge from the lower

side  and  penetrate  deeply  into  the  substratum.
The upright system is suppressed. A less extreme
condition is seen in the rhizoids occurring on the
underside of some chaetophoralean epiphytes.

its 

close 

and 

Draparnaldia

relation
Draparnaldiopsis are two aquatic members of the
order in which the erect system is dominant. The
upright  axes  of  Draparnaldia consist  of  large
barrel-shaped  cells,  from  which  arise  the  highly
branched  whorls  of  laterals  with  much  smaller
cells (Fig. 3.12). Frequently these laterals, many of
which terminate in hairs, are so profuse that the
axis  is  quite  obscured.  The  chloroplasts  of  the
lateral  branches  are  notably  better  developed
than those of the axes, indicating some localiza-
tion  of  function  within  the  upright  system.
Draparnaldiopsis is similar, but the axis consists of
long and short cells, and the whorls of ﬁne later-
als,  usually  originating  in  four  tufts,  arise  only
from the short cells. The tufts consist of radiating
long and short branches. Other branches, arising
particularly from the bases of the longer laterals,
turn  down,  branch  freely, and  invest  the  inter-
node in a cortical sheath, often thicker than the
axis itself. In both genera the prostrate system is
vestigial, and it is represented by a holdfast, the
function of which is assisted by the outgrowth of
rhizoids from adjacent cells of the main axis.

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND B

49

reproduction and rel ationships
In  the  asexual  reproduction  of  Stigeoclonium the
production of zoospores is conﬁned to the erect
system,  and 
that  of  Draparnaldia and
Draparnaldiopsis to the lateral branches. Zoospores
are usually quadriﬂagellate.

in 

The  sexual  cycles  of  the  Chaetophorales  are
not  well  known.  Both  isogamy  and  anisogamy
have been  reported,  and  Aphanochaete  is  ooga-
mous. Motile gametes have been described as both
biﬂagellate and quadriﬂagellate. Zygotes are com-
monly  bright  orange,  and  meiosis  is  believed  to
occur on germination.

Pleurococcus has no known method of reproduc-

tion other than simple cell division.

diversity 

of 

The  morphological 

the
Chaetophorales,  and  the  restricted  knowledge
about their life cycles, make it difﬁcult to assess
their  relationships  with  other  green  algae.
Isolated  specialized  forms,  such  as  Draparnaldia
and Aphanochaete, are a conspicuous feature of the
order.  Although  the  cells  of  the  Chaetophorales
usually contain only a single basin-shaped chloro-
plast,  their  growth forms  perhaps  foreshadow
later developments in plant evolution. The hetero-
trichous  habit,  for  example,  well  developed  in
some genera, is also a feature of the gametophytes
of many bryophytes (see Chapter 5).

The Oedogoniales
The  Oedogoniales  are  a  well-deﬁned  order,  pos-
sessing  several  unique  features.  Some  have
attached so much weight to these as to consider
that  the  order  should  be  removed  from  the
Chlorophyta. The Oedogoniales are not, however,
anomalous  in  such  fundamentals  as  wall  struc-
ture  and  pigmentation,  and  they are  probably
better regarded as a small group that has diverged
from the main line of evolution, the intermediate
stages  being  no 
represented.  The
Oedogoniales  comprise  only 
three  genera,
Oedogonium, Oedocladium and Bulbochaete. Of these,
Oedogonium  is  by  far  the  commonest  and  best
known.

longer 

the thallus
The  thallus  of  Oedogonium  is  an  unbranched
ﬁlament (Fig. 3.14). When young, the ﬁlaments are
attached by a basal holdfast, but unless the water

Figure 3.13. Aphanochaete polychaete. (After West and
Fritsch. 1927. A Treatise on the British Freshwater Algae.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.)

Aphanochaete (Fig.  3.13)  contains  a  number  of
epiphytes common on aquatic angiosperms. The
genus is representative of those members of the
Chaetophorales  in  which  the  prostrate  compo-
nent  is  dominant.  It  is  composed  of  cells  much
like  those  of  Stigeoclonium,  but  each  bears  on  its
dorsal  surface  one  or  more  hair-like  cells  which
soon lose their protoplasmic contents. They then
become brittle and are readily broken off.

Pleurococcus (Desmococcus) may also be referable
here.  The  cells  contain  a  single  parietal  chloro-
plast,  and  resemble  those  of  the  Chaetophorales.
They  occur  singly,  or  in  small  groups  or  compla-
nate  aggregates,  and  occasionally  in  damp  situa-
tions  in  short  ﬁlaments.  Pleurococcus is  the  main
component of the friable incrustation (often mixed
with other algae and lichens) which forms on the
shaded side of walls and tree trunks. It is probably
the most familiar of the smaller green algae.

50

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 2

reproduction
Both  asexual  and  sexual  reproduction  occur  in
Oedogonium. Asexual reproduction is by means of
zoospores which, like others of the Oedogoniales,
are  remarkable  in  possessing  an  apical  ring  of
many short ﬂagella (and are termed stephanokont).
They arise singly in cells at various sites along the
ﬁlament. While in the sporangium the zoospore is
surrounded by a mucilage sheath giving the wall
a characteristic two-layered appearance. The zoo-
spore  is  released  by rupture  of  the  sporangium,
thereby  causing  a  break  in  the  ﬁlament.  It
emerges still surrounded by mucilage, but this is
soon  shed  and  the  zoospore  becomes  almost
spherical (Fig. 3.16a). After a brief motile phase the
zoospore  settles  and  irregular  rhizoid-like  out-
growths  from  the  ﬂagellate  end  attach  it  to the
substratum. A new ﬁlament then develops.

Both  monoecious  and  dioecious  species  of
Oedogonium are  known.  Large,  almost  spherical,
oogonia  are  produced  within  the  ﬁlament  from
the upper cell of a vegetative division. The lower
cell  may  divide  again,  and  another  oogonium
develop, but more usually it remains as the sup-
porting cell. A single, dense, oosphere is formed in
each oogonium (Fig. 3.16b). The oosphere shrinks
away from the cell wall, and develops a colorless
receptive  spot  as  it  matures.  When  it  is  fully
mature, a pore appears at the anterior end of the
oogonium  adjacent  to the  receptive  spot  of  the
oosphere.  The  mature  oogonium  is  commonly
surrounded by mucilage.

Antheridia are produced by division of a vege-
tative cell into several disk-shaped portions, each
of which produces two (in some species, four) pale
green  male  gametes.  These  are  similar,  in  both
morphology and method of liberation, to the zoo-
spores. Liberated gametes are attracted chemotac-
tically to mature oogonia. Following fertilization
the  zygote  forms  an  oospore,  often  reddish  in
color  and  regularly  surrounded  by a thickened
wall.

In some dioecious species the male and female
ﬁlaments  differ  morphologically, and  the  male
may even be reduced to a minute individual epi-
phytic  upon  the  female.  In  these  nannandrous
species  the  dwarf  males  arise  from  the  female
plants  by way of  a  special  propagule  called  an
androspore. This is produced in a manner similar to

Figure 3.14. Oedogonium sp. Portion of ﬁlament.

they inhabit  is  ﬂowing,  the  mature  condition  is
free-ﬂoating.  The  individual  cells  have a single,
large nucleus,  and  a  reticulate  chloroplast.
Pyrenoids  are  frequent  at  the  interstices  of  the
reticulum.  Cell  division  is  normally  intercalary,
but the way in which the new cell walls are pro-
duced is highly peculiar (Fig. 3.15). The ﬁrst indi-
cation  that  a  cell  is  about  to divide  is  the
formation  of  a  ring  of  wall  material  toward the
upper end of the cell, just below the septum. The
nucleus then divides and a septum forms between
the daughter nuclei, but this septum remains free
at  the  periphery. During  the  division  of  the
nucleus  the  ring  in  the  upper  part  of  the  cell
becomes  larger  and  crescent-shaped  in  vertical
section.  Eventually  the  cell  wall  breaks  trans-
versely at this level, and the ring is drawn out lon-
gitudinally  to form  a  cylinder  of  new  wall
material.  Meanwhile  the  septum  between  the
nuclei moves up the cell, reaches the bottom of
the newly formed cylinder, and then fuses periph-
erally with the longitudinal walls. The wall of the
lower cell is thus largely that of the mother cell,
while that of the upper, except for a conspicuous
cap of original wall at the anterior end, is wholly
new. The presence of caps, which if the daughter
cell goes on dividing may be several in number, at
the anterior ends of the cell is a feature diagnos-
tic of the Oedogoniales.

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND B

51

Figure 3.15. Oedogonium.
Diagrammatic representation of
stages in cell division.

to

give 

settles to produce a new plant.
In  experimental  conditions
unchilled oospores have been
germinated 
rise
directly  to a single  ﬁlament
with very large cells. Oogonia
and  antheridia  are  produced,
but fertilization has not been
observed.  It  seems  likely  that
these  giant  forms  are  pro-
duced  without  meiosis,  the
nuclei  consequently  contain-
ing  twice  the  normal  number  of  chromosomes.
They provide an example in the algae of the apo-
sporic production of a gametophyte.

In laboratory cultures the sexual phase can be
induced by increasing the carbon dioxide concen-
tration of the medium. With dioecious species it
is also necessary to intermix male ﬁlaments with
female  to stimulate  the  production  of  oogonia.
The secretion of hormone-like substances into the
medium  seems  indicated  (cf.  Volvox,  p.  44).  In
axenic cultures gametes are rarely produced, but
the development of reproductive cells is notably
increased  if  bacteria  (e.g.,  Corynebacterium or
Pseudomonas putrida) are present in the culture.

rel ationships 
Related  to Oedogonium are  Bulbochaete and
Oedocladium. Bulbochaete resembles Oedogonium in
essentials, but the ﬁlaments are branched and ter-
minate in hairs. In Oedocladium the ﬁlaments are
both branched and form a heterotrichous system.
The afﬁnities of the Oedogoniales are obscure.
The  hairs  of  Bulbochaete and  the  heterotrichous
system  of  Oedocladium recall  features  of  the
Chaetophorales,  and  perhaps  indicate  a  distant
relationship.  Another  feature  in  common  is  the
peripheral girdle-shaped chloroplast in each cell.
The  small  gamete-like  zoospores  of  some
Chaetophorales  may  indicate  the  origin  of  nan-
nandry  in  some  Oedogoniales.  Multiﬂagellate
zoospores occur elsewhere only in some siphona-
ceous algae (e.g., Derbesia, p. 58), but a close rela-
tionship seems unlikely here.

Figure 3.16. Oedogonium sp. (a) Zoospore. (b) Oogonium
with adjacent dwarf males.

that  of  the  male  gametes,  except  that  only  one
androspore is produced per cell. Resembling zoo-
spores, except for their smaller size and yellowish
color,  the  androspores  are  attracted  chemotacti-
cally  to the  oogonium  and  its  supporting  cell.
Here they settle and give rise to small ﬁlaments
(Fig. 3.16b). After a few cells have been produced,
antheridia are cut off, and reproduction proceeds
as in the isomorphic (macrandrous) species.

Although oospores are sometimes able to ger-
minate immediately, a long resting period seems
generally to be necessary. There is evidence that
chilling  hastens  germination.  When  growth is
eventually resumed, the normal course is for four
haploid protoplasts to be extruded, each of which
develops  a  crown  of  ﬂagella,  swims  away,  and

52

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 2

Figure 3.17. Microspora pachyderma. Portion of ﬁlament.
(After West and Fritsch. 1927. A Treatise on the British
Freshwater Algae. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.)

The Sphaeropleales 
The small order Sphaeropleales is also included in
the  Chlorophyceae.  It  includes  the  distinctive
genus  Microspora.  The  ﬁlaments,  free-ﬂoating  at
maturity, are encountered in freshwater lakes and
meres. The cells contain a reticulate chloroplast
lacking pyrenoids. The cell walls disjoin in charac-
teristic H-shaped pieces when the ﬁlaments frag-
ment (Fig. 3.17). Asexual reproduction (other than
by fragmentation) is by bi- or quadriﬂagellate zoo-
spores.  Sexual  reproduction  is  isogamous,  the
gametes being biﬂagellate. The site of meiosis in
the cycle appears not to have been determined.

Ulvophyceae
The  orders  grouped  into  this  class  show  a  great
diversity of habit ranging from the ﬁlamentous to
the siphonaceous.

forms  are 

the  ﬁlamentous 

The Ulotrichales
Amongst 
the
Ulotrichales. Ulothrix itself has a simple ﬁlament
lacking branches. The genus has species in both
fresh  and  saline  waters.  When  mature  the  ﬁla-
ments  form loose,  free-ﬂoating  bundles.  All  the
cells are of equal status, except the basal attach-
ment cell usually present in young ﬁlaments. The
vegetative cells, which are often wider than long,
are  uninucleate  and  have a single  girdle-like,
peripheral  chloroplast  (Fig.  3.18a),  containing
many  pyrenoids.  Cell  divisions  are  sporadic  and

Figure 3.18. Ulothrix zonata. (a) Vegetative ﬁlament showing
the girdle-shaped chloroplast. (b) Above, production of
quadriﬂagellate zoospores; below, production of gametes
(diagrammatic).

intercalary. Fragmentation  of  the  ﬁlament  is
common,  but  this  is  caused  principally  by acci-
dental breakage; simultaneous dissociation of the
ﬁlament into segments has rarely been observed.

reproduction 
High  temperatures  stimulate  asexual  reproduc-
tion,  1–32  zoospores  (the  number  depending
upon the species) being produced in each cell by
division of the protoplast. The mature zoospores
are  pear-shaped  and  quadriﬂagellate  (macrozoo-
spores) (Fig. 3.18b above). In some species smaller
biﬂagellate  zoospores  (microzoospores)  are  also
produced,  intermediate  in  size  between  macro-
zoospores  and  gametes.  The  zoospores  are  liber-
ated through a pore in the wall of the parent cell,
each  zoospore  surrounded  by a mucilaginous
sheath. The free zoospore closely resembles a uni-
cellular  member  of  the  Volvocales,  devoid  of  its
cell  wall.  After  settling,  the  zoospore  attaches
itself by the posterior end (to which the stigma has
now shifted), and grows out laterally, producing a
holdfast cell on one side, and new vegetative cells
on the other. Sometimes, after the initial division
in the parent cell in a ﬁlament, aplanospores with
resistant walls are produced instead of zoospores.
initiate  sexual  reproduction.
Gametogenesis resembles the production of zoo-

Long  days 

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND B

53

Figure 3.19. Ulva lactuca. (a) Habit. (b) Transverse section
of vegetative thallus. (c) Transverse section of thallus
producing zoospores. ((a), (c) after Newton. 1937. A
Handbook of the British Seaweeds. British Museum, London;
(b) after Thuret, from Fritsch. 1935. The Structure and
Reproduction of the Algae, vol. 1. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.)

spores  in  asexual  reproduction.  The  gametes,
however, are uniformly biﬂagellate, and 8, 16, 32
or  64  (the  number  again  depending  upon  the
species) are produced in each gametangium (Fig.
3.18b below). Ulothrix is physiologically heterothal-
lic, gametes from the same ﬁlament being unable
to unite.  The  zygote  retains  four  ﬂagella  and  is
mobile for a short while, but is negatively photo-
tactic. Having settled, it then secretes a resistant
wall and enters a resting period during which it
may become attached and form a small unicellu-
lar  plant.  Germination,  occurring  in  short-day
conditions,  commences  with  meiosis,  at  which
the  mating  types  are  segregated.  Meiosis  is  fol-
lowed by one or two mitoses and the formation of
zoospores  or  aplanospores.  The  diploid  state  is
thus represented only by the zygotic cell and has
no  prolonged  existence.  According  to some
accounts the biﬂagellate swarmers are exclusively
gametic.

Ulotrichales.  Although  beginning 
life  as  a
ﬁlament, lateral divisions also occur so that the
mature plant (which is gametophytic) has a ﬂat,
leaf-like  thallus,  uniformly  one  cell  thick,
attached  to the  substratum  by a holdfast.  Some
species are notable for being able to tolerate great
changes of salinity in, for example, estuarine con-
ditions. In the life cycle of M. grevillei (a species of
north temperate coasts) the gametes are biﬂagel-
late  and  copulation  anisogamous.  The  zygote
settles  to form  a  small  unicellular  plant  which
becomes attached to the substratum by rhizoids.
Germination is as in Ulothrix, quadriﬂagellate zoo-
spores being released after meiosis and a number
of mitoses.

The Ulvales
The Ulvales contain forms ranging from branch-
ing  ﬁlaments  to expanded  thalli.  Ulva,  for
example, has a foliaceous thallus, very similar to
that of Monostroma, but in Ulva two cells thick (Fig.
3.19). Each cell, as in the Ulotrichales, contains a
single  chloroplast.  At cell  division  each  chloro-
plast divides at the same time as the nucleus. Ulva
was the ﬁrst multicellular plant in which it was
possible to follow unambiguous chloroplast divi-
sion with the electron microscope.

Monostroma is also currently classiﬁed with the

Young  plants  of  Ulva always  begin  their

54

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 2

thallus often remains as a bleached framework of
empty cells.

Sexual reproduction is again similar to that of
Ulothrix,  and  Ulva is  also  physiologically  hetero-
thallic.  The  gametes  of  the  two  mating  strains
differ  slightly  in  size.  The  zygote,  however, does
not undergo reduction division on germination,
but grows instead into a diploid thallus identical
with that of the haploid plant. The cycle is thus
isomorphic.  The  production  of  quadriﬂagellate
zoospores in cells toward the border of the blade
is  accompanied  by meiosis  (although  there  are
some  irregularities).  Equal  numbers  of  both
mating strains are produced.

Laboratory  cultures  of  Ulva have revealed
subtle controls of fertility. Axenic cultures repro-
duce rarely or irregularly. A glycoprotein isolated
from old medium suppresses sporulation at very
low concentrations. Also a “swarming inhibitor”,
produced during gametogenesis, appears to regu-
late  and  synchronize  gamete  release.  In  culture
the gametes of the ⫹ strain of U. mutabilis can be
made to grow into “parthenosporophytes”. These
mostly  diploidize  during  development,  and
produce  zoospores  by normal  meiosis.  The
gametes  of  the  ⫺ strain  do  this  far  less  readily.
Meiosis  is  attempted,  but  the  chromosomes  are
irregularly  distributed  and  the  viability  of  the
products very low.

The life history of Enteromorpha resembles that
of Ulva. An isomorphic cycle is also shown by the
branching  ﬁlamentous  Acrochaete,  which  grows
on, or in, the tissues of larger marine algae (e.g.,
Chondrus crispus, p. 33). Here, however, the gametes
of the two mating strains are produced in differ-
ent gametangia on the same plant.

There are no intermediate forms in the Ulvales
indicating how an isomorphic life cycle, such as
that of Ulva, might have originated. It is possible
that  a  relatively  simple  mutation  prevented
meiosis at the zygotic stage, and that the inhibi-
tion remained effective until after many cell gen-
erations.  Since  there 
is  no  evidence  that
chromosome number itself determines the form
of growth in any group of plants, this delaying of
mitosis would have allowed the development of a
diploid  thallus  closely  resembling  that  of  the
haploid. In the evolution of Ulva the emergence of
a distinct sporophyte was probably accompanied

Figure 3.20. Enteromorpha intestinalis. The thallus consists of
hollow thin-walled cylinders. (After Newton. 1937. A
Handbook of the British Seaweeds. British Museum, London.)

development as simple ﬁlaments. Division in prin-
cipally  two  dimensions  results  in  a  ﬂattened
expanse of tissue expanding from a narrow stalk
and holdfast (Fig. 3.19a). Some of the holdfast cells
produce  multinucleate  rhizoids  which  grow
between  the  two  cell  layers,  strengthening  the
thallus  (Fig.  3.19b).  These  are  most  evident  adja-
cent  to the  stalk.  Mutants  are  known  which
remain  ﬁlamentous,  the  cells  having  lost  the
ability to divide in more than one direction.

The marine intertidal zone is the characteris-
tic  habitat  of  both  Ulva and  the  closely  related
Enteromorpha which has a peculiar tubular thallus
(Fig. 3.20). Both species, like Monostroma, can toler-
ate wide variations in salinity, and may be found
far up tidal estuaries.

reproduction
Asexual  reproduction  occurs  in  a  number  of
species in the same manner as in Ulothrix, most of
the  vegetative  cells  taking  part 
(Fig.  3.19c).
Zoospores may be biﬂagellate or quadriﬂagellate.
After zoospores have been discharged, the parent

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND B

55

by the  progressive  elaboration  of  the  vegetative
structure  of  both  phases  of  growth.  The  experi-
mental evidence from Oedogonium (p. 51) indicates
that suppression of meiosis alone is not adequate
to establish an isomorphic life cycle.

The Prasiolales
Prasiola, usually placed with, or near, the Ulvales,
is a familiar plant on tidal rocks and shore lines,
particularly where the substrate is rich in nitro-
gen  (for  example  from  bird  droppings  or  seal
excrement). The thallus resembles a small Ulva in
form and attachment, but is only one cell thick.
The non-sexual plant reproduces itself by spheri-
cal spores (aplanospores) produced from the distal
part of the thallus. In the sexual plant the distal
portion of the thallus is the site of meiosis. The
haploid  cells  so  produced  then  undergo  several
mitoses,  building  up  groups  of  haploid  cells
within  the  diploid  thallus.  Each  group  of  cells
ultimately  differentiates  into  gametes,  either
biﬂagellate  males  or  non-ﬂagellate  females.  A
gametophytic  phase  thus  exists  for  some  time
within the conﬁnes of the sporophyte.

The fusion of a male and female gamete takes
place progressively. For a time one male ﬂagellum
remains  extruded  and  the  zygote  is  motile.
Ultimately there is total absorption and a walled
zygote is formed. Little is known about germina-
tion and the early development of the sporophyte.
Sexual reproduction tends to predominate in the
plants  lower  in  the  intertidal  belt  and  asexual
reproduction in those higher up.

Terrestrial species allied to Prasiola are found
near  the  base  of  north-facing  (and  permanently
damp) walls in the older parts of towns in the west
of  Ireland.  This  distribution  appears  to be  inﬂu-
enced  by the  sites  being  occasionally irrigated
with urine.

The Cladophorales
The remainder of the Ulvophyceae are character-
ized  by multinucleate  cells.  The  simpler  are
placed in the order Cladophorales. All are ﬁlamen-
tous. Cladophora itself has some 160 species, some
marine and others freshwater. The ﬁlaments show
true branching, buds developing toward the ante-
rior  end  of  the  elongated,  cylindrical  vegetative
cells (Fig. 3.21). The bundle of ﬁlaments is usually

Figure 3.21. Cladophora sp. Upper part of the thallus
showing characteristic branching and the greater density of
the cytoplasm toward the apical ends of the cells.

interconnected  by ﬁne 

attached  below  by a rhizoid-like  cell  to a ﬁrm
surface in the substratum. The internal structure
of the cells is complex, each cell being multinucle-
ate and having many small angular chloroplasts,
apparently 
threads,
forming a parietal network. In many species each
chloroplast  has  a  single,  more  or  less  spherical
pyrenoid,  transected  at  the  equator  by a single
thylakoid.  The  cell  wall  comprises  three  layers,
the  inner  one  of  cellulose  (the  microﬁbrils  of
which are arranged in bands of alternating orien-
tation),  a  central  layer  of  hemicellulose,  and
ﬁnally  an  outer  coating,  containing  up  to 70
percent  protein  and  possibly  chitinous,  which
gives  the  alga  its  characteristic  crisp  feeling.  It
also provides a surface which is rapidly colonized
by small  epiphytes,  notably  diatoms.  Division  of
the  protoplast,  which  is  not  regularly  related  to
nuclear division, is accompanied by the formation
of  transverse  septa.  These  develop  from  the
margin toward the center, and gradually acquire
a complicated lamellate structure at the periph-
ery, which  may  impart  some  ﬂexibility  to the
older ﬁlaments. Growth of the ﬁlaments is apical
in  Cladophora,  but  intercalary  growth is  general
elsewhere.

A curious feature exhibited by some species of

56

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 2

Cladophora  and  certain  other  genera  is  the  ten-
dency, when subjected to a gentle rolling motion
in  water, to  aggregate into  cushions  or  spheres.
These are termed “aegagropilous” species because
of the fancied resemblance of these aggregates to
the  balls  of  wool  found  in  goats’  stomachs.
Cladophorella, a plant of damp places, is of interest
because its upper cells secrete what appears to be
a true cuticle, possibly a forerunner of that found
in the land plants.

and

cells,

reproduction
Both the asexual and sexual reproduction of the
Cladophorales resemble that of Ulothrix. The zoo-
spores and gametes are produced in non-spe-
cialized
copulation is usually
isogamous, rarely anisogamous. Fusion of the
biﬂagellate gametes is lateral. The zoospores pro-
duced meiotically by the sporophyte are quadri-
ﬂagellate. An isomorphic life cycle has been
demonstrated in some species, but in others the
cycle is heteromorphic. Before these were under-
stood the gametophytic and sporophytic phases,
being unrecognized, were assigned to separate
genera.

Vegetative reproduction by fragmentation of
branches also occurs, and seems to be the sole
means of reproduction of the aegagropilous
species. In some species survival through unfa-
vorable periods is afforded by the formation of
thick-walled resting spores packed with food
reserves.

considered 

conveniently 

The Siphonales
The more complex Ulvophyceae with multinucle-
ate cells are all siphonaceous. In current classiﬁca-
tions  the  siphonaceous  algae  are  distributed
amongst  several  orders  (see  Table  2.1),  but  they
can  be 
together
(“Siphonales”). The thalli normally contain multi-
nucleate protoplasts and are consequently termed
coenocytic. Dividing walls are largely absent until
the  formation  of  the  reproductive  organs.  The
range in form of the thallus is considerable: it may
consist of a simple unbranched tube or a complex
mass of interwoven ﬁlaments. Those species with
complex  thalli  are  invariably  marine,  and  the
thalli  are  often  mechanically  strengthened  by

superﬁcial  deposits  of  calcium  carbonate.  There
are  numerous  chloroplasts,  and  in  some  species
they have particularly tough envelopes. They can
remain functional following ingestion by marine
invertebrates. The siphonaceous algae also differ
from  the  rest of  the  Chlorophyta  in  containing
both  ␣-  and  ␤-carotene,  instead  of  ␤-carotene
alone,  and  at  least  one  additional  carotenoid
(siphonoxanthin). Almost all are conﬁned to trop-
ical  or  warm seas.  The  classiﬁcation  of  the
Siphonales undergoes periodic revision as more is
discovered about their remarkable life histories.

Dichotomosiphon (Dichotomosiphonales) is ﬁl-
amentous with a superﬁcial resemblance to
Vaucheria (p. 79). It is aquatic and has been found
at depths of up to 15m (50ft) in fresh water.
Valonia (Siphonocladales) is marine and consists
solely of a bladder-like cell reaching a few centi-
meters in diameter. It often bears clusters of
daughter vesicles, and short basal branches from
a rhizoid-like holdfast. Valonia has been exten-
sively used in experiments on wall structure,
permeability and absorption of electrolytes.

of

the

siphonaceous

Acetabularia (Dasycladales)

(Fig. 3.22) has a
mushroom-shaped thallus when mature, the cap
reaching a diameter of about 1cm (0.4in.). The
whole delicate plant is stabilized by a shell of
calcium carbonate. The central axis produces
whorls of deciduous branches during growth.
Unlike most
algae,
Acetabularia is uninucleate throughout its vegeta-
tive development, the nucleus, large and conspic-
uous, remaining at the base of the stalk. It has
been found that if the stalk is removed from the
nucleate portion the stalk remains capable of
some growth and the apex may even begin to
form a cap. Nevertheless the nucleus is clearly
essential for continued growth and complete
morphogenesis. Decapitation and grafting experi-
ments have shown that the nucleus produces a
sequence of “morphogenetic substances” (now
known to be messenger RNAs) which ascend into
the stalk and determine the kind of growth which
occurs at the top. The RNAs appear to be masked
at transcription and to become activated in an
appropriate succession. Grafts made between the
stalk of one species and the nucleate portion of
another have revealed that the cytoplasm of the

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND B

57

cance, since a simple branched tube lacking septa
and with walls of uniform thickness would
become structurally unstable beyond a certain
point. In the vegetative condition the cytoplasm
is spread as an even layer containing numerous
nuclei and chloroplasts. The frond-like thallus of
Bryopsis rises more or less vertically and is
anchored to the substratum by rhizoids produced
from a small prostrate ﬁlament. Fragments of the
thallus will regenerate as new plants, but rhiz-
oidal outgrowths are formed only from the
morphologically lower end. This is an example of
polarity, widespread in the plant kingdom, but
particularly open to investigation in Bryopsis
because of its occurrence in a relatively simple
unicellular system. Derbesia is a plant of warmer
seas. Here there is a distinct “rhizome” attached
to the substratum by lobed holdfasts and produc-
ing from its upper surface branching tubular
threads.

Codium (Fig. 3.24) has a wider distribution and
extends into cooler seas. It is representative of
the most elaborate vegetative organization found
in the siphonaceous algae. The thallus is made
up of closely packed interwoven ﬁlaments
(hyphae), although the outward morphology
varies widely with species. In C. tomentosum the
thallus is a system of dichotomously branched
axes, each about 0.5cm (0.2in.)
in diameter,
anchored at the base. Other species are ﬂattened,
forming a cushion or plate, or spherical. In all
species a weft of branched ﬁlaments gives rise to
a continuous covering of elongated vesicles at the
exterior.

Caulerpa (Caulerpales)  has  an  extensively
creeping “rhizome” from which both rhizoids and
upright  “fronds” arise  (Fig.  3.25).  The  “fronds”
show a great variation in shape when mature, dif-
ferent species having been named from their dis-
tinctive forms (Fig. 3.26). Internally, all species of
Caulerpa show ingrowths of the cell wall forming,
throughout the thicker portion of the thallus, a
web  of  interconnecting  bars.  This  adds  to the
mechanical  stability  of  the  thallus,  and  the
increased surface area of the protoplast may facil-
itate the passage of minerals. The ﬁbrillar polysac-
charide  of  the  wall  is  not  cellulose  but  a  ␤-1,3
xylan, a polymer of a pentose sugar. The walls also

Figure 3.22. Acetabularia mediterranea. (a) Cell with mature
cap. (b) Detail of cap during cyst formation. (c) Longitudinal
section of gamete.

ﬁrst species can affect the expression of the
genetic information contained in the nucleus of
the second. Growth and development are depen-
dent upon blue light, and indole-3-acetic acid
(IAA), abscisic acid, and ethylene are also involved
in differentiation.

As  the  chloroplasts  replicate  in  the  growing
plant, their content of DNA becomes less uniform
and  in  some  undetectable  by cytological  tech-
niques. The fructosan inulin has been reported as
a  reserve  polysaccharide  in vivo.  The  mature
chloroplasts can be isolated comparatively easily.
They were the ﬁrst with which it was possible to
demonstrate normal photosynthesis in vitro.

The Codiales show a considerable advance in
vegetative organization. The thallus of Bryopsis
(Fig. 3.23), for example, possesses a main axis,
from which branches arise pinnately. These also
branch, leading to a complanate bipinnate, and
in some species tripinnate, condition. At the
insertion of each branch the cell walls are con-
thickened. This
stricted and conspicuously
feature undoubtedly has mechanical
signiﬁ-

58

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 2

Figure 3.23. Bryopsis plumosa. (a)
Habit. (b) Terminal portion of
branch. (After Newton. 1937. A
Handbook of the British Seaweeds.
British Museum, London.)

contain callose, a ␤-1,3 glucan,
also  found  in  the  sieve tubes
and reproductive structures of
land plants. Caulerpa is found
in temperate seas. Caulerpa tax-
ifolia is  currently  showing  an
aggressive  spread  in  parts  of
the  Mediterranean.  Halimeda
(Fig. 3.27) is a related tropical
alga with a complex thallus of
variable morphology. Calcium
carbonate  is  deposited  in  the
side walls of the outer vesicles.
These  deposits  survive  after
the death of the plant and yield one of the several
forms of coral. In the cells of the Caulerpales gen-
erally  chloroplasts  and  amyloplasts  are  both
present.  Udotea,  a  genus  represented  by several
species  in  tropical  and  subtropical  seas  and
similar in structure to Codium, provides a possible
example of the C4 photosynthetic pathway (p. 6)
in the algae.

reproduction
Although  Derbesia produces  stephanokont  zoo-
spores (resembling those of Oedogonium), all other
siphonaceous  algae  appear  to lack  specialized
means  of  asexual  reproduction.  In  Valonia,  for
example, vegetative multiplication takes place by
the sporadic detachment of the daughter vesicles.
In the larger forms segments, branches or parts of
the  “rhizome”  become  detached  and  establish
themselves as new plants. In Codium and Caulerpa
this  seems  to be  the  principal  method  of  repro-
duction.

The sexual cycles of many Siphonales are still
obscure. In general it appears that reproduction
is
isogamous or anisogamous, and oogamy
absent. In species of Bryopsis terminal pinnae, nor-
mally the smallest, become transformed into
gametangia and are cut off from the rest of the
thallus by a septum. The gametangia are conspic-

uously opaque as a consequence of the consider-
able multiplication of plastids. The gametes are
liberated by dissolution of the apex of the game-
tangia. They are biﬂagellate, but there is striking
anisogamy and, since each plant usually produces
gametes of only one size, a clear trend to dioecy.
The larger gametes (regarded as female) also
contain a distinctly green plastid, whereas the
smaller (male) gametes are yellowish. The nuclei
of the gametes and those of the parent thallus
(referred to as the macrothallus) contain the same
amount of DNA, so the macrothallus is clearly
haploid. After fusion the zygote develops immedi-
ately into a branching ﬁlament (microthallus) with
a single, very large, nucleus. This subsequently
undergoes successive divisions, leading to many
small secondary nuclei, dispersed throughout
the ﬁlament. At some stage meiosis occurs, fol-
lowing which the microthallus either liberates
stephanokont zoospores, or segregates fragments
which, like the zoospores, grow into new gameto-
phytic plants. Field observations indicate that the
course and the timing of the reproductive cycle
are readily inﬂuenced by local environmental
factors.

Although sexual reproduction in Codium and
Caulerpa is  probably  basically  similar  to that  in
Bryopsis, meiosis has been detected during gamet-

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND B

59

Figure 3.24. Codium tomentosum.
(a) Habit. (b) Transverse section of
thallus. (c) Gametangia. (After
Newton. 1937. A Handbook of the
British Seaweeds. British Museum,
London.)

Figure 3.25. Caulerpa prolifera. Portion of plant. (After
Taylor. 1960. Marine Algae of the Eastern Tropical and
Subtropical Coasts of the Americas. University of Michigan
Press, MI.)

Figure 3.26. Caulerpa. Types of “fronds”. (a) C. cupressoides.
(b) C. racemosa var. macrophysa. (c) C. asmeadii. (d) C. peltata.
(After Taylor. 1960. Marine Algae of the Eastern Tropical and
Subtropical Coasts of the Americas. University of Michigan
Press, MI.)

ogenesis in the macrothallus. The thallus in these
forms is therefore presumably diploid. The com-
plete life cycle has yet to be clearly resolved.

The life cycle of Acetabularia is now well under-
stood, and proves to have many curious features.
During vegetative growth the chromosomes in
the single nucleus at the base of the stalk undergo
continued endoreplication, the nucleus increas-
ing its volume by a factor of about 20000, and
reaching a diameter of at least 100 ␮m. The

number of nucleoli also increases. The portions of
chromosomes lying within the nucleoli actively
transcribe ribosomal RNA, and the familiar
“Christmas trees” formed by the growing RNA
molecules can be readily demonstrated by spread-
ing techniques and electron microscopy (Fig.
3.28). When growth of the giant basal nucleus
is completed, it divides into several thousand
secondary nuclei. These ascend into the cap,

60

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 2

Figure 3.27. Halimeda simulans. Portion of thallus. (After
Taylor. 1960. Marine Algae of the Eastern Tropical and
Subtropical Coasts of the Americas. University of Michigan
Press, MI.)

Figure 3.28. Acetabularia. Segment of chromosomal DNA in
the nucleolus of the giant nucleus. Ribosomal RNA is being
actively transcribed in the direction of the arrows, giving the
familiar “Christmas tree” formation. The actively transcribing
regions of the DNA are separated by inactive “spacers”.
(From Schweiger, Bannwarth, Berger and Kloppstech, in
Puseux-Dao (ed.) 1975. Molecular Biology of Nucleocytoplasmic
Relationships, pp. 203–12. Elsevier, Amsterdam.)

which by this stage has reached its mature size.
The cap now becomes cleft into uninucleate com-
partments. Each compartment becomes a cyst,
bounded by a thickened wall, from which biﬂag-
ellate gametes are ultimately liberated (Fig. 3.22b

that

already

encountered

and c). Although the gametes are morphologically
identical, their pairing behavior indicates the
presence of ⫹ and ⫺ mating strains, a situation
recalling
in
Chlamydomonas. The site of meiosis was for long
uncertain, but more recent observations, based
upon microspectrophotometric measurements
following Feulgen staining, of relative amounts of
DNA in the nuclei point to meiosis occurring at
division of the large primary nucleus. Following
gametogenesis and gametic fusion, the zygote
begins to develop immediately into the familiar
unicellular and uninucleate plant; the primary
nucleus is therefore the only diploid stage in the
life history.

The existence of a heteromorphic life cycle has
been conﬁrmed in Derbesia. Zoospores from some
species of Derbesia have been observed to grow into
vesicular  plants  reaching  about  1cm  (0.4in.)  in
diameter formerly placed in the genus Halicystis.
These are now known to be gametophytic. Zygotes
formed  from  the  fusion  of  biﬂagellate  gametes
have yielded  Derbesia.  Other  species  of  Halicystis
may  be  gametophytes  of  Bryopsis whose  sexual
cycles have not yet been fully investigated. There
are many indications that surprising discoveries
may yet be made about the life cycles of the siph-
onaceous algae.

rel ationships 
The  relationships  of  the  siphonaceous  algae  are
obscure, but the origin may have been in a form
resembling the present Chlorococcales, an order
in which tendencies toward the coenocytic habit
are evident. An ancestor may have been a simple
coenocyte  resembling  Protosiphon (p.  45).  Lime-
secreting siphonaceous algae are clearly ancient;
their  fossil  record  goes  back  as  far  as  the
Cambrian (see Table 1.1), where evidence may be
found for the existence of both the Codiales and
the  Dasycladales.  Palaeoporella from  the  late
Cambrian,  for  example,  was  a  lime-producing
form similar to Halimeda (Fig. 3.27). Fossil sipho-
nalean algae are particularly abundant from the
Ordovician, when they must have formed a signiﬁ-
cant  component  of  the  marine  benthic  ﬂora.
the  Acetabularia-like
Typical  of 
Coelosphaeridium with  numerous 
radiating
branches.

these  was 

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND B

61

Charophyceae
This  class  contains  unicellular,  ﬁlamentous  and
heterotrichous  forms.  Of  particular  interest  are
metabolic and structural features which resemble
those  found  in  higher  plants.  In  the  non-mito-
chondrial  part  of  respiration,  for  example,  the
enzyme  glycolate  oxidase,  characteristic  of  land
plants, replaces glycolate dehydrogenase present
elsewhere  in  the  Chlorophyta.  During  cell  divi-
sion in the Charophyceae the nuclei tend to move
well apart in telophase, and the spindle to persist.
In some members the new transverse wall forms
from  coalescing  vesicles  at  the  equator  in  the
manner in which the phragmoplast functions in
higher plants. This contrasts with the situation in
the Chlorophyceae (p. 41). A signiﬁcant feature in
the reproductive cells of some species is an array
of minute plates and microtubules at the root of
the ﬂagella (Fig. 3.35) in zoospores and gametes,
very similar to the multilayered structure found
in archegoniate spermatozoids (p. 104). Although
these features may have arisen more than once in
the course of evolution, they have drawn particu-
lar  attention  to the  Charophyceae  in  relation  to
the question of the kind of algae from which land
plants may have arisen.

Amongst  the  simpler  ﬁlamentous  forms  is
Klebsormidium (Klebsormidiales), most species of
which occur in the soil. The cells are not unlike
those of Ulothrix. Asexual reproduction occurs by
means of biﬂagellate zoospores. Sexual reproduc-
tion is isogamous.

The unicellular members of the class fall into

the orders Mesotaeniales and Desmidiales.

The Mesotaeniales
The  Mesotaeniales  contain  the  so-called  “sacco-
derm desmids”, the cell walls of which consist of
only one portion of (so far as known) uniform age
(cf. the “placoderm desmids”, see below). The cells
contain two plate-like chloroplasts symmetrically
placed on each side of the nucleus (Fig. 3.29). The
cell  walls  are  without  ornamentation  and  lack
pores. The cell sap is sometimes pigmented, and
these  desmids  (mostly  Ancylonema)  are  in  part
responsible for the “red snow” seen on alpine gla-
ciers  and  in  the  Arctic.  Saccoderm  desmids  also
occur in bog pools.

Figure 3.29. Cylindrocystis brebissonii, a saccoderm desmid
occurring amongst Sphagnum in acid pools. The two
prominent stellate chloroplasts are symmetrically placed in
the cell and the nucleus lies between them.

reproduction
Asexual  reproduction  is  by a simple  division,
several  cells  often  being  held  together  within  a
mucilage  sheath.  Sexual  reproduction  involves
conjugation of two cells. Meiosis and division of
the zygote into four daughter cells take place after
a resting period. Mendelian segregation of mating
type has been demonstrated in pure cultures.

The Desmidiales 
Most  of  the  desmids  are  referable  to the  order
Desmidiales (the “placoderm desmids”). They are
typically  unicellular  (although  sometimes  the
cells  may  be  aggregated  in  chains)  and  are  con-
spicuous  in  the  phytoplankton  of  oligotrophic
meres.  The  cells  have complex  shapes  and  a
precise and striking symmetry. In many forms the
cell  is  divided  into  two  halves,  one  being  the
mirror image of the other, connected by a narrow
central portion, the isthmus. The nucleus usually
lies in the isthmus, and one or more chloroplasts
are present in each half cell. Even in those forms
in which the central constriction is less conspicu-
ous  (e.g.,  Cosmarium,  Fig.  3.30)  or  absent  (e.g.,
Closterium)  the  cells  still  display  exact  bilateral
symmetry. In  Closterium the  cells  are  narrowed
toward the  poles  and  slightly  curved.  There  is  a
small vacuole at each pole. Crystals of barium sul-
fate are  commonly  found  in  the  vacuoles  even
when the concentration of barium ions without is
very low.

The cell wall is made up of an inner cellulose
layer and an outer layer of variable composition,
frequently containing iron compounds or silica. It

62

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 2

ally, meiosis yields two binucleate cells, but one
nucleus  in  each  cell  degenerates.  The  daughter
cells,  now  uninucleate,  are  of  opposed  mating
types. After a few mitotic cell divisions, the char-
acteristic desmid shape is attained.

The Zygnematales
The  thalli  of  the  order  Zygnematales  consist  of
unbranched and free-ﬂoating ﬁlaments, although
rhizoid-like outgrowths may attach the basal cell
to the substratum in the young state. Almost all
are found in fresh water.

The cells are often markedly elongate, having
an axile ratio of 5:1 or more. The nucleus lies near
the center suspended by cytoplasmic strands, and
the conspicuous chloroplast is in the form of a ﬂat
plate  (e.g.,  Mougeotia)  or  a  helical  band  at  the
periphery of the cell (e.g., Spirogyra, Fig. 3.32), or it
consists  of  two  stellate  portions  (e.g.,  Zygnema).
Numerous pyrenoids occur in each form of chloro-
plast. In strong light the chloroplast of Mougeotia
turns so that its narrow edge is presented to the
source.  Experiments  with  polarized  light  have
shown that the stimulus to this movement comes
from an array of photoreceptive molecules at the
periphery  of  the  cytoplasm.  The  proteinaceous
pigment phytochrome is also involved.

Growth of the ﬁlament is intercalary, all the
cells  except  the  basal  cell  being  capable  of  divi-
sion. The dividing wall grows in from the margin,
but the central region of the septum is completed
by the formation of a phragmoplast.

reproduction
Asexual reproduction is solely by fragmentation
of the ﬁlament, and is preceded by changes in the
transverse  walls.  In  some  species  the  middle
lamella of the transverse wall becomes gelatinous
and a turgor difference arises between the cells.
This causes one cell to bulge into its neighbor and
the junction between the cells becomes strained
to breaking point. In other species a ring or collar
of wall material forms on each side of the septum
and in a manner not yet understood leads to sep-
aration.  The  comparative  ease  with  which  the
cells  separate  has  led  some  to regard  the
Zygnematales as basically unicellular.

Sexual  reproduction  involves  conjugation,
occurring  normally  toward the  end  of  the

Figure 3.30. Cosmarium diplosporum, a placoderm desmid.
(After West and Fritsch. 1927. A Treatise on the British
Freshwater Algae. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.)

is  particularly  this  outer  layer, often  patterned
with spines and other protuberances, which pro-
vides the speciﬁc characteristics, and which puts
the desmids amongst the most beautiful of micro-
scopic  objects.  The  cells  are  frequently  sur-
rounded by an investment of mucilage secreted by
minute pores in the wall. It is probably the local-
ized secretion of such mucilage which enables the
cells to perform slow movements.

reproduction
Asexual reproduction is by ﬁssion. The details of
the  process  are  not  yet  fully  understood,  but  in
outline  it  is  as  follows.  After  nuclear  division  a
ring of wall material develops at the center of the
isthmus  and  grows  inward  to form  a  septum.
When complete, the daughter cells separate. Each
then regenerates the missing half and the symme-
try is restored (Fig. 3.31). This results in two adult
organisms in each of which half of the thallus is
inherited  from  the  previous  generation  and  the
other half newly synthesized. This is an example
of  semi-conservative  replication  of  an  organism
recalling that of the molecule of double-stranded
DNA.

Sexual  reproduction  involves  conjugation  of
cells. A protuberance may be formed from one cell
and  directed  toward the  other,  but  in  many
species the walls break down at the isthmus and
the protoplasts emerge and fuse. Following fusion
a  thick-walled  zygospore  is  formed.  The  wall
appears to be basically cellulose, but callose and a
sporopollenin-like substance may also be present.
The  resting zygotes (termed “hypnozygotes”)  are
resistant to desiccation, and remain dormant for
at least three months. In Cosmarium, which may be
representative  of  the  placoderm  desmids  gener-

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND B

63

Figure 3.31. Micrasterias, a placoderm desmid. (a) Mature
individual preparatory to division. (b) Following division, the
beginning of regeneration of new half cell.

Figure 3.32. Spirogyra sp. Cytology of vegetative cell.

growing season, but factors such as nitrogen dep-
rivation, pH, and altitude (presumably because of
its relationship with mean temperature) have all
been found to inﬂuence it. Before conjugation the
two participating ﬁlaments must lie parallel and
come  close  together  (Fig.  3.33a).  The  necessary

adjusting  movements  are  probably  brought
about  by the  localized  secretion  of  mucilage.
Since solitary ﬁlaments show no directed move-
ment  the  ﬁrst approach  of  one  ﬁlament  to
another,  presumably  of  opposed  mating  type,
must  involve some  form of  chemotaxis.  Once
alignment  has  taken  place,  further  mucilage
secretion  holds  the  ﬁlaments  in  position  and
opposing  cells  begin  to form  protuberances
directed  toward each  other.  The  production  of
protuberances  is  not  necessarily  simultaneous,
and a cell may be touched by the protuberance of
its partner before it has itself become active. The
production of a similar structure is then immedi-
ately induced. The growth of the protuberances
pushes the ﬁlaments apart at the site of conjuga-
tion. If an unmated protuberance touches a cell
which has already formed a connection there is
no  further  response 
(Fig.  3.33c).  Eventually
growth of the protuberances ceases, the opposed
distal  walls  dissolve,  and  a  conjugation  tube  is
formed  between  the  two  cells.  With the  forma-
tion of the tube complex, physiological changes
take place  within  the  protoplasts.  There  is  an
increase in starch, and a decrease in permeability
and the osmotic pressure of the cell sap. Before
completion of the conjugation tube no sexual dif-
ferentiation  of  the  two  protoplasts  is  apparent,
but as soon as communication is established one
protoplast  withdraws  from  its  wall,  and  passes
slowly through the tube to fuse with its partner.
Since all the protoplasts in one ﬁlament behave in
the same way (Fig. 3.33c) it is legitimate to regard
one  ﬁlament  as  male  and  one  as  female.  After

64

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 2

Figure 3.33. Sexual reproduction
in the Conjugales. (a) Zygnema
stellinium. (b) Mougeotia parvula. (c)
Spirogyra setiformis. (d) Spirogyra
velata, germination of zygospore.
(After West and Fritsch. 1927. A
Treatise on the British Freshwater
Algae. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.)

fusion  the  chloroplast  of  the
male gamete is resorbed, and
the zygote contracts.

The process of conjugation
is  subject  to a number  of
variations.  In  Spirogyra,  for
example, adjacent cells of the
same ﬁlament may sometimes
conjugate.  In  Zygnema and
Mougeotia  the  zygote  is  often
formed  in  the  conjugation  tube  (Fig.  3.33b).
Sexual differentiation of a morphological nature
is  seen  in  Sirogonium.  Here  the  male  gametan-
gium,  regularly  associated  with  a  sterile  cell,  is
notably smaller than the female. In all instances
the zygote forms a spore (zygospore) with a thick
wall  containing  a  sporopollenin-like  material.
After a period of dormancy the spore germinates
and gives rise to a single ﬁlament (Fig. 3.33d). In
those  species  investigated,  meiosis  has  been
shown  to occur  before  germination,  but  three
nuclei  degenerate.  The  survival  of  only  one
meiotic  product  prevents  a  direct  analysis  of
Mendelian segregation.

There  are  evident  afﬁnities  in  relation  to
sexual reproduction between the Mesotaeniales,
Desmidiales  and  Zygnematales.  These  three
orders  have often  been  grouped  together  as  the
Conjugales.

The Coleochaetales
The  Coleochaetales  are  a  small  order  of  which
Coleochaete is  fully  representative  (Fig.  3.34).  The
genus  contains  many  freshwater  epiphytes.  The
habit is basically heterotrichous, but the prostrate
element is usually dominant. An exception is C. pul-
vinata in which the erect branches form a conspic-
uous hemispherical cushion. Sheathed bristles are
a characteristic feature of the thallus of Coleochaete.

The  prostrate  portion  of  some  species  of
Coleochaete (e.g.,  C. scutata,  often  epiphytic  on
leaves of the aquatic angiosperm Naias) becomes
parenchymatous.  A  phragmoplast  has  been
observed at cell division and the dividing walls are
penetrated by plasmodesmata.

reproduction
Coleochaete is also outstanding in certain features
of  its  oogamous  sexual  reproduction.  The  cells
which differentiate into oogonia terminate short
branches,  although  they may ultimately  appear
lateral  because  of  continued  growth from  the
penultimate vegetative cell. The oogonium devel-
ops a long neck, termed a trichogyne (Fig. 3.34b),
which opens at the tip when the egg is ready for
fertilization.  The  antheridia  arise  in  the  ﬁla-
ments, often just above the oogonium, and each
produces a single colorless spermatozoid. On lib-
eration they are attracted, presumably chemotac-
tically, to  the  receptive  spot  at  the  tip  of  the
trichogyne, and fertilization follows.

As  a  consequence  of  fertilization,  but  in  a
manner still unknown, the vegetative cells adja-
cent to the oogonium are stimulated into growth
and envelop the zygote in a continuous parenchy-
matous  sheath.  Symplastic  connections  between
the zygote and the covering cells are lacking, but
the  common  wall  may  develop  irregular  projec-

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND B

65

very similar structure is encountered again in the
motile male gametes of archegoniate plants (pp.
104, 153).

A  plant  with  a  thallus  resembling  that  of
Coleochaete was  Parka (Fig.  3.36)  from  the  Upper
Silurian  and  Lower  Devonian.  The  thallus  con-
sisted of a pseudoparenchymatous disk formed by
two  layers  of  ﬁlaments  radiating  from  a  central
holdfast. Sporangia, lying between the two layers,
yielded great numbers of spores. These had robust
laminate  walls,  but  chemical  analysis  gives  no
ﬁrm indication of the presence of sporopollenin.
There  was  no  obvious  germinal  aperture.  The
occasion of meiosis is naturally unknown, but the
very numerous  spores  suggest  that  it  may  have
been delayed until after the zygotic nucleus had
undergone a number of mitoses. Parka may there-
fore give an insight into the origin of a multicel-
lular 
the
charophycean  algae,  and  may  represent  a  form
transitional  between  the  algal  and  bryophytic
grades  of  reproduction.  However, despite  its
tempting characteristics, Parka appears after the
earliest  occurrences  of  bryophytic  and  vascular
plants,  and  cannot  be  considered  a  potential
ancestral form (cf. Protosalvinia, p. 93).

generation  within 

sporophyte 

in 

encountered 

The Charales
The Charales reach the highest level of differenti-
ation 
the  Chlorophyta.
Nevertheless  they remain  basically  similar  to
other Chlorophyta in pigmentation, metabolism
and the limited nature of their anatomy. There are
only six living genera, the remainder being fossil.
The living Chara and Nitella are common in base-
rich waters, particularly those which are not too

Figure 3.34. Coleochaete. (a) C. scutata, surface view. (b) C.
pulvinata, sexual reproductive structures. ((a) after West and
Fritsch. 1927. A Treatise on the British Freshwater Algae.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge; (b) after Pringsheim,
from Fritsch. 1935. The Structure and Reproduction of the Algae,
vol. 1. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.)

tions  suggestive  of  the  thickened  and  labyrin-
thine boundary found between the gametophyte
and embryo sporophyte in archegoniate plants (p.
103). The sheath eventually dies, but its cells con-
tribute  to the  wall  which  forms  around  the
resting zygote. This wall is acetolysis-resistant and
may  contain  sporopollenin,  although  polymer-
ized fatty acids are also a possibility. In the pros-
trate species the zygotes are retained in the parent
thallus.

After  a  resting  period  the  zygote  germinates
and  the  nucleus  undergoes  meiosis.  This  is  fol-
lowed by several mitoses giving rise to a plate of 16
or 32 wedge-shaped cells. The original wall of the
zygote eventually bursts and each cell liberates a
biﬂagellate swarmer. Asexual reproduction of the
parent thallus also takes place by the liberation of
single zoospores.

The motile cells of Coleochaete show a remark-
able  development,  referred  to as  a  multilayered
structure  (MLS),  beneath  the  basal  bodies  of  the
two ﬂagella. This consists of a ﬂat ribbon of about
100  microtubules  overlying  an  array  of  narrow
plates, each about 50nm deep and with a central
discontinuity  (Fig.  3.35).  The  alignment  of  the
microtubules  is  transverse  to that  of  the  plates.
One end of the ribbon continues without curva-
ture  into  the  body  of  the  cell  (Fig.  3.35,  right).
Although  minute,  the  MLS  is  very distinctive.  A

66

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 2

Lamellar 
strip

Microtubular 
ribbon

Scales on
surface of
zoospore

Mitochondrion

Figure 3.35. Coleochaete, zoospore. Section of the
multilayered structure (MLS) at the anterior of the cell. The
section is parallel to the alignment of the microtubules of the
microtubular ribbon (spline). The plates of the lamellar strip
are perpendicular to the microtubules and are consequently
cut transversely. The anterior edge of the MLS lies beneath
the basal bodies of the ﬂagella (not visible in this section).
The microtubular ribbon continues to the posterior of the
cell and is presumably an important structural element. Scale
bar 0.1 ␮m. (Electron micrograph by H. J. Sluiman. 1983.
Reproduced from Protoplasma 115, by permission of
Springer-Verlag, Vienna.) 

fast-moving  and  with  a  muddy  substratum  to
provide  anchorage.  A  few  Charales  are  found  in
brackish  waters  (e.g.,  Lamprothamnium).  Many
species develop an exoskeleton of calcium carbo-
nate (hence the name “stoneworts”). This is clearly
an ancient feature since charalean exoskeletons,
which  are  readily  preserved  as  fossils,  can  be
traced back as far as the Devonian.

The thallus of the Charales always possesses a
clear  main  axis,  growing  from  a  dome-shaped
apical  cell  (Fig.  3.37).  Segments  are  cut  off  at
regular intervals and in a single column from the
ﬂat base of this cell, and each segment immedi-
ately divides again by a transverse wall. The upper
cell of this division becomes a nodal initial, and
the lower, which does not divide again, an inter-
node cell. The nodal initials remain meristematic
and  give  rise  to whorls  of  branches,  mostly  of
limited  growth.  The  mature  plant  thus  has  a
morphology reminiscent of Draparnaldiopsis. The

internode cells often achieve remarkable lengths
(up to 10cm (4in.) or more in Nitella), and the cyto-
plasm commonly shows vigorous streaming, rates
of up to 100 ␮ms⫺1 being common. The streaming
persists in protoplasts extracted enzymically from
internodal cells, although these adopt a spherical
form. The chloroplasts, which are discoid and lack
pyrenoids,  are  however  little  affected  by the
streaming  since  they lie  in  an  outer,  less  active
layer  (ectoplasm).  The  streaming  is  associated
with actin microﬁlaments, about 50 ␮m in length,
accompanied by myosin, being present in a single
cell. The nucleus often fragments in mature cells.
Symplastic  continuity  is  preserved  in  Chara and
Nitella by the  presence  of  plasmodesmata.  These
have a structure quite similar to that of the plas-
modesmata of land plants.

The large size of the internode cells of Nitella
makes them ideal for studying permeability. It is
even possible to cut off the ends and wash out the
contents,  leaving  the  plasmalemma  intact.  The
biophysical properties of this membrane can then
be  investigated  without  interference  from  the
cytoplasm.

In  Nitella the  internodes  consist  only  of  the
single  internode  cell,  but  in  Chara this  becomes
surrounded  by a cortex  formed  of  rows  of  cells
growing down from the lower cells of the node.

Unlike  most  benthic  algae  the  Charales  are
usually anchored to a soft substrate. Attachment
is by colorless branched rhizoids which issue from
the  lower  subterranean  nodes.  The  rhizoids  are

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND B

67

Figure 3.36. Parka decipiens. An impression fossil from the
Old Red Sandstone, Forfar, Scotland. The prominences on
the surface of the thallus correspond to the position of the
sporangia within. Scale bar 1mm.

negatively  gravitropic  and  contain  aggregated
crystals of barium sulfate. These may act as stato-
liths, and by deﬂecting the ﬂow of Golgi vesicles
containing wall materials to one side of the cell
cause  differential  growth,  and  hence  curvature.
Little information is available about the extent to
which  the  rhizoids  take up  nutrients  from  the
substratum.

reproduction
Vegetative  propagation,  the  only  method  of
asexual  reproduction,  is  by the  formation  of
tuberous  outgrowths  on  subterranean  nodes  or
rhizoids. These become ﬁlled with starch and can
withstand unfavorable conditions. The nodal out-
growths  often  have a stellate  symmetry  (“starch
stars”).

Sexual reproduction is oogamous, and highly
specialized.  The  male  and  female  reproductive

structures,  which  consist  of  antheridia  and
oogonia  (sometimes  termed  oosporangia)  sur-
rounded  by envelopes  of  sterile  tissue,  are  sufﬁ-
ciently large to be seen with the naked eye. In both
monoecious and dioecious species, the antheridia
develop  just  below  the  insertions  of  the  lateral
appendages (Fig. 3.38). A complicated sequence of
divisions leads to the mature antheridium.

The eight peripheral cells of the original pri-
mordium  form the  wall  of  the  antheridium.
Attached to the inner surface of the wall are the
manubria. These rod-shaped receptacles give rise
to numerous  threads  of  spermatogenous  cells
(Fig. 3.39) which ﬁll the cavity of the antheridium.
Each  spermatogenous  cell  produces  a single
biﬂagellate spermatozoid.

In Chara, the spermatozoid has an osmiophilic
“headpiece”  at  the  anterior  end  (Fig.  3.40),  in
which the basal bodies of the ﬂagella, one slightly
ahead of the other, are embedded. The ﬂagella are
directed  obliquely  backward  and  extend  about
the  length  of  the  spermatozoid.  Before  release,
the mature spermatozoid is coiled in an anticlock-
wise sense (when viewed from the anterior end)

68

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 2

Figure 3.37. Chara. (a) Habit. (b) Detail of apex of main
axis. ((b) after Esser. 1976. Kryptogamen. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin.)

into  a  helix  of  21⁄2 gyres,  the  total  length  of  the
gamete being about 55␮m. Behind the headpiece
lies  a  row  of  about  30  mitochondria,  and  above
them a microtubular ribbon, 14–16 microtubules
wide  at  the  anterior  end,  but  expanding  to a
maximum  of  38  microtubules  toward the  poste-
rior. This ribbon runs into the tail of the gamete.
The nucleus takes the form of a narrow cylinder,
occupying about 11⁄2 gyres and reaching 17␮m in
length. The chromatin is longitudinally striated.
The terminal half-gyre of the helix is occupied by
six  starch-containing  plastids.  There  is  no  MLS
associated with the motile apparatus of the kind
seen in the zoospore of Coleochaete (Fig. 3.35), but
one has been reported in the spermatozoid of the
related Nitella. In general the spermatozoids, with
their  long  narrow  nuclei,  resemble  those  of  the
simpler archegoniate plants (Chapter 5). The walls
of the mature antheridia of the Charales are often
rendered bright red by accumulating carotenoids.
Oogonia, as they approach maturity, become
surrounded  by a spiral  of  elongated  vegetative

cells,  at  the  tip  of  which  short  columns  of
rounded  cells  come  together  as  a  corona  (Fig.
3.37). Within this sheath lies the egg cell (or oos-
phere) mother cell. This undergoes a single divi-
sion and cuts off a small sterile cell below, leaving
the  egg  cell  (oosphere)  above.  This  accumulates
food reserves, increasing its major diameter from
about 40 to 600 ␮m and its volume by a factor of
about 3000. The cytoplasm becomes dense and dif-
ﬁcult to ﬁx satisfactorily for ultrastructural exam-
ination.  Spermatozoids  penetrate  slits  which
appear  in  the  coronal  region,  and  fertilization
occurs at a small clear area near the apex of the
egg, the so-called “receptive spot”. After fertiliza-
tion  a  cellulose  membrane  is  secreted  by the
zygote. This, together with the wall of the oogo-
nium and the inner walls of the spiral cells, which
become  thickened  and  indurated  and  in  which
sporopollenin  has  been  reported,  enclose  the
zygote in an almost impervious jacket, often rein-
forced externally with calcium carbonate.

Germination,  which  occurs  after  a  resting
period, is promoted by red light, indicating that it
is  controlled  by a phytochrome  system.  Meiosis
almost certainly occurs at germination, but it has

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND B

69

Figure 3.38. Chara sp. Male and
female reproductive organs.

Figure 3.39. Chara. (a) Antheridial ﬁlaments. (b)
Differentiating spermatozoids in cells of ﬁlament.

70

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 2

Figure 3.40. Chara. Mature
spermatozoid, as at liberation. A
headpiece (HP) lies at the anterior
end of the gamete. Behind this are
the two basal bodies (BB). A row of
mitochondria (M) begins below the
ﬂagella (F) before their emergence
and continues into the posterior of
the gamete. A ribbon of
microtubules, about 14
microtubules wide at its initiation,
also begins near the headpiece and
runs posteriorly, increasing in width
as it enters the mid-portion of the
gamete. The nucleus (N),
accompanied on its outer side by
the microtubular ribbon (S),
occupies about 11⁄2 of the posterior
gyres. The last half-gyre is occupied
by about six plastids (P) with
prominent starch. The gamete
measures about 55␮m from head to
tail, and is sinistrally coiled into 21⁄2
gyres. (From Duncan, Renzaglia and
Garbary. 1997. Plant Systematics and
Evolution 204.)

been little investigated because of cytological dif-
ﬁculties.  Apparently  only  one  of  the  tetrad  of
nuclei so produced remains intact; the remainder
degenerate. Division of the intact nucleus leads to
the production of two cells, which, as the mem-
branes of the zygote break open at the apex, yield
from  the  one  a  rhizoid  and  from  the  other  an
erect  green  ﬁlament.  This  ﬁlament  is  the  proto-
nema,  a  stage  of  development  peculiar,  in  the
Chlorophyta, to the Charales. Cell divisions occur
in the protonema, and it differentiates into nodes
and internodes. The ﬁrst node gives rise to rhiz-
oids and additional protonema, and the second to
a whorl of laterals, one of them developing into a
normal  main  axis  and  the  others  into  yet  more
protonema.  The  mature  plants  thus  arise  at
lateral branches of protonemal ﬁlaments.

At least one species of Chara has been shown to
be  parthenogenetic,  but  aberrations  of  the  life
cycle have been little investigated.

rel ationships
The relationships of the Charales are largely spec-
ulative.  The  fossils  show  that  they are  an

extremely ancient type of algal organization, even
fossilized  reproductive  organs  and,  more  com-
monly, zygotes (Gyrogonites) being recognizable in
rocks  as  old  as  the  Devonian.  A  charophyte
(Palaeonitella)  parasitized  by a fungus  has  been
observed in the Rhynie Chert (p. 27).

The small discoid chloroplasts of the Charales
are  more  like  those  of  the  higher  plants  than
those of Chlorophyta generally, but there is no evi-
dence  that  terrestrial  plants  came  directly  from
Chara-like ancestors. The Charales share with the
desmids  and  Spirogyra the  presence  of  barium
sulfate crystals in the cells, and whorled branch-
ing and an archegonium-like oogonium are repre-
sented in Draparnaldia and Coleochaete respectively.
Although there may be distant relationships, the
Charales are best regarded as a highly specialized,
and  in  certain  ecological  situations  highly  suc-
cessful,  order  of  aquatic  plants,  long  separated
from  the  main  trends  of  algal  evolution.  They
seem to have reached their maximum representa-
tion in Jurassic times and their diversity is prob-
ably less now than formerly.

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND B

71

Pleurastrophyceae
The small class Pleurastrophyceae contains ﬂagel-
late, coccoid and ﬁlamentous forms, mostly fresh-
water  and  occasionally  terrestrial.  The  basal
bodies  of  the  ﬂagella  of  the  motile  stages  show
characteristically a counterclockwise orientation
(Fig. 2.2B), in contrast to the clockwise orientation
found  in  the  Chlorophyceae.  The  most  notable
genus  currently  included  here  is  Trentepohlia
(sometimes placed in a separate class), worldwide
in distribution and common in warm moist situa-
tions. The heterotrichous thallus grows on rocks,
bark  and  shaded  leaves,  as  well  as  on  soil  and
humus,  and  is  often  conspicuous  for  its  orange,
rather than green, appearance. The cell walls are
thick and often layered, and this feature probably
accounts for the ability of the alga to resist desic-
cation. When growth is inhibited, as in conditions
of drought, there is a marked increase in the pig-
mentation of the cells, and concurrently an accu-
mulation  of  fat,  in  which  the  red  pigment
(hematochrome)  is  dissolved.  Some  species  of
Trentepohlia are components of lichens.

Reproduction
Asexual reproduction is by biﬂagellate zoospores,
and  takes  place  only  in  damp  conditions.
Sporangia  may  be  sessile  or  stalked.  The  stalked
sporangia are often distributed by wind, the liber-
ation of the zoospores taking place in damp con-
ditions. Purely vegetative propagation also occurs
by dispersal of fragments of the prostrate system.
Isogamous  sexual  reproduction  has  been
reported  in  some  species.  A  multilayered  struc-
ture has been detected in the motile cells, but it is
not 
in  the
Charophyceae. There is some evidence for an iso-
morphic  life  cycle,  the  sporophyte  producing
quadriﬂagellate zoospores meiotically, so re-estab-
lishing the gametophytic phase.

identical  with  that  occurring 

Trebouxia is  a  widespread  member  of  the
Pleurastrophyceae.  It  is  unicellular,  the  cells
sometimes forming rectangular packets (sarcinoid
colonies).  The  cells  contain  a  prominent  stellate
chloroplast with a central pyrenoid. Reproduction
is  by biﬂagellate  zoospores  or  by autospores.
Trebouxia is a component of many lichens.

Evolution within the Chlorophyta
It is reasonable to regard the unicellular forms as
relicts of the most primitive green algae, and this
is  supported  by comparisons  of  nucleotide
sequences  in  ribosomal  RNA.  Diversiﬁcation
can be  envisaged  as  being  accompanied  by a
progression  toward colonial,  coenobial  and  ﬁla-
mentous  organization,  this  taking  place  in  a
number  of  parallel  lines  resulting  in  the  major
classes recognized today. In Table 3.1 the classes
are placed according to the level of organization
reached by their thalli. Ultrastructural and molec-
ular  studies  reveal,  however, that  evolution  has
not  followed  simple  linear  paths  as  Table  3.1
might suggest. The positional relationships of the
basal  bodies  (Fig.  2.2),  for  example,  in  ﬂagellate
unicells and motile stages of multicellular forms
show  phylogenetic  heterogeneity.  The  11
o’clock–5 o’clock and 1 o’clock–7 o’clock arrange-
ments,  in  particular,  appear  to have  emerged
several times independently in different alliances.
Eukaryotic forms presumably arose from the
prokaryotic,  as  discussed  in  relation  to the
Rhodophyta (p. 36). Although Prochloron immedi-
ately excites interest as a possible ancestor of the
“a⫹b” plastid, there are substantial differences in
the carotenoids. A direct relationship is now con-
sidered unlikely (p. 39).

There  are,  however, compelling  reasons  for
regarding the Charophyceae as being close to the
algae from which the land plants arose. This is dis-
cussed further in Chapter 5.

EUGLENOPHYTA
Habitat Freshwater, a few marine.
Pigments Chlorophylls a, b; ␤-carotene; diadino-
xanthin, other xanthophylls less prominent.

Food reserve Paramylum.
Cell wall components No cell wall, but a pellicle

containing a helically arranged structural
protein present in many.

Reproduction Asexual, sexual doubtful, but if

present isogamous.

Growth form Predominantly unicellular, ﬂagel-

late.

Flagella Two, but only one (rarely two) emerging

from the gullet, Flimmer, anterior.

72

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 2

Table 3.1
The living green algae arranged according to the level of complexity attained in their respective classes,
and their relative position in the evolution of “a ⫹b” plants. The relationships between the classes appear too remote
to indicate affinities. A class which has reached a thalloid level of organization may nevertheless retain flagellate
forms (e.g., Chlamydomonas within the Chlorophyceae). The lateral displacements represent an estimate of the dis-
tance of the classes named from the line of evolution leading to the land plants.

,
s
u
o
t
n
e
m
a

l
i

F

r,
a
u

l

l
l

i

e
c
n
U

s
u
o
e
c
a
n
o
h
p
i
s

l

i

a
n
o
o
c

l

e
s
o

l
l

a
h
t
 
r
o

l

i

a
b
o
n
e
o
c
 
r
o

Land plants

Charophyceae

Chlorophyceae

Ulvophyceae

Pleurastrophyceae

Prasinophyceae

? Amoeboid forms

Prokaryotic forms

35°C  (95°F),  when  cell  division  proceeds  faster
than chloroplast ﬁssion so that some cells eventu-
ally lack them altogether. Similar colorless races
can  also  be  produced  by low concentrations  of
streptomycin,  a  drug  which  inhibits  chloroplast
replication.  It  seems  probable  that  naturally
heterotrophic  species  have evolved  by spontane-
ous loss of plastids from autotrophic forms.

Although heterotrophic nutrition, a feature of
animals,  is  common  in  the  Euglenophyta,  the
evidence  points  to the  ability  to ingest  organic
food  materials  being  a  secondary 
feature.
Heterotrophic  nutrition,  both  facultative  and
obligate,  is  in  fact  known  in  many other  algae.
Examples are provided by the Cyanophyta, and by
Polytoma (Volvocales)  and  Prototheca 
(Chloro-
coccales)  in  the  Chlorophyta.  The  Euglenophyta
are  nevertheless  outstanding  in  the  extent  to
which they have developed this facility. Similarly
a  cell  wall,  absent  in  the  Euglenophyta  and
animal  cells  generally, is  by no  means  always
present in other ﬂagellate unicellular algae. It is
lacking for example in Dunaliella (p. 42), otherwise
similar  to Chlamydomonas,  and  in  Micromonas (p.
11).  Flagellate  zoospores  and  gametes  are  also
commonly naked.

The  mode  of  nutrition  and  presence  or
absence of a cell wall thus appear to be relatively

Figure 3.41. Euglena spirogyra. Reconstruction of cell based
on photo- and electron micrographs. (From Leedale, Meeuse
and Pringsheim. 1965. Archiv für Mikrobiologie 50.)

The Euglenophyta have been assigned to both the
plant  and  animal  kingdoms,  since  the  division
contains  both  green  autotrophic  and  colorless
heterotrophic  forms.  Many  of  the  autotrophic
Euglenophyta are also able to thrive in the dark if
supplied with suitable metabolites, so they can be
regarded as facultative heterotrophs. Races free of
chloroplasts can be raised by growing cultures at

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND B

73

Figure 3.42. The tip of the
ﬂagellum of Euglena gracilis showing
the “Flimmer” hairs. Shadowed
preparation. Scale bar 1 µm.
(Electron micrograph by G. F.
Leedale. © Biophoto Associates.)

lakoids. A pyrenoid is present,
but  the  storage  product  para-
mylum (a  ␤-1,3-linked glucan)
is  formed  outside  the  chloro-
plast.  The  paramylum  gran-
ules are highly crystalline and
bounded  by a single  mem-
brane.  The  nucleus  lies  in  or
near the posterior half of the
cell and chromosomes remain
contracted  throughout  inter-
phase,  recalling  the  situation  in  the  dinoﬂagel-
lates  (p.  96).  At the  anterior  end  of  the  cell  is  a
small  invagination,  the  gullet,  which  in  hetero-
trophic forms may serve for the ingestion of food.
A system of vacuoles discharges at intervals into
the gullet and provides for osmoregulation. There
are  two  ﬂagella,  only  one  of  which,  normally
Flimmer (Fig. 3.42), emerges through the mouth
of  the  gullet.  The  base  of  this  ﬂagellum  bears  a
thickening, believed to be a photoreceptor, close
to the stigma in the adjacent cytoplasm.

Possibly  belonging  to the  heterotrophic
Euglenophyta is Scytomonas, a common intestinal
parasite.  Its  cytology  closely  resembles  that  of
Euglena,  and  paramylum  and  fat  occur  as  food
reserves.

Reproduction
Binary ﬁssion is the common method of reproduc-
tion of the Euglenophyta. By the end of nuclear
division  the  locomotor  apparatus  is  replicated
and cleavage of the whole cell proceeds from the
anterior  to the  posterior  end.  Nuclear  division
resembling  meiosis  has  been  reported,  but  well-
established  instances  of  sexual  reproduction  in
the Euglenophyta are lacking.

Although  predominantly  ﬂagellate,  a  few
Euglenophyta  are  encapsulated  and  form den-
droid colonies. These can be regarded as the result
of developmental trends from the ﬂagellate state
which  parallel  those  in  other  algal  groups,  but

plastic features at the ﬂagellate level of organiza-
tion.  It  should  be  noted  however  that  although
there is evidence that photosynthetic activity has
been lost in the course of evolution, resulting in
heterotrophic forms, there is no indication that it
has been spontaneously acquired. 

Euglena,  representative  of  the  Euglenales,  is
normally autotrophic, the cells containing several
discoid or band-like chloroplasts (Fig. 3.41). Each
has  a  compound  envelope  of  three  membranes,
the outer of which is continuous with the endo-
plasmic reticulum. Some species abound in water
rich  in  organic  material,  such  as  seepage  from
dunghills  and  farmyards,  while  others  occur  on
damp  mud  by rivers,  salt  marshes  and  similar
places.

The cell is retained in a characteristic spindle-
like  shape  by a rigid  outer  layer  of  cytoplasm
termed a pellicle. Electron microscopy has shown
that  the  pellicle  contains  a  band-like  proteina-
ceous  component  wound  in  several  helices
around  the  cell.  This  structural  protein  lies
against the plasmalemma and is associated with
microtubules. In those species in which the pelli-
cle  is  ﬂexible  a  ﬂowing  peristaltic  movement  is
commonly  observed,  particularly  if  ﬂagellar
movement is constrained or the ﬂagella are shed.
The  causes  of  this  “metabolic”  movement  are
obscure. The chloroplasts lie toward the periphery
of  the  less  viscous  cytoplasm,  and  the  lamellae
characteristically  consist  of  three  appressed  thy-

74

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 2

which  have reached  only  a  rudimentary  level
of morphological  complexity.  The  Eutreptiales
differ from the Euglenales in being biﬂagellate.

Relationships 
The relationships of the Euglenophyta with other
algae are obscure. In the presence of chlorophylls
a and  b they resemble  the  Chlorophyta,  but  the
carotenoid composition of the plastids is signiﬁ-
cantly  different.  The  ability  of  Euglena to grow
heterotrophically  in  the  absence  of  plastids  is
unique amongst the algae. This would be in line
with the view that Euglena originated from a ﬂag-

ellated  heterotroph  which  had  ingested  plastids
from another source. The third outer membrane
of the chloroplast envelope would then represent
the  bounding  membrane  of  the  food  vacuole  of
the  original  protozoan.  Assuming  the  photosyn-
thetic  activity  of  the  plastid  remained  unim-
paired,  the  composite  organism  would  be
effectively  phototrophic.  Any  relationship  with
the  Chlorophyta  would  be  correspondingly
remote and indirect. This would be in agreement
with the observed biochemical and metabolic dif-
ferences  between  the  Chlorophyta  and  the
Euglenophyta.

4

The subkingdom Algae: Part 3

Algae containing chlorophylls
a and c

Although  chlorophyll  a is  always  present  in  the
algae to be considered in this chapter, the amount
of chlorophyll c is sometimes small. Chlorophyll b
is always absent (but see Dinophyta, p. 95).

The “a⫹c” algae show a number of organiza-
tional  trends  resembling  those  seen  in  the
Chlorophyta.  There  are  also  features  not  repre-
sented in living Chlorophyta, but possibly present
at  some  stage  in  their  evolutionary  history.  The
chlorophyll  c-containing  algae  are  sometimes
referred  to collectively  as  the  “chromophyte
algae”.  The  ﬁrst four  divisions  considered  here
constitute the “heterokont algae” (Table. 2.1), and
have a number of basic features in common, relat-
ing  principally  to the  ﬂagella  and  chloroplasts.
Besides (where two are present) the inequality and
difference  in  ornamentation  of  the  ﬂagella,  the
chloroplast is typically surrounded (in addition to
its  normal  envelope)  by a fold  of  endoplasmic
reticulum. This “chloroplast endoplasmic reticu-
lum” is part of the general endoplasmic system,
connected  with  the  outer  membrane  of  the
nuclear envelope. It is not, however, conﬁned to
the  heterokonts,  but  is  found  also  in  the
Haptophyta  (p.  93)  and  Cryptophyta  (p.  96),
not regarded  as  closely  allied  to the  heterokont
algae.

CHRYSOPHYTA
Habitat Aquatic (mainly freshwater), often

common in plankton.

Pigments Chlorophylls a, c; ␤-carotene; fucoxan-

thin conspicuous, but other xanthophylls
also present.

Food reserves Fat, chrysolaminarin (leucosin).
Cell wall components Cellulose, hemicelluloses,

often with siliceous scales.

Reproduction Asexual, occasionally sexual.
Growth forms Flagellate, coccoid, colonial,

rarely ﬁlamentous; amoeboid stages in some
forms.

Flagella Two unequal (one Flimmer, usually the
longer), or one (Flimmer), anterior; in some
uniﬂagellate forms a second present as a
stump detectable only with the electron
microscope.

chloroplasts 

(chromatophores)), 

Although the Chrysophyta are strikingly different
in  color  (the  cells  usually  contain  two  golden-
brown 
the
members  of  this  division  show  many  growth
forms resembling those found in the Chlorophyta.
The  highest  levels  of  organization  attained
however are only the simple ﬁlament and small
discoid  parenchymatous  thalli,  suggesting  that
evolution,  although  parallel,  has  also  been  very
much slower than in the green algae.

The  Chrysophyta  are  of  considerable  interest
from the physiological and biochemical points of
view. The  characteristic  food  reserve,  chrysola-
minarin,  contained  in  solution  in  special  vac-
uoles, is a ␤-1,3 glucan. The frequent occurrence of
silica is also notable. Ecologically they are often
important  components  of  plankton.  The  marine
Aureococcus is  well  known  for  its  production  of
recurrent  “brown  tides”  along  the  east  coast  of

76

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 3

Figure 4.1. (a) Ochromonas. (b)
Mallomonas. (After Scagel, Bandoni,
Rouse, Schoﬁeld, Stein and Taylor.
1966. An Evolutionary Survey of the
Plant Kingdom. Wadsworth,
Belmont.)

North  America,  sometimes
reducing the light intensity on
the  sea  bed  sufﬁciently  to
cause  the  death  of  marine
angiosperms such as Zostera.

of 

Flagellate forms
The  ﬂagellate  habit  is  repre-
sented by a number of species,
often  referred  to as  the  chry-
somonads, some of which are
able to alter their shapes and
method 
locomotion.
Ochromonas,  for  example,  is  commonly  pear-
shaped, with two unequal ﬂagella (one up to six
times  the  length  of  the  other)  emerging  from  a
depression  at  the  anterior  end 
(Fig.  4.1a).
Sometimes  however  it  may  lose  this  shape  and
produce  narrow  outgrowths  (rhizopodia),  the
ﬂagella being lost. This amoeboid phase may also
pass  over  temporarily  into  a  thick-walled  cyst.
Ochromonas is  also  nutritionally  versatile  and  at
least one species is capable of feeding on a unicel-
lular blue-green alga.

assisting  ﬂotation. 

In  the  common  planktonic  Mallomonas (Fig.
4.1b) the pectinaceous wall is covered with imbri-
cating  siliceous  scales,  some  of  which  bear  deli-
cate hinged needles, often as long as the cell itself,
possibly 
curious
Silicoﬂagellineae  (Dictyochales)  are  also  placed
with  the  Chrysophyta.  These  are  uniﬂagellate
planktonic organisms furnished with an intracel-
lular  siliceous  skeleton.  The  cell  has  little  or  no
wall, and produces rhizopodia. Although the silic-
oﬂagellates are now rare, their skeletons are well
known as fossils from the Tertiary onward, indi-
cating former abundance.

The 

The  longer  ﬂagellum  in  Ochromonas is  fur-
nished  with  mastigonemes  which  themselves
bear  minute  ﬁlaments.  Electron  microscopy  has
shown that, after beginning their assembly in the
perinuclear  space,  the  mastigonemes  are  trans-

ferred to Golgi vesicles, where the ﬁlaments are
added. They then pass, still in vesicles, to the site
of emergence of the ﬂagellum, and appear in two
rows  on  the  ﬂagellar  surface.  The  cells  of  some
unicellular  chrysophytes  are  invested  with  elab-
orate  scales.  Those  of  Sphaleromantis tetragona,  a
species of freshwater ponds, for example, resem-
ble miniature ﬂower pots attached at their bases.
These  are  also  assembled  in  Golgi  vesicles  and
passed to the exterior.

Palmelloid and coccoid forms
A number of these are commonly encountered in
the ﬁeld. Synura forms a free-ﬂoating colony in the
plankton  of  drinking-water  reservoirs.  The  indi-
vidual cells are similar to Mallomonas, but are held
together  in  a  gelatinous  mucilage.  Hydrurus,
which  forms  brownish  layers  on  rocks  in  alpine
streams, is similar but the mucilaginous matrix
branches  irregularly. In  Dinobryon (Fig.  4.2a),  fre-
quent in both fresh water and the sea, the cells are
elongate,  and  each  is  enclosed  in  a cellulose
sheath.  The  sheaths  are  commonly  connected
head to tail.

Filamentous and thalloid forms
The  only  ﬁlamentous 
is
Phaeothamnion (Fig. 4.2b), found on rocks in rapidly
ﬂowing  streams.  The  club-shaped  cells  form

form of  note 

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND C

77

branching  ﬁlaments  which  readily  disarticulate
when disturbed.

The  thalloid  forms  are  few. Chrysothallus is
found  as  small  parenchymatous  disks,  epiphytic
upon  the  cartilage-like  stalks  of  the  colonial
pennate  diatom  Gomphonema (p.  82)  in  Lake 
Baikal.

Reproduction
Reproduction  of  the  Chrysophyta  is  predomi-
nantly asexual, longitudinal ﬁssion being charac-
teristic of the unicellular ﬂagellates. In Dinobryon
one  product  of  the  division  moves  out  of  the
sheath  and  forms  a  new  sheath  attached  to the
rim of the old, accounting for the characteristic
form of the colony. Copulation of ﬂagellated cells
has been observed in some instances. A life cycle
has  been  demonstrated  in  Synura.  The  colonies
may apparently be male or female. Gametes from
the male swim to the female and fuse with female
gametes. The gametes are indistinguishable from
vegetative cells, and copulation is isogamous. The
zygote forms a cyst surrounded by a siliceous wall.
Meiosis  probably  occurs  on  germination.  In
general, however, little is known of the life histo-
ries of the Chrysophyceae.

XANTHOPHYTA
Habitat Aquatic (mostly freshwater), damp soil.
Pigments Chlorophylls a, c,(e); ␤-carotene;

heteroxanthin, diadinoxanthin, diatoxan-
thin, vaucheriaxanthin.

Food reserves Fats, chrysolaminarin.
Cell wall components Cellulose, hemicellulose.
Reproduction Asexual and sexual, in some

forms oogamous.

Growth forms Flagellate, coccoid, colonial, ﬁla-

mentous, siphonaceous.

Flagella Typically two, strikingly unequal, the

larger usually Flimmer.

In  this  division  the  amount  of  chlorophyll  c is
again often small. Chlorophyll e, reported to occur
in some members, is now regarded as possibly a
breakdown  product  of  chlorophylls  a or  c.  The
absence of fucoxanthin from the plastids causes
the Xanthophyta to be yellow-green in appearance
compared with the Chrysophyta. Despite the rela-
tively  few  representatives,  the  division  again

shows a series of growth forms paralleling those
of the Chlorophyta. In the Xanthophyta the organ-
ization attained exceeds that in the Chrysophyta.
Vaucheria, for example, has a well-established siph-
onaceous habit and complex oogamy.

The inequality of the ﬂagella, and their inser-
tion to one side of the apex, are typically hetero-
kont.  The  cell  walls  in  many  forms  show  a
tendency to fall into two halves. The chloroplasts
are  green,  but,  in  contrast  to those  of  the
Chlorophyta,  they will  often  turn  blue  in  dilute
hydrochloric acid.

Flagellate and coccoid forms
Representative of the simplest ﬂagellate forms is
Chloromeson from the Baltic, resembling in organ-
ization  the  chrysophyte  Ochromonas,  and,  of  the
coccoid, Chlorobotrys (now sometimes placed in a
separate class, Eustigmatophyceae, on account of
the apparent absence of chlorophyll c, and a pecu-
liar kind of eyespot lying in the cytoplasm outside
the  chloroplast).  Chlorobotrys regularis (Fig.  4.3a),
common in bog and fen pools, has a spherical cell
resembling Chlorella. Several cells are usually held
together  in  mucilage  forming  a  free-ﬂoating
colony. Myxochloris (Fig.  4.4)  is  found  not  infre-
quently  as  a  naked  amoeboid  plasmodium  with
conspicuous  chloroplasts 
inside  the  hyaline
water-storage cells of the bog moss Sphagnum (p.
118).

Filamentous forms
Of  the  ﬁlamentous  forms  Tribonema (Fig.  4.3b)  is
the most notable. The short unbranched threads
are  encountered  in  fresh  water  and  on  damp
earth,  usually  in  base-rich  situations.  It  is  often
accompanied  by iron  bacteria  with  the  conse-
quence  that  the  ﬁlaments  become  stained  by
rusty-brown deposits of ferric carbonate. The cell
wall is clearly made up of two overlapping halves.
Consequently  the  ﬁlament,  when  disrupted,
breaks  up  into  a  number  of  pieces  H-shaped  in
optical  section,  closely  resembling  the  situation
in  the  green  alga  Microspora (p.  52).  It  is  the  H-
shaped  piece,  rather  than  the  complete  cell,
which is the basic unit of the ﬁlament so far as the
wall is concerned. At cell division, instead of the
usual septum being formed, a new H-shape is pro-
duced at the center of the parent cell. Internally,

78

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 3

Figure 4.2. (a) Dinobryon
cylindricum. (b) Phaeothamnion. ((a)
after West and Fritsch. 1927. A
Treatise on the British Freshwater
Algae. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.)

Figure 4.3. (a) Chlorobotrys
regularis. Above, individual cells and
germinating cyst; below, aggregate of
cells held together in mucilage. (b)
Tribonema bombicinum. (After West
and Fritsch. 1927. A Treatise on the
British Freshwater Algae. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.)

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND C

79

Figure 4.4. Myxochloris. Plasmodia in a water-storage cell in
a leaf of Sphagnum. The plasmodia show slow amoeboid
movement. Chloroplasts and lipid droplets are prominent. As
the leaf ages the plasmodia form single-celled cysts which, on
germination, yield typical heterokont biﬂagellate zoospores,
providing for the spread of the alga in carpets of the moss.
Scale bar 25␮m. (From Pascher. 1930. Archiv für
Protistenkunde 72).

the cell organelles are disposed in much the same
way as they are in Microspora, except that several
lenticular  plastids  occupy  the  peripheral  cyto-
plasm,  instead  of  a  single  band-like  plastid.
Although the cells normally have a single nucleus
there is evidence in some species of multinucleate
cells, perhaps indicating a transition to a coeno-
cytic condition.

Siphonaceous forms
The simplest of these is Botrydium (Fig. 4.5), super-
ﬁcially similar to Protosiphon (p. 45), but differing
in its forked rhizoid, and its ability to divide vege-
tatively. The  multinucleate  cells,  reaching  up  to
2mm (0.08in.) in diameter and containing numer-
ous  disk-shaped  chloroplasts,  are  frequently
encountered on damp mud. Vaucheria (Fig. 4.6) is
ﬁlamentous and branched, the single cell contain-
ing  numerous  nuclei  and  chloroplasts.  The
chloroplasts move in relation to light, the greatest
exposure occurring at low irradiances. The action

Figure 4.5. Botrydium granulatum.

Figure 4.6. Vaucheria, reproductive organs. (a) Release of
zoospore. (b) Gametangia.

spectrum  indicates  that  the  photoreceptor  is
probably a ﬂavoprotein. Various species are found
in fresh water and on damp earth, some becoming
greenhouse  pests.  In  terrestrial  situations  color-
less rhizoids attach the thallus to the substratum.

80

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 3

Some species become encrusted with calcium car-
bonate and contribute to the formation of tufa.

Reproduction
Asexual  reproduction  in  Botrydium is  by hetero-
kont zoospores generated and released when the
parent plant is ﬂooded. In dry conditions aplanos-
pores  may  be  produced,  or  even  cysts,  from  the
rhizoidal  regions.  Tribonema reproduces  vegeta-
tively by fragmentation of the ﬁlament and asex-
ually by the production of biﬂagellate zoospores.
These are produced singly or in pairs in the parent
cells and released by separation of the two halves.
In place of zoospores the cells of the ﬁlament may
sometimes give rise to thick-walled aplanospores.
As  these  germinate  the  protoplast  enlarges  and
causes the wall to fall into two pieces revealing its
structural similarity to the walls of the ﬁlament.
Asexual  reproduction  in  Vaucheria occurs  fre-
quently, and involves the formation of a peculiar
zoospore (Fig. 4.6). The apical region of a ﬁlament,
rich  in  oil  droplets  and  plastids,  is  cut  off  by a
transverse  septum.  The  many  nuclei  within  this
segment  migrate to  the  periphery  of  the  proto-
plast, and opposite each nucleus emerges a pair of
slightly unequal ﬂagella. The tip of the ﬁlament
becomes  gelatinous,  and  a  multiﬂagellate  zoo-
spore (synzoospore), which can be regarded as a
mass  of  unseparated  uninucleate  zoospores,
escapes. On coming to rest the ﬂagella disappear,
a wall is secreted, and the zoospore begins to ger-
minate. Two or three ﬁlaments emerge from the
spore, one of which usually acts as a holdfast. In
some species, particularly the terrestrial, aplanos-
pores lacking ﬂagella are produced in a manner
similar to that of the synzoospores. The spore is
liberated  by breakdown  of  the  sporangial  wall,
and  germination  may  begin  before  liberation  is
complete.

Sexual  reproduction,  involving  isogamy, has
been  reported  in  Tribonema and  Botrydium,  but
reaches  its  fullest  expression  in  the  oogamous
Vaucheria (Fig. 4.6). The onset of the reproductive
phase is indicated by the formation of antheridia.
The tip of a lateral branch, in which many nuclei,
but few plastids, accumulate, is cut off by a trans-
verse  septum.  The  cytoplasm  becomes  appor-
tioned between the nuclei, and each uninucleate
protoplast  then  differentiates  into  a  biﬂagellate

gamete. Meanwhile the female organ develops, in
many  species  next  to the  male  on  the  same
ﬁlament.  Although  the  oogonium  is  initially
multinucleate  at  maturity  it  contains  a  single
uninucleate  egg  cell.  When  the  egg  is  mature  a
short beak develops asymmetrically at the apex of
the oogonium and the egg becomes accessible to
the  male  gametes.  Only  one  penetrates  the  egg
cell, and its nucleus comes to lie by that of the egg,
not  fusing  with  it  until  it  has  swollen  to an
approximately equal volume. The zygote becomes
surrounded by a highly impervious wall and may
remain dormant for several months. Germination
leads to the formation of a new ﬁlament. Meiosis
appears to occur during formation of the gametes,
the life cycle thus being diplontic.

Since in most species of Vaucheria fusion takes
place between gametes from the same ﬁlament,
sexual reproduction provides for little more than
the  interpolation  of  a  resting  stage  in  the  life
cycle. A few species, however, are dioecious, allow-
ing the possibility of genetic recombination.

The limited evolution of the Xanthophyta
If,  as  seems  probable,  the  Xanthophyta  are  the
result of a line of evolution from some ancestral
motile form, parallel to that of the Chlorophyta,
the problem immediately arises of why the rate of
evolution has been so much slower. It is possible
that  relatively  infrequent  sexual  reproduction
and  its  limitation  to self-mating  (as  in  most
species  of  Vaucheria)  have been  a  continuous
feature  of  the  Xanthophyta.  This  would  have
limited  the  opportunity  for  genetic  recombina-
tion  and 
forms.
Biochemical  features  associated  with  the  differ-
ent pigmentation may also have restrained varia-
tion and evolutionary success. Fossil information
about the evolution of the division is almost non-
existent, but remains of minute coenocytic algae,
closely resembling species of Vaucheria, have been
found  in  deposits  900–1000  years  old  in  eastern
Siberia.

the  appearance  of  new 

B ACILLARIOPHYTA
Habitat Aquatic and terrestrial.
Pigments Chlorophylls a, c; ␤- (and possibly ⑀-)
carotene; diatoxanthin, diadinoxanthin,
fucoxanthin.

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND C

81

Food reserves Fat, chrysolaminarin.
Cell wall components Cells box-like, wall consist-

ing of two halves, one half ﬁtting over the
other like a lid. Hemicelluloses, silica, often
with a matrix of sulfated polysaccharides.

Reproduction Asexual and sexual (anisogamous

and oogamous).

Growth forms Unicellular, colonial.
Flagella One Flimmer (in some forms lacking the

central pair of microtubules); anterior.
(Present only in the male gametes of centric
diatoms.)

The Bacillariophyta, commonly known as the
diatoms, are a large division of microscopic
algae with intricately sculptured, siliceous walls.
The bilateral or radial symmetry of the cells,
and the regularity of the delicate markings on
their walls (Fig. 4.7), make the diatoms very
beautiful microscopic objects, rivaling even the
desmids.

The  diatoms  are  frequent  in  freshwater  and
marine  phytoplankton  and  are  therefore  of  eco-
nomic importance in the management of ﬁsher-
ies. Some species play a rôle in maintaining the
nutritional  status  of  the  planktonic  fauna  and
ﬂora  as  a  whole.  The  marine  centric  diatom
Rhizosolenia, for example, forms mats, a few square
centimeters  in  area,  which  rise  and  fall  in  the
ocean (possibly in consequence of ﬂuctuations in
their content of starch). Investigation of samples
in  the  Paciﬁc  has  shown  that  rising  mats  are
richer in nitrates and other minerals than falling
mats. They evidently provide a supply of essential
minerals  to the  surface  from  deeper  waters.
Nitrogen-ﬁxing  blue-green  algae  have also  been
found  associated  with  Rhizosolenia  mats.  Other
diatoms are benthic and live upon rocks or sand,
or as epiphytes.

The siliceous walls of the diatoms resist disso-
lution and decay after the death of the organism,
and those of the planktonic species accumulate as
fossils on beds of lakes and seas (Fig. 4.7). Since the
composition  of  the  diatom  ﬂora  is  dependent
upon  pH  of  the  water, ﬂoristic  analysis  of  lake
deposits can give an indication of environmental
trends over a long period of time. Huge deposits of
these  “diatomaceous  earths”  (Kieselguhr)  are
known from the Tertiary era, and some are mined

Figure 4.7. A fossil species of Coscinodiscus from a
diatomaceous earth. Scale bar 10 ␮m. (Micrograph provided
by J. Davy.)

for  use  as  abrasives,  ﬁlters  and  the  refractory
linings of furnaces.

Much study has been given to the cell wall of
diatoms, and it is principally upon its characteris-
tics  that  the  classiﬁcation  rests.  Although  the
several  thousand  species  of  diatoms  occur  in
many  different  shapes,  the  walls  of  all  consist
basically  of  two  parts  which  overlap  like  the
halves of a Petri dish (Fig. 4.8). Consequently, the
appearance of the cells from the side (girdle view)
is different from that from above (valve view). Two
principal orders, the Centrales (centric diatoms)
and  the  Pennales  (pennate  diatoms),  are  distin-
guished  by the  difference  in  valve  view. In  the
Centrales the valve is circular, triangular or polyg-
onal,  and  in  the  Pennales  elongate.  The  decora-
tion of the valve of the centric diatoms follows a
radial pattern, while in the pennate diatoms the
lines of ornamentation lie parallel and transverse
to the plane of symmetry of the valve. The inter-
section of the plane of symmetry and the surface
of the valve is usually marked by a longitudinal
ﬁssure  (raphe)  at  which  there  may  be  contact
between  protoplast  and  medium.  The  raphe  is
never present in centric diatoms. The sculpturing
of the wall depends upon inequalities in the thick-
ness of the outer siliceous layer. In some species
pores may be present in the thinner regions.

Coscinodiscus,  a  genus  containing  both  living
and  fossil  species  (Fig.  4.7),  the  former  widely

82

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 3

tion of tough rubbery mats. Beaches in some parts
of the Adriatic have been badly contaminated in
this manner.

Within  the  cell  the  cytoplasm  forms  a  thin
layer containing one or more chloroplasts, usually
brownish  in  color  because  of  the  accessory  pig-
ments  (particularly  fucoxanthin),  surrounding  a
large central vacuole. In the centric diatoms the
nucleus is also held in this peripheral layer, but in
the pennate diatoms the nucleus is suspended in
the  center  of  the  cell  by a band  of  cytoplasm
which traverses the  vacuole. A few diatoms lack
pigmentation  and  are  heterotrophic  (e.g.,  the
pennate planktonic Nitzschia).

Reproduction
Simple  asexual  reproduction  takes  place  by cell
division. This involves the separation of the two
halves of the wall, one half going to each daugh-
ter cell. Each daughter then immediately secretes
another half wall, thus completing its envelope.
Since  the  mature  walls  are  quite  inﬂexible,  and
each  new  half  ﬁts  into  a  pre-existing  one  in  the
manner of the bottom half of a Petri dish into the
top, the size of the cells inevitably decreases with
successive  vegetative  divisions.  Eventually  a
regeneration  process  occurs  which  is  normally
sexual. Conditions of depleted nutrition however
may lead to the formation of resting spores. After
two  divisions  of  the  starved  cell,  the  second  of
which  is  unequal,  the  larger  cell  becomes  the
spore.  The  wall  surrounding  the  spore  is  of  the
normal kind, but thicker.

Sexual reproduction in the centric diatoms is
oogamous and meiosis occurs in the production
of  gametes.  The  antheridial  cell  produces  four
spermatozoids,  each  of  which  has  a  single
Flimmer ﬂagellum. An unusual feature of the ﬂa-
gellum is the absence of the two central tubules
from the axoneme (p. 21). In the cell giving rise to
the oogonium, one daughter nucleus of the ﬁrst
meiotic division degenerates, and also one of the
second. The remaining nucleus, together with the
whole  of  the  cytoplasm,  becomes  the  egg.  After
fertilization, which may be within or without the
oogonium,  the  zygote  surrounds  itself  with  an
extensible polysaccharide wall. It then grows to as
much as four times its original size, forming an
auxospore.  Normal  siliceous  walls  are  then  laid

Figure 4.8. Diagrammatic representation of the
arrangement of the two halves of the wall in a diatom. (a)
Three-dimensional view. (b) Transverse section.

distributed in the oceans, is representative of the
free-ﬂoating  centric  diatoms.  Melosira,  found  in
both freshwater and marine plankton, is colonial.
The  cylindrical  cells  remain  attached  valve  to
valve, forming many-celled ﬁlaments (Fig. 4.9a). In
Chaetoceras,  also  ﬁlamentous,  the  valves  have
spine-like  outgrowths  which  project  from  the
sides of the ﬁlament and possibly assist ﬂotation.
The  common  free-ﬂoating  pennate  diatom  of
fresh  water  is  Pinnularia (Fig.  4.9b).  A  similar
marine organism is Pleurosigma, whose walls are
so  delicately  and  regularly  sculptured  that  the
valves are used as specimens to test the resolution
of 
forms  are
Asterionella (Fig. 4.10), frequent in Windermere, in
which  the  cells  are  grouped  in  star-like  aggre-
gates, and the marine Licmophora, where the cells
form tree-like colonies. Another notable colonial
pennate form is Gomphonema, commonly found as
a  slimy  brownish  coating  on  stones  in  running
fresh  water. The  funnel-shaped  cells  are  borne
either singly or in pairs on sparingly branched car-
tilage-like stalks.

light  microscopes.  Colonial 

Many  pennate  diatoms  are  able  to perform
small  jerky  movements,  often  returning  irregu-
larly to their starting point. Although the mecha-
nism of this movement is not entirely clear, it is
believed  to result  from  jets  of  mucilage  which
issue from the raphe. In some situations the secre-
tion of mucilage, in which acidic hemicelluloses
predominate,  is  continuous,  and  at  times  of
diatomic blooms the mucilage may accumulate in
considerable  quantities.  Cross-linking  with  the
ions of metallic pollutants can lead to the forma-

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND C

83

Figure 4.9. (a) Melosira. (b) Pinnularia. ((b) after Esser. 1976.
Kryptogamen. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.)

amy),  and  formation  of  auxospores  without
sexual fusion (apogamy) has also been observed.

If

a

common ancestor

Relationships
Although the Bacillariophyta share basic bio-
chemical and metabolic features with the
Xanthophyta and Chrysophyta (particularly with
some chrysomonads, see p. 76), and the hairs
(mastigonemes) of the ﬂagellum, when present,
are very similar to those of the heterokont algae
generally, the diatoms are clearly highly special-
ized.
the
Bacillariophyta probably diverged at an early
stage. On the other hand, there are no well-estab-
lished records of Paleozoic diatoms, and they do
not appear in quantity until the later Mesozoic
and Tertiary eras. This points to their origin
having been at the close of the Paleozoic, and
their major diversiﬁcation toward the end of the
Jurassic period. The earliest forms are centric,
suggesting that
the ﬂagellate male gamete,
found only in the centric diatoms, is a primitive
feature.

existed,

PHAEOPHYTA
Habitat Predominantly marine.
Pigments Chlorophylls a, c; ␤-carotene; violaxan-

thin, fucoxanthin.

Food reserves Polyols (e.g., mannitol), laminarin.
Cell wall components Cellulose, hemicellulose,

sulfated polysaccharides.

Reproduction Asexual and sexual (oogamous).

Figure 4.10. Asterionella.

down, and a renewed sequence of vegetative divi-
sions,  with  progressively  diminishing  cell  size,
begins.

Reproduction of the pennate diatoms is isoga-
mous. Two vegetative cells become held together
in  mucilage.  The  two  nuclei  divide  meiotically,
but only two products survive as gametes in each
instance.  The  valves  then  open  and  the  gametes
(which  lack  ﬂagella)  fuse.  As  in  the  centric
diatoms the zygotes grow into auxospores before
the beginning of vegetative divisions. Sometimes
two gametes of the same parent may fuse (autog-

84

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 3

Growth forms Filamentous, parenchymatous. No

free- living unicellular forms.

Flagella Two unequal, one smooth and one

Flimmer (sometimes spiny); usually lateral.

Of  the  many  genera  of  the  Phaeophyta  (brown
algae), only very few are freshwater, the remain-
der being seaweeds whose macroscopic ﬂattened
thalli  are  familiar  inhabitants  of  the  intertidal
regions of rocky coastlines. Other genera inhabit
the region just beneath the low-tide mark, some
being found solely in mid-ocean.

The vegetative organization of the Phaeophyta
surpasses  that  of  any  of  the  algae  so  far  consid-
ered. The simplest thallus encountered in the divi-
sion  consists  of  branching  ﬁlaments,  and  is
heterotrichous,  resembling  in  this  respect  the
most  complex  ﬁlamentous  forms  found  in  the
Chlorophyta.  This  generally  morphologically
advanced state is also reﬂected in the manner of
reproduction.  In  the  Phaeophyta  oogamy  is  the
general rule, and the alternation of phases in the
life cycle is developed to the point where gameto-
phyte  and  sporophyte  begin  to diverge morpho-
logically. In  the  epiphytic  Desmarestia antarctica
the gametophyte is an endophyte growing in the
medulla  of  the  host,  a  red  alga  (Curdiea).  Many
pheromones, produced by the female gametangia
and  attracting  the  male  gametes,  have been
detected  in  cultures  of  brown  algae.  The  phero-
mones  are  mostly  unsaturated  hydrocarbons  of
fairly low molecular weight, often aromatic, and
occasionally with cyclic regions in the molecule.
The  number  of  chloroplasts  in  a  cell  varies
from one to many, but is usually constant within
a genus. As in the Cryptophyta a chloroplast endo-
plasmic  reticulum,  continuous  with  the  outer
membrane of the nuclear envelope, is a character-
istic  feature.  The  thylakoids  are  commonly  in
groups  of  three.  Pyrenoids,  where  present,  are
often conspicuous, but are absent from the plas-
tids of many advanced genera.

The  ﬂagella  of  the  motile  cells  of  the  brown
algae are borne laterally (Fig. 4.11), not apically as
in  most  heterokonts.  The  posterior  ﬂagellum
often has a swelling near the base which ﬁts into
a recess in the eyespot in the adjacent chloroplast
(Fig. 4.11). The function of the eyespot is possibly
to focus incident light on to photoreceptors in the

ﬂagellar swelling, providing the cell with a photo-
tactic mechanism. A similar arrangement is seen
in the motile cells of other heterokonts, but is typ-
ically  absent 
the
Laminariales (p. 87). 

the  gametes  of 

from 

The Phaeophyta are divided into at least twelve
orders,  but  representatives  of  only  the  six  com-
moner  ones  will  be  considered  here.  They  will,
nevertheless,  fully  illustrate  the  probable  evolu-
tionary  trends  in  the  development  of  the
morphology and of the reproductive cycles of the
brown algae.

The Ectocarpales
The  Ectocarpales  are  represented  by Ectocarpus
(Fig.  4.12),  mostly  small  heterotrichous  plants
resembling in habit the green alga Cladophora (p.
55), common along the Atlantic coast of America
and  in  the  colder  seas  of  the  northern  hemi-
sphere. Around ports and docks some forms have
become tolerant of metal pollution, particularly
of copper. In the erect ﬁlaments the division of the
cells, which contain a few branching, ribbon-like
chloroplasts, is limited to well-deﬁned intercalary
regions. This method of growth, frequent in the
Ectocarpales, 
is  termed  “trichothallic”.  The
common Pylaiella is very similar to Ectocarpus but
tidal action often causes the axes to roll together,
forming a characteristic cable-like bundle.

Other  members  of  the  order  are  more
complex. Ascocyclus, for example, has an elaborate
prostrate  system,  and  in  this  respect  resembles
the green alga Coleochaete. The gelatinous cushion-
like  thallus  of  Leathesia,  although  appearing
parenchymatous, is formed by the adhesion of ﬁl-
aments.  A  truly  parenchymatous  condition  is
reached in Punctaria (Fig. 4.13). Here cell division
takes place in various directions and results in a
leaf-like thallus closely resembling Ulva.

reproduction
The  life  history of  Ectocarpus is  well  known  (Fig.
4.14). In favorable environmental conditions the
two phases, except in respect of the reproductive
organs,  are  morphologically  identical,  but  in
colder  regions  the  haploid  plant  may  develop
little,  or  even  not  at  all.  Reproduction  of  the
diploid plant takes place solely by zoospores, but
these  are  produced  in  two  kinds  of  sporangia,

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND C

85

Figure 4.11. Diagrammatic
representation of the male gamete
of Ectocarpus siliculosus, showing the
distribution of the cellular
organelles: af and pf, anterior and
posterior ﬂagella respectively; fh,
ﬂagellar hairs (present along the
whole length); fs, proximal swelling
of the posterior ﬂagellum; c,
chloroplast; e, eyespot; g, Golgi
body; n, nucleus; m, mitochondrion;
p, pyrenoid; li, lipid body; mb,
microbody; v1, v2, v3, vesicles with
possibly different functions. (From
Maier. 1997. European Journal of
Phycology 32.)

phase,  the  zoospores  settle
and yield diploid plants iden-
tical with their parent.

the 

The  cytology  of  the  devel-
oping  unilocular  sporangium
is more complex. The nucleus
of  the  initial  cell  is  conspicu-
ously large,  and  its  ﬁrst divi-
sions  are  probably  meiotic.
Although 
cytoplasm
becomes  multinucleate,  no
walls are formed, and it is only
at  maturity  that  the  proto-
plast  becomes  divided  into
uninucleate  portions.  Each
portion  differentiates  into  a
biﬂagellate  zoospore.  All  are
eventually  released  at  an
apical  pore.  Although  these
zoospores behave as those pro-
duced  in  plurilocular  sporan-
gia,  they yield  only  haploid
plants. The haploid plants bear only plurilocular
sporangia.  These  produce  motile  cells  which
behave either  as  zoospores,  reproducing  the
haploid phase asexually, or as gametes. The zygote
germinates without meiosis or production of zoo-
spores, and grows directly into a diploid plant.

Aberrations of this cycle are frequent. In cold
conditions the products of the unilocular sporan-
gia may function directly as gametes. The gamet-
ophytic plant is then eliminated from the cycle.
occasionally  been
Unmated  gametes  have

termed respectively “plurilocular” and “unilocu-
lar”  (Fig.  4.12).  The  plurilocular  sporangia  arise
from cells which undergo repeated transverse and
subsequently longitudinal division, giving rise to
spindle-shaped  groups  of  small,  more  or  less
cubical compartments, each of which at maturity
contains a single biﬂagellate zoospore. The pluri-
locular sporangia are commonly either lateral, or
terminate short lateral branches. Dehiscence is by
an  apical  pore.  Dissolution  of  the  partitions
allows  the  zoospores  to escape.  After  a  motile

86

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 3

Figure 4.12. Ectocarpus confervoides. (a) Habit. (b)
Sporangia. (After Newton. 1937. A Handbook of the British
Seaweeds. British Museum, London.)

observed to give rise to plants bearing unilocular
sporangia. This is an example of apogamy, the gen-
eration of a plant with the characteristics of the
sporophyte from an unfertilized gamete.

Although most species of Ectocarpus are isoga-
mous, two sexes are distinguished by the behavior
of the gametes. Those regarded as female are the
ﬁrst to settle, and fertilization follows. The male
and  female  gametangia  are  borne  on  different
plants. Anisogamy has been detected in the more
complex  Ectocarpales.  A  pheromone  has  been
detected  in  Ectocarpus,  consisting  of  a  seven-
carbon  ring  with  a  short  side  chain.  Although
called “ectocarpene”, it is also produced by some
other unrelated genera.

In  some  epiphytic  species  of  Ectocarpus and
Pylaiella the  gametophytes  and  sporophytes,
although  similar,  grow on  different  plants.  The
sporophytes of Pylaiella littoralis, for example, grow
on Fucus and the gametophytes on Ascophyllum.

The Sphacelariales
Representative of the small order Sphacelariales,
close to the Ectocarpales, is Sphacelaria, a hetero-
trichous alga ranging from polar to tropical seas.
The upright ﬁlaments terminate in an apical cell
conspicuous for its large size and brown pigmen-
tation.  Investigations  have shown  that  photope-
riod and temperature affects the form of the life
cycle.  Above  20°C  (68°F)  there  is  a  tendency  for
the  reproduction  of  both  the  gametophyte  and
the sporophyte to take place solely by multicellu-
lar propagules.

Figure 4.13. Punctaria latifolia. (a) Habit. (b) Transverse
section of thallus with sporangia. (After Newton. 1937. A
Handbook of the British Seaweeds. British Museum, London.)

The Cutleriales
Heterotrichous growth is also characteristic of the
small  order  Cutleriales.  The  principal  genus,
Cutleria, is represented by a number of species in
warmer seas of the northern hemisphere. There is
a well-developed life cycle (Fig. 4.15), but only one
component of the heterotrichous system is fully
represented  in  each  phase,  so  the  cycle  is  mark-
edly heteromorphic.

The sporophyte, which displays only the pros-
trate  component,  grows  as  an  incrustation  on
rocks,  and  was  originally  regarded  as  a  distinct
genus,  Aglaozonia.  The  unilocular  sporangia,  in
which,  as  usual,  meiosis  occurs,  are  superﬁcial,
and  yield  haploid  biﬂagellate  zoospores.  On  set-
tling, these become attached to the substratum by
a sucker-like holdfast.

The  gametophytes,  which  arise  from  the
attached zoospores, consist principally of an erect
ﬁlamentous  system.  The  ﬁlaments  run  parallel
and adhere to each other for much of their length,
forming  a  pseudoparenchymatous  thallus.  For  a
short distance at the apex, however, the ﬁlaments
are  free,  and  here  there  is  distinct  trichothallic
growth.  The  gametophytic  phase  of 
the
Mediterranean C. multiﬁda is dioecious (Fig. 4.15).
The male and female gametes are both biﬂagellate
and  motile,  but  the  male  are  minute  compared
with the female.

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND C

87

Figure 4.14. The life cycle of Ectocarpus.

Figure 4.15. Cutleria multiﬁda. Life cycle, showing both
anisogamy and the striking morphological difference between
gametophyte and sporophyte. The gametophyte, although
only one is shown, is dioecious. There is segregation for sex
in the formation of zoospores. Gametes and zoospores
diagrammatic showing relative sizes. (After Esser. 1976.
Kryptogamen. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.)

The Laminariales
The Laminariales, known collectively as kelps,
include Macrocystis and Nereocystis, the largest
known algae, sometimes reaching up to 60m
(197ft) in length. Some species, such as Undaria
(wakame) in Japan, are cultivated (“mariculture”)
for food, and others are harvested commercially as

sources of the mucopolysaccharide algin. This
yields alginic acid, widely used as an emulsifying
agent in the food and paint industries, and in the
processing of rubber. Specimens of Macrocystis off
the coast of Southern Australia grow by as much as
1m (39in.) a day, probably the fastest growth rate in
the plant kingdom, although possibly approached
amongst land plants by some bamboos (p. 305).

The Laminariales are usually found below low
water mark, but a few are regularly exposed at low
tide.  An  example  of  the  latter  is  the  striking
Postelsia of  the  Paciﬁc  coast  of  North  America,  a
species  with  an  arboreal  habit,  suggestive  of  a
miniature  coconut  palm.  The  sporophyte  of  the

88

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 3

Figure 4.16. Laminaria. (a) L. saccharina, habit. (b) L.
cloustoni, transverse section of fertile region of lamina. (After
Newton. 1937. A Handbook of the British Seaweeds. British
Museum, London.) (c) L. digitata, portion of female
gametophyte. (After Sauvageau, from Fritsch. 1945. The
Structure and Reproduction of the Algae, vol. 2. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.)

remarkable  Chorda  ﬁlum,  frequent  along  calmer
coasts of the north temperate zone, resembles a
cylindrical boot-lace, and can grow up to 5m (16ft)
long. The cylinder is hollow. The resulting buoy-
ancy  is  such  that  the  thalli  tend  to be  upright
when immersed.

vegetative structure
In Laminaria, which may be taken as representa-
tive of the order, the large thallus is differen-
tiated into holdfast, stipe and blade (Fig. 4.16).
Abrasion by tides and turbulence continually
wears away the end of the blade, but the loss is
made good by persistent growth from a meriste-
matic region at the base. A transverse section of
the tough, pliable stipe reveals three anatomi-
cally distinct zones. Chloroplasts are conﬁned to
an outer zone (meristoderm), covered by a layer of
protective mucilage. Within the meristoderm, in
which some cell division persists indeﬁnitely, is a
zone of paler, elongated cells forming a well-
deﬁned cortex. Toward the center of the stipe the

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND C

89

longitudinal walls become increasingly gelati-
nous, and at the center itself is a mucilaginous
matrix (medulla) containing intertwined and
branching ﬁlaments. The innermost part of the
cortex and the medulla also contain columns of
elongated cells broadened at each end, and hence
referred to as “trumpet hyphae”. The transverse
walls of these cells are often perforated by groups
of pits, and are frequently callosed. These are fea-
tures of the sieve plates of higher plant phloem.
There is now indeed ﬁrm evidence that the
trumpet hyphae of the laminarian Macrocystis
have a phloem-like function and take part in the
basipetal transport of assimilates. Gas conduits,
formed by the separation of cells (schizogeny),
also occur in the stipe.

reproduction
Reproductive areas, referred to as sori, develop on
the  blades  at  certain  times  of  the  year.  The  sori
consist of many unilocular sporangia interspersed
with  thick,  sterile,  protective  hairs  (paraphyses)
(Fig. 4.16b). Meiosis occurs in the development of
the sporangia, and they eventually yield haploid
zoospores.  These  in  turn  develop  into  haploid
gametophytic  plants,  much  smaller  than,  and
totally different in morphology from, the highly
organized sporophytes (Fig. 4.16c). The gametoph-
ytes are dioecious, and, since it has been shown in
a number of instances that spores giving rise to
male  and  female  gametophytes  are  produced  in
equal numbers in a sporangium, it appears that
sex determination is genotypic.

Although the gametophytes show a tendency
toward heterotrichous  growth,  any  cell  seems
capable  of  yielding  a  gametangium.  Oogamy  is
fully developed, the oogonium producing a single
egg which escapes at maturity through a pore at
the  apex  of  the  cell.  In  Laminaria angustata the
immature egg cell possesses ﬂagella, but these are
shed before the egg emerges. The egg cells never
become entirely free, but remain seated in a cup
formed by the thickened margins of the pore at
the  apex  of  the  oogonium.  The  male  plant  pro-
duces a number of terminal antheridia, from each
of which is liberated a single spermatozoid with
two lateral ﬂagella. Antheridia will not develop in
the absence of blue light or in temperatures above
20°C  (68°F).  At maturity  the  oogonia  produce  a

lamoxirene,  which 

pheromone, 
structurally
resembles  ectocarpene,  but  contains  an  oxygen
atom. This pheromone not only attracts the male
gametes,  but  also  promotes  the  ripening  and
opening of the antheridia.

Following fertilization, the zygote secretes an
external  membrane  and  develops  into  a  new
sporophyte without any resting period. The young
embryo may remain  attached  to the  female
gametophyte for a short period, but it is doubtful
whether  this  represents  anything  more  than
purely physical adhesion.

There  is  no  specialized  asexual  reproduction
of either the haploid or the diploid generations.
Aberrations of the life history, such as plants with
the haploid chromosome number but with sporo-
phytic morphology, have however been reported.
Fragments of the sporophyte of Laminaria digitata
and  of  other  laminarians,  when  cultured  in  the
laboratory, have been found to give rise to ﬁlamen-
tous gametophytes (apospory). Unisexual cultures
of the female gametophytes of L. digitata in similar
conditions  produce  abnormal  sporophytes  par-
thenogenetically  (apogamy).  These  sporophytes
have nuclei with 2C, 4C or 8C ploidy levels (C rep-
resents the amount of DNA in the normal haploid
nucleus). Possibly events of this kind occur sporad-
ically in nature.

The Fucales
The  Fucales,  the  various  species  of  which  are
known as “wracks”, are probably the most famil-
iar of all seaweeds, particularly in the British Isles.
The  intertidal  (littoral)  regions  of  rocky  shores
often show a number of distinct horizontal bands,
each  consisting  of  an  almost  pure  stand  of  a
member  of  the  Fucales.  Fucus (Fig.  4.17),  Pelvetia
and Ascophyllum are genera frequent in these hab-
itats. Desiccation of the thalli during exposure to
air is prevented by the secretion of mucilage, and
photosynthesis  probably  continues  during  low
tide.  A  few  Fucales  grow in  deeper  water, and
some (e.g., Sargassum) are free-ﬂoating. Although
principally conﬁned to the warmer regions of the
great oceans, a Japanese species of Sargassum has
become  naturalized  along  the  English  Channel.
Air bladders in which the proportions of oxygen
and nitrogen often differ from those of normal air
are frequently present in the thalli of the Fucales.

90

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 3

common  brown  seaweed  Ascophyllum nodosum is
regularly  systemically  infected  with  an  ascomy-
cete,  Mycosphaerella ascophylli.  Cultures  from
zygotes free of the fungus do not develop normal
morphology. Ascophyllum nodosum, as it normally
occurs, could thus be regarded as equivalent to a
lichen.

reproduction
Both monoecious and dioecious species occur. In
both,  the  reproductive  structures  form at  the
apices  and  these  in  turn  become  swollen  with
mucilage.

(conceptacles) 

Microscopic examination reveals ﬂask-shaped
invaginations 
in  this  swollen
region, some of which contain female gametangia
and others male, both interspersed with paraphy-
ses  (Figs.  4.18 and  4.19).  Meiosis  occurs  during
gametogenesis. The gametes are liberated at high
tide.

is  a 

As in the Laminariales, oogamy is fully devel-
oped, but in Fucus the eight eggs produced in an
oogonium become quite free and drift passively in
the sea. The spermatozoids, each of which has two
lateral ﬂagella, are attracted to the eggs. The pher-
omone  (fucoserratene),  produced  by the  female
oogonia, 
straight-chain  hydrocarbon.
Fertilization of the Fucus egg was probably the ﬁrst
example of sexual fusion in plants to be observed
under  the  microscope.  Although  hybrids  have
been described, fertilization in experimental con-
ditions is species-speciﬁc and depends upon a gly-
coprotein  recognition  system  on  the  surfaces  of
the  egg  and  spermatozoid.  Eggs  treated  with
fucose-binding lectins, for example, are fertilized
far less readily, presumably because of masking of
the binding sites. Investigations with monoclonal
antibodies  to sperm  surface  antigens  show  that
these binding sites are species-speciﬁc.

Following fertilization the zygote continues to
drift  and  secretes  a  mucilaginous  envelope.  It
eventually settles, becomes anchored by the muci-
lage,  and  germinates.  The  ﬁrst division  of  the
zygote establishes the polarity of all subsequent
growth, since one daughter cell gives rise to the
rhizoid  (and  ultimately  the  holdfast)  and  the
other to the blade. It has been found experimen-
tally that if the zygote is allowed to germinate in
an environment that is not uniform, such as in a

Figure 4.17. Fucus vesiculosus.

The  thallus  of  Fucus is  a  much  smaller  struc-
ture  than  that  of  Laminaria,  rarely exceeding
50cm  (20in.)  in  length,  but  the  differentiation
into  holdfast  and  blade  is  still  evident.  The  ﬂat-
tened  thallus  is  dichotomously  branched  and
each branch grows from an apical meristem. The
cells  in  the  apical  regions  produce  polyphenols.
These are released on to the surface by discharge
of vacuoles (exocytosis). The polyphenols are prob-
ably bacteriocidal and account for the freedom of
the growing regions from adhering microorgan-
isms. A distinct midrib usually lies at the center of
each  segment,  branching  in  register  with  the
thallus.  Small  cavities  containing  tufts  of  hairs
(cryptostomata)  are  scattered  in  the  marginal
wings. The wings in the older parts are gradually
worn away by the action of the sea until, in the
region of the holdfast, only the midrib remains,
giving the impression of a short stipe (Fig. 4.17).
Small,  densely  branched  ecotypes  of  Fucus often
form swards  in  salt  marshes  subject  to periodic
inundation.

An  interesting  discovery has  been  that  the

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND C

91

Figure 4.18. Fucus vesiculosus.
Transverse section of thallus with
female conceptacles.

transversely 

gradient of light, temperature
or  hydrogen  ion  concentra-
tion, the dividing wall always
forms 
to the
direction of the gradient. The
subsequent  behavior  of  the
daughter  cells  depends  upon
the  nature  of  the  gradient.
With a gradient  of  tempera-
ture, for example, the cell on
the  warmer  side  yields  the
rhizoid, and with a gradient of
light,  the  cell  on  the  darker
side. In nature, of the two cells
formed in the ﬁrst division of
the zygote, the rhizoid usually
develops  from  that  in  greater  contact  with  the
substratum. It seems likely that the orientation of
this  ﬁrst division  under  natural  conditions  is
determined by a combination of the environmen-
tal  gradients  that  have been  found  effective  in
inﬂuencing the polarity in laboratory cultures.

Once polarity is established, a minute electric
current passes through the embryo parallel to the
axis, the rhizoid pole becoming increasingly neg-
ative. This current naturally inﬂuences the distri-
bution of ions and charged molecules within the
embryo,  and  may  promote  regional  differentia-
tion.  In  Pelvetia (closely  allied  to Fucus)  calcium
ions move into the tip of the growing rhizoid. In
Fucus spiralis it has been shown that, once polarity
is  established,  it  is  registered  in  the  cell  wall.  A
protoplast from the apical portion of a two-celled
embryo, brought into contact with the wall from
the basal portion, develops into a rhizoid. This is
one example of the evidence now emerging that
cell walls have an important rôle in determining
cell  fate in  the  development  of  multicellular
plants.

interpretation of the life history
of the fuc ales
Two different interpretations have been made of
sexual  reproduction  in  Fucus and  other  Fucales.
One  brings  it  into  line  with  that  of  the

Figure 4.19. Fucus vesiculosus. (a) Transverse section of
thallus with male conceptacles. (b) Portion of antheridial
branch. ((b) after Thuret, from Fritsch. 1945. The Structure
and Reproduction of the Algae, vol. 2. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.)

92

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 3

Figure 4.20. Dictyota. (a) Habit. (b) Apical cell. (c) Incipient
dichotomy of the thallus.

Laminariales,  interpreting  the  gametangia  as
homologous  with  unilocular  sporangia,  the
gametophyte being reduced to nothing more than
a gamete. The other draws an analogy with sexual
reproduction  in  animals  such  as  man,  where
there  is  no  question  of  an  independent  haploid
phase.

There  is  no  specialized  asexual  reproduction
in the Fucales, but fragments of thalli may regen-
erate  in  favorable  conditions  yielding  indepen-
dent plants. The free-ﬂoating species of Sargassum
and the salt marsh forms of Fucus probably repro-
duce solely in this manner. Aberrations of the life
history, such as apogamy, appear to occur rarely, if
at all.

The Dictyotales
The thallus of Dictyota (Dictyotales), a widely dis-
tributed  genus,  is  ﬂattened  and  dichotomously
branched, each branch growing from a conspicu-
ous apical cell (Fig. 4.20). The thallus is only three
cells thick, lacking a midrib. The two outer layers
of cells are assimilatory, and the central one, con-
sisting of large cells, may act as a storage region.
The aerial parts of the thallus arise from a cylin-
drical  rhizome,  anchored  to the  substratum  by
tufts of rhizoids, and also showing apical growth.

reproduction
Sexual  reproduction  results  in  an  isomorphic
alternation of generations. Unilocular sporangia
arise scattered or in groups over the surface of the
diploid plant, and each yields, as a consequence of
meiosis, four non-ﬂagellate tetraspores (Fig. 4.21),
a  feature  which  distinguishes  the  Dictyotales

Figure 4.21. Dictyota. Sporophyte producing tetrasporangia.

from  all  other  brown  algae.  During  meiosis  in
Dictyota there is a 2:2 segregation for sex, and con-
sequently  male  and  female  gametophytes  are
present in approximately equal numbers. In other
genera  the  gametophytic  phase  is  commonly
monoecious.

The  oogonia  and  antheridia  are  produced  in
groups  (sori)  on  the  surface  of  the  thallus.  Each
oogonium produces a single egg which, like that
of  Fucus,  drifts  passively  in  the  water  when
released. The antheridia are plurilocular, and the
sorus is surrounded by a ring of sterile cells. The
spermatozoids (antherozoids) have a single lateral
ﬂagellum (Flimmer), but electron microscopy has
shown  that  a  second  is  present  as  a  rudiment
enclosed in the cytoplasm, recalling the situation
in  some  uniﬂagellate  Chrysophyta 
(p.  75).
Spermatozoids are attracted to the egg by a pher-
omone, now known to be a complex hydrocarbon
similar to ectocarpene (p. 86). The zygote germi-
nates very soon after fertilization.

There  is  no  specialized  asexual  reproduction
of  either  phase  of  the  life  cycle  in  D.  dichotoma.
Nevertheless in the genus Homoeostichus zoospores
have been reported. These are ovoid, 40–55␮m in
diameter,  and  bear  two  ﬂagella.  They  are  the
largest known  reproductive  cells  of  any  marine
macroalga.

Relationships of the Phaeophyta
The  Phaeophyta  are  a  circumscribed  division  of
the algae and little can be said of their wider rela-
tionship since no forms are known simpler than
the  Ectocarpales.  They  presumably  arose  from
some primitive ﬂagellate ancestor, and proceeded

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND C

93

canopy of marine algae, becomes light saturated
only at high irradiances. This is a characteristic of
“sun  plants”  of  land  vegetation,  and  is  perhaps
the consequence of an analogous specialization of
the photosynthetic system.

HAPTOPHYTA
Habitat Mostly marine.
Pigments Chlorophylls a, c; ␤-carotene; fucoxan-

thin, diadinoxanthin, diatoxanthin.

Food reserves Fat, chrysolaminarin (in vacuoles).
Cell wall components Cellulose, hemicellulose,

sometimes calcium carbonate in the form of
calciﬁed scales (coccoliths).

Reproduction Asexual, but life cycles little

known.

Growth forms Unicellular, some colonial.
Flagella Typically two, mostly smooth, equal or
unequal, usually with a third (haptonema)
lying between them.

(Prymnesiophyta)  are  distin-
The  Haptophyta 
guished by the haptonema, a ﬂagellum-like organ
of variable length. In some forms it is longer than
the ﬂagella. Although often coiled up like a pro-
boscis (Fig. 4.23), it may in some species serve to
attach the cells to the substratum, and in others
(notably  the  partly  phagocytic  Chrysochromulina)
act as a foraging device, trapping small algae (e.g.,
Chlorella)  and  bacteria.  In  transverse  section  the
haptonema  shows  three  concentric  membranes
enclosing  a  number  of  microtubules.  The  outer
membrane is continuous with the plasmalemma
and the inner pair represent a tubular extension
of the endoplasmic reticulum.

Figure 4.22. Protosalvinia, generalized reconstruction. Scale
bar 2 cm. (After Niklas and Phillips. 1976. American Journal of
Botany 63.)

to exploit a particular kind of pigmentation and
metabolism that proved especially satisfactory in
marine  environments.  It  is  striking  that  the
fucoid  form appears  to have  an  extremely  long
history. Compressed seaweeds in late Proterozoic
shales  (c. 570  million  years  old)  in  the  Yangtse
Gorges can be attributed with fair conﬁdence to
the Fucales.

There is no evidence that the Phaeophyta have
ever  contained  forms  becoming  successfully
adapted, as some of the Chlorophyta, to terrestrial
life. The few varieties of the Fucales (e.g., Fucus vesic-
ulosus var. muscoides),  all  of  limited  reproductive
capacity, which occur in salt marshes mixed with
halophytic ﬂowering plants appear to be instances
of specialization without any far-reaching signiﬁ-
cance. Nevertheless, in Paleozoic times there may
have been abortive attempts on the part of brown
algae  to become  land  plants.  Protosalvinia,  for
example, of the Upper Devonian, probably a plant
of shore lines, was thalloid (Fig. 4.22) and showed
Fucus-like  branching.  It  produced  thick-walled
spores in tetrads in what have been interpreted as
terminal conceptacles. Prototaxites, also Devonian,
consisted of trunk-like stems with a pseudoparen-
chymatous  organization  similar  to that  of  some
brown algae. They may have been the stipes of a
transmigrant  kelp.  The  afﬁnity  of  both  these
plants remains, however, in doubt.

It 

is  noteworthy  that  photosynthesis 

in
Laminaria,  which  often  dominates  a  pelagic

94

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 3

Haptophytes, 

including  coccolithophorids,
rich in fats may also have contributed to oil depos-
its formed in Cretaceous times.

Reproduction
Asexual  reproduction  probably  predominates
amongst  the  haptophytes,  motile  stages  often
alternating  with  non-motile  ones.  Similar  non-
motile forms, particularly of the coccolithophor-
ids, often have dissimilar motile stages, a feature
which makes a knowledge of the life history essen-
tial for classiﬁcation.

In some instances there is evidence of a sexual
cycle,  a  coccolith-bearing  diploid  stage  alternat-
ing with a small haploid ﬁlamentous plant. This
may  reproduce  itself  by swarmers,  or  produce
gametes.

DINOPHYTA
Habitat Aquatic, frequently planktonic.
Pigments Chlorophylls a, c; ␤-carotene; peridi-
nin, dinoxanthin, other xanthophylls less
prominent; in a few, phycobilins.

Food reserves Starch (formed outside the chloro-

plast), fats.

Cell wall components Cellulose, hemicellulose.
Reproduction Asexual, rarely sexual (probably

isogamous).

Growth forms Mostly unicellular, a few coccoid

or ﬁlamentous.

Flagella Two, apical or lateral, both with ﬁne

lateral hairs, or one smooth. In some forms
ﬂagella lacking.

The  Dinophyta  (Pyrrophyta)  are  predominantly
unicellular  planktonic  organisms,  with  walls
characteristically  furnished  with  longitudinal
and transverse furrows. Although there are ultra-
structural  characteristics  common  to the  whole
division,  two  classes  have been  recognized  by
some,  the  Desmophyceae  and  the  Dinophyceae.
The  Desmophyceae  are  notable  for  having  cell
walls consisting of two watchglass-like halves. The
edges  are  sometimes  extended  as  elaborate
borders,  possibly  assisting  ﬂotation.  The  ﬂagella
originate at the anterior end of the cell.

Although the Dinophyceae include some para-
sitic amoeboid forms, typically the cell walls, espe-
cially those of the dinoﬂagellates, are reinforced

Figure 4.23. Chrysochromulina showing the haptonema
between the ﬂagella. The two parietal chloroplasts, central
chrysolaminarin (leucosin) granule, and nucleus are also
indicated. (After Scagel, Bandoni, Rouse, Schoﬁeld, Stein and
Taylor. 1966. An Evolutionary Survey of the Plant Kingdom.
Wadsworth, Belmont.)

The Haptophyta are largely marine and plank-
tonic.  Some  (particularly  Chrysochromulina spp.)
are  responsible  for  toxic  “blooms”  causing  the
widespread death of ﬁsh. The remarkable cocco-
lithophorids also belong to the Haptophyta. The
walls of these organisms are closely beset with del-
icately  sculptured  plates  of  calcium  carbonate.
These are ﬁrst laid down in Golgi vesicles and then
excreted to the exterior. Deposits of these scales
from dead organisms (coccoliths) form the princi-
pal  component  of  calcareous  rocks  such  as  the
chalk  of  the  Cretaceous  period  (Fig.  4.24).  It  has
been estimated that chalk contains up to 800⫻106
coccoliths in 1cm3. The marine coccolithophorid
Emiliania huxleyi is  currently  the  most  abundant
calcifying  organism  on  Earth.  It  also  forms  vast
blooms.  As  a  consequence  of  the  reﬂectivity  of
the calciﬁed scales, these can be seen from the air,
and  even  from  satellites.  Emiliania cells  contain
the  osmoregulant  dimethylsulfoniopropionate
(DMSP).  As  the  blooms  die  and  are  devoured  by
grazers, this compound decomposes and releases
gaseous  dimethylsulﬁde  (DMS)  into  the  atmos-
phere.  The  DMS  is  in  turn  oxidized,  yielding  an
aerosol of sulfuric acid. In this way Emiliania con-
tributes  signiﬁcantly  to the  sulfur  content  and
acidity  of  the  Earth’s  atmosphere.  Phaeocystis,  a
non-calcareous haptophyte which forms banks of
foam  (particularly  on  beaches  in  the  southern
North Sea), is also a notable source of DMS.

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND C

95

Figure 4.24. Eiffellithus eximus, a
coccolith from the Cretaceous.
Scale bar 2␮m. (Micrograph
provided by A. J. J. Rees.)

with hexagonal polysaccha-
ride plates (Fig. 4.25), forming
the theca. Polymerized dipter-
pene may also be present in
the thecae of some species. The
arrangement of the ﬂagella in
the dinoﬂagellates is unique.
The attachment is lateral. One
ﬂagellum, usually smooth, is
directed toward the posterior
and its undulations push the
cell
forward. The other ﬂagellum, usually
Flimmer, lies in the transverse groove. This ﬂagel-
lum may serve to stabilize the cell, and improve
the effectiveness of the extended ﬂagellum. It has
been observed that when the transverse ﬂagellum
is inactive the cell rotates in one direction, and
when it is active, in the converse direction.

The cells of the Dinophyta contain one or more
chloroplasts, often (where the chloroplast is not
suspected of being an endosymbiont) dark brown
in color as a consequence of a large amount of the
pigment peridinin. The chloroplast envelope con-
sists  of  three  membranes,  a  feature  found  else-
where only in the Euglenophyta, and, also as in
the Euglenophyta, the thylakoids are characteris-
tically in stacks of three. A stigma is often present
in  the  motile  species  and  in  zoospores.  Many
species  lack  pigmented  plastids  and  live  hetero-
trophically, while others are fully pigmented and
form symbiotic  associations  with  invertebrates
(e.g., Amphidium klebsii, which is also free-living, in
the  ﬂatworm  Amphiscolops).  Yet  other  dinoﬂagel-
lates draw their photosynthates from what appear
to be endosymbiotic unicellular forms which may
be assignable to the cyanophytes, chlorophytes or
other  divisions  of  the  algae.  In  Peridinium,  for
example, it appears that the original endosymbi-
ont  was  a  chrysophyte  (p.  75).  These  (probably
comparatively recent) associations with endosym-
bionts from various sources may account for the
occasional  reports  of  a  chlorophyll  other  than  c
accompanying chlorophyll a in the dinophytes.

The nuclei of the dinoﬂagellates are peculiar

Figure 4.25. Ceratium hirundinella. (After Schilling, from
West and Fritsch. 1927. A Treatise on the British Freshwater
Algae. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.)

96

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 3

in  containing  chromosomes  which  remain
spiralized  throughout  the  nuclear  cycle  and
which, like those of prokaryotes, are deﬁcient in
histone proteins. Although earlier investigations
suggested  that  during  population  growth DNA
synthesis  was  continuous  (as  commonly  in  the
prokaryotes), later work with synchronized popu-
lations  has  revealed  a  distinct  S-phase  in  the
nuclear  cycle,  as  in  eukaryotes  generally. Many
dinoﬂagellates on being irritated emit trichocysts.
These are narrow proteinaceous needles or coils,
partly  crystalline,  which  ﬁrst appear  in  Golgi
bodies  and  emerge to  the  exterior  through  ﬁne
pores. This protozoan feature is encountered spo-
radically amongst the unicellular ﬂagellate algae.
Many dinoﬂagellates, including those involved
in blooms, such as the “red tides” of the Gulf of
Mexico,  produce  toxic  metabolites.  Millions  of
cells  may  be  present  in  a  single  liter  of  surface
water, and the products of the toxic species cause
widespread  death  of  ﬁsh,  dolphins  and  inverte-
brates. They may also be accumulated by shellﬁsh
and  affect  man.  A  common  component  of  red
tides is the dinoﬂagellate Gymnodinium breve, from
which the neurotoxin brevetoxin B has been iso-
lated. Species of the widely distributed Gonyaulax
yield the highly toxic saxitoxin, which, if taken in
with mussels and clams, can cause paralytic poi-
soning.  Ciguatoxin,  produced  by Gambierdiscus
toxicus,  frequent  in  warmer  seas  near  remote
islands  and  off-shore  reefs,  enters  the  tissues  of
reef ﬁsh and causes the illness known as “cigua-
tera”, believed to affect up to 20000 people each
year  in  the  Caribbean  alone.  Some  dinophyte
toxins are soluble in cell lipids, and if ingested by
humans  can  have long-term effects.  A  few  dino-
ﬂagellates, principally of warmer seas, exhibit bio-
luminescence. Noctiluca is a well-known example.
It is naked and wholly heterotrophic, feeding on
blooms of other dinoﬂagellates. Some dinoﬂagel-
lates  emit  ﬂashes  of  light  when  cultures  are
shaken, and can sometimes illuminate breaking
waves.

Although motile unicellular forms predomi-
nate in the Dinophyta, a few planktonic represen-
tatives are coccoid, and in the genera Dinothrix
(known only
and
Dinoclonium the cells, which lack ﬂagella, are
aggregated in short, sparsely branched ﬁlaments.

from marine

aquaria)

Reproduction
In  the  motile  species  reproduction  is  only  by
simple vegetative division. In armored forms the
theca  may  be  either  shed  and  then  re-formed
around the daughter cells, or split into two and
then  restored  after  division.  Zoospores  are  pro-
duced  by the  coccoid  and  ﬁlamentous  forms.
Many  dinoﬂagellates  produce  thick-walled  cysts
in  unfavorable  conditions.  Although  many  sink
and are lost, others remain sufﬁciently near the
surface  to germinate  when  conditions  improve.
These provide the “seed” for ensuing blooms. The
cysts are distinctive and are well known as fossils
from the Triassic onward (Fig. 4.26).

Sexual  reproduction,  both  isogamous  and
anisogamous, is known in the dinoﬂagellates. The
zygotes  either  germinate  immediately  or  form
resting cysts. In most instances meiosis occurs on
germination; Noctiluca is unusual in being diploid.
The Dinophyta are clearly a highly specialized
assemblage. The three membranes bounding the
chloroplast suggest (as in the Euglenophyta, p. 74)
an  endosymbiotic  origin  of  this  photosynthetic
compartment in the division as a whole, in addi-
tion to the more clearly deﬁned cases mentioned
earlier.

CRYPTOPHYTA
Habitat Aquatic, both marine and freshwater.
Pigments Chlorophylls a, c; ␣- (and rarely ⑀-) caro-

tene; alloxanthin, other xanthophylls less
prominent; biliproteins (phycoerythrin, phy-
cocyanin).

Food reserves Starch, formed outside the chloro-

plast but near the pyrenoid.

Cell wall components Naked, but a pellicle may

be present consisting of proteinaceous
plates.

Reproduction Asexual, sexual doubtful.
Growth forms Flagellate, palmelloid stages

occur.

Flagella Two, anterior, Flimmer, slightly unequal.

and marine phytoplankton. They

This division includes a few species, referred to col-
lectively as cryptomonads, occasional in freshwa-
ter
are
unicellular and biﬂagellate, in some forms one of
the ﬂagella being directed toward the posterior.
The ﬂagella are inserted at one side of a depression

ALGAE CONTAINING CHLOROPHYLLS A AND C

97

Figure 4.26. Gonyaulacysta helicoidea, a dinoﬂagellate cyst
from the Upper Jurassic. Scale bar 5␮m. (Micrograph
provided by J. Davy.)

(“gullet”) lined with refractive granules (Fig. 4.27).
These are the site of “ejectosomes” which function
in a manner analogous to that of the trichocysts of
the dinoﬂagellates (p. 96). The color of the cryp-
tomonads is variable depending upon the propor-
tion of accessory pigments in the chloroplasts.
These are commonly cup-shaped, and are bounded
not only with the usual two membranes, but also
(as in most of the heterokont algae) with a sheet of

chloroplast endoplasmic reticulum. The thylak-
oids are widely spaced, but less so than those of
rhodophyte plastids. The biliproteins are not in the
form of discrete phycobilisomes. A body termed a
“nucleomorph” lies between the chloroplast and
the surrounding endoplasmic reticulum. It is
bounded by two membranes and contains DNA,
and may represent the nucleus of an ancestral
eukaryotic endosymbiont, possibly a red alga.
Starch, although closely associated with the pyren-
oid, lies outside the chloroplast but within the
chloroplast endoplasmic reticulum (Fig. 4.27).

98

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 3

Although clearly properly placed in the “a⫹c”
algae, the wider relationships of the Cryptophyta
are obscure. The Cryptophyta are the only group
of algae, apart from the Cyanophyta, Glaucophyta
and Rhodophyta, to contain biliproteins as acces-
sory  photosynthetic  pigments.  The  only  well-
established means of reproduction is by ﬁssion.

Evolutionary trends within the
algae

From  the  foregoing  survey of  the  principal  fea-
tures and interrelationships of the algae, we can
now proceed to a consideration of the evolution-
ary  and  morphological  trends  displayed  by the
algal kind of organization as a whole.

Aquatic habitat and evolutionary change
A point of general signiﬁcance in relation to the
evolution of the algae arises from their predomi-
nantly  aquatic  habitat.  One  of  the  main  factors
inﬂuencing evolution within the plant kingdom
has  undoubtedly  been  environmental  change.
Nevertheless,  aquatic  plants,  particularly  those
that  are  marine,  are  to some  extent  protected
from such change, at least in a catastrophic form.
The volume of the sea in particular is so vast that
changes in such features as salinity and tempera-
ture  must  of  necessity  be  gradual.  Algae,  there-
fore, have exploited to an extent greater than that
of any other component of the world’s vegetation
an  environment  which  demands  only  compara-
tively  slow  adaptation  to changing  conditions.
This  possibly  accounts  for  the  persistence  of
numerous states of algal organization intermedi-
ate  between  the  simplest  unicellular  and  the
complex multicellular, and of simple isomorphic
life  cycles  (as  in  Ulva and  Ectocarpus)  without
spores or zygotes suited to withstand unfavorable
periods.

Closer inspection of individual groups reveals,
of course, that continuity of structure and pattern
is  to some  extent  illusory. The  Florideophycidae
amongst  the  Rhodophyta  and  the  Charales
amongst the Chlorophyta provide examples of the
numerous groups of living algae which lack close
relatives.  Nevertheless  the  groups  themselves,
having  inhabited  a  relatively  constant  environ-

ment  over  periods  of  geological  time,  give  a
clearer  indication  of  the  paths  evolution  has
taken than is often possible with land plants.

(stromatolites)

remains,

Antiquity of the algae
Geological evidence undoubtedly points to the
algae being an extremely ancient form of life.
Calcareous nodules
structurally
similar to those produced by some living blue-
green algae (e.g., Lithomyxa), are known from beds
of Precambrian age, possibly over 2500 million
years old. Filamentous
containing
organic matter and suggestive of blue-green or
even green algae, have
in
Precambrian rocks not less than 2000 million
years old. Possible coccoid forms of blue-green
algae have been described from even older rocks.
The record of algal life begins about 3000 million
years ago.

been found

Naturally fossilization has favored those algae
with  calcareous  skeletons.  Remains  of  the  cal-
ciﬁed  Siphonales,  for  example,  are  found  in  the
mid-Proterozoic (Table 1.1), and the record contin-
ues  (with  evidence  of  increasing  complexity)
into the  Mesozoic.  Similarly  the  calcareous
Rhodophyta appeared in the Cambrian, and were
well  represented  by the  Ordovician.  The  fossil
record is thus to some extent biased. Nevertheless,
current techniques are able to extract identiﬁable
remains  of  coccoid  and  ﬁlamentous  eukaryotic
algae  from  rocks  almost  as  ancient  as  those
bearing calciﬁed forms.

The  fossil  record,  although  admittedly  still
very fragmentary, fully supports  the  view  that
prokaryotes  preceded  eukaryotes  (perhaps  by as
much as 1000 million years), and that simple uni-
cellular  and  ﬁlamentous  algae  preceded  the
pseudoparenchymatous  and  parenchymatous
forms  encountered  today  in  the  three  major
divisions  of  eukaryotic  algae:  Rhodophyta,
Chlorophyta and Phaeophyta.

Evolution of the vegetative thallus
If the increase in morphological complexity from
ﬂagellate  unicellular,  through  coccoid,  ﬁlamen-
tous  and  pseudoparenchymatous  states  to large
parenchymatous  forms  such  as  Macrocystis is  an
evolutionary progression, the problem remains of
what  has  caused  and  directed  this  progression.

EVOLUTIONARY TRENDS WITHIN THE ALGAE

99

nity for the establishment of a line of sedentary
organisms.

The  tendency  for  daughter  cells  to remain
united  appears  to  be  a  basic  one,  and  would
account for the occurrence of some kind of colo-
nial or multicellular forms in all the divisions of
the algae. In the major divisions we must assume
that the advantages of association, possibly again
residing in metabolic and reproductive efﬁciency,
led  to the  elaboration  of  multicellular  thalli  in
which there gradually appeared divisions of labor
amongst the cells. In a multicellular form such as
Ulva, all the cells, except possibly the basal anchor,
divide  and  liberate  reproductive  bodies  simulta-
neously. There is no somatic tissue, and the indi-
vidual  is  destroyed  in  reproduction.  A  form in
which the parent persists through several repro-
ductive phases clearly has an advantage in a situ-
ation (as might arise with prolonged turbulence)
where conditions become temporarily intolerable
for the reproductive bodies, but remain tolerable
for the mature plant.

as 

in 

structures, 

reproductive 

The  evolution  of  complex  thalli  in  which
reproduction  was  conﬁned  to special  areas  or
branch  systems  would  thus  be  favored.  The
further opportunity would then arise for various
parts of the somatic tissue to become specialized,
and assist either in the support or protection of
the 
the
Florideophycidae and many other algae, or in the
exploitation of particular habitats, as with the air
bladders of many Fucales. Nevertheless the extent
to which the algal thallus can diversify is clearly
limited by its anatomical simplicity. This, and the
uniformity  of  the  aquatic  environment,  can  be
held responsible for the similar forms which have
evolved in the different divisions (e.g., Ulva (p. 53),
Punctaria (p. 86) and Porphyra (p. 31)). Parallelisms
in reproductive regions are also notable (e.g., the
trichogyne of the oogonia in the Coleochaetales
(p. 64) and Florideophycidae (p. 34)).

Evolution of sexual reproduction
With regard  to sexual  reproduction,  it  seems
beyond  doubt  that  oogamy  has  evolved  from
isogamy. With  forms  inhabiting  moving  water,
isogamous  reproduction  must  be  extremely
wasteful, and there are evident advantages if one
gamete (which  becomes  known  as  the  egg  cell,

Figure 4.27. Cryptomonas. Longitudinal section based on
electron micrographs, partly diagrammatic. (After Gibbs,
from Bold and Wynne. 1985. Introduction to the Algae, 2nd
edn. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.)

The cause presumably lies in the mutability char-
acteristic of all life, and the direction is no doubt
a consequence of natural selection. The nature of
selection in an aquatic environment, with its uni-
formity  in  space  and  time,  is,  however, little
understood.  This  is  particularly  true  of  the
marine environment,  and  of  planktonic  algae.
Consequently  discussion  of  algal  evolution
involves considerable conjecture.

has

not

beyond

proceeded

Nevertheless, reasoned speculation is not to
be discouraged, and algae undoubtedly show
many features of evolutionary signiﬁcance which
merit consideration. Amongst
the ﬂagellate
forms, for example, it is striking that the devel-
opment of motile colonies and aggregate organ-
isms
Volvox.
Presumably, with a diameter exceeding about
1 mm (0.04in.) the Volvox system would become
physically unstable, and the coordination of the
ﬂagellar activity necessary to bring about
directed motion of the organism no longer pos-
sible. If the earliest forms were indeed ﬂagellate,
the evolution of a sedentary form from a motile
one would result in the energy that would other-
wise be expended in swimming becoming avail-
able for growth and reproduction. The enhanced
reproductive capacity would result in proportion-
ately greater numbers, and provide the opportu-

100

THE SUBKINGDOM ALGAE: PART 3

Figure 4.28. The three kinds of life cycle found in the algae.
(a) Haplontic. (b) Diplohaplontic. (c) Diplontic.

and  regarded  as  female)  remains  relatively  sta-
tionary, especially  if  it  secretes  pheromones
causing the male gametes to accumulate around
it.  Moreover, a zygote  which  begins  life  with  a
copious food reserve has a better chance of survi-
val than one with little. Increasing size, however,
severely limits mobility, so again advantages can
be envisaged in a situation in which one gamete,
the  male,  remains  small  and  motile,  and  the
other, the female, loses motility and specializes in
the laying down of food reserves.

A non-motile zygote may, of course, be disad-
vantageous if it settles in a situation unfavorable
for  the  plant.  This  is  compensated  for  in  those
algae, such as Coleochaete, in which the zygote ger-
minates  to produce  zoospores.  Another  develop-
ment, possibly limiting the wastage of zygotes, is
shown in Laminaria, where the zygote germinates
while still attached to the gametophyte, foreshad-
owing a feature of the archegoniate plants.

Life histories of algae
Sexual  reproduction  inevitably  involves  a  cyclic
alternation between a haploid and a diploid con-
dition. The simplest life cycle found amongst the
algae is that in which the diploid condition, gen-
erated by the fusion of morphologically identical
gametes,  is  represented  only  by the  zygote  (Fig.
4.28a).  Meiosis  occurs  on  germination  of  the
zygote, thereby initiating a new haploid (gameto-
phytic)  phase.  A  cycle  of  this  kind,  termed
“haplontic”,  is  frequently  encountered  in  the
simpler  algae,  and  is  typical  of  the  ﬁlamentous

Chlorophyta.  Here,  however, it  may  have been
retained and developed as an adaptation facilitat-
ing survival in unfavorable conditions, since only
rarely does meiosis immediately follow syngamy,
and the intervening diploid phase is often spent
as a thick-walled, resting zygote.

Closely related to the haplontic cycle, and pos-
sibly evolved from it by a delaying of meiosis, is
that in which the zygote generates a multicellu-
lar,  diploid  (sporophytic)  phase.  This  eventually
produces reproductive bodies, almost always zoo-
spores, by a process involving meiosis. The haploid
condition  is  thus  restored  and  the  cycle  recom-
mences (Fig. 4.28b). Where, as in Ulva, the haploid
and  diploid  plants  are  morphologically  similar,
the  alternation  of  phases  is  isomorphic.  Where
the  phases  are  morphologically  different,  as,  to
take an extreme example, in Cutleria, the cycle is
heteromorphic (see p. 86). The evidence available
does  not  warrant  any  general  conclusion  about
whether isomorphic life cycles have evolved from
heteromorphic,  or  the  converse.  Life  cycles  in
which  both  haploid  and  diploid  phases  are
present  as  multicellular  individuals  are  termed
“diplohaplontic”.

Both  haplontic  and  diplohaplontic  cycles
show, in  addition  to isogamy, various  states  of
anisogamy  and  oogamy. The  complexities  of  the
diplohaplontic  cycles  of  the  Florideophycidae  of
the  Rhodophyta  are  unique  amongst  the  algae.
The early appearance of the coralline rhodophytes
in  the  fossil  record  suggests  nevertheless  that
these  complexities  had  been  acquired  by
Paleozoic times.

A  third  kind  of  life  cycle,  similar  to  that  of
most animals, occurs in the diatoms, Fucales, and

EVOLUTIONARY TRENDS WITHIN THE ALGAE

101

in several other isolated instances throughout the
algae.  The  diploid  condition  predominates,  and
the  haploid  is  represented  only  by the  gametes,
meiosis  occurring  during  gametogenesis  (Fig.
4.28c).  Again  the  evidence  does  not  allow  any
general conclusion about how this kind of cycle,
termed  “diplontic”,  originated.  As  with  the
haplontic, it may in certain instances have selec-
tive value. In Fucus, for example, as compared with
Laminaria, it is perhaps an advantage to have the
gametophytic  phase,  possibly  vulnerable  to the
vicissitudes of intertidal life, reduced to the uni-
locular sporangia and gametes. A noteworthy dif-
ference  between  the  haplontic  and  diplontic
cycles is that in the former the gametes from one
individual  are  genetically  uniform  (apart  from
chance mutations), whereas in the latter they are
heterogeneous, depending upon the heterozygos-
ity of the parent and the amount of crossing-over
at meiosis.

Throughout the algae variations of the regular
cycle have been observed both in vivo and in vitro.
Gametes,  for  example,  may  occasionally  develop
apogamously into sporophyte-like plants without
fertilization.  The  converse  (apospory),  the  devel-
opment of gametophyte-like plants from zygotes
(e.g.,  Oedogonium,  p.  51)  or  fragments  of  sporo-
phytic  tissue  (e.g.,  Laminaria,  p.  89),  although
induced in experimental conditions, has not been
observed  in  nature,  but  may  nevertheless  occa-
sionally occur. 

Despite these observations, the existence of
exclusively apogamous cycles in algae corre-
sponding to those in tracheophytes (pp. 209, 300)

has not been fully established. The ﬁrmest indica-
tions come from the centric diatoms, where in
some species there is frequent formation of aux-
ospores (normally developing from zygotes (p. 82))
without
evident male participation. Repro-
duction here may take the form of a regular par-
thenogenetic cycle.

Importance of the algae in the evolution of
plants
Thus  in  the  algae,  the  simplest  of  phototrophic
organisms, a number of progressions, which can
be  regarded  as  representing  channels  of  evolu-
tion, can be traced from unicellular to parenchy-
matous  organization,  from  isogamy  to oogamy,
and from simple to elaborate life cycles. These all
represent steps of fundamental importance in the
evolution  of  plant  life,  and  this  fully  justiﬁes
giving  the  algae  considerable  attention  in  any
review of the plant kingdom. At its upper limit,
the structural and reproductive complexity of an
alga  approaches  that  of  a  land  plant.  Laminaria,
for  example,  possesses  a  thallus  with  not  only
morphological  but  also  anatomical  differentia-
tion,  that  in  the  stipe  being  accompanied  by a
phloem-like function (p. 89). Additionally, the life
cycle is strikingly heteromorphic, and the sporo-
phyte is attached in the early stages of its develop-
ment  to  the  gametophyte.  Considered  solely  in
terms of the level of organization, the transition
from  an  advanced  alga  such  as  Laminaria to an
archegoniate or even angiospermous land plant is
small when compared with the evolution of that
alga from a unicellular ﬂagellate.

5

The subkingdom Embryophyta: division
Bryophyta (mosses and liverworts)

General features of the
bryophytes

The mosses and liverworts, although morphologi-
cally somewhat dissimilar, are classiﬁed together
as the Bryophyta. Because of their distinctive fea-
tures  they are  treated  as  a  division  of  the  plant
kingdom,  of  a  rank  equal  to that  of  the  algal
groups and the Tracheophyta (Table 1.2). There are
about  25000  species  of  bryophytes  in  all.  Three
classes are recognized, namely Marchantiopsida,
Anthocerotopsida and Bryopsida. They represent
the simplest of the archegoniate plants and form
a  single  division  with  the  following  characteris-
tics:

BRYOPHYTA
Habitat Mainly terrestrial.
Plastid pigments Chlorophylls a, b; ␤-carotene;

xanthophyll (lutein).

Food reserves Starch, to a lesser extent fats and

oils.

Cell wall components Cellulose, hemicelluloses.
Reproduction Heteromorphic life cycle, the

gametophytic phase normally the more con-
spicuous, and the sporophytic determinate
and partly dependent upon it. Sex organs
with a jacket of sterile cells, the egg cells
enclosed singly in ﬂask-shaped archegonia.
Zooidogamous, spermatozoids with two
whiplash ﬂagella. Embryogeny exoscopic.
Sporophyte producing non-motile, cutinized
spores, in some species with heavily thick-

ened and sculptured walls, usually all of one
size (homospory). Vegetative propagation of
the gametophyte by fragmentation or spe-
cialized gemmae.

Growth forms of gametophyte Thallus ﬂattened,
with some internal gametophyte differentia-
tion, or consisting of a main axis with leafy
appendages.

Although the simplest terrestrial plants, the bryo-
phytes in some parts of the world form a conspic-
uous component of the vegetation. They are, for
example,  prominent  amongst  the  epiphytes  of
mist forests of tropical mountains. Some species
form dense communities submerged in antarctic
lakes. Vast bogs in the northern hemisphere have
been built up largely by the growth of the moss
Sphagnum. The dead stems and leaves accumulate
below  the  growing  surface,  decaying  only  very
slowly in the almost anaerobic conditions in the
swampy bog,  and  become  consolidated  to form
peat, often several meters in depth. In some places
peat is an important fuel, and in granulated form
is  widely  used  in  horticulture  as  a  source  of
humus.

The  largest bryophyte,  Dawsonia,  is  a  tufted
moss  of  swampy places  in  Southeast  Asia  and
Australasia.  Individual  stems  of  this  genus  may
reach  or  even  exceed  1m (39in.)  in  length,  but
dimensions of this order are quite atypical of bryo-
phytes.  Most  are  lowly  plants,  many  of  them
inconspicuous and not easily seen without a hand
lens. The cellular differentiation within the larger
bryophytes is greater than in the algae, but lacks

the complexity found in vascular plants. Amongst
the mosses it reaches its maximum in Polytrichum
and  Dawsonia,  and  amongst  the  liverworts  in
Hymenophytum and Symphogyna. In all these forms
groups  of  elongated  cells  occur  in  the  central
region  of  the  stem.  Both  water-conducting  cells
and  “food”-conducting  cells  (analogous  to sieve
tubes) can be recognized in some species of bryo-
phytes (pp. 105, 122). Some water-conducting cells
approach in form the tracheids of tracheophytes,
but ligniﬁcation is absent.

Although a cuticle has been demonstrated in
some bryophytes, in general they are little able to
resist  desiccation  and  are  consequently  found
principally in damp and humid localities. In some
species  the  response  to humidity  is  remarkably
precise.  The  moss  Pterobryella papuensis,  for
example,  found  in  the  montane  forest in  New
Guinea, forms a girdle around tree trunks about
1m (39in.) from the ground, where the humidity
is neither too high nor too low. Other epiphytes,
however, such as species of the liverwort Metzgeria
and  of  the  moss  Orthotrichum,  tolerate  exposure
and are able, by virtue of colloids present in the
cell sap, to retain sufﬁcient water to maintain life
even in prolonged dryness. Electron microscopic
investigations  have shown  that  the  intracellular
membranes  of  these  forms  retain  their  basic
structure even in conditions of extreme desicca-
tion.

The  morphology  of  the  bryophytes  is  on  the
whole more complex than that of the algae. In the
mosses, for example, the mature thallus regularly
takes  the  form of  a  stem  bearing  leaves.  On  the
other  hand,  the  immature  gametophyte  (proto-
nema) of many mosses closely resembles a hetero-
trichous green alga and may, as for example in the
moss Pogonatum aloides, persist for many months.
Like the algae, the bryophytes produce no roots,
although  both  the  mature  and  immature  forms
of the thallus bear rhizoids. In a few forms, such
as  the  thallose  liverworts  Hymenophytum and
Symphogyna and  the  moss  Polytrichum,  the  aerial
parts of the plant are continuous with subterra-
nean creeping axes, superﬁcially resembling the
ﬁliform rhizomes of the smaller ﬁlmy ferns. Some
leafy  liverworts  also  produce  ﬁne  underground
axes. These may descend to depths of 1m (39in.) or
more in a peaty substratum and provide a means

GENERAL FEATURES OF THE BRYOPHYTES

103

far  as 

of vegetative propagation if the site is disturbed.
is  known,  only  one  bryophyte
So 
(Cryptothallus mirabilis,  a  thallose  liverwort)  is
wholly subterranean in habit and heterotrophic.
The thallus lacks chlorophyll and incorporates a
mycorrhizal  fungus.  Cryptothallus  provides  the
only instance known of the occurrence of leuco-
plasts  in  the  somatic  cells  of  a  liverwort.  Some
mosses  (e.g.,  Buxbaumia aphylla)  have few chloro-
plasts  and,  since  they occur  on  rotting  organic
matter,  are  probably  partly  saprophytic.  The
regular  association  of  certain  mosses  and  liver-
worts, particularly those of swampy habitats, with
speciﬁc  fungi  and  bacteria  may  be  indicative  of
synergistic relationships.

two  phases 

Of the two phases in the bryophyte life cycle,
the haploid gametophyte is usually persistent and
the sporophyte (sporogonium) of limited life span.
The  sporophyte  consists  of  little  more  than  a
capsule, a stalk (seta), and a basal foot inserted into
the  gametophyte.  The  developing  sporophyte  is
wholly or partly parasitic upon the gametophyte,
drawing  its  sustenance  by way of  the  foot.  The
apposed  walls  of  the  gametophytic  and  sporo-
phytic  cells  at  the  insertion  of  the  foot  are  fre-
quently labyrinthine, either on both sides of the
boundary or only on one side. In Polytrichum, for
example,  the  labyrinthine  walls  are  conﬁned  to
the sporophytic face. The passage of materials into
the sporophyte is entirely through the apoplast,
since in all archegoniates the boundary between
the 
In
Polytrichum the  transmembrane  potential  of  the
cells of the sporophytic face has been estimated to
be of the order of ⫺200 mV. This would promote,
for example, the uptake of amino acids secreted
into the apoplast from the gametophyte. In other
respects,  the  labyrinthine  walls,  with  their
charged  hydrated  polysaccharides,  may  act  as  a
ﬁlter  restricting  the  apoplastic  transfer  of  infor-
mational molecules. This would ensure the con-
tinued  separation  of  the  two  phases  and  the
maintenance  of  their  distinctive  developments.
The formation of the labyrinthine walls probably
arises  from  an  interaction  of  the  gametophytic
and  sporophytic  systems 
(analogous  to an
antigen–antibody  reaction),  resulting,  as  in  the
defense reactions of plant pathology, in the laying
down  of  mucilaginous  polysaccharides  at  the

lacks plasmodesmata. 

104

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA: DIVISION BRYOPHYTA (MOSSES AND LIVERWORTS)

interface.  Since  this  deposition  occurs  in  condi-
tions  of  active  ﬂux  from  gametophyte  to sporo-
phyte, the mucilaginous material is thrown into
channels  and  folds.  Labyrinthine  walls  are  com-
monly found at sites of invasion, such as bacterial
nodules  in  roots  and  mycorrhizal  interfaces,
where similar conditions probably obtain.

Sexual reproduction of the bryophytes is zoo-
idogamous,  and  all  depend  upon  free  water  for
fertilization.  The  spermatozoids  are  helical  in
form (Fig. 5.7), although in many bryophytes the
helix  barely  reaches  or  only  slightly  exceeds  a
single gyre. The helix, viewed from the anterior, is
left-handed  (sinistral).  Most  of  the  helix  is  occu-
pied by the nucleus, with the ﬂagella attached api-
cally. The  stability  of  the  helix  depends  upon  a
ribbon of microtubules (spline), which runs (with
diminishing width) from the apex of the gamete
into  the  posterior,  accompanying  the  elongated
nucleus. This recalls a form of structure already
seen  in  the  algae  (Fig.  3.39).  The  lengths  of  the
extended helices of the spermatozoids of a selec-
tion of bryophytes range from 9.4 to 99 ␮m, and
the DNA content of the nuclei from 0.17 to 4.05 pg
(1pg⫽10⫺12g), these two values being closely cor-
related. Electron microscopy gives indications of
the  chromatin  becoming  longitudinally  aligned
during differentiation of the sperm nucleus, but
it is not known how the chromosomes are accom-
modated  in  the  mature  organelle.  In  the  moss
Polytrichum it has been reported that the chromo-
somes begin to adopt an end-to-end association at
telophase of the last mitosis before formation of
the  spermatocyte.  Little  is  yet  known  about  the
effects of polyploidy on spermatozoid size, diffe-
rentiation and behavior, but laboratory and ﬁeld
observations do not indicate that there is neces-
sarily any impairment of function.

The  mobility  of  the  male  gametes  in  natural
conditions is very limited, rarely more than a few
centimeters, and often restricted to a few millime-
ters, although on a ﬂat surface greater distances
may be achieved. This inevitably limits the spread
of  genetic  variation  within  a  population.  About
two-thirds  of  all  liverworts,  and  slightly  more
than one-half of all mosses, are dioecious. Not sur-
prisingly,  fruiting  is  more  frequent  amongst
monoecious bryophytes than dioecious.

Although  reproduction  in  monoecious  bryo-

phytes is presumably dependent largely on selﬁng
(particularly  in  the  case  of  synoicous  mosses,  in
which  the  antheridia  and  archegonia  occur
together), there is no evidence that this has dele-
terious  consequences  in  nature.  Self-incompati-
bility has been detected in laboratory cultures of
mosses, but its occurrence in the wild is conjectu-
ral.  Investigators  have remarked  upon  the  fre-
quent  ﬁnding  of  apparently  healthy antheridia
which either failed to open or yielded non-motile
spermatozoids.  There  may  be  unidentiﬁed  envi-
ronmental  factors  causing  deﬁciencies  of  this
kind. They would inevitably limit the fertility of
natural populations. 

Dispersal  of  bryophytes  depends  upon  the
spores,  produced  meiotically  by the  sporophyte.
These  are  mostly  light  and  readily  wind-borne.
They contain chloroplasts and are surrounded by
a  two-layered  wall,  an  inner  intine and  an  outer
exine. Sporopollenin, often deposited in a pattern
characteristic  of  the  species,  is  a  feature  of  the
exine. This complex polymer protects the spores
from  rapid  dehydration.  Although  some  of  the
sporopollenin  is  produced  by the  spore  itself,
much  also  comes  from  degenerating  cells  adja-
cent to the sporocytes. This is added to the exine
in the ﬁnal stages of differentiation. These degen-
erating  cells  do  not,  however, form  a  distinct
tissue with a clear function as in most tracheoph-
ytes.

Many bryophytes produce capsules only rarely
or (so far as known) not at all. About 40 percent of
the British moss ﬂora produces sporophytes only
very occasionally, and  18 percent  of  the  British
and 9 percent of the eastern North American moss
ﬂoras  have been  found  only  as  gametophytes.
These species evidently rely largely or exclusively
on asexual means of reproduction.

The  features  used  in  the  classiﬁcation  of  the
bryophytes are ﬁrst the nature of the thallus, and
(where present) of the leaves, secondly the extent
of the development of the juvenile phase of the
gametophyte, and thirdly the presence or absence
of an opening mechanism in the capsule.

Marchantiopsida (liverworts)
Despite  the  diversity  of  the  liverworts,  there  is
little doubt that they form a natural group. The
protonemal phase of the gametophyte is usually

MARCHANTIOPSIDA (LIVERWORTS)

105

Figure 5.1. Marchantia polymorpha.
(a) Habit of female plant. (b)
Structure of gemma. (c)
Antheridiophore.

Figure 5.2. Marchantia polymorpha.
(a) Transverse section of thallus. (b)
Transverse section of pore. (c)
Surface view of pore.

ill deﬁned and the mature thallus almost always
shows recognizable dorsiventrality. A characteris-
tic feature of many liverworts is the presence of
oil  bodies,  often  of  complex  morphology,  in  the
cytoplasm.  These  possibly  render  the  tissues
unpalatable  to grazing  insects.  Liverworts  also
produce  bacteriocidal  substances,  and  some  of
these may have commercial value.

The antheridia of liverworts break open irreg-
ularly, instead of by a distinct cap cell. The capsule
of the sporophyte matures before the elongation
of  its  stalk,  the  converse  of  the  situation  in  the
mosses.

Of  the  seven  orders  of  the  Marchantiopsida,
the  common  Marchantiales,  Jungermanniales
and  Metzgeriales  will  be  considered  in  some
detail, and the small orders Sphaerocarpales and
Calobryales mentioned on account of special fea-
tures which claim attention.

The Marchantiales
The  Marchantiales  are  exclusively  thalloid.
Although some species are simple in appearance
and  structure, 
internal  organization  more
complex  than  that  found  in  any  other  thalloid
liverworts is also encountered in this order.

The thallus of Marchantia itself (Fig. 5.1), fre-
quent on damp soil and areas of burnt ground, is
dichotomously branched, with a thickened
central rib and the surface divided into hexagonal
areas visible with the naked eye. On examination
with a hand lens, a pore can be observed at the
center of each hexagonal area, which in transverse
section is seen to consist of an air chamber con-
taining photosynthetic tissue (Fig. 5.2). The pore,
like the stoma of a higher plant, probably allows
aeration of the thallus with the minimum dehy-
dration, although it is incapable of signiﬁcant
change in its aperture. Below the chlorophyllous

106

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA: DIVISION BRYOPHYTA (MOSSES AND LIVERWORTS)

tissue is a compact body of cells largely lacking
chloroplasts. The lower side of the thallus bears up
to eight rows of scales and unicellular rhizoids,
the walls of some of which bear peg-like invagina-
tions (“peg rhizoids”). The growth of the thallus is
sensitive to photoperiod, and ceases in long days.
This is accompanied by an accumulation of lunu-
laric acid, an endogenous growth regulator, pos-
sibly found in liverworts generally.

and 

Preissia. 

circular 

crushed, 

Amongst other members of the Marchantiales
showing  a  chambered  thallus  are  Conocephalum,
the  thallus  of  which  yields  a  characteristic  fra-
grance  when 
In
Conocephalum the  pore  is  much  simpler  than  in
Marchantia,  but  in  Preissia the  pore  is  not  only
complex  but  its  aperture  also  diminishes  with
falling  humidity.  This  feature  may  help  to limit
loss of water from the chamber and account for
Preissia being able to tolerate drier habitats than
Marchantia.  The  midrib  of  the  thallus  of  Preissia
also contains conspicuous elongated ﬁbrous cells.
In Conocephalum elongated water-conducting cells
in the ventral parenchyma have thickened walls
furnished  with 
thin-walled  pits.
Plasmodesmata  are  frequent  in  the  primary  pit
ﬁelds. Anastomosing bands of cellulosic material
decorate the inner surface of the wall. The mar-
chantialean liverwort Asterella also displays elon-
gated cells in the central part of the midrib. These
have thick walls, and the cytoplasm, aggregated at
the apical end of the cell, contains an assemblage
of  small  vacuoles  and  microtubules.  Numerous
plasmodesmata  with  conspicuous  desmotubules
are found in the end walls. These cells seem more
likely to be concerned with the conduction of food
materials than water. Exormotheca of South Africa,
also  marchantialean,  is  extremely  xerophytic.  It
forms colonies on decaying granite or gneiss, and
can withstand at least eight months of absolute
dryness. The cells contain proteins with immuno-
logical  properties  similar  to those  of  the  dehy-
drins found in blue-green algae and higher plants
subject to periodic desiccation.

Riccia represents the simplest kind of structure
found in the order. The lower part of the thallus is
again  a  compact  colorless  tissue,  but  the  upper
part consists of columns of chlorophyllous cells,
separated by narrow air channels. The upper cells
of  the  columns  are  colorless  and  ﬁt  closely

Figure 5.3. Marchantia polymorpha. Archegoniophore seen
from below.

together,  leaving  no  distinguishable  pores.  In
Riccia ﬂuitans (Fig. 5.9) the narrow, dichotomously
branched,  ﬂoating  thallus  is  divided  almost
entirely into air chambers separated by partitions
one cell thick.

reproduction
In  Marchantia,  which  is  dioecious,  sexual  repro-
duction is induced by increasing day length. The
male  and  female  gametes  are  produced  on
upright,  umbrella-shaped  structures 
termed
antheridiophores and  archegoniophores respectively
(and gametangiophores collectively) (Fig. 5.1a and c).
Both structures develop from one half of a dichot-
omy and are therefore homologous with a bifurca-
tion of the thallus. Their morphological nature is
clearly demonstrated by the rhizoids which grow
down grooves in the stalks (Figs. 5.3 and 5.4) and
by the  characteristic  photosynthetic  chambers
which develop in the caps of the mature gametan-
giophores. The female organs (archegonia) arise in
radial  rows  on  the  upper  surface  of  the  cap.
During the maturation of the archegonia, the cap
grows more above than below, with the result that
the  archegonia  become  transferred  to the  lower
surface. In the mature archegoniophore (Fig. 5.5)
each  row  of  archegonia  is  separated  from  its
neighbors by a curtain-like outgrowth, termed a

MARCHANTIOPSIDA (LIVERWORTS)

107

The  antheridiophore  lacks the  complexity  of
the  archegoniophore,  being  merely  an  elevated
cap  (Fig.  5.4),  with  the  antheridia  on  the  upper
surface.  Although  superﬁcial  in  origin,  the
mature antheridia are sunk in pits, each opening
to the exterior by a narrow pore. Each antherid-
ium is borne on a short stalk and bounded by a
single layer of sterile jacket cells. When mature it
contains a mass of small cubical cells (spermato-
cytes or antherocytes) in each of which differen-
tiates  a  biﬂagellate  spermatozoid.  This  is  in  the
form of a single gyre of a helix and consists of a
headpiece, an elongated nucleus, and a cytoplas-
mic tail (Fig. 5.7). The headpiece includes the two
posteriorly directed ﬂagella, one inserted behind
the  other,  and  a  large mitochondrion.  Close  to
this  is  a  lamellate  body,  the  multilayered  struc-
ture. A ribbon of microtubules, lying at an angle
of 45° to the plates of the MLS, extends from the
surface  of  this  body  and  follows  a helical  path
along the outside of the nucleus. The tail contains
a large plastid, parts of which extend as a ﬂap over
the end of the nucleus, and a mitochondrion lying
in a depression in the plastid. The differentiation
of  these  highly  specialized  gametes  from  cells
which are initially more or less isodiametric pre-
sents many problems of gene activation and cell
mechanics. Particularly interesting is the state of
the chromatin. Coarse ﬁbrils becoming oriented
parallel to the longitudinal axis of the nucleus are
evident in the early stages of the differentiation of
the nucleus, but the chromatin is fully condensed
in the mature gamete.

The  mature  antheridia  open  in  moist  condi-
tions  and  the  spermatocytes,  in  contact  with  a
ﬁlm of water, are rapidly dispersed, possibly a con-
sequence  of  the  high  surface  tension  of  the  cell
membrane. After a short time the spermatocytes
themselves break open and release the spermato-
zoids. For fertilization to be possible the male and
female plants must be growing together. It seems
likely  that  the  gametangia  become  mature,  and
fertilization occurs, before elongation of the gam-
etangiophores.

Although detailed observations are few, germi-
nation of the zygote of Marchantia probably begins
within 48 hours of fertilization. The ﬁrst division
is by a horizontal wall, transverse to the longitu-
dinal axis of the archegonium. Since it is from the

Figure 5.4. Marchantia polymorpha. Vertical section of
antheridiophore.

Figure 5.5. Marchantia polymorpha. Tangential section of an
almost mature archegoniophore.

perichaetium. In addition, sterile processes emerge
radially  from  the  upper  surface  of  the  cap
between the rows of archegonia, giving the whole
its familiar stellate appearance (Fig. 5.3).

The archegonium, as always in the bryophytes,
is formed in its upper parts by a simple column of
cells, and has a strikingly long neck (Fig. 5.6). The
egg  lies  at  the  dilated  base  of  the  ventral  canal
and,  when  mature,  appears  to be  suspended  in
ﬂuid. It is surmounted by a ventral canal cell, and
a number of neck canal cells. These degenerate at
maturity, and their products, when hydrated, give
rise to a mucilage through which the spermato-
zoids swim to reach the egg.

108

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA: DIVISION BRYOPHYTA (MOSSES AND LIVERWORTS)

Figure 5.6. Marchantia polymorpha.
(a) Archegonium before breakdown
of neck canal cells. (b) Mature
archegonium.

Figure 5.7. Marchantia polymorpha.
Diagram showing the disposition of
the organelles in an almost fully
differentiated spermatozoid. The
nucleus is cut open to show the
condensing chromatin. Scale
approximate. (After Carothers.
1975. Biological Journal of the Linnean
Society 7, Supplement 1.)

MARCHANTIOPSIDA (LIVERWORTS)

109

formed. In these the nucleus undergoes meiosis.
The  protoplast,  without  initial  furrowing,  is
divided  into  four  spores,  each  with  a  haploid
nucleus. The spores of the tetrads separate in the
capsule, become rounded in outline, and develop
walls. Not all the cells inside the capsule become
sporocytes; some (referred to as elaters because of
their subsequent behavior) elongate and lay down
spiral thickenings.

Elongation of the cells of the seta eventually
causes the calyptra to rupture, and, once exposed
to air,  the  single  layer  of  cells  surrounding  the
capsule  soon  bursts,  so  revealing  the  mass  of
yellow, haploid, spores. The loosening of this mass
and the dispersal of the spores are now assisted by
the contortions of the elaters. These contortions
are caused by the spiral bands in their walls, pre-
sumably consisting of cellulose microﬁbrils, alter-
ing  their  curvature  and  pitch as  they dry.  In
response to the strains generated in this way, the
cell as a whole makes jerky twisting movements.
The  spores  germinate  rapidly  on  a  damp
surface, giving rise to short, alga-like ﬁlaments of
cells. Division of the apical cell then ceases to be
conﬁned  to one  plane  and  subsequent  growth
leads to the mature form of the gametophyte.

In  most  capsules  of  Marchantia a  number  of
dyads can usually be found in addition to tetrads.
The spores of the dyads are larger and contain an
unreduced  chromosome  number.  They  yield
diploid  gametophytes.  In  Marchantia polymorpha
these are either purely male or purely female, but
in  some  tropical  species  bisexual  diploid  forms
are known.

No other genus has gametangiophores as elab-
orate as those of Marchantia. In Conocephalum, for
example,  the  archegoniophore  is  a  simple  cap
without  emergent  rays,  but  its  surface  has
complex pores in contrast to the simple ones else-
where.  In  Riccia,  gametangiophores  are  entirely
absent,  both  archegonia  and  antheridia  merely
lying at maturity in pits in the dorsal surface of
the  thallus.  The  sporophyte  generation  is  again
dependent on the gametophyte for nutrition, but
at maturity it consists of only a sac of spores, with
no seta or foot (Fig. 5.9). By the time the spores are
mature no living diploid tissue remains, and dis-
persal must await the decay of the gametophyte.
In  some  species  of  Riccia the  spores  continue  to

Figure 5.8. Marchantia polymorpha. Longitudinal section of
sporophyte rupturing the calyptra. Note the parallel
alignment of the elaters. (After Parihar. 1967. Bryophyta.
Central Book Depot, Allahabad.)

outer cell that the apex of the sporophyte arises,
embryogenesis is said to be “exoscopic”. The prod-
ucts of the inner cell form the foot, by which the
sporophyte  remains  anchored  in  the  gameto-
phyte.  Continued  growth and  differentiation,
which are dependent upon nutrients drawn from
the  gametophyte,  lead  to an  embryonic  sporo-
phyte consisting of three distinct regions. At the
summit is the immature capsule containing the
sporogenous cells, below this is a short seta, and,
at the base of the seta, the foot (Fig. 5.8).

At this stage, the young sporophyte is not only
enclosed  by the  proliferated  jacket  cells  of  the
archegonium, which form a calyptra, but also sur-
rounded  by a further  tubular  outgrowth  of  the
gametophyte  called  a  pseudoperianth (or  perigy-
nium).  Division of  the  sporogenous  tissue  (arches-
porium) inside the capsule remains mitotic until
eventually  the  spore  mother  cells  (sporocytes)  are

110

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA: DIVISION BRYOPHYTA (MOSSES AND LIVERWORTS)

Figure 5.9. Riccia ﬂuitans. (a) Transverse section of thallus.
(b) Thallus containing mature sporophyte.

cohere  in  their  original  tetrads.  In  Conocephalum
japonicum the  sporocytes  are  cylindrical  and  the
orientation of the spindles at meiosis is restricted.
In consequence the tetrad of spores is linear and
not tetrahedral.

bodies, 

Asexual  reproduction  of  the  Marchantiales
often  follows  from  bifurcation  of  the  thallus
being  accompanied  by progressive  decay  of  the
older  posterior  region.  In  this  way, an  area
becomes  quite  rapidly  colonized  by many  seem-
ingly individual  plants.  Additional  to this,
Marchantia has a notably elegant means of asexual
called
reproduction.  Multicellular 
gemmae, develop inside cup-like growths on the
upper  surface  of  the  thallus  (Fig.  5.1a).  Each
gemma  is  slightly  biconvex,  with  two  diametri-
cally opposed, marginal notches, each containing
a  small  meristem  (Fig.  5.1b).  When  mature,  the
gemmae become detached from the short stalk on
which they are borne, and are readily dispersed.
Experiments have shown that the newly detached
gemmae  have no  innate  dorsiventral  symmetry.
This becomes ﬁxed at germination by gradients of
light, temperature and other factors in the imme-
diate  environment.  Each  meristem  grows  out  to
form a new thallus  and,  ﬁnally, two individuals
result from decay of the central portion.

Culture  experiments  have shown  that  short
days promote the production of gemmae. The ger-
mination of the gemmae while in the cup is inhib-
ited  by growth-regulating  substances  diffusing
basipetally  from  the  apical  meristem  of  the
parent thallus.

evolution
Marchantia seems to represent the highest level of
organization achieved by a wholly thalloid gamet-
ophyte.  Are  we therefore  to regard  the  simple
Riccia as  a  primitive  marchantialean  plant,  and
Marchantia as  an  advanced  form?  Although  this
would  appear  plausible,  some  striking  breeding
experiments  with  Marchantia point  in  the  other
direction. A number of mutants were raised from
species of Marchantia in culture and hybridized in
various ways, with the result that a whole series
of forms was obtained which reproduced features
found in other genera of the order. The thallus of
the  var. dumortieroides,  for  example,  lacks air
chambers  and  resembles  that  of  Dumortiera,  a
genus  which,  except  for  this  feature,  is  close  to
Marchantia. Similarly the var. riccioides resembles
Riccia in its narrow branching and the immersion
of sex organs in the prostrate thallus. This reser-
voir  of  variation  in  Marchantia  suggests  that  its
evolutionary  antecedents  may  have yielded  the
other genera of the order by a process of simpliﬁ-
cation. Riccia would then be regarded as a reduced
form.

On  the  other  hand,  perhaps  both  Marchantia
and  Riccia should  be  regarded  as  evolved  forms.
The  archegoniophores  of  Marchantia,  which
elevate the almost seta-less capsule and facilitate
the  wide  dispersal  of  the  relatively  thin-walled
spores in air currents, can reasonably be regarded
as  an  advantageous  development.  In  the  xero-
phytic  species  of  Riccia,  however, the  spores  are
thick-walled and long-lived. Despite the apparent
rudimentary  sporophyte,  these  species  of  Riccia
are probably no less well adapted than Marchantia,
but  to a different,  Mediterranean  environment.
Nevertheless,  comparative  ribosomal  RNA  data
point to Riccia being ancient in the Marchantiales.
Clearly  identiﬁable  remains  of  both  Marchantia-

MARCHANTIOPSIDA (LIVERWORTS)

111

from 

and Riccia-like Marchantiales have been found in
Upper  Triassic  coals  of  Sweden,  establishing  the
antiquity of the marchantialean kind of thallus.
Persistent  tetrads  of  a  smooth  marchantialean
kind (p. 109), associated with remains of a possibly
Riccia-like thallus, of Silurian or Lower Devonian
age  have been  reported 
the  Welsh
Borderland.  Mats  of  Marchantia- and  Riccia-like
liverworts  are  a  prominent  feature  of  early
Cretaceous deposits in Antarctica. They appear to
have colonized  newly  deposited  river  sands  and
muds. These mats probably had an important eco-
logical function in binding virgin sediments and
promoting further colonization by tracheophytes.
Possibly  allied  to the  Marchantiales  is  the
largest known thallose liverwort, Monoclea, of New
Zealand.  There  are  no  specialized  gametangio-
phores,  but  the  manner  of  growth is  similar  to
that of Marchantia, and, as in Marchantia, there is
no furrowing of the sporocyte protoplast prelimi-
nary to spore formation. The thallus may reach a
length of 25cm (10in.), and its branches a width of
5cm (2in.).

in 

The Jungermanniales and Metzgeriales
The 
Jungermanniales  and  Metzgeriales,  the
largest orders amongst the hepatics, contain both
thalloid  and  leafy  forms.  Most  achieve only  a
small  size  in  temperate  regions,  but  leafy  forms
reaching  several  centimeters 
length  are
common in the humid tropics, where they are fre-
quently epiphytic. The thalloid genera are typiﬁed
by the  common  Pellia,  which  grows  dichoto-
mously  as  in  Marchantia,  but  differs  in  outward
appearance. A poorly deﬁned midrib of elongated
cells extends to each apical region. Examination
under  the  microscope  shows  that  the  thallus  is
indeed  simple,  having  none  of  the  specialized
photosynthetic tissue of the Marchantiales. Some
genera  have much  more  distinct  midribs
(Pallavicinia), while others, in which the thallus is
regularly dissected (Fossombronia), begin to resem-
ble the leafy forms. Morphological differentiation
in the thalloid forms reaches its peak in some of
the  tropical  representatives.  In  Symphogyna,  for
example, the ﬁliform underground rhizome gives
rise, in a sympodial fashion, to a sequence of erect
aerial thalli. These, to which the photosynthesis is
conﬁned and on which the sex organs are borne,

may reach a height of 2cm (0.75in.). The rhizome
contains  a  ﬁne  strand  of  elongated  water-con-
ducting cells, the differentiation of which begins
closely  behind  the  apical  cell.  The  mature  cells
have several  series  of  pits  arranged  helicoidally,
each pit being ontogenetically related to a plasmo-
desma. The heterotrophic Cryptothallus (p. 103) is
also placed with the Metzgeriales.

The leafy liverworts also show a wide range of
vegetative morphology, but here principally in the
form of the leaves. These may be simple, more or
less  circular,  plates  of  cells,  as  in  the  common
Odontoschisma sphagni,  or  more  often  twice  or
several times lobed. Sometimes the leaves achieve
great delicacy. In Blepharostoma, for example, the
lobes  consist  only  of  a  single  ﬁle  of  cells.  In
Frullania,  the  leaf  has  two  lobes,  the  lower  of
which  is  shaped  like  a  minute  helmet,  and  pos-
sibly serves as a water sac.

In most leafy liverworts the stem is inclined or
prostrate, and its symmetry clearly dorsiventral.
Although  the  leaves  are  usually  in  three  ranks,
only those on the dorsal side are fully developed.
Those of the third, ventral row (termed amphigas-
tria or under leaves) remain small, and are often
shed  a  short  distance  behind 
the  apex.
Surprisingly,  it  was  found  possible  to cause  the
development of ventral leaves of normal form by
treating  cultures  of  some  leafy  liverworts  (e.g.,
Plagiochila and  Gymnocolea)  with  hydroxyproline
(an  amino  acid)  or  the  inhibitor  2,2´-dipyridyl
(which prevents the formation of hydroxyproline
from  proline).  These  results  indicated  that  a
protein containing both proline and hydroxypro-
line  was  probably 
in  modulating
morphogenesis in these plants. This protein may
be  an  arabinogalactan  (AGP),  a  class  of  proteins
widely distributed in plants, and known to have
morphoregulatory properties (see, e.g., p. 294).

involved 

Classiﬁcation  of  the  leafy  liverworts  is  based
largely on the features of the leaves, including the
orientation of their insertions on the stem. When
the  anterior  margins  of  the  leaves  lie  regularly
beneath  the  posterior  of  those  in  front,  the
arrangement is said to be succubous (Fig. 5.10b) and
when  the  converse  incubous.  The  leaves  of  liver-
worts  regularly  lack  nerves  of  the  kind  seen  in
mosses, but the lower lobes of the bilobed leaves
of Diplophyllum possess a conspicuous central row

112

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA: DIVISION BRYOPHYTA (MOSSES AND LIVERWORTS)

Figure 5.10. Lophocolea cuspidata.
(a) Fertile shoot seen from above.
(b) Ventral surface showing
amphigastria and the succubous
arrangement of the leaves (see text).

of elongated cells. Conduction
of  water  along  the  stems  of
leafy  liverworts  is  probably
largely by  surface  capillarity.
Experiments have shown that
such  transport  is  more  rapid
with succubous arrangements
of leaves than with incubous.

reproduction 
Sexual  reproduction  is  essen-
tially similar to that described
for  the  Marchantiales,  except
that  specialized  gametangio-
phores are never produced. The antheridia, super-
ﬁcial in origin, usually occur singly, lying either in
cavities in the upper surface of the thallus (e.g.,
Pellia, Fig. 5.11) or, in leafy forms, in the axils of
leaves of special branches of limited growth (Fig.
5.10a). The spermatozoids are basically similar to
those of Marchantia, with differences in detail of
the MLS and microtubular ribbon. In at least one
species  of  Pellia the  spermatozoids  are  relatively
large,  the  nucleus  extending  for  several  gyres.
Also in Pellia the microtubular ribbon, as seen in
transverse  section,  is  not  closely  applied  to the
nucleus across its whole width, but is inclined at
an angle of about 45° to its surface. The archego-
nia are usually grouped, and are produced either
laterally, as in Pellia (Fig. 5.12), or at the tip of the
main  shoot,  as  in  most  leafy  liverworts.  When
archegonia  are  apical,  they,  and  ultimately  the
sporophyte,  terminate  the  growth of  the  main
shoot, so that vegetative growth is continued by a
lateral,  resulting  in  sympodial  branching.  Both
monoecious  and  dioecious  forms  occur,  some-
times in the same genus. The common Pellia epi-
phylla,  for  example, 
is  monoecious,  but  P.
fabbroniana,  frequent  in  calcareous  districts,  is
dioecious.

The sporophyte of the Jungermanniales and
Metzgeriales (Fig. 5.13) has a higher proportion of
sterile tissue than that of the Marchantiales. The

Figure 5.11. Pellia. Vertical section through antheridium.

sporophytes are green when young, and capable
of appreciable photosynthesis. Minerals are prob-
ably largely transmitted from the gametophyte,
but some may be absorbed directly. The capsule
develops while still enclosed in the calyptra and
the ultimate extension of the seta, which may
reach 1cm (0.4in.) or more, is extremely rapid
(rates of 1mm (0.04in.) hour⫺1 have been recorded
in Pellia). This extension is brought about solely by
cell elongation, and is accompanied by the disap-
pearance of starch from the cells. Extension is
markedly diminished if the activity of the Golgi

MARCHANTIOPSIDA (LIVERWORTS)

113

Figure 5.12. Pellia. Vertical section
of thallus showing archegonia.

a lobing of the protoplast, the furrows indicating
the planes which will separate the four spores of
the tetrad. Elaters are commonly present amongst
the  spores.  The  capsule  usually  opens  by four
valves  which,  as  a  consequence  of  differential
thickenings in the wall, become sharply reﬂexed.
The manner in which the elaters assist the distri-
bution  of  the  spores  varies.  In  Pellia the  elaters,
some of which remain as a brush attached to the
top of the seta (Fig. 5.13), are similar to those of
Marchantia. In some genera, however, the elaters
are  “explosive”.  In  Cephalozia bicuspidata,  for
example,  the  elaters  are  loosely  attached  to the
ends of the valves of the capsule. After the capsule
opens  they begin  to dry and  in  consequence  to

Figure 5.13. Pellia. Longitudinal section of maturing
sporogonium.

bodies in the cells is inhibited, indicating that it
is dependent upon a supply of hemicelluloses
reaching the walls. The extending setae display
phototropism, but the curvature is conﬁned to
the regions illuminated. There is no transmission
of the stimulus, a conspicuous feature of photot-
ropism in coleoptiles and seedlings. This differ-
ence is presumably related to the absence in the
sporophyte of Pellia of any localized site of
growth.

Meiosis 

the
Jungermanniales and Metzgeriales is preceded by

sporocytes 

in 

the 

of 

114

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA: DIVISION BRYOPHYTA (MOSSES AND LIVERWORTS)

Jungermanniales  and  Metzgeriales  are  known
from Devonian and Carboniferous rocks.

The Sphaerocarpales
The best-known member of the Sphaerocarpales is
Sphaerocarpos.  The  thallus  resembles  that  of  the
simpler  Marchantiales,  such  as  Riccia,  but  the
margin  is  frilly  and  suggestive  of  leaves.  The
antheridia  and  archegonia  occur  in  small  clus-
ters, each cluster enclosed in a distinctive involu-
cral  sheath.  As  in  Riccia,  the  sporophyte  is  little
more  than  a  capsule.  The  spores  can  be  stored
indeﬁnitely in de-aerated distilled water. In these
conditions they do not germinate, but viability is
preserved. The walls of the spores are commonly
heavily  thickened,  and  the  inner  wall  has  been
shown to consist of multiple separate lamellae, a
feature seen in the spores of some of the earliest
land plants (p. 115).

Sphaerocarpos,  which  is  regularly  dioecious,
has  ﬁgured  prominently  in  genetical  investiga-
tions.  It  was  found,  for  example,  that  the  wave-
length  of  UV  light  most  effective  in  producing
mutations in nuclei of immature spermatozoids
was that most strongly absorbed by nucleic acids,
providing the ﬁrst evidence for the special rôle of
these acids in heredity. Sphaerocarpos was also the
ﬁrst plant in which sex chromosomes were dem-
onstrated.  The  female  gametophyte  possesses  a
large X chromosome and the male a small Y, in
each instance accompanied by seven autosomes.
Irradiation  experiments  have  shown  that  both
chromosomes contain genetic information essen-
tial for the development of the respective sexual
features, and, in the case of the Y chromosome, for
a factor responsible for ensuring mobility of the
spermatozoids.

Sphaerocarpos has  also  provided  excellent
material  for  Mendelian  studies,  since  in  several
species the spores cohere ﬁrmly in their original
tetrads. The products of each meiosis can then be
separated  and  cultured  individually, allowing  a
direct  demonstration  of  genetic  recombination
(“tetrad analysis”). The spores are also of interest
in  relation  to the  inheritance  of  the  pattern  of
thickening of the wall, a feature used to discrimi-
nate species. The spores in hybrid capsules show
the  thickening  characteristic  of  the  female
parent,  suggesting  that  the  factors  determining

Figure 5.14. Pellia. Portion of capsule showing detail of the
wall, multicellular spores and elaters.

twist.  Suddenly  they violently  untwist,  hurling
both the elater and its adhering spores into the
air. The sudden expansion of the elater is believed
to be caused by the shrinking column of ﬂuid in
the drying cell being put under such tension that
it  eventually  spontaneously  vaporizes,  thus
increasing its volume many times.

The  spores  of  Pellia begin  to develop  before
being  shed  (Fig.  5.14),  a  feature  also  found  in  a
number of epiphytic leafy liverworts. The spores
of Cryptothallus tend to stick together in their orig-
inal tetrads. Some species of the Jungermanniales
and  Metzgeriales  are  rarely fertile.  Capsules  of
Plagiochila tridenticulata are wholly unknown. This
may  be  a  consequence  of  the  two  sexes  having
acquired  different  distributions.  The  North
American  populations  appear  to be  female  and
the European male.

Asexual  reproduction  of  many  species  takes
place by regeneration from fragments of mature
plants. Multicellular gemmae are not uncommon
and are sometimes conspicuous, as, for example,
the clusters of reddish two-celled gemmae on the
margins of the upper leaves of Sphenolobus exsecti-
formis, a plant frequent on rotting wood. In Blasia
pusilla, a thalloid form, multicellular gemmae are
produced in remarkable ﬂask-shaped receptacles
on  the  dorsal  side  of  the  thallus.  Release  of  the
gemmae in liverworts takes place by the cleavage
of a wall common to a cell of the gemma and the
parent (a schizolytic mechanism).

Remains  very suggestive  of  members  of  the

the pattern are maternally inherited through the
cytoplasm of the egg cell.

Although Sphaerocarpos is normally found on
damp earth, Riella is submerged, some species
being able to withstand brackish conditions. The
thallus takes the form of an erect ﬁliform stem,
rarely exceeding 2cm (0.75in.) in height, bearing
along one side a rufﬂed “wing” only one cell
thick. The rhizoids are conﬁned to the base. The
fossil Naiadita from the Upper Triassic is strik-
ingly similar to Riella (except that there is no well-
developed involucre around the sex organs), and
it probably grew in similar situations. Its refer-
ence to the Sphaerocarpales seems well estab-
lished. Dyads of spores with a structure similar to
that of
sphaerocarpalean spores have been
described from the lower Silurian, and intact
tetrads with similar features from the Lower
Carboniferous.

The Calobryales
The 
small  order  Calobryales,  of  which
Haplomitrium is  representative,  is  highly  distinc-
tive and the two genera it contains have a similar
growth form. The upright stems, which are radi-
ally symmetrical and bear three ranks of leaves,
rise  from  a  creeping  rhizome-like  axis  lacking
rhizoids. The archegonia are effectively terminal.
There  are  no  involucral  leaves  protecting  the
young sporophyte, but the calyptra is particularly
conspicuous.  The  spores  of  Haplomitrium show
irregular cohesion in dyads and tetrads.

Some  bryologists  have considered  the  sexual
reproductive  structures  of  the  Calobryales  to be
the most primitive amongst the bryophytes as a
whole.  The  curious  plant  Takakia (p.  121),  from
Japan  and  the  Paciﬁc  Northwest  and  originally
thought  to be  allied  to the  Calobryales,  is  now
known to be a moss.

Anthocerotopsida (hornworts)
This class contains a single order, Anthocerotales
(hornworts).  Although  formerly  included  with
Marchantiopsida,  the  Anthocerotales  are  now
usually  placed  in  a  separate  class,  mainly  on
account of their unique sporophyte. Anthoceros is
representative of its class.

ANTHOCEROTOPSIDA (HORNWORTS)

115

The Anthocerotales
The  gametophyte  of  Anthoceros recalls  Pellia in
external morphology except that there is neither
regular  dichotomous  growth nor  a  midrib  (Fig.
5.15a). The thallus is undifferentiated, apart from
internal  cavities  which  contain  mucilage  and
occasionally  the  blue-green  alga  Nostoc,  a  genus
known  to ﬁx  atmospheric  nitrogen.  In  most
species a single chloroplast, containing a complex
pyrenoid,  occurs 
in  each  cell,  a  situation
unknown elsewhere in the Bryophyta or in higher
plants  (with  the  exception  of  some  species  of
Selaginella), but common in the algae. This has led
to the suggestion that the Anthocerotae are closer
to an  algal  ancestry  than  other  Bryophyta.  The
lower surface of the thallus of most anthocerotes
contains  mucilage  pores.  The  oriﬁce  of  each  is
bounded by two cells, giving a close resemblance
to simple stomata (hence the term “pseudostom-
ata”).

Some species of Anthoceros (such as those of the
Mediterranean region) regularly form tubers, ena-
bling them to tide over a dry season unfavorable
for growth.

reproduction
In  Anthoceros,  as  in  Marchantia,  the  formation  of
the  sex  organs  is  dependent  upon  photoperiod.
Here, however, gametogenesis in most species is
initiated by diminishing day length, so that fertil-
ization occurs during winter.

The  antheridia  arise  from  a  cell  beneath  the
surface,  one  to several  antheridia  (depending
upon species) coming to lie in a closed chamber
(Fig.  5.15b).  The  roof  remains  intact  until  the
antheridia are mature. The spermatozoids resem-
ble  those  of  the  liverworts  generally, but  have
some  distinguishing  features  of  ultrastructural
detail.

Archegonia arise superﬁcially, but the wall of
the archegonium is continuous with the thallus,
the neck opening at the surface (Fig. 5.15c). This
resembles  the  situation  in  some  vascular  arche-
goniates 
6.20b).
Development  of  the  diploid  zygote  leads  to a
slender  cylindrical  sporophyte  (Fig.  5.16)  with  a
relatively  small  proportion  of  fertile  tissue.  The
sporophyte  remains  inserted  into  the  gameto-
phyte by a conspicuous lobed foot, and the basal

example, 

Fig. 

(see, 

for 

116

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA: DIVISION BRYOPHYTA (MOSSES AND LIVERWORTS)

Figure 5.15. Anthoceros laevis. (a) Female thallus with
sporophyte. (b) Section of antheridial chamber. (c) Section of
nearly mature archegonium. (d) Diagrammatic longitudinal
section of a sporophyte showing the different regions.

part is surrounded by an upgrowth of the thallus,
the involucre.

The development of the archesporium begins
as  a  dome-like  layer  within  the  summit  of  the
sporophyte. The sporophyte continues to grow for
several weeks or longer from a meristem close to
its base. During this growth the archesporium dif-
ferentiates  basipetally  as  a  hollow  cylinder,  the
center of which is occupied by a sterile columella.
Multicellular  elaters  (which  lack  distinct  spiral
thickenings and are often referred to as pseudo-
elaters)  differentiate  amongst  the  sporogenous
cells. When the spores at the top of the capsule are
ripe, the capsule dehisces basipetally (Fig. 5.15a)
along  two  longitudinal  slits,  the  opening  begin-
ning near the tip. As the upper part of the capsule
dries,  the  valves  separate  completely  above,  and
they begin to twist longitudinally. The consequent
contortions  of  the  valves  expose  the  spores  and
elaters adhering to the central column, and dis-

persal begins. The separation of the valves contin-
ues  downward  as  the  spores  mature,  and  mean-
while 
the  basal  meristem  generates  new
sporophytic  tissue  at  about  the  same  rate.
Consequently  a  single  sporophyte  continues  to
yield spores over a considerable period. The spores
have conspicuously  thickened  and  sculptured
walls.

Anthoceros and  its  allies  further  differ  from
other liverworts, but resemble the mosses, in pos-
sessing photosynthetic tissue in the outer layers
of  the  extending  sporophyte.  Stomata  are  also
present,  as  in  the  capsules  of  some  mosses.  The
sporophyte is thus not entirely dependent on the
gametophyte  for  nutrition,  but,  since  the  sporo-
phyte will still mature even if it is covered with a
tinfoil cap, it seems likely that it is able to draw a
substantial proportion of its essential metabolites
from the parent gametophyte.

evolutionary position
The Anthocerotales are remarkable amongst the
liverworts  in  recalling  the  features  of  both  the
algae (the presence of the pyrenoid in the chloro-
plast) and the mosses and higher plants (the pres-

BRYOPSIDA (MOSSES)

117

Figure 5.16. Anthoceros laevis. Female plants bearing young
sporophytes. Scale bar 5 cm.

ence of stomata and the continued growth of the
sporophyte).  They  are  consequently  thought  by
some  to stand  close  to the  line  of  evolution
leading  from  the  algae  to terrestrial  vegetation.
The intermediate position of the Anthocerotales
extends even to their ultrastructure. The electron
microscope  conﬁrms  that  the  chloroplasts  of
Anthoceros  resemble  those  of  the  algae,  but  the
chloroplasts  of  Megaceros,  which  are  several  in
each cell, often lack pyrenoids and possess well-
deﬁned grana. They thus resemble those of land
plants generally.

Another feature of the Anthocerotales which
has  excited  much  attention  is  the  axial  form of
the sporophyte, and the tendency in some species
for  the  foot  to produce  rhizoid-like  outgrowths
into  the  tissue  of  the  gametophyte.  Since  the
sporophyte in some forms is long-lived and may
even  persist  for  a  time  after  the  death  of  the

parent gametophyte, it may indicate how simple
axial  plants,  such  as  those  of  the  Silurian  and
early Devonian (p. 135), have evolved. Alternatively
the  Anthoceros condition  may  be  derived,  the
sporophyte  having  become  reduced  and  almost
deprived of its independence.

Although ﬁrm evidence relating to either pos-
sibility is lacking, it seems quite plausible that a
growth form similar to that shown by the living
Anthocerotales  did  play  some  part  in  the  evolu-
tion  of 
from  algal  ancestors.
Unfortunately the only fossils so far known attrib-
utable to the Anthocerotales are spores from the
Tertiary.

land  plants 

Bryopsida (mosses)
The mosses are a class much greater in number
and more widely distributed than the liverworts,
occurring in almost every habitat supporting life.
Apart from being the dominant vegetation in acid
bogs,  and  alpine  and  arctic  regions,  they are  a
familiar  feature  of  woodlands  and  hedgerows.

118

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA: DIVISION BRYOPHYTA (MOSSES AND LIVERWORTS)

Figure 5.17. Sphagnum ﬁmbriatum. (a) Upper portion of
shoot with sporophytes. (b) Stem leaf. (c) Branch leaf. (d)
Arrangement of cells in leaf, adaxial surface. (e) Section of
leaf.

Some  species  even  survive  the  polluted  atmos-
phere  of  urban  areas,  often  forming  dark  green
cushions  between  paving  stones  and  in  other
damp  crevices.  Mosses  in  exposed  situations,
including Sphagnum in bogs, often reach tempera-
tures of 30–40°C (86–104°F). Isoprene production
(p. 11), which is more common in mosses than in
any other major group of land plants, increases in
these  conditions,  and  may  consume  up  to 8
percent  of  the  carbon  ﬁxed.  As  in  other  land
plants,  isoprene  appears  to  be  concerned  with
protecting  the  photosynthetic  apparatus  from
excessive insolation and heating.

The  features  which  distinguish  the  mosses
from  the  liverworts  are  found  in  both  gameto-
phyte  and  sporophyte.  The  protonemal  stage  of
the gametophyte is often conspicuous, the mature
form of the gametophyte is always leafy, and the

rhizoids are multicellular. The sporophyte grows
from an apical cell. The capsule in many instances
has a complex opening mechanism which affects
the distribution of the spores, and sterile elaters
are never present.

The three orders, Sphagnales, Andreaeales and
Bryales,  differ  principally  in  the  nature  of  the
protonema  and  the  structure  of  the  capsule.
There  are  also  differences  in  the  ultrastructural
detail  of  the  spermatozoids  (which  resemble
those of other bryophytes) which may have taxo-
nomic signiﬁcance.

The Sphagnales
The Sphagnales, a very distinctive order, are repre-
sented  by a single  genus,  Sphagnum,  conﬁned  to
acid, waterlogged habitats. The more or less con-
tinuous  spongy  layer  of  peat  bogs  consists  very
largely of a range of Sphagnum species.

The adult gametophyte comprises an upright
main axis from which whorls of branches arise at
regular intervals (Fig. 5.17). The leaves, which are

BRYOPSIDA (MOSSES)

119

closely inserted, have a peculiar structure which
is  diagnostic  of  the  genus,  and  also,  in  its  ﬁner
details,  of  the  many  species  (Fig.  5.17c  and  d).
When  ﬁrst formed,  the  leaves  are  made  up  of
many  diamond-shaped  cells.  These  then  cut  off
narrow daughter cells, but on two sides only. The
daughter  cells  develop  chloroplasts,  but  the
mother cell remains colorless. It eventually dies,
but before doing so pores are formed in its upper
and lower walls and spiral bands of thickening are
often laid down around the cell. The architecture
of the leaf of Sphagnum thus provides a splendid
example  of  the  phenomenon  of  apoptosis,  a
pattern of programmed cell death being imposed
upon  the  developing  leaf.  The  cell-to-cell  inﬂu-
ences  which  determine  this  pattern  are  as  yet
wholly unknown.

The epidermis of the branches takes the form
of  a  cylindrical  sheet  of  empty  elongated  cells
(termed  “retort  cells”),  each  with  an  apical  pore
open  to the  exterior.  There  is  no  evidence  that
these cells are formed by a sequence of divisions
similar  to that  seen  in  the  development  of  the
empty cells of the leaf.

The  empty  cells  of  the  mature  leaf  and
branches are able to take up water and act as res-
ervoirs. The weight of a saturated plant may be as
much as 20 times that of the same plant dry. This
unique  water-storing  capacity  of  the  leaves
accounts for the outstanding bog-building proper-
ties of Sphagnum. The acidity of the bogs is largely
attributable  to the  presence  of  phenolic  sub-
stances in the walls of the dead cells which act in
the same way as ion-exchange resins. The growing
plants  extract  metallic  cations  from  inﬂowing
waters and release hydrogen ions, so maintaining
the acidity at values of around pH 4.0 or less. The
lack  of  oxygen  in  the  lower  levels  of  the  bog
impedes oxidation of the organic matter, leading
to accumulations of peat of considerable depth.

Well-preserved  leaves  similar  to those  of
Sphagnum have been found in Permian deposits in
Russia, indicating beyond doubt the great antiq-
uity of this kind of construction.

reproduction
The reproduction of Sphagnum is probably princi-
pally vegetative, the decay of the older parts even-
tually  causing  branches  to separate  and  thus  to

become new individuals. Disks of Sphagnum peat
from depths as great as 30cm (12in.) will produce
innovative growths when exposed to light and a
saturated atmosphere. These probably arise from
the outer cortex of the buried stems. Some cells
evidently remain viable and capable of division,
possibly for as long as 60 years.

Mature plants in favorable situations produce
sex organs freely. Both monoecious and dioecious
species  occur.  The  antheridia,  each  of  which
begins its development from a single apical cell,
lie in the axils of leaves toward the tips of small
upper  branches  (Fig.  5.18).  These  antheridial
branches are often strongly pigmented and clus-
tered  in  a  conspicuous  comal  tuft.  The  female
inﬂorescence  consists  of  a  bud-like  aggregate of
archegonia  and  bracts  borne  laterally  near  the
summit of the main stem.

After  fertilization  the  zygote  yields  a  sporo-
phyte  (Fig.  5.17a)  consisting  principally  of  a
capsule,  containing  a  dome-shaped  archespor-
ium, and a foot. The seta remains inconspicuous,
and the function of elevating the capsule is taken
on by the base of the female inﬂorescence which,
as the capsule matures, grows up as a leaﬂess axis,
or pseudopodium (Fig. 5.19). The absence of any cell
extension in the seta, and correspondingly of any
marked  ﬂux  of  ﬂuid  into  the  developing  sporo-
phyte,  is  correlated  with  the  absence  of  labyrin-
thine walls at the interface of the two generations
in the foot.

Release of the spores is brought about by air
pressure which builds up in the lower half of the
capsule as it dries (and may reach a level of 300kPa
(3atm)).  Eventually  this  pressure  is  sufﬁcient  to
dislodge the clearly differentiated lid (operculum)
with explosive force, and the spores are effectively
dispersed.

Developing  Sphagnum capsules  are  occasion-
ally  parasitized  by a fungus  (Bryophytomyces).
Although the mature capsule may appear perfect,
the small spores of the fungus replace those of the
host.  This  gave rise  to reports  of  heterospory  in
Sphagnum before the situation was understood.

Sphagnum spores  germinate 

to form  a
ﬁlament,  but  this  is  rapidly  replaced  by a small
thallose  protonema.  This  in  turn  gives  rise  to a
bud which develops into the familiar leafy gamet-
ophyte,  the  protonema  meanwhile  becoming

120

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA: DIVISION BRYOPHYTA (MOSSES AND LIVERWORTS)

Figure 5.18. Sphagnum sp. (a) Antheridial branch. (b)
Longitudinal section of antheridial branch. (c) Longitudinal
section of archegonial branch.

Figure 5.19. Sphagnum sp. Longitudinal section of nearly
mature sporophyte.

moribund  and  disappearing.  Protonemata  also
appear on disks of old peat maintained in humid
conditions.  Many  appear  to arise  from  spores
within the compacted peat which have remained
viable. Others are secondary in origin from viable
cells in the old stems.

The Andreaeales
The  Andreaeales  are  an  order  containing  only
three genera, distinguished by their peculiar cap-
sules.

The  leafy  gametophyte  of  Andreaea (Fig.  5.20)
rarely exceeds 1cm (0.4in.) in height. It is usually
found  growing  on  rock,  chieﬂy  in  cold,  exposed
and  relatively  dry  regions.  The  leaves  are  olive-
brown in color, composed of rounded cells, and in
most species showing no distinct midrib.

Sex organs are formed apically. The sporophyte
resembles  that  of  Sphagnum in  having  a  domed
archesporium (Fig. 5.20c), and in being borne on a
pseudopodium  at  maturity.  Dehiscence  of  the
capsule  takes  place  by four  longitudinal  slits
which  do  not  meet  at  the  tip  (Fig.  5.20b).  The
hygroscopic properties of the wall cause the slits
to close in damp conditions, and to open again in
dry (Fig. 5.20a).

The protonema of Andreaea is similar to that of

Sphagnum.

Also placed in the Andreaeales is the recently

BRYOPSIDA (MOSSES)

121

Figure 5.20. Andreaea nivalis. (a) Habit of fertile plant
showing dehisced capsule in dry condition. (b) Dehisced
capsule in wet condition. (c) Longitudinal section of mature
sporophyte.

discovered Andreaeobryum, growing in the oceanic
northwest of  Canada  and  Alaska.  The  capsule  is
elevated by a seta, and opens less regularly than in
Andreaea. The protonema produces curious cylin-
drical  multicellular  processes  which  are  green
photosynthetic.  Whereas
and 
Andreaea is  usually  found  on  siliceous  rocks,
Andreaeobryum prefers a calcareous habitat.

presumably 

Current evidence points to Takakia (p. 115) also
being  correctly  placed  here.  This  has  a  small
upright  stem,  rising  from  a  ﬁliform  rhizome,
growing  on  soil  partly  covering  rocks.  It  is
conﬁned to subalpine situations in Japan and the
oceanic  northwest of  the  American  continent.
The  stems  bear  linear  appendages  (“phyllids”),
usually in groups of two or three. The archegonia
are terminal. The archesporium is domed, and the
capsule lacks a peristome and lid. Dehiscence of
the  capsule  takes  place  by a single  slit  which
extends  spirally  from  the  base  of  the  capsule  to

the tip, a feature unique in the bryophytes. After
rupture, the calyptra is carried up at the summit
of  the  capsule,  but  becomes  loose  and  fragmen-
tary. The seta remains short and thick and does
not  attain  the  delicacy  seen  in  many  bryalean
mosses. In structure and shape the foot resembles
that  of  Andreaea.  Although  the  recognition  of
Takakia as a moss appears well founded, a distant
afﬁnity  with  the  Calobryales,  particularly  in
respect  of  the  archegonia  terminating  the  leafy
axes, remains a possibility.

The Bryales
The 600 or so genera of the Bryales form a well-
deﬁned order. Although there is a common basic
morphology  and  life  cycle  within  the  order,  the
variation  in  size,  detailed  structure  and  habitat
preferences  is  considerable.  Many  mosses  are
conﬁned  to permanently  damp  situations  in
woodlands and by springs, but others, for example
Tortula ruraliformis, are able to survive periods of
drought  in  sand  dunes  and  other  arid  habitats.
The cells of these species appear to have acquired
the capacity to continue metabolism at a reduced
rate while  partially  dehydrated.  At the  other

122

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA: DIVISION BRYOPHYTA (MOSSES AND LIVERWORTS)

Figure 5.21. Hypnum cupressiforme.
(a) Fertile shoot system. (b) A
portion of the shoot showing the
closely inserted leaves. (c) Capsule,
showing peristome in dry state. (d)
Peristome in wet condition.

extreme are a few subaquatic
species, such as Fontinalis anti-
pyretica.

Some  mosses  are  remark-
ably tolerant of heavy metals,
and  in  some  areas  serve  as
“indicator” plants. The world-
wide  genus  Mielichhoferia,  for
example,  contains  a  number
of  species  characteristic  of
acidic  copper-bearing 
soils
and rocks.

The most familiar form of the moss plant is the
adult gametophyte (Figs. 5.21 and 5.26). This con-
sists  of  a  main  axis  growing  from  an  apical  cell
and  bearing  leaves  which,  although  usually  spi-
rally inserted, may in some forms come to lie on
one  plane.  This  gives  the  shoot  a  complanate
appearance (e.g., Neckera, common on banks and
rocks). In a few species (e.g., Fissidens) the insertion
of  the  leaves  is  equitant  and  the  leaves  are
arranged in two ranks. The leaves of most mosses
consist  of  a  single  sheet  of  cells,  although  the
central  region  may  be  thickened  and  contain  a
well-deﬁned  midrib 
(often  referred  to as  a
“nerve”), sometimes excurrent in a hyaline point.
The most complex leaf is found in Polytrichum and
its allies. Here a number of parallel longitudinal
lamellae  grow up  from  the  upper  surface  (Fig.
5.22)  and  the  chloroplasts  occur  principally  in
these  cells.  Air  is  able  to circulate  between  the
lamellae, and experiments have shown that they
are sites of active photosynthesis. The shape of the
leaf,  and  the  nature  and  development  of  the
midrib and of the cells at the margin of the leaf,
feature  prominently  in  the  taxonomy  of  the
mosses.

Anatomically, moss  gametophytes  offer  little
that is outstanding amongst land plants, the most
complex differentiation being found in the stem
of  Polytrichum (Fig.  5.23).  Not  only  is  there  an

approach  here  to the  development  of  tracheids
(but no evidence of ligniﬁcation), but also a clear
radially symmetrical zonation in structure, recall-
ing that of the axes of some of the smaller ﬁlmy
ferns. A core of thin-walled cells (hydroids), which
are dead and empty at maturity, lies at the center.
These  have inclined  end  walls,  and  are  able  to
conduct  water  and  solutes.  In  the  rhizome  of
Polytrichum (but  less  frequently  in  the  upright
stem) the hydroids are mixed with stereids, living
cells  usually  with  thickened 
lateral  walls.
Surrounding the hydroids is a zone of elongated
elements  tending  to be  swollen  at  their  ends.
These are the leptoids. Their end walls are inclined,
callosed,  and  perforated  by plasmodesmata.
Although  the  nuclei  are  often  degenerate, some
protoplasmic contents persist. These include plas-
tids  with  rudimentary  thylakoids  and  plastoglo-
buli,  mitochondria,  and  often  conspicuous
endoplasmic  reticulum.  Leptoids  are  believed  to
have a phloem-like function. There is a close struc-
tural similarity to the sieve cells of gymnosperms.
in
Polytrichum and  its  allies,  a  core  of  hydroids  is
found  in  many  moss  stems.  Experiments  have
shown that, where present, the hydroids are the
principal site of the internal conduction of water.
In most mosses, however, there is also substantial
apoplastic conduction, or even capillary conduc-

leptoids  are 

Although 

found  only 

BRYOPSIDA (MOSSES)

123

Figure 5.22. Polytrichum commune.
Transverse section of leaf showing
the assimilatory lamellae.

phase.  The  upright  ﬁlaments
resemble the chloronema, but
in the prostrate (caulonema) the
septa are oblique and the cells
are  yellowish  in  color.  The
buds  yielding  the  mature
form of the gametophyte (Fig.
5.29)  arise  solely  on  the  caulonema.  A  culture
growing from a single spore tends to be radially
symmetrical. The buds arise in a series of concen-
tric rings, indicative of a form of developmental
periodicity within the culture.

reproduction
In  sexual  reproduction,  the  Bryales  show  every
possible  arrangement  of  the  archegonia  and
antheridia.  Both  monoecious  and  dioecious
species  occur,  and  amongst  the  monoecious
species  the  gametangia  may  be  either  mixed
together (synoicous) in a bud-like inﬂorescence, or
in separate inﬂorescences. Whatever the arrange-
ment,  the  antheridia  and  archegonia  are  often
numerous and interspersed with sterile hairs or
paraphyses (Figs. 5.24 and 5.25), the whole cluster
of  sex  organs  commonly  being  surrounded  by a
whorl  of  closely  adpressed  leaves  (perichaetium if
female;  perigonium if  male).  The  archegonia
usually have long necks, each consisting of several
tiers of cells, and the central canal may contain as
many as 10 cells. The antheridia are stalked, and
one or more cells at the apex usually form a dis-
tinct  lid  at  maturity,  opening  as  if  on  a  hinge
while the mass of spermatocytes is discharged.

There  is  a  striking  correlation  in  the  Bryales
between the position on the plant where the sex
organs are produced and the growth habit. Where
the reproductive organs terminate the main axis,
and growth is consequently sympodial, the main
axis  is  almost  invariably  upright.  These  are  the
acrocarpous mosses.  In  the  remainder,  where  the
sex  organs  are  produced  laterally  (the  pleurocar-
pous mosses),  the  main  axis  is  usually  creeping
(Fig. 5.21a). With only a few exceptions, the tufted
mosses are acrocarpous. Photoperiod and temper-
ature affect the onset of the sexual phase in many

Figure 5.23. Polytrichum commune. Transverse section of
stem. Stereids are more conspicuous in rhizomes than in
aerial stems.

tion external to the stem facilitated by adpressed
leaf bases or matted rhizoids. In some instances
(e.g.,  Thuidium tamariscinum)  the  stem  is  clothed
with a tomentum of green, branched, ﬁlamentous
outgrowths (paraphyllia) which acts like a wick. In
some other genera cells on the abaxial surface of
the  leaf  bases  lose  their  contents.  Pores  formed
between  them  and  to the  exterior  provide  a
system  of  superﬁcial  conducting  channels.  Such
cells are referred to as “hyalocysts”.

devel opment of the adult
g ametophyte
In all Bryales the protonemal phase is conspicu-
ous.  In  Funaria and  some  other  mosses  two  dis-
tinct  phases  of  protonemal  development  have
been  recognized.  In  the  ﬁrst (chloronema),  which
resembles  a  branching  ﬁlamentous  alga,  the
dividing walls are transverse and the cells bright
green. This gives way to a strongly heterotrichous

124

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA: DIVISION BRYOPHYTA (MOSSES AND LIVERWORTS)

mosses,  and  these  factors  are  probably  respon-
sible  for  the  annual  reproductive  cycle  seen  in
many  temperate  species.  In  extreme  conditions
sexual  cycles  may  become  altogether  erratic.
Spermatogenesis, for example, seems particularly
susceptible to damage by the low temperatures of
polar regions, and widespread abortion of embryo
sporophytes has also been observed in these situa-
tions.

The  development  of  the  sporophyte  begins
immediately after fertilization. A transverse wall
divides  the  zygote  into  an  upper  and  a  lower
(hypobasal)  cell.  Although  in  some  mosses  (e.g.,
Funaria)  transverse  and  longitudinal  divisions
then form a three-dimensional embryo, in which
the regions yielding the foot, seta and capsule are
soon  distinguishable,  in  others  continued  trans-
verse divisions of the hypobasal cell lead to a tran-
sient  ﬁlamentous  phase.  In  Mnium hornum and
Catherinea undulata the  ﬁlament  may  reach  7–9
cells in length. In some species the lower part of
the ﬁlament appears to persist as a downward pro-
jection of the foot between the cells of the gamet-
ophyte  (in  Molendoa hornschuchiana,  for  example,
this projection may reach a length of 275␮m).

In contrast to the liverworts, the extension of
the seta begins well before the capsule is mature.
The  venter  of  the  archegonium,  also  stimulated

Figure 5.24. Mnium sp. Longitudinal section of female head.

Figure 5.25. Mnium hornum. Longitudinal section of male
head.

BRYOPSIDA (MOSSES)

125

Figure 5.26. Funaria hygrometrica.
(a) Habit of fertile plant. (b) Mature
capsule showing intact peristome.
(c) Portion of peristome viewed
from the inside.

vaginula  without  damage.  In
this way it has been possible to
transfer the young sporophyte
of  Dicranum scoparium to the
vaginula of Catherinea undulata
(a  totally  unrelated  species)
and  to obtain  continued  and
normal growth of the foreign
sporophyte 
(Fig.  5.28).  This
supports  the  view  that  the
nutrition passing from gamet-
ophyte  to sporophyte  is  of  a
quite  general  character,  and
that molecules that are infor-
mational  and  species-speciﬁc
do  not  traverse  the  genera-
tional interface.

into growth by germination of the zygote, forms a
cap-like calyptra covering the young sporophyte.
Extension of the seta tears the calyptra away from
the main body of the gametophyte, but in many
species  (e.g.,  Funaria  hygrometrica)  it  continues
tightly to ensheathe the developing capsule. If the
calyptra  is  removed  prematurely, the  capsule
remains  upright  and  symmetrical,  instead  of
becoming arcuate (cf. Fig. 5.26a), and the apophy-
sis (Fig. 5.27) and upper part of the seta become
swollen.  The  inﬂuences  emanating  from  the
calyptra  seem  to be  partly  physical  and  partly
chemical. Replacement of the calyptra with one of
comparable  morphology  from  another  species
eliminates the effects of removal. It is noteworthy
that  mosses  in  which  the  apophysis  and  upper
part  of  the  seta  are  normally  swollen  (e.g.,
Oedipodium and  Splachnum)  are  characterized  by
poorly developed and loosely ﬁtting calyptras.

The terminal part of the gametophyte which
houses  the  foot  of  the  sporophyte  is  termed  the
vaginula.  Since  there  is  no  organic  continuity
between  the  two  generations,  the  embryonic
sporophyte can in some species be pulled from the

The  capsule  itself  (Figs.  5.21, 5.26,  5.27  and
5.29)  is  a  complex  organ,  but  its  differentiation
follows a regular radial pattern, and two concen-
tric  regions  of  tissue  can  be  recognized  which
follow  distinct  developmental  paths.  An  inner
region,  termed  the  endothecium,  gives  rise  to the
archesporium,  which  in  the  Bryales  is  never
domed  but  is  always  a  cylinder,  often  with  a
central  sterile  columella.  Outside  the  endothe-
cium is the amphithecium which, in most Bryales,
differentiates  a  ring  of  remarkable  tooth-like
structures, the peristome. This remains as a fringe
around  the  mouth  of  the  opened  capsule  (Figs.
5.21c and d and 5.26c). The peristome is developed
from  three  layers  of  cells.  Thickenings  are  laid
down on both sides of the tangential walls bound-
ing  the  middle  layer. Only  these  thickenings
remain at maturity. They then fall into a number
of  columns,  each  of  which  yields  a  peristome
tooth. Because of the ordered sequence of mitoses
in the differentiation of the amphithecium, and
the regular spacing of the cells giving rise to the
peristome, the number of teeth is constant in any
given species and is always a power of 2. Where a
peristome is fully developed (as in a moss such as

126

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA: DIVISION BRYOPHYTA (MOSSES AND LIVERWORTS)

divisions. The columella usually begins to break
down at this stage and ultimately the cavity of the
capsule is occupied solely by spores. When these
are mature the operculum detaches itself, expos-
ing  the  peristome  (Figs.  5.21c  and  d  and  5.26b),
which now begins to play an important rôle in the
dispersal  of  the  spores.  The  polysaccharide
material  forming  the  peristome  teeth  is  hygro-
scopic  and,  since  the  macromolecular  orienta-
tions  of  the  thickenings  in  the  two  columns  of
cells giving rise to a tooth differ, tensions are gen-
erated in the tooth with changes in its hydration.
These are released by sharp twisting and bending
movements.  The  peristome  thus  forms  a  very
effective  scattering  mechanism,  activated  by
changes  in  atmospheric  humidity.  The  exact
nature of the movements of the teeth varies with
the species. In some Bryales, for example Funaria
hygrometrica, the peristome is incurved when wet
and recurved when dry, but in others the move-
ments are less regular. 

In Pottia heimii (widespread on soil near the sea)
the peristome is rudimentary, and the lid of the
capsule  remains  attached  to the  columella.  The
lid is raised in relation to the rest of the capsule in
dry conditions, allowing escape of the spores, and
lowered  when  wet.  In  Polytrichum,  also  lacking  a
peristome,  the  capsule  remains  closed  by a
diaphragm  after  shedding  the  operculum.  The
spores escape through pores around its edge (Fig.
5.32).

The number of spores in a capsule varies from
a few thousand in species with small capsules to a
million  or  more  in  those  with  large capsules.
Although in dioecious mosses the male plants are
often  smaller  than  the  female,  differences  in
spore size correlated with sex are rare. The best-
known example is provided by Macromitrium of the
southern  hemisphere.  In  some  species  of  this
genus  the  spores  fall  distinctly  into  two  size
classes, the smaller giving rise to diminutive male
plants. The four spores in each tetrad are initially
similar,  but  subsequently  two  become  distinctly
larger. Evidently  there  is  segregation  of  sex  at
meiosis.

The spores of the Bryales have thin walls, and
germinate  rapidly  on  a  damp  surface.  The  dura-
tion  of  the  protonemal  phase  varies  widely. In
some  Bryales  it  is  comparatively  brief,  but  in

Figure 5.27. Funaria hygrometrica. Median longitudinal
section of immature capsule.

Funaria),  there  are  two  concentric  rings  of  teeth
(Fig.  5.26c),  but  in  other  genera  the  inner  teeth
may be missing, or the whole peristome may be
imperfect or rudimentary, or even absent.

Chlorophyllous tissue occurs in the immature
capsule, particularly in the basal region (apophy-
sis), where stomata are also found in the epider-
mis.  The  sporophyte  is  thus  to some  extent
autotrophic.  In  some  species  (e.g.,  Funaria hygro-
metrica), air spaces occur between the archespor-
ium and the wall of the capsule. This conspicuous
aeration has perhaps been developed in relation
to the  respiratory  demands  of  the  developing
archesporium.  The  seta  frequently  contains  a
strand  of  hydroids  ascending  from  the  foot  into
the base of the capsule. Leptoids are never present
in the seta.

Meiosis within the spore mother cells is fore-
shadowed  by the  appearance  of  furrows  indicat-
ing  the  site  of  the  future  dividing  walls,
accompanied by the siting of bundles of microtu-
bules  in  anticipation  of  the  imminent  nuclear

BRYOPSIDA (MOSSES)

127

Figure 5.28. Transplantation of
sporophytes in the Bryales. (a,b)
Control plants of Catherinea
undulata; (c) C. undulata with a
transplanted embryonic sporophyte
of Dicranum scoparium; (d,e) C.
undulata with sporophytes of D.
scoparium three weeks after
transplantation; (f,g) C. undulata with
transplanted embryos of D.
scoparium which have developed
into normal mature sporogonia; (h)
control plants of D. scoparium. Scale
bar 1cm. (From Arnandow. 1925.
Flora 118/119.)

Figure 5.29. Bryum pallens, fruiting condition. Scale bar 
1 cm.

128

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA: DIVISION BRYOPHYTA (MOSSES AND LIVERWORTS)

others  prolonged.  In  Pogonatum aloides,  common
on shaded acidic banks, the protonema persists as
a  dark  green  felt  from  which  mature  plants  of
limited  life  arise  over  a  long  period.  A  tropical
example  is  the  Southeast  Asian  Ephemeropsis
which  forms  an  extensive  protonema  on  leaves.
The mature plants arising from it are minute, con-
sisting  only  of  a  few  bracts  surrounding  sex
organs.  In  species  in  which  the  protonema  is  of
limited  duration  the  protonemal  state  is  often
continued by small amounts of secondary proto-
nema issuing from the bases of the mature plants.
The protonema of Tetraphis is unusual in produc-
ing small leaf-like outgrowths.

In  some  mosses  (for  example  Dicnemon,  an
Australasian  epiphytic  genus)  the  spores  germi-
nate  in  the  capsule,  so  that  the  mature  capsule
appears to contain gemmae. If these multicellular
nodules fall at a favorable site, they quickly yield
leafy gametophytic buds. It is not clear whether
each nodule comes from a single spore, or from a
tetrad. 

Vegetative  propagation  undoubtedly  plays  a
large part  in  the  asexual  reproduction  of  the
Bryales.  Sometimes  propagation  is  quite  crude.
Tufts of the moss Grimmia longirostris, for example,
a species of the Andean paramo which grows on
thin soil on rocks, become disrupted by frost. This
results in “moss balls”, small spheroidal masses of
soil and the moss, which are then freely distrib-
uted by wind. Additionally, almost any part of an
adult  moss  gametophyte  –  leaf,  stem  or  even
rhizoid – is capable of regeneration, usually yield-
ing a secondary protonema. Ultimately buds are
formed, as on the primary protonema, giving rise
to new individuals  (Fig.  5.30).  Many  species
produce  gemmae  of  characteristic  shape.  These
serve  as  an  ordered  means  of  asexual  reproduc-
tion.  Their  production  may  be  general,  or
conﬁned to certain regions of the plant, or even to
specialized structures (Fig. 5.31). The separation of
the  gemmae  from  the  parent  plant  is  either
schizolytic, as in the liverworts, or by the degener-
ation  of  a  special  tmema cell  connecting  the
gemma to the parent (lysigenic). The release of the
epiphyllous gemmae of some species of Tortula is
schizolytic,  and 
the  gemmae  of
Aulacomnium (Figs.  31h  and  32)  lysigenic.  The
multicellular gemmae of some species are able to

that  of 

Figure 5.30. Funaria hygrometrica. Development of buds on
protonema.

resist desiccation and remain viable for a consid-
erable time.

The  protonemal  phase  of  mosses  is  also
capable of asexual reproduction, but it is not clear
how  widespread  this  is  in  nature.  In  cultures  of
Funaria hygrometrica subjected  to dry conditions,
scattered  cells  of  the  chloronema  differentiate
into  brachycytes,  thick-walled  drought-resistant
cells, accompanied on each side by tmema cells.
The protonema then fragments, but growth can
be re-established on hydration by germination of
the brachycytes. Experimentally the formation of
brachycytes can be induced by abscisic acid (ABA),
but they dedifferentiate if ABA is removed from
the medium. The chloroplasts in the brachycytes
adopt  a  curious  cup-shaped  form,  the  photosyn-
thetic lamellae being conﬁned to the rim.

Campylopus atrovirens is an example of a species
which,  although  widely  distributed,  is  hardly
known in the sporophytic condition. Its dispersal
must be almost entirely by asexual means, but no
specialized propagules are produced.

the bryales as experimental
material
The ease with which many mosses can be grown
in  pure  culture  on  artiﬁcial  media  makes  them
very suitable for the experimental investigation of
morphogenesis.  Mutants  of  Physcomitrella,  for
example, are known in which the protonema will
not produce buds unless cytokinin is added to the
medium.  The  existence  of  mutants  of  this  kind
facilitates the  investigation of the  genetical and
physiological  factors  bringing  about  the  change

BRYOPSIDA (MOSSES)

129

without reduction of chromosome number (apos-
pory). Although the mature forms of the diploid
gametophytes are initially larger in all their parts
than  the  haploid  (the  so-called  gigas condition),
this difference in size may be spontaneously lost
and  the  haploid  and  diploid  become  indistin-
guishable.  Diploid  gametophytes  have variable
fertility,  but  with  continued  propagation  they
may  become  reproductively  perfect  and  yield
tetraploid sporophytes. Diploidization may occur
spontaneously in nature, either by apospory or by
the  chance  production  of  dyads  of  unreduced
spores. Diploid races of Funaria hygrometrica have
been  encountered  in  the  wild  in  Finland  and
California,  and  in  Australia  a  population  of  the
moss Hypopterygium on a single log was found to
contain  plants  with  several  different  levels  of
intraspeciﬁc polyploidy.

The determination of sex in the gametophytic
phase  of  bryophytes  presents  a  number  of
unsolved problems. The genotypic determination
of  sex  in  dioecious  species  of  Sphaerocarpos,

Figure 5.31. Asexual reproduction in mosses. (a–c)
Tetraphis pellucida: (a) habit of gemmiferous plant; (b,c)
mature gemma, front and side views. (d,e) Bryum rubens: (d)
habit; (e) gemma. (f,g) Ulota phyllantha: (f) young leaf with
apical tuft of gemmae; (g) gemma. (h,i) Aulacomnium
androgynum: (h) habit; (i) gemma.

in form of growth. The results of experiments in
vitro have nevertheless  to be  interpreted  with
caution.  For  example,  when  Funaria is  grown  in
pure  culture  on  medium  containing  activated
charcoal the protonema produces buds as readily
as on soil, but in the absence of charcoal they are
delayed. It seems likely that the charcoal absorbs
substances  secreted  by the  protonema  into  the
medium  which  would  otherwise  accumulate  in
the cells and have an inhibiting effect upon bud
formation.

The Bryales were the ﬁrst archegoniate plants
in  which  it  was  discovered  that  portions  of  the
sporophyte  placed  on  a mineral–agar  medium
would  give  rise  directly  to gametophytic  out-
protonemata)
growths 

secondary 

(termed 

130

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA: DIVISION BRYOPHYTA (MOSSES AND LIVERWORTS)

of  the  same  plant  (autoecy).  Here  sex  expression
must  begin  in  somatic  tissue,  but  experiments
have failed  to reveal  at  what  stage  expression  is
initiated, and results have been conﬂicting. Some
investigators  have found  that,  in  Funaria,  plants
obtained  by regeneration  from  leaves  surround-
ing  the  male  inﬂorescence  (perigonial  bracts)
were exclusively male, but others have shown that
plants obtained in this way remained autoecious.
Even plants raised by regeneration from the base
of the archegonium retained a bisexual tendency.
In cases of synoecy, where the male and female sex
organs are mixed together in the inﬂorescence (as
in the widespread Mnium cuspidatum), sex determi-
nation must certainly be very local and effective
only  in  the  differentiation  of  the  organs  them-
selves.

Surprisingly,  diploid  plants  of  the  common
Bryum  caespiticium,  a  dioecious  species,  raised
aposporously from sporophytic tissue, were found
to be predominantly male. Although the form of
growth was unambiguously gametophytic, in the
presence  of  a  diploid  nucleus  the  expression  of
female sexuality in these experiments seemed to
be largely suppressed.

Culture  experiments  have also  revealed  that
the  transition  from  gametophyte  to sporophyte
can also be induced directly (apogamy), but prob-
ably  only  with  gametophytes  which  are  at  least
diploid  in  constitution.  Phascum cuspidatum,  for
example,  obtained  aposporously,  will  begin  to
produce sporogonia at the tips of leaves and else-
where  if  the  medium  on  which  it  is  growing  is
allowed to dry. Rehydration results in the resump-
tion  of  gametophytic  growth.  Some  Bryales  will
produce sporogonia from secondary protonema if
the medium is enriched with sugar. On an appro-
priate medium it has sometimes been possible to
subculture  these  sporogonial  cultures  indeﬁ-
nitely. Aging  cultures  of  Physcomitrium pyriforme,
raised from spores, have been found, when trans-
ferred  to fresh  medium  containing  2  percent
sucrose,  to produce  sporogonia  freely. This  has
been taken as evidence of the accumulation in the
presence of sucrose of an “apogamy factor”, able
to bring about the switch from gametophytic to
sporophytic morphogenesis in the absence of fer-
tilization.  Some  of  the  sporogonia  produced  in
these experiments yielded dyads of spores. These

Figure 5.32. Position of the tmema cell beneath the
maturing gemma of Aulacomnium androgynum. The contents
of the fully extended tmema cell (tc) are beginning to
degenerate, although its plastids (p) and nucleus (n) are still
recognizable. Starch is accumulating in the plastids (p) of the
gemma (only the lower part shown) and lipid droplets (l) at
the periphery of its cells. bc, basal cell of gemma; sc, stalk
cell; v, vacuole. (From Ligrone, Duckett and Gambardella.
1996. Annals of Botany 78.)

associated  with  chromosomal  heteromorphy,
seems clearly established. Similarly, in the moss
Macromitrium (p.  126)  evidence  points  to a
Mendelian inheritance of sex. In some dioecious
mosses,  for  example  the  common  Plagiomnium
undulatum and  Ceratodon  purpureus,  although
there is chromosomal heteromorphy the extent to
which the pair of chromosomes concerned actu-
ally control sexual development is far less clear.
Although in a population of Ceratodon male and
female  plants  are  more  or  less  equally  repre-
sented,  careful  observations  have shown  some
families  produce  predominantly  male  offspring
and others female. This may arise from unknown
factors in different situations affecting germina-
tion of male and female spores differentially.

Often  in  monoecious  mosses,  as  in  the
common  Funaria  hygrometrica,  the  male  and
female sex organs are borne on different branches

germinated on basal medium and, in the presence
of  sucrose,  continued  to produce  sporophytes
apogamously in the same manner as the parental
gametophytes. The indications are that results of
this kind may be expected from the Bryales gener-
ally. They reveal that the expression of the genes
controlling  the  kind  of  growth can  be  readily
modiﬁed by nutrition and environmental stress.
Indeed, the bryophytes as a whole offer splendid
material for the experimental investigation of the
factors controlling the morphogenetic and repro-
ductive alternation in the archegoniate life cycle.
The  morphogenetic  effects  of  removing  pre-
maturely  the  calyptra  from  the  developing
capsule  of  Funaria (p.  125)  recall  the  results  of
experiments with Fucus embryos (p. 91), where cell
walls  have been  shown  to retain  the  ability  to
determine the form of morphogenesis. The sporo-
gonia of those mosses (p. 125) in which the upper
part of the seta and the apophysis of the sporogo-
nia  are  characteristically  swollen  may  represent
“natural 
experiments”  whose
morphological  results  follow  from  mutations
affecting the development of the calyptra.

evolutionary 

Relationships of the
bryophytes

Origin
The  signiﬁcant  similarities,  particularly  in  the
protonemal  phase,  between  the  bryophytes  and
the  algae  provide  compelling  evidence  that  the
mosses  and  liverworts  had  their  origin  in  some
algal form. Further, it is clear that the Bryophyta
share  many  more  basic  features,  such  as  the
nature of the photosynthetic pigments, cell wall
components  and 
the
Chlorophyta than with any other algae. Amongst
the Chlorophyta are many examples of the hetero-
trichous  habit  and  of  oogamy, and  in  the
Charophyceae of developments possibly foreshad-
owing  the  archegonium.  The  Charophyceae  also
share  with  the  bryophytes  the  possession  of  the
enzyme glycolate oxidase (p. 61), and the transfer
RNA  genes  in  the  chloroplast  genomes  of  the
Charophyceae  and  bryophytes  have striking
molecular similarities.

reserves,  with 

food 

The ﬂagella of the spermatozoids of the bryo-

RELATIONSHIPS OF THE BRYOPHYTES

131

phytes and the charophycean algae are also of the
same kind, and the multilayered structure under-
lying the ﬂagellar bases in the bryophytes recalls
similar  structures  in  the  motile  stages  of  the
Charophyceae. In the Charophyceae, however, the
two centrioles which become ﬂagella bases arise
at right angles to each other, whereas in biﬂagel-
late land plants they are initially coaxial. Another
signiﬁcant difference is that, whereas the micro-
tubular ribbon lies transverse to the plates of the
multilayered structure in the Charophyceae, it is
at an angle of 45° in the bryophytes. This results
in the ribbon following a curved path in the bryo-
phyte  spermatozoid,  contrasting  with  the  situa-
tion  in  Coleochaete (p.  65).  These  differences,
however, appear  to be  of  detail  rather  than  sub-
stance.

It is clear, nevertheless, that the Bryophyta are
considerably  more  highly  organized  than  any
Chlorophyta.  This  is  shown  by their  terrestrial
habit, differentiated thallus, regular phasic alter-
nation  of  gametophyte  and  sporophyte,  and  the
production of aerial spores. The manner in which
the reproductive organs are enclosed in a wall of
sterile cells also contrasts with the naked game-
tangia  and  sporangia  customary 
in  most
Chlorophyta.

Although  the  Charophyceae  indicate  how
archegonia  and  antheridia  may  have evolved,
little information is available about the origin of
the bryophytes themselves. A possible form transi-
tional between the algal and bryophyte grades of
reproduction was Parka (p. 65), locally frequent in
the  upper  Silurian  and  Lower  Devonian,  but  for
reasons given earlier this seems unlikely to have
been an ancestral form. Protosalvinia of the Upper
Devonian (p. 93), despite the indications of land
plant features, is also generally considered to have
been closer to the algae.

In the absence of well-deﬁned remains we can
only  speculate  how  a  bryophyte  might  have
evolved from algal ancestors. A thallose liverwort
like  Pellia,  for  example,  could  have been  derived
from a heterotrichous form in which the prostrate
component  had  become  parenchymatous  (a  ten-
dency  already  evident 
in  some  species  of
Coleochaete) and adopted dichotomous growth, the
aerial 
lost.
Heteromorphic  life  cycles  in  the  transmigrant

component  meanwhile  being 

132

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA: DIVISION BRYOPHYTA (MOSSES AND LIVERWORTS)

forms would have been no novelty since they are
well  represented  in  the  algae,  but  examples  of
non-motile  spores,  such  as  those  produced  by
Dictyota (p.  92),  are  few. The  evolution  of  non-
motile  spores  with  a  well-developed  exine  (of
which  sporopollenin  was  a  prominent  compo-
nent),  an  essential  for  terrestrial  life,  thus  prob-
ably  accompanied  the  transmigration.  Algal
forms  which  may  have developed  these  features
(e.g., Protosalvinia, p. 93) did not survive. 

The fossil record gives little information about
the  earliest  bryophytes.  Spore  dyads  and  perma-
nent tetrads (some membrane-bound) are known
from  the  Silurian,  and  are  considered  by some
to be  similar  to those  produced  by living
Sphaerocarpales (p. 115). Similar spore types have,
however, been  encountered  in  the  sporangia  of
rhyniophyte-like  plants  (p.  135).  Such  dyads  and
tetrads  now  appear  to have  been  not  infrequent
amongst the earliest land plants, be they bryophy-
tes, tracheophytes, or of some intermediate evolu-
tionary grade.

The possible bryophytes from Devonian rocks
are usually so ill preserved that their exact status
is  uncertain.  The  most  promising  candidate  is
perhaps Sporogonites from the Lower Devonian, a
form in which a number of capsules with stalks a
few centimeters in height seem to be arising from
a presumably creeping thallus. Unfortunately no
detail can be discerned and the bryophytic nature
of the fossil must remain conjectural. So far, the
fossil record is wholly silent on how the ancestral
organisms gave rise to the sporophytes character-
istic of bryophytes.

The  morphological  and  reproductive  differ-
ences between the mosses and liverworts appear
to extend as far back as the Carboniferous, since
the general classiﬁcation of the fossil bryophytes
from  these  ancient  rocks  is  readily  apparent.
Examples  of  liverworts  have already  been  men-
tioned (p. 114). Amongst the mosses Muscites from
the  Upper  Carboniferous  can  be  accepted  as  a
member of the Bryales. Several convincing fossil
mosses  are  known  from  the  Permian.  These
ﬁndings  strengthen  the  view  that  mosses  and
liverworts  have been  independent  evolutionary
lines from a very early period, and it is even pos-
sible  that  they had  independent  origins  from
transitional  archegoniate  forms.  Nevertheless,

studies of mitochondrial DNA point to the earliest
land plants having been liverwort-like. The liver-
worts, in common with all the Chlorophyta so far
examined,  lack  two  introns  in  this  organellar
DNA.  These  introns  are  present  in  mosses,  and
almost without exception in vascular plants.

Apart  from  their  archegoniate  reproduction,
bryophytes  have no  obvious  relationships  with
even the simplest vascular plants, living or fossil.
A number of fossils from the Rhynie Chert (p. 139)
may  have belonged  to plants 
intermediate
between Bryophyta and Tracheophyta, but the evi-
dence  is  not  conclusive.  The  Bryophyta  appear
never  to have  been  a  major  component  of  the
Earth’s vegetation, although they may have been
conspicuous  in  the  Carboniferous  forests.  They
have probably  remained  isolated  from  the  main
line  of  evolution  of  land  plants,  changing  only
slowly, and exploiting a relatively circumscribed
ecological niche. The failure to reach the morpho-
logical complexity characteristic of the remainder
of the land ﬂora may have been a consequence of
the  restriction  of  independence  to the  gameto-
phytic phase in the life cycle. A haploid organism
has no possibility of carrying a reservoir of vari-
ability in the form of recessive genes, capable of
being advantageously expressed in future chance
recombinations. This argument clearly has to be
used  with  caution  in  respect  of  the  notable
number of diploid mosses now known. Such dou-
bling of the gametophytic chromosome numbers
probably, however,  came  too  late  to disrupt  the
well-established morphology of the cycle. Despite
the factors limiting the evolutionary advance of
the gametophytic phase, a number of anatomical
and  morphological  trends  have been  strikingly
similar 
in  bryophytes  and  vascular  plants.
Bryophytes, for example, have acquired both leaﬁ-
ness  and,  in  the  stem  of  Polytrichum,  a  rudimen-
tary vascular  strand,  the  elements  of  which
superﬁcially resemble, structurally and function-
ally, xylem  and  phloem.  Although  there  are
undoubted  similarities  between  the  conducting
elements occurring in some bryophytes and those
of  the  early  tracheophytes  (particularly  those  of
the Rhyniopsida (p. 139)), detailed studies reveal
major  differences  in  cell  wall  organization.
Gametophytic  and  sporophytic  organisms  have
evidently  responded  in  a  similar  manner  to

RELATIONSHIPS OF THE BRYOPHYTES

133

Figure 5.33. Polytrichum
juniperinum, capsule. (a) Before
removal of calyptra. (b) Operculum
removed showing “pepper-pot”
mechanism.

complex 

strengthened  by the  surpris-
ingly
features
present  in  many  of  the  thal-
loid  forms  (e.g.,  in  Marchantia
and Anthoceros), and the readi-
ness  with which,  in  leafy
forms,  experimental 
treat-
ments can cause a reversal to
radial symmetry (p. 111). Also,
a thalloid form such as Pellia is
so outstandingly simple that it
stands under the suspicion of
being  reduced  and  special-
ized.

common environmental factors. The evolution of
their  conducting  systems  appears  to  have
occurred in parallel, providing no evidence for a
direct  phylogenetic  relationship  between  the
systems of bryophytes and those of tracheophytes.
Overall, the achievement of the bryophytes in the
generation of diversity in form, stature and repro-
ductive novelty has, in comparison with the trach-
eophytes, been modest.

Evolutionary relationships
The evolutionary relationships within the mosses
and  liverworts  themselves  are  also  obscure.  The
liverworts,  for  example,  show  a  whole  series  of
forms  from  the  creeping  thallus  (e.g.,  Pellia),  to
thalloid  with  two  rows  of  ventral  scales  (e.g.,
Blasia), thalloid in which the margin of the thallus
is  so  deeply  crenulate  that  the  lobes  resemble
leaves  (e.g.,  Fossombronia),  and  ultimately  leafy
forms  with  upright  stems  and  radial  symmetry
(e.g., Haplomitrium of the Calobryales). There has
been  much  argument  about  whether  this  series
represented  a  phylogenetic  advance,  or  whether
the  ﬁrst liverworts  resembled  Haplomitrium,  the
other forms being derived. The view that the radi-
ally  symmetrical  leafy  form is  primitive  is

Similar  arguments  apply
to the  mosses,  although  here
the relative uniformity of the
group  makes  comparative  morphology  even  less
informative.  Few  would  regard those  species
whose  capsules  possess  only  rudimentary  peri-
stomes, or even lack them altogether, as anything
other  than  reduced.  The  moss  capsule  with  its
clearly  differentiated  operculum  and  peristome
must  therefore  have been  an  early  and  distin-
guishing feature of the class. Capsules which are
clearly  referable  to a Dicranum-like  moss,  for
example,  have been  found  in  late  Cretaceous
deposits. There is no direct evidence of how peri-
stomes evolved, but it is possible that the “pepper-
pot”  mechanism  present  at  the  mouth  of  the
capsule  of  Polytrichum (Fig.  5.33),  and  the  bristle-
like peristome found in a few other genera, indi-
cate steps  in  a  developmental  pathway that
culminated in the typical peristome of the Bryales
(p.  125).  Well-preserved  specimens  of Polytrichum-
like capsules, and associated gametophytic axes,
are  also  known  from  the  late  Cretaceous,  so  it
appears beyond doubt that considerable diversiﬁ-
cation of the moss ﬂora had already taken place by
the end of the Mesozoic.

Although  we must  regard the  basic  morpho-
logical  features  of  the  bryophytes  as  having
arisen very early in the evolution of land plants,

134

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA: DIVISION BRYOPHYTA (MOSSES AND LIVERWORTS)

evolution  of  a  more  superﬁcial  nature  has  no
doubt continued in the division, its nature prob-
ably being inﬂuenced by evolution of vegetation
as a whole. Amongst the mosses, widespread poly-
ploidy  probably  facilitated  this  more  limited
adaptive variation. We can envisage that the rise
of  the  angiospermous  forests  in  the  Cretaceous

provided many new surfaces well suited for colo-
nization. A renewed burst of evolution, consisting
principally  of  diversiﬁcation  of  already  estab-
lished morphological forms, may have occurred at
this  time  leading  to the  substantial  epiphytic
element in the existing bryophyte ﬂora.

6

The subkingdom Embryophyta (cont.):
division Tracheophyta, Part 1

Early fossil land plants of
simple construction

Although trilete spores are known from the mid-
Ordovician and early Silurian, undisputed vascu-
lar plants are not found until halfway through the
Silurian.  A  number  of  these  lack  true  tracheids
(“protracheophytes”) or are insufﬁciently well pre-
served  to allow  us  to be  sure  of  the  presence  of
tracheids (“rhyniophytoids”).

The earliest accepted tracheophyte-like plant is
Cooksonia. Several species are now known ranging
from the upper Silurian to the Lower Devonian.
Cooksonia was evidently widespread, occurring in a
number of localities in North and South America
and Europe. The plants were dichotomously
branched (Fig. 6.1a) and probably formed swards,
perhaps in swampy areas, a few centimetres in
height. The axes, which were bare of any append-
ages, terminated in reniform (Fig. 6.1b and c) or
globose sporangia with little evidence of predeter-
mined sites of dehiscence. So far as known,
Cooksonia was homosporous. Vegetative axes of
some species have been found with a simple strand
of tracheids (true tracheophytes), but others
appear to lack them (“rhyniophytoids”). The pres-
ence of stomata-like pores has been conﬁrmed
only in forms from the earliest Devonian. There is
as yet no evidence of extensive aerating systems in
Cooksonia which might support the suggestion
that carbon dioxide was taken up through the

underground organs (as in Isoetes and a few other
living plants). Nothing is known of a gametophytic
phase, but the spores, since they bear a trilete scar,
were presumably produced meiotically in tetrads.
These early plants, which seem to have had
little obvious diversity in overall morphology,
other than in the spore types they produced, seem
to have given rise to a number of groups of land
plants. These include the Rhyniopsida (plants with
mostly terminal sporangia), the Lycopodiopsida
and the Zosterophyllopsida (plants with mostly
lateral sporangia, probably derived by some form
of “overtopping” (Fig. 6.32) from the Rhyniopsida),
and further “protracheophytes” and “rhyniophy-
toids” which were morphologically similar to the
Rhyniopsida. In some respects the “protracheoph-
ytes” and the “rhyniophytoids” show similarities
to bryophytes, or at least a bryophytic grade of evo-
lution. They differ, however, in each sporophyte
commonly bearing multiple or branched sporan-
gia. The relationship between them and the bryo-
phytes remains wholly unclear.

“Protracheophytes” and “rhyniophytoids”
In addition to those species of Cooksonia in which
we have  no  evidence  of  tracheids,  a  number  of
simple, dichotomously branched plants occur in
the late Silurian and are currently referable to the
“rhyniophytoids”.  These 
include  Caia,  with
upright cylindrical sporangia bearing surface pro-
jections, and Tortilicaulis, the sporangia of which
had  helically  aligned  epidermal  cells,  possibly

136

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 1

(c)

Figure 6.1. Cooksonia. (a) Habit. (b,c) Terminal reniform
sporangia of C. caledonica. Scale bar in (c) 1mm. The
specimen is from the Lower Devonian of Scotland. ((a), (b)
after Edwards, from Stewart. 1983. Paleobotany and the
Evolution of Plants. Cambridge University Press, New York.)

facilitating  dehiscence.  Other  than  the  spores,
nothing is known of a gametophytic phase.

“Protracheophytes”  persisted  into  the  Lower
Devonian.  Fine  specimens  are  known  from  the
Rhynie Chert in Scotland. Not only is the preserva-
tion remarkable, but also the extensive remains
have provided  considerable  information  regard-
ing an alternation of generations in these plants.
Aglaophyton (Fig.  6.2)  was  superﬁcially  similar  to
Rhynia (p.  139),  and  was  formerly  known  as  R.
major.  The  branching  of  the  aerial  axes  of
Aglaophyton,  however, was  wholly  dichotomous,
and  the  central  strand  consisted  of  cells  which
lacked the internal thickenings characteristic of
tracheophytes. Lyonophyton, most likely from ana-
tomical  similarities  to have  been  the  gameto-
phytic  phase  of  Aglaophyton,  appears  to have
consisted  of  ascending  axes,  with  stomata-like
pores in the epidermis and a general similarity to
those of the sporophyte, but terminating above in

a peripherally lobed, bowl-shaped structure (Fig.
6.3a).  On  the  inner  surface  of  the  bowl  were
rounded  emergences  with  dark  contents  (Fig.
6.3b).  Occasional  sections  of  these  emergences
reveal  within  the  cells  proﬁles  of  coiled  bodies.
These can reasonably be identiﬁed with ﬂagellate
spermatozoids,  pointing  to these  structures
having  been  antheridia.  Other  sections  show
short,  tubular  extensions  arising  from  a  disk  at
the base of the bowl. These have been interpreted
as  the  necks of  archegonia  (Fig.  6.3b),  but  this
identiﬁcation  is  less  certain.  Sciadophyton was  a
gametophyte  similar  to Lyonophyton.  The  axes
diverged from a central corm-like structure (Fig.
6.3c) and terminated in bowl-shaped gametangio-
phores  bearing  antheridia  and  archegonia  (Fig.
6.3d).  The  afﬁnity  of  this  gametophyte  may  lie
with the early Zosterophyllopsida (p. 141).

Horneophyton (Fig. 6.4) also occurs in the Rhynie
assemblage. This plant had dichotomizing aerial

EARLY FOSSIL LAND PLANTS OF SIMPLE CONSTRUCTION

137

Figure 6.2. Aglaophyton (Rhynia) major, reconstruction. Scale
bar 1mm. (From Kenrick and Crane. 1997. The Origin and
Early Diversiﬁcation of Land Plants. Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, DC.)

axes, reaching a height of about 20cm (8in.). The
axes  arose  from  a  sequence  of  corm-like  struc-
tures, each richly furnished with unicellular rhiz-
oids.  Sporangia  were  terminal,  the  sporogenous
tissue surrounding a central columella, recalling
the  situation  in  the  sporogonium  of  Anthoceros.
Unlike  those  of  Anthoceros,  the  sporangia  of
Horneophyton often dichotomized, occasionally as
many  as  three  times.  Plants  possessed  a  well-
deﬁned  cuticle,  stomata,  and  air  spaces  in  the
cortex. The spores, as evidenced by the triradiate
scar,  were  produced  meiotically  in  tetrahedral
tetrads (Fig. 6.31). They were protected by a resist-
ant  wall,  presumably  containing  sporopollenin.
The exact nature of the conducting elements in
the central strand of the axes is not yet clear, but
it may yet emerge that Horneophyton was a true tra-
cheophyte, and a member of the Rhyniopsida. The
gametophyte  Langiophyton,  also  described  from
the  Rhynie  Chert,  may  have belonged  to
Horneophyton.  This  bore  gametangiophores  with
ﬁnger-like  processes  at  the  apex,  each  of  which
contained an archegonium.

Figure 6.3. Gametophytes of Devonian plants. (a)
Lyonophyton. Axis terminating in a bowl-shaped
gametangiophore. Scale bar 1mm. (b) Part of a vertical
section of a gametangiophore, showing the relative positions
of antheridia (an) and possibly archegonia (ar). (c)
Sciadophyton. Upright axes ascending from a corm-like base.
Scale bar 1cm. (d) An axis terminating in a cup-shaped
gametangiophore. (From Stewart and Rothwell. 1993.
Paleobotany and the Evolution of Plants, 2nd edn. Cambridge
University Press, New York.)

138

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 1

Figure 6.4. Horneophyton. (a)
Reconstruction of sporophyte. Scale
bar 1 cm. (b) Diagrammatic
representation of bifurcate
sporangium with spores (s) and
central columella (c). (c) Tip of
branch of putative gametophyte
(Langiophyton) with ﬁnger-like
appendages within which archegonia
were borne. Scale bar 1 mm. (From
Kenrick and Crane. 1997. The Origin
and Early Diversiﬁcation of Land
Plants. Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, DC.)

These later “protracheoph-
ytes” appear to provide strong
evidence  for  the  homologous
origin of the two phases of the
life cycle in early land plants.
The  alternative,  the  “anti-
thetic theory”, holds that the
establishment  of  a  distinct
sporophytic phase was coinci-
dent with the colonization of
the  land.  Although  at  ﬁrst  a
simple  structure,  it  became
increasingly elaborate  as  the
land  ﬂora  evolved.  So  long  as
the  gametophyte  of  Cooksonia
remains unknown, the ances-
tral  state  in  terrestrial  plants  bearing  multiple
sporangia can only be conjectural. It should not be
overlooked that, if spore tetrads are a ﬁrm indica-
tion of meiosis and the presence of a life cycle, the
ﬁrst embryophytes  occurred  at  least  50  million
years earlier than the Rhynie assemblage.

General features of the
tracheophytes

All vascular plants (i.e., those possessing the lig-
niﬁed  conducting  tissue,  xylem)  are  placed  in  a
single  division 
(phylum),  the  Tracheophyta.
Discussion  of  the  many  classes  which  comprise
the  Tracheophyta,  and  their  interrelationships,
will occupy the remaining chapters of this book.
the

characteristics 

of 

The 

general 

Tracheophyta may be deﬁned as follows:

TRACHEOPHYTA
Habitat Predominantly terrestrial or epiphytic.
Plastid pigments Chlorophylls a, b; carotenoids

(principally ␤-carotene); xanthophylls
(usually principally lutein).

Food reserves Starch; to a lesser extent fats,

inulin and other polysaccharides. Proteins.

Cell wall components Cellulose, hemicelluloses,

lignin.

Reproduction Heteromorphic life cycle; sporo-

phyte the conspicuous phase, its growth
usually indeterminate. Sex organs with or
without a jacket of sterile cells. Male
gametes bi- or multiﬂagellate, or lacking
ﬂagella. Embryogeny rarely exoscopic,
embryo in many enclosed in a seed. Spores
rarely green, usually with well-deﬁned wall
(exine) impregnated with sporopollenin.
Often of two sizes, produced in different

GENERAL FEATURES OF THE TRACHEOPHYTES

139

sporangia, the larger (megaspores) female
and smaller (microspores) male (hetero-
spory). Specialized vegetative reproduction
of the sporophyte infrequent.

Growth forms Predominantly axial.

The Tracheophyta fall into a number of categories
(Table  6.1;  Fig.  6.5),  of  which  many  orders  and
some  classes  are  represented  solely  by fossils.
Those  living  tracheophytes  which  reproduce  by
spores (as opposed to seeds) are often referred to
collectively as the pteridophytes (Pteridophytina).
The tracheophytes as a whole have an abundant
fossil record.

Most  of  the  living  tracheophytes  are  seed-
bearing (Spermatophytina), and most of these in
turn are angiosperms (ﬂowering plants), in which
the  female  gametophyte  is  characteristically  the
embryo sac.  The  typical  pteridophyte  archego-
nium  is  wholly  absent.  Angiosperms  number
about 250000 species, and in many plant commu-
nities  they are  the  principal  component  of  the
ﬂora.  Nevertheless,  they have  evolved  only
recently  in  relation  to the  history of  the  trache-
ophytes as a whole (see Table 6.1), and their domi-
nance  is  a  comparatively  new  feature  in  world
vegetation.

The remainder of the Tracheophyta, with the
exception  of  a  few  gymnosperms  (non-ﬂowering
seed-bearing  plants),  are  archegoniate  and  their
fossil record extends back in some instances well
into  the  Paleozoic  (up  to 415 million  years  ago).
Taken as a whole, the archegoniate Tracheophyta
show  a  progressive  ability  to exploit  terrestrial
habitats. The steps which led to the development
of heterospory from homospory, and the elimina-
tion of the necessity of free ﬂuid for fertilization,
are  indicated  clearly  in  a  variety  of  living  and
fossil groups. The progression from simple hetero-
spory  to elaborate  seeds  is  also  evident  in  fossil
forms. These reproductive changes were accompa-
nied  by increasing  protection  of  the  plant  body
from  unfavorable  climatic  conditions,  thus
widely extending the range of environments avail-
able to plant life. The emergence and diversiﬁca-
tion of the angiosperms involved the exploitation
of many features which originated in early trache-
ophyte evolution.

A feature common to all living homosporous

Tracheophyta is the presence in the sporangium
of one or more concentric layers of cells surround-
ing  the  sporocytes.  These  cells  break  down  pro-
gressively  during  meiosis.  The  materials  so
liberated are utilized in the ﬁnal differentiation
of the spores, including the ultimate stages in the
laying down of the exine. This specialized tissue is
referred  to as  the  tapetum.  In  the  tracheophytes
which  are  both  heterosporous  and  seed-bearing
the tapetum is well represented in the microspo-
rangia, less so in the megasporangia.

Rhyniopsida
This  extinct  group  is  ancestral  amongst  trache-
ophytes. It contains those species of Cooksonia (p.
135) known to have possessed tracheids with inter-
nal thickenings. As knowledge of the anatomy of
the  “rhyniophytoids”  and  “protracheophytes”
expands,  some  of  these  may  prove  to have  been
early rhyniopsids.

Rhynia gwynne-vaughanii

(Fig.  6.6)  from  the
Rhynie  Chert  (Lower  Devonian)  had  branching
aerial  stems  arising  from  a  horizontal  rhizome
attached to the substratum by ﬁne rhizoids. The
ascending  axes,  with  both  dichotomous  and
lateral  branching,  reached  a  height  of  about
20 cm (8in.). Some of the axes terminated in fusi-
form sporangia. The sporangium was apparently
shed  after  release  of  the  spores,  the  fertile  axis
then being overtopped by the subjacent lateral so
giving  the  branching  a  monopodial  character.
Both  the  rhizome  and  the  aerial  shoots  had  a
central strand of tracheids, the protoxylem lying
at  the  center  (mesarch).  The  tracheids  were  sur-
rounded  by cells  resembling  the  leptoids  of
mosses (p. 122).

The  tracheids  of  the  Rhyniopsida  as  a  whole
had  annular  or  spiral  thickenings.  The  inner
surface of the wall was covered with a thin layer
of  resistant  material  furnished  with  minute
pores. This was laid down on material appearing
“spongy” in the fossilized state (possibly because
of  partial  resistance  to degradation).  These  fea-
tures of the wall distinguish the tracheids of the
Rhyniopsida from those of the Lycophytina (p. 151)
and  Euphyllophytina  (p.  162).  Water-conducting
systems may have evolved several times indepen-
dently during  the  migration  to land  (see  also
pp. 111, 132).

140

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 1

Table 6.1 Classification of division Tracheophyta.

Subdivision

Pteridophytina
(Spore-bearing vascular
plants)

Class

Order

(PTERIDOPHYTES)
(LYCOPHYTINA
Plants with laterally
derived sporangia)

Rhyniopsida
Zosterophyllopsida

Lycopodiopsida
(CLUB MOSSES)

(EUPHYLLOPHYTINA Trimerophytopsida
Plants with terminally
derived sporangia)

Equisetopsida
(HORSETAILS)

Cladoxylopsida
Polypodiopsida (FERNS)
(Eusporangiatae)

(Annulate sporangia)
(Leptosporangiatae)

Rhyniales
Zosterophyllales
Barinophytalesb
Drepanophycales
Protolepidodendrales
Lycopodialesa
Lepidodendralesb
Isoetalesa,b
Selaginellalesa,b
Trimerophytales
Calamitalesb
Equisetalesa
Sphenophyllalesb
Pseudoborniales
Cladoxylales
Zygopteridalesb
Marattialesa
Ophioglossalesa
Psilotalesa
Osmundalesa
Coenopteridales
Polypodialesa
Salvinialesa,b
Marsilealesa,b

(Progymnospermopsida) Aneurophytales

(Plants with
gymnospermic wood)

(GYMNOSPERMS)

Spermatophytina
(Seed-bearing plants)

(ANTHOPHYTES)

Lyginopteridopsida
(PTERIDOSPERMS)
Pinopsida
(PINE-like plants)

Ginkgoopsida
Cycadopsida
(CYCAD-like plants)

Protopityales
Archaeopteridalesb
Lyginopteridales
Medullosales
Cordaitales
Voltziales
Pinalesa
Taxalesa
Ginkgoalesa
Cycadalesa
Glossopteridales
Caytoniales
Bennettitales
Pentoxylales
Gnetalesa

Ephedralesa

Around 64 orders in six
subclassesa

Gnetopsida
(CHLAMYDOSPERMS) Welwitschialesa

(Double fertilization)
(ANGIOSPERMS)
(Plants with ﬂowers)

Magnoliopsida
(DICOTYLEDONS)

Liliopsida
(MONOCOTYLEDONS) Around 20 orders in

three subclassesa

Notes:
a Denotes living representatives. b Denotes the occurrence of heterospory within pteridophytic groups.

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH LATERAL SPORANGIA (LYCOPHYTINA)

141

Figure 6.5. A phylogeny of the major groups of
tracheophytes and their taxonomic hierarchy. Based on Table
6.1.

Tracheophytes with lateral
sporangia (Lycophytina)

The early vascular plants also included forms in
which the sporangia were borne laterally. They are
placed in the separate classes Zosterophyllopsida
and Lycopodiopsida. 

Zosterophyllopsida
Zosterophyllum (Fig. 6.7a) is known from the lower-
most Devonian in several localities in Europe. It
appears to have a tufted habit, with the branches
diverging at wide angles (“H-shaped” branching),
the whole reaching a height of about 15cm (6in.).
The  xylem  was  exarch,  and  often  elliptical  in
section.  It  consisted  of  distinctive  tracheids.  In
Zosterophyllum the  sporangia  were  clustered
toward the  ends  of  the  aerial  branches,  and

dehisced  along  the  distal  convex  surface.  Also
placed in the Zosterophyllopsida is Sawdonia (Fig.
6.7b),  found  at  a  number  of  levels  in  the  early
Devonian.  This  had  a  creeping  rhizome  from
which  aerial  branches,  showing  a  monopodial
tendency, rose to a height of about 30cm (12in.).
The  aerial  axes  were  clad  with  tapering  spines,
and the ultimate branches were circinately coiled
at the tips. Stomata were present in the epidermis,
and within the axes ascended a solid core of trach-
eids  with  reticulate  thickening.  The  sporangia
were  borne  laterally  in  loose  spikes  toward the
ends of the branches. Deheubarthia, widespread in
the Lower Devonian of South Wales, was similar to
Sawdonia.  Barinophyton (Fig.  6.8)  and  Protobarino-
phyton,  of  Upper  Devonian  age,  are  problematic,
but  are  similar  to zosterophyllopsids  in  general
morphology and anatomy. These plants bore spo-
rangia in two ranks on upright stems. The sporan-
gia  were  unusual  in  producing  spores  of  two
distinct sizes, and these plants have accordingly
ﬁgured in discussions of the origin of heterospory
(Table 1.1).

142

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 1

iopsids  were  abundant  in  the  Carboniferous
period, many then being represented by substan-
tial  trees.  Only  herbaceous  forms  have persisted
until the present day.

The early Lycopodiopsida

The Drepanophycales
The  Drepanophycales  are  represented  by the
remarkable Baragwanathia from upper Silurian or
Lower Devonian rocks of Australia and China. The
terminal  dichotomizing  axes  of  this  distinctive
plant  reached  a  diameter  of  1–2cm  (0.4–0.8in.),
the basal axes probably being more massive. They
bore needle-like leaves, arranged in a dense spiral
and reaching up to 4cm (1.6in.) in length (Fig. 6.9).
The  stem  contained  a  stellate  stele,  from  which
slender strands ascended into the leaves. Some of
the shoots had fertile regions in which reniform
sporangia,  containing  cutinized  spores, 
lay
amongst the leaves. Although the precise attach-
ment  of  the  sporangia  is  still  unknown,  the
general resemblance of Baragwanathia to a lycopod
is so striking that an afﬁnity seems undoubted.

Asteroxylon (Fig. 6.10), a plant from the Lower
Devonian Rhynie Chert, is better represented. The
branching was monopodial with dichotomizing
lateral branches, the whole probably reaching a
height of approximately 50cm (20in.). The aerial
axes bore spine-like enations about 5mm (0.2in.)
long, lacking a vascular strand but furnished with
stomata. The sporangia were reniform and termi-
nated distinct stalks arising between the enations
toward the tips of the branches. The stem in section
shows a stellate stele (actinostele) with mesarch
xylem. The cortex displayed at least three zones,
the middle consisting of plates of cells separated by
large air spaces. Vascular strands traversed the
cortex. They entered the stalks of the sporangia but
stopped short of the enations. The anatomy sug-
gests that Asteroxylon was a marsh plant.

The Protolepidodendrales
The  Protolepidodendrales  are  distinguished  by
their  microphylls  branching  at  the  tips.  In
Leclercqia (Fig. 6.11) from the Middle Devonian, the
leaf forked several times. This plant is particularly
noteworthy  since  a  ligule  (p.  114)  was  clearly
present.  The  sporangia  were  attached  to the

Figure 6.6. Reconstruction of Rhynia gwynne-vaughanii. Scale
bar 1cm. (From Stewart and Rothwell. 1993. Paleobotany and
the Evolution of Plants, 2nd edn. Cambridge University Press,
New York.)

Lycopodiopsida
The class Lycopodiopsida contains both living and
fossil  plants.  It  represents  one  of  the  most  com-
plete records of plant evolution currently known,
extending  from  the  Lower  Devonian  to the
present day. The characteristics of the division can
be summarized as follows:

Sporophyte consisting of more or less dichoto-
mously branching axes, but differentiated into
root and shoot. Shoot bearing microphylls, each
containing a single vein, but leaf trace leaving no
gap in the stele. Vascular tissue consisting of
tracheids and phloem. Sporangia in or near axils
of microphylls, sporophytes often aggregated into
cones (strobili), homo- or heterosporous.
Gametophyte (in living forms) terrestrial or subter-
ranean. Spermatozoids ﬂagellate. Embryogeny
endoscopic.

orders 

are 

recognized  within 

the
Six 
Lycopodiopsida,  three  containing  the 
living
species and their undoubted fossil relatives, and
three wholly fossil. The living lycopodiopsids are a
minor  component  of  contemporary  vegetation.
The fossil record, however, shows that the lycopod-

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH LATERAL SPORANGIA (LYCOPHYTINA)

143

Figure 6.7. Zosterophylls. (a) Habit of Zosterophyllum. Scale
bar 5mm. (b) Sporangia of Sawdonia showing transverse
dehiscence. ((a) from Kenrick and Crane. 1997. The Origin
and Early Diversiﬁcation of Land Plants. Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, DC; (b) after Gensel, from Stewart. 1983.
Paleobotany and the Evolution of Plants. Cambridge University
Press, New York.)

adaxial surface of the microphyll close to its inser-
tion.  The  habit  of  these  plants,  which  probably
thrived in the warm, humid climate of the early
Devonian, seems to have been similar to that of
the worldwide Lycopodium clavatum. They were also
probably  homosporous.  In  the  herbaceous  lyco-
podiopsids, living and fossil, there is a correlation
between exarch xylem and the lateral position of
the  sporangia,  contrasting  with  the  endarch
xylem and terminal sporangia of the rhyniopsids.
Carboniferous  rocks  yield  an  abundance  of

lycopodiopsid fossils, of both vegetative and repro-
ductive  structures,  and  isolated  spores.  Of  the
many forms present, some were evidently herba-
ceous.  Those  having  a  general  resemblance  to
living  Lycopodium are  placed  in  Lycopodites,  but
others,  in  which  heterospory  has  been  demon-
strated,  are  believed  to have  been  more  like
Selaginella and are placed in Selaginellites. In each
instance, however, the attribution is less certain
than with Mesozoic forms.

The Lepidodendrales
The  most  impressive  Lycopodiopsida  of  the
Carboniferous,  however, were  undoubtedly  the
arborescent  Lepidodendrales,  some  of  which
achieved  a  height  of  30m  (98ft).  Lepidodendron
(Paralycopodites,  Diaphorodendron)  (Fig.  6.12b),  for
example, consisted of a trunk, 1m (39in.) or more
in  diameter  at  its  base,  which  rose  as  a  single

144

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 1

detached and not immediately recognized, were
named  Stigmaria.  The  stigmarian  axes  dichoto-
mized  freely  and  the  smaller  bore  rootlets,  ana-
tomically  similar  to those  of  Isoetes  (p.  160),  in
spiral sequence.

Despite  the  girth of  Lepidodendron,  the
anatomy of the trunk was comparatively simple,
and its manner of growth consequently puzzling.
The  primary  vascular  tissue  is  often  well  pre-
served, and even sieve cells have been seen in suf-
ﬁcient  detail  to reveal  a  close  resemblance  to
those  of  Lycopodium.  An  exarch protostele  was
present  at  the  base  of  the  trunk,  but  above it
became  solenostele  (see  Fig.  7.28).  A  vascular
cambium  evidently  arose  at  an  early  stage,  but
above it added only a narrow zone of secondary
xylem to the primary. The formation of secondary
phloem is doubtful. Additional secondary activity
occurred in the outer cortex, resulting in a hard
sclerotic  periderm  which  undoubtedly  provided
the  principal  mechanical  support  to the  trunk.
The inner cortex contained elongated cells, a so-
called “secretory tissue”, which may have been a
primitive  form of  phloem.  The  central  zone  of
cortex, usually fragmentary or missing in the fos-
silized material, probably consisted of thin-walled
aerenchyma, continuous with that in the stigmar-
ian axes and leaves. The curious anatomy, particu-
larly  the  small  amount  of  secondary  xylem,  has
led to the view that the growth of these trees did
not continue indeﬁnitely, but was determinate. It
is  envisaged  that  the  plant  ﬁrst  generated  a
massive apical meristem (Fig. 6.12a), the activity
of  which  then  produced  an  axis  of  considerable
height  before  dichotomy  began.  At each  dichot-
omy the apices became smaller, until eventually
the  axes  either  terminated  in  a  cone,  or  their
apices merely ceased to be active.

Sigillaria (Fig. 6.12c) was also prominent in the
forests  of  the  Upper  Carboniferous.  Although
similar to Lepidodendron in its general features it
was  conspicuous  for  its  long,  grass-like  leaves,
sometimes  reaching  1m (39in.) 
length.
Sigillaria  further  differed  in  the  production  of
whorls of cones borne axially amongst the leaves,
instead  of  terminally  on  distal  branches,  as
in Lepidodendron.  Chaloneria
is  an  Upper
Carboniferous  lycophyte  with  a  strikingly differ-
ent form. The main axis, about 2m (6.5ft) tall, was

in 

Figure 6.8. Barinophyton. Terminal branches bearing
sporangia in two ranks. Scale bar 1cm. (From Kenrick and
Crane. 1997. The Origin and Early Diversiﬁcation of Land Plants.
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC.)

column  until  it  broke  up  by numerous  dichoto-
mies  into  the  dense  crown  of  branchlets.  The
upper parts of the tree bore simple ligulate micro-
phylls, up to 20cm (8in.) long, triangular in cross-
section,  and  arranged  in  regular  spirals.  The
trunk and lower branches of Lepidodendron and its
relatives  retained  a  characteristic  pattern  of
diamond-shaped  leaf  cushions  (Fig.  6.13).  In  the
upper part of each is a pit which indicates the site
of  the  ligule,  and  at  the  center  a  scar  showing
where the leaf was attached. Within the scar the
emerging vascular bundle can be discerned, and
two small depressed areas, one on each side of the
bundle. These are the remains of strands of aeren-
chyma (parichnos) which ran from the cortex of
the  stem  to the  leaf.  The  uniformity  of  the  leaf
scar  suggests  a  distinct  abscission  mechanism.
The trunk was anchored at ground level by four
radiating arms which, since they were ﬁrst found

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH LATERAL SPORANGIA (LYCOPHYTINA)

145

Figure 6.9. Baragwanathia. Shoot
bearing sporangia. (After Lang and
Cookson, from Stewart. 1983.
Paleobotany and the Evolution of
Plants. Cambridge University Press,
New York.)

Figure 6.10. Asteroxylon. (a) Reconstruction of fertile axis
with lateral sporangia. Scale bar 1cm. (b) Section of stem
with lobed xylem (x), leaf traces (lt), and foliar units (f). Scale
bar 2mm. (From Stewart and Rothwell. 1993. Paleobotany and
the Evolution of Plants, 2nd edn. Cambridge University Press,
New York.)

146

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 1

(b)

(a)

Figure 6.11. (a) Reconstruction of Leclercqia complexa with
sterile and fertile leaves. Scale bar 1cm. (b) Leclercqia leaf
showing ligule. (After Grierson and Bonamo, from Stewart
and Rothwell. 1993. Paleobotany and the Evolution of Plants,
2nd edn. Cambridge University Press, New York.)

wholly unbranched. Although about 10cm (4in.)
in  diameter  and  with  conspicuous  secondary
thickening below, the stem tapered with progres-
sive reduction in the amount of secondary thick-
ening to a slender apex. The narrow microphylls
were ligulate, about 1 cm (0.4in.) long, and borne
in  spiral  sequence.  Roots  were  produced  from  a
swollen rounded base. Some consider Chaloneria to
be  an  early  representative  of  the  Isoetales.  The
recent  discovery of  Clevelandodendron in  the
Cleveland 
slender
unbranched  lycopodiopsids  of  isoetalean  form
may have originated as early as the late Devonian.

indicates 

Shale 

that 

reproduction
In  most  Lepidodendrales  the  strobili,  varying
from 1 to 3.5 cm (0.4 to 1.4in.) in width and 5 to
40 cm (2 to 16in.) in length, were terminal on the
branchlets. A few homosporous cones are known,
(e.g.,
but  most,  even  some  of  the  earliest 

Cyclostigma from  the  Upper  Devonian),  were
heterosporous, resembling the cones of Selaginella
in general features and the placement of the spo-
rangia in relation to the ligule. In Chaloneria the
fertile regions were either conﬁned to the tip of
the  axis,  or  in  some  forms  fertile  and  sterile
regions alternated in the upper part of the stem.
Although  generally  the  sporangia  of  the
Lepidodendrales were borne in a manner similar
to those of Selaginella, there are forms in which the
wings  of  the  sporophyll  were  inﬂexed,  the
margins coming tightly together above the mega-
sporangium. Representative of this kind of devel-
opment  is  Lepidocarpon (Fig.  6.14).  An  even  more
elaborate form is Miadesmia, also from the Upper
Carboniferous,  which 
a  distinct
micropyle-like  opening,  surrounded  by hairs,  at
the  distal  end  of  the  enclosing  megasporophyll.
There were also lateral membranous outgrowths
which  may  have assisted  dispersal  of  the  entire
reproductive structure. Since Miadesmia reached a
length of only about 3 mm (0.12in.), it may have
been  borne  by a herbaceous  lycopodiopsid.  In
both  Lepidocarpon and  Miadesmia the  mature
megasporangium contained only one functional
megaspore.  The  complexity  of  the  apparatus

showed 

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH LATERAL SPORANGIA (LYCOPHYTINA)

147

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 6.12. Tree-like lycopodiopsids. (a) A suggested
juvenile form a few meters in height. (b, c) Reconstructions
of (b) Lepidodendron and (c) Sigillaria, both of which grew to
between 30 and 50m in height. ((a) from Phillips and
DiMichele. 1992. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 79;
(b), (c) after Hirmer (1927) from Stewart and Rothwell.
1993. Paleobotany and the Evolution of Plants, 2nd edn.
Cambridge University Press, New York.)

surrounding  the  megasporangia  of  Lepidocarpon
and  Miadesmia has  been  interpreted  as  a  trend
toward an  ovule-like  formation.  Lepidocarpon
seems to have been borne by Lepidophloios, a tree
reaching  some  20m  (70ft)  in  height,  the  shoots
with characteristically broad leaf scars. The male
cone  Lepidostrobus was  also  probably  borne  by
Lepidophloios.  It  is  possible  that  Lepidophloios was
dioecious,  providing  an  early  example  of  sex
expression segregated in this manner in the spor-
ophytic phase.

encountered  in  petriﬁed  material.  Megagameto-
phytes  were  wholly  or  partly  endosporic,  the
exposed  portion  often  bearing  rhizoids  at  its
margin  and  archegonia  in  the  central  cushion.
Possible mitotic ﬁgures have been seen in germi-
nating  microspores.  Undifferentiated  embryos
are  known  in  gametophytes  as  old  as  the  Lower
Carboniferous. In all essential respects the repro-
duction  of  the  free-sporing  Lepidodendrales
resembled that of Selaginella and Isoetes (pp. 156,
160).  In  Lepidocarpon germination  of  the  single
megaspore  was  certainly  in situ,  leading  to
rupture of the sporangial wall. Some specimens of
Lepidocarpon have yielded remarkable examples of
differentiated embryos lying within the gameto-
phyte, the whole enclosed within the megasporo-
phyll. It would be difﬁcult to deny such structures
the status of seeds. When detached they may have
ﬂoated, and provided a means of distribution of
the plant in the Carboniferous swamps.

Germinating megaspores and microspores are

Although the Lepidodendrales appear to have

148

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 1

Figure 6.13. Lepidodendron. (a) Surface of cast of stem
showing leaf cushions and scars. The thin-walled tissue of the
parichnos strands has collapsed in the leaf cushions,
producing the depressions referred to as secondary (lower)
parichnos strands below the leaf scar. (b) Shoots of
Lepidodendron showing leaves and exposed leaf cushions.
Scale bar 1cm.

intermediate  between 

died out at the end of the Paleozoic, a few similar
forms,  possibly  of  isoetalean  afﬁnity,  have been
found in Mesozoic rocks. Pleuromeia (Fig. 6.15), for
example, known from Triassic sandstones, is sug-
gestive  of  an 
the
Lepidodendrales and the Isoetales. A single trunk,
little  more  than  1m (39in.)  high,  with  spirally
arranged leaf scars, rose from a rounded or lobed
base which produced roots in the same manner as
stigmarian axes. It terminated above in a crown of
narrow ligulate leaves, and, when fertile, a single
erect  cone  with  curious  obtuse  sporophylls.
Pleuromeia was  heterosporous  and  may  occasion-
ally have been dioecious. Ecologically it seems to

have been  maritime,  some  species  possibly
forming coastal thickets.

The living lycopodiopsids

Origin
It is clear that the living lycopodiopsids are relicts
of  a  component  of  the  plant  kingdom  which
reached the peak of its morphological complexity
and  ﬂoristic  success  in  the  Paleozoic,  about  200
million  years  ago.  Although  this  period  was
marked  by the  spectacular  Lepidodendrales,  it
seems  very likely  that  herbaceous  forms  also
existed throughout the evolution of the class and
that  they closely  resembled  those  living  today.
Many  of  the  living  homosporous  lycopodiopsids
have high  chromosome  numbers 
(reaching
2n⫽134  in  some  species),  indicating  that  they
may be ancient allopolyploids behaving cytologi-
cally  as  diploids.  Nevertheless,  isozyme  analysis
shows  no  evidence  of  heterogeneity  normally

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH LATERAL SPORANGIA (LYCOPHYTINA)

149

Figure 6.14. Lepidocarpon. (a) Transverse section showing
megasporangium enclosed in folded sporophyll.  (b) Vertical
section of region indicated by a–a´ in (a). ((a) after Arnold.
1947. An Introduction to Paleobotany. McGraw-Hill, New York;
(b) after Hoskins and Cross, from Arnold. 1947. An
Introduction to Paleobotany. McGraw-Hill, New York.)

associated  with  species  of  known  allopolyploid
origin.  Hybridization  may  therefore  have played
little part in their evolution.

Besides  the  antiquity  of  the  lycopodiopsid
kind  of  construction,  the  fossil  record  also  indi-
cates  that  the  Lycopodiopsida  always  had  a  dis-
tinctly heteromorphic life cycle. As in the living
representatives, there is a conspicuous absence of
morphological  and  anatomical 
similarities
between  the  sporophytic  and  gametophytic
phases.  The  gametophytes  appear  never  to have
been other than parenchymatous plants of lowly
status,  and  indications  of  possible  ancestral  less
heteromorphic  cycles  are  wholly lacking.  The
reduction of the gametophytes in the heterospor-
ous Lycopodiopsida to little more than endosporic
thalli can be regarded as a major step in the direc-
tion  of  becoming  independent  of  humid  condi-
tions for the survival of this vulnerable phase. Had
the lycopodiopsids acquired this valuable adapta-
tion to terrestrial life earlier and proceeded from
Lepidocarpon to the  evolution  of  fully  integu-
mented seeds, their spectacular decline at the end
of the Paleozoic might never have occurred.

Figure 6.15. Pleuromeia sternbergi, reconstruction. (After
Hirmer, from Andrews. 1961. Studies in Paleobotany. Wiley,
New York.)

150

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 1

Figure 6.16. Lycopodium clavatum, habit. Scale bar 1cm.

The Lycopodiales
Members  of  the  order  Lycopodiales,  which
includes the genera Lycopodium (club mosses) and
the  Australasian  Phylloglossum,  are  distinguished
by their eligulate leaves and homospory.

Lycopodium (Fig. 6.16), with about 200 species, is
distributed throughout the world from arctic to
tropical  regions,  with  a  related  range  in  the
growth form  of  the  sporophyte.  The  colder  cli-
mates  favor  species  with  short,  erect  stems,  or
creeping  stems  giving  rise  to short  upright  side
branches,  while  those  in  the  tropics  have much
laxer  growth,  are  sometimes  stoloniferous,  and
are often epiphytes. Taxonomists are now inclined
to assign  species  of  Lycopodium to a number  of
smaller  genera.  For  present  purposes,  however,
the  concept  of  Lycopodium  will  be  retained,  and
alternative nomenclature will be indicated where
appropriate.

The stem is surrounded by microphylls, a form
of leaf which is typically small, simple in outline,
and with a single median vascular strand. Some

Figure 6.17. Lycopodium (Diphasiastrum) alpinum.
Longitudinal section of apical region of vegetative shoot.

species  of  Lycopodium,  especially  the  epiphytic
ones, are heterophyllous, the lateral rows of leaves
being expanded in the plane of the shoot system
and  the  upper  and  lower  rows  adpressed  and
smaller.  The  fertile  leaves  (sporophylls)  may be
similar to the sterile, as in L. (Huperzia) selago, and
the  fertile  regions  not  clearly  set  off  from  the
sterile along the axis. More usually, however, the
sporophylls differ from the sterile leaves in size,
shape and the extent of the chlorophyllous tissue,
and are often grouped together, as in L. clavatum,
in distinct cones (strobili) of determinate growth.
Roots arise endogenously, emerging from the
underside of the stem in the prostrate species, or
from near the base of the stem in upright species.
In some of the latter, initiation of the roots occurs
near  the  shoot  apex,  but  instead  of  emerging
there the roots grow down inside the cortex, and
break out only when they reach the level of the
soil.

The stem, which grows from a group of initial
cells (Fig. 6.17), contains a central stele. Although
basically a protostele, the detailed anatomy shows
considerable variation with species. In its simplest
form the stele consists of a core of tracheids, more
or  less  stellate  in  section,  with  phloem  lying

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH LATERAL SPORANGIA (LYCOPHYTINA)

151

Figure 6.18. Lycopodium clavatum. Transverse section of
stem.

between the arms. In other species, the xylem and
phloem  form parallel  bands  (Fig.  6.18)  (plectos-
tele), or the phloem and xylem may be intermin-
gled,  anastomosing  strands  of  sieve cells  being
scattered amongst the tracheids. In every instance
differentiation of the xylem begins at the exterior
and then proceeds centripetally, leaving no undif-
ferentiated tissue at the center. The xylem is thus
uniformly exarch. Detailed studies of the wall of
the  tracheids  of  L.  (Huperzia)  lucidulum have
revealed  that  the  spiral  thickenings  are  coated
with a layer of material (lignin) resistant to poly-
saccharide  hydrolases,  which  continues,  perfo-
rated  by irregularly  shaped  holes  ranging  in
diameter  from  less  than  1␮m  to about  4 ␮m,
between the thickenings. Beneath this, and adja-
cent to the primary cell wall, another layer can be
distinguished, referred to as the “template layer”,
which is not resistant to enzyme digestion. This
structure  is  very similar  to that  of  the  tracheid
walls  of  early  Lycophytina,  the  degradable  layer
being replaced in fossil material by clear matrix.
The  sieve cells  of  the  phloem  are  elongated
with steeply inclined end walls. The cell contents
are partly degenerate, but associated parenchyma
cells  have well-structured  protoplasts.  The  sieve
plates occur on both the lateral and tapering end
walls. The regular presence of callose has not been
conﬁrmed. The vascular tissue, entirely primary,

Figure 6.19. Lycopodium clavatum. Longitudinal section of
upper region of young strobilus.

is usually surrounded by a narrow zone of paren-
chyma,  and  this  in  turn  by an  endodermis,  the
cells of which have a distinct Casparian strip (see
p. 185).

The leaves, the chief site of photosynthesis, are
structurally simple. There are abundant stomata
on both surfaces, and internally numerous inter-
cellular spaces. There is, however, no clearly dif-
ferentiated mesophyll.

reproduction
Sporangia, borne singly in the axil of a sporophyll
or close to its insertion (Fig. 6.19) (and considered
by some to be cauline in origin), develop from a
group of initial cells, and are hence termed euspor-
angiate.  Continued  cell  division  within  the  pri-
mordium leads to a central mass of spore mother
cells surrounded by a wall several cells thick. The
inner  layers  of  the  wall  function  as  a  tapetum,
breaking  down  to provide  materials  which  con-
tribute to the development and maturation of the
spores.  Following  meiosis  the  four  young  spores

152

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 1

Figure 6.20. Lycopodium volubile.
(a) Vertical section of subterranean
gametophyte. (b) Mature
archegonium.

arrange themselves in a tetra-
hedral  fashion  so  that  each
spore  has  three  triangular
faces  at  its  proximal  pole
where it is in contact with its
fellows 
(Fig.  6.31).  As  the
spores  separate  these  areas
become  less  thickened  than
elsewhere,  and 
the  edges
between  them  conspicuous,
often  appearing  as  a  promi-
nent  triradiate  scar  in  the
mature  spore  (trilete spores).
The  sporangia  dehisce  trans-
versely along a line of thin-walled cells (stomium)
and the minute spores (each about 50 ␮m in diam-
eter) are distributed by wind.

In some species of Lycopodium the exine of the
spore  has  quite  elaborate  reticulate  ornamenta-
tion,  while  in  others  it  is  almost  smooth.  The
rough oily spores are not easily wetted and their
germination  may  be  delayed  for  several  years,
probably until weathering and attrition have ren-
dered the coat permeable. The process may be sim-
ulated in the laboratory by immersing such spores
in concentrated sulfuric acid. Following this treat-
ment the spores germinate freely in pure culture.
In natural conditions initially unwettable spores
may be washed deep into the soil before germina-
tion occurs, and this is reﬂected in the nature of
the gametophyte. For example, in Lycopodium  cla-
vatum,  the  spores  of  which  have a pronounced
reticulate  relief,  the  gametophyte  is  a  subterra-
nean saucer-shaped structure, growing saprophyt-
ically and persisting for several seasons. The sex
organs are produced on a cushion in the central
region. Lycopodium volubile has a similar spore and
gametophyte (Fig. 6.20). In the tropical Lycopodium
(Lycopodiella)  cernuum,  where  the  spores  are
smooth,  germination  and  development  occur
rapidly, producing lobed, cup-shaped gametophy-
tes  which  possess  chlorophyll  and  last  for  little
more than a single season. In L. (Huperzia) selago, in
which  the spores are somewhat intermediate in

the  development  of  the  wall,  there  is  a  corre-
sponding  ambivalence  in  the  habitat  of  the
gametophyte. In all instances the gametophyte of
this species is a small, carrot-shaped body growing
saprophytically and producing sex organs on the
upper cushion. It may, however, be either buried
or at the surface, and if the latter the upper part
becomes pale green. There is thus a general rela-
tionship between the nature of the spore wall and
the form and duration of the gametophytic plant.
The gametophytes of many species, including all
those whose gametophytes are subterranean, are
invested with a mycorrhizal fungus. Provided the
medium  is  appropriate,  such  gametophytes  can
nevertheless be grown in axenic culture.

The sex organs of Lycopodium arise from super-
ﬁcial cells of the gametophyte, and both the male
and  female  gametangia  are  enclosed  to a great
extent  by vegetative  tissue  (Fig.  6.20),  although
the archegonia  have relatively  conspicuous
necks. The  spermatozoids  are  biﬂagellate,  about
8–10 ␮m long, and spindle-shaped (Fig. 6.21). The
ultrastructure is basically similar to that of bryo-
phyte spermatozoids, but the nucleus is less elon-
gated and is not coiled. Fertilization is probably
facilitated by chemotactic attraction of spermato-
zoids to archegonia. The zygote divides by a wall
transverse  to the  axis  of  the  archegonium.  The
outer  cell,  termed  the  suspensor,  divides  no
further, but the inner remains meristematic and

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH LATERAL SPORANGIA (LYCOPHYTINA)

153

gives  rise  to two regions  of  cells.  The  central
region becomes the foot, while the inner differen-
tiates into the root, ﬁrst leaf, and stem apex of the
embryo proper. This  development  results  in  the
embryo being directed inwards, and the embryo-
geny is consequently said to be endoscopic.

At ﬁrst the apex of the embryo points down-
ward, but expansion of the foot region pushes it
to one  side  and  the  young  sporophyte  ﬁnally
breaks  out  of  the  surface  of  the  gametophyte.
Before  it  becomes  fully  established,  the  young
plant depends upon food materials absorbed from
the  gametophyte,  probably  through  the  foot.  In
some  species  of  Lycopodium (e.g.,  L.  (Lycopodiella)
cernuum)  the  differentiation  of  the  embryo is
delayed and it emerges as a parenchymatous pro-
tuberance,  termed  a  protocorm.  This  eventually
gives rise to one or more growing points, each of
which yields a normal plant. Apogamy has been
observed in L. cernuum in culture, but is not known
in nature. L. (Huperzia) selago commonly produces
bud-like gemmae in the axils of the upper leaves.
Phylloglossum,  conﬁned  to Australasia,  is  the
only  other  living  genus  of  the  Lycopodiales.  Its
single  species,  P. drummondii,  consists  of  an
upright  sporophyte,  reaching  5cm  (2in.)  or  less,
with  a  basal  whorl  of  leaves  and  a pedunculate
strobilus (Fig. 6.22). During growth a lateral axis
arises near the base of the plant and extends down
into  the  soil,  its  tip  eventually  becoming  trans-
formed into a tuber. This tuber forms an organ of
perennation,  persisting  through  the  dry  period
(when  the  remainder  of  the  plant  perishes)  and
giving  rise  to the  following  year’s  growth.  The
gametophyte of Phylloglossum is similar to that of
Lycopodium (Lycopodiella) cernuum, but the spermat-
ozoid,  although  of  a  shape  similar  to that  of  L.
cernuum,  is  furnished  with  about  20  apical
ﬂagella. Although Phylloglossum is strikingly differ-
ent  from  Lycopodium in  habit,  there  is  clearly  a
close similarity in basic features of anatomy and
reproduction (there is an interesting analogy, for
example,  between  the  protocorm  stage  in  the
development of the sporophyte of L. cernuum and
the  perennating 
Phylloglossum).
Phylloglossum is probably a form that has become
specialized  in  relation  to a particular  kind  of
habitat. Nevertheless, signiﬁcant differences from
Lycopodium in  the  differentiation  of  the  motile

tuber 

of 

Figure 6.21. Lycopodium (Lycopodiella) cernuum.
Diagrammatic reconstruction of the mature spermatozoid,
depicted with a wedge of the nucleus removed. About every
third microtubule of the microtubular ribbon (mtr) (spline)
and about every third lamella of the multilayered structure
(mls) are portrayed. am, large coiled anterior mitochondrion;
m, mitochondrion; od, osmiophilic droplet; st, starch within
the single plastid (amyloplast); pe, plastid envelope; bb, basal
body; gm, globular matrix (cytoplasm); ne, nuclear envelope;
ni, nuclear inclusion; c, chromatin; pm, plasmalemma. Scale
bar 1␮m. (From Robbins and Carothers. 1978. American
Journal of Botany 65.)

154

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 1

resumed  on  moistening  (“resurrection  plants”).
The  stems  are  commonly  much  more  branched
than  in  Lycopodium.  In  scandent  species  the
branching  of  the  laterals  often  takes  place  in  a
single plane. Leaves originate in a spiral sequence,
but the arrangement may be modiﬁed during sub-
sequent development. In S. selaginoides the leaves
are  all  similar  (isophylly)  and  remain  radially
arranged. Many species, however, display anisoph-
ylly  (heterophylly).  The  two  lower  rows  of  leaves
are  then  expanded  laterally, the  two  upper
remaining  smaller  and  appressed  (Fig.  6.23a).  In
scandent  species  the  anisophylly  is  frequently
conﬁned  to the  lateral  branches,  enhancing  the
frond-like appearance of the whole spray.

In young plants (Fig. 6.23b) roots are initially
produced from the base of the stem. Although in
a few species roots continue to be produced from
a tuberous stem base, in others later roots emerge
principally from leaﬂess rhizophores (Fig. 6.23b).
These originate from the stem at points of branch-
ing and grow down toward the soil, dichotomiz-
ing  as  they approach 
its  surface.  Contact
apparently  acts  as  a  stimulus,  causing  roots  to
arise  endogenously  and  penetrate  the  substra-
tum.

Structurally the leaves of Selaginella resemble
those of Lycopodium, but in a few species (such as
the Mexican S. schaffneri), instead of a single vein,
a number of veins radiate from the insertion and
branch dichotomously at their tips. In some trop-
ical  species  (e.g.,  S.  wildenowii)  leaves  shaded  by
other foliage develop a striking blue sheen (irides-
cence).  This  depends  upon  the  presence  of  two
superimposed  layers  of  polysaccharide  in  the
outer walls of the upper epidermis. These act as an
interference ﬁlter. When the leaf is ﬂooded, water
enters the space between the two layers and the
iridescence  fades.  In  a  few  species  of  Selaginella
(e.g., S. wildenowii) the cells of the upper epidermis
of  the  leaf  contain  a  single  cup-shaped  chloro-
plast,  similar  to that  of  Anthoceros (p.  115)  but
lacking a pyrenoid.

Diagnostic  of  Selaginella is  the  insertion  of  a
minute tongue-like ligule into the upper side of
the leaf close to the axis. This organ appears early
in the life of the leaf, but remains colorless since
the  plastids  fail  to develop  internal  lamellae  or
chlorophyll.  Its  cells  contain  prominent  Golgi

Figure 6.22. Phylloglossum drummondii. (a) Habit. (b)
Sporophyll and sporangium.

apparatus of the male gamete, and in the number
of ﬂagella, probably indicate a long period of sep-
arate evolution.

The Selaginellales
The  habit  of  the  order  Selaginellales  resembles
that of the Lycopodiales, but the microphylls are
ligulate,  the  sporophylls  are  always  aggregated
into  distinct  strobili,  and  the  spores  are  of  two
kinds (produced in separate sporangia), differing
in size and in the sexes of the gametes they even-
tually produce.

There are more than 700 species of Selaginella,
most  of  which  are  tropical,  ranging  from  small
epiphytes to large climbing plants. A few species
of arid areas are capable of ﬂexing their branches
and, in a rolled-up form, resisting prolonged des-
iccation (e.g., S. lepidophylla). The basic cell struc-
ture and enzymes are conserved in the dehydrated
cells.  Normal  form and  metabolism  are  rapidly

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH LATERAL SPORANGIA (LYCOPHYTINA)

155

Figure 6.23. Selaginella kraussiana.
(a) Anisophyllous shoot viewed from
above showing arrangement of
upper and lower rows of leaves. (b)
Young sporophyte.

begins just beneath the apex,
and its peculiar form must be
a  consequence  of  the  greater
expansion  of 
the  cortical
region than of the vascular, so
generating  the  intervening  space.  The  endoder-
mal cells remain alive and, as is usual in a well-
formed  endodermis,  the  plasmalemma  forms  a
tight junction with the Casparian strip embedded
in the radial walls.

The stele of Selaginella is basically a protostele
(p.  193)  lacking  internal  parenchyma,  but  it  is
often ribbon-like instead of cylindrical, and, espe-
cially in aerial axes, several steles may ascend the
stem  together  (polystely).  The  xylem  is  regularly
exarch. The tracheids of the metaxylem often lack
end  walls,  and  in  several  instances  can  be
regarded  as  forming  authentic  vessels.  The  end
walls  of  the  sieve cells  tend  to be  more  or  less
transverse, and pores are found in both the end
and lateral walls. In the rhizomes of a few species
the xylem is in the form of a hollow cylinder lined
on both surfaces by phloem. An endodermis also
occurs  both  externally  and  internally. Such  a
stele,  which  is  said  to be  amphiphloic and  is
referred to as a solenostele, clearly exhibits a more
complicated  pattern  of  differentiation  than  a
protostele, but the factors controlling differentia-
tion of this kind are still little known.

The meristems giving rise to rhizophores are
indistinguishable  from  those  of  shoots  in  their
early stages, but they appear to be indeterminate.
If a branch is removed the adjacent primordium
will grow out to form a shoot instead of a rhizo-
phore.  However, if  the  branch  is  replaced  by a
source of the growth-regulating substance indole-
3-acetic  acid 
(IAA,  auxin),  the  primordium
behaves  normally. This  was  one  of  the  ﬁrst and
most striking demonstrations of how growth-reg-
ulating  substances,  diffusing  from  one  area  to
another in a plant, maintain the familiar pattern
of  morphogenesis.  The  form of  growth in
Selaginella seems  to be  particularly  labile.  The

Figure 6.24. Selaginella sp. Transverse section of stem.

bodies.  The  whole  structure  is  evidently  special-
ized for the production and secretion of extracel-
lular  mucilage,  but  its  activity  is  of  limited
duration. The ligule dies and shrivels to a papery
fragment as the leaf expands.

The  axis  of  Selaginella,  unlike  that  of
Lycopodium,  grows  from  a  well-deﬁned  apical
initial  whose  divisions  are  wholly  periclinal.  In
general the anatomy of the axis is little different
from that of Lycopodium, but the endodermis is of
a kind unknown elsewhere in the plant kingdom.
At maturity  it  consists  of  elongated  hypha-like
cells which suspend the stele in a central cavity
(Fig.  6.24).  The  development  of  the  endodermis

156

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 1

Figure 6.25. Selaginella kraussiana.
Longitudinal section of strobilus.

apices of roots in pure culture
in  the  absence  of  auxin  may
begin to produce leaf primor-
dia and generate a shoot.

in 

strobili 

reproduction 
The sporangia of Selaginella are
borne 
(cones),
which  terminate  the  main  or
lateral  axes.  The  sporophylls
are usually in four ranks. Each
sporangium lies in the axil of
a  sporophyll,  between  the
ligule and the axis (Fig. 6.25).
There  are  two  kinds  of  sporangia,  producing
mega- and microspores respectively, located in dif-
ferent  regions  of  the  cone.  The  initial  develop-
ment of each kind of sporangium is the same, and
closely  resembles  that  of  the  sporangia  of
Lycopodium. Development diverges with the forma-
tion of the spore mother cells. In the microsporan-
gia all the mother cells undergo meiosis and form
microspores, but in the megasporangia not all the
sporogenous  cells  complete  their  development.
Only one or a very few mother cells yield spores,
and not all of these may persist. The consequence
is that the number of spores reaching maturity is
very small  and  ranges,  depending  upon  species,
from  one  (e.g.,  S.  sulcata)  to about  twelve.  The
factors  which  determine  the  course  of  develop-
ment  of  the  sporangial  primordium  are  as  yet
unknown, but in S. wallacei and S. pallescens it has
been  found  that  in  the  presence  of  ethylene
(known to have hormonal properties), released in
planta from 2-chloroethylphosphoric acid, the for-
mation of megasporangia is promoted. Some such
hormonal mechanism may control normal diffe-
rentiation.  The  fully  differentiated  megaspores
are conspicuous for their size, their store of food
materials built up at the expense of the tapetum
and the resorbed abortive sporogenous tissue and
spores, and the thickening and ornamentation of
their walls. In some species it has been possible to
demonstrate a colloidal, crystal-like structure in
the exine. This seems to be generated by a form of

macromolecular  self-assembly. Analogous  struc-
tures can be generated in vitro in polymer systems
in  deﬁned  conditions,  and  their  ultrastructural
features  can  be  almost  indistinguishable  from
those of natural walls. Selaginella produces some
of  the  most  remarkable  spores  in  the  plant
kingdom;  the  megaspores  of  S.  exaltata,  for
example, may exceed 1mm (0.04in.) in diameter.
Silica has been detected in the megaspore walls of
some species.

The microsporangia of

some species of
Selaginella have a well-deﬁned opening mecha-
nism. The wall of the fully ripe microsporangium
splits and the two valves gape open. They then
shut violently, causing the spores to ﬂy out of the
sac. Other species lack any special form of dehis-
cence and the release of the microspores is passive.
In some species (e.g., S. selaginoides) the micro-
spores are distributed still adherent in tetrads.
Megaspores may be distributed by a “sling shot”
mechanism similar to the active discharge of
microspores; those of S. selaginoides, for example,
are ejected with some force, although in this
species the release of the microspores is passive. In
general, passive release of the microspores is not
necessarily accompanied by a like release of the
megaspores, and vice versa. Liberated megaspores
are often found with microspores clinging to
them. These chance associations may lessen the
hazards of subsequent sexual congress.

Some  nuclear  divisions  occur  in  the  spores

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH LATERAL SPORANGIA (LYCOPHYTINA)

157

Figure 6.26. Selaginella kraussiana. Vertical section of
megaspore with endosporic gametophyte.

while they are still in the sporangia, but growth of
the gametophytes, leading to rupture of the spore
wall,  does  not  resume  until  after  the  spores  are
shed. In the microspore an unequal mitosis pro-
duces  a  large antheridial  cell  and  a  small  cell,
termed a prothallial cell, which represents the sole
development of the somatic tissue of the gameto-
phyte. The antheridial cell continues to divide and
yields a normal antheridium, from which 128 or
256 biﬂagellate spermatozoids are eventually lib-
erated. Each is about 25 ␮m long, with a narrow
elongated nucleus in which longitudinal strands,
probably of chromatin, become apparent during
differentiation.  Although  the  spermatozoids  of
Selaginella have a general resemblance to those of
bryophytes (p. 104), the former differ in having an
anterior mitochondrion longer than the nucleus.
Selaginella may be unique in this respect. In bryo-
phytes the nucleus extends for most of the length
of  the  spermatozoid.  The  small  volume  of  the
nucleus  of  the  Selaginella  spermatozoid  suggests
that its content of DNA may be lower than that
(0.38–0.92pg),  possibly
recorded 

for  mosses 

approaching  that  in  the  gamete  of  the  anthoce-
rote Notothylas (c. 0.17pg).

In the megaspore the food material comes to
occupy a central position, and free nuclear divi-
sion occurs at its periphery. Subsequently cell for-
mation begins beneath the triradiate scar, which
is eventually forced open by the general swelling,
exposing a cap of gametophytic tissue (Fig. 6.26).
The somatic tissue of the female gametophyte is
thus  more  extensive  than  that  of  the  male,
although  chlorophyll  is  quite  absent  from  both.
There is some speciﬁc variation in the extent to
which the cellular portion of the female gameto-
phyte is delimited from the food supply below. In
some species the boundary is imprecise, and cell
formation gradually extends down into the lower
region, but in other species a distinct diaphragm
separates the upper cellular region from a largely
acellular food reserve.

The  female  gametophyte,  once  exposed,  pro-
trudes as an irregular cushion bearing rhizoids at
its margin and, in the central region, archegonia.
The necks of the archegonia are very short, con-
sisting of no more than two tiers of cells (Fig. 6.27).
Fertilization  necessarily  depends  upon  a  micro-
spore  germinating  close  to a megaspore,  and  a

158

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 1

Figure 6.27. Selaginella kraussiana. Mature archegonium
(from an electron micrograph).

ﬁlm of water being present when the gametangia
are  mature.  The  rhizoids  around  the  female
gametophyte  may  in  these  conditions  serve  to
retain a “fertilization drop” above the archegonia
in which the spermatozoids congregate.

The embryogeny of Selaginella is like that of
Lycopodium in being endoscopic, but differs in
the greater development of the suspensor, and
the wide variation in detail between species. In
S. selaginoides, for example, elongation of the sus-
pensor pushes the developing embryo down into
the food reserve. In S. kraussiana, however, in
which the food reserve is
cut off by a
diaphragm, the development of the suspensor is
markedly less, but a curious downward exten-
sion of the archegonial canal carries the embryo
through the diaphragm into the center of the
gametophyte. Apart from these features, there is
also variation in the development of the foot
region of the embryo, and in the relative posi-
tions in which the various parts of the embryo
arise.
the embryo eventually
emerges from the upper surface of the gameto-
phyte (Fig. 6.28).

species

In all

The  substantial  thickening  of  the  megaspore
wall in Selaginella probably protects the spore for
considerable periods from desiccation and decay.
Once  conditions  are  favorable  for  germination,
development is rapid and, because of the consid-

Figure 6.28. Selaginella kraussiana. Sporophyte emerging
from gametophyte.

erable  food  reserve  of  the  megaspore,  indepen-
dent of an external supply of nutrients. Compared
with the life cycle of the homosporous Lycopodium,
there is considerably less time spent in the gamet-
ophytic phase. Since this, in view of the delicacy
of the gametophytic tissues and their dependence
on the maintenance of humid conditions, is the
most vulnerable phase of the life cycle, the mod-
iﬁcations  that  lead  to its  curtailment  no  doubt
confer  a  considerable  selective  advantage  on
Selaginella. This is perhaps reﬂected in its numer-
ous species.

In some species of Selaginella (e.g., S. rupestris)
young plants emerge from the female regions of
strobili. This has been regarded as following from
the  lodging  of  microspores  between  the  mega-
sporophylls and the fertilization of an egg while
the megaspore was still in situ, thus simulating an
early step in the evolution of a seed. It is doubtful,
however, whether this can be sustained. In S. rupes-
tris, at least, reproduction is apogamous, the meg-
aspore  producing  an  embryo directly  without
fertilization.

fossil history
Plants indistinguishable from living Selaginella in
vegetative  morphology  are  known  from  the
Carboniferous  Coal  Measures.  Miadesmia (p.  146)
probably  represents  an  extreme  development  of
selaginellean heterospory in response to the con-
ditions prevalent at that time, and parallels the

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH LATERAL SPORANGIA (LYCOPHYTINA)

159

Figure 6.29. Isoetes echinospora. (a)
Habit. (b) Leaf base with young
sporangium in face view and
longitudinal section.

Isoetes, 

sentatives,  contained  in  the
single  genus 
are
aquatic, or plants of situations
subject to periodic or seasonal
inundation.  The  leaves  of  the
aquatic species lack stomata.

Isoetes is widely distributed.
The rootstock in all species is
mostly  below  the  level  of  the
substratum.  The  meristem  at
the upper end of the rootstock
is depressed. Although it often
shows  a conspicuous  apical
cell,  divisions  of  this  cell  are
both anticlinal and periclinal,
not  strictly  anticlinal  as  in
Selaginella.  The  leaves,  which
in  some  aquatic  species  may  reach  a  length  of
70 cm  (27in.),  are  arranged  at  ﬁrst  distichously,
but  subsequently  in  a  dense  spiral  around  the
meristem. The roots arise from the lower end of
the stock where the meristem is again depressed,
but  here  lies  extended  along  a  transverse  cleft.
The roots are initiated at the base of the cleft (Fig.
6.30).

Accompanying this singular morphology is an
equally remarkable manner of growth. A cambial
zone consisting of more or less isodiametric cells
arises around the small amount of primary vascu-
lar tissue in the stock, but it contributes more to
the  cortex  than  to the  stele.  The  activity  of  this
cambium,  in  temperate  species  at  least,  is  sea-
sonal. In step with the addition of new material
within, a girdle of outer tissue, complete with its
decaying leaves above and roots beneath, sloughs
away.  Consequently, having  reached  its  mature
diameter (which may exceed its length), the stock
remains more or less the same size, the new leaves
and roots being carried up on to the shoulders of
their  respective  meristems  by the  expansion  of
the products of the anomalous cambium.

The anatomy of the stock presents a number of
peculiar features. The primary xylem consists of
more  or  less  isodiametric  tracheids,  and  at  the

general success of the heterosporous condition in
the  Upper  Carboniferous.  The  Jurassic  and
Cretaceous  periods  and  the  Tertiary  era  yield
abundant  evidence  of  herbaceous  forms  very
similar to Selaginella, commonly occurring as dis-
persed megaspores with a surface ornamentation
of characteristic form and a wall with a character-
istic  ultrastructure.  Although  a  ligule  has  not
been  demonstrated,  Selaginellites
for
example,  can  be  accepted  with  conﬁdence.  This
was  a  small  heterophyllous  plant,  with  leaves
faintly  denticulate  at  the  margin,  like  those  of
many species of Selaginella. There were four mega-
spores in each megasporangium, and each mega-
spore reached a diameter of about 500 ␮m, about
10 times the size of the microspores. With its clear
fossil record, Selaginella has a strong claim to be
the oldest living tracheophyte genus.

hallei, 

The Isoetales
The members of the order Isoetales have a remark-
able,  rush-like  habit,  quite  unlike  that  of  any
other  lycopodiopsid.  The  short,  ﬂeshy, upright
rootstocks occasionally show one or two dichoto-
mies. Each branch bears a tuft of quill-like micro-
phylls (Fig. 6.29). The microphylls are ligulate, and
reproduction  is  heterosporous.  All  living  repre-

160

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 1

conﬁned to a single furrow which runs along one
side  of  the  stock.  The  leaves  regularly  lack
stomata.  Carbon  dioxide  is  apparently  taken  in
through  the  roots.  It  has  been  suggested  that
Stylites may be a relict of astomatal forms which
were  present  in  the  transmigrants  invading  the
land in early Paleozoic times.

reproduction 
Mature  plants  of  Isoetes are  usually  abundantly
fertile.  The  leaves  ﬁrst formed  in  a season’s
growth bear  megasporangia,  and  those  later
microsporangia,  although  the  sporangia  fre-
quently abort on the last-formed leaves. The spo-
rangium  is  initiated  much  as  in  Selaginella
between the ligule of the sporophyll and the axis,
but  distinctive  features  emerge as  development
proceeds. Part of the central tissue, for example,
remains  sterile  and  differentiates  as  trabeculae
which  divide  the  mature  sporangium  into  a
number of compartments. Also, the ripe sporan-
gium  becomes  enclosed  in  a  thin  envelope
(velum). This originates just below the ligule and
grows  down  over  the  sporangium,  leaving  a
central pore (foramen).

In the megasporangium, part of the sporoge-
nous tissue degenerates, resulting in many fewer
sporocytes than in the microsporangium. Mature
megasporangia contain 100 or more megaspores,
ranging from 200 ␮m to almost 1mm (0.04in.) in
diameter. The microsporangia, in which there is
no  loss  of  sporocytes,  may  contain  up  to 106
spores, each about 40 ␮m in maximum diameter.
Isoetes is  peculiar  in  that  the  microspores  are
monolete and the megaspores are trilete. Not only
is this genus unique in the living lycopodiopsids
in producing monolete spores, but Isoetes is also
amongst  the  few  plants  in  which  monolete  and
trilete  spores  are  produced  by the  same  individ-
ual. Monolete spores can be considered as formed
by the bisection of two conjoined hemispheres by
a  plane  perpendicular  to the  equator  (Fig.  6.31).
The  linear  scar  thus  represents  the  line  of
common contact between the four segments. This
is  in  contrast  to the  tetrahedral  arrangement  of
most  pteridophyte  spores,  where  the  three
contact faces leave a trilete scar. In a few species of
Isoetes, microspores and megaspores occur in the
same sporangium, but the viability of the spores

Figure 6.30. Isoetes echinospora. Median vertical section of
rootstock in plane perpendicular to that of the basal cleft.

base of the stele they are arranged in an anchor-
like  bifurcation  lying  in  the  same  plane  as  the
basal cleft of the stock. The tissue produced on the
inside of the anomalous cambium differentiates
as  a  mixture  of  tracheids,  sieve cells  and  paren-
chyma. The remainder of the tissue in the stock is
parenchymatous,  and  no  recognizable  endoder-
mis delimits the vascular tissue.

The  leaves  contain  a  single  vascular  strand,
often very tenuous, surrounded by four air canals,
interrupted at intervals by transverse septa. These
canals  are  especially  striking  in  the  aquatic
species. The broadened leaf bases lack chlorophyll
and  overlap  widely, forming  a  tight  comal  tuft.
The  roots  possess  a  single  vascular  strand  sur-
rounded by a cortex of two distinct zones: an outer
fairly resistant to decay, and an inner of more del-
icate tissue with numerous air spaces.

In  a North American  mat-forming  species  of
Isoetes the  leaf  arrangement  remains  distichous,
and the rootstock extends laterally in the plane of
the leaves. Adventitious buds arise at the extrem-
ities of these extensions and give rise to additional
plants.  An  Andean  species  of  Isoetes (formerly
Stylites), found only by the sides of glacial lakes at
high  altitudes,  is  outstanding  in  that  the  root-
stock  is  dichotomously  branched.  The  plant  in
consequence  forms  dense  cushions  which  may
reach  a  height  of  15cm  (6in.).  The  roots  are

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA)

161

fossil history
Although Isoetes is like other lycopodiopsids in
essentials, it exhibits a number of outstanding
features unrepresented elsewhere in archegoni-
ate plants. It appears to be a product of a line of
lycopodiopsid evolution that has been indepen-
dent for a considerable period. The reasonable
hypothesis that the Isoetales have been derived by
reduction from arborescent antecedents such as
Pleuromeia (Fig. 6.15) now seems, following the dis-
covery of fossils of small, Isoetes-like plants in
Triassic rocks, altogether improbable. Nathorstiana
from Cretaceous rocks of Germany, once consid-
ered part of this reduction sequence, undoubtedly
recalls Isoetes. An upright rootstock, made irregu-
lar by leaf scars, reached a height of about 12cm
(4.8in.) and bore a crown of needle-like leaves. The
base was divided into a number of vertical lobes,
between which the roots emerged. The plant prob-
ably demonstrates that, at intervals, the largely
diminutive Isoetales have explored a more
upright habit.

Tracheophytes with terminal
sporangia (Euphyllophytina)

Trimerophytopsida
The  Trimerophytopsida  were  not  unlike  the
Rhyniopsida,  but  are  distinguished  by
a
general tendency  to a monopodial  habit  and  by
laterals  which  branched  freely, either  dichoto-
mously or even trichotomously. The evolutionary
progression leading to these forms has been much
debated,  but  it  seems  likely  that  unequal  exten-
sion following a dichotomy could lead to “overtop-
ping”,  and  ultimately  a  main  stem  bearing
complex  lateral  branch  systems.  The  “telome”
theory of Zimmerman (Fig. 6.32) offers a plausible
sequence  of  events  which  could  have led  to a
monopodial growth form.

The stems of the trimerophytopsids were either
naked or sometimes furnished with small spines.
The xylem was in the form of a protostele with the
protoxylem toward the center (endarch). The
metaxylem tracheids often had scalariform thick-
ening. The wall also contained bordered pits, with
strands of secondary wall material extending
across the pit aperture. There is a resemblance to

Figure 6.31. Diagrammatic representation of manner of
formation of (a) monolete and (b) trilete spores.

has not been tested. Reproduction in these species
may be aberrant.

The  spores  are  liberated  by the  decay  of  the
sporophylls. In their subsequent germination and
development they resemble the micro- and mega-
spores of Selaginella. In Isoetes, however, the male
gametophyte  is  wholly  endosporic.  The  single
antheridium yields only four spermatozoids, dif-
fering from those of Lycopodium and Selaginella in
being  multiﬂagellate.  They  are  released  by
rupture of the microspore wall. The female gamet-
ophyte is similar to that of Selaginella. Cell forma-
tion  usually  extends  down  into  the  body  of  the
spore, and the diaphragm seen in many species of
Selaginella is  absent.  Although  initially  endo-
sporic, the expanding gametophyte ruptures the
megaspore at the site of the triradiate scar, but, as
in  Selaginella,  fails  to develop  chlorophyll.  The
archegonia are also similar, but the necks consist
of four tiers of cells in place of two.

The  ﬁrst division  of  the  zygote  is  slightly
oblique. No suspensor is formed, but the embryo-
geny can  still  be  termed  endoscopic  since  the
outer cell gives rise to the foot and the remainder
of  the  embryo comes  from  the  products  of  the
inner cell. Differential growth causes the embryo
to turn round so that it becomes directed toward
the upper surface of the gametophyte. It eventu-
ally breaks through, but the young plant remains
for  some  time  partially  enclosed  by a sheath  of
gametophytic tissue.

Apogamy has been reported in triploid species
of Isoetes. Asexual reproduction by the production
of a bud in place of a sporangium is not uncom-
mon.

162

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 1

Figure 6.32. Diagram showing how a pseudomonopodial
branch system could be derived from a dichotomous system
by way of “overtopping” following the sequence (a)–(c).
(From Stewart and Rothwell. 1993. Paleobotany and the
Evolution of Plants, 2nd edn. Cambridge University Press, New
York.)

the Lycophytina form of tracheid. As there, in fossil
material the interior of the thickenings often
appears empty, presumably because of degradable
material having been replaced by matrix. The
genus Psilophyton (Fig. 6.33)
from the Lower
Devonian is representative of the trimerophytop-
sids. In some forms the monopodial habit was well
established. In Pertica, for example, from the Lower
Devonian in North America, there was a distinct
main axis with the lateral branches inserted in
four ranks. The sporangia of the trimerophytop-
sids were terminal, usually fusiform, and often in
tassels. In Pertica, 50 or more occurred crowded
together at the end of a spray of branchlets. So far
as known all these plants were homosporous.

Although  they became  extinct  at  the  end  of
the  Devonian, 
the  Trimerophytopsida  are
extremely  signiﬁcant  since  they appear  to have
been  ancestral  to all  the  megaphyllous  vascular
plants  (Euphyllophytina).  These  are  represented

Figure 6.33. Psilophyton dawsonii. (After Banks, Leclercq and
Hueber. 1975. Palaeontographica Americana 8.)

by the  extinct  Cladoxylopsida  and  Progymno-
spermopsida,  and  the  ferns,  horsetails,  gymno-
sperms and ﬂowering plants (angiosperms), all of
which have living representatives.

Lycopodiopsida, 

Equisetopsida
class
As  with 
the 
(horsetails)  also  contains  both
Equisetopsida 
living and fossil representatives. All share a recog-
nizable morphology. The general features of the
class can be summarized as follows:

the 

Sporophyte consisting of a monopodial branch
system, some axes rhizomatous and bearing roots.
Leaves microphyllous, unbranched and reduced
(except in some early forms), borne in whorls.
Vascular tissue of tracheids and phloem.
Sporangiophores peltate, aggregated in terminal
strobili. Living forms homosporous, but some
fossil forms heterosporous. Gametophytes known
only of living forms, terrestrial. Spermatozoids
multiﬂagellate. Embryogeny exoscopic.

Four  orders  are  recognized:  the  Equisetales
(containing  Equisetum  and  a  number  of  fossil

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA)

163

and 

the 

genera), 
Calamitales,
Sphenophyllales  and  Pseudoborniales.  Only
Equisetum is living.

extinct 

The early Equisetopsida
The  fossil  record  of  the  Equisetopsida  parallels
that of the Lycopodiopsida, beginning early in the
Paleozoic  and  expanding  in  the  Carboniferous,
when the Equisetopsida must have formed a large
part of the Earth’s vegetation. From the end of the
Paleozoic  to the  present  time  they have  been  of
diminishing importance until today only a single
genus remains.

and 

the  Upper  Devonian 

The Calamitales
The  fossil  equisetopsids  which  show  the  closest
resemblance to Equisetum are the Calamitales. One
of  the  earliest  may  have been  Archaeocalamites
from 
Lower
Carboniferous.  This  was  an  arborescent  plant
with secondary vascular tissue, the mature stems
reaching  about  1.5cm  (0.6in.)  in  diameter.  The
branches were whorled and the stem ribbed, but
the  ribs  did  not  alternate  as  in  living  Equisetum.
The  upper  branches  bore  leaves,  also  in  whorls,
which  dichotomized  several  times,  sometimes
reaching a length of 10cm (4in.). Calamites, which
ﬂourished  in  the  Carboniferous  forests,  is  alto-
gether better known (Fig. 6.34). These plants had a
creeping  rhizome  from  which  arose  massive
aerial stems bearing whorls of branches. In some
forms the main axis reached a diameter of about
15cm (6in.) and a height of at least 20m (65.5ft).
The  calamites  probably  formed  a  second  storey
beneath  the  arborescent  lycopodiopsids.  The
stems of Calamites were conspicuously ribbed, the
ribs in some forms alternating from node to node,
and in others colinear. Although Calamites is often
represented  only  by pith  casts,  petrifactions  are
also  known  which  have revealed  details  of  the
anatomy. There was a basic similarity to Equisetum,
and the protoxylem was associated with a canal.
Subsequently  a  cambium  arose  between  the
primary  xylem  and  phloem  and  contributed
substantial amounts of secondary vascular tissue
to the  stem.  Another  difference  from  Equisetum
was that no air canals were present in the cortex.
The axis did, however, grow, as in Equisetum, from
a single apical cell, beautifully preserved in some

Figure 6.34. Calamites, reconstruction. Scale bar 1m. (From
Stewart and Rothwell. 1993. Paleobotany and the Evolution of
Plants, 2nd edn. Cambridge University Press, New York.)

specimens.  The  leaves  of  Calamites were  simple
with a single median vein. The subsidiary cells of
the stomata bore transverse bars of cutin (see Fig.
6.39).

The  strobili  of  the  Calamitales,  which  termi-
nated  lateral  branches,  consisted  of  alternate
whorls  of  sporangiophores  and  bracts,  although
the cone of one early form appears to have con-
tained peltate sporangiophores alone. Since cones
are often found detached, they are placed in form
genera,  deﬁned  by the  relative  arrangements  of
the  sporangiophores  and  bracts.  The  two  form
genera most widely represented are Calamostachys
(Fig. 6.35) and Palaeostachys. The cones assigned to
these form genera may, of course, have been pro-
duced by plants differing widely vegetatively. Both
homosporous and heterosporous cones have been
described, and in at least one (Calamocarpon) the
megasporangium appears to have contained only

164

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 1

Figure 6.35. Calamostachys. (a) C.
ludwigi. Fertile shoot (from a
compression). (b) C. binneyana.
Longitudinal section of cone. ((a)
after Weiss, from Andrews. 1961.
Studies in Paleobotany. Wiley, New
York; (b) after Andrews. 1961.
Studies in Paleobotany. Wiley, New
York.)

functional  megaspore.
one 
The  evolution  of  heterospory
in the Calamitales appears to
have paralleled  that  in  the
Lepidodendrales,  but  there  is
no evidence of its having reached the seed-like for-
mations of Lepidocarpon and Miadesmia (p. 146). In
Elaterites (possibly the microsporangiate cone of a
heterosporous calamite) the spores had Equisetum-
like elaters.

The Sphenophyllales
The Sphenophyllales, another order of the equise-
topsids, appeared in the late Devonian and were
prominent  in  Carboniferous  ﬂoras.  They  share
little with the Equisetales and Calamitales except
the whorled arrangement of the leaves. They were
probably  scrambling  plants,  supporting  them-
selves on other vegetation in the manner of the
familiar  Galium aparine (cleavers  or  goose-grass).
The  leaves  were  wedge-shaped,  with  dichoto-
mously  branching  venation,  and  were  usually
borne in multiples of three (Fig. 6.36). The stems
contained a solid core of primary xylem, triangu-
lar in transverse section, with protoxylem at the
vertices.  The  primary  xylem  was  surrounded  by
secondary  in  radial  ﬁles,  resulting  in  a  vascular
system  strikingly reminiscent  of  that  of  a  root.
These  stems  of  Sphenophyllum  provide  the  ﬁnest
example in the Paleozoic of a spore-bearing plant
in which well-deﬁned secondary vascular tissue,
both xylem and phloem, was regularly produced
from a bifacial cambium. The strobili were termi-
nal and frequently consisted of whorls of sterile
bracts, each forming a cup-like sheath around the
axis, on the adaxial side of which were attached
the  sporangiophores 
(Fig.  6.35b).  The  distal
portion  of  the  sporangiophore,  which  was  free,
branched and recurved, bore a number of sporan-

gia. In other forms of cone the sterile part was less
well developed, and the sporangiophore branch-
ing more complex. Most of the cones were homo-
sporous,  but  distinct  heterospory  has  been
detected in one form. The Sphenophyllales disap-
peared at the beginning of the Triassic period.

The Pseudoborniales
The  Pseudoborniales  are  based  upon  remains
from  the  Upper  Devonian  of  Bear  Island  and
Alaska.  They  appear  to have  been  sizeable  trees,
many branches reaching a diameter of 10cm (4in.)
and the main axes as much as 60cm (24in.). The
leaves,  borne  in  whorls  of  four,  were  branched
once or twice. The upper branches terminated in
loose cones, up to 30cm (12in.) in length, consist-
ing of whorled bracts and sporangiophores. These
branched  several  times,  each  ultimately  produc-
ing  about  30  sporangia.  Although  their  general
features  are  in  accord  with  the  Pseudoborniales
being  placed  with  the  Equisetopsida,  little  is
known  about  them.  They  appear  to have  been  a
minor evolutionary line which disappeared rela-
tively quickly.

The living Equisetopsida

The Equisetales
The  striking  feature  of  the  Equisetales  is  the
jointed structure of the stem, and, in the regions
of uniform diameter, the regular alternations of
the  microphylls  in  the  successive  whorls.  The
stems are often conspicuously ridged, each ridge
being  in  line  with  the  leaf  above.  Consequently,

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA)

165

Figure 6.36. Sphenophyllum. (a) S.
verticillatum. Habit of vegetative
shoot (from a compression). (b) S.
(Bowmanites) dawsoni. Fertile whorl
viewed from above. ((a) after
Potonié. 1899. Lehrbuch der
Pﬂanzenpalaeontologie. Dümmler,
Berlin; (b) after Hirmer. 1927.
Handbuch der Palaeobotanik.
Oldenbourg, Munich.)

provided  the  number  of  leaves  in  a  series  of
whorls  remains  the  same,  the  ridges  also  show
regular  alternation  from  one  internode  to the
next.

Equisetum (Fig. 6.37a), the horsetail, is a famil-
iar sight in parts of the north temperate zone, but
is rarer in the tropics and southern hemisphere,
being absent altogether from Australia and New
Zealand.  About  15 species  are  now  living,  but
others are known as Mesozoic fossils. The genus,
or a form very closely similar, was widespread in
Cretaceous  times,  and  some  species  appear  to
have formed  dense  stands  at  the  fringes  of
Cretaceous  lakes.  Moist  habitats,  such  as  river
banks  and  marshy ground,  are  also  favored  by
most living species, but some are able to thrive in
much drier places. Equisetum arvense, for example,
often ﬂourishes on well-drained railway embank-
ments. All species have a similar growth form. A
perennial  underground  rhizome  gives  rise  to
green aerial shoots, and occasionally also to per-
ennating tubers packed with starch. In temperate
and arctic regions the aerial shoots die back at the
end of the growing season and new shoots emerge
in the following spring.

Although  the  height  of  the  aerial  system  of
Equisetum varies from a few centimeters in arctic
and alpine species to as much as 10m (33ft) in the
tropical E. giganteum, its morphology is strikingly
uniform. Branches appear only at the nodes, and
where  several  are  present  they too  are  whorled.
The branch primordia are not, however, axillary,
but they arise between the microphylls (Fig. 6.37b)
and eventually break through the sheath formed
by their congenitally fused bases. In subterranean

axes roots emerge from directly below the sites of
branch primordia. Branch and root primordia are
in  fact  present  at  every  node,  but  they develop
only  in  appropriate  environmental  conditions,
sometimes  reproducible  in  the  laboratory. In  E.
arvense, for example, green branches can be made
to grow  from  the  nodes  of  an  etiolated
unbranched fertile shoot if they are enclosed in a
moist chamber.

The structure of the axes of Equisetum also
shows little variation. The mature stems have a
large central cavity, surrounded by a ring of vascu-
lar bundles (Fig. 6.38). These bundles are of the
same number as the ribs on the outside of the
internode (and hence as the leaves of the node
above), and are also co-radial with them. An endo-
dermis can usually be distinguished, either encir-
cling the stele on the outside alone (as in E. arvense),
or forming two continuous cylinders, one inside
and one outside the ring of bundles (as in E.
hyemale), or surrounding each bundle individually
(as in E. ﬂuviatile). In some species the position of
the endodermis in the rhizome is different from
that in the aerial stem. Alternating with the vascu-
lar bundles, and lying between the endodermis
and the periphery, are large longitudinal air cham-
bers known as vallecular canals. The continuity of
the central cavity is interrupted at the nodes by
parenchymatous septa.

The vascular bundles themselves contain very
little ligniﬁed tissue. In a differentiated internode
the protoxylem is represented solely by fragments
of  tracheids  adhering  to the  sides  of  a  cavity,
termed  the carinal canal,  present  on  the  adaxial
side of each bundle. The metaxylem differentiates

166

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 1

E. hyemale the phloem close to the node is notable
in  lacking  well-deﬁned  sieve cells.  The  root,
branch and leaf traces also originate at the level of
the  node,  the  leaf  trace  departing  immediately
above the entry of the bundle from the internode
below.

The  strength  of  the  Equisetum stem  depends
principally upon the cortical ridges. These consist
of sclerenchymatous cells reinforced by deposits
of silica. The nodal septa have also been shown to
add  to the  rigidity  of  the  axis.  The  support  this
form of  construction  can  provide  is  evidently
limited  and  stems  frequently  buckle  under
mechanical stress. The taller species of Equisetum
usually grow in groves and, since the rough sili-
ceous stems and branches do not readily slide over
each other, the plants hold each other up.

The  microphylls  of  Equisetum soon  become
scarious, and photosynthesis takes place predom-
inantly  in  the  surface  layers  of  the  stem.  Apart
from a few curious “water stomata” or hydathodes
in the adaxial epidermis of the tip of the micro-
phyll, the stomata are conﬁned to the valleys of
the internodes, and thus lie above the vallecular
canals.  The  stomata  are  often  deeply  immersed,
merely a pore being visible externally. Each guard
cell is ﬂanked by a subsidiary cell, and each sub-
sidiary  cell  bears  transverse  bars  of  cutin  on  its
exposed surfaces (Fig. 6.39).

The growth of the axis of Equisetum provides a
striking  example  of  coordinated  differentiation.
The  axis  is  surmounted  by a single  tetrahedral
apical cell. The extent to which this particular cell
undergoes division is disputed, but adjacent to its
three posterior faces daughter cells are cut off in
a regular, clockwise sequence. While the stem is
growing  there  is  no  pause  in  the  meristematic
activity  of  the  apical  initials  and  their  products
are  recognizable  as  three  tiers  of  cells  in  the
extreme apex. The formation of a whorl of leaves
is ﬁrst indicated by the elevation of a ring of meris-
tematic  tissue  at  the  base  of  the  conical  apex.
While  this  ring  is  being  superseded  by another,
leaf  teeth  initials  become  visible  around  the
upper  margin  of  the  ﬁrst.  These  initials  are  of
limited growth and give rise to the free part of the
microphylls,  the  basal  ring  meanwhile  forming
the sheath of fused bases.

The  upper  three  or  four  nodal  primordia

Figure 6.37. Equisetum sylvaticum. (a) Habit. Early summer
condition, after production of vegetative branches, but before
shedding of cone. (b) Diagram showing arrangement of leaves
and ribs at a node at which there is exact alternation.

Figure 6.38. Equisetum arvense. Transverse section of young
stem.

as  two  groups  of  tracheids,  one  placed  tangen-
tially  on  each  side  of  the  phloem.  The  cells
between  the  phloem  and  the  carinal  canal  fre-
quently  develop  labyrinthine  walls.  These  may
regulate the ﬂow of solutes from the symplast of
the sieve cells to the apoplast of the canal. The vas-
cular  anatomy  of  the  nodes  is  highly  peculiar.
Here  the  tracheids,  resembling  those  of  the
metaxylem,  run  horizontally  and  form a ring
linking the bundles of the adjacent internodes. In

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA)

167

Figure 6.39. Equisetum sp. Structure of stomata. (a) In
vertical section. (b) In surface view partially macerated,
showing the bars of cutin on the subsidiary cells. (After
Hauke. 1957. Bulletin of the Torrey Botanical Club 84.)

remain close together, but the cells between them
become  organized  as  an  intercalary  meristem
which surrounds, but does not cut across, the pro-
cambial  strands.  This  meristem  becomes  active
between the fourth and ﬁfth nodes, and cuts off
cells acropetally which go to form the internode.
The  activity  continues  while  four  or  ﬁve  new
nodes  are  initiated  at  the  apex.  In  consequence
the mature length of the internode is reached by
about the ninth or tenth node. The secretion  of
silica on to the surface of the internode begins at
the top and proceeds downward, becoming com-
pleted as the intercalary growth ceases. The meta-
bolic pathway of the silica and the manner of its
secretion are not yet understood.

The  procambial  tissue,  the  disposition  of
which foreshadows that of the vascular bundles in
the  mature  axis,  advances  continuously, in  step
with the advance of the apex, and is always to be
found at the level of the uppermost leaf whorl pri-
mordia. Differentiation of the procambial strand
is  not,  however, a simple  acropetal  process.
Protoxylem begins to appear at about the fourth
node, and differentiation extends acropetally into
the leaf and basipetally into the node below. Since
this  differentiation  occurs  during  the  time  of
maximum  extension,  most  of  the  tracheids  ﬁrst
formed  in  the  internode  are  ruptured,  and  the
area of weakness provided by the differentiating
cells is pulled apart by the radial and tangential
expansion  of  the  stem,  so  yielding  the  carinal

canal.  Metaxylem  begins  to appear  at  the  ﬁfth
node, and also differentiates basipetally. The rate
of  differentiation  is  such  that  the  descending
strands  do  not  fuse  with  the  metaxylem  of  the
node beneath until the tenth node, when exten-
sion of the internodes is ceasing. The internodal
metaxylem thus escapes rupture, although occa-
sional small lacunae indicate that it is subjected
to some  stress  during  the  concluding  phases  of
differentiation. The differentiation of the phloem
follows more or less the same course as that of the
metaxylem.

In  temperate  and  arctic  habitats  the  aerial
branches perish in the winter, and in this instance
the growth of the shoot is a little different from
that just described. Almost the whole of the next
year’s shoot overwinters in primordial form as a
subterranean  bud.  In  spring  elongation  of  the
internodes  and  further  differentiation  proceeds
acropetally, so  generating  an  aerial  system  of
limited growth.

reproduction
In all species of Equisetum the sporangiophores are
aggregated  into  a  terminal  strobilus  (Fig.  6.40)
which terminates either a vegetative axis (as in E.
palustre)  or  a  specialized  axis  lacking  pigmenta-
tion which appears early in the growth season (as
in E. arvense). An intermediate state is shown by E.
sylvaticum, in which the fertile shoots are at ﬁrst
colorless, but after release of the spores become
green and branch. The vascular system inside the
cone recalls that of a node, since it consists of a
cylinder of metaxylem. Fine traces depart to the
sporangiophores, and the cylinder is broken here
and there by parenchymatous perforations which

168

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 1

Figure 6.40. Equisetum maximum.
(a) Median longitudinal section of
strobilus. (b) Peltate
sporangiophore. (c) and (d) Spores
with elaters in dry and moist
condition respectively.

bear no evident relation to the
departing  traces.  The  sporan-
giophores, which are not nec-
essarily  arranged  in  whorls,
are  peltate,  and  are  tightly
packed so that heads acquire a
polygonal  outline.  About  20
sporangia  are  pendent  from
the margin of the head, and so
lie more or less radially in the
intact cone.

A  sporangium  develops
from a group of cells, in which
a  central  archesporial  tissue,
surrounded  by a wall  several  layers  thick,  can
soon be distinguished. The inner layer of the wall
functions  as  a  tapetum,  together  with  about  a
third  of  the  archesporial  tissue,  the  remainder
being sporogenous.

Groups  of  sporogenous  cells  tend  to become
separated  by non-sporogenous  tissue,  possibly
accounting for some lack of synchrony in meiosis
within a sporangium. The spore output is never-
theless very high. The manner in which the spore
wall  is  formed  is  complex  and  unique  in  the
Pteridophytina.  After  the  laying  down  of  a  thin
layer  of  exine,  four  spirally  arranged  elaters  are
added as a further outer layer. Each consists of two
parts: an inner band of cellulose microﬁbrils (par-
allel  to arrays  of  microtubules  in  the  adjacent
plasmodial  tapetum)  and  an  outer  covering  of
homogeneous  material 
the
tapetum.  The  elaters  are  not  acetolysis-resistant
and can therefore be taken to lack sporopollenin.
When extended the elaters form an X, remaining
attached to the spore only at the intersection. The
mature spore retains no triradiate scar.

secreted 

from 

The mature sporangium opens along a longi-
tudinal stomium as the result of tensions arising
from  the  drying  out  of  spirally  thickened  cells
elsewhere in the wall. When the spores are freed
the elaters lift and respond to changes of humid-
ity with jerky movements which assist in the dis-

tribution of the spores. The entanglement of the
elaters also ensures that the spores are dispersed
in groups.

Equisetum is  usually  considered  to be  homo-
sporous. In E. arvense a large sample of spores falls
into two classes whose mean diameters differ by
about  10 ␮m,  but  this  is  probably  an  effect  of
drying.  The  spores,  which  contain  chlorophyll,
soon lose their viability if stored. On germination
the cellulosic inner layer of the spore wall is con-
tinuous with the wall of the emerging ﬁlament. A
high  concentration  of  potassium  ions  has  been
demonstrated  at  the  site  of  germination.  This
probably leads to a local increase in the plasticity
of  the  wall,  since  potassium  ions  are  known  to
reduce  the  amount  of  cross-linking  in  cellulose
microﬁbrils.  The  initial  ﬁlament  is  transformed
by division in a number of planes into a cushion
of cells anchored by rhizoids. Subsequent growth
is  from  a  marginal  meristem  which  forms  a
number of obliquely ascending lobes (Fig. 6.41), on
the upper surface of which the sex organs appear.
Growth in size is, however, limited, and the gam-
etophytes rarely exceed 1cm (0.4in.) in diameter
and  3mm  (0.12in.)  in  height,  although  much
larger forms have sometimes been found.

Culture  experiments  have shown  that  there
are  two  different  kinds  of  gametophyte.  About
half the gametophytes of a mass sowing of spores

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA)

169

remain small and produce only antheridia; very
few, if  isolated,  continue  to grow  and  produce
archegonia.  The  remaining  gametophytes  are
larger and longer-lived. They ﬁrst produce arche-
gonia,  and  then,  if  none  is  fertilized,  a  crop  of
antheridia,  followed  by another  of  archegonia.
Such gametophytes may last at least two years and
in favorable circumstances produce several sporo-
phytes. There is thus some evidence that Equisetum
is heterothallic, but, since the proportions of the
two  kinds  of  gametophyte  are  related  to the
density of sowing and other cultural conditions,
the differences in behavior cannot have a simple
Mendelian  basis.  Chance  variations  in  the  cyto-
plasmic  complements  of  the  spores,  leading  to
differences  in  competitiveness,  may  inﬂuence
somatic growth and subsequent sex expression.

The antheridia of Equisetum, like those of the
Lycopodiales, contain numerous spermatocytes.
They open by the parting of the cover cells and
the spermatocytes are discharged. Each is fur-
nished with a number of long ﬁbrils, an interest-
ing parallel to the elaters attached to the spore.
The ﬂagella of the enclosed spermatozoids soon
become active and the spermatocytes break open,
releasing the gametes. Each is about 20 ␮m long
and is twisted into a left-handed screw of three
gyres, with an apical crown of about 100 ﬂagella.
The ultrastructure is similar to that of other
archegoniate male gametes, and a ribbon of
microtubules adjacent to the nucleus is a promi-
nent feature. The spermatozoid swims at about
300 ␮ms⫺1 in a helicoid path. The archegonia are
formed mostly between the aerial lobes of the
gametophyte. The necks project, and at maturity
the four distal cells become elongated and
reﬂexed. The mature egg cell contains abundant
amyloplasts, a feature shared with the egg cells
of primitive, but not recent,
ferns (p. 205).
Fertilization, dependent, as
in the Lycopo-
diopsida, upon the presence of a ﬁlm of water, is
followed by the division of the zygote in a plane
perpendicular to the axis of the archegonium.
The subsequent embryogeny is exoscopic, and
the products of the outer cell give rise to the
stem apex, the primordium of the ﬁrst whorl of
leaves, and, in a variable lateral position, a root
apex.

The  development  of  the  young  sporophyte

Figure 6.41. Equisetum sylvaticum. (a) Young male
gametophyte. (b) Section through male branch. (c,d) E.
palustre, archegonia: (c) general view; (d) longitudinal section.
(After Duckett. 1968. PhD dissertation, University of
Cambridge.)

follows a curious course (Fig. 6.42), without par-
allel in other living archegoniate plants. The ﬁrst
axis,  which  contains  a  simple  protostele,  is  of
determinate growth and never increases in diam-
eter. In E. arvense, for example, it produces about
six  whorls,  each  of  about  three  leaves.  As  this
shoot ceases to grow, a bud grows out from below
the  ﬁrst whorl  of  leaves.  This  also  produces  an
upright axis, of slightly greater diameter than the
ﬁrst and containing a protostele that shows a ten-
dency  toward medullation.  This  process 
is
repeated two or three times until the axis reaches
the  diameter  and  structure  characteristic  of  the
mature  plant.  The  rhizomatous  growth habit  is
then  initiated.  The  primary  root  of  the  embryo
persists only a short time, and roots are produced
freely from the nodes at and below the soil surface
as the young plant becomes established.

Origin of the Equisetopsida
The bearing of the leaves or branches in whorls,
and the articulate structure of the stem, although

170

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 1

Figure 6.42. Equisetum arvense. (a) Sporeling. (b)
Development of mature form of plant. (After Barratt. 1920.
Annals of Botany 34.)

in  the  ﬂowering  plants 

characteristic  features  of  the  Equisetopsida,  are
not  of  course  conﬁned  to this  class  of  the  plant
kingdom. They are present in some of the algae
(e.g., Draparnaldia (p. 48), Batrachospermum (p. 33))
and 
(e.g.,  Galium,
Casuarina),  and  have clearly  arisen  a  number  of
times  in  plant  evolution.  Nevertheless,  the
Equisetopsida  appear  to have  specialized  in  this
organization of the plant body from their begin-
nings,  and  they may even  have had  a  common
origin  in  the  remote  past.  Unfortunately, no
fossils are known which show convincingly how
the Equisetopsida might have arisen.

Apart  from  the  Cretaceous  plants  closely
resembling  living  Equisetum,  referred  to earlier,
there is evidence of herbaceous forms having also
existed in the Paleozoic. Equisetites hemingwayi, for
example,  from  the  Upper  Carboniferous,  shows
the remains of a fertile shoot very like Equisetum in
the  structure  of  the  cone  and  order  of  size.
Although  in  some  of  the  Carboniferous  spheno-
phylls  sporangia  were  produced  in  association

with  bracts,  these  complexes  seem  to have  no
afﬁnity  with  the  lycopodiopsid  sporophyll,  a
reproductive  structure,  as  we have  seen  (p.  142),
well  established  in  early  Devonian  times.  The
Equisetopsida  may  themselves  have had  a
common  origin,  and  the  relationships  between
the  Calamitales  and  the  Equisetales  are  closer
than  between  the  other  orders.  There  seems  to
have been a general tendency toward the sporan-
giophore  becoming  peltate,  and  this  may  have
hindered  the  evolution  of  seed-like  structures.
The almost total elimination of the equisetopsids
points  to their  limitations,  which  possibly  lay
principally in the reproductive mechanisms. It is
difﬁcult  to account  for  the  survival  of  the
Equisetales  in  preference  to the  other  orders.  It
may have been because only this order contained
herbaceous forms sufﬁciently adaptable to meet
the ﬂuctuating conditions of the Mesozoic.

Cladoxylopsida
Conspicuous  amongst  the  Middle  and  Upper
Devonian ﬂoras are the Cladoxylales, comprising
a  number  of  genera  of  which  Calamophyton and
Pseudosporochnus are  representative.  The  best
examples have been found in Europe, but they are

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA) (CONT.)

171

Figure 6.43. Cladoxylopsida. (a)
Reconstruction of Calamophyton.
Scale bar 0.5 m. (b) Section of
Cladoxylon stem showing highly
dissected stele with peripheral
loops. Scale bar 1mm. ((a) after
Schweitzer. 1990. Pﬂanzen erobern
das Land.  Forschungsinstitut
Senckenberg, Frankfurt; (b) from
Stewart and Rothwell. 1993.
Paleobotany and the Evolution of
Plants, 2nd edn. Cambridge
University Press, New York.)

of  the  laterals.  The  plant  was
probably homosporous.

Carboniferous  Cladoxy-
lopsida  (including  Cladoxylon
itself) are known only as petri-
factions.  They  show  some  of
the  anatomical  characters  of
the Devonian forms, but until
material  showing  the  mor-
phology of the plants becomes
available  their  precise  rela-
tionship  with  the  Devonian
Cladoxylales  will  remain  unclear.  The  vascular
system of Cladoxylon consisted of ascending, anas-
tomosing  plates  of  xylem,  each  in  life  probably
surrounded by phloem and an endodermis. Since
the  system  has  the  appearance  of  falling  into  a
number of independent subsystems, it is regarded
as polystelic. As in the Devonian forms, the vascu-
lar  supply  to the  branches  was  compound  in
origin,  departing  from  several  of  the  adjacent
ascending  plates.  A  curious  anatomical  feature
was the presence of small parenchymatous areas
within the xylem, especially toward the periphery
of the stem. Some species of Cladoxylon may have
had rudimentary secondary thickening.

The Cladoxylopsida have in the past been con-
sidered as ancestral to both the Equisetopsida and
the  Polypodiopsida 
(ferns).  Current  concepts
suggest  that  a  close  relationship  with  the
Equisetopsida is unlikely, but a possible link with
the ferns cannot be discounted.

also  known  from  North  and  South  America.
Historically, accounts  of  the  Cladoxylales  have
been confused, and clear views about their rela-
tionships lacking.

Calamophyton (Fig. 6.43a) may prove typical of
the  group.  It  possessed  a  short  trunk  with  an
enlarged  base  from  which  roots  arose.  Branches
showed digitate to palmate multiple dichotomies.
The vascular system consisted of radially directed
plates  which  were  variously  connected  at  the
center of the axis, and which anastomosed within
(Fig.  6.43b).  Lateral  structures
the  branches 
showing  simple  dichotomy  (such  as  present  in
Psilophyton,  Fig.  6.33),  reaching  2cm  (0.75in.)  in
length, were present along the branches with no
obvious  regularity.  In  Pseudosporochnus,  the  dis-
tinction between small branches and lateral struc-
tures  was  less  clear,  some  laterals  possessing  a
number of dichotomies and corresponding xylem
traces. Ellipsoidal sporangia were borne at the tips

7

The subkingdom Embryophyta (cont.):
division Tracheophyta, Part 2

Polypodiopsida (ferns)
The  class  Polypodiopsida  encompasses  both
wholly fossil and also living representatives, many
of which have a long fossil history. The general fea-
tures of the class can be summarized as follows:

Sporophyte herbaceous or arborescent, in many
forms rhizomatous. Leaves often compound (meg-
aphylls). Vascular system of tracheids and phloem,
usually lacking clearly deﬁned secondary tissue.
Stele often divided into meristeles. Leaf traces
often complex, leaving a parenchymatous gap in
the stele at their origin. Sporangia borne on
leaves, but never on the adaxial surface of a micro-
phyll. Mostly homosporous; a few (living and
fossil) heterosporous. Gametophytes (known only
in living forms) simple, usually autotrophic,
lacking vascular tissue. Archegoniate.
Spermatozoids multiﬂagellate. Embryogeny typi-
cally endoscopic.

The living Polypodiopsida fall into six orders,
namely the Marattiales, Ophioglossales, Psilotales,
Osmundales, Polypodiales and Hydropteridales,
referred to collectively as ferns. Of these, the ﬁrst
three orders are eusporangiate (p. 151), while the
Polypodiales, and the Salviniales and Marsileales
(p. 212) of the now validated  Hydropteridales
(p. 216), are leptosporangiate (p. 190). The
Osmundales have in general
leptosporangiate
characteristics, but the sporangia develop in a
manner recalling that of eusporangiate sporangia.
The ferns are an important element of the world’s
ﬂora, numbering about 10000 species and being
particularly conspicuous in warm humid regions.
They show the greatest range of growth forms
amongst the vascular archegoniates. Although

largely herbaceous, a number of ferns of the
tropics and subtropics (mostly belonging to the
family Cyatheaceae) achieve the form and stature
of simple trees. Cyathea in the Kermadec Islands,
for example, has a palm-like habit and reaches a
height of 20m (65.5ft). At the other extreme are
minute epiphytes hardly bigger than leafy liver-
worts (with which they commonly grow). Some
families of ferns have a rich fossil record, their dis-
tinctive characteristics being recognizable as far
back as the Carboniferous (see pp. 179, 211). These
ferns are amongst the most ancient of living
plants.

A  signiﬁcant  feature  of  many  extinct  and
living Polypodiopsida is the close resemblance, in
appearance, development and behavior, between
leaves  and  branch  systems.  In  species  of  the
Carboniferous  Botryopteris (p.  176),  for  example,
the decumbent fronds gave rise here and there to
root  and  shoot  buds.  These  evidently  played  a
major  rôle  in  vegetative  propagation.  Similar
behavior is seen today in some living ferns (p. 194).
In Stromatopteris, a rare fern of New Caledonia, it
is difﬁcult to distinguish between frond and axis.
Similarly, aerial  shoots  (“fronds”)  and  branches
arise from the creeping rhizome of the Psilotales
in  an  almost  identical  manner.  Further,  the
fronds  of  the  fern Stromatopteris and  the  aerial
shoots of Tmesipteris (p. 185) are morphologically
closely similar. 

These  stem-like  properties  of  the  megaphyll
have given  rise  to the  view  that  it  is  fundamen-
tally  different  from  the  microphyll  of  the
Lycopodiopsida. Its origin clearly lies within the
Trimerophytopsida (p. 161) of the Lower Devonian.

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA) (cont.): FERNS

173

The lateral appendages of these early axes appear
to have  yielded  both  the  reduced  leaves  of  the
Equisetopsida  (p.  162)  and  the  branching  leaf
systems of the Cladoxylopsida (p. 171), progymno-
sperms  (p.  218)  and  ferns.  The  pinnules  of  these
larger structures presumably arose by the ﬂatten-
ing  and  fusion  of  the  ultimate  branchlets.  The
ferns distinguished themselves from the gymno-
sperms  by remaining  largely homosporous,  and
failing  to develop  extensive  secondary  tissues.
Although  the  absence  of  secondary  thickening
limited  the  stature  attained  by the  ferns,  they
were,  nevertheless,  an  important  component  of
Paleozoic ﬂoras.

groups  within 

Extinct orders of ferns
Although it is generally agreed that no true ferns
have yet been detected in the Devonian, it seems
likely that they share a common origin with other
megaphyllous 
early
Trimerophytopsida 
(see  Chapters  6  and  8).
Questions  remain  regarding  the  relationship  of
the  eusporangiate  and  leptosporangiate  ferns.
Some analyses indicate a derivation of the leptos-
porangiate from the eusporangiate, while others
favor a parallel development of both forms from
the Zygopteridales.

the 

The Zygopteridales
The  Zygopteridales,  an  order  mostly  conﬁned  to
the Carboniferous and regarded as truly fern-like,
may have been represented in the Devonian by the
remarkable  Rhacophyton  (Fig.  7.1).  This  was  prob-
ably  a  large bushy  plant  reaching  a  height  of
about  2m (6.5ft).  The  main  stem,  about  2cm
(0.75in.) in diameter, bore lateral branch systems
of  two kinds.  The  sterile  were  complanately
branched leading to a spray of branchlets, appro-
priately referred to as a frond. The fertile branches
had  a  much  more  complicated  morphology.  At
each  node  of  the  axis  of  the  frond  (rachis)  there
were  two sterile  branches  subtended  by two
densely  branched  tassels  of  sporangia.  The
branching was clearly not in one plane, but quad-
riseriate.  Rhacophyton  (sometimes  given  its  own
order, Rhacophytales) was probably homosporous.
The  quadriseriate  branching  of  the  frond  is
characteristic of the Carboniferous zygopterids, of
which Metaclepsydropsis is an example (Fig. 7.2). The

and 

characteristic 

vascular system of the stem of the zygopterids was
commonly a protostele, often with a parenchyma-
tous medulla. The fronds, which were usually in a
recognizable phyllotactic spiral, received a single
vascular  trace  which  assumed  in  the  petiole  a
deﬁnite 
symmetry.
Consequently  the  genera  and  species  of  these
ferns are largely based upon the proﬁle of the leaf
trace in transverse section. In Metaclepsydropsis, for
example, the section was hour-glass-shaped (clep-
sydroid).  The  protoxylem  lay  toward each  pole,
each  group  associated  with  an  island  of  paren-
chyma. Pinna traces arose from each pole in alter-
nate  pairs,  in  register  with  the  quadriseriate
branching. In Stauropteris (sometimes separated in
the Stauropteridales), where the frond was simi-
larly  constructed,  the  rachis  contained  four
groups  of  tracheids  ascending  in  parallel.  Well-
deﬁned  phloem  with  elliptical  sieve areas  has
been seen in several of these petriﬁed leaf traces.
In  several  zygopterid  fronds  there  were  small
branched emergences, each with an exiguous vas-
cular supply, at the base of the rachis and at the
sites of branching of the fronds. These are referred
to as aphlebiae (Fig. 7.2), and occur in some living
ferns (e.g., Hemitelia and other tree ferns).

Although metaxylem tracheids in radial rows
are  occasionally  seen  in  zygopterid  stems,  it  is
doubtful  whether  these  were  produced  by
cambial activity. As in living ferns secondary activ-
ity seems to have been absent.

The sporangia of many zygopterids were
massive (often reaching or exceeding 2.5mm
(0.1in.) in length) and presumably eusporangiate
(p. 151) in origin. In many forms (but not in
Rhacophyton) a distinct annulus of thickened cells
interrupted by a thin-walled stomium is visible.
Homospory appears to have been general, but an
example of heterospory was possibly provided by
the Carboniferous Stauropteris burntislandica. The
sporangia (Fig. 7.3) of this species (known as
Bensonites), which were parenchymatous at the
base, produced only one tetrad, consisting of two
large and presumably functional spores about
200 ␮m in diameter, with two small, possibly abor-
tive, spores lying between them. Interpretations of
Bensonites as indicative of heterospory depend,
however, upon the assumption that reproduction
of the parent was normal. A triploid form of living

174

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 2

Figure 7.1. Reconstruction of Rhacophyton ceratangium. (A)
Spiral arrangement of fronds. Oval areas (as at the arrow, f)
represent the position of fertile structures. Scale bar 20cm.
(B) Detail of primary pinna. (From Stewart and Rothwell.
1993. Paleobotany and the Evolution of Plants, 2nd edn.
Cambridge University Press, New York.)

the

spores, however,

Isoetes (p. 159), I. coromandelina, has been found to
produce spore tetrads similar to those of Bensonites.
Two of
lack nuclei.
Apparently, after the ﬁrst division of meiosis the
nucleus fails to divide again, but the mother cell
continues to form a tetrad, resulting in two of the
products being anucleate. A similar mechanism
may have produced Bensonites. It would not be legit-

imate to assume that triploidy, and subsequent
meiotic irregularities resembling those in I. coro-
mandelina, were not already represented in the
Paleozoic pteridophytes. Although the existence of
regular heterosporous reproduction in Stauropteris
burntislandica may therefore be doubtful, it is strik-
ing that a similar form of apparent megaspory
(although the two accompanying smaller spores
were not detected) was found in an earlier zygop-
terid, Gillespiea, from the Upper Devonian of
Virginia. This may, of course, have been an early
example of dyad formation, accompanied by the
omission of the second division of meiosis, an ireg-
ularity not uncommon in living free-sporing
archegoniates, and possibly of ancient origin.

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA) (cont.): FERNS

175

Figure 7.2. Metaclepsydropsis.
Reconstruction of portion of frond
showing quadriseriate arrangement
of pinnae. The stem was
rhizomatous.

Figure 7.3. Stauropteris
burntislandica. (a) Megasporangium
(from a specimen in the Oliver
Collection, Natural History
Museum, London). (b) An isolated
tetrad (Bensonites). (After Chaloner.
1958. Annals of Botany (New Series)
22.)

176

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 2

Figure 7.4. Botryopteris forensis. (a) Reconstruction of a
plant growing as an epiphyte on Psaronius (Fig. 7.11). Scale bar
10cm. (b) Sporangia. Scale bar 1mm. (Both from Stewart and
Rothwell. 1993. Paleobotany and the Evolution of Plants, 2nd
edn. Cambridge University Press, New York; (b) after Galtier.
1971. Naturalia Monspeliensia Botanique 22.)

In a species of the Carboniferous Stauropteris,
believed to be homosporous, spores germinating
in  a  manner  typical  of  living  ferns  have been
found  petriﬁed  within  sporangia.  Apart  from  a
few  isolated  instances  of  this  kind,  nothing
further is known of the gametophytic phase of the
zygopterids.

The Coenopteridales
With the  exception  of  those  forms  clearly  refer-
able  to families  still  existing,  the  remainder  of
the Carboniferous  ferns  are  placed  in  the
Coenopteridales. As in the zygopterids, the fronds
of  the  coenopterids  were  often  highly  branched
and spreading, but the symmetry remained com-
planate as in the frond of a living fern. Genera are
again  deﬁned  by the  shape  of  the  leaf  trace.  In
Botryopteris, for example, the trace was  ␻-shaped
in transverse section, the convexity of the curva-
ture being abaxial and the protoxylem lying at the
tips of the adaxial extensions. In Tubicaulis, by con-
trast, the trace was C-shaped, the convexity of the

curvature being adaxial. Where known, the vascu-
lar system of the axis appears to have been a proto-
stele lacking secondary thickening. Some species
of Botryopteris probably formed sprawling clumps,
with  decumbent  branches  rooting  at  intervals.
Others (Fig. 7.4a) were epiphytes, as were species of
Tubicaulis.

The  sporangia  of  the  coenopterids  (Fig.  7.4b)
were less massive than those of the zygopterids,
and  may  have been  leptosporangiate  (p.  190)  in
origin.  The  wall  was  a  single  cell  thick  and  fur-
nished  with  a  simple  terminal  opening  mecha-
nism similar to that of Osmunda (p. 190). They were
often  attached  to pinnules,  either  near  the
margin  or  superﬁcially. The  spores  were  trilete,
often with ﬁnely decorated exines, 40–70  ␮m in
diameter.  There  have been  no  indications  of
heterospory.

The  zygopterids  and  coenopterids  persisted
until the close of the Paleozoic era, but so far as
known are absent from the Mesozoic.

Existing orders of ferns

The Marattiales
This  small  order  of  ferns  is  wholly tropical.
Although not conspicuous in contemporary vege-
tation, they have a remarkably rich fossil record,
and marattialean ferns have been recognized with
certainty as far back as the Carboniferous.

Of  the  living  genera,  the  most  common  are
Angiopteris and Marattia. Both have short upright
trunks  bearing  large,  pinnately  branched  and

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA) (cont.): FERNS

177

show differentiation into palisade and mesophyll,
with the stomata conﬁned to the lower surface.

The stems of the upright forms usually grow
not from a single apical cell (as in most ferns) but
from a more massive meristem. The leaves form
an apical crown, and since each receives an exten-
sive trace, consisting of several strands of vascular
tissue, the form of the stele is highly complex. A
transverse section of the stem shows a number of
concentric cycles of partial steles (meristeles), and
dissection reveals that the meristeles of each cycle
anastomose  freely, occasional  anastomoses  also
occurring  between  adjacent  cycles.  Leaf  traces
originate from the outer cycle of meristeles. Root
traces,  which  may  arise  at  any  depth,  pass  out
obliquely 
into  the  cortex.  An  endodermis,
although  present  in  young  plants,  is  usually
absent from the stelar regions of the older.

Tapering tracheary elements with long scalar-
iform  perforation  plates  have been  observed  in
the  xylem  of  stems  and  roots  of  a  number  of
Marattiales.  These  can  justiﬁably  be  regarded  as
vessels.  The  stems  of  the  Marattiales  as  a  whole
contain little if any sclerenchyma, but there is an
abundance of mucilage canals and tannin sacs, as
elsewhere in the plant (Fig. 7.6). These indicate a
particular kind of carbon metabolism that seems
to have  been  widespread  amongst  the  ancient
ferns.

reproduction 
The  fertile  fronds  resemble  the  sterile  in  most
genera, and the sporangia, always eusporangiate
in  origin,  are  conﬁned  to the  lower  surface.  In
Angiopteris they arise in two ranks beneath veins
toward the margins of the pinnules (Figs. 7.7a and
7.9a). The group of sporangia is referred to collec-
tively  as  a  sorus.  Dehiscence  of  the  sporangia,
along a longitudinal stomium, is directed toward
the mid-line of the sorus (Fig. 7.9a). In Marattia the
fertile regions are similar, but the sporangia are
congenitally fused into a synangium (Figs. 7.7b, 7.8
and 7.9b). As the synangium matures and dries, it
splits longitudinally into two valves (Fig. 7.9b), and
each compartment dehisces by a pore in the inner
face.  The  number  of  spores  in  each  sporangium
(or  synangial  compartment)  in  the  Marattiales
reaches 1000 or more.

Given warmth, moisture and light, the spores

Figure 7.5. Angiopteris evecta. Specimen in Las Cruces
Botanic Garden, Puerto Rico. (Photograph provided by
C. Jermy, Natural History Museum, London.)

rather ﬂeshy fronds (Fig. 7.5), sometimes reaching
a length of 5m (16.5ft), and showing circinate ver-
nation  (i.e.,  the  fronds  expand  from  a  closely
coiled immature state). At the base of the petiole
are two prominent stipules which persist after the
leaf has fallen. Christensenia, a monotypic genus of
the Indo-Malayan region, has a creeping rhizome
with  palmately  divided  fronds,  which  have the
distinction  of  containing  the  largest stomata
known  in  the  plant  kingdom.  Danaea,  a  small
genus  conﬁned  to tropical  America,  has  one
species  with  a  simple,  ovate  frond,  and  another
with a small pinnate frond in which the lamina is
pellucid and ﬁlmy. These forms, although reveal-
ing the diversity in the fronds of the Marattiales,
are nevertheless unusual, and a massive angular
construction is characteristic of the fronds of the
Marattiales  as  a  whole.  The  laminae  normally

178

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 2

Figure 7.6. Angiopteris evecta.
Transverse section of secondary
rachis.

Figure 7.8. Marattia. Vertical section of synangium.

germinate  rapidly, and  after  passing  through  a
brief ﬁlamentous phase generate a green thalloid
gametophyte  with  apical  growth,  resembling  a
thallose  liverwort such  as  Pellia.  Although  auto-
trophic,  the  lower  cells  contain  an  endophytic,
and presumably mycorrhizal, fungus. The gamet-
ophyte can be long-lived and old specimens reach
a length of 3cm (1.4in.) or more. The antheridia
are sunken, and occur on both surfaces, but the
archegonia,  also  sunken,  are  conﬁned  to the
median region of the ventral surface. The protrud-

Figure 7.7. Fertile pinnules of the Marattiales. (a)
Angiopteris. (b) Marattia.

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA) (cont.): FERNS

179

Figure 7.9. (a) Angiopteris evecta. The abaxial surface of a
fertile pinnule showing the grouping of the sporangia into
sori, and the arrangement of the sori. The sporangia have
dehisced. (b) Marattia fraxinea. The abaxial surface of a fertile
pinnule showing the arrangement of the synangia. The
synangia have dehisced. Scale bars 2.5 mm.

ing neck cells form little more than a cap over the
ventral canal (Fig. 7.10).

The  ﬁrst division  of  the  zygote  is  by a wall
transverse to the longitudinal axis of the archego-
nium. The subsequent embryogeny is endoscopic,
and  the  embryo often  emerges  from  the  upper
side  of  the  gametophyte.  A  suspensor  has  been
reported in Danaea, but is elsewhere lacking.

Vegetative propagation of Angiopteris in glass-
houses  is  achieved  by culturing  the  massive  sti-
pules in peaty soil. In these conditions they will
give rise to one or more shoot buds. Asexual repro-
duction  of  this  kind  may  occur  sporadically  in
nature.

Figure 7.10. Angiopteris evecta.
Vertical section of archegonium. (a)
Immature. (b) Prior to fertilization.
(After Haupt, from Foster and
Gifford. 1959. Comparative
Morphology of Vascular Plants.
Freeman, San Francisco. ©1959.)

represented 

in 

fossil history
the
The  Marattiales  are 
Carboniferous  period  by both  vegetative  and
fertile  material.  Psaronius,  for  example,  is  the
remains  of  a  trunk  surrounded  by a mantle  of
descending roots (Figs. 7.11 and 7.12). The vascular
tissue, which was wholly primary, formed a poly-
cyclic array of anastomosing, band-like meristeles.
Morphologically and anatomically Psaronius is so
suggestive of an arborescent Angiopteris that there
seems  little  doubt  of  its  afﬁnity.  Fronds  of
Psaronius are encompassed by the genus Pecopteris,
while 
represented  by
(Fig.  7.13)  and  Eoangiopteris,  the
Scolecopteris

fertile  material 

is 

180

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 2

sporangia of which were very similar to those of
Angiopteris,  although  there  were  minor  differ-
ences in the sorus. Fertile fronds of marattialean
ferns,  resembling  those  of  various  modern
genera, are also found throughout the Mesozoic.

The Ophioglossales
The Ophioglossales form a small, and morpholog-
ically peculiar, order of living ferns which, since
they have no well-established fossil record, are of
obscure origin. In all members the fertile region
of the frond takes the form of a spike or pinnately
branched structure, clearly set off from the vege-
tative  portion.  A  feature  that  separates  the
Ophioglossales from other living ferns is that the
fronds,  instead  of  showing  circinate  vernation
(see p. 177), grow marginally from a more or less
ﬂat primordium. That of Botrychium lunaria when
young shows a distinct kind of folding, the upper
margins  of  the  pinnules  being  covered  by the
lower margins of the pinnules above.

Of  the  three  genera  of  the  class,  Botrychium
(moonwort)  and  Ophioglossum (adder’s  tongue)
(Fig.  7.14b)  are  fairly  widespread,  the  former
mainly in the north temperate zone and the latter
chieﬂy in the tropics. Both genera include species
native  to the  British  Isles.  The  third  genus,
Helminthostachys (Fig.  7.15),  is  restricted  to the
Polynesian Islands in the South Paciﬁc and a few
regions  in  the  Asian  tropics,  but  is  often  locally
abundant along roadsides. In parts of rural India
the young frond is used as a vegetable.

Figure 7.11. Psaronius, reconstruction. Scale bar 25cm.
(From Morgan. 1959. Illinois Biological Monographs 27.)

Figure 7.12. Psaronius conjugatus.
Transverse section of stem. From a
specimen in the Oliver Collection
(Natural History Museum, London).

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA) (cont.): FERNS

181

Figure 7.13. Scolecopteris incisifolia.
Reconstruction of portion of fertile
pinnule. (After Mamay, from
Andrews. 1961. Studies in
Paleobotany. Wiley, New York.)

In  Botrychium (Fig.  7.14a),
where the frond is annual, the
vegetative and fertile parts are
pinnately  branched.  Helmin-
thostachys is  basically  similar,
but the branches of the fertile
part of the frond are very con-
tracted  (Fig.  7.15).  In  Ophio-
glossum (Fig.  7.14b)  the  sterile  part  of  the  frond,
which  is  reticulately  veined,  is  elliptical  and
entire or, in a few epiphytic forms, dichotomously
lobed.  The  fertile  part  is  usually  a  simple
unbranched spike.

the vascul ar s ystem of the rhizome
The  Ophioglossales  are  rhizomatous,  growth
taking  place  from  a  single  apical  cell.  In
Botrychium the  rhizome  of  the  young  plant  con-
tains a medullated protostele (Fig. 7.16), but in the
stele of older plants a parenchymatous area perfo-
rates  the  xylem  anterior  to the  departing  leaf
trace.  The  endodermis  remains  wholly  exterior.
We thus arrive at a stele intermediate between a
protostele and a solenostele, often referred to as a
siphonostele  (see  Fig.  7.28).  A  rudimentary  sole-
nostele  does  in  fact  arise  in  some  species  of
Botrychium as a result of an endodermis appearing
on  the  inside  of  the  xylem  cylinder.  The  stele
shows a number of points of anatomical interest.
The  metaxylem  tracheids,  for  example,  bear
the
bordered  circular  pits, 
Ophioglossales  only  in  the  gymnosperms  and
angiosperms. There is also limited cambial activ-
ity  leading  to some  secondary  xylem,  otherwise
unknown in living ferns. Apart from this feature,
the anatomy of Ophioglossum and Helminthostachys
resembles that of Botrychium.

found  outside 

The  roots  of  all  Ophioglossales  tend  to be
ﬂeshy. The central vascular strand is either diarch
or, in the larger roots, polyarch. Many species of
Ophioglossum form vegetative buds on the roots.

Figure 7.14. (a) Botrychium lunaria, habit. (b) Ophioglossum
vulgatum, habit. Scale bar 2cm. (After Lowe. 1874–78. Our
Native Ferns. Groombridge, London.)

182

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 2

Figure 7.15. Helminthostachys.
Upper part of plant showing fertile
spike. Scale bar 5 cm.
(Photographed in Sri Lanka by R. D.
E. Jayasekera.)

reproduction
The spherical sporangia of Botrychium, eusporan-
giate in origin, arise in two ranks on the ultimate
branches of the fertile part of the frond. The spore
mother  cells  are  enclosed  in  a tapetum,  several
cells in thickness, in whose disintegration prod-
ucts the spores mature. Even at maturity the wall
of the sporangium is massive, and stomata inter-
rupt its outer layer. The spores, a few thousand in
number,  are  released  by transverse  dehiscence.
Botrychium, like the Ophioglossales as a whole, is
homosporous.

The  gametophyte  of  Botrychium is  a  ﬂattened
tuberous  prothallus,  subterranean  and  invested
with an endophytic fungus, presumably in mycor-
rhizal relationship (Fig. 7.17). Gametophytes have
also been raised in pure culture, but germination
is poor unless the spore walls are ﬁrst abraded by
shaking  with  sand.  A  period  of  darkness  is  also
essential  for  satisfactory germination,  although
following  germination  the  gametophytes  will
grow in the light. Chlorophyll remains absent and
sugar  is  essential  for  successful  growth.  The
antheridia are sunken, and each yields over 1000

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA) (cont.): FERNS

183

sometimes  approaching  5cm  (2in.)  in  length.
Both antheridia and archegonia are sunken. The
embryogeny is exoscopic.

Asexual reproduction by means of root buds is
well known in Ophioglossum, sometimes leading to
stands of a species more rapidly than sexual repro-
duction.  Cleared  lands  in  New  Guinea,  for
example,  were  observed  to become  rapidly  colo-
nized by large populations of Ophioglossum derived
almost  entirely from  root  buds.  Some  species  of
Botrychium produce 
spherical  multicellular
gemmae, up to 1mm (0.04in.) in diameter, from
meristematic regions of the cortex of the rhizome.
On abscission they develop in a manner similar to
that of embryos.

phyl ogeny
The  Ophioglossales  have no  close  relatives,  and
the  evidence  of  distribution  and  comparative
anatomy, particularly  in  relation  to the  massive
eusporangiate sporangia and the stele, points to
their being the relicts of an ancient lineage. The
bordered  pits  of  the  tracheids,  the  epiphyllous
origin of the fertile regions, and the production of
secondary  xylem  in  the  rhizome  of  Botrychium
have suggested  to some  that  the  Ophioglossales
are  derived  from  some  ancient  progymnosperm
stock (p. 218), and that there is no close relation-
ship with the polypodialean ferns. The negligible
fossil record of the Ophioglossales as a whole sug-
gests that they were never very numerous.

The chromosome numbers of Ophioglossum are
remarkably high, exceeding 1000 in one species.
The  living  forms  may  therefore  be  ancient  poly-
ploids.

The Psilotales
This  order  is  represented  by two small  genera,
Psilotum (Fig. 7.19a) and Tmesipteris (Fig. 7.19b). The
former  is  pan-tropical  and  not  uncommon,  but
the latter, although locally abundant, is conﬁned
to Australasia and Polynesia.

The  sporophyte  of  Psilotum,  which  may  be
either terrestrial or epiphytic, consists of upright
(or, in one epiphytic species, pendulous), dichoto-
mously branching axes arising from a horizontal
system  of  similarly  branching  rhizomes.  The
rhizomes  bear  rhizoids,  and  contain  an  endo-
phytic fungus, probably a symbiotic mycorrhizal

Figure 7.16. Botrychium lunaria. Transverse section of
rhizome.

construction, 

multiﬂagellate spermatozoids. The archegonia, of
quite  normal 
are  partially
immersed. The embryogeny of Botrychium is some-
what variable: in some species there is a suspen-
sor and development is endoscopic, in others the
suspensor  is  lacking  and  the  development  exos-
copic.  The  ﬁrst organ  to emerge is  the  root,
infected from the ﬁrst with the same endophytic
fungus as the gametophyte. The young plant may
remain  subterranean  in  an  immature  condition
for  several  years.  Some  individuals  may  even
become green and complete their life cycle while
remaining  covered  by litter.  Permanently  albino
forms are also known, but the inheritance of this
condition  has  not  been  studied.  It  seems  that
photosynthesis plays a minor rôle in the metabo-
lism of Botrychium, nutrition being, in some forms
at  least,  provided  entirely  by the  mycorrhizal
fungus. Despite the gametophyte being subterra-
nean,  interspeciﬁc  hybrids  of  Botrychium are
known and sometimes locally frequent.

The reproduction of Helminthostachys is similar
to that  of  Botrychium,  but  the  dehiscence  of  the
sporangia is longitudinal, and the embryogeny is
regularly endoscopic. In Ophioglossum the sporan-
gia, which occur as two rows partially embedded
in the spike (Fig. 7.18), open by transverse clefts.
Those  in  the  central  region  of  the  spike  mature
ﬁrst.  Each  contains  numerous  spores,  in  some
species of the order of 15000. The gametophyte of
Ophioglossum is  subterranean  and  cylindrical,

184

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 2

Figure 7.17. Botrychium
virginianum. Vertical section of
gametophyte. (After Campbell.
1905. The Structure and Development
of Mosses and Ferns. Macmillan, New
York.)

Figure 7.18. Ophioglossum
vulgatum. Longitudinal section of
young fertile spike.

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA) (cont.): FERNS

185

Figure 7.19. (a) Psilotum nudum,
fertile region. The trilocular
sporangia are subtended by small
forked bracts. (b) Tmesipteris
tannensis, fertile shoot. The bilocular
sporangia are attached at the forks
of conspicuous biﬁd bracts. Scale
bars 0.5cm.

a

b

association. Small scales, which are at ﬁrst green
but  soon  become  scarious,  occur  at  irregular
intervals on the aerial stem. They lack a vascular
strand, but in one species a strand does approach
the  base  of  the  scale,  but  stops  below  the  inser-
tion. Stomata are present, but are conﬁned to the
epidermis of the aerial stem.

The aerial stem of Psilotum contains a simple
stele  (protostele),  frequently  enclosing  in  the
upper regions a central parenchymatous medulla.
The xylem, consisting solely of tracheids, is often
stellate in transverse section, the arms narrowing
and standing opposite poorly deﬁned ribs at the
exterior of the stem (Fig. 7.20). The xylem is exarch

in the aerial stems, but tends to be mesarch in the
rhizome. Phloem surrounds the xylem, but, apart
from  the  lateral  sieve areas,  the  sieve cells  are
little different from elongated parenchyma cells.
An endodermis, separated from the phloem by a
narrow zone of pericyclic parenchyma, marks the
boundary  of  the  stele.  It  forms  a  usually  single-
layered sheath around the stele, its cells character-
ized  by the  Casparian  strip,  a  band  of  fatty
material embedded in the radial walls. The cells of
the  inner  cortex,  adjacent  to the  endodermis,
often  contain  accumulations  of  phlobaphene,  a
condensation product of tannin.

The branches of both the aerial and terrestrial

186

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 2

Figure 7.20. Psilotum nudum.
Transverse section of lower part of
aerial branch.

systems  of  the  sporophyte
grow indeﬁnitely  from  single
or small groups of apical cells.
There is no evidence that the
dichotomy of the axes follows
median  longitudinal  division
of  a  single  apical  cell,  as  in
certain  algae  (e.g.,  the  brown
alga Dictyota dichotoma (p. 92)).
Tmesipteris is frequently an
epiphyte  with  trailing  stems
(Fig.  7.19b).  The  general
morphology is similar to that
of  Psilotum,  but  branching  is
much 
frequent.  The
appendages  are  larger  and
more 
remaining
green and possessing stomata,
and also frequently a vascular
strand.  The  insertion  of  the
appendages is, however, peculiar, being longitudi-
nal instead of transverse, so that they appear more
as  ﬂange-like  outgrowths  of  the  axis  than  as
normal foliage leaves.

leaf-like, 

less 

reproduction
Spores  are  produced  in  the  upper  region  of  the
sporophyte  of  Psilotum (Fig.  7.19a).  The  spore-
bearing  organs,  which  are  distant  from  each
other, are three-lobed, and each is subtended by a
biﬁd  appendage.  The  lobes  correspond  to three
internal chambers (Fig. 7.21), separated by septa,
and  each  ﬁlled  with  spores.  It  is  still  not  clear
whether  this  spore-bearing  organ  is  to be  inter-
preted as a trilocular sporangium or as a synan-
gium  formed  by the  fusion  of  three  sporangia.
Three primordia are, however, visible early in the
ontogeny of the organ, perhaps indicating its syn-
angial  nature.  Since  a  distinct  vascular  strand
extends  into  the  base  of  the  synangium,  it  is
usually  regarded  as  terminating  a  lateral  axis,
rather  than  arising  in  association  with  a  sporo-
phyll. This view is strengthened by the existence
of a cultivated form, “Bunryu-zan”, in which the
synangia terminate vertical axes.

Figure 7.21. Psilotum nudum. Transverse section of
trilocular sporangium (synangium).

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA) (cont.): FERNS

187

Figure 7.22. Psilotum nudum. (a)
Gametophyte. (b) Mature
archegonium. (c) Antheridium. (d)
Young sporophyte. (After Bierhorst.
1953. American Journal of Botany 40
and Bierhorst. 1954. American
Journal of Botany 51.)

two 

zoids.  The  archegonium  has
four tiers of neck cells, but at
maturity all but the lower one
or 
tiers  degenerate.
Fertilization,  which  depends
upon the presence of a ﬁlm of
water, is brought about by spi-
rally  coiled,  multiﬂagellate
spermatozoids.

The  ﬁrst division  of  the
zygote is in a plane transverse
to the longitudinal axis of the
archegonium,  as  in  the  bryo-
phytes. The outer (or epibasal)
cell  yields  the  apex  of  the
embryo, and the inner (or hypobasal) the foot. The
embryogeny is thus exoscopic.

In  Tmesipteris,  spore-bearing  organs  occur  in
the upper parts of some of the shoots, each sub-
tended by a biﬁd appendage (Figs. 7.19b and 7.23).
These organs are regarded as synangia terminat-
ing very short lateral branches, but in Tmesipteris
each consists of only two fused sporangia.

The reproduction of Tmesipteris is very similar
to that of Psilotum. The foot of the young embryo
of Tmesipteris is lobed, and the whole bears a strik-
ing  resemblance  to the  young  sporophyte  of
Anthoceros.  It  is  doubtful,  however, whether  this
bears  the  phylogenetic  signiﬁcance  that  some
have claimed.

recall 

the 

Rhyniopsida 

origin
The anatomical and reproductive features of the
Psilotales 
and
Trimerophytopsida  of  the  Paleozoic.  There  is,
however, no  continuity  in  the  fossil  record,  and
the  origin  of  the  Psilotales  remains  conjectural.
Their  generally  high  chromosome  numbers
(52–210 in the gametophytic phase) may indicate
a  complex  polyploid  series  developed  with  little
evolutionary  change  over  geological  time,  but

Each of the three groups of archesporial cells
in the synangium arises from several cells, and is
thus eusporangiate in origin. Part of the periph-
eral  archesporium,  although  not  regularly
layered,  functions  as  a  tapetum.  The  remainder
yields sporogenous cells. Meiosis leads to tetrads
of monolete spores. The exine is lightly reticulate
with no very distinct ornamentation. The massive
wall  of  the  sporangium,  some  ﬁve  cells  thick  at
maturity,  dehisces  at  three  sites  symmetrically
placed with respect to the loculi.

The gametophyte of Psilotum is a subterranean
axial structure (Fig. 7.22), dichotomously branch-
ing,  and  resembling  short lengths  of  the  sporo-
phytic  rhizome.  The  similarity  extends  to the
anatomy, the ﬁner axes being wholly parenchyma-
tous, and the broader containing a central vascu-
lar strand. The peripheral cells, like those of the
rhizome,  house  an  endophytic  fungus.  Both  the
gametophyte  and 
the  sporophytic  rhizome
produce globular multicellular gemmae, a means
of vegetative propagation.

Antheridia and archegonia arise from superﬁ-
cial cells in the region of the growing points of the
gametophyte  (Fig.  7.22).  The  antheridia,  depend-
ing upon their size, liberate up to 250 spermato-

188

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 2

a crown of bipinnate leaves. The pinnules are com-
monly leathery, but in Leptopteris, a fern of New
Zealand  and  New  Guinea  allied  to Todea,  the
lamina  is  ﬁlmy  (as  in  the  Hymenophyllaceae,  p.
194), a single cell thick and lacking stomata. The
leaves  of  all  Osmundales  show  circinate  verna-
tion.  The  robust  leaf  bases  give  considerable
support  to the  stem  and  in  consequence  older
specimens are able to develop a dendroid form.

Remains of osmundalean ferns, retaining suf-
ﬁcient  features  to permit  ﬁrm  identiﬁcation  of
their afﬁnity, are known from the Upper Permian
(late Paleozoic), and the record, supported by pre-
served  axes,  fronds  and  sporangia,  continues
through the Mesozoic to the present. The stems of
early  representatives  of  the  Osmundales  were
protostelic, but in later forms the central part of
the  stele  became  replaced  by pith,  leading  to a
siphonostele (p. 192). In living Osmunda (Fig. 7.24)
the  stele  is  basically  a  siphonostele,  and  the
phloem and endodermis remain wholly external.
The continuity of the xylem, however, is broken at
the departure of the leaf traces, leaving a so-called
“leaf  gap”  which  closes  again  anteriorly. Since,
when dissected, the xylem (but not the stele as a
whole)  has  the  appearance  of  a cylinder  of
netting, Osmunda is said to have a dictyoxylic siph-
onostele. A transverse section of the stem of the
late Permian Thamnopteris appears almost identi-
cal,  even  in  the  extent  and  arrangement  of  the
sclerenchyma and the packing of the leaf bases,
with  a  comparable  section  of  the  rootstock of
Osmunda.

Some  remains  of  osmundalean  ferns  can  be
identiﬁed  even  to species  level.  Well-preserved
specimens from the Upper Cretaceous of Canada
have been  found  to resemble  in  all  respects  the
living Osmunda cinnamomea, still with an extensive
range in North America. This is in line with the
general  impression  that  species  longevity  in
homosporous  pteridophytes  commonly  exceeds
by far that provided by ﬂowering plants.

reproduction
In Osmunda the early leaves are sterile, while later
leaves  become  fertile  in  the  more  distal  regions
(Fig. 7.25). The fertile regions are devoid of chloro-
phyll. The sporangia arise from single initial cells
which may be cubic or tetrahedral. More than one

Figure 7.23. Tmesipteris tannensis, habit.

evidence  of  this  kind  is  inconclusive.  Similarity,
both in sporophyte and gametophyte, between the
Psilotales and certain New Caledonian ferns (e.g.,
Stromatopteris, p. 172), together with the results of
current cladistic analyses, support a placement of
the Psilotales within the Polypodiopsida.

The Osmundales
The  Osmundales  are  an  order  of  considerable
antiquity. Their derivation may have been separ-
ate from that of other eusporangiate and leptos-
porangiate ferns. There are three existing genera,
of which Osmunda is the largest and most widely
distributed.  Most  living  Osmundales  have erect
rootstocks, and some (e.g., Todea spp.) approach a
small tree-like form. They currently have few eco-
nomic  uses,  but  partially  decomposed  petioles
and  leaves  (“Osmunda  ﬁber”)  was  popular  in
Victorian  times  as  a  medium  for  growing  orna-
mental orchids.

The stem of Osmunda grows from a broad apex,
and in all but larger and older specimens a single
apical cell is recognizable. The stem terminates in

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA) (cont.): FERNS

189

Figure 7.24. Osmunda regalis. Transverse section of
rootstock.

cell  may  participate  in  the  development  of  the
sporangium, so they are neither strictly leptospor-
angiate  nor  eusporangiate.  At maturity  the  spo-
rangia are generally robust and each is borne on a
short stalk. The sporangia do not cluster in sori,
nor  is  there  any  form of  protective  membrane
(indusium, p. 198). The wall of the sporangium is
two cells thick, although the inner layer, together
with  the  tapetum,  is  derived  from  the  sporoge-
nous  tissue.  In  Osmunda the  indurated  cells,
forming an annulus-like cluster, are grouped lat-
erally (Fig. 7.26). A linear stomium extends from
the  cluster  over  the  apex  of  the  sporangium,
causing the dehiscent sporangium to open as two
valves. Some 29 trilete spores are produced in each
sporangium. They are green when released, and
soon  lose  their  viability  in  unfavorable  condi-
tions.

The  gametophytes  of  the  Osmundales  are
Marchantia-like,  with  a  distinct  midrib,  and  may
reach  a  length  of  a  few  centimeters.  The  anthe-
ridia are on the lower surface, often toward the
margin.  The  archegonia,  also  on  the  lower
surface, are found principally along the sides of

the midrib. Following fertilization, the ﬁrst divi-
sion of the zygote is in a plane parallel to the lon-
gitudinal  axis  of  the  archegonium.  The  second
division may also be parallel to the longitudinal
axis, but at right angles to the plane of the ﬁrst,
leading  to quadrants  with  a  common  edge  par-
allel to the axis. This contrasts with the common
situation in the leptosporangiate ferns (p. 207).

Subsequent divisions tend to be irregular and
the embryo assumes a globular form. In Todea, the
young embryo can be expressed from the archego-
nium  by gentle  pressure.  Attempts  to grow  it  to
maturity  in  artiﬁcial  media  have not,  however,
been successful; any growth obtained has tended
to revert to gametophytic form.

ferns  of 

The Polypodiales
The  Polypodiales  form the  largest order  of
ferns, including  (with  the  exception  of  some
Ophioglossales  and  Osmundales)  all  the  homo-
regions.  The
sporous 
Polypodiales  reach  their  greatest  representation
in  the  humid  tropics  and  subtropics.  A  square
hectare  of  forest in  Amazonian  Ecuador,  for
example,  was  estimated  to contain  at  least 50
species  of  polypodialean  ferns  of  widely  varying
growth forms.  Despite  the  diversity  of  the

temperate 

190

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 2

the  eusporangiate  condition  of 

Polypodiales, there are two features which distin-
guish  them  consistently  from  the  remainder  of
the living ferns. These are, ﬁrst, the origin of the
sporangium,  and,  second,  the  plane  of  the  ﬁrst
dividing wall of the zygote. In the Polypodiales the
sporangium develops from a single initial cell, a
leptosporangiate,  contrasting
condition  termed 
with 
the
Marattiales, Ophioglossales and Psilotales. Also in
the Polypodiales, at least in those species which
possess the typical heart-shaped gametophyte, the
ﬁrst dividing  wall  of  the  zygote  is  vertical  or
slightly oblique, parallel to the longitudinal axis
of  the  archegonium,  whereas  in  the  eusporan-
giate  ferns  the  ﬁrst wall  is  perpendicular  to the
archegonial axis. The subsequent embryogeny of
the Polypodiales is regularly endoscopic.

Figure 7.25. Osmunda javanica. Portion of frond with fertile
pinnules. Scale bar 4cm. (From Backer and Posthumus. 1939.
Varenﬂora voor Java. Buitenzorgs Lands Plantentuin.)

Figure 7.26. Osmunda regalis, sporangium.

forests 

the 

spores 

form is  Lecanopteris

in  mid-elevation  cloud 

growth forms and economic uses
In the constantly humid and warm temperate con-
ditions of tropical mountains and rain forest the
Polypodiales adopt a wide range of growth forms.
Besides terrestrial species, both upright and rhi-
zomatous,  are  found  arborescent  and  scandent
species,  and  numerous  epiphytes.  A  remarkable
creeping tree fern (Cyathea planadae), recently dis-
covered 
in
Colombia,  has  a  decumbent  stem  giving  rise  to
upright shoots. Amongst the epiphytes, a curious
myrmecophilous 
from
Southeast  Asia.  The  inﬂated  and  chambered
rhizome houses colonies  of ants. The sporangia,
the walls of which contain fat, are sought by the
ants  and 
thereby  distributed.
Myrmecophilous adaptations of this kind are oth-
erwise  found  only  in  ﬂowering  plants.  In  many
tree  ferns  the  dead  fronds  remain  attached  and
hang as a loose “skirt” around the trunk, making
it  difﬁcult  for  climbing  plants  to ascend  and
smother the crown, a feature also of many palms.
The metabolism of the Polypodiales resembles
that  of  the  land  plants  generally. A number,
mostly epiphytes, have been found to display CAM
(crassulacean acid metabolism), in which respira-
tory carbon dioxide produced in the dark is incor-
porated into oxaloacetic acid, yielding malic acid.
The carbon dioxide is released subsequently in the
light and assimilated in the normal way, a meta-
bolic pathway resembling that of C4 photosynthe-

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA) (cont.): FERNS

191

Figure 7.27. Dryopteris aristata.
Longitudinal section of stem apex.
(After Wardlaw. 1944. Annals of
Botany (New Series) 8.)

cells

are

cut off

growth of the stem
The stems of the Polypodiales
grow from a single, conspicu-
ous, apical cell (Fig. 7.27), tetra-
hedral in shape. Studies of cell
lineages indicate that daugh-
ter
in
sequence from its three poste-
rior faces. Nevertheless, fol-
lowing autoradiographic studies,
it has been
disputed whether the apical cell itself divides. It
seems that the nucleus of the apical cell may
become polyploid. The cell then ceases to divide,
but meristematic activity is retained by the cells
adjacent to the posterior faces. Examination in
polarized light has shown that the cellulose
microﬁbrils in the tangential walls of these cells
lie in arrays transverse to the axis of the stem.
Consequently tangential growth is constrained,
and expansion is predominantly radial and longi-
tudinal.

The  apex  of  the  polypodialean  ferns  is  evi-
dently much less specialized than that of a ﬂower-
ing plant. A slice taken from the tip of the apex,
no more than 0.25mm (0.01in.) in depth, will gen-
erate a normal stem in culture. The same result
with ﬂowering plants can be obtained only with a
substantially greater explant.

The  meristematic  activity  in  the  apical  cone
diminishes toward its base. Below the apical cone,
cell divisions are more generalized and variously
directed. Leaf primordia arise in this region in a
deﬁnite  phyllotactic  sequence.  A  leaf  primor-
dium, ﬁrst visible as a slight protuberance, soon
develops its own apical cell. As the leaf primordia
age and become separated by the expansion of the
apex,  bud  primordia  may  be  formed  between
them, but in some species buds do not appear at
all  so  long  as  the  apex  is  actively  meristematic.
Development of buds beyond the stage of primor-
dia  is  rarely seen  in  the  region  of  developing
leaves.  In  a  few  ferns  (e.g.,  Nephrolepis,  common
in cultivation)  some  of  the  buds  grow out  as
runners (stolons) and provide a means of asexual

sis (p. 6). Some terrestrial species are resistant to
toxic  metals.  Athyrium yokoscense,  a  Japanese
species,  for  example,  is  copper-tolerant.  This
depends  upon  the  plant’s  ability  to take  the
copper entering the plant into a thiolate complex,
and thus remove it from the general metabolism.
Few  Polypodiales  ﬁgure  in  today’s  economy
although some, for example Pteridium, have been
valued in the past as a source of fuel, thatch and
food. Young croziers of Pteridium are still cooked
and eaten in parts of Southeast Asia, despite the
presence  of  a  carcinogen.  In  North  America
Matteuccia is similarly used as a delicacy (“ﬁddle
heads”).  Secondary  plant  products  are  a  notable
feature of some fern fronds and rhizomes (such as
those of Central American species of Phlebodium),
and yield extracts with minor medicinal uses. In
some ferns these products are toxic. In Pteridium,
for  example,  they include  the  insect-moulting
hormone ecdysone, possibly providing protection
from predators.

In  the  less  stable  regions  of  the  Andes  local
Indians use the trunks of tree ferns for the frame-
work of buildings. The resistance of the scleren-
chyma to shattering by earthquakes is superior to
that of timber. Several species of herbaceous ferns
are  popular  horticultural  plants,  particularly
those mutants with striking modiﬁcation of the
form of  the  frond.  In  Britain,  avid  collecting  of
ferns for horticultural use has led to the rarity of
many native species. In Central America Rumohra
adiantiformis  (“leatherleaf”)  is  extensively  culti-
vated and exported for use by ﬂorists.

192

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 2

reproduction.  Runners  are  also  a  feature  of
Matteuccia struthiopteris (ostrich fern).

A  curious  situation  is  found  in  Pteridium
(bracken). The rhizomes of the mature plant are
arranged  in  layers,  the  lowermost  (up  to 30cm
(12in.)  or  more  beneath  the  surface)  consisting
solely of “long” shoots with extended internodes.
Most of the fronds are borne on short stubby rhi-
zomes  which  ascend  to near  the  soil  surface.  In
the event of a “front” of bracken invading a new
area, the lowermost rhizomes head the advance.
Since  the  apices  of  many  ferns  are  compara-
tively broad and accessible, they provide excellent
material  for  experimental  work  on  phyllotaxy.
The  results  indicate  that  the  young  leaf  primor-
dia,  each  a  center  of  meristematic  activity,  sup-
press growth in their immediate vicinity. Thus, if
the  position  in  which  a  leaf  primordium  is
expected  to arise  is  isolated  by radial  incisions
from  the  neighboring  recently  initiated  primor-
dia,  then  the  new  primordium  develops  with
unusual  vigor  and  outgrows  the  others.  Similar
experiments also conﬁrm the fundamental simi-
larity of stems and leaves in the Polypodiales. For
example, tangential incisions on the anterior side
of  very young  primordia  that  would  normally
yield leaves result in the production of stem buds
instead.  Incisions  on  the  posterior  side  are
without any effect. Consequently the determina-
tion of the subapical primordia appears to depend
upon their being initially traversed by gradients
of metabolites originating in the apical meristem.
If a primordium is isolated from these gradients
by an anterior incision it yields the radially sym-
metrical structure of a stem instead of the dorsi-
in
ventral  symmetry  of  a 
interpreting  the  results  of  microsurgery,  the
growth-stimulating effects of wounding must also
be taken into account.

leaf.  Naturally 

formation and morphol og y of the
stele
The  cells  which  yield  the  vascular  tissue  ﬁrst
become  recognizable  as  a  distinctively  staining
ring shortly below the apical cell. The diameter of
the ring increases in register with that of the apex
as  a  whole,  and  beneath  the  leaf  primordia  its
cells become conﬂuent with crescentic strands of
similar  cells  descending  from  them.  Further

down in the apex the cells of the ring are contin-
uous with the procambium, and this in turn with
the vascular tissue of the mature shoot. The posi-
tion of the protoxylem is variable, but commonly
mesarch.  The  large tracheids  of  the  metaxylem
have scalariform  pitting,  and  in  some  instances
(e.g., in the rhizome of Pteridium) the oblique end
walls have scalariform perforations. These vessel-
like  channels,  found  also  in  the  Marattiales  (p.
177), may occur more frequently in the xylem of
ferns than commonly supposed, and recall the sit-
uation in some species of Selaginella (see p. 155).
The phloem consists of sieve cells with sieve areas
conﬁned  to the  oblique  end  walls.  The  vascular
tissue is usually surrounded by a narrow zone of
parenchyma, and then by an endodermis with a
clear Casparian strip (see p. 185). The walls of the
cortical cells adjacent to the endodermis are often
thickened  and  made  conspicuous  by impregna-
tion  with  phlobaphene.  The  endodermis  and
these 
tangential  walls  probably
together limit apoplastic transport between stele
and cortex.

thickened 

The form of the stele in the Polypodiales shows
considerable variation (Fig. 7.28). In some species
of  Gleichenia,  for  example,  the  procambial  tissue
yields a solid core of tracheids from which the leaf
traces depart without any break in the continuity
of  the  xylem  (protostele,  Fig.  7.28a).  Some  other
species of Gleichenia show a similar stele, but with
the medullation of the tracheidal core leading to
the production of a siphonostele (Fig. 7.28b).

In some ferns, in which the stele is cylindrical,
phloem and endodermis are present both inside
and  outside  the  xylem  (Fig.  7.28c).  This  form of
stele,  found  principally  in  rhizomatous  ferns,  is
termed a solenostele (or amphiphloic siphonostele).
Leaf  gaps  are  regularly  present  and  sometimes
additional  perforations  unrelated  to the  depar-
ture  of  leaf  traces.  The  internal  and  external
phloem and endodermis are in continuity around
the margins of the gaps in the xylem. If the leaf
gap and other perforations are close together, as
in Dryopteris, the stele in section appears as a ring
of  anastomosing  vascular  bundles  (Fig.  7.28d),
each with internal xylem and concentric phloem.
This type of stele, which is of widespread occur-
rence,  is  termed  a  dictyostele.  A  complication,
shown  for  example  by the  rhizome  of  Pteridium

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA) (cont.): FERNS

193

Figure 7.28. Principal forms of fern steles. (a) Protostele.
(b) Siphonostele. (c) Solenostele. (d) Dictyostele.

(Fig. 7.29) and the trunks of the tree fern Cyathea,
is the presence of two or more concentric vascular
systems,  interconnected  at  intervals  and  usually
all contributing to the leaf traces. These steles are
said to be polycyclic. Steles are not always radially
symmetrical. Dictyosteles in the ferns with creep-
ing  rhizomes,  for  example,  are  often  markedly
dorsiventral, the departure of the leaf traces being
conﬁned  to the  upper  surface  and  ﬂanks  (Fig.
7.30).

experimental investig ation of
stel ar morphol og y
The form of the stele in the Polypodiales has also
been the subject of experimental investigation. In
Dryopteris, for example, if the apical region is iso-
lated by vertical cuts, but left in contact below, it
continues to grow and a solenostele differentiates
behind  it.  As  the  apex  expands  and  builds  up  a
new  crown,  the  stele  gradually  opens  out  to re-
form a dictyostele. In any one species, therefore,
the size of the apex determines the form of the
stele. This is also well shown in sporelings where
a protostele is always present at the beginning. In
protostelic species this merely increases in diame-
ter as the plant develops, but in solenostelic and
dictyostelic species the protostele of the sporeling
becomes  medullated,  and  phloem  and  endoder-
mis  appear  within  in  step  with  the  increasing

girth of the apex. This relationship between size
and form is clearly the consequence of physiolog-
ical equilibria, but they are undoubtedly complex
and have yet to be resolved.

o ther anatomic al features of the
stem
In addition to the xylem, which is wholly primary,
there  are  frequently  bands  or  rods  of  scleren-
chyma in the stem contributing to its rigidity. In
the tree ferns, for example, many of which reach
or exceed heights of 10m (33ft), mechanical stabil-
ity  is  dependent  almost  entirely  upon  the
extremely  tough  girdle  of  sclerenchyma  in  the
outer  cortex,  often  in  association  with  the  leaf
bases.  In  those  Polypodiales  which  are  believed,
on the basis of fossil evidence, to be relicts of very
ancient groups (e.g., Gleichenia), the parenchyma-
tous tissue of the stem often contains resin sacs
and  mucilage  canals.  Amongst  the  Polypodiales
more  recent  in  origin  these  features  are  less
evident.

roo t s
After  the  primary  root  all  subsequent  roots  are
adventitious,  in  arborescent  forms  often  being
produced even in the aerial regions and providing
a mantle of stubby outgrowths between the leaf
bases.  Roots  show  a  distinct  apical  cell,  but  in
some  instances  this  may  be  quiescent,  divisions
being conﬁned to the cells at its ﬂanks. As in other
ferns a root cap is present, and in many species

194

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 2

Figure 7.29. Pteridium aquilinum.
Transverse section of rhizome.

root  hairs.  The  xylem  is  com-
monly  diarch,  and  in  many
epiphytic  forms  all  but  the
protoxylem  often 
remains
unligniﬁed. The roots of some
ferns  produce  shoot  buds.
These facilitate the rapid colo-
nization of a new area.

morphol og y and
anatomy of the
vegetative leaves
The leaves of the Polypodiales
retain  an  apical  cell  during
their  development  from  the
primordium. Some form of pinnate branching is
usually present in the mature leaves. True dichot-
omous branching occurs very rarely (the frond of
Rhipidopteris peltata provides one of the few exam-
ples), but cymose branching, superﬁcially resem-
bling dichotomy, is shown by the leaves of several
species  of  Gleichenia.  The  ﬁlmy  fern Cardiomanes
reniforme of  New  Zealand  has  a  striking,  entire,
kidney-shaped  leaf,  up  to 5cm  (2in.)  in  width.
Notable  also  is  the  ﬁlmy  epiphyte  Microgonium
tahitense of the Asian tropics. The habit resembles
that  of  the  common  angiosperm  epiphyte
Dischidia.  The  ﬁliform  rhizome,  growing  on
smooth-barked  trees,  bears  peltate  leaves  which
are almost sessile and appressed to the substrate.
Roots  are  absent,  but  the  rhizome  and  the
margins of the leaves bear rhizoids.

In  a  few  Polypodiales  meristematic  areas  are
retained in the differentiated leaf, and these sub-
sequently  grow out  to form  either  additional
leaves  (as  in  Trichomanes proliferum (Fig.  7.31))  or
new  plantlets 
(as  in  Asplenium mannii and
Camptosorus radicans). These forms illustrate how
in the living ferns, as in the extinct (see p. 172), the
leaves  sometimes  display  features  suggestive  of
stems. All parts of the young leaves usually show
circinate  vernation.  The  extension  of  the  rachis
and  the  unrolling  of  the  pinnae  clearly  involve
considerable coordination of growth in space and
time.  There  is  evidence  that  this  is  dependent

upon the diffusion, and varying relative concen-
trations, of auxins (growth-regulating substances)
in  the  expanding  leaf,  but  these  auxins  are  not
necessarily  identical  with  those  in  seed  plants.
The expanding leaves of some ferns, for example
of the tropical Dryopteris decussata, are enveloped
in mucilage, possibly with some protective effect.
Extraﬂoral  nectaries  are  found  at  the  points  of
branching  of  the  frond  of  Pteridium.  There  is  no
evidence that they have any function apart from
the secretion of surplus metabolites.

is 

found 

throughout 

The lamina of the leaf is commonly differen-
tiated  into  palisade  and  mesophyll,  but  the
texture is very variable and in some species a thick
cuticle on the upper surface gives the leaf a sur-
prising harshness. “Filminess” is a consequence of
the lamina being only one cell thick. This condi-
tion,  already  seen  in  Leptopteris (Osmundales,
p. 188), 
family
Hymenophyllaceae.  Filmy  ferns  are  necessarily
conﬁned  to situations  of  continuously  high
humidity. They are often able to thrive in irradi-
ances  far  below  those  tolerated  by ﬂowering
plants, and more akin to those of the bryophyte
communities with which the epiphytic forms are
frequently  mixed.  In  Hymenophyllum  malingii,  a
peculiar epiphyte of New Zealand, the leaf lacks
a lamina.  Instead  the  axes  of  the  pinnately
branched frond bear green ﬁlaments interspersed
with stellate trichomes. Some of the larger tropi-

the 

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA) (cont.): FERNS

195

Figure 7.30. Elaphoglossum latifolium. Reconstruction of
stele showing the dorsiventral symmetry: v, ventral meristele;
d, dorsal meristele; b, bridge connecting the dorsal and
ventral meristeles; bt, bud trace; lts, strand of the leaf trace; r,
root trace; r´, root in association with bud trace. (From Bell.
1950. Annals of Botany (New Series) 14.)

cal  epiphytes  are  distinguished  by producing
sterile leaves of two forms. In addition to the erect
photosynthetic leaves are others which clasp the
support. The latter soon die, but persist in a rigid
scarious  condition  and  serve  as  collectors  of
humus  and  moisture.  Platycerium (Fig.  7.32)  pro-
vides a striking example of this kind of habit. In
other  epiphytes  of  similar  situations  the  leaves,
borne on a short upright rootstock, are stiff and
tightly  overlapping,  so  forming  a funnel  which
traps rain and organic matter. Asplenium nidus pro-
vides a typical example of these “nest ferns”. The

material at the base of the funnel is freely pene-
trated by absorptive rootlets.

The leaves of many temperate ferns die during
the winter, but remain attached (and are said to
be marcescent). In some species (e.g., Polystichum lon-
chitis) the leaves remain green, even in harsh con-
ditions. Experiments have shown that these leaves
provide a net contribution to assimilation, partic-
ularly early in the following season’s growth.

the fertile leaves and the nature of
the sporangia
The  fertile  leaves  of  the  Polypodiales  are  often
quite  similar  to the  sterile  (as  in  Dryopteris),  but
dimorphy is not uncommon. In Blechnum spicant,
for  example,  both  sterile  and  fertile  fronds  are
simply pinnate, but in the fertile ones the sterile
part of the lamina is very reduced. The sporangia
arise from single initial cells and are therefore lep-
tosporangiate, either at the margin or on the lower

196

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 2

Figure 7.31. Trichomanes
proliferum. Frond, showing indeﬁnite
growth. (From Bell. 1960. New
Phytologist 59.)

Figure 7.32. Platycerium. (a) Habit,
showing the two forms of leaves. (b)
Lower surface of fertile portion of
frond.

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA) (cont.): FERNS

197

Figure 7.33. (a–c) Anemia phylliditis: (a) fertile frond; (b)
portion of fertile region; (c) sporangium showing transverse
annulus. (d) Gleichenia, sporangium.

surface of the leaf. The mature sporangium has a
distinct stalk, the structure of which ranges from
a broad multicellular stump to a delicate and rel-
atively  long  column  of  cells.  The  wall  of  the
capsule is only one cell thick, and it always con-

tains a group of indurated cells and a well-deﬁned
stomium.  The  indurated  cells  are  arranged  in  a
single band (annulus) which encircles the sporan-
gium,  transversely  near  the  apex  of  the  sporan-
gium 
(as  in  Anemia (Fig.  7.33c)  and  other
Schizaeaceae),  or  obliquely  (as  in  Gleichenia (Fig.
7.33d)  and  the  Hymenophyllaceae),  or  vertically
(as in Dryopteris (Fig. 7.34) and most common tem-
perate  ferns).  The  annulus  is  interrupted  by the

198

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 2

Figure 7.34. Dryopteris. Stages in dehiscence of sporangium.
(After Ingold. 1939. Spore Discharge in Land Plants. Oxford
University Press, Oxford.)

stomium. Where the annulus is vertical, it is also
interrupted  by the  stalk  of  the  sporangium,  the
stomium then lying just in front of the stalk. The
sporangium dehisces at the stomium as a conse-
quence of tensions set up in drying. The mecha-
nism  has  been  studied  in  detail  in  those  ferns
where the annulus is vertical. Here, as the cell sap
in  the  annular  cells  diminishes  by evaporation,
asymmetrical  thickening  of  the  cell  walls  (Fig.
7.34)  causes  an  increasing  tangential  tension
which  tends  to reverse  the  curvature  of  the
annulus. The stomium eventually breaks, and the
upper  part  of  the  sporangium  gradually  turns
back as if on a hinge (Fig. 7.34). Tension in the cells
of the annulus soon reaches a critical level; at this
point  the  water  remaining  in  the  annular  cells
spontaneously  becomes  vapor.  The  tension  is
immediately released, and the upper part of the
sporangium ﬂies back to more or less its original
position  (Fig.  7.34).  These  two  movements  effec-
tively disperse the spores. It has sometimes been
observed  that  the  movements  are  repeated,  a
feature not so readily explained.

arrangement of the sporangia
In most Polypodiales the sporangia arise in dis-
tinct sori, usually beneath veins or near their
extremities, these two positions being called super-
ﬁcial and marginal respectively. Sometimes the

sporangia are produced in a continuous line,
referred to as a coenosorus, well shown, for example,
by Pteridium. The sorus is often partly or wholly
covered by an outgrowth of the lamina, called an
indusium, which adopts a characteristic form. In
Dryopteris, for example, the indusium is reniform
(Figs. 7.35 and 7.36), and in Polystichum peltate. In
Onoclea the sori are protected by a rolling up of the
fertile pinnules. In some species of Polypodium,
where an indusium is typically absent, the sori are
immersed in the lower surface of the lamina. A
few ferns show the so-called “acrostichoid” condi-
tion in which the sporangia arise as a continuous
felt on the lower surface of the fertile frond (e.g.,
Platycerium, Fig. 7.32). In some ferns (e.g., Gleichenia)
the sporangia in a sorus are all of the same age
(Fig. 7.37a,b), in others they are produced in
spatial and temporal sequence on an elongated
receptacle (as in the Hymenophyllaceae)
(Fig.
7.37c,d), yielding a so-called “gradate” sorus, and
in yet others the sporangia are produced over a
period but intermingled, leading to a so-called
“mixed” sorus (Fig. 7.37e,f) (as in Dryopteris and
most common temperate Polypodiales).

devel opment of the sporangia and
spores
In the development of the sporangium a cluster
of spore mother cells becomes surrounded by a
two-layered tapetum. In origin this is part of the
wall tissue and not of the archesporium, as in
eusporangiate sporangia. The cytological changes
accompanying meiosis provide a model for spor-

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA) (cont.): FERNS

199

Figure 7.35. Dryopteris ﬁlix-mas.
Vertical section of sorus.

(a)

(b)

Figure 7.36. The abaxial surface of fertile pinnules of
Dryopteris ﬁlix-mas. (a) The sori in a young condition, before
dehiscence of the sporangia. (b) Three weeks later, most of
the sporangia having dehisced. Scale bars 2 mm.

Figure 7.37. Principal forms of sorus. (a,b) Simple, the
sporangia all of the same age: (a) superﬁcial; (b) marginal.
(c,d) Gradate: (c) superﬁcial; (d) marginal. (e,f) Mixed: (e)
superﬁcial; (f) marginal.

ogenesis in the land plants generally. As their
nuclei enter prophase the spore mother cells
become surrounded by a thickened wall, and
cytoplasmic connections between them are extin-
guished. The presence of callose in this special
wall has not yet been convincingly demonstrated.
During prophase the density of the cytoplasm
diminishes and there is a loss in afﬁnity for basic
stains, largely accounted for by a fall in the fre-
quency of ribosomes and hence in the concentra-
tion of RNA. Spores are produced in tetrads. The
ﬁrst exine is secreted by the spore itself. At this
stage the thickened wall of the mother cell,
weakened by autolytic degradation, breaks open.
The spores then separate and complete their
development in the breakdown products of the
tapetum.

Some 26 to 28 spores are produced in each spo-
rangium, the higher numbers being characteris-
tic of the families believed to be more primitive.
The  spores  are  usually  of  the  order  of  40  ␮m  in
diameter, but measurements of a representative
sample  will  usually  show  a  normal  distribution
with  a  range  of  about ⫾10 ␮m  about  the  mean.
included  with  the
A few ferns,  normally 

200

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 2

Figure 7.38. Platyzoma microphyllum. View of the fronds,
showing the two rows of subopposite cup-like pinnules.
Fertile regions occur at intervals along the frond, the
sporangia obscured by the recurved margins of the pinnules.
The juvenile fronds consist solely of a slender green rachis,
lacking pinnules. Scale bar 1 cm. (Photograph provided by
Pamela Warren Wilson.)

homosporous, do in fact produce spores of differ-
ent  sizes.  The  most  extreme  example  is  seen  in
Platyzoma,  a  fern of  very unusual  appearance
(Fig. 7.38)  growing  on  deep  sands  in  northeast
Australia. Although the mature sporangia are all
about the same size, some produce 16 large spores
and others 32 smaller ones (although the diame-
ter of these is greater than that of fern spores in
general).  A  histogram  shows  a clearly  bimodal
distribution.  Nevertheless,  a  random  sample  of
spores  reveals  a  preponderance  of  small  spores
and a wide range of spore sizes within each size
class (Fig. 7.39). The difference in spore size seems
to result from the greater availability of nutrients
and space for spore growth when the number is

lower. The  size  of  the  spores  is  related  to sex
expression (p. 204).

The  outer  part  of  the  spore  wall  (exine),  the
material of which is derived from the tapetum, is
sometimes deposited in a characteristic pattern of
bars  and  ridges.  This  is  especially  true  of  the
Schizaeaceae,  and  it  provides  a  feature  that  has
been  very useful  in  identifying  fossil  forms.  In
some  ferns,  principally  the  more  recent,  the
spores  are  monolete  instead  of  trilete.  Monolete
spores  (p.  160)  often  have an  additional  translu-
cent  investment,  called  a  perispore,  formed  from
the remains of the tapetum. In a few ferns mono-
lete and trilete spores are found in the same spo-
rangium.

Production of viable spores usually fails in
hybrid ferns. Meiosis is irregular, the pairing of
the chromosomes being only partial or even
wholly absent. Division spindles are largely dis-
torted, and, although there is an attempt at spor-
ogenesis, most of the spores are usually inviable.
They are also often irregularly fused together by

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA) (cont.): FERNS

201

Figure 7.39. The size distribution of 177 spores of
Platyzoma microphyllum collected in Queensland, Australia.
The sample was taken from the fertile regions of three
fronds from different plants. The spores were mounted in 
25 percent alcohol. Ten non-overlapping ﬁelds, selected at
random, were photographed and the negatives printed at a
total ⫻80 ﬁnal magniﬁcation. The maximum diameters of the
spores were measured with a magnifying micrometer, the
scale graduated in 0.5 mm intervals (1 mm representing 
12.5 ␮m). (S. Laird, unpublished.)

exine into dyads or triads. Similar spore forma-
tions are well known in ancient deposits. This has
given rise to the suggestion that hybridization
was also a feature of early land plants. However,
the genetic control of meiosis is complex and
must itself have been subject to evolutionary
reﬁnement. Irregular spore formations in the
Paleozoic era may have been a consequence of
meiosis itself at that time not having achieved
the regular perfection that is commonly seen
today.

the g ametophytic phase
In some families, as in the Osmundales, the spores
are green when shed, but normally chlorophyll is
absent. Non-green spores are often rich in lipid,
amounting in some instances to 60 percent of the
dry weight. Green spores are short-lived, but non-
green spores may remain viable for many years,
particularly if buried in soil. In this way “banks”
of viable spores may be formed beneath stands of
ferns,  germination  occurring  only  if  the  spores
are  brought  to the  surface.  Such  reservoirs  of
spores  provide  for  the  re-colonization  of  areas
cleared by cultivation or other disturbance.

Although  moisture  is  essential  for  germina-
tion, the requirement for light is variable. Some
spores (e.g., Pteridium) germinate in the dark, but
others require the stimulus of red light. The phy-
tochrome system is evidently involved, but the sit-
uation is not simple since in some instances the
effect of red is reversed by both far-red and blue.
After  the  ﬁrst division  the  protruding  daughter
cell often yields a colorless rhizoid, the elongation

202

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 2

Figure 7.40. (a) Pteris ensiformis. Lower surface of
gametophyte, bearing young sporophyte. (b,c) Pteridium
aquilinum: (b) median longitudinal section of young
archegonium; (c) almost mature antheridium.

of which may be promoted by metal ions present
in the perispore. Continued divisions give rise to
an algal-like ﬁlament, the growth of which is pre-
dominantly apical, furnished with a few rhizoids.
Germination and production of the ﬁrst rhizoid
appear  to be  resistant  to inhibitors  of  transcrip-
tion, so it is probable that these initial steps are
dependent  upon 
long-lived  messenger  RNA
already present in the spore.

In some Polypodiales (the Hymenophyllaceae,
for example, and some Schizaeaceae), the gameto-
phyte remains ﬁlamentous and the sex organs are
borne on lateral cushions of cells. Yet other game-
tophytes  are  ribbon-like,  and  the  ribbon  may
branch freely. In many ferns (of which Dryopteris
and Pteridium provide familiar examples) the cell
at the apex of the initial ﬁlament soon begins to
divide in a number of directions, leading to the
formation  of  a  cordate  (heart-shaped)  gameto-
phyte  (Fig.  7.40).  There  is  no  general  agreement
about the cause of this change from one-dimen-
sional (1D) to two-dimensional (2D) growth, but it
seems likely that it is a consequence of a changing
balance between carbohydrate and protein metab-
olism. When the protein metabolism is depressed
in relation to the carbohydrate (as can be caused
experimentally  by growing  the  cultures  in  red

light) the gametophytes persist indeﬁnitely as ﬁl-
aments with elongated cells. In blue light, which
changes the balance of the metabolism in favor of
protein,  the  cells  divide  more  frequently  and
become progressively shorter, their width remain-
ing  little  changed.  Ultimately  the  apical  cell
becomes  broader  than  long.  In  these  conditions
1D  growth gives  way  almost  immediately to  2D.
The change in the direction of division at the apex
of the ﬁlament is in accordance with the concept
that the plane of the new wall in a dividing cell is
transverse  to the  principal  stress  in  the  plasma-
lemma  (which  in  turn  may  inﬂuence  the  align-
ment of microtubules). In cells which are longer
than broad this stress, caused by the turgor of the
cells,  is  longitudinal,  and  hence  the  new  wall
transverse. In cells broader than long the princi-
pal  stress  is  transverse  to the  ﬁlament,  and  the
new wall correspondingly longitudinal or almost
so.  Substances  which  affect  the  rate of  growth,
and the rapidity with which growth changes from
1D  to 2D,  can  be  isolated  from  media  in  which
spores  have been  cultured.  The  proportions  of
these  substances  vary in  relation  to the  wave-
length  of  the  light  to which  the  cultures  have
been exposed. Nevertheless, there is no evidence
as yet that the transition from 1D to 2D growth is
dependent upon the activation of speciﬁc genes.
Since the transition can also occur in high irradi-
ances  of  continuous  red  light,  it  seems  much
more likely that it is a consequence of correlations

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA) (cont.): FERNS

203

between  the  carbon/nitrogen  balance  of  the
metabolism of the gametophyte and the propor-
tions and stresses in the walls of the dividing cells.
Once  established,  the  apical  cell  evidently
retains  close  symplastic  connections  with  the
growing area of the gametophyte. Investigations
of  the  developing  cordate  gametophytes  of  the
fern Onoclea sensibilis have shown that the basipe-
tal walls of the apical cell are well furnished with
plasmodesmata. Frequencies of some 14 plasmo-
desmata ␮m⫺2 were regularly found, values com-
parable  with  those  occurring  in  the  walls  of
glandular cells with high rates of plasmodesmatal
transport.

are 

Mycorrhizal 

associations 

probably
common in fern gametophytes. The gametophytes
of  some  tropical  Schizaeaceae,  for  example,  are
subterranean  (resembling  those  of  Psilotum (p.
187)) and are thus presumably wholly dependent
upon  endophytic  fungi  for  their  nutrition.  In
Schizaea pusilla, a species with a phototrophic ﬁla-
mentous  gametophyte,  the  presence  of  a  truly
mycorrhizal fungus in wild populations was con-
clusively demonstrated by isolation of the fungus,
and  the  ﬁnding  that  continued  development  of
aseptically  germinated  spores  was  dependent
upon inoculation.

Despite  their  delicate  structure,  the  game-
tophytes  of  some  ferns  have proved  surprisingly
resistant to desiccation and freezing, their toler-
ances  often  far  exceeding  those  of  the  sporo-
phytes.  A  few  gametophytes  have modiﬁcations
which  clearly  promote  survival.  That  of  the
Mediterranean 
for
example,  has  a  tuberous  portion  resistant  to
drought, resulting in the curious situation of the
sporophyte  being  annual  and  the  gametophyte
perennial.  The  subterranean  gametophytes  of  a
few tropical species of the Schizaeaceae may also
have survival value.

Anogramma 

leptophylla, 

sex expression in the g ametophyte
In those ﬁlamentous gametophytes which bear
their sex organs in clusters on lateral cushions, the
male and female cushions are commonly separ-
ated. Cordate gametophytes, at least when young,
bear their sex organs in the apical region, sexual
expression almost always beginning with a male
phase. Following the male phase, archegonia

begin to be produced acropetally in more or less
orderly ﬁles behind the apical meristem. The gam-
etophytes of some ferns go through several cycles
of male/female sex expression in normal develop-
ment, but in Pteridium aging female gametophytes
lose an organized apical meristem, the production
of archegonia gradually ceases, and growth in turn
becomes disordered and irregular. Lateral prolife-
rations of the gametophyte may then begin to
produce antheridia. For a short time intragameto-
phytic selﬁng is thus possible, but in Pteridium such
selﬁng often results in defective sporelings. This
may be a consequence either of the homozygosity
of deleterious genes or of the egg cells produced at
the time of the re-establishment of a male phase
being themselves defective. Nevertheless,
in
Lygodium antheridia and archegonia appear to be
regularly produced intermixed, a condition recall-
ing that in synoicous mosses (p. 123).

A sample of fern spores sown on an agar plate
will frequently yield, after a period of culture, a
scattering  of  small  cordate  gametophytes  in
which  a  clear  apical  meristem  is  becoming
evident,  and  just  behind  it  the  production  of
archegonia.  Other  spores  will  have yielded  clus-
ters  of  cells  lacking  apical  organization,  and
commonly covered with antheridia. These game-
tophytes  remain  ameristic and  male  indeﬁnitely.
Some ameristic gametophytes are always present,
but the proportion tends to rise with increasing
density of sowing.

Experiments  have shown  that  the  control  of
sexuality in a culture of fern spores is remarkably
complex. When gametophytes are grown in pure
culture  substances  accumulate  in  the  medium
which stimulate the production of antheridia in
other young gametophytes. The chemical nature
of  these  substances,  called antheridiogens,  varies
with species, but some are closely similar to gibbe-
rellins.  Currently  12 compounds  have been  iso-
lated and found to have antheridiogen activity. As
a gametophyte passes from the antheridial to the
archegoniate  phase  it  becomes  insensitive  to its
antheridiogen,  but  it  is  still  secreted  into  the
medium. A genetic control of the effects produced
by antheridiogens has been demonstrated in the
fern Ceratopteris.  Here,  the  only  stage  which
responds  to the  fern’s  antheridiogen  begins
just after  germination  and  lasts  only  until  the

204

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 2

gametophyte has reached 4–5 cells in size. In the
presence  of  the  antheridiogen  such  a  gameto-
phyte  will  remain  amerisitic  and  male.  Several
mutations,  however, have  been  found  to affect
this response. One mutation (her) suppresses the
response and the gametophyte behaves as a her-
maphrodite. Another mutant (fem) interferes with
the  production  of  antheridia  and  gametophytes
grow into  meristic  females  in  the  presence  or
absence  of  the  pheromone.  Interestingly the
effect of the antheridiogen on young gametophy-
tes  can  be  suppressed  by adding  abscisic  acid  (a
known  antagonist  of  gibberellin  in  ﬂowering
plants) to the medium. The gametophytes in these
conditions  grow directly  into  hermaphrodites.
The  mixed  phenotype  of  a  culture  on  an  agar
medium  evidently  depends  upon  spore-to-spore
differences in the times of germination and the
rates  of  early  development,  combined  with  the
interaction  of  at  least  three  genes  controlling
competence and response. Some alleles of the her
mutation, when homozygous in the sporophyte,
interfere  with  the  development  of  the  fertile
frond.  Adventitious  buds  may  then  be  present
amongst the sporangia.

Although studied mostly in axenic conditions,
there is now evidence that antheridiogens regu-
late sexuality in natural populations of gametoph-
ytes. The results of some ﬁeld experiments have
indicated that the inﬂuence of antheridiogens on
the formation of apical meristems in developing
gametophytes and the induction of maleness are
separate effects. This would imply that antheridi-
ogens have the properties of both a hormone and
a pheromone. 

A particularly interesting situation is found in
Platyzoma (p. 200). Here the small spores give rise
to gametophytes which remain depauperate and
male, while the larger spores yield complex gam-
etophytes  which  are  female,  but  may  subse-
quently  also  bear  antheridia.  Spore  size  will
inevitably be related to the amount of cytoplasm
forming the initial endowment of the spore, and
it may be this feature which governs subsequent
growth and sex expression. Explants of the dimin-
utive  male  gametophytes, 
if  transferred  to
mineral–agar  medium,  have been  observed  to
regenerate  and  give  rise  to hermaphroditic
growths,  indicating  that  development  is  able  to

escape  from  its  initial  constraints.  It  has  not,
however, been  demonstrated  that  this  escape  is
possible  with  gametophytes  from  the  smallest
spores,  and  a  full  understanding  of  the  factors
determining sex expression in the gametophytes
of Platyzoma awaits further research.

It is conceivable that the ameristic gametoph-
ytes arising in cultures of ferns whose spores are
more  uniform  in  size  are  also  the  product  of
spores which have received by chance a reduced
amount of cytoplasm during the ﬁnal divisions of
sporogenesis.  Their  relatively  retarded  develop-
ment would leave them open to the full effects of
the  antheridiogen  coming  from  their  more
advanced neighbors.

differentiation of the g ametes
Antheridia usually contain 25 or 26 spermatocytes,
often with callosed walls. Each differentiates a
spermatozoid. There is active protein synthesis
during the initial stages of spermatogenesis, but
the later stages (including the formation of the
ﬂagella) appear to be largely a matter of protein
assembly. When the antheridia are mature,
ﬂooding causes the mucilage within to swell. The
cap cells are then forced off and the spermatocytes
extruded. The ﬂagella of
the spermatozoids
become active and each breaks free from its muci-
laginous shell. The motile spermatozoid is about 5
␮m long and takes the form of a helix with a left-
handed (anticlockwise) screw (cf. Fig. 7.49). The
anterior gyre is taken up with the multilayered
structure and the associated mitochondrion, and
the remaining gyres with the nucleus and micro-
tubular ribbon. Plastids are absent from the differ-
entiated gamete (Fig. 7.49). The ﬂagella, conﬁned to
the anterior gyres, emerge tangentially and are
directed posteriorly. They beat with a helical wave
which drives the spermatozoid forward and at the
same time causes it to rotate in the sense of the
screw. Current observations on a range of species
reveal that spermatozoids may remain active for
up to two hours following release, but whether
they similarly retain the ability to effect fertiliza-
tion has not been established.

The necks of the archegonia, consisting of 4–6
tiers  of  cells,  usually  project  conspicuously  and
are often recurved. As in the liverworts Marchantia
(p. 107) and Sphaerocarpos (p. 114), the maturation

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA) (cont.): FERNS

205

Figure 7.41. Part of a median section of a maturing egg of
Pteridium, showing the margin of the nucleolus (nu), and
nuclear bodies (arrows) in the nucleoplasm and in vesicles
budded off from the nucleus. The chromatin is highly
dispersed. m, mitochondrion; p, plastid. Scale bar 0.5␮m.

of  the  egg,  completed  within  about  24  hours,
involves  in  many  species  extensive  interpenetra-
tion  of  nucleus  and  cytoplasm.  Simultaneously,
small  aggregates  of  dense  material  (“nuclear
bodies”), 300–500nm in diameter, and apparently
formed at the periphery of the nucleolus, spread
throughout  the  nucleoplasm.  These  aggregates
enter vesicles, bounded by both membranes of the
nuclear envelope, which bud off from the surface
of the nucleus and are soon present throughout
the cytoplasm (Fig. 7.41). It has not been possible
to detect  nucleic  acids,  either  in  the  nuclear
bodies or in the material in the vesicles; it appears
to be  principally, if  not  entirely, acidic  protein.
These  bodies  are  not  therefore  correctly  called
“micronucleoli”. The signiﬁcance of this remark-
able  cytology  is  not  yet  known.  Although  it  was
ﬁrst thought to be concerned with the establish-
ment of sporophytic growth, it is clearly not essen-
tial  for  the  generational  change,  since  it  is  not

present in all ferns. It is not, for example, a feature
of  oogenesis  in  Osmunda.  Nuclear-cytoplasmic
behavior similar to that seen in the maturing egg
cells of Pteridium and Dryopteris is seen in somatic
cells  of  Nicotiana infected  with  tobacco  mosaic
virus. It is conceivable that some ferns, as do many
wild herbaceous ﬂowering plants, carry symptom-
less viruses, re-infection of the succeeding gener-
ation taking place during oogenesis.

The mature egg lies in a chamber with a thick-
ened and often callosed wall. The egg protoplast
is surrounded  by a conspicuous  membrane.
Although  acetolysis-resistant,  it  does  not  appear
to contain  sporopollenin,  but  to consist  of  poly-
merized lipids or fatty acids (and thus to resemble
the  acetolysis-resistant  components  of  certain
algal walls (pp. 45, 65)). The material for the mem-
brane is secreted on to the surface of the egg by a
process of exocytosis, being derived from a break-
down  of  a  proportion  of  the  cytoplasmic  orga-
nelles  during  oogenesis.  The  egg  cells  of  more
recent ferns, such as Pteridium and Dryopteris, lack
the conspicuous amyloplasts which are a feature
and  Osmunda
of 
(Osmundales),  and  Angiopteris 
(Marattiales),
undoubtedly relicts of ancient lineages.

the  egg  cells  of  Todea

206

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 2

Figure 7.42. Trichomanes speciosum. (a) A sporophyte
photographed at Flores in the Azores. (b) A stand of
gametophytes (arrows) growing on and under a sandstone
boulder at Bingley, Yorkshire. Although the species was
originally described from this locality, the sporophyte now
appears to be extinct here. (Photographs provided by
Johannes Vogel, Natural History Museum, London.)

Flooding causes mucilage within the canal of
the ripe archegonium to swell. The cap is forced
off and the contents of the canal ejected. A clear
passage,  containing  watery mucilage,  now  runs
down to the surface of the egg cell.

Some  fern gametophytes  appear  reluctant  to
produce  sex  organs  in  the  wild,  although  they
may  do  so  more  freely  in  laboratory  conditions.
Pale  green  ribbon-like  thalli,  resembling  small
liverworts and locally abundant in shaded rocky
areas  of  parts  of  temperate  North  America,  are
believed to be gametophytes of Vittaria, but sporo-
phytes are rare, and if present are commonly no
more  than  stunted  juveniles.  The  evolution  of
these  forms  may  have followed  from  the  game-
tophytes  being  more  tolerant  of  cool  conditions
than the corresponding sporophytes. The ﬁlamen-
tous gametophytes of some species of Trichomanes
are also found with defective sexual reproduction

(a)

(b)

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA) (cont.): FERNS

207

well beyond the present distribution of the sporo-
phyte  in  both  North  America  and  Europe.  Some
wholly  gametophytic  stands  of  the  European  T.
speciosum (Fig. 7.42), for example, occur more than
1000km  (c.  600  miles)  from  the  nearest  sporo-
phytes,  and  may  be  1000  or  more  years  old.
Antheridia are found in about half these colonies,
but  archegonia  are  very few.  Reproduction  of
these imperfect forms must be largely by fragmen-
tation and gemmae (Fig. 7.43). The distribution of
the  ﬁlmy  fern Mecodium wrightii of  British
Columbia and Alaska has similar features, appar-
ently  sterile  gametophytes  being  more  wide-
spread than sporophytes. Callistopteris baueriana, a
ﬁlmy  fern occurring  throughout  the  Hawaiian
archipelago, shows a less extreme situation. The
gametophyte  is  a  narrow  branching  thallus,
which, at some sites, may form dense pure stands
lacking  sporophytes,  although  elsewhere  sporo-
phytes are conspicuous.

The gametophytes of some ferns with normal
cycles  also  multiply  asexually. With  ferns  in
which the gametophyte has a prolonged ﬁlamen-
tous  phase  before  becoming  thalloid  (as  in  the
family Grammitidaceae), fragmentation of the ﬁl-
aments often leads to a number of independent
gametophytes,  each  capable  of  sexual  reproduc-
tion. Specialized gemmae, borne at the tips of ﬁl-
aments (termed sterigmata) (Fig. 7.43), are a regular
feature of many of the ﬁlamentous gametophytes
of ﬁlmy ferns. Older gametophytes of the cordate
kind of many ferns will proliferate at the margins
and yield a crop of younger gametophytes which
resume a sexual function. Others, such as those of
the  tropical  Asian  epiphyte  Lecanopteris,  produce
marginal  multicellular  gemmae  on  short  stalks.
The tropical Asian Phanerosorus major has a ribbon-
like  gametophyte  which,  as  well  as  reproducing
sexually, proliferates  freely  from  the  marginal
cells of the thallus, leading to a colonial gameto-
phytic  mat.  In  consequence,  many  young  sporo-
phytes may arise from initially only a few spores.

fertilization and embryogeny
Fertilization in the Polypodiales depends, as with
most  other  archegoniate  plants,  upon  the  pres-
ence of water. The mucilage around the mouth of
the  archegonial  canal,  possibly  because  it  con-
tains  traces  of  malic  acid  (known  to possess

chemotactic  properties),  attracts  the  spermato-
zoids and effectively conﬁnes them to the region
of  the  archegonia.  Several  spermatozoids  com-
monly enter an open archegonium, and occasion-
ally some can be seen to swim out again. Where
crosses  are  attempted  between  certain  genera
(e.g., Athyrium 씸 ⫻ Dryopteris ﬁlix-mas 씹) the muci-
lage immobilizes the foreign spermatozoids and
no  hybrids  are  produced.  Barriers  to  gametic
fusion in ferns are so far little studied. It is pos-
sible that in some species self-fertilization is pre-
vented, or its chances lessened, by incompatibility
mechanisms  in  the  archegonial  mucilage  or  at
the surface of the egg, but the evidence so far is
inconclusive. It appears, however, to be a general
rule that only one spermatozoid enters the egg,
although others may be seen pressed against its
surface.

Division of the zygote follows about 48 hours
after  fertilization.  Experiments  in  which  game-
tophytes  of  Pteridium  containing  maturing  eggs
have been  fed  with  radioactive  (tritiated)  thymi-
dine (which is incorporated into replicating DNA)
have shown that the nucleus of the zygote enters
mitosis without further DNA synthesis. This indi-
cates that the nucleus of the egg, and presumably
that of the spermatozoid, each contain the repli-
cated (2C) amount of DNA. The zygotic nucleus is
therefore ab initio in the G2 phase of the mitotic
cycle, with the 4C amount of DNA of the diploid
nucleus. It is consequently able to divide mitoti-
cally as soon as the cell is re-organized following
the disturbance of gametic fusion.

The  ﬁrst vertical  wall  is  succeeded  by a hori-
zontal so that in lateral aspect the zygote appears
divided into quadrants. These quadrants indicate
in  a  general  way  the  course  of  the  subsequent
embryogeny.  The  upper  anterior  region,  for
example, goes to form the apex of the new sporo-
phyte, the lower anterior the ﬁrst leaf, while the
posterior regions give rise to the ﬁrst root and the
foot  (Fig.  7.44).  There  is  no  suspensor.  Following
fertilization,  possibly  a  consequence  of  growth-
regulating  substances  coming  from  the  zygote,
the  growth of  the  gametophyte  diminishes  and
the  initiation  of  archegonia  ceases.  At the  same
time  the  cells  of  the  archegonium  immediately
above the fertilized egg proliferate, forming a con-
spicuous cap (calyptra).

208

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 2

Figure 7.43. Portion of a ﬁlamentous gametophyte of
Trichomanes speciosum growing in culture, showing the
production of gemmae (terminating sterigmata) and sex
organs. Partly diagrammatic. Scale bar 100 ␮m. (After
Rumsey. 1994. PhD dissertation, University of Manchester.)

The foot of the embryo remains surrounded by
a thickened boundary in which parts of the ace-
tolysis-resistant  membrane  originally  surround-
ing  the  egg  can  be  clearly  seen  in  section.  The
apposed  walls  of  the  cells  at  the  interface  of
gametophyte  and  sporophyte  develop  a  labyrin-
thine  structure.  Although  these  cells  have been
termed  “transfer  cells”,  the  term is  misleading
and  should  be  abandoned.  Experiments  with
radioactively labelled, potentially informational,
molecules, such as nucleosides, have shown that
these  molecules  do  not  traverse  the  gameto-
phyte/sporophyte  boundary. The  wall  labyrinth
appears therefore to be acting in respect of some
metabolites as a molecular ﬁlter. “Transfer cells”
at sites such as the gametophyte/sporophyte inter-
face  are  better  regarded  as  a  developmental
feature brought about by an active ﬂux (no doubt
containing  “innocuous”  metabolites,  such  as
sugars)  into the  growing  embryo through  amor-
phous  mucopolysaccharides  accumulating  (as
part of a quasi “defense reaction”) at the apposed
faces of the dissimilar generations. The situation

is clearly similar to that obtaining in the bryophy-
tes (p. 103).

Experiments  have shown  that  the  calyptra
formed  above the  zygote,  probably  by exerting
mechanical  pressure  on  the  developing  embryo,
plays  an  important  part  in  modulating  normal
embryogenesis,  again  recalling  the  situation  in
the mosses (p. 125). If the calyptra is removed from
above a very young zygote, the zygote gives rise to
a mass of parenchymatous tissue before produc-
ing  differentiated  growing  points.  With cordate
gametophytes,  an  intact  apical  meristem,  prob-
ably in consequence of the auxin it produces, is
also  essential  for  normal  embryogenesis.  If  this
meristem  is  destroyed,  differentiation  of  the
embryo is markedly slower and the emergence of
the ﬁrst root very much delayed.

Information, probably in the form of messen-
ger RNA, leading to the initiation of normal
embryogenesis appears to be already present in
the cytoplasm of the mature egg cell. If this RNA
is corrupted by allowing the egg to mature in the
presence of a sublethal concentration of the
uracil analog thiouracil, the zygote, formed fol-
lowing fertilization with a normal spermatozoid
and the immediate transfer of the gametophyte
to a thiouracil-free medium, gives rise to an
embryo which quickly reverts to gametophytic
growth. This provides a very satisfactory demon-

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA) (cont.): FERNS

209

Figure 7.44. Pteridium aquilinum.
Vertical section of embryo.

however, 

fectly  formed  and  functional,
and  are  capable  of  fertilizing
eggs of related sexual species.
Subsequently,
in
place  of  archegonia,  a  sporo-
phyte  develops  directly  from
the  subapical  region  of  the
gametophyte.  The 
cellular
mechanisms  underlying  this
kind  of  life  cycle  are  not  yet
understood.  The  condition  is
however  known  to be  geneti-
cally  dominant  since  hybrids
with sexual species have the same kind of apoga-
mous cycle. Ferns such as D. afﬁnis subsp. afﬁnis are
said  to be  agamosporic;  it  is  estimated  that  10
percent of homosporous ferns have a cycle of this
kind.

Another, much rarer, form of apogamous cycle
is found in a few ferns. Here it is the ﬁrst meiotic
division  which  fails,  but  the  end  result  is  the
same, 32 spores being produced in place of 64 (Fig.
7.45B). The spermatozoids produced by the game-
tophytes of these ferns are sluggish and probably
inactive. The heritability of this form of cycle has
not been established.

sexual 

and  preventing 

Experimentally, apogamy  can  sometimes  be
induced  by withholding  water  from  gametophy-
tes 
reproduction.
Sporophytes  have been  raised  in  this  way  from
gametophytes of Dryopteris ﬁlix-mas and Dryopteris
dilatata.  In  Pteridium in  pure  culture  apogamous
outgrowths  are  promoted  by a high  level  of
sucrose.  Such  experimentally  produced  sporo-
phytes  are  often  depauperate,  and  if  they reach
meiosis fail to produce viable spores. They natu-
rally lack the pre-meiotic doubling of the chromo-
somes characteristic of the D. afﬁnis kind of cycle.
The  direct  production  of  gametophytes  from
sporophytes 
(apospory)  can  be  very readily
induced in culture by placing fragments of juve-
nile  leaves  in  sterile  conditions  on  an  agar
medium.  The  gametophytes  are  usually  sexually
perfect and yield tetraploid sporophytes. This phe-
nomenon may occur sporadically in the wild and
lead to the production of natural autopolyploids.

stration of the rôle of RNA in the control of
morphogenesis.

It seems highly likely that intragametophytic
selﬁng  occurs  not  infrequently  in  fern popula-
tions.  Some  experiments  have failed  to demon-
strate deleterious  effects  of  such  selﬁng,  but  a
long-term experiment  with  Athyrium ﬁlix-femina
has clearly brought out the greater ﬁtness of the
progeny of intergametophytic mating. In natural
populations,  the  progeny  of  intragametophytic
mating are probably eliminated at an earlier stage
than their heterozygous neighbors.

Aberrations  of  the  fern life  cycle  are  not
uncommon. Apogamy, the production of a sporo-
phyte without sexual fusion, occurs regularly in
some ferns and can be induced experimentally in
others.  Dryopteris afﬁnis subsp.  afﬁnis (D.  borreri)
provides an example of a regular apogamous cycle
(Fig.  7.45A).  In  this  and  similar  species  the  ﬁnal
mitosis  of  the  sporogenous  cells  is  incomplete.
Following  division  of  the  chromosomes  the
nucleus  re-forms.  The  cell  remains  undivided,
although it has grown considerably as if a normal
division were about to occur. Instead it becomes a
spore mother cell. The restitution nucleus, which
has  twice  the  sporophytic  number  of  chromo-
somes, enters meiosis. The four spores produced,
reﬂecting the large size of the spore mother cell,
have diameters  of  about  80  ␮m,  and  contain
nuclei with the same number of chromosomes as
the  parent  sporophyte.  The  spores  germinate  in
the  normal  way  and  the  gametophytes  pass
through a male phase. The spermatozoids are per-

210

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 2

Figure 7.45. Apogamous life cycles in ferns. (A) As in
Dryopteris afﬁnis subsp. afﬁnis. (B) As in Asplenium aethiopicum.
(From Klekowski. 1973. American Journal of Botany 60,
modiﬁed.)

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA) (cont.): FERNS

211

Autopolyploids  may  also  arise  (probably  more
usually) by chance failure of reduction in meiosis.

evolution
The  evolutionary  relationships  of  the  living
Polypodiales can be studied at two levels. First, by
carrying  out  crosses  between  living  species  and
examining  the  pairing  behavior  of  the  chromo-
somes  at  meiosis  we can  obtain  evidence  of  the
extent  of  the  genetic  identity  between  them.
Second,  by comparing  the  morphology  and
anatomy of living species with the fossil we can
obtain  a  general  impression  of  the  evolution  of
the contemporary fern ﬂora.

Studies  of  chromosome  homologies  at
meiosis, facilitated by the ease with which squash
preparations can be made of developing sporan-
gia, have shown that many familiar species are of
hybrid  origin.  Dryopteris ﬁlix-mas,  for  example,  is
an allotetraploid probably derived from a hybrid
between two diploid ancestors, one similar to D.
oreades (D. abbreviata) and the other to D. caucasica.
Particularly interesting is that widespread forms
of  some  species  are  autotetraploids.  A  familiar
example is the subspecies quadrivalens of Asplenium
trichomanes. Other species are possibly tetraploid
in  origin,  but  isozyme  analysis  shows  that  they
behave as  diploids.  Representative  of  this  situa-
tion  is  the  common  Pteridium (n⫽52).  Selﬁng
experiments  with  Pteridium have nevertheless
revealed  considerable  genetic  variation  in  the
progeny. This  may  arise  from  recombination
between  duplicated  unlinked  loci  in  homoeolo-
gous  chromosomes  (homoeologous heterozygosity),
and would be in line with the view that, despite
the enzyme results, the species is ancestrally tetra-
ploid. Hybridization and duplication of chromo-
some number undoubtedly account for much of
the diversity in living ferns, but provide for little
profound anatomical or morphological change.

The development of techniques involving the
polymerase  chain  reaction  (PCR),  allowing  the
ampliﬁcation  of  minute  quantities  of  DNA,  has
enabled the investigation in depth of the chloro-
plast genome, providing yet another approach to
problems  of  recent  phylogeny. In  Asplenium,  for
example,  comparison  of  the  lengths  of  a  non-
coding  intron  in  the  chloroplast  DNA  has  facili-
tated  a  clear  understanding  of  the  parental

relationships of a range of hybrids of A. septentrio-
nale and  A.  trichomanes (known  collectively  as  A.
alternifolium).  The  molecular  evidence,  coupled
with the knowledge from ultrastructural studies
that  the  fully  developed  spermatozoids  of  ferns
lack plastids, point conclusively to A. septentrionale
having acted predominantly as the female parent.
This  unidirectional  hybridization  can  be  related
satisfactorily to the ecology and phenology of the
gametophytes of the parent species.

By contrast, the study of the fossil Polypodiales
has given valuable information about the evolu-
tionary  status  of  the  present-day  families.  The
Schizaeaceae, for example, have a well-established
fossil  history,  possibly  extending  back  to the
Paleozoic, although the oldest undisputed repre-
sentative of the family is Klukia from the Jurassic.
Tempskya (Fig.  7.46),  one  of  the  strangest  fern
fossils,  has  been  assigned  to the  Schizaeaceae.
Known  only  from  stem  fragments  of  Cretaceous
age, it is believed to have been a small tree fern
with  a  composite  trunk  consisting  of  numerous
ramifying  axes  bound  together  by adventitious
roots. The branching crowns of some Osmundales
approach a similar structure. Some authors prefer
to
family
(Tempskyaceae).  The  Gleicheniaceae  have a
history similar to that of the Schizaeaceae, again
becoming  relatively  abundant  in  the  Mesozoic.
Other  families,  such  as  the  Matoniaceae,  ﬁrst
appear  in  the  Mesozoic.  Nevertheless,  despite
these  evidences  of  antiquity,  most  of  the  living
Polypodiales  either  have no  fossil  record,  or  no
record extending back further than the Tertiary.
This  is  particularly  true  of  the  large family
Polypodiaceae,  and  we must  suppose  that  these
ferns  are  comparatively  recent,  probably  having
evolved toward the end of the Cretaceous period
and subsequently.

place  Tempskya

in  a 

separate 

Comparison  of  the  living  Polypodiales  with
the fossil, quite apart from tracing particular lin-
eages,  also  reveals  those  features  which  can  be
regarded in a general way as primitive. Protostelic
and solenostelic vascular systems, the simultane-
ous production of the sporangia in the sori, short
thick sporangial stalks, the indurated cells of the
sporangial  wall  aggregated  laterally  or  arranged
in  a  transverse  annulus,  and  a  large number  of
spores in each sporangium are all features of the

212

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 2

retained  here,  and  the  position  of  some  of  the
more  important  families  and  genera  in  this
double  classiﬁcation  is  shown  in  Table  7.1. This
classiﬁcation does not of course imply that living
families and genera have evolved from each other;
it  merely  illustrates  relative  primitiveness.  The
arrangement is substantiated by the fossil record
which  is  of  greater  duration  in  respect  of  the
Polypodiales  at  the  bottom  of  the  table  than  of
those at the top.

the

The Hydropteridales (Salviniales and
Marsileales) 
The Hydropteridales (water ferns) are outstanding
in being genuinely heterosporous. Although
mainly plants of fresh waters and swamps, some
species are characteristic of sites subject to sea-
sonal drying. Hydropterids of
family
Marsileaceae have a creeping rhizome bearing
subulate (Fig. 7.47), bifoliate or quadrifoliate
leaves. Those of the family Salviniaceae are
ﬂoating plants with short branching rhizomes.
The leaves are shortly petioled or sessile.
In
Salvinia the surface of the upper leaves is made
unwettable by a covering of waxy hairs; the lower
leaves are submerged and much divided, taking
the place of roots. In Azolla (Fig. 7.48) the leaves are
minute and unequally two-lobed, the larger upper
lobe ﬂoating and containing a mucilaginous
chamber
inhabited by the blue-green alga
Anabaena azollae. The delicate roots of Azolla, being
devoid of soil, are very suitable objects for the
study of root growth. Serial sectioning reveals how
the cell lineages derived from the three posterior
faces of the apical cell generate the mature root.

Figure 7.46. (A) Reconstruction of Tempskya. Scale bar 1m.
(B) Transverse section of composite trunk. Scale bar 20cm.
(From Stewart and Rothwell. 1993. Paleobotany and the
Evolution of Plants, 2nd edn. Cambridge University Press, New
York.)

early  Polypodiales.  Conversely, dictyosteles,  the
production of mixed sori, long and delicate spo-
rangial  stalks,  vertical  annuli,  and  low  spore
numbers  are  all  features  of  Polypodiales  with
little or no fossil record.

On the basis of these criteria it is possible to
assign the families of living ferns to three grades
according to their evolutionary advancement. It is
also  possible  to arrange  them  in  two  series,
according to whether the sporangia are marginal
or  superﬁcial  in  origin,  but  recent  research has
thrown considerable doubt upon the signiﬁcance
of  this  feature.  Nevertheless,  it  is  tentatively

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA) (cont.): FERNS

213

Table 7.1
development and origin of sporangia.

Classification of representative genera and families of living Polypodiales based on evolutionary

Features of evolutionary signiﬁcance

i

6
–
5
2
→












m
u
g
n
a
r
o
p
s
 
r
e
p
 
s
e
r
o
p
s
 
f
o
 
s
r
e
b
m
u
N

8
–
7
2

l

i

→

s
l
l

k
a
t
s
 
l
a
g
n
a
r
o
p
s
 
g
n
m
r
o

e
c
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
n
 
n
i
 
n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
R


f

i

Steles, commonly dictyosteles. Sori mixed.
Sporangia with vertical annuli interrupted
at stalk

Steles, dictyosteles or solenosteles. Sori
gradate. Sporangia with oblique annuli

Steles, protosteles or solenosteles. Sori
simultaneous. Indurated cells of sporangial
wall aggregated, or in transverse on 
oblique annuli

Position of origin of sporangia

Marginal

Pteridium
Davallia

Superﬁcial

Dryopteris
Polystichum
Asplenium
Athyrium
Polypodium

Hymenophyllaceae

Cyatheaceae

Schizaeaceae

Gleicheniaceae

Figure 7.47. Pilularia globulifera. (a) Habit. (b) Transverse
section of sporocarp showing the four sori. (c) Longitudinal
section of inseminated archegonium. ((a) after Hyde and
Wade. 1940. Welsh Ferns. National Museum, Cardiff.)

214

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 2

Figure 7.48. Azolla ﬁliculoides. (a) Habit. (b) Lower surface
of shoot showing a pair of microsporangial sori: m,
microsporangial sorus; r, root. Accompanying sporulation (in
temperate regions occurring toward the end of the growing
season) the leaves often develop a reddish pigmentation.
Scale bars 1mm. (After Campbell. 1905. The Structure and
Development of Mosses and Ferns. Macmillan, New York.)

Some  hydropterids  have economic  value.  In
rice-growing areas Azolla, on account of its nitro-
gen-ﬁxing symbiont Anabaena, is used extensively
as a green manure. The vegetative parts of Marsilea
yield a sedative used in Indian medicine, and the
sporocarps are a source of starch.

reproduction
In  Pilularia (Fig.  7.47),  representative  of  the
Marsileaceae, fertile pinnules are produced at the
base of the petiole. They curve over the developing
sporangia  and  become  concrescent  and  eventu-
ally  hardened,  so  producing  the  sporocarp.  The
ridge-like  placentae  bear  megasporangia  below
and  microsporangia  above (although  in  Marsilea
the positions are reversed). In Azolla (Salviniaceae)
the  sporangia  develop  on  the  submerged  lower
lobe  of  the  leaf  (Fig.  7.48b),  microsporangia  and
megasporangia  being  produced  in  separate sori.
The sporocarp is formed by an elaborate indusium
which totally encloses the sorus. Sporogenesis in
the hydropterids is similar to that in homospor-
ous ferns, but in the megasporangia all but one of
the 
resorbed.
Contrasting  with  the  single  megaspore  in  the
mature  megasporangium,  the  microsporangia
typically contain 64 microspores.

potential  megaspores 

are 

The sporocarps of the Marsileaceae open only
after  the  wall  has  weathered  and  been  abraded

sufﬁciently to permit the entry of water. This may
take years, but the viability of the spores declines
only very slowly during this period of dormancy.
When water eventually enters, the sori are carried
out  of  the  ruptured  sporocarp  by a worm-like
expansion of the gelatinous remains of the fertile
pinnules. The liberated spores germinate at once;
the megaspore rapidly gives rise to a single arche-
gonium surrounded by a few somatic cells (which
may develop chlorophyll), while the microspores
each produce a single antheridium containing 16
spermatocytes.  Investigation  of  the  spermato-
zoids of Marsilea has revealed that they have the
same  basic  structure  (Fig.  7.49)  as  those  of  the
Polypodiales,  although  about  twice  the  length.
The mitochondrion entering into the structure of
the helix is spectacularly large.

The sporocarps of the Salviniaceae open more
readily than those of the Marsileaceae. In Azolla the
megaspore is surrounded by four frothy massulae
(Fig. 7.50) formed from the tapetum, and these give
the liberated megaspore buoyancy, but it is doubt-
ful whether they keep it aﬂoat indeﬁnitely. A vari-
able number of massulae are formed in the
microsporangium (Fig. 7.51). Each includes a
number of microspores at its periphery, and is fur-
nished externally with peculiar anchor-like glo-
chidia. These male massulae hook themselves to
the female, and the complex then sinks.
Germination of the spores, in the main similar to
that of the spores of the Marsileaceae, then
follows. Embryogenesis is much more rapid in the
heterosporous ferns than in the homosporous.
Fertilization occurs within about 12 hours of the
germination of the spores, and an embryo emerges
from the archegonium on the following day.

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA) (cont.): FERNS

215

Figure 7.49. Marsilea vestita, spermatozoid. Drawing based
on observation of living gametes and electron micrographs.
The prominent mitochondrion, if straightened, would reach a
length of approximately 75␮m. The plasmalemma at the
posterior of the cell is shown in its expanded, bladder-like,
form following shedding of the terminal vesicle containing
plastids and small mitochondria. Scale bar 1 ␮m. (From Myles
and Bell. 1975. Journal of Cell Science 17.)

216

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 2

Figure 7.50. Azolla ﬁliculoides. (a)
Longitudinal section of
megasporangium. (b) Liberated
megaspore with male massulae
attached. (After Strasburger. 1873.
Über Azolla. Abel, Leipzig.)

Figure 7.51. Azolla ﬁliculoides. (a)
Longitudinal section of young
microsporangial sorus. (b)
Transverse section of mature
microsporangium. ((a) after
Campbell. 1905. The Structure and
Development of Mosses and Ferns.
Macmillan, New York; (b) after
Smith. 1955. Cryptogamic Botany, vol.
II. McGraw-Hill, New York.)

TRACHEOPHYTES WITH TERMINAL SPORANGIA (EUPHYLLOPHYTINA) (cont.): FERNS

217

origin
The origins of the hydropterid ferns are altogether
obscure.  Although  the  fossil  record  of  the
Marsileaceae is meager, remains of reproductive
parts resembling those of Azolla are identiﬁable as
far  back  as  the  Lower  Cretaceous.  Compressed
branching systems of Azolla, often with reproduc-
tive  structures,  are  known  from  the  Upper
Cretaceous.  Recent  fossil  evidence  has  yielded  a
possible  common  ancestor  for  the  two  families.
Hydropteris (Fig.  7.52),  from  the  late  Cretaceous,
had  a  marsileaceaean  morphology  but  salvinia-
ceaean  reproductive  features,  seemingly closely
linking  these  two  families.  The  introduction  of
Hydropteris as a generic name validates the use of
Hydropteridales as the name of the order contain-
ing the water ferns.

Figure 7.52. Hydropteris pinnata, reconstruction. Scale bar
5 mm. (From Rothwell and Stockey. 1994. American Journal of
Botany 81.)

8

The subkingdom Embryophyta (cont.):
division Tracheophyta, Part 3

Primitive ovulate plants and their
precursors (Progymnospermopsida)
The class Progymnospermopsida contains only
fossil plants. The concept of progymnospermy, a
stage at which plants with conifer-like anatomy
and morphology were still reproducing by spores,
followed the surprising discovery that certain
well-preserved trees of the Upper Devonian bore
frond-like sprays of branches, some of which bore
clusters of sporangia. Callixylon, the ﬁrst progym-
nosperm to be recognized, provides a splendid
example of this stage of evolution (Fig. 8.1a). The
trunks reached a diameter of 1.5m (5ft) and a
length of 8m (26ft) or more. Permineralized
remains reveal ﬁne details of the anatomy. A
central pith was surrounded by mesarch primary
xylem. Outside this lay a considerable thickness
of well-developed secondary xylem traversed by
narrow rays. The pits in the radial walls of the
tracheids were frequently grouped, the groups
aligned horizontally and in register with trach-
eids in the rays. Dense wood of this kind, also
characteristic of modern conifers, is termed pyc-
noxylic.

Although Callixylon was known for many years
as the trunk of a late Devonian tree, only much
later  were  discovered  specimens  in  organic  con-
nection with frond-like branches. These branches
were already known as Archaeopteris and had been
assumed to be the fronds of ferns. Archaeopteris is
known both sterile and fertile (Fig. 8.1b). The spo-
rangia were spindle-shaped, up to 3.5mm (0.14in.)
in  length,  and  occasionally  with  stomata  in  the
epidermis. Heterospory occurred in some species,
the  microspores  being  30–70 ␮m  and  the  mega-

spores 150–500 ␮m in diameter, the two classes of
spores being borne in separate sporangia.

Amongst other plants assigned to the progym-
nosperms  are  Aneurophyton (Aneurophytales),
known  from  the  Middle  and  Upper  Devonian  of
Europe  and  North  America,  and  Protopitys
(Protopityales)  from  the  Lower  Carboniferous  of
Scotland.  The  axes  of  Aneurophyton contained  a
core of primary xylem, triangular in section, sur-
rounded  by
secondary  wood.  The  spirally
arranged  branches  dichotomized  two  or  three
times, some terminating in tassels of sporangia.
Aneurophyton appears to have been homosporous.
The abundant pycnoxylic wood of Protopitys indi-
cates that it is the remains of a tree. The branches
were  distichously arranged  and  sporangia  were
borne in small terminal clusters. The diameter of
the spores lay between 80 and 160 ␮m. Protopitys
was probably heterosporous.

The progymnosperms, which ﬁrst become rec-
ognizable in the Middle Devonian and extend to
the Lower Carboniferous (and possibly later), rep-
resent a signiﬁcant intermediate stage in the evo-
lution of the land ﬂora. The notion that the frond
originated from a lateral branch system (p. 172) is
clearly supported by Callixylon and Archaeopteris
(Archaeopteridales). Anatomically the pycnoxylic
wood of
strikingly
modern in appearance, and some forms show
clear examples of a bifacial cambium producing
ﬁles of secondary phloem at its outer face. Further,
gymnospermous reproduction presumably arose
from heterosporous of the kind seen in many pro-
gymnosperms, although seeds are known almost
as old as the progymnosperms (see p. 219).

the progymnosperms

is

SPERMATOPHYTINA (SEED PLANTS): GYMNOSPERMS

219

Figure 8.1. (a) Callixylon
(Archaeopteris), reconstruction. (b)
Archaeopteris halliana.
Reconstruction of branch with
sterile leaves and fertile appendages.
(After Phillips, Andrews and Gensel,
from Stewart. 1983. Paleobotany and
the Evolution of Plants. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, New
York.)

present, consisting of tracheids
(in a few forms also of vessels)
and sieve cells. Sporangia
borne on specialized struc-
tures, probably of axial origin.
Heterospory general.
Megasporogenesis occurring
within a specialized tissue
(nucellus), this in turn sur-
rounded by a distinctive sheath
(integument), the whole

termed the ovule. Neither male nor female game-
tophytes autotrophic. Fertilization by multiﬂagel-
late spermatozoids, or by male cells with no
specialized means of locomotion, occurring
within the ovule, either before or after its being
shed. Embryogeny endoscopic, the embryo
remaining contained within the seed developed
from the ovule.

One  of  the  most  fully  investigated  of  the  early
gymnospermous seeds is Archaeosperma (Fig. 8.2a
and b) from the Upper Devonian of Pennsylvania.
Here  the  nucellus  (megasporangium)  was  sur-
rounded by an integument. This was deeply lobed
above, revealing radial symmetry. The single func-
tional  megaspore  was  surmounted  by three
abortive  spores.  Their  triradiate  markings  show
that  the  tetrad  had  tetrahedral  symmetry.
Megasporogenesis  in  Archaeosperma thus  resem-
bled that in heterosporous ferns such as Pilularia
and  Marsilea (p.  214).  In  Xenotheca (Fig.  8.2c),
another early Devonian seed, the integument was
even  more  deeply 
in
Archaeosperma.

lobed  above

than 

seeds.  Knowledge  of 

Little is yet known of the plants which bore the
Devonian 
the  early
Carboniferous  gymnosperms,  although  fuller
than  that  of  the  late  Devonian  representatives,
also remains limited. It seems likely, however, that

SPERMATOPHYTINA (seed
plants): GYMNOSPERMS

The seed habit, the formation and retention of the
embryo within  an  integumented  megasporan-
gium, is evidently of great antiquity. In paleobot-
any  the  term “seed”  is  also  used  for  fossilized
ovules,  the  later  stages  of  seed  formation  being
inferred.  In  general  the  early  seeds  of  the
Paleozoic terminated axes, and were either bilat-
erally  symmetrical  (platyspermic)  or  radial  (radio-
spermic). Examples of each are known from the late
Devonian.  Very similar  seeds  are  borne  by some
living plants. Together, the living and fossil forms
constitute  the  gymnosperms,  a  name  which
implies  that  the  seeds  are  naked,  unenclosed  in
any  carpellary  structure.  The  fossil  record  indi-
cates clearly that gymnospermy is the most prim-
itive form of the seed habit.

Although  a  diverse  division  with  possibly
more than one origin from the early land plants,
the  general  characteristics  of  the  gymnosperms
(not all being represented in the fossil forms) can
be summarized as follows:

Sporophyte usually arborescent; branching and
leaves various. Secondary vascular tissue always

220

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 3

Figure 8.2. Archaeosperma arnoldii. (a) The two-seeded
cupules were borne in pairs, the two pairs of seeds facing
each other. (b) Reconstruction of an individual seed showing
the three abortive megaspores at the top of the one which is
functional. The integument is deeply lobed above. (c) The
primitive Xenotheca devonica, showing even deeper lobing of
the integument, exposing the upper part of the nucellus. ((a),
(b) after Pettitt and Beck. 1968. Contributions from the
Museum of Paleontology, University of Michigan 22; (c) after
Hilton and Edwards, in Kurmann and Hemsley (eds.) 1988.
The Evolution of Plant Architecture. Royal Botanic Gardens,
Kew.)

some  were  impressive  trees.  Pitus
(Pitys),  for
example,  almost  certainly  a  gymnosperm,  had
enormous  trunks,  reaching  in  some  instances  a
diameter of 2m (6.5ft). Later in the Carboniferous
remains  become  sufﬁciently  numerous  for  the
recognition  of  distinct  classes,  of  which  two
(Cycadopsida  and  Pinopsida)  have descendants
living today.

The Cycadopsida, of which few still exist, have
a  fossil  record  that  can  be  linked  to the
Carboniferous Lyginopteridales and Medullosales
(the extinct “seed ferns”) with which they share

radiospermy.  By  contrast,  relatives  such  as  the
Gnetopsida, Bennettitales and Caytoniales reveal
features which suggest an afﬁnity with the angio-
sperms (Fig. 8.3). These groups may therefore be
seen as representing a natural sequence from the
most  primitive  to the  most  specialized  seed
plants. The Pinopsida (Coniferales, conifers) have
an obscure origin, but quickly became distinct in
their generally pycnoxylic wood, platyspermy, and
simple,  often  needle-like  leaves.  Their  relation-
ship  to the  Ginkgoopsida  is  unclear,  and  judg-
ment depends upon the relative emphasis placed
upon vegetative as opposed to reproductive char-
acters.

Early radiospermic gymnosperms

Lyginopteridopsida
(Pteridospermopsida)

The Lyginopteridales
Investigators  of  the  fern-like  fronds  found  in
Carboniferous rocks soon became aware that not
all these were in fact referable to ferns. Some were

SPERMATOPHYTINA (SEED PLANTS): GYMNOSPERMS

221

branched.  There  was  a  central  pith,  which  con-
tained nodules of thick-walled cells (similar to the
groups of stone cells in the ﬂesh of a pear), sur-
rounded by a ring of primary xylem strands (Fig.
8.4).  Exterior  to these  was  a  relatively  large
amount of secondary xylem. The tracheids of the
secondary  xylem,  like  those  of  the  metaxylem,
were  furnished  with  bordered  pits,  but  in  the
somewhat  smaller  tracheids  of  the  secondary
xylem they were absent from the tangential walls.
A  girdle  of  phloem,  rarely well  preserved,  lay
outside  the  xylem.  A  characteristic  feature  of
Lyginopteris was the anatomy of the outer cortex.
This contained radially elongated bands of ﬁbers
which anastomosed freely and clearly gave consid-
erable mechanical support to the stem.

The leaves of Lyginopteris (originally described
as Sphenopteris) were borne in a 2/5 phyllotaxy and
when  young  showed  circinate  vernation.  In
mature leaves, which sometimes reached a length
of 50 cm (19in.), the rachis dichotomized at about
half its length, but the remainder of the branch-
ing was pinnate and the ultimate segments were

Figure 8.3. (a) and (b) Spermatophyte cladograms
illustrating two of many equally likely trees. (c) A consensus
tree (one in which an “average” of alternative cladograms of
the seed plants is presented). The consensus tree indicates
how poorly resolved the spermatophyte groups remain. ((a),
(b) after Doyle and Donoghue. 1992. Brittonia 44; (c) after
Crane, in Beck (ed.) 1988. Origin and Evolution of
Gymnosperms. Columbia University Press, New York.)

undoubtedly  associated  with  seeds,  and  others
with stems in which there were secondary thick-
ening and other anatomical features rarely found
in the Polypodiopsida. Nevertheless, the habit of
these plants was probably something like that of
the Marattiales (p. 176). The leaves were megaphyl-
lous,  compound  and  pinnately  branched,  and
borne on stems of varying height. Together they
comprise  the  Lyginopteridales  (Cycadoﬁlicales),
and 
earliest
Lyginopteridopsida (pteridosperms).

representative 

are 

of 

the 

The features of the pteridosperm stem are well
shown  by the  Carboniferous  Lyginopteris.  These
well-preserved  axes  ranged  in  diameter  from
about  0.5  to 4cm  (0.2–1.6in.),  and  occasionally

222

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 3

Figure 8.4. Lyginopteris oldhamia.
Transverse section of stem. The
glandular epidermis has been lost.
The leaf trace divides into two
strands in the cortex, but these
reunite to form a V-shaped trace at
the base of the petiole.

narrow  pinnules.  The  outer
surface  of  many  parts  of
Lyginopteris was 
furnished
with  peculiar  multicellular
glands,  a  feature  which  has
enabled  paleobotanists 
to
reconstruct  the  entire  aerial
part of the plant from discon-
nected fragments.

reproductive
structures
The 
reproductive
female 
organs  of  Lyginopteris are  also
known  in  detail.  The  ovules
(originally  described  as  Lagenostoma)  terminated
axes which were probably branches of otherwise
normal leaves. Each ovule (or seed) was partially
enclosed in a cup formed by a number of glandu-
lar and basally fused bracts (Fig. 8.5a). This struc-
ture,  called  a  cupule,  in  some  forms  contained
more  than  one  ovule.  The  ovule  itself  was  an
upright,  radially  symmetrical  structure,  about
0.5 cm  (0.2in.)  long  and  a  little  less  broad.  The
central part (Fig. 8.5b), the nucellus, possibly a spe-
cialized  archesporial  tissue,  was  surrounded  by
an integument of two layers, the outer of which
contained  a  sclerenchymatous  sheath.  A  single
vascular bundle entered the base of the ovule and
divided  symmetrically  into  nine  parts  which
ascended the inner ﬂeshy part of the integument.
The  upper  part  of  the  integument  around  the
micropyle was shallowly lobed, the lobing corre-
sponding to the intervals between the ascending
veins. The nucellus was fused to the integument
except  at  its  summit.  Here  the  apical  portion
ascended as a column, surrounded by a sheath of
similar tissue (Fig. 8.5b). This specialized develop-
ment of the upper part of the nucellus, probably
serving as an effective pollen trap, is termed the
lagenostome. Pollen grains are often observed in the

space  between  the  base  of  the  sheath  and  the
column  (referred  to as  the  “pollen  chamber”).
Germination  may  have occurred  here,  but  few
details are yet known. A female gametophyte, sur-
rounded  by a distinct  membrane  and  bearing
archegonia  at  its  upper  surface,  lay  within  the
nucellus.  This  gametophyte  probably  developed
from  a  megaspore,  formed  as  one  of  a  tetrad
within  the  nucellus,  the  remaining  megaspores
degenerating.

The male reproductive organ of Lyginopteris is
not  yet  identiﬁed  with  certainty.  It  is,  however,
very probable  that  it  consisted  of  a  small  ovate
plate, about 2mm (0.08in.) in length, terminating
a branchlet and bearing about six or more bilocu-
lar  sporangia  (Fig.  8.6b).  Each  sporangium  was
about  3mm  (0.13in.)  long  and  1.5mm  (0.06in.)
wide. The microsporangiophores were borne on a
branch  system 
(the  whole  being  known  as
Crossotheca)  which  may  have formed  part  of  a
Lyginopteris leaf (Fig. 8.6a).

The pollen grains (Fig. 8.6c), which bore trira-
diate scars, were presumably distributed by wind.
By analogy with the pollination of living gymnos-
permous  ovules,  it  is  thought  the  grains  were
trapped by a drop of sugary ﬂuid which protruded

SPERMATOPHYTINA (SEED PLANTS): GYMNOSPERMS

223

Figure 8.5. Lagenostoma lomaxi. (a) Reconstruction of seed
and cupule. The heads of the glandular hairs are shown in
black. (b) Longitudinal section of seed. ((a) after a drawing by
F. W. Olive; (b) after Walton. 1940. An Introduction to the
Study of Fossil Plants. Black, London.)

from the micropyle, and that subsequent absorp-
tion of this drop drew the grains down into the
pollen  chamber.  Germination  of  the  grains  is
thought to have been proximal (i.e., at the site of
the triradiate scar, as with the spores of ferns and
bryophytes). This contrasts with the regular distal
germination  of  living  conifer  and  angiosperm
pollen. Pteridosperm pollen is accordingly often
referred to as “pre-pollen”. The production of pre-
pollen is thought likely to have been accompanied
subsequently by zooidogamous fertilization.

Embryos have only rarely been found in pteri-
dosperm  seeds,  and  their  absence  is  not  readily
explained.  Megagametophytes  with  archegonia
are not uncommon, and have been seen in the ear-
liest seeds of the late Devonian.

origin
The  pteridosperms  probably  had  their  origin  in
axial plants resembling the progymnosperms, the
fronds again being derived from lateral sprays of
branchlets. The radial symmetry of many pterido-
sperm seeds suggests that they may have evolved
from tassels of megasporangia in which a central
megasporangium became closely surrounded by a
ring  of  similar  megasporangia  (Fig.  8.7A  and  B).
Sterilization of the outer ring (Fig. 8.7C), but not
of the center, would then have resulted in an inte-

gumented  megasporangium.  Although  no  inter-
mediate stages in such a transformation have yet
come to light, it is signiﬁcant that in one of the
earliest  pteridosperm  seeds  from  the  Lower
Carboniferous 
(Salpingostoma)  the  integument
consists of a ring of ﬁnger-like processes, each con-
taining a vein, fused only in the basal region. In
such ovules, often termed “pre-ovules”, there was
no clearly deﬁned micropyle. Progressive fusion of
components  could  nevertheless  have led  to the
entire integuments of the pteridosperm seeds of
the Upper Carboniferous (Fig. 8.7D), the shallow
lobing  often  seen  in  the  micropylar  region  of
these integuments being the only remaining indi-
cation  of  their  compound  origin.  Experiments
with  models  have shown  that  the  ﬁnger-like
extensions of the integument seen in some of the
early  seeds  may, by  setting  up  local  turbulence,
have assisted in trapping wind-borne pollen above
the  nucellus.  The  development  of  the  lagenos-
tome, with its distinctive pollen chamber, at this
site  seems  to have  been  a  feature  of  the  earliest
radiospermic  seeds,  and  may  even  have been
present in remains of cupulate seeds found in the
Upper  Devonian.  The  lagenostome  of  the  pre-
ovule Hydrosperma, found in beds laid down at the
Devonian–Carboniferous  transition,  has  been
studied in some detail. It seems likely that, follow-
ing pollination, the ﬂoor of the pollen chamber
rose,  pushing  up  the  central  column  so  that  its
summit  blocked  the  entrance  to the  chamber
from above. In this way the chamber, in vivo prob-
ably  containing  a  sugary  secretion,  became  a
sealed “culture sac” in which the pollen was able

224

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 3

Figure 8.6. Crossotheca. (a) Reconstruction of fertile shoot.
(b) Detail of the fertile pinnule of Crossotheca sagittata. (c)
Microspore (pollen grain). The deep cleavage at the site of
the triradiate scar indicates proximal germination. ((a) after
Andrews. 1961. Studies in Paleobotany. Wiley, New York; (b)
after Millay and Taylor. 1977. American Journal of Botany 64; (c)
from a preparation by R. Kidston, photographed by W. G.
Chaloner.)

Figure 8.7. Diagrammatic representation of the derivation
of an integumented lyginopterid ovule from a tassel of
megasporangia. Further explanation in text.

SPERMATOPHYTINA (SEED PLANTS): GYMNOSPERMS

225

Figure 8.8. Reconstruction of
Medullosa, based on M. noei. The
plant reached a height of about 4m
(14ft). (After Stewart and
Delevoryas. 1956. Botanical Review
22.)

scrambling.

the end of
the Paleozoic
other, more complex, forms
(of which Medullosa is repre-
sentative) became prominent.
They were more like tree ferns
in habit (Fig. 8.8), sometimes
possibly
The
leaves had large petioles
which bifurcated at some dis-
tance from the stem, result-
ing in a frond which consisted
of
two symmetrical halves.
The
subsequent branching
was pinnate. The pinnules (as
seen in Alethopteris, Neuropteris
and other dispersed leaf
genera) were conspicuously
the
larger
than those of
earlier pteridosperms.
The
anatomy of the stem was par-
ticularly complex, the xylem
usually
into
several segments. In addition,
axial bundles of primary
“sympodia”)
xylem (called
were present at
the outer
edges of these segments. Secondary wood, con-
sisting of large tracheids and extensive rays, sur-
rounded the primary. Secondary wood of this
kind, which is relatively soft and spongy,
is
termed manoxylic. It is also found in some living
gymnosperms, notably the cycads (p. 247). The
leaf traces were also complex, each consisting of
several strands. The strands comprising the trace
for a single leaf originated from one or more of
the sympodia.

being

split

The seeds, placed in the genus Pachytesta, were
about  six  times  the  size  of  those  of  Lyginopteris,
and were more clearly borne in association with
foliar organs. They were distinctly trimerous and
lacked a cupule (Fig. 8.9a and b). The microspores
(pre-pollen), which were monolete, were produced

to germinate. This “hydrosperman reproduction”
is believed to have been widespread in the early
radiospermic seeds.

The development of ovules containing single
megaspores  from  progymnospermous  megaspo-
rangia is unlikely to have been a smooth progres-
sion. The regular failure of three of the spores in
the  tetrad  to develop  (seen  also  in  Lepidocarpon,
Fig.  6.14)  indicates  precisely  controlled  events
within the tetrad. This may have been the conse-
quence of a relatively simple mutation, but clearly
one of great signiﬁcance in plant evolution.

The Medullosales
typical of a wide range of
Lyginopteris
Carboniferous Lyginopteridopsida, but toward

is

226

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 3

Figure 8.9. (a) Pachytesta attached
to Alethopteris foliage. The seed was
about 40mm (1.6in.) long and
12 mm (0.5in.) in width. (b)
Pachytesta illinoensis in section: m,
micropyle; pc, pollen chamber; n,
nucellus; i, integument. (From
Stewart and Rothwell. 1993.
Paleobotany and the Evolution of
Plants, 2nd edn. Cambridge
University Press, New York.)

in  large tubular  sporangia,
borne in fused clusters (synan-
gia).

The descendants of the
Lyginopteridopsida
The Lyginopteridales may well
have given  rise  to  the  Callis-
tophytales, a group of pterido-
sperms with a Lyginopteris-like
stele, platyspermic seeds and saccate pollen. A cal-
listophytalean ovule from the mid-Pennsylvanian
(Table 1.1) has provided the best evidence yet for
the existence, already in Paleozoic times, of a “pol-
lination  drop”  mechanism  for  the  capture  of
pollen  (p.  237).  The  micropyle  of  the  ovule  was
ﬁlled with material, which in life may have been
a  syrupy  secretion,  containing  scattered  pollen
grains. The grains of some forms may have germi-
nated  distally. Clear  indications  of  nuclear  divi-
sions have been seen within some grains, and also
indications  of  pollen  tubes.  Although  many  of
these  features  are  suggestive  of  the  Pinopsida,
stratigraphic evidence precludes an origin of the
Pinopsida  from  the  Callistophytales.  Like  the
Lyginopteridales,  the  Callistophytales  became
extinct  at,  or 
the  end  of  the
Carboniferous.

just  after,

It seems beyond doubt that some pterido-
sperms persisted into the
early Mesozoic,
although the remains become much less fre-
quent after the close of the Paleozoic era and of
an unfamiliar form. There is also evidence that
the evolution of the pteridosperms in the north-
ern and southern hemispheres diverged at this
time, but the two ﬂoras remained in contact in
certain regions of Africa. The early Mesozoic
rocks of these regions have yielded a number of

puzzling plants, almost certainly derived from
the pteridosperms and probably of very great
importance in the evolution of the later seed
plants. Some of them had leaves with reticulate
venation and an appearance strikingly like that of
the leaves of some modern ﬂowering plants.
Others had seeds in partially closed cupules, a
development possibly leading to the remarkable
fruiting body of
the Caytoniaceae (p. 254).
Elsewhere, from a pteridospermic ancestor, most
likely within the Medullosales, the earliest cycads
appeared.
255),
Bennettitales (p. 252) and other radiospermic
orders are also most probably descended from
pteridospermic antecedents.

Glossopteridales

The

(p.

Platyspermic gymnosperms and pine
relatives

in 

the 

Upper 

Pinopsida
The  Pinopsida  have been  distinct  since  their
origin 
Devonian/Lower
Carboniferous.  Their  origin  in  relation  to the
Progymnospermopsida  and  Pteridospermopsida
remains wholly uncertain. Pycnoxylic wood, pla-
tyspermy and parallel-veined leaves have been fea-
tures  characteristic  of  the  Pinopsida  since  the
Cordaitales of the Carboniferous.

SPERMATOPHYTINA (SEED PLANTS): GYMNOSPERMS

227

Figure 8.10. (a) Reconstruction of
a cordaitalean shoot. (b)
Cordaianthus concinnus.
Reconstruction of two male shoots.
((a) after Grand’Eury, from
Andrews. 1961. Studies in
Paleobotany. Wiley, New York; (b)
after Delevoryas. 1953. American
Journal of Botany, 40.)

mineralized  while  they were
penetrating decaying remains
of  other  plants.  They  show  a
triarch stelar structure, and a distinct root cap at
the growing tip.

reproductive structures 
The  reproductive  organs  of  the  Cordaitales
(known  as  Cordaianthus)  were  borne  on  slender
branches. Although male and female were separ-
ate, they possibly occurred on the same tree. Each
reproductive region was basically a axis, from 10
to 30cm  (4–12in.)  in  length  (Fig.  8.10b),  bearing
two  rows  of  bracts  in  a  complanate  distichous
arrangement.  The  male  and  female  shoots
occurred singly in the axils of the bracts.

The  individual  male  shoots  (Fig.  8.10b)  were
about 1cm (0.4 in.) long. Each consisted of a short,
stout axis bearing a large number of linear-lance-
olate  scales,  each  with  a  single  vein,  in  a  close
spiral. The lower scales were sterile, and acute or
obtuse at their apices, but the upper were emargi-
nate and terminated in several (usually six) cylin-
drical  microsporangia.  Since  both  sterile  and
fertile scales lay in one spiral, they appear to have
been of similar morphological nature. The pollen
grains  were  surrounded  by air  bladders  (saccae)
formed by the separation of the layers of the wall.
The two layers remained in contact, however, in
one region, possibly the site of liberation of the
gametes. This thin area was opposite the small tri-
radiate scar at the proximal pole of the grain. It
thus appears that the Cordaitales had true pollen
with distal germination.

The female shoots were of similar organiza-
tion, but the fertile scales terminated in ovules
instead of microsporangia. In earlier forms the
fertile scales (megasporangiophores) projected
conspicuously from the shoot, branched, and

The Cordaitales
Although  vegetatively  resembling  some  modern
pinopsids,  the  Cordaitales  were  in  other  ways
quite distinct. They must have been amongst the
most impressive of the seed-bearing plants of the
later  Paleozoic.  So  far  as  is  known,  they were
mostly arborescent with columnar trunks, many
probably  reaching  heights  of  30m  (98ft)  and
diameters  of  1m (39in.).  Some,  however, were
sprawling plants with adventitious roots, provid-
ing  a  mangrove-like  appearance.  The  leaves,
conﬁned  to the  upper  branches,  were  spirally
arranged  and  strap-shaped  (Fig.  8.10a).  In  some
forms they were as much as 1m (39in.) in length
and 15cm (6in.) in width. There was regular par-
allel  venation  interspersed  with  longitudinal
bands  of  hypodermal  ﬁbers,  a  structure  not  dis-
similar to that of the leaves of the modern conifer
Araucaria araucana (Fig. 8.13b).

In general the vascular tissue of the cordaital-
ean trunks consisted of a large amount of secon-
dary  xylem,  typically  pycnoxylic,  traversed  by
narrow  parenchymatous  rays.  The  secondary
tissues  surrounded  a  medullated  primary  stele.
The  primary  xylem  tended  to diminish  in  later
forms, leaving a ring of mesarch bundles border-
ing an extensive pith, often broken up into lentic-
ular diaphragms. The secondary tracheids showed
several  series  of  circular  bordered  pits  on  their
radial walls, and were closely similar to those of
living  conifer  Araucaria.  The  leaf  traces,  which
passed  outward  from  the  primary  xylem,  were
simple in origin and commonly consisted of two
parallel strands. The roots of the Cordaitales are
quite  well  known,  since  they often  became  per-

228

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 3

Figure 8.11. Cordaitalean seeds. (A) Axis of Cardiocarpus
with ovules. (B and C) Mitrospermum in longitudinal (B) and
transverse section (C), demonstrating extreme platyspermy:
m, micropyle; pc, pollen chamber; sc, sclerenchymatous layer
within the integument (sclerotesta); s, softer outer layer of
the integument (sarcotesta), with a peripheral wing-like
extension (w); vb, vascular bundle entering the ovule, the
branches ascending in the sarcotesta. Both Cardiocarpus and
Mitrospermum were about 15mm (0.6in.) long and about the
same in maximum diameter. (From Stewart and Rothwell.
1993. Paleobotany and the Evolution of Plants, 2nd edn.
Cambridge University Press, New York.)

carried more than one seed (Fig. 8.11A). In the later
forms, however, the megasporangiophores were
shorter and unbranched, terminating in only one
seed concealed amongst the sterile scales.

The seeds of the Cordaitales were not radially
symmetrical, but bilateral, the margin of the seed
often being extended as a wing. Because of their
characteristic  ﬂattened  appearance,  these  seeds
are termed platyspermic, and they are readily dis-
tinguishable  from  the  predominantly  radio-
spermic seeds of the pteridosperms. Platyspermic
seeds, similar to those seen in cordaitalean inﬂo-
rescences,  are  frequently  found  detached  in
Carboniferous deposits and their structure is now
well known (Fig. 8.11B and C). They are about 1cm
(0.4in.)  in  height  and  only  a  little  less  in  their
major  transverse  diameter;  the  minor  is  of  the
order of 0.5cm (0.2in.). The integument was differ-
entiated into one or more layers, at least one of

which  was  sclerenchymatous.  The  nucellus,
except for the basal region, appears to have been
separate from the integument. A female gameto-
phyte, surrounded by a distinct “megaspore mem-
brane”,  developed  within  the  nucellus,  and
archegonia  were  produced  on  its  upper  surface,
the nucellus above this region becoming differen-
tiated  as  a  pollen  chamber.  Reticulate  markings
on the pollen grains lying in this chamber were
once regarded as indicating endosporic germina-
tion of the  grain,  but this interpretation is now
questioned. The pattern is more probably a relic of
the sculpturing of the wall than of an internal cel-
lular structure. Firm evidence for the production
of a pollen tube is lacking. Gametes were possibly
liberated into ﬂuid above the archegonia. As with
the  pteridosperms,  embryos  are  conspicuously
absent from cordaitalean seeds. The integument
of  a  cordaitalean  seed  (Fig.  8.11B  and  C)  has  the
appearance of having been formed by two valves,
each  containing  a  vein,  coming  together  and
enclosing  a  megasporangium.  This  view  is  sup-
ported  by the  occasional  occurrence  in  female
shoots of what are interpreted as abortive mega-
sporangia subtended by two unfused lobes. Each
seed would thus have three components, the two
outer which form the integument possibly having
been derived from sterilized sporangia. It is note-
worthy in this connection that the microsporan-
gia  were  commonly  produced  in  multiples  of
three.

SPERMATOPHYTINA (SEED PLANTS): GYMNOSPERMS

229

The Voltziales
The Voltziales are regarded as early forms of coni-
fers, but they show a close relationship, both veg-
etative  and  reproductive,  with  the  Cordaitales.
Representative  of  the  Upper  Carboniferous
Voltziales are Utrechtia and Emporia (Fig. 8.12). The
Voltziales had eustelic stems with exarch primary
vasculature. The wood was like that of the living
Araucaria (p. 231). Resin ducts occurred in the pith
and cortex, and in the mesophyll of the leaves. The
female cone consisted of an axis about 8cm (3in.)
long, bearing spirally or asymmetrically arranged
biﬁd bracts. In the axil of each was a radially sym-
metrical, but ﬂattened, dwarf shoot bearing small
bracts  and  a  fertile  scale  (Fig.  8.12b).  This  fertile
scale bore a single ovule. The ovule was inverted,
platyspermic,  and  adjacent  to the  side  of  the
fertile scale away from the biﬁd bract. This fertile
short  shoot  can  reasonably  be  regarded  as
morphologically intermediate between the fertile
female shoots of the Cordaitales and the ovulifer-
ous scale of a modern conifer (Fig. 8.20). A series of
fossils of late Paleozoic and early Mesozoic age, in
which  the  vegetative  and  fertile  parts  of  the
female short shoot become progressively less dis-
tinct,  leads  ultimately  to a structure  extremely
similar to an ovuliferous scale.

The  male  cones  of  the  Voltziales  (Fig.  8.12c)
closely resembled those of modern conifers, and
thus  differed  sharply 
the
Cordaitales.  Although  the  pollen  grains  of  the
early  conifers  and  of  the  Cordaitales  were  quite
similar, in some of the earliest they may still have
been  at  the  stage  of  “pre-pollen”  (p.  223)  and

those  of 

from 

Figure 8.12. (a) Erect female cones on a branch of
Utrechtia. Scale bar 2.5cm. (b) Reconstruction of a cone
segment of Emporia. The recurved ovule is sectioned to
show integument, nucellus and megaspore membrane. Scale
bar 1mm. (c) Microsporangiophore of Emporia with pollen
sacs. Scale bar 1mm. ((a) from Florin. 1951. Acta Horti
Bergiana 15; (b), (c) from Stewart and Rothwell. 1993.
Paleobotany and the Evolution of Plants, 2nd edn. Cambridge
University Press, New York.)

origin and fossil history
Little is known of the origin of the Cordaitales, but
it possibly lay well before the Carboniferous
period. Remains of substantial woody plants, the
xylem of which showed araucarian pitting (p. 231),
have been found as early as the Middle Devonian
(p. 218). In the leaves of some of the Cordaitales of
the Lower Carboniferous the nerves branched as
they approached the tip, possibly indicating an
origin in a fan-shaped structure. Axes bearing
leaves of the kind envisaged are in fact known
from the Middle Devonian of Bohemia, but the
relationship of these fossils (placed in the genus
Barrandeina) to the Cordaitales is quite unproven.
Nevertheless,
the
Cordaitales were derived from axial heterospor-
ous forms in much the same way as the pterido-
sperms, but that in the Cordaitales the megaphyll
condensed into the characteristic strap-shaped
leaf and the integument of the seed evolved in a
slightly different way. The earliest platyspermic
seeds come from the later Devonian.

impression is

that

the

The  Cordaitales  probably  persisted  into  the
beginning  of  the  Mesozoic,  but  then  became
extinct.

230

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 3

motile  spermatozoids  may  have been  produced.
Nevertheless, it is also possible that the siphonog-
amous  reproduction  seen  in  modern  conifers
evolved  quite  early. Perhaps  the  advantages  of
siphonogamy  saved  the  early  conifers  from  the
extinction that befell the Cordaitales.

The Pinales and Taxales (Coniferales)
The  Coniferales  (conifers)  are  the  most  wide-
spread  of  all  the  groups  of  gymnosperms,  and
they form the climax vegetation at high altitudes
and in the colder regions of the temperate zones,
particularly  the  north.  They  are  much  less
common in the tropics, and here they are usually
conﬁned to mountains and are often mixed with
angiospermous  trees.  Of  all  the  vascular  plants
discussed so far the conifers are the ﬁrst of signiﬁ-
cant  economic  importance.  They  are  almost  all
arborescent and the wood is used extensively as
timber and as a source of pulp for paper-making
and related industries.

The  growth form  of  a  conifer  is  frequently
pyramidal, the conspicuous main axis being the
principal source of the valuable timber. A few con-
ifers of this form attain remarkable sizes and ages.
Specimens  of  Sequoia (redwood),  for  example,  in
California  frequently  exceed  100m (333ft)  in
height, their trunks reaching diameters of several
meters  and  showing  over  2000  growth rings.
Pseudotsuga (Douglas  ﬁr)  in  the  forests  of  the
Olympic Peninsula of the Paciﬁc Northwest may
attain even greater heights (but not girth). Agathis
australis, the kauri pine of New Zealand, reaches
up  to 60m (200ft)  in  height,  and  the  trunks  a
diameter of 7m (20ft). The oldest living conifers
are  probably  specimens  of  Pinus aristata (bristle-
cone  pine)  at  high  altitudes  on  the  arid  White
Mountains  of  the  California–Nevada  border.
Modern techniques of dating show that some of
these  are  almost  5000  years  old.  Another  con-
tender for longevity is a specimen of Lagarastrobus
franklinii (Podocarpaceae), a Tasmanian endemic,
claimed to be 11000 years old.

Some conifers (such as the junipers) are bushy,
and  a  few  (conﬁned  to Australasia)  are  dwarf,
heather-like  shrubs  of  boggy  alpine  situations.
Occasionally the growth form is markedly inﬂu-
enced by the habitat. Pinus montana, for example,
is  a  pyramidal  tree  when  growing  in  acid  situa-

tions on lower hills, but a straggling shrub with
no evident main axis (Krummholz) when on lime-
stone at higher altitudes. Some conifers, although
resistant  to cold,  cannot  withstand  summer
drought. Picea sitchensis, for example, is restricted
in its native Paciﬁc Northwest of America to the
fog zone. Here its growth rate reaches an impres-
sive 100mm (4in.) or more in a year. Most conifers
tend  to be  surface-rooted,  and  many  species
produce stubby rootlets in the humus layer which
are  associated  with  mycorrhizal  fungi.  Large
stands of conifers may be linked from root to root
by the  mycelia  of  these  fungi,  with  inevitable
implications  for  disease  transmission.  Taxodium
distichum (swamp cypress), which grows in swamps
in the warmer parts of eastern North America, is
outstanding amongst conifers in producing nega-
tively gravitropic aerophores which rise above the
surface of the water. These specialized roots are,
however, found only in mature specimens and are
rarely produced outside the native habitat.

One conifer, Podocarpus ustus, has been found
as  a  parasite  on  a  species  of  Dacrydium (also
Podocarpaceae)  in  New  Caledonia.  It  may  regu-
larly be a root parasite, and, if so, is unique in the
gymnosperms.

shoo t s and stems
The stems of conifers grow from a group of meris-
tematic cells. In some genera, notably Araucaria,
the  apex  is  organized  into  a  distinct  tunica,  in
which  divisions  are  principally  anticlinal,  and  a
central  corpus,  where  divisions  are  in  several
planes.  The  corpus  gives  rise  to the  pith  and
primary vascular tissue. In some conifers, particu-
larly  of  the  Pinales,  a  succession  of  shoots,  pro-
duced  in  the  axils  of  scale  leaves,  regularly
undergo  little  extension  growth.  The  apices  of
these short shoots produce a few scale leaves and
then, before the apex becomes inactive, a limited
number of fully developed mature leaves. In Pinus
the number of these varies from one (Fig. 8.13a) to
ﬁve,  depending  upon  species.  Extreme  defolia-
tion,  following  for  example  a  massive  attack  by
caterpillars, may result in the normally dormant
apices  of  the  short  shoots  resuming  extension
growth,  so  deforming  the  architecture  of  the
entire shoot system. In other conifers which bear
their leaves on mature stems principally in short

SPERMATOPHYTINA (SEED PLANTS): GYMNOSPERMS

231

Figure 8.13. Forms of conifer leaf.
(a) Pinus monophylla. (b) Araucaria
araucana. (c) Chamaecyparis obtusa.

rower than those at its begin-
ning  (Fig.  8.15).  In  Pinus the
tracheids, which rarely exceed
4mm (0.17in.) in length, bear
bordered  pits,  usually  in  a
single row, on the radial walls.
The  central  part  of  the  pit
membrane  is  thickened  and
forms  the  torus  (Fig.  8.15).
Thickenings  often  present
along the margins of the pits
are  termed  the  “Rims  of
Sanio”.  In  Araucaria the  pits
are similar, but in 3–4 rows, the pits of adjacent
rows  alternating 
(referred  to as  “araucarian
pitting”).  The  tracheids  of  Araucaria,  but  not  of
Pinus, occasionally have small trabeculae (initially
of cellulose, but subsequently ligniﬁed) extending
across the lumen. These so-called “Bars of Sanio”
also occur in a number of other genera.

Considerable  differentiation  is  sometimes
present  in  the  parenchymatous  rays  of  conifer
woods. In Pinus, for example, the cells of the upper
and lower margins in the xylem portion of the ray
may  form radially  oriented  tracheids  (Fig.  8.15),
and  cells  in  a  similar  position  in  the  phloem
closely  apply  themselves  to the  sieve cells  and
become conspicuously rich in cytoplasm. The rays
provide a means of transporting materials later-
ally in the growing stem.

The resin canals of conifers, which are schizog-
enous in origin and interconnected, run longitu-
dinally in the leaves (Fig. 8.16) and xylem, and also
transversely in some of the larger rays. The resin
itself (a complex acidic substance containing oxi-
dized phenols and terpenes) is synthesized in the
epithelium of the canals, probably mostly in the
younger tissues, but the actual site of synthesis in
the cells is not yet exactly known. The resin system
can  be  tapped  by driving  a  gutter-shaped  steel
wedge  into  the  xylem  near  the  base  of  the  tree
(Fig.  8.17),  and  from  some  species  considerable
quantities of commercially valuable resin can be
collected. Pine resin, for example, is the source of
turpentine  and  colophony, both  widely  used  in

Figure 8.14. Pinus sylvestris. Transverse section of young
stem with only one season’s secondary vascular tissue.

shoots (e.g., Larix, Cedrus, Fig. 8.19), the number of
fully  formed  leaves  in  the  short  shoot  is  less
deﬁnite and does not form a speciﬁc character.

The mature stems of conifers are mostly secon-
dary wood, the pith and primary xylem being rel-
atively  inconspicuous  (Fig.  8.14).  At the  outside,
the phloem, cortex and periderm form a compar-
atively narrow band. The dense secondary xylem
consists  of  radial  ﬁles  of  tracheids,  traversed  by
narrow parenchymatous rays. Wood parenchyma
is not conspicuous. In Pinus it is conﬁned to the
epithelium of the resin canals, and it is entirely
lacking in Taxus. The tracheids are usually differ-
entiated  in  distinct  annual  rings,  those  formed
toward the  end  of  a  season’s  growth being  nar-

232

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 3

Figure 8.15. Pinus sylvestris. (a)
Radial longitudinal section of
secondary xylem at junction of early
and late wood. (b) Tangential
longitudinal section of a ray similar
to that shown in (a).

Figure 8.16. Pinus sylvestris. Photomicrograph of a
transverse section of a leaf, the ﬂat adaxial side uppermost,
mid-way along its length. The epidermal cells are ligniﬁed and
the stomata obscured, but the cells of the hypodermis are
visible and adjacent to them the resin canals. Two vascular
bundles, separated from the mesophyll by a common
endodermis, lie at the center of the leaf. Thickened and
ligniﬁed cells are found between these vascular bundles and
below the phloem, but the cells elsewhere within the
endodermis are largely transfusion tissue. Scale bar 0.1mm.

the paint and varnish industry (although less so
than formerly). The male bark beetle of Pinus pon-
derosa transforms a component of the resin into
the sex pheromone of the species.

leaves
The leaves of conifers take a variety of forms (Fig.
8.13), but they are nearly always small and simple
in  shape  ranging  from  needle-like structures

several centimeters in length (Pinus, Fig. 8.13a) to
closely adpressed scales reaching only a few milli-
meters  (as  in  Cupressaceae,  Fig.  8.13c).  Araucaria
araucana is unusual in having broadly lanceolate
leaves 5cm (1.4in.) or more in length (Fig. 8.13b).
In  the  Cupressaceae  the  plant  frequently  passes
through  a  juvenile  phase  in  which  it  produces
needle-like leaves. Cuttings or grafts of the juve-
nile phase sometimes go on producing needle-like
leaves indeﬁnitely, and these so-called Retinospora
forms  are  common  in  gardens.  The  venation  of
conifer leaves is never reticulate. There are either
a number of parallel veins (as in some species of
the Araucariaceae, Fig. 8.13b) or a single median
vein, often showing a double structure (as in Pinus,
Fig. 8.16). In addition to Pinus, some other conifers
(e.g.,  Larix,  Cedrus,  Fig.  8.19)  bear  their  leaves
wholly or principally on short shoots (p. 231). The
leaves of most conifers persist for several seasons;

SPERMATOPHYTINA (SEED PLANTS): GYMNOSPERMS

233

Figure 8.18. Pinus sylvestris. Transverse section of young
root.

of  ice  crystals.  The  photosynthetic  apparatus  of
these  conifers  is  also  able  to withstand  long
periods of darkness without irreparable damage
and, when illuminated, to carry out photosynthe-
sis  at  unusually  low  temperatures.  Additionally,
the  pyramidal  form and  the  diagravitropic
branches of many northern conifers are particu-
larly  suitable  for  trapping  the  low-angle  light
characteristic of high latitudes.

roo t s
The roots of conifers have a simple primary struc-
ture, similar to that found in the ferns. The apical
meristem is protected by a root cap, and root hairs
are produced from a zone immediately behind it.
Secondary vascular tissue begins to be formed at
a very early stage, often before the primary tissues
are fully differentiated (Fig. 8.18). Resin canals are
abundant  in  the  secondary xylem,  rays  and
cortex.

reproductive structures
As the vernacular name of the class implies, the
male and female reproductive organs of the coni-
fers are commonly borne in cones (Figs. 8.19 and
8.20).  Most conifers  are  monoecious,  but  dicli-
nous, the male and female cones being produced
in  different  regions.  In  Pinus,  for  example,  the
female cones are produced near the apex of the
tree  and  occupy  the  positions  of  main  lateral
buds, while the male cones are produced on the
lower branches, usually in groups, each cone occu-
pying the position of a short shoot. A few conifers
(e.g., Taxus and Juniperus communis) are dioecious.
The reproductive cones are usually compact, but

Figure 8.17. Pinus pinaster (maritime pine). The trunk of
this tree (photographed in Portugal by G. E. Creber) has
been tapped for resin. This species of pine is the principal
source of natural resin in Europe. Scale bar 5cm.

truly  deciduous. 

in  only  a  few  genera  (e.g.,  Larix (larch))  are  the
leaves 
In  Taxodium and
Metasequoia the leaves are conﬁned to the ultimate
branchlets, and the branchlets (phyllomorphs) are
shed as a whole at the end of the growing season.
Many features of anatomical and physiological
interest are presented by conifer leaves. The cuti-
cles, for example, are often furnished, especially
in the region of the stomata, with distinctive pat-
terns of tubercles and ridges. Palisade and spongy
mesophyll are commonly present, and in Pinus the
walls of the mesophyll cells have ridges projecting
into the cell (Fig. 8.16). A well-deﬁned hypodermis,
the cells of which may be ligniﬁed, is present in
many leaves. The vascular bundles are often sur-
rounded  by transfusion  tissue.  Resin  canals  are
frequent, and in some leaves (e.g., Thuja) a promi-
nent gland on the back of the leaf contains of fra-
grant oil. The leaves of conifers at high altitudes,
and of arctic regions, are remarkably resistant to
frost damage. Tissue water in twigs of species of
Pinus and Pseudotsuga, for example, can withstand
cooling to ⫺40°C (⫺40°F) without the formation

234

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 3

Figure 8.19. Larix decidua (larch).
Portion of a shoot showing the
short shoots and the female cone in
its second year. Note that the
female cone is negatively gravitropic
and that it terminates a lateral axis
having a position equivalent to that
of a short shoot. Scale bar 1cm.

Figure 8.20. Pinus sylvestris. (a)
Female cone in the early summer of
its ﬁrst year. (b) Single scale from
cone in (a), viewed from above. (c)
Longitudinal section along line a–b.

SPERMATOPHYTINA (SEED PLANTS): GYMNOSPERMS

235

Figure 8.21. Taxus baccata.
Longitudinal section of young ovule.
When fully mature, the nucellus
secretes a sugary ﬂuid which
accumulates as a drop at the oriﬁce
of the micropyle. This serves to trap
wind-borne pollen. Subsequent
resorption of the drop draws the
pollen down on to the surface of
the nucellus, where it germinates.

before being shed (Fig. 8.23). In
Pinus,  the 
liberated  pollen
grain contains two degenerat-
ing  prothallial  cells,  a  tube
cell and a generative cell (Fig.
the
8.26).  The  grains  of 
and
Taxales, 
Taxodiaceae 
Cupressaceae,  however,
lack
prothallial cells and are uninucleate when shed,
whereas the mature grains of the Araucariaceae
contain  up  to 15  prothallial  cells.  The  pollen
grains  of  all  living  conifers  germinate  distally,
that  is,  away  from  the  center  of  the  original
tetrad.

With regard to the morphology of the female
reproductive regions, that of Taxus is considered
ﬁrst as it facilitates an understanding of the more
complex situation in Pinus and other conifers. In
Taxus the ovule terminates a short shoot bearing
three pairs of decussate bracts. The ovule itself is
upright  and  bilaterally  symmetrical  (Fig.  8.21).
The single integument contains a sclerenchyma-
tous  layer, and  two  vascular  bundles,  diametri-
cally  opposed,  ascend  in  the  ﬂeshy  portion
adjacent  to the  nucellus.  A  female  gametophyte
arises  in  the  nucellus  as  in  other  gymnosperm
ovules,  and  when  mature  it  bears  immersed
archegonia in its micropylar surface. The minute
short shoot terminating in the ovule is axillary to
another  short  shoot  furnished  with  spirally
arranged scale leaves. This whole complex is itself
borne  in  the  axil  of  a  normal  foliage  leaf.  Both
short shoots of the female reproductive system in
Taxus are highly condensed and can be seen only
by a careful dissection.

In  the  female  cone  of  Pinus (Fig.  8.20)  we
are again concerned with an axis bearing spirally
arranged  scales  in  the  axils  of  which  are

in the Podocarpaceae the female cones are either
lax  or  reduced,  and  in  the  Taxales  the  female
reproductive  region  is  not  cone-like  at  all  (Fig.
8.21).  Nevertheless,  the  general  afﬁnities  of  the
Taxales are clearly with the conifers.

The male cones are fairly uniform in structure,
although they range widely in size. Those of Taxus
(Fig.  8.22b)  and  of  the  Podocarpaceae  and
Cupressaceae are globose, hardly reaching 0.5cm
(0.2in.) in diameter, but those of other conifers are
commonly elongated (Fig. 8.22a), and in Araucaria
they may exceed 20cm (8in.) in length and 3cm
(1.2in.) in width. All, however, consist of a central
axis bearing regularly arranged microsporangio-
phores (Fig. 8.22a). These take the form of scales,
more or less peltate in shape, a variable number
of pollen sacs being attached to the head and lying
parallel  to the  stalk.  The  pollen  grains  of  many
species  are  winged  and  readily  identiﬁable.  The
grains  of  Pinus (Fig.  8.23),  for  example,  have two
asymmetrically  placed  air  bladders  (formed  by
local  separation  of  the  layers  of  the  exine)
between  which  the  pollen  tube  emerges.  Other
grains  have characteristic  ornamentation;  those
of Cryptomeria, for example, possess a peculiar cut-
icular hook on one side. The pollen grains of some
members of the Cupressaceae are “dehiscent” or
“explosive”: following hydration the grains swell
and the exine is shed.

Pollen grains often begin to develop internally

236

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 3

Figure 8.22. (a) Pinus sylvestris. Longitudinal section of male
cone. Each microsporangiophore bears two pollen sacs. (b,c)
Taxus baccata: (b) mature male cone, each
microsporangiophore bearing 6–8 pollen sacs; (c) longitudinal
section of microsporangiophore.

ovuliferous structures (Fig. 8.20b and c). In Pinus,
however, the  ovuliferous  structure  is  also  scale-
like,  and  it  is  largely fused  with  and  ultimately
projects  beyond  the  bract  scale  in  whose  axil  it
arises (Fig. 8.20c). This, however, is not always the
situation,  even  in  the  Pinaceae.  In  Abies  (ﬁr),  for
example, the bract and ovuliferous scales remain
separate, and in some species (e.g., A. venusta) the
bract scale projects far beyond the ovuliferous. In
the  Pinaceae  the  ovuliferous  scale  bears  two
inverted  ovules  near  its  base  (Fig.  8.20b),  but  in
other families evolution has clearly taken a differ-
ent  course  and  the  number  of  ovules  and  their
orientation  vary.  In  Cryptomeria,  a  forest tree  of
Japan, the ovules are upright and the ovuliferous
scale develops after the ovules. In Libocedrus, a tree
of western North America and the southern hemi-
sphere, the ovules arise from the axis, more or less
in the axil of a bract, and again the development
of the ovuliferous scale is subsequent. This situa-
in  the  family
tion  appears  to be  general 

Cupressaceae. In Araucaria (Fig. 8.24) the ovulifer-
ous  scale  produces  and  ultimately  entirely  sur-
rounds  a  single  inverted  ovule.  A  specialized
ovuliferous scale of this kind, also found in some
Podocarpaceae,  is  termed  an  epimatium.  Despite
these variations, ovules throughout the conifers
are  regularly  bilaterally  symmetrical  and  the
seeds are often winged.

The morphological and anatomical evidence,
now supported by the paleobotanical (p. 229),
points to the ovuliferous scale being a highly
modiﬁed shoot. The vascular supply to the bract
scale, for example, consists of vascular bundles of
which the xylem is adaxial, the orientation
normal for a leaf trace. The bundles passing to
the ovuliferous scale, however, are not only
similar in position to those entering an axillary
shoot, but the xylem of each is also abaxial, an
orientation often seen at the base of a shoot trace.
The female region of Taxus can be readily related
to the cone of Pinus if the primary axis with its
spirally arranged bracts is regarded as a cone,
only one scale of which is fertile. The secondary
axis with its decussate bracts and terminal ovule
is then equivalent to an ovuliferous scale (Fig.
8.25).

SPERMATOPHYTINA (SEED PLANTS): GYMNOSPERMS

237

Figure 8.23. Pinus banksiana.
Median section of pollen grain
showing the ﬁrst division of the
microspore nucleus and the nature
of the bladders.

experiments
Wind-tunnel 
have shown  that  air  eddies
around the cone promote the
accumulation  of  wind-borne
grains  between  the  scales.
Following  pollination,  rapid
growth of  the  scales  causes

them to be tightly packed once again.

(oriental spruce)

Pollination, which in temperate climates
occurs in the spring, involves in many species a
pollination drop mechanism of the kind found
in Taxus (Fig. 8.21). In Pinus sylvestris, however, the
drop is apparently formed after the pollen has
lodged in the micropylar region of the ovule.
Since the young female cone is more or less
upright, the ovule itself is inverted (Fig. 8.20b).
The entrapped grain, assisted by its air sacs,
accordingly ascends
through the drop and
reaches the surface of the nucellus. In Picea orien-
the female cones are
talis
pendent and the ovules upright. Here grains
reaching the drop rapidly hydrate. The resultant
swelling of the grain forces the air out of the
sacs and the grain, when wholly waterlogged,
sinks to the nucellus. In some conifers (e.g., Larix)
the pollen is trapped by a stigmatic ﬂap of the
integument covered with a sticky secretion
before reaching the micropylar canal. Some
members of the Podocarpaceae (a family largely
conﬁned to the southern hemisphere) show
“pollen scavenging”: pollen alighting on wet-
table surfaces near the micropyle is “gathered
up” by an emerging drop and drawn into the
micropyle.
In Abies, although the pollen is
saccate, the ovule produces no pollination drop.
It is possible that pollination here is assisted by
rain drops carrying the ﬂoating pollen into the
interior of the cone. In families of conifers (e.g.,
Cupressaceae) in which the ovules are regularly
upright and produce pollination drops
the
pollen is non-saccate. In Araucaria the pollination
drop mechanism is entirely absent. The pollen
germinates between the scales of the female

Figure 8.24. Araucaria araucana. Longitudinal section of
young female scale. (After Hirmer. 1936. Bibliotheca Botanica
28.)

Figure 8.25. Diagrammatic representations of female
reproductive regions of (a) Taxus and (b) Pinales, showing
how Taxus can be regarded as bearing a cone only one scale
of which is fertile.

pollination and fertilization
The development of the female cone is so coordi-
nated  with  that  of  the  male  that  at  the  time  of
release of the pollen the axis of the female cone
undergoes general elongation, thus opening the
scales  and  allowing  penetration  of  the  pollen.

238

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 3

Figure 8.26. Pinus sp. Development of the pollen and ovule.
Diagrammatic, not to scale.

cone forming a freely branching, multinucleate,
mycelium-like weft, many of the branches reach-
the micropyle.
ing, and some penetrating,
Pollination in Agathis
follows a
similar course.

(kauri pine)

In Pinus the germination and development of
the male gametophyte within the female cone are
very slow and extend over a whole season (Fig.
8.26), coinciding with meiosis in the nucellus and
the initiation of the female gametophyte. A
pollen tube emerges from the grain in this ﬁrst
season’s growth (Fig. 8.26e and h), and the gener-
ative cell divides into a sterile (“stalk”) cell and a
spermatogenous
(“body”) cell. Little further
occurs in the winter, but in the following spring
development is resumed. After a period of free
gametophyte
nuclear
becomes cellular (Fig. 8.26i) and 1–6 archegonia
are formed in its upper surface (Fig. 8.26j), each
surrounded by conspicuous jacket cells. The
pollen tubes grow toward the archegonia, passage
through the nucellus being facilitated by
enzymes secreted by the pollen tube which
promote the separation of its cells and prevent
actual penetration of intact tissue. When a tube
has come to within a short distance of an arche-

division the

female

gonium, the spermatogenous cell, which has
moved into its tip, divides into two male (“sperm”)
cells of unequal size. The tube eventually pene-
trates the archegonium and the two sperm cells
are liberated into the egg cytoplasm, taking with
them some male cytoplasm. The larger sperm
nucleus passes into the egg nucleus, while the
smaller sperm cell, the sterile cell and the tube
nucleus all degenerate. Several archegonia in one
ovule may be penetrated by pollen tubes, and this
can result in the formation of several zygotes and
subsequent polyembryony.

Reproduction in Pinus is representative of that
of  the  conifers  generally. Amongst  the  principal
variations is the “dehiscent” or “explosive” pollen
of  the  Cupressaceae  (p.  235).  In  the  Taxodiaceae
the  female  gametophyte  often  produces  many
archegonia,  up  to 60  being  present  in  Sequoia.
Pollen tubes may discharge gametes, which in this
family are similar in size, above adjacent archego-
nia, each then being fertilized. In Taxus the male
gametes are naked nuclei of equal size.

In  all  conifers  (including  Taxus)  the  male
gametes  lack  any  specialized  means  of  locomo-
tion.  The  delivery  of  non-motile  male  gametes
into the vicinity of the female gamete by means of
a pollen tube is termed  siphonogamy. It contrasts
sharply with zooidogamy (pp. 104, 244).

SPERMATOPHYTINA (SEED PLANTS): GYMNOSPERMS

239

Figure 8.27. Pinus sp. Stages in the development of the
embryo. (After Bucholz, from Foster and Gifford. 1959.
Comparative Morphology of Vascular Plants. Freeman, San
Francisco. © 1959.)

embryogenesis
The formation of the zygote is remarkable in that
in  Pinus,  and  in  a  number  of  other  conifers  in
which the male gamete retains its cytoplasm (e.g.,
Larix),  the  original  egg  cytoplasm  is  largely
replaced  by a new cytoplasm  (“neocytoplasm”)
formed from that introduced by the male gamete.
During karyogamy the introduced cytoplasm sur-
rounds  the  zygotic  nucleus,  and  as  the  neocyto-
plasm is formed it displaces much of the original
egg cytoplasm. Correlated with this unusual cytol-
ogy is the discovery that in both Pinus and Larix,
although the inheritance of mitochondrial DNA is
maternal  (despite  the  formation  of  the  neocyto-
plasm), that of the chloroplast DNA is paternal. It
has  been  observed  in  a  number  of  conifers  that
during maturation of the female gamete the pro-
plastids of the egg cell become enveloped in mem-
branous whorls (“inclusions”) which move to the
periphery of the cell. The proplastids themselves
then  appear  to degenerate.  It  seems  that  their
DNA is also depolymerized.

Germination of the zygote frequently involves
free nuclear division, but in Pinus this is not exten-
sive, only four nuclei being so formed (Fig. 8.27a).
These  move to  the  bottom  of  the  archegonium
and  form a plate,  walls  then  being  laid  down
between them. These cells divide transversely, the
cells  of  each  column  behaving  synchronously.
This leads (Fig. 8.27c and d) to the formation of a

suspensor,  tetragonal  in  section,  terminating
below in four groups of embryonic initials, each
capable  of  yielding  an  embryo.  This  so-called
“cleavage polyembryony” may be further compli-
cated by additional embryos budding off from the
basal  suspensor  cells.  Usually  only one  of  these
many potential embryos reaches maturity.

The development of the zygote in other coni-
fers differs only in detail from that seen in Pinus.
In  Sequoia,  for  example,  there  is  no  initial  free
nuclear  division,  and  in  the  Podocarpaceae  the
cells of the proembryo pass through a binucleate
stage, a feature believed peculiar to this family. In
other conifers polyembryony seems less common
than in Pinus. The embryos of many conifers have
several cotyledons; as many as 12 may be present
in Pinus.

formation and liberation of the
seeds
The  mature  embryo lies  in  the  remains  of  the
female  gametophyte  and  nucellus,  and  is  sur-
rounded  by a hard  seed  coat  formed  from  the
integument. In some conifers (e.g., Sequoia, Pinus
sylvestris) this is expanded as a conspicuous wing
assisting the distribution of the seeds by wind (Fig.
8.28a).  The  female  cone  often  becomes  dry  and
woody  during  the  formation  of  the  seeds  and
sometimes does not open until a long period after
the seeds are mature. In P. sylvestris the cone opens
and releases the seeds in the second year after pol-
lination (the whole process of reproduction thus
extends over three years), but in the “closed cone”
pines  of  the  Paciﬁc  coast  of  North America  the
cones remain closed indeﬁnitely and the seeds are

240

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 3

Figure 8.28. Sequoia gigantea
(Sequoiadendron giganteum). (a) Seed.
(b) Longitudinal section (at a–b) of
well-soaked seed. (c) Young
seedling.

Figure 8.29. Taxus baccata. Shoot
bearing seeds surrounded by mature
arils.

extraordinarily 

released by decay of the scales
or as a consequence of the sin-
geing of the cones by a forest
ﬁre.  The  cones  of  some  pines
are 
large;
those  of  the  Californian  P.
coulteri, 
for  example,  may
reach  40cm  (16in.)  in  length
and  2kg  (4.4lb)  in  weight.  In
some  Podocarpaceae  and  in
Juniperus the ovuliferous scales
become  ﬂeshy  in  fruit,  the
“berries” of J. communis being used to ﬂavor gin. In
some  other  podocarps  and  in  Taxus the  seed
becomes  surrounded  by an  aril  which  grows  up
from  the  base  (Fig.  8.29).  In  Taxus this  becomes
bright red and succulent. Although the seed is poi-
sonous, the aril is wholesome and sought after by
birds,  probably  an  aid  to dispersal  of  the  seeds.
The non-winged seeds of some species of Pinus in
both Europe and North America (“nut pines”) are
edible and prized by both man and wildlife.

germination
In most conifers, germination is initiated by the
root pole of the embryo elongating and breaking
through the seed coat. The vigorous primary root
soon  anchors  the  seedling,  and  the  elongating
hypocotyl  raises  the  remains  of  the  seed,  from

which the cotyledons are rapidly withdrawn (Fig.
8.28c).  All  conifer  seedlings,  so  far  as  is  known,
become green in the dark, a remarkable property
that  distinguishes  them  from  the  seedlings  of
most angiosperms.

The seeds of Araucaria often germinate in the
cone before it falls apart. In some species the hypo-
cotyl  swells  to form  a  tuber,  and  the  seedling  is
capable of “resting” in this condition for several
months.  It  was  this  curious  feature  that  facili-
tated the transmission of the ﬁrst specimens of A.
araucana from Chile to Europe in the eighteenth
century.

evolution within the conifers
The fossil evidence points to the modern families
of  conifers  having  become  recognizable  by the

SPERMATOPHYTINA (SEED PLANTS): GYMNOSPERMS

241

end of the Paleozoic or beginning of the Mesozoic
(p.  5).  The  curious  lax  cone  of  many  Podo-
carpaceae, for example, is recognizable as far back
as  the  Lower  Triassic,  and  the  characteristic
female shoot of Taxus seems to have evolved by the
end of the same period.

The  current  geographical  distribution  of  the
conifers  presents  a  number  of  features  of  evolu-
tionary signiﬁcance. Floristically, for example, the
conifers  of  the  northern  hemisphere  are  strik-
ingly different  from  those  of  the  southern,  and
some families (notably the Pinaceae in the north
and the Araucariaceae in the south) hardly cross
the  equator.  Fossils  of  Quaternary  and  Tertiary
age give no indication that this is a recent segre-
gation, but they do reveal that the distribution of
some families was formerly much more extensive.
Sequoia,  for  example,  now  conﬁned  to the  west
coast of North America, was once widespread in
the  northern  hemisphere.  Climatic  changes  in
polar regions have also led to contractions in the
distribution  of  conifers.  In  the  Tertiary  period,
for example,  Taxodium swamps  occurred  in
Spitzbergen,  and  in  Eocene  times  Ellesmere
Island in the Canadian Arctic supported a forest
whose  fossilized  stumps  consist  of  wood  with  a
Metasequoia-like  anatomy. Metasequoia,  although
found today only in Szechuan Province of China,
had a wide distribution in North America in late
Cretaceous  and  Miocene  times.  Another  conifer
whose  distribution  is  currently  contracting  may
be  the  recently  discovered  Wollemia nobilis
(Araucariaceae), conﬁned to a small population in
a  remote  part  of  the  Central  Tablelands  of  New
South  Wales,  Australia.  It  occurs  mixed  with
angiospermous  trees  in  warm temperate  rain
forest. Surprisingly, all specimens of Wollemia so
far examined appear to be genetically uniform. A
fossil  pollen  grain  (Dilwynites),  very similar  both
morphologically  and  ultrastructurally  to that  of
Wollemia,  was  abundant 
the  Upper
Cretaceous to the beginning of the Tertiary. The
pollen data are consistent with a formerly wide-
spread  distribution  of  “Wollemi  pine”  in  the
southern hemisphere. Viewed globally, the fossil
evidence clearly points to the distribution of the
conifers having contracted substantially with the
rise of the angiospermous forests (p. 310).

from 

Ginkgoopsida
As with many Mesozoic gymnosperm groups, the
Ginkgoopsida demonstrate what appears to be an
almost random assortment of characters viewed
as signiﬁcant in taxonomy. In this case, a repro-
ductive  syndrome  comparable  with  that  of  the
cycads contrasts with a growth architecture and
anatomy  resembling  those  of  the  Pinopsida.
Situations such as this result from the relatively
common parallel development of particular char-
acters  in  different  groups.  The  problem  facing
paleobotanists and systematists is then to identify
and  distinguish  those  characters  which  have
multiple origins, and those which reveal phylog-
eny  (Fig.  8.3).  In  many  cases  confusion  is  com-
pounded  by the  scarcity  of  likely  primitive
candidates which might indicate the antecedents
of  a  group.  The  Ginkgoopsida,  for  example,
contain a single order Ginkgoales, of which there
are many fossil representatives but only one living
species, Ginkgo biloba.

The Ginkgoales
The  earliest  plausible  ginkgoalean 
fossil,
Trichopitys, from the Lower Permian (Fig. 8.30) had
spirally arranged, highly dissected leaves. Some of
the leaves bore shoots in their axes which in turn
supported  a  number  of  ovules,  apparently  with
bilateral symmetry. If Trichopitys was indeed gink-
goalean, then the emergence of the reproductive
shoot from a leaf axil suggests a relationship with
the Cordaitales within the Pinopsida, a relation-
ship supported by the pycnoxylic wood common
to the two orders. However, a number of reproduc-
tive features of living Ginkgo, such as a haustorial
pollen tube and zooidogamy, are shared with the
cycads (p. 244). It may be that the Ginkgoales, like
the  cycads,  had  an  independent  origin  amongst
the  pteridosperms  of  the  Upper  Carboniferous.
The characteristic dichotomizing tendency in the
ginkgoalean  leaf  may  be  foreshadowed  in  the
basal  dichotomy  which  was  a  regular  feature  of
the medullosalean frond (p. 225).

Leaf  fossils  of  Mesozoic  ginkgoaleans,  abun-
dant in some localities, have been assigned to the
modern genus on a basis of similarity. The genus
was  widespread  in  the  northern  hemisphere  in
the Mesozoic and early Tertiary. Jurassic species,
such  as  Ginkgo  huttoni and  G.  digitata (Fig.  8.31)

242

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 3

Figure 8.30. Trichopitys. (A) Part of
shoot with leaves and axillary shoots
with ovules. Scale bar 1cm. (B)
Detail of a fertile axillary shoot.
Scale bar 1mm. (C) Ovule. Scale bar
1cm. (From Stewart and Rothwell.
1993. Paleobotany and the Evolution of
Plants, 2nd edn. Cambridge
University Press, New York.)

resemble  extreme  forms  of
leaf produced by G. biloba (par-
ticularly by juveniles). It is gen-
erally  assumed  that  these
leaves were produced by trees
similar  to the  living  species.
Reproductive 
are
uncommon  and  difﬁcult  to
associate  with  individual  leaf
species.

organs 

Ginkgo biloba (maidenhair
tree), the sole living represen-
tative of the order Ginkgoales,
is a remarkable tree, with a striking pagoda-like
arrangement  of  the  main  branches.  It  was
unknown  to the  Western  world  until  the  seven-
teenth century. It was ﬁrst discovered in Japan and
subsequently in China, but always in cultivation.
Suggestions that wild stands of Ginkgo may occur
in  remote  parts  of  China,  although  not  improb-
able,  have never  been  conﬁrmed.  Ginkgo is  now
common in cultivation in all parts of the world.

Fully grown specimens of Ginkgo are tall, decid-
uous  trees  reaching  a  height  of  30m  (98ft)  or
more.  The  lateral  branches  bear  both  long  and
short shoots (Fig. 8.32), and leaves occur on each.
Damage  to a long  shoot  will  cause  one  or  more
adjacent  short  shoots  to behave as  long  shoots,
indicating that their manner of growth is not irre-
versible, and that the maintenance of the dwarf
condition probably depends upon the presence of
growth-regulating  substances  produced  by the
meristem  of  the  long  shoot.  Anatomically, the
apices of the long and short shoots are similar and
show well-deﬁned zonation, although no distinct
tunica and corpus are present. Growth takes place
from a superﬁcial group of apical initial cells. A
large proportion of a mature stem consists of sec-
ondary xylem, penetrated by narrow parenchyma-

tous  rays.  The  tracheids  have bordered  pits,
usually in a single row, on their radial walls.

The  leaves  of  Ginkgo are  fan-shaped,  usually
with a distal notch (hence the speciﬁc name). Two
vascular bundles ascend the petiole and dichoto-
mize in the lamina, with occasional anastomoses.
Short resin ducts may lie between the veins. The
distal  margin  of  the  leaf  is  usually  irregular,  a
feature  much  more  marked  in  juvenile  leaves
where the distal part of the leaf may even be seg-
mented.

reproduction
Ginkgo is  dioecious,  and  sex  determination
appears to be chromosomal since the male karyo-
type  reveals  a  heteromorphic  pair  of  chromo-
somes.  The  male  reproductive  structures  (Fig.
8.32) consist of small strobili, resembling catkins,
which arise in the axils of scale leaves of the short
shoot. The axis of the strobilus bears a number of
microsporangiophores  arranged  in  a  loose  and
irregular  spiral.  Each  microsporangiophore  is
slightly  peltate  and  the  sporangia,  usually  two,
are attached beneath the head. The pollen grains,
which  have a characteristic  furrow  in  the  wall,
contain four nuclei when shed, two of the nuclei

SPERMATOPHYTINA (SEED PLANTS): GYMNOSPERMS

243

Figure 8.31. Ginkgo huttoni (a) bore leaves with usually
three deep notches and many subsidiary shallow notches. G.
digitata (b) had leaves with few deep notches leading to a
more rounded outline. Both of Jurassic age. Scale bars 1cm.

being  associated  with  rudimentary  prothallial
cells, and the others identiﬁed as the generative
and tube nuclei respectively. The ﬁrst prothallial
cell soon degenerates.

The  ovules  are  usually  borne  in  pairs,  two
sessile ovules being symmetrically attached at the
end  of  a  stalk-like  sporangiophore.  Not  infre-
quently, however,  the  sporangiophore  branches
irregularly and bears more than two ovules. The
sporangiophore itself arises, as in the male, in the
axil of a scale or a leaf on a short shoot. The ovules
(Fig. 8.33) are about 0.5cm (0.2in.) long and about
as  broad,  and  are  surrounded  at  the  base  by a
cushion-like swelling of the broad end of the spo-
rangiophore.  They  possess  a  single  integument
into  which  two 
(sometimes  three)  vascular
bundles,  evenly  spaced,  ascend.  The  commonly
bilateral  symmetry  is  reﬂected  in  the  micropyle
which is slightly two-lipped at its tip. A megaspore
is  formed  within  the  nucellus  and  this  yields  a

female  gametophyte  bounded  by a conspicuous
membrane. The gametophyte is unique amongst
seed plants in containing chlorophyll. Sufﬁcient
light  reaches  the  gametophyte  to permit  some
photosynthesis,  supplementing  the  supply  of
photosynthates  reaching  the  gametophyte  from
the sporophyte. At maturity two archegonia arise
at  the  micropylar  end  of  the  gametophyte.
Meanwhile the nucellus above develops a pollen
chamber.

Pollination is assisted by a “pollination drop”
at the micropyle, and the pollen chamber, having
received  the  pollen,  then  becomes  closed  above.
The cavity of the nucellus progressively deepens,
carrying  the  pollen  with  it,  until  it  reaches  the
female  gametophyte,  the  center  of  which  is
extended upward to form a so-called “tentpole” (a
feature seen also in many fossil seeds). The germi-
nating pollen forms a tube, but, as in Cycas (p. 251),
this has a haustorial function. The tube penetrates
the nucellus and there branches freely, growing
through  the  air  spaces  at  the  interstices  of  the
cells. The proximal part of the grain forms a sac
hanging in the chamber above the archegonia. As
the archegonia mature the generative cell in the

244

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 3

Figure 8.32. Ginkgo biloba. Branch
of male tree, showing a long shoot
and a short shoot. The short shoot
is bearing microsporangiate strobili.
Drawn early in the growing season
before the leaves have reached
mature size.

Figure 8.33. Ginkgo biloba.
Longitudinal section of female
peduncle with young ovules.

male  gametophyte  divides,
yielding  a  spermatogenous
and  a  sterile  cell,  the  latter
wrapped around the surviving
prothallial  cell.  The  sperma-
togenous cell develops further
and produces two multiﬂagel-
late 
spermatozoids  whose
major  diameters  are  of  the
order  of  100 ␮m.  These  sper-
matozoids  are  released  into
the ﬂuid above the archegonia
and  bring  about  fertilization.
Fertilization  is  thus  clearly
zooidogamous.

In  some  locations  the  zygote  may  not  be
formed until after the ovule has been shed, but in
others  well-developed  embryos  have been  found
at this time. Development of the zygote begins by
free nuclear division, leading to a proembryo con-
taining about 256 nuclei. Walls then differentiate
and a ﬂask-shaped proembryo is formed, the lower
part  of  which  becomes  the  embryo proper. A
clearly  deﬁned  suspensor  is  thus  absent.  The
mature embryo has two cotyledons. Usually only
one  of  the  paired  ovules  on  the  sporangiophore
develops into a seed. In the mature seed (Fig. 8.34),
which reaches a diameter of about 2cm (0.75in.),
the outer layer of the integument becomes ﬂeshy

and resinous, and the inner hard. The formation
of the seed is completed in one season.

Diversiﬁcation of radiospermic
gymnosperms

Cycadopsida
The Cycadopsida in the broadest sense include all
those  gymnosperms  with  radiospermic  ovules
which have their origin on a foliar structure. The
angiosperms can be regarded as merely specializa-
tions  of  this  situation,  but  are  given  a  higher
status in view of their predominance in modern
vegetation.  Unlike  the  Pinopsida,  in  which  the

SPERMATOPHYTINA (SEED PLANTS): GYMNOSPERMS

245

Perhaps  rashly, Beania has  been  associated  in  a
reconstruction with a relatively slender stem ter-
minating  in  a  crown  of  simple  leaves  of  a  type
known  as  Nilssonia (Fig.  8.36b),  but  the  leaves
borne by at least some species of Beania appear to
have been  pinnate,  like  those  of  living  cycads.
There was no dichotomy in the lower part of the
rachis,  as  in  Medullosa (p.  225),  although  this
feature  is  retained  by some  Caytoniales  (p.  254).
The cycads have some morphological resemblance
to the extinct Mesozoic gymnosperms assigned to
the  Bennettitales  and  Pentoxylales,  but  they are
now seen to be distinct and to have retained many
features  recognized  as  primitive  amongst  seed
plants.

Although  in  Mesozoic  times  the  cycads  were
distributed as far north as Siberia and Greenland,
they are today conﬁned to tropical and subtropi-
cal regions in both the Old and New Worlds. There
are  nine  genera  in  all,  the  commonest  being
Zamia, Macrozamia, Cycas, Encephalartos, Dioon and
Ceratozomia,  but  only  Cycas,  extending  eastward
from  Madagascar  into  Polynesia,  has  anything
approaching  a  wide  distribution.  Encephalartos
woodii of Africa is represented only by male plants,
and is probably a natural hybrid.

stems
The  stems  of  the  cycads  are  either  short,  stocky
trunks (Fig. 8.37), often with a large portion below
ground, or are much taller, some reaching heights
of up to 15m (50ft). Below ground is a massive tap
root  which  bears,  together  with  normal  roots,
others which are negatively gravitropic and which
break up at the soil surface into coralloid masses.
These  contain  endophytic  fungi  and  blue-green
algae (Cyanophyta, p. 27).

The 

thick 

form. 

Apart  from  stature,  all  cycads  have a similar
growth
stem,  usually
unbranched,  bears  an  apical  rosette  of  large
pinnate leaves. The rate of growth is very slow and,
although there are no recognizable annual rings
in the stem, the age of any specimen can be calcu-
lated approximately from the rate of leaf produc-
tion and the number of leaf bases. A specimen of
Dioon only 2m (6.5ft) high was estimated in this
way to be about 1000 years old. Bowenia, conﬁned
to North Queensland, is anomalous in possessing
a  tuberous  rootstock bearing  only  one  or  two

Figure 8.34. Ginkgo biloba. Tip of short shoot bearing ripe
seeds.

early  orders  are  extinct,  the  most  primitive
Cycadopsida, the Cycadales, are still in existence,
although much diminished in numbers.

The Cycadales
The ﬁrst cycads occur in the late Carboniferous,
and appear to be descended directly from pterido-
sperms, possibly the Medullosales (Fig. 8.3). They
share  manoxylic  wood,  radiospermy,  and  frond-
like  leaves  with  this  group.  Living  cycads  are
essentially pachycaulous in habit; extinct forms,
however, appear in some instances to have been
leptocaulous and may have attained faster growth
rates.  Early  representatives  such  as  Bjuvia (Fig.
8.35) from the Upper Triassic of Sweden had entire
leaves,  in  contrast  to the  ubiquitous  pinnate
fronds of living cycads. Like those of Cycas, ovules
were borne on the proximal part of a fertile leaf
(megasporophyll), the distal sterile portion being
little  developed.  The  robust  trunk  presumably
consisted  principally  of  manoxylic  wood,  and
owed much support to the leaf bases. Later cycads,
such as Beania gracilis from the Jurassic, appear to
have produced axillary female cones. These can be
interpreted as determinate stems bearing highly
reduced  fertile  leaves.  Each  was  terminally
peltate, and bore beneath two ovules, symmetri-
cally placed (Fig. 8.36a). A more condensed version
of the cone of Beania is found in most genera of
living cycads, that of Zamia being closely similar.
As in living Zamia, stomata were detected in the
epidermis  of  the  nucellus  of  the  seed  of  Beania.

246

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 3

Figure 8.35. Bjuvia simplex.
Reconstruction of plant with female
cone. (After Florin, from Arnold.
1947. An Introduction to Paleobotany.
McGraw-Hill, New York.)

Figure 8.36. (a) Beania gracilis.
Ovulate cone about 10cm (4 in.) in
length. (b) Possible reconstruction
of a Jurassic plant with relatively
slender axes terminating in a crown
of simple leaves, bearing lateral
Beania-like cones. Scale bar 2.5cm.
(From Stewart and Rothwell. 1993.
Paleobotany and the Evolution of
Plants, 2nd edn. Cambridge
University Press, New York.)

SPERMATOPHYTINA (SEED PLANTS): GYMNOSPERMS

247

bases. The cycads generally thus provide typical
examples of manoxylic stems. Mucilage canals,
tannin cells, and cells containing crystals of
calcium oxalate occur in the pith and cortex of
mature stems.

Apart from the conspicuous foliage leaves (or
fronds), the stem also bears scale leaves, sequences
of each kind of leaf following a common phyllo-
tactic  arrangement.  The  scale  leaves  cover  the
apex  and  the  upper  part  of  the  stem  (Fig.  8.38),
often  disintegrating  to form  a  ﬁbrous  sheath
below. The foliage leaves in some species reach 1m
(39in.)  or  more  in  length.  In  Cycas  and  in  most
other genera the vernation of the young leaves is
circinate (as in polypodioid ferns), but in a few the
vernation  is  similar  to that  seen  in  the  fern
Botrychium (p. 180). In all cycads the leaves are pin-
nately  branched,  but  are  twice  pinnate  only in
Bowenia.  In  Cycas micholitzii,  a  distinctive  species
from  southeast  China  and  north Vietnam,  the
primary  pinnae  are  pedately  branched  into  a
small number of pinnules. The vascular supply to
the leaf is seen in sections of the rachis as a horse-
shoe-shaped trace of individual bundles. The trace
has  a  complex  origin  in  the  stem.  Some  strands
arise opposite the insertion of the leaf and girdle
the stem obliquely upward into the leaf base. In an
individual bundle of the trace much of the metax-
ylem is adaxial to the protoxylem, but character-
istically  a  few  tracheids,  often  separated  by
parenchyma,  lie  on  the  abaxial  side  adjacent  to
the phloem (“centrifugal xylem”).

The venation of the pinnae is various, but any
branching  is  dichotomous  and  open.  In  section
small patches of transfusion tissue (anatomically
intermediate between parenchyma and tracheids)
are  often  present  on  each  side  of  the  xylem.  In
Cycas, where each pinna has only a midrib, a sheet
of  similar  cells  extends  from  the  midrib  to the
margin (“accessory transfusion tissue”).

The pinnae have a leathery texture. A conspic-
uous cuticle is usually present, and an epidermis
(often  accompanied  by a hypodermis),  palisade
and  mesophyll  are  well  differentiated.  The  cell
walls  of  the  lower  epidermis  are  straight  or
slightly  sinuose,  and  the  stomata,  although
usually sunken, are surrounded by a simple ring
of subsidiary cells (haplocheilic stomata; Fig. 8.44b).
These  epidermal  features,  which  remain  clearly

Figure 8.37. Encephalartos hildebrandtii. Habit of plant
bearing female cone. (After Eichler, from Eichler in Engler and
Prantl. 1889. Die Natürlichen Pﬂanzenfamilien, vol. II, 1.
Engelmann, Leipzig.)

leaves  at  a  time.  The  leaves  of  cycads  contain  a
variety  of  metabolic  products,  some  poisonous
and others of possible therapeutic value.

The stem grows from a massive apex in which
there is generalized meristematic activity, and
considerable centrifugal expansion, as well as
growth in length. Behind the apical initials a core
of central tissue, which soon becomes distin-
guishable from the peripheral, differentiates into
the vascular tissue and pith. The peripheral zone
becomes cortex. The primary vascular tissue con-
sists of a ring of bundles with endarch protoxy-
lem, and these surround an extensive pith. The
secondary xylem is traversed by wide parenchy-
matous rays and the radial walls of its tracheids
are furnished with several series of circular bor-
dered pits (except in Zamia and Stangeria where
the pits are of the narrower kind characteristic of
ferns). The ﬁrst cambium is of limited activity,
and it is followed by others which arise succes-
sively outside the vascular cylinder. These cambia
are of diminishing activity, the last producing
merely a few concentric bundles lying out in the
cortex. The stele is thus highly parenchymatous,
and the main mechanical support of the stem
comes from its armor of sclerenchymatous leaf

248

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 3

Figure 8.38. Zamia sp. Young plant with female cone.
Although produced terminally, the female cone becomes
pushed to one side by the sympodial growth and appears to
be lateral. Scale bar 5cm. (Photograph by Frank White.)

evident in fossil material, are of great value in dis-
tinguishing extinct Mesozoic forms from superﬁ-
cially similar contemporary plants (see Fig. 8.44).

reproductive structures
The  mega-  and  microsporangiophores  of  the
cycads are aggregated into separate strobili borne
on different plants. The female cone either termi-
nates  the  main  axis  (in  which  case  subsequent
growth is  sympodial,  Fig.  8.38)  or  it  is  lateral,
according to the genus. The situation in Cycas is
exceptional for here the main axis, having given
rise to a sequence of megasporangiophores, con-
tinues to be active and reverts to the production
of normal vegetative leaves.

The female cones vary in compactness and in
the number of ovules borne on each megasporan-
giophore. At one extreme stands Cycas, in which
the  female  cone  consists  of  a  loose  aggregate of
megasporangiophores, the distal, sterile portions
of  which  are  more  extensive  than  in  any  other
cycad. Several pairs of ovules are attached in the
proximal region (Fig. 8.39b), the micropyles of the
ovules  being  directed  obliquely  outward.  At the
other  extreme  are  Zamia and  Encephalartos,  in
which  small,  peltate  sporangiophores  (Figs.  8.38
and  8.39a)  are  tightly  packed  in  a  distinct  ovoid
cone. Each sporangiophore bears two ovules, the
micropyles  of  which  are  directed  toward the
center of the cone. Both the cones and ovules in
the cycads generally are of extraordinary size. In
Encephalartos female  cones  have been  recorded
weighing  as  much  as  45kg  (90  lb),  and  in
Macrozamia the ovules reach a length of 6cm (2.4
in.). The whole of the female reproductive system

SPERMATOPHYTINA (SEED PLANTS): GYMNOSPERMS

249

Figure 8.39. (a) Encephalartos
hildebrandtii, megasporangiophore.
(b) Cycas revoluta,
megasporangiophore.

Figure 8.40. Cycas sp. (a) Male
cone. (b) Microsporangia, the scale
viewed from below.

erable  variation  in  size.  In
some  species  of  Encephalartos
the male cones reach a length
of  50cm  (19in.),  but  in  Zamia
only 5cm (2in.). The microspo-
rangiophores  are  in  the  form
of  scales,  closely  adpressed
during  growth and  when
mature covered on their lower
surfaces with several hundred
microsporangia 
(Fig.  8.40b).
The  sporangia,  about  1mm
(0.04in.) in length and structu-
rally  resembling  those  of  the
fern Angiopteris, are grouped in sori, each consist-
ing of 3–4 sporangia. Their origin is eusporangiate
and  their  formation  almost  simultaneous.  Each
sporangium  produces  some  hundreds  of  spores.
In  Encephalartos,  temperatures  some  15 oC  above
the ambient have been recorded in male cones at
the time of meiosis, a consequence of the intense
respiratory  activity  throughout  the  cone  at  this
stage  of  development.  The  microspores  of  the
cycads as shed (and partially dehydrated) are char-
acteristically  boat-shaped  as  a  consequence  of  a
broad  germination  furrow  (colpus)  in  the  distal

is thus on a much larger scale than in any other
living plants.

The  male  cones  of  the  cycads  (Fig.  8.40a)  are
also  either  terminal  or  lateral.  Where  terminal,
subsequent  growth is  always  (including  that  of
Cycas) sympodial. Where lateral, growth is mono-
podial and the cones may be present in consider-
able numbers. In Macrozamia, for example, 20–40
cones may be produced in rapid sequence around
the lower part of the apex. There is much more
uniformity  in  the  structure  of  the  male  cones
than in that of the female, although again consid-

250

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 3

Figure 8.41. Female reproductive system of cycads. (a)
Longitudinal section of young ovule. (b) Completion of
development of female gametophyte. (c) Archegonium
containing newly formed egg. (After McLuckie and McKee.
1958. Australian and New Zealand Botany. Horwitz, Sydney.)

face. Since there is a single germination site, the
grains  are  termed  monocolpate.  The  exine  on  the
proximal face shows only an indistinct tetrad scar.
Germination of the microspores begins in the spo-
rangium, and each spore when shed already con-
tains three cells, namely a single prothallial cell,
a generative cell and a tube nucleus (Fig. 8.42a).

devel opment of the g ametophytes
and fertilization
The  ovules  of  the  cycads  are  distinctly  radio-
spermic (although platyspermic forms may have
occurred in the Paleozoic), and the integument is
differentiated  into  sclerenchymatous  and  ﬂeshy
layers. In Zamia stomata occur in the nucellar epi-
dermis, a peculiar feature which may be present
in other cycads. In the immature ovule the mega-
spore mother cell, which is deeply embedded in
the nucellus, undergoes meiosis and gives rise to
four  megaspores  in  a  linear  or  T-shaped  tetrad.
The three outer megaspores degenerate, but the
inner  (chalazal)  megaspore  remains  viable  and
develops a layered wall of surprising complexity.
It germinates in situ and begins to form the female
gametophyte,  the  initial  development  of  which
consists  of  a  sequence  of  free  nuclear  divisions
(Fig.  8.41a).  The  gametophyte  enlarges  with  the
expanding ovule and eventually a vacuole forms
at  its  center.  Wall  formation  then  begins  at  the
periphery of the gametophyte and continues cen-
tripetally. The  archegonia  (Fig.  8.41b)  appear  at
the micropylar end of the gametophyte where the

cells are comparatively small. A distinct and thick-
ened  boundary, known  as  a  “megaspore  mem-
brane”, persists between the haploid gametophyte
and the diploid nucellus.

Although at ﬁrst sight unfamiliar, the arche-
gonia of the cycads can be seen from their devel-
opment to be quite similar to those of the lower
archegoniate  plants.  A  single  initial  cell  divides
into  an  outer  primary  neck  cell  (which  subse-
quently gives rise to one tier of neck cells) and an
inner central cell. The latter rapidly expands, and
then divides to form the egg and a small superﬁ-
cial ventral canal cell (Fig. 8.41c), which degener-
ates  as  the  egg  becomes  ready  for  fertilization.
Maturation of the egg involves considerable cyto-
logical activity. The nucleus enlarges and becomes
weakly staining, and in Zamia small bodies, which
appear in the light microscope as refractive drop-
lets, are seen to stream away from its surface into
the cytoplasm. This phenomenon, not yet investi-
gated in depth, possibly resembles the events in
the maturing egg of the fern Pteridium (p. 205). The
cycads  possess  the  largest egg  cells  known
amongst land plants. The diameter may reach or
exceed 3mm (0.13in.) or more, and even that of
the nucleus may be as much as 0.5mm (0.02in.).

Pollination,  which  occurs  during  the  closing
stages of the growth of the female gametophyte, is
brought about by the microspores, which are dis-
tributed by wind, or in some species possibly by
insects.  The  existence  of  Microcycas calocoma,  a
Cuban species, for example, appears to be endan-
gered because of the increasing rarity of its polli-
nator. The pollen grains are trapped in a sugary
“pollination drop” at the oriﬁce of the micropyle.
This ﬂuid, probably secreted by the cells at the tip
of the nucellus, is subsequently withdrawn, carry-

SPERMATOPHYTINA (SEED PLANTS): GYMNOSPERMS

251

Figure 8.42. Cycas sp.
Development of the male
gametophyte. (a) Vertical section of
microspore at liberation. (b)
Longitudinal section of pollen tube.
(c) Spermatozoid. ((a), (b) after
Swamy. 1948. American Journal of
Botany 35; (c) modiﬁed after Swamy.
1948. American Journal of Botany 35.)

may  reach  300mm  in  diame-
ter. Normally  only two sper-
matozoids  are  produced,  but
in  Microcycas the  sterile  cell
continues to divide giving rise
to 10 or more spermatogenous cells, each of which
yields  a  spermatozoid.  Only  the  ﬁrst-formed
appear to be fully functional. This may represent
the persistence of a primitive situation.

The  spermatozoids  are  ﬁnally  released  from
the  proximal  part  of  the  tube,  close  to the  rup-
tured  exine,  directly  into  the  ﬂuid  above the
archegonia. One or more eggs become fertilized.
The  penetrating  spermatozoid  sheds  its  cyto-
plasm (including the ﬂagella) in the cytoplasm of
the  egg,  and  its  nucleus  enters  and  disperses  in
the  large female  nucleus.  As  in  Ginkgo,  fertiliza-
tion is zooidogamous.

This account of the development of the male
gametophyte and fertilization is based principally
on  events  in  Macrozamia,  Dioon,  Zamia and  Cycas.
The  distal  germination  of  the  microspores  in
these genera coupled with the proximal release of
the  gametes  suggest  a  position  intermediate
between  the  pre-pollen  of  most  of  the  pterido-
sperms and the pollen of the conifers and angio-
sperms. Many features of sexual reproduction in
the  cycads,  however, need  conﬁrmation  and  re-
investigation 
In
Encephalartos, it has been observed that, in arche-
gonia  receiving  a  single  spermatozoid,  the  egg
nucleus often fragments on penetration. This may
indicate the existence of a mechanism of sperm
selection in this genus, certain gametic genomes
being incompatible.

by  modern 

techniques. 

embryogenesis
Although  the  development  of  the  male  and
female  gametophytes  and  the  interval  between

ing  the  microspores  with  it.  These  now  become
lodged  in  a  shallow  pollen  chamber  formed  by
autolysis  at  the  tip  of  the  nucellus  (Fig.  8.40b).
Here each  grain puts out a tube from the distal
part of the grain (i.e., on the side away from the
center  of  the  original  tetrad)  laterally  into  the
nucellus.  This  tube,  which  is  of  limited  growth
(unlike the freely branching pollen tube of Ginkgo,
p. 243), has a purely haustorial function, and only
the  tube  nucleus  enters  it.  In  Zamia small  out-
growths  of  pollen  tubes  may  invade  and  ulti-
mately kill individual nucellar cells.

In  the  presence  of  the  pollen,  and  possibly
accelerated by enzymes secreted by it, the upper
part  of  the  nucellus  continues  to break  down,
until all that remains above the mature archego-
nia is a small pool of ﬂuid. The development of the
male  gametophyte  meanwhile  continues.  The
generative cell, the only cell to show further activ-
ity, divides, giving rise to a spermatogenous (body)
cell and a sterile (stalk) cell which surrounds the
prothallial cell (Fig. 8.42b). The proximal part of
the  male  gametophyte  now  extends  and  bends
over the archegonia. The male gametophyte of the
cycads thus shows bidirectional growth; initially
distally  into  the  nucellus,  and  later  proximally
down toward the female gametophyte.

At the ﬁnal stage of development the nucleus
of the body cell divides. Each daughter nucleus,
together  with  some  cytoplasm,  then  differen-
tiates into a coiled, multiﬂagellate spermatozoid
(Fig. 8.42c). The spermatozoids are constructed on
the same principles as those of the lower arche-
goniates, but are much larger and in some cycads

252

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 3

fats, prominent in the cells of the female gameto-
phyte (“pseudo-endosperm”). The mature embryo
has  two  or  several  cotyledons  (depending  upon
the  species),  directed  away from  the  micropyle
and enclosing the stem apex (plumule). Although
a short axis is present below the cotyledons (hypo-
cotyl),  a  root  is  still  lacking  at  this  stage.  The
whole is surrounded by the exhausted remains of
the female gametophyte and nucellus, and exter-
nally by the integument. Germination occurs as
soon as conditions are favorable and the seed has
imbibed sufﬁcient water. The hypocotyl pushes its
way through the micropylar end of the seed and
then  begins  to develop  a  strong  tap  root  which
persists throughout the life of the plant. The coty-
ledons remain partially enclosed in the seed, but
the plumule emerges and gives rise to scale and
mature leaves, the ﬁrst of which have only a few
pinnae.

possible origin of the cyc ads
As  described  earlier  (p.  245),  the  ﬁrst cycads  are
found in the late Paleozoic. In their radiospermic
seeds and in the complexity of their stelar struc-
ture the cycads so closely resemble the later pter-
idosperms that it seems beyond doubt that they
had their origin in some common stock. If so, both
leaves  and  sporangiophores  would  have been
derived  from  lateral  branch  systems.  If  we
compare  the  megasporangiophore  of  Cycas  revo-
luta, with its pinnate distal portion, with that of
Zamia, where the sterile distal portion is lacking,
we may see the process by which an ovuliferous
megaphyll  lost  its  sterile  region  and  became
wholly reproductive. This specialization seems to
have been accomplished earlier in the male inﬂo-
rescences,  since  in  all  cycads,  even  those  of
Paleozoic  age,  the  microsporangiophores  have
little sterile tissue.

The Bennettitales
The  Bennettitales  are  wholly  fossil,  their  record
extending  from  the  Triassic  to the  Cretaceous
periods.  The  frequency  of  their  remains  is  such
that  they were  probably  a  more  conspicuous
element  of  the  Mesozoic  ﬂora  than  were  the
Cycadales.  In  habit  there  was  a  general  resem-
blance  to the  cycads.  Some  Bennettitales  were
upright, sparingly branched plants, while others

Figure 8.43. Cycas sp. Embryo and suspensor. (After
Swamy. 1948. American Journal of Botany 35.)

pollination  and  fertilization  is  prolonged  and
may  extend  over  months,  the  formation  of  the
proembryo follows  immediately  after  fertiliza-
tion.  After  a  period  of  free  nuclear  division,  in
which as many as 256 (28) or even more nuclei may
be  formed,  the  proembryo becomes  partly  or
wholly cellular. Further growth takes place at the
chalazal  end,  and  the  embryogeny is  evidently
endoscopic. At the extreme base of the proembryo
is  a  group  of  small  meristematic  cells  which
develop into the embryo proper, in some species
protected  on  the  outside  by a layer  of  cap  cells
which later degenerate. Above the embryonic cells
are  a  number  of  elongating  cells  which  form a
conspicuous  suspensor.  The  mature  suspensor
may reach several centimeters in length, but the
resistance it meets in driving the young embryo
into  the  nutritive  tissue  of  the  female  gameto-
phyte causes it to be highly twisted and coiled (Fig.
8.43).

The  embryo grows  and  differentiates  at  the
expense of the food reserves, including starch and

SPERMATOPHYTINA (SEED PLANTS): GYMNOSPERMS

253

Figure 8.44. Fossil cuticles of (a)
the bennettitalean type, and (b) the
cycadalean type. (From a
preparation by W. G. Chaloner.)

(Fig. 

8.45a). 

female 
In
Cycadeoidea the  ovules  are
often well preserved, and this
genus  provides  the  oldest
known  example  of  mega-
spores  produced  in  a linear
tetrad. The seeds were similar
in structure and symmetry to
those  of  cycads  and  pterido-
sperms,  although  the  exis-
tence of a second integument
has  been  suspected  in  some  forms.  Unlike  the
pteridosperms, embryos are sometimes well pre-
served. A massive hypocotyl was directed toward
the  micropyle,  resembling  the  situation  in  the
cycads.

The general anatomical and reproductive fea-
tures of the Bennettitales indicate that they also
had their origin in some pteridospermous stock,
and  in  some  respects  the  resemblance  is  closer
than with the cycads. The microsporangiophores
(Fig. 8.45b), for example, can be readily envisaged
as derived from condensed microsporangiate pter-
idosperm  fronds.  The  derivation  of  the  bisexual
cones can be envisaged as following from the con-
densation of an originally bisexual frond, or from
an  axillary  shoot  with  upper  female  and  lower
male  branches.  However  derived,  the  bisexual
cones,  often  with  subtending  bracts,  were
strongly suggestive of ﬂowers.

The 

fossil 

that 

record 

indicates 

the
Bennettitales evolved in parallel with the cycads.
There  is  no  obvious  explanation  of  why  they
should  have become  extinct  whereas 
the
Cycadales survived. It is noteworthy, however, that
the microsporangiophores of the bennettitalean
cone commonly ascended close to the ovules, and
self-pollination  may  have been  the  rule.  This
would  have limited  genetic  recombination  and
consequent adaptability.

The Caytoniales
The Caytoniales, Triassic and Jurassic in age (and
possibly extending into the Lower Cretaceous), are

were squat, bearing a crown of leaves near the soil
surface.

The leaves of the Bennettitales were entire or
pinnate, and very similar to those of the cycads.
They were not in fact easily distinguishable from
these until it was discovered that the epidermal
features  were  quite  different  (Fig.  8.44).  In  the
Bennettitales  the  walls  of  the  epidermal  cells
were highly sinuose, and the guard cells and sub-
sidiary cells appear to have had their origin from
the same mother cell, giving rise to so-called syn-
detocheilic stomata of characteristic form.

The stem structure, so far as it is known, was
similar to that of the cycads, except that girdling
leaf traces appear to have been absent. Secretory
canals  were,  however, occasionally  present,  a
feature  shared  with  cycads  and  some  pterido-
sperms.

reproduction
The cones of the Bennettitales appear to have been
bisexual  in  most  cases,  the  male  portion  being
below  the  female.  Each  consisted  of  an  axis
bearing  upright  (outward-facing)  ovules  inter-
spersed  with  sterile  scales.  The  ovules  were  sur-
rounded  by an  elongated  integument  similar  to
that  found  in  the  Gnetopsida  (p.  259).  The  sub-
tending  whorl  of  microsporangiophores  pro-
duced  either  microsporangia 
(Fig.  8.45)  or
complex synangia. The pollen grains were mono-
colpate,  similar  to those  of  the  cycads  and  later
pteridosperms.  In  most  forms  the  inﬂorescence
was  bisexual,  the  male  portion  being  below  the

254

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 3

Figure 8.45. Williamsoniella coronata (Bennettitales). 
(a) Longitudinal section of fertile shoot. (b) Micro-
sporangiophore showing partially enclosed microsporangia.
(After Harris, from Stewart.1983. Paleobotany and the
Evolution of Plants. Cambridge University Press, New York.)

a  heterogeneous  assemblage  of  Mesozoic  seed
plants  with  no 
living  representatives.  The
Corystospermaceae,  from  the  Triassic  of  South
Africa, were characterized by ovules with a curved
micropylar “beak”. In Umkomasia, which was prob-
ably a woodland deciduous tree, the leaves were of
the  doubly  pinnate  kind  known  as  Dicroidium (a
form genus).  The  female  reproductive  structure
was a pinnate branchlet bearing several recurved
cupules in opposite pairs (Fig. 8.46A). Each cupule
contained  a  single  ovule,  the  curved  micropylar
beak  (Fig.  8.46B)  projecting  conspicuously  from
the  cupule.  The  male  branchlet 
(known  as
Pteruchus, Fig. 8.46C) was very similar to Crossotheca
(p. 224), but the pollen grains were bisaccate, with
a  well-deﬁned  colpus.  Cupulate  structures  and
fronds similar to those of the corystosperms are
known from the Lower Cretaceous of Argentina,
suggesting  that  the  later  members  of  the  group
were coexistent with the earliest angiosperms (p.
303).

Also known from the South African beds are
the  Peltaspermaceae.  The  leaves  (Lepidopteris)  of
these  plants  were  bipinnate  fronds  about  30cm
(12in.)  in  length  (Fig.  8.47A),  characteristically

with blister-like swellings on the rachides and pin-
nules.  The  female  branchlet  was  pinnately
branched, each pinna terminating in a “cupulate
disk”, attached centrally to the pedicel. Attached
to the lower surface of the disk, and partly covered
by its recurved margins, were up to 20 ovules, a
curved  “micropylar  beak”  sometimes  being
evident (Fig. 8.47B and C). Their form gives rise to
the name Peltaspermum for these female units. The
male branchlets were again similar to Crossotheca.
Although  known  principally  from  South  Africa,
early  peltasperms  have also  been  reported  from
the late Permian of Western Europe.

The female reproductive branchlet of Caytonia
(Caytoniaceae) was similar to that of the corysto-
sperms, being a pinnately branched axis (Fig.
8.48a), about 5cm (2in.) or more in length and pos-
sibly dorsiventral in symmetry. The pinnae, more
or less in opposite pairs, terminated in hollow
spherical bodies about 0.5cm (0.2in.) in diameter
(Fig. 8.48b). A pore, communicating with the inter-
ior of the sphere but concealed by a small ﬂap of
tissue, lay adjacent to the pedicel. Within the
sphere was a series of up to 32 upright ovules,
appearing platyspermic, each about 2.5mm
(0.1 in.) in length, and the nucellus furnished with
a short micropylar beak. The ovules were arranged
in lines, more or less opposite the basal pore.

The  pollen  organs  of  Caytonia (Caytonanthus)
were branching clusters of elongate, pendent syn-
angia, each with four loculi (Fig. 8.48c). The pollen

SPERMATOPHYTINA (SEED PLANTS): GYMNOSPERMS

255

Figure 8.46. Triassic Corystospermaceae bore (A and B)
ovules (Umkomasia) in clusters on short branches. Pollen
organs (C) consisted of a disk-like lamina with numerous
pendent microsporangia. The leaves (D and E), referred to
the form genus Dicroidium, had a basal dichotomy. Scale bar
1 cm. (From Stewart and Rothwell. 1993. Paleobotany and the
Evolution of Plants, 2nd edn. Cambridge University Press, New
York.)

was bisaccate, and similar to that of the corysto-
sperm Pteruchus, but lacked a well-deﬁned colpus.
The leaves of Caytonia (Sagenopteris), about 6cm
(2.5in.) in length, were palmately compound, con-
sisting  of  usually  four  leaﬂets  (Fig.  8.48d),  each
resembling in shape and reticulate venation the
leaves  of  Glossopteris (p.  258).  The  stomata  were
haplocheilic.

Caytonia extends from the Upper Triassic to the
Lower Cretaceous, and had a wide northern hemi-
sphere distribution. Since pollen has been found
in  the  micropyles  of  the  ovules  of  Caytonia,  the
plant was evidently a gymnosperm.

The general features of the Caytoniales, partic-
ularly the tendency for the ovules to be borne
within, or to be partially, or wholly, enclosed by a
cupule-like structure, indicate that their origin,
like that of the Bennettitales, is likely to have
been in the late Paleozoic forms of the pterido-
sperms.

The Glossopteridales
The glossopterids were an enigmatic group of
gymnosperms with complex and peculiar repro-
ductive structures. They were abundant in the
southern hemisphere in the Permian and
Triassic. Glossopteris was a large, probably decidu-
ous, tree, the trunk reaching 40cm (16in.) in
diameter (Fig. 8.49a). The wood was pycnoxylic,
and the pitting araucarian. The roots (Vertebraria)
had characteristic radiating wedges of secondary
xylem, a feature thought possibly to indicate a
semi-aquatic habitat. The leaves were elongate-
ovate with a distinct central midrib, probably
borne with a spiral phyllotaxy. The lateral veins
commonly anastomosed, yielding a reticulate
mesh (Fig. 8.49b).

The  reproductive  organs  were  peculiar  and
complex, and those of both sexes were associated
with leaves. The ovules were borne on short stalks,
believed to have been axial to the leaf in origin,
but becoming adnate to the midrib, either ontog-
enetically or phylogenetically. In some forms the
stalk  supported  a  small  lamina,  about  6mm
(0.2 in.)  wide,  bearing  a  cluster  of  ovules  on  the
adaxial side and partially enclosing them with its
inrolled margins (Fig. 8.50). In later forms the clus-
ters  of  ovules  were  open,  each  ovule  almost
entirely surrounded by its own lamina. In general

256

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 3

Figure 8.47. Triassic Peltaspermaceae had large fern-like
leaves (A), referred to the form genus Lepidopteris. Ovules
were pendent from the lower surface of disk-like cupules (B
and C). Scale bars: (A) 2cm; (B) 1cm; (C) 1mm. ((A) from
Hughes. 1994. The Enigma of Angiosperm Origins. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge; (B), (C) from Stewart and
Rothwell. 1993. Paleobotany and the Evolution of Plants, 2nd
edn. Cambridge University Press, New York.)

the  ovules  were  platyspermic,  barely  reaching
2 mm  (0.8in.)  in  length.  Bisaccate  pollen  grains
have been observed within the pollen chambers.
In  the  male  organ  (Eretmonia),  solitary  or
paired clusters of microsporangia were borne on a

stalk arising from the midrib of a leaf, the posi-
tion corresponding to that bearing the ovules in
the female organ.

Glossopterids  are  known  to have  occurred  at
high  latitudes  in  the  southern  hemisphere
(Gondwana). They may have formed a conspicuous
part  of  the  polar  ecosystem  at  the  close  of  the
Paleozoic  era,  a  system  of  which  there  are  no
modern parallels. The particularly prominent and
wide growth rings of some glossopterid stems sug-
gests that they may have grown continuously over
the  long  days  of  the  polar  summer.  They  would
have escaped the diurnal cycle of lower latitudes,

SPERMATOPHYTINA (SEED PLANTS): GYMNOSPERMS

257

Figure 8.48. Caytonia nathorsti. (a) Reconstruction of fertile
shoot. (b) Longitudinal section of cupule. (c) Caytonanthus
kochi, reconstruction. (d) Sagenopteris phillipsi. ((a), (b) after
Thomas, from Andrews. 1961. Studies in Paleobotany. Wiley,
New York; (c) after Harris, from Andrews. 1961. Studies in
Paleobotany. Wiley, New York; (d) from Stewart and
Rothwell. 1993. Paleobotany and the Evolution of Plants, 2nd
edn. Cambridge University Press, New York.)

and  the  physiological  limits  which  this  imposes
on the rate of wood production.

The  reticulate  venation  in  the  leaves  of  the
glossopterids, coupled with the carpel-like lamina
associated with the ovules in some forms, have led
to their being considered as possible ancestors of
the ﬂowering plants. There is, however, no clear
evidence for such a relationship. The glossopter-
ids were extinct by the end of the Triassic.

The Pentoxylales
The Pentoxylales, known only from the Jurassic,
are poorly understood, but possibly of importance
in relation to the origin of the angiosperms. The
stems  of  Pentoxylon (Fig.  8.51A)  commonly  con-
tained  ﬁve  distinct  segments  of  vascular  tissue,
consisting  principally  of  pycnoxylic  secondary
xylem.  The  primary  xylem  was  mesarch.  The
plant,  which  was  presumably  a  small  tree  or
shrub,  produced  long  and  short  shoots  in  the
manner  of  Ginkgo.  Both  bore  entire  ovate  leaves
about  7cm  (3in.)  in  length,  and  with  syndeto-

cheilic  stomata  on  the  lower  surface.  Female
cones were borne on solitary or branched pedicels
arising  from  the  short  shoots.  They  consisted  of
densely  packed,  spirally  arranged  ovules  (Fig.
8.51B), each with a bulky integument. The micro-
pyle was placed centrally in each outer face. The
male reproductive structure, borne terminally on
separate  short  shoots,  consisted  of  a  ring  of
ﬁliform  axes,  fused  at  the  base  and  spirally
branched above. The branches terminated in uni-
locular microsporangia. The pollen was monocol-
pate and similar to that of cycads.

The Pentoxylales are very difﬁcult to classify.
Like the Ginkgoopsida, they seem to have been an
entirely  separate  group  of  plants,  presumably
originating  from  somewhere  within  the  wide
range of Paleozoic pteridosperms. Cladistic analy-
ses, utilizing a multiplicity of characters, suggest
a relationship with the Bennettitales (Fig. 8.3).

Another plant, well preserved but of at present
entirely obscure afﬁnities, is Sanmiguelia from the
Upper  Triassic  of  North  America.  Erect  stems,
bearing  apparently  plicate  leaves,  rose  from  a
basal rhizome (Fig. 8.52A). The venation was retic-
ulate, and each leaf had a sheathing base which
encircled the stem. Vessels occurred in the root.
Male and female reproductive regions were separ-
ate, and appeared to terminate stems and lateral
branches. Male “cones” consisted of paired micro-
sporangia  spirally  arranged  on  a  short  axis.

258

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 3

Figure 8.49. Glossopteris.
Reconstruction of a specimen about
4m (14ft) in height. Scale bar in (b)
1cm. (Based on Gould and
Delevoryas, from Stewart and
Rothwell. 1993. Paleobotany and the
Evolution of Plants, 2nd edn.
Cambridge University Press, New
York.)

Figure 8.50. Glossopteris.
Diagrammatic representation of the
female reproductive region. The
leaf-like megasporangiophore was
borne in the axil of a foliage leaf.
(From information in Gould and
Delevoryas. 1977. Alcheringa 1, and
Taylor and Taylor. 1992. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences
U.S.A. 89.)

SPERMATOPHYTINA (SEED PLANTS): GYMNOSPERMS

259

However, although the Gnetopsida indicate how
certain  characteristics  of  angiosperms  may  have
arisen, they themselves appear to be as derived as
the  angiosperms,  and  cannot  be  considered  as
having participated in angiosperm ancestry. The
Gnetopsida are united by the presence of vessels
in  their  secondary  xylem,  and  the  tendency  for
the tip of the nucellus to be extended as a micro-
pylar tube. In Gnetum and Welwitschia the female
gametophyte takes the form of an embryo sac.

the 

Unfortunately 

fossil  record  of 

the
Gnetopsida  is  very fragmentary  and  does  not
extend further back than the Cretaceous. Drewria
(Fig. 8.53) has features of leaf venation similar to
those  of  the  leaves  of  Welwitschia (p.  263),  and
similar dichasial reproductive structures. There is
also  a  resemblance  in  this  respect  to the
Chloranthaceae, believed to be primitive dicotyle-
dons 
(Magnoliopsida,  p.  303).  Nevertheless,
Welwitschia is such a bizarre plant that the signiﬁ-
cance  of  such  resemblances  is  altogether  doubt-
ful.

The Gnetales
The  genus  Gnetum is  exclusively  tropical,  occur-
ring  in  Asia,  Africa  and  South  America.  Many
species are lianes, but others are small trees. The
leaves are well developed (Fig. 8.54), and possess
broad,  oval  laminae  with  reticulate  venation,
some  of  the  veins  ending  blindly  in  areolae.

Figure 8.51. Pentoxylon sahnii. (A) An axis about 1cm
(0.4in.) in diameter, bearing a short shoot, from the Indian
Jurassic. (B) A short shoot with ovulate cones. (After Sahni,
from Stewart and Rothwell. 1993. Paleobotany and the
Evolution of Plants, 2nd edn. Cambridge University Press, New
York.)

Numerous such axes occurred in helical arrange-
ment at the termination of a branch. The female
unit consisted of clusters of cupules subtended by
bracts (Fig. 8.52B), arising either terminally or in
the axils of leaves. Although the detail is not ade-
quate  to be  certain,  each  cupule  probably  con-
tained  a  pair  of  recurved  ovules,  each  with  two
integuments. Despite its possessing a number of
angiospermous  features,  Sanmiguelia is  best
regarded  as  a  specialized  gymnosperm,  some  of
the  specializations  (e.g.,  its  carpel-like  cupules)
being shared with angiosperms.

order 

and 

is  monogeneric 

Gnetopsida
The  class  Gnetopsida  consists  of  three  extant
orders: Gnetales, Welwitschiales and Ephedrales.
Each 
one
(Welwitschiales)  monospeciﬁc.  Not  only  are  the
Gnetopsida  very different  from  other  gymno-
sperms,  but  the  orders  also  differ  markedly
amongst themselves. They have been extensively
studied by morphologists because of certain fea-
tures  which  make  them  appear  intermediate
angiosperms.
between 

gymnosperms 

and 

260

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 3

Figure 8.52. Sanmiguelia lewisii. (A) Male and (B) female
reproductive shoots. The larger leaves were 48–60cm
(19–24in.) long and 28–31cm (11–12in.) broad. (From
Cornet. 1986. Evolutionary Theory 7.)

Vegetatively, therefore, Gnetum has very much the
appearance of an angiosperm.

The stem of Gnetum usually has a small pith,
surrounded by a little primary xylem. Most of the
xylem is secondary and is interspersed with broad
parenchymatous rays. In the climbing forms the
stem is eccentric, and successive cambia give rise
to a polycyclic stelar structure, and asymmetry in
any particular region depending upon its spatial
orientation.  In  general  features,  therefore,  the
stem  is  closer  to that  of  the  cycads  and  pterido-
sperms than to that of the conifers. A striking dif-
is  the  differentiation  of
ference,  however,
authentic  vessels 
in  the  secondary  xylem.
Another  notable  feature  in  Gnetum is  the  close
association between parenchymatous cells, recall-
ing the companion cells of angiosperms, and the

sieve cells. The cortex adjacent to the phloem is
rich in ﬁbers, occasionally used as cord. In some
species  the  stems  contain  laticifers,  one  of  the
very few instances of these tissue elements occur-
ring outside the ﬂowering plants.

The placing of Gnetum in the gymnosperms is
justiﬁed  by the  nature  of  its  reproduction.  Both
male and female reproductive regions are strobili,
usually  terminating  lateral  axes,  although  some
species show cauliﬂory. In the male strobilus (Fig.
8.55a)  the  axis  bears  a  succession  of  gallery-like
sheaths, usually about eight in number, probably
formed from coalesced bracts. In the axil of each
sheath are whorls of male ﬂowers, in some species
surmounted  by whorls  of  abortive ovules.  The
male ﬂower (Fig. 8.55b) consists of a single micro-
sporangiophore, terminating in two microsporan-
gia,  surrounded  at 
its  base  by a delicate
membranous sheath. The pollen grains are spher-
ical, inaperturate or with widely dispersed pores.
They are trinucleate when shed, one nucleus prob-
ably being prothallial.

SPERMATOPHYTINA (SEED PLANTS): GYMNOSPERMS

261

inverted ﬂask (Fig. 8.56b), commonly called (by
analogy with the angiosperms) an embryo sac.
Much of the cytoplasm, in which the nuclei are
irregularly scattered, lies at the base of the sac, but
the remainder is distributed as a thick layer
around the periphery, a large vacuole occupying
the center. While the embryo sac is completing its
development, the pollen tubes, having penetrated
the nucellus, approach the sac. One of the nuclei
in the male gametophyte moves to the tip of the
tube and divides
into two sperm nuclei.
Meanwhile one or more nuclei in the upper part
of the embryo sac in the region adjacent to the
closest pollen tube become conspicuously large.
The pollen tube, having by now made contact with
the sac, discharges the two sperm nuclei into it.
Microspectroﬂuorometry has shown that the
sperm nuclei at the time of discharge have already
replicated their DNA, so that they contain twice
the basic (2C) amount. The male nuclei immedi-
ately migrate to the nearby large nuclei of the sac,
which can thus be identiﬁed as egg nuclei. There
is no clear segregation of egg cells or nuclei within
the sac, and both sperm nuclei from the pollen
tube may enter into fusions.

The  entry  of  the  male  nuclei  stimulates
general division of the somatic nuclei within the
embryo sac. The contents of the sac become cellu-
lar,  the  cells  often  containing  several  nuclei,
which  subsequently  fuse.  The  male  nucleus  and
egg  nucleus  meanwhile  coalesce  and  form a
zygote lying within what can now be regarded as
equivalent to a cellular endosperm. Development
of  the  zygote  proceeds  at  once,  presumably
because the egg nucleus, like the sperm nucleus,
has already replicated its DNA. Karyogamy would
then  result  in  a  zygotic  nucleus  with  the  pre-
mitotic 4C amount necessary for the maintenance
of  the  diploid  condition  (cf.  Pteridium,  p.  207).
Early  development  does  not  involve any free
nuclear  division.  A  complicated  suspensor,  pos-
sibly  partly  haustorial  in  function,  is  formed
before the embryo proper. Although, since more
than  one  egg  nucleus  may  be  present  in  the
embryo sac  and  several  male  nuclei  may  be  dis-
charged into it, there is potential polyembryony,
only one embryo usually comes to maturity. The
embryo has two cotyledons.

Although the reproductive apparatus is quite

Figure 8.53. Drewria potomacensis. Reconstruction of a
vegetative and (above) a terminally fertile shoot. Scale bar
1 cm. (After Crane and Upchurch, from Stewart and
Rothwell. 1993. Paleobotany and the Evolution of Plants, 2nd
edn. Cambridge University Press, New York.)

In the female strobilus (Fig. 8.55c) each sheath
encloses  a  whorl  of  female  ﬂowers.  Each  ﬂower
consists  of  a  single,  radially  symmetrical  ovule
(Fig. 8.56a) surrounded by three integuments, the
outer of which is possibly homologous with the
basal sheath of the male ﬂower. The inner integu-
ment is extended into a cutinized micropyle, and
the nucellus beneath becomes transformed into a
pollen chamber. One or more of the tetrad of meg-
aspores formed in the nucellus enters into the for-
mation of the acellular female gametophyte.

Pollination is by wind, and also by insects,
attracted to the male ﬂowers by the sugary pollina-
tion drops of the adjacent abortive ovules, and
subsequently transferring the pollen to functional
female strobili. The entry of the pollen into the
micropyles of functional ovules initiates renewed
growth of the ovule. The germinating grains,
trapped by the proliferation of the cells lining the
micropyle, send pollen tubes into the nucellus.
Meanwhile the female gametophyte completes its
development. At maturity it is shaped like an

262

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 3

Figure 8.54. Gnetum gnemon.
Portion of a shoot bearing female
strobili. Scale bar 5cm. (After
Madhulata, from Maheshwari and
Vasil. 1961. Gnetum. CSIR, Delhi.)

Figure 8.55. Gnetum gnemon. (a) Young microsporangiate
strobilus with whorls of abortive ovules. (b) Dehiscent
microsporangia. (c) Megasporangiate strobilus. (From
Maheshwari and Vasil. 1961. Gnetum. CSIR, Delhi.)

different, the seed of Gnetum recalls that of some
Bennettitales. When ripe, the outer integuments
of  the  Gnetum seed  become  ﬂeshy, and  in  some
species are edible. Gnetum gnemon is functionally
dioecious, male and female strobili being formed
on  separate  plants,  but  the  situation  in  other
species is not clear.

The Welwitschiales
In respect of habit Welwitschia (Fig. 8.57) is one of
the most peculiar plants in existence. The genus is
monotypic, and the single species is conﬁned to
desert  regions  of  southwest  Africa.  The  stem  is
short and upright, and mostly below soil level. At
the  upper  end  it  bears  two strap-shaped  leaves
with  indeﬁnite  basal  growth.  Developmentally
these are the ﬁrst pair of leaves after the cotyle-
dons, and growth soon becomes conﬁned to them.
A  further  pair  of  decussate  leaf  primordia  is
formed in the young plant, but these differentiate

SPERMATOPHYTINA (SEED PLANTS): GYMNOSPERMS

263

Figure 8.56. Gnetum ula. (a) Longitudinal section of very
young ovule. (b) Longitudinal section of mature female
gametophyte (embryo sac) showing entry of pollen tube.
(After Vasil, from Maheshwari and Vasil. 1961. Gnetum. CSIR,
Delhi.)

Figure 8.57. Welwitschia mirabilis. Habit of the male plant.
(After Hooker. 1863. Transactions of the Linnean Society, London
24.)

264

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 3

Figure 8.58. Welwitschia. (a) The
male ﬂower, enclosed by two pairs
of decussate bracts. (b) The
stamens, the ﬁlaments fused below
into a membranous tube, surround
a sterile ovule. Scale bars 1mm.

into  horn-like  protuberances.
Below, the  stem  passes  into  a
long tap root which gives rise
to an  extensive  root  system.
The  stem  contains  much  sec-
ondary  tissue,  and  it  shows
anatomical peculiarities simi-
lar to those found in Gnetum and Ephedra.

Welwitschia is  dioecious,  the  cone-like  repro-
ductive  structures  terminating  small  dichasial
branch systems arising in the axils of the leaves
(Fig. 8.57). The cones consist of a series of scales,
arranged in decussate pairs, in the axils of which
are the individual ﬂowers. The male units consist
of a short axis bearing, ﬁrst, two decussate pairs of
small scales, and then a ring of trilocular synan-
gia.  The  ﬁlaments  supporting  the  synangia  are
fused together at the base into a membranous cyl-
inder (Fig. 8.58). In the center of the unit, and ter-
minating its short axis, is an abortive ovule. The
pollen  grains  are  binucleate  when  shed,  but
neither nucleus can be regarded as belonging to a
prothallial cell.

The  female  unit  consists  solely  of  an  ovule
with two integuments, terminating an axis with
occasionally two minute lateral outgrowths. The
outer  integument,  which  is  broadly  winged  tan-
gentially  to the  cone  and  is  traversed  by several
vascular  bundles,  may  be  homologous  with  the
upper  pair  of  bracteoles  of  the  male  ﬂower. The
membranous inner integument is extended at its
apex into a cutinized micropylar tube. The basic
symmetry of the ovule seems to be radial rather
than bilateral.

Pollination  and  the  initiation  of  the  embryo
sac take place much as in Gnetum, but in the later
stages, especially at the time of pollination, there
are  features  peculiar  to Welwitschia.  After  the
initial free nuclear division in the sac, walls are
laid  down,  many  of  the  cells  so  formed  being
multinucleate. As the pollen tubes penetrate the
nucellus, some of the multinucleate cells in the

upper part of the embryo sac give rise to tubular
processes. These grow up toward the descending
pollen  tubes  and  potential  egg  nuclei  move to
their tips. When a pollen tube and process make
contact  the  separating  walls  dissolve and  the
sperm  and  egg  nuclei  fuse.  The  zygote  then
becomes  ensheathed  in  cytoplasm  and  a  cell
membrane  forms.  There  is  no  free  nuclear  divi-
sion in the development of the zygote. A suspen-
sor  is  formed  and  below  it  the  embryo proper.
Only  one  zygote  yields  a  mature  embryo.  There
are two cotyledons. In fruit the outer integument
of the seed persists as a broad wing which assists
aerial dispersal.

The Ephedrales
The genus Ephedra is widely but discontinuously
distributed.  Some  35  species  occur  in  the
Mediterranean  region,  Asia  and  the  Americas.
They  are  typical  “switch plants”,  consisting  of
densely branched axes, the younger of which are
green  and  photosynthetic  (Fig.  8.59).  The  leaves
consist  of  whorls  of  small  scales  which  soon
become scarious. Many species grow in extremely
arid  situations,  such  as  sand  dunes  and  scree
slopes, and these not unexpectedly have an exten-
sive root system. The young twigs of some species
have medicinal uses, and the genus is the source
of the alkaloid ephedrine.

The  stem  of  Ephedra grows  from  a  group  of
meristematic  cells,  and  a  distinct  tunica  and
corpus are recognizable in the apex. The primary
vascular system consists of a number of bundles
symmetrically placed around a central pith (Fig.
8.60), the bundles being linked at the nodes by a

SPERMATOPHYTINA (SEED PLANTS): GYMNOSPERMS

265

transverse  vascular  ring,  as  in  Equisetum.  The
primary  xylem  becomes  surrounded  by secon-
dary, traversed  by broad  parenchymatous  rays.
The tracheids have bordered pits on their radial
walls,  well-developed  tori  also  being  present.
Many  of  the  tracheids  are  arranged  in  columns,
and  the  end  walls  are  so  extensively  perforated
that  they can  be  legitimately  regarded  as  vessel
segments with foraminate perforation plates. The
phloem  consists  of  sieve cells  and  parenchyma,
the sieve cells, like those of the conifers, having
highly inclined end walls.

Ephedra is  dioecious.  The  male  reproductive
regions are cone-like terminations of short shoots
which  arise  in  the  axils  of  the  scale  leaves.  The
short shoot bears a number of bracts in decussate
pairs, and in the axil of each bract is a male unit
(Fig.  8.61).  This  consists  of  a  single  microsporan-
giophore,  enclosed  in  the  basal  region  by two
medianly  placed  bracteoles,  and  bearing  at  its
summit  2–8  microsporangia.  The  pollen  grains
are ellipsoidal and furnished with prominent lon-
gitudinal ridges. Nuclear divisions occur immedi-
ately after the formation of the grains and when
mature they contain four or ﬁve nuclei. The ﬁrst
two daughter nuclei, which do not again divide,
are regarded as prothallial.

The  female  reproductive  organ  is  similar  in
structure  to the  male,  but  only  the  uppermost

Figure 8.59. Ephedra sp. Portion of shoot system showing
the articulated stem, reduced leaves, and female reproductive
structures.

Figure 8.60. Ephedra sp.
Transverse section of young stem.

266

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 3

Figure 8.61. Ephedra altissima.
Microsporangiate shoot.

the  male 

pair  of  bracts  is  fertile.  Each
subtends  an  upright  ovule
which  is  surrounded  by a
sheath, sometimes two-lipped
above and  probably  homolo-
gous  with  the  two  bracteoles
of 
ﬂower.
Hermaphrodite  ﬂowers  are
occasionally  found.  The  radi-
ally  symmetrical  ovule  (Fig.
8.62)  is  bounded  by a papery
integument, 
the  apex  of
which  is  prolonged  into  a
micropylar  tube,  highly  cutinized  at  maturity.
Megasporogenesis is initiated in the nucellus and
in the usual way only one megaspore of the tetrad
persists. The female gametophyte passes through

Figure 8.62. Ephedra sp. Longitudinal section of ovule with
archegonia. (From a photograph by W. R. Ivimey-Cook, in
McLean and Ivimey-Cook. 1951. Textbook of Theoretical Botany.
Longman, London.)

a period of free nuclear division before becoming
cellular. Two, rarely more, archegonia are differ-
entiated  at  the  micropylar  end,  and  they are
unusual  in  being  quite  deeply  sunken  into  the
somatic tissue of the gametophyte. Although the
cytology within the archegonium is normal, fol-
lowing division of the central cell nucleus there is
no  cytokinesis,  and  the  ventral  canal  nucleus
remains in the upper part of the now binucleate
cell. As the archegonia mature, the upper part of
the  nucellus  breaks  down  to form  a  pollen
chamber,  and  complex  cytological  phenomena,
amongst them the amoeboid migration of nuclei
and endomitosis, occur in the upper cells of the
gametophyte.  A  prominent  “pollination  drop”
forms at the oriﬁce of the micropyle (Fig. 8.63).

some 

the  male  ﬂowers  of 

The pollen is distributed by wind and possibly
also by insects attracted by the sugary pollination
drop  produced  by non-fertile  ovules  associated
with 
species.
Germination of the pollen occurs directly on the
surface of the female gametophyte and a pollen
tube  pushes  its  way  into  an  archegonium.  Two
sperm nuclei, produced by division of the sperma-
togenous cell, enter the egg cell. One fuses with
the egg nucleus and the other, in some species at
least,  regularly  fuses  with  the  ventral  canal
nucleus  (a  form of  double  fertilization).  Both
fusion  products  undergo  mitoses  and  eight  pro-
embryos may result. There is thus potential poly-
embryony, but only one embryo normally reaches
maturity. A suspensor, of complex and compound
origin,  drives  the  surviving  embryo into  the

SPERMATOPHYTINA (SEED PLANTS): GYMNOSPERMS

267

Figure 8.63. Ephedra. Pollination
drop secreted from the tip of the
slender micropylar tube of a mature
ovule. Scale bar 1mm. (Photograph
by W. E. Friedman, reproduced by
permission of the American
Botanical Society.)

central region of the female gametophyte, rich in
food reserves. The mature embryo has two cotyle-
dons  and  lies  surrounded  by the  membranous
remains  of  the  ovular  tissues  and  the  hardened
integument.  Reproduction  in  Ephedra is  more
rapid  than  in  the  conifers;  the  interval  between
pollination  and  fertilization  may  amount  to no
more than 24 hours in Ephedra (cf. Pinus, p. 238).

The “double fertilization” in Ephedra has been
held to be relevant to the origin of the formation
of endosperm in ﬂowering plants (p. 298).

In many species of Ephedra the bracts below the
ovules become hard and wing-like in fruit, but in
the  alpine  E.  helvetica they become  ﬂeshy  and
brightly pigmented.

Gymnospermy as an evolutionary grade
The  diversity  of  the  gymnosperms  taken  as  a
whole,  in  both  vegetative  and  reproductive  fea-
tures,  indicates  that  gymnospermy must  be
regarded as a grade of evolutionary advance, prob-
ably  ﬁrst attained  in  the  second  half  of  the

268

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 3

Devonian  period.  The  seed  habit  may  of  course
have  arisen  independently  more  than  once  in
groups of plants at the progymnospermous level
of evolution. This would be in line with the over-
lapping  of  the  progymnosperms  and  gymno-
sperms  in  geological  time,  and  the  diversity
present  in  both.  Within  the  gymnosperms,  for
example, the afﬁnities of the cycads appear to be
pteridospermous,  those  of  Ginkgo  cordaitalean.
Here then are two groups of plants whose evolu-
tion has probably been independent for many mil-
lions of years, but which are at the same level of
advancement  in  respect  of  the  reproductive
process. A number of features in these primitive
seed  plants  may  have  evolved 
in  parallel.
Siphonogamy, for example, may have arisen inde-
pendently  in  the  Pinopsida  and  the  Gnetopsida.
Similarly, the symmetry of the ovule, although it
is useful to distinguish between radiospermy and
platyspermy in the early seeds, may also have been
a  feature  which  responded  independently  to
reproductive  specialization  in  the  evolving  line-
ages. The ovules of Caytonia (p. 254), for example,
appear to be platyspermic, although the afﬁnities
of the plant seem undoubtedly to be with the later
radiospermic pteridosperms.

The highest grade of gymnospermy is clearly
shown by the Gnetopsida. The peculiarities of the
female gametophyte in Gnetum and Welwitschia
indicate the kind of developments which, in
some early transitional forms, may have led to
the angiospermous embryo sac. Although there
are differences in the manner of their formation,

the vessels of the Gnetopsida also foreshadow
those of the angiosperms. Further, studies of the
nucleotide sequences of the nucleic acids show
that those of the Gnetopsida more closely resem-
ble those of the angiosperms than any other seed
plants. This agrees well with those cladistic anal-
yses of seed plants which, utilizing morphologi-
cal characters, can include fossils. However, recent
and more penetrating comparative analyses of the
nuclear, mitochondrial and chloroplast genomes
of a range of representative plants have indicated
that the afﬁnities of the Gnetopsida lie within
the conifers, the Pinopsida and the Gnetopsida
forming sister groups. The angiosperm-like fea-
tures of the Gnetopsida may thus have arisen
independently. The origin of the angiosperms
may even have preceded the emergence of the
Gnetopsida, lying in a more ancient stock of
seed plants, possibly identical with that which
gave rise to the Bennettitales and Pentoxylales
(although such a remote origin would be difﬁcult
to reconcile with comparatively late appearance
of fossil angiosperm pollen (see p. 303)). Further
discussion of the implications of the recent unex-
pected molecular discoveries will be found in
The Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
U. S. A., volume 97, pp. 4086-4097 (2000). Taking the
wider view, the relationship between the gymno-
sperms and the angiosperms is analogous to that
between the progymnosperms and the gymno-
sperms, the latter in each case being a special-
ized subset of the former.

9

The subkingdom Embryophyta (cont.):
division Tracheophyta, Part 4

SPERMATOPHYTINA (cont.):
ANGIOSPERMS (ﬂowering
plants)

The  angiosperms  are  the  most  abundant  and
widely distributed of the seed-bearing tracheoph-
ytes.  They  are  of  outstanding  economic  impor-
tance,  being  the  source  of  many  durable
hardwoods, most of our vegetable foodstuffs, and
about one-quarter (in monetary value) of commer-
cially marketed drugs. They number some 250000
species and show remarkable diversity in growth
form, morphology and physiology.

The  general  features  of  the  angiosperms  can

be summarized as follows:

Sporophyte herbaceous or arborescent; branching
usually axillary. Leaves various, but regarded as
megaphyllous in origin. Secondary vascular tissue
commonly present. Vascular system usually con-
sisting of vessels and tracheids, and sieve tubes
with distinctive companion cells. Heterospory as
in the gymnosperms, but the ovules borne within
a characteristic structure (carpel), usually closed,
the pollen germinating on a specialized region of
the exterior (stigma). Female gametophyte always
an embryo sac, lacking archegonia. Male cells
(sperms) lacking specialized means of locomotion,
released into the embryo sac from the ﬁlamentous
male gametophyte (siphonogamy). Fertilization
characteristically double, yielding in each embryo
sac a zygote and a mostly triploid endosperm
nucleus. Embryogeny endoscopic. Various forms
of asexual reproduction not uncommon.

Magnoliopsida and Liliopsida
The angiosperms fall into two major classes, the
Magnoliopsida  (dicotyledons)  and  the  Liliopsida
(monocotyledons), in which the embryos are com-
monly furnished with two or only one cotyledon
respectively. These  groups  also  differ  in  many
other features, with distinct trends in leaf vena-
tion and form, and ﬂower symmetry. It is, none-
theless,  convenient  to consider  them  together
because  of  the  wealth  of  shared  characteristics.
The  split  into  two  classes  is  largely one  of  expe-
diency, since it facilitates the classiﬁcation of the
enormous diversity of the existing ﬂower-bearing
spermatophytes.

The  evolution  of  the  two  classes  of  angio-
sperms (of which the largest, and in part the most
primitive, is the Magnoliopsida) has many differ-
ent aspects. Of particular interest to systematists
is the evolution of individual species, genera and
families.  Another  approach,  of  more  appeal  to
morphologists,  is  to consider  the  evolution  of
certain  morphological  or  anatomical  features
(e.g., the form of leaves and the nature of vascular
tissue) 
the  angiosperms  as  a  whole.
Unfortunately  the  amount  of  information  the
fossil record can offer directly on these points is
limited.  By  the  time  the  two  classes  of  angio-
sperms  become  ﬁrmly 
(mid-
Cretaceous)  they are  referable  to a surprising
extent to modern families and even genera. The
inception  of  the  angiosperms  was  evidently  fol-
lowed by a burst of radiative evolution which had
a  profound  effect  upon  the  Earth’s  ﬂora  and
fauna. The enigmatic origin and evolution of the

identiﬁable 

in 

270

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 4

Figure 9.1. Life forms of
angiosperms. The circles indicate
the positions of the resting buds. (a)
Phanerophyte. (b) Chamaephyte. (c)
Hemicryptophyte. (d) Cryptophyte.
(e) Therophyte.

angiosperms  will  be  consid-
ered  after  we have  reviewed
the main features of the two classes.

is 

Growth forms of angiosperms
Examination  of  a  tracheophyte  ﬂora  (frequently
consisting  principally  of  angiosperms)  will
usually reveal that it consists of a number of dis-
tinct  growth forms,  ranging  from  large woody
trees to minute herbs. The extent of the represen-
tation of these different morphologies in a given
vegetation presents intricate ecological problems,
the  discussion  of  which 
facilitated  by
Raunkiaer’s  concept  of  life  forms.  A  life  form is
deﬁned by the length of life of the shoots and the
position and protection of the resting buds (Fig.
9.1). Those plants in which the shoots are persis-
tent and the buds are carried well above the soil
surface  are  termed  phanerophytes,  those  with
resting  buds  closer  to the  surface  chamaephytes,
and those with resting buds at the surface hemi-
cryptophytes.  Familiar  examples  of  these  three
classes are, respectively, the larger woody plants,
small bushes such as Calluna (heather), and rosette
plants such as Taraxacum (dandelion). The classiﬁ-
cation, except for certain small specialized catego-
ries,  is  completed  by the  cryptophytes (geophytes)
where the resting buds are below the soil surface,
and  the  therophytes.  The  latter  are  those  annuals
and  ephemerals  which  tide  over  unfavorable
periods  as  embryos  enclosed  in  seeds.  By  use  of
this classiﬁcation it is possible to show in a precise
statistical manner that, for example, the vegeta-
tion of the humid tropics consists predominantly
of phanerophytes, and that in the northern hemi-
sphere  the  percentage  of  hemicryptophytes  in
general increases with latitude (Table 9.1).

Although  there  is  this  evident  relationship
between life form and distribution, no less impor-
tant in determining the distribution of individual
species are such factors as mean minimum tem-
peratures, the length of time available for gainful

photosynthesis in the yearly cycle, and the avail-
ability of moisture.

For convenience of description we can regard
the plant body of an angiosperm as consisting of
three morphological categories, stem, leaf and
root, although, as we shall see later, there are good
reasons for regarding the leaf as a megaphyll and
hence of axial origin. The main stem is usually
upright, displaying negative gravitropism and pos-
itive phototropism. Branching occurs in the axils
of leaves. The ﬁnal orientation of these laterals is
probably determined by a combination of complex
gravitropic and phototropic responses. Although
such branch systems are usually aerial, they may be
subterranean (when, of course, light will no longer
affect morphogenesis). The genus Parinarium, for
example, is represented by normal trees in tropical
Africa, but in P. capense (Fig. 9.2), a species of cooler
South Africa, the stem, although of similar woodi-
ness and ramiﬁcation, is below soil level, only
small shoots appearing at the surface. This so-
called suffrutescent habit is also encountered,
although less strikingly, in alpine willows.

In the development of the branch system the
main axis may originate in two ways. Either the
apical bud continues its vegetative growth indeﬁ-
nitely, or  it  is  extinguished  at  the  end  of  each
season, when either it gives rise to a reproductive
system of limited growth or it aborts. Where the
apical bud remains active (Fig. 9.3a), the main axis
is of simple origin, and growth is said to be mono-
podial. Where it is extinguished (Fig. 9.3b), growth
is continued in the following season by the upper-
most  lateral.  Subsequent  positional  re-adjust-
ments  often  almost  wholly  obscure 
the
discontinuities  in  the  mature  axis.  The  axis  is,
nevertheless, of compound origin, and growth is
said to be sympodial. These two kinds of growth are
represented  amongst  plants  of  all  life  forms.
Amongst phanerophytes, for example, the growth

SPERMATOPHYTINA (CONT.): ANGIOSPERMS (FLOWERING PLANTS)

271

Table 9.1

The relationship between life form and latitude.

Flora

Amazonian rain forest
St.Thomas & St. John (Virgin Islands)
Denmark
Iceland
Spitzbergen

Approx.
latitude

0°
18°N
57°N
65°N
77°N

Percentage representation

Ch

1
12
3
13
22

H

3
9
50
54
60

Cr

1
4
22
20
15

Th

0
14
18
11
2

Ph

95
61
7
2
1

Notes:
Data from C. Raunkiaer, 1934. The Life Forms of Plants. Oxford University Press, London. Succulents, water plants, and specialized
epiphytes are omitted.
Ph, phanerophyte; Ch, chamaephyte; H, hemicryptophyte; Cr, cryptophyte; Th, therophyte.

Figure 9.2. Parinarium capense.
The suffrutescent habit. (After Davy.
1922. Journal of Ecology 10.)

Figure 9.3. The basic types of
branching. (a) Monopodial. (b)
Sympodial.

272

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 4

of the ash (Fraxinus) is monopodial and that of the
lime (Tilia) is sympodial. The factors which cause
abortion of terminal buds in plants of sympodial
growth are  complex,  but  in  trees  day  length  is
often of paramount importance. The shortening
days of later summer and autumn stimulate the
synthesis of a growth inhibitor in the leaves. This
is  in  turn  transmitted  to the  terminal  buds,
causing either dormancy or in some species abor-
tion.  In  long  days  the  inhibitor  is  lacking.
Experimental alteration of day length can there-
fore  sometimes  lead  to plants  with  sympodial
growth becoming monopodial.

Aerial stems may sometimes twine in a regular
fashion. Familiar examples are the hop (Humulus
lupulus), where the stem grows with a left-handed
screw (clockwise  when  viewed  from  above),  and
bindweed  (Convolvulus),  where  the  screw is  right-
handed.  The  mechanism  by which  twining
growth is  achieved  remains  obscure,  but  in  the
hop it has been demonstrated that the curvature
of the stem remains the same whatever the diam-
eter of the support. Consequently with increasing
girth the coils become flatter. In some ﬂowering
plants the main axis takes the form of a horizon-
tal  rhizome,  a  form of  growth already  encoun-
tered in other groups of plants (e.g., p. 192). The
rhizome of Aegopodium podagraria (goutweed), and
probably of other species, is able, by adjusting the
orientation  of  its  growing  region,  to maintain
itself  at  an  almost  constant  depth  beneath  the
surface of the soil. The physiological mechanism
underlying  this  remarkable  behavior  is  still  not
wholly known, but the ambient oxygen tension is
probably  an  important  factor.  Other  highly
modiﬁed stems are seen in corms, bulbs and some
tubers,  in  which  the  stem,  which  is  adapted  for
the  storage  of  food,  either  in  itself  (corms,  Fig.
9.4a;  stem  tubers,  Fig.  9.4b)  or  in  the  associated
swollen leaf bases or scale leaves (bulbs, Fig. 9.4c ),
shows very little elongation. A very peculiar stem,
resembling  a  thallose  liverwort,  is  found  in  the
Podostemaceae (Fig. 9.5), a family of small plants
growing on rocks by tropical streams.

On tropical mountains at high altitudes (of the
order  of  4000m  (c.  13000ft)),  where  the  closed-
canopy  forest gives  way  to tussocky  vegetation,
familiar  plant  families  may  be  represented  by
bizarre  forms.  The  Asteraceae,  for  example,

contain  the  giant  rosette  plants  Espeletia (of  the
South American paramo) and species of Senecio of
similar  form on  African  mountains.  The  large-
leaved  perennial  rosettes  are  borne  on  woody
stems,  occasionally  branched,  and  frequently
shrouded  by persistent  dead  leaves,  the  whole
reaching  or  exceeding  2m (7ft)  in  height.  These
plants,  scattered  throughout  largely herbaceous
vegetation,  presumably  enjoy  a  selective  advan-
tage in the demanding environment at this alti-
tude,  but  the  operative  factors  have not  been
ﬁrmly identiﬁed. Species of Lobelia tend to adopt a
similar,  but  less  extreme,  form on  Mt.  Kenya  in
Africa. Molecular comparison of the African high
alpine  species  of  Senecio with  those  of  normal
form at  lower  altitudes  reveals  no  profound
genomic differences.

Stems

growth and anatomy
The stem of the angiosperm grows from a group
of meristematic cells lying near the summit of the
apex. The apex itself (Fig. 9.6) is usually organized
into  two  distinct  zones,  recognizable  by their
geometry  and  the  directions  of  the  divisions  of
the  cells.  In  the  center  is  the  corpus,  where  divi-
sions are in various directions, thus adding to the
width  of  the  apex  as  well  as  to its  length.  The
corpus is covered by the tunica, a layer of cells in
which  divisions  are  principally  anticlinal,  thus
increasing the surface of the apex. The tunica is
usually  two  cells  thick,  but  in  some  plants  the
thickness may amount to only a single cell and in
others to four or ﬁve. That these two zones are to
some  extent  independent  is  shown  by the  exis-
tence of chimeras in which the cells of the tunica
acquire (as a consequence, for example, of treat-
ment  with  colchicine)  aneuploid  or  polyploid
nuclei  and  retain  them  through  all  subsequent
divisions,  while  the  nuclei  of  the  cells  of  the
corpus remain diploid. The tunica yields the leaf
primordia  and  ultimately  the  cortex  of  the
mature stem, and the corpus the vascular tissue
and associated parenchyma. Although this kind of
apical organization is foreshadowed in the coni-
fers  (particularly  in  Araucaria (see  p.  230)),  it  is
nowhere so distinct as in the angiosperms.

In  the  Magnoliopsida,  the  primary  vascular

SPERMATOPHYTINA (CONT.): ANGIOSPERMS (FLOWERING PLANTS)

273

Figure 9.4. Stems modiﬁed for storage. (a) Longitudinal
section of the corm of Crocus (winter condition). (b) Stem
tuber formation in Solanum tuberosum. (c) Longitudinal
section of the bulb of Allium cepa.

tissue  usually  consists  of  a  ring  of  collateral
bundles in which the differentiation of the xylem
is centrifugal and of the phloem centripetal (Fig.
9.7). The xylem and phloem usually remain separ-
ated by a thin layer of undifferentiated cells, later
recognizable  as  the  intrafascicular  cambium.  In
the  Liliopsida,  however, the  bundles,  although

often  collateral  and  mostly  oriented  with  the
xylem adaxial, are not in one ring but are irregu-
larly  scattered  in  a  parenchymatous  matrix,
referred  to as  the  ground  parenchyma  (Fig.  9.8).
The bundles of the Liliopsida also lack potentially
meristematic  tissue  between  the  xylem  and  the
phloem, and are consequently said to be “closed”.
tissue  soon
appears in a magnoliopsid stem. The undifferen-
tiated layer in the primary bundle becomes meris-
tematic  and  continuous  with  a  similar  layer
interfascicular
between 

Usually  secondary  vascular 

the  bundles 

(the 

274

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 4

Figure 9.5. Butumia marginalis of
the Podostemaceae. Flowers are
produced at the margin of the
ﬂattened stem. (After Taylor. 1953.
Bulletin of the British Museum (Natural
History), Botany 1.)

Figure 9.6. Syringa. Longitudinal
section of the stem apex.

lianes). 

cambium),  and  subsequent
activity  of  the  cambial  ring
resembles that already seen in
the  gymnosperms  (Fig.  9.9).
The  ﬁrst cambium  does  not
always  continue  to function
indeﬁnitely (notably in woody
climbers, 
Other
cambia then arise outside the
vascular  cylinder,  recalling
the situation in Cycas (p. 247).
In  a  few  arborescent  Liliopsida  a  meristematic
zone  at  the  periphery  of  the  stem  gives  rise  to
additional collateral vascular bundles as the girth
of the stem increases. This activity is, however, not
extensive. In most arborescent Liliopsida, such as
the palms, the plant remains for several years as a
widening  bud  bearing  a  rosette  of  leaves  only  a
little above soil level. When the bud approaches
its mature diameter elongation of the stem takes
place very rapidly. For this reason, coconut palms,
for  example,  are  not  commonly  seen  with  their
trunks  half  extended.  The  manner  of  growth of
the liliopsid trees is thus quite different from that
of the magnoliopsid.

The vascular tissue of almost all angiosperms
is distinguished from that of all but a few living
gymnosperms  (Gnetopsida,  p.  259)  by the  pres-
ence  of  vessels  in  the  xylem  and  of  companion
cells in the phloem. Vessels are long tubes, com-
monly about 10cm (4in.) long, but in some plants,

such as lianes, reaching or exceeding a length of
5 m (16.5ft). These tubes are composed of segments
(Fig. 9.10), each of which is derived from a single
cell and is equivalent to a single tracheid. During
differentiation of a vessel, however, the end walls
of the segments are resorbed, leaving either mere
rims marking their position, or highly perforated
diaphragms, referred to as end plates. Vessels are
often accompanied by tracheids. There are a few
angiosperms (e.g., the largely southern hemi-
sphere Drimys) in which the conducting elements
of the xylem remain wholly tracheidal.

The  sieve cells  of  the  angiosperms  are
arranged in longitudinal rows, the whole column
being referred to as a sieve tube (Fig. 9.11). The end
walls of the sieve cells (or “sieve tube elements”)
are  usually  inclined  and  bear  one  or  more  sieve
plates. The contents of the sieve cells remain orga-
nized, although the cytology is peculiar and the

SPERMATOPHYTINA (CONT.): ANGIOSPERMS (FLOWERING PLANTS)

275

organelles,  including  the  nucleus,  are  partly
degenerate.  Deposits  of  an  amorphous  polysac-
charide, callose, often appear on the sieve plates
at the end of the growing season. The companion
cell or cells, closely applied to the sieve cell, may
be essential for its function. The companion cell
has a dense cytoplasm and a prominent nucleus;
it arises from the same mother cell as the adjacent
sieve cell. The sieve tubes of the liliopsid trees, in
the  absence  of  any  signiﬁcant  cambial  activity,
necessarily remain alive and functional for many
years.

The  vascular  system  of  the  Magnoliopsida  is
evidently  capable  of  maintaining  a  living  plant
body longer than that of the Liliopsida.  14C data
indicate  that  some  trees  in  the  Amazonian  rain
forest achieve ages in excess of 1400 years. Clumps
of  the  creosote  bush  (Larrea tridentata)  in  the
southwestern desert of North America have been
estimated  from  growth measurements  to be  at
least  10000  years  old.  Magnoliopsid  trees  may
attain 
impressive  heights.  The  Australian
Eucalyptus regnans, for example, a tree of the tem-
perate rain forest, reaches heights of 100m (333ft)
or  more,  rivaling  and  perhaps  exceeding  the
stature of conifers such as Sequoia and Pseudotsuga.
A cork cambium may arise in the outer cortex
of  the  stem,  particularly  in  Magnoliopsid  trees.
Any tissue outside it dies and forms a tough skin
covering  the  ﬁrst-formed  cork.  Aeration  of  the
cortex is continued by way of lenticels, passages
ﬁlled  with  powdery  cork  left  in  the  denser  and
compact layered tissue.

In  some  Australian  species  of  Eucalyptus
dormant  buds  are  retained  deep  within  the
tissues of the mature stem. These  epicormic buds
are  often  able  to survive  forest ﬁre  and  restore
growth to the affected area. A woody structure (lig-
notuber) is found at the base of the stem in many
species  of  Eucalyptus.  This  is  also  well  furnished
with  epicormic  buds  and  can  withstand  ﬁre.  In
the  “snow  gum”  (E.  pauciﬂora),  which  ascends  to
altitudes  of  1400m  (4700ft)  in  the  Northern
Tablelands of eastern Australia, the lignotuber is
able  to regenerate  aerial  growth in  areas  devas-
tated by avalanches.

Figure 9.7. Dahlia. Transverse section of a segment of a
young stem.

Figure 9.8. Zea mays. Transverse section of a segment of
stem.

276

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 4

Figure 9.9. Diagram showing the
method of production of secondary
vascular tissue in a magnoliopsid
stem.

Figure 9.10. Fraxinus. A single vessel segment from a
macerate of the secondary wood.

Figure 9.11. Cucumis. Longitudinal section of a sieve tube
and companion cell.

SPERMATOPHYTINA (CONT.): ANGIOSPERMS (FLOWERING PLANTS)

277

Figure 9.12. Thalictrum
aquilegifolium. Architecture of the
compound leaf.

In many parts of the world
wood is the principal source of
fuel. Some woods (e.g., Acacia)
contain 
rings  of  calcium
oxalate  crystals  at  the  boun-
daries  of  the  annual  rings.
These  release  carbon  dioxide
on  burning,  making  for  slow
combustion.  Such  wood  is
much sought after by villagers
in Zimbabwe.

Leaves
The  leaves  of  angiosperms
show a wide range of size and
shape, and all forms of phyllo-
taxy  from  distichy to  decus-
sate,  whorled  and 
spiral
arrangements  are  found.  The
factors determining these dif-
ferent arrangements have not
yet been identiﬁed. There are, however, theoreti-
cal  grounds  for  believing  that  spiral  arrange-
ments  (which,  with  upright  stems,  result  in  the
minimum amount of shading of a leaf by others
above it) are the consequence of a periodicity set
up  by interacting  morphogens  at  the  apex,  and
the resulting cell spacing. The actual emergence
of the leaf primordium seems to be facilitated by
the localized release of the wall-loosening protein
extensin into the walls of the cells at the site of
initiation.

In most mature leaves a petiole and lamina are
usually distinguishable, and two small lateral out-
growths at the base of the petiole, termed stipules,
are often present. In many species the leaves are
pinnately branched, sometimes even as far as the
third  order,  causing  the  whole  to resemble  a
lateral  branch  system.  This  resemblance  is  occa-
sionally  enhanced  (e.g.,  in  Thalictrum aquilegifo-
lium,  Fig.  9.12)  by the  presence  of  small
outgrowths,  recalling  stipules,  at  the  points  of
branching.  At the  other  extreme  leaves  may  be
little  more  than  scales,  photosynthesis  being
carried out principally if not entirely in the stem.

economic product s
The  stems  of  angiosperms  frequently  contain
abundant ﬁbers, and the formation of periderm
in the outer cortex or even closer to the vascular
tissue is often extensive. Some trees generate cork
very freely, that of Quercus suber (cork oak) in the
Mediterranean  region  and  the  Atlantic  coast  of
Portugal being periodically harvested and ﬁnding
many uses in commerce. A large part of the eco-
nomic  value  of  angiosperms  in  fact  lies  in  the
stems.  Quite  apart  from  the  often  very valuable
timber, stems yield materials as diverse as starch
(e.g., sago from the palm Metroxylon and arrowroot
from  the  rhizome  of  South  American  Maranta),
sugar (from sugar cane and in the form of syrup
from  the  stem  of  Acer saccharinum,  the  sugar
maple), ﬁbers, spices (e.g., cinnamon, the bark of
Cinnamomum zeylanicum), rubber (formed from the
latex of Hevea, and less importantly from that of
certain other species), oil (from the trunk of the
Amazonian  Copaifera),  and  drugs  (e.g.,  quinine
from the bark of Cinchona). The oil from Copaifera
is  rich  in  sesquiterpenes  and  resembles  diesel
fuel.

278

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 4

Figure 9.13. Ruscus aculeatus.
Habit of shoot.

In  Casuarina,  a  tree  of  the
tropics  and  subtropics  of  the
Old World with leaves of this
kind,  the  leaves  are  arranged
in  whorls  so  that  the  whole
shoot comes to bear a striking
external  likeness  to that  of
Equisetum. In a few plants (e.g.,
aculeatus,  butcher’s
Ruscus
broom)  the  reduction  of  the
leaves  to scarious  scales  has
been  accompanied  by the
transformation 
lateral
shoots of limited growth into
ﬂattened,  leaf-like  structures
called  phylloclades or  cladodes
(Fig. 9.13).

of 

An intermediate condition
is  where  photosynthesis  is
carried  on  in  broadened  and
ﬂattened  petioles,  the  laminae  being  absent  or
rudimentary. These  structures,  called  phyllodes,
are found in many species of Acacia (wattle).

A classiﬁcation has been developed for leaves,
depending upon the area of the mature lamina,
and  clear  relationships  have emerged  between
climate and leaf size. In the tropical rain forest,
for example, the leaves of many species tend to be
large and of similar area, but in the dry, scrubby
vegetation of the Mediterranean region the leaves
by contrast show a much wider range of consider-
ably smaller areas. Amongst other relationships,
mostly  of  unknown  signiﬁcance,  is  the  rarity  of
leaves  with  toothed  margins  in  tropical  vegeta-
tion,  and  their  abundance  in  temperate  vegeta-
tion. Leathery leaves, with their apices extended
into “drip tips”, are also characteristic of vegeta-
tion in regions of high rainfall. Experiments have
shown that such leaves do drain faster than com-
parable leaves lacking such tips. Species growing
by streams often tend to have long narrow leaves
(stenophylls). Species of Salix (willow) provide famil-
iar examples in north temperate regions.

Although the leaves of most species are differ-
entiated into a lamina and a petiole, sometimes
the petiole is lacking. The leaves are then termed

sessile.  The  grasses  provide  familiar  examples  of
sessile  leaves.  Most  leaves  are  oriented  with  the
plane of the lamina more or less horizontal, and
the insertion into the stem transverse. There are,
however, some plants (all with distichous phyllo-
taxy) in which the plane of the leaf is vertical and
the base of the leaf clasps the stem as a rider the
horse. This so-called equitant arrangement is well
seen in Iris. In some species motor cells, usually
aggregated  into  a  distinct  pulvinus,  are  able  to
alter  the  orientation  of  the  leaf  in  a  striking
fashion. In the tropical rain tree (Samanea (Pitheco-
lobium) saman), for example, the leaves appear to
collapse with the diminishing light of the after-
noon  (a  so-called  “sleep  movement”),  and  in
Mimosa pudica (sensitive plant) similar movements
take place  if  the  leaves  are  mechanically  dis-
turbed.  The  leaves  of  the  “compass  plants”,  of
which Lactuca scariola (a wild lettuce) is a notable
example, move in relation to the sun so that only
one  edge  is  fully  insolated  at  any  one  time.  The
motive effects of pulvini depend upon changes in
turgor and the ability of the cytoplasm in certain
conditions  to move  water  actively  in  and  out  of
vacuoles.

In  many  Liliopsida  the  leaf  bases  become

SPERMATOPHYTINA (CONT.): ANGIOSPERMS (FLOWERING PLANTS)

279

Figure 9.14. Impatiens parviﬂora.
Transverse section of leaf. (a) From
plant growing in full sunlight. (b)
From plant growing in 7 percent
sunlight. (After Hughes. 1959.
Journal of the Linnean Society, Botany
56.)

Amongst  other 
structures
found in leaves are oil glands,
often  giving  the  leaf  a  fra-
grance  when  crushed,  and,
usually  at  the  margins  or  on
the  petiole,  nectaries  (as,  for
example, in Prunus, cherry). In
some species of tropical plants
stipular  nectaries  are  asso-
ciated with symbiotic bacteria
(“leaf nodules”). The venation
of the lamina of the magnoli-
opsids is commonly reticulate,
patterns  of  extreme  intricacy
often  being  generated  by the
minor  veins,  many  of  which  end  blindly  in  the
areolae (Fig. 9.15). The symmetry of the vascular
supply ascending the petiole is usually clearly dor-
siventral, but it becomes almost perfectly radial in
the  petioles  of  peltate  leaves  (e.g.,  Tropaeolum
majus, the garden nasturtium).

The leaf primordium grows from initial cells
at  its  margin,  and  at  ﬁrst  cell  division  predomi-
nates  over  expansion.  The  pattern  of  the  main
veins  soon,  however, becomes  established,  and
also, in Magnoliopsida, that of any branching of
the  leaf.  This  is  brought  about  by the  marginal
meristem becoming discontinuous and its activ-
ity  conﬁned  to deﬁnite  areas  of  the  periphery.
Segmentation  in  the  leaves  of  liliopsids  (e.g.,
palms)  is  a  more  complicated  process,  involving
folding  and  the  elimination  of  tracts  of  tissue
between  areas  which  subsequently  become
pinnae.

As growth of a leaf primordium proceeds, cell
expansion  comes  to predominate  over  division,
one of the last products of cell division being the
guard cells of the stomata. It is evident that the
surface  growth of  the  lamina  is  closely  coordi-
nated with the extent of the vascular framework.
In  some  plants  it  is  possible  to disturb  this

swollen and form a subterranean bulb which over-
winters (Fig. 9.4c). The cells of the bulb are ﬁlled
with food reserves, and are often also rich in sec-
ondary metabolites. The lachrymatory thiopropa-
nol S-oxide of the onion bulb is particularly well
known. In palms the leaf base is often prominent
and continues to ensheathe the trunk long after
the  expanded  portion  of  the  leaf  has  died  and
fallen. The result is a shaggy-looking trunk, often
“tidied up” when palms are used as street trees.

anatomy and devel opment
Although the leaves of angiosperms are structu-
rally similar to those of gymnosperms, there are a
number of new features. The palisade tissue, for
example, is frequently sharply differentiated from
the rest of the mesophyll and in some plants, espe-
cially  in  those  that  are  shade  tolerant  (e.g.,
Impatiens parviﬂora, balsam), the form of the pali-
sade is markedly inﬂuenced by the irradiance (Fig.
9.14).  The  change  in  cell  shape  in  the  shade
exposes a greater proportion of the chloroplasts to
the incident light with the result that over a wide
range there is little variation in net assimilation.
Equitant leaves are usually bifacial, stomata and
palisade being symmetrically placed on each side.

280

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 4

Figure 9.15. Impatiens parviﬂora. The pattern of leaf
venation. (After Hughes. 1959. Journal of the Linnean Society,
Botany 56.)

coordination by allowing the primordium to form
in  one  day  length  but  to expand  in  another,
leading  to deformed  leaves.  These  experiments
reveal that the factors controlling the growth of
the  vascular  skeleton  are  different  from  those
inﬂuencing  the  expansion  of  the 
lamina.
Standing apart from this general scheme of devel-
opment  are  again  the  leaves  of  some  Liliopsida.
The leaf of a grass, for example, grows from a mer-
istem at the base of the lamina, above which there
is  continuous  basipetal  differentiation  until  the
leaf reaches its mature length.

In  some  species  leaves  are  deciduous,  being
severed from the axis by a distinct abscission layer.
Partial digestion and disarticulation of cell walls
at  this  site  are  brought  about  by hydrolases,
including  cellulase.  In  temperate  regions  abscis-
sion usually occurs during the shortening days of
autumn,  but  some  tropical  trees  also  regularly
shed  their  leaves,  the  periodicity  having  no
evident relation to season.

Leaves of angiosperms show a wider range of
surface  coverings  than  those  of  any  other  land
plants. These may take the form of plates or crys-
tals of wax (as on the upper surface of the leaf of
Zea mays) or of hairs or scales. Markedly pubescent
leaves are often found in desert plants, and such
investments may reduce the absorbance of photo-
synthetically  active  light  by as  much  as  60

Figure 9.16. Eucalyptus globulus. (a) Shoot with juvenile
leaves. (b) Shoot with adult leaves. (After Niedenzu, in Engler
and Prantl. 1898. Die Natürlichen Pﬂanzenfamilien, vol. III, 7.
Engelmann, Leipzig.)

percent. There is evidence that this is an adaptive
response, the degree of hairiness being such that
net assimilation is matched to the water available.
The vascular bundles in leaves are frequently
surrounded by a chlorophyllous sheath. In some
plants this sheath consists of a single layer of large
cells containing conspicuous chloroplasts. These
can be seen in the light microscope to lack grana,
but  starch grains  are  often  prominent.  This  so-
called “Kranz” anatomy is associated with a partic-
ular  kind  of  photosynthesis  in  which  carbon
dioxide  is  taken  ﬁrst into  phosphoenolpyruvate
instead of directly into the ribulose bisphosphate
of the Calvin cycle (p. 6).

juvenile and mature forms
As in the conifers, the leaves of young plants some-
times  differ  from  those  of  the  mature  in  both
form and  arrangement.  Eucalyptus globulus  (Fig.
9.16) provides a striking example of this phenom-
enon.  The  juvenile  leaves  are  ovate,  decussately
inserted,  and  bifacial  in  structure,  whereas  the
mature  are  falcate,  spirally  inserted  and  possess
normal dorsiventral structure. A young tree has a
cone of juvenile foliage within a crown of mature
foliage, showing that the change takes place more
or  less  simultaneously  at  all  the  apices  when  a
tree reaches a certain maturity. Sometimes, as in
Hedera helix (ivy), mature foliage does not appear
until the approach of reproduction. Once the pro-
duction of mature foliage has begun, the system is
remarkably  stable.  Reproductive  branches  of
Hedera, for example, can be struck as cuttings, and

SPERMATOPHYTINA (CONT.): ANGIOSPERMS (FLOWERING PLANTS)

281

these yield small bushes quite different in appear-
ance  and  growth from  the  scandent  vegetative
plant. The ﬂora of New Zealand is remarkable for
the number of woody plants in which the juvenile
and mature leaves have a very different form. It is
often  difﬁcult,  even  by experimental  means,  to
cause the apices of mature plants to revert to juve-
nile  growth.  It  appears  likely  that  maturity  is  a
consequence of complex and coordinated changes
in the ribonucleic acids and proteins in the meris-
tematic cells, and that the original system is only
readily re-created during sexual reproduction.

economic and ecol ogic al importance
Angiospermous  leaves  are  a  rich  source  of  food-
stuffs  and  raw  materials.  Fodder  crops  often
consist largely of leaves, and the leaves of many
species are prized as pot herbs because of the aro-
matic oils they contain. The leaves of a wide range
of  species  ﬁnd  medicinal  uses,  and  they are  the
commercial  source  of  a  number  of  important
drugs, amongst them atropine and hyoscyamine
(from  Atropa and  other  members  of 
the
Solanaceae)  and  cocaine  (from  Erythroxylon).  The
hallucinogens of Cannabis accumulate within the
resinous secretions of the leaves, particularly the
bracts  of  the  female  inﬂorescence.  The  amount
produced depends upon temperature, and in cool
temperate  regions  is  triﬂing.  The  biosynthetic
capacity  of  leaves  can  be  diverted  by genetic
manipulation into unusual products. Genes from
the bacterium Alcaligenes, responsible for the syn-
thesis  of  polyhydroxybutyrate  (PHB),  a  normal
reserve  product  in  this  organism,  when  trans-
ferred  to the  plastid  genome  of  Arabidopsis con-
tinue to be expressed. Up to 14 percent of the dry
mass of the transgenic plant may consist of pure
PHB. PHB is used in commerce for the preparation
of biodegradable household plastics. The biosyn-
thetic  capacities  of  transgenic  Arabidopsis  (and
possibly other plants) may provide a cheaper and
more  environmentally  acceptable  source  of  the
raw material than the chemical industry.

The leaves of many monocotyledonous species
yield valuable ﬁbers, and in tropical regions palm
leaves provide a ready and efﬁcient material for
thatching.  The  sheathing  leaf  bases  of  the
Amazonian  palm  Leopoldinia yield  commercial
quantities of a valuable ﬁber (piassava). The ﬁber

can  be  readily  twisted  into  cords  and  ropes.
Hawsers made from piassava are a familiar sight
on the lower Amazon; they have the advantages of
lightness and a reluctance to sink.

Apart from such direct utilization, angiosper-
mous leaves play a large part in maintaining the
fertility  of  the  soil.  Since  they contain  a  higher
proportion  of  nitrogenous  substances  and  fewer
antiseptic materials, such as tannins and phloba-
phene,  the  leaves  of  angiosperms  decay  more
rapidly  than  those  of  gymnosperms.  Angio-
spermous litter is thus quickly reduced to humus,
the organic matter that is the basis of soil fertility.
The  productivity  of  much  natural  vegetation  in
tropical regions depends upon the steady deposi-
tion of litter. Thoughtless removal of this natural
cover and destruction of the ecosystem can result
in areas of persistent and intractable barrenness.

Roots
The roots of the angiosperms are in general orga-
nized  similarly  to those  of  the  gymnosperms.
Those of some species are able to develop chloro-
phyll  when  illuminated.  In  Taeniophyllum (Fig.
9.17),  a  peculiar  Malaysian  epiphytic  orchid,
photosynthesis  is  in  fact  conﬁned  to band-like
aerial roots, the stem remaining little more than
a bud until the production of the inﬂorescence. A
number of angiosperms, especially those of tem-
perate regions that are biennial in habit, develop
a  swollen  tap  root  which  overwinters.  These  are
often  used  as  vegetables,  carrots  and  parsnips
being familiar examples. The swollen part of the
radish is the transitional region between root and
stem.

Remarkable development of roots is character-
istic of a number of tropical plants. In some trees
the secondary thickening of the principal roots at
the base of the trunk is markedly asymmetrical,
leading to the formation of substantial buttresses
1m (39in.) or more in height. Some trees develop
“prop roots”. These leave the trunk at 1m (39in.)
or more above ground level and descend obliquely
toward the substratum. They soon become secon-
darily  thickened.  At maturity  the  tree  is  sup-
ported  by a cone  of  such  outgrowths  around  its
base.  Some  species  of  ﬁg  (Ficus)  germinate  in
humus lodged in the branches of other trees. They
then  send  down  branching  roots  which  closely

282

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 4

Figure 9.17. Taeniophyllum sp.
Habit showing ﬂattened,
photosynthetic roots. (After Goebel
1933. Organographie der Pﬂanzen.
Fischer, Jena.)

species 

gravitropic. 
trees  of 

invest  and  ultimately  kill  the
supporting 
(“stran-
glers”).  Roots  are  not  always
negatively 
A
the
number  of 
Amazonian  rain  forest,  for
example,  produce  auxiliary
roots which ascend the trunks
of  neighboring  trees.  These
probably 
absorb  minerals
from the water trickling down
from the canopy and augment
the poor supply available from
the 
Swamp  plants,
notably the mangroves (which
colonize brackish estuaries in
the  tropics),  often  produce
negatively  gravitropic  aero-
phores from the root system, a
development foreshadowed in
the  pinopsid  Taxodium (see  p.
230).  The  roots  produced  by
the  aerial  stems  of  climbers
(e.g.,  Hedera (ivy)  and  Campsis
(trumpet  vine))  are  often  of
limited growth and modiﬁed in a manner which
assists adhesion.

soil. 

Associations  between  roots  and  microorgan-
isms are not infrequent. In forest trees the upper
rootlets,  usually  found  proliferating  in  litter,
often  possess  mycorrhizal  fungi.  The  roots  of
orchids are also mycorrhizal, but it has been dis-
covered  that  these  plants,  which  are  all  herba-
ceous,  can  be  grown  in  pure  culture  in  the
absence of the fungus, provided suitable nitroge-
nous substances are supplied in the medium. In
the  Fabaceae  (the  family  containing  the  peas,
beans and several important fodder plants) there
is  a  regular  association,  involving  anatomical
modiﬁcations, between the roots and certain soil
bacteria  capable  of  ﬁxing  atmospheric  nitrogen.
Similar  associations  with  other  nitrogen-ﬁxing
microorganisms  have been  conﬁrmed  in  Alnus

(alder),  Hippophaë (sea  buckthorn),  Myrica  (bog
myrtle) and Ceanothus (Californian lilac), and prob-
ably exist in a number of other plants.

The manner of growth of roots of angiosperms
has  been  studied  in  some  detail,  since  it  is  not
complicated  by the  presence  of  leaf  primordia.
Apart from the root cap, which is maintained by a
meristem  adjacent  to the  surface  of  the  apex
proper, meristematic  activity  lies  principally  in
the  summit  of  the  apex  (Fig.  9.18).  There  is,
however, convincing  evidence,  supported  by
experiments  with  radioactive  isotopes,  that  a
group  of  cells  at  the  center  of  the  apex  experi-
ences few if any divisions. These cells, forming a
so-called  “quiescent  center”,  can  be  stimulated
into division by wounding and radiation damage,
so  they are  not  deﬁcient  in  essentials.  Their
normal  inactivity  must therefore  depend  upon

SPERMATOPHYTINA (CONT.): ANGIOSPERMS (FLOWERING PLANTS)

283

parenchyma  (pericycle),  is  usually  present.  The
root  is  the  only  region  in  the  plant  body  of  an
angiosperm  where  an  endodermis  occurs  with
any  regularity.  The  presence  of  the  lipoidal
Casparian strip in the radial walls may ensure the
ordered uptake of mineral nutrients by subjecting
the lateral movement of the dissolved salts to the
control of the symplast.

The meristems of branch roots arise in the per-
icycle, an origin termed endogenous, and very dif-
ferent from the more superﬁcial (exogenous) origin
of branches of the stem. Where cork is produced,
the  cork  cambium  arises  in  the  pericycle,  thus
causing the whole of the primary tissue external
to it  ultimately  to die  and  slough  off.  In  herba-
ceous  plants  the  parenchymatous  tissues  of  the
roots  sometimes  become  locally  distended  with
food  materials,  occasionally  forming  distinct
tubers (e.g., Dahlia, Fig. 9.20). These serve as organs
of perennation.

Roots, especially those that are tuberous, are
frequent  sources  of  drugs  and  folk  medicines.
Aconitine,  obtained  from  the  roots  of  Aconitum
napellus,  frequent  in  alpine  meadows  and  seen
occasionally  by shaded  streams  in  Britain,  is  a
well-known  example.  Derris,  a  powder  made  by
grinding  the  roots  of  Derris  elliptica,  a  climbing
shrub of Asia, is a powerful insecticide harmless
to people.

Correlation within the plant body
The angiosperms, more than any other division of
the  plant  kingdom,  have been  investigated  with
the  object  of  discovering  the  factors  responsible
for  coordinating  the  growth of  the  plant  as  a
whole.  In  the  presence  of  an  apical  bud,  for
example, lateral buds commonly remain inactive,
an instance of correlative inhibition. Correlations of
this kind are clearly of great importance in deter-
mining the morphology of the mature plant.

Correlation  is  a  consequence  of  cell  interac-
tion, but the interacting cells are often separated
by others  not  directly  concerned.  These  interac-
tions at a distance are brought about by growth-
regulating  substances 
(often  termed  “plant
hormones”  or  “phytohormones”)  which  move
through  the  plant  in  a  manner  not  yet  wholly
understood.  Research has  now  revealed  a  whole
series  of  such  substances,  which  for  present

Figure 9.18. Trillium sp. Longitudinal section of root apex.

the physiological organization of the intact apex,
but the precise factors involved are still unknown.
Behind the meristematic area the cells elongate,
and measurements have shown that there is con-
siderable  synthesis  of  ribonucleic  acid  and
protein  in  the  cells  concerned  at  this  time.  In
some cells, often those which produce root hairs,
the  nuclei  undergo  a  curious  form of  mitosis
without 
(endomitosis),
associated  division 
leading to a polyploid condition.

The  roots  of  some  plants  secrete  substantial
quantities  of  substances  interfering  with  the
growth of adjacent species (allelopathy). The per-
ennial  weed  Pluchea lanceolata (Asteraceae),  for
example, a pest in semi-arid regions in India, lib-
erates a range of phenolics into the soil. These seri-
ously  depress  the  yield  of  crop  plants  and
contaminate local ground water.

A  transverse  section  of  a  young  root  of  an
angiosperm  commonly  shows  a central  core  of
xylem  with  radiating  arms  of  protoxylem,
between which lies the phloem. In the magnoliop-
sids the number of protoxylem groups is usually
small (Fig. 9.19), but in the liliopsids often greater,
usually in the region of 15 or 20. An endodermis,
separated  from  the  vascular  tissue  by a zone  of

284

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 4

Figure 9.19. Ranunculus acris.
Transverse section of young root,
showing the broad cortex and
narrow stele. The protoxylem is
exarch. Differentiation proceeds
inward yielding a central core of
metaxylem. The phloem lies
between the arms of xylem.

(amongst 

purposes  can  be  classiﬁed  as
auxins,  kinins,  abscisins,  gib-
berellins and ethylene. Auxins
(of  which  indole-3-acetic  acid
(IAA) is the most familiar) are
those  substances  which  will
cause  curvature  if  supplied
asymmetrically to the tip of a
decapitated  oat  coleoptile.
They are usually produced by
meristematic  cells  and  are
involved 
other
effects) in maintaining apical
dominance  and  initiating  differentiation.  In
culture solutions IAA (and its non-metabolizable
analog  naphthalene  acetic  acid)  are  particularly
effective in stimulating the production of roots, a
property  made  use  of  in  horticulture  in  the
rooting  of  cuttings.  Kinins  (cytokinins,  phytoki-
nins) are substances which promote cell division.
They are found in fruits and seeds, but may also be
generated  in  damaged  cells  and  cause  prolifera-
tion around wounds and their subsequent repair.
Abscisins  (abscisic  acid),  probably  produced  in
leaves, are effective in causing leaf abscission, and
dormancy in apical buds, common phenomena in
trees of temperate regions. In addition, they prob-
ably  enter  into  many  other  correlative  mecha-
nisms. Gibberellins were ﬁrst extracted from the
fungus  Gibberella which,  when  infecting  rice,
causes  the  plant  to be  excessively  tall.  They  are
now known to exist in higher plants. Early experi-
ments showed that when administered to dwarf
mutants  as,  for  example,  of  maize  (corn),  these
would grow to their normal stature. Evidence now
points to their being also involved in photoperi-
odic responses and the change from vegetative to
reproductive  growth.  Ethylene  has  long  been
known to be produced by ripening fruits, and con-
versely  the  process  of  ripening  in  stored  imma-

ture fruits can be controlled by regulation of the
amount of ethylene in the atmosphere. Ethylene
also  produces  many  other  effects,  probably  as  a
result  of  interacting  with  IAA  within  the  plant.
Many  other  naturally  occurring  substances,
amongst  them  salicylic  acid  and  jasmonic  acid,
have been found to affect cell growth and behav-
ior. Even steroid hormones (brassinosteroids) have
been discovered in plants, and in Arabidopsis, and
probably more generally, play an important rôle
in  light-regulated  development.  The  morphoge-
netic effects of sugar fragments (they are involved,
for example, in the changes in composition and
form of cell walls which occur as a consequence of
fungal infection) are another factor which has to
be  taken  into  account  in  the  control  of  growth
and development.

Although detailed investigation of the growth-
regulating substances is the province of the plant
physiologist, these substances are also basic to the
causal  study  of  morphology.  Regulatory  sub-
stances  are  ultimately  responsible  for  directing
the  growth of  a  species  in  its  characteristic  and
immediately  recognizable  way. It  was  inevitable
that the ﬂowering plants, because of their ubiq-
uity,  familiarity  and  economic 
importance,
should  ﬁgure  prominently  in  research into

SPERMATOPHYTINA (CONT.): ANGIOSPERMS (FLOWERING PLANTS)

285

numerous ﬂowers, arise directly from the trunk
and  hang  down  from  the  crown.  In  some  other
tropical  trees,  ﬂowers  are  produced  only  from
special regions toward the lower part of the trunk
(as  in  the  jack  fruit,  Artocarpus,  of  tropical
gardens), a phenomenon known as cauliﬂory.

In  annuals  and  certain  longer-lived  plants  of
warmer regions the production of ﬂowers heralds
the end of the life span. Such plants are said to be
monocarpic or hapaxanthic. A spectacular example is
the palm Corypha of tropical Asia. Growth termi-
nates  with  the  production  of  an  inﬂorescence
reaching a height of 14m (46ft) and a breadth of
12m (40ft), containing more than 100000 ﬂowers.
Reproduction  in  angiosperms  may  be  either
monoecious or dioecious. Monoecious species are
further divisible into the monoclinous, where the
male and female organs are together in the same
ﬂower, and the diclinous, where they are in separ-
ate ﬂowers (as in the cucumber, Cucumis sativus).
Functional  separation  of  the  sexes  in  bisexual
ﬂowers is often achieved by the organs of the two
sexes maturing at different times, a phenomenon
termed protandry if the male precede the female,
and  protogyny if  the  female  precede  the  male.
Some orchids show an extreme form of protandry
in  which  the  ovules  are  not  formed  unless  the
ﬂower is pollinated. In some species self-pollina-
tion  is  discouraged  or  prevented  by the  ﬂowers
being  in  two (as  in  Primula)  or  even  three  (as  in
Lythrum) forms (see p. 296).

male reproductive structures
The  male  sporangiophore  of  the  angiosperms  is
termed a stamen (Fig. 9.21). Typically this consists
of a stalk (ﬁlament) terminating in four pollen sacs,
the sacs being in two pairs, the pairs lying side by
side and joined by the connective. The whole of this
region is called the anther, and seen in transverse
section (Fig. 9.22) resembles the male synangia of
some  extinct  pteridosperms,  and  Caytonia (Fig.
8.48).  Apart  from  congenital  fusion  of  stamens,
discussed  later,  there  is  some  variation  in  the
form of  the 
In
Degeneria, for example, and in some members of
the  Magnoliaceae,  the  “ﬁlament”  is  in  fact  a
broadly ovate scale, about 5mm (0.19in.) long and
2mm  (0.08in.)  wide,  with  four  pollen  sacs  par-
tially embedded on the adaxial surface (Fig. 9.23).

individual  sporangiophore. 

Figure 9.20. Dahlia sp. The production of root tubers.

growth-regulating  substances.  Nevertheless,  the
study  of  simpler  systems  in  the  archegoniate
plants,  and  possibly  in  the  algae,  might  more
readily reveal how these substances enter into the
molecular  biology  of  the  cell  and  inﬂuence
morphogenesis.

Sexual reproduction
In the angiosperms the onset of the reproductive
phase is frequently (but not always) dependent on
the length of day (“photoperiodism”), both short-
day  and  long-day  plants  being  clearly  recogniz-
able.  The  reproductive  axes  are  ordinarily  short
and of limited growth. The axis itself and its atten-
dant  structures,  which  are  often  conspicuously
colored or shaped, is termed a ﬂower. Flowers may
be borne either singly (as in Anemone nemorosa) or
severally,
the  branching  system  bearing  the
ﬂowers then being called an inﬂorescence. Inﬂores-
cences  may  have
complex  morphology.
Sometimes  the  inﬂorescence  is  contracted  and
superﬁcially resembles a single ﬂower (as in many
Asteraceae). Inﬂorescences may also take the form
of loose strobili (as the catkins of Populus, poplar)
or  (especially  in  fruit)  a  coniferous  cone  (as  in
Alnus of the northern hemisphere and Banksia of
the southern). The parts of a plant giving rise to
ﬂowers  or  inﬂorescences  are  not  normally  very
different from those that are vegetative, but dis-
tinct functional separation occurs in some tropi-
cal  trees.  In  Couroupita guianensis (cannonball
tree),  for  example,  the  uppermost  branches  are
densely leafy and solely vegetative. The reproduc-
tive branches, which are almost leaﬂess and bear

286

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 4

Figure 9.21. Diagram showing the
features of a typical angiosperm
stamen. (a) Viewed from the front.
(b) Viewed from the back. In this
anther the pollen sacs open toward
the ﬂoral axis (introrse), but the
reverse position is also found
(extrorse).

Figure 9.22. Lilium longiﬂorum.
Transverse section of almost mature
anther.

At
the  other  extreme  the
ﬁlament  may  be  lacking,  one
or two anthers being attached
directly  to a modiﬁed  ﬂoral
axis, as in the complex ﬂower
of the orchids. Besides simple
dehiscence  along  a  longitudi-
nal  stomium,  other  methods
of opening, such as the devel-
opment  of  pores  or  the  diffe-
rentiation  of  distinct  valves,
are encountered in some species.

In contrast to microsporogenesis in Pinus, the
development  of  angiospermous  anthers  is  com-
monly  synchronous.  This  is  probably  a  conse-
quence  of  broad  cytoplasmic  connections
between the young spore mother cells, a phenom-
enon  (cytomixis)  not  seen  in  Pinus.  Subsequently
the  pollen  mother  cells  become  surrounded  by
thickened callosic walls and all interconnections
are  obliterated.  After  meiosis  the  young  micro-
spores, while still in the tetrad, begin to be coated
with sporopollenin. Concurrently, cellular organ-
ization breaks down in the tapetum, metabolites
are  mobilized  by hydrolase  activity,  and  addi-
tional  sporopollenin  is  synthesized.  The  young
pollen grains are released into this medium and
complete  their  development  at  its  expense  (Fig.
9.24). Much of the tapetal sporopollenin is added

to that  already  coating  the  grain,  probably  by
simple  accretion.  The  pattern  of  deposition  and
location of the pores (colpi) are established before
the  grain  is  liberated  from  the  tetrad.  The
Liliopsida and the Magnoliidae (p. 303) both have
pollen with a single aperture (monocolpate), but
pollen of the rest of the Magnoliopsida usually has
three  apertures  (tricolpate).  The  manner  of  the
inheritance  of  the  pattern  of  wall  thickening
(which is very distinctive (Fig. 9.25), allowing iden-
tiﬁcation  of  isolated  grains)  and  the  location  of
the  pores  are  still  unknown  (cf. Sphaerocarpos,  p.
114). The structure and cytochemistry of the wall
of a mature pollen grain are complex. The cham-
bered exine often takes up enzymes and other pro-
teins from the tapetum while the inner cellulosic
layer  (intine)  may  contain  secretions  from  the
grain  itself.  Although  the  tapetal  products  are

SPERMATOPHYTINA (CONT.): ANGIOSPERMS (FLOWERING PLANTS)

287

520 ␮m  and  diameter  of  19 ␮m.  Marine  angio-
sperms  (“sea  grasses”),  however, possess  “confer-
void”  pollen.  These  grains  lack  exine  and  may
reach or exceed 5 mm (0.19in.) in length. In some
species (as in the Ericaceae (heaths) and the deco-
rative  plant  Salpiglossis variabilis)  the  pollen
remains stuck together in tetrads, a feature facili-
tating, as in Sphaerocarpos (p. 114), tetrad analysis.
Even  larger  aggregates  of  pollen  (known  as
“polyads”) occur naturally in some genera. Those
of Parkia, for example, contain 16–32 grains and
are not separated by acetolysis (which destroys all
structural materials other than sporopollenin). In
Petunia,  where  the  grains  are  normally  separate,
adhesion within the tetrads can be brought about
by a recessive gene.

Development  of  the  male  gametophyte  nor-
mally begins while the pollen is still in the anther.
Usually two nuclei are present, of which one (the
vegetative  nucleus)  becomes  large and  diffusely
staining  and  the  other  (the  generative  nucleus)
dense  and  often  transversely  elongated  (Fig.
9.32a). These nuclei lie on a radius of the original
tetrad, and there is evidence that their conspicu-
ously different behavior depends upon gradients
set  up  in  the  cytoplasm  of  the  cleaving  pollen
mother cell and persisting in that of the grain. In
about  one-third  of  all  families  (both  liliopsids,
including  the  grasses,  and  magnoliopsids)  the
generative nucleus divides while still in the grain,
yielding trinucleate pollen.

female reproductive structures
The  megasporangiophore  is  the  distinguishing
feature  of  the  angiosperms  for  it  is  normally  a
closed body (termed a carpel), furnished with a dis-
tinct stigma (often elevated on a style) on which
the  pollen  germinates  (Fig.  9.26).  In  only  a  few
genera (e.g., Reseda) are the carpels open at matur-
ity. A carpel is dorsiventral in symmetry and the
fertile region is adaxial. One or several ovules may
be  present,  and  if  the  latter  they are  commonly
borne  in  two  series  along  the  so-called  “ventral
suture” of the carpel (Fig. 9.26).

The  ovules  are  much  smaller  than  those  of
most gymnosperms, but are structurally similar.
They  may  be  upright,  inverted,  or  occasionally
more or less horizontal, these three orientations
and
being 

orthotropous,  anatropous

termed 

Figure 9.23. Degeneria vitiensis. Adaxial surface of stamen.
(After Canright. 1952. American Journal of Botany 39.)

commonly regarded as sporophytic, and those of
the grain gametophytic, the precise nature of the
gene activation in the tapetum is not yet certain.
In some species part of the tapetal sporopollenin
coats an additional membrane delimiting the sac
containing the developing microspores (peritapetal
membrane). The formation of this barrier may be
associated with a change in the nature of the gene
expression within the sac.

Since  sporopollenin,  a  highly  polymerized
mixture of esters of complex fatty and cinnamic
acids, is extremely resistant to decay, the external
features  of  pollen  grains  partially  fossilized  in
peats  and  lake  muds  are  often  well  preserved.
These  deposits  provide  accurate  information
about  the  nature  and  composition  of  the  sur-
rounding vegetation in times past (pollen analysis).
The pollen grains of plants of terrestrial habitats
are mostly spherical or ellipsoidal, with varying
diameters,  those  of  some  plants  (e.g.,  Mirabilis)
reaching as much as 130 ␮m, but this is unusual.
There  are  a  few  examples  of  rod-like grains.  A
quite  remarkable  cylindrical  grain  is  found  in
Crossandra  (Acanthaceae),  attaining  a  length  of

288

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 4

Figure 9.24. Maturing microspores
of Catananche caerulea (Asteraceae)
lying in the tapetum. Anther
transversely freeze-fractured. Scale
bar 10 ␮m. (Unpublished micrograph
provided by S. H. Barnes and S.
Blackmore.)

Figure 9.25. Oenothera organensis.
Pollen grains (each with three
projecting colpi), enmeshed in
threads of viscin (a polymer
produced by the tapetum), lying on
the stigma. Scale bar 5␮m.
(Photomicrograph by H. Dickinson.)

SPERMATOPHYTINA (CONT.): ANGIOSPERMS (FLOWERING PLANTS)

289

the megaspore of the gymnosperms, is retained,
the megaspore in the angiosperms is frequently
smaller than the microspore. In many instances
only  the  inner  (chalazal)  megaspore  undergoes
further  development,  and  the  female  gameto-
phyte  is  consequently  said  to be  monosporic in
origin. The nucleus of the megaspore enters a suc-
cession  of  mitoses,  and,  in  step  with  the  expan-
sion  of  the  ovule  as  a  whole,  the  multinucleate
embryo sac is formed (Figs. 9.28e and f, and 9.29b).
In a frequent type of embryo sac there are eight
nuclei,  produced  by three  successive  mitoses,
which  associate  themselves  with  cytoplasm  and
arrange  themselves  in  a  deﬁnite  pattern  (Fig.
9.28e). Eight cells are usually identiﬁable at this
stage, each bounded by a delicate membrane. At
the micropylar end of the sac is a group of three
cells, of which one (frequently with a weakly stain-
ing nucleus) is the egg cell. The cells accompany-
ing the egg are termed synergid cells. The walls of
these  cells  at  their  micropylar  ends  frequently
have conspicuously  labyrinthine  walls.  These
form the so-called “ﬁliform apparatus”.

At the other end of the sac (the chalazal end) is
another  group  of  three  cells,  referred  to as  the
antipodals. The nuclei of the remaining two cells
(termed polar nuclei) come together at the center
of the sac and eventually fuse, thus giving rise to
a  central  diploid  fusion  nucleus  (Figs.  9.28f  and
9.29b).  During  the  development  from  the  mega-
spore  the  boundary  between  the  gametophyte
and sporophyte remains distinct, and the mature
embryo sac is commonly also surrounded by a cal-
losed  wall.  This  is  known  to be  impermeable  to
large molecules such as nucleosides.

The foregoing is only one of the several kinds
of development of the female gametophyte found
in the angiosperms. In some families, notably the
Onagraceae,  the  embryo sac  develops  from  the
outer and not from the inner megaspore, a feature
of unknown cytological and physiological signiﬁ-
cance. Sometimes, as in Allium (onion), meiosis in
the formation of the megaspores is incomplete, a
dyad of spores being produced instead of a tetrad.
The embryo sac, which develops directly from the
inner  spore,  is  then  said  to be  bisporic in  origin.
Finally, in another kind of development (seen, for
example, in Lilium), termed tetrasporic, the nucleus
of the megaspore mother cell divides meiotically,

Figure 9.26. The simple carpel characteristic of the family
Fabaceae (Leguminosae). This arrangement of the ovules is
referred to as “marginal placentation”.

campylotropous respectively (Fig. 9.27). At least one
integument is present, but in many families there
are  two,  and  in  some  as  many  as  four.  The  last-
formed  integument,  irrespective  of  the  total
number, sometimes becomes transformed into a
ﬂeshy aril in the fruit (as in the durian, Durio). The
integuments  normally  develop  uniformly, indi-
cating the basic radial symmetry of the angiosper-
mous  ovule.  A  slender  vascular  trace  enters  the
stalk of the ovule, but in only a few families does
this  extend  into  an  integumentary  vascular
system.

the female g ametophyte
The development of the female gametophyte, in
the angiosperms termed the embryo sac, begins
in  a  familiar  fashion  (Fig.  9.28a).  A  cell  in  the
upper part of the nucellus, immediately below the
layer of cells at its surface, becomes conspicuously
large and surrounded by a callosed wall. Meiosis
then leads to a tetrad of megaspores (Figs. 9.28b
and  9.29a).  Although  the  term “megaspore”,
because of the evident homology of this cell with

290

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 4

Figure 9.27. Forms of ovule orientation (diagrammatic).
(a) Orthotropous. (b) Anatropous. (c) Campylotropous.

Figure 9.28. Myosurus minimus (mouse tail). The sequence
of divisions leading to the production of a monosporic, eight-
nucleate embryo sac. Diagrammatic; not to scale.

but the cell itself does not divide at all. Instead,
mitotic  divisions  follow  and  the  cell  expands
without interruption to form the sac. Bisporic and
tetrasporic embryo sacs occur in a wide range of

families (and have already been noted in Gnetum
(p. 261)), and there is no justiﬁcation for regarding
this kind of origin as abnormal. Another kind of
variation  lies  in  the  number  of  nuclei  in  the
mature  sac.  Although  this  is  commonly  eight,
irrespective  of  the  mode  of  origin  of  the  sac,
others are known containing four or sixteen. The
is  also  variable.
cytology  of  development 

SPERMATOPHYTINA (CONT.): ANGIOSPERMS (FLOWERING PLANTS)

291

Figure 9.29. Myosurus minimus. The initiation and
completion of the female gametophyte. (a) The tetrad of
spores resulting from meiosis. The innermost (indicated by
the arrow) is the viable megaspore. (b) The mature embryo
sac. Scale bars 10µm.

Although  where  sexual  reproduction  is  normal
the  egg  nucleus  remains  haploid,  the  chalazal
polar nucleus may contain more than one set of
chromosomes so that the central fusion nucleus
becomes  triploid  or  even,  as  in  Fritillaria,  tetra-
ploid.

architecture of the fl ower
The  arrangement  of  the  reproductive  organs  in
the ﬂower is often of considerable complexity, and
ﬂoral  morphology  is  a  specialized  ﬁeld  with  its
own terminology. Here we shall use only as much
of this terminology as is necessary for general dis-
cussion, and for further details the reader must
consult specialist works. To facilitate illustration
of the principles involved in the structure of the
ﬂower, we shall ﬁrst consider a bisexual ﬂower in
which the components remain separate (Fig. 9.30),
a situation seen, for example, in Ranunculus. The
ﬂower terminates an axis, and the transition from

the  vegetative  to the  reproductive  region  is
marked by the occurrence of one or more whorls
of  sterile  structures  resembling  rudimentary
leaves. These form collectively the perianth. Where
two whorls are present the segments of the outer
whorl  are  frequently  green  (and  termed  sepals),
whereas  those  of  the  inner  are  brightly  colored
(and  termed petals).  These  two  parts  of  the  peri-
anth  are  termed  calyx and  corolla respectively.
Following  closely  upon  the  perianth  are  the
stamens, forming collectively the androecium. The
stamens may be either indeﬁnite in number and
spirally arranged (as in Ranunculus), or deﬁnite and
arranged  in  whorls,  the  positions  of  individual
stamens  often  then  bearing  a  clear  relation  to
each other and to those of the preceding perianth
segments.

The  termination  of  the  reproductive  axis,
often termed the receptacle, bears the carpels. This
female region is called the gynaecium or ovary. The
carpels  may  again  be  spirally  arranged,  as  in
Ranunculus, or in a single whorl. In the latter event
the carpels usually alternate in position with the
stamens of the uppermost whorl.

In unisexual ﬂowers the organs of one sex are

292

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 4

Scrophularia) or occasionally become enlarged and
brightly colored, and play a conspicuous part in
the  organization  of  the  ﬂower  (as  in  Canna  and
Iris).  Both  sterilization  and  congenital  fusion  of
parts are involved in the complex ﬂowers of the
orchids. Nectaries may be associated with almost
any  part  of  the  ﬂower, depending  upon  the
species.

ontogeny of the fl ower
Although in the gymnosperms the apices giving
rise to the reproductive and vegetative axes differ
little  in  organization,  in  angiosperms  they are
usually easily distinguishable. In becoming repro-
ductive  an  apex  ﬂattens  considerably  and  may
even  become  concave,  regions  previously  quies-
cent  now  showing  numerous  mitoses.  This  has
given  rise  to the  concept  of  the  vegetative  apex
containing a meristème d’attente active only in the
reproductive phase. The perianth whorls and spo-
rangiophores  are  often  produced  in  acropetal
sequence, the members of successive whorls alter-
nating in position, but this is not always so. The
direction  of  initiation  may  even  become  locally
reversed,  and  primordia  appear  between  the
whorls of those already laid down. This phenome-
non  affects  particularly  the  androecium,  with
conspicuous  results  in  the  symmetry  of  the
mature  ﬂower.
In  some  Caryophyllaceae,  for
example,  a  whorl  of  ﬁve  stamen  primordia
appears, each stamen alternating in position with
the preceding petals. A second whorl of stamens is
then  initiated  basipetally, the  stamens  alternat-
ing with those of the ﬁrst whorl, and hence stand-
ing  opposite  the  petals. 
In  this  way  an
obdiplostemonous ﬂower is formed.

Although  the  differentiation  of  the  gynae-
cium  usually  terminates  the  reproductive  axis,
the  axis  may sometimes  continue  to grow  and
produce  a  second  ﬂower, an  aberration  not
uncommonly seen in Geum. Abnormal growths of
this  kind  are  usually  the  consequence  of  muta-
tions. Such mutations, causing the appearance of
an  organ  in  an  unaccustomed  position,  are
termed  homoeotic,  and  the  phenomenon 
in
general,  homoeosis.  Homoeotic  mutations,  pro-
duced  experimentally, are  currently  proving  of
great  value  in  analyzing  the  factors  responsible
for the ordered development of the normal ﬂower.

Figure 9.30. Longitudinal section of a ﬂower with separate
components. Diagrammatic.

absent  or  non-functional,  although  the  bisexual
condition  can  sometimes  be  brought  about  by
treating the very young ﬂower with growth sub-
stances such as gibberellic acid. Unisexual ﬂowers
may  approach  the  limits  of  reduction,  a  feature
well  seen  in  catkin-bearing  trees.  In  Populus,  for
example,  the  male  ﬂower  consists  of  nothing
more than a disk bearing up to 20 stamens, and in
Salix,  where  the  male  ﬂower  is  similar,  the
number  of  stamens  is  commonly  no  more  than
two. Congenital fusion of parts of similar nature
is widespread in ﬂowers. Both the calyx and the
corolla  independently  may  become  tubular,  the
composite nature of the tube being indicated by
lobes or teeth at its mouth. Filaments of whorled
stamens  may  also  fuse  for  most  or  only  part  of
their  lengths,  leading  to a cylindrical  androe-
cium.  Fusion  of  carpels  leads  to a syncarpous
ovary, in  which  the  individual  carpels  are  often
represented by compartments (or loculi), as in the
Amaryllidaceae. Externally the composite nature
of the ovary is often indicated by lobing, or by the
style,  which  rises  from  the  center  of  the  ovary,
breaking up into branches equivalent in number
to the constituent carpels. The ovary may some-
times be sunken in the receptacle (as in Rosa), or
in  some  other  way  surmounted  by the  perianth
and  androecium,  leading  to clearly  epigynous
ﬂowers. Sterilization of one or more stamens may
occur, giving rise to staminodes which may either
in
persist  as 

rudimentary 

structures 

(as 

SPERMATOPHYTINA (CONT.): ANGIOSPERMS (FLOWERING PLANTS)

293

Figure 9.31. Salvia pratensis. (a) Half ﬂower showing the
normal position of the stamen. (b) The same after the plate
has been depressed. (After Kerner von Marilaun and Oliver.
1902. The Natural History of Plants. Blackie, London.)

From  the  effect  of  the  homoeotic  mutations,  it
can  be  inferred  that  the  unmutated  gene  (“wild
type”)  is  directly  concerned  with  the  normal
development of the organ in question. Despite the
major  advances  being  made  in  this  ﬁeld,  the
manner in which the interaction of the products
of the genes involved leads to normal morphogen-
esis remains a formidable problem.

A quite exceptional situation appears to exist
in the Mexican genus Lacandonia. Here the apical
region of the ﬂoral meristem produces anther pri-
mordia. Carpel primordia arise from the ﬂanks of
the meristem. The development of the male and
female organs takes the normal course. As in the
Onagraceae, the surviving megaspore is situated
at the micropylar end of the linear tetrad.

pollination and growth of the male
g ametophyte
Pollination in angiosperms is occasionally depen-
dent  upon  aerial  dispersal  of  the  grains  (as  in
catkin-bearing trees), but frequently involves the
participation of insects as carriers. Various mech-
anisms  have been  evolved  which  ensure  that
insects visiting ﬂowers in search of nectar become
dusted  with  pollen,  which  then  becomes  trans-
ported  to stigmatic  surfaces  in  other  ﬂowers.  A
familiar  example  of  such  a  pollination  mecha-
nism is provided by Salvia pratensis (sage), a species
pollinated  by the  bumblebee.  The  stamens  have

short  ﬁlaments,  but  a  greatly  elongated  connec-
tive  (Fig.  9.31).  The  longer  upper  portion  of  the
connective  terminates  in  an  anther,  but  the
shorter  lower  part  in  a  plate  blocking  the
approach  to the  nectary. A bee  attempting  to
reach the nectar displaces the plate. Since the con-
nective is hinged about the ﬁlament, the anther is
in this way forced on to the insect’s back, coating
it with pollen (Fig. 9.31). Pollen-collecting in some
cases is facilitated by the insect concerned (often
a  bumblebee)  generating  a  low-frequency  buzz
with its wings corresponding to the natural fre-
quency  of  vibration  of  the  anthers  visited.  The
shaking resulting from this resonance loosens the
pollen,  which  is  then  showered  on  to the  bee.
Flowers  showing  this  kind  of  “buzz  pollination”
often  have reﬂexed  petals,  with  the  anthers
forming  a  fully  exposed  projecting  cone  (as  in
many Solanaceae, including the familiar potato).
The pollen is usually small, 25␮m or less in diam-
eter, and the discharge is often through an apical
pore  in  the  anther.  A  remarkable  situation  is
encountered in Mucuna holtonii, a twining legume
(Fabaceae)  of  Central  America.  Pollination  is  by
bats,  who  visit  the  ﬂowers  for  nectar.  When  the
ﬂower is mature, and pollen and nectar are avail-
able, the concave vexillum (“standard” petal) on
the  upper  side  of  the  ﬂower  becomes  erect.  The
concavity of the vexillum is such that it accurately
reﬂects the echolocation calls of the species of bat
involved. The bats are thereby able to locate with
little  error  the  ﬂowers  which  it  is  proﬁtable  to
visit.

In some species pollen tends to cohere because

294

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 4

Figure 9.32. Development of a
pollen grain in which the ﬁnal
nuclear division occurs in the tube.
(a) Condition in the anther during
ﬁnal stages of the growth of the
wall. (b) Condition during liberation
and pollination. (c) The sperm cells
and vegetative nucleus (“male germ
unit”) move forward with the pollen
tube. Diagrammatic.

In 

of  the  presence  of  viscin
threads (Fig. 9.25), a product of
the  tapetum. 
Impatiens,
similar  threads  are  derived
from ﬁbrous tissue in the wall
of  the  anther.  These  threads
remain  attached  to the  inner  thecal  walls  and
tend  to restrain  the  escape  of  the  pollen.  In
orchids  the  pollen  regularly  coheres  in  a  mass
referred to as a pollinium. This adheres to a visiting
insect,  and  is  transferred  intact  to the  female
region of another ﬂower. The pollinium can also
be removed by a ﬁne probe, a technique used by
horticulturalists in hybridizing orchids. A bizarre
form of pollination is found in some orchids (e.g.,
Ophrys speculum of  the  western  Mediterranean)
where  the  pattern  and  conformation  of  the  lip
recall  the  female  of  the  insect  concerned,  and
even  an  odor  may  be  released  resembling  the
pheromone  of  the  species.  The  male  insect,  in
attempting to copulate with the lip of the ﬂower,
detaches the pollinium and involuntarily carries
it to another ﬂower. In addition to bats, a few trop-
ical ﬂowers are pollinated by birds, and Aspidistra,
once a favorite pot plant, whose ﬂowers are more
or less at ground level, by snails. The appropriate
authorities must be consulted for more detailed
accounts of pollination mechanisms.

The pollen, having been brought into contact
with  the  stigma  (to  which  it  may  be  ﬁrmly
attached as a consequence of electrostatic forces),
imbibes  water  from  the  surface  of  the  stigma.
Germination follows, usually within a few hours.
A pollen tube breaks through a colpus in the exine
of the grain (Fig. 9.32) and, provided there are no
incompatibility barriers, penetrates the style. The
growth of the tube is largely conﬁned to the tip,
behind which the wall becomes callosed. There is

notable physical activity in a growing tube, pos-
sibly a consequence of interaction between actin
microﬁlaments  and  myosin  on  the  outside  of
organelles.  The  passage  of  the  tube  toward the
ovules  often  follows  a tract  of  specialized,  thin-
walled, transmitting tissue. Specialized arabinog-
alactan proteins in the walls of the transmission
tissue have been associated in Nicotiana (tobacco)
with  directing  the  growth of  the  tube,  but  in
general  the  direction  may be  dependent  upon
metabolic  gradients  of  a  quite  simple  kind.  In
some species (e.g., Lilium) the style is hollow. The
pollen then grows down the surface of the cells
lining the canal, the outer walls of which are fre-
quently  labyrinthine.  Pollen  tubes  occasionally
branch,  branching  in  some  species  (e.g.,  Betula,
birch)  being  frequent  and  conspicuous.  In  some
tree  species  (e.g.,  Alnus),  where  pollination  takes
place  in  winter  or  early  spring,  development  of
the male gametophyte may be arrested for weeks
or months, completion of development and fertil-
ization taking place in summer.

If the generative cell has not already divided
(p. 287) into sperm cells it does so in the extending
tube. The two sperm cells are irregular in shape
and together with the vegetative cell sometimes
form a complex  referred  to as  the  “male  germ
unit”. This moves forward with the growth of the
tube  and  remains  close  to the  tip  (Fig.  9.32c).
Although  the  mechanism  driving  the  complex
forward  is  not  yet  clear,  actin  microﬁlaments,
prominent  in  the  growing  tube,  together  with

SPERMATOPHYTINA (CONT.): ANGIOSPERMS (FLOWERING PLANTS)

295

myosin are probably again involved. The distribu-
tion  of  the  cytoplasmic  organelles  between  the
two sperm cells is not always equal. In Plumbago,
for example, in one of the sperm cells mitochon-
dria  predominate,  and  in  the  other  plastids.  In
some  species 
(e.g.,  Lycopersicon (tomato)  and
Gossypium (cotton))  plastids  are  either  excluded
from  the  generative  cell  or  degenerate  during
spermatogenesis,  leaving  only  mitochondria  in
the cytoplasm. In a number of legumes it has been
observed  that,  although  the  generative  cell
retains plastids, they appear to lose all traces of
DNA.  Instances  are  known  in  which  the  sperm
cytoplasm lacks organelles altogether (e.g., Apium,
celery). 

Surprisingly,  the  sperm  cells  of  tobacco,  if
freed  precociously  by enzyme  treatment,  will
readily  fuse  with  each  other  (a  feature  also  of
meiotic protoplasts in lily). Although the proper-
ties of the plasmalemma throughout meiosis and
in the male gametophyte of angiosperms have not
been  studied  in  detail,  readiness  of  like  cells  to
fuse may be a general feature. The spatial organ-
ization of the “male germ unit” may serve to keep
the sperm cells separated until their release into
the embryo sac.

Variations  in  the  development  of  the  male
gametophyte are not uncommon. In some species,
for  example,  the  pollen  grains  put  out  two  or
more  tubes,  but  only  one  carries  the  gametes.
Some ﬂowers (termed cleistogamous) do not open,
but are nevertheless fertile. A familiar example is
provided by Viola canina (dog violet). The normal
(chasmogamous)  ﬂowers  of  spring  produce  little
seed,  but  the  bud-like  cleistogamous  ﬂowers  of
summer are fully fertile. Only minute petals are
present and all but the two abaxial stamens are
abortive.  The  pollen  of  these  two  surviving
stamens, however, is viable and germinates in the
anther.  The  pollen  tubes  grow through  the  wall
into  the  stigma.  Even  more  extensive  growth of
the pollen tube through vegetative tissue is shown
by the aquatic Callitriche (starwort). Although the
plant  is  monoecious,  the  ﬂowers  are  unisexual.
The  submerged  ﬂowers  remain  closed  and  the
pollen germinates in the anther. The tubes then
grow for long distances to female ﬂowers at the
same node, penetrating the ovary from below.

fertilization
A pollen tube enters the ovule either by way of the
micropyle or by growth through the chalazal end.
Entry into the  embryo sac itself is usually at its
micropylar end. A region near the tip of the tube,
possibly in consequence of enzymes produced by
synergid cells, soon breaks open. The contents of
the  tube  are  discharged  into  the  sac.  The  dis-
charge may take place, as in Gossypium, into one of
the synergids. The sperm cells are then stripped of
their  cytoplasm  and  only  the  male  nuclei  con-
tinue  into  the  sac.  Following  the  entry  of  the
sperm  cells  or  nuclei  the  “double  fertilization”,
characteristic  of  the  angiosperms,  then  ensues.
One gamete fuses with the egg cell and the other
moves through the sac and fuses with the central
cell. Fusion of the nuclei gives rise to the diploid
zygotic  nucleus  and  the  (usually)  triploid  endo-
sperm nucleus respectively. The movements of the
sperm  cells  may  not  always  be  random.  In
Plumbago, for example, where the gametes are not
freed of their cytoplasm by the synergid cells, and
the gametes differ, the cell richer in plastids fuses
preferentially  with  the  egg  cell.  In  general,
however, the inheritance of plastids seems to be
principally  maternal,  and  other  well-substanti-
ated  examples  of  biparental  inheritance  (e.g.,
Pelargonium) are few. The inheritance of mitochon-
dria  is  more  difﬁcult  to determine  and  may  be
more widely biparental. In Gossypium and similar
instances  of  synergid  intervention,  the  inheri-
tance of the cytoplasm and its components is pre-
sumably entirely maternal.

The  amount  of  DNA  in  the  sperm  nucleus
appears  to  be  variable  with  species.  In  Zea the
nucleus contains the 1C amount. Assuming sym-
metry, the content of the egg nucleus will also be
1C, and that of the zygotic nucleus 2C. The zygotic
nucleus has thus to pass though an S-phase before
diploid mitosis can occur. In Arabidopsis, however,
the DNA content of the sperm nucleus has been
found to double during development of the male
gametophyte. Again, assuming symmetry, follow-
ing fusion the zygotic nucleus will already be in
the 4C condition, rendering a pre-mitotic S-phase
unnecessary (cf. Gnetum, p. 261).

296

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 4

Figure 9.33. Primula sp. Half ﬂowers showing (a) thrum
arrangement and (b) pin arrangement.

control of mating
In  addition  to protogyny  and  protandry  (p.  285)
various  devices  are  found  which  discourage  or
prevent self-pollination and the possible deleteri-
ous  effects  of  inbreeding.  Conspicuous  amongst
these  are  those  involving  dimorphic  ﬂowers.  In
Primula, for example, the two kinds of ﬂowers are
termed “thrum-eyed” with a short style and ele-
vated  stamens,  and  “pin-eyed”  with  a  long  style
and lower stamens (Fig. 9.33). An insect searching
for nectar at the base of the corolla tube will tend
to pass pollen from the stamens of the “pins” to
the  styles  of  the  “thrums”  and  vice  versa.  This
morphological device is accompanied by a physio-
logical  difference  which  causes  the  imperfect
growth of “pin” and “thrum” pollen in their own
styles. The mechanism, which is genetically con-
trolled, depends upon the presence of antibodies
in the style which precipitate essential enzymes
in the pollen tubes of pollen from the same or like
ﬂowers. The pollen of the thrum ﬂowers is some
50  percent  greater  in  diameter  than  that  of  the
pin, and this is correlated with a greater rate of
extension of the pollen tube of the thrum pollen.
Lythrum salicaria and  some  other  species  have a
similar  mechanism  involving  three  kinds  of
ﬂowers,  the  diameter  of  the  pollen  grains  again
being related to the position of the stamens pro-
ducing them. Physiological systems of self-incom-
patibility unaccompanied by structural devices in

the ﬂower are widespread. In Linum, for example,
successful  growth of  the  pollen  tube  can  take
place only if the ratio of the osmotic pressure of
the style to that of the pollen is the order of 1:4, a
relationship  never  present  between  pollen  and
style  of  the  same  ﬂower. Other  mechanisms  are
seen  in  Raphanus (radish)  and  Brassica (cabbage).
Here the pollen germinates following selﬁng, but
penetration of the tube is impeded by the rapid
development  of  pads  of  callose  in  the  stigmatic
cells beneath its tip, although this does not seem
to be the sole cause of the infertility of self-polli-
nation. In Oenothera the incompatible tube pene-
trates,  but  in  the  style  it  becomes  plugged  and
growth ceases.

In general two kinds of incompatibility can be
distinguished, sporophytic and gametophytic. In
the  former  the  failure  of  pollination  is  a  conse-
quence of products of tapetal origin (called collec-
tively tryphine) carried by the exine of the pollen
grain.  Interaction  of  certain  of  these  products
with  the  papillae  at  the  surface  of  the  stigma
leads  to arrest  of  the  incompatible  pollen  tube.
The  brassicas  show  this  type  of  incompatibility
very clearly. In gametophytic incompatibility the
interaction is directly between the male gameto-
phyte itself, represented by the pollen tube with
its thin permeable wall, and the tissue of the style.
The distinction between sporophytic and gameto-
phytic  systems  is  not,  however, absolute.  In
Raphanus,  for  example,  in  addition  to an  initial
sporophytic system at the surface of the stigma,
careful  breeding  experiments  have revealed

SPERMATOPHYTINA (CONT.): ANGIOSPERMS (FLOWERING PLANTS)

297

Figure 9.34. Myosurus minimus. Longitudinal section of
embryo sac following fertilization. (a) After several divisions
of the primary endosperm nucleus. (b) After the ﬁrst division
of the zygote. The zygote is at the micropylar end of the sac.

further interactions of a gametophytic kind in the
style.  These  may  be  relics  of  an  earlier  gameto-
phytic system which has become cryptic. It seems
likely  that  basic  to both  the  sporophytic  and
gametophytic kinds of incompatibility is an inter-
action, similar to a defense reaction, which is seen
throughout  land  plants  generally  wherever  the
cells  of  gametophyte  and  sporophyte  are  inti-
mately apposed (see, for example, pp. 103, 208).

Other,  less  studied,  forms  of  incompatibility
also  exist.  In  species  of  Castanea (chestnut),  for
example,  incompatible  pollen  tubes  liberate
gametes, but fertilization fails. In Gasteria incom-
patible  pollination  leads  to the  formation  of
embryos, but they subsequently abort.

embryogeny
Following fertilization the contents of the embryo
sac are commonly resorbed, the zygote and endo-
sperm being the only sites of further growth. As in
other seed plants, the ﬁrst dividing wall of the

zygote lies transverse to the longitudinal axis of
the ovule (Fig. 9.34), and the subsequent embryo-
geny is endoscopic. Free nuclear division is not,
however, a characteristic of the development of
the proembryo, as it is in many gymnosperms.
Instead, embryogenesis begins with a series of
precise cell divisions, showing little variation
between species, and meristematic activity does
not pause until the embryo differentiates and the
seed is formed. The mature embryo (except in the
orchids where it remains an undifferentiated pro-
tocorm) possesses a stem apex (plumule), one or two
cotyledons, and a root apex (radicle). Even though
the mature embryo may be folded (as in Capsella
bursa-pastoris (shepherd’s purse), Fig. 9.35), the
radicle is always directed toward the micropyle.
The extent to which the fully formed embryo has
drawn upon the food reserves of the endosperm
varies widely with the species. In “endospermous”
seeds this reserve remains considerable, but in the
“non-endospermous” little remains, and much of
the food materials in these seeds often becomes
transferred to the cotyledons. Examples of such
seeds are those of the legumes where the swollen
cotyledons entirely replace the endosperm in
both space and function (Fig. 9.36a).

298

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 4

Figure 9.35. An almost mature
seed of Capsella bursa-pastoris
sectioned longitudinally and showing
the orientation of the embryo.

cytoplasmic 

features of the
endosperm
The  formation  of  the  endo-
sperm  usually  begins  before
the division of the zygote. The
primary  nucleus  and 
its
daughters undergo successive
mitoses, giving rise to an endo-
sperm  that  is  either  cellular
from the ﬁrst, or initially acel-
lular (Fig. 9.37a) and only later
partly  or  wholly  cellular.
Cytologically  the  endosperm
is  a  remarkable  tissue,  with
and
unique 
signiﬁ-
nuclear  properties, 
cantly  different 
the
haploid  “pseudo-endosperm”
of  the  gymnosperms  (see  p.
252).  It  is  a  rich  source  of
growth-regulating  substances
or  their  immediate  precur-
sors, many of them not yet chemically identiﬁed.
The  successful  culture  of  young  embryos  and
other  plant  tissues,  for  example,  is  often  impos-
sible in fully deﬁned media, but is facilitated by
the  addition  of  coconut  milk  (the  liquid  endo-
sperm of the coconut seed). Endosperm itself can
sometimes be obtained in pure culture and, since
the  cell  walls  of  young  endosperm  often  have
little thickening, such cultures have been used to
study the details of mitosis in vivo. In some endo-
sperms the nuclei reach high and irregular levels
of endopolyploidy, and amitotic nuclear division
has been reported in a number of instances.

from 

In keeping with the function of providing for
the nutrition of the embryo and young plant, the
cells  of  the  mature  endosperm  are  often  ﬁlled
with food materials. Carbohydrates, fats and pro-
teins  are  present  in  various  labile  forms.  The
occurrence  of  these  materials  is  sometimes  so
abundant that the seeds concerned acquire vast
economic  importance.  The  cereal  grains,  where
the endosperm yields starch and protein in a form

readily  palatable  to humans,  and  the  oil  seeds,
such as Ricinus (castor bean) and Linum (linseed),
are  familiar  examples.  Polymers  of  mannose
(mannans) also occur as reserve products, a pecu-
liar example being provided by Phytelephas, a palm.
The  large endosperm  of  this  species  becomes  so
heavily  indurated  with  a  mannan  that  it  enters
commerce under the name of “vegetable ivory”,
once used for the manufacture of buttons and bil-
liard  balls.  In  a  few  plants,  notably  the  orchids,
the  endosperm  undergoes  only  triﬂing  develop-
ment and in others it is remarkably aggressive. In
Pedicularis, for example, the endosperm produces
haustoria which invade the integumentary tissue,
leading eventually to its complete resorption.

In  relation  to the  gymnospermous  cycle,  the
endosperm is a new feature in the life cycle of the
seed  plants.  Powerful  arguments,  based  on  the
double  fertilization  which  occurs  regularly  in
Ephedra (p.  266),  have been  made  for  the  endo-
sperm  being  in  origin  a  highly  modiﬁed  second
embryo. It is signiﬁcant that there are many indi-

SPERMATOPHYTINA (CONT.): ANGIOSPERMS (FLOWERING PLANTS)

299

cations that endosperm may retain embryogenic
properties;  records  of  “endosperm  embryos”  are
not uncommon in older papers. Nevertheless, iso-
lated  central  fusion  cells  of  maize,  fused  with  a
single sperm cell in vitro, develop into endosperm
with no indications of embryogenesis. The devel-
opmental pathway of the “fertilized” central cell
thus seems to be ﬁrmly endospermal ab initio. The
genomic constitution of the fusion product must
normally  suppress  embryogenesis,  although
escape from this constraint is evidently occasion-
ally  possible.  The  complexity  of  the  situation  is
made  evident  by the  existence  of  mutants  of
certain plants, normally showing a regular sexual
cycle, which produce endosperm (and a seed) in
the absence of fertilization. It seems that the wild
type of the gene complex involved yields a protein
which, in normal reproduction, suppresses devel-
opment of the endosperm until after fertilization.
As a consequence of its polyploid genome, the
gene products of the endosperm are likely to be
compatible with those of the diploid sporophyte,
and in consequence immediately available for the
metabolism  of  the  embryo.  There  is  evidence,
however, that  satisfactory growth  and  morpho-
genesis  in  the  embryo is  dependent  upon  an
undisturbed  “endosperm  balance  number”  (nor-
mally  2씸:  1씹,  the  haplotype  being  provided  by
the pollen parent), and a ploidy ratio within the
ovule  of  2  (maternal  tissue):3  (endosperm):2
(embryo).  The  endosperm  nucleus  is  clearly
heterogeneous in the case of interspeciﬁc hybrids,
and this may account for the seeds of interspeciﬁc
crosses frequently being inviable. In this form of
infertility  the  embryo often  dies  in  the  seed,
apparently 
from  starvation.  Sometimes  the
embryo can be rescued and grown to maturity in
culture.  Normally, the  juxtaposition  of  embryo
and endosperm provides little impediment to the
transfer of metabolites. This no doubt makes for
the  generally  rapid  development  of  the  angio-
sperm embryo compared with that of the gymno-
sperms,  conferring  upon  them  a  signiﬁcant
selective advantage.

maturation of the seed and fruit
Associated with the maturation of the embryo are
considerable changes in the nucellus and integu-
ments. In some seeds food reserves are laid down

in the nucellus, and in the mature seed this then
forms  a  distinct  tissue  known  as  the  perisperm.
Frequently, however, only a little of the nucellus
remains, and this together with the integument
becomes  transformed  into  the  outer  covering  of
the  seed.  This  often  involves  the  deposition  of
much  cutin  and  lignin,  and  the  resulting  seed
coat  (testa)  is  consequently  often  remarkably
impervious.

As the seeds mature the ovary becomes a fruit.
There are numerous forms of fruits, but the wall
is formed either from the carpel (pericarp), or by
the  fusion  of  the  pericarp  with  surrounding
tissues. The pericarp may become hard, as in nuts,
or  dry  and  brittle,  as  in  the  capsules  of  the
Caryophyllaceae, or partly or wholly ﬂeshy, as in
common  edible  fruits.  In  berries  (e.g.,  tomato,
Lycopersicon)  the  pericarp  is  wholly  ﬂeshy,
in
(e.g.,  cherry,  Prunus)  the  outer  part
drupes 
becomes ﬂeshy while the inner hardens to form a
stone, and in pomes (e.g., apple, Malus) a thin layer
of  pericarp  hardens  while  the  remainder  fuses
with  the  surrounding  receptacle  and  forms  the
ﬂesh.  Where  fruits  are  palatable  to humans  or
animals the seeds commonly have a testa able to
survive passage through the digestive tract.

Seeds  are  often  distributed  while  still  in  the
fruit,  and  the  fruit  in  this  instance  commonly
bears hooks or spines (as in the burdock, Arctium),
or wings (ash, Fraxinus), or parachute-like fringes
of  hairs  (as  in  the  pappus  of  many  Asteraceae),
which assist dispersal by attachment to animals
or  by wind.  Other  angiosperms  have evolved
mechanisms  whereby  tensions  are  set  up  in  the
carpel wall as it dries, causing eventually an explo-
sive dehiscence which scatters the seeds far and
wide (e.g., spurge, Euphorbia). This brief summary
of a wealth of morphological detail shows how the
angiosperms have evolved a great variety of ways
which  ensure  wide  dissemination,  a  feature  in
which they differ sharply from the gymnosperms,
again contributing to their present success.

dormancy and germination
The  cause  of  the  cessation  of  growth of  the
embryo as  the  seed  matures  is  not  altogether
clear, but the partial dehydration of the interior of
the  seed  at  this  time  is  probably  an  important
factor.  Certainly  the  imbibition  of  water  is

300

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 4

Figure 9.36. (a) Vicia faba,
hypogeal germination. (b) Sinapis sp.,
epigeal germination.

essential for renewed growth,
but this by itself is often insuf-
ﬁcient  for  the  production  of
viable  seedlings.  A  period  of
dormancy  (“after  ripening”)
must  often  ensue  before  suc-
cessful 
germination  will
occur.  The  seeds  of  some
species also need to be chilled,
a treatment which apparently
activates  the  enzymes  which
make available to the embryo
the food reserves of the endo-
sperm. This cold requirement
also  provides  a  biological  advantage,  since  the
seeds  in  a  seasonal  climate  will  not  germinate
until  after  the  winter,  and  the  seedlings  thus
avoid  prolonged  freezing.  Other  seeds,  for
example  those  of  lettuce,  germinate  only  after
illumination,  and  the  phytochrome  system
(which  depends  upon  a  protein  sensitive  to red
light) is here involved in the renewal of growth. In
Banksia and some other Australian Proteaceae the
fruits open only after bush ﬁres (cf. “closed cone”
pines, p. 239), and the seeds germinate in the ash
layer. Not only is this a more favorable substratum
than  loose  humus,  but  the  seeds  of  at  least  one
species need heat treatment before they will ger-
minate. The seeds of many tropical plants, on the
other hand, germinate immediately in moist con-
ditions, and soon lose their viability if stored. The
tropical mangroves, plants of coasts and estuaries,
are  outstanding  in  that  in  some  species  the
embryo continues to develop in the ovules, and a
swollen  radicle  protrudes  from  the  withered
ﬂower. The young plant eventually falls and, with
the  radicle  correctly  oriented  for  penetration  of
the mud beneath, it rapidly establishes itself.

As a germinating seed imbibes water there is
usually  considerable  swelling  and  eventually
rupture of the testa. The radicle is the ﬁrst organ
to emerge, followed closely by the plumule. The
cotyledons  may  remain  within  the  seed  at  or
below soil level (hypogeal germination), as in Vicia
faba (broad bean) (Fig. 9.36a), or become elevated

(epigeal germination)  and  photosynthetic,  as  in
Sinapis (mustard) (Fig. 9.36b). Germination is basi-
cally  similar  in  monocotyledons  and  dicotyle-
dons, but in the grasses the plumule and radicle
are  ﬁrst enclosed  in  sheaths  called  the  coleoptile
and  coleorhiza respectively. Coleoptiles  show
marked  phototropic  and  gravitropic  responses
and, being devoid of appendages, are particularly
suitable  for  the  experimental  investigation  of
these phenomena.

Asexual reproduction
In  addition  to sexual  reproduction,  the  angio-
sperms  show  many  forms  of  asexual  reproduc-
tion.  One  form of  such  reproduction,  termed
apomictic, superﬁcially resembles sexual reproduc-
tion. Although its presence can be readily inferred
from  the  genetics  of  the  species  concerned,  the
elucidation  of  the  accompanying  cytology  has
sometimes demanded very careful investigation.
In  one  kind  of  apomixis,  parthenogenesis,  the  egg
develops without fertilization. Where this occurs
regularly, the nuclei involved in the formation of
the embryo sac and the nucleus of the egg contain
an  unreduced  number  of  chromosomes.  Such
embryo sacs may result from a modiﬁcation of the
meiosis  which  yields  the  megaspores  (as  in
Taraxacum),  or  from  the  spatial  and  functional
replacement  of  the  megaspore  by an  adjacent
nucellar  cell 
in  Hieracium,  hawkweed).
Although  the  formation  of  the  embryo occurs

(as 

SPERMATOPHYTINA (CONT.): ANGIOSPERMS (FLOWERING PLANTS)

301

Figure 9.37. Poncirus (Citrus) trifoliata. Longitudinal section
of micropylar end of embryo sac in which adventive
embryony is occurring. (a) Immediately after the fertilization
of the egg. (b) After the endosperm has become cellular.
Only the true embryo has a suspensor. (After Osawa, from
Maheshwari. 1950. An Introduction to the Embryology of
Angiosperms. McGraw-Hill, New York.)

without fertilization, the stimulus of pollination
is  often  needed  before  the  process  will  begin  (a
phenomenon known as pseudogamy), and an endo-
sperm may even be formed with the participation
of one of the sperm nuclei. The pollen, although
without genetic effect in the species producing it,
is  sometimes  able  to form  hybrids  with  related
sexual species. This parallels the situation in apog-
amous ferns, such as Dryopteris afﬁnis (p. 209).

Another form of apomixis involves the forma-
tion  of  embryos  directly  from  the  cells  of  the
nucellus, often in addition to the normal zygotic
embryo. A classical example of this phenomenon,
known  as  adventive embryony,  is  provided  by
Poncirus (Fig.  9.37),  where  the  mature  seeds  may
contain several viable embryos. Although in some
species adventive embryony is independent of pol-
lination,  there  are  others  (probably  including
Poncirus)  in  which  the  embryos  do  not  mature
unless it occurs. In these instances the germinat-
ing  pollen  probably  provides  a  chemical  factor
essential for continued growth. It is signiﬁcant in
this  connection  that  in  one  orchid,  Zygopetalum
machaii,  adventive  embryony,  although  depen-
dent  upon  pollination,  is  quite  as  effectively
stimulated  by pollen  from  another  genus  as  by

that  from  the  species  itself.  Multiple  seedlings
from normally one-seeded fruits are a feature of
many  tropical  trees,  and  this  suggests  that  apo-
mixis  may  be  widespread  in  the  tropical  rain
forest.

The only remaining form of apomixis is more
conspicuous  since  it  involves  the  formation  of
bulbils  or  dwarf  shoots  in  place  of  ﬂowers.
Saxifraga cernua and Festuca vivipara provide exam-
ples. Some species (e.g., S. cernua, Fig. 9.38) produc-
ing these structures are also able to reproduce in
a normal sexual manner, bulbils being borne in
the lower part of the inﬂorescence and ﬂowers in
the upper. In some grasses, and probably in other
plants displaying this phenomenon, the way the
plant reproduces can be inﬂuenced by the length
of day in which it is grown.

Other  forms  of  asexual  reproduction  are
purely vegetative. Stems may arch over and root
themselves, as in Rubus, and leaves of a number of
species produce plantlets either at the summit of
the petiole, as in Tolmiea (a frequent house plant),
or marginally, as in Kalanchoë. Species which grow
from bulbs usually reproduce themselves by the
production of axillary buds at the base of the axis
which develop into daughter bulbs. Corms multi-
ply themselves by a similar process. Fleshy roots
which are able to give rise to buds largely account
for  the  success  with  which  plants  such  as
Convolvulus arvensis (bindweed) and Lepidium draba
(hoary  cress)  are  able  to multiply  themselves.  In
addition  to these  various  forms  of  vegetative
layering,
reproduction  occurring 

in  nature, 

302

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 4

Figure 9.38. Saxifraga cernua. (a)
Inﬂorescence with one normal
ﬂower and the rest developing as
bulbils. (b) Germinating bulbil. (After
Kerner von Marilaun and Oliver.
1902. The Natural History of Plants.
Blackie, London.)

budding  and  grafting  are  frequently
used  in  horticulture,  and  are  the  only
means  of  propagating  many  valuable
varieties  whose  sexual  reproduction  is
defective. The protocorms of orchids (p.
297) transferred to aseptic culture will
each yield several plantlets, providing a
valuable  technique,  utilized  commer-
cially,
for  the  propagation  of  rare
species.

Most  remarkable  of  all,  perhaps,  is
that  in  experimental  conditions  iso-
lated  cells  and  even  pollen  grains  will
give  rise  to whole  plants  of  normal
growth and  form.  Those  raised  from
pollen grains are particularly useful in
breeding.  They  initially  contain  the
reduced  number  of  chromosomes,  but
this  can  be  doubled  by colchicine  so
that  a  pure  homozygote  is  obtained
which shows normal sexual reproduction.

The emergence of the angiosperms

The first angiosperms
As has been implied in the previous chapter, the
origin of the angiosperms, in terms of an ances-
tral group, remains obscure. There is little doubt
that  their  distant  ancestry 
lies  with  the
Lyginopteridopsida 
(p.  220).  Recent  cladistic
studies  point  strongly to  a  common  derivation
with  the  Bennettitales  (p.  252),  Pentoxylales  (p.
257)  and  Gnetopsida  (p.  259),  the  last  certainly
approaching angiosperms more closely than any
other  group  currently  known.  Together,  these
groups are sometimes referred to as the “anthoph-
ytes”, an expansion, to include the fossil represen-
the
tatives, 
the 
chlamydosperms, 
the
Gnetopsida. The search for the origin of the angio-
sperms now demands attention to the likely inter-

older 
comprising 

of 

concept 

of 
solely 

relationships  of  the  anthophytes 
(Fig.  9.39),
coupled  with  comparative  molecular  data  from
wide  surveys  of  living  Gnetopsida  and  angio-
sperms.

There are no simple criteria by which a fossil
can  be  accepted  as  an  angiosperm.  Vessels,  for
example, are found in the Gnetopsida, and arche-
gonia are absent from Gnetum and Welwitschia. The
presence  of  a  closed  carpel  and  pollen  tubes  in
stylar tissue are not readily demonstrated in fossil
material. With the earliest fossils, angiospermous
afﬁnity has largely to be assessed by the extent of
the  resemblances  to living  forms.  The  position
with regard to fossil pollen is fortunately clearer.
(Fig.  9.40)  is
Pollen  with  columellar  exine 
unknown outside the angiosperms, and there is
no convincing evidence that fossil gymnosperms
ever produced pollen of this kind.

Some have envisaged the angiosperms appear-
ing in upland regions (and hence away from sites
of fossilization) as early as the late Paleozoic, early

SPERMATOPHYTINA (CONT.): ANGIOSPERMS (FLOWERING PLANTS)

303

W elwitschia

Ephedra

Bennettitales

Angiosperm s

G netu m

Bennettitales

Ephedra

W elwitschia

G netu m

Angiosperm s

Figure 9.39. Two possible relationships of angiosperms
with their closest relatives. (From Crane, Friis and Pedersen.
1995. Nature 374.)

Figure 9.40. Diagram of a representative section of the
exine of an angiospermous pollen grain, showing the thin
endexine and the three layers of the ectexine. The exine
covering the colpus is both thinner and simpler.

forms  perhaps  resembling  Sanmiguelia  (p.  257).
The ﬁrst specimens of angiosperm pollen are not,
however, found until the Lower Cretaceous (Table
9.2).  In  view  of  the  long  distances  over  which
pollen can be transported by wind and water, an
origin  of  the  angiosperms  (as  we perceive  them
today) before the Mesozoic seems unlikely.

Some of the oldest reproductive parts assigned
to the angiosperms come from the Upper Jurassic
and  Lower  Cretaceous.  Archaeofructus,  from  the
Upper  Jurassic  of  China,  is  a  reproductive  axis
bearing helically arranged fruits. These have been
interpreted  as  being  formed  from  conduplicate
carpels (see, for example, Fig. 9.46). The branched
fertile axis was subtended by two leaf-like struc-
tures.  Although  of  probable  angiospermous
afﬁnity,  this  plant  is  unlike  any  previously
described.  However, its  overall  morphology  is  in

of 

of 

their 

identiﬁcation 

subclass  Magnoliidae 

keeping  with  a  position  in  the  Magnoliidae  (see
below). A diversity of angiosperm fossils has now
been recovered from the Lower Cretaceous. They
are  mostly  seeds  and  fruits,  lacking  structural
preservation. Their resemblances to those of any
living species are often too superﬁcial to permit
ﬁrm 
afﬁnities.
Nevertheless, all those that do have recognizable
features have been found to be attributable to the
existing 
the
Magnoliopsida, plants generally unspecialized in
construction. Commonly the carpels are free, and
the  ﬂoral  parts  are  spirally  arranged  and  often
poorly differentiated into petals and sepals (as in
Magnolia itself). The subclass also contains plants
with  very simple  ﬂowers  which  tend  to be  clus-
tered  in  spikes  (e.g.,  Piper,  pepper).  These  plants
are  commonly  not  woody.  It  would  seem  that
these 
the
Magnoliidae  gave rise  to the  remainder  of  the
Magnoliopsida  (sometimes  referred  to as  the
“eudicots”)  and  the  entire  class  Liliopsida  (Fig.
9.41). 

early 

angiosperms 

comprising 

304

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 4

Table 9.2 Stages of the Cretaceous.

Danian (Early Paleocene)

e
t
a
L

y

l
r
a
E

Maastrichtian
Campanian
Santonian
Turonian
Cenomanian

Albian
Aptian
Barremian
Hauterivian
Valanginian
Berriasian

Late Jurassic

Neocomian

Wealden Beds
(freshwater)

Age

(106 years)

65

97

145.6

Notes:
Time scale based on W. B. Harland et al. 1989. A Geologic Time Scale. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Later  in  the  Lower  Cretaceous  (in  rocks  of
Aptian and Albian age) are found ﬂowers with free
carpels, and fruits with small seeds evidently pro-
duced  from  anatropous  ovules.  Bisexual  ﬂowers
with their parts in a spiral arrangement have also
been reported. Leaves with angiosperm-like vena-
tion,  already  known  from  pre-Albian  rocks,  also
become more numerous and varied at this time.
Magnolia-like fossil ﬂowers have supported the
view, long  held  by those  studying  living  angio-
sperms,  that  the  Magnoliidae  are  primitive.
Nevertheless, it is the less spectacular remains of
stamens and tiny, apetalous ﬂowers from the early
Cretaceous  that  are  attracting  particular  atten-
tion. They are giving rise to the view that the ear-
liest  angiosperms  bore  small,  trimerous  ﬂowers
reaching  2mm  (0.08in.)  or  less  in  length.  The
stamens  generally  had  valvate  dehiscence,  and
the carpels a poorly developed stigmatic surface.
Such fossilized ﬂowers (Fig. 9.42) have been found
in early Cretaeous deposits in Portugal and North
America. In life many of these ﬂowers must have
resembled  those  of  living  peppers  (Piperaceae)
and  Chloranthaceae,  and  the  plants  that  bore
them  have been  referred  to as  “paleoherbs”.
Others were like those of Ceratophyllum (hornwort,

not to be confused with the bryophyte Anthoceros,
p. 115), at the present time a wholly aquatic genus.
Yet others resembled the ﬂowers of laurel (Laurus)
and the related genus Calycanthus. All these would
be  referable  to the  Magnoliidae.  Many  of  these
early ﬂowers were unisexual.

Derivation of the Liliopsida
The  recognition  that  small,  trimerous  ﬂowers
might  be  the  most  primitive  within  the
Magnoliidae  has  thrown  new  light  on  the  likely
source of the Liliopsida. The preponderance of the
trimerous state in this subclass can be attributed
to the  retention  of  an  ancient  feature,  and  the
concept  of  its  having  been  derived  by reduction
from the relative complexity of the Magnolia-like
ﬂower need not be invoked. In addition, the lack
of woodiness in the Liliopsida can be regarded as
a retained primitive characteristic. Cladistic anal-
yses, utilizing data from nucleotide sequences in
the plastid gene rbcL, as well as other molecular
and morphological features from a wide range of
monocotyledons, point to Acorus (sweet ﬂag), long
regarded as belonging to the Araceae, as the most
primitive  form of  living  Liliopsida.  Present  evi-
dence would therefore suggest that an ancestral

SPERMATOPHYTINA (CONT.): ANGIOSPERMS (FLOWERING PLANTS)

305

Laurales/M agnoliales
Aristolochiaceae
Calycanthaceae
Chloranthaceae
Nym phaeales
Winteraceae
W elwitschia
Liliopsida
Piperales
Eudicots
Ephedra
G netu m

Calycanthaceae
Chloranthaceae
Ceratophyllu m
Winteraceae
M agnoliales
W elwitschia
Liliopsida
Piperales
Laurales
Eudicots
Ephedra
G netu m

Figure 9.41. Two cladistic analyses depicting possible
relationships amongst primitive angiosperms. These analyses
have utilized morphological information combined with
sequence data from (a) ribosomal RNA and (b) the rbcL
plastid gene. (After Doyle, Donoghue and Zimmer. 1994.
Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 81, and Albert,
Backlund, Bremer et al. 1994. Annals of the Missouri Botanical
Garden 81, respectively.)

Figure 9.42. Early simple angiospermous ﬂowers of the
Magnoliidae. (a) Chloranthus-like androecium with three
stamens. Scale bar 0.2mm. (b) Platanus-like female ﬂower
with ﬁve free carpels. Scale bar 0.2 mm. (c) Fruit consisting of
three follicles borne on a receptacle. Scale bar 2mm. (After
Friis and Crepet, from Friis, Chaloner and Crane (eds.) 1987.
The Origins of Angiosperms. Cambridge University Press, New
York.)

form was to be sought amongst the paleoherbs, or
perhaps some early representatives of the magnol-
iid  family  Aristolochiaceae  (birthworts),  all  cur-
rently  herbaceous  and  with  trimerous  ﬂowers.
Flowers which can be conﬁdently ascribed to the

found 

in  the  Upper
Liliopsida  have been 
Cretaceous  Turonian  (Table  9.2).  They  resemble
those of the living Triuridaceae, currently a tropi-
cal family of small saprophytes.

The fossil record gives little information about
the diversiﬁcation of the early Liliopsida parallel-
ing  that  in  the  Magnoliopsida.  However, by  the
late  Cretaceous,  fruits  of  ginger-like  plants  and
leaves and stems of palms are found. The earliest
grasses  were  probably  bamboo-like.  Remains  of
grasses  appearing  referable  to the  Poaceae,  the
most important liliopsid family of temperate agri-
culture, are found in Eocene deposits (Fig. 9.43).

306

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 4

Figure 9.43. A grass-like liliopsid (Poaceae) node with
sheathing leaf base and adventitious roots. Eocene age, from
the Green River Sandstone, Colorado, USA. Scale bar 1cm.

Diversification of the early Magnoliopsida 
Current  evidence  clearly  points  to the  earliest
Magnoliopsida  being  represented  by plants
showing  afﬁnities  with  the  living  Magnoliidae.
Diversiﬁcation of these early forms evidently gave
rise to the “eudicots” (p. 303). Unisexual ﬂowers in
catkin-like  inﬂorescences,  resembling  those  of
living  Platanus (plane),  can  be  recognized  by the
Albian stage of the mid-Cretaceous, as can other
simple ﬂowers (e.g., Caloda) reminiscent of the sub-
class Hamamelididae, a group containing most of
the  wind-pollinated  forest
(Fig.  9.44).
Simultaneously, net-veined  leaves  became  more
common  (Fig.  9.45),  and  angiospermous  pollen
grains more abundant.

trees 

At the beginning of the Upper Cretaceous
(Cenomanian) the frequency and diversity of
substantially.
angiosperm remains

increase

Figure 9.44. Caloda. The female axis (a) bears many short
branches. Each short branch terminates in a cluster of
carpels (b). The precise relationships of this fossil remain
obscure, but it would appear to be basal within the
Hamamelididae, perhaps close to the Platanaceae. Scale bars:
(a) 1cm; (b) 2mm. (From Dilcher and Kovach. 1986. American
Journal of Botany 73.)

(Fig. 9.46),

for example,

Many of the leaves and ﬂowers begin to resemble
those of modern genera. A reconstruction of
shows
Archaeanthus
numerous conduplicate carpels borne spirally on
the terminal portion of a robust axis. Below
these were three regions of dehiscence scars that
probably represent the positions of stamens, per-
ianth segments, and bud scales or bracts.
Flowers with a cyclic arrangement of the ﬂoral
parts also appear in the fossil record by the mid-
Cretaceous (Fig. 9.47), some with syncarpous
gynaecia.

By the late Cenomanian, ﬂowers with inferior
ovaries are also found. Although many of the mid-
Cretaceous ﬂowers remain unfamiliar, a number
the
of 

amongst 

them 

living 

families, 

SPERMATOPHYTINA (CONT.): ANGIOSPERMS (FLOWERING PLANTS)

307

Figure 9.45. Leaf fossils from
progressively younger beds of the
mid-Cretaceous, showing a
tendency toward increasing
morphological complexity. (From
Upchurch and Wolfe, in Friis,
Chaloner and Crane (eds.) 1987.
The Origins of Angiosperms.
Cambridge University Press, New
York.)

more hazardous. Nevertheless,
Amborella, a shrubby angio-
sperm of New Caledonia,
related to the laurels and
other Magnoliidae (p. 303), has
been claimed as an example of
an angiosperm least altered
from the concept of the ances-
tral ﬂowering plant. Like all
characters involved in cladis-
tic analysis, DNA sequences
may be subject to changes in
evolution which reverse previ-
ous character switches. This
can give rise to bizarre results,
and presumably lead to clado-
grams in which, for example,
Selaginella occurs among the
ferns, and in a clade separate
from Isoetes and Lycopodium
(Huperzia)
(Chapter 6). The
rationality of such an arrange-
ment cannot be sustained on
any reading of the morphological evidence, living
or fossil. Despite the features of Amborella being in
a number of respects undeniably primitive, to
claim it as a “living fossil” would, on present evi-
dence, be quite unwarranted.

Evolution of morphological features within
the angiosperms

Origin of the carpel
There is little direct evidence of the origin of the
carpel.  It  is,  however, signiﬁcant  that  in  Drimys
(Fig. 9.48) and Degeneria (Fig. 9.49), both within the
extant Magnoliidae, the carpel is a clearly condu-
plicate structure with a lateral stigma lying along

Magnoliaceae, Platanaceae and Winteraceae, can
now be clearly recognized.

The technique of sequence analysis applied to
the DNA of selected living angiosperms has led to
numerous cladograms detailing degrees of rela-
tionship between the chosen specimens. Since
this form of analysis also incorporates a concept of
primitiveness (derived by comparison with a more
distantly related plant, such as a fern), these
studies are also capable of indicating likely ances-
tral genetic conﬁgurations. Generally, such inves-
tigations produce consistent results with regard
to the relationships within large groupings, such
as the Liliopsida and the “eudicots” (p. 303), but
ﬁrm recognition of the most primitive form is

308

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 4

Figure 9.46. Reconstruction of a
ﬂowering shoot of the
magnoliaceous Cenomanian (mid-
Cretaceous) plant Archaeanthus. The
deeply divided leaves are unlike
those of any living magnoliaceous
plant, but there is an approach to
this condition in Liriodendron (“tulip
tree”) of North America and China.
(After Dilcher and Crane. 1985.
Annals of the Missouri Botanical
Garden 71.)

part  or  the  whole  of  the  ventral  suture.  In
Degeneria the ventral margins of the carpel do not
even  fuse  (Fig.  9.49),  but  become  interlocked  by
hairs between which the pollen tubes force their
way.

It  is  clear  that  many  gymnospermous  struc-
tures  approach  the  carpel  in  form,  notably
those of  the  Glossopteridales  (p.  255)  and  corys-
tosperms  (p.  254).  Continuation  of  the  develop-
mental  trends  seen 
in  the  ovule-enclosing
structures  of  the  corystosperms  (pp.  256,  257)
could have led with little further modiﬁcation to
the  angiospermous  carpel.  This  would  have
required,  of  course,  the  ability  of  the  gameto-
phytic  pollen  tube  to grow  freely  through  the
sporophytic  tissue  to the  embryo sac.  The  ten-
dency for gametophytic and sporophytic tissues,
when in contact in the life cycle, to be separated
by isolating barriers  (well  seen  in  bryophytes  (p.
103)  and  ferns  (p.  208))  is  modulated  in  many
angiosperms  by the  presence  of  incompatibility
systems  (p.  296).  These  depend  upon  successful
pollination  being  possible  only  when  the
genomes  of  the  sporophyte  and  pollen  differ  in

Figure 9.47. Reconstruction of a mid-Cretaceous (Dakota
Formation) pentamerous ﬂower with features of the Rosidae.
The ﬂowers were 25–40mm (1–1.6in.) in diameter. (After
Basinger and Dilcher. 1980. Botanical Society of America,
Miscellaneous Series 158, from Stewart and Rothwell. 1993.
Paleobotany and the Evolution of Plants, 2nd edn. Cambridge
University Press, New York.)

SPERMATOPHYTINA (CONT.): ANGIOSPERMS (FLOWERING PLANTS)

309

Figure 9.48. Drimys piperita. (a)
Carpel with stigmatic surface along
the ventral suture. (b) Transverse
section of carpel. (After Bailey and
Swamy, from Foster and Gifford.
1959. Comparative Morphology of
Vascular Plants. Freeman, San
Francisco. © 1959.)

enforced 

dissimilar  genome.  This  con-
tinued  accessibility  was  an
essential  prerequisite  for  the
evolution of angiospermy. The
outbreeding 
by
systems
incompatibility 
would  also  have tended  to
promote the establishment of
new  forms,  and  probably  contributed  substan-
tially to the apparently rapid diversification of the
flowering plants in the late Mesozoic. The impres-
sion,  arising  from  the  occurrence  of  self-incom-
patibility in the living representatives of many of
the families to which some of the earliest angio-
sperms can be conﬁdently assigned, and from the
features of much of early Cretaceous pollen, that
the  emergent  angiosperms  were  indeed  self-
incompatible  is  becoming  increasingly accept-
able.  It  would  follow  that  self-compatibility  in
ﬂowering plants was a derived feature.

The woody habit
Although  comparative  analysis  of  living  ﬂoras
indicates that the woody habit is correlated with
reproductive features we can now recognize from
the fossil record as primitive, it should be noted
that  woody  plants  generally  reproduce  less
rapidly than herbaceous, thus limiting the rate of
evolutionary advance. Woodiness is predominant
amongst gymnosperms of the late Paleozoic and
Mesozoic, a possible exception being Sanmiguelia
(p.  257).  Certainly  some  of  the  earliest  angio-
sperms  were  woody,  but,  equally, herbaceous
paleoherbs were also amongst the earliest forms.
Shrubby forms may have evolved from herbaceous
in the Lower Cretaceous, and conversely shrubby
Archaeanthus-like plants may have given rise to her-
baceous  forms  in  mid-Cretaceous  times.  In
general, woodiness does not seem to have been a
feature of early to mid-Cretaceous vegetation, and
remarkably  little  angiosperm  wood  has  been

Figure 9.49. Degeneria sp. Transverse section of
conduplicate carpel. The ventral lobes, although appressed,
do not fuse, but become interlocked by hairs. The ﬂared
ventral margin provides a stigmatic surface. (After Swamy,
from Foster and Gifford. 1959. Comparative Morphology of
Vascular Plants. Freeman, San Francisco. © 1959.)

in 

reactions 

respect of alleles of certain incompatibility genes.
This genomic difference prevents the activation of
and 
defense 
style.
stigma 
Consequently  only  outbreeding 
is  possible.
Heterozygosity  is  thus  maintained  and  the  con-
tinuance of the system in successive generations
ensured. Incompatibility systems allow the closing
of the carpel while retaining the accessibility of
the  ovule  to pollen  tubes  with  an  appropriately

310

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 4

Figure 9.50. Diagram showing the changing composition
and form of the Earth’s vegetation during the Cretaceous
period. The current climax vegetation at middle latitudes is
included for comparison. (a) Araucarian conifer. (b)
Taxodiaceous conifer. (c) Cycadalean shrub. (d) Cycadeoidea-
like bennettitalean. (e) Herbaceous lycopod. (f) Fern. (g)
Angiosperm shrub. (h) Angiosperm herb. (i) Gnetalean herb
or small shrub. (j) Angiosperm tree. (After Crane, from Friis,
Chaloner and Crane (eds.) 1987. The Origins of Angiosperms.
Cambridge University Press, New York.)

found  of  Cretaceous  age.  Massive  trees,  such  as
occur  in  the  tropical  rain  forest,  probably  ﬁrst
appeared in the Upper Cretaceous (Fig. 9.50).

Xylem
Although  the  secondary  xylem  of  a  particular
species  of  angiosperm  has  a  characteristic
anatomy, within  the  angiosperms  as  a  whole
there  is  considerable  variation  in  such  features
as the length of vessel segments and the form of

SPERMATOPHYTINA (CONT.): ANGIOSPERMS (FLOWERING PLANTS)

311

Figure 9.51. Drosera rotundifolia.
(a) Habit. (b) Single leaf in which
some of the glandular hairs have
closed on an entrapped insect.
(After Kerner von Marilaun and
Oliver. 1902. The Natural History of
Plants. Blackie, London.)

a 

single 

plane. 

buds  (p.  301),  many  pinnate
leaves  are  hardly  distinguish-
able  from  lateral  shoots  of
limited growth, bearing leaves
in 
In
Chisocheton, a tree of Southeast
Asia with a large pinnate leaf,
the  apex  of  the  main  rachis
remains  active  for  several  seasons,  producing  a
pair of pinnae annually. The leaves of the related
tropical shrub Guarea behave in a similar way and
the  leaf  may  continue  to grow  for  as  long  as  10
years. Inbreeding may also reveal the developmen-
tal  similarity  of  stems  and  leaves.  In  some
improved  varieties  of  tomato,  for  example,  buds
arise freely along the rachis of the leaf, and the
distal part often continues growth as a shoot.

Comparatively recent evolution in the form of
leaves  has  evidently  been  concerned  in  some
instances with modiﬁcation for a particular func-
tion.  The  insect  traps  of  Drosera (sundew)  (Fig.
9.51),  Nepenthes (pitcher  plant)  (Fig.  9.52)  and
Dionaea  (Fig.  9.53)  are  examples  of  this  kind  of
development.  Sometimes  evolution  has  been  in
relation to, and perhaps coupled with, that of a
particular insect, usually a species of ant, which
lives in and is nourished by the plant concerned.
In several tropical species of Acacia, for example,
the  long  thorn-like  stipules  are  hollow  and
provide  shelter,  while  the  leaﬂets  terminate  in
small globules of parenchyma (Belt’s corpuscles)
which  are  devoured  by the  ants  (Fig.  9.54).
Succulence of leaves (the anatomical and physio-
logical modiﬁcation of the mesophyll enabling it
to retain large quantities of water) also reaches its
highest development in the angiosperms and is a
feature of many desert and maritime species.

Flowers and inflorescences
The fossil evidence (p. 303) points to the ﬁrst angio-
sperm ﬂowers having had the members of both
the sterile and fertile parts of the ﬂower separate

perforation  and  orientation  of  the  end  plate.
These features vary independently of each other,
but statistical analysis has revealed that two com-
binations  appear  signiﬁcantly  frequently. Long
vessel  segments  (1.3–2.0mm;  0.05–0.08in.),  for
example,  tend  to be  associated  with  obliquely
placed end plates with scalariform perforations,
and  short  segments  with  transverse  end  plates
with single large pores (see Fig. 9.10). Long vessel
segments  are  also  associated  with  a  number  of
other  features,  such  as  the  angularity  of  the
outline in transverse section, small cross-sectional
area and uniform thickening of the walls. Vessel
segments of this kind closely resemble the trach-
eids  of  divers  gymnosperms,  such  as  Callixylon
(Archaeopteris),  pines  and  Ginkgo.  Long  vessel  seg-
ments  might  be  expected  to characterize  the
xylem of the Magnoliidae generally. The wood of
Drimys,  also  placed  with  the  Magnoliidae,  lacks
vessels  altogether  and  consists  wholly  of  gym-
nosperm-like  tracheids.  Short  vessel  segments
may have been a feature of the paleoherb ances-
tors (perhaps in the form with which they occur
in  living  Liliopsida).  They  may  also  have arisen
independently (as in the Gnetopsida).

Leaves
Although  little  can  be  said  with  certainty  con-
cerning  the  evolution  of  leaves,  there  are  many
indications of stem-like properties in the leaves of
angiosperms, indicating their afﬁnity with mega-
phylls  (p.  172)  rather  than  microphylls  (p.  150).
Apart from the stem-like branching of some leaves
(p. 277) and the readiness of others to yield shoot

312

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 4

Figure 9.52. Nepenthes. Leaf modiﬁed to form a pitcher-like
insect trap. The inner surface of the pitcher is covered with
tile-like plates of wax making it impossible for the insect to
climb out. (After Botanical Magazine, from Wettstein. 1935.
Handbuch der Systematischen Botanik. Deuticke, Leipzig.)

from each other. In present-day ﬂoras such chorich-
lamydeous ﬂowers are found not only in primitive
woody species, but are also characteristic of such
families as the herbaceous Ranunculaceae and the
monocotyledonous Alismataceae. Nevertheless,
congenital fusion of parts (which rarely involves
actual fusion, but is a consequence of the delayed
appearance of separated meristems in develop-
ment), both of the perianth and of the reproduc-
tive region, can be looked upon with fair certainty
as a later feature in the evolution of the ﬂower. As
we have seen with the algae (Table 3.1), simple and
presumably earlier features can continue to exist
together with the more complex provided the
organisms concerned continue to ﬁll an ecological
niche and their attributes are not selectively disad-
vantageous.

common 

Quite  apart  from  fusion  of  parts  within  the
ﬂower, another tendency, clearly evident in some
alliances,  has  been  toward the  evolution  of
compact  inﬂorescences.  The  ultimate  form of
such  an  inﬂorescence  is  the  dense  capitulum,
occurring in a number of families, but character-
istic  of  the  Asteraceae  (Compositae).  In  many
instances, owing to the differentiation of disk and
ray  ﬂorets,  capitula  have come  superﬁcially  to
resemble simple ﬂowers, a feature well shown by
the 
In
Syncephalantha, a Central American composite, we
even ﬁnd a racemose aggregate of capitula which,
taken as a whole, also has a ﬂower-like form owing
to the  asymmetry  of  the  marginal  capitula.  The
sporadic occurrence of these ﬂower-like inﬂores-
cences in a number of families indicates that the
radiate form of the reproductive region, whatever
its  composition,  has  biological  signiﬁcance.
Natural selection would account for the repeated
emergence of this pattern despite the increasing
morphological  complexity  of  the  reproductive
region.

daisy, 

Bellis 

perennis. 

Figure 9.53. Dionaea muscipula (Venus ﬂytrap): an
insectivorous plant in which the leaf is highly modiﬁed. The
terminal lamina of the leaf is in two halves which rapidly close
together when the sensitive hairs on the surface are touched,
the marginal teeth interlocking. Entrapped insects are
digested by proteolytic enzymes coming from glandular hairs
on the inner (adaxial) surface of the lamina. Scale bar 2mm.

insect 

The evolution of spurred and otherwise zygo-
morphic petals, distinctive scents, nectaries and
peculiar stamens (see p. 285) and striking pigmen-
tation  of  the  perianth  are  all  usually  associated
with 
(and  rarely  bird)  pollination.
Sometimes the life cycles of both plant and insect
are so closely interwoven that one could not exist
without the other. Reproduction in the ﬁgs (Ficus)
provides a particularly striking example. Here evo-
lution has led to an urn-shaped receptacle, almost

SPERMATOPHYTINA (CONT.): ANGIOSPERMS (FLOWERING PLANTS)

313

Figure 9.54. Acacia sphaerocephala.
Portion of leaf showing the hollow
stipules and Belt’s corpuscles.

physiological  adaptation  to
extreme  habitats.  In  the  salt
marsh plant Limonium (sea lav-
ender), for example, glands on
the leaves actively excrete the
excess ions taken up with the
soil  water.
In  a  number  of
angiosperms evolution has led
to the  abandonment  of  auto-
trophy, the species concerned
consequence
becoming 
obligate  heterotrophs,  a  tran-
sition  already  seen  in  other
divisions 
plant
kingdom.  Examples  amongst
the  angiosperms  are  provided  by Epipogium,  an
orchid  which  lacks chlorophyll  and  derives  its
nutrition  from  a  highly  developed  mycorrhiza,
and  such  parasites  as  Lathraea (toothwort),
Orobanche (broomrape)  and  Cuscuta (dodder)  (Fig.
9.55).  A  number  of  angiosperms,  such  as  Viscum
(mistletoe), Euphrasia (eyebright) and Striga (a pest
of Sorghum in the semi-arid tropics), have become
parasitic  without  losing  the  ability  to photosyn-
thesize, so they are not entirely dependent upon
their hosts.

the 

in 

of 

Penetration  of  the  host  is  accomplished  in  a
number of different ways. In Viscum, the seed ger-
minates  in  the  bark  of  the  host  tree,  the  root
enters  the  cortex,  ramiﬁes,  and  haustoria  are
formed  with  the  vascular  system  of  the  host.  In
Cuscuta, the seeds germinate in the soil, but the
seedlings make wide circumnutatory movements.
Some achieve contact with the host. The parasitic
stem then twines tightly about the host branch,
making  about  three  turns  (rarely more)  before
growing  further.  At the  points  of  contact  protu-
berances develop and form haustoria within the
host. In the South African root parasite Hyobanche,
the haustoria develop from young scale leaves of
the subterranean rhizome of the parasite. When a
leaf primordium touches a young root of the host,
the site of contact begins to swell, and the distal
part of the host rootlet dies. Haustoria grow into
the swelling of the host root from the site of the
leaf of the parasite.

closed at the mouth. The female ﬂowers, the ﬁrst
to open in the cavity of the receptacle, are polli-
nated by particular wasps which force their way
through the narrow entrance and bring in pollen
from  elsewhere.  Eggs  are  laid  in  some  of  the
ovaries and the emergence of the new generation
of wasp coincides with the opening of the male
ﬂowers.  In  escaping  from  the  fruit  they take
pollen  with  them  and  the  cycle  is  repeated  in
another  developing  fruit.  In  some  species  the
cycle  is  even  more  complicated,  two  species  of
wasp  being  involved.  These  situations  raise  pro-
found problems of evolution, since at some stage
ﬂower  and  insect  must  have begun  to evolve
together, leading ultimately to complete mutual
dependence.

The inﬂorescences of the Araceae, in which the
small individual ﬂowers are crowded on a rod-like
spadix  surrounded  by a tent-like  spathe,  are
remarkable for the heat generated as the ﬂowers
mature. This is brought about by vigorous respir-
atory activity in the spadix. The high temperature
(as  much  as  30°C  (54°F)  above that  outside  the
spathe)  vaporizes  unpleasantly  smelling  com-
pounds which attract pollinators.

Physiology
It is evident that morphological diversiﬁcation in
the angiosperms has been accompanied by physio-
logical. Apart from the wide range of secondary
metabolites in angiosperms are many instances of

314

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 4

Figure 9.55. Cuscuta. (a) Habit. (b)
Transverse section of host stem
showing the penetration of the
vascular tissue of the parasite into
that of the host. ((a) after Kerner
von Marilaun and Oliver. 1902. The
Natural History of Plants. Blackie,
London.)

Recent evolution within families and
genera
Knowledge  of  recent  evolution  in  the  angio-
sperms  has  come  principally, as  with  the  ferns,
from studies of chromosome pairing in hybrids,
often  produced  under  experimental  conditions.
Hybridization  of  diploid  species,  followed  by
allopolyploidy, appears to have been the origin of
a  number  of  well-known  plants,  amongst  them
Spartina anglica (cord-grass)  and  Galeopsis tetrahit
(hemp  nettle).  Observations  of  chromosome  size
may assist in assessing evolutionary relationships

of a wider character. The family Commelinaceae,
for example, includes some genera in which the
chromosomes are small, others in which they are
strikingly large,  and  yet  others  in  which  the
nuclei contain chromosomes of both sizes. Fossils
have contributed little to knowledge of this kind
of evolution. A few fossil series of recent age are
known, mostly of angiospermous seeds, but they
indicate little other than minor changes in struc-
ture and shape. Seeds of the water plant Stratiotes
(water soldier), for example, are found in succes-
sive strata throughout the Tertiary era. There was

SPERMATOPHYTINA (CONT.): ANGIOSPERMS (FLOWERING PLANTS)

315

evidently  a  slight,  but  progressive,  lengthening
and  narrowing  of  the  seed  during  this  period,
together with minor changes in the relative devel-
opment of the parts.

Comparative  biochemistry  can  also  reveal
afﬁnities  of  living  plants  and  indicate  possible
lines  of  evolution.  The  grouping  of  species  in
Aesculus (buckeye), for example, is assisted by the
occurrence  in  some  species  of  distinctive  non-
protein amino acids and their absence in others.
Isozyme  analysis  can  also  indicate  evolutionary
pathways  within  genera.  The  constitution  of
chloroplast  DNA  has  also  been  subject  to evolu-
tionary change in recent time. Restriction enzyme
analysis of chloroplast DNAs from both liliopsids
and  magnoliopsids  has  assisted  in  elucidating
phylogenetic  relationships  within  genera  and
families.

The  lead-  and  copper-tolerant  forms  of  the
grasses Agrostis tenuis and Festuca ovina, found on
spoil heaps of old mines, are splendid examples of
recent  evolution.  This  is  generally  considered  to
have occurred  by selection  of  resistant  mutants
appearing spontaneously in natural populations.
Species tolerant of normally toxic concentrations
of various heavy metals are found in a wide range
of  angiosperm  families.  The  metal  ions  are
usually removed from the general metabolism by
complexing with speciﬁc amino acids or proteins.
The  latex  of  Sebertia acuminata  (Sapotaceae),  a
small  tree  endemic  to New Caledonia,  has  been
found to contain up to 11 percent of nickel, its tox-
icity suppressed by its forming a complex with the
amino acid histidine. Plants which show this kind
of  hyperaccumulation  often  serve  as  “indicator
plants”  to those  prospecting  for  ores  of  copper,
nickel and other metals. They may also provide a
means  of  extracting  valuable  metals  from  low-
grade sources. Plants of Indian mustard (Brassica
juncea), for example, growing on soils rich in par-
ticulate  gold,  will,  if  the  gold  is  solubilized  by
adding ammonium thiocyanate to the substrate,
take up  the  metal  freely. Although  the  thiocya-
nate eventually kills the plants, the gold can be
recovered by burning the dead plants and extract-
ing it from the ash. Such “phytomining” may have
a commercial future.

The main trends of angiosperm evolution
To summarize,  we can  envisage  the  main  evolu-
tionary trends in the angiosperms to have been as
follows.  They  emerged  from  the  gymnosperms,
probably, in  view  of  the  radial  symmetry  of  the
ovules and certain anatomical similarities, from a
group  evolving  from  the  Lyginopteridopsida  of
the  late  Paleozoic.  The  angiosperms  thus  inher-
ited a seed habit of long standing, and a service-
able  form of  axial  structure  in  which lateral
branch systems had long ago become megaphylls,
and in which megaphylls in turn were becoming
differentiated  into  petioles  and  laminae  with
reticulate  venation.  They  improved  upon  this
structure, replacing coarse and angular ramiﬁca-
tion  by
elegant  branching.  Anatomically,
strengthening tissues tended to become reduced
to those required by mechanical laws, and stems
and  branches  consequently  acquired  a  pliancy
that  is  a  protection  against  storms.  Vessels  were
also developed from tracheids, and a more highly
organized  phloem  containing  sieve tubes  and
companion  cells  from  simple  sieve cells  and
parenchyma, both developments probably having
advantageous  physiological  consequences.  The
reproductive  regions  became  highly  specialized,
their evolution often being correlated with that of
pollinating organisms.

Some  have suggested  that  the  angiosperms
had more than one origin, i.e., that they, like the
gymnosperms,  may  be  polyphyletic.  This,
however, seems  unlikely  in  view  of  the  general
occurrence of the characteristic “double fertiliza-
tion”  in  the  embryo sac.  Nevertheless,  the  rela-
tionship between some Liliopsida, especially the
palms,  and  the  Magnoliopsida  certainly  appears
remote,  and  we must  assume  that  these  two
classes have followed more or less parallel lines of
evolution for a considerable period.

We have considered both the herbaceous and
the woody habits to have been present in the ear-
liest angiosperms (p. 309). The subsequent evolu-
tion of the herbs was undoubtedly inﬂuenced by
their  interaction  with  grazing  animals,  and  the
establishment of angiospermous forests. In tropi-
cal  regions  many  herbaceous  angiosperms  (e.g.,
Orchidaceae and Bromeliaceae) are in fact epiphy-
tes upon angiospermous trees and shrubs, and it
seems clear that these epiphytes followed rather

316

THE SUBKINGDOM EMBRYOPHYTA (CONT.): DIVISION TRACHEOPHYTA, PART 4

than preceded the arboreal vegetation. Because of
the rapidity with which the relatively succulent
leaves  of  angiosperms  decay  in  tropical  condi-
tions, humus is soon formed wherever they accu-
mulate. Consequently, fertile substrata are found
in abundance on horizontal surfaces and in the
crotches of branches. This leads to an ecological
situation different from that in gymnospermous
forests, where the leaves mostly reach the ground
and  the  humus,  owing  to the  slow  decay  of  the
leaves,  is  covered  by harsh  and  unconsolidated
material unfavorable for the establishment of del-
icate herbaceous forms. It thus seems reasonable
to suppose  that  the  epiphytic  angiosperms  (and
ferns)  emerged  in  response  to,  and  are  in  the
process of exploiting, the new ecological habitat
created  by the  rise  of  the  angiosperm  forests.
Their evolution would then have been, in geologi-
cal time, a relatively recent event.

Today the angiosperms in some way resemble
successful  individuals  reaching  afﬂuent  middle
age,  determined  to let  no  human  experience
escape them. They experiment freely with meta-
bolic novelties, such as fragrant oils, peculiar alka-
loids  and  unusual  carbohydrates  (such  as  the
fructosan  inulin).  In  sexual  reproduction,  as
regards both pollination and the cytology of the

gametophytes, they show sometimes bizarre vari-
ations.  We probably  witness  the  angiosperms  at
the height of their success. It is difﬁcult to envis-
age their being supplanted by any other form of
vegetation. Nevertheless, the interdependence of
the  plant  and  animal  kingdoms,  sharing  a
common  environment,  itself  subject  to change,
may lead to surprising developments. Under the
hand of man, for example, the cereal grasses have
been so modiﬁed and “improved” that some are
now  unable  to reproduce  effectively  without
human 
intervention.  Despite  this  apparent
failing,  they none  the  less  occupy  large areas  of
fertile land, and from that point of view are far
more successful than they might otherwise have
been. Such dependence of one species on another,
like  the  specialized  forms  of  insect  pollination,
naturally has risks. Nevertheless, the progressive
failure of one partner may stimulate novel devel-
opments in the other that ensure its survival. We
can  be  conﬁdent  that,  so  long  as  the  photosyn-
thetic membrane, solar radiation and the atmos-
phere  (providing  carbon  dioxide)  continue  their
existence, there is no reason why the evolution of
plants  should  cease.  Many  more  remarkable
forms may yet emerge in geological time.

