Any screen.  
Any time.  
Anywhere.

Activate the eBook version  
of this title at no additional charge. 

Student Consult eBooks give you the power to browse and find content,  
view enhanced images, share notes and highlights—both online and offline.

Unlock your eBook today.
1    Visit studentconsult.inkling.com/redeem
2    Scratch off your code
3      Type code into “Enter Code” box
4    Click “Redeem”
5    Log in or Sign up
6    Go to “My Library”
It’s that easy!

Scan this QR code to redeem your  
eBook through your mobile device: 

Place Peel Off 
Sticker Here

For technical assistance:  
email studentconsult.help@elsevier.com 
call 1-800-401-9962 (inside the US)  
call +1-314-447-8200 (outside the US)

Use  of  the  current  edition  of  the  electronic  version  of  this  book  (eBook)  is  subject  to  the  terms  of  the  nontransferable,  limited  license  granted  on  
studentconsult.inkling.com. Access  to  the  eBook  is  limited  to  the  first  individual  who  redeems  the  PIN,  located  on  the  inside  cover  of  this  book,  at 
studentconsult.inkling.com and may not be transferred to another party by resale, lending, or other means. 

2015v1.0

CELL 
BIOLOGY

NOTE TO INSTRUCTORS:

Contact your Elsevier Sales Representative for image banks for  
Cell Biology, 3e, or request these supporting materials at: 
http://evolve.elsevier.com

This page intentionally left blank

THIRD EDITION

CELL 
BIOLOGY

THOMAS D. POLLARD, MD
Sterling Professor
Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology
Yale University
New Haven, Connecticut
WILLIAM C. EARNSHAW, PhD, FRSE
Professor and Wellcome Trust Principal Research Fellow
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, ICB
University of Edinburgh
Scotland, United Kingdom
JENNIFER LIPPINCOTT-SCHWARTZ, PhD
Group Leader
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Janelia Research Campus
Ashburn, Virginia
GRAHAM T. JOHNSON, MA, PhD, CMI
Director, Animated Cell
Allen Institute for Cell Biology
Seattle, Washington;
QB3 Faculty Fellow
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California

1600 John F. Kennedy Blvd.
Ste 1800
Philadelphia, PA 19103-2899

CELL BIOLOGY, THIRD EDITION
IE

ISBN: 978-0-323-34126-4
ISBN: 978-0-323-41740-2

Copyright © 2017 by Elsevier, Inc. All rights reserved.

No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic 
or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, 
without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further 
information about the Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations such  
as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our website: 
www.elsevier.com/permissions.

This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the 
Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).

Notices

Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience 
broaden our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical 
treatment may become necessary.

Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in 

evaluating and using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. In 
using such information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of 
others, including parties for whom they have a professional responsibility.

With respect to any drug or pharmaceutical products identified, readers are advised to check the 

most current information provided (i) on procedures featured or (ii) by the manufacturer of each 
product to be administered, to verify the recommended dose or formula, the method and duration 
of administration, and contraindications. It is the responsibility of practitioners, relying on their 
own experience and knowledge of their patients, to make diagnoses, to determine dosages and the 
best treatment for each individual patient, and to take all appropriate safety precautions.

To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, 
assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products 
liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, 
instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.

Previous editions copyrighted © 2008, 2004 by Thomas D. Pollard, William C. Earnshaw,  
Jennifer Lippincott-Schwartz.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Names: Pollard, Thomas D. (Thomas Dean), 1942- , author. | Earnshaw, William C., author. |  

Lippincott-Schwartz, Jennifer, author. | Johnson, Graham T., author.

Title: Cell biology / Thomas D. Pollard, William C. Earnshaw, Jennifer Lippincott-Schwartz,  

Graham T. Johnson.

Description: Third edition. | Philadelphia, PA : Elsevier, [2017] | Includes
  bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016008034| ISBN 9780323341264 (hardcover : alk. paper) |
 
Subjects: | MESH: Cell Physiological Phenomena | Cells
Classification: LCC QH581.2 | NLM QU 375 | DDC 571.6—dc23 LC record available at  
http://lccn.loc.gov/2016008034

ISBN 9780323417402 (international edition)

Executive Content Strategist: Elyse O’Grady
Senior Content Development Specialist: Margaret Nelson
Publishing Services Manager: Patricia Tannian
Senior Project Manager: Carrie Stetz
Design Direction: Margaret Reid

Printed in the United States of America

Last digit is the print number:  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1

The authors thank their families, who supported this work, and also express gratitude 
to their mentors, who helped to shape their views of how science should be conducted. 
Bill is proud to have both his longtime partner and confidante Margarete and his son 
Charles  as  advisors  on  the  science  for  this  edition.  He  would  not  be  surprised  if  his 
daughter  Irina  were  added  to  that  panel  for  our  next  edition.  His  contributions  are 
firstly dedicated to them. Bill also would like to thank Jonathan King, Stephen Harrison, 
Aaron  Klug,  Tony  Crowther,  Ron  Laskey,  and  Uli  Laemmli,  who  provided  a  diverse 
range  of  rich  environments  in  which  to  learn  that  science  at  the  highest  level  is  
an adventure that lasts a lifetime. Graham dedicates the book to his family, Margaret, 
Paul, and Lara Johnson; the Benhorins; friends Mari, Steve, and Andrew; and his partners 
Flower  and  Anna  Kuo.  He  also  thanks  his  mentors  at  the  Scripps  Research  Institute, 
Arthur Olson, David Goodsell, Ron Milligan, and Ian Wilson, for developing his career. 
Jennifer thanks her husband Jonathan for his strong backing and her lab members for 
their enthusiasm for the project. Tom dedicates the book to his wife Patty, a constant 
source of support and inspiration for more than five decades, and his children Katie 
and Dan, who also provided advice on the book. He also thanks Ed Korn and the late 
Sus Ito for the opportunity to learn biochemistry and microscopy under their guidance, 
and Ed Taylor and the late Hugh Huxley, who served as role models.

Contributors

Jeffrey L. Corden, PhD
Professor
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics
Johns Hopkins Medical School
Baltimore, Maryland

David Tollervey, PhD
Professor
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology
University of Edinburgh
Scotland, United Kingdom

vi

Preface

Our goal is to explain the molecular basis of life at the 
cellular level. We use evolution and molecular structures 
to  provide  the  context  for  understanding  the  dynamic 
mechanisms that support life. As research in cell biology 
advances  quickly,  the  field  may  appear  to  grow  more 
complex, but we aim to show that understanding cells 
actually  becomes  simpler  as  new  general  principles 
emerge and more precise molecular mechanisms replace 
vague concepts about biological processes.

For  this  edition,  we  revised  the  entire  book,  taking 
the  reader  to  the  frontiers  of  knowledge  with  exciting 
new  information  on  every  topic.  We  start  with  new 
insights about the evolution of eukaryotes, followed by 
macromolecules and research methods, including recent 
breakthroughs  in  light  and  electron  microscopy.  We 
begin the main part of the book with a section on basic 
molecular biology before sections on membranes, organ-
elles, membrane traffic, signaling, adhesion and extracel-
lular matrix, and cytoskeleton and cellular motility. As in 
the first two editions, we conclude with a comprehen-
sive  section  on  the  cell  cycle,  which  integrates  all  of  
the other topics.

Our coverage of most topics begins with an introduc-
tion  to  the  molecular  hardware  and  finishes  with  an 
account of how the various molecules function together 
in  physiological  systems.  This  organization  allows  for 
a  clearer  exposition  of  the  general  principles  of  each 
class  of  molecules,  since  they  are  treated  as  a  group 
rather than isolated examples for each biological system. 
This  approach  allows  us  to  present  the  operation  of 
complex  processes,  such  as  signaling  pathways,  as  an 
integrated  whole,  without  diversions  to  introduce  the 
various components as they appear along the pathway. 
For  example,  the  section  on  signaling  mechanisms 
begins  with  chapters  on  receptors,  cytoplasmic  signal 
transduction  proteins,  and  second  messengers,  so  the 
reader is prepared to appreciate the dynamics of 10 criti-
cal signaling systems in the chapter that concludes the 
section.  Teachers  of  shorter  courses  may  concentrate 
on a subset of the examples in these systems chapters, 
or  they  may  use  parts  of  the  “hardware”  chapters  as 
reference material.

We use molecular structures as one starting point for 
explaining  how  each  cellular  system  operates.  This 
edition includes more than 50 of the most important and 
revealing  new  molecular  structures  derived  from  elec-
tron  cryomicroscopy  and  x-ray  crystallography.  We 
explain the evolutionary history and molecular diversity 

of  each  class  of  molecules,  so  the  reader  learns  where 
the many varieties of each type of molecule came from. 
Our  goal  is  for  readers  to  understand  the  big  picture 
rather than just a mass of details. For example, Chapter 
16 opens with an original figure showing the evolution 
of all types of ion channels to provide context for each 
family of channels in the following text. Given that these 
molecular systems operate on time scales ranging from 
milliseconds  to  hours,  we  note  (where  it  is  relevant)  
the  concentrations  of  the  molecules  and  the  rates  of  
their reactions to help readers appreciate the dynamics 
of life processes.

We  present  a  wealth  of  experimental  evidence  in 
figures  showing  micrographs,  molecular  structures, 
and  graphs  that  emphasize  the  results  rather  than  the 
experimental  details.  Many  of  the  methods  will  be 
new to readers. The chapter on experimental methods 
introduces  how  and  why  scientists  use  particularly 
important  approaches  (such  as  microscopy,  classical 
genetics, genomics and reverse genetics, and biochemi-
cal methods) to identify new molecules, map molecular 
pathways, or verify physiological functions.

The book emphasizes molecular mechanisms because 
they reveal the general principles of cellular function. As 
a further demonstration of this generality, we use a wide 
range  of  experimental  organisms  and  specialized  cells 
and  tissues  of  vertebrate  animals  to  illustrate  these 
general principles. We also use medical “experiments of 
nature”  to  illustrate  physiological  functions  throughout 
the  book,  since  connections  have  now  been  made 
between most cellular systems and disease. The chapters 
on  cellular  functions  integrate  material  on  specialized 
cells  and  tissues.  Epithelia,  for  example,  are  covered 
under  membrane  physiology  and  junctions;  excitable 
membranes  of  neurons  and  muscle  under  membrane 
physiology;  connective  tissues  under  the  extracellular 
matrix;  the  immune  system  under  connective  tissue 
cells,  apoptosis,  and  signal  transduction;  muscle  under 
the  cytoskeleton  and  cell  motility;  and  stem  cells  and 
cancer under the cell cycle and signal transduction.

The  Guide  to  Figures  Featuring  Specific  Organisms 
and  Specialized  Cells  that  follows  the  Contents  lists 
figures by organism and cell. The relevant text accompa-
nies these figures. Readers who wish to assemble a unit 
on  cellular  and  molecular  mechanisms  in  the  immune 
system,  for  example,  will  find  the  relevant  material 
associated  with  the  figures  that  cover  lymphocytes/
immune system.

 vii

viii 

PREFACE

Our Student Consult site provides links to the Protein 
Data Bank (PDB), so readers can use the PDB accession 
numbers  in  the  figure  legends  to  review  original  data, 
display  an  animated  molecule,  or  search  links  to  the 
original literature simply by clicking on the PDB number 
in the online version of the text.

Throughout, we have attempted to create a view of 
Cell  Biology  that  is  more  than  just  a  list  of  parts  and 
reactions.  Our  book  will  be  a  success  if  readers  finish 
each section with the feeling that they understand better 
how some aspect of cellular behavior actually works at 
a mechanistic level and in our bodies.

Thomas D. Pollard

William C. Earnshaw

Graham T. Johnson

Jennifer Lippincott-Schwartz

Contents

SECTION I
Introduction to Cell Biology
  1  Introduction to Cells, 3
  2  Evolution of Life on Earth, 15

SECTION II
Chemical and Physical Background
  3  Molecules: Structures and Dynamics, 31
  4  Biophysical Principles, 53
  5  Macromolecular Assembly, 63
  6  Research Strategies, 75

SECTION III
Chromatin, Chromosomes, 
and the Cell Nucleus
  7  Chromosome Organization, 107
  8  DNA Packaging in Chromatin 

and Chromosomes, 123

  9  Nuclear Structure and Dynamics, 143

SECTION IV
Central Dogma: From Gene to Protein
 10  Gene Expression, 165
 11  Eukaryotic RNA Processing, 189
 12  Protein Synthesis and Folding, 209

SECTION V
Membrane Structure and Function
 13  Membrane Structure and Dynamics, 227
 14  Membrane Pumps, 241
 15  Membrane Carriers, 253
 16  Membrane Channels, 261
 17  Membrane Physiology, 285

SECTION VI
Cellular Organelles and 
Membrane Trafficking
 18  Posttranslational Targeting of Proteins, 303
 19  Mitochondria, Chloroplasts, 

Peroxisomes, 317

 20  Endoplasmic Reticulum, 331
 21  Secretory Membrane System and 

Golgi Apparatus, 351

 22  Endocytosis and the Endosomal Membrane 

System, 377

 23  Processing and Degradation of Cellular 

Components, 393

SECTION VII
Signaling Mechanisms
 24  Plasma Membrane Receptors, 411
 25  Protein Hardware for Signaling, 425
 26  Second Messengers, 443
 27  Integration of Signals, 463

SECTION VIII
Cellular Adhesion and 
the Extracellular Matrix
 28  Cells of the Extracellular Matrix and 

Immune System, 491

 29  Extracellular Matrix Molecules, 505
 30  Cellular Adhesion, 525
 31  Intercellular Junctions, 543
 32  Connective Tissues, 555

SECTION IX
Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility
 33  Actin and Actin-Binding Proteins, 575
 34  Microtubules and Centrosomes, 593

 ix

x 

CONTENTS

 35  Intermediate Filaments, 613
 36  Motor Proteins, 623
 37  Intracellular Motility, 639
 38  Cellular Motility, 651
 39  Muscles, 671

SECTION X
Cell Cycle
 40  Introduction to the Cell Cycle, 697
 41  G1 Phase and Regulation of 

Cell Proliferation, 713

 42  S Phase and DNA Replication, 727
 43  G2 Phase, Responses to DNA Damage, 
and Control of Entry Into Mitosis, 743

 44  Mitosis and Cytokinesis, 755
 45  Meiosis, 779
 46  Programmed Cell Death, 797

Cell SnapShots, 817

Glossary, 823

Index, 851

Acknowledgments

The  authors  thank  their  families  and  colleagues  for 
sharing  so  much  time  with  “the  book.”  Bill  thanks  
Margarete, Charles, and Irina for sharing their weekends  
and  summer  holidays  with  this  all-consuming  project. 
He  also  thanks  the  Wellcome  Trust  for  their  incom-
parable  support  of  the  research  in  his  laboratory  and 
Melpomeni Platani and the Dundee Imaging Facility for 
access  to  the  OMX  microscope.  Graham  thanks  Thao 
Do  and  Andrew  Swift  for  contributions  to  the  illustra-
tions, and colleagues Megan Riel-Mehan, Tom Goddard, 
Arthur  Olson,  David  Goodsell,  Warren  DeLeno,  Andrej 
Sali,  Tom  Ferrin,  Sandra  Schmid,  Rick  Horwitz,  UCSF, 
and  the  Allen  Institute  for  Cell  Science  for  facilitating 
work on this edition. He has special thanks for Ludovic 
Autin for programming the embedded Python Molecular 
Viewer (ePMV), which enabled substantial upgrades of 
many  figures  with  complex  structures.  Jennifer  thanks 
her  family  for  sharing  time  with  her  part  in  the  book. 
Tom  appreciates  four  decades  of  support  for  his  labo-
ratory  from  the  National  Institutes  of  General  Medical  
Sciences.

Many  generous  individuals  generously  devoted  their 
time  to  bring  the  science  up  to  date  by  providing  sug-
gestions for revising chapters in their areas of expertise. 
We  acknowledge  these  individuals  at  the  end  of  each 
chapter and here as a group: Ueli Aebi, Anna Akhmanova, 
Julie Ahringer, Hiro Araki, Jiri Bartek, Tobias Baumgart, 
Wendy  Bickmore,  Craig  Blackstone, 
Julian  Blow,  
Jonathan  Bogan,  Juan  Bonifacino,  Ronald  Breaker, 
Klaudia  Brix,  Anthony  Brown,  David  Burgess,  Cristina 
Cardoso, Andrew Carter, Bill Catterall, Pietro De Camilli, 
Iain  Cheeseman,  Per  Paolo  D’Avino,  Abby  Dernburg, 
Arshad Desai, Julie Donaldson, Charles Earnshaw, Donald 
Engelman, Job Dekker, Martin Embley, Barbara Ehrlich, 

Roland  Foisner,  Nicholas  Frankel,  Tatsuo  Fukagawa, 
Anton  Gartner,  Maurizio  Gatti,  David  Gilbert,  Gary 
Gorbsky,  Holly  Goodson,  Jim  Haber,  Lea  Harrington, 
Scott  Hawley,  Ron  Hay,  Margarete  Heck,  Ramanujan 
Hegde, Ludger Hengst, Harald Herrmann, Erika Holzbaur, 
Tim Hunt, Catherine Jackson, Emmanuelle Javaux, Scott 
Kaufmann, David Julius, Keisuke Kaji, Alexey Khodjakov, 
Vladimir  Larionov,  Dan  Leahy,  Richard  Lewis,  Kaspar 
Locker,  Kazuhiro  Maeshima,  Marcos  Malumbres,  Luis 
Miguel Martins, Amy MacQueen, Ciaran Morrison, Adele 
Marston, Satyajit Mayor, Andrew Miranker, Tom Misteli, 
David  Morgan,  Peter  Moore,  Rachel  O’Neill,  Karen 
Oegema, Tom Owen-Hughes, Laurence Pelletier, Alberto 
Pendas,  Jonathon  Pines,  Jordan  Raff,  Samara  Reck-
Peterson,  Elizabeth  Rhoades,  Matthew  Rodeheffer, 
Michael Rout, Benoit Roux, John Rubinstein, Julian Sale, 
Eric Schirmer, John Solaro, Chris Scott, Beth Sullivan, Lee 
Sweeney,  Margaret  Titus,  Andrew  Thorburn,  Ashok 
Venkitaraman,  Rebecca  Voorhees,  Tom  Williams,  and 
Yongli  Zhang.  We  thank  David  Sabatini,  Susan  Wente, 
and  Yingming  Zhao  for  permission  to  use  their  Cell 
SnapShots and Jason M. McAlexander for help with the 
final figures.

Special  thanks  go  to  our  colleagues  at  Elsevier.  Our 
visionary  editor  Elyse  O’Grady  encouraged  us  to  write 
this  third  edition  and  was  a  champion  for  the  project 
from  beginning  to  end  as  it  evolved  from  a  simple  
update of the second edition to an ambitious new book.  
Margaret  Nelson,  Content  Development  Specialist 
supreme, kept the whole project organized while dealing 
deftly  with  thousands  of  documents.  Project  Manager 
Carrie Stetz managed the assembly of the book with skill, 
patience,  and  good  cheer  in  the  face  of  many  compli-
cated requests for alterations.

 xi

Guide to Figures Featuring Specific Organisms and Specialized Cells

Organism/Specialized Cell Type
PROKARYOTES
Archaea
Bacteria

Viruses
PROTOZOA
Amoeba
Ciliates
Other protozoa
ALGAE AND PLANTS
Chloroplasts
Green algae
Plant cell wall
Plant (general)
FUNGI
Budding yeast
Fission yeast
Other fungi
INVERTEBRATE ANIMALS
Echinoderms
Nematodes
Insects

VERTEBRATE ANIMALS
Blood
Granulocytes
Lymphocytes/immune system
Monocytes/macrophages
Platelets
Red blood cells
Cancer
Connective tissue
Cartilage cells
Extracellular matrix
Fibroblasts
Mast cells
Bone cells
Fat cells
Epithelia
Epidermal, stratified
Glands, liver
Intestine
Kidney
Respiratory system
Vascular
Muscle
Cardiac muscle
Skeletal muscle

Smooth muscle
Nervous system
Central nervous system neurons
Glial cells
Peripheral nervous system neurons

Synapses
Reproductive system
Oocytes, eggs
Sperm
Other human cells and disease
Various organs

Figures

1.1, 1.2, 2.1, 2.4, 2.5
1.1, 1.2, 2.1, 2.4, 2.5, 2.7, 5.8, 5.12, 6.11, 7.4, 10.2, 10.5, 10.10, 10.11, 11.16, 12.6, 12.11, 13.9, 
14.3, 14.9, 14.10, 15.4, 16.2, 16.3, 16.6, 16.13, 16.14, 18.2, 18.9, 18.10, 19.2, 19.7, 19.9, 20.5, 
22.3, 22.10, 22.15, 27.11, 27.12, 27.13, 35.1, 37.12, 38.1, 38.24, 38.25, 42.3, 43.13, 44.27

5.10, 5.11, 5.12, 5.13, 22.15, 37.12

2.1, 2.4, 2.8, 22.2, 22.5, 38.1, 38.4, 38.10, 41.7
2.4, 38.1, 38.13
2.4, 2.7, 36.7, 38.4, 37.10, 38.6, 38.21, 38.23

18.1, 18.2, 18.6, 19.7, 19.8, 19.9
2.8, 37.1, 37.9, 38.13, 38.14, 38.16, 38.18
31.4, 32.12, 32.13
1.2, 2.1, 2.4, 2.7, 2.8, 3.25, 6.6, 31.4, 33.1, 34.2, 36.7, 37.9, 38.1, 40.3, 44.26, 45.8

1.2, 2.4, 2.8, 6.15, 6.16, 7.3, 7.4, 7.7, 7.8, 8.22, 34.2, 34.20, 37.11, 42.4, 42.5, 42.15, 43.8
2.4, 2.8, 6.3, 7.8, 33.1, 40.6, 43.2, 44.23
2.8, 45.6

2.8, 36.13, 40.11, 44.21, 44.22, 44.23
2.8, 36.7, 36.13, 38.11, 45.10, 46.9, 46.10
2.8, 7.4, 7.8, 7.15, 8.12, 8.13, 9.19, 14.19, 38.5, 38.11, 44.14, 44.12, 44.21, 44.25, 45.2, 45.8, 

45.10

28.1, 28.4, 28.7, 30.13, 38.1
27.8, 28.1, 28.4, 28.9, 28.10, 46.7, 46.9, 46.18
28.1, 28.4, 28.7, 32.6, 32.11, 38.3, 46.2, 46.13
28.4, 28.5, 30.14, 32.11
13.8, 13.9, 13.11, 28.4, 32.11
34.19, 38.9, 41.2, 41.11, 41.12, 41.15, 42.10

28.1, 32.2, 32.3, 32.8, 32.9
8.20
28.1, 28.2, 29.3, 29.4, 29.15, 32.1, 32.11, 35.1, 35.5, 37.1, 38.1
28.1, 28.8
28.1, 32.4, 32.5, 32.6, 32.7, 32.8, 32.9, 32.10
27.7, 28.1, 28.3

29.7, 35.6, 40.1, 41.2, 41.5, 42.10, 46.8
21.26, 23.6, 34.20, 41.2, 44.2
17.2, 31.1, 32.1, 33.1, 33.2, 34.2, 46.19
17.3, 29.17, 35.1, 46.6, 46.7
17.4, 32.2, 34.3, 37.6, 38.17
22.6, 29.8, 29.17, 30.13, 30.14, 31.2, 32.11, 46.20

39.1, 39.13, 39.14, 39.18, 39.19, 39.20, 39.21, 39.22
17.9, 29.17, 33.3, 36.3, 36.4, 36.5, 39.1, 39.2, 39.3, 39.4, 39.5, 39.6, 39.7, 39.8, 39.9, 39.10, 

39.11, 39.12, 39.13, 39.14, 39.15, 39.16, 39.17

29.8, 33.1, 35.8, 39.1, 39.23, 39.24

17.9, 17.10, 17.11, 30.8, 34.11, 34.12, 35.9, 37.7, 38.11, 39.12, 23.4
17.7, 17.9, 17.10, 29.17, 37.7
17.7, 17.9, 26.3, 26.16, 27.1, 27.2, 29.17, 30.15, 33.18, 35.9, 37.1, 37.3, 37.4, 37.5, 38.1, 38.6, 

39.12

17.9, 17.10, 17.11, 29.17, 39.12

26.15, 34.14, 40.7, 40.8, 40.10, 40.11, 40.12, 45.14
38.1, 38.2, 38.14, 38.15, 38.20, 38.22, 45.1, 45.2, 45.4, 45.5, 45.8, 45.11

7.4, 7.6, 7.9, 7.11, 8.20, 9.10, 23.4, 41.2, 42.10

S E C T I O N   I

Introduction to  
Cell Biology

This page intentionally left blank

C H A P T E R 

1 

Introduction to Cells

Biology  is  based  on  the  fundamental  laws  of  nature 

embodied in chemistry and physics, but the origin and 
evolution  of  life  on  earth  were  historical  events.  This 
makes biology more like astronomy than like chemistry 
and physics. Neither the organization of the universe nor 
life  as  we  know  it  had  to  evolve  as  they  did.  Chance 
played a central role. Throughout history and continuing 
today, the genes of all organisms have sustained chemi-
cal  changes,  some  of  which  are  inherited  by  their 
progeny.  Many  changes  have  no  obvious  effect  on  the 
fitness  of  the  organism,  but  some  reduce  it  and  others 
improve  fitness.  Over  the  long  term,  competition 
between  individuals  with  random  differences  in  their 
genes  determines  which  organisms  survive  in  various 
environments. Surviving variants have a selective advan-
tage  over  the  alternatives,  but  the  process  does  not  
necessarily  optimize  each  chemical  life  process.  Thus, 
students could probably design simpler or more elegant 
mechanisms for many cellular processes.

Despite  obvious  differences,  all  forms  of  life  share 
many molecular mechanisms, because they all descended 
from a common ancestor that lived 3 to 4 billion years 
ago (Fig. 1.1). This founding organism no longer exists, 
but  it  must  have  used  many  biochemical  processes 
similar to those that sustain contemporary cells.

Over  several  billion  years,  living  organisms  diverged 
from  the  common  ancestor  into  three  great  divisions: 
Bacteria, Archaea, and Eucarya (Fig. 1.1). Archaea and 
Bacteria  were  considered  to  be  one  kingdom  until  the 
1970s when the sequences of genes for ribosomal RNAs 
revealed that their ancestors branched from each other 
early in evolution. The origin of eukaryotes, cells with a 
nucleus, is still uncertain, but they inherited genes from 
both Archaea and Bacteria. One possibility is that eukary-
otes originated when an Archaea engulfed a Bacterium 
that subsequently evolved into the mitochondrion. Mul-
ticellular  eukaryotes  (green,  blue,  and  red  in  Fig.  1.1) 
evolved relatively recently, hundreds of millions of years 

after single-celled eukaryotes appeared. Note that algae 
and plants branched before fungi, our nearest relatives 
on the tree of life.

Living  things  differ  in  size  and  complexity  and  are 
adapted to environments as extreme as deep-sea hydro-
thermal  vents  at  temperatures  of  113°C  or  pockets  of 
water  at  0°C  in  frozen  Antarctic  lakes.  Organisms  also 
employ different strategies to extract energy from their 
environments. Plants, algae, and some Bacteria use pho-
tosynthesis to derive energy from sunlight. Some Bacte-
ria  and  Archaea  obtain  energy  by  oxidizing  inorganic 
compounds, such as hydrogen, hydrogen sulfide, or iron. 
Many organisms in all parts of the tree, including animals, 
extract energy from organic compounds.

As  the  molecular  mechanisms  of  life  have  become 
clearer, the underlying similarities among organisms are 
more  impressive  than  their  external  differences.  For 
example, all living organisms store genetic information 
in nucleic acids (usually DNA) using a common genetic 

C h l o r o p l a s t

Eucarya

Animals

Plants

Fungi

Amoeba

~1 billion
years ago

i o n

d r

n

o

h

Mito c

1–2 billion years ago,
first eukaryote with
a mitochondrion
Archaeon

Bacteria

~3.5 billion years ago,

common ancestor emerged

Archaea

FIGURE  1.1  SIMPLIFIED  PHYLOGENETIC  TREE.  This  tree 
shows  the  common  ancestor  of  all  living  things  and  the  three  main 
branches  of  life  Archaea  and  Bacteria  diverged  from  the  common 
ancestor and both contributed to the origin of Eukaryotes. Note that 
eukaryotic  mitochondria  and  chloroplasts  originated  as  symbiotic 
Bacteria. 

 3

4 

SECTION I  n  Introduction to Cell Biology

code, transfer genetic information from DNA to RNA to 
protein, employ proteins (and some RNAs) to catalyze 
chemical reactions, synthesize proteins on ribosomes, 
derive energy by breaking down simple sugars and lipids, 
use  adenosine  triphosphate  (ATP)  as  their  energy  cur-
rency,  and  separate  their  cytoplasm  from  the  external 
environment  by  means  of  phospholipid  membranes 
containing pumps, carriers, and channels.

Retention of these common molecular mechanisms in 
all parts of the phylogenetic tree is remarkable, given 
that the major groups of organisms have been separated 
for vast amounts of time and subjected to different selec-
tive  pressures.  These  ancient  biochemical  mechanisms 
could  have  diverged  radically  from  each  other  in  the 
branches of the phylogenetic tree, but they worked well 
enough  to  be  retained  during  natural  selection  of  all 
surviving species.

The cell is the only place on earth where the entire 
range of life-sustaining biochemical reactions can function, 
so an unbroken lineage stretches from the earliest cells 
to each living organism. Many interesting creatures were 
lost to extinction during evolution. The fact that extinc-
tion is irreversible, energizes discussions of biodiversity 
today.

This  book  focuses  on  the  molecular  mechanisms 
underlying biological functions at the cellular level (Fig. 
1.2). The rest of Chapter 1 summarizes the main points 
of  the  whole  text  including  the  general  principles  that 

apply equally to eukaryotes and prokaryotes and special 
features of eukaryotic cells. Chapter 2 explains what is 
known of the origins of life and its historic diversification 
through  evolution.  Chapter  3  covers  the  macromole-
cules that form cells, while Chapters 4 and 5 introduce 
the chemical and physical principles required to under-
stand  how  these  molecules  assemble  and  function. 
Chapter 6 introduces laboratory methods for research in 
cell biology.

Universal Principles of Living Cells
Biologists believe that a limited number of general prin-
ciples  based  on  common  molecular  mechanisms  can 
explain even the most complex life processes in terms 
of  chemistry  and  physics.  This  section  summarizes  the 
numerous features shared by all forms of life.
1.  Genetic information stored in the chemical sequence 
of DNA is duplicated and passed on to daughter cells 
(Fig. 1.3). Long DNA molecules called chromosomes 
store  the  information  required  for  cellular  growth, 
multiplication,  and  function.  Each  DNA  molecule  is 
composed of two strands of four different nucleotides 
(adenine [A], cytosine [C], guanine [G], and thymine 
[T])  covalently  linked  in  linear  polymers.  The  two 
strands  pair,  forming  a  double  helix  held  together  
by  interactions  between  complementary  pairs  of 
nucleotide  bases  with  one  on  each  strand:  A  pairs 

Nuclear envelope

Nuclear lamina

Nuclear pore

Chromatin

Nucleolus

Nucleus

Cortex
Microvillus
Coated pit
Microtubule
Actin filaments
Plasma membrane

Rough endoplasmic
reticulum

Free ribosomes

Centrioles

Microtubule

Centrosome

Lysosome
Peroxisome
Mitochondrion
Golgi apparatus

Early endosome

Protist

Animal

Plant

Mold

Bacteria

A
FIGURE 1.2  BASIC CELLULAR ARCHITECTURE. A, Section of a eukaryotic cell showing the internal components. B, Comparison of cells 
from the major branches of the phylogenetic tree. 

B

Yeast

Archaea

 

Parent DNA strand

Replication intermediate

Two partially
replicated DNA 
strands

Two identical DNA strands

FIGURE  1.3  DNA  STRUCTURE  AND  REPLICATION.  Genes 
stored as the sequence of bases in DNA are replicated enzymatically, 
forming two identical copies from one double-stranded original. 

with T and C pairs with G. The two strands separate 
during enzymatic replication of DNA, each serving as 
a template for the synthesis of a new complementary 
strand, thereby producing two identical copies of the 
DNA.  Precise  segregation  of  one  newly  duplicated 
double  helix  to  each  daughter  cell  then  guarantees 
the transmission of intact genetic information to the 
next generation.

2.  Linear  chemical  sequences  stored  in  DNA  code  for 
both  the  linear  sequences  and  three-dimensional 
structures of RNAs and proteins (Fig. 1.4). Enzymes 
called  RNA  polymerases  copy  (transcribe)  the  infor-
mation stored in genes into linear sequences of nucle-
otides of RNA molecules. Many RNAs have structural 
roles, regulatory functions, or enzymatic activity; for 
example, ribosomal RNA is by far the most abundant 
class of RNA in cells. Other genes produce messen-
ger RNA (mRNA) molecules that act as templates for 
protein  synthesis,  specifying  the  sequence  of  amino 
acids  during  the  synthesis  of  polypeptides  by  ribo-
somes.  The  amino  acid  sequence  of  most  proteins 
contains  sufficient  information  to  specify  how  the 
polypeptide  folds  into  a  unique  three-dimensional 
structure with biological activity. Two broad mecha-
nisms control the production and processing of RNA 
and protein from tens of thousands of genes. Geneti-
cally encoded control circuits consisting of proteins 
and RNAs respond to environmental stimuli through 
signaling pathways. Epigenetic controls involve mod-
ifications  of  DNA  or  associated  proteins  that  affect 
gene expression. Some epigenetic modifications can 
be transmitted during cell division and from a parent 
to an offspring. The basic plan for the cell contained 
in  the  genome,  together  with  ongoing  regulatory 

CHAPTER 1  n  Introduction to Cells 

5

Gene

DNA

Transcription

mRNA

N

Polypeptide chain
of amino acids

Folded protein

Translation by
ribosomes
C

Folding

=

FIGURE  1.4  Genetic information contained in the base sequence 
of DNA determines the amino acid sequence of a protein and its three-
dimensional  structure.  Enzymes  copy  (transcribe)  the  sequence  of 
bases in a gene to make a messenger RNA (mRNA). Ribosomes use 
the  sequence  of  bases  in  the  mRNA  as  a  template  to  synthesize 
(translate) a corresponding linear polymer of amino acids. This poly-
peptide folds spontaneously to form a three-dimensional protein mol-
ecule, in this example the actin-binding protein profilin. (For reference, 
see  Protein  Data  Bank  [www.rcsb.org]  file  1ACF.)  Scale  drawings  of 
DNA,  mRNA,  polypeptide,  and  folded  protein:  The  folded  protein  is 
enlarged  at  the  bottom  and  rendered  in  two  styles—space-filling 
surface  model  (left)  and  a  ribbon  diagram  showing  the  polypeptide 
folded into blue α-helices and yellow β-strands (right). 

mechanisms  (see  points  7  and  8  below),  works  so 
well  that  each  human  develops  with  few  defects  
from a single fertilized egg into a complicated ensem-
ble  of  trillions  of  specialized  cells  that  function 
harmoniously 
in  an  ever-changing 
environment.

for  decades 

3.  Macromolecular structures assemble from subunits 
(Fig.  1.5).  Many  cellular  components  form  by  self-
assembly of their constituent molecules without the 
aid  of  templates  or  enzymes.  The  protein,  nucleic 
acid,  and  lipid  molecules  themselves  contain  the 
information required to assemble complex structures. 
Diffusion usually brings the molecules together during 
these  assembly  processes.  Exclusion  of  water  from 
complementary surfaces (“lock-and-key” packing), as 
well  as  electrostatic  and  hydrogen  bonds,  provides 
the  energy  to  hold  the  subunits  together.  In  some 
cases, protein chaperones assist with assembly by pre-
venting the aggregation of incorrectly folded interme-
diates. Important cellular structures assembled in this 

6 

SECTION I  n  Introduction to Cell Biology

A. Atomic scale

1,500,000×

B. Molecular
     scale

C. Macromolecular
     scale

D. Organelle
     scale

10 nm

DNA

DNA and proteins

Chromatin fiber

Chromosome

E. Cellular scale

3000×

5,000 nm

Protein backbone

Globular proteins

Actin filament

Fatty acids

Lipid bilayer with proteins

Membrane

Microtubule

Filopodium with

plasma membrane

around actin

filaments

FIGURE  1.5  MACROMOLECULAR  ASSEMBLY.  Many  macromolecular  components  of  cells  assemble  spontaneously  from  constituent 
molecules without the guidance of templates. This figure shows chromosomes assembled from DNA and proteins, a bundle of actin filaments in 
a filopodium assembled from protein subunits, and the plasma membrane formed from lipids and proteins. 

way  include  chromatin,  consisting  of  nuclear  DNA 
packaged by associated proteins; ribosomes, assem-
bled  from  RNA  and  proteins;  cytoskeletal  polymers, 
assembled  from  protein  subunits;  and  membranes 
formed from lipids and proteins.

4.  Membranes grow by expansion of preexisting mem-
branes  (Fig.  1.6).  Cellular  membranes  composed  of 
lipids  and  proteins  grow  only  by  expansion  of  pre-
existing  lipid  bilayers  rather  than  forming  de  novo. 
Thus membrane-bounded organelles, such as mito-
chondria and endoplasmic reticulum, multiply by 
growth and division of preexisting organelles and are 
inherited maternally from stockpiles stored in the egg. 
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) plays a central role 
in  membrane  biogenesis  as  the  site  of  phospholipid 
synthesis.  Through  a  series  of  vesicle  budding  and 
fusion  events,  membrane  made  in  the  ER  provides 
material  for  the  Golgi  apparatus,  which,  in  turn, 
provides  lipids  and  proteins  for  lysosomes  and  the 
plasma membrane.

5.  Signal-receptor interactions target cellular constitu-
ents  to  their  correct  locations  (Fig.  1.6).  Specific 
recognition signals incorporated into the structures of 
proteins  and  nucleic  acids  route  these  molecules  to 
their proper cellular compartments. Receptors recog-
nize  these  signals  and  guide  each  molecule  to  its 
appropriate  compartment.  For  example,  proteins  
destined  for  the  nucleus  contain  short  amino  acid 
sequences  that  bind  receptors  to  facilitate  their 
passage  through  nuclear  pores  into  the  nucleus. 

Similarly, a peptide signal sequence first targets lyso-
somal proteins into the lumen of the ER. Subsequently, 
the  Golgi  apparatus  adds  a  sugar-phosphate  group 
recognized by receptors that secondarily target these 
proteins to lysosomes.

6.  Cellular constituents move by diffusion, pumps, and 
motors (Fig. 1.7). Most small molecules move through 
the  cytoplasm  or  membrane  channels  by  diffusion. 
However,  energy  provided  by  ATP  hydrolysis  or  
electrochemical  gradients  is  required  for  molecular 
pumps to drive molecules across membranes against 
con centration  gradients.  Similarly,  motor  proteins 
use  energy  from  ATP  hydrolysis  to  move  organelles 
and other cargo along microtubules or actin filaments.  
In  a  more  complicated  example,  protein  molecules 
destined  for  mitochondria  diffuse  from  their  site  
of  synthesis  in  the  cytoplasm  to  a  mitochondrion  
(Fig.  1.6),  where  they  bind  to  a  receptor.  Energy-
requiring reactions then transport the protein into the 
mitochondrion.

7.  Receptors and signaling mechanisms allow cells to 
adapt to environmental conditions (Fig. 1.8). Envi-
ronmental  stimuli  modify  cellular  behavior.  Faced 
with an unpredictable environment, cells must decide 
which  genes  to  express,  which  way  to  move,  and 
whether to proliferate, differentiate into a specialized 
cell,  or  die.  Some  of  these  choices  are  programmed 
genetically  or  epigenetically,  but  minute-to-minute 
decisions generally involve the reception of chemical 
or  physical  stimuli  from  outside  the  cell  and 

 

CHAPTER 1  n  Introduction to Cells 

7

A. Protein targeting from free ribosomes

Protein synthesized
on free ribosomes

Transport into 

nucleus

Completed
proteins released
into cytoplasm

Incorporation

into membranes
and lumens of 
peroxisomes and

mitochondria

Soluble
enzymes

Cytoskeleton

B. Protein targeting from ER-associated ribosomes

Complete proteins
incorporated into
ER membrane or
transported into
ER lumen

mRNA

Vesicles move from ER
      to Golgi apparatus

   and return

Vesicles move from the
Golgi to lysosomes and 

to plasma membrane

Membrane proteins
delivered to target

membrane

processing of these stimuli to change the behavior of 
the cell. Cells have an elaborate repertoire of recep-
tors  for  a  multitude  of  stimuli,  including  nutrients, 
growth  factors,  hormones,  neurotransmitters,  and 
toxins.  Stimulation  of  receptors  activates  diverse 
signal-transducing  mechanisms 
the 
message  and  generate  a  wide  range  of  cellular 
responses.  These  include  changes  in  the  electrical 
potential of the plasma membrane, gene expression, 
and  enzyme  activity.  Basic  signal  transduction 
mechanisms  are  ancient,  but  receptors  and  output 
systems  have  diversified  by  gene  duplication  and 
divergence during evolution.

that  amplify 

8.  Molecular feedback mechanisms control molecular 
composition, growth, and differentiation (Fig. 1.9). 
Living cells are dynamic, constantly fine-tuning their 
composition in response to external stimuli, nutrient 

Diffusion down
a concentration
gradient

Channel

Ca2+

Transport up
a concentration
gradient
ATP

ADP

Ca2+

Pump

Motor pulls
membrane
compartment

ATP

ADP

Lumen proteins

secreted

Microtubule track

FIGURE 1.6  PROTEIN TARGETING. Signals built into the amino 
acid  sequences  of  proteins  target  them  to  all  compartments  of  the 
eukaryotic cell. A, Proteins synthesized on free ribosomes can be used 
locally in the cytoplasm or guided by different signals to the nucleus, 
mitochondria,  or  peroxisomes.  B,  Other  signals  target  proteins  for 
insertion  into  the  membrane  or  lumen  of  the  endoplasmic  reticulum 
(ER).  From  there,  a  series  of  vesicular  budding  and  fusion  reactions 
carry the membrane proteins and lumen proteins to the Golgi appara-
tus, lysosomes, or plasma membrane. mRNA, messenger RNA. 

FIGURE  1.7  MOLECULAR  MOVEMENTS  BY  DIFFUSION, 
PUMPS, AND MOTORS. Diffusion: Molecules up to the size of globu-
lar  proteins  diffuse  in  the  cytoplasm.  Concentration  gradients  can 
provide  a  direction  to  diffusion,  such  as  the  diffusion  of  Ca2+  from  a 
region of high concentration inside the endoplasmic reticulum through 
a membrane channel to a region of low concentration in the cytoplasm. 
Pumps: Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-driven protein pumps transport 
ions  up  concentration  gradients.  Motors:  ATP-driven  motors  move 
organelles  and  other  large  cargo  along  microtubules  and  actin  fila-
ments. ADP, adenosine diphosphate. 

A. Ligand binds receptor
    turning it on

R

R*

G

G*

B. Receptor activates
    GTP-binding proteins

ATP

cAMP

K

K*

E

E*

C. Activated enzymes make
    second messenger cAMP

D. cAMP activates
    protein kinases

E. Kinases phosphorylate
    and activate enzymes

FIGURE 1.8  RECEPTORS AND SIGNALS. Activation of cellular metabolism by an extracellular ligand, such as a hormone. In this example, 
binding of the hormone (A) triggers a series of linked biochemical reactions (B–E), leading through a second messenger molecule (cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate [cAMP]) and a cascade of three activated proteins to regulate a metabolic enzyme. The response to a single ligand is multiplied 
at steps B, C, and E, leading to thousands of activated enzymes. GTP, guanosine triphosphate. 

8 

SECTION I  n  Introduction to Cell Biology

Precursor 1

Precursor 2

+

Enz 1

Enz 2
Intermediate
Enz 3

Tryptophan

Tyrosine

A

Check for
damaged or
unduplicated

DNA

G2

Mitosis

M

Check for

chromosome
attachment to
mitotic spindle

DNA

Cytokinesis

Check for
DNA nicks

G1

Growth
in mass

S

Chromosome
duplication

B

Centrosome
duplication

starts

Check for
favorable
environmental
conditions

FIGURE 1.9  MOLECULAR FEEDBACK LOOPS. A, Control of the 
synthesis of aromatic amino acids. An intermediate and the final prod-
ucts of this biochemical pathway inhibit three of nine enzymes (Enz)  
in  a  concentration-dependent  fashion,  automatically  turning  down  
the  reactions  that  produced  them.  This  maintains  constant  levels  of  
the  final  products,  two  amino  acids  essential  for  protein  synthesis.  
B, Control of the cell cycle. The cycle consists of four stages. During 
the  G1  phase,  the  cell  grows  in  size.  During  the  S  phase,  the  cell 
duplicates the DNA of its chromosomes. During the G2 phase, the cell 
checks  for  completion  of  DNA  replication.  In  the  M  phase,  chromo-
somes condense and attach to the mitotic spindle, which separates 
the duplicated pairs in preparation for the division of the cell by cyto-
kinesis. Biochemical feedback loops called checkpoints halt the cycle 
(blunt  bars)  at  several  points  until  the  successful  completion  of  key 
preceding events. 

availability,  and  internal  signals.  The  most  dramatic 
example  is  the  regulation  of  each  step  in  the  cell  
cycle. Feedback loops assure that the conditions are 
suitable for each transition such as the onset of DNA 
synthesis and the decision to begin mitosis. Similarly, 
cells  carefully  balance  the  production  and  degrada-
tion  of  their  constituent  molecules.  Cells  produce 
“housekeeping”  molecules  for  basic  functions,  such 
as  intermediary  metabolism,  and  subsets  of  other  
proteins and RNAs for specialized functions. A hierar-
chy of mechanisms controls the supply of each protein 
and RNA: epigenetic mechanisms designate whether 
a particular region of a chromosome is active or not; 
regulatory  proteins  turn  specific  genes  on  and  off  
and modulate the rates of translation of mRNAs into 
protein;  synthesis  balanced  by  the  rates  of  degrada-
tion determines the abundance of specific RNAs and 
proteins;  phosphorylation  (covalent  modification  of 

certain amino acids with a charged phosphate group) 
regulates protein interactions and activities; and other 
mechanisms regulate of the distribution of each mol-
ecule  within  the  cell.  Feedback  loops  also  regulate 
enzymes that synthesize and degrade proteins, nucleic 
acids, sugars, and lipids to ensure the proper levels of 
each cellular constituent.
A practical consequence of these common biochemi-
cal  mechanisms  is  that  general  principles  may  be  dis-
covered  by  studying  any  cell  that  is  favorable  for 
experimentation.  This  text  cites  many  examples  of 
research  on  bacteria,  insects,  protozoa,  or  fungi  that 
revealed  fundamental  mechanisms  shared  by  human 
cells. For example, humans and baker’s yeast use similar 
mechanisms  to  control  the  cell  cycle,  guide  protein 
secretion, and segregate chromosomes at mitosis. Indeed, 
particular  proteins  are  often  functionally  interchange-
able between human and yeast cells.

Features That Distinguish Eukaryotic and 
Prokaryotic Cells
Although sharing a common origin and basic biochemis-
try, cells vary considerably in their structure and organi-
zation  (Fig.  1.2).  Bacteria  and  Archaea  have  much  in 
common, including chromosomes in the cytoplasm, cell 
membranes with similar families of pumps, carriers and 
channels,  basic  metabolic  pathways,  gene  expression, 
motility powered by rotary flagella, and lack of membrane-
bound organelles. On the other hand, these prokaryotes 
are  wonderfully  diverse  in  terms  of  morphology  and 
their use of a wide range of energy sources.

Eukaryotes comprise a multitude of unicellular organ-
isms,  algae,  plants,  amoebas,  fungi,  and  animals  that 
differ  from  prokaryotes  in  having  a  compartmentalized 
cytoplasm  with  membrane-bounded  organelles  includ-
ing a nucleus. The basic features of eukaryotic cells were 
refined more than 1.5 billion years ago, before the major 
groups of eukaryotes diverged. The nuclear envelope 
separates  the  two  major  compartments:  nucleoplasm 
and cytoplasm. Chromosomes carrying the cell’s genes 
and the machinery to express those genes reside inside 
the nucleus. Most eukaryotic cells have ER (the site of 
protein and phospholipid synthesis), a Golgi apparatus 
(adds sugars to membrane proteins, lysosomal proteins, 
and secretory proteins), lysosomes (compartments con-
taining digestive enzymes), and peroxisomes (contain-
ers  for  enzymes  involved  in  oxidative  reactions).  Most 
also have mitochondria that convert energy stored in 
the  chemical  bonds  of  nutrients  into  ATP.  Cilia  (and 
flagella)  are  ancient  eukaryotic  specializations  used  for 
motility or sensing the environment.

Membrane-bounded  compartments  give  eukaryotic 
cells  a  number  of  advantages.  Membranes  provide  a 
barrier  that  allows  each  type  of  organelle  to  maintain 
novel  ionic  and  enzymatic  interior  environments.  Each 

 

CHAPTER 1  n  Introduction to Cells 

9

of these special environments favors a subset of the bio-
chemical reactions required for life as illustrated by the 
following  examples.  The  nuclear  envelope  separates  
the synthesis and processing of RNA in the nucleus from  
the translation  of  mature  mRNAs  into  proteins  in  the 
cytoplasm.  Segregation  of  digestive  enzymes  in  lyso-
somes  prevents  them  from  destroying  other  cellular 
components.  ATP  synthesis  depends  on  the  imperme-
able  membrane  around  mitochondria;  energy-releasing 
reactions  produce  a  proton  gradient  across  the  mem-
brane  that  drives  enzymes  in  the  membrane  to  synthe-
size ATP.

Overview of Eukaryotic Cellular 
Organization and Functions
This  section  previews  the  major  constituents  and  pro-
cesses  of  eukaryotic  cells.  With  this  background  the 
reader  will  be  able  to  appreciate  cross-references  to 
chapters later in the book.

Plasma Membrane
The  plasma  membrane  is  the  interface  of  the  cell  with 
its  environment  (Fig.  1.2).  Owing  to  the  hydrophobic 
interior  of  its  lipid  bilayer,  the  plasma  membrane  is 
impermeable to ions and most water-soluble molecules. 
Consequently,  they  cross  the  membrane  only  through 

transmembrane  channels,  carriers,  and  pumps  (Fig. 
1.10).  These  transmembrane  proteins  provide  the  cell 
with nutrients, control internal ion concentrations, and 
establish a transmembrane electrical potential. A single 
amino acid change in one plasma membrane pump and 
Cl− channel causes the human disease cystic fibrosis.

Other  plasma  membrane  proteins  mediate  interac-
tions of cells with their immediate environment. Trans-
membrane receptors convert the binding of extracellular 
signaling  molecules,  such  as  hormones  and  growth 
factors into chemical or electrical signals that influence 
the activity of the cell. Genetic defects in signaling pro-
teins, which mistakenly turn on signals for growth in the 
absence of appropriate extracellular stimuli, contribute 
to human cancers.

Plasma membrane adhesion proteins allow cells to 
bind  specifically  to  each  other  or  to  the  extracellular 
matrix  (Fig.  1.10).  These  selective  interactions  allow 
cells to form multicellular associations, such as epithelia 
(sheets  of  cells  that  separate  the  interior  of  the  body 
from the outside world). Similar interactions allow white 
blood cells to bind bacteria so that they can be ingested 
and  killed.  In  cells  that  are  subjected  to  mechanical 
forces,  such  as  muscle  and  epithelia,  cytoskeletal  fila-
ments  inside  the  cell  reinforce  the  plasma  membrane 
adhesion proteins. In skin, defects in these attachments 
cause blistering diseases.

CYTOPLASM

Actin

C

Na+

K+

ATP

ADP

C

B

Na+

Glucose

Na+

K+

H

–––

–––

–

D

E F

G

G

+ + +

+ + +

+

+ +

Na+

K+

Na+

Glucose Na+

K+

A

ANOTHER
CELL

OUTSIDE

FIGURE 1.10  STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS OF AN ANIMAL CELL PLASMA MEMBRANE. The lipid bilayer is a permeability barrier 
between the cytoplasm and the extracellular environment. Transmembrane adhesion proteins anchor the membrane to the extracellular matrix 
(A) or to like receptors on other cells (B) and transmit forces to the cytoskeleton (C). Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-driven enzymes (D) pump 
Na+ out of and K+ into the cell (E) to establish concentration gradients across the lipid bilayer. Transmembrane carrier proteins (F) use these ion 
concentration gradients to transport of nutrients into the cell. Selective ion channels (G) regulate the electrical potential across the membrane. A 
large variety of receptors (H) bind specific extracellular ligands and send signals across the membrane to the cytoplasm. 

10 

SECTION I  n  Introduction to Cell Biology

Nuclear 
  envelope
Nuclear pore

Nuclear pore

Nucleolus

Chromatin

FIGURE  1.11  ELECTRON  MICROGRAPH  OF  A  THIN  SECTION  OF  A  NUCLEUS.  (Courtesy  Don  Fawcett,  Harvard  Medical  School, 
Boston, MA.)

Nucleus
The nuclear envelope is a double membrane that sepa-
rates  the  nucleus  from  the  cytoplasm  (Fig.  1.11).  All 
traffic into and out of the nucleus passes through nuclear 
pores  that  bridge  the  double  membranes.  Inbound 
traffic  includes  all  nuclear  proteins  and  ribosomal  pro-
teins  destined  for  the  nucleolus.  Outbound  traffic 
includes mRNAs and ribosomal subunits.

The  nucleus  stores  genetic  information  in  extraordi-
narily long DNA molecules called chromosomes. Remark-
ably, portions of genes encoding proteins and structural 
RNAs make up only a small fraction (<2%) of the 3 billion 
nucleotide pairs in human DNA, but more than 50% of 
the  97  million  nucleotide  pairs  in  a  nematode  worm. 
Regions of DNA called telomeres stabilize the ends of 
chromosomes, and other DNA sequences organize cen-
tromeres  that  direct  the  distribution  of  chromosomes 
to  daughter  cells  when  cells  divide.  Much  of  the  DNA 
encodes a myriad of RNAs with regulatory activities.

The DNA and its associated proteins are called chro-
matin  (Fig.  1.5).  Interactions  with  histones  and  other 
proteins  fold  each  chromosome  compactly  enough  to  
fit  into  discrete  territories  inside  the  nucleus.  During 
mitosis,  chromosomes  condense  and  reorganize  into 
separate structural units suitable for sorting into daugh-
ter cells (Fig. 1.5).

Regulatory  proteins  called  transcription  factors 
turn  specific  genes  on  and  off  in  response  to  genetic, 
developmental,  and  environmental  signals.  Enzymes 
called  polymerases  make  RNA  copies  of  active  genes,  
a  process  called  transcription.  mRNAs  specify  the 
amino  acid  sequences  of  proteins.  Other  RNAs  have 

structural, regulatory, or catalytic functions. Most newly 
synthesized RNAs are processed extensively before they 
are ready for use. Processing involves removal of inter-
vening  sequences,  alteration  of  bases,  or  addition  of  
specific chemical groups at both ends. For cytoplasmic 
RNAs,  this  processing  occurs  before  RNA  molecules  
are  exported  from  the  nucleus  through  nuclear  pores. 
The  nucleolus  assembles  ribosomes  from  more  than 
50  different  proteins  and  3  RNA  molecules.  Genetic  
errors  resulting  in  altered  RNA  and  protein  products 
cause or predispose individuals to many inherited human 
diseases.

Ribosomes and Protein Synthesis
Ribosomes catalyze the synthesis of proteins, using the 
nucleotide  sequences  of  mRNA  molecules  to  specify  
the sequence of amino acids (Fig. 1.4). Ribosomes free 
in the cytoplasm synthesize proteins that are released for 
routing to various intracellular destinations (Fig. 1.6).

Endoplasmic Reticulum
Ribosomes  synthesizing  proteins  destined  for  insertion 
into cellular membranes or for export from the cell asso-
ciate with the ER, a continuous system of flattened mem-
brane  sacks  and  tubules  (Fig.  1.12).  Proteins  produced 
on  these  ribosomes  carry  signal  sequences  of  amino 
acids that target their ribosomes to receptors on the ER 
(Fig. 1.6). These regions of the ER are called rough ER 
owing to the attached ribosomes. As a polypeptide chain 
grows,  its  sequence  determines  whether  the  protein 
folds  up  in  the  lipid  bilayer  or  translocates  across  the 
membrane into the lumen of the ER. Enzymes add sugar 

 

CHAPTER 1  n  Introduction to Cells 

11

Rough endoplasmic
reticulum

Mitochondria

Free ribosomes

Smooth endoplasmic
reticulum

Golgi apparatus

Lysosome

FIGURE 1.12  ELECTRON MICROGRAPH OF A THIN SECTION OF A LIVER CELL SHOWING ORGANELLES. (Courtesy Don Fawcett, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.)

polymers to some proteins exposed in the lumen. Some 
proteins  are  retained  in  the  ER,  but  most  move  on  to 
other parts of the cell.

ER is very dynamic. Motor proteins move along micro-
tubules  to  pull  the  ER  membranes  into  a  branching 
network spread throughout the cytoplasm. Continuous 
bidirectional traffic moves small vesicles between the ER 
and  the  Golgi  apparatus.  These  vesicles  carry  soluble 
proteins  in  their  lumens,  in  addition  to  transporting 
membrane lipids and proteins. Proteins on the cytoplas-
mic surface of the membranes catalyze each membrane 
budding  and  fusion  event.  The  use  of  specialized  pro-
teins for budding and fusion of membranes at different 
sites  in  the  cell  organizes  this  membrane  traffic  and  
prevents  the  membrane  components  from  getting  
mixed up.

The  ER  also  serves  as  the  outer  membrane  of  the 
nuclear envelope, which can have attached ribosomes. 
ER enzymes synthesize many cellular lipids and metabo-
lize  drugs,  while  ER  pumps  and  channels  regulate  the 
cytoplasmic Ca2+ concentration.

Golgi Apparatus
The Golgi apparatus processes the sugar side chains on 
transmembrane  and  secreted  proteins.  It  consists  of  a 
stack  of  flattened,  membrane-bound  sacks  with  many 
associated vesicles. The Golgi apparatus is characteristi-
cally located in the middle of the cell near the nucleus 
and the centrosome (Figs. 1.2 and 1.12). Proteins to be 
processed  come  in  vesicles  that  detach  from  the  ER  
and fuse with Golgi apparatus membranes (Fig. 1.6). As 
proteins  pass  through  the  stacked  Golgi  membranes 
from  one  side  to  the  other,  enzymes  in  specific  stacks 
modify the sugar side chains of secretory and membrane 
proteins.

On the downstream side of the Golgi apparatus, pro-
cessed proteins segregate into different vesicles destined 
for lysosomes or the plasma membrane (Fig. 1.6). Many 
components  of  the  plasma  membrane  including  recep-
tors for extracellular molecules recycle from the plasma 
membrane  to  endosomes  and  back  to  the  cell  surface 
many  times  before  they  are  degraded.  Defects  in  this 
process can cause arteriosclerosis.

Lysosomes
An 
impermeable  membrane  separates  degradative 
enzymes  inside  lysosomes  from  other  cellular  compo-
nents (Fig. 1.12). After synthesis by rough ER, lysosomal 
proteins  move  through  the  Golgi  apparatus,  where 
enzymes  add  the  modified  sugar,  phosphorylated 
mannose (Fig. 1.6). Vesicular transport, guided by phos-
phomannose  receptors,  delivers  lysosomal  proteins  to 
the lumen of lysosomes.

Cells  ingest  microorganisms  and  other  materials  in 
membrane vesicles derived from the plasma membrane. 
The  contents  of  these  endosomes  and  phagosomes 
are delivered to lysosomes for degradation by lysosomal 
enzymes. Deficiencies of lysosomal enzymes cause many 
severe  congenital  diseases  where  substrates  of  the 
enzyme  accumulate  in  quantities  that  can  impair  the 
function of the brain, liver, or other organs.

Mitochondria
Mitochondrial enzymes use most of the energy released 
from the breakdown of nutrients to synthesize ATP, the 
common  currency  for  most  energy-requiring  reactions  
in cells (Fig. 1.12). This efficient process uses molecular 
oxygen to complete the oxidation of fats, proteins, and 
sugars to carbon dioxide and water. A less-efficient gly-
colytic system in the cytoplasm extracts energy from the 

12 

SECTION I  n  Introduction to Cell Biology

partial breakdown of glucose to make ATP. Mitochondria 
cluster near sites of ATP utilization, such as membranes 
engaged  in  active  transport,  nerve  terminals,  and  the 
contractile apparatus of muscle cells.

Mitochondria also respond to toxic stimuli from the 
environment including drugs used in cancer chemother-
apy by activating controlled cell death called apoptosis. 
A  toxic  cocktail  of  enzymes  degrades  proteins  and 
nucleic  acids  as  the  cell  breaks  into  membrane-bound 
fragments. Defects in this form of cellular suicide lead to 
autoimmune  disorders,  cancer,  and  some  neurodegen-
erative diseases.

Mitochondria  form  in  a  fundamentally  different  way 
from the ER, Golgi apparatus, and lysosomes (Fig. 1.6). 
Cytoplasmic  ribosomes  synthesize  most  mitochondrial 
proteins. Signal sequences on these mitochondrial pro-
teins bind receptors on the surface of mitochondria. The 
proteins  are  then  transported  into  the  mitochondrial 
interior or inserted into the outer or inner mitochondrial 
membranes.

Mitochondria arose from symbiotic Bacteria (Fig. 1.1) 
and most of the bacterial genes subsequently moved to 
the  nucleus.  However,  mitochondrial  DNA,  ribosomes, 
and mRNAs still produce a few essential proteins for the 
organelle. Defects in the maternally inherited mitochon-
drial genome cause several diseases, including deafness, 
diabetes, and ocular myopathy.

Peroxisomes
Peroxisomes are membrane-bound organelles containing 
enzymes  that  participate  in  oxidative  reactions.  Like 
mitochondria, peroxisomal enzymes oxidize fatty acids, 
but  the  energy  is  not  used  to  synthesize  ATP.  Peroxi-
somes  are  particularly  abundant  in  plants.  Peroxi-
somal  proteins  are  synthesized  in  the  cytoplasm  and  
imported  into  the  organelle  using  the  same  strategy  as 
mitochondria  but  with  different  targeting  sequences  
and  transport  machinery  (Fig.  1.6).  Genetic  defects  in 
peroxisomal  biogenesis  cause  several  forms  of  mental 
retardation.

Cytoskeleton and Motility Apparatus
A cytoplasmic network of three protein polymers—actin 
filaments, intermediate filaments, and microtubules (Fig. 
1.13)—maintains the shape of most cells. Each polymer 
has distinctive properties and dynamics. Actin filaments 
and  microtubules  provide  tracks  for  the  ATP-powered 
motor  proteins  that  produce  most  cellular  movements 
(Fig.  1.14),  including  locomotion,  muscle  contraction, 
transport  of  organelles  through  the  cytoplasm,  mitosis, 
and the beating of cilia and flagella. The proteins are 
also  used  for  highly  specialized  motile  processes,  such 
as muscle contraction and sperm motility.

Networks of crosslinked actin filaments anchored to 
the  plasma  membrane  (Fig.  1.10)  reinforce  the  surface 
of the cell. In many cells, tightly packed bundles of actin 

IF

MT

Actin

FIGURE 1.13  ELECTRON MICROGRAPH OF THE CYTOPLAS-
MIC MATRIX. A fibroblast cell was prepared by detergent extraction 
of soluble components, rapid freezing, sublimation of ice, and coating 
with metal. IF, intermediate filaments; MT, microtubules (shaded red). 
(Courtesy J. Heuser, Washington University, St. Louis, MO.)

filaments  support  finger-like  projections  of  the  plasma 
membrane  (Fig.  1.5).  These  filopodia  or  microvilli 
increase  the  surface  area  of  the  plasma  membrane  for 
transporting  nutrients  and  other  processes,  including 
sensory  transduction  in  the  ear.  Genetic  defects  in  a 
membrane-associated,  actin-binding  protein  called  dys-
trophin  cause  the  most  common  form  of  muscular 
dystrophy.

Actin filaments participate in movements in two ways. 
Assembly of actin filaments produces some movements, 
such as the protrusion of pseudopods. Other movements 
result from force generated by myosin motor proteins 
that  use  the  energy  from  ATP  hydrolysis  to  produce 
movements  along  actin  filaments.  Muscles  use  a  highly 
organized  assembly  of  actin  and  myosin  filaments  to 
drive  forceful,  rapid,  one-dimensional  contractions. 
Myosin  also  drives  the  contraction  of  the  cleavage  
furrow  during  cell  division.  External  signals,  such  as  
chemotactic  molecules,  can  influence  both  actin  fila-
ment organization and the direction of motility. Genetic 
defects  in  myosin  cause  enlargement  of  the  heart  and 
sudden death.

Intermediate filaments are flexible but strong intracel-
lular  tendons  that  reinforce  epithelial  cells  of  the  skin 
and other cells subjected to substantial physical stresses. 
All  intermediate  filament  proteins  are  related  to  the 
keratin molecules found in hair. Intermediate filaments 
characteristically  form  bundles  that  link  the  plasma 
membrane to the nucleus. Lamin intermediate filaments 
reinforce  the  nuclear  envelope.  Intermediate  filament 
networks are disassembled during mitosis and cell move-
ments as a result of specific reversible phosphorylation 
events. Genetic defects in keratin intermediate filaments 
cause blistering diseases of the skin. Defects in nuclear 
lamins are associated with some types of muscular dys-
trophy and premature aging.

Microtubules are rigid cylindrical polymers that resist 
compression better than actin or intermediate filaments. 

Neuron

Axon

Fibroblast

Synapse

 

A

B

Kinesin

Myosin

Dynein

FIGURE  1.14  TRANSPORT  OF  CYTOPLASMIC  PARTICLES 
ALONG ACTIN FILAMENTS AND MICROTUBULES BY MOTOR 
PROTEINS.  A,  Overview  of  organelle  movements  in  a  neuron  and 
fibroblast. B, Details of the molecular motors. The microtubule-based 
motors,  dynein  and  kinesin,  move  in  opposite  directions.  The  actin-
based  motor,  myosin,  moves  in  one  direction  along  actin  filaments. 
(Modified from Atkinson SJ, Doberstein SK, Pollard TD. Moving off the 
beaten track. Curr Biol. 1992;2:326–328.)

The molecular polarity of the microtubule polymer gives 
the  two  ends  different  properties  and  determines  the 
direction  of  movement  of  motor  proteins.  Most  micro-
tubules  in  cells  have  the  same  polarity  relative  to  the 
organizing centers that initiate their growth (eg, the cen-
trosome) (Fig. 1.2). Their rapidly growing ends are ori-
ented  toward  the  periphery  of  the  cell.  Individual 
cytoplasmic  microtubules  are  remarkably  dynamic, 
growing and shrinking on a time scale of minutes.

Microtubules serve as mechanical reinforcing rods for 
the cytoskeleton and the tracks for two classes of motor 

CHAPTER 1  n  Introduction to Cells 

13

proteins that use the energy liberated by ATP hydrolysis 
to move along the microtubules. Kinesin moves its asso-
ciated  cargo  (vesicles  and  RNA-protein  particles)  along 
the  microtubule  network  radiating  away  from  the  cen-
trosome,  whereas  dynein  moves  its  cargo  toward  the 
centrosome.  Together,  they  form  a  two-way  transport 
system  that  is  particularly  well  developed  in  the  axons 
and dendrites of nerve cells. Toxins can impair this trans-
port system and cause nerve malfunctions.

During mitosis, the cell assembles a mitotic apparatus 
of  highly  dynamic  microtubules  and  uses  microtubule 
motor proteins to distribute the replicated chromosomes 
into the daughter cells. The motile apparatus of cilia and 
flagella is built from a complex array of stable microtu-
bules  that  bends  when  dynein  slides  the  microtubules 
past  each  other.  A  genetic  absence  of  dynein  immobi-
lizes these appendages, causing male infertility and lung 
infections.

Microtubules,  intermediate  filaments,  and  actin  fila-
ments  each  provide  mechanical  support  for  the  cell. 
Interactions of microtubules with intermediate filaments 
and actin filaments unify the cytoskeleton into a continu-
ous mechanical structure. These polymers also provide 
a scaffold for some cellular enzyme systems.

Cell Cycle
Cells  carefully  control  their  growth  and  division  using  
an  integrated  regulatory  system  consisting  of  protein 
kinases (enzymes that add phosphate to the side chains 
of  proteins),  specific  kinase  inhibitors,  transcription 
factors,  and  highly  specific  protein  degradation.  When 
conditions inside and outside a cell are appropriate for 
cell  division  (Fig.  1.9B),  specific  cell  cycle  kinases  are 
activated  to  trigger  a  chain  of  events  leading  to  DNA 
replication  and  cell  division.  Once  DNA  replication  is 
complete, activation of cell cycle kinases such as Cdk1 
pushes the cell into mitosis, the process that separates 
chromosomes  into  two  daughter  cells.  Four  controls 
sequentially  activate  Cdk1  through  a  positive  feedback 
loop: (a) synthesis of a regulatory subunit, (b) transport 
into the nucleus, (c) removal and addition of inhibitory 
and stimulatory phosphate groups, and (d) repression of 
phosphatases  (enzymes  that  remove  the  phosphate 
groups Cdk1 puts on its protein targets).

Phosphorylation of proteins by Cdk1 leads directly or 
indirectly  to  disassembly  of  the  nuclear  envelope  (in 
most  but  not  all  eukaryotic  cells),  condensation  of 
mitotic  chromosomes,  and  assembly  of  the  mitotic 
spindle composed of microtubules. Selective proteoly-
sis of regulatory subunits of Cdk1 and key chromosomal 
proteins then allows the mitotic spindle to separate the 
previously  duplicated  identical  copies  of  each  chromo-
some.  As  cells  exit  mitosis,  the  nuclear  envelope  reas-
sembles  on  the  surface  of  the  chromosomes  to  reform 
the  daughter  nuclei.  Then  the  process  of  cytokinesis 
cleaves the daughter cells.

14 

SECTION I  n  Introduction to Cell Biology

A  key  feature  of  the  cell  cycle  is  a  series  of  built-in 
quality  controls,  called  checkpoints  (Fig.  1.9),  which 
ensure that each stage of the cycle is completed success-
fully  before  the  process  continues  to  the  next  step. 
These  checkpoints  also  detect  damage  to  cellular  con-
stituents  and  block  cell-cycle  progression  so  that  the 
damage  may  be  repaired.  Misregulation  of  checkpoints 
and  other  cell-cycle  controls  predisposes  to  cancer. 
Remarkably,  the  entire  cycle  of  DNA  replication,  chro-
mosomal  condensation,  nuclear  envelope  breakdown, 
and  reformation,  including  the  modulation  of  these 
events  by  checkpoints,  can  be  carried  out  in  cell-free 
extracts in a test tube.

understanding of the molecular basis of life at the cellular 
level. This journey starts with the evolution of the cell 
and introduction to the molecules of life. The following 
sections cover membrane structure and function, chro-
mosomes and the nucleus, gene expression and protein 
synthesis,  organelles  and  membrane  traffic,  signaling 
mechanisms,  cellular  adhesion  and  the  extracellular 
matrix,  cytoskeleton  and  cellular  motility,  and  the  cell 
cycle.  Enjoy  the  adventure  of  exploring  all  of  these 
topics. As you read, appreciate that cell biology is a living 
field that is constantly growing and identifying new hori-
zons.  The  book  will  prepare  you  to  understand  these 
new insights as they unfold in the future. 

Welcome to the Rest of the Book
This overview should prepare the reader to embark on 
the  following  chapters,  which  explain  our  current 

C H A P T E R 

2 

Evolution of Life on Earth

No  one  is  certain  how  life  began,  but  the  common 
ancestor  of  all  living  things  populated  the  earth  more 
than 3 billion years ago, not long (geologically speaking) 
after  the  planet  formed  4.5  billion  years  ago  (Fig.  2.1). 
Biochemical features shared by all existing cells suggest 
that this primitive microscopic cell had about 600 genes 
encoded in DNA, ribosomes to synthesize proteins from 
messenger  RNA  templates,  basic  metabolic  pathways, 
and a plasma membrane with pumps, carriers, and chan-
nels. Over time, mutations in the DNA created progeny 
that  diverged  genetically  into  a  myriad  of  distinctive 
species, most of which have become extinct. Approxi-
mately 1.7 million living species are known to science. 
Extrapolations  predict  approximately  9  million  eukary-
otic  species  and  10  times  more  prokaryotic  organisms 
living  on  the  earth  today.  On  the  basis  of  evolutionary 
histories  preserved  in  their  genomes,  living  organisms 
are  divided 
into  three  primary  domains:  Bacteria, 
Archaea, and Eucarya.

Eucarya

Green plants

Porphyra
Brown algae

~1 billion
years ago

Animals

Fungi

Amoeba

i o n

d r

n

o

h

Mito c

1–2 billion years ago,
first eukaryote with
a mitochondrion
Archaeon

~3.5 billion years ago,

common ancestor emerged

r o p l a s t

h l o

C

Proteobacterium

Escherichia

Chloroplast
progenitor

Cyanobacteria

Bacteria

Archaea

FIGURE 2.1  SIMPLE PHYLOGENETIC TREE WITH THE THREE 
DOMAINS  OF  LIFE—BACTERIA,  ARCHAEA,  AND  EUCARYA 
(EUKARYOTES)—AND A FEW REPRESENTATIVE ORGANISMS. 
The origin of eukaryotes with a mitochondrion about 2 billion years ago 
is  depicted  as  a  fusion  of  an  α-proteobacterium  with  an  Archaeon. 
Chloroplasts arose from the fusion of a cyanobacterium with the pre-
cursor of algae and plants. 

This  chapter  explains  our  current  understanding  of 
the  origin  of  the  first  self-replicating  cell  followed  by 
divergence of its progeny into the two diverse groups of 
prokaryotes, Bacteria and Archaea. It goes on to consider 
the  origin  of  Eucarya  and  their  diversification  over  the 
past 2 billion years.

Evolution  is  the  great  unifying  principle  in  biology. 
Research on evolution is both exciting and challenging 
because  this  ultimate  detective  story  involves  piecing 
together  fragmentary  evidence  spread  over  3.5  billion 
years.  Data  include  fossils  of  ancient  organisms  and/or 
chemical traces of their metabolic activities preserved in 
stone,  ancient  DNA  from  historical  specimens  (going 
back  more  than  500,000  years),  and  especially  DNA  of 
living organisms.

Prebiotic Chemistry Leading to  
an RNA World
Where  did  the  common  ancestor  come  from?  A  wide 
range of evidence supports the idea that life began with 
self-replicating RNA polymers sheltered inside lipid ves-
icles  even  before  the  invention  of  protein  synthesis  
(Fig.  2.2).  This  hypothetical  early  stage  of  evolution  is 
called the RNA  World. This attractive postulate solves 
the chicken-and-egg problem of how to build a system 
of  self-replicating  molecules  without  having  to  invent 
either DNA or proteins on their own. RNA has an advan-
tage, because it provides a way to store information in a 
type  of  molecule  that  can  also  have  catalytic  activity. 
Proteins excel in catalysis but do not store self-replicating 
genetic information. Today, proteins have largely super-
seded RNAs as cellular catalysts. DNA excels for storing 
genetic information, since the absence of the 2′ hydroxyl 
makes  it  less  reactive  and  therefore  more  stable  than 
RNA.  Readers  unfamiliar  with  the  structure  of  nucleic 
acids should consult Chapter 3 at this point.

Experts agree that the early steps toward life involved 
the  “prebiotic”  synthesis  of  organic  molecules  that 
became the building blocks of macromolecules. To use 

 15

16 

SECTION I  n  Introduction to Cell Biology

Simple

chemicals

Simple RNAs
that can store
information

Complex RNAs

with catalytic activity

Self-replication
of catalytic RNAs

DNA copies of
genetic information

Encapsulation of
nucleic acids in
lipid membrane

Ribosomes synthesize
proteins, which dominate
cellular catalysis

FIGURE 2.2  HYPOTHESES FOR PREBIOTIC EVOLUTION TO LAST COMMON ANCESTOR. Simple chemical reactions are postulated 
to have given rise to ever more complicated RNA molecules to store genetic information and catalyze chemical reactions, including self-replication, 
in a prebiotic “RNA world.” Eventually, genetic information was stored in more stable DNA molecules, and proteins replaced RNAs as the primary 
catalysts in primitive cells bounded by a lipid membrane. 

RNA as an example, mixtures of chemicals likely to have 
been present on the early earth can react to form ribose, 
nucleic  acid  bases,  and  ribonucleotides.  Minerals  can 
catalyze formation of simple sugars from formaldehyde, 
and  hydrogen  cyanide  (HCN)  and  cyanoacetylene  or  
formamide  can  react  to  make  nucleic  acid  bases.  One 
problem  was  the  lack  of  plausible  mechanisms  to  con-
jugate  ribose  with  a  base  to  make  a  nucleoside  or  add 
phosphate  to  make  a  nucleotide  without  the  aid  of  a 
preexisting  biochemical  catalyst.  However,  new  work 
revealed  a  pathway  to  make  ribonucleotides  directly 
from cyanamide, cyanoacetylene, glycolaldehyde, glycer-
aldehyde, and inorganic phosphate. Nucleotides do not 
polymerize spontaneously into polynucleotides in water, 
but  can  do  so  on  the  surface  of  clay  called  montmoril-
lonite. While attached to clay, single strands of RNA can 
act as a template for synthesis of a complementary strand 
to make a double-stranded RNA.

Given a supply of nucleotides, these reactions could 
have  created  a  heterogeneous  pool  of  small  RNAs  in 
special environments such as cracks in rocks heated by 
hydrothermal  vents.  These  RNAs  set  in  motion  the 
process of natural selection at the molecular level. The 
idea is that random sequences of RNA were selected for 
replication on the basis of useful attributes such as the 
ability  to  catalyze  biochemical  reactions.  These  RNA 
enzymes are called ribozymes.

One  can  reproduce  this  process  of  molecular  evolu-
tion  in  the  laboratory.  Starting  with  a  pool  of  random 
initial  RNA  sequences,  multiple  rounds  of  error-prone 
replication can produce variants that can be tested for a 
particular biochemical function.

In nature random events would rarely produce useful 
ribozymes,  but  once  they  appeared,  natural  selection 
could  enrich  for  RNAs  with  catalytic  activities  that 
sustain  a  self-replicating  system,  including  synthesis  of 
RNA from a complementary RNA strand. Over millions 

of years, a ribozyme eventually evolved with the ability 
to  catalyze  the  formation  of  peptide  bonds  and  to  syn-
thesize  proteins.  This  most  complicated  of  all  known 
ribozymes is the ribosome (see Fig. 12.6) that catalyzes 
the synthesis of proteins. Proteins eventually supplanted 
ribozymes as catalysts for most other biochemical reac-
tions.  Owing  to  its  greater  chemical  stability,  DNA 
proved  to  be  superior  to  RNA  for  storing  the  genetic 
blueprint over time.

Each  of  these  events  is  improbable,  and  their  com-
bined probability is exceedingly remote, even with a vast 
number  of  chemical  “experiments”  over  hundreds  of 
millions of years. Encapsulation of these prebiotic reac-
tions  may  have  enhanced  their  probability.  In  addition 
to  catalyzing  RNA  synthesis,  clay  minerals  can  also 
promote  formation  of  lipid  vesicles,  which  can  corral 
reactants to avoid dilution and loss of valuable constitu-
ents. This process might have started with fragile bilay-
ers  of  fatty  acids  that  were  later  supplanted  by  more 
robust phosphoglyceride bilayers (see Fig. 13.5). In labo-
ratory experiments, RNAs inside lipid vesicles can create 
osmotic pressure that favors expansion of the bilayer at 
the expense of vesicles lacking RNAs.

No  one  knows  where  these  prebiotic  events  took 
place.  Some  steps  in  prebiotic  evolution  might  have 
occurred  in  thermal  vents  deep  in  the  ocean  or  in  hot 
springs on volcanic islands where conditions were favor-
able for some of the reactions. Carbon-containing mete-
orites  have  useful  molecules,  including  amino  acids. 
Conditions for prebiotic synthesis were probably favor-
able beginning approximately 4 billion years ago, but the 
geologic  record  has  not  preserved  convincing  micro-
scopic  fossils  or  traces  of  biosynthesis  older  than  3.5 
billion years.

Another  mystery  is  how  L-amino  acids  and  D-sugars 
(see Chapter 3) were selected over their stereoisomers 
for  biological  macromolecules.  These  were  pivotal 

 

CHAPTER 2  n  Evolution of Life on Earth 

17

events,  since  racemic  mixtures  of  L-  and  D-amino  acids 
are not favorable for biosynthesis. For example, mixtures 
of nucleotides composed of L- and D-ribose cannot base-
pair  well  enough  for  template-guided  replication  of 
nucleic  acids.  In  the  laboratory,  particular  amino  acid 
stereoisomers  (that  could  have  come  from  meteorites) 
can bias the synthesis of D-sugars.

Divergent Evolution From the Last 
Universal Common Ancestor of Life
Shared biochemical features suggest that all current cells 
are  derived  from  a  last  universal  common  ancestor 
(LUCA) that lived at least 3.5 billion years ago (Fig. 2.1). 
LUCA could, literally, have been a single cell or colony 
of  cells,  but  it  might  have  been  a  larger  community  of 
cells  sharing  a  common  pool  of  genes  through  inter-
change of their nucleic acids. The situation is obscure, 
because none of these primitive organisms survived and 
they left behind few traces. All contemporary organisms  
have  diverged  equally  far  in  time  from  their  common 
ancestor.

Although  the  features  of  the  LUCA  are  lost  in  time, 
this organism is inferred to have had approximately 600 
genes  encoded  in  DNA.  It  surely  had  messenger  RNAs 
(mRNAs),  transfer  RNAs,  and  ribosomes  to  synthesize 
proteins and a plasma membrane with all three families 
of pumps, as well as carriers and diverse channels, since 
these  are  now  universal  cellular  constituents.  LUCA 
probably lived at moderate temperatures and may have 

used hydrogen as an energy source. The transition from 
primitive,  self-replicating,  RNA-only  particles  to  this 
complicated  little  cell  is,  in  many  ways,  even  more 
remarkable than the invention of the RNA World.

During  evolution  three  processes  diversify  genomes 

(Fig. 2.3):
•  Gene  divergence:  Every  gene  is  subject  to  random 
mutations  that  are  inherited  by  succeeding  genera-
tions. Some mutations change single base pairs. Other 
mutations add or delete larger blocks of DNA such as 
sequences coding a protein domain, an independently 
folded part of a protein (see Fig. 3.13). These events 
inevitably  produce  genetic  diversity  through  diver-
gence of sequences or creation of novel combinations 
of  domains.  For  example,  a  typical  human  genome 
differs at hundreds of thousands of sites from the the 
so-called  reference  genome  (see  Chapter  7).  Many 
mutations are neutral, but others may confer a repro-
ductive advantage that favors persistence via natural 
selection.  Other  mutations  are  disadvantageous, 
resulting  in  disappearance  of  the  lineage.  When 
species  diverge,  genes  with  common  origins  are 
called orthologs (Box 2.1).

•  Gene duplication and divergence: Rarely, a gene, 
part of a gene, or even a whole genome is duplicated 
during  replication  or  cell  division.  This  creates  an 
opportunity for evolution. Some sister genes are elimi-
nated,  but  others  are  retained.  As  these  sister  genes 
acquire  random  point  mutations,  insertions,  or  dele-
tions, their structures inevitably diverge, which allows 

A. Divergence of originally

identical genes from different
mutations in sister lineages

Ancestral
gene

Two species

diverge

B. Gene duplication

and divergence

C. Lateral gene

transfer

Ancestral
gene

Gene duplication

Transfer

Cell type A

Cell type B

i

D
v
e
r
g
e
n
c
e

Paralogous genes

Two species

diverge

Modified cell
type B with
new gene(s)

Orthologous genes

Orthologous genes

FIGURE 2.3  MECHANISMS OF GENE DIVERSIFICATION. A, Gene divergence from a common origin by random mutations in sister lineages 
creates orthologous genes. B, Gene duplication followed by divergence within and between sister lineages yields both orthologs (separated by 
speciation) and paralogs (separated by gene duplication). C, Lateral transfer moves entire genes from one species to another. 

18 

SECTION I  n  Introduction to Cell Biology

BOX 2.1  Orthologs, Paralogs, and Homologs

Genes with a common ancestor are homologs. The terms 
ortholog and paralog describe the relationship of homolo-
gous  genes  in  terms  of  how  their  most  recent  common 
ancestor  was  separated.  If  a  speciation  event  separated 
two genes, then they are orthologs. If a duplication event 
separated two genes, then they are paralogs. To illustrate 
this  point,  let  us  say  that  gene  A  is  duplicated  within  a 
species,  forming  paralogous  genes  A1  and  A2.  If  these 
genes are separated by a speciation event, so that species 
1  has  genes  sp1A1  and  sp1A2  and  species  2  has  genes 
sp2A1 and sp2A2, it is proper to say that genes sp1A1 and 
sp2A1 are orthologs and genes sp1A1 and sp1A2 are para-
logs, but genes sp1A1 and sp2A2 are also paralogs because 
their  most  recent  common  ancestor  was  the  gene  that 
duplicated.

for  different  functions.  Some  changes  may  confer  a 
selective advantage; others confer a liability. Multiple 
rounds of gene duplication and divergence can create 
huge  families  of  genes  encoding  related  but  special-
ized  proteins,  such  as  membrane  carrier  proteins. 
Sister  genes  created  by  duplication  and  divergence 
are called paralogs.

•  Lateral  transfer:  Another  mechanism  of  genetic 
diversification involves movement of genes between 
organisms,  immediately  providing  the  host  cell  with 
a  new  biochemical  activity.  Contemporary  bacteria 
acquire foreign genes in three ways. Pairs of bacteria 
exchange DNA directly during conjugation. Many bac-
teria  take  up  naked  DNA,  as  when  plasmids  move 
genes  for  antibiotic  resistance  between  bacteria. 
Viruses also move DNA between bacteria. Such lateral 
transfers  explain  how  highly  divergent  prokaryotes 
came  to  share  some  common  genes  and  regulatory 
sequences. Laterally transferred genes can change the 
course of evolution. For example, all the major branch-
ing  events  among  Archaea  appear  to  be  associated 
with lateral transfers of genes from Bacteria. Massive 
lateral  transfer  occurred  twice  in  eukaryotes  when 
they  acquired  two  different  symbiotic  bacteria  that 
eventually adapted to form mitochondria and chloro-
plasts. Lateral transfer continues to this day between 
pairs  of  prokaryotes,  between  pairs  of  protists,  and 
even  between  prokaryotes  and  eukaryotes  (such  as 
between pathogenic bacteria and plants).
The  genetic  innovations  created  by  these  processes 
produce phenotypic changes that are acted on by natural 
selection. The process depends on tolerance of organisms 
to  change,  a  feature  called  “evolvability.”  After  making 
assumptions  about  the  rates  of  mutations,  one  can  use 
differences in gene sequences as a molecular clock.

When  conditions  do  not  require  the  product  of  a 
gene,  the  gene  can  be  lost.  For  example,  the  simple 
pathogenic  bacteria  Mycoplasma  genitalium  has  just 

470  genes,  less  than  the  inferred  common  ancestor, 
because  it  relies  on  its  animal  host  for  most  nutrients 
rather  than  making  them  de  novo.  Similarly,  ancient 
eukaryotes  had  approximately  200  genes  required  to 
assemble an axoneme for a cilium or flagellum (see Fig. 
38.13), but most plants and fungi lost them. Vertebrates 
also lost many genes that had been maintained for more 
than 2 billion years in earlier forms of life. For instance, 
humans lack the enzymes to synthesize certain essential 
amino acids, which must be supplied in our diets.

Evolution of Prokaryotes
Bacteria  and  Archaea  dominate  the  earth  in  terms  of 
numbers, variety of species, and range of habitats. They 
share many features, including a single cytoplasmic com-
partment with both transcription and translation, basic 
metabolic  enzymes  and  flagella  powered  by  rotary 
motors in the plasma membrane. Both divisions of pro-
karyotes are diverse with respect to size, shape, nutrient 
sources, and environmental tolerances, so these features 
cannot be used for classification, which relies instead on 
analysis of their genomes. For example, sequences of the 
genes  for  ribosomal  RNAs  cleanly  identify  Bacteria  and 
Archaea  (Fig.  2.4).  Bacteria  are  also  distinguished  by 
plasma  membranes  composed  of  phosphoglycerides 
(see  Fig.  13.2)  with  F-type  adenosine  triphosphatases 
(ATPases)  that  use  proton  gradients  to  synthesize  ade-
nosine  triphosphate  (ATP)  or  ATP  hydrolysis  to  pump 
protons  (see  Fig.  14.5).  On  the  other  hand  the  plasma 
membranes of Archaea are composed of isoprenyl ether 
lipids and their V-type ATPases only pump protons (see 
Fig. 14.5).

Abetted by rapid proliferation and large populations, 
natural  selection  allowed  prokaryotes  to  explore  many 
biochemical solutions to life on the earth. Some Bacteria 
and  Archaea  (and  some  eukaryotes  too)  thrive  under 
inhospitable  conditions,  such  as  anoxia  and  tempera-
tures greater than 100°C as found in deep-sea hydrother-
mal  vents.  Other  Bacteria  and  Archaea  can  use  energy 
sources  such  as  hydrogen,  sulfate,  or  methane  that  are 
useless  to  eukaryotes.  Far  less  than  1%  of  Bacteria  and 
Archaea have been grown successfully in the laboratory, 
so many varieties escaped detection by traditional means. 
Today,  sequencing  DNA  samples  from  natural  environ-
ments has revealed vast numbers of new species in the 
ocean, soil, human intestines, and elsewhere. Only a very 
small  proportion  of  bacterial  species  and  no  Archaea 
cause human disease.

Chlorophyll-based photosynthesis originated in Bacte-
ria  around  3  billion  years  ago.  Surely  this  was  one  of  
the  most  remarkable  events  during  the  evolution  of  
life  on  the  earth,  because  photosynthetic  reaction 
centers  (see  Fig.  19.8)  require  not  only  genes  for 
several  transmembrane  proteins,  but  also  genes  for  
multiple  enzymes,  to  synthesize  chlorophyll  and  other  

 

CHAPTER 2  n  Evolution of Life on Earth 

19

Stramenopiles

Plants

Animals

1 billion years ago

Fungi

Cellular slime molds 
oeba-flag

A

m

ellate 

A

c

e

l
l

u

l

a

r

 

Dictyostelium

A

moeba 

Entamoeba

Naegleria

Euglena

Trypanosoma

s

Z

l
i

m

e

 

m

o

l

d

 

o

o

m

a

s

ti

g

o

t

e

 

Physarum

Trichomonas

Giardia

Eukarya

A

Bacteria

Cyanobacteria

Clostridium

Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Bacillus

Heliobacterium

Agrobacterium

Proteobacterium

Mitochondria
progenitor

Escherichia

Chloroplast
progenitor

C

h

l

o

r

Alveolates

Tetrahymena
(ciliate)

oplast

Porphyra

r i o n

d

n

2 billion
years

o

h

c

M it o

Aquifex

R ed algae 

D

i

p

l

o

m

o

n

a

d

s

 

~

Stem eukaryote

y

e

a

r

R

3
.
7
 
b

o

illi

s
 
a

o

o
t

g

n

o
 

Sulfolobus

Methanopyrus

Archaea

Methanobacterium

Common
ancestor

Methanococcus

Archaeoglobus

Halobacterium

B

Ampicomplexa, dinoflagellates, ciliates

Brown algae

Trypanosoma, Euglena, Naegleria

Giardia

Animals

Eukarya

Red algae

Green algae

Green plants

C h l oroplast

Rickettsia

Proteobacterium
Agrobacterium

Escherichia

Chloroplast
progenitor

Cyanobacteria

Clostridium
Mycobacterium tuberculosis

Bacillus

Heliobacterium

Bacteria

Chonoflagellates

Fungi

Amoebas

Dictyostelium

i o n

r

d

n

o

h

c

M it o

1–2 billion years ago,
“LECA” last eukaryotic
common ancestor

1–2 billion years ago,
first eukaryote with
a mitochondria

Archaeon

Lokiarchaeota

Sulfolobus

TACK
group

Aquifex

~3.5 billion years ago,

common ancestor emerged

Methanococcus
Methanobacterium

Archaeoglobus
Halobacterium

Archaea

Methanopyrus

FIGURE 2.4  COMPARISONS OF TREES OF LIFE. A, Universal tree based on comparisons of ribosomal RNA (rRNA) sequences. The rRNA 
tree has its root deep in the bacterial lineage 3 billion to 4 billion years ago. All current organisms, arrayed at the ends of branches, fall into three 
domains: Bacteria, Archaea, and Eucarya (eukaryotes). This analysis assumed that the organisms in the three domains diverged from a common 
ancestor. The lengths of the segments and branches are based solely on differences in RNA sequences. Because the rates of random changes 
in rRNA genes vary, the lengths of the lines that lead to contemporary organisms are not equal. Complete genome sequences show that genes 
moved laterally between Bacteria and Archaea and within each of these domains. Multiple bacterial genes moved to Eucarya twice: First, an 
α-proteobacterium fused with a primitive eukaryote, giving rise to mitochondria that subsequently transferred many of their genes to the eukaryotic 
nucleus; and second, a cyanobacterium fused with the precursor of algae and plants to give rise to chloroplasts. B, Tree based on analysis of 
full genome sequences and other data showing that eukaryotes formed by fusion of an α-proteobacterium with an Archaeon related to contem-
porary Lokiarchaeota. Chloroplasts arose from the fusion of a cyanobacterium with the eukaryotic precursor of algae and plants. (A, Based on 
a branching pattern from Sogin M, Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA; and Pace N. A molecular view of microbial diversity and the 
biosphere. Science. 1997;276:734–740. B, Based on multiple sources, including Adl SM, Simpson AG, Lane CE, et al. The revised classification 
of eukaryotes. J Eukaryot Microbiol. 2012;59:429–493; and Spang A, Saw JH, Jørgensen SL, et al. Complex archaea that bridge the gap between 
prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Nature. 2015;521:173–179.)

20 

SECTION I  n  Introduction to Cell Biology

complex organic molecules associated with the proteins.  
Chapter 19 describes the machinery and mechanisms of 
photosynthesis.

Even more remarkably, photosynthesis was invented 
twice in different bacteria. A progenitor of green sulfur 
bacteria  and  heliobacteria  developed  photosystem  I, 
while a progenitor of purple bacteria and green filamen-
tous bacteria developed photosystem II. Approximately 
3  billion  years  ago,  a  momentous  lateral  transfer  event 
brought the genes for the two photosystems together in 
cyanobacteria, arguably the most important organisms 
in the history of the earth. Cyanobacteria (formerly mis-
named blue-green algae) use an enzyme containing man-
ganese to split water into oxygen, electrons, and protons. 
Sunlight energizes photosystem II and photosystem I to 
pump the protons out of the cell, creating a proton gradi-
ent that is used to synthesize ATP (see Chapters 14 and 
19). This form of oxygenic photosynthesis derives energy 
from sunlight to synthesize the organic compounds that 
many other forms of life depend on for energy. In addi-
tion, beginning approximately 2.4 billion years ago, cya-
nobacteria produced most of the oxygen in the earth’s 
atmosphere as a by-product of photosynthesis, bioengi-
neering the planet and radically changing the chemical 
environment for all other organisms as well.

Origin of Eukaryotes
Divergence from the common ancestor explains the evo-
lution  of  prokaryotes  but  not  the  origin  of  eukaryotes, 
which inherited genes from both Archaea and Bacteria. 
The archaeal host cell that gave rise to eukaryotes (Fig. 
2.4B)  contributed  genes  for  informational  processes 
such  as  transcription  of  DNA  into  RNA  and  translation 
of RNA into protein, membrane traffic (Ras family gua-
nosine  triphosphatases  [GTPases]  and  ESCRT  [endo-
somal  sorting  complexes  required  for  transport]-III 
complex), actin, and ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis. A 
contemporary archaeon called Lokiarchaeota has these 
genes  and  is  the  closest  known  living  relative  of  the 
ancient archaeon that became the eukaryote. The origi-
nal  molecular  phylogenies  based  on  ribosomal  RNA 
(rRNA)  sequences  (Fig.  2.4A)  did  not  include  Lokiar-
chaeota, so they missed the direct connection between 
Archaea  and  eukaryotes.  Those  trees  accurately  repre-
sented the relationships among the sampled rRNAs. The 
long  branch  originating  between  Archaea  and  Bacteria 
and  extending  to  eukaryotes  reflected  the  extensive 
divergence of the rRNAs sequences, but not our current 
understanding  of  the  historical  events  depicted  in  
Fig. 2.4B.

The  bacterial  ancestor  of  mitochondria  was  an 
α-proteobacterium  related  to  modern-day  pathogenic 
Rickettsias. The bacterium established a symbiotic rela-
tionship with an ancient archaeal cell, donated genes for 
many metabolic processes carried out in the cytoplasm 

and  evolved  into  the  mitochondrion.  The  Bacterium 
retained its two membranes and contributed molecular 
machinery for ATP synthesis by oxidative phosphoryla-
tion  (see  Fig.  19.5),  while  the  host  cell  may  have  sup-
plied organic substrates to fuel ATP synthesis. Together, 
they had a reliable energy supply for processes such as 
biosynthesis,  regulation  of  the  internal  ionic  environ-
ment, and cellular motility. This massive lateral transfer 
of genes into the new organism was one of the defining 
events in the origin of eukaryotes.

This  pivotal  transfer  on  the  proteobacterial  genome 
to  the  original  eukaryote  seems  to  have  occurred  just 
once! The time is uncertain, but may have been as long 
as 2 billion years ago. The exact mechanism is unknow-
able  and  probably  irrelevant  given  its  uniqueness  (Fig. 
2.5).  The  two  prokaryotes  may  have  fused,  but  more 
likely an entire bacterium entered into the cytoplasm of 
its  host  allowing  the  two  cells  to  establish  a  mutually 
beneficial symbiotic relationship.

All traces of the original eukaryote have disappeared 
except  for  the  genes  donated  to  its  progeny.  Thus  we 
do not know if it had a nucleus, organelles, or a cytoskel-
eton.  Microscopic,  single-celled  eukaryotes  called  pro-
tists have been numerous and heterogeneous throughout 
evolution, but no existing protist appears to be a good 
model for the ancestral eukaryote.

The First Billion Years of  
Eukaryotic Evolution
Ancestral eukaryotes were present on earth more than 2 
billion  years  ago,  but  current  eukaryotes  all  diverged 
later from a singular, relatively sophisticated, amoeboid 
“last eukaryotic common ancestor” (LECA) with most of 
the specializations that characterize current eukaryotes, 
including  mitochondria,  nuclear  envelope,  linear  chro-
mosomes, membrane-bound organelles of the secretory 
and endocytic pathways, and motile flagella (Fig. 2.4B). 
The archaeal host brought genes for some of these func-
tions, but early eukaryotes must have tested many differ-
ent genetic innovations during the long time leading up 
to  LECA.  Reconstructing  the  events  between  the  first 
eukaryotes and LECA is challenging, because molecular 
clocks disagree and the fossil record is sparse. The earli-
est unambiguous eukaryotic fossils are 1.7 billion years 
old, but LECA could have lived in the range from 2.1 to 
0.9  billion  years  ago.  Thereafter  LECA  swept  aside  its 
competitors,  since  all  subsequently  diverging  species 
share the full complement of eukaryotic organelles.

Evolution of the Mitochondrion
The  mitochondrial  progenitor  brought  along  approxi-
mately 2000 genes, most of which eventually moved (by 
a  still  mysterious  process)  to  the  host  cell  nucleus  or 
were lost. This transfer of mitochondrial genes reduced 
the  size  of  current  mitochondrial  genomes  variously, 

 

CHAPTER 2  n  Evolution of Life on Earth 

21

Enzymes
secreted

Enzymes
digest large
proteins

D. Formation of elaborated
membrane biosynthetic
organelle (ER) and
nuclear envelope

Amino acids
transported
across
membrane

C. Bacterial genes migrate
to host genome as bacteria
evolves into mitochondria and
intercellular digestive system
forms in early eukaryote

A. Prokaryotic 
extracellular
digestive system

B. a-proteobacterium
enters the cytoplasm
of an Arachea

FIGURE 2.5  SPECULATIONS REGARDING THE EVOLUTION OF INTRACELLULAR COMPARTMENTS FROM PROKARYOTES TO 
PRIMITIVE EUKARYOTES. A–D, Possible stages in the evolution of intracellular compartments. ER, endoplasmic reticulum. 

leaving  behind  between  three  and  97  protein-coding 
bacterial  genes  (see  Chapter  19  for  more  details).  Like 
their bacterial ancestors, mitochondria are enclosed by 
two membranes, with the inner membrane equipped for 
synthesis of ATP. Mitochondria maintain the capacity to 
synthesize  proteins  and  a  few  genes  for  mitochondrial 
components. Nuclear genes encode most mitochondrial 
proteins,  which  are  synthesized  in  the  cytoplasm  and 
imported into the organelle (see Fig. 18.2). The transfer 
of bacterial genes to the nucleus sealed the dependence 
of the organelle on its eukaryotic host.

Even though acquisition of mitochondria was an early 
event in eukaryotic evolution, some eukaryotes, includ-
ing the anaerobic protozoans Giardia lamblia and Ent-
amoeba histolytica (both causes of diarrhea), lack fully 
functional mitochondria. These lineages lost many mito-
chondrial genes and functions through “reductive evolu-
tion” in certain environments that did not favor natural 
selection for respiration. These reduced organelles have 
two  membranes  like  mitochondria,  but  vary  consider-
ably in other functions. Such mitochondrial remnants in 
many organisms synthesize iron–sulfur clusters for cyto-
plasmic ATP synthesis, while others, called hydrogeno-
somes, make hydrogen.

Evolution of Membrane-Bounded Organelles
Compartmentalization  of 
into 
membrane-bounded organelles is one feature of eukary-
otes that is generally lacking in prokaryotes. Mitochon-
dria  were  an  early  compartment,  while  chloroplasts 
resulted  from  a  late  endosymbiotic  event  in  algal  cells 
(Fig.  2.7).  Endoplasmic  reticulum,  Golgi  apparatus,  

cytoplasm 

the 

lysosomes, and endocytic compartments arose by differ-
ent  mechanisms.  Compartmentalization  allowed  ances-
tral  eukaryotes  to  increase  in  size,  to  capture  energy 
more efficiently, and to regulate gene expression in more 
complex ways.

Prokaryotes  that  obtain  nutrients  from  a  variety  of 
sources  appear  to  have  carried  out  the  first  evolution-
ary  experiment  with  compartmentalization  (Fig.  2.5A). 
However, these prokaryotes are compartmentalized only 
in the sense that they separate digestion outside the cell 
from biosynthesis inside the cell. They export digestive 
enzymes (either free or attached to the cell surface) to 
break down complex organic macromolecules (see Fig. 
18.10). They must then import the products of digestion 
to  provide  building  blocks  for  new  macromolecules. 
Evolution of the proteins required for targeting and trans-
location of proteins across membranes was a prokaryotic 
innovation that set the stage for compartmentalization in 
eukaryotes.

More sophisticated compartmentalization might have 
begun  when  a  prokaryote  developed  the  capacity  to 
segregate protein complexes with like functions in the 
plane of the plasma membrane. Present-day Bacteria seg-
regate their plasma membranes into domains specialized 
for energy production or protein translocation. Invagina-
tion of such domains might have created the endoplas-
mic reticulum (ER), Golgi apparatus, and lysosomes, as 
speculated in the following points (Fig. 2.5):
•  Invagination of subdomains of the plasma membrane 
that synthesize membrane lipids and translocate pro-
teins  could  have  generated  an  intracellular  biosyn-
thetic organelle that survives today as the ER.

22 

SECTION I  n  Introduction to Cell Biology

•  Translocation into the ER became coupled to cotrans-
later-

lational  protein  synthesis,  particularly 
branching eukaryotes.

in 

•  The  ER  was  refined  to  create  the  nuclear  envelope 
housing the genome, the defining characteristic of the 
eukaryotic  cell.  This  enabled  cells  to  develop  more 
complex  genomes  and  to  separate  transcription  and 
RNA processing from translation.

•  Internalization  of  plasma  membrane  domains  with 
secreted  hydrolytic  enzymes  might  have  created  a 
primitive lysosome. Coupling of digestion and absorp-
tion  of  macromolecular  nutrients  would  increase 
efficiency.
This  divide-and-specialize  strategy  might  have  been 
employed a number of times to refine the internal mem-
brane system. Eventually, the export and digestive path-
ways  separated  from  each  other  and  from  the  lipid 
synthetic and protein translocation machinery.

As each specialized compartment became physically 
separated  from  other  compartments,  new  mechanisms 
were  required  to  allow  traffic  between  these  compart-
ments. The solution was transport vesicles to carry prod-
ucts  to  the  cell  surface  or  vacuole  and  to  import  raw 
materials.  Vesicles  also  segregated  digestive  enzymes 
from the surrounding cytoplasm. Once multiple destina-
tions  existed,  targeting  instructions  were  required  to 
distinguish the routes and destinations.

The outcome of these events (Fig. 2.6) was a vacuolar 
system consisting of the ER, the center for protein trans-
location  and  lipid  synthesis;  the  Golgi  complex  and 
secretory  pathway,  for  posttranslational  modification 
and  distribution  of  biosynthetic  products  to  different 
destinations;  and  the  endosome/lysosome  system,  for 
uptake and digestion. Comparative genomics reveals that 
LECA had a vesicular transport system nearly as complex 
as humans.

Atmospheric  oxygen  produced  by  photosynthetic 
cyanobacteria  allowed  eukaryotic  cells  to  synthesize 
cholesterol  (see  Fig.  20.15).  Cholesterol  strengthens 
membranes  without  compromising  their  fluidity,  so  it 
may  have  enabled  early  eukaryotic  cells  to  increase  in 
size  and  shed  their  cell  walls.  Having  shed  their  cell 
walls,  they  could  engulf  entire  prey  organisms  rather 
than relying on extracellular digestion. Oxygen also con-
tributed to the precipitation of most of the dissolved iron 
in  the  world’s  oceans,  creating  ore  deposits  that  are 
being mined today to extract iron.

The origins of peroxisomes are obscure. No nucleic 
acids  or  prokaryotic  remnants  have  been  detected  in 
peroxisomes,  so  it  seems  unlikely  that  peroxisomes 
began  as  prokaryotic  symbionts.  Peroxisomes  arose  as 
centers  for  oxidative  degradation,  particularly  of  prod-
ucts of lysosomal digestion that could not be reutilized 
for biosynthesis (eg, D-amino acids, uric acid, xanthine). 
One  possibility  is  that  they  evolved  as  a  specialization  
of the ER.

A. Endocytic pathways

B. Exocytic pathways

Recycling or
transcytotic
vesicles

Clathrin-coated
vesicles

Lysosome

Regulated
secretory
vesicles

Early
endosome

Late
endosome

Constitutive
secretory
vesicles

Golgi

FIGURE  2.6  MEMBRANE-BOUNDED  COMPARTMENTS  OF 
EUKARYOTES.  A,  Pathways  for  endocytosis  and  degradation  of 
ingested  materials.  B,  Pathways  for  biosynthesis  and  distribution  of 
proteins,  lipids,  and  polysaccharides.  Membrane  and  content  move 
through these pathways by controlled budding of vesicles from donor 
compartments  and  fusion  with  specific  acceptor  compartments. 
Transport of membranes and content through these two pathways is 
balanced to establish and maintain the sizes of the compartments. 

Given  that  these  internal  organelles  are  found  in  all 
branches of eukaryotes, they must all have evolved prior 
to  the  diversification  of  eukaryotes  from  LECA.  One 
unknown is which organelles appeared before the arrival 
of the mitochondrion.

Origins and Evolution of Chloroplasts
The  acquisition  of  plastids,  including  chloroplasts, 
began  when  a  cyanobacterial  symbiont  brought  photo-
synthesis into an ancient cell that then became an alga 
(Fig. 2.7). The host cell already had a mitochondrion and 
depended  on  external  carbon  sources  for  energy.  The 
cyanobacterium provided both photosystem I and pho-
tosystem II, allowing energy from sunlight to split water 
and to drive conversion of CO2 into organic compounds 
with O2 as a by-product (see Fig. 19.8). Symbiosis turned 
into complete interdependence when most of the genes 
required  to  assemble  the  plastid  moved  to  the  nucleus 
of  host  cells  that  continued  to  rely  on  the  plastid  to 
capture energy from sunlight. This still-mysterious trans-
fer  of  genes  to  the  nucleus  gave  the  host  cell  control 
over the replication of the former symbiont.

Many animal cells and protozoa associate with photo-
synthetic  bacteria  or  algae,  but  the  original  conversion 
of a bacterial symbiont into a plastid is believed to have 
been  a  singular  event.  The  original  photosynthetic 

 

CHAPTER 2  n  Evolution of Life on Earth 

23

Primary (P)
symbiosis

Secondary (S)

symbiosis

Tertiary (T)
symbiosis

S7

S6

S5

S4

S3

S2

S1

Prokaryote

(cyanobacteria)

P1

Red algae

e
c
n
e
g
r
e
v
i
D

Eukaryote

Glaucophytes

i

D
v
e
r
g
e
n
c
e

Green algae

AQUATIC

TERRESTRIAL

Green algal
progenitors
of land plants

Diatoms
(heterokonts)

T1

Various
dinoflagellates

Euglenoids

Land plants

Grasses

FIGURE 2.7  ACQUISITIONS OF CHLOROPLASTS. This is a timeline from left to right. The primary event was the ingestion of a cyanobac-
terium by the eukaryotic cell that gave rise to red algae, glaucophytes, and green algae. Green algae gave rise through divergence to land plants. 
Diatoms, dinoflagellates, and euglenoids acquired chloroplasts by secondary (S1 through S7) or tertiary (T1) symbiotic events when their precur-
sors ingested an alga with chloroplasts. (Modified from Falkowski PG, Katz ME, Knoll AH, et al. Evolution of modern eukaryotic phytoplankton. 
Science. 2004;305:354–360.)

eukaryote then diverged into four lineages: green algae 
(such  as  the  experimentally  useful  model  organism 
Chlamydomonas [see Fig. 38.16]), red algae (such as sea 
weeds and coral symbionts), brown algae (such as kelp), 
and a minor group of photosynthetic unicellular organ-
isms called glaucophytes (Fig. 2.7). Green algae gave rise 
through  divergence  to  more  than  300,000  species  of 
land plants. We understand those phylogenetic relation-
ships  much  better  than  the  branching  of  more  than 
50,000 species of red, brown, and green algae.

Events following the initial acquisition of chloroplasts 
were more complicated, since in at least seven instances, 
other  eukaryotes  acquired  photosynthesis  by  engulfing 
an entire green or red alga, followed by massive loss of 
algal genes. These secondary symbiotic events left behind 
chloroplasts  along  with  the  nuclear  genes  required  
for  chloroplasts.  For  example,  precursors  of  Euglena 
(on a different branch than algae and plants) took up a  
whole  green  alga,  as  did  one  family  of  dinoflagellates  
(on  another  branch).  Red  algae  participated  in  four 

secondary and one tertiary symbiotic events, giving rise 
to  photosynthetic  diatoms  and  dinoflagellates.  Today, 
photosynthesis by these marine microbes converts CO2 
into  much  of  the  oxygen  and  organic  matter  on  the 
earth.

These secondary symbiotic events make phylogenetic 
relationships of nuclear genes and chloroplast genes dis-
cordant  in  these  organisms.  The  original  phylogeny 
based  on  rRNA  sequences  (Fig.  2.4A)  assumed  incor-
rectly that these diverse organisms acquired chloroplasts 
by  primary  symbiosis  by  a  cyanobacterium.  The  phylo-
genetic  relationships  of  dinoflagellates  are  particularly 
complex,  given  that  they  acquired  chloroplasts  from 
three separate sources.

Divergence Eukaryotes From Last 
Eukaryotic Common Ancestor
Molecular phylogenies indicate that multiple eukaryotic 
lineages  diverged  from  LECA  at  an  uncertain  date 

24 

SECTION I  n  Introduction to Cell Biology

between 2.1 and 1 billion years ago and then diversified 
rapidly (Fig. 2.4B). Animals are on a branch with amoebas 
and fungi. Another branch gave rise to algae, plants, and 
a  vast  number  of  microorganisms,  including  Apicom-
plexa (malaria parasites), ciliates, and dinoflagellates. A 
third  branch  yielded  other  microorganisms,  including 
Euglena, the flagellated amoeba Naegleria, and trypano-
somes.  To  this  day  most  eukaryotes  consist  of  single 
cells.  Placing  some  groups  of  these  unicellular  eukary-
otes  on  the  phylogenetic  tree  continues  to  be  a  chal-
lenging  field  of  research.  Our  current  understanding 
(Fig. 2.4B) will be revised many times as more genome 
sequences are available.

The phylogenetic tree in Fig. 2.8 summarizes the most 
recent  billion  years  of  eukaryotic  evolution.  Note  that 
this  tree  differs  from  those  in  Fig.  2.4,  because  it  is  a 
radial  timeline  made  possible  by  carefully  dated  fossils 
that establish the times of branching events within the 
four  major  eukaryotic  lineages:  plants,  amoebas,  fungi 
and animals.

Evolution of Multicellular Eukaryotes
Colonial  bacteria  initiated  evolutionary  experiments  in 
living together more than 2 billion years ago, but multi-
cellular eukaryotes developed much later. Low levels of 
atmospheric  oxygen  may  have  been  a  limiting  factor. 
Photosynthetic  cyanobacteria  started  to  raise  the  con-
centration  of  atmospheric  oxygen  approximately  2.2 
billion years ago, but oxygen levels fluctuated widely and 
were  often  quite  low  (<1%  of  present  levels)  until 
approximately  800  million  years  ago.  Fossils  preserve 
multicellular  red  algae  1.2  billion  years  old.  By  750 
million years ago fungi, cellular slime molds, brown and 
green  algae,  and  animals  independently  evolved  strate-
gies  to  form  simple  multicellular  organisms  (Fig.  2.8). 
Many were likely lost to extinction during two periods 
of  exceedingly  cold  weather  (the  “snowball  earth”) 
leading up to 635 million years ago, but some survived.
The  ancestor  of  multicellular  animals  (metazoans) 
was  a  pioneering  colonial  organism  having  much  in 

Caenorhabditis elegans

Drosophila

Animals

Homo sapiens

Chimpanzee

= Genetic model
   organisms

Mouse

Rabbit
Cat

Marsupials

Cow

Kangaroo

B i r d s

Reptiles

Amphibians

Chicken

Lizards

Xenopus

Fish
Tunicates
Echinoderms

Zebra fish

Ciona

Sea urchin

Scallops

M

ollu

s

c

s

Flatworms

Acoel

Jellyfish/coral

Sponges

Cnidarians
Porifera

A

r
t

h

r

o

p

o

d

s

R
o
u
n
d
w
o

r

m
s

 

s

l

a
m
m
a
M

First fossil
animals

Vertebrates

Deuterostomes

Protostome-deuterostome

Bilateran ancestor

Eumetazoan ancestor

1–2 billion years ago, last
eukaryotic common ancestor (LECA)

1,100 my

400 my

Present

First fossil
land plants

Moss

Angiosperms

Physcomitrella
patens

Zea mays

Arabidopsis

Pine trees

Plants

Ferns

Nitella

Dictyostelium
discoideum

Acanthamoeba

castellanii

Amoebas

Bread molds

Schizosaccharo-
myces pombe

Saccharomyces
cerevisiae

Neurospora

Aspergillus

Fungi

Mushrooms

Watermolds

FIGURE 2.8  TIMELINE FOR THE DIVERGENCE OF ANIMALS, PLANTS, AND FUNGI. This tree has a radial timescale originating about 
1100 million years (my) ago with the last common ancestor of plants, animals, and fungi. Contemporary organisms and time are at the circumfer-
ence.  Lengths  of  branches  are  arbitrary.  The  order  of  branching  is  established  by  comparisons  of  gene  sequences.  The  times  of  the  earliest 
branching events are only estimates because calibration of the molecular clocks is uncertain and the early fossil records are sparse. (Modified 
from  Kuman  S,  Hedges  SB.  A  molecular  timescale  for  vertebrate  evolution.  Nature.  1998;392:917–920  [for  animals];  Green  Plant  Phylogeny 
Research Coordination Group at http://ucjeps.berkeley.edu/bryolab/GPphylo [for plants]; and Tree of Life Web Project at http://tolweb.org/tree 
[for fungi].)

 

CHAPTER 2  n  Evolution of Life on Earth 

25

common  with  contemporary  ciliated  protozoa  called 
choanoflagellates. Cells of sponges on the earliest surviv-
ing branch of animals (Porifera) still retain the morphol-
ogy of choanoflagellates. Earlier stages in the evolution 
of metazoans are still missing from the fossil record.

Approximately  700  million  years  ago  an  organism 
called the eumetazoan appeared and gave rise to major 
branches of animals: Cnidarians (jellyfish, sea anemones, 
Hydra and corals); and all bilaterally symmetrical animals. 
The  genome  sequence  of  a  sea  anemone  showed  that 
the eumetazoan ancestor had a large fraction of the core 
human genes. In fact many features of the sea anemone 
genome  (including  the  placement  of  introns)  are  more 
similar to vertebrates than insects. These genes and the 
properties  of  contemporary  Cnidarians  show  that  the 
ancient eumetazoan had advanced features including spe-
cialized epithelial, nerve, and muscle cells in two layers.
Genome  sequences  and  well-preserved  fossils  show 
that the eumetazoan gave rise 600 million years ago to 
animals that have bilateral symmetry at some time in their 
lives, three tissue layers (ectoderm, mesoderm, and endo-
derm),  and  complex  organs.  These  tiny  (180 µm  long) 
animals had a mouth, a gut, a coelomic cavity, and surface 
specializations  that  are  speculated  to  be  sensory  struc-
tures. Other 570-million-year-old fossils are similar to con-
temporary animal embryos. Formation of tissues required 
plasma membrane proteins for adhesion to the extracel-
lular matrix and to other cells (see Chapter 30). Genes for 
adhesion proteins—including proteins related to cadher-
ins, integrins, lectins, and immunoglobulin–cellular adhe-
sion  molecules  (Ig-CAMs)—are  found  in  species  that 
branched before metazoans, so their origins are ancient.
The  ancient  bilaterans  then  branched  in  succession 
into lineages containing flatworms (including planaria), 
protostomes  (arthropods  and  nematodes;  mollusks, 
annelid  worms,  brachiopods,  and  platyhelminths),  and 
deuterostomes  (echinoderms  and  Chordata,  including 
humans). The common ancestor of chordates had nearly 
80% of the classes of human genes but with some impor-
tant exceptions, such as those for the adaptive immune 
response (see Chapter 28).

Approximately  540  million  years  ago,  conditions 
allowed  the  rapid  emergence  of  macroscopic  multicel-
lular animals with skeletons in less than 20 million years. 
At  the  time  of  this  “Cambrian  explosion,”  metazoans 
became abundant in numbers and varieties in the fossil 
record.  Geological  factors  including  large  increases  in 
the sea level help to trigger the biological events. It will 
be interesting to learn how mutations in genes control-
ling  the  body  plan  drove  this  dramatic  appearance  of 
large, complicated animals over a relatively short period.

Looking Back in Time
Viewing  contemporary  eukaryotic  cells,  one  should  be 
awed by the knowledge that they are mosaics created by 

historical events that occurred over a vast range of time. 
Roughly  3.5  billion  years  ago,  the  common  ancestors  
of  living  things  already  stored  genetic  information  in 
DNA; transcribed genes into RNA; translated mRNA into 
protein  on  ribosomes;  carried  out  basic  intermediary 
metabolism; and were protected by plasma membranes 
with carriers, pumps, and channels. More than 2.5 billion 
years ago, bacteria evolved the genes required for oxy-
genic  photosynthesis  and  donated  this  capacity  to 
eukaryotes via endosymbiosis more than 1 billion years 
ago. An α-proteobacterium took up residence in an early 
eukaryote, giving rise to mitochondria approximately 2 
billion years ago. Although some prokaryotes have genes 
for  homologs  of  all  three  cytoskeletal  proteins,  eukary-
otes developed the capacity for cellular motility approxi-
mately  1.7  billion  years  ago  when  they  shed  their  cell 
walls and evolved genes for molecular motors and many 
proteins  that  regulate  the  cytoskeleton.  Multicellular 
eukaryotes with specialized cells and tissues arose only 
in the past 1.2 billion years after acquiring plasma mem-
brane receptors used for cellular interactions.

It is also instructive to consider how more complex 
functions, such as the operation of the human nervous 
system,  have  their  roots  deep  in  time,  beginning  with 
the advent of molecules such as receptors and voltage-
sensitive ion channels that originally served their unicel-
lular inventors. At each step along the way, evolution has 
exploited  the  available  materials  for  new  functions  to 
benefit the multitude of living organisms.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Mike Donoghue, Jim Lake, Leslie Orgel, Daniel 
Pollard, Katherine Pollard, Mitch Sogin, and Steve Stearns 
for  their  suggestions  on  the  second  edition,  and  espe-
cially  to  Martin  Embley,  Emmanuelle  Javaux,  and  Tom 
Williams for advice on this third edition.

SELECTED READINGS

Adl  SM,  Simpson  AG,  Lane  CE,  et al.  The  revised  classification  of 

eukaryotes. J Eukaryot Microbiol. 2012;59:429-493.

Butterfield  NJ.  Early  evolution  of  the  eukaryota.  Palaeontology. 

2015;58:5-17.

Chen J-Y, Bottjer DJ, Davidson EH, et al. Small bilaterian fossils from 
40  to  55  million  years  before  the  Cambrian.  Science.  2004;305:
218-222.

Dawkins  R.  The  Ancestor’s  Tale.  New  York:  Houghton  Mifflin; 

2004:673.

Deep Green Tree of Life Web Project. Available at <http://tolweb.org/

tree/phylogeny.html>.

Embley  T,  Martin  W.  Eukaryotic  evolution,  changes  and  challenges. 

Nature. 2006;440:623-630.

Eme  L,  Sharpe  SC,  Brown  MW,  Roger  AJ.  On  the  age  of  eukaryotes: 
evaluating evidence from fossils and molecular clocks. Cold Spring 
Harb Perspect Biol. 2014;6:a016139.

Falkowski PG, Katz ME, Knoll AH, et al. Evolution of modern eukary-

otic phytoplankton. Science. 2004;305:354-360.

26 

SECTION I  n  Introduction to Cell Biology

Gerlt JA, Babbitt PC. Divergent evolution of enzymatic function: Mech-
anistically diverse superfamilies and functionally distinct suprafami-
lies. Annu Rev Biochem. 2001;70:209-246.

Harwood A, Coates JC. A prehistory of cell adhesion. Curr Opin Cell 

Biol. 2004;16:470-476.

Javaux  EJ.  Early  eukaryotes  in  Precambrian  oceans.  In:  Gargaud  MP, 
Lopez-Garcia  P,  Martin  H,  eds.  Origins  and  Evolution  of  Life:  An 
Astrobiology  Perspective.  Cambridge,  UK:  Cambridge  University 
Press; 2011:414-449.

Javaux  EJ,  Marshall  CP,  Bekker  A.  Organic-walled  microfossils  in  3.2- 
billion-year-old  shallow-marine  siliciclastic  deposits.  Nature.  2010;
463:934-938.

Joyce GF. Forty years of in vitro evolution. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 

2007;46:6420-6436.

Keeling PJ. The number, speed, and impact of plastid endosymbiosis 

Poole  AM,  Gribaldo  S.  Eukaryotic  origins:  How  and  when  was  the 
mitochondrion acquired? Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2014;6:
a015990.

Powner MW, Gerland B, Sutherland JD. Synthesis of activated pyrimi-
dine  ribonucleotides  in  prebiotically  plausible  conditions.  Nature. 
2009;459:239-242.

Putnam  NH,  Srivastava  M,  Hellsten  U,  et al.  Sea  anemone  genome 
reveals ancestral eumetazoan gene repertoire and genomic organiza-
tion. Science. 2007;317:86-94.

Rivera MC, Lake JA. The ring of life provides evidence for a genome 

fusion origin of eukaryotes. Nature. 2004;431:152-155.

Schlacht A, Herman EK, Klute MJ, Field MC, Dacks JB. Missing pieces 
of  an  ancient  puzzle:  evolution  of  the  eukaryotic  membrane-
trafficking system. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2014;6:a016048.
Schrum JP, Zhu TF, Szostak JW. The origins of cellular life. Cold Spring 

in eukaryotic evolution. Annu Rev Plant Biol. 2013;64:583-607.

Harb Perspect Biol. 2010;2(9):a002212.

Knoll AH. Life on a Young Planet: The First Three Billion Years of 
Life on Earth. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press; 2003:277.
Knoll AH. Paleobiological perspectives on early eukaryotic evolution. 

Spang  A,  Saw  JH,  Jørgensen  SL,  et al.  Complex  archaea  that  bridge  the  

gap between prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Nature. 2015;521:173-179.

True JR, Carroll SB. Gene co-option in physiological and morphological 

Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2014;6:a016121.

evolution. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2002;18:53-80.

Koonin  EV,  Yutin  N.  The  dispersed  archaeal  eukaryome  and  the 
complex  archaeal  ancestor  of  eukaryotes.  Cold  Spring  Harb  Per-
spect Biol. 2014;6:a016188.

Lyons TW, Reinhard CT, Planavsky NJ. The rise of oxygen in Earth’s 

early ocean and atmosphere. Nature. 2014;506:307-314.

Mora C, Tittensor DP, Adl S, et al. How many species are there on earth 

and in the ocean? PLoS Biol. 2011;9(8):e1001127.

Vogel C, Bashton M, Kerrison ND, et al. Structure, function and evolu-
tion  of  multidomain  proteins.  Curr  Opin  Struct  Biol.  2004;14:
208-216.

Williams  TA,  Foster  PG,  Cox  CJ,  Embley  M.  An  archaeal  origin  of 
eukaryotes  supports  only  two  primary  domains  of  life.  Nature. 
2013;504:231-236.

Woese CR. A new biology for a new century. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev. 

Orgel  LE.  Prebiotic  chemistry  and  the  origin  of  the  RNA  world.  Crit 

2004;68:173-186.

Rev Biochem Mol Biol. 2004;39:99-123.

S E C T I O N   II 

Chemical and Physical 
Background

This page intentionally left blank

SECTION  II  OVERVIEW
A  primary  objective  of  this  book  is  to  explain  the 

molecular basis of life at the cellular level. This requires 
an appreciation of the structures of molecules as well as 
the basic principles of chemistry and physics that account 
for  molecular  interactions.  The  featured  molecules  are 
mostly proteins, but nucleic acids, complex carbo-
hydrates, and lipids are all essential for life.

Chapter 3 explains the design principles of the major 
biological macromolecules in enough detail that a reader 
will appreciate the functions of the hundreds of proteins 
and nucleic acids that are considered in later chapters. 
Important concepts include the chemical nature of the 
building  blocks  of  proteins  (amino  acids),  nucleic 
acids (nucleotides), and sugar polymers (monosaccha-
rides); the chemical bonds that link these units together; 
and the forces that drive the folding of polypeptides and 
nucleic acids into three-dimensional structures. Chapter 
13  in  Section  V  of  the  book  introduces  lipids  in  the 
context  of  the  structure  and  function  of  biological 
membranes.

No biological macromolecule operates in isolation in 
cells,  so  Chapter  4  explains  the  physics  and  chemistry 

Macromolecules

Ch 3

DNA

Protein

RNA

Macromolecular
assembly Ch 5

of  their  interactions.  Many  readers  will  never  take  a 
physical chemistry course, but they will discover in this 
chapter  that  a  relatively  few  general  principles  can 
explain  the  kinetics  and  thermodynamics  of  most 
molecular  interactions  that  are  relevant  to  cells.  For 
example,  just  two  numbers  and  the  concentrations  of 
the  reactants  explain  the  forward  and  reverse  rates  of 
chemical  reactions.  Just  one  simple  equation  relates 
these two kinetic parameters to the key thermodynamic 
parameter, the equilibrium constant—the tendency of 
the reaction to go forward or backward. A second simple 
equation relates the equilibrium constant to the energy 
of  the  reactants  and  products.  A  third  simple  equation 
relates  the  change  in  free  energy  during  a  reaction  to 
only two underlying parameters, the changes in heat and 
order  in  the  system.  These  three  equations  explain  all 
the  chemical  reactions  that  make  life  possible.  The 
authors hope that Chapter 4 inspires a few readers to try 
a “P-chem” course to learn more.

Many  cellular  processes  depend  on  macromolecular 
catalysts, protein enzymes, or RNA ribozymes. Chapter 4 
explains how biochemists analyze enzyme mechanisms, 

Research strategies

including microscopy Ch 6

Biophysical concepts and
enzyme mechanisms Ch 4

∆G = ∆H – T∆S = -RT lnK

 29

using as the example a protein that binds and hydrolyzes 
a  nucleotide,  guanosine  triphosphate  (GTP).  Cells  use 
related guanosine triphosphatases (GTPases) as molecu-
lar switches for many processes, including transport of 
macromolecules into and out of the nucleus (Chapter 9), 
protein  synthesis  (Chapter  12),  membrane  traffic  
(Chapters 20 to 22), signal transduction (Chapters 25 and 
27), regulation of the cytoskeleton (Chapters 33 and 38), 
and mitosis (Chapter 44).

Macromolecules are polymers that are held together 
by strong covalent bonds between the building blocks. 
Templates guide the synthesis of proteins (Chapter 12) 
and nucleic acids (Chapters 10 and 42), but most mac-
romolecular  structures  in  cells  assemble  spontaneously 
from their components without a template. Weak, non-
covalent  bonds  between  complementary  surfaces  hold 
these  macromolecular  assemblies  together.  Chapter  5 
explains how simple bimolecular reactions and confor-
mational changes guide the assembly pathways for com-
plexes  of  multiple  proteins  and  complexes  of  proteins 
with  nucleic  acids.  Cells  often  use  adenosine  triphos-
phate (ATP) hydrolysis or changes in protein conforma-
tion  to  control  the  reversible  reactions  required  to 
assemble  cytoskeletal  polymers,  signaling  machines, 
coats  around  membrane  vesicles,  and  chromosomes, 
among many other examples.

This  book  is  not  a  manual  for  experimental  cell 
biology,  but  to  understand  the  experiments  on  which 
modern  cell  biological  understanding  is  based;  readers 
will  want  to  appreciate  the  general  strategies  and  the 
principles  behind  a  few  common  methods.  Chapter  6 

explains  that  the  dominant  approach  in  cell  biology  is  
a  reductionist  one.  Many  classical  questions  in  cell 
biology were defined by the behavior of cells described 
by early pioneers in the 19th and early 20th centuries. 
Subsequent  microscopic  analysis,  genetic  analysis  in 
“model organisms,” and studies of human diseases have 
further  refined  these  questions  in  a  modern  context. 
Once  a  cellular  process  of  interest  has  been  identified, 
biologists  use  genetics  or  biochemistry  to  identify  the 
molecules that are involved. Next, chemical and physical 
methods are applied to learn enough about each mole-
cule to formulate a hypothesis about mechanisms. In the 
best-understood situations, these hypotheses are formal-
ized  as  mathematical  models  for  rigorous  comparison 
with biological observations.

Microscopes are the most frequently used tool in cell 
biology,  so  Chapter  6  explains  how  light  and  electron 
microscopes  both  magnify  and  produce  contrast—the 
two  factors  that  are  required  to  image  cells  and  mole-
cules. Equally important are the methods that are used 
to prepare biological specimens for microscopy and to 
showcase particular molecules for microscopic observa-
tion. In particular, fusion of proteins to jellyfish fluores-
cent  proteins  has  revolutionized  the  study  of  protein 
behavior in living cells. Chapter 6 also explains a number 
of the basic genetic experiments and methods to manip-
ulate nucleic acids in “molecular cloning” experiments. 
This background should help readers to understand the 
variety of experimental data presented in figures through-
out the book.

30

C H A P T E R 

3 

Molecules: Structures  
and Dynamics

This  chapter  describes  the  properties  of  water,  pro-

teins, nucleic acids, and carbohydrates as they pertain to 
cell biology. Chapter 13 covers lipids in the context of 
biological membranes.

Water
Water  is  so  familiar  that  its  role  in  cell  biology  and  its 
fascinating properties tend to be neglected. Water is the 
most  abundant  and  important  molecule  in  cells  and 
tissues.  Humans  are  approximately  two-thirds  water. 
Water  is  not  only  the  solvent  for  most  cellular  com-
pounds  but  also  a  reactant  or  product  in  thousands  of 
biochemical  reactions  catalyzed  by  enzymes,  including 
the  synthesis  and  degradation  of  proteins  and  nucleic 
acids and the synthesis and hydrolysis of adenosine tri-
phosphate (ATP), to name a few examples. Water is also 
an important determinant of biological structure, as lipid 
bilayers,  folded  proteins,  and  macromolecular  assem-
blies are all stabilized by the hydrophobic effect derived 
from the exclusion of water from nonpolar surfaces (see 
Fig. 4.5). Additionally, water forms hydrogen bonds with 
polar  groups  of  many  cellular  constituents,  ranging  in 
size from small metabolites to large proteins. It also asso-
ciates with small inorganic ions.

Physical chemists are still investigating water, one of 
the most complex liquids. The molecule is roughly tet-
rahedral in shape (Fig. 3.1A), with two hydrogen bond 
donors  and  two  hydrogen  bond  acceptors.  The  elec-
tronegative  oxygen  withdraws  the  electrons  from  the  
O–H covalent bonds, leaving a partial positive charge on  
the  hydrogens  and  a  partial  negative  charge  on  the 
oxygen. Hydrogen bonds between water molecules are 
partly  electrostatic  because  of  the  charge  separation 
(induced dipole) but also have some covalent character, 
owing to overlap of the electron orbitals. The strength 

of hydrogen bonds depends on their orientation, being 
strongest along the lines of tetrahedral orbitals. One can 
think of the oxygens of two water molecules sharing a 
hydrogen-bonded hydrogen. Given two hydrogen bond 
donors  and  acceptors,  water  can  be  fully  hydrogen-
bonded, as it is in ice (Fig. 3.1C). Crystalline water in ice 
has a well-defined structure with a complete set of tetrag-
onal hydrogen bonds and a remarkable amount (35%) of 
unoccupied space (Fig. 3.1D).

Liquid water is very heterogeneous and dynamic, with 
regions of local order and disorder fluctuating on a pico-
second time scale but no well-defined, long-range struc-
ture.  When  ice  melts,  the  volume  decreases  by  only 
about 10%, so liquid water has considerable empty space 
too.  The  heat  required  to  melt  ice  is  a  small  fraction 
(15%)  of  the  heat  required  to  convert  ice  to  a  gas,  in 
which all the hydrogen bonds are lost. Because the heat 
of melting reflects the number of bonds broken, liquid 
water must retain most of the hydrogen bonds that sta-
bilize ice. These hydrogen bonds create a continuous but 
dynamic, three-dimensional network of water molecules 
connected  at  their  tetrahedral  vertices,  allowing  water 
to  remain  a  liquid  at  a  higher  temperature  than  is  the 
case for a molecule of similar size, ammonia.

The properties of water have profound effects on all 
other molecules in the cell. For example, shells of water 
organized  around  ions  compete  effectively  with  other 
ions  with  which  they  might  interact  electrostatically 
(Fig. 3.1E). These shells of water travel with ions, govern-
ing the size of pores that they can penetrate. Similarly, 
hydrogen  bonding  with  water  strongly  competes  with 
the  hydrogen  bonding  that  occurs  between  solutes, 
including macromolecules. By contrast, water does not 
interact as favorably with nonpolar molecules as it does 
with  itself,  so  the  solubility  of  nonpolar  molecules  in 
water is low, and they tend to aggregate to reduce their 

 31

32 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

C. Frozen water
     (ball-and-stick) 

D. Frozen water
     (space-filling)

E. Ion-water
     interaction

1.00 Å

2.76 Å

Lone
electron
pair

A. Water anatomy

O

H

H

B. Liquid water
Two waters

Water

Water

FIGURE 3.1  WATER. A, Space-filling model and orientation of the tetrahedral electron orbitals that define the directions of the hydrogen bonds. 
B, Tetrahedral local order in liquid water revealed by a theoretical calculation of a three-dimensional map of regions around the central water 
molecule where the local density of oxygen is at least 40% higher than average. Two adjacent water oxygens are centered near the two hydrogen 
bond donors, and two other waters are positioned in an elongated cap so that their protons can hydrogen-bond with the central water oxygen. 
C, Stick figure of crystallized ice showing the tetrahedral network of hydrogen bonds. D, A space-filling model of crystalline ice showing the large 
amount of unoccupied space. E, Shell of water molecules around a potassium ion. Small ions, such as Li+, Na+, and F−, bind water more tightly 
than do larger ions, such as K+, Cl−, and I−. (D–E, From www.nyu.edu/pages/mathmol/library/water, Project MathMol Scientific Visualization Lab, 
New York University. See “ice.pdb” and “waterbox.pdb.”)

surface area in contact with water. Such nonpolar inter-
actions are energetically favorable, because they reduce 
unfavorable interactions of nonpolar groups with water 
and  increase  favorable  interactions  of  water  molecules 
with  each  other.  This  is  called  the  hydrophobic  effect 
(see Fig. 4.5). These interactions of water dominate the 
behavior  of  solute  molecules  in  an  aqueous  environ-
ment with a water concentration of 55.5 M, where they 
influence  the  assembly  of  proteins,  lipids,  and  nucleic 
acids into the structures that they assume in the cell. In 
addition,  strategically  placed,  hydrogen-bonded  water 
molecules can bridge two macromolecules in functional 
assemblies.

Proteins
Proteins  are  major  components  of  all  cellular  systems. 
This section presents some basic concepts about protein 
structure  that  help  explain  how  proteins  function  in 
cells. More extensive coverage of this topic is available 
in biochemistry books and specialized books on protein 
chemistry.

Proteins consist of one or more linear polymers called 
polypeptides composed of various combinations of 20 
different amino acids (Figs. 3.2 and 3.3) linked together 
by peptide bonds (Fig. 3.4). When linked in polypep-
tides,  amino  acids  are  referred  to  as  “residues.”  The 
sequence  of  amino  acid  residues  in  each  type  of  poly-
peptide is unique. It is specified by the gene encoding 
the protein and is read out precisely during protein syn-
thesis (see Fig. 12.9). The polypeptides of proteins with 
more than one chain are usually synthesized separately. 
However,  in  some  cases,  a  single  chain  is  divided  into 
pieces by cleavage after synthesis.

Polypeptides  range  widely  in  length.  Small  peptide 
hormones,  such  as  oxytocin,  consist  of  as  few  as  nine 
residues,  while  the  giant  structural  protein  titin  (see  
Fig. 39.7) has more than 25,000 residues. Most cellular 
proteins fall in the range of 100 to 1000 residues. Without 
stabilization  by  disulfide  bonds  or  bound  metal  ions, 
approximately  40  residues  are  required  for  a  poly-
peptide  to  adopt  a  stable  three-dimensional  structure  
in water.

The  sequence  of  amino  acids  in  a  polypeptide  can  
be determined chemically by removing one amino acid 
at  a  time  from  the  amino  terminus  and  identifying  the 
product.  This  procedure,  called  Edman  degradation, 
can be repeated approximately 50 times before declining 
yields limit progress. Longer polypeptides can be divided 
into fragments of fewer than 50 amino acids by chemical 
or  enzymatic  cleavage,  after  which  they  are  purified  
and sequenced separately. Even easier, one can sequence 
the gene or a complementary DNA (cDNA) copy of the 
messenger RNA (mRNA) for the protein (Fig. 3.16) and 
use the genetic code to infer the amino acid sequence. 
This  approach  misses  posttranslational  modifications 
(Fig.  3.3).  Analysis  of  protein  fragments  by  mass  spec-
trometry  identifies  posttranslational  modifications  and 
can be used to sequence tiny quantities of proteins.

Properties of Amino Acids
Every student of cell biology should know the chemical 
structures of the amino acids used in proteins (Fig. 3.2). 
Without these structures in mind, reading the literature 
and this book is like spelling without knowledge of the 
alphabet. In addition to their full names, amino acids are 
frequently  designated  by  three-letter  or  single-letter 
abbreviations.

 

CHAPTER 3  n  Molecules: Structures and Dynamics  

33

Glycine
Gly
G

H

+H3N  C  C

H

O
O–

Alanine
Ala
A

CH3

+H3N  C  C

H

O
O–

Valine
Val
V

H3C

CH3

CH

+H3N  C  C

H

O
O–

Leucine
Leu
L

H3C

CH3

CH
CH2

+H3N  C  C

H

O
O–

D
E
G
R
A
H
C
N
U

D
E
G
R
A
H
C
N
U
R
A
L
O
P

 

D
E
G
R
A
H
C

Cysteine
Cys
C

SH
CH2

+H3N  C  C

H

O
O–

Methionine
Met
M

CH3
S
CH2

CH2

+H3N  C  C

H

O
O–

Proline
Pro
P

CH2

H2C
CH2
+H2N  C  C

H

O
O–

Isoleucine
Ile
I

H3C

CH3

CH2

CH

+H3N  C  C

H

O
O–

Serine
Ser
S

OH
CH2

+H3N  C  C

H

O
O–

Threonine
Thr
T

OH

Tyrosine
Tyr
Y

Phenylalanine
Phe
F

O
O–

CH2
+H3N  C  C

H

O
O–

CH2
+H3N  C  C

H

O
O–

CH3
HO
H
+H3N  C  C

C

H

Asparagine
Asn
N

O

NH2
C
CH2

+H3N  C  C

H

O
O–

Glutamine
Gln
Q

O

NH2
C

CH2

CH2

+H3N  C  C

H

O
O–

Histidine
His
H

NH

+HN

CH2
+H3N  C  C

H

O
O–

Tryptophan
Trp
W

NH
CH

CH2
+H3N  C  C

H

O
O–

Aspartic acid
Asp
D

COO–

CH2

+H3N  C  C

H

O
O–

Glutamic acid
Glu
E

COO–
CH2

CH2

+H3N  C  C

H

O
O–

+1/2

Lysine
Lys
K

+
NH3
CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

+H3N  C  C

H

O
O–

Arginine
Arg
R

+H2N

NH2

C

NH
CH2

CH2

+H3N  C  C

CH2

H

O
O–

–1

–1

+1

+1

FIGURE 3.2  THE 20 L-AMINO ACIDS SPECIFIED BY THE GENETIC CODE. Shown for each are the full name, the three-letter abbrevia-
tion, the single-letter abbreviation, a stick figure of the atoms, and a space-filling model of the atoms in which hydrogen is white, carbon is black, 
oxygen is red, nitrogen is blue, and sulfur is yellow. For all, the amino group is protonated and carries a +1 charge, whereas the carboxyl group 
is ionized and carries a −1 charge. The amino acids are grouped according to the side chains attached to the α-carbon. These side chains fall 
into three subgroups. Top, The aliphatic (G, A, V, L, I, C, M, P) and aromatic (Y, F, W) side chains partition into nonpolar environments, as they 
interact poorly with water. Middle, The uncharged side chains with polar hydrogen bond donors or acceptors (S, T, N, Q, Y) can hydrogen-bond 
with water. Bottom, At neutral pH, the basic amino acids K and R are fully protonated and carry a charge of +1, the acidic amino acids (D, E) 
are fully ionized and carry a charge of −1, and histidine (pK: ~6.0) carries a partial positive charge. All the charged residues interact favorably with 
water, although the aliphatic chains of R and K also give them significant nonpolar character. 

34 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

Phosphoserine

Phosphothreonine

Phosphotyrosine

Phosphohistidine

Acetylated N-terminus

O–

–O

O
P
O
CH2
N  C  C
H H O

–O

O–

O
P
O
C H
N  C  C
H H O

H3C

O
–O P
O

O–

CH2
N  C  C
H H O

O
O–P
O

HN

N

CH2
N  C  C
H H O

Hydroxyproline

Cysteine disulfide

Tri-methyllysine

OHH
C

H2C

CH2
N  C  C
H H O

H H O
N  C  C
CH2
S
S
CH2
N  C  C
H H O

CH3
H3C N+
CH2

CH3

CH2

CH2

CH2
N  C  C
H H O

ε-N-Acetyl lysine
O

H3C

C
NH

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2
N  C  C
H H O

O
H3C

R

C  N  C  C
O

H H

Mono-methylarginine

H3C
HN +NH2

C

NH
CH2

CH2

CH2
N  C  C
H H O

FIGURE 3.3  MODIFIED AMINO ACIDS. Protein kinases add a phosphate group to serine, threonine, tyrosine, histidine, and aspartic acid 
(not shown). Other enzymes add one or more methyl groups to lysine, arginine, or histidine (not shown); a hydroxyl group to proline; or an acetate 
to the N-terminus of many proteins. The reducing environment of the cytoplasm minimizes the formation of disulfide bonds, but under oxidizing 
conditions within the membrane compartments of the secretory pathway (see Chapter 21), intramolecular or intermolecular disulfide (S–S) bonds 
form between adjacent cysteine residues. 

Residue 4

α
C4

ϕ

α
C3

Amide nitrogen

Carbonyl oxygen

Residue 2

α
C2

α
C1

φ

Residue 3

Planar peptide bond

R group of 
residue 1

FIGURE 3.4  THE POLYPEPTIDE BACKBONE. This perspective 
drawing  shows  four  planar  peptide  bonds,  the  four  participating 
α-carbons (labeled 1 to 4), the R groups represented by the β-carbons, 
amide  protons,  carbonyl  oxygens,  and  the  two  rotatable  backbone 
bonds (Φ and φ). The dotted lines outline one amino acid. (Modified 
from  Creighton  TE.  Proteins:  Structure  and  Molecular  Principles. 
New York: WH Freeman; 1983.)

All but one of the 20 amino acids commonly used in 
proteins  consist  of  an  amino  group,  bonded  to  the 
α-carbon,  bonded  to  a  carboxyl  group.  Proline  is  a 
variation on this theme with a cyclic side chain bonded 
back to the nitrogen to form an imino group. Both the 
amino group (pK >9) and carboxyl group (pK = ~4) are 
partially ionized under physiological conditions. Except 
for glycine, all amino acids have a β-carbon and a proton 

bonded  to  the α-carbon.  (Glycine  has  a  second  proton 
instead.)  This  makes  the  α-carbon  an  asymmetrical 
center  with  two  possible  configurations.  The  L-isomers 
are used almost exclusively in living systems. Compared 
with  natural  proteins,  proteins  constructed  artificially 
from D-amino acids have mirror-image structures. Many 
organisms  incorporate  selenocysteine  (Se  replacing  S) 
and  pyrrolizine  into  a  few  proteins  in  addition  to  the 
standard 20 amino acids.

Each  amino  acid  has  a  distinctive  side  chain,  or  R 
group, that determines its chemical and physical proper-
ties.  Amino  acids  are  conveniently  grouped  in  small  
families  according  to  their  R  groups.  Side  chains  are 
distinguished  by  the  presence  of  ionized  groups,  polar 
groups  capable  of  forming  hydrogen  bonds  and  their 
apolar  surface  areas.  Glycine  and  proline  are  special 
cases,  owing  to  their  unique  effects  on  the  polymer 
backbone (see later section on protein folding).

Enzymes  modify  many  amino  acids  after  their  incor-
poration  into  polypeptides.  These  posttranslational 
modifications  have  both  structural  and  regulatory 
functions (Fig. 3.3). This book often refers to these modi-
fications,  especially  to  reversible  phosphorylation  of 
amino  acid  side  chains,  the  most  common  regulatory 
reaction  in  biochemistry  (see  Fig.  25.1).  Some  aspara-
gine,  serine  and  threonine  residues  are  conjugated  
with  one  or  more  sugars  (Fig.  3.26).  Methylated  and 
acetylated lysines are important for chromatin regulation 
in the nucleus (see Fig. 8.3). In addition to the examples 
in Fig. 3.3, whole proteins, such as ubiquitin or SUMO 
(small ubiquitin-like modifier), can be attached through 

 

CHAPTER 3  n  Molecules: Structures and Dynamics  

35

DNA

Transfer RNA

Lipid bilayer

Insulin

Cytochrome c

Calmodulin

Dihydrofolate

reductase

Glucagon

Myoglobin

Troponin

Adenylate

kinase

Hemoglobin

TRP Repressor

Catabolite gene
activator protein

Tyrosyl-tRNA
synthetase

HIV-1 protease

Lysozyme

Phosphofructokinase

Aspartate carbomoyltransferase

Immunoglobulin

Glutamine synthetase

FIGURE 3.5  A GALLERY OF MOLECULES. Space-filling models of proteins compared with a lipid bilayer, transfer RNA (tRNA), and DNA, 
all on the same scale. TRP, tryptophan. (Modified from Goodsell D, Olsen AJ. Soluble proteins: Size, shape, and function. Trends Biochem Sci. 
1993;18:65–68.)

isopeptide  bonds  to  lysine  ε-amino  groups  to  act  as 
signals for degradation (see Fig. 23.3) or endocytosis (see 
Fig. 23.5).

This  repertoire  of  amino  acids  is  sufficient  to  con-
struct millions of different proteins, each with different 
capacities  for  interacting  with  other  cellular  constitu-
ents. This is possible because each protein has a unique 
three-dimensional  structure  (Fig.  3.5),  each  displaying 
the  relatively  modest  variety  of  functional  groups  in  a 
different way on its surface.

Architecture of Proteins
Our  knowledge  of  protein  structure  is  based  on  x-ray 
diffraction studies of protein crystals, electron microscopy 
of  single  molecules  and  nuclear  magnetic  resonance 
(NMR)  spectroscopy  studies  of  small  proteins  in  solu-
tion.  These  methods  show 
the  arrangement  of  
the  atoms  in  space,  allowing  for  computer  simulations 
of the atomic motions (molecular dynamics simulations). 

X-ray  diffraction  requires  three-dimensional  crystals  of 
the protein and yields a three-dimensional contour map 
showing  the  density  of  electrons  in  the  molecule  (Fig. 
3.6). In favorable cases, all the atoms except hydrogens 
are clearly resolved, along with water molecules occupy-
ing  fixed  positions  in  and  around  the  protein.  NMR 
requires  concentrated  solutions  of  protein  and  reveals 
distances between particular protons. Given enough dis-
tance  constraints,  it  is  possible  to  calculate  the  unique 
protein  fold  that  is  consistent  with  these  spacings.  
Electron microscopy of single molecules can now reveal 
structures at near atomic resolution (see Figs. 6.7, 14.4, 
14.6, 12.7, 16.9, 34.4, 36.10, and 37.2).

Each  amino  acid  residue  contributes  three  atoms  to 
the polypeptide backbone: the nitrogen from the amino 
group, the α-carbon, and the carbonyl carbon from the 
carboxyl  group.  The  peptide  bond  linking  the  amino 
acids  together  is  formed  by  dehydration  synthesis  (see 
Fig.  12.9),  a  common  chemical  reaction  in  biological 

36 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

FIGURE  3.6  PROTEIN  STRUCTURE  DETERMINATION  BY 
X-RAY  CRYSTALLOGRAPHY.  A  small  part  of  an  electron  density 
map at 1.5-Å resolution of the cytoplasmic T1 domain of the shaker 
potassium  channel  from  Aplysia.  The  chicken-wire  map  shows  the 
electron  density.  The  stick  figure  shows  the  superimposed  atomic 
model. (Data from M. Nanao and S. Choe, Salk Institute for Biological 
Studies, San Diego, CA.)

systems.  Water  is  removed  in  the  form  of  a  hydroxyl 
from the carboxyl group of one amino acid and a proton 
from  the  amino  group  of  the  next  amino  acid  in  the 
polymer.  Ribosomes  (RNA  enzymes)  catalyze  this  reac-
tion  in  cells.  Chemical  synthesis  can  achieve  the  same 
result in the laboratory. The peptide bond nitrogen has 
an (amide) proton, and the carbon has a double-bonded 
(carbonyl) oxygen. The amide proton is an excellent 
hydrogen bond donor, whereas the carbonyl oxygen is 
an excellent hydrogen bond acceptor.

The end of a polypeptide with the free amino group 
is called the amino terminus or N-terminus. The num-
bering  of  the  residues  in  the  polymer  starts  with  the 
N-terminal amino acid, as the biosynthesis of the polymer 
begins there on ribosomes. The other end of a polypep-
tide has a free carboxyl group and is called the carboxyl 
terminus or C-terminus.

The peptide bond has some characteristics of a double 
bond, owing to resonance of the electrons, and is rela-
tively rigid and planar. The bonds on either side of the 
α-carbon can rotate through 360 degrees, although a rela-
tively  narrow  range  of  bond  angles  is  highly  favored. 
Steric hindrance between the β-carbon (on all the amino 
acids  but  glycine)  and  the  α-carbon  of  the  adjacent 
residue  favors  a  trans  configuration  in  which  the  side 
chains alternate from one side of the polymer to the other 
(Fig. 3.4). Folded proteins generally use a limited range 
of  rotational  angles  to  avoid  steric  collisions  of  atoms 
along the backbone. Glycine, which lacks a β-carbon, is 
free  to  assume  a  wider  range  of  configurations  and  is 
useful for making tight turns in folded proteins.

Folding of Polypeptides
The amino acid sequence of each protein contains all the 
information  required  to  specify  folding  into  the  native 
structure, just one of a vast number of possible conforma-
tions.  Although  many  proteins  are  flexible  enough  to 
undergo  conformational  changes  (Fig.  3.12),  polypep-
tides  rarely  fold  into  more  than  one  final  stable  
structure. Exceptions with medical importance are influ-
enza  virus  hemagglutinin  protein  and  amyloid  (see 
Chapter 12).

Unfolding and refolding proteins in a test tube estab-
lished that amino acid sequences alone specify the three 
dimensional  structures  of  proteins.  Many,  but  not  all, 
proteins  that  are  unfolded  by  harsh  treatments  (high 
concentrations  of  urea  or  extremes  of  pH)  refold  to 
regain full activity when returned to physiological condi-
tions. Chapter 12 explains how an unfolded polypeptide 
rapidly  samples  many  conformations  through  trial  and 
error to select stable intermediates leading to the native 
structure. Cells use molecular chaperones to guide and 
control the quality of folding.

The following factors influence protein folding:

1.  Hydrophobic side chains pack very tightly in the core 
of proteins to minimize their exposure to water. Little 
free space exists inside proteins, so the hydrophobic 
core  resembles  a  hydrocarbon  crystal  more  than  an 
oil droplet (Fig. 3.7). Accordingly, many of the most 
conserved  residues  in  families  of  proteins  are  found 
in  the  interior.  Nevertheless,  the  internal  packing  is 
malleable  enough  to  tolerate  mutations  that  change 
the  size  of  buried  side  chains,  as  the  neighboring 
chains  can  rearrange  without  changing  the  overall 
shape  of  the  protein.  Interior  charged  or  polar  resi-
dues frequently form hydrogen bonds or salt bridges 
to neutralize their charge.

2.  Most  charged  and  polar  side  chains  are  exposed  on 
the surface, where they interact favorably with water. 
Although  many  hydrophobic  residues  are  inside, 
roughly  half  the  residues  exposed  to  solvent  on  the 
outer surface are also hydrophobic. Amino acid resi-
dues on the surface typically appear to play a minor 
role in protein folding. Experimentally, one can sub-
stitute many residues on the surface of a protein with 
any  other  residue  without  changing  the  stability  or 
three-dimensional structure.

3.  The polar amide protons and carbonyl oxygens of the 
polypeptide  backbone  maximize  their  potential  to 
form  hydrogen  bonds  with  other  backbone  atoms, 
side  chain  atoms,  or  water.  In  the  hydrophobic  
core of proteins, this is achieved by hydrogen bonds 
with  other  backbone  atoms  in  two  major  types  
of  secondary  structures:  α-helices  and  β-sheets 
(Fig. 3.8).

4.  Most  elements  of  secondary  structure  extend  com-
pletely across compact domains. Consequently, most 
loops  connecting α-helices  and β-strands  are  on  the 

 

A

α4

α6

β1

β3

β5

β7

β9

α8

α2

α10

Camera

Camera view

B
FIGURE  3.7  Space-filling  (A)  and  ribbon  (B)  models  of  a  cross-
section of the bacterial chemotaxis protein CheY illustrate some of the 
factors that contribute to protein folding. α-Helices pack on both sides 
of the central, parallel β-sheet. Most of the polar and charged residues 
are on the surface. The tightly packed interior of largely apolar residues 
excludes water. The buried backbone amides and carbonyls are fully 
hydrogen-bonded to other backbone atoms in both the α-helices and 
β-sheet. (For reference, see Protein Data Bank [PDB; www.rcsb.org] 
file 2CHF.)

surface  of  proteins,  not  in  the  interior  (Fig.  3.9). 
Exceptions  are  found  in  some  integral  membrane  
proteins  (see  Figs.  16.3,  16.13,  16.14,  and  16.15), 
where  α-helices  can  reverse  in  the  interior  of  the 
protein.
These factors tend to maximize the stability of folded 
proteins  in  one  particular  “native”  conformation,  but  
the  native  folded  state  of  naturally  evolved  proteins  is 
relatively unstable. The standard free energy difference 
(see Chapter 4) between a folded and globally unfolded 
protein  is  only  about  40 kJ  mol−1,  much  less  than  that 
of  a  single  covalent  bond!  Even  the  substitution  of  a 
single crucial amino acid can destabilize certain proteins, 
causing  a  loss  of  function.  Some  amino  acid  substitu-
tions, however, increase the stability of natural proteins, 
so  evolution  seems  to  have  selected  for  marginal 

CHAPTER 3  n  Molecules: Structures and Dynamics  

37

stability.  In  other  cases,  misfolding  results  in  noncova-
lent polymerization of a protein into amyloid fibrils asso-
ciated with serious diseases (see Chapter 12).

Given  that  protein  structures  are  encoded  in  their 
amino  acid  sequences,  a  long-range  goal  has  been  to 
predict  three-dimensional  structures  of  proteins  from 
sequences  alone.  The  rapid  accumulation  of  genome 
sequences increased the value of this approach. Although 
once  seen  as  intractable,  advances  in  computational 
methods  are  making  structure  prediction  a  reality.  Pre-
diction is straightforward if the structure of an ortholog 
or  paralog  is  available.  One  builds  the  amino  acid 
sequence of the unknown protein into the known struc-
ture to make a homology model that is often accurate 
enough to make reliable inferences about function. Strat-
egies to predict protein structures from sequence alone 
include  comparisons  with  sequences  of  known  struc-
tures,  threading  test  sequences  through  structural  ele-
ments  of  known  proteins  and  computational  searches 
for  folds  with  the  lowest  free  energy  with  or  without 
guidance  from  databases  of  known  protein  structures. 
These  methods  accurately  predict  many  protein  folds, 
but generally lack fine details provided by x-ray crystal-
lography. The Protein Structure Prediction Center runs 
competitions  to  predict  structures  and  lists  the  most  
successful  publically  available  methods  at  http://www 
.predictioncenter.org/index.cgi?page=links.  These  pre-
diction methods are also useful for improving the quality 
of  experimental  structures  when  the  resolution  of  the 
data are limited.

Secondary Structure
Much  of  the  polypeptide  backbone  of  proteins  folds  
into stereotyped elements of secondary structure, espe-
cially α-helices and β-sheets (Fig. 3.8). They are shown 
as spirals and polarized ribbons in “ribbon diagrams” of 
protein  organization  used  throughout  this  book.  Both 
α-helices  and  β-strands  are  linear,  so  globular  proteins 
can  be  thought  of  as  compact  bundles  of  straight  or 
gently curving rods, laced together by surface turns.

α-Helices  allow  polypeptides  to  maximize  hydrogen 
bonding  of  backbone  polar  groups  while  using  highly 
favored rotational angles around the α-carbons and tight 
packing of atoms in the core of the helix (Fig. 3.8). All 
these  features  stabilize  the  α-helix.  Viewed  with  the 
amino  terminus  at  the  bottom,  the  amide  protons  all 
point  downward  and  the  carbonyl  oxygens  all  point 
upward.  The  side  chains  project  radially  around  the 
helix, tilted toward its N-terminus. Given 3.6 residues in 
each turn of the right-handed helix, the carbonyl oxygen 
of  residue  1  is  positioned  perfectly  to  form  a  linear 
hydrogen bond with the amide proton of residue 5. This 
n to n + 4 pattern of hydrogen bonds repeats along the 
whole α-helix.

The  orientation  of  backbone  hydrogen  bonds  in 
α-helices  has  two  important  consequences.  First,  a 

38 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

A.  Alpha-helix

C–terminus

α
C12

N

Hydrogen
bond

O

α
C8

R group of
residue 8

N–terminus

B.  Antiparallel beta-sheet

C.  Parallel beta-sheet

D.  Beta turn type I

α
C2

α
C1

Side
chains

α
C3

α
C4

E.  Beta turn type II

α
C2

α
C3

α
C1

α
C4

F.  Omega turn

FIGURE  3.8  MODELS  OF  SECONDARY  STRUCTURES  AND  TURNS  OF  PROTEINS.  A, α-Helix.  The  stick  figure  (left)  shows  a  right-
handed α-helix with the N-terminus at the bottom and side chains R represented by the β-carbon. Hydrogen bonds between backbone atoms 
are indicated by blue lines. In this orientation, the carbonyl oxygens point upward, the amide protons point downward, and the R groups trail 
toward the N-terminus. Space-filling models (middle) show a polyalanine α-helix. The end-on views show how the backbone atoms fill the center 
of the helix. A space-filling model (right) of α-helix 5 from bacterial rhodopsin shows the side chains. Some key dimensions are 0.15 nm rise per 
residue, 0.55 nm per turn, and diameter of approximately 1.0 nm. (See PDB file 1BAD.) B, Stick figure and space-filling models of an antiparallel 
β-sheet. The arrows indicate the polarity of each chain. With the polypeptide extended in this way, the amide protons and carbonyl oxygens lie 
in the plane of the sheet, where they make hydrogen bonds (blue lines) with the neighboring strands. The amino acid side chains alternate point-
ing upward and downward from the plane of the sheet. Some key dimensions are 0.35 nm rise per residue in a β-strand and 0.45 nm separation 
between strands. (See PDB file 1SLK.) C, Stick figure and space-filling models of a parallel β-sheet. All strands have the same orientation (arrows). 
The orientations of the hydrogen bonds are somewhat less favorable than that in an antiparallel sheet. D–E, Stick figures of two types of reverse 
turns found between strands of antiparallel β-sheets. F, Stick figure of an omega loop. (See PDB file 1LNC.) 

 

CHAPTER 3  n  Molecules: Structures and Dynamics  

Alpha

Alpha/beta

Beta

39

C

N

C

N

C

N

FIGURE  3.9  RIBBON  DIAGRAMS  OF  PROTEIN  BACKBONES  SHOWING β-STRANDS  AS  FLATTENED  ARROWS, α-HELICES  AS 
COILS,  AND  OTHER  PARTS  OF  THE  POLYPEPTIDE  CHAINS  AS  ROPES.  Left,  The  β-subunit  of  hemoglobin  consists  entirely  of  tightly 
packed α-helices. (See PDB file 1MBA.) Middle, CheY is a mixed α/β structure, with a central parallel β-sheet flanked by α-helices. Note the 
right-handed twist of the sheet (defined by the sheet turning away from the viewer at the upper right) and right-handed pattern of helices (defined 
by the helices angled toward the upper right corner of the sheet) looping across the β-strands. (Compare the cross section in Fig. 3.7). (See PDB 
file 2CHF.) Right, The immunoglobulin VL domain consists of a sandwich of 2 antiparallel β-sheets. (See PDB file 2IMM.) 

helix has an electrical dipole moment, more negative at 
the  C-terminus.  Second,  the  ends  of  helices  are  less 
stable than the middle, as four potential hydrogen bonds  
are  not  completed  by  backbone  interactions  at  each  
end.  These  unmet  backbone  hydrogen  bonds  can  be 
completed  by  interaction  with  appropriate  donors  or 
acceptors  on  the  side  chains  of  the  terminal  residues. 
Interactions  with  serine  and  asparagine  are  favored  as 
“caps”  at  the  N-termini  of  helices,  because  their  side 
chains  can  complete  the  hydrogen  bonds  of  the  back-
bone  amide  protons.  Lysine,  histidine,  and  glutamine  
are  favored  hydrogen  bonding  caps  for  the  C-termini  
of helices.

All amino acids are found within naturally occurring 
α-helices.  Proline  is  often  found  at  the  beginning  of 
helices and glycine at the end, because they are favored 
in  bends.  Both  are  underrepresented  within  helices. 
When present, proline produces bends. Glycine is more 
common in transmembrane helices, where it contributes 
to helix–helix packing.

A  second  strategy  used  to  stabilize  the  backbone 
structure  of  polypeptides  is  hydrogen  bonding  of 
β-strands  laterally  to  form β-sheets  (Figs.  3.8  and  3.9). 
In individual β-strands, the peptide chain is extended in 
a configuration close to all-trans with side chains alter-
nating top and bottom and amide protons and carbonyl 
oxygens  alternating  right  and  left.  β-Strands  can  form 
a  complete  set  of  hydrogen  bonds,  with  neighboring 
strands  running  in  the  same  or  opposite  directions  in  
any combination. However, the orientation of hydrogen 
bond donors and acceptors is more favorable in a β-sheet 
with  antiparallel  strands  than  in  sheets  with  parallel 
strands.  Largely  parallel  β-sheets  are  usually  extensive 
and  completely  buried  in  proteins.  β-Sheets  have  a 
natural  right-handed  twist  in  the  direction  along  the 
strands. Antiparallel β-sheets are stable even if the strands 

are short and extensively distorted by twisting. Antiparal-
lel sheets can wrap around completely to form a β-barrel 
with as few as five strands, but the natural twist of the 
strands and the need to fill the core of the barrel with 
hydrophobic residues favors barrels with eight strands.

Up  to  25%  of  the  residues  in  globular  proteins  are 
present in bends at the surface (Fig. 3.8D–F). Residues 
constituting  bends  are  generally  hydrophilic.  The  pres-
ence  of  glycine  or  proline  in  a  turn  allows  the  
backbone  to  deviate  from  the  usual  geometry  in  tight 
turns,  but  the  composition  of  bends  is  highly  variable 
and not a strong determinant of folding or stability. Turns 
between  linear  elements  of  secondary  structure  are 
called  reverse  turns,  as  they  reverse  the  direction  of 
the  polypeptide.  Those  between  β-strands  have  a  few 
characteristic conformations and are called β-bends.

Many parts of polypeptide chains in proteins do not 
have a regular structure. At one extreme, small segments 
of  polypeptide,  frequently  at  the  N-  or  C-terminus,  are 
truly disordered in the sense that they are mobile. Many 
other  irregular  segments  of  polypeptide  are  tightly 
packed  into  the  protein  structure.  Omega  loops  are 
compact structures consisting of 6 to 16 residues, gener-
ally  on  the  protein  surface,  that  connect  adjacent  ele-
ments  of  secondary  structure  (Fig.  3.8F).  They  lack 
regular  structure  but  typically  have  the  side  chains 
packed in the middle of the loop. Some are mobile, but 
many  are  rigid.  Omega  loops  form  the  antigen-binding 
sites  of  antibodies.  In  other  proteins,  they  bind  metal 
ions or participate in the active sites of enzymes.

Packing of Secondary Structure in Proteins
Elements  of  secondary  structure  can  pack  together  in 
almost any way (Fig. 3.9), but a few themes are favored 
enough to be found in many proteins. For example, two 
β-sheets  tend  to  pack  face  to  face  at  an  angle  of 

40 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

0

10

20

30

40

50 Å

A

N–termini

N–terminus

N–terminus

B

E
R
H
E

Q

K

E
Y
A
G

L
E
K
K

g

GCN4-p1

e

E
L
E
K

V
V
N
V

M

L

L
L
L

L
L
L

L

M

V
N
V
V

d

a

c

K N S   D

f

b

C

K
E
L
E

e'

G
A
Y
E

K

b'

GCN4-p1

D  S N K

f'

c'

Q

E
H
R
E

a'

d'

g'

K
K
E
L

ion pairs

approximately 40 degrees with nonpolar residues packed 
tightly, knobs into holes, in between. α-Helices tend to 
pack  at  an  angle  of  approximately  30  degrees  across 
β-sheets, always in a right-handed arrangement. Adjacent 
α-helices tend to pack together at an angle of either +20 
degrees or −50 degrees, owing to packing of side chains 
from one helix into grooves between side chains on the  
other helix.

Coiled-coils are a common example of regular super-
structure (Fig. 3.10). Two α-helices pair to form a fibrous 
structure that is widely used to create stable polypeptide 
dimers in transcription factors (see Fig. 10.14) and struc-
tural  proteins  (see  Fig.  39.4).  Typically,  two  identical 

FIGURE 3.10  COILED-COILS. A, Comparison of a single α-helix, 
represented  by  spheres  centered  on  the  α-carbons,  and  a  two-
stranded,  left-handed  coiled-coil.  Two  identical α-helices  make  con-
tinuous contact along their lengths by the interaction of the first and 
fourth  residue  in  every  two  turns  (seven  residues)  of  the  helix.  (See 
PDB file 2TMA.) B, Atomic structure of the GCN4 coiled-coil, viewed 
end-on.  The  coiled-coil  holds  together  two  identical  peptides  of  this 
transcription factor dimer (see Fig. 10.14 for information on its func-
tion). Hydrophobic side chains fit together like knobs into holes along 
the interface between the two helices. (See PDB file 2ZTA.) C, Helical 
wheel  representation  of  the  GCN4  coiled-coil.  Following  the  arrows 
around the backbone of the polypeptides, one can read the sequences 
from the single-letter code, starting with the boxed residues and pro-
ceeding to the most distal residue. Note that hydrophobic residues in 
the  first  (a)  and  fourth  (d)  positions  of  each  two  turns  of  the  helices 
make hydrophobic contacts that hold the two chains together. Elec-
trostatic interactions (dashed lines) between side chains at positions 
e and g stabilize the interaction. Other coiled-coils consist of two dif-
ferent polypeptides (see Fig. 10.14), and some are antiparallel (see Fig. 
8.18). (C, Modified from O’Shea E, Klemm JD, Kim PS, Alber T. X-ray 
structure of the GCN4 leucine zipper, a two-stranded, parallel coiled-
coil. Science. 1991;254:539–544.)

α-helices  wrap  around  each  other  in  register  in  a  left-
handed  super  helix  that  is  stabilized  by  hydrophobic 
interactions of leucines and valines at the interface of the 
two  helices.  Intermolecular  ionic  bonds  between  the 
side chains of the two polypeptides also stabilize coiled-
coils.  Given  3.6  residues  per  turn,  the  sequence  of  a 
coiled-coil has hydrophobic residues regularly spaced at 
positions  1  and  4  of  a  “heptad  repeat.”  This  pattern 
allows one to predict the tendency of a polypeptide to 
form coiled-coils from its amino acid sequence.

β-Sheets  can  also  form  extended  structures.  One 
called  a  β-helix  consists  of  a  continuous  polypeptide 
strand folded into a series of short β-sheets that form a 
three-sided helix. See Fig. 24.4 for a β-helix in the insulin 
receptor L2 domain. 

Interaction of Proteins with Solvent
The surface of proteins is almost entirely covered with 
protons (Fig. 3.11). Some protons are potential hydrogen 
bond donors, but many are inert, being bonded to back-
bone or side chain aliphatic carbons. Although most of 
the charged side chains are exposed on the surface, so 
are  many  nonpolar  side  chains.  Many  water  molecules 
are ordered on the surface of proteins by virtue of hydro-
gen  bonds  to  polar  groups.  These  water  molecules 
appear  in  electron  density  maps  of  crystalline  proteins 
but  exchange  rapidly,  on  a  picosecond  (10−12  second) 
time  scale.  Waters  in  contact  with  nonpolar  atoms  on 
the  surface  of  proteins  maximize  hydrogen  bonding  
with  each  other,  forming  a  dynamic  layer  of  water  
with  reduced  translational  diffusion  compared  with  
bulk  water.  This  lowers  the  entropy  of  the  water  by 

 

CHAPTER 3  n  Molecules: Structures and Dynamics  

41

A. Protons exposed
     to solvent

B. Water molecules
     observed in crystals

= water

FIGURE 3.11  WATER ASSOCIATED WITH THE SURFACE OF 
A  PROTEIN.  A,  Protein  protons  exposed  to  solvent  (white)  on  the 
surface of a small protein, bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor. B, Water 
molecules observed on the surface of the protein in crystal structures. 
(See PDB file 5BTI.) 

increasing  its  order  and  provides  a  thermodynamic 
impetus to protein folding pathways that minimize the 
number of hydrophobic atoms displayed on the surface 
(see Fig. 4.5).

Intrinsically Disordered Regions of Proteins
Although  most  proteins  fold  into  three-dimensional 
structures,  some  regions  of  proteins,  and  even  whole 
proteins, can be intrinsically disordered. One method 
predicted disordered segments of 30 or more residues in 
one-third  of  eukaryotic  protein  sequences.  Disordered 
regions  were  discovered  as  gaps  in  electron  density 
maps  of  crystals  of  folded  proteins,  typically  loops 
between  elements  of  secondary  structure,  between 
folded  domains  or  at  N-  and  C-termini  (see  Fig.  8.2). 
These  polypeptides  typically  have  many  polar  and  few 
large hydrophobic residues, features that allow for accu-
rate prediction of disorder from amino acid sequences. 
Completely  disordered  proteins  are  soluble,  but  they 
occupy much larger volumes than folded proteins. NMR 
and  other  spectroscopic  methods  show  that  they  lack 
stable secondary structure.

Some  disordered  sequences  include  “short  linear 
motifs” of less than a dozen amino acids that participate 
in  protein–protein  interactions.  A  few  conserved  resi-
dues  within  these  motifs  interact  specifically  but  with 
low  affinity  with  other  proteins,  often  taking  on  a  spe-
cific structure when they bind the partner. Many of these 
motifs  are  ligands  that  bind  globular  proteins  to  build 
signalling  pathways  (see  Fig.  25.10  for  SH2,  SH3  and 
other receptors) or link other proteins (see Fig. 9.4 for 
nuclear  localization  sequences).  Even  more  frequently 
these  motifs  are  recognition  sites  for  posttranslational 
modifications (see Fig. 8.3), which can regulate binding 
to receptors. 

Protein Dynamics
Pictures of proteins tend to give the false impression that 
they  are  rigid  and  static.  On  the  contrary,  molecular 
dynamics  simulations  show  that  the  atoms  of  proteins 
vibrate around their mean positions on a picosecond time 
scale  with  amplitudes  up  to  0.2 nm  and  velocities  of 
200 m per second. This motion is a consequence of the 
kinetic energy of each atom, approximately 2.5 kJ mol−1 
at 25°C. These motions allow the protein as a whole  to 
explore  a  variety  of  subtly  different  conformations on 
a fast time scale. Binding to a ligand or a change in condi-
tions may favor one of these alternative conformations.

In addition to relatively small, local variations in struc-
large  conformational 
ture,  many  proteins  undergo 
changes  (Fig.  3.12).  These  changes  in  structure  often 
reflect a change of activity or physical properties. Con-
formational changes play roles in many biological pro-
cesses,  ranging  from  opening  and  closing  ion  channels 
(see Fig. 16.5) to cell motility (see Fig. 36.4). Many con-
formational  changes  have  been  observed  indirectly  by 
spectroscopy  or  hydrodynamic  methods  or  directly  by 
crystallography  or  NMR.  For  example,  when  glucose 
binds  the  enzyme  hexokinase,  the  two  halves  of  the 
protein  clamp  around  this  substrate  by  rotating  12 
degrees about hinges in two sections of the polypeptide. 
Guanosine  triphosphate  (GTP)  binding  to  elongation 
factor EF-Tu causes a domain to rotate 90 degrees about 
two  glycine  residues!  Similarly,  phosphorylation  of  gly-
cogen phosphorylase causes a local rearrangement of the 
N-terminus that transmits a structural change over a dis-
tance of more than 2 nm to the active site (see Fig. 27.3). 
The  Ca2+  binding  regulatory  protein  calmodulin  under-
goes a dramatic conformational change when wrapping 
tightly around a helical peptide of a target protein (also 
see Chapter 26).

Modular Domains in Proteins
Some proteins consist of a single compact unit (Fig. 3.7), 
but  many  others  consist  of  multiple,  independently 
folded,  globular  regions,  or  domains,  connected  in  a 
modular  fashion  in  one  polypeptide  (Fig.  3.13).  Most 
domains consist of 40 to 100 residues, but kinase domains 
(see  Fig.  25.3)  and  motor  domains  (see  Figs.  36.3  
and  36.9)  are  much  larger.  Many  domains  have  folds 
shared  by  domains  in  other  proteins.  The  members  of 
such  a  family  of  domains  are  said  to  be  homologous, 
because they evolved from a common ancestor. Through 
the processes of gene duplication, transposition, and 
divergent  evolution  widely  used  domains  (eg,  the 
immunoglobulin domain) became incorporated into hun-
dreds of different proteins, where they serve unique func-
tions.  Homologous  domains  in  different  proteins  have 
similar  folds  but  may  differ  significantly  in  amino  acid 
sequences.  Nevertheless,  most  related  domains  can  
be  recognized  from  characteristic  patterns  of  amino 
acids  along  their  sequences.  For  example,  cysteine 

42 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

A.  Hexokinase

(–) Glucose

(+) Glucose

B.  EF-Tu

(–) GTP

(+) GTP

C. Calmodulin

*

*

*

(–) Peptide

(+) Peptide

FIGURE 3.12  CONFORMATIONAL CHANGES OF PROTEINS. 
A, The glycolytic enzyme hexokinase. The two domains of the protein 
hinge  together  to  surround  the  substrate,  glucose.  (See  PDB  files 
2YHX and 1HKG.) B, EF-Tu, a cofactor in protein synthesis (see Fig. 
12.9),  folds  more  compactly  when  it  binds  guanosine  triphosphate 
(GTP).  (See  PDB  files  1EFU  and  1EFT.)  C,  Calmodulin  (see  Chapter 
26) binds Ca2+ and wraps itself around an α-helix (red) in target pro-
teins. Note the large change in position of the helix marked with an 
asterisk. (See PDB files 3CLN and 2BBM.) 

residues of immunoglobulin (Ig) G domains are spaced in 
a  pattern  required  to  make  intramolecular  disulfide  
bonds (Fig. 3.3).

Rarely, protein domains with related structures arose 
independently  and  converged  during  evolution  toward 
a  particularly  favorable  fold.  This  is  the  hypothesis  to 
explain  the  similar  folds  of  immunoglobulin  and  fibro-
nectin  (FN)  III  domains,  which  have  unrelated  amino 
acid sequences.

Nucleic Acids
Nucleic acids, polymers of a few simple building blocks 
called nucleotides, store and transfer all genetic infor-
mation.  This  is  not  the  limit  of  their  functions.  RNA 
enzymes,  ribozymes,  catalyze  some  biochemical  reac-
tions. Other RNAs are receptors (riboswitches) or con-
tribute to the structures and enzyme activities of major 
cellular components, such as ribosomes (see Fig. 12.7) 
and  spliceosomes  (see  Fig.  11.15).  In  addition,  nucleo-
tides themselves transfer chemical energy between cel-
lular  systems  and  information  in  signal  transduction 
pathways.  Later  chapters  elaborate  on  each  of  these 
topics.

Building Blocks of Nucleic Acids
Nucleotides consist of three parts: (1) a base built of one 
or two cyclic rings of carbon and a few nitrogen atoms, 
(2) a five-carbon sugar, and (3) one or more phosphate 
groups (Fig. 3.14). DNA uses four main bases: the purines 
adenine  (A)  and  guanosine  (G)  and  the  pyrimidines 
cytosine  (C)  and  thymine  (T).  In  RNA,  uracil  (U)  is 
found in place of thymine. Some RNA bases are chemi-
cally modified after synthesis of the polymer. The sugar 
of  RNA  is  ribose,  which  has  the  aldehyde  oxygen  of 
carbon 4 cyclized to carbon 1. The DNA sugar is deoxy-
ribose, which is similar to ribose but lacks the hydroxyl 
on  carbon  2.  In  both  RNA  and  DNA,  carbon  1  of  the 
sugar is conjugated with nitrogen 1 of a pyrimidine base 
or  with  nitrogen  9  of  a  purine  base.  The  hydroxyl  of 
sugar carbon 5 can be esterified to a chain of one or more 
phosphates,  forming  nucleotides  such  as  adenosine 
monophosphate (AMP), adenosine diphosphate (ADP), 
and ATP.

Covalent Structure of Nucleic Acids
DNA  and  RNA  are  polymers  of  nucleotides  joined  by 
phosphodiester bonds (Fig. 3.15). The backbone links 
a chain of five atoms (two oxygens and three carbons) 
from one phosphorous to the next—a total of six back-
bone atoms per nucleotide. Unlike the backbone of pro-
teins  in  which  the  planar  peptide  bond  greatly  limits 
rotation, all six bonds along a polynucleotide backbone 
have some freedom to rotate, even that in the sugar ring. 
This feature gives nucleic acids much greater conforma-
tional flexibility than polypeptides, which have only two 
variable  torsional  angles  per  residue.  The  backbone 
phosphate group has a single negative charge at neutral 
pH. The N–C bond linking the base to the sugar is also 
free  to  rotate  on  a  picosecond  time  scale,  but  rotation 
away from the backbone is strongly favored. The bases 
have a strong tendency to stack upon each other, owing 
to favorable van der Waals interactions (see Chapter 4) 
between these planar rings.

Each  type  of  nucleic  acid  has  a  unique  sequence  of 
nucleotides.  Laboratory  procedures  employing  the 

 

CHAPTER 3  n  Molecules: Structures and Dynamics  

43

A. Common protein domains

B

H1

H2

FN I

FN II

FN III

Ig

L1

L2

IgG antibody

H3

H4

Ig

IgG

F1

Ig

F3

Fibronectin

CD4

K
PDGF
receptor

K

Ig

Twitchin

SH2

SH3

Kinase

C. Scale drawings of multidomain proteins

F1

F2

F1

F3

S3
S3

S2
Grb2

S3

S2

K

Src

F3 F3

Ig

10

FIGURE  3.13  MODULAR  PROTEINS  CONSTRUCTED  FROM  EVOLUTIONARILY  HOMOLOGOUS,  INDEPENDENTLY  FOLDED 
DOMAINS. A, Examples of protein domains used in many proteins: fibronectin 1 (FN I), fibronectin 2 (FN II), fibronectin 3 (FN III), immunoglobulin 
(Ig), Src homology 2 (SH2), Src homology 3 (SH3), and kinase. (See PDB files 1PDC, 1FNA, 2IG2, 1HCS, 1PRM, and 1CTP.) B, Immunoglobulin 
G (IgG), a protein composed of 12 Ig domains on four polypeptide chains. Two identical heavy chains (H) consist of four Ig domains, and two 
identical light chains (L) consist of two Ig domains. The sequences of these six Ig domains differ, but all are folded similarly. The two antigen-
binding sites are located at the ends of the two arms of the Y-shaped molecule composed of highly variable loops contributed by domains H1 
and L1. (See PDB file 2IG2.) C, Examples of proteins constructed from the domains shown in A: fibronectin (see Fig. 29.15), CD4 (see Figs. 27.8 
and 28.8), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) receptor (see Fig. 24.4), Grb2 (see Fig. 27.6), Src (see Fig. 25.3 and Box 27.1), and twitchin 
(see Chapter 39). Each of the 31 FN III domains in twitchin has a different sequence. F1 is FN I, F2 is FN II, and F3 is FN III. 

enzymatic  synthesis  of  DNA  allow  the  sequence  to  be 
determined rapidly (Fig. 3.16). Newly synthesized DNA 
and RNA molecules have a phosphate at the 5′ end and 
a  3′  hydroxyl  at  the  other  end.  All  DNA  and  RNA  mol-
ecules are synthesized biologically in the same direction 
(see  Figs.  10.9  and  42.1)  by  reaction  of  a  nucleoside 
triphosphate with the 3′ sugar hydroxyl of the growing 
strand.  Cleavage  of  the  two  terminal  phosphates  from 
the  new  subunit  provides  energy  for  extension  of  the 
polymer in the 5′ to 3′ direction. The 5′ nucleotides of 
mRNAs are subsequently modified by the addition of a 
specialized cap structure (see Figs. 11.2 and 12.3).

Secondary Structure of DNA
A  few  viruses  have  chromosomes  consisting  of  single-
stranded  DNA  molecules,  but  most  DNA  molecules  
are paired with a complementary strand to form a right-
handed double helix, as originally proposed by Watson 
and  Crick  (Fig.  3.17).  Key  features  of  the  double  helix 
are two strands running in opposite directions with the 
sugar-phosphate  backbone  on  the  outside  and  pairs  of 
bases hydrogen-bonded to each other on the inside (Fig. 
3.14). Pairs of bases are nearly perpendicular to the long 
axis of the polymer and stacked 0.34 nm apart from the 
adjacent  bases.  This  regular  structure  is  called  B-form 

44 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

O–

O–
P

O

O

O

O–

P

O

O

P

O

O–

H

N

N

NH2

CH2
H

H

O

N

H

H
OH

Base
χ

CH

C

H

O

OH

O–

Base

O–

H

O4'

C1'H

OH

C2'

O–

O    P    O    C    C    C    O    P    O5'  C5'  C4'  C3'  O3'  P    O

N

H

O
5' end

α

β

γ

δ

ε

ζ

H

H H

O

H

H H

O
3' end

A

ATP

OH

Pyrimidines

Purines

G

C

H

H

C5

N H

O

C4

C6

C5

H

C6

N

NH

N

C'1

C2
O

NH

C2

N

N

H

C8

N

C4

C'1

C

G

H

A

H

NH

C6

C5

T

CH3
C5

O
C4

H

C6

N H

N

N
C'1

C2

O

B

U 

H

A

N

C4

H

C8

N

C'1

C2

N

T

A

FIGURE  3.15  ROTATIONAL  FREEDOM  OF  THE  BACKBONE 
OF A POLYNUCLEOTIDE, RNA IN THIS CASE. The stick figure of 
two residues shows that all six of the backbone bonds are rotatable, 
even the C4′—C′ bond that is constrained by the ribose ring. This gives 
polynucleotides more conformational freedom than polypeptides. Note 
the phosphodiester bonds between the residues and the definition of 
the 3′ and 5′ ends. Space-filling and stick figures at the bottom show 
a  uridine  (U)  and  adenine  (A)  from  part  of  Fig.  3.17.  (Modified  from 
Jaeger JA, SantaLucia J, Tinoco I. Determination of RNA structure and 
thermodynamics. Annu Rev Biochem. 1993;62:255–287.)

DNA. On average, in solution, B-form DNA has 10.5 base 
pairs per turn and a diameter of 1.9 nm, but real DNA is 
not  completely  regular.  Hydrogen  bonds  between 
adenine and thymine and between guanine and cytosine 
span nearly the same distance between the backbones, 
so the helix has a regular structure that, to a first approxi-
mation,  is  independent  of  the  sequence  of  bases. 
However, a run of As tends to bend the helix. Because 
the  bonds  between  the  bases  and  the  sugars  are  asym-
metrical,  the  DNA  helix  is  asymmetrical:  The  major 
groove on one side of the helix is broader than the other, 
minor  groove.  Most  cellular  DNA  is  approximately  in  
the  B-form  conformation,  but  proteins  that  regulate  
gene  expression  can  distort  the  DNA  significantly  (see 
Fig. 10.7).

Under some laboratory conditions, DNA forms stable 
helical structures that differ from classic B-form DNA. All 
these  variants  have  the  phosphate-sugar  backbone  on 
the  outside,  and  most  have  the  usual  complementary 
base pairs on the inside. A-form DNA has 11 base pairs 
per turn and an average diameter of 2.3 nm. DNA–RNA 
hybrids and double-stranded RNA also have A-form struc-
ture.  Z-DNA  is  the  most  extreme  variant,  as  it  is  a  left-
handed helix with 12 base pairs per turn. The existence 
of Z-DNA in cells is still in question.

DNA  molecules  are  either  linear  or  circular.  Human 
chromosomes are huge single linear DNA molecules (see 
Fig. 7.1). Eukaryotic mitochondria and chloroplasts have 
circular DNA chromosomes (Fig. 3.18) like most bacteria 
and DNA viruses.

When circular DNAs or linear DNAs with both ends 
anchored  (as  in  chromosomes;  see  Chapter  8)  are  
twisted  about  their  long  axis,  the  strain  is  relieved  by  

H

C5

O
C4

H

NH

C6

C5

H

C6

N H

N

N
C'1

C2

O

C2

N

H

N

C4

H

C8

N

C'1

U

A

C
FIGURE  3.14  ADENOSINE  TRIPHOSPHATE 
(ATP)  AND 
NUCLEOTIDE BASES. A, Stick figure and space-filling model of ATP. 
B, Four bases used in DNA. Stick figures show the hydrogen bonds 
used  to  form  base  pairs  between  thymine  (T)  and  adenine  (A)  and 
between cytosine (C) and guanine (G). C, Uracil replaces thymine in 
RNA. C′1 refers to carbon 1 of ribose and deoxyribose. 

CHAPTER 3  n  Molecules: Structures and Dynamics  

45

 

I

N
O
T
A
R
A
P
E
R
P

Genomic
DNA

Shear DNA
into random
fragments

Linker sequence
complementing
flow cell oligo A

DNA insert

Add linkers to
each end of

DNA fragments

Sparse population of
fragemented DNA bound to
either of the two types of oligos

Linker sequence

matching

flow cell oligo B

Bind single-strand DNA fragments

to complementary DNA tethers

attached to flow cell surface

Sparse glass-bound complimentary
single strands (extended
glass-bound oligos)

Replicate DNA by
extending the tether
bound to the slide

Denature

Local clusters
of replicated DNA
bound to surface
by tethers

I

I

N
O
T
A
C
F
L
P
M
A

I

Cleave off and

remove one of two

orientations

2x single-stranded copies 

(forward and reverse strands)

tethered to the flow cell

Replicate DNA to

extend second tether

Repeat cycle of bending
and replication many times

Remove

original DNA

Single DNA strands bend
over and bind second type

of tether on the surface

Replicated linkers
compliment opposite
glass-bound tethers

I

G
N
C
N
E
U
Q
E
S

Add primers

and fluorescent

nucleotides

Dense spots of only

forward strands

Carry out 50-300 cycles of

elongation of complementary

strands by adding single
fluorescent nucleotides

GC

A

T

T

TA

C G

G

Image surface of flow
cell after each cycle to
determine the nucleotide
added to each patch of DNA

FIGURE  3.16  RAPID PARALLEL DNA SEQUENCING. Random fragments of DNA are physically separated on the surface of a flow cell 
and then amplified by the polymerase chain reaction. Next, DNA polymerase is used to add one complementary base with a fluorescent dye and 
a blocking group. After imaging the color of the base added to each molecule, the fluorescent dye and blocking group are removed from each 
DNA, allowing another round of complementary base addition. (This is the technology used in sequencers from Illumina, Inc.) 

the  development  of  long-range  bends  and  twists  called 
supercoils  or  superhelices  (Fig.  3.18).  Supercoiling 
can be either positive or negative depending on whether 
the  DNA  helix  is  wound  more  tightly  or  somewhat 
unwound.  Supercoiling  is  biologically  important,  as  it 
can  influence  the  expression  of  genes.  Under  some  
circumstances,  supercoiling  favors  unwinding  of  the 
double  helix.  This  can  promote  access  of  proteins 
involved  in  the  regulation  of  transcription  from  DNA 
(see Chapter 10).

The  degree  of  supercoiling  is  regulated  locally  by 
enzymes  called  topoisomerases.  Type  I  topoisomer-
ases nick one strand of the DNA and cause the molecule 
to unwind by rotation about a backbone bond. Type II 
topoisomerases cut both strands of the DNA and use an 
ATP-driven  conformational  change  (called  gating)  to 
pass  a  DNA  strand  through  the  cut  prior  to  rejoining  
the  ends  of  the  DNA.  To  avoid  free  DNA  ends  during  
this reaction, cleaved DNA ends are linked covalently to 
tyrosine  residues  of  the  enzyme.  This  also  conserves 

chemical bond energy, so ATP is not required for religa-
tion of the DNA at the end of the reaction.

Secondary and Tertiary Structure of RNAs
RNAs  range  in  size  from  microRNAs  of  20  nucleotides 
(see Fig. 11.12) to mRNAs with more than 80,000 nucle-
otides.  Because  each  nucleotide  has  approximately 
three  times  the  mass  of  an  amino  acid,  RNAs  with  a 
modest  number  of  nucleotides  are  bigger  than  most 
proteins  (see  Fig.  1.4).  The  16S  RNA  of  the  small  ribo-
somal  subunit  of  bacteria  consists  of  1542  nucleotides 
with  a  mass  of  approximately  460  kD,  much  larger  
than any of the 21 proteins with which it interacts (see 
Fig.  12.6).

Except for the RNA genomes of a few viruses, RNAs 
generally  do  not  have  a  complementary  strand  to  pair 
with  each  base.  Instead  they  form  specific  structures 
by  optimizing  intramolecular  base  pairing  (Figs.  3.19 
and 3.20). Comparisons of homologous RNA sequences 
from  a  selection  of  organisms  provide  much  of  what  

46 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

A

B

A
T
G
C

Sugar-phosphate
backbone

1 Helical turn = 3.4 nm

Hydrogen
bonds

Minor groove

Major groove

FIGURE 3.17  MODELS OF B-FORM DNA. The molecule consists 
of two complementary antiparallel strands arranged in a right-handed 
double  helix  with  the  backbone  (see  Fig.  3.15)  on  the  outside  and 
stacked pairs of hydrogen-bonded bases (see Fig. 3.14) on the inside. 
Top,  Space-filling  model.  Middle,  Stick  figures,  with  the  lower  figure 
rotated  slightly  to  reveal  the  faces  of  the  bases.  Bottom,  Ribbon 
representation.  (Idealized  24-base  pair  model  built  by  Robert  Tan, 
University of Alabama, Birmingham.) 

is  known  about  this  intramolecular  base  pairing.  The 
approach  is  to  identify  pairs  of  nucleotides  that  vary 
together  across  the  phylogenetic  tree.  For  example,  if 
an  A  and  a  U  at  discontinuous  positions  in  one  RNA 
are  changed  together  to  C  and  a  G  in  homologous  
RNAs,  it  is  inferred  that  they  are  hydrogen-bonded 
together.  This  covariance  method  works  remarkably 
well,  because  hundreds  to  thousands  of  homologous 
sequences  for  the  major  classes  of  RNA  are  available 
from  comparative  genomics.  Conclusions  about  base 
pairing  from  covariance  analysis  have  been  confirmed 
by experimental mutagenesis of RNAs and direct struc-
ture  determination.

The  simplest  RNA  secondary  structure  is  an  anti-
parallel  double  helix  stabilized  by  hydrogen  bonding  

1 µm

FIGURE  3.18  DNA  SUPERCOILING.  Electron  micrographs  of  a 
circular mitochondrial DNA molecule in a relaxed configuration (A) and 
a  supercoiled  configuration  (B).  (From  David  Clayton,  Stanford 
University,  Stanford,  CA;  originally  in  Stryer  L:  Biochemistry,  4th  ed. 
New York: WH Freeman; 1995.)

of  complementary  bases  (Figs.  3.19,  3.20,  and  3.21). 
Similarly  to  DNA,  G  pairs  with  C  and  U  pairs  with  A. 
Unlike the case in DNA, G also frequently pairs with U 
in RNA. Helical base pairing occurs between both locally 
contiguous  sequences  and  widely  separated  sequences 
(Fig.  3.19).  When  contiguous  sequences  form  a  helix, 
the strand is often reversed by a tight turn, forming an 
antiparallel  stem–loop  structure.  These  hairpin  turns 
frequently  consist  of  just  four  bases.  A  few  sequences 
are  highly  favored  for  turns,  owing  to  their  compact, 
stable structures. Bulges due to extra bases or noncom-
plementary bases frequently interrupt base-paired helices 
of RNA (Fig. 3.19).

Crystal structures of transfer RNAs (tRNAs) (Fig. 3.20) 
and  a  hammerhead  ribozyme  (Fig.  3.21)  established 
that RNAs have novel, specific, three-dimensional struc-
tures.  Crystal  structures  of  ribosomes  (see  Fig.  12.7) 
showed  that  larger  RNAs  fold  into  specific  structures 
using similar principles. Crystallization of RNAs is chal-
lenging,  and  NMR  provides  much  less  information  on 
RNA than on proteins of the same size, so much is yet 
to be learned about RNA structures.

As in proteins, many residues in RNAs are in conven-
tional  secondary  structures,  especially  stems  consisting 
of base-paired double helices; however, RNA backbones 
make  sharp  turns  that  allow  unconventional  hydrogen 
bonds  between  bases,  ribose  hydroxyls,  and  backbone 
phosphates. Generally, the phosphodiester backbone is 
on  the  surface  with  most  of  the  hydrophobic  bases 
stacked  internally.  Some  bases  are  hydrogen-bonded 
together in triplets (Fig. 3.22) rather than in pairs. Clus-
ters  of  Mg2+  ions  stabilize  regions  of  tRNA  with  high 
densities of negative charge.

Like  proteins,  RNAs  can  change  conformation.  The 
TAR RNA is a stem–loop structure with a bulge formed 
by three unpaired nucleotides (Fig. 3.22). TAR is located 

 

A

CHAPTER 3  n  Molecules: Structures and Dynamics  

47

C. Bulge 
     loop

B. Hairpin 
     loop
Single-
stranded
region

H bonds

Stem

D. Internal 
     loop

E. Multibranched
     junction

FIGURE 3.19  RNA SECONDARY STRUCTURES. A, Base pairing of Escherichia coli 16S ribosomal RNA determined by covariance analysis 
of nucleotide sequences of many different 16S ribosomal RNAs. The line represents the sequence of nucleotides. Blue sections are base-paired 
strands;  pink  sections  are  bulges  and  turns;  green  sections  are  neither  base-paired  nor  turns.  B,  An  antiparallel  base-paired  stem  forming  a 
hairpin loop. C, A bulge loop. D, An internal loop. E, A multibranched junction. (A, Modified from Huysmans E, DeWachter R. Compilation of 
small ribosomal subunit RNA sequences. Nucleic  Acids  Res. 1987;14(Suppl):73–118. B–E, Modified from Jaeger JA, SantaLucia J, Tinoco I. 
Determination of RNA structure and thermodynamics. Annu Rev Biochem. 1993;62:255–287.)

T stem

54

64

4

5'

72

3'

T loop

56

Variable
loop

20

60
50

15

D loop

44

32
Anticodon
loop

PO4

5'

1

4

7

Y

R

U

G

26

3' Phenylalanine
76

A
C
C

72

69

Acceptor
stem

T stem

60
Y
A
C
T loop
R
G T Ψ C
54

56

64

50

Y

44

Variable
loop

7

69

12

D stem

26

Anticodon
stem

38

D stem

12

α

15
R A
D loop
A
G G β
20

Anticodon
stem

Anticodon

Anticodon
loop

32

Y
U

38

H

A
FIGURE 3.20  Atomic structure of phenylalanine transfer RNA (phe-tRNA) determined by x-ray crystallography. A, An orange ribbon traces the 
RNA backbone through a stick figure (left) and space filling model (right). B, Skeleton drawing. C, Two-dimensional base-pairing scheme. Note 
that the base-paired segments are much less regular than is B-form DNA. (For reference, see PDB file 6TNA. B, Modified from an original by 
Alex Rich, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.)

C

B

at the 5′ end of all RNA transcripts of HIV, the virus that 
causes AIDS. Binding of a regulatory protein called TAT 
changes the conformation of TAR and promotes elonga-
tion of the RNA. Binding arginine also changes the con-
formation of TAR.

Like proteins, RNAs can bind ligands. RNA sequences 
located in the mRNAs regulate approximately 2% of the 
genes  in  the  bacterium  Bacillus  subtilis.  For  example, 

mRNAs for enzymes used to synthesize purines such as 
guanine  have  a  guanine-sensitive  riboswitch  that  con-
trols  translation  (Fig.  3.22C–D).  Low  concentrations  of 
guanine do not bind the RNA, which assumes a variety 
of  conformations  that  allow  transcription.  High  con-
centrations  of  guanine  bind  the  RNA  and  favor  a  
conformation  that  blocks  transcription.  This  negative 
feedback optimizes the cellular concentration of guanine. 

48 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

Tetraloop

Stem I

Stem II

Cleavage
site

Domain II

Stem III

A

Uridine turn

B

FIGURE 3.21  HAMMERHEAD RIBOZYME, A SELF-CLEAVING RNA SEQUENCE FOUND IN PLANT VIRUS RNAS. A, Ribbon diagram. 
B, Space-filling model. The structure consists of an RNA strand of 34 nucleotides complexed to a DNA strand of 13 nucleotides (in vivo, this is 
a 13-nucleotide stretch of RNA that would be cleaved by the ribozyme). The RNA forms a central stem–loop structure (stem II) and base pairs 
with the substrate DNA to form stems I and III. Interactions of the substrate strand with the sharp uridine turn distort the backbone and promote 
its cleavage. (For reference, see PDB file 1HMH. A, Modified from Pley HW, Flaherty KM, McKay DB. Three-dimensional structure of a hammer-
head ribozyme. Nature. 1994;372:68–74.)

Riboswitches  bind  other  metabolites  and  even  fluoride 
ions.  Binding  these  ligands  regulates  the  expression  of 
proteins relevant to their physiology.

Like proteins, RNAs catalyze chemical reactions (see 
Chapter  11  for  more  details.).  Some  function  entirely  
on their own, but proteins support some enzymatically 
active  RNAs  including  RNase  P  (see  Fig.  11.9)  and  the 
large ribosomal subunit. Binding of cellular metabolites 
regulates the activities of some ribozymes. The 14 known 
classes of naturally occurring ribozymes cleave RNAs and 
synthesize proteins, while artificial ribozymes developed 
experimentally  can  catalyze  other  reactions,  including 
RNA synthesis.

Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates are a large family of biologically essential 
molecules made up of one or more sugar molecules that 
get  their  name  because  their  chemical  composition  is 
often  formed  from  multiples  of  CH2O.  Sugar  polymers 
differ from proteins and nucleic acids by having branches. 
Compared with proteins, which are generally compact, 
hydrophilic sugar polymers tend to spread out in aqueous 
solutions to maximize hydrogen bonds with water. Car-
bohydrates  may  occupy  5  to  10  times  the  volume  of  a 
protein  of  the  same  mass.  The  terms  glycoconjugate 
and complex carbohydrate are currently preferred for 
sugar polymers rather than polysaccharide.
Carbohydrates serve four main functions:

1.  Covalent  bonds  of  sugar  molecules  are  a  primary 

source of energy for cells.

2.  The  most  abundant  structural  components  on  earth 
are  sugar  polymers:  cellulose  forms  cell  walls  of 
plants; chitin forms exoskeletons of insects; and gly-

cosaminoglycans  are  space-filling  molecules  in  con-
nective tissues of animals.

3.  Sugars form part of the backbone of nucleic acids, and 
nucleotides participate in many metabolic reactions.
4.  Single sugars and groupings of sugars form side chains 
on lipids (see Fig. 13.3) and proteins (see Figs. 21.26 
and  29.13).  These  modifications  provide  molecular 
diversity beyond that inherent in proteins and lipids 
themselves,  changing  their  physical  properties  and 
vastly expanding the potential of these glycoproteins 
and glycolipids to interact with other cellular compo-
nents in specific receptor-ligand interactions (see Fig. 
30.12). Conversely, other glycoconjugates block inap-
propriate cellular interactions.
A  modest  number  of  simple  sugars  (Fig.  3.23)  form 
the vast array of different complex carbohydrates found 
in nature. These sugars consist of three to seven carbons 
with one aldehyde or ketone group and multiple hydroxyl 
groups.  In  water,  the  common  five-carbon  (pentose) 
and  six-carbon  (hexose)  sugars  cyclize  by  reaction  of 
the aldehyde or ketone group with one of the hydroxyl 
carbons.  Cyclization  forms  compact  structures  used  in 
all  the  glycoconjugates  considered  in  this  book.  Given 
several  asymmetrical  carbons  in  each  sugar,  a  great  
many stereochemical isomers exist. For example, the 
hydroxyl  on  carbon  1  can  either  be  above  (β-isomer) 
or  below  (α-isomer)  the  plane  of  the  ring.  Proteins 
(enzymes,  lectins,  and  receptors)  that  interact  with 
sugars distinguish these stereoisomers.

Sugars  are  coupled  to  other  molecules  by  highly  
specific enzymes, using a modest repertoire of intermo-
lecular  bonds  (Fig.  3.24).  The  common  O-glycosidic 
(carbon-oxygen-carbon)  bond  is  formed  by  removal  of 
water from two hydroxyls—the hydroxyl of the carbon 

 

A

Arginine (–)

Arginine (+)

CHAPTER 3  n  Molecules: Structures and Dynamics  

49

B

G
A
G
C
U

38

C

U

U
C

GG

C
G
A
G

U

U

A
C
G
U
A
G
C
G
C
C
G
C G

Loop

Upper
stem

Bulge

27

C

23

Lower
stem

R

N

O

U38

H

N

O

N
A27

N

N

H

H

R
N

N

O

H

O

N
U23

N

R

C. Guanine riboswitch turned on

D. Guanine riboswitch turned off

Switching
domain

L2-L3
interaction
stable

Riboswitch
core ordered

Guanine

G

U

A

U

U
G

C
A
C

Binding
domain

G
U
A
C
G
G
U
U
C
A
U
U
G
C
U
U
G
C
U
C
U
U U
U
U
U
A
P1 helix used
to form antiterminator

U
G C
G C
U
G
U
C
C
G
A
C
U
A

U
A
A
A
C
A
C
A
G
C
G
G
G
C
C
A
C
A
A
G
U
U
C
UU

G
C
C
A
A
G
G
U
A
A
C
G
A
C
U
G
G
G

U

G

L2-L3
interaction
stable

G
A
U
A
G
U
G
C
G
C
Riboswitch
U
core disrupted
A
A
U
5' CGAACACUC A U A  

UUU
G
G
A
U

UA

G

Antiterminator
stable
Terminator
disrupted
GA G C GGGG

A

A

U

G
C
U
U

RNA
Pol
UUUA 3' 

U

U

G

G
A
U
A
G
U
G
C
G
C
U

U
A
A
A
C
A
C
G
C
A
A
A
U
UU
U

U
G C
G C
U
G
U
C
C
G

A
C
G
G
G
C
A
G
C
A
A
CHX
C
A
U
U
A
C
U
C
A
C

U
A
U
G
G
G
U
G
A
G

C

G
U
A
A

U
U
U
G
A
G
C
G
G
G
C
A
A
A3'
U
U
G
U
C
U
U
UUU

A

U
U
U
C
U
C
G
U
U
C
G
G
U
U
A
C
U
G
A
G
C
U
G
U
A
C
U
U
U
U
A
U
U
GG
A
U

G

U

C
A
C
G
C
C
A
A
G

P1 helix
stable

5'

CGAA

Terminator
stable

RNA
Pol

Antiterminator formation prevented

by stabilized P1 helix

E. Ribbon diagram of
     guanine riboswitch
     turned off

L3

P2

J2/3

L2

P3

J1/2

J5/1

Guanine (HX)

5'

P1

3'

FIGURE 3.22  RNA CONFORMATIONAL CHANGES. A–B, Molecular models of NMR structures of TAR, a stem–loop regulator of HIV mes-
senger RNA (mRNA). Binding of arginine (or a protein called TAT) causes a major conformational change: Two bases twist out of the helix into 
the solvent (top). U23 forms a base triplet with U38 and A27 (space-filling model), and the stem straightens. This conformational change promotes 
transcription of the rest of the mRNA. (A, For reference, see PDB files 1ANR and 1AKX.) C–E, Guanine-binding riboswitch from Bacillus subtilis. 
C, Diagram of the mRNA showing the location of the riboswitch just upstream of the genes for the enzymes required to synthesize guanine. At 
low guanine concentrations, the RNA is folded in a way that allows transcription of the genes. (See PDB file 4FE5.) D, High guanine concentra-
tions (the analog hypoxanthine [HX] is shown here) bind to the riboswitch, causing refolding into a terminator stem loop that prevents transcription 
of  the  mRNA.  E,  Ribbon  drawing  of  the  crystal  structure  with  bound  hypoxanthine.  (For  reference,  see  Batey  RT,  Gilbert  SD,  Montange  RK. 
Structure of a natural guanine-responsive riboswitch complexed with the metabolite hypoxanthine. Nature. 2004;432:411–415 [C] and Mandal 
M, Boese B, Barrick JE, et al. Riboswitches control fundamental biochemical pathways in B. subtilis and other bacteria. Cell. 2003;113:577–
586 [D].)

bonded  to  the  ring  oxygen  of  a  sugar  and  a  hydroxyl 
oxygen of another sugar or the amino acids serine and 
threonine. A similar reaction couples a sugar to an amine, 
as in the bond between a sugar and a nucleoside base. 
Sugar  phosphates  with  one  or  more  phosphates  esteri-
fied to a sugar hydroxyl are components of nucleotides 
as well as of many intermediates in metabolic pathways.
Glycoconjugates—polymers of one or more types of 
sugar  molecules—are  present  in  massive  amounts  in 
nature and are used as both energy stores and structural 
components  (Fig.  3.25).  Cellulose  (unbranched  β-1,4 
polyglucose), which forms the cell walls of plants, and 
chitin  (unbranched  β-1,4  poly  N-acetylglucosamine), 
which forms the exoskeletons of many invertebrates, are 

the first and second most abundant biological polymers 
found on the earth. In animals, giant complex carbohy-
drates  are  essential  components  of  the  extracellular 
matrix  of  cartilage  and  other  connective  tissues  (see  
Figs.  29.13  and  32.3).  Glycogen,  a  branched  α-1,4 
polymer of glucose, is the major energy store in animal 
cells.  Starch—polymers  of  glucose  with  or  without  a 
modest level of branching—performs the same function 
for plants.

Glycoconjugates  differ  from  proteins  and  nucleic 
acids in that they have a broader range of conformations 
owing  to  the  flexible  glycosidic  linkages  between  
the  sugar  subunits.  Although  extensive  intramolecular 
hydrogen bonds stabilize some sugar polymers and some 

50 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

A. Stereoisomers

B. Modified hexoses

C. Keto

H
4
HO

6
CH2OH
OH
5
H
OH
3
H

H
2
OH

H

1

O

6 carbon C1 aldehyde

Condensation to
cyclic hemiacetal
heavily favored
O OH
β
H

Rapid

H

equilibrium

HOCH2
H

H
OH

HO

H

OH

β-D-glucose

HOCH2

HO

H

H
OH

O OH
H

H

H

OH
β-D-galactose

HOCH2
H

H
OH

HO

O

H

H
α
OH

H

OH
α-D-glucose

HOCH2
H

H
OH

HO

O OH
HO

H

β-D-glucose

H

H

β-D-mannose

HOCH2
H

H
OH

O OH
H

HO

H
NH2
β-D-glucosamine

H

HOCH2
H

H
OH

HO

O OH
H

H

H

N  C  CH3
H  O

β-D-N-acetylglucosamine

HO    O

C

H

HO

H
OH

O

H

OH

H

H

OH

β-D-glucuronic acid

HOCH2

O

H2COH

OH

H H HO
H
α-D-fructose

OH

D. Riboses

HOCH2
H H
OH

O

OH

H

H

OH

β-D-ribose

HOCH2
H H
OH

O

OH

H

H

H

β-D-deoxyribose

FIGURE 3.23  A–C, Simple sugar molecules. Stick figures and space-filling model of D-glucose showing the highly favored condensation of 
the carbon 5 hydroxyl with carbon 1 to form a hemiacetal. The resulting hydroxyl group on carbon 1 is in a rapid equilibrium between the α 
(down) or β (up) configurations. The space-filling model of β-D-glucose illustrates the stereochemistry of the ring; the stick figures are drawn as 
unrealistic planar rings to simplify comparisons. Stick figures show three stereoisomers of the 6-carbon glucose (A), three modifications of glucose 
(B), a 6-carbon keto sugar condensed into a 5-membered ring (C), and two 5-carbon riboses (D). 

Hemiacetal 

sugars

react with

to form

Glucose

Alcohols

HOCH2

H

HO

H
OH

H

O OH
H
H

OH

+

HO  R

Ribose

Amines

O

HOCH2
H H
OH

OH

H

H

OH

+

H2N  R

O-glycosidic
bond
HOCH2

H

HO

H
OH

H

O O  R
H

β
H

OH

N-glycosidic
bond

HOCH2
H

H

OH

O

N  R

H

H

OH

Examples

Sucrose

HOCH2

H

HO

H
OH

O H
α1
H

HO

O

CH2
2
H

H

O

OH

H
H
Glucose-α(1      2)fructose

OH

OH

CH2
OH

Cytidine
H
H

O

HOCH2

NH2
N

N

O

H H
OH

H

OH

FIGURE 3.24  GLYCOSIDIC BONDS. Stick figures show the formation of O- and N-glycosidic bonds and a common example of each: the 
disaccharide sucrose and the nucleoside cytidine. Enzymes catalyze the formation of glycosidic bonds in cells. The chemical name of sucrose 
[glucose-α(1→2)fructose] illustrates the convention for naming the bonds of glycoconjugates. 

glycosidic  linkages  are  relatively  rigid,  NMR  studies 
revealed that many glycosidic bonds rotate freely, allow-
ing  the  polymer  to  change  its  conformation  on  a  sub-
millisecond  time  scale.  This  dynamic  behavior  limits 
efforts  to  determine  glycoconjugate  structures.  They  
are  reluctant  to  crystallize,  and  the  multitude  of 

conformations  does  not  lend  itself  to  NMR  analysis. 
Structural details are best revealed by x-ray crystallogra-
phy  of  a  glycoconjugate  bound  to  a  protein,  such  as  a 
lectin or a glycosidase (a degradative enzyme).

Specific enzymes link sugars to proteins in just three 
different ways (Fig. 3.26). Glycoprotein side chains vary 

 

CHAPTER 3  n  Molecules: Structures and Dynamics  

51

in size from one sugar to polymers of hundreds of sugars. 
These  sugar  side  chains  can  exceed  the  mass  of  the 
protein to which they are attached. Chapters 21 and 29 
consider glycoprotein biosynthesis.

Compared  with  the  nearly  invariant  sequences  of  
proteins  and  nucleic  acids,  glycoconjugates  are  hetero-
geneous  because  enzymes  assemble  these  sugar  poly-
mers  without  the  aid  of  a  genetic  template.  These 

A. Cellulose, unbranched polymer of D-glucose

HO

CH2

Hydrogen bonds
stabilize the chain

H

O

O

O

HO

O
HO

CH2OH

HO

CH2

O

O

HO

H

O

O

OH

B. Glycogen, branched polymer of D-glucose

HO

CH2

O

α
O

HO

HO

CH2

HO

HO

α
O

HO

HO

CH2

O

O

α
O
C

HO

α
O

HO

α
O

HO

β-1   4 glycosidic bonds

α-1   4 glycosidic bonds
along linear chain

α-1   6 glycosidic bonds
at branches

O

HO

HO

α
O

HO

CH2

O

HO

HO

α
O

HO

CH2

O

α
HO O

FIGURE  3.25  EXAMPLES  OF  SIMPLE  GLYCOCONJUGATES. 
Stick figures show the conformations of the sugar rings. A, Cellulose, 
an unbranched homopolymer of glucose used to construct plant cell 
walls.  B,  Glycogen,  a  branched  homopolymer  of  glucose  used  by 
animal cells to store sugar. Many glycoconjugates consist of several 
different types of sugar subunits (see Figs. 21.26 and 29.13). 

glycosyltransferases  link  high-energy  sugar-nucleosides 
to  acceptor  sugars.  These  enzymes  are  specific  for  the 
donor sugar-nucleoside and selective, but not completely 
specific,  for  the  acceptor  sugars.  Thus,  cells  require 
many different glycosyltransferases to generate the hun-
dreds of types of sugar-sugar bonds found in glycocon-
jugates.  Particular  cells  consistently  produce  the  same 
range of specific glycoconjugate structures. This repro-
ducible heterogeneity arises from the repertoire of gly-
cosyltransferases expressed, their localization in specific 
cellular  compartments,  and  the  availability  of  suitable 
acceptors. Glycosyltransferases compete with each other 
for  acceptors,  yielding  a  variety  of  products  at  many 
steps in the synthesis of glycoconjugates. For example, 
the  probability  of  encountering  a  particular  glycosyl-
transferase depends on the part of the Golgi apparatus 
(see  Fig.  21.14)  in  which  a  particular  acceptor  finds 
itself.

Aqueous Phase of Cytoplasm
The  aqueous  phase  of  cells  contains  a  wide  variety  of 
solutes,  including  inorganic  ions,  building  blocks  of 
major  organic  constituents,  intermediates  in  metabolic 
pathways,  carbohydrate  and  lipid  energy  stores,  and 
high  concentrations  of  proteins  and  RNA.  In  addition, 
eukaryotic  cells  have  a  dense  network  of  cytoskeletal 
fibers  (Fig.  3.27).  Cells  control  the  concentrations  of 
solutes  in  each  cellular  compartment,  because  many  
(eg,  pH,  Na+,  K+,  Ca2+,  and  cyclic  AMP)  have  essential 
regulatory  or 
in  particular 
compartments.

functional  significance 

The  high  concentration  of  macromolecules  and  the 
network of cytoskeletal polymers make the cytoplasm a 
very different environment from the dilute salt solutions 
that  are  usually  employed  in  biochemical  experiments 
on cellular constituents. The presence of 300 mg/mL of 

A

HO

HO

OHC

H2

H3C C N

O

O

O
CH2

C   N   C   C   N
H
O

HH

O

O-glycosidic bond of
β-N-acetylglucosamine

to serine

OH
C

OH
H2

B

HO

H3C C N

O

O

O

HC   CH3
C   N   C   C   N
H
O

H H

O

O-glycosidic bond of

β-N-acetylgalactosamine

to threonine

C

HO

HO

OHC

H2

H3C C N

O

O

O

N

C
CH2

C   N   C   C   N
O
H

H H

O

N-glycosidic bond of
β-N-acetylglucosamine

to asparagine

FIGURE  3.26  THREE  TYPES  OF  GLYCOSIDIC  BONDS  LINK  GLYCOCONJUGATES  TO  PROTEINS.  A,  An  O-glycosidic  bond  links 
N-acetylglucosamine to serine residues of many intracellular proteins. B, An O-glycosidic bond links N-acetylgalactosamine to serine or threonine 
residues  of  core  proteins,  initiating  long  glycoconjugate  polymers  called  glycosaminoglycans  on  extracellular  proteoglycans  (see  Fig.  29.13).  
C, An N-glycosidic bond links N-acetylglucosamine to asparagine residues of secreted and membrane glycoproteins (see Fig. 21.26). A wide variety 
of glycoconjugates extend the sugar polymer from the N-acetylglucosamine. These stick figures illustrate the conformations of the sugar rings. 

52 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

FIGURE  3.27  CROWDED  CYTOPLASM.  Scale  drawing  of 
eukaryotic cell cytoplasm emphasizing the high concentrations of ribo-
somes (shades of red), proteins (shades of tan, blue, and green), and 
nucleic  acids  (gray)  among  cytoskeletal  polymers  (shades  of  blue). 
(From D. Goodsell, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA.)

protein and RNA causes the cytoplasm to be crowded. 
The concentration of bulk water in cytoplasm is less than 
the 55 M in dilute solutions, but the microscopic viscos-
ity of the aqueous phase in live cells is remarkably close 
to  that  of  pure  water.  Crowding  lowers  the  diffusion 
coefficients  of  the  molecules  approximately  threefold, 
but  it  also  enhances  macromolecular  associations  by 
raising the chemical potential of the diffusing molecules 
through  an  “excluded  volume”  effect.  Macromolecules 
take  up  space  in  the  solvent,  so  the  concentration  of 
each  molecule  is  higher  in  relation  to  the  available 
solvent.  At  cellular  concentrations  of  macromolecules, 
the chemical potential of a molecule (see Chapter 4) may 
be  one  or  more  orders  of  magnitude  higher  than  its 
concentration. (The chemical potential, rather than the 
concentration, determines the rate of reactions.) There-
fore,  crowding  favors  protein–protein,  protein–nucleic 
acid, and other macromolecular assembly reactions that 
depend  on  the  chemical  potential  of  the  reactants. 
Crowding also changes the rates and equilibria of enzy-
matic  reactions,  usually  increasing  the  activity  as  com-
pared with values in dilute solutions.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We  thank  Ronald  Breaker,  Andrew  Miranker,  and  
Elizabeth  Rhoades  for  their  suggestions  on  revisions  to 
this chapter.

SELECTED READINGS

Adams  PD,  Baker  D,  Brunger  AT,  et al.  Advances,  interactions,  and 
future  developments  in  the  CNS,  Phenix,  and  Rosetta  structural 
biology software systems. Annu Rev Biophys. 2013;42:265-287.

Bryant  RG.  The  dynamics  of  water-protein  interactions.  Annu  Rev 

Biophys Biomol Struct. 1996;25:29-53.

Chothia  C,  Hubbard  T,  Brenner  S,  et al.  Protein  folds  in  the  all-beta  
and  all-alpha  classes.  Annu  Rev  Biophys  Biomol  Struct.  1997;26:
597-627.

Creighton TE. Proteins: Structure and Molecular Principles. 2nd ed. 

New York: WH Freeman; 1993:507.

DNA  sequencing.  Available  at  <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DNA

_sequencing>.

Doherty EA, Doudna JA. Ribozyme structures and mechanisms. Annu 

Rev Biophys Biomol Struct. 2001;30:457-475.

Dorn  M,  E  Silva  MB,  Buriol  LS,  Lamb  LC.  Three-dimensional  protein 
structure prediction: Methods and computational strategies. Comput 
Biol Chem. 2014;53PB:251-276.

Feizi T, Mulloy B. Carbohydrates and glycoconjugates: Glycomics: The 
new era of carbohydrate biology. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2003;13:
602-604.

Frommer  J,  Appel  B,  Müller  S.  Ribozymes  that  can  be  regulated  by 

external stimuli. Curr Opin Biotechnol. 2015;31:35-41.

Fürtig B, Nozinovic S, Reining A, Schwalbe H. Multiple conformational 
states  of  riboswitches  fine-tune  gene  regulation.  Curr  Opin  Struct 
Biol. 2015;30:112-124.

Komander  D,  Rape  M.  The  ubiquitin  code.  Annu  Rev  Biochem. 

2012;81:203-229.

Lindorff-Larsen  K,  Piana  S,  Dror  RO,  Shaw  DE.  How  fast-folding  pro-

teins fold. Science. 2011;334:517-520.

Lupas  A.  Coiled-coils:  New  structures  and  new  functions.  Trends 

Biochem Sci. 1996;21:375-382.

Moult  J,  Fidelis  K,  Kryshtafovych  A,  et al.  Critical  assessment  of 
methods of protein structure prediction (CASP)—round x. Proteins. 
2014;82(suppl 2):1-6.

Murthy VL, Srinivasan R, Draper DE, Rose GD. A complete conforma-

tional map for RNA. J Mol Biol. 1999;291:313-327.

Oldfield CJ, Dunker AK. Intrinsically disordered proteins and intrinsically 

disordered protein regions. Annu Rev Biochem. 2014;83:553-584.

Onoa B, Tinoco I. RNA folding and unfolding. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 

2004;14:374-379.

Parak FG. Proteins in action: The physics of structural fluctuations and 

conformational changes. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2003;13:552-557.

Ponting CP, Russell RR. The natural history of protein domains. Annu 

Rev Biophys Biomol Struct. 2002;31:45-71.

Ramesh  A,  Winkler  WC.  Metabolite-binding  ribozymes.  Biochim 

Biophys Acta. 2014;1839:989-994.

Serganov  A,  Nudler  E.  A  decade  of  riboswitches.  Cell.  2013;152:

17-24.

Sosnick  TR,  Barrick  D.  The  folding  of  single  domain  proteins—have 

we reached a consensus? Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2011;21:12-24.

Toor  N,  Keating  KS,  Pyle  AM.  Structural  insights  into  RNA  splicing. 

Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2009;19:260-266.

Van Roey K, Uyar B, Weatheritt RJ, et al. Short linear motifs: Ubiquitous 
and functionally diverse protein interaction modules directing cell 
regulation. Chem Rev. 2014;114:6733-6778.

Vogel C, Bashton M, Kerrison ND, et al. Structure, function and evolu-
tion  of  multi-domain  proteins.  Curr  Opin  Struct  Biol.  2004;14:
208-216.

Wolynes  PG.  Evolution,  energy  landscapes  and  the  paradoxes  of 

protein folding. Biochimie. 2015;119:218-230.

C H A P T E R 

4 

Biophysical Principles

The concepts in this chapter form the basis for under-

standing all the molecular interactions in chemistry and 
biology.  To  illustrate  some  of  these  concepts  with  a 
practical example, the chapter concludes with a section 
on  the  exceptionally  important  Ras  family  of  enzymes 
that  bind  and  hydrolyze  the  nucleotide  guanosine  tri-
phosphate (GTP). This example provides the background 
knowledge  to  understand  how  guanosine  triphospha-
tases  (GTPases)  participate  in  numerous  processes 
covered in later chapters.

Most molecular interactions in cells are driven by dif-
fusion  of  reactants  that  simply  collide  with  each  other 
on  a  random  basis.  Similarly,  dissociation  of  molecular 
complexes is a random process that occurs with a prob-
ability determined by the strength of the chemical bonds 
holding  the  molecules  together.  Many  other  reactions 
occur  within  molecules  or  molecular  complexes.  The 
aim of biophysical chemistry is to explain life processes 
in terms of such molecular interactions.

The extent of a chemical reaction is characterized by 
the equilibrium constant; the rates of the reactions are 
described by rate constants. This chapter reviews the 
physical basis for rate constants and how they are related 
to  the  thermodynamic  parameter,  the  equilibrium  con-
stant.  These  simple  but  powerful  principles  permit  a 
deeper  appreciation  of  molecular  interactions  in  cells. 
On the basis of many examples presented in this book, 
it will become clear to the reader that rate constants are 
at  least  as  important  as  equilibrium  constants  because 
the  rates  of  reactions  govern  the  dynamics  of  the  cell 
and many processes are controlled at rate-limiting steps. 
The chapter includes discussion of the chemical bonds 
important in biochemistry.

This chapter is adapted in part from Wachsstock. DH, Pollard TD. 
Transient state kinetics tutorial using KINSIM. Biophys J. 
1994;67:1260–1273.

First-Order Reactions
First-order reactions have one reactant (R) and produce 
one or more products (P). The general case is simply

R

P→

Some  common  examples  of  first-order  reactions  (Fig. 
4.1) include conformational changes, such as a change 
in shape of protein A to shape A*:

A

A*→

and the dissociation of complexes, such as

AB

A B→ +

The  rate  of  a  first-order  reaction  is  directly  propor-
tional to the concentration of the reactant (R, A, or AB 
in  these  examples).  The  rate  of  a  first-order  reaction, 
expressed  as  a  differential  equation  (rate  of  change  of 
reactant or product as a function of time [t]), is simply 
the concentration of the reactant times a constant, the 
rate constant k, with units of s−1 (per second):

Rate

= −

R
[ ]
d

dt

=

P
[ ]
d

dt

=

R
[ ]
k

The rate of the reaction has units of M s−1, where M is 
moles per liter and s is seconds (molar per second). As 
the reactant is depleted, the rate slows proportionally.
A first-order rate constant can be viewed as a prob-
ability per unit of time. For a conformational change, it 
is the probability that any A will change to A* in a unit 
of time. For dissociation of complex AB, the first-order 
rate constant is determined by the strength of the bonds 
holding  the  complex  together.  This  “dissociation  rate 
constant”  can  be  viewed  as  the  probability  that  the 
complex will fall apart in a unit of time. The probability 
of the conformational change of any particular A to A* 
or of the dissociation of any particular AB is independent 
of  its  concentration.  The  concentrations  of  A  and  AB 

 53

54 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

A

A*

Conformational

change

A

B

A

+

B

Dissociation

FIGURE 4.1  FIRST-ORDER REACTIONS. In first-order reactions, 
a single reactant undergoes a change. In these examples, molecule A 
changes conformation to A* and the bimolecular complex AB dissoci-
ates to A and B. The rate constant for a first-order reaction (arrows) 
is a simple probability. 

are important only in determining the rate of the reac-
tion observed in a bulk sample (Box 4.1).

To review, the rate of a first-order reaction is simply 
the  product  of  a  constant  that  is  characteristic  of  the 
reaction  and  the  concentration  of  the  single  reactant. 
The  constant  can  be  calculated  from  the  half-time  of  a 
reaction (see Box 4.1).

Second-Order Reactions
Second-order reactions have two reactants (Fig. 4.2). The 
general case is

R

1

2+ →

R

product

A common example in biology is a bimolecular associa-
tion reaction, such as

A B

+ →

AB

where  A  and  B  are  two  molecules  that  bind  together. 
Some  examples  are  binding  of  substrates  to  enzymes, 
binding of ligands to receptors, and binding of proteins 
to other proteins or nucleic acids.

The  rate  of  a  second-order  reaction  is  the  product  
of  the  concentrations  of  the  two  reactants,  R1  and  R2, 
and the second-order rate constant, k:

Reaction rate

=

P
[ ]
d

dt

=

[
k

R R

][

1

]

2

The  second-order  rate  constant,  k,  has  units  of  M−1 s−1 
(per  molar  per  second).  The  units  for  the  reaction  
rate are

[

R

1

⋅
] [

R

2

]

⋅ =
k

M M M s or M s

−
1

−
1

⋅

⋅

−
1

the same as a first-order reaction.

The  value  of  a  second-order  “association”  rate  con-
stant, k+, is determined mainly by the rate at which the 
molecules collide. This collision rate depends on the rate 
of diffusion of the molecules (Fig. 4.2), which is deter-
mined by the size and shape of the molecule, the viscos-
ity  of  the  medium,  and  the  temperature.  These  factors 
are  summarized  in  a  parameter  called  the  diffusion 
coefficient,  D,  with  units  of  m2 s−1.  D  is  a  measure  of 

BOX 4.1  Relationship of the Half-Time to 
a First-Order Rate Constant

In thinking about a first-order reaction, it is useful to refer 
to the half-time of the reaction. The half-time, t1/2, is the 
time  for  half  of  the  existing  reactant  to  be  converted  to 
product. For a first-order reaction, this time depends only 
on the rate constant and therefore is the same regardless 
of the starting concentration of the reactant. The relation-
ship is derived as follows:

[
d R dt

]

= −

[
k R

]

[
d R R

] [

] = −

kdt

Integrating and rearranging, we have

ln[

t =
]
R

ln[

−o
]
R

kt

so

or

[

R
t

]

=

[

R

]
o e

−

kt

where Ro is the initial concentration and Rt is the concen-
tration at time t.

When the concentration at the initial time point Ro is 

reduced by half,

1

2

[

R
o

]

=

[

R

]
o e

−

kt

1 2

or

and

Thus,

= −e kt

1 2

1

2

2

= ekt

1 2

ln 2

= kt

1 2

so, rearranging, we have

t
1 2

= .

0 693

k

and

k

= 0 693 1 2

t

.

Therefore dividing 0.693 by the half-time gives the first-
order rate constant and dividing 0.693 by the rate constant 
gives the half-time. This relationship is independent of the 
extent of the reaction at the outset of the observations and 
allows one to estimate the rate constant without knowing 
absolute concentrations.

how fast a molecule moves in a given medium. The rate 
constant  for  collisions  is  described  by  the  Debye-
Smoluchowski  equation,  a  relationship  that  depends 
only on the diffusion coefficients and the area of interac-
tion between the molecules:

k

=

4

π (
b D

A

+

D N

)

B

103

o

where b is the interaction radius of the two particles (in 
meters),  the  Ds  are  the  diffusion  coefficients  of  the 

 

CHAPTER 4  n  Biophysical Principles 

55

A

+

B

A

B

Slower

Slower

C

+

D

C

D

Slower

Faster

D

+

D

D D

Faster

Faster

FIGURE  4.2  SECOND-ORDER  REACTIONS.  In  second-order 
reactions,  two  molecules  must  collide  with  each  other.  The  rate  of 
these collisions is determined by their concentrations and by a collision 
rate constant (arrows). The collision rate constant depends on the sum 
of the diffusion coefficients of the reactants and the size of their interac-
tion sites. The rate of diffusion in a given medium depends on the size 
and shape of the molecule. Large molecules, such as proteins, move 
more  slowly  than  small  molecules,  such  as  adenosine  triphosphate 
(ATP).  A  protein  with  a  diffusion  coefficient  of  10−11 m2 s−1  diffuses 
about 10 µm in a second in water, whereas a small molecule such as 
ATP diffuses 100 times faster. The rate constants (arrows) are about 
the same for A + B and C + D because the large diffusion coefficient 
of D offsets the small size of its interaction site on C. Despite the small 
interaction size, D + D is faster because both reactants diffuse rapidly. 

reactants,  and  No  is  Avogadro’s  number.  The  factor  of 
103 converts the value into units of M−1 s−1.

For particles the size of proteins, D is approximately 
10−11 m2 s−1  and  b  is  approximately  2  ×  10−9 m,  so  the 
rate  constants  for  collisions  of  two  proteins  are  in  the 
range  of  3  ×  108 M−1 s−1.  For  small  molecules  such  as 
sugars, D is approximately 10−9 m2 s−1 and b is approxi-
mately  10−9 m,  so  the  rate  constants  for  collisions  of  a 
protein and a small molecule are approximately 20 times 
larger  than  collisions  of  two  proteins,  in  the  range  of  
7  ×  109 M−1 s−1.  On  the  other  hand,  experimentally 
observed  rate  constants  for  the  association  of  proteins 
are 20 to 1000 times smaller than the collision rate con-
stant, on the order of 106 to 107 M−1 s−1. The difference 
is attributed to a steric factor that accounts for the fact 
that macromolecules must be correctly oriented relative 
to each other to bind together when they collide. Thus 
the  complementary  binding  sites  are  aligned  correctly 
only 0.1% to 5% of the times that the molecules collide.
Many  binding  reactions  between  two  proteins, 
between enzymes and substrates, and between proteins 
and larger molecules (eg, DNA) are said to be “diffusion 
limited” in the sense that the rate constant is determined 
by  diffusion-driven  collisions  between  the  reactants. 
Thus many association rate constants are in the range of 
106 to 107 M−1 s−1.

To  review,  the  rate  of  a  second-order  reaction  is 
simply the product of a constant that is characteristic of 
the reaction and the concentrations of the two reactants. 
In  biology,  the  rates  of  many  bimolecular  association 
reactions are determined by the rates of diffusion-limited 
collisions between the reactants.

Reversible Reactions
Most reactions are reversible, so the net rate of a reaction 
is equal to the difference between the forward and reverse 
reaction rates. The forward and reverse reactions can be 
any  combination  of  first-  or  second-order  reactions.  A 
reversible conformational change of a protein from A to 
A* is an example of a pair of simple first-order reactions:

A

A*(cid:31)

The forward reaction rate is k+A with units of M s−1, and 
the reverse reaction rate is k −A* with the same units. At 
equilibrium, when the net concentrations of A and A* no 
longer change,

and

k
+

[

A

]

−=
k

[

A*

]

K

eq

=

k k
+
−

=

[

A* A

] [

]

This  equilibrium  constant  Keq  is  unitless  because  the 
units  of  concentration  and  the  rate  constants  cancel  
out.  Equilibrium  constants  are  designated  by  upper-
case Ks.

The  same  reasoning  with  respect  to  the  equilib-
rium  constant applies to a simple bimolecular binding 
reaction:

A B

+ (cid:31)

AB

where A and B are any molecule (eg, enzyme, receptor, 
substrate, cofactor, or drug). The forward (binding) reac-
tion is a second-order reaction, whereas the reverse (dis-
sociation) reaction is a first-order reaction. The opposing 
reactions are

Rate of association

Units M s

:

A B
][ ]

= +k [
−1

Rate of dissociation

= −k [

AB
]

Units M s

:

−1

The  overall  rate  of  the  reaction  is  the  forward  rate 

minus the reverse rate:

Net rate

=
=

association rate dissociation rate
k
+

A B
][ ]

−
AB
]]

[

−

k
−

[

Depending  on  the  values  of  the  rate  constants  and  
the concentrations of A, B, and AB, the reaction can go 
forward, backward, or nowhere.

56 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

At equilibrium, the forward and reverse rates are (by 

definition) the same:

k
+

[

A B
][ ]

−=
k

[

AB
]

The equilibrium constant for such a bimolecular reaction 
can be written in two ways:

Association equilibrium constant:

K

a

=

[

AB A B
][ ]

] [
− =

1

= +
k k
−
×

M M M

Units M

:

This is the classical equilibrium constant used in chem-
istry, where the strength of the reaction is proportional 
to  the  numerical  value.  For  bimolecular  reactions,  the 
units  of  reciprocal  molar  are  difficult  to  relate  to,  so 
biochemists frequently use the reciprocal relationship:

Dissociation equilibrium constant:

K

d

[

=

= −
Units M M M M

A B AB
]
×

][ ] [
=

:

k k
+

When half of the total A is bound to B, the concentra-
tion of free B is simply equal to the dissociation equilib-
rium constant.

Thermodynamic Considerations
The driving force for chemical reactions is the lowering 
of  the  free  energy  of  the  system  when  reactants  are 
converted into products. The larger the reduction in free 
energy, the more completely reactants will be converted 
to products at equilibrium. A thorough consideration of 
thermodynamics  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  text,  but  
an  overview  of  this  subject  is  presented  to  allow  the 
reader  to  gain  a  basic  understanding  of  its  power  and 
simplicity.

The  change  in  Gibbs  free  energy, ΔG,  is  simply  the 
difference in the chemical potential, µ, of the reactants 
(R) and products (P):

∆G =

−µ
µP

R

The chemical potential of a particular chemical species 
depends on its intrinsic properties and its concentration, 
expressed as the equation
µ µ=

+0 RT

Cln

where µ0 is the chemical potential in the standard state 
(1 M in biochemistry), R is the gas constant (8.3 J mol−1 
degree−1),  T  is  the  absolute  temperature  in  degrees 
Kelvin,  and  C  is  the  ratio  of  the  concentration  of  the 
chemical species to the standard concentration. Because 
the standard state is defined as 1 M, the parameter C has 
the  same  numerical  value  as  the  molar  concentration, 
but is, in fact, unitless. The term RT ln C adjusts for the 
concentration. When C = 1, µ = µ0.

Under standard conditions in which 1 mol of reactant 
is  converted  to  1 mol  of  product,  the  standard  free 
energy change, ΔG0, is
∆G 0

−µ

µP

=

R

0

0

However,  because  most  reactions  do  not  take  place 
under these standard conditions, the chemical potential 
must  be  adjusted  for  the  actual  concentrations.  This  
is  done  by  including  the  concentration  term  from  the 
definition  of  the  chemical  potential.  An  equation  for  
the  free  energy  change  that  takes  concentrations  into 
account is

0

P

+

∆G

=

µ

RT

P
ln[ ]

R
ln[ ]
Substituting the definition of ΔG0, we have
∆
G

R
ln[ ]

P
ln[ ]

∆
G

∆
G

RT

RT

RT

RT

+

=

−

+

=

0

0

−

µ

0

R

−

P R
ln[ ] [ ]

This relationship tells us that the free energy change for 
the conversion of reactants to products is simply the free 
energy change under standard conditions corrected for 
the actual concentrations of reactant and products.

At  equilibrium,  the  concentrations  of  reactants  and 
products  do  not  change  and  the  free  energy  change  is 
zero, so

or

0

=

∆G

0

+

RT ln[

P
eq

] [

R

eq

]

∆G

0 = − RT ln[

P
eq

] [

R

]

eq

You  are  already  familiar  with  the  fact  that  the  equilib-
rium  constant  for  a  reaction  is  the  ratio  of  the  equilib-
rium concentrations of products and reactants. Thus that 
relationship  can  be  substituted  in  this  thermodynamic 
equation:

∆G

0 = −

RT K

ln

or

K e

=

−

0

∆G RT

=

+

k k

−

=

[

P
eq

] [

R

eq

]

This profound relationship shows how the free energy 
change is related to the equilibrium constant. The change 
in the standard Gibbs free energy, ΔG0, specifies the ratio 
of  products  and  reactants  when  the  reaction  reaches 
equilibrium, regardless of the rate or path of the reac-
tion.  The  free  energy  change  provides  no  information 
about whether or not a given reaction will proceed on 
a time scale relevant to cellular activities. Nevertheless, 
because the equilibrium constant depends on the ratio 
of  the  rate  constants,  knowledge  of  the  rate  constants 
reveals  the  equilibrium  constant  and  the  free  energy 
change  for  a  reaction.  Consider  the  consequences  of 
various values of ΔG0:

•  If ΔG0  equals  0,  e−∆G RT0

  equals  1,  and  at  equilib-
rium,  the  concentration  of  products  will  equal  
the concentration of reactants (or in the case of a 

 

CHAPTER 4  n  Biophysical Principles 

57

bimolecular reaction, the product of the concentra-
tions of the reactants).

•  If ΔG0 is less than 0,  e−∆G RT0

 is greater than 1, and 
at equilibrium, the concentration of products will 
be  greater  than  the  concentration  of  reactants. 
Larger, negative free energy changes will drive the 
reaction  farther  toward  products.  Favorable  reac-
tions have large negative ΔG0 values.

•  If ΔG0 is greater than 0,  e−∆G RT0

 is less than 1, and 
at equilibrium, the concentrations of reactants will 
exceed the concentration of products.

It is sometimes said that a reaction with a positive ΔG0 
will not proceed spontaneously. This is not strictly true. 
Reactants  will  still  be  converted  to  products,  although 
relative to the concentration of reactants, the concentra-
tion of products will be small. The size and sign of the 
free energy change tell nothing about the rate of a reac-
tion.  For  example,  the  oxidation  of  sucrose  by  oxygen 
is highly favored with a ΔG0 of −5693 kJ/mol, but “a flash 
fire in a sugar bowl is an event rarely, if ever, seen.”*

The free energy change is additionally related to two 
thermodynamic  parameters  that  are  important  to  the 
subsequent  discussion  of  molecular  interactions.  The 
Gibbs-Helmholtz equation is the key relationship:

∆
G

=

∆
∆
H T S

−

where ΔH is the change in enthalpy, an approximation 
(with  a  small  correction  for  pressure-volume  work)  of 
the bond energies of the molecules. Thus ΔH is the heat 
given  off  when  a  bond  is  made  or  the  heat  taken  up 
when a bond is broken. The change in enthalpy is simply 
the  difference  in  enthalpy  of  reactants  and  products.  
In biochemical reactions, the enthalpy term principally 
reflects energies of the strong covalent bonds and of the 
weaker hydrogen and electrostatic bonds. If no covalent 
bonds  change,  as  in  a  binding  reaction  or  a  conforma-
tional  change,  ΔH  is  determined  by  the  difference  in 
the  energy  of  the  weak  bonds  of  the  products  and 
reactants.

The change in entropy, expressed as ΔS, is a measure 
of the change in the order of the products and reactants. 
The value of the entropy is a function of the number of 
microscopic arrangements of the system, including the 
solvent  molecules.  Note  the  minus  sign  in  front  of  the 
TΔS term. Reactions are favored if the change in entropy 
is positive, that is, if the products are less-well-ordered 
than the reactants. Increases in entropy drive reactions 
by  increasing  the  negative  free  energy  change.  For 
example,  the  hydrophobic  effect,  which  is  discussed 
later in this chapter, depends on an increase in entropy. 
Increases in entropy provide the free energy change for 

*Eisenberg D, Crothers D. Physical Chemistry with Applications to 
the Life Sciences. Menlo Park, CA: Benjamin Cummings, 1979.

many  biologic  reactions,  especially  macromolecular 
folding  (see  Chapters  3  and  12)  and  assembly  (see 
Chapter 5).

As emphasized in the case of ΔG, neither the rate of 
the  reaction  nor  the  path  between  reactants  and  prod-
ucts is relevant to the difference in enthalpy or entropy 
of  reactants  and  products.  The  reader  may  consult  a 
physical chemistry book for a fuller explanation of these 
basic principles of thermodynamics.

Linked Reactions
Many important processes in the cell consist of a single 
reaction,  but  most  of  cellular  biochemistry  involves  a 
series of linked reactions (Fig. 4.3). For example, when 
two macromolecules bind together, the complex often 
undergoes some type of internal rearrangement or con-
formational  change,  linking  a  first-order  reaction  to  a 
second-order reaction.
+ (cid:31)

A B

AB*

(cid:31)

AB

AB

One of thousands of such examples is GTP binding to a 
G protein, causing it to undergo a conformational change 
from  the  inactive  to  the  active  state  (Figs.  4.6  and  4.7 
later).

Similarly,  the  basic  enzyme  reaction  considered  in 
most biochemistry books is simply a series of reversible 
second- and first-order reactions:

E S

+

(cid:31)

ES

ES

(cid:31)

EP

EP

(cid:31)

E P

+

where  E  is  enzyme,  S  is  substrate,  and  P  is  product. 
These and more complicated reactions can be described 
rigorously  by  a  series  of  rate  equations  like  those 
explained  previously.  For  example,  enzyme  reactions 
nearly always involve one or more additional intermedi-
ates between ES and EP, coupled by first-order reactions, 
in which the molecules undergo conformational changes.
Linking reactions together is the strategy used by cells 
to  carry  out  unfavorable  reactions.  All  that  matters  is  
that the total free energy change for all coupled reactions 
is  negative.  An  unfavorable  reaction  is  driven  forward  
by  a  favorable  reaction  upstream  or  downstream.  For 
example,  a  proton  gradient  across  the  mitochondrial 

A

+

B

A

B

A*

B

Dissociation

favored

Favorable conformational 
change pulls the linked 

reaction to the right

FIGURE 4.3  LINKED REACTIONS. Two molecules, A and B, bind 
together weakly and then undergo a favorable conformational change. 
The binding reaction is unfavorable, owing to the high rate of dissocia-
tion of AB, but the favorable conformational change pulls the overall 
reaction far to the right. 

58 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

membrane  is  used  as  an  energy  source  to  drive  the  
unfavorable reaction producing adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP) from adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and inorganic 
phosphate (see Fig. 14.5). This proton gradient is derived, 
in turn, from the oxidation of chemical bonds of nutri-
ents. To use a macroscopic analogy, a siphon can initially 
move  a  liquid  uphill  against  gravity  provided  that  the 
outflow  is  placed  below  the  inflow,  so  that  the  overall 
change in energy is favorable.

An appreciation of linked reactions makes it possible 
to  understand  how  catalysts,  including  biochemical 
catalysts—protein  enzymes  and  ribozymes—influence 
reactions. They do not alter the free energy change for 
reactions,  but  they  enhance  the  rates  of  reactions  by 
speeding up the forward and reverse rates of unfavorable 
intermediate reactions along pathways of coupled reac-
tions. Given that the rates of both first- and second-order 
reactions depend on the concentrations of the reactants, 
the overall reaction is commonly limited by the concen-
tration of the least-favored, highest-energy intermediate, 
called a transition state. This might be a strained confor-
mation  of  substrate  in  a  biochemical  pathway.  Interac-
tion of this transition state with an enzyme can lower its 
free  energy,  increasing  its  probability  (concentration) 
and  thus  the  rate  of  the  limiting  reaction.  Acceleration 
of  biochemical  reactions  by  enzymes  is  impressive. 
Enhancement  of  reaction  rates  by  10  orders  of  magni-
tude is common.

Chemical Bonds
Covalent bonds are responsible for the stable architec-
ture of the organic molecules in cells (Fig. 4.4). They are 
very  strong.  C—C  and  C—H  bonds  have  energies  of 
approximately  400 kJ mol−1.  Bonds  this  strong  do  not 
dissociate spontaneously at body temperatures and pres-
sures, nor are the reactive intermediates required to form 
these bonds present in finite concentrations in cells. To 
overcome  this  problem,  living  systems  use  enzymes, 
which stabilize high-energy transition states, to catalyze 
formation and dissolution of covalent bonds. Energy for 
making strong covalent bonds is obtained indirectly by 
coupling to energy-yielding reactions. For example, met-
abolic  enzymes  convert  energy  released  by  breaking 
covalent  bonds  of  nutrients,  such  as  carbohydrates, 
lipids,  and  proteins,  into  ATP  (see  Fig.  19.4),  which  

supplies  energy  required  to  form  new  covalent  bonds 
during  the  synthesis  of  polypeptides.  Metabolic  path-
ways relating the covalent chemistry of the molecules of 
life  are  covered  in  depth  in  many  excellent  biochem-
istry  books.

For cell biologists, four types of relatively weak inter-
actions  (Fig.  4.5)  are  as  important  as  covalent  bonds 
because they are responsible for folding macromolecules 
into  their  active  conformations  and  for  holding  mole-
cules together in the structures of the cell. These weak 
interactions are (a) hydrogen bonds, (b) electrostatic 
interactions, (c) the hydrophobic effect, and (d) van 
der Waals interactions. None of these interactions is 
particularly strong on its own. Stable bonding between 
subunits  of  many  macromolecular  structures,  between 
ligands  and  receptors,  and  between  substrates  and 
enzymes is a result of the additive effect of many weak 
interactions working in concert.

Hydrogen and Electrostatic Bonds
Hydrogen  bonds  (Fig.  4.5)  occur  between  a  covalently 
bound donor H atom with a partial positive charge, Δ+ 
(the result of electron withdrawal by a covalently bonded 
O or N), and an acceptor atom (usually O or N) with a 
partial negative charge, Δ−. These bonds are highly direc-
tional,  with  optimal  bond  energy  (12  to  29 kJ mol−1) 
when the H atom points directly at the acceptor atom. 
Hydrogen bonds are extremely important in the stabiliza-
tion of secondary structures of proteins, such as α-helices 
and  β-sheets  (see  Fig.  3.8),  and  in  the  base  pairing  of 
DNA and RNA (see Fig. 3.14).

A. Hydrogen bond

D. Hydrophobic effect

C O H N

B. Electrostatic bond

C

O
O–

H
N+H

C. Electrostatic bond
with chelated metal ion

C

O
O–

O
C–O

Ca2+

+

Water excluded
from complementary
hydrophobic surfaces

H

S

C H
C C
H

O
OH

H

N

H

H

H

H

N

> 400 kJ mol−1
300 – 400 kJ mol−1
200 – 300 kJ mol−1
< 50 kJ mol−1

FIGURE  4.4  COVALENT  BONDS.  Bond  energies  for  the  amino 
acid cysteine. 

FIGURE 4.5  WEAK INTERACTIONS. A, Hydrogen bond. Oppo-
site partial charges in the oxygen and hydrogen provide the attractive 
force. B, Electrostatic bond. Atoms with opposite charges are attracted 
to  each  other.  C,  Ca2+  chelated  between  two  negatively  charged 
oxygens. D, The hydrophobic effect arises when two complementary, 
apolar surfaces make contact, excluding water molecules that formerly 
were associated with the surfaces. The increased disorder of the water 
increases the entropy and provides the decrease in free energy to drive 
the  association.  van  der  Waals  interactions  between  closely  packed 
atoms on complementary surfaces also stabilize interactions. 

 

CHAPTER 4  n  Biophysical Principles 

59

Electrostatic (or ionic) bonds occur between charged 
groups  that  have  either  lost  or  gained  a  proton  (eg, 
+). Although these bonds are poten-
—COO− and —NH3
tially  about  as  strong  as  an  average  hydrogen  bond 
(20 kJ mol−1),  it  has  been  argued  that  they  contribute 
little  to  biological  structure.  This  is  because  a  charged 
group is usually neutralized by an inorganic counterion 
(such as Na+ or Cl−) that is itself surrounded by a cloud 
of  water  molecules.  The  effect  of  having  the  cloud  of 
water molecules is that the counterion does not occupy 
a single position with respect to the charged group on 
the  macromolecule;  consequently,  these  interactions 
lack structural specificity.

Electrostatic interactions come into their own in dis-
sociating  biological  structures,  since  like  charges  on 
potential binding surfaces of macromolecules will repel 
one  another.  This  allows  phosphorylation  to  control 
many biological interactions. Enzymatic introduction of 
a  negatively  charged  phosphate  group  can  disrupt  an 
otherwise  stable  interaction  between  two  proteins, 
whereas  removal  of  phosphate  allows  the  interaction 
(see Chapter 25).

Hydrophobic Effect
Self-assembly and other association reactions that involve 
the joining together of separate molecules to form more 
ordered structures might seem unlikely when examined 
from the point of view of thermodynamics. Nonetheless, 
many  binding  reactions  are  highly  favored,  and  when 
such  processes  are  monitored  in  the  laboratory,  it  can 
be shown that ΔS actually increases.

How  can  association  of  molecules  lead  to  increased 
disorder? The answer is that the entropy of the system—
including macromolecules and solvent—increases owing 
to the loss of order in the water surrounding the macro-
molecules (Fig. 4.5). This increase in the entropy of the 
water  more  than  offsets  the  increased  order  and 
decreased  entropy  of  the  associated  macromolecules. 
Bulk  water  is  a  semistructured  solvent  maintained  by  
a  loose  network  of  hydrogen  bonds  (see  Fig.  3.1).  
Water  cannot  form  hydrogen  bonds  with  nonpolar 
(hydrophobic)  parts  of  lipids  and  proteins.  Instead, 
water  molecules  form  “cages”  or  “clathrates”  of  exten-
sively H-bonded water molecules near these hydropho-
bic surfaces. These clathrates are more ordered than is 
bulk  water  or  water  interacting  with  charged  or  polar 
amino acids.

When proteins fold (see Fig. 12.10), macromolecules 
bind together (see Chapter 5), and phospholipids associ-
ate to form bilayers (see Fig. 13.5), hydrophobic groups 
are buried in pockets or between interfaces that exclude 
water.  The  highly  ordered  water  formerly  associated 
with these surfaces disperses into the less-ordered bulk 
phase, and the entropy of the system increases.

The  increase  in  the  disorder  of  water  that  results 
when  hydrophobic  regions  of  macromolecules  are 

buried is called the hydrophobic effect. Hydrophobic 
interactions  are  a  major  driving  force,  but  they  would 
not  confer  specificity  on  an  intermolecular  interaction 
except for the fact that the molecular surfaces must be 
complementary  to  exclude  water.  The  hydrophobic 
effect is not a bond per se, but a thermodynamic factor 
that favors macromolecular interactions.

van der Waals Interactions
van  der  Waals  interactions  occur  when  adjacent  atoms 
come close enough that their outer electron clouds just 
barely  touch.  This  action  induces  charge  fluctuations 
that  result  in  a  nonspecific,  nondirectional  attraction. 
These 
interactions  are  highly  distance  dependent, 
decreasing in proportion to the sixth power of the sepa-
ration.  The  energy  of  each  interaction  is  only  about 
4 kJ mol−1 (very weak when compared with the average 
kinetic  energy  of  a  molecule  in  solution,  which  is 
approximately 2.5 kJ mol−1) and is significant only when 
many  interactions  are  combined  (as  in  interactions  of 
complementary surfaces). Under optimal circumstances, 
van der Waals interactions can achieve bonding energies 
as high as 40 kJ mol−1.

When  two  atoms  get  too  close,  they  strongly  repel 
each other. Consequently, imperfect fits between inter-
acting  molecules  are  energetically  very  expensive,  pre-
venting association if surface groups interfere sterically 
with each other. As a determinant of specificity of mac-
romolecular  interactions,  this  van  der  Waals  repulsion  
is  even  more  important  than  the  favorable  bonds  dis-
cussed  earlier,  because  it  precludes  many  nonspecific 
interactions.

Strategy for Understanding  
Cellular Functions
One  strategy  for  understanding  the  mechanism  of  any 
molecular  process—including  binding  reactions,  self-
assembly  reactions,  and  enzyme  reactions—is  to  deter-
mine the existence of the various reactants, intermediates, 
and  products  along  the  reaction  pathway  and  then  to 
measure the rate constants for each step. Such an analy-
sis yields additional information about the thermodynam-
ics of each step, as the ratio of the rate constants reveals 
the  equilibrium  constant  and  the  free  energy  change, 
even for transient intermediates that may be difficult or 
impossible to analyze separately.

In earlier times, biochemists lacked methods to evalu-
ate the internal reactions along most pathways, but they 
could measure the overall rate of reactions, such as the 
steady-state rate of conversion of reactants to products 
by  an  enzyme.  To  analyze  these  data,  they  simplified 
complex  mechanisms  using  relationships  such  as  the 
Michaelis-Menten  equation  (described  in  biochemistry 
textbooks). Now, abundant supplies of proteins, conve-
nient  methods  for  measuring  rapid  reaction  rates,  and 

60 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

computer programs that can be used to analyze complex 
reaction  mechanisms  generally  make  such  simplifica-
tions unnecessary.

Analysis of an Enzyme Mechanism:  
The Ras GTPase
This section uses a vitally important family of enzymes 
called  GTPases  to  illustrate  how  enzymes  work.  The 
example is Ras, a small GTPase that serves as part of a 
biochemical pathway linking growth factor receptors in 
the plasma membrane of animal cells to regulation of the 
cell cycle. The example shows how to dissect an enzyme 
reaction  by  kinetic  analysis  and  how  crystal  structures 
can  reveal  conformational  changes  related  to  function. 
GTPases related to Ras regulate a host of systems, includ-
ing  nuclear  transport  (see  Fig.  9.18),  protein  synthesis 
(see  Figs.  12.8  and  12.9),  vesicular  trafficking  (see  Fig. 
21.6), signaling pathways coupled to seven-helix recep-
tors  including  vision  and  olfaction  (see  Fig.  25.9),  the 
actin cytoskeleton (see Figs. 33.13 and 33.19), and assem-
bly  of  the  mitotic  spindle  (see  Fig.  44.8).  This  section 
gives the reader the background required to understand 
the  contributions  of  GTPases  to  all  these  processes  as 
they are presented in the following sections of the book.
Having evolved from a common ancestor, Ras and its 
related  GTPases  share  a  homologous  core  domain  that 
binds  a  guanine  nucleotide  and  uses  a  common  enzy-
matic cycle of GTP binding, hydrolysis, and product dis-
sociation to switch the protein on and off (Fig. 4.6). The 
GTP-binding domain consists of approximately 200 resi-
dues  folded  into  a  six-stranded  β-sheet  sandwiched 
between  five α-helices.  GTP  binds  in  a  shallow  groove 
formed largely by loops at the ends of elements of sec-
ondary structure. A network of hydrogen bonds between 
the protein and guanine base, ribose, triphosphate, and 
Mg2+ anchor the nucleotide. Larger GTPases have a core 
GTPase  domain  plus  domains  required  for  coupling  to 
seven-helix receptors (see Fig. 25.9) or regulating protein 
synthesis (see Figs. 12.10 and 25.7).

The  bound  nucleotide  determines  the  conformation 
and activity of each GTPase. The GTP-bound conforma-
tion is active, as it interacts with and stimulates effector 
proteins. In the example considered here, the Ras-GTP 
binds and stimulates a protein kinase, Raf, which relays 
signals  from  growth  factor  receptors  to  the  nucleus  
(see Fig. 27.6). The guanosine diphosphate (GDP)-bound 
conformation of Ras is inactive because it does not bind 
effectors. Thus, GTP hydrolysis and phosphate dissocia-
tion switch Ras and related GTPases from the active to 
the inactive state.

All  GTPases  use  the  same  enzyme  cycle,  which 
involves four simple steps (Fig. 4.6). GTP binding favors 
the  active  conformation  that  binds  effector  proteins. 
GTPases  remain  active  until  they  hydrolyze  the  bound 

A. Ras-GDP

B. Ras-GTP

GTP

Switch I

Switch II

GTP

Active

GT

Slow
timer

2

GDP

GAP

Inactive

G

1

Fast

GDP

4

Rate
limiting

GEF

GDI

GD

Fast

3

Pi

FIGURE 4.6  Top, Atomic structures of the small GTPase Ras. GTP 
hydrolysis  and  phosphate  dissociation  change  the  conformations  of 
the switch loops. (For reference, see Protein Data Bank [www.rcsb.org] 
files 1Q21 [A] and 121P [B].) Bottom, Generic GTPase cycle. The size 
of the arrows indicates the relative rates of the reactions. GAP, GTPase 
activating protein; GD, GTPase with bound GDP; GDI, guanine nucleo-
tide dissociation inhibitor; GDP, GTPase with bound GDP and inorganic 
phosphate; GEF, guanine nucleotide exchange factor; GT, GTPase with 
bound GTP; Pi, phosphate. 

GTP. Hydrolysis is intrinsically slow, but binding to effec-
tor  proteins  or  regulatory  proteins  can  accelerate  this 
inactivation  step.  GTPases  tend  to  accumulate  in  the 
inactive  GDP  state,  because  GDP  dissociation  is  very 
slow.  Specific  proteins  catalyze  dissociation  of  GDP, 
making  it  possible  for  GTP  to  rebind  and  activate  the 
GTPase.  Seven-helix  receptors  activate  their  associated 
G-proteins.  Guanine  nucleotide  exchange  proteins 
(GEFs) activate small GTPases.

Figure  4.7  illustrates  the  experimental  strategy  used 

to establish the mechanism of the Ras GTPase cycle.

Step  1:  GTP  binding.  GTP  binds  rapidly  to  nucleotide-
free Ras in two linked reactions (Fig. 4.7A). The first 
is  rapid  but  reversible  association  of  GTP  with  Ras. 
Second  is  a  slower  but  highly  favorable  first-order 
conformational change, which produces the fluores-
cence signal in the experiment and accounts for the 

 

CHAPTER 4  n  Biophysical Principles 

61

A 

Ras + mGTP

B 

Ras • GTP

C

Ras • GDP

GTP binding

Ras • mGTP

= active

GTP hydrolysis

GDP release

Ras • GDP • P
Pi release

Ras • GDP + Pi

1.0

1.0

Ras + GDP

+ Cdc24 GEF

Ras with bound GTP

0

0

0.1

0

0

plus NF1 GAP

minus NF1 GAP

0.6

Time (sec)

– Cdc24 GEF

2000.0

0

0

1.0

n
o
i
t
c
a
e
r
 
f
o
 
t
n
e
t
x
E

FIGURE 4.7  Kinetic dissection of the Ras GTPase cycle using a series of “single turnover” experiments, in which each enzyme molecule carries 
out a reaction only once. A, GTP binding. Nucleotide-free Ras is mixed rapidly with a fluorescent derivative of GTP (mGTP), and fluorescence is 
followed on a millisecond time scale. With 100 µM mGTP (approximately 10% of the cellular concentration), binding is fast (half-time less than 
5 ms),  but  the  change  in  fluorescence  is  slower,  approximately  30 s−1,  because  it  depends  on  a  subsequent,  slower  conformational  change. 
Linking  the  association  reaction  to  this  highly  favorable  (K  =  106)  first-order  conformational  change  accounts  for  the  exceedingly  high  affinity 
(Kd = ~10−11 M) of Ras for GTP. Binding and dissociation of GDP are similar. B, GTP hydrolysis and γ-phosphate dissociation. GTP is mixed with 
Ras, and hydrolysis is followed by collecting samples on a millisecond time scale with a “quench-flow” device, dissociating the products from 
the enzyme and measuring the fraction of GTP converted to GDP. The Ras-GDP-P intermediate releases γ-phosphate spontaneously in a first-
order reaction. A fluorescent phosphate-binding protein is used to measure free phosphate. On this time scale in this figure, Ras alone does not 
hydrolyze GTP or dissociated phosphate because the hydrolysis rate constant is 5 × 10−5 s−1, corresponding to a half-time of 1400 seconds. The 
GTPase activating protein (GAP) neurofibromin 1 (NF1) at a concentration of 10 µM increases the rate of hydrolysis to 20 s−1 and allows observa-
tion of the time course of phosphate dissociation at 8 s−1. C, GDP dissociation. Ras with bound fluorescent mGDP is mixed with GTP, which 
replaces the mGDP as it dissociates. The loss of fluorescence over time gives a rate constant for mGDP dissociation of 0.00002 s−1. The guanine 
nucleotide exchange factor Cdc24Mn at a concentration of 1 µM increases the rate of mGDP dissociation 500-fold to 0.01 s−1. (Data from Lenzen 
C, Cool RH, Prinz H, et al. Kinetic analysis by fluorescence of the interaction between Ras and the catalytic domain of the guanine nucleotide 
exchange factor Cdc24Mn. Biochemistry. 1998;37:7420–7430; and Phillips RA, Hunter JL, Eccleston JF, Webb MR. Mechanism of Ras GTPase 
activation by neurofibromin. Biochemistry. 2003;42:3956–3965.)

high affinity of Ras for GTP (Kd typically in the range 
of 10−11 M). The conformation change involves three 
segments  of  the  polypeptide  chain  called  switch  I, 
switch II, and switch III. Folding of these three loops 
around the γ-phosphate of GTP traps the nucleotide 
and creates a binding site for the Raf kinase, the down-
stream effector (see Fig. 27.6).

Step 2: GTP hydrolysis. Hydrolysis is essentially irrevers-
ible  and  slow  with  a  half-time  of  approximately  4 
hours (Fig. 4.7B). Although slow, GTP hydrolysis on 
the enzyme is many orders of magnitude faster than 
in  solution.  Like  other  enzymes,  interactions  of  the 
protein  with  the  substrate  stabilize  the  “transition 
state,” a high-energy chemical intermediate between 
GTP and GDP. In this transition state, the γ-phosphate 
is  partially  bonded  to  both  the  β-phosphate  and  an 
attacking  water.  Hydrogen  bonds  between  protein 
backbone  amides  and  oxygens  bridging  the  β-  and 
γ-phosphates and on the γ- and β-phosphates stabilize 
negative charges that build up on these atoms in the 
transition state. Hydrolysis is slow in comparison with 
most enzyme reactions, because none of these hydro-
gen  bonds  is  particularly  strong.  Another  hydrogen 
bond  from  a  glutamine  side  chain  helps  position  a 
water for nucleophilic attack on the γ-phosphate. The 

importance of this interaction is illustrated by muta-
tions  that  replace  that  glutamine  with  leucine.  This 
mutation reduces the rate of hydrolysis by orders of 
magnitude  and  predisposes  to  the  development  of 
many  human  cancers  by  prolonging  the  active  state 
and  thus  amplifying  growth-promoting  signals  from 
growth factor receptors.

Step  3:  Dissociation  of  inorganic  phosphate.  After 
hydrolysis,  the  γ-phosphate  dissociates  rapidly.  This 
reverses  the  conformational  change  of  the  three 
switch loops, dismantling the binding site for effector 
proteins.

Step  4:  Dissociation  of  GDP. On its own, Ras accumu-
lates in the inactive GDP state, because GDP dissoci-
ates  extremely  slowly  with  a  half-time  of  10  hours 
(Fig.  4.7C).  GTP  cannot  bind  and  activate  Ras  until 
GDP dissociates.

Ras and most other small GTPases depend on regula-
tory  proteins  to  stimulate  the  two  slow  steps  in  the 
GTPase cycle: GDP dissociation and GTP hydrolysis. For 
example, when growth factors stimulate their receptors, 
a  series  of  reactions  (see  Fig.  27.6)  brings  a  guanine 
nucleotide  exchange  factor  (GEF)  to  the  plasma 
membrane  to  activate  Ras  by  accelerating  dissociation  

62 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

of GDP. First the GEF binds Ras-GDP and then favors a 
slow  conformational  change  that  distorts  a  part  of  Ras 
that interacts with the β-phosphate. This allows GDP to 
dissociate on a time scale of seconds to minutes rather 
than  10  hours  (Fig.  4.7C).  Once  GDP  has  dissociated, 
nucleotide-free Ras can bind either GDP or GTP. Binding 
GTP  is  more  likely  in  cells,  because  the  cytoplasmic 
concentration of GTP (approximately 1 mM) is 10 times 
that of GDP. GTP binding activates Ras, allowing trans-
mission of the signal to the nucleus.

GTPase-activating  proteins  (GAPs)  turn  off  Ras 
and related GTPases, by binding Ras-GTP and stimulating 
GTP  hydrolysis,  thereby  terminating  GTPase  activation 
(Fig.  4.7B).  Ras  GAPs  stabilize  the  transition  state,  by 
contributing a positively charged arginine side chain that 
stabilizes  the  negative  charges  on  the  oxygen  bridging 
the β-  and γ-phosphates  and  on  the γ-phosphate.  GAPs 
also help position Gln61 and its attacking water. In the 
experiment  in  the  figure,  a  GAP  called  neurofibromin 
(NF1) binds Ras with a half-time of 3 ms (not illustrated) 
and stimulates rapid hydrolysis of GTP at 20 s−1. This is 
followed  by  rate-limiting  dissociation  of  γ-phosphate 
from the Ras-GDP-P intermediate at 8 s−1 and rapid dis-
sociation of NF1 from Ras at 50 s−1. NF1 is the product 
of a human gene that is inactivated in the disease called 
neurofibromatosis. Lacking the NF1 GAP activity to keep 
Ras  in  check,  affected  individuals  develop  numerous 
neural  tumors  that  disfigure  the  skin  and  may  compro-
mise the function of the nervous system.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

We thank Martin Webb for his help with GTPase kinetics 
for the second edition.

SELECTED READINGS

Berg OG, von Hippel PH. Diffusion controlled macromolecular interac-

tions. Annu Rev Biophys Biophys Chem. 1985;14:131-160.

Eisenberg D, Crothers D. Physical Chemistry with Applications to the 

Life Sciences. Menlo Park, CA: Benjamin Cummings; 1979.

Garcia HG, Kondev J, Orme N, Theriot JA, Phillips R. Thermodynamics 

of biological processes. Methods Enzymol. 2011;492:27-59.

Garcia-Viloca M, Gao J, Karplus M, Truhlar DG. How enzymes work: 
analysis by modern rate theory and computer simulations. Science. 
2004;303:186-194.

Herrmann  C.  Ras-effector  interactions:  after  one  decade.  Curr  Opin 

Struct Biol. 2003;13:122-129.

Johnson KA. Transient-state kinetic analysis of enzyme reaction path-

ways. Enzymes. 1992;20:1-61.

Lenzen  C,  Cool  RH,  Prinz  H,  et al.  Kinetic  analysis  by  fluorescence  
of  the  interaction  between  Ras  and  the  catalytic  domain  of  the 
guanine nucleotide exchange factor CdcMn. Biochemistry. 1998;37:
7420-7430.

Northrup  SH,  Erickson  HP.  Kinetics  of  protein-protein  association 
explained  by  Brownian  dynamics  computer  simulation.  Proc  Natl 
Acad Sci USA. 1992;89:3338-3342.

Phillips RA, Hunter JL, Eccleston JF, Webb MR. Mechanism of Ras GTPase 

activation by neurofibromin. Biochemistry. 2003;42:3956-3965.

Pollard  TD.  A  guide  to  simple  and  informative  binding  assays.  Molec 

Biol Cell. 2010;21:4061-4067.

Pollard TD, De La Cruz E. Take advantage of time in your experiments: 
a guide to simple, informative kinetics assays. Mol Biol Cell. 2013;24:
1103-1110.

C H A P T E R 

5 

Macromolecular Assembly

The discovery that dissociated parts of viruses can reas-
semble in a test tube led to the concept of self-assembly. 
Demonstration  that  purified  components  of  viruses,  
bacterial  flagella,  ribosomes,  and  cytoskeletal  filaments 
assemble  in  vitro  established  self-assembly  as  a  central 
principle  in  biology.  Even  large  biological  structures, 
such  as  the  mitotic  spindle  (Fig.  5.1),  are  constructed 
from  molecules  that  assemble  by  defined  pathways 
without  external  templates.  Chromosomes,  nuclear 
pores, transcription initiation complexes, vesicle fusion 
machinery, and intercellular junctions, assemble by the 
same strategy. The properties of the constituents deter-
mine  the  assembly  mechanism  and  architecture  of  the 
final  structure.  Weak  but  highly  specific  noncovalent 
interactions  hold  together  the  building  blocks,  which 
include proteins, nucleic acids, and lipids.

The ability of subunit molecules to assemble spon-
taneously  into  the  complicated  structures  required  for 
cellular function greatly increases the power of the infor-
mation stored in the genome. The primary structure of 

A

B

FIGURE 5.1  MICROTUBULES USE RECYCLED SUBUNITS TO 
REORGANIZE  COMPLETELY  DURING  THE  CELL  CYCLE. 
A, Interphase. Microtubules (green) form a cytoplasmic network radiat-
ing from the microtubule organizing center at the centrosome, stained 
red.  The  nuclear  DNA  is  blue.  B,  Mitosis.  Duplicated  centrosomes 
become  the  poles  of  the  bipolar  mitotic  apparatus.  Microtubules 
(green) radiate from the poles to contact chromosomes (blue) at cen-
tromeres  (red),  pulling  the  chromosomes  to  the  poles.  After  mitosis, 
the interphase arrangement of microtubules reassembles. (A, Courtesy 
A.  Khodjakov,  Wadsworth  Center,  Albany,  NY.  B,  Courtesy  D. 
Cleveland, University of California–San Diego.)

a  protein  or  nucleic  acid  specifies  not  only  the  folding 
of the individual protein or nucleic acid subunit but also 
the bonds that it can make in a larger assembly.

Assembly of macromolecular structures differs funda-
mentally from the template-specified, enzymatic mecha-
nisms with which cells replicate genes (see Chapter 42), 
transcribe  gene  sequences  into  RNAs,  and  translate  
messenger  RNA  (mRNA)  sequences  into  proteins  (see 
Chapters  10  and  12).  Macromolecular  assembly  does  
not require templates and rarely involves enzymatic for-
mation  or  dissolution  of  covalent  bonds  between  sub-
units.  When  enzymatic  processing  occurs  during  the 
assembly of some viruses (see Example 6 below), colla-
gen (see Fig. 29.6), and elastin (see Fig. 29.11), it usually 
precludes reassembly of the dissociated parts.

After explaining the advantages and general features of 
self-assembly, this chapter concludes with several model 
systems illustrating these principles. Subsequent chapters 
show how these ideas help explain the structure, biogen-
esis, and function of most cellular components.

Assembly of Macromolecular Structures 
From Subunits
Using subunits provides multiple advantages for assembly 
processes, as originally pointed out by Crane (Box 5.1).

Assembly  of  large  structures  from  subunits  con-
serves  the  genome.  The  assembly  of  macromolecular 
structures from identical subunits, like bricks in a wall, 
obviates the need to specify separate parts. For example, 
a  plant  virus,  the  tobacco  mosaic  virus  (TMV;  see 
Example 4 below), consists of 2130 protein subunits of 
158  amino  acids  each  and  a  single-stranded  RNA  mole-
cule  of  6390  nucleotides.  Having  a  separate  gene  for 
each viral coat protein would require 1,009,620 nucleo-
tides  of  RNA,  which  would  be  approximately  160-fold 
longer  than  the  entire  viral  RNA!  The  virus  conserves  
its  genome  by  using  a  single  copy  of  the  coat  protein 
gene  (474  nucleotides—7.4%  of  the  genome)  to  make 

 63

64 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

the  2130  identical  protein  subunits  that  assemble  into 
the virus coat.

Using small subunits improves the chance of synthe-
sizing  error-free  building  blocks.  All  biological  pro-
cesses are susceptible to error, and protein synthesis by 
ribosomes is no exception (see Chapter 12). The error 
rate of translation is approximately 1 in 3000 amino acid 
residues. Therefore, the odds that any given amino acid 
residue  is  correct  are  0.99967.  With  these  odds,  the 
chance  that  a  TMV  subunit  will  be  translated  correctly 
is  0.99967158,  or  0.949.  Thus,  approximately  95%  of  all 
TMV  coat  proteins  in  an  infected  cell  are  perfect,  pro-
viding an ample supply of subunits with which to con-
struct an infectious virus. Of the 5% of subunits with a 
mistake,  some  will  be  functional  and  others  will  not, 
depending on the nature and position of the amino acid 
substitution. By contrast, the chance of correctly synthe-
sizing  the  viral  coat,  if  TMV  coated  its  RNA  with  one 
huge polypeptide with 336,540 residues, would be only 
0.99967336540, or 5.6 × 10−49.

Construction from subunits provides a mechanism 
for eliminating faulty components. Given that a signifi-
cant fraction of all proteins has minor errors, good and 
bad subunits can be segregated on the basis of their ability 
to form correct bonds with their neighbors at the time of 
assembly.  Faulty  subunits  will  not  bond,  are  excluded 
from the final structure, and are usually degraded.

Subunits  can  be  recycled.  Many  macromolecular 
structures  assemble  reversibly,  and  because  they  are 
built  of  subunits,  the  subunits  can  be  reused  later.  For 
example,  the  subunits  of  the  mitotic  spindle  microtu-
bules  reassemble  into  the  interphase  array  of  microtu-
bules (Fig. 5.1; see also Chapter 44).

Assembly from subunits provides multiple opportu-
nities  for  regulation.  Simple  modifications  of  subunits 
can  regulate  the  state  of  assembly.  For  example,  many 
intermediate filaments disassemble during mitosis when 
their  subunits  are  phosphorylated  by  protein  kinases 
(see Figs. 35.5 and 44.6).

Specificity by Multiple Weak Bonds on 
Complementary Surfaces
Stable  macromolecular  assemblies  require  intermolecu-
lar interactions stronger than the forces tending to dis-
sociate the subunits. Subunits diffusing independently in 
an  aqueous  milieu  have  a  kinetic  energy  of  approxi-
mately  2.5  kJ  mol−1  at  25°C.  Interactions  in  macromo-
lecular assemblies must be strong enough to overcome 
this thermal energy, which tends to pull them apart.

Specific  macromolecular  associations  are  achieved  
by  combining  a  small  repertoire  of  weak  bonds  on 
complex, three-dimensional surfaces. Four weak interac-
tions  (see  Fig.  4.5)—the  hydrophobic  effect,  hydrogen 
bonds,  electrostatic  interactions,  and  van  der  Waals 
interactions—hold together subunits of macromolecular 

BOX 5.1  Crane’s Hypothesis

In  1950,  the  physicist  H.R.  Crane  predicted  in  Scientific 
Monthly  that  macromolecular  structures  in  biology  are 
assembled  from  multiple  subunits  and  according  to  the 
laws of symmetry. A symmetric structure is composed of 
numerous  identical  subunits,  all  in  equivalent  environ-
ments (ie, making identical contacts with their neighbors). 
For  example,  Fig.  5.2A  shows  a  plane  hexagonal  array, 
with each subunit making identical contacts with the six 
surrounding subunits. This is the most efficient way to fill 
a flat surface with globular subunits.

Crane also predicted that elongated tubular structures 
are  assembled  with  symmetry.  This  type  of  symmetry  is 
known as a helix. One way of constructing a helix is to 
take a plane hexagonal array, cut it along one of its lattice 
lines,  and  roll  it  up  into  a  tube  (Fig.  5.2B).  The  bonds 
between adjacent subunits are nearly identical in the plane 
array  and  the  helical  tube,  except  for  the  fact  that  each 
bond is distorted just enough to roll the sheet into a tube. 
Introduction  of  fivefold  vertices  into  a  hexagonal  array 
allows it to fold up into a closed polygon (Fig. 5.2D–F).

Crane  argued  further  that  biological  structures  could 
avoid  the  problem  of  poisoning  by  defective  subunits  if 
such  subunits  were  recognized  and  discarded.  Crane’s 
thinking about this problem was stimulated by a visit to a 
factory producing complex parts for vacuum tubes during 
World  War  II.  When  he  asked  the  factory  manager  how 
much  training  the  workers  needed  to  assemble  such  a 
complex  product,  he  was  surprised  to  learn  that  the 
average was only 4 hours. The supervisor explained that 
they  worked  on  an  assembly  line  where  each  worker 
made only one small component (a subunit). If that com-
ponent was defective, it was simply discarded, so the final 
product  was  built  only  from  perfect  components.  Crane 
suggested that cells use the same strategy.

Crane’s  theories  led  to  the  hypothesis  that  cellular 
structures “build” themselves by self-assembly. Thus, the 
design of the final structure is somehow incorporated into 
the  shape  of  the  individual  subunits.  Remarkably,  all  of 
Crane’s  predictions  about  subunits  and  assembly  turned 
out to be correct.

assemblies just like they stabilize folded proteins. Multi-
ple  weak  interactions  suffice,  because  the  free  energy 
changes  contributed  by  all  the  weak  interactions  are 
added  together.  With  a  small  correction  for  entropy 
changes, the overall binding constant for the association 
of subunits is the product of the equilibrium constants 
for each weak interaction [KA = (K1)(K2)(K3)(…)(Kn)].

Far from being a liability, multiple weak interactions 
provide  assembly  systems  with  the  ability  to  achieve 
exquisite specificity that is derived from the “fit” between 
complementary  surfaces  of  interacting  molecules 
(see Examples 4 and 5 below). Complementary surfaces 
are  important  for  three  reasons.  First,  atoms  with  the 
potential to form hydrogen bonds or electrostatic bonds 
must  be  placed  in  a  complementary  arrangement  for  

 

CHAPTER 5  n  Macromolecular Assembly 

65

smoothed  against  one  another;  in  the  case  of  rigid 
objects, a Velcro-like bond is tightest when the surfaces 
have complementary shapes.

Often  short,  intrinsically  disordered  regions  of  pro-
teins adopt a stable structure when they dock onto the 
surface of a partner protein. This provides both flexibil-
ity  and  strength  to  protein  assemblies.  In  some  assem-
blies, flexible polypeptide strands knit subunits together 
(see  Examples  1,  5,  and  6  in  “Regulation  by  Accessory  
Proteins”  below).  In  other  cases,  assembly  is  coupled  
to the folding (or refolding) of the subunit proteins (see 
Examples 3, 4, and 6 below).

Symmetrical Structures Constructed From 
Identical Subunits
Studies of relatively simple systems composed of identi-
cal subunits, such as actin filaments, bacterial flagella and 
viruses, provided most of what is known about assembly 
processes.  Their  symmetries  suit  them  for  analysis  by 
x-ray crystallography and electron microscopy, and their 
biochemical  simplicity  facilitates  analysis  of  assembly 
mechanisms. Subunits in asymmetric assemblies, such as 
transcription factor complexes (see Fig. 10.7), are likely 
to behave similarly but are more difficult to study.

The subunits in a symmetrical macromolecular struc-
ture make identical bonds with one another. In practice, 
biological  assemblies  use  only  three  fundamental  types 
of  symmetry.  Proteins  that  assemble  on  flat  surfaces, 
such  as  membranes,  typically  have  plane  hexagonal 
symmetry;  filaments  have  helical  symmetry;  and 
closed structures have polygonal symmetry.

Subunits Arranged in Hexagonal Arrays  
in Plane Sheets
The simplest way to pack globular subunits in a plane is 
to form a hexagonal array with each subunit surrounded 
by  six  neighbors.  This  happens  if  one  puts  a  layer  of 
marbles in the bottom of a box and then tilts the box. A 
hexagonal  array  maximizes  contacts  between  the  sur-
faces of adjacent subunits. Membranes are the only flat 
surfaces  in  cells,  and  a  number  of  membrane  proteins 
crowd  together  in  hexagonal  arrays  on  or  within  the 
lipid  bilayers.  Connexons  of  gap  junctions  (Fig.  5.3A), 
bacteriorhodopsin of purple membranes (see Fig. 13.8B), 
and  porin  channels  of  bacterial  membranes  (see  Fig. 
13.8C) all form regular hexagonal arrays in the plane of 
the lipid bilayer. Clathrin coats form hexagonal nets on 
the surface of membranes (Fig. 5.3B).

Helical Filaments Produced by Polymerization of 
Identical Subunits With Like Bonds
Helical arrays of identical subunits form cytoskeletal fila-
ments  (see  Examples  1  and  2  below),  bacterial  flagella 
(see Example 3 below), and some viruses (see Example 
4 below). In helices subunits are positioned like steps of 

A

C

E

B

D

F

FIGURE  5.2  FOLDING OF PAPER MODELS OF HEXAGONAL 
ARRAYS  OF  IDENTICAL  PARTICLES  INTO  A  HELIX  OR  A 
CLOSED POLYGON. A, A hexagonal array of particles similar to the 
arrangement of subunits in the tobacco mosaic virus. B, The sheet is 
rolled around onto itself to make a helix similar to the virus. C, A hex-
agonal array of particles with three identical subunits in each triangular 
unit. The subunits around one sixfold axis are colored pink. D–F, The 
sheet  is  cut  along  two  lattice  lines  and  folded,  creating  two  fivefold 
vertices (green dot). Introduction of 12 such fivefold vertices creates 
an  icosahedron.  (From  Caspar  D,  Klug  A.  Physical  principles  in  the 
construction  of  regular  viruses.  Cold  Spring  Harb  Symp  Quant  Biol. 
1962;27:1–24.)

the  bonds  to  form.  Second,  complementary  surfaces  
can exclude water between subunits, as required for the 
hydrophobic effect. Third and most important, repulsive 
forces  arising  from  clashes  between  even  a  few  atoms 
on imperfectly matching surfaces can preclude interac-
tions between two incorrect bonding partners.

To  use  a  macroscopic  analogy,  the  interactions 
between  subunits  of  macromolecular  assemblies  have 
much more in common with Velcro fasteners than with 
snaps. Snaps provide an easy way to attach components 
to one another, and they can attach components whose 
surfaces  touch  only  at  the  snaps.  A  single  snap  is  
often  enough  to  hold  two  items  together.  By  contrast, 
Velcro fasteners work because many tiny hooks become 
entrapped in a mesh of fibrous loops. The strength pro-
vided by each hook is minuscule, but when hundreds or 
thousands  of  hooks  work  together,  bonding  is  strong. 
Velcro  works  best  when  the  two  bonding  surfaces  are 

66 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

A

B

C

G

Tetrahedron

Octahedron

Icosahedron

D

E

F

A

B

Icosahedron

Icosahedral symmetry

FIGURE 5.3  ELECTRON MICROGRAPHS SHOWING HEXAG-
ONAL NETWORKS OF MEMBRANE PROTEINS. A, Integral mem-
brane  protein.  Gap  junction  subunits  called  connexons  span  the  
lipid  bilayer.  An  isolated  junction  was  prepared  by  negative  staining.  
B, Peripheral membrane proteins. Clathrin coats on the surface of a 
membrane in a hexagonal array. Introduction of fivefold vertices allows 
this sheet to fold up around a coated vesicle, shown at the bottom of 
the figure. This is a replica of the inner surface of the plasma mem-
brane. (A, Courtesy N.B. Gilula, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, 
CA. B, Courtesy J. Heuser, Washington University, St. Louis, MO.)

H

a  spiral  staircase.  Subunits  are  spaced  a  fixed  distance 
apart along the axis and each new subunit is rotated by 
a fixed angle relative to the previous subunit. Helices can 
have  one  or  more  strands.  TMV  has  one  strand  of  sub-
units (see Example 4 below), whereas bacterial flagella 
have 11 strands (see Example 3 below). Helices can be 
either solid, like actin filaments (see Example 1 below), 
or hollow, like bacterial flagella (see Example 3 below) 
and TMV (see Example 4 below).

The asymmetry of protein subunits gives most helical 
polymers in biology a polarity (see Examples 1, 3, and 4 
below). Different bonding properties at the two ends of 
the polymer can have important consequences for their 
assembly and functions.

Spherical Assemblies Formed by Regular Polygons 
of Subunits
Geometric constraints limit the ways that identical sub-
units can be arranged on a closed spherical surface with 
equivalent  or  nearly  equivalent  contacts  between  the 
subunits. By far, the most favored arrangement is based 
on a net of equilateral triangles. On a plane surface, these 
triangles will pack hexagonally with sixfold vertices (Fig. 
5.2). Since the time of Plato, it has been appreciated that 
introducing  vertices  surrounded  by  three,  four,  or  five 
triangles will cause such a network of triangles to pucker 
and, given an appropriate number of puckers, to close 
up into a complete shell (Fig. 5.4). Four threefold verti-
ces  make  a  tetrahedron,  six  fourfold  vertices  make  an 
octahedron, and 12 fivefold vertices make an icosahe-
dron. Remarkably, no other ways of arranging triangles 
will complete a shell. In addition to threefold, fourfold, 
or  fivefold  vertices  that  introduce  puckers,  a  closed 
polygon  can  contain  additional  triangular  faces  and 
sixfold  vertices  to  expand  the  volume.  The  sixfold 

FIGURE  5.4  MODELS OF GEOMETRIC SOLIDS. A, A tetrahe-
dron  with  four  threefold  vertices  and  four  triangular  faces.  B,  An 
octahedron  with  six  fourfold  vertices  and  eight  triangular  faces.  
C–H, Various icosahedral solids with 12 fivefold vertices. Many other 
arrangements of subunits are possible. C, One triangle on each face. 
D, Four triangles on each face. E, A dodecahedron with 20 vertices 
and 12 faces. F, An intermediate polyhedron with 60 vertices and 32 
faces  (12  pentagons  and  20  hexagons).  G,  An  extended  structure 
made by including rings of hexagons between two icosahedral hemi-
spheres.  H,  R.  Buckminster  Fuller  standing  in  front  of  one  of  his 
geodesic domes. (From Caspar D, Klug A. Physical principles in the 
construction  of  regular  viruses.  Cold  Spring  Harb  Symp  Quant  Biol. 
1962;27:1–24.)

vertices can be placed symmetrically with respect to the 
fivefold  vertices  to  produce  a  spherical  shell  or  asym-
metrically to form an elongated structure (Fig. 5.4G).

Most closed macromolecular assemblies in biology are 
polygons  with  fivefold  vertices  (see  Examples  5  and  6 
below).  (The  cubic  iron-carrying  protein  ferritin  is  an 
exception.)  An  important  reason  for  this  is  that  most 
structures  require  some  sixfold  vertices  to  provide  suf-
ficient internal volume. This favors fivefold vertices for 
the puckers, as they require much less distortion of the 
subunits located on the triangular faces of the hexagonal 
plane sheet than do threefold or fourfold vertices. Fur-
thermore,  the  distortion  in  the  contacts  between  the 
triangles is minimized if the fivefold vertices are in equiv-
alent positions. Closed icosahedral shells can be assem-
bled  from  any  type  of  asymmetrical  subunit  given  two 
provisions: (a) The subunit must be able to form bonds 

 

CHAPTER 5  n  Macromolecular Assembly 

67

with like subunits in a triangular network; and (b) these 
subunits  must  be  able  to  accommodate  the  distortion 
required to form both fivefold and sixfold vertices. Both 
fibrous (Fig. 5.3B) and globular subunits (see Examples 
5 and 6 below) can fulfill these criteria.

These considerations indicate that subunits in a closed 
macromolecular  assembly  must  be  arranged  in  rings  of 
five or six. A simple variation has three like protein sub-
units on each face, but three different protein subunits, 
or more than three like subunits, can be used on each 
face  to  construct  icosahedrons.  The  closest  packing  is 
achieved  if  the  protein  subunits  form  pentamers  and 
hexamers, but other arrangements on the 20 faces of an 
icosahedron are possible (see Example 6 below).

Assembly Pathways
Understanding  any  assembly  mechanism  depends  on 
determining  the  order  that  the  subunits  bind  together 
and the rates of these reactions. This section describes 
some  general  principles  about  assembly  reactions,  but 
the following examples illustrate that more is generally 
known about the pathways than the reaction rates.

All  self-assembly  processes  depend  on  diffusion-
driven, random, reversible collisions between the sub-
units. As is described in Chapter 4, the rate equation for 
such a second-order bimolecular reaction is

Rate

=

k
+

(

A B
)( )

−

k
−

(

AB

)

where  k+  is  the  association  rate  constant;  k−  is  the  dis-
sociation  rate  constant;  and  (A),  (B),  and  (AB)  are  the 
concentrations of the reactants and products. In assem-
bly reactions A and B are the subunit and the structure 
to  which  it  binds.  Elongation  of  actin  filaments  (see 
Example 1 below) illustrates this mechanism.

The association rate is directly proportional to the 
concentration  of  subunits  and  a  rate  constant  (k+). 
This rate constant depends on the rates of diffusion of 
the subunits, the size of their complementary surfaces, 
and the degree of tolerance in orientation permitted for 
binding. In general, association rate constants are limited 
by diffusion and are in the range of 105 to 107 M−1 s−1 for 
most protein association reactions.

The rate of dissociation (k−) determines the stabili-
ties of complexes formed by random collisions. If two 
macromolecules  collide  in  an  orientation  that  allows  
a  large  number  of  simultaneous  weak  interactions  on  
complementary  surfaces  or  allows  flexible  strands  to 
intertwine  two  subunits,  the  complex  will  dissociate 
slowly. If the surfaces are noncomplementary, few inter-
actions  form  and  the  collision  complex  dissociates 
rapidly.  Collision  complexes  have  a  wide  spectrum  of 
dissociation  rate  constants  ranging  from  greater  than 
1000 s−1  for  very  unstable  complexes  to  less  than 
0.00001 s−1 for very stable complexes. (The former com-
plexes have a half-life of 0.7 ms, whereas the half-life of 

the latter is 16 hours. See Box 4.1 for an explanation of 
half-times.) Thus specificity is achieved by rapid dissocia-
tion of nonspecific complexes.

The  sequence  of  random  collisions,  each  followed  
by separation or bonding, can be viewed as a scanning 
process that allows each molecule to sample a variety of 
interactions.  At  cellular  concentrations  (see  Fig.  3.27), 
macromolecules collide at high rates, but most collisions 
involve  irrelevant  molecules  or  molecules  that  could 
bind but collide in the wrong orientation. Given the high 
frequency of random collisions, it is important that pro-
teins are not intrinsically too “sticky.”

Conformational  changes  following  formation  of  a  
collision  complex  between  subunits  often  stabilize  
interactions.  Because  the  equilibrium  constants  for  all 
the  coupled  reactions  are  multiplied,  a  favorable  con-
formational  change  can  provide  the  major  change  in  
free  energy  holding  a  structure  together  (see  Fig.  4.3).  
Bacterial  flagella  provide  one  clear  example  (see  
Example 3 below).

Large  structures  usually  assemble  by  specific  path-
ways in which new properties emerge at most steps. A 
new binding site for the next subunit may emerge from 
a conformational change in a newly incorporated subunit 
or  by  juxtaposition  of  two  parts  of  a  binding  site  on 
adjacent subunits. Such emergent properties favor addi-
tion of subunits in an orderly fashion until the process 
is  completed.  The  assembly  of  actin  (see  Example  1), 
myosin (see Example 2), tomato bushy stunt virus (see 
Example 5), and bacteriophage T4 (see Example 6) illus-
trates control of assembly by emergent properties.

Initiation of assembly is frequently much less favor-
able  than  its  propagation.  Free  subunits  associating 
randomly cannot participate in all the stabilizing interac-
tions  enjoyed  by  a  subunit  joining  a  preexisting  struc-
ture. Consequently, assembly of the first few subunits to 
form a “nucleus” for further growth may be thousands 
of times less favorable than the steps that follow during  
the  growth  of  the  assembly  (see  Example  1  below).  
The  chance  of  dissociation  from  the  assembly  is  
reduced  once  subunits  can  engage  in  the  full  com-
plement  of  bonds  made  possible  by  conformational 
changes that stabilize  the  structure.  Cells  often  solve 
the  nucleation  problem  by  constructing  specialized 
structures to nucleate the formation of macromolecular  
assemblies  (see  Examples  3  and  6;  also  see  Figs.  33.13 
and 34.16).

Regulation at Multiple Steps on Sequential 
Assembly Pathways
Many assembly reactions proceed spontaneously in vitro, 
but all seem to be tightly regulated in vivo. For example, 
at  the  time  of  mitosis,  cells  disassemble  their  entire 
microtubule network and reassemble the mitotic spindle 
with  the  same  subunits  (Fig.  5.1).  The  following  are 

68 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

some  examples  of  the  mechanisms  that  cells  use  to 
control assembly processes.

Regulation by Subunit Biosynthesis and Degradation
Cells  regulate  the  supply  of  building  blocks  for  assem-
bly reactions. For example, the concentration of unpo-
lymerized tubulin regulates the stability of tubulin mRNA 
providing a feedback mechanism that controls the con-
centration of tubulin subunits available to form microtu-
bules.  On  the  other  hand,  red  blood  cells  regulate  the 
assembly of their membrane skeleton (see Fig. 13.10) by 
synthesizing  a  limiting  amount  of  one  subunit  of  the 
spectrin  heterodimer.  Following  assembly  of  the  mem-
brane  skeleton,  proteolysis  destroys  the  leftover  unas-
sembled copies of the other subunit.

Regulation of Nucleation
Regulation  of  a  rate-limiting  nucleation  step  is  particu-
larly  striking  in  the  case  of  microtubules.  Microtubule 
nucleation  from  subunits  is  so  unfavorable  that  most 
cellular  microtubules  grow  from  preformed  structures 
in  microtubule  organizing  centers  (see  Figs.  5.1  and 
34.16).  Varying  the  number,  position,  and  activity  of 
microtubule  organizing  centers  helps  cells  to  produce 
different  microtubule  arrays  during  interphase  and 
mitosis.

Regulation by Changes in Environmental Conditions
Weak  bonds  between  subunits  allow  cells  to  regulate 
assembly processes with relatively mild changes in con-
ditions, such as in pH or ion concentrations. For example, 
when  TMV  infects  a  plant  cell,  the  low  concentration  
of Ca2+ in cytoplasm promotes disassembly of the virus 
because  Ca2+  links  the  protein  subunits  together  (see 
Example  4  below).  Uncoating  the  RNA  genome  in  this 
way begins a new cycle of replication.

Another  example  is  a  requirement  for  a  phospholi-
pase  to  promote  the  rapid  release  of  the  RNA  genome 
from  picornaviruses  such  as  polio  and  cold  viruses. 
Without the phospholipase, virus particles are engulfed 
and  destroyed  by  autophagy  (see  Chapter  23)  before 
they can replicate and propagate an infection.

Regulation by Covalent Modification of Subunits
Phosphorylation of specific serine, threonine, or tyrosine 
residues  (see  Fig.  25.1)  can  regulate  interactions  of 
protein  subunits  in  macromolecular  assemblies.  This 
strategy is versatile, because the cell cycle and extracel-
lular signals control the activities of the kinases that add 
phosphate  and  the  enzymes,  called  protein  phospha-
tases,  that  reverse  the  modification.  Given  the  uniform 
bonding between subunits of symmetrical macromolecu-
lar  structures,  phosphorylation  of  the  same  amino  acid 
residue on each subunit can control assembly.

Reversible  phosphorylation  regulates  the  assembly  
of  the  nuclear  lamina,  the  filamentous  network  that 

supports the nuclear envelope (see Fig. 9.8). At the onset 
of  mitosis,  a  protein  kinase  adds  phosphate  groups  to  
the  lamina  subunits  causing  the  network  to  fall  apart  
(see  Fig.  44.6).  Removing  these  phosphates  at  the  end 
of mitosis is one step in the reassembly of the nucleus. 
Other  chemical  modifications  can  regulate  assembly 
reactions. Proteolysis is a drastic and irreversible modifi-
cation  used  in  the  assembly  of  the  bacteriophage  T4 
head (see Example 6 below) and collagen (see Fig. 29.4). 
Assembly of collagen fibrils is an extreme example, as it 
requires hydroxylation of prolines and lysines, glycosyl-
ation, disulfide bond formation, oxidation of lysines, and 
chemical crosslinking. Subunits in other assemblies are 
modified by methylation, acetylation, glycosylation, fatty 
acylation, tyrosination, polyglutamylation, or linkage to 
ubiquitin-like proteins.

Regulation by Accessory Proteins
Self-assembly  processes  were  originally  thought  to 
require  only  the  components  found  in  the  final  struc-
ture, but many assembly reactions either require or are 
facilitated by auxiliary factors. Molecular chaperones 
that  promote  protein  folding  (see  Fig.  12.11)  also 
promote assembly reactions. In fact, bacterial mutations 
that  compromised  assembly  of  bacteriophages  led  to 
the  discovery  of  the  original  chaperonin-60,  GroEL  
(see  Fig.  12.14).  This  class  of  chaperones  also  facili-
tates  assembly  of  oligomeric  proteins,  such  as  the  
chloroplast  enzyme  RUBISCO.  Chaperones  may  simply 
prevent  aggregation  during  the  folding  of  subunit  pro-
teins  prior  to  their  assembly.  They  may  also  partici-
pate  directly  in  assembly  reactions,  but  this  has  not 
been  proven.

Bacteriophage  T4  depends  on  accessory  proteins 
coded by the virus to assemble its head. Often, proteoly-
sis  destroys  these  accessory  proteins  prior  to  insertion 
of the viral DNA (see Example 6 below). Bacteriophage 
P22  uses  approximately  250  copies  of  an  accessory 
“scaffolding protein” as a catalyst to guide the initial 
assembly of its capsid protein into an icosahedral head. 
Before the DNA is inserted, the scaffolding proteins exit 
from the interior of the head and recycle to promote the 
assembly of other viruses.

Accessory  molecules  specify  the  size  of  a  few  
assemblies. The best characterized example is the RNA 
genome  precisely  regulating  the  length  of  TMV  (see 
Example 4 below).

Numerous proteins regulate assembly of the cytoskel-
eton,  and  some  are  incorporated  into  the  polymer 
network.  Taking  actin  as  an  example,  different  classes  
of  proteins  regulate  nucleotide  exchange,  determine  
the  concentration  of  monomers  available  for  assembly, 
nucleate and cap the ends of filaments, sever filaments, 
and crosslink filaments into bundles or random networks 
(see Fig. 33.10). Proteins with similar activities regulate 
the assembly of microtubules.

 

CHAPTER 5  n  Macromolecular Assembly 

69

The following examples demonstrate how the general 
principles  govern  the  assembly  of  real  biological 
structures.

EXAMPLE 1  Actin Filaments: Rate-Limiting Nucleation and 
the Concept of Critical Concentration
Actin filaments consist of two strands of subunits wound 
helically  around  one  another  (Fig.  5.5).  (The  structure 
can also be described as a single short-pitch helix with 
all  the  subunits  repeating  every  5.5 nm.)  Each  subunit 
contacts  two  subunits  laterally  and  two  other  subunits 
longitudinally. Hydrogen bonds, electrostatic bonds, and 
hydrophobic  interactions  stabilize  contacts  between 
subunits. Subunits all point in the same direction, so the 
polymer is polar. The appearance of actin filaments with 
bound  myosin  (see  Fig.  33.8)  originally  revealed  the 
polarity now seen directly at atomic resolution. The fila-
ment decorated with myosin looks like a line of arrow-
heads with a point at one end and a barb at the other.
Actin binds adenosine diphosphate (ADP) or adenos-
ine  triphosphate  (ATP)  in  a  deep  cleft.  Irreversible 
hydrolysis of bound ATP during polymerization compli-
cates  the  assembly  process  in  a  number  of  important 
ways (see Fig. 33.9). Here, assembly of ADP-actin, a rela-
tively simple, reversible reaction, illustrates the concepts 
of nucleation and critical concentration.

Initiation of polymerization by pure actin monomers, 
also  called  nucleation,  is  so  unfavorable  that  polymer 
accumulates  only  after  a  lag  during  which  enough  fila-
ments accumulate to detect polymerization (Fig. 5.6C). 
Initiation  of  each  new  filament  is  slow,  because  small 

actin  oligomers  are  exceedingly  unstable.  Actin  dimers 
dissociate on a microsecond time scale, so their concen-
tration  is  low,  making  addition  of  a  third  subunit  rare. 
Actin trimers are more stable than dimers and serve as 
the nucleus for filament growth by adding more subunits 
(Fig. 5.6A). A trimer makes sense as a nucleus because 
it is the smallest oligomer with a complete set of inter-
molecular bonds. Unfavorable nucleation minimizes the 
spontaneous formation of filaments and enables the cell 
to control this reaction with specific nucleating proteins 
(see Figs. 33.12 and 33.14).

Elongation of actin filaments is a bimolecular reaction 
between monomers and a single site on each end of the 
filament (Fig. 5.6B–D). The growth rate of each filament 
is directly proportional to the concentration of subunits. 
If  the  rate  of  assembly  is  graphed  as  a  function  of  the 
concentration of actin monomer, the slope is the associa-
tion rate constant, k+. The y-intercept is the dissociation 
rate  constant,  k−.  The  elongation  rate  is  zero  where  the 
plot  crosses  the  x-axis.  This  monomer  concentration  is 
called the critical concentration. Above this concentra-
tion,  polymers  grow  longer.  Below  this  concentration, 
polymers shrink. Polymers grow until the monomer con-
centration falls to the critical concentration. At the critical 
concentration,  subunits  bind  and  dissociate  at  the  same 
rate.  The  rates  of  association  and  dissociation  are 

A. Actin nucleus assembly
Unstable

intermediate

Actin

nucleus

B. Actin filament assembly

s
r
e
m
o
n
o
m
d
e

 

t
t
i

F

y
t
i
s
n
e
D
M
E

 

B

A

Barbed end

Pointed end

Long-pitch
helix

C. Spontaneous
     polymerization

D. Elongation

36 nm

5.5 nm

Short-pitch
helix

C

12

Μ
µ

 
]
r
e
m
y
o
P

l

[

6

0

0

1
-
c
e
s
 
e

t

a
R

20

10

0

-10

0

k + Barbed end 

k  +   P o i n t e d   e n d  

1.8 µΜ Critical
concentration

k –

4

2
[Actin] µΜ

6

200

400

600

Time (sec)

FIGURE 5.5  ACTIN FILAMENT STRUCTURE. A, Electron micro-
graph of a negatively stained actin filament. B, Model of the actin fila-
ment. The lower part is a reconstruction from electron micrographs. 
The upper part is a ribbon diagram showing the subunits using differ-
ent colors corresponding to C. C, Model showing two ways to describe 
the helix: (1) two long-pitch helices (orange/yellow and blue/green) or 
(2)  a  one-start  short-pitch  helix  including  all  the  subunits  (yellow  to 
green to orange to blue). 

FIGURE  5.6  ACTIN  FILAMENT  ASSEMBLY.  A,  Formation  of  a 
trimeric nucleus from monomers. B, Elongation of the two ends of a 
filament by association and dissociation of monomers. C, Time course 
of  spontaneous  polymerization  of  purified  adenosine  diphosphate 
(ADP)-actin  under  physiological  conditions.  D,  Dependence  of  the 
rates of elongation at the two ends of actin filaments on the concentra-
tion of ADP-actin monomers. (Data from Pollard TD. Rate constants 
for  the  reactions  of  ATP-  and  ADP-actin  with  the  ends  of  actin  fila-
ments. J Cell Biol. 1986;103:2747–2754.)

70 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

somewhat different at the two ends of the polar filament. 
The rapidly growing end is called the barbed end, and the 
slowly growing end is called the pointed end.

EXAMPLE 2  Myosin Filaments: New Properties Emerge as 
the Filaments Grow
Myosin-II forms bipolar filaments held together by inter-
actions of the α-helical, coiled-coil tails of the molecules 
(Fig.  5.7).  Antiparallel  overlap  of  tails  forms  a  central 
bare  zone  flanked  by  filaments  with  protruding  heads. 
On  either  side  of  the  bare  zone,  parallel  interactions 
extend  the  filament.  The  simplest  myosin-II  minifila-
ments from nonmuscle cells consist of just eight mole-
cules  (Fig.  5.7B).  Muscle  myosin  filaments  are  much 
larger but are built on the same plan (Fig. 5.7A). Mole-
cules  are  staggered  at  14.3-nm  intervals  in  these  fila-
ments.  This  arrangement  maximizes  the  ionic  bonds 
between zones of positive and negative charge that alter-
nate  along  the  tail.  Hydrophobic  interactions  are  also 
important;  170  water  molecules  dissociate  from  every 
molecule incorporated into a muscle myosin filament.

Both  types  of  bipolar  myosin-II  filaments  grow  from 
the center, with molecules adding to both ends. Growth 
of  cytoplasmic  myosin-II  minifilaments  is  self-limited. 
Filaments  of  muscle  myosin-II  grow  longer  by  adding 
molecules to the ends of filaments in a diffusion-limited, 
bimolecular reaction. The reaction is unusual in that the 
dissociation  rate  constant  increases  with  the  length  of 
the filament, eventually limiting the length of the polymer 
at the point where the dissociation rate equals the asso-
ciation rate.

EXAMPLE 3  Bacterial Flagella: Assembly with 
a Rate-Limiting Folding Reaction
Bacterial flagella are helical polymers of the protein fla-
gellin  (Fig.  5.8).  Eleven  strands  of  subunits  surround  a 
narrow central channel.

Bare zone

Bipolar

100 nm

100 nm

A

B

FIGURE 5.7  STRUCTURE OF MYOSIN FILAMENTS. A, Skeletal 
muscle myosin filament. Drawing and electron micrograph of a nega-
tively  stained  filament.  B,  Acanthamoeba  myosin-II  minifilament. 
Drawing  and  electron  micrograph  of  a  negatively  stained  filament.  
(A, Courtesy J. Trinick, Bristol University, United Kingdom.)

A. EM surface reconstruction B. Transverse section

C. Flagellin F41 fragment

D1

D2

D3

D. Hook FlgE31 subunit

E. Assembly

Cap

Filament

Exported
flagellin subunit

Junction

Up to 2500 nm

Hook

Outer membrane
Peptidoglycan
Cytoplasmic membrane

Rotary motor

Flagellin subunit synthesized
in the cytoplasm

FIGURE  5.8  STRUCTURE  OF  THE  FLAGELLA  FROM  THE 
BACTERIUM Salmonella typhimurium. A, Surface rendering from 
reconstructions  of  electron  micrographs  with  superimposed  ribbon 
diagrams  of  the  structure  of  the  flagellin  subunit.  B,  Cross  section 
from image processing of electron micrographs, showing the central 
channel  and  superimposed  ribbon  diagrams  of  the  structure  of  the 
flagellin  subunit.  (For  reference,  see  Protein  Data  Bank  [PDB;  www.
rcsb.org] file 1IO1.) C, Ribbon diagram of part of the flagellin subunit. 
(See PDB file 1WLG.) D, Ribbon diagram of the hook subunit, FlgE31. 
E,  Drawing  of  a  flagellar  filament  attached  via  the  hook  segment  to 
the  basal  body,  the  rotary  motor  that  turns  the  flagellum.  The  cap 
structure is found at the distal end of the filament. A flagellin subunit 
in transit through the central channel from its site of synthesis in the 
cytoplasm  to  the  distal  tip  is  shown  in  the  break  in  the  filament. 
(A–B, From Mimori-Kiyosue Y, Yamashita I, Fujiyoshi Y, et  al. Role of 
the outermost subdomain of Salmonella flagellin in the filament struc-
ture revealed by electron cryomicroscopy. J Mol Biol. 1998;284:521–
530.  B,  Data  from  Samatey  FA,  Imada  K,  Nagashima  S,  et  al. 
Structure  of  the  bacterial  flagellar  protofilament  and  implications  for 
a  switch  for  supercoiling.  Nature.  2001;410:331–337.  C,  Data  from 
Samatey FA, Matsunami H, Imada K, et  al. Structure of the bacterial 
flagellar hook and implication for the molecular universal joint mecha-
nism.  Nature.  2004;431:1062–1068.)

 

CHAPTER 5  n  Macromolecular Assembly 

71

Isolated  flagella  elongate  by  addition  of  flagellin.  As 
expected for a bimolecular reaction the rate is propor-
tional to the concentration of flagellin monomers at low 
concentrations (Fig. 5.9A), but unexpectedly, the rate of 
elongation  plateaus  at  a  maximum  of  approximately 
three monomers per second at high flagellin concentra-
tions  (Fig.  5.9B).  This  plateau  occurs  because  a  rate-
limiting step consisting of a relatively slow conformational 
change is required before the next subunit can bind. The 
slow  step  may  involve  folding  of  disordered  parts  of 
flagellin into α-helices that interact to form the two con-
centric cylinders inside the flagellum.

A. Rate vs. flagellin
     low concentrations

B. Rate vs. flagellin
     high concentrations

e

t

a
R

2

1

0

–1

–2

0

0

Plateau

99

66

33

e

t

a
R

k + 

k –

0.1
[Flagellin] µΜ

0.2

0.3

0

0

20

30
10
[Flagellin] µΜ

FIGURE  5.9  ELONGATION  OF  FLAGELLAR  FILAMENTS 
FROM SEEDS (FRAGMENTS OF FLAGELLA) IN VITRO. The plots 
show the dependence of the elongation rate on subunit concentration. 
A,  Low  concentrations.  B,  High  concentrations.  (Modified  from 
Asakura S. A kinetic study of in vitro polymerization of flagellin. J Mol 
Biol. 1968;35:237–239.)

Bacteria use structures called the base plate and hook 
assembly  to  initiate  flagellar  growth  and  to  anchor  the 
flagellum to the rotary motor that turns it (see Fig. 38.25). 
This overcomes extremely unfavorable nucleation reac-
tions.  Amazingly,  flagella  grow  only  at  the  end  located 
farthest  from  the  cell.  Flagellin  subunits  synthesized  in 
the cytoplasm diffuse through the narrow central channel 
of the flagellum (Fig. 5.9) out to the distal tip, where a 
cap  consisting  of  an  accessory  protein  prevents  their 
escape before assembly.

EXAMPLE 4  Tobacco Mosaic Virus: A Helical Polymer 
Assembled With a Molecular Ruler of RNA
TMV was the first biological structure recognized to be 
a helical array of identical subunits, and it was the first 
helical protein structure to be determined at atomic reso-
lution  (Fig.  5.10).  Production  of  infectious  TMV  from 
RNA  and  protein  subunits  was  the  first  self-assembly 
reaction  reproduced  from  purified  components.  At  the 
time, during the 1950s, newspapers proclaimed, “Scien-
tists create life in a test tube!”

The virus is a cylindrical copolymer of one RNA mol-
ecule (the viral genome) and 2130 protein subunits. The 
protein subunits are constructed from a bundle of four 
α-helices,  shaped  somewhat  like  a  bowling  pin.  These 
subunits pack tightly in the virus and are held together 
by  hydrophobic  interactions,  hydrogen  bonds,  and  
salt  bridges.  The  RNA  follows  the  protein  helix  in  a  
spiral from one end of the virus to the other, protected 
in  a  groove  in  the  protein  subunits.  Arginine  residues 
lining the groove neutralize the negative charges along 
the  RNA  backbone  (Fig.  5.10B).  Each  protein  subunit 

A

B

RNA
+

Protein
nucleus

Elongation at

neutral pH

Limit at

neutral pH

C

D

FIGURE 5.10  STRUCTURE AND ASSEMBLY OF TOBACCO MOSAIC VIRUS. A, Atomic structure of the protein subunit with the backbone 
in gray, beta carbons of acidic residues in red and beta carbons of basic residues in blue. B, The helical arrangement of protein subunits and 
their interactions with the individual nucleotides of RNA in red. Note the basic residues in the protein groove that binds the RNA. C, The subunit 
protein  forms  small  oligomers  of  two  plus  turns  at  neutral  pH  that  can  elongate  in  the  presence  of  RNA.  D,  Electron  micrograph  of  tobacco 
mosaic virus (TMV) frozen in amorphous ice. (For reference, see PDB file 2TMV. A–C, Modified from drawings of D. Caspar, Florida State University, 
Tallahassee, FL. D, Courtesy R. Milligan, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA.)

72 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

also  makes  hydrophobic  and  electrostatic  interactions 
with three RNA bases.

RNA regulates assembly of the protein subunits in two 
ways.  First,  RNA  allows  the  protein  to  polymerize  at  a 
physiological  pH.  Protein  alone  forms  helical  polymers 
of varying lengths at nonphysiological acidic pH, but at 
neutral pH it forms only unstable oligomers of 30 to 40 
protein  subunits,  slightly  more  than  two  turns  of  the 
helix (Fig. 5.10C). RNA promotes folding of disordered 
loops  lining  the  central  channel  of  these  oligomers, 
acting as a switch to drive propagation of the helix by 
incorporating additional protein subunits. Second, RNA 
is the molecular ruler that determines the precise length 
of the assembled virus. Only after interacting with RNA 
at the growing end of the polymer can subunits fold into 
a structure compatible with a stable virus.

EXAMPLE 5  Tomato Bushy Stunt Virus: Quasi-equivalent 
Bonding Between Protein Subunits
The  first  atomic  structure  of  a  spherical  virus  (tomato 
bushy  stunt  virus,  TBSV)  revealed  that  the  flexibility 
required  to  form  both  fivefold  and  sixfold  icosahedral 
vertices  lies  within  the  protein  subunit  rather  than  in  
the bonds between subunits. The 180 identical subunits 
associate in pairs in two different ways, distinguished in 
Fig.  5.11  by  the  green-blue  and  red  colors.  The  blue 
subunit  of  the  green-blue  pairs  is  used  exclusively  for 
fivefold  vertices.  Three  red  subunits  and  three  green 
subunits form sixfold vertices. External contacts of both 
green-blue and red pairs with their neighbors are similar, 
but  the  contacts  between  pairs  of  red  subunits  differ 
from  pairs  of  green-blue  subunits.  The  difference  is 
achieved by changing the position of the amino-terminal 
portion of the coat protein polypeptide chain. Two sub-
units in green-blue pairs pack tightly against each other, 
providing the sharp curvature required at fivefold verti-
ces. In red dimers, the amino-terminal peptide acts as a 
wedge  to  pry  the  inner  domains  of  the  subunits  apart 
and  flatten  the  surface,  as  is  appropriate  for  sixfold  
vertices.  Thus,  the  flexible  arm  acts  like  a  switch  to 
determine  the  local  curvature.  This  subunit  flexibility 
accommodates  the  12-degree  difference  in  packing  at 
fivefold and sixfold vertices. Other spherical viruses use 
a  similar  strategy  to  achieve  quasiequivalent  packing 
of identical subunits.

TBSV provided the first of many examples of flexible 
arms that lace subunits together. Amino-terminal exten-
sions of three red subunits intertwine at sixfold vertices. 
As  if  holding  hands,  these  arms  form  a  continuous 
network on the inner surface, reinforcing the coat.

Icosahedral plant viruses like TBSV can assemble from 
pure protein and RNA, although in cells they assemble 
in  association  with  intracellular  membranes,  reactions 
facilitated  by  ESCRT,  the  endosomal  sorting  complex 
required  for  transport  (see  Fig.  22.17).  An  attractive 
hypothesis for self-assembly from dimers of coat protein 

A

Monomer

RNA-binding
  domain
Connecting
  arm

Shell
  domain
Projecting
  domain

B

C

D

E
FIGURE  5.11  TOMATO  BUSHY  STUNT  VIRUS  STRUCTURE 
AND  ASSEMBLY  PATHWAY.  A,  Ribbon  diagram  of  a  coat  protein 
subunit.  (See  PDB  file  2TBV.)  B,  Block  diagram  of  one  subunit. 
C,  Block  diagrams  of  dimers  of  coat  protein  subunits.  D,  Proposed 
nucleus  for  a  sixfold  vertex  with  three  dimers  (red).  Three  additional 
dimers (green-blue) are proposed to add to complete a sixfold vertex. 
Five blue subunits associate to make a fivefold vertex. E, Two different 
surface representations of the viral capsid showing the quasi-equivalent 
positions occupied by red, blue, and green subunits. (C–D, Modified 
from  Olson  A,  Bricogne  G,  Harrison  S.  Structure  of  tomato  bushy  
stunt virus IV. The virus particle at 2.9 Å resolution. J Mol Biol. 1983;
171:61–93.)

is  that  local  information  built  into  the  growing  shell 
specifies the pathway. Three dimers in the red conforma-
tion bind a specific viral RNA sequence, forming a nucle-
ating structure similar to a sixfold vertex. Folding of the 
arms in this nucleus forces the next three dimers to take  
the  green-blue  conformation,  since  no  intermolecular 
binding  sites  are  available  for  their  arms.  The  greater 
curvature of the green-blue dimers dictates that fivefold 
vertices form at regular positions around the nucleating 
sixfold  vertex.  Additional  fivefold  vertices  form  appro-
priately  as  positions  for  this  more  favored  association 

 

CHAPTER 5  n  Macromolecular Assembly 

73

become available around the growing shell. The beauty 
of  this  idea  is  that  local  information  (the  availability  of 
intermolecular  binding  sites  for  strands)  automatically 
favors the insertion of green-blue or red dimers, as appro-
priate, to complete the icosahedral shell.

EXAMPLE 6  Bacteriophage T4: Three Irreversible Assembly 
Pathways Form a Metastable Structure
Bacteriophage T4 is a virus of the bacterium Escherichia 
coli  (Fig.  5.12).  Genetic  analysis  established  that  more 
than 49 distinct gene products contribute to assembly of 
this virus. Three separate, multicomponent substructures— 
heads, tails, and tail fibers—assemble along independent 
pathways  and  combine  to  form  the  virus  (Fig.  5.13). 
Emergence  of  new  properties  automatically  orders  the 
steps  along  each  pathway,  so  assembly  occurs  sequen-
tially  even  in  the  presence  of  reactive  pools  of  all  the 
subunits. A good product is ensured, because defective 
subassemblies fail to attach and are rejected.

A protein complex nucleates the growth of a prelimi-
nary  version  of  the  icosahedral  head  and  later  attaches 

Head with DNA 
(85 × 115 nm)

Collar attached 
to neck
Whiskers

Sheath
(98 × 22 nm)

Long tail fiber
(3.5 × 150 nm)

Baseplate
Tail spike (17 nm)

one vertex of the head to the tail. A complex of the major 
head protein with several accessory proteins adds to the 
growing  head.  The  accessory  proteins  end  up  inside  
the precursor head. After proteolysis cleaves 20% of the 
peptide from the N-terminus of the major head protein 
and degrades the accessory proteins, a major conforma-
tional change shifts part of the head protein from inside 
to outside and expands the volume of the head by 16%. 
Then,  an  ATP-driven  rotary  motor  inserts  the  166,000- 
base-pair DNA molecule into the head through a hole in 
a vertex. This motor, one of the strongest in nature, can 
produce  a  force  of  70  pN,  enough  to  compress  the  
DNA  inside  the  head  to  a  pressure  of  60  atmospheres. 

Tail

Head

Base
plate

5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 25,
26, 27, 28, 29,
51, 53, frd, td

 alt, IpI, IpII, IpIII,
 20, 21, 22, 23, 24,
(31), 40, 66, 67, 68

Tail
spikes

9, 11, 12, (57)
(can add later)

54, 48

Core

19

Sheath

18

3, 15

Whiskers

wac

gp20 portal protein

16, 17

DNA

ATP hydrolysis

2, 4, 50, 64,
65, soc, hoc

13, 14

Spontaneous
assembly

Tail fibers

(distal)

 36, 37,
(38), (57)

35

A

B

Tail tube (98 × 9 nm with
3-nm diameter channel)

Injected DNA

63

Completed
virus

34, (57)

Tail fibers
(proximal)

FIGURE 5.12  STRUCTURE OF BACTERIOPHAGE T4. A, Infec-
tious phage particle. B, Association with Escherichia coli and injection 
of DNA by contraction of the sheath. (Data from Leiman PG, Chipman 
PR,  Kostyuchenko  VA,  et al.  Three-dimensional  rearrangement  of  
proteins  in  the  tail  of  bacteriophage  T4  on  infection  of  its  host.  
Cell. 2004;118:419–429.)

FIGURE 5.13  ASSEMBLY PATHWAY OF BACTERIOPHAGE T4. 
The  numbers  refer  to  genes  required  at  each  step.  ATP,  adenosine 
triphosphate.  (Modified  from  Wood  WB,  Edgar  RS,  King  J,  et al.  
Bacteriophage assembly. Fed Proc. 1968;27:1160–1166.)

74 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

Within the head, the pressurized DNA is restrained in a 
near-crystalline,  metastable  state  until  it  is  released 
during infection of the E. coli host.

The tail is a double cylinder of a rod-like, helical core 
and  a  loosely  fitting  helical  sheath,  both  attached  to  a 
base plate. A complicated pathway involving at least 15 
gene  products  and  13  steps  assembles  the  hexagonal 
base plate. One of these proteins, acting like a “safety” 
on  a  gun,  stabilizes  its  shape.  A  plug  in  the  middle  of  
the  hexagonal  base  plate  nucleates  the  polymerization 
of core subunits. Next, the sheath subunits polymerize 
into a helical lattice that mimics the underlying core. In 
mutants that lack base plates, sheath subunits assemble 
inefficiently into a shorter and fatter helix.

The  three  assembly  lines  converge,  joining  heads  to 
tails and then adding the six long, independently assem-
bled tail fibers that give the completed virus its spider-
like  appearance.  Attachment  of  tail  fibers  to  the  base 
plate somehow removes the “safety” that held the base 
plate in its hexagonal form. The finished bacteriophage 
is hardy enough to survive for 20 years at 4°C in a meta-
stable state, poised to infect its bacterial host.

When tail fibers contact a susceptible bacterium, dra-
matic  structural  changes  in  the  sheath  force  the  tail  
core through both bacterial membranes in a syringe-like 
fashion  (Fig.  5.13B).  The  base  plate  changes  from  a 
hexagon into a six-pointed star that cuts loose the central 
plug  with  its  attached  tail  core.  The  weakness  of  the 
contacts between sheath and core allows the sheath to 
“recrystallize” into its preferred short, fat, helical form. 
Because  the  sheath  is  firmly  attached  at  both  the  base 
plate and the top of the tail core, this spring-like contrac-
tion  drives  the  core  through  the  base  plate  into  the 
bacterium. This action also unplugs the head, allowing 
the pressurized DNA to extrude through the channel in 
the  core  into  the  bacterium.  Thus  the  linear  assembly 
reactions  and  an  adenosine  triphosphatase  (ATPase) 

motor produce a machine that does physical work when 
triggered.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

We  thank  Tony  Crowther  for  his  suggestions  on  revi-
sions to this chapter for the second edition.

SELECTED READINGS

Caspar  DLD.  Virus  structure  puzzle  solved.  Curr  Biol.  1992;2:

169-171.

Caspar DLD, Klug A. Physical principles in the construction of regular 

viruses. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 1962;27:1-24.

Harrison  SC.  What  do  viruses  look  like?  Harvey  Lect.  1991;85:

127-152.

Leiman PG, Chipman PR, Kostyuchenko VA, et al. Three-dimensional 
rearrangement of proteins in the tail of bacteriophage T4 on infec-
tion of its host. Cell. 2004;118:419-429.

Liddington RC, Yan Y, Moulai J, et al. Structure of simian virus 40 at 

3.8 A resolution. Nature. 1991;354:278-284.

Namba K, Stubbs G. Structure of tobacco mosaic virus at 3.6 A resolu-

tion: Implications for assembly. Science. 1986;231:1401-1406.

Oosawa  F,  Asakura  S.  Thermodynamics  of  the  Polymerization  of 

Protein. New York: Academic Press; 1975.

Pollard  TD,  Blanchoin  L,  Mullins  RD.  Biophysics  of  actin  filament 
dynamics  in  nonmuscle  cells.  Annu  Rev  Biophys  Biomol  Struct. 
2000;29:545-576.

Rossmann MG, Mesyanzhinov VV, Arisaka F, Leiman PG. The bacterio-
injection  machine.  Curr  Opin  Struct  Biol. 

phage  T4  DNA 
2004;14:171-180.

Simpson AA, Tao Y, Leiman PG, et al. Structure of the bacteriophage 

phi29 DNA packaging motor. Nature. 2000;408:745-750.

Sinard JH, Pollard TD. Acanthamoeba myosin-II minifilaments assem-
ble  on  a  millisecond  time  scale  with  rate  constants  greater  than 
those expected for a diffusion limited reaction. J Biol Chem. 1990;
265:3654-3660.

Smith  DE,  Tans  SJ,  Smith  SB,  et al.  The  bacteriophage  straight  phi29 
portal motor can package DNA against a large internal force. Nature. 
2001;413:748-752.

Wood WB. Genetic control of bacteriophage T4 morphogenesis. Symp 

Soc Dev Biol. 1973;31:29-46.

Research Strategies

Research  in  cell  biology  aims  to  discover  how  cells 

work at the molecular level. Powerful tools are available 
to achieve this goal. To understand how these methods 
contribute  to  explaining  cellular  function,  this  chapter 
begins  with  a  brief  account  of  the  synthetic  approach 
used in cell biology. This strategy is based on the premise 
that one can understand a complex cellular process by 
reducing the system to its constituent parts and charac-
terizing their properties to generate mechanistic hypoth-
eses  for  testing  in  live  cells.  This  approach,  also  called 
reductionism,  has  dominated  cell  biology  research 
since the middle of the 20th century and has succeeded 
time after time. For example, most of what is understood 
about  protein  synthesis  has  come  from  isolating  and 
characterizing  ribosomes,  messenger  RNAs  (mRNAs), 
transfer RNAs (tRNAs), and accessory factors. In this and 
many other cases, proof of function has been established 
by  reconstituting  a  process  from  isolated  parts  of  the 
molecular  machine,  verifying  these  conclusions  with 
genetic  experiments  and  quantitative  measurements  in 
live  cells.  Most  processes  are  sufficiently  complicated 
that  computer  simulations  of  mathematical  models  are 
an important part of interpreting the observations.

This reductionist approach involves much more than 
simply  identifying  the  molecular  parts  of  a  cellular 
machine. Essential tasks include the following (note that 
after item 1, the order can vary):
1.  Defining a biological question
2.  Making  a  complete  inventory  of  the  participating 

molecules

3.  Localizing the molecules in cells
4.  Measuring 
molecules

the  cellular  concentrations  of 

the 

5.  Determining atomic structures of the molecules
6.  Identifying molecular partners and pathways in the 

system

7.  Measuring  rate  and  equilibrium  constants  for  the 

reactions

8.  Reconstituting  the  biological  process  from  purified 

molecules

C H A P T E R 

6 

9.  Testing  for  physiological  function  with  genetics, 

drugs, or other approaches

10.  Formulating  a  mathematical  model  and  simulating 

the behavior of the system
This full agenda is complete for a few biological pro-
cesses, such as bacterial chemotaxis (see Figs. 27.12 and 
27.13). Often, much is known about some aspects of a 
process, such as a partial list of participating molecules, 
the localization of these molecules in a cell, or functional 
tests by removing the genes for one or more molecules 
from  an  experimental  organism.  Less  often  is  enough 
information  available  about  molecular  concentrations 
and reaction rates to formulate and simulate a dynamical 
mathematical  model  of  the  process  to  verify  that  the 
whole system actually works as anticipated. Thus, much 
work remains to be done.

Imaging
Microscopy of live and fixed cells often provides initial 
hypotheses about the mechanisms of cellular processes. 
Imaging is also a valuable adjunct to genetic analysis and 
testing mechanisms.

Microscopy is useful for cell biologists, owing to for-
tunate  coincidences  within  the  electromagnetic  spec-
trum.  First,  the  wavelength  of  visible  light  (390  to 
700 nm) is suitable for imaging cells and their membrane 
bounded  organelles  (0.5 µm  to  tens  of  micrometers), 
and the wavelength of electrons (~0.004 nm) is right for 
imaging macromolecular assemblies (angstroms to nano-
meters)  and  larger  objects  such  as  cellular  organelles. 
Second, one can focus visible light with glass lenses and 
electrons with electromagnetic lenses.

Resolution,  the  ability  to  discriminate  two  points,  
is  directly  related  to  the  wavelength  of  the  light.  The 
equation is

D = 0 61.
λ

N

sin

α

where D is the resolution, λ is the wavelength of light, 
N is the refractive index of the medium between objects 

 75

76 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

(~1  for  cells),  and  sin  α  is  the  numerical  aperture  of 
the lens (up to 1.4 for light microscopes). The limit of 
resolution with visible light and glass lenses is normally 
approximately 0.2 µm. Fortunately, various superresolu-
tion methods described below allow much higher reso-
lution  imaging  with  visible  light.  Soft  x-rays  with  a 
wavelength of approximately 3 nm have the potential to 
provide high resolution, but are not practical for routine 
imaging because the lenses are relatively crude. However, 
analysis  of  molecular  crystals  by  diffraction  of  higher 
energy  x-rays  (wavelength  ~0.1 nm)  is  a  powerful 
method for determining structures of macromolecules at 
atomic resolution. The wavelength of electrons acceler-
ated at 100 kiloelectron volt (keV) is small, and with new 
detectors and image averaging, researchers are now able 
to  achieve  resolutions  of  less  than  1 nm,  making  them 
preferable to x-rays for visualizing large macromolecular 
assemblies.

Microscopes have two functions. The first is to enlarge 
an image of the specimen so that it can be seen with the 
eye or a camera. Just as important, but less appreciated, 
microscopes  must  produce  contrast  so  that  details  of 
the enlarged image stand out from each other.

Light Microscopy Methods
Six methods are used to produce contrast in light micro-
graphs of biological specimens (Table 6.1 and Fig. 6.1). 
These are called wide-field methods, as a broad beam of 
illuminating light is focused on the specimen by a con-
denser lens.

The classic light microscopic method is bright field, 
whereby  the  specimen  is  illuminated  with  white  light. 
However,  most  cells  absorb  very  little  visible  light  and 
thus  show  little  contrast  with  bright-field  illumination 
(Fig.  6.2A).  For  this  reason,  specimens  are  fixed  with 
crosslinking  chemicals  and  permeabilized  before  stain-
ing with organic dyes that absorb light and create con-
trast. Three-dimensional tissues are fixed and embedded 
in  paraffin  or  plastic,  before  cutting  sections  with  a 

microtome (a device that cuts a series of thin slices from 
the  surface  of  a  specimen),  and  staining  with  a  variety 
of  dyes  (for  examples,  see  Figs.  28.3,  29.3,  29.8,  31.1, 
32.1, 32.2, 32.5, 32.7, 32.9, and 40.1). Alternatively, sec-
tions may be taken from frozen tissue and then stained. 
In either case, the cells are killed by fixation or section-
ing prior to observation.

Observations  of  live  cells  require  other  methods  
to  produce  contrast.  Most  of  these  methods  are  also 
useful for fixed cells. Phase-contrast microscopy gen-
erates  contrast  by  interference  between  light  scattered  
by the specimen and a slightly delayed reference beam 
of light. Small variations in either thickness or refractive 
index  (speed  of  light)  can  be  detected,  even  within  
specimens that absorb little or no light (Fig. 6.2B). Dif-
ferential 
interference  contrast  (DIC)  produces 
an  image  that  looks  as  though  it  is  illuminated  by  an 
oblique  shaft  of  light  (Fig.  6.2C)  but  is  actually  a  
thin  optical  section  of  the  specimen.  Two  nearby 
beams interfere with each other, producing contrast in 
proportion  to  the  gradient  of  local  differences  in  the 
refractive index across the specimen. Thus, an organelle 
with  a  high  refractive  index  (slow  speed  of  light)  in 
cytoplasm  will  appear  light  on  one  side  (where  the 
refractive  index  is  increasing  with  respect  to  the  cyto-
plasm)  and  dark  on  the  other  (where  the  refractive  
index  is  decreasing).  Computer  processing  can  greatly 
enhance  contrast  and  remove  optical  artifacts  from 
images.  For  example,  computer-enhanced  DIC  can 
increase  the  contrast  enough  to  image  single  microtu-
bules (see Fig. 34.6).

Dark-field  microscopy and polarization  micros-
copy  have  specialized  uses  in  biology.  In  dark-field 
microscopy,  the  specimen  is  illuminated  at  an  oblique 
angle so that only light scattered by the specimen is col-
lected  by  the  objective  lens.  Recall  how  easy  it  is  to 
detect  tiny  dust  particles  in  a  beam  of  light  in  a  dark 
room.  The  contrast  is  so  great  that  a  single  isolated 
microtubule  stands  out  brightly  from  the  dark  back-
ground.  However,  a  dark-field  image  of  something  as 

TABLE 6.1  Methods for Producing Contrast in Light Microscopy
Type

Principle

Requirements

Bright field

Absorption of visible light

Light-absorbing stains on a thin 

Fluorescence

Emission of light by fluorescent 

molecule

specimen

Cellular molecules labeled with 

fluorescent dyes or expression of 
fluorescent proteins

Phase contrast

Variations in thickness and refractive 

Relatively flat cells

index within specimen

Differential interference 

Gradient of refractive index across the 

May be used on thick, unstained 

contrast (DIC)

specimen

specimens

Dark field
Polarization

Scattering of light
Differences in refractive index for 

Relatively thin, simple specimen
Birefringent (highly ordered along a 

perpendicular beams of polarized light

linear axis) elements in specimen

Live Cells

Fixed Cells

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

 

CHAPTER 6  n  Research Strategies 

77

A. Upright light microscope
     generic light path

B. Inverted light
     microscope
     generic light path

C. Inverted
     epifluorescence
     microscope

D. Transmission
     electron microscope

Lamp

Mirror

Fluorescent
specimen

+

+

Eyepiece

Observer
or camera
Ocular lens

Ocular lens

Processing optics
Objective lenses
Specimen
Condenser lenses
Diaphragm
Processing optics

Mirror

Field diaphragm

Lamp lens

Lamp

Condenser
lens

White
light

Green filter

Diaphragm

Specimen
Objective
lens
Processing
optics

Mirror

Observer
or camera

Ocular
lens

Electron gun
Anode
Condenser lens
Specimen
Objective lens

Projector lenses

Observer

Window

Fluorescent
screen or
camera

Objective lens

Dichroic
mirror

VACUUM

FIGURE  6.1  LIGHT  PATHS  THROUGH  LIGHT  AND  ELECTRON  MICROSCOPES.  A,  Optical  path  in  an  upright  light  microscope.  The 
condenser lens focuses light on the specimen. Light interacts with the specimen. The objective lens collects and recombines the altered beam. 
An ocular lens projects the enlarged image onto the eye or a camera. Processing optics produce contrast by phase contrast, differential interfer-
ence, or polarization. B, Optical path in an inverted light microscope. C, Epi-illumination for fluorescence microscopy. The objective lens acts as 
the  condenser  to  focus  the  exciting,  short-wavelength  light  (green,  in  this  example)  on  the  specimen.  Fluorescent  molecules  in  the  specimen 
absorb the exciting light and emit longer-wavelength light (red, in this example). The same objective lens collects emitted long-wavelength light. 
A dichroic mirror in the light path reflects the exciting light and transmits emitted light. An additional filter (not shown) blocks any short-wavelength 
light from reaching the viewer. D, Optical path in a transmission electron microscope. Electromagnetic lenses carry out the same functions as 
glass lenses in a light microscope. The image may be observed visually when the electrons produce visible light from a fluorescent screen or 
recorded on film or by a digital camera. 

A. Bright field

B. Phase contrast

C. DIC

D. Fluorescence

E. Bright field

F. Phase contrast

G. DIC

H. Polarization

FIGURE 6.2  COMPARISON OF METHODS TO PRODUCE CONTRAST. A–D, Micrographs of a spread mouse 3T3 cell grown in tissue 
culture on a microscope slide, then fixed and stained with rhodamine-phalloidin, a fluorescent peptide that binds actin filaments. Contrast methods 
include bright field (A), phase contrast (B), differential interference contrast (DIC) (C), and fluorescence (D). E–H, Micrographs of myofibrils isolated 
from skeletal muscle. Contrast methods include bright field (E), phase contrast (F), differential interference contrast (G), and polarization (H). The 
A-bands, consisting of parallel thick filaments of myosin (see Fig. 39.3), appear as dark bands with phase contrast and are birefringent (either 
bright or dark, depending on the orientation) with polarization. (A–D, Courtesy R. Mahaffy, Yale University, New Haven, CT.)

78 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

complicated as cytoplasm is confusing, owing to multi-
ple overlapping objects that scatter light.

In  polarization  microscopy,  the  specimen  is  placed 
between two crossed polarizing filters so no light passes 
through the second polarizer unless the specimen modi-
fies its polarization state. This happens if the polarized 
light  passes  more  slowly  through  the  specimen  when 
vibrating  in  one  plane  than  when  vibrating  in  the  per-
pendicular plane (much as a saw cuts wood faster with 
the grain than across it). The filaments in striated muscle 
(Fig.  6.2H)  and  microtubules  in  a  mitotic  spindle  are 
among the few biological specimens aligned well enough 
to be birefringent and produce contrast in a polarization 
microscope.  New  innovations  are  expanding  the  capa-
bilities of this approach.

Fluorescence Microscopy
Remarkable  sensitivity  makes  fluorescence  micros-
copy a powerful tool. Digital cameras can image a single 
fluorescent  molecule.  When  a  fluorescent  molecule 
absorbs  a  photon,  an  electron  is  excited  into  a  higher 
state.  Nanoseconds  later,  the  electron  falls  back  to  
its  ground  state  and  most  of  the  energy  is  converted  
into  a  longer-wavelength  (lower-energy)  photon.  For 
example, the fluorescent dye rhodamine absorbs green 
light  (shorter  wavelength)  and  emits  red  light  (longer 
wavelength).

Fluorescent Probes
Fluorescence  microscopy  requires  a  fluorescent  mole-
cule, either an organic dye or fluorescent protein in the 
specimen.  The  historic  approach  was  to  target  mole-
cules  in  fixed,  permeabilized  cells  with  a  protein  or 
nucleic acid labeled with a fluorescent dye. A powerful 
version  of  this  strategy  uses  antibodies,  proteins  pro-
duced  by  the  immune  system  (see  Fig.  28.8),  to  react 
with specific molecular targets. Antibodies can be tagged 
with fluorescent dyes and used to localize molecules in 
cells  by  fluorescence  microscopy  (Fig.  6.3E).  This  is 
called fluorescent antibody staining or immunofluores-
cence. Another approach is to label an oligonucleotide 
with  a  fluorescent  dye  to  probe  for  nucleic  acids  with 
complementary sequences in fixed cells, a process called 
fluorescence in situ hybridization or FISH (see Fig. 8.10). 
Similarly,  one  can  attach  a  fluorescent  dye  to  a  small 
molecule that binds tightly to a cellular component, such 
as phalloidin binding to actin filaments, to localize them 
in cells (Fig. 6.2D).

The  application  of  fluorescence  microscopy  to  live 
cells  began  with  labeling  a  purified  lipid,  protein,  or 
nucleic  acid  with  a  fluorescent  dye.  When  introduced 
into  a  live  cell  by  microinjection  or  other  means,  the 
tagged  molecule  often  seeks  its  natural  location  (see  
Figs. 37.6 and 38.9).

The discovery of naturally fluorescent proteins, such 
as  green  fluorescent  protein  (GFP)  from  jellyfish, 
made  it  possible  to  genetically  encode  fluorescent  tags 
and track individual proteins in live cells. DNA-encoding 
GFP is joined (usually to one end) to the coding sequence 
for a protein and introduced into cells where it directs 
the synthesis of a fusion protein consisting of GFP linked 
to the protein of interest. Ideally, homologous recombi-
nation or genome editing (Fig. 6.16) is used to replace 
the  wild-type  gene  with  the  coding  sequence  for  GFP 
fusion protein in the genome of the test cell. Where this 
is difficult or impossible, the GFP fusion protein can be 
produced from exogenous DNA or RNA introduced into 
the  cell.  A  critical  but  often  neglected  aspect  of  these 
studies  is  to  demonstrate  by  genetic  or  biochemical 
experiments that the fusion protein functions normally. 
GFP fluorescence marks the fusion protein wherever it 
goes  in  the  cell  and  can  be  measured  to  count  labeled 
molecules (Fig. 6.3A–C).

Mutations in GFP can change its fluorescence proper-
ties,  providing  fluorescent  proteins  with  a  range  of 
colors. When attached to different protein types, these 
probes allow two or more protein species to be visual-
ized  simultaneously  in  the  same  cell  (Fig.  6.3D).  Other 
mutations  allow  UV  light  to  turn  on  the  fluorescence 
(photoactivation)  or  change  the  wavelength  of  the 
emitted  light  (photoswitching).  Fluorescent  proteins 
have been engineered into “biosensors” to measure pH 
or Ca2+ concentration or a protein’s behavior/interactions.
Inventive imaging techniques make good use of these 
new  optical  probes.  For  example,  one  can  bleach  the 
GFP in part of the cell with strong light and observe over 
time  how  GFP  from  other  parts  of  the  cell  fills  in  the 
dark  area  (Fig.  6.3F).  Such  a  fluorescence  recovery  
after  photobleaching  (FRAP)  experiment  reveals  how 
molecules  move  by  diffusion  in  the  cytoplasm  or  in  
the  plane  of  cellular  membranes.  Other  applications  
include  fluorescence  resonance  energy  transfer  (FRET) 
to measure the distance between fluorophores and fluo-
rescence  correlation  spectroscopy  (FCS)  to  measure  
diffusion  coefficients  of  molecules  in  a  narrow  beam  
of light.

Imaging Methods for Fluorescence Microscopy
The standard method of illumination, called epifluores-
cence, uses the objective lens to both excite and image 
fluorescence  (Fig.  6.1C).  Filters  and  dichroic  mirrors  
that  reflect  short  wavelengths  direct  the  exciting  light 
through the objective to the specimen. Fluorescent mol-
ecules in the specimen emit longer-wavelength light in 
every direction, some of which is collected by the objec-
tive.  The  emitted  light  passes  through  the  dichroic 
mirror and a camera records the image. Emission filters 
remove  any  exciting  light  scattered  by  the  specimen. 
Because  the  exciting  light  passes  through  the  entire 

 

CHAPTER 6  n  Research Strategies 

79

AA. DIC

B. Fluorescence

C. Deconvolution stereo

D. Confocal

E. Immunostained Golgi

F. Golgi FRAP experiment

Prebleach

Postbleach

20 sec

2 min

FIGURE  6.3  FLUORESCENCE  MICROSCOPY  METHODS.  A–C,  Light  micrographs  of  live  fission  yeast  expressing  green  fluorescence 
protein (GFP) fused to myosin-I. A, Differential interference contrast (DIC). B, Standard wide-field fluorescence of the same cells. C, Stereo pair 
of a three-dimensional reconstruction of a stack of optical sections made by deconvolution of wide-field images. Removal of out-of-focus blur 
improves the resolution and contrast of small patches enriched in myosin-I. A stereo view is obtained by focusing your left eye on the left image 
and right eye on the right image. This can be achieved by holding the micrographs close to your eyes and then gradually withdrawing the page 
about 12 inches. D, Scanning confocal fluorescence micrograph of fission yeast cells showing red microtubules and green Tea 1 protein (a protein 
involved in determining cell shape). This thin optical section eliminates the blur from fluorescence in other planes of focus. E–F, Fluorescence 
recovery after photobleaching (FRAP). E, A fibroblast cell in tissue culture stained with fluorescent antibodies for the Golgi apparatus (yellow) and 
microtubules (green) and with the fluorescent dye DAPI (4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole) for DNA (blue). F, A series of fluorescence micrographs of 
a fibroblast cell expressing GFP-galactosyltransferase, which concentrates in the Golgi apparatus. The GFP in a bar-shaped zone is bleached 
with a strong pulse of light, and the fluorescence is followed over time. After 2 minutes GFP-galactosyltransferase redistributes by lateral diffusion 
in the membranes to fill in the bleached zone. (A–C, From Lee W-L, Bezanilla M, Pollard TD. Fission yeast myosin-I, Myo1p, stimulates actin 
assembly by Arp2/3 complex and shares functions with WASp. J Cell Biol 2000;151:789–800. D, Courtesy Hilary Snaith and Kenneth Sawin, 
University  of  Edinburgh,  United  Kingdom.  E–F,  Courtesy  J.  Lippincott-Schwartz,  N.  Altan,  and  K.  Hirschberg,  National  Institutes  of  Health, 
Bethesda, MD.)

specimen, out of focus light emitted by molecules above 
and below the focal plane blurs the image (Fig. 6.3B).

Superimposition  and  out-of-focus  noise  can  be  mini-
mized either computationally or optically. An image pro-
cessing  method  called  deconvolution  produces  clear 
fluorescence images of thick specimens by using an itera-
tive computer process to restore light that is blurred out 
of focus to its proper focal plane. Starting with a stack 
of blurry images taken with a traditional wide-field micro-
scope  at  different  focal  planes  all  the  way  through  the 
specimen,  this  method  produces  a  remarkably  detailed 
three-dimensional  image  in  sharp  focus  throughout  
(Fig. 6.3C).

Several  optical  methods  are  used  to  image  thin  sec-
tions of a specimen. In total internal reflection fluo-
rescence microscopy (Fig. 6.4G–H), an oblique beam 

of exciting light is reflected from the interface between 
the  slide  and  the  aqueous  specimen,  setting  off  an  
evanescent  wave  that  penetrates  the  specimens  only 
approximately 100 nm. This excites molecules only near 
the surface of the slide and avoids fluorescent molecules 
deeper in the specimen.

Confocal microscopy produces thin optical sections 
of  fluorescent  specimens  by  illuminating  with  one  or 
many  points  of  laser  light  sharply  focused  in  all  three 
directions: x, y, and z (Fig. 6.4A–D). These points of light 
are  scanned  across  the  specimen  in  a  raster  (parallel 
lines)  pattern  to  excite  fluorescent  molecules.  Light 
emitted at each consecutive point in the specimen passes 
through a pinhole in front of the camera to remove out- 
of-focus light. A  photomultiplier  detects  the  light from 
each  raster  (Fig.  6.4A).  A  computer  reassembles  the 

80 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

A. Laser scanning confocal

Specimen

Laser

Excitation
        light

Emission
 light

Objective
lens

Tilting mirror
scans the specimen

C. Spinning disk

Pinholes

Dichroic
  mirror

Specimen

Objective lens

Pinhole disk with
array of 50-µm holes

Excitation and
emission light

Dichroic
     mirror

Photon
detector

Digital
camera

Lens disk with
microlens array

E. Light sheet

Illu

Shaped
laser

m

in

a

tio

n
 
a

xis

G. TIRF

Aqueous
sample

Digital
camera

Laser
light

Digital
camera

Im aging axis

Light
sheet

Specimen

Acquired data

Transformed data

Prism

Excitation through

prism

Evanescent wave

100 nm

Objective

Excitation through

objective

Evanescent wave

Glass

B

D

F

H

 

CHAPTER 6  n  Research Strategies 

81

FIGURE 6.4  METHODS TO MAKE THIN OPTICAL SECTIONS OF FLUORESCENT SPECIMENS. A, Imaging strategy for a laser scanning 
confocal fluorescence microscope. B, Optical section taken with a laser scanning microscope through a live, dividing starfish embryo expressing 3 
× GFP SpEct2 (gold; a guanine nucleotide exchange factor of Rho-GTPases) and 2 × mCh EMTB (cyan; ensconsin microtubule-binding domain to 
mark microtubules). The field is 180 µM wide. C, Imaging strategy for a spinning disk confocal fluorescence microscope. D, Image taken with a spin-
ning disk confocal microscope of a fixed U2OS cell stained with rhodamine-phalloidin (red; to mark actin filaments) and Alexa Fluor 488–antibodies 
to myosin-IIA (green). E, Imaging strategy for light sheet microscopy. F, Image from a lattice light sheet movie of a cytotoxic T lymphocyte expressing 
Lifeact-mEmerald attacking a target cell expressing membrane-targeted mTagBFP2. G, Total internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF) microscopy with 
structured illumination (SIM). The exciting laser beam is reflected from the glass–water interface, producing a thin (100-nm) evanescent wave that 
excites fluorophores in the specimen. The exciting light may be directed through a prism or the microscope objective. H, Image taken by TIRF-SIM 
microscopy of a U2OS cell expressing enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP)-nonmuscle myosin-IIA (green) and mAppleFtractin (red, to mark 
actin filaments). In D and H the fluorescence from myosin-II appears as pairs of spots marking the two ends of the minifilaments (see Fig. 5.7B). 
(A, Modified from http://malone.bioquant.uni-heidelberg.de/methods/imaging/imaging.html#CLSM. B, From Su KC, Bement WM, Petronczki M, von 
Dassow G. An astral simulacrum of the central spindle accounts for normal, spindle-less, and anucleate cytokinesis in echinoderm embryos. Mol Biol 
Cell. 2014;25:4049–4062. C, Courtesy Carl Zeiss Microscopy GmbH. D, Courtesy Dylan Burnette, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN. E, Modified 
from Rozbicki E, Chuai M, Karjalainen AI, et al. Myosin-II-mediated cell shape changes and cell intercalation contribute to primitive streak formation. 
Nat Cell Biol. 2015;17:397–408. F, From Alex Ritter and Jennifer Lippincott-Schwartz [National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD], Gillian Griffiths 
[Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, United Kingdom], and Eric Betzig [Janelia Farm Research Campus, Ashburn, VA]. G, Modified from 
www.nikon.com/products/microscope-solutions/lineup/inverted/wtirf/index.htm. H, Courtesy Jordan Beach and John Hammer, National Institutes 
of Health. For reference, see Beach JR, Shao L, Remmert K, et al. Nonmuscle myosin II isoforms coassemble in living cells. Curr Biol. 2014;24:
1160–1166.)

TABLE 6.2  Superresolution Fluorescence Microscopy

Name

Localization 

microscopy 
(FPALM, PALM, 
STORM)

Structured 

illumination (SIM)

Stimulated emission 

depletion (STED)

Principle

Wide-field illumination is used to activate 

a small subset of widely separated 
photoconvertible fluorescent molecules, 
their positions are determined precisely, 
building up a two-dimensional image 
over many successive cycles

Superimposition of the fluorescence image 
with an intense scanned and rotated bar 
pattern improves the resolution

Two superimposed beams scan the 

specimen with one suppressing emission 
from all but a tiny spot

Fluorophores

Photoconvertible 
fluorescent dyes 
and proteins that 
turn on and off 
or change color

Any photostable 

fluorophore

Fluorescent dyes, 

some fluorescent 
proteins

Resolution 
(X-Y Plane)

20–40 nm

Time to Image

Seconds to 

minutes

~100 nm

Seconds

~30 nm

30 frames/sec 
with 62-nm 
resolution

FPALM, fluorescence photoactivation localization microscopy; PALM, photoactivated localization microscopy; STORM, stochastic optical reconstruction 
microscopy.

image by assigning the fluorescence intensity measured 
at each point along the raster lines to the corresponding 
point  in  the  cell  (Fig.  6.4B).  Scanning  the  specimen 
rapidly  with  spinning  disks  of  small  lenses  and  corre-
sponding  pinholes  allows  rapid  imaging  with  a  digital 
camera (Fig. 6.4C–D). A series of confocal images taken  
at  different  planes  of  focus  can  be  used  for  three-
dimensional reconstructions.

Light  sheet  microscopy  creates  thin  optical  sec-
tions  of  fluorescent  specimens  by  focusing  laser  light 
into  a  sheet  2–8 µm  thick  and  passing  it  through  an 
illumination  objective  to  focus  onto  the  sample  (Fig. 
6.4E–F). A detection objective sits at right angles to the 
illumination  objective  to  collect  emitted  fluorescence  
for  the  camera.  The  sample  resides  between  the  two 
objectives  on  a  rotatable  stage  that  allows  light  sheet 
illumination  of  successive  planes.  Acquisition  of  three-
dimensional images at high imaging speeds is possible, 

allowing all the cells in thick specimens, including intact 
embryos, to be imaged at high resolution.

Superresolution Fluorescence Microscopy
Three methods have extended the resolution of fluores-
cence  microscopy  well  beyond  the  classic  limit  of 
0.2 µm. Each has strengths and weaknesses for different 
applications (Table 6.2).

Localization microscopy (independently named FPALM 
[fluorescence  photoactivation  localization  microscopy], 
PALM  [photoactivated  localization  microscopy],  and 
STORM [stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy]) 
depends on the availability of organic dyes and fluores-
cent proteins that can be switched by light between dark 
and fluorescent states (photoactivation) or between two 
fluorescent  states  with  different  emission  wavelengths 
(photoconversion). This makes it possible to turn on the 
fluorescence  of  just  a  few  widely  separated  individual 

82 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

A. Distribution of
     fluorophores

B. Simulated wide field

Photoconversion & imaging
of a few random fluorophores

Simulate PSF
to compare

C. iPALM

Repeat
1,000s

of

times

Reconstructing image

fluorescence 

FIGURE 6.5  SUPERRESOLUTION FLUORESCENCE MICROS-
COPY.  Superresolution 
localization  microscopy. 
A, Imaging strategy. A specimen containing thousands of photocon-
vertible  fluorophores  is  pulsed  with  UV  light  to  activate  a  few  of  the 
molecules. A wide-field image shows the position of each as a blurred 
spot (green). The center of each is located precisely (cursor and white 
point).  Each  fluorescent  molecule  is  bleached  and  the  process  is 
repeated  many  times  to  assemble  a  high-resolution  image.  B  and 
C, Image of endoplasmic reticulum in a cultured cell stained with fluo-
rescent antibodies to reticulon. B, Image showing how the localizations 
would  appear  in  a  conventional  wide-field  fluorescence  microscope. 
C,  Superresolution  localization  microscopy.  (B–C,  Courtesy  Dylan 
Burnette, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN.)

fluorescent molecules (Fig. 6.5). Although the image of 
each fluorescent molecule is blurred by the point spread 
function  of  the  microscope,  the  center  of  each  point  
of light can be determined precisely by fitting the distri-
bution  with  a  computer.  An  image  is  built  up  of  these 
point  localizations  through  thousands  of  cycles  of  
photoactivation/conversion,  imaging,  and  photobleach-
ing. Initially this process took many minutes, but high-
speed  digital  cameras  can  now  collect  hundreds  of 
images  per  second,  making  the  method  useful  for  
live  cells.  The  initial  reports  used  epifluorescence  and  
total internal reflection for photoconversion and localiza-
tion.  Light  sheet  illumination  offers  a  new  alternative. 
The  improvement  in  the  resolution  from  200 nm  to 
30 nm offered by these methods reveals many structural 
details of interest to cell biologists (Fig. 6.5B). Because 
single  molecules  are  imaged,  localization  microscopy  
is  also  used  to  estimate  the  stoichiometry  and  spatial 
correlations  of  molecules  within  cells,  and  to  track  
their motions.

Stimulated  emission  depletion  (STED)  micros-
copy improves resolution by reducing the focal spot size 
with specialized optics. Concentric beams of laser light 

narrow  the  fluorescence  emission  to  a  central  focal  
spot by depleting fluorescence in surrounding region of 
the  sample.  Scanning  this  focal  spot  across  the  sample 
allows formation of an image with ~70- to 90-nm resolu-
tion.  STED  initially  employed  fluorescent  dyes  but  can 
now  be  performed  with  fluorescent  proteins  and  in  
live cells.

Structured illumination microscopy (SIM) increases 
spatial  resolution  by  illuminating  a  sample  with  pat-
terned light and computationally analyzing the interfer-
ence of the illumination pattern and the sample. It can 
image live cells faster and with much less light than that 
required by other superresolution approaches. Because 
the  structured  illumination  pattern  cannot  be  focused 
beyond half the wavelength of the excitation light, SIM 
originally  enhanced  resolution  only  by  a  factor  of  two. 
Nonlinear  approaches  have  extended  the  resolution  to 
better than 100 nm, making SIM a powerful superresolu-
tion method for imaging live cells (Fig. 6.4H).

Electron Microscopy
A transmission electron microscope (Fig. 6.1D) can 
resolve points below 0.3 nm, but the practical resolution 
was historically limited by the methods used to prepare 
specimens  and  damage  from  the  electron  beam.  The 
initial  method  to  prepare  cells  and  tissues  for  electron 
microscopy  was  to  fix  with  chemicals,  dehydrate  with 
organic solvents, embed in plastic, cut with a diamond 
knife  into  thin  sections,  and  stain  the  sections  with 
heavy  metals  (Fig.  6.6A).  The  resolution  of  approxi-
mately  3 nm  was  sufficient  to  bridge  the  gap  between 
light  microscopy  and  macromolecular  structures. 
Between  1950  and  1970  electron  micrographs  of  thin 
sections  of  cells  and  tissues  revealed  most  of  what  is 
known about the organization of their organelles.

Electron microscopy advanced with the introduction 
of  new  methods  to  prepare  cells  and  molecules.  The 
highest resolution of whole cells is attained by directly 
viewing rapidly frozen specimens embedded in vitreous 
ice (amorphous water frozen so rapidly that ice crystals 
do  not  form)  (see  Fig.  5.11).  This  is  called  electron 
cryomicroscopy, because the stage holding the frozen 
specimen is cooled to the temperature of liquid nitrogen. 
Imaging requires relatively thin specimens. Frozen speci-
mens  can  be  cut  with  a  microtome  or  by  ion  beam 
etching into sections thin enough for direct viewing.

Low  contrast  and  superimposition  of  details  limited 
electron cryomicroscopy until image-processing methods 
called  tomography  were  developed  to  reconstruct 
three-dimensional volumes. The specimen is tilted inside 
the  microscope,  and  micrographs  taken  from  a  wide 
range  of  angles.  The  information  is  merged  computa-
tionally  into  a  three-dimensional  map,  for  viewing  in  
thin  slices  from  any  angle  (Fig.  6.6D).  Structures  as 
complex  as  entire  cells  can  be  visualized  with  a 

 

A

CHAPTER 6  n  Research Strategies 

83

B

C

D

E

FIGURE 6.6  ELECTRON MICROGRAPHS OF CELLS. A–D, Transmission electron micrographs. A, Thin section of a plasma cell, an immune 
cell specialized to synthesize and secrete antibodies. B, Freeze-fracturing. The cleavage plane passed through the cytoplasm and then split apart 
the two halves of the bilayer of the nuclear envelope. This fractured surface was then shadowed with platinum. The cytoplasm is in the upper 
left.  Nuclear  pores  are  prominent  in  the  nuclear  envelope.  C,  A  cultured  cell  prepared  by  rapid  freezing,  fracturing,  deep  etching,  and  rotary 
shadowing with platinum. Membranes of the endoplasmic reticulum stand out against the porous cytoplasmic matrix. D, Tomographic reconstruc-
tion of a thin slice through a presynaptic terminal of a cultured neuron that was rapidly frozen and thinned by focused ion beam milling. The image 
shows  a  mitochondrion  (mi),  microtubules  (mt),  and  synaptic  vesicles  (sv)  inside  the  plasma  membrane.  E,  Scanning  electron  micrograph  of 
developing flowers of the Western mountain aster. (A–B, Courtesy Don W. Fawcett, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA. C, Courtesy John 
Heuser,  Washington  University,  St.  Louis,  MO.  D,  From  Lučič  V,  Rigort  A,  Baumeister  W.  Cryo-electron  tomography:  the  challenge  of  doing 
structural biology in situ. J Cell Biol. 2013;202:407–419. E, Courtesy J.-L. Bowman, University of California, Davis.)

84 

A

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

B

C

D

100 nm

100 nm

40 nm

FIGURE 6.7  ELECTRON MICROGRAPHS OF MOLECULES. A–B, Transmission electron micrographs of myosin-II minifilaments. A, Fila-
ments on a thin carbon film prepared by negative staining with uranyl acetate. B, Filaments on a mica surface prepared by rotary shadowing with 
platinum. C, Low-dose electron micrograph of single, purified TRPV1 (transient receptor potential vanilloid-1) channel proteins in a thin film of ice. 
The contrast is so low that identifying the molecules is difficult. D, Reconstruction the TRPV channel structure at 3.4 Å resolution from 10,000 
single  molecules.  Slice  through  the  three-dimensional  reconstruction  showing  amino  acid  side  chains  and  the  orange  atomic  model  with  the 
central ion pore surrounded by one α-helix from each of the four identical subunits. (A–B, Courtesy J. Sinard, Yale University, New Haven, CT. 
C–D, From Liao M, Cao E, Julius D, Cheng Y. Structure of the TRPV1 ion channel determined by electron cryo-microscopy. Nature. 2013;504:
107–112.)

resolution of a few nanometers. Tomography can also be 
applied to sections of plastic-embedded specimens.

The  freeze–fracture  method  provides  a  different 
view inside cells. A frozen specimen is cleaved by crack-
ing the ice. Surfaces exposed by the fracture are rotary 
shadowed  with  a  thin  coat  of  platinum  for  viewing  
with a transmission electron microscope (Fig. 6.6B). Fre-
quently,  the  cleavage  plane  splits  apart  the  two  halves 
of lipid bilayers to reveal proteins embedded in the plane 
of  the  membrane.  Subliming  some  frozen  water  from  
the  fracture  surface  before  shadowing  reveals  three-
dimensional  details  of  the  cytoskeleton  deeper  in  the 
cytoplasm,  if  soluble  molecules  are  extracted  before 
freezing (Fig. 6.6C; see also Figs. 1.13 and 5.3B).

Electron microscopy is valuable to study macromole-
cules,  macromolecular  assemblies,  polymers,  and  two-
dimensional crystals. These specimens can be frozen in 
vitreous  ice  for  direct  imaging  by  electron  cryomicros-
copy (see Figs. 5.10A, 6.7C, 34.6B, and 36.4A). Alterna-
tively,  macromolecules  can  be  rotary  shadowed  as  in 
freeze fracturing after drying on a smooth surface (Fig. 
6.7C) or rapidly freezing and subliming away the ice (see 
Figs. 30.4 and 34.10). Another method is negative stain-
ing,  in  which  specimens  are  dried  from  aqueous  solu-
tions  of  heavy  metal  salts  (Fig.  6.7A).  A  shell  of  dense 
stain  encases  particles  on  the  surface  of  a  thin  film  of 
carbon and can preserve structural details at a resolution 
of approximately 2 nm.

Computer image processing of electron micrographs 
is  used  to  reconstruct  three-dimensional  structures  
of  macromolecules  and  macromolecular  assemblies  

(Fig.  6.7C).  Single  particles  are  reconstructed  by  first 
classifying images of tens of thousands of randomly ori-
ented  particles  into  categories  corresponding  to  differ-
ent views. Then, an average three-dimensional structure  
is  calculated  computationally  from  this  ensemble  (Fig. 
6.7D).  The  exposure  to  electrons  is  kept  low  to  avoid 
radiation damage.

Micrographs of particles with helical symmetry, such 
as  actin  filaments  (see  Fig.  33.7)  and  bacterial  flagella 
(see  Fig.  5.8),  are  analyzed  in  two  ways:  either  helical 
image processing or by dividing the polymer into short 
segments for analysis by single particle methods. A few 
proteins  form  two-dimensional  crystals  naturally  or  in 
the laboratory. Computational analysis of electron micro-
graphs  and  electron  diffraction  patterns  of  such  two-
dimensional  crystals  with  methods  related  to  those  for 
x-ray  diffraction  have  produced  structures  of  bacteri-
orhodopsin  (see  Fig.  13.9),  aquaporin  water  channels  
(see Fig. 16.15), and tubulin (see Fig. 34.4B) at steadily 
improving resolutions.

Improvements in freezing technology, image recogni-
tion  and  averaging  algorithms,  microscopes  and,  most 
importantly, cameras that detect electrons directly (anal-
ogous  to  the  CCD  cameras  used  to  detect  fluorescent 
light) have pushed the resolution in favorable specimens 
to less than 0.3 nm (Fig. 6.7C–D). It is now possible to 
visualize amino acid side chains in many large macromo-
lecular  structures  that  were  difficult  or  impossible  to 
study by x-ray diffraction. These recent advances in elec-
tron microscopy have revolutionized studies of complex 
biological structures.

 

CHAPTER 6  n  Research Strategies 

85

A  scanning  electron  microscope  (SEM)  can  be 
used on thicker specimens, such as whole cells or tissues 
that have been fixed, dried, and coated with a thin metal 
film.  Here,  an  electron  beam  scans  a  raster  pattern  
over the surface of specimens, and secondary electrons 
emitted from the surface at each point are collected and 
used to reconstruct an image (Fig. 6.6E). The resolution 
of conventional SEM is limited, but nonetheless valuable 
for  studying  surface  features  of  cells  and  their  three-
dimensional relationships in tissues.

SEMs  with  high-energy  (field  emission)  guns  to 
produce the electron beam have higher resolution suit-
able for studying cellular substructures, such as nuclear 
pores (see Fig. 9.6B). One may use a focused ion beam 
to etch away the surface of an embedded specimen to 
expose internal details for imaging of the surface by SEM. 
Many  cycles  of  etching  and  imaging  can  be  used  to 
reconstruct the entire specimen in three dimensions.

Choice of Organisms for  
Biological Research
Given that life on earth arose from a common ancestor 
(see  Fig.  2.1),  one  can  learn  about  basic  cellular  pro-
cesses  in  any  organism  by  studying  the  molecules  of 
interest. It is useful to select an organism that specializes 
in the process, such as skeletal muscle to study contrac-
tile  proteins  (see  Chapter  39)  or  Chlamydomonas  to 
study flagella (see Fig. 38.18). Some organisms have the 
advantage that communities of scientists invested years 

to develop genetic, molecular genetic, and biochemical 
methods  for  experimentation.  These  valuable  experi-
mental  tools  have  attracted  investigators  to  a  growing 
number of “model” organisms (Table 6.3).

Model Organisms
Most  model  organisms  have  completely  sequenced 
genomes  and  facile  methods  to  manipulate  the  genes, 
including  replacement  of  a  gene  with  a  modified  gene 
by the process of homologous recombination or genome 
editing (Fig. 6.16). Haploid organisms with one copy of 
each chromosome after mitotic division are particularly 
favorable for detecting the effects of changes in genes, 
called  mutations  (Box  6.1).  It  is  useful  for  a  haploid 
organism to have a diploid stage with two copies of each 
chromosome and a sexual phase, during which meiotic 
recombination occurs between the chromosomes from 
the two parents. (See Fig. 45.3 for details on recombina-
tion.) This allows one to construct strains with a variety 
of mutations and facilitates mapping mutations to a par-
ticular gene. In addition, diploids carrying a lethal muta-
tion of a gene that is essential for life can be propagated, 
provided that the mutation is recessive.

Budding yeast and fission yeast meet all these criteria, 
so they are widely used to study basic cellular functions. 
Moving between haploid and diploid stages greatly sim-
plifies  the  process  of  creating  and  analyzing  recessive 
mutations.  This  is  important,  because  most  loss-of- 
function  mutations  are  recessive.  Research  combining 
genetic,  biochemical,  and  microscopic  analysis  have 

TABLE 6.3  Model Genetic Organisms

Organism

Genome Size 
and Ploidy

Number 
of Genes

Gene Targeting 
by Homologous 
Recombination

Genome Editing 
With Nucleases

Meiotic 
Recombination

Gram-negative bacterium, 

4.6 Mb, haploid

4288

Yes

Escherichia coli

Cellular slime mold, 

34 Mb, haploid

~12,000

Yes

Dictyostelium 
discoideum

Budding yeast, 

Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae

Fission yeast, 

Schizosaccharomyces 
pombe

Mustard weed, 

Arabidopsis thaliana

Nematode worm, 
Caenorhabditis 
elegans

12.1 Mb, haploid

~6604

Yes

14 Mb, haploid

~4900

Yes

100 Mb, diploid

~25,706

No

97 Mb, diploid

~18,266

Difficult

Fruit fly, Drosophila 

180 Mb, diploid

~13,338

Difficult

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

melanogaster

Zebrafish, Danio rerio
Mouse, Mus musculus
Human, Homo sapiens

1400 Mb, diploid
3000 Mb, diploid
3000 Mb, diploid

~26,206
~25,000
~25,000

Difficult
Yes
Yes, cultured cells

Yes
Yes
Yes, cultured cells

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Biochemistry

Excellent

Excellent

Good

Good

Poor

Poor

Fair

Good
Good
Good

86 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

BOX 6.1  Key Genetic Terms

Allele. A version of a gene.
Complementation.  Providing gene function in trans (ie, 

by another copy of a gene).

Conditional mutation.  Mutation giving an altered pheno-
type  only  under  certain  conditions,  such  as  tempera-
ture, medium composition, and so on.

Diploid.  Genome with two copies of each chromosome, 

one from each parent.

Dominant  mutation.  Mutation  giving  an  altered  pheno-
type, even in the presence of a copy of the wild-type 
gene on another chromosome.

Essential gene.  Gene required for viability.
Gene.  Nucleotide sequence required to make a protein or 
RNA product, including the coding sequence, flanking 
regulatory sequences, and any introns.

Genome.  Entire genetic endowment of an organism.
Genotype.  Genetic  complement, 

including  particular 

mutations.

Haploid.  Genome with single copies of each chromosome.
Mutant.  Organism with a mutation of interest.
Mutation.  A  change  in  the  chemical  composition  of  a 
gene, including changes in nucleotide sequence, inser-
tion, deletions, and so on.

Pedigree.  Family history of a genetic trait.
Phenotype.  (From  the  Greek  term  for  “shining”  or 
“showing.”) Appearance of the organism as dictated by 
its genotype.

Plasmid.  Circular DNA molecule that self-replicates in the 

cytoplasm of a bacterium or nucleus of a eukaryote.

Recessive  mutation.  Mutation  giving  an  altered  pheno-

type only when no wild-type version is present.

Recombination.  Physical exchange of regions of the genome 
between homologous chromosomes or between a plas-
mid and a chromosome.

Wild  type.  The  naturally  occurring  allele  of  a  gene;  the 

phenotype of the naturally occurring organism.

made  fundamental  contributions  to  cell  biology,  but 
yeast are solitary cells with specialized lifestyles.

Multicellular  organisms  are  required  to  study  the 
development  and  function  of  tissues  and  organs.  Flies, 
nematode worms, mice, and humans share many ancient, 
conserved genes that control their cellular and develop-
mental systems, so flies and worms are popular for basic 
studies  of  animal  development  and  tissue  function. 
However,  vertebrates  evolved  a  substantial  number  of 
new gene families (roughly 7% of total genes) and a large 
number of new proteins by rearranging ancient domains 
in new ways. Therefore, mice are often used for experi-
ments on specialized vertebrate functions, especially the 
nervous  system.  Although  not  an  experimental  organ-
ism, humans are included on this list, because much can 
be learned by analysis of human genetic variation and its 
relationship  to  disease.  Humans  are,  of  course,  much 
more eloquent than the model organisms when it comes 

to  describing  their  medical  problems,  many  of  which 
have a genetic basis that can be documented by analysis 
of pedigrees and DNA samples. Furthermore, traits can 
be studied in billions of humans. The mustard Arabidop-
sis  thaliana  is  the  most  popular  plant  for  genetics, 
because  its  genome  is  small,  reproduction  is  relatively 
rapid,  and  methods  for  genetic  analysis  are  well  devel-
oped. The moss Physcomitrella patens has experimental 
advantages  for  studying  basic  plant  biology.  One  chal-
lenge has been the lack of methods to replace genes by 
homologous recombination in plants (see later section).
By focusing on a limited number of easy-to-use model 
organisms, biological research has raced forward begin-
ning  during  the  last  quarter  of  the  20th  century.  This 
focus does have liabilities. For one, these organisms rep-
resent  a  very  limited  range  of  lifestyles.  Thousands  of 
other solutions to survival exist in nature, and they tend 
to  be  ignored.  At  the  cellular  level,  these  liabilities  are 
less severe, as most cellular adaptations are ancient and 
shared by most organisms.

Cell Culture
Regardless  of  the  species  to  be  studied,  growing  large 
populations of isolated cells for biochemical analysis and 
microscopic  observation  is  helpful.  This  is  straightfor-
ward for the unicellular organisms such as fungi or bac-
teria,  which  can  be  grown  suspended  in  a  nutrient 
medium.  These  organisms  can  also  be  grown  on  the 
surface of gelled agar in a petri dish. When single cells 
are dispersed widely on an agar surface, each multiplies 
to form a macroscopic colony, all descendants of a single 
cell. This family of cells is called a clone.

It  is  often  possible  to  isolate  single  live  cells  from 
multicellular organisms by dissociating a tissue with pro-
teolytic  enzymes  under  conditions  that  weaken  adhe-
sions  between  the  cells.  Many  isolated  cells  grow  in 
sterile  media,  a  method  called  tissue  culture  or  cell 
culture. Terminally differentiated cells such as muscle or 
nerve cells do not reenter the cell cycle and grow. Cells 
that  are  predisposed  to  grow  in  the  body,  including 
fibroblasts  (see  Fig.  28.2)  and  endothelial  cells  from 
blood vessels (see Fig. 30.13), will grow if the nutrient 
medium  is  supplemented  with  growth  factors  to  drive 
the  cell  cycle  (see  Fig.  41.9).  This  is  accomplished  by 
adding  fetal  calf  serum,  which  contains  a  rich  mixture 
of growth factors. Some cultured cells grow in suspen-
sion, but most prefer to grow on a surface of plastic or 
glass  (Fig.  6.2),  often  coated  with  extracellular  matrix 
molecules for adhesion (see Fig. 30.11). This is the origin 
of the term in vitro, meaning “in glass,” used to describe 
cell culture. Normal cells grow until they cover the arti-
ficial  surface,  when  contacts  with  other  cells  arrest 
further growth (see Fig. 41.3). Dissociation and dilution 
of the cells onto a fresh surface allow growth to resume. 
Most “primary cells” isolated directly from tissues divide 
a limited number of times (see Fig. 7.15). Primary cells 

 

CHAPTER 6  n  Research Strategies 

87

can become immortal, either through mutations or trans-
formation  by  a  tumor  virus  that  overcomes  cell-cycle 
controls.  Such  immortal  cells  are  called  cell  lines. 
Similar changes allow cancer cells to grow indefinitely. 
HeLa cells, the very first cell line, were derived from a 
cervical cancer that afflicted the African-American patient 
Henrietta  Lacks.  HeLa  cells  have  been  growing  world-
wide in laboratories for more than 60 years.

A variation on cell culture is to grow a whole organ 
or part of an organ in vitro. The requirements for organ 
culture are often more stringent than those for growing 
individual  cells,  but  the  method  is  used  routinely  for 
experiments  on  slices  of  brain  tissue  and  for  studying  
the  development  of  embryonic  organs  from  stem  cells 
(see Box 41.2).

Inventory: Gene and Protein Discovery
Classical Genetics: Identification of  
Genes Through Mutations
The  strategy  in  classical  genetics  is  to  make  random 
mutations that compromise a particular cellular function 
and then to find the mutated gene(s). This approach is 
extremely  powerful,  especially  when  little  or  nothing  
is  known  about  a  process  or  when  the  gene  product 
(usually  a  protein)  is  present  at  low  concentrations. 
Genetic analysis of yeast has been spectacularly success-
ful  in  mapping  out  complex  pathways,  including  the  
cell cycle (see Chapters 40 to 44) and secretory pathway 
(see Chapter 21).

Because  one  generally  does  not  know  the  relevant 
genes in advance, it is important that mutations are intro-
duced randomly into the genome and, ideally, limited to 
one mutation in each organism tested. A prerequisite for 
such a genetic screen is a good assay for the biological 
function of interest. Simplicity and specificity are essen-
tial,  as  interesting  mutations  may  be  rare,  and  much 
effort  may  be  expended  characterizing  each  mutation. 
The  assay  may  test  the  ability  to  grow  under  certain 
conditions, drug resistance, morphologic changes, cell-
cycle arrest, or abnormal behavior. Mutations arise spon-
taneously  at  low  rates,  so  often  a  chemical  (eg,  ethyl 
methyl  sulfonate  or  nitrosoguanidine)  or  radiation  is 
used to increase the frequency of damage. Another strat-
egy is to insert an identifiable segment of DNA randomly 
into  the  genome  to  disrupt  genes  and  mark  them  for 
subsequent analysis.

Haploid  organisms  are  favorable  for  detecting  muta-
tions, because damage to the single copy of a gene will 
alter function, so either a loss or a gain of function can 
be detected with suitable test conditions (ie, the ability 
to grow under certain conditions), biochemical assay, or 
morphologic assay. A disadvantage of haploid organisms 
is  that  they  are  not  viable  following  the  loss  of  func-
tion of an essential gene. Consequently, one selects for 
conditional  mutant  alleles  that  allow  a  haploid 

organism to survive mutation of an essential gene under 
permissive conditions (eg, low temperatures) but not 
under restrictive conditions (eg, high temperatures).
One  can  often  identify  a  mutated  gene  in  a  haploid 
organism by a complementation experiment. A popu-
lation  of  mutant  cells  is  induced  to  take  up  DNA  frag-
ments  contained  in  a  plasmid  library  constructed  from 
the wild-type genome or complementary DNAs (cDNAs). 
Plasmids are circular DNA molecules that can be propa-
gated  readily  in  bacteria  and,  if  suitably  designed,  in 
eukaryotes as well. Plasmids carrying the wild-type gene 
will correct loss-of-function mutations, allowing cells to 
grow  normally.  Plasmids  complementing  the  mutation 
are  isolated  and  sequenced.  The  mutant  gene  can  be 
sequenced to determine the nature of the damage. This 
complementation test can also be used to discover genes 
from  other  species  that  correct  the  mutation  in  the 
model  organism.  For  example,  genes  for  human  
cell-cycle  proteins  can  complement  many  cell-cycle 
mutations in yeast (see Chapter 40).

Genetics in obligate diploid organisms is more com-
plicated. Many mutations will appear to have no effect, 
provided  that  the  corresponding  gene  on  the  other  
functions  normally.  These  recessive 
chromosome 
mutations produce a phenotype only after crossing two 
mutant  organisms,  yielding  25%  of  offspring  with  two 
copies of the mutant gene. (Consult a genetics textbook 
for  details  on  mendelian  segregation.)  Other  mutations 
will yield an altered phenotype even when only one of 
the two genes is affected. These dominant mutations 
can  include  simple  loss  of  function  alleles  when  two 
wild-type genes are required to make sufficient product 
for  normal  function  (called  haploinsufficiency);  pro-
duction of an altered protein that compromises the for-
mation  of  a  multimeric  assembly  by  normal  protein 
subunits produced by the wild-type gene (called domi-
nant  negative);  and  production  of  an  unregulated 
protein that cannot be controlled by partners in the cell 
(another type of dominant negative).

If  the  genome  is  small,  a  mutation  can  be  found  by 
sequencing  the  entire  genome,  but  the  classic  method 
for identifying a mutated gene is genetic mapping. One 
observes  the  frequency  of  recombination  between 
known genetic markers and the mutation of interest in 
genetic crosses. This is usually sufficient to map a gene 
to a broad region of a particular chromosome. If a com-
plete  genome  sequence  is  available,  the  database  of 
sequenced genes in the area highlighted by mapping is 
examined  to  look  for  candidate  genes  that  might  carry 
the  mutation.  If  the  mutation  was  made  by  inserting  a 
piece of DNA, such as a transposable element, randomly 
into  the  genome,  one  can  recover  the  transposable 
element together with some of the surrounding chromo-
some, which is sequenced to identify the disrupted gene.
Once  a  gene  required  for  the  function  of  interest  is 
identified  and  sequenced  (see  Fig.  3.16),  the  primary 

88 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

structure  of  the  protein  (or  RNA)  is  deduced  from  the 
coding  sequence.  Searching  for  proteins  with  similar 
sequences  or  domains  in  the  same  or  other  species  is 
often  informative,  particularly  if  something  is  known 
about the function of the corresponding gene product. 
Protein can often be expressed from a cDNA copy of the 
mRNA,  tested  for  activity  and  binding  partners,  and 
(when fused to GFP or when used to make an antibody) 
localized in cells.

Genomics and Reverse Genetics
Complete  sequences  of  the  coding  regions  of  most 
popular  experimental  organisms  are  now  available. 
Work  is  continuing  to  annotate  this  data  to  provide  
definitive  inventories  of  genes.  The  task  has  been  
aided  by  sequencing  cDNA  copies  of  expressed  genes 
(expressed  sequence  tags  [ESTs]),  which  help  docu-
ment the diversity of products created by transcription 
and RNA processing (see Chapter 10).

The sequences of proteins with known functions are 
used  to  search  sequenced  genomes  for  new  proteins 
with  related  functions.  These  searches  are  surprisingly 
fruitful,  as  many  genes  arose  by  gene  duplication  and 
occur as extended families. Once a predicted sequence 
has been identified, one can check when and where the 
gene is expressed in the organism, test the consequences 
of deleting the gene, or test for interactions of the protein 
with other proteins (see later section). These tests can 
be done one gene at a time or on a genome-wide scale. 
For  example,  investigators  created  strains  of  budding 
yeast lacking each of the 6000 genes and discovered that 
only 19% are essential for viability. They also tested for 
interaction  between  the  deletion  mutations  and  other 
genes, and for interactions of the product of each gene 
with the products of all other genes. These preliminary 
screening  tests  often  yield  clues  about  function.  Ulti-
mately, however, function is understood only when rep-
resentatives of each protein family are studied in detail 
by  the  biophysical,  biochemical,  and  cellular  methods 
described in the following sections.

Reverse  genetics  refers  to  the  process  of  starting  
with  a  known  gene  and  selectively  disrupting  its  func-
tion by deleting the gene by homologous recombination 
or genome editing. Depleting the RNA product by RNAi 
(RNA  interference;  discussed  later  in  the  section  titled 
“Three  Options  to  Test  for  Physiological  Function”)  is 
simpler  experimentally  but  often  more  complicated  to 
interpret due to “off-target” effects.

Biochemical Fractionation
The biochemical approach (to the inventory) is to purify 
active molecules for analysis of structure and function. 
This requires a sensitive, quantitative assay to detect the 
component  of  interest  in  crude  fractions,  an  assay  to 
assess  purity,  and  methods  to  separate  the  molecule 
from the rest of the cellular constituents. Assays are as 

diverse as the processes of life. Enzyme activity is often 
easy to measure. Many molecules are detected by binding 
a  partner  molecule.  For  example,  nucleic  acids  bind 
complementary  nucleotide  sequences  and  sequence-
specific regulatory proteins; receptors bind ligands; anti-
bodies  bind  their  antigens;  and  many  proteins  bind 
partner proteins. More difficult assays reconstitute a cel-
lular process, such as membrane vesicle fusion, nuclear 
transport, or molecular motility. Devising a sensitive and 
specific assay requires creativity. A second prerequisite 
for purification is a simple method for assessing purity. 
Various  types  of  gel  electrophoresis  often  work  bril-
liantly (Box 6.2 and Fig. 6.8).

With a functional assay and a method to assess purity, 
one sets about purifying the molecule of interest. Highly 
abundant  constituents,  such  as  actin  or  tubulin,  may 
require  purification  of  only  20-  to  100-fold,  but  many 
important molecules, such as signaling proteins and tran-
scription  factors,  constitute  less  than  0.1%  of  the  cell 
protein, so extensive purification is required.

One  may  start  with  the  organism,  if  it  is  avail-
in  large  quantities  (tens  of  grams)  and  amenable  
able 
to  fractionation.  Alternatively,  many  proteins  can  be 
ex pressed  from  cDNAs  in  bacteria,  yeast,  or  virus-
infected  insect  cells.  An  advantage  of  this  approach  is 
that  mutations  can  be  made  at  will,  including  substitu-
tion of one or more amino acids, deletion of parts of the 
protein or adding domains that facilitate purification.

First, the cell is disrupted gently to avoid damage to 
the  molecule  of  interest.  This  may  be  accomplished 
physically by mechanical shearing with various types of 
homogenizers or, where appropriate, chemically, with 
mild  detergents  that  extract  lipids  from  cellular  mem-
branes.  Next,  the  homogenate  is  centrifuged  to  sepa-
rate particulate and soluble constituents.

Purification of Organelles
If  the  molecule  of  interest  is  part  of  an  organelle,  cen-
trifugation can be used to isolate the organelle. Typically, 
the first step is to centrifuge the crude cellular homog-
enate  multiple  times  at  a  succession  of  higher  speeds 
(and  therefore  forces).  Large  particles  such  as  nuclei 
pack into a pellet at the bottom of the centrifuge tube 
at  low  speeds,  whereas  high  speeds  are  required  to 
pellet  small  vesicles.  These  pellets  may  be  enriched  in 
particular organelles but are never pure.

Two  complementary  centrifugation  methods  can 
improve the purity. The motion of particles in a centrifu-
gal force field depends on their mass and shape, but also 
on the difference between their density and that of the 
surrounding  medium.  Particles  do  not  move  when  the 
density of the medium matches their own density. There-
fore, organelles with different densities can be separated 
from each other by centrifuging for many hours in a tube 
containing  a  concentration  gradient  of  sucrose  (eg,  5% 
sucrose  in  buffer  at  the  top  of  the  tube,  increasing  to 

 

CHAPTER 6  n  Research Strategies 

89

BOX 6.2  Gel Electrophoresis

An electrical field drives molecules in a sample through a gel 
matrix.  Agarose  gels  (Fig.  6.8B)  are  used  commonly  for 
nucleic  acids,  whereas  polyacrylamide  gels  are  used  for 
both nucleic acids and proteins (Fig. 6.8C). Most often, the 
ionic detergent sodium dodecylsulphate (SDS) is employed 
to dissociate the components of the sample from each other, 
making  their  rate  of  migration  through  the  gel  depend  on 
their size. SDS binding unfolds polypeptide chains and gives 
them a uniform negative charge per unit length. Small mol-
ecules move rapidly and separate from slowly moving large 
molecules, which are more impeded by the matrix. By the 
time small molecules reach the end of the gel, all the com-
ponents  in  the  sample  are  spread  out  according  to  size. 
Buffers  containing  high  concentrations  of  the  nonionic, 
denaturing  agent  urea  also  dissociate  and  unfold  protein 
molecules.  Electrophoresis  in  urea  separates  the  proteins 
depending on both their charge and size. Negatively charged 
proteins move toward the positive electrode, whereas posi-
tively  charged  proteins  move  in  the  opposite  direction. 
Another  approach,  called  isoelectric  focusing,  uses  a 
buffer containing molecules called Ampholines, which have 
both  positive  and  negative  charges.  In  an  electrical  field 
across  a  gel,  Ampholines  set  up  a  pH  gradient.  Proteins 
(usually dissociated in urea) migrate to the pH where they 
have  a  net  charge  of  zero,  their  isoelectric  point.  This  is  a 
sensitive approach to detect charge differences in proteins, 
such  as  those  introduced  by  phosphorylation.  Isoelectric 
focusing in one gel followed by SDS-gel electrophoresis in a 

second  dimension  can  resolve  hundreds  of  individual  pro-
teins in complex samples (see Fig. 38.14A).

Many  methods  are  available  to  detect  molecules  sepa-
rated  by  gel  electrophoresis.  Fluorescent  dyes,  such  as  
ethidium bromide, bind nucleic acids (Fig. 6.8B). Following 
blotting of separated nucleic acids from the gel onto nitrocel-
lulose  or  nylon  films,  specific  sequences  can  be  detected  
by  hybridization  with  complementary  oligonucleotides  or 
longer  sequences  of  cloned  DNA  (probes)  labeled  with 
radioactivity or fluorescent dyes.

Proteins  are  detected  by  binding  colored  dyes  or  more 
sensitive  metal  reduction  techniques.  Obtaining  a  single 
stained band on a heavily loaded SDS gel is the goal of those 
purifying proteins. Of course, some pure proteins consist of 
multiple polypeptide chains (Fig. 6.8C); in such cases, mul-
tiple bands in characteristic ratios are seen. Specific proteins 
are often detected with antibodies. To do this, proteins are 
transferred electrophoretically from the polyacrylamide gel 
to  a  sheet  of  nitrocellulose  or  nylon  before  reaction  with 
antibodies. This transfer step is called blotting. Antibodies 
labeled with radioactivity are detected by exposing a sheet 
of  x-ray  film.  Antibodies  are  also  detected  by  reaction  
with a second antibody conjugated to an enzyme that cata-
lyzes  a  light-emitting  reaction  (chemiluminescence)  or 
by  direct  conjugation  with  fluorescent  molecules,  which 
exposes  a  sheet  of  x-ray  film  or  a  digital  detector.  Some 
proteins  can  be  detected  by  reaction  with  naturally  occur-
ring binding partners.

A. Gel electrophoresis

B. DNA gel

C. Protein gel

Samples placed in wells

Run gel

Process
to reveal
molecules

– – – – –

+ + + + +

Stained

Immunoblots
ARPC2 ARPC1

5
4
3
2
1.6

1

0.5
0.4

Empty vector
Supercoiled 
  plasmid
Insert

205
97
68

a
D
k
 
n
i
 
e
z
S

i

43

29

18

14

s
e
s
a
b
o

l
i

k
 
n
i
 
e
z
S

i

FIGURE 6.8  GEL ELECTROPHORESIS. A, Schematic showing a (generic) gel with three sample wells and an electric field. B, Agarose 
gel electrophoresis of DNA samples stained with ethidium bromide. The lane on the left shows size standards. The middle lane has a bacte-
rial plasmid, a supercoiled (see Fig. 3.18) circular DNA molecule carrying an insert (Fig. 6.11 provides details). The right lane has the same 
plasmid digested with a restriction enzyme that cleaves the DNA twice, releasing the insert. Although smaller than the circular plasmid, the 
empty vector runs more slowly on the gel because the linear DNA offers more resistance to movement than the supercoiled circular plasmid. 
C, Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of the Arp2/3 complex, an assembly of seven protein subunits involved with actin polymerization (see 
Fig. 33.12). All three samples are identical. In the left lane, the proteins are stained with the nonspecific protein dye Coomassie blue. The 
proteins in the other two lanes were transferred to nitrocellulose paper; each reacted with an antibody to one of the subunit proteins (ARPC2 
and  ARPC1).  The  position  of  the  bound  antibody  is  determined  with  a  second  antibody  coupled  to  an  enzyme  that  produces  light  and 
exposes a piece of film black. This method is called chemiluminescence. (B, Courtesy V. Sirotkin, Yale University, New Haven, CT. C, Courtesy 
H. Higgs, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH.)

20%  sucrose  at  the  bottom).  In  such  a  sedimentation 
equilibrium  gradient,  particles  such  as  membrane 
bound organelles move until their density equals that of 
the  gradient,  at  which  point  they  move  no  farther, 
regardless of how long or hard they are spun. Very dense 

particles  containing  DNA  or  RNA  can  be  purified  by 
centrifugation to equilibrium in gradients of dense salts, 
such as cesium chloride. An alternative is a sedimenta-
tion velocity experiment, where one centrifuges for a 
shorter time, so particles separate on the basis of their 

90 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

sedimentation  rates  rather  than  coming  to  equilibrium. 
Gradients  of  sucrose  or  glycerol  are  used  to  give  the 
particles more or less constant velocities, with the higher 
density  near  the  bottom  counteracting  the  higher  cen-
trifugal  force,  which  increases  with  the  square  of  the 
distance from the center of the rotor (think of a spinning 
ice skater).

Additional methods are useful for purifying organelles 
from  subcellular  fractions  obtained  by  sedimentation 
velocity  and  sedimentation  equilibrium.  For  example, 
antibodies  specific  for  a  molecule  on  the  surface  of  an 
organelle can be attached to a solid support and used to 
bind the organelle. Contaminating material can then be 
washed away.

Purification of Soluble Proteins
Given  sufficient  starting  material  most  soluble  proteins 
can  be  purified  by  chromatography  (Box  6.3  and 
Fig. 6.9). The most powerful of these methods is affinity 
chromatography,  where  a  molecule  attached  to  a  bead 
binds specifically to the soluble macromolecule of inter-
est.  Adding  a  binding  site  to  a  recombinant  protein  
facilitates  its  purification.  Popular  examples  include  an 
epitope tag, which is a short peptide that binds a par-
ticular  antibody;  a  His-tag,  which  is  a  short  sequence 
of histidine residues that binds to a metal chelate; GST 
is the enzyme glutathione-S-transferase that binds tightly 
to  glutathione;  and  maltose-binding  protein  binds  to 
maltose.

From Protein to Gene
Once a protein of interest has been purified, the path to 
its gene(s) is relatively direct. The pioneering approach 
was to cut the polypeptide into fragments by proteolytic 
enzymes. These fragments were isolated by chromatog-
raphy  and  their  amino  acid  sequences  determined  by 
Edman  degradation  (see  Chapter  3).  Given  part  of  the 
amino acid sequence, the corresponding gene was iden-
tified  in  a  genomic  database  or  isolated  by  using  oligo-
nucleotide probes as the assay (see “Isolation of Genes 
and Complementary DNAs” below).

Mass spectrometry is now the dominant method to 
identify  protein  sequences.  A  purified  polypeptide  is 
cleaved at specific sites with a proteolytic enzyme such 
as trypsin, and the masses of the fragments are measured 
precisely with a mass spectrometer. If the protein comes 
from an organism with a sequenced genome, the gene 
encoding  the  protein  can  be  identified  by  matching  
the  experimental  masses  of  the  tryptic  fragments  with 
masses  of  all  the  peptides  predicted  from  the  genome 
sequence.  More  frequently,  certain  initial  peptide  frag-
ments  are  selected  within  the  mass  spectrometer  and 
diverted into a chamber inside the machine where they 
are  bombarded  under  conditions  that  randomly  break 
the  peptide  backbone.  The  masses  of  the  overlapping 
fragments reveal the amino acid sequence of the peptide. 

This  approach  can  be  applied  to  identify  thousands  of 
proteins in complex mixtures by digesting the heteroge-
neous sample with trypsin, fractionating by chromatog-
raphy,  and  analyzing  the  column  fractions  by  mass 
spectrometry.

Recent  important  advances  in  mass  spectrometry 
include  the  ability  to  provide  accurate  quantitation  of 
relative amounts of large numbers of proteins in different 
samples (eg, two different mutant cell lines) and measur-
ing the mass of large protein complexes. Mass spectrom-
etry can also identify the positions of chemical crosslinks 
between protein subunits in macromolecular complexes. 
This  method  provides  information  about  the  organiza-
tion  of  protein  complexes  that  cannot  be  studied  by 
x-ray crystallography.

Isolation of Genes and Complementary DNAs
A variety of methods make isolation of specific nucleic 
acids  relatively  routine.  Genomic  DNA  is  isolated  from 
whole cells by selective extraction. mRNAs are purified 
by  affinity  chromatography,  taking  advantage  of  their 
polyadenylate (poly[A]) tails (see Fig. 11.3), which bind 
by  base  pairing  to  poly(dT)  attached  to  an  insoluble 
matrix (Fig. 6.9A). DNA is easier to work with than RNA 
(eg, it can be cleaved by restriction endonucleases and 
cloned), so RNAs are usually converted to a complemen-
tary DNA (cDNA) by reverse transcriptase, a viral DNA 
polymerase that uses RNA as a template.

Several options exist to obtain a particular DNA from 

a complex mixture:
1.  The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) uses a heat-
stable DNA polymerase and two primers (oligonucle-
otides,  each  complementary  to  one  of  the  ends  of  
a  DNA  sequence  of  interest)  to  synthesize  a  strand  
of DNA complementary to another DNA strand (Fig. 
6.10A). Repeated steps of synthesis and denaturation 
allow an exponential amplification in the amount of 
the DNA between the primers. Designing the primers 
requires  knowledge  of  the  sequence  of  the  gene  of 
interest. This may be available from databases or may 
be guessed from the protein sequence or the sequence 
of the same gene in a related species or a similar gene 
in  the  same  species.  If  the  reaction  is  successful,  a 
single sequence is amplified in quantities sufficient for 
cloning, sequencing, or large-scale biological produc-
tion  by  expression  in  a  bacterium  (see  later  discus-
sion). PCR is so sensitive that DNA sequences from a 
single cell can be isolated and characterized.

2.  A DNA segment of interest can be isolated by cloning 
in  a  bacterial  virus  or  plasmid  (Fig.  6.11A).  Such 
cloning strategies use “libraries” of DNA sequences, 
highly complex mixtures that may include more than 
106  different  cDNAs  or  genomic  DNA  fragments. 
These DNA molecules are transferred into a plasmid, 
a circular DNA molecule that is capable of replication 
in a host bacterium, or less often into the genome of 

BOX 6.3  Chromatography

Affinity  chromatography  (Fig.  6.9)  is  the  most  selective 
purification method. A ligand that binds the target molecule 
is  attached  covalently  to  a  solid  matrix.  When  a  complex 
mixture of molecules passes through the column, the target 
molecule binds, whereas most of the other molecules flow 
through.  After  the  column  is  washed,  the  target  protein  is 
eluted  by  competition  with  free  ligand  or  changing  condi-
tions, such as changes in pH or salt concentration. The ligand 
and target in Fig. 6.9 are both nucleic acids, but they can be 
any molecules that bind together, including pairs of proteins, 
drugs and proteins, proteins and nucleic acids, and so on.

Gel  filtration  separates  molecules  on  the  basis  of  size. 
Inert  beads  of  agarose,  polyacrylamide,  or  other  polymers 
are manufactured with pores of a particular size. Large mol-
ecules are excluded from the pores and elute first from the 
column in a volume (void volume) equal to the volume of 
buffer  outside  the  beads  in  the  column.  Small  molecules, 
such as salt, penetrate throughout the beads and elute much 
later in a volume equal to the total volume of the column. 
Molecules  of  intermediate  size  penetrate  the  beads  to  an 
extent that depends on their molecular radius. This param-
eter, called the Stokes’  radius, can be measured quantita-
tively  if  the  column  is  calibrated  with  standards  of  known 

size. Such molecules elute between the void volume and the 
total volume.

Ion  exchange  chromatography  uses  charged  groups 
attached  covalently  to  inert  beads.  These  charged  groups 
may  be  positive  (eg,  the  tertiary  amine  diethylaminoethyl 
[DEAE])  or  negative  (eg,  carboxylate  or  phosphate).  Ionic 
interactions retain oppositely charged solutes on the surface 
of the column particles, provided that the ionic strength of 
the buffer is low. Typically, a gradient of salt is used to elute 
bound solutes.

Other  types  of  chromatography  media  are  widely  used. 
Crystals  of  calcium  phosphate,  called  hydroxyapatite,  bind 
both proteins and nucleic acids, which can be eluted selec-
tively by a gradient of phosphate buffer. Beads with hydro-
phobic groups, such as aromatic rings, absorb many proteins 
in concentrated salt solutions. They can be eluted selectively 
by a declining gradient of salt.

The resolution of all chromatography methods depends 
on  the  size  of  the  particles  (usually  beads)  that  form  the 
immobile  phase  in  the  column.  Small  particles  give  better 
resolution,  but  also  resist  flow.  Therefore,  high-resolution 
systems require high pressures to maintain good flow rates 
(eg, high-pressure liquid chromatography [HPLC]).

A

B. Gel filtration

rRNA lacks poly(A)

mRNA with poly(A)

Population 
mostly rRNA

Poly(A) + RNA anneals

oligo dT on column

rRNA and other

RNA lacking poly(A)

flow through 

Apply mixture of RNAs
to column in high salt so

poly(A) and oligo dT

hybridize

O

l
i

g
o
 
(
d
T
)
 
s
e
p
h
a
r
o
s
e

Elute mRNA
with low salt

n
o

i
t

a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
C

0

0

Large

Void volume

Medium

Small

S
a

l

l
t
 
v
o
u
m
e

Absorbance
monitor

Volume

C. Ion exchange

Strongly
negatively
charged

Weakly

negatively
charged
S alt 
gradient 

Volume

Positively
charged

n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
C

0

0

FIGURE 6.9  CHROMATOGRAPHY. A, Affinity chromatography to purify poly(A) mRNAs with poly(dT) attached to beads. A mixture of 
RNAs is extracted from cells and applied to the column in a buffer containing a high concentration of salt. Only poly(A)+ mRNA binds and is 
then eluted with buffer containing a low concentration of salt. (mRNA, messenger RNA; rRNA, ribosomal RNA.) B, Gel filtration chromatography 
separates molecules on the basis of size. Large molecules (blue) are excluded from the beads and travel through the column in the void volume 
outside the beads. Smaller molecules (green) penetrate the beads depending on their size. Tiny molecules (red), such as salt, completely 
penetrate the beads and elute in a volume (the salt volume) equal to the size of the bed of beads. Material eluting from the column is monitored 
for absorbance of ultraviolet light (260 nm for nucleic acids, 280 nm for proteins) to measure concentration and then collected in tubes in a 
fraction collector. C, Anion exchange chromatography. The beads in the column have a positively charged group that binds negatively charged 
molecules. A gradient of salt elutes bound molecules depending on their affinity for the beads. For cation exchange chromatography, the beads 
carry a negative charge. 

92 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

Heat × 1 minute

3'

5'

Add complementary
oligonucleotide primers,
cool for annealing

3'
Primer

5'

Synthesize
complementary
strands

5'

3'

3'

5'

3'

5'

R
e
p
e
a
t
 
t
h
e

 

c
y
c
e

l

 

 
t
o
d
o
u
b
e

l

 

 
t
h
e
n
u
m
b
e
r

DNA sequence
of interest

5'

Denatured DNA

3'

5'

3'

5'

3'

DNA
polymerase

5'

3'

3'

5'

This doubles the number
of identical DNA duplexes
corresponding to the region

between the primers

20 × yields 1 million copies

FIGURE 6.10  POLYMERASE CHAIN REACTION. From the top, 
double-stranded  DNA  with  a  sequence  of  interest  is  denatured  by 
heating  to  separate  the  two  strands.  An  excess  of  oligonucleotide 
primers  complementary  to  the  ends  of  the  sequence  of  interest  are 
added and allowed to bind by base pairing. DNA polymerase synthe-
sizes complementary strands, starting from the primers. This cycle is 
repeated many times to amplify the sequence of interest. Use of a DNA 
polymerase from a thermophilic bacterium allows many cycles at high 
temperature without losing activity. 

a  virus  (usually  a  bacteriophage).  The  plasmids  are 
introduced into susceptible bacteria, which grow on 
agar in petri dishes. Conditions are chosen in which 
only  those  bacteria  carrying  a  plasmid  will  grow  to 
form a colony. Some of the cells are picked up from 
the agar with a nylon membrane, and the DNA they 
carry is tested for hybridization to a DNA probe com-
plementary  to  the  sequence  of  interest.  This  probe 
may  be  a  chemically  synthesized  oligonucleotide 
based on a sequence in a database or may be inferred 
from the amino acid sequence of the protein of inter-
est. Commonly, the probe is a small piece of cloned 
DNA  generated  by  PCR  or  obtained  from  an  EST 
repository.  Colonies  that  react  with  the  probe  are 
recovered from the petri dish. Initially, these isolates 
are  complex  mixtures  of  cells  bearing  plasmids.  A 
uniform population (clone) is obtained by successive 
rounds of dilution, recovery, and replating until all the 
cells carry the plasmid of interest.

3.  DNA synthesis is an increasingly attractive approach 
to avoid the cloning procedure entirely. Modern tech-
nologies  permit  the  synthesis  of  DNAs  greater  than 
10,000 base pairs long, so if the desired sequence is 

known,  a  commercial  company  can  synthesize  the 
DNA  fragment  in  a  plasmid  backbone.  An  attractive 
feature of this approach is that one can make specific 
or  random  mutations  in  the  DNA  by  adjusting  the 
synthesis conditions. This avoids the need to carry out 
site-directed mutagenesis, as discussed in the follow-
ing paragraph.
Once a gene or cDNA has been cloned, it is sequenced 
and used to deduce the sequence of the encoded protein. 
Of  course,  analysis  of  a  DNA  sequence  cannot  reveal 
posttranslational  modifications  of  a  protein,  such  as 
phosphorylation,  glycosylation,  or  proteolytic  process-
ing. Such modifications, which are often critical for func-
tion, can be identified only by mass spectrometry analysis 
of proteins isolated from cells.

Cloned cDNAs are used to express native or modified 
proteins in bacteria or other cells for biochemical analy-
sis  or  antibody  production.  This  approach  has  two 
advantages.  First,  the  quantity  of  protein  produced  is 
often  far  greater  than  that  from  the  natural  source. 
Second,  cloned  DNA  can  readily  be  modified  by  site-
directed mutagenesis to make specific amino acid sub-
stitutions and other alterations that are useful for studying 
protein  function  (Fig.  6.12).  The  behavior  of  mutant 
proteins in cells can provide evidence for the role of a 
given protein in particular cellular functions. Thus, bio-
chemical,  genetic,  and  molecular  cloning  approaches 
may  be  applied  collectively  to  reveal  the  function  of 
proteins.

Genome Engineering
Classical  random  mutagenesis  has  created  many  useful 
mutations that change the activity of genes, but genome 
editing  modifies  genes  precisely  and  directly.  These 
methods  allow  one  to  remove,  insert,  or  modify  DNA 
sequences at will. All the directed methods depend on 
creation of single or double strand breaks in DNA. Cells 
repair  double  strand  breaks  by  two  methods  (see  Fig. 
43.12). Nonhomologous end joining brings together 
any two broken ends, often with the loss of some base 
pairs. This may be exploited to eliminate the expression 
or normal function of a gene. Alternatively homology-
directed repair uses a homologous DNA sequence on 
the sister chromatid after DNA replication (see Box 43.1) 
to  guide  the  repair.  One  can  make  use  of  homology-
directed  repair  by  providing  exogenous  DNA  with 
homology  to  the  genome  on  both  sides  of  a  region  to  
be  modified.  The  region  between  these  targeting 
sequences  is  used  to  remove,  alter,  or  add  a  particular 
sequence. Traditionally, a plasmid was created contain-
ing two substantial regions of the chromosome (usually 
several  thousand  base  pairs)  flanking  the  region  to  
be  engineered.  When  introduced  into  cells  capable  of 
homologous recombination, the targeting sequences can 
recombine into the chromosome, thereby replacing the 

 

CHAPTER 6  n  Research Strategies 

93

A. Plasmid cloning

Ori

Amp

EcoR1

Plasmid vector with
multiple restriction

sites, including EcoR1 

Digest with

EcoR1 restriction

endonuclease

Source DNA

Gene of
interest

EcoR1

EcoR1

B. Restriction endonucleases

Cut

5'
3'

5'
3'

N N G A A T T C N N
N N C T  T A A G N N

EcoR1

Cut

Cut

N N G G A T C C N N
N N C C T A G G N N

BamH1

Cut

3'
5'

3'
5'

5'

3'

5'

3'

Anneal

complementary

ends

N N G     A A T T C N N

5'

3'

N N C T  T A A     G N N

3'

5'

N N G     G A T C C N N

5'

3'

N N C C T A G     G N N

3'

5'

3'

5'

3'

5'

Ligate
ends

Plasmid with
gene insert

Transform bacteria
and grow on
ampicillin

Colonies of bacteria
carrying the plasmid

Screen these colonies
for gene of interest

FIGURE 6.11  DNA CLONING. A, Cloning of a segment of DNA into a plasmid vector. The vector is a circular DNA molecule with an origin 
of replication (Ori) that allows it to replicate in a host bacterium. Most vectors also include one or more genes conferring antibiotic resistance—in 
this  example,  resistance  to  ampicillin  (Amp).  This  enables  one  to  select  only  those  bacteria  carrying  the  plasmid  by  the  ability  to  grow  in  the 
presence of ampicillin. Vectors also contain a sequence of DNA with multiple restriction enzyme digestion sites (see part B) for the insertion of 
foreign DNA molecules. In this example, a single restriction enzyme, EcoR1, is used to cut both the source DNA and the plasmid vector, leaving 
both with identical single-strand overhangs. The ends of the insert and the cut vector anneal together by base pairing and are then covalently 
linked together by a ligase enzyme, forming a complete circle of DNA. Plasmids are introduced into bacteria, which are then grown on ampicillin 
to  select  those  with  plasmids.  Colonies  of  bacteria  are  screened  for  those  containing  the  desired  insert  using,  for  example,  DNA  probes  for 
sequences specific to the gene of interest. Fig. 6.8B shows gel electrophoresis of a plasmid carrying an insert before and after digestion with a 
restriction enzyme to liberate the insert from the vector. B, Sequence-specific cutting of DNA with restriction enzymes. EcoR1 and BamH1 are 
two of the hundreds of different restriction enzymes that recognize and cleave specific DNA sequences. Both of these restriction enzymes rec-
ognize a palindrome of six symmetrical bases. Note that each enzyme leaves ends with characteristic sequences on both cut ends that are useful 
for base pairing with DNA having the same cut. Other restriction enzymes recognize and cut from 4 to 10 bases. 

Gene

Vector DNA

Denature

Plasmid

**

**

Ligate to
close ends

Plasmid with
point mutation

Primer 1

*

Primer with
mutation ( )
*
Synthesize

second strand

of whole plasmid

After denaturation and synthesis
of the second (mutated) strand
from primer 2, both strands
have a mutation ( )
*

**

Amplify by
PCR with

both primers

Primer 2

FIGURE 6.12 
IN VITRO MUTAGENESIS OF CLONED DNA. This is one of several types of PCR methods used to change one or more 
nucleotides (the asterisk in this example) in a cloned gene using a primer with altered bases. In this particular method, primer 1 has the altered 
base and is used to duplicate the entire plasmid. Primer 2 is used to synthesize the whole plasmid from the other end. After amplification with 
both primers, the two ends are ligated together, and the plasmid is produced in quantity by growth in bacteria. 

94 

A

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

sgRNA (specific to
the targeted gene)

Cas 9

DNA targeted

Target DNA

RNA-loop formed

PAM

DNA cleaved

B

)
5
1
-
3
4
 
e
r
u
g
i
f
 
e
e
s
(
 
r
i
a
p
e
r
 
n
o
i
t
a
n
b
m
o
c
e
r
 

i

s
u
o
g
o
o
m
o
H

l

CRISPR/Cas9 breaks DNA

3'

5'

Intact DNA

Precise double
strand break

Homologous DNA
with modification or
deletion in middle

Homologous DNA
guides the repair
of the break

= Resolvase cutting sites

Repaired DNA

Modified DNA

FIGURE 6.13  GENOME MODIFICATION BY HOMOLOGOUS RECOMBINATION AND EDITING. A, Creation of a precise double strand 
break by the CRISPR/Cas9 system. The guide RNA may consist of two pieces or be joined together by the blue loop. The red stem loops target 
the guide RNA to Cas9. The guide sequence (green) binds a complementary DNA sequence and separates the strands, allowing the two nuclease 
active sites of Cas9 to cleave the two strands of the target DNA. Cellular machinery repairs the double strand break either with a small deletion 
by nonhomologous end joining or with the insertion of donor DNA as in B by homology directed repair. B, Homologous recombination to insert 
a  new  DNA  sequence  between  a  pair  of  DNA  sequences  homologous  to  sequences  in  the  genome.  (A,  For  reference,  see  Doudna  JA, 
Charpentier E. Genome editing. The new frontier of genome engineering with CRISPR-Cas9. Science. 2014;346:1077.)

endogenous  sequence  with  the  new  DNA  in  between 
the  targeting  sequences.  The  new  DNA  can  change  a 
single base pair, add codons for amino acids, including 
epitope tags or fluorescent proteins, or even replace the 
entire  coding  sequence  to  create  a  null  mutation. 
When making a null mutation, one places between the 
targeting sequences a selectable marker, such as a gene 
encoding  resistance  to  a  drug  that  would  normally  kill 
the cells. This selectable marker replaces all or a portion 
of the coding sequence of the target gene and is used to 
enrich  for  cells  with  the  disrupted  gene.  Resistance  to 
the selectable marker does not ensure that the targeted 
gene is disrupted, as the exogenous DNA with the select-
able  marker  may  integrate  elsewhere  in  the  genome. 
Thus  careful  analysis  must  be  performed  to  verify  the 
products of the experiment.

Simply  introducing  a  DNA  molecule  with  targeting 
and  modification  sequences  into  some  cells  suffices  to 
make  precise  genome  modifications  by  homologous 
recombination (Fig. 6.13A). The frequency of sponta-
neous  breaks  followed  by  homology-directed  repair 

guided  by  an  exogenous  DNA  is  high  enough  in  yeast, 
chicken  DT40  cells,  and  mammalian  embryonic  stem 
cells  to  make  gene  targeting  practical.  However,  until 
recently  the  process  was  inefficient  or  impossible  in 
most eukaryotes including plants and popular metazoan 
model organisms (Table 6.3).

New genome editing methods allow efficient gene 
disruption or modification in most organisms (Table 6.3). 
The  essential  trick  was  to  find  a  way  to  cut  a  
single defined site in huge genomes to create an oppor-
tunity for cellular repair machinery to add or remove a 
few  nucleotides  and  rejoin  the  cut  by  nonhomologous 
end joining or insert modified DNA by homology-directed 
repair. Identification of a unique site in a whole genome 
requires  recognition  of  20  or  more  bases  in  the  DNA. 
Initial success was achieved coupling a nuclease to pro-
teins  that  recognize  DNA  sequences,  either  zinc-finger 
domains from transcription factors (see Fig. 10.14B) or 
transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs).
A revolutionary new technology for genome editing, 
the  CRISPR/Cas9  system,  uses  a  guide  RNA  to  direct 

 

CHAPTER 6  n  Research Strategies 

95

the Cas9 nuclease to a specific location in the genome 
(Fig. 6.13B). The Cas9 protein has two different nuclease 
domains (see Fig. 11.16), each of which makes a single 
strand  break  in  the  DNA.  CRISPR  stands  for  clustered 
regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats of DNA. 
Bacteria  and  Archaea  evolved  the  system  for  defense 
against  viruses.  CRISPR  guide  RNAs  include  sequences 
that bind Cas9 and a sequence complementary to a viral 
RNA or DNA. In the guide RNAs used for genome editing, 
the viral sequence is replaced with a sequence of 19 or 
20 nucleotides that can base pair with high fidelity with 
a complementary genomic DNA sequence. This genomic 
sequence must be followed by a PAM (protospacer adja-
cent  motif)  sequence  that  is  specific  for  each  CRISPR 
system. This PAM sequence can be as simple as “NGG” 
(where N is any base) as observed in Streptococcus pyo-
genes.  The  guide  RNA  binds  one  strand  of  DNA,  sepa-
rates the two strands, and presents them to the two Cas9 
nuclease  sites.  Repair  by  nonhomologous  end  joining 
creates  local  additions  or  deletions  that  may  inactivate 
or modify the gene by altering the codon reading frame. 
Adaptations  of  the  system  allow  workers  to  efficiently 
introduce single insertions, deletions or mutations, or to 
introduce  larger  insertions.  When  homology-directed 
repair  fixes  the  double  strand  break,  DNA  may  be 
removed or exogenous DNA provided by the experimen-
talist can be inserted to modify the genome sequence or 
add a desired sequence such as that for GFP. This method 
works  in  most  cells  tested,  including  all  the  popular 
experimental organisms (including adult mice!), greatly 
expanding  the  reach  of  genome  engineering  for  basic 
research and showing promise for clinical applications. 
However,  the  efficiency  varies,  because  homology-
directed repair activity is low in many cells and tissues. 
Alternative strategies use pairs of guide RNAs to make to 
cuts  in  a  gene  or  Cas9  with  only  one  active  nuclease 
domain  results  in  a  single  strand  break  that  the  cell 
repairs  by  the  base  excision  repair  pathway  (see  Fig. 
43.12). These methods are rapidly evolving, and creating 
revolutionary opportunities to study gene function.

Molecular Structure
Primary Structure
DNA  sequences  are  now  determined  by  automated 
methods (see Fig. 3.16) and used to deduce the sequence 
of  proteins  and  structural  RNAs.  Mass  spectrometry  is 
now  the  method  of  choice  to  detect  modified  amino 
acids (see Fig. 3.3), which are not revealed by the DNA.

Subunit Composition
Gel  electrophoresis  of  many  isolated  proteins  has 
revealed that they consist of more than one polypeptide 
chain (eg, Fig. 6.8C). Their stoichiometry can be deter-
mined  from  their  masses  and  intensities  of  the  stained 
bands on the gel, but the only way to determine the total 

number of subunits is to measure the molecular weight 
of the native protein or protein assembly. A sedimenta-
tion velocity experiment in an analytical ultracentrifuge 
provides  both  parameters  required  to  measure  the 
molecular weight of a purified macromolecule: the sedi-
mentation coefficient (from the velocity of the moving 
particles); and the diffusion coefficient (from the spread-
ing  of  the  boundary  of  particles).  The  diffusion  coeffi-
cient  can  also  be  calculated  from  the  Stokes  radius 
measured by gel filtration (Fig. 6.9B). The combination 
of gel filtration with multiangle laser light scattering 
also  gives  accurate  molecular  weights,  but  neither  the 
diffusion coefficient nor sedimentation coefficient alone 
provides  enough  information  to  measure  a  molecular 
weight.  An  analytical  ultracentrifuge  can  also  measure 
the molecular weight with a sedimentation equilibrium 
experiment. A sample of purified material is centrifuged 
in a physiological salt solution at relatively low speed in 
a rotor that allows the measurement of the mass concen-
tration  from  the  top  to  bottom  of  the  sample  cell.  At 
equilibrium,  the  sedimentation  of  the  material  toward 
the bottom of the tube is balanced by diffusion from the 
region of high concentration at the bottom of the tube. 
This  balance  between  sedimentation  and  diffusion 
uniquely defines the molecular weight of the particle.

Atomic Structure
Three complementary methods, x-ray crystallography 
(see  Fig.  3.6),  electron  microscopy  (Fig.  6.7D),  and 
nuclear  magnetic  resonance  (NMR)  spectroscopy, 
are  used  to  determine  the  structure  of  proteins  and 
nucleic acids at atomic resolution. X-ray crystallography 
has  the  highest  resolution  but  not  all  proteins  can  be 
crystallized.  Both  NMR  and  electron  microscopy  avoid 
the  requirement  to  crystallize  the  sample.  Electron 
microscopy  is  particularly  useful  for  large  structures 
such as the phage T4 tail baseplate, where 56,082 amino 
acid residues were mapped. NMR provides more infor-
mation about the dynamics of the molecule in solution, 
but the protein must be soluble at high concentrations, 
and NMR is difficult for proteins larger than 30 kD.

Partners and Pathways
Most  cellular  components  are  parts  of  assemblies,  net-
works,  or  pathways,  so  a  major  challenge  in  defining 
biological function is to place each molecule in its physi-
ological context with all of its molecular partners. The 
classic example of such an endeavor is the biochemical 
mapping of major metabolic pathways (see Fig. 19.4 or 
a biochemistry textbook). Genetics played a prominent 
role  in  the  discovery  of  the  network  of  proteins  that 
control the cell cycle (see Fig. 40.2). Currently, signaling, 
regulation  of  gene  expression,  membrane  trafficking, 
and the control of development are pathways of particu-
lar interest.

96 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

Biochemical Methods
Once  a  molecule  of  interest  has  been  purified,  finding 
its cellular partners is often the next step. Antibodies are 
frequently  used  to  separate  a  protein  and  its  partners 
from crude extracts. An antibody specific for the mole-
cule of interest can be attached directly or indirectly to 
a  bead  and  used  to  bind  the  protein  of  interest  along 
with any associated molecules. This is called immuno-
precipitation. After a gentle wash, bound proteins are 
analyzed by gel electrophoresis and identified with anti-
bodies  or  mass  spectrometry.  Bound  nucleic  acids  are 
cloned and sequenced.

For soluble proteins, the molecule of interest can be 
attached  to  an  insoluble  support,  such  as  small  beads, 
and  used  for  affinity  chromatography  (Fig.  6.9A).  If 
purified protein is available, it can be attached to beads 
by  chemical  crosslinking.  Alternatively,  the  protein  of 
interest  can  be  expressed  as  a  fusion  protein  with  a 
protein  (eg,  GST)  or  peptide  epitope  tag  that  binds  to 
another molecule attached to the beads. The beads with 
the  attached  protein  are  mixed  with  a  crude  cellular 
extract to allow other proteins to bind. Then unbound 
molecules are washed away in chromatography column 
or by pelleting in a centrifuge. Varying the concentration 
of such beads is a simple way to measure the affinity of 
the probe for its various partners.

A variation of this method called TAP (tandem affin-
ity purification) tagging is used to purify stable protein 
complexes from crude whole-cell lysates. A recombinant 

FIGURE  6.14  ANALYSIS  OF  GENETIC 
INTERACTIONS 
BETWEEN TWO GENES, M AND N. The sizes of the arrows indicate 
the level of function of the gene product, usually a protein. The phe-
notype  is  indicated  for  each  example.  Mutant  phenotype  means  an 
altered function dependent on gene products M and N. In the diagram, 
the plus sign indicates a wild-type allele, the asterisk indicates a sup-
pressor allele, and Δ indicates a null mutation. A, Bypass suppression. 
Gene products M and N operate in parallel, with M making the larger 
contribution. Loss of M yields a mutant phenotype because N alone 
does not provide sufficient function. Mutation N* enhances the function 
of  N,  allowing  it  to  provide  function  on  its  own.  B,  Suppression  by 
epistasis. Products M and N act in series on the same pathway. Loss 
of  M  function  blocks  the  pathway.  Mutation  N*  allows  N  to  function 
without stimulation by product M. C, Interactional suppression. Func-
tion requires interaction of gene products M and N. Mutation M− inter-
feres with the interaction. Suppressor mutation N* allows product N* 
to interact with M−. D, Synthetic lethal interaction when null mutations 
in either M or N are viable. The products of genes M and N operate 
in  parallel  to  provide  function.  N  provides  sufficient  function  in  the 
absence  of  M  (ΔM)  and  vice  versa.  Loss  of  both  M  and  N  is  lethal. 
E, Synthetic lethal interaction when null mutations in either M or N are 
lethal.  Products  M  and  N  function  in  series.  N  can  provide  residual 
function even when M is compromised by mutation M−, and vice versa. 
When both M and N are compromised (M−, N−), the pathway provides 
insufficient function for viability. (Modified from Guarente L. Synthetic 
enhancement in gene interaction: a genetic tool comes of age. Trends 
Genet. 1993;9:362–366.)

protein  is  tagged  with  two  different  peptide  epitopes 
separated  by  a  cleavage  site  for  a  highly  specific  viral 
protease. Beads with antibodies to the outermost tag are 
used  to  capture  the  doubly  tagged  protein  along  with 
associated  proteins  from  a  crude  cellular  extract.  The 
TEV (tobacco etch virus) protease, which has no natural 
targets  in  the  cell,  cleaves  the  tagged  protein  from  the 
immobilized  antibody.  Then  the  remaining  tag  is  used 
for  a  second  round  of  affinity  purification  to  remove 
most nonspecifically bound proteins.

Genetics
Given a mutation in a gene of interest, two genetic tests 
are  used  to  search  for  partners:  (a)  identification  of  a 
second  mutation  that  ameliorates  the  effects  of  the 
primary mutation (a suppressor mutation, Fig. 6.14A–
B) and (b) identification of a second mutation that makes 
the phenotype more severe, often lethal (an enhancer 
mutation [Fig. 6.14C–E]). A specialized class of enhancer 

A. Bypass suppression 

M+N+
M+
N+

Wild type

Null mutant ∆M N+

∆M suppressor N*

X

∆M
N+

Mutant

∆M
N*

X

Wild type'

B. Suppression by epistasis 

.6M+N+
N+

M+

Null mutant ∆M N+

∆M suppressor N*

∆M

X

N+

∆M

X

N*

Wild type

Mutant

Wild type'

C. Interactional suppression 
Non-null

M+N+

mutant M– N+

M– suppressor N*

M+ N+

M–

N+

M– N*

Wild type

Mutant

Wild type'

D. Synthetic lethal interaction when mutations 
     in either M or N are viable
Null mutant
∆M or ∆N

Double null
mutant ∆M ∆N

Wild type M+N+

X

∆M
N+

X

∆M
∆N

M+
N+

Viable

Viable

Lethal

E. Synthetic lethal interaction when null mutations
     in either M or N are lethal
Non-null

Wild-type M+N+

mutant M– or N–

Double non-null
mutant M– N–

M+

N+

Essential
function
Viable

M–

N+

Essential
function
Viable

M–

N–

Essential
function
Lethal

 

CHAPTER 6  n  Research Strategies 

97

mutations,  called  synthetic  lethal  mutations,  is  par-
ticularly  useful  in  the  analysis  of  genetic  pathways  in 
yeast. In this case, mutations in two genes in the same 
pathway,  if  present  in  the  same  cell,  even  as  heterozy-
gotes  (ie,  each  cell  having  one  good  and  one  mutant 
copy of each gene), cannot be tolerated, so the cell dies. 
It is thought that each mutation lowers the level of pro-
duction  of  some  critical  factor  just  a  bit  and  that  the 
combination of the two effectively means that the output 
of the pathway is insufficient for survival. These tests can 
be made with existing collections of mutations by geneti-
cally crossing mutant organisms. Alternatively, one can 
seek new mutations created by a second round of muta-
genesis.  The  results  depend  on  the  architecture  of  the 
particular pathway. If the products of the genes in ques-
tion operate in a sequence, analysis of single and double 
mutants  can  often  reveal  their  order  in  the  pathway.  
For  essential  genes  in  haploid  organisms,  a  conditional  
allele of the primary mutation simplifies the experiment. 
Synthetic  interactions  (suppression  or  lethality)  may  
also be discovered by overproduction of wild-type genes 
on  a  plasmid.  Caution  is  required  in  interpreting  sup-
pressor  and  enhancer  mutations,  given  the  complexity 
of  cellular  systems  and  the  possibility  of  unanticipated 
consequences of the mutations.

Another approach to find protein partners is called a 
two-hybrid assay (Fig. 6.15). This assay depends on the 
observation  that  some  activators  of  transcription  have 
two  modular  domains  with  discrete  functions:  One 
domain binds target sites on DNA, and the other recruits 
the transcriptional apparatus (see Fig. 10.15). The target 
gene  is  expressed  if  both  activities  are  present  at  the 

Normal regulation of gene expression

Activation
domain
DNA-binding
domain

ACT

GAL4 transcription factor

General transcription 
factors

GAL
UAS

RNA
polymerase

β-Galactosidase
coding sequence

Two-hybrid interaction activates gene expression
Library of potential
  prey proteins fused
  to the activation 
  domain

Bait protein
  fused to
  DNA-binding
  domain

ACT

GAL
UAS

If prey binds the bait,
  β-galactosidase
  mRNA is made

FIGURE  6.15  ONE  VERSION  OF  THE  YEAST  TWO-HYBRID 
ASSAY FOR INTERACTING PROTEINS. Interaction between “bait” 
protein  and  “prey”  protein  (bottom)  brings  together  the  two  halves 
of  a  transcription  factor  required  to  turn  on  the  expression  of 
β-galactosidase. The DNA-binding domain of the GAL4 transcription 
factor binds a specific DNA sequence: GAL UAS. Generally, a library 
of  random  cDNAs  or  gene  fragments  is  used  to  express  test  prey 
proteins as fusions with the activation domain. 

transcription start site, even if the activities are on two 
different proteins. For the two-hybrid assay, the coding 
sequence of the protein whose partners are to be identi-
fied  is  fused  to  the  coding  sequence  of  a  yeast  protein 
that  recognizes  a  target  DNA  sequence  upstream  of  a 
gene that provides the readout of the assay. This so-called 
bait  protein  is  expressed  constitutively  in  yeast  cells.  
A  plasmid  library  is  constructed  consisting  of  cDNA 
sequences  of  all  possible  interaction  partners  (“prey”), 
each  fused  to  the  coding  sequence  of  an  “activator 
domain” and a nuclear localization sequence. This library 
of “prey” proteins is introduced into a population of the 
“bait”  yeast  strain.  The  readout  gene  is  expressed  in  a 
cell  if  a  “prey”  protein  binds  the  “bait”  protein  and 
recruits the transcriptional apparatus. Many variations of 
this assay exist. One produces an enzyme that makes a 
colored  product,  so  colonies  of  yeast  with  interacting 
proteins  can  be  identified  visually.  In  another  version, 
the target gene encodes a gene essential for production 
of a particular amino acid, so only cells with a bait–prey 
interaction will grow on agar plates lacking that amino 
acid. Putative interactions must subsequently be tested 
carefully to define specificity, as false-positive results are 
common. Moreover, some valid interactions are missed 
owing to false-negative results.

Large-Scale Screening With Microarrays
Microarrays display thousands of tiny spots on a glass 
slide,  each  with  a  particular  DNA  sequence  or  protein 
(Fig. 6.16). This allows many reactions to be monitored 
in parallel. One type of microarray has cDNAs or oligo-
nucleotides  for  thousands  of  genes.  Probing  such  an 
array with complementary copies of mRNAs from a test 
sample  reveals  which  genes  are  expressed.  This  assay 
can  be  used  to  find  partners,  because  expression  of 
genes  contributing  proteins  to  a  particular  pathway  is 
often  coordinated  as  conditions  change.  For  example, 
unfolded proteins in the lumen of the endoplasmic retic-
ulum trigger the expression of nearly 300 genes for pro-
teins  of  the  endoplasmic  reticulum  (see  Fig.  20.13). 
Microarrays  of  thousands  of  different  proteins  can  be 
used  to  test  for  interactions.  For  example,  reaction  of 
protein arrays with each yeast protein kinase, one kinase 
per  slide,  identified  the  substrates  phosphorylated  by 
each kinase (Fig. 6.16B).

Rates and Affinities
Information  about  reaction  rates  is  important  for  two 
reasons. First, reaction rates are required to account for 
the  dynamic  aspects  of  any  biological  system.  Second, 
although  the  methods  in  the  previous  section  usually 
provide  initial  clues  about  the  integration  of  proteins 
into  pathways,  knowledge  of  reactant  concentrations 
and rate constants is the only way to fully understand 
biochemical  pathways.  Fortunately,  just  two  types  of 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

98 

A

B

C

FIGURE  6.16  LARGE-SCALE  ANALYSIS  OF  GENE  EXPRES-
SION  AND  KINASE  ACTIVITY  WITH  MICROARRAYS.  A,  Gene 
expression. PCR was used to make cDNA copies of mRNAs from two 
parts  of  the  human  brain.  The  cDNAs  from  cerebral  cortex  mRNAs 
were labeled with a red fluorescent dye, whereas those from the cer-
ebellum were labeled with a green fluorescent dye. A mixture of equal 
proportions  of  the  two  fluorescent  cDNA  preparations  was  reacted 
with 384 different known cDNAs arrayed in tiny spots on a glass slide. 
The fluorescence-bound cDNAs were imaged with a microscopic fluo-
rescent scanner similar to a confocal microscope. Yellow spots bound 
equal  quantities  of  cDNAs  from  the  two  sources.  Red  spots  bound 
more cDNA from the cortex, indicating a higher concentration of those 
mRNAs. Green spots bound more cDNA from the cerebellum, indicat-
ing a higher concentration of those mRNAs. B–C, Large-scale identi-
fication  of  substrates  for  a  protein  kinase.  Thousands  of  different 
budding yeast proteins tagged with GST− and 6 histidines were over-
expressed  in  yeast  and  purified  by  affinity  chromatography.  Each 
protein was spotted in duplicate on a glass slide, a small portion of 
which is shown here. B, The amount of bound protein in each spot 
was detected with a fluorescent antibody to GST (indicated by varying 
intensity  of  fluorescence  from  dark  red  to  white).  C,  The  slide  was 
incubated  with  a  yeast  kinase  in  the  presence  of  33P-adenosine  tri-
phosphate (ATP). Radioactive phosphorylated proteins were detected 
as  pairs  of  dark  spots  by  autoradiography.  One  pair  is  boxed.   
(A,  Courtesy  C.  Barlow  and  M.  Zapala,  Salk  Institute,  La  Jolla,  CA. 
B–C,  Courtesy  Geeta  Devgan  and  Michael  Snyder,  Yale  University, 
New Haven, CT. For reference, see Zhu H, Bilgin M, Bangham R, et al. 
Global  analysis  of  protein  activities  using  proteome  chips.  Science. 
2001;293:2101–2105.)

reactions occur in biology: first-order reactions, such as 
conformational  changes  and  dissociation  of  molecular 
complexes,  and  second-order  reactions  between  two 
molecules.  Chapter  4  explains  the  rate  constants  for 
such reactions, the relationship of rate constants to the 
equilibrium constant for a reaction, and the relationship 
of the equilibrium constant to thermodynamics. Fig. 4.7 
illustrates how transient kinetics experiments were used 
to  determine  the  mechanism  of  the  Ras  guanosine  tri-
phosphatase (GTPase) (see Fig. 4.6).

Despite their importance, rate constants and the phys-
iological concentrations of the molecules in a pathway 

are usually the least understood aspects of most biologi-
cal  systems.  A  common  impediment  is  the  lack  of  an 
assay  with  sufficient  sensitivity  and  time  resolution  to 
measure reaction rates. Optical methods, such as those 
using  fluorescence,  are  usually  the  best  and  can  be 
devised for most processes.

Reconstitution of Function From  
Isolated Components
The  classic  biochemical  test  of  function  is  reconstitu-
tion of a biological process from purified components. 
This  involves  creating  conditions  in  the  test  tube  in 
which isolated molecules can perform a complex process 
normally carried out by a cell. The difficulty of the task 
depends  on  the  complexity  of  the  function.  Successful 
reconstitution experiments reveal the molecular require-
ments and mechanisms involved in a process. Examples 
of successful tests include reconstitution of ion channel 
function  in  pure  lipid  membranes  (see  Chapter  16), 
protein synthesis and translocation of proteins into the 
endoplasmic  reticulum  (see  Fig.  20.9),  and  motility  of 
bacteria  powered  by  assembly  of  actin  filaments  (see  
Fig. 37.12).

Anatomic Tests of Physiological Function
No biological process can be understood without knowl-
edge of where the components are located in the cell. 
Often, cellular localization of a newly discovered mol-
ecule  provides  the  first  clue  about  its  function.  This 
accounts for why cell biologists put so much effort into 
localizing molecules in cells. Cell fractionation, fluores-
cent  antibody  staining,  and  expression  of  GFP  fusion 
proteins  are  all  valuable  approaches,  illustrated  by 
numerous  examples  in  this  book.  For  more  detailed 
localization,  antibodies  can  be  adsorbed  to  small  gold 
beads  and  used  to  label  fixed  specimens  for  electron 
microscopy (see Fig. 29.7).

GFP fusion proteins are particularly valuable, because 
of  the  ease  of  their  construction  and  expression  and 
because they can be used to monitor both the behavior 
and  dynamics  of  molecules  within  living  cells.  For 
example, the time course of fluorescence recovery of a 
photobleached area (Fig. 6.3F) provides information on 
the mobility of the fusion protein (ie, whether it diffuses 
freely, is immobilized on a scaffold, or is actively trans-
ported) and its interaction properties within the cell (see 
Figs.  13.12  and  9.4).  However,  attaching  GFP  might 
affect either the localization or function of the protein, 
so  it  is  important  to  demonstrate  that  a  GFP  fusion 
protein is fully functional by genetic replacement of the 
native  protein.  This  is  done  routinely  in  yeast  but  was 
done  rarely  for  animal  proteins  until  genome  editing 
methods became available.

 

CHAPTER 6  n  Research Strategies 

99

Proteins  and  other  cellular  components,  including 
DNA,  RNA,  and  lipids,  can  be  labeled  with  fluorescent 
dyes to study their intracellular localization and dynam-
ics. Fluorescent RNAs and proteins can be microinjected 
into  cells.  Fluorescent  lipids  can  be  inserted  into  the 
outer leaflet of the plasma membrane in living cells; from 
there,  they  move  to  appropriate  membranes  and  then 
mimic the behavior of their natural lipid counterpart.

Three Options to Test for  
Physiological Function
Although often obscured by technical jargon, just three 
methods are available to test for physiological function: 
(a)  reducing  the  concentration  of  active  protein  (or 
other  molecule),  (b)  increasing  the  concentration  of 
active  molecule,  and  (c)  replacing  a  native  molecule 
with  a  molecule  with  altered  biochemical  properties. 
Biochemical, pharmacological, and genetic methods are 
available for each test, the genetic methods often yield-
ing the cleanest results. Interpreting these experiments 
is  most  reliable  when  robust  assays  are  available  to 
measure  quantitatively  how  the  cellular  process  under 
investigation  functions  when  the  concentration  of  a 
native molecule is varied or an altered molecule replaces 
the native molecule. When done well, these experiments 
provide  valuable  constraints  for  quantitative  models  of 
biological systems, as described below.

Reducing the Concentration of a Macromolecule
Disrupting  a  gene  by  classical,  random  genetics  or  by 
genome engineering usually provides definitive informa-
tion  about  the  functions  of  the  gene  and  its  products. 
This  option  is  available  if  the  molecule  is  not  required 
for  viability.  If  a  protein  is  essential,  there  are  four 
options  for  eliminating  its  activity.  The  mRNA  can  be 
depleted, the protein can be depleted, the protein can 
be  inhibited,  or  the  protein  can  be  replaced  with  an 
altered version that is fully active under a certain set of 
conditions  and  completely  inactive  under  other  condi-
tions (a conditional mutant).
•  Depletion  of  RNAs:  RNAi  is  widely  used  to  deplete 
mRNAs  from  many  cells  and  organisms,  including 
nematodes and cultured cells of flies and humans (see 
Fig. 11.12 for details). Animals, fungi, and plants natu-
rally use this process to suppress expression of foreign 
RNAs,  such  as  those  introduced  by  viruses.  To  sup-
press a particular RNA in human cells experimentally, 
one  synthesizes  a  double-stranded  RNA,  including  a 
sequence  of  at  least  21  nucleotides  matching  the 
target  cellular  RNA  such  as  an  mRNA.  These  may  
be  on  separate  strands  or  a  single  hairpin  molecule. 
When  introduced  into  cells,  an  enzyme  cuts  the 
double-stranded RNA into pieces of approximately 21 
nucleotides  and  one  strand  is  loaded  onto  a  protein 

complex (see Fig. 11.12). If the bound RNA base pairs 
with the complementary sequence of a cellular RNA 
(usually  an  exact  match  is  required),  the  protein 
cleaves  the  target  RNA,  initiating  its  degradation.  If 
depletion of the mRNA is successful, the level of the 
targeted  protein  falls  5-  to  10-fold  as  it  is  degraded 
naturally  over  several  days.  Loss  of  the  protein  may 
produce a cellular phenotype. The simplicity of this 
approach  made  RNAi  very  popular  and  suitable  for 
scaling  up  to  study  thousands  of  genes.  However, 
false-negative results are common, because some tar-
geted protein usually remains. Furthermore, off-target 
effects,  where  an  unexpected  second  mRNA  is  also 
targeted, are also common and difficult to detect. One 
must thus be very cautious in interpreting the results 
with this method. Nevertheless, many are attempting 
to use RNAi therapeutically.

A  second  option  is  to  put  the  expression  of  the 
protein or RNA under the control of regulatory pro-
teins that are sensitive to the presence of a small mol-
ecule, such as a vitamin or hormone. Then, expression 
of the molecule can be turned on and off at will. This 
is  commonly  done  for  vertebrate  cells  by  using  pro-
moters of gene expression engineered so that they can 
be  turned  on  or  off  by  the  antibiotic  tetracycline, 
which  alters  the  ability  of  a  bacterial  protein  (the  
tetracycline  repressor)  to  bind  particular  regulatory 
sequences added to the DNA. A limitation of this tech-
nology is that some proteins are so stable that days are 
required  to  reduce  their  concentrations.  During  this 
time, cells may be able to compensate for the loss of 
the protein of interest.

•  Selective  protein  degradation:  Proteins  can  be 
removed  from  cells  by  targeted  degradation  when 
linked  to  a  degron–an  amino  acid  sequence  that 
under certain conditions triggers rapid proteolysis of 
the fusion protein by the ubiquitin-proteasome system 
(see  Fig.  23.3).  For  example,  plant  cells  respond  to 
the  hormone  auxin  by  destroying  certain  transcrip-
tional repressors carrying a degron sequence. Because 
animal cells do not use auxin, one can add the degron 
sequence to target proteins (preferably by editing the 
degron into the chromosomal copy of the gene) and 
use  auxin  to  trigger  their  specific  destruction,  often 
in less than 1 hour.

•  Inhibitors:  A  time-tested  strategy  is  to  inhibit  a  par-
ticular  protein  with  a  drug,  inhibitory  peptide,  anti-
body, or inactive partner protein. Drugs as probes for 
function  have  a  long  and  distinguished  history  in 
biology, but their use is hampered by the difficulty of 
ruling  out  side  effects,  including  action  on  other 
unknown targets. One wag even asserted, “drugs are 
only  specific  for  about  a  year,”  roughly  the  time  it 
takes someone to find an unexpected second target. 
Nevertheless,  many  drugs  are  useful  because  their 

100 

SECTION II  n  Chemical and Physical Background

onset  of  their  action  is  rapid  and  their  effects  are 
reversible, so one can follow the process of recovery 
when they are removed. The use of libraries of small 
molecules  to  probe  biological  processes  has  been 
called chemical genetics.

If microinjected into cells, antibodies can be very 
specific,  but  the  effects  on  their  target  must  be  
fully  characterized,  and  sufficient  antibody  must  be 
introduced into the target cell to inactivate the target 
molecule.  Some  arginine-rich  peptides,  such  as  one 
from the HIV Tat protein, can be used to carry inhibi-
tory  peptides  across  the  plasma  membrane  into  the 
cytoplasm.  Other  peptides  can  guide  experimental 
peptides into various cellular compartments. It is also 
possible to inactivate pathways by expressing domi-
nant  negative  mutants  that  can  do  part,  but  not 
all, of the job of a given protein. Dominant negative 
mutants  of  protein  kinases  are  particularly  effective. 
The  active  site  is  modified  to  eliminate  enzymatic 
activity, but the modified protein can still bind to its 
regulatory proteins and substrates. This can interfere 
with signal transduction pathways very effectively by 
competing  with  functional  endogenous  kinases  for 
regulatory factors and substrates. Dominant negative 
mutants offer the advantage that they can be expressed 
in many types of cells. All too often, however, little is 
known  about  the  concentrations  of  these  dominant 
negative agents or the full range of their targets.

•  Conditional  mutations:  Some  mutant  proteins  are 
active  under  limited  conditions.  For  example,  one  
class of conditional mutations allows a protein to be 
active at one temperature and inactive at another, typi-
cally  a  high  temperature.  Such  temperature-sensitive 
mutations have been invaluable to study essential genes 
in prokaryotes and fungi, but are used much less often 
in plants and metazoan organisms. Although one must 
control for the effects of temperature on other cellular 
processes,  the  rapid  onset  and  reversibility  of  the 
effects  of  conditional  mutations  reduces  the  chance 
that the cell adapts with genetic changes.

Increasing the Concentration of a Macromolecule
The  concentration  of  active  protein  can  be  increased  
by  overexpression,  for  example,  driving  the  expres-
sion of a cDNA from a very active viral promoter. Some 
expression systems are conditional, being turned on, for 
example,  by  an  insect  hormone  that  does  not  activate 
endogenous  genes.  Interpreting  the  consequences  of 
overexpression  tends  to  be  less  straightforward  than 
other  approaches,  as  specificity  of  interactions  with 
other  cellular  components  can  be 
lost  at  high 
concentrations.

Altering the Activity of a Macromolecule
Genetics or genome editing are used to replace a native 
protein or RNA with a version with altered biochemical 

properties  (Table  6.2).  Examples  of  altered  proteins 
include  an  enzyme  with  altered  catalytic  function  or  
a  protein  with  altered  affinity  for  a  particular  cellular 
partner. Ideally, the altered protein is fully characterized 
before its coding sequence is used to replace that of the 
wild-type protein. Amino acid residues to be mutated are 
often  determined  based  on  atomic  structures.  When 
these experiments are conducted in vivo, it is important 
that the cellular concentration of the altered protein is 
confirmed to be the same as the wild-type protein. On 
the  relatively  long  time  scale  of  such  experiments 
(months  in  vertebrates),  interpreting  the  outcome  may 
be compromised by the ability of cells to adapt geneti-
cally  in  unknown  ways  to  the  change  imposed  by  the 
gene substitution.

Mathematical Models of Systems
An inventory of molecular components; their structures, 
concentrations,  molecular  partners,  and  reaction  rates; 
and genetic tests for their contributions to a physiologi-
cal process will suggest hypotheses for how the system 
works.  However,  one  does  not  know  if  the  proposed 
mechanism  works  unless  simulations  based  on  a  math-
ematical  model  can  match  the  performance  of  the  cel-
lular  system  over  a  range  of  conditions,  including 
mutation  and  inhibition  of  one  or  more  components. 
Even  in  the  best  cases  (bacterial  metabolic  pathways, 
bacterial  chemotaxis,  yeast  cell  cycle,  muscle  calcium 
transients,  and  muscle  crossbridges),  initial  mathemati-
cal  models  fell  short  of  duplicating  the  physiological 
process. This meant that some aspect of the process was 
incompletely  understood  or  that  assumptions  in  the 
mathematical  model  were  incorrect.  Regardless,  such 
failures offer important clues about the shortcomings of 
current knowledge and point the way toward improve-
ments  in  underlying  assumptions,  experimental  param-
eters,  or  mathematical  models.  By  cycling  from  theory 
to  simulation  to  experiment  and  back  to  improved 
theory, investigators converge on the underlying truth.

SELECTED READINGS

Altieri  AS,  Byrd  TA.  Automation  of  NMR  structure  determination  of 

proteins. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2004;14:547-553.

Bader GD, Heilbut A, Andrews B, et al. Functional genomics and pro-
teomics: Charting a multidimensional map of the yeast cell. Trends 
Cell Biol. 2003;13:344-356.

Brent R, Finley RLJ. Understanding gene and allele function with two-

hybrid methods. Annu Rev Genet. 1997;31:663-704.

Bruckner A, Polge C, Lentze N, Auerbach D, Schlattner U. Yeast two-
hybrid, a powerful tool for systems biology. Int J Mol Sci. 2009;10:
2763-2788.

Chen  BC,  Legant  WR,  Wang  K,  et al.  Lattice  light-sheet  microscopy: 
imaging  molecules  to  embryos  at  high  spatiotemporal  resolution. 
Science. 2014;346:349.

Cheng  Y.  Single-particle  cryo-EM  at  crystallographic  resolution.  Cell. 

2015;161:450-457.

 

CHAPTER 6  n  Research Strategies 

101

Costanzo M, Baryshnikova A, Myers CL, Andrews B, Boone C. Charting 
the genetic interaction map of a cell. Curr Opin Biotechnol. 2011;
22:66-74.

Cox  S.  Super-resolution  imaging  in  live  cells.  Dev  Biol.  2015;401:

175-181.

Danuser  G,  Waterman-Storer  CM.  Quantitative  fluorescent  speckle 
microscopy of cytoskeleton dynamics. Annu Rev Biophys Biomol 
Struct. 2006;35:361-387.

Doudna  JA,  Charpentier  E.  Genome  editing.  The  new  frontier  of 

genome engineering with CRISPR-Cas9. Science. 2014;346:1077.

Frey TG, Perkins GA, Ellisman MH. Electron tomography of membrane-
bound cellular organelles. Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct. 2006;
35:199-224.

Giepmans  BN,  Adams  SR,  Ellisman  MH,  Tsien  RY.  The  fluorescent 
toolbox for assessing protein location and function. Science. 2006;
312:217-224.

Mogilner  A,  Wollman  R,  Marshall  WF.  Quantitative  modeling  in  cell 

biology: What good is it? Dev Cell. 2006;11:1-9.

Mohr SE, Smith JA, Shamu CE, Neumüller RA, Perrimon N. RNAi screen-
ing  comes  of  age:  improved  techniques  and  complementary 
approaches. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2014;15:591-600.

Murphy  DB.  Fundamentals  of  Light  Microscopy  and  Electronic 

Imaging. New York: Wiley-Liss; 2001.

Nishimura K, Fukagawa T, Takisawa H, Kakimoto T, Kanemaki M. An 
auxin-based  degron  system  for  the  rapid  depletion  of  proteins  in 
nonplant cells. Nat Methods. 2009;6:917-922.

Pollard TD. No question about exciting questions in cell biology. PLoS 

Biol. 2013;e1001734.

Pollard TD, De La Cruz E. Take advantage of time in your experiments: 
a  guide  to  simple,  informative  kinetics  assays.  Mol  Biol  Cell. 
2013;24:1103-1110.

Pratsch  K,  Wellhausen  R,  Seitz  H.  Advances  in  the  quantification  of 

Godin AG, Lounis B, Cognet L. Super-resolution microscopy approaches 

protein microarrays. Curr Opin Chem Biol. 2014;18:16-20.

for live cell imaging. Biophys J. 2014;107:1777-1784.

Ramsey JD, Flynn NH. Cell-penetrating peptides transport therapeutics 

Green  MR,  Sambrook  J.  Molecular  Cloning.  4th  ed.  Plainview,  NY: 

into cells. Pharmacol Ther. 2015;154:78-86.

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory; 2001.

Guarente L. Synthetic enhancement in gene interaction: A genetic tool 

come of age. Trends Genet. 1993;9:362-366.

Sample V, Mehta S, Zhang J. Genetically encoded molecular probes to 
visualize and perturb signaling dynamics in living biological systems. 
J Cell Sci. 2014;127:1151-1160.

Hsu PD, Lander ES, Zhang F. Development and applications of CRISPR-

Sioud  M.  RNA  interference:  mechanisms,  technical  challenges,  and 

Cas9 for genome engineering. Cell. 2014;157:1262-1278.

therapeutic opportunities. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1218:1-15.

Huang  B,  Bates  M,  Zhuang  X.  Super-resolution  fluorescence  micros-

Slayter EM. Optical Methods in Biology. New York: Wiley-Interscience; 

copy. Annu Rev Biochem. 2009;78:993-1016.

1970.

Janes  KA,  Lauffenburger  DA.  Models  of  signaling  networks-what  cell 
biologists  can  gain  from  them  and  give  to  them.  J  Cell  Sci.  2013;
126:1913-1921.

Larance M, Lamond AI. Multidimensional proteomics for cell biology. 

Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2015;16:269-280.

Lewis  NE,  Nagarajan  H,  Palsson  BO.  Constraining  the  metabolic 
genotype-phenotype  relationship  using  a  phylogeny  of  in  silico 
methods. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2012;10:291-305.

Li  D,  Shao  L,  Chen  BC,  et al.  ADVANCED  IMAGING.  Extended-
resolution  structured  illumination  imaging  of  endocytic  and  cyto-
skeletal dynamics. Science. 2015;349:aab3500.

Lučič V, Rigort A, Baumeister W. Cryo-electron tomography: the chal-
lenge  of  doing  structural  biology  in  situ.  J  Cell  Biol.  2013;202:
407-419.

McIntosh JR, Nicastro D, Mastronarde D. New views of cells in 3D: An 
introduction  to  electron  tomography.  Trends  Cell  Biol.  2005;15:
43-51.

Slepchenko  BM,  Schaff  JC,  Carson  JH,  Loew  LM.  Computational  cell 
biology:  Spatiotemporal  simulation  of  cellular  events.  Annu  Rev 
Biophys Biomol Struct. 2002;31:423-441.

Westermarck J, Ivaska J, Corthals GL. Identification of protein interac-
tions  involved  in  cellular  signaling.  Mol  Cell  Proteomics.  2013;12:
1752-1763.

Wijdeven RH, Neefjes J, Ovaa H. How chemistry supports cell biology: 
the  chemical  toolbox  at  your  service.  Trends  Cell  Biol.  2014;24:
751-760.

Wu  RZ,  Bailey  SN,  Sabatini  DM.  Cell-biological  applications  of 

transfected-cell microarrays. Trends Cell Biol. 2002;12:485-488.

Internet
Biophysical Society. Biophysical Techniques. <http://www.biophysics.
org/Education/SelectedTopicsInBiophysics/BiophysicalTechniques/
tabid/2313/Default.aspx>

This page intentionally left blank

S E C T I O N   III

Chromatin, Chromosomes, 
and the Cell Nucleus

This page intentionally left blank

SECTION  III  OVERVIEW

Every  organism  is  defined  by  a  blueprint  consisting 
of  information  stored  in  its  chromosomes.  With  the 
exception  of  a  few  viruses,  these  chromosomes  are 
composed  of  enormously  long  circular  or  linear  mole-
cules  of  DNA.  (Those  few  viruses  use  RNA  instead.) 
Chromosomes  have  fascinated  biologists  ever  since  it 
was  understood  that  they  contain  the  genetic  informa-
tion  that  defines  each  organism—its  genome.  After 
Watson and Crick’s proposal of a structure for DNA in 
1953, it was realized that the DNA is a linear sequence 
of A, T, G, and C bases that can be thought of as a code 
to describe the physical attributes for every organism.

This  code  was  originally  thought  to  be  impossibly 
complex and so vast that it could never be completely 
understood,  but  recent  technological  advances  have 
permitted scientists to determine the complete sequences 
of enormous DNA molecules. Since 1996, the ENSEMBL 
database  (the  official  website  coordinating  genome 
information) has grown to contain the sequences of DNA 
molecules  that  make  up  the  genomes  of  more  than  40 
plants,  50  animals  (from  aardvarks  to  zebrafish),  65 
“model organisms” including nematode worms such as 
Caenorhabditis elegans and fruit flies such as Drosophila 
melanogaster,  160  protists,  600  fungi  (including  many 
species and strains of budding and fission yeast) and over 
30,000  bacteria.  The  genomes  of  thousands  of  humans 
have been sequenced as well as much of the genome of 
Neanderthal  man.  These  genome  sequences  not  only 
reveal much about the biology of living organisms, but 
also are the most important source of information about 
the evolution of life on Earth (see Chapter 2).

This  does  not  mean  that  we  understand  everything 
about chromosomes, however. Far from it. We still know 
very little about how chromosomal DNA molecules are 
packaged so that they not only fit into cells but also allow 
access  to  the  library  of  genetic  information  that  they 
contain. In prokaryotes, the single chromosome is con-
centrated in a specialized region of the cytoplasm called 
the nucleoid. In eukaryotes, the chromosomes are pack-
aged in a specialized membrane-bounded compartment 
known  as  the  nucleus.  This  difference  in  organization 
has important consequences for the regulation of gene 
expression.

Chapter 7 describes the organization of chromosomal 
DNA  molecules.  Every  species  has  a  characteristic 
number of chromosomes that occupy distinct territories 
within  the  nucleus  and  can  be  visualized  as  separate 
entities only during cell division. For example, humans 
have 46 chromosomes that contain, in total, about 6.2 × 
109  base  pairs  of  DNA.  Perhaps  the  most  surprising 

characteristic of this chromosomal DNA is how variable 
it is from person to person. A “typical” human genome 
has more than 400,000 differences from the “reference 
genome” stored in ENSEMBL!

Analysis of the human genome sequence revealed that 
the  genes  encoding  proteins  and  RNAs  are  often  sur-
rounded  by  huge  noncoding  deserts.  In  fact,  the  vast 
majority  of  the  chromosomal  DNA  in  humans  has  no 
coding  function,  although  much  of  it  is  transcribed  
into  noncoding  RNAs.  Some  of  these  noncoding  RNAs 
have regulatory functions (Chapter 11), but the function 
of other long noncoding RNAs remains enigmatic. Two 
specific  DNA  structures  are  essential  for  the  mainte-
nance of a constant chromosome complement in a given 
species:  centromeres  and  telomeres.  Centromeres 
consist of DNA sequences that, together with 90 or more 
proteins (Chapter 8), direct the segregation of chromo-
somes  during  cell  division.  Telomeres  are  specialized 
structures  that  protect  the  ends  of  chromosomes  and 
permit complete replication of the chromosomal DNA.

Given  the  spacing  of  3.4 Å  per  base  pair  in  B-form 
DNA, each human cell contains more than 2 m of DNA 
packaged into a nucleus only 5 to 20 × 10−6 m in diam-
eter! Chapter 8 explains how DNA is extensively folded 
to  fit  into  the  nucleus.  The  first  levels  of  packaging 
shorten  the  DNA  about  40-fold  by  wrapping  it  around 
histone proteins to form nucleosomes. Higher levels of 
packaging  of  the  chromatin  fiber  are  just  beginning  to 
be understood using powerful genomics methods such 
as Hi-C (a method that identifies DNA sequences that are 
close to one another in the nucleus), which has revealed 
that  the  genome  is  packaged  into  local  domains  of 
100,000 to 1 million base pairs known as topologically 
associating domains (TADs).

The  complex  of  DNA  with  its  packaging  proteins  is 
called  chromatin.  Nuclei  contain  two  broad  classes 
of  chromatin:  heterochromatin,  which  is  highly  con-
densed throughout the cell cycle and is generally inactive 
in  transcription,  and  euchromatin,  which  is  less  con-
densed and contains actively transcribed genes. Different 
types of chromatin are defined by complex patterns of 
posttranslational  modifications  of  the  histone  proteins. 
These modifications direct the binding of protein readers 
that  establish  chromatin  states  to  promote  or  repress 
gene expression or serve other structural roles.

Chapter  9  discusses  the  structure  and  physiology  of 
the nucleus. The boundary of the nucleus is a nuclear 
envelope  composed  of  inner  and  outer  nuclear  mem-
branes, separated by a perinuclear space that is continu-
ous with the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum. The 

 105

inner nuclear membrane is supported by a protein layer 
called the nuclear lamina. Mutations in the lamina and 
other nuclear envelope proteins cause a wide spectrum 
of inherited human diseases, with mutations in the lamin 
genes causing approximately 16 different diseases.

Traffic  into  and  out  of  the  nucleus  moves  through 
nuclear pore complexes that span the two membrane 
bilayers of the nuclear envelope. Newly processed RNAs 
head out to the cytoplasm. So do the ribosomal subunits 
that  will  translate  them  into  proteins,  some  of  which 
then  wend  their  way  back  into  the  nucleus.  Proteins 
destined for transport across the nuclear envelope (either 
alone  or  associated  with  RNA  molecules)  typically 
contain  short  stretches  of  amino  acids,  called  nuclear 
localization sequences or nuclear export sequences, 
that  bind  to  specific  adapter  and  receptor  proteins  to 
facilitate  transport  across  the  nuclear  pore.  A  small 
guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) called Ran regulates 
the directionality of this transport, because it is present 
primarily  in  its  GTP-bound  form  in  the  nucleus  and  its 

GDP-bound  form  in  the  cytoplasm.  Ran-GTP  in  the 
nucleus causes imported cargos to dissociate from their 
transporters  and  cargos  destined  for  export  to  bind  to 
their carriers.

The nucleus contains a number of substructures. The 
most  prominent  of  these  is  the  nucleolus,  a  versatile 
factory for transcription of ribosomal RNA (rRNA) from 
a  tandem  array  of  genes  and  processing  of  rRNA  and 
other  noncoding  RNAs,  as  well  as  ribosome  assembly. 
Nuclei  also  contain  several  other  specialized  regions. 
These serve a range of functions, including small nuclear 
ribonucleoprotein  (snRNP)  and  small  nucleolar  ribonu-
cleoprotein  (snoRNP)  assembly  (in  Cajal  bodies)  and 
serving  as  assembly  sites  for  certain  transcriptional 
corepressor  complexes  (PML  and  Polycomb  group 
bodies).  Other  nuclear  substructures  are  sites  of  DNA 
damage  that  are  marked  for  repair  (53BP1  nuclear 
bodies). Studies of these specialized subdomains reveal 
that compartmentalization of the nucleus contributes to 
the regulation of nuclear functions.

106

C H A P T E R 

7 

Chromosome Organization

Chromosomes are enormous DNA molecules that can 

be  propagated  stably  through  countless  generations  of 
dividing  cells  (Fig.  7.1).  Genes  are  the  reason  for  the 
existence of the chromosomes, but in higher eukaryotes, 
they make up a relatively small fraction of the chromo-
somal  DNA.  Cells  package  chromosomal  DNA  with 

2 µm

FIGURE 7.1  ELECTRON MICROGRAPH OF A CHROMOSOME 
FROM WHICH MOST PROTEINS WERE EXTRACTED. This allows 
DNA  (thin  lines)  to  spread  out  from  the  residual  scaffold.  Enormous 
amounts  of  DNA  are  packaged  in  each  chromosome.  This  image 
shows less than 30% of the DNA of this chromosome. (From Paulson 
JR,  Laemmli  UK.  The  structure  of  histone-depleted  chromosomes. 
Cell. 1977;12:817–828.)

roughly  twice  its  weight  of  protein.  This  DNA-protein 
complex, called chromatin, is discussed in Chapter 8.

In addition to the genes, only three classes of special-
ized  DNA  sequences  are  needed  to  make  a  fully  func-
tional chromosome: (a) a centromere, (b) two telomeres, 
and (c) an origin of DNA replication for approximately 
every  100,000  base  pairs  (bp).  Centromeres  regulate  
the  partitioning  of  chromosomes  during  mitosis  and 
meiosis. Telomeres protect the ends of the chromosomal 
DNA  molecules  and  ensure  their  complete  replication. 
Chapter 42 discusses DNA replication. Chapter 10 con-
siders the structure of genes. Box 7.1 lists a number of 
key terms presented in this chapter.

Chromosome Morphology  
and Nomenclature
With  few  specialized  exceptions,  chromosomes  from 
somatic cells of higher eukaryotes are visualized directly 
only during mitosis. Each mitotic chromosome consists 
of  two  sister  chromatids  (corresponding  to  the  two 
copies of the replicated DNA) that are held together at 
a  waist-like  constriction  called  the  centromere.  The 
portions of the chromosomes that are not in the centro-
mere itself are called chromosome “arms” (Fig. 7.2).

One DNA Molecule Per Chromosome
Most  prokaryotic  and  mitochondrial  chromosomes  are 
circular  DNA  molecules  that  lack  telomeres,  but  natu-
rally occurring eukaryotic nuclear chromosomes are gen-
erally one linear DNA molecule that stretches between 
the  telomeres  at  either  end.  The  clearest  proof  that 
each  chromosome  is  composed  of  a  single  DNA  mole-
cule was obtained for budding and fission yeasts, where 
intact  chromosomal  DNA  molecules  may  be  visualized 
by  pulsed-field  gel  electrophoresis  as  a  characteristic 
series of bands (Fig. 7.3). This technique can display the 
largest chromosome of fission yeast at 5,579,133 bp, but 

 107

108 

SECTION III  n  Chromatin, Chromosomes, and the Cell Nucleus

BOX 7.1  Key Terms

Centromere: The chromosomal locus that regulates the 
movements  of  chromosomes  during  mitosis  and 
meiosis.  The  centromere  is  defined  by  specific  DNA 
sequences  plus  proteins  that  bind  to  them,  although 
epigenetic factors also play a key role. In higher eukary-
otes, the centromere of mitotic chromosomes can be 
visualized as a constricted region where sister chroma-
tids are held together most closely.

Chromatin: DNA plus the proteins that package it within 

the cell nucleus.

Chromosome:  A  DNA  molecule  with  its  attendant  pro-
teins that moves as an independent unit during mitosis 
and  meiosis.  Before  DNA  replication,  each  chromo-
some consists of a single DNA molecule plus proteins 
and is called a chromatid. After replication, each chro-
mosome consists of two identical DNA molecules plus 
proteins. These are called sister chromatids. Chromo-
somal  DNA  molecules  are  usually  linear  but  can  be 
circular in organelles, bacteria, and viruses.

Kinetochore:  The  centromeric  substructure  that  binds 
microtubules  and  directs  the  movements  of  chromo-
somes in mitosis.

Telomere: The specialized structure at either end of the 
chromosomal DNA molecule that ensures the complete 
replication of the chromosomal ends and protects the 
ends within the cell.

Telomere

P arm

Centromere

Q arm

Telomere

Sister 

chromatid

Chromosome
Size
Number
(× 1000

base pairs)

IV

1523

XV
VII
XII

XVI
XIII

II
XIV
X

XI
V
VIII

IX

III
VI
I

1092
1092
1079

952
925

814
785
748

667
578
563

442

316
272
231

FIGURE  7.3  PULSED-FIELD  GEL  ELECTROPHORESIS  OF 
BUDDING  YEAST  CHROMOSOMES.  Intact  cells  embedded  in  a 
block of agarose are treated under very gentle conditions with prote-
ases and detergents to free the chromosomal DNA from other cellular 
constituents. The DNA is then moved under the influence of an electri-
cal field out of the agarose block and directly into an agarose gel. The 
technique uses a specialized gel apparatus in which the direction and 
strength of the electrophoretic field is varied periodically. This technique 
permits the separation of very long DNA molecules (of up to several 
million base pairs). (Courtesy P. Hieter, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada.)

even  the  smallest  human  chromosome,  which  is  about 
48  million  bp 
in  
this way.

large  to  resolve 

is  too 

long, 

Acrocentric

Submetacentric

Metacentric
Telocentric
FIGURE 7.2  ANATOMY OF MITOTIC CHROMOSOMES FROM 
HIGHER  EUKARYOTES.  Left,  The  principal  structural  features  of 
chromosomes. Right, An electron micrograph of human mitotic chro-
mosomes. Bottom, A diagram of the various classes of chromosomes. 
At mitosis, chromosomes of higher eukaryotes consist of sister chro-
matids  held  together  at  the  centromeric  region.  Chromosomes  are 
classified on the basis of the position of the centromere relative to the 
arms. In metacentric chromosomes, the centromere is located midway 
along the chromatid. In submetacentric chromosomes, the centromere 
is located asymmetrically so that each chromatid can be divided into 
short (P) and long (Q) arms. In acrocentric chromosomes, the centro-
mere is located near the end of the arms. In telocentric chromosomes, 
the centromere appears to be located very near the end of the chro-
matid. (Micrograph courtesy William C. Earnshaw.)

Organization of Genes on Chromosomes
The  first  chromosome  to  be  completely  sequenced  (in 
1977) was that of the bacterial virus ϕx174 (Table 7.1). 
Starting  in  the  1990s  much  effort  has  been  devoted  to 
determining  the  complete  sequences  of  the  chromo-
somes  of  a  wide  variety  of  organisms  including  thou-
sands of microbial species and well over 1000 humans. 
The  complex  genomes  sequenced  thus  far  range  in  
size  from  580,000 bp  for  Mycoplasma  genitalium, 
which  causes  urinary  tract  infections  in  humans,  to 
3,547,121,844 bp for humans themselves (this figure is 
arbitrary  as  explained  below).  Numbers  of  protein-
coding genes identified range from 480 in M. genitalium 
to  20,296  for  humans  (Table  7.1).  However,  because 
gene-detection  algorithms  are  still  being  perfected, 

 

CHAPTER 7  n  Chromosome Organization 

109

TABLE 7.1  DNA Content of Various Genomes
Organism
fX174 (bacterial virus)
Mycoplasma genitalium (pathogenic bacterium)
Rickettsia prowazekii (endoparasitic bacterium)
Escherichia coli (free-living bacterium)
Bacillus subtilis (free-living bacterium)
Saccharomyces cerevisiae (budding yeast)
Schizosaccharomyces pombe (fission yeast)
Caenorhabditis elegans (nematode worm)
Drosophila melanogaster (fruit fly)
Arabidopsis thaliana (plant)
Anopheles gambiae (malaria mosquito)
Oryza sativa japonica (rice)
Mus musculus (house mouse)
Rattus norvegicus (Brown Norway rat)
Xenopus tropicalis (South African clawed frog)
Homo sapiens (human)
Amoeba dubia (single-celled protozoan)

Haploid Genome Size (bp)

Predicted Number of Protein-Coding Genes

5386
580,070
1,111,523
4,639,221
4,214,810
12,157,105
13,800,000
10.3 × 107
1.4 × 108
1.25 × 108
2.78 × 108
4.3 × 108
3.4 × 109
3.0 × 109
1.3 × 109
3.5 × 109
670 × 109

11
480*
834
4288
4100
6692
4970
20,447
13,918
27,000
14,000
16,941
22,547
22,293
18,442
20,296

?

*It appears that only 265 to 350 of these genes are essential for life.
In most higher eukaryotes, the huge tracts of repeated DNA sequences in and around centromeres are poor in genes and beyond the limits of present 
technology to sequence. Thus, when statistics are given on chromosome sizes in descriptions of genome sequencing projects, these portions are often 
omitted. Where possible, the genome size figures given here reflect the entire genome (sequenced and unsequenced). Predicted gene numbers 
constantly change as genome sequences are reanalyzed.

estimates of gene numbers are constantly changing, even 
for completely sequenced genomes.

As a rule of thumb, bacterial genomes tend to make 
very  efficient  use  of  space,  with  approximately  90%  of 
the  genome  being  devoted  to  coding  sequences.  The 
remaining 10% is mostly taken up by sequences involved 
in  gene  regulation.  Rickettsia  prowazekii  is  a  notable 
exception  with  only  76%  of  the  genome  devoted  to 
coding  sequences.  Because  this  intracellular  parasite 
derives  many  of  its  metabolic  functions  from  the  host 
cell,  much  of  its  noncoding  DNA  may  be  remnants  of 
unneeded  genes  undergoing  various  stages  of  gradual 
loss from the genome.

The  first  fully  sequenced,  eukaryote  genome  was 
from  budding  yeast  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae.  The  12 
million bp yeast genome is subdivided into 16 chromo-
somes ranging in size from 230,000 bp to more than 1 
million bp (Fig. 7.3). This genome has a dramatic history. 
Ancestral  budding  yeast  apparently  had  eight  chromo-
somes but at one point underwent a duplication of the 
entire  genome.  This  event  was  followed  by  numerous 
small  deletions  that  resulted  in  the  subsequent  loss  of 
approximately 90% of the duplicated genes. As a result, 
the  modern  budding  yeast  genome  contains  approxi-
mately  6692  predicted  genes,  many  of  which  are  para-
logs (genes produced by duplication that have evolved 
to take on distinct functions; see Box 2.1). Remarkably, 
only  about  1000  of  these  genes  are  indispensable  for 
life.  Approximately  5%  of  yeast  genes  are  segmented, 
containing regions that appear in mature RNA molecules 

(exons)  and  regions  that  are  removed  by  splicing 
(introns)  (discussed  in  detail  in  Chapter  11).  Exons 
occupy approximately 75% of the budding yeast genome, 
with  the  remainder  in  regulatory  regions,  repeated 
DNAs, and introns (Fig. 7.4).

The  fission  yeast  genome  yielded  some  surprises. 
Fission yeast has substantially fewer genes than budding 
yeast,  but  the  genes  that  it  does  have  exhibit  greater 
diversity. Furthermore, 43% of those genes have introns. 
During  the  more  than  500  million  years  of  evolution 
since the two yeasts diverged, the fission yeast genome 
was not duplicated and trimmed down, so it has fewer 
sister (paralogous) genes and has retained more ancient 
genes.  The  biggest  difference  between  the  fission  and 
budding  yeast  chromosomes  is  the  structure  of  their 
centromere regions (see later).

Two  other  important  milestones  were  the  complete 
genome  sequences  of  two  “model”  organisms  that  are 
widely  used  by  cell  and  developmental  biologists:  the 
nematode  worm  Caenorhabditis  elegans  and  the  fruit 
fly Drosophila melanogaster. These metazoan sequences 
revealed many important organizational differences from 
fungi. Although its genome is eight times larger than that 
of budding yeast (103 million bp distributed in six chro-
mosomes),  the  nematode  has  only  about  three  times 
more  genes.  Surprisingly,  the  fly,  with  an  even  larger 
genome and more complex body plan and life cycle, has 
about one-third fewer genes than the worm. In fact, only 
approximately  27%  of  the  C.  elegans  genome  and  13% 
of  the  Drosophila  genomic  DNA  code  for  proteins. 

110 

SECTION III  n  Chromatin, Chromosomes, and the Cell Nucleus

B. subtilis

20k

40k

S. cerevisiae from chromosome 2

40k

D. melanogaster from chromosome 2

40k

60k

60k

60k

80k

80k

80k

H. sapiens from chromosome 21

200k

300k

400k

500k

20k

40k

60k

80k

FIGURE 7.4  COMPARISON OF THE DISTRIBUTION OF GENES OVER 90,000 BP OF THE CHROMOSOME OF A TYPICAL BACTE-
RIUM  (Bacillus  subtilis),  THE  BUDDING  YEAST  (Saccharomyces  cerevisiae),  THE  FRUIT  FLY  (Drosophila  melanogaster),  AND 
HUMANS (Homo sapiens). To give a more accurate representation of the distribution of human genes, we also show a stretch of chromosome 
21 spanning 500,000 bp.  Arrows show the direction of transcription. Regions of genes encoding a product are shown as  thick  orange  bars. 
Intervening sequences (introns) are shown as thin lines. (Courtesy A. Kerr, University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom.)

Instead,  the  fly  has  much  more  noncoding  DNA  than  
the worm.

The “finished” sequence of the human genome pub-
lished  in  2004  (and  which  still  contains  a  number  of 
unresolved “gaps”) revealed an even lower gene density. 
Humans  have  far  fewer  genes  than  the  up  to  100,000 
that had been predicted (current total 20,296, although 
this  is  subject  to  change)  (Table  7.1).  Protein-coding 
regions occupy only approximately 1.5% of the chromo-
somes, although genes themselves occupy up to approx-
imately 46% of the genome (see next paragraph). Various 
repeated-sequence  elements  and  pseudogenes  occupy 
approximately 50% of the genome, as is discussed in a 
later section.

To put this all in perspective, every million base pairs 
of  DNA  sequenced  yielded  483  genes  in  S.  cerevisiae, 
197 genes in C. elegans, 117 genes in D. melanogaster, 
and only 7 to 9 genes in humans. If the Escherichia coli 
chromosome were the size of chromosome 21, the small-
est  human  chromosome  at  approximately  48 ×  106 bp, 
it would have nearly 44,000 genes—more than the entire 
human  complement!  In  fact,  chromosome  21  has  only 
225  genes.  As  a  result  of  this  organization,  a  common 
strategy is to sequence the exome of an individual (the 
1.5% of the genome found in exons) to reveal all changes 
(mutations) in protein sequences. However this strategy 
misses many mutations in noncoding regulatory regions 
that cause disease.

Human genes range in size from a few hundred base 
pairs  to  well  over  106 bp,  the  average  being  about 
28,000 bp and the longest (encoding dystrophin; see Fig. 
39.9)  being  2.2  ×  106 bp.  Most  human  protein-coding 
genes have introns separating an average of nine exons 
averaging  only  145 bp  each,  but  the  variability  is 

enormous. Genes can have more than 100 exons or only 
one. The average intron is a bit over 3000 bp long, but 
the  human  genome  has  more  than  3000  introns  that  
are  greater  than  50,000 bp  and  nine  that  are  greater  
than  500,000 bp  long.  In  total,  approximately  25%  of  
the genome  is  transcribed  as  introns.  As  a  result,  dis-
covering  new  genes  in  genomic  DNA  sequence  is  a 
complex art.

The distribution of protein-coding genes along chro-
mosomes is also highly variable. For example, on chro-
mosome 9, gene density ranges from 3 to 22 genes per 
106 bp. On chromosome 21, one region of 7 × 106 bp, 
encompassing  nearly  20%  of  the  whole  chromosome, 
has no identified protein-coding genes at all. This region 
is almost twice the size of the entire E. coli chromosome! 
Approximately 25% of the genome is made up of regions 
of  greater  than  5  ×  105 bp  that  are  devoid  of  protein-
coding genes and are termed gene deserts.

Much  of  the  “noncoding  DNA”  is  transcribed  into 
RNA, so that overall approximately 80% of the genome 
is transcribed. Some long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) 
have roles in chromosome structure or gene regulation, 
but the functions (if any) of most lncRNAs remain to be 
established and many may be transcriptional “noise.”

Transposable Elements Make up Much of 
the Human Genome
Eukaryotic  genomes  contain  large  amounts  of  repeti-
tive  DNA  sequences  that  are  present  in  many  copies 
(thousands, in some cases). By contrast, coding regions 
of  genes  (which  are  typically  present  in  a  single  copy 
per  haploid  genome)  are  referred  to  as  unique-
sequence DNA.

 

CHAPTER 7  n  Chromosome Organization 

111

Repetitive DNA shows two patterns of distribution in 
the chromosomes. Satellite DNAs are clustered in dis-
crete  areas,  often  at  centromeres  (see  “Pseudogenes” 
below).  Other  types  of  repetitive  DNA  are  dispersed 
throughout  the  genome.  In  humans,  most  of  this  dis-
persed  repetitive  DNA  is  composed  of  transposable 
elements—small, discrete DNA elements that either are 
now or were formerly capable of moving from place to 
place  within  the  DNA.  There  are  many  types  of  these 
elements,  but  for  purposes  of  simplicity,  they  can  be 
divided into two overall classes. Transposons move via 
DNA  intermediates,  and  retrotransposons  move  via 
RNA  intermediates.  Transposons  generally  move  by  a 
cut-and-paste mechanism in which the starting element 
cuts  itself  out  of  one  location  within  the  genome  and 
inserts itself somewhere else. There is currently no evi-
dence  for  active  transposons  in  humans,  but  in  Dro-
sophila,  transposition  by  transposons,  such  as  the 
P  element,  accounts  for  at  least  half  of  spontaneous 
mutations.

Even though humans no longer have active transpo-
sons, we still use at least two functional vestiges of these 
elements. One of the ways in which the diversity of the 
immune  system  is  generated  is  by  cutting  and  pasting 
portions  of  the  genes  that  encode  the  variable  regions  
of  the  immunoglobulin  chains  (see  Fig.  28.10).  This 
process involves moving segments of DNA around, and 
it  now  appears  that  the  enzymes  that  accomplish  this 
process were originally encoded by ancient transposons. 
In  addition,  CENP-B  (centromere  protein  B;  see  Fig. 
8.20),  an  abundant  protein  that  binds  to  the α-satellite 
DNA  repeats  in  primate  centromeres,  is  closely  related 
to  a  transposase  enzyme  encoded  by  one  family  of 
transposons.

Retrotransposons move (transpose) from one place 
in the DNA to another via production of an RNA inter-
mediate. They then convert this RNA into DNA as it is 
being inserted at another site in the genome. Thus, on 
completion  of  a  transposition  event,  the  original  ret-
rotransposon  remains  in  its  original  chromosomal  loca-
tion,  and  a  newly  generated  element  (which  may  be 
either  full-length  or  partial)  is  inserted  at  a  new  site  in 
the  genome.  The  copying  of  RNA  into  DNA  is  carried 
out  by  a  specialized  type  of  DNA  polymerase  called  a 
reverse  transcriptase.  These  enzymes  were  discov-
ered  in  tumor  viruses  with  RNA  chromosomes,  but 
human  cells  also  have  a  number  of  genes  encoding 
reverse transcriptases.

The  best-known  retrotransposons  are  LINES  (long 
interspersed  nuclear  elements)  and  SINES  (short  inter-
spersed  nuclear  elements).  Reverse 
transcriptases 
encoded  by  LINES  are  responsible  for  movements  of 
both  LINES  and  SINES.  The  L1  class  of  LINES  encodes 
two  proteins,  one  of  which  has  reverse  transcriptase 
activity (Fig. 7.5). All DNA polymerases, including reverse 
transcriptases, work by elongating a preexisting stretch 

Complete L1 element inserted in the chromosome

5'UTR

ORF1

ORF2

3'UTR

L1 transcribed

L1 proteins translated in
cytoplasm then return
to nucleus

L1 proteins direct L1 RNA to target
sites elsewhere on chromosomes

Target site

ORF2 nicks target site DNA

L1 reverse transcriptase
copies the L1 mRNA
attached to chromosomal
DNA (used as primer)

Fallas off

Repair results in insertion
of all or part of L1 element

FIGURE  7.5  MECHANISM  OF  TRANSPOSITION  OF  AN  L1 
ELEMENT. The element is transcribed by RNA polymerase II (see Fig. 
10.4).  Proteins  encoded  by  the  element  nick  the  chromosome, 
promote  base  pairing  of  the  L1  transcript  with  the  target  site,  and 
reverse transcribe the RNA into DNA. The L1 DNA is synthesized as 
an extension of the chromosome. The mechanism of final closing up 
of the nicks and gaps is not yet fully understood. mRNA, messenger 
RNA; ORF, open reading frame; UTR, untranslated region. 

of  double-stranded  nucleic  acid  (see  Chapter  42  for  a 
discussion of the mechanism of DNA synthesis). L1 ele-
ments  insert  themselves  into  the  chromosome  by  first 
nicking  the  chromosomal  DNA,  then  using  the  newly 
created  end  as  a  primer  for  synthesis  of  a  new  DNA 
strand (Fig. 7.5). The template for this DNA synthesis by 
the reverse transcriptase is the LINE RNA, and the newly 
synthesized  DNA  is  made  as  a  direct  extension  of  the 
chromosomal  DNA  molecule.  Most  LINE  insertions  are 
partial copies of the full-length element. Apparently, the 
reverse transcriptase usually falls off before it completes 
copying the entire element.

LINES and SINES plus other remnants of transposable 
elements account for up to 50% of the human genome. 
LINES,  with  a  consensus  sequence  of  6  to  8 kb,  make  
up  approximately  20%  of  the  genome.  (A  consensus 
sequence  is  the  average  arrived  at  by  comparing  a 
number  of  different  sequenced  DNA  clones.)  Approxi-
mately 80% of human genes have at least one segment 
of L1 sequence inserted, typically in an intron. The Alu 
class  of  SINES,  with  a  consensus  sequence  of  about 

112 

SECTION III  n  Chromatin, Chromosomes, and the Cell Nucleus

300 bp,  constitutes  approximately  13%  of  the  total 
DNA—almost a million copies scattered throughout the 
genome.  Alu  elements  are  derived  from  the  7SL  RNA 
gene, which encodes the RNA component of signal rec-
ognition particle (see Fig. 20.5). They are actively tran-
scribed  by  RNA  polymerase  III  (see  Fig.  10.8)  but  are 
short and do not have enough coding capacity to encode 
for  complex  proteins.  They  therefore  rely  on  the  L1 
machinery  to  move  around.  It  is  therefore  somewhat 
paradoxical  that  SINES  and  LINES  have  quite  different 
distributions along the chromosomes. LINES are concen-
trated in gene-poor regions of the chromosomes with a 
relatively higher content of A + T base pairs. In contrast, 
the Alu SINES are concentrated in gene-rich regions with 
a relatively higher content of G + C base pairs.

Transposition can be harmful, as along the way, genes 
can  be  disrupted,  deleted,  or  rearranged.  Because  of 
their tendency to insert into gene-rich regions of chro-
mosomes,  Alu  elements  are  one  of  the  most  potent 
endogenous human mutagens, with a new Alu insertion 
occurring once in every 100 births. In contrast, although 
LINES  can  cause  genome  instability  when  they  move, 
and despite the large fraction of the human genome that 
is derived from LINES, they cause only 0.07% of sponta-
neous mutations seen in humans, owing to several miti-
gating  features:  (a)  Only  about  100  L1  elements  are 
active, and these appear to be active in the germline (ie, 
during production of gametes) and in brain (where they 
may  promote  neuronal  diversity).  (b)  LINE  elements 
prefer  to  move  into  gene-poor  areas  of  chromosomes. 
(c) Most LINE sequences are only fragments of the com-
plete  element.  In  contrast,  mice  apparently  have  many 
more active L1 elements (~3000), and L1 transposition 
causes  approximately  2.5%  of  spontaneous  mutations  
in mice. One of the ancestral roles of the RNA interfer-
ence (RNAi) machinery (see Fig. 11.13) might have been 
to  suppress  the  deleterious  activity  of  transposable 
elements.

The  physiological  role,  if  any,  of  these  elements  is 
much debated. One long-favored possibility is that they 
do nothing advantageous and are analogous to an infec-
tion of the DNA that is tolerated as long as it does not 
disrupt  genes  that  are  essential  for  life.  This  is  called  
the  “selfish  DNA”  hypothesis.  This  notion  has  been 
challenged  for  Alu  sequences,  which  are  efficiently  
transcribed into RNA. Alu transcripts accumulate under 
conditions of cellular stress such as viral infection. This 
is interesting because Alu transcripts can bind very effi-
ciently to a protein kinase called PKR, which is induced 
by  interferon  as  part  of  the  cell’s  antiviral  protection 
pathways. The best-known function of PKR is phosphor-
ylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2α-subunit (eIF-2α; 
see Fig. 12.8). This profoundly inhibits protein synthesis. 
PKR  is  generally  activated  by  double-stranded  RNAs 
(dsRNAs), and this is presumably important for its anti-
viral role, as many viruses have RNA chromosomes. Alu 

transcripts  at  low  levels  activate  PKR  (ie,  suppress 
protein  synthesis),  but  at  higher  levels,  they  inactivate 
the enzyme (ie, promote protein synthesis). Thus, it has 
been  suggested  that  Alu  transcripts  might  be  natural 
regulators of protein synthesis under conditions of cel-
lular stress.

LINES  can  also  modulate  transcription  of  genes  by 
influencing the behavior of RNA polymerase as it passes 
through them. Thus, they might have a role in the control 
of  gene  expression.  As  discussed  at  the  end  of  this 
chapter, the structure of telomeres (the ends of chromo-
somes) is in part maintained by telomerase, a special-
ized form of reverse transcriptase, whose mechanism is 
closely related to that of the L1 reverse transcriptase.

Pseudogenes
One surprise that emerged from analysis of the eukary-
otic  genome  sequences  was  the  presence  of  pseudo-
genes:  more  than  14,000  in  humans.  Pseudogenes  are 
derived  from  genes  but  are  no  longer  functional.  They 
arise in two ways, both involving transposable elements. 
Processed  pseudogenes,  the  more  common  variety, 
are created by reverse transcription of mature messenger 
RNA (mRNA) sequences into DNA, apparently by a LINE 
reverse transcriptase that inserts the copy back into the 
genome.  Because  these  sequences  come  from  mature 
mRNA, they lack introns. They also lack sequences that 
regulate  transcription  initiation  and  termination  (see 
Chapter  10),  so  they  are  not  expressed.  Unprocessed 
pseudogenes are created either by reverse transcription 
of unspliced precursor mRNAs or by local duplications 
of the chromosome that can occur as a result of recom-
bination  between  transposable  elements.  The  duplica-
tions can initially create bona fide functional gene copies 
that may become pseudogenes as they accumulate muta-
tions that render their transcripts nonfunctional. Because 
pseudogenes are not functional, mutation of their DNA 
is not selected against during evolution, as are harmful 
mutations in the coding sequences of genes. Thus, over 
time,  pseudogenes  become  decreasingly  recognizable 
and  eventually  are  lost  from  recognition  in  the  sea  of 
noncoding DNA.

Segmental Duplications in  
the Human Genome
Approximately  5%  of  the  human  genome  is  composed 
of regions of segmental duplication that have formed 
relatively recently in evolutionary time. Segmental dupli-
cations  are  regions  of  1000  or  more  base  pairs  with  a 
DNA sequence identity of 90% or greater that are present 
in more than one copy but are not transposons. They are 
interesting,  because  they  can  have  a  significant  impact 
on  human  health.  Regions  of  highly  related  DNA 
sequence  can  base-pair  with  one  another  and  can 

 

CHAPTER 7  n  Chromosome Organization 

113

Chromosome 7

7p22
7p21

7p15

7p14
7p13
7p12
7p11
7q11.1
7q11.21
7q11.22
7q11.23

7q21

7q22

7q31

7p

7q

2.5 Mb

2.0 Mb

0.5 Mb

7q32
7q33
7q34
7q35
7q36

1.15 Mb are
  deleted from
  individuals with
  Williams syndrome

B

0 Mb

A
FIGURE 7.6  SEGMENTAL DUPLICATIONS WITHIN A REGION 
OF  HUMAN  CHROMOSOME  7  GIVE  RISE  TO  WILLIAMS-
BEUREN  SYNDROME.  A,  Inappropriate  recombination  between 
duplicated sequences causes the deletion of a region of the chromo-
some. B, Williams-Beuren syndrome is a rare congenital disorder that 
is characterized by an outgoing personality, a characteristic elfin-like 
facial appearance, moderate to mild intellectual disability, and a range 
of  physical  problems.  (Courtesy  the  Williams  Syndrome  Association, 
http://www.williams-syndrome.org/.)

subsequently  recombine.  Depending  on  how  these 
regions are distributed on the chromosomes, this recom-
bination can eliminate intervening regions of nondupli-
cated DNA. If the deleted region contains genes important 
for human health, then the result can be disease.

One  example  of  this  is  found  on  chromosome  7, 
where deletion of a portion of the long arm is associated 
with  Williams-Beuren  syndrome,  a  complex  develop-
mental disorder associated with a highly variable range 
of  symptoms  that  can  include  elfin-like  facial  features, 
defects  in  certain  mental  skills,  and  a  wide  range  of 
physical  problems  (Fig.  7.6).  These  deletions  occur 
because  large  (>140,000 bp)  segmental  duplications  of 
DNA  distributed  across  a  region  of  2  ×  106 bp  flank  a 
unique sequence region of approximately 1 × 106 bp. If 
recombination  occurs  between  the  segmental  duplica-
tions, approximately 1.6 × 106 bp, including the unique 
sequence DNA, are lost. Because of the highly complex 
organization of this region and the large size of the dupli-
cations, this turned out to be the most difficult region of 
chromosome 7 to sequence.

The Human Genome:  
Variations on a Theme
The  human  “reference  genome”  sequence  does  not 
come  from  a  single  person,  but  is  instead  an  idealized 
assembly derived from the DNA of a number of people. 
Constructing an artificial reference genome is necessary, 
because  although  we  might  imagine  that  there  is  only 

one “human genome,” data from sequencing many thou-
sands  of  genomes  have  shown  that  there  are  dramatic 
variations  in  DNA  content  and  sequence  among  indi-
viduals. Famously, analysis of some particularly variable 
regions of repetitive sequences forms the basis for DNA 
testing  in  criminology  and  paternity  testing.  Given  the 
large  number  of  genomes  sequenced  to  date,  it  makes 
sense to talk of a “typical” genome and how this differs 
from  the  reference.  Prepare  to  be  amazed.  A  typical 
genome has 4 to 5 × 106 differences from the reference! 
The largest number of affected base pairs are in 2100 to 
2500  “structural  variants”  (changes  involving  >50 bp). 
These  include  deletions,  more  than  120  LINE  and  
more  than  900  SINE  insertions,  and  other  changes  not 
found in the reference genome. Overall, they encompass 
20  ×  106 bp  and  often  occur  in  regions  of  repeated 
DNA sequence. Other variations occur in genes, with a 
typical  genome  having  approximately  165  mutations 
that truncate proteins, approximately 11,000 mutations 
that change protein sequences, and a staggering 520,000 
mutations in regions thought to be involved in regulat-
ing  gene  expression.  Occasionally,  these  variations  are 
linked  to  inherited  human  disease,  and  genome-wide 
association studies (GWAS) correlating sequence changes 
with human disease are a major ongoing focus of these 
sequencing  efforts.  At  centromere  regions  of  chromo-
somes,  the  content  of  repeated  DNA  sequences  com-
monly varies by over 106 bp between different individuals. 
Overall,  this  rather  staggering  variability  leads  to  the 
question, “What is a ‘normal’ human genome?”

The Centromere: Overview
The centromere is at the heart of all chromosomal move-
ments in mitosis and meiosis, as it nucleates on its surface 
the formation of the button-like kinetochore (see Fig. 
8.21),  the  structure  that  attaches  chromosomes  to  the 
mitotic  spindle  (the  microtubule-based  apparatus  upon 
which chromosomes move; see Chapter 44). In mitotic 
chromosomes  of  most  higher  eukaryotes,  the  centro-
mere forms a waist-like stricture or primary constric-
tion where the two sister chromatids are most intimately 
paired.  The  centromere  is  a  chromatin  structure,  and 
both DNA and proteins are essential to its function.

Variations in Centromere Organization  
Among Species
In  budding  yeast,  autonomous  CEN  (centromere) 
sequences  specify  protein-binding  sites  required  for 
assembly  of  the  kinetochore;  if  inserted  into  circular 
DNA  molecules  (plasmids),  they  render  them  capable  
of  interacting  with  the  mitotic  spindle  and  segregat-
ing during mitosis (Fig. 7.7). In other organisms, includ-
ing  the  fission  yeast  Schizosaccharomyces  pombe, 
centromere  sequences  require  an  activation  event  to 
nucleate  kinetochore  formation.  This  event  appears  to 

114 

SECTION III  n  Chromatin, Chromosomes, and the Cell Nucleus

Uppercase = present in at least 14 of the 16 centromeres
Lowercase = present in at least 9 centromeres
               –   = any base can be present here

A.  S. cerevisiae

125 bp

CDE I
A 
G

A 
  TCAC    TG
G

CDE II
78-86  bp
~ 90% A + T

CDE III

  t G t t Tt t G– t TTCCGAAa – – – a a a a a

3'

5'

A

Replication

Replication

Mitosis

Mitosis

+

or

+

Random segregation

B

C

+

All cells

= Plasmid

Functional CEN 
sequence CDE I,
CDE II, CDE III

FIGURE  7.7  THE  BUDDING  YEAST  CENTROMERE  (CEN)  IS 
SPECIFIED  BY  A  125-BP  SEQUENCE.  A,  Three  conserved  DNA 
elements  (CDE  I  to  CDE  III).  CDE  I  and  CDE  III  bind  proteins  in  a 
sequence-specific manner. CDE III has mirror symmetry: a central C 
(dot)  is  flanked  by  two  regions  of  complementary  DNA  sequence 
(arrows). All that seems to be important about CDE II is its abundance 
of A and T nucleotides and its overall length. B–C, The assay for mitotic 
stability of a plasmid used to clone CEN DNA from most budding yeast 
chromosomes.  The  plasmid  carries  a  gene  encoding  an  enzyme 
involved in adenine metabolism. When the plasmid is present, colonies 
are white. If the plasmid is lost, the colonies become red as a result 
of  the  accumulation  of  a  metabolic  by-product.  If  the  plasmid  is 
capable  of  replication  but  lacks  a  centromere,  the  colonies  will  be 
mostly  red,  reflecting  the  inefficient  segregation  of  the  plasmid  at 
mitosis (B). If the plasmid carries a functional centromere, the colonies 
will be white, as the plasmid will be successfully transmitted at nearly 
every division (C). 

involve epigenetic modification of the DNA and/or chro-
matin (discussed later).

CEN  sequences  from  all  16  budding  yeast  chromo-
somes have a common organization based around three 
conserved sequence elements (Fig. 7.7). These are des-
ignated  (in  the  5′  to  3′  direction)  CDE  I  (centromere 
DNA element I, 8 bp), CDE II (78 to 86 bp), and CDE 
III (25 bp). A 125-bp region spanning CDE I to CDE III 
is sufficient to direct the efficient segregation of a yeast 
chromosome,  which  can  reach  a  size  of  more  than  1 
million bp. This type of centromere, in which the kineto-
chore is assembled as a result of protein recognition of 

CDE I

CDE II

CDE III

B.  S. pombe chromosome III

~110 kb

Central core

Inner repeats

Outer repeats

C.  D. melanogaster X chromosome

420 kb

Transposons
AATAT satellite

AAGAG satellite
Nonrepetitive DNA

FIGURE  7.8  ORGANIZATION  OF  THE  CENTROMERIC  DNAS 
OF BUDDING YEAST, FISSION YEAST, AND FRUIT FLY. A, The 
budding yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) point centromere is speci-
fied by a 125-bp sequence. B, The fission yeast (Schizosaccharomy-
ces pombe) regional centromeres all contain central core DNA flanked 
by  complex  arrays  of  repeated  sequences.  Embedded  within  these 
repeated sequences are a number of genes encoding transfer RNAs, 
not shown here. The minimum region required to construct a functional 
centromere  in  fission  yeast  artificial  chromosomes  is  approximately 
10 kb in length and includes the central core DNA plus a portion of 
the flanking repeated DNA. C, The fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster) 
also has a regional centromere encompassing 420 kb. This is rich in 
satellite DNA and contains a number of transposable elements. The 
same satellite DNAs and transposons are also found at other, noncen-
tromeric, regions of the chromosomes. 

specific  DNA  sequences,  is  known  as  a  point  centro-
mere and to date has been found only in budding yeasts. 
Kinetochores  assembled  on  point  centromeres  bind  a 
single microtubule.

Even  though  the  average  size  of  S.  pombe  chromo-
somes is only fivefold larger than their counterparts in S. 
cerevisiae  (4.6 Mb  vs.  0.87 Mb),  fission  yeast  centro-
meres are 300- to 600-fold larger (Fig. 7.8). The smallest 
S. pombe centromere consists of 35,000 bp, whereas the 
largest spans 110,000 bp. Fission yeast centromeric DNA 
is much more complex than its budding yeast counter-
part,  containing  a  central  core  of  4  to  7 kb  of  unique-
sequence  DNA  flanked  by  complex  arrays  of  repeated 
sequences.  This  type  of  centromere  is  known  as  a 
regional  centromere.  Kinetochores  assembled  on 
regional  centromeres  bind  multiple  microtubules  (two 
to four in the case of S. pombe).

Studies of S. pombe centromeres revealed in addition 
to the primary DNA sequence, an epigenetic activation 
step  is  required  for  CEN  DNA  to  function  as  a  centro-
mere.  Epigenetic  events  are  inheritable  properties  of 

 

CHAPTER 7  n  Chromosome Organization 

115

chromosomes that are not directly encoded in the nucle-
otide  sequence.  They  are  typically  explained  either  by 
enzymatic modification of the DNA (eg, methylation of 
cytosine)  or  by  modification  of  proteins  that  are  stably 
associated  with  the  DNA.  Epigenetic  mechanisms  also 
play an essential role in the assembly of centromeres in 
higher eukaryotes, including humans. In both S. pombe 
and  metazoans,  these  epigenetic  changes  involve  the 
construction of a special chromatin environment at cen-
tromeres.  What  this  means  in  practice  is  that  (except 
budding yeast), no single DNA sequence can be put into 
cells and function directly as a centromere. If a piece of 
S.  pombe  centromeric  DNA  is  introduced  into  cells,  it 
must undergo a series of packaging events and modifica-
tions  that  turn  it  into  a  functional  centromere.  These 
events are so rare that when candidate DNA molecules 
with  CEN  sequences  are  introduced  into  S.  pombe 
cells,  only  about  1  in  105  assembles  into  a  functional 
centromere.

Regional centromeres are typically organized around 
a  core  region  that  nucleates  kinetochore  formation 
during mitosis. This core consists of a specialized form 
of chromatin called centrochromatin containing CENP-A, 
a specialized form of histone H3 that can replace H3 in 
nucleosomes (see Fig. 8.21). How the centrochromatin 
is  organized  varies  dramatically  between  species  (Fig. 
7.8). Centrochromatin is typically flanked by constitu-
tive heterochromatin, a form of chromatin that gener-
ally suppresses gene transcription and remains condensed 
throughout  the  cell  cycle  (see  Fig.  8.7).  Constitutive 
heterochromatin  is  characterized  by  the  presence  of 
special modifications of the histone proteins and other 
proteins  that  “read”  (bind  to)  those  modifications. 
(Chapter  8  discusses  heterochromatin.)  Both  the  core  
of  the  centromere  and  flanking  heterochromatin  are 
usually (but not invariably) comprised of repeated DNA 
sequences.

The  first  fully  sequenced  centromere  of  a  metazoan 
was  that  of  rice  chromosome  8.  Sequencing  was  
possible,  because  the  rice  centromere  contains  limited 
amounts  of  a  centromeric  satellite  DNA  (CentO)  dis-
persed in blocks separated by transposons, retrotranspo-
sons, and fragments. All in all, 72% of this centromere is 
composed of repetitive sequences. The kinetochore, as 
defined  by  sequences  associated  with  CENP-A,  spans 
750 kb  and  is  interspersed  with  regions  of  chromatin 
containing  normal  histone  H3  that  is  apparently  pack-
aged into heterochromatin. Surprisingly, this centromere 
region  contains  at  least  four  genes  that  are  actively 
transcribed.

More  recently  it  was  discovered  that  chickens  have 
three  and  the  horse  one  chromosome  with  sequences 
composed  of  nonrepetitive  DNA  and  lacking  flanking 
heterochromatin.  These  centromeres  are  thought  to  
be  evolutionarily  new,  and  may  have  originated  from 
neocentromeres  (see  later).  It  is  thought  that  such  

evolutionarily new centromeres gradually acquire repeti-
tive  DNA  sequences,  possibly  because  they  provide 
as-yet unknown advantages over evolutionary time. The 
rice centromere is not evolutionarily new, having had its 
present  organization  for  at  least  the  last  10,000  years 
(since  the  indica  and  japonica  cultivars  of  rice  were 
separated)  and  appears  to  be  intermediate  between  a 
canonical metazoan centromere and a neocentromere.
The centromere organization of the fruit fly D. mela-
nogaster  shows  important  similarities  and  differences 
to  the  rice  centromere.  The  centromere  of  the  fly’s  X 
chromosome occupies a stretch of roughly 420,000 bp 
(Fig.  7.8)  that  is  composed  mostly  of  simple-sequence 
satellite DNAs interspersed with transposable DNA ele-
ments. This resembles the situation in plants; however, 
in Drosophila, no sequences were found in this region 
that  are  unique  to  the  fly  centromeres;  all  sequences 
found at centromeres could also be found on the chro-
mosome  arms.  Thus,  it  appears  that  something  other 
than  the  DNA  sequence  alone  must  be  responsible  for 
conferring  centromere  activity  on  this  region  of  the 
chromosome.

In addition to point centromeres in budding yeast and 
regional  centromeres  found  in  most  metazoans,  many 
plants and insects as well as in the nematode C. elegans 
have  a  third  variant,  in  which  centromere  activity  is 
distributed  along  the  whole  length  of  the  mitotic  
chromosomes.  These  holocentric  chromosomes  have 
binding sites for about 20 microtubules distributed along 
the  whole  poleward-facing  surface  of  the  chromosome 
during  mitosis  rather  than  a  disk-like  kinetochore  at  a 
centromeric constriction, as in humans. If a holocentric 
chromosome is fragmented, every piece can bind micro-
tubules  and  segregate  in  mitosis.  Perhaps  surprisingly, 
the proteins of the holocentric kinetochore are the same 
as  those  found  at  disk-like  regional  kinetochores  (see 
Chapter  8).  Accordingly  CENP-A  is  found  in  domains 
scattered across half of the worm genome that are char-
acterized by low levels of transcription in the germline. 
One possibility is that in these chromosomes, any chro-
matin with the right transcriptional profile can serve to 
nucleate  kinetochore  assembly—perhaps  the  require-
ment for special epigenetic marks has been relaxed.

Vertebrate Centromere DNA
Vertebrate centromeres initially proved extremely diffi-
cult  to  characterize  in  molecular  detail,  largely  due  to 
their large size and complex, highly repetitious organiza-
tion.  For  example,  the  centromere  of  chromosome  21 
(the smallest human chromosome at ~48 million bp) has 
been  estimated  to  encompass  more  than  5  million  bp. 
This  entire  region  is  composed  of  many  thousands  of 
copies of short DNA repeat sequences clustered together 
in head-to-tail arrays known as satellite DNA. Many lines 
of  research  have  now  converged  to  reveal  that  this 
centromere-associated satellite DNA is a preferred site of 

116 

SECTION III  n  Chromatin, Chromosomes, and the Cell Nucleus

Centromere

Chromatid

1

2

3

4

Centromeric satellite DNA 

300,000–5,000,000 bp

A1 B1 C1 D1 E1 F1

Higher-order arrays

A4 B4 C4 D4 E4 F4

Monomer (171 bp)

CTTCGTTGGAAPuCGGGA

CENP-B box
(not in all monomers)

A TTCGTTGGAAACGGGA

Mouse CENP-B box 

FIGURE 
7.9  HIERARCHICAL  ORGANIZATION  OF  α-
SATELLITE DNA AT HUMAN CENTROMERES. The numbers (1 to 
4) indicate higher-order repeats of α-satellite DNA. These may contain 
from  2  to  32  monomers  (indicated  by  A1,  B1,  and  so  on).  DNA 
sequences of adjacent monomers within a repeat (eg, A1, B1, C1) may 
differ by as much as 40% from one another. DNA sequences of mono-
mers occupying identical positions within the higher-order repeats (A1, 
A4, etc.) are nearly 99% identical to one another. The  red sequence 
shown  at  the  bottom  represents  the  binding  site  for  centromeric 
protein CENP-B. 

centromere formation, but that centromeres can (rarely) 
form  elsewhere.  The  trigger  that  seems  to  define  any 
particular  region  of  the  chromosome  as  a  centromere 
involves  epigenetic  modifications  of  the  DNA  and  
chromatin,  at  least  one  of  which  is  the  binding  of  
the specialized histone H3 variant CENP-A.

The  major  human  centromeric  satellite  DNA,  α-
satellite, is a complex family of repeated sequences that 
constitutes approximately 5% of the genome. Monomers 
averaging approximately 171 bp long are organized into 
higher-order  repeats  (Fig.  7.9).  Some  of  the  monomers 
have a conserved 17-bp sequence (the CENP-B box) that 
forms  the  binding  site  for  the  centromeric  protein 
CENP-B  (mentioned  earlier  as  having  its  origin  in  an 
ancient  DNA  transposon).  The  organization  of  higher-
order repeats varies greatly from chromosome to chro-
mosome,  and  numerous  repeat  patterns,  comprising  2  
to  32  monomers,  have  been  described.  Each  chromo-
some has one or a few types of higher-order repeats of 
α-satellite DNA.

The  entire  centromeric  region  of  certain  chromo-
somes may be composed of α-satellite monomers, appar-
ently with little or no interspersed DNA of other types. 
The amount of α-satellite DNA at different centromeres 
varies widely: from as little as 300,000 bp on the Y chro-
mosome  to  up  to  5  million  bp  on  chromosome  7.  In 

addition, the α-satellite DNA content of a given chromo-
some can vary by more than a million bp between dif-
ferent individuals. Clearly, a wide variation in the local 
organization of α-satellite DNA is tolerated.

Human chromosomes also contain several other fami-
lies  of  satellite  DNA.  Classical  satellites  I  to  IV,  which 
together  constitute  2%  to  5%  of  the  genome,  are  com-
posed  of  divergent  repeats  of  the  sequence  GGAAT. 
These  satellites  occur  in  blocks  more  than  20,000 bp 
long  that  are  immediately  adjacent  to  the  centromeres 
of a number of chromosomes and may be found at lower 
levels near most centromeres. The so-called pericentro-
meric region adjacent to the centromere of chromosome 
9  apparently  contains  7  to  10  million  bp  of  satellite  III 
sequence. The long arm of the Y chromosome also con-
tains huge amounts of satellite III DNA (up to 40% of its 
total DNA).

If α-satellite DNA arrays longer than about 50,000 bp 
are introduced into cultured human cells, they occasion-
ally form tiny minichromosomes with functional centro-
meres. For this to work, the α-satellite DNA arrays must 
have  a  highly  regular  organization,  and  some  of  the 
monomers  must  contain  binding  sites  for  CENP-B.  For-
mation  of  these  mammalian  artificial  chromosomes  is 
very inefficient, so it is clear that α-satellite DNA arrays 
cannot automatically function as CEN DNA—some type 
of epigenetic activation is required.

There is an interesting corollary of this role of epigen-
etic  modifications  in  assembly  of  a  functional  centro-
mere. Suppose a bit of noncentromeric DNA somehow 
acquired the right set of modifications. Could that now 
function as a centromere? The answer is yes. The forma-
tion  of  neocentromeres  on  noncentromeric  DNA  has 
been seen in S. pombe, fruit flies, chickens, and humans 
and was first described in plants.

Rare  individuals  have  a  chromosome  fragment  that 
segregates in mitosis, despite loss of the normal centro-
mere. Such chromosomes have acquired a new centro-
mere or neocentromere in a new location on one of the 
chromosome  arms.  Remarkably,  neocentromeres  are 
composed of the normal DNA that exists at that location 
on the chromosome arm and yet somehow has acquired 
centromere function. Neocentromeres are bona fide cen-
tromeres; for example, they bind all known centromeric 
proteins  except  for  CENP-B,  which  requires  specific 
sequences on α-satellite DNA for binding. Different neo-
centromeres need have no sequences in common. These 
observations  strongly  support  the  hypothesis  that  epi-
genetic  markers  rather  than  the  exact  DNA  sequence 
specify  the  centromere.  The  natural  occurrence  of 
α-satellite DNA at centromeres may reflect a propensity 
of α-satellite chromatin to acquire the epigenetic mark, 
rather than a sequence-specific mechanism as occurs in 
S. cerevisiae.

In  one  study  of  a  chicken  cell  line,  more  than  100 
independent  new  neocentromeres  formed  after  the 

 

CHAPTER 7  n  Chromosome Organization 

117

normal  centromere  was  deleted  experimentally  (Fig. 
7.10). Amazingly, every neocentromere formed on a dif-
ferent  DNA  sequence  with  no  common  underlying 
sequence features. Regions containing or lacking genes 
could be incorporated into a neocentromere. The only 
common  feature  was  a  domain  of  chromatin  roughly 
40,000 bp  long  containing  CENP-A  nucleosomes.  This 

A. Entire Z chromosome

B. Entire Z chromosome
     with neocentromere

1000

1000

3
0
1
 
×
 
s
d
a
e
R

0

15

 

3
0
1
×
 
s
d
a
e
R

0

CENP-A

CENP-A

0
80
Position on Z chromosome

Z centromere

CENP-A

42.62

42.65

Position on Z chromosome

0

15

0

0
80
Position on Z chromosome

BM23 neocentromere

CENP-A

3.78
Position on Z chromosome

3.81

FIGURE  7.10  DISTRIBUTION  OF  CENTROMERE  HISTONE 
CENP-A AT THE NATURAL CENTROMERE AND AT A NEOCEN-
TROMERE  ON  THE  CHICKEN  Z  CHROMOSOME.  Cells  were 
treated with formaldehyde to crosslink proteins to DNA. Isolated DNA 
was fragmented into short pieces of a few hundred base pairs and an 
antibody used to pull down the DNA fragments crosslinked to CENP-A. 
Thousands  of  DNA  fragments  associated  with  CENP-A  were  then 
sequenced. These sequences were mapped along the Z chromosome 
(the female sex chromosome of the chicken). (Data from Hori T, Shang 
W-H, Toyoda A, Misu S, et al. Histone H4 Lys 20 mono-methylation 
of the CENP-A nucleosome is essential for kinetochore assembly. Dev 
Cell. 2014;29:740–749.)

corresponds to the size of the centromere on the starting 
chromosome.

The epigenetic mark that defines an active centromere 
can  be  lost  as  well  as  gained.  Thus,  it  is  possible  for  a 
centromere  to  retain  its  normal  DNA  composition  and  
yet lose the ability to assemble a kinetochore. This has 
been  seen  most  clearly  in  naturally  occurring  human 
dicentric chromosomes. The chromosome shown in Fig. 
7.11 arose through a breakage and fusion near the long 
arm  of  chromosome  13  and  has  two  centromeres.  As 
shown in the figure, one of these lost the ability to assem-
ble a kinetochore even though it retained its α-satellite.

What is the elusive epigenetic mark and how does it 
“magically” mark a region of the chromosome as a centro-
mere? At present, all evidence suggests that the epigenetic 
mark  has  something  to  do  with  low  level  transcription  
of  the  CENP-A-containing  DNA  during  mitosis.  This  is 
remarkable,  because  transcription  is  supposed  to  be 
entirely shut off during mitosis, and indeed, it seems that 
centromeres  are  the  only  region  of  the  genome  that  is 
transcribed at that time. We do not yet know whether it 
is the process of transcription that is important or whether 
the RNA transcripts themselves serve an important role in 
specifying centromere chromatin.

Once  a  DNA  sequence  has  acquired  the  proper  epi-
genetic mark, it can assemble a functional kinetochore 
that can regulate chromosome behavior in mitosis. This 
involves  the  binding  and  function  of  100  or  more  pro-
teins as discussed in Chapter 8 (see Fig. 8.21).

Ends of the Chromosomes: Why 
Specialized Telomeres Are Needed
The ends of chromosomal DNA molecules pose at least 
two problems that cells solve by packaging the chromo-
some ends into specialized structures called telomeres. 

A

B. CENP-B (a-satellite DNA)

C. CENP-C (kinetochore)

Active

Inactive

FIGURE  7.11  EPIGENETIC  REGULATION  OF  HUMAN  CENTROMERE  FUNCTION.  An  unusual  chromosome  was  discovered  during 
prenatal screening of a fetus that sonography had indicated to be abnormal. This chromosome consisted of two copies of the maternal chromo-
some 13 linked end to end. It thus contained two centromeres and so was termed dicentric. Such dicentric chromosomes are normally unstable 
during mitosis, as the two centromeres on one chromatid often become attached to opposite spindle poles. This causes the chromosome to be 
stretched between opposite spindle poles and ultimately break. In the case of this particular dicentric chromosome, one of the centromeres was 
inactivated (presumably, it lost its epigenetic mark). This chromosome thus behaves perfectly normally in mitosis. When the distribution of cen-
tromere  proteins  at  the  active  and  inactive  centromeres  was  compared,  it  was  found  that  CENP-B  was  present  at  both  but  that  CENP-C,  a 
marker for kinetochores, was present only at the active centromere. A, Organization of the dicentric chromosome. B, Phase-contrast view of 
chromosomes from the amniocytes (left). Phase-contrast view taken with superimposed antibody staining for CENP-B (right). C, DNA stain of a 
different chromosome spread (left). Staining with antibody specific for CENP-C (right). (B–C, Courtesy William C. Earnshaw.)

118 

SECTION III  n  Chromatin, Chromosomes, and the Cell Nucleus

First,  it  is  essential  that  cells  distinguish  the  ends  of  a 
chromosome  from  breaks  in  DNA.  When  cells  detect 
DNA breaks, they stop their progression through the cell 
cycle and repair the breaks by joining the ends together 
(see  Box  43.1).  Telomeres  keep  normal  chromosome 
ends  from  inducing  cell  cycle  arrest  and  from  being 
joined  to  other  DNA  ends  by  the  repair  machinery. 
Second, telomeres permit the chromosomal DNA to be 
replicated out to the very end.

Structure of Telomeric DNA
Telomeres  in  all  eukaryotes  tested  to  date  (with  the 
exception  of  several  insect  species  including  Drosoph-
ila)  are  composed  of  many  repeats  of  short  DNA 
sequences. The sequence 5′ TTAGGG 3′ is found at the 
ends of chromosomes in organisms ranging from human 
to rattlesnake to the fungus Neurospora  crassa. In the 
human, roughly 650 to 2500 copies of this sequence are 
found at the ends of each chromosome, a total length of 
approximately 4000 to 15,000 bp (this varies in different 
tissues).  Higher  plant  telomeres  have  the  sequence 
TTTAGGG, and other variations of this repeat sequence 
have been noted in protozoans and yeasts.

The telomeric repeat is organized in a unique orienta-
tion with respect to the chromosome end. Thus, the end 
of  every  chromosome  has  one  G-rich  strand  and  one 
complementary C-rich strand. The G-rich strand always 
makes up the 3′ end of the chromosomal DNA molecule. 
Thus,  the  very  3′  end  of  the  chromosome  always  has 
the following structure: …(TTAGGG)-OH. Furthermore, 
the end of the chromosome is not a blunt structure; the 
G-rich  strand  ends  in  a  single-stranded  overhang  30  to 
400 bp  long.  This  single  strand  of  DNA  is  critical  for 
telomere structure and function. It regulates telomerase 
activity and also “invades” the double helix of telomeric 
repeats,  base-pairing  and  causing  the  ends  of  chromo-
somes  to  form  large  loops,  called  T  loops  that  protect 
chromosome ends (see later discussion). A surprisingly 
complex  balance  of  enzymatic  activities  maintains  this 
single strand of DNA. These activities change throughout 
the cell cycle in dividing cells.

How Telomeres Replicate the Ends of  
the Chromosomal DNA
Telomeres  prevent  the  erosion  of  the  end  of  the  chro-
mosomal  DNA  molecule  during  each  round  of  replica-
tion (for a more extensive discussion of DNA replication, 
see  Chapter  42).  All  DNA  replication  proceeds  with  a 
polarity of 3′ to 5′ on the template DNA (5′ to 3′ in the 
newly synthesized DNA). Furthermore, all DNA polymer-
ases  (but  not  RNA  polymerases)  work  by  elongating  a 
pre-existing  stretch  of  double-stranded  nucleic  acid. 
During  cellular  DNA  replication,  this  is  achieved  by 
making  a  short  RNA  primer  and  then  elongating  the 
RNA: DNA duplex with DNA polymerase. The primer is 
subsequently  removed,  and  DNA  polymerase  fills  the  

A

B

C

DNA unwound

Parent strands

DNA replication

Lagging strand

Primer

Leading strand

Daughter strands

RNA primer removal

Okazaki fragment
   ligation

SS overhang on other end

SS overhang
(unreplicated DNA)

3'
5'

3'

5'

3'

5'

3'

5'

3'

5'

FIGURE  7.12  DNA  REPLICATION  PROBLEM  AT  CHROMO-
SOME ENDS. DNA polymerases cannot initiate the formation of DNA 
on  a  template  de  novo;  they  can  only  extend  preexisting  nucleotide 
strands  (see  Chapter  42).  In  contrast,  RNA  polymerases  can  initiate 
synthesis without a primer. All replicating DNA chains start from a short 
region  of  RNA,  which  is  used  to  “prime”  DNA  polymerase.  A,  DNA 
strand separation. B, RNA primer synthesis. Replication of DNA starts 
with  the  synthesis  of  an  RNA  primer  (magenta)  complementary  to  a 
short  sequence  of  DNA,  which  is  extended  by  DNA  polymerase.  
C, The RNA primer is degraded and the gap is filled in by DNA poly-
merase. This being true, how can the DNA underneath the very last 
RNA primer replicated? SS, single stranded. 

gap  by  elongation  from  the  next  upstream  DNA  end  
(Fig. 7.12).

If the terminus of the chromosomal DNA is replicated 
from an RNA primer that sits on the very end of the DNA 
molecule, it follows that when this primer is removed, 
there  is  no  upstream  DNA  on  which  to  put  a  primer. 
How, then, is the DNA underneath the last RNA primer 
replicated? Years of searching for a DNA polymerase that 
could operate in the opposite direction proved fruitless. 
The  answer  that  ultimately  emerged  turned  out  to  be 
both elegant and unexpected.

Most  organisms  have  an  enzyme  called  telomerase 
that  specifically  lengthens  the  3′  end  of  the  chromo-
somal DNA. Telomerases contain both protein and RNA 
subunits.  The  sequences  of  the  RNA  component  pro-
vided an essential clue to how this enzyme works.

The  RNA  component  of  human  telomerase  con-
tains  the  sequence  AUCCCAAUC,  which  can  base-pair  
with  the  TTAGGG  telomere  repeat  at  the  ends  of  the 

 

CHAPTER 7  n  Chromosome Organization 

119

chromosome.  The  enzyme  uses  its  own  RNA  as  a  tem-
plate  for  the  synthesis  of  DNA,  which  it  “grows”  from 
the end of the chromosome (Fig. 7.13). This hypothesis 
was confirmed by showing that changing the sequence 
of the telomerase RNA alters the telomere sequence at 
the end of the chromosome.

According to this model, the telomerase actually syn-
thesizes DNA using an RNA template. Thus, telomerase 
is a reverse transcriptase similar to that involved in the 
movement of the LINE retrotransposons (Fig. 7.5). When 
L1  family  LINE  retrotransposons  insert  themselves  into 
the  chromosome,  a  DNA  end  created  at  a  nick  in  the 
chromosome is used to prime synthesis of a DNA strand 
using the LINE RNA as template, the newly synthesized 
DNA being a direct extension of the chromosomal DNA 
molecule.

Human telomerase consists of hTERT (the telomerase 
reverse transcriptase) complexed to hTERC, the telomer-
ase RNA, which is 450 nucleotides long. Telomerase RNA 
varies  in  size  and  sequence  between  species.  Active 
human  telomerase  can  be  reconstituted  in  vitro  from 
purified hTERC and hTERT in the presence of a cell-free 
lysate  from  reticulocytes  (which  appears  to  provide 
essential  protein-folding  factors).  In  cells,  telomerase  
is  associated  with  auxiliary  protein  subunits  that  are 
involved in telomerase RNA processing and maturation.

Telomerase  is  subject  to  tight  biological  regulation. 
Active enzyme is detected in only a few normal tissues 
of adult humans. These include the stem cells of various 
tissues and male germ cells. In addition, approximately 
90% of cancer cells express active telomerase and abnor-
mal expression of telomerase has been linked to cancer. 
This telomerase is thought to enable the cancer cells to 
grow  indefinitely  without  undergoing  erosion  of  the 
ends of the chromosomes.

FIGURE  7.13  TELOMERASE  PROVIDES  A  ECHANISM  FOR 
LENGTHENING  CHROMOSOMAL  ENDS.  A–B,  Normal  mecha-
nisms of DNA replication are unable to replicate the very 3′ end of the 
chromosomal  DNA.  C,  Telomerase  solves  this  problem  by  providing 
its  own  template  in  the  form  of  an  intrinsic  RNA  subunit.  This  RNA 
subunit  contains  a  sequence  complementary  to  that  found  at  the 
chromosome terminus on the 3′ strand. This sequence is able to base-
pair with the DNA at the chromosome terminus and act as a template 
for DNA synthesis. In this case, the primer is the 3′ end of the chro-
mosomal DNA, and the template is the RNA of the telomerase enzyme. 
Thus,  the  process  of  telomere  elongation  is  a  specialized  form  of 
reverse transcription (copying RNA into DNA), a process similar to that 
occurring  during  transposition  of  LINES  (long  interspersed  nuclear 
elements) (Fig. 7.5), and during the life cycle of certain RNA-containing 
tumor viruses. The telomerase enzyme releases and rebinds its tem-
plate after each 6 to 7 bp of new DNA has been synthesized. Up to 
several hundred base pairs may be added to the telomere in this way. 
D, In most cells, the 3′ end of the chromosomal DNA terminates in a 
single-stranded G-rich strand 30 to 400 nucleotides long that is essen-
tial for telomere structure and function. 

A
(TTAGGG)n

(AATCCC)n

B

C

3'

Parent strand
Lagging strand

5'
Primer

RNA primer removal

Okazaki fragment
   ligation

3'

5'

Telomerase polymerization

3'

Telomerase
RNA template

Telomerase translocation
and reannealing cycle

3'
GGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAG
CCCAATCCCAATCCC

5'

A U C C C

A  AUCCCAAUCCC

A

3'

A

U

C

 

5'

Elongation

GGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAG
CCCAATCCCAATCCC

A  AUCCCAAUCCC

A U C C C

A

A

UC

 

Translocation

GGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAG
CCCAATCCCAATCCC

A  AUCCCAAUCCC

Elongation

GGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAG
CCCAATCCCAATCCC

A  AUCCCAAUCCC

A U C C C

A U C C C

A

A

UC

 

A

A

U

C

 

3' OH

D
(TTAGGG)n

(AATCCC)n

5'

~200 Base overhang

120 

SECTION III  n  Chromatin, Chromosomes, and the Cell Nucleus

Paradoxically,  hTERC  is  not  tightly  regulated.  The 
hTERC RNA is detected in many tissues, most of which 
lack  telomerase  activity.  By  contrast,  the  expression  of 
hTERT correlates tightly with telomerase activity. Indeed, 
introduction of a DNA-encoding hTERT into telomerase-
negative  cells  produces  telomerase  activity.  This  can 
have  extremely  important  consequences  for  the  prolif-
eration of the cells (Fig. 7.16).

In  cells  that  lack  telomerase,  a  second  pathway  can 
help  maintain  the  telomeric  repeats  at  chromosome 
ends.  This  ALT  (alternative  lengthening  of  telomeres) 
process  involves  DNA  recombination  between  telo-
meres. Cancer cells that lack telomerase expression have 
an activated ALT pathway.

A third solution to this problem was taken by dipter-
ans such as D. melanogaster, in which the ends of the 
chromosomes  are  composed  of  transposable  elements. 
In the fly, a few bp are lost from the end of the chromo-
some at every round of replication. This erosion of the 
chromosome ends is remedied by the occasional trans-
position  of  specialized  transposable  elements  to  the 
chromosome end. Thus, this appears to be an example 
of an originally “selfish DNA” that has become recruited 
for an essential cellular function.

Structural Proteins of the Telomere
Telomeres provide special protected ends for the chro-
mosomal  DNA  molecule,  in  part  by  coating  the  end  of 
the  DNA  molecules  with  protective  proteins  and  by 
adopting a specialized DNA loop structure. In organisms 
with  relatively  short  telomeric  DNA  sequences,  those 
sequences  are  packaged  into  a  specialized  chromatin 
structure. In mammals, in which the telomeric sequences 
are much longer, the bulk of the telomeric DNA is pack-
aged into conventional chromatin (see Chapter 8).

A  complex  of  six  proteins  called  shelterin  associ-
ates  with  telomeres  in  most  organisms  that  have  a  
telomerase  (Fig.  7.14).  Two  subunits  directly  bind  the 
TTAGGG duplex while one binds to the single stranded 
overhang.  The  other  two  subunits  bridge  the  DNA 
binding subunits. S. cerevisiae has homologous subunits 
that  bind  to  the  telomeric  repeats  and  the  G-strand  
overhang.  They  protect  the  end  of  the  recessed  C-rich 
strand at telomeres, and this strand is rapidly degraded 
if these proteins are missing, with lethal consequences 
for  the  cell.  Shelterin  appears  to  both  regulate  telom-
erase  activity  and  play  an  essential  role  in  protecting  
chromosome  ends.

A. Telomerase reverse transcriptase
     lengthens the chomosome end

AGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAG
TCCCAATCCCAATCC

3' OH

Shelterin
recruits
telomerase

A U C C C

A  AUCCCAAUCCC

A

3'

A

U

C

 

5'

AGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTT
TCCCAATCCCAATCC
A U C C C

A  AUCCCAAUCC
C

A

C strand

Telomerase
extends G-strand

B. The shelterin complex protects chromosome ends
ATM signaling

TIN2

TPP1

POT1

3 ’   O H

ATR signaling

Homology-directed
repair
Nonhomologous
end joining

5’ end resection

TRF1

TRF2

RAP1

3'

A

U
C 

5'

C. Loop model of telomere structure

100  nm

AGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAG
TCCCAATCCCAATCC

5'

3' OH

Polymerase alpha 
extends C-strand

A UCC C A  AUCCCAAUCC

3'

C

A

A

5'

UC 
3' OH

AGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAG
TCCCAATCCCAATCC

AATCCCAATCCCA

5'

T loop

D loop

FIGURE 7.14  TELOMERE STRUCTURES. A, Structure of telomerase. B, Organization and functions of shelterin, a complex of six subunits. 
TRF1 and TRF2 dimers bind to the double-stranded (TTAGGG)n repeats at telomeres. Together they bind TIN2, which in turn binds TPP1, which 
helps  recruit  POT1  to  the  single-stranded  DNA  at  the  chromosome  end.  If  shelterin  is  lost,  chromosomes  fuse  with  one  another,  and  many 
abnormalities are seen. C, T-loop model for vertebrate telomeres. Chromosomal ends may form a T-loop structure when a single-stranded G-rich 
3′ end of the chromosome “invades” a double-stranded portion of the telomere, base-pairing with one strand and displacing the other strand (D 
loop). Inset, A T loop excised together with its chromatin proteins from a chicken erythrocyte chromosome. (Inset, From Nikitina T, Woodcock 
CL. Closed chromatin loops at the ends of chromosomes. J Cell Biol. 2004;166:161–165.)

 

CHAPTER 7  n  Chromosome Organization 

121

The Ku70/80 and MRN complexes are additional com-
ponents  of  telomeres  that  are  conserved  from  yeast  to 
human.  If  mutations  inactivate  these  complexes,  telo-
meres frequently fuse together. This poses a conundrum, 
because  elsewhere  on  chromosomes,  these  same  pro-
teins recognize DNA ends and participate in the repair 
of DNA breaks by joining bits of broken DNA together, 
a  pathway  known  as  nonhomologous  end  joining 
(NHEJ) (see Chapter 43). This is exactly the opposite of 
their role at telomeres. It thus appears that the breakage 
repair machinery recognizes chromosome ends, but the 
shelterin  complex  somehow  changes  its  function  from 
an end-joining role to an end-blocking protective role.

Loss of shelterin results in a loss of the G-strand over-
hangs and a dramatic increase in the tendency of chro-
mosomes  to  fuse  end  to  end.  This  is  because  the 
chromosome ends are now recognized as DNA breaks, 
and the cell attempts to repair them using several of the 
DNA repair pathways discussed in Chapter 43. Fig. 7.15 
shows  fused  chromosomes  in  a  Drosophila  mutant 
lacking  a  protein  essential  for  the  assembly  of  the  fly 
equivalent  of  the  shelterin  complex  at  telomeres.  In 
organisms with shelterin, the end protection may occur 
in part because subunit TRF2 can promote the formation 
of a special looped configuration of DNA in which the 
single-stranded  G-strand  overhang  is  base-paired  with 
“upstream” TTAGGG DNA (Fig. 7.14C).

Telomeres may also direct chromosome ends to their 
proper  location  within  the  cell.  In  budding  yeast  (and 
many other species), telomeres prefer to cluster together 

A. Wild-type

B. Caravaggio

C. HOAP protein

X

4

3

2

2

4

X

X

3

3

4

2

3

3

4

OH

3

HO

4

Telomeres
protect ends

4

DNA repair/
end fusion

3

4

FIGURE 7.15  DISRUPTION OF THE PROTECTIVE COMPLEX 
AT TELOMERES RESULTS IN CHROMOSOME FUSIONS. A, The 
chromosomes of a wild-type female Drosophila melanogaster seen at 
mitotic  metaphase  (see  Chapter  44).  B,  The  Caravaggio  mutant  is 
characterized  by  a  “train”  of  chromosomes  generated  by  telomere-
telomere fusions. (Caravaggio is the name of an Italian train.) C, The 
cav gene encodes HP1/Orc2-associated protein (HOAP), which spe-
cifically localizes at all Drosophila telomeres. (A, Courtesy Gianni Cenci 
and Maurizio Gatti, University of Rome, Italy. B, From Cenci G, Siriaco 
G, Raffa GD, et al. Drosophila HOAP protein is required for telomere 
capping. Nat Cell Biol. 2003;5:82–84. C, Courtesy Nature Cell Biology.)

at  the  nuclear  periphery.  Mutants  in  telomere-binding 
proteins, or in regions of the histones with which they 
interact,  disrupt  this  clustering  in  yeast.  This  results  in 
activation  of  genes  that  are  normally  silenced  when 
located in close proximity to telomeres. Thus, position-
ing of the telomere within the nucleus may be used to 
sequester  genes  into  compartments  where  their  tran-
scriptional activity is repressed.

Telomeres, Aging, and Cancer
Although  the  average  length  of  telomeric  repeats  in 
humans  is  approximately  4000 bp,  this  length  varies. 
Chromosomes  of  older  individuals  have  shorter  telo-
meres,  and  gametes  have  longer  telomeres.  This  sug-
gested  the  interesting  possibility  that  chromosomes 
might  lose  telomeric  sequences  during  the  life  of  an 
individual.

The relationship between telomere length and aging 
can be studied in cultured cells. Normal cells in culture 
grow  for  only  a  limited  number  of  generations  (often 
called the Hayflick limit) before undergoing senescence 
(this  involves  permanent  cessation  of  growth,  enlarge-
ment  in  size,  and  expression  of  marker  enzymes,  such 
as  β-galactosidase).  Because  normal  somatic  cells  lack 
telomerase activity, their telomeres shorten and eventu-
ally  reach  a  critically  short  threshold  before  the  cells 
senesce. In some cases, it is possible to force senescent 
cells to resume proliferation (eg, by expressing certain 
viral oncogenes). These “driven” cells continue to divide 
and  their  telomeres  continue  to  shorten  until  a  crisis 
point is reached. In crisis, cells suffer chromosomal insta-
bility (chromosomal fusions and breaks can occur) and 
cell death. In populations of human cells in crisis, very 
rarely (in approximately 1 in 106 cases), cells appear that 
once  again  grow  normally.  These  cells  now  express 
telomerase.  These  observations  with  cultured  cells  led 
to  the  suggestion  that  senescence  might  occur  in  cells 
when  the  telomeric  repeats  of  one  or  more  chromo-
somes are reduced to a critical level.

If  correct,  this  model  suggests  very  interesting  (and 
controversial) implications for the regulation of cell life. 
Suppose that telomerase is active in the germline, so that 
all  gametes  have  long  telomeres.  Now,  if  the  enzyme 
were inactivated in somatic cells, this would effectively 
provide every cell lineage with a limitation on how many 
times it could divide before loss of telomeric sequences 
caused it to become senescent. Provided that the starting 
telomeres were sufficiently long and that telomerase was 
expressed in stem cells of tissues like testis and intestine, 
in which rapid division occurs throughout the life of the 
individual,  this  lack  of  telomerase  in  most  cells  would 
have no deleterious effect on the life span of the organ-
ism. In fact, such a mechanism might provide an impor-
tant  advantage  by  minimizing  the  chances  that  a  clone 
of  cells  would  escape  from  the  normal  regulation  of 
growth control and become cancerous.

122 

SECTION III  n  Chromatin, Chromosomes, and the Cell Nucleus

This model has been tested in two ways. First, mice 
were  prepared  in  which  the  gene  coding  for  the  RNA 
component of telomerase or the telomerase reverse tran-
scriptase  was  disrupted.  These  mice  were  healthy  and 
fertile  for  six  generations  in  the  complete  absence  of 
telomerase  but  then  subsequent  generations  became 
sterile as a result of cell death in the male germline. The 
cell  death  occurred  when  the  telomeres  shortened 
below  a  critical  threshold.  Having  telomeres  approxi-
mately  seven  times  longer  than  humans  might  have  
contributed to their initial survival through several gen-
erations. Other studies show that mice age prematurely, 
when  their  telomeres  shorten  below  a  certain  length. 
Remarkably,  this  ageing  phenotype  can  be  cured  over 
the course of several weeks by activating hTERT in those 
mice. However, this “cure” can be a two-edged sword, 
as  depending  on  the  genetic  makeup  of  the  mice,  the 
activation of hTERT can result in the formation of aggres-
sive tumors! These experiments show that telomerase is 
not  essential  for  the  day-to-day  life  of  the  mouse,  but 
clearly  it  is  needed  for  the  long-term  survival  of  the 
species.  In  humans,  a  number  of  diseases  (collectively 
termed  “telomeropathies”)  are  associated  with  inheri-
tance of mutant alleles of telomere components. These 
diseases include dyskeratosis congenita (a complex con-
dition affecting the skin and nails that is associated with 
a  complex  array  of  other  life-threatening  conditions), 
aplastic  anemia  (loss  of  blood  cell  formation),  bone 
marrow failure and others. These diseases are all associ-
ated with failures in cell proliferation.

In a second experiment, the hTERT reverse transcrip-
tase  subunit  of  telomerase  was  introduced  into  normal 

s

l
l

e
c
 
g
n
d
v
D

i

i

i

Normal cells expressing
TERT reverse transcriptase

Normal
cells

0

0

20

40

60

80

Population doublings

FIGURE  7.16 
INTRODUCTION  OF  hTERT  INTO  NORMAL 
CELLS  IS  SUFFICIENT  TO  OVERCOME  THE  SENESCENCE 
LIMIT  AND  IMMORTALIZE  THE  CELLS.  Following  expression  of 
hTERT, the human reverse transcriptase subunit of telomerase, cells 
act like normal cells (they are not transformed into cancer cells), but 
they can grow indefinitely. TERT, telomerase reverse transcriptase. 

cells growing in culture. This caused an increase in the 
level of active telomerase with dramatic results. Instead 
of  undergoing  senescence,  these  cells  kept  dividing  in 
culture,  apparently  indefinitely  (Fig.  7.16).  However, 
unlike cancer cells, which are also immortal, these cells 
did  not  acquire  the  ability  to  cause  tumors.  Thus,  this 
experiment showed convincingly that telomeres are part 
of a mechanism that regulates the proliferative capacity 
of somatic cells.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We  thank  Beth  Sullivan,  Rachel  O’Neill,  Vladimir  
Larionov,  Maurizio  Gatti,  and  Lea  Harrington  for  their 
advice during revision of this chapter.

SELECTED READINGS

Aitman TJ, Boone C, Churchill GA, et al. The future of model organisms 

in human disease research. Nat Rev Genet. 2011;12:575-582.

Beck  CR,  Garcia-Perez  JL,  Badge  RM,  Moran  JV.  LINE-1  elements  in 
structural variation and disease. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet. 
2011;12:187-215.

Birchler JA, Gao Z, Sharma A, Presting GG, Han F. Epigenetic aspects 
of  centromere  function  in  plants.  Curr  Opin  Plant  Biol.  2011;14:
217-222.

Bloom  KS.  Centromeric  heterochromatin:  the  primordial  segregation 

machine. Annu Rev Genet. 2014;48:457-484.

Doolittle  RF.  Microbial  genomes  opened  up.  Nature.  1998;392:

339-342.

Fukagawa T, Earnshaw WC. The centromere: chromatin foundation for 

the kinetochore machinery. Dev Cell. 2014;30:496-508.

Gent JI, Dawe RK. RNA as a structural and regulatory component of 

the centromere. Annu Rev Genet. 2012;46:443-453.

Heidenreich B, Rachakonda PS, Hemminki K, Kumar R. TERT promoter 
mutations in cancer development. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2014;24:
30-37.

Huang  CR,  Burns  KH,  Boeke  JD.  Active  transposition  in  genomes. 

Annu Rev Genet. 2012;46:651-675.

Martínez P, Blasco MA. Replicating through telomeres: a means to an 

end. Trends Biochem Sci. 2015;40:504-515.

Palm  W,  de  Lange  T.  How  shelterin  protects  mammalian  telomeres. 

Annu Rev Genet. 2008;42:301-334.

Schueler MG, Sullivan BA. Structural and functional dynamics of human 
centromeric chromatin. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet. 2006;7:
301-313.

Simonti CN, Capra JA. The evolution of the human genome. Curr Opin 

Genet Dev. 2015;35:9-15.

Smit  AF.  Interspersed  repeats  and  other  mementos  of  transposable 
elements  in  mammalian  genomes.  Curr  Opin  Genet  Dev.  1999;9:
657-663.

Stanley  SE,  Armanios  M.  The  short  and  long  telomere  syndromes: 
paired  paradigms  for  molecular  medicine.  Curr  Opin  Genet  Dev. 
2015;33:1-9.

Yan H, Jiang J. Rice as a model for centromere and heterochromatin 

research. Chromosome Res. 2007;15:77-84.

The 1000 Genomes Project Consortium. A global reference for human 

genetic variation. Nature. 2015;526:68-74.

C H A P T E R 

8 

DNA Packaging in Chromatin  
and Chromosomes

Eukaryotic chromosomal DNA molecules are thousands 

of  times  longer  than  the  diameter  of  the  nucleus  and 
therefore must be highly compacted throughout the cell 
cycle.  This  compaction  is  accomplished  by  combining 
the DNA with structural proteins to make chromatin. 
Chromatin  folding  must  compact  the  DNA  but  still 
permit access of the transcriptional machinery to regions 
of the chromosome required for gene expression.

The first level of folding involves coiling DNA around 
a  protein  core  to  yield  a  nucleosome.  The  string  of 
nucleosomes,  known  as  a  10-nm  fiber,  shortens  DNA 
approximately sevenfold relative to naked DNA. In some 
specialized  cell  types  this  is  further  condensed  into  a 
30-nm  fiber  that  shortens  the  DNA  six-  to  sevenfold 
more. However, it appears that in most cells the further 
folding of the 10-nm fiber involves coils and looping, and 
is remarkably irregular and dynamic.

First Level of Chromosomal DNA 
Packaging: The Nucleosome
The continuous DNA fiber of each chromosome is pack-
aged into many hundreds of thousands of nucleosomes 
linked in series. Individual nucleosomes can be isolated 
following  cleavage  of  DNA  between  neighboring  parti-
cles by DNA-cutting enzymes called nucleases. Random 
digestion  of  chromatin  initially  yields  a  mixture  of  par-
ticles consisting of short chains of nucleosomes contain-
ing  multiples  of  approximately  200  base  pairs  of  DNA 
(Fig.  8.1).  Continued  nuclease  cleavage  yields  a  stable 
particle  with  146  base  pairs  of  DNA  (1.75  turns  of  the 
DNA wrapped around the protein core). This is called a 
nucleosome core particle.

The  nucleosome  core  particle  is  disk-shaped,  with 
DNA  coiled  in  a  left-handed  superhelix  around  an 
octamer  of  core  histones.  This  octamer  consists  of  a 
central tetramer composed of two closely linked H3:H4 
heterodimers,  flanked  on  either  side  by  two  H2A:H2B 

heterodimers.  High-resolution  crystal  structures  of 
nucleosome  core  particles  revealed  that  each  core 
histone has a compact domain of 70 to 100 amino acid 
residues  that  adopts  a  characteristic  Z-shaped  “histone 
fold” consisting of a long α-helix flanked by two shorter 
α-helices (Fig. 8.2).

The amino-terminal approximately 30 amino acid resi-
dues  of  the  core  histones  (referred  to  as  N-terminal 
tails)  are  important  for  interactions  both  inside  and 
outside the nucleosome. They project outward from the 
cylindrical  faces  of  the  nucleosomal  core  as  well  as 
between the adjacent winds of the DNA on the nucleo-
some  surface.  Although  these  N-terminal  tails  are  not 
ordered  either  in  crystals  of  nucleosome  core  particles 
or in solution, they are among the most highly conserved 
regions of these very highly conserved proteins. This is 
because  they  serve  as  signaling  platforms  and  mediate 
packing  interactions  between  nucleosomes.  Modifica-
tions  of  the  N-terminal  tails  regulate  DNA  accessibility 
within the chromatin fiber to the transcription, replica-
tion, and repair machinery.

Chromatin Modifications and Regulation of 
Chromatin Function
The  discovery  that  the  sequence  of  bases  in  DNA  pro-
vides a code to specify the primary structure of proteins 
triggered a revolution that culminated 50 years later with 
the near-complete sequencing of the human genome. To 
fully exploit this coding information, cells must control 
when to use it. Initial studies of the processes controlling 
gene expression focused on regulation of transcription 
by proteins that recognize specific DNA sequences at the 
5′ end of genes (see Chapter 10), as this is how bacteria 
regulate gene expression. Eukaryotic gene regulation is 
much more elaborate.

Human nuclei contain roughly 3.3 × 107 nucleosomes 
distributed along the DNA. Although more than 70% of 
the molecular surface of nucleosomal DNA is accessible 

 123

SECTION III  n  Chromatin, Chromosomes, and the Cell Nucleus

C

124 

A
A

B

12 nm

200 bp

166 bp
146 bp

Increasing digestion with nucleases

146 bp = nucleosome core DNA

5.7 nm

166 bp = 2 full turns

FIGURE  8.1  NUCLEOSOMES. A, Electron micrograph showing chromosomal loops covered in nucleosomes, which look like beads on a 
string. B, Nuclease digestion of chromosomes releases fragments containing varying numbers of nucleosomes (left) in which the DNA fragments 
vary by multiples of 200 base pairs (center). More extensive nuclease digestion results in production of the nucleosome core particle, with 146 
base pairs of DNA (right). C, Crystal structure of a nucleosome core particle. The DNA wraps around a compact core of histones. (A, Courtesy 
William C. Earnshaw. B, Left panel, modified from Woodcock CL, Sweetman HE, Frado LL. Structural repeating units in chromatin. II: Their isolation 
and partial characterization. Exp Cell Res. 1976;97:111–119. B, Center and right panels, modified from Allan J, Cowling GJ, Harborne N, et al. 
Regulation of the higher-order structure of chromatin by histones H1 and H5. J Cell Biol. 1981;90:279–288. C, For reference, see Protein Data 
Bank [PDB; www.rcsb.org] file 1KX5.)

A

H3
H4

H2A
H2B

B

FIGURE  8.2  SECONDARY  STRUCTURE  OF  THE  HISTONES  WITHIN  THE  CORE  PARTICLE.  A,  A  ribbon  diagram  shows  that  each 
histone protein in the octameric core of the nucleosome has a characteristic Z-shaped α-helical structure (the histone-fold). The flexible N-terminal 
portions of the histones, which have a critical role in regulating chromatin structure, did not occupy a unique location in the crystal and do not 
appear  in  this  structure.  B,  The  histone  octamer  surrounded  by  one  of  the  two  turns  of  DNA.  (Modified  from  PDB  file  1KX5  and 
Luger K, Mäder AW, Richmond RK, et al. Crystal structure of the nucleosome core particle at 2.8 Å resolution. Nature. 1997;389:251–260.)

2 nm

 

CHAPTER 8  n  DNA Packaging in Chromatin and Chromosomes  

125

A. Histone modifications create chromatin states

E

EDITOR

B

M
MARK

Transcription

Heterochromatin

R

READER

Polycomb
chromatin

Transcription

M M

H3

H2N

A R T KQTARKSTGG K A P R K Q L A T K AARKSAPATGGV KKPHR 

A

M

A

M M

A
Mitotic
eraser

M

A

M M

A

A

Mitotic
eraser

M

S GRGK

GGKGL G K G G A

A

M

K R H RKVLR
A

D
 

Ac

A

ε-N-Acetyl lysine
O-Phospho serine
(Mono, di, tri) methyl lysine
(Mono, di) methyl arginine

M
M
U Mono-ubiquitin

C

+

+

H2N

PEPSKSAPAPK K G S K K A I T K A Q K KDGKKRKRSR K  

A

A

A

A

A

A

SGR G K Q G G KARAKA K  

Lysine

Tri-methyl lysine

H2N

diverse
activities

Polycomb: inhibits

RNA Pol II elongation

C

chromatin

state

H2A

U
K K TESHHKA K G K  

C O O H

A

M

U

VKYTSSK 

COOH

Mitotic
eraser
H4

A

A

H2B

FIGURE 8.3  HISTONE MODIFICATIONS. A, E → M → R → C pathways use posttranslational modifications to create different chromatin 
states. B, Modification of the amino- and carboxyterminal domains of the histones regulates nucleosome assembly, transcription, and mitotic 
chromosome  condensation.  Highlighted  here  are  methylations  of  three  lysines,  which  are  associated  with  transcription,  heterochromatin,  and 
facultative heterochromatin respectively. Note that each residue is immediately adjacent to a residue phosphorylated in mitosis, which knocks the 
READER off the methylation mark. The modifications are described in the figure key. C, Structure of tri-methyl lysine. For other structures of modified 
amino acids see Fig. 3.3. Arginine, R; lysine, K; serine, S. (Modified from PDB file 1KX5 and Khorasanizadeh S. The nucleosome: from genomic 
organization to genomic regulation. Cell. 2004;116:259–272.)

to  solvent,  most  nonhistone  proteins  involved  in  gene 
regulation  bind  nucleosomal  DNA  10-  to  104-fold  less 
well  than  naked  DNA.  Thus,  nucleosomes  establish  a 
general environment in which DNA replication and gene 
transcription are repressed unless signals are given to the 
contrary.

The access of proteins to DNA in chromatin is regu-
lated  both  by  the  density  and  specific  localization  of 
nucleosomes,  and  by  specific  modifications  of  the  his-
tones. The histones are acted on by enzymes we will call 
EDITORS (Fig. 8.3). EDITORS either place a MARK (a post-
translational modification) often, but not exclusively, on 
the histone N-terminal tail or remove an existing MARK. 
READERS then bind specifically to the  MARK and recruit 
a variety of other activities. In some cases MARKs can act 
directly by influencing the charge properties of chroma-
tin. The net result is the creation of a specific CHROMATIN 
STATE, of which two examples are: “open for transcrip-
tion” and “inaccessible to transcription factors.”

It has been proposed that the combination of  MARKS 
on  histones  makes  a  kind  of  “code”  that  specifies  the 
activity  of  various  chromatin  regions.  This  is  disputed, 
however, as depending on context, individual MARKS can 
recruit  different  READERS  with  very  different  outcomes. 
Thus,  if  there  is  a  code,  it  is  far  from  simple  and  the 
significance of many of the histone MARKS remains to be 
deciphered.  It  has  also  been  widely  proposed  that 
histone  MARKS,  together  with  methylation  of  the  DNA 
itself  are  the  basis  of  epigenetic  regulation  (see  Fig. 

7.11):  the  stable,  heritable  regulation  of  chromosomal 
functions by information that is not encoded in the DNA 
sequence. DNA methylation can be propagated through 
many cell divisions, but it is less clear that histone modi-
fications are normally propagated in this way. Thus the 
role  of  histone  modifications  in  epigenetic  memory 
should be regarded as a popular hypothesis rather than 
an accepted fact.

Regulation of Chromatin Structure by the Histone 
N-Terminal Tails
The N-terminal histone tails provide a molecular “handle” 
to  manipulate  DNA  accessibility  in  chromatin.  This 
complex area can only be outlined here. A wide range 
of MARKS has been identified at many sites in the histone 
N-terminal  tails  and  elsewhere  (Fig.  8.3;  see  Cell  
SnapShot  1).  These  modifications  include  acetylation, 
methylation and ubiquitination of lysine residues, phos-
phorylation  of  serine  and  threonine,  and  poly(ADP)
ribosylation. Histones with acetylated lysines are gener-
ally associated with “open” chromatin that is permissive 
for  RNA  transcription,  while  histones  with  methylated 
lysines can be associated with either “open” or “closed” 
chromatin states.

Because the histone modifications are read as combi-
nations,  individual  modifications  do  not  necessarily 
always  have  the  same  consequences.  One  example  of 
this  is  the  phosphorylation  of  histone  H3  on  serine  
10  (H3-S10ph).  In  mitotic  cells,  this  correlates  with  

126 

SECTION III  n  Chromatin, Chromosomes, and the Cell Nucleus

chromatin compaction, but when combined with acety-
lation of surrounding amino acid residues, it can also be 
associated  with  the  activation  of  gene  transcription  as 
nonproliferating cells reenter the cell cycle (see Chapter 
41).  During  mitosis,  phosphorylation  of  threonine  3, 
serine 10, and serine 28 disrupts the binding of READERS 
to methylation MARKS on lysines 4, 9, and 28, respectively 
(Fig. 8.3B). Thus, one  MARK can regulate the activity of 
an adjacent MARK.

Acetylation  involves  the  transfer  of  acetate  groups 
from acetyl coenzyme A to the ε-amino groups of lysine. 
This  reduces  the  net  positive  charge  of  the  N-terminal 
domain, causing chromatin to adopt an “open” confor-
mation that is more favorable to transcription. The acety-
lation  MARK  acts  as  a  binding  site  for  protein  READERs, 
one  example  of  which  is  an  approximately  100-amino-
acid  sequence  motif  called  a  bromodomain.  Various 
bromodomain-containing READERS recruited to chromatin 
by  acetylated  histones  often  further  modify  histones  in 
other ways that either promote or limit the accessibility 
of the DNA for transcription into RNA.

Proteins  called  transcription  factors  regulate  gene 
expression  by  binding  specific  DNA  sequences  and 
recruiting the transcriptional machinery (RNA polymer-
ases and associated proteins) to activate gene expression 
(see  Fig.  10.12).  Many  transcription  factors  recruit  a 
protein  complex,  called  a  coactivator,  that  facilitates 

loading  of  the  transcriptional  apparatus  onto  the  gene. 
Often,  coactivators  possess  domains  that  recognize 
histone  MARKS  and  have  EDITOR  activities  to  lay  down 
new MARKS on N-terminal histone tails. For example, the 
yeast SAGA complex contains over 10 proteins, includ-
ing  READERS  that  recognize  histone  methylation  and 
acetylation.  It  also  has  an  EDITOR  activity  that  removes 
the  protein  MARK  ubiquitin  (see  Fig.  23.2)  from  target 
proteins plus a histone acetyltransferase  EDITOR activity 
that  acetylates  lysine-14  and  lysine-8  in  the  N-terminal 
tails of histone H3 (Fig. 8.4).

Histone acetylation is dynamic. Just as transcriptional 
coactivators  contain  histone  acetyltransferases  that  add 
acetyl groups to nucleosomes and promote gene activa-
tion, so corepressors, which are recruited in an analogous 
manner,  can  contain  histone  deacetylases  that  remove 
acetyl  groups  from  selected  lysine  residues.  Deacety-
lation tends to repress gene expression and is one strat-
egy used to regulate cell-cycle progression during the G1 
phase of the cell cycle (see Fig. 41.9). Histone acetylation 
is crucial for life. Yeast cells die if certain key lysines are 
mutated  to  arginines,  thus  preserving  their  positive 
charge but preventing them from being acetylated.

In addition to marking nucleosomes by modification 
of  their  N-terminal  tails,  cells  also  use  the  energy  pro-
vided  by  adenosine  triphosphate  (ATP)  hydrolysis  to 
actively  remodel  nucleosomes.  This  involves  complex 

Binding site

Gene off

TF

TATA

Nucleosome

Histone N-terminal tails

Transcription
factor

RNA polymerase

TF

TATA

Gene transcribed

AC

AC

AC

AC

AC

AC

acetyltransferase

Histone

(HAT)

Ada2

GCN5

Ada3

A simple HAT
complex from yeast

Other subunits?

Spt8

Ada2

Spt7

Ada3

Spt20

Spt3

GCN5

A complicated HAT
complex from yeast

FIGURE  8.4  Transcription  factors  (purple)  bind  specific  DNA  sequences  and  recruit  coactivators  to  the  5′  ends  of  genes.  Many  of  these 
coactivators work by acetylating the N-terminal tails or body of the core histones, thereby loosening the chromatin structure and promoting the 
binding and activation of the RNA polymerase holoenzyme (see Chapter 10). The coactivators vary in composition and complexity from relatively 
simple histone acetyltransferase complexes (bottom left) to the huge and elaborate SAGA complex (bottom right). In this side view, only one of 
the two turns of DNA around the nucleosome is seen. GCN5, Ada2, Ada3, Spt3, Spt7, Spt8, and Spt20 are the names of budding yeast genes 
whose products are found in these complexes. AC, acetylation; TATA, DNA sequence in the gene promoter [see Chapter 10]). 

 

CHAPTER 8  n  DNA Packaging in Chromatin and Chromosomes  

127

protein “machines” that include a catalytic subunit that 
couples ATP hydrolysis to DNA translocation. All eukary-
otes possess approximately 20 different classes of these 
chromatin  remodeling  enzymes.  These  different  sub-
classes  are  capable  of  directing  a  range  of  different 
changes to nucleosome organization. For example, some 
enzymes reposition nucleosomes so that they are evenly 
spaced along DNA. Others remove histones from DNA. 
Still others direct replacement of core histone proteins 
with specialized variants.

Histone Deposition During Nucleosome Assembly
During DNA replication, existing nucleosomes are parti-
tioned randomly between daughter DNA strands. Newly 
assembled  nucleosomes  then  fill  the  gaps.  When  not 
associated  with  DNA,  histones  are  always  bound  to 
protein chaperones. Newly translated H3 and H4, which 
are acetylated on lysine-9 of H3 and lysine-5 and lysine- 
12  of  H4,  associate  with  a  chromatin  assembly  factor, 
called  CAF1.  One  of  the  three  subunits  of  CAF1  is  a 
chaperone  called  retinoblastoma-associated  protein  of 
48 kD (RbAp48). CAF1 is targeted to sites of DNA repli-
cation  by  interaction  with  proliferating  cell  nuclear 
antigen (PCNA), a doughnut-shaped protein that encircles 
the DNA and helps DNA polymerase slide along it during 
replication (see Fig. 42.12). Thus, CAF1 delivers newly 
synthesized histones to sites on the chromosome where 
new  nucleosomes  are  required  as  DNA  is  synthesized 
during the S phase of the cell cycle (see Chapter 42). H3 
and H4 are deposited first on the new DNA, followed by 
two H2A:H2B heterodimers to complete the assembly of 
the nascent nucleosome.

Histone Variants
Approximately 75% of histone H3 in chromatin is depos-
ited  during  DNA  replication  by  CAF1.  The  remaining 
25%  is  a  special  isoform  of  H3,  called  H3.3,  that  is 
encoded by a different gene and deposited on chromatin 
by  a  different  mechanism.  Histone  H3.3  is  transcribed 
throughout  the  cell  cycle  and  is  not  coordinated  with 
DNA  synthesis.  Newly  synthesized  H3.3  binds  to  the 
RbAp48  chaperone,  but  they  then  associate  with  a 
protein called histone regulator A (HIRA) instead of the 
two  CAF1  subunits.  Some  H3.3  assembles  into  nucleo-
somes  at  the  time  of  DNA  replication,  just  like  the 
canonical H3. However, H3.3 can also be inserted into 
chromatin at other times of the cell cycle. For example, 
the  HIRA–RbAp48  complex  swaps  H3.3/H4  dimers  for 
H3/H4 dimers in chromatin during transcription, when 
the nucleosomes on the underlying gene are transiently 
perturbed.  Although  demethylases  can  remove  the 
methyl groups from histone H3, replacement of histone 
H3  methylated  on  lysine  9  (H3-K9me)  with  unmethyl-
ated  H3.3  is  an  efficient  way  to  convert  “closed”  chro-
matin,  where  transcription  is  disfavored,  into  “open” 
chromatin that is favorable for transcription.

Other  specialized  histone  variants  also  contribute  
to  the  microdiversity  of  chromatin.  For  example,  the  
H3  isoform  CENP-A  is  a  key  component  of  the  kineto-
chore,  the  structure  that  assembles  at  centromeres  to 
promote  chromosome  segregation  during  mitosis  (see 
Fig. 8.21 below).

The  largest  number  of  variant  forms  has  been 
described for H2A. Interaction between the N-terminus 
of H4 and an acidic patch on the surface of H2A on the 
adjacent  nucleosome  has  an  important  role  in  promot-
ing chromatin fiber compaction. Therefore, altering the 
local H2A composition, which influences the strength of 
this interaction, provides another way to vary the acces-
sibility  of  the  DNA  for  gene  expression.  One  variant, 
H2AX,  which  constitutes  approximately  15%  of  the  
cellular  H2A,  helps  maintain  genome  integrity.  At  sites 
of  DNA  damage,  H2AX  is  rapidly  phosphorylated  by 
protein kinases. This serves as a  MARK for the assembly 
of  multiprotein  complexes  that  signal  and  repair  the 
damage (see Box 43.1).

Linker DNA and the Linker Histone H1
When  examined  by  electron  microscopy  at  low  ionic 
strength,  nucleosomal  chromatin  resembles  a  string  of 
10 nm  diameter  beads  with  linker  DNA  extended 
between adjacent nucleosomes (Fig. 8.1). Each nucleo-
some  in  chromosomes  is  typically  associated  with 
approximately  200  base  pairs  of  DNA.  Subtracting  166 
base  pairs  for  two  turns  around  the  histone  octamer 
leaves  34  base  pairs  of  linker  DNA  between  adjacent 
nucleosomes. Linker DNA can vary widely in length in 
different tissues and cell types.

A fifth histone, H1 or linker histone, binds to linker 
DNA  where  the  DNA  molecule  enters  and  exits  the 
nucleosome  (Fig.  8.5).  H1  histones  have  a  “winged  
helix”  central  domain  flanked  by  unstructured  basic 
domains at both the N- and C-termini (Fig. 8.5). Mammals 
have  at  least  eight  variant  forms  (called  subtypes)  of  
H1  histones  (H1a–e,  H10,  H1t,  and  H1oo).  The  amino 
acid  sequences  of  these  variants  differ  by  40%  or  
more. H10  is  found  in  cells  entering  the  nondividing 
G0  state  (see  Chapter  41),  whereas  H1t  and  H1oo  are 
found  exclusively  in  developing  sperm  and  oocytes, 
respectively.

The  role  of  H1  linker  histone  in  chromatin  remains 
enigmatic. The protein was originally assumed to regu-
late  chromatin  compaction,  yet  it  is  mobile  in  the 
nucleus,  spending  no  more  than  a  few  minutes  at  any 
given location. Deletion of the sole linker histone genes 
from  yeast  and  Tetrahymena  (a  ciliated  protozoan) 
causes no obvious ill effects, but H1 is essential in mice. 
Although genes that encode individual H1 isoforms can 
be deleted in mice, simultaneous deletion of the genes 
for  three  isoforms  causes  embryonic  death,  apparently 
the  consequence  of  alterations  in  chromatin  structure 
that perturb normal patterns of gene expression.

128 

SECTION III  n  Chromatin, Chromosomes, and the Cell Nucleus

Nucleosome model

C

Linker

H1 histone

A

Heterochromatin

B. Bright field
     micrograph

H1

C

N

Euchromatin

Inactive X

C. Fluorescence micrograph

D. Computer 3D
     reconstruction

N

Inactive X

FIGURE  8.5  THE  BINDING  SITE  OF  HISTONE  H1  ON  THE 
NUCLEOSOME, NEAR THE SITE WHERE DNA STRANDS ENTER 
AND EXIT THE CORE PARTICLE. Orange, DNA; blue, H3; purple, 
H4;  red,  H2A;  yellow,  H2B.  (For  reference,  see  PDB  files  1KX5  and 
1HST.) 

Functional Compartmentation  
of Chromatin: Heterochromatin  
and Euchromatin
Chromatin  has  traditionally  been  categorized  into  two 
main classes based on structural and functional criteria. 
Euchromatin  contains  almost  all  genes,  both  actively 
transcribed  and  quiescent.  Heterochromatin  is  tran-
scriptionally repressed and is generally more condensed 
than  euchromatin  (Fig.  8.6).  Heterochromatin  was  ini-
tially  recognized  because  it  stains  more  darkly  with 
DNA-binding dyes than the remainder of the interphase 
nucleus.

More  recent  analyses  based  on  mapping  patterns  of 
the  modifications  of  the  histone  N-terminal  tails  now 
suggest that there are at least five classes of chromatin 
environments  in  nuclei.  These  classes,  defined  some-
what  arbitrarily  and  given  colors  for  names,  are  green 
(classic  heterochromatin  with  HP1;  described  later), 
yellow  (active  chromatin  rich 
in  H3-K4me3),  red  
(active  chromatin  rich  in  histone  remodelers),  blue 
(facultative  heterochromatin  repressed  by  polycomb 
proteins), and black (repressed, but not via HP1). Another 

FIGURE  8.6  EUCHROMATIN  AND  HETEROCHROMATIN. 
A,  Electron  micrograph  of  a  thin  section  of  a  plasma  cell  nucleus. 
Euchromatin is decondensed. Heterochromatin (mostly clumped near 
the  nuclear  envelope  and  central  nucleolus)  remains  condensed.  
B, Light micrograph of a female nucleus with four Barr bodies (arrows) 
(facultative heterochromatin composed of the inactive X chromosome). 
This  woman  has  a  highly  abnormal  genetic  makeup,  with  five  X 
chromosomes. The X chromosome inactivation system has a built-in 
counting  mechanism  that  ensures  that  only  one  X  chromosome 
remains  active.  C–D,  The  Barr  body  is  structurally  distinct  from  the 
active X chromosome. This figure is from a three-dimensional study in 
which the X chromosome was identified by in situ hybridization “paint-
ing”  with  probes  that  covered  the  entire  chromosome.  C,  One  slice 
through the three-dimensional data set. D, Two different views of the 
X  chromosomes  reconstructed  in  three  dimensions.  The  inactive  X 
chromosome is shown in red. Because of X chromosome inactivation, 
females are mosaic for functions encoded on the X chromosome. Each 
female  embryo  has  two  X  chromosomes:  Xpat  and  Xmat  (for  paternal 
and maternal). Following X chromosome inactivation, some cells will 
express genes from Xpat and others will express genes from Xmat. The 
inactivation is permanent; eg, all progeny of a cell with Xpat inactivated 
will  also  have  Xpat  inactivated.  This  inactivation  occurs  randomly  in 
different cells of the embryo. In cats, genes responsible for coat color 
are encoded on the X chromosome. The patchy color pattern of calico 
cats  reflects  the  underlying  pattern  of  X  chromosome  inactivation.  
All  classic  calico  cats  are  females.  (A,  From  Fawcett  DW.  The  Cell. 
Philadelphia:  WB  Saunders;  1981.  B,  Courtesy  Barbara  Hamkalo, 
University of California, Irvine. C–D, From Eils R, Dietzel S, Bertin E, 
et al. Three-dimensional reconstruction of painted human interphase 
chromosomes:  active  and  inactive  X  chromosome  territories  have 
similar volumes but differ in shape and surface structure. J Cell Biol. 
1996;135:1427–1440.)

approach  has  identified  chromatin  regions  associated 
with  the  inner  surface  of  the  nuclear  envelope.  These 
lamina-associated  domains  tend  to  average  approxi-
mately 106 base pairs in size and are mostly transcription-
ally inactive.

 

CHAPTER 8  n  DNA Packaging in Chromatin and Chromosomes  

129

A  typical  nucleus  has  both  euchromatin  and  hetero-
chromatin, the latter often being concentrated near the 
nuclear  envelope  and  around  nucleoli.  Much  of  the 
nuclear interior is occupied by pale-staining euchromatin 
rich  in  actively  transcribing  genes.  Nuclei  with  low 
transcriptional  activity  have  relatively  more  hetero-
chromatin.  Classically  two  types  of  heterochromatin, 
constitutive and facultative, have been recognized.

Constitutive  heterochromatin  is  typically  associ-
ated  with  repetitive  DNA  sequences,  such  as  satellite 
DNAs  (see  Fig.  7.9),  that  are  packaged  into  “closed” 
(green)  chromatin  in  every  cell  type.  In  at  least  some 
cases,  establishment  of  constitutive  heterochromatin 
involves  transcription  of  those  repeated  DNA  elements 
to produce double-stranded RNAs that are cleaved into 
short fragments by the RNA interference (RNAi) machin-
ery (see Fig. 11.13). The resulting short RNAs are thought 
to target activities that promote heterochromatin forma-
tion  to  their  sites  of  transcription  in  the  chromosome 
(see Fig. 11.14).

The MARK that best defines constitutive heterochroma-
tin  is  H3-K9me3  (Fig.  8.7),  which  is  recognized  by  the 
READER  heterochromatin  protein  1  (HP1).  The  HP1 
amino-terminus  contains  a  50-amino-acid  motif  called  a 
chromodomain  (chromatin  modification  organizer) 
that binds to H3-K9me3. Surprisingly, most HP1 is highly 
mobile in nuclei, moving on a time frame of seconds. It 
also binds and recruits enzymes that tri-methylate histone 
H3 lysine 9.

HP1 can promote the lateral spreading of heterochro-
matin along the chromosome by recruiting other proteins 
that further modify the histone aminoterminal tails (Fig. 
8.7). For example, the enzyme that trimethylates H3-K9 
itself binds to HP1 and can modify adjacent nucleosomes. 
As  a  result,  heterochromatin  is  not  a  static  “closed” 
chromatin compartment but can “invade” nearby genes 
along the chromosome. If a chromosomal rearrangement 
moves an actively transcribed gene close to constitutive 
heterochromatin, heterochromatin may spread across it 
and repress transcription (Fig. 8.7). This is called posi-
tion effect.

HP1  and  other  repressive  proteins  can  also  recruit 
DNA  methyltransferases  that  modify  the  underlying  
DNA  by  adding  a  methyl  group  to  the  5′  position  on 
cytosine  in  the  dinucleotide  CpG  (cytosine  phosphate 
guanine).  Methylation  can  recruit  READERS  that  inacti-
vate gene transcription if it occurs near the 5′ promoters 
of  genes  (see  Chapter  10)  in  regions  with  an  above 
average  concentration  of  CpG  called  CpG  islands. 
Among the several binding proteins that recognize DNA 
containing  5-methyl-cytosine,  methyl-cytosine  binding 
protein (MeCP2) can repress expression of nearby genes 
by recruiting a histone deacetylase complex that removes 
acetyl  groups  from  the  core  histone  N-terminal  tails  
(Fig.  8.7).  MeCP2  is  highly  abundant  in  neurons,  and 
mutations in the protein cause Rett syndrome, an X-linked 

A. Gene translocation displayed on mitotic chromosome

Chromosome
breakage and

rejoining

Constitutive

heterochromatin

Gene

B

Heterochromatin
with bound HP1

M3

M3

M3
HP1 recruits histone
deacetylase (HDAC)

M3

M3

M3
HDAC deacetylates
H3 lysine 9

M3

M3

M3

HP1 recruits Suv 39

Open, transcribed chromatin

A

A

Open, transcribed chromatin

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

M3

M3

M3
Suv 39 trimethylates
H3 lysine 9

M3

M3

M3

M3

M3

M3

Heterochromatin spreads over entire region

Gene off

M3

M3

M3

M3

M3

M3

M3

M3

FIGURE  8.7  POSITION  EFFECT  AND  THE  SPREADING  OF 
HETEROCHROMATIN. A, If a transcriptionally active gene is moved 
next to a region of heterochromatin, it may be repressed as the het-
erochromatin spreads. The relative position of the gene is shown on 
mitotic chromosomes as it would be determined by in situ hybridization 
(Fig. 8.10). B, Diagrammatic representation of stages in the spreading 
of heterochromatin and silencing of the active gene: removal of acetyl 
groups from the histones by a histone deacetylase; addition of two or 
three  methyl  groups  to  lysine  9  of  H3;  and  binding  of  HP1,  which 
recruits a DNA methyltransferase plus other heterochromatin proteins 
to create heterochromatin. A, acetylation; Me, methylation. 

neurodevelopmental  disorder  in  which  female  infants 
develop  apparently  normally  for  6  to  18  months,  but 
then regress, losing language and adopting stereotypical 
postures and movements. How the MeCP2 defects lead 
to Rett syndrome is not known.

Facultative heterochromatin consists of sequences 
that  are  in  heterochromatin  in  some  cell  types  and  in 
euchromatin  in  others.  X  chromosome  inactivation  is  

130 

SECTION III  n  Chromatin, Chromosomes, and the Cell Nucleus

the  classic  example  of  facultative  heterochromatin  in 
mammals.  In  females,  one  X  chromosome  in  each  cell 
(selected at random) is inactivated early in development 
prior to implantation of the embryo. The inactivated X 
chromosome forms a discrete patch of heterochromatin 
at the nuclear periphery known as the Barr body (Fig. 
8.6).  Because  most  genes  carried  on  the  inactivated  X 
chromosome  become  transcriptionally  silent,  females 
with  two  X  chromosomes  have  the  same  levels  of  X 
chromosome-linked  gene  expression  as  males  with  a 
single X chromosome.

Polycomb group proteins form facultative heterochro-
matin  by  modifying  histones.  They  were  identified  in 
Drosophila  as  mutants  in  which  particular  body  seg-
ments “forgot” their identity during development due to 
reactivation of the expression of several homeodomain 
transcription  factors  (see  Fig.  10.14).  Drosophila  poly-
comb chromatin apparently locks genes that have been 
switched  off  in  a  silent  epigenetic  state  that  is  stable 
through many generations of cell division.

Two PRCs (polycomb repressive complexes) regulate 
transcription.  The  PRC2  complex  initiates  silencing  by 
tri-methylating  histone  H3  on  lysine  27  (H3-K27me3). 
Then  chromodomain-containing  members  of  the  PRC1 
complex  bind  specifically  to  H3-K27me3  (note  the  dif-
ference  from  the  HP1  chromodomain,  which  READS 
H3-K9me3).  PRC1  contains  an  E3  ubiquitin  ligase  (see 
Fig.  23.3)  that  transfers  a  single  ubiquitin  molecule  to 
lysine 119 of histone H2A (H2A-K119ub). PRC1 binding 
also causes nucleosomes to form dense clumps that are 
resistant to remodeling and “opening” by ATP-dependent 
remodeling “machines.”

Polycomb group proteins also function in X chromo-
some inactivation, in stem cell maintenance, and possibly 
in cancer stem cells. In mammals, the inactive X chro-
mosome expresses a large (15 kb) noncoding RNA called 
XIST  that  associates  with  and  “coats”  the  inactive  X 
chromosome. Next, the PRC2 complex associates with 
the  inactive  X,  transiently  recruiting  PRC1,  which  pro-
duces  H2A-K119ub.  This,  together  with  low  levels  of 
histone  acetylation,  enrichment  for  the  H2A  variant 
macroH2A,  and  high  levels  of  CpG  methylation  in  
many  CpG  islands  combines  to  inhibit  transcription  of 
most genes.

Several polycomb group proteins are required for the 
self-renewal of blood and neural stem cells, and may also 
perform a similar function in cancer stem cells. In stem 
cells, polycomb group proteins regulate transcription of 
factors  that  control  the  cyclin-dependent  kinases  that 
drive cell-cycle progression (see Chapter 40). They may 
also  participate  in  the  DNA  damage  response  (see 
Chapter 43).

Imprinting: A Specialized Type of Gene Silencing
The  factors  that  produce  heterochromatin  are  also 
involved in a very specific type of gene silencing known 

as  imprinting.  An  imprinted  gene  is  stably  turned  off 
during  formation  of  the  egg  or  sperm.  For  example,  if 
the maternal copy of a gene is imprinted, then expres-
sion can come only from the corresponding homologous 
chromosome  contributed  by  the  father.  Currently, 
approximately 80 imprinted genes are known.

One  well-studied  imprinting  system  involves  the 
genes for insulin-like growth factor-2 (IGF2) and a non-
coding  RNA  H19  in  the  mouse  (Fig.  8.8).  The  DNA 
between  these  genes  has  an  insulator  element  with 
binding sites for the CCTC-binding factor CTCF. Binding 
of CTCF to the insulator differs, depending on whether 
the chromosome is derived from the egg or sperm. On 
the maternal chromosome, it allows the H19 gene to be 
expressed  but  turns  off  the  IGF2  gene  by  preventing 
access  to  a  transcriptional  enhancer.  On  chromosomes 
derived from the sperm, methylation of CpG sequences 
in  the  control  region  stops  CTCF  from  binding.  As  a 
result,  the  paternal  copy  of  IGF2  has  access  to  its 
enhancer  and  is  expressed,  but  the  H19  gene  is  not 
expressed. This simple switch ensures that the offspring 
expresses only the paternal copy of the IGF2 gene and 
the maternal copy of H19.

Higher-Order Structure of Chromosomes
Higher Levels of Chromosomal DNA Packaging in 
Interphase Nuclei
Levels  of  chromatin  structure  beyond  the  nucleosome 
are poorly understood. This lack of clarity arises in part 
because dense packing of macromolecules in the nucleus 
makes  it  difficult  to  observe  the  details  of  higher-level 
folding  of  chromatin  fibers  directly.  For  more  than  35 
years  the  accepted  dogma  was  that  the  next  level  of 
chromatin  compaction  beyond  the  10-nm  fiber  was  a 
solenoidal 30-nm fiber. Recent results, primarily using 
cryoelectron  microscopy,  now  strongly  question  the 
existence of the 30-nm fiber in vivo in most cells.

Visualization of specific DNA loci within fixed inter-
phase  nuclei  by  in  situ  hybridization  (introduced  in  
Fig. 8.10) can be used to estimate the degree of chroma-
tin  compaction  by  comparing  the  physical  distance 
between two DNA sequences with a known number of 
base  pairs  between  them.  For  regions  of  DNA  up  to 
approximately  250,000  base  pairs  apart,  the  chromatin 
fiber is shortened approximately 80- to 100-fold. When 
sequences are separated by tens of millions of base pairs, 
the shortening increases by another 20- to 30-fold. This 
suggests at least two levels of chromatin folding beyond 
the 10-nm fiber.

The organization of chromatin fibers can be observed 
by  superresolution  fluorescence  microscopy  of  living 
cells after labeling with a fluorescent marker, such as the 
jellyfish  green  fluorescent  protein  (GFP  [see  Fig.  6.3]) 
(Fig.  8.9).  Individual  nucleosomes  are  locally  dynamic, 
changing their packing and locations as cells traverse the 

 

CHAPTER 8  n  DNA Packaging in Chromatin and Chromosomes  

131

A. Maternal allele during
     oogenesis

B. Paternal allele during
     spermatogenesis

Enhancer

Enhancer

DNMT

M

DNMT M

CTCF

IGF2

ICR

H19

IGF2

M M

M ICR H19

CTCF binding creates boundary
  blocking the enhancer from
  accessing IGF2

CTCF can't bind methylated IRC and
  now the enhancer can reach IGF2

IGF2

ICR

H19

IGF2

M M

M ICR

H19

Enhancer

Enhancer instead activates
  the much closer H19 gene

CTCF

Methylation of the H19 promotor leaves
  it in a heterochromatin-
  like state

IGF2

ICR H19

IGF2

M

M

H19

M

M ICR

FIGURE  8.8 
IMPRINTING  OF  THE  INSULIN-LIKE  GROWTH  FACTOR-2  AND  H19  LOCI.  A,  During  oogenesis,  CTCF  binding  to  the 
imprinting control region (ICR) prevents methylation of the DNA. In the zygote, this methylated chromosome from the mother is bound by CTCF, 
which acts as an insulator, blocking the IGF2 (insulin-like growth factor-2) gene from gaining access to its enhancer. As a result, the maternal 
chromosome expresses H19 and not IGF2. B, During spermatogenesis, the ICR is methylated. In the zygote, the ICR on the chromosome derived 
from the father cannot bind CTCF. As a result, the IGF2 gene gains access to its enhancer and is expressed. The H19 gene is off. 

A

B

5 µm

Single nucleosomes (PALM)

Reconstruction from

~100,000 nucleosomes

FIGURE 8.9  SUPERRESOLUTION VISUALIZATION OF NUCLEO-
SOMES IN A LIVING HUMAN CELL. This experiment uses a clone 
of HeLa (Henrietta Lacks) cells expressing photoactivatable red fluo-
rescent protein (mCherry) linked to histone H2B. This form of red fluo-
rescent protein usually has almost no fluorescence, but some fractions 
become  highly  fluorescent  by  spontaneous  activation.  A,  When 
imaged  by  photoactivated  localization  microscopy  (PALM)  ultraviolet 
laser microbeam, individual nucleosomes can be observed. B, When 
an  image  corresponding  to  approximately  100,000  nucleosomes  is 
reconstructed,  the  nucleus  is  seen  to  be  organized  into  chromatin 
domains.  (Courtesy  K.  Maeshima,  National  Institute  of  Genetics, 
Japan.)

cell cycle. Some electron microscopy studies observed a 
fiber,  100  to  300 nm  in  diameter,  which  was  called  a 
chromonema fiber. In most studies, however, the chro-
matin appears to be relatively disordered.

Together  all  these  analyses  are  leading  to  a  view  of 
interphase  chromatin  as  composed  of  irregular  10-nm 
chromatin  fibers  that  are  organized  in  dynamic  loops. 
The 30-nm fibers and chromonema filaments may occur 
only under specialized conditions.

Large-Scale Structural Compartmentation 
of the Nucleus
Although  interphase  nuclei  lack  a  high  degree  of 
order,  a  number  of  general  organizational  principles 
are  recognized.  First,  individual  chromosomes  tend  to 
concentrate  within  discrete  territories  and  intermingle 
with one another only to a limited extent. This is seen 
most  clearly  in  human  somatic  cell  nuclei  when  indi-
vidual chromosomes are visualized by a special type of 
in  situ  hybridization  called  chromosome  painting  (Fig. 
8.10). The volume of territories occupied by individual 
chromosomes correlates with the proportion of actively 
transcribing  genes.  In  some  cases,  active  genes  are 

132 

A

SECTION III  n  Chromatin, Chromosomes, and the Cell Nucleus

B

Chromosomal DNA

Probe

5,000 bp

Probe

C

D

E

16

11

2

18

3

13

1

6

15

5

6

1

FIGURE 8.10  FLUORESCENCE IN SITU HYBRIDIZATION REVEALS THAT CHROMOSOMES OCCUPY DISCRETE TERRITORIES IN 
INTERPHASE NUCLEI. A, Chromosomes are spread on a slide as in Fig. 8.15. Following chemical fixation steps to preserve the chromosomal 
structure, the chromosomal proteins are removed by digestion with proteases and the genomic DNA strands are melted (separated) by heating. 
Next, a “probe DNA” (yellow) is added. This probe DNA is single-stranded so that it can base-pair (hybridize) to its complementary sequences 
in the chromosome. The probe DNA is chemically labeled with biotin. Next, the sites of hybridization on the chromosomes are detected with fluo-
rescently labeled avidin, a protein from egg white that binds to biotin with extremely high affinity. The sites of avidin-binding appear yellow, whereas 
the  remainder  of  the  chromosomal  DNA  is  counterstained  with  a  red  dye.  B,  The  micrograph  shows  fluorescence  in  situ  hybridization  (FISH) 
analysis using a probe from near the von Hippel–Lindau locus on chromosome 3. C, Metaphase chromosome labeled by FISH using chromosome 
paint probes (probes distributed all along the chromosome, excluding repetitive DNA). In this 24-color FISH image, every chromosome is marked 
with two or three fluorochromes (true color image). D, The same combinatorial probe was used in 24-color FISH on a fibroblast nucleus under 
conditions preserving the 3D architecture. Every chromosome forms distinct chromosome territory. E, Every chromosome territory of the same 
nuclear optical section as on B was identified and false-colored after classification. (B, Courtesy Jeanne Lawrence, University of Massachusetts, 
Worcester. C–E, Courtesy I. Solovei, A. Bolzer, and T. Cremer, University of Munich, LMU, Germany.)

located  well  outside  of  the  territories,  as  though  their 
activation  involved  looping  out  a  much  larger  domain 
from  the  remainder  of  the  chromosome.  These  move-
ments  during  gene  activation  may  involve  relocation 
from  compartments  where  transcription  is  relatively 
infrequent  to  compartments  where  transcription  is 
favored (Fig. 8.11C–D).

Silent  chromatin  tends  to  be  concentrated  near  the 
nuclear  periphery  in  a  wide  range  of  cell  types.  This 
supports  the  hypothesis  that  particular  chromosomal 
regions (eg lamina-associated domains near the nuclear 
lamina;  see  Chapter  9)  might  have  preferred  locations 
within  the  nucleus.  As  a  result,  chromosomes  that  are 
rich  in  actively  transcribed  genes  tend  to  be  localized 
toward the nuclear interior, while chromosomes with a  
lower  gene  content  tend  to  be  found  near  the  nuclear 
periphery (Fig. 8.11A–B).

These  positions  of  chromosomes  are  mostly  estab-
lished  by  where  chromosomes  are  located  during  the 
exit from the previous mitosis. Most movements of the 
chromatin during interphase are of 0.5 µm or less. These 
movements likely occur within topologically associating 

domains (TADs) (see the next section), while the chro-
mosomes overall remain relatively stationary.

Special Interphase Chromosomes With Clearly 
Resolved Loop Structures
Studies  of  specialized  chromosomes  from  organisms 
ranging from flies to mammals originally revealed a link 
between  chromatin  loops  and  regulated  gene  expres-
sion.  Loops  are  clearly  seen  in  lampbrush  chromo-
somes  during  meiotic  prophase  in  oocytes  of  many 
species  (Fig.  8.12A).  These  loops  are  sites  of  intense 
transcriptional activity as oocytes stockpile huge stores 
of the components needed for rapid cell divisions during 
early  development  of  the  fertilized  egg.  The  loops  are 
easily seen because the DNA is coated with many RNA 
transcripts,  together  with  proteins  that  package  and 
process them.

Similar loops are present in the giant polytene chro-
mosomes found in some tissues of  Drosophila larvae. 
Each polytene chromosome consists of more than 1000 
identical DNA molecules packed side-by-side in precise 
linear  register.  Polytene  chromosomes  have  a  complex 

C

D

 

A

Chromosome 1
Chromosome 20

B

CHAPTER 8  n  DNA Packaging in Chromatin and Chromosomes  

133

A

C

42

43

44

45

46

47

B

D

E

Puff

Puff

Chromosome territory 1
Chromosome territory 20

10 µm

FIGURE  8.11  CHROMOSOME  POSITION  IN  THE  NUCLEUS 
CORRELATES  WITH  TRANSCRIPTIONAL  ACTIVITY.  A,  Meta-
phase chromosome spread from a healthy donor with painted chro-
mosomes 1 (red) and 20 (green). B, The same paint probes were used 
in  fluorescence  in  situ  hybridization  (FISH)  experiments  on  three-
dimensionally preserved fibroblast nuclei (3D-FISH): they revealed two 
pairs of chromosome territories. Note the more central positioning of 
chromosome  20  territories  and  the  more  peripheral  positioning  of 
chromosome  1  territories.  C–D,  The  CD4  gene  (green)  is  located  in 
the nucleoplasm in cells where it is expressed (C) but is associated 
with  centromeric  heterochromatin  in  cells  where  it  is  silent  (D). 
(A–B,  Courtesy  I.  Solovei,  A.  Bolzer,  and  T.  Cremer,  University  of 
Munich,  LMU,  Germany.  C–D,  From  Lamond  AI,  Earnshaw  WC. 
Structure  and  function  in  the  nucleus.  Science.  1998;280:547–553; 
and Brown KE, Guest SS, Smale ST, et al. Association of transcription-
ally silent genes with Ikaros complexes at centromeric heterochromatin. 
Cell. 1997;91[6]:845–854.)

pattern of thousands of bands (Fig. 8.12B–D). Stress or 
stimulation  of  gene  expression  by  hormones  causes 
certain bands to lose their compact shape and puff out 
laterally. Each puff is composed of hundreds of identical, 
actively transcribed chromatin loop domains (Fig. 8.12E).

Chromatin Conformation Capture and 
Topologically Associating Domains
Powerful  insights  into  the  organization  of  chromatin 
fibers  in  somatic  cell  nuclei  have  followed  from  the 
development  of  a  technique  called  3C  (chromosome 

FIGURE 8.12  CHROMATIN LOOPS IN SPECIAL INTERPHASE 
CHROMOSOMES. A, Phase contrast view of the left end of meiotic 
lamp brush chromosome 6 from the newt Notophthalmus viridescens. 
B–D, Domain organization of polytene chromosomes. Once Drosophila 
larvae reach a certain developmental stage, most cells stop dividing, 
and  larval  growth  proceeds  via  an  increase  in  the  size  of  individual 
cells.  To  keep  the  protein  synthesis  machinery  of  these  huge  cells 
supplied with messenger RNA, DNA replication is uncoupled from cell 
division  so  that  ultimately,  the  cells  contain  many  times  the  normal 
complement of cellular DNA (ie, they are polyploid). In certain tissues, 
the  numerous  copies  of  the  chromosomes  are  maintained  in  strict 
alignment with respect to one another, making giant polytene chromo-
somes, the best known of which occur in the salivary gland. B, Giant 
polytene chromosomes are visible within isolated salivary gland nuclei. 
C,  A  portion  of  a  high-resolution  map  of  the  Drosophila  polytene 
chromosomes. D, Polytene chromosome showing puffs. The inset box 
shows an area analogous to that used in panel E. E, Electron micro-
graph  of  puff  showing  transcribing  DNA  loops.  These  loops  are 
covered with a “fuzz” corresponding to growing RNA chains coated 
with proteins. (A, From Roth MB, Gall JG. Monoclonal antibodies that 
recognize transcription unit proteins on newt lampbrush chromosomes. 
J  Cell  Biol.  1987;105:1047–1054.  B,  From  Robert  M.  Isolation  and 
manipulation of salivary gland nuclei and chromosomes. Methods Cell 
Biol.  1975;9:377–390.  C,  Courtesy  Margarete  Heck,  University  of 
Edinburgh, United Kingdom. D, From Andersson K, Mahr R, Bjorkroth 
B, et al. Rapid reformation of the thick chromosome fiber upon comple-
tion of RNA synthesis at the Balbiani ring genes in Chironomus tentans. 
Chromosoma.  1982;87:33–48.  E,  From  Lamb  MM,  Daneholt  B. 
Characterization  of  active  transcription  units  in  Balbiani  rings  of  Chi-
ronomus tentans. Cell. 1979;17:835–848.)

134 

SECTION III  n  Chromatin, Chromosomes, and the Cell Nucleus

A. Hi-C

Crosslink nucleus
digest with restriction
endonuclease

DNA “handcuffed” by
protein crosslinks

Biotin

Fill in ends with
biotin label

Ligate ends

Purify and shear
to break the DNA

B. Interpreting the Hi-C map
Regions along chromosome

10

0

0

l

i

R
e
g
o
n
s
 
a
o
n
g
 
c
h
r
o
m
o
s
o
m
e

10

0

0

7

10

10

TAD

TAD

C
A compartments

B compartments

Topologically
associated
domains
(TADs)

Loops

Pull down biotin to 
isolate and sequence
millions of biotinylated
junction fragments

Interpret the result

8

9

5

6

7

10

11 12

FIGURE 8.13  HI-C REVEALS CHROMATIN FOLDING PATTERNS IN NUCLEI. A, Diagram of important steps during the Hi-C procedure. 
B, Example of a Hi-C map with a diagram of how it is interpreted. The numbers along the axes are arbitrary and are supplied for demonstration 
purposes only. Each time two sequences are linked together, a red dot is inserted in the matrix. This map contains many millions of those dots. 
TADS are the square groupings of dark dots which indicate regions that are often linked together. C, Hi-C reveals the presence of both very 
long-range compartments and topologically associating domains (TADs) in chromosomes. (C, Modified from Dekker J, Marti-Renom MA, Mirny 
LA.  Exploring  the  three-dimensional  organization  of  genomes:  interpreting  chromatin  interaction  data.  Nat  Rev  Genet.  2013;14:390–403. 
Micrograph from Thoma F, Koller T. Influence of histone H1 on chromatin structure. Cell. 1977;12:101–107.)

conformation capture) and its many derivatives, includ-
ing Hi-C (Fig. 8.13A). In Hi-C, cells are treated with the 
fixative  formaldehyde,  which  nonspecifically  crosslinks 
proteins to the DNA. The idea is to “handcuff” together 
adjacent stretches of DNA. After cleaving the DNA with 
a  restriction  endonuclease,  the  ends  are  labeled  with  
a  biotinylated  nucleotide,  and  then  ligated  together.  
This links pieces of DNA that were captured together by 
the  crosslinking  procedure  and  were  therefore  physi-
cally  close  to  one  another  in  the  nucleus.  Importantly, 
these  sequences  may  be  very  far  apart  on  the  chromo-
somal  DNA  or  even  on  different  chromosomes!  The  
biotin-containing  DNAs  are  then  sequenced  by  high-
speed  parallel  methods  (Fig.  3.16),  yielding  several 
hundred  million  sequence  “reads”  that  generate  a  map 
(Fig. 8.13B) with an approximately 100-kb resolution of 
all  regions  of  chromosomes  that  are  close  to  other 
regions of chromosomes.

This analysis reveals two levels of chromatin organiza-
tion: TADs and compartments (Fig. 8.13C). A TAD is 
a region of the chromosome—usually spanning 100,000 
to  1,000,000  base  pairs—whose  DNA  sequences  are 
preferentially  captured  together,  presumably,  because 
they form a cluster of loops. The bands seen in polytene 

chromosomes correspond to TADs. A defining feature is 
that  sequences  in  two  adjacent  TADs  rarely  come  in 
contact  with  one  another  even  though  they  may  be 
closer  to  one  another  along  the  DNA  strand  than  two 
more distant sequences that are found within the same 
TAD. One current model is that TADs form because the 
DNA is looped locally by CTCF and the cohesin complex 
(see later).

Hi-C maps also show longer-range interactions known 
as compartments. They are thought to involve interac-
tions between many TADs, and may correspond to larger 
domains of euchromatin and heterochromatin.

The  protein  CTCF  (CCCTC  binding  factor)  marks 
approximately  75%  of  TAD  boundaries  at  binding  sites 
that  define  functional  elements  termed  insulators. 
These were originally identified as short DNA sequence 
elements  that  frequently  separate  regions  with  active 
and  inactive  genes.  For  example,  an  insulator  region 
containing CTCF and rich in H3 acetylated on K9 often 
separates an active gene cluster from an adjacent region 
of heterochromatin, Acetylation of H3 blocks methylation 
of H3-K9, thereby providing a barrier to the spreading of 
heterochromatin marked with H3-K9me3. CCTF binding 
in the insulator can physically block the DNA from being 

 

CHAPTER 8  n  DNA Packaging in Chromatin and Chromosomes  

135

methylated, providing another defense against the spread 
of heterochromatin. Other TAD boundaries correspond 
to housekeeping genes undergoing active transcription, 
or  to  the  presence  of  other  insulators  associated  with 
transfer RNA genes.

CTCF  can  recruit  a  ring  shaped  complex  called 
cohesin, which is a key architectural factor in chromo-
somes  (Fig.  8.18).  Cohesin  was  originally  identified, 
because  it  regulates  the  pairing  between  replicated  
DNA  molecules  (sister  chromatids)  when  cells  divide. 
However,  defects  in  the  cohesin  loading  machinery 
cause Cornelia de Lange syndrome, a group of develop-
mental disorders characterized by abnormalities in regu-
lation of gene expression but (surprisingly) no dramatic 
effects on sister chromatid segregation during mitosis. It 
later emerged that cohesin is associated with up to half 
of all actively transcribed genes.

In mammals, 50,000 to 70,000 CTCF binding sites have 
been  mapped,  most  of  which  are  actually  within  TADs. 
One  prominent  CTCF  binding  site  is  found  within  Alu 
SINES,  the  short  mobile  genetic  elements  that  comprise 
up to 15% of the human genome (see Chapter 7). Because 
CTCF  and  cohesin  are  thought  to  function  together  to 
bring regulatory elements together with genes, this asso-
ciation  with  a  mobile  DNA  element  has  been  suggested 
to be one factor that contributed to humans developing 
complex patterns of gene regulation.

In terms of function, it seems likely that clustering of 
loops in TADs may provide a mechanism to coordinate 
the  regulation  of  gene  expression  and,  possibly,  DNA 
replication.  Clusters  of  loops  have  been  suggested  to 
form  active  chromatin  hubs  associated  with  locus 
control regions, which are responsible for coordinating 
the expression of groups of genes.

Locus  control  regions  (LCRs)  were  identified, 
because they could influence the transcriptional activity 
of cloned DNA sequences in transgenic animals. When 
genes are introduced into cultured cells, they normally 
insert  at  random  into  the  chromosomes.  Expression  of 
such foreign transgenes depends on the site of insertion 
into  the  host  chromosome.  Transgenes  are  usually 
expressed when they insert into an active chromosomal 
domain but repressed when they insert into an inactive 
region. LCRs are DNA sequences that permit transgenes 
to  be  expressed  no  matter  where  they  insert  into  the 
chromosomes, suggesting that they create active chroma-
tin hubs independent of the surrounding chromosome.

LCRs typically consist of clusters of multiple short 150 
to 300 base pair regions that are rich in binding sites for 
transcriptional  regulators  (see  Chapter  9).  Experiments 
in which a single LCR drives the expression of a cluster 
of  several  genes  reveal  that  the  LCR  stimulates  the 
expression of only one gene at a time. Thus, LCRs appear 
to work by physically associating with a gene, forming 
a loop in the chromatin and establishing an active chro-
matin hub that turns on its expression. Because cohesin 

can encircle pairs of DNA strands, it is now thought that 
this complex may anchor these DNA loops.

Organization of Mitotic Chromosomes
When  cells  divide,  the  chromatin  is  dramatically  reor-
ganized, forming mitotic chromosomes that can be seg-
regated  efficiently  to  daughter  cells.  The  formation  of 
mitotic  chromosomes  involves  two  steps;  compaction  
of the chromatin roughly threefold and organization of 
each sister chromatid (the replicated DNA molecule and 
proteins that package it) into a robust structure that can 
move as a unit when cells divide.

It  is  still  not  known  how  the  chromatin  fiber  is  
organized in mitotic chromosomes. Classic hierarchical 
coiling models suggested that the 30-nm chromatin fiber 
coils on itself, reaching larger and larger diameters and 
higher degrees of compaction. The 30-nm fiber is now 
largely disbelieved, but high-resolution Hi-C data reveal 
that  chromatin  fiber  coiling  is  an  important  feature  of 
mitotic chromosome formation.

Hi-C technology also reveals that TADs disappear from 
chromosomes as cells enter mitosis and are replaced by 
a  more-or-less  uniform  distribution  of  approximately 
80,000 to 120,000 base pair loops. A variety of microscopy 
experiments  had  previously  suggested  that  chromatin 
loops  containing  15,000  to  100,000  base  pairs  provide 
the structural basis for large scale chromatin compaction 
in  mitotic  chromosomes.  These  loops  radiate  outward 
from the central chromatid axis and can be seen when 
metaphase  chromosomes  are  swelled  in  hypotonic  
solutions (Fig. 8.14C).

We favor a model proposing that mitotic chromosome 
formation involves both hierarchical coiling and looping 
of the chromatin fiber. During this process, key proteins 
become  concentrated  along  the  axial  regions  of  the 
condensing chromosome arms and stabilize the overall 
structure  (Fig.  8.14A).  The  mechanism  of  chromatin 
folding in mitotic chromosomes remains an area of active 
investigation and controversy.

Although  much  less  ordered  than  polytene  chromo-
somes, the arms of typical diploid mitotic chromosomes 
nonetheless have a more-or-less reproducible substructure. 
If  mammalian  chromosomes  from  the  early  (prometa-
phase) stage of mitosis are subjected to a staining proce-
dure  called  G-banding,  up  to  2000  discrete  bands  are 
observed (Fig. 8.15). Although the structural basis for the 
bands is not known, the pattern is highly reproducible. 
Dark  G-bands  tend  to  be  gene-poor  regions  relatively 
enriched  for  DNA  with  a  low  A : T  content  and  rich  in 
long interspersed nuclear elements (see Fig. 7.5). They 
tend to replicate later in S phase than light G-bands (also 
called R, or reverse, bands). Cytogeneticists used these 
highly reproducible banding patterns for many years to 
identify individual human chromosomes.

The  quasi-reproducible  higher-order  structure  of 
mitotic  chromosomes  is  also  seen  when  specific  DNA 

136 

SECTION III  n  Chromatin, Chromosomes, and the Cell Nucleus

A. Chromosome packaging

B. DNA loops (chromatin proteins removed)

Extracted metaphase
chromatid

Chromosome scaffold
components

Coiled chromonema fiber
(chromatid) at metaphase

Chromosome scaffold
components

100-nm chromonema
fiber at prophase

Loop chromatin

C. Chromatin loops

DNA

Nucleosomes

FIGURE 8.14  CURRENT MODEL OF MITOTIC CHROMOSOME STRUCTURE. A, Filament of nucleosomes, chromatin looping, clustering 
of  chromatin  loops  into  coiled  fiber.  Nonhistone  proteins  complexes  (blue  dots)  bind  and  end  up  concentrated  along  the  central  axis  of  the 
chromatid arm. Crosslinks between these complexes create the chromosome scaffold. When chromosomes are swollen or extracted, the scaffold 
remains compact, and loops of chromatin or DNA radiate out from it. B, DNA loops seen in a human mitotic chromosome from which the histones 
had  been  removed.  C,  Human  chromosome  showing  loop  domains.  (B,  From  Paulson  JR,  Laemmli  UK.  The  structure  of  histone-depleted 
chromosomes. Cell. 1977;12:817–828. C, Courtesy William C. Earnshaw.)

sequences  marked  by  in  situ  hybridization  appear  as 
pairs  of  spots  on  the  sister  chromatids  (Fig.  8.10).  The 
two spots are distributed approximately symmetrically, 
indicating  that  the  chromatin  fiber  is  folded  similarly, 
though not identically, in both chromatids.

Role of Nonhistone Proteins in  
Chromosome Architecture
Mitotic  chromosomes  are  composed  of  roughly  equal 
masses  of  DNA,  histones,  and  nonhistone  proteins. 
Early  evidence  suggesting  that  nonhistone  proteins 
might contribute to mitotic chromosome structure came 
from experiments in which chromosomes were treated 
with  nucleases  to  digest  the  DNA  and  extracted  to 

remove  most  chromosomal  proteins,  including  essen-
tially  all  the  histones.  The  surviving  remnant  of  the 
chromosome  contained  approximately  5%  of  the  pro-
teins and less than 0.1% of the DNA, but still looked like 
a chromosome (Fig. 8.16). If the DNA was not digested, 
loops of DNA protruded from the protein (Fig. 8.14B). 
The protein remnant was called the chromosome scaf-
fold because it looked like a structural backbone for the 
chromosome.  Indeed,  chromosome  scaffold  prepara-
tions contain several proteins with essential roles in the 
structure and maintenance of mitotic chromosomes.

If isolated nuclei are subjected to the procedures used 
to isolate mitotic chromosome scaffolds, a residual struc-
ture is also obtained. This has been termed the nuclear 

 

A

Mitotic 
cell with 
chromosomes

B

C

Late prophase

3

2
1
1

2

3

p

q

4

Mid-metaphase

Early metaphase

Mid-metaphase

Late prophase

FIGURE  8.15  CHROMOSOME  BANDING  REVEALS  A 
COMPLEX  AND  REPRODUCIBLE  MULTIDOMAIN  SUBSTRUC-
TURE  OF  MITOTIC  CHROMOSOME  ARMS.  A,  Mitotic  cells  in  a 
hypotonic  medium  are  dropped  onto  a  slide  to  spread  the  chromo-
somes. In G-banding, chromosomes are given harsh treatments, such 
as  exposure  to  concentrated  sodium  hydroxide,  proteases,  or  high 
temperatures,  and  then  stained  with  Giemsa  dye.  The  chromosome 
arms  then  exhibit  a  characteristic  pattern  of  light  and  dark  bands.  
B, Photographs of G-banded human chromosome 2 from cells in late 
prophase,  early  metaphase,  and  mid-metaphase.  Several  examples 
are shown for each stage, illustrating the reproducibility of the banding 
patterns. C, Diagram summarizing the metaphase and prophase pat-
terns.  Because  G-banding  patterns  are  reproducible,  this  technique 
provides  a  way  to  identify  individual  chromosomes  unambiguously. 
This was a major factor in the development of the field of cytogenetics, 
which  is  the  study  of  the  correlation  between  the  structure  of  the 
chromosomes  and  genetics.  (B–C,  Modified  from  Yunis  JJ,  Sawyer 
JR, Ball DW. The characterization of high-resolution G-banded chro-
mosomes of man. Chromosoma. 1978;67:293–307.)

matrix or nucleoskeleton. Although the existence and 
function of a nuclear matrix in vivo remains controver-
sial,  some  components  of  the  mitotic  chromosome 
scaffold  (eg,  cohesin  and  condensin;  discussed  here) 
have  roles  in  organizing  chromosome  territories  and 

CHAPTER 8  n  DNA Packaging in Chromatin and Chromosomes  

137

chromatin  loops.  For  example,  cohesin  and  CTCF  are 
thought to have important roles in organizing the archi-
tecture of interphase chromatin into TADs.

Members  of  the  SMC  protein  family  have  several 
important  roles  in  chromosome  dynamics.  The  name 
derives from their roles in the structural maintenance of 
chromosomes.  SMC  proteins  are  components  of  multi-
protein  complexes,  such  as  condensin  and  cohesin, 
that are essential for mitotic chromosome architecture, 
the  regulation  of  sister  chromatid  pairing,  DNA  repair 
and replication, and the regulation of gene expression.

The two condensin complexes are composed of two 
SMC proteins (SMC2 and SMC4), plus two sets of three 
auxiliary subunits. Each SMC polypeptide folds back on 
itself at a hinge region to form a long antiparallel coiled-
coil.  This  brings  together  two  globular  domains  from 
either  end  of  the  molecule,  each  with  half  of  an  ATP-
binding  site  (Figs.  8.17  and  8.18).  ATP  binding  causes 
the two globular domains to associate with one another. 
This association is then reinforced by binding of a strap-
like  kleisin  (from  the  Greek  for  closure)  subunit.  The 
other  auxiliary  subunits  bind  to  the  kleisin  and  appear 
to regulate association of the complex with DNA. Con-
densin I and condensin II are thought to regulate distinct 
aspects of mitotic chromosome architecture.

Condensin  has  a  complex  role  in  establishing  the 
architecture of mitotic chromosomes. Condensin I regu-
lates  the  timing  of  chromosome  condensation  and  has 
an  essential  role  in  changing  the  genome  organization 
from TADs to a brush-like array of loops as chromosomes 
form  during  entry  of  cells  into  mitosis.  Condensin  II 
apparently  drives  the  compaction  of  the  chromosome 
loops along the sister chromatid axes.

The cell-cycle kinase Cdk1:cyclin B (see Chapter 40) 
regulates  condensin  binding  to  chromosomes  by  phos-
phorylation of an auxiliary subunit. During mitosis con-
densin 
is  concentrated  along  the  central  axis  of 
chromosome  arms.  When  condensin  binds  to  naked 
DNA in a test tube, it can use the energy of ATP hydro-
lysis  to  supercoil  the  DNA.  The  cellular  role  of  this 
activity is unknown, but it may contribute to changing 
the conformation of chromatin loops. When condensin 
is  depleted,  mitotic  chromatin  condenses  (apparently 
driven  by  changes  in  histone  modifications),  but  the 
resulting  chromosomes  are  fragile  and  appear  disorga-
nized if condensin depletion is rapid and complete.

Cohesin  is  the  second  major  SMC-containing  pro-
tein  complex  of  interphase  and  mitotic  chromosomes. 
Cohesin  is  a  tetramer  containing  SMC1  and  SMC3  plus 
two auxiliary subunits. Cleavage of the kleisin Scc1, by 
a protease called separase initiates sister chromatid sepa-
ration in mitotic anaphase (see Fig. 44.16). Cohesin, like 
condensin,  is  a  ring-like  molecule  (Fig.  8.18).  How 
cohesin  holds  the  two  sister  chromatids  together  is  
still  debated,  although  it  is  generally  thought  to  physi-
cally  encircle  two  sister  DNA  molecules.  Cohesin 

138 

A

SECTION III  n  Chromatin, Chromosomes, and the Cell Nucleus

B

C
h
r
o
m
o
s
o
m
e
s

Topoisomerase II
Condensin

Micrococcal

nuclease
2M NaCl
extraction

l

S
o
u
b
e

l

 

t

p
r
o
e
n
s

i

C. Scaffold

s
c
a

f
f

l

o
d
s

C
h
r
o
m
o
s
o
m
e

Mitotic cells

Isolated

chromosomes

Insoluble proteins =

chromosome scaffolds

FIGURE 8.16 
ISOLATION OF MITOTIC CHROMOSOME SCAFFOLDS REVEALS IMPORTANT STRUCTURAL PROTEINS. A, Diagram 
of the procedure used to isolate mitotic chromosomes. B, Sodium dodecylsulfate polyacrylamide gel showing proteins of isolated chromosomes, 
proteins extracted during scaffold isolation, and proteins of isolated scaffolds. C, Chromosome scaffold centrifuged onto a thin carbon film and 
rotary-shadowed with Pt : Pd (platinum : palladium). The  structure, which is approximately 95%  protein, retains the overall shape of  the mitotic 
chromosome. (B–C, Courtesy William C. Earnshaw.)

A

Add purified
nuclei

B

n
o

i
t

l

k
c
o
M

e
p
e
d

e

t

l

e
p
m
o
C

n
o

i
t

l

e
p
e
d

E. Distribution of condensin SMC2
     subunit in mitotic chromosomes

Deplete

condensin complex

with antibody

Xenopus mitotic
egg extract

Add purified
nuclei

C

Smc4
CAP-D2
Smc2
CAP-G

Add back purified
condensin

15 µm

D

Chromosome
condensation

No chromosome

condensation

Restored

chromosome
condensation

5 µm

FIGURE 8.17 
IDENTIFICATION OF THE CONDENSIN COMPLEX. A, Experimental protocol showing that condensin is required for mitotic 
chromosome  condensation  in  vitro.  B,  Sodium  dodecylsulfate  (SDS)  polyacrylamide  gel  reveals  the  members  of  the  condensin  complex  and 
demonstrates that they can be depleted from egg extract using a specific antibody. C–D, Chromatin lacking condensin does not form mitotic 
chromosomes in vitro, and this is restored by adding back condensin. E, Immunofluorescence micrograph showing the distribution of condensin 
subunit SMC2 on mitotic chromosomes of the chicken. The tiny chromosomes, called microchromosomes, are normal bird microchromosomes. 
(A–D, From Hirano T, Kobayashi R, Hirano M. Condensins, chromosome condensation protein complexes containing XCAP-C, XCAP-E and a 
Xenopus homolog of the Drosophila Barren protein. Cell. 1997;89:511–521. D, Micrograph courtesy William C. Earnshaw.)

assembles on chromosomes during DNA replication and 
is  recruited  to  regions  of  heterochromatin  by  HP1. 
Recent  evidence  also  suggests  that  cohesin  also  has  an 
important  role  in  regulating  gene  expression  during 
interphase, possibly by stabilizing chromatin loops that 
assemble active chromatin hubs. CTCF can bind cohesin, 
and  the  two  proteins  are  found  at  most  boundaries 

between  TADs  (though  there  are  many  more  binding 
sites for the two proteins within TADs).

DNA topoisomerase IIα, an enzyme that alters DNA 
topology  by  passing  one  double-helix  strand  through 
another,  is  a  very  abundant  component  of  mitotic  
chromosomes. In mitosis, topoisomerase IIα is concen-
trated  at  centromeres  and  in  axial  regions  along  the 

 

A

Hinge

CHAPTER 8  n  DNA Packaging in Chromatin and Chromosomes  

139

D. Cohesin

Hinge

E. Condensin I

C

Separase
cleavage
180

Separase
cleavage
268

3
c
m
S

1
c
m
S

N-term
Scc1

B

Hinge

N

Smc2

C
Smc4

Smc2

Smc4

C-term

Scc1

3
c
m
S

1
c
m
S

SA1

SA2

Pds5

2
c
m
S

4
c
m
S

CAP-H

CAP-G

CAP-D2

FIGURE 8.18  CONDENSIN AND COHESIN COMPLEXES. A–B, Model of the isolated dimer of SMC2 and SMC4 from condensin. Chemical 
crosslinks between SMC2 and SMC4 used to constrain the modeling are shown in red. Colored spheres represent lysines involved in crosslinks. 
B, Structure of a portion of the cohesin complex showing the paired heads with a bound fragment of the Scc1 kleisin. C–D, Subunit composition 
and structural organization of the cohesin and condensin complexes. (B, From Gligoris TG, Scheinost JC, Bürmann F, et al. Closing the cohesin 
ring: structure and function of its Smc3-kleisin interface. Science. 2014;346:963–967.)

chromosome  arms.  Topoisomerase  IIα  is  very  dynamic 
in vivo, moving on and off chromosomes in a time frame 
of  seconds.  Mitotic  chromosomes  from  cells  lacking 
topoisomerase  II  are  long  and  thin,  and  the  protein  is 
thought to have a role in untangling the DNA as the loops 
condense  along  the  chromosome  axis  during  chromo-
some  formation.  Topoisomerase  II  is  also  required  for 
replicated sister chromatids to separate from one another 
during mitotic anaphase. Presumably, the enzyme sepa-
rates  tangles  and  intertwinings  of  DNA  created  during 
DNA replication.

Remarkably, of the more than 4000 proteins found in 
mitotic chromosomes, only the histones, and fewer than 
20  nonhistone  proteins  are  known  to  have  a  role  in 
mitotic chromosome formation. This does not count the 
more  than  100  proteins  that  are  required  to  form  the 
kinetochores, which direct chromosomal movements in 
mitosis.

The Chromosome’s Control Center:  
The Kinetochore
The  centromere  is  the  genetic  locus  that  specifies  the 
site where a kinetochore assembles on the chromosomal 
DNA molecule. The kinetochore is a button-like struc-
ture embedded in the surface of the centromeric chro-
matin  of  most  eukaryotic  mitotic  chromosomes  (Fig. 
8.19). When thin sections of centromeres are examined 
by electron microscopy, the kinetochore often appears 
to have several layers. The inner kinetochore is embed-
ded  in  the  surface  of  the  centromere  and  is  composed 
of a specialized form of chromatin. The outer kineto-
chore consists of an outer plate with a fibrous corona 
on  its  outer  surface.  It  is  constructed  from  protein 

A

Kinetochore

Inner plate
(kinetochore
assembly and

stability?)

Microtubules

Outer plate
(microtubule

binding)

B

C

Corona
(motors)

FIGURE 8.19  KINETOCHORE STRUCTURE. A, Diagram of the 
major layers of the kinetochore. B, Thin-section electron micrograph 
of  a  kinetochore  with  attached  microtubules.  C,  Thin-section  micro-
graph  of  an  unattached  kinetochore.  (B,  Courtesy  J.B.  Rattner, 
University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada. C, Courtesy Rebecca L. Bernat 
and William C. Earnshaw.)

complexes  that  link  the  chromatin  to  microtubules  of 
the mitotic spindle.

During interphase, the kinetochore persists as a con-
densed  ball  of  heterochromatin  that  resembles  other 
areas  of  condensed  chromatin  within  the  nucleus.  The 
distinct multilayered kinetochore structure forms on the 
surface of the centromere during an early stage of mitosis 
called  prophase  (see  Chapter  44),  reaching  its  mature 
state  following  nuclear  envelope  breakdown  when  the 
chromosome  comes  into  contact  with  microtubules  at 
the onset of mitotic prometaphase.

140 

SECTION III  n  Chromatin, Chromosomes, and the Cell Nucleus

Chapter  7  describes  the  three  types  of  centromeres 
known  in  eukaryotes  (see  Fig.  7.9).  Point  centromeres 
found  in  budding  yeasts  assemble  kinetochores  on 
defined  DNA  sequences  and  do  not  require  epigenetic 
activation  to  function.  They  bind  one  microtubule. 
Regional centromeres, found in organisms ranging from 
fission  yeast  to  humans,  are  based  on  preferred  DNA 
sequences but require epigenetic activation to function. 
They bind two to 20 or more microtubules. In holocen-
tromeres, as found in Caenorhabditis elegans and many 
plants  and  insects,  the  microtubules  (roughly  20  in  C. 
elegans)  bind  all  along  the  poleward-facing  surface  of 
the mitotic chromosome. Given this diversity of centro-
meres, it is remarkable that the proteins responsible for 
kinetochore  assembly  and  function  are  well  conserved 
across evolution.

Mammalian Kinetochore Proteins
The first three specific kinetochore proteins identified in 
any  species  were  discovered 
in  humans  using  
autoantibodies  present  in  the  sera  of  patients  with 

rheumatic disease (Fig. 8.20). These proteins, designated 
CENP-A (centromere protein), CENP-B, and CENP-C, are 
conserved from humans to yeasts. They are part of the 
16-protein  constitutive  centromere-associated  network, 
which is composed of proteins that remain bound to the 
inner kinetochore throughout the cell cycle. The inner 
kinetochore  chromatin  is  based  on  specialized  nucleo-
somes with the histone H3 variant CENP-A (Fig. 8.21). 
How CENP-A targets the DNA to assemble kinetochore-
specific  nucleosomes  is  unknown,  but  some  factors 
include  a  specialized  chaperone,  histone  modifications 
and  specialized  RNA  transcription,  which,  remarkably, 
occurs during mitosis.

CENP-B binds specifically to a 17–base pair sequence 
(the CENP-B box) in α-satellite centromere DNA (see Fig. 
7.9) and is required for efficient kinetochore assembly, 
but the mechanistic details are unknown. CENP-B prob-
ably originated as the enzyme responsible for movement 
of an ancient transposon.

CENP-C and CENP-T (identified much later) are essen-
tial DNA-binding proteins that bridge between the inner 
chromatin  and  outer  microtubule-binding  components 

A. Scleroderma patient

C

B

Serum from  
patient

D. Immunoblot with
     autoimmune serum

CENP-C
• Links the outer and 
  inner kinetochore
• Binds CENP-A and 
  Mis12 complex

CENP-B
• Binds centromere 
  DNA sequence
• Promotes efficient 
  kinetochore assembly

CENP-A
• Centromeric histone 
  H3 variant
• Marks site of 
  kinetochore assembly

FIGURE 8.20  SOME PATIENTS WITH SCLERODERMA HAVE AUTOANTIBODIES THAT RECOGNIZE CENTROMERIC PROTEINS. 
Scleroderma (“hard skin”) is a serious connective tissue disease associated with excessive deposition of collagen in the skin and walls of blood 
vessels. Note the “purse string” appearance of the skin surrounding the mouth of this patient (A). When serum from a patient with anticentromere 
antibodies is added to chromosomes on a slide (B) and bound antibodies are detected with a fluorescent probe, the centromeric regions of the 
chromosomes “light up” (C). Anticentromere antibodies are useful to identify patients who are at risk for serious autoimmune disease. Up to 20% 
of the population has a mild condition—Raynaud phenomenon (hypersensitivity of the skin to cold)—that is very rarely a precursor to scleroderma. 
Sensitive assays for anticentromere antibodies revealed that patients with Raynaud phenomenon who also have these autoantibodies have an 
increased risk of progression to scleroderma. D, Centromere proteins (CENPs) detected with anticentromere antibodies from a scleroderma patient 
on an immunoblot following sodium dodecylsulfate gel electrophoresis of chromosomal proteins. (A, From Dana R. Scleroderma. In: Albert DM, 
ed. Albert & Jakobiec’s Principles & Practice of Ophthalmology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2008. C–D, Courtesy William C. Earnshaw.)

 

CHAPTER 8  n  DNA Packaging in Chromatin and Chromosomes  

141

of the kinetochore (Fig. 8.21). It has been suggested that 
the CENP-C link is primarily involved in enabling chro-
mosome movements, whereas the CENP-T linkage may 
monitor the status of kinetochore attachment.

The  best-characterized  component  of  the  outer 
kinetochore complex is the NDC80 complex—an elon-
gated  rod  with  globular  ends  linked  by  central  coiled-
coils.  One  end  of  this  complex  binds  to  microtubules. 
Some  copies  of  the  NDC80  complex  form  a  network 
with six other components that is thought to be the main 
mechanical  link  between  chromosomes  and  microtu-
bules. Both CENP-C and CENP-T independently link the 
inner chromatin to this outer NDC80-associated network. 
One  protein  from  the  NDC80  network  also  recruits  to 
kinetochores  the  signaling  components  of  the  mitotic 
checkpoint  pathway  that  regulates  progression  of  the 
cell through mitosis without errors (see Fig. 44.11).

CENP-T/W

KNL1

Ndc80 complex

Microtubule

CENP-C

CCAN

Mis12
complex
CENP-A

nucleosome

Outer kinetochore assembles only in mitosis
Links kinetochore to microtubules

Inner kinetochore
Associates with centromere chromatin across whole cell cycle

FIGURE 8.21  HYPOTHETICAL MODEL FOR THE ORGANIZA-
TION OF THE VERTEBRATE KINETOCHORE. Protein complexes 
discussed in the text are indicated. 

Centromere Proteins of the Budding Yeast
The  best-characterized  kinetochores  come  from  bud-
ding  yeast.  Yeast  kinetochores  have  been  isolated  and  
subjected  to  both  biochemical  and  biophysical  charac-
terization (Fig. 8.22). More than 65 kinetochore-associated 
proteins assemble a structure at least the size and com-
plexity of a ribosome.

Specific centromere DNA-binding factors (CBF) recog-
nize the DNA sequences (CDE I and CDE III) that specify 
the  point  centromere  (see  Fig.  7.7)  and  wrap  around  
a  specialized  nucleosome  containing  a  centromere-
specific histone H3 variant related to CENP-A (Fig. 8.22). 
A  stretch  of  A : T-rich  DNA  called  CDE  II  completes  
one  turn  around  this  nucleosome,  juxtaposing  the  
flanking  CDE  I  and  CDE  III  elements  and  their  associ-
ated proteins.

Several large complexes bind to this nucleosome/CBF 
platform  (Fig.  8.22).  Although  the  CBF  proteins  are 
unique to yeast, the other complexes are all conserved 
from yeast to humans. These include the NDC80 complex 
(which was first identified by yeast genetics). The NDC80 
complex binds to a ring made by the 10-subunit Dam1 
complex  that  encircles  the  microtubule.  This  may  
help  the  kinetochore  hold  onto  microtubules  that  are 
shrinking  as  the  chromosome  moves  poleward  during 
anaphase.  The  Dam1  complex  is  poorly  conserved 
during evolution, although a possible vertebrate counter-
part has been identified.

Role of RNA Interference at Fission  
Yeast Centromeres
The  fission  yeast  Schizosaccharomyces  pombe  has 
the  simplest  well-characterized  regional  centromere.  
It  assembles  a  kinetochore  that  binds  two  to  four 

A

Ndc80 complex

B

Spc105

Cse4
nucleosome

COMA

Mif2

CBF3

MIND

Dam1
complex

Microtubule

KMN

100 nm 

100 nm 

FIGURE 8.22  MODEL FOR THE ORGANIZATION OF THE BUDDING YEAST KINETOCHORE AND MICROGRAPH OF AN ISOLATED 
KINETOCHORE. A, Hypothetical diagram of budding yeast kinetochore (for discussion of the yeast centromere DNA, see Chapter 7). B, Electron 
micrograph of a budding yeast kinetochore attached to a microtubule. (B, From Gonen S, Akiyoshi B, Iadanza MG, et al. The structure of purified 
kinetochores reveals multiple microtubule-attachment sites. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2012;19:925–929.)

142 

SECTION III  n  Chromatin, Chromosomes, and the Cell Nucleus

microtubules.  Fission  yeast  have  orthologs  of  all  the 
proteins  and  protein  complexes  described  here.  The 
fission yeast centromere provides insights into the forma-
tion  of  centromeric  heterochromatin.  The  “silent” 
repeated DNA in the S. pombe centromere is transcribed 
from  both  DNA  strands,  yielding  short  double-stranded 
RNAs  that  are  processed  by  the  RNAi  machinery.  This 
RNAi  response  is  part  of  the  pathway  for  assembly  of 
centromeric  heterochromatin  (see  Fig.  11.14).  A  wide 
range of S. pombe mutants affecting the RNAi machinery 
all  compromise  centromere  function  and  mitotic  chro-
mosome segregation.

Whether  RNAi  is  also  essential  for  centromere  func-
tion in metazoans has been more difficult to determine, 
as genetic analysis is complicated by multiple redundan-
cies in the genes encoding the RNAi machinery. However, 
careful  analysis  reveals  that  centromeric  satellite  DNAs 
are  indeed  transcribed.  Remarkably,  this  transcription 
occurs  during  mitosis,  and  is  the  only  transcription 
known to occur during that cell-cycle phase. The special-
ized  regulation  that  enables  mitotic  centromere  tran-
scription  is  unknown,  as  is  whether  the  transcripts 
participate  in  a  functional  RNAi  pathway  like  that 
observed in yeast.

Conclusions
Ironically,  just  as  the  sequence  of  the  euchromatic 
portion of the human genome was completed, a shift in 
our understanding revealed that essential aspects of the 
control  of  gene  activity  and  chromosome  structure 
cannot  be  revealed  by  analysis  of  the  DNA  sequence 
alone,  as  these  regulatory  processes  are  “encoded”  in 
transient epigenetic modifications of DNA and histones. 
Understanding  the  extraordinarily  elaborate  epigenetic 
code has only just begun, so watch this space for further 
exciting developments.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Julie Ahringer, Wendy Bickmore, Job Dekker, 
Margarete  Heck,  Kazuhiro  Maeshima,  and  Tom  Owen-
Hughes for their suggestions on revisions to this chapter.

SELECTED READINGS

Allshire  RC,  Ekwall  K.  Epigenetic  regulation  of  chromatin  states  in 
Schizosaccharomyces  pombe.  Cold  Spring  Harb  Perspect  Biol. 
2015;7:a018770.

Bannister AJ, Kouzarides T. Regulation of chromatin by histone modi-

fications. Cell Res. 2011;21:381-395.

Belmont AS. Large-scale chromatin organization: the good, the surpris-

ing, and the still perplexing. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2014;26:69-78.

Bickmore WA. The spatial organization of the human genome. Annu 

Rev Genomics Hum Genet. 2013;14:67-84.

Biggins S. The composition, functions, and regulation of the budding 

yeast kinetochore. Genetics. 2013;194:817-846.

Chaligné R, Heard E. X-chromosome inactivation in development and 

cancer. FEBS Lett. 2014;588:2514-2522.

de Graaf CA, van Steensel B. Chromatin organization: form to function. 

Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2013;23:185-190.

Fukagawa T, Earnshaw WC. The centromere: chromatin foundation for 

the kinetochore machinery. Dev Cell. 2014;30:496-508.

Gibcus  JH,  Dekker  J.  The  hierarchy  of  the  3D  genome.  Mol  Cell. 

2013;49:773-782.

Huang H, Sabari BR, Garcia BA, et al. SnapShot: histone modifications. 

Cell. 2014;159:458-458.e1.

Hudson  DF,  Marshall  KM,  Earnshaw  WC.  Condensin:  architect  of 

mitotic chromosomes. Chromosome Res. 2009;17:131-144.

Jeppsson K, Kanno T, Shirahige K, et al. The maintenance of chromo-
some structure: positioning and functioning of SMC complexes. Nat 
Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2014;15:601-614.

Maze I, Noh KM, Soshnev AA, et al. Every amino acid matters: essential 
contributions  of  histone  variants  to  mammalian  development  and 
disease. Nat Rev Genet. 2014;15:259-271.

Merkenschlager M, Odom DT. CTCF and cohesin: linking gene regula-

tory elements with their targets. Cell. 2013;152:1285-1297.

Narlikar  GJ,  Sundaramoorthy  R,  Owen-Hughes  T.  Mechanisms  and 
functions  of  ATP-dependent  chromatin-remodeling  enzymes.  Cell. 
2013;154:490-503.

Pombo  A,  Dillon  N.  Three-dimensional  genome  architecture:  players 

and mechanisms. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2015;16:245-257.

Simon JA, Kingston RE. Occupying chromatin: polycomb mechanisms 
for getting to genomic targets, stopping transcriptional traffic, and 
staying put. Mol Cell. 2013;49:808-824.

Takeuchi K, Fukagawa T. Molecular architecture of vertebrate kineto-

chores. Exp Cell Res. 2012;318:1367-1374.

Thadani R, Uhlmann F, Heeger S. Condensin, chromatin crossbarring 

and chromosome condensation. Curr Biol. 2012;22:R1012-R1021.
Westhorpe  FG,  Straight  AF.  Functions  of  the  centromere  and  kineto-
chore  in  chromosome  segregation.  Curr  Opin  Cell  Biol.  2013;25:
334-340.

Zhang T, Cooper S, Brockdorff N. The interplay of histone modifications-

writers that read. EMBO Rep. 2015;16:1467-1481.

C H A P T E R 

9 

Nuclear Structure and Dynamics

The  nucleus  houses  the  chromosomes  together  with 

the  machinery  for  DNA  replication  and  RNA  transcrip-
tion and processing (Fig. 9.1). Immature RNAs must be 
kept  apart  from  the  translational  apparatus  because 
eukaryotic  genes  are  transcribed  into  RNAs  containing 
noncoding  intervening  sequences  that  are  removed  by 
splicing  to  assemble  mature  RNA  molecules  with  a 
continuous open reading frame. Sequestration of imma-
ture RNAs is one function of the nuclear envelope, two 
concentric membrane bilayers that separate the nucleus 
and  cytoplasm.  The  nuclear  envelope  also  regulates  
the  bidirectional  transport  of  macromolecules  in  and  
out  of  the  nucleus,  participates  in  chemical,  protein  
and  mechanical  signaling  pathways,  contributes  to 
genome organization, and provides mechanical stability 
to the nucleus.

Nuclear
Nuclear
envelope
envelope

Nuclear
Nuclear
pores
pores

Nucleolus
Nucleolus

Heterochromatin
Heterochromatin

FIGURE 9.1  ELECTRON MICROGRAPH OF A THIN SECTION 
OF  A  CANCER  CELL  NUCLEUS  WITH  MAJOR  FEATURES 
LABELED. (Courtesy Scott Kaufmann, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.)

This  chapter  describes  what  is  known  about  the 
structure of the nucleus, the nuclear envelope, and the 
transport of macromolecules into and out of the nucleus, 
and discusses their links to human diseases. Aspects of 
nuclear  structure  and  function  that  are  discussed  else-
where  include  genome  and  chromosome  organization 
(Chapter  7),  chromatin  structure  (Chapter  8),  DNA 
replication  (Chapter  42)  and  RNA  transcription  and 
processing (Chapters 10 and 11).

Overall Organization of the Nucleus
Studies  in  which  entire  individual  chromosomes  are 
labeled by in situ hybridization (chromosome painting; 
see Fig. 8.10) reveal that chromosomes tend to occupy 
discrete regions within the nucleus called chromosome 
territories.  The  boundaries  of  adjacent  territories, 
where  more  actively  transcribed  regions  are  generally 
located,  overlap  with  one  another  such  that  approxi-
mately 40% of each territory intermingles with adjacent 
territories. The chromatin of these overlapping regions 
tends to be less compact than in the rest of the territory, 
and is referred to as the interchromosomal domain. 
Most  RNA  transcription  and  processing  are  thought  to 
occur within this domain. Although the nucleoplasm is 
very  crowded  with  chromosomes  and  ribonucleopro-
teins  (RNPs),  proteins  can  nonetheless  diffuse  surpris-
ingly rapidly through the nucleus, possibly by moving in 
the interchromosomal domain. Evidence is accumulating 
that actin is present in nuclei, presumably in the inter-
chromosomal domain. Although the role of this actin is 
unknown, an attractive hypothesis is that it forms a scaf-
fold for other processes. Nuclear actin can influence the 
positioning of nuclear subdomains.

Specialized Subdomains of the Nucleus
Cell  nuclei  contain  numerous  discrete  subdomains  or 
bodies  with  distinctive  structural  organizations  and/
or  biochemical  composition  (Fig.  9.2  and  Table  9.1). 

 143

144 

SECTION III  n  Chromatin, Chromosomes, and the Cell Nucleus

A

B

C

Nucleoli

PML
bodies

Cajal
bodies

Nuclear
envelope

Speckles

5 µm

Nucleoli
Speckles
Chromatin
Cajal bodies

D

PIKA

Nucleoli

FIGURE 9.2  EXAMPLES OF MAJOR SUBNUCLEAR STRUCTURES. A, Components involved in RNA processing are scattered throughout 
the nucleus but concentrated in domains called speckles that are rich in interchromatin granules. Inhibition of RNA processing causes splicing 
components to accumulate in enormous concentrations of interchromatin granule clusters. Several cells were injected with a short oligonucleotide 
that disrupts the function of the U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP) in RNA processing (see Fig. 11.15), and were then stained with an 
antibody recognizing the Sm splicing components (green). The injected cells were marked by introducing an inert fluorescent dextran marker into 
the cytoplasm (red). B, Nucleus with simultaneous staining of nucleoli (blue), PML (promyelocytic leukemia) nuclear bodies (red), Cajal bodies 
(green), and the nuclear envelope (purple). C, Nucleus with simultaneous staining of chromatin (blue), nucleoli (red), speckles (green), and Cajal 
bodies (white). D, Nucleus with simultaneous staining of DNA (blue) and the polymorphic interphase karyosomal association (PIKA)/53BP1 nuclear 
body/OPT (Oct1/PTF/transcription) domain (red). Nucleoli appear as unstained areas. A number of proteins involved in the sensing and repair of 
DNA  damage  concentrate  in  the  PIKA.  (A,  Courtesy  David  Spector,  Cold  Spring  Harbor  Laboratory,  Cold  Spring  Harbor,  NY.  B–C,  Courtesy 
Angus Lamond, University of Dundee, United Kingdom. D, Courtesy William S. Saunders and William C. Earnshaw.)

The  most  prominent  of  these  is  the  nucleolus,  dis-
cussed  in  the  next  section.  Although  often  referred  to 
as  organelles,  nuclear  subdomains,  unlike  cytoplasmic 
organelles,  are  not  membrane-bounded.  In  fact,  many 
proteins  that  have  been  examined  by  the  fluorescence 
recovery  after  photobleaching  technique  (see  Fig.  6.3) 
exchange  relatively  rapidly  between  a  nuclear  body 
and  a  nucleoplasmic  pool.  Therefore,  these  bodies 
represent highly dynamic associations of macromolecu-
lar  complexes.  By  concentrating  particular  RNAs  and 
proteins  with  enzymes  involved  in  their  maturation, 
they  accelerate  macromolecular  assembly  and  matura-
tion processes. They may also concentrate components 
involved  in  gene  regulation  or  repair  at  particular  
chromosomal loci.

Structures  associated  with  RNA  transcription  and 
processing  are  found  at  up  to  10,000  sites  spread 
throughout the typical mammalian nucleus as well as in 
a  few  more  prominent  domains.  The  dispersed  sites 
likely  correspond  to  structures  called  perichromatin 
fibrils,  originally  observed  by  electron  microscopy 
on  the  surface  of  regions  of  condensed  chromatin. 

Perichromatin fibrils contain various splicing factors and 
RNA-packaging proteins.

When factors involved in RNA processing are detected 
by  fluorescence  microscopy,  20  to  50  bright  speckles 
are seen against a diffuse background of nucleoplasmic 
staining  (Fig.  9.2).  The  diffuse  staining  probably  corre-
sponds to splicing factors associated with perichromatin 
fibrils  at  dispersed  sites.  Most  speckles  correspond  to 
clusters  of  interchromatin  granules,  particles  20  to 
25 nm in diameter distributed throughout the interchro-
mosomal domain. Proteomic analysis reveals that isolated 
interchromatin  granules  contain  more  than  200  stably 
associated proteins, most involved with various aspects 
of RNA processing. When tagged with green fluorescent 
protein, components involved in pre–mRNA (messenger 
RNA)  processing  cycle  between  speckles  and  sites  of 
transcription in less than 1 minute in live cells.

Metabolic labeling experiments indicate that speckles 
are not major sites of active transcription, although most 
transcription  sites  are  associated  with  the  periphery  of 
speckles.  Speckles  are  less  prominent  in  cells  that  
transcribe  RNA  at  high  levels,  and  become  strikingly 

 

CHAPTER 9  n  Nuclear Structure and Dynamics 

145

TABLE 9.1  Major Nuclear Subdomains
Structure

Nucleolus

Comments
The nucleolus (typically 1 to 5 structures of 0.5 to 5 µm diameter in mammalian cell nuclei) is the site of ribosomal 
RNA (rRNA) transcription and processing, as well as of preribosomal assembly. It is also the site of processing of 
several other noncoding RNAs, including the RNA component of the signal recognition particle (SRP; see Fig. 20.5).  
It plays an important role in helping organize the genome during interphase, as well as in regulating the stability  
of p53, a critical transcription factor that is involved in regulating the cell cycle, particularly when DNA damage 
occurs.

Speckles

Speckles are concentrations of components involved in RNA processing. They often correspond to clusters of 

interchromatin granules seen by electron microscopy. They may serve as storage depots of splicing factors, or they 
may play a more active role in splicing factor modification and/or assembly.

Cajal bodies

Formerly known as coiled bodies. Approximately 0.2 to 1.0 µm in diameter, Cajal bodies have a coiled fibrous 

substructure. First identified by electron microscopy, up to 10 of these structures are seen in transformed cells.  
They are usually absent from nontransformed normal cells. They contain the human autoantigen p80-coilin and  
survival of motor neurons (SMN) protein, which is encoded by the gene mutated in spinal muscular atrophy, a severe, 
inherited, human, muscular wasting disease. They are involved in small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP) and small 
nucleolar ribonucleoprotein (snoRNP) assembly and in maturation of telomerase (which also contains an RNA 
component).

PML bodies

Also known as PODs and ND10, 10 to 30 of these structures are scattered throughout the nucleus. They are thought to 

enhance gene repression by serving as assembly sites for certain transcriptional corepresser complexes. They also 
appear to be targeted during viral infections. Fusion of the marker protein PML to the α-retinoic acid receptor is often 
found in acute promyelocytic leukemia (hence the name PML), in which the PML bodies appear highly fragmented. 
Treatments that are effective against PML restore the normal morphology of PML bodies (see text).

Polycomb 

group bodies
53BP1 nuclear 

bodies

Concentrations of the PRC1 and PRC2 complexes (see Chapter 8) involved in the silencing of facultative 

heterochromatin. One mechanism for gene inactivation may be translocation into these inactive domains.

Defined as concentrations of the DNA repair-associated protein 53BP1. Also known as PIKA (polymorphic interphase 
karyosomal association) and OPT (Oct1/PTF/transcription) domain. These domains may be up to 5 µm in diameter 
during G1 phase, but their morphology and number vary across the cell cycle. They appear to correspond to sites of 
DNA damage during mitosis that arise as a result of incomplete DNA replication during S-phase.

prominent when RNA processing is inhibited (Fig. 9.2). 
Together  these  observations  suggest  that  speckles  may 
be dynamic depots where RNA processing factors accu-
mulate  then  they  are  not  active.  They  may  also  have  a 
role  in  rendering  mRNAs  competent  for  export  to  the 
cytoplasm.

Cajal bodies (formerly known as coiled bodies) are 
compact  structures  approximately  0.3  to  1.0 µm  in 
diameter (Fig. 9.2B) that resemble balls of tangled threads 
in  the  electron  microscope.  Nuclei  of  rapidly  growing 
transformed  cells  typically  have  one  to  10  prominent 
Cajal  bodies.  These  structures  are  absent  from  most 
nontransformed  (normal)  cells.  They  contain  an  80-kD 
human autoantigen called p80-coilin and the survival of 
motor  neurons  (SMN)  protein,  which  is  encoded  by  a 
gene mutated in spinal muscular atrophy, a severe inher-
ited human muscular wasting disease. The SMN protein 
participates in importing immature small nuclear ribonu-
cleoproteins  (snRNPs)  into  the  nucleus  after  their 
assembly in the cytoplasm. p80-coilin recruits the SMN 
complex to Cajal bodies, where the snRNPs are further 
processed  to  render  them  functional  in  RNA  splicing 
reactions (see Chapter 11). Cajal bodies also have a role 
in the maturation of the RNP enzyme telomerase as well 
as other functions.

Mammalian  nuclei  also  contain  approximately  10  to 
30 bodies, varying in size from 0.3 to 1.0 µm, known as 
promyelocytic  leukemia  (PML)  bodies  (Fig.  9.2B). 
PML bodies were initially defined by the presence of a 
protein called PML, an important regulator of cell growth 
and genome stability. PML has a RING-finger amino acid 
sequence motif and is therefore probably an E3 ligase for 
ubiquitin  or  ubiquitin-like  proteins  (see  Fig.  23.2).  Its 
targets are unknown. In normal cells, PML bodies appar-
ently have a role in assembling corepressor complexes 
that  modify  chromatin  to  repress  transcription  (see 
Chapter 8). Their other functions are not known.

The PML gene was identified by analysis of a chromo-
some  translocation  between  chromosomes  15  and  17 
found  in  patients  with  acute  promyelocytic  leukemia 
(APL).  In  many  patients,  this  translocation  produces  a 
gene fusion between PML and the retinoic acid receptor 
alpha  (RARα).  The  fusion  protein,  PML-RARα,  blocks 
differentiation  of  hematopoietic  precursors  and  causes 
APL. In APL cells, PML-RARα is distributed in tiny punc-
tate  foci  scattered  throughout  the  nucleus.  When  APL 
cells are treated with arsenic trioxide, which is clinically 
effective in treating APL, PML-RARα aggregation causes 
prominent PML bodies to reform. PML-RARα is ubiquity-
lated  within  those  bodies  and  subsequently  degraded. 

146 

SECTION III  n  Chromatin, Chromosomes, and the Cell Nucleus

A

Dense fibrillar
component
Fibrillar center

B

Nucleoli

Nucleus

Nucleolus
organizing regions

Granular
component

Mitotic
chromosomes

FIGURE 9.3  NUCLEOLUS AND NUCLEOLAR ORGANIZER REGION. A, Electron micrograph of a thin section of a typical nucleolus. The 
fibrillar centers, dense fibrillar component, and granular component are indicated. B, Use of silver staining to visualize the nucleolus in interphase 
nuclei  and  the  nucleolar  organizer  regions  on  mitotic  chromosomes  of  the  rat  kangaroo.  (A,  From  Fawcett  DW.  The  Cell.  Philadelphia:  WB 
Saunders;  1981.  B,  From  Robert-Fortel  I,  Junéra  HR,  Géraud  G,  et al.  Three-dimensional  organization  of  the  ribosomal  genes  and  Ag-NOR 
proteins during interphase and mitosis in PtK1 cells studied by confocal microscopy. Chromosoma. 1993;102:146–157.)

This allows the hematopoietic precursors to differentiate 
and cures the cancer.

A

The Nucleolus: The Most Prominent  
Nuclear Subdomain
The  nucleolus,  first  described  only  5  years  after  the 
nucleus,  in  1835,  is  the  most  conspicuous  and  best-
characterized  nuclear  subdomain  (Figs.  9.1  and  9.3). 
Most mammalian cells have one to five nucleoli, which 
are  specialized  regions  0.5  to  5.0 µm  in  diameter  sur-
rounding transcriptionally active ribosomal RNA (rRNA) 
gene  clusters.  Nucleoli  are  the  sites  of  most  steps  in 
ribosome biogenesis, from the transcription and process-
ing of rRNA to the initial assembly of ribosomal subunits. 
The  ribosome  is  a  complex  macromolecular  machine 
with  four  different  structural  rRNA  molecules  and 
approximately 85 proteins that are assembled into two 
subunits (see Figs. 12.6 and 12.7). Transcription of rRNA 
by RNA polymerase I comprises nearly half of total cel-
lular RNA synthesis in some cell types. This high level of 
synthesis  is  necessary  to  produce  approximately  5 
million ribosomes in each cell cycle, more than 30 every 
second in budding yeast.

Nearly  700  proteins  associate  stably  with  human 
nucleoli. Many more may associate transiently, and this 
composition changes to reflect different metabolic states 
of the cell (Fig. 9.4). Many nucleolar proteins are involved 
with  either  rRNA  synthesis  and  modification  or  with 
ribosome subunit assembly. The functions of many other 
nucleolar proteins remain unknown and may reflect the 
involvement  of  nucleoli  in  other  biological  processes. 

Pre-bleach

0 s

10 s

60 s

5 min

30 min

B

Pre-bleach

0 s

10 s

20 s

40 s

60 s

FIGURE 9.4  ANALYSIS OF DYNAMICS OF CHROMATIN AND 
A MAJOR NUCLEOLAR COMPONENT. A, Fluorescence recovery 
after  photobleaching  (FRAP)  of  H2B-GFP  (green  fluorescent  protein) 
shows that chromatin is immobile within the cell nucleus. B, FRAP of 
fibrillarin-GFP  shows  that  this  major  component  of  nucleoli  is  highly 
dynamic. Scale bar: 5 µm. (A–B, Courtesy Tom Misteli. B, From Phair 
RD, Misteli T. High mobility of proteins in the mammalian cell nucleus. 
Nature. 2000;404:604–609.)

Other stable RNAs, including the RNA component of the 
signal  recognition  particle  (see  Fig.  20.5),  are  also  pro-
cessed in the nucleolus.

Intriguingly,  the  nucleolus  is  involved  in  controlling 
the  stability  of  the  critical  cell-cycle  regulator  protein 
p53 (see Fig. 41.5). Healthy cells keep p53 levels low by 
using  ubiquitylation  in  the  nucleolus  to  destabilize  it. 
Under certain types of stress, cells defend themselves by 

 

CHAPTER 9  n  Nuclear Structure and Dynamics 

147

activating p53. They do this by having nucleolar proteins 
bind and inactivate Mdm2, the key factor that ubiquity-
lates p53.

Ribosomal Biogenesis in Functionally Distinct 
Regions of the Nucleolus
Transmission  electron  micrographs  of  thin  sections 
show  three  morphologically  distinct  regions  in  the 
nucleolus (Fig. 9.3). Fibrillar centers contain concen-
trations of rRNA genes, together with RNA polymerase 
I  and  its  associated  transcription  factors.  Actively  tran-
scribed  ribosomal  genes  are  found  near  the  border 
between  the  fibrillar  centers  and  a  dense  fibrillar 
component that surrounds them. The granular com-
ponent  is  the  site  for  many  steps  in  ribosome  subunit 
assembly and is made up of densely packed clusters of 
ribosomal precursors called preribosomal particles 15 to 
20 nm in diameter.

rRNA  loci  have  a  modular  organization.  Genes  alter-
nate  with  spacer  regions  in  large  tandemly  arranged 
clusters  (see  Fig.  11.10).  The  repeat  unit  in  this  array 
(gene  plus  spacer)  is  approximately  40,000  base  pairs 
in  humans.  Humans  have  approximately  300  to  400 
copies of the ribosomal DNA (rDNA) repeat unit located 
in  clusters  on  chromosomes  13,  14,  15,  21,  and  22. 
Usually,  only  a  fraction  of  these  genes  is  actively  tran-
scribed.  An  additional  rRNA,  5S  RNA,  is  encoded  by 
distinct  genes  and  transcribed  by  RNA  polymerase  III  
(see Fig. 10.8).

A simple yet efficient mechanism guarantees a balance 
between  the  RNA  components  of  the  two  ribosomal 
subunits. The major rRNA components are encoded by 
a single precursor RNA molecule. In humans, this 13,000-
base precursor is commonly described by its sedimenta-
tion coefficient in sucrose gradients as 45S. Following its 
transcription, the RNA precursor is processed in a series 
of  cleavages  to  yield  the  18S,  5.8S,  and  28S  rRNA  mol-
ecules  (see  Fig.  11.10).  In  addition  to  the  cleavages, 
rRNA processing also involves extensive base and sugar 
modifications, including approximately 100 2′-O-methyl 
ribose and approximately 90 pseudouridine residues per 
molecule. The earliest stages of rRNA processing prob-
ably  occur  in  the  dense  fibrillar  component  of  the 
nucleolus. Later stages take place in the granular compo-
nent.  Ribosomal  protein  synthesis  occurs  in  the  cyto-
plasm on free ribosomes. The newly synthesized proteins 
are transported into the nucleus for assembly into ribo-
somes, predominantly in the granular component.

Disassembly of the Nucleolus During Mitosis
The  nucleolus  disassembles  during  each  mitotic  cycle, 
starting  with  the  dispersal  of  the  dense  fibrillar  and 
granular components during prophase. This disassembly 
is  driven  by  specific  phosphorylation  of  nucleolar  
proteins.  Ultimately,  the  fibrillar  centers  alone  remain 
associated  with  the  mitotic  chromosomes,  forming  

what are termed nucleolus-organizing regions (NORs 
[Fig. 9.3B]), which often form a prominent secondary 
constriction  of  the  chromosome.  (The  primary  con-
striction  is  the  centromere.)  Several  nucleolar  proteins 
and  RNA  polymerase  I  remain  bound  at  NORs  as  cells 
enter and exit mitosis but most nucleolar proteins coat 
the surface of the mitotic chromosomes forming a peri-
chromosomal layer or “skin.”

Nucleolar reformation begins in mitotic telophase as 
processing factors and unprocessed pre-RNA remaining 
from the previous cell cycle associate with NORs (10 in 
human), which then cluster into one to five foci. Next, 
a  wide  variety  of  nucleolar  components  assemble  into 
particles  termed  prenucleolar  bodies  that  associate 
with  the  NORs  in  a  process  requiring  transcription  of  
the  rRNA  genes.  Normally,  nascent  transcripts,  rather 
than ribosomal genes, nucleate assembly of the nucleolus 
in  each  cell  cycle.  If  antibodies  to  RNA  polymerase  I  
are microinjected into mitotic cells, rRNA transcription 
is  blocked,  and  nucleoli  do  not  reform  in  the  next  
G1 phase.

Structure of the Nuclear Envelope
The nuclear envelope provides a selective permeability 
barrier between the nuclear compartment and the cyto-
plasm  and  acts  as  a  platform  that  helps  organize  the 
chromosomes in discrete functional domains (Fig. 9.5). 
The barrier keeps pre-mRNAs in the nucleus until they 
are fully processed and licensed for export so that only 
mature  mRNAs  are  delivered  to  ribosomes  in  the  cyto-
plasm  for  translation  into  protein.  It  also  provides  an 

Rough 
endoplasmic
reticulum

Ribosome

CYTOPLASM

Nuclear pore
complex

Outer
membrane

Inner
membrane
Nuclear 
lamina
Chromatin

PERINUCLEAR SPACE

NUCLEAR INTERIOR

FIGURE 
ORGANIZATION. 

9.5  OVERVIEW  OF  NUCLEAR 

ENVELOPE 

148 

SECTION III  n  Chromatin, Chromosomes, and the Cell Nucleus

additional level of genetic protection and control since 
various chromosomal events, including DNA replication 
and  expression  of  certain  genes,  are  regulated,  at  least 
in  part,  by  changes  in  the  ability  of  factors  to  move 
between the cytoplasm and nucleus.

The nuclear envelope is composed of two concentric 
lipid  bilayers  termed  the  inner  and  outer  nuclear 
membranes.  The  outer  nuclear  membrane  is  continu-
ous  with  the  rough  endoplasmic  reticulum  and  shares 
some  of  its  functions,  including  the  presence  of  ribo-
somes.  It  also  has  unique  proteins  and  functions.  For 
example, it contains proteins that help link the nuclear 
interior with the cytoskeleton. A fibrous nuclear lamina 
of  intermediate  filaments  supports  the  inner  nuclear 
membrane  in  many  eukaryotes.  These  and  other  inner 
nuclear membrane proteins mediate interactions of the 
envelope with chromatin. The inner and outer nuclear 
membranes  are  separated  by  an  approximately  50-nm 
luminal space that is continuous with the lumen of the 
endoplasmic reticulum. Nuclear pore complexes and 
the  associated  pore  membrane  bridge  both  nuclear 
membranes and provide the primary route for commu-
nication  between  the  nucleus  and  cytoplasm  during 
interphase.

Structure and Assembly of the Nuclear Lamina
The nuclear lamina is a thin protein meshwork composed 
of type V intermediate filament proteins called nuclear 
lamins (Figs. 9.6 and 9.7). Lamins can be divided into 
two families. Lamin A is encoded by a gene that gives 
rise to four major polypeptides (including lamin C) by 
alternative  splicing  (see  Fig.  11.6).  Members  of  the 
lamin B family are the products of two distinct genes. 
The  various  families  of  lamin  proteins  assemble  into 
distinct  fibrous  networks  (Fig.  9.6),  exhibit  different 
patterns of gene expression, and appear to have distinct 
roles in nuclear structure.

The pattern of lamin gene expression depends on the 
cell type and stage of development. The lamina of embry-
onic stem cells and early embryos is comprised of B-type 
lamins. Lamins A and C typically appear later in develop-
ment as cells begin to differentiate, and their expression 
varies  in  different  cell  types.  This  variation  in  lamina 
composition may contribute to different patterns of gene 
expression  and  mechanical  stability  of  the  nucleus. 
Lamins  A/C  promote  nuclear  stiffness,  whereas  nuclei 
containing only B-type lamins are more elastic.

Like  other  intermediate  filament  proteins  (see  Fig. 
35.2), nuclear lamins have a central, rod-like domain that 

A
A

B
B

Nuclear pore 
Nuclear pore
complexes
complexes

Nuclear
Nuclear
lamina
lamina

OL

C

LA

EE

OL

DD

LB1

FF

FIGURE 9.6  NUCLEAR LAMINA. A, Thin-section electron micrograph of a nuclear envelope with a prominent nuclear lamina and nuclear 
pores.  B,  Field  emission  scanning  electron  micrograph  of  the  inner  surface  of  an  amphibian  oocyte  nuclear  envelope.  The  nuclear  pores  are 
prominent, protruding above the underlying nuclear lamina. C–F, Visualization of lamins A and B1 in a HeLa (Henrietta Lacks) cell nucleus by 
structured illumination superresolution microscopy. Both lamins form short filaments that mostly do not colocalize. OL, overlay. (A, For reference, 
see Fawcett DW. The Cell. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1981, Fig. 156 [top]. B, From Zhang C, Jenkins H, Goldberg MW, et al. Nuclear lamina 
and  nuclear  matrix  organization  in  sperm  pronuclei  assembled  in  Xenopus  egg  extract.  J  Cell  Sci.  1996;109:2275–2286.  C–F,  From  Shimi  T, 
Kittisopikul M, Tran J, et al. Structural organization of nuclear lamins A, C, B1, and B2 revealed by superresolution microscopy. Mol Biol Cell. 
2015;26:4075–4086.)

 

A

B. Human Lamin A fiber

C. Human Lamin A

Ig domain

NLS

N Head

5 nm

α-helical coiled-
coil dimerization

Lamin A: ZMPSTE24 cleavage site

CaaX

Tail

FIGURE 9.7  LAMIN ORGANIZATION AND ASSEMBLY. A, Sev-
eral stages in the assembly of isolated lamin B dimers into filaments 
in vitro. The dimers at left have two globular heads at the C-terminal 
end  of  a  rod  that  is  52 nm  long.  B–C,  Diagram  of  the  structural 
organization of the nuclear lamins. The sequence CaaX (see text) is a 
signal for the attachment of a farnesyl group. NLS, nuclear localization 
sequence.  (A,  From  Heitlinger  E,  Peter  M,  Haner  M,  et al.  Expres-
sion  of  chicken  lamin  B2  in  Escherichia  coli:  characterization  of  its 
structure, assembly, and molecular interactions. J Cell Biol. 1991;113:
485–495.)

is largely α-helical (Fig. 9.7). The basic building block of 
lamin assembly is a dimeric α-helical coiled-coil (see Fig. 
3.10)  of  two  identical  parallel  polypeptides.  Lamin 
dimers self-associate end to end to form protofilaments 
that associate laterally in a process that is under active 
investigation.

The  coiled-coil  is  followed  by  a  large  C-terminal 
domain  with  a  central  globular  fold  and  containing  a 
nuclear  localization  sequence  (see  later  section)  that 
promotes  the  rapid  import  of  newly  synthesized  lamin 
precursors  into  the  nucleus.  In  most  lamins,  the 
C-terminus  acquires  a  lipid  posttranslational  modifica-
tion  that  targets  them  to  the  nuclear  membrane.  This 
involves  enzymatic  addition  of  the  C15-isoprenoid 
hydrocarbon  tail  farnesyl  (see  Figs.  13.10  and  20.15). 
The farnesyl group is added to a cysteine side chain in 
an amino acid motif called the CaaX box (Ca1a2X, where 
C is a cysteine located four amino acids from the carboxyl 
terminus;  a1  is  any  aliphatic  amino  acid;  a2  is  valine, 
isoleucine  or  leucine;  and  X  is  usually  methionine  or 
serine)  at  the  carboxyl  terminus  of  the  protein.  This 
motif  was  first  recognized  in  the  Ras  proteins  (see 
Fig. 25.7). The aaX residues are removed after addition 
of  the  farnesyl  group.  B-type  lamins  are  not  processed 

CHAPTER 9  n  Nuclear Structure and Dynamics 

149

further, leaving the farnesylated cysteine at the carboxyl 
terminus.

In contrast, once it is at the nuclear membrane, pre–
lamin A is processed by a protease called Zmpste24 (zinc 
metalloprotease similar to yeast Sterile 24) that clips off 
15 additional amino acids from the C-terminus including 
the farnesylated cysteine, thereby loosening its associa-
tion with the membrane. Possibly as a result of this, some 
A-type  lamins  also  distribute  throughout  the  nucleo-
plasm. These intranuclear lamins have been suggested to 
have roles in cell-cycle regulation (see next section).

The assembled lamina is tethered to the inner nuclear 
membrane  both  by  the  farnesyl  group  and  by  interac-
tions with integral membrane proteins (see next section). 
The surface of the lamina facing the nuclear interior also 
interacts  with  the  chromosomes.  Thus,  the  lamina  and 
its associated proteins both serve as a structural support 
for  the  nuclear  envelope  and  influence  chromosome 
distribution and function within the nucleus (see later).

Proteins of the Inner Nuclear Membrane
Several hundred integral membrane proteins are associ-
ated  with  the  inner  nuclear  membrane,  often  in  in  a 
tissue  specific  manner.  Of  these,  the  lamin  B  receptor, 
LAP2  (lamina-associated  protein  2),  emerin,  MAN1, 
SUN1, and SUN2 have been characterized in detail. Some 
inner  nuclear  membrane  proteins  bind  lamins  to  help 
anchor the lamina polymer to the membrane and many 
can interact with chromatin. The lamin B receptor binds 
heterochromatin  protein  HP1  (Fig.  9.8)  and  links  the 
envelope to condensed chromatin. Codisruption of the 
lamin B receptor and lamin A releases most heterochro-
matin from the nuclear periphery.

The  LEM  domain,  a  40-amino-acid  motif  common  to 
several  nuclear  proteins,  including  LAP2,  emerin,  and 
MAN1, binds to an abundant small protein called barrier-
to-autointegration factor (BAF), so named for a separate 
role  facilitating  viral  genome  integration  for  HIV.  BAF 
binds directly to DNA and to histones and functions in 
organizing chromatin across the cell cycle.

LAP2  can  affect  chromatin  organization  in  multiple 
ways. Some of its several splice variants lack the trans-
membrane  region  for  inner  nuclear  membrane  associa-
tion  and  are  soluble.  Both  soluble  and  transmembrane 
forms  have  the  LEM  domain  and  bind  BAF,  but  the 
transmembrane  forms  can  also  bind  a  histone  deacety-
lase.  Interactions  of  intranuclear  lamin  A  and  a  soluble 
splice variant of LAP2 are important for cell-cycle regula-
tion  by  forming  a  complex  with  the  tumor  suppressor 
retinoblastoma  protein  (pRb;  see  Chapter  41).  This,  
in  turn,  regulates  the  transcription  factor  E2F  (see  
Fig. 41.9), which is important for activating the G2-to-S 
transition.  Several  other  inner  nuclear  membrane  pro-
teins also bind transcriptional activators, in some cases 
sequestering  them  at  the  nuclear  periphery  away  from 
their gene targets.

150 

SECTION III  n  Chromatin, Chromosomes, and the Cell Nucleus

Out e r Nuclear Membrane 

LBR

LAP2

         (β–γ)

Man-1

Emerin

CYTOPLASM

LAP1

Lamin A 
Lamin A 

HP1

Lamin B 
Lamin B 

LEM
LEM

BAF

Heterochrom a t i n  

NUCLEOPLASM

KASH TM domain

KASH binding
domain of SUN

SUN1/2
~45nm

SUN3
~20nm

SUN4/5
~12nm

FIGURE 9.8 
INTEGRAL PROTEINS OF THE INNER NUCLEAR MEMBRANE. Lamin B receptor (LBR), lamina-associated protein 2 (LAP2), 
Man-1,  and  emerin  all  bind  lamin  B.  LBR  associates  with  chromatin  via  HP1.  The  other  three  associate  with  chromatin  via  the  barrier-to- 
autointegration factor (BAF). Emerin and lamina-associated protein 1 (LAP1) also bind to lamin A. The α form of LAP2 is not membrane associated 
and is not shown here. Three isoforms of SUN proteins link the inner nuclear membrane to KASH domain proteins of the outer nuclear membrane. 
KASH proteins asssociate with the cytoskeleton. (SUN proteins from Sosa BA, Kutay U, Schwartz TU. Structural insights into LINC complexes. 
Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2013;23[2]:285–291. For reference, see Protein Data Bank [www.rcsb.org] file 4DXT [ribbon diagram of SUN/KASH].)

The  SUN  proteins  bind  lamin  A,  and  then  connect 
across the nuclear envelope lumen to huge KASH domain 
proteins in the outer nuclear membrane that in turn bind 
to all three major cytoplasmic filament systems, actin fila-
ments,  intermediate  filaments,  and  microtubules  (see 
Fig.  9.8  and  Chapters  33  to  35).  Thus,  the  lamina  is 
linked to the rest of the cytoskeleton. Deletions or muta-
tions in several lamina proteins, including the SUN pro-
teins,  reduce  the  mechanical  stability  of  the  cell  and 
interfere  with  cell  migration.  SUN  proteins  are  also 
important  for  maintaining  the  uniform  spacing  of  the 
nuclear  envelope  lumen.  Their  disruption  results  in 
uneven  separation  of  the  inner  and  outer  nuclear 
membranes.

These diverse functions in genome organization and 
regulation, cell cycle regulation, signaling cascades and 
cell  and  nuclear  mechanical  stability  could  explain  the 
link  between  mutations  in  nuclear  envelope  proteins 
and human disease (see later).

Role of the Nuclear Envelope in  
Genome Organization
A  high-throughput  method  revealed  that  the  nuclear 
lamina  has  an  important  role  in  chromosome  organiza-
tion  within  nuclei.  The  method  uses  a  DNA-modifying 
enzyme fused to a lamin protein, so nearby DNA is modi-
fied  and  can  be  mapped  along  the  genome.  In  human 
cells,  approximately  40%  of  the  genome  is  found  in  
1000 to 1500 LADs (lamina-associated domains; Fig. 9.9) 
ranging  in  size  from  10 kb  to  approximately  10 Mb. 
Analysis  of  single  cells  revealed  that  approximately 
15%  of  LADs  are  associated  with  the  lamina  in  most 
cells, with the remainder varying from cell to cell. The 
constitutive  LADs  have  low  transcriptional  activity. 
Indeed, heterochromatin-associated histone marks such 
as  H3K9me3  (see  Fig.  8.7)  promote  association  of  par-
ticular chromosomal regions with the lamina. The LADs 

at a distance from the nuclear periphery are either associ-
ated with a similar repressive compartment surrounding 
nucleoli or are in the nuclear interior. Interestingly, asso-
ciation of the chromosomes with the nuclear envelope is 
perturbed in some nuclear envelope-associated diseases 
(see the next section).

Chromatin  interactions  with  nuclear  pores  can  have 
both  positive  and  negative  effects  on  gene  expression. 
In  mammalian  cells,  the  chromatin  near  pores  appears 
less  condensed  (less  heterochromatic)  than  most  chro-
matin adjacent to the lamina. The significance of these 
interactions is still under study.

Disassembly of the nuclear envelope during mitosis in 
metazoa releases the chromosomes so that they can be 
segregated  to  the  daughter  cells  by  the  cytoplasmic 
mitotic  spindle  (see  Fig.  44.1).  Mitotic  segregation  of 
chromosomes  to  daughter  cells  takes  place  within  the 
nucleus in many other eukaryotes, including yeasts.

Nuclear Envelope Defects Lead to Human Diseases
In 1994, a gene mutated in patients with human X-linked 
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy was found to encode 
a protein of the inner nuclear envelope. The gene was 
named emerin. This link between the nuclear envelope 
and human disease was the tip of a huge iceberg. Genetic 
defects  in  nuclear  envelope  proteins  cause  at  least  20 
disorders,  including  muscular  dystrophies,  lipodystro-
phies,  and  neuropathies  (diseases  of  striated  muscle, 
fatty tissue, and the nervous system, respectively). The 
most  dramatic  of  these  is  Hutchinson-Gilford  progeria 
syndrome (Fig. 9.10). Affected individuals are essentially 
normal  at  birth,  but  they  appear  to  age  rapidly  and  
die  in  their  early  teens  of  symptoms  (including  athero-
sclerosis  and  heart  failure)  that  are  typically  associated 
with extreme age.

More  than  500  mutations  scattered  across  the  gene 
encoding lamin A/C cause at least 15 different diseases, 

 

Nuclear
envelope

A

Lamina

CYTOPLASM

M

M

M M

MM
M M
Methyl
groups

Dam

M
methylase

Chromatin fiber

Isolated DNA

M

M
LAD

M

M

MM M M

M M

M M M M

M M

X µm

LADs

Cell 1

Cell 2

Cell 3

Cell 4

Cell n–1

Cell n

Average

LADs

0

Position on chromosome 17 (Mb)

40

80

B

)

E
O

(
 

d
e

t
c
e
p
x
e

/

d
e
v
r
e
s
b
O

C

5
0
5
0
5
0
5
0
5
0
5
0

5
0

FIGURE  9.9  NUCLEAR  LAMINA  HELPS  ORGANIZE  THE 
CHROMATIN  INTO  FUNCTIONAL  DOMAINS.  A,  Dam  methylase 
fused to a lamin protein methylates the DNA in chromatin that is closely 
associated  with  the  nuclear  lamina.  Isolation  of  the  DNA  allows  the 
methylation sites to be mapped. B, Constitutive LADs associate with 
the lamina even after the cell has gone through mitosis and the lamina 
has  been  disassembled  and  reassembled.  C,  Sites  of  increased 
methylation on chromosome 17 from six single human cells, plus an 
average of the entire population. Lamina-associated domains (LADs) 
are indicated. (B–C, Modified from Kind J, Pagie L, de Vries SS, et al. 
Genome-wide  maps  of  nuclear  lamina  interactions  in  single  human 
cells. Cell. 2015;163:134–147.)

collectively  termed  laminopathies,  some  of  which  are 
variants of the diseases mentioned above (Fig. 9.10). At 
least  two  laminopathies  are  also  linked  to  mutations  
in  the  Zmpste24  protease.  Some  of  the  symptoms  of 
laminopathies  can  be  modeled  in  mice,  where  loss  of 
lamin A causes nuclear envelope defects and leads to a 
type of muscular dystrophy.

The most surprising aspect of the laminopathies is the 
fact that except for premature aging, the defects linked 
to  each  mutation  are  limited  to  a  few  tissues  such  as 
striated muscle, even though lamins A/C are ubiquitous 
in differentiated cells throughout the body. Lamin muta-
tions appear to compromise the stability of the nuclear 
envelope,  so  it  has  been  suggested  that  muscle  nuclei 

CHAPTER 9  n  Nuclear Structure and Dynamics 

151

might be particularly sensitive to these mutations, owing 
to  mechanical  stress  during  contraction.  However,  this 
mechanism cannot account for the link between lamin 
mutations and lipodystrophy—fat is not a force-generating 
tissue—neuropathy, or progeria.

An  alternative  suggestion  is  that  these  mutations 
change  interactions  between  the  inner  nuclear  mem-
brane  and  chromatin  and  this  alters  gene  expression 
patterns.  Cells  from  patients  with  Hutchinson-Gilford 
progeria  syndrome  show  signs  of  aging  in  culture  
that are accompanied by dramatic alterations in hetero-
chromatin (see Fig. 8.6), but changes in gene expression 
are relatively small and vary between patients.

Nuclear Pore Complexes
In  a  typical  growing  cell,  nearly  all  traffic  between  the 
nucleus  and  cytoplasm  passes  through  approximately 
3000  channels,  called  nuclear  pore  complexes, 
that  bridge  the  inner  and  outer  nuclear  membranes  
(Fig.  9.11).  Nuclear  pore  complexes  have  a  scaffold 
consisting  of  three  stacked  rings  each  with  eightfold 
symmetry.  Cytoplasmic  and  nuclear  rings  flank  a 
prominent spoke ring that is intimately associated with 
the pore membrane linking the inner and outer nuclear 
membranes. The nuclear ring is anchored to the nuclear 
lamina. A less-prominent fourth luminal ring surrounds 
the  pore  membrane  in  the  NE  lumen.  The  minimum 
diameter  of  the  central  channel  through  the  pore  is 
approximately 40 nm, and the channel is approximately 
50- to 70-nm long.

Eight filaments project outward from both the nuclear 
and cytoplasmic rings. These are involved in docking of 
macromolecules  to  be  transported  through  the  pore. 
The nuclear filaments are linked at their outer ends by a 
terminal ring, much like the wire that secures the cork 
on  a  champagne  bottle.  This  structure  is  called  the 
nuclear basket.

Vertebrate  nuclear  pore  complexes  are  large  struc-
tures with a mass of approximately 90 to 120 million Da 
as  assessed  by  electron  cryomicroscopy.  Core  com-
ponents 
identified  by  mass  spectrometry  account  
for  approximately  70  million  Da  of  the  mass.  Yeast 
nuclear  pores  are  similar  in  overall  structure  but  
about half the mass.

The protein composition of nuclear pore complexes 
is  remarkably  conserved.  Approximately  30  core  pro-
teins,  called  nucleoporins  (Fig.  9.12),  are  present  in 
multiples  of  eight  copies.  Mass  differences  between 
electron  cryomicroscopy  and  mass  spectrometry  mea-
surements  may  be  accounted  for  by  transport  factors  
and  other  auxiliary  subunits  that  do  not  have  a  key 
structural role.

Two  multiprotein  complexes,  the  10-member  Y 
complex  (named  because  of  its  shape)  and  the  five-
member  Nup93  complex  make  up  the  scaffold  of  the 
pore. The cytoplasmic and nuclear rings are assembled 

152 

SECTION III  n  Chromatin, Chromosomes, and the Cell Nucleus

A. Selected lamin mutations and the diseases they cause

K
3
0
2
E

 

 
r
o
G
3
0
2
E

K
5
9
1
N

Q
9
4
2
R

K
6
5
4
N

 
r
o

 
I

A
2
4
4
V

6
5
4
N

D
5
6
4
G

T
9
6
4

I

W
2
8
4
R

 

 
r
o
Q
2
8
4
R

N
6
8
4
K

P
7
2
5
R

 

 
r
o
H
7
2
5
R

K
8
2
5
T

P
0
3
5
L

)

C
a
L
(
 

S
1
7
5
R

H
4
8
5
R

H
2
8
5
R

G
8
0
6
G

K
6
8
3
E

H
7
7
3
R

C
8
9
2
R

P
4
9
2
Q

K
8
5
3
E

Q
6
3
3
R

3

4 5

6

7

8 9

10

11

12

P
0
5
R

 

 
r
o
S
0
5
R

P
5
2
R

G
0
6
R

R
5
8
L

5'

Exon 1

Lamin A

P
0
5
1
T

P
3
3
1
R

2

Globular domain

Coiled-coil helical domain

B

CYTOPLASM

Outer Nu c l e a r  Membrane 

Emerin

ZMPSTE24

LBR

Globular
domain

CaaX

C

EMD – autosomal-dominant

Emery-Dreifuss
muscular dystrophy

DCM – dilated cardiomyopathy

LGMD1B –

FPLD –

3'

CMT2 –

limb girdle muscular
dystrophy type 1B
familial partial
lipodystrophy

Charcot-Marie-Tooth
neuropathy type 2 B1

MAD – mandibuloacral dysplasia
HGP –

Hutchinson-Gilford
progeria

Lamin B 
Lamin B

Lamin A 
Lamin A 

Mandibuloacral

dysplasia

X-linked Emery-Dreifuss

muscular dystrophy

Pelger Huët anomaly

Greenberg skeletal dysplasia

NUCLEOPLASM

FIGURE 9.10  HUMAN DISEASES ASSOCIATED WITH NUCLEAR ENVELOPE ABNORMALITIES. A, Some of the mutations in the gene 
encoding lamin A that are associated with human disease. The G608G mutation makes no change in the protein sequence but creates a splice 
site leading to the loss of 50 amino acid residues from lamin A, leading to an impaired processing of prelamin A and generation of stably farnesyl-
ated lamin A. This mutation causes Hutchinson-Gilford progeria. Colored numbers at the top refer to the amino acid that has been changed by 
each mutation. Mutations are distributed in exons all across the gene as shown. B, Mutations in other nuclear envelope proteins cause similar 
diseases. Three examples are shown. C, Two young boys with the premature aging disorder Hutchinson-Gilford progeria. Sam Berns (left) with 
friend John Tacket, Progeria Research Foundation Youth Ambassador. (A, Modified from Mounkes L, Kozlov S, Burke B, et al. The laminopathies: 
nuclear structure meets disease. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2003;13:223–230. C, Courtesy the Progeria Research Foundation, Peabody, MA; http://
www.progeriaresearch.org.)

from  16  copies  each  of  the  Y  complex.  The  Nup93 
complex  forms  the  framework  of  the  spoke  ring  and 
interacts  with  four  nucleoporins  having  transmem- 
brane domains that bend and fuse the pore membrane.  
Several  of  these  proteins  share  structural  features  with 
clathrin-like  proteins  that  coat  membrane  transport  
vesicles  (see  Fig.  21.8),  so  they  may  have  a  common 
evolutionary origin.

Eleven of the 30 nucleoporins contain repeats of the 
dipeptide  FG  (phenylalanine-glycine).  Two  common 
versions  include  XFXFG  and  GLFG.  In  all,  the  pore 
contains  approximately  5000  of  these  FG  repeats  in 
highly  flexible  intrinsically  disordered  regions  of  the 
proteins.  FG  nucleoporins  are  anchored  to  the  pore  
scaffold  with  their  FG  repeat  regions  projecting  into  
the central pore, where they form the transport barrier 
(see later).

Three  experiments  show  that  nucleoporins  are 
required  to  transport  proteins  into  the  nucleus.  First, 
antibodies to nucleoporins inhibit transport when added 
to isolated nuclei or when injected into live cells. Second, 
lectins,  such  as  wheat  germ  agglutinin  (which  binds 
specifically  to  sugars  attached  to  many  nucleoporins), 
inhibit  transport  in  similar  experiments.  Third,  nuclear 

pore complexes assembled in Xenopus egg extracts (see 
Box 40.3) in the absence of the highly conserved nucleo-
porin  p62,  the  defining  member  of  the  FG-rich  p62 
complex  of  three  nucleoporins,  appear  structurally 
normal but are inactive in transport.

In metazoans, nuclear pore complexes are remarkably 
stable,  with  the  proteins  apparently  persisting  for  the 
lifetime  of  the  cell.  New  pore  complexes  continue  to 
assemble  throughout  interphase,  but  they  disassemble 
into  soluble  subcomplexes  during  mitosis.  During  the 
telophase  stage  of  mitosis,  pore  complex  reassembly 
begins with binding of the Y complex to chromatin. The 
Y  complex  then  interacts  with  transmembrane  nucleo-
porins  and  the  Nup93  complex,  which  recruits  factors 
that bend and fuse the membranes, forming the pore. If 
the  Nup93  complex  is  depleted  from  Xenopus  egg 
extracts, nuclear membranes form around added nuclei 
but are devoid of pores.

Traffic Between Nucleus and Cytoplasm
The nuclear pore complex is a highly efficient conduit 
that  can  allow  the  passage  of  up  to  approximately 
100 MDa of cargo per second. Traffic leaving the nucleus 

 

A

Nuclear
envelope

Outer

membrane

Lumen

Inner

membrane

B

D

CHAPTER 9  n  Nuclear Structure and Dynamics 

153

Cytoplasmic

filaments

Cytoplasmic

ring

Spoke ring

C

Nup192

Nup170

Disordered
FG repeats
in lumen

Nuclear

ring

Basket
filament
Terminal

ring

Nuclear
basket 

Nup192

CYTOPLASMIC
VIEW

CNC

CNT

Nic96

CNC

Nup170
CNT
Nic96

SIDE
VIEW

FIGURE 9.11  NUCLEAR PORE COMPLEX. A–B, Three-dimensional and central section views of models of the human nuclear pore complex. 
C, Two views of the molecular organization of the nuclear pore based on three-dimensional reconstructions of cryoelectron micrographs. The 
pore has eight-fold symmetry in the plane of the nuclear envelope and two-fold symmetry perpendicular to the nuclear envelope. Colored protein 
subunits are identified with labels; the membrane is gray. Disordered FG repeats (green dotted lines) fill the central pore. D, Detail of the molecular 
model illustrating the two-fold symmetry of the protein subunits perpendicular to the nuclear envelope, with colored subunits above and gray 
subunits below. (C–D, For reference, see Protein Data Bank file 5A9Q and von Appen A, Kosinski J, Sparks L, et al. In situ structural analysis of 
the human nuclear pore complex. Nature. 2015;526:140–143.)

C

N

Sc NUP2

Sc NUP1

Hs-p62

Hs POM121

Sc NUP49

Sc NUP116

100 Amino acids
Repeat motif
XFXFG region

GLFG region
FG mixed region
Hydrophobic span

FIGURE  9.12  SEQUENCE  ORGANIZATION  OF  SEVERAL 
NUCLEOPORINS,  THE  STRUCTURAL  COMPONENTS  OF  THE 
NUCLEAR PORES. Nucleoporins contain combinations of repeated 
sequences as shown. Letters refer to the amino acids (see Fig. 3.2). 
The hydrophobic FG (phenylalanine-glycine) repeats facilitate nuclear 
trafficking through the pores by interacting specifically with transport 
factors carrying cargo. 

includes  messenger  ribonucleoproteins  (mRNPs),  ribo-
somal subunits, and transfer RNAs (tRNAs), all of which 
must  be  transported  to  the  cytoplasm  to  function  in 
protein synthesis. Traffic entering the nucleus includes 
transcription  factors,  chromatin  components,  and  ribo-
somal proteins. Other molecules follow more complex 
routes.  Small  nuclear  RNAs  (snRNAs)  are  exported  to  
the cytoplasm to acquire essential protein components; 
they are then reimported into the nucleus, where they 
undergo further maturation steps before functioning in 
RNA  processing.  Individual  pores  can  simultaneously 
transport components in both directions.

Nuclear  pores  have  constitutive  peripheral  channels 
through which solutes and small proteins of up to 30 to 
40 kD  (~5–10 nm)  can  diffuse  passively.  However,  the 
pores can also actively transport much larger macromo-
lecular  complexes  via  the  central  channel.  Almost  all 
physiological  traffic  through  the  pores,  even  of  small 
molecules, is a facilitated process that involves specific 
carrier  proteins  traversing  the  central  channel.  For 
example,  the  28-kD  NTF2  dimer  (the  Ran  transporter; 
see  later)  traverses  the  pore  approximately  120  times 

154 

A

SECTION III  n  Chromatin, Chromosomes, and the Cell Nucleus

CYTOPLASM

A

C

N

NC

NC

NUCLEUS

FIGURE 9.13  Electron micrographs (upper panels) and an artist’s 
rendition (lower panels) show deformation of a large RNP particle as 
it passes through the nuclear pore complex (cytoplasm [top]; nucleus 
[bottom]).  This  RNA  encodes  a  secreted  protein,  with  a  molecular 
weight of about 1 million Da, from the salivary gland of the fly Chirono-
mus  tentans.  Once  in  the  cytoplasm,  the  5′  end  of  the  RNA  docks 
with  ribosomes  and  begins  synthesis  of  its  protein  even  before  
the  passage  of  the  remainder  of  the  RNP  through  the  pore  has  
been completed. (From Mehlin H, Daneholt B, Skoglund U. Transloca-
tion of a specific premessenger ribonucleoprotein particle through the 
nuclear  pore  studied  with  electron  microscope  tomography.  Cell. 
1992;69:605–613.)

more  rapidly  than  does  the  27-kD  green  fluorescent 
protein.

The pore gate opens to a maximum of approximately 
40 nm,  but  larger  particles  can  squeeze  through,  pro-
vided that they are deformable. This is well documented 
for export of a well-studied enormous RNA that associ-
ates  with  roughly  500  packaging  proteins  to  make  an 
RNP particle approximately 50 nm in diameter. The RNP 
is  deformed  into  a  rod-shaped  structure  as  it  squeezes 
through  the  pore  (Fig.  9.13).  Rigid  particles  cannot 
usually exceed the 30- to 40-nm limit.

Integral proteins of the inner nuclear membrane enter 
the nucleus by diffusion in the plane of the membrane. 
The lamin B receptor is highly mobile in the endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER), its site of synthesis, and rapidly diffuses 
to  the  nuclear  envelope.  There,  it  transits  to  the  inner 
membrane  through  the  peripheral  channels  of  the 
nuclear pore complex. Once in the inner nuclear mem-
brane, it becomes fixed in place, presumably by binding 
to the lamina and/or chromatin. This mechanism involv-
ing  lateral  diffusion  and  retention  is  a  common  mode  
of  membrane  protein  translocation  into  the  nucleus, 
although  conventional  transport  through  the  pore  may 
also occur (see later).

Proteins  that  are  imported  into  the  nucleus  bear  a 
nuclear  localization  sequence  (NLS),  also  called  a 
nuclear localization signal, that is recognized by specific 
carrier proteins called transport receptors (Figs. 9.14 and 
9.15).  The  best-studied  NLS  is  a  patch  of  basic  amino 

0.5 h

7 h

48 h

NUCLEUS (N)

B

NLS

Nucleoplasmin

pentamer

(145,000 Da)

CYTOPLASM (C)

Partial digestion
with protease

Microinject
into frog oocyte

FIGURE  9.14 
IDENTIFICATION  OF  A  NUCLEAR  LOCALIZA-
TION  SEQUENCE  ON  THE  PROTEIN  NUCLEOPLASMIN.  This 
29,000-Da  protein  exists  in  vivo  as  a  pentameric  complex  with  a 
molecular weight of 145,000. The monomer is small enough to diffuse 
passively through the nuclear pores, but the pentamer is too large to 
do so. A, Gentle cleavage of the pentamer with a protease removes 
a relatively small peptide from one end of the protein (left two gel lanes). 
When  the  cleaved  pentamers  were  labeled  with  radioactivity  and 
injected into the cytoplasm of a Xenopus oocyte, it was found that four 
species  were  produced  that  could  still  migrate  into  the  nucleus  and 
one  species  was  produced  that  could  not  (right  three  pairs  of  gel 
lanes). B, The interpretation of this experiment is that each nucleoplas-
min polypeptide contains a “tail” that can be removed by proteolysis 
and that this tail contains a nuclear localization sequence. Each pen-
tamer can migrate into the nucleus as long as it retains at least one 
polypeptide  with  a  tail.  Tailless  pentamers  remain  stuck  in  the  cyto-
plasm. (A, From Dingwall C, Sharnick SV, Laskey RA. A polypeptide 
domain that specifies migration of nucleoplasmin in the nucleus. Cell. 
1982;30:449–458.)

acids  similar  to  the  sequence  PKKKRKV  (single-letter 
amino  acid  code;  see  Fig.  3.2),  first  identified  on  the 
simian  virus  40  (SV40)  large  T  antigen.  A  point  muta-
tion, yielding PKNKRKV, inactivates this sequence as an 
NLS. A related type of bipartite NLS features two smaller 
patches of basic residues separated by a variable spacer 
(KRPAATKKAGQAKKKK  [critical  residues  are  under-
scored]). These two types of sequences are referred to 
as  basic  NLSs.  Basic  NLSs  function  autonomously  and  
can  direct  the  migration  of  a  wide  range  of  molecules 
into  the  nucleus  in  vivo.  In  one  example,  colloidal 
gold  particles  up  to  23 nm  in  diameter  coated  with 
nucleoplasmin (a protein with a bipartite basic NLS) are 
transported through nuclear pores (Fig. 9.16). NLSs vary 

 

CHAPTER 9  n  Nuclear Structure and Dynamics 

155

A.  -NLS

B.  +NLS

FIGURE  9.15 
ICAD (inhibitor of caspase-activated DNase) protein (see Fig. 46.13) was fused to the green fluorescent protein (GFP;  green 
here)  and  expressed  in  cultured  cells.  The  DNA  is  blue.  A,  A  mutant  form  of  ICAD : GFP  fusion  protein  lacking  the  ICAD  nuclear  localization 
sequence (NLS) accumulates randomly throughout the cell. B, The intact ICAD : GFP fusion protein with NLS accumulates quantitatively in the 
nucleus. (Courtesy K. Samejima, University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom.)

CYTOPLASM

0.1 µm

NUCLEUS

FIGURE  9.16  NUCLEAR  LOCALIZATION  SEQUENCE  OF 
NUCLEOPLASMIN CAN CAUSE COLLOIDAL GOLD PARTICLES 
TO BE TRANSPORTED INTO THE CELL NUCLEUS. A thin-section 
electron micrograph shows gold particles coated with nucleoplasmin 
crossing  the  nuclear  envelope  by  passing  through  the  nuclear  pore 
complexes.  Much  smaller  gold  particles  coated  with  bovine  serum 
albumin  (BSA)  remain  in  the  cytoplasm.  Both  sets  of  gold  particles 
were  microinjected  into  the  cytoplasm  of  Xenopus  oocytes,  and  the 
cells were processed 1 hour later for electron microscopy. Scale bar: 
0.1 µm. (From Dworetzky SI, Lanford RE, Feldherr CM. The effects of 
variations in the number and sequence of targeting signals on nuclear 
uptake. J Cell Biol. 1988;107:1279–1287.)

in size and sequence, and are recognized by a number of 
different  kinds  of  transport  receptors.  For  example,  an 
alternative type of NLS rich in glycine promotes nuclear 
import  by  a  similar  mechanism  (see  later)  but  using  a 
different transport receptor.

Many  proteins  exported  from  the  nucleus  bear  a 
nuclear export sequence (NES) that is recognized by 
transport  receptors  related  to  those  used  for  nuclear 
import (Fig. 9.17). Like import signals, these signals vary 

in size and complexity. The HIV I Rev protein provides 
one example of a leucine-rich sequence (LQLPPLERLTL) 
that  is  recognized  by  the  carrier  CRM1.  Certain  RNA 
sequences or structures may also serve as NESs.

The following is a brief thumbnail of protein import 
into  the  nucleus  (Fig.  9.18).  A  protein  with  an  NLS 
(known as cargo) binds to an import receptor either 
by  itself  or  in  combination  with  an  adapter  molecule, 
forming a complex that then passes through pores into 
the nucleus. There, the cargo and adapter (if used) are 
displaced  from  the  import  receptor.  The  adapter  then 
releases  its  cargo  and  is  transported  back  to  the  cyto-
plasm as the cargo of an export receptor. Import recep-
tors  also  shuttle  back  through  pores,  where  they  can 
meet more cargo or cargo/adapter complexes. Molecules 
exported from the nucleus use a variation of this cycle, 
being  picked  up  by  the  transport  machinery  in  the 
nucleus and discharged in the cytoplasm.

The key to this system is that it is vectorial: Nuclear 
components  are  transported  into  the  nucleus  while 
components  that  function  in  the  cytoplasm  are  trans-
ported  out.  This  means  that  each  carrier  picks  up  its 
cargo on one side of the nuclear envelope and deposits 
it  on  the  other.  This  directionality  is  regulated  by  a 
simple yet elegant system involving Ran, a small guanine 
triphosphatase (GTPase [see Figs. 4.6 and 4.7 for back-
ground material on GTPases]), and associated factors.

Components of Nuclear Import and Export
The  nuclear  import  and  export  system  involves  many 
components, but the general principles of its operation 
are  simple.  To  understand  how  it  works,  this  section  

156 

SECTION III  n  Chromatin, Chromosomes, and the Cell Nucleus

A. Nucleoplasmin

D. Rhodamine BSA

B. Nucleoplasmin minus NLS

E. Ovalbumin: HIV Rev-NES

C. Nucleoplasmin minus NLS

nuclear injection

F. Ovalbumin: HIV Rev-NES

+ Leptomycin B

FIGURE  9.17  DEMONSTRATION  OF  THE  EXISTENCE  OF 
SPECIFIC  NUCLEAR  IMPORT  AND  EXPORT  SIGNALS  ON 
PROTEINS. Left, Nuclear import. A, Nucleoplasmin microinjected into 
the  cytoplasm  rapidly  migrates  into  the  nucleus.  B,  Nucleoplasmin 
lacking  its  nuclear  localization  sequence  (NLS),  when  microinjected 
into the cytoplasm, stays in the cytoplasm. C, Nucleoplasmin lacking 
its  NLS  microinjected  into  the  nucleus  stays  in  the  nucleus.  Right, 
Nuclear export. D, Fluorescently labeled bovine serum albumin (BSA) 
microinjected into the nucleus stays in the nucleus. E, When ovalbumin 
conjugated to the nuclear export sequence (NES) of the HIV (the virus 
that  causes  AIDS)  Rev  protein  is  microinjected  into  the  nucleus,  it 
rapidly migrates into the cytoplasm. F, In the presence of leptomycin 
B (a drug that inhibits the activity of the nuclear export receptor CRM1), 
ovalbumin  conjugated  to  the  NES  of  HIV  Rev  protein  stays  in  the 
nucleus  after  microinjection.  (A–C,  From  Dingwall  C,  Robbins  J, 
Dilworth  SM,  et al.  The  nucleoplasmin  nuclear  location  sequence  is 
larger  and  more  complex  than  that  of  SV-40  large  T  antigen.  J  Cell 
Biol.  1988;107:841–849,  copyright  the  Rockefeller  University  Press. 
D–F, From Fukuda M, Asano S, Nakamura T, et al. CRM1 is respon-
sible for intracellular transport mediated by the nuclear export signal. 
Nature. 1997;390:308–311.)

first  introduces  several  of  the  components  (see  Cell 
SnapShot  2)  and  then  describes  one  transport  event  in 
detail.

Adapters
Adapters  bind  to  the  NLS  or  NES  sequences  on  some 
cargo molecules and also to particular regions on recep-
tors.  The  best-characterized  adapter  is  importin  α, 
which is responsible for recognition of small basic NLS 
sequences and works together with the transport recep-
tor importin β (see later) in nuclear transport. Importin 
α  consists  of  a  highly  flexible  N-terminal  NLS-like 

importin β-binding domain followed by 10 repeats of a 
helical motif (the Armadillo repeat [Fig. 9.18D]) that give 
the structured portion of the molecule a slug-like shape. 
The  importin β-binding  motif  can  bind  either  the  NLS-
binding region on importin β or the NLS-binding domain 
on importin α itself (the “belly” of the slug). The latter 
provides an autoinhibitory mechanism that is thought to 
be  important  in  regulating  the  release  of  cargo  in  the 
nucleus at the end of an import cycle. Binding to impor-
tin β uncovers the NLS binding site on importin α so that 
it can bind cargo more efficiently.

Other  nuclear  trafficking  pathways  use  different 
adapters.  For  example,  two  adapters  bridge  between 
snRNA  and  the  export  receptor  CRM1  during  snRNA 
export from the nucleus.

Nuclear Transport Receptors
Except for mRNP export from the nucleus (which uses 
special  transport  factors),  all  nuclear  trafficking  recep-
tors are related to importin β, the import receptor for 
proteins  bearing  a  basic  NLS.  At  least  20  nuclear  trans-
port  receptors  are  known  in  vertebrates  (14  in  yeast). 
These  proteins  are  also  called  karyopherins.  Some 
function in nuclear import, but others function in export. 
Importin  β  consists  entirely  of  19  copies  of  a  helical 
protein  interaction  motif  called  a  HEAT  repeat,  giving 
the protein the shape of a snail-like superhelix with the 
potential  to  interact  with  a  large  number  of  protein 
ligands.  All  importin β  family  members  have  a  binding 
site  for  the  Ran  GTPase  (Fig.  9.18D).  Importin β  binds 
many NLSs directly but also interacts with other cargoes 
via  the  importin  α  adapter.  Nucleoporin  FG  repeats 
sandwich  between  importin  β  HEAT  repeat  helices 
during passage through the pore channel.

Directionality/Recycling Factors
Ran-GTPase  and  its  bound  nucleotides  inform  nuclear 
trafficking  receptors  whether  they  are  located  in  the 
nucleus or cytoplasm. Ran-GTP (Ran with bound guano-
sine triphosphate [GTP]) dissociates import complexes 
but is required to form export complexes. The system 
imparts  directionality  because  Ran-GTP  is  converted  to 
Ran-GDP (guanosine diphosphate) in the cytoplasm and 
Ran-GDP is converted to Ran-GTP in the nucleus.

Like  other  small  GTPases,  Ran  has  low  intrinsic 
GTPase  activity,  but  interactions  with  binding  proteins 
(Ran-BP1  or  Ran-BP2)  and  a  GTPase-activating  protein 
called  Ran-GAP1  stimulate  GTP  hydrolysis.  Ran-BP1  is 
anchored in the cytoplasm. Ran-BP2 is a component of 
the  fibers  projecting  from  the  nuclear  pore  into  the 
cytoplasm. This huge (>350 kD) protein can bind up to 
four Ran molecules as well as Ran-GAP1 and provides a 
structural  scaffold  for  the  conversion  of  Ran-GTP  into 
Ran-GDP at the surface of the pore. Because Ran-BP1 and 
Ran-BP2 are both anchored in the cytoplasm, Ran-GTP is 
efficiently converted to Ran-GDP only in the cytoplasm, 

 

CHAPTER 9  n  Nuclear Structure and Dynamics 

157

A. Simple nuclear import

Cargo

B. Nuclear import with
     adaptor
Cargo

1

2

3

1

2

3

Importin β

Ran-GDP

Ran-GTP

Ran-GDP

GTP

Importin α

Importin β

GDP

Ran-GEF
(on chromatin)

4

6

8

5

Ran-GAP

CYTOPLASM

Ran-BP

D. Nuclear import / export proteins

Ran-GAP

Ran-BP

C. Nuclear export

NUCLEUS

Ran-GAP

Ran-GDP

Ran-GDP / GTP
overlap

Ran-GEF

Ran-GTP

Ran-BP / Ran-GTP

Importin β / Ran-GTP

Ran-GDP

GTP

Ran-GTP

GDP

4

Ran-GEF
(on chromatin)

5

Cas

GTP

6

Ran-
GTP

GDP

Ran-GEF
(on chromatin)

8

7

Importin α
with NLS

Exportin

Exportin
complexed
with importin
and Ran-GTP

Ran-GAP

Ran-BP

Cargo
(in this case
importin α)

FIGURE 9.18  NUCLEAR TRAFFICKING OF MACROMOLECULES. Nuclear import of a cargo by the import receptor importin β without 
(A) or with (B) the use of an adapter protein. C, Export of a cargo by the importin β-related export receptor Cas. In this case, the cargo is the 
import adapter importin α. Directionality is given by Ran. Ran-GTP (guanosine triphosphate) releases import cargoes in the nucleus and is required 
for formation of the export complex. Numbers refer to the steps described in the text. D, Crystal structures of several of the components involved 
in nuclear transport. (Ribbon models courtesy F. Wittinghofer, MPI Dortmund, Germany.)

yielding  a  nuclear/cytoplasmic  ratio  of  Ran-GTP  of 
approximately 200 : 1.

Ran-GDP  must  reenter  the  nucleus  to  be  recharged 
with GTP. Efficient Ran-GDP transport into the nucleus 
requires  nuclear  transport  factor  2  (NTF2).  Back  in  
the nucleus, Ran must release its bound GDP to acquire 
GTP.  GDP  dissociation  is  intrinsically  slow  but  is  
stimulated  by  a  guanine  nucleotide  exchange  factor 
(GEF). This protein, called regulator of chromosome 
condensation  1  (RCC1),  is  tightly  associated  with 
chromatin throughout the cell cycle. This allows nuclear 
import to resume immediately after the nuclear envelope 
reforms at the end of mitosis. Because Ran is involved in 

essentially  every  nuclear  trafficking  event,  the  flux  of  
this  small  protein  across  the  nuclear  envelope  is 
enormous—several  million  molecules  per  minute  in 
cultured cells.

Description of a Single Import Cycle in Detail
Consider the import into the nucleus of a typical protein 
(Fig. 9.18):
1.  In the cytoplasm, the import complex forms as impor-
tin β binds to cargo either directly or complexed with 
an  importin  α  adapter  (the  latter  is  true  for  cargos 
containing the very widely studied basic NLS discussed 
previously).

158 

SECTION III  n  Chromatin, Chromosomes, and the Cell Nucleus

2.  The import complex binds (docks) to the cytoplasmic 

filaments of the nuclear pore.

3.  The  complex  is  transferred  through  the  pore  in  a 
process  that  is  still  under  investigation.  A  popular 
model  proposes  that  the  highly  concentrated  FG 
repeat-containing  unstructured  regions  of  nucleopo-
rins  associate  to  form  a  hydrogel  within  the  pore 
channel that blocks most diffusion through the pore. 
Nuclear transport receptors (eg, importin β) bind FG 
repeats  by  trapping  them  between  their  packed 
helices.  This  locally  “melts”  the  hydrogel,  allowing 
the  receptor  and  its  bound  cargo  to  drift  rapidly 
through  the  gel,  ultimately  crossing  the  pore  in  less 
than  20 ms.  This  process  does  not  require  energy 
from nucleoside triphosphate hydrolysis.

4.  In the nucleus, Ran-GTP binds to importin β, displac-

ing the cargo from it.

5.  Importin β/Ran-GTP  shuttles  back  through  the  pore 

to the cytoplasm.

6.  In  the  nucleus,  if  the  cargo  was  bound  directly  to 
importin β, it is now free to function. If it was actually 
a cargo/importin α complex, this now encounters a 
nuclear export receptor called CAS. Ran-GTP and CAS 
bind tightly to importin α, displacing the cargo.

7.  CAS  carries  importin  α  and  Ran-GTP  through  the 
nuclear pores back to the cytoplasm. Thus, importin 
α functions as an adapter in one direction and cargo 
in the other.

The cargo is now in the nucleus, but the system is 
stalled.  The  import  receptor,  importin  β,  is  back  in 
the  cytoplasm,  but  in  a  complex  with  Ran-GTP  that 
cannot bind new cargo. The import adapter, importin 
α, is also in the cytoplasm, but it is locked in a complex 
with the CAS export receptor and Ran-GTP. The solu-
tion to this problem is simple.

8.  Ran-BP1,  Ran-BP2,  and  Ran-GAP1  associated  with 
cytoplasmic filaments of the nuclear pore catalyze the 
hydrolysis of GTP bound to Ran. Ran-GDP dissociates 
from  importin  α,  readying  it  for  further  cycles  of 
nuclear  import.  In  addition,  GTP  hydrolysis  causes  
the importin α/CAS/Ran-GDP complex to dissociate, 
allowing  CAS  to  return  to  the  nucleus  for  further 
cycles as an export receptor and making importin α 
available  in  the  cytoplasm  to  bind  more  cargo  and 
function as an import adapter. The hydrolysis of GTP 
on Ran is the only source of chemical energy required 
to drive the accumulation of proteins in the nucleus 
against a concentration gradient.
Although  there  are  several  names  to  remember,  the 
nuclear  trafficking  system  is  actually  quite  straight-
forward,  being  regulated  by  the  state  of  the  guanine 
nucleotide bound by Ran. The key point is that the GEF 
that charges Ran-GDP with GTP is in the nucleus and the 
Ran-GAPs that promote hydrolysis of GTP bound to Ran 
are cytoplasmic. Cargo that is meant to be imported into 
the nucleus is released from its carriers in the presence 

of  high  levels  of  nuclear  Ran-GTP.  Conversely,  cargo 
that  is  destined  for  export  to  the  cytoplasm  is  picked 
up  by  its  carriers  only  in  the  presence  of  high  levels 
of  nuclear  Ran-GTP  and  is  released  when  the  Ran  is 
converted to Ran-GDP in the cytoplasm. In this way, the 
directionality of transport is defined by the different con-
centrations  of  Ran-GDP  and  Ran-GTP  in  the  cytoplasm  
and nucleus.

A Distinct Pathway for mRNA Export From Nuclei
Small  RNAs  are  exported  by  karyopherin  transport 
receptors  using  Ran-GTP  for  directionality,  but  the 
export of mRNA depends on a different mechanism that 
includes numerous quality controls. mRNA is exported 
as  very  large  mRNP  complexes  that  begin  to  assemble 
during RNA processing with binding of the transcription 
export  (TREX)  complex  to  the  mRNA.  These  mRNP 
complexes dock on the inner surface of the pore, where 
they are subjected to quality control by the exosome (see 
Fig.  11.8)  and  other  surveillance  activities.  Incorrectly 
processed  mRNAs  are  degraded.  Correctly  processed 
mRNAs are guided through the nuclear pore by a dimeric 
transport  receptor,  Nxf1-Nxt,  which  is  not  related  to 
karyopherins, but also interacts with FG repeats. Adenos-
ine triphosphate (ATP), rather than GTP hydrolysis gives 
directionality  to  the  process.  The  ATP  is  used  in  the 
cytoplasm  by  enzymes  that  change  the  RNA  structure 
and dissociate Nxf1-Nxt1, thus preventing the RNP from 
reentering the pore.

Regulation of Transport Across  
the Nuclear Envelope
Cells  regulate  nuclear  trafficking  in  several  ways.  The 
first  of  these  is  to  change  the  number  of  pores.  In  rat 
liver, there are 15 to 20 pores per square micrometer of 
nuclear  envelope  (~4000  per  nucleus),  whereas  nuclei 
of  transcriptionally  quiescent  avian  erythrocytes  have 
very few nuclear pore complexes.

Nuclear trafficking is often regulated by phosphoryla-
tion near the NLS on the cargo. Phosphorylation adjacent 
to  a  basic  NLS  inhibits  nuclear  import.  This  provides  a 
mechanism  to  regulate  the  ability  of  a  particular  cargo 
to enter the nucleus in response to cell cycle (see Fig. 
43.6)  or  other  signals  that  can  be  coupled  to  specific 
protein kinase activation.

Traffic  across  the  nuclear  envelope  is  also  regulated 
by  masking  or  unmasking  NLSs.  A  “nuclear”  protein 
whose NLS is covered up is trapped in the cytoplasm. A 
good  example  is  the  regulation  of  transcription  factor 
nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) by inhibitor of nuclear factor 
κB (IκB; Fig. 9.19). IκB binds to NF-κB and covers up its 
NLS.  Because  IκB  also  has  a  nuclear  export  signal,  the 
NF-κB:IκB complex is entirely cytoplasmic. Following an 
appropriate  signal  (see  Fig.  10.21C),  IκB  is  degraded. 
This  uncovers  the  NLS  on  NF-κB,  allowing  it  to  enter 
the nucleus. This mechanism regulates gene expression 

 

CHAPTER 9  n  Nuclear Structure and Dynamics 

159

A. Regulation of NF-κB localization

Extracellular

signal 

IκB degraded

Import receptor
NLSs exposed

IκB

NLS

NLS

p50

p65

B. Localization of dorsal in fly embryos

To NUCLEUS

Lateral view

Transverse section

FIGURE  9.19  REGULATION  OF  NUCLEAR  FACTOR  κB  (NF-
κB) LOCALIZATION. A, The transcription factor NF-κB is kept in the 
cytoplasm as a result of interactions with its inhibitor IκB (inhibitor of 
nuclear  factor  κB).  IκB  holds  NF-κB  in  the  cytoplasm  in  two  ways. 
When  it  binds  NF-κB,  it  covers  up  the  NF-κB  nuclear  localization 
sequence (NLS). Second, IκB contains a nuclear export signal, so that 
any  NF-κB  associated  with  it  that  happens  to  enter  the  nucleus  is 
rapidly exported to the cytoplasm. B, Localization of the dorsal tran-
scription  factor  (a  relative  of  NF-κB)  in  Drosophila  embryos.  These 
images represent a longitudinal (left) and cross-sectional (right) view of 
wild-type embryos. The dorsal protein is stained with specific antibody, 
which  appears  as  dark  spots  where  it  has  become  concentrated  in 
the cell nuclei in the ventral portion of the embryo. (B, From Roth S, 
Stein D, Nusslein-Volhard C. A gradient of nuclear localization of the 
dorsal  protein  determines  dorsoventral  pattern  in  the  Drosophila 
embryo. Cell. 1989;59:1189–1202.)

during  development  (Fig.  9.19B)  and  activation  of 
immune cells (see Fig. 27.8), among other examples.

Disorders Associated With Defective 
Nuclear Trafficking
In many instances, protein function appears to be regu-
lated  by  adjusting  its  location  in  the  cell,  and  nuclear 
transport  is  one  mechanism  controlling  localization. 
Thus, a myriad of examples undoubtedly exist in which 
disruption  of  transport  leads  to  disease.  This  area  has 
yet  to  be  explored  systematically,  but  in  one  interest-
ing  example,  human  sex  determination  is  disrupted 
by  mutations  of  an  NLS  on  the  SRY  (sex-determining 
region Y) transcription factor, a master regulator of sex 
determination.  These  NLS  mutants  apparently  disrupt 
the  accumulation  of  SRY  in  the  nucleus  at  a  critical 
stage  during  development,  causing  individuals  with  a 

46XY  karyotype  (normal  male)  to  develop  as  females. 
Mutations  in  nuclear  pore  proteins  are  also  associated 
with developmental diseases and chromosomal translo-
cations  involving  pore  components  and  are  implicated 
in  a  variety  of  cancers.  Nuclear  transport  defects  are 
also  found  in  numerous  human  neurodegenerative 
diseases  (eg,  Alzheimer  disease),  but  the  mechanism  is  
not known.

Other Uses of the Importin/Ran Switch
The  ability  of  Ran-GTP  to  release  substrates  bound  to 
importin β provides a highly efficient switch for regulat-
ing protein availability. Cells use this system to regulate 
several  supramolecular  assembly  processes,  including 
assembly  of  the  nuclear  envelope,  nuclear  pore,  and 
mitotic spindle.

In  these  processes,  importin  β  (and  occasionally 
importin α) acts as a negative regulator of assembly by 
binding to and sequestering key proteins. In the case of 
mitotic spindle assembly in large cells such as eggs that 
lack  centrosomes,  sequestration  of  key  proteins  blocks 
spindle assembly. In eggs, this block is overcome in the 
vicinity  of  chromosomes,  which  bind  high  concentra-
tions  of  the  GEF  RCC1.  Spindle  assembly  is  triggered 
only after nuclear envelope breakdown, when the chro-
mosomes come in contact with the cytoplasm (see Fig. 
44.2).  Conversion  of  Ran-GDP  to  Ran-GTP  near  the 
chromosomes results in Ran-GTP binding to importin β. 
This releases bound proteins and triggers mitotic spindle 
formation.  Importin  β  and  Ran  also  appear  to  regulate 
nuclear pore assembly in a similar way by sequestering 
key  pore  components, 
including  the  Nup107-160 
complex, until they are released by Ran-GTP.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Roland Foisner, Harald Herrmann, Tom Misteli, 
Michael Rout, and Eric Schirmer for their advice on revi-
sions to this chapter.

SELECTED READINGS

Amendola  M,  van  Steensel  B.  Mechanisms  and  dynamics  of  nuclear 

lamina-genome interactions. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2014;28:61-68.

Azuma  Y,  Dasso  M.  The  role  of  Ran  in  nuclear  function.  Curr  Opin 

Cell Biol. 2000;12:302-307.

Dundr M. Nuclear bodies: multifunctional companions of the genome. 

Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2012;24:415-422.

Fernandez-Martinez J, Rout MP. A jumbo problem: mapping the struc-
ture  and  functions  of  the  nuclear  pore  complex.  Curr  Opin  Cell 
Biol. 2012;24:92-99.

Forbes DJ, Travesa A, Nord MS, et al. Nuclear transport factors: global 

regulation of mitosis. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2015;35:78-90.

Gruenbaum  Y,  Foisner  R.  Lamins:  nuclear  intermediate  filament  pro-
teins with fundamental functions in nuclear mechanics and genome 
regulation. Annu Rev Biochem. 2015;84:131-164.

Kabachinski  G,  Schwartz  TU.  The  nuclear  pore  complex—structure 

and function at a glance. J Cell Sci. 2015;128:423-429.

160 

SECTION III  n  Chromatin, Chromosomes, and the Cell Nucleus

Lamond  AI,  Earnshaw  WC.  Structure  and  function  in  the  nucleus. 

Sosa  BA,  Kutay  U,  Schwartz  TU.  Structural  insights  into  LINC  com-

Science. 1998;280:547-553.

Pombo  A,  Dillon  N.  Three-dimensional  genome  architecture:  players 

and mechanisms. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2015;16:245-257.

Schmidt HB, Görlich D. Transport selectivity of nuclear pores, phase 
separation,  and  membraneless  organelles.  Trends  Biochem  Sci. 
2016;41:46-61.

plexes. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2013;23:285-291.

Wickramasinghe VO, Laskey RA. Control of mammalian gene expres-
sion  by  selective  mRNA  export.  Nat  Rev  Mol  Cell  Biol.  2015;16:
431-442.

S E C T I O N   IV 

Central Dogma:  
From Gene to Protein

This page intentionally left blank

SECTION  IV  OVERVIEW
The hugely important prediction of a structure for DNA 

Fundamental differences in the ways in which eukary-
otes  and  prokaryotes  store  their  genomes  have  had  a 
profound influence on the structure of genes and the fate 
of  cellular  RNAs.  In  prokaryotes,  the  DNA  occupies  
a  distinct  region  of  cytoplasm  that  is  not  bounded  by  
a  membrane.  This  means  that  transcription  of  DNA 
sequences  into  mRNAs  and  translation  of  mRNAs  into 
proteins can be coupled directly, with ribosomes attach-
ing to nascent mRNAs even before they are fully copied 
from  the  DNA  template.  In  contrast,  eukaryotes  house 
their genomes and the machinery for RNA transcription 
and processing in a nucleus bounded by a nuclear enve-
lope.  Eukaryotic  protein-coding  RNAs  must  be  trans-
ported  across  the  nuclear  membrane  prior  to  their 
translation by ribosomes in cytoplasm. This geographic 
segregation, in which mRNAs are created in one subcel-
lular compartment and used in another, has allowed the 
evolution  of  structurally  complex  genes  whose  RNA 
products are spliced before use.

The  initial  RNA  products  of  transcription  of  most 
eukaryotic  genes  require  extensive  modifications  by 
RNA  processing  before  they  are  ready  to  function. 
Chapter  11  explains  that  most  protein-coding  genes  of 
higher eukaryotes contain protein-coding regions called 
exons separated by noncoding intron regions. Conse-
quently,  the  initial  RNA  copy  of  these  genes  must  be 
processed  to  remove  the  introns  before  the  finished 
mRNA is exported from the nucleus.

The nucleus is the site of many other essential RNA-
processing events. These include the addition of 5′ cap 
structures  to  mRNAs,  polyadenylation  of  the  3′  end  of 
mRNAs, cleavage of some RNAs into functional smaller 
pieces, modification of RNA bases, and a host of some-
times bizarre editing events. Both the RNA substrates for 
these events and many enzymes that carry out the reac-
tions  are  packaged  into  ribonucleoprotein  particles  by 

not  only  led  Crick  and  Watson  to  propose  a  general 
strategy for the replication of DNA (discussed in Chapter 
42)  but  also  led  Francis  Crick  to  propose  the  central 
dogma of molecular biology: that DNA is transcribed into 
RNA  and  that  this  RNA  is  then  translated  into  protein. 
Chapters 10 to 12 present how this central dogma plays 
out  at  the  cellular  level,  with  one  crucial  addition  that 
could not have been foreseen by Crick. This new element 
is  the  complex  battery  of  processing  events  that  RNAs 
undergo  before  they  function  as  messengers,  transfer 
vehicles,  processing  machines,  or  protein  synthesizing 
machines in the ribosome.

Chapter 10 discusses transcription of DNA sequences 
into RNA, the initial step in recovering the information 
encoded in the genome. Three eukaryotic cellular RNA 
polymerases have distinct specialized tasks: polymerase 
I transcribes ribosomal RNAs; polymerase II transcribes 
all  messenger  RNAs  (mRNAs)  plus  a  number  of  small 
RNA molecules that are involved in RNA processing; and 
polymerase III transcribes transfer RNAs (tRNAs) and 
the  smallest  ribosomal  RNAs.  These  three  polymerases 
evolved from a common ancestor and retain many shared 
features. However, they have acquired significant differ-
ences in the ways they act on their target genes.

Eukaryotic  genes  contain  both  upstream  (5′)  and 
downstream  (3′)  regulatory  regions  that  are  not  tran-
scribed  into  RNA.  Each  gene  has  a  promoter  located 
just upstream from the site where transcription begins. 
Enhancers are DNA sequences that regulate transcrip-
tion  from  a  distance.  Both  promoter  and  enhancer 
sequences form binding sites for regulatory proteins that 
either stimulate or repress transcription. The chromatin 
organization  of  the  DNA  template  and  its  organization 
within  the  nucleus  also  influence  the  efficiency  of 
transcription.

DNA

Gene

Cell
Cell

nucleus
nucleus

Gene expression
(Ch 10)

RNA
processing
(Ch 11)

Protein
synthesis
(Ch 12)

mRNA

(DNA replication

[Ch 42])

NUCLEOPLASM

CYTOPLASM

 163

specific  proteins,  but  RNAs  themselves  carry  out  a 
number  of  enzymatic  reactions,  including  catalysis  of 
peptide bond formation by the ribosome.

Cells  also  contain  enzymes  that  fragment  double-
stranded RNAs into small pieces, used by other proteins 
to direct the silencing of the genes that encoded them. 
This process of RNA interference (RNAi) is critical for 
defense against RNA viruses and in chromatin regulation. 
Cell biologists also use RNAi as a technique to study gene 
function in the laboratory.

Chapter  12  describes  how  ribosomes  translate  the 
sequence of nucleotide triplets in mRNAs into proteins. 
tRNAs  act  as  adapters,  matching  specific  amino  acids 
with triplet codons in the mRNA. The RNA component 
of  ribosomes  catalyzes  the  transfer  of  each  successive 
amino  acid  from  its  tRNA  onto  the  C-terminus  of  the 
growing polypeptide. Every step in the process is care-
fully regulated to ensure quality control of the finished 
polypeptide.  Initiation  factors  select  the  proper  AUG 
codon  in  the  mRNA  to  begin  the  polypeptide  with  a 
methionine residue (or formylmethionine in the case of 
bacteria). Elongation factors check that the proper tRNA 

is  matched  with  each  codon  before  peptide  bonds  are 
formed. Although polypeptides grow at 20 residues per 
second, errors occur at a rate of less than one residue in 
a thousand. Termination factors bring protein synthesis 
to  a  close  at  the  C-terminus  of  the  polypeptide  and 
recycle  the  ribosomal  subunits  for  another  round  of 
translation.

Although some proteins fold spontaneously into their 
mature  form  following  release  from  a  ribosome,  many 
proteins require a helping hand to reach their properly 
folded state. Chapter 12 covers four types of chaperones 
that help proteins fold by different mechanisms. Trigger 
factor,  which  is  associated  with  ribosomes,  provides 
a  hydrophobic  groove  for  protein  folding.  Heat  shock 
protein  (Hsp)  70  and  Hsp90  chaperones  bind  hydro-
phobic  residues  in  nascent  polypeptides,  prevent  the 
unfolded protein from aggregating, and thereby promote 
folding. Cycles of binding and release are accompanied 
by  hydrolysis  of  adenosine  triphosphate  (ATP).  Chap-
eronins  related  to  GroEL  provide  chambers  to  protect 
proteins  during  folding.  ATP  hydrolysis  releases  the 
protein from this chamber.

164

C H A P T E R 

10 

Gene Expression*

Each  organism,  whether  it  has  600  genes  (Myco-

plasma),  6000  genes  (budding  yeast),  or  25,000  genes 
(humans),  depends  on  reliable  mechanisms  to  regulate 
the expression of these genes (ie, turn them on and off). 
This  is  called  regulation  of  gene  expression.  In  simple 
organisms,  such  as  bacteria  and  yeast,  environmental 
signals,  such  as  temperature  or  nutrient  levels,  control 
much  of  gene  expression.  In  multicellular  organisms, 
genetically programmed gene expression controls devel-
opment  starting  from  a  fertilized  egg.  Within  these 
organisms,  cells  send  each  other  signals  that  control 
gene  expression  either  through  direct  contact  or  via 
secreted  molecules,  such  as  growth 
factors  and 
hormones.

Given  the  vast  numbers  of  genes,  even  in  simple 
organisms, regulation of gene expression is complicated. 
Control  is  exerted  at  multiple  steps,  including  produc-
tion of messenger RNA (mRNA), translation, and protein 
turnover. This chapter focuses on the first of these regu-
latory  steps:  the  transcription  mechanisms  that  lead  to 
the production of mRNA and other RNA transcripts.

Proteins  called  transcription  factors  (TFs)  turn 
genes on or off by binding to DNA regulatory sequences 
associated with sequences encoding the protein or RNA 
product of the gene. The paradigm of this level of regula-
tion is the bacterial repressor that controls expression of 
genes  required  for  lactose  metabolism  in  Escherichia 
coli.  In  eukaryotes,  TFs  are  numerous,  representing 
approximately 6% of human genes. They are also quite 
diverse, binding to a wide range of DNA regulatory sites. 
Fortunately,  they  fall  into  a  limited  number  of  families 
with similar structures and binding mechanisms. Three 
types  of  eukaryotic  DNA-dependent  RNA  polymerases 
respond to these regulatory proteins and transcribe DNA 
sequence  into  RNA.  Regulation  of  TFs  is  achieved  by 
variations  in  a  limited  number  of  mechanisms  that 

*This chapter was written by Jeffry L. Corden.

control  their  synthesis,  transport  from  the  cytoplasm 
into the nucleus, activity through posttranslational modi-
fications or binding to small molecular ligands.

One key level of regulation is transcription initiation, 
the  first  step  in  production  of  RNA  transcripts.  This 
chapter examines the basic features of both prokaryotic 
and eukaryotic transcription units and the transcription 
machinery.  Regulatory  TFs  that  control  the  expression 
of groups of genes are discussed in the context of how 
external signals can reprogram patterns of gene expres-
sion. Finally, the chapter addresses the mechanisms that 
couple  transcription  to  the  downstream  processing  of 
nascent transcripts.

Transcription Cycle
Synthesis  of  RNA  by  RNA  polymerases  is  a  cyclic 
process  that  can  be  broken  down  into  three  sets  of 
events: initiation, elongation, and termination (Fig. 10.1). 
Each  of  these  events  consists  of  multiple  steps  that  
can be regulated independently. In the first step of the 
initiation process, RNA polymerase binds to the chro-
mosome  near  the  beginning  of  the  gene,  forming  a 
preinitiation  complex  at  a  sequence  termed  a  pro-
moter.  This  binding  must  be  highly  specific  to 

Initiation

Elongation

Termination

DNA

RNA
polymerase

RNA

FIGURE  10.1  THE TRANSCRIPTION CYCLE. The transcription 
reaction consists of three basic steps in which the RNA polymerase 
initiates transcription at the promoter, elongates the nascent RNA copy 
of one of the DNA strands, and terminates transcription recognition of 
the appropriate signals. 

 165

166 

SECTION IV  n  Central Dogma: From Gene to Protein

distinguish  promoter  from  nonpromoter  DNA.  Next,  a 
conformational  change  in  the  polymerase–promoter 
complex  separates  the  DNA  strands.  This  open 
complex  allows  RNA  polymerase  access  to  single-
stranded nucleotide bases that serve as the template to 
start the transcript. After formation of a phosphodiester 
bond between the first two complementary ribonucleo-
tides, the polymerase translocates one base and repeats 
the process of phosphodiester bond formation, resulting 
in elongation of the nascent RNA. The elongation reac-
tion cycle continues at an average rate of approximately 
20 to 30 nucleotides per second until the complete gene 
has  been  transcribed.  However,  the  rate  of  elongation  
is  not  uniform,  as  RNA  polymerase  pauses  at  certain 
sequences.  The  final  step  in  the  transcription  cycle, 
termination,  occurs  when  the  polymerase  reaches  a 
signal on DNA that causes an extended pause in elonga-
tion.  Given  enough  time,  the  appropriate  sequence 
context  and  factors,  the  nascent  transcript  dissociates 
from  the  elongating  RNA  polymerase,  and  the  DNA 
template returns to a base-paired duplex conformation. 
Ultimately,  RNA  polymerase  dissociates  from  the  tem-
plate and is free to search for a new promoter.

Regulatory molecules target each of the steps in the 
transcription  cycle.  The  frequency  of  initiation  from 
different promoters varies as dictated by the need for the 
gene product. The initiation reaction is most often regu-
lated,  presumably  because  this  prevents  synthesis  of 
transcripts that are not needed. Elongation and termina-
tion  can  also  be  regulated,  as  can  splicing  and  further 
processing  of  mRNAs  and  noncoding  RNAs  (ncRNAs) 
(see Chapter 11). In eukaryotes, the sum of these nuclear 
regulatory steps, together with cytoplasmic regulation of 
mRNA stability and translation efficiency, contributes to 
the wide variation in the abundance of various mRNAs 
and proteins in particular types of cells.

Transcription Unit
Genetic information in DNA is transcribed in segments 
corresponding to one or a few genes. Gene-coding and 
regulatory  (cis-acting)  DNA  sequences  that  direct  the 
initiation  of  transcription,  elongation,  and  termination 
are collectively called a transcription unit. Prokaryotic 
transcription units, called operons, contain more than 
one gene, often encoding proteins with related physio-
logical  functions  (Fig.  10.2A).  DNA  sequences  flanking 
the  operon  direct  the  initiation  and  termination  of 
transcription.

A  simple  eukaryotic  transcription  unit,  such  as  that 
encoding the human hemoglobin β-chain, also has flank-
ing  regulatory  sequences,  but  the  region  encoding  the 
polypeptide is interrupted by exons (Fig. 10.2B). Muta-
tions  that  reduce  β-globin  levels  in  patients  with 
β-thalassemias  can  occur  either  in  the  coding  region, 
resulting in an unstable or truncated polypeptide, or in 
the  adjacent  control  regions,  leading  to  low  levels  of 

A. Procaryotic transcription unit

DNA

mRNA
5'

I

i

Z

Y

A

Transcription

z

y

a

3'

B. Eukaryotic transcription unit

β-globin transcription unit

on genome

DNA

Pre-mRNA
5'

Exon

Transcription

Intron

Exon

Intron

Exon

3'

Splicing

Mature human-
globin mRNA

Promoter mutations result in lower level of mRNA
Nonsense, frameshift, missense mutations
  yield unstable or inactive protein
Splice-site mutations result in aberrantly spliced mRNA
3' processing site mutations result in failure
  to polyadenylate mRNA

FIGURE  10.2  PROKARYOTIC  AND  EUKARYOTIC  TRAN-
SCRIPTION UNITS. A, The two transcription units required for regula-
tion of lactose metabolism in Escherichia coli. The I gene encodes the 
lac  repressor,  while  the  Z,  Y,  and  A  genes  encode  β-galactosidase, 
lactose permease, and thiogalactoside transacetylase. All three genes 
are required for the cell to grow on media containing lactose and are 
coregulated as the lac operon. B, The nucleotide sequence of one of 
the  two  DNA  strands  is  transcribed  into  a  complementary  pre-
messenger  RNA  (mRNA)  copy.  The  pre-mRNA  is  processed  by 
removing  introns  and  splicing  together  the  protein-coding  exons 
(orange). The DNA sequences required for expression of a functional 
β-globin protein are indicated in different colors (see key). Mutations 
lead  to  decreased  β-globin 
in  any  of  these  sequences  can 
expression. 

transcription or aberrant processing of the newly synthe-
sized RNA (see Chapter 11). Thus, the transcription unit 
can  be  thought  of  as  a  linked  series  of  modules,  all  of 
which must be functional for the gene to be transcribed 
at the correct level.

Biogenesis of RNA
Typical cells contain more RNA than genomic DNA. The 
population of RNA molecules range in size from several 
tens  to  several  thousand  nucleotides.  In  prokaryotes, 
translation  is  initiated  on  newly  synthesized  mRNA 
during transcription. In eukaryotes, RNA is transported 
from its site of synthesis in the nucleus to the cytoplasm, 
where most RNA is used to synthesize proteins. Eukary-
otic cells have four different types of RNA:
1.  Ribosomal  RNA  (rRNA  [see  Fig.  11.9])  makes  up 

approximately 75% of the total.

2.  Small,  stable  RNAs,  such  as  transfer  RNA  (tRNA 
[see  Fig.  12.4]),  small  nuclear  RNAs  (snRNA  [see 

 

CHAPTER 10  n  Gene Expression 

167

Chapter 11]) involved in splicing, and 5S rRNA, make 
up approximately 15% of the total.

3.  mRNA  and  its  precursor  heterogeneous  nuclear 

RNA (hnRNA) account for only 10% of the total.

4.  ncRNAs,  including  micro  RNAs  (miRNAs),  are 
not  abundant  but  regulate  a  variety  of  RNA-based 
processes.
Transcription  of  eukaryotic  DNA  in  the  nucleus  is 
linked  to  subsequent  steps  that  process  the  nascent 
transcript  in  preparation  for  its  eventual  function  (see 
Chapter  11  for  a  complete  discussion  of  these  steps). 
Processing  of  mRNA  precursors  includes  capping  and 
methylation of the 5′ end of the nascent transcript, splic-
ing  to  remove  introns  and  modifying  the  3′  end  by 
cleavage and addition of a stretch of adenosine residues. 
The finished mRNA is then transported to the cytoplasm, 
where it serves as the template for protein synthesis.

Eukaryotic  ribosomal  RNA  is  encoded  in  tandemly 
repeated  genes  and  each  gene  is  transcribed  as  a  long 
precursor  molecule,  which  is  cleaved  and  modified  to 
give the final 28S, 5.8S, and 18S RNAs (Fig. 10.3). These 
RNAs are assembled, together with 5S RNA and approxi-
mately  80  proteins,  into  ribosomes  in  the  nucleolus. 

A

Ribosomal DNA repeat

Nontranscribed

spacer

45S precursor RNA

Transcription unit

Transcription

Cleavage

Ribosomal RNAs

18S

5.8S

28S
5S RNA and 
ribosomal proteins

Ribosome

B

Nucleolar
DNA

Nascent
pre-rRNA
molecules

Direction of
transcription

Transcription unit

Transcription unit
Nontranscribed spacer

FIGURE  10.3  RIBOSOMAL  RNA  TRANSCRIPTION  UNIT. 
Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) is transcribed from a set of transcription units 
arrayed  as  tandem  copies  of  the  same  transcription  unit.  A,  Map 
showing  the  arrangement  of  sequences  in  a  typical  ribosomal  DNA 
repeat. B, Electron micrograph showing two active rRNA transcription 
units. Note that each transcription unit is transcribed by multiple RNA 
polymerases.  As  the  polymerases  traverse  the  gene,  the  attached 
nascent RNA is extended, giving a tree-like appearance. (B, Courtesy 
of Yvonne Osheim, University of Virginia, Charlottesville.)

Transfer  RNA  is  synthesized  in  the  nucleus  and  trans-
ported to the cytoplasm, where it is charged with amino 
acids prior to participating in protein synthesis (see Fig. 
12.5).  snRNAs  are  synthesized  and  processed  in  the 
nucleus.  From  there,  they  migrate  to  the  cytoplasm, 
where  they  acquire  essential  proteins,  and  then  return 
to  the  nucleus  to  catalyze  RNA  splicing  reactions  (see 
Fig. 11.11). The postsynthetic processing pathway that 
a  particular  transcript  follows  is  dictated,  in  part,  by  
the  transcription  machinery  that  is  used  to  initiate  and 
elongate  the  transcript  and  by  certain  features  of  the 
nascent RNA.

RNA Polymerases
Cellular RNA polymerases synthesize a strand of nucleic 
acid  in  the  5′  to  3′  direction  that  is  complementary  to 
one of the chromosomal DNA strands. Even though the 
enzymatic  reaction  is  similar  to  DNA  replication  (see  
Fig. 42.1), there are several important differences. First, 
RNA polymerases synthesize a strand of ribonucleotides. 
Second, unlike DNA polymerase, RNA polymerases can 
initiate  transcription  without  a  primer.  Finally,  unlike 
replication,  the  newly  transcribed  sequences  do  not 
remain base-paired with the template but are displaced 
from the template approximately 10 base pairs (bp) from 
the  growing  end  of  the  nascent  RNA.  All  known  RNA 
polymerases  share  these  properties  and  have  similar 
structures,  since  they  arose  from  a  common  ancestor 
during evolution.

Bacteria have a single RNA polymerase composed of 
six polypeptides. Two copies of the α subunit and one 
each of the β, β′, and ω subunits form a five-subunit core 
enzyme  that  synthesizes  RNA.  The  sixth  subunit,  σ, 
binds  to  the  core  enzyme  to  form  a  holoenzyme  that 
is  able  to  recognize  promoter  sequences  and  initiate 
transcription.

Most  eukaryotes  have  three  different  RNA  polymer-
ases  (some  species  of  plants  contain  four)  with  the 
largest  subunits  closely  related  to  bacterial  β  and  β′ 
subunits.  RNA  polymerases  I,  II,  and  III  each  have  10 
core subunits, most of which are unique to each enzyme 
(Fig. 10.4A). RNA polymerases I and III have additional 
subunits  similar  to  RNA  polymerase  II  general  TFs  dis-
cussed in a following section.

RNA  polymerase  I  concentrates  in  the  nucleolus, 
where it synthesizes rRNA. Throughout the nucleoplasm 
RNA polymerase II synthesizes mRNA and several classes 
of  ncRNAs  including  some  snRNAs  involved  in  RNA 
splicing,  and  long  noncoding  RNAs  (lncRNAs)  and 
miRNAs implicated in gene regulation. RNA polymerase 
III  synthesizes  tRNA,  5S  rRNA,  and  the  7S  RNA  of  the 
signal  recognition  particle  (see  Fig.  21.5).  RNA  poly-
merase IV is present only in plants, where it is involved 
in heterochromatin formation and gene silencing.

The multiple eukaryotic RNA polymerases apparently 
originated  through  duplication  of  primordial  genes, 

168 

SECTION IV  n  Central Dogma: From Gene to Protein

A

E. coli

β'

β

α

α

Pol I

1

2

3

4

6

5
7
8 9 10

Pol II

1

2

3

4

6

5
8 9 10

7

Pol III

1

2

3

4

5 6

7 8 9 10

B. Ribbon

Tandem repeats of the
consensus aa sequence
Tyr–Ser–Pro–Thr–Ser–Pro–Ser

CTD

90°

C. Conserved sequences

N

Pol I

Pol II

Pol III

E. coli

C

CTD

90°

Book icon

Book icon

D. Conserved residues (red)

Yeast pol I
Yeast pol II
Yeast pol III
Human pol II
H. halobium
E. coli

 K  K E  G   L   F  R   K H M M G K R  V N
G  K E  G R     I    R  G N   L M G K R  V D
G  K Q G R  F  R  G N   L  S   G K R  V D
G  K E  G R  V  R  G N   L M  G K R  V D
G  K E  G R   F  R  G S    L   S  G K R  V N
G  K Q G R   F  R  Q N   L    L  G K R  V D

FIGURE 10.4  MULTIPLE RNA POLYMERASES. A, Eukaryotic cells have three different polymerases (Pol) that share three common subunits 
(numbers 5, 6, and 8) and have a number of other related, but distinct, subunits (indicated by related colors and distinct shading). B, A ribbon 
diagram of the structure of RNA polymerase II showing the arrangement of different subunits (colored as in part A). Metal ions are indicated as 
red balls. A prominent cleft, large enough to accommodate a DNA template, is formed between the two largest subunits. The model DNA fragment 
is shown for size comparison only. C, Conserved amino acid sequences are dispersed throughout the largest subunits. Red indicates sequences 
that are conserved among both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Yellow represents sequences that are conserved among the three different eukaryotic 
RNA polymerases. D, Conserved residues are located on the inner surface of the RNA polymerase cleft. E. coli, Escherichia coli; H. halobium, 
Halobacterium  halobium.  (B,  For  reference,  see  Protein  Data  Bank  [PDB;  www.rcsb.org]  file  1I50  and  Cramer  P,  Bushnell  DA,  Kornberg  RD. 
Structural basis of transcription: RNA polymerase II at 2.8 angstrom resolution. Science. 2001;292:1863–1876. D, From Zhang G, Campbell EA, 
Minakhin L, et al. Crystal structure of Thermus aquaticus core RNA polymerase at 3.3 Å resolution. Cell. 1999;98:811–824.)

followed  by  evolution  of  specialized  functions.  RNA 
polymerase  II  is  the  most  versatile,  because  it  must 
transcribe  approximately  25,000  different  species  of 
human mRNAs and perhaps an equal number of ncRNAs. 
The  relative  abundance  of  individual  mRNAs  can  vary 
widely, often in response to external signals, from just a 
few  copies  to  more  than  10,000  copies  per  cell.  Thus, 
RNA  polymerase  II  must  recognize  thousands  of  differ-
ent promoters and transcribe them with widely varying 
efficiencies. In contrast, RNA polymerase I is specialized 
to transcribe more than 100,000 copies of rRNA per cell 
and  RNA  polymerase  III  synthesizes  several  hundred 
species of highly abundant transcripts.

Specialization  has  been  balanced,  however,  by  the 
need to retain the structural elements required for RNA 

synthesis. The subunits of both prokaryotic and eukary-
otic enzymes assemble into a roughly spherical structure 
with a diameter of approximately 150 Å and a cleft 25 Å 
wide,  to  accommodate  the  DNA  template  (Fig.  10.4B). 
The  two  largest  subunits  form  the  framework  of  the 
structure, with two lobes that clamp down on the tem-
plate DNA and form the catalytic core (Fig. 10.4C). The 
most  conserved  residues  are  located  on  the  inner  sur-
faces of the enzymes with the site of nucleotide addition 
on the back wall of the cleft (Fig. 10.4D).

Transcription does not necessarily require such large 
enzymes.  Bacteriophages  have  evolved  structurally  dis-
tinct, DNA-dependent RNA polymerases that are one-fifth 
the size of the eukaryotic enzymes yet are able to carry 
out complete transcription cycles. The complexity of the 

 

CHAPTER 10  n  Gene Expression 

169

eukaryotic enzymes is likely attributable to the need for 
regulation,  with  additional  subunits  acting  as  sites  
for  interaction  with  regulatory  proteins.  Domains  that 
differ among the three types of eukaryotic RNA polymer-
ases are likely to interact with factors that are unique to 
a particular class of polymerase. One example of a class-
specific  domain  is  the  carboxyl-terminal  domain 
(CTD)  of  the  largest  subunit  of  RNA  polymerase  II, 
which is composed of tandem repeats of the consensus 
heptapeptide TyrSerProThrSerProSer. The CTD is highly 
phosphorylated  in  vivo,  and  the  timing  of  CTD  phos-
phorylation  suggests  that  this  modification  may  be 
involved  in  the  transition  between  the  initiation  and 
elongation steps of transcription. By serving as a scaffold 
binding numerous auxiliary factors, the CTD also couples 
transcription  with  the  subsequent  processing  of  the 
nascent mRNA as is discussed in a later section.

RNA Polymerase Promoters
Initiation of transcription requires loading of RNA poly-
merase onto the chromosome at the promoter of a gene 
or operon. A promoter can be loosely defined as a DNA 
sequence  where  RNA  polymerase  binds,  unwinds  the 
template  and  initiates  transcription.  Strong  promoters 
drive  the  expression  of  genes  whose  products  are 
required in abundance. Weaker promoters regulate the 
expression  of  rare  proteins  or  RNAs.  In  multicellular 
organisms, a promoter may direct expression at a high 
level in some cells, at an intermediate level in others, and 
be repressed in yet others.

Promoters in bacteria are recognized by direct interac-
tions of the RNA polymerase σ factor with specific DNA 
sequences. The most common σ factor in E. coli (σ 70) 
recognizes two conserved six-base sequences located 10 
bases  (minus  10)  and  35  (minus  35)  upstream  of  the 
transcription  start  site  (Fig.  10.5A).  Once  initiation  has 
occurred, σ is no longer required and can dissociate from 
the core enzyme. Bacterial cells have several distinct σ 
factors, each of which binds the core enzyme and directs 
RNA  polymerase  to  a  subset  of  promoters  that  contain 
different  recognition  sequences,  thereby  promoting 
independently  regulated  transcription  of  genes  with 
diverse functions.

Eukaryotic promoter sequences for RNA polymerases 
I  and  II  are  also  situated  upstream  of  the  transcription 
start site. RNA polymerase I recognizes a single type of 
promoter  located  upstream  of  each  copy  of  the  long 
tandem array of pre-rRNA coding sequences (Figs. 10.3B 
and 10.5B). The core element of this promoter overlaps 
the  transcription  start  site,  while  an  upstream  control 
element located approximately 100 bp from the start site 
stimulates transcription.

Comparison  of  the  first  eukaryotic  protein-coding 
gene  sequences  revealed  a  conserved  consensus 
sequence—TATAAAA—called  a  TATA  box,  located 
approximately 30 bp upstream of the transcription start 

A. Prokaryotic promoter

-35 (6 bp)

(17–19 bp)

-10 (6 bp)

+1

5'

10 bp

DNA

3'

B. Eukaryotic Pol I promoter

-200

5'

Upstream element

-100

-50

DNA

Core element

50 bp

+20

3'

C. Eukaryotic Pol II promoter

10 bp

-37 to -32 -31 to -26
5'

TATA

BRE
TFIIB

recognition

element
C C A
C G C C
G G G

TATA
box

TATA A A

DNA

+1

INR

Initiator

Py Py A N Py Py

T
A

+28 to +34

DPE

3'
Downstream

promoter
element
A
TG C G T G
G

A

D. Eukaryotic Pol III
     promoter:
     tRNA genes

E. Eukaryotic Pol III
     promoter:
     5S rRNA gene

25 bp

5'

+8 +20

A box

DNA

+50 +61

B box

3'

5'

+40

DNA

+80

3'

C box

FIGURE  10.5  PROKARYOTIC  AND  EUKARYOTIC  PROMOT-
ERS. The prokaryotic (A) and three eukaryotic (B–E) RNA polymerases 
recognize  different  promoter  sequences.  Positions  of  promoter  ele-
ments are indicated with respect to the start of transcription (+1). For 
the  RNA  polymerase  II  (Pol  II)  promoter  elements,  the  consensus 
sequences  are  shown.  Not  all  polymerase  II  promoters  contain  all 
these elements. Pol, polymerase; rRNA, ribosomal RNA; TF, transcrip-
tion factor; tRNA, transfer RNA. 

site  of  many  genes  transcribed  by  RNA  polymerase  II 
(Fig. 10.5C). In addition to the TATA box, a less-conserved 
promoter element, the initiator, is found in the vicinity 
of the transcription start site of many genes. Some genes 
transcribed by polymerase II do not contain TATA boxes 
but  may  contain  strong  initiator  elements.  Together, 
these two elements account for the basal promoter activ-
ity of most protein-coding genes.

Two types of RNA polymerase III promoters have key 
elements within the transcribed sequences (Fig. 10.5D–
E). tRNA genes contain two 11-bp elements, the A box 
and  B  box,  centered  approximately  15  bp  from  the  5′ 
and  3′  ends  of  the  coding  sequence,  respectively.  The 
5S-rRNA gene contains a single internal element, the C 
box,  located  in  the  center  of  the  coding  region.  Given 
the differences in classes of eukaryotic promoters, it is 
not surprising that each type of polymerase uses differ-
ent proteins to recognize the promoter sequences.

Transcription Initiation
The  loading  of  RNA  polymerase  onto  double-stranded 
genomic DNA at a promoter sequence is best understood 
in prokaryotes and is discussed first before initiation by 
eukaryotes.  Initiation  takes  place  in  a  series  of  defined 

170 

SECTION IV  n  Central Dogma: From Gene to Protein

A. Closed complex (binding)

B. Open complex (melting)

C. Transcribing complex

Jaws of
clamp

RNA exit
channel

Nucleotide
entry channel

FIGURE  10.6  THREE  STEPS  IN  RNA  POLYMERASE  INITIATION.  A,  In  the  closed  complex,  the  double-stranded  promoter  DNA  is 
recognized by σ factor domains on the surface of the holoenzyme. Double-stranded DNA then transfers into the active site shown here. B, The 
open complex forms by unwinding DNA surrounding the transcription start site and positioning the single-stranded template in the active site of 
the polymerase. C, The initiation reaction in the context of the transcription cycle. 

TABLE 10.1  Summary of Eukaryotic RNA Polymerase II General Transcription Factors
Factor

Number of Subunits

Subunit M (kD)

Functions

TFIIA
TFIIB
TFIID
(TBP)
TFIIE
TFIIF
TFIIH

Polymerase II
TOTALS

TBP, TATA box–binding protein.

3
1
12
1
2
2
9

12
42

12, 19, 35
25
15–250
38
34, 57
30, 74
35–98

10–220
~1000

Stabilizes binding of TBP and TFIIB
Binds TBP, selects start site, and recruits polymerase II
Interacts with regulatory factors
Subunit of TFIID; specifically recognizes the TATA box
Recruits TFIIH
Binds polymerase II and TFIIB
Unwinds promoter DNA; phosphorylates CTD 

(C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II)

Catalyzes RNA synthesis

steps  (Fig.  10.6).  First,  RNA  polymerase  holoenzyme 
binds to the double-stranded promoter, forming what is 
called the closed complex. Interactions between the σ 
factor  and  bases  in  the  −10  and  −35  elements  of  the 
promoter determine the specificity and strength of this 
interaction  (Fig.  10.5).  The  second  step  in  initiation  is 
the formation of an open complex by separation of the 
two  strands  of  DNA  around  the  transcription  start  site 
producing a 14 base transcription bubble. This unpairing 
is accompanied by a conformational change in the poly-
merase that positions the single-stranded DNA template 
in  the  active  site  and  narrows  the  DNA-binding  cleft, 
effectively  closing  the  polymerase  clamp.  In  the  next 
step, the DNA template in the active site base-pairs with 
the first two ribonucleotides, and the first phosphodies-
ter  bond  is  catalyzed.  The  process  of  single  nucleotide 
addition  is  repeated  until  the  nascent  RNA  is  eight  to 
nine bases long, at which point addition of bases to the 
growing RNA chain results in the unpairing of the 5′ RNA 
base  of  the  RNA-DNA  hybrid,  and  the  nascent  RNA 
begins  to  exit  through  a  channel  on  the  surface  of  the 
polymerase.  The  resulting  conformational  change  in 
polymerase leads to the release of σ factor and formation 

of a stable ternary (three-way) complex containing RNA 
polymerase, the DNA template, and the nascent RNA.

General Eukaryotic Transcription Factors
Eukaryotic RNA polymerases require multiple initiation 
factors  to  start  transcription.  All  the  RNA  polymerases 
use  a  TATA  box–binding  protein,  but  most  of  the 
other initiation factors are unique for each class. On the 
other hand, each RNA polymerase uses the same general 
transcription  factors  (GTFs)  for  most  promoters. 
GTFs are remarkably conserved among eukaryotes. The 
next  sections  describe  transcription  initiation  by  the 
three forms of eukaryotic RNA polymerase.

RNA Polymerase II Factors
Initiation  of  transcription  by  RNA  polymerase  II  in 
vitro  depends  on  the  ordered  assembly  of  more  than 
20 GTFs at the promoter (Table 10.1). Assembly of this 
RNA  polymerase  II  preinitiation  complex  begins 
with  binding  of  TFIID,  a  large  protein  complex  (~700 
kD) consisting of TATA box–binding protein (TBP) and 
TBP-associated  factors  called  TAFIIs  (Fig.  10.7A). 
TBP  alone  is  sufficient  for  basal  transcription,  while 

 

CHAPTER 10  n  Gene Expression 

171

TATA

Gene

A

TAFs

II D

TBP

CTD

Pol II

II F

II A

II B

II E

II H

Preinitiation
complex

TAFs

B

TBP
F

A

H

E

B

C

N

C

C

N

TBP

D.

TBP

N

C

TF II B

Elongation factors

Direction of
transcription

+1

FIGURE 10.7  RNA POLYMERASE II PREINITIATION COMPLEX ON THE ADENOVIRUS-2 MAJOR LATE PROMOTER DNA. A, The 
sequential assembly of general transcription factors leads to a preinitiation complex with the promoter region in the closed complex. Helicase 
activities present in transcription factor IIH (TFIIH) use the energy of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to unwind the promoter, leading to formation 
of  an  open  complex.  B,  Binding  of  the  TATA  box–binding  protein  (TBP)  leads  to  C,  a  pronounced  bend  in  the  DNA.  D,  TFIIB  interacts  both 
upstream and downstream of the TATA box and directs RNA polymerase to the transcription start site. (B–D, For reference, see PDB file 1VOL. 
TBP + DNA coordinates courtesy Stephen Burley, Rockefeller University, New York.)

TBP-associated 
factors  (TAFs)  apparently  serve  as 
targets  for  further  activation  of  transcription  (see  sub-
sequent  sections).  DNA  binding  by  TBP  is  provided  by 
a  highly  conserved  C-terminal  of  180  amino  acids, 
which forms a saddle-shaped monomer with an axis of 
dyad  symmetry  (Fig.  10.7B).  The  underside  of  the  TBP 
“saddle”  binds  to  the  minor  groove  of  the  TATA 
sequence,  which  is  splayed  open  in  the  process.  A 

pronounced DNA bend is produced at each end of the 
TATAAA  element  by  the  intercalation  of  phenylalanine 
side  chains  (Fig.  10.7C).

The TFIID-TATA box complex serves as a binding site 
for additional GTFs and positive and negative regulators. 
TFIIA  binding  stabilizes  the  TBP-DNA  interaction  and 
prevents the binding of repressors that would otherwise 
block further initiation complex formation.

172 

SECTION IV  n  Central Dogma: From Gene to Protein

The next step in assembly of the initiation complex 
is adding TFIIB, which binds to one side of TBP, making 
contacts  with  DNA  upstream  and  downstream  of  the 
TATA  box  (Fig.  10.7D).  Mutations  in  the  yeast  gene 
encoding  TFIIB  alter  mRNA  start-site  selection,  indicat-
ing that TFIIB establishes the spacing between the TATA 
box  and  the  transcription  start  site.  TFIIB  interacts 
directly with TBP and RNA polymerase II and is essential 
for the next steps in initiation complex assembly.

RNA  polymerase  II  joins  the  preinitiation  complex 
(Fig. 10.7A) associated with TFIIF. This factor stabilizes 
the  interaction  of  RNA  polymerase  II  with  TFIIB  and 
TBP.  TFIIF  also  binds  to  free  polymerase  and  prevents 
interactions with nonpromoter DNA sites.

TFIIH  and  its  stimulatory  factor  TFIIE  are  the  final 
general factors to enter the preinitiation complex. Their 
binding stabilizes contacts between proteins and DNA in 
the vicinity of the transcription start site. TFIIH contains 
eight  polypeptides,  several  of  which  have  functions 
outside of transcription initiation. Helicases associated 
with  TFIIH  use  energy  from  adenosine  triphosphate 
(ATP) hydrolysis to unwind a short stretch of promoter 
DNA  at  the  transcription  start  site.  This  separation  of 
DNA strands allows RNA polymerase II to recognize the 
template  strand,  bind  the  complementary  nucleotides, 
and synthesize the first few phosphodiester bonds.

TFIIH also contains a protein kinase that phosphory-
lates the CTD. This is Cdk-activating kinase (CAK), itself 
a Cdk-cyclin complex that phosphorylates and activates 
other  cyclin-dependent  kinases  (see  Fig.  40.14).  In  the 
initiation complex, phosphorylation of the CTD releases 
it  from  interactions  with  GTFs  and  mediator  (see  later 
section)  allowing  it  to  leave  the  promoter  and  enter  
the  transcription  elongation  phase.  Other  TFIIH  sub-
units  have  been  identified  as  components  of  the  DNA 
repair  machinery.  Several  genes  encoding  TFIIH  sub-
units  are  mutated  in  xeroderma  pigmentosa,  a  human 
disease  with  defects  in  DNA  excision  repair.  This  sug-
gests that TFIIH might link transcription to DNA repair 
(see Box 43.1).

Initiation by RNA Polymerases I and III
Distinct  initiation  complexes  initiate  transcription  at 
RNA  polymerase  I  and  III  promoters  (Fig.  10.8).  RNA 
polymerases  I  (Pol  I)  and  III  (Pol  III)  contain  subunits 
related  to  polymerase  II  (Pol  II)  GTFs  TFIIF  and  TFIIE. 
Unique  TFIIB-related  factors  provide  additional  GTF 
functions for Pol I and Pol III.

The Pol I upstream binding factor binds to both the 
upstream control element and part of the core element 
of the promoter (Fig. 10.8A). A protein complex called 
SL1  stabilizes  this  initial  complex.  SL1  consists  of  TBP 
and TAFs specific to RNA Pol I, including one related to 
TFIIB.  A  unique  factor  Rrn3  binds  Pol  I  and  modulates 
rRNA transcription in response to nutrient availability.

A. Pol I rRNA promotors

+1

UCE

Core element

Pre-rRNA gene

TBP

TAFs

Pol I

UBF UBF

B. Pol III tRNA promotor

TBP

TFIIIC

Pol III

B''

BRF
TFIIIB

C. Pol III 5S-rRNA promotor

TFIIIC

TFIIIA

B''

TBP

BRF

TFIIIB

Pol III

FIGURE  10.8  RNA  POLYMERASE  I  AND  III  PREINITIATION 
COMPLEXES. A, Ribosomal RNA promoters assemble a preinitiation 
complex. (UCE, upstream control element.) This complex consists of 
an upstream binding factor (UBF) and a multisubunit factor that con-
tains TATA box–binding protein (TBP). Together, these factors recruit 
RNA  polymerase  I.  B–C,  Initiation  at  RNA  polymerase  III  promoters 
requires recognition of sequences within the transcribed sequences. 
These  sequences  differ  for  transfer  RNA  (tRNA)  and  5S  ribosomal 
genes. B, In the case of tRNA genes, only TFIIIC is required for specific 
binding.  C,  For  5S  genes,  the  internal  element  is  recognized  by  the 
specific DNA-binding factor TFIIIA. BRF, TFIIB-related factor. 

The  assembly  of  RNA  Pol  III  initiation  complexes 
differs  at  various  promoters.  Initiation  at  tRNA  genes 
begins  with  TFIIIC  binding  to  the  A  and  B  boxes  (Fig. 
10.8B);  TFIIIB  then  binds  upstream  of  the  A  box  at  a 
sequence determined both by an interaction with TFIIIC 
and  through  the  DNA-binding  capacity  of  TBP.  Once  
the  TFIIIC–TFIIIB  complex  has  assembled,  RNA  Pol  III  
initiates  transcription.  Multiple  rounds  of  initiation  can 
occur on the stable transfer DNA (tDNA)–TFIIIC–TFIIIB 
complex.  Transcription  of  5S  rRNA  genes  requires  an 
additional factor called TFIIIA that recognizes the C box 
located  near  the  center  of  the  5S  rRNA  coding  region. 
TFIIIC then binds with contacts on each side of TFIIIA, 
similar  to  the  A  and  B  boxes  contacting  tRNA  genes. 
Finally,  TFIIIB  binds  through  interactions  with  TFIIIC 
and  DNA,  and  the  resulting  preinitiation  complex  is 
recognized by RNA Pol III.

 

CHAPTER 10  n  Gene Expression 

173

Summary of the Eukaryotic Basal  
Transcription Machinery
Despite  the  evolutionary  divergence  of  the  multiple 
eukaryotic  RNA  polymerases  and  the  specialization  of 
each  polymerase  for  a  unique  set  of  promoters,  the 
fundamental  mechanisms  of  transcription  have  been 
conserved.  This  conservation  is  reflected  not  only  in 
similar  sequences  of  the  subunits  of  the  polymerases 
themselves  but  also  in  the  presence  of  TBP  and  TFIIB 
homologs  among  the  GTFs  used  by  each  class  of  poly-
merase. Indeed, Archaea, which have only a single RNA 
polymerase, contain both TBP and TFIIB suggesting that 
initiation  mechanisms  employing  GTFs  evolved  before 
the duplication of the RNA polymerases.

Why are so many factors required to make a transcript? 
Part  of  the  complexity  might  be  necessary  to  generate 
multiple sites for interaction with regulatory factors that 
could either activate or repress the assembly or function 
of  the  preinitiation  complex.  A  second  role  for  the 
complex set of factors could be to target polymerases to 
specific sites in the nucleus. Finally, some factors could 
help  load  elongation,  splicing,  or  termination  factors 
onto the RNA polymerases.

Transcription Elongation and Termination
The final stage of initiation leads to elongation and move-
ment of the polymerase away from the promoter. This 
process  of  promoter  clearance  is  associated  with 
structural changes in the polymerase, which prepare it 
for efficient RNA synthesis and render it susceptible to 
the action of factors that regulate elongation. Such regu-
latory  factors,  together  with  structural  features  of  the 
nascent transcript, influence elongation and can trigger 
the termination of transcription and the dissociation of 
the  ternary  elongation  complex  containing  the  DNA 
template, nascent RNA, and RNA polymerase. The termi-
nation  reaction  typically  occurs  at  the  3′  end  of  the 
gene  or  operon  and  serves  both  to  recycle  RNA  poly-
merase  for  additional  initiation  reactions  as  well  as  to 
ensure  that  adjacent  genes  are  not 
inadvertently 
transcribed.

Transcription Elongation Complex
Efficient synthesis of RNA requires balancing two com-
peting demands. First, the elongation complex must be 
very  stable,  because  premature  dissociation  from  DNA 
produces  defective  partial  transcripts  and  requires  the 
polymerase  to  restart  transcription  from  the  promoter. 
However,  the  complex  must  also  be  bound  loosely 
enough  so  that  the  polymerase  can  easily  translocate 
along the DNA template.

RNA  polymerase  evolved  to  meet  these  needs.  The 
cleft  formed  at  the  interface  between  the  two  largest 
subunits is open when the polymerase is in the initiation 

complex. Once the first few RNA phosphodiester bonds 
form,  the  polymerase  undergoes  a  conformational 
change. Subunits at the outer edge of the cleft close like 
jaws to encircle the DNA template. In this structure, the 
front  end  of  the  transcription  “bubble”  (an  unpaired 
segment of the DNA template) is positioned at the back 
wall of the cleft, close to the catalytic center. The elonga-
tion  complex  is  highly  efficient  and  can  function  
continuously  for  the  17  hours  required  to  transcribe  
the more than 2 million-bp mammalian dystrophin gene 
(see Fig. 39.17).

Catalytic Cycle
The DNA-dependent RNA polymerases catalyze synthesis 
of an RNA polymer from ribonucleoside 5′-triphosphates 
(ATP,  guanosine  triphosphate  [GTP],  cytidine  triphos-
phate [CTP], and uridine triphosphate [UTP]) according 
to the following reaction:

(

NMP

)

n

+

NTP

→

(

NMP

)

++1

n

PPi

where  (NMP)n  is  the  RNA  polymer;  NTP  is  ATP,  UTP, 
CTP,  or  GTP;  and  PPi  is  pyrophosphate.  Polymerase 
extends the RNA chain in the 5′ to 3′ direction by adding 
ribonucleotide units to the chain’s 3′ OH end. Selection 
of  the  incoming  nucleoside  triphosphate  (NTP)  is 
directed  by  the  DNA  template  and  takes  place  at  the 
transcription bubble (Fig. 10.9). The 3′ hydroxyl group 
acts as a nucleophile, attacking the α-phosphate of the 
incoming NTP in a reaction similar to that seen in DNA 
replication (see Fig. 42.1). The chain elongation reaction 
proceeds in vivo at a rate of 30 to 100 nucleotides per 
second  and  is  facilitated  by  a  set  of  flexible  protein 
modules surrounding the polymerase active site.

Pausing, Arrest, and Termination
Following  the  addition  of  each  nucleotide,  RNA  poly-
merase  may  add  an  additional  nucleotide,  pause,  move 
in  reverse,  or  terminate  (Fig.  10.9B).  The  relative  
probabilities  of  these  alternative  reactions  depend  
on  interactions  between  the  transcription  complex  
and the template, the nascent RNA transcript, and regula-
tory TFs.

RNA polymerase does not elongate at a constant rate. 
Instead,  it  synthesizes  RNA  in  short  spurts  between 
pauses. A pause of short duration can be caused by low 
NTP  concentrations  or  alternatively  by  the  transient 
unpairing  of  the  3′  end  of  the  nascent  transcript  and 
template. Longer pauses are provoked by the presence, 
in the nascent RNA, of short (~20 bp) self-complementary 
sequences that can fold to form a stem-loop or hairpin, 
or the presence of a weak RNA–DNA hybrid. The pres-
ence of an unstable RNA–DNA hybrid can arise from the 
misincorporation of an NTP leading to an unpaired base 
in  the  hybrid.  In  this  case,  the  RNA  polymerase  can 
backtrack or slide backward on the template (Fig. 10.9C). 

174 

SECTION IV  n  Central Dogma: From Gene to Protein

A. RNA polymerase

Nascent
RNA

B. Active site

Termination

Elongation
3' OH

Editing

RNA
transcript

Template

Position

–1

1 +1

Next NTP

C. Elongating

5'

3'

5'

5'

D. Paused

5'

3'

E. Arrested

5'

3'

5'

3'

5'

3'

5'

3'

5'

3'

Backsliding

Backsliding

3'

FIGURE 10.9  TRANSCRIPTION ELONGATION. A, Model of the transcription elongation complex consisting of RNA polymerase, template 
DNA, and nascent RNA transcript. RNA polymerases interact with the template upstream and downstream of the transcription bubble. B, The 
active site of RNA polymerase positions the growing end of the nascent transcript in the appropriate location for the addition of the next nucleoside 
triphosphate (NTP). After each single nucleotide addition, the polymerase may translocate forward and repeat the nucleotide addition (C), slide 
backward and pause for a variable time (D), or slide further backward, causing a transcription arrest that is reversed when the polymerase cleaves 
the nascent RNA (E). 

Backward  movement  of  the  transcription  bubble  is 
accompanied by a zippering movement of the RNA–DNA 
hybrid  in  which  the  nascent  RNA  in  the  exit  channel 
rehybridizes  with  upstream  template  sequences  and  
the  3′  end  of  the  transcript  unpairs  from  the  hybrid 
and is extruded through the same channel that NTPs use 
to  enter  the  active  site.  If  the  polymerase  backtracks 
more  than  a  few  nucleotides  the  complex  becomes 
arrested  and  cannot  resume  elongation  without  assis-
tance  of  additional  factors.  For  example,  transcription 
elongation  factors  can  bind  in  the  NTP  channel  of 
arrested complexes and activate the RNA polymerase to 
cleave the backtracked RNA. The new 3′ terminal residue 
is  correctly  positioned  for  incorporation  of  the  next 
complementary NTP (Fig. 10.9C–E). This editing process 
increases the fidelity of transcription. Pausing also occurs 
following  transcription  of  U-rich  sequences,  and  in  
prokaryotes  this  is  often  associated  with  transcription 
termination.

Termination
When  elongating  RNA  polymerase  reaches  the  end  
of  a  gene  or  operon,  specific  sequences  in  the  RNA 

called  terminators  trigger  the  release  of  the  transcript 
and  dissociation  of  the  RNA  polymerase.  Bacteria  have 
two types of terminators. The first are called intrinsic 
(or  rho-independent)  terminators,  because  they 
function  in  the  absence  of  any  protein  factors  (Fig. 
10.10A).  Intrinsic  terminators  consist  of  two  sequence 
elements in the RNA: a stable GC-rich hairpin and a run 
of  about  eight  consecutive  U  residues.  As  the  first  of 
these elements is synthesized, it forms a hairpin, causing 
polymerase to pause with less stable U:A bp (with only 
two H bonds [see Fig. 3.14]) in the hybrid. The nascent 
transcript  is  released  from  this  complex,  terminating 
transcription.  The  second  type  of  prokaryotic  termina-
tion  requires  a  protein  factor  called  rho  (Fig.  10.10B). 
Rho  is  a  hexameric  helicase  that  binds  cytosine-rich 
sequences and uses ATP hydrolysis to translocate along 
the nascent transcript in the 5′ to 3′ direction, essentially 
chasing the RNA polymerase. When polymerase pauses, 
rho can catch up and use the energy derived from ATP 
hydrolysis to pull the RNA out of the transcription elon-
gation complex.

Eukaryotic RNA polymerases evolved distinct mecha-
nisms  for  termination.  RNA  Pol  III  requires  no  protein 

 

CHAPTER 10  n  Gene Expression 

175

A. Rho-independent termination

B. Rho-dependent termination

G
C
G
G

C

G

C
C

G- and C-rich self-
complementary
region forms hairpin

 G- and C-rich

G
C
GG

C
G
C
C

Hairpin structure
induces release of
paused polymerase
from polyU sequence

C
C
G
C

G
G
C
G
UUU U UU

CC  C CC C  

Rho hexamer binds specific
C-rich sequences of RNA

Rho migrates 5' to 3'
to signal release of
pol on contact

Rho's helicase activity
unwinds RNA/DNA duplex
releasing RNA

FIGURE 10.10  PROKARYOTIC TRANSCRIPTION TERMINATION. A, Rho-independent termination is directed by sequences in the nascent 
transcript that operate in the absence of any additional factors. B, The bacterial termination factor rho translocates along the nascent RNA and 
on reaching the RNA polymerase (pol) causes the disassembly of the elongation complex. 

factors but terminates efficiently after transcribing four 
to  six  consecutive  U  residues,  presumably  owing  to 
instability of the RNA–DNA hybrid in the enzyme active 
site. RNA Pol I terminates in response to a protein factor 
that  blocks  further  elongation  by  binding  to  a  DNA 
sequence downstream of the termination site, leaving an 
inherently unstable U-rich RNA–DNA hybrid in the active 
site.  The  RNA  Pol  II  termination  mechanism  is  more 
complex,  requiring  a  large  multiprotein  complex  that 
recognizes  the  poly(A)  addition  signal  sequence  in  the 
nascent transcript (see Fig. 11.3 for pre-mRNA process-
ing).  Deletion  or  mutation  of  the  poly(A)  signal  results 
in a failure to terminate messages at the appropriate site. 
Thus,  RNA  Pol  II  termination  is  coupled  to  3′-end  pro-
cessing (see Chapter 11).

Gene-Specific Transcription Regulation
Transcription initiation is the critical first step in deter-
mining  that  each  gene  is  expressed  at  the  appropriate 
level in each cell. Depending mainly on the sequence of 
the  promoter  and  other  regulatory  sequences,  expres-
sion  can  be  constitutive  or  influenced  by  regulatory 
proteins.  This  section  discusses  proteins  that  regulate 
transcription  of  specific  genes  either  positively  or 
negatively.  The  discussion  starts  with  a  prokaryotic 
example  and  then  covers  a  variety  of  eukaryotic 
regulators.  Although  the  details  differ  in  prokaryotes 

and  eukaryotes,  many  of  the  basic  principles  are  
the same.

Regulation of Transcription Initiation in Prokaryotes
Prokaryotes  typically  regulate  gene  expression 
in 
response to environmental cues such as the presence of 
nutrients in the growth medium (see Fig. 27.11). These 
signals are transmitted to the appropriate genes through 
regulatory proteins that bind to specific sequences near 
the  genes  they  control  to  either  activate  or  repress 
transcription.  Both  of  these  regulatory  mechanisms 
come into play in regulation of the E. coli lactose (lac) 
operon  (Figs.  10.2A  and  10.11).  The  genes  expressed 
from  this  operon  are  required  for  cells  to  metabolize 
lactose but are not expressed in the absence of lactose. 
Genetic  studies  in  the  1960s  showed  that  the  gene 
upstream of the lac operon (I in Fig. 10.2A) encodes a 
repressor  (lac  repressor)  that  blocks  expression  of  the 
lac operon in the absence of lactose (Fig. 10.11). The lac 
repressor binds to a site called an operator that overlaps 
the  RNA  polymerase  binding  site  in  the  lac  promoter. 
Lactose binding changes the conformation of the repres-
sor, so it dissociates from DNA, allowing RNA polymerase 
to bind the promoter.

Full expression of the lac operon requires the catabo-
lite  activator  protein  (CAP),  another  allosteric  protein 
that binds DNA just upstream of the lac promoter. CAP 
is  activated  by  a  conformational  change  induced  when 

176 

SECTION IV  n  Central Dogma: From Gene to Protein

A. Lac regulation physiology

e
s
o
t
c
a
L

e
s
o
c
u
G

l

Bacterial

polymerase

High level of
transcription

–35

–10

CAP
site

Lac Z

Low level of
transcription

No transcription

Lac repressor

5'
3'

Lac

operator

B. Lac regulation
     mechanics

CAP
(inactive)

cAMP

Active CAP
  attracts
  polymerase

CAP-binding zone

Lac
repressor
(inactive)

Lactose
inducer

Lac
repressor
(active)

Repressor binding

zone half-sites

CAACGCAATTAATGTGAGTTAGCTCACTCATTAGGCACCCCAGGCTTTACACTTTATGCTTCCGGCTCGTATGTTGTGTGGAATTGTGAGCGGATAACAATTTCACACAGGAAACAGCT
GTTGCGTTAATTACACTCAATCGAGTGAGTAATCCGTGGGGTCCGAAATGTGAAATACGAAGGCCGAGCATACAACACACCTTAACACTCGCCTATTGTTAAAGTGTGTCCTTTGTCGA

Transcription

-35

-10

+1

Lac operator

Polymerase-binding zone

FIGURE 10.11  REGULATION OF THE LACTOSE (LAC) OPERON. A, RNA polymerase (green) binding to the lac promoter is regulated by 
the binding of repressor or activator (catabolite activator protein [CAP]). B, Binding sites for CAP and the repressor at the lac operon. The main 
repressor-binding site overlaps the promoter and blocks access of RNA polymerase. Additional lac repressor-binding sites are located upstream 
and downstream of the promoter. Lac repressor can form a tetramer and thus bind two operators, forming a loop in the lac operon DNA. Inducer 
(eg, lactose) binding dramatically alters the conformation of the lac repressor diminishing its affinity for the operator. CAP binds just upstream of 
the promoter where it can stabilize the bound RNA polymerase. 

it binds cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), which 
the cell produces when the intracellular glucose concen-
tration is low. Active CAP bound to its site stabilizes the 
otherwise weak interaction of RNA polymerase with the 
promoter.  The  resulting  activation  allows  maximum 
expression of the lac operon in the presence of lactose 
and the absence of glucose.

Control  of  lac  gene  expression  by  opposing  repres-
sors  and  activators  is  an  example  of  regulation  at 
the  first  step  in  transcription  initiation,  binding  of 
RNA  polymerase  to  the  promoter.  Regulating  access 
of  RNA  polymerase  to  promoters  is  a  common  form 
of  transcription  regulation  in  both  prokaryotes  and  
eukaryotes.

Overview of Eukaryotic Gene-Specific Transcription
While recruitment of RNA polymerase to the promoter 
remains a key step in eukaryotic transcription regulation, 
there  are  additional  layers  of  complexity.  First,  DNA  is 
bound  by  histones  and  packaged  in  nucleosomes  (see 
Fig.  8.1)  that  can  block  binding  of  TFs  and  RNA  poly-
merase.  Overcoming  this  generalized  repressive  effect 
requires activators that alter chromatin structure allow-
ing the recruitment of RNA polymerase.

Another major difference is that eukaryotic TFs bound 
tens  to  hundreds  of  kilobases  away  from  the  promoter 

Gene-specific
transcription
factors

Enhancer

Promotor
proximal
elements

Coregulators:

Mediator, ATP-dependent 
nucleosome remodelers, 
histone modifiers and 
negative cofactors

Mediator

TAFs

+1

Pol II

TBP

TF IID

FIGURE  10.12  NETWORK  OF  INTERACTIONS  THAT  REGU-
LATE RNA POLYMERASE II. Input comes from transcription factors 
bound  to  promoter  proximal  elements  and  enhancers  and  from 
coregulators that modify chromatin. 

can  activate  transcription.  In  many  cases  these  gene-
specific TFs do not act directly on polymerase but require 
coregulators that act as a bridge between gene-specific 
factors,  the  chromatin  template  and  RNA  polymerase 
with its associated GTFs (Fig. 10.12).

The following sections explain how detailed mecha-
nistic  studies  of  a  small  set  of  model  genes  provided 

 

A

CHAPTER 10  n  Gene Expression 

177

Transcription factor binding sites

Nucleosome locations

-
e
m
o
s
o
e
c
u
N

l

i

n
o
g
e
r
 

e
e
r
f

Histone modifications

B

C

D

s
d
a
e
r
 
e
c
n
e
u
q
e
s
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

-
e
m
o
s
o
e
c
u
N

l

i

n
o
g
e
r
 

e
e
r
f

FIGURE  10.13  CHROMATIN  IMMUNOPRECIPITATION  COUPLED  WITH  HIGH-THROUGHPUT  SEQUENCING  (CHIP-SEQ)  MAPS 
PROTEIN BINDING SITES AND HISTONE MODIFICATIONS. A, Experimental protocol. B, Frequency of DNA reads of DNA associated with 
three transcription factors associated with the UCHL5 gene. C, Frequency of DNA reads of DNA associated nucleosomes along two budding 
yeast genes. Nucleosomes are spaced regularly along the DEP1 gene but not along the CYS3 gene. D, Histone modifications along an active 
and an inactive gene. The thickness of the bar represents the frequency of each modification. (B, From Farnham P. Insights from genomic profiling 
of  transcription  factors.  Nat  Rev  Gen.  2009;10:605–616.  C,  From  Barth  TK,  Imhof  A.  Fast  signals  and  slow  marks:  the  dynamics  of  histone 
modifications. Trends Biochem Sci. 2010;35:618–626. D, Based on data from Jiang C, Pugh F. Nucleosome positioning and gene regulation: 
advances through genomics. Nat Rev Gen. 2010;10:161–172.) 

the  concepts  for  our  current  understanding  of  how 
thousands  of  different  proteins  combine  to  regulate 
tens  of  thousands  of  different  promoters.  Genome-
wide  studies  have  refined  our  understanding  of  how 
these  regulatory  mechanisms  function  in  more  global 
gene  regulatory  networks.  Before  addressing  specific 
mechanisms,  we  consider  techniques  for  mapping 
regulatory  proteins  to  specific  sites  in  the  eukaryotic  
genome.

Mapping Transcription Components on the Genome
One  of  the  key  advances  in  transcription  research  
has been to map transcription regulators and transcripts 
on  a  genome-wide  basis.  Fig.  10.13  describes  one  of  
these  approaches:  chromatin 
immunoprecipitation 
coupled  with  high-throughput  sequencing  (ChIP-seq). 
This  approach  yields  a  genome-wide  snapshot  of  
the  positions  of  RNA  polymerase,  TFs,  and  histones 

on  DNA  and  the  modifications  of  these  components. 
This  comprehensive  view  of  the  distributions  of 
transcription  components  has  yielded  novel  insights 
about  the  locations  of  regulatory  sequences  and  the 
presence of different combinations of histone modifica-
tions.  This  information  will  undoubtedly  guide  future 
experiments  where  the  regulatory  mechanisms  are  not  
yet clear.

Chromatin and Transcription
DNA in eukaryotic cells associates with an equal mass of 
protein  to  form  chromatin  (see  Chapter  8).  Packaging 
DNA  in  arrays  of  nucleosomes  compacts  the  DNA  and 
restricts  access  of  transcription  proteins  to  the  DNA 
template. Understanding how the transcription machin-
ery interacts with nucleosomes is a key to understanding 
eukaryotic transcription regulation.

178 

SECTION IV  n  Central Dogma: From Gene to Protein

Gene activation often involves disruption or displace-
ment  of  nucleosomes  located  on  specific  regulatory 
regions. Before the discussion of specific mechanisms, it 
is useful to consider some aspects of nucleosome struc-
ture.  The  nucleosome  consists  of  DNA  wrapped  in  a 
left-handed helix around an octamer of histone subunits 
(see Fig. 8.1). The histone core makes numerous contacts 
with  the  DNA  minor  groove  and  phosphate  backbone, 
leading to tight but relatively nonspecific binding. This 
aspect of the nucleosome allows for a dynamic associa-
tion with DNA, because binding of the histone core to 
DNA is nearly as energetically favorable for all sequences. 
However,  nucleosomes  are  not  positioned  uniformly 
along  the  DNA.  First,  some  AT-rich  sequences  do  not 
bend  in  a  manner  that  can  form  a  stable  nucleosome. 
Such  sequences  are  often  found  in  promoter  regions. 
Second,  nucleosomes  are  less  stable  if  the  histones  are 
modified, for example by acetylation or the inclusion of 
variant  histone  proteins.  The  presence  of  unstable 
nucleosomes  enables  the  transcription  machinery  to 
access key regulatory sequences.

Nucleosome  remodeling  complexes  can  either 
expose  or  shield  regulatory  elements  by  altering  the 
location  of  nucleosomes  on  the  DNA  template.  These 
multiprotein  remodeling  complexes  use  energy  from 
ATP  hydrolysis  to  destabilize  interactions  between  his-
tones and DNA thus altering the position of the nucleo-
some and “remodeling” the chromatin. One example is 
the  SWI/SNF  (yeast  mating  type  switching  defective/
sucrose  nonfermenting)  complex  that  is  recruited  to  a 
specific subset of genes through interactions with tran-
scription activators. The resulting remodeling of nucleo-
somes  in  the  vicinity  of  promoters  may  be  required  to 
form a stable preinitiation complex. Genomic mapping 
of histones (Fig. 10.13) shows that most Pol II promoters 
are free of nucleosomes.

Histone Modifications and Gene Expression
Specific  enzymes  modify  the  histone  tails  with  diverse 
chemical groups, often on lysine residues. Gene regula-
tory proteins recruit the modifying enzymes to chromatin 
generally as part of larger complexes (Table 10.2). Acti-
vator  proteins  generally  recruit  histone  acetyltransfer-

ases, while histone deacetylases are part of corepressor 
complexes.

The hundreds of chromatin regulatory complexes in 
cells give rise to different chromatin states defined both 
by  their  pattern  of  histone  modification  and  by  
their  transcription  (Fig.  10.13).  Silent  chromatin  is  not 
transcribed  and  has  nucleosomes  with  H3K9me3  or 
H3K27me3  modifications  spanning  multiple  genes  in 
heterochromatin  (see  Chapter  8).  Active  chromatin 
often  contains  nucleosomes  with  H3K4ac  or  H3K4me, 
H4K8ac  modifications,  often  in  promoter–proximal 
nucleosomes (Fig. 10.13). In stem cells (see Box 41.2), 
many  promoter–proximal  regions  contain  both  activat-
ing and repressing marks, so the genes are thought to be 
poised to be either activated or repressed as downstream 
signals dictate.

Most  chromatin  regulators  are  parts  of  larger  com-
plexes  containing  protein  modules  that  recognize  
histone  modifications  such  as  bromodomains  that 
interact  with  acetylated  tails  or  chromodomains  that 
bind  methylated  tails.  For  example,  the  SAGA  histone 
acetyltransferase complex contains a bromodomain that 
anchors  the  complex  to  chromatin,  facilitating  further 
modification  of  regions  that  are  already  acetylated.  A 
subunit of TFIID also contains a bromodomain that can 
facilitate the binding of TFIID to acetylated nucleosomes 
associated with active chromatin. Similarly, a number of 
histone methyltransferases contain chromodomains and 
are therefore targeted to their substrates by preexisting 
histone methylation.

The  following  sections  describe  examples  of  how 
TFs, chromatin regulators, and the general transcription 
machinery interact to regulate eukaryotic genes.

Gene-Specific Eukaryotic Transcription Factors
Eukaryotic TFs bind specific DNA sequences associated 
with the genes they regulate. This binding leads to activa-
tion  or  repression  of  transcription  in  a  spatially  and 
temporally  controlled  manner.  In  the  simplest  cases,  
the TF interacts directly with RNA Pol II and the GTFs 
but in more complex cases, the interaction may involve 
a coactivator or corepressor (see the following section). 
Current  estimates  indicate  that  approximately  6%  of  

TABLE 10.2  Nucleosome-Modifying Complexes
Name

Catalytic Activity

Subunits

SAGA
NuA4
P300
NuRD
SIR2
MLL

15
6
1
9
3
7

Histone acetylase
Histone acetylase
Histone acetylase
Histone deacetylase
Histone deacetylase
Histone methylase

Histone-Interacting Domain

Bromodomain
Chromodomain
Bromodomain
Chromodomain
Neither
Neither

Target Histone(s)

H3, H2B
H4
H2A, H2B, H3, H4
?
H4
H3 (lysine 4)

 

CHAPTER 10  n  Gene Expression 

179

the  coding  capacity  of  the  human  genome  (more  than 
1000  genes)  is  devoted  to  TFs  that  recognize  specific 
DNA  sequences.  The  following  sections  discuss  the 
functional  organization  of  these  proteins,  how  they 
recognize  DNA  and  how  they  interact  with  chromatin 
and the GTFs.

DNA-Binding Domains
Binding  proteins  to  specific  DNA  sequences  requires 
recognition of a pattern of bases along the double helix. 
The  richest  source  of  DNA  sequence  specificity  comes 
from the chemical groups exposed in the major groove. 
Most  specific  DNA-binding  proteins  probe  the  major 
groove of the double helix with a small structural element 
(usually, an α-helix) with a shape complementary to the 
surface  topography  of  a  particular  DNA  sequence.  The 
correct  DNA  sequence  is  recognized  through  multiple 
interactions between amino acid side chains in the rec-
ognition  helix  and  the  chemical  groups  on  the  DNA 
bases in the major groove. Single amino acid changes in 
the recognition helix can change the DNA sequence that 
is recognized. Protein-DNA complexes are stabilized by 
additional contacts between amino acid side chains and 
deoxyribose rings and phosphate groups or by bending 
the DNA.

DNA  recognition  domains  of  specific  TFs  typically 
interact with only 3 to 6 bp of DNA. Given the size and 
complexity  of  the  typical  mammalian  genome,  a 
sequence must be approximately 16 bp long to occur by 
chance only once. How then can TFs recognize specific 
genes among the vast number of close but nonidentical 
sequences?  Two  strategies  increase  the  length  of  the 
specific  sequence  to  be  recognized.  The  protein  can 
either use several recognition elements or dimerize with 
itself or other DNA-binding proteins. Protein dimers can 
recognize sequences with twofold rotational symmetry.
DNA-binding  proteins  can  be  grouped  into  families 
based  on  the  structure  of  the  domains  used  for  DNA 
sequence  recognition  (Fig.  10.14).  These  include  the 
helix-turn-helix  (HTH)  proteins,  homeodomains, 
zinc  finger  proteins,  steroid  receptors,  leucine 
zipper  proteins,  and  helix-loop-helix  proteins. 
Although these families include most known TFs, there 
remain other, less-common recognition domains. Within 
a given family, the recognition domain of each TF has an 
amino acid sequence that targets the protein to a particu-
lar DNA sequence. Conversely, different families of TFs 
can recognize the same regulatory sequence. The follow-
ing sections discuss several of the more common eukary-
otic DNA-binding domains.

A. Homeodomain

B. Zinc fingers

C. Glucocorticoid receptor

N N T A A T G G N N 
N N A T T A C C N N

N A G A A C A N N N T G T T C T N
N T C T T G T N N N A C A A G A N

N N G C G T G G G C G N N
N N C G C A C C C G C N N

D. Basic region zipper

E. Factor 1
     homodimer

F. Factor 2
    homodimer

G. Factor 1/2
     heterodimer

N N T G A G T C A N N
N N A C T C A G T N N

FIGURE  10.14  MOLECULAR STRUCTURES OF TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR DNA-BINDING DOMAINS. Recognition of specific DNA 
sequences requires interactions between amino acid side chains in the protein and chemical groups on the DNA bases. In each of the examples 
shown here, an α-helix interacts with specific bases through contacts in the major groove. A, The homeodomain α-helix recognizes a specific 
6-bp sequence. B, A protein with three zinc fingers recognizes three consecutive 3-bp sequences. C, The glucocorticoid receptor forms a dimer 
that recognizes the same 6-bp sequence (a hormone response element) in opposite orientations spaced 3 bp apart. D, A leucine zipper factor 
dimerizes to recognize a pair of 4-bp sites with opposite orientation spaced 1 bp apart. 

180 

SECTION IV  n  Central Dogma: From Gene to Protein

Homeodomain
This  motif  of  60  amino  acids  was  discovered  in  Dro-
sophila proteins that regulate development and is found 
in many eukaryotic TFs, including more than 150 human 
genes.  Recognition  is  provided  by  an  HTH  motif  com-
posed  of  two  helices,  one  of  which  sits  in  the  major 
groove of the DNA-binding site contacting a recognition 
sequence  of  6  bp  (Fig.  10.14A).  The  HTH  structure  is  
not  a  stable  domain  on  its  own,  but  functions  as  part  
of a larger DNA-binding domain, such as the homeodo-
main. A flexible arm interacting with the minor groove 
provides  the  homeodomain  with  additional  binding 
affinity.

Zinc Finger Proteins
The zinc finger protein sequence motif (Fig. 10.14B) is 
found in more than 600 human TFs. Each “finger” con-
sists of 30 residues with conserved pairs of cysteines and 
histidines that bind a single zinc ion. The tip of the finger 
sticks  into  the  DNA  major  groove,  where  it  contacts 
three  bases.  Most  zinc  finger  proteins  contain  multiple 
fingers, allowing longer sequences to be recognized to 
increase specificity. A related structure is present in the 
steroid hormone receptor family, although in this case, 
four  cysteine  residues  coordinate  the  zinc  ion  and  the 
finger  is  composed  of  two  helices  rather  than  one. 
Steroid  hormone  receptors  also  contain  a  dimerization 
domain,  allowing  recognition  of  sequences  with  dyad 
symmetry  (Fig.  10.14C).  Artificial  zinc  fingers  can  now 
be designed enabling synthetic proteins to recognize any 
desired DNA sequence for experimental manipulations.

Leucine Zipper Proteins
Leucine  zipper  domains  are  made  up  of  two  motifs:  a 
basic  region  that  recognizes  a  specific  DNA  sequence 
and a series of leucines spaced 7 residues apart along an 
α-helix (leucine zipper) that mediate dimerization. These 
motifs  form  a  continuous  α-helix  that  can  dimerize 
through  formation  of  a  coiled-coil  structure  involving 
paired  contacts  between  hydrophobic  leucine  zipper 
domains  (Fig.  10.14D;  also  see  Fig.  3.10).  Dimers  of 
leucine zipper proteins recognize short, inverted, repeat 
sequences. The zipper family comprises many members, 
some of which can cross-dimerize and recognize asym-
metrical sequences. Another family of factors comprises 
the helix-loop-helix proteins, which have the same type 
of  basic  region  but  differ  in  that  they  have  two  helical 
dimerization domains separated by a loop region.

A

Transcription activation
DNA binding

+
+

–
–

–
+

Gene 1

B

Factor 1

Factor 2

Swapped
domains

Activation

DNA binding

Transcription
machinery

Gene 2

Gene 2

FIGURE  10.15  TRANSCRIPTION  FACTORS  CONSIST  OF 
DISCRETE, FUNCTIONAL MODULES. A, Domain characterization. 
Although the entire factor is required for activation, the bottom domain 
is  sufficient  for  DNA  binding.  B,  Domain  swapping.  The  activation 
domain  of  one  factor  (activating  gene  1)  can  be  fused  to  the  DNA-
binding  domain  of  a  heterologous  factor  (activating  gene  2).  The 
resulting chimeric factor will activate only genes containing the recogni-
tion site for the DNA-binding domain (gene 2). 

Acidic  activation  domains  are  generally  unstructured 
segments  of  polypeptide  consisting  of  multiple  acidic 
residues  dispersed  among  a  few  key  hydrophobic  resi-
dues. Such domains activate transcription when experi-
mentally grafted to a wide variety of different DNA-binding 
domains in a number of different cell types. Other types 
of  activator  domains  have  been  characterized  as  being 
rich in proline or glutamine.

The  diverse  activation  domains  use  several  mecha-
nisms  to  activate  transcription,  the  most  direct  being 
recruitment  of  the  basal  transcription  machinery.  For 
example, the glutamine-rich activation domain of the SP1 
factor  (see  the  next  section)  interacts  with  TFIID  to 
recruit  GTFs  to  the  promoter.  In  many  cases  transcrip-
tion activators and repressors do not contact the GTFs or 
Pol II directly but rather act via interactions with coregu-
lator complexes as discussed in a following section.

Transcription Factors as Modular Proteins
Binding of a TF to DNA per se does not activate transcrip-
tion. A separate domain provides this function by inter-
acting directly or indirectly with the basal transcription 
machinery  to  elevate  the  rate  of  transcription  (Fig. 
10.15).  The  best-characterized  activation  domain  is  an 
acidic region derived from the herpesvirus VP16 protein. 

Transcription Factor Binding to Eukaryotic Promoter 
Proximal and Enhancer Elements
Experiments analyzing eukaryotic promoter function in 
living cells revealed numerous DNA regulatory sequence 
elements  in  addition  to  the  basal  promoter  elements 
recognized  by  the  GTFs.  The  regulatory  sequence  
elements  fall  into  two  broad  categories  based  on  their 

 

A

CAT

Expression

CAT reporter
gene

+1

Promoter

?????

?????

????

X X X X X

X X X X X

X X X X X

X X X X X

Expression
of CAT?

+1

+
+
–
+
–
+
–
+

X X X X X

X X X X X

X X X X X

CCAAT

GCGCG

TATA

CAT gene

Identified sequence elements

X X X = mutations

B. Promoter proximal elements of the
     human metallothionein gene

GRE

AP2

AP2 MRE MRE AP2 AP1 MRE SP1

TATA

-300

-250

-200

-150

-100

-50

0

FIGURE  10.16  RNA  POLYMERASE  II  PROMOTER  REGULA-
TORY ELEMENTS. A, In vivo assays are used to identify key regula-
tory sequences. In the example shown, a promoter is placed in front 
of a gene encoding chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT), and the 
resulting  plasmid  is  transfected  into  cultured  cells.  This  bacterial 
enzyme  is  easily  assayed  in  eukaryotic  cells  because  there  is  no  
corresponding  endogenous  activity.  Targeted  clusters  of  mutations, 
strategically placed throughout the promoter region, are tested for their 
effect  on  expression  of  the  reporter  gene.  Mutations  that  reduce 
expression define important regulatory elements. B, The region imme-
diately  upstream  of  the  metallothionein  gene  contains  binding  sites  
for several transcription factors. Each element is named for the factor 
that binds there: GRE (glucocorticoid response element), MRE (metal 
response element), and AP1, AP2, and SP1 (which bind protein factors 
with the same names as the DNA elements). 

distances from the promoter. Promoter proximal ele-
ments  are  located  within  a  few  hundred  base  pairs 
upstream  of  the  transcription  start  site.  Enhancer 
sequences  can  be  located  from  tens  to  hundreds  of 
kilobases from the start of transcription.

One example of a promoter proximal element is the 
CCAAT box in the promoter of the herpes simplex virus 
thymidine  kinase  gene.  This  site  was  identified  by  a 
technique  called  linker-scanning,  in  which  clustered 
mutations  are  introduced  at  regular  intervals  in  the 
promoter  (Fig.  10.16A).  In  the  case  of  the  thymidine 
kinase promoter, the CCAAT and TATAAA sequences are 

CHAPTER 10  n  Gene Expression 

181

A

E

Up to –10 kb

Up to +10 kb

TATA

Exon 1

E

Exon 2

E

B. Enhanceosome

5'

Pre-mRNA

3'

Cohesin

Enhancer DNA

Coactivator

+1

Enhanceosome

complex

A T A

T

Exon   1  

FIGURE  10.17  ENHANCER  ELEMENTS.  A,  These  clusters  of 
factor-binding sites can influence expression when located far from the 
promoter in either the upstream or downstream position. In addition, 
they work in either orientation with respect to transcription. B, Model 
enhancer showing the tight packing of several different DNA-binding 
proteins. These complexes fold into structures that have been called 
enhanceosomes. 

required for full transcription. Thymidine kinase expres-
sion  also  requires  the  sequence  GGCGCC,  which  was 
subsequently shown to serve as the binding site for SP1, 
a  TF  involved  in  expression  of  a  number  of  so-called 
housekeeping  genes,  whose  products  are  involved  in 
constitutive cellular functions. Other promoter proximal 
elements  are  involved  in  regulated  expression,  for 
example,  in  response  to  cellular  stress  or  exposure  to 
heavy  metals.  Most  promoters  are  paired  with  several 
different  promoter  proximal  elements.  This  allows  for 
regulation of transcription levels by varying the relative 
abundance  or  activity  of  the  various  factors.  A  good 
example  is  the  human  metallothionein  gene,  whose 
product  protects  cells  from  the  toxic  effects  of  metals 
(Fig. 10.16B). The location of numerous regulatory ele-
ments directly upstream of the TATA box suggests that 
a variety of different mechanisms regulate this gene.

Enhancers are clusters of regulatory DNA sequences 
that resemble promoter proximal elements, but are con-
siderably more complicated and have several distinguish-
ing features. First, an enhancer can increase the rate of 
initiation from a basal promoter even if it is located up 
to  100  kb  away  along  the  chromosome.  Second,  the 
enhancer element will work in either orientation relative 
to the promoter (Fig. 10.17A). Third, enhancers can func-
tion with a heterologous promoter. Figure 10.17B shows 
an example of an enhancer sequence with a number of 
TFs bound, forming a complex called an enhanceosome. 
Many genes are associated with multiple enhancers. Each 
enhancer  usually  works  in  a  cell  type–specific  fashion. 
An example is a sequence in an intron of the immuno-
globulin  heavy-chain  gene  that  enhances  transcription 

182 

SECTION IV  n  Central Dogma: From Gene to Protein

in lymphocytes but not in other cells. This regulation of 
enhancer function is accomplished by varying the levels 
of  various  enhancer-binding  TFs  in  different  tissues.  In 
addition, enhancer chromatin structure is characterized 
by  a  nucleosome  free  region  that  allows  TFs  to  bind, 
flanked  by  nucleosomes  bearing  histone  H3K27ac  and 
H4K3me1 modifications. The following sections discuss 
how  enhancers  interact  with  TFs  and  coregulators  to 
increase transcription from promoters.

Coactivators
Coactivators  are  complexes  of  regulatory  proteins  that 
do not bind DNA themselves but are recruited by gene-
specific  TFs.  These  complexes  contain  proteins  that 
recruit the GTFs, alter chromatin structure and assist in 
the  early  stages  of  transcription.  The  most  common 
coactivator is the Mediator, a complex of 26 proteins in 
human cells that bridges DNA-bound TFs to Pol II (Fig. 
10.18A). Different Mediator subunits bind particular TFs 
and  communicate  regulatory  signals  to  the  initiation 
complex. One example: an interaction of Mediator with 
the Pol II CTD helps stabilize the preinitiation complex. 
Mediator also stimulates the CTD kinase activity of TFIIH 
thus releasing the CTD from the Mediator (Fig. 10.18A)
Another class of coactivators has histone acetyltrans-
ferase activity that modifies histones and other proteins 
(Fig.  10.18B).  One  example  is  p300/CBP.  This  was  ini-
tially  identified  as  a  protein  interacting  with  a  TF  that 

A

Mediator 

General transcription
factors bind mediator 

Template DNA

TAFs

TBP

TPIID

CTD

binds  cAMP  response  elements.  Many  different  TFs 
recruit p300 to chromatin to locations generally assumed 
to  be  enhancers.  Histone  H3K27  is  one  of  the  main 
targets of p300. This same H3 residue is the target of the 
polycomb  repressive  complexes  (see  Chapter  8),  sug-
gesting  that  p300  plays  a  role  in  switching  between 
active and repressed chromatin states.

A  third  class  of  chromatin  coactivators  regulates 
access to DNA by moving, ejecting, or altering the com-
position  of  nucleosomes.  The  SWI/SNF  complex  is  an 
example of a nucleosome remodeler. When recruited to 
chromatin by TFs, this complex moves nucleosomes that 
block  regulatory  or  promoter  sequences.  Coactivators 
often work together to activate genes. Initial binding of 
a TF may recruit a chromatin remodeler that exposes a 
second TF binding site. This second TF may then recruit 
mediator, thereby recruiting Pol II and the GTFs.

Corepressors  act  in  opposition  to  coactivators  by 
repressing  transcription.  The  most  common  form  of 
repression  involves  chromatin  modifications  that  block 
TF access (Fig. 10.18C). Histone deacetylase complexes 
like Sir2 and NuRD (Table 10.2) remove acetyl modifica-
tions leading to chromatin compaction and repression of 
transcription.  Polycomb  is  another  pair  of  corepressor 
complexes  that  methylates  H3K27  leading  to  inhibi-
tion  of  RNA  polymerase  elongation.  Polycomb  repres-
sive  complexes  play  critical  roles  in  early  embryonic 
development.

B. Histone acetylation activates transcription 

Transcription
factor

Coactivator

Initiation

+1

Pol II

Pol II binds   

Unphosphorylated  
CTD binds mediator 

ACAC

AC

AC

AC

AC

ACAC

AC

AC

Template DNA

TPIID

+1

Pol II

Preinitiation complex

TFIIH phosphorylates the CTD 
allowing Pol II to escape promoter 

Template DNA

TPIID

TAFs

TBP

P P P P P

P

RNA

C. Histone deacetylation represses transcription 

Transcription factor
Corepressor

AC AC
AC

AC

AC AC

AC

AC

FIGURE 10.18  TRANSCRIPTION ACTIVATION MECHANISMS. A, General transcription factors and mediator form a scaffold for binding 
RNA polymerase II with unphosphorylated C-terminal domain (CTD) to form a preinitiation complex. Phosphorylation of CTD by TFIIH releases 
polymerase and starts transcription. B, Histone acetylases in a coactivator loosen chromatin in the vicinity of the promoter, allowing assembly of 
preinitiation  complexes.  C,  Recruitment  of  histone  deacetylases  in  a  corepressor  represses  transcription  by  compacting  the  chromatin  in  the 
vicinity of the promoter. 

 

CHAPTER 10  n  Gene Expression 

183

PP

SP

P T

SS

Y

SS
Y

P

Termination

PP

PP

PP

PP

SP

P T

SS

Y

SS
Y

P

Capping enzyme

SP

P T

SS

Y

SS
Y

P

C-terminal

domain

SP

P T

SS

Y

SS
Y

P

Preinitiation

mRNA

PP

SP

P T

SS

Y

SS
Y

P

PolyA tail

Mediator

PP

SP

P T

SS

Y

SS
Y

P

Cap

Elongation

Initiation

Mediator

disssociation

FIGURE  10.19  PHOSPHORYLATION  OF  THE  C-TERMINAL  DOMAIN  OF  RNA  POLYMERASE  II  REGULATES  TRANSCRIPTION. 
This cycle illustrates how phosphorylation influences each step in mRNA transcription. See the text for details. 

Long-Range Regulatory Interactions
Most  genes  are  regulated  by  enhancers  located  many 
thousands of bases away from their promoter, so some 
means  of  communication  between  enhancer  and  pro-
moter is required for gene activation. This is most com-
monly  achieved  through  direct  interaction  when  the 
chromatin fiber forms a loop bringing the enhancer and 
promoter into close contact. Such interactions between 
enhancers and promoters involve the cohesin complex 
discovered because it regulates separation of sister chro-
matids during cell division (see Fig. 8.18). The cohesin 
complex  forms  a  ring  around  two  DNA  strands  thus 
stabilizing the loop (Fig. 10.17). ChIP-seq screening for 
cohesin and high levels of Mediator has identified several 
hundred intergenic regions containing multiple enhanc-
ers  clustered  together.  These  “super  enhancers”  direct 
transcription  of  genes  that  specify  cell  fate  and  when 
associated with oncogenes lead to tumor pathogenesis.

Post Initiation Regulation of Polymerase  
II Transcription
After formation of a transcription preinitiation complex 
several steps lead to promoter clearance, elongation and 
termination.  The  CTD  of  Pol  II  not  only  orchestrates 
promoter  proximal  events  but  is  also  important  for 
coupling  transcription  to  splicing  of  the  nascent  tran-
script and to 3′-end formation (see Chapter 11). The CTD 
(Fig. 10.4C) is comprised of tandem repeats of the repeat 
of seven amino acids (Y1S2P3T4S5P6S7). The three serines 

are  phosphorylated  at  different  stages  of  the  transcrip-
tion  cycle  (Fig.  10.19).  TFIIH  kinase  CDK7  phosphory-
lates  serine  5  (Ser5)  in  the  preinitiation  complex.  This 
releases the Mediator from Pol II and creates a binding 
site for the capping enzyme that modifies the 5′ end of 
the message (see Fig. 11.2). At most promoters, inhibi-
tory  factors  pause  the  early  Pol  II  elongation  complex 
after  synthesizing  approximately  30  nucleotides.  Phos-
phorylation  of  CTD  Ser2  by  Cdk9  releases  the  paused 
polymerase and allows elongation to proceed. Signaling 
pathways  regulate  this  process  at  many  genes.  Ser2 
phosphorylation  also  helps  recruit  the  RNA  splicing 
machinery to the nascent transcript. At the 3′ end of the 
gene,  Ser2  phosphorylation  recruits  the  cleavage  and 
polyadenylation  machinery  leading  to  formation  of  the 
mature mRNA and termination of elongation.

Combinatorial Control
The complexity of eukaryotic regulatory systems allows 
for the integration of multiple regulatory signals at indi-
vidual  genes.  Such  combinatorial  control  is  seen  in  a 
limited way in prokaryotes. For example, the E. coli lac 
genes  are  regulated  by  both  lactose  and  glucose.  Only 
when glucose is low and lactose is present do the activa-
tor (CAP) and repressor (lac repressor) function to maxi-
mize lac expression.

Regulation  of  transcription  initiation  in  eukaryotes  
is based on similar principles with DNA-binding activa-
tors  and  repressors  controlling  individual  genes.  Each 

184 

SECTION IV  n  Central Dogma: From Gene to Protein

eukaryotic gene typically has binding sites for multiple 
factors. Integration of the individual binding events can 
take  place  in  several  ways.  First,  there  is  a  degree  of 
synergism to the binding of multiple factors. The enhan-
ceosome is an example where binding of proteins that 
bend the DNA promotes binding of additional proteins. 
The key characteristic of the enhanceosome complex is 
that  it  stimulates  transcription  more  strongly  than  the 
sum of the individual TFs. Synergy can also result from 
multiple interactions between activators bound to DNA 
at  different  upstream  sites  or  different  enhancers  
and  targets  in  coactivators  such  as  the  mediator  or 
nucleosome  remodeling  complexes.  Many  of  the  same 
mechanisms also can occur with repressors.

Combinatorial control also can result from the inter-
play between factors that alter chromatin structure. For 
example, modification of histone tails by a histone acet-
yltransferase  tethered  to  a  DNA-bound  TF  can  loosen 
chromatin at a particular site and create binding sites for 
additional factors. Subsequent binding of a nucleosome-
remodeling complex can render sequences more acces-
sible to the transcriptional machinery.

Modulation of Transcription Factor Activity
Regulation  of  transcription  initiation  is  fundamentally 
important in controlling gene expression. In many cases, 
the  availability  of  factors  that  bind  to  specific  sites  in 
promoters  is  the  switch  that  turns  a  gene  on.  Various 
strategies control the binding of specific factors to DNA 
regulatory  elements  (Fig.  10.20).  One  of  the  most 
straightforward is de novo synthesis of the specific factor 
(Fig. 10.20A). This requires an additional level of regula-
tion  of  transcription  and  translation  of  the  mRNA  that 
encodes the specific factor. These steps take time, so this 
regulatory  strategy  is  used  more  commonly  to  regulate 
developmental  pathways  than  situations  where  rapid 
responses are required.

Several  mechanisms  are  used  for  rapid  regulation  of 
the activity of existing TFs. One mechanism involves the 
formation of an active factor from two inactive subunits 
(Fig. 10.20D). This association can be regulated through 
synthesis  or  by  modification  of  preexisting  subunits, 
leading  to  their  association.  Binding  of  small-molecule 
ligands is another means of controlling TF activity (Fig. 
10.20B). In this case, the binding of the ligand induces 
a  conformational  change  that  leads  to  DNA  binding 
and  transcription  activation.  Interaction  of  TFs  with 
inhibitory subunits is also used to regulate factor activity 
(Fig.  10.20E).  The  DNA  binding  or  activation  potential 
is  held  in  check  until  the  appropriate  signal  leads  to 
dissociation or destruction of the inhibitory factor. Cova-
lent modification—for example, by phosphorylation—is 
also  used  to  convert  inactive  TFs  to  a  functional  form 
(Fig.  10.20C).  Finally,  the  ability  of  TFs  to  bind  DNA 
may be regulated by restricting their localization to the 
cytoplasm  (Fig.  10.20F).  These  regulatory  schemes  are 
not  mutually  exclusive,  and  many  regulatory  pathways 

A. De novo synthesis

D. Heterodimer formation
Activation
subunit

DNA-binding
subunit

B. Ligand binding

E. Dimer dissociation

Ligand

Inhibitor

C. Phosphorylation

F. Subcellular localization
Inhibitor

NUCLEUS

FIGURE  10.20  REGULATION  OF  TRANSCRIPTION  FACTOR 
ACTIVITY.  Many  strategies  have  evolved  to  regulate  transcription 
factors  in  response  to  specific  signals.  A,  The  availability  of  a  factor 
may be controlled by expressing it, de novo, only when it is needed. 
B, Factors may be synthesized in an inactive state and depend on a 
small  molecule  (ligand)  for  activity.  C,  Transcription  factors  that  are 
synthesized  in  an  inactive  state  can  be  activated  by  postsynthetic 
modification,  such  as  phosphorylation.  D,  Some  factors  require  an 
appropriate partner for activity. E, Constitutively active factors can be 
held in check by associating with inhibitory subunits. F, Active factors 
can be sequestered in the cytoplasm by blocking their transport to the 
nucleus. 

(see the examples that follow) employ several different 
levels of regulation.

Transcription Factors and  
Signal Transduction
One hallmark of eukaryotic gene regulation is the ability 
of cells to respond to a wide range of external signals. 
Cells detect the presence of hormones, growth factors, 
cytokines, cell surface contacts, and many other signals. 
They  transmit  this  information  to  the  nucleus,  where 
changes  in  expression  of  specific  genes  are  executed 
(see Fig. 27.4 for the three types of signaling pathways 
to the nucleus). TFs often execute the final step in these 
signal  transduction  pathways;  the  following  sections 
discuss several examples not covered in Chapter 27.

Steroid Hormone Receptors
Regulation  of  gene  expression  by  steroid  hormone 
receptors  involves  both  ligand-binding  and  inhibitory 
subunits.  This  family  of  nuclear  receptors  includes  TFs 
with  a  common  sequence  organization  consisting  of  a 
specific  DNA-binding  domain,  a  ligand-binding  domain 

CHAPTER 10  n  Gene Expression 

185

B

7-helix
receptor

C

Receptor

 

A

Steroid

Nuclear
hormone
receptor

Hsp90

Steroid

Adenylcyclase

Activated
G-protein

R

R

cAMP

R
C

R

C

Inactive
protein
kinase A

Adaptor
proteins

Kinases

IκB

complex

IκB

NF-κB

IκB

degraded by
proteasome

C

C

Active
protein
kinase A

CBP

CYTOPLASM

NUCLEUS

CREB

Polymerase

FIGURE 10.21  TRANSCRIPTION FACTORS AS TARGETS OF SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION PATHWAYS. External signals are transmitted 
by a variety of pathways that eventually impinge on transcription factors. A, Steroid hormones diffuse through the cell membrane and bind to the 
hormone receptor in the cytoplasm (estrogen) or, more commonly, the nucleus. Hormone binding induces a conformational change that renders 
the receptor competent to activate transcription. B, Ligands bound to the extracellular surface of seven-helix receptors initiate a pathway that 
leads to the activation of protein kinase A, which then moves to the nucleus, where it phosphorylates transcription factor CREB (cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate [cAMP] response element–binding). (C, catalytic subunit of protein kinase A [PKA]; R, regulatory subunit of PKA that is dissociated 
from C by binding cAMP [R is shown smaller than actual size].) C, In a third strategy, constitutively active transcription factors are kept sequestered 
in the cytoplasm until a signaling pathway is activated. In this example, the transcription factor nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) is bound to an inhibitor 
called  IκB  (inhibitor  of  nuclear  factor  κB).  Activation  of  the  pathway  leads  to  phosphorylation  of  IκB,  which  targets  the  inhibitory  subunit  for 
destruction by the proteasome. The free NF-κB is transported to the nucleus, where it activates the transcription of target genes. 

that regulates DNA binding, and one or more transcrip-
tion activation domains. The ligands that regulate these 
factors  are  small,  lipid-soluble  hormone  molecules  that 
diffuse through cell membranes and bind directly to the 
TF  in  the  cytoplasm  (Fig.  10.21A).  Steroid  hormones, 
retinoids,  thyroid  hormone,  and  vitamin  D  bind  to  dis-
tinct  nuclear  receptors,  enabling  them  to  recognize 
sequences in the promoters of a range of target genes. 
The  specific  sites  of  action  in  promoter  DNA,  termed 
hormone  response  elements,  are  related  to  either 
AGAACA  or  AGGTCA  (Fig.  10.14C).  Specificity  of  the 
response  is  generated  by  the  spacing  and  relative  ori-
entation  of  the  binding  sites.  Nuclear  receptors  can  
bind as homodimers, although some form heterodimers. 
In addition to heterodimerizing with other members of 
the  nuclear  receptor  family,  interactions  with  other 
types of TFs can link the steroid response to other path-
ways that signal through cell surface receptors.

Heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) blocks inactive steroid 
hormone  receptors  from  interacting  with  DNA  (Fig. 
10.21A  and  see  Fig.  17.13).  This  chaperone  keeps  the 

receptor ligand-binding domain in a conformation ready to 
bind the ligand but unable to enter the nucleus. Hormone 
binding  to  the  receptor  dissociates  Hsp90  and  frees  the 
receptor’s  DNA-binding  domain.  The  free  ligand–bound 
receptor moves from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, where 
it binds its DNA target and activates transcription.

Cyclic Adenosine Monophosphate Signaling
Changes in gene expression often develop in response 
to the binding of signal molecules to cell surface recep-
tors. Binding of ligand induces a structural change in the 
receptor that sets off a chain of events leading to changes 
in transcription. Protein phosphorylation plays an impor-
tant role in this process.

The adenyl cyclase system controls not only metabo-
lism  (see  Fig.  27.3)  but  also  gene  expression  (Fig. 
10.21B).  Ligand  binding  to  some  seven-helix  receptors 
leads  to  cAMP  synthesis,  which,  in  turn,  activates 
protein  kinase  A  (see  Fig.  27.3).  The  promoters  of 
cAMP-regulated  genes  contain  a  conserved  DNA 
sequence  element,  called  a  cAMP  response  element, 

186 

SECTION IV  n  Central Dogma: From Gene to Protein

that  mediates  the  transcriptional  response  to  cAMP.  A 
TF,  termed  cAMP  response  element–binding  (CREB) 
protein,  binds  this  sequence  specifically.  CREB  protein 
is  a  leucine  zipper  TF  that  binds  DNA  as  a  dimer.  The 
DNA-binding domain of CREB protein can be exchanged 
with other DNA-binding domains without loss of cAMP 
responsiveness. This indicates that cAMP does not work 
by altering CREB binding to DNA. Rather cAMP alters the 
transcription  activation  function  by  stimulating  protein 
kinase A to phosphorylate a specific residue (serine 133) 
in CREB. Phosphorylation changes the conformation of 
CREB and allows interaction with a protein adaptor that 
recruits the transcription machinery leading to transcrip-
tion of target genes.

Nuclear Factor κB Signaling
The family of NF-κB TFs controls immune and inflamma-
tory responses, development, cell growth, and apoptosis. 
The activity of NF-κB is normally tightly controlled and 
persistently  active  NF-κB  is  associated  with  cancer, 
arthritis, asthma, and heart disease. In most cells, NF-κB 
is  held  in  an  inactive  form  in  the  cytoplasm  through 
interaction with an inhibitor called inhibitor of nuclear 
factor  κB  (IκB)  (see  Figs.  9.19  and  10.21C).  When  B 
lymphocytes  (see  Fig.  28.9)  are  stimulated  to  produce 
antibody,  NF-κB  binds  to  an  enhancer  in  the  immuno-
globulin  κ-chain  gene  and  activates  transcription.  The 
stimulatory signal leading to NF-κB activity is transmitted 
through  a  protein  kinase  cascade  that  ultimately  phos-
phorylates I-κB, signaling its destruction by proteolysis. 
I-κB destruction unmasks the NF-κB nuclear localization 
signal,  leading  to  its  transport  to  the  nucleus,  where  it 
activates transcription of immunoglobulin genes.

Transcription Factors in Development
The previous discussion focused on how external signals 
can lead to changes in gene expression in the nucleus, 
which, in turn, changes cellular functions. A critical step 
in  this  genetic  program  is  the  regulation  of  one  TF  by 
another. Such cascades of TF activity are fundamental to 
gene regulation in development.

Early  cell  divisions  in  multicellular  organisms  create 
different  types  of  daughter  cells  that  express  distinct  
sets  of  genes.  In  this  case,  two  types  of  information 
govern  the  expression  of  a  gene.  First,  the  interaction  
of  the  cell  with  its  environment  sends  signals  that  are 
transduced  to  the  nucleus  and  change  the  pattern  of 
gene expression. How the nucleus interprets the trans-
duced  signals  depends  on  the  set  of  TFs  that  preexist 
within  it.  Thus,  in  addition  to  external  signals,  the  
history of the cell dictates which genes will respond to 
incoming signals.

The programs of TF interaction during development 
are complicated, but the underlying principles of these 
pathways  are  well  conserved.  Many  developmentally 
regulated  TFs  are  autoregulated  (Fig.  10.22),  allowing 

A. Cascade
External
signal

DNA 

mRNAs 

Proteins 

B. Autoregulatory inhibition
External
signal

C. Combinatorial activation
External
signal

Second external
signal

FIGURE  10.22  GENE  REGULATORY  CIRCUITS.  The  complex 
patterns of gene expression observed in multicellular organisms arise 
from  interactions  among  thousands  of  transcription  activators  and 
repressors, as illustrated by three examples. A, Transcription factors 
activate  the  expression  of  other  factors  leading  to  a  cascade  of 
changes  in  gene  expression  following  the  initial  external  signal.  
B, Some transcription factors can act as both activators or repressors. 
In this example, the external signal leads to expression of a transcrip-
tion factor that goes on to activate the expression of other genes and 
repress its own expression. C, Multiple transcription factors regulate 
most genes, so activation requires more than one external signal—two 
in this example. 

TFs to activate their own expression. This positive feed-
back creates a switch that leads to continued expression 
after the initial stimulus is gone. Other developmentally 
regulated TFs are, in turn, regulated by several different 
factors.  This  allows  combinatorial  signals  to  dictate 
expression (Fig. 10.22C). For example, some TFs activate 
certain promoters while repressing others. The basis of 
this  contradictory  property  is  thought  to  be  the  ability 
of TFs to cooperate with each other when bound at the 
same promoter. This cooperation can be either positive 
or negative. This allows the expression of a target gene 
to be regulated both by external signals (eg, proximity 
of an adjacent cell that expresses a signaling molecule) 
and by the preexistence of a given factor in the cell. In 
this way, only cells of a given lineage that are located in 
a  certain  area  of  an  embryonic  segment  express  the 
gene.  As  new  TFs  involved  in  development  are  discov-
ered, the challenge will be to decipher the complicated 
combinatorial interactions among them.

 

SELECTED READINGS

Corden JL. RNA polymerase II C-terminal domain: Tethering transcrip-

tion to transcript and template. Chem Rev. 2013;113:8423-8455.

de Laat W, Duboule D. Topology of mammalian developmental enhanc-

ers and their regulatory landscapes. Nature. 2013;502:499-506.

Dekker  J,  Mirny  L.  The  3D  genome  as  moderator  of  chromosomal 

communication. Cell. 2016;164:1110-1121.

Delest  A,  Sexton  T,  Cavalli  G.  Polycomb:  a  paradigm  for  genome 
organization  from  one  to  three  dimensions.  Curr  Opin  Cell  Biol. 
2012;24:405-414.

CHAPTER 10  n  Gene Expression 

187

Ong CT, Corces VG. CTCF: an architectural protein bridging genome 

topology and function. Nat Rev Genet. 2014;15:234-246.

Ruthenburg AJ, Li H, Patel DJ, et al. Multivalent engagement of chro-
matin  modifications  by  linked  binding  modules.  Nat  Rev  Mol  Cell 
Biol. 2007;8:983-994.

Sainsbury  S,  Bernecky  C,  Cramer  P.  Structural  basis  of  transcription 
initiation  by  RNA  polymerase  II.  Nat  Rev  Mol  Cell  Biol.  2015;16:
129-143.

Spitz  F,  Furlong  EE.  Transcription  factors:  from  enhancer  binding  to 

developmental control. Nat Rev Genet. 2012;13:613-626.

Teves  SS,  Weber  CM,  Henikoff  S.  Transcribing  through  the  nucleo-

Hnisz D, Abraham BJ, Lee TI, et al. Super-enhancers in the control of 

some. Trends Biochem Sci. 2014;39:577-586.

cell identity and disease. Cell. 2013;155:934-947.

Landick  R.  The  regulatory  roles  and  mechanism  of  transcriptional 

pausing. Biochem Soc Trans. 2006;34:1062-1066.

Levine M. Transcriptional enhancers in animal development and evolu-

tion. Curr Biol. 2010;20:R754-R763.

Murakami  K,  Calero  G,  Brown  CR,  et al.  Formation  and  fate  of  a 
complete  31-protein  RNA  polymerase  II  transcription  preinitiation 
complex. J Biol Chem. 2013a;288:6325-6332.

Murakami  K,  Elmlund  H,  Kalisman  N,  et al.  Architecture  of  an  RNA 
polymerase II transcription pre-initiation complex. Science. 2013b;
342:1238724.

Vannini A, Cramer P. Conservation between the RNA polymerase I, II, 
and  III  transcription  initiation  machineries.  Mol  Cell.  2012;45:
439-446.

Yan  J,  Enge  M,  Whitington  T,  et al.  Transcription  factor  binding  in 
human cells occurs in dense clusters formed around cohesin anchor 
sites. Cell. 2013;154:801-813.

Zaret  KS,  Carroll  JS.  Pioneer  transcription  factors:  establishing  
competence  for  gene  expression.  Genes  Dev.  2011;25:2227-
2241.

Zhou Q, Li T, Price DH. RNA polymerase II elongation control. Annu 

Rev Biochem. 2012;81:119-143.

This page intentionally left blank

C H A P T E R 

11 

Eukaryotic RNA Processing*

In all organisms, the genetic information is encoded in 

the  sequence  of  the  DNA.  However,  to  be  used,  this 
information  must  be  copied  or  transcribed  into  the 
related  polymer,  RNA.  Eukaryotes  synthesize  many  dif-
ferent  types  of  RNA,  but  no  RNA  is  simply  transcribed 
as  a  finished  product.  The  mature,  functional  forms  of 
all  eukaryotic  RNA  species  are  generated  by  posttran-
scriptional  processing.  These  processing  reactions  are 
the major topic of this chapter.

The  major  RNAs  can  be  assigned  to  three  major 
classes: (1) The cytoplasmic messenger RNAs (mRNAs) 
and  their  nuclear  precursors  (pre-mRNAs)  carry  the 
information  that  is  used  to  specify  the  sequence,  and 
therefore ultimately the structure, of all proteins in the 
cell. (2) Other RNAs do not encode protein but function 
directly,  playing  major  roles  in  various  metabolic  path-
ways,  including  protein  synthesis.  These  include  the 
ribosomal  RNAs  (rRNAs)  and  transfer  RNAs  (tRNAs), 
which are the key components of the protein synthesis 
machinery;  the  small  nuclear  RNAs  (snRNAs),  which 
form the core of the pre-mRNA splicing system; and the 
small  nucleolar  RNAs  (snoRNAs),  which  are  important 
factors in ribosome biogenesis. These RNAs are generally 
much longer-lived than mRNAs and therefore often are 
referred to as stable or noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs). (3) 
The  third  and  most  recently  identified  class  of  RNA 
comprises  several  structurally  related  groups  of  very 
small  (21  to  25  nucleotides)  RNA  species  that  play 
important  roles  in  regulating  gene  expression.  Base 
pairing  between  endogenous  micro-RNAs  (miRNAs)  
and  target  mRNAs  in  the  cytoplasm  represses  their 
translation  into  protein.  The  packaging  of  DNA  into  
a  nontranscribed  form  termed  heterochromatin  (see 
Fig. 8.7) is promoted by a class of nuclear, small centro-
meric RNAs. The introduction of small double-stranded 

*This chapter was written by David Tollervey and includes some text 
and figures from a chapter in the first edition written by Barbara 
Sollner-Webb, with contributions from Christine Smith.

RNAs into many cell types and organisms results in cleav-
age of the target mRNA and consequent silencing of gene 
expression.  This  phenomenon  is  described  as  RNA 
interference  (RNAi),  and  the  RNAs  are  referred  to  as 
small interfering RNAs (siRNAs).

In  addition,  a  heterogeneous  set  of  longer  ncRNAs 
(lncRNAs) have been implicated in a variety of nuclear 
events.

Synthesis of Messenger RNAs
Fig.  11.1  shows  an  overview  of  mRNA  synthesis  and 
degradation.

Messenger RNA Capping and Polyadenylation
Two distinguishing features set mRNA apart from other 
RNAs:  a  5′  cap  structure  and  a  3′  poly(A)  tail.  These 
elements  help  protect  the  mRNA  against  degradation 
and  act  synergistically  to  promote  translation  in  the 
cytoplasm.

The  mRNA  cap  is  an  unusual  structure.  It  consists  
of  an  inverted  7-methylguanosine  residue,  which  is 
joined onto the body of the mRNA by a 5′-triphosphate–5′ 
linkage  (Fig.  11.2).  Cap  addition  involves  three  enzy-
matic activities: (a) a 5′ RNA triphosphatase cleaves the 
5′  triphosphate  on  the  nascent  transcript  to  a  diphos-
phate;  (b)  RNA  guanylyltransferase  forms  a  covalent 
enzyme–guanosine  monophosphate  (GMP)  complex 
and  then  caps  the  RNA  by  transferring  this  to  the  
diphosphate; and (c) RNA (guanine-7) methyltransferase  
covalently  alters  the  guanosine  base  by  methylation, 
generating  m7G.  In  addition,  the  first  encoded  nucleo-
tides  are  frequently  modified  by  methylation  of  the  2′ 
hydroxyl  position  on  the  ribose  group,  but  the  func-
tional  significance  of  these  internal  modifications  is 
currently unclear.

During  3′  end  processing,  the  nascent  pre-mRNA  is 
cleaved by an endonuclease, and a tail of adenosine resi-
dues  is  added  by  poly(A)  polymerase.  Approximately 

 189

190 

SECTION IV  n  Central Dogma: From Gene to Protein

Cotranscriptional
mRNA capping

Recognition and

cleavage of poly(A) site
(termination competence)

Transcription
termination

Exon 1
m7G
Capping
enzymes

Exon 2 Poly(A)

Pol II

site

CTD

m7G

Spliceosome

EJC

Pre-mRNA surveillance

NUCLEUS

CYTOPLASM

m7G

EJC

AA AAA

or

m 7 G

Dcp1/2

Lsm1-7

Rat1

mRNA nuclear
export

AA AAA

AA AAA

m7G

m7G

AA A

Nuclear
exosome

A. Nonsense-mediated decay

B. mRNA turnover

AA AAA

C. ARE-mediated decay
m7G

ARE

AA AAA

m7G

m7G

m7G

AA AAA

EJC

AA AAA

Upf 1/2/3
AA AAA

Rapid 5´ and 3´ degradation

m7G

Cotranslational
deadenylation

m7G

Dcp1/2

Lsm1-7

m 7 G

Xm1

P body

Caf1/Ccr4

m7G

or

ARE-BP

ARE

Cytoplasmic
exosome

Rapid 3´ degradation

m7G

Lsm1-7

Cytoplasmic

exosome

3´ degradation

D. Nonstop decay

m7G

m7G

m7G

Ski7

Cytoplasmic

exosome

Displacement of stalled

ribosome and rapid

3´ degradation

FIGURE 11.1  SYNTHESIS AND DEGRADATION OF EUKARYOTIC MESSENGER RNAS. Nascent messenger RNA (mRNA) transcripts 
are transcribed by RNA polymerase II. Formation of the 5′ cap structure and cleavage and polyadenylation of the 3′ end of the mRNA both occur 
cotranscriptionally and involve factors that are recruited by the C-terminal domain (CTD) of the transcribing polymerase (see Fig. 10.4). The termina-
tion of transcription requires both the recognition of the site of polyadenylation and the activity of the 5′-exonuclease Rat1, which degrades the 
nascent  RNA  transcripts.  Rat1  binds  to  the  polymerase  CTD  via  a  linker  protein.  Pre-mRNA  splicing  can  either  be  cotranscriptional  or  occur 
shortly after transcript release, and recruitment of splicing factors is not strongly dependent on the CTD. In human cells, the spliceosome deposits 
the exon-junction complex (EJC) around 24 nucleotides upstream of the site of splicing. Several steps in nuclear mRNA maturation are subject 
to surveillance. In yeast, nuclear pre-mRNAs can be either 3′ degraded by the nuclear exosome complex or decapped and 5′ degraded by the 
exonuclease Rat1. Nuclear decapping requires the Lsm2–8 complex and is probably performed by the Dcp1/2 decapping complex. Once in the 
cytoplasm, the mRNA is translated into proteins and undergoes degradation. Several different mRNA degradation pathways have been identified. 
A, Nonsense-mediated decay (NMD). If the EJCs all lie within or very close to the open reading frame (ORF), they will be displaced by the translating 
ribosomes. However, if an EJC lies beyond the end of the ORF, it will remain on the translated mRNA. This is taken as evidence that translation 
has  terminated  prematurely  and  triggers  the  NMD  pathway.  Recognition  of  the  EJC  requires  the  Upf1/2/3  surveillance  complex,  which  also 
interacts with the ribosomes as they terminate translation. In yeast, NMD triggers both rapid decapping and 5′ degradation, without prior deadenyl-
ation, and 3′ degradation by the exosome. B, General mRNA turnover. During translation, most mRNAs undergo progressive poly(A) tail shortening. 
Loss of the poly(A) tail leads to rapid degradation. As in the nucleus, cytoplasmic mRNAs can be degraded from either the 5′ or the 3′ end. The 
5′ degradation occurs largely in a specialized cytoplasmic region termed the P body in yeast or cytoplasmic foci in human cells. Here, the mRNAs 
are decapped by the Dcp1/2 heterodimer and then degraded by the cytoplasmic 5′-exonuclease Xrn1. Both activities are strongly stimulated by 
the cytoplasmic Lsm1–7 complex. Alternatively, deadenylated mRNAs can be 3′ degraded by the cytoplasmic exosome. C, ARE-mediated decay. 
In this pathway, specific A+U rich elements (AREs) are recognized by ARE-binding proteins (ARE-BPs) in the nucleus. These are transported to 
the cytoplasm in association with the mRNA and recruit the cytoplasmic exosome to rapidly degrade the RNA. D, Nonstop decay. If the mRNA 
lacks a translation termination codon, the first translating ribosome will stall and be trapped at the 3′ end of the RNA. The Ski7 protein, which is 
associated with the cytoplasmic exosome complex, is believed to release the stalled ribosome and target the RNA for 3′ degradation by the 
exosome. Note that this legend provides more complex information than that given in the text for interested readers. 

200  to  250  A  residues  are  added  to  mRNAs  in  human 
cells,  while  70  to  90  are  added  in  yeast.  Cleavage  and 
polyadenylation are performed by a large complex con-
taining  approximately  20  proteins  that  recognizes 
sequences in the mRNA, of which the best defined is a 
highly conserved AAUAAA motif located upstream of the 
site of polyadenylation (Fig. 11.3).

Links Between Messenger RNA Processing  
and Transcription
The processes of cap addition and 3′ cleavage and poly-
adenylation are both linked to transcription of the mRNA 
by RNA polymerase II and occur cotranscriptionally on 
the  nascent  RNA  (Fig.  11.1).  The  C-terminal  domain 

 

CHAPTER 11  n  Eukaryotic RNA Processing 

191

A. Chemical structure of 5' capped mRNA

A. Signals for polyadenylation

RNA

polymerase

HO
2'

H

O

H3C

+N

7

1'
N

8

9

O

5

4
3
1 2

6
HN
m7G

N

NH2

B. 5' capping pathway

5' end of primary

transcript

αβγ
p p p N p N p

Triphosphatase

Pi

αβ
p p N p N p

α β γ
G p p p

Guanylyl 
transferase

PPi
G p p p N p N p

αα β

Guanine-
7-methyl
transferase

SAM

SAH

m7G p p p N p N p

SAM

2'-O-methyl
transferase

SAH
m7G p p p Nm p N p
SAM

2'-O-methyl
transferase

SAH

5'— 5'
linkage

–O

–O

–O

H

5'

OH
3'
H
4'
CH2
O
P O
O
P O
O
P O
O
H2C
4'
H H
3'
O
P O
O
H2C

–O

5'

O

H

Nuc 1
1'
H
2'
OCH3

O

Nuc 2

H H
O
P O
O
H2C

–O

H

H
OCH3

O

Nuc 3

H H
O
P O
O
H2C

–O

H

H
OH

O

Nuc 4

H

H
OH

H H
O
P O
O

–O

m7G p p p Nm p Nm p
Capped mRNA

FIGURE  11.2  MESSENGER  RNAS  HAVE  A  DISTINCTIVE  5′ 
CAP STRUCTURE. A, The 5′ ends of messenger RNAs (mRNAs) are 
blocked by an inverted guanosine residue that is attached to the body 
of the mRNA by a 5′–5′ triphosphate linkage. The N7 position of the 
guanosine  is  methylated  (red).  The  first  encoded  nucleotide  of  the 
mRNA (Nuc 1) is also methylated on the 2′-hydroxyl of the ribose ring. 
The second nucleotide (Nuc 2) may also be methylated. B, Capping 
of mRNAs is a multistep process. 

(CTD)  of  the  largest  subunit  of  RNA  polymerase  II 
consists  of  many  copies  of  a  seven-amino-acid  repeat 
(YS2PTS5PS), which undergo reversible modification by 
phosphorylation  (see  Fig.  10.4).  A  pronounced  change 
in the CTD phosphorylation pattern coincides with the 
release  of  the  polymerase  from  initiation  mode  into 
processive  elongation  mode.  Immediately  following 
transcription  initiation,  the  repeats  are  largely  phos-
phorylated  on  the  serine  residue  at  position  5.  This 
modification  is  lost,  while  serine  2  phosphorylation 
increases, as the polymerase moves along the transcript. 
Capping of the 5′ end of the mRNA occurs by the time 

AAUAAA

GU-rich

Cleavage occurs after
  transcribing this signal
Poly(A) added to new 3' end

AAUAAA

AAA200

*

*

B. Frequency (%) of 
residues in animals

97  98  100  100  100  97
A   A   U   A   A   A

FIGURE  11.3  SIGNALS  FOR  PRE–MESSENGER  RNA  POLY-
ADENYLATION. A, Poly(A) tails are added to pre–messenger RNAs 
(mRNAs)  following  transcription.  After  pol  II  transcribes  the  protein-
coding  region  of  the  mRNA,  it  encounters  two  sequence  elements: 
AAUAAA and a GU-rich element. These act as signals for the assembly 
of a large 3′ processing complex that cleaves the nascent pre-mRNA, 
releasing  it  from  the  transcription  complex,  and  adds  a  tail  of  up  to 
200 adenosine residues. B, The poly(A) signal is highly conserved in 
vertebrates. 

the  transcript  is  approximately  25  to  30  nucleotides 
long, and the capping enzyme is recruited by the serine 
5 phosphorylated CTD. This and other interactions with 
the  polymerase  result  in  strong  allosteric  activation  of 
capping activity. In contrast, the cleavage and polyade-
nylation  factors  involved  in  3′  end  processing  are 
recruited by interaction with the CTD phosphorylated at 
serine 2.

The major termination pathway for RNA polymerase 
II on mRNAs is dependent on 3′ processing. Termination 
requires recognition of the poly(A) site by the cleavage 
and  polyadenylation  factors.  These  are  carried  along 
with  the  transcribing  polymerase,  and  their  offloading 
might make the polymerase competent for termination. 
Cleavage of the nascent transcript also allows the entry 
of a 5′ exonuclease—an enzyme that can degrade RNA 
from the 5′ end in a 3′ direction. This enzyme, which is 
called  Rat1  in  yeast  and  Xrn2  in  humans,  then  chases 
after  the  transcribing  polymerase,  degrading  the  newly 
transcribed RNA strand as it goes. When the exonuclease 
catches  the  polymerase,  it  stimulates  termination  of 
transcription. This is referred to as the Torpedo  model 
for transcription termination.

Regulated 3′ End Formation on Histone 
Messenger RNAs
A different 3′ end processing system operates for mRNAs 
encoding the major, replication-dependent histone pro-
teins. These are highly expressed only during DNA rep-
lication, when they must package the newly synthesized 
DNA.  A  sequence  in  the  3′  untranslated  region  (3′ 

192 

SECTION IV  n  Central Dogma: From Gene to Protein

UTR) of these mRNAs is recognized by base pairing to 
a small RNA: the U7 snRNA. In addition, a specific stem-
loop  structure  is  recognized  by  a  stem-loop  binding 
protein. Endonuclease cleavage generates the mature 3′ 
end  of  the  mRNA,  which  is  not  polyadenylated  but  is 
protected  from  degradation  by  the  stem-loop  binding 
protein.  The  efficiency  of  histone  mRNA  synthesis  is 
increased  during  DNA  replication  at  least  in  part  by 
increased  abundance  of  stem-loop  binding  protein. 
Other  minor  histone  variants  that  are  synthesized 
throughout  the  cell  cycle  are  polyadenylated  like  
other mRNAs.

Pre–Messenger RNA Splicing
Important  experiments  in  the  1950s  and  1960s  estab-
lished  that  genes  are  collinear  with  their  protein  prod-
ucts. It therefore came as a considerable surprise when, 
in the late 1970s, it emerged that genes in animals and 
plants  frequently  had  numerous  strikingly  large  inserts 
whose sequence was not included in the mature mRNA 
or  the  protein  product.  It  turns  out  that  most  human 
pre-mRNAs  undergo  splicing  reactions,  in  which  spe-
cific  regions  are  cut  out  and  the  flanking  RNA  is  cova-
lently rejoined. The regions that will form the mRNA are 
termed  exons,  and  the  bits  that  are  cut  out  (and  are 
normally  degraded)  are  called  introns.  In  unicellular 
eukaryotes, introns are generally a few hundred nucleo-
tides in length or shorter. In metazoans, however, they 
are often several kilobases in length, and pre-mRNAs can 
contain many introns. It is therefore remarkable that all 
the sites can be precisely identified and spliced.

Signals for Splicing
The signals in the pre-mRNA that identify the introns and 
exons are recognized by a combination of proteins and 
a group of small RNAs called the snRNAs. The snRNAs 
function  in  complexes  with  proteins  in  small  nuclear 
ribonucleoprotein (snRNP) particles. Splicing occurs in 
a large complex termed the spliceosome, within which 
the  pre-mRNA  assembles  together  with  five  snRNAs 
(U1, U2, U4, U5, and U6) and approximately 100 dif-
ferent  proteins.  Particularly  important  protein-splicing 
factors are members of a large group of SR-proteins—so 
named  because  they  contain  domains  rich  in  serine-
arginine dipeptides.

Three  conserved  sequences  within  introns  play  key 
roles  in  their  accurate  recognition  by  the  splicing 
machinery (Fig. 11.4). These lie immediately adjacent to 
the 5′ splice site and the 3′ splice site and surround 
an  internal  region  that  will  form  the  intron  branch 
point  during  the  splicing  reaction.  The  U1  and  U6 
snRNAs have sequences that are complementary to the 
5′  splice  site,  whereas  U2  is  complementary  to  the 
branch point region.

Although the spliceosome will finally bring together 
the  sequences  at  each  end  of  the  intron,  it  is  thought 

that the splicing machinery initially recognizes the exons 
in a reaction termed exon definition. This makes sense 
because mRNA exons are generally quite small—up to a 
few hundred nucleotides in length—whereas the introns 
can be many kilobases long.

No  sequences  in  the  exons  are  strictly  required  for 
splicing,  but  there  are  important  stimulatory  elements 
termed  exonic  splicing  enhancers  (ESEs),  which 
generally  bind  members  of  the  SR  protein  family.  The 
ESEs have two major functions: to stimulate the use of 
the flanking 5′ and 3′ splice sites, promoting exon defini-
tion, and to prevent the exon in which they are located 
from being included in an intron. This latter function is 
particularly  important  in  ensuring  that  all  introns  are 
spliced  out  without  the  splicing  machinery  skipping 
from the 5′ end of one intron to the 3′ end of a down-
stream intron.

Pre–Messenger RNA Splicing Reaction
The splicing reaction proceeds in two steps (Fig. 11.4). 
In  the  first,  the  5′–3′  phosphate  linkage  that  joins  the 
5′  exon  to  the  first  nucleotide  of  the  intron—at  the 
5′  splice  site—is  attacked  and  broken.  This  reaction 
leaves the 5′ end of the intron attached to a downstream 
adenosine  residue  via  an  unusual  5′–2′  phosphate 
linkage. Because this adenosine remains attached to the 
flanking nucleotides by conventional 5′ and 3′ phospho-
diester bonds, this creates a circular molecule with a tail 
that  includes  the  3′  exon.  This  structure  is  termed  the 
intron  lariat,  and  the  adenosine  to  which  the  5′  end 
of  the  intron  is  attached  is  termed  the  branch  point, 
because it has a branched structure. In the second step 
of splicing, the free 3′ hydroxyl on the 5′ exon is used 
to  attack  and  break  the  linkage  between  the  last  
nucleotide  of  the  intron  and  the  3′  exon—at  the  3′ 
splice  site.  This  leaves  the  5′  and  3′  exons  joined  by  a 
conventional  5′–3′  linkage  and  releases  the  intron  as  a 
lariat.  This  is  linearized  by  the  debranching  enzyme 
and  is  probably  rapidly  degraded  from  both  ends  by 
exonucleases.

The initial steps in splicing are the recognition of the 
5′  splice  site  by  the  U1  snRNA  and  the  binding  of  U2 
snRNA  to  the  branch  point  region,  assisted  by  SR  pro-
teins (Fig. 11.5). Base pairing between U2 and the pre-
mRNA  leaves  a  single  adenosine  bulged  out  of  a  helix 
and available for interaction with the 5′ splice site. The 
U4 and U6 snRNAs then join the spliceosome as a base-
paired duplex, within a large complex that also contains 
the U5 snRNA. The U4 and U6 base pairing is opened, 
and  the  liberated  U6  sequences  displace  U1  at  the  5′ 
splice site. They also bind to U2—bringing the 5′ splice 
site and branch point into close proximity. At this point, 
the first enzymatic step of splicing occurs. This reaction 
is believed to be directly catalyzed by the intricate struc-
ture  of  the  snRNA/pre-mRNA  interactions  rather  than  
by the protein components of the spliceosome. The 5′ 

 

CHAPTER 11  n  Eukaryotic RNA Processing 

193

A. Signals for splicing

GU

Exon 1

Intron

A     AG

Exon 2

5' splice site

Exon

A  G  G  U

65  75 100 100 60  70   85  65
A  G  G  U  A  A  G  U

3' splice site

A  G  G

Exon

65 100 100  50
(Py)≥10 N  C  A  G  G

Mammals
Yeast

Intron

Branch
point

A

80        80   90   75  100   95
Py N Py Py Pu A* Py
 U  A  C  U   A   A*  C

Exon

A  G  G

Exon

'

3
G
5

'

B. Splicing mechanism

GU

Exon 1

Intron

A     AG

Exon 2

A
2'O

3'

3'4'

5'

5'

U
G
A     AG

Lariat

Exon 2

U
G
A     AG

Lariat

+

Exon 1

Exon 2

Exon 1

Debranch

Degrade (exonuclease)

FIGURE 11.4  SIGNALS AND MECHANISM OF PRE–MESSENGER RNA SPLICING. The precursors to most messenger RNAs (mRNAs) 
in humans and other eukaryotes contain regions (introns) that will not form part of the mature mRNA and do not encode protein products. During 
pre-mRNA splicing, the introns are removed and flanking regions (exons) are ligated. A, Introns contain three conserved sequence elements that 
are recognized during splicing. These lie at the 5′ and 3′ splice sites and surrounding the branch point adenosine within the intron. Numbers 
indicate  the  degree  of  conservation  at  each  position  in  mammalian  pre-mRNAs.  The  branch  point  sequence  is  much  more  highly  conserved 
between different pre-mRNAs in yeast. The region between the branch point and the 3′ splice site frequently contains a run of pyrimidine residues, 
which is referred to as the polypyrimidine tract. B, Pre-mRNA splicing involves two catalytic steps. An attack by the branch point adenosine on 
the 5′ splice site releases the 5′ exon and intron as a circularized molecule (referred to as the intron lariat) joined to the 3′ exon. In the second 
step, the 3′ end of the 5′ exon attacks the 3′ splice site releasing the joined exons and the free intron lariat. The lariat is subsequently linearized 
(debranched) and degraded. 

splice  site  is  attacked  and  broken  by  the  ribose  2′ 
hydroxyl group of the adenosine residue that is bulged 
out  of  the  U2–intron  duplex.  The  U5  snRNA  and  its 
associated proteins are responsible for holding onto the 
now  free  5′  exon  and  correctly  aligning  it  with  the  3′ 
exon for the second catalytic step of splicing.

Both catalytic steps in splicing are technically termed 
transesterification  reactions,  because  nucleotides  are 
linked  by  phosphodiester  bonds,  and  the  new  bond  is 
made  at  the  same  time  as  the  old  bond  is  broken.  For 
this  reason,  the  splicing  reactions  do  not,  in  principle, 
require any input of energy. However, the assembly and 
subsequent  disassembly  of  the  spliceosome  require 
numerous adenosine triphosphatases (ATPases). Most of 
these  belong  to  a  family  of  proteins  that  are  generally 
termed  RNA  helicases.  These  are  believed  to  use  the 
energy  of  adenosine  triphosphate  (ATP)  hydrolysis  to 
catalyze structural rearrangements within the assembling 
and disassembly spliceosome.

AT-AC Introns
The  large  majority  of  human  mRNA  splice  sites  have  a 
GU  dinucleotide  at  the  5′  splice  site  and  AG  at  the  3′ 
splice site (Fig. 11.4). However, a minor group of introns 
contain  different  consensus  splicing  signals  and  are 
termed AT-AC (pronounced “attack”) introns because of 
the identities of the nucleotides located at the 5′ and 3′ 
splice sites. The splicing of the AT-AC introns involves a 
distinct set of snRNAs—U11, U12, U4ATAC, and U6ATAC—
which  replace  U1,  U2,  U4,  and  U6,  respectively.  Only 
U5  is  common  to  both  spliceosomes.  However,  the 
underlying  splicing  mechanism  is  believed  to  be  the 
same for both classes of intron.

Alternative Splicing
A surprising finding from the human genomic sequenc-
ing project was the relatively low number of predicted 
protein-coding genes, currently estimated at fewer than 

194 

SECTION IV  n  Central Dogma: From Gene to Protein

5' splice site

Exon 1

Intron

Branch
point

A

3' splice site

Exon 2

Pre-mRNA

U1 base pairs with 5' splice site
U2 base pairs with branch site

U1

U2

A

U5 brings exon 1 and exon 2
  into close proximity
U4 releases U6 which then 
  base pairs to U2

U6

U4

Intron

U6

U1

Exon 1

U2

Exon 2

U5

U1 released and U6 binds
  the 5' splice site
Exons clipped and ligated
Lariat released

Exon 1 Exon 2

G
A
Lariat

C

.
 

S
m

i
t

h

 

a
n
d
G

 

.
 
J
o
h
n
s
o
n

.
 

a

f
t

e
r
 

P

.
 

S
h
a
r
p

FIGURE  11.5  SMALL NUCLEAR RNAS PLAY KEY ROLES IN 
PRE–MESSENGER RNA SPLICING. Although shown here as RNAs, 
the small nuclear RNA (snRNA)s function in large RNA-protein com-
plexes termed snRNPs. Despite this fact, the major steps in both intron 
recognition and catalysis are believed to be performed by the snRNAs. 
The  5′  splice  site  and  intron  branch  point  are  recognized  by  base 
pairing to the U1 and U2 snRNAs, respectively. The U5 snRNA enters 
the  spliceosome  in  a  complex  with  U4  and  U6,  which  are  tightly 
base-paired. U5 contacts both the 5′ and 3′ exons. U4 releases U6, 
which  base-pairs  to  U2  and  then  displaces  U1  in  binding  to  the  5′ 
splice  site.  Within  this  very  complex  RNA  structure,  the  2′  hydroxyl 
group  on  the  branch  point  adenosine,  which  is  bulged  out  of  the 
duplex between U2 and the pre-mRNA, attacks the phosphate group 
at the junction between the 5′ exon and the intron. In a transesterifica-
tion reaction, the phosphate backbone is broken at the 5′ splice site. 
The 5′ exon is released with a 3′ OH group, and the 5′ phosphate of 
the intron is transferred onto the 2′ position of the ribose on the branch 
point adenosine, creating the intron lariat structure. U5 retains the 5′ 
exon  and  aligns  it  for  a  second  transesterification  reaction,  during 
which the 3′ hydroxyl on the 5′ exon attacks the 3′ splice site, joining 
the exons and releasing the intron lariat. 

20,000. This result has caused increased interest in the 
phenomenon  of  alternative  splicing,  which  allows  the 
production of more than one mRNA, and therefore more 
than  one  protein  product,  from  a  single  gene.  Several 
general  forms  of  alternative  splicing  are  commonly 
found.  Exons  can  be  excluded  from  the  mRNAs,  or 

introns  can  be  included.  Some  genes  have  arrays  of 
multiple alternative exons, only one of which is included 
in each mRNA. In addition, the use of alternative splice 
sites can generate longer or shorter forms of individual 
exons (Fig. 11.6).

Current estimates for the proportion of human genes 
that  are  subject  to  alternative  splicing  range  from  30%  
to 75%. In some cases, this could potentially give rise to 
a  very  large  number  of  different  protein  isoforms. 
Alternatively  spliced  proteins  can  have  antagonistic  
functions,  such  as  transcription  activation  versus  tran-
scription  repression.  For  the  vast  majority  of  human 
genes, no information is available on the relative activi-
ties  of  different  spliced  isoforms.  Compounding  the  
difficulty  in  understanding  is  the  fact  that  many  genes 
show  tissue-specific  splicing.  Thus,  a  gene  could  be 
transcribed in, say, both the liver and brain but generate 
products  with  substantially  different  functions  in  each 
tissue. In addition to generating protein diversity, alter-
native  splicing  can  generate  mRNAs  with  premature 
translation  termination  codons—“nonsense”  codons. 
These are subject to rapid degradation by the nonsense-
mediated decay (NMD) surveillance pathway (see later). 
Switching  splicing  into  a  pathway  that  generates  an  
NMD  target  is  therefore  a  means  of  downregulating  
gene expression.

It  is  likely  that  alterations  in  the  activities  of  many 
different factors can lead to the preferential use of alter-
native splice sites. In at least some cases, changes in the 
abundance of a general splicing factor generates tissue-
specific patterns of splicing.

Localization of Pre–Messenger RNA Splicing
The location of the splicing reaction within the nucleus 
was  long  a  contentious  topic.  The  snRNAs  can  be 
detected dispersed in the nucleoplasm but concentrate 
in  small  structures  referred  to  as  nuclear  speckles  or 
interchromatin granules, as well as in discrete larger 
structures  known  as  Cajal  bodies  (see  Fig.  9.2).  It  is 
now widely accepted that most splicing is performed by 
the  dispersed  snRNA  population  and  can  occur  either 
cotranscriptionally  or  immediately  following  transcript 
release. Consistent with this, there is evidence that the 
recruitment  of  some  splicing  factors  is  promoted  by 
association with the CTD of the transcribing polymerase. 
The speckles are likely to represent sites at which splic-
ing factors are stockpiled ready for use. The Cajal bodies, 
in  contrast,  represent  sites  of  maturation  in  which  the 
snRNAs  undergo  site-specific  nucleotide  modification 
and perhaps assembly with specific proteins.

Modification of Messenger RNAs
Site-specific  nucleotide  modifications  take  place  at  
many  sites  on  mRNAs,  notably  including  formation  of 
pseudouracil,  5-methylcytosine,  N1-methyladenosine, 

 

CHAPTER 11  n  Eukaryotic RNA Processing 

195

 Alternative splicing

a

b

Exon 1

Intron 1

Exon 2

Intron 2

e

d

f

c

Exon 3

and exon 3'

Intron 3

Exon 4

3'

a

b
Exon 1 2

c
3

4

e

d

c

3

1

1

3'

4
or
3'
or

3'

4

Proteins
produced

Proteins
produced

5'

5'

f

f

c

3'

c
* *
3'

4
or

4

1

1

3'

3'

5'

5'

5'

5'

FIGURE 11.6  ALTERNATIVE SPLICING CAN GENERATE MULTIPLE DIFFERENT PROTEINS FROM A SINGLE GENE. Here are some 
of the possible mRNA and protein products of a gene whose pre-mRNA is subject to alternative splicing. Left, Examples show the effects of 
skipping one or more internal exons, which produces a set of related proteins with different combinations of “modules.” Right, Examples show 
the effects of alternative splice sites. In the case shown, the use of alternative 3′ splice sites redefines the 5′ end of the downstream exon. This 
can lead to the inclusion of additional amino acids in the protein product. Use of an alternative splice site can also cause the exon to be read in 
a different reading frame (green asterisk), changing the amino acid sequence. If the alternative reading frame contains a translation stop codon 
(red asterisk), a truncated protein will be produced, and the mRNA will generally be targeted for rapid degradation by the nonsense-mediated 
decay (NMD) pathway (Fig. 11.1). 

and  N6-methyladenosine  (m6A).  Proteins  that  interact 
with  m6A  have  been  characterized  as  WRITERS  (methyl-
transferases that create the modification), READERS (pro-
teins that specifically bind mRNAs with m6A modification 
and  alter  the  processing,  stability,  or  translation)  and 
ERASERS (proteins that remove the modification by oxida-
tive  demethylation).  Nuclear  binding  of  m6A  READERS 
can  alter  pre-mRNA  alternative  splicing  and  export. 
However, most m6A modifications in human mRNAs are 
close to the 3′ end and cytoplasmic binding of  READERS 
can  promote  rapid  mRNA  turnover  and  translation 
repression.  Methylation  and  demethylation  of  m6A  are 
important  in  human  development,  particularly  during 
spermatogenesis.

Editing of Messenger RNAs
The  term  RNA  editing  in  humans  refers  to  covalent 
modifications  that  are  made  to  individual  nucleotides, 
which  alter  the  base-pairing  potential.  Because  the 
process  of  translation  involves  base  pairing  between 
mRNA  and  tRNAs,  editing  of  the  mRNA  can  have  the 
effect  of  changing  the  amino  acid  that  is  incorporated 
and  therefore  the  function  of  the  protein.  Like  alterna-
tive  splicing,  this  increases  the  diversity  of  protein 
products that can be synthesized from the genome.

Slightly confusingly, the term editing is also used for 
quite different mechanisms that insert and delete nucleo-
tides  from  RNAs  in  some  single-celled  eukaryotes.  The 
best-characterized  example  is  in  the  mitochondria  of 
trypanosomes,  which  are  protozoans  that  cause  major 
human  diseases, 
including  African  trypanosomiasis, 
Chagas  disease,  and  leishmaniasis.  Uracil  residues  are 
added and, less frequently, deleted from the mitochon-
drial mRNAs at many sites. These changes are specified 
by  a  large  number  of  small  guide  RNAs.  This  form  of 
editing is not known to occur in higher eukaryotes.

NH2
N

O

N
(R)C'1

H2O NH3

Apobec -1

O

NH

O

N
(R)C'1

Cytidine

Uridine

NH2

N

N

N

N
C'1(R)

Adenosine

H2O NH3

ADAR

O

HN

N

N
C'1(R)

N

Inosine

FIGURE  11.7  RNA  EDITING  CHANGES  NUCLEOTIDE  BASE 
PAIRING. The coding potential of an mRNA can be altered by deami-
nation. In C-to-U editing, the amino group at position 4 of the cytosine 
base is replaced with a carbonyl group, creating uracil. In A-to-I editing, 
replacement  of  the  amino  group  at  position  2  of  adenosine  creates 
inosine, which base-pairs with C residues rather than with U. ADAR, 
adenosine deaminase acting on RNA. 

C-to-U Editing
Deamination  of  cytosine  to  uracil  is  performed  by  an 
editing  complex,  sometimes  referred  to  as  the  edito-
some,  which  includes  the  deaminase  Apobec-1  (Fig. 
11.7).  Only  a  small  number  of  nuclear-encoded  targets 
have  been  identified,  and  in  these,  editing  generates 
translation termination codons, producing shorter forms 
of the encoded proteins. The best-characterized example 
of  C-to-U  RNA  editing  involves  the  mRNA  encoding 
intestinal  apolipoprotein  B  (ApoB),  where  CAA-to-UAA 
editing  in  the  loop  of  a  specific  stem-loop  structure 
generates a stop codon. The truncated protein, ApoB48, 
has an important role in lipoprotein metabolism. In other  
cases  editing  may  generate  mRNAs  that  are  targets  for 
NMD  (see  later),  leading  to  downregulation  of  protein 
expression.

196 

SECTION IV  n  Central Dogma: From Gene to Protein

A-to-I Editing
The  enzyme  ADAR  (adenosine  deaminase  acting  on 
RNA) can convert adenine residues to inosine by deami-
nation of the base (Fig. 11.7). Inosine acts like guanosine 
and  base-pairs  with  cytosine  rather  than  uracil,  poten-
tially  altering  the  protein  encoded  by  the  mRNA.  Most 
of  the  transcripts  edited  by  ADAR  encode  receptors  of 
the central nervous system, and RNA editing is required 
to  create  the  full  receptor  repertoire.  The  amino  acid 
substitutions  that  result  from  editing  of  the  mRNAs  
can  greatly  alter  the  properties  of  ion  channels,  and  
aberrant  editing  occurs  in  various  disorders  ranging  
from  epilepsy  to  malignant  brain  gliomas.  ADAR  binds 
as a dimer to imperfect double-stranded RNA duplexes, 
which are formed between the target site and sequences 
in  a  flanking  intron.  Editing  is  generally  not  100%  effi-
cient,  so  heterogeneous  populations  of  proteins  are 
generated.

In  addition  to  specific  editing  of  individual  nucleo-
tides, ADARs can hyperedit long double-stranded RNAs 
(dsRNAs).  In  mammals,  dsRNAs  elicit  a  strong  antiviral 
response from the innate immune system and hyperedit-
ing  is  important  to  avoid  inappropriate  recognition  of 
endogenous dsRNAs.

Cytoplasmic Polyadenylation
The  early  steps  of  embryogenesis  in  metazoans  occur 
before  transcription  of  the  genome  commences.  All 
mRNAs that are present in early embryos were therefore 
inherited  from  the  mother.  These  “maternal  messages” 
are  frequently  translationally  inactive,  at  least  in  part 
because they lack a poly(A) tail. They can be activated 
for  translation  by  polyadenylation  in  the  cytoplasm. 
Cytoplasmic polyadenylation events are critical for many 

developmental  decisions  in  oocytes  and  embryos.  In 
addition,  regulated  cytoplasmic  polyadenylation  at  syn-
apses  controls  local  translation  in  neuronal  cells.  This 
involves  a  family  of  distinct  cytoplasmic  polymerases. 
Their  association  with  substrates  and  activity  are  both 
regulated by specific RNA-binding proteins.

Messenger RNA Degradation and Surveillance
Exosome Complex
The RNA exosome is a multiprotein complex with exo-
nuclease and endonuclease activities. The complex has 
a  barrel-like  structure.  Substrates  are  threaded  through 
the  lumen  of  the  barrel  to  reach  the  active  site  of  the 
major 3′ exonuclease (DIS3/Rrp44) (Fig. 11.8). In addi-
tion, DIS3/Rrp44 harbors an endonuclease activity that 
is not accessed through the central channel. The nuclear 
exosome complex is associated with an additional 3′ to 
5′ exonuclease (Rrp6 in yeast, PM-Scl100 in humans). In 
both  the  nucleus  and  cytoplasm,  the  activity  of  the 
exosome is dependent on cofactors. Chief among these 
are  two  related  RNA  helicases  (proteins  that  can  open 
RNA  and  RNA-protein  structures  using  energy  derived 
from  ATP  hydrolysis);  Mtr4  in  the  nucleus  and  Ski2  in 
the  cytoplasm.  In  the  nucleus,  Mtr4  is  a  component  
of the TRAMP (Trf4/5-Air1/2-Mtr4 polyadenylation) and 
NEXT (nuclear exosome targeting) complexes together 
with  RNA  binding  proteins,  while  Ski2  forms  the  SKI 
complex,  which  is  required  for  all  known  functions  
of  the  exosome  in  mRNA  degradation.  The  nuclear 
exosome  and  Mtr4  participate  in  RNA  maturation, 
notably  in  the  processing  of  the  5.8S  rRNA.  However, 
the major functions of the nuclear exosome are probably 
in  the  surveillance  and  degradation  of  many  different 
types  of  defective  nuclear  RNAs  and  RNA–protein  
complexes,  and  the  clearance  of  numerous  classes  of 

B. Nuclear exosome

C. Cytoplasmic exosome

A

5'
RNA

Rrp6

6-member ring

90°

Rrp44

TOP
VIEW

S1/KH cap

Central
channel

RNA

degradation

Trf4/5

Air1/2

Rrp6

3'

PH

Rrp44

NUCLEUS

RNA
5'
TRAMP
complex

SKI
complex

Ski7

Ski3

Ski8

Ski2

Cap

Mtr4

Cap

3'

A A A

PH

Rrp44

CYTOPLASM

FIGURE  11.8  THE  EXOSOME  COMPLEX  AND  COFACTORS.  The  exosome  has  a  barrel  structure  with  the  major  active  site  in  the  3′ 
exonuclease  Rrp44/Dis3  located  at  the  base  of  the  central  lumen  of  the  complex.  An  additional  3′  exonuclease  Rrp6  is  located  close  to  the 
entrance of the central channel, while an endonuclease active site on Rrp44 is located on the exterior of the structure. The exosome barrel is 
composed of an RNA-binding cap structure and a core containing six proteins that show sequence similarities to Escherichia coli RNase PH, but 
which  have,  surprisingly,  all  lost  their  catalytic  activities  in  eukaryotes.  Substrate  RNAs  are  inserted  into  the  complex  by  related  nuclear  and 
cytoplasmic  localized  RNA  helicases:  Mtr4  and  the  TRAMP  (Trf4/5-Air1/2-Mtr4  polyadenylation)  complex  in  the  nucleus  and  Ski2  in  the  SKI 
complex in the cytoplasm. 

 

CHAPTER 11  n  Eukaryotic RNA Processing 

197

ncRNAs.  The  cytoplasmic  exosome  functions,  together 
with  the  SKI  complex,  in  several  different  mRNA  turn-
over pathways.

Degradation of Messenger RNA
Most  analyses  of  the  regulation  of  gene  expression  
have  concentrated  on  changes  in  the  levels  of  mRNA 
transcription.  However,  the  rate  at  which  mRNAs  are 
degraded  is  also  important,  influencing  both  the  total 
amount of protein synthesized and the timing of protein 
synthesis  following  a  transcription  event.  mRNAs  are 
frequently  described  as  having  half-lives,  but  this  is 
generally quite misleading. Degradation is not stochastic, 
and  it  is  probably  better  to  think  of  mRNA  lifetimes. 
There are enormous variations in the lifetimes of differ-
ent  human  mRNAs—from  a  very  few  minutes  to  many 
days—that  have  a  large  impact  on  protein  expression 
levels.

Different pathways of mRNA degradation can be clas-
sified as (a) the default pathway (ie, when we do not yet 
know of any specific activator or repressor of degrada-
tion), (b) regulated degradation pathways that respond 
to  developmental  or  other  signals,  and  (c)  surveillance 
pathways  that  identify  and  rapidly  degrade  aberrant 
mRNAs or pre-mRNAs. A theme emerging from studies 
of  all  mRNA  decay  pathways  is  that  RNA-binding  pro-
teins,  which  associate  with  the  newly  transcribed  pre-
cursor in the nucleus, can be retained when the mRNA 
is exported to the cytoplasm. These proteins maintain a 
record  of  the  nuclear  history  of  the  RNA  that  can  be 
“read”  by  the  cytoplasmic  degradation  machinery,  and 
this plays a key role in determining the cytoplasmic fate 
of the mRNA.

A key step in the timing of degradation of most mRNA 
is  the  slow,  stepwise  removal  of  the  poly(A)  tail  by 
enzymes called deadenylases. The intact poly(A) tail is 
bound by multiple copies of the poly(A)-binding protein 
(PABP), at a stoichiometry of around one molecule per 
10  to  20  A  residues.  Surprisingly,  PABP  antagonizes  5′ 
cap removal, probably via interactions with the transla-
tion initiation factor eIF4G, which, in turn, stabilizes the 
cap-binding protein eIF4E. These interactions effectively 
circularize the mRNA and strongly stimulate translation 
initiation  (see  Fig.  12.8).  When  the  tail  becomes  too 
short for the last PABP molecule to bind, these interac-
tions are lost. The cap can then be removed by a decap-
ping complex, which cleaves the triphosphate linkage 
to the body of the mRNA, releasing m7GDP. Cap removal 
allows rapid 5′ to 3′ degradation of the mRNA by the 5′ 
exonuclease Xrn1. In addition, loss of the PABP/poly(A) 
complex  allows  3′-degradation  of  the  mRNA  by  the 
cytoplasmic exosome.

A+U Rich Element–Mediated Degradation
The degradation of many mRNA species in human cells 
is triggered by the presence of sequence motifs referred 

to as A+U rich elements (AREs) (Fig. 11.1C). These are 
generally  located  in  the  3′  UTR  of  the  mRNA,  where 
bound proteins will not be displaced by the translating 
ribosomes. This pathway plays an important regulatory 
role in gene expression, as it targets for rapid turnover 
mRNAs that encode proteins such as cytokines, growth 
factors, oncogenes, and cell-cycle regulators, for which 
limited and transient expression is important. Computa-
tional analyses indicate that up to 8% of human mRNAs 
carry AREs, and there is evidence that alterations in the 
activity of this pathway are associated with both devel-
opmental  decisions  and  cancer.  ARE-binding  proteins 
associate with the nuclear pre-mRNAs and are exported 
to  the  cytoplasm,  where  they  can  either  activate  or 
repress ARE-mediated decay. Some ARE-binding proteins 
that activate degradation function by directly recruiting 
the  exosome  complex  to  degrade  the  mRNA  from  
the 3′ end.
Surveillance of Messenger RNAs
Nonsense-Mediated Decay
The surveillance of mRNA integrity is important because 
defective  molecules  can  encode  truncated  proteins, 
which are frequently toxic to the cell. The presence of 
a premature translation termination signal (or nonsense 
codon) strongly destabilizes mRNA via the NMD pathway 
(Fig.  11.1A).  In  human  cells,  termination  codons  are 
identified  as  being  located  in  a  premature  position  by 
reference  to  the  sites  of  pre-mRNA  splicing.  Normal 
termination  codons  are  within,  or  very  close  to,  the  3′ 
exon, so no former splice sites lie far downstream. If any 
former splice site is located more than approximately 50 
nucleotides downstream of the site of translation termi-
nation, the mRNA is targeted for degradation. The sites 
of former splicing events can be identified in the spliced 
mRNA  product,  because  the  spliceosome  deposits  a 
specific protein complex on the mRNA during the splic-
ing reaction (Fig. 11.1). This exon-junction complex 
(EJC) binds to the 5′ exon sequence approximately 24 
nucleotides  upstream  of  the  splice  site.  Several  of  the 
EJC  components  remain  associated  with  the  mRNA  
following its export to the cytoplasm. In normal mRNAs, 
the  EJCs  will  all  be  displaced  by  the  first  translating  
ribosome,  so  if  one  (or  more)  remains  on  the  mRNA, 
then  translation  has  terminated  too  soon  and  NMD  is 
activated.

The  identification  of  premature  termination  codons  
in yeast and Drosophila does not rely on cues provided 
by  splice  sites  but  probably  involves  recognition  of  
other nuclear RNA-binding proteins that are retained on 
the  cytoplasmic  mRNAs.  In  all  organisms  tested,  NMD 
also  requires  a  surveillance  complex,  which  bridges 
interactions between the terminating ribosome and the 
“place markers” on the mRNAs.

In  yeast  and  probably  in  humans,  recognition  of  an 
mRNA as prematurely terminated activates both 5′ and 

198 

SECTION IV  n  Central Dogma: From Gene to Protein

3′  degradation.  The  mRNA  can  be  decapped  and 
5′-degraded by Xrn1 without prior deadenylation or can 
be rapidly deadenylated and 3′-degraded by the exosome. 
In  contrast,  the  degradation  of  mRNAs  targeted  by  the 
NMD pathway in Drosophila is initiated by an endonu-
cleolytic cleavage.

Nonstop Decay
Some  mRNAs  lack  any  translation  termination  codon 
because they have been inappropriately polyadenylated, 
inaccurately spliced, or partially 3′-degraded. Translating 
ribosomes efficiently stall at the ends of such nonstop 
mRNAs. This inhibits the repeated synthesis of truncated 
proteins  (Fig.  11.1D).  The  cytoplasmic  form  of  the 
exosome  complex  is  associated  with  Ski7p,  which  is 
homologous to the guanosine triphosphatases that func-
tion  in  translation.  The  interaction  of  Ski7p  with  the 
stalled ribosome is believed to both release the ribosome 
and target the mRNA for rapid degradation.

Nuclear RNA Degradation
Analyses  of  RNA  degradation  have  focused  largely  on 
cytoplasmic mRNA turnover, but most RNA synthesized 
in  a  eukaryotic  cell  is  actually  degraded  within  the 
nucleus.  Pre-mRNAs  are  predominantly  composed  of 
intronic sequences, and almost all stable RNAs are syn-
thesized as larger precursors that undergo nuclear matu-
ration. In contrast to the role of poly(A) tails in stabilizing 
mRNAs  in  the  cytoplasm,  there  is  evidence  that  short, 
oligo(A)  tails  can  act  as  destabilizing  features  during 
RNA  degradation  in  the  nucleus.  The  TRAMP  complex 
cofactors include nuclear poly(A) polymerases and acti-
vate  the  exosome  complex,  probably  by  providing  a 
single-stranded  “landing  pad,”  during  surveillance  and 
degradation of many defective nuclear RNAs, including 
pre-mRNAs, pre-tRNAs and pre-rRNAs. In bacteria such 
as  Escherichia  coli,  poly(A)  tails  are  added  to  RNAs 
to  make  them  better  substrates  for  degradation.  This  
has  led  to  the  proposal  that  the  original  function  of 
polyadenylation was in RNA degradation, and this role is 
maintained  in  the  eukaryotic  nucleus.  Following  the 
appearance of the nuclear envelope in early eukaryotes, 
poly(A)  tails  took  on  a  distinctly  different  function  
in  promoting  mRNA  stability  and  translation  in  the 
cytoplasm.

Synthesis of Stable RNAs
Transfer RNA Synthesis
All tRNAs are excised from the interior of larger precur-
sors (pre-tRNAs) (Fig. 11.9). Some pre-tRNAs are polycis-
tronic, with two or more tRNAs excised from the same 
precursor. In yeast, at least, the genes that encode tRNAs 
cluster  around  the  surface  of  the  nucleolus,  and  pre-
tRNA  processing  appears  to  occur  largely  within  the 
nucleolus.

A

B

C

RNase P
recognition site

3'

5'

RNase P

5'

5'

3'

5'

5'

CCA 3'

3'

1. Endonuclease
2. CCA adding enzyme

3'

5'

3'

5'

3'

1. Endonuclease
2. Multiactivity ligase
3. Phosphotransferase

3'

5'

3' splice site

Anti-codon
5' splice site

FIGURE  11.9  MATURE  TRANSFER  RNAS  ARE  GENERATED 
BY PROCESSING. A, Transcription by RNA polymerase III generates 
a  pre–transfer  RNA  (tRNA)  that  is  5′  and  3′  extended  and  may  also 
contain an intron. Cleavage by RNase P generates the mature 5′ end. 
B, The 3′ end is cleaved by an unidentified nuclease, and the sequence 
CCA is added by a specific RNA polymerase. This sequence forms a 
single  stranded  3′  end  on  all  tRNAs.  C,  If  an  intron  is  present,  it  is 
removed in a splicing reaction that is distinct from pre-mRNA splicing 
and does not involve small RNA cofactors. The anticodon (green) is 
generally located 1 nucleotide away from the splice site. 

The 5′ end of the mature tRNA is generated by cleav-
age by the ribozyme endonuclease RNase P, which rec-
ognizes  structural  elements  that  are  common  to  all 
tRNAs. The 3′ ends of all mature tRNAs have the sequence 
Cp-Cp-AOH, to which the aminoacyl group is covalently 
attached.  However,  this  CCA  sequence  is  not  encoded 
by the tRNA gene in eukaryotes, although it is encoded 
by tRNA genes in many bacteria. Instead, the pre-tRNA 
is  initially  trimmed,  and  the  CCA  sequence  is  then  
added  by  a  specific  RNA  polymerase  that  belongs  to  
the same family as the poly(A) polymerases that add tails 
to mRNAs.

Many pre-tRNAs contain a single, short intron, which 
is removed by splicing. The enzymology of tRNA splicing 
is  quite  different  from  that  of  pre-mRNA  splicing.  The 
pre-tRNA  is  cleaved  at  the  5′  and  3′  splice  sites  by  a 
tetrameric protein complex containing two endonucle-
ases  and  two  targeting  factors.  The  cleavages  leave 
products  with  5′  hydroxyl  residues  and  2′  to  3′  cyclic 
phosphate. A separate tRNA ligase then recognizes these 
termini and rejoins the exons.

In addition, tRNAs are subject to a bewildering array 
of covalent nucleotide modifications. Almost 100 differ-
ent modified nucleotides have been identified in tRNAs, 

 

CHAPTER 11  n  Eukaryotic RNA Processing 

199

ranging  from  simple  methylation  to  the  addition  of  
very elaborate molecules. All are added without breaking 
the phosphate backbone of the RNA. The structures of 
all  mature  tRNAs  are  very  similar,  since  each  must  fit 
exactly into the A, P, and E sites of the translating ribo-
some  (see  Fig.  12.7).  It  is  likely  that  the  modifications 
help  the  tRNAs  fold  into  precisely  the  correct  shape. 
They  also  aid  accurate  recognition  of  different  tRNAs  
by the aminoacyl-tRNA synthases, which are responsible 
for  charging  each  species  of  tRNA  with  the  correct 
amino acid.

Ribosome Synthesis
The  synthesis  of  ribosomes  is  a  major  activity  of  any 
actively growing cell. Three of the four rRNAs—the 18S, 
5.8S,  and  25S/28S  rRNAs—are  cotranscribed  by  RNA 
polymerase I as a polycistronic transcript. This pre-rRNA 
is the only RNA synthesized by RNA polymerase I and is 
transcribed  from  tandemly  repeated  arrays  of  the  ribo-
somal  DNA  (rDNA).  In  humans,  approximately  300  to 
400 rDNA repeats are present in five clusters (on chro-
mosomes 13, 14, 15, 21, and 22). These sites often are 
referred  to  as  nucleolar  organizer  regions,  reflecting 
the  fact  that  nucleoli  assemble  at  these  locations  in 
newly formed interphase nuclei. The pre-rRNAs are very 
actively transcribed and can be visualized as “Christmas 
trees” in electron micrographs taken following spreading 
of the chromatin using low-salt conditions and detergent 
(Fig. 11.10A). The 5S rRNA is independently transcribed 
by RNA polymerase III. In most eukaryotes, the 5S rRNA 
genes are present in separate repeat arrays.

Nucleolus
Most  steps  in  ribosome  synthesis  take  place  within  a 
specialized nuclear substructure, the nucleolus (see Fig. 
9.3). In micrographs, the nucleolus appears to be a very 
large and stable structure, but kinetic experiments indi-
cate that it is in fact highly dynamic, with most nucleolar 
proteins  rapidly  exchanging  with  nucleoplasmic  pools. 
A  current  view  of  the  nucleolus  is  that  its  assembly  is  
the consequence of many relatively weak and transient 
interactions between the nucleolar proteins. The result 
is a self-assembly process that greatly increases the local  
concentration  of  ribosome  synthesis  factors.  This  is 
envisaged  to  promote  efficient  preribosome  assembly 
and  maturation  while  allowing  the  rapid  and  dynamic 
changes  in  preribosome  composition  involved  in  this 
pathway.  Similar  mechanisms  may  generate  other  sub-
nuclear structures such as Cajal bodies.

The  key  steps  in  ribosome  synthesis  are  (a)  tran-
scription  of  the  pre-rRNA,  (b)  covalent  modification  of 
the  mature  rRNA  regions  of  the  pre-rRNA,  (c)  process-
ing  of  the  pre-rRNA  to  the  mature  rRNAs,  and  (d) 
assembly  of  the  rRNAs  with  the  ribosomal  proteins 
(Fig. 11.10D). During ribosome synthesis, the maturing 
preribosomes  move  from  their  site  of  transcription  in 

the dense fibrillar component of the nucleolus, through 
the  granular  component  of  the  nucleolus.  They  are 
then  released  into  the  nucleoplasm  prior  to  transport 
through  the  nuclear  pores  to  the  cytoplasm.  Here,  the 
final  maturation  into  functional  40S  and  60S  ribosomal 
subunits  takes  place.

Pre–Ribosomal RNA Processing
The posttranscriptional steps in ribosome synthesis are 
extraordinarily  complex,  involving  approximately  200 
proteins  and  approximately  100  snoRNA  species,  in 
addition  to  the  four  rRNAs  and  approximately  80  ribo-
somal  proteins.  Ribosome  synthesis  is  best  understood 
in budding yeast, but all available evidence indicates that 
it is highly conserved throughout eukaryotes. A combina-
tion  of  endonuclease  cleavages  and  exonuclease  diges-
tion  steps  generates  the  mature  rRNAs  in  a  complex, 
multistep processing pathway. Many pre-rRNA process-
ing  enzymes  have  been  identified,  although  others 
remain to be found (Fig. 11.10E). The remaining species, 
5S  rRNA,  is  independently  transcribed  and  undergoes 
only 3′ trimming.

Modification of the Pre–Ribosomal RNA
The rRNAs are subject to covalent nucleotide modifica-
tion  at  many  sites.  Modification  takes  place  on  the  
pre-rRNA,  either  on  the  nascent  transcript  or  shortly 
following transcript release from the DNA template. The 
most  common  modifications  are  methylation  of  the 
2′-hydroxyl group on the sugar ring (2′-O-methylation) 
and  conversion  of  uracil  to  pseudouridine  by  base 
rotation. The sites of these modifications are selected by 
base  pairing  with  two  groups  of  snoRNAs.  The  box 
C/D snoRNAs direct sites of 2′-O-methylation and carry 
the  methyltransferase  (called  fibrillarin  in  humans  and 
Nop1 in yeast) (Fig. 11.10B). The box H/ACA snoRNAs 
select  sites  of  pseudouridine  formation  and  carry  the 
pseudouridine synthase (called dyskerin in humans and 
Cbf5 in yeast [Fig. 11.10C]).

A small number of snoRNAs do not direct RNA modi-
fication  but  are  required  for  pre-rRNA  processing.  The 
best  characterized  is  the  U3  snoRNA,  which  binds 
cotranscriptionally to the 5′–external transcribed spacer 
(ETS) region of the pre-rRNA. Base pairing between U3 
and  the  pre-rRNA  is  required  for  the  early  processing 
reactions  on  the  pathway  of  18S  rRNA  synthesis  and 
directs  the  assembly  of  a  large  pre-rRNA  processing 
complex  called  the  small  subunit  processome.  This 
complex can be visualized as a “terminal knob” in micro-
graphs of spread pre-rRNA transcripts (Fig. 11.10A).

A subset of ribosome synthesis factors interacts with 
both the rDNA and RNA polymerase I. These interactions 
might promote both efficient pre-rRNA transcription and 
recognition of the nascent pre-rRNA. This is reminiscent 
of the association of mRNA processing factors with RNA 
polymerase II and suggests that maturation of different 

200 

SECTION IV  n  Central Dogma: From Gene to Protein

A

D

Nascent
pre-rRNA
molecules

DNA

Direction of
transcription

Transcription unit

Transcription unit
Nontranscribed spacer

rDNA

Pol I transcription

Processing

Modification

Pre-rRNA
2'-O-methylation
Box C + D snoRNAs
ϕ-formation
Box H + ACA snoRNAs

Assembly

NUCLEOLUS

Diffusion

NUCLEOPLASM

5S rRNA

Recycling

Preribosomes

Processing
and assembly
factors

Ribosomal
proteins

Protein
synthesis

Structural
reorganization
and transport

Late
maturation

Preribosomes

Nuclear
pore
complex

Processing
and assembly
factors

CYTOPLASM

Ribosomes

B. Box C/D snoRNAs
     guide 2'-O-methylation

C. Box H/ACA snoRNAs
     guide pseudouridylation

2'OMe

D'

C'

3'

C
snoRNA
5'

D

3'

2'OMe
5'

rRNA

ΝΨ

ΝΨ

3'
snoRNA

5'

H

5'

rRNA
3'

ACA

E. S. cerevisiae pre-rRNA processing 

Primary transcript

5'

Cotranscriptional
   cleavage of 3’ ETS

35s

3'

Rnt1p

Cleavage A0 A1 A2
?

? ?

20s

27sA2

Cleavage E

?

18s

RNase
MRP

Cleavage A3

27sA3

Exonuclease
 A3     B1S

Processing B2

Xrn1p
Rat1p

27sBS

Rex1p

?

7s

Cleavage C2
25s

Exosome

Exonuclease
C1     C1

Xrn1p
Rat1p

25s

Exonuclease
E     C2

5.8s

Rex1p
Rex2p

FIGURE 11.10  RIBOSOME SYNTHESIS. A, “Christmas trees” of nascent pre-rRNA transcripts. This electron micrograph shows ribosomal 
DNA (rDNA) genes in the process of transcription. Note the numerous molecules of RNA polymerase I (Pol I) along the rDNA, each associated 
with  a  pre–ribosomal  RNA  (rRNA)  transcript.  In  the  enlarged  inset,  the  terminal  balls  can  be  seen  on  the  transcripts.  These  large  pre–rRNA-
processing complexes (small subunit processomes) assemble around the binding site for the U3 small nucleolar RNA (snoRNA) and are required 
for the early pre-rRNA processing steps. B–C, Roles of the modification guide snoRNAs. The pre-rRNAs undergo extensive covalent modification. 
Most modification involves methylation of the sugar 2′ hydroxyl group (2′-O-methylation) or pseudouridine (Ψ) formation, at sites that are selected 
by  base  pairing  with  a  host  of  small  nucleolar  ribonucleoprotein  (snoRNP)  particles.  Human  cells  contain  well  over  100  different  species  of 
snoRNPs, and each pre-rRNA molecule must transiently associate with every snoRNP in order to mature properly. Sites of 2′-O-methylation are 
selected by base pairing with the box C/D class of snoRNAs, which carry the methyltransferase Nop1/fibrillarin. Sites of pseudouridine formation 
are selected by base pairing with the box H/ACA class of snoRNAs, which carry the pseudouridine synthase Cbf5/dyskerin. D, Key steps in 
eukaryotic  ribosome  synthesis.  Following  transcription  of  the  pre-rRNAs,  most  steps  in  eukaryotic  ribosome  synthesis  take  place  within  the 
nucleolus. The preribosomes are then released from association with nucleolar structures and are believed to diffuse to the nuclear pore complex 
(NPC). Passage through the NPC is preceded by structural rearrangements and the release of processing and assembly factors. Further ribosome 
synthesis  factors  are  released  during  late  structural  rearrangements  in  the  cytoplasm  that  convert  the  preribosomal  particles  to  the  mature 
ribosomal subunits. During pre-rRNA transcription and processing, many of the approximately 80 ribosomal proteins assemble onto the mature 
rRNA regions of the pre-RNA. E, The pre-rRNA processing pathway. The pathway is presented for the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, 
but  extensive  conservation  is  expected  throughout  eukaryotes.  The  mature  rRNAs  are  generated  by  sequential  endonuclease  cleavage,  with 
some of the mature rRNA termini generated by exonuclease digestion. Scissors with question marks indicate that the endonuclease responsible 
is unknown. 

 

A. mRNA
Pol II

promoter

CHAPTER 11  n  Eukaryotic RNA Processing 

201

Poly(A)
signal

Pol II

terminator

Pol II

promoter

snoRNA

Poly(A)
signal

Pol II

terminator

B. snoRNA/mRNA

Exon

Intron

Exon

Splicing

m7G p p p

AAA

+

Intron

mRNA

Debranching

Exonuclease
degradation

Exon

Exon

Intron
Splicing

m7G p p p

AAA

+

Intron

mRNA

Debranching

Exonuclease
degradation
5'p
snoRNA

+

C. snRNA processing

snRNA gene

Transcription

Pol II

pre-snRNA

CBC

m7G

Nuclear export

m7G

Sm-protein
binding

m7G

Functions in

pre-mRNA splicing

Modification
by scaRNPs
Assembly with
snRNA-specific
proteins

CAJAL
BODY

D. snoRNA processing

snoRNA gene

Pol II

Transcription
and assembly
with snoRNP
proteins

Functions in

ribosome synthesis

Modification
by snoRNPs

NUCLEOLUS

Nucleolar
import

pre-snoRNA

m3

2,2,7G

m3

2,2,7G

m3

2,2,7G

Nuclear import

CBC

m7G

Cap trimethylation
and 3´ trimming

Cap trimethylation
and 3´ trimming

NUCLEUS

CYTOPLASM

FIGURE  11.11  DIFFERENT  PATTERNS  OF  STABLE  RNA  SYNTHESIS  BY  RNA  POLYMERASE  II.  A,  Primary  transcripts  encoding 
messenger RNAs (mRNAs) generally contain one or more introns, which are removed and degraded to produce the mature mRNA. B, In human 
cells, the small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) that are involved in ribosomal RNA (rRNA) modification are generally synthesized by excision from the 
introns of highly transcribed protein-coding genes. The small nucleolar ribonucleoproteins (snoRNPs) bind to the snoRNA sequence within the 
pre-mRNA  and  protect  it  from  degradation.  C,  The  spliceosomal  U1,  U2,  U4,  and  U5  small  nuclear  RNAs  (snRNAs)  are  transcribed  by  RNA 
polymerase II (Pol II) and, like mRNAs, are capped with 7-methylguanosine and bound by the nuclear cap-binding complex (CBC). The pre-snRNA 
is  exported  to  the  cytoplasm,  where  it  associates  with  the  Sm-protein  complex  and  is  3′  trimmed.  The  cap  is  then  hypermethylated  to 
2,2,7-trimethylguanosine, and the RNA-protein complex is reimported into the nucleus. The newly imported snRNPs localize to the Cajal bodies, 
where the snRNA is covalently modified at sites selected by base pairing to the small Cajal RNAs (scaRNAs), another class of modification guide 
RNAs. Assembly with specific proteins then generates the mature snRNPs. D, Some snoRNAs, including U3, are individually transcribed by RNA 
polymerase II. Like the snRNAs, they are initially capped by with 7-methylguanosine and bind CBC. Following association with a set of snoRNA-
specific proteins, they undergo cap-trimethylation and 3′ trimming. The snoRNPs then localize to the nucleolus, where they themselves undergo 
snoRNP-dependent modification and then participate in rRNA processing. 

classes of RNA and their assembly with specific proteins 
might be functionally coupled to transcription.

Small Nuclear RNA Maturation
The  U1,  U2,  U4,  and  U5  snRNAs  are  encoded  by  indi-
vidual  genes  transcribed  by  RNA  polymerase  II  (Fig. 
11.11C).  Like  mRNAs,  the  snRNA  precursors  undergo 
cotranscriptional  capping  with  7-methylguanosine,  but 
they are not polyadenylated. In human cells, the newly 
synthesized  precursors  to  these  snRNAs  are  then 
exported to the cytoplasm. Once in the cytoplasm, the 
snRNAs form complexes with the Sm-proteins. This set 

of seven different, but closely related, proteins assembles 
into a heptameric ring structure. Sm-proteins are named 
after  the  human  autoimmune  serum  that  was  initially 
used in their identification. On their own, the Sm-proteins 
show low substrate specificity in RNA binding. However, 
in  human  cells,  the  assembly  of  the  snRNAs  with  the 
Sm-proteins is highly specific and is mediated by a large 
protein  complex.  This  complex  includes  the  SMN 
protein  (survival  of  motor  neurons),  which  is  the 
target  of  mutations  in  the  relatively  common  genetic 
disease spinal muscular atrophy. While in the cytoplasm 
the snRNAs are further processed; the 3′ end of the RNA 

202 

SECTION IV  n  Central Dogma: From Gene to Protein

is trimmed, and the cap structure undergoes additional 
methylation  to  generate  2,2,7-trimethylguanosine.  This 
hypermethylated  cap  structure 
is  also  present  on 
snoRNAs  (see  later)  and  might  be  important  to  allow 
resident  nuclear  RNAs  to  be  distinguished  from  mRNA 
precursors.

Once  the  cap  is  trimethylated  and  bound  by  the 
Sm-proteins,  the  snRNAs  can  be  reimported  into  the 
nucleus,  where  they  initially  localize  to  discrete  sub-
nuclear  structures  termed  Cajal  bodies  (see  Fig.  9.2). 
Within  the  Cajal  bodies,  specific  nucleotides  in  the 
snRNAs are modified by 2′-O-methylation and pseudou-
ridine  formation.  The  sites  of  these  modifications  
are  selected  by  base  pairing  with  a  group  of  resident 
small  Cajal  body  RNAs  (scaRNAs),  which  carry 
the  RNA-modifying  enzymes.  The  scaRNAs  closely 
resemble  the  snoRNAs  except  that  single  scaRNAs  can 
frequently  direct  both  2′-O-methylation  and  pseudouri-
dine formation.

Maturation  of  U6  snRNA  is  quite  different  from  that 
of  the  other  snRNAs.  U6  is  transcribed  by  RNA  poly-
merase III and is not exported to the cytoplasm. Mature 
U6 retains the 5′ triphosphate and 3′ poly(U) tract that 
are  characteristic  of  primary  transcripts  made  by  RNA 
polymerase III (see Chapter 10). However, the 5′ triphos-
phate is methylated on the γ-phosphate (ie, the position 
furthest  from  the  nucleotide),  while  the  terminal  U  of 
the poly(U) tract carries a 2′ to 3′ cyclic phosphate. Both 
of these modifications may help protect the RNA against 
degradation.  U6  does  not  bind  the  Sm-proteins  but 
instead associates with a related heptameric ring struc-
ture  that  is  comprised  of  seven  Lsm  proteins  (“like 
Sm”).  Two  distinct  but  related  heptameric  Lsm  com-
plexes  are  present  in  the  nucleus  and  cytoplasm.  The 
nuclear  Lsm2–8  complex  binds  to  the  U6  snRNA  and 
participates in the decapping of mRNA precursors that 
are destined for degradation in the nucleus (Fig. 11.1). 
In contrast, the Lsm1–7 complex participates in mRNA 
decapping and 5′ degradation in the cytoplasm. Nucleo-
tides within the U6 snRNA are also modified at positions 
that  are  selected  by  guide  RNAs,  but  this  modification 
occurs in the nucleolus rather than the Cajal body.

Small Nucleolar RNA Maturation
The  snoRNAs  are  generally  transcribed  by  RNA  poly-
merase  II  (except  in  some  plants  in  which  polymerase 
III–transcribed  snoRNAs  can  be  found).  However,  the 
genes  encoding  snoRNAs  can  have  a  surprising  variety 
of different organizations. In human cells, most snoRNAs  
are excised from the introns of genes that also encode 
proteins  in  their  exons  (Fig.  11.11B).  The  introns  that 
encode  snoRNAs  are  released  by  splicing  and  then  
linearized by debranching. The mature snoRNA is then 
generated by controlled exonuclease digestion. In con-
trast, most characterized snoRNAs in higher plants and  
several yeast snoRNAs are processed from polycistronic  

precursors  that  encode  multiple  snoRNA  species.  Indi-
vidual  pre-snoRNAs  are  liberated  by  cleavage  of  the 
precursor  by  the  double-strand–specific  endonuclease 
RNase III (Rnt1 in yeast) and then trimmed at both the 
5′  and  3′  ends.  SnoRNAs  can  also  be  processed  from 
single  transcripts,  and  these  have  many  features  in 
common  with  snRNA  transcripts.  Like  snRNAs,  these 
individually  transcribed  snoRNAs  carry  trimethylguano-
sine  cap  structures  (Fig.  11.11D).  However,  unlike 
snRNAs,  which  have  a  cytoplasmic  phase,  the  matura-
tion  of  snoRNAs  and  assembly  of  snoRNPs  take  place 
entirely within the nucleus, most steps probably occur-
ring in the nucleolus.

Synthesis and Function of Micro-RNAs
The  terms  siRNAs  and  miRNAs  are  used  to  describe 
groups of RNAs that are physically similar but have dis-
tinct functions and a variety of different names. All are 
approximately  22  nucleotides  in  length  and  associate 
with a protein complex called the RNA-induced silenc-
ing  complex  (RISC).  Under  different  circumstances, 
siRNAs  can  lead  to  cleavage  of  target  RNAs,  repress 
translation  of  mRNAs,  or  inhibit  transcription  of  target 
genes via formation of heterochromatin. It seems likely 
that  miRNAs  play  major  roles  in  regulating  global  pat-
terns of gene expression in human cells.

miRNAs are encoded in the genomes of many eukary-
otes, including humans (Fig. 11.12). These are frequently 
transcribed  as  polycistronic  precursors  called  pri-
miRNAs (primarily miRNAs). Within the pri-miRNA, the 
precursors to the individual miRNAs (pre-miRNAs) form 
stem-loop  structures.  The  stems  are  first  cleaved  by  a 
nuclear  double-strand–specific  endonuclease  called 
Drosha, releasing the individual pre-miRNAs. These are 
then  exported  to  the  cytoplasm,  where  cleavage  by  a 
second  double-strand–specific  endonuclease,  Dicer, 
releases the miRNA in the form of a duplex with charac-
teristic  two-nucleotide  3′  overhangs  and  5′  phosphate 
groups. These duplexes are incorporated into the RISC 
complex,  where  one  of  the  strands  becomes  the  func-
tional miRNA.

If the target mRNA sequence is incompletely comple-
mentary to the miRNA, its translation is repressed (Fig. 
11.12). This is likely to be the normal function of most 
endogenous miRNAs. It has recently been estimated that 
30%  or  more  of  human  mRNAs  are  targets  of  miRNA 
regulation.  miRNAs  show  tissue-specific  patterns  of 
expression  and  dynamic  changes  in  expression  during 
differentiation.  Individual  miRNAs  can  modulate  the 
expression of many different mRNAs. Changes in miRNA 
expression levels have been correlated with many human 
developmental  transitions  and  numerous  cancers.  The 
effects  of  individual  miRNAs  on  the  expression  levels  
of  target  RNAs  are  generally  quite  small  (less  than 
twofold), but they play important roles by reinforcing or 

 

CHAPTER 11  n  Eukaryotic RNA Processing 

203

Polycistronic
miRNA genes

Monocistronic
miRNA genes

dsRNA

Dicer

Transcription

etc.

pri-miRNA

Nuclear cleavage
of pri-miRNAs

Drosha

pre-miRNA (~70nt)

Nuclear export

Exportin 5
Ran-GTP

NUCLEUS

pre-miRNA (~70nt)

Cytoplasmic cleavage of pre-miRNAs

Dicer

CYTOPLASM

Mature miRNA(~22nt)

Degradation of passenger strand

RISC complex

Target mRNA binding

Target mRNA m7G

RISC

AA AAAAAA A A

Dicer cleavage generates ~22nt
dsRNA fragments with 2nt 3´ overhang

TRBP

siRNA

Small dsRNAs incorporated
into RISC complex
Ago2

RISC complex

One strand becomes functional siRNA
used to recognize target sequences

Ago2 cleaves target RNA within
region base-paired to siRNA

Target
mRNA

Translation repressed

Exonucleases digest target mRNA

FIGURE  11.12  microRNA  MATURATION.  The  polycistronic 
micro-RNA  (miRNA)  precursors  (termed  primary-miRNAs,  or  pri-
miRNAs)  are  cleaved  by  the  double-strand-specific  endonuclease 
Drosha  within  the  nucleus.  The  individual  pre-miRNAs  are  then 
exported to the cytoplasm by the export factor Exportin 5 in complex 
with Ran-GTP (see Fig. 9.18). Once in the cytoplasm, the pre-miRNAs 
are  cleaved  by  the  double-strand–specific  endonuclease  Dicer.  One 
strand  of  the  resulting  duplex  is  then  incorporated  into  the  RNA-
induced silencing complex (RISC) and becomes the functional miRNA. 
Imperfect duplexes are formed between the miRNA and target mes-
senger  RNAs  (mRNAs);  this  results  in  the  inhibition  of  the  mRNA 
translation. 

suppressing  changes  in  gene  expression  programs  that 
underlie cell fate decisions.

The synthesis and stability of miRNAs are subject to 
functionally  important  regulation.  Proteins  binding  to 
the  pre-miRNAs  can  enhance  of  inhibit  maturation, 
imposing  tissue-specific  expression  patterns.  In  some 
cases,  miRNA  or  pre-miRNA  degradation  is  strongly 
stimulated by the activity of terminal uracil transferases 
(TUTases)  that  add  uracil  nucleotides  to  the  3′  ends 
of  substrate  RNAs.  This  targets  them  for  degradation  
by a cytoplasmic exonuclease Dis3L2, which shows high 
specificity  for  RNAs  with  3′  terminal  U  tracts.  This 
pathway  is  important,  for  example,  in  regulating  the 
abundance  of  the  Let-7  miRNA,  which  is  highly  con-
served  in  evolution.  Let-7  functions  as  an  oncogene  in 
humans and is frequently overexpressed in cancers.

If a target RNA sequence is perfectly complementary 
to the miRNA, it is cleaved by a component of the RISC 

FIGURE  11.13  SMALL  INTERFERING  RNAS  FUNCTION  IN 
MESSENGER  RNA  CLEAVAGE.  In  contrast  to  the  endogenous 
micro-RNAs  (miRNAs),  exogenously  added  small  interfering  RNAs 
(siRNAs) are designed by experimenters to be perfectly complementary 
to the target RNA, which is then cleaved by the Ago-2 component of 
the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) complex. In many organ-
isms  (including  the  nematode  worm  Caenorhabditis  elegans  and 
insects such as Drosophila), long double-stranded RNAs can be used. 
These  are  processed  to  approximately  22-nucleotide  duplexes.  In 
human  cells,  siRNAs  are  generally  introduced  as  preformed  22- 
nucleotide  duplexes  or  as  stem-loops  with  structures  that  resemble 
endogenous  pre-miRNAs.  In  either  case,  the  siRNAs  associate  with 
Dicer, the double-strand RNA-binding protein TRBP, and Argonaut 2 
to form the RISC complex. One strand becomes the functional siRNA, 
while the “passenger” strand is lost from the complex. 

complex, Ago2 (“Slicer”). Target RNA cleavage occurs 
within  the  miRNA:  mRNA  duplex  at  a  fixed  distance 
(between nucleotides 10 and 11) from the 5′ end of the 
miRNA, which is specifically bound and used to precisely 
position the duplex relative to the catalytic site.

This  pathway  can  be  exploited  in  a  technique  for  
the specific inactivation of target mRNAs, termed RNAi 
(Fig. 11.13). RNAi uses exogenously provided RNAs that 
are generally fully complementary to the target, typically 
provided  as  22-nucleotide  RNAs  termed  siRNAs.  In 
many  organisms  (eg,  in  Drosophila  or  the  nematode 
Caenorhabditis  elegans),  RNAi  can  be  performed  by 
introducing long dsRNAs. These are cleaved in vivo by 

204 

SECTION IV  n  Central Dogma: From Gene to Protein

Dicer into 22-bp fragments, which are then incorporated 
into  the  RISC  complex.  In  mammals,  including  human 
cells,  long  dsRNAs  cannot  be  used  for  RNAi,  as  they 
trigger  an  antiviral  response  and  cell  death.  RNAi  can, 
however, be performed in human cells by the introduc-
tion  of  precleaved  22-bp  RNA  fragments.  Alternatively, 
small hairpin structures can be expressed that resemble 
endogenous  pre-miRNAs.  These  are  processed  into 
functional 22-nucleotide siRNAs in vivo. The small size, 
ease  of  use,  and  potent  function  of  siRNAs  have  made 
RNAi a powerful method for many analyses of eukaryotic 
gene function.

In  the  nucleus,  a  closely  related  system  is  used  to 
establish transcriptional silencing of RNA synthesis (Fig. 
11.14).  Although  important  gaps  remain  in  our  under-
standing, it appears that transcription of a region of the 
chromosomal DNA on both strands, generating a dsRNA, 
may be sufficient to induce its silencing. The dsRNA is 
likely to be cleaved by Dicer and/or Drosha to generate 
22  nucleotide  fragments,  in  this  case  termed  siRNAs. 
These  associate  with  a  nuclear  complex  called  RITS 
(RNA-induced  transcriptional  silencing  [see  Fig. 
11.14]),  which  is  related  to  the  cytoplasmic  RISC 
complex. These siRNAs identify the corresponding gene, 
possibly  by  binding  to  nascent  RNA  transcripts  and, 
together with the RITS complex components, recruit a 
protein  methyltransferase.  This  methylates  histone  H3  
on  lysine  9,  a  hallmark  of  repressive  heterochromatin, 
which in turn recruits other heterochromatin proteins 
such as HP1 (see Fig. 8.7). The RITS complex includes an 
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, and this may be able to 
generate new siRNAs, allowing the spreading of the het-
erochromatin into flanking sequences. The tendency of 
heterochromatin to spread into the flanking euchromatin 
has long been recognized and gives rise to the phenom-
enon of position effect variegation (see Fig. 8.7). In some 
eukaryotes,  the  methylated  histone  H3  can  also  recruit 
DNA methyltransferases that modify cytosine residues 
to  5′-methylcytosine.  This  reinforces  heterochromatin 
formation and makes it heritable by daughter cells. This 
system may be important for the establishment of hetero-
chromatin domains, such as those surrounding the cen-
tromeres in higher eukaryotes. It might also function as a 
defense system against the amplification of transposable 
elements.

The  irony  is  that  it  now  seems  likely  that  the  large-
scale  organization  and  transcriptional  activity  of  the 
genome in many eukaryotes will involve RNAs that long 
eluded detection because they are so small.

Synthesis and Function of  
Piwi-Interacting RNAs
The  Piwi-interacting  RNAs  (piRNAs)  form  a  distinct 
class of small RNAs, approximately 26 to 31 nucleotides 
in  length.  They  are  named  because  of  their  interaction 

Bidirectional transcription
Cleavage by dicer

DNA repeats (centromeric
regions, transposons, etc.)

sRNA

Identification of DNA
sites homologous to sRNAs

RITS

Methylation of lysine 9
on histone H3

Histone
methyltransferase

Heterochromatin
maintenance and
spreading

DNA methylation
(stable inheritance
of repressed state)

M

M

Heterochromatin
proteins

Gene off

M

DNA
methyltransferase

M M

M
MM

M

FIGURE  11.14  SMALL  HETEROCHROMATIC  RNAS  FUNC-
TION IN HETEROCHROMATIN FORMATION. The targets of micro-
RNAs (miRNAs) and small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) are cytoplasmic 
messenger RNAs (mRNAs). However, siRNAs can also function in the 
nucleus.  Small  double-stranded  RNAs  (dsRNAs)  in  the  nucleus  can 
associate  with  the  RNA-induced  transcriptional  silencing  (RITS) 
complex. The siRNA-RITS complex then identifies the genomic site of 
transcription, possibly by recognition of the nascent transcripts. This 
leads to the establishment of heterochromatin at this location, via the 
recruitment  of  protein  methyltransferases  that  methylate  lysine  9  on 
histone  H3,  a  hallmark  of  repressive  heterochromatin  (see  Fig.  8.7).  
In  some  organisms,  this  is  followed  by  methylation  of  the  DNA,  
which  makes  the  repressed  heterochromatic  state  more  stable  and 
heritable. 

with  PIWI  proteins  that  were  first  identified  in  Dro-
sophila  and  are  related  to  Argonaut.  In  invertebrates, 
piRNAs function in a silencing system in germline cells 
that  blocks  expression  of  transposons,  thus  protecting 
the DNA against recombination and mutation. In humans, 
piRNAs are also strongly expressed in the germline and 
are necessary for spermatogenesis.

Synthesis and Function of Other 
Noncoding RNAs
RNA sequencing in human cells revealed that the major-
ity (70%–90%) of the genome is detectably transcribed, 

 

CHAPTER 11  n  Eukaryotic RNA Processing 

205

even  though  only  less  than  2%  encodes  proteins.  This 
phenomenon  is  termed  pervasive  transcription,  and  it 
generates  a  bewildering  array  of  ncRNA  species.  The 
definition  of  “ncRNAs”  is  somewhat  vague,  but  it  has 
come to mean the collection of transcripts that do not 
encode proteins, and do not fall neatly into one of the 
other  major  RNA  classes  (tRNA,  rRNA,  snRNA,  etc). 
Human  cells  synthesis  many  thousands  of  different 
lncRNAs, defined as being longer than 200 nucleotides 
in  length.  These  generally  resemble  mRNAs  in  being 
transcribed by RNA polymerase II and carrying cap and 
poly(A) modifications. The number of different lncRNAs 
increases  with  organismal  complexity,  suggesting  that 
they may play important roles in generating tissue diver-
sity;  however,  relatively  few  lncRNAs  have  been  func-
tionally  characterized  in  detail.  The  best  understood 
human lncRNA is Xist, which plays a key role in silencing 
one copy of the X chromosome in most female mammals, 
including  humans.  This  is  required  to  balance  gene 
expression compared to males, which have only a single 
X  chromosome.  Xist  RNA  synthesized  from  a  gene 
present on the silenced X forms protein complexes that 
appear  to  coat  the  compacted  chromosome  (see  Fig. 
8.6). Transcription silencing is achieved, at least in part, 
by  recruitment  of  the  polycomb  repressive  complex, 
which  modifies  specific  residues  in  the  histones  that 
package the DNA.

Ribozymes
Some  RNAs  have  catalytic  activity  in  the  absence  of 
proteins.  Such  RNA  enzymes  are  termed  ribozymes, 
and they play a number of key roles.

Group I and Group II Self-Splicing Introns
Two classes of introns can catalyze their own excision 
from  precursor  RNAs.  These  ribozymes  are  referred  
to  as  group  I  and  group  II  self-splicing  introns. 
Both  classes  of  RNA  fold  into  complex  structures  that 
catalyze  splicing  via  two-step  transesterification  path-
ways (Fig. 11.15).

The  first  group  I  intron  was  identified  in  1981  as  a 
413-nucleotide fragment that was able excise itself from 
the  pre-rRNA  synthesized  in  the  ciliate  Tetrahymena. 
This was a major surprise, because at that time all known 
enzymes were proteins. The demonstration that an RNA 
could  function  as  an  enzyme  had  a  major  impact  on 
subsequent RNA research. Group I introns are found in 
the  pre-rRNAs  of  other  unicellular  eukaryotes,  in  the 
mitochondria  and  chloroplasts  of  many  lower  eukary-
otes, and in the mitochondria of higher plants.

Group II introns have been found in mitochondria of 
plants and fungi and in chloroplasts. The splicing mecha-
nism  of  group  II  introns  strikingly  resembles  nuclear 
pre-mRNA  splicing  (Fig.  11.15C–D).  This  led  to  the 
proposal  that  the  nuclear  pre-mRNA  splicing  system 
derived  from  ancestral  group  II  introns.  During  early 

eukaryotic evolution, the catalytic center of the group II 
intron  might  have  become  fragmented  and  separated 
into the present spliceosomal snRNAs. This would have 
converted  a  system  that  could  work  only  on  its  own 
transcript into a system that could process other RNAs, 
greatly increasing the potential range of spliced RNAs.

RNase P and RNase MRP
Shortly  after  the  identification  of  the  group  I  intron  in 
Tetrahymena, the RNA component of RNase P was also 
shown  to  function  as  a  ribozyme.  RNase  P  is  an  RNA-
protein complex that cleaves pre-tRNAs at the 5′ end of 
the mature tRNA sequence in all organisms. The bacte-
rial enzyme has one RNA component and one protein, 
but the RNA can cleave pre-tRNAs in vitro in the absence 
of the protein. In eukaryotes, RNase P has become more 
complicated,  with  one  RNA  and  nine  protein  compo-
nents.  The  eukaryotic  RNA  has  not  been  shown  to  be 
active  in  the  absence  of  proteins,  but  it  does  show 
structural  similarities  to  the  bacterial  RNA,  and  it  is 
assumed to be the catalyst.

Eukaryotes also contain a second RNA-protein enzyme, 
called RNase MRP, which is closely related to RNase P. 
The RNA components share common structural features, 
and the complexes share eight common proteins. RNase 
MRP cleaves the pre-rRNA between the small and large 
subunit rRNAs (Fig. 11.10E). Notably, in many bacteria, 
RNase  P  can  cleave  the  pre-rRNA  at  a  similar  position 
because of the presence of a tRNA within the pre-rRNA 
transcript.  This  suggests  that  RNase  MRP  arose  in  an 
early eukaryote as a specialized form of RNase P, with a 
specific function in pre-rRNA processing. By analogy to 
RNase P, cleavage by RNase MRP is predicted to be RNA 
catalyzed. RNase MRP also functions in mRNA turnover, 
at least in yeast, initiating the cell-cycle-regulated degra-
dation of a small number of mRNAs.

Large Subunit Ribosomal RNA
The  most  important  ribozyme  is  the  rRNA  component 
of  the  large  ribosomal  subunit,  which  does  not  partici-
pate in RNA processing but catalyzes peptide bond for-
mation (see Fig. 12.9). During translation elongation, the 
peptidyltransferase  reaction  (the  reaction  by  which 
amino acid residues are attached to each other to form 
proteins)  is  catalyzed  by  the  rRNA  itself.  The  peptidyl-
transferase  reaction  is  energetically  favorable,  and  it  is 
currently  thought  that  the  catalytic  activity  derives  pri-
marily from the precise spatial positioning of the A-site 
and  P-site  tRNAs  by  the  rRNA.  The  ribosomal  proteins 
act as chaperones in ribosome assembly and as cofactors 
to increase the efficiency and accuracy of translation.

RNA-Based Gene Editing
Rapid  progress  has  been  made  in  experimental  gene 
editing  techniques,  driven  by  the  development  of 

206 

SECTION IV  n  Central Dogma: From Gene to Protein

A. Group II splicing

B. Group II RNA

C. Group II intron

5'
Exon 1

Intron

A

3'
Exon 2

A

Lariat

Exon 2

Exon 1

A

Lariat

+

Exon 1

Exon 2

III

II

Intron

IV

V

A

Exon 2

Pre-mRNA

I

5'

Exon 1

VI

3'

F. Group I splicing

E. Spliceosome
     RNAs

D. Spliceosome

5'
Exon 1

G

Intron

3'
Exon 2

G

Exon 2

Exon 1

G

Intron

+

Exon 1

Exon 2

U4

U6

U5

A

Exon 2

U2

3'

U1

5'

Exon 1

Pre-mRNA

Intron

U2

Catalytic
center

U5

U6

U5

FIGURE 11.15  COMPARISON OF SELF-SPLICING WITH PRE–MESSENGER RNA SPLICING. Group I and group II introns are catalytic 
RNAs or ribozymes that can excise themselves from precursor RNAs in the absence of proteins. A, The removal of group I introns is mechanistically 
distinct from nuclear pre–messenger RNA (mRNA) splicing and commences with the binding of an exogenous guanosine nucleotide (red G) within 
a pocket created by the intronic RNA structure. This G is used to attack and break the phosphate backbone at the 5′ splice site. Subsequently, 
the free 3′ end of exon 1 attacks the phosphodiester bond at the 3′ splice site, leading to exon ligation and the release of the linear intron. B, In 
contrast, the mechanism of splicing group II introns is very similar to pre-mRNA splicing. An adenine residue (A) near the 3′ end of the intron 
attacks the 5′ splice site, leading to the formation of a lariat intermediate. The subsequent attack of the free 3′ end of exon 1 on the phosphodiester 
bond at the 3′ splice site leads to exon ligation and the release of the intron lariat (compare to Fig. 11.4). C–D, Parallels can be drawn between 
structure and mechanism of group II self-splicing introns and pre-mRNA splicing. This suggested the model that group II introns gave rise to the 
nuclear pre-mRNA splicing system. The small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs) may be derived from fragments of a group II intron that developed the 
ability to function in trans (ie, on other RNAs) rather than acting only in cis on its own sequence. Specifically, domain VI of the group II introns 
functions like the U2-branch point duplex in activating the branch-point adenosine by bulging it out of a helix. Domain V acts like the U2-U6 
duplex in bringing this adenosine to the 5′ splice site. Domain III resembles the U5 snRNA in base pairing to both the 5′ and 3′ exons at the 
splice sites. 

RNA-based,  site-specific  DNA  cleavage  systems.  These 
are  derived  from  immunity  systems  that  are  present  in 
many  bacteria  and  most  Archaea.  DNA  sequencing 
identified  “clustered  regularly-interspaced  short  palin-
dromic repeats” (CRISPR) in which the regions between 
the  repeats  are  generally  derived  from  the  genomes  of 
bacteriophages (viruses that infect bacteria) or plasmids. 
Conserved  proteins  encoded  adjacent  to  the  CRISPR 
loci  assemble  into  the  Cascade  complex.  Cascade  rec-
ognizes  and  cleaves  novel,  incoming  phage  DNA  and 
incorporates  small  fragments  into  the  CRISPR  genomic 
locus. On subsequent phage infection, Cascade proteins 
use the CRISPR RNA transcript to recognize and degrade 

the  phage  DNA.  Numerous  variants  of  the  CRISPR/
Cascade  system  exist,  probably  reflecting  evolutionary 
pressure  from  the  development  of  antagonistic  phage 
systems.

It  was  subsequently  shown  that  a  single  Cascade 
protein, together with a suitably engineered guide RNA, 
can perform highly specific, double-stranded DNA cleav-
age in almost any genome, including humans (Fig. 11.16). 
This has greatly facilitated genetic manipulation in many 
systems.  At  the  time  of  writing,  the  Cas9  protein  from 
Streptococcus  pyogenes  is  predominately  used  as  the 
RNA-directed endonuclease, but the field is developing 
rapidly. Future advances in genetic engineering of cells 

 

A

Cas9

5’
3’

5’

Main cleavage sites

GGCGCATAAAGATGAGACGC
Non-target DNA strand

3’
UCGGUGCUUCG
G
AGCCACGGUGAAA
AACUUG

A
A

C

U

A

U

A
U

GUCCGU
C  GGAAUAAAAUU  CGAUACGACAAAA
RNA-DNA hybrid
GGCGCAUAAAGAUGAGACGCGUUUUAGAGCUAUGCUGUUUU
CCGCGTATTTCTACTCTGCG

GAA

sgRNA

A

G

A
A

ACCGCTAATC
TGGCGATTAG

5' NTS
3' NTS

dsDNA

Target DNA

PAM
(protospacer
adjacent motif)

CHAPTER 11  n  Eukaryotic RNA Processing 

207

B

TOP
VIEW

A

N

s g R

Stem
loops

FRONT
VIEW

60°

5' NTS
Target
DNA
3' NTS

Cleavage

sites

Stem
loops

FIGURE 11.16  RNA-GUIDED DNA CLEAVAGE. The Cas9 protein has double-strand DNA (dsDNA) endonuclease activity at sites selected 
by  base  pairing  with  specific  guide  RNAs.  Eukaryotic  genome  engineering  commonly  makes  use  of  a  complex  between  the  Streptococcus 
pyogenes Cas9 double-strand nuclease and a single-guide RNA (sgRNA) guide. Cas9 can open the DNA duplex allowing potential base-pairing 
to the sgRNA. If the 20 nt complementary sequence is identified in the DNA together with a conserved element, called the protospacer adjacent 
motif (PAM), Cas9 can then cleave both DNA strands. 

and organisms will revolutionize cell biology and medi-
cine over coming decades.

discovered,  so  there  is  every  reason  to  think  that  addi-
tional classes of RNA remain to be identified.

Conclusions
Eukaryotic cells have a bewildering array of RNA species 
that  perform  many  different,  key  functions  in  gene 
expression.  The  mature  forms  of  all  these  RNAs  are 
generated  by  RNA  processing  reactions,  so  the  RNA 
processing  machinery  is  of  considerable  importance. 
Probably  for  this  reason,  RNA-processing  enzymes  and 
cofactors are generally highly conserved during eukary-
otic evolution. For many RNA species, transcription and 
maturation are closely coupled and can be thought of as 
an integrated system.

Finally, it is notable that many RNA species and func-
tionally important modifications have only recently been 

SELECTED READINGS

Cech TR, Steitz JA. The noncoding rna revolution—trashing old rules 

to forge new ones. Cell. 2014;157:77-94.

Ebert MS, Sharp PA. Roles for microRNAs in conferring robustness to 

biological processes. Cell. 2012;149:515-524.

Henras AK, Plisson-Chastang C, O’Donohue M-F, et al. An overview of 
pre-ribosomal RNA processing in eukaryotes. Wiley Interdiscip Rev 
RNA. 2015;6:225-242.

Kilchert  C,  Wittmann  S,  Vasiljeva  L.  The  regulation  and  functions  
of  the  nuclear  RNA  exosome  complex.  Nat  Rev  Mol  Cell  Biol. 
2016;17:227-239.

Lee M, Kim B, Kim VN. Emerging roles of RNA modification: m6A and 

U-tail. Cell. 2014;158:980-987.

Papasaikas P, Valcárcel J. The spliceosome: the ultimate RNA chaper-

one and sculptor. Trends Biochem Sci. 2016;41:33-45.

This page intentionally left blank

C H A P T E R 

12 

Protein Synthesis and Folding*

Whatever  their  final  destination—cytoplasm,  mem-

branes, or extracellular space—proteins are synthesized 
in  the  cytoplasm  of  both  prokaryotic  and  eukaryotic 
cells.  The  only  exceptions  are  proteins  encoded  by 
genes  in  mitochondria  and  chloroplasts,  which  are  
synthesized in those organelles.

The biochemical synthesis of proteins is called trans-
lation,  as  the  process  translates  sequences  of  nucleo-
tides in a messenger RNA (mRNA) into the sequence 
of amino acids in a polypeptide chain (Fig. 12.1). Transla-
tion  of  mRNA  requires  the  concerted  actions  of  small 
transfer  RNAs  (tRNAs)  linked  to  amino  acids,  ribo-
somes  (complexes  of  RNA  and  protein),  and  many 
soluble proteins. Guanosine triphosphate (GTP) binding 
and hydrolysis regulate several proteins that orchestrate 
the  interactions  of  these  components.  Ultimately,  RNA 
molecules  in  the  ribosome  catalyze  the  formation  of 
peptide  bonds.  Some  newly  synthesized  polypeptides 
fold  spontaneously  into  their  native  structure  in  the  
cellular environment, but many require assistance from 
proteins called chaperones.

All contemporary organisms share a common transla-
tion apparatus, so the mechanism of peptide bond forma-
tion must predate the common ancestor approximately 
3.5 billion years ago. By the time of the common ances-
tor, many relatively complicated regulatory features were 
in place and were inherited across the phylogenetic tree.

Protein Synthetic Machinery
Messenger RNA
mRNAs  have  three  parts:  Nucleotides  at  the  5′  end 
provide binding sites for proteins that initiate polypep-
tide  synthesis;  nucleotides  in  the  middle  specify  the 
sequence  of  amino  acids  in  the  polypeptide;  and 

*This chapter was revised using material from the first edition 
written by William E. Balch, Ann L. Hubbard, J. David Castle, and  
Pat Shipman.

4. Subunit
    recycling

C

N

Large subunit

Exit
hole

3'

Small
subunit

AUG

1. Initiation

GTPase

Stop
codon
3. Termination

GTPase

tRNAs

5'

end of mRNA

Elongating
polypeptide

2. Elongation

N

Peptidyl
tranferase
site

tRNAs

N

N

Two

GTPases

FIGURE  12.1  OVERVIEW  OF  THE  TRANSLATION  CYCLE 
SHOWING  SIX  RIBOSOMES  ON  A  SINGLE  mRNA.  1,  Initiation. 
Initiator tRNAMet, mRNA, and accessory soluble factors assemble on 
the  small  subunit,  which  then  joins  with  a  large  subunit.  Met  is  the 
three-letter code for methionine. 2, Elongation. The polypeptide chain 
is synthesized, in the order specified by the mRNA, in sequential steps 
by recruitment of new aa-tRNAs that match the coding sequence of 
the mRNA, formation of peptide bonds, and dissociation of free tRNA. 
3, Termination. Release factors recognize the stop codon (yellow) and 
terminate  translation.  The  ribosome  releases  the  polypeptide  for 
folding in the cytoplasm. 4, Subunit recycling. The ribosomal subunits 
dissociate and are available for another round of translation. aa-tRNA, 
Aminoacyl-tRNA; AUG, initiation codon; GTPase, guanosine triphos-
phatase; tRNA, transfer RNA. 

nucleotides  at  the  3′  end  regulate  the  stability  of  the 
mRNA (Fig. 1.1). Within the protein-coding region, suc-
cessive  triplets  of  three  nucleotides,  called  codons, 
specify the sequence of amino acids. The genetic code 
relating nucleotide triplets to amino acids is, with a few 
minor exceptions, universal. One to six different triplet 
codons  encode  each  amino  acid  (Fig.  12.2).  An  initia-
tion codon (AUG) specifies methionine, which begins 

 209

210 

SECTION IV  n  Central Dogma: From Gene to Protein

Second Position

U

UUU
UUC
UUA
UUG

CUU
CUC
CUA
CUG

AUU
AUC
AUA
AUG

GUU
GUC
GUA
GUG

Phe

Leu

Leu

Ile

Met

Val

C

UCU
UCC
UCA
UCG

CCU
CCC
CCA
CCG

ACU
ACC
ACA
ACG

GCU
GCC
GCA
GCG

Ser

Pro

Thr

Ala

A

UAU
UAC
UAA
UAG

CAU
CAC
CAA
CAG

AAU
AAC
AAA
AAG

GAU
GAC
GAA
GAG

Tyr

Stop

His

Gln

Asn

Lys

Asp

Glu

G

UGU
UGC
UGA
UGG

CGU
CGC
CGA
CGG

AGU
AGC
AGA
AGG

GGU
GGC
GGA
GGG

Cys

Stop
Trp

Arg

Ser

Arg

Gly

U
C
A
G

U
C
A
G

U
C
A
G

U
C
A
G

 

T
h
i
r
d
P
o
s
i
t
i
o
n
 
(
3

'
 

e
n
d
)

)
d
n
e

 
'

5
(
 
n
o
i
t
i

s
o
P

 
t
s
r
i
F

U

C

A

G

= Chain-terminating codon
= Initiation codon

FIGURE 12.2  THE GENETIC CODE. The locations of the nucleotide in first, second, and third positions define the amino acid specified by 
the code. 

all polypeptide chains, but may subsequently be removed. 
In  addition,  any  one  of  three  termination  codons 
(UAA, UGA, UAG) stops peptide synthesis.

Eukaryotic and bacterial mRNAs differ in three ways. 
First,  eukaryotic  mRNAs  encode  one  protein,  whereas 
bacterial mRNAs generally encode more than one protein. 
Second,  most  eukaryotic  (and  eukaryotic  viral)  mRNAs 
are  capped  by  an  inverted  7-methylguanosine  residue 
joined onto the 5′ end of the mRNA by a 5′-triphosphate-
5′  linkage  (see  Fig.  11.2  and  Fig.  12.3).  This  5′  cap  is 
stable  throughout  the  life  of  the  mRNA.  It  provides  a 
binding site for proteins and protects the 5′ end against 
attack  by  nucleases.  Third,  most  metazoan  mRNAs  
require processing to remove introns (see Fig. 11.4).

Most  eukaryotic  mRNAs  have  a  3′  tail  of  50  to  200 
adenine  residues  added  posttranscriptionally  to  the  3′ 
end (see Fig. 11.3). This poly(A) tail binds a protein that 
promotes  export  from  the  nucleus  and  protects  the 
mRNA from degradation in the cytoplasm. The 3′ poly(A) 
tails  are  shorter  or  absent  on  bacterial  mRNAs.  Many 
single-stranded mRNAs have some double-stranded sec-
ondary structure (see Fig. 3.19) that must be disrupted 
during translation to allow reading of each codon.

Transfer RNA
tRNAs are adapters that deliver amino acids to the trans-
lation machinery by matching mRNA codons with their 
corresponding  amino  acids  as  they  are  incorporated  
into a growing polypeptide (Fig. 12.4). One to four dif-
ferent tRNAs are specific for each amino acid, generally 

Cap

m7G
P
P
P
5'

P
P
P
5'

m7G

mRNA

Prokaryotic

Eukaryotic

Eukaryotic mRNA cap
with associated proteins

FIGURE  12.3  mRNA  CAP  STRUCTURES.  Prokaryotic  mRNAs 
(messenger RNAs) end with a 5′ triphosphate. The 5′ cap of eukaryotic 
mRNAs consists of a 7-methylguanosine residue (m7G) linked to the 
mRNA  by  three  phosphates.  The  protein  eIF-4E  binds  the  cap  and 
protects  against  degradation  by  nucleases.  (See  Protein  Data  Bank 
[PDB; www.rcsb.org] file 1EJ1.)

reflecting their abundance in proteins. Specialized tRNAs  
carrying  methionine  (formylmethionine  in  bacteria)  
initiate protein synthesis.

Transfer  RNAs  consist  of  ∼76  nucleotides  that  base-
pair  to  form  four  stems  and  three  intervening  loops. 
These  elements  of  secondary  structure  fold  to  form  an 
L-shaped  molecule.  A  “decoding”  triplet  (the  antico-
don) is at one end of the L (the anticodon arm), and the 
amino acid acceptor site is at the other end of the L (the 
acceptor arm).

Enzymes called aminoacyl-tRNA (aa-tRNA) synthe-
tases catalyze a two-step reaction that couples a specific 
amino  acid  covalently  to  its  cognate  tRNA  (Fig.  12.5).  

 

CHAPTER 12  n  Protein Synthesis and Folding 

211

T stem

54

64

4

T loop

56

Variable
loop

20

60
50

15

44

32

Anticodon
loop

B

A

3' Amino acid

acceptor

A
C
C

PO4

5'

72

69

Acceptor
stem

T stem

60
Y
A
C
T loop
R
G T Ψ C
54

56

64

50

Y

44

38

Variable
loop

5'

72

3'

1

4

7

Y

R

U

G

26

D stem

12

15
R A
D loop
A
G G
20

7

69

12

D stem

26

Anticodon
stem

38

Anticodon

Anticodon
stem

32

Y
U

C

Anticodon

FIGURE  12.4 
tRNA STRUCTURE. tRNAs (transfer RNAs) match an amino acid attached at the 3′ end with the mRNA (messenger RNA) 
triplet coding for that amino acid. A, Ribbon model, space-filling model, and textbook icon showing base pairing of the anticodon to an mRNA 
codon. B, Backbone model. C, Planar model showing stem loops of a generic tRNA. Single-letter code for the bases: adenine (A), any purine 
(R), any pyrimidine (Y), cytosine (C), guanine (G), pseudouridine (ψ), thymine (T), and uracil (U). (See PDB file 6TNA.)

aa-AMP

Two conjugations sites

R

+H3N  C  C
O

H

O
O
P O–
O
H2C
HO

O

Ad

OH

Class I
HO

O
CH2

Ad

Class II
HO

O
P O
O–

Cyt

O

PPi

tRNA

aa

+

ATP

Class I
synthetase

Class I aa linkage

R

+H3N  C  C

H

O
O

Ad

HO

O
P O
O–

O
CH2

Cyt

O

Synthetase  

+

AMP

tRNA synthetase

Synthetase • aa-AMP

tRNA • synthetase • aa-AMP

aa-tRNA

FIGURE  12.5  CHARGING  A  tRNA  WITH  ITS  CORRECT  AMINO  ACID.  tRNA  synthetases  (shown  schematically  and  as  a  space-filling 
atomic model in purple) provide a docking platform for a specific amino acid and its cognate tRNA (shown in orange as a schematic model and 
as a ribbon model bound to a synthetase). The amino acid is first activated by reaction with adenosine triphosphate (ATP). The carboxyl group 
of the amino acid is coupled to the α-phosphate of adenosine monophosphate (AMP) with the release of pyrophosphate. The synthetase then 
transfers the amino acid from the aminoacyl-AMP (aa-AMP) to a high-energy ester bond with either the 2′ (illustrated here) or 3′ hydroxyl of the 
adenine at the 3′ end of the tRNA. aa, Aminoacyl; PPi, inorganic phosphate. (See PDB file 1QTQ.)

212 

SECTION IV  n  Central Dogma: From Gene to Protein

A. Prokaryotic

30s

16s
RNA

B. Mammalian

30s

70s

50s

50s

5s
RNA

23s
RNA

40s

18s
RNA

40s

80s

60s

60s

5.8s
RNA

5s
RNA

28s
RNA

21 proteins

32 proteins

33 proteins

49 proteins

FIGURE 12.6  MOLECULAR COMPONENTS OF RIBOSOMES. RNA is light gray in the small subunits and dark gray in the large subunits. 
Proteins are colored. A, Crystal structure of the 70S ribosome from the thermophilic bacterium Thermus thermophilus. B, Cryoelectron microscopic 
structure of the 80S ribosome from pig pancreas actively synthesizing protein. The three columns show space-filling models (left), inventories of 
ribosomal  RNAs  (rRNAs)  and  proteins  (middle),  and  maps  of  the  secondary  structures  of  prokaryotic  16S  rRNA  and  18S  eukaryotic  rRNAs 
to  illustrate  their  similarities  despite  divergent  sequences.  (A,  See  PDB  file  4W2F.  B,  Cryo-EM  density  maps  are  EMData  Bank  [EMDB;  www
.emdatabank.org] files 2644, 2646, 2649, and 2650. Also see PDB file 3J7O.) 

In the first step, adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and the 
amino  acid  react  to  form  a  high-energy  aminoacyl  (aa) 
adenosine monophosphate (AMP) intermediate with the 
release of pyrophosphate. The second step transfers the 
amino acid to the 3′ adenine of tRNA, forming an aa-tRNA. 
This reaction is called charging, as the high-energy ester 
bond between the amino acid and the tRNA activates the 
amino acid, preparing it to form a peptide bond with an 
amino group in the growing polypeptide chain. Each of 
the  20  aa-tRNA  synthetases  couples  a  particular  amino 
acid to its several corresponding tRNAs. The two classes 
of aa-tRNA synthases have different evolutionary origins 
and attach their amino acids to two different hydroxyls 
of the adenine at the 3′ end of the tRNA (Fig. 12.5).

The  fidelity  of  protein  synthesis  depends  on  near-
perfect  coupling  of  amino  acids  to  the  appropriate 
tRNAs.  Synthetases  make  this  selection  by  interacting 
with  as  many  as  three  areas  of  their  cognate  tRNAs:  
anticodon,  3′  acceptor  stem,  and  the  surface  between 
these sites (Fig. 12.5). Some synthetases use proofread-
ing  steps  to  remove  incorrectly  paired  amino  acids  
from tRNAs.

Ribosomes
Ribosomes  are  giant  macromolecular  machines  that 
bring  together  an  mRNA  and  aa-tRNAs  to  synthesize  a 
polypeptide.  Base  pairing  between  mRNA  codons  and 
tRNA  anticodons  ensures  that  the  sequences  of  the  
polypeptides  synthesized  are  those  prescribed  by  the 

sequences of codons in the corresponding mRNAs. After 
many  years  of  effort,  crystal  and  cryoelectron  micro-
scopic (cryo-EM) structures are now available for many 
kinds of ribosomes (Fig. 12.6). Some surprises emerged 
from these structures.

Ribosomes  consist  of  a  small  subunit  and  a  large 
subunit  that  bind  together  during  translation  of  an 
mRNA  (Fig.  12.7).  Each  subunit  includes  one  or  more 
ribosomal  RNA  (rRNA)  molecules  and  many  distinct 
proteins  (Fig.  12.6).  The  sizes  of  these  subunits  and 
rRNAs are traditionally given in units of S (Svedburg), the 
sedimentation  coefficient  measured  in  an  ultracentri-
fuge.  Although  all  ribosomes  derive  from  a  common 
ancestor  and  have  similar  mechanisms  of  action,  their 
structures  have  diverged.  Mammalian  ribosomes  have 
larger RNAs and  more  proteins  than  prokaryotic  and 
mitochondrial ribosomes.

Ribosomal RNAs constitute the structural core of each 
ribosomal subunit (Fig. 12.7). The 18S rRNA of the small 
subunit  of  mammalian  ribosomes  contains  approxi-
mately 1900 nucleotides, most of which are folded into 
base-paired  helices.  The  large  subunit  of  mammalian 
ribosomes  includes  three  RNAs:  a  28S  rRNA  consisting 
of approximately 5000 nucleotides, a 5.8S rRNA of 156 
nucleotides,  and  a  5S  rRNA  of  121  nucleotides.  The 
rRNAs fold into many based-paired helices, as first pre-
dicted by comparing the sequences of rRNAs from many 
different  species  (Fig.  12.6).  These  helices  and  their 
intervening  loops  pack  to  form  a  compact  structure. 

 

A

40s

60s

D

CP

L7/L12
stalk

B

E

CHAPTER 12  n  Protein Synthesis and Folding 

213

C

A/P
tRNA

60s

Pore

Nascent

chain

F

CP

P

A

E

*

Tunnel

FIGURE 12.7  STRUCTURE OF THE MAMMALIAN RIBOSOME. The structure the pig Thermus thermophilus ribosome. RNA is shown in 
light gray for the small subunit and dark gray for the large subunit, and proteins are shown in a range of colors. A, Side view of a space-filling 
model. B, Cutaway side view of the large subunit showing the elongating polypeptide (as a black zigzag) in the exit channel through the core of 
the large subunit. C–E, Space filling models from different points of view. C, Bottom view showing the pore of the exit channel. D, Crown view 
showing the active site. E, Crown view showing three transfer RNAs (orange) bound in the active site. F, Crown view with ribbon diagrams of 
the proteins minus RNA. (Based on PDB file 4W2F.)

Although prokaryotic rRNAs differ in size and sequence 
from eukaryotic rRNAs, they fold similarly. Many features 
of rRNAs have been conserved during evolution, includ-
ing  the  surfaces  where  subunits  interact,  the  sites  for 
binding  tRNA,  mRNA,  and  protein  cofactors,  and  the 
nucleotides involved with peptide bond formation.

Most ribosomal proteins associate with the surface of 
the rRNA core, although several extend peptide strands 
into the core (Fig. 12.7). Ribosomal proteins are gener-
ally small (10 to 30 kD) and basic. With one exception, 
ribosomes have just one copy of each protein.

Decoding  of  mRNAs  and  polypeptide  synthesis  take 
place  in  the  cavity  between  the  subunits.  The  surfaces 
of  this  cavity  are  generally  free  of  proteins,  so  (amaz-
ingly) rRNAs—not proteins—are largely responsible for 
mRNA  binding,  tRNA  binding,  and  catalysis  of  peptide 
bond formation. tRNAs move sequentially through three 
sites shared by the two subunits: the A  site (aa-tRNA), 
the P site (for peptidyl-tRNA), and the E site (for exit). 
The  growing  polypeptide  chain  exits  in  a  tunnel  that 
passes through the RNA core of the large subunit.

The  synthesis  and  assembly  of  a  yeast  ribosome 
requires the participation of all three RNA polymerases, 

75 small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs), and more than 200 
protein factors, in addition to the 80 ribosomal proteins 
and 4 rRNAs present in the mature ribosomes. Precursor 
RNAs are cleaved and modified to form the rRNAs (see 
Fig. 11.10). Assembly factors consisting of snoRNAs and 
numerous proteins then orchestrate the stepwise assem-
bly of rRNAs and ribosomal proteins into the small and 
large subunits and guide their export from the nucleus 
into the cytoplasm.

Although the genes for many ribosomal proteins are 
essential  for  viability,  mutations  in  some  can  cause 
remarkably specific defects. For example, humans with 
just one functional gene for ribosomal protein RPSA are 
missing  their  spleen,  but  are  otherwise  normal.  Muta-
tions in genes for other subunits cause anemia and muta-
tions in genes for certain assembly proteins cause liver 
disease.

Soluble Protein Factors
Many soluble proteins cycle on and off ribosomes during 
protein synthesis, enhancing the rate and/or the fidelity 
of the reactions that occur there. The following sections 
highlight the role(s) of these soluble factors.

214 

SECTION IV  n  Central Dogma: From Gene to Protein

Mechanism of Protein Synthesis
Organisms  in  all  three  domains  of  life  use  homologous 
components  and  similar  reactions  to  synthesize  pro-
teins,  although  the  details  differ  as  expected  after  3 
billion  years  of  evolutionary  divergence.  In  all  three 
domains,  protein  synthesis  takes  place  in  four  steps: 
initiation,  elongation,  termination,  and  subunit  recy-
cling  (Fig.  12.1).  Conformational  changes  move  ribo-
somes  along  the  mRNA  as  the  gene  sequence  is  read 
out.  Few  errors  are  made  thanks  to  precise  pairing  
of  tRNAs  with  their  amino  acids  and  codons  in  the 
mRNA  that  occur  on  the  ribosome.  Guanosine  triphos-
phatase  (GTPase)  proteins  regulate  the  progress  and 
fidelity  each  step  (see  Fig.  4.6  for  details  on  GTPase 
cycles).

Initiation Phase
The goal of initiation is to bring together the initiator 
tRNA carrying methionine (or N-formylmethionine, fMet, 
in Bacteria) and the AUG initiator codon of the mRNA in 
the  appropriate  site  on  the  ribosome  (Fig.  12.8).  First, 
the two RNAs form a ternary complex on a small ribo-
somal subunit, which then associates with a large subunit 
to form a 70S ribosome in Bacteria and an 80S ribosome 

in  eukaryotes.  Eukaryotes  use  more  than  10  soluble 
protein factors (eukaryotic initiation factors [eIFs]) to 
coordinate the RNA interactions. Fewer protein factors 
(designated IF) participate in prokaryotes. In eukaryotes, 
several steps occur in succession:

Step 1.  Initiator Met-tRNA and the GTPase eIF-2A (with 
bound  GTP)  form  a  preinitiation  complex  on  a 
small ribosomal subunit.

Step 2.  Several protein initiation factors assemble on the 
5′ cap of the mRNA. The RNA helicase eIF-4A in this 
complex uses ATP hydrolysis to remove any second-
ary structure or bound proteins from the 5′ end of the 
mRNA.  These  cap  recognition  factors  also  interact 
with  poly(A)-binding  proteins  on  the  far  end  of  the 
mRNA,  forming  a  circular  complex  that  can  either 
favor or inhibit initiation of translation.

Step  3.  The  cap  recognition  complex  targets  the 
mRNA to a preinitiation complex. The order of these 
first three steps is still being investigated. For example, 
mRNA may bind to the small subunit before the initia-
tion factors and Met-tRNA.

Step 4.  The small subunit and two initiation factors form 
a  tunnel  on  the  small  subunit  through  which  the 
mRNA  is  allowed  to  slide  as  the  initiator  tRNA  in  

Small subunit

1. Preinitiation
    complex forms

mRNA 5'

m7G

Start

2. Initiation factors bind 5’ cap

eIF-2A • GTP • tRNAMet

3. mRNA binds
    preinitiation
    complex

5'

40S

initiation
factors

tRNAMet
GTP

eIF-2A

GDP

4. Ribosome scans
    mRNA for AUG

Pi

5. Initiator tRNA binds AUG
    and GTP is hydrolyzed

6. eIF-2A and initiation factors dissociate

7. Subunit joining

Stop

AAA(A)n   3'
mRNA initiation factors
Poly(A) binding
protein

AAA(A)n  3'

Some mRNAs circularize
before binding ribosomes

AA(A)n 3'

P A

Large subunit

8. Elongation (see Fig. 12.9)

FIGURE 12.8  STEPS IN INITIATION IN EUKARYOTES. 1, Initiation factors (green) assemble with mRNA (messenger RNA), eIF-2A (purple, 
activated with GTP), and tRNAMet on a small ribosomal subunit to form the preinitiation complex. 2, Other initiation factors (blue) bind the 5′ cap 
of the mRNA. For some mRNAs, these 5′ cap-binding factors interact with poly(A)-binding proteins at the 3′ end of the mRNA. This circularization 
promotes initiation of some mRNAs and inhibits initiation of other mRNAs. 3, The preinitiation complex binds an mRNA. 4, The small subunit 
scans the mRNA for the AUG start codon (green). 5, When the initiator tRNA binds the start codon, eIF-2a hydrolyzes its bound GTP (guanosine 
triphosphate). 6, Phosphate, GDP (guanosine diphosphate), eIF-2a, and other initiation factors dissociate and recycle for further rounds of initia-
tion. 7, The small subunit binds a large subunit. 8, Elongation begins. m7G, 7-Methylguanosine. 

 

CHAPTER 12  n  Protein Synthesis and Folding 

215

the  P-site  scans  for  the  initiator  AUG  codon.  This 
movement depends on ATP hydrolysis, but its role is 
not clear. Eukaryotic mRNAs tend to begin translation 
at  the  first  AUG  codon  encountered,  but  the  local 
sequence  of  the  mRNA  may  also  contribute  to  the 
specificity as it does in Bacteria.

Step  5.  When  Met-tRNA  base-pairs  with  the  initiator 

AUG codon, eIF-2A hydrolyzes its bound GTP.

Step 6.  eIF-2A and the other initiation factors dissociate 

from the small subunit for recycling.

Step 7.  A large ribosomal subunit binds the small subunit 
complexed  with  both  the  mRNA  and  Met-tRNA. 
Another  GTPase  called  eIF-5B  hydrolyzes  its  bound 
GTP before elongation of the polypeptide begins.

Initiation  is  the  slowest  and  most  highly  regulated 
step in protein synthesis, frequently involving phosphor-
ylation  of  initiation  factors.  For  example,  cells  that  are 
subjected  to  various  stresses  use  phosphorylation  of 
eIF-2A  to  inhibit  translation.  Phosphorylation  increases 
the affinity of eIF-2A for its guanine nucleotide-exchange 
factor (eIF-2B), which competes with the initiator tRNA. 
In contrast, phosphorylation of eIF-4F favors translation 
by  enhancing  the  interaction  of  this  initiation  factor  
with the 5′ cap of mRNAs. This mechanism can influence 
the selective translation of particular mRNAs, since the 
5′ caps of mRNAs vary in affinity for eIF-4F.

Elongation Phase
During  elongation,  the  ribosome  sequentially  selects 
aa-tRNAs  from  the  cellular  pool  in  the  order  specified  
by the sequence of codons in the mRNA it is translating 
(Fig.  12.9).  The  ribosome  catalyzes  formation  of  a 
peptide  bond  between  the  amino  group  of  the  amino 
acid part of each new aa-tRNA and the carboxyl group 
at  the  C-terminus  of  the  growing  polypeptide  chain  
and then moves on to the next codon. Codon-directed 
incorporation  of  amino  acids  into  the  polypeptide  
chain  begins  once  the  two  ribosomal  subunits  are  
joined  with  an  initiator  tRNA  and  mRNA  properly  in 
place (Fig. 12.8).

The elongation reactions occur in the cavity between 
the  two  ribosomal  subunits.  mRNA  is  threaded,  codon 
by codon, along a bent path between the subunits. aa-
tRNAs enter on one side of the cavity and bind succes-
sively to three sites between the two ribosomal subunits. 
Interactions with both subunits allows the tRNA to main-
tain contact with the ribosome as it moves, step by step, 
from the A site to the P site to the E site prior to dissocia-
tion.  When  the  tRNAs  are  bound  in  the  A  and  P  sites, 
their  anticodons  base-pair  with  mRNA  codons.  Peptide 
bonds form at the other end of the tRNAs, which posi-
tion the amino acid on the tRNA in the A site adjacent 
to peptidyl chain on the tRNA in the P site of the large 
subunit.  The  growing  polypeptide  exits  through  a 
10-nm–long tunnel in the large subunit.

Two GTPases called elongation factors (EF; eEF for 
eukaryotic  elongation  factors)  bind  near  the  A  site  and 
favor movements of the subunits relative to each other 
that  facilitate  the  movements  of  the  mRNA  and  tRNAs 
through  the  ribosome.  Some  of  the  energy  from  GTP 
hydrolysis also increases the accuracy, but makes elonga-
tion the most expensive phase of translation in terms of 
energy expenditure.

The  following  paragraphs  summarize  the  current 
understanding  of  the  four  elongation  steps:  (1)  an 
aa-tRNA binds to the A site on the ribosome; (2) proof-
reading  ensures  that  it  is  the  correct  aa-tRNA;  (3)  a 
peptide bond forms; and (4) translocation advances the 
mRNA by one codon and moves the peptidyl-tRNA from 
the A site to the P site on the ribosome. New structures 
and spectroscopic observations of single ribosomes will 
continue to reveal more details.

Step 1.  aa-tRNA binding. The first GTPase (called eEF1A 
in eukaryotes and EF-Tu in Bacteria; see Fig. 25.7) is 
charged  with  GTP  by  a  nucleotide-exchange  factor 
(called eEFX in eukaryotes and EF-Ts in Bacteria). This 
prepares eEF1A to bind an aa-tRNA, which it delivers 
to an empty A site of a ribosome. Cells contain enough 
eEF1A-GTP  to  bind  all  the  aa-tRNAs  and  protect  the 
labile ester bond anchoring the amino acid.

Step 2.  Proofreading. A proofreading mechanism retains 
aa-tRNAs in the A site if they are correctly base paired 
with  the  mRNA  codon  and  allows  other  aa-tRNAs  
to dissociate. This “kinetic proofreading mechanism” 
uses two first-order reactions to discriminate between 
correct  and  incorrect  aa-tRNAs:  hydrolysis  of  GTP 
bound to eEF1A; and dissociation of guanosine diphos-
phate  (GDP)-eEF1A  from  the  aa-tRNA  and  the  ribo-
some.  If  the  aa-tRNA  anticodon  is  base  paired  with  
the  correct  mRNA  codon,  then  the  ribosome  stimu-
lates  GTP  hydrolysis,  phosphate  release,  a  massive 
conformational change (see Fig. 25.7), and eEF1A dis-
sociation in a few milliseconds. This allows the ami-
noacyl end of the aa-tRNA to move into the peptidyl 
transfer site on the large subunit and form a peptide 
bond.  Those  aa-rRNAs  with  weak,  imperfect  codon-
anticodon  pairs  dissociate  from  the  A  site  before 
eEF1A  can  hydrolyze  GTP  and  dissociate  from  the 
aminoacyl end of the tRNA.

Step 3.  Peptidyl transfer. The RNA of the large subunit 
forms the highly conserved active site that catalyzes 
the formation of peptide bonds (Fig. 12.9). This reac-
tion  eliminates  water  and  transfers  the  carboxyl 
group  esterified  to  the  peptidyl-tRNA  in  the  P  site  
to  the  free  amino  group  of  the  aa-tRNA  in  the  A  
site.  Catalysis  of  peptide  bond  formation  depends  
on  a  combination  of  precise  orientation  of  the  sub-
strates  and  stabilization  of  the  transition  state  (just  
like  protein  enzymes).  The  chemistry  is  similar,  but  
in  reverse,  to  the  hydrolysis  of  peptide  bonds  by  

216 

SECTION IV  n  Central Dogma: From Gene to Protein

tRNA charged
(see Fig. 12-5)

+

mRNA

30s

Release
factors

Termination

Polypeptide

50S

RF

aa • tRNAaa •
GTP • eEF1A

complex

1

Elongation:
repeat cycle

Proofreading:
incorrect tRNAs
released due to 
low affinity

eEFX

eEF1A • eEFX
complex

GDP

GTP

eEFX
(GEF)

GTP
hydrolysis

2

Pi

tRNA accepted
eEF1A released

deacyl-tRNA released

Peptidyl transfer

A

P

OO

H

C
C
R4
NH2
Peptidyl
transferase
catalyzes
formation of
new peptide
bond

OH

OO

C
C
NH

R4

H
O

C
C

R3

H
NHO

C
C

R2

H
NHO

P

OO

C
C

R3

H
NHO

C
C

R2

H
NHO

H

C
C
R1
NH2

eEF2 release

GTP hydrolysis
Translocation

4

GDP

eEF2

eEF2
binding

GTP

Hybrid
states

A

Polypeptide
chain exits

H
O
CH2

Termination by puromycin

Puromycin
OO
OO

H

C
C
NH2

A

CH3
O

Puromycin mimics
aa–tRNAtyr or
aa–tRNAphe

P

OH

H3C
H3C

N

N

NN

O

CH3
O

HO

NHO

C
C
NH2

H
O

C
C
NH

R4

H
O

3

Peptidyl
transfer

A

P

OO

C
C

R4

H
NHO

C
C

R3

H
NHO

C
C

R2

H
NHO

H

C
C
R1
NH2

H

C
C
R1
NH2

RIBOSOME INTERIOR

C
C

H

R3

FIGURE 12.9  STEPS IN ELONGATION AND TERMINATION IN EUKARYOTES. Starting in the upper left, elongation factor eEF1A (EF-Tu 
in Bacteria) forms a ternary complex with GTP and each amino acyl-tRNAaa for (1) delivery to the matching the mRNA codon in the A site of 
the ribosome. This ternary complex dissociates rapidly if the anticodon–codon match is incorrect. (2) If the anticodon–codon match is correct, 
the ternary complex remains bound to the A site long enough for eEF1A to hydrolyze its bound GTP and dissociate from the tRNA still bound 
to the A site. (3) The ribosome catalyzes formation of a new peptide bond (inset). (4) After eEF2 (EF-G in Bacteria) binds the A site, GTP hydrolysis 
causes a conformational change that facilitates translocation of the tRNAs and mRNA through the ribosome. Release factors (RF, green) recognize 
the stop codon and terminate the polypeptide chain (blue), allowing the mRNA and ribosomal subunits to dissociate. The guanine nucleotide-
exchange factor eEFX promotes the exchange of GDP for GTP on eEF1A. The enlargements at the bottom show details of peptidyl transfer and 
the mechanism whereby the antibiotic puromycin terminates translation prematurely by mimicking the terminus of amino acyl-tRNATyr or tRNAPhe. 
It is incorporated on the C-terminus of the polypeptide, which then dissociates from the ribosome, because it lacks an activated carboxyl group. 

proteolytic enzymes such as chymotrypsin. After for-
mation of the new peptide bond, the tRNA in the A 
site  has  the  polypeptide  on  one  end  and  its  antico-
don  arm  still  base-paired  to  its  mRNA  codon  on  the  
small  subunit.  The  antibacterial  agent  puromycin 
can  disrupt  elongation  by  mimicking  a  tRNAPhe  or 

tRNATyr (Fig. 12.10). Puromycin attacks the esterified 
carboxyl  group  of  a  peptidyl-tRNA  in  the  P  site,  
but  lacking  an  appropriate  acceptor  site  for  further  
peptidyl  transfer  reactions,  it  terminates  elongation. 
This  results  in  premature  release  of  the  polypeptide 
chain from the ribosome.

 

CHAPTER 12  n  Protein Synthesis and Folding 

217

U

TS

Slow

Fast

I

-225

-245

A/t

-265

0

0

4

Qs

8

10

Qc

20

12

30

N

FIGURE 12.10  ENERGY LANDSCAPE IN PROTEIN FOLDING. 
As  a  protein  matures  from  the  unfolded  state  (U)  through  transition 
states (TS) to the native folded state (N), native-like contacts form, and 
the free energy of the system decreases. The two paths (folding tra-
jectories)  illustrate  that  fast  protein  folding  (yellow  line)  is  observed 
when  more  native-like  contacts  are  made.  When  proteins  become 
trapped in partially folded intermediate states, folding is slower (pink 
line)  because  energy  barriers  must  be  overcome.  (Modified  from 
Radford  SE,  Dobson  CM.  Computer  simulations  to  human  disease: 
emerging themes in protein folding. Cell. 1999;97:291–298.)

Step  4.  Translocation.  The  second  GTPase  elongation 
factor (eEF2 in eukaryotes and EF-G in Bacteria) pro-
motes three linked reactions that complete the elon-
gation cycle. These GTPases have domains similar to 
domains  1  and  2  of  EF-Tu  (see  Fig.  25.7)  plus  three 
domains  that  mimic  the  size  and  shape  of  a  tRNA. 
Domain 1 binds and hydrolyzes GTP. Domains 3 to 5 
target GTP-eEF2 to an empty A site on the ribosome. 
Binding of GTP-eEF2 to an empty A site favors rotation 
of the small subunit approximately 6 degrees relative 
to the large subunit. Hydrolysis of the GTP bound to 
eEF2 and phosphate dissociation promote the reverse 
rotation of the small subunit and movement of pepti-
dyl-tRNA  from  the  A  site  to  the  P  site  on  the  small 
subunit together with sliding of the mRNA three bases 
forward on the small subunit. This translocation step 
produces relatively large forces of approximately 13 
pN  (piconewtons)  with  the  energy  coming  from 
peptide bond formation. At the same time, the deacyl-
ated tRNA in the P site is moved to the exit (E) site, 
where  it  dissociates  later  from  the  ribosome.  Finally 
eEF2  with  bound  GDP  dissociates  from  the  A  site, 
allowing another round of elongation.

Addition of each new amino acid pushes the growing 
peptide through a 10-nm–long tunnel in the large subunit 
lined with RNA (Figs. 12.1, 12.6, and 12.7). The tunnel 
accommodates an extended polypeptide approximately 
40  residues  long  with  the  N-terminus  in  the  lead.  The 

distal parts of the tunnel are wide enough to pass an α-
helix,  but  most  folding  of  the  polypeptide  takes  place 
outside the ribosome. Peptides longer than 40 residues 
protrude from the large subunit.

Cells  balance  speed  and  accuracy  during  translation 
to achieve an error rate of about 1 in 104 incorrect amino 
acids.  As  a  result  of  this  compromise,  ribosomes  add 
about  20  amino  acids  per  second  to  a  polypeptide  at 
37°C, so synthesis of a protein of average size (300 amino 
acids)  takes  only  15  seconds.  Greater  precision  could  
be  achieved  by  slowing  translation,  but  slower  cellular 
growth might be an evolutionary disadvantage.

Termination Phase
Termination occurs when the ribosome encounters a 
termination codon (UAA, UAG, or UGA) at the 3′ end of 
the coding sequence. Assembly of the polypeptide stops 
because a protein release factor, rather than an aa-tRNA, 
binds in the A site on the small subunit of the ribosome 
(Fig. 12.9). These release factors (called eRF1 in eukary-
otes and RF1 or RF2 in bacteria) recognize stop codons 
and  induce  the  ribosome  active  site  to  hydrolyze  the 
peptidyl ester between the C-terminal amino acid of the 
polypeptide chain and the tRNA in the P site. The com-
pleted polypeptide chain threads through the ribosome 
and  is  released.  Then  a  GTPase  uses  energy  from  GTP 
hydrolysis to promote dissociation of the mRNA and the 
ribosomal subunits, which are available for recycling to 
initiate translation of another mRNA.

Further Features of Protein Synthesis
Most mRNAs support protein synthesis by multiple ribo-
somes,  forming  polysomes  (Fig.  12.1).  Approximately 
40 to 50 nucleotides of mRNA are associated with each 
ribosome.  Consequently,  once  a  ribosome  has  read 
approximately  60  nucleotides  the 
initiation  codon 
emerges and is available to assemble another ribosome-
tRNA complex and start translation. Ribosomes can pack 
close together on one mRNA with all of newly synthe-
sized polypeptides emerging around the periphery. This 
multiple occupancy of mRNAs explains why ribosomes 
are  more  abundant  than  mRNAs  and  how  one  mRNA 
molecule can guide the synthesis of several copies of its 
protein product simultaneously.

This account of protein synthesis may give the impres-
sion of a homogeneous population of ribosomes moving 
steadily  on  mRNAs,  but  variation  exists  at  every  level. 
For example, three types of experiments show that ribo-
somes can pause during translation. Biochemical experi-
ments and observations of single ribosomes showed that 
certain sequences, such as several consecutive prolines 
or mRNA secondary structures, can stall translation. Cells 
have a special elongation factor (called EF-P in bacteria 
and a/eIF-5A in eukaryotes) that binds stalled ribosomes 
and promotes peptide bond formation, so the ribosome 
can move on.

218 

SECTION IV  n  Central Dogma: From Gene to Protein

New experiments using high-throughput DNA sequenc-
ing  have  documented  pauses  and  revealed  many  other 
features of translation for all the mRNAs in a cell. This 
method, called “ribosomal profiling” or “ribosome foot-
prints,” takes advantage of the fact that a ribosome pro-
tects  approximately  30  bases  of  the  associated  mRNA 
from digestion by nucleases. Therefore, one can isolate 
polysomes,  digest  with  a  nuclease,  and  isolate  the  pro-
tected  mRNA  sequences.  After  copying  into  DNA,  mil-
lions  of  fragments  are  sequenced  in  parallel  (see  Fig. 
3.16)  to  show  precisely  to  the  nucleotide  where  ribo-
somes are located on mRNAs. The number of DNA reads 
is higher if ribosomes stall at certain positions. This broad 
view also revealed many surprising events that take place 
during translation, including unconventional start sites, 
pauses  caused  by  environmental  conditions  and  the  
association of many small RNAs with ribosomes.

Ribosomes  can  vary  in  composition  and  posttransla-
tional modifications. Single genes encode most mamma-
lian ribosomal proteins, but plants have multiple genes 
for isoforms that are expressed in different cells. As they 
mature (see Fig. 11.10), rRNAs are methylated and some 
uridines  are  converted  to  pseudouridine  (Fig.  12.4). 
Ribosomal proteins are modified by acetylation, methyla-
tion, phosphorylation, O-linked β-D-N-acetylglucosamine 
and  ubiquitylation.  These  differences  each  have  the 
potential  to  influence  protein  synthesis,  although  few 
examples  have  been  characterized  in  detail.  A  large 
number  of  proteins  associate  with  ribosomes  and  may 
also influence their activities.

Spontaneous Protein Folding
Termination is the final step in translation, but just the 
beginning  for  a  new  protein.  A  polypeptide  begins  to 
experience its new environment while still being synthe-
sized.  When  it  is  approximately  40  residues  long,  its 
N-terminus  emerges  from  the  protected  tunnel  of  the 
large  ribosomal  subunit  into  cytoplasm,  where  it  must 
fold into a three-dimensional structure (see Fig. 3.5) and 
find its correct cellular destination.

The structure of folded proteins and the folding mech-
anism  are  both  encoded  in  the  amino  acid  sequence, 
making  folding  spontaneous  under  suitable  conditions. 
For  the  soluble  proteins,  these  conditions  are  aqueous 
solvent  at  physiological  temperature,  neutral  pH,  and 
moderate ionic strength. Folding of transmembrane pro-
teins in a lipid bilayer is quite different (see Chapter 20). 
In test tube experiments, small soluble proteins can be 
denatured  with  high  temperature,  extremes  of  pH,  or 
high  concentrations  of  urea  or  guanidine.  Denatured 
proteins exist as ensembles of unfolded polymers with 
little residual secondary structure.

When  denatured  polypeptides  of  modest  length  are 
transferred to physiological conditions, many fold spon-
taneously into their native three-dimensional structures 
on  a  microsecond  to  millisecond  time  scale.  (Proteins 

such  as  collagen,  which  require  isomerization  of  pro-
lines,  fold  much  more  slowly;  see  Fig.  29.4.)  Starting 
from many  initial  denatured  states,  a  polypeptide  con-
verges  toward  a  single  low-energy  native  state  (Fig. 
12.10)  driven  by  energy  from  numerous  noncovalent 
interactions  and  the  hydrophobic  effect  (see  Fig.  4.5). 
The number of possible pathways to the native state is 
so numerous that if they were sampled individually, pro-
teins  would  never  fold.  Thus,  both  theory  and  experi-
ment  indicate  that  folding  involves  a  subset  of  the 
potential pathways, including the formation of an ensem-
ble  of  loosely  folded  transition  states  with  elements  of 
secondary structure, certain turns, and hydrophobic con-
tacts found in the core of the native protein. However, 
the free energy landscape for folding has hills and valleys, 
so proteins can be trapped in partially folded states.

Many proteins fold spontaneously without assistance 
during  biosynthesis  in  vivo.  Folding  begins  when  the 
N-terminus of the nascent polypeptide emerges from the 
ribosome. The vectorial nature of this very slow “cotrans-
lational  folding”  has  both  advantages  and  liabilities.  An 
advantage is that folding before the polypeptide is com-
plete  limits  the  routes  to  the  folded  state  and  might 
account  for  why  many  proteins  fold  more  efficiently 
during  biosynthesis  than  from  the  denatured  state.  On 
the other hand, vectorial folding precludes interactions 
of N-terminal sequences with C-terminal sequences until 
they have emerged from the ribosome. Such interactions 
are common in folded proteins.

Folding  of  larger  proteins  is  more  complicated,  
especially  in  the  crowded  cytoplasm  where  partially 
folded  proteins  expose  hydrophobic  segments  that  are 
normally  buried  in  the  core  of  native  proteins.  These 
exposed core elements can aggregate irreversibly before 
folding  is  complete.  Thus,  many  newly  synthesized 
native  proteins  need  assistance  to  avoid  irreversible 
denaturation, aggregation, or destruction by proteolysis 
during folding.

Misfolding  of  mutant  proteins  contributes  to  many 
human diseases. For example, the most common cause 
of  cystic  fibrosis  is  genetic  deletion  of  the  codon  for  a 
single  amino  acid  in  cystic  fibrosis  transmembrane  
regulator  (CFTR),  resulting  in  failure  of  the  protein  to 
fold  properly  (see  Fig.  17.4).  Beyond  lacking  function,  
misfolded  proteins  also  poison  the  assembly  of  native 
proteins in blistering skin diseases (see Fig. 35.6), hyper-
trophic  cardiomyopathies  (see  Table  39.1),  and  other 
“dominant negative” conditions. Folding of proteins into 
nonnative  states  causes  prion  and  amyloid  diseases  
(Box 12.1).

Chaperone-Assisted Protein Folding
Several  families  of  molecular  chaperones  (Fig.  12.11) 
facilitate  folding  of  newly  synthesized  and  denatured 
proteins.  These  chaperones  do  not  fold  polypeptides  
by  directing  the  formation  of  secondary  or  tertiary 

 

CHAPTER 12  n  Protein Synthesis and Folding 

219

BOX 12.1  Protein Misfolding in Amyloid Diseases

Misfolding of diverse proteins and peptides results in spon-
taneous assembly of insoluble amyloid fibrils. Such patho-
logical  misfolding  is  associated  with  transmission  of  HIV, 
Alzheimer  disease,  Parkinson  disease,  transmissible 
spongiform encephalopathies (such as “mad cow disease”), 
and polyglutamine expansion diseases (such as Huntington 
disease,  in  which  genetic  mutations  encode  abnormal 
stretches  of  the  amino  acid  glutamine).  Accumulation  of 
amyloid  fibrils  in  these  diseases  is  associated  with  slow 
degeneration  of  the  brain.  Pathological  misfolding  also 
results  in  amyloid  deposition  in  other  organs  such  as  the 
endocrine  pancreas  in  Type  II  diabetes.  Some,  but  not  all, 
amyloids are intrinsically toxic to cells. Some amyloid precur-
sors are more toxic than the fibrils themselves.

The  precursor  of  a  given  amyloid  fibril  may  be  the  
wild-type  protein  or  a  protein  modified  through  mutation, 
polyglutamine expansion, proteolytic cleavage, or posttrans-
lational modification. In all cases, fibril initiation is unfavor-
able owing to very slow assembly of the first few molecules, 
but once formed, fibrils elongate quickly by adding protein 
subunits.  Amyloid  fibrils  are  extremely  stable  and  resistant 
to proteolysis.

Given  that  many  unrelated  proteins  and  peptides  form 
amyloid,  it  is  remarkable  that  these  twisted  fibrils  all  have 
similar structures: narrow sheets up to 10 µm long consist-
ing of thousands of short β-strands that run across the width 
of  the  fibril.  The  β-strands  can  be  either  parallel  or  anti-
parallel,  depending  on  the  particular  protein  or  peptide. 
Some amyloid fibrils consist of multiple layers of β-strands. 
The structures of the various parent proteins have nothing 
in common with each other or with amyloid cross–β-sheets, 
so these are examples of polypeptides with two stable folds.
To form amyloid, the native protein must either be par-
tially  unfolded  or  cleaved  into  a  fragment  with  a  tendency 
to  aggregate.  In  the  common  form  of  dementia  called 
Alzheimer  disease,  proteolytic  enzymes  cleave  a  peptide 
(Aβ) from a transmembrane protein called β-amyloid precur-
sor  protein  whose  normal  role  is  to  participate  in  signal 
transduction.  Aβ  forms  toxic  oligomers  and  amyloid  fibrils 

that  accumulate  in  the  brain  as  neurons  degenerate.  Simi-
larly, proteolytic fragments of an enzyme normally found in 
human semen form amyloid fibrils that enhance the transmis-
sion of HIV by many orders of magnitude. Therapeutic strate-
gies include small molecules that stabilize native proteins or 
inhibit amyloid polymerization.

“Infectious  proteins”  called  prions  cause  transmissible 
spongiform  encephalopathies,  such  as  “mad  cow”  disease. 
Normally,  these  proteins  do  no  harm,  but  once  misfolded, 
the protein can act as a seed to induce other copies of the 
protein  to  form  insoluble  amyloid-like  assemblies  that  are 
toxic  to  nerve  cells.  Such  misfolding  rarely  occurs  under 
normal  circumstances,  but  the  misfolded  seeds  can  be 
acquired by ingesting infected tissues.

Other  proteins,  including  the  peptide  hormone  insulin, 
the  actin-binding  protein  gelsolin,  the  receptor  protein  β2-
microglobin and the blood-clotting protein fibrinogen, form 
amyloid  in  certain  diseases.  An  inherited  point  mutation 
makes the secreted form of gelsolin susceptible to cleavage 
by a peptide processing protease in the trans-Golgi net work. 
Fragments from the protein form extracellular amyloid fibrils 
in several organs. Exposure to copper during renal dialysis 
promotes β2-microglobin to form amyloid fibrils in joints.

Given  that  amyloid  fibrils  form  spontaneously  and  are 
exceptionally stable, it is not surprising that functional amy-
loids  exist  in  organisms  ranging  from  bacteria  to  humans. 
For example, formation of the pigment granules responsible 
for skin color depends on a proteolytic fragment of a lyso-
somal membrane protein that forms amyloid fibrils as a scaf-
fold for melanin pigments. Budding yeast has approximately 
10  proteins  known  to  either  assume  their  “native”  fold  or 
assemble into amyloid fibrils. The native fold of the protein 
Sup35p serves as a translation termination factor that stops 
protein synthesis at the stop codon (see Fig. 12.9). Rarely, 
Sup35p misfolds and assembles into an amyloid fibril. These 
fibrils sequester all the Sup35p in fibrils, where it is inactive. 
The faulty translation termination that occurs in its absence 
has diverse consequences that are inherited like prions from 
one generation of yeast to the next.

structure.  Rather,  chaperones  inhibit  aggregation  by 
binding  exposed  hydrophobic  segments  of  nonnative 
polypeptides  or  providing  sequestered  environments. 
They  release  polypeptides  in  a  folding-competent  state 
for  attempts  at  folding.  If  folding  fails,  the  cycle  of 
binding and release can be repeated. The following sec-
tions cover trigger factor (and other chaperones associ-
ated  with  ribosomes),  Hsp70,  Hsp90,  and  cylindrical 
chaperonins. In addition, specialized chaperones assist 
with  the  folding  of  particular  proteins  such  as  tubulin 
and actin. Mutations in several of these chaperones have 
been  associated  with  human  disease.  See  Fig.  20.6  for 
chaperones in the endoplasmic reticulum.

Trigger Factor
Hydrophobic  segments  of  the  nascent  polypeptide  
chain must be protected from aggregation until enough 

of the chain has emerged from the ribosome to partici-
pate in folding. Each growing polypeptide first encoun-
ters  a  chaperone  bound  next  to  the  exit  tunnel  on  
the  large  ribosomal  subunit.  The  chaperone  associated 
with  bacterial  ribosomes  is  called  trigger  factor  (Fig. 
12.11).  A  structurally  unrelated  protein  called  nascent  
polypeptide-associated  complex  has  a  similar  function  
in Archaea and eukaryotes. An extended array of hydro-
phobic  patches  on  trigger  factor  binds  hydrophobic  
features on the nascent polypeptide chain. These weak, 
rapidly  reversible  interactions  prevent  folding  and  pro-
tect the unfolded peptide from aggregation. The signal 
recognition particle binds on the other side of the exit 
tunnel,  positioned  so  that  its  methionine-rich  groove  
(see  Fig.  20.5)  also  interacts  with  the  growing  poly-
peptide.  Most  bacterial  polypeptides  fold  successfully 
after  being  released  from  trigger  factor,  while  most 

220 

SECTION IV  n  Central Dogma: From Gene to Protein

A. Bacteria

B. Eukaryotes

Trigger
factor

mRNA

DnaK

NAC

Hsp40

DnaJ

Hsp70

Prefoldin

Native protein

~65–80%

Native protein
~10–20%

ATP + GrpE
or other
chaperones

Hsp90
system

ATP +
cofactors?
Native
protein

7ATP +
GroES

GroEL

Native protein

~15–20%

ATP +
cofactors?

TRiC

Native protein
~10–15%

Native protein
~10%

FIGURE 12.11  COMPARISON OF CHAPERONE-ASSISTED FOLDING PATHWAYS. A, Bacteria. B, Eukaryotes. The percentages refer 
to estimates of the fraction of proteins using each pathway. Most proteins fold without the assistance of chaperones. Hsp, heat shock protein; 
NAC, nascent polypeptide-associated complex. (Modified from Hartl FU, Hayer-Hartl M. Molecular chaperones in the cytosol: From nascent chain 
to folded protein. Science. 2002;295:1852–1858. Copyright 2002 American Association for the Advancement of Science.)

eukaryotic  polypeptides  require  assistance  from  addi-
tional chaperones.

Hsp70 Chaperones
The  most  widespread  chaperones  are  members  of  the 
heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70) family (Fig. 12.12). Their 
name came from the observation that cells subjected to 
stresses, such as elevated temperature, increase the syn-
thesis  of  these  proteins  to  protect  against  denatured 
proteins.  Hsp70s  are  present  in  Archaea,  Bacteria 
(called  DnaK),  and  most  compartments  of  eukaryotes. 
The  family  includes  Hsp70  in  mitochondria  and  BiP  in 
endoplasmic  reticulum  (see  Fig.  20.6).  Budding  yeasts 
have genes for 14 Hsp70s; vertebrates have more.

Hsp70s  enzymes  consist  of  two  domains:  an  N- 
terminal domain (folded like actin) binds and hydrolyzes 
ATP.  It  is  connected  by  flexible  hinge  to  a  C-terminal 
domain  that  uses  a  clamp  to  bind  and  release  a  wide 
range  of  nascent  segments  of  unfolded  polypeptides 
with  approximately  eight  hydrophobic  residues.  ATP 
hydrolysis and phosphate release close the clamp on the 
hydrophobic  polypeptides,  while  ATP  binding  opens  
the clamp and releases  the  polypeptide.  This  cycle  of 
peptide  bind ing and release, protects hydrophobic pep-
tides from aggregation during attempts at folding, deliv-
ery  to  mitochondria  and  chloroplasts,  and  import  into 
these organelles (see Figs. 18.4 and 18.6).

Hsp70  cooperates  with  other  chaperones.  Members 
of another family of heat shock proteins (Hsp40, called 
DnaJ in Bacteria) deliver unfolded proteins to bacterial 
Hsp70 (DnaK) and promote their binding by stimulating 

DnaK  to  hydrolyze  ATP.  Another  co-chaperone  called 
GrpE  promotes  exchange  of  adenosine  diphosphate 
(ADP) for ATP, which opens the clamp and releases the 
bound  peptide.  Animal  Hsp70s  have  a  mechanism  of 
action  similar  to  that  of  DnaK  except  that  they  have 
intrinsic nucleotide-exchange activity and do not require 
a nucleotide-exchange protein such as GrpE.

Remarkably, Hsp70 can cooperate with an AAA ade-
nosine  triphosphatase  found  in  bacteria,  plants,  and 
fungi  to  unfold  aggregated  proteins.  Energy  from  ATP 
hydrolysis is used to pull a polypeptide from the aggre-
gate  through  the  central  channel  of  the  adenosine  tri-
phosphatase (ATPase). The polypeptide has a chance to 
fold once it emerges from the channel.

Hsp90 Chaperones
Hsp90  cooperates  with  other  chaperones  to  stabilize 
steroid–hormone receptors such as those for progester-
one,  glucocorticoids,  estrogens,  and  androgens,  before 
they bind their ligands (Fig. 12.13). The chaperones use 
cycles  of  ATP  hydrolysis  to  maintain  receptors  in  an 
“open” state, ready to bind hydrophobic steroids. Steroid 
binding completes the folding of the receptors and dis-
places the Hsp90 complex. Then the receptors move to 
the nucleus to regulate gene expression (see Fig. 10.21). 
Hsp90 also interacts with other signaling proteins includ-
ing protein kinases.

Chaperonins
The  chaperonin  family  of  barrel-shaped  particles  pro-
motes efficient protein folding (Fig. 12.14). They allow 

 

CHAPTER 12  n  Protein Synthesis and Folding 

221

A. Hsp70 structure

Binding domain

GrpE

SHR

Hsp70

Hsp40
HIP

Hsp90

Hsp90
HOP

Intermediate

complex

ATPase domain

B. DnaK cycle

DnaJ delivers

new polypeptide

Polypeptide

GrpE

Open
state

ATP

ADP

GrpE

Closed
state

HOP

Hsp70

ATP

Hsp40

P23

HIP

IP
Hsp90

Hsp90
P23

GA

IP

Pi

Hormone

Mature complex
Hsp90

IP

Hsp90

P23

SHR hormone-
binding conformation

FIGURE 12.12  HEAT SHOCK PROTEIN 70 STRUCTURE AND 
FUNCTION.  A,  Ribbon  diagrams  of  the  atomic  structures  of  DnaK 
(blue) and GrpE  (green). B, The heat shock protein (Hsp) 70 folding 
cycle with bacterial DnaK as the example. DnaJ (Hsp40) delivers an 
unfolded peptide to the ATP-bound open state of DnaK and promotes 
ATP  hydrolysis.  The  ADP-bound  closed  state  of  DnaK  binds  the 
peptide strongly. GrpE promotes dissociation of ADP. Rebinding of ATP 
dissociates  GrpE  and  the  peptide,  which  is  free  to  attempt  folding. 
Multiple Hsp70 cycles are usually required to complete protein folding. 
(For  reference,  see  Zhu  X,  Zhao  X,  Burkholder  WF,  et al.  Structural 
analysis  of  substrate  binding  by  the  molecular  chaperone  DnaK. 
Science. 1996;272:1606–1614; and Harrison CJ, Hayer-Hartl M, Hartl 
F,  et al.  Crystal  structure  of  the  nucleotide  exchange  factor  GrpE 
bound  to  the  ATPase  domain  of  the  molecular  chaperone  DnaK. 
Science. 1997;276:431–435.)

nascent  and  denatured  polypeptides  to  fold  or  refold 
while sequestered in a cylindrical cavity protected from 
the  complex  environment  of  the  cytoplasm.  Although 
85% of newly synthesized bacterial proteins fold sponta-
neously or with the assistance of Hsp70s, the remainder 
require the more isolated folding environment provided 
by chaperonins (Fig. 12.11). The mechanism of chapero-
nins is best understood for Escherichia coli GroEL and 
its  co-chaperonin  GroES.  They  assist  with  folding  of 
nascent  polypeptides,  which  in  bacteria  occurs  largely 
after translation is complete.

The GroEL/GroES complex consists of a cylinder with 
a central cavity composed of GroEL and a cap structure 
made of GroES. GroEL forms two rings of seven identi-
cal subunits. Mitochondrial (Hsp60/Hsp10), chloroplast 

DNA binding

FIGURE  12.13  STABILIZATION  OF  LIGAND-FREE  STEROID 
HORMONE  RECEPTORS  BY  HSP70,  HSP90,  AND  VARIOUS 
ACCESSORY FACTORS (HOP, HIP, P23, GA, AND IP). Hormone 
binding  releases  the  chaperones  and  allows  the  receptor-steroid 
complex to move to the nucleus. SHR, steroid hormone receptor. (For 
reference, see Buchner J. Hsp90 & Co.—a holding for folding. Trends 
Biochem Sci. 1999;24:136–142.)

(Cpn60/Cpn10), and eukaryotic chaperonins (TriC) are 
similar in design but more elaborate than GroEL/GroES, 
containing  up  to  eight  different  gene  products.  This 
complexity  represents  evolutionary  diversification  for 
regulation of chaperonin function.

ATP binding and hydrolysis set the tempo for folding 
cycles.  Unfolded  polypeptides  interact  with  hydropho-
bic  patches  on  the  inner  wall  of  the  GroEL  cylinder. 
Cooperative  binding  of  ATP  to  each  of  the  subunits  in 
one  of  the  two  rings  of  seven  changes  their  conforma-
tion (compare the upper and lower rings in Fig. 12.14B), 
expanding the internal volume by twofold and favoring 
binding  of  a  heptameric  ring  of  10-kD  GroES  subunits. 
This closes the top of the cylinder and creates a folding 
cavity for proteins up to approximately 70 kD. After ATP 
hydrolysis  on  the  ring  surrounding  the  folding  protein 
and  ATP  binding  to  the  opposite  ring  of  seven  GroEL 
subunits,  the  GroES  cap  releases,  and  the  cage  opens. 
Folded polypeptides escape into the cytoplasm, whereas 
incompletely folded intermediates can rebind GroEL for 
another attempt at folding.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

We thank Peter Moore for his suggestions on revisions 
to this chapter.

222 

SECTION IV  n  Central Dogma: From Gene to Protein

Unfolded
peptide

GroES

7ATP +
GroES

GroEL

ATP

ATP

ADP

ADP

7pi

Space-filling
cross section

Folded
peptide

7ATP +
GroES

ATP

ATP

7ADP +
GroES

Ribbon (top view)

142 Å

140 Å

A

B

FIGURE 12.14  CHAPERONIN-MEDIATED FOLDING BY GroEL AND GroES. A, One folding cycle. B, Crystal structure of GroEL with a 
GroES cap bound to the upper, adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-bound ring of seven subunits. Unfolded polypeptides bind the rim of an uncapped 
ring. Cooperative binding of ATP to each of the seven GroEL subunits in one ring changes their conformation, favors GroES binding, and doubles 
the volume of the central cavity, where the protein folds. Following ATP hydrolysis, binding of ATP and GroES to the lower ring structure dissoci-
ates the upper GroES and discharges the folded protein. (B, Modified from Xu Z, Horwich AL, Sigler PB: The crystal structure of the asymmetric 
GroEL-GroES-(ADP)7 chaperonin complex. Nature. 1997;388:741–750. See PDB file 1AON.)

SELECTED READINGS

Myers  JK,  Oas  TG.  Mechanisms  of  fast  protein  folding.  Annu  Rev 

Biochem. 2002;71:783-815.

Castellano LM, Shorter J. The surprising role of amylod fibrils in HIV 

Ow  SY,  Dunstan  DE.  A  brief  overview  of  amyloids  and  Alzheimer’s 

infection. Biology (Basel). 2012;1:58-80.

disease. Protein Sci. 2014;23:1315-1331.

Chiti  F,  Dobson  CM.  Protein  misfolding,  functional  amyloid,  and 

human disease. Annu Rev Biochem. 2006;75:333-366.

Pearl LH, Prodromou C. Structure and mechanism of the Hsp90 molec-
ular chaperone machinery. Annu Rev Biochem. 2006;75:271-294.

Daggett  V,  Fersht  AR.  Is  there  a  unifying  mechanism  for  protein 

Piper M, Holt C. RNA translation in axons. Annu  Rev  Cell  Dev  Biol. 

folding? Trends Biochem Sci. 2003;28:18-25.

2004;20:505-523.

Dobson  CM.  Protein  folding  and  misfolding.  Nature.  2003;426:

Ramakrishnan V. The ribosome emerges from a black box. Cell. 2014;

884-890.

159:979-984.

Hayer-Hartl  M,  Bracher  A,  Hartl  FU.  The  GroEL-GroES  chaperonin 
machine:  A  nano-cage  for  protein  folding.  Trends  Biochem  Sci. 
2016;41:62-76.

Hinnebusch  AG.  Molecular  mechanism  of  scanning  and  start  codon 
selection in eukaryotes. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev. 2011;75:434-467.
Ibba M, Söll D. Aminoacyl-tRNAs: Setting the limits of the genetic code. 

Genes Dev. 2004;18:731-738.

Ramakrishnan  Lab.  Ribosome  Structure  and  Function.  Movies  and 
Overview  Figures  of  the  Ribosome.  <http://www.mrc-lmb.cam.
ac.uk/ribo/homepage/mov_and_overview.html>.

Rodnina  MV.  The  ribosome  as  a  versatile  catalyst:  reactions  at  the 
peptidyl  transferase  center.  Curr  Opin  Struct  Biol.  2013;23:
595-602.

Saibil HR. Biochemistry. Machinery to reverse irreversible aggregates. 

Ingolia NT. Ribosome profiling: new views of translation, from single 

Science. 2013;339:1040-1041.

codons to genome scale. Nat Rev Genet. 2014;15:205-213.

Kim YE, Hipp MS, Bracher A, et al. Molecular chaperone functions in 
protein  folding  and  proteostasis.  Annu  Rev  Biochem.  2013;82:
323-355.

Liu T, Kaplan A, Alexander L, et al. Direct measurement of the mechan-
ical work during translocation by the ribosome. Elife. 2014;3:e03406.
May BC, Govaerts C, Prusiner SB, Cohen FE. Prions: So many fibers, so 

little infectivity. Trends Biochem Sci. 2004;29:162-165.

Mazumder B, Seshadri V, Fox PL. Translational control by the 3′-UTR: 

The ends specify the means. Trends Biochem Sci. 2003;28:91-98.

Moore  PB.  How  should  we  think  about  the  ribosome?  Annu  Rev 

Biophys. 2012;41:1-19.

Mumtaz MA, Couso JP. Ribosomal profiling adds new coding sequences 

to the proteome. Biochem Soc Trans. 2015;43:1271-1276.

Saio T, Guan X, Rossi P, Economou A, Kalodimos CG. Structural basis 
for protein antiaggregation activity of the trigger factor chaperone. 
Science. 2014;344:1250494.

Selkoe DJ. Folding proteins in fatal ways. Nature. 2003;426:900-904.
Sonenberg  N,  Dever  TE.  Eukaryotic  translation  initiation  factors  and 

regulators. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2003;13:56-63.

Voorhees  RM,  Ramakrishnan  V.  Structural  basis  of  the  translational 

elongation cycle. Annu Rev Biochem. 2013;82:203-236.

Wilkie  GS,  Dickson  KS,  Gray  NK.  Regulation  of  mRNA  translation  
by  5′-  and  3′-UTR-binding  factors.  Trends  Biochem  Sci.  2003;28:
182-188.

Xue S, Barna M. Specialized ribosomes: a new frontier in gene regula-
tion  and  organismal  biology.  Nat  Rev  Mol  Cell  Biol.  2012;13:
355-369.

S E C T I O N   V 

Membrane Structure  
and Function

This page intentionally left blank

SECTION  V  OVERVIEW
Life, as we know it, depends on a thin membrane that 

apparatus,  lysosomes,  and  the  vesicles  of  the  secretory 
and endocytic pathways.

Peripheral membrane proteins found on the surfaces 
of the bilayer often participate in enzyme and signaling 
reactions. Others form a membrane skeleton on the cyto-
plasmic  surface  that  reinforces  the  fragile  lipid  bilayer 
and attaches it to cytoskeletal filaments.

Integral  membrane  proteins  that  cross  lipid  bilayers 
feature prominently in all aspects of cell biology. Some 
are  enzymes  that  synthesize  lipids  for  biological  mem-
branes (Chapter 20). Others serve as adhesion proteins 
that allow cells to interact with each other or extracel-
lular substrates (see Chapter 30). Because cells need to 
sense hormones and many other molecules that cannot 
penetrate a lipid bilayer, they have evolved thousands of 
protein  receptors  that  span  the  bilayer  (Chapter  24). 
Hormones  or  other  extracellular  signaling  molecules 
bind selectively to receptors exposed on the cell surface. 
The  energy  from  binding  is  used  to  transmit  a  signal 
across the membrane and regulate biochemical reactions 
in the cytoplasm (Chapters 25 to 27).

A  large  fraction  of  the  energy  that  is  consumed  by 
organs such as our brains is used to create ion gradients 
across  membranes.  Several  large  families  of  integral 
membrane  proteins  control  the  movement  of  ions  and 
other solutes across membranes. Chapter 14 introduces 
three  families  of  pumps  that  use  adenosine  triphos-
phate  (ATP)  hydrolysis  as  the  source  of  energy  to  
transport  ions  or  solutes  up  concentration  gradients 
across  membranes.  For  example,  pumps  in  the  plasma 

separates  each  cell  from  the  surrounding  world.  These 
membranes, composed of two layers of lipids, are gener-
ally impermeable to ions and macromolecules. Proteins 
embedded  in  the  lipid  membrane  facilitate  the  move-
ment of ions, allowing cells to create an internal environ-
ment  different  from  that  outside.  Membranes  also 
subdivide  the  cytoplasm  of  eukaryotic  cells  into  com-
partments called organelles. Chapter 13 introduces the 
features  that  are  shared  by  all  biological  membranes:  a 
bilayer  of  lipids,  integral  proteins  that  cross  the 
bilayer,  and  peripheral  proteins  associated  with  the 
surfaces.

Membranes  are  a  planar  sandwich  of  two  layers  of 
lipids that behave like two-dimensional fluids. Each lipid 
has a polar group coupled to hydrocarbon tails that are 
insoluble  in  water.  The  hydrocarbon  tails  are  in  the 
middle of the membrane bilayer with polar head groups 
exposed  to  water  on  both  surfaces.  Despite  the  rapid, 
lateral diffusion of lipids in the plane of the membrane, 
the hydrophobic interior of the bilayer is poorly perme-
able  to  ions  and  macromolecules.  This  impermeability 
makes it possible for cellular membranes to form barriers 
between  the  external  environment,  cytoplasm,  and 
organelles. The selectively permeable membrane around 
each  organelle  allows  the  creation  of  a  unique  interior 
space for specialized biochemical reactions that contrib-
ute  to  the  life  of  the  cell.  Chapters  18  to  23  consider 
in detail all the organelles, including mitochondria, chlo-
roplasts,  peroxisomes,  endoplasmic  reticulum,  Golgi 

Membrane
organization

Ch 13

Pumps Ch 14

Carriers
Ch 15

Channels

Ch 16

K-channel

ABC transporter

Na/K

ATPase
pump

Na+

Na-Ca
carrier
Ca2+

K+

Membrane physiology Ch 17

H+

H+

Proton pump

 225

membranes of animal cells use ATP hydrolysis to expel 
Na+ and concentrate K+ in the cytoplasm. Another type 
of  pump  creates  the  acidic  environment  inside  lyso-
somes.  A  related  pump  in  mitochondria  runs  in  the 
opposite direction, taking advantage of a proton gradient 
across the membrane to synthesize ATP. A third family, 
called  ABC  transporters,  use  ATP  hydrolysis  to  move  a 
wide variety of solutes across plasma membranes.

Carrier  proteins  (Chapter  15)  facilitate  the  move-
ment of ions and nutrients across membranes, allowing 
them to move down concentration gradients much faster 
than they can penetrate the lipid bilayer. Some carriers 
couple movement of an ion such as Na+ down its con-
centration gradient to the movement of a solute such as 
glucose up a concentration gradient into the cell. Carri-
ers  change  their  shape  reversibly,  opening  and  closing 
“gates”  to  transport  their  cargo  across  the  membrane 
one molecule at a time.

Channels  are  transmembrane  proteins  with  selec-
tive  pores that allow ions, water, glycerol, or ammonia 
to  move  very  rapidly  down  concentration  gradients 
across membranes (Chapter 16). Taking advantage of ion 
gradients created by pumps and carriers, cells selectively 
open ion channels to create electrical potentials across 
the plasma membrane and some organelle membranes. 
Many  channels  open  and  close  their  pores  in  response 
to  local  conditions.  The  electrical  potential  across  
the  membrane  regulates  voltage-gated  cation  channels. 
Binding of a chemical ligand opens other channels. For 
instance,  nerve  cells  secrete  small  organic  ions  (called 
neurotransmitters)  to  stimulate  other  nerve  cells  and 
muscles by binding to an extracellular domain of cation 
channels.  The  bound  neurotransmitter  opens  the  pore 
in  the  channel.  In  the  cytoplasm,  other  organic  ions  
and Ca2+ can also regulate channels. Cyclic nucleotides 
open  plasma  membrane  channels  in  cells  that  respond 
to light and odors. Inositol triphosphate and Ca2+ control 

channels that release Ca2+ from the endoplasmic reticu-
lum.  Through  these  diverse  activities  channels  partici-
pate in all aspects of membrane physiology.

All  living  organisms  depend  on  combinations  of 
pumps,  carriers,  and  channels  for  many  physiological 
functions (Chapter 17). Cells use ion concentration gra-
dients  produced  by  pumps  as  a  source  of  potential 
energy to drive the uptake of nutrients through plasma 
membrane carriers. Epithelial cells lining our intestines 
combine different carriers and channels in their plasma 
membranes to transport sugars, amino acids, and other 
nutrients from the lumen of the gut into the blood. Many 
organelles use carriers driven by ion gradients for trans-
port. Most cells use ion channels and transmembrane ion 
gradients  to  create  an  electrical  potential  across  their 
plasma membranes. Nerve and muscle cells create fast-
moving  fluctuations  in  the  plasma  membrane  potential 
for high-speed communication; operating on a millisec-
ond  time  scale,  voltage-gated  ion  channels  produce 
waves  of  membrane  depolarization  and  repolarization 
called  action  potentials.  Each  of  our  physiological 
systems  depends  on  this  cooperation  among  pumps,  
carriers and channels.

Our abilities to perceive our environment, think, and 
move  depend  on  transmission  of  electrical  impulses 
between nerve cells and between nerves and muscles at 
specialized  structures  called  synapses.  When  an  action 
potential  arrives  at  a  synapse,  voltage-gated  Ca2+  chan-
nels  trigger  the  secretion  of  neurotransmitters.  In  less 
than  a  millisecond,  the  neurotransmitter  stimulates 
ligand-gated  cation  channels  to  depolarize  the  plasma 
membrane  of  the  receiving  cell.  Muscle  cells  respond 
with an action potential that sets off contraction. Nerve 
cells in the central nervous system integrate inputs from 
many  synapses  before  producing  an  action  potential. 
Pumps  and  carriers  cooperate  to  reset  conditions  after 
each round of synaptic transmission.

226

C H A P T E R 

13 

Membrane Structure  
and Dynamics
Membranes composed of lipids and proteins form the 

barrier  between  each  cell  and  its  environment.  Mem-
branes  also  partition  the  cytoplasm  of  eukaryotes  into 
compartments,  including  the  nucleus  and  membrane-
bounded organelles. Each type of membrane is special-
ized for its various functions, but all biological membranes 
have  much  in  common:  a  planar  fluid  bilayer  of  lipid 
molecules, integral membrane proteins that cross the 
lipid bilayer, and peripheral membrane proteins on 
both  surfaces.  This  chapter  opens  with  a  discussion  of 
the lipid bilayer. It then considers examples of integral 
and  peripheral  membrane  proteins  before  concluding 
with  a  discussion  of  the  dynamics  of  both  lipids  and 
proteins.  The  following  three  chapters  introduce  three 
large  families  of  membrane  proteins:  pumps,  carriers, 
and channels. Chapter 17 explains how pumps, carriers, 
and channels cooperate in a variety of physiological pro-
cesses.  Chapters  24  and  30  cover  plasma  membrane 
receptor proteins.

Development of Ideas About  
Membrane Structure
Our current understanding of membrane structure began 
with  E.  Overton’s  proposal  in  1895  that  cellular  mem-
branes consist of lipid bilayers (Fig. 13.1A). In the 1920s 
it  was  found  that  the  lipids  extracted  from  the  plasma 
membrane of red blood cells spread out in a monolayer 
on the surface of a tray of water to cover an area suffi-
cient  to  surround  the  cell  twice.  (Actually,  offsetting 
errors—incomplete  lipid  extraction  and  an  underesti-
mation  of  the  membrane  area—led  to  the  correct 
answer!) X-ray diffraction experiments in the early 1970s  
established definitively that membrane lipids are arranged 
in a bilayer.

During  the  1930s,  cell  physiologists  realized  that  a 
simple  lipid  bilayer  could  not  explain  the  mechanical 
properties of the plasma membrane, so they postulated 
a  surface  coating  of  proteins  to  reinforce  the  bilayer  

A. 1926

B. 1943

C. 1972

D. 2001

WATER

EXTRACELLULAR
SPACE

Hydrocarbons

Fatty acid chains
–
+

Polar
groups

+
–

Polar
groups

Protein 
on surface

Proteins
anchored to
phospholipid bilayer

WATER

CYTOPLASM

Seven-helix

receptor

Thy-1

D y n amic
p h o s p h olipid
l a yer
b i

Integral
proteins

Src

High-resolution
protein structures

Receptor
tyrosine
kinase

FIGURE 13.1  DEVELOPMENT OF CONCEPTS IN MEMBRANE STRUCTURE. A, Gorder and Grendel model from 1926. B, Davson and 
Danielli model from 1943 reflecting beliefs of the time about the small sizes of proteins. C, Singer and Nicholson fluid mosaic model from 1972. 
D, Contemporary model with peripheral and integral membrane proteins. The lipid bilayer shown here and used throughout the book is based 
on a dynamic computational model (Fig. 13.5). The density of proteins in actual membranes is higher than shown here. 

 227

228 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

(Fig. 13.1B). Early electron micrographs of thin sections 
of  cells  strengthened  this  view,  since  all  membranes 
appeared as a pair of dark lines (interpreted as surface 
proteins and carbohydrates) separated by a lucent area 
(interpreted as the lipid bilayer). By the early 1970s, two 
complementary approaches showed that proteins cross 
the  lipid  bilayer.  First,  electron  micrographs  of  mem-
branes  that  are  split  in  two  while  frozen  (a  technique 
called  freeze-fracturing;  see  Fig.  6.6C)  revealed  protein 
particles embedded in the lipid bilayer. Later, chemical 
labeling  showed  that  many  membrane  proteins  are 
exposed on both sides of the bilayer. Light microscopy 
with fluorescent tags demonstrated that membrane lipids 
and some membrane proteins diffuse in the plane of the 
membrane.  Quantitative  spectroscopic  studies  showed 
that  lateral  diffusion  of  lipids  is  rapid  but  that  flipping 
from one side of a bilayer to the other is slow. The fluid 
mosaic  model  of  membranes  (Fig.  13.1C)  incorporated 
this information, showing transmembrane proteins float-
ing  in  a  fluid  lipid  bilayer.  Subsequent  work  revealed 
structures  of  many  proteins  that  span  the  lipid  bilayer, 
the  existence  of  lipid  anchors  on  some  membrane  
proteins,  and  a  network  of  cytoplasmic  proteins  that 
restricts the motion of many integral membrane proteins 

(Fig.  13.1D).  The  density  of  proteins  in  actual  mem-
branes is higher than illustrated in the figure.

Lipids
Lipids  form  the  framework  of  biological  membranes, 
anchor  soluble  proteins  to  the  surfaces  of  membranes, 
store energy, and carry information as extracellular hor-
mones and as intracellular second messengers. Lipids are 
organic  molecules  generally  less  than  1000  Da  in  size 
that are much more soluble in organic solvents than in 
water.  They  consist  predominantly  of  aliphatic  or  aro-
matic hydrocarbons.

This  chapter  explains  the  structures  of  the  major 
lipids found in biological membranes and how the hydro-
phobic  effect  drives  lipids  to  self-assemble  stable  bilay-
ers.  Membranes  also  contain  hundreds  of  minor  lipid 
species, some of which may also have important biologi-
cal functions.

Phosphoglycerides
Phosphoglycerides  (also  called  glycerophospholipids) 
are  the  main  constituents  of  membrane  bilayers  (Fig. 
13.2).  (These  lipids  are  often  called  phospholipids,  an 

CH3

H3C  +N  CH3

CH2

CH2

OH

O
O–

+NH3
HC  C
CH2

OH

Choline

Serine

OH
H  C  H
H  C  OH
H  C  H
OH

Glycerol

OH H

H HO
OH
H

H

HO

OH

H

H

H

OH HO
OH
H

H

HO

OPO3

2–

H

H
OH
Inositol 

H

OPO3

2–

Inositol 4,5-biphosphate

A. Alcohols
+NH3
CH2
CH2
OH

Ethanolamine

B. Fatty acids
O–O

C
CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2
H  C  H

C. Phospholipid
     synthesis

CDP

CMP

Glycerol

O–O

C
CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

HC
HC

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2
H  C  H

D. Common phosphoglyceride

Phosphate

Alcohol
O 

O  P  O–

H H

O

Glycerol

H  C1  C2  C3  H2
OO

OO

C
CH2

C
CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

Fatty  acids

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

C3

C2

C1

Phosphatidylcholine

H

Palmitic acid

H

Oleic acid

FIGURE 13.2  STRUCTURE AND SYNTHESIS OF PHOSPHOGLYCERIDES. A, Stick figures and space-filling models of the alcohol head 
groups. B, Stick figures and space-filling models of two fatty acids. C, An alcohol, glycerol, and two fatty acids combine to make a phospho-
glyceride.  In  some  cases  cytidine  diphosphate  (CDP)  provides  the  phosphate  linking  glycerol  to  the  alcohol.  CMP,  cytidine  monophosphate.  
D, Diagram of a phosphoglyceride and a space-filling model of phosphatidylcholine. 

 

CHAPTER 13  n  Membrane Structure and Dynamics  

229

TABLE 13.1  Common Fatty Acids of 
Membrane Lipids
Name

Carbons

Double Bonds (Positions)

Myristate
Palmitate
Palmitoleate
Stearate
Oleate
Linoleate
Linolenate
Arachidonate

14
16
16
18
18
18
18
20

0
0
1 (Δ9)
0
1 (Δ9)
2 (Δ9, Δ12)
3 (Δ9, Δ12, Δ15)
4 (Δ5, Δ8, Δ11, Δ14)

imprecise term, as other lipids contain phosphate.) Phos-
phoglycerides have three parts: a three-carbon backbone 
of  glycerol,  two  long-chain  fatty  acids  esterified  (or 
attached via an ether link in Archaea) to hydroxyl groups 
on  carbons  1  and  2  (C1  and  C2)  of  the  glycerol,  and 
phosphoric  acid  esterified  to  the  C3  hydroxyl  group  of 
glycerol. Most also have an alcohol head group esterified 
to the phosphate. Fatty acids have a carboxyl group at 
one  end  of  an  aliphatic  chain  of  13  to  19  additional 
carbons (Table 13.1). More than half of the fatty acids in 
membranes have one or more double bonds.

Fatty acids and phosphoglycerides are amphiphilic, 
as  they  have  both  hydrophobic  (fears  water)  and 
hydrophilic (loves water) parts. The aliphatic chains of 
fatty acids are hydrophobic. The carboxyl groups of fatty 
acids  and  the  head  groups  of  phosphoglycerides  are 
hydrophilic. The hydrophobic effect (see Fig. 4.5) drives 
amphiphilic  phosphoglycerides  to  assemble  bilayers  
(see later).

Cells  make  more  than  100  major  phosphoglycerides 
using  many  different  fatty  acids  and  esterifying  one  of 
five different alcohols to the phosphate. In general, the 
fatty acids on C1 have no or one double bond, whereas 
the  fatty  acids  on  C2  have  two  or  more  double  bonds. 
Each  double  bond  creates  a  permanent  bend  in  the 
hydrocarbon chain that contributes to the fluidity of the 
bilayer. The alcohol head groups give phosphoglycerides 
their names:

phosphatidic acid [PA] (no head group)
phosphatidylglycerol [PG] (glycerol head group)
phosphatidylethanolamine 

(ethanolamine 

[PE] 

head group)

phosphatidylcholine [PC] (choline head group)
phosphatidylserine [PS] (serine head group)
phosphatidylinositol [PI] (inositol head group)
The various head groups confer distinctive properties 
to the various phosphoglycerides. All head groups have 
a  negative  charge  on  the  phosphate  esterified  to  glyc-
erol.  Neutral  phosphoglycerides—PE  and  PC—have  a 
positive  charge  on  their  nitrogens,  giving  them  a  net 
charge of zero. PS has extra positive and negative charges, 
giving  it  a  net  negative  charge  like  the  other  acidic 

phosphoglycerides (PA, PG, and PI). PI can be modified 
by esterifying one to five phosphates to the hexane ring 
hydroxyls.  These  polyphosphoinositides  are  highly 
negatively charged.

The  complicated  metabolism  of  phosphoglycerides 
can be simplified as follows: Enzymes can interconvert 
all phosphoglyceride head groups and remodel fatty acid 
chains.  For  example,  three  successive  enzymatic  meth-
ylation  reactions  convert  PE  to  PC,  whereas  another 
enzyme exchanges serine for ethanolamine, converting 
PS  to  PE.  Other  enzymes  exchange  fatty  acid  chains  
after  the  initial  synthesis  of  a  phosphoglyceride.  These 
enzymes  are  located  on  the  cytoplasmic  surface  of  the 
smooth  endoplasmic  reticulum.  Biochemistry  texts 
provide more details of these pathways.

Several minor membrane phospholipids are variations 
on  this  general  theme.  Plasmalogens  have  a  fatty  acid 
linked to carbon 1 of glycerol by an ether bond rather 
than an ester bond. They serve as sources of arachidonic 
acid  for  signaling  reactions  (see  Fig.  26.9).  Cardiolipin 
has two glycerols esterified to the phosphate of PA.

Sphingolipids
Sphingolipids  get  their  name  from  sphingosine,  a 
nitrogen-containing base synthesized from serine and a 
fatty acid (Fig. 13.3). Sphingosine acts like the structural 
counterpart of glycerol plus one fatty acid of phospho-
glycerides.  Sphingosine  carbons  1  to  3  have  polar  sub-
stituents. A double bond between C4 and C5 begins the 
hydrocarbon  tail.  Two  variable  features  distinguish  
the  various  sphingolipids:  the  fatty  acid  (often  lacking 
double  bonds)  attached  by  an  amide  bond  to  C2  and 
the  nature  of  the  polar  head  groups  esterified  to  the 
hydroxyl on C1.

Most  sugar-containing  lipids  of  biological  membranes 
are sphingolipids. The head groups of glycosphingolip-
ids consist of one or more sugars. Some are neutral; others 
are negatively charged. All of these head groups lack phos-
phate.  Sugar  head  groups  of  some  glycosphingolipids 
serve  as  receptors  for  viruses.  Alternatively,  a  phosphate 
ester can link a base to C1. These so-called sphingomy-
elins  have  phosphorylcholine  or  phosphoethanolamine 
head  groups  just  like  PC  and  PE.  Receptor-activated 
enzymes  remove  phosphorylcholine  from  sphingomy-
elin  to  produce  the  second  messenger  ceramide  (see  
Fig. 26.11).

Sphingolipids  are  longer  than  most  phosphoglycer-
ides  and  much  more  abundant  in  the  thicker  plasma 
membrane  than  in  membranes  inside  cells  (see  Fig. 
21.3). The hydrocarbon tails of sphingosine and the fatty 
acid  contribute  to  the  hydrophobic  bilayer,  and  polar 
head groups are on the surface.

Sterols
Sterols  are  the  third  major  class  of  membrane  lipids. 
Cholesterol  (Fig.  13.4)  is  the  major  sterol  in  animal 

230 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

A. Sphingosine

B. Glycosphingolipids

C. Sphingomyelin

Phosphate

–O  P  O

Derived from

serine

H

HO H

OH

C   C3  C2  C1H2

H

+NH3

CH
CH2

Acyl chain 
(CH2)12

i

d
c
a
 
y
t
t
a
f
 

m
o
r
f
 
d
e
v
i
r
e
D

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH3

i

e
n
s
o
g
n
h
p
S

i

Sugar(s)
O

H

HO H

C   C   C   CH2

CH
CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2
CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH3

HNH

O

C
CH2

CH2

CH2

Fatty acid

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH3

Alcohol (choline or
ethanolamine)
O 

Choline

i

e
n
s
o
g
n
h
p
S

i

H

HO H

O

C   C   C   CH2

CH
CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2
CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH3

HNH

O

C
CH2

CH2

CH2

Fatty acid

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH3

Sphingomyelin

FIGURE  13.3  SPHINGOLIPIDS.  A,  Stick  figure  and  space-filling  model  of  sphingosine.  B,  Diagram  of  the  parts  of  a  glycosphingolipid. 
Ceramide has a fatty acid but no sugar. C, Stick figure and space-filling model of sphingomyelin. 

A

HO

B

CH3

CH3

CH   CH3
CH2

CH2

CH2
H3C  C  H
CH3

C

FIGURE  13.4  CHOLESTEROL.  A,  Stick  figure.  B,  Space-filling 
model. C, Disposition of cholesterol in a lipid bilayer with the hydroxyl 
oriented  toward  the  surface.  The  rigid  sterol  nucleus  tends  to  order 
fluid bilayers in the region between C1 and C10 of the fatty acids but 
promotes motion of the fatty acyl chains deeper in the bilayer owing 
to its wedge shape. 

plasma membranes, with lower concentrations in inter-
nal  membranes.  Plants,  lower  eukaryotes,  and  bacteria 
have  other  sterols  in  their  membranes.  The  rigid  four-
ring structure of cholesterol is apolar, so it inserts into 
the  core  of  bilayers  with  the  hydroxyl  on  C3  oriented 
toward the surface.

Cholesterol  is  vital  to  metabolism,  being  situated  
at the crossroads of several metabolic pathways, includ-
ing  those  that  synthesize  steroid  hormones  (such  as 
estrogen, testosterone, and cortisol), vitamin D, and bile 
salts  secreted  by  the  liver.  Cholesterol  itself  is  synthe-
sized (see Fig. 20.15) from isopentyl (5-carbon) build-
ing  blocks  that  form  10-carbon  (geranyl),  15-carbon 
(farnesyl), and 20-carbon (geranylgeranyl) isopren-
oids.  As  is  described  later,  these  isoprenoids  are 
used  as  hydrocarbon  anchors  for  many  important  

membrane-associated proteins. Isoprenoids are also pre-
cursors  of  natural  rubber  and  of  cofactors  present  in 
visual pigments.

Glycolipids
Cells  have  three  types  of  glycolipids:  (a)  sphingolipids 
(the predominant form), (b) glycerol glycolipids with a 
sugar chain attached to the hydroxyl on C3 of a diglyc-
eride, and (c) glycosylphosphatidylinositols (GPIs). 
Some  GPIs  simply  have  a  short  carbohydrate  chain  on 
the  hydroxyl  of  inositol  C2.  Others  use  a  short  sugar 
chain  to  link  C6  of  PI  to  the  C-terminus  of  a  protein 
(Fig. 13.10C).

Triglycerides
Triglycerides are simply glycerol with fatty acids esteri-
fied  to  all  three  carbons.  Lacking  a  polar  head  group, 
they  are  not  incorporated  into  membrane  bilayers. 
Instead, triglycerides form oily droplets in the cytoplasm 
of  cells  to  store  fatty  acids  as  reserves  of  metabolic 
energy (see Fig. 28.3). Mitochondria oxidize fatty acids 
and  convert  the  energy  in  their  covalent  bonds  into 
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) (see Fig. 19.4).

Physical Structure of the Fluid  
Membrane Bilayer
Physical Properties of Bilayers of a Single Lipid
In an aqueous environment, amphiphilic lipids spontane-
ously self-assemble into ordered structures in microsec-
onds. The amphiphilic nature of phosphoglycerides and 
sphingolipids favors formation of lamellar bilayers, planar 
structures  with  fatty  acid  chains  lined  up  more  or  less 
normal  to  the  surface  and  polar  head  groups  on  the 

 

CHAPTER 13  n  Membrane Structure and Dynamics  

231

A.  Book icon

B. Computational
     model

C.  H2O

D.  Head groups

E.  Hydrocarbon tails

1.5 nm

3.5 nm

FIGURE  13.5  COMPUTATIONAL MODEL OF A HYDRATED DIMYRISTOYLPHOSPHATIDYLCHOLINE BILAYER. A, Icon of the lipid 
bilayer used throughout this book, based on the model shown in B. B, Space-filling model of all the lipid atoms in the simulation. Stick figures 
of the water molecules are red. The polar regions of phosphatidylcholine (PC) from the carbonyl oxygen to the choline nitrogen are blue. Hydro-
carbon tails are yellow. C, Stick figures of the water molecules only. D, Stick figures of the polar regions of PC from the carbonyl oxygen to the 
choline nitrogen only. E, Stick figures of the hydrocarbon tails only. This model was calculated from first principles starting with 100 PC molecules 
(based on an x-ray diffraction structure of PC crystals) in a regular bilayer with 1050 molecules of bulk phase water on each side. Taking into 
account surface tension and distribution of charge on lipid and water, the computer used simple Newtonian mechanics to simulate the molecular 
motion of all atoms on a picosecond time scale. After less than 100 picoseconds of simulated time, the liquid phase of the lipids appeared. The 
model shown here is after 300 picoseconds of simulated time. Such models account for most molecular parameters (electron density, surface 
roughness, distance between phosphates of the two halves, area per lipid [0.6 nm2], and depth of water penetration) of similar bilayers obtained 
by averaging techniques, including nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), x-ray diffraction, and neutron diffraction. (Courtesy E. Jakobsson, University 
of Illinois, Urbana. Modified from Chiu S-W, Clark M, Balaji V, et al. Incorporation of surface tension into molecular dynamics simulation of an 
interface: a fluid phase lipid bilayer membrane. Biophys J. 1995;69:1230–1245.)

surfaces exposed to water (Fig. 13.5A). The two halves 
of the bilayer are called leaflets.

Bilayer  formation  is  favored  energetically  by  the 
increase  in  entropy  when  the  hydrophobic  acyl  chains 
interact  with  each  other  and  exclude  water  from  the 
core of the bilayer. The head groups of PC and PS have 
about the same cross-sectional areas as the aliphatic tails, 
so they are approximately cylindrical in shape, appropri-
ate for flat bilayers. The hydrophobic effect is so strong 
that it drives lipid head groups into close packing, deplet-
ing water from the head group layer. The area per lipid 
molecule of a given type tends to be constant, so bilayers 
bend in response if molecules are added asymmetrically 
to one leaflet. The smaller head group makes PE adopt 
a slightly conical shape, favoring a curved bilayer.

Bilayers  of  pure  lipids  are  of  two  physical  states 
depending on the temperature. The liquid disordered 
phase  is  a  flexible,  two-dimensional  fluid  with  disor-
dered  acyl  chains  and  the  lipids  diffusing  rapidly  (Fig. 
13.5A).  Tight  packing  of  acyl  chains  in  the  gel  state 
limits  lateral  diffusion.  Low  temperatures  favor  the  gel 
state.  Above  a  critical  temperature  the  gel  melts  and 
transitions to the liquid disordered phase.

The transition temperature depends on the saturation 
and  lengths  of  the  acyl  chains.  Short  acyl  chains  favor 
the liquid state. Fatty acids with 18 or more carbons are 
solid  at  physiological  temperatures  unless  they  contain 

double  bonds  that  create  a  permanent  bend  and  favor 
the liquid state by preventing tight packing of fatty acid 
tails in the middle of the bilayer.

Phosphoglycerides 

in  biological  membranes  are 
largely in the liquid phase owing to their compositions. 
The C14 and C16 fatty acids are saturated, but C18 fatty 
acids  usually  have  one  to  three  double  bonds  and  C20 
fatty  acids  have  four  double  bonds  (Table  13.1).  The 
phosphoglycerides  in  particular  biological  membranes 
vary in both the lengths and saturation of the acyl chains. 
For  example,  abundant  polyunsaturated  acyl  chains  in 
synaptic vesicles (see Fig. 17.8) make the bilayer flexible 
and facilitate membrane traffic.

Biophysical  methods,  including  fluorescence  recov-
ery  after  photobleaching  (Fig.  13.12),  show  that  phos-
phoglycerides  diffuse  rapidly  in  the  plane  of  a  bilayer 
with a lateral diffusion coefficient (D) of about 1 µm2 s−1. 
Given  that  the  rate  of  diffusion  is  2(Dt)1/2  (t =  time),  a 
phosphoglyceride  moves  laterally  about  1 µm/s  in  the 
plane of the membrane, fast enough to circumnavigate 
the membrane of a bacterium in a few seconds. Rarely 
(~10−5 s−1,  corresponding  to  a  half-time  of  20  hours),  a 
neutral  phosphoglyceride,  such  as  PC,  flips  unassisted 
from  one  side  of  a  bilayer  to  the  other.  Flipping  of 
charged phosphoglycerides is even slower.

A  computational  method  called  molecular  dynamics 
is  used  to  study  the  organization  and 

simulation 

232 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

dynamics of lipid bilayers (Fig. 13.5 explains the method). 
The model shown in Fig. 13.5 has the (short) 14-carbon 
acyl chains on the inside and polar head groups facing 
the surrounding water. The molecular density is lowest 
in the middle of the bilayer. The model emphasizes the 
tremendous disorder of the lipid molecules, as expected 
for a liquid. Fatty acid chains undergo internal motions 
on a picosecond time scale, making them highly irregu-
lar,  with  approximately  25%  of  the  bonds  in  the  bent 
configuration.  Longer  simulations  show  that  the  lipids 
wobble  and  rotate  around  their  long  axes  in  nanosec-
onds  and  diffuse  laterally  on  longer  time  scales.  Polar 
phosphorylcholine head groups vary widely in their ori-
entations,  some  protruding  far  into  water.  This  makes 
the bilayer surface very rough on the nanometer scale. 
Water  penetrates  the  bilayer  only  to  the  level  of  the 
deepest  carbonyl  oxygens,  leaving  a  dehydrated  layer 
approximately 1.5 nm thick in the middle of the bilayer.
Bilayers  of  phosphoglycerides  have  an  electrical 
potential between the hydrocarbon (positive inside) and 
the aqueous phase, arising from the orientations of the 
carbonyl  groups  and  the  tendency  of  water  molecules 
near  the  bilayer  to  orient  with  their  positive  dipole 
toward the hydrocarbon interior. These factors dominate 
over  an  oppositely  oriented  electrical  dipole  between 
the P and N atoms of the head groups. This inside posi-
tive potential may contribute to the barrier to the trans-
fer  of  positively  charged  ions  and  polypeptides  across 
membranes.

Despite the disorder and lateral movement of the mol-
ecules,  bilayers  of  phosphoglycerides  are  stable  and 
impermeable to polar or charged compounds, even those 
as  small  as  Na+  or  Cl−.  This  poor  electrical  conductivity 
is essential for many biological processes (see Fig. 17.6). 
Small,  uncharged  molecules,  such  as  water,  ammonia,  
and  glycerol,  penetrate  the  hydrophobic  core  in  small 
numbers  passing  only  slowly  across  bilayers  and  much 
more rapidly through channels (see Figs. 16.14 and 16.15).
Although  bilayers  neither  stretch  nor  compress 
readily, they are very flexible, owing to rapid fluctuations 
in  the  arrangement  of  the  lipids.  Molecular  dynamics 
simulations  accurately  reproduce  these  mechanical 
properties.  Thus,  one  can  draw  out  a  narrow  tube  of 
membrane  with  little  resistance  by  pulling  gently  on  a 
vesicle composed of a simple bilayer (Fig. 13.6).

Physical Properties of Bilayers of Two or  
More Lipids
All  biological  membranes  consist  of  mixtures  of  lipids. 
Experiments  on  bilayers  reconstituted  from  purified 
lipids revealed the physical properties of mixtures of two 
or more lipids. As expected from first principles, bilayers 
composed  of  mixtures  of  lipids  can  sort  into  domains 
with different compositions. For example, Fig. 13.6 shows 
a  large  vesicle  formed  from  cholesterol  and  2  forms  of 
PC. The PC with saturated acyl chains segregated into a 

Disordered
phase

Ordered 
  phase

Pipette
A

Pipette

B

t = 5 s

t = 180 s

t = 411 s

C
C

DD

EE

FIGURE 13.6  LIPID SORTING IN DOMAINS DRIVEN BY MEM-
BRANE  CURVATURE.  A,  Schematic  of  the  experiment.  The  giant 
lipid vesicle was composed of 37 mol% 1,2-dipalmitoyl-sn-glycero-3-
phosphocholine,  33 mol%  cholesterol,  30 mol%  1,2-dioleoyl-sn-
glycero-3-phosphocholine  and  1 mol%  of  ganglioside  GM1.  This 
mixture of lipids spontaneously sorts into two domains: a disordered 
liquid domain marked with PE tagged with a red fluorescent dye; and 
an ordered liquid domain marked with a protein tagged with a green 
fluorescent  dye  that  binds  GM1.  A  suction  micropipette  on  the  left 
holds the vesicle. A second pipette pulled a narrow tube of membrane 
from  the  ordered  domain. B,  Immediately  after  the  tube  was  pulled. 
C, D–E, successive time points showing partitioning of the disordered 
liquid domain into the tubule. Scale bars are 1 µm. 

more  ordered  liquid  phase  with  a  high  melting  tem-
perature  distinct  from  PC  with  unsaturated  acyl  chains 
in  a  less-ordered  liquid  phase  with  a  low  melting  tem-
perature. Cholesterol has opposite effects on liquid and 
gel  phases  of  phosphoglycerides,  favoring  the  ordered 
liquid  phase  above  the  transition  temperature  but  dis-
rupting the order of the gel state. The presence of cho-
lesterol  in  a  bilayer  makes  the  acyl  chains  pack  more 
compactly. This allows lateral mobility of the lipids but 
restricts movement of small molecules across the bilayer.
Sphingolipids are taller than most phosphoglycerides 
and  tend  to  separate  with  cholesterol  into  thicker 
domains of the bilayer (Fig. 13.7B). These domains are 
much more abundant in the plasma membrane than in 
thinner membranes inside cells (see Fig. 21.3).

Structure and Physical Properties of  
Biological Membranes
Biological membranes vary considerably in lipid compo-
sition.  In  addition  to  a  variety  of  phosphoglycerides, 
plasma  membranes  of  animal  cells  are  approximately 
35% cholesterol and more than 10% sphingolipids (Fig. 
13.7), while internal membranes have lower amounts of 
these lipids. Prokaryotic membranes have different lipid 
compositions.  Bacterial  membranes  consist  of  PE,  PG, 
cardiolipin, and other lipids. Archaeal membranes have 
a mixture of glycolipids, neutral lipids, and ether-linked 
lipids, and some include single fatty acids.

Most  lipids  are  distributed  asymmetrically  between 
the halves of biological membranes. In animal cell plasma 
membranes,  glycosphingolipids  are  outside,  while  PS, 

CHAPTER 13  n  Membrane Structure and Dynamics  

233

A. Hypotonic

B. Isotonic

C. Hypertonic

Cholesterol

SM

GS

PC

PE

PS

Raft

D. Phase
∆P

E. Lipid

F. Membrane
    skeleton

 

A

B

FIGURE 13.7  ASYMMETRICAL DISTRIBUTION OF LIPIDS IN 
THE PLASMA MEMBRANE OF AN ANIMAL CELL. A, Sphingomy-
elin  (SM)  and  cholesterol  form  a  small  cluster  in  the  external  leaflet. 
GS,  glycosphingolipid;  PC,  phosphatidylcholine;  PE,  phosphatidyl-
ethanolamine;  PS,  phosphatidylserine.  PS  is  enriched  in  the  inner 
leaflet.  B,  Lipid  raft  in  the  outer  leaflet  of  the  plasma  membrane 
enriched in cholesterol and sphingolipids. The lipids in the inner leaflet 
next to the raft are less well characterized. 

PE,  and  PI  are  enriched  in  the  cytoplasmic  half  of  the 
bilayer (Fig. 13.7). PS asymmetry gives the cytoplasmic 
surface of the plasma membrane a net negative charge. 
Less is known about the lipid asymmetry of organelle 
membranes.  Transmembrane  proteins  bind  lipids  with 
some  specifically,  so  they  also  influence  the  lipid  com-
position of membranes. Cholesterol is distributed more 
evenly between the two leaflets of membranes because it 
flips between the two sides of a bilayer on a second time 
scale. This happens because much less energy is required 
to bury its single hydroxyl than a polar head group.

Lipid asymmetry is initially established during biosyn-
thesis in the cytoplasmic leaflet of the endoplasmic retic-
ulum (ER) (see Chapter 20). A protein (not yet identified) 
passively redistributes lipids synthesized on the cytoplas-
mic side of ER between the halves of the bilayer. Lipid 
asymmetry is reestablished along the secretory pathway 
and maintained in the plasma membrane by two families 
of enzymes that use energy from ATP hydrolysis to move 
lipid molecules from one side of a bilayer to the other. 
Flippases are P-type adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) 
pumps for lipids (see Fig. 14.7). One isoform of the P4 
ATPase  pumps  is  found  in  the  Golgi  apparatus,  while 
other  isoforms  are  found  in  secretory  vesicles,  endo-
somes,  or  the  plasma  membrane  to  concentrate  PS  on 
the  cytoplasmic  sides  of  these  membranes.  A  second 
family called floppases are ABC transporter pumps that 
move lipids from cytoplasmic leaflet to the extracellular 
leaflet. The same activity that mixes lipids in the ER also 
exposes  PS  on  the  outer  surface  of  activated  platelets 

FIGURE  13.8  MEMBRANE  DEFORMABILITY  ILLUSTRATED 
BY THE PLASMA MEMBRANE OF HUMAN RED BLOOD CELLS. 
A–C, Differential interference contrast light micrographs. In an isotonic 
medium, the cell is a biconcave disk. In a hypotonic medium, water 
enters the cytoplasm, and the cell rounds up and bursts (arrows) if the 
area of the membrane cannot accommodate the volume. In a hyper-
tonic medium, water leaves the cell and the membrane is thrown into 
spikes  and  folds.  D,  Phase-contrast  micrograph  showing  that  the 
plasma  membrane  is  flexible  enough  to  be  drawn  by  suction  into  a 
capillary  tube.  E,  Fluorescence  micrograph  showing  that  membrane 
lipids, marked with a fluorescent dye, evenly surround the membrane 
extension.  F,  The  elastic  membrane  skeleton,  marked  with  another 
fluorescent  dye,  stretches  into  the  capillary  but  not  to  the  tip  of  
the  extension.  (D–F,  Courtesy  N.  Mohandas,  Lawrence  Berkeley 
Laboratory, Berkeley, CA. For reference, see Discher D, Mohandas N, 
Evans  E.  Molecular  maps  of  red  cell  deformation.  Science. 
1994;266:1032–1035.)

(see  Fig.  30.14)  and  on  cells  marked  for  phagocytosis 
during programmed cell death (see Fig. 46.7).

Because  they  interact  favorably,  cholesterol  and 
sphingolipids  form  small  domains  in  the  outer  leaflet  
of  plasma  membranes  called  rafts  (Fig.  13.7B).  Special 
invaginations  of  the  plasma  membrane  called  caveolae 
(see  Fig.  22.7)  are  the  best-characterized  example  of 
sphingolipid–cholesterol  rafts.  Some  transmembrane 
proteins, GPI-anchored proteins, and fatty acid–anchored 
proteins  (Fig.  13.10)  associate  with  sphingolipids  and 
cholesterol  in  artificial  bilayers,  so  rafts  are  thought  to 
participate in signaling.

Like bilayers of pure phosphoglycerides cellular mem-
branes have limited permeability to ions, high electrical 
resistance,  and  the  ability  to  self-seal.  Little  force  is 
required to deform bilayers into complex shapes. These 
features  are  illustrated  by  the  response  of  a  red  blood 
cell plasma membrane to changes in volume (Fig. 13.8). 
The membrane area is constant, so a reduction in volume 

234 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

throws the membrane into folds, whereas swelling dis-
tends it to a spherical shape until it eventually bursts. If 
osmotic forces rupture a lipid bilayer, it will reseal.

The  lipid  molecules  comprising  membranes  are  not 
soluble in water, but cytoplasmic lipid-binding proteins 
can take up specific lipids from a membrane and deliver 
them to another membrane. This process transfers lipids 
from  their  sites  of  synthesis  in  the  ER  to  mitochondria 
as well as between other organelles (see Fig. 20.17).

Membrane Proteins
Proteins are responsible for most membrane functions. 
The  variety  of  membrane  proteins  is  great,  comprising 
more than one-third of proteins in sequenced genomes. 
Integral membrane proteins cross the lipid bilayer, and 
peripheral membrane proteins associate with the inside 
or  outside  surfaces  of  the  bilayer.  Transmembrane  
segments  of  integral  membrane  proteins  interact  with 
hydrocarbon  chains  of  the  lipid  bilayer  and  have  few 
hydrophilic residues on these surfaces. Like other soluble 
proteins,  peripheral  membrane  proteins  have  hydro-
philic residues exposed on their surfaces and a core of 
hydrophobic residues. Chemical extraction experiments 
distinguish  these  two  classes  of  membrane  proteins. 
Alkaline solvents (eg, 0.1 M carbonate at pH 11.3) solu-
bilize most peripheral proteins, leaving behind the lipid 
bilayer  and  integral  membrane  proteins.  Detergents, 
which  interact  with  hydrophobic  transmembrane  seg-
ments, solubilize integral membrane proteins.

Integral Membrane Proteins
Atomic structures of a growing number of integral mem-
brane  proteins  and  primary  structures  of  thousands  of 
others  show  how  proteins  associate  with  lipid  bilayers 
(Fig.  13.9).  Many  integral  membrane  proteins  have  a 
single peptide segment that fulfills the energetic criteria 
(Box 13.1) for a membrane-spanning α-helix. Glycopho-
rin  from  the  red  blood  cell  membrane  was  the  first  of 
these proteins to be characterized (Fig. 13.9A). Nuclear 
magnetic  resonance  experiments  established  that  the 
single transmembrane  segment  of  glycophorin  is  an 
α-helix.  This  helix  interacts  more  favorably  with  lipid 
acyl chains than with water. By analogy with glycopho-
rin, it is generally accepted that single, 25-residue hydro-
phobic segments of other transmembrane proteins fold 
into α-helices. In many cases, independent evidence has 
confirmed  that  the  single  segment  crosses  the  bilayer. 
For  example,  proteolytic  enzymes  might  cleave  the 
peptide at the predicted membrane interface but cannot 
access  the  membrane  interior.  Potential  glycosylation 
sites might be located outside the cell. Chemical or anti-
body labeling might identify parts of the protein inside 
or outside the cells.

Transmembrane segments of integral membrane pro-
teins  that  cross  the  bilayer  more  than  once  are  folded 

BOX 13.1  Amino Acid Sequences Identify 
Candidate Transmembrane Segments

Amino  acid  sequences  of  integral  membrane  proteins 
provide important clues about segments of the polypep-
tide  that  cross  the  lipid  bilayer.  Each  crossing  segment 
must be long enough to span the bilayer with a minimum 
of charged or polar groups in contact with the lipid (Fig. 
13.8).  Polar  backbone  amide  and  carbonyl  atoms  are 
buried in α-helices or β-sheets to avoid contact with the 
lipid. Aromatic residues frequently project from transmem-
brane  segments  into  the  lipid  near  the  level  where  acyl 
chains are bonded to the lipid head groups (red side chains 
in Fig. 13.8). A helix of 20 to 25 residues or a β-strand of 
10 residues is long enough (3.0 to 3.8 nm) to span a lipid 
bilayer depending on the thickness of the bilayer.

Quantitative  analysis  of  the  side  chain  and  backbone 
hydropathy  (aversion  to  water)  of  the  sequence  of  an 
integral membrane protein usually identifies one or more 
hydrophobic  sequences  long  enough  to  cross  a  bilayer 
(see  the  legend  for  Fig.  13.8  for  details).  The  approach 
works  best  for  helices  that  are  inserted  directly  in  the 
lipid, like the single transmembrane helix of glycophorin 
A that has mostly apolar side chains. If a protein has mul-
tiple transmembrane helices, some may escape detection 
by  hydrophobicity  analysis  because  they  form  a  hydro-
philic cavity lined with charged and polar side chains. For 
example, two of seven transmembrane helices of bacteri-
orhodopsin  contain  charged  residues  facing  the  interior  
of  the  protein,  so  they  are  less  hydrophobic  than  the  
other  transmembrane  helices.  Transmembrane  β-strands 
are more challenging, as only half of the side chains face 
the membrane lipids. None of the transmembrane strands 
of porin qualify as transmembrane segments by hydropho-
bicity  criteria.  They  are  short,  and  many  contain  polar 
residues facing the central cavity.

into α-helices or β-strands. Hydrogen bonding of all back-
bone  amides  and  carbonyls  in  the  secondary  structure 
minimizes the energy required to bury the backbone in 
the hydrophobic lipid bilayer. For the same reason, most 
amino acid side chains in contact with fatty acyl chains 
in the bilayer are hydrophobic. Membrane proteins can 
bind  specific  types  of  lipids  that  stabilize  the  protein. 
Chapter 20 considers how transmembrane proteins fold 
during their biosynthesis.

Integral  membrane  proteins  with  all  α-helical  trans-
membrane  segments  are  the  most  common.  Examples 
are  bacteriorhodopsin  (Fig.  13.9B;  see  also  Fig.  27.2), 
pumps  (see  Figs.  14.3,  14.4,  14.7,  and  14.10),  carriers 
(see  Fig.  15.4),  channels  (see  Fig.  16.3),  cytochrome 
oxidase  (see  Fig.  19.5),  and  photosynthetic  reaction 
centers (see Fig. 19.9). Where these proteins have polar 
and  charged  residues  in  the  plane  of  the  bilayer,  they 
generally face away from the lipid toward the interior of 
the protein, in contrast to the opposite arrangement in 
water-soluble proteins.

 

CHAPTER 13  n  Membrane Structure and Dynamics  

235

A. Glycophorin

B. Bacteriorhodopsin

C. Porin

a

b

a

b

Biological unit (dimer)

a

a

e

d

b

c

g

f

e

d

b

c

TOP VIEW

Biological unit (trimer)

Biological unit (trimer)

a

b

c

e

d

g

f

a

3

0

3

0

x
e
d
n

i
 
y
h

t

a
p
o
r
d
y
H

-3

20

100

-3

20

Residue number

100

200
Residue number

3

0

-3

20

HYDROPHOBIC

HYDROPHILIC

200
100
Residue number

FIGURE  13.9  STRUCTURES  OF  REPRESENTATIVE  INTEGRAL  MEMBRANE  PROTEINS.  Top,  Views  across  the  lipid  bilayer.  Middle, 
Views in the plane of the lipid bilayer. Bottom, Hydrophobicity analysis. A, Glycophorin, a human red blood cell protein, has a single transmembrane 
α-helix. The extracellular and cytoplasmic domains are artistic conceptions. The transmembrane helices have a strong tendency to form homodi-
mers in the plane of the membrane (see Protein Data Bank [PDB; www.rcsb.org] file 1MSR). B, Bacteriorhodopsin, a light-driven proton pump from 
the plasma membrane of a purple bacterium (see Fig. 14.3), has seven transmembrane helices. The green space-filling structure is retinal, the 
covalently bound, light-absorbing “chromophore.” This structure was first determined by electron microscopy of two-dimensional crystals and 
extended to higher resolution by x-ray diffraction (see PDB file 1AT9). C, Porin, a nonselective channel protein from the outer membrane of a bac-
terium, is composed largely of transmembrane β-strands. This structure was determined by x-ray crystallography of three-dimensional crystals (see 
PDB file 1PRN). Hydropathy plots are calculated from the energy required to transfer an amino acid from an organic solvent to water. One sums 
the transfer free energy for segments of 20 residues. Segments with large, positive (unfavorable) transfer free energies (around 1.5 on this scale) 
are more soluble in the hydrophobic interior of a membrane bilayer than in water and thus are candidates for membrane-spanning segments. 

Many  transmembrane  proteins  consist  of  multiple 
subunits  that  associate  in  the  plane  of  the  bilayer  (Fig. 
13.9). The transmembrane helix of glycophorin A has a 
strong tendency to form homodimers in the plane of the 
membrane. Dimers are favored because complementary 
surfaces on a pair of helices interact more precisely with 
each other than with lipids. The positive entropy change 
associated  with  dissociation  of  lipids  from  interacting 
protein surfaces (comparable to the hydrophobic effect 
in water) drives the reaction. Backbone carbonyl oxygens 

also  form  unconventional  hydrogen  bonds  with  C-α 
hydrogens that stabilize dimers. Bacteriorhodopsin mol-
ecules  self-associate  in  the  plane  of  the  membrane  to 
form  extended  two-dimensional  crystals.  Many  mem-
brane  channels  form  by  association  of  four  similar  or 
identical subunits with a pore at their central interface 
(see Fig. 16.2). Bacterial cytochrome oxidase is an assem-
bly of four different subunits with a total of 22 transmem-
brane  helices  (see  Fig.  19.5).  The  purple  bacterium 
photosynthetic reaction center consists of three unique 

236 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

helical  subunits  plus  a  peripheral  cytochrome  protein 
(see Fig. 19.9).

A minority of integral membrane proteins use β-strands 
to cross the lipid bilayer. Porins form channels for many 
substances, up to the size of proteins, to cross the outer 
membranes  of  Gram-positive  bacteria  and  their  eukary-
otic descendents, mitochondria and chloroplasts. Porins 
consist of an extended β-strand barrel with a hydropho-
bic exterior surrounding an aqueous pore (Fig. 13.9C). 
These subunits associate as trimers in the lipid bilayer.

In  addition  to  transmembrane  helices  or  strands, 
many  integral  membrane  proteins  have  structural  ele-
ments that pass partway across the bilayer. Porins have 
extended  polypeptide  loops  inside  the  β-barrel.  Many 
channel  proteins  have  short  helices  and  loops  that 
reverse  in  the  middle  of  the  membrane  bilayer.  These 
structural  elements  help  form  pores  specific  for  potas-
sium (see Fig. 16.3), chloride (see Fig. 16.13), and water 
(see Fig. 16.15).

Peripheral Membrane Proteins
Six  strategies  bind  peripheral  proteins  to  the  surfaces  of 
membranes  (Fig.  13.10).  One  of  three  different  types  of 
hydrophobic acyl chains can anchor a protein to a mem-
brane  by  inserting  into  the  lipid  bilayer.  Other  proteins 
bind electrostatically to membrane lipids, and some insert 
partially  into  the  lipid  bilayer.  Many  peripheral  proteins 
bind directly or indirectly to integral membrane proteins.

Isoprenoid Tails
A 15-carbon isoprenoid (farnesyl) tail (see Fig. 20.15) is 
added posttranslationally to the side chain of a cysteine 

residue near the C-terminus of the guanosine triphospha-
tase (GTPase) Ras (see Fig. 4.6) and many other proteins. 
The  enzyme  making  this  modification  recognizes  the 
target  cysteine  followed  by  two  aliphatic  amino  acids 
plus  any  other  amino  acid  (a  CAAX  recognition  site). 
Another enzyme cleaves off the AAX residues. This mem-
brane  attachment  is  required  for  Ras  to  participate  in 
growth factor signaling (see Fig. 27.6).

Myristoyl Tails
Myristate,  a  14-carbon  saturated  fatty  acid,  anchors  the 
tyrosine  kinase  Src  (see  Box  27.5)  and  other  proteins 
involved in cellular signaling to the cytoplasmic face of 
the plasma membrane. Myristate is added to the amino 
group  of  an  N-terminal  glycine  during  the  biosynthesis 
of these proteins. Insertion of this short, fatty acyl chain 
into  a  lipid  bilayer  is  so  weak  (Kd:  ~10−4 M)  that  addi-
tional  electrostatic  interactions  between  basic  side 
chains of the protein and head groups of acidic phospho-
glycerides  are  required  to  maintain  attachment  to  the 
membrane.

Glycosylphosphatidylinositol Tails
A  short  oligosaccharide-phosphoglyceride  tail  links  a 
variety  of  proteins  to  the  outer  surface  of  the  plasma 
membrane.  The  C-terminus  of  the  protein  is  attached 
covalently to the oligosaccharide, and the two fatty acyl 
chains  of  PI  are  in  the  lipid  bilayer.  In  animal  cells,  
this GPI anchors important plasma membrane proteins, 
including enzymes (acetylcholine esterase; see Fig. 17.9), 
adhesion  proteins  (T-cadherin;  see  Fig.  30.5),  and  
cell  surface  antigens  (Thy-1).  The  protozoan  parasite  

A. Ras

C

B. Src
peptide

N

C

C. Thy-1

D. Annexin

E. Prostaglandin
synthase

F. Cadherin 
and catenin

Tail of
cadherin

β-catenin

FIGURE  13.10  SIX  MODES  OF  ASSOCIATION  OF  PERIPHERAL  MEMBRANE  PROTEINS  WITH  LIPID  BILAYERS.  A,  A  C-terminal 
isoprenoid tail attaches Ras to the bilayer (see PDB file 121P). B, An N-terminal myristoyl tail binds Src weakly to the bilayer. Electrostatic interac-
tions between acidic lipids and basic amino acids stabilize the interaction. C, A C-terminal glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) tail anchors Thy-1 
(similar to an immunoglobulin variable domain) to the bilayer. D, Electrostatic interactions with phospholipids bind annexin to the bilayer (see PDB 
file 1A8A). E, Hydrophobic helices of prostaglandin H2 synthase partially penetrate the lipid bilayer (see PDB file 1CQE). F, The peripheral protein 
β-catenin (blue and purple; see PDB file 1CQE) associates with the cytoplasmic portion of the transmembrane adhesion protein cadherin (red 
and green; see PDB file 1FF5). 

 

CHAPTER 13  n  Membrane Structure and Dynamics  

237

Trypanosoma  brucei covers itself with a high concen-
tration  of  a  GPI-anchored  protein.  If  challenged  by  an 
antibody response from the host, the parasite sheds the 
protein by hydrolysis of the lipid anchor and expresses 
a variant protein to evade the immune system.

Electrostatic Interaction With Phospholipids
As postulated in the 1930s (Fig. 13.1), some soluble cyto-
plasmic  proteins  bind  the  head  groups  of  membrane 
lipids.  Annexins,  a  family  of  calcium-binding  proteins 
implicated in membrane fusion reactions, bind tightly to 
PS (Fig. 13.10D). A second example is the “BAR” domain 
found in a variety of proteins. Positively charged residues 
on the concave surface of curved, dimeric BAR domains 
bind electrostatically to curved membranes or deform flat 
membranes into tubules (see amphiphysin in Fig. 22.11). 
Myosin-I motor proteins (see Fig. 36.7) also bind strongly 
to acidic phosphoglycerides of cellular membranes.

Partial Penetration of the Lipid Bilayer
Hydrophobic  α-helices  of  prostaglandin  H2  synthase 
(see Figs. 13.10E and 26.9) anchor the enzyme to mem-
branes by partially penetrating the lipid bilayer. Another 
example is reticulons, proteins that insert into the cyto-
plasmic leaflet of the ER membrane and promote bending 
into narrow tubules and sharply curved edges of sheets 
(see Fig. 20.3).

Association With Integral Proteins
Many  peripheral  proteins  bind  cytoplasmic  domains  of 
integral membrane proteins. For example, catenins bind 
transmembrane  cell  adhesion  proteins  called  cadherins 
(Fig. 13.10F). These protein–protein interactions provide 
more specificity and higher affinity than do the interac-
tions of peripheral proteins with membrane lipids. Such 
protein–protein interactions anchor the cytoskeleton to 
transmembrane  adhesion  proteins  (see  Fig.  31.8)  and 
guide the assembly of coated vesicles during endocytosis 
(see Fig. 22.9). Protein–protein interactions also provide 
a way to transmit information across a membrane. Ligand 
binding to the extracellular domain of a transmembrane 
receptor can change the conformation of its cytoplasmic 
domain, promoting interactions with cytoplasmic, signal-
transducing proteins (see Chapter 24).

The membrane skeleton on the cytoplasmic surface 
of the plasma membrane of human red blood cells (Fig. 
13.11)  provided  the  first  insights  regarding  interaction 
of  peripheral  and  integral  membrane  proteins.  Two 
types  of  integral  membrane  proteins—an  anion  carrier 
called Band 3 and glycophorin—anchor a two-dimensional 
network of fibrous proteins to the membrane. The main 
component of this network is a long, flexible, tetrameric, 
actin-binding protein called spectrin (after its discovery 
in lysed red blood cells, “ghosts”; see Fig. 33.17). A linker 
protein called ankyrin binds tightly to both Band 3 and 
spectrin.  Approximately  35,000  nodes  consisting  of  a 

A

B

C

Spectrin

D

Band 3
4.2
Ankyrin

Glycophorin C
4.1

β-actin

Tropomyosin
Tropomodulin

Dematin
Adducin

FIGURE 13.11  THE MEMBRANE SKELETON ON THE CYTO-
PLASMIC SURFACE OF THE RED BLOOD CELL PLASMA MEM-
BRANE.  A,  Whole  cell.  B,  Cutaway  drawing.  C,  Detailed  drawing. 
Nodes  consisting  of  a  short  actin  filament  and  associated  proteins 
interact with multiple spectrin molecules, which, in turn, bind to two 
transmembrane proteins: glycophorin and (via ankyrin) Band 3. D, An 
electron  micrograph  of  the  actin-spectrin  network.  (D,  Courtesy  R. 
Josephs, University of Chicago, IL.)

short actin filament and associated proteins interconnect 
the  elastic  spectrin  network.  This  membrane  skeleton 
reinforces the bilayer, allowing a cell to recover its shape 
elastically after it is distorted by squeezing through the 
narrow lumen of blood capillaries.

Membrane Protein Dynamics
Several  complementary  methods  can  monitor  move-
ments of plasma membrane proteins (Fig. 13.12A). The 
original  approach  was  to  label  proteins  with  a  fluores-
cent  dye,  either  by  covalent  modification  or  by  attach-
ment of an antibody with a bound fluorescent dye. After 
a spot of intense light irreversibly bleaches the fluores-
cent dyes in a small area of the membrane, one observes 
the fluorescence over time with a microscope. If the test 
protein is mobile, unbleached proteins from surrounding 
areas move into the bleached area. The rate and extent 
of fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) 
revealed that a fraction of the population of most mem-
brane proteins diffuses freely in two dimensions in the 
plane of the membrane, but that a substantial fraction is 
immobilized because the recovery from photobleaching 

238 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

A. Fluorescence photobleaching

A. Free
     diffusion

B. Partial
     confinement

C. Directed
     motion

0 sec

1 sec

10 sec

B. Single bead

C. Laser trap

Bead

Proteins

0 sec

1 sec

FIGURE 13.12  METHODS USED TO DOCUMENT THE MOVE-
MENTS  OF  MEMBRANE  PROTEINS.  A,  Fluorescence  recovery 
after photobleaching. Simulated experimental data with individual mol-
ecules are shown as green dots. B, Single-particle tracking. C, Optical 
trapping. 

is incomplete. The same photobleaching method is used 
to  study  the  mobility  of  fluorescent  fusion  proteins  
targeted  to  any  cellular  membrane  (see  Fig.  6.3).  The 
second  approach  is  to  label  individual  membrane  pro-
teins  with  antibodies  or  lectins  (carbohydrate-binding 
proteins)  attached  to  small  particles  of  gold  or  plastic 
beads (Fig. 13.12B). High-contrast light microscopy can 
follow the motion of a particle attached to a membrane 
protein.  Despite  their  size,  the  particles  have  minimal 
effects  on  diffusion  of  membrane  proteins.  The  third 
method is an extension of single-particle tracking. Instead 
of merely watching spontaneous movements, the inves-
tigator can grab a particle in an optical trap created by 
focusing an infrared laser beam through the microscope 
objective  (Fig.  13.12C).  Manipulation  of  particles  with 
an  optical  trap  reveals  what  happens  when  force  is 
applied to a membrane protein.

Membrane proteins exhibit a wide range of dynamic 
behaviors  (Fig.  13.13).  Some  molecules  diffuse  freely. 
Others diffuse intermittently, alternating with periods of 
restricted movement. Substantial numbers of membrane 
proteins are immobilized, presumably by direct or indi-
rect  associations  with  the  membrane  skeleton  or  the 
cytoskeleton, or by forming large arrays through mutual 
interactions.

The population of a given type of membrane protein 
(eg, a cell adhesion protein) may exhibit more than one 
class  of  dynamic  behavior.  For  example,  most  proteins 
with GPI anchors diffuse freely, as is expected from their 
association  with  the  lipid  bilayer,  but  a  fraction  of  any 
GPI-anchored  protein  has  restricted  mobility.  Some 
transmembrane proteins also diffuse freely, but a fraction 
may become trapped or immobilized at any time. Diffus-
ing proteins must be free of interactions with the mem-
brane skeleton and with anchored membrane proteins. 
Cell  adhesion  proteins  (cadherins;  see  Fig.  30.5)  and 

FIGURE  13.13  MOVEMENTS  OF  PROTEINS  IN  THE  PLANE 
OF MEMBRANES. A, Free diffusion. B, Partial confinement by obsta-
cle clusters, some associated with the membrane skeleton. C, Directed 
movement  by  a  motor  on  an  actin  filament.  (For  reference,  see  
Jacobson K, Sheets ED, Simson R. Revisiting the fluid mosaic model 
of membranes. Science. 1995;268:1441–1442.)

nutrient receptors (transferrin receptors; see Fig. 22.15) 
are  examples  of  transmembrane  proteins  that  diffuse 
intermittently. They alternate between free diffusion and 
temporary trapping for 3 to 30 seconds in local domains 
measuring less than 0.5 µm in diameter. In some cases, 
trapping depends on the cytoplasmic tails of transmem-
brane proteins, which are thought to interact reversibly 
with  the  cytoskeleton  or  with  immobilized  membrane 
proteins. Tugs with an optical trap show that the cages 
that  confine  these  particles  are  elastic,  as  expected  for 
cytoskeletal  networks.  Extracellular  domains  of  these 
proteins  may  also  interact  with  adjacent  immobilized 
proteins.  Immobilized  proteins  do  not  diffuse  freely,  
and  particles  attached  to  them  resist  displacement  by 
optical traps.

The lipid bilayer can flow past immobilized transmem-
brane proteins without disrupting the membrane. If the 
plasma  membrane  of  a  red  blood  cell  is  sucked  into  
a  narrow  pipette  (Fig.  13.8D),  lipids  of  the  fluid  mem-
brane  bilayer  extend  uniformly  over  the  protrusion, 
leaving behind the immobilized membrane proteins and 
the membrane skeleton.

Some membrane proteins undergo long-distance trans-
lational  movements  in  relatively  straight  lines.  Because 
disruption  of  cytoplasmic  actin  filaments  by  drugs 
impedes  these  movements,  myosins  (see  Fig.  36.7)  are 
the  most  likely  motors  for  these  movements.  In  some 
instances,  members  of  the  integrin  family  of  adhesion 
proteins (see Fig. 30.9) use this transport system.

Movements  of  membrane  proteins  in  the  plane  of  
the membrane are essential for many cellular functions. 
Transmembrane  receptors  concentrate  in  coated  pits 
before internalization during receptor-mediated endocy-
tosis  (see  Fig.  22.12).  Similarly,  transduction  of  many 
signals from outside the cell depends on the formation 
of receptor dimers or trimers (see Figs. 24.5, 24.7, 24.8, 
24.9,  24.10,  and  46.18).  Bound  extracellular  ligands  
stabilize  collisions  between  freely  diffusing  receptor  

 

CHAPTER 13  n  Membrane Structure and Dynamics  

239

proteins,  juxtaposing  their  cytoplasmic  domains  and 
activating downstream signaling mechanisms. Similarly, 
movements in the plane of the plasma membrane allow 
clustering of adhesion receptors that enhances binding 
of cells to their neighbors or to the extracellular matrix 
(see Figs. 30.6 and 30.11).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We  thank  Tobias  Baumgart  and  Donald  Engelman  for 
their suggestions on this chapter.

SELECTED READINGS

McNeil PL, Steinhardt RA. Plasma membrane disruption: repair, preven-

tion, adaptation. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2003;19:697-731.

Nagle JF, Tristram-Nagle S. Structure of lipid bilayers. Biochim Biophys 

Acta. 2000;1469:159-195.

Owen DM, Magenau A, Williamson D, Gaus K. The lipid raft hypothesis 
revisited—new  insights  on  raft  composition  and  function  from 
super-resolution  fluorescence  microscopy.  Bioessays.  2012;34:
739-747.

Pandit  SA,  Scott  HL.  Multiscale  simulations  of  heterogeneous  model 

membranes. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009;1788:136-148.

Robertson JD. Membrane structure [historical perspective]. J Cell Biol. 

1981;91:1895-2045.

Sachs  JN,  Engelman  DM.  Introduction  to  the  membrane  protein 
reviews:  the  interplay  of  structure,  dynamics,  and  environment  
in  membrane  protein  function.  Annu  Rev  Biochem.  2006;35:
707-712.

Blaskovic S, Blanc M, van der Goot FG. What does S-palmitoylation do 

Shevchenko A, Simons K. Lipidomics: coming to grips with lipid diver-

to membrane proteins? FEBS J. 2013;280:2766-2774.

sity. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2010;11:593-598.

Curran  AR,  Engelman  DM.  Sequence  motifs,  polar  interactions  and 
conformational  changes  in  helical  membrane  proteins.  Curr  Opin 
Struct Biol. 2003;13:412-417.

Engelman DM. Lipid bilayer structure in the membrane of Mycoplasma 
laidlawii [bilayer structure established by x-ray diffraction]. J  Mol 
Biol. 1971;58:153-165.

Simons K, Geri MJ. Revitalizing membrane rafts: new tools and insights. 

Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2010;11:688-699.

Stoeckenius  W,  Engelman  DM.  Current  models  for  the  structure  of 
biological membranes [historical perspective]. J Cell Biol. 1969;42:
613-646.

Wang  L.  Measurements  and  implications  of  the  membrane  dipole 

Fleming  KG.  Energetics  of  membrane  protein  folding.  Annu  Rev 

potential. Annu Rev Biochem. 2012;81:615-635.

Biophys. 2014;43:233-255.

Wollam J, Antebi A. Sterol regulation of metabolism, homeostasis and 

Forrest  LR.  Structural  symmetry  in  membrane  proteins.  Annu  Rev 

development. Annu Rev Biochem. 2011;80:885-916.

Biophys. 2015;44:311-337.

Kiessling LL, Splain RA. Chemical approaches to glycobiology. Annu 

Rev Biochem. 2010;79:619-653.

Zverina EA, Lamphear CL, Wright EN, Fierke CA. Recent advances in 
protein  prenyltransferases:  substrate  identification,  regulation,  and 
disease interventions. Curr Opin Chem Biol. 2012;16:544-552.

This page intentionally left blank

C H A P T E R 

14 

Membrane Pumps

Introduction to Membrane Permeability
Lipid bilayers provide a barrier to diffusion of ions and 
polar molecules larger than about 150 Da, so transmem-
brane  proteins  are  required  for  selective  passage  for  
ions, and other larger molecules across membranes. The 
proteins  controlling  membrane  permeability  fall  into 
three  broad  classes—pumps,  carriers,  and  channels—
each with distinct properties (Fig. 14.1). These proteins 
control traffic of small molecules across membranes, an 
essential of many physiological processes.
•  Pumps are enzymes that use energy from adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP), light, or (rarely) other sources to 
move ions (generally, cations) and other solutes across 
membranes at relatively modest rates. Pumps are also 
called  primary  active  transporters,  because  they 
transduce electromagnetic or chemical energy directly 
into transmembrane concentration gradients between 
membrane-bound compartments.

•  Carriers  provide  passive  pathways  for  solutes  to 
move  across  membranes  down  their  concentration 
gradients  from  a  region  of  higher  concentration  to 
one  of  lower  concentration.  Each  conformational 
change  in  a  carrier  protein  translocates  a  limited 
number  of  small  molecules  across  the  membrane.  
Carriers  use  ion  gradients  created  by  pumps  as  a 
source of energy to perform a remarkable variety of 
work. Translocation of an ion down its concentration 
gradient  can  drive  another  ion  or  solute  up  a  con-
centration  gradient,  so  these  are  called  secondary 
transporters (see Chapter 15).

•  Channels  are  ion-specific  pores  that  typically  open 
and  close  transiently  in  a  regulated  manner.  Open 
channels are highly specific but passive transport-
ers, allowing a flood of an ion or other small solute 
to pass quickly across the membrane, driven by elec-
trical and concentration gradients. The movement of 
ions  through  open  channels  controls  the  electrical 

Specificity
Rate (ions/sec)
Gradient
Energy input
Ions/conformational
        change

Pump
Absolute
100
Uphill
Required
~1

             Carrier
              Intermediate
              <1000
              Downhill*
              No
              ~1
         *May pull another solute uphill

Channel
Only 10–20×
106
Downhill
No
Many

FIGURE  14.1  PROPERTIES  OF  THE  THREE  TYPES  OF  PROTEINS  THAT  TRANSPORT  IONS  AND  OTHER  SOLUTES  ACROSS 
MEMBRANES. The triangles represent the concentration gradients of Na+ (blue) and glucose (green) across the membrane. 

 241

242 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

potential across membranes (see Fig. 11.17), so that 
changes  in  channel  activity  produce  rapid  electrical 
signals  in  excitable  membranes  of  nerves,  muscles, 
and other cells (see Fig. 12.6).
This chapter starts with pumps, because they create 
the  solute  gradients  required  for  transport  by  carriers 
(see Chapter 15) and channels (see Chapter 16). Chapter 
17 concludes this section with examples of how pumps, 
carriers, and channels work together to perform a remark-
able  variety  of  functions.  An  important  point  is  that  
differential  expression  of  a  subset  of  isoforms  of  these 
proteins  in  specific  membranes  allows  differentiated 
cells to perform a wide range of complex functions.

Diversity of Membrane Pumps
Protein  pumps  transport  ions  and  other  solutes  across 
membranes  up  concentration  gradients.  Energy  can 
come from a variety of sources: light, oxidation–reduction 
(redox) reactions, or, most commonly, hydrolysis of ATP 
(Table  14.1).  Energy  is  conserved  in  the  form  of  trans-
membrane electrical or chemical gradients of the trans-
ported ion or solute. The potential energy in these ion 
gradients drives a variety of energy-requiring processes 
(Fig.  14.2).  Most  known  biological  pumps  translocate 

Chemiosmotic
Uptake/efflux of nutrients, 
metabolites, salts

Osmotic volume regulation
H2O follows ions

Mechanical
H+-driven 
flagellar rotation

ION GRADIENTS

Chemical
H+ (Na+)-driven 
ATP synthesis

Signal transduction
Ca2+ entry, action potentials

Cell homeostasis
pH regulation, efflux 
or sequestration of 
toxic solutes

FIGURE 14.2  PROCESSES DRIVEN BY ENERGY STORED IN 
ION GRADIENTS.

TABLE 14.1  Diversity of Membrane Pumps*
Energy Source

Pump

Light

Light
Redox potential

Decarboxylation
Pyrophosphate
ATP

Bacteriorhodopsin
Halorhodopsin
Photoredox
Electron transport chain NADH 

oxidase

Ion-transporting decarboxylases
H+-pyrophosphatase
Transport ATPases

cations. Although they could just as well move anions, 
cations were selected during the evolution of early life 
forms 3 billion years ago.

Each family of pumps (Table 14.1) had a single source 
during  evolution,  so  all  members  of  each  family  share 
similar structures and mechanisms. The small number of 
families is remarkable given the importance of pumps in 
establishing  transmembrane  electrochemical  gradients. 
Of course, a host of downstream carriers can take advan-
tage of a limited number of ion concentration gradients 
to carry out many secondary reactions.

This chapter considers four types of pumps, empha-
sizing  examples  in  which  both  high-resolution  struc-
tures and detailed biochemical analysis of pathways are 
available.  Chapter  19  provides  additional  details  on  H+ 
translocation by redox-driven cytochrome c oxidase and 
the role of F-type pumps in ATP synthesis by mitochon-
dria and chloroplasts. Microbiology texts provide more 
information  on  pumps  driven  by  decarboxylases  and 
pyrophosphatases.

Light-Driven Proton Pumping  
by Bacteriorhodopsin
Owing to its simplicity, its small size, and the availability 
of  many  high-resolution  structures  (Fig.  14.3),  more  is 
known about light-driven transport of protons by bacte-
riorhodopsin than about any other pump. This pump 
converts light energy into a proton gradient across the 
plasma membrane of the halophilic (salt-loving) Archaea 
Halobacterium  halobium.  A  proton-driven  ATP  syn-
thase uses this proton gradient to make ATP (Fig. 14.5). 
The 26-kD polypeptide is folded into seven α-helices that 
cross the lipid bilayer. The light-absorbing chromophore 
retinal (vitamin A aldehyde) is bound covalently to the 
side  chain  of  lysine  216  (Lys216)  via  a  Schiff  base,  a 
C═N—C bond. The design of this seven-helix transporter 
is remarkably similar to that of the large family of seven-
helix  receptors,  especially  the  photoreceptor  proteins 
that  vertebrates  use  for  vision  (see  Fig.  27.2).  Two-
dimensional crystalline arrays of bacteriorhodopsin give 
the plasma membrane its purple color.

Driven Substance
H+
Cl−
H+
H+
Na+
Na+
H+
Various ions and solutes

Distribution

Halobacteria
Halobacteria
Photosynthetic organisms
Mitochondria, bacteria
Alkalophilic bacteria
Bacteria
Plant vacuoles, fungi, bacteria
Universal

ATPase, adenosine triphosphatase; NADH, reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; Redox, oxidation–reduction.
*Each class of pumps has a different evolutionary origin and structure.

 

CHAPTER 14  n  Membrane Pumps 

243

6.  The retinal reisomerizes to the all-trans configuration 

in preparation for another cycle.
The net result of this cycle is rapid vectorial transport 
of a proton from the cytoplasm out of the cell. Steps 4 
to 6 are rate limiting, occurring at a rate of about 100 s−1. 
The  other  reactions  are  fast,  provided  that  there  is  an 
adequate flux of light. Retinal not only captures energy 
by  absorbing  a  photon  but  also  acts  as  a  switch  that 
changes both the accessibility and affinities of the proton-
binding groups in a sequential fashion.

In addition to bacteriorhodopsin, halobacterial plasma 
membranes contain two related proteins: halorhodopsin 
and  sensory  rhodopsin.  Halorhodopsin  absorbs  light  
and pumps chloride into the cell. Interestingly, a single 
amino  acid  substitution  can  reverse  the  direction  of 
pumping. Sensory rhodopsin couples light absorption by 
its bound retinal to phototaxis (swimming toward light) 
with a tightly coupled transducer protein. In the absence 
of this transducer, sensory rhodopsin transports protons 
out of the cell much like bacterial rhodopsin.

Channelrhodopsins  are  another  member  of  this 
family  with  bound  retinal  and  seven  transmembrane 
helices.  Absorbance  of  a  photon  transiently  opens  a 
cation channel across the membrane as part of chemo-
taxis  of  green  algae  (see  Fig.  38.16).  Light  can  control 
the excitability of cells engineered to express this light-
gated channel, a method called optogenetics.

Overview of Adenosine  
Triphosphate–Driven Pumps
Three  families  of  transport  adenosine  triphosphatases 
(ATPases)  (Table  14.2)  are  essential  for  the  physiology 
of all forms of life. The rotary ATPases and P-type ATPases 
both generate electrical and/or chemical gradients across 
membranes.  ABC  (adenosine  triphosphate  binding  cas-
sette)  transporters  not  only  produce  ion  gradients  
but also transport a much wider range of solutes across 
membranes.  Chemical  inhibitors  have  been  useful  in 
characterizing  these  pumps,  and  some  are  also  used 
therapeutically (Table 14.3).

Free energy released by ATP hydrolysis sets the limit 
on  the  concentration  gradient  that  these  pumps  can 
produce. If transport is electrically neutral (ie, if it does 
not produce a membrane potential; see Fig. 11.17), the 
maximum  gradient  is  about  1  million-fold.  The  electri-
cally  neutral,  P-type  H+K+-ATPase  of  gastric  epithelial 
cells  actually  produces  such  an  extraordinary  gradient 
when it acidifies the stomach down to a pH of 1.

Rotary ATPase Families
The  rotary  ATPases  originated  in  the  last  universal 
common ancestor of life on earth (see Fig. 1.1) so they 
share  many  common  features.  Over  time  these  genes 
diverged, giving rise to three families of rotary ATPases: 

Retinal

Asp 96

Asp 85
Lys 216

H+

FIGURE 14.3  PROTON PATHWAY ACROSS THE MEMBRANE 
THROUGH BACTERIORHODOPSIN. Numerous atomic structures, 
fast spectroscopic measurements of reaction intermediates, and anal-
ysis  of  a  wide  array  of  mutations,  revealed  the  pathway  for  protons 
through  the  middle  of  the  bundle  of  seven α-helices.  A  cytoplasmic 
proton binds successively to Asp96, the Schiff base linking retinal to 
lysine 216 (Lys216), Asp85, and Glu204 before releasing outside the 
cell. Absorption of light by retinal drives conformational changes in the 
protein that favor the transfer of the proton across the membrane up 
its concentration gradient. (For reference, see Protein Data Bank [PDB; 
www.rcsb.org]  file  1C3W  and  Wickstrand  C,  Dods  R,  Royant  A, 
Neutze R. Bacteriorhodopsin: would the real structural intermediates 
please stand up? Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015;1850:536–553.)

The  proton  pathway  across  the  membrane  includes 
the  side  chains  of  aspartate  96  (Asp96),  aspartate  85 
(Asp85), glutamate 204 (Glu204), the Schiff base, and a 
water molecule next to the Schiff base, a C═N—C bond. 
Local environments give the two aspartates remarkably 
different  ionization  constant  (pKa)  values.  Asp96  has  a 
very high pKa of approximately 10, so it can serve as a 
proton donor. Asp85 has a low pKa of approximately 2, 
so it serves as a proton acceptor. Absorption of a photon 
induces reversible changes in the conformations of the 
retinal and the protein that allow for the transfer a single 
proton from the cytoplasm to the extracellular space.
1.  The  mechanism  starts  with  retinal  in  the  all-trans 
configuration  and  protons  bound  to  the  Schiff  base 
and Asp96 at the hydrophobic, cytoplasmic end of the 
proton pathway.

2.  Absorption of a photon isomerizes retinal to the 13-cis 
configuration. This changes the conformation of the 
protein, lowers the pKa of the Schiff base, and favors 
transfer of its proton to Asp85.

3.  Asp85 transfers the proton to Glu204, which releases 

the proton outside the cell.

4.  A further conformational change of the protein reori-
ents the Schiff base toward Asp96. The pKa of Asp96 
is  lower  in  this  conformation,  so  a  proton  transfers 
from Asp96 to the Schiff base.

5.  Asp96 is reprotonated from the cytoplasm.

244 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

TABLE 14.2  Adenosine Triphosphate–Driven Transport Adenosine Triphosphatase Pumps
Pump
Function
Rotary ATPases
AOA1
FOF1

Archaea, some bacteria
Mitochondria, chloroplasts, 

H+ (some cases Na+)
H+

8 or more
8 or more

Subunits

Distribution

Substrate

H+- or Na+-driven ATP synthesis
H+-driven ATP synthesis or H+ 

bacterial

8 or more

Eukaryotic endomembranes

H+

pumping

ATP-driven H+ pumping

Plasma membrane
Stomach and kidney plasma 

3 Na+ for 2 K+
1 H+ for 1 K+

Generate Na+, K+ gradient
Gastric and renal H+ secretion

membranes

Sarcoplasmic reticulum, 
endoplasmic reticulum

2 Ca2+ for 2 H+

Lowers cytoplasmic Ca2+

Plasma membrane
Plasma membrane in yeast, 

1 Ca2+ for 1 H+
1 H+

plants, protozoa

Lowers cytoplasmic Ca2+
Generate proton gradient

Plasma membrane
Respiratory tract and 
pancreatic epithelial 
plasma membranes

Endoplasmic reticulum
Liver cell apical plasma 

membrane

Drugs
ATP, Cl−

Drug secretion
Cl− secretion

Antigenic peptides
Phosphatidylcholine

Transport antigenic peptides into ER
Phosphoglyceride flippase, bile 

2
2

1

1
1

1
1

2
1

VOV1
P-Type ATPase Family
Na+Κ+-ATPase
H+K+-ATPase

SERCA Ca-ATPase

PMCA Ca-ATPase
H+-ATPase

ABC Transporters
MDR1 P-glycoprotein
CFTR

TAP1, 2
MDR2

STE6
HisQMP
PstSCAB
OppDFBCA
HlyB

1
4 + pp
4 + pp
4 + pp
2

Yeast plasma membrane
Bacteria plasma membrane
Bacteria plasma membrane
Bacteria plasma membrane
Escherichia coli plasma

Mating pheromone peptide
Histidine
Phosphate
Oligopeptides
Hemolysin A (107-kD protein)

secretion

Secretion
Histidine uptake
Phosphate uptake
Peptide uptake
Hemolysin A uptake

CFTR, cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator; MDR1, 2, multidrug resistance 1, 2; PMCA, plasma membrane calcium ATPase; pp, periplasmic protein; 
SERCA, sarcoplasmic-endoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase; TAP1, 2, transport-associated protein 1, 2.

TABLE 14.3  Tools for Studying Pumps
Agent

Cardiac glycosides* (digitalis)
Omeprazole*
Oligomycin

*Used clinically as drugs.

Target
Na+K+-ATPase
H+K+-ATPase (parietal cell)
F0F1-ATP synthase

A-, F-, and V-types. Contemporary rotary ATPases either 
use proton gradients to synthesize ATP or run in reverse 
using  ATP  hydrolysis  to  pump  protons.  This  section 
begins  with  the  common  features  of  rotary  ATPases. 
Concluding sections cover the distribution of the three 
specialized  families  among  organisms,  their  structures, 
and their functions.

Architecture of Rotary Adenosine Triphosphatases
Rotary  ATPases  consist  of  two  rotary  motors  (R1  and 
RO), as illustrated by the structure of the proton-driven, 
A-type  ATP  synthase  from  the  Archaea  Thermus  ther-
mophilus (Fig. 14.4A–B). The water-soluble, globular R1 
motor catalyzes ATP hydrolysis or synthesis. The RO (for 
oligomycin-sensitive  factor)  motor  is  embedded  in  

the  membrane  and  conducts  protons  across  the  lipid  
bilayer. Two connections link the R1 and RO motors. A 
centrally located shaft fixed to a ring of transmembrane 
c-subunits extends through the middle of R1. Two periph-
eral stalks anchor R1 to the a-subunit, an integral mem-
brane protein located in the membrane bilayer next to 
the ring of c-subunits. The central shaft rotates inside R1, 
and the ring of c-subunits rotates relative to the adjacent 
a-subunit.

Pioneering biochemical studies and a crystal structure 
of  mitochondrial  F-type  ATP  synthase  (Fig.  14.4C)  first 
suggested  that  rotation  of  the  central  shaft  couples 
proton  fluxes  through  the  transmembrane  RO  to  ATP 
synthesis or, alternatively, couples ATP hydrolysis in R1 
to proton pumping by RO. Light microscopy confirmed 
this rotation (Fig. 14.4D). Mitochondrial R1 was attached 
to  a  glass  coverslip,  and  a  tiny  bead  or  actin  filament  
was  attached  to  the  free  end  of  the  central  shaft.  ATP 
hydrolysis  by  R1  drove  the  rotation  of  the  bead 
or filament on the central shaft. If the bead is magnetic, 
a rotating magnetic field can drive the shaft and synthe-
size ATP from adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and phos-
phate. The central shaft rotates up to an astounding 130 

 

A

CHAPTER 14  n  Membrane Pumps 

245

a

b

B

F0

c

δ
ε

t
f
a
h
S

γ

c-subunit

F1

C

Rotor of
c subunits

Stator

Textbook
  icon

D

αATP

βADP

Streptavidin

βADP

Bead

Peripheral
  stalk

αATP

γ

βADP

αATP

Ni-NTA coated glass

His8-tag

FIGURE 14.4  CRYSTAL STRUCTURE AND MECHANICS OF ROTARY ATP SYNTHASES. A–B, Three-dimensional maps of the Thermus 
thermophilus  ATP  synthase  based  on  reconstructions  of  cryoelectron  micrographs.  Color  code:  red,  α-subunits;  yellow,  β-subunits;  blue, 
γ-subunits; green, a-subunits; magenta, c-subunits. (See PDB file 3J0J.) A, Side view of a semitransparent gray map with ribbon diagrams based 
on crystal structures and models of individual subunits. Scale bar is 2.5 nm. B, Side view (top) and top view (bottom) of the a-subunit and ring 
of c-subunits. C, A ribbon diagram of a crystal structure of the bovine mitochondrial ATP synthase viewed from the membrane (bottom) side with 
α-subunits (red), β-subunits (yellow), and the γ-subunit (blue). All three α-subunits have a bound ATP. The β-subunits are empty or bind ATP or 
adenosine  diphosphate  (ADP).  (See  PDB  file  1BMF.)  D,  An  experiment  showing  ATP-driven  rotation  of  the  γ-subunit  relative  to  the  α-  and 
β-subunits. Streptavidin and biotin link the γ-subunit to a bead, which is observed to rotate by light microscopy. (For reference, see Lau WC, 
Rubinstein  JL.  Subnanometre-resolution  structure  of  the  intact  Thermus  thermophilus  H+-driven  ATP  synthase.  Nature.  2011;481:214–218; 
Abrahams JP, Leslie AGW, Lutter R, Walker JE. Structure at 2.8 Å resolution of F1-ATPase from bovine heart mitochondria. Nature. 1994;370:621–
628; and Nishizaka T, Oiwa K, Noji H, et al. Chemomechanical coupling in F1-ATPase revealed by simultaneous observation of nucleotide kinetics 
and rotation. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2004;11:142–148.)

times per second (8000 rpm) in mitochondria and twice 
as fast in chloroplasts.

In  the  simplest  case,  bacterial  R1  consists  of  five 
different  types  of  polypeptides  in  the  ratio  α3β3γΔε. 
Mitochondrial  R1  has  additional  subunits.  The  α-  and 
β-subunits  are  folded  similarly  and  arranged  alternately 
like six segments of an orange. The γ-subunit is a long, 
antiparallel,  α-helical  coiled-coil  forming  the  central 
shaft. This hydrophobic shaft fits tightly in a hydropho-
bic  sleeve  in  the  middle  of  the  hexamer  of  α-  and 
β-subunits.  To  accommodate  the  asymmetrical  shaft, 
each of the surrounding α- and β-subunits has a slightly 
different  conformation.  Each  α-  and  β-subunit  has  an 
adenine nucleotide-binding site at the interface with its 
neighbor. ATP bound stably to α-subunits does not par-
ticipate in catalysis. Nucleotide-binding sites on β-subunits 
catalyze ATP synthesis and hydrolysis.

Mechanical rotation of the γ-subunit inside R1 is tightly 
coupled to ATP synthesis or hydrolysis (Fig. 14.5). A flux 
of protons through the RO complex produces clockwise 
(when viewed from RO) rotation inside the αβ hexamer, 
like the camshaft in a motor. The mechanical force pro-
duced by the asymmetric camshaft drives conformational 
changes in β-subunits that synthesize ATP. When operat-
ing  in  the  other  direction,  ATP  hydrolysis  drives  coun-
terclockwise  rotation  of  the  shaft,  which  can  pump 
protons through RO.

During ATP hydrolysis or synthesis, catalytic sites on 
the β-subunits participate cooperatively in a sequence of 
steps coupled to rotation of the central shaft (Fig. 14.5). 

The β-subunits are in one of three conformations—open, 
loose,  and  tight—designating  a  range  of  affinities  for 
adenine  nucleotides.  At  any  given  time  an  R1  molecule 
has  one  open  β-subunit,  one  loose  β-subunit,  and  one 
tight  β-subunit.  All  three  subunits  pass  in  lock  step 
through the sequence of three states as the rotor turns.
When  hydrolyzing  ATP,  the  rate-limiting  step  is  ATP 
binding  to  the  open  β-subunit.  The  energy  from  ATP 
binding  causes  a  conformational  change  driving  an  80- 
degree counterclockwise rotation of γ-subunit in less than 
a millisecond. This favors ATP hydrolysis on the β-subunit 
that just bound ATP. After approximately 2 milliseconds, 
another  reaction,  possibly  ADP  dissociation  from  the  
third  β-subunit,  rapidly  rotates  the  γ-subunit  another  40 
degrees, completing a 120-degree step of the motor.

When  synthesizing  ATP,  the  β-subunit  in  the  loose 
conformation binds ADP and inorganic phosphate (Pi). 
Energy provided by a 120-degree rotation of the γ-subunit 
converts  this  site  to  the  tight  conformation,  which 
creates an environment in the active site where ADP and 
Pi  spontaneously  form  ATP.  Energy  from  a  subsequent 
120-degree rotation of the shaft drives the tight state to 
the open state, which allows ATP to dissociate.

The membrane-embedded RO complexes are a second 
rotary motor consisting of 12 to 18 protein subunits in 
the ratio ab2c8–15 in bacteria (Fig. 14.4B). The mitochon-
drial FO complex has a single “b” subunit with two trans-
membrane  strands.  The  c-subunits  are  hairpins  of  two 
α-helices with a conserved residue (either aspartic acid 
or  glutamic  acid  depending  on  the  species).  Eight  to 

246 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

A. F1-ATP synthase

B. Mechanism of ATP synthesis

OUTSIDE BACTERIAL CELL
OR INTERMEMBRANE SPACE

H+

CROSS SECTION

β

γ

β

β
ADP + Pi
binding

γ

β

β

ADP

+
Pi 

a

F0

H+

b

ε

c

γ

β

ADP
+ Pi

ATP

α

BACTERIAL CYTOPLASM
OR MITOCHONDRIAL MATRIX

δ

α

ATP formed
from ADP + Pi

F1

F

120º

ATP release

F

ATP

FIGURE 14.5  A–B, Model of the mitochondrial FOF1-ATP synthase. FO is the oligomycin-sensitive factor. F1 is the adenosine triphosphatase 
(ATPase). Proton transfer across the membrane can drive ATP synthesis, or ATP hydrolysis can pump protons across the membrane. The text 
explains the reversible ATPase reaction. ADP, adenosine diphosphate; Pi, phosphate. (Data from Elston T, Wang H, Oster G. Energy transduction 
in ATP synthase. Nature. 1998;391:510–513.)

15 c-subunits  (depending  on  the  species)  form  a  ring 
with the acidic residue either exposed to the surround-
ing lipids or buried at the interface with the a-subunit. 
The  single  a-subunit  is  closely  apposed  to  the  ring  of 
c-subunits and linked to the α- and β-subunits by one of 
three peripheral shafts. The a-subunit consists of multi-
ple α-helices that form two half channels for protons to 
move  across  the  membrane.  Other  protein  subunits 
attach  the  ring  of  c-subunits  to  the  γ-subunit  camshaft 
that rotates inside the ring of α- and β-subunits.

The RO motor couples proton translocation to rotation 
during  ATP  synthesis  as  follows.  The  conserved  acidic 
residues of the c-subunits (Glu63 in Thermus, Asp61 in 
mitochondria)  in  contact  with  the  interior  of  the  lipid 
bilayer  are  protonated,  so  they  are  uncharged.  As  a 
c-subunit  rotates  into  contact  with  the  a-subunit,  the 
proton on Glu63 escapes through the first half channel 
into  the  bacterium  or  mitochondrion.  Thermal  motion 
drives random Brownian motions of the c-ring, but the 
negatively  charged  side  chain  of  Glu63  favors  rotation 
that brings it into alignment with the second half channel 
of the a-subunit. There a proton enters from outside the 
bacterium  or  mitochondrion  and  neutralizes  the  car-
boxyl  group.  The  number  of  protons  transported  for 
each  ATP  synthesized  depends  on  the  number  of 
c-subunits, but ranges from three to five.

The reactions in the RO and R1 complexes are tightly 
coupled.  For  example,  reaction  of  the  chemical  DCCD 
(dicyclohexylcarbodiimide)  with  the  conserved  acidic 

residue on a single c-subunit blocks proton conduction 
and  ATP  hydrolysis  or  synthesis.  All  the  transitions  are 
reversible  in  bacterial  ATP  synthases.  Given  a  higher 
concentration  of  protons  outside  than  inside,  protons 
pass  through  RO  and  drive  the  synthesis  of  ATP.  Con-
versely,  ATP  hydrolysis  by  R1  can  drive  protons  out  of 
the cell when required.

Evolutionary Origins and Diversity of Rotary 
Adenosine Triphosphatases
The  original  rotary  ATPase  in  the  common  ancestor  of 
life  on  earth  may  have  evolved  from  enzymes  called 
helicases consisting of a hexamer of subunits structurally 
homologous to the β/B subunits of rotary ATPases. These 
helicases use energy from ATP hydrolysis to thread DNA 
or  RNA  through  the  channel  in  the  middle  of  the 
hexamer.  Some  helicases  associate  with  channels  that 
could have been the precursor of the RO. No example of 
the  primordial  enzyme  still  exists  and  the  initial  path-
ways of divergence are unclear, but the rotary ATPases 
diversified  into  three  distinct  families:  F-type  ATP  syn-
thases in many bacteria and eukaryotic mitochondria and 
chloroplasts; reversible A-type ATPases in other bacteria 
and archaea; and eukaryotic V-type proton pumps. The 
eukaryotic V-type pumps likely came from the Archaeal 
progenitor,  but  diverged  in  structure  and  became  spe-
cialized  to  pump  protons.  Two  versions  of  F-type  ATP 
synthases came to eukaryotes with the symbiotic bacte-
ria that gave rise to mitochondria and chloroplasts.

 

CHAPTER 14  n  Membrane Pumps 

247

F-Type Adenosine Triphosphate Synthases
F-type ATPases of mitochondria, chloroplasts, and bacte-
rial  plasma  membranes  (Figs.  14.4C  and  14.5)  produce 
most of the world’s ATP during aerobic metabolism (see 
Chapter  19).  Their  architectures  resemble  the  A-  and 
V-type  ATPases,  but  only  a  single  peripheral  stalk  con-
nects the R1 and RO complexes. Redox-driven and light-
driven  pumps  create  proton  gradients  to  drive  ATP 
synthesis  by  F-type  ATPases  (see  Figs.  19.5  and  19.8). 
Purified F-type ATPases are freely reversible, and when 
required  by  circumstances,  many  bacteria  use  their 
F-type  ATPase  to  produce  a  proton  gradient  at  the 
expense  of  ATP  hydrolysis.  Eukaryotes  have  elaborate 
mechanisms to prevent futile cycles of ATP synthesis and 
hydrolysis. For example, an inhibitory protein binds the 
mitochondrial ATP synthase and prevents ATP hydroly-
sis, if the oxygen supply required to generate the proton 
gradient is compromised.

V-Type Rotary Adenosine Triphosphatases
V-type  ATPases  are  composed  of  subunits  homologous 
to other rotary ATPases (Fig. 14.6). The A- and B-subunits 
are homologs of F-type α- and β-subunits. Three periph-
eral  stalks  anchor  the  channel  forming  an  a-subunit  to 
the hexamer of A- and B-subunits. An ancient gene dupli-
cation made the c-subunits of eukaryotic V-type pumps 

twice  as  large  as  those  of  F-type  ATPases  and  archaeal 
A-type ATPases. Each of 10 c-subunits has four α-helices 
with one conserved aspartic acid residue to transfer the 
proton.  Accordingly,  a  V-type  ATPase  typically  hydro-
lyzes three ATPs to transport 10 protons.

V-type pumps acidify the interiors of many membrane-
bound  compartments  in  eukaryotic  cells,  including  
the Golgi apparatus (see Chapter 21), secretory vesicles, 
clathrin-coated  vesicles,  endosomes,  lysosomes  (see  
Fig. 22.15), and plant vacuoles. The acidic pH promotes 
ligand  dissociation  from  receptors  in  endosomes  and 
activates  lysosomal  hydrolases,  as  well  as  many  other 
reactions  (see  Fig.  22.15).  Proton  gradients  created 
across these internal membranes also provide the energy 
source  to  drive  H+-coupled  transport  of  other  solutes 
by carriers, such as the uptake of neurotransmitters by 
synaptic  vesicles  (see  Figs.  17.8D  and  17.9D).  V-type 
pumps  are  also  present  in  the  plasma  membranes  of  
cells specialized to secrete protons, such as osteoclasts 
(see Fig. 32.6), macrophages, and kidney tubule interca-
lated cells.

A-Type Rotary Adenosine Triphosphatases
Archaea  and  some  bacteria  have  A-type  ATP  synthases 
(Fig. 14.4A–B) powered by gradients of protons or Na+ 
ions.  Lipid  bilayers  are  less  permeable  to  Na+  than  H+, 

A. V1-ATPase
EM surface of
Vph1 stator

TOP VIEW 50% reduced

B

Atomic
structures

Stator

VACUOLE LUMEN
OR OUTSIDE CELL

H+

C

E

S
h
a

f
t

D

B

A

Rotor of
c subunits

E

C

D

Peripheral
stalks

ATP

ADP
+ Pi

A

A

B

V0

Vph1

H+

V1

CYTOPLASM

FIGURE  14.6  STRUCTURE  OF  THE  BUDDING  YEAST  V-TYPE  ADENOSINE  TRIPHOSPHATASE.  A–B,  Side  views  of  a  space-filling 
three-dimensional model from two points of view based on reconstructions from cryoelectron micrographs. The stator subunit is shown as a light 
blue surface view of the electron microscopic density. The subunits are color coded and their names are indicated by letters. Inset, Top view of 
the stator subunit and a ring of 10 C-subunits, each with four transmembrane helices. B, Mechanism of the V-type pump. ATP hydrolysis rotates 
the central shaft and pumps protons across the membrane through the stator and C-subunits. (For reference, see Zhao J, Benlekbir S, Rubinstein 
JL. Electron cryomicroscopy observation of rotational states in a eukaryotic V-ATPase. Nature. 2015;521:241–245.)

248 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

which  may  avoid  dissipating  energy  in  some  environ-
ments. These enzymes have two peripheral stalks.

2Ca-E1 conformer

P-Type Cation Pumps: E1E2-Adenosine 
Triphosphatases
All  living  organisms  depend  on  P-type  ATPases  (Table 
14.2)  to  pump  cations  across  membranes.  Their  name 
comes from the fact that they use a high-energy covalent 
β-aspartyl  phosphate  intermediate.  They  are  also 
called E1E2-ATPases from a description of the conforma-
tional  changes  that  they  undergo  during  the  course  of 
their mechanism.

Eukaryotic  P-type  ATPases  generate  primary  ion  gra-
dients across the plasma membrane that are required for 
the function of ion channels (see Chapter 16) and most 
cation-coupled  transport  mediated  by  carrier  proteins 
(see Chapter 15). Producing these primary ion gradients 
is expensive, consuming about one-third of the human 
body’s energy. In animal cells, Na+K+-ATPase produces 
the primary gradients of Na+ and K+. In plants and fungi, 
the  functional  homolog  H+-ATPase  generates  a  proton 
gradient.  Other  eukaryotic  P-type  ATPases  acidify  the 
stomach and clear the cytoplasm of the second messen-
ger, Ca2+ (see Fig. 26.12). Bacterial P-type ATPases scav-
enge  K+  and  Mg2+  from  the  medium  and  export  Ca2+, 
Cu2+, and toxic heavy metals. Most P-type ATPases pump 
cations, but the P4 class (flippases) move lipids from one 
side of a membrane to the other (see Chapter 13).

The best understood P-type ATPase is the sarco(endo)
plasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase (SERCA1), which pumps 
Ca2+ from the cytoplasm into the endoplasmic reticulum 
(Fig. 14.7). ATP hydrolysis provides energy to move Ca2+ 
across the membrane up a steep concentration gradient. 
The mechanism is understood in detail, thanks to exten-
sive biochemical analysis and crystal structures of all the 
chemical  intermediates  along  the  pathway  (Fig.  14.8). 
This thorough analysis was possible because the enzyme 
is  abundant  in  the  sarcoplasmic  reticulum  of  skeletal 
muscle (see Fig. 39.13), allowing it to be purified in large 
quantities.

The Ca2+-ATPase has 10 α-helices that cross the mem-
brane bilayer and bind two Ca2+ ions side by side in the 
middle  of  the  membrane.  The  globular  region  in  the 
cytoplasm  consists  of  three  domains.  The  N-domain 
binds ATP and transfers its γ-phosphate to aspartic acid 
351 (Asp351) in the P-domain. The A-domain transmits 
large conformational changes in the cytoplasmic domains 
to  six  of  the  transmembrane  helices,  which  alternate 
between  two  conformations.  In  the  E1  conformation 
cytoplasmic Ca2+ has access to binding sites among the 
transmembrane  helices  (Fig.  14.8A).  The  E2  conforma-
tion  opens  the  Ca2+  binding  sites  to  the  lumen  of  the 
endoplasmic reticulum (Fig. 14.8B). Each step along the 
pathway—Ca2+  binding  on  the  cytoplasmic  side,  ATP 
binding, phosphorylation of the enzyme, dissociation of 

N domain

ATP binding site

Phosphorylation site

D351

A domain

N

P domain

CYTOPLASM

C

ER LUMEN

M domain

Ca2+ pumped
into lumen

FIGURE  14.7  STRUCTURE  OF  A  P-TYPE  ADENOSINE  TRI-
PHOSPHATASE PUMP. Crystal structure of sarcoendoplasmic reticu-
lum  calcium–ATPase  (SERCA)  from  skeletal  muscle  in  the  2Ca-E1 
conformation with two Ca2+ ions bound among four of the 10 trans-
membrane  helices  near  the  middle  of  the  membrane  bilayer.  In  the 
cytoplasm,  the  N-domain  binds  nucleotide  (ATP)  and  transfers  the 
γ-phosphate  to  Asp351  (D351)  in  the  P-domain.  (For  reference,  see 
PDB file 1SU4 and Toyoshima C, Nakasako M, Nomura H, Ogawa H. 
Crystal  structure  of  the  calcium  pump  of  sarcoplasmic  reticulum  at 
2.6 Å resolution. Nature. 2000;405:647–655.)

ADP,  release  of  Ca2+  into  the  lumen,  and  hydrolysis  of 
the β-aspartyl phosphate intermediate—is linked confor-
mational changes in both the cytoplasmic domains and 
the six transmembrane helices. The transition between 
the E1 and E2 conformations involves an “occluded” state 
in which the bound Ca2+ is not accessible on either side 
of the membrane. This occluded state allows the pump 
to  transport  against  a  large  concentration  gradient 
without a leak.

Because the cycle transfers two Ca2+ into the lumen 
and two H+ out, it generates an electrical potential (see 
Chapter  16).  In  the  steady  state,  the  Ca2+  gradient  is 
maintained, but the H+ gradient dissipates, owing to H+ 
permeability across the membrane and to the buffering 
capacity of the lumen. All reactions in the pathway are 
reversible,  so  a  large  gradient  of  Ca2+  across  the  mem-
brane can drive the synthesis of ATP, although this does 
not happen in cells.

Two mechanisms regulate the SERCA2 Ca-ATPase in 
the  heart.  Covalent  addition  of  SUMO  (small  ubiquitin-
like  modifier),  a  small  protein  related  to  ubiquitin  (see 
Fig  23.2),  to  two  lysines  is  required  for  full  activity.  
Phospholamban,  a  small  accessory  subunit  with  one  
transmembrane  helix,  inhibits  SERCA2  activity.  Cyclic 
adenosine  monophosphate  (AMP)-protein  kinase  phos-
phorylates  phospholamban,  overcoming  this  inhibition 
and stimulating calcium pumping (see Chapter 39).

 

CHAPTER 14  n  Membrane Pumps 

249

A. Reaction mechanics
CYTOPLASM

 3 × 1012 M-2
2 Ca2+ 2 H+

105 M-1
AT

Net

results
2 H+

7 × 10-4 M
ADP

Conformational change closes

cytoplasmic gate for Ca2+

0.3

2 H • E1

2 Ca • E1

2 Ca • E1 • AT

2 Ca • E1~   • ADP 

2 Ca • E1~

2 H • E2

   i
10-2 M

LUMEN OF ER

2 H • E2 •

1

2 H • E2~

2 Ca • E2~

2 Ca2+
2 H+
 3 × 10-6 M2

2 Ca2+ O4

2–

B. Ribbon diagrams of the intermediates in the enzyme cycle

ATP

Mg2+

2 Ca2+

AD

ATP

Mg2+

Mg2+

Ca2+

2 Ca • E1

2 Ca • E1 • AT

2 Ca • E1~   • ADP 

2 Ca • E2~

2 H • E2

Ca2+

2 H+

FIGURE  14.8  MECHANISM  OF  THE  SARCOPLASMIC  RETICULUM  CALCIUM–ATPASE  (SERCA).  A,  Biochemical  pathway.  The  E 
stands for enzyme, having two conformations: E1 and E2. E1 has the Ca2+-binding site oriented toward the cytoplasm. E2 has the Ca2+-binding 
site oriented toward the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum. Ca2+ binds E1 on the cytoplasmic side. Subsequent binding of ATP and phosphoryla-
tion of the enzyme drive the enzyme toward the E2 state and transport Ca2+ up a steep concentration gradient into the lumen of the endoplasmic 
reticulum. Dephosphorylation of the enzyme favors a return to the E1 state. B, Ribbon diagrams of structures along the biochemical pathway. 
Conformational changes are coupled to ATP hydrolysis and transport of Ca2+. Starting on the left side, the pump without bound Ca2+ or ATP 
vacillates between the E2 and E1 conformations, alternatively exposing the Ca2+-binding sites on the two sides of the membrane. If Ca2+ ions are 
available in the cytoplasm, such as after activation of muscle (see Fig. 39.15), they bind cooperatively to the E1 conformation with micromolar 
affinity. Ca2+ binding favors Mg-ATP binding to the N-domain and striking conformational changes that rotate the N-domain and close a gate 
between the bound Ca2+ and the cytoplasm when the A-domain pulls on a transmembrane helix. This conformation with the γ-phosphate of ATP 
close to the side chain of Asp351 allows formation of the phosphoenzyme intermediate. The equilibrium constant for phosphorylation is near 
unity, so most of the energy from ATP hydrolysis is stored in a high-energy conformation of the protein. Then ADP (adenosine diphosphate) dis-
sociates resulting in a rotation of the A-domain that moves several transmembrane helices to expose the Ca2+-binding sites to the lumen of the 
endoplasmic reticulum and reduces the affinity for Ca2+ by orders of magnitude. Thus Ca2+ dissociates into the lumen, completing its uphill transfer 
from the cytoplasm. Hydrolysis of the phosphorylated intermediate and dissociation of phosphate reverse the conformational changes in both 
the cytoplasmic and transmembrane domains, completing the cycle. (For reference, see PDB files 1SU4, 1T5S, 1T5T, 1WPG, and 1IWO and 
Toyoshima C, Nomura H, Tsuda T. Lumenal gating mechanism revealed in calcium pump crystal structures with phosphate analogues. Nature. 
2004;432:361–368;  and  Soerensen  T,  Moeller  JV,  Nissen  P.  Phosphoryl  transfer  and  calcium  ion  occlusion  in  the  calcium  pump.  Science. 
2004;304:1672–1675.)

Other P-type ATPases consist of structurally homolo-
gous  α-subunits  with  large  cytoplasmic  domains  and  a 
minimum  of  six  transmembrane  helices.  Eukaryotic 
P-type ATPases, such as the Na+K+-ATPase, have 10 trans-
membrane helices. These pumps work the same way as 
the  Ca2+-ATPase,  but  with  adaptations  to  pump  other 
ions.  For  example,  the  E1  conformation  of  the  Na+K+-
ATPase picks up three Na+ from the cytoplasm and the 
P-E2 conformation releases these Na+ sequentially outside 
the cell. Binding of two extracellular K+ leads to dephos-
phorylation of the enzyme and results in the occlusion 
of K+ in the KE2 conformation. ATP binding releases this 

K+ on the cytoplasmic side and regenerates the E1 con-
formation,  so  the  cycle  can  start  over  again.  An  extra 
50-kD β-subunit with a single transmembrane helix and 
a glycosylated extracellular globular domain is required 
for  both  transport  and  intracellular  trafficking  of  the 
Na+K+-ATPase and H+K+-ATPase.

P-type ATPases are involved in human diseases. Muta-
tions in the SERCA1 Ca2+-ATPase cause muscle stiffness 
and  cramps.  Malfunctions  of  the  SERCA2  contribute  to 
heart  failure.  Drugs  called  cardiac  glycosides  can 
strengthen the heartbeat by inhibiting the cardiac isoform 
of Na+K+-ATPase (see Fig. 39.22 for details). These drugs, 

250 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

originally  derived  from  foxglove  plants,  were  the  first 
used to treat congestive heart failure, but they are quite 
toxic.  Mutations  in  Cu2+-ATPases  cause  two  inherited 
diseases:  Menkes  syndrome,  in  which  patients  are 
copper-deficient  owing  to  impaired  intestinal  absorp-
tion,  and  Wilson  disease,  in  which  the  inability  to 
remove copper from the liver is toxic. Omeprazole and 
related drugs are used to treat ulcers by inhibiting gastric 
H+K+-ATPase.

Adenosine Triphosphate–Binding  
Cassette Transporters
ABC transporters are found in all known organisms, so 
the founding gene must have originated in the common 
ancestor  of  all  living  things.  They  are  the  largest  and 
most diverse family of ATP-powered pumps (Table 14.2). 
For  example,  ABC  transporters  are  the  largest  gene 
family in the colon bacterium Escherichia coli. Similarly, 
the  genome  of  baker’s  yeast  encodes  at  least  30  ABC 
transporters,  compared  with  16  P-type  ATPases,  one 
F-type  ATPase,  and  one  V-type  ATPase.  In  eukaryotes 
particular  family  members  are  located  in  the  plasma 
membrane,  endoplasmic  reticulum,  mitochondria  and, 
most likely, other membranes.

Most  ABC  transporters  are  specific  for  one  or  a  few 
related substrates, but the family as a whole has an enor-
mous  range  of  substrates,  including  inorganic  ions, 
sugars,  amino  acids,  lipids,  complex  polysaccharides, 
peptides, and even proteins. Specialized members of the 
family act as ion channels (eg, the cystic fibrosis trans-
membrane regulator [CFTR]) or regulate other mem-
brane proteins, such as the sulfonylurea receptor.

ABC  transporters  have  a  modular  design  with  two 
domains that cross the membrane and two cytoplasmic 
domains that hydrolyze ATP (Figs. 14.9 and 14.10). Each 
transmembrane domain consists of a bundle of α-helices 
that  spans  the  bilayer:  typically  six  times  but  up  to  

10 times in some examples. The sequences of the trans-
membrane  domains  have  diverged  considerably  to 
accommodate  a  range  of  diverse  substrates.  The  
structures  of  the  nucleotide  binding  domains  are  more 
conserved,  including  two  sequences  in  the  nucleotide-
binding  domain  that  give  the  family  its  name  (ATP- 
binding  cassette).  The  Walker  A  motif  (GXXGXGKS/T, 
where X is any residue) is also called a P loop because  
it  binds  the  γ-phosphate  of  ATP  in  ABC  transporters 
and  other  ATP-binding  proteins.  The  Walker  B  motif 
(RX6–8F4D, where F is any hydrophobic residue) interacts 
with the Mg2+ bound to ATP. Approximately 100 residues 
typically separate motif B from motif A in the polypep-
tide. The interface between the pair of nucleotide-binding 
domains forms two active sites for ATP hydrolysis.

The  four  independently  folded  domains  of  an  ABC 
transporter can be in a single polypeptide or as many as 
four different subunits (Fig. 14.9). The single poly peptide 
comprising  some  vertebrate  ABC  transporters  includes 
an  additional  cytoplasmic  R-domain  for  regulation  by 
phosphorylation.

form  two  chambers 

Crystal  structures  of  several  ABC  transporters  and 
analysis  of  the  enzyme  mechanism  suggest  how  ABC 
transporters  might  work  (Fig.  14.10).  The  two  trans-
membrane  subunits 
for  the  
substrate.  In  one  conformation  a  chamber  lined  by 
hydrophobic  side  chains  is  open  outside  the  cell  (the 
periplasmic  space  in  the  case  of  prokaryotes)  (Fig. 
14.10A). A gate composed of conserved residues blocks 
access  of  the  substrate  to  the  cytoplasm.  In  the  other 
conformation,  the  chamber  is  open  to  the  cytoplasm 
(Fig.  14.10B).  Each  nucleotide-binding  cytoplasmic 
domain partners with a transmembrane subunit and the 
other nucleotide-binding domain. Two bound ATP mol-
ecules link the nucleotide-binding subunits together.

Prokaryotes  often  use  a  periplasmic  subunit  that  
binds  a  specific  substrate  and  delivers  it  to  the  pump. 
Because  the  substrate  binding  proteins  are  asymmetric,  

OppBCDF

HisQMP

RbsAC

MsbA

BtuCD

TAP

MDR

CFTR

B. Eukaryotic

A. Bacterial

Transmembrane
   domains
ATP binding and
regulatory domains

Cargo

Oligopeptide

Histidine

Ribose

Lipids

Vitamin B12

MHC peptides

Drugs

R

Peptides

2 different
2 different

2 different
2 same

2 different
1 chain

2 same
   chains

2 same
2 same

2 different
   chains

1 chain

1 chain

FIGURE 14.9  DOMAIN ARCHITECTURE OF ADENOSINE TRIPHOSPHATE BINDING CASSETTE (ABC) TRANSPORTERS. A, Bacterial 
transporters. B, Eukaryotic transporters. Each transporter has two ATP-binding domains in the cytoplasm (purple circles) and two transmembrane 
domains, each consisting of 6 to 10 α-helices (blue or pink squares). The cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator (CFTR) has an additional regula-
tory (R) domain in the cytoplasm. The four domains required for activity may be four separate polypeptides or may be incorporated in several 
ways into polypeptides with two or four domains. MHC, major histocompatibility complex. 

 

A

CHAPTER 14  n  Membrane Pumps 

251

B

BtuF

BtuC

BtuD

C. Vitamin B12 pump
     mechanism

BtuF with bound

vitamin B12
binds to BtuC

BtuF

B12

BtuC

BtuD

ATP

ATP binds between two BtuD
subunits opening pore to outside

ATP hydrolysis and

product release

dissociates the BtuD
domains and opens
the pore towards 

the cytoplasm

ADP + Pi

Vitamin B12 escapes
into cytoplasm

FIGURE 14.10  STRUCTURE OF TWO ADENOSINE TRIPHOSPHATE BINDING CASSETTE (ABC) TRANSPORTERS AND PROPOSED 
MECHANISM OF TRANSPORT. A, Ribbon diagram of the crystal structure of the Escherichia coli BtuCDF vitamin B12 transporter with bound 
adenylyl-imidodiphosphate (AMP-PNP). Two identical BtuC subunits (blue) traverse the membrane with a central cavity open to the outside. Two 
identical BtuD subunits (red) bind and hydrolyze ATP. A periplasmic protein BtuF binds and delivers vitamin B12 to BtuCD. (See PDB file 4F13.) 
B, Ribbon diagram of the Archaeoglobus fulgidus of ModBC molybdate transporter without bound nucleotide and the cavity between the trans-
membrane domains of MobB open to the cytoplasm. C, Proposed mechanism of vitamin B12 transport: BtuCD begins on the far right free of 
both  vitamin  B12  and  ATP;  two  ATP  molecules  bind  between  the  BtuD  subunits,  bringing  them  together  and  opening  the  cavity  between  the 
transmembrane subunits to the outside; BtuF with bound vitamin B12 binds to BtuC and delivers vitaminB12 to BtuC; after ATP hydrolysis, adenosine 
diphosphate (ADP) and inorganic phosphate (Pi) dissociate and separation of the BtuD domains is coupled to conformational changes that open 
the gate of BtuC transiently, releasing vitamin B12 into the cytoplasm. (For reference, see Hollenstein K, Frei DC, Locher KP. Structure of an ABC 
transporter in complex with its binding protein. Nature. 2007;446:213–216; and Korkhov VM, Mireku SA, Locher KP. Structure of AMP-PNP-
bound vitamin B12 transporter BtuCD-F. Nature. 2012;490:367–372.)

they  interact  differently  with  the  two  transmembrane 
domains.

ATP binding and hydrolysis drive a cycle of conforma-
tional changes that allows a substrate to bind on one side 
of the membrane and to escape on the other side (Fig. 
14.10C). The most complete set of structures is available 
for  the  bacterial  vitamin  B12  transporter  BtuCD.  ATP 
binding  promotes  association  of  the  BtuD  subunits, 
changing their orientations and opening a cavity in the 
transmembrane  BtuC  subunits  facing  the  periplasm.  A 
BtuF protein carrying vitamin B12 binds and unloads the 
substrate into the open cavity. ATP hydrolysis and release 
of  ADP  and  Pi  cause  dissociation  of  the  cytoplasmic 
domains resulting in a conformational change that tran-
siently opens a pathway for vitamin B12 to exit into the 
cytoplasm.  Two  ATPs  are  hydrolyzed  for  each  vitamin 
transported.

ABC  transporters  with  similar  mechanisms  include 
bacterial  permeases  that  pump  nutrients  into  the  cell, 
and  TAP1  and  TAP2  that  pump  peptide  fragments  of 
antigenic  proteins  into  the  lumen  of  the  endoplasmic 
reticulum. Some substrates of ABC transporters are mem-
brane bound. For example, the E.  coli “flippase” MsbA 
moves  phospholipids  from  one  leaflet  of  the  bilayer  to 
the other, whereas yeast STE6 transports a small, prenyl-
ated pheromone peptide out of the cell.

The  multiple  drug  resistance  proteins  (MDR1, 
MDR2  and  related  proteins)  are  ABC  transporters  that 
provide  a  substantial  challenge  for  cancer  chemother-
apy  (Fig.  14.11).  In  about  half  of  cases  in  which 

Toxic drug

Mutant expresses
high level of MDR

Clone expands

Drug kills most

tumor cells

MDR pumps
out toxic drug

Tumor of drug-resistant
cells continues to grow

in presence of drug

FIGURE  14.11  MULTIPLE  DRUG  RESISTANCE  (MDR)  IN 
CANCER CHEMOTHERAPY. In a population of tumor cells, most are 
sensitive to killing by a chemotherapeutic drug. However, variants that 
express high levels of the ABC transporter, MDR, can clear the cyto-
plasm of the drug. A clone of these variant cells may expand, allowing 
the tumor to grow in the presence of the drug. 

chemotherapy fails to cure a human cancer, the cause is 
the emergence of clones of tumor cells that overexpress 
an MDR. Normal cells use a low level of MDR1 to export 
unknown  natural  substrates,  perhaps  a  steroid,  a  phos-
pholipid,  or  another  hydrophobic  molecule.  MDR  can 
also transport many hydrophobic compounds, including 
some  chemotherapeutic  drugs.  These  drugs  enter  cells 
by crossing the plasma membrane and poison vital cel-
lular  processes.  Cells  that  overexpress  MDR  survive  by 
pumping the drug out of the cell.

The  multiple  drug  resistance  protein  2  (MDR2)  is 
another  unconventional  pump  located  in  the  apical 

252 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

plasma  membrane  of  liver  cells.  It  normally  functions  
as  a  flippase  that  moves  phosphatidylcholine  from  the 
inner  to  the  outer  half  of  the  lipid  bilayer,  perhaps  in 
preparation for secretion in bile.

The vertebrate cystic fibrosis transmembrane conduc-
tance  regulator  (CFTR  [see  Fig.  14.9B])  looks  like  an  
ABC transporter but acts like a channel. It allows Cl− and 
bicarbonate ions to move down their concentration gra-
dients out of the cell. Homology models and mutagenesis 
suggest that the pore conducting these anions is located 
in the middle of the bundle of transmembrane α-helices. 
ATP  binding  and  hydrolysis  by  the  nucleotide-binding 
domains regulate gating of the channel, but the mecha-
nism is incompletely understood. Mutations in CFTR are 
responsible  for  cystic  fibrosis  (see  Fig.  12.4).  Of  more 
than  1000  known  disease-causing  mutations  by  far  the 
most  common  is  deletion  of  phenylalanine  508.  This 
position corresponds to a highly conserved hydrophobic 
residue  in  the  vitamin  B12  transporter  that  is  important 
for interaction of BtuD with BtuC. Mutant ΔF508 CFTR 
folds  very  slowly  and  is  retained  in  the  endoplasmic 
reticulum  (ER)  where  it  is  destroyed,  depriving  the 
plasma  membrane  of  chloride  channel  activity.  Deplet-
ing  Ca2+  from  the  ER  by  inhibiting  the  SERCA  Ca2+-
ATPase  can  apparently  allow  some  ΔF508  CFTR  to 
escape  from  calcium-dependent  chaperones  (see  Fig. 
20.12) and function on the cell surface.

An  unexpected  function  of  an  ABC  transporter 
emerged from work on sulfonylurea drugs used to treat 
forms of diabetes involving inadequate insulin secretion. 
The  sulfonylurea  receptor  (SUR)  is  an  ABC  transporter 
that forms a 4 : 4 complex with Kir6 potassium channel 
subunits (see Fig. 11.2). This complex is an ATP-sensitive 
potassium channel (KATP) that regulates insulin secretion. 
Sulfonylureas activate insulin secretion by inhibiting the 
KATP channel (see Fig. 11.2).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Kaspar Locker and John Rubinstein for sugges-
tions on revisions of this chapter.

SELECTED READINGS

Hollenstein  K,  Dawson  RJ,  Locher  KP.  Structure  and  mechanism  of 
ABC transporter proteins. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2007;17:412-418.
Janas  E,  Hofacker  M,  Chen  M,  et al.  The  ATP  hydrolysis  cycle  of  the 
nucleotide-binding  domain  of  the  mitochondrial  ATP-binding  cas-
sette transporter Mdl1p. J Biol Chem. 2003;278:26862-26869.

Jih KY, Hwang TC. Nonequilibrium gating of CFTR on an equilibrium 

theme. Physiology (Bethesda). 2012;27:351-361.

Junge  W,  Nelson  N.  ATP  synthase.  Annu  Rev  Biochem.  2015;84:

631-657.

Kanai R, Ogawa H, Vilsen B, Cornelius F, Toyoshima C. Crystal struc-
ture of a Na+-bound Na+,K+-ATPase preceding the E1P state. Nature. 
2013;502:201-206.

Kho  C,  Lee  A,  Jeong  D,  et al.  SUMO1-dependent  modulation  of 

SERCA2a in heart failure. Nature. 2011;477:601-605.

Kinosita K Jr, Adachi K, Itoh H. Rotation of F1-ATPase: How an ATP-
driven  molecular  machine  may  work.  Annu  Rev  Biophys  Biomol 
Struct. 2004;33:245-268.

Korkhov VM, Mireku SA, Veprintsev DB, Locher KP. Structure of AMP-
PNP-bound  BtuCD  and  mechanism  of  ATP-powered  vitamin  B12 
transport by BtuCD-F. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2014;21:1097-1099.

Kuhlbrandt  W.  Biology,  structure  and  mechanism  of  P-type  ATPases. 

Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2004;5:282-295.

Lanyi JK. Bacteriorhodopsin. Annu Rev Physiol. 2004;66:665-688.
Lórenz-Fonfría VA, Heberle J. Channelrhodopsin unchained: structure 
and  mechanism  of  a  light-gated  cation  channel.  Biochim  Biophys 
Acta. 2014;1837:626-642.

Mulkidjanian AY, Makarova KS, Galperin MY, Koonin EV. Inventing the 
dynamo machine: the evolution of the F-type and V-type ATPases. 
Nat Rev Microbiol. 2007;5:892-899.

Nichols CG, Singh GK, Grange DK. KATP channels and cardiovascular 

disease: suddenly a syndrome. Circ Res. 2013;112:1059-1072.

Stewart  AG,  Laming  EM,  Sobti  M,  Stock  D.  Rotary  ATPase-dynamic 

molecular machines. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2014;25:40-48.

Toyoshima  C,  Iwasawa  S,  Ogawa  H,  et al.  Crystal  structures  of  the 
calcium pump and sarcolipin in the Mg2+-bound state. Nature. 2013;
495:260-264.

Toyoshima C, Nomura H, Tsuda T. Lumenal gating mechanism revealed 
in  calcium  pump  crystal  structures  with  phosphate  analogues. 
Nature.  2004;432:361-368.  (See  a  movie  of  the  structural  changes 
during  the  ATPase  cycle  at  <https://legacy.wlu.ca/documents/
29450/nature06418-s2.mov>.)

Wickstrand C, Dods R, Royant A, Neutze R. Bacteriorhodopsin: Would 
the real structural intermediates please stand up? Biochim Biophys 
Acta. 2015;1850:536-553.

Winther AM, Bublitz M, Karlsen JL, et al. The sarcolipin-bound calcium 
pump  stabilizes  calcium  sites  exposed  to  the  cytoplasm.  Nature. 
2013;495:265-269.

C H A P T E R 

15 

Membrane Carriers

Carriers  are  integral  membrane  proteins  that  move 

select chemical substrates across all cellular membranes 
(Fig. 15.1). Common substrates for carriers are ions and 
small, soluble organic molecules, but some substrates are 
lipid soluble. The energy to transport substrates comes 
from  electrochemical  gradients  across  the  membrane. 
Some  carriers  transport  substrates  down  concentration 
gradients,  but  others  use  transmembrane  ion  gradients 
created by pumps to transport across a membrane up a 
concentration gradient.

Carriers  are  also  known  as  facilitators,  transporters,  
or  porters.  This  book  uses  “carrier”  because  the  term 
unambiguously identifies them, whereas “transporter” is 
also  used  to  describe  pumps,  leading  to  unnecessary 
confusion.

Basic Carrier Mechanism
Atomic structures of carriers reveal a variety of protein 
folds, so multiple carrier genes must have arisen during 

the early days of life on earth. Remarkably, these proteins 
converged during evolution on a common mechanism.
All  carriers  are  composed  of  bundles  of  transmem-
brane  helices  that  form  a  binding  site  for  one  or  more 
substrates  in  the  middle  of  the  membrane  bilayer  (Fig. 
15.1). Carrier proteins have at least two conformations:  
one  where  the  substrate  has  access  to  the  binding  site 
from outside the cell and one where access is available 
from  inside  the  cell.  Both  conformations  have  tight  
seals formed by hydrophobic residues that keep solutes 
from  crossing  the  membrane.  Some  carriers  have  an  
additional occluded conformation, where the substrate-
binding  site  is  closed  on  both  sides  of  the  membrane.  
By alternating  between  the  open-out  and  open-in  con-
formations,  the  carrier  provides  a  pathway  across  the 
membrane.

Carriers  work  step  by  step  like  enzymes,  binding  
substrates  on  one  side  of  membranes,  undergoing  a  
conformational  change  that  reorients  this  binding  site, 
and  releasing  substrate  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 

Glucose

XyIE

GLUT1

Open-out

Open-in

FIGURE 15.1  TRANSPORT BY A CARRIER PROTEIN. Structural basis for transport of glucose (green) across the plasma membrane by 
a carrier protein. Ribbon diagrams show the structures of the glucose carriers XylE with the glucose binding site open outside the cell and glucose 
transporter  1  (GLUT1)  with  the  glucose  binding  site  open  to  the  cytoplasm.  The  diagrams  show  how  glucose  moves  down  its  concentration 
gradient by binding to open-out conformation and being released into the cytoplasm by the open-in conformation. The XylE H+-glucose symporter 
is shown as a model for the open-out conformation of the GLUT1 uniporter. (For reference, see Protein Data Bank [PDB; www.rcsb.org] files 
4GC0 and 4PYP and Deng D, Xu C, Sun P, et al. Crystal structure of the human glucose transporter GLUT1. Nature. 2014;510:121–125.)

 253

254 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

membrane.  In  many  cases  a  simple  rocking  motion, 
shown diagrammatically in Fig. 15.1, explains this alter-
nating  access  mechanism.  The  conformational  change 
that moves substrates across the membrane is rate limit-
ing  (on  the  order  of  0.1  to  1000  events  per  second), 
whereas channels transfer ions at rates of 106 to 109 s−1 
during the brief times that they open (see Chapter 16).

Three Transport Strategies
Transport  by  carriers  depends  on  energy  provided  by 
gradients of solutes across the membrane (Fig. 15.2). All 
carriers  move  solutes  down  concentration  gradients. 
Remarkably, many carriers transport a second substrate 
up  a  concentration  gradient  powered  by  the  transport 
of another substrate down its electrochemical gradient. 
All carrier-mediated reactions are reversible, so substrate 
concentrations on the two sides determine the rates of 
the  second  order  binding  reactions  and  thus  the  direc-
tion of net transfer across the membrane.

Classic  physiological  experiments  done  well  before 
the first carrier structures were determined in the early 
2000s led to the discovery of the three types of carriers, 
characterized their mechanisms, and even correctly pre-
dicted some of the molecular details (Box 15.1). Carriers 
are  classified  into  three  broad  categories  (Fig.  15.2) 
depending  on  how  transport  is  coupled  to  the  energy 
source:
•  Uniporters  transport  a  single  substrate  across  the 
membrane  and  down  its  electrochemical  gradient, 
hence  the  prefix  “uni-.”  This  reaction  is  also  called 
facilitated  diffusion—facilitated  in  the  sense  that 
the carrier provides a low-resistance pathway across 
a  poorly  permeable  lipid  bilayer.  Nonelectrolytes, 

such as glucose, use uniporters simply to move across 
membranes down a chemical gradient. The substrate 
binding  sites  are  more  fully  occupied  on  the  uphill 
side of the concentration gradient, so the net move-
ment  of  substrate  is  downhill.  When  substrate  con-
centrations are the same on the two sides, exchange 
continues without net movement because the carrier 
is  equally  saturated  on  both  sides  of  the  membrane. 
Glucose  transporter  (GLUT)  carriers  for  glucose  are 
an example of uniporters found in mammalian tissues 
(Fig. 15.1). Movement of charged substrates is influ-
enced  by  the  membrane  potential  and  by  pH  gradi-
ents in the case of weak acids or bases.

•  Antiporters  exchange  two  substrates  in  opposite 
directions across a membrane. Movement of one sub-
strate  down  its  concentration  gradient  drives  the 
other  substrate  up  its  concentration  gradient  (Fig. 
15.2). Antiporters generally exchange like-for-like sub-
strates: cations for cations, anions for anions, sugars 
for  sugars,  and  so  on.  Typically,  the  two  substrates 
compete  for  binding  antiporters,  so  only  one  binds  
at  a  time.  A  bound  substrate  is  required  for  the  
reversible,  conformational  change  that  exposes  the 
substrate-binding  site  on  one  or  the  other  side  of  a 
membrane. These features make transport of two sub-
strates dependent on each other in an obligate fashion. 
For  example,  the  adenine  nucleotide  carrier  (ANC) 
antiporter  exchanges  adenosine  diphosphate  (ADP) 
for  adenosine  triphosphate  (ATP)  across  the  mito-
chondrial inner membrane (Fig. 15.4A).

•  Symporters  allow  two  or  more  substrates  to  move 
together in the same direction across a membrane. A 
concentration  gradient  of  one  substrate,  often  Na+, 
provides the energy to transport the other substrate 

Na+

Glucose

Na+

Ca2+

PRIMARY REACTION

SECONDARY REACTIONS

Sugar

Pump

Na+/K+- ATPase

Uniporter
Glucose
Amino acid

Symporter
Na+/ sugar
Na+/ amino acid
Na+/ Cl–
Na+/ K+/ 2Cl–
Na+/ H2PO4

–   

Na+

Antiporter

Na+/ H+
Na+/ Ca2+
Cl– / HCO3

–

FIGURE 15.2  PRIMARY AND SECONDARY TRANSPORT REACTIONS. An adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-driven pump produces a gradi-
ent of an ion, such as Na+, across a membrane. The triangles represent gradients of Na+ (purple), glucose (green), sugar (blue), and Ca2+ (light 
blue) across the membrane. The Na+ gradient drives secondary transport reactions mediated by carriers. Uniporters allow an ion or other solute 
to move across the membrane down its concentration gradient. Symporters and antiporters couple transport of an ion (Na+ in this example) down 
its concentration gradient with the transport of a solute (glucose or Ca2+ in these examples) up its concentration gradient. Antiporters carry out 
these reactions in succession, picking up Na+ outside, reorienting, dissociating Na+ inside, picking up Ca2+ inside, reorienting, and releasing Ca2+ 
outside. ATPase, adenosine triphosphatase. 

 

CHAPTER 15  n  Membrane Carriers 

255

BOX 15.1  Discovery of Carrier Proteins and Mechanisms

Classic  experiments  with  GLUT1  in  the  plasma  membrane 
of  red  blood  cells  led  to  the  carrier  concept  in  the  1950s. 
Human red blood cells are convenient to use, because they 
express  high  concentrations  of  GLUT  carriers.  The  time 
course  of  radioactive  glucose  accumulation  (Fig.  15.3A) 
showed that transport is stereospecific for D-glucose and that 
net transport stops when the concentrations of D-glucose are 
equal inside and out. Slow equilibration of L-glucose across 
the membrane probably represents passive diffusion across 
the  lipid  bilayer,  as  this  rate  can  be  predicted  from  the  
solubility  of  glucose  in  membrane  lipids.  This  experiment 
showed that something in the membrane accelerates the rate 
of  glucose  entry,  giving  rise  to  the  concept  of  facilitated 
diffusion.

The dependence of the initial rate of D-glucose entry on 
its  concentration  (Fig.  15.3B)  provided  evidence  for  a  spe-
cific, saturable, carrier molecule in the membrane. Because 
the rate of D-glucose entry includes both diffusion across the 
bilayer and movement through a carrier, the  L-glucose rate 
was used to correct for the rate of diffusion. Once this was 
been done, the rate of facilitated D-glucose entry had a hyper-
bolic  dependence  on  the  concentration  of  D-glucose  (Fig. 
15.3C). This concentration dependence is just like a bimo-
lecular binding reaction (see Fig. 4.2) or the rate of a simple 
enzyme  mechanism  that  depends  on  the  rate  of  substrate 
binding to the enzyme. Thus, the substrate concentration at 
the half-maximal velocity provides an estimate of the affinity 
of the carrier for the substrate. At high substrate concentra-
tions, the substrate-binding sites on the carrier are saturated, 

and  the  rate  plateaus  at  a  maximal  velocity  owing  to  rate-
limiting conformational changes. These enzyme-like proper-
ties, along with the ability to stop facilitated transport with 
protein  inhibitors,  suggest  that  carriers  are  proteins  with 
specific binding sites for their substrates.

Two key experiments (Fig. 15.3D–E) established the sym-
porter concept. The first demonstrated that extracellular Na+ 
was  required  for  membranes  from  intestinal  cells  with  the 
SGLT1 carrier to accumulate D-glucose against a concentra-
tion gradient. This experiment left open the possibility that 
Na+ simply activates the carrier in some way without being 
used  directly  to  drive  glucose  accumulation.  Second,  an 
experiment  with  LacY  demonstrated  that  sugar  and  cation 
move across the membrane together. Not only was a proton 
gradient required for sugar transport, but also a high concen-
tration of another sugar (a nonmetabolizable lactose analog) 
in  the  medium  could  drive  H+  into  the  cell  along  with  the 
sugar. Additional experiments confirmed that the stoichiom-
etry of the reaction was one lactose transported in for every 
H+  transported  in.  (Because  this  transport  reaction  is  not 
electrically neutral, the membrane potential is a factor, and 
another pathway must be available to balance the charge—
eg, by carrying K+ in the opposite direction.) Parallel experi-
ments on plasma membrane vesicles isolated from vertebrate 
kidney cells showed that Na+ moving inward down its elec-
trochemical gradient can carry glucose in with it. When the 
Na+  concentration  is  equal  on  the  two  sides,  the  carrier 
facilitates  the  movement  of  glucose  across  the  membrane 
but not its net accumulation.

Red blood cells + glucose

In = out

D-Glucose

A

n

l
 
]

e
s
o
c
u
G

l

[

B

e

t

a
R

D-Glucose

C

e
c
n
e
r
e

f
f
i

d

 

e

t

a
R

L-Glucose

L-Glucose

Km

D. Intestinal epithelial
  cells + glucose

E. Bacteria + lactose
  analog

Vmax

10

]
t

u
O

[
 
/
 
]

n

I
[

1

Na+ added

7.20

H
p

7.10

+ Substrate

In = out

No Na+

7

+ Detergent

Time

Concentration

Concentration

Time

Time

FIGURE 15.3  EXPERIMENTS THAT REVEALED THE EXISTENCE OF MEMBRANE CARRIERS. A-C, Experiments on human red 
blood cells. A, Time course of the uptake of D- and L-glucose. B, Rate of uptake of D- and L-glucose as a function of extracellular concen-
tration. Uptake of L-glucose was by diffusion across the lipid bilayer. C, Rate of uptake of D-glucose corrected for diffusion as a function of 
extracellular concentration. The curve is similar to the dependence of an enzyme on substrate concentration, yielding the maximum rate 
(Vmax) at high substrate concentration and the apparent affinity of the carrier (Km) for the substrate at half the maximal rate. D, E, Experiments 
revealing the existence of symporters. D, The effect of Na+ on the uptake of radioactive glucose by apical plasma membrane vesicles isolated 
from intestinal epithelial cells containing the Na+/glucose symporter SGLT1. The addition of Na+ to the external buffer strongly favors glucose 
uptake against its concentration gradient. E, Cotransport of protons and lactose by bacteria expressing LacY H/lactose symporter. Bacteria 
were suspended in a weakly buffered medium. Lactose added to the medium moved into the cells and down its concentration gradient. 
Protons accompanied lactose through the symporter, raising the pH of the medium. If detergent made the membrane permeable, the pH 
did not change. 

256 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

A. Mitochondrial
      ADP/ATP carrier

B. Lac permease

C. Acr B multidrug transporter

D. Glutamate
     transporter

MITOCHONDRIAL
INTERMEMBRANOUS
SPACE

PERIPLASM

MATRIX

CYTOPLASM

E. Viewed from cell exteriors

FIGURE 15.4  STRUCTURES OF CARRIER PROTEINS. Ribbon diagrams of four carriers illustrate their diversity. A, Bovine mitochondrial 
adenosine diphosphate (ADP)/adenosine triphosphate (ATP) transporter. B, Escherichia coli Lac Y. C, E. coli AcrB multidrug transporter. The three 
identical subunits are shown in different colors. D, Pyrococcus horikoshii glutamate transporter. The three identical subunits are shown in different 
colors. E, Views of the exterior of the cell or mitochondrion with the transport pathway shaded tan. (For reference, see PDB files 1OKC [A], 1PV7 
[B], 1OY8 [C], and 1XFH [D] and Pebay-Peyroula E, Dahout-Gonzalez C, Kahn R, et al. Structure of mitochondrial ADP/ATP carrier in complex 
with carboxyatractyloside. Nature. 2003;426:39–44; Abramson J, Smirnova I, Kasho V, et al. Structure and mechanism of the lactose permease 
of  E.  coli.  Science.  2003;301:610–615;  Murakami  S,  Nakashima  R,  Yamashita  E,  Yamaguchi  A.  Crystal  structure  of  bacterial  multidrug  efflux 
transporter AcrB. Nature. 2002;419:587–593; and Reyes N, Ginter C, Boudker O. Transport mechanism of a bacterial homologue of glutamate 
transporters. Nature. 2009;462:880–885.)

8 nm

across the membrane (Fig. 15.2). This is also known 
as  cotransport.  The  two  substrates  bind  coopera-
tively,  and  the  conformational  change  that  reorients 
the substrate-binding sites is much more favorable for 
free  carrier  and  carrier  with  two  bound  substrates 
than for carrier with only one bound substrate. These 
features  minimize  leaks  of  one  substrate  across  the 
membrane. E. coli LacY (Fig. 15.4B) and mammalian 
SGLT  (sodium-dependent  glucose  transporter)  Na+-
coupled GLUTs are examples of symporters.
Whether  a  carrier  is  a  uniporter,  antiporter,  or  sym-
porter  depends  on  the  number  of  substrate-binding  
sites  and  the  rate  and  equilibrium  constants  for  the 
various  species  to  reorient  across  the  membrane.  The 
net  rate  of  transfer  depends  on  the  concentrations  of 
substrates.

When  a  carrier  uses  an  ion  gradient  to  provide  
the energy to transport a second substrate, it is said to 
catalyze a secondary reaction. In this sense, pumps cata-
lyze primary transport reactions (Fig. 15.2), using energy 
from  ATP  hydrolysis,  electron  transport,  or  absorption 
of  light  to  create  ion  gradients  (see  Chapter  14).  
Coupling  an  ion  gradient  created  by  pumps  to  drive 
transport  by  a  carrier  is  called  a  chemiosmotic  cycle 
(see Fig. 17.1).

A few carriers are more complicated than is indicated 
by this classification. For example, excitatory neurotrans-
mitter  carriers  catalyze  both  antiporter  and  symporter 
reactions, with Na+ and Cl− going in one direction and a 
neurotransmitter in the opposite direction (Fig. 15.4D). 
This  example  also  makes  the  important  general  point 
that  the  stoichiometry  of  antiporter  and  symporter  

 

CHAPTER 15  n  Membrane Carriers 

257

Type

Antiporter
Uniporter

Mitochondria
Brown fat mitochondria

Neurons
Pyrococcus horikoshii

Red blood cells
Neurons, glia
Aquifex aeolicus
Intestine

Uniporter
Uniporter

Bacteria
Plants

Symporter
Symporter

TABLE 15.1  Examples of Carrier Proteins
Carrier
Distribution
Mitochondrial Carriers
ANC
UCP
Sweet
SemiSWEET
SWEET
Glutamate Carrier Family
Glutamate carrier
GltPh
APC (Amino Acid-Polyamine-Organocation)
Band 3
GABA carrier
LeuT
SGLT1
NHA
ASBT
Symporter
Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS)
Uniporter
GLUT1
GLUT4
Uniporter
Symporter
LacY
Antiporter
NCE
Antiporter
NHE-1
NKCC1
Symporter
UhpT
Antiporter
Bacterial Multidrug Carriers
ArcB

Antiporter
Symporter
Symporter
Symporter

Antiporter

E. coli

Intestine

Red blood cells
Fat, muscle
Escherichia coli
Muscle
Kidney, intestine
Kidney, gut, lung
E. coli

Substrate

ADP/ATP
H+

Glucose
Glucose

2 Na+/glutamate
2 Na+/glutamate

−/Cl−

HCO3
Na+/Cl−/GABA
Na+/Cl−/aspartate
Na+/glucose

Function

ATP, ADP exchange
Uncoupling protein, heat production

Glucose uptake
Glucose secretion

Glutamate uptake at synapses
Glutamate uptake

Acid-base balance
GABA uptake at synapses
Aspartate uptake
Glucose uptake

Na+/bile acid

Bile acid retrieval

Glucose
Glucose
H+/lactose
3Na+/Ca2+
Na+/H+
Na+/K+/2Cl−, water
Pi/glucose 6-phosphate

Glucose uptake
Insulin-responsive glucose uptake
Lactose uptake
Ca2+ regulation of heart
Acid-base balance
NaCl regulation, fluid secretion
Glucose 6-phosphate uptake

Drug/H+

Drug export

ADP, adenosine diphosphate; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; GABA, γ-aminobutyric acid; GLUT, glucose transporter; Pi, inorganic phosphate; SGLT, 
sodium-dependent glucose transporter.

reactions  need  not  be  one-to-one.  Table  15.1  provides 
other examples.

Diversity of Carrier Proteins
Biological experimentation and exploration of genomes 
have revealed more than a hundred families of carriers, 
many of which can be grouped into superfamilies. The 
full extent of carrier diversity in nature is not yet known. 
Crystal structures of a sample of carriers (Fig. 15.4) illus-
trate their diversity. These proteins differ in evolutionary 
origins  but  converged  toward  common  mechanisms 
implemented by different structures. In all cases, trans-
port  depends  on  conformational  changes,  so  under-
standing  carrier  mechanisms  has  depended  on  crystal 
structures. A number of specific inhibitors (Table 15.2) 
have been useful in establishing physiological functions 
of carriers.

Mitochondrial Carrier Family
Members of an extensive family of mitochondrial carrier 
proteins are the simplest known. The founding members 
of the family are antiporters that transport ATP and ADP 
across  the  membranes  of  mitochondria,  chloroplasts, 

TABLE 15.2  Tools for Studying Carriers
Agent
Target
Na+/K+/2Cl− symporter
Na+/H+ antiporter
HCO3
GLUT isoforms
GLUT isoforms
SGLT isoforms

Furosemide*
Amiloride*
DIDS, SITS
Cytochalasin B
Phloretin
Phlorizin

−/Cl− antiporter

*Used clinically as a drug.
DIDS, 4,4-diisothiocyanatostilbene-2,2′-disulfonic acid; SITS, 4-acetamido-
4′-isothiocyanostilbene-2,2′-disulfonic acid.

and other eukaryotic organelles (Fig. 15.4A). Their genes 
were formed by a threefold duplication and divergence 
of  a  sequence  that  encodes  a  pair  of  transmembrane 
helices connected by a short helix in the mitochondrial 
matrix. The six transmembrane helices form a cup with 
a common binding site for ATP and ADP in the middle 
of the bilayer. Conformational changes are proposed to 
expose this binding site alternatively on the two sides of 
the  inner  mitochondrial  membrane  without  allowing 
protons  to  leak  across  the  membrane.  Nucleotides  are 
transported  down  their  concentration  gradients,  ADP 

258 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

moves  into  mitochondria  and  ATP  moves  out.  Other 
family  members  transport  amino  acids  and  ketoacids. 
Uncoupling protein 1 is a carrier that allows protons to 
escape from mitochondria in brown fat to generate heat 
when  animals  arise  from  hibernation  and  mammalian 
infants are born (see Fig. 28.3).

SWEET/SemiSWEET Sugar Carriers
A  second  family  of  tiny  carriers  also  consists  of  six  
transmembrane  helices,  but  the  bacterial  SemiSWEET 
uniporters are built from two subunits each with three 
transmembrane  helices.  A  rocking  motion  opens  the 
central binding site alternatively on the two sides of the 
membrane  similar  to  other  carriers.  The  homologous 
SWEET carriers of plants have a similar architecture, but 
all  six  transmembrane  helices  are  formed  by  one  poly-
peptide with an additional helix to link the two halves. 
These SWEET carriers transport glucose out of plant cells 
into the phloem.

Bacterial Multidrug Carriers
Multidrug carriers help bacteria in hostile environments 
by expelling a wide variety of toxic hydrophobic chemi-
cals  (Fig.  15.4C).  Substrates  include  bile  salts,  dyes, 
detergents,  and  lipid-soluble  antibiotics.  When  overex-
pressed,  these  carriers  can  make  bacteria  resistant  to 
antibiotics.  The  protein  is  a  homotrimer  of  huge  sub-
units,  each  with  12  transmembrane  helices.  Large 
domains above the membrane help span the periplasmic 
space.  Substrates  that  are  soluble  in  the  membrane 
diffuse into a hydrophobic binding site in the center of 
the  carrier  and  are  transported  out  of  the  cell  by  an 
antiporter mechanism that depends on a proton gradient 
across the plasma membrane.

Excitatory Neurotransmitter Carriers
Glutamate carriers remove the excitatory neurotransmit-
ter glutamate from the synaptic cleft after a nerve impulse 
(see  Fig.  17.10).  Homologous  carriers  transport  gluta-
mate and aspartate into bacteria. The protein is a trimer 
of identical subunits, each composed of eight transmem-
brane helices that form independent transport pathways 
(Fig. 15.4D). Two α-helical hairpin loops in each subunit 
partially cross the bilayer and bind a glutamate. For each 
glutamate  transported  across  the  membrane  three  Na+ 
and one H+ move in the same direction and one K+ moves 
in the opposite direction, so this is an example of sym-
porter  with  features  of  an  antiporter.  Starting  with  the 
pathway open outside the cell, Na+ and glutamate bind 
cooperatively  to  the  carrier,  inducing  a  conformational 
change that occludes the binding site. Then the parts of 
the protein that bind glutamate and Na+ move as a block 
approximately 1.8 nm to release these substrates inside 
the  cell,  while  the  parts  of  the  protein  at  the  trimeric 
interface are stationary. Each of the three subunits in a 
trimer operates independently.

APC Superfamily of Carriers
Crystal structures revealed that nine different families of 
carriers have the same fold as the bacterial LeuT sodium-
leucine symporter. The proteins have 10 transmembrane 
helices  with  the  first  five  folded  like  the  second  five,  
but inverted in the membrane. The founding gene likely 
formed  by  duplication  of  a  gene  encoding  five  helices. 
Subsequent  duplication  and  divergence  of  this  original 
gene created many paralogs with specificities for a range 
of  substrates,  while  retaining  the  10  helix  fold  even  as 
the sequences diverged so much that they are no longer 
recognized as homologous. Some family members have 
additional transmembrane helices, bringing the total to 
11  to  14.  Substrates  bind  deep  within  the  bundle  of 
helices  flanked  by  rings  of  hydrophobic  residues  that 
can, depending on the conformation, block access from 
either or both sides. Different conformations expose the 
binding site externally or to the cytoplasm.

The APC superfamily includes both antiporters such 
as  proton/Ca2+  exchangers  and  symporters  such  as  the 
SGLT1 Na+/glucose carrier. SGLT uses a gradient of Na+ 
established by the Na+K+-ATPase (adenosine triphospha-
tase)  pump  (see  Chapter  14)  to  move  glucose  up  its 
concentration  gradient  into  intestinal  cells  (see  Fig. 
17.2).  Na+  binds  first,  promoting  glucose  binding  and 
closing the external seal. Conformational changes open 
an inward facing cavity, open the cytoplasmic seal and 
release Na+ followed by glucose.

APC sodium symporters in the central nervous system 
clear synaptic clefts of neurotransmitters, including nor-
epinephrine,  dopamine,  serotonin,  and  γ-aminobutyric 
acid (GABA) (see Fig. 17.8). Dysfunction of these carriers 
contributes  to  human  depression  and  other  illnesses. 
Cocaine and widely used drugs including tricyclic anti-
depressants 
these  carriers.  Antidepressants 
occupy the substrate binding site and lock the carrier in 
the open-out conformation.

inhibit 

NhaA Family of Carriers
Crystal structures showed that another group of carriers 
share a common fold with two related segments of five 
transmembrane  helices,  but  with  a  topology  different 
than  the  APC  superfamily.  This  was  surprising,  since 
their sequences lacked similarity. Two of the best char-
acterized  examples  are  the  bacterial  Na+/H+  antiporter 
and  the  mammalian  Na+  symporter  that  transports  bile 
acids  from  the  intestine  back  into  the  blood.  Although 
the substrates and their binding sites differ in these two 
carriers,  similar  conformational  changes  expose  the 
binding sites on opposite sides of the membrane.

MFS Carrier Proteins
The  major  facilitator  superfamily  (MFS)  includes 
many  of  the  best-characterized  carriers.  MFS  carriers 
consist  of  single  polypeptides  that  form  12  transmem-
brane  helices  with  a  central  substrate-binding  pocket 

 

CHAPTER 15  n  Membrane Carriers 

259

(Figs.  15.1  and  15.4B).  A  rocking  motion  around  the 
substrate  produces  alternate  two  conformations  that 
expose the substrate-binding site(s) on the opposite side 
of the membrane.

The  sequences  and  structures  of  the  two  halves  of 
each protein are homologous, so it is believed that the 
original gene was created by duplication of an ancestral 
gene,  which  coded  for  a  six-helix  protein  that  formed 
functional dimers. As the MFS gene family grew during 
evolution, the ancient gene duplication and fusion had 
two advantages. First, it allowed the two halves of each 
gene to diversify separately to increase specificity for a 
wide variety of substrates. Second, a single polypeptide 
simplifies  assembly  of  a  functional  carrier,  as  two  half-
sized subunits do not have to find each other. If the two 
halves  of  a  12-helix  MFS  carrier  are  expressed  in  the 
same cell, they can assemble functional carriers, but less 
efficiently than the intact protein.

The MFS family includes uniporters, symporters, and 
antiporters.  The  following  examples  illustrate  their 
versatility.

Mammalian  GLUT  uniporters  allow  glucose  to  move 
down  its  concentration  gradient  into  cells:  red  blood 
cells  use  GLUT1  (Fig.  15.1);  and  fat  and  muscle  use 
GLUT4 in response to insulin (see Fig. 27.7). Figure 17.2 
shows how epithelial cells use the MFS uniporter GLUT5 
and  APC  superfamily  glucose  symporter  SGLT1  to  take 
up glucose from the intestine after a meal.

The  mammalian  heart  3Na+/Ca2+  antiporter  binds 
either Na+ or Ca2+ and uses the large Na+ gradient across 
the plasma membrane to drive the transport of Ca2+ out 
of  the  cytoplasm  up  a  concentration  gradient  (see  Fig. 
39.22).  In  the  outward  facing  conformation  the  carrier 
binds three Na+. After the conformational change reori-
ents the binding site, the three Na+ dissociate inside and 
one Ca2+ binds. Reorientation of the binding site carries 
this Ca2+ to the outer surface of the cell, where it dissoci-
ates.  In  addition  to  the  substrate  concentrations,  the 
membrane potential must also be taken into account, as 
this exchange is not electrically neutral, and the poten-
tial may affect the binding of one or both substrates to 
the carrier.

The Na+/H+ antiporter allows cells of the mammalian 
kidney, gut, and most other organs to manipulate their 
internal  pH.  Band  3  antiporter  of  red  blood  cells 
−.  Carbon  dioxide  produced  in 
exchanges  Cl−  for  HCO3
tissues  by  oxidative  reactions  diffuses  into  red  blood 
cells, where a cytoplasmic enzyme—carbonic anhydrase— 
−.  The  antiporter 
transforms  carbon  dioxide  into  HCO3
−  to  return  to  the  plasma, 
provides  a  way  for  the  HCO3
where it is carried to the lungs as the bicarbonate anion.
E. coli LacY symporter uses a proton gradient across 
the plasma membrane to drive accumulation of lactose 
(Fig. 15.3B). The proton gradient is created by the respi-
ratory chain under aerobic conditions (see Fig. 19.5) or 

by the F-type ATPase (adenosine triphosphatase) pump 
under  anaerobic  conditions  (see  Fig.  14.5).  Protons 
move  down  their  concentration  gradient  as  lactose 
moves up its concentration gradient into the cell.

Bacterial  GlpT  is  a  glycerol-3-phosphate–phosphate 
antiporter. GlpT has a pair of conserved arginines near 
the middle of the bilayer that bind phosphate. When the 
binding  site  is  open  on  the  periplasmic  side  of  the  
membrane,  GlpT  binds  glycerol-3-phosphate  preferen-
tially, since its affinity is higher than that of phosphate. 
When  the  binding  site  is  exposed  to  the  cytoplasm,  
glycerol-3-phosphate dissociates and is replaced by phos-
phate, which is present at a higher concentration in the 
cytoplasm. Another antiporter UhpT (uptake of hexose 
phosphate transporter) allows E. coli to scavenge glucose 
6-phosphate from the medium in exchange for inorganic 
phosphate.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We  thank  Peter  Maloney  for  material  used  in  the  first 
edition  and  Michael  Caplan  for  his  suggestions  on  the 
second edition.

SELECTED READINGS

Deng  D,  Xu  C,  Sun  P,  et al.  Crystal  structure  of  the  human  glucose 

transporter GLUT1. Nature. 2014;510:121-125.

Faham  S,  Watanabe  A,  Besserer  GM,  et al.  The  crystal  structure  of  a 
sodium galactose transporter reveals mechanistic insights into Na+/
sugar symport. Science. 2008;321:810-814.

Guan L, Kaback HR. Lessons from lactose permease. Annu Rev Biophys 

Biomol Struct. 2006;35:67-91.

Madej  MG,  Kaback  HR.  Evolutionary  mix-and-match  with  MFS  trans-

porters II. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2013;110:E4831-E4838.

Murakami S, Nakashima R, Yamashita E, Yamaguchi A. Crystal structure 
of  bacterial  multidrug  efflux  transporter  AcrB.  Nature.  2002;419:
587-593.

Nury  H,  Dahout-Gonzalez  C,  Trézéguet  V,  et al.  Relations  between 
structure and function of the mitochondrial ADP/ATP carrier. Annu 
Rev Biochem. 2006;75:713-741.

Reyes  N,  Ginter  C,  Boudker  O.  Transport  mechanism  of  a  bacterial 

homologue of glutamate transporters. Nature. 2009;462:880-885.

Ruprecht JJ, Hellawell AM, Harding M, et al. Structures of yeast mito-
chondrial  ADP/ATP  carriers  support  a  domain-based  alternating-
access  transport  mechanism.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  USA.  2014;111:
E426-E434.

Shi  Y.  Common  folds  and  transport  mechanisms  of  secondary  active 

transporters. Annu Rev Biophys. 2013;42:51-72.

Traba J, Satrústegui J, del Arco A. Adenine nucleotide transporters in 
organelles:  novel  genes  and  functions.  Cell  Mol  Life  Sci.  2011;68:
1183-1206.

Transporter Classification Database. <http://www.tcdb.org/>.
Yan  N.  Structural  Biology  of  the  Major  Facilitator  Superfamily  Trans-

porters. Annu Rev Biophys. 2015;44:257-283.

Yernool  D,  Boudker  O,  Jin  Y,  Gouaux  E.  Structure  of  a  glutamate 
transporter homologue from Pyrococcus horikoshii. Nature. 2004;
431:811-818.

Yu EW, McDermott G, Zgurskaya HI, et al. Structural basis of multiple 
drug-binding capacity of the AcrB multidrug efflux pump. Science. 
2003;300:976-980.

This page intentionally left blank

C H A P T E R 

16 

Membrane Channels

Channels  are  integral  membrane  proteins  with  trans-

membrane  pores  that  allow  particular  ions  or  small  
molecules  to  cross  a  lipid  bilayer.  Some  channels  are 
open constitutively, but most open just part time. Each 
time  a  channel  opens,  thousands  to  millions  of  ions 
diffuse  down  their  electrochemical  gradient  across  the 
membrane. Carriers and pumps are orders of magnitude 
slower,  since  they  use  rate-limiting  conformational 
changes to transport each ion (see Chapters 14 and 15).
The  ability  to  control  diffusion  across  membranes 
allows  channels  to  perform  three  essential  functions 
(Fig. 16.1). First, certain channels cooperate with pumps 

A

Na+

H2O

B

K+

Na+

H2O

Na+ H2O

C

Ca2+

Na+

H2O

FIGURE  16.1  FUNCTIONS  OF  MEMBRANE  CHANNELS. 
A, Transport of salt and water across an epithelium by water channels 
in both the apical and basolateral membranes, a Na+ channel in the 
apical  membrane,  and  a  Na+  pump  in  the  basolateral  membrane. 
B,  Regulation  of  membrane  potential.  The  triangle  represents  the 
concentration difference of K+ across the membrane. The zigzag arrow 
represents the membrane potential, negative inside. C, Ca2+ signaling 
in secretion. 

and carriers to transport water and ions across cell mem-
branes. This is required to regulate cellular volume and 
for secretion and absorption of fluid, as in salivary glands, 
kidney,  inner  ear,  and  plant  guard  cells.  Second,  ion 
channels regulate the electrical potential across mem-
branes. The sign and magnitude of the membrane poten-
tial  depend  on  ion  gradients  created  by  pumps  and 
carriers and the relative permeabilities of various chan-
nels  (Appendix  16.3).  Open  channels  allow  unpaired 
ions  to  diffuse  down  concentration  gradients  across  a 
membrane, separating electrical charges and producing 
a  membrane  potential.  Coordinated  opening  and 
closing of channels change the membrane potential and 
produce an electrical signal that spreads rapidly over the 
surface of a cell. Nerve and muscle cells use these action 
potentials  (see  Fig.  17.6)  for  high-speed  communica-
tion. Third, other channels admit Ca2+ from outside the 
cell  or  from  the  endoplasmic  reticulum  into  the  cyto-
plasm, where it triggers a variety of processes (see Fig. 
26.12), including secretion (see Fig. 21.19) and muscle 
contraction (see Fig. 39.16).

Cells control channel activity in two ways. In the long 
term,  each  cell  type  expresses  a  unique  repertoire  of 
channels from among hundreds of channel genes. Excit-
able  cells,  such  as  nerve  and  muscle,  express  plasma 
membrane  voltage-gated  channels  to  produce  action 
potentials. Epithelial cells express channels for Na+, Cl−, 
K+,  and  water  to  produce  the  salt  and  water  fluxes 
required  for  secretion  and  reabsorption  of  fluids  in 
glands and the kidney. In the short term, cells open and 
shut specific types of channels in response to physiologi-
cal or environmental stimuli. Some channels respond to 
changes in membrane potential. Others respond to intra-
cellular or extracellular ligands or to mechanical forces. 
Still  others,  such  as  kidney  water  channels,  are  shifted 
from one membrane compartment to another to mediate 
physiological functions.

Channels are important in medicine. Ion channels are 
targets of powerful drugs and toxins, including curare, 

 261

262 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

tetrodotoxin (“voodoo toxin”), paralytic shellfish toxins, 
cobra  toxin,  local  anesthetics,  antiarrhythmic  agents, 
and  probably  general  anesthetics  (Appendix  16.1). 
Defects in ion channel genes cause many inherited dis-
orders, ranging from some cardiac arrhythmias to kidney 
stones.  Antibodies  target  ion  channels  in  the  human 
autoimmune disorder myasthenia gravis.

This  chapter  discusses  in  detail  12  large  families  of 
plasma  membrane  channels.  A  note  at  the  end  of  the 
chapter briefly introduces four additional types of chan-
nels.  Other  chapters  discuss  cystic  fibrosis  transmem-
brane regulator Cl− channels (see Fig. 17.4), gap junction 
channels  used  for  communication  between  adjacent 
cells (see Fig. 31.7), and intracellular Ca2+ release chan-
nels  that  participate  in  signal  transduction  (see  Figs. 
26.13 and 39.15). Understanding channels requires not 
only  information  about  their  structure  and  activity  but 
also  some  knowledge  of  electrical  phenomena.  Appen-
dixes  16.2  to  16.4  contain  essential  material  about 
electrophysiology.

Physiologists  introduced  the  concept  of  channels  in 
the  1950s  to  explain  ion  currents  during  action  poten-
tials. Proof that channels are integral membrane proteins 
followed  in  the  1970s  with  isolation  of  the  nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptor channel and the voltage-gated Na+ 
channel.  The  great  diversity  of  channels  was  revealed 
initially by cloning complementary DNAs (cDNAs) using 
functional  assays  and  homology  with  known  channels. 
Ultimately, the full repertoire of channels emerged from 
sequenced genomes.

A  new  channel  protein  can  be  characterized  by 
expressing its cDNA in a test cell and then making elec-
trical recordings of ion currents from the cell or patches 
of  its  membrane  (Appendix  16.2).  If  expression  of  a 
single-channel  protein  fails  to  reproduce  the  channel 
activity observed in the cell of origin, auxiliary subunits 
are  probably  required.  Historically,  investigation  of 
channel  functions  has  relied  on  toxins  and  drugs  that 
inhibit  particular  channels  more  or  less  specifically 
(Appendix  16.1).  Mutations,  including  those  in  human 
disease,  provide  definitive  tests  for  physiological  func-
tions and have yielded some surprising results.

Channel Diversity and Evolution
Humans have approximately 400 genes encoding channel 
proteins.  The  historical  channel  nomenclature  based 
variously  on  the  ion  transported,  mode  of  regulation, 
physiological role, or drug sensitivity is often ambiguous. 
Fortunately,  knowledge  of  channel  protein  structures 
clarified evolutionary relationships and provided a frame-
work to classify most plasma membrane channels into a 
few large families (Fig. 16.2).

Channels are integral membrane proteins, usually with 
two  or  more  α-helices  crossing  the  lipid  bilayer.  Porins 
are  an  exception;  they  are  built  from  transmembrane 

β-strands  (see  Fig.  13.9C).  Channels  generally  consist  of 
two to six subunits, but some are single, large polypep-
tides.  The  transmembrane  pores  for  conducting  ions  or 
other substrates are often located in the middle of a group 
of subunits or subunit-like domains, but the pores of chlo-
ride,  water,  and  ammonia  channels  are  located  within 
single subunits (Fig. 16.2).

A limited number of genes in early forms of life appear 
to have given rise to most channel genes. For example, 
the  gene  for  a  simple  prokaryotic  channel  with  just  
two transmembrane segments (confusingly called S5 and 
S6) was the progenitor of a huge family of channels with 
2 to 24 transmembrane segments per subunit (Fig. 16.2). 
A simple duplication of one of these genes yielded chan-
nels  with  four  segments.  Even  before  the  emergence  
of eukaryotes, the addition of four transmembrane seg-
ments  (S1  to  S4)  yielded  channels  with  six  transmem-
brane  segments.  Acquisition  of  positive  charges  by  S4 
provided  for  voltage  sensitivity.  Two  rounds  of  gene 
duplication  and  divergence  produced  voltage-gated 
channels, such as voltage-gated Na+ channels, consisting 
of four domains, each with six transmembrane segments. 
Already in bacteria a gene in this family added a domain 
that  binds  glutamate  to  become  a  glutamate-gated 
channel.  Water  channels  originated  in  prokaryotes  by 
duplication  of  a  gene  that  encoded  three  hydrophobic 
transmembrane segments. Pentameric neurotransmitter 
channels,  ammonia  channels  and  double-barreled  Cl− 
channels all had bacterial ancestors.

Channels in higher eukaryotes are products of multi-
gene  families  that  arose  from  multiple  rounds  of  gene 
duplication  and  divergence.  Alternative  splicing  of 
mRNAs  also  enriches  the  variety  of  channels.  In  some 
cases,  combining  different  subunit  isoforms  in  one 
channel creates increased specialization. All of this diver-
sity suggests a sophistication of function that is difficult 
to demonstrate in the laboratory. For example, it is not 
known  why  the  sodium  channels  that  produce  action 
potentials in neurons cannot substitute for their counter-
parts in skeletal muscle.

Channel Structure
The pH-regulated K+ channel KcsA from the bacterium 
Streptomyces lividans serves as a model for channels in 
general  and  the  whole  family  of  S5/S6  channels  in 
particular  (Fig.  16.3).  Four  identical  subunits  are  com-
posed of two transmembrane helices connected by a P 
loop (for pore)—a short third helix and a crucial strand 
that  makes  the  selectivity  filter.  The  transmembrane 
helices  are  packed  close  together  on  the  cytoplasmic 
side of the bilayer forming a gate that can be either open 
or  closed  in  response  to  conditions.  Local  competition 
between  the  favorable  ion–ligand  interactions  and  
unfavorable ligand–ligand interactions yields robust ion 
selectivity  despite  thermal  fluctuations  of  the  protein 

Postulated
primordial
channel

Known

prokaryote
channels

Postulated primitive
eukaryote channels

Known eukaryote

channels

Transmembrane

topology

Subunit

composition

TM1-TM2

Neuropeptide
Amiloride-
sensitive

Isoforms
Isoforms

TM1-TM2

XC-ATP

Isoforms

TM1

TM2

N

C

TM1

TM2

S5-S6

S5-P-S6
(KcsA)

S5-P-S6

Kir

 Isoforms

   Duplication

TWIK

 Isoforms

S1–S5-P-S6
(KCh)

S1–S5-P-S6

IC ligand-gated

Isoforms

S1–S5-P-S6

S1–S5-P-S6

TRP

 Isoforms

S1–S4-S5-P-S6

S1–S4-S5-P-S6
 
   Duplication

   Duplication
 

4×[S1–S4-S5-P-S6]

VG-K-Ch

 Isoforms

VG-NaCh

 Isoforms

 

VG-CaCh

 Isoforms

N

C

N

N

N

S1

N

N

?

IP3-R

Ryanodine-R

N

S1

Glutamate- 

binding
protein 

Glutamate R
M1–P–M2

Glutamate R

Glutamate R

  Isoforms

?

?

5HT3R

  Isoforms

nAChR
GABA•R

  Isoforms
  Isoforms

N

N

?

S1–S12
(eeClC)

S1–S12

ClC

  Isoforms

3-segment

  Duplication

6-segment

Aquaporin

Aquaporin

Aquaporin

  Isoforms

S1

N

N

11 helix

Ammonia ch

Ammonia ch

Ammonia ch

  Isoforms

N

C

C

C

C

S6

C

C

S6

C

C

C

S14

C

C

?

Connexins

  Isoforms

N

C

FIGURE  16.2  CLASSIFICATION  OF  CHANNEL  PROTEINS.  This  scheme  is  based  on  atomic  structures  and  genome  sequences.  The 
transmembrane topology has the extracellular side at the top and uses rectangles to indicate helices labeled “S.” P loops are shown as a short 
helix and loop between two transmembrane helices. S4 voltage-sensing helices are pink; pore positions are orange. The last column shows the 
subunit compositions. The origins of most channel families can be traced back to prokaryotes. Relatively recent gene duplications and divergence 
have  given  rise  to  multiple  isoforms  of  most  types  of  channels  in  eukaryotes.  ClC,  chloride  channel;  GABA,  γ-amino  butyric  acid;  5HT, 
5-hydroxytryptamine; IC, intracellular ligand; IP3, inositol triphosphate; Kir, potassium inward rectifier; nAch, nicotinic acetylcholine; R, receptor; 
Ryanodine, a chemical that binds calcium-release channels; TRP, transient receptor potential; VG, voltage-gated; XC-ATP, extracellular ATP-gated 
channel. 

264 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

A. KcsA

B. KcsA pore

C

D. Selectivity filter and gate

K+ hydrated
K+ dehydrated
H2O oxygen

Pore

Pore
helix

Selectivity
filter

Gate

3 of 4 subunits shown

(front deleted for visual clarity)

N

C

FIGURE 16.3  ATOMIC STRUCTURE OF KCSA, A K+ CHANNEL FROM STREPTOMYCES LIVIDANS. A, Transmembrane topology. The 
short helix and loop between the two transmembrane helices are called a P loop because they form the pore. B, Space-filling model with each 
subunit shaded a different color and with a cutaway view to expose the central pore, which contains three K+ ions (blue). C, Views from outside 
the cell. Aromatic side chains (shown as stick figures) at both ends of the transmembrane helices of each subunit project radially into the lipid. 
D, Selectivity filter and gate. The blue mesh shows the electron density of the region of two subunits flanking the selectivity filter. The stick figure 
is the molecular model with five (red) carbonyl oxygens lining the pore and coordinating with four bound K+ ions (green). Red waters surround 
K+ ions on both sides of the pore. The ribbon model has the front subunit removed to reveal the central pore. Starting on the extracellular side, 
the 4.5-nm–long pore consists of a negatively charged vestibule; the 1.2-nm–long selectivity filter with binding sites for four dehydrated K+ ion; 
a central cavity with space for a single hydrated K+; a gate (closed here); and a negatively charged cytoplasmic vestibule. (For reference, see 
Protein Data Bank [PDB; www.rcsb.org] file 1BL8 and Doyle DA, Morais-Cabral J, Pfuetzner RA, et al. The structure of the potassium channel: 
molecular  basis  of  K+  conduction  and  selectivity.  Science.  1998;280:69–77;  and  Zhou  Y,  Morais-Cabral  JH,  MacKinnon  R.  Chemistry  of  ion 
coordination and hydration revealed by a K+-channel-Fab complex at 2.0 Å resolution. Nature. 2001;414:43–48. Also see http://www.sciencemag
.org/content/suppl/2014/10/15/346.6207.352.DC1/1254840s1.mov for a molecular dynamics simulation of K+ movements through KcsA.)

structure. On the extracellular side the transmembrane 
helices splay apart to make room for the pore helices 
and selectivity filter.

The selectivity filter is a centrally located pore where 
the four identical subunits meet, each subunit contribut-
ing  a  quarter  of  the  wall.  Highly  conserved  residues 
(glycine-tyrosine-glycine) in an unusual linear conforma-
tion  line  the  pore.  The  backbone  carbonyl  oxygens 
(C═O)  of  four  successive  residues  of  each  subunit  all 
point  toward  the  pore.  The  pore  is  1.2 nm  long  and 
approximately 0.2 nm in diameter—just wide enough to 
accommodate a dehydrated K+ ion. Physiological experi-
ments show that this passage distinguishes between K+ 
and Na+ with a fidelity of 1000 : 1 even though Na+ (with 
a diameter of 0.095 nm) is smaller than K+ (0.133 nm in 
diameter). K+ fits so perfectly into the pore that the car-
bonyl oxygens replace its water shell without an energy 
penalty, whereas the smaller Na+ binds more strongly to 
its hydration shell than to the pore. Ions that fit poorly 
in the pore are rejected, as it is energetically unfavorable 
to shed their hydration shell. Local electrostatic interac-
tions between ions and carbonyl oxygens also contribute 
to selectivity. Carbonyl oxygens carry the optimal elec-
tric  dipole  to  favorably  counterbalance  the  hydration 
free energy of K+ over that of Na+, thereby giving robust 
selectivity despite thermal fluctuations of the protein.

The selectivity filter accommodates up to four K+ ions, 
a  local  concentration  exceeding  that  inside  or  outside 
the cell by more than 10-fold, so it actually concentrates 
K+. However, this does not impede diffusion through the 
pore,  as  electrostatic  repulsion  between  these  closely 
spaced  ions  forces  them  apart.  Outside  the  filter,  the 
pore  is  lined  with  hydrophobic  groups,  but  a  cavity  in 
the middle of this passage accommodates a hydrated K+ 
in an environment with a negative electrostatic potential 
that is thought to reduce the electrostatic barrier to the 
ion as it crosses the membrane.

Open channels vary widely in their ability to discrimi-
nate among ions. Highly selective channels, such as KcsA 
and  voltage-gated  K+  channels,  pass  K+  ions  without 
bound water. Less-selective channels, such as the nico-
tinic  acetylcholine  receptor,  are  equally  permeable  to 
Na+  and  K+,  which  probably  pass  through  as  hydrated 
ions. Gap junction channels pass most molecules smaller 
than 800 Da without discrimination (see Fig. 31.7).

The  ion  flux  through  an  open  channel  (at  a  fixed 
membrane potential) is approximately proportionate to 
the ion concentration on the side from which the ions 
migrate.  The  maximum  rate  of  ion  flux—106  to  108 
ions/s—is limited by the time required for binding and 
dissociation at specific sites as an ion traverses the pore. 
At  this  high  rate,  the  interactions  that  discriminate 

 

CHAPTER 16  n  Membrane Channels 

265

between selected and rejected ions last only 10 to 100 
nanoseconds! Ions move in single file through the pore, 
driven in part by their mutual electrostatic repulsion.

Channel Activity
Electrical  recordings  of  single  channels  (see  Fig.  16.16 
for  the  method)  show  that  the  pore  across  the  mem-
brane  is  either  fully  open  or  closed  (Fig.  16.4).  Open 
channels,  called  the  active  state,  pass  selected  ions 
across  the  membrane  through  the  filter  and  a  gate  at 

)

A
p
(
 
t
n
e
r
r
u
c
 
c
n
o

i

I

0

-4

-8

Channel
closed

Channel
open

0

100

200

300

Time (msec)

FIGURE  16.4  PATCH  RECORDING  OF  A  SINGLE-CATION 
CHANNEL  MOLECULE.  This  time  course  shows  the  current  that 
results  when  a  single  channel  opens  and  closes  at  random.  When 
open,  it  conducts  Na+  ions  at  a  rate  of  approximately  36  ×  106  per 
second,  yielding  a  current  of  −6 pA  (picoamperes).  The  transitions 
between open and closed are so fast that they appear instantaneous 
on this millisecond time scale. 

rates  approaching  their  diffusion  in  water.  In  closed 
channels  the  gate,  filter  or  both  are  closed  (Fig.  16.5). 
Switching  between  conducting  and  nonconducting 
states is called gating. Transitions between closed and 
open  states  are  so  fast  that  they  appear  to  be  instanta-
neous  on  the  experimental  timescale  of  single  channel 
recordings (Fig. 16.4). Channels may rapidly flicker open 
and closed, but generally do not open partway or change 
their ion selectivity.

A hinge motion of the cytoplasmic ends of the trans-
membrane helices opens or closes the gate of KcsA and 
related channels (Fig. 16.5A). Cytoplasmic pH regulates 
the gate of KcsA. Examples later in this chapter illustrate 
how energy to open other channels comes from mechan-
ical force, binding of cytoplasmic or extracellular ligands, 
or changes in the membrane potential.

A  process  called  inactivation  operates  in  parallel 
with  gating  to  stop  the  flux  of  ions  through  channels. 
Inactivation makes a channel unresponsive to conditions 
that otherwise favor the active state. Typically channels 
cycle  from  closed  to  open  and  then  inactivate  before 
returning to the closed state (Fig. 16.5C). So-called C-type 
inactivation results from a subtle change in the confor-
mation of the filter of a channel with an open gate (Fig. 
16.5B). In N-type inactivation, flexible cytoplasmic parts 
of the protein plug the open pore of an otherwise open 
channel (Fig. 16.5D).

A. Gating

B. Inactivation

C. Functional States

o
o

o
o

Active
K+

o
o

o
o

D

K+

o
o

o
o

TM2

Gate closed

r = 8.10 Å
Filter open

Filter open
Gate closed

Filter open
Gate open

Gate

Open

o
o

o
o

o
o

o
o

o
o

o
o

TM2

Gate open

r = 5.47 Å
Filter closed

Filter closed
Gate closed

Filter closed
Gate open

Inactivated
by ball

FIGURE 16.5  FUNCTIONAL STATES OF KCSA. A, Gating. Ribbon diagram showing three of the four subunits with the gate closed (see 
PDB file 1BL8) and open (see PDB file 1K4C). B, C-type inactivation. Stick figures show the selectivity filter in the open (see PDB file 1K4C) and 
closed  (see  PDB  file  1K4D)  conformations.  C,  Drawings  of  four  functional  states.  Closed  channels  are  inactive  owing  the  gate  or  filter  being 
closed. Both the gate and filter are open in active channels, forming a selective pore for K+ ions across the bilayer. The arrows show the probabili-
ties of transitions between the states; red arrows are probabilities in the presence of an external stimulus (acid pH in this case), while black arrows 
are probabilities in the absence of the stimulus. D, N-type inactivation of other channels. An inactivation “ball” at the N-terminus of voltage-gated 
channels blocks the pore of an active channel. (For reference, see Cuello LG, Jogini V, Cortes DM, et al. Structural mechanism of C-type inactiva-
tion in K+ channels. Nature. 2010;466:203–208; and Ostmeyer J, Chakrapani S, Pan AC, et al. Recovery from slow inactivation in K+ channels 
is controlled by water molecules. Nature. 2013;501:121–124.)

266 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

Large  organic  or  inorganic  ions,  such  as  polyamines 
and Mg2+, block other open channels simply by occlud-
ing the pore. Depending on the channel, blocking ions 
bind  to  sites  on  the  outside,  the  inside,  or  both  sides  
of the membrane. The membrane potential drives block-
ing  ions  into  or  out  of  channels.  Blocking  ions  that  
dissociate on a millisecond time scale cause the current 
through  the  channel  to  flicker  on  and  off  multiple  
times  every  time  the  channel  opens,  while  slowly  dis-
sociating ions can turns off a channel for a longer time. 
Local anesthetics such as lidocaine are pharmacological 
channel blockers.

Transition Between the Closed, Open,  
and Inactivated States
The  steady-state  probability  of  being  open  (Po)  is 
simply  the  fraction  of  the  total  time  that  the  channel  
is  open.  For  a  given  channel,  the  fraction  of  time  in  
the  open  state  determines  the  ion  flux.  Channels  act 
independently,  so  the  total  flux  across  a  membrane 
depends on the number of channels that are open at a 
given time.

Local physiological conditions, considered in detail in 
the  following  sections,  control  gating  from  moment  to 
moment. Cells also use the full range of signaling mecha-
nisms (see Chapters 24 to 26) from phosphorylation to 
second  messengers  to  guanosine  triphosphate  (GTP)–
binding proteins to influence the probability that particu-
lar channels open or close. By modulating the sensitivity 
of  various  channels,  cells  modify  the  behavior  of  their 
membranes and their responses to internal and external 
conditions. This modulation makes channels in general, 
and  membrane  excitability  in  particular,  highly  adapt-
able.  Chapter  17  illustrates  how  channel  modulation 
regulates the heart rate, changes the efficiency of com-
munication  between  nerve  cells,  and  adapts  cells  to 
some stresses.

Opening a channel for a few milliseconds can change 
the  membrane  potential  but  not  the  cytoplasmic  ion 
composition, because only a few ions crossing the mem-
brane is enough to produce a large change in membrane 
potential  (Appendixes  16.3  and  16.4).  This  conserves 
energy because ion gradients created by energy-requiring 
pumps  are  not  dissipated.  Longer  openings  of  tens  of 
milliseconds  can  alter  the  ion  composition  of  the  cell. 
For  example,  voltage-gated  Ca2+  channels  remain  open 
long  enough  to  change  the  intracellular  Ca2+  concen-
tration  and  trigger  cellular  events  (see  Fig.  39.16B).  
In this way, they convert an electrical signal to a chemi-
cal signal.

four copies of a small subunit with one transmembrane 
helix. After an infected cell takes the virus into an endo-
some  (see  Chapter  22),  the  acidic  environment  opens 
the channel, allowing protons to enter the virus and to 
initiate  disassembly  of  the  protein  shell  that  surrounds 
the genome. The antiviral drug amantadine blocks these 
channels.

Bacteria  secrete  peptides  (gramicidin,  alamethicin,  
and colicins)  that  are  designed  to  kill  other  species  by 
form ing  highly  selective  and  conductive  channels.  Only 
13  amino  acids  are  required  for  gramicidin  A  to  form 
β-helical  homodimers  that 
function  as  K+-selective 
channels.

Vertebrates  also  have  simple  channel  proteins  of 
approximately  130  residues  with  a  single  transmem-
brane  segment  and  no  sequence  homology  with  other 
known  channels.  These  minK  molecules  do  not  form 
channels  on  their  own  but  serve  as  accessory  subunits 
for  a  conventional  P  loop,  voltage-gated,  K+-channel  in 
the  heart  and  some  epithelial  cells.  Mutations  in  the 
minK gene cause defects in excitation of the heart and 
deafness.

Channels With Two  
Transmembrane Segments
Evolution  produced  three  unique  families  of  channels 
with  two  transmembrane  helices.  They  have  the  same 
topologies  with  both  termini  in  the  cytoplasm  but  dif-
ferent  structures,  so  their  evolutionary  origins  were 
different.

Mechanosensitive Channels
MscL  from  bacteria  (Fig.  16.6A)  is  a  simple  channel  of 
five  subunits.  One  of  the  two  transmembrane  helices 
forms  the  wall  of  the  pore.  A  third  C-terminal  helix 
extends the pore into the cytoplasm. The pore is lined 
with  polar  residues  except  for  a  gate  at  its  narrowest 
constriction, where an isoleucine and a valine reduce the 
diameter to approximately 0.2 nm. Tension in the plane 
of  the  membrane  created  by  osmotic  stress  is  believed 
to rearrange these helices and open the channel. Open 
channels  have  large  pores  lacking  a  selectivity  filter,  
so  ions,  water  and  even  large  organic  molecules  pass 
through  them.  This  response  avoids  osmotic  lysis  of  
the  cell.  MscL  channels  are  widespread  in  prokaryotes 
and  are  also  found  in  eukaryotes.  Bacteria  and  most 
eukaryotes also have functionally similar but structurally 
unrelated  mechanosensitive  channels  with  three  trans-
membrane helices.

Channels With One  
Transmembrane Segment
The simplest known channel is found in the membrane 
envelope of influenza virus. This M2 channel consists of 

Amiloride-Sensitive Channels
A family of trimeric channels is sensitive to inhibition by 
the diuretic drug amiloride. They likely arose in the last 
common  ancestor  of  eukaryotes.  The  family  includes 
chordate acid–sensing channels, metazoan epithelial Na+ 

 

A. MscL mechano-
sensitive channel

CHAPTER 16  n  Membrane Channels 

267

Cutaway view of pore

B. Acid-sensitive
    channel

C. ATP-gated channel

N

C

C

N

N

C

FIGURE  16.6  ATOMIC  STRUCTURES  OF  THREE  CHANNELS  WITH  TWO  TRANSMEMBRANE  HELICES.  A,  The  mechanosensitive 
MscL channel from Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Ribbon and space-filling models with each subunit shaded a different color, showing both views 
from the side and from outside the cell. The cutaway view exposes the central pore, which is 8 nm long. B, Ribbon model of the trimeric acid-
sensitive channel from chicken. C, Ribbon model of the trimeric adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-gated P2X4 channel from zebrafish. (A, For refer-
ence, see PDB file 2OAR and Chang G, Spencer RH, Lee AT, et al. Structure of the MscL homolog from Mycobacterium tuberculosis: a gated 
mechanosensitive ion channel. Science. 1998;282:2220–2226. B, See PDB file 2QTS and Jasti J, Furukawa H, Gonzales EB, et al. Structure of 
acid-sensing  ion  channel  1  at  1.9  A  resolution  and  low  pH.  Nature.  2007;449:316–323.  C,  See  PDB  file  3I5D  and  Kawate  T,  Michel  JC, 
Birdsong WT, et al. Crystal structure of the ATP-gated P2X(4) ion channel in the closed state. Nature. 2009;460:592–598.)

channels  and  metazoan  peptide-gated  channels.  Three 
identical subunits with two transmembrane helices form 
a  centrally  located  pore  (Fig.  16.6B).  This  architecture 
and  the  lack  of  a  P-loop  show  that  the  gene  for  these 
channels  originated  separately  from  the  large  family  of 
S5-S5  channels.  Judging  from  homology  epithelial  Na+ 
channels  are  likely  to  be  heterotrimers  of  α,  β,  and 
γ subunits.

Epithelial  Na+  channels  accelerate  the  rate-limiting 
step in the transport of Na+ and water across many types 
of epithelia (Fig. 16.1A). Typically, Na+ diffuses down its 
concentration gradient through these channels into the 
cytoplasm and is pumped out of the cell into the underly-
ing  extracellular  space  by  Na+/K+-ATPases  (adenosine 
triphosphatases)  in  the  basolateral  plasma  membrane 
(see Chapter 14). Water follows Na+ through water chan-
nels. Renal collecting tubules use this strategy to resorb 
salt and water. Lung epithelial cells use the same mecha-
nism to clear fluid from air spaces. Mice with knockout 
mutations in the lung epithelial Na+ channel gene die at 
birth with fluid in their lungs.

Amiloride binds and inhibits epithelial Na+ channels, 
increasing the output of urine, while the cardiac peptide 
atrial natriuretic peptide inhibits these channels indi-
rectly (see Fig. 24.8). If salt is lost from the body, produc-
tion of the steroid hormone aldosterone increases the 
plasma  membrane  content  of  Na+  channels  and  salt 
resorption by the kidney.

These  channels  open  and  close  randomly  for  rela-
tively long periods, between 0.5 and 5 seconds. The pH 
gates  acid-sensing  channels  involved  with  pain  percep-
tion, but neither the membrane potential nor any known 
natural ligand activate epithelial Na+ channels.

Mutations in patients with Liddle syndrome increase 
the open time of epithelial Na+ channels. This results in 
excess  resorption  of  salt  and  water  by  the  kidney  and 
severe high blood pressure. Excess secretion of aldoste-
rone  by  adrenal  tumors  has  similar  effects.  When  the 
blood  supply  to  the  brain  is  compromised  in  a  stroke, 
the  acidic  environment  activates  one  type  of  epithelial 
sodium  channel  that  then  admits  both  Na+  and  Ca2+, 
causing much of the damage in a stroke.

Small  peptides  gate  the  amiloride-sensitive  Na+  chan-
nels in the nervous systems of invertebrates. Related chan-
nels in the human brain are not well characterized.

Adenosine Triphosphate–Gated Channels
Extracellular  adenosine  triphosphate  (ATP)  activates  a 
family of homotrimeric cation channels with two trans-
membrane helices (Fig. 16.6C). Many neurons make syn-
aptic vesicles containing both ATP and neurotransmitters, 
so  they  release  ATP  at  synapses.  ATP  binding  to  the 
extracellular domains opens a gate composed of leucine 
side  chains  in  the  middle  of  the  pore.  One  example  is 
sympathetic  nerves  that  innervate  blood  vessels  and 
transmit  pain  perception.  This  function  makes  these 
channels attractive targets for treating pain. These ATP-
gated “purinergic” channels are called P2X receptors to 
distinguish them from P2Y ATP receptors, members of 
the  seven-helix  family  of  receptors  coupled  to  trimeric 
GTP-binding proteins.

S5-S6 Channel Family
The  largest  and  most  diverse  family  of  ion  channels  
arose  early  during  evolution  from  a  gene  for  a  simple 

268 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

channel  with  two  transmembrane  helices  and  a  P-loop 
like  KcsA  (Fig.  16.2).  They  are  called  S5-S6  channels. 
Many family members have four additional helices (S1–
S4) in addition to the defining S5-P-S6 motif. The follow-
ing  sections  illustrate  the  diversity  and  unique  features 
of  these  channels  having  2,  4,  or  6  transmembrane 
helices.

Inward Rectifier Potassium Channels
Kir channels consist of two transmembrane helices with 
a  P  loop  in  between.  The  P  loop  and  helix  S6  line  the 
K+-selective pore. Several channels in this family (Kir2.1, 
Kir2.3, Kir3 family, and Kir4.1) are inward rectifiers. 
A rectifier is an electronic component that passes current 
preferentially in one direction. Inward rectifier K+ chan-
nels would pass K+ into the cell if the membrane poten-
tial were below EK (Appendix 16.3), but such membrane 
potentials  are  not  achieved  physiologically.  Above  the 
resting potential, open Kir channels pass only a small K+ 
current  out  of  the  cell.  The  reason  is  that  impermeant 
cytoplasmic  cations,  Mg2+,  and  polyamines  (ornithine 
metabolites having net positive charges of 2+ to 4+) bind 
to  negatively  charged  residues  on  the  cytoplasmic  end 
of  the  S6  segment  of  open  channels  and  block  the 
passage  of  K+.  Despite  their  low  permeability,  these 
channels help maintain the resting membrane potential 
in many cells and to repolarize excitable cells during an 
action potential.

Divergence  from  a  common  ancestor  created  a 
number  of  channels  with  differing  physiological 
properties:
•  Kir1.1  channels  provide  a  pathway  for  K+  to  leave 
kidney  collecting  duct  cells  for  the  urine.  They  are 
constitutively  open  and  not  blocked  by  cytoplasmic 
ions.

•  Kir2  channels  in  the  heart  and  brain  contribute  to 
maintaining  the  resting  membrane  potential  by 
keeping it from being hyperpolarized. They are con-
stitutively active with inward rectification sensitive to 
membrane potential.

•  Kir3 or Kir3.1 and Kir3.4 channels in the pacemaker 
cells of the heart regulate heart rate under the control 
of trimeric GTP–binding proteins (see Fig. 39.21).

•  Cytoplasmic  ATP  regulates  Kir6.2  channels.  These 
channels, also called KATP channels, have a novel func-
tion  in  the  pancreas  requiring  interaction  with  a 
member of the ABC (adenosine triphosphate binding 
cassette) transporter family, the sulfonylurea recep-
tor (SUR) (see Chapter 15). High blood glucose levels 
raise intracellular ATP concentrations, which closes 
Kir6.2 channels. This pushes the membrane potential 
toward the threshold for opening a voltage-sensitive 
Ca2+ channel, which triggers insulin secretion. Sulfo-
nylurea drugs used to treat diabetes mellitus act like 
glucose, which promotes insulin secretion by inhibit-
ing these ATP-sensitive channels.

S5-S6 Channels With Four Transmembrane Helices
K+ channels with four transmembrane segments and two 
P  loops  (Fig.  16.2,  TWIK)  are  abundant  in  animal 
genomes, with 15 genes in humans. Two of these sub-
units form a channel with four domains similar to KcsA. 
They  help  establish  the  resting  potential  of  the  plasma 
membrane by allowing K+ to leak out of the cell, inde-
pendent of the membrane potential. Volatile anesthetics 
activate  these  leak  channels,  leading  to  hyperpolariza-
tion of the membrane and reduced excitability.

Voltage-Gated Cation Channels
Voltage-gated  channels  have  two  main 
functions.  
First, voltage-gated Na+ and K+ channels produce action 
potentials  in  excitable  cells  (see  Fig.  17.6).  Depolariza-
tion of the membrane transiently opens these channels 
in sequence, driving the membrane potential first toward 
the  Na+  equilibrium  potential  (Appendix  16.3)  and 
then back toward the K+ equilibrium potential. Second, 
voltage-gated  Ca2+  channels  convert  electrical  signals 
into chemical signals when they admit Ca2+ to the cyto-
plasm,  where  it  acts  as  a  second  messenger  (see  Figs. 
17.9,  17.10,  and  26.12)  to  stimulate  secretion,  activate 
protein kinases, trigger muscle contraction, or influence 
gene expression.

Voltage-gated K+ channels are tetramers of four identi-
cal or mixed subunits with a common domain organiza-
tion  (Fig.  16.2).  Voltage-gated  Na+  and  Ca2+  channels 
consist  of  four  identical  subunits  in  bacteria,  but  in 
animals the four homologous but distinct domains (each 
with  S1  to  S6)  are  linked  in  a  huge  polypeptide  (Fig. 
16.2).  Voltage-gated  channels  may  have  additional  spe-
cialized  domains  and/or  subunits,  but  the  four  main 
domains carry out the basic functions.

Hydrophobic segments S5 and S6 are transmembrane 
helices with a P loop in between (Fig. 16.7). The P loop 
forms the selectivity filter, since a point mutation in the 
P loop can change the ion selectivity of the channel, for 
example from Na+ to Ca2+. The cytoplasmic ends of the 
four  S6  helices  form  the  gate,  like  the  homologous 
helices of KcsA (Fig. 16.5A).

Helices  S1  to  S4  form  a  separate  voltage-sensing 
domain  embedded  in  the  lipid  bilayer  lateral  to  the 
pore-forming  domain  of  the  adjacent  subunit.  Helix  S4  
is  a  key  part  of  the  sensor  by  virtue  of  four  positively 
charged  residues  (most  often  arginine)  on  one  side.  A 
helix between S4 and S5 connects the gate to the voltage-
sensing domain in the bilayer (Fig. 16.7A).

The  voltage-sensing  domains  couple  the  membrane 
potential  to  channel  gating.  Voltage-sensitive  channels 
are  intrinsically  open  in  the  absence  of  a  membrane 
potential. A negative internal membrane potential stabi-
lizes  the  closed  state  with  the  voltage-sensing  domain 
closer to the cytoplasmic side of the bilayer. The transi-
tion  between  closed  and  open  occurs  over  a  narrow 
voltage range (Fig. 16.8), likely because the four domains 

 

CHAPTER 16  n  Membrane Channels 

269

A. Ribbon model
     (2 of 4 subunits)

B. Top view (4 subunits)
K+ ions

C. Surface model
     (3 of 4 subunits)

K+

D. Plugging mechanism

S2

S4

S5

T1–S1

S4–S5 
Linker

T1

β

S2

S1

C

S3

S4

S6

S5

N

C

N

KcsA

NavAb

E177

L176*

T175*

S3’

S4’

N

K+

N

FIGURE  16.7  VOLTAGE-GATED  POTASSIUM  CHANNEL.  Crystal  structure  of  the  Kv1.2  K+  channel  with  β2-subunits  from  rat  brain. 
A, Ribbon diagram of two of the four α-subunits and two of the four β-subunits viewed from the side. Each of the four α-subunits contributes 
an S5 helix, P loop, and S6 helix to form a channel similar to KcsA. Helices S1 through S4 form a separate domain connected to the channel 
domain by the S4–S5 linker helix. Movements of the S4 helix in response to the membrane potential pull the channel gate open and closed. The 
N-terminal T1 domains of each α-polypeptide are located in the cytoplasm, interacting with the tetrameric β-subunit. B, Ribbon diagram viewed 
from outside the cell, illustrating the central channel domains and the peripheral voltage-sensing domains. C, Side view of a space-filling model 
of three of the four subunits, showing K+ ions (blue), one above the membrane, four in the selectivity pore, and one in the vestibule. D, Space-
filling model with an artist’s conception of the N-terminal “ball-and-chain” plugging the open gate of an inactivated channel. (For reference, see 
PDB file 2A79 and Long SB, Campbell EB, MacKinnon R. Crystal structure of a mammalian voltage-dependent Shaker Family K+ channel. Science. 
2005;309:897–902.)

1.0

0.5

Po

–90

Em

0

0

FIGURE 16.8  Graph of the open probability (Po) of a voltage-gated 
Na+ channel as a function of membrane potential (Em). Essentially, all 
channels are closed at the resting potential of −70 mV, and all are open 
above a threshold potential of approximately −40 mV. 

respond cooperatively. Biophysical measurements show 
that  as  the  membrane  depolarizes,  the  S4  helix  moves 
approximately 1 nm through the voltage-sensing domain 
within the bilayer toward the outside of the cell and pulls 
on S5 and S6 to open the gate. This movement of positive 
charges on the S4 helix along with the rest of the voltage-
sensing domain is detected as a “gating current.”

These channels inactivate rapidly when an inactiva-
tion peptide on a flexible chain occludes the open pore 
and blocks conduction (Figs. 16.5D and 16.7D). Inactiva-
tion peptides are located at the N-terminus of K+ chan-
nels  (Fig.  16.7D)  or  in  a  loop  between  the  domains  of 
Na+  channels.  Amputation  of  the  inactivation  peptide 

eliminates inactivation, but an experimentally provided 
soluble inactivation peptide can restore inactivation by 
binding open channels. Less is known about the transi-
tion from the inactivated state to the closed state, but a 
conformational change must occlude the pore before the 
ball dissociates from the cytoplasmic side of the pore.

Voltage-Gated Potassium Channels
All  voltage-gated  K+  channels  assemble  from  four  α-
subunits.  Depolarization  of  the  membrane  opens  these 
channels and drives the membrane potential toward the 
K+ resting potential.

Animals  use  two  strategies  to  produce  voltage-gated 
K+ channels with diverse physiological properties. First, 
humans  express  many  different  K+  channel  proteins 
from  40  genes,  augmented  by  alternate  splicing  of  
messenger  RNAs.  Some  K+  channels  are  heterotetra-
mers,  a  combinatorial  strategy  with  the  potential  to 
produce thousands of different tetramers. T1 domains at 
the N-termini of these subunits (Fig. 16.7A) restrict for-
mation of tetramers from some isoforms. Second, cyto-
plasmic  β-subunits  associate  with  some  types  of 
α-subunits (Fig. 16.7A) and modify their physiology. One 
type  of  voltage-gated  K+  channel  has  a  Ca2+  binding 
site  at  the  C-terminus.  Signaling  events  that  raise  cyto-
plasmic  Ca2+  make  these  channels  more  sensitive  to 
membrane  depolarization,  reducing  the  excitability  of 
the membrane.

Mutations  in  the  gene  for  the  cardiac  K+  channel, 
called HERG (human ether-a-go-go-related gene), are the 
most  common  cause  of  an  autosomal-dominant  disease 

270 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

called long QT syndrome. The QT interval is the time 
between  depolarization  and  repolarization  of  the  heart 
muscle  on  electrocardiograms.  HERG  is  responsible 
for repolarizing the membrane during action potentials 
(see Fig. 39.20). Mutant channels open more slowly in 
response  to  depolarization  of  the  membrane.  This  pro-
longs the action potential and predisposes to abnormal 
cardiac  rhythms  and  sudden  death.  Some  HERG  muta-
tions also cause deafness.

Voltage-Gated Na+ Channels
When  activated  by  membrane  depolarization,  voltage-
gated  Na+  channels  open  synchronously  over  a  narrow 
range of membrane potentials (Fig. 16.8) and then inac-
tivate in 1 to 2 milliseconds. This cycle depolarizes the 
plasma  membrane  transiently  during  action  potentials 
(see  Fig.  17.6),  so  the  distribution  of  these  channels 
effectively  defines  the  excitable  regions  of  nerve  cell 
membranes (see Fig. 17.10A). The selectivity filter favors 
Na+ over K+ by more than 10-fold. The filter consists of 
two parts: a ring of four negatively charged glutamic acid 
side  chains  in  bacteria,  and  a  ring  of  four  water  mole-
cules.  Human  Na+  channels  have  a  ring  of  two  acidic 
residues, a lysine and an alanine. These rings allow par-
tially  hydrated  Na+  ions  to  diffuse  rapidly  across  the 
membrane. An open channel rapidly inactivates when a 
short flexible cytoplasmic segment between domains III 
and IV binds to and blocks the open pore. The channel 
remains  inactivated  until  the  membrane  repolarizes. 
Then the channel rearranges to the closed state without 
reopening.  Inactivation  does  not  depend  steeply  on 
membrane potential, but because it occurs much more 
frequently  when  the  channel  is  open,  inactivation 
appears  to  be  voltage  dependent.  A  high  frequency  of 
membrane depolarization causes a slower type of inacti-
vation  that  results  from  rearrangement  of  the  four  
subunits (or domains) to change the shape of the filter.
Vertebrates  express  more  than  10  Na+  channel  iso-
forms with some variations of these common features. A 
polypeptide insert between domains I and II of isoforms 
expressed in neurons, cardiac muscle, and neonatal skel-
etal muscle contains multiple phosphorylation sites that 
modulate  channel  activity.  In  mammals,  one  or  more 
small  β-subunits  help  target  α-subunits  to  their  proper 
places in the cell or modify channel behavior.

Certain voltage-gated Na+ channels participate in the 
perception of pain produced by noxious stimuli such as 
chemicals,  toxins,  and  extreme  temperatures.  Remark-
ably, humans with mutations of the Nav1.7 channel feel 
no pain and mice with mutations of the Nav1.8 channel 
are  insensitive  to  scorpion  toxin.  Local  anesthetics, 
such as lidocaine and procaine, prevent the perception 
of  painful  stimuli  by  blocking  Na+  channels  in  sensory 
nerves  and  inhibiting  generation  of  action  potentials. 
Nav1.7 and Nav1.8 are targets for new pain killing drugs. 
Voltage-gated  Na+  channels  of  cardiac  muscle  cells  are 
also sensitive to local anesthetics, which are used for the 

emergency  treatment  of  potentially  fatal  disorders  of 
cardiac rhythm. Voltage-gated Na+ channels are also the 
targets of puffer fish toxins and paralytic toxins that scor-
pions, spiders, and snails use to immobilize their prey.

Mutations  in  the  gene  for  a  heart  Na+  channel  are 
another cause of long QT syndrome in humans. Patients 
have  a  mixture  of  normal  and  defective  Na+  channels. 
Most  of  the  time,  the  mutant  channels  open  and  
close normally, but occasionally, they fail to inactivate, 
sustaining  the  inward  Na+  current  that  depolarizes 
the  membrane.  These  rare  abnormal  events  in  a  large 
population  of  Na+  channels  delay  the  repolarization  of 
the  membrane,  prolong  the  action  potential,  and  pre-
dispose  the  patient  to  abnormal  cardiac  rhythms  and 
sudden death.

Voltage-Gated Calcium Channels
Like voltage-gated Na+ channels voltage-gated Ca2+ chan-
nels consist of four homologous domains in vertebrates. 
These  channels  favor  Ca2+  over  Na+  by  more  than  500-
fold, even though both ions are the same size. Remark-
ably, just three amino acid substitutions in each subunit 
convert  a  Na+  channel  into  a  Ca2+  selective  channel.  A 
structure of one of these mutant channels shows that the 
selectivity  filter  consists  of  three  binding  sites  for  fully 
hydrated  Ca2+  ions  along  the  axis  of  the  pore.  Higher 
affinity of these sites for Ca2+ than Na+ explains the selec-
tivity. Like voltage-gated Na+ channels, Ca2+ channels are 
activated by membrane depolarization, inactivated by a 
conformational change, and returned to the resting state 
when  the  membrane  repolarizes.  Inactivation  is  gener-
ally slower than that for Na+ channels.

Voltage-sensitive  Ca2+-selective  channels  have  other 
subunits  in  addition  to  the  large  α1-subunit  with  four 
internally  homologous  domains.  The  glycoprotein  α2-
subunit is essential for the assembly and normal gating 
kinetics  of  α1.  Other,  smaller  peptide  subunits  desig-
nated β, γ, and Δ, promote delivery of the α1-subunit to 
the  cell  surface  and  modify  the  voltage-dependence  of 
the channel.

Ca2+  channels  have  numerous  functions.  First,  Ca2+ 
channels contribute to membrane depolarization during 
action potentials in some cells. Ca2+ currents supplement 
Na+ currents in vertebrate heart cells and replace them 
in heart pacemaker cells (see Fig. 39.20) and some inver-
tebrate neurons. Given the very low Ca2+ concentration 
in  the  cytoplasm  (see  Fig.  26.12),  open  Ca2+  channels 
have a powerful effect on the membrane potential.

Second, Ca2+ channels convert electrical signals (mem-
brane depolarization) into chemical signals by raising the 
local  concentration  of  Ca2+.  Action  potentials  in  nerve 
terminals open plasma membrane calcium channels and 
incoming Ca2+ stimulates the secretion of neurotransmit-
ters (see Figs. 17.9 and 17.10). In cardiac muscle, action 
potentials cause an influx of Ca2+ that triggers the release 
of  additional  Ca2+  from  the  endoplasmic  reticulum  to 
activate contraction (see Fig. 39.15).

 

CHAPTER 16  n  Membrane Channels 

271

TABLE 16.1  Calcium Channel Classification
Type

Distribution

L-type
N-type
P/Q-type
T-type

Heart; skeletal muscle
Heart; sympathetic neurons; CNS presynaptic terminals
Synapses
Neurons

Functions

Excitation-contraction coupling
Neurotransmitter secretion
Neurotransmitter secretion
Neuron excitation

Blockers

Dihydropyridines
ω-Conotoxin

Ni2+

Third,  voltage-gated  Ca2+  channels  act  as  voltage 
sensors  in  skeletal  muscle.  Action  potentials  stimulate 
voltage-gated  Ca2+  channels,  which  use  direct  physical 
contact to activate Ca2+ release channels in the endo-
plasmic  reticulum  to  release  more  Ca2+  that  stimulates 
contraction (see Fig. 39.15).

To  carry  out  these  diverse  physiological  functions, 
vertebrate  cells  express  a  variety  of  Ca2+  channel  pro-
teins  with  different  physiological  properties.  Tradition-
ally,  Ca2+  channels  were  divided  into  several  classes, 
termed N, T, L, and P/Q, based on their sites of expres-
sion,  voltage  required  for  activation,  open  channel  
currents,  inactivation  kinetics,  and  sensitivity  to  drugs 
(Table 16.1). For example, only L-type calcium currents 
are sensitive to dihydropyridines, which are used thera-
peutically  to  dilate  blood  vessels  by  relaxing  smooth 
muscle. N-type Ca2+ currents resist dihydropyridines but 
are blocked selectively by ω-conotoxin, which prevents 
neurotransmitter release at some synapses. This classifi-
cation is still useful, but the discovery and characteriza-
tion of channel isoforms with novel properties blurred 
these distinctions.

Transient Receptor Potential Channels
Diverse  chemical  and  physical  stimuli  activate  various 
transient receptor potential (TRP) channels. These share 
many features with voltage-gated cation channels, includ-
ing four subunits, each with six transmembrane helices, 
a  central  selectivity  filter  formed  by  a  P-loop  between 
helices  S5  and  S6  (Fig.  11.3)  and  a  peripheral  domain 
composed of helices S1 to S4 (Fig. 16.9). It is likely that 
a  common  ancestor  gave  rise  to  both  families  which 
diverged  widely.  Helix  S4  has  aromatic  residues  rather 
than  the  arginines  characteristic  of  voltage-gated  chan-
nels, so TRP channels are generally not voltage-sensitive. 
The  large  cytoplasmic  domains  on  both  the  N-  and 
C-termini  of  TRP  channels  are  not  shared  by  voltage-
gated cation channels.

When active, TRP channels admit modest amounts of 
both extracellular Na+ and Ca2+ through short selectivity 
filters  that  include  a  ring  of  four  backbone  carbonyls. 
Both  the  selectivity  filter  and  contacts  between  the  S6 
helices contribute to closing the pore of inactive chan-
nels.  Structures  of  the  heat-sensitive  transient  receptor 
potential vanilloid-1 (TRPV1) channel show that binding 
of a spider toxin to the extracellular side of the pore and 
capsaicin next to the S5-S6 linker helix each contribute 
to opening the pore.

A

B

Chemical stimulus
Menthol
Capsaicin

Activates
No response
TRPM8

S1–S4
domain

 S5-P-S6

pore

module

No response No response
Activates
No response
TRPV1
TRPV2

Activation ranges

0

10

20
Temperature (ºC)

30

40

50

60

FIGURE  16.9  TRANSIENT  RECEPTOR  POTENTIAL  (TRP) 
CHANNELS.  A,  Structure  of  the  heat-activated  TRPV1  (transient 
receptor potential vanilloid-1) channel determined by electron cryomi-
croscopy. Ribbon diagrams of views from the side and top show the 
central  pore  and  peripheral  domains.  B,  Responses  of  three  TRP 
channels  to  chemicals  and  temperature.  Cold  temperatures  and  the 
cooling chemical menthol activate TRPM8. Hot temperatures and cap-
saicin,  the  active  ingredient  of  hot  chili  peppers,  activate  TRPV1.  
(For  reference,  see  Liao  M,  Cao  E,  Julius  D,  et al.  Structure  of  the 
TRPV1 ion channel determined by electron cryo-microscopy. Nature. 
2013;504:107–112 [A] and McKemy DD, Neuhausser WM, Julius D. 
Identification of a cold receptor reveals a general role for TRP channels 
in thermosensation. Nature. 2002;416:52–58 [B].)

Organisms from most parts of the phylogenetic tree 
use the TRP family of channels for sensation of diverse 
stimuli, including chemicals, osmolarity of their environ-
ment,  and  temperature.  TRP  channels  enable  humans 
to sense bitter and sweet tastes, pain, high temperature 
(and  hot  spices),  and  cool  stimuli.  For  example,  both 
high  temperatures  and  chemicals  from  hot  spices  acti-
vate TRPV1 channels, accounting for the perception of 
such spices as being “hot” (Fig. 16.9B). The brain cannot 
discern  whether  heat  or  a  spice  activated  the  TRPV1 
channels in a sensory nerve. Similarly, cold temperatures 
activate  the  CMR1  channel  that  also  responds  to  cool-
ing  chemicals  such  as  menthol.  Signaling  mechanisms 

272 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

downstream  from  seven-helix  receptors  and  receptors 
tyrosine kinases (see Chapter 24) activate other TRP chan-
nels,  in  some  cases  by  producing  a  second  messenger 
(see Chapter 26) such as the membrane lipids phospha-
tidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) and diacylglycerol.

Channels Gated by Intracellular Ligands
Cytoplasmic Ca2+, cyclic nucleotides, or β/γ-subunits of 
trimeric  G-proteins  (see  Fig.  25.9)  activate  a  group  of 
channels with six transmembrane segments and a P loop 
(LC ligand-gated [see Fig. 16.2]). Genes for these chan-
nels  diverged  from  K+  channels  relatively  recently  in 
evolution,  about  the  time  when  animals  diverged  from 
fungi. Their sequences are similar to each other.

Ca2+-activated K+ channels are first cousins of voltage-
gated  K+  channels  with  the  Ca2+-binding  protein, 
calmodulin  (see  Fig.  3.12C),  bound  constitutively  to 
the cytoplasmic tail following S6. Ca2+, entering the cyto-
plasm  through  the  plasma  membrane  or  released  from 
intracellular stores (see Fig. 26.12), binds this associated 
calmodulin and activates the channel by making it more 
sensitive to membrane depolarization. Differential gene 
expression and alternative splicing produce a variety of 
these channels with different physiologi cal properties.

Cyclic  nucleotide–gated  ion  channels  have  a 
C-terminal  cyclic  nucleotide–binding  domain  homolo-
gous  with  bacterial  cyclic  nucleotide–binding  proteins 
(Fig.  16.10).  Four  of  these  subunits  form  a  functional 
channel.  Binding  of  cyclic  adenosine  monophosphate 
(cAMP)  or  cyclic  guanosine  monophosphate  (cGMP) 
(see Fig. 26.1) to the cytoplasmic receptor domain opens 
a pore for Na+ and Ca2+ and depolarizes the membrane. 
Changes  in  cyclic  nucleotide  concentration  provide  a 
sharp on–off switch, as ligand must occupy at least three 
of the four subunits to open the channel. Ca2+ entering 
the  cytoplasm  binds  to  calmodulin  associated  with  the 
N-terminal cytoplasmic part of the protein. This provides 
negative feedback to the channel.

Ion channels gated by intracellular cyclic nucleotides 
are particularly important in sensory systems, including 
olfaction  (see  Fig.  27.1)  and  vision  (see  Fig.  27.2). 
Odorant molecules stimulate olfactory sensory neurons 
by  binding  seven-helix  receptors  in  the  plasma  mem-
brane. These receptors work through trimeric G-proteins 
to  increase  the  cytoplasmic  concentration  of  cAMP. 
cAMP  opens  cAMP-gated  cation  channels,  depolarizes 
the membrane, and activates voltage-gated Na+ channels 
to fire an action potential. Signal transduction in photo-
receptor  cells  also  uses  a  cyclic  nucleotide–gated 
channel.  Light  activates  a  seven-helix  receptor,  leading 
to a decline in cytoplasmic cGMP. This sends a positive 
signal by closing cGMP-gated channels, hyperpolarizing 
the photoreceptor plasma membrane, and reducing the 
secretion of the neurotransmitter glutamate.

A sister group of channels, called hyperpolarization-
activated cyclic nucleotide-gated channels, regulate the 

A. Cyclic nucleotide–gated channels

Calmodulin

S1

S2

S3 S4 S5

P

S6

binding

Cyclic nucleotide-
binding domain

C

N

B

N

N

N

N

C

C

C

cAMP

FIGURE 16.10  CYCLIC NUCLEOTIDE–GATED CATION CHAN-
NELS. A, Domain architecture with an N-terminal calmodulin binding 
site, six predicted transmembrane helices (S1 to S6), a P loop, and a 
C-terminal cyclic nucleotide–binding domain. B, Ribbon diagram of a 
model of the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-gated channel 
based  on  the  homologous  transmembrane  elements  of  the  TRPV1 
channel and a structure on the cytoplasmic cyclic nucleotide binding 
domain  that  crystalized  as  a  tetramer.  (For  reference,  see  PDB  file 
1Q5O and Zagotta WN, Olivier NB, Black KD, et al. Structural basis 
for  modulation  and  agonist  specificity  of  HCN  pacemaker  channels. 
Nature. 2003;425:200–205.)

electrical  activity  of  the  heart.  These  “HCN  channels” 
open  in  response  to  extremes  of  membrane  potential. 
Binding of cyclic nucleotides makes these channels more 
sensitive to the membrane potential.

Ca-Release Channels
The most massive members of the S5-S6 family of chan-
nels  release  Ca2+  from  the  endoplasmic  reticulum  of 
eukaryotes (see Fig. 26.13). These huge genes originated 
in  ancient  metazoans  and  diverged  into  two  families 
called  IP3  receptors  (for  the  ligand  inositol  1,4,5-
triphosphate)  and  Ryanodine  receptors  (a  drug)  that 
inactivates them (Fig. 16.2). Huge cytoplasmic domains 
are  linked  to  channel-forming  domains  of  other  similar 
members of the S5-S6 family (see Fig. 26.13).

Ion Channels Gated by  
Extracellular Ligands
Channels  gated  by  chemicals  mediate  communication 
between  nerve  terminals  and  other  nerves  or  muscles. 
This  communication  takes  place  at  specializations  
called  synapses,  which  facilitate  chemical  transmission 
(see Figs. 17.9 and 17.10). On the sending side, presyn-
aptic terminals are specialized for exocytosis of chemi-
cals  called  neurotransmitters,  which  they  package  in  
small vesicles. Neurotransmitters include acetylcholine, 
serotonin,  glutamic  acid,  glycine,  and  γ-aminobutyric 
acid  (GABA)  (see  Fig.  17.8).  When  an  action  potential 
arrives  at  a  nerve  terminal,  voltage-gated  Ca2+  channels 

 

CHAPTER 16  n  Membrane Channels 

273

admit  Ca2+  to  the  cytoplasm.  This  causes  synaptic  vesi-
cles  to  fuse  with  the  plasma  membrane,  releasing  neu-
rotransmitters outside the cell. Neurotransmitters diffuse 
to the postsynaptic membrane in microseconds.

On the receiving side, the neurotransmitter activates 
ligand-gated ion channels in the postsynaptic membrane. 
Some  ligand-gated  channels  trigger  action  potentials  in 
the postsynaptic membrane by admitting cations, which 
drive the membrane potential toward threshold. Others 
inhibit action potentials by admitting Cl−, which hyper-
polarizes the postsynaptic membrane.

Stimulation of ligand-gated channels is transient because 
of inactivating conformational changes called desensitiza-
tion, and because neurotransmitters are rapidly removed 
from the synaptic cleft between the cells (see Figs. 17.9 
and 17.10). An extracellular enzyme degrades acetylcho-
line. Carriers (see Chapter 15) remove other neurotrans-
mitters by pumping them back into the presynaptic cell.

Glutamate Receptors
The amino acid glutamate is the main neurotransmitter 
used  by  neurons  in  the  brain  to  excite  other  neurons. 
Binding  of  glutamate  to  glutamate-gated  channels  pro-
vides the energy to open a cation channel permeable to 
both  Na+  and  K+,  depolarizing  the  postsynaptic  mem-
brane  (see  Fig.  17.10).  This  depolarization  excites  the 
cell  by  activating  voltage-gated  sodium  channels  to 
trigger an action potential. Thus these channels are vital 
to every aspect of brain function and their dysfunction 
contributes to human diseases including psychiatric dis-
orders.  Plant  glutamate  receptors  participate  in  the 
response of developing plants to light.

Glutamate  receptors  are  highly  divergent  members  
of the S5-S6 family of channels. Their genes apparently 
originated by fusion of genes for an S5-P-S6 channel and 
a bacterial amino acid–binding protein (Fig. 16.2).

Eukaryotic glutamate receptor channels are tetramers, 
usually of two pairs of homologous subunits (Fig. 16.11). 
Each subunit has an extracellular aminoterminal domain 
involved with channel assembly, a ligand-binding domain 
and  four  hydrophobic  segments.  M1,  M2,  and  M3  cor-
respond  to  S5-P-S6  in  other  family  members,  although  
the orientation of the pore in the plasma membrane is 
inverted compared with KcsA. Like KcsA, the M3 helices 
cross  to  form  the  gate  located  on  the  cytoplasmic  side 
of  the  membrane  owing  to  the  inverted  orientation  of 
the pore. The available structures have yet to resolve the 
details of the selectivity filter.

Binding  of  glutamate  (and  various  drugs)  in  a  cleft  
in  the  ligand-binding  domain  provides  the  energy  to 
close the domain like a clamshell. This motion produces 
tension  on  the  transmembrane  domain  and  opens  the 
gate. After the pore opens, spontaneous conformational 
changes in the extracellular domains rapidly reclose the 
pore  resulting  in  an  inactive  “desensitized”  state  with 
bound ligand.

A. Glutamate receptors
Glutamate receptor–A

N

B

N-terminal domain

a

Amino terminal

domains

1 2 3

b

c

4

d

C

VIEW FROM CELL EXTERIOR

Ligand
binding
domains

Competitive
antagonist

VIEW FROM CELL INTERIOR

FIGURE 16.11  GLUTAMATE-GATED ION CHANNEL. A, Domain 
organization of the α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionate 
(AMPA)–type  glutamate  receptor  with  the  glutamate-binding  domain 
between a and b and four predicted transmembrane segments, M1 to 
M4. M2 is a P loop oriented toward the cytoplasm. B, Ribbon diagrams 
of the atomic structure of the inactive AMPA-A channel with each of  
the  four  identical  subunit  polypeptides  a  different  color.  Space-filling 
models show a competitive antagonist bound to the glutamate binding 
site. The side view shows the three domains. Note that the cytoplasmic 
domains of the blue and green subunits are oriented vertically, but that 
the yellow and red subunits swap their amino terminal domains. Top 
views show that the cytoplasmic domains have twofold symmetry, a 
dimer of dimers, while the transmembrane domains have fourfold sym-
metry. (For reference, see PDB file 3KG2 and Sobolevsky AI, Rosconi 
MP, Gouaux E. X-ray structure, symmetry and mechanism of an AMPA-
subtype glutamate receptor. Nature. 2008;462:745–756.)

Multiple  genes,  alternative  splicing,  and  RNA  editing 
(see  Fig.  11.7)  contribute  to  the  diversity  of  glutamate 
receptor subunits, which assemble into homo- and hetero-
tetrameric channels used in different parts of the nervous 
system. In addition to glutamate receptors, three families 
of isoforms are sensitive to different pharmacologic ago-
nists:  N-methyl-D-aspartate  (NMDA),  α-amino-3-hydroxy-
5-methyl-4-isoxazole  propionate  (AMPA),  or  kainate. 
NMDA  receptors  are  obligate  heterotetramers  involved 
with learning and memory (see Fig. 17.11). They are more 
permeable  to  Ca2+  than  to  Na+  and  K+  and  desensitize 
slower than the other isoforms. Because excess intracel-
lular  Ca2+  can  be  damaging,  overstimulation  of  NMDA 
receptors by glutamate released from cells during strokes 
or  constitutive  activation  of  NMDA  receptors  by  point 
mutations can kill nerve cells.

Pentameric Ligand-Gated Ion Channels
Several important neurotransmitters activate members of 
a family of channels with five subunits (Fig. 16.12). They 
are  also  called  Cys-loop  receptors.  A  subset  of  bacteria 

274 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

N

A

Acetylcholine receptor

M1

M2 M3

C

M4

*

*

ACh+

*

Na+
K+

*

Na+

K+

B

C

D

E

ACh+

SYNAPTIC

CLEFT

CYTOPLASM

FIGURE  16.12  NICOTINIC  ACETYLCHOLINE  RECEPTOR.  A,  Domain  organization.  All  four  hydrophobic  segments,  M1  to  M4,  form 
transmembrane helices. B–C, Structure of the pentameric nicotinic acetylcholine receptor from the electric organ of the electric ray determined 
by electron microscopy. B, Reconstruction at a resolution of 0.46 nm. C, Ribbon diagrams of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor from a structure 
at a resolution of 0.40 nm. Left, View from the extracellular side, showing five M2 helices lining the central pore. Right, Side view of model. The 
extracellular  domains  of  two  red α-subunits  bind  acetylcholine.  D,  Space-filling  surface  representation.  E,  Diagram  showing  the  acetylcholine 
(Ach)-binding  sites,  the  proposed  conformational  changes  following  activation,  and  the  passages  for  Na+  into  the  cell  and  K+  out  of  the  cell. 
A  43-kD  protein  called  rapsyn  (blue)  binds  on  the  cytoplasmic  side.  (For  reference,  see  PDB  file  1OED  and  Miyazawa  A,  Fujiyoshi  Y, 
Unwin N. Structure and gating mechanism of the acetylcholine receptor pore. Nature. 2003;423:949–955.)

and  one  Archaeon  have  genes  for  structurally  related 
channels,  but  metazoans  are  the  only  eukaryotes  with 
these channels. Perhaps an early metazoan acquired the 
gene from a bacterium by lateral transfer.

The nicotinic acetylcholine receptor from the plasma 
membrane  of  skeletal  muscle  cells  was  the  first  ligand-
gated channel to be characterized in detail. This receptor 
triggers action potentials that stimulate muscle contrac-
tion (see Figs. 17.9 and 39.14). It is called the nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptor because it also binds the tobacco 
alkaloid nicotine. Related nicotinic acetylcholine recep-
tors  in  the  central  nervous  system  are  the  targets  in 
tobacco addiction.

The muscle nicotinic acetylcholine receptor is a pen-
tamer of four different, but homologous, subunits with 
the composition α2βγε (Fig. 16.12). Each subunit has a 
large  N-terminal  extracellular  segment,  four  transmem-
brane  α-helices  (M1  to  M4),  and  a  large  cytoplasmic 
segment between M3 and M4. M2 α-helices from the five 
subunits  line  a  central  transmembrane  pore  like  staves 
of a barrel. Hydrophobic side chains line this pore except 
for a few negative charges that may contribute to cation 
selectivity.  The  other  three  transmembrane  α-helices 
of  each  subunit  separate  the  M2  helices  from  the  sur-
rounding lipid. The N-terminal segments of each subunit 
form  massive  extracellular  domains,  each  folded  into 
similar, highly twisted β-sandwiches. Deep cavities in the 
α-subunits  bind  acetylcholine.  Similar  transmembrane 
domains  form  the  pores  of  bacterial  pentameric  chan-
nels,  but  the  extracellular  ligand-binding  domains  are 
smaller and they lack cytoplasmic domains.

Gating  and  ion  selectivity  of  acetylcholine  recep-
tors  differ  in  concept  from  the  P-loop  family  of  chan-
nels.  In  closed  channels,  the  narrowest  part  of  the 
closed  pore  is  less  than  0.7 nm  in  diameter,  too  small 
for  hydrated  K+  and  Na+  ions,  and  the  hydrophobic 
pore  does  not  provide  a  passage  for  unhydrated  ions. 
Acetylcholine  binding  to  the  two  α-subunits  provides 
energy  to  change  the  conformations  of  the  extracellu-
lar  domains,  which  rotate  the  M2  helices  and  open  a 
channel  that  is  more  permeable  to  K+  and  Na+  than  to 
Ca2+. The resulting permeability to all three ions causes 
the  membrane  potential  to  collapse  toward  a  reversal 
potential  (see  the  section  in  Appendix  16.3  entitled 
“Net  Current  through  Ion-Selective  Channels”)  around 
0 mV.  This  triggers  voltage-gated  Na+  channels  to  ini-
tiate  a  self-propagating  action  potential  in  the  muscle 
plasma  membrane  with  nearly  100%  efficiency  (see  
Fig. 17.9).

Muscle cells and some central nervous system neurons 
express  more  than  two  dozen  different  isoforms  of  
nicotinic  acetylcholine  receptors.  Most  are  composed  
of  a  mixture  of  subunits  but  some  have  five  identical 
subunits.

Many  toxins  bind  nicotinic  acetylcholine  receptors, 
blocking  communication  between  motor  nerves  and 
skeletal  muscle  (Appendix  16.1). α-Bungarotoxin  has 
been  used  to  characterize  the  receptor.  Curare  is  a 
powerful  muscle  relaxant  used  during  surgery  because 
it blocks acetylcholine-binding sites without opening the 
channel. Local anesthetics, such as procaine, bind within 
the channel and block ion conductance.

 

CHAPTER 16  n  Membrane Channels 

275

Some people produce autoimmune antibodies to nic-
otinic  acetylcholine  receptors,  resulting  in  a  disease 
called  myasthenia  gravis.  When  antibody  binds  the 
receptor, the skeletal muscle cell internalizes the recep-
tor,  reducing  its  response  to  acetylcholine  and  causing 
weakness.

The neurotransmitter serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine) 
activates excitatory Na+/K+ channels similar in architec-
ture to nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. The pentameric 
receptors that respond to GABA and glycine are Cl− chan-
nels that hyperpolarize the postsynaptic membrane, so 
they inhibit excitability. Several isoforms of GABA recep-
tors bind benzodiazepines, drugs used to treat depres-
sion. They increase the probability that the channel will 
open.  Strychnine  inhibits  glycine  receptors,  making 
neural circuits oversensitive to stimulation.

Chloride Channels
ClC Channels
Bacteria, yeast, and animals have genes for members of 
a  large  family  of  ClC  chloride  channels  with  a  unique 
evolutionary origin and structure. They are selective for 
Cl− and gated by the membrane potential. ClCs control 
membrane excitability and contribute to volume regula-
tion and epithelial transport.

ClC  subunits  are  triangular  transmembrane  proteins 
formed from 18 α-helices (Fig. 16.13). These helices sur-
round  a  pore  that  passes  through  the  middle  of  each 
subunit, like the pores of ammonia channels (Fig. 16.14), 
aquaporins  (Fig.  16.15),  and  porins  (see  Fig.  13.9C). 
Several  helices  around  the  pore  extend  only  part  way 
across the lipid bilayer. Highly conserved residues in the 
loops between these helices form the selectivity filter for 
Cl− in the middle of the membrane bilayer. Two subunits 
associate tightly in the lipid bilayer, so each channel has 
two pores that independently conduct Cl− when active.

ClC0  from  skeletal  muscle  is  a  well  characterized 
member  of  the  family.  Like  voltage-gated  cation  chan-
nels, ClC0 channels open when the membrane depolar-
izes  and  spontaneously  close  shortly  thereafter.  A 
negatively  charged  glutamate  side  chain  is  believed  to 
block the pore of inactive channels and to swing out of 
the  way  in  active  channels.  In  an  unexpected  turn  of 
events, physiological analysis of the bacterial ClC channel 
used for structural studies revealed it has many features 
of a carrier that exchanges Cl− for H+ rather than behav-
ing like a typical ion channel like other members of this 
family. This is an example of blurred distinctions among 
channels, carriers, and pumps.

Mutations of Cl− channel genes cause several human 
diseases. Defective skeletal muscle ClC1 channels cause 
recessive and dominant myotonias. Mutations in kidney 
ClC5  channels  predispose  individuals  to  the  formation 
of kidney stones.

Bestrophin Channels
These  channels  are  another  unique  family  with  their 
own  evolutionary  origin,  distinct  structure,  and  wide 
distribution  in  prokaryotes  and  eukaryotes.  They  were 
discovered as the protein mutated in some patients with 
retinal degeneration. Affected patients have one of more 
than  120  different  mutations  spread  throughout  the 
protein.  Most  mutations  causing  retinal  degeneration 
encode  proteins  in  photoreceptor  cells,  such  as  visual 
pigments,  but  bestrophin  is  expressed  in  supporting 
cells of the retinal pigment epithelium.

Channels  formed  by  five  subunits  looks  superficially 
like  nicotinic  acetylcholine  receptors  but  their  fold  is 
different (Fig. 16.13B). The isoform in the human eye is 
a Cl− channel activated by intracellular Ca2+, which binds 
a  site  near  the  pore.  The  selectivity  filter  is  formed  by 
two rings of phenylalanine side chains with the slightly 
electropositive edges of their aromatic rings in the pore. 

A. ClC channel

B. Bestrophin

Chloride ions

VIEW FROM CELL EXTERIOR

N

N

FIGURE  16.13  CHLORIDE CHANNELS. A, Crystal structure of a ClC channel StClC from the bacterium  Salmonella typhimurium. These 
ribbon diagrams show one subunit in  red and the other in  blue. The white sphere shows the position of a Cl− ion in the selectivity filter. This 
structure is the model for other chloride channels, but it actually works more like a carrier than a channel. B, Crystal structure of bestrophin from 
the bacterium Klebsiella pneumoniae. The ribbon diagrams show each of the five subunits in a different color. (A, For reference, see PDB file 
1KPK and Dutzler R, Campbell EB, Cadene M, et al. X-ray structure of a ClC chloride channel at 3.0 Å reveals the molecular basis of anion 
selectivity. Nature. 2002;415:287–294. B, See PDB file 4WD8 and Yang T, Liu Q, Kloss B, et al. Structure and selectivity in bestrophin ion chan-
nels. Science. 2014;346:355–359.)

276 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

A. Ammonia channel

B. View from cell exterior

C. Cut section

Ammonia
molecules

FIGURE 16.14  AMMONIA CHANNELS. A, Ribbon diagram of one subunit of the trimeric AmtB ammonia channel from Escherichia coli with 
the  extracellular  side  at  the  top.  B,  Ribbon  and  space-filling  diagram  of  the  channel  viewed  from  outside  the  cell.  Each  of  the  three  identical 
subunits has a pore for ammonia to cross the lipid bilayer. C, Space-filling cutaway drawing of one subunit exposing the channel for passage of 
ammonia (blue). In the vestibule facing outside the cell, an ammonium ion gives up a proton to an amino acid side chain before passing through 
the hydrophobic pore through the core of the protein as uncharged ammonia. At the narrowest point of the pore, hydrogen bonds between the 
ammonia and two histidines contribute to the specificity. (For reference, see PDB file 1U77 and Khademi S, O’Connell J, Remis J, et al. Mecha-
nism of ammonia transport by Amt/MEP/Rh: structure of AmtB at 1.35 Å. Science. 305:1587–1594, 2004.)

A

B

C

*

*

*

*

N

C

Water
pore

ASN 192
ASN 76

H2O

FIGURE  16.15  WATER  CHANNELS.  A,  Membrane  topology  of  aquaporin-1  deduced  from  the  primary  structure.  The  two  halves  of  the 
polypeptide have similar sequences but are inverted relative to each other. B, Structure determined by electron crystallography, showing four 
identical units, each with a pore (red asterisk). Helices are depicted as cylinders. C, Detail of the water pore, with a chain of water molecules 
crossing the membrane. Two asparagines in the middle of the pore hydrogen bond one water. (Courtesy P. Agre, Johns Hopkins Medical School, 
Baltimore, MD. For reference, see PDB file 1FQY and Murata K, Mitsuoka K, Hirai T, et al. Structural determinants of water permeation through 
aquaporin-1. Nature. 2000;407:599–605.)

The  bacterial  channel  shown  in  Fig.  16.13B  is  a  Na+ 
channel,  but  replacing  a  single  isoleucine  in  the  pore 
with phenylalanine coverts it to a Cl− channel. Another 
single residue in the pore is important for gating.

Other Chloride Channels
In  addition  to  the  bestrophin  family,  researchers  have 
characterized three other types of calcium-gated Cl− chan-
nels. TMEM16A channels are dimers of subunits with 10 
transmembrane helices, a novel channel structure. Some 
of the ten members of the TMEM16A family have addi-
tional  functions  including  exchange  of  lipids  between 

the two leaflets of membranes. Volume-regulated anion 
channels respond to cell swelling by conducting Cl− and 
some small organic molecules (Fig. 11.5).

Ammonia Channels
Another  ancient  family  of  channel  proteins  evolved  in 
early  prokaryotes  to  conduct  ammonia  across  the  cell 
membrane. Ammonia can directly penetrate lipid bilay-
ers,  but  these  channels  allow  low  concentrations  of 
ammonia to serve as a source of nitrogen that prokary-
otes  use  to  synthesize  proteins  and  nucleic  acids. 

 

CHAPTER 16  n  Membrane Channels 

277

BOX 16.1  Rh Antigens

Before anything was known about membrane proteins or 
ammonia transport, immunologists discovered that injec-
tion  of  rhesus  monkey  red  blood  cells  into  rabbits  pro-
duced  antibodies  that  reacted  with  most,  but  not  all, 
human red blood cells. This Rh antigen, now known to be 
the most common isoform of the human ammonia channel, 
is  clinically  relevant  because  the  red  blood  cells  of  an 
“Rh-positive” fetus inheriting this isoform from the father 
can  provoke  an  immunologic  response  from  the  mother 
if she lacks this isoform and is “Rh negative.” During sub-
sequent pregnancies, these maternal antibodies can attack 
the red blood cells of an Rh-positive fetus, causing serious 
complications.

Bacteria, Archaea, and eukaryotes still depend on these 
channels.  Humans  use  these  channels  to  conduct  both 
ammonia  and  carbon  dioxide  across  the  plasma  mem-
branes of red blood cells, where they are known as Rh 
antigens (Box 16.1). These channels are also important 
for transporting ammonia in the kidney and liver.

Ammonia channels consist of three identical subunits, 
each  composed  of  11  transmembrane  helices  (Fig. 
16.14). The interfaces between these subunits are tightly 
sealed, but each subunit has a narrow internal pore that 
is  highly  selective  for  ammonia  and  methylammonium. 
+  and  methylammo-
Both  substrates  (ammonium  NH4
+)  are  charged  in  aqueous  solution  and 
nium  CH3NH3
must leave behind a proton to pass through the pore as 
uncharged  species  (NH3,  CH3NH2).  They  pick  up  a 
replacement proton on the other side of the membrane 
as  they  exit  the  channel.  Selectivity  is  achieved  by  
the  tight  fit  of  the  substrates  in  the  hydrophobic  pore  
and  by  transient  formation  of  a  novel  hydrogen  bond 
within the pore. With millimolar ammonium on one side 
of  a  membrane,  these  channels  conduct  hundreds  of 
ammonia molecules per second without leaking water, 
protons, or other charged species.

Water Channels
Water diffuses relatively slowly across lipid bilayers, so 
membranes are barriers to water movement unless they 
contain water channels. Such channels were postulated 
years ago, but they eluded identification until investiga-
tors tested a small hydrophobic protein from red blood 
cells for water channel activity. Expression of this protein 
in  frog  eggs  made  them  permeable  to  water,  so  they 
swelled and burst when placed in hypotonic media. Dis-
covery of this aquaporin rapidly led to the characteriza-
tion  of  a  family  of  related  water  channels  from  many 
species,  including  bacteria,  fungi,  and  plants.  Related 
channels,  called  aquaglyceroporins,  transport  glycerol 
and ammonia across bacterial membranes. Other family 
members transport CO2 in plants.

Four identical aquaporin subunits form a stable tetra-
mer in the plane of the membrane (Fig. 16.15). The two 
halves of the protein arose by gene duplication, as their 
structures  and  sequences  are  remarkably  similar.  Each 
subunit  has  a  narrow  pore  that  is  selective  for  water 
passing through the middle of a bundle of α-helices. Ten 
water molecules line up in a pore approximately 0.3 nm 
in diameter. Hydrogen bonding of waters with a pair of 
asparagine residues at a narrow point in the pore allows 
the  channel  to  be  selective  for  water.  Water  channels 
have no gates, so they are open constitutively.

Osmotic pressure created by pumps, carriers, and the 
macromolecular  composition  of  the  cytoplasm  drives 
water through aquaporins at rates exceeding 109 mole-
cules  per  second.  This  explains  why  red  blood  cells 
rapidly  swell  and  shrink  passively,  depending  on  the 
osmolarity of the surrounding fluid (see Fig. 13.8).

Various human tissues express 12 different aquaporin 
isoforms. Aquaporin-1 is found in red blood cells, renal 
proximal tubules, blood vessel endothelial cells, and the 
choroid plexus (which makes spinal fluid in the brain). 
A few humans carry mutations that inactivate aquaporin-1; 
remarkably,  homozygotes  have  no  symptoms,  despite 
the low water permeability of their red blood cells (and 
presumably other tissues that depend on this isoform). 
Aquaporin-2  is  required  for  the  epithelial  cells  lining  
collecting ducts in the kidney to reabsorb water. Antidi-
uretic hormone (vasopressin) controls the placement 
of aquaporin-2 in the collecting duct plasma membrane. 
It activates a seven-helix receptor, causing cytoplasmic 
vesicles  storing  aquaporin-2  to  fuse  with  the  plasma 
membrane.  This  allows  water  to  move  from  the  urine 
into  the  hypertonic  extracellular  space  of  the  renal 
medulla.  Inactivating  mutations  in  both  aquaporin-2 
genes  results  in  severe  water  loss,  called  nephrogenic 
diabetes  insipidus.  Reaction  of  mercuric  chloride  with 
sensitive  cysteine  residues  closes  the  aquaporin  water 
pores,  explaining  how  mercurials,  used  therapeutically 
as diuretics in the past, inhibit the reabsorption of water 
filtered by the kidney.

Plants  are  particularly  dependent  on  water,  so  they 
have  evolved  a  large  family  of  aquaporin  genes.  These 
isoforms are located in most cellular membranes. Plants 
must move water to maintain turgor and expand cells in 
growing  tissues.  Water  moves  continuously  from  roots 
through  xylem  vessels  and  cells  in  tissues  to  exit  from 
stomata  in  leaves  as  vapor.  These  movements  across  
cell  and  tonoplast  membranes  depend  on  aquaporins. 
Plants  also  depend  on  aquaporins  to  transport  CO2  for 
photosynthesis.

Porins
Porins are channels with wide, water-filled pores found 
in  the  outer  membranes  of  gram-negative  bacteria  
and  mitochondria.  The  subunits  are  composed  of  an 

278 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

antiparallel  barrel  of  16  or  18  β-strands  that  cross  the 
membrane  (see  Fig.  13.9C).  One  to  three  of  the  loops 
connecting  the  strands  extend  into  the  center  of  the 
barrel  and  line  the  pore.  The  functional  molecule  con-
sists of three identical subunits.

Most porins are relatively nonselective pores for small, 
water-soluble  molecules,  although  some  are  specific  
for certain solutes, such as sugars. E. coli uses a related 
protein  with  22  transmembrane  β-strands  to  transport 
iron  complexes  across  the  outer  membrane.  A  central 
“cork” domain occludes the lumen of this β-barrel. Inter-
actions across the periplasmic space with plasma mem-
brane  proteins  open  and  close  the  pore.  A  variety  of 
viruses use bacterial porins as receptors.

Other Families of Channels
The 12 families of channels covered above have received 
the most attention, but researchers continue to discover 
new channels that do not fit into any of these families. 
TMBIM channels are monomers of just seven transmem-
brane  helices  that  form  a  pH-sensitive  calcium  leak 
channel through the middle of the tiny protein. Piezo2 
forms  pressure-sensitive,  non-selective  cation  channels 
that detect the touch sensation in skin. Piezo genes in a 
wide  range  of  eukaryotes  encode  large  polypeptides 
with  24–36  transmembrane  segments.  Bacteria  have  a 
family of fluoride channels consisting of a homodimer of 
subunits with four transmembrane helices. Both bacteria 
and  eukaryotes  have  novel  channels  selective  for  urea. 
They  are  homotrimers  of  subunits  with  12  transmem-
brane helices. A pore for urea passes through each of the 
subunits. The human urea channel is vital for the func-
tion of the kidney.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We  thank  Fred  Sigworth  for  advice  on  earlier  editions 
and Bill Catterall, David Julius, and Benoit Roux for sug-
gestions on revisions to this chapter.

SELECTED READINGS

Biel  M.  Cyclic  nucleotide-regulated  cation  channels.  J  Biol  Chem. 

2009;284:9017-9021.

Birnbaum  SG,  Varga  AW,  Yuan  LL,  et al.  Structure  and  function  of  
Kv4-family  transient  potassium  channels.  Physiol  Rev.  2004;84:
803-833.

Catterall  WA.  Ion  channel  voltage  sensors:  structure,  function,  and 

pathophysiology. Neuron. 2010;67:915-928.

Catterall WA, Swanson TM. Structural basis for pharmacology of voltage- 
gated  sodium  and  calcium  channels.  Mol  Pharmacol.  2015;88:
141-150.

Dolphin AC. G protein modulation of voltage-gated calcium channels. 

Pharmacol Rev. 2003;55:607-627.

Dutzler  R.  The  structural  basis  of  ClC  chloride  channel  function. 

Trends Neurosci. 2004;27:315-320.

Haswell ES, Phillips R, Rees DC. Mechanosensitive channels: what can 

they do and how do they do it? Structure. 2011;19:1356-1369.

Hilf  RJ,  Dutzler  R.  A  prokaryotic  perspective  on  pentameric  ligand-
gated  ion  channel  structure.  Curr  Opin  Struct  Biol.  2009;19:
418-424.

Hille  B.  Ion  Channels  of  Excitable  Membranes.  3rd  ed.  Sunderland, 

MA: Sinauer Associates; 2001.

Hummer  G.  Potassium  ions  line  up.  Do  K+  ions  move  in  single  file 

through potassium channels? Science. 2014;346:303.

Jasti J, Furukawa H, Gonzales EB, Gouaux E. Structure of acid-sensing 
ion  channel  1  at  1.9  Å  resolution  and  low  pH.  Nature.  2007;449:
316-323.

Jiang  Y,  Lee  A,  Chen  J,  et al.  Crystal  structure  and  mechanism  of  a 

calcium-gated potassium channel. Nature. 2002;417:515-522.

Jiang Y, Lee A, Chen J, et al. X-ray structure of a voltage-dependent K+ 

channel. Nature. 2003;423:33-41.

Julius  D.  TRP  channels  and  pain.  Annu  Rev  Cell  Dev  Biol.  2013;29:

355-384.

Kane Dickson V, Pedi L, Long SB. Structure and insights into the func-

tion of a Ca2+-activated Cl− channel. Nature. 2014;516:213-218.

Kawate T, Michel JC, Birdsong WT, Gouaux E. Crystal structure of the 
ATP-gated  P2X(4)  ion  channel  in  the  closed  state.  Nature.  2009;
460:592-598.

Khademi S, O’Connell J, Remis J, et al. Mechanism of ammonia trans-
port  by  Amt/MEP/Rh:  Structure  of  AmtB  at  1.35  Å.  Science.  2004;
305:1587-1594.

King  LS,  Kozono  D,  Agre  P.  From  structure  to  disease:  The  evolving 

tale of aquaporin biology. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2004;5:687-698.
Kunzelmann K. TMEM16, LRRC8A, bestrophin: chloride channels con-
trolled  by  Ca(2+)  and  cell  volume.  Trends  Biochem  Sci.  2015;40:
535-543.

Lee CH, Lü W, Michel JC, et al. NMDA receptor structures reveal subunit 

arrangement and pore architecture. Nature. 2014;511:191-197.

Lewin  GR.  Natural  selection  and  pain  meet  at  a  sodium  channel. 

Science. 2013;342:428-429.

Liao M, Cao E, Julius D, Cheng Y. Structure of the TRPV1 ion channel 
determined  by  electron  cryo-microscopy.  Nature.  2013;504:
107-112.

Lu Z. Mechanism of rectification in inward-rectifier K+ channels. Annu 

Rev Physiol. 2004;66:103-129.

Matulef  K,  Zagotta  WN.  Cyclic  nucleotide-gated  ion  channels.  Annu 

Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2003;19:23-44.

Meyerson JR, Kumar J, Chittori S, et al. Structural mechanism of gluta-
mate receptor activation and desensitization. Nature. 2014;514:328-
334.  For  an  animation  of  the  transition  of  GluA2  from  closed  to  
open  see  <http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v514/n7522/fig
_tab/nature13603_SV1.html>.

Payandeh  J,  Scheuer  T,  Zheng  N,  Catterall  WA.  The  crystal  structure 

of a voltage-gated sodium channel. Nature. 2011;475:353-358.

Sachdeva  R,  Singh  B.  Insights  into  structural  mechanisms  of  gating 
induced  regulation  of  aquaporins.  Prog  Biophys  Mol  Biol.  2014;
114:69-79.

Sobolevsky AI, Rosconi MP, Gouaux E. X-ray structure, symmetry and 
mechanism of an AMPA-subtype glutamate receptor. Nature. 2009;
462:745-756.

Stroud RM, Miercke LJ, O’Connell J, et al. Glycerol facilitator GlpF and 
the associated aquaporin family of channels. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 
2003;13:424-431.

Vargas E, Yarov-Yarovoy V, Khalili-Araghi F, et al. An emerging consen-
sus on voltage-dependent gating from computational modeling and 
molecular dynamics simulations. J Gen Physiol. 2012;140:587-594.
Verdoucq L, Rodrigues O, Martinière A, et al. Plant aquaporins on the 
move: reversible phosphorylation, lateral motion and cycling. Curr 
Opin Plant Biol. 2014;22:101-107.

Yarov-Yarovoy V, DeCaen PG, Westenbroek RE, et al. Structural basis 
for  gating  charge  movement  in  the  voltage  sensor  of  a  sodium 
channel. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2012;109:E93-E102. For a movie 
of  the  structural  change  see  <http://www.pnas.org/content/
suppl/2011/12/08/1118434109.DCSupplemental/sm01.mov>.

 

CHAPTER 16  n  Membrane Channels 

279

APPENDIX 16.1 
Examples of Channel-Blocking Agents

Compound (Chemical Class)
Sodium Channel Blockers
Tetrodotoxin (alkaloid)
Saxitoxin (alkaloid)
µ-Conotoxins (peptide)
Batrachotoxin (alkaloid)
Lidocaine
Potassium Channel Blockers
Quaternary amino alkanes
Scorpion toxin
Calcium Channel Blockers
Dihydropyridines
ω-conotoxin (peptide)
Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptor
α-Bungarotoxin (peptide)
α-Cobra toxin
Curare

Source

Physiological Effect

Japanese puffer fish
Dinoflagellates
Maine snails
Arrow poison frogs
Chemical synthesis

Chemical synthesis
Scorpions

Chemical synthesis
Pacific cone snail

Paralyzes skeletal muscle
Paralyzes skeletal muscle
Paralyzes skeletal muscle
Opens Na-channels, paralyzes skeletal muscle
Reduces cardiac and nerve excitability

Blocks K-currents, increases nerve excitability
Blocks K-currents, increases nerve excitability

Reduces excitability of L-type channels of striated muscles
Inhibits nervous system N-type channels; blocks synaptic transmission

Snake, Bungarus multicinctus
Cobra
Plant, Strychnos toxifera

Blocks neuromuscular transmission; paralyzes skeletal muscle
Blocks neuromuscular transmission; paralyzes skeletal muscle
Blocks neuromuscular transmission; paralyzes skeletal muscle

APPENDIX 16.2 
Electrical Recordings in Biology
Analysis  of  electrical  activity  across  biological  mem-
branes  requires  sensitive  methods  to  detect  electrical 
potential differences and the flow of current on a rapid 
time scale. Physiologists and clinicians use four general 
methods, with different sensitivities, to detect electrical 
activity of single channels (patch electrodes), cell mem-
branes  (microelectrodes  and  fluorescent  dyes),  and 
whole tissues (extracellular electrodes).

Single-Channel Recordings With Patch Electrodes
Patch-clamp  microelectrodes  (Fig.  16.16A)  provide  the 
best way to characterize the behavior of individual chan-
nels.  A  small-diameter,  fire-polished  glass  capillary  is 
pressed onto the surface of a cell and suction is used to 
form  a  high-resistance  seal  (10  to  −50  gigaohms).  The 
membrane patch is small enough to contain just a few 
ion channels. The electrode becomes part of an electric 
circuit  that  can  measure  current  or  voltage  across  the 
membrane.  The  high-resistance  seal  between  micropi-
pette and membrane ensures that more electrical current 
(composed of ions) flows through a single open channel 
than  leaks  in  around  the  side  of  the  electrode.  When  
a channel opens, a sensitive ammeter connected to the 
micropipette  records  the  direction  and  magnitude  of  
ion  flow  through  the  channel  as  an  electrical  current. 

Patch  electrodes  give  direct  information  about  both 
current  and  the  time  that  individual  channels  spend 
open or closed.

Variations  of  the  patch-clamp  technique  provide 
access  to  channel  properties.  Leaving  the  membrane 
patch  on  the  cell  (cell-attached  configuration)  reveals 
properties  of  the  channels  in  their  cellular  context. 
Lifting  the  membrane  patch  off  the  cell  (excised-patch 
configuration)  exposes  the  cytoplasmic  surface  of  the 
membrane to ions, enzymes, or second messengers that 
the investigator adds to the bath. Similarly, the investiga-
tor  can  test  the  effects  of  potential  ligands,  drugs,  and 
ions in the micropipette.

Measurement of Membrane Potentials With 
Intracellular Microelectrodes and Fluorescent Dyes
A glass capillary is drawn to a fine tip (~0.5 µm), filled 
with  a  conducting  solution  (3 M  KCl),  and  inserted 
through  the  plasma  membrane.  The  tip  penetrates  the 
cell  with  minimal  damage,  and  the  membrane  seals 
tightly  around  it.  The  microelectrode  is  connected  to  
a  meter  to  record  current  and  voltage  (Fig.  16.16B). 
Alternatively,  the  investigator  can  apply  a  patch  elec-
trode  to  the  cell  surface  and  suck  forcefully  to  breach 
the  membrane,  putting  the  micropipette  in  continuity  

280 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

A

Tight seal

On-cell patch

Cytoplasm

Off-cell patch

Buffer

B

–

Voltmeter

+

–

+

–

+

T0–T1

T1–T2

T2–T3

Squid axon

Electrode
enters

V = 0

0

Electrode is
withdrawn

e
g
a
t
l
o
V

Vm = –60 to 
        –90 mV

–90

Polarization

Depolarization

Hyperpolarization

T0

T1

Time

T2

T3

with  the  cytoplasm  for  recordings  from  the  rest  of  
the membrane.

Two microelectrodes inserted into a beaker of saline 
register  no  potential  difference.  If  one  electrode  is 
inserted  into  a  cell,  the  meter  registers  a  potential  
difference  of  −60  to  −90 mV  inside  the  cell  relative 
to the bath. This membrane potential arises from the 
combined  action  of  many  membrane  pumps,  carriers, 
and channels.

FIGURE 16.16  ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL MEASUREMENTS. 
A, Patch electrode. Fine-tipped glass micropipettes form a tight seal 
with a small patch of plasma membrane. The salt solution inside the 
pipette conducts current flowing through an open channel in the patch 
for recording. Lifting the patch of membrane off the cell exposes the 
cytoplasmic  surface  of  the  membrane  to  experimental  manipulation 
from the bath. Solutes in the micropipette can stimulate the extracel-
lular face of the membrane. B, Measurement of membrane potentials 
and  currents  with  microelectrodes.  A  fine-tipped  micropipette  pene-
trates the plasma membrane of a cell and is part of a circuit that can 
record either membrane potential or current flowing across the mem-
brane.  To  measure  membrane  potential,  a  voltmeter  in  the  circuit 
records the voltage inside the cell relative to the bath and follows any 
changes that occur when ion channels open and close. To measure 
current, an electronic feedback device is placed in the circuit to hold 
the  membrane  potential  at  a  constant  value.  Under  these  “voltage-
clamped” conditions, the feedback device provides current to balance 
any  current  that  results  from  opening  of  membrane  channels.  The 
current  from  the  feedback  device  is  a  record  of  current  across  the 
membrane channels. The membrane potential is an ensemble property 
of  a  large  number  of  individual  molecules.  Microelectrodes  can 
measure the membrane potential on a submillisecond time scale. 

Fluorescent dyes can provide an optical signal that is 
sensitive to membrane potential. This is the only conve-
nient  approach  for  acquiring  information  about  the 
spatial distribution of potential charges within cells.

Extracellular Electrical Measurements
Synchronous electrical activity of thousands of cells pro-
duces small electrical currents outside the cells, which 
can  be  recorded  with  extracellular  electrodes  or  even 
with  electrodes  on  the  surface  of  the  body.  Physicians 
take advantage of this phenomenon to record the ensem-
ble electrical activity of the heart (electrocardiogram 
[ECG]),  brain  (electroencephalogram  [EEG]),  and 
muscle  (electromyogram  [EMG]).  These  recordings 
reflect  the  behavior  of  thousands  of  cells,  so  they  pro-
vide little information about individual events at molecu-
lar or cellular levels.

APPENDIX 16.3 
Biophysical Basis of Membrane Potentials
The  membrane  potential  arises  from  separation  of 
charges  across  an  insulating  surface  (Fig.  16.17).  The 
lipid  bilayer  provides  the  insulation  required  to  sepa-
rate  charges.  Either  pumps  or  channels  can  produce 
unpaired  charges.  Pumps  that  transport  unpaired  ions 
generate  membrane  potentials  directly.  Channels  that 
pass unpaired ions can use ion concentration gradients 

across  membranes  to  generate  membrane  potentials. 
The concentration gradient provides a diffusional force 
to drive ions through channels. Because channels are ion 
specific,  an  excess  of  charge  builds  up  after  very  few 
ions  cross  a  membrane.  This  excess  charge  creates  a 
membrane  potential  and  stops  the  net  movement  of 
additional ions across the membrane.

 

CHAPTER 16  n  Membrane Channels 

281

Membrane-bounded
vesicle with no
channels

Impermeable
membrane

K+ 14 mM
Cl– 14 mM

Em = 0 mV K+ 140 mM
Cl– 140 mM

A

K+ 14 mM
Cl– 14 mM

A K+ channel opens;
K+ moves out

At equilibrium, the
flux of K+ is equal
in and out

K+ 14 mM
Cl– 14 mM

Em = 0 mV
K+ 140 mM
Cl– 140 mM

Em = –60 mV

B

EK

Jo

Ji

Flux

–60

–30

0

30

Em

FIGURE 16.17  MEMBRANE POTENTIAL. A, Production of a membrane potential, Em, by a K+-selective ion channel and a 10-fold potassium 
chloride concentration gradient across a membrane. The three panels illustrate the situations without a channel, when a channel first opens, and 
at equilibrium. B, Dependence of K+ fluxes out of the vesicle (Jo) and into the vesicle (Ji) as a function of membrane potential (Em). K+ passes out 
of the vesicle (driven by the concentration gradient) and into the vesicle (driven by the voltage across the membrane). At a potential of −60 mV, 
these fluxes are balanced. This is called the resting potential, or EK. If the membrane potential is more positive than −60 mV, the flux of K+ out of 
the vesicle (driven by the concentration gradient) exceeds the flux into the vesicle (driven by the voltage across the membrane). This pushes the 
potential toward EK. 

This discussion starts with a qualitative description of 
forces behind membrane potentials and then develops a 
quantitative account of membrane potentials with single 
or multiple types of ion channels.

Diffusion Potentials
An  impermeable  membrane  enclosing  concentrated 
potassium chloride is suspended in a bath of more dilute 
potassium  chloride  (Fig.  16.17).  If  the  membrane  con-
tains  a  pore  that  is  selectively  permeable  for  bidirec-
tional diffusion of K+, the concentration gradient drives 
K+  out  of  the  membrane  compartment.  Because  Cl− 
cannot pass through this selective pore or the membrane 
bilayer,  the  inside  compartment  loses  positive  charge. 
Charge  imbalance  creates  an  electrical  field,  negative 
inside, called the membrane potential. By convention, 
extracellular voltage is defined as zero.

Force provided by the membrane potential influences 
the diffusion of ions through the pore in both directions. 
The positive potential outside opposes the diffusion of 
K+ out of the vesicle and drives K+ into the vesicle, up 
its concentration gradient. Net K+ efflux continues until 
a charge imbalance builds up a membrane potential large 
enough to drive K+ influx at the same rate that the con-
centration gradient drives K+ efflux. The electrical poten-
tial  required  to  stop  net  ion  movement  is  called  the 
equilibrium potential for K+, or Nernst potential, EK.

Quantitative Relationships
The  quantitative  description  of  membrane  potentials  
by  the  Nernst  equation  is  the  central  concept  of  elec-
trophysiology.  This  relationship  between  an 
ion 

concentration  gradient  and  a  balancing  membrane 
potential is derived as follows, using K+ as an example.
The concentration gradient provides the first force. Jo 
is  the  rate  (expressed  in  ions  per  second)  of  efflux 
through the K+-selective pore. Ji is the rate of influx. The 
fluxes  are  proportionate  to  the  concentrations  on  the 
side from which the ions come. The ratio of these rates 
is equal to the ratio of the inside and outside K+ concen-
trations, Ki and Ko:

J
o
J

i

=

K
K

i

o

A typical cell has a Ki : Ko ratio of approximately 35.

The membrane potential provides a second force. A 
positive  potential  gives  a  positive  ion  a  higher  energy, 
driving it down the electrical gradient. A negative poten-
tial has the opposite effect. The difference in electrical 
energy per mole of ions is equal to zFE, where z is the 
valence (+1 for K+), F is the Faraday constant (105 cou-
lombs [C]/mol), and E is the potential in volts. This dif-
ference in energy enters the equation for the flux ratio 
as  an  exponential  term  (the  “Boltzmann  factor”),  with 
the  electrical  energy  difference  divided  by  the  thermal 
energy:

J
o
J

i

=

zFE RT

K e
i
K

o

where  R  is  the  gas  constant  and  T  is  the  absolute 
temperature.

The K+ fluxes in and out are equal when

zFE RT

K e
i
K

o

= 1

282 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

This famous Nernst equation can be rearranged to give 
the  equilibrium  (Nernst)  potential  in  terms  of  the  ion 
concentrations.

E

K

=

RT
zF

ln

K K

o

i

RT is the thermal energy of a mole of particles. The ratio 
RT/zF  has  the  dimensions  of  voltage  and  provides  the 
electrical potential that gives a mole of charged particles 
with  valence  z  an  electrical  energy  (zFE)  equal  to  the 
thermal energy (RT). At physiological temperatures, its 
value is approximately 25 mV for univalent ions where 
z = 1. The ratio of RT/zF establishes the range of poten-
tials (tens of millivolts) that occur in cells.

Another form of the Nernst equation is more conve-
nient. Because ln(x) = 2.3 log(x) and 2.3 RT/F = 60 mV 
at 30°C, the Nernst equation can be rewritten as

E

K

= 60 mV

z

log

K K

o

i

Thus,  the  membrane  potential  is −60 mV  when  the  K+ 
concentration  inside  is  10  times  the  concentration 
outside.

Nernst Potential for Various Ions
The  Nernst  potential  can  be  calculated  for  each  ion 
known  to  have  a  selective  channel  in  cell  membranes: 
Na+,  K+,  Ca2+,  and  Cl−  (Fig.  16.18).  Given  physiological 
gradients of these ions across the plasma membrane, the 
membrane potential could range from −98 to +128 mV, 
depending on which channels are open. In resting cells, 
only  K+  channels  are  open,  so  the  resting  membrane 
potential  is  close  to  EK.  Thus,  variation  of  extracellular 

EXTRACELLULAR
  Na+= 145
  K+= 4
  Ca2+= 1.8
  Cl–= 150

CYTOPLASM
  Na+= 12
  K+= 155
  Ca2+= 0.0002
  Cl–= 4

E (Nernst)

+128

Ca2+

+67

Na+

0 mV

-90
-98

Cl–
K+

FIGURE  16.18  PHYSIOLOGICAL  ION  CONCENTRATIONS 
AND  MEMBRANE  POTENTIALS.  Ion  concentrations  in  the  cyto-
plasm  and  outside  a  vertebrate  muscle  cell.  The  scale  on  the  right 
shows  the  corresponding  equilibrium  membrane  potentials  (Nernst 
potentials)  that  would  result  if  channels  for  each  one  of  these  ions 
opened. 

K+  concentration  changes  the  membrane  potential.  In 
vertebrates, the normal extracellular K+ concentration is 
approximately 4 mM, but it varies from 2 mM to >8 mM 
in  disease  states.  This  fourfold  variation  in  Ko  changes 
the  membrane  potential  by  30  to  37 mV,  enough  to 
affect  cellular  processes  that  are  sensitive  to  the  mem-
brane  potential.  Other  channels  open  and  close  selec-
tively in response to extracellular or intracellular ligands, 
membrane  potential,  physical  forces,  or  other  factors 
(see text). Selective activation of channels is responsible 
for  action  potentials  and  other  behavior  of  excitable 
membranes (see Fig. 17.6).

APPENDIX 16.4 
Charging and Discharging the Membrane
Opening  or  closing  ion  channels  influences  the  mem-
brane  potential  and  the  flux  of  ions  across  the  mem-
brane. This discussion explains how movement of just a 
few ions allows cells to change their membrane potential 
without dissipating ion gradients across the membrane. 
Consequently,  flux  through  a  few  ion  channels  rapidly 
changes  the  membrane  potential  during  action  poten-
tials.  The  result  of  opening  multiple  channels  with  dif-
ferent  ion  selectivities  and  concentration  gradients  is 
also explained.

Membrane Capacitance
The  membrane  potential  (E)  produced  by  a  given  net 
charge inside the cell (Q) depends on the physical prop-
erties of the membrane, summarized in a constant called 
capacitance (C):

E

=

Q
C

Capacitance  depends  on  membrane  area,  thickness 
(physical  separation  between  internal  and  external 
charges),  and  dielectric  constant.  If  the  capacitance  is 
large,  many  ions  must  move  to  change  the  membrane 
potential. For cell membranes, the capacitance is approx-
imately 1 mF/cm2. One farad is 6 × 1018 charges per volt.

Charge Movement for a Small Cell
The following calculation shows why ion concentration 
gradients change little during most electrical events in 
cells. This is important to eliminate the requirement for 
excessive energy to restore ion gradients. A cell that is 
18 µm in diameter might have a capacitance of 10−11 F, or 
6 ×  107  charges  per  volt  of  membrane  potential.  Thus, 

 

CHAPTER 16  n  Membrane Channels 

283

movement of 6 million positive charges out of the cell 
produces a membrane potential of −0.1 V, or −100 mV. A 
cell of this size with an internal concentration of 150 mM 
K+ contains approximately 2.7 × 1011 K+, so movement of 
fewer than one in 40,000 K ions (0.0025%) from inside to 
outside creates a large membrane potential. This fraction 
of ions is far less for large cells, owing to their smaller 
ratio  of  surface  area  to  volume.  Thus,  little  energy  is 
required  for  a  large  change  in  membrane  potential, 
such as an action potential. When ion channels open, few 
ions cross the membrane before an opposing electrical 
field develops and retards further flux.

In Chapters 14 and 15, pumps and carriers were also 
noted  to  produce  opposing  membrane  potentials  when 
moving  ions  across  membranes.  This  can  be  avoided  
by  opening  ion  channels  that  short-circuit  the  change  
in membrane potential by providing pathways for coun-
terions to move in the same direction or similar ions to 
move in the opposite direction across the membrane.

Rate of Charge Movement Through Channels
A current is the rate of movement of charge. The ionic 
current (I) across a membrane is taken as positive when 
charges move outward. According to this definition, the 
equation for conservation of charge in a cell is

dQ
dt

I= −

A positive current reduces the net charge inside the cell, 
and vice versa. Including the relationship for capacitance 
(E = Q/C), the equation relates the current to the rate of 
change of membrane potential:
= −
I
C

dE
dt

Because  channels  conduct  about  6  ×  106  charges  per 
second,  a  single  open  channel  changes  E  at  a  rate  of 
−100 mV/sec on this 18-µm cell.

Because  most  channels  occur  at  densities  of 
50–200/µm2, an 18-µm cell will have 50,000 to 200,000 
channels.  If  a  few  channels  open  together,  the  mem-
brane potential rapidly approaches the Nernst potential 
for  the  selected  ion.  This  explains  why  most  electrical 
events  in  cells  transpire  in  a  millisecond  time  frame. 
Because the rate of current flow through ion channels is 
not limiting, the time course of electrical events depends 
on  the  kinetics  of  channel  opening  and  closing.  This 
focuses attention on factors that control whether chan-
nels are open or closed, also known as gating.

Net Current Through Ion-Selective Channels
Another  way  to  describe  ionic  current  across  a  mem-
brane is

complicated  (Fig.  16.17B),  so  electrophysiologists 
approximate  this  current-voltage  relationship  of  chan-
nels by a linear relationship, such as Ohm’s law (E = IR):

I

=

−(
g E E

ion

)

where g is conductance (inverse of resistance) and Eion 
is the reversal potential of a particular ion channel (the 
potential at which current reverses from out to in). For 
perfectly selective pores, the reversal potential for each 
ion equals its Nernst potential, even in the face of other 
ionic  gradients.  The  unit  used  for  current  is  siemens 
(equivalent  to  1  ampere  per  volt).  Most  channels  have 
currents in the picosiemens range (10−12 S).

For  a  simple  pore,  a  plot  of  current  versus  mem-
brane  potential  is  linear,  with  no  current  at  Eion;  real 
channels are more complicated. Typical plots of current 
versus voltage deviate from a straight line. This is called 
rectification. Deviation may be attributable to voltage-
dependent  conformational  changes  in  the  channel 
protein or to nonpermeant ions blocking the pore.

Each  channel  contributes  independently  to  the  total 
current,  so  given  n  channels  on  a  cell  membrane,  the 
total current is

I ng E E

−(

=

)

ion

Opening  Na+  and  K+  channels  has  opposite  effects 
because  the  ion  concentration  gradients  are  reversed. 
The  Nernst  potential  for  Na+  is  approximately  +65 mV 
in a typical cell, given a 10-fold excess of Na+ outside the 
cell.  Current  through  an  Na+  channel  is  negative  (ie, 
inward) at membrane potentials below ENa. Thus, if a Na+ 
channel opens on a cell in which E equals 0, the mem-
brane potential rises toward ENa.

Consequence of Multiple Channel Types  
Opening Simultaneously
More than one type of open channel creates a situation 
more  complicated  than  the  equilibrium  described  by 
the Nernst potential for a single-ion species (Figs. 16.18 
and 16.19). Consider a cell with physiological ion gradi-
ents and two channels—one open K+ channel and one 
open Na+ channel—having conductances of gK and gNa. 
The total current through these two channels is the sum 
of the individual currents:
−

g E E
K

E E

total

)

+

−

g

Na

(

)

Na

K

I

=

(

Note  from  this  relationship  that  current  is  zero  at  the 
midpoint between EK and ENa, and the line has twice the 
slope of a single channel (ie, twice the conductance).

Which  channel  predominates?  The  equation  for  Itotal 

can also be written as

I

total

=

g

eff

−(
E E

eff

)

I

=

ze
o

(

J

o

−

J

i

)

where the effective conductance geff and reversal poten-
tial Eeff are given by

where eo is the elementary charge. The dependence of 
current  on  membrane  potential  for  real  channels  is 

g

eff

=

g
K

+

g

Na

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

Current

+   o

K

n l y  
Eeff

EK

K+ and N a+ together 

ENa

–100

–50

0

50 mV

100

Total

n l y  

+   o

a

N

284 

A

B

FIGURE  16.19  MEMBRANE  POTENTIAL  AND  CURRENTS 
ACROSS  A  MEMBRANE  WITH  TWO  TYPES  OF  CHANNELS. 
A,  Dependence  of  currents  on  membrane  potential  resulting  from 
opening either K+ channels or Na+ channels individually or together. In 
contrast to Fig. 16.17, which shows ion fluxes in each direction, this 
is a plot of net current. EK and ENa are the equilibrium potentials (zero 
current)  when  only  potassium  or  sodium  channels  are  open.  When 
both  types  of  channels  are  open,  the  equilibrium  potential  (Eeff)  is 
midway between the equilibrium potentials of the two types of chan-
nels.  B,  Distribution  of  positive  (red)  and  negative  (blue)  ions  across 
the plasma membrane and around a cell having a negative membrane 
potential.  Excess  negative  charge  builds  up  near  the  inside  of  the 
membrane, with the excess positive charge near the outside. 

and

E

eff

=

g E
K K
+
g

g
K

Na

+

g E
Na Na
+
g
g
K

Na

The two channels together act like a single channel with 
an  effective  conductance  equal  to  the  sum  of  their 

conductances and a reversal potential that is the weighted 
average of their reversal potentials, that is, weighted by 
their relative conductances (Fig. 16.19A).

Goldman,  Hodgkin,  and  Katz  formulated  another 
equation for E. It uses permeability (P, in units of cm/s) 
to describe the membrane potential:

E

E

=

RT
F

ln

P
Na
P
Na

]
[
Na
o
[
]
Na
i

+
+

P K
K
P K
K

[
[

]
o
]
i

+
+

[
]
Cl
P
Cl
o
]
[
Cl
P
Cl
i

+
(cid:31)
+
(cid:31)(cid:31)

This equation summarizes the concepts presented here 
about membrane potentials. Just two factors determine 
the membrane potential: (a) the concentration gradi-
ents of different ions (eg, the Nernst potentials for each 
ion) and (b) the relative permeabilities of the membrane 
to these ions. When all Na+ and Cl− channels are closed 
(PNa, PCl = 0), the equation reduces to the Nernst relation-
ship for K. When all K+ and Cl− channels are closed (PK, 
PCl = 0), the equation collapses to the Nernst relationship 
for Na+.

In nerve cells, the resting membrane is most permeable 
to  K+  but  also  slightly  permeable  to  Na+,  so  the  resting 
potential is near EK. Opening more K+ channels or lower-
ing extracellular K+ makes the resting potential more nega-
tive. Opening more Na+ channels or raising extracellular 
Na+ makes the resting potential more positive.

Charge Redistribution by Electrical Conduction
Most  cellular  ions  have  balancing  counterions  and  are 
distributed randomly in solution, whereas unpaired ions 
contributing  to  membrane  potentials  are  confined  to 
boundary layers near the membrane (Fig. 16.19B). Like-
charged  ions  repel  one  another,  so  unpaired  ions  tend 
to  accumulate  at  boundaries  where  they  can  move  no 
farther.

During  electrical  events,  unpaired  ions  redistribute 
over membrane surfaces by electrical conduction at rates 
much faster than diffusion. This works as follows: Ions 
are  always  in  motion,  exchanging  places.  Introduction 
of extra ions sets off a chain of movements as neighbors 
repel each other, resulting in rapid spread of unbalanced 
charge  near  the  membrane.  Diffusion  of  the  entering 
ions over the plane of the membrane would take much 
longer than this electrical wave. Thus, electrical signal-
ing is the fastest signaling process in cells.

C H A P T E R 

17 

Membrane Physiology

This chapter describes how pumps, carriers, and chan-

nels  cooperate  in  living  systems.  These  three  compo-
nents often work together in circuits or cycles. Pumps 
establish  gradients  of  ions  across  membranes  (see 
Chapter  9).  Channels  regulate  membrane  permeability 
to  these  ions  to  maintain  the  electrical  potential  (see 
Chapter 11) required for membrane excitability. Carriers 
use ion gradients as a source of energy to drive transport 
as well as to do other work (see Chapter 10). Coupling 
ion  fluxes  through  pumps  and  carriers  to  do  work  is 
called a chemiosmotic cycle.

Selective expression of a repertoire of pumps, carri-
ers,  and  channels  in  specific  membrane  compartments 
enables  cells  to  build  sophisticated  machines  from  a 
stockpile  of  standard  components.  If  the  pumps,  carri-
ers,  and  channels  produced  by  a  cell  are  known,  it  is 
relatively  easy  to  explain  complicated  physiological  
processes. The examples in this chapter also show how 
defects  in  pumps  and  channels  cause  disease  and  how 
drugs can alleviate the symptoms.

Chemiosmotic Cycles
A simple chemiosmotic cycle couples a cation transport-
ing  pump  to  solute  transport  by  a  carrier  across  the 
plasma membrane or an organelle membrane (Fig. 17.1). 
The driving reaction is called the primary transport step. 
This involves an input of energy and, in most cases, some 
chemical  reaction.  Other  steps  called  secondary  trans-
port reactions depend on ion gradients. The transported 
substrate  is  the  same  chemically  on  both  sides  of  the 
membrane. Although chemiosmotic cycles are simple in 
concept,  their  importance  and  power  should  not  be 
underestimated.  They  operate  in  every  membrane  of 
every cell.

Pumps  use  energy  derived  from  adenosine  triphos-
phate  (ATP)  hydrolysis,  light  absorption,  or  another 
chemical reaction (see Table 9.1) to move ions across a 

membrane. This raises the concentration of a cation (C+) 
on  one  side  and  depletes  it  on  the  other  side  of  a 
membrane-bounded  compartment.  An  ion  gradient  is 
characterized by a chemical term, the concentration gra-
dient, and an electrical gradient (the membrane potential 
explained in Fig. 11.17). The electrochemical potential 
across a membrane represents a reservoir of power and 
a  capacity  to  do  work,  also  known  as  an  ion-motive 
force. A macroscopic analogy is using a pump to fill an 
elevated reservoir with fluid.

Carriers and other membrane proteins use the poten-
tial energy of ion gradients to drive other processes. This 
is  analogous  to  using  fluid  flow  out  of  a  reservoir  to  
drive a turbine, which uses the energy for other types of 
work. Many carriers use energy derived from the down-
hill  passage  of  one  substrate  to  transport  one  or  more 
other substances up their concentration gradients across 
the same membrane barrier. In Fig. 17.1, the carrier links 

C+

+ ++ +++ +

++ +

C+
S

– ––––– – –

ATP hydrolysis

C+

C+

Pump

S

Carrier

FIGURE 17.1  A MODEL CHEMIOSMOTIC CYCLE IN A MEM-
BRANE  SURROUNDING  A  CLOSED  SPACE.  An  adenosine 
triphosphate  (ATP)-driven  pump  transports  a  cation  C+  out  of  the 
compartment. The energy derived from ATP is stored as a concentra-
tion  gradient  of  C+  (red  triangle)  and  a  membrane  potential  (yellow 
arrow)  across  the  membrane.  The  carrier  uses  the  electrochemical 
gradient  of  C+  to  drive  the  transport  of  both  C+  and  a  solute  up  a 
concentration gradient (green triangle) across the membrane. 

 285

286 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

the transport of solute S to the movement of cation C+ 
down its gradient. Recirculation of cations allows a cell 
to accumulate solute against its concentration gradient. 
In addition to the osmotic work illustrated in Fig. 17.1, 
chemiosmotic cycles can do chemical work. During both 
oxidative  and  photosynthetic  phosphorylation,  proton 
cycles drive ATP synthesis by rotary ATP synthases (see 
Figs. 9.5, 19.5, and 19.8). Chemiosmotic cycles can also 
perform mechanical work. An electrochemical gradient 
of protons across the plasma membrane drives the rota-
tion of bacterial flagella (see Fig. 38.25).

Chemiosmotic  cycles  using  protons  dominate  the  
biological  world.  Most  bacterial  cycles  involve  proton 
pumps,  proton-linked  carriers,  or  other  proton-linked 
events. The same is true of early-branching eukaryotes, 
fungi, and plants. Plasma membranes of plant cells have 
a  powerful  proton  pump  and  a  collection  of  proton  
carriers. Proton chemiosmotic cycles are also character-
istic  of  most  eukaryotic organelles,  including the  Golgi 
apparatus,  endosomes,  lysosomes,  mitochondria,  and 
chloroplasts. Animal cell plasma membranes are a major 
exception, because they use predominantly sodium ions 
for their chemiosmotic cycles.

Epithelial Transport
Net  transport  across  an  epithelium  depends  on  tight 
junctions (see Fig. 31.2) that seal the extracellular space 
between  the  cells  (Fig.  17.2).  These  junctions  separate 
two extracellular compartments. The apical compart-
ment is the free surface or lumen of the organ (eg, the 
intestine, respiratory tract, or kidney tubules—topologi-
cally continuous with the external world). The basolat-
eral compartment lies between epithelial cells and is 
continuous with the underlying connective tissue and its 
blood vessels. Tight junctions restrict diffusion of solutes 
between the apical and basolateral compartments of the 
extracellular  space.  The  extent  of  this  seal  varies  from 
very  tight  to  leaky.  Tight  junctions  also  separate  the 
plasma  membrane  into  apical  and  basolateral  domains, 
restricting the movement of integral membrane proteins 
between these domains.

Glucose Transport in the Intestine, Kidney, Fat,  
and Muscle
A  chemiosmotic  cycle  transports  glucose  from  food 
uphill from the lumen of the intestine to the blood (Fig. 
17.2).  Tight  junctions  restrict  movement  of  glucose 
between  the  epithelial  cells,  so  all  the  glucose  must 
move  through  the  epithelial  cells  using  the  following 
components:
•  Na+K+-adenosine  triphosphatase  (ATPase),  located  in 

the basolateral plasma membrane

•  SGLT1  (sodium  glucose  cotransporter  1)  Na+/
glucose  symporter,  restricted  to  the  apical  plasma 
membrane

LUMEN/Apical

Glucose

Na+

Glucose

Na+

Tight
junction

Basolateral
membrane

Glucose

3 Na+

BASAL 
LAMINA

Glucose

Glucose

3 Na+

Glucose

2 K+

TISSUE SPACE exchangeable with blood

FIGURE  17.2  GLUCOSE  TRANSPORT  BY  THE  INTESTINAL 
EPITHELIUM. Tight junctions seal the epithelium of polarized epithe-
lial  cells.  Na+K+-adenosine  triphosphatase  (ATPase)  pumps  (space-
filling  model)  in  the  basolateral  plasma  membrane  drive  Na+/glucose 
symporters in the apical plasma membrane (upper inset) and glucose 
uniporters in the basolateral plasma membrane (left icon in lower inset) 
to move glucose from the lumen of the intestine to the blood. Baso-
lateral K+ channels (middle icon) recycle K+ pumped into the cell. 

•  GLUT5  (glucose  transporter  5)  glucose  uniporter, 

restricted to the basolateral plasma membrane
Na+K+-ATPases use ATP hydrolysis to produce Na+ and 
K+  gradients  across  the  plasma  membrane  by  continu-
ously pumping Na+ out of and K+ into the cell. SGLT Na+/
glucose  symporters  use  Na+  moving  inward  down  its 
electrochemical gradient across the apical plasma mem-
brane  to  accumulate  high  internal  concentrations  of 
glucose  from  the  gut  lumen.  In  this  step,  energy  is 
expended  (dissipation  of  the  Na+  gradient)  to  move 
glucose uphill. GLUT (glucose transporter) uniporters in 
the basolateral membrane simply facilitate movement of 
cytoplasmic glucose down its concentration gradient out 
of the cell. The kidney uses a similar strategy to recap-
ture  glucose  filtered  from  blood,  transporting  it  across 
the renal proximal tubule cell and back into the blood.
Fat  and  muscle  cells  use  the  GLUT4  D-glucose  uni-
porter  to  take  up  glucose  from  the  blood  when  it  is 
plentiful following a meal. These cells store GLUT4 inter-
nally  in  membrane  vesicles.  After  a  meal,  high  blood 
glucose stimulates secretion of insulin into blood. Signal 
transduction  mechanisms  (see  Fig.  27.7)  lead  to  fusion 
of the GLUT4 vesicles with the plasma membrane. This 
increases the rate of glucose transport into fat and muscle 
by  fivefold  to  20-fold,  lowering  the  blood  glucose 

 

CHAPTER 17  n  Membrane Physiology 

287

concentration  and  providing  the  cells  with  glucose  to 
convert into glycogen and triglycerides for storage.

Salt and Water Transport in the Kidney
In a section of the kidney tubule called the loop of Henle, 
the  epithelium  uses  Na+K+-ATPase  pumps  and  Na+/
K+/2Cl−  symporters  to  reabsorb  NaCl  that  is  filtered 
from  blood  into  the  excretory  pathway  (Fig.  17.3). 
Without  this  mechanism,  salt  would  be  lost  in  urine. 
Tight  junctions  seal  this  epithelium,  so  that  salt  must 
pass through the cells to return to the blood. Na+/K+/2Cl− 
symporters  in  the  apical  plasma  membrane  allow  NaCl 
from the urine to enter the cell down its concentration 
gradient.  Abundant  Na+K+-ATPases  in  the  basolateral 
plasma  membrane  (5000/µm2)  create  a  Na+  gradient  to 
drive  the  symporter  and  to  clear  the  cytoplasm  of  Na+ 
accumulated  from  the  tubule  lumen.  KCl  that  enters 
with  Na+  through  the  Na+/K+/2Cl−  symporter  leaves 
the  cell  through  channels:  K+  channels  in  apical  and 
basolateral  membranes  and  Cl−  channels  in  basolateral 
membranes.

Furosemide,  a  drug  used  to  treat  congestive  heart 
failure,  inhibits  the  Na+/K+/2Cl−  symporter  in  the  loop 
of Henle. A weak heart leads to accumulation of fluid in 
the lungs (causing shortness of breath) and other tissues 
(causing  swelling  of  the  ankles).  Inhibiting  the  Na+/

LUMEN

NaCl

KCl

Tight
junction

NaCl

KCl

Na+ Cl–

Cl– K+

BASAL
LAMINA

3 Na+

ADP
ATP

2 K+

3 Na+

Cl–

Cl–

TISSUE SPACE exchangeable with blood

FIGURE 17.3  SODIUM CHLORIDE TRANSPORT BY THE EPI-
THELIUM OF THE KIDNEY TUBULE. Tight junctions seal the space 
between these polarized epithelial cells of the thick ascending limb of 
the  loop  of  Henle.  Na+K+-ATPase  pumps  (space-filling  model)  in  the 
basolateral  plasma  membrane  drive  Na+/K+/2Cl−  symporters  in  the 
apical plasma membrane. K+ channels in the apical plasma membrane 
and K+ channels and Cl− channels in the basolateral plasma membrane 
provide paths for K+ to circulate and for Cl− to follow Na+ across the 
cell from the lumen of the tubule to the blood compartment. 

K+/2Cl−  symporter  reduces  NaCl  reabsorption,  so  the 
kidney  produces  larger  quantities  of  urine,  clearing 
excess fluid from the body and relieving symptoms.

Cystic Fibrosis as a Transporter Disease
Cystic fibrosis results from loss of function mutations of 
the  cystic  fibrosis  transmembrane  regulator  (CFTR),  an 
unorthodox  ABC  transporter  that  functions  as  a  Cl− 
channel (see Chapter 9). Patients suffer from lung infec-
tions and impaired secretion of digestive enzymes by the 
pancreas. Understanding the pathology requires knowl-
edge  of  the  mechanisms  that  produce  the  fluid  layer 
containing  NaCl  on  the  apical  surface  of  the  epithelial 
cells  lining  the  airways  of  the  lung  (Fig.  17.4).  Water  
and Cl− move through the cell, while Na+ moves between 
the cells.

The complicated process depends on familiar pumps 
and  carriers.  Cl−  moves  into  the  base  of  the  cell  along 
with  Na+  and  K+  through  Na+/K+/2Cl−  symporters 
powered by the electrochemical gradient of Na+ created 
by  Na+K+-ATPases  in  the  basolateral  membrane.  This 
brings excess potassium chloride into the cell. K+ then 

LUMEN

CFTR
– – – – – ––
– – –– – –
–
–
–
–

Cl–

ATP

Cl– H2O

Apical

– – –– –

– – –

–
– ––
Na+
–
–
–
–
–

Leaky
tight
junction

Cl–

ATP

Cl– H2O

2 Cl–

3 Na+

ADP

ATP

BASAL
LAMINA
++

+

+
+

+ +

+ + +

+ +
+

2 Cl–

K+
Na+

2 K+

3 Na+

++ + + ++ +

+

H2O

TISSUE SPACE exchangeable with blood

FIGURE 17.4  SALT AND WATER TRANSPORT ACROSS THE 
EPITHELIUM  LINING  THE  RESPIRATORY  TRACT.  Leaky  tight 
junctions  partially  seal  the  space  between  these  polarized  epithelial 
cells. Na+K+-ATPase pumps in the basolateral plasma membrane drive 
Na+/K+/2Cl−  symporters  in  the  basolateral  plasma  membrane.  CFTR 
(cystic  fibrosis  transmembrane  regulator)  Cl−  channels  in  the  apical 
plasma membrane allow Cl− to move into the lumen, creating a nega-
tive electrical potential that pulls Na+ between the cells into the lumen. 
CFTR also releases ATP, which activates additional Cl− channels. Water 
follows  sodium  chloride  into  the  lumen  through  water  channels  and 
between the cells. Basolateral K+ channels allow K+ to circulate. 

288 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

recycles out of the cell by way of channels in the baso-
lateral  plasma  membrane,  leaving  behind  excess  Cl− 
inside the cell. When activated by phosphorylation of its 
regulatory domain and ATP binding, CFTR in the apical 
plasma membrane opens a channel for Cl− and bicarbon-
ate. Cl− moves down its electrochemical gradient out of 
the cell, carrying charge to the outside. The whole epi-
thelium becomes polarized, with the lumen electrically 
negative  relative  to  the  basolateral  fluid  compartment. 
This  electrical  driving  force  draws  Na+  between  cells 
through leaky tight junctions from the extracellular fluid 
compartment  to  the  surface  of  the  epithelium.  Sodium 
chloride on the apical surface creates an osmotic force 
that draws water down its concentration gradient across 
the cells to the lumen through water channels (see Fig. 
11.15).  CFTR  also  appears  to  inhibit  transport  mecha-
nisms that reabsorb fluid from the lumen of the epithe-
lium.  A  balance  between  this  fluid  secretion  and  fluid 
reabsorption  normally  keeps  a  layer  of  water  on  the 
surface of the epithelium allowing the cilia to clear secre-
tions and bacteria from the lung.

Loss of CFTR function leaves the lungs of cystic fibrosis 
patients too dry. This situation is life threatening because 
cilia  in  the  respiratory  tract  cannot  move  sticky,  dry, 
mucus containing bacteria and viruses out of the lungs, 
thereby  predisposing  to  respiratory  infections.  Sticky 
secretions  in  the  pancreatic  ducts  also  interfere  with 
the secretion of digestive enzymes by the pancreas.

The severity of the disease depends on the particular 
mutation  in  the  CFTR  gene.  Symptoms  are  relatively  
mild  in  patients  with  point  mutations  that  reduce  the 
open probability of the channel. A drug called ivacaftor 
increases  the  activity  of  these  mutant  channels  and 
relieves  many  symptoms.  The  disease  is  more  severe 
with  the  most  common  mutation  (67%  of  cases),  dele-
tion  of  the  codon  for  phenylalanine  508  (F508).  The 
mutant Δ508 protein is temperature-sensitive, not folding 

properly  at  37°C,  so  it  fails  to  negotiate  the  secretory 
pathway  to  the  plasma  membrane.  Patients  with  two 
copies of the Δ508 mutation have classic cystic fibrosis. 
Heterozygotes  with  the  Δ508  mutation  and  a  normal 
gene (approximately 5% of humans) have no symptoms. 
Combining the ΔF508 mutation with one of more than 
a thousand different mutations in the other copy of the 
gene causes the typical lung disease and a range of sever-
ity in the pancreatic problems. Treating patients with the 
Δ508  mutation  is  challenging,  but  new  therapies  are 
being  explored,  including  activation  of  other  plasma 
membrane Cl− channels.

Transport Mechanisms to Improve Food Production
Plants depend on transport mechanisms to take up nutri-
ents, CO2, and water, and to export toxic materials, but 
their capacities vary widely. Thus some plants are more 
tolerant  of  salty  conditions  or  concentrate  higher  con-
centrations of micronutrients such as iron. Carriers par-
ticipate  in  most  of  these  reactions,  so  providing  food 
crops  with  optimal  carriers  is  a  promising  strategy  to 
improve production. For example, providing plants with 
carriers to export compounds that neutralize toxic ions 
such  as  Al3+  allows  them  to  grow  in  acidic  soils  while 
supplying  them  with  a  channel-like  Na+  transporter 
improves salt tolerance. Similarly, providing variants of 
carriers  with  a  high  affinity  for  iron  results  in  higher 
concentrations of this micronutrient in rice.

Cellular Volume Regulation
Cells employ both short- and long-term strategies involv-
ing pumps, carriers, and channels to maintain a constant 
volume  (Fig.  17.5).  These  compensatory  mechanisms  
are  required  because  water  moves  across  the  plasma 
membrane through water channels and slowly through 
lipid bilayers if the osmotic strength of the environment 

A. Hypertonic medium

B. Hypotonic medium

Normal
volume

Cl–
Taurine

K+

K+

Cl–

H2O

HCO3

–

H+

Water exits

Cl–

Cell shrinks

Water enters

Cell swells

Na+
K+
2Cl+

Na+

H2O

Acute
compensation:
cell swells

Acute
compensation:
cell shrinks

Normal
volume

FIGURE 17.5  ACUTE CELLULAR VOLUME CONTROL. A, Cell is placed in hypertonic medium. B, Cell is placed in hypotonic medium. 
Cells compensate for volume changes by activating channels and carriers to move inorganic ions into or out of the cell. Swelling-sensitive LRRC8 
channels also release taurine from the cell. Water follows passively through channels and across the lipid bilayer. 

 

CHAPTER 17  n  Membrane Physiology 

289

differs  even  slightly  from  that  inside  the  cell.  Water 
moves  to  maintain  an  osmotic  equilibrium,  as  is  illus-
trated  for  red  blood  cells  in  Fig.  8.8.  In  a  hypotonic 
medium,  water  moves  into  the  cell  to  dilute  the  cyto-
plasm.  In  a  hypertonic  medium,  water  moves  out  to 
concentrate the cytoplasm. The mechanisms employed 
to  compensate  for  these  volume  changes  are  well 
defined, but the mechanisms that sense volume changes 
and trigger these responses are still being investigated.

Animal  cells  respond  acutely  to  loss  of  water  in  a 
hypertonic  environment  by  activating  Na+/H+  antiport-
− antiporters, and/or Na+/K+/2Cl− symport-
ers, Cl−/HCO3
ers that bring KCl and NaCl into the cell. Water follows, 
returning the cell to its original volume in minutes.

Swelling in a hypotonic environment quickly activates 
plasma  membrane  K+  channels,  Cl−  channels,  and/or  a 
K+/Cl−  symporter,  releasing  potassium  chloride,  osmo-
lytes,  and  water  from  the  cell.  Osmolytes  are  small 
organic molecules, including amino acids and metaboli-
cally  inactive  polyalcohols  (sorbitol  and  inositol)  and 
methylamines.  Bestrophins  are  the  Cl−  channels  acti-
vated by swelling in flies (see Fig. 11.13), but vertebrates 
use  LRRC8  channels  related  to  gap  junction  connexins 
(see  Fig.  31.7)  that  release  the  osmolyte  taurine  along 
with Cl−.

Compensation by moving water along with ions and 
osmolytes  works  in  the  short  run,  but  changes  in  the 
internal  concentrations  of  K+,  Na+,  and  Cl−  affect  the 
membrane potential and other physiological processes. 
In the long term, cells maintain their volume by adjust-
ing  the  osmotic  strength  of  cytoplasm  with  osmolytes. 
Adjusting osmolyte concentrations takes longer than ion 
concentrations, as it requires synthesis or degradation of 
osmolytes  and  their  transport  proteins,  such  as  Na+/
osmolyte symporters.

Excitable Membranes
Regulation of membrane potential is particularly impor-
tant  in  higher  organisms,  which  use  electrical  signals 
generated  by  membrane  channels  for  communication  
in  their  nervous  and  muscular  systems.  For  example, 
reading  and  understanding  this  page  depend  on  rapid 
creation and processing of electrical and chemical signals 
by  cells  in  the  visual  system  and  brain.  Ion  channels 
produce  the  key  event,  a  transient  change  in  electrical 
potential  of  the  plasma  membrane,  called  an  action 
potential.  These  energy-efficient  electrical  signals  are 
the fastest means of communication in the body, spread-
ing  over  the  plasma  membrane  at  tens  of  meters  per 
second.  Similarly,  action  potentials  trigger  skeletal 
muscle contraction, control the timing of the heartbeat, 
and  coordinate  the  peristaltic  motions  of  the  gut  and 
contractions of the uterus.

Electrical  excitability  is  not  limited  to  nerves  and 
muscles. Eggs use a form of action potential as an early 

step  in  blocking  fertilization  by  more  than  one  sperm. 
Chemotaxis by macrophages and secretion of insulin and 
other  hormones  both  depend  on  electrical  excitability. 
The  reader  should  be  familiar  with  the  appendixes  in 
Chapter 11 to appreciate the following material.

Description of an Action Potential
If a microelectrode (see Fig. 11.16B) drives a small posi-
tive or negative current into a cell, a second microelec-
trode  a  short  distance  away  detects  a  small  voltage 
response.  These  electrotonic  potentials  decline  rapidly 
with distance if the cell is not excitable.

The  plasma  membrane  of  an  excitable  cell,  such  as 
neuron or muscle, reacts much differently to depolar-
ization. Rather than responding with a small local current, 
an excitable cell generates a large, reproducible change 
in membrane potential, called an action potential when 
depolarized beyond a certain level (called a threshold) 
(Fig.  17.6).  Voltage-gated  ion  channels  (see  Fig.  11.7) 
generate  this  powerful  electrical  signal  that  spreads 
rapidly  (10 m/sec)  over  the  entire  plasma  membrane. 
During  an  action  potential,  the  membrane  potential  
can reach a peak of +40 to 50 mV before repolarizing to 
the resting potential. Because action potentials are self-
triggering,  they  travel  without  dissipation  over  long 

50

ENa

Em

Thresh-
old

EK

0

–50

)

V
m

(
 
l

a

i
t

n
e

t

o
p

 

e
n
a
r
b
m
e
M

–100

0

80

60

40

20

0

e
n
a
r
b
m
e
m

 
f

o

 
2
m
µ
 
r
e
p

l

 
s
e
n
n
a
h
c
 

n
e
p
O

Voltage-gated
Na+ channels

Voltage-gated
K+ channels

1

2

Time (msec)

3

4

Open

Closed

Open
K+ leak
channels

FIGURE 17.6  THE TIME COURSE OF AN ACTION POTENTIAL 
PASSING  A  MEASURING  ELECTRODE  INSERTED  THROUGH 
THE  PLASMA  MEMBRANE  OF  A  SQUID  GIANT  AXON.  Spread 
of an action potential from an adjacent area of the membrane brings 
the membrane potential Em to threshold, triggering the action potential 
at this point on the membrane. The other curves show the conduc-
tance of the membrane at this point for Na+ and K+ expressed as the 
concentration  of  open  channels.  The  lower  trace  shows  the  times 
during which K+ leak channels open and close at this point. ENa is the 
Na+ equilibrium potential, and EK is the K+ equilibrium potential. 

290 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

distances. This high-speed transmission is very efficient, 
requiring  movement  of  very  few  ions  across  the 
membrane.

The molecular events during an action potential were 
first  characterized  around  1950  in  squid  giant  axons 
using microelectrodes coupled to an electronic feedback 
circuit. This clever “voltage clamp” holds the membrane 
potential  constant  by  providing  the  cell  with  electrical 
current to compensate for changes in ion currents. Inves-
tigators discovered that changes in permeability to Na+ 
and  K+  ions  produced  action  potentials.  Changing  one 
variable at a time, they determined the time and voltage 
dependence  of  ion-specific  conductance.  They  also 
determined  the  relationship  between  conductance  and 
voltage. From these relationships, measured under con-
trolled  conditions,  they  could  calculate  the  membrane 
response  to  virtually  any  experimental  condition.  To 
explain  these  changes  in  permeability,  they  postulated 
the  existence  of  ion  channels.  The  voltage  clamp  pro-
vided a direct measure of this channel activity.

Three Channels Generating Action Potentials
Voltage-gated  Na+  and  K+  channels  open  and  close  in 
sequence  to  produce  action  potentials.  Depending  on 
the type of open channel, the membrane potential varies 
in  time  between  the  K+  equilibrium  potential  (EK)  and 
the  Na+  equilibrium  potential  (ENa)  (see  Fig.  11.18). 
Because  membrane  depolarization  activates  these  ion 
channels,  and  because  the  response  spreads  this  depo-
larization,  triggering  an  action  potential  initiates  a 
cascade of reactions that moves over the membrane, first 
to  depolarize  and  then  to  repolarize  the  membrane.  In 
nerves,  just  three  types  of  voltage-gated  channels  are 
required to generate action potentials:
•  K+-selective  leak  channels  of  the  Kir  family  and  the 
TWIK family (see Fig. 11.2) are open at resting poten-
tials. Cytoplasmic Mg2+ blocks Kir channels when the 
membrane depolarizes.

•  Voltage-gated  Na+  channels  are  closed  at  the  resting 
potential  but  open  if  the  membrane  depolarizes  to 
approximately  −40  mV.  They  open  only  transiently, 
because  a  first-order  inactivation  reaction  closes  the 
pore, even if the membrane potential is at or above 
zero  (see  Fig.  16.5).  These  channels  return  to  the 
closed state without passing through the open state.
•  Delayed-rectifier  voltage-gated  K+  channels  have  a 
low  probability  of  being  open  at  the  resting  poten-
tial.  They  respond  to  membrane  depolarization  by 
opening, but more slowly than Na+ channels do. They 
stay open long enough to allow the repolarizing mem-
brane potential to approach EK.
The  properties  of  these  channels  explain  the  time 

course of an action potential as follows:

Stage 1: At rest, the membrane is slightly permeable 
to K+ but not to other ions, so the resting potential 

is near EK, approximately −70 mV. K+-selective leak 
channels and a few open voltage-gated K+ channels 
contribute to this basal K+ permeability.

Stage 2: If the membrane is depolarized by an oncom-
ing  action  potential  and  reaches  the  threshold 
potential,  K+-selective  leak  channels  close  and 
voltage-gated  Na+  channels  open.  Because  the 
membrane  is  permeable  only  to  Na+  and  because 
many Na+ channels open, Na+ moves into the cell 
and  the  membrane  potential  rapidly  approaches 
ENa, approximately +45 mV.

Stage  3:  After  1  to  2  msec,  Na+  channels  spontane-
ously  inactivate  and  slowly  responding  delayed-
rectifier  K+  channels  open.  Now  the  membrane 
is strongly and selectively permeable to K+, so K+ 
moves out of the cell, and the membrane potential 
reverses all the way to EK, approximately −80 mV. 
K+ channels are less synchronized than Na+ chan-
nels, so the membrane potential falls slower than 
it rises.

Stage  4:  Delayed-rectifier  K+  channels  close  progres-
sively as the membrane repolarizes, and K+-selective 
leak channels open, returning the membrane poten-
tial to the resting voltage, just above EK.

During  an  action  potential,  the  membrane  voltage 
changes by 100 to 150 mV in 1 to 2 msec. The membrane 
bilayer is approximately 7 nm thick, so this voltage cor-
responds  to  a  field  variation  on  the  order  of  150,000 
volts/cm in 1 to 2 msec. Such strong forces elicit confor-
mational changes in membrane proteins, such as voltage-
gated ion channels.

Membrane Depolarization: The Stimulus for  
Action Potentials
The initial depolarization of the plasma membrane that 
triggers an action potential can arise from activation by 
a neurotransmitter (see “Synaptic Transmission” below) 
or  spreading  of  an  action  potential  from  an  adjacent 
region  of  the  membrane  or  from  an  adjacent  cell 
through a gap junction. Membrane depolarization must 
exceed  a  certain  threshold  to  trigger  an  action  poten-
tial.  The  threshold  arises  directly  from  the  properties 
of  the  ion  channels.  Depolarization  less  than  threshold 
activates a few Na+ channels, producing a small inward 
Na+  current,  but  it  also  activates  some  delayed-rectifier 
K+  channels,  resulting  in  K+  efflux.  If  the  Na+  conduc-
tance is small in relation to the K+ conductance, outward 
currents  predominate  and  the  membrane  repolarizes. 
Depolarization  greater  than  threshold  activates  addi-
tional Na+ channels, yielding inward Na+ currents greater 
than outward K+ currents, at least briefly. This positive 
feedback loop further depolarizes the membrane, ampli-
fying  activation  of  Na+  channels  and  producing  the 
cascade  of  channel  activation  that  makes  action  poten-
tials  an  all-or-nothing  event.

 

CHAPTER 17  n  Membrane Physiology 

291

Myelin Sheaths Speed Action Potentials
Action  potentials  naturally  spread  rapidly  over  muscle 
cells and along extensions of neurons called axons, but 
some axons in the central and peripheral nervous system 
have  insulation  that  speeds  their  propagation  up  to 
10-fold.  Supporting  cells  make  the  insulation  by  wrap-
ping  layers  of  plasma  membrane  around  the  axon  to 
form a myelin sheath (Fig. 17.7). Gaps between these 
insulated sections expose the plasma membrane of the 
axon with voltage-gated ion channels. Action potentials 
jump  at  high  speed  from  one  gap  to  the  next.  Activity 
of the neuron can stimulate supporting cells to increase 
the thickness and extent of the sheath, which raises the 
speed  of  action  potentials  and  contributes  to  learning 
certain motor skills.

Synaptic Transmission
Most  neurons  use  chemical  messengers  called  neu-
rotransmitters (Fig. 17.8) to communicate rapidly with 
each  other  and  with  effector  cells,  such  as  skeletal 
muscle and glands. This chemical communication occurs 
at  sites  called  synapses  (Figs.  17.9  and  17.10),  where 
the  sending  cell  is  specialized  to  secrete  a  particular 
neurotransmitter  and  the  receiving  cell  is  specialized  
to respond to that neurotransmitter. The sending side of 
a  synapse  is  referred  to  as  presynaptic,  whereas  the 
receiving side is designated postsynaptic. Small vesicles 
containing neurotransmitter pack the presynaptic nerve 
terminal.  Neurotransmitter  receptors  concentrate  in 
the postsynaptic plasma membrane. Modest changes in 
either  the  presynaptic  release  of  neurotransmitter  or 
postsynaptic  receptor  activation  can  profoundly  influ-
ence how a neuron processes this information. Analysis 
of  synaptic  transmission  has  revealed  much  about  the 
mechanisms of secretion (see Chapter 22), signal trans-
duction,  and  psychoactive  drugs  that  affect  behavior. 
Not  all  synapses  use  chemical  transmitters.  In  special 

cases, gap junctions (see Fig. 31.6) connect neurons at 
“electrical  synapses,”  where  current  moves  directly 
between the two cells.

All  seven  neurotransmitters  shown  in  Fig.  17.8  are 
small organic molecules with an amino group. Secretory 

FIGURE 17.7  MYELIN SHEATH ON COCHLEAR NERVE THAT 
TRANSMITS  IMPULSES  FROM  THE  EAR  TO  THE  BRAIN. 
Electron micrograph of a thin section showing a Schwann cell and the 
myelin  sheath  that  is  wrapped  around  the  axon.  The  inset  shows  a 
portion  of  the  sheath  at  a  higher  magnification.  (Courtesy  Enrico  
Mugnaini.  From  Fawcett  DW.  The  Cell,  2nd  ed.  Philadelphia: 
WB Saunders; 1981.)

Transmitter

Acetylcholine

Dopamine

γ-Aminobutyric
  acid (GABA)

Glutamate

Glycine

Norepinephrine

Serotonin

Structure

Channels

O

CH3
C
O
CH2

CH2

H3C  +N  CH3

CH3
Excitatory
  (nicotinic)
  Na+ / K+
  channel

OH

HO

CH2
+H3N  CH2

O–O

C
CH2

CH2
+H3N  CH2

Inhibitory
  Cl– channel

Seven-helix

Muscarinic
  receptor

Dopamine
  receptor

β-type GABA 
  receptor

s
r
o
t
p
e
c
e
R

COO–
CH2

CH2

+H3N  C  C

H

O
O–

H

+H3N  C  C

H

O
O–

OH

HO

NH

HO

CH
+H3N  CH2

HO

CH2
+H3N  CH2

Excitatory
  Na+ / K+ channel
or Na+ / K+ / Ca2+
  channel

Metabotropic
  glutamate 
  receptor

Inhibitory
  Cl– channel

Excitatory
  Na+ / K+
  channel

Adrenergic
  receptor

Serotonin
  receptor

FIGURE 17.8  NEUROTRANSMITTERS AND THEIR LIGAND-GATED ION CHANNELS AND SEVEN-HELIX RECEPTORS. 

292 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

A

Nerve

B

Muscle cell

Motor
end plate

Glial cell

Mitochondria

Nerve ending

Neurofilaments

Microtubules

Synaptic
vesicles
Basal
lamina

H+

ACh
synthesis

K+

ATP
ADP

ACh

ACh

ATP

ADP

ATP

ADP

H+

Endocytosis

Acetylcholine
esterase

Voltage-gated
channels inactive

Na+

ADP

ATP

K+

Fusion

ACh

Ligand-
activated

Na+

Ca2+

Na+

K+

K+

K+

Na+

i a l 

ACh receptor
closes upon
ACh dissociation

N

e

r

v

e

 
a

ctio

n p

o
t
e

n

ti

a

l 

K+

Na+

Ca2+

K+

Voltage-

gated

K+

Na+

Na+

Na+

Muscle action pot e n t

C. Excitatory transmission

D. Recovery

FIGURE 17.9  NEUROMUSCULAR JUNCTION. A, A scanning electron micrograph of a motor nerve and the skeletal muscle cells that it 
innervates. B, An electron micrograph of a thin section of a frog neuromuscular junction. C, Excitatory synaptic transmission. The nerve action 
potential opens voltage-gated calcium channels. Entry of Ca2+ triggers fusion of a synaptic vesicle containing acetylcholine (ACh) with the plasma 
membrane. ACh binds and opens postsynaptic channels on the muscle cell, which trigger an action potential. D, Recovery includes ACh hydro-
lysis, recycling of synaptic vesicle membranes, and loading of synaptic vesicles with new ACh. (A, Courtesy Don Fawcett, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA. B, Courtesy J.E. Heuser, Washington University, St. Louis, MO.)

 

A

Axon
hillock

CHAPTER 17  n  Membrane Physiology 

293

B

Myelin
sheath

High Na+-channel
density

C. Excitatory transmission
PRESYNAPTIC
NEURON

Dendrite

Low Na+-
channel
density

Glut

Fusion

D. Recovery

K+

ATP

ADP

H+

H+

Glut

H+/Glut
antiporter

H+

ATP
ADP
–

–

+

Na+

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

Glut

–

+

Na+
–

+

–

+

–

+

+

Glut

+

+

+

+

–

–

–

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

+

–

+

–

Action potential 

K+

ATP
ADP
–

+++

–

+

+

–

––

Na+

K+

+

Na+

+

–

–
ADP

ATP

+

K+

Na+

++

– –

Ca2+

–

+

–

+

Glut

Ca2+

–

+

+

–

+

–

+

+

Na+

+
++
–
– –

+

+

–

+

–

–

–

+

K+

–
––

+ +

+

–

+ +

––

+++

–
–

+ +

+

–

+

–

–

–
ADP

ATP

+

POSTSYNAPTIC NEURON

Na+
 Depolarization

Glut stimulates
receptors to open

K+

Repolarization

Glut receptors close
upon Glut dissociation

FIGURE 17.10  CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM SYNAPSES. A, A neuron with its cell body and dendrites covered with a mixture of excitatory 
and inhibitory synapses. A high density of voltage-gated Na+ channels in the proximal part of the axon, called the axon hillock, favors the genera-
tion  of  an  action  potential  when  the  sum  of  postsynaptic  potentials  brings  the  axon  hillock  to  threshold.  B,  An  electron  micrograph  of  a  thin 
section of brain showing synapses with vesicles (green) clustered in the presynaptic axon. The inset shows an anatomically correct molecular 
model of a synaptic vesicle. C, Synaptic transmission at a central nervous system (CNS) excitatory synapse. A presynaptic action potential opens 
voltage-gated Ca2+ channels. Entry of Ca2+ stimulates fusion of synaptic vesicles filled with glutamate (Glut) with the plasma membrane. Glutamate 
binds and opens postsynaptic α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionate (AMPA) receptors that generate a local postsynaptic potential 
change. D, Recovery from excitatory stimulation includes retrieval of glutamate by a presynaptic Na+/glutamate symporter and concentration of 
glutamate in synaptic vesicles by a H+/glutamate antiporter. (B, Courtesy Don Fawcett, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA. Inset, Modified from 
Takamori S, Holt M, Stenius K, et al. Molecular anatomy of a trafficking organelle. Cell. 2006;127:831–846.)

mechanisms  are  similar  at  all  synapses,  but  each  neu-
rotransmitter  requires  its  own  biochemical  machinery 
for synthesis, packaging in synaptic vesicles, and recep-
tion  by  postsynaptic  cells.  Such  distinctive  features  of 
synapses using a particular transmitter make it possible 

to modify synaptic transmission selectively in the clinic, 
such as in treatment with psychoactive drugs.

In  addition  to  activating  ligand-gated  ion  channels, 
most  neurotransmitters  also  stimulate  particular  seven-
helix  receptors  (Fig.  17.8;  see  also  Fig.  24.3).  For 

294 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

example, acetylcholine stimulates the seven-helix mus-
carinic acetylcholine receptor, which uses a trimeric 
G-protein  intermediary  to  activate  Kir3.1 K+  channels 
(Fig. 39.21). Glutamate stimulates seven-helix “metabo-
tropic”  receptors,  which  also  act  through  trimeric  G 
proteins. Disruption of the gene for metabotropic gluta-
mate receptors leaves mice with defects in coordination 
and  learning,  and  overstimulation  of  these  receptors 
might contribute to some forms of intellectual disability  
in humans.

The  following  sections  compare  synapses  at  the  
neuromuscular junction and in central nervous system. 
Both illustrate how pumps, carriers, and channels work 
together at synapses.

Neuromuscular Junction
Motor neurons in the spinal cord and brainstem control 
contraction of skeletal muscle cells (see Fig. 39.14). Long 
axons  from  these  neurons  terminate  in  synapses  on  
skeletal muscle cells, called neuromuscular junctions 
(Fig.  17.9A–B).  Every  neuronal  action  potential  that 
reaches  a  neuromuscular  junction  evokes  an  action 
potential  that  spreads  over  the  postsynaptic  surface  of 
the muscle cell and initiates contraction. This highly reli-
able,  one-to-one  communication  depends  on  chemical 
transmission  by acetylcholine  between  the  nerve  and 
muscle.  Highly  concentrated  nicotinic  acetylcholine 
receptors (see Fig. 11.12) in the postsynaptic membrane 
(~20,000/µm2) transduce the arrival of extracellular ace-
tylcholine into membrane depolarization.

Figure 17.9C illustrates the membrane proteins required 
for neuromuscular transmission. Both the nerve terminal 
and  muscle  depend  on  Na+K+-ATPase  and  Ca2+-ATPase 
pumps to maintain gradients of Na+, K+, and Ca2+ across 
their plasma membranes. Both presynaptic and postsyn-
aptic cells need voltage-gated Na+ channels and K+ chan-
nels  for  action  potentials.  Additionally,  the  presynaptic 
membrane requires voltage-gated Ca2+ channels to trigger 
secretion of acetylcholine.

A neuronal action potential initiates synaptic transmis-
sion  by  admitting  Ca2+  into  the  presynaptic  terminal 
through voltage-gated Ca2+ channels. In less than 1 msec, 
Ca2+ triggers fusion of synaptic vesicles containing ace-
tylcholine  with  the  plasma  membrane.  Within  micro-
seconds,  acetylcholine  released  into  the  synaptic  cleft 
between the cells reaches millimolar concentrations and 
binds postsynaptic acetylcholine receptors.

Weak binding of acetylcholine to two subunits of the 
acetylcholine receptor (see Fig. 11.12) opens a nonse-
lective cation channel. The open pore is  about  equally 
permeable  to  K+  and  Na+  and  less  permeable  to  Ca2+, 
so  the  membrane  potential  collapses  toward  a  reversal 
potential  (see  Fig.  16.19)  of  approximately  0  mV.  This  
is  above  the  threshold  for  triggering  a  self-propagating 
action potential in the muscle plasma membrane, which 
occurs with nearly 100% efficiency. The action potential 

traveling  over  the  muscle  plasma  membrane  activates 
voltage-gated Ca2+ channels that trigger Ca2+ release from 
smooth  endoplasmic  reticulum,  resulting  in  muscle  
contraction (see Fig. 39.15).

Two  different  mechanisms  terminate  activation  of 
acetylcholine  receptors.  An  extracellular  enzyme,  ace-
tylcholinesterase,  degrades  free  acetylcholine  in  the 
synaptic  cleft  in  a  few  milliseconds.  In  parallel,  acetyl-
choline  receptors  automatically  undergo  a  conforma-
tional  change  that  increases  the  affinity  for  bound 
acetylcholine and closes the channel. Acetylcholine then 
dissociates  slowly  from  these  desensitized  receptors, 
which return to the resting state.

Nerve  terminals  retrieve  synaptic  vesicle  membrane 
by  pinching  off  some  transiently  opened  vesicles  and  
by endocytosis (see Chapter 22). Cytoplasmic enzymes 
synthesize  new  acetylcholine.  A  V-type  ATPase  proton 
pump (see Fig. 9.6) acidifies the lumen of synaptic vesi-
cles, providing an electrochemical potential to drive an 
acetylcholine/H+ antiporter that concentrates acetylcho-
line in vesicles.

Central Nervous System Synapses
Each of the approximately 100 billion (1011) neurons in 
the  human  brain  receives  synaptic  inputs  from  many 
other neurons, forming a grand total of about 1015 syn-
apses.  Inputs  at  synapses  covering  the  surfaces  of  the 
dendrites  and  the  cell  body  (Fig.  17.10A)  drive  local 
changes  in  the  membrane  potential  that  are  integrated 
at the base of the axon to start an action potential. Some 
synapses  excite  the  postsynaptic  cell,  while  others 
inhibit. Furthermore, most neurotransmitters (Fig. 17.8) 
activate both channels, producing point-to-point signals 
on a fast time scale, as well as seven-helix receptors that 
modulate the behavior of other neurons on longer time 
scales. In addition, many central nervous system (CNS) 
synapses  secrete  both  a  neurotransmitter  and  one  of 
more than 100 neuropeptide hormones for communica-
tion through seven-helix receptors on neighboring cells. 
Finally, some neurons can secrete two neurotransmitters 
or  switch  their  neurotransmitters  during  development. 
In all these ways synaptic transmission between neurons 
in  the  CNS  (Fig.  17.10)  differs  fundamentally  from  the 
stable, efficient, one-to-one, excitatory coupling at neu-
romuscular junctions.

Transmission at chemical synapses in the CNS depends 
on  cooperation  of  pumps,  carriers,  and  channels  (Fig. 
17.10C–D) similar to the neuromuscular junction. Incom-
ing  information  takes  the  form  of  action  potentials  
that  arrive  at  synapses  and  open  voltage-gated  Ca2+ 
channels  in  the  presynaptic  membrane.  The  transient 
rise  in  cytoplasmic  Ca2+  can  trigger  the  fusion  of  syn-
aptic  vesicles  with  the  presynaptic  plasma  membrane, 
releasing  transmitter,  but  the  probability  of  success-
ful  fusion  is  lower  than  at  neuromuscular  junctions.  
Neurotransmitters  secreted  by  the  presynaptic  cell  

 

CHAPTER 17  n  Membrane Physiology 

295

activate  ligand-gated  channels  that  control  the  post-
synaptic  membrane potential. Carriers in the presynap-
tic  membrane  and  adjacent  supporting  cells  terminate  
transmission  by  removing  neurotransmitter  from  the  
synaptic cleft.

Excitatory  synapses  using  the  neurotransmitters 
glutamate, acetylcholine, or serotonin activate recep-
tor  channels  (see  Figs.  16.11  and  16.12)  permeable  to 
cations  that  depolarize  the  membrane.  Opening  these 
channels causes a local, short-lived change in membrane 
potential,  called  a postsynaptic  potential  (PSP).  Indi-
vidual PSPs do not fire action potentials for two reasons. 
First, individual PSPs raise the membrane potential only 
a  few  millivolts,  so  they  do  not  bring  the  postsynaptic 
membrane to threshold. Second, the plasma membrane 
of dendrites and the cell body contains few voltage-gated 
Na+  channels.  Furthermore,  inhibitory  synapses  on 
the same cell counteract excitatory synapses by secret-
ing glycine or γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) to activate 
Cl− channels that hyperpolarize the membrane, taking 
it farther from threshold (see Fig. 11.18).

Neurons  spatially  average  excitatory  and  inhibitory 
PSPs as they spread passively over the postsynaptic mem-
brane and generate an action potential only when their 
sum at a particular time brings the membrane potential 
to threshold in the proximal part of the axon, called the 
axon  hillock  (Fig.  17.10A).  This  part  of  the  plasma 
membrane is particularly sensitive to voltage, owing to 
a  high  concentration  of  voltage-gated  Na+  channels.  At 
threshold,  they  open,  depolarizing  the  membrane  (Fig. 
17.6). Delayed-rectifier K+ channels then repolarize the 
membrane,  resetting  it  in  preparation  for  subsequent 
action potentials. The frequency of postsynaptic action 
potentials is proportional to the intensity of the presyn-
aptic  input  above  a  threshold.  Each  action  potential  is 
identical  and  propagates  down  the  axon.  Both  the 
pattern and frequency of action potentials carry informa-
tion in the brain.

Removal  of  neurotransmitters  from  the  synaptic  
cleft terminates activation of postsynaptic receptors (Fig. 
17.9D).  The  Na+  gradient  across  the  plasma  membrane 
drives  symporters  that  return  neurotransmitters  to  
their  presynaptic  cells.  Within  the  presynaptic  cell,  a 
V-type, proton-translocating ATPase acidifies the lumen 
of  the  synaptic  vesicle  and  establishes  a  proton  elec-
trochemical  gradient  across  the  vesicle  membrane  to  
drive the antiporter that concentrates transmitter inside 
the vesicle.

Modification of Central Nervous System Synapses 
by Drugs and Disease
The  duration  of  synaptic  stimulation  depends  on  the  
rate  of  clearance  of  neurotransmitters  from  the  synap-
tic  cleft,  so  inhibiting  these  transport  processes  with  
drugs  prolongs  stimulation  at  particular  classes  of  CNS 
synapses,  with  profound  effects  on  brain  function  and 

behavior.  Cocaine  inhibits  a  plasma  membrane  dopa-
mine  transporter  as  well  as  transporters  for  serotonin 
and  norepinephrine.  Tricyclic  antidepressants  inhibit 
norepinephrine  uptake,  and  other  drugs  inhibit  sero-
tonin uptake. These drugs have dramatic effects on the 
symptoms  of  depression  as  well  as  other  psychiatric 
disorders.

Excess  stimulation  of  N-methyl-D-aspartate  (NMDA) 
receptors rapidly kills postsynaptic neurons, most likely 
owing  to  the  deleterious  effects  of  excess  cytoplasmic 
Ca2+. This occurs when glutamate is released from isch-
emic brain tissue during a stroke caused by compromis-
ing  the  blood  supply  to  a  region  of  the  brain.  Such 
damage might also contribute to neuron death in degen-
erative  diseases  of  the  nervous  system,  such  as  amyo-
trophic lateral sclerosis and Alzheimer disease.

Nicotinic  acetylcholine  receptors  in  the  CNS  are 
found  on  both  the  postsynaptic  and  presynaptic  mem-
branes along with glial cells, so the effects of acetylcho-
line secreted by neurons and nicotine from tobacco are 
widespread. In some cases they carry out fast, excitatory 
synaptic transmission as at the neuromuscular junction. 
Nicotinic  acetylcholine  receptors  in  the  presynaptic 
plasma membrane are highly permeable to Ca2+, so their 
stimulation  admits  Ca2+  into  the  presynaptic  terminal. 
This  enhances  both  the  spontaneous  release  of  neu-
rotransmitter  and  release  in  response  to  action  poten-
tials.  The  isoform  composition  of  CNS  acetylcholine 
receptors  differs  from  that  of  muscles  (see  Fig.  11.12). 
Some are homopentamers of α-subunits. Others are het-
eropentamers  of  α-  and  β-subunits.  Activation  of  these 
ligand-gated  channels  in  different  regions  of  the  brain 
may  account  for  the  enhancing  effects  of  nicotine  on 
learning  and  memory  but  also  for  tobacco  addiction. 
Loss  of  CNS  neurons  that  secrete  acetylcholine  might 
contribute to dementia in Alzheimer disease.

Modification of Central Nervous System  
Synapses by Use
Memories are thought to depend on structural changes 
that modify the strength or numbers of synapses between 
neurons in the brain, processes called synaptic plastic-
ity. Particular patterns of stimulation can produce long-
term  changes  that  enhance  or  reduce  the  efficiency  of 
transmission  at  various  glutamate-mediated  synapses 
(Fig. 17.11). The hippocampus, a region of the verte-
brate  cerebral  cortex  known  to  participate  in  some 
forms of learning and memory, is often used for observ-
ing a simple form of cellular learning. Intense stimulation 
of excitatory glutamate synapses (20 pulses over a period 
of 200 msec) can increase synaptic strength for days or 
weeks.  This  is  called  long-term  potentiation  (LTP). 
Conversely,  slow,  prolonged  stimulation  of  glutamate 
synapses reduces the response for hours. This is called 
long-term depression (LTD). The mechanisms of LTP 
and  LTD  have  been  investigated  thoroughly,  because 

296 

SECTION V  n  Membrane Structure and Function

A. Before LTP
Probability of vesicle release low, <50%

B. LTP Induction

Rapid stimulation

C. LTP Outcome
Probability of vesicle release high, >80%

Postsynaptic responsiveness low

NMDA receptors open

Postsynaptic responsiveness high

Ca2+ enters

Increase in AMPA active receptors

Ca2+ binds calmodulin

Increase in AMPA receptor conductance

Stimulates CAM kinase II

Increase in spines

AMPA receptor phosphorylation

DENDRITE

AXON

Input

l

a
i
t
n
e
t
o
p
 
n
o
i
t
c
A

Synaptic vesicles
  containing
  glutamate

Na+

 
e
r
i
f
-
d
p
a
R

i

l

s
a
i
t
n
e
t
o
p
 
n
o
i
t
c
a

Active AMPA-R
Inactive AMPA-R
NMDA-R

Small

postsynaptic

Dendritic spine

potential
change
Output

Input

l

a
i
t
n
e
t
o
p
 
n
o
i
t
c
A

Na+

Na+

Na+

Na+
Na+

Na+

Na+

Lots of
glutamate

Na+

NO?
Ca2+
CAM 
Kinase II

Calmodulin

Active AMPA-R

New
dendritic
spine

Large

postsynaptic

potential
change
Output

FIGURE 17.11  LONG-TERM POTENTIATION OF SYNAPTIC TRANSMISSION AT EXCITATORY SYNAPSES IN THE HIPPOCAMPUS. 
A, Prior to long-term potential (LTP), postsynaptic responses to presynaptic action potentials are unreliable and small. B, Some acute responses 
to  vigorous  stimulation.  C,  After  induction  of  LTP,  postsynaptic  responses  are  more  reliable  and  larger.  AMPA-R  (α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-
methylisoxazole-4-propionate receptor) and NMDA-R (N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor) are two classes of glutamate receptors; NO is nitric oxide, 
a candidate for the retrograde signaling molecule; CAM kinase II is calcium-calmodulin kinase II. 

they  occur  on  appropriate  time  scales  to  modify  syn-
apses  during  development  and  high-order  brain  func-
tions, such as learning and memory.

Induction  of  LTP  involves  two  types  of  glutamate 
receptor channels (see Fig. 11.11) located in postsynap-
tic  specializations  called  dendritic  spines  (Fig.  17.11). 
(α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-
AMPA 
propionate)  receptors  open  and  close  rapidly  in 
response to glutamate and depolarize the membrane by 
admitting Na+. NMDA receptors respond slowly to glu-
tamate and also depolarize the membrane by admitting 
Ca2+.  The  response  of  NMDA  receptors  to  glutamate 
depends on the membrane potential, as partial depolar-
ization is required to displace an extracellular Mg2+ ion 
blocking  the  channel.  This  dual  dependence  on  gluta-
mate  and  membrane  potential  makes  NMDA  receptors 
coincidence  detectors,  responsive  to  rapid  stimulation 
or stimulation at nearby excitatory synapses.

In principle, LTP and LTD might alter the efficiency 
of  synaptic  transmission  by  changing  glutamate  release 
from  the  presynaptic  cell  or  the  responsiveness  of  the 

postsynaptic cell to glutamate. Investigators debate the 
relative importance of presynaptic and postsynaptic pro-
cesses,  but  both  likely  contribute.  Inconsistencies  in 
observations likely reflect the fact that LTP involves mul-
tiple  processes  (Fig.  17.11),  and  the  protocols  used  to 
study LTP can emphasize one feature over others.

One  presynaptic  factor  is  the  probability  that  an 
action potential will stimulate the fusion of a glutamate-
containing synaptic vesicle with the plasma membrane. 
In the resting state, glutamate release by these vesicles 
is unreliable. LTP increases the probability of exocytosis 
from less than 0.5 to greater than 0.8. The mechanism 
of enhanced transmitter release is still being investigated. 
Candidates include NMDA receptors in the presynaptic 
membrane,  diffusive  messengers  such  as  nitric  oxide 
(see Fig. 26.17) providing feedback from the postsynap-
tic  side,  and  strengthened  adhesion  between  the  pre- 
and postsynaptic membranes.

At least two factors on the postsynaptic side influence 
the response to glutamate: the number of active AMPA 
receptors  at  a  synapse;  and  the  number  and  sizes  of 

 

CHAPTER 17  n  Membrane Physiology 

297

synapses  with  the  stimulating  axon.  Inactive  synapses 
with  only  NMDA  receptors  do  not  respond  to  weak 
stimulation  with  glutamate,  but  intense  presynaptic 
release  of  glutamate  during  LTP  arouses  such  silent  
synapses,  especially  if  coordinated  with  membrane 
depolarization  from  neighboring  synapses.  Ca2+  enters 
the  postsynaptic  dendritic  spine  through  active  NMDA 
receptors,  binds  calmodulin  (see  Fig.  3.12C)  and  
activates  the  processes  that  initiate  and  maintain  LTP. 
Within  seconds,  calcium-calmodulin  activates  calcium-
calmodulin  (CAM)-kinase  II  (see  Fig.  25.4A),  which  
phosphorylates AMPA receptors. Phosphorylated AMPA 
receptors are more responsive to glutamate. In addition 
LTP shifts AMPA receptors from an intracellular pool of 
recycling  endosomes  to  the  postsynaptic  membrane 
where they are anchored by proteins in the postsynaptic 
density on the inside of the plasma membrane.

Within  minutes,  induction  of  LTP  triggers  signaling 
cascades  that  maintain  the  increased  efficacy,  leading  
to  structural  changes  and  increased  protein  synthesis. 
These changes may induce dendrites to stabilize existing 
spines or sprout new filopodia and spines that increase 
the number of synapses within an hour or so. Extension 
of  these  processes  and  remodeling  of  the  shape  of  
dendritic spines depend on actin filament assembly (see 
Fig.  38.7).  Direct  imaging  in  the  brain  of  live  mice  has 
documented  the  formation  of  new  spines  associated 
with  learning  a  motor  skill,  a  change  enhanced  by  
sleep. Over the longer term, the postsynaptic cell initi-
ates  gene  transcription  and  protein  synthesis,  bringing 
about  further  changes  that  stabilize  enhanced  synaptic 
transmission.

LTD appears, in many ways, to be the reverse of LTP 
with  multiple  factors  contributing.  Small  molecules 
released  from  the  dendritic  spine  activate  seven-helix 
cannabinoid  receptors  on  the  presynaptic  membrane 
and reduce the reliability of exocytosis. In addition, post-
synaptic  AMPA  receptors  are  less  responsive  owing  to 
sequestration in internal compartments.

Armed  with  the  growing  body  of  knowledge  
about  synaptic  plasticity  at  the  cellular  level,  many 

neuroscientists are investigating the short- and long-term 
changes  in  the  brain  that  account  for  learning  and 
memory.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Pietro De Camilli for his suggestions on revi-
sions to this chapter.

SELECTED READINGS

Birren  SJ,  Marder  E.  Plasticity  in  the  neurotransmitter  repertoire. 

Science. 2013;340:436-437.

Dineley KT, Pandya AA, Yakel JL. Nicotinic ACh receptors as therapeu-
tic  targets  in  CNS  disorders.  Trends  Pharmacol  Sci.  2015;36:
96-108.

Dorwart M, Thibodeau P, Thomas P. Cystic fibrosis: Recent structural 

insights. J Cyst Fibros. 2004;3:91-94.

Feldman  DE.  Synaptic  mechanisms  for  plasticity  in  the  neocortex. 

Annu Rev Neurosci. 2009;32:33-55.

Hoffmann  EK,  Lambert  IH,  Pedersen  SF.  Physiology  of  cell  volume 

regulation in vertebrates. Physiol Rev. 2009;89:193-277.

Hogg  RC,  Bertrand  D.  What  genes  tell  us  about  nicotine  addiction. 

Science. 2004;306:983-984.

Keating  MT,  Sanguinetti  MC.  Molecular  and  cellular  mechanisms  of 

cardiac arrhythmias. Cell. 2001;104:569-580.

Mall  MA,  Galietta  LJ.  Targeting  ion  channels  in  cystic  fibrosis.  J  Cyst 

Fibros. 2015;14:561-570.

Park P, Volianskis A, Sanderson TM, et al. NMDA receptor-dependent 
long-term potentiation comprises a family of temporally overlapping 
forms of synaptic plasticity that are induced by different patterns of 
stimulation. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2013;369:20130131.
Qiu Z, Dubin AE, Mathur J, et al. SWELL1, a plasma membrane protein, 
is an essential component of volume-regulated anion channel. Cell. 
2014;157:447-458.

Riordan  JR.  CFTR  function  and  prospects  for  therapy.  Annu  Rev 

Biochem. 2008;77:701-726.

Strange K. Cellular volume homeostasis. Adv  Physiol  Educ. 2004;28:

155-159.

Vincent  GM.  The  long  QT  syndrome:  Bedside  to  bench  to  bedside.  

N Engl J Med. 2003;348:1837-1838.

Voss FK, Ullrich F, Münch J, et al. Identification of LRRC8 heteromers 
as  an  essential  component  of  the  volume-regulated  anion  channel 
VRAC. Science. 2014;344:634-638.

Yang  G,  Lai  CS,  Cichon  J,  et al.  Sleep  promotes  branch-specific  for-
mation  of  dendritic  spines  after  learning.  Science.  2014;344:
1173-1178.

This page intentionally left blank

S E C T I O N   VI 

Cellular Organelles and 
Membrane Trafficking

This page intentionally left blank

ments specialized to provide energy; to synthesize lipids, 
carbohydrates,  proteins,  and  nucleic  acids;  and  to 
degrade cellular constituents. These subcellular compart-
ments,  called  organelles,  have  distinctive  chemical 
compositions. Organelles vary in abundance and size in 
different  cell  types,  including  multicellular  organisms, 
where each tissue and organ has specialized functions. 
An  organelle  often  holds  a  monopoly  on  performing  
a  given  task;  for  example,  endoplasmic  reticulum 
(ER)  synthesizes  membrane  proteins  and  certain  mem-
brane  lipids,  lysosomes  contain  enzymes  to  degrade 
many macromolecules, and mitochondria convert energy 
derived from the covalent bonds of nutrients into adenos-
ine  triphosphate  (ATP)  to  provide  energy  for  diverse 
cellular functions.

A  semipermeable  membrane  surrounds  each  organ-
elle  and  establishes  an 
internal  microenvironment  
with concentrated enzymes, cofactors, and substrates to  
favor  particular  macromolecular  interactions.  Pumps 
(Chapter  14),  carriers  (Chapter  15),  and  channels 

Translated
polypeptide
chains

Protein import

Ch 18

Secretory pathway

import Ch 21

Mitochondria and
chloroplasts Ch 19

Endoplasmic reticulum

Ch 20

SECTION  VI  OVERVIEW
Eukaryotic cells evolved membrane-bounded compart-

(Chapter  16)  in  each  organelle  membrane  establish  an 
internal  chemical  environment  (pH,  divalent  cation 
concentration,  reduction–oxidation  [redox]  potential) 
that is appropriate for particular biochemical functions. 
Mitochondria  and  chloroplasts  use  many  enzymes 
embedded in their membranes to catalyze reactions that 
depend on the separation of reactants across the mem-
brane  or  involve  hydrophobic  substrates  and  products 
soluble in the lipid bilayer (Chapter 19). Compartments 
also protect the rest of the cell from potentially danger-
ous activities, such as degradative enzymes in lysosomes 
and oxidative enzymes in peroxisomes.

This  division  of  labor  among  organelles  has  many 
advantages  but  also  presents  cells  with  challenges  in 
terms  of  coordination  of  cellular  activities,  organelle 
biosynthesis, and cell division. Organelles are not autono-
mous,  so  their  activities  must  be  integrated  to  benefit  
the  whole  cell.  Therefore,  mechanisms  are  required  to 
transport  material  between  compartments  and  across 
the  membranes  that  surround  them.  Many  functional 
pathways  require  macromolecules  and  lipids  to  move 

Endocytic
pathway

Ch 22

Degradation

Ch 23

 301

from one organelle to another in a vectorial manner. This 
transport between organelles generally involves budding 
of  vesicles  from  one  membrane-bounded  compartment 
followed by fusion with another, in a process collectively 
termed vesicular trafficking. In addition, contact sites 
between some membranes allow for exchange of lipids.
This  section  focuses  on  two  important  processes  as 
they  pertain  to  the  biogenesis  and  functions  of  the 
various  organelles:  the  targeting  of  proteins,  either 
during or after translation to their home organelle, and 
the bidirectional movement of vesicular traffic between 
organelles  and  the  plasma  membrane.  The  exocytic  or 
secretory pathway from the endoplasmic reticulum to 
the plasma membrane and lysosomes coordinates organ-
elle biosynthesis and secretion. The endocytic pathway 
takes  in  molecules  and  microscopic  particles  from 
outside  the  cell  along  with  plasma  membrane  compo-
nents. Operating together, the two pathways coordinate 
the  distribution  and  turnover  of  membrane  proteins  
and lipids.

Proteins that are synthesized in the cytoplasm either 
remain  there  or  move  to  their  final  destinations  in  the 
nucleus  (Chapter  9),  mitochondria,  chloroplasts,  and 
peroxisomes  (Chapter  18).  Hundreds  of  proteins  des-
tined for mitochondria and chloroplasts are synthesized 
in the cytoplasm and directed to these organelles by zip 
codes  built  into  their  polypeptide  sequences.  Usually, 
these guide sequences are removed by proteolytic pro-
cessing once the polypeptide has moved through chan-
nels into one of the membranes or compartments inside 
these  organelles.  Different  sorts  of  targeting  sequences 
target dozens of proteins to peroxisomes.

Chapter 19 explains how mitochondria and chloro-
plasts descended from bacteria that established symbi-
otic relationships with eukaryotes in two singular events 
about a billion years apart. Mitochondria brought along 
the capacity for ATP synthesis by oxidative phosphory-
lation,  while  chloroplasts  contributed  photosynthesis 
and  oxygen  production.  Peroxisomes  are  derived 
from the ER by a process that is distinct from the secre-
tory  pathway.  They  carry  out  a  number  of  oxidative 
reactions.

The  ER  (Chapter  20)  generates  the  secretory  path-
way  by  synthesizing  proteins  for  membranes  and  for 
secretion as well as many of the lipids that are used in 
membranes throughout the cell. Amino acid sequences 
called  signal  sequences  direct  ribosomes  that  synthe-
size  integral  membrane  proteins  and  secreted  proteins 
to receptors on the endoplasmic reticulum. Translation 
pushes these polypeptides through a protein pore into 
the lumen of the ER or into the lipid bilayer. After folding 
and modification by addition of oligosaccharides, these 
proteins exit from the ER in vesicles for transport to the 
Golgi apparatus and more distal parts of the secretory 
pathway,  including  lysosomes  and  plasma  membrane. 
Retrograde  vesicle  traffic  mediated  by  other  proteins 

302

retrieves membranes and proteins from the Golgi appa-
ratus  back  to  the  ER.  Despite  this  heavy  bidirectional 
traffic between organelles, accurate sorting mechanisms 
allow each organelle to maintain its identity.

Chapter 21 explains the mechanisms used for mem-
brane trafficking. Cells use three different types of coat 
proteins with common evolutionary origins for budding 
membrane  vesicles.  Under  the  direction  of  membrane-
associated  guanosine  triphosphatases  (GTPases),  these 
proteins form a coat on a donor membrane that distorts 
the lipid bilayer into a vesicle that buds from the surface. 
The  vesicle  carries  membrane  proteins  and  lipids  and 
any  material  in  the  lumen.  Sorting  signals  direct  some 
proteins  into  these  transport  vesicles.  After  the  vesicle 
moves  by  diffusion  or  by  active  transport  along  the 
cytoskeleton  to  a  target  membrane,  different  GTPases 
and  peripheral  proteins  facilitate  fusion  of  the  vesicle 
with a target membrane.

Cells  employ  at  least  five  distinct  mechanisms  to 
internalize plasma membrane, along with a wide range 
of extracellular materials (Chapter 22). Ingestion of small 
particles, including bacteria, takes place by phagocyto-
sis, in which a veil of plasma membrane surrounds the 
particle and takes it into a vacuole inside the cell. Fusion 
of  vesicles  containing  lysosomal  enzymes  initiates  the 
degradation of the contents. A second endocytic pathway 
takes receptors and their ligands into cells in small vesi-
cles  coated  with  clathrin.  Other  forms  of  endocytosis 
take up extracellular fluid and patches of plasma mem-
brane enriched in cholesterol, sphingolipids, and certain 
signaling  proteins.  Inside  the  cell,  the  contents  and 
membranes of these various endocytic vesicles are sorted 
in endosomes and then directed in vesicles back to the 
plasma membrane or onward to the Golgi apparatus or 
lysosomes for recycling.

DNA is stable, but cells continuously replace most of 
their other constituents in a cycle of synthesis and degra-
dation. Chapter 23 explains how cells degrade proteins 
and lipids, taken in from outside by endocytosis or from 
inside the cell. Each type of RNA, protein, and lipid has a 
natural lifetime, generally much shorter than that of the 
cell  itself.  Proteins  are  degraded  and  replaced,  some 
every hour, others every day, and some every few weeks 
or months. Membrane lipids also turn over; some with 
lifetimes measured in minutes. Proteins and lipids taken 
in  by  endocytosis  are  degraded  in  lysosomes.  In  the 
process  called  autophagy,  a  double  membrane  sur-
rounds  a  zone  of  cytoplasm,  that  can  include  entire 
organelles. Fusion of late endosomes and lysosomes with 
these autophagic vacuoles delivers enzymes that degrade 
the contents. A large protein complex called the protea-
some  degrades  cytoplasmic  and  nuclear  proteins,  but 
only  after  they  are  marked  for  degradation  by  conjuga-
tion  with  the  small  protein,  ubiquitin.  A  hierarchy  of 
ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes controls the fate of pro-
teins as they turn over during the cell cycle.

C H A P T E R 

18 

Posttranslational Targeting  
of Proteins

Protein synthesis is largely carried out by cytoplasmic 

ribosomes that provide all the proteins for the nucleus, 
cytoplasm,  peroxisomes,  and  secretory  pathway.  Mito-
chondria and chloroplasts import most of their proteins 
from  the  cytoplasm,  even  though  they  originated  
as bacterial endosymbionts and have retained the capac-
ity  to  synthesize  a  few  of  their  proteins.  Most  of  the 
original  bacterial  genes  moved  to  the  nucleus  of  the 
eukaryotic host.

Given a common site of synthesis, accurate address-
ing is essential to direct proteins to their sites of action 
and  to  maintain  the  unique  character  of  each  cellular 
compartment.  This  is  achieved  by  “zip  codes”  built  
into  the  structure  of  each  protein  (Fig.  18.1).  Residues 
in  the  sequence  of  each  protein—often,  but  not 

necessarily,  contiguous  amino  acids—form  a  signal  for 
targeting.

Targeting signals are both necessary and sufficient 
to guide proteins to their final destinations. Transplanta-
tion of a targeting signal, such as a presequence from a 
mitochondrial protein, to a cytoplasmic protein reroutes 
the  hybrid  protein  into  the  organelle  specified  by  the 
targeting sequence, mitochondria in this example. Some 
targeting  signals  are  transient  parts  of  the  protein.  For 
example,  most  mitochondrial  proteins  are  synthesized 
with N-terminal extensions that guide them to mitochon-
dria and then are removed. Alternatively, signals may be 
a permanent part of the mature protein, in some cases 
serving  repeatedly  to  target  a  mobile  protein  between 
different  destinations.  Permanent  nuclear  targeting 

Proteins synthesized
on free ribosomes

Polypeptide synthesized
with chloroplast transit
sequence

Polypeptide synthesized with
chloroplast transit sequence
and secondary targeting
sequence

Polypeptide synthesized with
mitochondrial presequence

Polypeptide synthesized
with C-terminal PTS signal

Transit sequences are cleaved before folding in
stroma or secondary targeting signal
directs protein to final location

STROMA

Chloroplast

Presequence is cleaved
off and protein folds in
target compartment

Mitochondria

MATRIX

Peroxisome

MATRIX

FIGURE  18.1  TARGETING  SIGNALS  DIRECT  POLYPEPTIDES  SYNTHESIZED  ON  CYTOPLASMIC  RIBOSOMES  TO  CHLORO-
PLASTS, MITOCHONDRIA, AND PEROXISOMES. Signal peptidases remove some signals after the polypeptide enters the organelle. 

 303

304 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

signals can be located at the N-terminus, the C-terminus, 
or even the middle of a protein (see Chapter 9). Some 
proteins have more than one targeting signal: a primary 
code that directs the protein to the target organelle or 
pathway, and a second signal that steers the protein to 
its  specific  site  of  residence  within  the  organelle  or 
pathway.

Targeting  signals  direct  proteins  to  their  destination 
by  binding  to  organelle-specific  receptors  or  using 
soluble escort factors as intermediaries. When necessary, 
proteins cross membranes via channels called translo-
cons formed by integral membrane proteins (Fig. 18.2). 
Like  ion  channels  (see  Chapter  16),  these  protein-
translocating  channels  are  gated  to  prevent  indiscrimi-
nate transport of cellular constituents when not occupied 
by  a  polypeptide.  Polypeptides  fit  so  tightly  in  these 
channels  during  translocation  that  ions  do  not  leak 
through.  Ions  traverse  ion  channels  in  a  microsecond, 
whereas  polypeptides  take  tens  of  seconds  to  move 
through  translocons.  Protein  synthesis,  adenosine  tri-
phosphate (ATP) hydrolysis, or the membrane potential 
provides  the  energy  to  power  protein  translocation 
across membranes.

Three  families  of  protein  translocation  channels  are 
found in all three domains of life. Sec translocons direct 
proteins  into  the  endoplasmic  reticulum  in  eukaryotes 
and out of prokaryotes. The Tat family of pores translo-
cates folded proteins into chloroplast thylakoids and out 
of  prokaryotes.  Membrane  proteins  related  to  Oxa1p 
help  insert  proteins  synthesized  in  the  mitochondrial 
matrix  and  prokaryotic  cytoplasm  into  membranes. 
Mitochondria  (Fig.  18.4),  chloroplasts  (Fig.  18.6),  and 

prokaryotes  (Fig.  18.10)  have  additional  families  of 
protein translocation channels.

Primary  targeting  can  occur  either  cotranslationally, 
coincident with protein synthesis, or posttranslationally, 
after  polypeptide  synthesis.  Chapter  20  covers  protein 
targeting to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) where, with 
a  few  exceptions,  targeting  is  cotranslational.  This 
chapter  covers  posttranslational  targeting  mecha-
nisms that move proteins across membrane bilayers into 
mitochondria, chloroplasts, and peroxisomes, and out of 
Bacteria. Eukaryotes also secrete a few proteins directly 
across  the  plasma  membrane.  Chapter  9  covers  post-
translational  movements  of  proteins  into  and  out  of  
the  nucleus  through  a  large  aqueous  channel  in  the 
nuclear pore.

Transport of Proteins Into Mitochondria
Mitochondrial  outer  and  inner  membranes  define  two 
spaces: one between the outer and inner membranes 
(termed  the  intermembrane  space)  and  an  interior 
space termed the matrix (Fig. 18.3). Each membrane and 
space  has  distinct  functions  and  protein  compositions, 
which are discussed in Chapter 19. Targeting signals and 
specific translocation machinery guide more than 1000 
imported proteins selectively to these compartments.

Genetic  and  biochemical  experiments  on  fungi 
defined  the  molecular  machinery  for  proteins  to  enter 
mitochondria. The TOM40 complex (translocase of the 
outer mitochondrial membrane) is the main portal into 
the mitochondrion. Thereafter proteins take one of four 
routes to different compartments: the outer membrane 

A. Protein export
     from bacteria

B. Protein transport
     in eukaryotes

Sec

Sec translocon translocates
proteins synthesized on
the rough ER into the
membrane or lumen

Proteins synthesized on free
ribosomes are released
into the cytoplasm

Omp85

Tat
Sec

DNA

IM

OM

CYTOPLASM

Toc
Tic

Toc and Tic translocons
translocate proteins into
the membranes or stroma
of chloroplasts

SAM

Tom

Tim
MATRIX

Chloroplast

Sec and Tat translocons
translocate proteins into
the thylakoid membrane
or lumen

STROMA

Sec

Tat

Thylakoid
membrane

IM

OM

Tom and Tim translocons
translocate proteins into
the membranes or matrix
of mitochondria

PEX proteins insert proteins
into the membrane or
lumen of peroxisimes

Mitochondria

PERIPLASMIC
SPACE

PEX

MATRIX

Peroxisome

OM

IM

FIGURE 18.2  TRANSLOCONS USED BY POLYPEPTIDES TO CROSS MEMBRANES. A, Bacterium with Sec and Tat translocons in the 
inner  membrane  and  Omp85  in  the  outer  membrane.  B,  Eukaryote  translocons  including  Sec  in  the  endoplasmic  reticulum  and  thylakoid 
membrane of chloroplasts, Toc in the outer membrane of chloroplasts, Tic in the inner membrane of chloroplasts, Tat in the thylakoid membrane 
of chloroplasts, Tom and SAM in the outer membrane of mitochondria, Tim in the inner membrane of mitochondria, and PEX in peroxisomes. 

 

CHAPTER 18  n  Posttranslational Targeting of Proteins  

305

using the SAM complex (sorting and assembly machin-
ery of the outer membrane); the intermembrane space; 
the inner membrane via the TIM22 complex (translocase 
of  the  inner  mitochondrial  membrane);  and  the  matrix 
using the TIM23 complex. Targeting signals direct pro-
teins  to  the  TOM40  complex  and  then  on  to  other  
locations.  Translocation  requires  energy  and  assistance 
from  protein  chaperones  both  outside  and  inside 
mitochondria.

Delivery of Protein to Mitochondria
After synthesis by cytoplasmic ribosomes, most proteins 
destined for mitochondria bind cytosolic chaperones of 
the  Hsp70  (heat  shock  protein  70)  family  (see  Fig. 
12.12).  This  interaction  maintains  proteins  in  unfolded 
configurations  competent  for  import  (Fig.  18.3).  Some 
imported proteins require additional factors for targeting 
to the translocation machinery.

Targeting motifs for matrix proteins are called prese-
quences, because they are usually removed by proteo-
lytic cleavage in the mitochondrial matrix. Presequences 
are generally located at the N-termini of precursor poly-
peptides  as  contiguous  sequences  of  10  to  70  amino 
acids.  They  are  rich  in  basic,  hydroxylated,  and  hydro-
phobic amino acids, but share no defined sequences in 
common.  The  targeting  sequences  of  many  mitochon-
drial membrane proteins are in the middle of the poly-
peptide and are not cleaved after import. Cytochrome c, 

a  component  of  the  electron  transport  chain  in  the 
intermembrane space (see Fig. 19.5), also has an internal 
signal for import into mitochondria.

A  succession  of  weak  interactions  with  outer  mem-
brane  receptors  Tom20,  Tom22,  and  Tom70  guides 
presequences and other target signals to the outer mem-
brane  translocon.  The  presequence  initially  contacts 
Tom20.  Eight  residues  of  the  presequence  fold  into  an 
amphipathic (hydrophobic on one side, hydrophilic on 
the other) α-helix that binds in a shallow hydrophobic 
groove  on  Tom20  with  favorable  electrostatic  interac-
tions  (Fig.  18.4D).  Other  parts  of  the  presequence  are 
thought  to  interact  with  Tom40,  the  translocon  itself. 
Although these associations are weak, collectively, they 
distinguish  mitochondrial  presequences  from  other 
proteins in the cytoplasm with high fidelity.

Translocation Across the Outer Membrane
Tom40,  a  β-barrel  protein  similar  to  a  porin  (see  Fig. 
13.9C), forms the translocon of the outer membrane. Six 
proteins  with  single  transmembrane  helices  associate 
around the periphery of Tom40: the three receptor sub-
units and three small subunits. These Tom40 complexes 
form dimers or trimers in the plane of the membrane (Fig. 
18.3E) with pores approximately 2 nm in diameter.

The outer membrane receptors transfer presequences 
and other targeting sequences to the translocon channel. 
Chemical  crosslinking  showed  that  both  hydrophobic 

A. Common pathway

Hsp70 Presequence

bound to Tom20

B. Route to stroma

C

C. Route to 
     intermembrane
     space

C

CYTOPLASM
OUTER
MEMBRANE

Tom
–
–
20
–

–
–
–

+
+

Tom
70

Tom
40

Tom22

INTERMEMBRANE
SPACE

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

– – –

Tim
23

+
Tim
17

+ +
∆ψ
– – –

+

+

+

– – –

Tim
44

+

+ +
∆ψ
– – –

MPP

+

+

+

– – –

New Hsp70

+

+ +
∆ψ
– – –

+

+

+

– – –

Tim
44

+

+ +
∆ψ
– – –

MPP

C

+ +
∆ψ
–

– –

INNER
MEMBRANE

MATRIX

– – –

Signal
peptidase

ATPADP

Hsp 70

N

Cleaved
presequence

ATPADP

Cleaved
presequence

FIGURE 18.3 
IMPORT OF MATRIX PROTEINS INTO MITOCHONDRIA. Models of the Tom and Tim complexes. A, Common pathway 
across the outer membrane. Hsp70 (heat shock protein 70) escorts polypeptides synthesized on cytoplasmic ribosomes to mitochondria where 
the presequence associates with Tom20/22. The basic presequence leads the polypeptide through Tom40, the translocase of the outer membrane, 
to the intermembrane space. B, Route to the stroma. The presequence enters the translocase of the inner membrane (Tim). The potential across 
the inner membrane (Δψ) pulls the presequence through Tim into the matrix, where it is cleaved by MPP (matrix processing protease). Cycles of 
Hsp70 binding to the peptide followed by adenosine triphosphate (ATP) hydrolysis and dissociation of Hsp70 from Tim44 ratchet the translocating 
peptide into the matrix, where it folds. C, Route to the intermembrane space. After cleavage of the presequence, the polypeptide backs up into 
the intermembrane space. 

306 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

A. Mitochondrion

CYTOPLASM

Outer
membrane

B. Tom20
Ser16'

Gln75

Arg14'

Glu79

N
Presequence

Inner
membrane

Intermembrane
space
MATRIX

Glu78

Arg17'

C. Tom40 dimer

D. Model

CYTOPLASM

C

Tom20

Tom
70

E. Model of Tom complex
     trimer

Tom
40

Tom22

OUTER
MEMBRANE

INTERMEMBRANE
SPACE

Tom6TM

Tim
23

Tim
17

INNER
MEMBRANE

Tim
44

MATRIX

Tom5TM

FIGURE  18.4  MITOCHONDRIAL  IMPORT  COMPONENTS.  A,  Electron  micrograph  of  a  thin  section  of  a  mitochondrion.  B,  Structure 
determined by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy of a presequence peptide bound to a hydrophobic patch on Tom20, a receptor from 
the mitochondrial outer membrane. Space-filling model of a cytoplasmic domain of Tom20. The presequence forms two turns of α-helix with two 
arginines exposed on the surface. N is the N-terminus and C is the C-terminus of the peptide. Yellow is a hydrophobic patch; orange is Gln-rich; 
red is Glu-rich. C, Three-dimensional reconstruction from electron micrographs of a dimer of Tom40, the translocase of the outer mitochondrial 
membrane. D, Schematic of the mitochondrial import apparatus, including Tom complex in the outer membrane and Tim complex in the inner 
membrane. E, Model of the active trimer of Tom complex. This face view shows cross sections of the transmembrane helices of four accessory 
subunits. (A, Courtesy Don W. Fawcett, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA. B,  Courtesy  D.  Kohda,  Kyushu  University.  From  Abe  Y,  Shodai 
T,  Muto  T,  et al.  Structural  basis  of  prese quence recognition by the mitochondrial protein import receptor Tom20. Cell. 2000;100:551–560 and 
Protein Data Bank [PDB; www.rcsb.org] file 1OM2. C, From Ahting U, Thun C, Hegerl R, et al. The Tom core complex: the general protein import 
pore of the outer membrane of mitochondria. J Cell Biol. 1999;147:959–968, copyright The  Rockefeller  University  Press. E, From Shiota T, Imai 
K, Qiu J, et al. Molecular architecture of the active mitochondrial protein gate. Science. 2015;349:1544–1548.)

and  charged  polypeptides  move  through  the  central 
pore  of  the β-barrel.  Proteins  must  be  largely  unfolded 
to fit through the 2-nm pore. Like other translocons Tom 
channels are likely to be gated, and they close when not 
occupied by a translocating polypeptide.

Assembly of Outer Membrane Proteins
Some  simple  outer  membrane  proteins  transfer  later-
ally  into  the  bilayer  while  they  are  in  transit  through 
Tom, while more complicated outer membrane β-barrel 
proteins,  including  Tom40  itself,  require  assistance. 
This  is  provided  by  another  protein  complex  in  the 
outer membrane called the SAM complex. The β-barrel 
protein  SAM50  forms  a  channel  and  cooperates  with 
a  second  subunit  to  mediate  folding  and  insertion  of 
β-barrel proteins into the membrane, similar to its bacte-
rial counterpart. The TOM and SAM complexes interact, 
so  the  unfolded  polypeptide  can  move  from  the  TOM 
complex to the SAM complex with assistance from TIM 
chaperones associated with the inner membrane.

Translocation Across the Inner Membrane to  
the Matrix
Proteins  use  the  Tim23  translocon  to  cross  the  inner 
membrane  into  the  matrix.  The  integral  membrane 
proteins Tim23 and Tim17 form the channel across the 
inner membrane and associate with three other subunits 
(Fig. 18.3). These proteins consist of four transmembrane 
helices rather than β-strands as in  Tom40. Interactions 
of the N-terminal presequences of matrix proteins with 
Tim50  and  Tim23  guide  the  presequence  into  the 

translocation channel. Physical interactions of Tom and 
Tim  complexes  may  facilitate  the  transfer  of  matrix 
proteins  across  both  membranes.  The  MPP  peptidase 
(matrix  processing  protease)  cleaves  off  the  prese-
quences once they enter the matrix.

Two  energy  sources—the  electrical  potential  across 
the  inner  membrane  and  ATP  hydrolysis  by  matrix 
chaperones—power  polypeptide  translocation  across 
the inner membrane. The membrane potential (negative 
inside) pulls positively charged presequences across the 
membrane.  Then  the  chaperone  Hsp70  takes  over  and 
uses  cycles  of  peptide  binding  and  ATP  hydrolysis  to 
move the peptide into the matrix. One idea is that Hsp70 
rectifies  movements  of  the  polypeptide  in  the  pore, 
allowing  movement  forward  into  the  matrix  but  not 
backward.  Hsp70  binds  when  the  polypeptide  slides 
forward.  After  ATP  hydrolysis,  Hsp70  dissociates  from 
the  polypeptide  and  the  exchange  factor  mGrp1  (see 
Fig. 12.12 for a related protein) rapidly recharges it with 
ATP,  ready  for  another  cycle  of  peptide  binding,  ATP 
hydrolysis,  and  release.  This  allows  the  polypeptide  to 
slide  forward  into  the  matrix  but  not  backward,  so  it 
eventually  ends  up  as  a  folded  protein  in  the  matrix. 
Another  model  proposes  that  the  energy  from  ATP 
hydrolysis is used to actively pull the polypeptide across 
the inner membrane.

Proteins  destined  for  the  intermembrane  space  take 
the same route as those going to the matrix. However, 
after their presequences are cleaved by the MPP pepti-
dase,  they  reverse  into  the  space  between  the  two 
membranes rather than continuing into the matrix.

 

CHAPTER 18  n  Posttranslational Targeting of Proteins  

307

A. Targeting sequence 
     binds Tom

B. Chaperones 
     bind peptide

C

N

Tom20

+
+
+

C

Internal
targeting
sequence

–
Tom
–
–
70

N

C. Translocation
     from Tim22 
     into bilayer

CYTOPLASM

Tom
40

Tom22

+

+
+
∆ψ
– – –

Tiny Tim
chaperones

+

+ +

– – –

Tim9/10
+
+
∆ψ
– – –

+
Tim
22

Tim8/13

+ +

+
Tim
54

– – –

+

–

+
∆ψ
–

+

–

+

C

+

N
+

+

–

–

–

+
+

–

MATRIX

FIGURE  18.5 
IMPORT  OF  THE  ADP/ATP  ANTIPORTER  ACC 
AND ITS INSERTION INTO THE INNER MEMBRANE BILAYER. 
A white bar across a translocon pore indicates that it is closed. A, An 
internal  targeting  sequence  binds  the  ACC  polypeptide  to  Tom70, 
which directs it into the Tom channel. B, In the intermembrane space, 
Tim9/10  and  Tim8/13  capture  the  polypeptide  and  direct  it  to  the 
Tim22/54  translocon  that  is  used  for  import  of  matrix  proteins.  
C, Tim22/54, in conjunction with the inner membrane potential (Δψ), 
promotes  insertion  of  the  six  transmembrane  helices  into  the  inner 
membrane bilayer. 

Translocation Into the Inner Membrane Bilayer
The integral proteins of the inner membrane lack cleav-
able  targeting  signals,  depending  instead  on  targeting 
information contained in the intact protein to reach their 
destination. One example is the most abundant protein 
of  the  inner  membrane,  the  adenosine  diphosphate 
(ADP)/ATP antiporter that spans the inner membrane six 
times (see Fig. 15.4). Its signal sequence is located in the 
middle of the polypeptide.

A  family  of  small  “tiny  Tim”  chaperone  proteins 
(Tim8,  Tim9,  Tim10,  Tim12,  and  Tim13)  guide  inner 
membrane proteins from the TOM complex across the 
intermembrane  space  to  the  Tim22  translocon  in  the 
inner  membrane  (Fig.  18.5).  Complexes  of  Tim9/10  or 
Tim8/13 bind to hydrophobic segments of polypeptides 
during transit to the inner membrane.

Many inner membrane proteins use the Tim22 trans-
locon to access the lipid bilayer. Tim22 has three or four 
transmembrane helices and forms the channel, but little 
is  known  about  its  structure.  It  associates  with  Tim54, 
Tim12,  and  Tim18  in  a  300-kD  complex.  Insertion  of 
transmembrane  segments  into  the  bilayer  depends  on 
membrane potential.

Export From the Matrix
Insertion of proteins synthesized in the matrix into the 
inner membrane depends on an inner membrane protein 
called Oxa1p, which forms a translocon similar to bacte-
rial YidC and chloroplast Alb3 (see later sections). Mito-
chondrial  ribosomes  are  anchored  to  Oxa1p,  allowing 
hydrophobic transmembrane segments to insert directly 
into  the  bilayer.  At  least  one  other  protein  complex 
participates in export of proteins from the matrix.

Transport of Proteins Into Chloroplasts
Eukaryotes  acquired  chloroplasts  through  symbiosis 
with  a  photosynthetic  cyanobacterium  (see  Figs.  2.4 
and  19.7).  Over  time,  most  of  the  bacterial  genes 
moved  to  the  nucleus,  so  more  than  3000  chloroplast 
proteins are synthesized on cytoplasmic ribosomes and 
imported  into  one  of  three  chloroplast  membranes  or 
the three compartments that they surround (Fig. 18.2). 
The innermost thylakoid membranes contain the photo-
synthetic  apparatus  inherited  from  cyanobacteria.  The 
outer  membrane  likely  came  from  the  eukaryotic  host, 
whereas the inner envelope membrane has both bacte-
rial  and  eukaryotic  features.  Some  organisms  acquired 
their  photosynthetic  plastids  by  secondary  or  even  ter-
tiary  rounds  of  endosymbiosis  (see  Fig.  2.7).  These 
secondary  or  tertiary  plastids  are  bounded  by  one  or 
more  additional  membranes  and  have  more  compli-
cated  mechanisms  to  import  the  proteins  expressed 
from nuclear genes.

Although the protein import systems of chloroplasts 
and  mitochondria  both  use  zip  codes  on  the  imported 
proteins and translocons in the membranes (Fig. 18.6), 
the  two  systems  share  no  common  proteins.  Another 
striking  difference  is  that  chloroplasts  use  specialized 
versions of some import components to acquire different 
proteins. This flexibility is important, as these organelles 
(collectively  called  plastids),  have  tissue-specific  and 
age-specific  functions,  ranging  from  photosynthesis  to 
starch storage (see Chapter 19). Mitochondria are more 
homogeneous,  so  a  restricted  set  of  import  proteins 
suffices.

In plants, N-terminal signal sequences called transit 
sequences  target  chloroplast  proteins  to  the  import 
machinery  in  the  outer  envelope.  When  added  experi-
mentally  to  the  N-terminus  of  a  test  protein,  transit 
sequences  suffice  to  guide  the  test  protein  into  the 
stroma  of  chloroplasts.  These  N-terminal  targeting 
sequences  vary  in  length  from  13  to  146  residues,  and 
their amino acid sequences have little in common beyond 
a  net  positive  charge.  The  current  understanding  is  
that transit sequences are heterogeneous, because they 
contain  many  different  types  of  zip  codes  that  bind 
selectively to the specialized import receptors that plants 
express to allow different plastids to import the proteins 
appropriate  for  chloroplasts,  starch  storage  organelles, 
and other specialized functions.

All  imported  proteins  use  the  same  “general  import 
pathway”  to  cross  the  outer  and  inner  envelope  mem-
branes.  The  machinery  consists  of  different  protein 
complexes in each membrane called Toc (translocon at 
the outer envelope membrane of chloroplasts) and Tic 
(translocon at the inner envelope membrane of chloro-
plasts) (Fig. 18.6). These complexes were identified by 
chemical crosslinking of imported proteins to translocon 
proteins. Both Toc and a “super complex” of Toc with 

308 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

A. Common pathway,
     six destinations

B

CYTOPLASMHsp70

C

Transit
sequence

GTP

GDP

GTP

Toc
34

Toc
75

GTP

Toc
159

Toc
36

OM

OM

GTP

Toc
34

Toc
75

GTP

Toc
159

Toc
36

INTERMEMBRANE

SPACE

INTERMEMBRANE
SPACE

Tic

20/21

Tic
110

IM

IM

STROMA

Signal
peptidase

Tic

20/21

Tic
110

Signal
peptidase

THYLAKOID
MEMBRANE

THYLAKOID

MATRIX

STROMA

D

E

C

F

Hsp70

ATP

ADP

Tic

SP

N

C

Cleaved transit signal

Hsp70

Hsp60

FIGURE 18.6  CHLOROPLAST PROTEIN IMPORT VIA TOC AND TIC COMPLEXES. A, Common pathway across the outer membrane 
leading to six different destinations. B–F, Five stages in the movement of proteins into the stroma. B, Energy-independent binding of the transit 
sequence to outer membrane lipids and proteins, especially Toc159. C, Then guanosine triphosphate (GTP) hydrolysis by Toc34 and perhaps 
Toc159 promote insertion of the transit sequence through the outer membrane pore composed of Toc75. D, ATP hydrolysis by Hsp70 facilitates 
delivery to the inner membrane translocon Tic20/21. E, A stromal protease SP removes the N-terminal transit sequence. F, Hsp60 (heat shock 
protein 60) and Hsp70 promote folding of stromal proteins, while other proteins are rerouted to other compartments, including thylakoids. Tic, 
translocon at the inner envelope membrane of chloroplasts; Toc, translocon at the outer envelope membrane of chloroplasts. (Modified from Chen 
X, Schnell D. Protein import into chloroplasts. Trends Cell Biol. 1999;9:222–227; and May T, Soll J. Chloroplast precursor protein translocon. 
FEBS Lett. 2000;452:52–56.)

Tic  can  be  isolated  for  analysis  of  their  composition. 
Mutations that compromise chloroplast import have also 
contributed to understanding the process.

The journey of a protein from its site of synthesis in 
cytoplasm into the stroma is understood in broad outline. 
The Toc159 and Toc34 proteins are receptors for transit 
sequences  on  the  surface  of  chloroplasts.  Plant  cells 
express  different  isoforms  of  Toc159  and  Toc34  to 
accommodate the import of different proteins appropri-
ate  to  their  differentiated  state,  although  the  details  of 
these  interactions  are  not  yet  clear.  Both  Toc159  and 
Toc34  have  cytoplasmic  guanosine  triphosphatase 
(GTPase)  domains  similar  to  other  small  GTPases  (see 
Fig.  25.7).  Bound  guanosine  triphosphate  (GTP)  favors 
binding  of  transit  sequences,  and  a  bound  transit 
sequence stimulates GTP hydrolysis and transfer of the 
transit sequence to the translocon.

The  β-barrel  protein  Toc75  forms  the  translocon 
across the outer membrane for all imported proteins. A 
homologous protein Omp85 translocates proteins in the 
opposite direction across the outer membrane of gram-
negative bacteria. These proteins have a variable number 
of N-terminal POTRA (polypeptide transport associated) 
domains  that  may  interact  with  many  different  transit 
sequences.  Polypeptides  are  thought  to  be  unfolded 
during  transit  through  the  narrow  pore.  Proteins  des-
tined for the outer membrane insert after passing through 
Toc75, similar to mitochondria.

The  pore  across  the  inner  membrane  consists  of  a 
complex of at least seven Tic proteins, but many details 
regarding  their  structures  and  functions  are  not  yet 
settled.  The  abundant  protein  Tic110  not  only  forms 
some or all of a pore but also binds Hsp70 chaperones 
on the stromal side of the membrane. Smaller proteins 
called Tic20 and Tic21 appear to be distantly related to 
mitochondrial  Tim23/17,  so  they  may  form  a  second 
type of channel composed of transmembrane helices in 
the inner membrane.

As proteins emerge into the stroma, a signal peptidase 
cleaves  off  the  transit  peptide  before  the  proteins  fold 
or  redistribute  to  their  final  locations.  Hydrolysis  of 
hundreds  of  ATP  molecules  in  the  stroma  is  required  
to  complete  the  translocation  and  folding  of  imported 
proteins.  The  contributing  enzymes  include  an  AAA 
adenosine  triphosphatase  (ATPase),  heat  shock  protein 
93  (Hsp93),  chaperone  Hsp70,  and  a  chaperonin  heat 
shock protein 60 (Hsp60) (see Chapter 12). Some pro-
teins remain in the stroma. Other proteins move on to 
thylakoid  membranes  or  the  thylakoid  lumen  using  at 
least four different pathways.

Some  photosynthesis  proteins  insert  directly  into 
thylakoid  membranes  from  the  stroma.  Others  require 
help  from  proteins  homologous  to  parts  of  the  signal 
recognition particle (SRP) system used for export from 
bacteria (Fig. 18.10) and into the ER of eukaryotes (see 
Fig. 20.6). Although chloroplasts lack SRP RNA, GTPases 

 

CHAPTER 18  n  Posttranslational Targeting of Proteins  

309

similar to an SRP protein and the SRP receptor cooperate 
with a protein that is homologous to translocon Oxa1p 
to mediate insertion into the thylakoid membrane.

Hydrophilic proteins destined for the thylakoid lumen 
retain a secondary N-terminal signal sequence after the 
transit  sequence  is  cleaved  in  the  stroma.  Some  move 
across the thylakoid membrane into the thylakoid lumen 
through  a  translocon  homologous  to  bacterial  SecYE, 
powered by ATP hydrolysis by a homolog of SecA (Fig. 
18.9).  Other  proteins  with  tightly  bound  redox  factors 
cross  the  thylakoid  membrane  while  compactly  folded 
using  translocon  factors  similar  to  the  bacterial  Tat 
system  (Fig.  18.2).  Secondary  signal  sequences  with  
two  arginine  residues  direct  these  proteins  to  a  Tat 
translocon and the proton gradient drives the polypep-
tide  across  the  membrane.  After  translocation,  a  pepti-
dase  in  the  thylakoid  lumen  removes  both  types  of 
secondary signal sequences.

Transport of Proteins Into Peroxisomes
Peroxisomes  are  simple  organelles  with  a  single  mem-
brane  limiting  a  lumen  containing  many  oxidative 
enzymes  (see  Fig.  19.10).  Nuclear  genes  encode  all 
proteins  found  in  the  membrane  and  lumen  of  peroxi-
somes.  Their  messenger  RNAs  are  translated  on  cyto-
plasmic  ribosomes,  and  the  proteins  are  incorporated 
posttranslationally into peroxisomes (Fig. 18.1).

Two  types  of  targeting  signals  direct  proteins  from  
the cytoplasm to the peroxisome lumen (called matrix). 
The  type  1  peroxisomal  targeting  signal  (PTS1)  is 
found  at  the  extreme  C-terminus  of  most  peroxisomal 
enzymes  (Fig.  18.7).  PTS1  is  just  three  amino  acids  

long  with  consensus  sequence  of  serine-lysine-leucine-
COOH,  or  a  conservative  variant.  For  example,  alanine 
or cysteine can  substitute  at  the  −3  position,  arginine 
or  histidine can  function  at  the  penultimate  position, 
and methionine can substitute for the C-terminal leucine. 
Amidation of the C-terminal carboxylate inactivates the 
signal.  The  type  2  peroxisomal  targeting  signal  (PTS2) 
also  targets  a  few  proteins  (only  four  are  known  in 
humans,  one  in  yeast)  to  the  peroxisome  matrix.  PTS2 
sequences are located at or near the N-terminus and have 
a  loose  consensus  sequence  of  RLXXXXXH/QL  (where 
X is any amino acid).

Proteins  called  peroxins  deliver  proteins  from  the 
cytoplasm to the peroxisomal membrane or lumen (Fig. 
18.8  and  Table  18.1).  Loss-of-function  mutations  in 
humans and yeast revealed genes for more than 20 per-
oxins that participate in the biogenesis and proliferation 
of  peroxisomes.  Mutations  of  human  PEX  genes  cause 
devastating diseases (Table 18.1).

The  PEX5  import  receptor  carries  proteins  with  a 
PTS1 signal to the peroxisomal lumen by a highly unusual 
mechanism.  The  soluble  protein  PEX5  is  proposed  to 
bind  the  PTS1  motif  and  insert  into  the  lipid  bilayer 
surrounding the peroxisome, where it forms a transient 
pore to deliver the cargo protein into the lumen. Mem-
brane proteins including a receptor called PEX14 partici-
pate in delivery of proteins into the lumen. Then PEX5 
returns  to  the  cytoplasm  for  further  rounds  of  import. 
Recycling PEX5 depends on conjugation with ubiquitin 
and  ATP  hydrolysis  by  an  AAA  ATPase,  a  process  with 
some  similarities  to  ER-associated  degradation  (ERAD; 
see Fig. 20.12). A similar mode of action is proposed for 
PEX7, the import receptor for PTS2 proteins.

A

C

B

Arg 520

H2O

H2O

Arg 378

Leu (-1)

Lys (-2)

Ser (-3)

Gln (-4)

Tyr (-5)

TPRs
5–7

Lys 490

Asn 489

Asn 524

Asn 497

Asn 531

N
TPRs
1–3

FIGURE 18.7  BINDING OF A PEROXISOMAL TARGETING SIGNAL TYPE 1 (PTS1) TARGETING SIGNAL TO PEX5. A, PTS1 binds to 
the C-terminal tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) domain of PEX5. The C-terminal, 40-kD TPR domain of PEX5, shown as a ribbon diagram, surrounds 
the PTS1 peptide, shown as a stick figure. Note TPRs 1 to 3 (yellow ribbons) and TPRs 5 to 7 (blue ribbons). An α-helical span (green ribbon) 
links the two triplet TPRs at the bottom of this structure; the C-terminal extension (white ribbons) also connects the two triplet TPRs. B, Detailed 
view of PEX5–PTS1 interactions between the PTS1 backbone (brown bonds) and PEX5 side chains (white bonds); the putative hydrogen bonds 
are shown as dashed green lines. This structure revealed the chemical basis of PEX5-PTS1 binding, as well as the sequence constraints of PTS1. 
(A, From PDB file 1FCH and Gatto GJ Jr, Geisbrecht BV, Gould SJ, Berg JM. Peroxisomal targeting signal-1 recognition by the TPR domains of 
human PEX5. Nat Struct Biol. 2000;7:1091–1095.)

310 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

A. De novo formation

B. Growth and division

Faresylated PEX16

from cytoplasm

Budding

PEX3

inserted into
ER membrane

PEX16- and PEX3-

mediated import
of membrane 

proteins

PEX5- and PEX7-
mediated import

of matrix 
proteins

Preperoxisome

Nascent

peroxisome

Expansion by continued

import of matrix
and membrane

proteins

Division

FIGURE 18.8  PEROXISOME BIOGENESIS. A, De novo formation by budding of a vesicle containing PEX3 and PEX16 from endoplasmic 
reticulum  to  form  a  preperoxisome.  B,  Growth  and  division  of  peroxisomes.  PEX3  and  PEX16  mediate  the  import  of  membrane  proteins. 
The PEX5–PTS1 receptor, PEX7, and other peroxins mediate the import of proteins with PTS1 and PTS2 into peroxisomes. 

TABLE 18.1  Peroxins: Proteins for the Assembly of Peroxisomes
Groups
Peroxins
Peroxisome Matrix Protein Import

Functions

PEX5
PEX13, PEX14, PEX17, PEX33
PEX8 (PEX23)
PEX7
PEX18, PEX20, PEX21

PTS1 receptor and channel
Membrane docking complex for PEX5
Membrane partners of PEX5 & PEX14
PTS2 receptor
PTS2 coreceptors with PEX7

Diseases

NALD, ZS
NALD, ZS

RCDP

Recycling Matrix Import Machinery

PEX1, PEX6
PEX15, PEX26
PEX2, PEX4, PEX10, PEX12
PEX22

AAA ATPases for recycling PEX5
Membrane anchors for PEX1 & PEX6
Ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme for cycling PEX5
Membrane anchor for PEX4

IRD, NALD, ZS

IRD, NALD, ZS

Peroxisome Membrane Protein Import

PEX19
PEX3 (PEX16)

Cytoplasmic PMP receptor & chaperone
Membrane receptor for imported protein

Peroxisome Biogenesis From Endoplasmic Reticulum

PEX16
PEX23, PEX30
PEX25
Peroxisome Fusion and Fission

Recruits PMPs from ER membrane
Regulate de novo peroxisome formation
Recruits Rho1

ZS
IRD, ZS

ZS

PEX11, PEX25, PEX27, PEX34
PEX1, PEX6

Regulate membrane elongation & fission
AAA ATPases membrane fission & fusion

Mild ZS
IRD, NALD, ZS

ATPase, adenosine triphosphatase; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; IRD, infantile Refsum disease; NALD, neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy; PBD, peroxisome 
biogenesis disorder; PMP, peroxisome membrane protein; PTS1/PTS2, peroxisomal targeting signal type 1/type 2; RCDP, rhizomelic chondrodysplasia 
punctate; ZS, Zellweger syndrome.
For reference, see Smith JJ, Aitchison JD. Peroxisomes take shape. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2013;14:803–817.

Peroxisomal membranes form from lipids synthesized 
in the ER and proteins imported from the cytoplasm. The 
lipids  are  delivered  in  vesicles.  Peroxisomal  membrane 
proteins  use  one  or  more  membrane  peroxisomal 
targeting  sequences  (mPTSs)  for  delivery  to  peroxi-
somes.  The  sequences  of  mPTS  motifs  vary  widely  but 
include basic amino acids along with a transmembrane 
domain.  PEX19  is  the  cytoplasmic  receptor  for  mPTS 
motifs.  It  stabilizes  these  membrane  proteins  in  the 
cytoplasm and delivers them to PEX3 and PEX16 on the 
peroxisome for insertion into the membrane (Fig. 18.8). 
Cells  deficient  in  any  of  these  three  peroxins  lack 

peroxisomal membranes and the peroxisomal membrane 
proteins  are  degraded  or  mislocalized  to  other  cellular 
membranes, particularly mitochondria.

Peroxisomes may arise by either of two pathways (Fig. 
18.8). Some peroxisomes form de novo by budding from 
the  ER.  PEX3  is  inserted  into  the  ER,  where  it  recruits 
PEX16 and other peroxins. This specialized domain of ER 
then pinches off to form a nascent peroxisome de novo. 
By originating from the ER in this manner, peroxisomes 
can  arise  in  cells  that  lack  them  without  a  preexisting 
peroxisome  as  template.  Preexisting  peroxisomes  can 
grow by fusing with nascent peroxisomes and importing 

 

CHAPTER 18  n  Posttranslational Targeting of Proteins  

311

proteins and lipids. They also divide by a fission process 
that depends the GTPase dynamin (see Fig. 22.9).

Translocation of Eukaryotic Proteins 
Across the Plasma Membrane by  
ABC Transporters
Most  proteins  that  are  secreted  by  eukaryotic  cells  
travel to the cell surface through the classical secretory 
pathway,  including  the  ER  and  Golgi  apparatus  (see 
Chapters  20  and  21).  But  budding  yeast  use  an  ABC 
transporter  (see  Fig.  8.9)  to  transport  their  a-type 
mating  factor  directly  from  the  cytoplasm  across  the 
plasma  membrane.  The  a-factor  is  synthesized  in  the 
cytoplasm as part of a precursor, excised from the pre-
cursor by proteolytic cleavage, and then prenylated on 
its C-terminus before transport across the plasma mem-
brane. This mechanism has been invoked to explain the 
secretion  of  a  few  mammalian  proteins  that  lack  the 
“signal sequences” that direct proteins to the classic ER 
secretory pathway. These include some cytokines, fibro-
blast  growth  factor,  and  some  blood-clotting  factors. 
This is a well-characterized route for secretion of some 
bacterial proteins.

Targeting to the Surfaces of  
the Plasma Membrane
Many proteins synthesized in the cytoplasm are targeted 
to  the  cytoplasmic  side  (known  as  the  cytoplasmic 
leaflet)  of  organelle  and  plasma  membranes  (see  Fig. 
13.9). These include peripheral membrane proteins that 
bind  to  cytoplasmic  domains  of  integral  membrane 
proteins or bind directly to the lipid bilayer.

Other proteins are tethered to membrane bilayers by 
a  covalently  attached  lipid  added  as  a  posttranslational 
modification  following  synthesis  on  cytoplasmic  ribo-
somes. Lipid modifications on tethered proteins include 
long-chain,  saturated  fatty  acids  and  isoprenoids.  The 
saturated  fatty  acids  are  either  myristate  (14  carbons), 
which is added through amide linkage to aminoterminal 
glycine  residues,  or  palmitate  (16  carbons),  which  is 
usually  added  through  a  thioether  linkage  to  cysteine 
residues found toward the C-terminus. The isoprenoids 
farnesyl  (15  carbons)  and  geranylgeranyl  (20  carbons) 
are added through thioether linkages to cysteine residues 
located  at  or  near  the  C-terminus  in  specific  structural 
motifs.  Attachment  of  a  lipid  helps  stabilize  membrane 
association, but does not guarantee permanent anchor-
ing to the membrane. Some proteins, such as the catalytic 
subunit of cyclic adenosine monophosphate–dependent 
protein  kinase  (PKA),  are  fatty  acylated  but  remain 
mostly soluble in cytoplasm.

Proteins  attached  to  the  external  surface  of  plasma 
membranes  by  glycosylphosphatidylinositol  anchors 

arrive by a different route. These proteins are synthesized 
on  ribosomes  associated  with  the  ER  and  then  translo-
cated  into  the  ER  lumen  anchored  by  a  C-terminal 
transmembrane  segment.  Inside  the  ER  the  protein  is 
cleaved  from  its  membrane  anchor  and  transferred 
enzymatically  to  glycosylphosphatidylinositol  before 
transport to the cell surface (see Fig. 20.8C).

Prokaryotic Protein Export
Bacteria and Archaea employ at least 10 distinct strategies 
to transport proteins from the cytoplasm across the inner 
membrane and beyond. Seven of these pathways use a 
common pore across the inner membrane called the Sec 
translocon. These pathways are important because some 
contribute to human disease. In addition, they serve as 
important model systems, since eukaryotes use a homolo-
gous  translocon  to  move  proteins  into  the  bilayer  or 
lumen of the ER (see Fig. 20.7). This section begins with 
a discussion of six branches of the Sec secretory pathway 
and finishes with three distinct pathways.

Pathways Dependent on the SecYE Translocon
Organisms in all three domains of life use Sec translocons 
to  move  proteins  synthesized  in  the  cytoplasm  across 
membranes.  Translocons  in  the  plasma  membranes  of 
Bacteria  and  Archaea  consist  of  two  transmembrane 
proteins called SecY and SecE in Bacteria (Fig. 18.9). The 
translocons of the ER of eukaryotes consist of homolo-
gous protein subunits called Sec61α and γ (see Fig. 20.7). 
The narrow pore for translocating the secreted polypep-
tide  is  located  in  the  middle  of  a  bundle  of  α  helices. 
Loss-of-function mutations of SecY or SecE compromise 
the  secretion  of  most  proteins  by  Bacteria  or  Archaea. 
Several  accessory  subunits  assist  in  translocation,  but 
they  are  not  essential  in  Bacteria  and  are  not  present  
in eukaryotes.

Posttranslational Protein Translocation
Bacteria use Sec-signal sequences to direct many pro-
teins  to  the  SecYE  translocon  for  transport  across  the 
plasma membrane or for insertion into the plasma mem-
brane.  Gram-positive  bacteria  such  as  Bacillus  subtilis 
lack an outer membrane, so the proteins leave the cell 
after  crossing  the  plasma  membrane.  In  gram-negative 
bacteria,  translocated  proteins  enter  the  periplasm, 
insert into the outer membrane, or leave the cell.

Proteins targeted to the Sec translocon are synthesized 
in the cytoplasm with an N-terminal Sec-signal sequence. 
These targeting sequences consist of approximately 25 
residues beginning with methionine, followed by a few 
basic residues, 10 to 15 hydrophobic residues, and a site 
for cleavage by a proteolytic enzyme called signal pepti-
dase  after  translocation  across  the  inner  membrane. 
Chaperones  such  as  SecB  bind  newly  synthesized  pro-
teins  to  prevent  folding  and  maintain  a  state  that  is 

312 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

A. Bacterial protein export mechanism

N

Signal peptidase

N

N

3

N

4

5

6

7

ATP

ATP

Pi

ADP

ATP

C

C

C

C

C

B. SecB

C. SecA 

D. SecYE

ADP

PERIPLASM

INNER
MEMBRANE

SecYE

N

SecA

2

1

N

SecB

C

C

CYTOPLASM

FIGURE 18.9  SECRETION OF PROTEIN FROM BACTERIA THROUGH THE SecYE TRANSLOCON. A, Pathway of secretion. 1, After 
synthesis by a cytoplasmic ribosome, the polypeptide associates with the SecB chaperone. 2, SecA binds the presequence (blue) and docks on 
the SecYE translocon. 3, The presequence inserts into the translocon. 4, ATP-binding to SecA promotes insertion of the associated polypeptide 
into the translocon, followed by cleavage of the signal sequence. 5–7, The membrane potential and cycles of ATP hydrolysis by SecA drive the 
polypeptide  across  the  inner  membrane.  B,  Ribbon  diagram  of  Haemophilus  influenzae  SecB.  C,  Ribbon  diagram  of  Bacillus  subtilis  SecA. 
D, Ribbon diagram of Methanococcus jannaschii SecY complex translocon. (A, Modified from Danese PN, Silhavy TJ. Targeting and assembly 
of periplasmic and outer-membrane proteins in E. coli. Annu Rev Genet. 1999;32:59–94. For reference, see PDB file IOZB and Zhou J, Xu Z. 
Structural determinants of SecB recognition by SecA in bacterial protein translocation. Nat Struct Biol. 2003;10:942–948 [B]; PDB file 1TF2 and 
Osborne  AR,  Clemons  WM,  Rapoport  TA.  A  large  conformational  change  of  the  translocation  ATPase  SecA.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  U  S  A. 
2004;101:10937–10942 [C]; and PDB file 1RHZ and van de Berg B, Clemons WM, Collinson I, et al. X-ray structure of a protein-conducting 
channel. Nature. 2004;427:36–44 [D].)

competent  for  translocation  (Fig.  18.9).  Unlike  most 
other chaperones (see Figs. 12.13 and 12.14), SecB does 
not require ATP hydrolysis for cycles of interaction with 
substrates.  Hsp70  homologs  (DnaK)  have  a  secondary 
role in chaperoning precursors for translocation.

Translocation  of  many  bacterial  membrane  and 
secreted  proteins  with  cleavable  signal  sequences 
depends  on  the  ATPase  SecA.  A  system  reconstituted 
from purified SecA, SecY, and SecE can translocate pre-
cursor proteins across lipid membranes in the presence 
of  ATP.  Remarkably,  Archaea  lack  SecA,  although  they 
depend on translocon components that are homologous 
to SecYE. Eukaryotes use SecA only for translocation into 
chloroplast thylakoids (Fig. 18.2).

SecA binds proteins associated with SecB in the cyto-
plasm  and  targets  the  signal  sequence  to  the  SecY 
translocon. SecY “proofreads” the signal sequence asso-
ciated with SecA, releasing those with imperfect matches 
to the consensus prior to translocation. Binding to SecY 

changes  the  conformation  of  SecA,  bringing  together 
two  domains  that  form  a  clamp  around  the  substrate 
peptide.  Inside  the  clamp  the  peptide  substrate  binds 
weakly through hydrogen bonds to the edge of a small 
β-sheet. Cycles of ATP hydrolysis by SecA cause a rocking 
motion of a lever arm that pushes the unfolded peptide 
through  the  channel  in  small  steps.  The  protein  then 
folds after translocation.

Signal peptidases located on the outer surface of the 
plasma  membrane  cleave  signal  peptides  from  translo-
cated  proteins  soon  after  they  cross  the  plasma  mem-
brane.  Some  bacterial  signal  peptidases  are  similar  to 
eukaryotic  homologs.  Other  bacterial  signal  peptidases 
are  specialized  to  cleave  lipoproteins  just  before  an 
invariant  cysteine.  This  cysteine  is  then  conjugated  to 
diacylglycerol,  which  anchors  the  lipoprotein  to  the 
outer  surface  of  the  plasma  membrane  or  to  the  outer 
membrane  of  gram-negative  bacteria.  Signal  peptidases 
also degrade cleaved signal peptides.

 

CHAPTER 18  n  Posttranslational Targeting of Proteins  

313

Translocation Dependent on the Signal  
Recognition Particle
In eukaryotes, the signal recognition particle (SRP) is 
the adapter between signal sequences and the translocon 
of ER (see Fig. 20.5), but in bacteria, only a minority of 
integral  membrane  proteins  and  secreted  proteins 
depend  on  SRP  for  targeting  to  the  Sec  translocon. 
Eukaryotic  and  Archaeal  SRPs  consist  of  a  7S  RNA  and 
several proteins, whereas Escherichia coli SRP consists 
of a smaller 4.5S RNA and a single protein called Ffh (for 
“fifty-four  homolog,”  after  its  eukaryotic  counterpart) 
(see Fig. 20.5). SRP binds Sec-signal sequences and signal-
anchor  sequences  as  they  emerge  from  the  ribosome. 
This interaction slows translation until SRP docks on the 
cytoplasmic  surface  of  the  inner  membrane  with  its 
receptor  FtsY  and  the  Sec  translocon.  Resumption  of 
translation  drives  the  polypeptide  through  the  translo-
con. See Chapter 20 for more details on SRP and eukary-
otic cotranslational translocation.

Insertion of Inner Membrane Proteins
Proteins  inserted  into  the  inner  membrane  depend  on 
YidC, a protein with six transmembrane helices related 
to  Oxa1p  and  Alb3,  that  direct  proteins  into  the  inner 
membrane of mitochondria and thylakoid membranes of 
chloroplasts.  Work  is  being  done  to  determine  if  YidC 
inserts membrane proteins on its own or accepts them 
from the Sec translocon.

Insertion of Proteins in the Outer Membrane of 
Gram-Negative Bacteria
Outer  membrane  proteins  are  synthesized  in  the  cyto-
plasm  and  directed  to  the  Sec  translocon  by  signal 
sequences.  The  signal  sequence  is  cleaved  from  the 
unfolded protein after crossing the inner membrane into 
the  periplasm.  Several  periplasmic  chaperones  and 
assembly factors participate in protein folding, including 
enzymes that catalyze the isomerization of proline peptide 
bonds and oxidation/reduction of cysteine thiol groups. 
Insertion into the outer membrane depends on β-barrel 
proteins, but little is known about the targeting signals.

Outer Membrane Autotransporter Pathway
Some  proteins,  including  secreted  proteolytic  enzymes 
and toxins as well as membrane-anchored adhesins and 
invasins,  hitch  a  ride  to  the  cell  surface  on  their  own 
outer  membrane  transporters  (Fig.  18.10A).  These  pro-
teins have an N-terminal secreted domain and a C-terminal 
domain that forms a transmembrane β-barrel like a porin 
(see Fig. 13.9). The protein uses the Sec pathway to cross 
the  inner  membrane  and  the  β-barrel  inserts  into  the 
outer membrane. The N-terminal functional domain then 
translocates  across  the  outer  membrane  through  its 
β-domain  pore.  An  outer  membrane  protease  releases 
toxins and proteases, whereas adhesins that follow this 
route remain on the surface attached to the β-domain.

Outer Membrane Single Accessory Pathway
Some hemolysins and hemagglutinins move to the peri-
plasm  through  the  Sec  pathway  and  then  use  a  single 
accessory protein to translocate across the outer mem-
brane.  The  accessory  protein  forms  a  β-barrel  in  the 
outer  membrane  with  a  pore  like  autotransporters  and 
the porins that transport peptides across the outer mem-
branes of chloroplasts.

Chaperone/Usher Pathway
Gram-negative  bacteria  use  a  novel  mechanism,  down-
stream  of  the  Sec  pathway,  to  transport  and  assemble 
pili on their outer surface. Pili are appendages involved 
with  bacterial  pathogenesis,  including  urinary  tract 
infections.  A  periplasmic  chaperone  binds  the  pillus 
peptide  and  promotes  folding.  The  pilus  subunit  is 
folded  similar  to  an  immunoglobulin  domain  (see  Fig. 
3.13), but lacks the seventh β-strand. This exposes core 
hydrophobic  residues.  The  chaperone  consists  of  two 
immunoglobulin-like  domains,  one  of  which  donates  a 
strand  to  complete  the  immunoglobulin  domain  of  the 
pilus  subunit.  The  chaperone  delivers  a  pilus  subunit  
to  an  outer  membrane  translocon  called  usher  (Fig. 
18.10A). There it transfers its bound subunit to the end 
of a growing chain of pilus subunits, all bound together, 
head  to  tail,  by  strands  that  complete  the  seven-strand 
β-sheet  of  the  adjacent  subunit.  On  the  outer  surface, 
the  pilus  subunits  rearrange  into  a  helical  pilus.  The 
assembly  reaction  is  thought  to  provide  the  energy  for 
translocation.  The  chaperone  prevents  premature 
assembly of the pilus.

Type II Secretion
Bacteria  use  an  alternate  route  downstream  of  the  Sec 
pathway  to  secrete  other  toxins  and  enzymes  with 
cleaved signal sequences (Fig. 18.10A). At least a dozen 
protein subunits participate in this complicated pathway. 
The  pore  in  the  outer  membrane  is  composed  of  a 
secretin, a protein with relatives that also participate in 
type  III  secretion,  phage  biogenesis,  and  formation  of 
one type of pilus. The secretin pore is a ring of 12 to 14 
subunits around a large gated channel that is 5 to 10 nm 
in diameter.

Type IV Secretion
Bacteria secrete a few proteins using an apparatus similar 
to  that  used  for  DNA  transfer  between  two  bacteria 
during conjugation and for DNA injection into plant cells 
by Agrobacterium. DNA is transferred directly from the 
cytoplasm of one bacterium to the cytoplasm of another 
bacterium  or  plant  cell.  Proteins  that  are  secreted  by  
this pathway include pertussis toxin by Bordetella per-
tussis  and  another  toxin  by  Helicobacter  pylori.  This 
pathway  starts  with  synthesis  in  the  cytoplasm  and 
translocation  across  the  plasma  membrane  by  the  Sec 
translocon.  If  present,  the  signal  sequence  is  cleaved 

314 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

A. SecYE-dependent pathways

Type V autotransporter

Single accessory

subunit

N

N

OM

Forms
channel
and self-inserts

PERIPLASM

N

SecYE

IM

Cleaved
signal

sequence

CYTOPLASM

B. SecYE-independent pathways

Pillus

Usher

Type II

Secretin

Type IV
To
eukaryotic
cell

Folded
protein

Chaperone

Folded
protein

N

eukaryotic

To

cell

DNA

Folded
protein

Type I

Folded
protein

Flagella

Type III

Tol C

Membrane
fusion protein
ABC
transporter

Flagellin
subunit

ATP

ADP

ATP

ADP

N

C

C

N

FIGURE 18.10  SECRETION ACROSS THE OUTER MEMBRANE OF GRAM-NEGATIVE BACTERIA. A, Pathways dependent on SecYE. 
The cleaved signal sequence is shown in blue. The β-domain of autotransporters forms a pore for the translocation of part of its own chain, 
which may remain attached, as shown, or be cleaved for escape from the cell. Single accessory proteins form a pore for secretion of separate 
proteins. Usher forms a pore for the translocation and assembly of pili. Type II secretion uses a secretin pore for translocation. Type IV secretion 
employs a large translocon similar to that used by Agrobacterium for secretion of DNA. B, Pathways independent of SecYE. Type I secretion 
uses an ABC transporter to cross the inner membrane and additional subunits to cross the periplasm and outer membrane. Left panel, Ribbon 
model of TolC, one type of translocon that spans the periplasm and outer membrane. Right panel, Each TolC subunit contributes four β-strands 
to a porin-like structure that spans the outer membrane. α-Helical continuations of these β-strands form a tube having an internal diameter of 
3.5 nm for transport of proteins across the periplasm. Bacterial flagella transport flagellin subunits across both membranes and then through the 
central channel of the flagellar filament for incorporation at the growing tip. Type III secretion uses components similar to the basal body of flagella. 
Gray illustration (far right) shows a three-dimensional reconstruction of the type III secretion apparatus from Salmonella typhimurium. IM, inner 
membrane; OM, outer membrane. (A–B, Modified from Thanassi DG, Hultgren SJ. Multiple pathways allow protein secretion across the bacterial 
outer membrane. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2000;12:420–430. B, TolC ribbon diagram based on PDB file 1EK9. For reference, see Koronakis V, Sharff 
A, Koronakis E, et al. Crystal structure of the bacterial membrane protein TolC central to multidrug efflux and protein export. Nature. 2000;405:914–
919. Reconstruction of the type III secretion complex from S. typhimurium based on Marlovits TC, Kubori T, Sukhan A, et al. Structural insights 
into the assembly of the type II secretion needle complex. Science. 2004;306:1040–1042.)

 

CHAPTER 18  n  Posttranslational Targeting of Proteins  

315

before translocation across the outer membrane by the 
type IV secretion system (Fig. 18.10A).

Pathways Independent of the Sec Translocon
Type I ABC Transporters
Bacteria use ABC transporters (see Fig. 8.9) to secrete a 
small number of toxins (eg, E. coli hemolysin), proteases, 
and lipases. C-terminal signal sequences of 30 to 60 resi-
dues  target  these  proteins  to  the  ABC  transporter,  the 
only component required for secretion by gram-positive 
bacteria.  Gram-negative  bacteria  require  not  only  a 
transporter in the inner membrane but also two proteins 
that  form  a  continuous  channel  across  the  periplasm  
and  outer  membrane  (Fig.  18.10B).  ATP  hydrolysis  by 
the  ABC  transporter  provides  energy  for  translocation. 
Protein  conduits  across  the  periplasm  and  outer  mem-
brane engage ABC transporters presenting substrates for 
export  and  then  disengage  when  translocation  is  com-
plete.  Genes  for  secreted  proteins  are  generally  in  the 
same operon as the export machinery.

Flagellar and Type III Secretion Systems
The  basal  bodies  of  bacterial  flagella  transport  flagellin 
subunits  through  a  central  pore  that  crosses  both  mem-
branes (Fig. 18.10B) and extends the length of the flagellar 
shaft to the tip, where subunits add to the distal end (see 
Fig.  5.8).  This  flagellar  pathway  transports  a  few  other 
proteins,  including  a  phospholipase  that  con tributes  to 
the virulence of Yersinia, the cause of the black plague.
Pathogenic gram-negative bacteria, such as Yersinia, 
use the syringe-like type III apparatus, similar to a bacte-
rial  flagellum,  to  transport  toxins  from  the  cytoplasm 
into the medium or directly into target cells. In the target 
cell, these toxins disrupt cellular physiology, in part by 
forming  pores  in  target  cell  membranes.  The  type  III 
secretion  complex  consists  of  approximately  20  differ-
ent protein subunits including some with homology to 
rotary ATPases (see Fig. 8.4). A complex base consisting 
of  several  protein  rings  spans  the  periplasm  and  both 
membranes. A polymer of a single type of protein forms 
a hollow needle up to 40 nm long for injection of toxins 
directly into target animal or plant cells.

Several  signals  direct  proteins  to  this  pathway.  One 
such  signal  is  a  noncleavable  signal  sequence  in  the 
secreted  protein  that  binds  a  chaperone  dedicated  to 
targeting toxins to the type III pathway. A cytoplasmic 
ATPase  separates  secreted  proteins  from  chaperones, 
and  the  transmembrane  electrochemical  gradient  of 
protons provides most of energy for transport.

Double Arginine Pathway
Many  but  not  all  Bacteria  and  Archaea  use  proteins 
homologous  to  chloroplast  Tat  proteins  to  translocate 

folded  proteins  across  the  plasma  membrane.  In  both 
prokaryotes and chloroplasts, some of these cargo pro-
teins  participate  in  redox  reactions  and  have  bound 
cofactors such as flavins or FeS clusters. These cofactors 
are incorporated as the proteins fold in the cytoplasm or 
chloroplast stroma. In contrast to the Sec translocon, the 
Tat  translocon  accommodates  folded  proteins.  The 
N-terminal signal sequences for this pathway have a pair 
of arginines (RR) in a conserved sequence (Ser/Thr-Arg-
Arg-X-Phe-Leu-Lys, where X is any amino acid) adjacent 
to a stretch of at least 13 uncharged residues. Transloca-
tion of these proteins in E.  coli requires three Tat pro-
teins.  One  forms  the  transmembrane  pore,  and  the 
others  appear  to  participate  in  targeting.  Virtually  all 
Archaeal  proteins  that  move  through  Tat  remain 
anchored to the cell surface.

SELECTED READINGS

Berks BC. The twin-arginine protein translocation pathway. Annu Rev 

Biochem. 2015;84:843-864.

Chacinska  A,  Koehler  CM,  Milenkovic  D,  et al.  Importing  mito-
chondrial  proteins:  machineries  and  mechanisms.  Cell.  2009;138:
628-644.

Chatzi KE, Sardis MF, Karamanou S, Economou A. Breaking on through 
to the other side: protein export through the bacterial Sec system. 
Biochem J. 2013;449:25-37.

Costa  TR,  Felisberto-Rodrigues  C,  Meir  A,  et al.  Secretion  systems  in 
gram-negative bacteria: structural and mechanistic insights. Nat Rev 
Microbiol. 2015;13:343-359.

Dautin  N,  Bernstein  HD.  Protein  secretion  in  Gram-negative  bacteria 
via  the  autotransporter  pathway.  Annu  Rev  Microbiol.  2007;61:
89-112.

Demarsy E, Lakshmanan AM, Kessler F. Border control: selectivity of 
chloroplast  protein  import  and  regulation  at  the  TOC-complex. 
Front Plant Sci. 2013;5:483.

Diepold A, Armitage JP. Type III secretion systems: the bacterial flagel-
lum and the injectisome. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2015;
370:20150020.

Gutensohn M, Fan E, Frielingsdorf S, et al. Toc, Tic, Tat et al.: Structure 
and function of protein transport machines in chloroplasts. J Plant 
Physiol. 2006;163:333-347.

Kedrov A, Kusters I, Driessen AJ. Single-molecule studies of bacterial 

protein translocation. Biochemistry. 2013;52:6740-6754.

Li HM, Chiu CC. Protein transport into chloroplasts. Annu Rev Plant 

Biol. 2010;61:157-180.

Li HM, Teng YS. Transit peptide design and plastid import regulation. 

Trends Plant Sci. 2013;18:360-366.

Neupert W, Herrmann JM. Translocation of proteins into mitochondria. 

Annu Rev Biochem. 2007;76:723-749.

Shiota  T,  Imai  K,  Qiu  J,  et al.  Molecular  architecture  of  the  active 

mitochondrial protein gate. Science. 2015;349:1544-1548.

Smith JJ, Aitchison JD. Peroxisomes take shape. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 

2013;14:803-817.

Szabo  Z,  Pohlschroder  M.  Diversity  and  subcellular  distribution  of 

archaeal secreted proteins. Front Microbiol. 2012;3:207.

Thanassi DG, Hultgren SJ. Multiple pathways allow protein secretion 
across the bacterial outer membrane. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2000;12:
420-430.

This page intentionally left blank

C H A P T E R 

19 

Mitochondria, Chloroplasts, 
Peroxisomes

This  chapter  considers  three  organelles  formed  by 

posttranslational  import  of  proteins  synthesized  in  the 
cytoplasm.  Mitochondria  and  chloroplasts  both  arose 
from  endosymbiotic  bacteria,  two  singular  events  that 
occurred about 1 billion years apart (see Fig. 2.4B). Both 
mitochondria and chloroplasts retain remnants of those 
prokaryotic genomes  but  depend  largely on  genes  that 
were  transferred  to  the  nucleus  of  the  host  eukaryote. 
Both  organelles  brought  biochemical  mechanisms  that 
allow  their  eukaryotic  hosts  to  acquire  and  use  energy 
more  efficiently.  In  oxidative  phosphorylation  by 
mitochondria  and  photosynthesis  by  chloroplasts, 
energy  from  the  breakdown  of  nutrients  or  from  
absorption of photons is used to energize electrons. As 
these electrons tunnel through transmembrane proteins, 
energy  is  extracted  to  create  proton  gradients.  These 
proton gradients drive the rotary adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP)  synthase  (see  Fig.  14.5)  to  make  ATP,  which  is 
used as energy currency to power the cell. Peroxisomes 
contain no genes and depend entirely on nuclear genes 

to encode their proteins. Their evolutionary origins are 
obscure.  Peroxisomes  contain  enzymes  that  catalyze  a 
wide range of oxidation reactions that are essential for 
cellular homestasis. Patients who lack peroxisomes have 
severe neural defects.

Mitochondria
Evolution of Mitochondria
Mitochondria  (Fig.  19.1)  arose  about  2  billion  years  
ago when a bacterium fused with an archaeal cell (see 
Fig.  2.4B  and  associated  text).  The  bacterial  origins  of 
mitochondria  are  apparent  in  their  many  common  fea-
tures (Fig. 19.2). The closest extant relatives of the bac-
terium  that  gave  rise  to  mitochondria  are  Rickettsia, 
aerobic α-proteobacteria with a genome of 1.1 megabase 
(Mb)  pairs.  These  intracellular  pathogens  cause  typhus 
and Rocky Mountain spotted fever. It now appears likely 
that  the  actual  progenitor  bacterium  had  the  genes 
required for both aerobic and anaerobic metabolism.

A

B

FIGURE 19.1  CELLULAR DISTRIBUTION AND STRUCTURE OF MITOCHONDRIA. A, Fluorescence light micrograph of a Cos-7 tissue 
culture cell with mitochondria labeled with green fluorescent antibody to the β-subunit of the F1-ATPase (adenosine triphosphatase) and micro-
tubules  labeled  red  with  an  antibody.  B,  Electron  micrograph  of  a  thin  section  of  a  mitochondrion.  (A,  Courtesy  Michael  Yaffee,  University  of 
California–San Diego. B, Courtesy Don Fawcett, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.)

 317

318 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

A. Mitochondria

Outer membrane
Inner membrane

DNA
Cristae
Matrix

Book icon

B

INTERMEMBRANE SPACE

C

PERIPLASM

I

II

III

IV

I

II

III

IV

MATRIX

CYTOPLASM

D. Bacterium

CYTOPLASM

Periplasmic space

DNA

Inner membrane
Outer membrane

FIGURE 19.2  The compartments of a mitochondrion (A–B) com-
pared with a bacterium (C–D). Respiratory chain complexes I to IV are 
labeled with roman numerals. 

By the time of the last eukaryotic common ancestor 
(LECA), most of the bacterial genes were lost or moved 
to the nucleus, but all known mitochondria retain some 
bacterial genes. A few eukaryotes that branched from the 
last  eukaryotic  common  ancestor,  such  as  Entamoeba, 
subsequently  lost  the  organelle,  leaving  behind  a  few 
mitochondrial genes in the nucleus.

Chromosomes of contemporary mitochondria vary in 
size from 366,924 base pairs (bp) in the plant Arabidop-
sis to only 5966 bp in Plasmodium. These small, usually 
circular  genomes  encode  RNAs  and  proteins  that  are 
essential  for  mitochondrial  function,  including  some  
subunits of proteins responsible for ATP synthesis. The 
highly  pared-down  human  mitochondrial  genome  with 
16,569  bp  encodes  only  13  mitochondrial  membrane 
proteins, two ribosomal RNAs, and just enough transfer 
RNAs (tRNAs) (22) to translate these genes. The number 
of  proteins  encoded  by  other  mitochondrial  genomes 
ranges from just three in Plasmodium to 97 in a proto-
zoan. Nuclear genes encode more than 1000 other mito-
chondria proteins, including those required to assemble 
ribosomes  and  synthesize  proteins  in  the  matrix.  All 
mitochondrial  proteins  encoded  by  nuclear  genes  are 
synthesized  in  the  cytoplasm  and  imported  into  mito-
chondria (see Figs. 18.3 and 18.4).

Structure of Mitochondria
Mitochondria  consist  of 
two  membrane-bounded  
compartments,  one  inside  the  other  (Fig.  19.2).  The 

outer  membrane  surrounds  the  intermembrane 
space.  The  inner  membrane  surrounds  the  matrix. 
Each membrane and compartment has a distinct protein 
composition and functions.

Porins  in  the  outer  membrane  provide  nonspecific 
channels for passage of molecules of less than 5000 Da, 
including  most  metabolites  required  for  ATP  synthesis. 
Some  proteins  in  the  intermembrane  space  participate 
in ATP synthesis but, when released into the cytoplasm, 
trigger  programmed  cell  death  (see  Fig.  46.16).  The 
matrix is the site of fatty acid oxidation, the citric acid 
cycle, and mitochondrial protein synthesis.

The  highly  impermeable  inner  membrane  has  two 
domains. The boundary domain next to the outer mem-
brane is specialized for protein import at contacts with 
the  outer  membranes  (see  Fig.  18.4).  The  rest  of  the 
inner  membrane  forms  folds  called  cristae  that  are 
specialized  for  converting  energy  provided  by  break-
down  of  nutrients  in  the  matrix  into  ATP.  Cristae  may 
be  tubular  or  flattened  sacs  and  vary  in  number  and 
shape, depending on the species, tissue, and metabolic 
state.  Four  complexes  (I  to  IV)  of  integral  membrane 
proteins use the transport of electrons to create a gradi-
ent of protons across the inner membrane (Fig. 19.2B). 
The F-type rotary ATP synthase (see Fig. 14.5) uses this 
proton  gradient  to  synthesize  ATP.  A  complex  of  five 
transmembrane proteins and two soluble proteins stabi-
lizes  the  junction  of  cristae  with  the  inner  membrane. 
The  complex  is  called  MICOS  for  mitochondrial  con-
tact  site  and  cristae  organizing  system,  because  loss  of 
these  proteins  results  in  disorganized  cristae.  MICOS 
links  the  inner  and  outer  membranes  and  separates  
the transmembrane proteins of the inner membrane into 
two domains.

Biogenesis of Mitochondria
Mitochondria grow by importing most of their proteins 
from  the  cytoplasm  and  by  internal  synthesis  of  some 
proteins and replication of their own genome (Fig. 19.3). 
Targeting and sorting signals built into the mitochondrial 
proteins  that  are  synthesized  in  the  cytoplasm  direct 
them to their destinations (see Fig. 18.4).

Similar to cells, mitochondria divide, but unlike most 
cells,  they  also  fuse  with  other  mitochondria.  These 
fusion and division reactions were first observed nearly 
100  years  ago.  Now  it  is  appreciated  that  a  balance 
between  ongoing  fusion  and  division  determines  the 
number of mitochondria within a cell. Both fusion and 
division depend on proteins with guanosine triphospha-
tase  (GTPase)  domains  related  to  dynamin  (see  Fig. 
22.8).  In  fact,  eukaryotes  might  have  acquired  their 
dynamin  genes  from  the  bacterium  that  became  the 
mitochondrion.

Mitochondrial division starts when a tubule of endo-
plasmic reticulum (ER) membrane encircles a mitochon-
drion to mark the site for division. Then a dynamin-related 

 

CHAPTER 19  n  Mitochondria, Chloroplasts, Peroxisomes 

319

Nuclear genes on nuclear DNA

Over 1,000 mitochondrial

proteins synthesized

in cytoplasm

Import into
mitochondria

Mitochondrial genes
on mitochondrial DNA

• 13 mitochondrial
membrane proteins

• 22 tRNAs
• 2 rRNAs

FIGURE 19.3  BIOGENESIS OF HUMAN MITOCHONDRIA. The 
relative contributions of nuclear and mitochondrial genes to the protein 
composition. rRNA, ribosomal RNA; tRNA, transfer RNA. 

GTPase  forms  a  spiral  around  the  mitochondrion  and 
cooperates  with  actin  filaments  to  pinch  mitochondria 
in two. During apoptosis (see Chapter 46), this GTPase 
also participates in the fragmentation of mitochondria.

Mitochondrial  fusion  involves  two  GTPases,  one 
anchored  in  the  outer  membrane  and  the  other  in  the 
inner  membrane,  both  linked  by  an  adapter  protein  in 
the  intermembrane  space.  Fusion  of  the  outer  mem-
branes requires a proton gradient across the inner mem-
brane, whereas fusion of the inner membranes depends 
on  the  electrical  potential  across  the  inner  membrane. 
Loss-of-function mutations in fusion proteins lead to cells 
with numerous small mitochondria, some lacking a mito-
chondrial DNA (mtDNA) molecule. Human mutations in 
the  genes  for  fusion  proteins  result  in  defects  in  the 
myelin sheath that insulates axons (one form of Charcot-
Marie-Tooth disease) and the atrophy of the optic nerve. 
Mitochondrial  fusion  proteins  are  also  required  for 
apoptosis.

Synthesis of ATP by Oxidative Phosphorylation
Mitochondria  use  energy  extracted  from  the  chemical 
bonds  of  nutrients  to  generate  a  proton  gradient  
across the inner membrane. This proton gradient drives 
the  F-type  rotary  ATP  synthase  to  produce  ATP  from 
adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and inorganic phosphate. 
Enzymes  in  the  inner  membrane  and  matrix  cooperate 
with pumps, carriers, and electron transport proteins in 
the  inner  membrane  to  move  electrons,  protons,  and 
other  energetic  intermediates  across  the  impermeable 
inner membrane. This is a classic chemiosmotic process 
(see Fig. 17.1).

Mitochondria receive energy-yielding chemical inter-
mediates  from  two  ancient  metabolic  pathways,  gly-
colysis and fatty acid oxidation (Fig. 19.4), that both 
evolved  in  the  common  ancestor  of  living  things.  Both 
pathways feed into the equally ancient citric acid cycle 
of energy-yielding reactions in the mitochondrial matrix:

•  The glycolytic pathway in the cytoplasm converts the 
six-carbon sugar glucose into pyruvate, a three-carbon 
substrate for pyruvate dehydrogenase, a large, soluble, 
enzyme  complex  in  the  mitochondrial  matrix.  The 
products of pyruvate dehydrogenase (carbon dioxide, 
the reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleo-
tide  [NADH],  and  acetyl  coenzyme  A  [CoA])  are 
released into the matrix. NADH is a high-energy elec-
tron  carrier.  Acetyl-CoA  is  a  two-carbon  metabolic 
intermediate  that  supplies  the  citric  acid  cycle  with 
energy-rich bonds.

•  Breakdown of lipids yields fatty acids linked to acetyl-
CoA  by  a  thioester  bond.  These  intermediates  are 
transported across the inner membrane of mitochon-
dria, using carnitine in a shuttle system. In the matrix, 
acyl-carnitine is reconverted to acyl-CoA. Enzymes in 
the matrix degrade fatty acids two carbons at a time 
in a series of oxidative reactions that yield NADH, the 
reduced form of flavin adenine dinucleotide (FADH2, 
another  energy-rich  electron  carrier  associated  with 
an integral membrane enzyme complex), and acetyl-
CoA for the citric acid cycle.
Breakdown of acetyl-CoA during one turn of the citric 
acid cycle produces three molecules of NADH, one mol-
ecule of FADH2, and two molecules of carbon dioxide. 
Energetic electrons donated by NADH and FADH2 drive 
an electron transport pathway in the inner mitochon-
drial  membrane  that  powers  a  chemiosmotic  cycle  to 
produce  ATP  (Fig.  19.5).  Electrons  use  two  routes  to 
pass through three protein complexes in the inner mito-
chondrial  membrane.  Starting  with  NADH,  electrons 
pass through complex I to complex III to complex IV. 
Association  of  these  three  complexes  in  a  “super 
complex” may facilitate electron transfer. Electrons from 
FADH2  pass  through  complex  II  to  complex  III  to 
complex IV. Along both routes, energy is used to transfer 
multiple protons (corresponding to at least 10 electrons 
per  NADH  oxidized)  across  the  inner  mitochondrial 
membrane  from  the  matrix  to  the  inner  membrane 
space. The resulting electrochemical gradient of protons 
drives ATP synthesis (see Fig. 14.5).

This process is called oxidative phosphorylation, 
because molecular oxygen is the sink for energy-bearing 
electrons  at  the  end  of  the  pathway,  and  because  the 
reactions add phosphate to ADP. Eukaryotes that live in 
environments with little or no oxygen use other accep-
tors for these electrons and produce nitrite, nitric oxide, 
or other reduced products rather than water. Oxidative 
phosphorylation  is  understood  in  remarkable  detail, 
thanks to atomic structures of F-type ATP synthase and 
each  electron  transfer  complex.  Nuclear  genes  encode 
most  of  the  protein  subunits  of  these  complexes,  but 
mitochondrial genes encode a few key subunits.

Bacteria  and  mitochondria  share  homologous  pro-
teins for the key steps in oxidative phosphorylation (Fig. 
19.2), although the machinery in mitochondria is usually 

320 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

A. Glycolysis (in the cytoplasm)
2–
OPO3

H

HOH2C
H
OH

HO

O

H

OH
H
Glucose

H

ATP ADP

OH

Hexokinase

H2C
H
H
OH

HO

O

H

H

OH

OH
H
Glucose

6-phosphate

2– OH
OPO3
O
CH2

H2C

H

HO

H

OH

H
OH
Fructose

6-phosphate

Phospho-
glucose

isomerase

ATP ADP

Phospho-
fructokinase

B. Citric acid cycle (in the mitochondrial matrix)

Dihydroxyacetone

phosphate

2–

2– OPO3
OPO3
O

CH2

H2C

H

HO

H

OH

H
OH
Fructose

1,6-biphosphate

Aldolase

Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
(2 molecules)

Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
dehydrogenase

1,3-bisphosphoglycerate
(2 molecules)

HO O
H
H C C C
H

O

OPO3H–

Triosephosphate
isomerase

H H

O

H C C CH

OH
2–

O
PO3

2 NAD + 2 Pi
2 NADH + 2 H+
O
H C C C
OH
2–

OPO3

H H

2–

O
PO3

2 ADP

H2O +

O
C SCoA

CH3
Acetyl-CoA

HSCoA

COO –
C O
CH2
COO –

Oxaloacetate

COO –
CH2

HO C COO –

Citrate

CH2
COO –

NADH + H+

NAD+

COO –

HO C H
CH2
COO –

Malate

cis-Aconitate

H2O

COO –
CH2
C COO –
CH
COO –

H2O

H2O

COO –
CH
CH
COO –

Fumarate

Isocitrate

COO –
CH2

H C COO –

HO C H

COO –

FADH2
FAD

NAD+
CO2 + NADH + H+

COO –
CH2
CH2
COO –

Succinate

α-Keto-
glutarate

COO –
CH2
CH2
C O
COO –

3-phosphoglycerate
(2 molecules)

Phosphoglycerate
kinase

H H

2 ATP
O
H C C C
OH
2–

O–

O
PO3

Phosphoglyceromutase

2-phosphoglycerate
(2 molecules)

H H

O
H C C C
OPO3
HO

O–
2–

Phosphoenolpyruvate
(2 molecules)

Enolase

H H

2 H2O
O
H C C C
OPO3

O–
2–

2 ADP

2 ATP
O
H C C C

H O

O–

Pyruvate
kinase

Pyruvate
(2 molecules)

C. Integration of metabolic
     pathways in mitochondrium
ATP

ADP

H

Lipid

breakdown

Glycosis

Pyruvate

CO2

GTP + HSCoA

GDP + Pi

Succinyl CoA
SCoA

O

C
CH2
CH2
COO –

NAD+ + HSCoA
CO2 + NADH + H+

H+

Fatty acids

Pyruvate

Pi
O2

O2

H2O

ADP
+ Pi

ATP

Acetyl-CoA

H+ H+ H+

H+

e–

FADH2

NADH

Citric
acid
cycle

CO2
NADH

FADH2

FIGURE  19.4  METABOLIC PATHWAYS SUPPLYING ENERGY FOR OXIDATIVE PHOSPHORYLATION. A, Glycolysis. ADP, adenosine 
diphosphate; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; NAD, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; NADH, reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide. 
B, Citric acid cycle. Production of acetyl-coenzyme A (CoA) by the glycolytic pathway in cytoplasm and fatty acid oxidation in the mitochondrial 
matrix drive the citric acid cycle in the mitochondrial matrix. This energy-yielding cycle is also called the Krebs cycle after the biochemist H. Krebs. 
NADH and FADH2 (reduced form of flavin adenine dinucleotide) produced by these pathways supply high-energy electrons to the electron transport 
chain. GTP, guanosine triphosphate; HSCoA, reduced coenzyme A. C, Overview of metabolic pathways. Note energy-rich metabolites (yellow). 

 

A

CHAPTER 19  n  Mitochondria, Chloroplasts, Peroxisomes 

321

B

+

–

H+

Cytochrome c

H+

H+

H+

e-

+

+
Q

–

–

+
+
QH2

e-
–

–

+

+

–

–

e-

e-

O2

H2O

FADH2

FAD

Succinate
Complex II

Complex IV

Complex III

INTERMEMBRANE SPACE

ATP

Pi

H+

ADP

+

–

+

–

+

–

H+

+

–

–
ADP + Pi

ATP

Complex V

Carriers

MATRIX

NADH NAD+
Complex I

C

D

Cytochrome c1

Cytochrome b

Rieske
protein

Subunit II

INTERMEMBRANE

SPACE

Subunit I

Subunit III

Complex IV

Complex III

MATRIX

F0

F1

Complex V

FIGURE 19.5  CHEMIOSMOTIC CYCLE OF THE RESPIRATORY ELECTRON TRANSPORT CHAIN AND ADENOSINE TRIPHOSPHATE 
(ATP) SYNTHASE. A, A mitochondrion for orientation. B, The electron transport system of the inner mitochondrial membrane. Note the pathway 
of electrons through the four complexes (red and yellow arrows) and the sites of proton translocation between the matrix to the intermembrane 
space (black arrows). The stoichiometry is not specified, but at the last step, four electrons are required to reduce oxygen to water. The F-type 
ATP synthase uses the electrochemical proton gradient produced by the electron transport reactions to drive ATP synthesis. FAD, flavin adenine 
dinucleotide. C, Arrangement of F-type rotary ATP synthases and the electron transport chain in the inner membrane. D, Some atomic structures 
of the electron transport chain components. In the cytochrome bc1 complex III, the 3 of 11 mitochondrial subunits used by bacteria are shown 
as  ribbon  models.  The  supporting  subunits  found  in  mitochondria  are  shown  as  cylinders.  The  four  subunits  of  complex  IV  encoded  by  the 
mitochondrial genome are shown as ribbon models. They form the functional core of the complex, which is supported by additional subunits 
shown  as  cylinders.  See  Fig.  14.4  for  further  details  of  ATP  synthase  (complex  V).  (D,  Images  of  complex  III  and  complex  IV  courtesy  of  M. 
Saraste, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany. For reference, see Zhang Z, Huang L, Schulmeister VM, et al. Electron 
transfer by domain movement in cytochrome bc1. Nature. 1998;392:677–684; and Yoshikawa S, Shinzawa-Itoh K, Nakashima R, et al. Redox-
coupled  crystal  structural  changes  in  bovine  heart  cytochrome  c  oxidase.  Science.  1998;280:1723–1729.  Also  see  Protein  Data  Bank  [PDB; 
www.rcsb.org] file 2OCC.)

more complex. Plasma membranes of bacteria and inner 
membranes  of  mitochondria  have  equivalent  compo-
nents,  and  the  bacterial  cytoplasm  corresponds  to  the 
mitochondrial  matrix  (Fig.  19.2).  Thus,  bacteria  are 
useful model systems with which to study the common 
mechanisms.

Energy  enters  this  pathway  in  the  form  of  electrons 
that  are  produced  when  NADH  is  oxidized  to  the  oxi-
dized form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+), 
releasing  one  H+  and  two  electrons  (Fig.  19.5B).  If  the 

proton and electrons were to combine immediately with 
oxygen,  their  energy  would  be  lost  as  heat.  Instead, 
these  high-energy  electrons  are  separated  from  the 
protons  and  then  passed  along  the  electron  transport 
pathway  before  finally  rejoining  molecular  oxygen  to 
form water. Along the pathway, electrons associate tran-
siently  with  a  series  of  oxidation–reduction  acceptors, 
generally  metal  ions  associated  with  organic  cofactors, 
such  as  hemes  in  cytochromes  and  iron-sulfur  centers 
(2Fe2S)  and  copper  centers  in  complex  IV.  Electrons 

322 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

move  along  the  transport  pathway  at  rates  of  up  to 
1000 s−1. To travel at this rate through a transmembrane 
protein complex spanning a 35-nm lipid bilayer, at least 
three reduction–oxidation (redox) cofactors are required 
in  each  complex,  because  the  efficiency  of  quantum 
mechanical tunneling of electrons between redox cofac-
tors falls off rapidly with distance. Two cofactors, even 
with optimal orientation, would be too slow.

Electrons  give  up  energy  as  they  move  step  by  step 
along the transport pathway. In three complexes along 
the pathway, this energy is used to pump protons from 
the matrix to the inner membrane space. This establishes 
an  electrochemical  proton  gradient  across  the  inner 
mitochondrial  membrane  that  is  used  by  the  F-type 
rotary ATP synthase to drive ATP production. Direction 
is  provided  to  the  movements  of  electrons  by  progres-
sive  increases  in  the  electron  affinity  of  the  acceptors. 
The final acceptor, oxygen (at the end of the pathway), 
has the highest affinity.

The  first  component  of  the  electron  transport  path-
way, complex I (or NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase), 
handles electrons obtained from NADH. Vertebrate mito-
chondrial complex I with 46 different protein subunits 
is much more complex than bacterial complex I with 14 
subunits.  NADH  donates  two  electrons  to  flavin  mono-
nucleotide  associated  with  protein  subunits  located  on 
the matrix side of the inner membrane. A crystal struc-
ture of the cytoplasmic domain of the bacterial complex 
shows the path for the electrons from flavin mononucle-
otide  through  seven  iron  sulfur  clusters  to  quinone  in 
the lipid bilayer. For each molecule of NADH oxidized, 
the transmembrane domains of complex I transfer four 
protons from the matrix into the inner membrane space.
The  second  component  of  the  electron  transport 
pathway is complex II or succinate:ubiquinone reduc-
tase, a transmembrane enzyme that makes up part of the 
citric  acid  cycle.  Complex  II  couples  oxidation  of  suc-
cinate  (a  four-carbon  intermediate  in  the  citric  acid 
cycle) to fumarate with reduction of flavin adenine dinu-
cleotide  (FAD)  to  FADH2.  Complex  II  does  not  pump 
protons  but  transfers  electrons  from  FADH2  to  ubiqui-
none.  Reduced  ubiquinone  carries  these  electrons  to 
complex III.

The  third  component  of  the  electron  transport 
pathway  is complex  III,  also  called cytochrome  bc1. 
This well-characterized, transmembrane protein complex 
consists of 11 different subunits. The homologous bacte-
rial complex has only three of these subunits, the ones 
that participate in energy transduction in mitochondria. 
Eight  other  subunits  surround  this  core.  Complex  III 
couples  the  oxidation  and  reduction  of  ubiquinone  to 
the transfer of protons from the matrix across the inner 
mitochondrial  membrane.  Energy  is  supplied  by  elec-
trons  from  both  complex  I  and  complex  II  that  move 
through  the  cytochrome  b  subunit  to  a  subunit  with  a 
2Fe2S  redox  center.  This  subunit  then  rotates  into 

position  to  transfer  the  electron  to  cytochrome  c1, 
another  subunit  of  the  complex.  Cytochrome  c1  then 
transfers the electron to the water-soluble protein cyto-
chrome  c  in  the  intermembrane  space  (or  periplasm  
of bacteria).

Cytochrome oxidase, complex IV, takes electrons 
from four cytochrome c molecules to reduce molecular 
oxygen to two waters and to pump four protons out of 
the  matrix.  Mitochondrial  genes  encode  the  three  sub-
units that form the core of this enzyme, carry out elec-
tron  transfer,  and  translocate  protons.  Nuclear  genes 
encode the surrounding 10 subunits.

The electrochemical proton gradient produced by the 
electron  transport  chain  provides  energy  to  synthesize 
ATP.  Chapter  14  explained  how  the  F-type  rotary  ATP 
synthase (complex V) can either use ATP hydrolysis to 
pump  protons  or  use  the  transit  of  protons  down  an 
electrochemical  gradient  to  synthesize  ATP  (see  Figs. 
14.4  and  14.5).  The  proton  gradient  across  the  inner 
mitochondrial membrane drives rotation of the γ-subunit. 
The rotating γ-subunit physically changes the conforma-
tions of the α- and β-subunits, bringing together ADP and 
inorganic phosphate to make ATP. An antiporter in the 
inner  membrane  exchanges  cytoplasmic  ADP  for  ATP 
synthesized in the matrix (see Fig. 15.4A).

Cryoelectron  tomography  revealed  that  dimers  of 
F-type  rotary  ATP  synthases  are  located  in  rows  along  
the  crests  of  the  cristae,  where  they  are  responsible  
for the sharp bend in the inner membrane (Fig. 19.5C). 
The other components of the electron transfer machin-
ery occupy the flat sides of the cristae. This arrangement 
of proteins and the small volume inside cristae facilitates 
the  movements  of  protons  and  cytochrome  c  between 
the components.

Mitochondria and Disease
As  expected  from  the  central  role  of  mitochondria  in 
energy  metabolism,  mitochondrial  dysfunction  contrib-
utes  to  a  remarkable  diversity  of  human  diseases  
(Fig.  19.6),  including  seizures,  strokes,  optic  atrophy, 
neuropathy,  myopathy,  cardiomyopathy,  hearing  loss, 
and  type  2  diabetes  mellitus.  These  disorders  arise  
from  mutations  in  genes  for  mitochondrial  proteins 
encoded  by  both  mtDNA  and  nuclear  DNA.  Many  of  
the  known  disease-causing  mutations  are  in  genes  for 
mitochondrial tRNAs.

The  existence  of  approximately  1000  copies  of 
mtDNA per vertebrate cell influences the impact of del-
eterious mutations. A mutation in one copy would be of 
no  consequence,  but  segregation  of  mtDNAs  may  lead 
to cells in which mutant mtDNAs predominate, yielding 
defective proteins. For example, a recurring point muta-
tion in a subunit of complex I causes some patients to 
develop sudden onset of blindness in middle age owing 
to  the  death  of  neurons  in  the  optic  nerve.  Patients  
with  the  same  mutation  in  a  larger  fraction  of  mtDNA 

 

CHAPTER 19  n  Mitochondria, Chloroplasts, Peroxisomes 

323

A. Disorders due to mutations in nuclear DNA-encoded proteins

Number of subunits
nDNA-encoded

Complex I

~35

Complex II

Complex III

4

10

Complex IV

10

Complex V

~14

INTERMEMBRANE
SPACE

Leigh syndrome
Leukodystrophy

Leigh syndrome
Paraganglioma

H+

Cytochrome c

H+

Leigh syndrome
Cardioencephalomyopathy
Leukodystrophy/tubulopathy

H+

H+

e-

+

+
Q

–

–

+
+
QH2

e-
–

–

+

+

–

–

e-

e-

O2

H2O

NADH NAD+

FADH2

FAD

Succinate

ATP

Pi

H+

ADP

+

–

+

–

+

–

H+

+

–

–
ADP + Pi

ATP

Number of subunits
mtDNA-encoded

B. Disorders due to mutations in mitochondrial DNA-encoded proteins
Complex V

Complex IV

Complex III

Complex I

Complex II

0

7
LHON
LHON + dystonia
Sporadic myopathy

1

3

Sporadic myopathy

Sporadic anemia
Sporadic myopathy
Encephalomyopathy

2
NARP
MILS
FBSN

Carriers

MATRIX

FIGURE 19.6  Mutations in both mitochondrial and nuclear genes for mitochondrial proteins cause a variety of diseases by compromising the 
function of particular mitochondrial subsystems. FBSN, familial bilateral striatal necrosis; LHON, Leber hereditary optic neuropathy; MILS, mater-
nally  inherited  Leigh  syndrome;  mtDNA,  mitochondrial  DNA;  NARP,  neurogenic  muscle  weakness,  ataxia,  retinitis  pigmentosa;  nDNA,  nuclear 
DNA; Pi, inorganic phosphate. (Modified from Schon EA. Mitochondrial genetics and disease. Trends Biochem Sci. 2000;25:555–560.)

molecules suffer from muscle weakness and intellectual 
disability as children. Mutations in the genes for subunits 
of ATP synthase cause muscle weakness and degenera-
tion  of  the  retina.  Slow  accumulation  of  mutations  in 
mtDNA may contribute to some symptoms of aging.

Mutations  in  mitochondrial  DNA  are  passed  from  a 
mother  to  her  children,  as  sperm  mitochondria  do  not 
contribute to the embryo. Methods are being developed 
to  combine  genetically  normal  nuclei  from  affected 
mothers with enucleated cytoplasm from healthy donors 
to eliminate these mutations in infants conceived by in 
vitro fertilization.

Mutations in nuclear genes for mitochondrial proteins 
cause  similar  diseases  (Fig.  19.6A).  A  mutation  in  one 
subunit of the protein import machinery (see Fig. 18.5), 
Tim8, causes a type of deafness.

Chloroplasts
Structure and Evolution of Photosynthesis Systems
Photosynthetic  bacteria  and  chloroplasts  of  algae  and 
plants (Fig. 19.7) use chlorophyll to capture the remark-
able amount of energy carried by single photons to boost 
electrons to an excited state. These high-energy electrons 
drive a chemiosmotic cycle to make nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide  phosphate  (NADPH)  and  ATP.  Photosyn-
thetic  organisms  use  ATP  and  the  reducing  power  of 
NADPH  to  synthesize  three-carbon  sugar  phosphates 
from  carbon  dioxide.  Glycolytic  reactions  (Fig.  19.4) 

running backward use this three-carbon sugar phosphate 
to make six-carbon sugars and more complex carbohy-
drates for use as metabolic energy sources and structural 
components. Some bacteria and Archaea, such as Halo-
bacterium  halobium,  use  a  completely  different  light-
driven  pump  lacking  chlorophyll  to  generate  a  proton 
gradient to synthesize ATP (see Fig. 14.3). In that case, 
retinol  associated  with  bacteriorhodopsin  absorbs  light 
to drive proton transport.

Photosynthesis  originated  approximately  3.5  billion 
years  ago  in  a  bacterium,  most  likely  a  gram-negative 
purple bacterium (see Fig. 2.4). These bacteria evolved 
components  to  assemble  a  transmembrane  complex  of 
proteins,  pigments,  and  oxidation/reduction  cofactors 
called  a  reaction  center  (Fig.  19.8).  Reaction  centers 
absorb  light  and  initiate  an  electron  transport  path-
way that  pumps  protons  out  of  the  cell.  Such  pho-
tosystems  turn  sunlight  into  electrical  and  chemical 
energy with 40% efficiency, better than any human-made  
photovoltaic  cell.  Given  their  alarming  complexity  and 
physical  perfection,  it  is  remarkable  that  photosystems 
emerged  only  a  few  hundred  million  years  after  the 
origin of life itself.

Broadly  speaking,  photosynthetic  reaction  centers  
of  contemporary  organisms  can  be  divided  into  two  
different  groups  (Fig.  19.8).  The  reaction  centers  of 
purple  bacteria  and  green  filamentous  bacteria  use  the 
pigment  pheophytin  and  a  quinone  as  the  electron 
acceptor,  similar  to  photosystem  II  of  cyanobacteria 

324 

A

Thylakoid
membrane

Thylakoid
space

Stroma

Outer
membrane
Inner
membrane

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

B. Chloroplast

Outer membrane
Inner membrane

Grana

Stroma

Thylakoid
membrane

Thylakoid

space

Starch
granule

C

THYLAKOID SPACE

D

PERIPLASM

STROMA

CYTOPLASM

E. Cyanobacterium

DNA
Ribosomes

Cell wall
Plasma
membrane
Thylakoid
membrane
Thylakoid
space
Cytoplasm
DNA
Ribosomes

FIGURE 19.7  MORPHOLOGY OF CHLOROPLASTS AND CYANOBACTERIA. A, Electron micrograph of a thin section of a spinach chlo-
roplast. B, Chloroplast. C–D, Comparison of the machinery in the photosynthetic membranes of chloroplasts and cyanobacteria. E, Drawing of 
a cyanobacterium illustrating the internal folds of the plasma membrane to form photosynthetic thylakoids. (A, Courtesy K. Miller, Brown University, 
Providence, RI.)

and  chloroplasts.  The  reaction  centers  of  green  sulfur 
bacteria  and  heliobacteria  have  iron-sulfur  centers  as 
electron acceptors, similar to photosystem I of cyano-
bacteria and chloroplasts.

Cyanobacteria  are  unique  among  bacteria  in  that 
they  have  both  types  of  photosystems  as  well  as  a  
manganese-containing  enzyme  that  splits  water,  releas-
ing  from  two  water  molecules  four  electrons,  four 
protons, and oxygen (Fig. 19.7E). Coupling this enzyme 
to  photosynthesis  was  a  pivotal  event  in  the  history  of 
the  earth,  as  this  reaction  is  the  source  of  most  of  the 
oxygen in the earth’s atmosphere.

Chloroplasts  of  eukaryotic  cells  arose  from  a  symbi-
otic cyanobacterium (see Fig. 2.7). Much evidence indi-
cates  that  this  event  occurred  just  once,  giving  all 
chloroplasts  a  common  origin.  Thereafter  chloroplasts 
moved  by  lateral  transfer  to  various  organisms  that 
diverged  prior  to  the  acquisition  of  chloroplasts,  for 
example, from a green alga to Euglena.

Chloroplasts have retained up to 250 original bacterial 
genes on circular genomes. As in the case of mitochon-
dria,  many  bacterial  genes  were  lost  or  moved  to  the 
nucleus of host eukaryotes. Chloroplast genomes encode 
subunits of many proteins responsible for photosynthe-
sis  and  chloroplast  division,  ribosomal  RNAs  and  pro-
teins,  and  a  complete  set  of  tRNAs.  More  than  2000 
chloroplast proteins encoded by nuclear genes are syn-
thesized  in  the  cytoplasm  and  transported  posttransla-
tionally into chloroplasts (see Fig. 18.6).

The  organization  of  cyanobacterial  membranes 
explains the architecture of chloroplasts (Fig. 19.7C–E). 
In  cyanobacteria,  light-absorbing  pigments,  as  well  as 

protein  complexes  involved  with  electron  transport  
and ATP synthesis, are concentrated in invaginations of 
the  plasma  membrane.  The  F1  domain  of  the  F-type 
rotary ATP synthase faces the cytoplasm, and the lumen 
of  this  membrane  system  is  periplasmic.  This  internal  
membrane  system  remains  in  chloroplasts  but  is  sepa-
rated  from  the  inner  membrane  (the  former  plasma  
membrane).  These  thylakoid  membranes  contain 
photosynthetic  hardware  and  enclose  the  thylakoid  
membrane space. Like the bacterial plasma membrane,  
the  chloroplast  “inner  membrane”  is  a  permeability 
barrier,  containing  carriers  for  metabolites.  The  inner  
membrane surrounds the stroma, the cytoplasm of the 
original  symbiotic  bacterium,  a  protein-rich  compart-
ment  devoted  to  synthesis  of  three-carbon  sugar  phos-
phates, chloroplast proteins, and all plant fatty acids. The 
stroma also houses the genomes and stores starch. The 
outer  membrane,  like  the  comparable  bacterial  and 
mitochondrial membranes, has large pore channels that 
allow free passage of metabolites.

Plastids
Chloroplasts  are  just  one  manifestation  of  a  class  of 
organelles  called  plastids.  Depending  on  the  develop-
mental  stage  and  tissue  type  plastids  have  a  range  of 
compositions and functions made possible by selective 
synthesis  and  import  of  proteins.  Chloroplasts  are  spe-
cialized  for  photosynthesis  in  green  plant  tissues  but 
differ  considerably  in  composition  and  physiology  in 
developing  and  senescent  plant  tissues.  Some  plastids, 
such  as  the  starch-storing  amyloplasts  in  potatoes,  lack 
the photosynthetic machinery.

 

CHAPTER 19  n  Mitochondria, Chloroplasts, Peroxisomes 

325

A. Purple bacteria, green filamentous bacteria

PERIPLASM

B. Electron energy

Cytochrome

Cytochrome c2

Light

3 H+

H+

QA

QB

QH2

e-

2 H+

H

Light-harvesting
complex

Type II

photosystem

Cytochrome b c1

complex

H+

+

++

–

–

–

ADP
+ Pi
ATP

ATP synthase

CYTOPLASM

H+

BChl2*

BChl

BPhe

QA

QB
Cytochrome b c1

Cytochrome c2

BChl2

)
s
t
l
o
v
(
 
y
g
r
e
n
E

-1.0

-0.5

0

0.5

1.0

Purple bacteria

C. Green sulfur bacteria Heliobacteria

PERIPLASM

D. Electron energy

Cytochrome c2

H+

Light

Light

H+

H+
Light-harvesting complex

Fes
Fes

Ferridoxin

H+

e-
NAD
+ H+ 

NADH

H+

+

+

+

–

–

–

ADP
+ Pi
ATP

Cytochrome b c

complex

Type I

photosystem

NAD

reductase

ATP synthase

CYTOPLASM

E. Cyanobacteria, algae, plants
2 H2O

4 H+ + O2 

3 H+

Plastocyanin

Light

Mn2+

QA

QB

QH2

e-

2 H+

H
Light-harvesting

complexes

Light

e-

Fes

Fes

Ferridoxin

H+

e-
NADP
+ H+ 

NADPH

PERIPLASM/
LUMEN

H+

H+

+

+

+

–

–

–

ADP
+ Pi
ATP

Photosystem II

Cytochrome b6 f

complex

Photosystem I

NADP

reductase

ATP synthase

STROMA/
CYTOPLASM

BChl2*

Chl

BChl2

FX

FA/B
NAD

)
s
t
l

o
v
(
 
y
g
r
e
n
E

-1.0

-0.5

0

0.5

1.0

Green sulfur bacteria

F. Electron energy

)
s
t
l

o
v
(
 
y
g
r
e
n
E

-1.0

-0.5

0

0.5

1.0

Chl2*

Chl
Q

FX

FA/B
NADP

Chl2*

Phe

QA

QB

Chl2

H2O

YZ

Chl2

Chloroplasts and cyanobacteria
Photosystem II

Photosystem I

FIGURE 19.8  COMPARISON OF PHOTOSYNTHETIC COMPONENTS, ELECTRON TRANSPORT PATHWAYS, AND CHEMIOSMOTIC 
CYCLES TO MAKE ADENOSINE TRIPHOSPHATE. A–B, Type II photosystem only. C–D, Type I photosystem only. E–F, Both photosystem II 
and  photosystem  I.  Right  diagrams,  The  energy  levels  of  electrons  in  the  three  types  of  photosynthetic  organisms,  showing  excitation  of  an 
electron by an absorbed photon (vertical arrows), electron transfer pathways through each reaction center (arrows sloping right), and electron 
transfer steps outside the reaction centers (arrows sloping left). (A, C, and E, For reference, see Kramer DM, Schoepp B, Liebl U, et al. Cyclic 
electron transfer in Heliobacillus mobilis. Biochemistry. 1997;36:4203–4211. B, D, and F, For reference, see Allen JP, Williams JC. Photosynthetic 
reaction centers. FEBS Lett. 1998;438:5–9.)

Light and Dark Reactions
Photosynthetic  mechanisms  capture  energy 
photons to drive two types of reactions:
•  Light reactions depend on continuous absorption of 
photons. These reactions occur in or on the surface 

from 

of thylakoid membranes. They include the generation 
of high-energy electrons, electron transport to make 
NADPH, creation of a proton gradient across the thy-
lakoid  membrane  for  the  chemiosmotic  synthesis  of 
ATP, and generation of oxygen.

326 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

•  Dark  reactions  convert  carbon  dioxide  into  three-
carbon  sugar  phosphates.  These  reactions  continue 
for some time in the dark. However, they depend on 
ATP and NADPH produced by light reactions, so they 
eventually stop when ATP and NADPH are exhausted 
in the dark. These reactions account for most of the 
carbon dioxide converted to carbohydrates on earth. 
(Alternatively  specialized  prokaryotes  drive  carbon 
fixation  by  oxidation  of  hydrogen  sulfide  and  other 
inorganic compounds.)
All photosynthetic systems use similar mechanisms to 
capture energy from photons (Fig. 19.8). Pigments asso-
ciated  with  transmembrane  proteins  in  photosynthetic 
reaction centers absorb photons and use the energy to 
boost  electrons  to  a  high-energy  excited  state.  Subse-
quent electron transfer reactions partition this energy in 
several  steps  to  generate  a  proton  gradient  across  the 
membrane.  Generation  of  this  proton  electrochemical 
gradient and chemiosmotic production of ATP are similar 
to oxidative phosphorylation (Fig. 19.5).

Specific photosynthetic systems differ in the complex-
ity  of  the  hardware,  the  source  of  electrons,  and  the 
products  (Fig.  19.8).  Most  photosynthetic  bacteria  use 
either a type I photosystem or a type II photosystem to 
create a proton gradient to synthesize ATP. Cyanobacte-
ria and green plants use both types of reaction centers 
in series to raise electrons to an energy sufficient to make 
NADPH in addition to ATP. These advanced systems also 
use water as the electron donor and produce molecular 
oxygen as a by-product.

Energy Capture and Transduction by Photosystem II
The reaction center from the purple bacterium Rhodop-
seudomonas  viridis  (Fig.  19.9A)  serves  as  a  model  for 
the  more  complex  photosystem  II  of  cyanobacteria  
and chloroplasts. This bacterial reaction center consists 
of just four subunits. A cytochrome subunit on the peri-
plasmic  side  of  the  membrane  donates  electrons.  Two 
core  subunits  form  a  rigid  transmembrane  framework  
to  bind  10  cofactors  in  orientations  that  favor  transfer  
of  high-energy  electrons  from  two  “special”  bacterio-
chlorophylls  through  chlorophyll  b  and  bacte-
riopheophytin b.

Photosynthesis  begins  with  absorption  of  a  photon  
by  the  special  pair  bacteriochlorophylls.  Photons  in  
the visible part of the spectrum are quite energetic, 40 
to  80 kcal  mol−1,  enough  to  make  several  ATPs.  The 
purple bacterium reaction center absorbs relatively low-
energy,  870-nm  red  light.  The  energy  elevates  an  elec-
tron in the special pair bacteriochlorophylls to an excited 
state  (Fig.  19.8B).  This  excited  state  can  decay  rapidly 
(109 s−1),  causing  the  energy  to  dissipate  as  heat  or 
emission of a less-energetic photon by  fluorescence  or 
phosphorescence.  However,  reaction  centers  are  opti-
mized  to  transfer  excited-state  electrons  rapidly  and  
efficiently from the special pair bacteriochlorophylls to 

bacteriopheophytin  (3  ×  10−12 s)  and  then  to  tightly 
bound quinone A (200 × 10−12 s). Transfer is by quantum 
mechanical tunneling right through the protein mol-
ecule.  Because  the  tunneling  rate  falls  off  sharply  with 
distance,  four  redox  centers  must  be  spaced  close 
together to allow an energetic electron to transfer across 
the  lipid  bilayer  faster  than  spontaneous  decay  of  the 
excited state.

On the cytoplasmic side of the membrane, two elec-
trons  transfer  from  quinone  A  to  quinone  B  (100  × 
10−9 s), where they combine with two protons to make 
a  high-energy  reduced  quinone,  QH2  (Fig.  19.8A).  In 
purple bacteria, these cytoplasmic protons are taken up 
through water-filled channels in the reaction center, con-
tributing to the proton gradient.

QH2 has a low affinity for the reaction center and dif-
fuses in the hydrophobic core of the bilayer to the next 
component  in  the  pathway,  the  chloroplast  equivalent 
of  the  mitochondrial  cytochrome  bc1  complex  III  (Fig. 
19.8A).  As  in  mitochondria,  passage  of  energetic  elec-
trons  through  this  complex  releases  protons  from  QH2 
on  the  periplasmic  side  of  the  membrane,  adding  
to the electrochemical gradient. The electron circuit is 
completed  by  transfer  of  low-energy  electrons  from 
complex  bc1  to  a  soluble  periplasmic  protein,  cyto-
chrome  c2.  Electrons  then  move  to  the  cytochrome 
subunit  of  the  reaction  center,  which  supplies  special 
pair chlorophylls with electrons for the photosynthetic 
reaction cycle.

The  net  result  of  this  cycle  is  the  conversion  of  the 
energy  of  two  photons  into  transport  of  three  protons 
to the periplasm. A diagram of the energy levels of the 
various  intermediates  in  the  cycle  (Fig.  19.8B)  shows 
how energy is partitioned after an electron is excited by 
a photon and then moves, step by step, through protein-
associated redox centers back to the ground state.

The  proton  electrochemical  gradient  established  
by  photosynthetic  electron  transfer  reactions  is  used  
to  drive  an  F-type  rotary  ATP  synthase  (see  Fig.  14.5) 
similar  to  those  of  nonphotosynthetic  prokaryotes  and 
mitochondria.

Light Harvesting
Reaction center chlorophylls absorb light, but both chlo-
roplasts  and  bacteria  increase  the  efficiency  of  light  
collection  with  proteins  that  absorb  light  and  transfer 
the  energy  to  a  reaction  center.  Most  of  these  light-
harvesting complexes are small, transmembrane pro-
teins  that  cluster  around  a  reaction  center,  although 
some bacteria and algae also have soluble light-harvesting 
proteins. Transmembrane, light-harvesting proteins con-
sist  of  a  few α-helices  associated  with  multiple  chloro-
phyll  and  carotenoid  pigments  (Figs.  19.8A  and  C  and 
19.9B). Using multiple pigments broadens the range of 
wavelengths  absorbed  and  increases  the  efficiency  of 
photon capture. Leaves are green because chlorophylls 

 

CHAPTER 19  n  Mitochondria, Chloroplasts, Peroxisomes 

327

A. Purple bacterium type II photosystem
     reaction center

B. Cyanobacterium type I
     photosystem

Cytochrome

Hemes

L

Electron
pathway

Clb

Car

Phb

PsaM

PsaA/B

PsaK

PsaF/J

M

CYTOPLASM

H

QB

Fe

QA

PsaE

PsaL/I

PsaD

PsaC

eC1

eC2

eC3

FX

FIGURE  19.9  STRUCTURES  OF  PHOTOSYSTEM  HARDWARE.  A,  Ribbon  diagram  of  type  II  photosystem  from  the  purple  bacterium 
Rhodopseudomonas viridis, with ball-and-stick models of bacteriochlorophyll and other cofactors to the right in their natural orientations. Similar 
core subunits L and M each consists of five transmembrane helices. This pair of subunits binds four molecules of chlorophyll b (Clb), two mol-
ecules of bacteriopheophytin b (Phb), one nonheme iron (Fe), two quinones (QA, QB), and one carotenoid (Car) in a rigid framework. A cytochrome 
with four heme groups binds to the periplasmic side of the core subunits. Subunit H associates with the core subunits via one transmembrane 
helix and with their cytoplasmic surfaces. The atomic structure of this photosynthetic reaction center was the Nobel Prize work of J. Diesenhofer, 
R. Huber, and H. Michel. B, Ribbon diagram of photosystem I of Synechococcus elongatus, with ball-and-stick models of chlorophyll and other 
cofactors to the right in their natural orientations. This trimeric complex consists of three identical units, each composed of 11 polypeptide chains. 
Within each of these units, this 4-Å resolution structure includes 43 α-helices, 89 chlorophylls, 1 quinone, and 3 iron-sulfur centers, but other 
details  (eg,  amino  acid  side  chains)  are  not  resolved.  The  photosynthetic  reaction  center  consists  of  the  C-terminal  halves  of  the  two  central 
subunits (PsaA/PsaB, red-brown) associated with six chlorophylls, one or two quinones, and a shared iron-sulfur cluster. Plastocyanin or cyto-
chrome  c6  on  the  lumen  side  donates  electrons  to  reduce  the  P700  special  pair  chlorophylls  (eC1)  of  the  reaction  center.  Light  energizes  an 
electron,  which  passes  successively  through  two  other  chlorophylls,  a  quinone,  and  the  shared  iron-sulfur  cluster  (red),  Fx.  The  electron  then 
transfers to the iron-sulfur clusters of the accessory subunit PsaC on the stromal side of the membrane. The surrounding eight subunits (red, 
gray), associated with approximately 80 chlorophylls, compose the core antenna system, forming a nearly continuous ring of α-helices around 
the reaction center. Absorption of light by additional light-harvesting complexes and these antenna subunits puts chloroplast electrons into an 
excited state. This energy passes from one pigment to the next until it eventually reaches the reaction center. (A, Copyright Diesenhofer & Michel, 
Nobel Foundation, 1988. For reference, see PDB file 1PRC and Diesenhofer J, Michel H. The photosynthetic reaction center from the purple 
bacterium Rhodopseudomonas viridis. Science. 1989;245:1463–1473. A 3.5-Å crystal structure of the photosystem II complex from the cyano-
bacterium  Thermosynechococcus  elongatus,  including  19  subunits,  is  now  available.  Also  see  Ferreira  KN,  Iverson  TM,  Maghlaoui  K,  et al. 
Architecture of the photosynthetic oxygen-evolving center. Science. 2004;303:1831–1838. B, For reference, see PDB file 2PPS and Schubert 
W-D,  Klukas  O,  Krauss  N,  et al.  Photosystem  I  of Synechococcus  elongatus  at  4 Å  resolution:  comprehensive  structure  analysis.  J  Mol  Biol. 
1997;272:741–769.)

and  carotenoids  absorb  purple  and  blue  wavelengths 
(<530 nm) as well as red wavelengths (>620 nm), reflect-
ing only yellow-green wavelengths in between.

Light  absorbed  by  light-harvesting  proteins  boosts 
pigment electrons to an excited state. This energy (but 
not the electrons) moves without dissipation by fluores-
cence  resonance  energy  transfer  from  one  closely 
spaced  pigment  molecule  to  another  and  eventually  to 
the  special  pair  chlorophylls  of  a  reaction  center.  This 
rapid  (10−12 s),  efficient  process  transfers  energy  cap-
tured over a wide area to a reaction center to initiate a 
cycle of electron transfer and energy transduction.

Energy Capture and Transduction by Photosystem I
The reaction centers of green sulfur bacteria and helio-
bacteria  are  similar  to  photosystem  I  of  cyanobacteria 
and  chloroplasts.  Generation  of  a  proton  gradient  by 
photosystem  I  has  many  parallels  with  photosystem  II. 
Direct absorption of light or resonance energy transfer 
from  surrounding  light-harvesting  complexes  excites 
special-pair  chlorophylls  in  photosystem  I  (Fig.  19.8C–
D).  Excited-state  electrons  move  rapidly  within  the  
reaction  center  from  these  chlorophylls  through  two 
accessory  chlorophylls  to  an  iron-sulfur  center.  The 
pathway  includes  a  quinone  in  cyanobacteria  and 

328 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

chloroplasts.  Electrons  then  move  to  the  iron-sulfur 
center of a subunit on the cytoplasmic side of the mem-
brane.  The  subsequent  events  in  green  sulfur  bacteria 
and heliobacteria include electron transfer by the soluble 
protein  ferredoxin  to  an  NAD  reductase,  followed  
by  transfer  by  a  lipid  intermediate  to  cytochrome  bc 
complex,  and  then  back  to  the  reaction  center  via  a 
cytochrome c.

Oxygen-Producing Synthesis of NADPH and ATP by 
Dual Photosystems
Chloroplasts and cyanobacteria combine photosystem II 
and  photosystem  I  in  the  same  membrane  to  form  a 
system capable of accepting low-energy electrons from 
the  oxidation  of  water  and  producing  both  a  proton 
gradient to drive ATP synthesis and reducing equivalents 
in the form of NADPH (Fig. 19.8E–F). Both photosystems 
are more elaborate in dual systems than in single systems. 
Although  plant  photosystem  II,  with  more  than  25 
protein subunits, is much more complicated than is the 
homologous  reaction  center  of  purple  bacteria,  the 
arrangement of transmembrane helices and chlorophyll 
cofactors  in  the  core  of  the  plant  reaction  center  is 
similar to the simple reaction center of purple bacteria.
Photosynthesis  involves  a  tortuous  electron  transfer 
pathway  powered  at  two  waystations  by  absorption  of 
photons.  This  process  begins  when  the  special  pair  
chlorophylls  of  photosystem  II  are  excited  by  direct 
absorption of light or by resonance energy transfer from 
surrounding  light-harvesting  complexes  (Fig.  19.8E– 
F). Electrons come from splitting two waters into molec-
ular  oxygen  and  four  protons.  Excited-state  electrons 
tunnel  through  the  redox  cofactors  and  combine  with 
protons  from  the  stroma  (or  cytoplasm  in  bacteria)  to 
reduce  quinone  QB  to  QH2,  a  high-energy  electron 
donor.  QH2  diffuses  to  complex  b6-f,  the  chloroplast 
equivalent  of  the  mitochondrial  bc1  complex.  Passage 
of  electrons  through  complex  b6-f  releases  protons 
from  QH2  into  the  thylakoid  lumen  (or  bacterial  peri-
plasm),  contributing  to  the  proton  gradient  across  the 
membrane.

Complex b6-f donates electrons from QH2 to photosys-
tem  I.  Direct  absorption  of  680-nm  light  or  resonance 
energy  transfer  from  surrounding  light-harvesting  com-
plexes  boosts  special  pair  chlorophyll  electrons  to  a  
very high-energy, excited state (Fig. 19.8F). Excited-state 
electrons  pass  through  chlorophyll  and 
iron-sulfur 
centers of photosystem I to the iron-sulfur center of the 
redox  protein,  ferredoxin,  on  the  cytoplasmic/stromal 
surface  of  the  membrane.  The  enzyme  nicotinamide 
adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP) reductase com-
bines  electrons  from  ferredoxin  with  a  proton  to  form 
NADPH, the final product of this complex electron trans-
fer pathway powered at two waystations by absorption 
of  photons.  Uptake  of  stromal  protons  during  NADPH 
formation  contributes  to  the  transmembrane  proton 

gradient  for  the  synthesis  of  ATP.  Antiporters  in  the 
inner  membrane  exchange  ATP 
in 
mitochondria.

for  ADP,  as 

Synthesis of Carbohydrates
ATP and NADPH produced by light reactions drive the 
unfavorable  conversion  of  carbon  dioxide  into  sugars. 
This  is  the  first  step  in  the  earth’s  annual  production  
of  approximately  1010  tons  of  carbohydrates  by  photo-
synthetic  organisms.  This  process  is  very  expensive,  
consuming  three  ATPs  and  two  NADPHs  for  each  
carbon dioxide added to the five-carbon sugar ribulose 
1,5-bisphosphate.  The  responsible  enzyme,  ribulose 
phosphate carboxylase (called RUBISCO), is the most 
abundant protein in the stroma and might be the most 
abundant protein on the earth. The products of combin-
ing  the  five-carbon  sugar  with  carbon  dioxide  are  two 
molecules of the three-carbon sugar 3-phosphoglycerate.
An  antiporter  in  the  inner  chloroplast  membrane 
exchanges 3-phosphoglycerate for inorganic phosphate, 
so  3-phosphoglycerate  can  join  the  glycolytic  pathway 
in  the  cytoplasm  (Fig.  19.4).  Driven  by  this  abundant 
supply  of  3-phosphoglycerate,  the  glycolytic  pathway 
runs  backward  to  make  six-carbon  sugars,  which  are 
used to make disaccharides such as sucrose to nourish 
nonphotosynthetic  parts  of  the  plant,  the  glucose 
polymer starch to store carbohydrate, and cellulose for 
the extracellular matrix (see Figs. 3.25A and 32.13).

Peroxisomes
Peroxisomes  are  organelles  bounded  by  a  single  mem-
brane (Fig. 19.10), named for their content of enzymes 
that produce and degrade hydrogen peroxide, H2O2. Oxi-
dases  produce  H2O2  and  peroxidases  such  as  catalase 
break it down. Peroxisomes also contain diverse enzymes 
for  the  metabolism  of  lipids  and  other  metabolites, 
including the β-oxidation of fatty acids and oxidation of 
bile acids and cholesterol. All peroxisomal proteins are 
encoded  by  nuclear  genes,  translated  on  cytoplasmic 
ribosomes, and then subsequently incorporated into per-
oxisomes (see Fig. 18.8).

Peroxisomes  form  in  two  different  ways:  de  novo 
synthesis by budding from the ER and growth and divi-
sion  of  preexisting  peroxisomes  (see  Fig.  18.8).  Cells 
that lack preexisting peroxisomes can form peroxisomes 
without  a  template  by  differentiation  and  budding  of  
ER  membranes.  Two  key  proteins  known  as  peroxins, 
PEX3  and  PEX16,  are  targeted  to  the  ER,  where  they 
recruit other peroxins to form a specialized domain that 
pinches off to form a nascent peroxisome.

Defects in peroxisomal biogenesis cause a spectrum  
of  lethal  human  diseases  known  as  the  peroxisomal 
biogenesis disorders (see Table 18.1). These diseases 
include  Zellweger  syndrome,  neonatal  adrenoleuko-
dystrophy,  infantile  Refsum  disease,  and  rhizomelic  

 

CHAPTER 19  n  Mitochondria, Chloroplasts, Peroxisomes 

329

A

B

FIGURE 19.10  PEROXISOMES. A, Fluorescence micrographs of a CV1 cell expressing green fluorescent protein fused to PTS1, which labels 
peroxisomes green. Microtubules are stained red with labeled antibodies, and nuclear DNA is stained blue with propidium iodide. B, Electron 
micrograph of a thin section of a tissue culture cell showing three peroxisomes. Peroxisomes have a single bilayer membrane and a dense matrix, 
including a crystal (in some species) of the enzyme urate oxidase. (A, Courtesy S. Subramani, University of California–San Diego. For reference, 
see Wiemer EAC, Wenzel T, Deernick TJ, et al. Visualization of the peroxisomal compartment in living mammalian cells. J Cell Biol. 1997;136:71–
80. B, Courtesy Don W. Fawcett, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.)

chondrodysplasia  punctata.  These  diseases  are  moder-
ately  rare,  occurring  in  approximately  1  in  50,000  live 
births. Most patients with peroxisomal biogenesis disor-
ders display no defect in peroxisome membrane synthesis 
or import of peroxisomal membrane proteins, but they 
do have mild-to-severe defects in matrix protein import. 
However, in rare cases, patients lack peroxisome mem-
branes altogether. Studies of both yeast pex mutants and 
cells from patients with peroxisomal biogenesis disorders 
have  provided  clues  regarding  peroxisome  biogenesis 
(see Table 18.1).

SELECTED READINGS

Chacinska  A,  Koehler  CM,  Milenkovic  D,  et al.  Importing  mitochon-
drial  proteins:  machineries  and  mechanisms.  Cell.  2009;138:
628-644.

Demarsy E, Lakshmanan AM, Kessler F. Border control: selectivity of 
chloroplast  protein  import  and  regulation  at  the  TOC-complex. 
Front Plant Sci. 2013;5:483.

Emma  F,  Montini  G,  Parikh  SM,  et al.  Mitochondrial  dysfunction  in 
inherited  renal  disease  and  acute  kidney  injury.  Nat  Rev  Nephrol. 
2016;doi: 10.1038/nrneph.2015.214; [Epub ahead of print].

Hohmann-Marriott  MF,  Blankenship  RE.  Evolution  of  photosynthesis. 

Annu Rev Plant Biol. 2011;62:515-548.

Hosler  JP,  Ferguson-Miller  S,  Mills  DA.  Energy  transduction:  Proton 
transfer  through  the  respiratory  complexes.  Annu  Rev  Biochem. 
2006;75:165-187.

Jarvis P, López-Juez E. Biogenesis and homeostasis of chloroplasts and 

other plastids. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2013;14:787-802.

Keeling PJ. The number, speed, and impact of plastid endosymbiosis 

in eukaryotic evolution. Annu Rev Plant Biol. 2013;64:583-607.

Kühlbrandt  W.  Structure  and  function  of  mitochondrial  membrane 

protein complexes. BMC Biol. 2015;13:89.

Kühlbrandt W, Davies KM. Rotary ATPases: A new twist to an ancient 

machine. Trends Biochem Sci. 2016;41:106-116.

Labbé K, Murley A, Nunnari J. Determinants and functions of mitochon-

drial behavior. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2014;30:357-391.

Nelson N, Junge W. Structure and energy transfer in photosystems of 

oxygenic photosynthesis. Annu Rev Biochem. 2015;84:659-683.

Pfanner N, van der Laan M, Amati P, et al. Uniform nomenclature for 
the mitochondrial contact site and cristae organizing system. J Cell 
Biol. 2014;204:1083-1086.

Poole  AM,  Gribaldo  S.  Eukaryotic  origins:  How  and  when  was  the 
mitochondrion acquired? Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2014;6:
a015990.

Schon EA, DiMauro S, Hirano M. Human mitochondrial DNA: roles of 
inherited and somatic mutations. Nat Rev Genet. 2012;13:878-890.
Smith JJ, Aitchison JD. Peroxisomes take shape. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 

2013;14:803-817.

This page intentionally left blank

C H A P T E R 

20 

Endoplasmic Reticulum

The  endoplasmic  reticulum  (ER)  is  the  largest 

membrane-delineated  intracellular  compartment  within 
eukaryotic  cells,  having  a  surface  area  up  to  30  times 
that  of  the  plasma  membrane  (Fig.  20.1).  The  ER 
performs  many  essential  cellular  functions,  includ-
ing  protein  synthesis  and  processing,  lipid  synthesis, 
compartmentalization  of  the  nucleus,  calcium  (Ca2+) 
storage  and  release,  detoxification  of  compounds,  and 
lipid  transfer  and  signaling  to  other  organelles  (Table 
20.1).  It  also  has  roles  in  the  biogenesis  of  the  Golgi 
apparatus,  peroxisomes  and  lipid  droplets,  and  helps 
mitochondria  to  divide.  Approximately  one-third  of  all 
cellular  proteins  are  imported  into  the  lumen  of  the 
ER  or  integrated  into  ER  membranes.  Import  occurs 
at  rates  of  2  to  13  million  new  proteins  synthesized 
per  minute.  The  ER  retains  some  of  these  imported 
proteins for its own functions, some are degraded, and 
others  are  exported  into  the  secretory  pathway  (see 
Chapter 21) for targeting to other compartments within  
the  cell.

The ER is organized as an extensive array of tubules 
and flat saccules called cisternae (cisterna means “reser-
voir”) that form an interconnected and contiguous three-
dimensional  network  (a  reticulum)  stretching  from  the 
nuclear  envelope  to  the  cell  surface.  This  system  has 
several  structural  domains.  The  ER  that  flattens  around 
the  cell  nucleus  to  form  a  double  membrane  bilayer 
barrier  is  called  the  nuclear  envelope  (see  Fig.  9.5). 
The peripheral ER that extends from the nuclear enve-
lope is comprised of both a polygonal network of tubules 
and  flat,  stacked  membrane  cisternae  close  to  the 
nucleus.  The  stacked  cisternae  are  covered  with  ribo-
somes  for  the  synthesis,  import,  and  folding  of  mem-
brane,  luminal,  and  secreted  proteins.  The  tubule 
network extends throughout the cytoplasm (Fig. 20.1C); 
its  functions  include  lipid  synthesis,  Ca2+  storage  and 
release,  and  making  contacts  with  the  membranes  of 
other organelles and the plasma membrane.

This  chapter  describes  (a)  the  overall  functions  and 
organization of the ER, (b) insertion of proteins into and 

B

C

A

Stacked
cisterane

Tubules

Nuclear
pore

Nuclear
envelope

Stacked
cisterane

Ribosomes

Peripheral
sheet

FIGURE 20.1  OVERVIEW OF THE ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM/NUCLEAR ENVELOPE. A, Diagram of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
and  nuclear  envelope.  B–C,  Fluorescence  micrographs  of  cells  expressing  an  ER  marker  tagged  with  green  fluorescent  protein  (white  in  this 
image). B, The expansive character of ER is emphasized. C, Peripheral ER tubules. (A, From Goyal U, Blackstone C. Untangling the web: mecha-
nisms underlying ER network formation.  Biochim  Biophys  Acta. 2013;1833:2492–2498. B–C, Courtesy Drs. Chris Obara and Aubrey Weigel, 
Janelia Research Campus, Ashburn, VA.)

 331

332 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

TABLE 20.1  Subdomains of the 
Endoplasmic Reticulum
ER Domain

Function

Rough ER

Protein translocation
Protein folding and 
oligomerization

Carbohydrate addition
ER degradation

Smooth ER

Detoxification
Lipid metabolism
Heme metabolism
Calcium release

Nuclear 

envelope
ER export 

sites

Nuclear pores
Chromatin anchoring
Export of proteins 

and lipids into 
secretory pathway

Associated Proteins

Sec61 complex, TRAP, 

TRAM, BiP
PDI, Calnexin, 

Calreticulin, BiP

Oligosaccharide 

transferase
EDEM, Derlin1
Cytochrome P450 

enzymes

HMG-CoA reductase
Cytochrome b5
IP3 receptors
POM121, GP210
Lamin B receptor
Sar1p, Sec12p, Sec16p

ER contact 

Transport of lipids

LTPs

zones

BiP, biding immunoglobulin protein; EDEM, ER degradation-enhancing 
α-mannosidase-like protein; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; HMG-CoA, 
β-hydroxy-β-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A; IP3, inositol triphosphate; 
LTP, lipid-transfer protein; PDI, protein disulfide isomerase; TRAM, 
translocating chain-associating membrane protein; TRAP, translocon-
associated protein.

across the ER membrane, (c) the mechanisms of folding, 
assembly,  and  degradation  of  proteins  in  the  ER,  and  
(d)  the  synthesis  and  metabolism  of  lipids  by  the  ER. 
Chapter 21 covers the secretory pathway, which begins  
at  the  ER.  Chapter  26  explains  how  the  ER  stores  and 
releases Ca2+.

Overview of Endoplasmic Reticulum 
Functions and Organization
The  foremost  function  of  the  ER  is  producing  most 
proteins that are secreted from the cell as well as lipids 
that  make  up  the  membranes  of  the  other  organelles, 
including  the  Golgi  apparatus,  endosomes,  lysosomes, 
and  plasma  membrane.  The  ER  also  supplies  much  of  
the  lipid  for  the  membranes  of  mitochondria  and 
peroxisomes.

The  area  of  ER  specialized  for  protein  synthesis, 
folding, and degradation is called the rough ER, because 
its cytoplasmic surface is studded with ribosomes (Fig. 
20.2B). The rough ER contains specialized receptors and 
channels that transfer proteins synthesized by ribosomes 
in  the  cytoplasm  across  ER  membranes.  Inside  the  ER 
lumen,  newly  synthesized  proteins  are  exposed  to  a 
dense  meshwork  of  chaperones  and  other  modifying 
enzymes (estimated to be 200 mg/mL) that catalyze their 
folding and assembly. Proteins that are incorrectly folded 
or misfolded can be exported back into the cytoplasm, 
where  they  are  degraded.  Misfolded  proteins,  when 

A

CYTOPLASM

rER

NUCLEUS

sER

ER export
domain

Golgi
apparatus

B

Nuclear
envelope

FIGURE  20.2  ENDOPLASMIC  RETICULUM  SUBDOMAINS. 
A, Drawing of a cell with specialized regions of the endoplasmic reticu-
lum  (ER).  Rough  ER  (rER)  with  bound  ribosomes  extends  from  the 
nuclear  envelope  to  the  cell  periphery.  Smooth  ER  (sER)  without 
ribosomes  is  specialized  for  drug  metabolism  and  steroid  synthesis 
and includes tubulovesicular elements composing ER exit sites. The 
nuclear  envelope  consists  of  ER  membrane  wrapped  around  the 
chromosomes and other nuclear elements. B, Electron micrograph of 
a  thin  section  of  rough  ER  and  neighboring  mitochondrion  from  the 
pancreas. The lumen is colored blue. (Micrograph by Keith R. Porter; 
courtesy Don W. Fawcett, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.)

accumulated  in  the  ER  at  high  levels,  can  trigger  an 
unfolded protein response. This activates specific genes 
in  the  nucleus  whose  products  help  modify  or  destroy 
the misfolded proteins and compensate for the decreased 
capacity of ER folding. Both soluble and transmembrane 
proteins  are  exported  from  the  ER  at  sites  called  ER 
export  domains.  These  tubulovesicular  membranes 
lack  ribosomes  and  bud  off  vesicle  intermediates  for 
delivery to the Golgi apparatus (see Chapter 21).

The  surface  of  the  ER  forming  the  outer  nuclear 
envelope,  which  faces  the  cytoplasm,  is  indistinguish-
able from the rest of the ER except for the presence of 
nuclear pores that allow passage of molecules between 
the nucleus and cytoplasm (see Fig. 9.18). By contrast, 
the  ER  surface  forming  the  inner  nuclear  envelope, 
which  faces  the  nucleoplasm,  contains  specialized  
proteins that interact with the nuclear lamina and chro-
matin  (see  Fig.  9.8).  In  mitosis,  the  ER  maintains  its 
morphology as an interconnected network, whereas the 
nuclear  envelope  either  disassembles  (in  most  animal 
cells; see Fig. 44.6) or remains intact (in yeasts and most 
other  fungi).  In  cells  where  the  nuclear  envelope 

 

CHAPTER 20  n  Endoplasmic Reticulum 

333

disassembles  during  mitosis,  nuclear  pores  disassemble 
and integral membrane proteins of the nuclear envelope 
diffuse into surrounding ER membranes.

Peroxisomes, lipid droplets, and the Golgi apparatus 
all  depend  on  the  ER  for  their  biogenesis  and  mainte-
nance.  During  peroxisome  biogenesis,  the  ER  provides 
the  initial  scaffold  for  recruiting  core  components  (ie, 
Pex16p  and  Pex3p)  involved  in  peroxisomal  protein 
import  (see  Fig.  18.8).  Biogenesis  of  the  Golgi  appara-
tus  depends  on  the  ER  to  synthesize  resident  enzymes 
and  on  constitutive  cycling  of  membrane  between  the 
ER  and  Golgi  apparatus.  Consequently,  perturbing  the 
export of proteins from the ER impacts the structure and 
function  of  the  Golgi  apparatus.  Lipid  droplets  emerge 
directly  from  the  ER  by  the  accumulation  of  neutral 
lipids between the leaflets of the ER bilayer. This forms 
an oil droplet that eventually buds toward the cytoplasm. 
Subsequent  growth  of  lipid  droplets  may  take  place 
by  neutral  lipid  synthesis  either  on  their  surface  or  at  
the ER.

The ER lumen is the major Ca2+ storage site in cells, 
owing to calcium pumps in the membrane (see Figs. 14.7 
and 26.12) and many Ca2+-binding proteins in the lumen. 
The second messenger IP3 (inositol triphosphate) releases 
Ca2+ from the lumen by activating calcium release chan-
nels  (see  Fig.  26.12).  Carefully  regulated  release  and 
uptake of Ca2+ by the ER control muscle contraction (see 
Fig.  39.15)  and  many  other  cellular  processes.  The  ER 
can  also  release  Ca2+  next  to  neighboring  organelles  at 
ER–organelle contact sites.

The  smooth  ER,  composed  of  tubular  elements 
lacking  ribosomes,  is  dedicated  to  enzyme  pathways 
involved in drug metabolism (hepatocytes), steroid syn-
thesis  (endocrine  cells),  or  calcium  uptake  and  release 
(see Fig. 26.12). The cytochrome P450 family of heme-
containing membrane proteins resides in the smooth ER. 
These  enzymes  use  an  electron  transfer  process  to 
detoxify endogenous steroids, carcinogenic compounds, 
lipid-soluble drugs, and environmental xenobiotics. The 
lumen of the ER is an oxidizing environment that favors 
disulfide bond formation, which helps stabilize proteins 
that are exported from the ER to the outside of the cell.
The  abundance  of  a  particular  ER  region  varies  in 
specialized  cells.  Cells  dedicated  to  the  production, 
storage,  and  regulated  secretion  of  proteins  (such  as 
exocrine cells and activated B cells) are rich in rough ER. 
By  contrast,  smooth  ER  is  abundant  in  endocrine  cells 
that  synthesize  steroid  hormones  and  in  muscle  cells 
owing to their requirement to store and release Ca2+ to 
control contraction.

Endoplasmic Reticulum Shape Generation
Several classes of proteins determine the unique morphol-
ogy of the ER as it undergoes continual rearrangements. 
These  proteins  ensure  that  the  ER  maintains  itself  as  a 
single polygonal network of tubules and stacked cister-
nae  extending  from  the  nuclear  envelope  to  the  cell 
periphery  (Fig.  20.3).  Proteins  that  mediate  ER  tubule 
formation include the reticulons and DP1/Yop1 proteins 

A

ER
tubules

C

Reticulons

SMOOTH
ER TUBULE

ER
LUMEN

Atlastins

B

GTPase

Atlastin/Sey1p

CYTOSOL

LIPID
BILAYER

ER LUMEN

Reticulons or
DP1/Yop1p

D

GTP

hydrolysis

Membrane

fusion

FIGURE  20.3  ENDOPLASMIC  RETICULUM  SHAPING  AND  FUSION  PROTEINS.  A,  Superresolution  fluorescence  micrograph  of  the 
peripheral network of tubular ER membranes stained with an antibody to reticulon. See Fig. 6.5 for details. B, Insertion of reticulons and atlastin 
into  the  ER  membrane  bilayer. C,  Drawings  of  tubular  ER  membranes  showing  reticulon  proteins  in  the  cytoplasmic  leaflet  of  the  bilayer  and 
atlastin proteins connecting two tubules. D, Proposal for the fusion of ER membranes by atlastin with energy coming from guanosine triphosphate 
(GTP)  hydrolysis.  (B,  Modified  from  Chen  S,  Novick  P,  Ferro-Novick  S.  ER  structure  and  function.  Curr  Opin  Cell  Biol.  2013;25:428–433. 
C–D,  Modified  from  Goyal  U,  Blackstone  C.  Untangling  the  web:  mechanisms  underlying  ER  network  formation.  Biochim  Biophys  Acta. 
2013;1833:2492–2498. D, Modified from Lin S, Sun S, Hu J. Molecular basis for sculpting the endoplasmic reticulum membrane. Int J Biochem 
Cell Biol. 2012;44:1436–1443.)

334 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

(Fig. 20.3B–C). Although not related by sequence, these 
proteins share hydrophobic segments predicted to form 
α-helical hairpins that partially span the lipid bilayer (Fig. 
20.3B).  Insertion  of  these  hydrophobic  segments  into 
the  cytoplasmic  leaflet  of  the  ER  membrane  bilayer  is 
thought to help generate the highly curved, tubular ER 
morphology,  along  with  directly  scaffolding  reticulons 
on  the  surface  of  the  ER.  Reticulons  and  DP1/YOP1 
proteins also participate in nuclear pore formation, most 
likely by stabilizing curved membranes.

Members  of  the  atlastin/RHD3/Sey1p  family  of 
dynamin-related  guanosine  triphosphatases  (GTPases) 
localize to highly curved ER membranes and mediate the 
formation  of  three-way  junctions  responsible  for  the 
polygonal  structure  of  the  tubular  ER  network  (Fig. 
20.3B–C). Atlastins consist of an N-terminal cytoplasmic 
GTPase  domain  and  a  three-helix  bundle  followed  by 
two very closely spaced transmembrane segments and a 
C-terminal  amphipathic  helix.  Guanosine  triphosphate 
(GTP)  binding  stimulates  interactions  between  atlastin 
oligomers  in  two  adjacent  membranes,  forming  a  teth-
ered complex. Fusion between ER tubules depends on 
a conformational change in the cytosolic domain linked 
to  GTP  hydrolysis  that  pulls  the  membranes  together, 
leading  to  oligomerization  of  the  transmembrane  seg-
ments,  and  interaction  of  the  C-terminal  tail  with  the 
membranes undergoing fusion. After membrane fusion, 
atlastin releases GDP before another round of membrane 
fusion.

Interactions with microtubules can remodel the ER in 
two ways: motor proteins can pull ER along the side of 
a microtubule; or the ER membrane can attach to +TIP 
attachment complexes that track the end of a growing 
microtubule (see Fig. 37.6). One example of TIP tracking 
uses the transmembrane ER protein stromal interaction 
molecule 1 (STIM1) (see Fig. 26.12), which binds directly 
to the +TIP protein EB1 (see Fig. 34.4C). This interaction 
allows ER tubules containing STIM1 to reach the plasma 
membrane and activate Orai (see Fig. 26.13A), the store-
operated  Ca2+-channel  in  the  plasma  membrane  that 
admits Ca2+ to refill calcium stores in the ER. Interactions 
with  the  actin  cytoskeleton  can  also  drive  ER  remodel-
ing. This is particularly important in plants (see Fig. 37.9) 
and yeast cells (see Fig. 37.11), but also occurs in animal 
cells  such  as  neurons,  where  myosin-Va  transports  ER 
along  actin  filaments  (see  Fig.  36.8)  into  the  dendritic 
spines of neurons.

Defects in proteins that control the shape of the ER 
often lead to disease. For example, autosomal dominant 
mutations  in  atlastin  or  reticulons  result  in  length-
dependent degeneration of the distal parts of the axons 
of  corticospinal  upper  motor  neurons  in  hereditary 
spastic paraplegias, and contribute to the pathogenesis 
of  amyotrophic  lateral  sclerosis,  which  involves  degen-
eration  of  both  upper  and  lower  motor  neurons.  The 
large  size  and  highly  polarized  geometry  of  neurons 

makes  shaping  and  distributing  the  ER  network  espe-
cially important in these cells.

Endoplasmic Reticulum– 
Organelle Contacts
The ER makes many types of contacts with other mem-
branes, which are mediated by specific proteins. Chapter 
26 describes contacts between Ca2+-sensing proteins in 
the ER membrane with plasma membrane Ca2+ channels 
that  cells  use  to  resupply  the  ER  with  Ca2+  (see  Fig. 
26.12).  Other  membrane  contact  sites  (Fig.  20.4 
and  Table  20.2)  depend  on  a  conserved  receptor  on  
the  cytoplasmic  surface  of  the  ER  called  VAP  (for 
VAMP [vesicle-associated membrane protein]-associated 
protein; see Fig. 20.17). The cytoplasmic domain of VAP 
binds  a  wide  range  of  proteins  with  an  FFAT  motif 
containing  two  phenylalanines  (FF)  in  an  acidic  tract. 
FFAT proteins link the ER to mitochondria, endosomes, 
Golgi, peroxisomes or the plasma membrane. Within the 
gap  of  10  to  30 nm  between  the  organelles,  tethered 
proteins  with  lipid  binding  domains  transfer  lipid  mol-
ecules between the lipid bilayers (see Fig. 20.17). Muta-
tions of one of the two genes for VAP cause some cases 
of  neurodegenerative  diseases  (amyotrophic 
lateral 
sclerosis, Parkinson disease). Membrane contact sites are 
also  important  for  Ca2+  signaling.  Because  Ca2+  diffuses 
only about 100 nm from its release site (see Chapter 26), 
Ca2+  signals  from  the  ER  to  other  organelles  are  more 
efficient  at  tight  interfaces.  ER–organelle  contacts  also 
control organelle division and many aspects of cytoplas-
mic and plasma membrane organization.

e

n

b r a

m

e

a  m

m

P la s

Mitochondrion

Endosome

Lysosome

Lipid
droplet

Golgi

Peroxisome

ER

NUCLEUS

FIGURE  20.4  ENDOPLASMIC  RETICULUM–ORGANELLE 
CONTACT SITES. Drawing of a cell showing contacts of the endo-
plasmic reticulum (ER) with endosomes, Golgi apparatus, lipid droplets, 
mitochondria, peroxisomes, and plasma membrane. 

 

CHAPTER 20  n  Endoplasmic Reticulum 

335

Calcium transfer
Lipid transfer
Tethers and possibly transfers lipids

TABLE 20.2  Location and Proposed Functions of Proteins at Endoplasmic Reticulum–Organelle Contacts
ER-Mitochondria Contacts
MFN1-MFN2
VAPs-PTPIP51
ERMES complex
ER-Endosome
VAP-A-ORP1L
VAP-A-STARD3
VAP-A-Protrudin
ORP5-NPC1
ER-Golgi Contacts
VAP-OSBP
VAP-CERT
VAP-NIR2
ER-Lipid Droplet Contacts
FATP1-DGAT2

Senses sterol levels and regulates endosome positioning
Transfers sterols
Transfers kinesin-1 from the ER to late endosomes to facilitate their to the cell periphery
ORD domain of ORP5 transfers cholesterol

Transfers PtdIns(4)P from the Golgi apparatus to ER and sterols from ER to Golgi apparatus
Transfers ceramide
Maintains diacylglycerol levels in the Golgi

Coordinates lipid droplet expansion at lipid droplet-ER MCSs

CERT, ceramide transport protein; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; MCS, membrane contact site; OSBP, oxysterol-binding protein; VAP, VAMP (vesicle-
associated membrane protein)-associated protein.

Overview of Protein Translocation Into  
the Endoplasmic Reticulum
A  major  function  of  the  ER  is  to  import  and  process 
newly synthesized proteins from the cytoplasm. This is 
necessary for growth of other organelles, including the 
Golgi  apparatus,  nucleus,  endosomes,  lysosomes,  and 
plasma membrane, as well as for production of nearly all 
proteins secreted from the cell. All proteins are synthe-
sized in the cytoplasm and must be targeted specifically 
to the ER, where they are either fully translocated across 
the  ER  membrane  and  released  into  the  ER  lumen 
(soluble proteins) or only partly translocated across the 
ER membrane and transferred into the lipid bilayer of the 
ER  membrane  (transmembrane  proteins).  The  orienta-
tion of a protein in the lipid bilayer or its localization to 
the lumen is established during initial protein transloca-
tion  and  maintained  as  vesicles  transfer  the  protein 
between membranes of the secretory pathway (see Fig. 
21.2).  Thus,  domains  of  transmembrane  proteins  to  be 
exposed  on  the  cell  surface  must  be  in  the  ER  lumen 
when their transmembrane domains are inserted into the 
ER membrane. Similarly, secreted soluble proteins must 
be fully translocated into the lumen of the ER.

Because  the  ER  lumen  is  topologically  equivalent  to 
the extracellular space, transport of proteins into the ER 
is  analogous  to  transport  into  or  across  a  prokaryotic 
plasma  membrane  (see  Fig.  18.9).  In  both  cases  trans-
ported substrates must be recognized, targeted from the 
cytoplasm to the membrane, and translocated across the 
membrane  through  a  protein  channel  without  other 
molecules  leaking  across  the  membrane.  Overcoming 
these obstacles involves specialized and regulated factors 
in the cytosol and target membrane.

Insertion of proteins in the ER can occur either as the 
protein  is  being  made  by  membrane-bound  ribosomes 

(cotranslational  translocation)  or  after  synthesis  is 
complete  (posttranslational  translocation),  each  by 
distinct  mechanisms.  In  the  posttranslational  pathway, 
the protein is first fully synthesized in the cytoplasm and 
then translocated independently of the ribosome.

Cotranslational Translocation
Signal Sequences
All  soluble  and  membrane  proteins  destined  for  ER 
translocation using the cotranslational pathway contain 
a hydrophobic “leader” sequence that serves as a recog-
nition signal for direction to the ER membrane. N-terminal 
leader  sequences  (termed  signal  sequences)  are  typi-
cally 15 to 35 amino acids long and contain a hydropho-
bic  core  of  at  least  6  residues.  For  many  membrane 
proteins, the first transmembrane segment (a hydropho-
bic  stretch  of  16  to  25  residues)  serves  as  a  signal 
sequence.  Aside  from  hydrophobicity,  these  signal 
sequences have no other features in common. Neverthe-
less,  when  attached  to  proteins  that  are  not  normally 
targeted  to  the  ER,  these  signal  sequences  direct  the 
protein to the ER and not to other organelles such as to 
mitochondria  or  peroxisomes,  which  use  different  tar-
geting signals (see Fig. 18.1).

Signal Recognition Particle and Signal Recognition 
Particle–Receptor
The  cotranslational  pathway  begins  once  the  first 
hydrophobic  residues  of  either  a  signal  sequence  or  a 
transmembrane  segment  emerges  from  the  ribosome 
and  is  recognized  by  the  signal  recognition  particle 
(SRP),  a  large  ribonucleoprotein  complex  (Fig.  20.5). 
SRP  binds  these  hydrophobic  peptides,  slows  transla-
tion  by  that  ribosome  and  delivers  the  ribosome  to  a 
protein-conducting channel in the ER membrane called 

336 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

FIGURE  20.5  STRUCTURE  AND  MECHANISM  OF  THE  SIGNAL  RECOGNITION  PARTICLE.  A,  Secondary  structure  of  human  and 
Escherichia coli signal recognition particle (SRP) RNAs with sites of protein interactions in blue. B–E, Cryoelectron microscopic structures of SRP 
bound to mammalian ribosomes. SRP (green) wraps around the ribosome from the exit tunnel of the large subunit to the guanosine triphosphatase 
(GTPase) center near transfer RNA (tRNA) in the P-site. B, Structure with the SRP54 subunit (green ribbon diagram) engaging the transmembrane 
domain (TMD) of a nascent polypeptide that has just emerged from the exit tunnel of the ribosome. C, Two views of the structure of the SRP–
ribosome complex in the scanning mode. D, Steps in the interaction of SRP with the ribosome, nascent polypeptide, and eukaryotic elongation 
factor  2  (eEF2).  E,  In  the  engaged  mode  the  transmembrane  domain  of  the  nascent  chain  displaces  one  of  the  SRP54  helices.  (B–E,  From 
Voorhees RM, Hegde RS. Structures of the scanning and engaged states of the mammalian SRP-ribosome complex. eLife. 2015;4:e07975.)

a  translocon.  Then  translation  resumes,  driving  the 
polypeptide  through  the  translocon  into  the  lumen  of 
the ER or inserting it into the membrane bilayer.

Human  SRP  is  composed  of  six  proteins  (named  by 
their  apparent  molecular  weights)  assembled  on  a 
300-nucleotide RNA that spans the distance from the exit 
tunnel  on  the  large  ribosome  subunit  to  the  GTPase 
center  where  translation  factor  GTPases  (eEF1,  eEF2, 
eEF3)  bind.  The  SRP54  protein  subunit  binds  signal 
sequences in a deep, hydrophobic groove lined by the 
flexible side chains of several methionines. Like bristles 
of  a  brush,  the  methionines  accommodate  the  various 
hydrophobic  side  chains  of  different  signal  sequences. 
Phosphates of the SRP RNA near one end of the hydro-
phobic groove interact with basic residues that are often 
(but  not  always)  adjacent  to  the  hydrophobic  core  of 
signal sequences and transmembrane signal segments.

Once  SRP54  has  engaged  a  signal  sequence,  the 
opposite  end  of  SRP  associates  with  the  other  side  of 
the large ribosomal subunit at the GTPase center, where 
it can compete with binding of elongation factors eEF1 
and eEF2 thereby slowing translation (Fig. 20.5E). This 
modest slowing of translation provides time to target the 
ribosome to the translocation channel in the ER before 
excessive polypeptide synthesis precludes cotranslational  
transport.

The complex consisting of ribosome, nascent chain, 
and  SRP  targets  selectively  to  the  ER  membrane  by 
binding the SRP receptor, a heterodimer consisting of 
one  subunit  that  binds  SRP  and  another  that  spans  the 
ER  membrane  (Fig.  20.6).  Both  the  SRP54  subunit  and 
the  SRP  receptor  have  GTPase  domains  (Fig.  20.6B) 
similar to Ras (see Fig. 4.6). Neither SRP nor SRP recep-
tor  hydrolyzes  GTP  on  its  own.  Instead,  association  of 
the  two  GTPase  domains  that  accompanies  successful 
targeting  completes  both  of  their  active  sites,  resulting 
in  hydrolysis  of  both  bound  GTPs.  Dissociation  of  the 
γ-phosphates reduces the affinity of SRP for its receptor. 
The net result is that they dissociate from each other as 
well as from the ribosome and nascent chain. Dissocia-
tion  of  SRP54  from  its  binding  site  near  the  ribosome 
exit  tunnel  now  allows  the  protein-conducting  Sec61 
channel to bind at the same site. The ribosome is now 
successfully  targeted  to  and  docked  at  the  translocon, 
providing  an  opportunity  for  subsequent  translocation 
or membrane insertion of the nascent polypeptide. SRP 
is released into the cytoplasm for another round of tar-
geting,  while  SRP  receptor  diffuses  away  in  the  mem-
brane to capture the next SRP–ribosome complex.

The  targeting  cycle  thus  delivers  the  ribosome–
nascent  chain  complex  to  the  translocon  and  recycles 
the  SRP  and  SRP  receptor.  GTP  binding  and  hydrolysis 

CHAPTER 20  n  Endoplasmic Reticulum 

337

SRP-Receptor

G

T

P

G

T

P

SRP-R

SRP

SRP

Binding completes both active sites
resulting in hydrolysis of both GTPs,

dissociation & resumption of translation

Pause

Unit binds to

SRP receptor on
ER membrane

GDP

GTP

SRP
released

G

G

T

T

P

P

G

D

P

N

 

A

mRNA

Small

ribosomal
subunit

B

Ribosome
binds mRNA

Large

ribosomal
subunit

Translation

begins

Polypeptide
chain

G

T

P

SRP

Translation

Signal sequence

N

SRP binds signal

and ribosome, slowing
polypeptide translation

G

T

P

CYTOPLASM

ER LUMEN

G

D

P

SRP
receptor

TRAP

TRAM

Sec61 channel

GDP

GTP

BiP

ATP
ADP

BiP ratchets
as translation continues

FIGURE 20.6  COTRANSLATIONAL PATHWAY FROM RIBOSOME TO THE ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM LUMEN. A, Signal recognition 
particle (SRP) and SRP-receptor use a cycle of recruitment and GTP hydrolysis to control delivery of a ribosome with an messenger RNA (mRNA) 
and nascent chain with a signal sequence to the Sec61 translocon in the ER membrane. SRP binds a signal sequence emerging from a ribosome 
and slows polypeptide translation. SRP also directs the ribosome to the SRP-receptor on the ER membrane, where the ribosome docks on the 
translocon  and  continues  translation.  B,  Ribbon  diagrams  of  two  views  of  the  complex  between  SRP  and  SRP-receptor  showing  the  close 
association between the two GTPase domains, which activates GTPase hydrolysis. ADP, adenosine diphosphate; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; 
BiP, binding immunoglobulin protein; GDP, guanosine diphosphate; TRAM, translocating chain-associating membrane protein; TRAP, translocon-
associated protein. 

by SRP and SRP receptor provide directionality and order 
to the sequence of reactions that bring the nascent chain 
to the translocation channel.

Sec61 Complex: The Protein-Conducting Channel
The nascent chain emerging from the ribosome engages 
and  opens  the  translocon  for  transport  across  the  ER 
membrane. The translocon is an evolutionarily conserved 
complex  of  three  transmembrane  proteins  associated 
with  proteins  inside  the  ER.  The  eukaryotic  Sec61 
complex  consists  of  an  α  subunit  with  10  transmem-
brane  helices  and  smaller β  and γ  subunits  with  single 
helices crossing the membrane (Fig. 20.7). The subunits 
of the homologous bacterial and archaeal SecY complex 
are called SecY, SecE, and SecG (see Fig. 18.9D).

The  Sec61  complex  provides  a  high-affinity  docking 
site  for  the  ribosome–nascent  chain  complex.  Addi-
tional factors thought to facilitate binding of the signal 
sequence  to  the  Sec61  complex  include  the  protein  

TRAM (translocating chain-associating membrane protein) 
and  the  protein  complex  TRAP  (translocon-associated 
protein).  Bacterial  SecY  interacts  with  fully  translated 
peptides  associated  with  the  chaperone  SecA  (see  
Fig. 18.9A).

Prokaryotic  and  eukaryotic  translocons  have  nearly 
identical  structures.  The  10  transmembrane  helices  of 
Sec61α are arranged around a narrow, hourglass-shaped 
pore that is most constricted near the center of the lipid 
bilayer (Fig. 20.7B). A seam between two pairs of helices, 
termed the lateral gate, can potentially separate to open 
the  pore  toward  the  membrane  like  a  clamshell.  The 
small  accessory  subunits  form  supporting  transmem-
brane helices.

Interactions  with  the  ribosome  and  signal  sequence 
control opening of the Sec61 translocon across or toward 
the  membrane.  Without  these  ligands  translocons  are 
quiescent with closed pores and lateral gates. A ring of 
hydrophobic side chains fills the pore and a short helix 

338 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

FIGURE  20.7  STRUCTURE  OF  THE  SEC61  PROTEIN-CONDUCTING  TRANSLOCON.  Structures  were  determined  by  cryoelectron 
microscopy of single particles. A, Cross section through the large subunit of a ribosome with a nascent chain in the ribosome exit tunnel and 
Sec61 associated with the exit pore. B–E, Ribbon diagrams and interpretative drawings of the three functional states of Sec61: B–C, quiescent 
without a translocating polypeptide and with a plug in the closed channel; D, primed while bound to a ribosome; and E, engaged with a bound 
signal sequence helix (in blue), an open channel and open lateral gate. (A, From Voorhees RM, Fernandez IS, Scheres SH, Hedge RS. Structure 
of  the  mammalian  ribosome-Sec61  complex  to  3.4  Å  resolution.  Cell.  2014;157;1632–1643.  B–E,  From  Voorhees  RM,  Hegde  RS.  Toward  a 
structural understanding of co-translational protein translocation. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2016;41:91–99.)

called  a  plug  further  blocks  the  channel.  When  the 
cytoplasmic loops of Sec61α interact with the ribosome, 
the translocon undergoes a subtle conformational change 
to  a  “primed”  state  that  contains  a  partially  opened 
lateral gate.

A  signal  sequence  emerging  from  the  ribosome 
exploits  this  cracked  lateral  gate  to  fully  open  the 
channel.  The  signal  sequence  entering  the  pore  of  the 
translocon forms an α-helix that binds to a hydrophobic 
patch in the lateral gate. The bound signal sequence is 
oriented with its N-terminus toward the cytoplasm, so it 
forms  a  loop  in  the  pore  of  the  translocon  extending 
back  to  the  exit  site  on  the  ribosome.  This  interaction 
leads to parting of the lateral gate, which is held open 
by the bound signal peptide. A parted lateral gate widens 
the translocon pore, leading to displacement of the plug 
in preparation for protein translocation.

The ability to recognize signal sequences allows Sec61 
to  discriminate  substrates  for  translocation  from  other 
proteins. Traditionally, this was thought to be a constitu-
tive  process  predetermined  by  the  sequences  on  the 
substrate. However, various cell types differ in the effi-
ciency  with  which  they  recognize  particular  signal 
sequences. This can be explained if additional proteins 
at the translocation site influence signal sequence recog-
nition. For example, proteins Sec62, Sec63, p180, p34, 
TRAM, and TRAP complex may stimulate or inhibit the 
translocation of selected substrates by recognizing diver-
sity  within  the  signal  sequence.  Selective  changes  in 
expression  or  modifications  of  these  accessory  compo-
nents in different cell types could then affect the outcome 
of translocation for different substrates.

Polypeptides  can  take  one  of  two  possible  paths 
through the engaged translocon as translation proceeds. 
Secretory  proteins  and  soluble  parts  of  membrane  pro-
teins  move  through  the  translocon  pore  into  the  ER 
lumen.  Transmembrane  domains  of  integral  membrane 
proteins  leave  the  translocon  pore  through  the  lateral 
gate to enter the hydrophobic environment of the lipid 
bilayer. Elongation of the polypeptide chain by the ribo-
some provides the energy for the nascent chain to pass 
through  the  channel  across  the  membrane  or  into  the 
bilayer.  Thus,  the  energy  used  for  protein  synthesis  is 
harnessed to drive translocation of the polypeptide to its 
destination.

Translocation of Soluble Proteins Into the Lumen of 
the Endoplasmic Reticulum
Soluble  proteins  destined  for  secretion  or  retention  in 
the ER lumen are translocated through the central pore 
of  the  translocon  (Fig.  20.8A).  The  small,  flexible  side 
chains lining the pore fit snugly around a translocating 
peptide, preventing passage of ions or other small mol-
ecules.  Thus  the  nascent  chain  has  a  continuous  path 
from  the  peptidyl  transferase  center  in  the  ribosome, 
through the translocation channel into the ER. Inside the 
ER  lumen  binding  and  release  of  chaperones  such  as 
binding immunoglobulin protein (BiP) may help translo-
cate the polypeptide across the membrane, although this 
has not been firmly established.

Once  the  translocating  polypeptide  has  grown  to 
approximately 150 residues, a signal peptidase associ-
ated with the translocon in the ER lumen cleaves off the 
signal sequence. After signal peptide cleavage, the new 

 

CHAPTER 20  n  Endoplasmic Reticulum 

339

A. Protein released in lumen

Start-transfer sequence

Stop-transfer sequence

CYTOPLASM

Sec61
channel

ER LUMEN

Signal
sequence

Signal cleaved,
translocation

continues

Signal degraded,

peptide folded

N

Mature protein

B. Single transmembrane protein with C-terminus in cytoplasm (type 1)

C

Translocation

N-terminal start-transfer
peptide in Sec61 channel

C. GPI-anchored protein

Translocation

N-terminal start-transfer
peptide in Sec61 channel

Stop-transfer

sequence stops

in channel

Stop-transfer

sequence stops

in channel

Signal

peptide cleaved,
protein released

from channel

N

Mature
transmembrane
protein

C

N

Start-transfer

peptide cleaved,
protein released

from channel

Protein is
cleaved and
transferred

to a GPI

lipid anchor

C

N

D. Single transmembrane protein with
     N-terminus in cytoplasm (type 2)

N

E. Two transmembrane-containing protein
     with N-terminus in cytoplasm

C

N

N

Translocation

Internal start-transfer
peptide in Sec61 channel

F. Multiple transmembrane protein

Stop-transfer

sequence stops

translocation

Internal start-transfer
peptide in Sec61 channel

Completed

protein released

from channel

Translocation

Completed

protein released

from channel

C

Internal start-transfer
peptide in Sec61 channel

N

N

N

N

Lateral transfer
from the channel

to the bilayer

C

Process repeated until all

start-transfer and stop-transfer
peptides are inserted into bilayer

FIGURE 20.8  COMPARISON OF PATHWAYS USING SEC61 TO TARGET PROTEINS TO THE ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM LUMEN 
OR MEMBRANE. The drawings show how signal sequences, start-transfer sequences and stop-transfer sequences target protein to Sec61 
channel and then to the lumen and membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). GPI, glycosylphosphatidylinositol. 

340 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

N-terminus of the growing polypeptide continues to pass 
through  the  translocon  until  it  is  released  into  the  ER 
lumen.  The  remaining  cleaved  signal  peptide  either  is 
degraded  or  may  have  other  functions  elsewhere  in  
the cell.

Insertion of Membrane Proteins Into  
the Endoplasmic Reticulum Bilayer
Most  proteins  destined  for  insertion  into  the  ER  mem-
brane bilayer use the Sec61 protein-conducting channel, 
which  recognizes  and  inserts  their  transmembrane 
domains  into  the  membrane  bilayer.  The  machinery  
for  targeting  and  insertion  is  physically  coupled  to  the 
ribosome near the polypeptide exit tunnel, so the trans-
membrane  domains  are  shielded  from  the  aqueous 
cytoplasm.

Transmembrane  proteins  are  categorized  as  type  1, 
type  2,  or  polytopic  depending  on  the  orientation  of 
their  transmembrane  domains  across  the  lipid  bilayer 
(Fig. 20.8). This orientation is established during transla-
tion  and  maintained  as  the  protein  moves  to  its  final 
destination in the cell by membrane budding and fusion 
events (see Chapters 21 and 22).

The N-terminal signal sequence of type 1 transmem-
brane proteins initiates translocation, similar to soluble 
proteins by engaging two helices adjacent to the lateral 
gate (Fig. 20.8B). As translation proceeds, a stop-transfer 
signal  (usually  a  transmembrane  domain)  stops  the 
transfer  process  before  the  polypeptide  chain  is  com-
pletely  translocated.  After  the  signal  sequence  (also 
called  a  start-transfer  signal)  is  cleaved  off  by  the  ER 
signal peptidase, the transmembrane segment slides out 
of the translocon through the lateral exit site. This leaves 
the protein oriented with its N-terminus in the ER lumen, 
its transmembrane segment spanning the ER membrane 
and its C-terminus in the cytoplasm.

Some  type  1  proteins,  called  glycosylphosphati-
dylinositol (GPI)-anchored proteins, exchange their 
C-terminal  transmembrane  segment  for  an  oligosaccha-
ride  anchored  to  the  lipid  phosphatidylinositol  (Fig. 
20.8C; also see Fig. 13.10). An enzyme in the ER lumen 
cleaves  off  the  transmembrane  segment  and  transfers  
the  new  C-terminus  to  a  preassembled  GPI  membrane 
anchor.  Many  cell-surface  proteins  are  attached  to  the 
plasma  membrane  in  this  manner.  This  allows  them  to 
be readily released from the cell when specific phospho-
lipases  in  the  plasma  membrane  are  activated.  For 
example, during sperm capacitation, many GPI-anchored 
proteins are cleaved and released from the sperm plasma 
membrane.  This  reorganization  of  the  sperm’s  cell 
surface is essential for a sperm to fertilize an egg.

Type 2 transmembrane proteins use a transmem-
brane  domain  in  the  middle  of  the  polypeptide  as  an 
internal  signal  sequence  (Fig.  20.8D).  Once  such  an 
internal signal sequence emerges from a ribosome, it is 
recognized  by  SRP  and  brought  to  the  ER  membrane, 

where it serves as a start-transfer signal to initiate protein 
translocation. When the protein is fully synthesized, the 
start-transfer signal, which is not cleaved off, slides out 
of  the  translocation  channel  into  the  surrounding  lipid 
bilayer, where it serves as a transmembrane anchor.

Polytopic proteins that span the membrane multiple 
times  (such  as  ion  channels  and  carriers)  use  multiple 
stop-transfer signals, none of which are cleaved by signal 
peptidases  (Fig.  20.8E–F).  SRP  is  probably  required  to 
target  the  first  signal  sequence  to  the  ER  membrane. 
Thereafter,  the  dynamics  of  the  channel  must  accom-
modate sequences that specify translocation of loops in 
the cytoplasm or lumen alternating with the transfer of 
transmembrane segments to the lipid bilayer.

Association of Lipid-Anchored Proteins With the 
Cytoplasmic Surface of the Endoplasmic Reticulum
Many classes of lipid-anchored proteins, including N-Ras 
and  H-Ras  GTPases,  are  targeted  from  the  cytoplasm 
to  the  cytoplasmic  leaflet  of  the  ER  bilayer  by  post-
translational  modification  of  a  C-terminal  CAAX  motif 
(where C is cysteine, A is any aliphatic residue, and X is 
any residue). First, a soluble enzyme attaches a farnesyl 
or geranylgeranyl lipid to the cysteine residue in CAAX 
with  a  thioether  bond,  anchoring  the  protein  to  the 
cytoplasmic surface of the ER membrane. Then, a prenyl-
CAAX protease in the ER bilayer cleaves off the AAX resi-
dues, leaving the prenylcysteine as the new C terminus. 
Finally, another enzyme in the ER bilayer methylates the 
carboxyl group of the modified cysteine. Lipid-anchored 
proteins  reach  the  plasma  membrane  by  following  the 
secretory  pathway  out  of  the  ER.  One  or  two  other 
cysteine residues upstream of the CAAX motif of N-Ras 
and H-Ras can be tagged with palmitic acid via a labile  
thioester bond.

Posttranslational Translocation by  
Sec61 Translocons
Proteins targeted for posttranslational translocation into 
the ER have signal sequences and use the Sec61 translo-
con  for  entering  the  ER,  but  use  proteins  other  than  
SRP  or  SRP  receptor  to  guide  them  to  the  translocons 
after  being  released  from  the  ribosome  into  the  cyto-
plasm (Fig. 20.9). Posttranslational translocation is most 
common  in  yeast  and  bacteria.  Mammalian  cells  use  it 
primarily  for  translocating  small  proteins  (<200  amino 
acids), which are inefficiently recognized by SRP, because 
their signal sequence is exposed only briefly (or not at 
all) before translation is complete. Specific chaperones 
including  the  cytoplasmic  adenosine  triphosphatase 
(ATPase)  TRC-40  and  calmodulin  hold  these  polypep-
tides  in  a  largely  unfolded  state  in  the  cytoplasm  until 
they  are  delivered  to  the  tetrameric  Sec62/63  protein 
complex in the ER membrane. There the signal sequence 
engages and opens the Sec61 channel in a fashion similar 
to cotranslational translocation.

 

CHAPTER 20  n  Endoplasmic Reticulum 

341

CYTOPLASM

Ribosome releases
chaperone-bound
polypeptide

Polypeptide-chaperone
complex associates
with translocon

Sec63

ER LUMEN

Sec62
complex
Sec61
channel

Translocation
begins

BiP

BiP ratchets
polypeptide
into lumen

ADP

ATP

FIGURE  20.9  POSTTRANSLATIONAL  PATHWAY  FROM  RIBOSOME  TO  ENDOPLASMIC  RETICULUM  LUMEN.  As  the  polypeptide 
(purple thread) emerges from the ribosome in the cytoplasm, it is bound by chaperones (green) that prevent it from aggregating and guide it to 
the Sec62/63 protein complex at the ER membrane. After signal sequence (blue) engages with the Sec61 protein-conducting channel, cycles of 
BiP binding to and release in the lumen pull the polypeptide across the membrane. 

Because protein synthesis is already complete, another 
energy source is exploited to move these polypeptides 
through  the  translocon  into  the  ER.  BiP,  a  luminal  ER 
chaperone of the heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70) family, 
binds the substrate in the ER lumen, thereby preventing 
it from sliding back into the cytoplasm. Repeated rounds 
of substrate binding and release, driven by ATP hydroly-
sis,  allow  BiP  to  act  as  a  molecular  ratchet  to  bias  the 
diffusion of the substrate into the lumen. The transmem-
brane protein Sec63 helps recruit BiP to the translocon 
and  regulates  BiP  ATPase  activity.  Thus,  the  peptide  is 
“pulled”  across  the  membrane  from  the  luminal  side 
instead  of  being  “pushed”  from  the  cytoplasmic  side,  
as  during  cotranslational  translocation.  Other  Hsp70 
family  members  function  similarly  during  import  of 
proteins  into  mitochondria  and  chloroplasts  (see  Figs. 
18.3 and 18.6).

Tail-Anchored Proteins
Tail-anchored proteins represent approximately 3% to 
5%  of  all  membrane  proteins.  They  have  diverse  roles  
in  membrane  biogenesis  and  traffic,  as  well  as  in  cell 
metabolism (Table 20.3). Tail-anchored proteins include 
SNARE (soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attach-
ment protein receptor) proteins, such as syntaxins and 
synaptobrevins,  which  are  responsible  for  membrane 
fusion events within cells (see Chapter 21); Sec61γ and 
Sec61β  of  the  translocation  channel;  cytochrome  b5, 
which participates in lipid metabolism; and Bcl and Bax, 
which are found on the mitochondrial outer membrane 
and regulate apoptosis.

Tail-anchored  proteins  are  inserted  into  membranes 
by a posttranslational translocation pathway that avoids 
the  Sec61  translocation  channel.  A  single  stretch  of 
hydrophobic amino acids close to the C-terminus anchors 
these  proteins  in  the  bilayer  with  only  two  to  three 
hydrophilic  residues  in  the  ER  lumen  and  N-terminal 

TABLE 20.3  Examples of Tail-Anchored Proteins
Protein
ER-Inserted
Target SNAREs (syntaxin)

Target membrane for vesicle 

Function

Vesicle SNAREs 

(synaptobrevin)

Target membrane for vesicle 

insertion

insertion

Giantin
Sec61γ, Sec61β
Cytochrome b5
Heme oxygenases I and II
UBC 6
Mitochondrial-Inserted
Bcl-2
Bax
Tom5, Tom6

Golgi tethering protein
ER protein translocation
Heme metabolism
Heme metabolism
ER degradation

Apoptosis
Apoptosis
Mitochondrial protein translocation

ER, endoplasmic reticulum; SNARE, soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive 
factor attachment protein receptor.

functional  domains  in  the  cytoplasm  (Fig.  20.10).  Tail-
anchored  proteins  lack  an  N-terminal  signal  sequence 
and their membrane-interacting region is so close to the 
C-terminus  that  it  emerges  from  the  ribosome  only  on 
termination  of  translation.  Consequently,  tail-anchored 
proteins  do  not  bind  to  SRP,  which  recognizes  only 
signal peptides or transmembrane domains as part of a 
nascent polypeptide chain (ie, still attached to the ribo-
some). Once in the cytoplasm tail-anchored proteins are 
not  directed  posttranslationally  to  the  Sec61  channel. 
Instead,  a  cytoplasmic  ATPase  and  membrane  proteins 
insert  the  hydrophobic  C-terminal  anchor  into  the  
membrane (Fig. 20.10).

First the hydrophobic transmembrane domain of tail-
anchored proteins binds to Get3, a homodimeric, cyto-
plasmic  ATPase  with  an α  helical  domain.  With  bound 

342 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

Ribosome

TMDTM
MD

ogn

Recognition
R
Reco
ition
n
ATP ATP
ATP ATP
+
+
+
C

Get3

++
++

Recycling
Rec
cyclinn
ng
c

Targeting
Targetin
ng
n

Pre-targeting
complex

CYTOPLASM

Release
Relea
aase

ADP

ADP

ER OR MITOCHONDRIAL
OR CHLOROPLAST LUMEN

ADP ADP
+
++
C
++
++

Integration

Get1-Get2

+
+
+
+
++
+
C

FIGURE  20.10  TARGETING OF TAIL-ANCHORED PROTEINS 
TO  THE  ER  OR  MITOCHONDRIAL  MEMBRANE.  Tail-anchored 
proteins have a short, hydrophobic transmembrane domain flanked on 
one  or  both  sides  by  positively  charged  residues.  After  the  protein 
emerges from the ribosome, the polypeptide binds to a pretargeting 
complex that direct it to a dimer of the Get3 adenosine triphosphatase 
(ATPase).  Hydrolysis  of  ATP  closes  the  transmembrane  helix  in  a 
hydrophobic groove for delivery to the target membrane bilayer. ATP 
binding releases the tail-anchored protein for insertion into the target 
membrane bilayer. After insertion, the majority of the protein remains 
in  the  cytoplasm  with  only  the  C-terminal  charged  residues  in  the 
lumen. ADP, adenosine diphosphate; TMD, transmembrane domain. 
(Modified  from  Hegde  RS,  Keenan  RJ.  Tail-anchored  membrane 
protein insertion into the endoplasmic reticulum. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 
2011;12:787–798. See Protein Data Bank [www.rcsb.org] files 4XTR, 
4XVU, and 4XWO.)

ATP the Get3 subunits adopt a conformation, exposing 
a  large  hydrophobic  groove  for  binding  hydrophobic 
substrates. While the target protein is bound to Get3 in 
the  cytoplasm,  additional  cofactors  help  maintain  the 
solubility of its hydrophobic tail and prevent binding to 
other chaperones.

Next the complex of Get3 with bound tail-anchored 
protein  is  recognized  by  the  Get1–Get2  receptor  on  
the  ER  surface  (Fig.  20.10).  This  interaction  promotes 
hydrolysis of ATP bound to Get3 and release of the tail-
anchored protein into the membrane bilayer. This two-
step  mechanism  is  reminiscent  of  the  SRP-mediated 
cotranslational  insertion  pathway,  which  also  involves 
nucleotide  binding  (albeit  GTP)  followed  by  receptor 
interaction.  Finally,  Get3  dissociates  from  Get1  and  is 
recycled  back  to  the  cytoplasm  for  handling  the  next 
substrate. Insertion of a tail-anchored protein in a bilayer 
translocates many fewer C-terminal hydrophilic residues 
across  the  membrane  than  the  translocation  of  most 
other transmembrane and soluble proteins.

Protein Folding and Oligomerization in 
the Endoplasmic Reticulum
Once  nascent  polypeptides  translocate  across  the  ER 
bilayer through the Sec61 translocon, they emerge into 
the  ER  lumen  and  interact  with  a  wealth  of  proteins. 
Those  proteins  remove  the  signal  sequence,  add  oligo-
saccharides,  and  direct  folding  by  catalyzing  disulfide 

bond  formation  and  oligomerization.  One  such  factor, 
the Hsp70 chaperone BiP, binds unfolded polypeptides 
by  interacting  with  hydrophobic  regions  that  are  nor-
mally sequestered in the protein interior (see Fig. 12.12). 
These  interactions  prevent  newly  synthesized  proteins 
from  aggregating  and  promote  their  folding.  Cycles  of 
BiP binding also bias the movement of the polypeptide 
into  the  ER  lumen  but  not  back  out.  Another  enzyme 
called oligosaccharyl transferase adds core sugars to 
the growing chain when an asparagine in an appropriate 
sequence context is detected. A fourth enzyme, protein 
disulfide isomerase (PDI), catalyzes disulfide exchange 
between  sulfhydryl  groups  on  cysteines  allowing  the 
formation of disulfide (S-S) bonds. The oxidizing equiva-
lents  to  form  disulfide  bonds  flow  from  flavin  adenine 
dinucleotide (FAD) through two pairs of cysteines of an 
ER membrane protein that oxidizes a pair of cysteines in 
the active site of PDI. PDI then mediates correct forma-
tion of disulfide bonds by forming and breaking mixed 
disulfides  with  polypeptide  substrates  until  the  correct 
disulfides are formed.

Retention of these folding factors in the ER depends 
on  the  sequence  lysine–aspartic  acid–glutamic  acid–
leucine (KDEL) at the C-termini of these enzymes. If this 
sequence is deleted, the mutated protein is transported 
to  the  Golgi  apparatus  and  secreted  from  the  cell. 
Remarkably,  addition  of  KDEL  to  a  normally  secreted 
protein results in its accumulation in the ER.

Folding  and  assembly  factors  interact  with  proteins 
throughout  their  lifetimes  in  the  ER.  The  following  
sections  describe  the  machinery  that  controls  protein 
folding and assembly in the ER, mechanisms for sensing 
correctly  folded  or  misfolded  proteins,  and  pathways  
for  disposing  of  misfolded  proteins  that  accumulate  in  
the ER.

N-Linked Glycosylation
Most proteins synthesized in association with the ER are 
glycoproteins  with  covalently  attached  carbohydrates. 
One  class  of  oligosaccharides  is  added  to  asparagine  
residues during translocation of the protein into the ER 
(Fig.  20.11).  These  asparagine  or  N-linked  oligosac-
charides  form  flexible  hydrated  branches  that  can 
extend  3 nm  from  the  polypeptide.  They  frequently 
make up a sizable portion of the mass of a glycoprotein 
and  cover  a  large  fraction  of  its  surface.  These  polar 
oligosaccharides  make  proteins  more  hydrophilic  and 
less  likely  to  aggregate.  By  avoiding  aggregation,  the 
protein  has  a  higher  probability  of  folding  correctly. 
Once correctly folded, the protein can leave the ER and 
move through the secretory pathway, where the sugars 
can be modified further. The great diversity of oligosac-
charides  found  on  secreted  proteins  is  also  crucial  for 
their functions outside the cell.

Preformed  oligosaccharides  are  added  to  asparagine 
residues.  These  precursors  are  composed  of  14  sugars 

 

CHAPTER 20  n  Endoplasmic Reticulum 

343

CYTOPLASM

Sugars not
to scale

Dolichol
phosphate

ER LUMEN

Core mannose oligosaccharide
  linked to dolichol by a high-
  energy phosphate bond

Oligosaccharide
transferase

N

Transfer across
the ER membrane

Addition of more
mannose units

ASN

Transfer of core
oligosaccharide
to an asparagine

side chain

FIGURE 20.11  DOLICHOL PATHWAY. A core oligosaccharide consisting of mannose and N-acetylglucosamine is synthesized in the cyto-
plasm, attached through high-energy pyrophosphate bonds to dolichol in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane. Following transfer across 
the ER bilayer, the addition of sugars imported into the ER completes the core structure. The oligosaccharide-transferase complex transfers the 
completed oligosaccharide to the consensus Asn-X-Ser/Thr motif of a nascent chain as it enters the lumen of the ER. 

(three glucoses, nine mannoses, and two N-acetyl glucos-
amines)  (Glc3Man9GlcNAc2).  They  are  synthesized  in 
a stepwise fashion while attached to the ER membrane 
by  dolichol  phosphate  (a  long-chained,  unsaturated 
isoprenoid  alcohol  with  pyrophosphate  at  one  end;  
Fig.  20.11).  Assembly  of  the  oligosaccharide  precursor 
involves  14  separate  transfer  reactions:  seven  on  the 
cytoplasmic  face  of  the  ER  and  seven  in  the  lumen. 
Midway in this process, the glycolipid flips from facing 
the cytoplasm to facing the lumen of the ER. Once facing 
the  ER  lumen,  the  enzyme  oligosaccharyltransferase 
transfers the complete oligosaccharide from dolichol to 
asparagine side chains on the nascent polypeptide con-
tained  in  the  sequences  Asn-X-Ser/Thr,  where  X  is  any 
amino  acid  other  than  proline.  This  sequence  is  recog-
nized after it has emerged a distance of 12 to 14 residues 
out of the translocon into the ER lumen.

Calnexin/Calreticulin Cycle
Once  the  core  oligosaccharide  has  been  added,  the 
glycoprotein begins a cycle of modifications that help it 
achieve its fully folded state. This calnexin cycle (Fig. 
20.12) starts when glucosidases I and II remove the first 
two  glucose  residues  of  the  core  glycan.  The  resulting 
monoglucosylated  transmembrane  or  soluble  proteins 
bind  to  calnexin,  a  type  I  transmembrane  protein  in 
the  ER  lumen  (Fig.  20.12).  Monoglucosylated  soluble 
proteins  also  bind  to  calreticulin,  a  soluble  protein 
in  the  ER  lumen  similar  to  calnexin.  Both  are  mono-
meric, calcium-binding proteins related to sugar-binding 
lectin  proteins  from  legumes.  Binding  to  calnexin  or 
calreticulin prevents glycoproteins from aggregating and 
exposes them to glycoprotein to ERp57, a thiol-disulfide 

oxidoreductase,  closely  related  to  PDI.  ERp57  bound 
to  calnexin  and  calreticulin  catalyzes  intramolecular 
disulfide bond interchange during protein folding.

Once  glucosidase  II  removes  the  remaining  glucose 
residue on the core glycan, the glycoprotein is released 
from  calnexin/ERp57.  The  glycoprotein  is  now  free  to 
leave the ER unless it is recognized by a soluble enzyme, 
uridine  diphosphate  (UDP)-Glc:glycoprotein  glucosyl-
transferase (GT). GT reglucosylates incompletely folded 
glycoproteins,  so  it  serves  as  a  folding  sensor  in  the 
cycle. When reglucosylated by GT, the glycoprotein goes 
through  another  cycle  of  binding  to  calnexin  or  calre-
ticulin.  The  glycoprotein  stays  in  the  cycle  until  it  is 
properly  folded  and  oligomerized,  at  which  point  it 
enters the secretory pathway. If the protein fails to fold 
or oligomerize properly, it is removed from the cycle by 
being  translocated  out  of  the  ER  into  the  cytoplasm, 
where  it  is  degraded.  If  participation  in  the  cycle  is 
inhibited,  for  example,  by  blocking  the  action  of  the 
glucosidases,  the  folding  efficiency  decreases.  In  this 
case,  the  glycoprotein  may  associate  with  BiP,  which 
cooperates with the calnexin cycle in helping the protein 
to fold correctly.

Many polypeptides transferred to the ER are subunits 
of multiprotein complexes that assemble before leaving 
the  ER.  Because  each  polypeptide  is  synthesized  on  a 
separate  ribosome  and  because  the  synthesis  of  the 
chains  composing  a  complex  may  be  unbalanced,  BiP 
and  other  chaperones  must  protect  hydrophobic  sur-
faces  and  promote  subunit  interactions  before  export. 
For  example,  chaperones  play  a  critical  role  in  loading 
antigenic  peptides  onto  major  histocompatibility 
complex type I proteins in the ER (see Fig. 27.8D). These 

344 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

A. Calnexin
     cycle

Translocon

Transport into
ER lumen

CYTOPLASM

ER MEMBRANE

Reverse transport
into cytoplasm
for proteasomal
degradation

UMP

Nascent
protein
chain

Unfolded
protein

S
S

Glucosidase I
Glucosidase II

G
G

S
S

H
H

UDP

UDP•

G

Glucosyl-
transferase

Correctly
folded
protein

EDEM

Incorrectly
folded
protein

Exit to
Golgi

B. Calnexin ER domain

G
G
G

Glc3Man9

Mannose core
3 Glucoses

G
Glc1Man9

Arm do

m

ain

Binding

Globular
domain
with Ca2+

C

N

Thioloxido-
reductase
(ERp57)

ER LUMEN

ER MEMBRANE

CYTOPLASM

Glucosidase II
Release

G

S
S

S
S

S
H

Man8–7

Calnexin

G

FIGURE  20.12  CALNEXIN  CYCLE  OF  PROTEIN  FOLDING  IN  THE  LUMEN  OF  THE  ER  AND  PROTEIN  DEGRADATION  FROM 
THE  ER.  A,  Glucosidases  I  and  II  rapidly  remove  two  of  three  glucoses  from  newly  synthesized,  unfolded  glycoprotein.  The  calnexin-
thioloxidoreductase  complex  binds  the  monoglucosylated  protein.  Glucosidase  II  removes  the  remaining  glucose,  releasing  the  protein.  If  the 
released  protein  is  folded,  it  can  exit  the  ER.  If  unfolded,  it  is  recognized  by  glucosyltransferase  and  reglucosylated  so  that  it  reenters  the 
folding cycle until folding is complete, or it enters the degradation pathway by interacting with EDEM (ER degradation-enhancing α-mannosidase-
like  protein)  and  a  retrograde  translocation  channel,  which  deliver  the  unfolded  polypeptide  to  the  proteasome  for  degradation.  Thioloxidore-
ductases  catalyze  rearrangements  of  disulfide  bonds  during  folding.  (Glc,  glucose;  Man,  mannose;  UDP,  uridine  diphosphate;  UMP,  uridine 
monophosphate.)  B,  Three-dimensional  structure  of  calnexin  showing  a  globular,  lectin-binding  domain  and  an  extended  arm  composed  of 
four  repeat  modules  that  folds  around  a  sugar  residue  after  it  binds  to  the  globular  domain. 

chaperones  also  protect  cell  surface  receptors  and 
secreted proteins from binding potential ligands that are 
also imported into the ER and that could activate them 
prematurely.

Protein Degradation in the Endoplasmic 
Reticulum and the Unfolded  
Protein Response
Protein Degradation in Endoplasmic Reticulum
Improperly  folded  polypeptides,  excess  subunits  of 
oligomeric  assemblies,  or  incorrectly  assembled  oligo-
mers are degraded rather than being exported from the 
ER  (Fig.  20.12).  The  degradation  process,  termed  ER-
associated  degradation  (ERAD),  prevents  accumula-
tion  of  unsalvageable,  misfolded  proteins  in  the  ER. 
Misfolded  glycoproteins  are  recognized,  retrotranslo-
cated across the ER membrane to the cytoplasm, ubiqui-
tylated  (see  Fig.  23.3),  and  then  degraded  by  the 
proteasome in the cytoplasm.

The  ERAD  mechanism  distinguishes  misfolded  or 
unassembled  glycoprotein  subunits  from  bona  fide 
folding  intermediates  by  linking  degradation  to  the 

trimming  of  mannoses  (Fig.  20.12).  The  concentration 
of  mannosidases  in  the  ER  is  low,  so  the  terminal 
mannoses of the core oligosaccharide are unlikely to be 
trimmed  from  newly  synthesized  proteins  if  they  fold 
promptly. On the other hand, if folding is prolonged, the 
terminal  glucose  and  mannose  residues  are  lost  from  
the core oligosaccharide making them a substrate for a 
membrane-bound  ER  protein  called  EDEM  (for  “ER 
degradation-enhancing  α-mannosidase-like  protein”). 
EDEM directs the glycoprotein to the retrotranslocation 
channel  for  extraction  to  the  cytoplasm.  Sec61  is  one 
candidate  for  the  retrotranslocon,  but  the  nature  and 
mechanism of this pathway are still being investigated. 
In  the  cytoplasm  the  Bag6  complex  (comprised  of  
Bag6, TRC35α, and ubl4A) prevents aggregation of these 
proteins  until  they  are  ubiquitinated  and  degraded  by 
proteasomes.

Sometimes  proteins  with  signal  sequences  fail  to 
translocate into the ER and are mislocalized to the cyto-
plasm.  This  can  happen  if  there  are  mutations  in  the 
signal  sequence,  certain  stresses,  or  intrinsic  inefficien-
cies  in  their  translocation.  The  Bag6  complex  and  pro-
teasomes dispose of these proteins.

 

CHAPTER 20  n  Endoplasmic Reticulum 

345

A. ATF6 pathway

B. IRE1 pathway

C.  PERK pathway

2. S1P and S2P proteases
    cleave AFT6 yielding
    a cytosolic fragment

1. With stress, BiP binds
    to unfolded proteins
    releasing itself from
    IRE1

1. With stress, PERK
    phosphorylates
    translation initiation
    factor 2 (eIF2␣)

1. With stress, membrane-
    bound AFT6 transits
    from ER to Golgi

2. IRE1
    homodimerizes

3. IRE1 dimer binds
    to, then splices
    XBP1 mRNA

2. eIF2␣ attenuates
    translation to reduce
    number of unfolded
    proteins in the ER

3. ATF6 fragment migrates
    to nucleus to activate
    transcription of
    UPR genes

NUCLEUS

4. Mature XBP1 mRNA encodes
    a transcription factor whose
    product activates
    UPR target genes

FIGURE 20.13  UNFOLDED PROTEIN RESPONSE (UPR) PATHWAYS TO STRESS IN THE LUMEN OF THE ENDOPLASMIC RETICU-
LUM (ER). A, ATF6 (activating transcription factor 6) pathway. B, IRE1 (inositol requiring 1) pathway. C, PERK (PKR-like endoplasmic reticulum 
kinase) pathway. mRNA, messenger RNA. 

Stress Responses in the Endoplasmic Reticulum
Conditions  that  flood  the  ER  with  excess  protein  or 
result in accumulation of misfolded proteins trigger the 
unfolded protein response (UPR; Fig. 20.13). Essen-
tially, any condition in which protein import exceeds the 
protein-folding  capacity  of  the  ER  triggers  the  UPR: 
misfolding of mutant proteins, inhibition of ER glycosyl-
ation (eg, by the drug tunicamycin), inhibition of disulfide 
formation (by reducing agents), or even overproduction 
of normal proteins. To compensate for these events, this 
stress-induced signaling pathway upregulates genes that 
are  required  to  synthesize  the  entire  ER,  including  its 
folding machinery. In yeast, the UPR activates more than 
300  genes  involved  with  all  aspects  of  ER  function, 
including  lipid  synthesis,  protein  translocation,  protein 
folding, glycosylation, and degradation, as well as export 
to and retrieval from the Golgi apparatus. Developmental 
programs  in  metazoans  may  work  through  the  same 
genetic  controls  to  determine  the  abundance  of  ER  in 
differentiated  cells,  producing,  for  example,  extensive 
ER in secretory cells such as plasma, liver, and pancreatic 
acinar cells.

The  UPR  depends  on  three  ER  transmembrane  pro-
teins  that  sense  and  respond  to  stress  in  the  ER: ATF6 
(activating transcription factor 6); IRE1 (inositol requir-
ing 1); and PERK/PEK (PKR-like endoplasmic reticulum 
kinase/pancreatic  eIF2a  kinase)  (Fig.  20.13).  Each  of 
these proteins has a different mechanism but all initiate 
signaling pathways that regulate the production of pro-
teins required for ER function. This allows cells to adjust 

the  capacity  of  the  ER  to  promote  protein  folding 
depending on the demand. Metazoan cells have all three 
pathways, but yeast have only IRE1.

Under normal conditions the concentration of BiP in 
the  ER  lumen  exceeds  the  concentration  of  unfolded 
proteins, so free BiP is available to bind to the luminal 
domains  of  three  ER  transmembrane  proteins,  ATF6, 
IRE1 and PERK (PKR-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase). 
These  interactions  with  BiP  retain  ATF6  in  the  ER  and 
prevent  the  dimerization  of  IRE1  and  PERK,  keeping 
them inactive.

If  unfolded  proteins  in  the  lumen  of  the  ER  bind  to 
all of the BiP, IRE1 is free to dimerize. This activates the 
endoribonuclease activity of the cytoplasmic domain of 
IRE1, allowing it to remove a small intron from the mes-
senger  RNA  (mRNA)  for  XBP1,  a  bZIP  (basic  leucine 
zipper)  domain–containing  transcription  factor 
(see Fig. 10.14). Removing this intron alters the transla-
tional  reading  frame  of  XBP1  allowing  the  mRNA  to 
encode a potent transcriptional activator of genes for ER 
proteins.

Similarly,  without  free  BiP  in  the  ER  lumen,  PERK 
dimerizes  and  phosphorylates  eukaryotic  translation 
initiation factor 2 (eIF2). This reduces the frequency 
of AUG codon recognition and slows the rate of transla-
tion  initiation  on  many  mRNAs.  However,  mRNAs  for 
many proteins involved in cell survival and ER functions 
are preferentially translated under these conditions.

Accumulated unfolded proteins release BiP from ATF6, 
causing ER transmembrane protein to be transported to 

346 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

the Golgi apparatus, where it is cleaved by S1P and S2P 
proteases to produce a soluble fragment that is released 
into the cytoplasm. The fragment moves to the nucleus, 
where  it  activates  the  transcription  of  target  genes, 
including XBP1.

Aspects of the UPR pathway involving IRE1 and PERK 
are also important for promoting differentiation in higher 
eukaryotic  cells.  For  example,  IRE1  is  activated  during 
B-lymphocyte  differentiation  into  a  plasma  cell  (see  
Fig.  28.9),  during  which  the  ER  expands  fivefold  to 
accommodate  the  synthesis  and  secretion  of  immuno-
globulins. Activation of the innate immune response (see 
Fig. 28.6), for example by lipopolysaccharide treatment, 
also  activates  IRE1.  PERK  activity  is  also  required  for 
B-cell differentiation and/or survival.

Diseases Linked to Protein Folding in the ER
The  ER  synthesizes  all  the  proteins  for  the  exocytic 
and  endocytic  pathways,  so  it  is  not  surprising  that 
many  diseases  result  from  proteins  failing  to  pass  ER 
quality  control.  Many  metabolic  disorders,  including 
some  lysosomal  storage  diseases  (see  Appendix  23.1), 
are  a  direct  consequence  of  key  enzymes  failing  to  be 
exported from the ER. The most common form of cystic 
fibrosis  results  from  the  inability  of  cells  to  export  a 
mutant form of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane regula-
tor to the cell surface, where it normally functions as a 
chloride channel in the respiratory system and pancreas 
(see  Fig.  17.4).  Similarly,  the  inability  of  the  liver  to 
secrete  mutated  forms  of  α1-antitrypsin  into  the  blood 
predisposes  affected  individuals  to  the  lung  disease 
emphysema. Normally, α1-antitrypsin protects tissues by 
inhibiting extracellular proteases such as elastase, which 
is  produced  by  neutrophils.  Mutations  causing  disease 
prevent α1-antitrypsin folding in the ER, resulting in its 
degradation.  The  resulting  deficiency  in  α1-antitrypsin 
circulating  in  the  blood  allows  elastase  to  destroy  lung 
tissue,  leading  to  emphysema.  In  severe  cases,  mutant 
forms of the protein not only fail to be exported from the 
ER  but  also  elude  degradation  pathways,  accumulating 
as insoluble aggregates that induce stress responses and  
liver failure.

In  some  conditions,  the  UPR  helps  compensate,  in 
part,  for  mutations  in  cargo  proteins.  In  congenital 
hypothyroidism, mutant thyroglobulin (the precursor 
of thyroid hormone) is not exported efficiently from the 
ER. Excess protein accumulates as insoluble aggregates 
in the ER. Feedback pathways trigger massive prolifera-
tion  of  ER  in  an  attempt  to  produce  normal  levels  of 
circulating hormone. Similarly, in mild forms of osteo-
genesis  imperfecta  (see  Chapter  32),  osteoblasts 
assemble  and  secrete  defective  procollagen  chains  for 
bone synthesis. As a result, the resulting bone tissue is 
weak. The alternative, complete loss of procollagen by 
retention and degradation of the mutant procollagen in 
the  ER,  would  be  lethal.  Faulty  ER  quality  control  may 

also contribute to diseases of the central and peripheral 
nervous systems, including Alzheimer disease.

Lipid Biosynthesis, Metabolism,  
and Transport Within the  
Endoplasmic Reticulum
ER  membranes  synthesize  all  of  the  major  classes  of 
lipids  and  their  precursors  that  are  formed  within  
cells. These include phosphoglycerides, cholesterol, and 
ceramide. ER enzymes participating in phosphoglyceride 
synthesis  have  their  active  sites  facing  the  cytoplasm, 
where  most  lipid  precursors  are  synthesized.  Synthesis 
begins with the conjugation of two activated fatty acids 
to  glycerol-3  phosphate  to  form  phosphatidic  acid, 
which can be dephosphorylated to produce diacylglyc-
erol (DAG; see Fig. 26.4). Neither phosphatidic acid nor 
DAG  is  a  major  component  of  membranes;  however, 
both  are  used  in  the  synthesis  of  the  four  major  phos-
phoglycerides:  phosphatidylcholine  (PC),  phospha-
tidylethanolamine  (PE),  phosphatidylserine  (PS), 
and  phosphatidylinositol  (PI)  (see  Fig.  13.2).  The 
most abundant phospholipids, PC and PE, are produced 
with  the  activated  head  groups,  cytidine  diphosphate 
(CDP)-choline and CDP-ethanolamine. PI synthesis is by 
a  distinct  route  using  inositol  and  CDP-DAG  produced 
from phosphatidic acid (see Fig. 26.7). PS synthesis (in 
mammalian cells) is an energy-independent exchange of 
polar head groups of PE. Head group exchange of phos-
pholipids occurs primarily in the ER but may also occur 
in other organelles.

Biosynthesis of lipids in the cytoplasmic leaflet of the 
ER creates a topologic problem by restricting membrane 
growth  to  that  side  of  the  membrane.  Individual  lipids 
move  to  the  leaflet  facing  the  ER  lumen  by  flipping 
across  the  bilayer  (Fig.  20.14).  This  transfer  across  the 
ER bilayer is much faster than in vesicles of pure lipids, 
owing  to  protein  translocators  called  flippases.  The 
flippases  in  the  ER  membrane  catalyze  movements  of 
most phospholipids in both directions without consum-
ing metabolic energy (Fig. 20.14A). Thus they distribute 
lipids  symmetrically  across  the  ER  bilayer.  These  key 
enzymes have not yet been identified.

Pumps  using  ATP  hydrolysis  as  their  energy  source 
redistribute  lipids  across  the  membrane  bilayers  of  the 
Golgi  apparatus  and  plasma  membrane  (Fig.  20.14B). 
P4-type ATPases (see Fig. 14.7; also called aminophos-
pholipid translocases) mediate fast exchange of PS and 
PE  from  the  extracellular  leaflet  to  cytoplasmic  leaflet  
of  the  plasma  membrane.  Keeping  PS  in  the  extracel-
lular  leaflet  low  is  important  because  PS  on  the  cell 
surface is a signal for macrophages to engulf apoptotic 
cells  (see  Fig.  46.7)  and  activates  blood  platelets  (see  
Fig.  30.14).  Keeping  PE  levels  high  in  the  cytoplasmic 
leaflet facilitates endocytic budding events at the plasma 
membrane  because  of  PE’s  cone-like  shape,  which 

 

CHAPTER 20  n  Endoplasmic Reticulum 

347

A. Flippase in ER

B. P4-type ATPase

ER LUMEN

Flippase

P4-type
ATPase

CELL EXTERIOR

CYTOPLASM

PE or PS

PC

ATP

ADP

Cholesterol

FIGURE 20.14  MOVEMENTS OF LIPIDS BETWEEN LEAFLETS 
OF THE MEMBRANE BILAYER. A, Uncharacterized flippases in the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) catalyze the exchange of lipids between 
leaflets  promoting  lipid  symmetry  across  the  ER  bilayer.  B,  ABC 
transporter ATPases in the plasma membrane use ATP hydrolysis to 
transfer  phosphatidylserine  (PS)  and  phosphatidylethanolamine  (PE) 
from  the  extracellular  leaflet  to  the  cytoplasmic  leaflet  of  the  plasma 
membrane. PC, phosphatidylcholine. 

expands the cytoplasmic leaflet relative to the extracel-
lular leaflet. Certain ABC transporters (see Fig. 14.10; 
also called floppases) facilitate the translocation of PC, 
glycosphingolipids,  and  cholesterol  from  the  extracel-
lular leaflet to the cytoplasmic leaflet. In liver cells, this 
process translocates lipids to the extracellular leaflet of 
the  apical  plasma  membrane  where  they  are  released 
into the bile.

Cholesterol Synthesis and Metabolism
Cholesterol is maintained in animal cells by a combina-
tion  of  de  novo  synthesis  (Fig.  20.15)  in  the  ER  and 
receptor-mediated  endocytosis  of  lipoprotein  particles 
containing esterified cholesterol (see Chapter 22). Coor-
dinated  regulation  of  these  two  processes  precisely 
maintains the physiological level of cholesterol in cellular 
membranes. Peroxisomes also may participate in aspects 
of cholesterol synthesis and metabolism.

Twenty-two  sequential  steps  are  required  to  synthe-
size  cholesterol  from  acetate  (Fig.  20.15).  Cytoplasmic 
enzymes  catalyze  the  initial  steps,  using  water-soluble 
molecules  to  produce  farnesyl-pyrophosphate  from 
acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA). An important exception 
is  the  step  going  from  3-hydroxy-3methylglutaryl  CoA 
(HMG-CoA) to mevalonate. A carefully regulated, integral 
membrane  protein  of  the  ER  (Fig.  20.15),  HMG-CoA 
reductase,  catalyzes  this  key  step.  Millions  of  people 
take drugs called statins that inhibit HMG-CoA reductase 
and  lower  cholesterol  levels  in  the  blood,  an  effective 
treatment  to  reduce  cardiovascular  disease  owing  to 
arteriosclerosis.  Enzymes  in  the  ER  bilayer  catalyze  
the subsequent condensation of farnesyl-pyrophosphate 
to  make  squalene,  and  cyclization  to  cholesterol,  pro-
gressively less-polar molecules. Although the final steps 

C2
Acetyl CoA

C6
HMG CoA

HMG CoA
reductase

2 NADPH
2 NADP

C6
Mevalonate

ATP
ADP
ATP
ADP
ATP
ADP
C5
Isopentyl PP

O

CH3 C SCoA

HO

CH2 CH2

CH3
C
OH

CH2 C

O
O–

H3C
H2C

O

C

CH2

CH2 O P O

O–

O
P
O–

O

O

Isopentyl PP

C10
Geranyl PP

H3C C
Isopentyl PP

CH3

CH3

C CH2
H

CH2 C

C CH2 O P O
H

O–

O
P
O–

O

C15
Farnesyl PP

3 Isoprene groups

Farnesyl PP

C30
Squalene 6 Isoprene groups

NADPH + O2

HO

C27
Cholesterol

CH3

CH3

CH   CH3
CH2

CH2

CH2
H3C  C  H
CH3

FIGURE  20.15  BIOSYNTHESIS  OF  CHOLESTEROL.  Choles-
terol is synthesized from acetyl coenzyme A (CoA). Synthesis of meva-
lonate  from  3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl  CoA  (HMG-CoA)  is  closely 
regulated by controlling the concentration of the enzyme, HMG-CoA 
reductase,  as  shown  in  Figure  20.16.  Five-carbon  isoprene  groups  
are  the  building  blocks  (yellow)  for  making  a  10-carbon  geranyl-
pyrophosphate 
farnesyl-pyrophosphate,  and 
30-carbon squalene intermediates. Several reactions add a hydroxyl 
group  and  join  squalene  into  four  rings  to  make  cholesterol.  NADP/
NADPH, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate. 

(PP),  a  15-carbon 

leading to cholesterol take place in the ER, cholesterol 
is  not  a  resident  ER  lipid  and  is  rapidly  exported  to 
post-ER  membranes,  including  the  plasma  membrane, 
where  it  constitutes  up  to  50%  of  the  bilayer.  Chapter 
21  discusses  the  distribution  of  cholesterol  in  different 
organelles and current ideas regarding its transport.

Feedback loops sense the cholesterol content of the 
ER membrane and regulate both the synthesis and deg-
radation  of  enzymes  that  synthesize  cholesterol  (Fig. 
20.16). High cholesterol levels inhibit the synthesis and 
stimulate  the  destruction  of  key  synthetic  enzymes.  A 

348 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

A. High cholesterol

SCAP traps SREBP
in the endoplasmic

reticulum

N

Cholesterol

C

bHLH-

zip

C

= Cholesterol-
    sensing
    segments

Destroyed by
proteasome

C

N

Cholesterol

SCAP

Insig

SREBP

HMG CoA
reductase

ER LUMEN

B. Low cholesterol

SCAP delivers SREBP

to proteases in the

Golgi apparatus
N

C

bHLH-

zip

C

bHLH-

zip

SRE

NUCLEUS

Increased
expression

of cholesterol-
synthesizing

enzymes

Insig

SCAP

Cleaves
within
bilayer

C

Cleavage 2

Site 2

protease

Site 1

protease
Cleavage 1

GOLGI LUMEN

FIGURE 20.16  CONTROL OF CHOLESTEROL BIOSYNTHESIS BY PROTEOLYSIS. A, High-cholesterol conditions. Cholesterol-sensing 
transmembrane segments (pink) of SCAP (SREBP cleavage-activation protein) retain intact SREBP (sterol regulatory element-binding protein) in 
the  endoplasmic  reticulum  (ER)  through  an  interaction  with  Insig.  Similar  cholesterol-sensing  transmembrane  segments  of  β-hydroxy-β-
methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase stimulate its destruction by proteolysis. B, Low-cholesterol conditions. Insig dissociates from 
SCAP and SREBP, allowing these molecules to move to the Golgi apparatus where the membrane-anchored site 1 serine protease cleaves the 
loop of SREBP in the lumen. Subsequently, a transmembrane zinc-protease cleaves SREBP at a second site within the bilayer, releasing the 
basic  helix-loop-helix-zip  (bHLH-zip)  transcription  factor.  This  factor  enters  the  nucleus,  where  it  activates  genes  for  cholesterol  biosynthetic 
enzymes by steroid-response elements (SREs). 

transcription factor precursor, steroid regulator element-
binding  protein  (SREBP),  controls  the  expression  of 
these genes (see Fig. 23.10). When cholesterol is abun-
dant,  SREBP  cleavage-activating  protein  (SCAP),  a 
partner protein with cholesterol-sensing transmembrane 
segments (see Fig. 23.11), retains SREBP in the ER owing 
to  interactions  with  the  protein  Insig.  When  the  mem-
brane  cholesterol  level  is  low,  SCAP  and  Insig  do  not 
interact. The SREBP–SCAP complex is therefore free to 
move  to  the  Golgi  apparatus,  where  two  successive 
proteolytic  cleavages  release  the  N-terminal  domain  of 
SREBP, a basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper transcrip-
tion factor, into the cytoplasm. (The Golgi proteases that 
are responsible for cleaving SREBP are SP1 and SP2, the 
same  ones  used  to  process  ATF6  during  the  UPR  [Fig. 
20.13].)  In  the  nucleus,  the  transcription  factor  binds 
steroid regulatory elements, enhancers for a wide range 
of  genes  encoding  enzymes  that  synthesize  cholesterol 
and other lipids, as well as low-density lipoprotein recep-
tors that take up cholesterol from outside the cell (see 
Fig.  23.10).  Cholesterol  also  regulates  degradation  of 
HMG-CoA  reductase,  which  has  cholesterol-sensing 
transmembrane  domains  similar  to  SCAP.  Abundant 
cholesterol targets HMG-CoA reductase for degradation 
by  the  proteolytic  pathway  that  disposes  of  unfolded 
proteins  through  the  proteasome  (Fig.  20.12;  also  
see  Chapter  23).  The  enzyme  acyl-CoA-cholesterol 

transferase  helps  lower  cholesterol  levels  in  the  ER 
bilayer by catalyzing the formation of cholesterol esters, 
a storage form of cholesterol.

Ceramide Synthesis
Ceramide,  the  backbone  of  all  sphingolipids  (see 
Fig.  13.3),  also  begins  its  synthesis  on  the  cytoplasmic 
face  of  ER  membranes.  It  is  made  through  sequential 
condensation  of  the  amino  acid  serine  with  two  fatty 
acids. Ceramide is transported to the Golgi apparatus by 
a  nonvesicular  pathway  (see  the  next  section),  where 
enzymes  on  the  luminal  leaflet  either  add  oligosaccha-
ride chains to form glycosphingolipids or add a choline 
head  group  to  form  sphingomyelin  (see  Fig.  13.3  and 
Chapter 21).

Lipid Movements Between Organelles
Lipids  diffuse  rapidly  in  the  plane  of  the  bilayer  and 
slowly flip-flop across the bilayer (see Chapter 13), but 
their hydrophobic nature makes free diffusion between 
adjacent  bilayers  through  the  aqueous  cytoplasm  ther-
modynamically unfavorable and very slow. Budding and 
fusion of vesicles is a major pathway for moving lipids 
between  organelles  (see  Chapter  21).  However,  lipid-
transfer proteins (LTPs) can mediate direct exchange 
of  individual  lipid  molecules  between  bilayers  at  mem-
brane contact sites (Fig. 20.17A–B). Plant LTPs are tiny 

 

CHAPTER 20  n  Endoplasmic Reticulum 

349

A LTPs

B Lipid transfer at a membrane contact site

C Autoinhibited OSBP

GOLGI LUMEN

CYTOPLASM

PI4P

Arf1-GTP

Untethered
lipid transfer
protein moves
lipids between
bilayers

Active OSBP
tethered to VAP

Cholesterol

VAP

PI4P

PH domains

FFAT
motifs

VAP
binds
FFAT
motifs

Lipid-binding

CYTOPLASM

ER LUMEN

Cholesterol

Active complex

FIGURE 20.17  MECHANISMS OF LIPID MOVEMENTS BETWEEN MEMBRANE BILAYERS. A, Cytoplasmic lipid transfer proteins bind 
membrane lipids and transfer them to other membranes. B, Model for lipid transfer at contact sites between the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and 
Golgi apparatus membranes. The VAP protein anchored to the ER binds the FFAT motif of OSBP, while the PH domain of OSBP associates with 
phosphatidylinositol (PI)-4P in the Golgi apparatus membrane. The lipid binding domains of OSBP transfer cholesterol from the ER to the Golgi 
apparatus and PI4P in the opposite direction while swinging on tethers between the two membranes. C, Domain organization of autoinhibited 
OSBP (oxysterol-binding protein). (Modified from Mesmin B, Antonny B. The counterflow transport of sterols and PI4P. Biochim Biophys Acta. 
2016;1861:940–951.)

(9-kD) proteins with a hydrophobic pocket that binds a 
range of lipids and facilitates their movements between 
membranes.

Animals  have  several  families  of  LTPs  with  different 
structures  but  related  strategies  for  binding  particular 
lipid  molecules.  Often  a  hinged  “cover”  protects  the 
lipid-binding pocket, allowing the lipid-binding domain 
to embed partially into the cytoplasmic leaflet of a mem-
brane bilayer.

Some LTPs consist of a single lipid-binding domain, so 
they  extract  a  lipid  from  a  membrane  and  then  diffuse 
through  the  cytoplasm  to  deliver  the  lipid  to  another 
membrane  like  plant  LTPs.  Other  LTPs  have  additional 
domains  (Fig.  20.17B).  Many  have  a  ligand-binding 
domain such as a PH domain (see Fig. 25.10) that binds 
phosphoinositides and an FFAT motif that binds VAP on 
the  cytoplasmic  surface  of  the  ER.  These  interactions 
bring two membranes close together (Fig. 20.4), setting 
up conditions that favor lipid transfer. For example, VAP 
in the ER anchors one end of the LTP and the PH domain 
binds phosphoinositides in the Golgi apparatus or plasma 
membrane.  The  lipid-binding  domain  exchanges  lipids 
between  the  closely  apposed  membranes  as  it  moves 
back and forth on a mobile tether (see Fig. 12.10B). The 
result is lipid exchange but not net lipid transfer.

One  example  of  an  LTP  is  ceramide  transport 
protein  (CERT),  which  extracts  newly  synthesized 
ceramide  from  the  ER  and  carries  it  to  the  Golgi 

apparatus.  Another  example  is  the  oxysterol-binding 
protein (OSBP) that binds to VAP-A in the ER and Arf1-
GTPase in the Golgi apparatus. The lipid-binding domain 
promotes the counter-flow of cholesterol from the ER to 
the Golgi apparatus and PI4P in the opposite direction. 
This helps the cell tune its cholesterol levels according 
to  the  PI4P  level  in  the  Golgi.  VAP  also  recruits  
other  proteins  with  FFAT-like  motifs  to  ER  membrane 
contact sites.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We  thank  Craig  Blackstone,  Ramanujan  Hegde,  and 
Rebecca Voorhees for their suggestions on revisions to 
this chapter.

SELECTED READINGS

Borgese N, Fasana E. Targeting pathways of C-tail-anchored proteins. 

Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011;1808:937-946.

Brambilla Pisoni G, Molinari M. Five questions (with their answers) on 

ER-associated degradation. Traffic. 2016;17:341-350.

Cherepanova  N,  Shrimal  S,  Gilmore  R.  N-linked  glycosylation  and 
homeostasis  of  the  endoplasmic  reticulum.  Curr  Opin  Cell  Biol. 
2016;41:57-65.

Chung J, Torta F, Masai K, et al. PI4P/phosphatidylserine countertrans-
port  at  ORP5-  and  ORP8-mediated  ER-plasma  membrane  contacts. 
Science. 2015;349:428-432.

Goyal  U,  Blackstone  C.  Untangling  the  web:  Mechanisms  underlying 
ER  network  formation.  Biochim  Biophys  Acta.  2013;1833:2492-
2498.

350 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

Hampton RY, Sommer T. Finding the will and the way of ERAD sub-

Shao  S,  Hegde  RS.  Membrane  protein  insertion  at  the  endoplasmic 

strate retrotranslocation. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2012;24:460-466.

reticulum. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2011;27:25-56.

Hegde  RS,  Keenan  RJ.  Tail-anchored  membrane  protein  insertion  
into  the  endoplasmic  reticulum.  Nat  Rev  Mol  Cell  Biol.  2011;12:
787-798.

Johnson  N,  Powis  K,  High  S.  Post-translational  translocation  into  the 
endoplasmic  reticulum.  Biochim  Biophys  Acta.  2013;1833:2403-
2409.

Lev  S.  Non-vesicular  lipid  transport  by  lipid-transfer  proteins  and 

beyond. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2010;11:739-750.

Voorhees RM, Hegde RS. Structures of the scanning and engaged states 

of the mammalian SRP-ribosome complex. eLife. 2015;4:e07975.

Voorhees RM, Hegde RS. Structure of the Sec61 channel opened by a 

signal sequence. Science. 2016;351:88-91.

Voorhees  RM,  Hegde  RS.  Toward  a  structural  understanding  of 
co-translational protein translocation. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2016;41:
91-99.

Walter P, Ron D. The unfolded protein response: from stress pathway 

Mesmin B, Antonny B. The counterflow transport of sterols and PI4P. 

to homeostatic regulation. Science. 2011;334:1081-1086.

Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016;1861:940-951.

Murphy SE, Levine TP. VAP, a versatile access point for the Endoplas-
mic  reticulum:  review  and  analysis  of  FFAT-like  motifs  in  the 
VAPome. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016;1861:952-961.

Phillips  MJ,  Voeltz  GK.  Structure  and  function  of  ER  membrane 
con tact sites with other organelles. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2016;17:
69-82.

Westrate  LM,  Lee  JE,  Prinz  WA,  et al.  Form  follows  function:  the 
importance  of  endoplasmic  reticulum  shape.  Annu  Rev  Biochem. 
2015;84:791-811.

C H A P T E R 

21 

Secretory Membrane System and 
Golgi Apparatus

Eukaryotic  cells  transport  newly  synthesized  proteins 

destined  for  the  extracellular  space,  the  plasma  mem-
brane,  or  the  endocytic/lysosomal  system  through  a 
series  of  functionally  distinct,  membrane-bound  com-
partments, including the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), 
Golgi apparatus, and vesicular transport intermediates. 
This  secretory  membrane  system  (Fig.  21.1)  allows 
eukaryotic  cells  to  perform  three  major  functions:  (1) 
distribute proteins and lipids synthesized in the ER to the 
cell  surface  and  other  cellular  sites;  (2)  modify  and/or 
store protein and lipid molecules after their export from 
the ER; and (3) generate and maintain the unique identi-
ties and functions of the ER, Golgi apparatus, and plasma 
membrane.

The  eukaryotic  secretory  membrane  system  offers 
advantages  over  the  simpler  secretory  process  in  pro-
karyotic  cells  that  inserts  newly  synthesized  proteins 
directly  into  or  across  the  plasma  membrane  (see  Fig. 
18.9).  First,  distinct  compartments  of  the  secretory 
pathway provide protective environments to synthesize, 
fold,  assemble,  and  modify  membrane  and  secretory 
proteins before they are exposed on the cell surface.

Second,  eukaryotic  cells  have  the  capacity  to  store 
secretory  proteins  in  membrane  compartments.  This  is 
an  advantage  because  it  allows  the  cell  to  regulate  the 
release of proteins from the cell surface in response to 
internal or external signals.

Third,  membranes  with  distinct  lipid  compositions 
allow  for  specialized  functions  in  the  various  compart-
ments. For example, the lipid composition of the ER is 
favorable for folding of transmembrane proteins. On the 
other  hand,  ordered,  flexible  arrays  of  cholesterol  and 
sphingolipids in the plasma membrane are mechanically 
stable  and  impermeable  to  water-soluble  molecules. 
These  properties  are  advantageous  for  the  cell  surface  
as  well  as  for  membrane  protrusion  for  phagocytosis  
(see  Chapter  22)  and  for  crawling  (see  Chapter  38). 

P l a s m a   membrane

Lysosome

Endosome

Secretory
granule

ERES

TGN

Golgi
apparatus

VTC

ERES

ERES

ER

NUCLEUS

FIGURE  21.1  OVERVIEW  OF  THE  SECRETORY  MEMBRANE 
SYSTEM.  Transport  carriers  move  lipids  and  proteins  between  the 
three principal organelles of the secretory pathway—the endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER), Golgi apparatus, and plasma membrane. The carriers 
are either small vesicles or larger vesicle–tubule elements that move 
along  microtubules  (brown  lines)  between  membranes.  The  antero-
grade pathway takes newly synthesized proteins, called cargo, from 
the  ER  to  the  Golgi  apparatus,  and  from  the  Golgi  apparatus  to  
the plasma membrane or to the endosome/lysosomal system. Carriers 
form  at  ER  export  sites  (ERES),  producing  vesicular  tubular  carriers 
(VTCs)  that  move  to  the  Golgi  apparatus.  Retrograde  transport  
carriers bud from the VTC or Golgi apparatus to retrieve proteins and 
lipids  back  to  the  ER.  A  different  set  of  retrograde  carriers  retrieve 
proteins  and  lipids  from  the  endosomal/lysosomal  system  back  to  
the trans-Golgi network. The spaces inside carriers and organelles of 
the secretory membrane system are all topologically equivalent to the 
outside of the cell. 

 351

352 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

Prokaryotic  cells  must  keep  their  plasma  membrane 
pliable enough with loosely packed phosphoglycerides 
for newly synthesized transmembrane proteins to fold in 
a hydrophobic environment.

This chapter describes how the secretory membrane 
system  is  organized  and  operates  to  fulfill  these  func-
tions. It also provides a detailed description of the Golgi 
apparatus whose conserved features are central for the 
operation of the secretory membrane system.

Overview of the Secretory  
Membrane System
The  secretory  membrane  system  uses  membrane-
enclosed transport carriers to move thousands of diverse 
macromolecules—including  proteins,  proteoglycans, 
and glycoproteins—efficiently and precisely among dif-
ferent membrane-bound compartments (ie, the ER, Golgi 
apparatus, and plasma membrane). Proteins transported 
through the secretory system are called cargo. Proteins in 
the lumen are stored in a compartment or secreted from 
the  cell.  Transmembrane  proteins  can  be  retained  in  a 
particular compartment (eg, Golgi processing enzymes), 
delivered  to  the  plasma  membrane,  or  recycled  among 
compartments (eg, transport machinery).

Transfer  of  cargo  molecules  through  the  secretory 
system begins with their cotranslational insertion into or 
across the ER bilayer (see Fig. 20.8). Cargo proteins next 
fold and are sorted and concentrated within membrane-
bound carrier  vesicles for transport to the next com-
partment. The vesicular tubular carriers (VTCs) that 
bud from the ER are destined for fusion with membranes 
of the Golgi apparatus. The Golgi apparatus is the central 
processing and sorting station in the secretory membrane 
system  where  enzymes  modify  the  glycan  side  chains 
and  cleave  some  cargo  proteins.  Processed  cargo  pro-
teins are sorted into membrane-bound carriers that bud 
from the Golgi apparatus and move to the plasma mem-
brane, the endosome/lysosomal system, back to the ER 
or, in some specialized cells, into secretory granules for 
regulated secretion later on. Remarkably, contents never 
leak during these steps in cargo transport.

Membrane-enclosed  carriers  that  transport  cargo 
through  the  secretory  system  are  shaped  as  tubules, 
vesicles, or larger structures (Fig. 21.2). Carriers continu-
ously shuttle between ER, Golgi apparatus, endosomes, 
and plasma membrane, distributing cargo to its appropri-
ate  target  organelle.  Carriers  are  too  large  to  diffuse  
in  the  crowded  cytoplasm  but  are  transported  along  
microtubules  or  actin  filaments  by  molecular  motor 
proteins.

The flow of cargo and lipid forward through the secre-
tory system toward the plasma membrane (anterograde 
traffic)  is  balanced  by  selective  retrograde  traffic  of 
cargo proteins and lipids back toward the ER (Fig. 21.1) 
for repeated use. Retrograde traffic also returns proteins 

A. Small carrier transport

Budding

D

o

n

o
r
 

m
e
m
b
r
a
n
e

B. Large carrier transport

Tethers

Tethering

Motors

Movement

Rab GTPases
and tethers

Coat
proteins

Fusion

SNAREs

A
c
c
e
p
t
o
r
 

m
e
m
b
r
a
n
e

Fusion

Cargo

FIGURE  21.2  PROTEIN  MACHINERY  FOR  SECRETORY 
TRANSPORT. Coat proteins help sort soluble cargo and transmem-
brane proteins into a coated bud that pinches off a donor membrane 
as (A) a coated vesicle or (B) larger vesicular tubular carriers. Motor 
proteins move carriers along either microtubules (shown here) or actin 
filaments. Long coiled-coil tethers or multimeric tethering complexes 
attach  carriers  to  an  acceptor  membrane.  SNARE  (soluble  N-
ethylmaleimide-sensitive  factor  attachment  protein  receptor)  proteins 
on the carrier and acceptor membrane then form a complex that drives 
membrane fusion and delivery of the carrier’s membrane and content 
to the acceptor membrane. During this process, the relative topology 
of the lipids and transmembrane proteins is maintained. 

that are inadvertently carried forward through the secre-
tory system for redirection to their proper location. Both 
anterograde  and  retrograde  flows  of  membrane  within 
the  secretory  system  are  necessary  for  the  ER,  Golgi 
apparatus, and plasma membrane to generate and main-
tain their distinct functional and morphologic identities. 
Despite this continuous two-way traffic, all the organelles 
in the secretory system maintain their distinct characters, 
including different lipid and protein compositions.

The  orientation  (topology)  of  lipids  and  proteins  in 
the membrane bilayer is established during synthesis in 
the ER and maintained during transport by a carrier (Fig. 
21.2).  Hence,  the  same  side  of  the  membrane  always 
faces  the  cytoplasm.  The  other  side  initially  faces  the 
lumen of the ER. This side remains inside each membrane 
compartment along the secretory pathway or is exposed 
on  the  cell  surface  if  the  carrier  fuses  with  the  plasma 
membrane.

Cargo freely enters, concentrates, or is excluded from 
each transport carrier. This chapter describes the various 
mechanisms that facilitate such sorting of cargo, includ-
ing the role of lipid gradients and protein-based sorting 
machinery. It next explains proteins that ensure carriers 
fuse only with the correct target compartment. Finally, 

 

CHAPTER 21  n  Secretory Membrane System and Golgi Apparatus 

353

it  describes  the  Golgi  apparatus  and  its  diverse  mem-
brane trafficking pathways.

Role of Lipid Gradients in  
Membrane Trafficking
A conserved feature of the secretory membrane system 
is the differential distribution of glycerophospholipids 
(phosphoglycerides),  sphingolipids  (eg,  sphingomy-
elin and glycosphingolipids), and cholesterol (see Figs. 
13.2, 13.3, and 13.4) along the pathway (Fig. 21.3A). The 
concentrations  of  cholesterol  and  sphingolipids  range 
from  low  in  the  ER  membranes  to  intermediate  in  the 
Golgi apparatus and high in the plasma membrane (Fig. 
21.3). Membranes containing these lipids differ in thick-
ness, one property used to sort transmembrane proteins, 
which  tend  to  partition  into  membranes  with  a  thick-
ness  that  matches  the  lengths  of  their  transmembrane 
segments.

Generation and Maintenance of the Lipid Gradient
Cells  establish  and  actively  maintain  a  lipid  gradient 
across  the  secretory  pathway  with  a  thin  ER  bilayer, 
progressively  thicker  bilayers  in  intermediate  compart-
ments and the thickest bilayer of the plasma membrane. 
The gradient results from the self-organizing capacity of 
sphingolipids, cholesterol, and phosphoglycerides; syn-
thesis  of  these  lipids  at  different  sites;  and  sorting  of 
lipids by vesicular and nonvesicular mechanisms. These 
three factors produce lipid circulation that generates the 
lipid  gradient  (Fig.  21.3A).  Physical  interactions  among 
the various classes of lipids can concentrate or exclude 
specific membrane lipids and proteins in microdomains. 
The  different  lipid  compositions  within  the  secretory 
system facilitate sorting of membrane proteins.

Mixtures of purified lipids in artificial membrane lipid 
bilayers  can  self-organize  into  distinct  lipid  domains 
with  unique  properties.  For  example  if  sphingolipid  is 

added to an artificial bilayer containing glycerophospho-
lipids and cholesterol, the cholesterol and sphingolipid 
partition  into  domains  separate  from  the  glycerophos-
pholipids (Fig. 21.4A–B). Cholesterol and sphingolipids 
associate in the plane of the membrane because of van 
der Waals interactions between the sphingolipid’s long, 
saturated  hydrocarbon  chain  and  cholesterol’s  rigid,  
flat-cylindrical  steroid  backbone.  Glycerophospholipids 
are  largely  excluded  from  cholesterol  and  sphingolipid 
domains,  because  unsaturated,  kinked  hydrocarbon 
chains  do  not  interact  as  closely  with  cholesterol.  The 
domains  enriched  in  cholesterol  and  sphingolipid  are 
thicker  than  the  surrounding  membrane  composed  of 
shorter, unsaturated, kinked glycerophospholipids (Fig. 
21.4C). Tension on the bilayer (ie, from binding of pro-
teins that bend or curve the membrane or from pulling 
the membrane into a narrow tubule) enhances the ten-
dency of lipids with different physical properties to sepa-
rate into distinct phases (see Fig. 13.6).

Cholesterol  can  also  affect  a  bilayer  composed  of 
glycerophospholipids  alone  (Fig.  21.4D;  also  see  Fig. 
13.6) by filling in the spaces between the floppy hydro-
carbon chains of glycerophospholipids. This forces the 
glycerophospholipids 
into  a  tighter  alignment  and 
increases the distance between their head groups. As a 
result, the bilayer is thicker and ordered. This is a char-
acteristic of bilayers enriched in sphingomyelin alone or 
sphingomyelin plus cholesterol. Indeed, disordered and 
ordered lipid phases separate in a giant lipid vesicle and 
the disordered lipid phase spontaneously partitions into 
a narrow tubule that can be pulled from the vesicle (see 
Fig. 13.6). This effect of shape could promote the parti-
tioning of lipids along the secretory pathway.

Synthesis  of  the  major  membrane  lipids  at  different 
locations  contributes  to  the  lipid  gradient.  The  ER  
produces  cholesterol  and  glycerophospholipids  while 
the  Golgi  apparatus  synthesizes  glycosphingolipids  
and  sphingomyelin.  Newly  synthesized  cholesterol  is 

A

PM (GPL:high sterol)

GPL & SL

GPL, sterol & SL

B. ER
GPL-rich

C. Golgi
Mixed richness

D. PM
Sterol/SL-rich

Golgi (GPL:
medium sterol)

GPL

GPL & Sterol

Resident
ER protein

Resident

Golgi protein

PM

protein

PM

protein

ER (GPL:
Low sterol)

SL = sphingolipid =
Sterol = cholesterol =
GPL = glycerophospholipid =

FIGURE 21.3  GRADIENT OF LIPIDS ACROSS THE SECRETORY PATHWAY. The gradient arises from the self-organizing properties of 
the lipids and their synthesis at different sites. This gradient helps sort transmembrane proteins during membrane traffic. A, Lipid circulation and 
sorting within the secretory membrane system. Glycerophospholipids (GPLs) and cholesterol (sterol) are synthesized in the ER, whereas sphin-
golipids (SLs), including sphingomyelin and glycosphingolipids, are synthesized in the Golgi apparatus. Cholesterol moves to the Golgi apparatus 
where  it  associates  with  SL  and  is  carried  to  the  plasma  membrane.  B–D,  Sorting  of  transmembrane  proteins  based  on  the  length  of  their 
transmembrane helices: short helices in the thin bilayer of the ER composed of GPLs; medium helices in mixed bilayers of the Golgi apparatus; 
and long helices in the thick bilayer of the plasma membrane enriched in SL and sterols. 

354 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

A

B

C

m
n
5

 

.

3

GPL-rich

POPC/cholesterol

POPC/cholesterol/

sphingomyelin

SL = sphingolipid
Sterol = cholesterol
GPL = glycerophospholipid

 

m
n
1
4

.

SL-rich
Sterol-rich

D

L
P
G

L
S

L
P
G

l

o
r
e
t
s
 
&

L
S

l

o
r
e
t
s
 
&

FIGURE 21.4  PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF MEMBRANE LIPIDS. A–B, Illustrations of vesicles with artificial bilayers. A, A 2 : 1 mixture of 
POPC/cholesterol. B, A 2 : 1 : 1 mixture of POPC/cholesterol/sphingomyelin. The blue circular spots in part B are domains enriched in cholesterol 
and sphingomyelin that have segregated from POPC. C, A bilayer enriched in cholesterol and sphingomyelin is thicker than a bilayer composed 
mainly  of  glycerophospholipids,  owing  to  the  long  saturated  hydrocarbon  chains  of  glycosphingolipids. D,  Heights  of  membrane  lipids:  short, 
glycerophospholipids  alone;  medium,  glycerophospholipids  with  high  concentrations  of  cholesterol;  and  tall,  sphingolipids  and  sterols.  POPC, 
1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine. 

continually removed from the ER by both vesicular and 
nonvesicular pathways (see Fig. 20.17) and redistributed 
to the Golgi apparatus, where interactions with sphingo-
lipids prevent it from returning to the ER. Association of 
cholesterol  with  sphingolipids  in  the  Golgi  apparatus 
triggers the lateral differentiation of domains enriched in 
these lipids.

Movement of lipids by protein-based sorting and traf-
ficking (see the next section) is a third factor contribut-
ing  to  the  lipid  gradient.  Anterograde  movements  of 
vesicles containing glycerophospholipids, sphingolipids, 
and cholesterol from the Golgi apparatus to the plasma 
membrane  is  balanced  by  selective  retrograde  flow. 
Vesicular transport recycles glycerophospholipids trans-
ferred  from  the  ER  to  the  Golgi  apparatus  back  to  the 
ER.  Similarly,  sphingolipids  delivered  to  the  plasma 
membrane from the Golgi apparatus are returned to the 
Golgi apparatus. Cholesterol, in contrast, is not returned 
through  these  retrograde  pathways  to  either  the  ER  or 
Golgi  apparatus;  instead,  it  circulates  within  the  endo-
cytic  pathway  leading  to  lysosomes.  From  lysosomes, 
cholesterol can be passed back to the ER by lipid transfer 
proteins to inform sterol sensors in the ER of the cellular 
cholesterol balance (see Fig. 20.16). Excess cholesterol 
sensed  in  the  ER  can  be  esterified  and  stored  in  lipid 
droplets.

Functions of the Lipid Gradient
The  lipid  gradient  along  the  secretory  pathway  serves 
two important functions. First, it generates different lipid 
environments  in  the  ER,  Golgi  apparatus,  and  plasma 
membrane  favorable  for  their  functions.  The  ER  mem-
brane  is  composed  primarily  of  glycerophospholipids 
(ie, phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidylserine, and phos-
phatidylethanolamine).  The  loosely  packed  acyl  chains 
of phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidylcholine, and phos-
phatidylethanolamine are readily deformable, permitting 
newly synthesized membrane proteins to insert into and 
fold in the ER bilayer. By contrast, abundant sterols and 
sphingolipids make the plasma membrane bilayer thicker 
and  less  permeable  to  small  molecules,  suitable  as  the 

surface barrier. The intermediate concentration of sterols 
and  sphingolipids  in  the  Golgi  apparatus  may  have 
advantages for a membrane-sorting station.

The  lipid  gradient  also  directs  transmembrane  pro-
teins  to  specific  destinations  where  the  lengths  of 
transmembrane helices match the thickness of the target 
membranes  (Fig.  21.3B–D).  This  matching  avoids  the 
energy cost of exposing hydrophobic residues to water 
or hydrophilic residues to the lipid bilayer. Hence, resi-
dent membrane proteins in the ER and Golgi apparatus 
typically have shorter transmembrane segments (approx-
imately  15  residues)  than  resident  plasma  membrane 
proteins (approximately 20 to 25 residues). Retention or 
transport  of  these  proteins  occurs  because  the  lipid 
bilayers  of  carriers  budding  out  from  either  the  ER 
(toward  the  Golgi  apparatus)  or  the  Golgi  apparatus 
(toward  the  plasma  membrane)  are  thicker  than  the 
bilayers  of  the  donor  organelles.  Only  transmembrane 
proteins with transmembrane segments long enough to 
span this thickness enter such carriers.

If the transmembrane segment of a plasma membrane 
protein  is  shortened  experimentally  by  recombinant 
DNA  techniques,  the  new  protein  is  retained  in  the 
thinner bilayers of the ER and/or Golgi apparatus rather 
than moving to the thicker plasma membrane. Similarly, 
when the transmembrane segment of a Golgi protein is 
extended, the protein is no longer retained in the Golgi 
apparatus but is transported to the plasma membrane.

The lipid-based protein sorting mechanism based on 
the  lipid  gradient  across  the  secretory  pathway  works 
together  with  protein-based  mechanisms,  described 
below, to fine tune specificity and increase efficiency in 
protein trafficking within cells.

Proteins Involved in Membrane Trafficking
Sorting  and  transporting  proteins  within  the  secretory 
membrane system depend on a variety of proteins: spe-
cialized coat proteins that help generate transport carrier 
vesicles  containing  specific  cargo  proteins;  “tethering 
factors”  that  attach  carriers  to  their  target  membranes; 

 

CHAPTER 21  n  Secretory Membrane System and Golgi Apparatus 

355

proteins that mediate fusion of the carrier vesicle with 
an acceptor membrane; and membrane-bending proteins 
that  detect  and  help  drive  membrane  curvature.  Acti-
vated GTPases or specific lipids such as phosphoinositi-
des  recruit  these  sorting  proteins  to  the  cytoplasmic 
surfaces  of  appropriate  membranes.  Motor  proteins 
move the carrier vesicles along cytoskeletal tracks to the 
appropriate cellular location.

Guanosine Triphosphatases That Regulate  
Membrane Traffic
Two  major  families  of  small  guanosine  triphosphatases 
(GTPases)—Arf  (adenosine  diphosphate  [ADP]-ribosyl-
ation  factor)  and  Rab  (Ras-related  in  brain)—regulate 
membrane  traffic;  all  are  related  to  Ras  (Figs.  4.6  and 
4.7).  Like  Ras,  their  intrinsic  GTPase  cycles  are  slow, 
being  limited  by  the  rate  of  GTP  hydrolysis,  and  even 
more  by  the  rate  of  guanosine  diphosphate  (GDP)  dis-
sociation. Each GTPase has guanine nucleotide exchange 
factors  (GEFs)  that  not  only  catalyze  the  exchange  of 
GDP  for  GTP.  This  both  activates  these  proteins  and 
targets them to particular membranes. Once located on 
the  appropriate  membrane  and  activated  with  bound 
GTP,  these  GTPases  bind  effector  proteins  that  form 
membrane buds or proteins that target carrier vesicles to 
their  destinations.  Like  Ras,  GTPase  activating  proteins 
(GAPs)  turn  off  these  membrane  traffic  GTPases  by 
stimulating GTP hydrolysis.

ADP-Ribosylation Factor and Sar1 GTPases
Arf  family  GTPases,  including  Arf1  to  Arf6  and  Sar1 
(secretory  and  Ras-related)  GTPase,  recruit  specific 
protein effectors to the membrane surface. The effectors 
function  in  vesicle  formation  and  tethering,  organelle 
biogenesis  and  dynamics,  nonvesicular  lipid  transport 
and  cytoskeletal  regulation.  Multiple  GEFs  on  specific 
membranes and GAPs coordinate the spatial and tempo-
ral  regulation  of  these  small  GTPases.  Whereas  Arf1-6 
proteins  function  at  various  sites  throughout  the  endo-
membrane  system,  Sar1  functions  exclusively  at  ER  
exit sites.

A  key  feature  of  Arfs  is  a  myristoylated  N-terminal 
amphipathic helix that facilitates binding to membranes 
(Fig. 21.5). Upon GTP binding, this helix is released from 
a  hydrophobic  pocket  on  Arf  and  inserts  into  the  lipid 
bilayer, resulting in strong membrane association.

Sequence  comparisons  separate  Arf  proteins  into 
three classes. All eukaryotes have class I (Arfs 1, 2, and 
3),  animals  alone  have  class  II  (Arf4  and  5),  and  both 
animals and plants have class III (Arf6). Arfs 1, 3, 4, and 
5 function primarily in the secretory pathway, whereas 
Arf6 functions in the endocytic pathway.

Arf  GEFs  recruit  specific  Arf  proteins  to  particular 
membrane  surfaces  and  then  catalyze  the  exchange  of 
GDP  for  GTP.  All  six  subfamilies  of  Arf  GEFs  contain  
a  conserved  Sec7-like  domain,  which  catalyzes  GTP 

exchange for GDP. Some Arf GEFs function in the secre-
tory pathway (GBF/Gea GEFs), others work at the trans-
Golgi and trans-Golgi network (TGN) (BIG/Sec7 GEFs), 
and  still  others  function  in  the  endocytic  system 
(cytohesin/Arno  GEFs).  The  toxic  fungal  metabolite 
brefeldin  A  inhibits  Arf1  activation  in  the  secretory 
pathway by trapping a Sec7 domain–Arf–GDP complex 
(Fig.  21.5D).  This  prevents  Arf1  activation  by  GTP, 
blocks  the  secretory  pathway  and  causes  the  Golgi 
apparatus to disassemble.

Hydrophobic residues of effector proteins then bind 
Arf-GTP in an area centered on a triad of aromatic resi-
dues (Fig. 21.5). Effectors are usually dimers or pseudodi-
mers, so they bind two Arf-GTP molecules symmetrically. 
This may orientate effectors on the membrane to create 
multivalent membrane-binding platforms.

The  highly  diverse  Arf  effectors  include  coat  com-
plexes,  lipid  transfer  proteins,  membrane  tethers,  scaf-
fold  proteins,  and  actin  regulators.  Arf1’s  effectors 
include the coat protein I (COPI) coat in the early secre-
tory  pathway;  the  adaptor  protein  1  (AP1),  and  AP3  
coats  in  post-Golgi  trafficking;  long  coiled-coil  proteins 
associated  with  Golgi  membranes;  and  lipid  transfer 
proteins at contact sites between ER and Golgi. Arf-GTP 
both  recruits  and  mediates  conformational  changes  of 
effector proteins.

While associated with a membrane, active Arfs bind 
their effectors until an Arf GAP induces hydrolysis of the 
bound GTP, reversing membrane association and effec-
tor  binding.  The  locations  of  11  subfamilies  of  GAPs 
determine  where  each  type  of  Arf  is  inactivated.  Arf 
GAPs use a conserved domain with a zinc finger to cata-
lyze the hydrolysis of GTP (Fig. 21.5C). Some Arf GAPs 
contain a BAR domain, which both senses and induces 
membrane curvature. Other Arf GAPs have amphipathic 
lipid packing sensor (ALPS) motifs that mediate binding 
to highly curved membranes. Still other Arf GAPs contain 
domains such as Rho GAP domains, ankryin repeats or 
Src homology-3 (SH3) domains for interactions with the 
actin cytoskeleton and signaling networks.

Rab GTPases
Rab family GTPases control protein–protein interactions 
between  transport  carriers  and  docking  complexes  on 
target membranes (Fig. 21.6). Mammals express approxi-
mately  70  different  Rab  proteins  to  specify  numerous 
transport steps in the secretory membrane system. The 
Rab  proteins  localize  to  different  membrane  compart-
ments  and  trafficking  pathways,  functioning  as  mem-
brane  organizers  by  regulating  a  plethora  of  soluble 
effector  molecules  (Fig.  21.6).  Researchers  use  Rab 
proteins as markers for specific organelles (eg, Rab5 for 
early endosomes) or, when expressed in mutant forms, 
to perturb the system (see Fig. 22.12B).

The  bound  nucleotide  controls  the  cycling  of  Rab 
the  cytoplasm  

proteins  between  membranes  and 

356 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

A. Arf1•GDP

B. Arf1•GTP

C. GAP bound to Arf1-GDP

Switch I

Interswitch
Switch II

GTP

Mg

GDP

GDP

Sw II

Mg

Sw I

90°

N

C

C

N

N

C

D. Membrane binding and dissociation of Arf1

GDP

Switch I

Myristoyl
group

Stabilized

GDP

BFA
GEF

Interswitch
Switch II

Arf1
N-terminal amphipathic helix

GDP

GTP

Brefeldin A
GDP

GTP

N

C

Arf1

GAP

GDP

Effector

GTP

GTP

Pi

GAP

ER LUMEN

FIGURE 21.5  ARF-GTPASE CYCLE. A–C, Ribbon diagrams. A, Arf1-GDP; B, Arf1-GTP; and C, Arf1 bound to its GAP. D, Membrane binding 
and dissociation of Arf1. In the cytoplasm, Arf1 exists in its GDP-bound form with its N-terminal amphipathic helix tucked into a hydrophobic 
pocket.  An  N-terminal  myristoyl  group  allows  Arf1  to  bind  membranes  for  activation  by  a  GEF.  The  exchange  of  GDP  for  GTP  changes  the 
conformation of switch 1 and switch 2, as well as the interswitch loop and displaces the N-terminal helix (striped blue and pink) from its pocket 
so it can anchor Arf1-GTP to the membrane. Arf1-GTP then recruits effectors. Association of a GAP with the Arf1–GTP–effector complex stimulates 
GTP hydrolysis. Arf1-GDP returns to the cytoplasm, and GAP and effector proteins dissociate from the membrane. The drug BFA stabilizes the 
association of Arf1-GDP with its GEF. This interferes with exchange of GDP for GTP, so Arf1 cannot recruit effectors to the membrane and traffic 
between the ER and Golgi apparatus is disrupted. Arf, adenosine diphosphate–ribosylation factor; BFA, brefeldin A; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; 
GAP, GTPase-activating protein; GDP, guanosine diphosphate; GEF, guanine nucleotide exchange factor; GTP, guanosine triphosphate; GTPase, 
guanosine triphosphatase. 

(Fig. 21.6). Rab-specific GEFs associated with membranes 
recruit  Rabs  and  catalyze  the  exchange  of  GDP  for  
GTP.  Geranylgeranyl  lipids  coupled  to  two  conserved, 
C-terminal cysteine residues facilitate the association of 
Rab-GTP with the membrane bilayer and are essential for 
their functions. The cysteines are included in a variable 
segment  of  30  amino  acids  that  targets  each  Rab  to  its 
correct subcellular location.

Like Ras, switch I and switch II regions of Rabs differ 
in  conformation  when  GDP  or  GTP  is  bound.  In  the 
GDP-bound  state,  the  switch  regions  are  unfolded, 
whereas  when  GTP  is  bound  they  adopt  well-defined 
conformations, allowing effector binding.

Membrane-associated  Rab-GTP  recruits  the  targeting 
and docking proteins used to recognize the target mem-
brane  and  initiate  bilayer  fusion  or  other  membrane 
trafficking steps. Effectors that interact specifically with 
Rab-GTP  include  fusion  regulators,  molecular  tethers, 

motors,  sorting  adaptors,  kinases,  phosphatases,  Rab 
regulators, and components of membrane contact sites. 
Recruitment of such effectors occurs in a spatiotempo-
rally controlled manner in part due to the ability of Rab 
proteins to bind to overlapping or nonoverlapping sites 
on the same effector. In the early endosome, for example, 
Rab4, Rab5, and Rab33 all interact with rabaptin-5.

Following membrane fusion, a Rab-specific GAP stimu-
lates  GTP  hydrolysis,  recycling  Rab-GDP  back  to  GDI 
(guanine  nucleotide  dissociation  inhibitor)  in  the 
cytoplasm.  Rabs  intrinsically  hydrolyze  GTP  relatively 
rapidly, so Rab GAPs are less crucial than GEFs in modu-
lating Rabs on membranes.

In  the  cytoplasm,  the  carrier  protein  GDI  prevents 
exchange of GDP bound to Rab for GTP and sequesters 
the hydrophobic geranylgeranyl groups. Proteins called 
displacement factors recruit Rab-GDP to membranes by 
displacing GDI.

 

CHAPTER 21  n  Secretory Membrane System and Golgi Apparatus 

357

T

T

T

Rab-
GTP

T

Tether

 

B
M
E
M
R
O
N
O
D

R A NE

T

GDP

GEF

GTP

D

D

GDI

GAP

Pi

TFC

D

D

GDI

D

D

D

GDI

P l a s m a   m e m b r a ne

Clathrin

A

 

C
C
E
P
T
O
R
M
E
M
B
R
A
N
E

Endosome

Golgi

apparatus

Rab-GTP

GDI

FIGURE 21.6  RAB GTPASE CYCLE. Rab-GDP is bound to GDI 
in  the  cytoplasm.  A  GTPase  dissociation  factor  (not  shown)  on  the 
membrane separates Rab-GDP from GDI so it can be activated by a 
membrane-associated, Rab-specific GEF. Rab-GTP recruits effectors, 
such  as  coiled-coil  tethers  and  TFCs,  which  aid  in  targeting  and 
docking  the  vesicle.  A  GAP  stimulates  GTP  hydrolysis  and  returns 
Rab-GDP  to  GDI  in  the  cytoplasm.  Insets  show  ribbon  diagrams  of 
Rab-GTP  and  GDI.  GDI,  guanine  nucleotide  dissociation  inhibitor; 
GDP, guanosine diphosphate; GTP, guanosine triphosphate; GTPase, 
guanosine  triphosphatase;  Pi,  inorganic  phosphate;  TFC,  tethering 
factor complex. 

This GTPase cycle allows Rab proteins to regulate the 
timing of the assembly and disassembly of diverse multi-
protein complexes involved in the trafficking of transport 
containers.  Some  Rab  effectors  have  Rab  GAP  or  GEF 
activity.  They  facilitate  membrane  traffic  by  promoting 
the  rapid  accumulation  or  removal  of  Rab  GTPases  on 
membranes.

Mutations  in  the  genes  for  Rab  GTPases  cause  dis-
eases. Rab27a normally controls exocytosis of lysosome-
related  organelles,  such  as  melanosomes  and  lytic 
granules.  Rab27a  mutations  cause  Griscelli  syndrome 
type 2 characterized by albinism and immunodeficiency. 
Other Rab mutations cause neuropathies, mental retarda-
tion and ciliopathies.

Rab GTPases play a crucial role in phagocytosis and 
phagosome maturation, so many intracellular pathogens 
target  Rab  GTPases  to  interfere  with  the  ability  of  the 
host  phagocytes  to  ingest  and  degrade  pathogens.  The 
bacterial pathogenesis factors can either act as Rab GEFs 
or GAPs that activate or inactivate specific Rab GTPases, 
or they can interfere with Rab functions through enzy-
matic modifications, such as proteolytic cleavage, lipida-
tion, or AMPylation. These activities allow the pathogen 
to evade destruction in the phagolysosome and establish 
a replicative niche within the host.

COPII

COPI

VTC

ERES

FIGURE  21.7  DISTRIBUTIONS  OF  COAT  PROTEINS  ALONG 
THE  SECRETORY  PATHWAY.  Clathrin,  coat  protein  I  (COPI),  and 
coat protein II (COPII) coats are color coded. 

Membrane Budding Coat Complexes
Coat complexes form a basketlike lattice or cage cover-
ing the cytoplasmic surface of many transport intermedi-
ates.  The  cage  deforms  the  membrane  into  a  curved 
shape,  helping  to  drive  the  formation  of  a  transport 
carrier. Soon after the carrier is formed and loaded with 
cargo, the coat lattice disassembles, allowing the carrier 
to fuse with a target membrane.

Three different types of coats, coat protein II (COPII), 
COPI, and clathrin, are used for different transport steps 
(Fig. 21.7). COPII and COPI coats function in the early 
secretory pathway, with COPII coats budding membrane 
with cargo from the ER, and COPI coats budding cargo 
from pre-Golgi and Golgi compartments. Clathrin oper-
ates later in the secretory pathway and in the endosomal 
system, budding cargo from the trans-Golgi network and 
from the plasma membrane to endosomes.

X-ray  crystallography  and  cryoelectron  microscopy 
revealed that the three coats have underlying similarities 
as  well  as  obvious  differences  (Fig.  21.8A).  In  all  three 
cases an inner “adaptor” layer interacts with cargo and 
small GTPases (or phosphatidylinositol[4,5]bis-phosphate 
[PI(4,5)P2]). An outer “cage” shapes the carrier, enabling 
it to bud from the bilayer. Clathrin and COPII coats form 
these layers sequentially with adaptor protein complexes 
binding  the  membrane  before  recruiting  cage  compo-
nents. Both layers of the COPI coat are recruited together 
as a complex called “coatomer.”

358 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

A. Coats

COPII

COPI

Clathrin

B. Cages

C. Vertext structures

Vertex

β-propeller

Vertex

β-propeller

Vertex

β-propeller

FIGURE  21.8  THREE  HOMOLOGOUS  VESICLE  COATS.  The 
panels compare the organization of coat protein I (COPI), coat protein 
II (COPII) and clathrin coats, each with an inner and outer layer. The 
homologous outer cage components are α-COP and β′-COP of COPI, 
Sec31 of COPII, and clathrin. They impart geometric order to the coat 
and each has a β-propeller domain next to the membrane for binding 
the sorting motifs of cargo proteins at the end of a rod consisting of 
an α-solenoid. Both the clathrin and COPI cages are assembled from 
three elongated chains joined at a central hub. Leg segments intertwine 
to form each edge of the lattice. The COPII cage is assembled from 
four rods joined at a central hub. COPII lattices have triangular, pen-
tagonal or hexagonal faces, whereas COPI and clathrin lattices have 
hexagonal  or  pentagonal  faces.  The  homologous  inner  components 
are the γ–ζ–β–δ-COP subcomplex of COPI, Sec23p/Sec24p of COPII, 
and the AP1 and AP2 clathrin adaptors. 

Outer-cage  components  impart  geometric  order  to 
each coat complex, and each of the outer-cage proteins 
has a domain that binds transmembrane cargo proteins 
(Fig. 21.8B–C). Clathrin and COPI cages assemble from 
three legged units joined at a central hub (Fig. 21.8B–C). 
Leg segments from adjacent trimers intertwine to form 
each  edge  of  the  icosahedral  lattice  of  hexagons  and 
pentagons  (see  Fig.  5.4).  By  contrast,  the  COPII  cage 
assembles from units with four-legged chains joined at a 
central hub (Fig. 21.8B–C). Each leg forms an edge of a 
COPII cage composed of triangular, pentagonal or hex-
agonal faces (Fig. 21.5C).

A  specific  GEF  and  GTPase  usually  set  the  time  and 
place of coat-mediated vesicle formation. The exception 
is  clathrin-mediated  endocytosis,  where  the  adaptor 
protein 2 (AP2) complex is recruited to membranes by 
PI(4,5)P2. The following sections explain the coats in the 
order they act in the secretory pathway.

COPII Coat: Structure, Assembly, and Disassembly
The  COPII  coat  complex  (Fig.  21.9)  assembles  cages  
that  bud  vesicles  from  the  ER.  The  machinery  consists  
of the Sar1p GTPase, Sec23p•Sec24p subcomplex, and 
Sec13p•Sec31p subcomplex. The proteins self-assemble 
a  polymeric  scaffold  on  the  cytoplasmic  surface  of  the 
ER  that  collects  specific  cargo  molecules.  The  coat  is 
curved, so its growth promotes the formation of mem-
brane  buds  that  pinch  off  the  membrane  as  coated 
vesicles.

COPII  coats  assemble  by  a  sequential  process  with 
built in negative feedback (Fig. 21.9E). The GEF Sec12p 
recruits  inactive  Sar1-GDP  from  the  cytoplasm  to  the  
ER  membrane  and  catalyzes  the  exchange  GDP  for  
GTP.  Activated  Sar1p-GTP  extends  a  tail  into  the  ER 
membrane  and  recruits  the  two  COPII  subcomplexes 
from the cytoplasm. Sec23p•Sec24p subcomplexes bind 
Sar1p and recruit Sec13p•Sec31p subcomplexes, which 
polymerize into a mesh-like scaffold that coats the mem-
brane. The coat grows as more Sec23p•Sec24p subcom-
plexes  anchored  by  Sar1p  diffuse  in  from  surrounding 
membrane  and  become  crosslinked  by  Sec13p•Sec31p 
subcomplexes recruited from the cytoplasm. This lattice 
serves  as  the  outer  layer  of  the  COPII  coat.  Growth  of 
the lattice bends the patch of membrane into a coated 
bud  that  pinches  off  as  a  coated  carrier  (containing 
concentrated  proteins)  or  remains  as  a  “metastable” 
coated  structure  that  participates  in  the  differentiation 
of membrane domains at ER exit sites.

Hydrolysis of GTP bound to Sar1p initiates COPII coat 
disassembly.  The  coat  subunit  Sec23p  is  the  GAP  for 
Sar1p. Together, the coat protein Sec13p and membrane 
curvature stimulate the GAP activity of Sec23p, so assem-
bly of the coat automatically leads to its disassembly as 
inactive Sar1p-GDP releases from the COPII lattice.

Localization of the Sec12p GEF to the ER membrane 
and  the  Sec23p  GAP  for  Sar1p  in  the  coat  provides  a 
mechanism  for  the  continuous,  self-regulated  assembly 
and  disassembly  of  the  COPII  coat.  Sar1p-GTP  guides 
addition of coat subcomplexes to the rim of the lattice, 
thereby deforming the membrane into a coated carrier. 
At  the  same  time  Sar1p-GDP  and  associated  subcom-
plexes  are  released  from  the  lattice  interior.  Sec12p  is 
left behind in the ER membrane when the coated vesicle 
detaches.  Then  the  two  COPII  complexes  dissociate 
from the carrier vesicle.

Transmembrane  cargo  proteins  are  concentrated  in 
the  bud  in  the  ER  membrane  by  interacting  with  the 
Sec24p component of COPII coats (Fig. 21.9E). Sec24p 
recognizes  several  types  of  sorting  signals  in  the  cyto-
plasmic domains of the cargo proteins including diacidic 
motifs  with  the  consensus  sequence  asp-glu-x-asp-glu 
(DExDE) and short hydrophobic motifs such as phe-phe 
(FF), phe-tyr (FY), leu-leu (LL), or ile-leu (IL). Transmem-
brane cargo proteins lacking these sorting signals collect 
in COPII-coated buds at ER exit sites either by associating 

 

CHAPTER 21  n  Secretory Membrane System and Golgi Apparatus 

359

A. Sar1-GDP

B. Sec23p-24p

GDP

Mg

Sw I
Sw II

Sar1-GTP

C. Curvature
     induction

D. EM

C

N

Sec24p

Sec23p

E. Mechanism of coat assembly

Sar1p-
GDP

Sec23p-
Sec24p

GDP

Sar1p-
GTP

GTP

Sar1p-
GDP

Sec31p-
Sec13p

Sec12p

1. Activation 
    of GTPase

TM cargo

2. Formation of pre-
    budding complex

3. Coat oligomerization

Soluble cargo

4. Vesicle
budding

ER LUMEN

5. Coat
    disassembly

F. Self-assembling COPII cuboctahedral cage

Sec13

Sec31

Sec31

Sec13

10nm

FIGURE 21.9  COPII COAT ASSEMBLY ON THE ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM. A, Ribbon diagram of Sar1-GDP. B, Ribbon diagram of 
the Sec23p-Sec24p complex bound to Sar1-GTP. C, Sec23p-Sec24p has a concave, positively charged surface that promotes curvature when 
it binds a lipid bilayer. D, Electron micrograph of a thin section of a COPII vesicle formed in vitro when ER membranes were incubated with cytosol 
and ATP. E, The membrane-anchored Sec12p GEF activates Sar1 by bringing Sar1 to the membrane and promoting exchange of GDP for GTP. 
Sar1p-GTP then recruits the Sec23p•Sec24p subcomplex, which assembles the Sec31/Sec13p cage. Transmembrane cargo with suitable sorting 
motifs binds Sec24p. Coat complexes dissociate from the lattice after Sar1-GTP converts to Sar1-GDP and releases into the cytosol. The lattice 
grows into a coated bud that can pinch off the membrane as a coated vesicle, leaving Sec12 behind on the ER membrane. F, Three-dimensional 
reconstruction of COPII cage at 30-Å resolution from cryoelectron microscopy of single particles. ATP, adenosine triphosphate; COPII, coat protein 
II; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; Sar1, secretory and Ras-related 1. (A, For reference, see Protein Data Bank [PDB; www.rcsb.org] files 1F6B, 1M2B 
and  1M2O.  C,  Modified  from  Bickford  LC,  Mossessova  E,  Goldberg  J.  A  structural  view  of  the  COPII  vesicle  coat.  Curr  Opin  Struct  Biol. 
2004;14:147–153.  D,  Courtesy  W.  Balch,  Scripps  Research  Institute,  La  Jolla,  CA.  F,  Modified  from  Stagg  SM,  Gurkan  C,  Fowler  DM,  et al. 
Structure of the Sec13/31 COPII cage. Nature. 2006;439:234–238.)

with  other  cargo  proteins  with  sorting  signals  or  by 
partitioning into the cholesterol-rich bilayers of ER exit 
sites as a result of their long transmembrane segments. 
Large, soluble cargo proteins like protocollagen (300 nm 
long; see Fig. 29.4) are too large to fit into conventional 
COPII transport carrier vesicles of 60 to 90 nm in diam-
eter. Instead, these molecules leave the ER in enlarged 
COPII structures containing special packing machinery.

COPI Coat: Structure, Assembly, and Disassembly
The COPI coat complex guides protein sorting and ret-
rograde transport from the Golgi apparatus and pre-Golgi 

membranes (also called VTC) back to the ER (Fig. 21.1). 
This  transfer  of  membrane  and  proteins  is  crucial  for 
Golgi  structures  to  differentiate  functionally  and  mor-
phologically from the ER. Like the COPII coat complex, 
the COPI coat complex assembles into a lattice (ie, COPI 
coat) on a patch of membrane, recruits specific proteins 
and deforms the membrane into a coated bud that either 
pinches  off  as  a  coated  carrier  or  remains  as  a  “meta-
stable” coated structure.

The  COPI  coatomer  complex  consists  of  seven 
subunits (α, β, β1, ε, γ, ζ), ranging in mass from 25 kD 
to  more  than  100 kD  (Fig.  21.10).  Membrane-bound 

360 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

A. Coatomer complex

γ

ε

β

α

β'

ζδ

Arf1-
GDP

Pi

B. COP I vesicle formation

Arf1-
GDP

Arf1-
GTP

GTP

GDP

GEF

Coatomer

Arf-GAP

C

Arf1

Homologous to
clathrin AP1
γ ′-COP
ζ′-COP

δ′-COP

β′-COP

Homologous
to clathrin
β′-COP
α′-COP
ε′-COP

Transmembrane
cargo

FIGURE 21.10  COPI COAT ASSEMBLY ON MEMBRANES. A, Schematic model of the COPI coatomer complex with the subunits labeled. 
B, Pathway of coat assembly. An Arf1-specific GEFs recruits whole coatomer complexes which bind cargo, vesicle tethering factors, and fusion 
factors. Polymerization of coatomers bends a patch of membrane and activates the GAP that stimulates Arf1 to hydrolyze GTP. After Arf1-GDP 
is released, coatomer and GAP are destabilized and dissociate from the coat. The continuous cycle of coatomer binding, polymerization, and 
dissociation mediated by Arf1 GTPase activity can form a coated bud that pinches off the membrane or remain as a meta-stable coated bud 
that imparts curvature and tension to the membrane. C, Reconstruction of the two layers of the COPI coat from cryoelectron micrographs. Arf, 
ADP-ribosylation factor; COPI, coat protein I. (For reference, see Dodonova SO, Diestelkoetter-Bachert P, von Appen A, et al. Vesicular transport. 
A  structure  of  the  COPI  coat  and  the  role  of  coat  proteins  in  membrane  vesicle  assembly.  Science.  2015;349:195–198  and  EM  Data  Bank 
[www.emdatabank.org] files 2985, 2986, 2987, 2988, and 2989 and PDB files 5A1U, 5A1V, 5A1W, 5A1X, and 5A1Y.)

Arf1-GTP and cargo proteins recruit coatomer. Addition 
of Arf-GAP1 from the cytoplasm to coatomer bound to 
Arf1-GTP  on  membranes  completes  the  basic  building 
unit  of  the  COPI  coat.  The  COPI  coat  polymerizes  by 
adding  COPI  units  diffusing  in  the  plane  of  the  mem-
brane.  Growth  of  the  coat  bends  the  membrane  as  it 
forms a basket-like lattice.

Although  recruited  en  bloc  onto  membranes,  coat-
omer consists of a cage-like subcomplex and an adaptor 
subcomplex. The adaptor complex composed of the ε, 
γ,  and  ζ  subunits  is  close  to  the  membrane  and  binds 
two copies of Arf1-GTP. This adaptor subcomplex makes 
multiple contacts with the cage subcomplex. The cage 
subcomplex composed of the α, β, and β1 subunits forms 
an outer layer of the coat, analogous to clathrin or the 
outer layer of COPII (Sec13/Sec31). Multiple interactions 
of both Arf1-GTP and cargo in the membrane drive simul-
taneous recruitment of cage and adaptor subcomplexes.
Transmembrane  cargo  proteins  recycling  from  the 
Golgi  apparatus  to  the  ER  are  concentrated  in  COPI-
coated  buds  by  interacting  with  the  cage  subcomplex. 
Most  of  these  proteins  have  a  dilysine  sorting  motif 
generally  found  at  their  C-terminus  (Lys-Lys-x-x-COOH  
or  KKxx,  where  x  is  any  amino  acid).  Two  arginine  
residues  substitute  for  the  lysines  in  some  proteins. 
These  dilysine  motifs  bind  on  the  top  surface  of  the 
N-terminal β-propeller domains of α- and β1-COPI, which 
have highly charged basic and acidic patches facing the 
bilayer.

The  cage  subcomplex  differs  from  clathrin  and 
Sec13/31 in two ways. First, cage subcomplexes recog-
nize and bind cargo motifs. Cargo binds the N-terminal 
β-propeller  domain  of  the  clathrin  heavy  chain  or 
Sec23/24  rather  than  the  outer  layers  of  these  coats. 
Second,  clathrin  and  Sec13/31  polymerize  to  form 
regular lattices with global point group symmetry, while 
cage  subcomplexes  show  significant  conformational 
heterogeneity and flexibility.

Arf-GAP1 is inactive during its diffusion with individual 
coatomer units, but curved membranes favor its interac-
tion  with  Arf1-GTP  and  hydrolysis  of  the  GTP  (Fig. 
21.10B). Thus, assembly of the COPI coat on a membrane 
automatically inactivates Arf1. Arf1-GDP is released from 
the membrane, destabilizing the lattice of coatomer and 
Arf-GAP1 and leading to disassembly of the coat.

As in the case of COPII these dynamic events result 
in  the  assembly  of  COPI  around  the  periphery  of  the 
lattice and their release from the interior (Fig. 21.11A). 
The  flux  of  coat  units  through  the  lattice  continues 
whether or not a coated vesicle detaches from the mem-
brane  and  allows  for  several  outcomes  (Fig.  21.11A-C). 
The lattice can grow, disassemble (after budding off the 
membrane as a coated vesicle), or persist as a coated bud 
(creating tension in the bilayer) with coat units associat-
ing  and  dissociating  at  equal  rates.  These  behaviors  of 
the coat lattice orchestrate protein sorting and morpho-
logic events at ER export domains that allow the VTC to 
form (Fig. 21.11D).

 

CHAPTER 21  n  Secretory Membrane System and Golgi Apparatus 

361

A. Growth

Coat unit

“Coat”

D. COPI & COPII
     locality

To Golgi

GTPase

TM cargo

Membrane

B. Disassembly

C. Persistence

ER export

domain

VTC

COPI

COPII

ER

FIGURE 21.11  FATES OF COPI COAT COMPLEXES ON MEMBRANES. A, When binding of coat units is faster than release, the coat 
grows and forms a coated vesicle. B, After a coated vesicle forms, coat binding becomes slower than release (owing to GEF not being incorporated 
into the coated bud), and the coat disassembles. C, When coat units bind at the same rate as they release, then the coat is metastable (it neither 
shrinks  nor  grows  but  imparts  curvature  to  the  membrane).  By  increasing  curvature  in  the  membrane,  metastable  coats  increase  membrane 
tension, which can cause lipid partitioning. D, Cartoon diagram of the distribution of COPII and COPI coats on ER export domains and VTCs. 
COPII  coats  are  restricted  to  ER  membranes,  where  they  recruit  cargo  into  the  ER  export  domain.  COPI  coats  are  present  on  the  vesicular/
tubular  elements  of  the  VTC  and  Golgi  apparatus,  where  they  orchestrate  retrieval  of  proteins  back  to  the  ER.  COPI/II,  coat  protein  I/II;  ER, 
endoplasmic reticulum; GEF, guanine nucleotide exchange factor; VTC, vesicular tubular carrier. 

Clathrin Coats: Structure, Assembly,  
and Disassembly
Clathrin forms a three-legged structure termed a triskel-
ion (Fig. 21.12A). The three 190-kD heavy chains form 
the  legs,  which  consist  of  α-helical  zigzags  associated 
with one of two extended light chains of approximately 
30 kD (LCα or LCβ). Under special conditions this hexa-
meric unit can self-assemble an empty cage built like a 
soccer ball with clathrin forming the ribs between adja-
cent faces. Each rib of the cage incorporates portions of 
four different triskelions, which are, in turn, arranged in 
pentagons and hexagons. (Fig. 5.4 explains how penta-
gons  and  hexagons  form  closed  shells.)  Together  with 
clathrin,  these  molecules  help  drive  curvature  of  the 
underlying membrane and promote vesicle formation.

The assembly of clathrin cages depends on assembly 
proteins  (APs)  that  link  clathrin  to  membrane  lipids 
and proteins (Fig. 21.12B-E). Two classes of structurally 
and  functionally  distinct  APs  exist:  the  monomeric  AP 
AP180/CALM  and  heterotetrameric  adapter  protein 
complexes  (AP1-4).  AP2  is  the  only  heterotetrameric 
AP  involved  in  clathrin-coated  vesicle  formation  at  the 
plasma membrane and binds to membranes without the 
need of a small GTPase because it binds PI(4,5)P2. Other 
heterotetrameric APs that assemble clathrin-coated vesi-
cles on other membranes require Arf GTPases.

The four subunits of the AP2 complex have distinct 
functions. The large α adaptin subunit binds PI(4,5)P2 in 
the plasma membrane and cooperates with the small σ2 
adaptin subunit to bind dileucine-based sorting motifs 
(D/ExxxLL  where  D  is  aspartic  acid,  E  is  glutamic  acid 

and L is leucine) that serve as internalization signals in 
the  cytoplasmic  tails  of  transmembrane  receptors.  The 
large β2 subunit binds directly to clathrin and promotes 
its assembly. The medium sized µ2 subunit interacts with 
tyrosine-based  sorting  motifs  (YxxΦ  where  Y  is 
tyrosine  and  Φ  is  any  bulky  hydrophobic  amino  acid), 
the  internalization  signals  for  other  transmembrane 
receptors. All these ligands, as well as AP180/CALM and 
synaptotagmin, recruit AP2 to the plasma membrane.

Additional adaptor proteins help coordinate clathrin 
coat  formation  by  recruiting  cargo  and  other  proteins. 
Adaptor  proteins,  including  epsin,  amphiphysin,  Hrs/
Vps27p,  and  β-arrestin,  consist  of  one  or  more  folded 
domains  connected  by  long,  flexible  linkers  with  mul-
tiple  weak-binding  sites  (Fig.  21.12C–E).  This  “string 
and  knots”  design  allows  the  flexible  linkers  to  sweep 
through  cytoplasm  hunting  for  multiple  ligands  that 
bind  reversibly  to  the  string-like  regions.  Cooperative 
networks  of  weak  interactions  between  multivalent 
binding partners create a positive amplification cascade 
that,  once  initiated,  drives  clathrin-coat  formation.  The 
large GTPase dynamin (see Fig. 22.8) forms a collar at 
the  neck  of  deeply  invaginated  coated  pits  and  helps 
control the fission and internalization of clathrin-coated 
vesicles.

After  a  coated  vesicle  pinches  from  the  membrane, 
multiple  mechanisms  disassemble  coat  components, 
which are recycled, leaving the vesicle free to fuse with 
other  membranes  to  form,  for  example,  endosomes. 
Endophilin recruits the lipid phosphatase synaptojanin, 
which  dephosphorylates  PI(4,5)P2  and  weakens  the 

362 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

A. EM-averaged model of clathrin with fitted crystal structures

B. AP2 adapter

C
Rotated 90º with
light-chain
bound

Vertex

Proximal leg

C

Knee

Distal leg

Terminal
domain

N

Linker

α-appendage

C-µ2-
domain

N

Clathrin
binding

site

β2-
adaptin

σ2-
adaptin

α-
adaptin

=

YXXΦ

C. AP180/CALM and
     potential binders

D. Epsin and
     potential binders

E. Amphiphysin
     potential binders

ANTH
domain

ENTH
domain

UIMs

Positively cha r g e

e

d  f a c

Accessory
protein:
  AP2 (α,β2)

Clathrin

Accessory
proteins:
  Eps12
  AP2(α)

SH3
domains
Accessory proteins’

PxRpxR site

Membrane
of acidic
phospholipids

BAR domains

Accessory
protein:
AP2(α)

Clathrin

FIGURE 21.12  STRUCTURE OF THE CLATHRIN COAT. A, Structure of clathrin triskelions assembled into a clathrin cage at 2-nm resolution. 
The legs of clathrin triskelions are formed from repeating units of five helix hairpins. The N-terminal domain is a seven-bladed β-propeller similar 
to a trimeric G-protein β-subunit. B, Model of the AP2 complex from high-resolution structures of its individual subunits. The large subunits are 
helical solenoids of approximately 30 repeats of six- to eight-turn helices connected by short loops, whereas σ2 and µ2 are each five-stranded 
β-sheets  flanked  by  α-helices.  C,  Model  of  AP180/CALM  from  its  high-resolution  structure.  The α-helical  solenoid  domain  at  the  N-terminus 
(called the ANTH domain) binds PI(4,5)P2 and has a similar structure to the epsin ENTH domain. The long C-terminal tail has no predicted second-
ary structure but contains binding motifs for Eps15, clathrin, and Dx[FW]. D, Model of epsin from a high-resolution structure. The ENTH domain 
binds PI(4,5)P2, attaching epsin to the membrane. The long flexible arm contains a UIM and can bind AP2 and clathrin. When ubiquitin is bound 
to this motif, it serves as a signal for directing the membrane through the endocytic pathway, ending in incorporation into internal vesicles of 
multivesicular bodies that ultimately are degraded by hydrolytic enzymes stored in lysosomes. E, High-resolution structural model of amphiphysin. 
The molecule contains an N-terminal BAR domain and a C-terminal SH3 domain. The positively charged, concave surface of the dimer binds to 
curved  membrane  bilayers.  The  central  extended  region  binds  clathrin  and  AP2α,  and  C-terminal  SH3  domain  bind  polyproline  motifs.  AP2, 
adaptor protein 2; PI(4,5)P2, phosphatidylinositol(4,5)bis-phosphate; SH3, Src homology region-3; UIM, ubiquitin-interacting motif. (A, Courtesy 
Corinne Smith, Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, United Kingdom. B–C, Courtesy Frances Brodsky, Uni-
versity of California, San Francisco; Tomas Kirchhausen, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA; and David Owen, Medical Research Council Labo-
ratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, United Kingdom.)

attachment of coat proteins such as dynamin, APs, and 
clathrin  to  the  membrane.  The  heat  shock  chaperone 
protein  HSC70  uses  adenosine  triphosphate  (ATP) 
hydrolysis  and  cooperates  with  the  protein  auxilin  to 
disassemble  clathrin  cages.  In  parallel  the  network  of 
adapters dissociates in a self-propagating fashion.

Tethering Factors
Tethering factors target carrier vesicles to specific organ-
elles  (Fig.  21.13)  prior  to  fusion  directed  by  SNARE 
(soluble  N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive  factor  attachment 
protein  receptor)  proteins  (Fig.  21.14).  Tethering  pro-
teins also play structural roles as components of a Golgi 
matrix  or  scaffold  for  the  assembly  of  other  factors 

important  for  fusion  and/or  cargo  sorting.  Tethering 
factors can be divided into two general classes.
1.  Coiled-coiled tethering factors

•  These  rod-shaped  proteins  are  homodimeric, 
coiled-coils with globular heads at both ends that 
extend  more  than  150 nm  from  membranes  into 
the  cytoplasm  (Fig.  21.13).  Active  Rabs  anchor 
these tethers to the carrier vesicle. They promote 
formation  of  SNARE  complexes  on  vesicle  and 
target membranes. An internal hinge-like region in 
the tail collapses once the tether brings the carrier 
vesicle close to the acceptor membrane.

•  The  membranes  of  the  Golgi  apparatus  are  
decorated  with  several  large  coiled-coil  tethering  

 

CHAPTER 21  n  Secretory Membrane System and Golgi Apparatus 

363

Rab-GTP

ALPS

Tethering
protein

Rab
binding
site

Arf-GTP

FIGURE  21.13  TETHERING  PROTEINS.  Golgins,  such  as 
GMAP-210, emanate from the Golgi like tentacles, capturing vesicles 
through their ALPs motif. The captured vesicle undergoes fast on and 
off reactions to penetrate into the Golgin matrix, interacting with Rab 
proteins  with  specific  binding  sites  along  the  coiled-coil  region  of 
golgins.  This  brings  the  vesicle  close  to  the  surface  so  that  SNARE 
(soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor) 
proteins, operating at a closer distance (10–15 nm), can engage it and 
drive fusion. In addition to their role in membrane trafficking, golgins 
provide binding sites for regulators of the cytoskeleton. 

proteins called “golgins” (including GM130, GMAP-
210  and  p115).  Golgins  have  multiple  binding  
sites  for  Rab  GTPases  along  their  lengths  of  up  
to  300 nm.  Golgins  may  emanate  like  tentacles 
from the Golgi membranes, capturing vesicles, so 
SNARE  proteins  operating  at  a  closer  distance 
(10–15 nm)  can  engage  the  vesicles  and  drive 
fusion (Fig. 21.14).

2.  Multisubunit tethering factors

•  These  tethers  are  more  compact  than  the  coiled-
coil tethers but also direct carrier vesicles to accep-
tor membranes. TRAPP I (transport protein particle) 
is a flat complex of seven subunits that participates 
in  fusion  of  vesicles  from  ER  with  the  Golgi  
apparatus. The eight subunits of COG (conserved 
oligomeric  Golgi)  extend  only  approximately 
30 nm  from  the  membrane.  The  exocyst  consists 
of  eight  subunits  that  tether  secretory  vesicles  to 
the plasma membrane. All three of these tethering 
complexes bind inactive Rabs and function as GEFs 
to exchange GDP for GTP. Cells defective in COG 
function  have  pleiotropic  defects  in  glycosylation 
reactions  in  the  Golgi,  consistent  with  a  role  in 
vesicular  trafficking  across  the  Golgi  system.  The 
HOPS  (homotypic  fusion  and  vacuolar  protein 
sorting) complex has two subunits for interaction 
with  Rab7  and  shares  four  subunits  with  another 
tether.  HOPS  participates  in  the  fusion  of  endo-
somal  and  lysosomal  vesicles  by  bridging  Rab 
GTPases on two membranes.

Membrane Fusion Machinery: SNAP  
Receptor Components
Fusing  two  membranes  requires  several  steps  (Fig. 
21.14). The membranes must approach each other and 
bend  to  get  destabilized.  Then,  the  proximal  bilayer 
leaflets fuse to form a “stalk intermediate,” followed by 
fusion  of  the  distal  leaflets  to  form  and  subsequently 
expand a fusion pore. Theoretical modeling suggests the 
total energy to drive fusion ranges from 40 to 100 ΚΒT.
The  SNARE  family  of  proteins  drives  the  fusion  of 
carrier vesicles with acceptor membranes using energy 
from assembling an alpha-helical bundle to pull the mem-
branes  together  (Fig.  21.14).  Two  mechanisms  assure 
that  each  type  of  vesicle  (or  tubule)  carrier  fuses  with 
the  right  target  membrane.  First,  Rab  GTPases  recruit 
specific tethering factors that link carrier vesicles to the 
correct target membranes. Then particular SNAREs help 
ensure the specificity of fusion.

Most  SNAREs  are  transmembrane  proteins  with 
C-termini anchored in the bilayer and N-terminal domains 
in the cytoplasm. Each contains a sequence of 60 to 70 
residues  with  a  heptad  repeat  (ie,  “SNARE  motif”)  that 
can form a coiled-coil (see Fig. 3.10) but is largely disor-
dered  on  its  own.  Fusion  requires  SNARE  proteins  on 
both  transport  vesicles  (v-SNAREs)  and  target  mem-
branes (t-SNAREs). When cognate v- or t-SNAREs interact 
on  opposing  membranes,  they  form  a  trans-SNARE 
complex or SNAREpin, comprised of four SNARE motifs 
assembled in a four-helix bundle. Assembly of the SNAR-
Epin complex forces the opposing membranes together.
Synaptic  vesicle  fusion  (Figs.  17.9  and  17.10)  is  a 
well-studied  example  of  SNARE  activity.  The  synaptic 
vesicle  carries  one  v-SNARE  (synaptobrevin,  also  called 
VAMP) and the target membrane has a binary complex 
of t-SNAREs syntaxin-1 and SNAP-25 (soluble N-ethylma-
leimide  sensitive  factor  attachment  protein).  Synapto-
brevin and SNAP-25 are partially disordered on their own 
and form α-helices during fusion, while syntaxin-1 folds 
back on itself in an antiparallel coiled-coil before contrib-
uting a single helix to the bundle. Six proteins regulate 
the assembly of SNAREs, which initially form a primed 
complex that zips together into the complete four-helix 
bundle when triggered by Ca2+.

The process starts with syntaxin-1 folded in a closed, 
inhibited  conformation  because  of  bound  Munc18-1. 
Then Munc13s opens syntaxin-1, allowing the N-terminal 
domains of the three SNAREs to form a primed but inac-
tive  complex  with  Munc18-1  still  bound.  The  regula-
tory  proteins  synaptotagmin-1  and  complexin  prevent 
primed,  partially  assembled  SNARE  complexes  from 
fusing the membrane.

Entry of Ca2+ into the cell through voltage-gated Ca2+ 
channels causes membrane fusion in less than 1 millisec-
ond. Ca2+ binds synaptotagmin-1 and allows completion 
of  the  four-helix  bundle,  likely  by  relieving  the  inhibi-
tion  by  complexin.  This  assembly  process  brings  the 

364 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

A. Free vesicle

B. Formation of a
     tethered, primed
     complex

Synaptobrevin

Syntaxin

Tether

SNAP-25

Tether

SNAP-25
Syntaxin

Synaptobrevin

C. Fusion complex
     assembly

D. Fusion

E. SNARE fusion details

PITP, PI5 kinase,

PIP2, Munc13

CAPS, synaptotagmin

PIP2

Zippering

CAPS

Tethering / docking

Priming

Ca2+

Ca

sensors

Fusion

Fusion
pore

FIGURE 21.14  MEMBRANE FUSION BY SNARE PROTEINS. The example is neurotransmitter release. A, A synaptic vesicle with tethers 
and v-SNARE synaptobrevin (blue) approaches the plasma membrane, which has tethers and complexes of the t-SNAREs syntaxin (red) and 
SNAP-25 (green). B, The v- and t-SNAREs dock to form a primed but inactive complex. C, When stimulated by an action potential (see Fig. 
17.10), the SNAREs zip together to form a trans-SNARE complex that pulls the membranes together. The inset in the upper right shows a ribbon 
diagram  of  the  fully  assembled  SNAREs  anchored  to  the  membranes.  D,  The  vesicle  fuses  with  the  plasma  membrane,  leaving  cis-SNARE 
complexes  on  the  plasma  membrane.  E,  Overview  of  SNARE-mediated  fusion.  SNARE,  soluble  N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive  factor  attachment 
protein receptor. (Top right inset, Modified from Ossig R, Schmitt HD, de Groot B, et al. Exocytosis requires asymmetry in the central layer of the 
SNARE complex. EMBO J. 2000;19:6000–6010.)

membranes together to overcome the energy barrier to 
fusion.  The  trans-SNARE  complex  between  two  mem-
branes is transformed into a cis-SNARE complex on the 
cytoplasmic face of the fused membrane (Fig. 21.14D).
Most  SNAREs  are  tail-anchored  proteins  (see  Fig. 
20.10) with a transmembrane segment inserted into ER 
membranes  after  translation.  SNAREs  without  a  trans-
membrane  domain  are  attached  to  the  membrane  by 
lipid modifications such as palmitoylation. SNAREs reach 
their destinations in cells either by traversing the secre-
tory pathway to reach specific organelles, or by directly 
inserting into the organelle membrane (ie, plasma mem-
brane or mitochondria) via their tail anchors.

After the lipid bilayers fuse, SNAP proteins recruit a 
ubiquitous AAA adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) (see 
Box  36.1)  called  NSF  (for  N-ethylmaleimide  [NEM]–
sensitive factor) to disassemble the cis-SNARE complex. 
NSF  uses  the  energy  from  ATP  hydrolysis  to  dissociate 
the  bundle  of  SNARE  helices  and  recycles  the  SNAREs 
for  another  round  of  membrane  fusion.  The  sulfhydryl 

alkylating reagent NEM inactivates NSF and can prevent 
all carrier transport in the cell.

SNAREs  often  cycle  between  compartments  for 
repeated  use.  For  example,  SNAREs  involved  in  ER  to 
Golgi  transport  are  packaged  into  COPII  coats  at  ER 
export  sites  for  delivery  to  the  Golgi  apparatus,  where 
they  mediate  homotypic  fusion  (ie,  fusion  of  two  like 
transport containers that have identical cis-SNARE pairs) 
among  incoming  carriers  as  well  as  heterotypic  fusion 
(ie, fusion of two distinct membrane structures that have 
different cis-SNARE pairs) of these carriers with the Golgi 
membrane.  The  SNAREs  are  then  packaged  into  COPI 
coats for retrieval to the ER. This allows them to function 
repeatedly in ER-to-Golgi apparatus transport.

Membrane Bending Proteins
Proteins with BAR domains influence membrane traffick-
ing by inducing membrane curvature, stabilizing curva-
ture generated by other forces, and recruiting cytoplasmic 
proteins  to  membranes  of  a  particular  size  or  shape  

 

CHAPTER 21  n  Secretory Membrane System and Golgi Apparatus 

365

BAR domains

Classical BAR

N–BAR
(N-terminal
amphipathic 
helix-BAR)
F–BAR 
(FCH-BAR)

I-BAR
(Inverse-BAR)

Human BAR
domain proteins
Arfaptins

Amphiphysins/BINs,
endophilins/BIFs

FBP17, FCHo1,
FCHo2, syndapins

IRSp53, MIM

FIGURE  21.15  MEMBRANE-BENDING  PROTEINS.  Structures 
of  subclasses  of  proteins  with  BAR  domains.  Proteins  with  BAR 
domains  play  important  roles  in  membrane  trafficking  by  inducing 
membrane curvature, stabilizing curvature generated by other forces, 
or  detecting  curvature  in  order  to  recruit  cytosolic  factors  to  mem-
branes of a particular size or shape. (For reference, see PDB files 1I49 
[classical bar], 1ZWW [N-BAR], 2EFK [F-BAR], and 1WDZ [I-BAR].)

(Fig. 21.15). Most BAR domains have a coiled-coil core 
of  three α  helices  approximately  20 nm  long.  Classical 
BAR domains are shaped like a banana and are adapted 
to bind membranes with highly positive curvatures (ie, 
small  vesicles).  F-BAR  and  I-BAR  domains  fit  on  mem-
branes with less-positive curvature or even on concave, 
negatively  curved  membranes.  Most  BAR  domain  pro-
teins have at least one additional domain, such as an SH3 
domain (see Fig. 25.10) that binds polyproline sequences 
in other proteins.

BAR  domains  use  two  mechanisms  to  bend  mem-
branes.  In  one,  the  intrinsic  curvature  of  BAR  domain 
dimers simply imposes its shape on the membrane sub-
strate. In the second, amphipathic wedges present in the 
BAR domain insert into the bilayer, promoting membrane 
curvature  by  concerted  displacement  of  lipids  in  the 
leaflet  proximal  to  the  site  of  insertion.  For  example, 
N-BARs have an N-terminal amphipathic helix within the 
BAR domain that can wedge into one leaflet of the bilayer 
to push the lipids apart. These two mechanisms are not 
mutually  exclusive.  The  local  deformations  caused  by 
insertion  of  the  BAR  domain  can  facilitate  binding  
of  additional  BAR  domains  from  other  proteins  and 
thereby generate a positive-feedback cycle for curvature 
propagation.

BAR  domain  proteins  are  important  at  membrane 
trafficking  hubs  where  the  generation  of  membrane 
curvature is coupled tightly to reorganization of the actin 
cytoskeleton and signaling through small GTPases. At the 
TGN,  a  BAR  protein  regulates  biogenesis  of  transport 
carriers  for  regulated  secretion.  Other  BAR  proteins 
participate 
in  clathrin-mediated  endocytosis  where  
they  coordinate  bud  neck  constriction,  actin  filament 
assembly  and  recruitment  of  proteins  for  fission  and 
uncoating.

Secretory Transport From the Endoplasmic 
Reticulum to the Golgi Apparatus
Transport  of  newly  synthesized  proteins  out  of  the  ER 
takes place in specialized areas called ER export sites. 
In  fluorescence  images  these  structures  appear  as  dis-
persed, punctate structures approximately 1 to 2 µm in 
diameter  scattered  over  the  surface  of  the  ER  (Fig. 
21.16A).  Individual  ER  export  sites  are  organized  into 
two  zones:  a  region  of  smooth  ER  membrane  studded 
with  COPII-coated  buds  and  uncoated  tubules;  and  a 
central  cluster  of  vesicles  and  tubules  (Fig.  21.16B–C). 
The  ER  membrane  is  continuous  between  these  two 
zones  until  the  vesicle-tubule  cluster  and  its  associated 
cargo detach from the ER and move to the Golgi appa-
intermediates,  called  vesicular 
ratus  as  transport 
tubular carriers (VTCs) (Fig. 21.11D).

Cargo molecules use three distinct modes of transport 
out  of  the  ER:  bulk  flow,  signal-mediated  sorting,  and 
partitioning within the lipid bilayer. In bulk flow, cargo 
passively  distributes  between  the  ER  and  the  transport 
vesicles it generates. Soluble proteins that do not interact 
with proteins having export signals use this pathway to 
exit the ER.

In  signal-mediated  transport,  sorting  motifs  in  the 
cytoplasmic domains of transmembrane proteins interact 
with COPII machinery to concentrate the cargo (and any 
associated molecules) in transport carriers. These export 
signals  are  found  on  proteins  that  constitutively  cycle 
between  the  ER  and  Golgi  (such  as  the  p24  family  of 
proteins) as well as on a portion of secretory membrane 
proteins.

Many membrane proteins partition into the bilayer of 
transport  carriers  based  on  their  collective  physico-
chemical properties without the help of specific sorting 
signals or receptors (Figs. 21.3 and 21.4). The p24 family 
of  proteins  facilitates  this  sorting  by  interacting  with 
COPII  coats  and  concentrating  at  ER  exit  sites,  where 
they increase the thickness of the bilayer by sequestering 
cholesterol. Plasma membrane proteins with long trans-
membrane helices partition into the thicker membranes  
of  transport  vesicles,  while  ER-resident  proteins  with 
shorter  transmembrane  domains  are  retained  in  the 
thinner bilayer of the bulk ER. This process allows thou-
sands of diverse types of membrane cargo to efficiently 
move  out  of  the  ER  into  vesicular  carriers  destined  for 
the Golgi apparatus.

The  sequential  actions  of  the  Sar1,  Rab1,  and  Arf1 
GTPases  and  their  effectors  orchestrate  the  differentia-
tion of the ER export sites into mobile VTCs (Fig. 21.17). 
Sar1 GTPase initiates the formation of the ER export site 
by  assembling  the  COPII  coat  that  forms  coated  buds  
and  concentrates  specific  integral  membrane  proteins 
(including  the  p24  proteins  and  v-SNAREs)  in  the  bud. 
The thicker membrane bilayer promotes partitioning of 
proteins with long transmembrane domains into the ER 

366 

A

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

B

C

0.1 µm

FIGURE  21.16  ENDOPLASMIC  RETICULUM  EXPORT  DOMAINS  AND  VESICLE  TUBULE  CARRIERS.  A,  Fluorescence  micrograph 
showing the distribution of ER export domains and Golgi apparatus in a fibroblast expressing an ER export domain marker, Sec31-YFP (red) and 
a Golgi marker, galactosyltransferase-CFP (green). The ER exit sites are distributed throughout the cytoplasm as punctate structures, whereas 
the Golgi apparatus is localized next to the nucleus. B, Electron micrograph of a thin section of a typical ER export domain containing a central 
VTC that can detach and traffic to the Golgi apparatus. ER is green, ER-associated-coated buds are blue, the VTC is red; arrowheads mark 
COPI coats, and arrows mark clathrin-coated vesicles from the plasma membrane. C, Reconstruction from four consecutive serial-thin sections 
illustrating the three-dimensional organization of an ER export domain demarcated by the box. CFP, cyan fluorescent protein; COPI, coat protein 
I;  ER,  endoplasmic  reticulum;  VTC,  vesicular  tubular  carrier.  (A,  Modified  from  Altan-Bonnet  N,  Sougrat  R,  Liu  W,  et al.  Golgi  inheritance  in 
mammalian cells is mediated through endoplasmic reticulum export activities. Mol Biol Cell. 2006;17:990–1005. B–C, From Bannykh SI, Nishimura 
N, Balch WE. Getting into the Golgi. Trends Cell Biol. 1998;8:21–25.)

Trans Golgi

Cis Golgi

ER export
domain

VTC

Rab1, Arf1
& effectors

Sar1 &
effectors

Arf1[T31N]

BFA

Sar1[T39N]

FIGURE  21.17  TRANSPORT  FROM  THE  ENDOPLASMIC 
RETICULUM TO THE GOLGI APPARATUS. ER to Golgi transport 
is  orchestrated  by  the  combined  activities  of  many  molecules.  Sar1 
and its effectors initiate COPII-coated bud formation and clustering of 
cargo at regions called ER export sites. This induces p115 and Rab1 
to bind to these regions, which in turn recruits GBF1, the GEF for Arf1. 
Subsequent recruitment of Arf1 and its effectors further differentiates 
the ER export domain into a VTC. The VTC detaches from the ER and 
targets  the  Golgi  apparatus,  where  it  fuses  with  the  cis  face  of  the 
Golgi. The cargo in the VTC is then released into the Golgi and moves 
to  the  trans-Golgi  (where  it  will  exit  from  the  TGN).  Expression  of  a 
constitutively inactive Sar1 mutant, Sar1[T39N], blocks COPII recruit-
ment, and no ER exit sites form. Expression of an inactive Arf1 mutant, 
Arf1[T31N],  or  BFA  treatment  blocks  recruitment  of  Arf1  effectors, 
which prevents ER exit sites from differentiating into VTCs. This causes 
the shrinkage and disappearance of the Golgi apparatus because new 
membrane from the ER cannot be delivered to the Golgi. BFA, brefeldin 
A;  COPII,  coat  protein  II;  ER,  endoplasmic  reticulum;  GEF,  guanine 
nucleotide exchange factor; Sar1, secretory and Ras-related 1; TGN, 
trans-Golgi network; VTC, vesicular tubular carrier. 

export site, including those without COPII recognition 
motifs.  The  SNARE  proteins  allow  vesicles  and  mem-
brane tubules that bud from the ER export site to fuse 
with themselves to form a tubule cluster. The tethering 
factors GM130 and giantin anchor these membranes to 
the  cytoskeleton.  The  GEF  GBF1  activates  Arf1,  which 
recruits effectors that initiate the retrieval of proteins in 
vesicles  back  to  the  ER.  Activated  Arf1  also  recruits 
ankyrin and spectrin (see Fig. 13.11), which form a scaf-
fold  for  other  cytoskeletal  proteins,  including  dynactin 
and dynein.

A mutation that locks Sar1 in the inactive GDP state 
(causing COPII to be released from membranes) prevents 
ER export domain formation. Likewise, trapping Arf1 in 
the GDP state with a mutation or by brefeldin A (BFA) 
treatment blocks VTC formation (Fig. 21.17A). Both the 
mutations  and  BFA  also  cause  the  Golgi  apparatus  to 
disappear,  because  the  Golgi’s  existence  depends  on 
continuous membrane input from the ER.

The  dynein–dynactin  motor  complex  (see  Fig.  37.2) 
helps  detach  VTCs  from  ER  export  domains  and  trans-
ports  VTCs  toward  the  minus  ends  of  microtubules 
located  at  the  centrosome  near  the  Golgi  apparatus 
(Fig. 21.17). The VTC matures as activated Arf1 recruits 
dozens  of  cytoplasmic  proteins  to  its  membranes. 
Lipid-modifying  enzymes  such  as  phosphatidylinositol 
kinases and phosphatases change the lipid composition, 
permitting tethering factors and matrix proteins to bind 

 

CHAPTER 21  n  Secretory Membrane System and Golgi Apparatus 

367

the membrane of the motile VTC. The COPI coat binds 
to  and  clusters  specific  proteins,  enabling  them  to  be 
retrieved back to the ER.

Upon  arriving  at  the  centrosome  VTCs  fuse  with 
membranes on the cis or entry face of the Golgi appa-
ratus.  This  region  is  also  called  the  cis-Golgi  network 
and is characterized by an elaborate tubular appearance. 
Membrane  fusion  releases  cargo  proteins  and  lipids 
carried  by  the  VTC  into  the  Golgi  system  for  process-
ing by enzymes that modify the cargo’s oligosaccharide  
side chains.

Golgi Apparatus
The Golgi apparatus (Fig. 21.18) performs three primary 
functions within the secretory membrane system. First, 
it  is  a  factory  to  synthesize  the  carbohydrate  chains  
of  glycoproteins,  proteoglycans,  and  polysaccharides 
secreted  by  plants  (eg,  inulin)  in  preparation  for  their 
biological functions at the cell surface. Second, the Golgi 
apparatus is a protein-sorting station for the delivery to 
many cellular destinations. This includes transport to the 
plasma membrane, secretion to the cell exterior, sorting 
to the endosome/lysosomal system, or retrieval back to 
the ER. Third, the Golgi apparatus synthesizes sphingo-
myelin  and  glycosphingolipids.  These  lipids  associate 
with  cholesterol  and  influence  protein  sorting  in  the 
Golgi apparatus and plasma membrane.

Golgi Morphology and Dynamics
The  Golgi  apparatus  in  many  animal  cells  appears  as  a 
ribbon-like  structure  adjacent  to  the  nucleus  and  close 

to  the  centrosome,  the  main  microtubule-organizing 
center of the cell (Fig. 21.18A). Electron micrographs of 
thin sections show that the Golgi apparatus consists of 
stacked,  flattened,  membrane-enclosed  cisternae  that 
resemble a stack of pancakes (Fig. 21.18B). Crosslinking 
of cisternae by Golgi-associated tethering factors results 
in their tight, parallel alignment within the stack. Tubules 
and vesicles at the rims of the stacks interconnect many 
stacks  into  a  single  ribbon-like  structure  by  a  process 
dependent on microtubules. If microtubules are experi-
mentally depolymerized, the ribbon-like Golgi structure 
reorganizes into single stacks found at ER exit sites (Fig. 
21.19).  This  distribution  resembles  the  distribution  of 
Golgi  stacks  in  plant  cells,  where,  hundreds  of  single 
stacks  are  located  adjacent  to  ER  exit  sites  rather  than 
being joined together as a single ribbon.

Stacks of Golgi cisternae in animal and plant cells all 
exhibit  a  cis-to-trans  polarity  reflecting  the  passage  of 
cargo through the organelle. Proteins and lipids from the 
ER  enter  the  cis  face  (entry  face)  of  the  stack.  After 
passing through the stack of cisternae, cargo leaves from 
the  trans  face  at  the  opposite  side  of  the  stack.  Mem-
brane  sorting  and  transport  activities  of  the  Golgi  are 
thought to be especially high at the cis and trans faces 
and within the tubular-vesicular elements (noncompact 
zone) that interconnect the stacks (Fig. 21.18B).

Three  proposed  mechanisms  explain  transport  of 
secretory  cargo  proteins  through  the  Golgi  apparatus 
(Fig. 21.20). In one model, the cisternae comprising the 
Golgi stack are relatively stable structures and secretory 
cargo transits from cisterna to cisterna across the stack 
in  tubules  or  vesicles  that  bud  from  one  cisternae  and 

A

B

Noncompact

zone

Compact
zones

TGN

Trans Golgi

Cis Golgi

200 nm

Mitochondria

Golgi
Microtubules

FIGURE 21.18  LOCALIZATION AND MORPHOLOGY OF THE GOLGI APPARATUS IN ANIMAL CELLS. A, Fluorescence micrograph 
of a rat fibroblast stained with antibodies to galactosyltransferase (a Golgi enzyme) (red) and antibodies to tubulin (green). The Golgi apparatus 
typically extends as a ribbon-like structure around the centrosome located on one side of the nucleus. B, Electron micrograph of a rat epithelial 
cell showing a single stack of cisternae cut transversely. The cis and trans faces of the Golgi are at opposite sides of the stack, with the trans-Golgi 
network (TGN) extending from the trans face. (Courtesy J. Lippincott-Schwartz and Rachid Sougrat, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.)

368 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

A. Microtubule dependent
     localization of the Golgi

B. Relocalization of Golgi in absence
     of microtubules

ERES

VTC

Golgi

ER

ERES

VTC

NUCLEUS

Golgi
VTC
ERES

FIGURE 21.19  EFFECT OF MICROTUBULE DEPOLYMERIZATION ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE GOLGI APPARATUS. A, Micro-
tubules (red) radiating from the centrosome (red lines) with their plus ends at the cell periphery help localize the Golgi apparatus in many animal 
cells by serving as tracks for the inward movement of membrane-bound carriers (vesicular tubular carrier [VTC]) derived from the endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER). The carriers deliver secretory cargo, as well as Golgi enzymes, to the Golgi apparatus. Retrograde transport of Golgi enzymes 
back to the ER does not depend on microtubules (since the ER is widely distributed throughout the cytoplasm). Because of this, when microtubules 
are disassembled (B), the Golgi apparatus reforms as separate stacks at sites adjacent to ER export sites, owing to the accumulation of cycling 
Golgi enzymes at these sites. 

A. Vesicle transport

B. Cisternal progression

C. Lipid partitioning mechanism

TGN
Trans

Medial

Cis

VTC

FIGURE 21.20  MODELS FOR CARGO MOVEMENT THROUGH THE GOLGI APPARATUS. A, Vesicle budding and fusion as the cargo 
moves forward. B, Cisternal progression as cisternae with cargo form on the cis side and mature as the Golgi enzymes move back through the 
stack. C, Lipid partitioning mechanism. 

fuse with the next. Directional flow is achieved by the 
cargo proteins having preferential affinity for the mem-
branes comprising the tubular/vesicular transport inter-
mediates budding out from the Golgi toward the plasma 
membrane.  In  a  second  mechanism,  called  cisternal 
progression,  secretory  cargo  is  transported  across  the 
stack in continuously progressing cisternae. New cister-
nae form at the cis face of the stack by coalescence of 
VTCs  and  then  progress  across  the  stack  to  the  trans 
side.  Secretory  cargo  molecules  are  confined  within  a 
given  cisterna  until  it  passes  from  the  cis  face  to  the 

trans face and exits from the Golgi apparatus in transport 
carriers. Support for cisternal progression derives from 
studies  in  yeast  showing  markers  in  individual  Golgi 
cisterna mature from early to late forms over time. Live 
cell kinetic measurements in mammalian cells show that 
cargo  exits  from  the  Golgi  over  an  exponential  time 
course  with  no  lag.  This  finding,  together  with  the 
observation  that  resident  enzymes  and  cargo  partition 
into distinct domains within the Golgi apparatus, in addi-
tion  to  having  overlapping  distributions,  have  led  to  a 
third  model  of  Golgi  trafficking.  In  this  model, 

 

CHAPTER 21  n  Secretory Membrane System and Golgi Apparatus 

369

partitioning of cargo proteins into lipid domains depleted 
of Golgi enzymes provides a mechanism for their export 
out of the Golgi (Fig. 21.20).

The size, appearance, and even existence of the Golgi 
apparatus  depend  on  the  amount  and  rate  of  cargo 
movement  through  the  secretory  pathway.  The  yeast 
Saccharomyces  cerevisiae,  for  example,  has  a  poorly 
developed  Golgi  apparatus  because  secretory  transport 
is  normally  too  fast  for  elaborate  Golgi  structures  to 
accumulate.  However,  conditions  that  slow  cargo 
transport  out  of  the  Golgi  apparatus  in  yeast  cells  lead 
to  the  Golgi  apparatus  enlarging  and  rearranging  into 
compact stacks similar to those seen in most animal and  
plant cells.

The Golgi apparatus is a dynamic rather than perma-
nent  cellular  structure,  because  both  its  proteins  and 
lipids  move  continuously  along  various  pathways.  No 
class  of  Golgi  protein  is  stably  associated  within  this 
organelle. Integral membrane proteins, including process-
ing enzymes and SNAREs, continuously exit and reenter 
the  Golgi  apparatus  by  membrane-trafficking  pathways 
leading  to  and  from  the  ER.  Peripheral  membrane 
proteins associated with the Golgi apparatus (including 
Arf1, coatomer, Rab proteins, matrix proteins, tethering 
factors,  and  GEFs)  exchange  constantly  between  Golgi 
membranes and cytoplasmic pools.

The  transient  and  dynamic  association  of  molecules 
with the Golgi apparatus makes this organelle sensitive 
to the functions of many cellular systems. For example, 
in  the  absence  of  microtubules  the  Golgi  apparatus  in 
mammalian  cells  relocates  adjacent  to  ER  export  sites 
(Fig. 21.19). This arises because Golgi enzymes that are 
continuously recycling back to the ER cannot return to 
a  centrosomal  location  without  microtubules.  Instead, 
they accumulate together with Golgi scaffolding, tether-
ing, and structural coat proteins at ER exit sites distrib-
uted across the ER, forming Golgi ministacks.

BFA  disperses  the  Golgi  apparatus  by  a  different 
mechanism.  The  drug  prevents  Arf1  from  exchanging 
GDP for GTP (Fig. 21.5), thereby preventing the mem-
brane from recruiting Arf1 effectors from the cytoplasm. 

Within minutes, resident transmembrane proteins of the 
Golgi  are  recycled  to  the  ER  where  they  are  retained, 
and the Golgi apparatus vanishes. If BFA is removed, the 
Golgi  apparatus  reforms  by  outgrowth  of  membrane 
from the ER.

The  Golgi  apparatus  disassembles  during  mitosis  in 
many eukaryotic cells and then reassembles in interphase 
(Fig.  21.21).  This  process  superficially  resembles  the 
effects  of  BFA  application  and  washout,  since  many 
Golgi enzymes return to the ER or to ER exit sites during 
mitosis and reemerge from the ER at the end of mitosis. 
This is triggered both by Arf1 being inactivated and by 
tethering factors/matrix proteins of the Golgi apparatus 
being  phosphorylated  by  mitotic  kinases  (see  Chapter 
40) during mitosis.

Although  the  Golgi  apparatus  is  highly  dynamic  and 
continually exchanges its protein and lipid components 
with other cellular compartments, it maintains a unique 
biochemical  and  morphologic  identity.  This  allows 
the  Golgi  apparatus  to  participate  in  several  major 
biosynthetic  and  processing  pathways  in  the  cell,  as  is  
discussed next.

Glycoprotein and Glycolipid Processing
A primary function of the Golgi apparatus is the glyco-
sylation  (ie,  sugar  modification)  of  proteins  and  lipids 
called glycoproteins and glycolipids. Most cell-surface 
proteins  and  lipids  and  secreted  proteins  are  glycosyl-
ated.  Their  glycans  participate  in  numerous  biological 
functions,  including  cell–cell  and  cell–matrix  interac-
tions,  intracellular  and  intercellular  trafficking,  and 
signaling.

The  most  widely  recognized  glycosylation  event 
occurring within the Golgi involves the modification of 
N-linked oligosaccharides on glycoproteins (Fig. 21.22). 
These  N-linked  sugar  chains  are  added  as  preformed 
complexes of 14 sugar residues to asparagine side chains 
of proteins in the ER (see Figs. 3.26 and 20.11). Follow-
ing  delivery  to  the  Golgi,  the  N-linked  sugar  chains  of 
the glycoprotein undergo extensive modifications in an 
ordered sequence. First, some of the mannose residues 

G2

10 µm

Prometaphase

Metaphase

Telophase

G1

0 min

30 min

40 min

60 min

90 min

FIGURE 21.21  FLUORESCENCE MICROGRAPHS OF A CELL EXPRESSING A TAGGED GOLGI ENZYME, GALACTOSYLTRANSFERASE–
GREEN FLUORESCENCE PROTEIN (GFP), DURING MITOSIS. Time lapse images. As the cell in the left of the image passes through prophase 
and metaphase, its Golgi membranes fragment and then disperse into the ER. During cytokinesis, the Golgi membranes reappear as fragments. 
These fragments then coalesce into a juxtanuclear Golgi ribbon at the end of mitosis. (From Sengupta P, Sateite-Lrosjnan P, Seo AY, et al. ER 
trapping reveals Golgi enzymes continually visit the ER through a recycling pathway that controls Golgi organization. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 
2015;112:6752–6761.)

370 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

A

B

C

D

E

F

ASN

GlcNAc

Gal

NANA

Man

Glc

ER

CIS GOLGI

TRANS GOLGI

CELL
SURFACE

FIGURE 21.22  PROCESSING OF N-LINKED CORE OLIGOSACCHARIDES IN THE GOLGI APPARATUS. A–F, Sequential steps trim the 
mannose  (Man)/glucose  (Glc)  core  and  then  add  N-acetylglucosamine  (GlcNAc),  galactose  (Gal),  and  sialic  acid  (NANA)  to  form  a  variety  of 
complex oligosaccharides, one of which is shown here. ASN, asparagine. 

are removed. This is followed by the sequential addition 
of  N-acetylglucosamine,  removal  of  more  mannoses, 
addition  of  fucose  and  more  N-acetylglucosamine,  and 
finally addition of galactose and sialic acid residues. Cell 
biologists have used the N-linked glycan-processing steps 
that  take  place  in  the  mammalian  Golgi  apparatus  as 
experimental signposts for the passage of glycoproteins 
through the secretory pathway.

After growing by simple addition of monosaccharide 
units,  many  oligosaccharides  are  modified  by  enzymes 
that  add  phosphate,  sulfate,  acetate,  or  methyl  groups  
or  isomerize  specific  carbons.  These  modifications,  as 
well  as  differential  processing  of  N-linked  oligosaccha-
ride structures (producing high-mannose type, complex 
type, and hybrid structures), contribute to the diversity 
of  sugar  residues  on  the  cell  surface  and  can  impart 
specific functions to the sugar chains.

More than 200 Golgi enzymes participate in the bio-
synthesis  of  glycoproteins  and  glycolipids.  Glycosyl-
transferases  add  specific  sugar  residues  to  glycans, 
while glycosidases remove specific sugar residues. All 
these enzymes are type II transmembrane proteins with 
a short cytoplasmic amino terminal domain followed by 
a transmembrane segment and catalytic luminal domain 
within the Golgi cisternae.

Carrier  proteins  transfer  sugar-nucleotides  made  in 
the  cytoplasm  into  the  lumen  of  the  Golgi  apparatus  
for elongation of glycan chains (see Chapter 15). These 
carriers  are  antiporters  (see  Fig.  15.2)  that  exchange 
nucleotide  sugars  (such  as  uridine  diphosphate  [UDP]- 
N-acetylglucosamine, UDP-galactose, and cytidine mono-
phosphate [CMP]-N-acetylneuramic acid) for nucleoside 
monophosphates formed during glycosyl transfer. Glyco-
syltransferases then use the high-energy sugar-nucleotides 
as  substrates  to  add  new  sugars  to  an  oligosaccharide 
chain.  Most  glycosyltransferases  are  specific  for  sugar-
nucleotide donors and particular oligosaccharide accep-
tors, but the oligosaccharides are synthesized without a 
template,  so  their  structures  vary  more  than  polypep-
tides  and  polynucleotides,  which  are  synthesized  on 

templates.  Glycosidases  trim  sugars  from  the  branched 
core oligosaccharides prior to addition of other sugars. 
They  include  mannosidases  I  and  II,  which  clip  outer-
branch  mannose  residues  on  N-linked  oligosaccharides 
prior to the addition of N-acetylglucosamine.

The  Golgi  enzymes  also  add  oligosaccharides  to  the 
hydroxyl  groups  of  serine  and  threonine  residues  of 
selected  proteins,  such  as  proteoglycans,  heavily  gly-
cosylated proteins in secretory granules, and the extra-
cellular matrix (see Figs. 29.12 and 29.13). This process, 
called  O-linked  glycosylation,  begins  with  the  addi-
tion  of  one  of  three  short  oligosaccharides  to  selected 
serine  and  threonine  residues  of  a  proteoglycan  core 
protein (see Fig. 3.26). Glycosyltransferases in the Golgi 
apparatus then add many copies of the same disaccharide 
unit to the growing polysaccharide. Other enzymes then 
add  sulfates  to  a  few  of  the  sugar  residues  before  the 
molecule exits the Golgi system.

Enzymes  in  the  Golgi  apparatus  also  mark  specific 
proteins for transport to lysosomes by phosphorylating 
the  6-hydroxyl  of  mannose.  This  modification  is  the 
sorting signal that directs lysosomal enzymes to mannose 
6-phosphate  receptors  in  the  trans-Golgi  apparatus  for 
targeting to lysosomes. The N-linked oligosaccharides on 
these lysosomal enzymes are initially processed in the ER 
by trimming of glucose and mannose residues. However, 
in the Golgi apparatus, they are the unique substrates for 
two enzymes that act sequentially to generate terminal 
mannose 6-phosphates. Human patients with the lethal 
disease  mucolipidosis  II  (called  I-cell  disease)  fail  to 
phosphorylate the mannose residues required for target-
ing  to  lysosomes  (see  Chapter  23).  As  a  result,  their 
lysosomal enzymes are secreted from the cell, and lyso-
somes fail to degrade waste materials. Lysosomes become 
engorged with undigested substrates, leading to fatal cell 
and tissue abnormalities.

Enzymes  in  the  Golgi  stacks  also  load  noncova-
lently  associated  cholesterol  and  phospholipids  onto  
high-density  and  low-density  lipoproteins  for  secre-
tion  by  liver  cells  into  the  blood.  In  plant  cells,  Golgi 

 

CHAPTER 21  n  Secretory Membrane System and Golgi Apparatus 

371

enzymes  also  synthesize  complex  polysaccharides  that 
are  important  constituents  of  the  plant  cell  wall  (see  
Fig. 32.13).

Proteolytic Processing of Protein Precursors
A number of proteins, including peptide hormones, are 
cleaved into active fragments in the Golgi apparatus and 
its secretory vesicles. These proteins are synthesized as 
large  precursors  with  one  or  more  small  hormones 
embedded in long polypeptides. One example is a yeast 
mating  pheromone.  Another  is  proopiomelanocortin, 
the  precursor  to  no  fewer  than  six  small  peptide  hor-
mones  including  endogenous  opioids  in  vertebrates. 
Proteolytic enzymes called prohormone convertases 
cleave  the  precursor  proteins  into  active  hormones  in 
the  TGN  and  post-TGN  transport  intermediates.  The 
mixture  of  products  depends  on  the  prohormone  con-
vertases expressed in particular cells. Proteolysis in the 
Golgi  also  affects  the  final  folding  state  and  activity  of 
many other proteins. Inherited defects in these process-
ing  pathways  lead  to  a  number  of  diseases,  including 
hormone insufficiency and a hereditary amyloid disease.

Lipid Biosynthesis and Metabolism
The  Golgi  apparatus  also  synthesizes  sphingolipids, 
including  sphingomyelin  and  the  glycosphingolip-
ids  glucosylceramide  and  galactosylceramide  (see  Fig. 
13.3).  These  sphingolipids  are  key  components  of  the 
lipid  gradient  across  the  secretory  pathway  (Fig.  21.4) 
and  contribute  to  the  function  of  the  Golgi  apparatus 
as  a  sorting  station.  Sphingolipids  spontaneously  form 
microdomains  or  lipid  rafts  in  the  luminal  leaflet  of 
Golgi  membranes.  Glycosylphosphatidylinositol  (GPI)- 
anchored  proteins  (see  Fig.  13.10),  doubly  acylated 
proteins,  and  transmembrane  proteins  physically  parti-
tion  into  these  thicker  microdomains  and  are  thereby 
enriched in vesicles destined for the plasma membrane.
Ceramide,  the  backbone  of  all  sphingolipids  (see 
Chapter 20 and Figs. 13.2 and 26.4), is synthesized in the 
ER and then transported to the Golgi complex, where it 
is modified to form glucosylceramide and sphingomyelin. 
Glucosylceramide synthesis is catalyzed on the cytoplas-
mic  surface  of  Golgi  membranes  by  the  enzyme  UDP-
glucose:ceramide glucosyltransferase. Glucosylceramide 
can  then  be  transported  to  the  plasma  membrane  or 
translocated to the luminal leaflet of Golgi membranes, 
where  galactosylation  of  the  head  group  results  in  the 
formation  of  lactosylceramide.  Sequential  glycosylation 
of lactosylceramide by glycosyltransferases of the Golgi 
lumen  generates  complex  glycolipids  and  gangliosides 
for  the  plasma  membrane.  Ceramide  and  cholesterol  
can be transferred between the ER and Golgi apparatus 
by  a  nonvesicular  transport  pathway  involving 
the  ER-localized  ceramide  transfer  protein  (CERT)  and 
Golgi-localized  oxysterol-binding  protein  (OSBP)  (see 
Fig. 20.17).

Sphingomyelin  synthase,  an  enzyme  on  the  luminal 
leaflet  of  Golgi  membranes,  catalyzes  the  synthesis  of 
sphingomyelin. The enzyme transfers phosphorylcholine 
from  phosphatidylcholine  to  ceramide,  releasing  the 
signaling lipid diacylglycerol (DAG) in the process. This 
mechanism therefore couples consumption of the signal-
ing lipid ceramide (see Fig. 26.11) with the production 
of the signaling lipid DAG (see Fig. 26.8). If DAG accu-
mulates  in  the  Golgi  apparatus,  phosphorylcholine  can 
be transferred from sphingomyelin back to DAG, forming 
phosphatidylcholine  and  ceramide.  Alternatively,  DAG 
can be digested by lipases.

Sorting From the Trans-Golgi Network
After  transport  through  the  Golgi  system,  cargo  leaves 
the trans or exit face of the Golgi apparatus (Fig. 21.23). 
The exit region is called the TGN (trans-Golgi network) 
because of its tubular network organization. This organi-
zation  is  characteristic  of  other  sorting  compartments, 
such  as  the  VTC,  the  cis-Golgi,  and  sorting  endosomes 
(see  Fig.  22.12).  Cargo  that  arrives  in  the  TGN  can  be 
distributed, via distinct transport carriers, to three main 
intracellular  locations:  the  plasma  membrane  and  cell 
exterior; the endosome/lysosomal system, polarized cell 
surfaces, or specialized secretory organelles or granules. 

B

A

0 sec

To cell
membrane

To endosomes/

lysosomes

7

24

29

41

To secretory

granual

TGN

Cis
Golgi

FIGURE  21.23  PATHWAYS  FROM  THE  TRANS-GOLGI 
NETWORK. A, Time series of fluorescence micrographs of a tissue 
culture  cell  expressing  green  fluorescence  protein  (GFP)-tagged 
vesicular  stomatitis  G-protein  (VSVG-GFP).  The  images  show  long 
tubules  enriched  in  the  labeled  protein  (arrows)  emanating  from  the 
Golgi apparatus. The tubules later detach from the Golgi and traffic to 
the  plasma  membrane.  Scale  bar  is  5  µm.  B,  Cargo  is  sorted  and 
packaged  into  distinct  transport  carriers  for  targeting  to  the  plasma 
membrane, endosomes/lysosomes, and secretory granules.  (A, From 
Hirschberg K, Miller CM, Ellenberg J, et al. Kinetic analysis of secretory 
protein  traffic  and  characterization  of  Golgi  to  plasma  membrane 
transport intermediates in living cells. J Cell Biol. 1998;143:1485–1503, 
copyright by the Rockefeller University Press.)

372 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

Specialized cells emphasize one or more of these path-
ways.  The  intracellular  route  taken  by  each  protein 
depends on many factors, including whether the protein 
aggregates,  prefers  specialized  lipid  environments,  or 
has sorting properties encoded in the polypeptide chain.

Constitutive Transport to the Plasma Membrane
A steady stream of proteins and lipids from the TGN to 
the  cell  surface  occurs  constitutively  through  tubular 
transport  carriers  that  bud  out  from  the  TGN  (Fig. 
21.23B). No known coat proteins form these structures. 
Instead,  cargo  proteins  conveyed  to  the  plasma  mem-
brane by these structures have transmembrane segments 
that partition into lipid domains containing sphingolipids 
and  cholesterol.  Activation  of  specific  lipid-modifying 
enzymes  such  as  phosphatidylinositol  4-kinase  in  the 
sorting domain of the TGN enriched in sphingolipids and 
cholesterol results in the domains forming tubules that 
pinch  off  the  TGN.  In  addition  to  membrane  compo-
nents, bulk soluble markers are also carried to the plasma 
membrane by these structures. Motors moving on micro-
tubules  and/or  actin  filaments  facilitate  extension  of 
these  tubules,  while  dynamin-2  mediates  tubule  sever-
ing. In mammalian cells, motor proteins such as kinesins 
move the constitutive membrane carriers outward from 
the  Golgi  apparatus  along  microtubules.  Fusion  of  the 
carriers with the plasma membrane releases cargo carried 
in the lumen of the carrier vesicle into the extracellular 
space. After fusion, membrane lipids and proteins redis-
tribute laterally by diffusion in the plane of the plasma 
membrane.

Trafficking to the Plasma Membrane in  
Polarized Cells
Polarized cells, such as epithelial cells, have functionally 
(and thus compositionally) distinct apical and basolateral 
plasma membrane domains (Fig. 21.24A–B). Tight junc-
tions  (see  Figs.  31.2  and  31.3)  both  seal  the  space 
between  neighboring  cells  and  form  the  boundary 
between  these  two  membrane  domains  by  preventing 
diffusion  of  lipids  and  proteins  between  the  domains. 
This polarity is essential for the physiological functions 
of epithelia in virtually every organ including the intes-
tine (see Fig. 17.2) and kidney (see Fig. 17.3).

Most of our knowledge of membrane sorting in polar-
ized  cells  has  come  from  studying  epithelial  cells.  As 
expected,  the  trafficking  complexity  increases  as  desti-
nation options increase, and cells use at least three dis-
tinct  mechanisms  for  the  polarized  sorting  of  plasma 
membrane  proteins  (Fig.  21.24C–D).  Most  epithelial 
cells  use  combinations  of  these  three  mechanisms  to 
generate and maintain cell polarity.

The first mechanism (Fig. 21.24C) involves selective 
packaging of proteins destined for the apical or basolat-
eral membranes into distinct carrier vesicles at the TGN 
for delivery to the appropriate surface. Direct targeting 
to the basolateral membrane uses sorting signals in the 

A

B

C

D

E

a
Lipid
raft

bl

Lysosome

Sorting
endosome

FIGURE  21.24  PATHWAYS  THAT  ESTABLISH  DISTINCT 
PLASMA  MEMBRANE  DOMAINS  IN  POLARIZED  EPITHELIAL 
CELLS.  A–B,  Fluorescence  micrographs  of  polarized  epithelial  cells 
showing tight junctions (marked with red fluorescence in both A and 
B)  that  seal  the  boundary  between  apical  and  basolateral  domains. 
A,  E-cadherin  (green)  is  restricted  to  the  apical  plasma  membrane. 
B, Syntaxin-3 (green) is restricted to the basolateral surface. Nuclei are 
stained  red.  C–D,  Three  pathways  for  the  distribution  of  integral 
membrane proteins destined for either the apical (a [red]) or basolateral 
(bl [blue]) membranes of polarized epithelial cells. C, Direct sorting from 
the  TGN  to  either  the  apical  or  basolateral  surface.  Apical  transport 
involves inclusion into lipid rafts, whereas proteins destined for direct 
transport to the basolateral surface carry a cytoplasmic sorting motif 
for inclusion into specific transport vesicles. D, Indirect pathway. Newly 
synthesized proteins are randomly targeted to both surfaces followed 
by selective retention and/or selective degradation from one surface 
or the other, resulting in a polarized distribution. E, Indirect pathway. 
Newly synthesized proteins are transported to the basolateral surface, 
followed by retention of basolateral proteins and selective transcytosis 
of apical proteins to the apical surface. (A–B, Courtesy T. Weimbs and 
S.H. Low, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH.)

cytoplasmic domains of membrane proteins for sorting 
during secretory transport, often canonical motifs such 
as  YXXΦ  (tyrosine–any two  amino  acids–hydrophobic) 
and  [DE]XXXL[LI]  (aspartic  acid  or  glutamic  acid–any 
three amino acids–leucine–leucine or isoleucine). These 
or other sorting signals direct receptors for low-density 
lipoprotein, transferrin, mannose-6-phosphate receptors 
(MPRs), and polymeric immunoglobulins from the TGN 
into basolaterally directed carriers. The µ-1B subunit of 
AP1 has a higher affinity for these targeting motifs than 
µ-1A  and  packages  cargo  proteins  into  clathrin-coated 
vesicles for delivery to basolateral membranes. The µ-1A 
subunit  of  AP1  is  involved  in  nonpolarized  trafficking. 
AP4  can  also  mediate  packaging  of  some  proteins  for 
basolateral membranes.

 

CHAPTER 21  n  Secretory Membrane System and Golgi Apparatus 

373

Direct  targeting  of  proteins  from  the  TGN  to  the 
apical  domain  of  polarized  epithelial  cells  is  less-well 
defined, but may depend on partitioning into lipid rafts 
enriched  in  sphingomyelin  and  cholesterol  (see  Fig. 
13.7) formed in the TGN. Proteins concentrate in lipid 
rafts in the TGN followed by sorting into carrier vesicles 
directed  to  the  apical  cell  surface.  Examples  include 
proteins with a GPI anchor, N- or O-glycans that bind to 
galectins  (a  multivalent  carbohydrate-binding  protein) 
and  influenza  virus  hemagglutinin  and  neuraminidase. 
Other  GPI-anchored  proteins  depend  on  MAL  (myelin 
and lymphocyte protein, VIP17), or annexin2, to target 
to apical membranes.

The  second  mechanism  for  generating  cell  polarity 
(Fig.  21.24D)  delivers  newly  synthesized  proteins  ran-
domly to the apical and basolateral surfaces, followed by 
their  selective  retention  or  depletion  at  those  sites.  At 
steady  state  the  proteins  become  concentrated  at  the 
domain where they are more stable. This mechanism is 
used for establishing polarity during cellular differentia-
tion.  In  this  case,  uniformly  distributed  proteins  that 
preexist  on  a  nonpolarized  cell  will  redistribute  in  a 
polarized  fashion  in  response  to  cell–cell  contacts  that 
initiate  polarization.  Often,  this  involves  the  selective 
retention of a specific protein in the appropriate domain 
through 
intracellular  (cytoskeletal)  or  extracellular  
(cell–cell or cell–matrix) interactions, or both. Proteins 
that are not actively retained in the other plasma mem-
brane  domain  are  internalized  and  degraded  in  lyso-
somes.  Examples  of  proteins  that  are  polarized  in  this 
way  include  Na+K+-ATPase  and  the  immunoglobulin 
cell  adhesion  molecule  (IgCAM)  adhesion  molecule 
uvomorulin.

A  third  mechanism  for  generating  cell  polarity  (Fig. 
21.24E)  delivers  all  newly  synthesized  proteins  to  the 
basolateral surface, followed by selective internalization 
of  apical  proteins,  which  are  sorted  in  the  endosomal 
compartment  and  delivered  to  the  apical  surface  in  a 
process  termed  transcytosis.  Proteins  with  motifs  such 
as YXXΦ and [DE]XXXL[LI] are retained at the basolat-
eral surface through local recycling, while proteins that 
associate  with  lipid  rafts,  including  GPI-anchored  pro-
teins, use transcytosis to reach the apical domain.

Sorting to the Endosome/Lysosomal System
Coats  capture  specialized  cargo  for  the  endolysosome 
system in carrier vesicles budding off the TGN. Approxi-
mately 50 different acid hydrolases follow this pathway, 
including glycosidases, proteases, lipases, nucleases, and 
sulfatases.  These  enzymes  are  marked  with  mannose 
6-phosphate  in  the  cis-Golgi  apparatus  to  divert  them 
from  the  constitutive  secretory  pathway.  Marked  pro-
teins  bind  to  MPRs  (mannose-6-phosphate  receptors) 
(Fig. 21.25A) in the lumen of the trans-Golgi apparatus.
Two  sorting  motifs  in  the  cytoplasmic  tails  of  MPRs 
target  the  receptor  and  bound  lysosomal  enzymes  to 
clathrin-coated  vesicles  in  the  TGN  for  delivery  to 

endosomes  and  lysosomes.  The  YXXΦ  sorting  motifs 
bind heterotetrameric AP1 (Fig. 21.12B). “Acidic cluster 
dileucine signals” bind the coat adaptor protein GGA.

AP1  and  GGA  cooperate  to  package  lysosomal 
enzymes into clathrin-coated vesicles that bud from TGN 
membranes.  AP1  interacts  with  Arf1-GTP,  phosphati-
dylinositol 4-phosphate (PI4P) and clathrin. GGA recruits 
clathrin.  Its  VHS  domain  recognizes  the  acidic-cluster-
dileucine  motif  of  MPRs.  GGA  proteins  have  several 

PM

Receptors
recovered

A

AP2

Misdirected receptors
and many lysosomal
membrane proteins

Receptors
recycled

AP1, GGA

M6P binds
to receptors

M6P
generated

Trans-Golgi

AP3

Cis-Golgi

Lysosomal
hydrolase precursor

ER

Early endosome

Endosome
matures

H+

Late endosome

Mature lysosomal
hydrolase

Lysosome

B

Arf -GDP

GTP

GDP

Arf -GTP

TGN

AP1

Clathrin

Y-motif

MPR

FIGURE 21.25  SORTING PATHWAYS USED BY MANNOSE-6-
PHOSPHATE  RECEPTORS  AND  COAT  ASSEMBLY  AT  THE 
TRANS-GOLGI  NETWORK.  A,  Mannose-6-phosphate  receptors 
(MPRs) carry newly synthesized lysosomal hydrolases with mannose-
6-phosphate  (M6P)  from  the  trans-Golgi  network  (TGN),  via  endo-
somes,  to  lysosomes,  after  which  the  MPRs  return  to  the  TGN. 
Receptors misdirected to the cell surface are recovered by endocytosis 
and  returned  to  the  pathway  in  endosomes.  GGA  (Golgi-localizing, 
γ-adaptin ear domain homology, Arf-binding protein), clathrin adapter 
proteins. B, Coordination of coat assembly and cargo recruitment at 
the TGN. An exchange factor activates the small GTPase Arf to bind 
GTP, which triggers recruitment of adaptor protein 1 (AP1) coat con-
stituents  to  the  TGN  membrane.  The  MPR  is  concentrated  in  the 
emerging  coated  vesicle  through  interactions  between  a  tyrosine-
based  sorting  motif  in  its  cytoplasmic  domain  and  the  µ-subunit 
of AP1. 

374 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

other  conserved  domains:  the  GAT  domain  interacts 
with Arf-GTP and PI4P on trans-Golgi membranes; and 
the GAE domain binds accessory proteins that contribute 
to  vesicle  formation,  movement  and  fusion  with  post-
TGN membranes.

Carrier  vesicles  with  MPRs  move  from  the  TGN  to 
discharge their cargo in the acidic environment in endo-
somes. Then carrier vesicles transfer unoccupied MPRs 
back to the TGN (Fig. 21.25A). This process is controlled 
both  by  retromer  and  EpsinR  complexes.  Retromer  is 
a  heteropentameric  complex  that  binds  cargo  such  as 
MPRs. EpsinR has an N-terminal ENTH domain (which 
binds PI4P) followed by a long, unfolded domain (with 
binding sites for AP1 and GGAs).

Internalized  bacterial  exotoxins  such  as  Shiga  toxin 
(see Fig. 22.10) exploit this pathway used for recycling 
MPRs from the endosome to the TGN. The B subunit of 
the  toxin  uses  retromer  and/or  EpsinR  to  travel  from 
endosomes to the TGN on its way to the ER and cytosol.
Certain  lysosomal  enzymes,  including  acid  sphingo-
myelinase  and  cathepsin  D/H,  use  a  transmembrane 
protein  called  sortilin  as  an  alternative  route  from 
the  TGN  to  lysosomes  independently  of  mannose- 
6-phosphate  (M6P).  The  cytosolic  domain  of  sortilin 
contains  motifs  that  bind  GGAs  and  APs,  which  direct 
the sortilin-bound cargo into carriers that target to endo-
somes and lysosomes.

Lysosomal membrane proteins are not modified with 
M6P groups, so they use sorting signals in their cytosolic 
tails  to  mediate  both  lysosomal  targeting  and  rapid 

endocytosis at the cell surface. These lysosomal-targeting 
signals belong to YXXΦ or acidic-cluster-dileucine types, 
but have subtle features (ie, placement close to the trans-
membrane segment of the protein) that direct the protein 
to lysosomes. These sorting signals interact with AP1 at 
the TGN, AP2 at the plasma membrane, and AP3 and AP4 
in  endosomes.  Unlike  the  other  AP  proteins,  AP4  does 
not recruit clathrin and forms a non-clathrin coat.

Lysosomal  membrane  proteins  (including  lysosomal-
associated  membrane  protein  [LAMP]-1,  LAMP-2,  and 
CD63)  follow  either  a  direct  or  indirect  pathway  from 
the  TGN  to  lysosomes.  The  direct  pathway  includes  
early or late endosomes before lysosomes. The indirect 
pathway  involves  transport  to  the  plasma  membrane 
followed by endocytosis and passage through endosomes 
before eventual delivery to lysosomes. Because depletion 
of plasma membrane-localized AP2 and its partner clath-
rin inhibits transport of LAMPs to lysosomes more pro-
foundly than depletion of AP1, the indirect pathway may 
be more heavily used than the direct pathway for target-
ing LAMPs to lysosomes.

Secretory Granule Formation, Transport, and Fusion
Endocrine,  exocrine,  and  neuronal  cells  use  a  third 
sorting  pathway  from  the  TGN  to  concentrate  and 
package  selected  proteins  in  storage  granules  before 
they  are  discharged  from  the  cell  in  response  to  hor-
monal or neural stimulation. This regulated secretory 
pathway (Fig. 21.26) stores and discharges on command 
many proteins needed intermittently such as polypeptide 

A

B

C. Proinsulin

iSG

iSG

iSG

TGN

iSG

iSG

CGN

D. Insulin

mSG

iSG

mSG

iSG

FIGURE 21.26  FORMATION OF SECRETORY GRANULES. Transmission electron micrograph of a thin section (A) and a diagram (B) show 
immature secretory granules (iSG) as they emerge from the trans-Golgi network (TGN). Much of the TGN surface is consumed by forming immature 
secretory granules. C–D, Cryoelectron micrographs of frozen sections reacted with gold-labeled antibodies to proinsulin (C) or insulin (D). Pro-
insulin is concentrated in immature secretory granules. After processing, insulin is concentrated in mature, dense-core secretory granules (mSG). 
(A, Courtesy Y. Clermont, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, with permission of Wiley-Liss, Inc. B, Modified from Clermont Y, Rambourg 
A, Hermo L. Trans-Golgi network (TGN) of different cell types: three-dimensional structural characteristics and variability. Anat Rec. 1995;242:289–
301. C–D, Courtesy L. Orci, University of Geneva, Switzerland.)

 

CHAPTER 21  n  Secretory Membrane System and Golgi Apparatus 

375

Ca2+

Dissociation
at neutral pH

SG

Pause for
Ca2+ signal

Transport
to PM

Recovery
of non-SG 
proteins

Sorting
endosome

H+
Zn2+

Decreasing pH and
introducing Zn
precipitate secretory
proteins

Recycled to TGN
or delivered to
lysosomes

TGN

l

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
t
a
m
 
e
o
u
c
a
v
 
g
n
s
n
e
d
n
o
C

i

FIGURE  21.27  MATURATION  OF  NASCENT  SECRETORY 
GRANULES/CONDENSING  VACUOLES.  The  vacuolar  H+-ATPase 
in the secretory granule (SG) membrane lowers the internal pH. This 
drives condensation and concentration of the contents. Dense-core, 
mature  secretory  granules  are  stored  in  the  cytoplasm  until  a  Ca2+-
mediated signaling event triggers fusion and release of their contents. 
Proteins inadvertently included in large, immature secretory granules 
emerging from the trans-Golgi network (TGN) are captured by clathrin-
coated vesicles and recycled to endosomes and the TGN. PM, plasma 
membrane. 

hormones  and  digestive  enzymes.  These  secreted  pro-
teins apparently lack a universal sorting signal. Instead, 
secretory granule formation appears to involve physical 
sorting,  selective  retention,  and  condensation  of  the 
secretory proteins through charge neutralization, protein 
aggregation and active extrusion of ions (Fig. 21.27).

Aggregation  can  be  selective  during  formation  of 
secretory  granules.  For  example,  the  polypeptide 
hormone  insulin  is  cleaved  from  a  precursor  called 
proinsulin.  Proteolytic  enzymes  cleave  proinsulin  at  
two  sites  in  immature  granules,  generating  insulin  and 
C-peptide. Zinc ions selectively condense insulin in the 
granule  core  surrounded  by  C-peptide.  Subsequently, 
budding  of  vesicles  from  immature  granules  removes 
more C-peptide than insulin. Carefully regulated insulin 
secretion  controls  the  glucose  concentration  in  the 
blood plasma by a process that adjusts the rate of glucose 
taken into muscle and fat cells (see Fig. 27.7). Either the 
production of insulin or the regulation of glucose uptake 
is compromised in diabetes mellitus.

The  proteolytic  enzyme  carboxypeptidase  E  (CPE) 
may act as a sorting signal for sorting of hormones and 
neuropeptides  at  the  TGN  into  secretory  granules.  A 
short α-helical domain on CPE interacts with the granule 
membrane, allowing cargo proteins that bind to CPE to 
be codelivered with CPE into a secretory granule.

A P-type calcium ATPase pump called SPCA1 (secre-
tory  pathway  Ca2+/Mn2+-ATPase  pump  type  1)  helps 
aggregate  proteins  for  secretory  granules  in  the  TGN. 
Binding  of  actin  filaments  on  the  cytosolic  face  of  the 
TGN  is  thought  to  concentrate  SPCA1  into  a  sorting 
domain.  Ca2+  pumped  into  the  lumen  of  the  TGN  by 
SPCA1 activates a Ca2+ binding protein called Cab45 to 
bind  soluble  cargo  proteins  and  helps  segregate  them 
into secretory vesicles.

Fusion  of  secretory  granules  with  the  plasma  mem-
brane and release of their contents is carefully regulated 
to  ensure  that  they  fuse  only  on  demand.  Regulated 
fusion has been studied most extensively in the context  
of  synaptic  vesicle  release  (see  Figs.  17.9  and  17.10),  
in  endocrine  cells  (Fig.  21.26),  and  in  mast  cells  
(see Fig. 28.8).

Regulated secretion can be divided into three steps: 
docking, priming, and fusion (Fig. 21.14). Docking is the 
slowest  step  and  is  believed  to  involve  interactions  
of  v-SNARE  and  t-SNAREs  regulated  by  Rab  GTPases.  
In  vitro  reconstitution  studies  suggest  that  additional  
proteins are required for the priming step in neuroendo-
crine cells. They include a phosphatidylinositol transfer 
protein  and  a  phosphatidylinositol  5-kinase  and  its 
product phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2).

In most cases a transient local increase in cytoplasmic 
Ca2+ triggers fusion of the secretory granule membrane 
with  the  plasma  membrane,  a  process  called  calcium-
secretion coupling. Diverse signals produce the calcium 
influx that triggers fusion, including activation of seven-
helix  receptors  on  neuroendocrine  cells,  activation  of 
immunoglobulin E receptors in mast cells (see Fig. 28.8), 
and membrane depolarization in neurons (see Figs. 17.10 
and 17.11). Calcium-binding proteins called synaptotag-
mins are believed to act as clamps on the fusion machin-
ery, inhibiting fusion until calcium triggers their release 
(Fig. 21.14). In endocrine cells and neurons a cytoplas-
mic protein, CAPS (calcium activator protein for secre-
tion), is recruited to the secretory vesicle by interacting 
with PIP2 and is required for calcium-triggered fusion of 
dense core secretory granules.

The fine-tuned control of regulated secretion is illus-
trated by exocytosis of the glucose carrier GLUT4, which 
mediates  insulin-stimulated  glucose  uptake  in  fat  and 
muscle (see Fig. 27.7). GLUT4 delivery to the cell surface 
requires: mobilization of GLUT4-containing storage ves-
icles  from  intracellular  sites;  docking  at  the  plasma 
membrane;  and,  finally,  fusion  of  the  two  membranes. 
Fig.  27.7  illustrates  how  insulin  controls  this  pathway  
by activating phosphatidylinositide 3′-kinase (PI3K) and 
Akt/PKB,  which  phosphorylates  the  Rab-GAP  protein 
AS160. Unphosphorylated AS160 retains GLUT4 vesicles 
within  the  cell  by  inactivating  Rab10.  AS160  loses  its 
GAP activity when phosphorylated in response to insulin. 
This  turns  on  the  Rab  proteins,  which  interact  with 
myosin-Va  to  translocate  the  GLUT4  vesicle  to  the  cell 

376 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

surface. Once docked at fusion sites, the SNARE machin-
ery  drives  fusion  of  the  vesicle  with  the  plasma  mem-
brane, delivering GLUT4 to the cell surface.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Juan Bonifacino, Catherine Jackson, and Yongli 
Zhang for their suggestions on revisions to this chapter.

SELECTED READINGS

Altan-Bonnet N, Sougrat R, Lippincott-Schwartz J. Molecular basis for 
Golgi maintenance and biogenesis. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2004;16(4):
364-372.

Antonny B. Membrane deformation by protein coats. Curr Opin Cell 

Biol. 2006;18:1-9.

Bigay  J,  Antonny  B.  Curvature,  lipid  packing,  and  electrostatics  of 
membrane  organelles:  defining  cellular  territories  in  determining 
specificity. Dev Cell. 2012;23:886-895.

Bonifacino  JS.  Adaptor  proteins  involved  in  polarized  sorting.  J  Cell 

Biol. 2014;204:7-17.

Bonifacino  JS,  Hurley  JH.  Retromer.  Curr  Opin  Cell  Biol.  2008;20:

427-436.

Borgese  N.  Getting  membrane  proteins  on  and  off  the  shuttle  bus 
between the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi complex. J Cell 
Sci. 2016;129:1537-1545.

Cherfils  J.  Arf  GTPases  and  their  effectors:  assembling  multivalent 
membrane-binding  platforms.  Curr  Opin  Struct  Biol.  2014;29:
67-76.

Cherfils J, Zeghouf M. Regulation of small GTPases by GEFs, GAPs and 

GDIs. Physiol Rev. 2013;93:269-309.

Dancourt J, Barlowe C. Protein sorting receptors in the early secretory 

pathway. Annu Rev Biochem. 2010;79:777-802.

Debuke ML, Munson M. The secret life of tethers: the role of tethering 
factors  in  SNARE  complex  regulation.  Front  Cell  Dev  Biol.  2016;
4:1-8.

De  Matteis  MA,  Wilson  C,  De  Angelo  G.  Phosphatidylinositol-4- 

phosphate: the Golgi and beyond. Bioessays. 2013;35:612-622.

Faini M, Prinz S, Beck R, et al. The structures of COPI-coated vesicles 
reveal alternate coatomer conformations and interactions. Science. 
2012;336:1451-1454.

Faini M, Beck R, Wieland FT, et al. Vesicle coats: structure, function, 
and  general  principles  of  assembly.  Trends  Cell  Biol.  2013;23:
279-288.

Gillingham AK, Munro S. Finding the Golgi: Golgin coiled-coil proteins 

show the way. Trends Cell Biol. 2016;26:399-408.

Guo  Y,  Sirkis  DW,  Schekman  R.  Protein  sorting  at  the  trans-Golgi 

network. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2014;30:169-206.

Holthuis JC, Menon AK. Lipid landscapes and pipelines in membrane 

homeostasis. Nature. 2014;510:48-57.

Jackson LP. Structure and mechanism of COPI vesicle biogenesis. Curr 

Opin Cell Biol. 2014;29:67-73.

Jackson  CL.  Mechanisms  for  transport  through  the  Golgi  complex.  

J Cell Sci. 2009;122:443-452.

Jackson  CL,  Bouvet  S.  Arfs  at  a  glance.  J  Cell  Sci.  2014;127:

4103-4109.

Kaiser HJ, Orlowski A, Rog T, et al. Lateral sorting in model membranes 
by cholesterol-mediated hydrophobic matching. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA. 2011;108:16628-16633.

Khan  AR,  Menetrey  J.  Structural  biology  of  Arf  and  Rab  GTPases’ 
effector recruitment and specificity. Structure. 2013;21:1284-1296.
Kienzle  C,  von  Blume  J.  Secretory  cargo  sorting  at  the  trans-Golgi 

network. Trends Cell Biol. 2014;24:584-593.

Leto  D,  Saltiel  AR.  Regulation  of  glucose  transport  by  insulin:  traffic 

control of GLUT4. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2012;13:383-395.

Lippincott-Schwartz J, Phair RD. Lipids and cholesterol as regulators of 
traffic in the endomembrane system. Annu Rev Biophys. 2010;39:
559-578.

Miller  EA,  Schekman  R.  COPII—a  flexible  vesicle  formation  system. 

Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2013;25:420-427.

Patterson GH, Hirschberg K, Polishchuk RS, et al. Transport through 
the Golgi apparatus by rapid partitioning within a two-phase mem-
brane system. Cell. 2008;133:1055-1067.

Rizo J, Xu J. The synaptic vesicle release machinery. Annu Rev Biophys. 

2015;44:339-367.

Santos AJ, Raote I, Scarpa M, et al. TANGO1 recruits ERGIC membranes 
to the endoplasmic reticulum for procollagen export. Elife. 2015;4:
e10982.

Sengupta  P,  Satpute-Krishnan  P,  Seo  AY,  et al.  ER  trapping  reveals 
Golgi  enzymes  continually  revisit  the  ER  through  a  recycling 
pathway that controls Golgi organization. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 
2015;112:6752-6761.

Wu  B,  Guo  W.  The  exocyst  at  a  glance.  J  Cell  Sci.  2015;128:

2957-2964.

Zanetti G, Prinz S, Daum S, et al. The structure of the COPII transport-

vesicle coat assembled on membranes. eLife. 2013;2:1-15.

Zhen  Y,  Stenmark  H.  Cellular  functions  of  Rab  GTPases  at  a  glance.  

J Cell Sci. 2015;128:3171-3176.

C H A P T E R 

22 

Endocytosis and the Endosomal 
Membrane System

Regulated  entry  of  molecules  into  eukaryotic  cells 

occurs at the plasma membrane, the interface between 
the  intracellular  and  extracellular  environments.  Small 
molecules such as amino acids, sugars, and ions traverse 
the  plasma  membrane  through  the  action  of  integral 
membrane protein pumps (see Chapter 14), carriers (see 
Chapter 15), or channels (see Chapter 16). On the other 
hand,  macromolecules  can  enter  cells  only  by  being 
captured and enclosed within membrane-bound carriers 
that invaginate and pinch off the plasma membrane in a 
process  known  as  endocytosis.  Cells  use  endocytosis 
to feed themselves, to defend themselves, and to main-
tain homeostasis. Some toxins, viruses, pathogenic bac-
teria, and protozoa “hijack” this process to enter cells.

Endocytosis was discovered more than a century ago 
in white blood cells (macrophages and neutrophils), the 
body’s  “professional  phagocytes”  (see  Fig.  28.6).  Endo-
cytosis by these cells is very active, and they internalize 
the equivalent of their entire plasma membrane surface 
every  hour.  When  macrophages  internalize  particles  of 
blue litmus paper, the particle color changes, revealing 
that endocytic vacuoles are acidic. Investigators still use 
molecules  tagged  with  fluorescent  dyes,  green  fluores-
cent protein, or electron-dense markers to follow endo-
cytosis  in  living  or  fixed  cells  by  light  or  electron 
microscopy.  Subcellular  fractionation,  sometimes  aided 
by loading cells with tracers that alter the density of the 
endocytic compartments or with ferromagnetic tags, has 
allowed  the  isolation  and  biochemical  characterization 
of distinct classes of endocytic structures. In vitro recon-
stitution  systems  have  also  helped  to  decipher  the 
mechanisms  governing  membrane  trafficking  along  the 
endocytic pathway.

Cells use many different mechanisms for endocytosis 
(Fig.  22.1).  These  differ  in  mode  of  uptake  and  in  the 
type  and  intracellular  fate  of  internalized  cargo.  The 
mechanisms include phagocytosis, macropinocytosis, 
clathrin-mediated endocytosis, caveolae-dependent 

uptake, and nonclathrin/noncaveolae endocytosis. 
The  protrusions  or  invaginations  of  the  plasma  mem-
brane  that  are  formed  during  these  diverse  endocytic 
processes  all  require  coordinated  interactions  between 
a variety of protein and lipid molecules that dynamically 
link the plasma membrane and cortical actin cytoskeleton 
inside the cell.

In  phagocytosis  and  clathrin-mediated  endocytosis, 
cell  surface  receptors  selectively  bind  macromolecules 
(ligands)  to  be  internalized.  Ligands  can  be  proteins, 
glycoproteins,  or  carbohydrates.  In  phagocytosis,  the 
ligands are usually membrane constituents of other cells, 
bacteria, or viruses, whereas in clathrin-mediated endo-
cytosis  the  ligands  are  often  growth  factors  or  other 
soluble  components.  After  ligand-receptor  complexes 
are  concentrated  into  patches  in  the  membrane,  the 
membrane is then either pinched off to form small vesi-
cles  (in  clathrin-mediated  endocytosis)  or  zipped  up 
around the particle to form a large vacuole inside the cell 
(in phagocytosis).

Other forms of endocytosis are less selective. In some 
cases,  cells  take  up  bulk  fluid  through  small,  pinocytic 
vesicles or through macropinocytosis, in which the cell 
extends  its  membrane  and  engulfs  extracellular  fluid 
indiscriminately.  Alternatively,  ligands  and  molecules 
associated  with  lipid  rafts  are  taken  up  at  the  plasma 
membrane  through  caveolae-mediated  or  nonclathrin/
noncaveolar endocytosis.

Endocytic carriers produced by the various endocytic 
mechanisms  are  transported  into  the  cytoplasm  away 
from the plasma membrane, where they fuse with each 
other and with other membrane compartments compris-
ing  the  endosomal  membrane  system.  Among  the 
various  compartments  of  the  endocytic  membrane 
system are early/recycling endosomes, multivesicu-
lar bodies, late endosomes, and lysosomes. Each has 
a distinct role in the sorting, processing, and degradation 
of internalized cargo, and they communicate with each 

 377

378 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

A. Macropinocytosis

B. Clathrin-coated
     vesicles

C. Noncoated
     vesicles

D. Caveolae

E. Phagocytosis

50–1000 nm

100–150 nm

≈100 nm

50–80 nm

0.1–10 µm

FIGURE 22.1  A–E, Electron micrographs and diagrams illustrating five structurally and mechanistically distinct pathways for entry into the cell. 
The endocytic vesicles that are generated differ in size and structure, as shown. (A and D, Courtesy D. Fawcett, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA. B, Courtesy C-M Chang and S. Schmid, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA. C, Courtesy S. Hansen and B. van Deurs, University of 
Copenhagen, Denmark. E, Courtesy Blair Bowers, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.)

other  and/or  the  plasma  membrane  by  mechanistically 
diverse and highly regulated pathways.

This chapter describes the molecular mechanisms of 
the major types of endocytosis and the functions of the 
endosomal system.

Phagocytosis
Phagocytosis  is  the  ingestion  of  large  particles  such  as 
bacteria,  foreign  bodies,  and  remnants  of  dead  cells  
(Fig.  22.2).  Cells  use  the  actin  cytoskeleton  to  push  a 
protrusion  of  the  plasma  membrane  that  surrounds  
these particles (Fig. 22.3).

Some  cells,  including  macrophages,  dendritic  cells, 
and  neutrophils  (see  Chapter  28),  are  specialized  
for  phagocytosis.  The  presence  of  bacteria  or  pro-
tozoa  in  tissues  attracts  phagocytes  from  the  blood 
(see  Fig.  30.13).  They  then  ingest  the  microorganisms 
and 
immune  responses. 
Other  cell  types  use  phagocytosis  to  remove  dead 
neighboring  cells,  while  amoeba  use  phagocytosis  for  
feeding.

inflammatory  and 

initiate 

Phagocytosis  proceeds  through  four  steps:  attach-
ment, engulfment, fusion with lysosomes, and degrada-
tion (Fig. 22.3). These steps are highly regulated by cell 
surface  receptors,  polyphosphatidylinositides,  and  sig-
naling  cascades  mediated  by  Rho-family  guanosine  tri-
phosphatases (GTPases).

FIGURE  22.2  ELECTRON  MICROGRAPH  OF  AN  AMOEBA 
INGESTING  A  LATEX  BEAD  BY  PHAGOCYTOSIS.  Note  the 
numerous sites of attachment between the amoeba cell surface and 
the  bead.  (Courtesy  John  Heuser,  Washington  University,  St.  Louis, 
MO.)

Attachment and Engulfment
Attachment depends on the ability of the phagocytic cell 
to  recognize  the  particle  to  be  ingested.  Such  specific 
interactions trigger ingestion of the particle. Vertebrates 
use  proteins,  collectively  called  “opsonins,”  to  mark 

 

CHAPTER 22  n  Endocytosis and the Endosomal Membrane System 

379

Cell receptors
recognize surface 
molecules on 
bacterium

Actin removed from
phagosome

Endosome

Growth

Binding activates
receptors that
trigger actin
assembly

Recycling

Phagosome
maturation

Phagolysosome

Primary 
lysosome

Degradation

Secondary 
lysosome

Golgi

FIGURE 22.3  MOLECULAR MECHANISM FOR PHAGOCYTO-
SIS OF A BACTERIUM BY A MACROPHAGE. Macrophage surface 
receptors are activated by contact with a bacterium; this triggers actin 
filament  assembly  that  leads  to  protrusion  of  the  plasma  membrane 
to engulf the bacterium. The actin filaments encasing the newly formed 
phagosome  depolymerize,  and  membrane  traffic  to  and  from  the 
phagosome leads to its maturation. Hydrolytic enzymes are delivered 
to the phagosome by fusion with primary lysosomes or more mature 
secondary lysosomes, and the bacterium is degraded. 

bacteria  and  other  foreign  particles  for  phagocytosis. 
Opsonins  include  antibodies,  which  bind  to  foreign 
antigens  on  bacteria,  and  complement  proteins,  which 
tag  infected  or  dying  cells.  Phagocytes  such  as  macro-
phages use plasma membrane receptors to bind particles 
coated with opsonins. For example, immunoglobulin 
Fc receptors bind to the constant regions of immuno-
globulin  G  molecules  (see  H3  and  H4  domains  in  Fig. 
3.13B) coating pathogenic bacteria and viruses.

Engulfment begins by binding of receptors such as the 
Fc  receptor  to  a  foreign  particle  with  the  appropriate 
target on its surface to generate localized signals on the 
cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane. These signals 
trigger  the  assembly  of  actin  filaments  immediately 
adjacent to the particle to be ingested. Growth of these 
actin filaments supports the plasma membrane as it zips 
tightly around the particle to form a cup-like protrusion, 
called  the  phagocytic  cup.  These  events  depend  on 

polyphosphoinositides  and  phosphatidylinositol  (PI) 
kinases (Box 22.1 and Figs. 22.4 and 26.7). In the phago-
cytic  cup,  PI(3)  kinase  generates  PI(3,4,5)P3  (PIP3),  a 
ligand  for  PH-domains  of  guanine  nucleotide  exchange 
factors  for  the  small  GTPases  Rac1,  Arf6,  and  Cdc42. 
Once activated, these GTPases stimulate actin assembly, 
leading to phagocytic cup growth.

Closure  of  the  phagocytic  cup  occurs  when  the 
membrane  zips  up  around  the  particle  and  then  fuses 
together. Phagosome closure coincides with local deple-
tion  of  PIP3  by  PI  phosphatases  and  phospholipase  Cγ. 
The phosphatase produces PI(4,5)P2 in the phagosome 
membrane.  This  promotes  assembly  of  actin  filaments 
that drive the vesicle away from the plasma membrane 
into the cytoplasm.

Both the plasma membrane and internal membranes 
contribute  to  make  a  phagocytic  cup.  Internal  mem-
branes from recycling endosomes, late endosomes, and 
possibly  endoplasmic  reticulum  (ER)  contribute  to  the 
phagocytic cup by fusing with the plasma membrane in 
a  process  called  focal  exocytosis.  When  secretory 
lysosomes  fuse  at  the  forming  phagocytic  cup,  they 
release  cytokines  that  contribute  to  inflammation.  This 
couples  phagocytosis  to  the  immune  response.  Focal 
exocytosis  relies  on  the  same  steps  that  are  involved  
in  other  membrane  fusion  events,  including  transport  
of  internal  membranes  along  cytoskeletal  tracks  and 
their  fusion  by  compartment-specific  SNARES  (soluble 
N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive 
[NSF]  attachment 
protein  receptors)  under  the  control  of  Rab  GTPases  
(see Fig. 21.6).

factor 

Fusion With Lysosomes and Alternative Fates
After  closure  and  movement  of  the  phagosome  away 
from  the  plasma  membrane,  the  actin  filaments  sur-
rounding  it  disassemble,  and  motors  direct  the  phago-
some  along  microtubules  deep  into  the  cell  during  a 
process termed directed maturation. A series of fusion 
and fission reactions remove plasma membrane compo-
nents and replace them with endosome-specific compo-
nents  including  proteins  (eg,  SNAREs)  required  for 
selective fusion with acidic lysosomes containing active 
hydrolytic  enzymes.  Fusion  with  lysosomes  creates  a 
hybrid vacuole called a phagolysosome (Fig. 22.3).

A  combination  of  factors  kills  ingested  microor-
ganisms  in  phagolysosomes.  The  reduced  form  of 
nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase in 
the phagolysosomal membrane produces a lethal barrage 
of toxic oxidants. Small peptides called defensins bind 
and  disrupt  microbial  membranes.  Proteases  and  acid 
hydrolases in the lumen of the phagolysosome degrade 
the  ingested  organism  to  its  constituent  amino  acids, 
monosaccharides  and  disaccharides,  nucleotides,  and 
lipids. These small products of digestion are transported 
across  the  phagolysosomal  membrane  into  the  cyto-
plasm,  for  reuse  to  synthesize  new  macromolecules.  

BOX 22.1  Polyphosphatidylinositides in Endocytosis

Phosphatidylinositol (PI) is a glycerophospholipid with a 
cyclohexanol  head  group  (Fig.  22.4D)  that  can  be  phos-
phorylated on carbons 3, 4, and 5 either singly or in combi-
nation to produce polyphosphoinositides (see Fig. 26.7). 
Polyphosphoinositides  are  minor  lipids  in  the  cytoplasmic 
leaflet  of  the  plasma  membrane  (~1%  of  total  lipids)  and 
endocytic  membranes,  but  lipid  kinases  and  phosphatases 
can change their levels rapidly at local sites in membranes 
(Fig.  22.4E).  This  local  synthesis  of  particular  polyphos-
phoinositides regulates membrane remodeling during exocy-
tosis,  endocytosis,  and  vesicular  trafficking  by  recruiting 
and/or  activating  proteins  that  sense  the  curvature  of  the 
lipid bilayer, form scaffolds on the membrane (eg, clathrin 
and dynamin), or regulate actin assembly.

The most important polyphosphoinositide for endocyto-
is  phosphatidylinositol(4,5)bis-phosphate  (PI(4,5)P2) 
sis 
with  phosphates  on  carbons  4  and  5  of  the  head  group.  
Two lipid kinases synthesize PI(4,5)P2 by adding phosphate 
first to the hydroxyl on carbon 4 and then to the hydroxyl 
on  carbon  5  (Fig.  22.4E;  also  see  Fig.  26.7).  The  second 
enzyme,  phosphatidylinositol-4-P-5  kinase,  is  activated 
by another glycerophospholipid, phosphatidic acid (PA; see 
Fig. 13.2). Because PI(4,5)P2 activates the phospholipase D 
(see Fig. 26.4) that makes PA, the two enzymes form a posi-
tive  feedback  loop  that  enriches  PI(4,5)P2  locally  in  the 
membrane. Interactions of PI(4,5)P2 with proteins from the 
cytoplasm retards its mobility in the plane of the membrane, 
raising  its  local  concentration  until  it  is  depleted  by  
removal  of  the  head  group  or  by  dephosphorylation  
(see Fig. 26.7).

A. Phagocytosis

PI(3,4,5)-P3

PI(4,5)-P2

B. Clathrin-
     mediated
     uptake

PI(4,5)-P2

PI(4,5)P2  participates  in  clathrin-mediated  endocytosis, 
phagocytosis,  and  macropinocytosis  (Fig.  22.4A–C).  The 
formation  of  the  clathrin  lattice  and  its  tethering  to  the 
plasma  membrane  relies  on  several  proteins  that  interact 
with  PI(4,5)P2,  including  AP180/CALM,  epsin,  and  AP2 
(Fig. 22.9). The GTPase dynamin, which is essential for the 
scission  of  clathrin-coated  vesicles,  also  binds  to  PI(4,5)P2 
(Fig. 22.9). Dephosphorylation of PI(4,5)P2 to form PI(4)P is 
mediated by synaptojanin, which plays an important role in 
clathrin uncoating.

In phagosome biogenesis, high-affinity binding between 
ligands and plasma membrane receptors attracts PI(3)kinase, 
which  produces  PIP3  (PI(3)P,  phosphorylated  on  the 
hydroxyl on carbon 3). Activation of Rac, Arf6, and Cdc42 
by PIP3 leads to cortical actin assembly and protrusion of the 
plasma  membrane  around  the  phagocytosed  particle.  The 
plasma membrane then zips up around a phagocytosed par-
ticle. After plasma membrane closure, PI(4,5)P2 in the phago-
some  membrane  promotes  the  assembly  of  actin  filaments 
that move the vesicle away from the plasma membrane.

Whereas  PI(4,5)P2  helps  regulate  endocytosis,  PI(3)P  is 
important  for  early  endosome  dynamics.  It  is  found  on  the 
limiting and intraluminal membranes of endosomes, where it 
recruits  effector  molecules.  These  include  EEA1,  which  is 
responsible for endosome-endosome fusion through its inter-
action  with  Rab5,  and  Hrs,  which  recognizes  ubiquitinated 
endocytic cargo and facilitates the formation of intraluminal 
endosomal vesicles through the assembly of ESCRT-I, ESCRT-II, 
and ESCRT-III. PI(3)kinase class II or class III is responsible for 
generating PI(3)P on membranes (Fig. 22.4E).

C. Macropinocytosis

D. PI

PI(4,5)-P2

PI(4)-P

HO

Macropinosome

PI(3)-P

OH
3

OH
4

5

HO

1

O
6
O  P
O

OH
2

O-

O

OCO

C  O

Lysosome

Phagosome

PI(3)-P

PI(3)-P

Early

endosome

Multivesicular
carrier body

Late

endosome

LBPA

Lysosome

PI(3,5)-P2

Phago-
lysosome

E. Reactions
PI(3,4,5)-P3

PI(4,5)-P2

PI(3)K
class I

PI(4)-P

PI

PI(3)-P

PI(3)K

class II & III

PI(3,5)-P2

FIGURE  22.4  DISTRIBUTION  OF  PHOSPHOINOSITIDES  AMONG  ENDOCYTIC  COMPARTMENTS.  A–C,  Polyphosphoinositol 
territories  within  the  endocytic  system.  Localized  PI(4,5)P2  in  the  plasma  membrane  plays  a  role  in  phagocytosis  (A),  clathrin-mediated 
endocytosis (B), and macropinocytosis (C). PI(3,4,5)P3 in the plasma membrane participates in phagocytosis. PI(3)P is enriched in endo-
somes, whereas PI(3,5)P2 and lysobisphosphatidic acid (LBPA) are enriched in late endosomes. Proteins, including clathrin adapters, bind 
to the specific polyphosphoinositides depicted here, providing a mechanism for their targeting. D, Phosphatidylinositol can be phosphorylated 
on  the  3,  4,  or  5  position  of  its  inositol  ring,  with  all  seven  combinations  possible.  The  polyphosphatidylinositides  that  are  so  generated 
embed in the cytoplasmic leaflets of membranes. E, Biochemical pathways that generate different polyphosphatidylinositides. Three classes 
of PI(3)-kinases participate: Class I PI(3)-kinase uses PI(4,5)P2 as substrate yielding PI(3,4,5)P3 (involved in phagocytosis); Class II and III 
PI(3)-kinases use PI yielding PI(3)P (involved in endosome maturation). PI(3)-kinase inhibitors such as wortmannin and 3-methyladenine have 
helped to characterize the function of these PI(3)-kinases. The inhibitors compete for adenosine triphosphate (ATP) binding in the active site 
of the kinase domain. 

 

CHAPTER 22  n  Endocytosis and the Endosomal Membrane System 

381

BOX 22.2  Survival Strategies for Intracellular 
Pathogens

“Escape”
•  Secretion of toxins that disrupt phagosomal membrane 
(Shigella flexneri, Listeria monocytogenes, Rickettsia 
rickettsii)

“Dodge”
•  Entrance 

through 

alternative,  pathogen-specific 
pathway (Salmonella typhimurium, Legionella pneu-
mophila, Chlamydia trachomatis)

•  Inhibition 

of  phagosome-lysosome 

fusion 

(S. 

typhimurium, Mycobacterium tuberculosis)

•  Inhibition of phagolysosome maturation and acidifica-

tion (Mycobacterium species)

“Stand and Fight”
•  Low  pH-dependent  replication  (Coxiella  burnetii,  S. 

typhimurium)

•  Enhancement of DNA repair to survive oxidative stress 

(S. typhimurium)

•  Protective pathogen-specific virulence factors (C. bur-

netii, S. typhimurium)

•  Prevention of the processing and presentation of bacte-

rial antigens (S. typhimurium)

Any undegraded material remains in the lysosome, which 
is then called a residual body.

Antigen-presenting phagocytic cells, such as dendritic 
cells,  cleave  proteins  of  ingested  microorganisms  into 
small  peptides  for  loading  onto  membrane  receptors 
called major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II 
molecules. This transfer occurs in phagolysosomes called 
the  antigen-presenting  compartment  in  these  cells. 
MHC  Class  II  molecules  loaded  with  peptides  recycle 
back  to  the  surface  of  phagocytic  cells,  where  they 
activate CD4+ T-lymphocytes (see Fig. 27.8).

Some  pathogens  have  counterstrategies  to  avoid 
destruction  by  phagolysosomes.  These  include  mecha-
nisms either to inhibit fusion of phagosomes with lyso-
somes, to resist the low pH environment of the lysosome, 
or to escape to the cytoplasm by lysing the phagolyso-
some membrane (Box 22.2). For example, in the lungs 
of  patients  with  tuberculosis,  macrophages  ingest  the 
bacterium Mycobacterium tuberculosis but the bac-
terium  evades  destruction  by  secreting  a  phosphatase 
that  dephosphorylates  PIP3  and  thus  halts  phagosome 
maturation.

Macropinocytosis
Many  cells  ingest  extracellular  fluid  in  large  endocytic 
structures called macropinosomes. Growth factors or 
other  signals  stimulate  actin-driven  protrusions  of  the 
plasma  membrane  in  the  form  of  ruffles  (Fig.  22.5). 

A

B

FIGURE  22.5  MACROPINOCYTOSIS.  A–B,  Scanning  electron 
micrographs of Acanthamoeba castellanii showing membrane ruffling 
and  macropinocytosis,  the  major  pathway  for  nutrient  uptake  in  this 
organism.  (Courtesy  of  Steve  Doberstein,  Johns  Hopkins  Medical 
School, Baltimore, MD.)

These  protrusions  close  around  extracellular  fluid, 
forming  a  macropinosome,  which  is  then  transported 
along  microtubules  toward  the  center  of  the  cell.  This 
process allows cells to internalize unconcentrated extra-
cellular fluid, which is useful for bulk nutrient uptake.

Macropinosomes  persist  inside  cells  for  5  to  20 
minutes,  during  which  their  membrane  components 
either recycle back to the plasma membrane, potentially 
bypassing other organelles within the cell, or are deliv-
ered to lysosomes (Fig. 22.4C). Although the composition 
of  macropinosome  membranes  resembles  the  plasma 
membrane  ruffles  from  which  they  were  derived,  the 
ruffles  themselves  are  believed  to  be  enriched  in  both 
specific  polyphosphoinositides  and  lipid  raft  markers. 
Internalization  of  this  unique  part  of  the  membrane 
during  macropinocytosis,  therefore,  alters  the  overall 
composition of the plasma membrane. This might influ-
ence cellular motility and responses to external stimuli.
Formation  of  macropinosomes  depends  on  many  of 
the  same  proteins  used  for  phagocytosis.  PI  kinases  
and GTPases recruit and activate proteins that assemble 
the  actin  filaments  supporting  membrane  ruffles.  For 
example,  the  GTPase  Arf6  activates  phosphatidyl-4-
phosphate-kinase,  leading  to  production  of  PI(4,5)P2  at 
plasma membrane sites of macropinocytosis (Fig. 22.4C). 
PI(4,5)P2 then activates factors that nucleate or promote 
actin assembly (see Fig. 33.13). Overexpressing a consti-
tutively active form of Arf6 increases ruffling and accu-
mulation of macropinosomes enriched in PI(4,5)P2.

Macropinocytosis serves diverse cellular functions. In 
some cases, it is induced by activation of plasma mem-
brane receptors. Removal of these same receptors from 
the  cell  surface  by  macropinocytosis  downregulates 
their  signaling  activity.  Constitutive  macropinocytosis 
allows  cells  to  take  up  molecules  from  the  medium. 
Examples include uptake of nutrients by amoeba, thyro-
globulin by thyroid cells, and bulk extracellular fluid by 
dendritic cells for immune surveillance. Some migrating 
cells  use  macropinocytosis  for  motility  to  coordinate 
insertion  and  uptake  of  plasma  membrane  with  their 
direction  of  motion.  Certain  pathogenic  bacteria  (eg, 
Salmonella  typhimurium)  inject  toxins  into  cells  to 
trigger macropinocytosis and provide a pathway for the 

382 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

bacterium to enter the cell. Once in a macropinosome, 
the bacteria can replicate and avoid being destroyed by 
other cells engaged in phagocytosis.

Endocytosis Mediated by Caveolae
Caveolae  are  small  (~50 nm  wide)  patches  of  plasma 
membrane  (“little  caves”)  enriched  in  cholesterol  and 
coated  on  the  cytoplasmic  surface  with  the  proteins 
caveolin and cavin. Cavins are only found in vertebrates, 
while caveolins are more widely distributed in metazoa. 
Caveolae  also  contain  diverse  signaling  molecules  (eg, 
H-Ras), glycosphingolipids and membrane transporters, 
including  calcium  pumps  (Fig.  22.6).  Caveolae  vary  
in  shape  from  flat  to  flask-shape  invaginations  of  the 
membrane.

A

B

Capillary lumen

FIGURE 22.6  CAVEOLAE. A, Electron micrograph of a thin section 
of a muscle capillary showing caveolae (“little caves”). These structures 
are  abundant  in  endothelial  cells  that  mediate  transcytosis.  Arrows 
show “cave” openings. B, Electron micrograph of the inside surface 
of  a  fibroblast  prepared  by  quick-freezing,  deep-etching,  and  rotary 
shadowing.  The  protein  cavin  forms  the  rope-like  coats  on  the  
caveolae (white arrows). Caveolae are typically smaller than clathrin-
coated pits (arrowheads). (A, Courtesy D. Fawcett, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA. B, Courtesy John Heuser, Washington University, 
St. Louis, MO.)

The  coat  proteins,  caveolin  and  cavin,  stabilize 
the  unique  caveolae  micro-domains  (Fig.  22.7).  Cells 
devoid  of  either  protein  lack  morphologically  evident 
caveolae. Caveolin inserts as a loop into the inner leaflet 
of the plasma membrane, with both its C- and N-terminus 
facing the cytoplasm (Fig. 22.7B). Single caveolae contain 
approximately 150 molecules of caveolin. Oligomers of 
14  to  16  caveolin  molecules  are  stabilized  by  palmi-
toylation, binding cholesterol in a 1 : 1 ratio, and also by 
interactions  with  complexes  of  peripheral  membrane 
proteins called cavin that confine caveolin to caveolae. 
Cavins  form  the  rope-like  polymers  that  coat  the  cyto-
plasmic surface of caveolae (Fig. 22.7D). They are trimers 
of  subunits  with  two  coiled-coil  domains.  Some  cell 
types  express  multiple  cavin  isoforms  that  assemble 
heterotrimers. Interactions with phosphatidylserine and 
PIP2  direct  cavins  to  caveolae,  as  they  do  not  seem  to 
bind  directly  to  caveolin.  The  rope-like  polymers  of 
cavins  contrast  with  the  geometrical  assemblies  of  the 
coat  proteins  on  clathrin-coated  pits  and  COP-coated 
buds (see Fig. 21.8).

The density of caveolae on the cell surface can vary 
widely. For example, the flow of blood over endothelial 
cells  causes  caveolae  to  flatten.  Other  conditions  that 
flatten caveolae include phosphorylation of caveolin (ie, 
in  cells  expressing  viral-sarcoma  tyrosine  kinase,  v-src) 
or  depletion  of  membrane  cholesterol.  When  caveolae 
collapse,  cavins  are  degraded  and  caveolin  and  associ-
ated lipids redistribute across the plasma membrane (Fig. 
22.7C). Dispersal of caveolin and lipid from caveolae in 
this  manner  during  different  stresses  increases  the 
surface area and elasticity of the plasma membrane. This 
property  allows  cells  with  abundant  caveolae,  such  as 
endothelial and muscle cells, to respond to physiological 
stretch and fluid flow.

Caveolae  are  most  abundant  on  endothelial  cells 
(>10% of the plasma membrane area) where they mediate 
transcellular  shuttling  of  serum  proteins  and  nutrients 
from the bloodstream into tissues. Transmembrane cargo 
proteins in the plasma membrane associate with caveo-
lae  through  interactions  with  caveolin  and/or  with 
components  of  the  cholesterol-enriched  membrane. 
Internalization  of  caveolae  requires  rearrangements  of 
the actin cytoskeleton as well as the action of the GTPase 
dynamin (Fig. 22.8). The vesicles that form during this 
process  are  small  (~60 nm  in  diameter)  and  interact 
transiently  with  endosomes  or  fuse  with  each  other 
while  retaining  their  cytoplasmic  coat  of  caveolin  and 
cavin.  Caveolae  also  concentrate  at  the  basolateral 
surface of other epithelial cells and at the rear of migrat-
ing cells.

Caveolae contribute less to endocytosis in cells other 
than endothelial cells but serve additional roles including 
storing  microdomain-associated  lipids,  and  regulating 
both  noncaveolar  endocytic  pathways  and  a  variety  of 
signaling pathways.

 

CHAPTER 22  n  Endocytosis and the Endosomal Membrane System 

383

C. Flattening of caveola

Raft

Caveola

Raft

Cavin

D. Cavin structure and
     assembly

Cavin cross
section

A

HA

GPI

B

Cavin 1

Cytoplasmic cavin

oligomers

HR1
trimerization

Cavin trimers

Assembled
caveolae

YES

C

C

N

N

FIGURE 22.7  COMPARISON OF LIPID RAFTS AND CAVEOLAE. A, Lipid rafts enriched in cholesterol and sphingolipids can exist inde-
pendently of caveolin. Lipid rafts are enriched in proteins anchored to the outer leaflet by glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) tails and some integral 
membrane proteins (HA, influenza virus hemagglutinin, and YES, a Src-family tyrosine kinase), depending on the composition of their transmem-
brane domains. B–D, Caveolae are stabilized by caveolin (blue schematic), which inserts into the inner leaflet and binds cholesterol (red) and by 
rope-like polymers of cavin (purple). C, Dissociation of cavin results in flattening of the membrane bud. D, Cavin structure. Ribbon diagram of 
the first cavin helical segment, which forms a triple coiled-coil along the with second helical domain. Cavin trimers assemble oligomers the associate 
with  membrane  lipids  to  coat  caveolae  as  shown  by  the  detail  from  the  electron  micrograph  in  Fig.  22.6.  (For  reference,  see  Protein  Data  
Bank [www.rcsb.org] file 4QKV and Kovtun O, Tillu VA, Ariotti N, et al. Cavin family proteins and the assembly of caveolae. J Cell Sci. 2015;128:
1269–1278.)

A
A

B. Pit

Dynamin

Hub

Clathrin triskelions

Coated pit
Coated pit

Clathrin
Clathrin
sheet
sheet

FIGURE 22.8  CLATHRIN-COATED PITS. A, Electron micrograph of the cytoplasmic surface of the plasma membrane with sheets of clathrin 
and  clathrin-coated  pits.  The  cytoplasm  was  washed  away  before  the  membrane  was  prepared  by  rapid-freezing,  deep-etching  and  rotary 
shadowing with platinum. B, Drawing of a clathrin-coated pit and the arrangement of clathrin triskelions in the coat. (Micrograph courtesy John 
Heuser, Washington University, St. Louis, MO.)

Proteins in caveolae regulate cell growth and division, 
mitogen-activated  protein  (MAP)  kinase  signaling  and 
cell–cell contact inhibition. The N-terminus of caveolin 
interacts with a variety of signaling molecules, including 
src family kinases (see Fig. 24.3), H-Ras and MAP kinase 
pathways  (see  Fig.  27.6)  and  endothelial  nitric  oxide 

synthase  (see  Fig.  26.17).  Interactions  of  caveolin  with 
the  kinase  domain  of  epithelial  growth  factor  receptor 
(see Fig. 24.5) and the Gα subunit of heterotrimeric G 
proteins (see Fig. 25.9) inhibit their signaling. However, 
the relation of the effects on signaling and endocytosis 
is  unclear.  Indeed,  caveolin  sometimes  marks  other 

384 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

uptake  pathways  formed  from  noncaveolar  regions  of 
the plasma membrane.

Mice lacking caveolin are viable but their endothelial 
cells cannot bind or take up serum albumin (which binds 
fatty  acids  and  steroids)  from  the  blood.  Nonetheless, 
these  mice  are  remarkably  normal,  so  other  pathways 
must compensate for loss of the caveolar pathway. Loss-
of-function  mutations  of  caveolin  or  cavin  genes  cause 
human diseases, including lipodystrophy, muscular dys-
trophies, cardiac diseases, and cancer.

Clathrin-Mediated Endocytosis
Clathrin-dependent  endocytosis  (Fig.  22.8)  occurs  on 
specialized  patches  of  the  plasma  membrane,  called 
coated pits, formed by a protein lattice of clathrin and 
adapter molecules on their cytoplasmic surface (see Fig. 
21.12  for  details  about  clathrin  structure  and  mecha-
nism). Eukaryotic cells use clathrin-mediated endocy-
tosis  to  obtain  essential  nutrients,  such  as  iron  and 
cholesterol, and to remove activated receptors from the 
cell surface. The process also controls the activation of 
signaling  pathways  and  participates  in  the  turnover  of 
membrane  components.  Clathrin-coated  vesicles  also 
retrieve  synaptic  vesicle  membrane  at  synapses  follow-
ing neurotransmitter release (see Fig. 17.9). In addition 
to its role in endocytosis at the plasma membrane, clath-
rin  also  participates  in  cargo  sorting  and  membrane 
budding at other sites in cells, including endosomes and 
the trans-Golgi network (TGN).

Ligand-receptor  complexes  concentrate  in  coated  
pits  on  the  cell  surface  and  then  pinch  off  to  form 
clathrin-coated vesicles that carry the cargo into the 
cell, completing the budding process in approximately 
1 minute. Coated pits typically occupy 1% to 2% of the 
plasma membrane surface area. Therefore, depending on 

how effectively a receptor-ligand complex concentrates 
in  coated  pits  (typically  10-  to  20-fold),  20%  to  40%  of 
cell  surface  receptors  can  be  internalized  per  minute. 
Internalization of receptors that are not concentrated in 
coated  pits  is  much  slower,  reflecting  the  rate  of  bulk 
membrane uptake into the clathrin-dependent pathway.

Formation and Disassembly of  
Clathrin-Coated Vesicles
Clathrin-coated vesicles form in several steps (Fig. 22.9) 
using the core adaptor protein AP2 as the major hub for 
interactions between the membrane and the clathrin coat 
(Fig. 22.8). First the α-adaptin subunit of AP2 binds PI(4,5)
P2 and dileucine sorting motifs on the cytoplasmic tails of 
transmembrane  receptors.  Then  the  β2  subunit  of  AP2 
binds  clathrin  and  initiates  assembly  of  the  polyhedral 
coat. Interactions of the µ2 subunits of AP2 with sorting 
motifs  on  cargo  molecules  concentrate  them  in  the 
clathrin-coated region of the plasma membrane. AP2 also 
acts as a binding scaffold for several other components 
that  assist  with  or  regulate  coated  vesicle  invagination 
including Eps15, amphiphysin, and intersectin (Fig. 22.9).
Coated  pits  concentrate  a  wide  range  of  cargoes, 
because diverse accessory adaptor proteins link different 
membrane proteins to AP2 (see Fig. 21.12). Most cargo 
adaptors also help bend the vesicle membrane.

Once  the  coated  pit  is  deeply  invaginated,  the  neck 
narrows  and  pinches  off  a  clathrin-coated  vesicle  from 
the  plasma  membrane.  The  large  (100-kD)  GTPase 
dynamin binds to PI(4,5)P2 in the membrane tubule and 
assembles  a  spiral  “collar”  around  the  necks  of  deeply 
invaginated  coated  pits.  GTP  hydrolysis  during  interac-
tions between turns of the dynamin spiral constricts the 
collar and promotes scission of the membrane. In cells 
without dynamin, vesicle formation arrests at the stage 
of clathrin coat formation or before vesicle scission.

AP2

recruitment

Coat assembly
and curvature

Coated pit
formation

Dynamin collar

constriction

Detachment

Uncoating

AP2

Clathrin

Cargo clustered

in coated pit

Clathrin
AP180/CALM
AP2

Eps15
Intersection
Amphipysin

Coated
vesicle

Amphiphysin

Dynamin

Dynamin
Endophilin
Epsin

Cortactin
Actin

Transport 
vesicle

Synaptojanin
Auxilin
Hsc70

FIGURE 22.9  TIMELINE OF RECEPTOR-MEDIATED ENDOCYTOSIS DRIVEN BY THE CLATHRIN-COATED VESICLE. AP2 complexes 
are targeted to the plasma membrane and interact with tyrosine-based sorting motifs in the cytoplasmic domains of transmembrane proteins. 
AP2 also initiates the assembly of a polygonal lattice of clathrin, which concentrates cargo molecules in coated pits. AP2 and clathrin interact 
with the BAR-domain protein amphiphysin, which attracts the guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) dynamin. After assembly of a coated pit and 
fission of the coated vesicle from the plasma membrane, auxilin and the adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) Hsc70 dissociate clathrin and release 
the vesicle carrying cargo into the cell for fusion with endosomes. 

 

CHAPTER 22  n  Endocytosis and the Endosomal Membrane System 

385

The proline-rich domain of dynamin binds a number 
of  proteins  with  SH3  domains,  including  endophilin, 
cortactin,  and  amphiphysin.  These  proteins,  together 
with dynamin, help orchestrate coated pit invagination 
and  budding.  For  example,  crescent-shaped  dimers  of 
the BAR proteins endophilin and amphiphysin (see Fig. 
21.12)  induce  membrane  curvature  during  coated  pit 
constriction  and  coated  vesicle  release  by  binding  to 
highly  curved,  negatively  charged  membranes.  Epsin’s 
lipid-binding ENTH domain and extended tail help retain 
clathrin  and  AP2  on  membranes.  Intersectin  promotes 
actin assembly by recruiting the GTPase Cdc42 and the 
nucleation-promoting  factor  N-WASP  (neural  Wiskott-
Aldrich syndrome protein). Together with cortactin they 
stimulate  assembly  of  actin  filaments  that  help  drive 
internalization.

Soon  after  a  clathrin-coated  vesicle  pinches  off  the 
plasma membrane, the chaperone adenosine triphospha-
tase (ATPase) Hsc70, the J domain protein auxilin (see 
Fig. 12.12B) and cyclic GMP–dependent kinase begin to 
disassemble  the  clathrin  coat  (Fig.  22.9).  Endophilin 
recruits the lipid phosphatase synaptojanin, which con-
tributes  to  uncoating  by  dephosphorylating  PI(4,5)P2. 
The loss of PI(4,5)P2 weakens the attachment of dynamin, 
AP2, and clathrin to the membrane. Uncoating recycles 
coat  components  and  frees  the  vesicle  to  fuse  with 
similar vesicles or with early endosomes. Thereafter, the 
content and membrane components of the coated vesicle 
are routed to the various destinations (Fig. 22.4).

Nonclathrin/Noncaveolar Endocytosis
Surprisingly,  cells  continue  to  take  up  certain  proteins 
and lipids even when clathrin coat assembly is disrupted 
by  overexpression  of  domains  from  Eps15.  Eps15  nor-
mally links several clathrin assembly proteins to AP2, so 
individual Eps15 domains can interfere with coat assem-
bly.  Since  this  discovery,  this  process  of  “nonclathrin/
noncaveolar  endocytosis”  has  been  shown  to  take  up 
extracellular  fluid,  membrane  lipids,  and  many  other 
types of cargoes. It also plays important roles in generat-
ing cell polarity, in maintaining lipid homeostasis, and as 
an entry portal for pathogens (Fig. 22.10).

Nonclathrin/noncaveolar endocytosis takes up highly 
diverse  cargo  molecules  using  several  mechanisms  to 
concentrate  them  on  the  membrane.  The  best  under-
stood  of  these  depends  on  clustering  the  extracellular 
domains of glycosylated membrane lipids and proteins. 
For  example,  extracellular  lectins  (eg,  galectins)  can 
recognize  and  crosslink  glycolipids  and  glycoproteins 
into  tightly  packed  nano-environments.  Shiga  toxin, 
from  Shigella  bacterium  that  causes  diarrhea,  uses  this 
strategy to enter cells. The toxin binds to glycosphingo-
lipid globotriaosylceramide (Gb3) on the cell surface and 
creates lipid clusters that reorganize the lipid bilayer in 
a  way  that  favors  membrane  bending  without  internal 

A

Clustered receptors

Cholesterol

B. Shigatoxin

N-BAR
proteins

Actin

Internalization

Shigatoxin

TGN

Endophilin
BAR-domain
proteins

Actin

Arf 6

Early
endosome

Multivesicular
body

Lysosome

FIGURE 22.10  NONCLATHRIN/NONCAVEOLAR ENDOCYTO-
SIS PATHWAY. A, Clustering of membrane receptor proteins initiates 
membrane  deformation  in  an  inward  bud.  Recruitment  of  the  BAR 
domain protein endophilin helps stabilize the curved membrane. Actin 
polymerization drives inward protrusion of the tubule. After separation 
from  the  plasma  membrane  tubular  carrier  vesicles  fuse  with  early 
endosomes and the internalized receptors sort into different pathways 
toward  lysosomes,  trans-Golgi  network  (TGN)  or  back  to  the  cell 
surface. Arf6 regulates receptor recycling back to the plasma mem-
brane.  B,  Shigatoxin  uptake.  Shigatoxin  binds  the  ganglioside  Gb3. 
Clustering of toxin–Gb3 complexes results in invagination of a mem-
brane tubule, in which other lipids sort passively. BAR-domain proteins 
like  endophilin  A2  bind  to  the  tubule  and  recruit  motor  proteins  
to  extend  the  tubule  along  microtubules  followed  by  scission  of  a 
vesicle. 

coat proteins (Fig. 22.10B). Cholera and Shiga toxins are 
taken  up  by  other  endocytic  pathways,  but  only  exert 
their  toxic  effects  after  entering  the  cell  through  the 
nonclathrin/noncaveolar  pathway.  Shiga 
toxin’s  A 
subunit is transferred from the endocytic vesicle to the 
Golgi apparatus and the ER. After moving across the ER 
membrane  into  the  cytoplasm,  the  A  subunit  inhibits 
protein synthesis by removing an adenine from the 28S 
RNA of the large ribosomal subunit.

Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored proteins 
serving  as  hydrolytic  enzymes,  adhesion  molecules, 
complement  regulators,  receptors,  and  prion  proteins 
can enter cells by nonclathrin/noncaveolar endocytosis. 
Their  lipid  anchors  reside  in  the  outer  leaflet  of  the 
membrane  bilayer  (see  Fig.  13.10),  so  no  part  of  these 
molecules  can  interact  with  the  cytoplasmic  proteins 
used  to  recognize  cytoplasmic  sorting  signals  of  trans-
membrane proteins during clathrin-mediated and caveo-
lar endocytosis. Some GPI-linked proteins can partition 
into  membrane  domains  for  nonclathrin/noncaveolar 
endocytosis but others depend on proteins such as the 
lipid raft-associated protein flotillin to cluster efficiently. 
During this process, actin polymerization (usually driven 

386 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

by  the  Cdc42  GTPase)  helps  coalesce  membrane  con-
stituents into cholesterol-enriched microdomains.

Some transmembrane proteins including MHC1 Class 
I  molecules,  interleukin-2  receptors,  and  seven-helix 
receptors can be internalized by nonclathrin/noncaveolar 
endocytosis.  Uptake  of  these  receptors  depends  on 
ligand  binding,  which  is  thought  to  trigger  receptor 
clustering into cholesterol-rich microdomains. The mul-
tifunctional  adaptor,  endophilin,  assists  with  the  inter-
nalization  of  the  β1-adrenergic  receptor  (see  Fig.  27.3) 
and  receptor  tyrosine  kinases  (see  Fig.  27.6).  When 
activated, these receptors drive the local production of 
PI(4,5)P2, which attracts endophilin.

Once  cargo  molecules  are  clustered  at  sites  of 
nonclathrin/noncaveolar  endocytosis,  multiple  mecha-
nisms  contribute  to  internalization  of  the  membrane 
bud. Rather than using coat complexes to recruit cargo 
and to bud from the membrane, this pathway is believed 
to exploit heterogeneity in the lipid and protein compo-
sition  of  the  plasma  membrane  to  form  lipid  microdo-
mains with cargo that bud into the cell (Fig. 22.10). Like 
lipid rafts, the microdomains are enriched in cholesterol 
and  glycosphingolipids  and  cholesterol  depletion  dis-
rupts  the  uptake  of  all  cargo  molecules.  In  some  cases 
the membrane microdomains recruit N-BAR proteins or 
helix-inserting epsins that bend the membrane and serve 
as scaffolding modules (see Fig. 21.15). For example, the 
endophilin  BAR  domain  induces  membrane  curvature 
and supports scission of the vesicle, while its SH3 domain 
binds  cytoplasmic  proteins.  Differential  recruitment  of 
lipid  kinases  and  phosphatases  along  the  tube  and  its 
narrow  neck  initiates  a  kinetic  segregation  of  lipids  in 
the neck region, triggering scission of the tubule carrier 
from the plasma membrane. This can occur either with 
or without dynamin. As the membrane invaginates, actin 
polymerization  and  traction  by  myosin  motors  are 
thought to elongate it into a tube.

These components cooperate to drive the formation 
of  tubular  endocytic  structures  that  separate  from  
the  plasma  membrane  (Fig.  22.10).  Once  inside  the  
cell,  tubular  carriers  sort  to  early  endosomes  or  the  
Golgi  apparatus  by  various  mechanisms  requiring  Rab 
and Arf GTPases and scaffolds for connecting to micro-
tubule motors. Routing is also affected by ubiquitination 
tags placed on the cargo.

In addition to being a portal for entry of GPI-anchored 
proteins,  toxins,  receptors,  and  other  proteins,  the 
nonclathrin/noncaveolar  pathway  serves  as  a  reservoir 
of membrane required for cell spreading, delivering key 
adhesion proteins (ie, integrins) and nutrient pumps to 
the  plasma  membrane.  It  also  helps  differentiate  the 
plasma membrane of epithelial cells into polarized apical 
and basolateral domains (see Fig. 21.25). Indeed, enrich-
ment  of  GPI-anchored  proteins  and  lipid  rafts  (see  Fig. 
13.7)  in  apical  domains  requires  the  nonclathrin/
noncaveolar endocytic pathway, socholesterol depletion 

disrupts  cell  polarity.  By  contrast,  most  proteins  in 
basolateral  domains,  such  as  transferrin  receptors  and 
low-density  lipoprotein  (LDL)  receptors,  are  excluded 
from  lipid  rafts  and  do  not  enter  the  nonclathrin/
noncaveolar endocytic pathway. Instead, they are taken 
up by clathrin-mediated endocytosis and recycle back to 
basolateral domains after releasing their ligand.

Endocytic Compartments Associated With 
Clathrin-Dependent Endocytosis
Endocytic  transport  intermediates  formed  by  clathrin-
dependent  or  clathrin-independent  mechanisms  fuse 
with  and  deliver  their  cargo  to  endosomes.  Like  the  
TGN  in  the  biosynthetic  pathway,  endosomes  are  the 
major sorting compartments along the endocytic pathway 
toward  lysosomes  and  other  destinations.  Consistent  
with  their  sorting  function,  endosomes  are  a  pleo-
morphic  collection  of  vesicles,  vacuoles,  tubules,  and 
multivesicular  bodies.  The  following  sections  describe 
these  compartments  in  relation  to  clathrin-mediated 
endocytosis,  the  most  extensively  studied  endocytic 
pathway.

In  clathrin-mediated  endocytosis,  four  classes  of 
endosomes are distinguished based on the kinetics with 
which they accumulate endocytic tracers, their morphol-
ogy,  localization  within  the  cell,  and  the  presence  of 
specific marker proteins (Fig. 22.11). Newly internalized 
proteins  are  first  delivered  to  so-called  early  endo-
somes, an anastomosing network of tubules and vacu-
oles near the plasma membrane. They serve primarily as 
a sorting compartment for two pathways, one recycling 
receptors and other components in tubules and vesicles 
back to the plasma membrane and the other leading to 
destruction in lysosomes (Fig. 22.12A). Receptors return-
ing to the cell surface first move from early endosomes 
to  recycling  endosomes,  tubular  portions  of  early 
endosomes located in the perinuclear Golgi region of the 
cell. Alternatively, early endosomes transform into mul-
tivesicular bodies, transport intermediates that mature 
into  late  endosomes.  Late  endosomes  ultimately  fuse 
with lysosomes (discussed in Chapter 23), whose acid 
hydrolases degrade internalized cargo.

These four endosomal compartments are not distinct, 
stable organelles, but rather exist as stages of a continuum 
of compartments engaged in sorting of endocytic cargo. 
Each  compartment  uses  specific  sorting  mechanisms  
to  separate  cargo,  receptors,  and  lipids  for  trafficking 
into  different  routes.  These  sorting  mechanisms  are 
linked  to  membrane  differentiation  events  that  allow 
particular  compartments  to  fuse  together,  move  apart, 
extend  tubules,  form  invaginated  intraluminal  vesicles, 
or  remain  as  vacuolar  structures.  The  endosomal  com-
partments  are  constantly  remodeled  according  to  the 
quantity  and  type  of  receptors  and  cargoes  that  traffic 
through them.

 

CHAPTER 22  n  Endocytosis and the Endosomal Membrane System 

387

Coated pit

Early

endosomes

Lysosome

Late
endosome

Lysosome

FIGURE  22.11  ENDOSOMAL  COMPARTMENTS.  Electron 
micrograph showing internalized gold-conjugated protein being trans-
ported  through  the  structurally  diverse  organelles  of  the  endosomal 
compartment.  A  gradient  of  colors  shows  the  maturation  of  early 
endosomes  to  late  endosomes  and  lysosomes.  Gold  particles  (tiny 
black  dots)  are  first  delivered  to  early  or  sorting  endosomes  (yellow) 
that  have  both  tubular  and  vacuolar  regions  and  few  intraluminal 
membranes. Tubular portions are recycled to the plasma membrane, 
whereas vacuolar portions undergo maturation. Late endosomes (light 
brown)  are  vacuolar  and  contain  increasing  amounts  of  intraluminal 
membranes.  Lysosomes  (dark  brown)  are  very  dense  organelles, 
packed with internal vesicles and membrane whorls. (Courtesy Mark 
Marsh, University College, London, United Kingdom.)

Early Endosomal Compartment
Early endosomes receive membrane proteins and lipids 
delivered into the cell by clathrin-dependent endocyto-
sis.  The  amount  of  protein  and  lipid  entering  the  early 
endosomal  compartment  is  enormous,  given  that  bulk 
plasma membrane is internalized at rates as high as 2% 
per  minute  and  nutrient  receptors  such  as  transferrin 
receptor (which binds iron-bound ferritin) are internal-
ized at rates exceeding 20% per minute. Remarkably, the 
majority of this internalized material (approximately 90% 
of  internalized  protein  and  lipid  and  60%  to  70%  of  all 
internalized fluid) is rapidly recycled to the cell surface 
from  early  endosomes.  The  rest  of  the  membrane  and 
contents  are  routed  to  lysosomes  for  degradation.  This 
sorting of proteins and lipids in endosomes depends on 
the following features.

First, early endosomal membranes extend long mem-
brane tubules that can move apart and fuse with other 
compartments.  This  allows  the  detached  membrane 

tubules to fuse with the plasma membrane or recycling 
endosomes.

Second,  the  geometry  of  the  early  endosome  assists 
with sorting proteins and lipids. Soluble ligands accumu-
late  in  the  volume-rich  vacuolar  portions  of  the  early 
endosome,  whereas  receptors  accumulate  in  tubular 
portions with a high ratio of surface area to volume (Fig. 
22.12D).  This  physically  separates  membrane  compo-
nents for recycling back to the plasma membrane either 
directly or after passing through recycling endosomes or 
the  TGN,  depending  on  when  they  detach  from  the 
endosomal membrane. On the other hand, vacuolar por-
tions  of  early  endosomes  mature  into  multivesicular 
bodies and late endosomes before fusing with lysosomes 
where their contents are degraded.

Third,  V-type  rotary  ATPases  pump  protons  (see 
Fig.  14.6)  into  endosomes,  progressively  lowering  the 
luminal pH along the endocytic pathway from approxi-
mately pH 6.5 in early endosomes to approximately pH 
5.0 in late endosomes (Fig. 22.12D). The interaction of 
many  ligands  with  their  transmembrane  sorting  recep-
tors is sensitive to pH (Fig. 22.12C), so the pH gradient 
controls where each cargo molecule dissociates from its 
membrane receptor along the endosomal pathway (Fig. 
22.12D).  When  receptor–ligand  complexes  reach  their 
threshold  pH  for  dissociation,  the  ligands  are  released 
into the lumen of the endosome and are carried in the 
vacuolar  portion  of  the  endosome  toward  lysosomes, 
while the transmembrane receptors are returned to the 
plasma membrane in tubules.

Fourth, oligomerization and aggregation of transmem-
brane  proteins  influence  sorting  in  endosomes.  For 
example,  monomeric  Fc  receptors  recycle  from  endo-
somes to the plasma membrane, but Fc receptors cross-
linked  by  binding  antigen–antibody  complexes  on  the 
cell  surface  are  targeted  from  endosomes  to  lysosomes 
for  degradation.  Processing  of  internalized  epidermal 
growth factor (EGF) receptors (see Fig. 27.6) is another 
example. Binding of EGF causes receptors to dimerize, 
followed by addition of a single ubiquitin (see Fig. 23.3). 
After  internalization,  EGF  does  not  dissociate  until  the 
pH  is  less  than  5.0.  As  a  result,  the  EGF–EGF  receptor 
complex is targeted to lysosomes for degradation. This 
process,  termed  downregulation  (see  Fig.  23.5),  is  a 
negative  feedback  loop  that  allows  cells  to  adapt  to 
continuous stimulation (see Fig. 27.6).

In addition to these features, the membranes of early 
endosomes  exhibit  a  “mosaic”  of  specialized  domains 
with  unique  lipids,  protein–lipid,  and  protein–protein 
complexes  (Fig.  22.12B).  These  domains  orchestrate 
membrane  tubulation,  invagination,  and  fusion.  The  
differentiated  domains  are  maintained  dynamically  by 
localized  production  of  PI(3)P  by  PI(3)-kinase  in  early 
endosomal  membranes.  PI(3)P  recruits  the  protein  
early endosome antigen 1 (EEA1), which has a FYVE-
domain  to  bind  PI(3)P.  Homodimers  of  EEA1  have 

388 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

A. Overview

B. Lipid concentrations

  Direct recycling

(peripheral cytoplasm)

 Indirect recycling

(perinuclear cytoplasm)

Plasma membrane

E
n
d
o
s
o
m
a
l
 

m
a
t
u
r
a
t
i
o
n

Early endosome

Multivesicular
body

Late endosome

Lysosome

Recycling
endosome

TGN

Rab4

Early
endosome

Rab5-EEA1
PI3-P

Rab11

Rab7

Recycling
endosome

TGN

Rab7

Late

endosome

Lysobisphosphatidic
acid
Rab9

E
n
d
o
s
o
m
a
l
 

m
a
t
u
r
a
t
i
o
n

C. Ligand binding as a function of pH

D. pH gradient along pathway

Plasma membrane

Tfn

TfnR + Tfn 

LDLR

H+

Early
endosome
pH 6.5

100

50

LDL

Fe

MPR

EGF

r
o

t

p
e
c
e
r
 

o

t
 

i

g
n
d
n
b

i

 

d
n
a
g

i
l
 
t

n
e
c
r
e
P

0

7

6

5
pH

4

3

Recycling
endosome
pH 6.8

TGN

E
n
d
o
s
o
m
a

l
 

m
a

t

u
r
a

t
i

o
n

H+

Late
endosome
pH 4.5

Lysosome

H+

MPR

Fe
LDL 
MP ligand 
EGFR + EGF

FIGURE  22.12  MEMBRANE  TRAFFIC  AND  CONTENT  SORTING  ALONG  THE  ENDOCYTIC  PATHWAY.  A,  Overview.  Cargo  and 
membrane taken up by clathrin-mediated endocytosis are delivered to tubulovesicular early endosomes, which mature into multivesicular bodies 
and late endosome before fusion with lysosomes. Each compartment sorts membrane containing receptors and other proteins into tubules and 
vesicles that are recycled to the plasma membrane either directly or indirectly through perinuclear recycling endosomes or the trans-Golgi network 
(TGN). Endosomes mature by accumulating internal membranes, delivery of lysosomal hydrolases from the TGN, and acquisition of targeting and 
fusion  machinery.  B,  Domain  organization  of  the  endocytic  pathway.  Local  production  of  PIs  in  subregions  of  endosomal  membranes  recruit 
specific Rabs and Rab-binding proteins such as EEA1 (depicted in different colors). C, Interactions of many cargo molecules with their trans-
membrane receptors depend on pH. D, V-type rotary ATPase proton pumps progressively acidify the lumens of endosomal compartments. This 
gradient of pH facilitates protein sorting by regulating where along the pathway that each ligand dissociates from its transmembrane receptor. 
Dissociated ligands in the luminal space are targeted to lysosomes, whereas receptors in the membrane can be recycled to the cell surface in 
tubular endosomes. Iron dissociates from transferrin (Tfn) in early endosomes and apotransferrin without bound iron recycles with its receptor. 
Mannose-6-phosphate proteins dissociate from their receptors (MPRs) in late endosomes. Some ligands, such as epidermal growth factor (EGF), 
remain bound and are delivered with their receptor (epidermal growth factor receptor [EGFR]) to lysosomes. 

for 

sites 

the  Rab5  GTPase  at  both 
binding 
ends  of  a  long  coiled-coil,  so  they  can  link  two  
membranes marked with Rab5, such as two early endo-
somes  or  an  endocytic  vesicle  and  an  early  endosome. 
Rab5  recruits  SNARE  machinery  (eg,  syntaxin  13  and 
N-ethylmaleimide–sensitive factor [NSF]; see Fig. 21.15) 

to  membranes  forming  dynamic  oligomeric  complexes 
that promote homotypic and heterotypic fusions of early 
endosomes. Inhibiting PI(3)-kinase with the drug wort-
mannin prevents the formation of such fusion assemblies, 
as  PI(3)P  is  required  to  recruit  EEA1.  Early  endosomes 
without PI(3)P cannot fuse.

 

CHAPTER 22  n  Endocytosis and the Endosomal Membrane System 

389

The binding of Rab5 effectors to early endosomes and 
the presence of guanine nucleotide exchange factors for 
Rab5  in  the  effector  complexes  establishes  a  positive-
feedback  loop  that  amplifies  the  recruitment  and  the 
activation of Rab5 in specific regions of early endosomes. 
This  feedback  generates  and  maintains  domains  that 
contain  Rab5-EEA1-PI(3)P  in  early  endosomes.  Other 
Rabs  are  thought  to  operate  in  a  similar  fashion  in  the 
endosomal  system,  with  Rab4  and  Rab11  in  early/
recycling  endosomes  and  Rab7  and  Rab9  in  late  endo-
somes (Fig. 22.12B). Like Rab5, these other Rab proteins 
are thought to organize membrane domains with distinct 
functions within a single endosome compartment.

Multivesicular Bodies
into  multivesicular 
Sorting  endosomes  transform 
bodies,  which  continue  the  sorting  process.  Most 
residual plasma membrane proteins and recycling recep-
tors are returned to the plasma membrane, while proteins 
destined  for  degradation  are  sorted  into  intraluminal 
vesicles and tubules. Multivesicular bodies gain lysosomal 
hydrolases from vesicles delivered from the TGN along 
the biosynthetic pathway.

Multivesicular bodies begin to form from the vacuolar 
portions  of  early  endosomal  membranes  by  invaginat-
ing  membrane  with  receptors  destined  for  late  endo-
somes  or  lysosomes  (Fig.  22.13;  see  Fig.  23.5).  Many  
downregulated  receptors  are  tagged  with  ubiquitin 
(Fig.  23.2)  for  sorting 
into  multivesicular  bodies. 
Two  types  of  proteins  contribute  to  sorting  ubiqui-
tinated  receptors:  Hrs  (hepatocyte-growth-factor-
regulated  tyrosine  kinase  substrate)  and  ESCRT-I, 
ESCRT-II,  and  ESCRT-III  (endosomal  sorting  com-

plexes  required  for  transport-I,  transport-II,  and  
transport-III).

Hrs  binds  ubiquitinated  receptors  when  they  arrive 
in  early  endosomes.  Association  with  PI(3)P  retains 
Hrs  on  the  cytoplasmic  surface  of  endosomes,  so  the 
PI 3-kinase inhibitor wortmannin inhibits the formation 
of  intraluminal  vesicles  in  MVBs.  Through  interactions 
with  clathrin,  Hrs  sorts  ubiquitinated  receptors  into 
clathrin-coated  domains  on  new  multivesicular  bodies. 
These  domains  do  not  form  clathrin-coated  vesicles 
but  instead  sort  ubiquitinated  membrane  proteins  for 
transfer  to  ESCRT-1.  Sequential  transfer  to  ESCRT-II 
and  -III  on  the  cytoplasmic  surface  of  the  multive-
sicular  body  drives  both  receptor  incorporation  into 
the  membrane  invaginations,  and  invagination  of  the 
membrane itself. As the intraluminal membrane system 
matures,  the  compartment  is  called  a  late  endosome. 
Late  endosomes  subsequently  fuse  with  preexisting  
lysosomes.

ESCRT-I is also involved in retrovirus budding at the 
plasma membrane (eg, Ebola and HIV), a process that 
is  topologically  equivalent  to  membrane  invagination 
occurring in multivesicular bodies. The HIV Gag protein 
highjacks the ESCRT-I complex by mimicking the binding 
activity of HRS.

Under  certain  conditions  multivesicular  bodies  fuse 
with the plasma membrane, releasing their intraluminal 
vesicles, termed exosomes, outside the cell. Exosomes 
have  regulatory  functions  in  the  immune  system.  For 
example, antigen-presenting cells such as B-lymphocytes 
and  dendritic  cells  secrete  exosomes  during  exocy-
tic  fusion  of  MHC  class  II  compartments  with  the  
plasma membrane. The released exosomes can stimulate 

A. Multivesicular body
     (MVB) formation

B. MVB formation mechanism
ESCRT II

ESCRT I
Vps37

ESCRT III

Vps4

Vps27/Hrs

Vps28

Vps22

Snf7

Vps25

Vps20

Vps2

Ub

Vps23

Vps36

Vps24

Transmembrane
cargo

1. Ubiquitylated
    cargo delivered
    to MVB

2. Ubiquitylated
    cargo passed
    from ESCRT-I
    to ESCRT-II to
    ESCRT-III

3. Vps4 disassembles
    ESCRT-III, releasing
    ubiquitin from cargo
4. Cargo transfers to internal
    vesicle while ESCRT-III
    subunits recycle

FIGURE 22.13  PROTEIN SORTING IN MULTIVESICULAR BODIES. A, MVBs accumulate small vesicles and tubules targeted for lysosomal 
degradation by invagination of the limiting membrane. MVB formation and sorting require interactions among several proteins. Interactions with 
Vps/Hrs sort ubiquitinated receptors that are sorted to MVBs. The ubiquitinated receptor is then delivered to ESCRT-I by an interaction between 
Hrs and the Vps23 subunit of ESCRT-I. The receptor is then relayed to ESCRT-II and then to ESCRT-III. Invagination of an intraluminal vesicle 
containing the receptor is mediated through polymerization of ESCRT-III complexes, which are small, highly charged coiled-coil proteins. An AAA 
ATPase, Vps4, disassembles the multimeric ESCRT subunits, allowing them to be reutilized. 

390 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

proliferation  of  T-lymphocytes.  Exosomes  might  also 
represent  a  novel  method  of  intercellular  communica-
tion.  For  example,  HIV  particles  found  in  exosomes 
could  represent  a  type  of  “Trojan  horse”  capable  
of  transmitting  the  HIV  virus  when  taken  up  by  
other cells.

Late Endosomes
Late  endosomes  (Fig.  22.11)  serve  as  a  final  sorting 
station  for  determining  which  membrane  constituents  
in  the  endocytic  pathway  will  be  degraded  and  which 
will  be  recycled  (Fig.  22.12A).  For  example,  mannose 
6-phosphate  receptors  for  acid  hydrolases  and  trans-
membrane enzymes involved in the proteolytic process-
ing of precursor proteins (eg, the dibasic endopeptidase 
furin  and  carboxypeptidase  D)  are  recycled  from  late 
endosomes  to  the  TGN  and  back  to  the  plasma  mem-
brane. Transport from late endosomes to TGN is thought 
to involve budding of membrane-enclosed carriers from 
late endosomes followed by fusion with the TGN.

Genetic  and  biochemical  analyses  of  this  process 
revealed  an  important  role  of  retromer,  a  complex 
composed  of  five  proteins  that  includes  members  of 
the  sorting  nexin  family  of  proteins.  Mutations  in 
any  of  the  retromer  proteins  prevent  acid  hydrolase 
receptors  from  being  retrieved  to  the  TGN  and 
result  in  secretion  of  acid  hydrolases  at  the  plasma  
membrane.

Late endosomes are structurally distinct from multive-
sicular  bodies  by  being  pleomorphic,  with  cisternal, 
tubular,  and  multivesicular  regions.  They  also  contain 
large amounts of lysosomal glycoproteins (in particular, 
lysosome-associated membrane proteins [Lamp] 1 
and  Lamp2)  and  the  lipid  lysobisphosphatidic  acid 
(Fig.  22.12B).  This  lipid  prefers  to  be  in  a  hexagonal 
phase  that  can  promote  positive  or  negative  bilayer 
curvatures that favor membrane invagination and intra-
luminal  vesicle  formation.  Lamps  are  restricted  to  the 
limiting  membranes  of  multivesicular,  late  endosomal 
elements, while their internal membranes are enriched 
in lysobisphosphatidic acid.

Other Endocytic Compartments  
and Pathways
Endocytic  cargo  and  membrane  taken  up  by  phago-
cytosis,  macropinocytosis,  caveolae,  and  nonclathrin/
noncaveolar pathways do not pass through multivesicu-
lar bodies or late endosomes (Fig. 22.14). Instead, cargo 
taken  into  phagosomes  or  macropinosomes  remains 
within  these  structures  as  they  mature  into  and/or  
fuse  with 
lysosomes.  Endocytic  structures  formed  
by  caveolae  serve  as  a  conduit  for  movements  of  
molecules  to  other  regions  of  the  plasma  membrane. 
Nonclathrin/noncaveolar  endocytic  structures  deliver 
selected  components  to  the  TGN  (resupplying  it  with 

Phagocytosis

Macropinocytosis

Macropinosome

    Caveolae-
     uptake

Phagosome

Lysosome

Early endosome

Phago-
lysosome

Recycling
endosome

TGN

    Nonclathrin,
     noncaveolae-
     uptake

FIGURE  22.14  PATHWAYS  FOLLOWED  BY  MOLECULES 
TAKEN  UP  BY  PHAGOCYTOSIS,  MACROPINOCYTOSIS, 
CAVEOLAE,  AND  NONCLATHRIN/NONCAVEOLAE  UPTAKE. 
Arrows  depict  the  routes  followed  by  membrane-bound  and  soluble 
cargo  molecules  after  uptake  by  each  endocytic  mechanism.  
TGN, trans-Golgi network. 

glycosphingolipids)  and  lysosome,  as  well  as  recycling 
other molecules back to the plasma membrane.

Endocytosis and Signaling
Endocytosis regulates signaling by cell-surface receptors 
in all phases of animal development, from cell prolifera-
tion  to  cell  migration  and  survival.  Understanding  this 
regulation  is  important  for  disease  prevention;  for 
example, many cancer cells are sensitive to therapeutics 
that target the endocytic pathways of specific signaling 
receptors.

Endocytosis regulates the strength or duration of sig-
naling most simply by controlling the number of recep-
tors available in the plasma membrane for activation by 
ligands.  When  such  endocytosis  occurs  nonuniformly 
across the cell, localized signaling emerges. One example 
of this is at the leading edge of migrating cells.

Receptors  are  marked  for  internalization  by  binding 
β-arrestin  or  by  ubiquitylation.  For  example,  β-arrestin 
binds the cytoplasmic tails of seven-helix receptors that 
have  been  phosphorylated  (see  Fig.  24.3).  Binding  a 
receptor changes the conformation of β-arrestin, expos-
ing binding sites for clathrin and AP2. These interactions 
trigger internalization of the receptor. β-arrestin can also 
coordinate components of the MAP kinase pathway on 
the  internalized  membranes  to  facilitate  downstream 
signaling. Ubiquitylation of ligand bound receptors pro-
motes  their  recruitment  into  clathrin-coated  pits,  pre-
sumably  through  interactions  with  ubiquitin-binding 

 

CHAPTER 22  n  Endocytosis and the Endosomal Membrane System 

391

domains of the clathrin-coat adaptors Epsin and EPS15. 
After  internalization,  the  HRS  complex  targets  active, 
ubiquitinylated  receptors  to  lysosomes  for  degradation 
(Fig. 22.13).

Some receptors continue to signal after endocytosis, 
prolonging the duration and intensity of the signal when 
ligand is limiting. For example, activated EGF receptors 
continue  activating  the  MAP  kinase  cascade  (see  Fig. 
27.6). Another example is transforming growth factor-β–
receptor signaling (see Fig. 27.10) from early endosomes. 
This  signaling  causes  the  transcription  factor  SMAD2 
(Sma- and Mad-related protein 2) to dissociate from SARA 
(SMAD  anchor  for  receptor  activation)  on  endosomes. 
SMAD2  then  translocates  into  the  nucleus  to  regulate 
gene transcription. Another way to sustain signaling after 
endocytosis is to return internalized receptors back to the 
plasma membrane, rather than to lysosomes (Fig. 22.14).

Viruses and Protein Toxins as 
“Opportunistic Endocytic Ligands”
The  threat  of  infectious  diseases  throughout  the  world 
has made research on the survival tactics of intracellular 
pathogens and cellular defenses against them particularly 
important.  Many  enveloped  viruses  (ie,  those  with  a 
membrane  bilayer)  enter  cells  by  catching  a  ride  on 
membrane  proteins  internalized  by  endocytosis.  Once 
inside an endosome, the low pH causes conformational 
changes in viral membrane proteins that promote their 
insertion into and fusion with the organelle membrane. 
This  transfers  the  viral  nucleocapsid  to  the  cytoplasm, 
where it has access to the cell’s synthetic machinery to 
replicate itself (Fig. 22.15).

Protein toxins produced by bacteria and plants enter 
cells by binding to cell surface integral proteins or gly-
colipids and hitchhiking into cells when these receptors 
are taken in by endocytosis (Fig. 22.15). Various toxins 
enter the cytoplasm from different intracellular compart-
ments,  because  their  requirements  for  translocation 
differ. When pH is the trigger, toxins can be translocated 
directly across the endosomal membrane. Other toxins 
travel  back  to  the  ER  and  use  the  cell’s  translocation 
machinery in reverse to enter the cytoplasm. Once inside 
these toxins can kill animal cells by inhibiting cytoplas-
mic functions, such as protein translation.

Both  clinicians  and  basic  researchers  benefit  by 
studying  these  highly  evolved  “hitchhikers.”  From 
them,  much  can  be  learned  about  which  properties, 
sequences, and motifs to look for in endogenous, fuso-
genic proteins. Understanding something as esoteric as 
the action of a plant toxin can also have medical benefits, 
as  in  the  treatment  of  cancer  through  coupling  of  the 
catalytic (A) subunits of toxins such as ricin to antibodies 
and  targeting  of  the  toxic  subunit  to  malignant  cells. 
These  chimeric  proteins  are  called  immunotoxins. 
Similarly, the discovery of efficient viral mechanisms for 

A. Translocation across endosome

H+

Capsid

DNA

B. Fusion with endosome

H+

C. Lysis of endosome

H+

D. Retrograde transport to ER

FIGURE  22.15  ENTRY OF VIRUSES AND TOXINS INTO THE 
CELLS.  Many  viruses  and  toxins  bind  to  cell  surface  receptors  that 
are  efficiently  internalized.  A,  Once  in  endosomes,  pH-dependent 
conformational changes can trigger the translocation of toxin subunits 
across the endosomal membrane into the cytoplasm. B, pH-dependent 
conformational changes can activate fusogenic viral coat proteins to 
mediate fusion of the viral envelope with the endosomal membrane, 
releasing  the  nucleocapsid  into  the  cytoplasm.  C,  Some  bacteria 
secrete toxins after entering the endosome/phagosome; these inter-
calate into the membrane, creating large pores that disrupt endosomal 
compartments. Once in the cytoplasm, the bacterium can usurp the 
cell’s actin (yellow filaments) assembly machinery for propulsion. (See 
Fig. 37.12.) D, Some toxins enter through caveolae and are transported 
to  the  endoplasmic  reticulum  (ER),  where  they  can  use  the  cell’s 
translocation machinery—in reverse—to enter the cytoplasm. 

delivering their genomes into host cells has made differ-
ent viruses powerful candidates for therapeutic delivery  
of genes.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We  thank  Juan  Bonifacino,  Satyajit  Mayor,  and  Julie 
Donaldson  for  their  suggestions  on  revisions  to  this 
chapter.

SELECTED READINGS

Asrat S, de Jesus DA, Hempstead AD, et al. Bacterial pathogen manipu-
lation  of  host  membrane  trafficking.  Annu  Rev  Cell  Dev  Biol. 
2014;30:79-109.

392 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

Barbieri E, Di Fiore PP, Sigismund S. Endocytic control of signaling at 

the plasma membrane. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2016;39:21-27.

Bissig C, Gruenberg J. Lipid sorting and multivesicular endosome bio-

genesis. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2013;5:a016816.

Bohdanowicz  M,  Grinstein  S.  Role  of  phospholipids  in  endocytosis, 

phagocytosis, and macropinocytosis. Physio Rev. 2013;93:69-106.

Boucrot  E,  Ferreira  A,  Almeida-Souze  L,  et al.  Endophilin  marks  and 
controls a clathrin-independent endocytic pathway. Nature. 2015;
517:460-465.

Kirchhausen T, Owen D, Harrision SC. Molecular structure, function, 
and  dynamics  of  clathrin-mediated  membrane  traffic.  Cold  Spring 
Harb Perspect Biol. 2014;6:a016725.

Klumperman J, Raposo G. The complex ultrastructure of the endoly-
sosomal system. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2014;6:a016857.
Kovtun  O,  Tillu  VA,  Ariotti  N,  et al.  Cavin  family  proteins  and  the 

assembly of caveolae. J Cell Sci. 2015;128:1269-1278.

Maxfield FR. Role of endosomes and lysosomes in human disease. Cold 

Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2014;6:a016931.

Burd C, Cullen PJ. Retromer: a master conductor of endosome sorting. 

Mayor S, Parton RG, Donaldson JG. Clathrin-independent pathways of 

Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2014;6:a016774.

Cossart P, Helenius A. Endocytosis of viruses and bacteria. Cold Spring 

Harb Perspect Biol. 2014;6:a016972.

Di Fiore PP, von Zastrow M. Endocytosis, signaling, and beyond. Cold 

Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2014;6:a016865.

Doherty  GJ,  McMahon  HT.  Mechanisms  of  endocytosis.  Annu  Rev 

Biochem. 2009;78:857-902.

endocytosis. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2014;6:a016758.

McMahon  HT,  Boucrot  E.  Molecular  mechanism  and  physiological 
functions of clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 
2011;12:517-533.

Merrifield CJ, Kaksonen M. Endocytic accessory factors and regulation 
of clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 
2014;6:a016733.

Goldenring  JR.  Recycling  endosomes.  Curr  Opin  Cell  Biol.  2015;35:

Parton RG, del Pozo MA. Caveolae as plasma membrane sensors, pro-

117-122.

Henne WM, Senmark H, Emr SD. Molecular mechanisms of the mem-
brane  sculptin  ESCRT  pathway.  Cold  Spring  Harb  Perspect  Biol. 
2013;5:a016766.

Huotari J, Helenius A. Endosome maturation. EMBO J. 2011;30:3481-

3500.

Irannejad R, Tsvetanova NG, Lobingier BT, von Zastrow M. Effects of 
endocytosis  on  receptor-mediated  signaling.  Curr  Opin  Cell  Biol. 
2015;35:137-143.

Johannes L, Wunder C, Bassereau P. Bending “on the rocks”—a cock-
tail  of  biophysical  modules  to  build  endocytic  pathways.  Cold 
Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2014;6:a016741.

Johannes  L,  Parton  RG,  Bassereau  P,  et al.  Building  endocytic  pits 

without clathrin. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2015;16(5):311-321.

tectors and organizers. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2013;14:98-112.

Raiborg C, Rusten TR, Stenmark H. Protein sorting into multivesicular 

endosomes. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2003;15:446-455.

Renard H-F, Simunovic M, Lemiere J, et al. Endophilin-A2 functions in 
membrane  scission  in  clathrin-independent  endocytosis.  Nature. 
2015;517:493-496.

Robinson  MS.  Forty  years  of  clathrin-coated  vesicles.  Traffic.  2015;

16:1210-1238.

Schink  KO,  Tan  K-W,  Stenmark  H.  Phosphoinositides  in  control  
of  membrane  dynamics.  Annu  Rev  Cell  Dev  Biol.  2016;32:24.1-
24.29.

Wandinger-Ness A, Zerial M. Rab proteins and the compartmentaliza-
tion  of  the  endosomal  system.  Cold  Spring  Harb  Perspect  Biol. 
2014;6:a022616.

C H A P T E R 

23 

Processing and Degradation of 
Cellular Components

Cells  can  synthesize  nearly  all  the  building  blocks 

required  to  make  proteins,  nucleic  acids  and  other 
macromolecules, but they are also masters at recycling. 
Thus,  even  though  an  individual  cell  might  live  for 
weeks, months, years, or even the entire lifetime of the 
organism, its proteins, lipids, and RNA turn over continu-
ously.  Catabolic  processes  ensure  the  regular  replace-
ment of misfolded, mislocalized, or otherwise damaged 
molecules with newly synthesized ones. These processes 
are  also  triggered  under  starvation  conditions,  when 
cells perceive a shortage of raw materials, such as amino 
acids. Lastly, targeted degradation of specific molecules 
in response to physiological signals is critical for signal 
transduction,  cell-cycle  regulation,  and  cell  and  tissue 
remodeling  during  development.  This  chapter  focuses 
primarily on mechanisms that govern protein catabolism 
(degradation) and turnover, as these are the best studied; 
lipid  turnover  is  also  discussed.  Chapter  11  considers 
RNA turnover.

Characteristics of Constitutive  
Protein Turnover
The  levels  of  cellular  constituents  at  steady  state  are 
dictated by a careful balance of the rates of synthesis and 
degradation.  Once  translated  on  the  ribosome,  each 
protein turns over at a characteristic rate. Turnover can 
be  massive.  For  example,  approximately  40%  of  total 
cellular  protein  in  rat  liver  is  degraded  every  day.  The 
time  course  of  degradation  of  the  population  of  any 
specific protein follows a single exponential—suggesting 
that chance determines which copies of the protein are 
degraded (see Fig. 4.1 for first-order reactions). The rate 
is usually expressed as a half-life, the time for half of the 
molecules  to  be  degraded.  Measured,  protein  half-lives 
range from longer than 100 hours to less than 10 minutes. 
For human HeLa (Henrietta Lacks) cells the average half-
life of a typical protein is 24 hours—the generation time 

of the cells. This is an indication that most proteins are 
relatively stable.

The intrinsic rate of degradation of a given protein is 
determined  by  many  factors,  including  its  size,  overall 
charge,  thermal  instability,  flexibility,  hydrophobicity, 
folding,  posttranslational  modifications,  and  assembly 
with  other  protein  subunits  (if  it  is  multimeric).  Multi-
meric  proteins  are  more  stable  when  associated  
with their partners in complexes than on their own. A 
protein  may  have  specific  sequences  or  structural  
motifs (degrons) that are recognized by the proteolytic 
machinery.  Phosphorylation  marks  some  proteins  for 
destruction. The rate at which a protein is degraded can 
be altered either by increasing the activity of its degrada-
tive pathway or by exposure or creation of degrons to 
initiate destruction.

Tor Kinase—A Master Regulator of Cell Physiology
Tor kinase—the target of rapamycin—is, more than any 
other  protein,  the  master  regulator  of  cell  physiology. 
(Rapamycin  is  an  important  immunosuppressant  drug 
used  in  transplantation  and  cancer  therapy  that  was 
isolated from soil of Rapa Nui, Easter Island). This serine-
threonine kinase, which is known as mTor (mechanistic 
target of rapamycin) in humans, is the subject of thou-
sands of research studies because it sits at several nodes 
that control cellular pathways activated by a wide range 
of surface receptors. These include both heterotrimeric 
G  protein  signaling  pathways  (mTor  is  activated  by 
phosphatidylinositol  3,4,5-trisphosphate  [PIP3];  see  Fig. 
26.7)  and  intrinsic  pathways  initiated  by  the  cell  to 
coordinate  its  growth  with  its  physiological  state  (Fig. 
23.1).  Tor  kinase  regulates  protein  synthesis  and  cell 
growth, and mutants in this kinase pathway are charac-
terized by having small cells. Mutants in several regula-
tors of mTor activity are strongly associated with cancer.
mTor  kinase functions  in  complexes  that  have char-
acteristic components and cellular roles. For example, in 

 393

394 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

Cell surface
receptor

PIP3

IRS1

Pi3K

PDK Akt

?

mTor
TORC2

Actin
filaments

Amino
acids

A

B

N

K63

mTor
TORC1
Lysosome

Autolysosome

Autophagosome

y
g
a
h
p
o
t
u
A

TFEB

Phagophore

MITOCHONDRION

ER

mTor
TORC2

NUCLEUS

FIGURE  23.1  TOR  KINASE  IS  A  MASTER  REGULATOR  OF 
CELL PHYSIOLOGY. mTor (mechanistic target of rapamycin) kinase 
is present in two complexes, TORC1, which regulates catabolism in 
response  to  amino  acid  levels  in  lysosomes,  and  TORC2  which  is 
responsible  for  cytoskeletal-based  signaling.  Both  complexes  have 
many  other  functions,  with  many  other  inputs  and  regulators  not 
indicated here. The black box downstream of the cell surface receptor 
indicates other intermediate steps that have been omitted here for the 
sake of simplicity. IRS, insulin receptor substrate; PDK, phosphoinositide- 
dependent protein kinase; Pi3K, phosphatidylinositol 3′-kinase; TFEB, 
transcription factor EB; TORC, target of rapamycin complex. 

association with Raptor (regulatory-associated protein of 
mTor)  and  other  proteins,  mTor  forms  the  TORC1 
complex  (target  of  rapamycin  complex-1),  which  is  a 
master  regulator  of  catabolic  pathways.  TORC1  associ-
ates with the surface of lysosomes, where its regulatory 
subunits  read  the  content  of  free  amino  acids  in  the 
lysosomal lumen in a mechanism facilitated by the lyso-
somal v-ATPase (vacuolar adenosine triphosphatase, the 
same enzyme that establishes the acidic environment in 
the  lysosome  interior).  Active  mTor  inhibits  cellular 
catabolism  by  phosphorylating  a  transcription  factor 
called TFEB (transcription factor EB), thereby causing it 
to be trapped on the surface of the lysosomes. TFEB is 
the master regulator of lysosome assembly and autophagy 
(see  Cell  SnapShot  2).  A  drop  in  lysosomal  amino  acid 
levels  results  in  mTor  inactivation.  This  allows  TFEB 
dephosphorylation,  releasing  the  protein  to  enter  the 
nucleus,  where  it  activates  the  transcription  of  more 
than 400 genes.

The TORC2 complex of mTor with Rictor (rapamycin-
insensitive  companion  of  mTor)  is  associated  with  the 
plasma membrane and endoplasmic reticulum and acti-
vated  by  interacting  with  ribosomes.  TORC2  is  a  key 
regulator of the cytoskeleton and signaling pathways that 
receive their input from it. It is also an important regula-
tor of cell death pathways.

K48

C

FIGURE 23.2  A polyubiquitin chain (A) is generated on a protein by 
sequential conjugation of ubiquitin (B), shown in a ribbon diagram. This 
typically targets the protein for degradation by the proteasome. Lysines 
48 and 63 (K48, K63), two of the most common sites of linkage. 

Modification of Proteins by Ubiquitylation
Ubiquitin  is  a  very  abundant  and  highly  conserved 
76-residue  protein  that  marks  proteins  for  degradation 
by proteasomes and lysosomes in addition to other func-
tions  (Fig.  23.2).  Enzymes  attach  the  C-terminus  of 
ubiquitin  covalently  to  lysine  side  chains  of  target  pro-
teins.  In  addition  to  its  roles  in  proteolysis,  reversible 
ubiquitylation  contributes  to  DNA  repair,  chromosome 
structure, and the assembly of ribosomes, proteasomes, 
and other multimeric complexes. Proteins with ubiquitin-
binding  domains  direct  ubiquitylated  proteins  to  their 
various fates.

Ubiquitylation of protein substrates proceeds through 
a tightly regulated multistep pathway that was elucidated 
through biochemical purification of mammalian compo-
nents  and  in  vitro  reconstitution  of  partial  reactions.  
The overall scheme can be subdivided into three stages 
(Fig. 23.3):
•  Activation  of  ubiquitin:  A  ubiquitin-activating 
enzyme  E1  catalyzes  the  formation  of  a  covalent 
thioester  bond  between  the  side  chain  of  one  of  its 
own cysteine residues and the carboxyl group of the 
C-terminal  glycine  of  ubiquitin.  Humans  have  only 
two E1 enzymes for ubiquitin.

•  Transfer  of  ubiquitin  to  an  E2  enzyme:  Activated 
ubiquitin is transferred to a cysteine residue of an E2 
or  ubiquitin-conjugating  (or  carrier)  enzyme. 
Humans have approximately 35 E2 enzymes.

•  Ubiquitylation  of  target  proteins:  E3  ubiquitin 
ligases  facilitate  the  transfer  of  ubiquitin  from  an 
E2-conjugate to the protein substrate, either directly 
or in two steps through an E3-ubiquitin intermediate. 
The  ubiquitin  C-terminus  is  usually  attached  to  the 

 

A

CHAPTER 23  n  Processing and Degradation of Cellular Components 

395

E1

Ubiquitin-activating enzyme

E2a

E2b

Ubiquitin-conjugating
enzyme or ubiquitin
carrier proteins

E2c

B

E1

1. Activation

C O
S

ATP AMP
+ Pii

E1

E1

E2b

C

OH

O

2. Substrate

       recognition

Protein
substrate

C O
S
E2b

E3d

E3a

E3b

E3c

E3d

E3e

E3f

Ubiquitin
protein
ligases

Peptides

Sa

Sb

Sc Sd Se Sf Sg Sh Si Sj Sk Sl

Cellular
substrates

Ubiquitin

ADP
+ Pi

ATP

Proteasome

Protein Sf

3. Specific
    ubiquitination

FIGURE 23.3  UBIQUITIN CONJUGATION MECHANISM. A, A hierarchy of ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes and ubiquitin protein ligases work 
together  to  recognize  and  ubiquitylate  specific  cellular  substrates  in  a  highly  regulated  manner.  B,  The  three  stages  of  ubiquitylation  for  one 
representative set of enzymes. A single ubiquitin-activating enzyme (E1) serves all downstream pathways. One of more than approximately 35 (in 
human) E2 enzymes serves as an intermediate to transfer activated ubiquitin and works with one of more than 600 (in human) E3 enzymes to 
recognize  the  appropriate  target  protein  (Sf)  and  to  transfer  the  first  ubiquitin  molecule.  Subsequent  polyubiquitylation  targets  the  protein  for 
degradation in the proteasome. ADP, adenosine diphosphate; AMP, adenosine monophosphate; Pii, pyrophosphate. 

TABLE 23.1  Ubiquitin/Proteasome Targeting Systems
Recognition Determinant (Degron)
Cellular Substrates
Transcription factors (eg, IκB, β-catenin)
Cell cycle regulators (eg, CDK inhibitors)

Phosphorylated signals
DS*GXXS*
S*P, T*P sequences phosphorylated by CDKs
Destruction box
R(A/T)(A)L(G)X(I/V)(G/T)(N)
KEN Box
… KEN …
The N-end rule
… N-terminal aa F,L,W,Y,R,K,H
Auxin-inducible degron
Amphipathic or hydrophobic peptides

Mitotic cyclins
Cell-cycle regulators
Cell-cycle regulators

General applicability unknown
Cleaved cohesion subunit Scc1
Any protein with the degron attached
Misfolded or damaged endoplasmic reticulum proteins

Ubiquitin Ligases (E3)

SCF complexes

APC

APC

E3α (Ubr1p)

SCF with plant F-box protein Tir1
Hrd1, gp78

APC, anaphase-promoting complex; CDK, cyclin-dependent kinase.
*Phosphorylation sites on serine residues.

target protein by an amide bond to the ε-amino group 
of a lysine residue or to the N-terminal amino group.
Humans have more than 600 E3 enzymes that confer 
specificity to the ubiquitylation reaction. Many of these 
contain a protein structural motif of 40 to 60 amino acids 
called a RING (really interesting new gene) finger. This 
is a specialized type of Zn2+ finger (see Fig. 10.14) that 
recognizes E2-ubiquitin conjugates. E3 ligases recognize 
the substrate and position the E2-ubiquitin conjugate so 
that  ubiquitin  transfer  to  the  target  lysine  is  efficient. 
Additional  ubiquitin  molecules  may  subsequently  be 
conjugated by other E2 enzymes to create a polyubiq-
uitin  chain  (Figs.  23.2  and  23.3).  When  acting  as  a 
signal  for  protein  destruction,  the  C-terminus  of  the 
incoming  ubiquitin  usually  links  to  lysine  48  of  the 

previous one, but links to all seven lysines of ubiquitin 
(or the NH2-terminus) have been observed.

The  primary  responsibility  for  substrate  selectivity 
lies  with  the  E3  family  of  enzymes,  which  can  bind 
either directly to protein substrates or indirectly through 
adapter  molecules.  Although  the  E2  enzymes  can 
interact  directly  with  substrate,  in  general,  they  recog-
nize  an  E3  substrate  complex.  One  E2  enzyme  can 
cooperate  with  several  different  E3  enzymes  in  the 
ubiquitylation reaction. The E2-ubiquitin/E3 pair usually 
recognizes  a  specific  degron  sequence  on  the  target 
protein  (Table  23.1).

Humans also have approximately 80 deubiquitylating 
enzymes  (DUBs)  that  remove  ubiquitin  from  target 
proteins, allowing the target protein fate to be changed 

396 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

in response to other cellular signals. This increases the 
flexibility of ubiquitin-based signaling pathways. Disrup-
tion of the ubiquitylation machinery is lethal in yeast.

In addition to acting as a signal for protein degrada-
tion,  ubiquitin  can  also  be  involved  in  protein  sorting 
and  protein–protein  interactions.  Proteins  that  bind  to 
ubiquitin  can  affect  the  fate  of  the  target  protein  in  a 
variety  of  ways.  If  polyubiquitin  chains  are  assembled  
by linking ubiquitins between the C-terminal and lysine 
63, rather than lysine 48, the ubiquitin chain has a dif-
ferent shape and the modified protein is not targeted for 
destruction.  Instead,  lysine  63–linked  ubiquitin  chains 
are  implicated  in  membrane  protein  targeting  to  the  
lysosome,  signaling  pathways,  DNA  repair,  and  mitotic 
regulation.

At  least  eight  other  highly  conserved  small  proteins 
related to ubiquitin can be conjugated to ε-amino groups 
of lysine on target proteins by E1, E2, and E3 enzymes 
that  are  distinct  from  those  involved  in  conjugating 
ubiquitin. These modifications are generally not involved 
in  protein  degradation  and  instead  serve  a  variety  of 
signaling  functions.  The  best  known  of  these  are  the 
three  SUMO  (small  ubiquitin-like  modifier)  proteins. 
SUMO can be conjugated to the same residues on target 
proteins  as  ubiquitin,  but  typically  regulates  protein–
protein interactions rather than promoting degradation. 
In some specialized instances, SUMO can recruit ubiqui-
tin  E3  ligases  and  trigger  degradation  of  the  target 
protein.

Proteolysis: A Compartmentalized Process
Unregulated  proteolysis  within  a  cell  would  be  lethal. 
Therefore,  cells  compartmentalize  intracellular  proteo-
lytic activity in two distinct ways so that only appropriate 
substrates  are  degraded.  Lysosomes  are  membrane-
bound compartments that sequester various hydrolases, 
including proteases, and provide a low pH environment 
in which the enzymes are optimally active. Proteasomes 
are  proteolytic  machines  assembled  from  multiple 
protein  subunits  with  the  proteolytically  active  sites 
corralled  inside  on  the  walls  of  a  narrow  cylindrical 
chamber. The constricted internal diameter of the cylin-
der  and  regulatory  complexes  that  guard  the  openings 
allow access only to unfolded polypeptide chains. Energy 
in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is required 
for  proteasomes  to  unfold  and  degrade  proteins,  even 
though  hydrolysis  of  a  peptide  bond  actually  releases 
energy.

Intracellular proteolysis typically depends on specific 
recognition of protein substrates and their translocation 
into  a  proteolytic  compartment.  Generally  speaking, 
long-lived  cytosolic  proteins  and  integral  membrane 
proteins circulating within the secretory and endosomal 
systems are degraded by lysosomes, whereas short-lived 
cytoplasmic  proteins  and  endoplasmic  reticulum  (ER) 
membrane  proteins  are  degraded  by  the  proteasome. 

Ubiquitin  targets  most  (though  not  all)  molecules  for 
degradation by proteasomes and can also target proteins 
to lysosomes for degradation. Ubiquitin or a polyubiqui-
tin  chain  is  recognized  by  specific  receptors  on  the 
proteolytic machinery.

Degradation in Lysosomes
Lysosomes, the major digestive organelles, contain at least 
60 distinct hydrolytic enzymes, including proteases, pep-
tidases,  phosphatases,  lipases,  phospholipases,  glycosi-
dases, sulfatases, and nucleases. Lysosomal hydrolases are 
tagged in the Golgi apparatus with mannose-6-phosphate 
groups  on  their  N-linked  oligosaccharides.  Mannose-6-
phosphate  receptors  in  the  trans-Golgi  network  then 
divert the tagged hydrolases to endosomes and lysosomes 
(see Chapter 21). Most lysosomal hydrolases are synthe-
sized as inactive precursors and are activated by proteoly-
sis  on  arrival  in  lysosomes.  The  low  pH  of  lysosomes, 
maintained by the v-ATPase proton pump (see Fig. 14.6), 
is  essential  for  efficient  degradation.  Most  lysosomal 
enzymes  have  maximal  hydrolytic  activity  at  pH  4  to  5 
rather  than  at  the  cytoplasmic  pH  of  6.5  to  7.0.  Under 
these conditions, some of the hydrolases carry a positive 
charge  and  adhere  to  the  lipid  bilayers  of  lysosomal  
membranes.  This  renders  them  more  resistant  than  
most non-lysosomal macromolecules to the harsh environ-
ment. Lysosomal hydrolases degrade proteins, lipids, and 
nucleic  acids  to  amino  acids,  lipids,  sugars,  and  nucleo-
tides that are transported across the lysosomal membrane 
to  the  cytoplasm,  where  they  are  reused  to  synthesize 
new macromolecules.

Lysosomes  degrade  substrates  that  originate  both 
outside and inside the cell. Extracellular substrates taken 
into the cell by endocytosis are delivered to lysosomes 
via the endocytic pathway (see Chapter 22). Lysosomes 
also  degrade  cellular  constituents,  accounting  for  50%  
to  70%  of  cellular  protein  turnover.  Cytoplasmic  sub-
strates are delivered to lysosomes by dedicated autopha-
gosomes  and  by  direct  capture  from  the  cytoplasm  in  
a  process  termed  autophagy.  In  certain  hematopoi-
etic  cell  lineages,  lysosomes  can  also  act  as  secretory 
organelles.

The essential role of lysosomes as the primary site for 
constitutive degradation is revealed by the more than 50 
distinct  human  lysosomal  storage  diseases  (Appendix 
23.1).  Patients  with  these  diseases  lack  the  function  of 
one or more lysosomal hydrolases, membrane proteins, 
or other factors involved in lysosomal function. Conse-
quently,  undigested  material  accumulates  in  lysosomes 
(Fig.  23.4).  This  disrupts  homeostasis  and  can  kill  the 
cell. The manifestations of lysosomal storage diseases are 
exceedingly complex, and although approximately two-
thirds  of  patients  suffer  from  a  range  of  neurological 
symptoms,  any  organ  system  can  be  affected  by  these 
diseases.

 

CHAPTER 23  n  Processing and Degradation of Cellular Components 

397

Delivery to Lysosomes Via the Endocytic Pathway
Lysosomal  degradation  of  plasma  membrane  proteins 
internalized  by  endocytosis  plays  an  important  role  in 
remodeling the plasma membrane in response to various 

FIGURE  23.4  ELECTRON  MICROGRAPH  OF  ABNORMAL 
LYSOSOMES  IN  THE  NEURONS  OF  A  PATIENT  WITH  GM1 
GANGLIOSIDOSIS. Similar lysosomes, called membranous cytoplas-
mic bodies, accumulate in the neurons of patients with GM2 ganglio-
sidosis  (Tay-Sachs  disease).  (Courtesy  Kinuko  Suzuki,  University  of 
North Carolina, Chapel Hill.)

stimuli. For example, the half-life of the receptor for the 
epidermal growth factor (EGF) is normally approximately 
10  hours.  However,  when  circulating  EGF  binds,  the 
activated  receptor  is  more  efficiently  internalized  and 
degraded  in  lysosomes  with  a  half-time  of  less  than  
1  hour.  This  downregulates  the  biological  response  
(Fig. 23.5; also see Fig. 27.6).

The  degradation  of  lipids  and  membrane  proteins  
in  lysosomes  poses  a  topologic  problem,  as  fusion  of 
lysosomes  with  other  membrane  compartments  would 
simply  merge  the  two  membranes.  This  problem  is 
solved  by  segregating  the  components  to  be  degraded 
into  regions  of  membrane  that  bud  into  endosomes, 
forming the intraluminal vesicles or tubules of multive-
sicular bodies (see Fig. 22.13). Fusion of a multivesicular 
body with a lysosome delivers the intraluminal vesicles 
to the lumen of the lysosome for digestion (Fig. 23.5).

Multivesicular  bodies  form  via  a  sorting  process  in 
endosomes (see Chapter 22). Proteins destined for deg-
radation  are  tagged  with  single  ubiquitin  molecules,  a 
process  distinct  from  the  polyubiquitylation  reaction 
required for targeting to proteasomes. These monoubiq-
uitinated  proteins  are  gathered  together  in  endosomes 
by ubiquitin-binding proteins, which are localized there 
by  interaction  with  phosphatidylinositol  3-phosphate 
(PI3-P) formed by PI3-kinase (see Fig. 26.7). A sequence 
of multiprotein ESCRT complexes (endosomal complex 

A

Ligand

B

Activated

1. Endocytosis

Recycled

2. Gathering

Endosome

Multivesicular
body

ESCRT I

ESCRT
complexes

ESCRT II
3. Concentrating

Ub

4. Budding inward

ESCRT III

Autolysosome

5. Fusion with
    lysosome

FIGURE  23.5  RECEPTOR DOWNREGULATION. A, To limit the time course of epidermal growth factor (EGF) stimulation, activated EGF 
receptors are internalized and delivered to endosomes and sequestered with other membrane proteins to be destroyed within intraluminal vesicles 
that accumulate to form multivesicular bodies. Proteins destined for internalization and destruction are marked with single ubiquitin molecules. 
Sorting of the ubiquitin-tagged proteins and invagination of the late endosomal membrane are driven by the three ESCRT (endosomal sorting 
complexes required for transport) complexes. The ubiquitins are recycled prior to budding into the multivesicular body interior After fusion with 
lysosomes, lysosomal proteases and lipases ensure that both the extracellular and cytoplasmic domains of the EGF receptor are degraded along 
with the intraluminal vesicles. Cytosolic proteins are also incorporated into the internal vesicles of multivesicular late endosomes and are degraded 
in a constitutive process termed microautophagy. B, Electron micrograph of EGF receptor marked with gold-labeled antibodies in multivesicular 
endosomes fusing with a lysosome. (B, Courtesy Colin Hopkins, MRC Laboratory, University College, London, United Kingdom.)

398 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

required for transport [Fig. 22.13]) further concentrates 
the  monoubiquitinated  proteins  to  membrane  regions 
that  bud  into  the  vesicle  interior.  ESCRT  complexes 
initially  bind  monoubiquitin  but  later  recruit  enzymes 
that  remove  and  recycle  the  ubiquitin.  Constriction  of 
the bud necks driven by the assembly of helical filaments 
of the ESCRT-III complex releases the intraluminal vesi-
cles into the interior of the endosome, creating a multi-
vesicular  body.  Interestingly,  budding  of  a  number  of 
viruses, including Ebola and HIV-1, the virus that causes 
AIDS, resembles the process of multivesicular body for-
mation. Indeed, HIV hijacks two of the ESCRT complexes 
for this purpose.

Autophagy
Macroautophagy,  microautophagy,  and  chaperone-
mediated autophagy are processes leading to the break-
down  of  cytoplasmic  constituents  within  lysosomes. 
Autophagy  first  evolved  as  a  defense  of  single-celled 
organisms against starvation, but now has key functions 
in cellular homeostasis.

Macroautophagy  (usually  simply  referred  to  as 
autophagy) involves the engulfment of large regions of 
cytoplasm. An initiating signal leads to the formation of 
a  specialized  membrane  in  association  with  specific 
cargo.  This  membrane  expands,  curls  and  seals  itself  
off,  enclosing  the  cargo  and  forming  a  double-layered 
autophagosome,  which  then  fuses  with  a  lysosome, 
leading to the degradation and ultimate recycling of all 
internal contents (Fig. 23.6). Cargo may include glycogen 
granules, ribosomes, and even organelles such as mito-
chondria and peroxisomes.

Genetic  screens  in  budding  yeast  have  identified  
36  so-called  Atg  genes  required  for  autophagosome 

Autophagosome

Lysosome

formation and development. Although the details are still 
being determined, it appears that the process may initi-
ate at more than one site in the cytoplasm–including the 
ER,  ER  exit  sites,  mitochondria  or  trans-Golgi.  There, 
numerous  small  vesicles  containing  the  membrane 
protein  Atg9,  interact  with  the  multi-protein  Atg1/ULK 
scaffold complex to fuse, forming a flattened membrane 
sheet. This membrane curls to form a cup-like structure, 
the phagophore, which grows and ultimately is sealed 
off  to  form  a  double-membrane  autophagosome  (Fig. 
23.7). Two ubiquitin-like systems recruit components to 
the growing phagophore. One conjugates Atg8 to phos-
phatidylethanolamine,  anchoring  it  to  the  membrane 
surface, where it recruits other membrane vesicles to the 
phagophore.  The  other  forms  a  conjugate  of  two  Atg 
proteins that recruits other pathway components to the 
phagophore. Both conjugation reactions use a chain of 
enzymes analogous to those that attach ubiquitin to its 
target proteins targeted (see later).

Fusion  of  a  nascent  autophagic  vacuole  with  late 
endosomes and lysosomes involves a specialized SNARE 
(soluble  N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive  factor  [NSF]  attach-
ment  protein  receptor)  protein  (see  Fig.  21.15)  and 
forms  an  autolysosome  with  acid  hydrolases  in  the 
lumen. These degrade the contents, including the inter-
nalized membrane, releasing amino acids, lipids, sugars, 
and nucleotides back to the cytoplasm (Fig. 23.7). The 
end stage of an autolysosome is a residual body with a 

Phagophore

ER

A. Envelopment

Cross-section

B. Sealing

C. Merging with
     lysosome

D. Resulting 
     residual
     body

FIGURE  23.6  ELECTRON  MICROGRAPH  OF  AN  AUTOPHA-
GOSOME. From starved rat liver shows an autophagosome containing 
a  mitochondrion  in  the  process  of  fusing  directly  with  a  secondary 
lysosome.  (From  Dunn  WA  Jr.  Studies  on  the  mechanisms  of 
autophagy:  Maturation  of  the  autophagic  vacuole.  J  Cell  Biol. 
1990;110:1935–1945, copyright The Rockefeller University Press.)

FIGURE  23.7  THE  FOUR  STAGES  OF  AUTOPHAGY.  A,  A 
phagophore  membrane  forms,  enveloping  a  region  of  cytoplasm 
containing target proteins and organelles. B, Membrane fusion results 
in formation of a nascent autophagosome. C, The nascent autophago-
some  fuses  with  a  primary  or  secondary  lysosome,  which  delivers 
hydrolytic  enzymes  that  degrade  the  autophagosome  contents.  
D, Undigested material remains in residual bodies. 

 

CHAPTER 23  n  Processing and Degradation of Cellular Components 

399

dense core of undegraded material. The process of for-
mation  and  degradation  of  autophagic  vacuoles  in  the 
liver requires less than 15 minutes.

Macroautophagy  is  regulated  by  mTor,  which  phos-
phorylates  both  the  master  transcriptional  regulator, 
TFEB, and key Atg components. Intracellular signals that 
trigger macroautophagy are tied to intracellular levels of 
particular amino acids. Amino acids and some circulating 
peptide  hormones  are  potent  inhibitors  of  autophagy, 
promoting both cytoplasmic sequestration of TFEB and 
phosphorylation  (and  inactivation)  of  Atg1.  Starvation 
increases  circulating  levels  of  the  hormone  glucagon, 
which  releases  TFEB  and  also  leads  to  Atg1  dephos-
phorylation  and  stimulates  autophagy  in  liver  cells. 
Feeding  produces  the  opposite  reaction  due  to  the  
action of insulin (see Fig. 27.7), and ultimately reduces 
autophagy.

Budding yeast use autophagy as a cell survival pathway 
during starvation, but autophagy can kill some cells. For 
example,  autophagy  can  lead  to  death  when  a  cell 
receives a lethal insult under conditions in which apop-
totic  pathways  (see  Chapter  46)  are  not  functional. 
Autophagy has also been implicated in the developmen-
tal programs of a number of higher organisms and in the 
destruction  of  intracellular  protein  aggregates.  Protein 
aggregates  and  damaged  organelles,  such  as  mitochon-
dria are tagged with ubiquitin and recognized by one of 
two  autophagy  receptors  that  bind  both  ubiquitin  and 
Atg8-containing  vesicles.  This  results  in  their  envelop-
ment by growing phagophore membranes, and delivery 
to autolysosomes via autophagy.

Microautophagy is a byproduct of multivesicular body 
formation (Fig. 23.5; also see Fig. 22.13). Small volumes 
of  cytoplasm  are  captured  in  the  intraluminal  vesicles 
and  tubules  that  invaginate  within  endosomal  or  lyso-
somal  membranes.  The  cytoplasmic  components  are 
degraded as the vesicles surrounding them are consumed. 
Not  all  proteins  in  intraluminal  vesicles  are  chosen 
randomly—some  cytosolic  proteins  are  selected,  pack-
aged  and  delivered  to  lysosomes  by  this  route.  When 
starved for glucose, Saccharomyces cerevisiae expresses 
several  cytoplasmic  enzymes  and  membrane  transport-
ers  that  are  required  to  process  more  complex  sugars. 
When  glucose  becomes  available,  the  yeast  switches 
metabolic  pathways  and  degrades  the  enzymes  it  no 
longer needs. Transporters in the plasma membrane are 
internalized and delivered to the vacuole (the yeast lyso-
some equivalent) through the formation of multivesicular 
bodies  and  microautophagy.  Unneeded  cytoplasmic 
enzymes are selectively packaged into small vesicles that 
deliver their contents to the vacuole by fusion.

Chaperone-mediated  autophagy  (CMA)  is  a  quality 
control  mechanism  to  eliminate  soluble  cytoplasmic 
proteins  that  are  incorrectly  folded  or  assembled.  The 
process selects for degradation the 20% to 30% of cyto-
plasmic proteins with the linear target sequence KFERQ. 

The  molecular  chaperone  Hsc70  recognizes  KFERQ 
when the protein is unfolded or—if the protein is part 
of a complex—not associated with its normal partners. 
Hsc70 binds and escorts the protein to lysosomes where 
an  integral  membrane  protein  transfers  it  across  the 
membrane  aided  by  a  second  chaperone  functioning 
inside the lysosome. Prolonged starvation also activates 
CMA, apparently to supply cells with amino acids for the 
synthesis  of  essential  proteins.  In  both  Parkinson  and 
Alzheimer  diseases  neurons  accumulate  proteins  with 
KFERQ  sequences,  so  defects  in  CMA  may  contribute  
to  these  neurodegenerative  diseases.  CMA  is  unable  to 
combat  those  diseases  once  they  start,  as  the  process 
functions  only  on  soluble  proteins  and  not  proteins  in 
complexes or cytoplasmic aggregates.

Degradation by Proteasomes
The proteasome is a mobile self-contained compartment 
for  regulated  proteolysis.  Proteasomes  are  highly  abun-
dant structures about half the size of a ribosome that are 
located  in  both  the  cytoplasm  and  nucleoplasm  (Fig. 
23.8). Proteasomes contain an array of proteolytic active 
sites arrayed on the interior wall of a cylindrical chamber. 
They  degrade  target  proteins  down  to  small  peptides 
(Fig. 23.9). Proteins targeted to the proteasome can be 
selected  because  they  are  abnormal  or  misfolded  but 
may  also  be  selected  in  response  to  signaling  cascades 
or  at  key  transitions  of  the  cell  cycle.  One  class  of  
proteasomes  processes  intracellular  antigens  for  pre-
sentation by the immune system.

The  proteasome  has  two  major  structural  compo-
nents:  the  core  and  the  regulatory  particle,  the  latter 
comprising  base  and  lid  subassemblies.  The  cylindrical 
core, referred to as the 20S proteasome (named accord-
ing  to  its  sedimentation  coefficient;  see  Chapter  6)  is 
structurally  conserved  from  bacteria  to  mammals, 
although the subunit composition varies. Mammals have 
three  distinct  regulatory  particles  that  feed  different 
types of substrates to the core.

In mammals, the core consists of four stacked seven-
member  rings.  Each  ring  consists  of  seven  distinct 
polypeptides: two rings of β-type subunits form a central 
chamber lined by the proteolytic active sites; and rings 
of  α-type  subunits  form  antechambers  on  either  end 
of the central chamber. The noncatalytic α-subunits gate 
the access of the substrate into the proteolytic chamber. 
The  narrow  lumen  of  the  antechamber  only  allows 
access to unfolded polypeptide chains.

Three  of  the  β-type  subunits  of  eukaryotic  protea-
somes have hydrolytic activities (Fig. 23.9). The caspase-
like activity of the β1-subunit cleaves after acidic residues, 
the  trypsin-like  activity  of  the  β2-subunit  cleaves  after 
basic  residues,  and  the  chymotrypsin-like  activity  of  
the  β5-subunit  cleaves  after  hydrophobic  residues  (see 
Fig.  46.11  for  a  description  of  caspases).  These  three  

400 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

A

α

β

β

α

11 nm

B

α6

α7

β7

β2

α2

α5

α4

α1

α3

α2

β1

β2

β1

β7

β3

β6

α5

α1

α7

α6

C. 26S proteasome

Lid

Base

e
m
o
s
a
e
t
o
r
p
 
S
0
2

l

)
e
c
i
t
r
a
p
 
e
r
o
c
(

y
r
o

l

a
u
g
e
r
 

l

e
c
i
t
r
a
p

t

S
9
1

FIGURE  23.8  STRUCTURE  OF  THE  PROTEASOME.  A  and  B,  Crystal  structure  of  20S  proteasomes  from  Thermoplasma  acidophilum 
(A)  and  from  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae  (B).  Note  the  conservation  of  structure  from  Archaea  to  yeast.  C,  Structure  of  the  26S  proteasome 
from Schizosaccharomyces pombe. (For reference, see Protein Data Bank [PDB; www.rcsb.org] file 1PMA from Lowe J, Stock D, Jap B, et al. 
Crystal structure of the 20S proteasome from the archaeon T. acidophilum at 3.4 Å resolution. Science. 1995;268:533–539 [A], PDB file 1RYP 
from Groll M, Ditzel L, Lowe J, et al. Structure of 20S proteasome from yeast at 2.4 Å resolution. Nature. 1997;386:463–471 [B], and PDB file 
4CR2 from Lasker K, Förster F, Bohn S, et al. Molecular architecture of the 26S proteasome holocomplex determined by an integrative approach. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012;109:1380–1387 [C].)

A

B

C

Caspase-like

β1

Trypsin-like

β2

Inactive

β3

Inactive

β7

Inactive

β6

Inactive

β4

Chymotrypsin-like

β5

FIGURE  23.9  A POLYPEPTIDE MOVING THROUGH THE CENTRAL CHANNEL OF THE 20S PARTICLE. Note that only three of the 
seven subunits are catalytically active, and each has a distinct catalytic activity. View C is down the barrel in A. 

activities combine to give the proteasome broad specific-
ity,  allowing  it  to  cleave  diverse  substrates  into  short 
peptides of seven to nine residues. An N-terminal threo-
nine residue of the β-subunits is exposed by autocatalytic 
proteolysis  and  serves  as  the  key  active  site  residue  
for  proteolysis.  The  antibiotic  lactacystin  reacts  cova-
lently  and  selectively  with  these  threonine  residues  to 

inactivate  the  proteasome.  The  remaining  four  β-type 
subunits in eukaryotic proteasomes are not posttransla-
tionally processed to mature, catalytically active enzymes.
The cylindrical cores of eukaryotic and archaeal pro-
teasomes  are  capped  on  one  or  both  ends  by  the  base 
and lid complexes of the regulatory particle, forming the 
26S  proteasome.  The  type  of  regulatory  particle  varies 

 

CHAPTER 23  n  Processing and Degradation of Cellular Components 

401

depending on the function of the proteasome. The 19S 
regulatory  particle  associated  with  proteasomes  that 
degrade  most  proteins  has  two  functions.  First,  the  10 
lid  proteins  include  receptors  that  bind  ubiquitin  and 
deubiquitinating enzymes, DUBs, that clip off ubiquitin 
chains.  Removal  of  the  ubiquitin  enables  its  recycling  
for  later  reuse  and  is  critical  for  proteolysis,  because  
the substrate cannot fit into the channel with ubiquitin 
attached.  Second,  the  10  subunit  base  includes  an  
AAA-ATPase  (see  Box  36.1)  composed  of  six  distinct 
polypeptides. This enzyme uses energy from ATP hydro-
lysis  to  unfold  protein  substrates  and  thread  them  
into the central channel for proteolysis. ATP hydrolysis 
is  not  required  for  the  proteolytic  cleavages  in  the  
central chamber.

Cells of higher vertebrates have a distinct regulatory 
particle,  the  11S  cap,  associated  with  a  subpopulation  
of  20S  proteasome  cores.  The  cytokine  α-interferon 
induces the synthesis of this specialized “immunopro-
teasome,”  which  cleaves  intracellular  antigens,  such 
as  those  derived  from  an  infecting  virus,  into  peptides 
suitable in size for presentation on the surface of antigen-
presenting  cells  (see  Fig.  27.8).  The  11S  cap  does  not 
recognize ubiquitylated protein substrates and may be a 
docking site for specific molecular chaperones. Special-
ized catalytic β-subunits in the immunoproteasome 20S 
core generate somewhat longer peptides that are better 
suited for antigen presentation. The immunoproteasome 
is physically and functionally coupled to an ABC trans-
porter  (see  Fig.  14.10)  called  the  TAP  (transporter 
associated  with  antigen  presentation)  that  translocates 
the  peptides  it  generates  into  the  ER.  Another  integral 
membrane protein of the ER directly loads translocated 
peptides  onto  class  I  major  histocompatibility 
antigen  (MHC)  molecules  for  transport  to  the  cell 
surface,  where  the  MHC-peptide  complex  stimulates 
T-cells (see Fig. 27.8). To avoid detection by the immune 
system,  some  viruses  block  this  pathway  and  force  
the translocation of MHC molecules backward through 
TAP,  out  of  the  ER,  and  into  the  waiting  maw  of  
the proteasome.

Motifs That Specify Ubiquitylation
Ubiquitylation  directs  the  selective  degradation  of  
many  different  proteins.  These  include  abnormally 
folded proteins, regulatory proteins (including some that 
control  cell-cycle  progression),  components  of  signal 
transduction systems, and regulators of transcription.

Polyubiquitin  chains  are  most  commonly  linked 
through  lysine  48,  but  all  other  linkages,  except  lysine 
63, also appear to be involved in proteasomal targeting. 
It was thought that chains of four or more ubiquitins are 
required  for  targeting  to  the  proteasome,  but  it  now 
seems that the number of ubiquitins bound to the target 
protein (possibly at multiple sites) rather than the length 
of individual chains may be the critical determinant.

Regulated  proteolysis  is  critical  in  controlling  cell-
cycle  progression  and  transcription  activation.  Here, 
targeting signals for degradation are often generated by 
speci fic  phosphorylation  events  (Table  23.1).  For 
example, phosphorylation of a conserved sequence near 
the  N-terminus  of  several  transcription  factors  or  their 
regulatory  subunits  generates  a  phospho-degron  recog-
nized  by  the  SCF  complex  (a  family  of  modular  E3 
enzymes named for their three core components: skp1, 
cdc53/cullin,  and  an  F-box-containing  protein;  see  Fig. 
40.16). SCF then ubiquitylates the target, marking it for 
destruction. This phosphorylation is often performed by 
cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks [see Fig. 40.14]) and is 
thereby tightly linked to the cell cycle.

A second multisubunit class of E3 enzymes, designated 
the  APC/C  (anaphase-promoting  complex/cyclosome), 
recognizes a degenerate, nine-residue “destruction box” 
sequence near the N-terminus of several cell-cycle regu-
latory proteins that targets these proteins for degradation 
(see Chapter 40). An even shorter amino acid sequence 
lysine, glutamic acid, asparagine (KEN), the “KEN box,” 
can  also  serve  as  a  destruction  signal  for  the  APC/C. 
Deletion  of  the  destruction  box  or  the  KEN  box  stabi-
lizes  the  target  protein,  whereas  transferring  these 
sequences to a normally stable protein may result in cell- 
cycle–dependent  ubiquitylation  and  rapid  degradation. 
Destruction or KEN boxes are not themselves regulated, 
but APC/C activity and specificity are regulated by Cdk 
phosphorylation (see Chapter 40).

The  simplest  natural  degron  is  described  by  the 
“N-end  rule.”  Certain  destabilizing  amino  acids  at  the 
N-terminus of a protein can be recognized for ubiquity-
lation by a specific E3, leading to subsequent destruction 
of  the  protein.  Although  several  apparent  N-end  rule 
substrates  have  been  identified,  it  is  unlikely  that  this 
simple  rule  applies  generally  in  vivo  as  proteins  with 
“destabilizing” NH2-terminal residues (after processing to 
remove  methionine)  do  not  tend  to  have  shorter  half-
lives than most proteins.

The  plant  hormone  auxin  uses  targeted  protein 
destruction  to  induce  expression  of  the  genes  that  it 
regulates. Auxin binds to a specific F-box protein which 
changes its conformation and can, as a result, recognize 
a  degron  motif  on  a  repressor  protein  that  normally 
holds  auxin-responsive  genes  in  an  inactive  state.  SCF-
binding results in ubiquitylation and destruction of the 
repressor  leading  to  activation  of  the  auxin-responsive 
genes.  When  attached  to  animal  proteins,  the  auxin-
induced  degron  can  be  used  experimentally  to  trigger 
the  rapid  destruction  of  the  target  proteins  in  cells 
induced to express the plant F-box protein.

Amphipathic or hydrophobic stretches of amino acids 
also  function  as  general  recognition  determinants  for 
ubiquitylation.  Because  hydrophobic  surfaces  are  often 
buried  in  a  folded  protein  or  at  the  interface  between 
subunits, exposure of this class of determinant is thought 

402 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

to  assist  in  targeting  misfolded  proteins  or  excess  
subunits  of  oligomeric  proteins  for  degradation.  This 
pathway is especially prevalent in controlling the degra-
dation of proteins that fail to fold in the ER (see later).

Because proteolysis is key for cell-cycle progression, 
interference  with  the  proteasome  has  been  adopted  as  
a  strategy  for  treatment  of  cancer.  One  proteasome 
inhibitor, bortezomib, is now used in the clinic to treat 
advanced multiple myeloma, a leukemia of B-lymphocytes.

Elimination of Misfolded Proteins From  
the Endoplasmic Reticulum
Integral membrane proteins and secretory proteins fold 
and assemble in the lipid bilayer or lumen of the ER (see 
Fig.  20.8).  Proteins  that  fail  to  fold  or  assemble  are 
retrieved from the ER and degraded by the proteasome 
in  a  pathway  known  as  ERAD  (ER-associated  degrada-
tion).  The  ERAD  pathway  also  regulates  levels  of  a 
number  of  ER  resident  proteins.  ERAD  target  proteins 
are detected either by a chaperone in the ER lumen, or 
directly  by  a  large  multi-protein  complex  inserted  in  
the  ER  membrane.  Either  way,  the  substrate  is  retro-
translocated  by  that  complex  back  to  the  cytoplasmic 
surface of the ER where it either has its trans-membrane 
domains cleaved in the plane of the membrane by spe-
cific  proteases  or  is  captured,  forcibly  extracted  from  
the  membrane  by  an  AAA-ATPase  and  ubiquitylated  by 
one  of  two  dedicated  E3  ligases  prior  to  degradation  
by proteasomes.

Medical interest in the ERAD pathway arises because 
defects in ubiquitylation of particular proteins are associ-
ated  with  the  pathology  of  Parkinson  disease.  Further-
more,  the  most  common  form  of  cystic  fibrosis  results 
from ERAD-mediated degradation of a slow-folding (but 
catalytically  competent)  variant  of  the  CFTR  (cystic 
fibrosis  transmembrane  regulator)  ABC  (adenosine  tri-
phosphate  binding  cassette)  transporter  (see  Fig.  17.4) 
before it can be exported to the cell surface.

Other Regulated Intracellular Proteolysis
Another  form  of  regulated  intracellular  proteolysis  is 
activation of inactive proenzymes or transcription factors 
by proteolytic cleavage (see Fig. 10.21 for NFκB [nuclear 
factor κB]). An important example of activation by pro-
teolytic cleavage is provided by caspases. Extracellular 
or  intracellular  signals  trigger  the  cleavage  of  procas-
pases, turning on their proteolytic activity and initiating 
a  cascade  that  leads  to  an  inflammatory  response  or 
apoptosis (see Figs. 46.17 and 46.18). In all cases, intra-
cellular proteolysis is tightly regulated through a combi-
nation  of  triggered  activation  of  the  protease,  specific 
substrate recognition, and compartmentalization.

Lipid Turnover and Degradation
Lipids and membrane proteins destined for degradation 
enter the lysosome either via the endocytic pathway or 

via autophagy. Distinct pathways exist for the turnover 
of the three classes of cellular lipids: phosphoglycerides, 
glycolipids,  and  cholesterol.  Glycolipids,  which  are 
restricted to the extracellular leaflet of lipid bilayers, are 
degraded primarily in lysosomes, and they accumulate in 
lysosomal storage diseases (Appendix 23.1). Sphingomy-
elin  and  gangliosides  are  delivered  to  lysosomes  via 
vesicular transport and degraded to the level of ceramide, 
sugars, and fatty acids by a series of lysosomal hydrolases. 
Their degradation requires association with an activator 
protein  to  extract  them  from  membranes  and  render 
them accessible to the catabolic enzymes. The lysosomal 
membrane has a specialized lipid composition including 
lysobisphosphatidic  acid  (see  Fig.  22.14),  which  is 
also  enriched  in  intraluminal  vesicles  of  multivesicular 
bodies  and  lysosomes.  Lysobisphosphatidic  acid  may 
play a role in activating sphingomyelinases and restrict-
ing  their  hydrolytic  activity  to  the  intraluminal  side  of 
the membranes. Other sphingomyelinases also exist on 
the cell surface, and their activation triggers production 
of the lipid second messenger ceramide (see Fig. 26.11).
The  turnover  of  phosphoglycerides  is  much  more 
varied  in  mechanism  and  location.  Phosphoglycerides 
from  the  outer  leaflet  of  the  plasma  membrane,  are 
degraded in lysosomes to their fatty acids, head group, 
and  glycerol  constituents.  Often,  phosphoglyceride 
degradation is only partial, and the degradative products 
(eg,  fatty  acids,  lysophospholipids,  and  diacylglycerol) 
are  salvaged  and  reutilized  in  “short-circuit  pathways.” 
In  this  way,  “old”  phospholipids  are  “remodeled,” 
forming new ones with the same or altered properties. 
These  phospholipid-remodeling  reactions  are  catalyzed 
by  a  variety  of  phospholipases  that  cleave  the  phos-
pholipid  to  generate  distinct  products  (see  Fig.  26.4). 
Localized lipid remodeling can generate specialized lipid 
subdomains required for vesicle fusion or fission or the 
selective  recruitment  of  proteins  to  the  membrane.  In 
addition, molecules released from partial degradation of 
phosphoglycerides, fatty acids, diacylglycerol, and some 
head groups function as second messengers in signaling 
cascades (see Fig. 26.5).

Cholesterol Homeostasis
Cholesterol  metabolism  in  mammals  involves  multiple 
organs  (see  Fig.  20.15  for  the  synthetic  pathway). 
Approximately 90% of the free cholesterol in animal cells 
is in the plasma membrane. Cholesterol is the precursor 
for steroid hormones, which are synthesized in special-
ized  cells  but  used  throughout  the  body  for  myriad 
essential functions. Cholesterol is also the precursor for 
bile acids, which are synthesized by the liver and trans-
ported  to  the  gut,  where  they  aid  in  the  digestion  of 
dietary fat. Unlike the case with virtually all other cellular 
molecules,  individual  cells  cannot  degrade  cholesterol. 
Instead,  cellular  levels  of  cholesterol  are  regulated  by  
a  complex  balance  of  endogenous  synthesis,  uptake  
of  extracellular  cholesterol,  and  efflux  of  intracellular 

 

CHAPTER 23  n  Processing and Degradation of Cellular Components 

403

Late endosome / lysosome

NPC-1

C

D

Free

cholesterol

Cholesterol

ER

B

A

LDL

LDL-R

Free

cholesterol

Cholesterol

esters

ACAT

HMGCoA
reductase

Cholesterol esters

(storage form)

Free cholesterol

stimulates HMGCoA
reductase degradation

Lipid
droplet

Cholesterol-bound SCAP
 holds SREBP in the ER,
  blocking its cleavage

In low-level cholesterol,
  SCAP/SREBP moves to
  the Golgi, where SREBP
  is cleaved releasing its
  transcription factor
  domain (see Fig. 20.14)

NUCLEUS

[LDL-R] increase

Cholesterol
biosynthetic

enzymes

increase

FIGURE 23.10  THE INTRACELLULAR PROCESSING AND REGULATION OF CHOLESTEROL BIOSYNTHESIS. A, Dietary cholesterol 
is delivered to cells in low-density lipoprotein (LDL) particles. B, LDL particles are taken up by clathrin-mediated endocytosis. C, Free cholesterol 
is released in late endosomes/lysosomes and transported to the cell surface or internal membranes, depending, in part, on the activity of the 
Niemann-Pick  disease  type  C1  (NPC-1)  integral  membrane  protein  (D).  Excess  cholesterol  can  be  acylated  by  acyl  coenzyme  A  cholesterol 
acyltransferase  (ACAT)  activity  and  stored  in  cytoplasmic  lipid  droplets  as  cholesterol  esters.  ACAT  activity  is  increased  by  high  intracellular 
cholesterol  levels.  At  the  same  time,  high  cholesterol  in  the  membrane  decreases  new  cholesterol  synthesis  by  triggering  the  proteasome-
dependent degradation of the enzyme β-hydroxy-β-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase. Finally, high cellular cholesterol decreases 
the uptake of LDL particles and dietary cholesterol by blocking proteolytic processing of the transcription factor sterol regulatory element-binding 
protein (SREBP), which is required for LDL-receptor (LDL-R) expression (see Fig. 20.16). Genetic defects that perturb steps A to D, which are 
required  to  maintain  the  delicate  balance  of  cholesterol  homeostasis,  cause  several  human  diseases.  Familial  hypercholesterolemia  is  caused 
either by a lack of LDL-R (A) or by LDL-R that is defective in endocytic activity (B). Wolman disease is a lysosomal storage disease that is caused 
by defective lysosomal cholesterol esterase activity; Niemann-Pick disease type C, another lysosomal storage disease, results in defective traf-
ficking  of  cholesterol  out  of  late  endosomes  and  lysosomes  caused  by  mutations  in  NPC-1  (D).  ER,  endoplasmic  reticulum;  SCAP,  SREBP 
cleavage activating protein. 

cholesterol to vascular fluids (Fig. 23.10). When present 
in  excess,  cholesterol  accumulates  as  plaques  in  the 
walls of major arteries, contributing to atherosclerosis.
Cholesterol  is  transported  through  the  body  as  cho-
lesterol esters packaged with other lipids and proteins. 
Cholesterol  esters  are  even  more  hydrophobic  than 
cholesterol, because they have a fatty acid esterified to 
the  hydroxyl  group.  The  intestine  assembles  dietary 
cholesterol into particles called chylomicrons, which are 
transported through the blood and eventually taken up 
by the liver, which is also the major site of cholesterol 
synthesis in mammals. The liver packages dietary and de 
novo–synthesized  cholesterol  into  low-density  lipo-
proteins (LDLs), which are secreted into the blood for 
transport to other tissues. Other cells take up LDL par-
ticles  via  receptor-mediated  endocytosis  and  deliver 
them  along  the  endocytic  pathway  to  lysosomes  (Fig. 
23.10).  Within  the  lysosome,  cholesterol  esters  are 
hydrolyzed, and the bulk of free LDL-derived cholesterol 
is  transported  by  a  cytoplasmic  carrier  protein  back  to 
the  plasma  membrane.  Importantly,  a  small  portion  of 
cholesterol  is  also  transported  to  the  ER,  where  the 
cholesterol  level  controls  the  activity  of  transcription 

factors  that  regulate  genes  involved  with  cholesterol 
metabolism.

Two  key  enzymes  in  the  ER  have  sterol-sensing 
domains that allow them to respond to the cholesterol 
content of the membrane and control intracellular free 
cholesterol  levels  (Fig.  23.11).  Accumulation  of  LDL-
derived cholesterol in the ER activates acyl coenzyme A 
cholesterol  acyltransferase  (ACAT),  the  enzyme  that 
converts free cholesterol to cholesterol esters for storage. 
Substantial increases in the levels of free cholesterol (or 
an oxygenated metabolite of it) also triggers the destruc-
tion of the enzyme that catalyzes the first step in choles-
terol biosynthesis, β-hydroxy-β-methylglutaryl-coenzyme 
A (HMG-CoA) reductase (Fig. 23.11). Cholesterol triggers 
the  degradation  of  HMG-CoA  reductase  through  a 
pathway  that  depends  on  ubiquitin  and  proteasomes.  
In addition, the membrane-bound transcription activator 
sterol  regulatory  element-binding  protein  (SREBP)  is 
trapped in the ER by SREBP cleavage activating protein 
(SCAP),  a  third  protein  with  a  sterol-sensing  domain. 
This limits, the expression of the genes for both HMG-CoA 
reductase and the LDL receptor. When ER cholesterol is 
low, SCAP/SREBP escapes to the Golgi apparatus, where 

404 

SECTION VI  n  Cellular Organelles and Membrane Trafficking

LATE
ENDOSOME

of  diseased  patients,  and  cholesterol  homeostasis  is 
impaired.  NPC-1  also  has  a  sterol-sensing  domain  (Fig. 
23.11; also see Fig. 20.10).

NPC-1

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We  thank  Klaudia  Brix,  Ron  Hay,  Margarete  Heck,  and 
Chris  Scott  for  their  suggestions  on  revisions  to  this 
chapter.

HMG-CoA
reductase

SELECTED READINGS

SCAP

ENDOPLASMIC
RETICULUM

FIGURE  23.11  THE  STEROL-SENSING  DOMAIN.  Proteins 
involved  in  cholesterol  trafficking  and  homeostasis  share  a  common 
sequence  motif—the  sterol-sensing  domain.  This  is  a  region  of  the 
protein (red) that spans the membrane five times. Cholesterol binding 
to this domain in the protein Niemann-Pick disease type C1 (NPC-1) 
is  required  for  normal  cholesterol  trafficking,  whereas  binding  to  the 
analogous domain inhibits the function of β-hydroxy-β-methylglutaryl-
coenzyme  A  (HMG-CoA)  reductase  (which  is  ubiquitylated  and 
destroyed)  and  of  SCAP  (which  is  retained  in  the  ER  as  a  complex 
with  sterol  regulatory  element-binding  protein  [SREBP]),  thereby 
downregulating sterol production and uptake. 

proteolytic  cleavage  liberates  the  SREBP  activation 
domain (see Fig. 20.16). This then travels to the nucleus 
to  drive  the  expression  of  LDL  receptor,  HMG-CoA 
reductase, and other proteins involved with cholesterol 
metabolism. This negative feedback mechanism reduces 
cholesterol input both from de novo synthesis and from 
extracellular sources (Fig. 23.10).

Cholesterol  homeostasis  is  critical  to  human  health, 
and a number of genetic diseases result from defects in 
cholesterol  metabolism.  Defects  in  the  LDL  receptor 
reduce  or  eliminate  LDL  uptake,  and  LDL  builds  up  in 
the blood, leading to cholesterol deposition in the walls 
of  arteries  and  atherosclerosis.  Rare  defects  in  the 
enzyme that hydrolyzes cholesterol esters in lysosomes 
lead to Wolman disease, which causes death within the 
first year of life. Niemann-Pick type C disease is a devas-
tating  neurodegenerative  disorder  that  results  from 
mutations  in  a  multitransmembrane  domain  NPC-1 
protein  that  is  required  for  transport  of  LDL-derived 
cholesterol  from  late  endosomes  to  both  the  plasma 
membrane and ER. Cholesterol accumulates in lysosomes 

Arias E, Cuervo AM. Chaperone-mediated autophagy in protein quality 

control. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2011;23:184-189.

Babst M, Odorizzi G. The balance of protein expression and degrada-
tion:  an  ESCRTs  point  of  view.  Curr  Opin  Cell  Biol.  2013;25:
489-494.

Betz  C,  Hall  MN.  Where  is  mTOR  and  what  is  it  doing  there?  J  Cell 

Biol. 2013;203:563-574.

Brown JS, Jackson SP. Ubiquitylation, neddylation and the DNA damage 

response. Open Biol. 2015;5:150018.

Christianson  JC,  Ye  Y.  Cleaning  up  in  the  endoplasmic  reticulum: 

ubiquitin in charge. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2014;21:325-335.

Deshaies RJ, Joazeiro CA. RING domain E3 ubiquitin ligases. Annu Rev 

Biochem. 2009;78:399-434.

Earnshaw WC, Martins LM, Kaufmann SH. Mammalian caspases: Struc-
ture,  activation,  substrates,  and  functions  during  apoptosis.  Annu 
Rev Biochem. 1999;68:383-442.

Fernández ÁF, López-Otín CJ. The functional and pathologic relevance 

of autophagy proteases. J Clin Invest. 2015;125:33-41.

Goldstein JL, Brown MS. A century of cholesterol and coronaries: from 

plaques to genes to statins. Cell. 2015;161:161-172.

Huber LA, Teis D. Lysosomal signaling in control of degradation path-

ways. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2016;39:8-14.

Hurley JH. ESCRTs are everywhere. EMBO J. 2015;34:2398-2407.
Inobe  T,  Matouschek  A.  Paradigms  of  protein  degradation  by  the 

proteasome. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2014;24:156-164.

Kimura H, Caturegli P, Takahashi M, Suzuki K. New insights into the 
function  of  the  immunoproteasome  in  immune  and  nonimmune 
cells. J Immunol Res. 2015;2015:541984.

Kraft  C,  Martens  S.  Mechanisms  and  regulation  of  autophagosome 

formation. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2012;24:496-501.

Matyskiela  ME,  Martin  A.  Design  principles  of  a  universal  protein 

degradation machine. J Mol Biol. 2013;425:199-213.

Nakatsukasa K, Kamura T, Brodsky JL. Recent technical developments 
in the study of ER-associated degradation. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2014;
29:82-91.

Parenti  G,  Andria  G,  Ballabio  A.  Lysosomal  storage  diseases:  from 

pathophysiology to therapy. Annu Rev Med. 2015;66:471-486.

Settembre  C,  Ballabio  A.  Lysosome:  regulator  of  lipid  degradation 

pathways. Trends Cell Biol. 2014;24:743-750.

Simons K, Ikonen E. How cells handle cholesterol. Science. 2000;290:

1721-1726.

Sontag  EM,  Vonk  WI,  Frydman  J.  Sorting  out  the  trash:  the  spatial 
nature  of  eukaryotic  protein  quality  control.  Curr  Opin  Cell  Biol. 
2014;26:139-146.

 

CHAPTER 23  n  Processing and Degradation of Cellular Components 

405

APPENDIX 23.1 
Lysosomal Storage Diseases

Disease(s)

Sphingolipidosis
GM1 ganglioside
Tay-Sachs
GM2 gangliosidosis
Sandhoff
GM2 gangliosidosis
Krabbe (galactosylceramide lipidosis)
Niemann-Pick A and B (sphingomyelin lipidosis)

Gaucher
Glucosylceramide lipidosis
Fabry
Glycoprotein storage diseases

Mucopolysaccharidosis
Several types

Sialidosis
Mucolipidosis II
I-cell disease

Enzyme Defect
β-Galactosidase

Hexosaminidase A

Hexosaminidase A and B

Galactosyl ceramide β-Galactosidase
Sphingomyelinase

β-Glucocerebrosidase

α-Galactosidase A
α-Fucosidase
α-Mannosidase
α-Aspartylglycosamine
α-Iduronidase
Iduronosulfate sulfatase
N-acetyl-α-glucosaminidase
Heparan sulfatase
β-Glucuronidase
Neuraminidase
UDP-N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc): 

glycoprotein GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase

Accumulated Material

GM1 gangliosidosis 

glycoproteins

GM2 gangliosides

GM2 gangliosides

Galactocerebrosides
Sphingomyelin
Cholesterol
Glucosylceramide

Trihexosylceramide
Glycopeptides
Glycolipids
Oligosaccharides
Heparan sulfate

Sialyloligosaccharides
Glycoproteins
Glycolipids

This page intentionally left blank

S E C T I O N   VII

Signaling Mechanisms

This page intentionally left blank

SECTION  VII  OVERVIEW

Cells depend on signaling systems to adapt to changing 

environmental conditions. Free-living organisms, such as 
yeast and bacteria, respond to changes in temperature, 
osmotic stress, and nutrients by synthesizing the proteins 
required to optimize their survival. Motile cells respond 
to  chemicals  by  migrating  toward  attractants  and  away 
from  repellants.  In  vertebrate  animals,  the  hormone 
adrenaline  stimulates  cellular  energy  metabolism,  and 
growth factors stimulate cells to duplicate their genomes 
and divide. Developmentally regulated genetic programs 
equip  each  cell  with  the  molecular  hardware  that  is 
required to adapt to remarkably diverse stimuli.

The first three chapters in this section introduce the 
main  molecular  components  of  signaling  pathways: 
receptors, protein messengers, and second messengers. 
With  this  background,  the  reader  can  appreciate  the  
nine  well-characterized  signal  transduction  pathways 
presented  in  Chapter  27  without  being  distracted  by 
descriptions of molecular components.

Cells use molecular receptors (Chapter 24) to detect 
chemical and physical stimuli. Physical interaction of the 
stimulus  with  the  receptor  provides  energy  to  modify 
the  structure  of  the  receptor  and  initiate  a  signaling 
pathway. With the exception of RNA “riboswitches,” all 
receptors  are  proteins.  A  few  stimuli,  including  light, 
steroid hormones, and gases, penetrate the plasma mem-
brane  and  react  with  receptors  inside  the  cell.  Most 
stimuli  from  outside  the  cell,  including  proteins,  pep-
tides, and charged organic molecules, cannot penetrate 
the plasma membrane. These extracellular ligands bind 
transmembrane receptors on the cell surface that trans-
fer the signal across the lipid bilayer.

Most  stimuli  act  through  one  of  approximately  25 
families of receptor proteins, each coupled to a distinct 
signal  transduction  pathway  (see  Fig.  24.1).  Multiple 
isoforms within each family provide thousands of differ-
ent receptors, each with specificity for particular stimuli. 
For example, of 20,447 genes in the nematode genome, 
nearly 800 encode a large family of receptors with seven 
transmembrane  helices.  Presumably,  all  members  of 
each receptor family arose from a common ancestor and 
acquired  new  specificities  by  multiple  rounds  of  gene 
duplication and divergent evolution.

Active receptors generate a chemical signal inside the 
cell by interacting with one or more cytoplasmic proteins 
(Chapter 25). This transduction step converts one type 
of signal (the stimulus) into another signal (the messen-
ger) and often amplifies the signal. Some receptors have 
a  cytoplasmic  domain  with  protein  kinase  activity  or 
associate with a separate protein kinase. These enzymes 

transfer  phosphate  from  adenosine  triphosphate  (ATP) 
to specific amino acids on target proteins. The cytoplas-
mic domains of active seven-helix receptors catalyze the 
exchange of guanosine diphosphate (GDP) for guanosine 
triphosphate (GTP) on signal-transducing guanosine tri-
phosphatases (GTPases), called G-proteins. GTP binding 
activates these G-proteins, allowing them to bind and 
regulate target proteins. Adapter proteins may link active 
receptors  to  downstream  effector  proteins,  including 
kinases  and  GTPases.  Cytoplasmic  signaling  proteins 
often  act  in  cascades,  passing  a  signal  from  one  to 
another.  Amplification  along  these  pathways  allows 
small  stimuli  to  rapidly  generate  large  biochemical 
responses inside the cell.

Many signaling pathways regulate the concentrations 
of small molecules, called second messengers (Chapter 
26). The most widely used second messengers are Ca2+, 
cyclic  nucleotides,  and  lipids.  They  modify  cellular 
behavior  by  binding  to  and  activating  a  wide  range  of 
effector proteins, regulating membrane physiology, cel-
lular metabolism, motility, and gene expression.

Signaling  pathways  regulate  most  cellular  processes 
(Chapter  27).  Effector  systems  include  transcription 
factors that control gene expression, proteins that regu-
late secretion, metabolic enzymes, structural elements of 
the  cytoskeleton  and  associated  motors,  cell-surface 
receptors, regulators of the cell cycle, and membrane ion 
channels. Multiple signaling pathways converge on each 
of  these  effector  systems.  Integration  of  these  diverse 
signals  determines  the  behavior  of  the  cell,  whether  it 
secretes, moves, grows, divides, or differentiates.

Understanding  signaling  pathways  can  be  challeng-
ing.  First,  cells  employ  hundreds  of  distinct  signaling 
pathways, involving hundreds to thousands of different 
proteins.  Second,  few  signal  transduction  mechanisms 
involve  simple  linear  pathways  from  a  stimulus  to 
a  change  in  behavior.  Rather,  most  pathways  branch 
and  converge  multiple  times.  Thus  information  from 
several  inputs  can  influence  each  effector  system.  This 
provides  for  integration  of  regulatory  mechanisms  but 
makes  it  difficult  to  predict  how  information  flows 
through  a  system.  Third,  most  pathways  have  positive 
or  negative  feedback  loops  that  can  either  augment  or 
inhibit  responses.  These  feedback  loops  can  either 
prolong or foreshorten the signal or even make it oscil-
late.  Fourth,  the  response  of  some  pathways  depends 
on  both  the  strength  and  the  temporal  pattern  of  the 
stimulus. Ultimately, signaling pathways must be under-
stood  as  integrated  systems,  like  complex  electrical  
circuits.

 409

Biochemistry/pharmacology and genetic analysis have 
revealed  much  about  signaling  mechanisms.  The  bio-
chemical approach generally starts with identification of 
a  naturally  occurring  or  synthetic  chemical,  such  as  a 
hormone,  that  modifies  the  activity  of  an  organism, 
organ,  or  cell.  These  compounds  are  called  agonists. 
Characterization  of  the  biological  effects  of  agonists  is 
often aided by the discovery of chemicals that antagonize 
their action. In many cases, such antagonists prove to 
be  useful  as  drugs,  even  before  their  mechanisms  are 
understood.  Aspirin  is  just  one  historic  example.  To 
define  the  mechanism,  it  is  necessary  to  purify  and 
characterize  the  receptor  that  binds  the  chemical  and 
then trace the biochemical steps from receptor to effec-
tors. Pioneering research established these pathways for 
each class of receptor. Subsequently the primary struc-
ture of each new receptor  has  revealed  (by  homology 
with  known  recep tors) the type of transduction mecha-
nism  that  lies  between  the  receptor  and  the  effector 
systems in the cell.

The  genetic  approach  involves  characterization  of 
mutations that affect the flow of information through a 

signaling  pathway.  By  collecting  enough  mutants  and 
testing for a hierarchy of effects, investigators can often 
define  the  flow  of  information  through  a  pathway. 
Cloning and sequencing the mutated genes then reveals 
the  proteins  involved.  Because  one  need  make  no 
assumptions  about  the  nature  of  the  biochemical  com-
ponents  or  how  they  are  connected,  completely  novel 
molecules emerge from genetic screens just as easily as 
familiar ones. One particularly fruitful genetic approach 
has been to analyze genes that predispose individuals to 
cancer or cause naturally occurring heritable diseases in 
humans, mice, or other species. Many proteins respon-
sible  for  regulating  cell  growth  and  proliferation  cause 
cancer  when  constitutively  activated  by  mutations. 
Inactivating mutations in other signaling proteins cause 
cancer, developmental defects or endocrine diseases.

To  understand  the  dynamics  of  a  signaling  system, 
one must learn enough about all the pathways and the 
rates of the reactions to formulate mathematical models 
that can explain how the system responds to the inten-
sity  and  pattern  of  the  stimuli.  This  is  best  understood 
for the system that controls bacterial chemotaxis.

410

C H A P T E R 

24 

Plasma Membrane Receptors

Cells use approximately 25 different families of recep-

tor proteins (Fig. 24.1) to detect and respond to a myriad 
of chemical and physical stimuli (Appendix 24.1). Most 
receptors  are  plasma  membrane  proteins  that  interact 
with  chemical  ligands  or  are  stimulated  by  physical 
events such as light absorption. A few chemical stimuli, 
including  steroid  hormones  and  the  gas  nitric  oxide, 
cross  the  plasma  membrane  and  bind  receptors  inside 
the  cell.  Some  ligands  arise  inside  cells.  These  include 
the  cyclic  nucleotides  that  stimulate  cyclic  nucleotide-
gated channels (see Fig. 16.10) and metabolites that bind 
riboswitches (see Fig. 3.22).

Gene duplication and divergent evolution within each 
family produced genes for multiple receptor isoforms 
that  interact  with  different  ligands.  Members  of  each 
family  share  one  or  more  structurally  homologous 
domains.  Isoforms  in  some  families  share  both  ligand-
binding and signal-transducing strategies (eg, seven-helix 
receptors  and  cytokine  receptors).  Members  of  other 

families  share  either  a  similar  ligand-binding  structure 
(tumor  necrosis  factor  [TNF]  receptor  family)  or  a 
common  signal-transducing  method  (receptor  tyrosine 
kinases) but differ in other respects. Amino acid substitu-
tions  in  common  structural  scaffolds  allow  isoforms  to 
recognize their specific ligands.

In  multicellular  organisms,  selective  expression  of 
certain  receptors  and  the  associated  transduction  mol-
ecules allows differentiated cells to respond specifically 
to  particular  ligands  but  not  others.  Fortunately,  the 
mechanisms of the best-characterized receptors usually 
apply to the rest of their family. Thus, learning about a 
few  examples  provides  a  working  knowledge  of  many 
related receptors.

One cannot predict the type of receptor, signal trans-
duction mechanism, or nature of the response from the 
chemical nature of a stimulus (Appendix 24.1). Although 
proteins  and  peptides  are  the  only  known  ligands  for 
receptor  kinases  and  kinase-linked  receptors,  proteins 

Receptors

Voltage-gated ion channel
Receptor S/T kinase
Two-component
Receptor
  tyrosine 
Ligand-gated
    kinase
  ion channel

Integrin

Tyrosine kinase–linked

Cytokine

Receptor tyrosine
  phosphatase
Receptor
  guanylyl
    cyclase
Cytoplasmic
  guanylyl 
    cyclase

Sphingomyelinase-
Seven-helix

  linked

Membrane
potential

Response
regulator

S/T

phosphorylation

Tyrosine

phosphorylation

cGMP

Dephosphorylation

Trimeric
G-protein

Ceramide

Selectin

Cadherin

  receptor
Toll-like
Cytoplasmic
    receptor
  steroid

β-catenin

Gene

expression

Effectors

FIGURE 24.1  SIXTEEN CLASSES OF RECEPTORS AND THEIR SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION MECHANISMS. S/T, serine/threonine. 

 411

412 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

and peptides also stimulate some seven-helix receptors 
and guanylyl cyclase receptors. A particularly wide range 
of stimuli activates seven-helix receptors. This includes 
photons,  amino  acids,  nucleotides,  biogenic  amines, 
lipids,  peptides,  proteins,  and  hundreds  of  different 
organic molecules. Some ligands bind distinct receptors 
on  different  cells.  For  example,  acetylcholine  activates 
skeletal  muscle  contraction  by  opening  a  ligand-gated 
ion  channel  (see  Fig.  16.12).  It  also  binds  seven-helix 
receptors  on  other  cells,  activating  signaling  pathways 
mediated  by  guanosine  triphosphate  (GTP)–binding 
proteins  (see  Fig.  39.21).  Some  ligands  with  similar 
names bind to different types of receptors. For example, 
several interleukins (IL-2 through IL-6) bind to cytokine 
receptors, but IL-1 activates a TNF family receptor, and 
IL-8 binds a seven-helix, G-protein–coupled receptor.

Energy  from  ligand  binding  is  used  to  change  the 
conformations of receptors and transfer the signal across 
the plasma membrane to activate cytoplasmic signals. In 
the  simplest  case  ligand  binding  on  the  cell  surface 
changes  the  conformation  of  seven-helix  receptors, 
including parts of the receptor exposed in the cytoplasm. 
More commonly ligand binding to extracellular domains 
of  a  receptor  aligns  cytoplasmic  domains  in  a  manner 
that  stimulates  enzyme  activity  or  favors  binding  of 
proteins that propagate the signal.

Most  signal-transducing  pathways  include  one  or 
more  enzymes  that  amplify  signals.  In  some  receptor 
families, an enzyme is part of the receptor protein itself 
(receptor  tyrosine  kinases),  but  in  others,  the  receptor 
interacts  with  a  separate  cytoplasmic  enzyme  (trimeric 
G-proteins, cytoplasmic protein kinases).

If extracellular stimulation is sustained, most signaling 
systems downregulate their response. The literature vari-
ously calls this adaptation, attenuation, desensitization, 
tachyphylaxis, or tolerance. For example, rhodopsin and 
odorant receptors turn off within a second of continuous 
stimulation  (see  Figs.  27.1  and  27.2).  This  allows  one  
to  distinguish  rapidly  changing  visual  information  and 
concentrations of odors.

This  chapter  discusses  nine 

families  of  well-
characterized  receptors  that  transfer  signals  across  the 
plasma  membrane.  Other  chapters  describe  additional 
receptor families: Chapter 16, ligand-gated and voltage-
gated  ion  channels;  Chapter  10,  nuclear  receptors  for 
steroids  and  other  ligands;  Chapter  25,  receptors  with 
protein-phosphatase  activity;  Chapter  26,  cytoplasmic 
nitric  oxide  receptors  with  guanylyl  cyclase  activity; 
Chapter  27,  two-component  receptors  and  tyrosine 
kinase–linked  receptors;  and  Chapter  30,  cell  adhesion 
receptors, including integrins, cadherins, and selectins.

Seven-Helix Receptors
Members  of  the  largest  family  of  plasma  membrane 
receptors  are  built  from  a  serpentine  arrangement  of 

Resting

Active

N

Ligand

Bound
ligand

TM5

TM6

C

TM5

TM6

Phosphorylation sites

FIGURE  24.2  STRUCTURE  OF  SEVEN-HELIX  RECEPTORS. 
Ribbon diagrams from crystal structures of resting and active human 
β2-adrenergic receptors illustrating the differences in the conformation 
brought about by binding the ligand, adrenaline. The structure of active 
receptor bound to a trimeric G-protein is nearly identical. The N-terminal 
segment  outside  and  the  C-terminal  segment  inside  the  cell  are 
modeled. (For reference, see Protein Data Bank [PDB; www.rcsb.org] 
files 2RH1 and Cherezov V, Rosenbaum DM, Hanson MA, et al. High-
resolution crystal structure of an engineered human beta2-adrenergic 
G protein-coupled receptor. Science. 2007;318:1258–1265; and PDB 
file  4LDO  and  Ring  AM,  Manglik  A,  Kruse  AC,  et al.  Adrenaline-
activated  structure  of  β2-adrenoceptor  stabilized  by  an  engineered 
nanobody. Nature. 2013;502:575–579.)

seven  transmembrane  α-helices  (Fig.  24.2).  When  acti-
vated,  these  diverse  receptors  are  guanine  nucleotide 
exchange  proteins  (GEFs;  see  Fig.  4.6)  for  cytoplasmic 
trimeric GTP-binding proteins (see Fig. 25.9). For this 
reason they are also called G-protein–coupled receptors. 
GTP  binding  activates  the  trimeric  G-proteins,  which 
relay signals to effector proteins inside cells. Eight Nobel 
Prizes have been awarded for work on this pathway.

Seven-helix  receptors  have  the  same  topology  and 
ligand-binding site as bacteriorhodopsin (see Fig. 13.8), 
so  the  genes  may  be  very  ancient.  Slime  molds  have 
seven-helix  receptors  linked  to  trimeric  G-proteins,  so 
the  eukaryotic  genes  for  these  proteins  are  at  least  1 
billion years old. Four percent (790) of the genes of the 
nematode  Caenorhabditis  elegans  encode  seven-helix 
receptors, the largest family of proteins in the worm. In 
mammals, olfactory cells alone use 500 to 1000 different 
seven-helix receptors to discriminate odorant molecules 
(see  Fig.  27.1).  Other  cells  are  estimated  to  express 
another  375  seven-helix  receptors  to  respond  to  light, 
amino  acids,  peptide  and  protein  hormones,  catechol-
amines,  and  lipids.  The  chemical  ligand  remains  to  be 
determined for many of these 375 receptors, which are 
therefore  termed  orphan  receptors.  Many  medically 
useful drugs bind seven-helix receptors.

More than 75 crystal structures established that seven-
transmembrane  helices  are  packed  similarly  in  these 
receptors, with the centrally located helix 3 forming part 
of  the  ligand  binding  pocket.  The  size  of  the  external 
opening  to  the  ligand  binding  site  varies  along  with 
sequences  and  conformations  of  the  extracellular  and 
cytoplasmic loops. The N-termini are outside the cell and 
vary from seven to 6000 residues. Some large N-terminal 

 

CHAPTER 24  n  Plasma Membrane Receptors 

413

domains participate in ligand binding. The cytoplasmic 
loops  between  helices  1–2,  3–4,  and  5–6  interact  with 
trimeric G-proteins. The C-terminal segment of the poly-
peptide  extends  into  the  cytoplasm  but  is  anchored  to 
the  bilayer  by  two  covalently  attached  fatty  acids.  It  is 
probably  intrinsically  disordered  and  varies  in  length 
from 12 to more than 350 residues. The figures in this 
book  show  seven-helix  receptors  as  monomers,  but 
many seven-helix receptors function as dimers or larger 
oligomers, allowing for crosstalk between the subunits.
Soluble  chemical  ligands  activate  most  seven-helix 
receptors  by  binding  in  a  central  pocket  among  the 
extracellular ends of the helices approximately one-third 
of  the  way  across  the  membrane.  Residues  lining  this 
pocket are highly variable between isoforms, providing 
specificity for each receptor to bind a particular ligand. 
Drugs also bind between the helices. The light-absorbing 
pigment 11-cis retinal is covalently bound in a similar 
location to the photoreceptor protein rhodopsin (Fig. 
24.2B)  and  is  activated  by  absorbing  a  photon  that 
changes  its  conformation  (see  Fig.  27.2).  Peptide  hor-
mones  bind  deep  in  the  helical  pocket  but  probably  
also  interact  with  residues  that  are  more  exposed  on  
the  cell  surface.  Receptors  for  some  large  ligands  
(pituitary  glycoprotein  hormones,  such  as  luteinizing 
hormone,  follicle-stimulating  hormone,  and  thyroid-
stimulating hormone) and some small ligands (glutamate, 
γ-aminobutyric acid, calcium) bind with high affinity to 
extracellular  N-terminal  domains  of  their  seven-helix 

receptor. The N-terminal domain with bound ligand then 
stimulates  the  transmembrane  domain  of  the  receptor. 
The blood-clotting enzyme thrombin activates its recep-
tor on platelets by proteolysis of the receptor rather than 
by direct binding (see Fig. 30.14). The N-terminal peptide 
cleaved from the receptor dissociates and activates other 
receptors; what is left of the newly truncated N-terminus 
folds back and activates its own receptor.

Seven-helix receptors exist in an equilibrium between 
two  conformations  (Fig.  24.2),  a  resting  state  and  an 
activated state with the ability to catalyze the exchange 
of  nucleotide  bound  to  trimeric  G-proteins  (Fig.  24.3). 
Without  bound  ligand,  the  resting  state  is  strongly 
favored. Ligand binding to the receptor (or the isomeri-
zation of retinal after absorbing light) shifts the equilib-
rium to the active state and initiates signal transduction. 
Activation involves reorganizing of contacts between the 
helices in the core of the protein and large movements 
of  transmembrane  helices  5  and  6  (Fig.  24.2B).  These 
changes  create  a  binding  site  for  the  α-subunit  of  the 
target  G-protein  composed  of  the  cytoplasmic  ends  of 
transmembrane helices 3, 5, and 6 (Fig. 24.3).

Active  receptors  catalyze  the  dissociation  of  guano-
sine diphosphate (GDP) bound to an inactive Gα subunit 
of  the  trimeric  G-protein.  Cytoplasmic  GTP  then  binds 
and  activates  Gα  (see  Fig.  25.9).  A  single  active  seven-
helix receptor can amplify the signal by activating up to 
100 G-proteins. After dissociating from the receptor and 
each other, both Gα-GTP and Gβγ stimulate downstream 

A. Resting

B. Active

C. Adapted

Ligand binding shifts

the equilibrium towards

the active state

α

GDP

β
γ 

GTP

GDP

Active receptor

catalyzes exchange of
GDP for GTP on Gα . . .

 . . . followed by

dissociation of active
Gα, active Gβγ, and

active receptor 

DAG

cAMP

PKA and PKC
phosphorylate
the receptor tail

Second messengers

cAMP and DAG activate

PKA and PKC

Arrestin

Negative feedback
by phosphorylation
and arrestin binding

GTP

Both Gα-GTP and Gβγ 

activate downstream effectors

that produce second messengers

FIGURE 24.3  ACTIVATION AND ADAPTATION OF A SEVEN-HELIX RECEPTOR. A, Ligand binding shifts the equilibrium from the resting 
conformation toward the active conformation. B, The active receptor binds trimeric G-protein, and promotes dissociation of guanosine diphosphate 
(GDP), allowing GTP to bind. This dissociates Gα from Gβγ, allowing both to activate downstream effectors that produce, for example, the second 
messengers cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), which activates protein kinase A (PKA), and diacylglycerol (DAG), which activates protein 
kinase C (PKC). C, Both kinases phosphorylate active receptors on their C-terminus, which attracts arrestin, putting the receptor into the inactive 
adapted  state.  (For  reference,  see  PDB  file  2RH1  [inactive  BAR  with  bound  carazolol]  and  Cherezov  V,  Rosenbaum  DM,  Hanson  MA,  et al. 
High-resolution crystal structure of an engineered human beta2-adrenergic G protein-coupled receptor. Science. 2007;318:1258–1265; PDB file 
4LDO [active BAR with bound adrenaline] and Ring AM, Manglik A, Kruse AC, et al. Adrenaline-activated structure of β2-adrenoceptor stabilized 
by an engineered nanobody. Nature. 2013;502:575–579; PDB file 3SN6 [active BAR bound to Gs] and Rasmussen SG, DeVree BT, Zou Y, et al. 
Crystal  structure  of  the  β2  adrenergic  receptor–Gs  protein  complex.  Nature.  2011;477:549–555;  and  PDB  file  4JQI  [β-arrestin  bound  to  a 
phosphorylated C-terminal peptide] and Shukla AK, Manglik A, Kruse AC, et al. Structure of active β-arrestin-1 bound to a G-protein-coupled 
receptor phosphopeptide. Nature. 2013;497:137–141.)

414 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

effector proteins, further amplifying the signal (see Fig. 
27.3 for an example of amplification).

Most seven-helix receptors adapt to sustained stimula-
tion by negative feedback from the signaling pathway. 
Receptor activation produces second messengers that 
stimulate multiple kinases. These kinases phosphorylate 
the C-terminal tail of the receptor, inhibiting interactions 
of G-proteins with receptors still bound to their ligands 
(Fig.  24.3C).  The  kinases  include  cyclic  adenosine  
monophosphate (cAMP)–activated protein kinase A and 
protein  kinase  C  (see  Fig.  25.4).  Furthermore,  Gβγ  sub-
units released in response to receptor stimulation activate 
G-protein–coupled receptor kinases that modify the 
receptors  themselves.  These  pathways  allow  for  cross-
talk  between  receptors,  as  activation  of  one  class  of 
receptors can inactivate other receptors.

Phosphorylation of the receptor tail creates a binding 
site for arrestin, a protein with multiple functions (Fig. 
24.3). First, arrestin blocks interactions of the receptor 
with G-proteins, terminating signaling through the main 
pathway downstream of most seven-helix receptors. In 
some  cases,  arrestin  initiates  a  new  signal  through  the 
mitogen-activated  protein  (MAP)  kinase  pathway  (see 
Figs. 27.6 and 27.7 for two other pathways). Arrestin also 
promotes the removal of seven-helix receptors from the 
plasma  membrane  by  endocytosis  in  clathrin-coated 
vesicles.  Some  internalized  receptors  recycle  to  the 
plasma  membrane,  some  continue  to  activate  trimeric 
G-proteins from endosomes, and others are modified by 
ubiquitin  and  directed  to  lysosomes  for  destruction. 
Chapter 27 discusses three dramatic examples of seven-
helix receptor adaptation.

Hundreds  of  mutations  have  been  documented  in 
seven-helix  receptors.  Some  are  harmless,  such  as  the 
recessive  mutations  in  the  gene  for  melanocortin  1 
receptor that confer red hair and fair skin. Others have 
been  linked  to  human  diseases  (Table  24.1).  Mutations 

TABLE 24.1  Seven-Helix Receptors and Disease
Defective Receptor
Activating Mutations
Parathyroid Ca2+ sensor
Rhodopsin
Thyroid hormone receptor

Hypoparathyroidism
Night blindness
Hyperthyroidism, thyroid 

Disease Phenotype

Loss-of-Function Mutations
Cone cell opsin
Parathyroid Ca2+ sensor

Rhodopsin

Thyroid hormone receptor
Vasopressin receptor

cancer

Color blindness
Hyperparathyroidism, failure to 

respond to serum Ca2+

Retinitis pigmentosa, retinal 

degeneration

Hypothyroidism
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus; 

kidneys fail to resorb water

can  inactivate  seven-helix  receptors  by  every  conceiv-
able  means  from  failure  to  synthesize  the  full-length 
protein  to  reduced  affinity  for  ligands  to  failure  to  
activate G-proteins. For example, loss-of-function muta-
tions  in  rhodopsin  cause  retinitis  pigmentosa,  a  degen-
eration  of  photoreceptor  cells.  Mutations  of  the 
melanocortin  4  receptor  cause  human  obesity.  More 
than a hundred different mutations produce seven-helix 
receptors  that  are  constitutively  active  without  ligand. 
Particular mutations of rhodopsin cause night blindness, 
and mutations in a calcium receptor cause dysfunction 
of  the  parathyroid  gland.  The  physiology  of  these 
activating  mutations  is  complicated,  because  cells  use 
feedback mechanisms to compensate for the continually 
active  receptors.  These  inherited  loss-of-function  muta-
tions are generally recessive.

Receptor Tyrosine Kinases
Polypeptide growth factors control cellular proliferation 
and differentiation by binding plasma membrane recep-
tors  with  cytoplasmic  protein  tyrosine  kinase  activity 
(Fig.  24.4).  For  example,  epidermal  growth  factor 
(EGF)  stimulates  proliferation  and  differentiation  of 
epithelial cells. Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) 
stimulates  growth  of  smooth  muscle  cells,  glial  cells,  
and  fibroblasts  (see  Fig.  32.11).  Growth  factors  and  
their  tyrosine  kinase  receptors  were  discovered  by  
three  strategies:  biochemical  purification  of  proteins  
that stimulate cellular growth or differentiation; genetic 
analysis  of  development  of  flies  and  nematodes;  and 
searches for genes that cause cancer. Cytokine receptors 
(Fig.  24.6)  and  immune  cell  receptors  (see  Fig.  27.8) 
signal through separate tyrosine kinase subunits.

Genome sequencing established that humans have 58 
genes for 20 families of receptor tyrosine kinases, each 
with distinct structural features. Most have an extracel-
lular ligand-binding domain connected to a cytoplasmic 
tyrosine kinase domain by a single transmembrane helix 
(Fig. 24.4). Ligand binding is mediated by immunoglobu-
lin  domains,  fibronectin  III  domains  (see  Fig.  3.13), 
cadherin  domains  (see  Fig.  30.5),  and  less-common 
β-helical  and  cysteine-rich  domains.  This  architecture 
illustrates that genes for receptor tyrosine kinases were 
assembled from sequences for familiar domains followed 
by  divergence  to  allow  for  interactions  with  diverse 
ligands.

Ligand binding activates receptor tyrosine kinases by 
bringing together a pair of kinase domains on the cyto-
plasmic  face  of  the  membrane.  The  juxtaposition  of 
kinase domains allows the partners to activate each other 
by  direct  interaction  or  by  phosphorylating  each  other 
on  tyrosine  residues.  In  most  cases,  phosphorylation  
of the activation loop of the catalytic domain converts 
the  kinase  from  an  inactive  to  an  active  conformation 
(see Fig. 25.3E–F). Phosphorylation of tyrosines between 

CHAPTER 24  n  Plasma Membrane Receptors 

415

N

L1

Cysteine-
rich

L2

C

C

N

 

N

EphB2R
globular
domain

C

FN3
domains

EphR

PDGFR FGFR VEGFR

Met

TrkA

RET

Axl

EGFR

Insulin R

Ig-domains

SEMA domain

CAD
domains

L1

L2

Kinase domains

Kinase inserts

C-terminal extensions

FIGURE 24.4  RECEPTOR TYROSINE KINASES. Domain architecture of nine of the 20 families of receptor (R) tyrosine kinases, with ribbon 
models of several domains. The globular domain of the EphB2 receptor is a β sandwich with a ligand-binding site that includes the exposed loop 
on the front of this model (see PDB file 1IGY). The extracellular part of the insulin-like growth factor consists of two similar β-helical domains 
connected  by  cysteine-rich  domains  (see  PDB  file  1IGR).  The  cytoplasmic  kinase  domain  from  the  insulin  receptor  is  similar  to  most  typical  
kinases (see PDB file 1IRK). Kinase inserts and C-terminal extensions contain tyrosine phosphorylation sites. Receptor names: Axl, receptor for 
the growth factor Gas6; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; EphR, receptor for ephrin membrane-bound ligands in the nervous system, 
the  largest  class  of  receptor  tyrosine  kinases;  FGFR,  fibroblast  growth  factor  receptor;  Met,  receptor  for  hepatocyte  growth  factor;  PDGFR, 
platelet-derived growth factor receptor; RET, a cadherin adhesion receptor; TrkA, receptor for nerve growth factor; VEGFR, vascular endothelial 
growth factor. Domain names: CAD, cadherin; F3, fibronectin-III; Ig, immunoglobulin. (For reference, see Lemmon MA, Schlessinger J. Cell signaling 
by receptor tyrosine kinases. Cell. 2010;141:1117–1134.)

the  membrane  and  the  kinase  domain  contribute  to 
activating or inhibiting some receptors.

Ligands  juxtapose  tyrosine  kinase  domains  in  three 
ways. Dimeric ligands such as PDGF and stem cell factor 
recruit  a  pair  of  receptors  from  the  pool  of  subunits 
diffusing  in  the  plane  of  the  membrane  and  link  them 
physically  (Fig.  24.5A).  This  induced  dimerization 
juxtaposes two kinase domains in the cytoplasm.

The extracellular domains of EGF receptors fold in an 
autoinhibited conformation that precludes dimerization 
(Fig.  24.5B).  EGF  binding  stabilizes  a  rearrangement  of 
extracellular  domains  that  favors  their  dimerization 
without EGF directly crosslinking the subunits. Receptor 
dimerization  brings  together  the  cytoplasmic  kinase 
domains.  One  kinase  domain  interacts  physically  with 
the other to turn on its activity without requiring phos-
phorylation of the kinase activation loop.

Insulin  induces  a  conformational  change  in  a  pre-
formed receptor dimer (see Fig. 24.4; also see Fig. 27.7).  
The  conformational  change  brings  together  the  kinase 
domains, which activate each other by transphosphory-
lation of activation loops (see Fig. 25.3E–F).

Receptor tyrosine kinases activate effector proteins in 
two different ways. All activated kinases phosphorylate 
tyrosines  on  inserts  and  C-terminal  extensions  of  their 
own kinase domains, creating phosphotyrosine-binding 
sites for downstream effector and adapter proteins with 
Src homology 2 (SH2) and phosphotyrosine-binding 
(PTB) domains (Fig. 24.5; also see Figs. 27.6 and 27.7). 

Each  SH2  and  PTB  domain  binds  preferentially  to  a 
certain phosphotyrosine site by virtue of a pocket that 
recognizes  both  the  phosphotyrosine  and  several  adja-
cent residues (see Fig. 25.10). For example, each of five 
phosphotyrosines of the PDGF receptor binds a different 
effector or adapter protein. Binding an effector protein 
to a receptor phosphotyrosine favors its phosphorylation 
by  the  receptor  kinase.  In  the  case  of  phospholipase 
Cγ, tyrosine phosphorylation both activates its catalytic 
activity  and  dissociates  the  enzyme  from  its  PTB  site, 
allowing it to move to its site of action on the membrane. 
Alternatively, binding to the receptor may promote activ-
ity by bringing an effector protein near its substrate. This 
applies  to  both  phosphoinositide  3-kinase,  which 
acts on lipid substrates in the membrane bilayer (see Fig. 
27.7), and the nucleotide exchange protein that activates 
the  Ras  guanosine  triphosphatase  (GTPase),  which  is 
anchored to the membrane bilayer (see Fig. 27.6).

Multiple  mechanisms  silence  receptor 

tyrosine 
kinases. In the short term, some intracellular transducers 
activated by the receptor provide negative feedback to 
turn  off  the  receptor.  For  example,  lipid  second  mes-
sengers produced by phospholipase Cγ activate protein 
kinase C, which inhibits the receptor tyrosine kinase by 
phosphorylation.  In  the  longer  term,  endocytosis  in 
clathrin-coated  vesicles  removes  active  dimeric  recep-
tors  from  the  cell  surface.  Receptors  may  continue  to 
signal  from  endosomes.  Some  internalized  receptor 
tyrosine kinases recycle to the plasma membrane. Others 

416 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

A. KIT receptor for stem cell factor

B. Epidermal growth factor receptor

Receptor
monomer

SFC
dimer

Autoinhibited
monomer

130º

EGF

Two

extracellular

domains
dimerize

SCF dimer binds

and dimerizes

receptor

Kinase domains
phosphorylate

each other

SH2 domains
of transducer
proteins bind

phosphotyrosines

Ubiquitination
& endocytosis

Lipid second
messengers

EGF binding

opens extracellular

domains

One kinase

domain binds and

activates other
kinase domain

Minimally

active kinase

domain

MAP kinase

pathway

(see Figure 27-6)

FIGURE 24.5  SUBUNIT DIMERIZATION MECHANISMS FOR ACTIVATING RECEPTOR TYROSINE KINASES. A, KIT receptor for stem 
cell factor (SCF). (Note that this is not the SCF Skp1-Cullin-F box ubiquitin E3 ligase that is important for cell cycle regulation.) In the absence of 
SCF, receptor monomers diffuse in the plasma membrane. Binding of an SCF dimer brings together two receptor molecules, bringing into proximity 
their  cytoplasmic  kinase  domains.  This  allows  for  transphosphorylation  of  their  activation  loops  and  creation  of  phosphotyrosine  binding  sites  
for  the  Src  homology  2  (SH2)  and  phosphotyrosine-binding  (PTB)  domains  of  downstream  signal  transduction  proteins.  B,  Epidermal  growth 
factor (EGF) receptor. In the absence of EGF, intramolecular interactions preclude dimerization. EGF binding changes the conformation of the 
extracellular domains allowing dimerization of two receptors, bringing together two cytoplasmic kinase domains. One kinase domain binds and 
activates the other, which creates phosphotyrosine binding sites for SH2 and PTB domains of downstream signal transduction proteins. (For refer-
ence, see PDB files 2EC8 [KIT monomer], 2E9W [KIT dimer SCF complex], 2AHX and 2A91 [EGF receptor] and Yuzawa S, Opatowsky Y, Zhang 
Z, et al. Structural basis for activation of the receptor tyrosine kinase KIT by stem cell factor. Cell. 2007;130:323–334; and Kovacs E, Zorn JA, 
Huang Y, et al. A structural perspective on the regulation of the epidermal growth factor receptor. Annu Rev Biochem. 2015;84:739–764.)

are modified by the addition of ubiquitins to one or more 
lysine side chains and degraded (see Fig. 23.3).

Mutations of genes for receptor tyrosine kinases cause 
human disease. Many cancers have activating mutations 
or  overexpression  of  EGF  family  receptors.  Activating 
mutations  are  found  in  all  parts  of  these  receptors  
and  work  by  most  conceivable  mechanisms  including 
dimerizing receptors without bound ligands and revers-
ing  autoinhibition.  Antibodies  against  extracellular 
domains  or  drugs  that  inhibit  kinase  activity  are  useful 
therapeutically.  Activating  mutations  in  a  fibroblast 
growth  factor  receptor  lead  to  a  variety  of  congenital 
abnormalities of the skeleton, including a form of dwarf-
ism  and  premature  fusion  of  the  sutures  between  the 
bones of the skull. Some of these mutations activate by 
promoting  receptor  dimerization  through  disulfide 
bonds or association of transmembrane helices. Others 
change ligand specificity.

Cytokine Receptors
Cytokines are a diverse family of polypeptide hormones 
and growth factors that bind transmembrane receptors 
associated  with  cytoplasmic  tyrosine  kinases.  These 
kinases activate cytoplasmic transcription factors called 
STATs (signal transducer and activator of transcriptions) 
that  regulate  many  cellular  processes.  Although  they 

differ  in  detail,  all  cytokines  are  four-helix  bundles. 
Pituitary  growth  hormone  controls  body  growth  and 
development  of  mammals,  so  loss  of  function  receptor 
mutations cause one type of dwarfism. Erythropoietin 
regulates  the  proliferation  and  differentiation  of  red 
blood  cell  precursors  (see  Fig.  28.4).  Interleukins 
modulate cells of the immune system, so loss-of-function 
receptor mutations result in deficient immune cells.

The 30 human cytokine receptors are homodimers or 
heterodimers with extracellular fibronectin III domains 
that  bind  the  ligand  and  a  single  transmembrane  helix 
(Fig.  24.6).  The  large  (40-kD),  intrinsically  disordered 
cytoplasmic domains have a binding site near the mem-
brane for one of several protein tyrosine kinases called 
JAKs  (“just  another  kinase”).  JAKs  have  both  a  kinase 
domain  and  an  inactive  pseudokinase  domain.  When 
associated  with  the  cytoplasmic  domains  of  inactive 
receptor  dimers  the  pseudokinase  domains  inhibit  the 
kinase domains of the partner JAK.

The  best-characterized  cytokine  receptor  binds 
growth  hormone.  Binding  of  this  monomeric  ligand 
rotates the extracellular and transmembrane domains of 
the receptor relative to each other and activates the two 
JAK kinases bound to the cytoplasmic domains by sepa-
rating  the  inhibitory  pseudokinase  domains  from  the 
kinase  domains  (Fig.  24.6).  This  allows  the  JAKs  to 
activate each other by transphosphorylation. Active JAKs 

 

FERM

SH2

Growth
hormone

Active

Resting

Growth
hormone
binding
Activation

juxtaposes kinase

domains

Pseudokinase
(inhibits partner
kinase)

Intrinsically disordered
cytoplasmic domain

Kinase

Active kinase

C

FIGURE  24.6  STRUCTURE  AND  ACTIVATION  OF  THE 
GROWTH HORMONE RECEPTOR. Resting dimeric receptors have 
a JAK2 kinase bound to each of the intrinsically disordered cytoplasmic 
tails  near  the  inside  of  the  plasma  membrane.  The  pseudokinase 
domains  interact  with  and  inhibit  the  kinase  domain  of  the  partner 
JAK2. Growth hormone binding rearranges the two receptor molecules 
relative to each other and separates the JAK2 kinases so the kinase 
domains transactivate each other to initiate the intracellular signaling 
cascade.  (For  reference,  see  Brown  RJ,  Adams  JJ,  Pelekanos  RA, 
et al. Model for growth hormone receptor activation based on subunit 
rotation within a receptor dimer. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2005;12:814–821; 
and Brooks AJ, Dai W, O’Mara ML, et al. Mechanism of activation of 
protein  kinase  JAK2  by  the  growth  hormone  receptor.  Science. 
2014;344:1249783.)

CHAPTER 24  n  Plasma Membrane Receptors 

417

also phosphorylate tyrosines in the receptor cytoplasmic 
tails as well as transcription factors called STATs, which 
migrate to the nucleus to regulate gene expression (see 
Fig. 27.9 for more on the pathways).

N

Receptor Serine/Threonine Kinases
A third class of growth factor receptors uses cytoplasmic 
serine/threonine  kinase  domains  to  transduce  signals 
(Figs.  24.7  and  24.8).  Dimeric  protein  ligands  bring 
together two different types of receptor subunits to turn 
on kinase activity. Active receptors phosphorylate tran-
scription  factors  called  SMADs  (Sma-  and  Mad-related 
proteins),  stimulating  their  movement  from  cytoplasm 
into the nucleus, where they regulate genes controlling 
cellular proliferation and differentiation (see Fig. 27.10).
Forty different proteins bind human receptor serine/
threonine  kinases.  These  dimeric  growth  factors  are 
particularly  important  during  embryonic  development. 
Transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) both inhibits 
proliferation of most adult cells and also stimulates pro-
duction of extracellular matrix, including collagen, pro-
teoglycans, and adhesive glycoproteins (see Chapter 29). 
Activin was discovered as a releasing factor for pituitary 
follicle-stimulating hormone but also has a strong influ-
ence on the differentiation of early embryonic cells into 
primitive germ layers. A family of bone morphogenetic 
proteins (BMPs) influence the differentiation of osteo-
blasts,  which  lay  down  bone  matrix,  as  well  as  many 
other cells.

A. Receptor serine / 
threonine complexes

N

N

N

N

Cys box

TM

I
I
-

R
t
c
A

I
I
-

R
β
T

Kinase

I
-

R
t
c
A

I
-

R
β
T

s
e
r
 
0
0
1

Tail

C

C

C

C

B. Proposed signaling mechanism

C. Side view

RI

RII

Inactive
RI kinase
domain

Active

RII kinase

domain

D. Top view

RI • RII • TGF-β

SMAD-P

Cell-cycle

arrest

FIGURE  24.7  RECEPTOR  SERINE/THREONINE  KINASES.  A,  Drawing  of  domain  architecture  of  activin  (Act)  and  transforming  growth 
factor-β (TGF-β) receptors. TM, transmembrane domain. B, Mechanism of activation of receptor serine/threonine kinases. Ligand binds two type 
II receptors (RII) and two type I receptors (RI). Within this hexameric complex, the type II receptor phosphorylates and activates the type I receptors, 
which, in turn, phosphorylate cytoplasmic transcription factors called SMADs (Sma- and Mad-related proteins). Phosphorylated SMADs move to 
the nucleus to activate particular genes. See Fig. 27.10 for details. C–D, Ribbon and space-filling models of bone morphogenetic protein 7 (BMP7) 
bound to type I and type II receptors. This model is based on crystal structures of dimeric BMP7 bound to two extracellular domains of the type 
II activin receptor and of BMP2 bound to two extracellular domains of BMP type I receptor. (For reference, see PDB files 1LX5 and 1S4Y and 
Greenwald J, Groppe J, Gray P, et al. The BMP7/ActRII extracellular domain complex provides new insights into the cooperative nature of receptor 
assembly.  Mol  Cell.  2003;11:605–617;  and  Shi  Y,  Massague  J.  Mechanisms  of  TGFβ  signaling  from  cell  membranes  to  the  nucleus.  Cell. 
2003;113:685–700.)

418 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

A

N

B

N

NO

G cyclase

C

Soluble

ANF

Kinase-like

G cyclase

C

ANF receptor

ANF receptor
dimer

Inactive
kinase

GTP

cGMP

G cyclase

Ligand binding
pulls cytoplasmic
domains together
inducing activation

FIGURE 24.8  GUANYLYL CYCLASE RECEPTORS. A, Compari-
son of the domain architecture of the transmembrane atrial natriuretic 
factor  (ANF)  receptor  and  the  cytoplasmic  nitric  oxide  receptor.  
B, Ribbon model of the extracellular domains of a dimer ANF receptor 
with  a  model  of  the  juxtaposed  cytoplasmic  domains.  ANF  binding 
causes tilting of the transmembrane domains, which aligns the active 
sites  of  the  guanylyl  cyclase  domains  and  turns  on  enzyme  activity. 
(For reference, see PDB file 1JDN and Ogawa H, Qiu Y, Ogata CM, 
et al.  Crystal  structure  of  hormone-bound  atrial  natriuretic  peptide 
receptor extracellular domain: rotation mechanism for transmembrane 
signal transduction. J Biol Chem. 2004;279:28625–28631.)

Serine/threonine  kinase  receptors  are  composed  of 
two types of subunits. Humans have genes for seven type 
I receptors and five type II receptors. Single transmem-
brane  sequences  link  the  small  ligand-binding  domains 
to  cytoplasmic  serine/threonine  kinase  domains.  The 
linker  residues  between  the  transmembrane  helix  and 
the type I kinase domain inhibit its activity. Signal trans-
duction requires the kinase activities of both subunits.

Receptors  are  present  in  small  numbers  on  the  cell 
surface. Four receptor subunits bind independently to a 
dimeric  ligand,  beginning  with  high-affinity  binding  of 
two type II receptors followed by lower-affinity interac-
tions  with  two  type  I  receptors  (Fig.  24.7B).  Within  
this  complex,  the  constitutively  active  type  II  receptor 
kinases  activate  the  type  I  receptors  by  phosphorylat-
ing  serine  and  threonine  residues  in  the  inhibitory  
linker region.

The  signal  is  propagated  by  type  I  receptor  kinases 
phosphorylating cytoplasmic transcription factors called 
SMADs.  Phosphorylated  SMADs  move  to  the  nucleus, 
where  they  cooperate  with  other  transcription  factors  
to  regulate  gene  expression  (see  Fig.  27.10).  These 

receptors  can  also  activate  MAP  kinase  and  PI3  kinase 
signaling pathways and phosphorylate tyrosines on a few 
proteins.

Loss  of  TGF-β  receptors  makes  some  tumors  unre-
sponsive to growth inhibition by TGF-β and contributes, 
in part, to their ability to replicate autonomously. On the 
other hand, inappropriate regulation of TGF-β signaling 
may contribute to overproduction of extracellular matrix 
in chronic inflammatory diseases and pathological fibro-
sis that scars diseased organs. Mice with null mutations 
of one of their three TGF-β genes die with inflammation 
in  multiple  organs  caused  by  excessive  proliferation  of 
lymphocytes.

In addition to these transducing receptors, cells have 
a greater abundance of another plasma membrane TGF-
β-binding  protein  (type  III  receptors)  that  lacks  signal 
transduction activity. A single transmembrane sequence 
links  the  large  extracellular  proteoglycan  domain  to  a 
small  cytoplasmic  domain.  This  receptor  may  concen-
trate TGF-β on the cell surface. Even in the absence of 
TGF-β,  type  II  receptors  phosphorylate  type  III  recep-
tors, creating a binding site for β-arrestin and promoting 
endocytosis of both type II and type III receptors.

Guanylyl Cyclase Receptors
Animals have a family of cell surface receptors (Fig. 24.8) 
with intracellular domains that catalyze the formation of 
3′-5′–cyclic  guanosine  monophosphate  (cGMP)  from 
GTP. A second type of guanylyl cyclase is found in the 
cytoplasm and activated by the gases nitric oxide and 
carbon monoxide (see Fig. 26.1 for more details of these 
signal  transduction  pathways).  Regardless  of  its  enzy-
matic  origin,  cGMP  regulates  the  same  targets:  cGMP-
gated ion channels (see Fig. 16.10), cGMP-stimulated 
protein kinases (see Fig. 25.4), and cyclic nucleotide 
phosphodiesterases (see Fig. 26.1).

All  known  ligands  for  plasma  membrane  guanylyl 
cyclase receptors are peptides, although the ligands for 
some receptors are not known. Most insights regarding 
function have come from knowledge about the ligands, 
the  tissue  distribution  of  receptors,  and  receptor  gene 
disruptions,  as  highly  specific  inhibitors  of  the  cell-
surface guanylyl cyclases are not yet available.

Vertebrates  have  at  least  seven  isoforms  of  guanylyl 
cyclase receptors; nematode worms have more than 25. 
These  receptors  are  homodimers  with  characteristic, 
ligand-binding  extracellular  domains,  single  transmem-
brane  helices,  and  two  cytoplasmic  domains—an  enzy-
matically inactive kinase domain and a guanylyl cyclase 
domain (Fig. 24.8). The cyclase domain is closely related 
to adenylyl cyclases with the active sites shared between 
two domains (see Fig. 26.2).

In  the  absence  of  ligand  the  cytoplasmic  guanylyl 
cyclase  domains  are  inactive.  Ligand  binding  in  the  
cleft  between  the  extracellular  domains  causes  a 

 

CHAPTER 24  n  Plasma Membrane Receptors 

419

scissor-like  motion  that  changes  the  relationship  of 
cytoplasmic  domains  in  a  way  that  stimulates  guanylyl 
cyclase activity.

Guanylyl  cyclase  receptor  A  (GC-A)  binds  atrial 
natriuretic  factor,  a  polypeptide  hormone  that  is 
secreted mainly by the heart to control blood pressure. It 
stimulates excretion of salt and water by the kidney and 
dilates blood vessels. Mice with null mutations for GC-A 
have high blood pressure and enlarged hearts and fail to 
respond  when  overloaded  with  fluid  and  salt  adminis-
tered intravenously. Intestinal guanylyl cyclase receptor 
C (GC-C) binds bacterial enterotoxin, the mediator of 
fluid secretion in bacterial dysentery. The bacterial toxin 
mimics  endogenous  intestinal  peptides  that  regulate 
fluid secretion motility of the gut. Mice with null muta-
tions  for  GC-C  are  completely  resistant  to  enterotoxin 
without  other  apparent  physiological  defects.  Guanylyl 
cyclase receptors E and F (GC-E, GC-F) are restricted to 
the eye; a null mutation for GC-E results in loss of cone 
visual receptor cells. Guanylyl cyclase receptor D (GC-D) 
is  restricted  to  olfactory  neuroepithelium.  Sea  urchin 
spermatozoa use a guanylyl cyclase receptor to respond 
to peptides secreted by eggs.

Tumor Necrosis Factor Receptor Family
TNF  and  its  receptor  are  the  prototypes  for  a  diverse 
group of cell-signaling partners (Fig. 24.9) that regulate 
the expression of genes for a wide range of developmen-
tal  and  inflammatory  processes  as  well  as  cell  death  
(see Fig. 46.18). Lymphocytes produce three isoforms of 
TNF (also called lymphotoxin and cachectin), a trimeric 

lymphokine. TNF plays many roles in shock and inflam-
mation,  protection  from  bacterial  infections,  killing 
tumor cells, and wasting in chronic disease. In humans, 
the family includes 19 ligands and 29 related receptors.
TNF  is  synthesized  as  a  transmembrane  protein  and 
released from the cell surface by proteolysis. Mice with 
a genetic deletion of the lymphotoxin-α (TNF) gene have 
no lymph nodes, so TNF participates in the development 
of the immune system. Other ligands for the TNF class 
of receptors are also trimers of subunits composed of β 
strands,  such  as  the  membrane-bound  Fas-ligand  on 
killer  T  cells  (see  Fig.  46.18).  Nerve  growth  factor 
binds  with  low  affinity  to  a  member  of  this  family  in 
addition  to  the  tyrosine  receptor  kinase  A  (TrkA;  
see Fig. 24.4).

Human cells express two types of TNF receptors that 
bind the same ligands but generate different responses. 
The two receptors have similar ligand-binding domains 
coupled by single transmembrane segments to different 
cytoplasmic  domains.  The  extracellular  part  of  these 
receptors  consists  of  four  similar  repeats  of  approxi-
mately 40 amino acids, each stabilized by three disulfide 
bridges (Fig. 24.9B). In the absence of ligand, individual 
receptor subunits are presumed to diffuse independently 
in the plane of the membrane.

Three  finger-like  receptors  grasp  one  trimeric  TNF 
molecule  by  binding  along  the  interfaces  between  
TNF  subunits.  The  tapered  shape  of  TNF  brings  toge-
ther  the  transmembrane  segments  and  cytoplasmic 
domains of three receptors. Clustering three cytoplasmic 
domains allows  an  active  TNF  receptor  to  assemble 
a  com plex  signaling  platform  of  adapter  proteins  that 

A. TNF ligand and receptor families

B. TNF bound to receptor

Name:

TNF

(cachectin)

LT-α

NGF

Fas ligand
on T cells

Cell
type:

All cells

All cells

Neurons

Fas receptor
on target cells

TNF
trimer

TNF

receptor

90°

TNF 

monomer

Cystine-
rich unit

Action:

Cytotoxicity
proliferation

Apoptosis

Anti-apoptosis

Apoptosis

FIGURE 24.9  TUMOR NECROSIS FACTOR (TNF) RECEPTOR FAMILY. A, Domain architecture of a sample of members from the TNF 
receptor family. LT-α, lymphotoxin-α; NGF, nerve growth factor. B, Atomic structure of TNF bound to its receptor. TNF is a trimer of three identical 
β sandwich subunits arranged in a pear-like structure. The four extracellular cysteine-rich domains of the receptor grasp TNF like prongs. This 
clusters three cytoplasmic domains and allows the assembly of adapter proteins that transduce the signal. (A, Modified from Beutler B, van Huffel 
C. Unraveling function in the TNF ligand and receptor family. Science. 1994;264:667–668, copyright American Association for the Advancement 
of Science. B, For reference, see PDB file 1TNR and Banner DW, D’Arcy A, Janes W, et al. Crystal structure of the soluble human 55 kD TNF 
receptor-human TNF beta complex: implications for TNF receptor activation. Cell. 1993;73:431–445.)

420 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

become  modified  with  polyubiquitin  chains  and  ulti-
mately  lead  to  activation  of  the  transcription  factor 
nuclear  factor  κB  (NF-κB;  see  Fig.  10.21).  Active  TNF 
receptors  also  turn  on  a  plasma  membrane  phospholi-
pase  that  hydrolyzes  sphingomyelin,  producing  the 
second messenger ceramide (see Fig. 26.11).

TNF participates in the inflammation associated with 
autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis. Inter-
cepting TNF before it reaches its receptor is remarkably 
successful  in  blunting  inflammation  in  these  diseases. 
This  is  accomplished  by  injections  of  monoclonal  anti-
bodies  to  TNF  or  constructs  containing  just  the  extra-
cellular domains of the TNF receptor.

Related  receptors  also  bind  to  multimeric  ligands 
leading to assembly of cytoplasmic signaling complexes. 
For example, Fas ligand triggers cell death by clustering 
Fas and assembling a signaling platform that activates a 
cascade of intracellular proteolysis (see Fig. 46.18).

Toll-Like Receptors
Metazoan organisms and plants use a family of receptors 
named  Toll-like  receptors  (TLRs)  to  sense  and  respond 
to infection by a wide variety of microorganisms includ-
ing viruses, bacteria, fungi, and protozoa. They mediate 
responses  by  regulating  the  expression  of  genes  for 
inflammatory factors. Fig. 28.6 provides details on their 
structures and functions.

Notch Receptors
Components of the Delta/Notch signaling pathway were 
identified by analysis of mutations affecting early devel-
opment  in  flies  and  nematodes.  Ligands  are  transmem-
brane proteins called Delta in flies and vertebrates and 
LAG-2 in worms. These ligands and their Notch recep-
tors  regulate  cellular  fates  during  early  embryonic 
development.  Typically,  cells  expressing  Delta  interact 
with  Notch  receptors  on  adjacent  cells  to  force  the 
neighboring  cells  to  choose  a  fate  different  from  their 
own.  The  actual  outcome  depends  on  the  context;  in 
each tissue, Delta/Notch signals are integrated with the 
actions of other signaling pathways. As a general point, 
Delta/Notch  signals 
to  reinforce  differences 
between cells in a particular tissue. For example, Delta 
on  the  earliest  neurons  directs  adjacent  cells  to  other 
fates. Defects in Delta or Notch result in excess neurons.
Delta is active as a cell surface protein that interacts 
locally with adjacent cells, but a matrix metalloprotein-
ase (see Fig. 29.19) cleaves some Delta from the mem-
brane,  allowing  it  to  act  at  a  distance  from  its  cell  of 
origin. The receptors, called Notch (flies, vertebrates) or 
Lin-12  (worms),  consist  of  36  extracellular  EGF-like 
domains  and  leucine-rich  repeats,  a  single  transmem-
brane span, and an intracellular region of ankyrin repeats 
that  lacks  enzyme  activity.  Notch  is  synthesized  as  a 

tend 

single  polypeptide  chain  and  is  cleaved  once  near  the 
base of the extracellular domain in the Golgi apparatus 
before  transport  to  the  plasma  membrane.  The  two 
polypeptides  remain  associated  through  noncovalent 
interactions.

Cells  carrying  Delta  activate  Notch  receptors  on 
adjacent  cells.  This  leads  to  proteolytic  cleavage  that 
frees  the  intracellular  domains  from  the  membrane. 
These cytoplasmic domains move into the nucleus and 
join a complex of proteins, including CSL, that activate 
transcription of certain genes.

Hedgehog Receptors
Genetic studies of Drosophila revealed a novel class of 
protein  ligands,  called  Hedgehog,  and  two  membrane 
proteins,  called  Patched  and  Smoothened,  that  are 
required  for  signal  transduction  during  development. 
The  Hedgehog  receptor  Patched  consists  of  12  trans-
membrane  segments  related  to  proton-driven  bacterial 
antiporters, but the transported substrate, if any, is not 
known. Smoothened is an unusual seven-helix receptor 
that is constitutively active. Substoichiometric quantities 
of Patched inhibit the activity of Smoothened, perhaps 
by  transporting  out  of  the  cell  a  ligand  that  binds  and 
inhibits  Smoothened.  In  flies,  the  Hedgehog  pathway 
cooperates with the Wnt system (see Fig. 30.7) to estab-
lish  boundaries  between  segments  of  the  embryo  and 
maintain a pool of stem cells.

Every  aspect  of  this  novel  signaling  pathway  estab-
lished new principles. A signal sequence guides Hedge-
hog  protein  into  the  secretory  pathway,  but  before  
it  reaches  the  cell  surface,  the  protein  cleaves  itself  
in two pieces. The C-terminal half of the protein carries 
out the cleavage reaction. This autocatalytic reaction also 
adds  a  molecule  of  covalently  bound  cholesterol 
to  the  newly  formed  C-terminus  of  the  first  half  of  the 
protein, which is the domain with signaling activity. This 
was  the  first  example  of  cholesterol  being  used  for 
posttranslational  modification  of  a  protein.  Cholesterol 
and  an  N-terminal  palmitic  acid  anchor  the  signaling 
domain to membranes and lipoprotein particles, which 
are  secreted  and  act  on  cells  up  to  30  cell  diameters 
distant from the source.

The Hedgehog signal transduction pathway is compli-
cated,  in  part  because  activation  is  achieved  by  inacti-
vating  inhibitors.  In  the  absence  of  Hedgehog,  active 
Patched  inhibits  Smoothened.  Hedgehog  binding  turns 
off  Patched  and  relieves  the  inhibition  of  Smoothened 
(the  first  inactivation  of  an  inhibitor  in  this  pathway). 
Active  Smoothened  assembles  a  complex  of  several 
proteins  that  inhibits  the  proteolytic  inactivation  of  a 
transcription factor called Ci (the second inactivation of 
an  inhibitor  in  this  pathway).  Active  Ci  controls  the 
expression of several genes required for cell fate speci-
fication and differentiation including Patched itself.

 

CHAPTER 24  n  Plasma Membrane Receptors 

421

Vertebrate  orthologs  of  the  proteins  that  form  the 
insect  Hedgehog  pathway  have  similar  functions,  regu-
lating  cellular  differentiation  in  many  tissues,  including 
formation of the neural tube. Mutations in one of three 
mammalian  Hedgehog  genes  (sonic  hedgehog)  cause 
widespread developmental defects that range from mild 
to grotesque, including a single eye in the middle of the 
face. Mutations in the gene for Patched cause basal cell 
carcinoma of the skin, the most common cancer in fair-
skinned people. Human Smoothened is a protooncogene; 
activating  mutations  prevent  its  inhibition  by  Patched 
and cause skin tumors. The Ci ortholog Gli1 is an onco-
gene that was originally discovered in brain tumors.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Dan Leahy for suggestions on revisions of this 
chapter.

SELECTED READINGS

Chillakuri  CR,  Sheppard  D,  Lea  SM,  Handford  PA.  Notch  receptor-
ligand  binding  and  activation:  insights  from  molecular  studies. 
Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2012;23:421-428.

Kang  JS,  Liu  C,  Derynck  R.  New  regulatory  mechanisms  of  TGF-beta 

receptor function. Trends Cell Biol. 2009;19:385-394.

Kovacs E, Zorn JA, Huang Y, et al. A structural perspective on the regu-
lation of the epidermal growth factor receptor. Annu Rev Biochem. 
2015;84:739-764.

Krzysztof  P.  G  protein–coupled  receptor  rhodopsin.  Annu  Rev 

Biochem. 2006;75:743-767.

Lefkowitz RJ, Whalen EJ. Beta-arrestins: Traffic cops of cell signaling. 

Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2004;16:162-168.

Lemmon MA, Schlessinger J. Cell signaling by receptor tyrosine kinases. 

Cell. 2010;141:1117-1134.

Massagué J. TGFβ signalling in context. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2012;

13:616-630.

Misono KS, Philo JS, Arakawa T, et al. Structure, signaling mechanism 
and regulation of the natriuretic peptide receptor guanylate cyclase. 
FEBS J. 2011;278:1818-1829.

Park PS, Filipek S, Wells JW, et al. Oligomerization of G protein-coupled 
receptors: past, present, and future. Biochemistry. 2004;43:15643-
15656.

Schoneberg T, Schulz A, Biebermann H, et al. Mutant G-protein-coupled 
receptors  as  a  cause  of  human  diseases.  Pharmacol  Ther.  2004;
104:173-206.

Thompson MD, Hendy GN, Percy ME, et al. G protein-coupled recep-
tor mutations and human genetic disease. Methods Mol Biol. 2014;
1175:153-187.

Venkatakrishnan AJ, Deupi X, Lebon G, et al. Molecular signatures of 

G-protein-coupled receptors. Nature. 2013;494:185-194.

Waters  MJ.  The  growth  hormone  receptor.  Growth  Horm  IGF  Res. 

2016;28:6-10.

Derbyshire ER, Marletta MA. Structure and regulation of soluble guanyl-

Zhang G. Tumor necrosis factor family ligand-receptor binding. Curr 

ate cyclase. Annu Rev Biochem. 2012;81:533-559.

Opin Struct Biol. 2004;14:154-160.

Ingham  PW,  Nakano  Y,  Seger  C.  Mechanisms  and  functions  of  
Hedgehog signalling across the metazoa. Nat  Rev  Genet. 2011;12:
393-406.

Zhang X, Gureasko J, Shen K, et al. An allosteric mechanism for activa-
tion of the kinase domain of epidermal growth factor receptor. Cell. 
2006;125:1137-1149.

APPENDIX 24.1 
Receptors and Ligands

Nature of Activation

Examples of Biological Function

Electrical
Electrical

Membrane repolarization
Action potential

Classes of Receptors
Activators
Voltage-Gated Ion Channels → Membrane Depolarization or Repolarization
Voltage-gated potassium channel
Voltage gated sodium channel
Ligand-Gated Ion Channels → Changes in Membrane Permeability
Acetylcholine (nicotinic)
Adenosine triphosphate
Glutamate (N-methyl-D-aspartate)
Glutamate (non–N-methyl-D-aspartate)
Glycine
Serotonin
Seven-Helix Receptors → Trimeric G Proteins → Diverse Responses
Acetylcholine (muscarinic)
Adrenocorticotropic hormone
Adenosine
Angiotensin II
Bradykinin
Calcitonin
Cholecystokinin

Biogenic amine
Peptide
Nucleoside
Peptide
Protein
Protein
Peptide

Biogenic amine
Nucleotide
Amino acid
Amino acid
Amino acid
Biogenic amine

Action potential
Change in membrane potential
Change in membrane potential
Change in membrane potential
Change in membrane potential
Change in membrane potential

Slows heart; stimulates intestinal secretion
Stimulates adrenal cortisol production
Dilates blood vessels
Stimulates aldosterone secretion; contracts smooth muscle
Stimulates intestinal secretion
Inhibits calcium resorption from bone
Stimulates intestinal secretion

Continued

422 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

APPENDIX 24.1 
Receptors and Ligands—cont’d

Nature of Activation
Protein
Biogenic amine
Lipid
Protein
Biogenic amine
Peptide
Protein
Amino acid
Peptide
Amino acid
Peptide
Amino acid
Protein
Protein
Photon
Lipid
Protein
Peptide
Biogenic amine
Organics
Alkaloids
Peptide
Protein
Protein
Lipid
Biogenic amine
Peptide
Protein
Protein
Peptide
Peptide
Protein

Examples of Biological Function
Classes of Receptors
Leukocyte chemoattractant
Complement (C5a, C3a)
Neurotransmitter; inhibits prolactin secretion
Dopamine
Promote or inhibit platelet aggregation, many other actions
Eicosanoids (prostaglandins)
Vasoconstriction
Endothelins
Glycogenolysis; increases cardiac contractility
Epinephrine
Leukocyte chemotaxis
F-met-leu-phe
Growth of ovarian follicle
Follicle-stimulating hormone
γ-Aminobutyric acid
Inhibitory neurotransmitter; stimulates intestinal secretion
Glycogenolysis; stimulates intestinal secretion
Glucagon
Modulates synaptic transmission
Glutamate
Stimulates secretion of growth hormone
Growth hormone–releasing factor
Allergic responses; vasodilation; stimulates secretion
Histamine
Chemotaxis of leukocytes
IL-8
Steroid production by ovarian granulosa cells
Luteinizing hormone
Vision
Light absorption by rhodopsin
Fibroblast proliferation, neurite retraction
Lysophosphatidic acid
Melanin synthesis
Melanocyte-stimulating hormone
Stimulates gastrointestinal and pancreatic secretion; neurotransmitter
Neurokinins (substance P)
Smooth muscle relaxation
Norepinephrine
Olfaction
Odorants
Alter mood, deaden pain, inhibit intestinal motility
Opioids
Contraction of uterus
Oxytocin
Bone calcium resorption
Parathyroid hormone
Secretion of pituitary hormones
Peptide-releasing factors
Platelet activation
Platelet-activating factor
Stimulates intestinal secretion
Serotonin
Inhibits secretion of growth hormone, insulin, and glucagon
Somatostatin
Activates platelets
Thrombin
Thyroid hormone secretion
Thyroid-stimulating hormone
Stimulates intestinal secretion
Vasoactive intestinal peptide
Regulates the permeability of the renal tubule to water
Vasopressin
Wingless (Wnt)
Modulates gene expression
Two-Component Systems: Receptor/Histidine Kinase → Response Regulator → Diverse Responses
Aspartate
Osmotic pressure
Receptor Tyrosine Kinase → Ras, MAP Kinase, PLC, PI3 Kinase → Alter Gene Expression
Epidermal growth factor
Fibroblast growth factor-α
Fibroblast growth factor-β
Hepatocyte growth factor (scatter factor)
Insulin
Insulin-like growth factor I
Macrophage colony-stimulating factor
Neurotrophins (nerve growth)
Platelet-derived growth factor
Steel ligand
Transforming growth factor-α
Vascular endothelial cell growth factor

Epithelial cell proliferation and differentiation
Mesoderm differentiation; fibroblast mitogen
Fibroblast mitogen
Epithelial cell mitogenesis, motility
Glucose uptake; cell growth
General body growth
Growth and differentiation of monocytes
Neural growth; neuron survival
Smooth muscle, fibroblast, glial growth and differentiation
Development of melanocytes, germ cells
Differentiation of connective tissue
Endothelial cell growth

Amino acid
Physical

Controls flagellar motor and chemotaxis
Regulates gene expression

Protein
Protein
Protein
Protein
Protein
Protein
Protein
Protein
Protein
Protein
Protein
Protein

 

CHAPTER 24  n  Plasma Membrane Receptors 

423

APPENDIX 24.1 
Receptors and Ligands—cont’d

Nature of Activation

Classes of Receptors
Cytokine Receptors → JAK Kinase → STAT Transcription Factors → Gene Expression
Ciliary neurotrophic factor
Erythropoietin
Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
Granulocyte-monocyte colony-

Protein
Protein
Protein
Protein

Survival/differentiation of neurons and glial cells
Growth and differentiation of red cell precursors
Growth and differentiation of granulocyte precursors
Growth and differentiation of leukocyte precursors

Examples of Biological Function

stimulating factor

Protein
Various

Peptide
Protein
Protein
Protein

Peptide

Peptide

Protein
Protein
Protein
Protein
Protein
Protein
Protein
Protein
Protein

Growth and differentiation of T lymphocytes
Growth and differentiation of B lymphocytes

Cell growth and differentiation of somatic cells
Growth factor for lymphocytes
Growth factor for hematopoietic stem cells
Regulates gene expression
Regulates gene expression
Regulates gene expression
Regulates gene expression
Macrophage and lymphocyte gene expression
Stimulates milk synthesis

Growth hormone
IL-2
IL-3
IL-4
IL-5
IL-6
Interferon α/β
Interferon γ
Prolactin
Tyrosine Kinase–Linked Receptors → Cytoplasmic Tyrosine Kinase → Gene Expression
MHC-peptide complex→T-cell receptor
Antigens→B-cell receptor
Receptor Serine/Threonine Kinase → SMAD Transcription Factors → Control of Gene Expression
Mesoderm development
Activin
Bone morphogenetic protein
Mesoderm development
Inhibition of gonadal stromal mitogenesis
Inhibins
Transforming growth factor-β
Growth arrest, mesoderm development
Membrane Guanylyl Cyclase Receptors → cGMP → Regulation of Kinases and Channels
Atrial natriuretic peptide
Heat-stable endotoxin, guanylin
Sea urchin egg peptides
Sphingomyelinase-Linked Receptors → Ceramide-Activated Kinases → Gene Expression
IL-1
Tumor necrosis factor
Integrins → Nonreceptor Tyrosine Kinases → Diverse Responses
Fibronectin, other matrix proteins
Selectins
Mucins
Cadherins
Like cadherins on another cell
Notch
Delta
Cytoplasmic Guanylyl Cyclase Receptors → cGMP → Kinases, cGMP-Gated Channels
Nitric oxide
Cytoplasmic Steroid Receptors → Active Transcription Factor → Gene Expression
Retinoic acid
Steroid hormones
Thyroid hormone

Cell growth and differentiation
Cell growth and differentiation
Cell growth and differentiation

Inflammation, wound healing
Inflammation, tumor cell death

Cell-surface protein

Cell fate determination

Organic
Steroids
Amino acid

Glycoproteins

Cell adhesion

Protein
Protein

Protein

Protein

Contact inhibition

Gas

Smooth muscle relaxation

Vasodilation; sodium excretion; intestinal secretion
Unknown
Fertilization

Cell motility, gene expression

cGMP, cyclic guanosine monophosphate; IL, interleukin; JAK, “just another kinase,” later renamed Janus kinase; MAP, mitogen-activated protein; MHC, 
major histocompatibility complex; PI3, phosphatidylinositol 3; PLC, phospholipase C; SMAD, Sma- and Mad-related protein; STAT, signal transducer and 
activator of transcription.

This page intentionally left blank

C H A P T E R 

25 

Protein Hardware for Signaling

This chapter introduces proteins that transduce signals 

in the cytoplasm: protein kinases, protein phosphatases, 
guanosine  triphosphatases  (GTPases),  and  adapter  pro-
teins.  Remarkably,  kinases  and  GTPases  use  the  same 
strategy to operate molecular switches that carry infor-
mation through signaling pathways: the simple covalent 
addition  and  removal  of  inorganic  phosphate.  Protein 
kinases add phosphate groups to specific protein targets, 
and  phosphatases  remove  them.  GTPases  bind  guano-
sine  triphosphate  (GTP)  and  hydrolyze  it  to  guanosine 
diphosphate (GDP) and inorganic phosphate (Pi), which 
dissociates. In both cases, the presence or absence of a 
single  phosphate  group  switches  a  protein  between 
active and inactive conformations.

Addition of phosphate is reversible, so both types of 
switches can be used as molecular timers that cycle on 
and off at tempos determined by the intrinsic properties 
of  the  switch  and  its  environment.  GTPases  are  active 
with  bound  GTP  and  switch  off  when  they  hydrolyze 
GTP to GDP. Similarly, phosphorylation activates many 
proteins but can inhibit others.

These molecular switches are often linked in series to 
form  a  signaling  cascade  that  can  both  transmit  and 
refine signals. Enzymes along signaling pathways (includ-
ing kinases) often act as amplifiers. Turning on the binary 
switch  of  one  enzyme  molecule  can  produce  many 
product molecules, each of which, in turn, may continue 
to propagate and amplify the original signal by activating 
downstream  molecules.  Many  pathways  include  nega-
tive  feedback loops. Few signaling pathways are linear; 
instead, most branch and intersect, allowing cells to inte-
grate information from multiple receptors and to control 
multiple  effector  systems  simultaneously.  Chapter  27 
illustrates the functions of molecular switches in several 
signaling pathways.

Protein Phosphorylation
Phosphorylation  is  an  extremely  common  posttransla-
tional modification of proteins; it regulates the activity of 
one  or  more  proteins  along  most  signaling  pathways. 
Among other things, phosphorylation and dephosphory-
lation  control  metabolic  enzymes,  cell  motility,  mem-
brane channels, assembly of the nucleus, and cell-cycle 
progression.  Phosphorylation  turns  some  processes  on 
and others off. In either case, both the addition of a phos-
phate by a protein kinase and its removal by a protein 
phosphatase are required to achieve regulation.

For historical and practical reasons, it has been easier 
to  study  protein  kinases  than  protein  phosphatases,  so 
most research and accounts of regulation by phosphory-
lation emphasize kinases (witness the 522,950 PubMed 
hits  for  “protein  kinase”  compared  with  72,899  for 
“protein phosphatase” in January 2016). Readers should 
understand  that  both  directions  are  important  on  this 
two-way street.

In eukaryotes, more than 99% of protein phosphoryla-
tion  occurs  on  serine  and  threonine  residues,  but 
phosphorylation  of  tyrosine  residues  regulates  many 
processes  in  animals  (Fig.  25.1).  Bacteria  and  Archaea 
use histidine and aspartate phosphorylation for signal-
ing  (see  Fig.  27.11),  but  these  modifications  are  little 
known  in  eukaryotes.  Phosphohistidine  and  phospho-
aspartate  are  more  difficult  to  assay  than  are  other 
phosphorylated residues, so pathways using these phos-
phoamino  acids  might  have  escaped  detection.  Less 
appreciated is that many serines and threonines (includ-
ing  some  modified  by  phosphorylation)  are  reversibly 
modified  by  O-linked  β-N-acetylglucosamine,  which  is 
much  larger  than  phosphate.  The  numerous  effects  of 
this modification are slowly emerging.

 425

426 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

Phosphoserine

–O

O–

O
P
O
CH2
N  C  C
H

O

Phosphothreonine

O–

O
–O P
O
C H

H3C

N  C  C
H

Phosphotyrosine

O

O
–O P
O

O–

CH2

N  C  C
H

O

Phosphohistidine

N3

O
O–P
O

O

HN

N

CH2

N  C  C
H

FIGURE  25.1  STRUCTURES  OF  PHOSPHOAMINO  ACIDS.  In  addition  to  the  N1  nitrogen  illustrated,  histidine  may  be  phosphorylated 
on N3. 

A

B

Phosphate
group

FIGURE  25.2  PHOSPHORYLATION  BLOCKS  SUBSTRATE 
BINDING TO ISOCITRATE DEHYDROGENASE. A, Surface repre-
sentation with isocitrate (red/gray) bound to the active site. B, Phos-
phorylation of serine 113 (yellow) blocks isocitrate binding. (For more 
information,  see  Protein  Data  Bank  [PDB;  www.rcsb.org]  files  3ICD 
and 4ICD.)

Effects of Phosphorylation on Protein Structure  
and Function
Despite its small size, phosphate is well suited to regu-
late the activity of proteins. The addition of a phosphate 
group with two negative charges to a single amino acid 
can alter the activity of a protein in several ways:
•  Direct interference. Addition of a phosphate group to 
the  active  site  of  the  metabolic  enzyme  isocitrate 
dehydrogenase blocks substrate binding (Fig. 25.2) by 
both  direct  steric  hindrance  and  electrostatic  repul-
sion  of  negatively  charged  substrates.  Phosphoryla-
tion also can directly block protein interactions, such 
as  the  polymerization  of  intermediate  filaments  (see 
Fig.  44.6)  and  binding  of  cofilin  to  actin  monomers 
and filaments (see Fig. 33.16). Electrostatic repulsion 
caused  by  phosphorylation  regulates  interactions 
between kinetochores and microtubules in mitosis.

•  Conformational change. A phosphate group can par-
ticipate in hydrogen bonds and electrostatic interac-
tions distinct from those of the hydroxyl group that 
it replaces on an amino acid side chain. These interac-
tions  of  phosphorylated  residues  may  change  the  
conformation of the protein. For example, phosphor-
ylation activates the insulin receptor tyrosine kinases 
by inducing a dramatic change in a polypeptide loop 
in  the  active  site  (Fig.  25.3E).  Phosphorylation  of  
a  single  serine  activates  the  metabolic  enzyme 

glycogen  phosphorylase  by  stabilizing  a  compact, 
active conformation.

•  Creation  of  binding  sites.  Phosphorylated  residues 
participate  in  many  protein  interactions  (see  Fig. 
25.10A). Phosphorylated tyrosines act as MARKS recog-
nized  by  READERS,  such  as  SH2  (Src  homology  2) 
domains and phosphotyrosine-binding (PTB) domains 
to  regulate  protein-protein  interactions.  A  phospho-
serine is required on protein ligands for binding 14-3-3 
domains, some WW domains, and some FHA domains. 
Phosphotyrosine  and  SH2  domains  were  the  first 
MARK/READER pair to be identified (see Chapter 8).

Protein Kinases
Protein kinases catalyze the transfer of the γ-phosphate 
from  adenosine  triphosphate  (ATP)  to  amino  acid  side 
chains  of  proteins.  Eukaryotes  have  numerous  kinase 
genes:  116  in  budding  yeast  (second  to  transcription 
factor genes), 409 in nematode worms (second only to 
seven-helix  receptor  genes),  and  544  in  humans.  Most 
in  eukaryotes  are  either  serine/
protein  kinases 
threonine  kinases  or  tyrosine  kinases  (Appendix 
25.1),  but  a  few  kinases  phosphorylate  all  three  amino 
acids.  Some  of  these  kinases  (55  in  humans)  lack  resi-
dues  normally  required  for  kinase  activity.  Some  pseu-
dokinases  have  residual  enzyme  activity,  but  usually 
they  regulate  active  kinases.

Most  serine/threonine  and  tyrosine  kinases  had  a 
common evolutionary origin and share similar structures 
and  catalytic  mechanisms,  despite  extensive  sequence 
divergence and differences in substrate specificity. Tyro-
sine  kinases  emerged  in  animals.  Nevertheless,  fungi 
have phosphotyrosine owing to two families of serine/
threonine  kinases  that  also  phosphorylate  tyrosine. 
Three protein tyrosine phosphatases reverse these reac-
tions.  A  family  of  40  “atypical”  protein  kinases  had  a 
separate  origin  from  the  major  family.  Lipid  kinases 
have a catalytic domain related to typical protein kinases. 
They  phosphorylate  inositol  phospholipids  (see  Fig. 
26.7) or a few proteins.

The  catalytic  domain  of  eukaryotic  protein  kinases 
consists  of  approximately  260  residues  in  two  lobes 

 

CHAPTER 25  n  Protein Hardware for Signaling 

427

A. PKA ribbon

PKA surface

B. PKA + PKI surface

ATP

Substrate
  binding
  site

PKI

C. c-Src

SH3
N

SH2

PPII helix

NT lobe

Y 416

D. PKA bound  to RI inhibitor

C-subunit

Y 527

C

CT lobe

R-subunit

E. Insulin receptor tyrosine kinase

F

D 1150

D 1132

Y 1163

Y 1158

Y 1162

D 1150

Y 1158

Y 1163

AMP-PNP

D 1132

Y(P)

Y 1162

Inactive

Active (triphosphorylated)

FIGURE 25.3  PROTEIN KINASE STRUCTURES. A, Ribbon diagram and space-filling model of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-
dependent protein kinase with a nonhydrolyzable adenosine triphosphate (ATP) analog (red) bound to the active site. The adenine base of the 
ATP fits into a hydrophobic cleft formed by β-sheets lining the interface of the two lobes. The phosphates bind to conserved residues in loops 
connecting the β-strands. (See PDB file 2CPK.) B, Space-filling model of protein kinase A (PKA) with bound protein kinase inhibitor (PKI). The 
location  of  this  inhibitory  peptide  revealed  the  binding  site  for  protein  substrates.  (See  PDB  file  1FMO.)  C,  Ribbon  diagram  of  c-Src.  When 
tyrosine-527  is  phosphorylated,  the  SH2  (Src  homology  2)  domain  binds  intramolecularly  to  the  C-terminus,  locking  the  kinase  in  an  inactive 
conformation. The N-terminal SH3 (Src homology 3) domain binds intramolecularly to a proline-rich sequence (PPII helix) connecting the SH2 
and kinase domains. NT and CT are the N- and C-terminal lobes of the kinase domain. D, Ribbon diagram of PKA bound to the RIα regulatory 
subunit. The pseudo substrate peptide (yellow) sits in the active site. Binding of cAMP to two sites on the RIα subunit causes a conformational 
change that dissociates RIα from the catalytic subunit. (See PDB file 3FHI.) E, Insulin receptor tyrosine kinase. Ribbon diagram and space-filling 
model with the catalytic loop in orange and the activation loop in green. (See PDB file 1IRK.) F, Space-filling model of insulin receptor tyrosine 
kinase triphosphorylated on the activation loop. This rearranges the activation loop, allowing substrates (pink with a white tyrosine side chain) 
access to the active site. AMP-PNP is a nonhydrolyzable analog of ATP with nitrogen bridging the β- and γ-phosphates. (See PDB file 1IR3.) 
(E–F, Space-filling models courtesy Steven Hubbard, New York University, New York.)

surrounding  the  ATP-binding  pocket  (Fig.  25.3).  Each 
kinase phosphorylates a restricted range of protein sub-
strates that bind to a groove on the surface of the kinase 
with the side chain of the residue to be phosphorylated 
positioned  in  the  active  site  (Fig.  25.3B).  Typically,  all 

substrates that bind a particular kinase have similar resi-
dues  surrounding  the  target  serine,  threonine,  or  tyro-
sine (a consensus target sequence). For example, the 
consensus  sequence  for  protein  kinase  A  (PKA)  is  
Arg-Arg-Gly-Ser/Thr-Ile.  The  arginines  and  isoleucine 

Catalytic
subunit

CM

CM

PS

PS

cGMP

cGMP

DAG

DAG

Ca

PS

PH

Kinase

Kinase

Kinase

Kinase

Kinase

Kinase

PKG

CaMK II

MLCK

PKCα

PKB/AKt

TGF-β R

428 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

Serine / threonine kinases
cAMP

cAMP

PKA

RII
subunit

Tyrosine kinases

TM

Kinase

100 res

Src

Btk

N

FGFR

SH3

SH2

Kinase

Y

PH

SH3

SH2

Kinase

C

Ig

Ig

Ig

TM

Kinase

FIGURE  25.4  PROTEIN  KINASE  DOMAIN  ARCHITECTURE. 
See  Appendix  25.1  for  definitions  of  the  kinase  names.  Btk,  Bruton 
tyrosine  kinase;  Ca,  calcium-binding  site;  cAMP  and  cGMP,  cyclic 
nucleotide–binding sites; CM, overlapping pseudosubstrate/calmodulin- 
binding site; DAG, diacylglycerol-binding site; FGFR, fibroblast growth 
factor receptor; Ig, immunoglobulin domains; PH, pleckstrin homology 
domain; PS, pseudosubstrate sequences; SH2 and SH3, Src homol-
ogy domains; TM, transmembrane domain. 

flanking  the  target  serine  or  threonine  residue  specify 
binding  to  PKA.  Interactions  outside  the  catalytic  site 
may also contribute to specific binding.

In  addition  to  the  catalytic  domain,  most  protein 
kinases have other domains for regulation or localization 
(Fig. 25.4). Single transmembrane helices anchor recep-
tor  kinases  to  membranes.  Many  receptor  tyrosine 
kinases have tyrosine residues inserted within the kinase 
domain  and  at  the  C-terminus.  Phosphorylation  of  
these tyrosines creates binding sites for effector proteins 
with SH2 (Src homology 2) domains (see Figs. 27.6, 27.7, 
and 27.8).

Prokaryotes  generally  lack  serine/threonine/tyrosine 
kinases but use a large family of histidine kinases for 
signal  transduction  (see  Fig.  27.11).  These  prokaryotic 
kinases differ in structure, mechanism and evolutionary 
origin  from  eukaryotic  kinases.  A  few  bacteria  have 
acquired eukaryotic kinases by lateral transfer of genes.

Regulation of Protein Kinases
Each kinase has its own regulatory mechanism, but most 
involve  multiple  strategies  including  phosphorylation 
and  interactions  with  intrinsic  peptides  or  extrinsic 
proteins.

Phosphorylation
Phosphorylation by the same type of kinase or another 
kinase  can  either  activate  or  inhibit  protein  kinases. 
When  linked  in  series,  different  types  of  kinases  form 
signaling  cascades  that  can  amplify  and  sharpen  the 
response to a stimulus (Fig. 27.5):

•  Activation  by  phosphorylation.  This  is  the  most 
common way to regulate kinases. For example, phos-
phorylation of three tyrosines on an activation loop 
activates the insulin receptor kinase. Phosphorylation 
refolds the activation loop, allowing substrates access 
to the active site and bringing together the residues 
required  for  catalysis  (Fig.  25.3D).  Acti vation  loop 
phosphorylation also turns on other receptor tyrosine 
kinases,  Src-family  tyrosine  kinases  (Fig.  25.3C;  see 
also  Box  27.5),  mitogen-activated  protein  (MAP) 
kinases (Fig. 27.5), cyclin-dependent kinases (see Fig. 
40.14),  and  calcium-calmodulin–dependent  kinases 
(Fig. 25.4).

•  Inhibition  by  phosphorylation.  Phosphorylation  of 
myosin light-chain kinase by PKA reduces its affinity 
for  its  protein  substrate,  and  phosphorylation  of 
platelet-derived  growth 
factor  receptor  tyrosine 
kinase by protein kinase C (PKC) inhibits its activity. 
Phosphorylation of a C-terminal tyrosine inhibits Src-
family tyrosine kinases by creating an intramolecular 
binding site for an SH2 domain at the N-terminus (Fig. 
25.3C). This interaction traps the kinase in an inactive 
conformation.  Phosphorylation  also  inhibits  cyclin-
dependent cell-cycle kinases by blocking ATP binding 
(see Fig. 40.14).

Regulation of Substrate Binding
Peptides that are intrinsic to the kinase or part of a sepa-
rate  protein  can  inhibit  kinases  by  competing  with 
protein substrates for binding to the enzyme (Figs. 25.3B 
and D and 25.4):
•  Extrinsic regulation by inhibitory subunits. Separate 
regulatory  (R)  subunits  inhibit  PKA  by  blocking 
the  protein  substrate  site  with  a  pseudosubstrate 
(Figs.  25.3D  and  25.4).  Pseudosubstrates  have  con-
sensus  target  sequences  lacking  the  phosphorylated 
residue.  For  example,  RI  pseudosubstrate  has  the 
sequence Arg-Arg-Gly-Ala-Ile, which binds in the sub-
strate groove but is not phosphorylated. The RII pseu-
dosubstrate has a serine, which is phosphorylated by 
PKA  but  then  does  not  dissociate  from  the  catalytic 
subunit like phosphorylated substrates. Cyclic adenos-
ine monophosphate (cAMP) regulates the affinity of 
these regulatory subunits for the PKA catalytic subunit. 
In resting cells, the regulatory subunit is free of cAMP 
and  binds  the  catalytic  subunit  with  high  affinity.  
With  a  rise  in  cAMP  concentration  (see  Fig.  26.3), 
cAMP binds the regulatory subunit, dissociates it from  
the catalytic subunit, and allows substrates access to 
the  active  site.  Regulatory  proteins  inhibit  cyclin- 
dependent kinases by blocking access of ATP or cyclin 
(see Fig. 40.14).

•  Autoinhibition. Many kinases have an intrinsic pseu-
dosubstrate sequence (Fig. 25.4) that binds intramo-
lecularly to the active site, autoinhibiting the enzyme 
(Fig.  25.3B).  Ca2+-calmodulin  activates  myosin 

 

CHAPTER 25  n  Protein Hardware for Signaling 

429

light-chain  kinase  and  calmodulin-activated  kinase 
(CaMK)  by  displacing  the  pseudosubstrate from the 
active site. Cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) 
binding  to  protein  kinase  G  (PKG)  displaces  the  
autoinhibitory  peptide  from  the  catalytic  domain,  
activating the enzyme.

•  Extrinsic  regulation  by  activating  proteins. Regula-
tory  proteins  activate  some  protein  kinases.  For 
example, cyclins activate cyclin-dependent cell-cycle 
kinases (Cdks) (see Fig. 40.14).

Targeting
Several  mechanisms  target  kinases  to  specific  cellular 
locations, bringing them close to their substrates. Target-
ing helps explain how kinases with broad specificity can 
have specific effects in particular cells:
•  The  intracellular  location  of  PKA  is  determined  by 
both its RI and RII subunits and a family of A kinase–
anchoring  proteins  (AKAPs).  When  the  cAMP 
concentration  is  low,  regulatory  subunits  bind  and 
inhibit PKA. RII subunits also bind to AKAPs, which 
target the inhibited PKA catalytic subunit to cellular 
locations,  including  centrosomes,  actin  filaments, 
microtubules,  endoplasmic  reticulum,  peroxisomes, 
mitochondria,  or  plasma  membrane.  An  increase  in 
cytoplasmic cAMP releases active PKA in close prox-
imity to particular substrates. Once freed from RI or 
RII subunits by cAMP, the active PKA catalytic subunit 
can migrate into the nucleus, where it encounters a 
different  array  of  substrates  and  regulates  gene  tran-
scription (see Fig. 26.3F). The inhibitory protein PKI 
(protein  kinase  inhibitor)  (Fig.  25.3B)  is  capable  of 
capturing  PKA  in  the  nucleus  and  targeting  it  for 
transport  back  to  the  cytoplasm.  Some  AKAPs  bind 
other protein kinases, such as PKC and phosphatases 
(PP2B).  Similar  to  AKAPs,  a  three-protein  module, 
including  INCENP,  survivin,  and  borealin,  binds  and 
targets aurora-B kinase to centromeres early in mitosis 
and  the  central  spindle  and  cleavage  furrow  late  in 
mitosis (see Fig. 44.10).

•  Pleckstrin  homology  (PH)  domains  (Fig.  25.10A) 
and lipid tags target some kinases to lipid bilayers. A 
PH domain directs PKB/Akt to membrane polyphos-
phoinositides.  This  interaction  with  lipids  opens  up 
sites on the catalytic domain for phosphorylation and 
activation  by  phosphoinositide-dependent  protein 
kinase  1  (PDK1),  another  kinase  with  a  PH  domain. 
An  N-terminal  myristic  acid  anchors  Src  tyrosine 
kinase to the plasma membrane (see Fig. 7.10).

•  Phosphorylation  induces  the  MAP  kinase  extracel-
lular signal-regulated kinase 2 (ERK2) to form homo-
dimers,  triggering  movement  of  the  dimer  into  the 
nucleus,  where  it  regulates  gene  expression  (see  
Fig. 27.6).

•  A  scaffolding  protein  called  STE5,  first  identified  in 
yeast, brings together three protein kinases that form 

part  of  the  cascade  of  kinases  that  activate  MAP 
kinases (see Fig. 27.5).

Kinases and Disease
Unregulated kinases—for example, the receptor tyrosine 
kinase  RET  in  endocrine  cancers  and  cyclin-dependent 
kinase 4 (Cdk4) in melanoma—predispose individuals to 
cancer. Most patients with chronic myelogenous leuke-
mia  have  a  gene  rearrangement  that  produces  a  fusion 
of  the  protein  bcr  and  c-abl,  a  nonreceptor  tyrosine 
kinase. The constitutively active fusion protein promotes 
the  transformation  of  white  blood  cell  precursors  into 
cancer cells. The most effective treatment is with a drug 
called imatinib mesylate (Gleevec), which inhibits bcr-abl 
kinase activity. Additional drugs are being developed to 
inhibit other hyperactive protein kinases that drive the 
proliferation  of  other  cancer  cells.  Their  therapeutic 
potential is great, but cancer cells acquire mutations in 
the  target  kinase  that  readily  prevent  binding  of  the 
drugs and result in relapse of the tumor.

Protein Phosphatases
Eukaryotes  have  several  families  of  protein  phospha-
tases  that  remove  phosphate  from  amino  acid  side  
chains (Table 25.1 and Fig. 25.5). Like protein kinases, 
most  protein  phosphatases  are  active  toward  either 
phosphoserine-threonine  or  phosphotyrosine,  although 
several  dual-specificity  phosphatases  can  dephosphory-
late  all  three  residues.  Each  of  the  90  human  tyrosine 
phosphatases  is  thought  to  act  on  a  limited  number  of 
substrates. The 20 human serine-threonine phosphatases 
achieve specificity by associating with an array of acces-
sory subunits, which regulate enzyme activity and target 
catalytic  subunits  to  particular  substrates.  Domains  
flanking the catalytic domains may also regulate enzyme 
activity (Fig. 25.6). For example, phosphorylation regu-
lates  binding  of  some  phosphatases  to  their  targeting 
subunits.

PPP Family of Serine/Threonine Phosphates
Members of the PPP family of serine/threonine phos-
phatases are found in Bacteria, Archaea, and all tissues 
of  eukaryotes.  All  three  PPP  subfamilies  (Table  25.1) 
share the same catalytic fold with a two-metal ion cluster 
(Fe2+ and Zn2+ in vivo) in the active site (Fig. 25.5A). PP1 
and PP2A are two of the most evolutionarily conserved 
enzymes.

Diverse regulatory subunits determine the substrates 
for PP1 and PP2A by targeting catalytic subunits to spe-
cific  sites  in  the  cell  (Table  25.1).  For  example,  more 
than 50 proteins target a 38-kD catalytic subunit of PP1 
to specific substrates. M subunits not only target PP1 to 
smooth  muscle  myosin-II  but  also  create  an  active  site 
specific for the regulatory light chains relative to other 
substrates.  Dephosphorylation  of  light  chains  relaxes 
smooth  muscle  (see  Fig.  39.24).  G  subunits  regulate 

430 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

TABLE 25.1  Protein Phosphatases
Catalytic Subunit
Serine/Threonine Phosphatases
PPP Family
PP1C subfamily

Regulatory Elements

PP2A subfamily = catalytic, 

A and B subunits

PP2B (calcineurin) = catalytic 

A subunit + B subunit

PPM Family
PP2C

Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases
PTP Family
Cytosolic PTPs (PTP1B, 

>50 regulatory subunits target 
and regulate catalytic subunit
B subunits target and regulate 

core enzyme

Calcium-calmodulin activates by 
binding autoinhibitory peptide

Inhibitors

Regulated Functions

Okadaic acid
Microcystin
Okadaic acid
Microcystin
Cyclosporine-cyclophilin
FK506 (tacrolimus)-FKBP

Glycogen metabolism, muscle 

contraction, cell cycle, mRNA splicing
MAP kinase pathway, metabolism, cell 

cycle

T-lymphocyte activation, brain NMDA 

receptor signaling

Integral N- or C-terminal 

Unsaturated fatty acids

Antagonism of stress-activated kinases

peptides

SH2 and other domains target to 

Vanadate

Various signaling pathways

SHP1, SHP2)

substrates

Transmembrane PTPs (CD45, 

Homodimerization may inhibit 

Vanadate

Lymphocyte activation

RPTPµ, RPTPα)

Dual-Specificity Family (MAP 
kinase phosphatases, etc.)
Cdc25 Family

Low Molecular Weight Family 
(acid phosphatases)

activity

MAP kinase pathway

Polo kinase, CDKs, 

phosphatases

Located in lysosomes

Sulfuretin, coscinosulfate

Cell cycle

—

Unknown

CDK, cyclin-dependent kinase; FKBP, FK-binding protein; MAP, mitogen-activated protein; mRNA, messenger RNA; NMDA, N-methyl-D-aspartate; SH2, Src 
homology 2.

A. Serine/threonine
     phosphatases

B. Tyrosine phosphatases

* = Active site

*

*

*

*

*

*

PPP family: PP1α1

PPM family: PP2C

PTP family: RPTPα

Dual specificity

family: VHR

Cdc25A

Low molecular

weight

FIGURE 25.5  PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE STRUCTURES (RED ASTERISKS MARK THE ACTIVE SITES). A, Serine-threonine phospha-
tases:  PP1α1  (PDB  file  1FJM)  and  PP2C  (PDB  file  1LR4).  B,  Four  families  of  protein  tyrosine  phosphatases:  receptor  tyrosine  phosphatase 
RPTPα (PDB file 1YFO), dual-specificity phosphatase VHR (PDB file 1VHR), Cdc25A (PDB file 1C25), and low-molecular-weight phosphatase 
(PDB file 1PNT). 

glucose metabolism by targeting PP1 to glycogen parti-
cles,  where  it  dephosphorylates  two  enzymes  that 
control glycogen metabolism. Fig. 27.3 explains how the 
hormone  adrenaline  activates  PKA,  which  phosphory-
lates  the  G  subunit,  allowing  enzymes  to  break  down 
glycogen  into  glucose-6-phosphate.  A  65-kD  scaffold 
subunit  and  several  B  subunits  regulate  PP2A,  which 
dephosphorylates many substrates, including kinases in 
the  MAP  kinase  cascade  (see  Fig.  27.5).  The  inhibitors 
okadaic  acid  (a  polyketide  from  dinoflagellates)  and 
microcystin  (a  cyclic  peptide  from  cyanobacteria)  

block  access  of  substrates  to  the  active  sites  of  PP1  
and PP2A.

PP2B,  also  known  as  calcineurin,  is  the  only  cyto-
plasmic  phosphatase  regulated  by  Ca2+.  The  A  subunit 
has  the  phosphatase  active  site.  The  A  subunit  has  an 
autoinhibitory  segment  that  blocks  its  own  active  site. 
An  increase  in  cytoplasmic  Ca2+  activates  PP2B  by  first 
binding  to  calmodulin.  Calcium-calmodulin  then  binds 
the  autoinhibitory  segment  and  displaces  it  from  the 
active  site.  The  transcription  factor  NF-AT  (nuclear 
factor–activated  T  cells)  is  the  best  known  substrate.  

 

CHAPTER 25  n  Protein Hardware for Signaling 

431

A. Serine / threonine phosphatases
PPP family
PP1C

N

Catalytic

PP2A

PP2B (calcineurin)

PPM family
PP2C

Catalytic

Catalytic

Catalytic

C

CB

CM Auto-

inhibitory

B. Protein tyrosine phosphatases
PTP family
PTP1B

FNIII

FNIII

FNIII

CD45

TM

Catalytic

Dual specificity
MAPK-P

Cdc25

Low molecular weight

Inactive
Cys

Catalytic

Cys

Catalytic

Cys

Catalytic

Cys

Inactive

Cys

Catalytic

100 res

FIGURE 25.6  PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE DOMAIN ARCHITEC-
TURE:  SCALE  LINEAR  MODELS.  A,  Serine-threonine  phospha-
tases.  B,  Protein  tyrosine  phosphatases.  The  five  different  catalytic 
domain folds are coded with different colors. CB, calcium binding; CM, 
calmodulin-binding;  FNIII,  fibronectin  III;  MAPK,  mitogen-activated 
protein kinase; TM, transmembrane segment. 

Fig. 27.8 explains how activated T-cell receptors turn on 
PP2B,  which  dephosphorylates  NF-AT,  allowing  it  to 
enter the nucleus and turn on expression of several lym-
phocyte  growth  factors.  PP2B  is  the  indirect  target  of 
two  potent  drugs  that  inhibit  the  immune  rejection  of 
transplanted  organs.  These  drugs—cyclosporine  and 
FK506—bind two different small proteins: cyclophilin 
and FK-binding protein. Both drug–protein complexes 
inhibit  PP2B  by  blocking  the  active  site.  This  prevents 
expression  of  genes  regulated  by  NF-AT.  Cyclosporine 
revolutionized human organ transplantation by suppress-
ing the immune response.

PPM Family of Serine/Threonine Phosphates
Members  of  the  large  PPM  family  of  serine/threonine 
phosphatases  are  found  in  bacteria,  plants,  fungi,  and 
animals.  The  catalytic  domain  is  incorporated  into  a 
variety  of  polypeptides  with  additional  domains  that 
confer  specificity  toward  substrates  such  as  stress-
activated  kinases  and  mitochondrial  dehydrogenases. 
The structures of PPMs and PPPs are unrelated, but both 
have  two  metal  ions  in  the  active  site  (Mg2+  for  PPM), 
and  both  catalyze  the  same  phosphomonoester  hydro-
lytic reaction. This is thought to be an example of con-
vergent evolution toward similar active sites.

Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases
The  107  human  protein  tyrosine  phosphatases  (PTPs 
[Table  25.1])  regulate  lymphocyte  activation,  the  cell 
cycle, and many other processes by reversing the actions 

of  protein  tyrosine  kinases.  Some  PTPs  are  tumor  sup-
pressors  regulating  cell  proliferation,  so  somatic  muta-
tions  that  inactivate  these  enzymes  are  common  in 
cancer  cells.  On  the  other  hand,  dephosphorylation  of 
tyrosine  activates  other  proteins,  such  as  Src  tyrosine 
kinase (Fig. 25.3C) and cyclin-dependent protein kinases 
(see  Fig.  40.14).  Eleven  human  PTP  genes  encode  pro-
teins that are missing key catalytic residues, so they must 
have other functions.

The four families of PTPs represent a remarkable evo-
lutionary  tale.  PTPs  and  dual-specificity  phosphatases 
derived from a common ancestor and have similar three-
dimensional structures, while Cdc25 and low-molecular-
weight  tyrosine  phosphatases  have  different  folds,  so 
they arose from different ancestors (Fig. 25.5B). Never-
theless, all four families converged to have similar active 
sites  that  bind  phosphotyrosine  in  a  deep,  narrow 
pocket,  transfer  the  phosphate  to  the  sulfur  atom  of  a 
cysteine  in  the  sequence  Cys-x-x-x-x-x-Arg,  and  release 
the  phosphate  in  the  rate-limiting  step,  when  water 
attacks the phosphocysteine intermediate.

Some  PTPs  have  multiple  substrates  including  phos-
phoinositides, while others are limited to a few protein 
substrates.  Localization  contributes  additional  specific-
ity.  For  example,  the  transmembrane  segment  that 
anchors  CD45  to  the  plasma  membrane  (Fig.  25.6) 
enhances  its  access  to  some  substrates  and  restricts  its 
access to other substrates.

PTP Subfamily
The 38 human PTPs have catalytic domains with about 
230  residues  that  favor  phosphotyrosine  as  a  substrate 
by a factor of 105 over phosphoserine or phosphothreo-
nine.  Transient  oxidation  of  the  catalytic  cysteine  by 
hydrogen peroxide accompanies activation of some sig-
naling pathways that depend on phosphorylation of tyro-
sines, such as the insulin pathway (see Fig. 27.7).

Many PTPs are located in the cytoplasm where they 
may  be  bound  to  cellular  partners.  Adapter  domains, 
such as SH2 domains, bind the phosphatases SHP-1 and 
SHP-2 to phosphotyrosines. C-terminal hydrophobic resi-
dues  bind  the  phosphatase  PTP1B  to  the  endoplasmic 
reticulum. Eight families of human PTPs are transmem-
brane proteins. A single transmembrane segment links a 
variety  of  extracellular  domains  to  one  or  two  PTP 
domains  in  the  cytoplasm  (Fig.  25.6).  The  membrane 
proximal PTP domain has phosphatase activity. In most 
cases,  the  second  PTP  domain  is  inactive.  Extracellular 
domains  of  some  transmembrane  PTPs  bind  extracel-
lular matrix glycoproteins or the same protein on other  
cells.  Some  of  these  extracellular  ligands  can  inhibit 
phosphatase  activity,  but  much  remains  to  be  learned 
about the regulation of these PTPs.

CD45  (also  called  RPTPc),  the  best-characterized 
transmembrane PTP, constitutes a remarkable 10% of the 
plasma membrane protein of human lymphocytes. CD45 

432 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

is required for antigens to activate B and T lymphocytes 
(see  Fig.  27.8)  where  it  dephosphorylates  inhibitory 
phosphotyrosine residues of Src-family tyrosine kinases 
(Fig. 25.3C). Lymphocytes that lack CD45 fail to release 
intracellular Ca2+, secrete lymphokines, or proliferate in 
response to antigen stimulation.

Dual-Specificity Subfamily
The  dual-specificity  phosphatases  prefer  phosphotyro-
sine as a substrate, but can also dephosphorylate serine 
and threonine at approximately 1% of that rate. The most 
studied members of this group, the MAP kinase phospha-
tases (MKPs), inactivate MAP kinases by dephosphory-
lating  both  phosphotyrosine  and  phosphothreonine 
residues  (see  Fig.  25.5B).  Divergent  members  of  this 
family,  such  as  the  PTEN  (phosphatase  and  tensin) 
phosphatase,  remove  phosphate  from  the  D-3  position 
of polyphosphoinositides (see Fig. 26.7).

Cdc25 Subfamily
Cdc25  removes  inhibitory  phosphates  from  threonine 
and  tyrosine  residues  on  the  master  cell-cycle  kinases 
Cdk1  and  Cdk2,  releasing  these  enzymes  to  promote 
cell-cycle progression (see Fig. 43.7). This is an example 
of a phosphatase activating a biological process.

Cooperation Between Kinases and Phosphatases
Some  protein  phosphatases  are  stably  associated  with 
their  substrate  proteins.  One  example  is  the  dual-
specificity MAP kinase phosphatase-3 (MKP-3), which is 
bound  to  MAP  kinase  (see  Fig.  27.6).  Following  activa-
tion by upstream kinases, this MAP kinase is active only 
transiently,  owing  to  dephosphorylation  by  the  associ-
ated phosphatase. These have been called self-correcting 
signal complexes, but more broadly speaking, this is an 
example of a biological timer.

Pharmacological Agents for Studying  
Protein Phosphatases
Inhibitors of protein phosphatases (Table 25.1) are used 
to explore the biological functions of these enzymes, but 
few of these inhibitors are entirely specific for one phos-
phatase.  Development  of  specific  inhibitors  of  protein 
phosphatases is challenging because these enzymes have 
similar active sites and achieve their specificity primarily 
via targeting subunits rather than substrate recognition.

Guanosine Triphosphate–Binding Proteins
Cells  use  GTP-binding  proteins  (called  GTPases  or 
G-proteins)  to  regulate  a  host  of  functions,  including 
protein synthesis, signal transduction from plasma mem-
brane  receptors,  cytoskeleton  assembly,  membrane 
traffic, and nuclear transport (Appendix 25.2). Genes for 
GTPases are ancient, as all forms of life use GTPases to 
regulate  protein  synthesis.  The  other  three  classes  of 

A. Ras-GDP (inactive)

B. Ras-GTP (active)

GTP

GDP

Switch I

Switch II

C. EF-Tu-GDP (inactive)

D. EF-Tu-GTP (active)

GDP

D1

GTP

D2

D3

FIGURE 25.7  GTPase ATOMIC STRUCTURES. Ribbon models 
with  ball-and-stick  models  of  bound  nucleotides.  Switch  I  is  green, 
and switch II is red. A, Ras-GDP (PDB file 1Q21). B, Ras-GTP (PDB 
file 121P). C, EF-Tu-GDP (PDB file 1TUI). D, EF-Tu-GTP. GTP (PDB file 
1EFT) hydrolysis and phosphate dissociation cause major changes in 
the  conformations  of  the  switch  loops  of  both  proteins  and  of  the 
orientations of the D2 and D3 domains of EF-Tu. 

GTPases  are  small  GTPases  related  to  Ras,  trimeric 
G-proteins,  and  dynamin-related  GTPases.  The  small 
GTPases  appeared  during  evolution  in  Lokiarchaeota, 
the  archaeal  progenitor  of  eukaryotes  (see  Fig.  2.4B). 
Gene  duplication  and  divergence  created  multiple  iso-
forms within these classes to provide more specificity.

All  these  GTPases  share  a  core  domain  that  binds  a 
guanine nucleotide (Fig. 25.7) and use a common enzy-
matic cycle of GTP binding, hydrolysis, and product dis-
sociation  to  switch  the  protein  on  and  off  (Fig.  25.8). 
The core GTP-binding domain consists of approximately 
200  residues  folded  into  a  β-sheet  of  six  strands  sand-
wiched between five α-helices (Fig. 25.7). GTP binds in 
a shallow groove formed largely by loops at the ends of 
elements of secondary structure. A network of hydrogen 
bonds  between  the  protein  and  guanine  base,  ribose, 
triphosphate, and Mg2+ anchor the nucleotide. The archi-
tecture  of  the  GTPase  domain  was  maintained  during 
evolution despite differences between the major classes 
in approximately 80% of the residues.

All GTPases use the same enzyme cycle. The confor-
mation of a GTPase depends on whether GTP or GDP is 
bound.  The  active  GTP-bound  conformation  interacts 
with  effector  proteins.  The  GDP  conformation  is  inac-
tive, because it does not bind effectors (Fig. 4.7). Chapter 
4 explains how the mechanism was determined.

The  GTPase  cycle  (Fig.  25.8)  consists  of  four  steps: 
(1) Rapid binding of GTP is coupled to changes in the 

 

CHAPTER 25  n  Protein Hardware for Signaling 

433

Inactive

G

GDP

4

Rate
limiting

GEF

GDI

GD

GTP

Active

GT

Slow
timer

2

GDP

A. Simple

1

Fast

Fast

3

Pi

B. Heterotrimeric
GTP

Inactive

GDP

R • Gαβγ D

R • Gαβγ

4c Fast

4b Rate limiting

1

R

Active

All active
+
+

Gβγ

T
Gα

GAP

D
Gαβγ

R

4a

D
Gα

2

Effectors
RGS
GAPs

DP
Gα

Gβγ

3

Pi

FIGURE 25.8  COMPARISON OF THE GTPASE CYCLES OF RAS AND A TRIMERIC G-PROTEIN. The size of the arrows indicates the 
relative rates of the reactions. A, GTPase cycle of Ras. B, GTPase cycle and subunit cycle of a trimeric G-protein. R is a seven-helix receptor. 
Regulators of G-protein signaling (RGS) and some effector proteins stimulate GTP hydrolysis. GAP, GTPase-activating protein; GD, GTPase with 
bound GDP; GDI, guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitor; GDP, GTPase with bound GDP and inorganic phosphate; GEF, guanine nucleotide 
exchange factor; GT, GTPase with bound GTP. 

conformations  of  three  segments  of  the  polypeptide 
called  switch-I,  switch-II,  and  switch-III.  In  the  active 
GTP  state,  these  switch  loops  form  a  binding  site  for 
downstream target proteins. (2) GTP hydrolysis is slow 
and  irreversible.  (3)  Dissociation  of  the  γ-phosphate  is 
fast and coupled to the return of the switch loops to the 
inactive conformation. (4) GTPases tend to accumulate 
in the inactive GDP-state, because GDP dissociates slowly 
and GTP cannot bind until GDP dissociates.

Diverse intrinsic or extrinsic protein modules regulate 
the  GTPase  cycle.  Most  GTPases  depend  on  other  pro-
teins,  called  guanine  nucleotide  exchange  factors 
(GEFs),  to  accelerate  dissociation  of  GDP  (Appendix 
25.2).  Although  diverse  in  structure,  these  GEFs  have 
similar  mechanisms.  They  distort  the  P  loop,  the  part  
of the nucleotide binding site that interacts with the β 
phosphate,  allowing  GDP  to  escape,  and  then  bind 
tightly to the nucleotide-free GTPase. Most small GTPases 
require  extrinsic  GTPase-activating  proteins  (GAPs) 
to stimulate the GTP hydrolysis that turns them off.

Elongation Factors
These  GTPases  act  as  timers  to  ensure  the  fidelity  of 
protein synthesis (see Fig. 12.9). Elongation factor Tu 
(EF-Tu)  has  two  accessory  domains  hinged  to  the 
GTPase core (Fig. 25.7C–D). GTP EF-Tu binds and deliv-
ers  aminoacyl-tRNAs  (transfer  RNAs)  to  the  A  site  of  a 
ribosome. If the tRNA anticodon matches the messenger 
RNA (mRNA) codon at the A site, it remains bound long 

enough  for  GTP  to  be  hydrolyzed.  This  releases  EF-Tu 
from the ribosome and allows the correct amino acid to 
be added to the growing polypeptide chain. The acces-
sory  factor  EF-Ts  is  the  GDP  exchange  factor  for  this 
system.

Small Guanosine Triphosphatases
All  six  families  of  small  GTPases  consist  of  a  single 
domain similar to Ras (Fig. 25.7A–B). The Arf, Rab, and 
Sar  GTPases  act  as  switches  for  intracellular  traffic  of 
membrane  vesicles  (see  Chapter  21).  The  Ran  family 
regulates nuclear transport (see Fig. 9.18) and assembly 
of the mitotic spindle (see Fig. 44.8). This chapter intro-
duces  the  Ras  and  Rho  families  of  small  GTPases  that 
transduce signals from cell surface receptors.

Covalently  attached  lipids  anchor  many  small 
GTPases  to  membrane  bilayers.  These  hydrophobic 
chains are required for activity. Ras and some Rho and 
Rab  proteins  are  modified  with  a  C-15  or  C-20  prenyl 
chain  on  a  C-terminal  cysteine.  Arfs  are  myristoylated, 
but other small GTPases, such as Ran, are not modified 
and are soluble in the cytoplasm. Membrane-associated 
GTPases may cycle into the cytoplasm when their lipid 
tails turn over or when they bind cytoplasmic regulatory 
proteins such as Rho-GDI (Rho-guanine nucleotide dis-
sociation  inhibitor  [see  Fig.  21.13]).  Rab,  Arf,  and  Sar 
GTPases  also  recycle  through  the  cytoplasm  as  they 
direct vesicular traffic from one compartment to another. 
Membrane  association  can  be  regulated  either  by 

434 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

interactions with accessory proteins (in the case of Rab) 
or  through  guanine  nucleotide–dependent  conforma-
tional changes (in the case of Arf and Sar).

Ras  is  the  prototypical  small  GTPase.  Ras  transmits 
signals from growth factor receptor tyrosine kinases to 
transcription factors that control genes required for cel-
lular  proliferation  (see  Figs.  27.6  and  27.7).  In  resting 
cells, Ras accumulates in the inactive GDP form. Stimula-
tion  of  growth  factor  receptors  attracts  SOS,  the  Ras 
nucleotide exchange factor, to the membrane, where it 
activates Ras by exchanging GDP for GTP. Ras-GTP then 
activates  a  cascade  of  protein  kinases  that  ultimately 
controls gene expression. Ras has low intrinsic GTPase 
activity  (rate  =  0.005 s−1;  half-time  =  140 s)  that  is  not 
stimulated  by  binding  effector  proteins.  An  accessory 
protein  called  Ras-GAP  stimulates  GTPase  activity  105-
fold  by  providing  a  crucial  arginine  for  the  active  site. 
This inactivates Ras until SOS again stimulates dissocia-
tion of GDP. Mutations that inhibit GTP hydrolysis pre-
dispose to cancer, because without GTP hydrolysis, Ras 
is continually active and stimulates cellular growth. (Fig. 
41.12). These mutations are extremely common, occur-
ring in 20% to 30% of all human cancers.

The  16  members  of  the  human  Rho  family  include 
Rho itself, Rac, and Cdc42. They regulate the actin and 
microtubule cytoskeletons, cellular growth, and cellular 
polarity.  Stimulation  of  certain  seven-helix  receptors  
and  receptor  tyrosine  kinases  activates  Rho-family 
GTPases by turning on exchange factors that catalyze the 
exchange of GDP for GTP. Activated Rho-family proteins 

stimulate  kinases  (such  as  p21-activated  kinase  and 
Rho-kinase), which mediate downstream effects on the 
actin  cytoskeleton.  For  example,  Rho-kinase  activates 
myosin-II by phosphorylating the regulatory light chain 
and  inhibiting  the  light  chain  phosphatase  (see  Fig. 
39.21).  Activated  Cdc42  binds  Wiskott-Aldrich  syn-
drome  protein (WASp), a protein that regulates actin 
filament nucleation (see Figs. 33.13 and 38.7). WASp is 
defective  in  Wiskott-Aldrich  syndrome,  an  inherited 
human  disease  characterized  by  a  deficiency  in  blood 
cell function. Rac stimulates another protein related to 
WASp that regulates actin filament nucleation.

Trimeric G-Proteins
These  GTP-binding  proteins  transduce  signals  received 
from  seven-helix  receptors  for  hormones,  light,  and 
odors to a variety of effector proteins, including enzymes 
and  ion  channels.  However,  in  rare  cases,  signals  that 
activate  trimeric  G-proteins  can  also  arise  inside  the  
cell  independent  of  transmembrane  receptors.  The  
best-characterized  examples  of  intracellular  activation 
are G-proteins that regulate asymmetrical cell division.

Trimeric G-proteins consist of three subunits Gα, Gβ, 
and Gγ (Fig. 25.9). The Gα subunits have a GTP-binding 
domain  similar  to  small  GTPases  linked  by  two  strands 
to a domain of α-helices. The helical domain protects the 
nucleotide-binding site when GDP is bound to the inac-
tive  protein.  Gβ  and  Gγ  subunits  bind  tightly  to  each 
other  and  reversibly  to  Gα.  Gβ  is  a  torus-shaped  mole-
cule  composed  of  seven  modules,  each  folded  into  an 

B. Activation by ligand binding
     and exchange of GDP for GTP

C. Three separate
     active components

Active seven-helix
receptor

A. Resting
     (three inactive
     components)

Ligand

Resting seven-helix
receptor

α

γ 

GTPase
domain

α-Helical
domain

GDP

GTP

Trimeric
G-protein

β

GDP

GTP

Three active
components

FIGURE 25.9  ACTIVATION OF A TRIMERIC G-PROTEIN BY A SEVEN-HELIX RECEPTOR. These examples are β2-adrenergic receptor 
and the Gs-protein complexes. A, Receptor resting state without a ligand and a separate trimeric G-protein in its inactive GDP-Gαβγ state. Both 
Gα and Gγ are anchored to the lipid bilayer. B, Interaction of active β2-adrenergic receptor with a trimeric G-protein. This interaction catalyzes 
the exchange of GDP for GTP on Gα. C, Active Gα and Gβγ dissociate from each other and the receptor and are available to interact with effec-
tor proteins. GTPase, guanosine triphosphatase. (For reference, see PDB file 2RH1 and Cherezov V, Rosenbaum DM, Hanson MA, et al. High-
resolution crystal structure of an engineered human beta2-adrenergic G protein-coupled receptor. Science. 2007;318:1258–1265 [A]; PDB file 
3SN6 and Rasmussen SG, DeVree BT, Zou Y, et al. Crystal structure of the β2 adrenergic receptor–Gs protein complex. Nature. 2011;477:549–
555 [B]; and PDB file 4LDO and Ring AM, Manglik A, Kruse AC, et al. Adrenaline-activated structure of β2-adrenoceptor stabilized by an engi-
neered nanobody. Nature. 2013;502:575–579 [C].)

 

CHAPTER 25  n  Protein Hardware for Signaling 

435

antiparallel  β-sheet  (Fig.  25.9).  These  so-called  WD 
repeats are found in many proteins. Loops on one face 
of  the  torus  interact  with  Gα-GDP,  blocking  effector 
interaction  sites  on  both  partners.  Loops  on  the  other 
face of Gβ bind tightly to Gγ.

A  variety  of  lipid  anchors  attach  trimeric  G-proteins 
to the inside of the plasma membrane. Most Gα subunits 
are  anchored  by  an  N-terminal  fatty  acid,  usually 
myristate,  and  some  have  an  additional  palmitic  acid 
anchor on a reactive cysteine. Most Gγ subunits have a 
C-20 prenyl group on a C-terminal cysteine.

Subunit Diversity
Yeasts have genes for just two Gα proteins, one of which 
participates  in  responses  to  sex  pheromones,  but 
mammals  have  genes  for  20  Gα,  5  Gβ,  and  12  Gγ  sub-
units.  Alternative  splicing  of  Gα  mRNAs  creates  addi-
tional  diversity.  If  these  subunits  were  combined  in  all 
possible  ways,  mammals  could  make  more  than  1000 
different trimeric G-proteins, but only a subset of these 
combinations have been detected.

Given  more  than  1000  genes  for  seven-helix  recep-
tors,  many  receptors  use  the  same  G-proteins  to  trans-
duce signals. For example, hundreds of different odorant 
receptors in the nose activate Golfα (see Fig. 27.1). Tri-
meric G-proteins act on a limited variety of downstream 
effectors, including ion channels, kinases, and enzymes 
that produce second messengers (Table 25.2).

Guanosine Triphosphatase Cycle
Seven-helix  receptors  activate  trimeric  G-proteins  by 
catalyzing  the  exchange  of  GDP  for  GTP  on  the  Gα 
subunit.  GTP  binding  from  the  cytoplasm  changes  the 
conformation  of  Gα  and  releases  Gβγ  (Fig.  25.9).  This 
generates two signals, as both Gα and Gβγ can engage 
downstream effector proteins. It is convenient to think 
about this process as two cycles: a GTPase cycle coupled 
to a subunit cycle (Fig. 25.8B).

The  intrinsic  rate  of  GDP  dissociation  from  trimeric 
G-proteins is near zero (half-life approximately 10 to 60 

minutes), but interaction of an active receptor with Gα 
triggers  conformational  changes  that  allow  GDP  to  dis-
sociate many orders of magnitude faster. Conformational 
changes in Gα include rotation of the α-helical domain 
away from the nucleotide-binding site. Then GTP in the 
cytoplasm binds nucleotide-free Gα on a millisecond-to-
second time scale, fast enough for vision (see Fig. 27.2). 
Gβγ  does  not  interact  with  the  receptor,  but  must  be 
bound  to  Gα-GDP  before  active  membrane  receptors 
can trigger dissociation of GDP.

GTP  draws  the  three  switch  loops  together  around 
the γ-phosphate  in  a  conformation  that  favors  dissocia-
tion of Gβγ and association with effector proteins. This 
conformational  change  is  the  physical  manifestation  of 
the transfer of a signal from an activated receptor to Gα.
Like all GTPases, the duration of the signal carried by 
trimeric G-proteins depends on the rate of GTP hydroly-
sis. Thanks to a strategically placed arginine (on a linker 
to  the  helical  domain),  trimeric  G-proteins  hydrolyze 
GTP  faster  than  small  GTPases.  The  half-time  of  the 
active state is approximately 10 to 20 seconds, adequate 
for  activation  of  a  target  protein.  Note  that  the  helical 
domain acts both as an intrinsic inhibitor of GDP disso-
ciation and as an activator of GTP hydrolysis, similar to 
two separate regulators of small GTPases (guanine nucle-
otide dissociation inhibitor [GDI] and GAP).

Two different types of proteins promote GTP hydro-
lysis  and  limit  the  lifetime  of  the  active  state:  effector 
proteins  and  extrinsic  GTPase  activators,  called  RGS 
proteins  (regulators  of  G-protein  signaling).  For 
example,  Gqα-GTP  binds  and  stimulates  phospholipase 
Cβ,  which  produces  two  second  messengers:  inositol 
1,4,5-triphosphate  (IP3)  and  diacylglycerol  (see  Fig. 
26.12). At the same time, phospholipase Cβ accelerates 
GTP hydrolysis by Gqα, providing negative feedback to 
turn off the signal.

The RGS family includes more than 20 proteins that 
can stimulate the GTPase activity of G-proteins approxi-
mately 100-fold, yielding half-times of less than 1 second. 
These  RGS  proteins  work  by  stabilizing  the  transition 

TABLE 25.2  Receptors and Effectors for G-Protein Isoforms
Family (No. of 
Human Members)
Giα (7)

Receptors
α-Adrenergic amines, acetylcholine, chemokines, 

various neurotransmitters, tastants

α-Adrenergic amines, acetylcholine, various 

neurotransmitters

β-Adrenergic amines, hormones (corticotropin, 

glucagon, parathyroid, thyrotropin, others)

Effectors

Inhibit adenylyl cyclase, open potassium channels, 

close calcium channels

Activate phospholipase Cβ to produce IP3, which 

releases Ca2+

Stimulate adenylyl cyclase to produce cAMP, 

receptor kinase

Gqα (5)

Gsα (3)

Gtα (2)

G13α (2)
Golfα

Rhodopsin, which absorbs light

Activate cGMP phosphodiesterase to break down 

Thrombin and others
Odorant receptors

cGMP, receptor kinase

Rho and others
Activate adenylyl cyclase, receptor kinase

cAMP, Cyclic adenosine monophosphate; cGMP, cyclic guanosine monophosphate; IP3, inositol triphosphate.

436 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

state  between  GTP  and  GDP-Pi.  Such  rapid  adaption  is 
important in dynamic physiological systems such as the 
heart and eye. Some RGS proteins also have a Rho–GEF 
domain, so they may connect seven-helix receptors and 
trimeric G-proteins to the Rho family of small GTPases.

Subunit Cycle
The GTPase cycle is linked a subunit cycle (Fig. 25.8B). 
Gα  cycles  on  and  off  both  Gβγ  and  the  receptor  as  it 
traverses its GTPase cycle. The conformational changes 
in Gα induced by GTP binding reduce the affinity of Gα 
for both its receptor and associated Gβγ subunits, so the 
three  molecular  partners  separate  on  the  cytoplasmic 
face of the membrane (Fig. 25.9). Once dissociated, the 
receptor,  Gα,  and  Gβγ  are  each  free  to  interact  with 
other  partners  to  independently  propagate  the  signal 
(Table  25.2).  The  conformation  of  Gβγ  is  the  same 
whether bound to Gα or free, but dissociation from Gα 
unmasks binding sites on Gβγ for activating membrane 
targets such as ion channels. Gβγ also provides a mem-
brane anchor to enhance the interaction of cytoplasmic 
effectors (such as kinases that phosphorylate seven-helix 
receptors) with membrane targets.

The linked GTPase and subunit cycles allow activation 
of a single receptor to generate a massive signal. Although 
most seven-helix receptors are active only briefly (owing 
to  rapid  ligand  dissociation  and  rapid  inactivation  [see 
Figs. 27.1 and 27.2]), they can turn on multiple G-proteins 
and activate several downstream effector proteins. These 
effectors often include enzymes or channels that rapidly 
amplify  the  signal.  Reassociation  of  Gβγ  with  Gα-GDP 
terminates the signal at the end of the cycle.

Mechanisms of Effector Activation
Activated Gα and Gβγ subunits may act individually, but 
they  may  also  act  synergistically  and  even  antagonisti-
cally.  Two  examples,  elaborated  upon  in  Chapter  27, 
illustrate how G-proteins activate effector proteins.

In the eye, phototransduction takes place on a milli-
second time scale. When the seven-helix photoreceptor 
rhodopsin  absorbs  a  photon,  the  G-protein  Gtα  (also 
called transducin) relays and amplifies a signal (see Fig. 
27.2). Each activated rhodopsin generates approximately 
500  Gtα-GTPs,  which  bind  and  inactivate  an  inhibitory 
subunit  of  the  enzyme  cGMP  phosphodiesterase.  This 
stimulates the activity of the phosphodiesterase (see Fig. 
26.1),  which  lowers  the  cytoplasmic  concentration  of 
cGMP and closes an ion channel. The signal is transient, 
because both an RGS protein and the inhibitory subunit 
promote hydrolysis of GTP bound to Gtα. Inactive Gtα-
GDP dissociates from the inhibitory subunit, terminating 
the signal that flowed through Gtα to the enzyme.

In the heart, the β-adrenergic receptor activates Gsα, 
releasing both Gsα-GTP and Gβγ to bind effector proteins 
(see  Fig.  27.3).  During  its  10-second  lifetime,  Gsα-GTP 
binds  and  stimulates  the  enzyme  adenylyl  cyclase  to 
produce  the  second  messenger  cAMP.  Gβγ  assists  in 
receptor  inactivation  by  binding  β-ARK,  a  kinase  that 
phosphorylates and turns off the β-adrenergic receptor, 
terminating the signal.

Trimeric G-Proteins in Disease
Either  abnormal  activation  or  inactivation  of  trimeric 
G-proteins can cause disease (Table 25.3). Mutations that 
interfere  with  GTP  hydrolysis  cause  Gα  to  accumulate 
in  the  GTP  state  and  persistently  activate  downstream 
effectors.  For  example,  mutations  in  arginine  or  gluta-
mine residues of Gα that are crucial for GTP hydrolysis 
can cause tumors by prolonging the activation of path-
ways responsible for cell proliferation. Common variants 
in the sequence of other G-proteins are associated with 
high blood pressure and other common diseases.

Some bacterial toxins mediate their effects by acting 
on G-proteins. The cholera bacterium causes diarrhea by 
secreting cholera toxin, an enzyme that enters the cyto-
plasm after a complicated journey from the cell surface. 

TABLE 25.3  Guanosine Triphosphatases and Disease
Disease
Excess Signal
Cholera
Pituitary and thyroid 

Mechanism

GTPase

Gsα
Gsα

Cholera toxin ADP-ribosylation of R201 inhibits GTP hydrolysis in intestinal epithelium.
Somatic point mutations of R201 or Q227 inhibit GTP hydrolysis; constitutive activity 

adenomas

Various cancers
Deficient Signal
Whooping cough

Night blindness
Pseudohypoparathyroidism 

type Ia

Ras

Giα

Gtα
Gsα

mimics signal from hormones that stimulate proliferation and secretion by these glands.
Point mutations inhibit GTP hydrolysis, generating persistent signals for cell proliferation.

Pertussis toxin ADP-ribosylation of Giα C347 in the bronchial epithelium blocks receptor 

activation; connection to coughing not established.

Germline point mutation in G38.
Point mutations result in loss of Gsα or may block its activation by receptors.

ADP, adenosine diphosphate; C, cysteine; G, glycine; GTP, guanosine triphosphate; GTPase, guanosine triphosphatase; Q, glutamine; R, arginine.
Modified from Farfel Z, Bourne HR, Iiri T. The expanding spectrum of G protein diseases. N Engl J Med. 1999;340:1012–1020.

 

CHAPTER 25  n  Protein Hardware for Signaling 

437

The  enzyme  catalyzes  the  addition  of  an  adenosine 
diphosphate  (ADP)–ribose  to  the  arginine  required  for 
Gsα to hydrolyze GTP. Activated Gsα-GTP accumulates, 
prolonging the production of high levels of cAMP, which 
causes  life-threatening  diarrhea  by  stimulating  salt  and 
water secretion into the intestine. Pertussis toxin from 
the whooping cough bacterium secretes an enzyme that 
adds ADP-ribose to a cysteine residue of Giα or other Gα 
subunits.  This  inhibits  the  interaction  of  the  trimeric 
G-protein  with  activated  receptors,  so  the  G-protein 
accumulates in the inactive GDP state. One consequence 
is  airway  irritability.  Similarly,  Clostridium  botulinum 
C3  toxin  ADP-ribosylates  and  inhibits  Rho-GTPases, 
whereas  a  Clostridium  difficile  toxin  uses  uridine 
diphosphate (UDP)–glucose to glucosylate and turn off 
the whole class of Rho proteins.

Dynamin-Related Guanosine Triphosphatases
These  large  GTPases  have  an  N-terminal  GTP-binding 
domain and a C-terminal GTPase-activating domain that 
allows  self-assembly  into  spiral  polymers  around  the 
membrane tubules that form at sites of endocytosis (see 
Fig.  22.8).  The  GTPase  cycle  drives  interaction  of  the 
subunits along the spiral to constrict the tubule. Other 
dynamin family members regulate vacuolar trafficking in 
yeast and the division of mitochondria.

Experimental Tools
Mutations,  especially  those  that  constitutively  activate 
GTPases  (by  inhibiting  GTP  hydrolysis)  or  inactivate 
GTPases,  have  been  used  to  investigate  their  functions 
in cells. For biochemical experiments, slowly hydrolyzed 
analogs of GTP, such as GTPγS (with a sulfur substituted 
for one of the γ-phosphate oxygens), are used to prolong 
the active state of GTPases. Similarly, aluminum fluoride 
and beryllium fluoride bind very tightly in place of the 
hydrolyzed γ-phosphate, keeping Gα in an active GDP-Pi 
state similar to GTP. The fungal metabolite brefeldin A 

blocks  nucleotide  exchange  on  some  Arfs,  disrupting 
membrane  traffic  between  the  Golgi  complex  and  the 
endoplasmic reticulum (see Fig. 21.11).

Molecular Recognition by  
Adapter Domains
During  the  characterization  of  signaling  pathways, 
related  sequences  of  amino  acid  were  discovered  in  
different  proteins,  such  as  Src  (Figs.  25.3C  and  25.4B). 
These turned out to be compactly folded domains (Fig. 
25.10)  that  are  incorporated  into  a  variety  of  proteins 
(Fig.  25.11),  including  many  with  no  role  in  signaling. 
These  domains  mediate  interactions  between  proteins 
and with membrane lipids (Table 25.4).

The  names  of  adapter  domains  generally  came  from 
the proteins where they were discovered. For example, 
Src  homology  (SH)  domains  were  first  recognized  in 
the Src tyrosine kinase (Fig. 25.3C). SH1 is the tyrosine 
kinase domain; the SH2 domain binds phosphotyrosine 
peptides; and the SH3 binds polyproline type II helices. 
Chapter 27 provides detailed examples of how adapter 
domains  function  in  signalling  pathways.  This  section 
provides  an  overview  of  their  structure  and  ligand-
binding properties. The following points apply to adapter 
proteins in general.

Adapter  domains  mediate 

interactions  that  are 
required to assemble proteins into multimolecular func-
tional units that typically carry out a series of reactions. 
To facilitate these interactions, many signaling proteins 
have more than one adapter domain or bind more than 
one ligand. In signal transduction, these physical associa-
tions  make  transmission  from  receptors  to  effectors 
more reliable, like an integrated machine rather than one 
that  relies  solely  on  diffusion  and  random  associations. 
Mutations in experimental organisms and roles in various 
human diseases have verified the importance of adapter 
domains  for  many  pathways.  Interactions  mediated  by 

TABLE 25.4  Adapter Domains

Domain Name

EH (Eps15 homology)
EVH1 (Ena-VASP homology)
PH (Pleckstrin homology)
PDZ

PTB (phosphotyrosine binding)
SH2 (Src homology 2)
SH3 (Src homology 3)

WW
14-3-3

Size 
(Residues)

95
110
100
100

125
100
60

38–40
250

Consensus Ligands
S/T-N-P-F′-Φ
D/E-Φ-P-P-P-P
PIP2, PIP3
-x-x-S/T-x-V-COOH
-x-x-Φ-x-Φ-COOH
-Φ-x-N-P-x-pY-
-pY-x-x-Φ-
(+) -R/K-x-x-P-x-x-P-
(−) -x-P-x-x-P-x-R/K-
-P-P-x-Y-
-R-S-X-pS-x-P-

Example of Proteins With Domain

Clathrin adapter proteins, synaptojanin I
WASp, VASP, Ena
Kinases, scaffolds, GEFs, GAPs, PLCδ, dynamin
Scaffolds for channels and transduction enzymes

IRS1, Shc scaffold proteins
Transduction enzymes and scaffold proteins
Tyrosine kinases, phosphatases, Grb2, PLCγ, spectrin, myosin I

Peptidyl prolyl isomerase, ubiquitin ligase
14-3-3 isoforms

Φ, hydrophobic residue; COOH, C-terminus; Ena, enabled gene; GAP, GTPase-activating protein; GEF, guanine nucleotide exchange factor; Grb2, adapter 
protein; IRS1, insulin receptor substrate 1; PLC, phospholipase C; pS, phosphoserine; pY, phosphotyrosine; Shc, receptor tyrosine kinase substrate; 
VASP, vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein, WASp, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein; (−), minus orientation; (+), plus orientation.

438 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

A. Phosphorylation-sensitive domains

PIP3 head
group

SH2

PTB

PH

B. Poly-L-proline ligands

C. Other ligands (see Table 25.4)

14-3-3

SH3

EVH1

PDZ

EH

FIGURE 25.10  ATOMIC MODELS OF ADAPTER PROTEIN DOMAINS. Ribbon diagrams show their architecture, and the surface render-
ings show how ligands bind. A, Domains with phosphorylation-sensitive interactions. B, Domains with poly-l-proline ligands. C, Domains with 
other ligands. (For reference, see PDB files 1HCS [SH2], 1IRS [PTB], 1DYN [PH], 1A38 [14-3-3], 1ABO [SH3], 1EVH [EVH1], 1BEQ [PDZ], and 
1EH2 [EH].) EH, Eps15 homology; EVH1, Ena-Vasp homology 1; PDZ, postsynaptic density protein 95, disc large tumor suppressor (DIg1), and 
zona occludens 1; PH, pleckstrin homology; PTB, phosphotyrosine-binding; SH2/3, Src homology 2/3. 

adapter domains complement the organizing activities of 
anchoring proteins, such as STE5 and AKAPs (see “Tar-
geting” under “Regulation of Protein Kinases” above).

All  members  of  each  family  of  adapters  have  similar 
structures (and common evolutionary origins) but differ 
in  their  affinities  for  a  range  of  similar  ligands.  For 
example, all SH2 domains bind peptides with a sequence 
phosphotyrosine-X-X-hydrophobic  residue.  All  require 

phosphotyrosine but differ in their affinity for peptides 
depending on the hydrophobic residue and the interven-
ing residues. This lock-and-key strategy creates specific-
ity with many particular combinations, as in macroscopic 
locks and keys. Although lacking in sequence similarity, 
three of these domains—PH, PTB, and EVH1 (Ena-VASP 
homology 1)—have similar folds (Fig. 25.10) and likely 
had a common ancestor. Nevertheless, their ligands are 

 

Src

PTPLC

PLCγ1

Ras-GAP

Vav (GEF)

c-Crk

Grb2

IRS1

WASp

N

C

SH3

SH2

Kinase

SH2

SH2

Phosphatase

PLC

SH2

SH2

SH3

PLC

SH2

SH3

SH2

PH

GAP

DBL

SH3

SH2

SH3

SH2 SH3 SH3

SH3

SH2

SH3

PH

PTB

Cdc42

Actin

Arp2/3

100 res

EVH1

poly-P

FIGURE  25.11  SCALE  DRAWINGS  OF  PROTEINS  WITH 
ADAPTER  DOMAINS.  Actin  and  Arp2/3  indicate  binding  sites  for 
actin monomers and Arp2/3 complex; Cdc42, a Rho-family GTPase; 
c-Crk and Grb2, multidomain adapter proteins; DBL, a guanine nucle-
otide exchange factor domain; EVH1, Ena-VASP homology 1 domain; 
GAP, GTPase activating; IRS1, insulin receptor substrate; PLC, phos-
pholipase C; poly-P, polyproline; PTPLC, protein tyrosine phosphatase; 
Ras-GAP,  Ras  GTPase  activating  protein;  SH,  Src  homology;  Vav,  a 
guanine  nucleotide  exchange  protein;  WASp,  Wiskott-Aldrich  syn-
drome protein. 

quite distinct from each other and bind to different sites 
on the commonly folded domains.

Some  interactions  depend  on  reversible  covalent 
modifications  of  ligands:  tyrosine  phosphorylation  for 
SH2 and some PTB domains, serine phosphorylation for 
some  14-3-3  and  WW  domains,  and  3-phosphorylation  
of  inositol  for  some  PH  domains.  This  allows  these  
adapters to form and dissipate in response to signals that 
modulate phosphorylation of their ligands.

Many  interactions  of  adapter  domains  with  their 
ligands  are  tenuous,  so  associations  are  reversible  on  a 
time scale of seconds, allowing rapid rearrangements in 
response to signals. Frequent dissociation is also required 
for covalent modifications of the ligands, such as access 
of phosphatases to their substrates.

Phosphorylation-Sensitive Adapters
SH2 Domains
SH2  domains  bind  short  peptide  sequences  beginning 
with a phosphotyrosine. Like a two-pronged plug, these 
peptides  insert  a  phosphotyrosine  and  a  hydrophobic 
side chain into two cavities in the SH2 socket. A phos-
phate on the tyrosine increases the affinity of a peptide 
for  its  partner  SH2  domain  by  orders  of  magnitude  by 
virtue  of  an  extensive  network  of  hydrogen  bonds 
between  the  phosphate  and  its  deep  binding  pocket. 
This allows reversible phosphorylation to control inter-
actions  between  SH2  domains  and  their  ligands.  This 
switching mechanism is used in growth factor signaling 
and lymphocyte activation (see Figs. 27.6 to 27.8). The 
hydrophobic  side  chain  inserts  into  a  cavity  on  the 
surface of the SH2 domain. The size of this side chain is 
a major determinant of binding specificity. Two residues 

CHAPTER 25  n  Protein Hardware for Signaling 

439

between these plug residues straddle the β-sheet of the 
SH2 with their side chains exposed to solvent.

SH2 interactions with target peptides and proteins are 
relatively  weak,  with  Kds  in  the  range  of  0.1  to  1 µM. 
This allows for rapid exchange of partners and dephos-
phorylation of the phosphotyrosine. Nevertheless, these 
interactions are specific, as the 115 human proteins with 
SH2  domains  each  engage  a  limited  number  of  target 
phosphoproteins.  SH2  domains  target  several  signal 
transduction enzymes to phosphotyrosines on receptor 
tyrosine kinases (see Fig. 27.6) as the first step in propa-
gating signals to effectors, including second messengers 
and transcription factors.

Phosphotyrosine-Binding Domains
Most  PTB  domains  require  a  phosphotyrosine  at  the 
C-terminal end of the peptide ligand. Adjacent hydropho-
bic residues contribute to binding specificity. The bound 
peptide is hydrogen-bonded onto the edge of a β-sheet, 
and phosphotyrosine interacts with basic residues. PTB 
domains target adapter proteins to phosphotyrosines on 
receptor tyrosine kinases, such as insulin receptor (see 
Fig.  27.7).  A  few  PTB  domains  bind  unphosphorylated 
peptide ligands.

14-3-3 Proteins
Vertebrates have at least seven genes for 14-3-3 subunits 
that assemble into homodimers or heterodimers. Protein 
ligands  with  an  appropriate  sequence  and  a  central  
phosphoserine  bind  each  subunit  with  submicromolar 
affinity. Peptides with two appropriate sequences bind 
much more tightly. The 14-3-3 proteins regulate protein 
kinases, including the Ras-activated kinase Raf (see Fig. 
27.6)  and  cellular  death  pathways  (see  Chapter  46). 
During interphase or after DNA damage, a 14-3-3 protein 
inhibits  the  cell  cycle  regulatory  phosphatase  Cdc25, 
when it is phosphorylated on a serine (see Fig. 43.4).

WW Domains
These  tiny  adapter  domains  are  found  in  more  than  
100  proteins.  Most  bind  certain  phosphoserine  or  
phosphothreonine peptides, but some bind proline-rich 
ligands.  These  phosphorylation-dependent  interactions 
regulate Cdc25 and ubiquitin-mediated protein destruc-
tion (see Chapter 23).

PH Domains
These compact domains of approximately 100 residues 
are named for the PH domain in pleckstrin, the major 
substrate  for  PKC  in  platelets.  PH  domains  bind  poly-
phosphoinositides  (see  Fig.  26.7).  PH  domains  of 
dynamin and phospholipase Cδ prefer phosphatidylino-
sitol (PI) (4,5) P2 (PIP2), whereas the PH domain of the 
Bruton  tyrosine  kinase  (Btk)  favors  PI(3,4,5)P3  (PIP3). 
These  interactions  target  proteins  with  PH  domains  to 
membrane bilayers rich in PIP2 and PIP3 and make these 
membrane  interactions  responsive  to  the  activities  of 

440 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

phosphoinositide  kinases  (see  Figs.  26.7  and  38.10). 
PH-domain  proteins  include  kinases  (PKB/Akt,  PDK1; 
see  Fig.  27.7),  signaling  scaffolding  proteins  (insulin 
receptor  substrate  1  [IRS1];  see  Fig.  27.7),  enzymes 
(phospholipase Cγ1 [PLCγ1]; see Figs. 26.4 and 26.12), 
and GEFs. Mutations in the PH domain of the Btk tyrosine 
kinase reduce affinity for PI(3,4,5)P3 and cause a failure 
of  B-lymphocyte  development  (see  Fig.  28.9),  resulting 
in immunodeficiency from a lack of antibodies.

Adapters With Proline-Rich Ligands
SH3 Domains
SH3  domains  found  in  more  than  250  different  human 
proteins  bind  to  proline-rich  sequences  of  numerous 
target  proteins  that  help  assembly  signalling  pathways. 
For example, SH3 domains of the adapter protein Grb2 
(Fig.  25.11)  link  activated  growth  factor  receptors  to  
the nucleotide exchange protein for Ras (see Fig. 27.6). 
SH3  domains  are  also  found  in  tyrosine  kinases  and  
cytoskeletal  proteins,  including  myosin-I,  spectrin,  and 
cortactin.

The ligands for SH3 domains form left-handed, type 
II polyproline helices (see Fig. 29.1) that make hydro-
phobic interactions with aromatic residues in a shallow 
groove on the SH3 domain, as well as hydrogen bonds 
contributed  by  ligand  peptide  carbonyl  oxygens.  Resi-
dues  flanking  the  central  proline  helix  contribute  to 
binding  specificity.  Even  optimal  peptide  ligands  bind 
relatively weakly (Kds in the micromolar range), so they 
exchange  rapidly.  When  incorporated  into  proteins, 
type II poly-L-proline helices with appropriate sequences 
bind  somewhat  more  tightly,  owing  to  secondary 
interactions.

EVH1 Domains
EVH1 domains (Fig. 25.10) are found in WASp (see Fig. 
33.13)  and  other  signaling  proteins  that  regulate  actin 
polymerization.  EVH1  domains  are  folded  like  PH  and 
PTB  domains,  but  have  a  groove  that  binds  type  II 
proline-rich  helices  of  target  proteins.  This  site  also 
differs  from  that  for  phosphotyrosine  peptides  on  PTB 
domains. Thus, a common scaffold has diverged to form 
three completely different binding sites.

Other Adapter Domains
PDZ Domains
PDZ domains are found in one to seven copies in scaf-
folding  proteins  that  cluster  together  ion  channels  and 
signal transduction proteins at synapses, in photorecep-
tors, and in polarized epithelial cells. PDZ domains bind 
specific  sequence  motifs,  usually  found  at  the  very 
C-terminus  of  proteins  or,  more  rarely,  at  the  end  of β 
hairpin structures. PDZ domains bind their ligands, in a 
manner  reminiscent  of  PTB  domains,  by  incorporating 
them  through  hydrogen  bonds  as  an  extra  strand  in  a 
β-sheet.

EH Domains
EH domains are small bundles of four α-helices that bind 
peptides with the sequence asparagine-proline-phenylal-
anine.  Flanking  residues  contribute  to  specificity.  The 
best-characterized EH-mediated interactions are involved 
with endocytosis (see Chapter 22).

SELECTED READINGS

Kinases
Endicott JA, Noble MEM, Johnson LN. The Structural Basis for Control of 

Eukaryotic Protein Kinases. Annu Rev Biochem. 2012;81:587-613.

Langeberg LK, Scott JD. Signalling scaffolds and local organization of 

cellular behaviour. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2015;16:232-244.

Wang  Z,  Gucek  M,  Hart  GW.  Cross-talk  between  GlcNAcylation  and 
phosphorylation: site-specific phosphorylation dynamics in response 
to globally elevated O-GlcNAc. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2008;105:
13793-13798.

Zhang  J,  Yang  PL,  Gray  NS.  Targeting  cancer  with  small  molecule 

kinase inhibitors. Nat Rev Cancer. 2009;9:28-39.

Phosphatases
Alonso A, Pulido R. The extended human PTPome: A growing tyrosine 

phosphatase family. FEBS J. Nov 17, 2015;[Epub ahead of print].

Aramburu J, Heitman J, Crabtree GR. Calcineurin: A central controller 

of signalling in eukaryotes. EMBO Rep. 2004;5:343-348.

Barford  D,  Das  AK,  Egloff  M-P.  Structure  and  mechanism  of  protein 
phosphatases:  Insights  into  catalysis  and  regulation.  Annu  Rev 
Biophys Biomol Struct. 1998;27:133-164.

Gallego M, Virshup DM. Protein serine/threonine phosphatases: Life, 

death, and sleeping. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2005;17:197-202.

Mohebiany AN, Nikolaienko RM, Bouyain S, Harroch S. Receptor-type 
tyrosine phosphatase ligands: looking for the needle in the haystack. 
FEBS J. 2013;280:388-400.

Guanosine Triphosphatases
Bockoch GM. Biology of the p21-activated kinases. Annu Rev Biochem. 

2003;72:743-781.

Garcia-Mata R, Boulter E, Burridge K. The ‘invisible hand’: regulation 
of  RHO  GTPases  by  RHOGDIs.  Nat  Rev  Mol  Cell  Biol.  2011;12:
493-504.

Kach J, Sethakorn N, Dulin NO. A finer tuning of G-protein signaling 
through regulated control of RGS proteins. Am J Physiol Heart Circ 
Physiol. 2012;303:H19-H35.

Rasmussen  SG,  DeVree  BT,  Zou  Y,  et al.  Crystal  structure  of  the  β2 
adrenergic  receptor-Gs  protein  complex.  Nature.  2011;477:
549-555.

Rauen KA. The RASopathies. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet. 2013;

14:355-369.

Schmid  SL,  Frolov  VA.  Dynamin:  Functional  design  of  a  membrane 

fission catalyst. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2011;27:79-105.

Vigil D, Cherfils J, Rossman KL, Der CJ. Ras superfamily GEFs and GAPs: 
validated and tractable targets for cancer therapy? Nat Rev Cancer. 
2010;10:842-857.

Adapters
Nourry  C,  Grant  SG,  Borg  JP.  PDZ  domain  proteins:  Plug  and  play!  

Sci STKE. 2003;2003(179):RE7.

Pawson T, Nash P. Assembly of cell regulatory systems through protein 

interaction domains. Science. 2003;300:445-452.

Scott JD, Dessauer CW, Taskén K. Creating order from chaos: Cellular 
regulation  by  kinase  anchoring.  Annu  Rev  Pharmacol  Toxicol. 
2013;53:187-210.

 

CHAPTER 25  n  Protein Hardware for Signaling 

441

APPENDIX 25.1 
Families of Protein Kinases

Groups

Substrate

AGC

S, T

CaMK

S, T

CK1
CMGC

S, T, (Y)
S, T, (Y)

RGC
STE

Tyrosine 
kinase

Tyrosine 
kinase- 
like
Other

S, T, Y

Y

S

S, T, Y

Atypical
Histidine 
kinases

S
H

Bacterial 
Genes

0

0

0
0

0
0

0

0

0

0 to >30*

Yeast 
Genes

17

Human 
Genes

63

Examples

PKA
PKB
PKC

PKG
RSK

GRK

16

74

CaMK

4
21

0
18

0

0

38

15
2

10
33

5
47

90

43

83

48
?

AMP-PK
MLCK
CK-I, CK-II
Cdks

MAPK
GSK3

kinases
Src family

Raf
TGF-βR

Wee1p
Polo-like
ATM, ATR
Tar

Regulation

cAMP
PI3K, PDKs
Ca2+, lipids

cGMP
MAPK, PDKs

G proteins

Ca2+, calmodulin

AMP
Ca2+, calmodulin

Cyclins, 

phosphorylation

Phosphorylation
PKB

Targets or Regulated Function

Metabolic enzymes, TFs, channels
GSK3/metabolism, survival
Receptor tyrosine kinases, 

channels, TFs

IP3R, CFTR, VASP
Ribosome/synthesis of translation 

machinery

Seven-helix receptor 

downregulation

Synaptic transmission, 

cytoskeleton, TFs

Fatty acid, cholesterol synthesis
Myosin-II/contraction
Circadian clocks, Wnt
Many/cell cycle

TFs/proliferation
Glycogen metabolism, survival

MAPK/proliferation
LIM kinase/cytoskeleton
PLCγ, Ras, MAPK pathway/cell 

proliferation

Phosphorylation

Many/proliferation, lymphocyte 

Ras
TGF-β

Phosphorylation
Phosphorylation
DNA damage
Aspartate

activation, cytoskeleton, 
adhesion

MAPKK/proliferation
Smads/differentiation

Cdks/cell cycle
Several/mitosis, cytokinesis
p53, Chk1/cell-cycle arrest
Bacterial chemotaxis, gene 

expression

MAPKK
PAK
Receptor tyrosine 

Phosphorylation
Small GTPases
Growth factors

AGC, protein kinase A, G, and C family; AMP-PK, adenosine monophosphate (AMP)–activated protein kinase; ATM, ataxia telangiectasia mutated; ATR, 
ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3-related protein; CaMK, calmodulin-activated protein kinase; cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; Cdk, cyclin-
dependent kinase; CFTR, cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator; cGMP, cyclic guanosine monophosphate; CK, casein kinase; CMGC, CDK, MAPK, 
GSK3, and CLK family; GF, growth factor; GRK, G protein–coupled receptor kinase; GSK, glycogen synthase kinase; H, histidine; IP3R, inositol 
trisphosphate receptor, a Ca2+ release channel; LIM, Lin11, Isl-1, and Mec-3; MAPK, mitogen-activated protein kinase (also called ERK, for extracellular 
signal–regulated kinase); MAPKK, MAP kinase kinase; MLCK, myosin light-chain kinase; PAK, p21 (small GTPase)-activated kinase; PDK, 
3-phosphoinositide–dependent protein kinase; PI3K, phosphatidylinositide 3′-kinase; PKA, cyclic AMP–dependent protein kinase; PKB, protein kinase B 
(also called Akt); PKC, calcium-dependent protein kinase; PKG, cyclic guanosine monophosphate (GMP)–dependent protein kinase; polo, a Drosophila 
gene; PLCγ, phospholipase C-gamma; Raf, cellular homologue of retroviral oncogene; RGC, Receptor guanylate cyclase family; RSK, ribosomal subunit 6 
kinase; S, serine; Smads, Sma- and Mad-related proteins; STE, homologs of yeast STE7; T, threonine; Tar, aspartic acid receptor; TFs, transcription factors; 
TGF, transforming growth factor; VASP, vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein; Wee1p, fission yeast kinase; (Y), tyrosine.
*Number of histidine kinases in prokaryotes. Bacteria: Bacillus subtilis 37; Escherichia coli 7; Borrelia burgdorferi—Lyme disease spirochaeta 2; 
Myobacterium tuberculosis 14—also has 11 eukaryotic serine/threonine kinase genes, likely derived by lateral gene transfer from eukaryotic hosts. 
Archaea: Methanococcus jannaschii 0; Aquifex aeolicus 0; Archaeoglobus fulgidus 3.

442 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

APPENDIX 25.2 
Parallels Among Guanosine Triphosphate-Binding Proteins

Bacterial 
Genes

Yeast 
Genes

Worm 
Genes

Functions

GDP 
Dissociation 
Inhibitors

Receptors

GTP 
Exchange 
Factors

GTPase-
Activating 
Factors

Direct 
Effectors

Arf-GEFs

Sec-7/ARNO

Arf-GAP

Rab-GDI

Rab-GEFs

Rab-GEFs

Rab-GAP

Ran-GDF1, 

RCC1

RanBP1, 

RanGAP1

COPI coat 
proteins
Docking 

and fusion 
factors

Importin β

Receptor 
tyrosine 
kinases
Receptor 
tyrosine 
kinases, 
7-helix 
receptors
Sec12 GEF

SOS

Ras-GAP

Raf

Dbl/PH-GEFs

Rho-GAP

p65 PAK, 

Sec12

Sec23

Rho 
kinase, 
WASp

COPII coat 

proteins

Seven-helix 
receptors

7-Helix 

receptors

Effector 

Many 

proteins, 
RGS 
proteins

enzymes, 
channels

Ribosome

EF-Ts/EF1β

Ribosome

Ribosome

—

Ribosome

11

24

2

8

Vesicule 

formation

Vesicle 

targeting 
and fusion

Nuclear 

transport, 
mitotic 
spindle

Transduction 

of growth 
factor signals

10

Regulation  

Rho-GDI

of actin 
cytoskeleton

3

Vesicule 

formation

20

Transduction 

Gβγ

of a wide 
variety of 
signals

5

4

Protein 

synthesis

Protein 

synthesis

1–12

Protein 

Ribosome

synthesis

Family
Small Gtpases
Arf

Rab

Ran

Ras

Rho

Sar

Trimeric G Proteins
0

Elongation Factors
EF-Tu/
EF1α

1–2

EF-G/EF2

RF1,2/eRF

Dynamin

1–2

1–2

0

Translocation GTPases
Ffh/SRP54

0

0

0

0

0

0

6

10

2

4

7

1

2

4

5

1

2

2

1–3

Endocytosis

?

Not required

Dimerization

Membrane 

fission 
factors

?

Polypeptide 

translocation 
into ER

Nascent 

SRP receptor

Sec 61 

polypeptide 
chains

translocon

EF-Tu/Ts, elongation factor Tu/Ts; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; GAP, GTPase-activating protein; GDI, guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitor; GEFs, 
guanine nucleotide exchange factors; RGS, regulators of G-protein signaling; SRP, signal recognition particle; WASp, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein.

C H A P T E R 

26 

Second Messengers

This chapter considers the remarkable variety of small 

molecules  that  carry  signals  inside  living  cells.  These 
second messengers are chemically diverse, ranging from 
hydrophobic lipids confined to membrane bilayers, to an 
inorganic  ion  (Ca2+),  to  nucleotides  (cyclic  adenosine 
monophosphate  [cAMP]  and  cyclic  guanosine  mono-
phosphate [cGMP]), to a gas (nitric oxide). The messages 
that these molecules carry are encoded by their concen-
trations. In the simplest case, a rise or fall in the concen-
tration  of  the  second  messenger  conveys  a  signal  from 
its source to its target. In other cases, the signal depends 
on the rate or frequency of the fluctuations in the con-
centration of the second messenger. The local concen-
tration  of  a  second  messenger  depends  on  the  rate  of 
production, the rate of diffusion from the site of produc-
tion, and the rate of removal. Most second messengers 
are produced by enzymes that switch on and off rapidly, 
allowing modulation of the concentration of second mes-
sengers on a millisecond time scale. In the case of Ca2+, 
the  cytoplasmic  concentration  is  determined  by  chan-
nels that release the ion from membrane-delimited stores 
and by pumps that remove it from cytoplasm.

The  physical  state  of  second  messengers  has  impor-
tant  consequences.  Lipid-derived  second  messengers 
reach different targets in the cell depending on whether 
they are more soluble in lipid bilayers or in water. Simi-
larly,  Ca2+  acts  only  locally  in  cytoplasm,  where  a  high 
concentration  of  binding  sites  limits  its  free  diffusion. 
Cyclic  nucleotides  diffuse  rapidly  through  cytoplasm, 
but their concentrations may rise and fall locally, owing 
to  restricted  sites  of  synthesis  combined  with  rapid  
hydrolysis at particular sites in the cell.

The complexity of signaling pathways is determined 
by  the  number  of  sources  and  targets  of  each  second 
messenger.  Generally,  multiple  signal  sources  and  mul-
tiple  second  messenger  targets  generate  a  remarkable 
complexity. Chapter 27 considers a few model systems 
in  which  it  is  possible  to  understand  how  signals  are 
integrated and transduced.

This chapter presents second messengers in four sec-
tions: Cyclic Nucleotides, Lipid-Derived Second Messen-
gers,  Calcium,  and  Nitric  Oxide.  All  these  topics  are 
interrelated,  as  multiple  second  messengers  participate 
in  many  signaling  systems.  For  example,  nitric  oxide 
controls  the  production  of  cGMP,  and  inositol  triphos-
phate derived from a membrane lipid controls the release 
of Ca2+ into cytoplasm.

Cyclic Nucleotides
Two  cyclic  nucleoside  monophosphates—adenosine 
3′,5′-cyclic  monophosphate  (cAMP)  and  guanosine 
3′5′-cyclic  monophosphate  (cGMP)—are  employed  as 
second  messengers  (Fig.  26.1).  Both  act  by  binding 
reversibly  to  specific  proteins.  Enzymes  that  produce 
and degrade cyclic nucleotides determine the concentra-
tions of these messengers available to bind targets. These 
enzymes turn over their substrates rapidly, so they can 
amplify  signals  massively  on  a  millisecond  time  scale, 
under  the  control  of  diverse  signaling  pathways  (see 
three  examples  in  Chapter  27).  Cyclases  make  cyclic 
nucleotides  in  a  single  step  from  the  corresponding 
nucleoside triphosphate, either adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP) or guanosine triphosphate (GTP).

Cyclic  nucleotides  diffuse  in  the  cytoplasm  at  about 
the  same  rate  as  in  free  solution,  activating  a  selected 
repertoire  of  downstream  targets,  including  protein 
kinases  (see  Figs.  25.3  and  25.4),  cyclic  nucleotide–
gated  ion  channels  (see  Fig.  16.10),  and,  in  the  case 
of  cAMP,  one  class  of  guanine  nucleotide  exchange 
factors  (Epac)  for  small  guanosine  triphosphatases 
(GTPases)  (Rap1  and  Rap2).  The  components  of  this 
system  are  quite  ancient.  The  protein  domains  of  the 
effector proteins that bind cAMP or cGMP are homolo-
gous to the cAMP-binding domain of CAP (cAMP binding 
protein), a bacterial transcription factor. Enzymes called 
cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases hydrolyze cAMP 
and  cGMP  to  inactive  nucleoside  5′-monophosphates. 

 443

444 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

Precursor

Second messenger

Inactive product

O–

O–
P

O

O

O

O–

P

O

O

P

O

O–

N

H

N

O

N

CH2
H

H

OH

H

H
OH

Seven-helix 

receptors

NH2

Gsα Giα

N

H

Adenylyl
 cyclase

H

N

N

NH2

Ca-calmodulin

N

H

cAMP

Phosphodiesterase

O–

O–
P

O

O

CH2
H

H

CH2
O
H
O
P
O–

O

O

N

H

H
OH

H

N

N

NH2

N

H

O

N

H

H
OH

OH

5'-AMP

H2N

N

N

O

N

O

N

H

H

H
OH

OH

O–
P

O

O

O

ATP

O–

3' 5'-cyclic AMP

O–

P

O

O

P

O

O–

CH2
H

H

H2N

N

N

O

N

O

N

H

H

H
OH

OH

Ligand

H2N

N

N

Receptor

guanylyl cyclase

Cytoplasmic

guanylyl cyclase

CH2
O
H
O
P
O–

O

O

N

H

H
OH

Targets:
  cAMP-protein kinase
  cAMP-gated ion channels
  ePAC GEF

O

N

H

Gtα

cGMP

Phosphodiesterase

O–

O–
P

O

O

CH2
H

H

GTP

3' 5'-cyclic GMP

NO

Targets:
  cGMP-protein kinase
  cGMP-gated ion channels

5'-GMP

FIGURE  26.1  CYCLIC NUCLEOTIDE METABOLISM. Synthesis and degradation of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and cyclic 
guanosine monophosphate (cGMP), including regulatory inputs and targets. Gsα, Giα, and Gtα are trimeric guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) 
α subunits (see Fig. 25.9). AMP, adenosine monophosphate; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; Ca, calcium; GMP, guanosine monophosphate; GTP, 
guanosine triphosphate; NO, nitric oxide. 

Eleven genes encode more than 40 different phosphodi-
esterases,  which  vary  in  their  specificities  for  the  two 
cyclic  nucleotides,  expression  in  various  tissues,  and 
localization to cellular compartments.

A family (10 human genes) of enzymes called adeny-
lyl  cyclases  synthesize  cAMP  from  ATP.  One  adenylyl 
cyclase is a soluble enzyme that can concentrate in the 
nucleus. However, most of these enzymes are anchored 
to  the  plasma  membrane  by  multiple  transmembrane 
segments. Two homologous catalytic domains reside in 
the cytoplasm (C1 and C2 in Fig. 26.2). These cytoplasmic 
domains can be produced experimentally as soluble pro-
teins  separately  from  the  transmembrane  domains  and 
can then be recombined to make a fully active enzyme. 
Both domains are necessary because the active site lies 
at the interface between them. Generally, the concentra-
tion  of  adenylyl  cyclases  is  very  low  relative  to  the  tri-
meric G-proteins that regulate their activity.

Multiple regulatory mechanisms act synergistically to 
regulate adenylyl cyclases. GTP-Gsα, the GTPase subunit 
of  a  trimeric  G-protein,  activates  many  membrane-
associated  adenylyl  cyclases  by  binding  far  from  the 
active  site  (Fig.  26.2)  and  inducing  a  conformational 
change. Ca2+-calmodulin or protein kinase C (PKC) acti-
vate  other  adenylyl  cyclases.  GTP-Giα,  the  GTPase 
subunit of another trimeric G-protein, and protein kinase 
A  (PKA)  each  inhibit  some  cyclases.  Gβγ  subunits  of 

trimeric G-proteins activate some adenylyl cyclases but 
inhibit  others.  These  diverse  regulatory  mechanisms 
allow  adenylyl  cyclases  to  integrate  a  variety  of  input 
signals.  The  diterpene  forskolin  from  a  Coleus  plant 
binds to and activates adenylyl cyclases. Forskolin is not 
only  useful  to  manipulate  the  cAMP  concentration  in 
cells experimentally, but it is also used to purify adenylyl 
cyclases  by  affinity  chromatography.  Regulation  of  the 
soluble form of adenylyl cyclase differs from that of all 
other isoforms. It is activated by bicarbonate, an essential 
step in sperm maturation.

The  concentration  of  cAMP  in  resting  cells  is  too  
low,  approximately  10−8 M,  to  bind  its  targets.  Stimula-
tion  of  appropriate  receptors  (such  as  the  seven-helix 
β-adrenergic receptor, see Fig. 27.3) increases the cyto-
plasmic cAMP concentration more than 100-fold, enough 
to  saturate  the  regulatory  subunits  of  protein  kinase  A 
(PKA) (Fig. 26.3). Dissociation of the regulatory (R) sub-
units  frees  the  active  PKA  catalytic  subunits  (see  Fig. 
25.3D)  to  phosphorylate  cytoplasmic  and  membrane 
substrates and to move into the nucleus to activate the 
transcription  factor  CREB  (cyclic  nucleotide  regulatory 
element–binding protein) (see Fig. 10.21).

Outside  the  animal  kingdom,  cAMP  has  many  func-
tions.  In  bacteria,  cAMP  controls  gene  expression  in 
response  to  nutritional  conditions.  The  cellular  slime 
mold Dictyostelium uses cAMP as an extracellular signal, 

 

CHAPTER 26  n  Second Messengers 

445

A. Resting cell

B. 19 sec

C. 49 sec

M1

M2

1 2 3 4

5 6

7 8 9 10 11 12

C1a

N

A

C2a
C1b

N

N

Cl-

GTP

Forskolin

C

C2b

N
C

N

ATP

C

C

B

Gsα • GTP

Adenylyl cyclase

FIGURE 26.2  ADENYLYL CYCLASE. A, Topology of the polypep-
tide. The C1a and C2a regions fold together to form the active enzyme. 
B, Atomic structure of the catalytic domains of adenylyl cyclase associ-
ated with Gsα. ATP is bound to the active site. Breaks in the chain are 
caused by disordered regions. (For reference, see Protein Data Bank 
[PDB; www.rcsb.org] file 1CJK. From Tesmer JJ, Sunahara RK, Gilman 
AG, et al. Crystal structure of the catalytic domains of adenylyl cyclase 
in a complex with Gsα GTPγS. Science. 1997;278:1907–1916. Copy-
right 1997 American Association for the Advancement of Science.)

acting through a seven-helix receptor, for its social inter-
actions (see Fig. 38.10).

Guanylyl  cyclases  are  dimeric  enzymes  similar  to 
adenylyl  cyclases.  In  fact,  mutation  of  just  two  amino 
acid residues can convert a guanylyl cyclase to an adeny-
lyl  cyclase.  Vertebrates  express  two  types  of  guanylyl 
cyclases  (see  Fig.  24.8).  Members  of  a  family  of  trans-
membrane receptors with cytoplasmic cyclase domains 
respond to ligand binding by aligning the two cytoplas-
mic domains of the enzyme to produce cGMP. The gases 
nitric oxide and carbon monoxide activate cytoplasmic 
guanylyl  cyclases  when  they  bind  a  heme  group  in  a 
regulatory domain (see “Nitric Oxide” below).

Lipid-Derived Second Messengers
Phosphoglycerides  (see  Fig.  13.2)  and  sphingolipids  
(see  Fig.  13.3)  not  only  form  cellular  membranes,  but 
also participate in a wide range of signaling mechanisms. 
The  long  list  of  intracellular  and  extracellular  second 
messengers  derived  from  lipids  is  undoubtedly  still 

Stimulate with serotonin

D. Resting cell

E. 3 min

F. 2 hrs

Stimulate with serotonin, forskolin, IBMX

FIGURE 26.3 
IMAGES OF cAMP TRANSIENTS IN CULTURED 
APLYSIA SENSORY NEURONS. Neurons were injected with protein 
kinase A (PKA) labeled on the catalytic subunit with fluorescein and on 
the regulatory subunit with rhodamine. Fluorescence energy transfer 
between the dyes on the two subunits provides an assay for cAMP, 
which dissociates the subunits and reduces energy transfer. Fluores-
cent  dyes  also  allow  detection  of  the  subunits  inside  the  neuron.  
A,  Free  cAMP  in  the  resting  cell  is  <50  nM  (blue).  B–C,  Stimulation 
with  serotonin  activates  adenylyl  cyclase  and  increases  cytoplasmic 
cAMP to the micromolar range (red), especially within fine processes. 
Images 120 µm wide were taken just inside the cell near the coverslip. 
D, Another resting neuron imaged at the level of the nucleus. At the 
low resting level of cAMP, <50 nM (blue) labeled PKA is excluded from 
the nucleus. E, Stimulation with serotonin plus forskolin (to stimulate 
adenylyl  cyclase)  and  isobutylmethylxanthine  (IBMX)  to  inhibit  phos-
phodiesterases that catalyze cAMP breakdown, raises the concentra-
tion of cAMP around the nucleus (yellow). F, Two hours later, the free 
catalytic subunit of PKA (pink) accumulates in the nucleus. (Courtesy 
R.Y.  Tsien,  University  of  California,  San  Diego.  F,  From  Bacskai  BJ, 
Hochner  B,  Mahaut-Smith  M,  et al.  Spatially  resolved  dynamics  of 
cAMP and protein kinase A in Aplysia neurons. Science. 1993;260:222–
226.  Copyright  1993  American  Association  for  the  Advancement  of 
Science.)

incomplete.  Three  membrane  lipids  are  the  primary 
sources of these signaling molecules (Fig. 26.4):
1.  Phosphatidylinositol  and  its  various  phosphory-
lated  derivatives,  discussed  later,  are  minor  lipids  of 
the cytoplasmic leaflet of the plasma membrane and 
organelle membranes.

2.  Phosphatidylcholine  is  a  major  membrane  phos-
phoglyceride  found  in  both  leaflets  of  the  plasma 
membrane and organelle membranes (see Fig. 13.2).
3.  Sphingomyelin, the major membrane sphingolipid, 
concentrates in the outer leaflet of the plasma mem-
brane (see Fig. 13.3).

Enzyme Reactions That Produce Lipid  
Second Messengers
Three kinds of enzymes—phospholipases, lipid kinases, 
and  lipid  phosphatases—produce  most  lipid-derived 
second  messengers.  Remarkably,  most  conceivable 

446 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

A. PIP2 (Phosphatidylinositol 4, 5-bisphosphate)

Phosphatidic acid

Diacylglycerol

O 
C

O

Arachidonic acid

IP3

OH    
   OPO2
⫺

OPO3

=

O

O 
P
O-

O

Phospholipase D

Phospholipase C

Phospholipase A2

O

C 
O

O

C 
O

B. PC (Phosphatidylcholine)

Phosphatidic acid

Diacylglycerol

O 
C

O

Arachidonic acid

C. Sphingomyelin
Ceramide
Sphingosine

Fatty acid

O

O 
P
O-

O

CH2 CH2

CH3 
N+
CH3

CH3

Phospholipase D

Phospholipase C

Phospholipase A2

OH 

O
NH2

C 
O

O CH2 CH2

O 
P
O-
Sphingomyelinase

CH3 
N+
CH3

CH3

Ceramidase

FIGURE  26.4  PRODUCTION  OF  LIPID  SECOND  MESSEN-
GERS  BY  ENZYMATIC  ATTACKS  ON  THREE  PARENT  LIPIDS. 
A,  PIP2  (phosphatidylinositol  4,5-bisphosphate).  IP3,  inositol  triphos-
phate. B, PC (phosphatidylcholine). C, Sphingomyelin. Second mes-
sengers are named and are surrounded by colored boxes. 

products that could be produced by these enzymes from 
the three parent lipids do indeed participate in signaling 
reactions, either directly or indirectly. The second mes-
sengers produced by these reactions partition between 
the  aqueous  phase  of  the  cytoplasm  (products  desig-
nated  by  italics  in  this  section)  and  the  hydrophobic 
phase of the membrane bilayer (products designated by 
bold italics in this section). In the following paragraphs, 
the  details  of  the  various  enzymatic  reactions  and  the 
structures of the lipid derivatives are less important than 
is  the  broader  principle  that  cells  use  the  full  range  of 
chemical  diversity  in  their  membrane  lipids  to  create 
chemical signals to regulate cellular activities.

Three types of enzyme reactions generate lipid second 

messengers:
•  Three types of phospholipases cleave three of the 
four  ester  bonds  of  phosphoglycerides  (Fig.  26.4). 
Corresponding  enzymes  attack  the  two  ester  bonds 
and single amide bond of sphingomyelin. Phospho-
lipase A2 (PLA2) removes the C2 fatty acid, yielding 
a free fatty acid, which partitions into the cytoplasm 
with  the  aid  of  fatty  acid–binding  proteins,  and  a 
lysophosphoglyceride. The corresponding cerami-
dase  removes  the  fatty  acid  from  sphingomyelin. 
When  phospholipase  C 
the 

(PLC)  cleaves 

(such  as 

phosphorylated  head  group 
inositol 
1,4,5-triphosphate [IP3]) from a phosphoglyceride, it 
leaves  behind  diacylglycerol  (DAG)  in  the  mem-
brane  bilayer.  The  corresponding  sphingomyelinase 
leaves  behind  ceramide  in  the  membrane  bilayer. 
Phospholipase D (PLD) cleaves the polar head group 
from  phosphoglycerides,  producing  phosphatidic 
acid that remains in the bilayer. Production of phos-
phatidic  acid  from  phosphatidylcholine  generates 
choline, which has no known signaling activity. Phos-
pholipase  A1  (PLA1),  which  cleaves  the  ester  bond 
linking the fatty acid to the C1 position on the glycerol 
is also not yet known to participate in signaling.

•  Lipid kinases add phosphate groups to DAG to make 
phosphatidic  acid  and  to  phosphatidylinositol  to 
make  a  variety  of  polyphosphoinositides,  including 
phosphatidylinositol  4-phosphate  (PIP),  phos-
phatidylinositol  4,5-bisphosphate  (PIP2 ),  and 
phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3 ). 
PIP2  is  a  substrate  for  a  family  of  phosphoinositide-
specific phospholipase Cs that produce the important 
signaling molecules DAG and IP3 (Fig. 26.4A).

•  Lipid phosphatases remove phosphate from phos-
phatidic acid (another way to make DAG) and phos-
phates from inositol head groups.
Cells also use transferases that add or exchange head 
groups  or  fatty  acids  on  membrane  phosphoglycerides 
(see  Fig.  13.2).  These  enzymes  are  essential  for  lipid  
biosynthesis but have not been implicated in signaling. 
For example, transferases add choline (as the nucleotide 
conjugate cytidine diphosphate [CDP]–choline) to DAG 
to  make  phosphatidylcholine).  In  the  case  of  phospha-
tidylinositol,  the  head  group  is  provided  by  dephos-
phorylation  of  IP3  to  inositol,  which  is  recombined 
enzymatically  with  a  CDP  conjugate  of  DAG  to  make 
phosphatidylinositol.

Sequential action of two or more enzymes produces 
some  lipid  second  messengers.  For  example,  cells  can 
make DAG in two steps from phosphatidylcholine: PLD 
first  makes  phosphatidic  acid,  which  is  then  dephos-
phorylated  by  phosphatidic  acid  phosphatase.  PLD  fol-
lowed  by  PLA2  makes  lysophosphatidic  acid  from 
phosphatidylcholine. PLA2 also initiates the production 
of  a  huge  family  of  fatty  acid  derivatives  called  eico-
sanoids by cleaving the fatty acid arachidonic acid from 
phosphatidylcholine.  Cyclooxygenases  and  lipoxygen-
ases then modify arachidonic acid to make prostaglan-
dins,  thromboxanes,  and  leukotrienes  (Figs.  26.9  and 
26.10), signaling molecules that leave the cell to interact 
with surface receptors on other cells.

Agonists and Receptors
Most signaling pathways have the potential to produce 
lipid second messengers, depending on the expression 
of  the  appropriate  enzymes.  Some  pathways  activate 
enzymes directly. For example, receptor tyrosine kinases 

 

CHAPTER 26  n  Second Messengers 

447

bind and activate certain phosphatidylinositol phos-
pholipase  Cs  (PI-PLCs).  Seven-helix  receptors  signal 
through  trimeric  G-proteins  to  activate  another  PI-PLC. 
Other pathways are less direct; one leads from G-protein–
coupled receptors or receptor tyrosine kinases to DAG 
and PKC, activating an isoform of PLD.

Targets of Lipid Second Messengers
Downstream targets of the lipid second messengers are 
diverse but can be generalized to some extent into three 
categories (Fig. 26.5):
1.  Most lipid second messengers derived from phospho-
glycerides and retained in the membrane bilayer exert 
their  physiological  effects  on  PKC  isozymes  (Figs. 
26.5 and 26.6). Ceramide is also retained in the bilayer, 

where it activates another protein kinase and a protein 
phosphatase (Fig. 26.11). Phosphatidic acid activates 
a lipid kinase, PI5 kinase, which phosphorylates phos-
phatidylinositol (Fig. 26.7).

2.  IP3  and  sphingosine-1-phosphate  each  use  different 
mechanisms  to  release  Ca2+  from  vesicular  stores  in 
the cytoplasm (Fig. 26.12).

3.  All  water-soluble  lipid  second  messengers  contain-
ing  or  derived  from  fatty  acids  (platelet-activating 
factor  [PAF], 
lysophosphatidic  acid  [LPA],  eico-
sanoids)  cross  the  plasma  membrane  and  leave  the 
cell.  Then  they  bind  and  activate  seven-helix  recep-
tors on the surface of target cells.
With  so  much  potential  for  information  transfer  
(multiple  agonists,  multiple  membrane  transduction  

Phospholipid
precursors

Phosphatidylinositol
(4, 5)-bisphosphate

Phosphatidylcholine

Enzymes

PI3 kinase

PI-PLC

PC-PLC

PLD

PLA2

Second
messengers

Ptdlns

(3, 4, 5)-P3

DAG

PtdOH LysoPtdCho

Seven-helix
receptors

Out of cell

Out of cell

Sphingomyelin

Sphingomyelinase

Ceramide

Target
proteins

PKC(s)

PH-domain

proteins

Ins

(1, 4, 5)-P3

IP3 receptor/
Ca2+ channel

PKC(s)

PKC(s)
Other
targets?

PKC(s)

Arachidonate

Eicosanoids

PKC(s)
SMase

PP2A

Ser/Thr kinase

Sphingosine-
1-phosphate

Ca2+ 
stores

FIGURE  26.5  GENERATION  OF  LIPID  SECOND  MESSENGERS  AND  THEIR  CELLULAR  TARGETS.  Lyso PtdCho,  lysophosphatidyl 
choline; PKC, protein kinase C; PLA2, phospholipase A2; PP2A, protein phosphatase 2A; PtdIns (3,4,5)-P3, phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate 
(PIP3); PtdOH, phosphatidic acid. (Modified from Liscovitch M, Cantley LC. Lipid second messengers. Cell. 1994;77:329–334.)

A. Structure

Regulatory domain

DAG / 

Phorbol esters

Calcium/

acidic lipids

Kinase domain

N

PS

C1

C 2

C2-like

α

β

γ

δ

ε

η

ζ

B. Tissue 
distribution

C. Activators

C

Ubiquitous

Ca2+, DAG, PS, FFA, LysoPC

Many tissues

Ca2+, DAG, PS, FFA, LysoPC

Brain only

Ubiquitous

Brain, others

Lung, skin, heart

Ubiquitous

Ca2+, DAG, PS, FFA, LysoPC

DAG, PS

DAG, PS

?

PIP3

FIGURE  26.6  PROTEIN  KINASE  C  (PKC)  FAMILY.  A,  Domain  organization  of  PKC  isozymes  with  ligand-binding  sites.  PS  (yellow  box) 
indicates the pseudosubstrate sequence that binds to and inhibits the kinase catalytic site. B, Tissue distribution. C, Activators. DAG, diacylg-
lycerol; FFA, free fatty acid; LysoPC, lysophosphatidylcholine; PIP3, phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate; PS, phosphatidylserine. 

448 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

Phosphatidylinositol

HO

HO

HO

O 
P
OH

O

O

OH

OH

Phosphoinositide
pathways

PtdIns-3,5P2

O 
C

O

C 
O

O

Regulated by receptor
tyrosine kinases and
seven-helix receptors
Regulated by receptor
tyrosine kinases

Second messengers

PtdIns-3P

PtdIns-3,4P2

PtdIns-3,4,5P3

PI-3K

PI-3K

PTEN

PI-3K

PI-4K

PtdIns

PtdIns-4P

PtdIns-5P

PI-5K

PtdIns-4,5P2

PLC

IP3 + DAG

Resynthesis

Li+

Inositol + PA

FIGURE  26.7  SYNTHESIS  AND  TURNOVER  OF  PHOS-
PHOINOSITIDES.  Enzymes  regulated  by  both  receptor  tyrosine 
kinases and seven-helix receptors are purple. Enzymes regulated only 
by receptor tyrosine kinases are blue. Second messengers are green. 
PA,  phosphatidic  acid;  PI-3k,  phosphatidylinositol  3′-kinase;  PI-4k, 
phosphatidylinositol  4′-kinase;  PI-5k,  phosphatidylinositol  5′-kinase; 
PLC,  phospholipase  C;  PLD,  phospholipase  D;  PtdIns,  phosphati-
dylinositol; PTEN, phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chro-
mosome 10 (a tumor suppressor). 

mechanisms,  multiple  lipid  second  messengers,  and  
multiple  downstream  targets),  where  is  the  specificity  
in  these  systems?  Do  all  cells  respond  in  all  possible 
ways?  The  answer  is  no  because  the  protein  hardware 
required  for  these  reactions  is  selectively  expressed  in 
differentiated  cells  and  carefully  localized  at  particular 
sites in cells, such as the plasma membrane, nucleus, or 
cytoskeleton. In addition, targeting of PKC isozymes to 
particular  cellular  compartments  ensures  that  only 
selected  substrates  are  phosphorylated  in  response  to 
lipid  second  messenger  production.  Thus,  each  cell  
uses  a  limited  number  of  items  from  the  lipid  second 
messenger  menu  to  produce  a  customized  response  to 
each agonist.

Other  parts  of  this  book  present  examples  of  lipid 
second  messengers  participating  in  many  processes.  
For  example,  regulated  secretion  (see  Chapter  21)  in 
response  to  an  agonist  binding  a  seven-helix  or  tyro-
sine  kinase  receptor  requires  a  transient  Ca2+  signal  in 
the  cytoplasm.  These  receptors  activate  a  PI-PLC  to 
produce IP3 from PIP2. IP3 releases Ca2+ from the endo-
plasmic  reticulum  (ER).  IP3-mediated  Ca2+  release  from 
the  ER  also  controls  smooth  muscle  contraction  
(see Fig. 39.24).

Protein Kinase C
Many lipid second messengers, including DAG, PIP3, ara-
chidonic acid, phosphatidic acid, and lysophosphatidyl-
choline  activate  one  or  more  of  the  10  PKC  isozymes 
expressed by vertebrate cells (Fig. 26.6). These diverse 
PKC  isozymes  provide  a  selective  response  to  various 
lipid  second  messengers.  Some,  but  not  all,  PKC  iso-
zymes also require Ca2+ for activation. Sphingosine may 
inhibit some PKC isozymes.

Lipid second messengers activate PKC by dissociating 
an intramolecular pseudosubstrate sequence from the 
active  site.  Pseudosubstrates  have  alanine  at  the  phos-
phorylation site instead of the serine found in substrates. 
DAG and other lipid second messengers bind C1 regions 
adjacent to the pseudosubstrate. DAG binding depends 
on  phosphoglycerides,  such  as  phosphatidylserine. 
Phorbol esters, pharmacological activators of PKC that 
promote  tumor  formation  in  laboratory  experiments, 
bind  PKC  in  a  fashion  similar  to  DAG.  Ca2+-dependent 
PKC isozymes have C2 regions that mediate binding to 
phospholipids in the presence of Ca2+. During apoptosis, 
caspases  cleave  off  this  regulatory  domain  (see  Fig. 
46.12) producing constitutively active PKC isoforms.

Activated  PKCs  have  many  potential  targets  in  cells 
and are implicated in the regulation of cellular activities 
ranging  from  gene  expression  to  cell  motility  to  the 
generation  of  lipid  second  messengers.  PKC  isozymes 
are selective toward certain protein substrates. The C2 
regions  target  PKC  isozymes  to  the  plasma  membrane, 
cytoskeleton, or nucleus.

PKCs can provide either positive or negative feedback 
to the signaling pathways that turn them on. PKC acti-
vates  PLD  and  PLA2  and  provides  positive  feedback, 
because  those  enzymes  produce  more  DAG  to  sustain 
the activation of PKC. On the other hand, PKC provides 
negative  feedback  when  it  phosphorylates  and  inhibits 
both  growth  factor  receptors  and  PI-PLCγ1.  PKC  also 
phosphorylates and inhibits PI-PLCβ, generating negative 
feedback after activation of seven-helix receptors. Nega-
tive  feedback  makes  both  of  these  signaling  events 
transient.

Phosphoinositide Signaling Pathways
Although  minor  in  terms  of  mass  in  biological  mem-
branes, phosphoinositides are major players in signaling 
(Fig. 26.7). The parent compound, PI, is a phosphoglyc-
eride  with  a  cyclohexanol  head  group  called  inositol. 
Specific lipid kinases phosphorylate the 4 and 5 hydroxyl 
groups  of  phosphatidylinositol  to  form  PI(4-)P  and 
PI(4,5-)P2, usually referred to simply as PIP and PIP2. A 
specific  phosphatase  can  remove  the  D5  phosphate. 
Inactivation of the single copy of this gene on the human 
X-chromosome  causes  Lowe  syndrome  with  cataracts, 
renal failure, and intellectual disability.

PIP2  is  a  substrate  for  a  family  of  receptor-controlled 
PI-PLCs  that  cleave  off  the  phosphorylated  head  group, 

 

CHAPTER 26  n  Second Messengers 

449

producing two potent second messengers: IP3 and DAG. 
Water-soluble  IP3  activates  Ca2+  release  channels  in  the 
ER (Fig. 26.12), and lipid-soluble DAG activates PKC (Fig. 
26.5). In contrast to Ca2+, which diffuses slowly and acts 
locally,  IP3  diffuses  rapidly  through  the  cytoplasm,  trig-
gering  Ca2+  release.  DAG  is  confined  to  membranes 
but diffuses laterally to bind and activate PKC. Enzymes 
inactivate both IP3 and DAG. DAG is inactivated by phos-
phorylation  to  make  phosphatidic  acid,  a  second  mes-
senger  in  its  own  right  but  also  an  intermediate  in  the 
resynthesis  of  phosphoinositides.  IP3  is  dephosphory-
lated to inositol, which is inactive as a second messenger. 
Lithium  chloride  (LiCl)  inhibits  the  final  step,  dephos-
phorylation of inositol-1-phosphate. Li+ is clinically useful 
as  a  treatment  for  bipolar  disorder,  but  it  is  not  certain 
that it has its effects through phosphoinositide signaling. 
Some tissues inactivate IP3 by phosphorylation to inositol 
1,3,4,5-tetrakisphosphate (IP4).

Vertebrates use 10 classes of PI-PLCs to provide tissue-
specific coupling of various receptors to the production 
of IP3 and DAG. An Src homology 2 (SH2) domain targets 
PI-PLCγ1  to  a  phosphotyrosine  on  a  receptor  tyrosine 
kinase,  which  then  activates  the  newly  bound  PLC  by 
tyrosine phosphorylation (Fig. 26.12). Trimeric G-protein 
Gqα activates another isozyme, PI-PLCβ.

When a PI-PLC hydrolyzes PIP2, phosphatidylinositol-4 
kinase  and  phosphatidylinositol-5  kinase  respond  to 
replace  the  pool  of  PIP2  at  the  expense  of  membrane 
phosphatidylinositol.  This  generates  a  transient  flux  of 
lipid molecules from phosphatidylinositol to PIP to PIP2 
to  DAG.  On  a  longer  time  scale,  phosphatidylinositol  
is  replaced  by  synthesis  from  phosphatidic  acid  and 
inositol.

Receptor  tyrosine  kinases  activate  another  family  of 
lipid  kinases,  PI-3  kinases,  which  phosphorylate  the 
3-hydroxyl group of PI, PIP, and PIP2. The products are 
PI(3-)P,  PI(3,4-)P2,  and  PI(3,4,5-)P3.  PI(3,4,5-)P3  is  not  a 
substrate for the PI-PLCs that produce IP3 and DAG, but 
it activates some PKC isozymes and binds specifically to 
certain  pleckstrin  homology  domains  (see  Fig.  25.10), 
bringing  enzymes  such  as  protein  kinase  B  (PKB/Akt) 
to  the  plasma  membrane.  Association  with  the  mem-
brane leads to phosphorylation and activation of PKB as 
part  of  insulin  signaling  (see  Fig.  27.7).  A  phosphatase 
that removes the D3 phosphate from PIP3 is a tumor sup-
pressor called PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog 
deleted  on  chromosome  10).  Loss  of  PTEN  function  in 
tumors  allows  PIP3  to  build  up,  activating  PKB  and 
growth-promoting downstream pathways involving Tor 
kinase.  A  steroid-like  molecule  called  wortmannin 
inhibits PI-3 kinase relatively specifically and is used to 
investigate the physiological roles of PIP3.

Phosphatidylcholine Signaling Pathways
Phosphatidylcholine is not only a major structural lipid 
of  the  plasma  membrane  but  also  an  important  source 

PI-PLC

PC-PLD

PLA2

AA

PA

PC-PLC

DAG

e
s
n
o
p
s
e
R

Ins (1, 4, 5)P3

Seconds

Minutes

Hours

FIGURE  26.8  TIME  COURSE  OF  LIPID  SECOND  MESSEN-
GERS PRODUCED BY VARIOUS PHOSPHOLIPASES FOLLOW-
ING  ACTIVATION  OF  RECEPTOR  TYROSINE  KINASES  OR 
SEVEN-HELIX RECEPTORS. AA, arachidonic acid; DAG, diacylglyc-
erol; PA, phosphatidic acid; PLA2, phospholipase A2. 

of DAG and a large family of other signaling molecules 
(Fig.  26.5).  In  response  to  agonist  stimulation,  cells 
produce two waves of DAG (Fig. 26.8). Within seconds, 
PI-PLCs activated by seven-helix or tyrosine kinase recep-
tors produce the first wave of DAG from PIP2. Then, over 
a  period  of  minutes,  a  second  wave  of  DAG  is  derived 
from phosphatidylcholine, either directly by a phospha-
tidylcholine (PC)-PLC or in two steps by PLD (to remove 
choline) and a phosphatidic acid phosphatase (to remove 
the  phosphate  from  phosphatidic  acid).  The  first  wave 
of DAG may contribute to the second wave as PKC acti-
vates  one  PLD  isoform,  and  Ca2+  produced  in  the  first 
wave may also activate PLD.

Phosphatidylcholine  is  also  the  main  source  of  fatty 
acid–derived second messengers. PLA2 releases arachi-
donic  acid,  a  C20  unsaturated  fatty  acid  that  is  found 
predominantly at the C2 position of phosphoglycerides. 
Arachidonic  acid  activates  some  PKC  isozymes  and, 
together with DAG, provides positive feedback to PLA2 
and  PLD  to  sustain  the  production  of  arachidonic  acid 
and DAG.

Lipid-Derived Second Messengers for  
Intercellular Communication
Cells produce an amazing array of bioactive compounds 
from phosphatidylcholine and arachidonic acid, forming 
second messengers that escape from the cell and mediate 
their effects by binding to receptors either on the cell of 
origin or neighboring cells. Thus these compounds are 
locally active hormones. This sets them apart from clas-
sical second messengers, which (with the exception of 
nitric  oxide)  act  inside  the  cell  of  origin.  All  the  com-
pounds  presented  here  activate  target  cells  by  binding 

450 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

ER LUMEN

Triglycerides

Lipases

Arachidonic
acid

COOH

2 O2 
Cyclooxygenase activity of COX

PGG2 

O
O

COOH

OOH

Peroxidase activity of COX

PGH2 

O
O

COOH

OH

CYTOPLASM

Final products leave the
cell of origin and bind
to seven-helix receptors

HOOC

O

ECM

Prostacyclin = PGI2
(inhibits platelets)

HO

OH

Phospho-
glycerides
(PI, PC, PE)
Cholesterol

esters

Cyclooxygenase 1

Cyclooxygenase 2

or

COOH

COOH

COOH

COOH

OH

OH

OH

OH

Endotheliu m
Platelets

Thromboxane A2 = TXA2 
(activates platelets)

O
O

HO

O

O

PGD2 

i

s
o
m
e
r
a
s
e
s

S
p
e
c
a

i

l
i

z
e
d

HO

PGE2 

HO
HO

PGF2α 

FIGURE 26.9  PATHWAY OF PROSTAGLANDIN SYNTHESIS. Cyclooxygenase-1 (ribbon diagram with space-filling surface) is a homodimer 
that is bound to the inner surface of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane by hydrophobic membrane-binding helices. This enzyme has two 
active  sites  that  convert  arachidonic  acid  to  prostaglandin  H2.  A  hydrophobic  channel  2.5 nm  long  leads  from  the  bilayer  to  the  active  sites. 
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs compete with arachidonic acid for binding to the cyclooxygenase active site, and aspirin covalently modifies 
serine 530 in the active site. Specific prostaglandin synthases on the cytoplasmic surface of the ER convert prostaglandin H2 into various products, 
which then diffuse out of the cell. COX, cyclooxygenase; PC, phosphatidylcholine; PE, phosphatidylethanolamine; PI, phosphatidylinositol; TXA2, 
thromboxane A2. (For reference, see PDB file 1CQE.) 

seven-helix  receptors.  Vertebrates  make  a  particularly 
rich  variety  of  these  lipid-derived  signaling  molecules, 
but  slime  molds  and  algae  use  some  of  the  same  com-
pounds for communication.

Eicosanoids (eicosa is Greek for “20”) are a diverse 
family  of  metabolites  derived  from  the  20-carbon  
fatty  acid  arachidonic  acid.  They  include  prostaglan-
dins,  thromboxanes,  leukotrienes,  and  lipoxins 
(Figs.  26.9  and  26.10).  Depending  on  the  particular 
receptor and G-protein, eicosanoids selectively activate 
or  inhibit  the  synthesis  of  cAMP,  release  Ca2+,  activate 
PKC, or regulate ion channels. Biological consequences 
are  diverse,  depending  on  the  specific  eicosanoid  and 
target cell. Eicosanoids are important medically as media-
tors of inflammation.

Prostaglandins  and  thromboxanes  are  synthesized 
from arachidonic acid by pairs of enzymes, the first being 
generic  and  the  second  being  specific  for  a  particular 
product (Fig. 26.9). Most differentiated cells express pre-
dominantly  one  second-step  enzyme  and  thus  produce 
just one of these local hormones.

The  first  enzyme,  prostaglandin  H  synthetase 
(also  called  cyclooxygenase),  has  two  active  sites  that 
catalyze  successive  reactions  that  convert  arachidonic 
acid  into  prostaglandin  G2  and  then  into  prostaglan-
din  H2.  Most  cells  express  cyclooxygenase-1  (COX-1) 

constitutively  as  a  housekeeping  enzyme.  Inflamma-
tory  stimuli  induce  expression  of  the  closely  related  
enzyme  cyclooxygenase-2  (COX-2).  Cyclooxygenases 
are  located  inside  the  ER  and  intermembrane  space  of 
the  nuclear  envelope.  Second-tier  enzymes  are  specific 
prostaglandin isomerases that convert prostaglandin 
H into various prostaglandin and thromboxane products 
on the cytoplasmic surface of the ER.

Physiological responses to each eicosanoid depend on 
the  selective  expression  of  specific  seven-helix  recep-
tors. For example, receptors for prostaglandin F2a prepare 
the uterus, but not other organs of pregnant mammals, 
for delivery. Counteracting eicosanoids and their recep-
tors  control  the  response  of  platelets  to  blood  vessel 
damage  (see  Fig.  30.14).  Normally,  endothelial  cells 
lining blood vessels produce prostaglandin I2 (prostacy-
clin),  which  inhibits  interaction  of  platelets  with  the 
vessel wall and promotes blood flow by relaxing smooth 
muscle cells in the wall of the vessel. If blood vessels are 
damaged, the blood-clotting protein thrombin activates 
platelets to aggregate and plug gaps in the endothelium 
(see Fig. 30.14). Activated platelets produce thrombox-
ane  A2,  which  diffuses  locally  to  promote  irreversible 
platelet aggregation and blood vessel constriction by trig-
gering smooth muscle cells to produce IP3, release Ca2+, 
and  contract  (see  Fig.  39.24).  This  secondary  response 

 

CHAPTER 26  n  Second Messengers 

451

COOH

Arachidonic acid

Lipoxygenase

H 

OOH 

COOH

Lipoxygenase

Mast cells
Macrophages
Monocytes
Neutrophils

O

C5H11

Leukotriene A4

COOH

Enzyme

Glutathione Glutathione-
S-transferase

H 

OH 

H 

OH 

COOH

H 

OH 

COOH

C5H11

Leukotriene B4
Attracts neutrophils
and macrophages

H 
C5H11

S 

CH2 
CHCONHCH2COOH
NHCOCH2CH2CHCOOH

NH2

Leukotriene C4
Contracts smooth muscle
Makes blood vessels leaky

FIGURE 26.10  PATHWAYS OF LEUKOTRIENE SYNTHESIS. 

mediated by positive feedback through thromboxane A2 
minimizes blood loss but can contribute to pathological 
formation of clots in vital blood vessels, resulting in heart 
attacks and strokes. Tissue injury also provokes synthesis 
of prostaglandins E2 and I2, which mediate inflammation 
locally by dilating blood vessels, sensitizing pain recep-
tors, and causing fever.

Nonsteroidal  antiinflammatory  drugs,  including 
aspirin  and  ibuprofen,  target  both  cyclooxygenase  iso-
zymes. Most of these drugs competitively inhibit arachi-
donic  acid  binding  to  both  enzymes,  but  aspirin 
covalently and irreversibly acetylates a serine residue in 
their  active  sites.  Either  way,  these  drugs  inhibit  the 
synthesis of all prostaglandins and thromboxanes. Aspirin 
reduces  the  incidence  of  heart  attacks  and  strokes  by 
inhibiting the synthesis of thromboxane A2 by platelets, 
which  reduces  platelet  aggregation  and  pathological 
clotting in blood vessels. Low doses of aspirin are selec-
tive  and  effective  for  platelets,  as  platelets  have  only 
COX-1  and  lack  the  capacity  for  protein  synthesis  to 
replace  inactivated  enzyme.  Low-dose  aspirin  also  pro-
tects  against  colon  cancer.  High  doses  of  aspirin  and 
other nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs reduce inflam-
mation,  pain,  and  fever  by  inhibiting  the  synthesis  of 
other eicosanoids, but this is not without potential side 
effects,  including  gastrointestinal  bleeding.  Drugs  that 
selectively  inhibit  COX-2  relieve  inflammation  without 
the  gastrointestinal  side  effects  caused  by  inhibition  of 
COX-1. However, they inhibit  the  synthesis  of  prosta-
glandin  I2  by  endothelium. The lack of prostaglandin I2 

to inhibit platelet aggregation increases the risk of heart 
attacks  and  strokes,  so  most  of  these  drugs  have  been 
withdrawn from clinical use.

Macrophages  and  white  blood  cells  produce  an 
enzyme called 5-lipoxygenase that synthesizes leukot-
rienes  and  lipoxins  by  addition  of  oxygen  to  specific 
double bonds of arachidonic acid (Fig. 26.10). The first 
biologically active product, leukotriene A4, can be modi-
fied by addition and subsequent trimming of glutathione 
to  yield  a  variety  of  active  leukotrienes.  Leukotrienes 
mediate  inflammatory  reactions  by  constricting  blood 
vessels, allowing plasma to leak from small vessels and 
attracting white blood cells into connective tissue. These 
effects,  together  with  constriction  of  the  respiratory 
tract, contribute to the symptoms of asthma. Drugs that 
inhibit  5-lipoxygenase  and  leukotriene  receptors  can 
relieve symptoms of asthma, but other agents are more 
effective.  Lipoxins  are  another  family  of  mediators  
that  act  on  blood  vessels.  They  are  formed  by  the  
addition  of  oxygen  to  both  the  C-5  and  C-15  positions  
of arachidonic acid.

Phosphatidylcholine is also the starting point for pro-
duction of two other water-soluble, intercellular, second 
messengers:  lysophosphatidic  acid  (LPA)  and  platelet 
activating  factor  (PAF).  Activated  platelets  and  injured 
fibroblasts  produce  LPA  from  phosphatidylcholine  by 
the  action  of  the  phospholipases  PLD  and  PLA2  (Fig. 
26.4).  A  variety  of  cells  synthesize  PAF  in  two  steps, 
using PLA2 to remove the C2 fatty acid from phosphati-
dylcholine molecules with an ether-bonded fatty alcohol 
(rather than an ester-bonded fatty acid) on the C1 posi-
tion and a second enzyme to acetylate the C2 hydroxyl 
group.  LPA  and  PAF  escape  cells  and  stimulate  target 
cells by binding to seven-helix receptors. Depending on 
their signaling hardware, cells respond to LPA in differ-
ent  ways:  Activation  of  the  PLC/IP3  pathway  releases 
intracellular Ca2+ in some cells; activation of a mitogen-
activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway (see Fig. 27.6) 
stimulates  some  cells  to  divide;  and  activation  of  
Rho-family  small  GTPases  stimulates  formation  of  actin 
bundles in cultured cells (see Fig. 33.19). As is expected 
from its name, PAF activates platelets, but it also modifies 
the behavior of other blood cells, inhibits heart contrac-
tions, and stimulates contraction of the uterus.

Endocannabinoids are a family of fatty acid amides 
that activate the seven-helix receptors that also respond 
to Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol, the active ingredient in mari-
juana.  Many  tissues,  including  the  brain,  synthesize  
the classic endocannabinoid, N-arachidonyl-ethanolamine, 
from  ethanolamine  and  arachidonic  acid.  Brain  cannabi-
noid receptors are found exclusively on the axonal side 
of synapses. Stimulation of the postsynaptic neuron results 
in  Ca2+  entry,  activating  the  enzymes  that  synthesize 
endocannabinoids. When these lipid second messengers 
diffuse from the postsynaptic cell back to the presynaptic 
terminal, they bind class 1 cannabinoid receptors, which 

452 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

suppress transmitter release by blocking Ca2+ entry. Some 
of these presynaptic terminals secrete the inhibitory neu-
rotransmitter  γ-aminobutyric  acid  (GABA),  so  the  endo-
cannabinoid  increases  the  activity  of  the  postsynaptic 
neuron,  including  those  that  suppress  the  sensation  of 
pain.  The  functions  of  cannabinoid  receptors  in  other 
tissues  are  less-well  understood.  Another  lipid  amide,  
oleamide  (cis-9,10-octadecenoamide),  induces  sleep  in 
mammals, most likely through GABA receptors (see Fig. 
11.8).  An  enzyme  called  fatty  acid  amide  hydrolase 
degrades all these signaling molecules.

Sphingomyelin/Ceramide Signaling Pathways
Activation of plasma membrane receptors for TNF and 
IL-2  stimulates  formation  of  the  lipid-soluble  second 
messenger  ceramide  from  sphingomyelin  (Fig.  26.11) 
in parallel with the activation of the transcription factor 
nuclear  factor  kappa  B  (NF-κB)  (see  Fig.  10.21).  Sphin-
gomyelin  is  concentrated  in  the  external  leaflet  of  the 
plasma membrane (see Fig. 26.4). Ligand binding to TNF 
or IL-2 receptors activates a plasma membrane sphingo-
myelinase (a specialized PLC) that removes phosphor-
ylcholine  from  sphingomyelin,  producing  ceramide. 
Ceramide flips across the lipid bilayer to the cytoplasmic 

Neutral
sphingomyelinase

TNF
ligand

TNF

receptor

Sphingomyelin

Ceramide

Neutral
sphingomyelinase

Sphingomyelin
Ceramide

Flips

Activates

Protein kinase

C-zeta

Ceramide-activated
protein phosphatase

(PP2A family)

+ Choline

Flips
across
bilayer

Activates
protein
kinase

 Ceramide-
activated
protein
kinase

C-Raf1

MAP kinase

pathway

FIGURE  26.11  SPHINGOMYELIN/CERAMIDE  SIGNALING 
PATHWAY.  Stimulation  of  the  tumor  necrosis  factor  (TNF)  receptor 
activates  a  neutral  sphingomyelinase,  which  cleaves  choline  from 
sphingomyelin. Ceramide flips across the bilayer and activates a cyto-
plasmic  kinase  as  well  as  protein  kinase  C  (PKC)-ζ  and  a  protein 
phosphatase. MAP, mitogen-activated protein. 

surface and activates a proline-directed, serine/threonine 
protein  kinase  associated  with  the  plasma  membrane. 
Target proteins have the sequence X-Ser/Thr-Pro-X and 
include epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor and Raf 
kinase.  Downstream  events  include  activation  of  MAP 
kinase,  which  activates  transcription  factors  and  other 
effectors (see Fig. 27.6). Ceramide also activates a protein 
phosphatases 1 and 2A.

Sphingosine  and  sphingosine-1-phosphate  are 
produced from sphingomyelin by a succession of enzy-
matic reactions (Fig. 26.4). Ceramidase removes the fatty 
acid, and sphingomyelinase removes the phosphorylcho-
line head group to form sphingosine. Then sphingosine 
kinase  adds  phosphate  to  C1  to  make  sphingosine-1- 
phosphate.  Sphingosine-1-phosphate  escapes  from  cells 
and activates seven-helix receptors on other cells. Several 
parallel  signaling  pathways  influence  motility  of  lym-
phocytes  and  growth  of  blood  vessels,  as  well  as  
smooth muscle contraction. Antagonists of sphingosine-1- 
phosphate are being tested as antiinflammatory drugs.

Cross Talk
Interaction  (cross  talk)  among  lipid  second  messenger 
pathways  is  thought  to  integrate  signals  from  different 
agonists.  Consequently,  it  is  difficult  to  define  distinct 
linear pathways from an agonist to an individual effector 
through  lipid  second  messengers.  The  following  are 
some  examples  of  cross  talk  using  enzymes  defined  in 
Fig. 26.4:
1.  Positive feedback. PI-PLCs produce DAG, which acti-
vates PKC, which phosphorylates and activates PLA2 
and PLD. These activated enzymes produce additional 
lipid second messengers (arachidonic acid and phos-
phatidic  acid)  to  amplify  and  diversify  the  initial 
response.

2.  Convergence  of  two  pathways  on  the  same  target. 
Arachidonic  acid  (produced  by  activated  PLA2)  and 
DAG (produced by either a PI-PLC or PLD and phos-
phatidic  acid  phosphatase)  synergistically  activate 
some PKC isozymes.

3.  Conversion  of  a  messenger  into  another  messenger. 
DAG and phosphatidic acid are readily interconverted 
by the appropriate kinase and phosphatase.

Calcium
Overview of Calcium Signaling
Calcium  ion,  Ca2+,  is  a  versatile  second  messenger  that 
regulates  many  processes,  including  synaptic  transmis-
sion,  fertilization,  secretion,  muscle  contraction,  and 
cytokinesis.  All  eukaryotes  (but  not  prokaryotes)  use 
Ca2+ signals. Nature probably chose Ca2+ for signaling by 
default. Given that cells depend on phosphate for energy 
metabolism  (ATP),  nucleic  acid  structure,  and  many 
other  functions,  early  cells  evolved  mechanisms  to 
extrude  Ca2+  from  cytoplasm  to  avoid  precipitation  of 

 

CHAPTER 26  n  Second Messengers 

453

calcium phosphate. Cells took advantage of the resulting 
Ca2+  gradient  between  cytoplasm  and  ocean  water  (or 
extracellular space in animals) to drive tiny pulses of Ca2+ 
into  cytoplasm  for  signaling.  This  movement  of  Ca2+ 
between compartments via ion channels is very fast.

Rather  than  being  synthesized  and  metabolized  like 
all  other  second  messengers,  Ca2+  is  released  into  and 
removed  from  the  cytoplasm  (Fig.  26.12).  ATP-driven 
Ca2+  pumps 
the  plasma  membrane  and  ER 

in 

keep  cytoplasmic  Ca2+  levels  low.  A  variety  of  stimuli, 
operating through different receptors (Table 26.1), open 
Ca2+ channels in the plasma membrane or ER, allowing 
a  concentrated  burst  of  Ca2+  to  enter  the  cytoplasm. 
Cellular responses to Ca2+ signals depend on the reper-
toire  of  Ca2+-sensitive  proteins  and  effector  systems 
(Appendix  26.1).  Some  proteins  respond  directly  by 
binding Ca2+, whereas others respond to Ca2+ bound to 
a small protein called calmodulin.

A

High [Ca2+]

Receptor
tyrosine
kinase

PIP2

DAG

PIP2

+
IP3

PLCβ

Seven-
helix

receptor

Voltage-
sensitive

L-type
channel
Ca2+

Store-

operated

Orai

channel
Ca2+

B

Calcium
pump
Ca2+

Active Orai

Ca2+ channels

PLCγ

Ca2+

ATP

ADP

Calcium
pump

Ca2+

ENDOPLASMIC

RETICULUM

GTP

Gα

Ca2+

Active
IP3R

Ca2+

ADP

ATP

Ca2+

Ca2+

Active STIM

oligomer

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Inactive
Ca2+ bound
STIM dimer

Ca2+
ER lumen [Ca2+]

< 100 µM

ER lumen [Ca2+]

 ~ 400 µM

Inactive

IP3R

CYTOPLASM

Resting cytoplasmic [Ca2+] = 0.1 µM

FIGURE 26.12  PATHWAYS OF Ca2+ RELEASE AND UPTAKE. A, Ca2+ pumps in the plasma membrane and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
membrane use ATP hydrolysis to pump Ca2+ out of the cytoplasm. A variety of receptors activate phospholipase C (PLC) isozymes to produce 
IP3 from phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2). IP3 diffuses to the ER, where it opens IP3 receptors (IP3Rs), releasing Ca2+ from the lumen 
into  cytoplasm.  Voltage-sensitive  L-type  Ca2+  channels  respond  to  membrane  depolarization  by  admitting  extracellular  Ca2+.  ADP,  adenosine 
diphosphate; STIM, stromal interaction molecule. B, Store-operated Ca2+ entry. If signaling activities deplete Ca2+ from the lumen of the ER, Ca2+ 
dissociates from binding sites on STIM located in the lumen. This results in aggregation of STIM and interactions of its cytoplasmic domains with 
plasma membrane Orai Ca2+ channels, This opens a channel that allows extracellular Ca2+ to move slowly into the cytoplasm, so the calcium 
pumps in the ER can replenish the Ca2+ stores. 

TABLE 26.1  Stimuli for Ca2+ Signals
Stimulus

Action potentials
Adenosine 

triphosphate (ATP)

Peptide growth factors
Antigens
Peptide hormones
Neurotransmitters

Light

Receptor Class
Voltage-sensitive Ca2+ channels
P2X plasma membrane channels
P2Y seven-helix G-protein-coupled 

Second Messenger

Distribution

None
None
Inositol triphosphate 

Nerve, muscle
Many cells
Many cells

receptors

Receptor tyrosine kinases
T-cell receptor, tyrosine kinases
Seven-helix G-protein–coupled receptors
Ligand-gated cation channels
Seven-helix G-protein–coupled receptors
Rhodopsin, G-proteins

(IP3)

IP3
IP3
IP3
None
IP3
IP3

Many cells
Lymphocytes
Endocrine cells, other epithelial cells
Neurons
Neurons
Photoreceptors

454 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

Removal of Ca2+ From Cytoplasm
P-type  ATP-driven  Ca2+  pumps  (see  Fig.  14.7)  in  the 
plasma membrane and ER keep cytoplasmic Ca2+ levels 
low  and  generate  a  5000-fold  concentration  gradient 
across these membranes (Fig. 26.12). Elevated cytoplas-
mic  Ca2+  concentrations  activate  Ca2+  pumps  until  the 
cytoplasmic Ca2+ concentration falls to about 0.1 µM, the 
resting level. Three different genes and alternative splic-
ing produce at least five different Ca2+-ATPase pumps.

A 

remarkably  high  concentration  of 

SERCA 
(sarcoplasmic–endoplasmic  reticulum  calcium  ATPase) 
pumps in the smooth ER of striated muscle cells (specially 
named sarcoplasmic reticulum) gives them the capac-
ity to handle the millisecond Ca2+ transients that control 
contraction (see Fig. 39.15). In the heart, the activity of 
the  Ca2+-ATPase  is  modulated  by  phospholamban,  a 
6-kD integral membrane protein of the sarcoplasmic retic-
ulum. Phosphorylation by PKA and calmodulin-activated 
kinase  (CaM  kinase)  dissociates  phospholamban  from  
the Ca2+ pump, stimulating its activity.

ER stores Ca2+ for signaling (Table 26.2). Proteins in 
the lumen bind much of the Ca2+, but their low affinities 
ensure  that  bound  and  free  Ca2+  are  in  a  rapid  equilib-
rium,  providing  free  Ca2+  for  release  when  membrane 
channels  open.  Calsequestrin  is  a  major  Ca2+-binding 
protein  of  striated  muscle  sarcoplasmic  reticulum.  In 
other cells, the ER lumen sometimes contains calseques-
trin,  but  more  commonly,  it  contains  calreticulin,  a 
47-kD protein with a low affinity (Kd = 250 µM) but high 
capacity (25 moles per mole) for Ca2+. Calreticulin is also 
a chaperone for protein folding (see Fig. 20.12).

Mitochondria sequester Ca2+, using carriers driven by 
the  electrochemical  potential  across  the  inner  mem-
brane. Although their Ca2+ content is high, mitochondria 
do  not  participate  in  signal  transduction  by  regulated 
release of Ca2+ into cytoplasm.

Refilling Endoplasmic Reticulum by  
Store-Operated Ca2+ Entry
Repeated stimulation can deplete Ca2+ from intracellular 
stores, because plasma membrane pumps remove from 
the cell part of the Ca2+ released into the cytoplasm from 
the ER. Experimentally, ER stores can also be depleted 
by  thapsigargin,  a  lactone  isolated  from  plants  that 
inhibits most known ER Ca2+ pumps.

A process called store-operated Ca2+ entry replen-
ishes Ca2+ stores in the ER by admitting extracellular Ca2+ 
through  plasma  membrane  channels  called  Orai  (Fig. 
26.12B). These low-conductance Ca2+-selective channels 

are formed by a hexamer of identical subunits with four 
transmembrane  domains  unrelated  to  other  channels 
described  in  Chapter  16.  An  integral  protein  of  the  ER 
called STIM senses the Ca2+ concentration in the lumen 
and controls Orai. Stromal interaction molecule (STIM) 
has Ca2+-binding EF hands (Ca2+ binding sites in calmodu-
lin consisting of α-helices E and F) (see Fig. 3.12C) in the 
lumen,  one  transmembrane  helix  and  a  cytoplasmic 
domain with coiled-coils that interacts with Orai. STIM 
dimers  are  dispersed  in  the  membrane  when  the  Ca2+ 
level is high inside the lumen. When the Ca2+ concentra-
tion in the lumen falls, Ca2+ dissociates from STIM, which 
clusters into units that interact directly with the cytoplas-
mic end of Orai and open the Ca2+-channel. Pumps in the 
ER take up the Ca2+ entering the cytoplasm, refilling the 
Ca2+  stores  and  dissociating  STIM  clusters  from  Orai. 
Mutations  in  Orai  cause  immune  deficiency,  because 
store-operated Ca2+ entry is essential for lymphocyte acti-
vation (see Fig. 27.8).

Calcium-Release Channels
Voltage-gated and agonist-gated channels in the plasma 
membrane  (Table  26.3  and  Fig.  26.12)  admit  Ca2+  into 
the  cytoplasm  from  outside.  Chapter  16  explains  how 
the  membrane  potential  or  agonists  open  these  chan-
nels.  Voltage-gated  channels  are  essential  for  rapid 
responses in excitable cells such as muscles and neurons. 
Owing to rapid inactivation by negative feedback from 
the released Ca2+, most of these channels produce brief, 
self-limited Ca2+ pulses.

Two  types  of  agonist-gated  channels—called  IP3 
receptors  and  ryanodine  receptors—release  Ca2+  from 
the  ER.  Striated  muscles  uses  ryanodine  receptors, 
whereas smooth muscle and nonmuscle cells have both 
types  of  release  channels  (Table  26.2).  In  excitable 
muscle  cells,  plasma  membrane  Ca2+  channels  trigger 
ryanodine-receptor channels to release Ca2+ from the ER. 
In  nonexcitable  cells,  stimulation  of  either  seven-helix 
receptors  or  receptor  tyrosine  kinases  produces  IP3, 
which triggers IP3 receptors to release Ca2+ from the ER.

Inositol 1,4,5-Trisphosphate Receptor Ca2+ Channels
Numerous  signal  transduction  pathways  generate  IP3 
(Fig. 26.7), which activates IP3 receptors to release Ca2+ 
from the ER in animal cells. Plants and fungi appear to 
lack IP3 receptors.

IP3 receptors are tetramers of giant 313-kD polypep-
tides  with  multiple  domains  mostly  in  the  cytoplasm 
(Fig.  26.13B).  Six  transmembrane  segments  near  the 

TABLE 26.2  Molecular Components of the Calcium-Sequestering Compartments
Cell Type

Sequestering Proteins

Release Channel

Striated muscles
Smooth muscle
Nonmuscle cells

Ca2+ Pump
SR Ca-ATPase
Ca-ATPase
One of five Ca-ATPases

Calsequestrin
Calreticulin > calsequestrin
Calreticulin > calsequestrin

Ryanodine receptor
IP3 receptor and ryanodine receptor
IP3 receptor and/or ryanodine receptor

 

CHAPTER 26  n  Second Messengers 

455

TABLE 26.3  Ca2+-Release Channels
Type
Plasma Membrane Ca2+ Channels
ATP-activated channel
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate 

Distribution

Smooth muscle
Sperm

(cAMP)-activated channel

L-type Ca2+-channel

Skeletal and cardiac 

muscle, brain, other 
nonmuscle cells

N-type Ca2+-channel

Neurons, endocrine cells

Voltage

P-type Ca2+-channel
T-type Ca2+-channel
Endoplasmic Reticulum Ca2+ Channels
IP3 receptors

Purkinje neurons

Most cells including brain 

Voltage
Voltage

IP3, Ca2+

Control

Features

Extracellular ATP
Cytoplasmic cAMP

Voltage

Excitation–contraction coupling, 

defective in muscular dysgenesis. 
High threshold, dihydropyridine 
(DHP)-sensitive, regulated by PKA

Neurotransmitter release, modulated 

by G-proteins. High threshold, 
conotoxin sensitive

Insensitive to DHP and conotoxin
Low threshold

Heparin-sensitive

and smooth muscle

Type I ryanodine receptor
Type II ryanodine receptor

Skeletal muscle
Cardiac muscle, other cells

DHP-receptor, Ca2+
Ca2+, cyclic adenosine 

Ca2+ release stimulates contraction
Ca2+ release stimulates contraction

diphosphate (cADP)-ribose

Type III ryanodine receptor

Smooth muscle, other cells

Ca2+, cADP-ribose

Ca2+ release stimulates contraction

A. Orai channel
OUTSIDE CELL

B. IP3 receptor Ca-channel

C. Ryanodine receptor Ca-channel

CYTOPLASM

TOP VIEW FROM
OUTSIDE CELL

VIEW FROM OUTSIDE CELL

SIDE VIEW (AT 2X TOP VIEW)

Ca2+ in pore

CYTOPLASM

LUMEN OF ER

KcsA

Ryanodine

Comparison of P-loops from
KcsA and ryanodine receptor

FIGURE 26.13  STRUCTURES OF CALCIUM CHANNELS. Face views and side views of ribbon diagrams with space-filling surfaces based 
on crystal and cryoelectron microscopy structures. A, Crystal structure of the Orai channel with a detail of Ca2+ in the selectivity filter. B, Cryo-
electron microscopy structure of the inositol triphosphate (IP3) receptor–channel consisting of four identical subunits of 2750 residues. Six trans-
membrane segments and a P-loop facing the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) are similar to other channels. C, Cryoelectron microscopy 
structure of the ryanodine receptor–channel consisting of four identical subunits of 5037 residues. The six helices and P-loop forming the channel 
are located in the middle of the transmembrane domain. TRPV1, transient receptor potential vanilloid-1. (For reference, see PDB file 4HKR and 
Hou  X,  Pedi  L,  Diver  MM,  et al.  Crystal  structure  of  the  calcium  release-activated  calcium  channel  Orai.  Science.  2012;338:1308–1313  [A]; 
EMData Bank file 6369, PDB file 3JAV, and Fan G, Baker ML, Wang Z, et al. Gating machinery of InsP3R channels revealed by electron cryomi-
croscopy. Nature. 2015;527:336–341 [B]; and Yan Z, Bai XC, Yan C, et al. Structure of the rabbit ryanodine receptor RyR1 at near-atomic resolu-
tion. Nature. 2015;517:50–55 [C].)

456 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

4

2

0

)

%

(
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
p
 
n
e
p
o
 
l
e
n
n
a
h
C

A

Type I InsP3R

180 µM

2 µM

0.2 µM

0.02 µM

0.01

0.1

1

10

Calcium [µM]

4

2

0

)

%

(
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
p
 
n
e
p
o
 
l
e
n
n
a
h
C

B

IP3 = 2 µM

Ca2+ = 0.1 µM 

Type III
  InsP3R

Type I
  InsP3R

0.01

0.1

1

10

Calcium [µM]

2

1

0.1

0

e
t
a
r
 
l
a
i
t
i
n
i
 
d
e
z

i
l

a
m
r
o
N

C

-8

-7

-6

-5

Log [IP3]

FIGURE 26.14  GATING OF INOSITOL TRIPHOSPHATE (IP3) RECEPTOR Ca2+ RELEASE CHANNELS. A, Dependence of channel open 
probability of type I receptors on the concentrations of IP3 (next to each curve) and Ca2+. B, Comparison of the dependence of open probability 
of type I and type III receptors on the concentration of Ca2+ at a fixed concentration of 2 µM IP3. High concentrations of Ca2+ inhibit type I recep-
tors  but  not  type  III  receptors.  C,  Dependence  of  open  probability  of  type  I  receptors  on  the  concentration  of  IP3  at  a  fixed  concentration  of 
0.1 µM Ca2+. InsP3R, inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor. (A, Data from Kaftan EJ, Ehrlich BE, Watras J. InsP3 and Ca2+ interact to increase the 
dynamic range of InsP3 receptor-dependent Ca2+ signaling. J Gen Physiol. 1997;110:529–538. B, Data from Hagar RE, Burgstahler AD, Nathanson 
MH,  et al.  Type  III  InsP3  receptor  channel  stays  open  in  the  presence  of  increased  calcium.  Nature.  1998;396:81–84.  C,  Data  from  Hirota  J, 
Michikawa  T,  Miyawaki  A,  et al.  Kinetics  of  calcium  release  by  IP3  receptor  in  reconstituted  lipid  vesicles.  J  Biol  Chem.  1995;270:
19046–19051.)

C-terminus  form  a  tetrameric  Ca2+  channel  similar  to 
other cation channels, including a P-loop between seg-
ments 5 and 6 facing the lumen of the ER (see Fig. 10.3). 
The pore is large and nonselective, but Ca2+ is the main 
ion crossing the open channel, owing to the large con-
centration  gradient  between  the  ER  lumen  and  the 
cytoplasm.

Cytoplasmic IP3 and Ca2+ cooperate to open and close 
these  channels,  with  IP3  setting  the  sensitivity  of  the 
channel to Ca2+ (Fig. 26.14). IP3 binds with submicromo-
lar affinity between domains near the N-terminus of each 
subunit far from the membrane pore. Basic amino acids 
in  the  binding  site  form  a  network  of  hydrogen  bonds 
with all three phosphates and the hydroxyls of IP3. Ca2+ 
binds to the IP3-binding domains and several other sites 
along  the  polypeptide.  IP3  must  occupy  at  all  four  of 
these  sites  to  open  the  channel.  Channels  respond 
rapidly, because binding and dissociation of both ligands 
is fast (k+ = 33 µM−1 s−1, k− = 6 s−1 for IP3). The conforma-
tional changes that couple ligand binding to opening the 
gate in the pore are still being investigated. High concen-
trations  of  Ca2+  in  the  ER  lumen  sensitize  receptors  to 
IP3. Phosphorylation by PKA, PKC, and CaM kinase can 
raise or lower the sensitivity to IP3.

Three human genes and alternative splicing produce 
a  variety  of  IP3  receptors  with  different  physiological 
properties for various cell types. Type I and type II IP3 
receptors  open  in  response  to  Ca2+  with  a  bell-shaped 
concentration  dependence.  A  channel  is  most  likely  to 
be  open  when  the  cytoplasmic  Ca2+  concentration  is 
about 0.3 µM. Below 0.1 µM and above 100 µM Ca2+, the 
channel is generally closed. When IP3 activates a channel, 
Ca2+ release provides rapid positive feedback as its local 
cytoplasmic  concentration  rises  into  the  micromolar 

range, stimulating channel opening and then slow nega-
tive  feedback  as  the  local  Ca2+  concentration  climbs 
higher.  The  result  is  a  short,  self-limited  pulse  of  Ca2+ 
release in response to a modest change in IP3 concentra-
tion.  Calmodulin  probably  mediates  the  long-lasting 
inhibitory effects of high Ca2+. Type III IP3 receptors are 
different;  Ca2+  activates  them,  but  high  Ca2+  concentra-
tions do not compete with IP3 for binding the channel 
or inhibiting Ca2+ release. This lack of negative feedback 
(or  very  slow  feedback)  allows  cells  with  type  III  IP3 
receptors  to  produce  a  large,  global  pulse  of  Ca2+  that 
can ultimately drain Ca2+ stores from the ER.

Ryanodine Receptor Ca2+ Channels
Ryanodine receptors release Ca2+ from the ER to trigger 
contraction of striated muscles. The name came from the 
high  affinity  of  the  channel  for  a  plant  alkaloid  called 
ryanodine,  which  can  activate  or  block  Ca2+  release, 
depending  on  its  concentration  and  the  target  tissue. 
Ryanodine has no physiological function, but the name 
has stuck, because binding of radioactive ryanodine was 
the key assay for isolating the protein.

Ryanodine  receptors  are  homotetramers  of  565-kD 
subunits with a massive cytoplasmic domain and a cation 
channel  domain  near  the  C-terminus  (Fig.  26.13C),  an 
architecture similar to that of IP3 receptors. Three ryano-
dine receptor genes encode proteins that are about 60% 
identical  and  expressed  in  different  cells  (see  Table 
26.3). Ryanodine receptors are the primary release chan-
nels  in  striated  muscles  where  they  are  activated  by 
physical  contact  with  voltage-gated  Ca2+  channels  (see 
Fig.  39.15).  In  cardiac  muscle  the  ryanodine  receptors 
are activated by calcium induced calcium release where 
the initiating calcium comes through plasma membrane 

 

CHAPTER 26  n  Second Messengers 

457

A. Ca2+

B. PKC

C. Ca2+ + PKC

FIGURE 26.15  WAVE OF Ca2+ RELEASE AND PROTEIN KINASE C (PKC) ACTIVATION SPREADING FROM THE SITE OF ARTIFICIAL 
ACTIVATION OF A XENOPUS EGG. A, Ca2+ signal. B, PKC activation. C, Superimposition of the two signals. The egg was injected with calcium 
red (a fluorescent dye sensitive to the concentration of Ca2+) and a fusion protein, consisting of green fluorescent protein and PKC, which produces 
green fluorescence when PKC is activated. The egg was activated by a needle prick (arrows) and imaged at intervals of 20 seconds. A wave 
of  Ca2+  (more  intense  red)  precedes  a  wave  of  active  PKC  (green)  from  the  site  of  activation.  (Courtesy  Carolyn  Larabell,  Lawrence  Berkeley 
Laboratory, Berkeley, CA.)

voltage-gated Ca2+ channels. In smooth muscle and non-
muscle cells, ryanodine receptors augment IP3 receptor 
Ca2+-release channels.

As in the case of type I and type II IP3 receptors, Ca2+ 
activates  ryanodine  receptors  with  a  bell-shaped  con-
centration  dependence.  This  Ca2+-induced  Ca2+  release 
allows a local wave of transient activation to spread from 
one ryanodine receptor to the next.

Cyclic  adenosine  diphosphate–ribose  (cADP-
ribose), sets the Ca2+ sensitivity of ryanodine receptors, 
similar to IP3 for its receptor. At low concentrations of 
cADP-ribose, high levels of cytoplasmic Ca2+ are required 
to open the channel, whereas at high concentrations of 
cADP-ribose, even resting Ca2+ concentrations open the 
channel. A single enzymatic step produces cADP-ribose 
from the metabolite nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, 
NAD+.  cGMP  regulates  ADP-ribosyl  cyclase,  presum-
ably  through  a  cGMP-dependent  protein  kinase.  cADP-
ribose  is  implicated  in  the  Ca2+  transient  that  triggers 
secretion of insulin from pancreatic β cells in response 
to  glucose.  In  fertilization  of  echinoderm  eggs,  cADP-
ribose  releases  Ca2+  through  ER  ryanodine  receptors  in 
parallel  with  IP3-mediated  Ca2+  release.  Vertebrate  eggs 
depend  entirely  on  the  IP3  release  mechanism  (Fig. 
26.15).  Nicotinic  acid  adenine  dinucleotide  phosphate, 
a  metabolic  product  of  β-NADP  (nicotinamide-adenine 
dinucleotide phosphate), also releases Ca2+ from internal 
stores. Its mechanism is not yet certain, but may involve 
a  protein  that  modulates  the  activity  of  Ca2+  release 
channels.

Physiological and pharmacological agents can stimu-
late or inhibit ryanodine receptor activity. Phosphoryla-
tion  by  PKA  increases  ryanodine  receptor  channel 
activity and may contribute to the effects of β-adrenergic 
receptor  stimulation  on  the  heart  (see  Fig.  39.21).  Caf-
feine  activates  Ca2+  release  by  ryanodine  receptors 
and is used to stimulate sperm in fertility tests. Numer-

ous  agents  suppress  the  spontaneous  release  of  Ca2+ 
by  ryanodine  receptors  in  heart  and  skeletal  muscle. 
These  include  FKBP  (FK-binding  protein,  the  protein 
that binds the immunosuppressant drug FK506), micro-
molar  ryanodine,  the  local  anesthetic  procaine,  and 
calmodulin.

Point mutations in the RyR1 ryanodine receptor gene 
(expressed in skeletal muscle) cause malignant hyper-
thermia in humans and pigs. The most common human 
mutation  is  autosomal  dominant  with  an  incidence  of 
approximately 1 in 50,000. Mutant ryanodine receptors 
are unusually sensitive to activation by general anesthet-
ics, which trigger Ca2+ release, sustained skeletal muscle 
contraction,  and  pathological  heat  generation.  If  not 
treated promptly, the fever can be lethal. The pig muta-
tion is autosomal recessive, and stress can trigger lethal 
attacks.

Calcium Dynamics in Cells
Only  about  1  in  100  cytoplasmic  Ca2+  ions  is  free  to 
diffuse; the other 99 are bound to Ca2+-binding proteins, 
estimated to be approximately 300 µM. At a concentra-
tion  of  0.1  µM  in  the  cytoplasm  of  a  resting  cell,  the 
half-time for a free Ca2+ ion is approximately 30 µs, and 
its range of diffusion is only about 0.1 µm. When bound 
to a protein messenger such as calmodulin, Ca2+ has a 
wider range in the cytoplasm of approximately 5 µm.

When  cells  are  stimulated,  Ca2+  pours  into  the  cyto-
plasm  through  release  channels  at  approximately  106 
ions per second reaching peak cytoplasmic Ca2+ concen-
trations  in  the  micromolar  range.  The  temporal  and 
spatial patterns depend on the stimulus, type of release 
channel,  rate  of  Ca2+  pumping  out  of  cytoplasm,  and 
rates  of  binding  and  dissociation  on  target  proteins. 
These Ca2+ signals last for milliseconds to minutes. They 
can  rise  and  fall  locally,  flood  the  whole  cytoplasm,  or 
travel in waves across a cell.

458 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

Methods to visualize Ca2+ concentrations inside living 
cells  revealed  this  amazing  temporal  and  spatial  com-
plexity  of  Ca2+  signals.  The  original  experimental  Ca2+ 
sensor  was  a  jellyfish  protein  called  aequorin,  which 
emits light when it binds Ca2+ (see Fig. 39.15). An evolv-
ing  series  of  Ca2+-sensitive  fluorescent  dyes  (Fura-2, 
calcium  green,  calcium  red,  Fluo-4)  largely  replaced 
aequorin and made possible the observations described 
in  the  following  paragraphs.  Genetically  encoded  Ca2+ 
biosensors, constructed by fusing calmodulin to fluores-
cent  proteins,  offer  advantages,  including  targeting  to 
particular cellular compartments and the ability to adjust 
the range of Ca2+ concentrations that generate a response 
by mutating the Ca2+-binding site.

Voltage-dependent  Ca2+  channels  in  excitable  cells 
such as neurons and striated muscles respond rapidly (<1 
ms) to an action potential to admit extracellular Ca2+. At 
chemical  synapses,  this  produces  a  brief,  locally  con-
fined  Ca2+  pulse  that  triggers  the  release  of  synaptic 
vesicles (see Fig. 11.9). In striated muscles, each action 
potential causes a transient, global increase in cytoplas-
mic Ca2+ lasting tens of milliseconds (see Fig. 39.15). The 
details differ in skeletal and cardiac muscle, but the ele-
mentary  events  are  similar.  Voltage-sensitive  Ca2+  chan-
nels in T tubules (invaginations of the plasma membrane; 
see Fig. 39.10) activate one or a few ryanodine receptor 
channels in the adjacent ER through direct physical inter-
action in skeletal muscle and through Ca2+ release in the 
heart. Ca2+ released by these ryanodine receptors triggers 
Ca2+ release from nearby ryanodine receptors, generating 
a  local  pulse  of  Ca2+  called  a  Ca2+  spark.  Because  T 
tubules  penetrate  throughout  the  muscle  cytoplasm, 
thousands of these sparks are produced simultaneously, 
yielding a transient global rise in Ca2+. The brief duration 
of  the  excitatory  signal  and  the  robust  Ca2+  pumping 
activity of the ER limit the duration of the signal.

Nonexcitable cells generally rely on slower, receptor-
mediated production of IP3 to produce transient changes 
in cytoplasmic Ca2+. For example, activation of a frog egg 
at  the  point  of  sperm  entry  or  artificial  activation  by 
pricking  with  a  needle  (Fig.  26.15)  results  in  a  self-
propagating wave of cytoplasmic Ca2+ that spreads slowly 
around the cell. This produces a wave of secretion and 
activation of downstream effectors, such as PKC.

Many cells with type I and II IP3 receptors respond to 
constant  agonist  stimulation  with  transient  bursts  of 
cytoplasmic Ca2+ (Fig. 26.16). The agonist concentration 
sets  the  level  of  cytoplasmic  IP3  (and,  possibly,  cADP-
ribose), which determines the sensitivity of release chan-
nels to cytoplasmic Ca2+. A region of the cell with a high 
density of the most sensitive channels then initiates the 
release  of  Ca2+  at  a  focus.  The  resulting  Ca2+  transient 
may spread through the cytoplasm as a planar or spiral 
wave that is driven locally by Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release 
from  either  ryanodine  receptors  or  IP3  receptors.  Such 
transients  are  self-limited,  because  cytoplasmic  Ca2+ 

concentrations  exceeding  0.5  to  1.0  µM  inhibit  both 
type I and type II IP3 receptors. This negative feedback 
closes release channels and allows Ca2+ pumps to clear 
the cytoplasm of Ca2+. Release channels recover slowly 
from  this  negative  feedback,  creating  a  pause  between 
Ca2+ transients. In this way, the cell decodes the concen-
tration of agonist as a function of the frequency of Ca2+ 
pulses. Colliding waves annihilate each other, owing to 
negative feedback by high concentrations of Ca2+ or local 
depletion of Ca2+ stores.

Cells with type III IP3 receptors respond differently. 
Agonists produce a flood of Ca2+ that fills the entire cyto-
plasm  for  seconds,  owing  to  less  negative  feedback  by 
high Ca2+.

Participation  of  multiple  second  messengers  and 
channel types can produce complex responses to stimu-
lation.  For  example,  acetylcholine  and  cholecystokinin 
stimulate  polarized  epithelial  cells  of  the  pancreas  to 
secrete digestive enzymes. Stimulation produces a wave 
of cytoplasmic Ca2+ originating at the apical surface and 
spreading  throughout  the  cell.  The  frequency  of  these 
waves  depends  on  agonist  concentration  and  depends 
on  IP3  and  cADP-ribose  and  their  receptors  in  the  ER, 
which  set  the  sensitivity  of  the  release  mechanisms  to 
cytoplasmic Ca2+.

Ca2+ Targets
Ca2+ signals have widespread effects owing to the diver-
sity  of  target  proteins  (Appendix  26.1).  The  response 
depends on the available targets, as well as modulating 
effects of parallel signaling pathways. Most target proteins 
have a signature fold called an EF hand that binds Ca2+ 
and/or other divalent cations (see Fig. 3.12C). Some of 
these proteins bind Ca2+ directly, including Ca2+-activated 
plasma membrane channels for K+ and Cl−, troponin-C in 
striated muscles, synaptotagmin (a Ca2+-sensing synaptic 
vesicle protein), and calpain (a Ca2+-activated protease). 
The proteins parvalbumin and calbindin D28K buffer the 
cytoplasmic Ca2+ concentration.

Ca2+ regulates many other proteins indirectly by first 
binding  and  activating  calmodulin  (see  Fig.  3.12C), 
which  binds  target  proteins  by  wrapping  around  an α-
helix (see Fig. 3.12C). In many cases Ca-calmodulin stim-
ulates  the  activity  of  the  target  protein,  such  as  CaM 
kinase  II,  which  modifies  multiple  substrate  proteins, 
greatly amplifying the effect of Ca2+. On the other hand, 
Ca-calmodulin  inhibits  the  activity  of  other  target  pro-
teins  such  as  cyclic  nucleotide-gated  ion  channels  (see 
Fig.  16.10).  PKA  phosphorylation  activates  a  small 
protein called “regulator of calmodulin signaling,” which 
inhibits calmodulin. As expected for a highly conserved 
protein with diverse functions, few viable mutations of 
calmodulin have been linked to human disease, with the 
exception of rare cases of cardiac arrhythmias.

Owing  to  the  oscillatory,  transient  nature  of  Ca2+ 
signals, some cellular responses depend on the frequency 

 

CHAPTER 26  n  Second Messengers 

459

A. Experiment

B. Simulations

C

D

1.2

[Ca2+]

0.05

1.15

[Ca2+]

0.05

16.1

[InsP3]

0.16

0.0377

P0

0.0

1.4 s

2.4 s

2.6 s

2.8 s

3.2 s

4.3 s

8.0 s

10.1 s

16.0 s

1.0

0.5

k
a
e
p

 
t
y
c
]
+
2
a
C

[

0

0

Soma

Neurite

4

8

12
Time after BK

addition (seconds)

2.4 s

2.6 s

2.8 s

3.2 s

4.3 s

8.0 s

10.1 s

16.0 s

k
a
e
p

 
]
+
2
a
C

[
 

e
v
i
t

l

a
e
R

1.0

0.5

0

0

14

7

)

M
µ
(
 
]
3
P
s
n

I
[

0

0

4

8

12
Time after BK

addition (seconds)

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
p

 

 

n
e
p
o
R
3
P
s
n

I

0.04

0.02

0

0

4

8

12
Time after BK

addition (seconds)

4

8

12
Time after BK

addition (seconds)

FIGURE 26.16  WAVE OF Ca2+ RELEASED IN THE CYTOPLASM OF A CULTURED NEUROBLASTOMA CELL STIMULATED AT TIME 
ZERO WITH BRADYKININ (BK) AND FOLLOWED AT INTERVALS FOR 16 SECONDS. False colors indicate Ca2+ concentration or modeled 
inositol triphosphate (IP3) concentration or modeled open probability of IP3 receptor channels. The model was made with Virtual Cell software, 
taking into account measured local concentrations of IP3 receptors and their biochemical properties. Graphs show the time course of various 
parameters  in  the  neurite  and  cell  body.  A,  Experimental  data  with  Ca2+  (micromolar)  measured  with  the  intracellular  indicator  calcium  green. 
B, Model of the local cytoplasmic Ca2+ concentration (micromolar). C, Model of the local cytoplasmic IP3 concentration (micromolar). D, Model 
of the open probability of IP3 receptor channels. InsP3, IP3. (Courtesy L. Loew, University of Connecticut Health Center. From Fink CC, Slepchenko 
B, Moraru II, et al. Morphological control of IP3-dependent signals. J Cell Biol. 1999;147:929–936. For reference, see Fink CC, Slepchenko B, 
Moraru II, et al. An image-based model of calcium waves in differentiated neuroblastoma cells. Biophys J. 2000;79:163–183.)

of Ca2+ transients. At least one target protein, CaM kinase 
II,  decodes  frequency  information  into  a  prolonged 
adjustment in its level of activity.

Nitric Oxide
The free radical gas nitric oxide (NO• [the dot represents 
an  unpaired  electron  on  the  nitrogen])  provides  cells 
with a unique way to transmit signals. It diffuses rapidly 

through membranes, allowing the signal to spread from 
cell to cell like some lipid second messengers rather than 
being  confined  to  the  cell  of  origin  like  most  other 
second  messengers.  Nitric  oxide  has  long  been  known 
as a mildly toxic air pollutant, so it was easy to accept 
the finding that macrophages produce nitric oxide to the 
kill microorganisms and tumor cells. On the other hand, 
it  was  surprising  to  learn  in  the  late  1980s  that  nitric 
oxide  is  a  diffusible  messenger:  Nitric  oxide  made  by 

460 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

endothelial  cells  lining  blood  vessels  relaxes  smooth 
muscle in the walls of arteries and serves as an uncon-
ventional  neurotransmitter  for  some  neurons  in  the 
central and peripheral nervous systems.

Nitric oxide is not a single chemical species. NO• is 
only  one  of  several  readily  interconvertible  reduction–
oxidation (redox) states of nitrogen monoxide, including 
nitrosonium  (NO+)  and  nitroxyl  (NO−)  ions.  Although 
nitric  oxide  is  stable  in  water,  it  reacts  readily  with 
oxygen and has a half-life of only a few seconds in the 
body. Consequently, nitric oxide must be produced con-
tinuously to provide a sustained effect. Much nitric oxide 
is  inactivated  by  binding  to  the  heme  of  hemoglobin. 
Nitric  oxide  is  eventually  metabolized  to  nitrate  and 
nitrite and excreted from the body. Note that the stable 
anesthetic gas nitrous oxide, N2O, also known as laugh-
ing gas, is not part of this family of nitrogen monoxides.
Enzymes  called  nitric  oxide  synthases  produce 
nitric  oxide  by  converting  L-arginine  and  molecular 
oxygen into citrulline and nitric oxide (Fig. 26.17). Nico-
tinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) pro-
vides reducing equivalents for the reaction. Nitric oxide 
synthase  (NOS)  is  really  two  enzymes  in  one.  The 
N-terminal oxidase domain has a heme group that partici-
pates  directly  in  oxidation  of  arginine.  The  C-terminal 
reductase  domain  supplies  electrons  to  the  oxidase 
domain.  NOS  depends  on  an  extraordinary  number  of 
cofactors to handle the electron transfers that are required 
to  produce  nitric  oxide:  heme  and  tetrahydrobiopterin 
bound to the oxidase domain, and flavin adenine dinucle-
otide, flavin mononucleotide, and NADPH in the reduc-
tase domain. Some gram-positive bacteria have an NOS 
with only the N-terminal oxidase domain that is presum-
ably the evolutionary ancestor of eukaryotic NOS. These 
bacterial enzymes catalyze nitration of substrates rather 
than production of nitric oxide.

Vertebrates express three NOS isozymes selectively in 
various tissues. NOS1 and NOS3 are synthesized consti-
tutively. Inducible NOS (iNOS or NOS2) is found in mac-
rophages,  liver,  and  fibroblasts.  Macrophages  produce 
NOS2 only when stimulated by endotoxin, interferon-γ, 
or other factors. Endothelial NOS (eNOS or NOS3) is also 
made by some neurons. NOS3 is targeted to membranes 

NH2

H2N+
C

NH
CH2
CH2
CH2
+H3N  C  C

H

O2

O
O–

OH
N

C

NH2

O

NH2

C

NADPH

1/2 NADPH

NH
CH2
CH2
CH2
+H3N  C  C

H2O

H

O2

O
O–

H2O

NH
CH2 NO•
+
CH2
CH2
+H3N  C  C

O
O–

H

Arginine

Hydroxy-arginine

Citrulline

FIGURE  26.17  SYNTHESIS  OF  NITRIC  OXIDE.  NADPH,  nico-
tinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate. 

Targets:
  Guanylyl 
    cyclase
  Pathogens

by N-terminal myristoylation and palmitoylation. Neuro-
nal  NOS  (nNOS  or  NOS1)  is  made  by  approximately  
1% of neurons in the cerebral cortex as well as skeletal 
muscle  and  epithelial  cells.  NOS1  associates  with  the 
plasma membrane dystrophin complex in skeletal muscle 
(see Fig. 39.17) and is lost from the membrane in patients 
with muscular dystrophy.

Ca2+-calmodulin  and  phosphorylation  regulate  NOS 
activity  independently.  Ca2+-calmodulin  activates  NOS 
by  binding  a  short  regulatory  sequence  between  the  
two  enzyme  domains.  Ca2+  signals  activate  NOS  in 
most  tissues,  although  macrophage  NOS2  binds  Ca2+-
calmodulin  so  tightly  that  it  is  permanently  activated. 
PKB/Akt,  the  kinase  activated  by  PIP3,  phosphorylates 
and activates NOS3.

The main target for the low concentrations of nitric 
oxide used for signaling is soluble guanylyl cyclase, the 
cytoplasmic  enzyme  that  makes  cGMP  (see  Fig.  24.8). 
Nitric oxide binds reversibly to iron in the heme group 
of  guanylyl  cyclase,  causing  a  conformational  change 
that activates the enzyme. Nitric oxide also reacts with 
cysteine  side  chains  of  proteins  (S-nitrosylation).  This 
covalent  posttranslational  modification  can  modify  
the  activity  of  sensitive  proteins  such  as  NSF  (N-
ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor), a protein that is required 
for membrane trafficking (see Fig. 21.12).

Macrophages produce concentrations of nitric oxide 
that are high enough to kill microorganisms directly. The 
−)  to 
nitric  oxide  combines  with  superoxide  anion  (O2
form  peroxynitrite  (OONO−),  which  rapidly  breaks 
•,  both  very  toxic  oxidants 
down  into  OH•  and  NO2
that  kill  ingested  microorganisms.  Plants  also  produce 
nitric oxide as part of their defense mechanism against 
pathogens.

Nitric  oxide  from  three  different  sources  regulates 
blood flow and blood pressure in response to local physi-
ological demands. During exercise, the repeated release 
of  Ca2+  that  stimulates  skeletal  muscle  contraction  (see 
Fig.  39.15)  also  binds  calmodulin  and  activates  NOS  
to  produce  nitric  oxide.  Nitric  oxide  diffuses  out  of  
the skeletal muscle and relaxes smooth muscle cells sur-
rounding nearby blood vessels by activating cGMP pro-
duction  and  thereby  protein  kinase  G  (PKG)  (see  Fig. 
25.4).  PKG  reduces  membrane  excitability  by  opening 
Ca-activated  K-channels  and  inhibits  contraction  by  
lowering  the  internal  Ca2+  concentration  by  inhibiting 
production  of  IP3.  This  increases  local  blood  flow  to 
supply  oxygen  and  nutrients.  Endothelial  cells  lining  
the inside of blood vessels also use nitric oxide to regu-
late  vascular  smooth  muscle.  Mechanical  shear  stress 
from  blood  flow  continuously  stimulates  endothelial  
cell phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase to produce PIP3, which 
stimulates PKB/Akt to phosphorylate and activate NOS3. 
This provides a sustained, long-term signal to relax vas-
cular smooth muscle. Acutely, hormones such as acetyl-
choline and bradykinin can stimulate endothelial cells to 

 

CHAPTER 26  n  Second Messengers 

461

produce  nitric  oxide  by  causing  Ca2+  release  from  ER. 
Mice that lack NOS3 have high blood pressure.

Mono- and di-NG-methylated arginines strongly inhibit 
NOS  and  therefore  have  been  used  experimentally  to 
reveal many biological functions of nitric oxide. Inhibi-
tion  of  NOS  compromises  killing  of  bacteria  by  macro-
phages.  Similarly,  inhibition  of  endothelial  nitric  oxide 
production causes vascular smooth muscle cells to con-
tract,  which  raises  blood  pressure  and  demonstrates  a 
constitutive  role  for  nitric  oxide  in  relaxation  of  these 
cells. Nitric oxide produced by autonomic nerves causes 
erection  of  the  penis  by  stimulating  the  production  of 
cGMP  and  relaxing  vascular  smooth  muscle  cells.  The 
drug sildenafil (Viagra) is used to treat erectile dysfunc-
tion,  as  it  inhibits  the  phosphodiesterase  that  breaks 
down  cGMP.  Sildenafil  and  related  drugs  bind  in  the 
active  site,  excluding  cGMP.  Other  autonomic  nerves 
use  nitric  oxide  to  control  the  smooth  muscle  cells  in 
the  walls  of  the  intestines.  Nitric  oxide  is  the  active 
metabolite of nitroglycerin, a drug that is widely used to 
relieve  pain  (angina  pectoris)  associated  with  compro-
mised blood flow in the heart. It dilates coronary arteries 
and improves circulation. In addition to regulating cere-
bral  blood  flow,  nitric  oxide  produced  by  nerve  cells  
in the brain may contribute to certain types of learning 
by  reinforcing  the  release  of  neurotransmitters  (see  
Fig. 17.11).

Carbon  monoxide  (CO)  is  another  gaseous  intercel-
lular  second  messenger  under  some  circumstances.  It 
too  regulates  soluble  guanylate  cyclase  and  influences 
the activity of some enzymes.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We  thank  Barbara  Ehrlich  and  Richard  Lewis  for  their 
suggestions on revisions to this chapter.

SELECTED READINGS

Amcheslavsky A, Wood ML, Yeromin AV, et al. Molecular biophysics 
of  Orai  store-operated  Ca2+  channels.  Biophys  J.  2015;108:237-
246.

Baillie GS, Scott JD, Houslay MD. Compartmentalisation of phosphodi-
esterases  and  protein  kinase  A:  Opposites  attract.  FEBS  Lett. 
2005;579:3264-3270.

De  Caterina  R,  Zampolli  A.  From  asthma  to  atherosclerosis: 
5-lipoxygenase, leukotrienes and inflammation. N Engl J Med. 2004;
350:4-7.

Fan G, Baker ML, Wang Z, et al. Gating machinery of InsP3R channels 

revealed by electron cryomicroscopy. Nature. 2015;527:336-341.

Futerman AH, Hannun YA. The complex life of simple sphingolipids. 

EMBO Rep. 2004;5:777-782.

Garavito RM, Mulichak AM. The structure of mammalian cyclooxygen-

ases. Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct. 2003;32:183-206.

Geiger M, Wrulich OA, Jenny M, et al. Defining the human targets of 
phorbol  ester  and  diacylglycerol.  Curr  Opin  Mol  Ther.  2003;5:
631-641.

Guse AH. Calcium mobilizing second messengers derived from NAD. 

Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015;1854:1132-1137.

Hill BG, Dranka BP, Bailey SM, et al. What part of NO don’t you under-
stand?  Some  answers  to  the  cardinal  questions  in  nitric  oxide 
biology. J Biol Chem. 2010;285:19699-19704.

Hou  X,  Pedi  L,  Diver  MM,  Long  SB.  Crystal  structure  of  the  calcium 
release-activated  calcium  channel  Orai.  Science.  2012;338:1308-
1313.

Mak DO, Foskett JK. Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors in the endo-
plasmic  reticulum:  A  single-channel  point  of  view.  Cell  Calcium. 
2015;58:67-78.

Marshall CB, Nishikawa T, Osawa M, et al. Calmodulin and STIM pro-
teins: Two major calcium sensors in the cytoplasm and endoplasmic 
reticulum. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015;460:5-21.

McKinney MK, Cravatt BF. Structure and function of fatty acid amide 

hydrolase. Annu Rev Biochem. 2005;74:411-432.

McLaughlin S, Wang J, Gambhir A, Murray D. PIP2 and proteins: Interac-
tions,  organization,  and  information  flow.  Annu  Rev  Biophys 
Biomol Struct. 2002;31:151-175.

Newton  J,  Lima  S,  Maceyka  M,  Spiegel  S.  Revisiting  the  sphingolipid 
rheostat: Evolving concepts in cancer therapy. Exp Cell Res. 2015;
333:195-200.

Olson  KR,  Donald  JA,  Dombkowski  RA,  Perry  SF.  Evolutionary  and 
comparative aspects of nitric oxide, carbon monoxide and hydrogen 
sulfide. Respir Physiol Neurobiol. 2012;184:117-129.

Patterson RL, Boehning D, Snyder SH. Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate recep-

tors as signal integrators. Annu Rev Biochem. 2004;73:437-465.

Radmark O, Samuelsson B. Regulation of 5-lipoxygenase enzyme activ-

ity. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005;338:102-110.

Rhee  SG.  Regulation  of  phosphoinositide-specific  phospholipase  C. 

Annu Rev Biochem. 2001;70:281-312.

Soboloff  J,  Rothberg  BS,  Madesh  M,  et al.  STIM  proteins:  dynamic 
calcium signal transducers. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2012;13:549-565.
Toyoshima C, Inesi G. Structural basis of ion pumping by Ca2+-ATPase of 

the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Annu Rev Biochem. 2004;73:269-292.

Usman MW, Luo F, Cheng H, et al. Chemopreventive effects of aspirin 

at a glance. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015;1855:254-263.

Vanhaesebroeck B, Leevers SJ, Ahmadi K, et al. Synthesis and function 
of  3-phosphorylated  inositol  lipids.  Annu  Rev  Biochem.  2001;70:
535-602.

Van  Petegem  F.  Ryanodine  receptors:  allosteric  ion  channel  giants.  

Berridge MJ, Lipp P, Bootman MD. The versatility and universality of 

J Mol Biol. 2015;427:31-53.

calcium signaling. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2000;1:11-21.

Wilson RI, Nicoll RA. Endocannabinoid signaling in the brain. Science. 

Bos JL. EPAC: A new cAMP target and new avenues in cAMP research. 

2002;296:678-682.

Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2003;4:733-738.

Chandrasekharan  NV,  Simmons  DL.  The  cyclooxygenases.  Genome 

Biol. 2004;5:241.

Worby CA, Dixon JE. PTEN. Annu Rev Biochem. 2014;83:641-669.
Zaccolo M, Magalhães P, Pozzan T. Compartmentalisation of cAMP and 

Ca2+ signals. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2002;14:160-166.

462 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

APPENDIX 26.1 
Examples of Ca2+ Regulated Proteins

Binding Site

EF hand*
EF hand
C2 domain

Novel
Novel
Novel
Novel
Novel
Novel
Novel

Protein
First-Order Proteins That Bind Ca2+ Directly
Membrane Proteins
Annexins
Bestrophin Ca2+-activated Cl− channels
Ca2+-activated K+ channels
IP3 receptor
Ryanodine receptor
Synaptotagmin
TMEM16A Ca2+-activated Cl− channels
Enzymes
Calmodulin-domain protein kinases
Calpain
Protein kinase C, some isozymes
Cytoskeletal Proteins
α-Actinin (some isoforms)
Centrin/caltractin
Gelsolin, villin
Molluscan myosin light chains
Troponin C
Calcium-Binding Proteins
Calmodulin
Calbindin-D28K
Calretinin
Parvalbumin
S100 proteins (18 human isoforms)
S100 calbindin-D9K
Recoverin
Second-Order Proteins Activated by Ca2+-Calmodulin
Membrane Proteins
Adenylyl cyclase (some isoforms)
Ca2+-dependent Na+ channels
cGMP-gated cation channels
Plasma membrane Ca2+-ATPase pumps
Enzymes
Calcineurin
CaM kinase (several isozymes)
cAMP phosphodiesterase
IP3 kinase
Myosin light-chain kinase
NAD kinase
Nitric oxide synthetase
Phosphorylase kinase
Cytoskeletal Proteins
MARCKS

EF hand
EF hand
Novel
EF hand
EF hand

EF hand
EF hand
EF hand
EF hand
EF hand
EF hand
EF hand

Function

Promote membrane interactions
Participate in secretion
Control membrane excitability
Ca2+-release channel; activated and inhibited by Ca2+
Ca2+-release channel, activated and inhibited by Ca2+
A synaptic vesicle Ca2+ sensor
Intestinal motility

Plant protein kinases
Ca2+-dependent protease
Multifunctional protein kinases activated by Ca2+

Actin filament crosslinking protein
Ca2+-sensitive contractile fibers
Actin filament severing and capping proteins
Regulate muscle contraction; activated by Ca2+
Ca2+-activated regulator striated muscle contraction

Ca2+-activated regulator of many proteins
Cytoplasmic Ca2+ buffer
Activates guanylyl cyclase
Cytoplasmic Ca2+ buffer
Diverse regulatory functions; some isoforms may be secreted
Cytoplasmic Ca2+ buffer
Regulates visual phototransduction

Produces cAMP
Na+ currents
Phototransduction
Clears cytoplasm of Ca2+

Protein phosphatase 2B
Multifunctional protein kinase
Degrades cAMP
Phosphorylates IP3
Activates smooth muscle and cytoplasmic myosin
Phosphorylates NAD
Makes nitric oxide
Phosphorylates phosphorylase

Actin filament crosslinking protein

CaM, calmodulin; cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; cGMP, cyclic guanosine monophosphate; IP3, inositol triphosphate; NAD, nicotinamide 
adenine dinucleotide.
*EF hand is the abbreviation for the Ca2+ binding site in calmodulin consisting of α-helices E and F.

C H A P T E R 

27 

Integration of Signals

This  chapter  summarizes  how  a  variety  of  well-

characterized signal transduction pathways work at the 
cellular and molecular levels. These examples illustrate 
diverse  mechanisms,  but  common  strategies,  for  carry-
ing  information  about  changing  environmental  condi-
tions into cells and eliciting adaptive responses. Chapters 
24 to 26 describe the molecular hardware used in these 
pathways. Here, the focus is on the flow of information, 
including  examples  of  branching  and  converging  path-
ways. For each pathway, the key events are reception of 
the stimulus, transfer of the stimulus into the cell, ampli-
fication  of  a  cytoplasmic  signal,  modulation  of  effector 
systems  over  time,  and  adaptation  through  negative 
feedback loops. Few signaling pathways operate in isola-
tion;  physiological  responses  usually  depend  on  the 
integration of several pathways.

Although  each  pathway  illustrated  here  is  the  best 
characterized of its kind, gaps usually exist in our knowl-
edge  about  some  aspects  of  the  dynamical  behavior. 
These gaps are expected, as most pathways are compli-
cated  and  few  pathways  are  amenable  to  quantitative 
analysis in live cells. Ongoing investigations will continue 
to  refine  the  schemes  presented  in  the  following  sec-
tions, particularly with respect to how each operates as 
an integrated system.

Signal Transduction by  
G-Protein–Coupled, Seven-Helix 
Transmembrane Receptors
The first three signaling pathways use seven-helix recep-
tors coupled to trimeric G-proteins. Two highly special-
ized sensory systems—olfactory and visual reception—are 
particularly well characterized, because their outputs are 
electrophysiological events that can be monitored at the 
level  of  single  cells  and  single  membrane  ion  channels 
on a rapid time scale. On a millisecond time scale, these 
two  sensory  transducers  amplify  minute  stimuli  to 

produce changes in the membrane potential that initiate 
a  signal  to  the  central  nervous  system.  The  response  
of  cells  to  the  hormone  epinephrine  through  the  β-
adrenergic  receptor  provides  an  interesting  contrast  
to  these  rapidly  responding  sensory  systems.  Although 
many of the protein components are similar, the response 
is  slower  and  much  more  global,  affecting  cellular 
metabolism and responsiveness as a whole.

Detection of Odors by  
the Olfactory System
Metazoan  sensory  systems  detect  external  stimuli  with 
extremely  high  sensitivity  and  specificity.  The  chemo-
sensory  processes  of  smell  and  taste  have  evolved  into 
highly specialized biochemical and electrophysiological 
pathways  that  connect  individuals  with  their  environ-
ment. Of these two sensory modalities, olfaction is more 
sensitive,  allowing  mammals  to  detect  odorants  at 
concentrations  of  a  few  parts  per  trillion  in  air  and  to 
distinguish  among  more  than  1010  different  combina-
tions of odorants. Most volatile chemicals with molecular 
weights  of  less  than  1000  are  perceived  to  have  
some  odor.  The  olfactory  system  shares  features  with 
many  systems  that  eukaryotes  use  for  communication, 
such  as  external  pheromone  signals  of  yeast  and  
insects  as  well  as  internal  hormonal  signals,  such  as 
adrenaline,  that  circulate  in  the  blood  between  organs 
of metazoans.

Volatile  odorant  compounds  first  dissolve  in  the 
mucus that bathes the sensory tissue in the nasal cavity. 
Animals  use  a  family  of  odorant-binding  proteins  to 
solubilize odorants in mucus. Odorant-binding proteins 
typically bind a number of related compounds with low 
affinities, so odorants exchange rapidly on and off. When 
odorants  dissociate,  they  can  interact  with  receptor 
proteins  located  on  specialized  cilia  of  the  olfactory 
neurons.

 463

464 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

Sensory Neurons
Olfactory  sensory  neurons  located  in  the  nasal  epi-
thelium of vertebrate organisms detect specific odorants 
and  respond  by  sending  action  potentials  to  the  brain 
(Fig. 27.1). These neurons have three specialized zones. 
An apical dendrite extends to the surface of the epithe-
lium  and  sprouts  approximately  12  sensory  cilia  spe-
cialized 
for  responding  to  particular  extracellular 
odorants. The response depends on high concentrations 
of four proteins in the ciliary membrane: a single type of 
odorant  receptor  per  cell,  the  trimeric  G-protein  Golf, 
type III adenylyl cyclase, and cyclic nucleotide–gated ion 
channels.  The  cell  body  contains  the  nucleus,  protein-
synthesizing  machinery,  and  plasma  membrane  pumps 
and  channels  that  set  the  resting  electrical  potential  of 

the plasma membrane. An axon projects from the base 
of each neuron to secondary neurons in the olfactory 
bulb at the front of the brain.

Olfactory  sensory  neurons  are  unique  among  adult 
neurons in their ability to replace themselves from pre-
cursor cells in the epithelium within 30 days after they 
are destroyed. If protected from viruses and environmen-
tal  toxins,  they  turn  over  much  more  slowly,  so  the 
ability of self-renewal appears to be an adaptation to the 
hazards  associated  with  exposure  to  the  environment. 
Loss of olfactory function with age results, in part, from 
a decreased ability to maintain this neuronal replacement 
process. The presence of neurons in an epithelium might 
seem  odd,  but  recall  that  the  entire  central  nervous 
system derives from the embryonic ectoderm.

A

Cells with a
  particular
  odorant
  receptor

B

Cilia

Dendrite

D

Receptors
Golf
Adenylyl cyclase
cAMP-gated
  channels

Other
sensory
neurons

BM

C. Signal transduction mechanism

Pumps

Voltage-sensitive
  ion channels

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Axon to   o l factory bulb

Axons
converging in
olfactory bulb

Odorant

Odorant
receptor

cAMP-gated
  channels

Na+

Adenylyl
cyclase

D
Golf

T
Golfβγ

T
Golfα

ATP

cAMP

Ca2+

CIC

Action potential

Cl–

Ca2+

PKA

ORK

Ca2+

PDE

5'-AMP

Ca-calmodulin

Positive
Negative

FIGURE 27.1  OLFACTION. A, Light micrograph of a section of sensory epithelium from the nasal passage of a mouse after staining (purple) 
for one olfactory receptor messenger RNA. Note that only a few cells express this gene. B, Drawing of the sensory epithelium, highlighting the 
locations of signal-transducing proteins in three parts of one olfactory sensory neuron. BM, basement membrane. C, Signal transduction mecha-
nism. An odorant molecule binds and activates a specific seven-helix plasma membrane receptor. The activated receptor catalyzes the exchange 
of guanosine diphosphate (GDP) for guanosine triphosphate (GTP) on multiple trimeric G-proteins, causing dissociation of Golfα from Gβγ. Golfα-GTP 
activates adenylyl cyclase to produce multiple cyclic adenosine monophosphates (cAMPs). cAMP binds to and opens cyclic nucleotide–gated 
ion channels, depolarizing the plasma membrane. Ca2+ admitted by the cAMP-gated channel opens chloride channels (ClCs), which augment 
membrane depolarization. Membrane depolarization triggers an action potential at the base of the axon that travels along the axon to secondary 
neurons  in  the  brain.  Multiple  negative  feedback  loops  (red)  terminate  stimulation.  cAMP  activates  protein  kinase  A  (PKA),  and  Gβγ  activates 
odorant receptor kinase (ORK [green]), both of which phosphorylate and inhibit the receptor. Ca2+ binds calmodulin, which inhibits the cAMP-gated 
channel and activates phosphodiesterase (PDE) to break down cAMP. D, Light micrograph of the olfactory bulb of a mouse expressing a marker 
enzyme (β-galactosidase) driven by the promoter for one odorant receptor. A histochemical reaction marks the axons of these cells blue. Axons 
from many olfactory sensory neurons expressing the same receptor converge on the same glomerulus in the olfactory bulb. (A, From Ressler KJ, 
Sullivan SL, Buck LB. A zonal organization of odorant receptor gene expression in the olfactory epithelium. Cell. 1993;73:597–609. D, Courtesy 
Charles Greer, Yale University, New Haven, CT. For reference, see Zou D-J, Feinstein P, Rivers AL, et al. Postnatal refinement of peripheral olfactory 
projections. Science. 2004;304:1976–1979.)

 

CHAPTER 27  n  Integration of Signals 

465

Overview of the Pathway
The process of reception and transduction of olfactory 
stimuli takes place in five steps (see Fig. 27.1):
1.  Extracellular  odorants  bind  and  activate  seven-helix 

receptors on the cilia of olfactory neurons.

2.  Activated receptors amplify the signal by catalyzing the 
exchange of guanosine diphosphate (GDP) for guano-
sine triphosphate (GTP) on multiple molecules of Golf.
3.  Each GTP-Golfα dissociates from Gβγ and amplifies the 
signal  by  activating  an  adenylyl  cyclase  molecule  to 
produce  many  molecules  of  cyclic  adenosine  mono-
phosphate (cAMP).

4.  cAMP binds to and opens cyclic nucleotide–gated ion 

channels, depolarizing the plasma membrane.

5.  Membrane  depolarization  opens  voltage-gated  ion 
channels,  triggering  an  action  potential  (a  self-
propagating  wave  of  membrane  depolarization;  see 
Fig.  17.6)  that  starts  at  the  base  of  the  axon  of  the 
sensory  neuron  and  moves  to  secondary  neurons  in 
the olfactory bulb in the brain.
As  one  can  appreciate  from  everyday  experience, 
olfactory signal transduction is very sensitive but adapts 
quickly  to  the  continued  presence  of  an  odorant  as 
explained in the following account of each step.

Odorant Receptors
The  olfactory  system  uses  a  large  family  of  seven-helix 
receptors  to  detect  a  wide  range  of  ligands  present  at 
low  concentrations  in  nasal  mucus.  These  receptors 
were  identified  by  cloning  their  complementary  DNAs 
(see Fig. 6.11 for cDNAs) from the olfactory epithelium. 
Genome  sequencing  established 
that  mice  have 
approximately  1000  functional  odorant  receptor  genes 
(approximately  4%  of  total  genes!),  whereas  humans 
have approximately 350 functional genes and fish have 
100. Sequence comparisons and mutagenesis established 
that  odorants  bind  among  transmembrane  helices  3,  5, 
6, and 7, the most variable part of these proteins. Each 
sensory  neuron  typically  expresses  a  single  type  of 
odorant  receptor  (Fig.  27.1A),  using  negative  feedback 
from  the  receptor  itself  to  suppress  the  expression  of 
other  types  of  odorant  receptors.  The  1000  cells  that 
express each receptor are scattered in zones throughout 
the olfactory epithelium.

G-Protein Relay
Odorant binding changes the conformation of the recep-
tor,  allowing  it  to  catalyze  the  exchange  of  nucleotide 
on Golf on the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane. 
In  fewer  than  100 msec,  an  activated  receptor  can 
produce 10 to 100 activated GTP-Golfα molecules, which 
then dissociate from their Gβγ subunits.

Production of Cyclic Adenosine Monophosphate
In the third step, GTP-Golfα binds to and activates a spe-
cialized  olfactory  isozyme  of  adenylyl  cyclase.  While 

active,  each  enzyme  generates  nearly  100 cAMP  mol-
ecules. By 75 milliseconds after stimulation, the concen-
tration of cAMP inside the cilium peaks at greater than 
10 µM,  returning  to  baseline  within  500  milliseconds. 
This dramatic fluctuation in cAMP concentration is made 
possible  by  the  high  surface-to-volume  ratio  of  cilia, 
which ensures that membrane-associated signaling com-
ponents interact rapidly and confines the cAMP within 
a small volume. The cAMP transient is short-lived, owing 
to hydrolysis of cAMP by a phosphodiesterase with a 
high turnover rate.

Cyclic Nucleotide–Gated Channels Trigger  
an Action Potential
Experiments  on  isolated  olfactory  neurons  established 
that  the  fast  cAMP  transient  depolarizes  the  plasma 
membrane by activating cyclic nucleotide–gated cation 
channels. The density of these channels in ciliary mem-
branes (>2000/µm2) is much higher than that in the cell 
body  (6/µm2).  Binding  of  at  least  two  cAMP  molecules 
increases the probability that the channel is open from 
near 0 to about 0.65. Because the probability is not 1.0, 
individual  activated  channels  flicker  open  and  closed  
on  a  millisecond  time  scale.  The  ensemble  of  many 
activated channels admits enough Na+ and Ca2+ to depo-
larize  the  membrane.  Ca2+-activated  chloride  channels 
carry additional current. The lag of 200 to 500 millisec-
onds  between  binding  of  the  odorant  and  peak  mem-
brane depolarization is attributable to the relatively slow 
binding  of  cAMP  to  the  channel.  Triggering  an  action 
potential  differs  from  the  role  of  cAMP  in  most  other 
tissues, where the main target is protein kinase A (PKA 
[see Fig. 25.3]).

Depolarization  of  the  ciliary  membrane  initiates  an 
action  potential  (see  Fig.  17.6)  by  activating  voltage-
gated  sodium  channels  (see  Fig.  16.2)  in  the  cell  
body.  The  action  potential  propagates  along  the  axon  
to  a  chemical  synapse  with  the  second  neuron  in  
the path way located in the olfactory bulb of the brain. 
The  two  stages  of  amplification  downstream  of  the 
receptor  allow  a  few  active  receptors  to  produce  an 
action potential.

Adaptation
Desensitization—the waning of perceived odorant inten-
sity  despite  its  continued  presence—results  from  a 
combination  of  processes  in  both  olfactory  neurons  
and the brain. Even with constant exposure to odorant 
the system adapts at each step in the signaling pathway 
owing  to  the  transient  G-protein  activation,  the  self-
limited  increase  in  cAMP,  and  the  brief  membrane 
depolarization  (Fig.  27.1C).  The  sequential  nature  of 
many  of  these  feedback  circuits  implies  that  they  have 
intrinsic  delays  and  therefore  serve  not  only  to  alter  
the  magnitude  of  the  response  but  also  to  shape  its  
time course.

466 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

G-protein–coupled  receptors  are  desensitized  by 
protein  kinases  that  phosphorylate  the  receptor  and  
by  proteins  called  arrestins  that  bind  phosphorylated 
receptors (see Fig. 24.3). These modifications inhibit the 
interaction  of  activated  receptors  with  G-proteins  and 
provide  negative  feedback  at  the  first  stage  of  signal 
amplification. Negative feedback is coupled to receptor 
stimulation,  because  the  olfactory  receptor  kinase 
is  brought  to  the  plasma  membrane  by  binding  the  
Gβγ  subunits  released  by  receptor-induced  G-protein 
dissociation.

Ca2+ entering the cell through cyclic nucleotide–gated 
channels  binds  calmodulin,  which  provides  two  types  
of  negative  feedback.  Calcium-calmodulin  activates  the 
cAMP phosphodiesterase, which rapidly converts cAMP 
to  inactive  5′-adenosine  monophosphate  (AMP).  It 
also  binds  to  the  cyclic  nucleotide–activated  channels, 
reducing  their  affinity  for  cAMP  by  10-fold  and  also 
reducing the probability of opening at less than saturat-
ing cyclic nucleotide concentrations. These two effects 
of Ca2+ alter the responsiveness of the neuron to initial 
odorant exposure, limit the time course of the response, 
extend  the  dynamic  range  over  which  the  cell  can 
respond, and make a cell transiently refractory to addi-
tional stimulation.

Processing in the Brain
Mammals  discriminate  vastly  more  odorants  than  the 
number of available receptors. This is achieved by com-
bining  information  from  multiple  types  of  receptors  in 
their central nervous systems. The molecular specificity 
established  in  the  olfactory  epithelium  between  an 
odorant  and  its  receptor  is  preserved  at  the  first  step  
in  the  brain,  because  all  the  axons  from  the  sensory 
neurons that express a particular odorant receptor con-
verge on only two to three target areas in the olfactory 
bulb called glomeruli (Fig. 27.1D). There the axons from 
like  sensory  neurons  form  synapses  with  dendrites  of 
about  50  secondary  neurons  in  the  pathway.  Given 
approximately  1000  odorant  receptors  in  the  mouse, 
each  mouse  olfactory  bulb  has  approximately  2000 
glomeruli.  Most  of  the  secondary  neurons  send  their 
axons  to  higher  levels,  where  they  terminate  in  a  
combinatorial  manner  on  cortical  neurons.  Of  special 
interest,  the  odorant  receptor  itself  is  an  important 
determinant of axon targeting to the glomeruli. Expres-
sion of different odorant receptors results in the axons 
selecting new glomerular targets.

The discrimination of a particular odorant is achieved 
in two stages: At the first stage, each odorant activates 
several different receptors, and each receptor can bind 
a  group  of  related  odorants.  Therefore,  each  odorant 
activates a particular pattern of olfactory sensory neurons 
and their coupled glomeruli. At the next level, neurons 
in the cerebral cortex receive information from a com-
bination of glomeruli, leading to eventual discrimination 

BOX 27.1  Sex and the Second Olfactory System

Animals  use  olfaction  to  find  their  mates,  identify  their 
offspring, and mark their territories. Some of the odorants 
used  for  social  interactions  are  volatile  chemicals  that 
stimulate  the  main  olfactory  system.  A  second  accessory 
olfactory  system  detects  other  social  odorants.  Some  are 
volatile chemicals found in urine; others are not volatile, 
including  major  histocompatibility  complex  (MHC)  class 
II  peptide  complexes  that  are  shed  from  the  surfaces  of 
cells into the urine and other secretions. Accessory sensory 
neurons  are  located  in  a  special  part  of  the  epithelium 
lining nasal cavity called the vomeronasal organ. Each of 
these neurons expresses one of approximately 300 seven-
helix  receptors  from  a  different  family  than  the  main 
odorant  receptors.  Odorant  binding  activates  a  signal 
transduction  pathway  distinct 
from  main  olfactory 
neurons,  dependent  on  a  Trp  channel  (see  Fig.  16.9) 
rather than a cyclic nucleotide–gated channel. The axons 
project to the accessory olfactory bulb in the brain.

of many different smells at higher levels of the brain. Box 
27.1 has information on our second olfactory system.

Photon Detection by the Vertebrate Retina
Overview of Visual Signal Processing
Photons are energetic but unconventional agonists. They 
are tiny, move very fast, and penetrate most biochemical 
materials. These properties create a formidable challenge 
for  detecting  photons  and  transducing  their  intensities 
and wavelengths into a signal that can be transmitted to 
the  brain.  Nevertheless,  vertebrate  photoreceptor  cells 
capture  single  photons  and  convert  this  energy  into  a 
highly  amplified  electrical  response  (Fig.  27.2).  Photo-
transduction  is  the  best-understood  eukaryotic  sensory 
process, because the system is amenable to sophisticated 
biophysical,  biochemical,  and  physiological  analysis. 
Single-cell organisms use similar mechanisms to respond 
to light (see Fig. 38.16).

Vertebrate photoreceptor cells are neurons located 
in  a  two-dimensional  array  in  the  retina,  an  epithelium 
inside the eye. The cornea and lens of the eye form an 
inverted real image of the outside world on the retina, 
so  the  intensity  of  the  light  across  the  field  of  view  is 
encoded by the array of geographically separate photo-
receptor  cells.  Photoreceptor  cells  lie  at  the  base  of  a 
complex neural processing system. Having detected the 
rate  of  photon  stimulation  at  a  particular  place  in  the 
visual  field,  photoreceptor  neurons  communicate  this 
information to higher levels of the visual system. Initial 
processing of the information takes place in the retina, 
where  secondary  and  tertiary  neurons  take  input  from 
multiple  photoreceptors  to  derive  local  information 
regarding image contrast, as well as color and intensity. 
Neuroscience  texts  present  more  detailed  information 

 

CHAPTER 27  n  Integration of Signals 

467

A. Rod anatomy

B. Dark

C. Activation

Photon

D. Recovery

Plasma
membrane

Disks

t
n
e
m
g
e
s
 
r
e
t
u
O

Connecting
cilium
ER
Golgi
Mito-
chondria

t
n
e
m
g
e
s
 
r
e
n
n
I

Nucleus

Fiber

Synaptic
ending

Retina

Rhodopsin

α

β

D

γ 

GTrimeric

cGMP
Guanylyl
cyclase

GTP

Ca2+

cGMP-
gated

channels

open

Gα

D
GTP GDP

T

Phospho-
diesterase
GMP

cGMP

Na+

GTP

cGMP-
gated

channels

close

Gβγ

ATP ADP

RGS

Kinase

GTP

Arrestin

RGS promotes
GTP hydrolysis

D
cGMP

Na+

Ca2+

cGMP-
gated

channels

open

4 Na+

Carrier

–
+
–
–
+
–

+
+
–
+
–
+

Plasma membrane
hyperpolarizes

–
–
–
––
–

+
+
+
+
+

Current restores
resting membrane
potential

–
+
–
–
+
–

+
+
–
+
–
+

K+

4 Na+

Carrier

+
–
+

–
–
+

+
–
+

–

–
+
+
Constitutive
–
secretion of
glutamate

–

–
–

+
+

Hyperpolarized
membrane inhibits
secretion

+

–

+

–

+

–

+

+
–
+

–
–
+

–

+
–
+
Glutamate
secretion
resumes

–
+

–

–

+

Glutamate

Glutamate

FIGURE  27.2  VERTEBRATE VISUAL TRANSDUCTION. A, Drawing of a rod cell. Disks in the outer segment are rich in rhodopsin. ER, 
endoplasmic reticulum. B–D, Drawings of small portions of an outer segment (upper panels) and the synaptic terminal of a rod cell (lower panels) 
in three physiological states. Active components are highlighted by bright colors. B, Resting cell in the dark. Constitutive production of cyclic 
guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) keeps a subset of the plasma membrane cGMP-gated channels open most of the time, allowing an influx 
of Na+ and Ca2+. At this membrane potential, the synaptic terminal constitutively secretes the neurotransmitter glutamate. Ca2+ leaves the outer 
segment via a sodium/calcium exchange carrier in the outer segment, whereas Na+ leaves the cell via a sodium pump in the plasma membrane 
of the inner segment. C, Absorption of a photon activates one rhodopsin, allowing it to catalyze the exchange of GTP for GDP bound on many 
molecules of transducin (GT). This dissociates GTα from Gβγ. Each GTα-GTP binds and activates one molecule of phosphodiesterase (attached 
to the disk membrane by N-terminal isoprenyl groups), which rapidly converts cGMP to guanosine monophosphate (GMP). As the concentration 
of free cGMP declines, the cGMP-gated channels close, leading to hyperpolarization of the plasma membrane and inhibition of glutamate secretion 
at the synaptic body. D, Recovery is initiated when rhodopsin kinase phosphorylates activated rhodopsin. Binding of arrestin to phosphorylated 
rhodopsin  prevents  further  activation  of  GT.  Phosphodiesterase  and  an  RGS  protein  cooperate  to  stimulate  hydrolysis  of  GTP  bound  to  GT, 
returning GT to the inactive GTα-GDP state. Synthesis of cGMP by guanylyl cyclase returns the cytoplasmic concentration of cGMP to resting 
levels  and  opens  the  cGMP-gated  channels.  Constitutive  secretion  of  glutamate  resumes.  ADP,  adenosine  diphosphate;  ATP,  adenosine 
triphosphate. 

on  higher  levels  of  visual  processing  in  the  retina  
and brain.

The response of photoreceptor cells depends on the 
intensity of the light, that is, the flux of photons. Verte-
brate retinas detect light with intensities that range over 
10  orders  of  magnitude.  Rod  photoreceptors  (Fig. 
27.2A)  detect  low  levels  of  light  from  approximately 
0.01 photon/µm2/s (dim stars) to 10 photons/µm2/s but 
do not discriminate light of different colors. Cone pho-
toreceptors (cones) respond to more intense light, up 
to about 109 photons/µm2/s (full sunlight). Three classes 
of cones with chromophores sensitive to different wave-
lengths  of  light  allow  humans  to  encode  wavelength. 
This is the basis for color vision (Box 27.2).

BOX 27.2  Color Vision

Three  types  of  cones  allow  us  to  discriminate  colors. 
Cones  are  organized  much  like  rods  but  express  one  of 
three  different  seven-helix  photoreceptors,  each  with  a 
distinct  visual  pigment.  The  absorption  spectra  of  the 
photoreceptors overlap, so the central nervous system can 
perceive colors from deep purple to deep red by compar-
ing  the  relative  activation  of  the  three  types  of  cones  at 
each point in the visual field. As in rods, signal transduc-
tion in cones depends on degradation of cyclic guanosine 
monophosphate (cGMP) and closure of cGMP-gated chan-
nels.  Activation  of  cones  requires  much  more  intense 
light, but cones respond faster than rods.

468 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

Rods  and  cones  have  three  specialized  regions  with 
different  molecular  components  and  functions.  The 
nucleus  and  the  organelles  in  the  inner  segment 
maintain the cell’s structure and metabolism. A vestigial 
cilium connects the inner segment to the outer segment, 
which  consists  of  a  stack  of  internal  membrane  disks 
containing the photoreceptor protein, rhodopsin in the 
case of rods, surrounded by the plasma membrane. Disks 
form by invagination and pinching off of flattened sacks 
of plasma membrane. Rhodopsin synthesized in the cell 
body is transported to the plasma membrane along the 
secretory pathway and segregated into disk membranes. 
The  lumen  of  the  disks  corresponds  topologically  to  
the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum or the extracel-
lular space. The base of the photoreceptor cell forms a 
synapse with the next neuron in the circuit.

Absorption of a photon activates rhodopsin and initi-
ates a signaling cascade (Fig. 27.2) involving a trimeric 
G-protein  that  activates  a  cyclic  guanosine  monophos-
phate  (cGMP)  phosphodiesterase.  The  phosphodiester-
ase lowers the cytoplasmic concentration of cGMP and 
closes  cGMP-gated  channels  in  the  plasma  membrane. 
Closing these channels hyperpolarizes the plasma mem-
brane and reduces the release of glutamate at the synapse 
with the next neuron in the visual circuit.

Feedback loops operate at every level in this pathway, 
turning off the response to a flash of light. The following 
sections explain how these reactions achieve their spec-
tacular sensitivity in rods.

Rhodopsin
Rhodopsin is a seven-helix, G-protein-coupled receptor 
with  a  light-absorbing  chromophore,  11-cis  retinal, 
covalently attached to lysine 296 through a protonated 
Schiff base (Fig. 27.2B). Although 11-cis retinal is bound 
to a site in the bundle of transmembrane helices similar 
to sites where ligands bind other seven-helix receptors, 
this conformation of rhodopsin is inactive with respect to 
catalyzing nucleotide exchange on its trimeric G-protein. 
Thus,  rhodopsin  is  a  seven-helix  receptor  with  a  cova-
lently attached, but inactive, ligand.

The ability of rods to detect single photons depends 
on two favorable properties. First, the noise level is very 
low, owing to the stability of the 11-cis retinal. In verte-
brate rods, fewer than one molecule in 4 × 1010 isomer-
izes  spontaneously  every  second,  so  the  background 
level of activated rhodopsin is very low, even with more 
than 108 molecules of rhodopsin per cell. Thus, one does 
not  perceive  spots  of  light  in  the  dark.  Second,  rods 
absorb  photons  very  efficiently  by  virtue  of  the  high 
density of rhodopsin in disks (~25,000 rhodopsins/µm2) 
and stacking thousands of disks on top of each other in 
the  direction  of  incoming  photons.  Rhodopsin  consti-
tutes 90% of the disk membrane protein and 45% of the 
disk  membrane  mass.  About  half  of  the  photons  that 
traverse  the  outer  segment  are  absorbed,  and  about 

two-thirds  of  absorbed  photons  produce  an  electrical 
change in the plasma membrane.

Absorption  of  light  initiates  the  signal  transduction 
pathway. The energy from the absorbed photon isomer-
izes the 11-cis retinal chromophore to all-trans retinal 
in  picoseconds,  creating  a  cascade  of  intramolecular 
reactions  that  activate  rhodopsin  by  changing  its  con-
formation.  The  active  conformation  called  metarho-
dopsin II catalyzes nucleotide exchange on transducin, 
its trimeric G-protein partner (see Fig. 25.9). Following 
activation,  rhodopsin  is  inactivated  by  hydrolysis  of  
the  Schiff  base  linking  all-trans  retinal  to  the  protein 
and  dissociation  of  the  chromophore.  Attachment  of  a 
fresh  molecule  of  11-cis  retinal,  derived  from  vitamin 
A  or  regenerated  from  all-trans  retinal,  regenerates 
rhodopsin.

Positive Arm of the Signal Cascade
Two enzymatic reactions amplify the signal initiated by 
absorption  of  light.  Metarhodopsin  II  catalyzes  the 
exchange of GDP for GTP on the α subunit of transducin, 
which  then  dissociates  its βγ  subunits  also  attached  to 
the cytoplasmic face of the disk membrane by covalently 
bound  lipid  groups.  Each  metarhodopsin  II  produces 
hundreds  of  activated  transducins  in  a  fraction  of  a 
second, nearly as fast as the molecules collide while they 
diffuse  in  the  plane  of  the  very  crowded  disk  bilayer. 
Nevertheless, nucleotide exchange on transducin is rate-
limiting in the whole transduction cascade, even with a 
107 acceleration by metarhodopsin II.

Transducin  α-GTP  activates  phosphodiesterase 
associated  with  the  disk  membrane  by  binding  the 
enzyme’s two inhibitory γ subunits. This frees the cata-
lytic  α  and  β  subunits  of  phosphodiesterase  to  break 
down  cGMP  to  guanosine  monophosphate  (GMP)  at  a 
high  rate.  The  cytoplasmic  concentration  of  cGMP 
depends  largely  on  its  rate  of  destruction  by  light-
activated phosphodiesterase, as it is made continuously 
by guanylyl cyclase.

As  the  concentration  of  cGMP  falls,  cGMP-gated 
cation  channels  (see  Fig.  16.10)  in  the  plasma  mem-
brane  close  resulting  in  hyperpolarization  of  the  mem-
brane.  This  change  in  membrane  potential  inhibits 
glutamate  release  at  the  synapse.  The  light-induced 
decline in glutamate release has opposite effects on the 
two  types  of  “bipolar  neurons”  connected  to  rods:  It 
stimulates “on-type” bipolar neurons to fire action poten-
tials  and  hyperpolarizes  the  “off-type”  bipolar  neurons. 
This  combination  of  responses  is  the  first  step  in  the 
discrimination of contrast in our visual world.

Amplification in this pathway is spectacular. Within 1 
second  after  absorption  of  a  single  photon,  rhodopsin 
activates  1000  transducins  and  a  similar  number  of 
phosphodiesterases, which break down 50,000 cGMPs. 
This change in concentration closes hundreds of cGMP-
gated channels, each of which blocks the entry of more 

 

CHAPTER 27  n  Integration of Signals 

469

BOX 27.3  Electrical Circuits in the Photoreceptor

Absorption  of  light  changes  currents  flowing  through 
electrical circuits in photoreceptor cells. In the dark, the 
resting cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) concen-
tration in the outer segment keeps open 1% of the cGMP-
gated channels. These open channels produce an inward 
“dark current” of Na+ and Ca2+, which is balanced by an 
outward  current  of  K+  through  channels  in  the  inner 
segment.  Sodium-potassium  adenosine  triphosphatase 
(ATPase) pumps in the inner segment compensate for the 
accumulation of Na+ and the depletion of K+. Ca2+ entering 
the outer segment is exported by a carrier in the plasma 
membrane of the outer segment that exchanges Ca2+ and 
K+ for Na+.

Following  absorption  of  a  photon,  both  the  cGMP 
concentration and the probability of the cGMP-gated chan-
nels being open declines on a millisecond time scale. In 
parallel,  the  cation  current  into  the  outer  segment  falls, 
hyperpolarizing  the  plasma  membrane.  The  cytoplasmic 
Ca2+  concentration  also  declines  from  about  300 nM  to 
50 nM.  The  magnitudes  of  these  responses  depend  on  
the number of photons absorbed and the size of the ampli-
fied signal.

Two  useful  properties  emerge  from  the  fact  that  the 
extracellular  concentration  of  Ca2+  largely  blocks  open 
photoreceptor channels, similar to the cyclic nucleotide–
gated channel of olfactory neurons. First, this reduces the 
burden  on  the  pumps  that  maintain  the  ionic  gradients  
in  the  cell.  Second,  using  multiple  channels  with  low  
ionic conductance improves the signal-to-noise ratio. For 
example,  if  only  two  channels  carried  the  dark  current, 
the  statistical  opening  or  closing  of  one  channel  would 
create  large  fluctuations  in  the  current.  If  100  partially 
blocked channels carried the same current, then opening 
or  closing  single  channels  has  a  modest  effect  on  
total current.

than  10,000  cations.  Box  27.3  provides  more  details 
about the electrical circuit in the rod cell.

Recovery and Adaptation
After a dim flash of light, the dip in cytoplasmic cGMP 
concentration and hyperpolarization of the plasma mem-
brane are short-lived, on the order of 2 seconds in rods, 
and even less in cones. Rods reset the signaling pathway 
by  inhibiting  metarhodopsin  II,  inactivating  transducin 
α-GTP, and stimulating the synthesis of cGMP.

Phosphorylation  turns  off  active  metarhodopsin  II. 
Transducin  βγ  subunits  activate  rhodopsin  kinase 
(called GRK1 for G-protein–coupled receptor kinase 1), 
which  phosphorylates  several  residues  near  the  C- 
terminus  of  the  receptor.  Phosphorylation  not  only 
reduces the ability of rhodopsin to activate transducin, 
but  it  also  creates  a  binding  site  for  arrestin,  which 
further  production  of  transducin  α-GTP 
prevents 
(see Fig. 24.3).

BOX 27.4  Second Visual System to Set Circadian 
Clocks

Many organisms, including humans, use the regular varia-
tion in light during the day and night to entrain a network 
of  transcription  factors  that  control  a  24-hour  circadian 
cycle  of  metabolic  activities  throughout  the  body.  For 
example,  mice  that  are  kept  in  complete  darkness  con-
tinue to run (searching for food) during the hours corre-
sponding to night and sleep during the hours corresponding 
to  day.  Without  light  input,  they  gradually  drift  from  a 
precise 24-hour cycle. Neither rods or cones are required 
to  receive  the  light  that  synchronizes  the  internal  cycle 
with the 24-hour day. Instead, a subset of retinal ganglion 
cells  absorbs  the  light  and  sends  signals  to  the  hypotha-
lamic region of the brain. At least two different photopro-
teins  absorb  the  light:  melanopsin,  an  opsin  family 
member, and cryptochromes, proteins with a flavin chro-
mophore. So the eye is two photodetectors in one.

The  second  level  of  negative  feedback  comes  from 
the hydrolysis of GTP bound to transducin α in less than 
1  second.  Both  phosphodiesterase  (just  activated  by 
transducin α) and an RGS protein (regulator of G-protein 
signaling; see Fig. 25.8) stimulate transducin α to hydro-
lyze the bound GTP. Humans with mutations that disable 
the retinal RGS protein cannot adapt to rapid changes in 
light, so they are blinded for several seconds when they 
step  out  of  a  dark  room  into  full  sunlight.  Dissociation 
of transducin α-GDP from phosphodiesterase inhibitory 
subunits terminates cGMP breakdown.

The reduction in cytoplasmic Ca2+ that accompanies 
closure  of  cGMP-gated  cation  channels  stimulates  the 
guanylyl cyclase that rapidly restores the cGMP concen-
tration.  This  change  opens  the  cation  channels  and 
returns the membrane potential to the resting level.

Box 27.4 has information on a second visual system 

that mammals use to set circadian clocks.

Regulation of Metabolism Through  
the β-Adrenergic Receptor
Epinephrine,  a  catecholamine  that  is  also  called 
adrenaline  (Fig.  27.3),  is  secreted  by  the  neuroendo-
crine cells of the adrenal gland and other tissues when 
an animal is startled, is stressed, or otherwise needs to 
respond vigorously. Norepinephrine, a closely related 
catecholamine,  is  secreted  by  sympathetic  neurons, 
including  those  that  regulate  the  contractility  of  the 
heart.  These  hormones  flow  through  the  blood  and 
stimulate  cells  of  many  types  throughout  the  body  to 
heighten their metabolic activity.

The  particular  physiological  response  in  each  tissue 
depends on selective expression of a family of nine adren-
ergic receptors and their associated signaling hardware 
in differentiated cells (Table 27.1). Epinephrine binding 

470 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

OH

OH
Epinephrine

OH

OH

OH

Norepinephrine

Tyrosine

HO
H N

H3C

CH
CH
H

A. Ligand binds receptor,

    turning it on

α

γ 

GDP

GTP

β

GDP

CH
HO
H2N CH

H

CH2
H2N C C

H

O
OH

B. Receptor activates
    trimeric GTPase

C. G,α-GTP activates
    adenylyl cyclase

Gβγ

Gα

+

BAR receptor

kinase

GTP

ATP

cAMP

D. cAMP activates PKA

g
o
L

108

107

106

105

104

103

100

10

1

0

0

Glucose-6 P

P-phosphorylase

P-phosphorylase
kinase

cAMP
PKA

Gα-GTP

Active receptor

Time (minutes)

PKA

RII

PKA-RII

E. PKA phosphorylates PK

ATP

PP1

Calmodulin-phosphorylase kinase-

Ca2+

F. Ca2+ completes
    activation of PK

Calmodulin-

phosphorylase

kinase

Ca-CM-phosphorylase kinase-

G. Phosphorylase activated
     by phosphorylation

ATP

Phosphorylase

PP1

Phosphorylase-

H. Active phosphorylase
     makes glucose-6 P

Glycogen

Glucose-6

ATP

FIGURE  27.3  β-ADRENERGIC  SIGNALING  MECHANISM.  Active  components  are  shown  in  bright  colors.  Upper  right,  Pathway  of  epi-
nephrine synthesis. Lower left, Time course of the amplification of the signal by the catalytic cascade of signal-transducing enzymes. A, Epinephrine 
binds the seven-helix β-adrenergic receptor, shifting its equilibrium to the active conformation. B, Active receptor catalyzes the exchange of GDP 
for GTP on GSα, dissociating GSα-GTP from Gβγ. C, GSα-GTP activates adenylyl cyclase, which produces multiple cAMPs. D, cAMP activates 
protein kinase A (PKA) by dissociating the regulatory subunit, RII. E, PKA phosphorylates and partially activates multiple molecules of phosphory-
lase kinase (PK). F, Ca2+ binds to calmodulin (CM) associated with PK, completing activation. G, PK phosphorylates and activates phosphorylase. 
H,  Phosphorylase  catalyzes  the  conversion  of  glycogen  to  glucose-6  phosphate.  Negative  feedback  loops  (red)  terminate  stimulation.  cAMP 
activates PKA and Gβγ activates β-adrenergic receptor kinase, both of which phosphorylate and inhibit the receptor from catalyzing nucleotide 
exchange. PP1, protein phosphatase 1. 

to  these  β-adrenergic  receptors  is  the  classic  example 
of  a  pathway  using  a  seven-helix  receptor  (see  Fig. 
24.2), a trimeric G-protein (see Fig. 25.9), and adenylyl 
cyclase  (see  Fig.  26.2)  to  produce  cAMP.  This  second 
messenger mediates a wide variety of cellular responses 
by activating PKA (see Fig. 25.3), which phosphorylates 
many different cellular proteins, thereby changing their 
activities.

Differentiated cells vary in their responses to epineph-
rine and norepinephrine, because they express different 

targets  for  PKA.  In  the  heart,  PKA  phosphorylates 
voltage-gated Ca channels, increasing cytoplasmic Ca2+, 
and  phospholamban,  a  small  membrane  protein  that 
stimulates Ca2+ pumps in the smooth endoplasmic reticu-
lum  to  clear  Ca2+  from  the  cytoplasm  (see  Fig.  39.14). 
These changes stimulate the heart to contract more fre-
quently and with greater force (see Fig. 39.21). On the 
other  hand,  PKA  in  smooth  muscle  cells  of  arteries 
phosphorylates  and  inhibits  myosin  light  chain  kinase, 
which inhibits contraction and increases blood flow (see 

 

CHAPTER 27  n  Integration of Signals 

471

TABLE 27.1  Four Examples of Adrenergic Receptors and Physiological Responses
Receptor
α1

Tissue

Signaling Pathway
Gq, PLC-β, IP3, Ca2+, MLCK
Gq
Gq
Gi, Ca2+
Gi, inhibit A-cyclase, K+ channel open
Gs, A-cyclase, cAMP, PKA, phospholamban
Gs, A-cyclase, cAMP, PKA, phosphorylase
Gs, A-cyclase, cAMP, PKA, phosphorylase

Responses

Contraction
Relaxation
Glycogenolysis
Contraction
Secretion inhibition
Increased contraction
Glycogenolysis
Glycogenolysis

α2

β1
β2

Smooth muscle, blood vessels
Smooth muscle, GI tract
Liver
Smooth muscle, blood vessels
Pancreatic islets
Heart
Liver
Skeletal muscle

cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; GI, gastrointestinal; IP3, inositol triphosphate; MLCK, myosin light-chain kinase; PKA, protein kinase A; PLC-β, 
phospholipase Cβ.

Fig.  39.24).  Skeletal  muscle  and  liver  cells  respond  to 
epinephrine  and  PKA  by  breaking  down  glycogen  
to  release  glucose  into  the  circulation  (Fig.  27.3),  
while  PKA  in  brown  fat  cells  dissipates  energy  as  heat 
(see Fig. 28.3).

This  section  explains  how  β-adrenergic  receptors 
regulate  the  production  of  glucose-6  phosphate  from 
glycogen (Fig. 27.3), a process termed glycogenolysis. As 
with  vision  and  olfaction,  the  response  to  epinephrine 
is sensitive, highly amplified (see the graph in Fig. 27.3), 
and subject to negative feedback control. Five stages of 
amplification along the seven-step pathway allow binding 
of  a  single  molecule  of  epinephrine  to  a  receptor  to 
activate  millions  of  enzyme  molecules  that  produce 
many millions of molecules of glucose-6 phosphate:
1.  Epinephrine  binds  to  a  β-adrenergic  receptor,  trap-
ping it in its active conformation. The resting system 
is on the verge of activation, because the ligand-free 
receptor is in a rapid equilibrium between activated 
and unactivated states. Even without agonist, a small 
fraction of receptors is active at any given time. Thus, 
experimentally  increasing  the  total  concentration  
of  receptors  (and  therefore  the  concentration  of  
spontaneously  active  receptors)  can  maximally  acti-
vate  downstream  pathways,  even  in  the  absence  of 
agonists.

2.  Each  activated  receptor  catalyzes  the  exchange  of 
GDP  for  GTP  on  many  molecules  of  the  trimeric 
protein Gs, causing the dissociation of GTP-Gsα from 
the Gβγ subunits and amplifying the signal up to 100-
fold.  The  G-protein  subunits  remain  attached  to  the 
membrane  by  their  lipid  anchors  but  separate  to 
activate different targets. This is the first branch point 
in the pathway.

3.  GTP-Gsα  binds  and  activates  adenylyl  cyclase,  an 
integral  membrane  protein  (see  Fig.  26.2)  that  pro-
duces  many  molecules  of  cAMP.  This  is  the  second 
stage of amplification.

4.  cAMP  activates  PKA  by  binding  and  dissociating  its 
inhibitory  RII  subunit  (see  Fig.  25.3).  Activation  of 

PKA  mediates  most  effects  of  cAMP,  but  cAMP  also 
activates  cyclic  nucleotide–gated  ion  channels  in 
some cells.

5.  Each activated PKA amplifies the signal by phosphory-
lating  many  substrate  molecules,  including  phos-
phorylase  kinase.  This  enzyme  requires  Ca2+  for 
activity, but phosphorylation by PKA reduces the Ca2+ 
requirement,  so  the  kinase  is  active  even  at  resting 
(0.1 µM)  Ca2+  concentrations.  On  the  other  hand, 
high cytoplasmic Ca2+ concentrations alone, as during 
muscle contraction, can activate phosphorylase kinase 
without phosphorylation.

6.  Each activated phosphorylase kinase further amplifies 
the  signal  by  phosphorylating  and  activating  many 
molecules  of  the  enzyme  phosphorylase  b.  PKA 
enhances the phosphorylation of both phosphorylase 
kinase and phosphorylase b by inhibiting the regula-
tory  G  subunit  of  protein  phosphatase  1  (see  Fig. 
25.5), which dephosphorylates both enzymes.

7.  Each activated phosphorylase molecule (called phos-
phorylase  a)  removes  many  glucose  subunits  from 
glycogen, one at a time. This fifth stage of amplifica-
tion produces glucose-6-phosphate, which can enter 
the  energy-releasing  glycolytic  pathway  of  the  cell 
(see Fig. 19.4) or, in the case of liver, can be dephos-
phorylated  and  released  into  the  bloodstream  to 
provide an energy source for other cells in the body.
If  the  concentration  of  epinephrine  in  the  blood 
declines, epinephrine dissociates rapidly from β-receptors 
and their equilibrium shifts promptly toward the inactive 
state. Even in the continued presence of epinephrine the 
cell  adapts  owing  to  reactions  that  counterbalance  the 
positive arm of the pathway as follows.

First,  each  activating  reaction  is  reversible,  either 
spontaneously  or  catalyzed  by  specific  enzymes.  Acti-
vated  GTP-Gsα  hydrolyzes  its  bound  nucleotide  slowly, 
at  a  rate  of  approximately  0.05 s−1,  then  rebinds  Gβγ, 
returning  the  complex  to  its  inactive  state.  A  Ca2+-
calmodulin-activated phosphodiesterase degrades cAMP 
to  inactive  5′-adenosine  monophosphate  (AMP).  This 

472 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

convergence allows signaling pathways that release Ca2+ 
(see Fig. 26.12) to modulate the β-adrenergic pathway.
Second,  the  system  has  several  negative  feedback 
loops  that  operate  on  a  range  of  time  scales.  As  in 
olfaction  and  vision,  active  β-adrenergic  receptors  are 
inhibited  by  phosphorylation.  In  seconds  to  minutes 
inhibitory sites in the C-terminal cytoplasmic tail are phos-
phorylated by PKA activated by cAMP and β-adrenergic 
receptor  kinase  (now  called  GRK2)  recruited  by  Gβγ 
subunits  released  from  Gsα-GTP. β-arrestin  binding  to 
phosphorylated  receptors  rapidly  blocks  interactions 
of  the  active  receptor  with  G-proteins  and  attracts 
cAMP  phosphodiesterase  to  the  membrane.  On  a  time 
scale  of  many  minutes,  interactions  of  β-arrestin  with 
clathrin  and  adapter  proteins  (see  Fig.  22.9)  mediate 
removal  of  receptors  from  the  cell  surface  by  endocy-
tosis.  Prolonged  stimulation  by  epinephrine  results  in 
receptor ubiquitination (see Fig. 23.2), endocytosis, and  
degradation.

In  addition  to  these  effects  on  glucose  metabolism, 
active β-adrenergic receptors produce at least two other 
signals. Gβγ subunits activate calcium channels in some 
cells. This Ca2+ can augment glycogen breakdown at the 
phosphorylase  kinase  step.  In  addition  to  its  negative 
effects, β-arrestin activates the mitogen-activated protein 
(MAP)  kinase  pathway  (Fig.  27.6)  by  binding  to  phos-
phorylated  receptors  and  also  serving  as  a  membrane-
anchoring site for the cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase, c-Src.

Signaling Pathways Influencing  
Gene Expression
Many extracellular ligands influence gene expression, via 
just  three  kinds  of  generic  pathways  (Fig.  27.4).  The 
ligands for the first generic pathway are small and hydro-
phobic, such as steroids, vitamin A, and thyroid hormone. 
These ligands penetrate the plasma membrane  and  bind 
nuclear  receptors  in  the  cytoplasm. The ligands for the 
other  two  generic  pathways  include  small  charged 
molecules, peptides, and pro teins that cannot penetrate 
the plasma membrane. Therefore, they must bind recep-
tors on the cell surface to initiate pathways that activate 
transcription factors. In all cases, activated transcription 
factors cooperate with other nuclear proteins to regulate 
the expression of specific genes:
1.  Nuclear  receptor  pathways:  Ligands  such  as  steroid 
hormones cross the plasma membrane into the cyto-
plasm,  where  they  bind  latent  transcription  factors 
called  nuclear  receptors.  Ligand-bound  receptors 
move  from  the  cytoplasm  into  the  nucleus  and,  in 
combination  with  other  proteins,  activate  transcrip-
tion of specific genes (see Fig. 10.21A).

2.  Pathways  activating  mobile  kinases  in  the  cyto-
plasm:  Some  plasma  membrane  receptors  turn  on 
pathways  to  activate  cytoplasmic  protein  kinases, 
which enter the nucleus, where they phosphorylate 

B

A

Small

hydrophobic

ligands

C

Charged small

Charged small

molecules, peptides,

molecules, peptides,

proteins

proteins

ECM

Plasma

membrane
receptors

Bind nuclear

receptor

Activate

cytoplasmic

kinase

CYTOPLASM

NUCLEUS

Phosphorylate latent
transcription factor

Activate latent
cytoplasmic

transcription factor
(phosphorylation,

proteolysis)

Gene

Gene

Gene

1. Steroid hormones
2. Thyroid hormone

1. PKA    CREB
2. Receptor tyrosine
    kinases
    MAP kinase
3. T-cell receptor
    cytoplasmic
    tyrosine
    kinase

1. Cytokines    STAT
2. TGF-β      Smads
3. TNF     NF-κB
4. Delta     Notch
5. Hedgehog
6. Wnt     β-catenin
7. TCR     NF-AT

FIGURE  27.4  THREE  SIGNALING  PATHWAYS  BY  WHICH 
EXTRACELLULAR  LIGANDS  INFLUENCE  GENE  EXPRESSION. 
A, Nuclear receptor pathway for small hydrophobic ligands that pen-
etrate  the  plasma  membrane  (see  Fig.  10.21A  for  an  example).  
B, Pathways employing a plasma membrane receptor and a cytoplas-
mic  protein  kinase  that  enters  the  nucleus  to  activate  a  latent 
transcription factor. (See Fig. 10.21B for the PKA pathway, Fig. 27.6 
for a receptor tyrosine kinase pathway, and Fig. 27.8 for a cytoplasmic 
tyrosine kinase pathway.) C, Pathways employing a plasma membrane 
receptor and activating a latent transcription factor in the cytoplasm. 
The list includes six known pathways of this type. (See Fig. 27.8 for 
nuclear factor–activated T cells [NF-AT]; Fig. 27.9 for a signal trans-
ducer and activator of transcription [STAT] pathway; Fig. 27.10 for a 
SMAD [Sma- and Mad-related protein] pathway; Fig. 10.21C for the 
nuclear  factor  κB  [NF-κB]  pathway;  Chapter  24  for  the  Notch  and 
Hedgehog pathways; and Fig. 30.7 for the β-catenin pathway.) CREB, 
cAMP  response  element–binding  protein;  ECM,  extracellular  matrix; 
TCR, T-cell receptor; TNF, tumor necrosis factor. 

latent  transcription  factors.  These  mobile  kinases 
include PKA (see Fig. 10.21B) and several MAP kinases 
(Figs. 27.5 through 27.8).

3.  Pathways activating latent transcription factors in 
the  cytoplasm:  Other  plasma  membrane  receptors 
activate latent transcription factors in the cytoplasm, 
generally  by  phosphorylation  or  proteolysis.  These 
activated transcription factors then enter the nucleus. 
These mobile transcription factors include nuclear 
factor–activated  T  cells  (NF-AT)  (Fig.  27.8);  signal 
transducer  and  activator  of  transcriptions  (STATs) 
(Fig.  27.9),  SMADs  [Sma-  and  Mad-related  proteins] 
(Fig.  27.10);  nuclear  factor  κB  (NF-κB)  (see  Fig. 

 

CHAPTER 27  n  Integration of Signals 

473

10.21C);  Notch  (see  Chapter  24);  Hedgehog  (see 
Chapter 24); and β-catenin (see Fig. 30.7).

Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase 
Pathways to the Nucleus
Cascades of three protein kinases terminating in a MAP 
kinase relay signals from diverse stimuli and receptors 
to the nucleus (Fig. 27.5). The first kinase activates the 
second  kinase  by  phosphorylating  serine  residues.  The 
second kinase activates MAP kinase by phosphorylating 
both a tyrosine and a serine residue in the activation loop 
(see  Fig.  25.3F).  Active  MAP  kinase  enters  the  nucleus 
and phosphorylates transcription factors, which regulate 
gene expression. Key targets include genes that advance 
or restrain the cell cycle, depending on the system. MAP 
kinases also regulate the synthesis of nucleotides required 
for making RNA and DNA.

A  variety  of  cell  surface  receptors  initiate  pathways 
that  activate  MAP  kinase  cascades.  Many  of  these  path-
ways  pass  through  the  small  guanosine  triphosphatase 
(GTPase) Ras, allowing cells to integrate diverse growth-
promoting signals to control the cell cycle (see Fig. 41.9). 
Receptor tyrosine kinases for growth factors (Fig. 27.6) 
and  insulin  (Fig.  27.7)  send  signals  through  Ras.  Other 
receptors  use  nonreceptor  tyrosine  kinases  coupled  to 
Ras and MAP kinase, such as T-lymphocyte receptors via 
zeta-associated  protein  kinase  (ZAP-kinase)  (Fig.  27.8). 
Seven-helix  receptors  can  also  activate  MAP  kinase 
pathways.  For  example,  β-arrestin  not  only  inactivates 
β-adrenergic  receptors,  it  also  couples  them  to  a  MAP 
kinase  pathway  (see  Fig.  24.3).  Budding  yeast  activates 
MAP kinase pathways in two ways. Mating pheromones 

bind  seven-helix  receptors  that  release  Gβγ  subunits  of 
trimeric G-proteins, which activate the first kinase in the 
cascade.  Alternatively,  osmotic  shock  activates  a  two-
component  receptor  (Fig.  27.11)  upstream  of  another 
MAP  kinase  pathway  that  regulates  the  synthesis  of 
glycerol, which is used to adjust cytoplasmic osmolarity.
Animal cells have multiple MAP kinase cascades with 
particular isoforms of the three kinases linked in series 
and leading to different effectors (Fig. 27.5). The kinases 
that make up these pathways are expressed selectively 
in  various  cells  and  tissues.  Deletion  of  single  MAP 
kinases  in  mice  is  generally  not  lethal,  so  crosstalk 
between pathways is likely to be extensive.

A  cascade  of  kinases  provides  opportunities  to  inte-
grate  inputs  from  converging  pathways  and  to  amplify 
signals. Amplification can be so strong that a MAP kinase 
cascade  can  act  like  an  all-or-nothing  switch.  For  
example, frog oocytes that are arrested in the G2 stage 
of the cell cycle react to the hormone progesterone by 
either remaining arrested or entering the cell cycle at full 
speed.  Progesterone  activates  a  MAP  kinase  cascade 
consisting  of  Mos,  MEK1,  and  the  p42  MAP  kinase.  In 
individual cells, the MAP kinase is either unphosphory-
lated  and  inactive  or  doubly  phosphorylated  and  fully 
active. This bistable switch-like response depends in part 
on the fact that both MEK1 and MAP kinase require two 
independent  phosphorylation  events  for  activation.  In 
addition, active MAP kinase provides two types of posi-
tive  feedback  (Fig.  27.5B).  MAP  kinase  both  activates 
Mos by phosphorylation and also drives Mos expression. 
Consequently,  a  marginal  stimulus  turns  on  some  cells 
strongly  and  others  not  at  all  rather  than  producing  a 
partial response in all the cells.

A

Inputs

Growth
factors

Oxidative

stress

Interleukin-1

Receptors

Receptor

tyrosine kinase

Receptor

tyrosine kinase

TNF family

receptor

Extracellular

matrix

Integrins

Activators

Ras

Src

TRAF6/TAB1/2

Rac1

B

Inputs

Receptor

Activator

MAP kinase kinase
kinase (S/T kinases) 

MAP kinase kinase

(dual specificity kinases)

MAP kinase
(S/T kinase)

Substrates

Outputs

c-Raf

MEKK2

TAK1

MEKK1

MAP KKK

MKK1

MKK5

MKK3/6

MKK4/7

Erk1/2

Erk5

p38(α, β, γ, δ)

JNK1/2/3

p90RSK
(kinase)

MEF2
(TF)

MNK1
(kinase)

c-Jun
(TF)

Growth,

differentiation

Gene

expression

Cytokine
production

Growth,

differentiation

N
e
g
a
t
i

v
e
 
f
e
e
d
b
a
c
k

k
c
a
b
d
e
e
f
 

e
v

i
t
i
s
o
P

MAP KK

MAP kinase

Transcription factor

Gene expression:
(MAP KKK) & (MAP
kinase phosphatase)

FIGURE 27.5  A, Four mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathways. The pathways are arranged vertically. The levels of the pathways are 
arranged horizontally with the nuclear compartment at the bottom. Dual-specificity protein kinases phosphorylate S/T and Y residues. B, Positive 
and negative feedback loops along a generic MAP kinase pathway. K, kinase; TF, transcription factor. 

474 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

Autoinhibited
monomer

130º

EGF

A. EGF binding

opens extracellular

domains

Minimally

active kinase

domain

B. Extracellular
domains dimerize

One kinase domain
binds and activates
other kinase domain

C. Receptor binds
and activates PLCγ
PIP2

DAG+IP3

D. Other effectors with SH2 or
PTB domains bind P-tyrosines

E. Ras

activation

Ras
GTP

Ras
GDP

PLCγ

SOS

PKC

Grb2

Raf

Raf

activation

Ubiquitination
& endocytosis

Transcription
factors

ERK

ERK
activation

G. Cellular proliferation,

differentiation, etc

MEK

MEK
activation

e p ath w ay

s

a

  M A P   k i n

F .

FIGURE 27.6  EPIDERMAL GROWTH FACTOR (EGF) RECEPTOR TYROSINE KINASE SIGNALING PATHWAY THROUGH MITOGEN-
ACTIVATED PROTEIN (MAP) KINASE. A, Ligand binding changes the conformation of the extracellular domains of the receptor. B, Extracellular 
domains dimerize, bringing together the tyrosine kinase domains of two receptor subunits in the cytoplasm. Direct interactions and transphos-
phorylation activate the kinases and create specific docking sites for effector proteins with SH2 (Src homology 2) domains. C, Phospholipase Cγ 
(PLCγ)  binds  one  phosphotyrosine  and  is  activated  by  phosphorylation  to  break  down  PIP2  into  diacylglycerol  and  inositol  triphosphate  (IP3). 
D, A complex of the adapter protein Grb2 and the nucleotide exchange factor SOS binds another phosphotyrosine. (The gene for SOS protein 
got its name—“son of sevenless”—as a downstream component of the sevenless growth factor receptor gene required for the development of 
photoreceptor  cell  number  seven  in  the  fly  eye.)  E,  SOS  catalyzes  the  exchange  of  GDP  for  GTP  on  the  membrane-associated  small 
GTPase Ras. Ras-GTP attracts the cytoplasmic serine/threonine kinase Raf to the plasma membrane. F, Raf phosphorylates and activates the 
dual-function kinase mitogen activated protein/extracellular signal-related kinase (MEK). MEK phosphorylates and activates MAP kinase. G, MAP 
kinase enters the nucleus and activates latent transcription factors. (Receptor drawings based on originals by Daniel J. Leahy, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, MD. For reference, see Protein Data Bank [PDB; www.rcsb.org] file 2AHX for the unliganded receptor and Bouyain S, Longo 
PA,  Li  S,  et al.  The  extracellular  region  of  ErbB4  adopts  a  tethered  conformation  in  the  absence  of  ligand.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  U  S  A. 
2005;102:15024–15029.)

Both yeast and mammals anchor two or three of the 
kinases  in  certain  MAP  kinase  pathways  to  a  common 
scaffold  protein.  Physical  association  of  the  enzymes 
insulates  these  pathways  from  parallel  pathways  but 
precludes amplification.

Growth Factor Receptor Tyrosine  
Kinase Pathway Through Ras to  
Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase
Protein  and  polypeptide  growth  factors  control  the 
expression  of  genes  required  for  growth  and  devel-
opment.  For  example,  the  protein  epidermal  growth 
factor  (EGF)  controls  proliferation  and  differentiation 

in  vertebrates.  Platelet-derived 
of  epithelial  cells 
growth  factor  (PDGF)  stimulates  the  proliferation  of 
connective  tissue  cells  required  to  heal  wounds  (see  
Fig. 32.11).

Growth  factor  signaling  pathways  transfer  informa-
tion from the cell surface through at least seven different 
protein molecules to the nucleus (Fig. 27.6). Conserva-
tion of the main features of the mechanism in vertebrates, 
nematodes, and flies made it possible to combine infor-
mation  from  different  systems.  Genetic  tests  identified 
the components and established the order of their inter-
actions. Many components were identified independently 
as oncogenes and by biochemical isolation and recon-
stitution of individual steps.

 

CHAPTER 27  n  Integration of Signals 

475

Information flows from growth factors to the nucleus 

as follows:
1.  Growth  factors  bind  to  the  extracellular  domain  of 
their  receptors,  bringing  two  receptors  together 
either by linking them (see Fig. 24.5A) or inducing a 
conformational change (see Fig. 24.5B).

2.  Dimerization of receptors activates their cytoplasmic 
tyrosine kinase domains either by transphosphory-
lating  tyrosine  residues  on  the  activation  loop 
of their partner (see Fig. 24.5A) or by allosteric inter-
actions  (see  Fig.  24.5B).  The  active  kinases  phos-
phorylate other tyrosines on the cytoplasmic domain 
of the receptor.

3.  Each  newly  created  phosphotyrosine  is  flanked  by 
unique amino acids that form specific binding sites for 
SH2  domains  of  downstream  effectors,  including 
phospholipase Cγ1, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase 
(PI3K) and a preformed complex of the adapter protein 
Grb2 with SOS. Grb2 consists of three Src homology 
domains:  SH3/SH2/SH3  (see  Fig.  25.10).  The  SH2 
domain  binds  tyrosine-phosphorylated  growth  factor 
receptors.  The  SH3  domains  anchor  proline-rich 
sequences  (PPPVPPRR)  of  SOS,  a  guanine  nucleotide 
exchange factor for the small GTPase Ras (see Fig. 4.6).
4.  Association  of  Grb2-SOS  with  the  receptor  raises  its 
local  concentration  near  Ras,  which  is  anchored  to 
the bilayer by farnesyl and palmitoyl groups. Proxim-
ity alone suffices for SOS to activate Ras, by exchang-
ing GDP for GTP, as forced experimental targeting of 
SOS  to  the  plasma  membrane  by  other  means  also 
activates  Ras.  Ras-GTP  is  active  for  some  time,  as  it 
hydrolyzes GTP very slowly (0.005 s−1). Two mecha-
nisms inactivate Ras-GTP: a GTPase-activating protein 
(Ras-GAP) binds to the receptor and stimulates GTP 
hydrolysis; and removal of the palmitate releases Ras 
from the plasma membrane.

5.  Ras-GTP binds and activates Raf-1, a serine/threonine 

kinase (a MAP kinase kinase kinase).

6.  Active  Raf-1  phosphorylates  and  activates  the  dual-
function protein kinase MEK (also called MAP kinase 
kinase or MKK1).

7.  MEK  activates  MAP  kinase  by  phosphorylating  both 

serine and tyrosine residues on the activation loop.

8.  Active MAP kinase has some cytoplasmic substrates, 
and  also  enters  the  nucleus  to  phosphorylate  and 
activate  transcription  factors  already  bound  to  DNA 
(Fig.  27.5).  These  transcription  factors  control  the 
expression  of  genes  for  proteins  that  drive  the  cell 
cycle  (see  Fig.  41.9),  as  well  as  phosphatases  that 
generate negative feedback by inactivating the kinases 
along these pathways (Fig. 27.5B).
The routes from the cell surface through Ras and MAP 
kinase  to  nuclear  transcription  factors  are  not  simple 
linear pathways. The signal is amplified at some steps and 
influenced by both positive and negative feedback loops 
at  multiple  levels  (Fig.  27.5).  For  example,  negative 

feedback comes from pathways through phospholipase 
Cγ1  and  PI3K  that  produce  Ca2+  and  lipid  second  mes-
sengers that activate protein kinase C (PKC) isoforms (see 
Fig. 26.6). PKC inhibits growth factor receptors by phos-
phorylation. Active receptors are also modified by addi-
tion  of  a  single  ubiquitin,  a  signal  for  inactivation  by 
endocytosis (see Figs. 22.13 and 23.2).

Growth factor pathways are essential for normal growth 
and  development,  but  malfunctions  can  cause  disease  
by inappropriate cellular proliferation. One example is the 
release  of  PDGF  at  the  sites  of  blood  vessel  injury.  Nor-
mally, PDGF stimulates wound repair (see Fig. 32.11), but 
excess stimulation of the proliferation of smooth muscle 
cells in the walls of injured blood vessels is an early event 
in the development of arteriosclerosis.

Many  components  of  growth  factor  signaling  path-
ways were discovered during the search for genes that 
cause cancer. As Jean Marx put it, “growth pathways are 
liberally paved with oncogene products.”* Several of the 
genes were identified in cancer-causing viruses as onco-
genes  capable  of  transforming  cells  in  tissue  culture. 
Oncogenes  include  sis,  a  retroviral  homolog  of  PDGF; 
erbB,  a  homolog  of  the  EGF  receptor;  and  raf  kinase. 
Subsequently, the normal homologs of these genes were 
found  to  have  mutations  in  human  cancers.  Cancer-
causing  mutations  typically  make  the  protein  constitu-
tively  active,  producing  a  positive  signal  for  growth  in 
the absence of external stimuli (see Fig. 41.12).

Two types of mutations increase the concentration of 
active Ras-GTP and transmit positive signals for growth 
in the absence of external stimuli, predisposing individu-
als to malignant disease (see Fig. 41.12). Point mutations 
(such  as  substitution  of  valine  for  glycine-12)  can  con-
stitutively  activate  Ras  by  reducing  its  GTPase  activity. 
Alternatively, mutations that inactivate GTPase-activating 
proteins  (GAPs),  such  as  NF1  (the  gene  causing  neu-
rofibromatosis,  the  so-called  elephant  man  disease;  see  
Fig. 4.7), reduce the rate that Ras hydrolyzes GTP.

Insulin Pathways to GLUT4 and  
Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase
The  insulin  receptor  tyrosine  kinase  triggers  an 
acute response that allows muscle and adipose cells to 
take up blood glucose following a meal (Fig. 27.7). High 
blood  glucose  levels  stimulate  β  cells  in  the  islets  of 
Langerhans  of  the  pancreas  to  secrete  insulin,  a  small 
protein hormone. Insulin receptors are found on many 
cells. Insulin is also a growth factor acting through the 
MAP kinase pathway.

The insulin receptor is a stable, dimeric tyrosine kinase 
composed  of  two  identical  subunits,  each  consisting  of 
two polypeptides covalently linked by a disulfide bond. 
In the absence of insulin the extracellular domains hold 

*Marx J: Forging a path to the nucleus. Science. 1993;260:1588–1590.

476 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

Insulin receptor
Insulin

A. Insulin
     binds

Flotillin

Tyrosine

kinase domain

(inactive)

B. Transphosphorylation
     activates tyrosine
     kinase domains

CAP
Cbl

D

C

SHC

PTB domain
PH domain
PIP2

F
IRS

E

PIP3
G

PI3K

Grb2-SOS

GEF

Ras-GDP

Ras-GTP

Ras-GDP

Glucose

K

Glycogen
synthase
L. Promotes
     conversion of
     glucose into
     glycogen

H

Akt
J. Indirectly
     activates
     Rabs on 
     vesicle to 
     promote
     fusion

TC10-GDP

TC10-GTP

I. Releases vesicle
    from cytoplasmic 
    tethers

MAP
kinase

MAP
kinase

Thr-
Tyr-

Inactive

Active (triphosphorylated)

Vesicle with

GLUT4 glucose

transporters

FIGURE  27.7 
INSULIN  SIGNALING  PATHWAYS  IN  AN  ADIPOSE  CELL.  A,  Insulin  binds  the  preformed  dimeric  receptor,  allowing  the 
association of the transmembrane domains and bringing together the tyrosine kinase domains in the cytoplasm. B, The tyrosine kinase domains 
activate each other by transphosphorylation of activation loops (Fig. 27.3F). Receptor kinases then phosphorylate a variety of downstream targets: 
(C) the adapter protein Cbl, which activates a guanine nucleotide exchange protein (GEF) that in turn activates the small GTPase TC10; (D) the 
adapter protein SHC, which binds Grb2-SOS and slowly initiates the MAP kinase pathway; (E) the adapter protein IRS, which binds Grb2-SOS 
and rapidly initiates the MAP kinase pathway; and (F) another IRS phosphotyrosine, which binds phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K). G, PI3K 
phosphorylates  PIP2  to  make  phosphatidylinositol  3,4,5-trisphosphate  (PIP3).  H,  PIP3  binds  and  activates  several  protein  kinases:  Akt  (protein 
kinase B [PKB]), protein kinase Cλ (PKCλ), and PKCζ. I, Activated TC10 initiates the release of glucose transporter 4 (GLUT4) storage vesicles 
from  cytoplasmic  tethers.  J,  Akt  phosphorylates  and  inactivates  Rab  GTPase-activating  proteins  (GAPs),  activating  Rab  GTPases  on  GLUT4 
storage vesicles, stimulating their fusion with the plasma membrane. K, GLUT4 transports glucose into the cell. L, Akt indirectly activates glycogen 
synthase. CAP binds Cbl to the plasma membrane protein flotillin. The phosphotyrosine-binding (PTB) domain of IRS binds phosphotyrosine and 
the PH domain binds PIP3. (For reference, see Kavran JM, McCabe JM, Byrne PO, et al. How IGF-1 activates its receptor. Elife. 2014;25:3.)

the  transmembrane  helices  and  cytoplasmic  tyrosine 
kinase domains apart. Insulin binding to the extracellular 
domains  allows  the  transmembrane  domains  to  come 
together.  This  brings  the  tyrosine  kinase  domains  into 
proximity so they can transphosphorylate each other (see 
Fig. 25.3F), turning on their kinase activities (Fig. 27.7D). 
The  kinases  propagate  the  signal  by  phosphorylating 
adapter proteins including IRS (insulin receptor sub-
strate, isoforms 1 to 4), SHC (for SH2 and collagen-like), 
and Cbl. Each plays a distinct role in the ensuing response. 
This strategy differs from growth factor receptors, which 
phosphorylate  tyrosines  on  the  receptor  itself  to  create 
binding sites for effector enzymes with SH2-domains.

The short-term effects of insulin are to stimulate glucose 
uptake from blood (particularly into skeletal muscle and 
white  fat)  and  the  synthesis  of  glycogen,  protein,  and 
lipid. Glucose uptake in these cells depends on the glucose 
carrier, GLUT4 (see Fig. 15.1 for closely related carriers). 
In the absence of insulin glucose uptake is limited, because 
these  cells  have  few  GLUT4  uniporters  in  their  plasma 
membranes.  Most  GLUT4  molecules  are  stored  in  the 
membranes of vesicles trapped near the Golgi apparatus 
inside the cell. Insulin stimulates fusion of these GLUT4 
storage  vesicles  with  the  plasma  membrane,  increasing 
the capacity to transport glucose into the cell.

Delivery of GLUT4 to the plasma membrane requires 
two  separate  signals  from  the  insulin  receptor,  one  to 
release  the  storage  vesicles  from  their  tethers  and  the 
other  to  target  the  vesicles  for  fusion  with  the  plasma 
membrane. The first signal begins with phosphorylation 
of  the  adapter  protein  Cbl,  which  activates  a  guanine 
nucleotide  exchange  factor  (GEF).  The  GEF  activates 
the small GTPase TC10, leading to the release of GLUT4 
vesicles  trapped  near  the  Golgi  apparatus.  The  second 
signal  begins  with  PI3K  binding  to  a  phosphotyrosine  
on  IRS.  PI3K  synthesizes  phosphatidylinositol  3,4,5- 
trisphosphate (PIP3), which activates protein kinase PKB/
Akt and other kinases. Akt indirectly activates Rab GTPases 
associated  with  the  GLUT4  vesicles  by  phosphorylating 
and  inactivating  a  Rab  GAP.  Active  Rab-GTP  promotes 
fusion  of  GLUT4  storage  vesicles  with  the  plasma  mem-
brane.  Akt  also  stimulates  the  conversion  of  glucose 
entering  the  cell  through  GLUT4  into  its  storage  form, 
glycogen, by releasing glycogen synthase (the enzyme 
that  makes  glycogen)  from  inhibition  by  glycogen  syn-
thase  kinase  (GSK)  3.  Inactivating  mutations  of  Akt  and 
the  downstream  Rab-GAP  cause  rare  forms  of  diabetes, 
showing their importance in the response to insulin.

Insulin is also a growth factor for some cells, acting 
through  the  Ras/MAP  kinase  pathway  to  nuclear 

 

A. Resting

T-cell receptor

complex

β

α

ε

γ

ε

δ

ζ

CD4

Lck
(inactive)

Cytoplasmic 
tails of CD3

D. Ribbon diagram
     of MHC class II
     with bound
     peptide

CHAPTER 27  n  Integration of Signals 

477

B. Contact with antigen-
     presenting cell

ANTIGEN-
PRESENTING CELL

C. ZAP-70 activated by binding
     ζ-chain phosphotyrosines

ANTIGEN-
PRESENTING CELL

MHC complex
Antigen

T CELL

ITAM

Active Lck
phosphorylates
ITAM tyrosines

E. Propagation of signals

ZAP-70
(active)

SH2

SH2
Kinase

ZAP-70
(inactive)

LAT

PIP2

DAG+

IP3

LAT

RAFT

EXTRACELLULAR
SPACE

T CELL

ZAP-70
(active)

ANTIGEN-PRESENTING CELL

EXTRACELLULAR
SPACE

Ras GDP

Ras GTP

Ca2+

Calcineurin

PKC

PLCγ

SH2

NF-AT

NFκB

Gads

SLP 76

Grb2-
SOS

Raf

Raf

Vav

Rac-GDP

Rac-
GTP

PAK

Cytoskeleton

MAP
kinase

MAP
kinase

thr-
thr-

F

H

Gene
transcription

NUCLEUS

Seconds

Minutes

Hours

G. Immunological synapse

ANTIGEN-PRESENTING CELL

T CELL

T CELL

ANTIGEN-PRESENTING CELL

ICAM1

LFA

T CELL

FIGURE 27.8  T-LYMPHOCYTE ACTIVATION. A, Drawing of the T-cell receptor (TCR) complex on a resting T lymphocyte including inactive 
nonreceptor tyrosine kinase Lck and unphosphorylated phosphorylation sites (ITAMs [immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs]) on the 
cytoplasmic  tails  of  CD3  subunits.  B,  An  encounter  with  an  antigen-presenting  cell  with  a  major  histocompatibility  complex  (MHC)-antigenic 
peptide complex complementary to the particular TCR initiates signaling. Active Lck phosphorylates various ITAMs. C, The nonreceptor tyrosine 
kinase ZAP-70 (zeta-associated protein of 70 kD) is activated by binding via its two SH2 (Src homology 2) domains to phosphorylated ITAMs on 
the zeta chains. D, Ribbon diagrams of MHC II (green) with bound peptide from moth cytochrome c (orange). The main model is reduced in size 
and  tilted  90  degrees  forward  in  the  view  in  the  upper  right  corner,  the  same  orientation  as  in  the  panels  B,  C,  E,  and  H.  E,  Active  ZAP-70 
phosphorylates  various  targets,  including  the  transmembrane  protein  LAT  and  the  adapter  protein  SLP76,  which  then  propagate  the  signal. 
Phospholipase Cγ binds a LAT phosphotyrosine and produces inositol triphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG). IP3 releases Ca2+ from vesicular 
stores. Ca2+ activates calcineurin (protein phosphatase 2B), which activates the latent transcription factor nuclear factor–activated T cells (NF-AT). 
DAG and Ca2+ activate protein kinase C (PKC), which activates latent transcription factor nuclear factor κB (NFκB). Vav, the nucleotide exchange 
factor of the small GTPase Rac, is activated by binding to SLP76. Grb2-SOS binds another phosphorylated ITAM and initiates the MAP kinase 
cascade. F, Micrographs of the time course of the interaction of a T cell with an artificial membrane mimicking a specific antigen-presenting cell. 
Each  image  comprises  a  superimposition  interference  reflection  micrograph,  showing  the  closeness  of  contact  as  shades  of  gray  (with  white 
being closest apposition), and a fluorescence micrograph, showing TCRs (green) and intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM1) (red). The stable 
arrangement of ICAM1 around concentrated TCRs is called an immunologic synapse. G–H, Immunologic synapse with a central zone of TCRs 
bound to MHC complexes and peripheral ICAM1 bound to the integrin LFA. Gads is an adapter protein; RAFT is a lipid raft. (D, For reference, 
see PDB file 1KT2 and Fremont DH, Dai S, Chiang H, et al. Structural basis of cytochrome c presentation by IEk. J Exp Med. 2002;195:1043–1052. 
F, Courtesy M. Dustin, New York University, New York.)

478 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

transcription factors. The signaling circuit to Ras has two 
arms  that  operate  on  different  time  scales.  The  fast 
pathway,  acting  within  seconds,  is  through  tyrosine 
phosphorylation of IRS, which binds Grb2-SOS and initi-
ates the MAP kinase pathway. The slow arm, acting over 
a period of minutes, is through phosphorylation of SHC, 
which  binds  larger  quantities  of  Grb2-SOS  and  slowly 
initiates a sustained response of the MAP kinase pathway. 
Normal growth and tissue differentiation of many animals 
depend  on  insulin-like  growth  factors,  which  act  on 
receptors  similar  to  insulin  receptor  and  use  IRS1  to 
channel growth-promoting signals to the nucleus.

T-Lymphocyte Pathways Through 
Nonreceptor Tyrosine Kinases
Some  signaling  pathways  that  control  cellular  growth 
through  cytoplasmic 
and  differentiation  operate 
protein  tyrosine  kinases  separate  from  the  plasma 
membrane  receptors.  The  best-characterized  pathways 
control the development and activation of lymphocytes 
in the immune system. T lymphocytes are the example 
used  in  this  discussion.  T  lymphocytes  defend  against 
intracellular  pathogens,  such  as  viruses,  and  assist  B 
lymphocytes in producing antibodies (see Fig. 28.9).

Antigen-presenting cells activate T cells by presenting 
peptide  antigens  on  their  surface  bound  to  histocom-
patibility proteins for interactions with T-cell receptors 
(TCRs)  and  accessory  proteins  (Fig.  27.8).  Engagement 
of  the  TCR  triggers  a  network  of  interactions  among 
protein  tyrosine  kinases,  adapter  proteins,  and  effector 
proteins on the inner surface of the plasma membrane. 
Tyrosine  phosphorylation  of  multiple  membrane  and 
cytoplasmic  proteins  activates  three  separate  pathways 
to  the  nucleus.  Two  pathways  activate  cytoplasmic 
transcription  factors;  the  third  uses  the  Ras/MAP 
kinase  pathway  to  activate  transcription  factors  in  
the nucleus.

The  T-cell  antigen  receptor  is  a  complex  of  eight 
transmembrane polypeptides (Fig. 27.8A). The α and β 
chains, each with two extracellular immunoglobulin-like 
domains,  provide  antigen-binding  specificity.  Similar  to 
antibodies (see Fig. 28.10), one of these immunoglobulin 
domains  is  constant  and  one  is  variable  in  sequence. 
The genes for TCRs are assembled from separate parts, 
similar to the rearrangement of antibody genes (see Fig. 
28.10).  Genomic  sequences  for  variable  domains  are 
spliced  together  randomly  in  developing  lymphocytes 
from a panel of sequences, each encoding a small part 
of  the  protein.  Assembly  of  TCRs  in  the  endoplasmic 
reticulum  requires  six  additional  transmembrane  poly-
peptides, each with one or more short sequence motifs, 
called  immunoreceptor  tyrosine  activation  motifs 
(ITAMs), in their cytoplasmic domains.

This combinatorial strategy creates a diversity of T-cell 
antigen receptors, with one type expressed on any given 

T  cell.  Variable  sequences  of  α  and  β  chains  provide 
binding sites for a wide range of different pep tide antigens 
bound to cell surface proteins on antigen-presenting cells. 
These are collectively termed the major histocompati-
bility complex (MHC) antigens (Fig. 27.8D). The peptide 
antigens are fragments of viral proteins or other foreign 
proteins  that  are  degraded  inside  the  cell,  inserted  into 
compatible MHC molecules during their assembly in the 
endoplasmic reticulum, and transported to the cell surface.
The expression of single types of α and β chains pro-
vides each individual T cell with specificity for a particular 
peptide.  Although  T-cell  antigen  receptors  bind  specifi-
cally,  their  affinity  for  the  peptide-MHC  complex  is  low 
(Kd  [dissociation  equilibrium  constant]  in  the  range  of 
10 µM).  Given  the  small  number  (hundreds)  of  unique 
MHC-peptide complexes found on the target cell surface, 
this low affinity would not be sufficient for a lymphocyte 
to form a stable complex with an antigen-presenting cell. 
Accessory proteins called coreceptors, such as CD4 (also 
the  receptor  for  human  immunodeficiency  virus  [HIV]) 
and CD8 (see Fig. 30.3), bind directly to any MHC protein 
and reinforce the interaction of the two cells. Activation 
by  antigen  stimulation  also  depends  on  parallel  nonspe-
cific stimuli from inflammatory mediators.

Two  classes  of  cytoplasmic  protein  tyrosine  kinases 
transmit  a  signal  from  the  engaged  TCR  to  effector 
systems.  The  first  class  of  kinases,  including  Lck  and 
Fyn,  are  relatives  of  the  Src  tyrosine  kinase  (see  Fig. 
25.3C),  the  first  oncogene  to  be  characterized  (Box 
27.5). These tyrosine kinases are anchored to the plasma 
membrane  by  myristoylated  N-terminal  glycines  and 
inhibited by a phosphotyrosine near the C-terminus (see 
Fig. 25.3C). This tyrosine is phosphorylated by a kinase, 
Csk,  and  dephosphorylated  by  the  transmembrane 
protein  tyrosine  phosphatase,  CD45  (see  Fig.  25.6B). 
Apparently, CD45 keeps Lck partially dephosphorylated 
and  therefore  partially  active  in  resting  lymphocytes. 
Zeta-associated  protein–70 kD  (ZAP-70)  is  the  most 
important of the second class of protein tyrosine kinases 
in this pathway. Two SH2 domains allow ZAP-70 to bind 
tyrosine-phosphorylated ITAMs on ζ chains.

Physical contact of a T lymphocyte with an antigen-
presenting cell carrying an MHC-peptide specific for its 
TCR generates multiple signals as follows:
1.  Engagement  of  TCRs  leads  to  activation  of  Lck  by 
dephosphorylation  of  the  inhibitory  C-terminal  tyro-
sine and phosphorylation of its activation loop.

2.  Active Lck phosphorylates ITAMs on the various TCR 

accessory chains.

3.  ZAP-70 is activated by binding phosphorylated ITAMs 

and phosphorylation of its activation loop by Lck.

4.  Active ZAP-70 phosphorylates targets that include the 
key  transmembrane  protein  LAT  and  the  adapter 
protein SLP76, which then propagate the signal.

5.  Signals  reach  the  nucleus  by  three  pathways.  First, 
is  activated  by  binding  a 

phospholipase  Cγ1 

 

CHAPTER 27  n  Integration of Signals 

479

BOX 27.5  Src Family of Protein Tyrosine Kinases

The founding member of the Src family of protein tyrosine 
kinases has a prominent place in modern biology. During 
the 1920s, Peyton Rous discovered the first cancer-causing 
virus in a mesodermal cancer of chickens called a sarcoma. 
Later, the Rous sarcoma virus was found to be a virus with 
an RNA genome (a retrovirus). Comparisons with similar 
viruses that did not cause cancer revealed that one gene, 
named src, is responsible for transforming cells into cancer 
cells. Many years later, a gene very similar to src was found 
in  normal  chicken  cells.  The  cellular  protein  product, 
c-Src, is a carefully regulated protein tyrosine kinase that 
controls of cellular proliferation and differentiation. Muta-
tions  in  the  gene  for  viral  src,  v-src,  activate  its  protein 
product  constitutively,  driving  cells  to  proliferate  and 
contributing to the development of cancer.

The family of Src-like proteins shares a common struc-
ture  (see  Fig.  25.3C).  Five  functionally  distinct  segments 
are  recognized  in  the  sequences.  An  N-terminal  myristic 
acid anchors the protein to the plasma membrane. Without 
this modification, the protein is inactive. The next domains 
are the founding examples of Src homology domains SH3, 
which  bind  proline-rich  peptides,  and  SH2,  which  bind 
peptides  containing  a  phosphorylated  tyrosine  (see  Fig. 
25.10). The kinase domain is followed by a tyrosine near 
the  C-terminus.  Phosphorylation  of  this  tyrosine  and  its 
intramolecular binding to the SH2 domain lock the kinase 
in  an  inactive  conformation.  Dephosphorylation  of  the 
C-terminal tyrosine and phosphorylation of the activation 
loop activate the kinase.

Expression of c-Src is highest in brain and platelets, but 
a  null  mutation  in  mice  produces  relatively  few  defects, 
except in bones, where a failure of osteoclasts to remodel 
bone leads to overgrowth, a condition called osteopetrosis 
(see Fig. 32.6).

phosphotyrosine  on  LAT  and  by  its  own  tyrosine 
phosphorylation. Active phospholipase Cγ1 produces 
inositol triphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol. Release 
of Ca2+ from vesicular stores by IP3 activates calcineu-
rin  (protein  phosphatase  2B  [see  Fig.  25.6A]).  This 
activates  the  latent  transcription  factor  nuclear 
factor–activated T cells (NF-AT). Second, Grb2-SOS 
binds  another  phosphotyrosine  on  LAT  and  initiates 
the MAP kinase cascade by activating Ras. Third, Vav, 
a  nucleotide  exchange  factor  for  small  GTPases,  is 
anchored  indirectly  to  LAT.  This  initiates  a  pathway 
that degrades IκB, freeing nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) 
(see Fig. 10.21C) to enter the nucleus.

6.  The  signal  ultimately  reaches  the  cytoskeleton  via 
Vav,  which  catalyzes  the  exchange  of  GTP  for  GDP 
on  the  Rho-family  GTPase  Rac,  which  leads  to  actin 
filament assembly (see Fig. 38.7).
When  a  T  cell  recognizes  an  antigen-presenting  
cell  with  an  appropriate  peptide  bound  to  MHC  on 

its  surface,  the  TCRs  and  adhesion  proteins  in  the 
interface  between  the  cells  rearrange  to  form  an 
“immunologic  synapse”  (Fig.  27.8F).  TCRs  initially 
gather  around  a  region  of  contact  between  integrins 
(lymphocyte  function–associated  antigen)  on  the  T 
cell  and  immunoglobulin-cellular  adhesion  molecules 
(ICAMs) on the antigen-presenting cell. Over time, actin 
polymerization around the periphery of this zone drives 
TCR complexes into a central region where the plasma 
membranes  are  close  together  surrounded  by  a  ring  of 
relatively tall adhesion molecules (Fig. 27.8G–H). Active 
TCR  clusters  in  this  central  region  generate  a  signal  to 
the nucleus and are then internalized and degraded.

The best immunosuppressive drugs used in human 
organ transplantation block lymphocyte proliferation by 
inhibiting  calcineurin,  the  phosphatase  that  activates 
NF-AT.  These  drugs  completely  block  T-cell  activation 
providing that they are given within 1 hour of the stimu-
lus;  that  is,  before  gene  expression  has  been  initiated. 
Cyclosporine and FK506 bind to separate cytoplasmic 
proteins,  cyclophilin,  and  FK-binding  protein.  Both  of 
these  drug-protein  complexes  bind  calcineurin  and 
inhibit  its  phosphatase  activity.  Considering  that  many 
cells  express  calcineurin,  the  effects  of  these  drugs  on 
lymphocytes  is  amazingly  specific,  with  relatively  few 
side effects. Specificity arises from the low concentration 
of calcineurin in lymphocytes: only 10,000 molecules in 
T cells compared with 300,000 in other cells. Hence, low 
concentrations  of  inhibitor  can  selectively  block  calci-
neurin  in  T  lymphocytes.  Cyclosporine  made  human 
heart and liver transplantation feasible.

The response to TCR activation depends on the par-
ticular state of differentiation of the T cell that encounters 
its partner antigenic peptide. Stimulation causes some T 
cells  to  secrete  toxic  peptides  that  kill  the  antigen-
presenting  cell,  others  synthesize  and  secrete  lympho-
kines (immune system hormones), others proliferate and 
differentiate,  and  yet  others  commit  to  apoptosis  (see 
Fig. 46.9).

Cytokine Receptor, JAK/STAT Pathways
Many polypeptide hormones and growth factors (collec-
tively called cytokines) regulate gene expression through 
a  three-protein  relay  without  a  second  messenger—the 
most direct signal transduction pathway from extracellular 
ligands to the nucleus (Fig. 27.9). Growth hormone uses 
this  mechanism  to  drive  overall  growth  of  the  body, 
erythropoietin directs the proliferation and maturation of 
red  blood  cell  precursors,  and  several  interferons  and 
interleukins  mediate  antiviral  and  immune  responses. 
Slime  molds  and  animals  use  these  pathways,  but  these 
proteins are not present in fungi or plants.

The  three  components  in  these  pathways  are  a 
dimeric  plasma  membrane  receptor  that  lacks  intrinsic 
enzymatic activity, a tyrosine kinase (JAK) constitutively 

480 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

A. Ligand binds

Ligand

B. Transphos-
     phorylation

JAK

(Negative
feedback)

SH2

STAT

Synthesis
of SOCS1

C. STAT binds
     phospho-
     tyrosine

G. P-STAT dimer
     enters nucleus

DNA

E. Secondary STAT
     phosphorylation
     via growth factor
     receptor tyrosine
     kinase pathway

D. Tyrosine

phosphorylation
releases STATs

SH2

STAT

F. Reciprocal binding of
    SH2 to phosphotyrosine
    forms STAT dimer

CYTOPLASM

SOC S1

H. STAT activates expression
     of various genes
including SOCS1

NUCLEUS

FIGURE 27.9  CYTOKINE JAK KINASE/SIGNAL TRANSDUCER AND ACTIVATOR OF TRANSCRIPTION (STAT) SIGNALING PATHWAY. 
A,  Cytokine  binds  a  preformed  receptor  dimer  (see  Fig.  24.7),  changing  arrangement  of  the  JAK  tyrosine  kinases  bound  to  the  cytoplasmic 
domains of the receptor. B, Active JAKs phosphorylate each other and tyrosines on the receptor. C, The SH2 (Src homology 2) domain of the 
latent transcription factor STAT binds a receptor phosphotyrosine. D, JAK phosphorylates the STATs, which then dissociate from the receptor. 
E, Growth factor receptor tyrosine kinases can also activate STATs. F, STATs form active dimers by reciprocal SH2-phosphotyrosine interactions. 
G, The STAT dimer enters the nucleus. H, The STAT dimer activates the expression of various genes. One of these genes encodes SOCS1, 
which creates negative feedback by inhibiting further STAT activation. JAK, just another kinase. 

associated  with  each  receptor  subunit,  and  a  latent, 
cytoplasmic  transcription  factor  called  a  STAT  (signal 
transducer  and  activator  of  transcription).  JAKs,  origi-
nally given the lighthearted name “just another kinase,” 
are  often  called  Janus  kinases  (for  the  Greek  god  who 
opens  doors).  The  N-terminal  halves  of  JAKs  mediate 
their  association  with  receptors.  In  the  absence  of  a 
ligand  the  kinases  are  inactive  owing  to  interactions 
with the partner kinase (Fig. 24.6). Some cytokine recep-
tors  bind  and  activate  a  single  type  of  JAK;  others  are  
promiscuous.

The signal from ligand binding moves from the cyto-
kine receptor to JAK to STAT to the nucleus (Fig. 27.9) 
as follows:
1.  Ligand  binding  changes  the  conformation  of  the 
receptor  and  relieves  the  mutual  inhibition  of  the 
associated JAKs (Fig. 24.6).

2.  The JAKs activate each other by transphosphorylation 
and phosphorylate tyrosines on the cytoplasmic tails 
of the receptors, creating docking sites for STATs.

3.  SH2  domains  target  preformed  STAT  dimers  to  

phosphotyrosine binding sites on the receptor.

4.  The JAK phosphorylates the STAT, changing the ori-
entation  of  the  subunits.  This  dissociates  the  STAT 
from the receptor.

5.  Active  STAT  dimers  enter  the  nucleus  and  activate 

expression of various genes.
Three different mechanisms turn down the response 
to  cytokine  activation.  Phosphatases  inactivate  the 

receptor,  kinase,  and  intranuclear  STATs.  Endocytosis 
also turns off active receptors. A slowly acting, negative 
feedback loop limits the duration of the response. One 
of  the  genes  expressed  in  response  to  STAT  encodes 
SOCS1.  Once  synthesized,  the  SOCS1  protein  inhibits 
further  STAT  activation  by 
the  
cytokine receptor.

interacting  with 

Selective  expression  of  specific  cytokine  receptors, 
four  JAKs,  and  six  STATs  prepares  differentiated  mam-
malian cells to respond specifically to various cytokines. 
Active  STATs  are  either  homodimers  or  heterodimers  
of  two  different  STATs.  A  variety  of  STATs,  with  some 
unique  and  some  common  subunits,  binds  regulatory 
sites  of  genes  required  to  activate  the  target  cells.  The 
products of genes controlled by STATs not only contrib-
ute  to  differentiated  cellular  functions,  but  some  also 
drive  proliferation.  Accordingly,  loss  of  JAK  function 
causes certain immune deficiencies, while patients with 
mutations  in  STAT5b  are  resistant  to  growth  hormone 
and  fail  to  grow.  The  opposite  effect  follows  from  a 
mutation  that  renders  JAK2  constitutively  active:  red 
blood  cells  proliferate  out  of  control,  independent  of 
stimulation by erythropoietin.

The three-protein pathway from a cytokine receptor 
to  JAK  to  activated  STAT  is  appealing  in  its  simplicity, 
but in reality, these pathways do not operate in isolation. 
On one hand, converging signals from EGF- and PDGF-
receptors  can  phosphorylate  and  activate  STATs,  a 
second  input  to  STAT-responsive  genes  (Fig.  27.9).  On 

 

CHAPTER 27  n  Integration of Signals 

481

the  other  hand,  some  cytokine  receptors  can  regulate 
gene expression by acting through Shc and Grb2-SOS to 
Ras and MAP kinases and other pathways.

Serine/Threonine Kinase Receptor 
Pathways Through SMAD
All metazoans use a family of dimeric polypeptide growth 
factors related to transforming growth factor-β (TGF-
β [see Fig. 24.7]) to specify developmental fates during 
embryogenesis and to control cellular differentiation in 
adults. In humans more than 40 genes in this family of 
ligands  are  divided  into  two  classes:  (a)  those  closely 
related to TGF-β and activins and (b) a large family of 
bone  morphogenetic  proteins.  All  activate  a  short 
pathway  consisting  of  receptor  serine/threonine 
kinases and a family of eight mobile transcription factors 
called SMADs (Sma- and Mad-related proteins). The 
receptors  consist  of  two  types  of  subunits  called  RI 
(seven  isoforms  in  human)  and  RII  (five  isoforms). 
Various combinations of these receptors bind about 30 
different ligands, some of which antagonize each other.
Ligand  binding  brings  together  two  RI  and  two  RII 
receptors,  allowing  the  RII  receptors  to  activate  the  RI 
receptors by transphosphorylation (see Fig. 24.7). Active 
RI receptors phosphorylate “regulated SMADs” (R-SMADs), 

A. TGFβ brings together two RI receptors with two RII receptors

B. RII kinases phosphorylate
     and activate RI kinases

Inactive
RI kinase
domain

Active

RII kinase

domain

MH2

MH1

MH1

MH2

Co-SMAD

such as SMAD2 and SMAD3 (Fig. 27.10). Phosphorylated 
R-SMADs  dissociate  from  RI  and  associate  with  SMAD4, 
called  a  co-SMAD,  because  it  is  not  subjected  to  phos-
phorylation itself. A trimer consisting of two R-SMADs and 
one co-SMAD enters the nucleus and associates with other 
DNA binding proteins to activate or inhibit transcription 
of specific genes as well as influencing chromatin struc-
ture. The number of targeted genes varies from a handful 
to hundreds depending on the other transcription factors 
produced by the cell and epigenetic modifications of the 
target gene chromatin. Other SMADs regulate these path-
ways by inhibiting phosphorylation of R-SMADs.

The SMAD pathway activated by TGF-β regulates cel-
lular proliferation and differentiation of many cell types, 
including  epithelial  and  hematopoietic  cells.  Although  
its  name  implies  that  it  should  drive  transformation, 
TGF-β actually stops the cell cycle of normal cells in G1 
by promoting expression of negative regulators of cyclin-
dependent  kinases  (see  Fig.  41.3).  On  the  other  hand, 
TGF-β can stimulate the growth of some cancers.

In accord with the ability of TGF-β pathways to inhibit 
cellular growth, many human tumors have loss-of-function 
mutations  in  the  genes  for  TGF-β  receptors  or  SMADs. 
Mutations in an accessory receptor for TGF-β cause mal-
formed  blood  vessels  in  the  human  disease  hereditary 
hemorrhagic  telangiectasia.  Mice  with  homozygous 

RI • RII • TGF-β

SARA

C. R-SMAD binds RI kinase
     in complex with SARA

MH1

Auto inhibited R-SMAD (2/3)

MH2

D. RI kinase phosphorylates R-SMAD,
     promoting dissociation from
     the kinase and SARA

DNA

NUCLEUS

F. Active SMAD trimer
     enters nucleus

Co-SMAD

E. Two R-SMADs
     bind a Co-SMAD

G. SMADs associate with other
     DNA-binding proteins to activate
     or inhibit transcription
     of specific genes

o
r

CYTOPLASM

FIGURE 27.10  TRANSFORMING GROWTH FACTOR (TGF)-β/SMAD SIGNALING PATHWAY. A, Binding of a TGF-β dimer assembles a 
complex consisting of two RII receptors and two RI receptors. B, RII phosphorylates and activates RI. C, An autoinhibited R-SMAD binds RI in 
a  complex  with  the  adapter  SARA.  D,  RI  kinase  phosphorylates  R-SMAD,  which  promotes  its  dissociation  from  RI.  E,  A  co-SMAD  binds  an 
R-SMAD dimer to form an active trimer. F, The SMAD trimer enters the nucleus. G, The SMAD trimer associates with other DNA-binding proteins 
to activate or inhibit transcription of specific genes. 

482 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

loss-of-function mutations in genes for the components of 
the TGF pathway die during embryonic development.

Like  other  signaling  pathways,  these  receptors  and 
SMADs  do  not  operate  in  isolation.  MAP  kinases  and 
cyclin  dependent  kinases  can  phosphorylate  SMADs,  
and  active  RI  receptors  can  activate  MAP  kinase  path-
ways and other signaling pathways.

Bacterial Chemotaxis by a Two-
Component Phosphotransfer System

The two-component system (Box 27.6) regulating bacte-
rial chemotaxis (Fig. 27.12) is the best-understood signal-
ing  pathway  of  any  kind.  E.  coli  cells  use  five  types  of 
plasma  membrane  receptors  to  sense  a  variety  of 

BOX 27.6  “Two-Component” Signaling

Prokaryotes, fungi, and plants transduce stimuli ranging from 
nutrients  to  osmotic  pressure  using  signaling  systems  con-
sisting of as few as two proteins, a receptor-linked histidine 
kinase, and a “response regulator” activated by phosphoryla-
tion of an aspartic acid (Fig. 27.11). Extensive collections of 
mutants in these pathways and sensitive single-cell assays for 
responses, such as flagellar rotation, provide tools for rigor-
ous tests of concepts and mathematical models derived from 
biochemical experiments on isolated components.

Two-component  systems  are  abundant  in  bacteria  with 
32 response regulators and 30 histidine kinases in Escherichia 
coli.  Archaea  have  genes  for  up  to  24  response  regulators. 
Some  eukaryotes  have  a  few  two-component  systems,  but 
these genes were lost in metazoans. The slime mold Dictyo-
stelium  has  more  than  10  histidine  kinases,  whereas  fungi 
have  just  one  or  two  of  these  systems.  Plants  use  a  two-
component system to regulate fruit ripening in response to 
the gas ethylene.

Two-component receptors either may include a cyto-
plasmic histidine kinase domain (Fig. 27.11C) or may bind a 
separate histidine kinase, such as the aspartate chemotactic 
receptor  Tar  (Fig.  27.11B).  Tar  consists  of  two  identical 
subunits.  Three  Tar  dimers  are  anchored  together  at  their 
bases in the cytoplasm (Fig. 27.11B). Binding of aspartic acid 
between the extracellular domains of two subunits changes 
their  orientation  by  a  few  degrees.  Transmission  of  this 
conformational change across the membrane alters the activ-
ity of CheA, a histidine kinase associated with the cytoplas-
mic domains of the receptor.

Histidine kinases have a conserved catalytic domain of 
approximately 350 residues that is structurally unrelated to 
eukaryotic serine/threonine/tyrosine kinases (shown in Fig. 
25.3).  Another  domain  allows  them  to  form  homodimers. 
Histidine  kinases  are  incorporated  into  a  wide  variety  of 
proteins,  including  transmembrane  receptors  (Fig.  27.11C) 
and  cytoplasmic  proteins  such  as  CheA  (Fig.  27.11B).  The 
catalytic  domain  transfers  the  γ-phosphate  from  adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP) to just one substrate, a histidine residue 
of its homodimeric partner. This histidine is usually located 
in the dimerization domain.

All response regulators have a domain of approximately 
120 residues folded like CheY (Fig. 27.11B; also see Fig. 3.7). 
Transfer of phosphate from the phosphohistidine of a kinase 
to an invariant aspartic acid changes the conformation of the 
response regulator. Most response regulators such as CheB 
(Fig. 27.11B) and OmpR (Fig. 27.11C) are larger than CheY, 

having C-terminal effector domains. Many effector domains, 
including  OmpR,  bind  DNA  and  regulate  transcription  of 
specific genes when the response regulator is activated by 
aspartate  phosphorylation.  Other  response  regulators  are 
included as a domain of the histidine kinase itself.

Reversible phosphorylation transfers information through 
two-component systems. The mechanism differs fundamen-
tally  from  eukaryotic  kinase  cascades,  which  transfer  
phosphate  from  ATP  to  serine,  threonine,  or  tyrosine, 
forming  phosphoesters  at  every  step.  By  contrast,  two-
component systems first transfer a phosphate from ATP to  
a  nitrogen  of  a  histidine  of  the  kinase,  the  first  of  the  
two protein components. The high-energy his~P phosphora-
midite  bond  is  unstable,  so  the  phosphate  is  readily  trans-
ferred to the side chain of an aspartic acid of the response 
regulator (RR):

ATP kinase-his

+

↔

ADP kinase-his P

~

+

kinase-his P RR-asp

~

+

↔

kinase-his RR*-asp P

~

+

RR*-asp P H O

~ +

2

↔

RR-asp phosphate

+

Phosphorylation  activates  response  regulators  (RR*)  by 
changing their conformation. Details differ depending on the 
response  regulator.  In  the  case  of  OmpR,  phosphorylation 
relieves  autoinhibition  of  the  DNA-binding  domain  (Fig. 
27.11C). Phosphorylation of CheY reveals a binding site for 
the  flagellar  rotor.  The  signal  dissipates  by  dephosphoryla-
tion  of  the  response  regulator,  either  by  autocatalysis  or 
stimulated  by  accessory  proteins.  Lifetimes  of  the  high-
energy aspartic acylphosphate vary from seconds to hours.
A  minimal  two-component  system,  such  as  a  bacterial 
osmoregulatory pathway (Fig. 27.11C), consists of a dimeric 
plasma  membrane  receptor  with  a  cytoplasmic  histidine 
kinase domain and a cytoplasmic response regulator protein. 
Signal transduction is carried out in four steps. A change in 
osmolarity alters the conformation of the receptor, activating 
the  kinase  activity  of  its  cytoplasmic  domain.  The  kinase 
phosphorylates  a  histidine  residue  on  the  other  subunit  of 
the dimeric receptor. This phosphate is transferred from the 
receptor to an aspartic acid side chain of the response regula-
tor protein OmpR. Phosphorylation changes the conforma-
tion  of  the  response  regulator  domain  of  OmpR,  allowing  
its  DNA-binding  domain  to  activate  the  expression  of  
target genes.

 

CHAPTER 27  n  Integration of Signals 

483

A. Tar structure

B. Chemotaxis

α3

α2

α4

α1

N

C

Ligand
binding

Trans-
membrane

Linker

Che R
Methyl

Che W

α4

α5

Methylation

Che A

Signaling

RR

Che Y

Receptor

Methyl

Che B

5

4

5
4
2

3

1
H

ATP

ATP

1

CheA

CheW

Tar

helices

C. Osmoregulation

Env Z

H

ATP

ATP

Ligand

Receptor

Che W

+ ADP

ATP

2
2

3
3

4
4

Kinase

5
5

C
C

Che A
dimer

N

C
Che Y

N

RR

Methyl-
esterase
C
Che B

D

RR

Response
regulators

D
RR

3

N
N

H
1
1
H

D

Rotary
motor

Receptor

Env Z
dimer
N

N

Sensor

HPt

H

ADP +

Kinase

N

ATP

C

C

D

RR DNA
binding

C

OmpR

Gene

expression

OmpR

D

RR

FIGURE  27.11  TWO-COMPONENT  BACTERIAL  SIGNALING  SYSTEMS.  A,  Atomic  model  of  the  aspartate  receptor  Tar.  The  atomic 
structures  of  the  extracellular  and  cytoplasmic  domains  were  determined  by  X-ray  crystallography.  The  transmembrane  α-helices  are  models 
based on the primary structure. The two polypeptides are shown in red and blue. Each polypeptide starts in the cytoplasm and passes twice 
through  the  lipid  bilayer.  B,  Bacterial  chemotaxis  signaling  proteins.  Scale  models  of  the  molecular  components  and  pathway  of  information 
transfer. The ribbon diagrams of domains shown on the right are color coded in the molecular models on the left. An accessory protein, CheW, 
facilitates binding of the histidine kinase CheA to the aspartate receptor Tar. CheY and CheB are response regulators. CheR is a methyl transferase. 
C, Bacterial osmoregulation. The histidine kinase forms the cytoplasmic domain of the receptor. OmpR is the response regulator with a DNA-
binding domain. Scale models of the molecules (left) and pathway of information transfer (right). (A, Modified from material courtesy S.H. Kim, 
University of California, Berkeley. For reference, see PDB file 1QU7 and Kim KK, Yokota H, Kim SH. Four helical-bundle structure of the cytoplasmic 
domain  of  a  serine  chemotaxis  receptor.  Nature.  1999;400:787–792.  B–C,  Based  on  material  courtesy  A.M.  Stock,  Robert  Wood  Johnson 
Medical  School.  For  reference,  see  Stock  AM,  Robinson  WL,  Goudreau  PN.  Two-component  signal  transduction.  Annu  Rev  Biochem. 
2000;69:183–215.)

different  chemicals,  which  range  from  nutrients  to 
toxins. These receptors are also called methyl-accepting 
chemotaxis  proteins,  as  they  are  regulated  by  methyla-
tion.  The  most  abundant  receptor,  with  thousands  of 
copies per cell, is Tar (Fig. 27.11A–B), the receptor for 
the nutrients aspartic acid (Tar-D) and maltose, protons 
(as part of pH sensing), temperature, and the repellent 
nickel. The receptors form clusters of various sizes over 
the  cell  membrane,  with  the  highest  concentration  at 
one end of the cell (Fig. 27.12A). This polarized distribu-
tion facilitates interactions between receptor molecules 
but  has  nothing  to  do  with  sensing  the  direction  of 
chemical gradients.

The  chemotactic  signaling  system  guides  swimming 
bacteria  toward  attractive  chemicals  and  away  from 
repellents  in  a  biased  random  walk.  Environmental 
chemicals influence the behavior of the cell by biasing 
the  rotation  direction  of  the  flagellar  motor  (see  Figs. 
38.24  and  38.25  for  details  of  the  motor  itself).  In  the 
absence of a response regulator, the motor turns coun-
terclockwise,  and  the  bacterium  swims  smoothly  in  a 
more  or  less  linear  path.  When  the  flagella  turn  clock-
wise,  the  bacterium  tumbles  about  in  one  place.  A 
tumble  allows  a  bacterium  to  reorient  its  direction 
randomly,  so  when  it  resumes  smooth  swimming,  it 
usually  heads  in  a  new  direction.  In  the  absence  of 

484 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

A. Messenger paths

Nose spot with complex
of chemoreceptors
including Tar

Flagella

Inner membrane
Peptidoglycan layer
Outer membrane

B. Steady
    swimming

C. Tumble

Flagella
form a
bundle

Bundle of
flagella
flies apart

Flagella and
bundle rotate

counterclockwise

D. Chemotaxis

ATTRACTANT

Bacteria heading

toward attractant tend

to keep running

Postulated path
of Che Y

Rotary motor

Bacterium
tumbles
in place

Reoriented bacteria
tend to keep running
toward attractant

Bacteria heading

away from attractant

tend to tumble

Tumbling bacteria
reorient randomly

Reoriented bacteria
run toward attractant

Flagella rotate
clockwise

Bacteria tumble until
a random tumble orients
them toward the attractant

FIGURE 27.12  MOTILITY OF BACTERIA IS DETERMINED BY THE DIRECTION OF ROTATION OF THEIR FLAGELLA. A, Drawing of 
Escherichia coli showing the flagella and arrangement of signal transduction components with the highest concentration of receptors at one pole 
of  the  cell.  B,  Flagella  that  rotate  counterclockwise  (viewed  from  the  tip  of  the  flagella)  form  a  bundle  that  pushes  the  cell  smoothly  forward. 
C, When flagella rotate clockwise, the bundle flies apart, and the cell tumbles in place. D, An attractive chemical biases movement toward its 
source by modulating the frequency of runs and tumbles. 

chemoattractants,  bacteria  randomly  switch  between 
periods of swimming that last about 0.9 second and brief 
tumbles  lasting  about  0.1  second,  allowing  for  random 
reorientations every second.

A gradient of chemical attractant promotes the length 
of  runs  up  the  gradient  by  suppressing  tumbling  if  the 
concentration  of  attractant  increases  over  time  (Fig. 
27.12D). A two-component signaling pathway senses the 
concentration  of  attractant  and  controls  the  frequency 
of  tumbling  through  phosphorylation  of  the  response 
regulator CheY, which acts on the flagellar motor. Most 
components of the system were discovered by mutagen-
esis and named “Che” for chemotaxis gene with a low-
ercase “p” to indicate phosphorylation.

Ligand-free Tar receptors stimulate the phosphoryla-
tion  of  the  associated  histidine  kinase  CheA,  which  is 
bound  to  the  receptor  by  a  “scaffold”  protein  CheW. 
CheAp  activates  the  response  regulator,  CheY,  by 
transferring  phosphate  from  histidine  to  aspartic  acid 
57  (D57)  of  CheY.  CheYp  has  a  higher  affinity  for  the 
flagellar motor than CheY, so ligand-free receptors main-
tain  a  steady  state  with  the  rotors  partially  saturated 

with  CheYp.  With  several  bound  CheYps,  the  motor 
switches  from  its  free-running,  counterclockwise  state 
to  a  brief  clockwise  tumble  approximately  once  per  
second.

Information about aspartate in the environment flows 
rapidly through the pathway as changes in the concen-
trations  of  the  phosphorylated  species  CheAp  and 
CheYp.  A  key  point  is  that  Tar  with  bound  aspartate, 
Tar-D,  ceases  to  activate  histidine  phosphorylation  of 
CheA. Hence aspartate binding to Tar reduces the satura-
tion of the flagellar motors with CheYp and the frequency 
of tumbles.

For  the  cell  to  respond  to  aspartate  on  a  subsecond 
time  scale,  an  accessory  protein,  CheZ,  is  required 
to 
increase  the  rate  of  CheYp  dephosphorylation  
more  than  100-fold  from  its  slow  spontaneous  rate  of 
0.03 s−1. Given this fast dissipation of CheYp, phosphate 
must  flow  constantly  from  adenosine  triphosphate  
(ATP)  to  CheAp  to  CheYp  to  maintain  a  tumbling  
frequency of about 1 s−1 in the absence of an attractant 
(Fig.  27.13A).  (Most  other  two-component  pathways 
respond  in  minutes  rather  than  milliseconds,  because 

 

A. No aspartate

Outer
membrane

1

CHAPTER 27  n  Integration of Signals 

485

B. Early events after
     sudden increase 
     in aspartate
     concentration

5

C. Late events after a
     sudden increase
     in aspartate
     concentration

5

5

Asp

Asp
1

Asp

Asp
1

Asp

Asp

PM

Che R
Methyl

ATP

ADP

Methyl
Che B
(on)

g
n
o
r
t

S

4

2

3

Che Z

Che Y

Che R
Methyl

W
e
a
k

Che Y

Che A

Methyl
Che B
(on)

Che R
Methyl

ATP

ADP

4

2

Che Z

Me

Me

Me

Che B
(off)

3

4

2

Che Z

FIGURE 27.13  SIGNALING DURING BACTERIAL CHEMOTAXIS. Drawing of the signaling system under three conditions. A, Absence of 
aspartate. Ligand-free Tar (1) allows CheA to phosphorylate CheY and CheB (3). Constant dephosphorylation of CheYp drives a cycle of phos-
phorylation (2). The steady-state concentration of CheYp keeps the motor partially saturated (4). The partially saturated motor turns counterclock-
wise 90% of the time (runs [thick arrow]) and clockwise 10% of the time (tumbles [thin arrow]) (5). B, Rapid response to the presence of aspartate. 
Aspartate binding turns off Tar (1). Constant dephosphorylation depletes CheYp on a time scale of tens of milliseconds (2). CheY dissociates 
from the motor (4). The motor, without CheYp, rotates counterclockwise, so the bacterium runs continuously (5). C, Slower, adaptive response 
to the presence of aspartate. Inactive CheA stops phosphorylating CheB, allowing dephosphorylation of CheBp on a time scale of seconds; this 
inactivation of CheB and the higher affinity of CheR for inactive Tar result in higher methylation of Tar (1). Even with bound aspartate, methylated 
Tar is partially active, allowing phosphorylation of CheA (2). CheY is phosphorylated (3). CheYp rebinds the motor (4). The flagella turn clockwise 
part of the time, returning to the steady-state frequency of runs and tumbles (5). 

dephosphorylation  of  the  response  regulator  is  much 
slower. The following sections examine chemotaxis on 
the system level.)

Temporal Sensing of Gradients
Unlike eukaryotic cells, most bacteria are too small and 
move too fast to detect a spatial gradient along the length 
of  the  cell  body.  Instead,  they  sense  the  gradient  as  a 
perceived change in concentration of attractant or repel-
lent as a function of time. When a bacterium swims up 
a  gradient  of  chemoattractant,  the  concentration  of 
attractant increases with time, and the signaling mecha-
nism  suppresses  tumbling.  Fewer  tumbles  result  in  a 
biasing  of  smooth  swimming  toward  the  attractant. 
When a cell swims down the gradient, tumbling is more 
frequent, allowing for reorientation.

A  sudden  increase  in  the  concentration  of  aspartate 
yields a smooth swimming response within 200 millisec-
onds as a result of rapid reequilibration of the concentra-
tions  of  all  the  cytoplasmic  signaling  components  (Fig. 
27.13B). Aspartate binds Tar and inhibits autophosphory-
lation  of  CheA.  CheYp  has  a  half-life  of  less  than  100 
milliseconds, so the concentrations of CheAp and CheYp 
decrease  rapidly.  CheYp  dissociates  from  the  flagellar 
motor  and  the  tendency  of  the  motor  to  stay  in  the 
counterclockwise, smooth swimming direction increases. 
If the concentration change with time is due to a persis-
tent gradient of aspartate, the bacterium tends to move 
on average up the gradient toward the source, although 

it  will  make  several  runs  up  and  down  the  gradient 
during this time.

The  opposite  sequence  of  events  takes  place  if  a 
bacterium swims down a gradient of aspartate. The frac-
tion  of  Tar  with  bound  aspartate  declines,  CheAp  and 
CheYp  concentrations  rise,  and  tumbling  is  more  fre-
quent,  providing  opportunities  to  reorient  and  swim 
back  up  the  gradient.  Such  is  the  case  with  avoiding  a 
repellant gradient, as well.

Adaptation
If the aspartate concentration suddenly increases every-
where, bacteria respond quickly with smooth swimming, 
but  within  tens  of  seconds  to  minutes,  they  return  to 
their  normal  frequency  of  intermittent  tumbling.  Thus, 
the steady-state tumbling frequency depends on changes 
in the concentration of aspartate relative to background 
levels  rather  than  the  absolute  concentration.  This 
remarkable  capacity  to  adapt  is  accomplished  by  a  
feedback  control  mechanism  provided  by  reversible 
methylation of the receptor (Fig. 27.13C).

Two  relatively  slow  enzymes  determine  the  level  of 
Tar methylation (Fig. 27.11B). CheR adds methyl groups 
to four glutamic acid residues on each receptor polypep-
tide,  whereas  the  response  regulator  CheB  removes 
them. Methylated Tar has a somewhat lower affinity for 
aspartate than unmethylated Tar, but Me-Tar with bound 
aspartate  is  more  effective  at  stimulating  CheA  phos-
phorylation than Tar with bound aspartate.

486 

SECTION VII  n  Signaling Mechanisms

CheR  is  constitutively  active  but  sensitive  to  the 
overall metabolic state of the cell, as it depends on the 
concentration of S-adenosyl methionine, a methyl donor 
that  is  used  in  many  metabolic  reactions.  The  CheB 
methylesterase is autoinhibited by its response regulator 
domain  but  activated  by  phosphorylation  by  CheAp. 
Thus,  CheB  methylesterase  activity  depends  on  the 
concentration  of  CheAp,  and  rate  of  demethylation 
determines the level of receptor methylation.

Adaptation  occurs  because  aspartate  binding  to  Tar 
activates two different pathways on different time scales. 
On a millisecond time scale, the concentrations of both 
CheAp and CheYp decline, CheYp dissociates from the 
motor,  and  the  cell  swims  smoothly.  As  Tar  molecules 
convert to the aspartate-bound state, CheR has a greater 
affinity for demethylated glutamate residues on the inac-
tive Tar-D and begins to methylate them, which occurs 
on a time scale of seconds. As Tar molecules accumulate 
methyl  groups,  the  reduced  activity  associated  with 
ligand binding is slowly reversed. In this way, Tar mol-
ecules with bound aspartate have their activity restored 
to the baseline level that they had before the aspartate 
increased.  This  robust  adaptation 
concentration 
mechanism  is  an  integral  feedback  system,  just  like  a 
thermostat  on  a  heater.  The  system  works  in  part, 
because  CheR  preferentially  methylates  inactive  recep-
tors  and  CheBp  preferentially  demethylates  active 
receptors.

Extended Range of Response
An amazing feature of this system is its ability to respond 
with  fast  changes  in  flagellar  rotation  and  slow  adapta-
tion  to  changes  of  just  a  few  percentage  points  in 
aspartate  concentration  over  a  range  of  five  orders  of 
magnitude.  Clearly,  a  simple  bimolecular  reaction  of 
aspartate  with  Tar  cannot  change  the  fractional  satura-
tion  of  Tar  over  such  an  extended  range  of  concentra-
tions.  This  extended  range  of  sensitivity  is  valuable  for 
the survival of the bacterium and depends on amplifica-
tion  at  the  level  of  the  receptor  whereby  aspartate 
binding  to  one  Tar  activates  many  surrounding  Tars  in 
the receptor clusters at the end of the cell. This physical 
communication  is  achieved  by  a  lattice  of  CheA  and 
CheW between the cytoplasmic tips of the receptors.

Bacterial chemotaxis illustrates some of the classical 
features of signaling pathways, including high sensitivity 
due  to  amplification  at  the  level  of  CheA  phosphoryla-
tion, feedback control through methylation of Tar, and 
branching  networks  that  respond  on  different  time 
scales  to  the  same  stimulus.  The  mechanism  has  been 
tested thoroughly by mutating all the signaling compo-
nents  and  observing  the  consequences.  Furthermore, 
random  variations  in  the  numbers  of  these  proteins  
allow individuals in populations of bacterial cells to take 

advantage of a wide range of environments and improve 
the fitness of the community.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Jonathan Bogan and Nicholas Frankel for sug-
gestions on revisions of this chapter.

SELECTED READINGS

Babon JJ, Lucet IS, Murphy JM, Nicola NA, Varghese LN. The molecular 
regulation  of  Janus  kinase  (JAK)  activation.  Biochem  J.  2014;462:
1-13.

Bogan JS. Regulation of glucose transporter translocation in health and 

diabetes. Annu Rev Biochem. 2012;81:507-532.

Boucher  J,  Kleinridders  A,  Kahn  CR.  Insulin  receptor  signaling  in 
normal and insulin-resistant states. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 
2014;6:a009191.

Bray  D.  The  propagation  of  allosteric  states  in  large  multiprotein 

complexes. J Mol Biol. 2013;425:1410-1414.

Call ME, Wucherpfennig KW. The T cell receptor: Critical role of the 
membrane  environment  in  receptor  assembly  and  function.  Annu 
Rev Immunol. 2005;23:101-125.

Capra  EJ,  Laub  MT.  Evolution  of  two-component  signal  transduction 

systems. Annu Rev Microbiol. 2012;66:325-347.

Dustin  ML,  Groves  JT.  Receptor  signaling  clusters  in  the  immune 

synapse. Annu Rev Biophys. 2012;41:543-556.

Ferrell  JE  Jr.  Self-perpetuating  states  in  signal  transduction:  Positive 
feedback, double-negative feedback and bistability. Curr Opin Cell 
Biol. 2002;14:140-148.

Frankel NW, Pontius W, Dufour YS, et al. Adaptability of non-genetic 
diversity  in  bacterial  chemotaxis.  Elife.  2014;3:doi:10.7554/eLife.
03526.

Goh  LK,  Sorkin  A.  Endocytosis  of  receptor  tyrosine  kinases.  Cold 

Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2013;5:a017459.

Hubbard  SR.  The  insulin  receptor:  both  a  prototypical  and  atypical 
receptor tyrosine kinase. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2013;5:
a008946.

Johnson  GL,  Lapadat  R.  Mitogen-activated  protein  kinase  pathways 
mediated by ERK, JNK and p38 protein kinases. Science. 2002;298:
1911-1912.

Jones  CW,  Armitage  JP.  Positioning  of  bacterial  chemoreceptors. 

Trends Microbiol. 2015;23:247-256.

Krzysztof  P.  G  protein–coupled  receptor  rhodopsin.  Annu  Rev 

Biochem. 2006;75:743-767.

Massagué J. TGFβ signalling in context. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2012;13:

616-630.

Mombaerts  P.  Genes  and  ligands  for  odorant,  vomeronasal  and  taste 

receptors. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2004;5:263-278.

Ridge  KD,  Abdulaev  NG,  Sousa  M,  et al.  Phototransduction:  Crystal 

clear. Trends Biochem Sci. 2003;28:479-487.

Rieke F, Baylor DA. Single photon detection by rod cells of the retina. 

Rev Mod Phys. 1998;70:1027-1036.

Ritter SL, Hall RA. Fine-tuning of GPCR activity by receptor-interacting 

proteins. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2009;10:819-830.

Shi Y, Massague J. Mechanisms of TGF-β signaling from cell membranes 

to the nucleus. Cell. 2003;113:685-700.

Tu Y. Quantitative modeling of bacterial chemotaxis: signal amplification 

and accurate adaptation. Annu Rev Biophys. 2013;42:337-359.

van der Merwe PA, Dushek O. Mechanisms for T cell receptor trigger-

ing. Nat Rev Immunol. 2011;11:47-55.

Venkatakrishnan AJ, Deupi X, Lebon G, et al. Molecular signatures of 

G-protein-coupled receptors. Nature. 2013;494:185-194.

S E C T I O N   VIII

Cellular Adhesion and  
the Extracellular Matrix

This page intentionally left blank

SECTION  VIII  OVERVIEW
This section covers the variety of extracellular materials 

that  provide  mechanical  support  for  the  tissues  of  
multicellular  organisms.  After  their  divergence  about  1 
billion years ago, animals and plants evolved completely 
different macromolecules to construct their extracellular 
matrices. The main biopolymer in animals is the protein 
collagen,  whereas  plants  use  the  polysaccharide  cellu-
lose.  Both  can  make  impressively  strong  structures, 
including  cartilage  and  bone  in  animals  and  wood  that 
supports giant trees. This section also explains the mech-
anisms that cells of all sorts use to adhere to each other 
and  the  objects  in  their  environments,  including  the 
extracellular  matrix.  Cell  surface  adhesion  proteins 
enable cells to establish intimate relationships with each 
other  and  macromolecules  in  the  extracellular  matrix. 
These  interactions  are  essential  for  tissue  integrity  and 
intercellular communication in complex tissues, includ-
ing the brain, heart, and other organs.

Chapter  28  describes  the  cells  that  are  found  in  
the extracellular matrix of vertebrate animals. Fibro-
blasts  synthesize  and  secrete  the  macromolecules  that 
form the extracellular matrix. Fat cells store high-energy 
lipid  molecules.  Specialized  phagocytic  cells  and 
immune  system  cells  patrol  the  extracellular  matrix  of 

connective  tissues,  seeking  out  and  destroying  foreign 
cells and molecules throughout the body.

Chapter 29 describes the biosynthesis of the macro-
molecules that form the extracellular matrices of verte-
brates.  In  connective  tissue,  fibroblasts  secrete  the 
protein subunits of collagen fibrils and elastic fibers 
as  well  as  adhesion  proteins  and  complex  polysaccha-
rides that reinforce the protein fibers in the extracellular 
matrix.  The  proportions  of  these  macromolecules  vary 
considerably. Tendons, ligaments, and some layers of the 
intestinal wall are composed largely of massive collagen 
fibrils with relatively few cells. The vitreous body of the 
eye  is  composed  mostly  of  gelatinous  polysaccharides 
with few fibers. The simplest type of extracellular matrix 
is the basal lamina, a thin layer of matrix that is secreted 
as  rug  beneath  epithelial  cells  and  a  sheath  around 
muscle cells and neurons.

Remarkably,  just  four  families  of  plasma  membrane 
adhesion  proteins,  immunoglobulin  cell  adhesion 
molecules  (IgCAMs),  cadherins,  integrins,  and 
selectins,  account  for  much  of  cellular  adhesion. 
Chapter  30  introduces  these  adhesion  proteins  and 
explains some of their diverse structures and functions. 
IgCAMs  and  cadherins  make  specific  interactions  with 

Cells Ch 28

Primitive
mesenchymal 
cell

Proliferation/differentiation

Junctions

Ch 31

Extracellular matrix Ch 29

Adhesion Ch 30

Various cell types

Connective tissues Ch 32

 489

complementary proteins on the surface of partner cells. 
Most  integrins  bind  to  extracellular  matrix  molecules, 
but some engage adhesion proteins on other cells. Selec-
tins  interact  with  glycoproteins  called  mucins  on  the 
surfaces of other cells.

Expression of a limited repertoire of adhesion protein 
isoforms allows cells of multicellular organisms to estab-
lish  specific  interactions  with  appropriate  partner  cells 
while avoiding inappropriate interactions. The specific-
ity  provided  by  these  adhesion  molecules  is  required  
to form epithelia during embryonic development, assem-
ble  specialized  connective  tissues  (Chapter  32),  heal 
wounds, and transmit the force of muscle contraction to 
the extracellular matrix. Chapter 30 features two exam-
ples of dynamic, selective adhesion: adhesion of platelets 
to each other during the repair of damage to small blood 
vessels and blood clotting, and adhesion of white blood 
cells  to  the  endothelial  cells  lining  blood  vessels  of 
inflamed tissues.

Even unicellular organisms require molecular mecha-
nisms  to  adhere  to  other  cells  and  objects  that  they 
encounter  in  their  environments.  For  example,  unicel-
lular algae and yeast adhere to each other during mating, 
and  slime  mold  amoebas  adhere  to  each  other  as  they 
develop into fruiting bodies. Bacteria also form complex 
biofilms to help them survive in hostile environments.

Intercellular  junctions  are  specialized  sites  of  adhe-
sion between cells in some tissues (Chapter 31). Tight 
junctions allow a sheet of epithelial cells to create semi-
permeable  barriers  between  tissue  compartments  such 
as the lumen and the wall of the intestine. Such barriers 
allow epithelia to concentrate materials on one side or 
the other. Gap junctions are composed of nonselective 

channels that connect the cytoplasms of two cells. These 
channels enable action potentials to spread directly from 
one cell to the next, as in the heart. Gap junction chan-
nels  also  allow  solutes  that  are  less  than  1000  Da  in 
molecular  weight  to  move  between  the  coupled  cells. 
Cadherins  connect  adjacent  cells  to  the  cytoskeleton  
at  two  types  of  adhesive  junctions.  The  cytoplasmic 
domains of cadherins are anchored to actin filaments at 
adherens  junctions  and  to  intermediate  filaments  at 
desmosomes.

The  abundance,  organization,  and  proportions  of 
macromolecular components determine the mechanical 
properties of the extracellular matrix (Chapter 32). Plant 
cells secrete cellulose, a polymer of glucose units, plus 
a  mixture  of  other  polysaccharides,  glycoproteins,  and 
organic  molecules  to  make  a  wall  around  each  cell. 
These cell walls form materials ranging from soft cotton 
fibers to the wood that supports giant Sequoia trees.

Connective  tissues  of  animals  also  exhibit  striking 
variety, owing to their particular mixtures of matrix mol-
ecules.  Skin  and  blood  vessels  are  resilient,  because  of 
numerous  elastic  fibers.  Tendons  have  great  tensile 
strength,  owing  to  the  high  density  of  collagen  fibrils. 
Bone is incompressible and rigid, because of its calcified 
collagen matrix. On the level of gross anatomy, cells and 
fibers  form  fascia,  tendons,  cartilage,  and  bones  that 
support the organs of the body. Connective tissue also 
provides avenues for communication and supply within 
the body. Both the circulatory system and the peripheral 
nervous system run through connective tissue compart-
ments  of  each  organ.  The  vascular  system  transports 
phagocytic and immune system cells to sites where they 
are needed for defense.

490

C H A P T E R 

28 

Cells of the Extracellular Matrix  
and Immune System
A remarkable variety of specialized cells populate the 

connective  tissues  of  animals.  These  cells  manufacture 
extracellular matrix, defend against infection, and main-
tain energy stores in the form of lipid (Fig. 28.1). Some 
of these cells arise in connective tissue and remain there. 
These  indigenous  cells  are  specialized:  Fibroblasts 
make  the  collagen,  elastic  fibers,  and  proteoglycans  of 
the  extracellular  matrix;  fat  cells  store  lipids;  chondro-
cytes  secrete  the  matrix  for  cartilage;  and  osteoblasts 
manufacture the calcified matrix of bone. The remaining 
cells  arise  elsewhere,  travel  through  blood  and  lymph, 
and enter connective tissue as needed, so they are known 
as  immigrant  cells.  These  visitors  are  part  of  the 
immune system, which defends against pathogens. This 
chapter introduces all these cells.

Indigenous Connective Tissue Cells
Mesenchymal Stem Cells
During embryogenesis the indigenous cells of connective 
tissues (fibroblasts, fat cells, chondrocytes, and osteoblasts) 

A

Mesenchymal stem cell

Differentiation and proliferation

derive  from  multipotential  mesenchymal  stem  cells  (see 
Box 41.2 and Fig. 28.1). In adults, small numbers of these 
inconspicuous  precursor  cells  associate  with  small  blood 
vessels but are difficult to identify by light microscopy. By 
electron microscopy (Fig. 28.2), mesenchymal cells resem-
ble fibroblasts but with fewer organelles of the secretory 
pathway.  The  nature  of  the  mesenchymal  stem  cells  in 
adult tissues is still being investigated.

Fibroblasts
Fibroblasts are the connective tissue workhorses, synthe-
sizing and secreting most macromolecules of the extra-
cellular  matrix  (Fig.  28.2).  Chapter  29  considers  the 
synthesis of these matrix molecules in detail. As appro-
priate for a secretory cell, mature fibroblasts have abun-
dant  rough  endoplasmic  reticulum  and  a  large  Golgi 
apparatus. They are generally spindle-shaped, with a flat-
tened, oval nucleus, but can assume many other shapes 
depending on the mechanical forces in the surrounding 
matrix.  The  migratory  patterns  of  the  fibroblasts  deter-
mine the patterns of collagen fibrils in tissues.

B

White
fat cell

 

F
r
o
m
T
h
o
m
a
s
 

L
e
n

t
z

Mesenchymal
stem cell

Fibroblast

Monocyte

Mast cell

Neutrophil

Eosinophil

White fat cell

Brown fat cell

Fibroblast

Chondrocyte Osteoblast

Lymphocyte

Plasma cell

Macrophage

FIGURE 28.1  CONNECTIVE TISSUE CELLS. A, Indigenous connective tissue cells all originate from a stem cell called a primitive mesen-
chymal cell. B, Connective tissue near a small blood vessel showing indigenous cells in pink and immigrant cells in green. 

 491

492 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

A

B

Golgi

Collagen

F

i

b
r
o

b

l

a

s
t

M

e

s

e

n

c

h

y

m

a

l 

c

e

ll

FIGURE  28.2  FIBROBLASTS.  A,  Scanning  electron  micrograph  of  fibroblasts  migrating  through  collagen  fibrils.  B,  Transmission  electron 
micrograph of a thin section of a fibroblast illustrating the abundant organelles of the secretory pathway (endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi appa-
ratus) and extracellular collagen fibrils. A primitive mesenchymal cell is shown in the lower left. (A, Courtesy E.D. Hay, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA. B, Courtesy D.W. Fawcett, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.)

In  response  to  tissue  damage,  fibroblasts  proliferate 
and migrate into the wound, where they synthesize new 
matrix  to  restore  the  integrity  of  the  tissue  (see  Fig. 
32.11). This process can get out of control if inflamma-
tory cells secrete excessive transforming growth factor 
(TGF)-β (see Fig. 27.10) and other factors that stimulate 
fibroblasts to produce matrix molecules. Fibrosis, excess 
accumulation  of  extracellular  matrix,  can  compromise 
the functions of the heart, liver, lung, or skin.

White Fat Cells
White fat cells (adipocytes) of vertebrates store lipids 
as a readily accessible reserve of energy. They arise from 
mesenchymal progenitors and are distributed in connec-
tive tissues beneath the skin and in the abdominal mes-
entery. These round cells vary in diameter depending on 
the size of their single, large, lipid droplet (Fig. 28.3) 
containing  triglycerides,  neutral  lipids  with  a  fatty 
acid  esterified  to  all  three  carbons  of  glycerol  (see  
Fig. 13.2 for the structures of glycerol and fatty acids). 
Specialized proteins coat the cytoplasmic surface of lipid  
droplets. Intermediate filaments and endoplasmic reticu-
lum  separate  the  lipid  droplet  from  the  thin  rim  of 
cytoplasm.

Fat cells respond to the metabolic needs of the body. 
After a meal, parasympathetic nerves stimulate fat cells 
to take up fatty acids and glycerol from blood and syn-
thesize triglycerides for storage. During fasting or when 
the  body  requires  energy,  sympathetic  nerves  acting 
through β-adrenergic receptors (see Fig. 27.3), stimulate 

adipocytes to hydrolyze fatty acids from triglycerides for 
release  into  the  blood  for  use  by  other  organs.  If  a 
mammal ingests excess calories, white fat cells enlarge 
their lipid stores and increase in number. White fat cells 
are long lived, with a half-life approximately 9 years, so 
the excess cells persist in obese individuals.

White  fat  tissue  is  also  an  endocrine  organ  that 
secretes  several  cytokines  and  polypeptide  hormones 
including  leptin.  Many  factors  including  nutritional 
status, mass of fat cells, exercise and sleep influence the 
rate of leptin secretion. Leptin suppresses appetite and 
hunger by stimulating cytokine receptors on neurons in 
the  brain.  These  neurons  respond  by  secreting  other 
polypeptide  hormones  that  regulate  appetite.  Massive 
obesity  results  from  congenital  absence  of  leptin  or 
defects in its receptor.

A  variety  of  mutations  cause  inherited  lipodystro-
phies, conditions with loss of fat in one or more tissues. 
Examples  include  loss  of  function  mutations  of  an 
enzyme required to synthesize triglycerides or a nuclear 
receptor  that  stimulates  differentiation  of  fat  cells.  It  is 
an  ongoing  mystery  why  mutations  in  the  gene  for 
nuclear lamins A and C (see Fig. 9.7) or a protease that 
processes lamin A should cause selective loss of fat from 
the trunk and limbs.

Brown and Beige Fat Cells
Brown and beige fat cells of placental mammals derive 
their  color  from  cytochromes  in  numerous  mitochon-
dria, which they use to generate heat in response to cold 

 

A

B

CHAPTER 28  n  Cells of the Extracellular Matrix and Immune System  

493

IF

C

D

E

IF

F

Mitochondria

Lipids

 

B
a
n
d
F

 

T
h
o
m
a
s
 

L
e
n
t
z

 
f
r
o
m

Lipid

ER

FIGURE 28.3  FAT CELLS. A, Light micrograph of a section of white adipose (fat) cells stained with hematoxylin and eosin. B, Drawing of a 
white  adipose  cell.  C,  Transmission  electron  micrograph  of  a  thin  section  of  the  edge  of  a  lipid  droplet  showing  the  circumferential  sheath  of 
vimentin  intermediate  filaments  (IF  [see  Chapter  35]).  D,  Interpretive  drawing  of  a  lipid  droplet  with  its  associated  filaments  and  endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER). E, Light micrograph of a section of brown fat. F, Drawing of a brown fat cell. (A, C, and E, Courtesy D.W. Fawcett, Harvard Medical 
School,  Boston,  MA.  B  and  F,  Modified  from  T.  Lentz,  Yale  Medical  School,  New  Haven,  CT.  D,  Modified  from  Werner  Franke,  University  of 
Heidelberg, Germany.)

or (in lean rodents) excess food intake. Fat is stored in 
multiple,  small  droplets  (Fig.  28.3F).  Brown  fat  is  less 
abundant than white fat, being concentrated in connec-
tive tissue between the scapulae in mammals. Newborn 
humans  have  more  brown  fat  than  do  adults  in  order  
to  generate  heat  during  the  adjustment  to  a  new  envi-
ronment  after  birth.  Hibernating  animals  use  brown  
fat  to  raise  their  temperatures  when  emerging  from 
hibernation.  Beige  fat  cells  are  found  among  white  
fat  cells  and  increase  in  numbers  when  a  mouse  is 
exposed  to  cold.  A  fourth  type  of  fat  cell  is  found  in  
bone marrow.

Both  brown  and  beige  fat  cells  generate  heat  by  
short-circuiting the proton gradient that is usually used 
to  generate  adenosine  triphosphate  (ATP)  in  mito-
chondria  (see  Fig.  19.5).  Sympathetic  nerves  acting 
through  β-adrenergic  receptors  (see  Fig.  27.3)  and 
protein kinase A stimulate brown fat cells to break down 
lipids  to  provide  fatty  acids  for  oxidation  by  mito-
chondria.  β-Adrenergic  receptors  also  drive  expression 
of “uncoupling protein,” a carrier in the inner mitochon-
drial membrane similar in structure to the mitochondrial 
ATP/adenosine  diphosphate  (ADP)  antiporter  (see  Fig. 
15.4A). Uncoupling protein-1 dissipates the proton elec-
trochemical  gradient  across  the  inner  mitochondrial 
membrane  (perhaps  acting  as  a  fatty  acid/proton  sym-
porter), so energy is lost as heat rather than being used 

to synthesize ATP. Beige fat cells also run a futile cycle 
of  creatine  phosphorylation  and  dephosphorylation  
to  produce  heat.  Thermogenesis  may  be  an  “energy 
buffer” that, when defective in animals, can contribute 
to obesity. Therefore, stimulating thermogenesis is one 
goal in the treatment of obesity.

Brown fat cells express thermogenic proteins consti-
tutively, whereas β-adrenergic stimulation drives expres-
sion of these proteins in beige fat cells. The thermogenic 
fat cells have different precursors. Brown fat cells arise 
from  the  same  mesenchymal  stem  cells  as  skeletal 
muscle, while beige fat cells are more closely related to 
white fat cells.

Origin and Development of Blood Cells
The blood of vertebrates contains a variety of cells, each 
with  a  specialized  function  (Fig.  28.4  and  Table  28.1). 
Red blood cells transport oxygen, platelets repair damage 
to  blood  vessels,  and  various  types  of  white  blood  
cells  defend  against  infections.  All  blood  cells  derive 
ultimately from pluripotent stem cells (Fig. 28.4B; also 
see  Box  41.2).  These  hematopoietic  stem  cells  can 
restore the production of all blood cells in mice that have 
been irradiated to destroy their own blood cell precur-
sors  or  after  transplantation  of  human  bone  marrow. 
Destruction  of  stem  cells  (eg,  by  drugs  such  as 

494 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

A

RBC

Neutrophil

B

Platelets

Monocyte

Lymphocyte

Lymphocyte

Common
lymphoid
progenitor

B lymphocyte

T lymphocyte

Platelets

Neutrophil

Eosinophil

Basophil

Platelets

Pleuri-
potential
stem cell

Myeloid
stem cell

Committed
stem cells

Megakaryocyte

Granulocyte

Monocyte

RBC

Platelets

FIGURE 28.4  BLOOD CELLS. A, Light micrograph of a dried blood smear prepared with Wright stain. B, Family tree of blood cells showing 
the developmental relationships of the various lineages. Looping-back arrows indicate renewal of the cell type. Forward-oriented arrows indicate 
differentiation and proliferation. RBC, red blood cell. (A, Courtesy J.-P. Revel, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena.)

TABLE 28.1  Blood Cells (as Seen on a Stained 
Smear of Blood)
Type

Concentration
300,000/µL

Features
Anucleate; 2–3 µm wide; 

Platelets

Erythrocytes

~5 × 106/µL

Neutrophils

~60% of total 

WBCs

purple granules

7 µm wide biconcave disks; 
no nucleus; pink cytoplasm
10–12 µm wide; multilobed 
nucleus; many unstained 
granules; few azurophilic 
(blue) granules

Eosinophils

~2% of total 

Bilobed nucleus; numerous, 

WBCs

large, refractile, pink-stained 
granules; ~12 µm wide

Basophils

~0.5% of total 

Lobed nucleus; large, 

WBCs

blue-stained granules; 
~10 µm wide

Lymphocytes

~30% of total 

Small, round, intensely 

WBCs

Monocytes

~5% of total 

WBCs

WBCs, white blood cells.

stained nucleus; some small 
azurophilic granules; 
variable amount of clear 
blue cytoplasm, so may be 
classified as either small 
(~7–8 µm wide), medium, 
or large

Up to 17 µm wide; large, 

indented nucleus and 
gray-blue cytoplasm with a 
few azurophilic granules

chloramphenicol) leads to aplastic anemia, a condition 
in which few blood cells are produced, owing to a lack 
of precursors.

Hematopoietic stem cells do not grow well in tissue 
culture,  because  they  require  a  special  environment 

provided  in  the  bone  marrow.  In  these  niches  located 
next to small blood vessels, endothelial cells, mesenchy-
mal cells, and sympathetic nerves provide contacts and 
growth factors. Sympathetic nerves also drive the release 
of  small  numbers  of  hematopoietic  stem  cells  into  the 
blood every day following a circadian rhythm.

Pluripotent  hematopoietic  stem  cells  give  rise  to 
much  larger  numbers  of  more  mature  stem  cells  that 
proliferate  and  produce  blood  cells.  At  several  stages 
along  the  differentiation  pathway,  precursors  undergo 
irreversible  differentiation  that  commits  them  to  a  par-
ticular  lineage.  The  first  branch  in  the  pathway  of  dif-
ferentiation  separates  the  precursors  of  lymphocytes 
from  the  precursors  of  the  other  blood  cells  called 
myeloid stem cells. Next, myeloid stem cells differentiate 
into  committed  stem  cells  that  reside  in  different  loca-
tions in bone marrow. One branch gives rise to red blood 
cells, megakaryocytes, and platelets. In the other branch 
a common committed stem cell differentiates into mono-
cytes and the three types of granulocytes (neutrophils, 
eosinophils,  and  basophils).  Mast  cells  also  arise  from 
myeloid  stem  cells,  although  the  lineage  is  uncertain. 
Through differentiation, each mature cell type acquires 
unique functions. Platelets, red cells, granulocytes, and 
monocytes  develop  in  bone  marrow.  Lymphocytes 
develop  in  both  bone  marrow  and  lymphoid  tissues 
(thymus, spleen, and lymph nodes).

Minute  quantities  of  specific  glycoprotein  growth 
factors  control  the  balance  between  self-renewal  and 
proliferation  at  each  stage  of  blood  cell  development, 
starting with pluripotential stem cells. Feedback mecha-
nisms  control  production  of  these  growth  factors.  For 
example,  the  oxygen  level  in  the  kidney  controls  the 
synthesis of erythropoietin, the growth factor for the 

 

CHAPTER 28  n  Cells of the Extracellular Matrix and Immune System  

495

red blood cell series. (See Fig. 27.9 for the cytokine sig-
naling  pathway.)  A  dimeric  transcription  factor  called 
hypoxia  inducible  factor  (HIF)-1α/HIF-1β  regulates  the 
expression of erythropoietin. When oxygen is abundant, 
HIF-1α is hydroxylated on a proline residue, marking it 
for ubiquitination and destruction (see Fig. 23.3), turning 
down  the  expression  of  erythropoietin.  When  kidney 
cells  lack  oxygen  (owing  to  low  levels  of  red  blood  
cells, poor blood circulation in the kidney, or high alti-
tude) HIF-1α/HIF-1β accumulates, and erythropoietin is 
expressed and secreted to stimulate red blood cell pro-
duction  by  bone  marrow.  The  reciprocal  relationship 
between oxygen and erythropoietin that is achieved by 
this feedback mechanism sets red blood cell production 
at a level required to deliver oxygen to the tissues. Many 
other cells use the HIF-1α/HIF-1β system to adjust gene 
expression to local oxygen levels.

Mutations altering the growth control (see Fig. 41.12) 
of a stem cell can give rise to proliferative disorders, such 
as leukemia. In chronic myelogenous leukemia, a chro-
mosomal rearrangement in a single white blood cell pre-
cursor  creates  a  fusion  between  the  genes  for  BCR 
(breakpoint  cluster  region)  and  ABL  (a  Src  family  cyto-
plasmic tyrosine kinase; see Fig. 25.3 and Box 27.5). The 
BCR-ABL protein is constitutively active and drives pro-
liferation of a clone of immature white blood cells that 
crowd  out  and  inhibit  the  production  of  other  blood 
cells, leading to anemia and platelet deficiency. Affected 
individuals are prone to infection, because the immature 
white blood cells are ineffective phagocytes. Fortunately, 
a  small-molecule  inhibitor  of  the  kinase  activity  of 
BCR-ABL ( imatinib mesylate [GLEEVEC]) suppresses this 
clone  in  many  patients.  Mutations  rendering  the  JAK2 
(just  another  kinase  2)  kinase  (see  Fig.  24.6)  constitu-
tively  active  drive  proliferation  in  other  leukemias. 
Uncontrolled  proliferation  of  a  clone  of  red  blood  cell 
precursors  causes  a  similar  condition,  characterized  by 
excess red cells, called polycythemia vera.

Cells Confined to the Blood
Erythrocytes (Red Blood Cells)
Red  blood  cells  (RBCs)  (Fig.  28.4;  also  see  Fig.  13.8) 
contain  more  than  300 mg/mL  of  hemoglobin  to  carry 
oxygen  from  the  lungs  to  tissues  and  carbon  dioxide 
from tissues to the lungs. As they proliferate and differ-
entiate  in  bone  marrow,  RBC  precursors  accumulate 
hemoglobin  and  shed  all  their  organelles.  A  resilient, 
spectrin–actin  membrane  cytoskeleton  (see  Fig.  13.11) 
maintains  the  biconcave  shape  even  after  the  cell  is 
heavily distorted each time it squeezes through a small 
capillary. The elasticity of the membrane skeleton allows 
it to regain its shape.

Human  bone  marrow  produces  about  100  billion 
RBCs  each  day.  After  circulating  in  blood  for  120  
days,  erythrocytes  abruptly  become  senescent,  and 

phagocytes in the spleen, liver, and bone marrow remove 
them  from  the  blood.  The  biochemical  basis  of  this 
precise cellular aging and clearance process is still being 
investigated.

Mutations in many different genes cause RBC diseases. 
In  hereditary  spherocytosis  (and  other  hemolytic 
anemias), the membrane cytoskeleton loses its resiliency 
as a result of mutations, causing deficiencies or molecu-
lar  defects  of  spectrin  or  other  component  proteins. 
These defective cells are easily damaged and eventually 
become  smaller  and  rounder  than  normal.  Many  differ-
ent mutations of the globin genes may compromise the 
synthesis  of  a  particular  globin  gene  or  decrease  the 
stability  or  oxygen-carrying  capacity  of  hemoglobin.  In 
sickle cell disease, hemoglobin S is prone to assemble 
into  tubular  polymers  that  distort  the  cell  and  clog  up 
the circulation.

Platelets
Platelets are small cellular fragments without a nucleus 
that  contribute  to  blood  clotting  and  repair  of  minor 
defects in the sheet of endothelial cells that lines blood 
vessels.  A  long,  coiled  microtubule  presses  out  against 
the  plasma  membrane,  like  a  spring,  to  maintain  the 
platelet’s  disk  shape  (Fig.  28.5).  The  most  prominent 
organelles are two types of membrane-bound granules. 
Dense granules contain ADP and serotonin. Alpha gran-
ules  contain  stores  of  adhesive  glycoproteins  including 
fibrinogen,  fibronectin  (see  Fig.  29.14),  and  thrombos-
pondin  as  well  as  the  potent  protein  hormone  called 
platelet-derived  growth 
factor.  Platelet-derived 
growth  factor  has  a  role  in  wound  healing  (see  Fig. 
32.11), but can contribute to atherosclerosis by stimulat-
ing the abnormal proliferation of smooth muscle cells in 
the walls of damaged arteries. Another secreted cytokine 
kills malaria parasites inside RBCs.

Platelets  containing  a  full  complement  of  organelles 
bud from the tips of protrusions on the surface precursor 
cells—giant  polyploid  megakaryocytes  in  the  bone 
marrow. Thrombopoietin, a protein hormone related 
to erythropoietin, controls platelet production by stimu-
lating  the  thrombopoietin  cytokine  receptor.  Liver  and 
kidney  cells  secrete  thrombopoietin  at  a  constant  rate. 
Receptors on circulating platelets bind part of the throm-
bopoietin.  Consequently,  the  blood  concentration  of 
thrombopoietin  available  to  stimulate  megakaryocyte 
maturation and platelet formation is inversely related to 
the total number of platelets. This feedback loop stimu-
lates platelet production if the platelet supply is low.

Like RBCs, platelets are confined to the blood where 
they circulate for about seven days. Two pools of plate-
lets freely exchange with each other: About two-thirds 
of the total platelets circulate, whereas one-third of the 
platelets  are  stored  in  the  blood  vessels  of  the  spleen. 
The  stored  pool  may  increase  when  the  spleen  is 
enlarged, decreasing the platelet count in the blood.

496 

A

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

B

MT

C

D

E

Actin

Granules

MT

F
Platelet
Endothelium

Basal lamina

G
Damage exposes
basal lamina
Platelet
binds

H
Activated platelets
secrete ADP

ADP

ADP

I
Activated platelets
aggregate over 
defect

MT

FIGURE  28.5  PLATELETS  AND  THEIR  ROLE  IN  HEMOSTASIS.  A–B,  Transmission  electron  micrographs  of  thin  sections  of  platelets. 
C,  Interpretive  drawing  showing  the  circumferential  band  of  microtubules  (MT),  actin  filaments  in  the  cortex,  and  granules  in  the  cytoplasm. 
D, Role of platelets in blood clot retraction. Filopodia grasp strands of fibrin in a blood clot (upper panel) and pull them together (lower panel). 
E, Electron micrograph of a thin section showing platelets adhering to the basal lamina through a small defect in the endothelium and to a second 
platelet in the lumen. F–I, Stages in the repair of a defect in the endothelial lining of a blood vessel. F, Circulating platelets do not bind to normal 
endothelial cells. G, Damage to the endothelium exposes the basal lamina, and a platelet binds to the collagen. H, Collagen activates the platelet 
to secrete adenosine diphosphate (ADP), which activates passing platelets. I, Activated platelets bind together, covering the defect in the endo-
thelium. (A–B, Courtesy O. Behnke, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.)

Platelets  control  bleeding  in  three  ways.  First,  they 
adhere  and  change  shape  to  cover  damaged  vascular 
surfaces.  Second,  platelets  stimulate blood  clotting.  A 
surface protein on activated platelets stimulates a cascade 
of  proteolytic  reactions  culminating  in  the  cleavage  of 
plasma fibrinogen to form fibrin, which polymerizes to 
clot blood. The fibrin gel stops the flow of blood from 
damaged blood vessels. Third, platelets help close holes 
in damaged blood vessels by pulling on fibrin strands and 
contracting the clot.

When  the  mild  trauma  of  daily  existence  produces 
defects in the endothelial cells lining blood vessels, plate-
lets repair the damage. Platelets bind to von Willebrand 
factor and collagen in the basal lamina when it is exposed 
by damage to the endothelium. This triggers one of the 
best-understood examples of regulated cellular adhesion 
(for  more  detail,  see  Fig.  30.14).  Activated  platelets 
aggregate, extend actin-containing filopodia, and secrete 
the contents of their granules. The secreted ADP sets up 
a positive feedback loop, activating more platelets that 
form a cluster to fill the defect in the endothelium. Other 
platelets  are  consumed  by  phagocytic  cells  in  the  liver 
and spleen.

Patients with defective platelets or reduced circulat-
ing platelets (a complication of bone marrow disease and 
cancer  chemotherapy)  bruise  easily,  owing  to  unre-
paired  damage  in  small  blood  vessels,  and  may  even 
bleed  spontaneously.  Conversely,  hyperactive  platelets 
may initiate pathological clots in the blood vessels of the 
heart,  causing  heart  attacks  or  thrombosis  in  the  veins 
of the legs.

Cellular Basis of Innate Immunity
All multicellular animals use two forms of innate immu-
nity to defend themselves against infection by microor-
ganisms.  Phagocytic  cells  track  down,  ingest,  and  kill 
bacteria  and  fungi  (see  Fig.  22.3).  A  second  line  of 
defense is secretion of cytokines and small antimicrobial 
proteins by white blood cells and epithelial cells of the 
skin and intestine.

The following sections describe the main mammalian 
phagocytes,  macrophages  and  neutrophils  (Fig.  28.4). 
They originate in bone marrow from a common commit-
ted stem cell (see Fig. 28.4B) and acquire unique func-
tions as they differentiate. 

Innate immune cells detect the presence of microor-
ganisms  using  Toll-like  receptors  (TLRs)  (Fig.  28.6). 
The Toll gene was discovered in Drosophila encoding a 
receptor  that  was  first  linked  to  dorsal–ventral  polarity 
in early development and later shown to be required for 
resistance to fungal infections.

TLRs are called “pattern recognition receptors,” because 
they bind generic, repeating structures of polymeric mac-
romolecules rather than recognizing fine molecular details 
like antibodies. These “pathogen-associated molecular pat-
terns”  or  PAMPs  are  found  on  components  essential  for 
the functions of the microorganisms such as viral double-
stranded  RNA,  bacterial  flagellin, 
lipopolysaccharide  
from the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria, and 
zymosan from the cell walls of fungi.

Mammals have about a dozen TLRs in three classes. All 
TLRs have cytoplasmic TIR (Toll interleukin-1 receptor) 

 

CHAPTER 28  n  Cells of the Extracellular Matrix and Immune System  

497

Ligand-binding
domain with
leucine-rich
repeats

Receptor

TIR domain
of TLR1

TNF gene
expressed

TLR1 and TLR2 receptors dimerized
by triacetylated lipopeptide

Adaptor
proteins

Kinases

NF-κB activated then
imported into nucleus

NF-κB

Adaptor proteins

bound to TIR domain

TLR3 bound to double-stranded

RNA in an endosome

FIGURE 28.6  TOLL-LIKE RECEPTORS SIGNALING FROM THE PLASMA MEMBRANE AND ENDOSOMES. Binding of a triacetylated 
bacterial lipopeptide stabilizes a heterodimer of Toll-like receptor (TLR)-1 and TLR2 in the plasma membrane shown as ribbon diagrams with 
space-filling surfaces. Dimers of TLR3 in the membranes of endosomes bind double-stranded RNAs released from viruses. Ligand binding to 
receptor dimers aligns their cytoplasmic Toll-interleukin receptor (TIR) domains and allows binding of adapter proteins that initiate a signal trans-
mitted to kinases, which activate cytoplasmic transcription factors including nuclear factor κB (NF-κB). NF-κB moves to the nucleus and stimulates 
expression of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and other inflammatory mediators. (Molecular structures are based on Protein Data Bank [www.rcsb 
.org] file 2Z2X. For reference, see Jin MS, Kim SE, Heo JY, et al. Crystal structure of the TLR1-TLR2 heterodimer induced by binding of a tri-
acylated lipopeptide. Cell. 2007;130:1071–1082; and Liu L, Botos I, Wang Y, et al. Structural basis of toll-like receptor 3 signaling with double-
stranded RNA. Science. 2008;320:379–381.)

domains, but differ in other respects. Classic TLRs have 
ligand binding domains consisting of leucine rich repeats 
(Fig. 28.6). Interleukin (IL)-1 receptors have extracellular 
immunoglobulin (Ig) domains.

PAMP  binding  to  a  dimeric  TLR  on  the  plasma  
membrane  of  white  blood  cells  or  antigen-processing  
dendritic cells stimulates the secretion of inflammatory 
mediators such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and IL-1 
and IL-6. TNF and ILs then alert distant cells to respond 
to  the  infection.  The  signaling  pathway  from  TLRs  to 
TNF  (Fig.  28.6)  involves  cytoplasmic  adapter  proteins 
and kinases that activate transcription factors including 
nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) (see Fig. 10.22C) and expres-
sion  of  some  long  noncoding  RNAs.  Plasma  membrane 
TLRs  also  activate  mitogen-activated  protein  (MAP) 
kinase pathways (see Fig. 27.5).

The  response  also  includes  secretion  of  approxi-
mately 40 small proteins called chemokines that attract 
motile  phagocytic  cells.  Chemokines  with  many  unre-
lated  names  (IL-8,  RANTES  [regulated  upon  activation, 
normal T-cell expressed and secreted], eotaxin, monocyte 
chemotactic  protein  [MCP]-1,  etc.)  have  similar  struc-
tures  and  bind  to  a  family  of  14  different  chemokine 
receptors expressed selectively by lymphocytes, mono-
cytes, and granulocytes. These seven-helix receptors are 
coupled  to  trimeric  G-proteins  (see  Fig.  24.3)  that 
mediate chemotaxis (see Fig. 38.10) toward the source 

of  the  chemokine.  Secretion  of  antimicrobial  peptides 
such  as  defensins  and  cathelicidins  not  only  kill  patho-
gens by interacting with their membranes but also attract 
and  activate  cells  of  both  the  innate  and  the  adaptive 
immune systems.

Cytoplasmic receptors with TIR domains bind nucleic 
acids.  TLRs  3,  7,  8,  and  9  are  located  in  endosomes, 
where  they  bind  double-stranded  RNA  released  from 
viruses and single stranded RNAs from viruses and bac-
teria.  Signaling  pathways  using  some  of  the  same  com-
ponents  as  the  plasma  membrane  TLRs  stimulate  the 
expression and secretion of TNF and interferon (IFN)-α. 
The cytoplasmic system uses a helicase called RIG-I and 
other proteins to recognize foreign RNAs and to respond 
via NF-κB to produce IFN-β.

Other  pattern  recognition  receptors  reside  in  the 
cytoplasm  of  innate  immune  cells  and  other  cells.  For 
example,  nucleotide-binding  oligomerization  domain 
(NOD)-like receptor proteins activate a kinase that stimu-
lates  both  the  transcription  factor  NF-κB  and  the  MAP 
kinase pathways. Other NOD-like receptor proteins acti-
vate  the  proteolytic  enzyme  caspase-1  (see  Fig.  46.11), 
which  processes  inflammatory  cytokine  precursors  for 
secretion.

In addition to phagocytes, mammals have special lym-
phocytes  called  natural  killer  cells  that  express  a 
variety of receptors to detect and kill cells infected with 

498 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

a  virus.  Like  other  innate  immune  cells,  natural  killer 
cells  also  secrete  a  variety  of  cytokines  that  influence 
immune responses and inflammation.

These elements of the innate immune system are pro-
grammed  genetically,  so  they  respond  without  prior 
exposure to the pathogen. Despite their generic nature, 
these innate responses work remarkably well, defending 
all metazoans against infection.

Neutrophils
Neutrophils,  also  known  as  polymorphonuclear  leuko-
cytes or “polys,” are the main phagocytes circulating in 
blood, ready to enter connective tissues at sites of infec-
tion. They are distinguished by a multilobed nucleus and 
two  types  of  granules  (Fig.  28.7).  The  more  abundant 
specific  granules  contain  lysozyme  (an  enzyme  that 
digests  bacterial  cell  walls)  and  alkaline  phosphatase. 
These  granules  do  not  stain  with  either  the  basic  or 
acidic  dyes  used  for  blood  smears,  so  these  cells  are 
called  neutrophils.  Azurophilic  granules  are  true  lyso-
somes  containing  hydrolytic  enzymes  bound  to  acidic 

proteoglycans.  Neutrophils  have  few  mitochondria,  so 
they  produce  ATP  in  poorly  oxygenated  wounds  by 
breaking down stores of glycogen by glycolysis. They are 
among the most motile cells in the body.

Human  bone  marrow  produces  about  100  billion 
(80 g) neutrophils each day. In response to infection or 
injury, a circulating factor releases neutrophils from the 
bone  marrow  into  the  blood.  Neutrophils  spend  about 
10  hours  in  blood,  spending  part  of  the  time  adherent 
to  endothelial  cells,  chiefly  in  the  lung.  Exercise  and 
epinephrine release adherent neutrophils into the circu-
lating pool; smoking increases the adherent pool. Neu-
trophils leave the blood by receptor-mediated attachment 
to  endothelial  cells  and  then  crawling  between  them 
into the connective tissue (see Fig. 30.13), where they 
perish after a day or two of phagocytosis.

Neutrophils are humans’ first line of defense against 
bacterial  infection,  and  they  are  highly  specialized  for 
finding  and  destroying  bacteria.  Provided  that  the  con-
centration of neutrophils is high enough (approximately 
10  million  cells  per  milliliter),  these  motile  phagocytes 

A. Neutrophil

D. Monocyte

B. Eosinophil

C. Basophil

E. Macrophage

T
h
o
m
a
s
 

L
e
n

t
z

I
l

u
s
t
r
a

t
i

o
n
s
 
A
E

-

 
f
r
o
m

FIGURE 28.7  WHITE BLOOD CELLS. Transmission electron micrographs of thin sections of each cell and interpretive drawings with lyso-
somes  shown  in  brown.  A,  A  neutrophil  showing  the  multilobed  nucleus  (the  connections  between  lobes  are  in  other  sections)  and  the  two 
classes  of  granules.  B,  An  eosinophil  showing  the  bilobed  nucleus  and  the  large,  specific  granules  containing  a  darkly  stained  crystalloid. 
C,  Basophil  with  large  specific  granules  colored  blue.  D,  Blood  monocyte.  E,  Macrophage  grown  in  tissue  culture.  (Micrographs  courtesy 
D.W. Fawcett, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA. Drawings modified from T. Lentz, Yale Medical School, New Haven, CT.)

 

CHAPTER 28  n  Cells of the Extracellular Matrix and Immune System  

499

can find and destroy bacteria faster than the invaders can 
reproduce.  Bacterial  products,  especially  N-formylated 
peptides,  attract  neutrophils  by  binding  plasma  mem-
brane  receptors  and  stimulating  locomotion,  similar  to 
chemotaxis by other cells (see Fig. 38.10). Neutrophils 
bind and ingest bacteria by phagocytosis (see Fig. 22.3). 
Both types of granules fuse with phagosomes, delivering 
antibacterial  proteins  and  proteolytic  enzymes  that  
kill  the  ingested  bacteria.  Some  granules  fuse  with  
the  plasma  membrane,  releasing  antibacterial  proteins 
outside  the  cell.  Phagosome  membranes  produce  milli-
−)  radicals  and 
molar  concentrations  of  superoxide  (O2
other  reactive  oxygen  species  that  help  disperse  the 
granule enzymes and contribute to killing bacteria. These 
toxic  oxygen  species  may  also  cause  collateral  damage 
to  the  neutrophil.  Genetic  defects  in  the  enzymes  
that  produce  superoxide  cause  chronic  granulomatous 
disease,  a  serious  human  disease,  because  neutrophils 
cannot kill ingested bacteria and fungi.

Eosinophils
Eosinophils  are  members  of  the  granulocyte  lineage, 
present in low numbers in the blood. They are identified 
in blood smears as cells with a bilobed nucleus and large 
specific granules that stain brightly red with eosin (Fig. 
28.7B). Specific granules contain a cationic protein crys-
talloid,  a  ribonuclease  and  peroxidase,  in  addition  to  a 
crystalloid of a basic protein.

Like  neutrophils,  eosinophils  transit  the  blood  for 
hours  on  their  way  to  connective  tissues,  especially  in 
the  gastrointestinal  tract,  where  they  survive  for  a  few 
days. Chemotactic factors generated by the complement 
system, basophils, some tumors, parasites, and bacteria 
all attract eosinophils to tissues. Many of the same factors 
attract other leukocytes, but particular chemokines are 
specialized  for  eosinophils.  Eosinophils  accumulate  in 
blood and in tissues infected with parasites, but experts 
do  not  agree  on  whether  eosinophils  kill  bacteria  or 
parasites. Activated eosinophils contribute to inflamma-
tion in some allergic disorders such as asthma but they 
also secrete factors that promote immune responses by 
lymphocytes.

Macrophages
Macrophages are a diverse group of professional phago-
cytes  with  many  common  features  but  two  different 
origins.  All  have  a  receptor  tyrosine  kinase  (colony-
stimulating factor receptor) that drives their differentia-
tion into phagocytes. Macrophages in brain, liver, lung 
and some other tissues arise from cells in the embryonic 
yolk sac, while adult tissue macrophages develop from 
monocytes  that  develop  in  bone  marrow  and  circulate 
in the blood. Monocytes are the largest blood cells with 
an indented nucleus and a small number of azurophilic 
granules (Figs. 28.4A and 28.7D). After about 3 days in 
the blood, monocytes enter tissues and differentiate into 

macrophages under the influence of local growth factors, 
including  lymphokines  secreted  by  lymphocytes  (Fig. 
28.9). Macrophages enlarge and amplify their machinery 
for  locomotion,  phagocytosis,  and  killing  microorgan-
isms  and  tumor  cells.  Tissue  macrophages  may  divide 
and  survive  for  months.  Local  growth  factors  in  bone 
stimulate monocytes to fuse and differentiate into multi-
nucleated osteoclasts that degrade bone matrix during 
bone remodeling (see Fig. 32.6).

Macrophages generally follow neutrophils to wounds 
or  infections  to  clean  up  debris  and  foreign  material. 
Plasma membrane receptors for antibodies allow macro-
phages to recognize foreign matter marked with antibod-
ies and to facilitate its ingestion. Primary lysosomes fuse 
with  phagosomes  to  degrade  the  contents.  Eventually, 
the  cytoplasm  fills  with  residual  bodies  containing  the 
remains of ingested material (see Fig. 23.4). When con-
fronted  with  large  foreign  bodies,  macrophages  can  
fuse together to form giant cells. Giant multinucleated 
microphages  will  even  try  to  ingest  a  Petri  dish  if  it  is 
coated with antibody.

Macrophages and their cousins, called dendritic cells 
(see  below),  participate  in  the  immune  response  by 
degrading  ingested  protein  antigens  and  presenting 
antigen fragments on their surface bound to major histo-
compatibility  complex  (MHC)  class  II  proteins  (Fig. 
28.9).  This  complex  activates  helper  T  lymphocytes  
carrying the appropriate T-cell receptors (see Fig. 27.8). 
Activated T cells proliferate and secrete growth factors 
that stimulate B lymphocytes to produce antibodies.

Engagement of TLRs stimulates macrophages, which 
secrete  dozens  of  factors  involved  with  host  defense, 
inflammation,  and  normal  development.  Among  these, 
IL-1,  TGF-α,  TGF-β,  and  platelet-derived  growth  factor 
stimulate  the  proliferation  and  differentiation  of  the  
cells required to heal wounds (see Fig. 32.11). Chemo-
kines  attract  cells  of  the  immune  system  to  sites  of 
inflammation.

Mast Cells and Basophils
Basophils  (Fig.  28.6C)  and  mast  cells  (Fig.  28.8)  both 
have  histamine-containing  granules  that  are  secreted 
when  antigens  bind  cell-surface  IgE  molecules.  The 
large, abundant granules contain, by mass, 30% heparin–
basic protein complex, 10% histamine, and 35% basic 
proteins, including proteases. Plasma membrane recep-
tors bind a random selection of IgE antibodies made by 
the immune system in response to exposure to antigens. 
Binding  of  the  corresponding  antigen  to  IgE  on  the 
surface  of  a  basophil  or  mast  cell  activates  a  signaling 
pathway with a Src family tyrosine kinase similar to those 
in  T  lymphocytes  (see  Fig.  27.8).  A  cytoplasmic  Ca2+ 
pulse triggers fusion of granules with the plasma mem-
brane (see Fig. 21.16) and other pathways stimulate pro-
duction  of  cytokines  and  lipid  second  messengers. 
Mechanical  trauma,  radiant  energy  (heat,  X-rays), 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

500 

A

connective tissue blood vessels (Fig. 28.8) and beneath 
epithelial  cells  lining  airways  and  the  gastrointestinal 
tract. Basophils circulate in small numbers in the blood. 
They  look  much  like  neutrophils,  but  have  a  bilobed 
nucleus and large, basophilic, specific granules contain-
ing  serotonin  and  all  the  histamine  in  the  blood  (Fig. 
28.7C). Basophils are weak phagocytes.

Humans  have  both  circulating  basophils  and  tissue 
mast cells, but this is not universal. Mice, for example, 
have mast cells but no basophils, and turtles have baso-
phils but no mast cells.

Cellular Basis of Adaptive Immunity
Starting with cartilaginous fish, vertebrates developed a 
sophisticated adaptive immune system. The response 
is slower than innate immunity, because it depends on 
the  selection  and  multiplication  of  lymphocytes  that 
produce soluble antibodies or cell surface receptors pre-
cisely  targeted  to  foreign  molecules.  This  response 
depends  on  rearrangement  and  mutation  of  genes  to 
produce  highly  selective  antibodies  and  receptor  pro-
teins.  Although  this  adaptive  response  takes  about  a 
week  to  mobilize,  it  produces  specialized  lymphocytes 
that  survive  for  years,  providing  the  host  with  a  faster 
adaptive  response  when  exposed  to  the  pathogen  a 
second time.

In response to infection, lymphocytes of the immune 
systems  of  vertebrates  produce  two  kinds  of  adaptive 
responses:  humoral  (in  the  body  fluids)  and  cellular.  B 
lymphocytes produce the humoral response by secret-
ing  antibodies  (immunoglobulins),  soluble  proteins 
that diffuse in the blood and tissue fluids. Many types of 
T lymphocytes mediate the cellular arm of the adaptive 
immune response. Of these, cytotoxic T lymphocytes 
(killer  T  cells)  destroy  cells  infected  with  viruses, 
whereas  helper  T  cells  regulate  other  lymphocytes. 
These responses protect against infection but fail in AIDS 
when the HIV kills helper T cells. A blood smear reveals 
lymphocytes of various sizes and shapes (Fig. 28.4), but 
not their remarkable heterogeneity at the molecular level 
(Fig. 28.9).

Antibodies  produced  by  B  cells  provide  a  chemical 
defense against viruses, bacteria, fungi, and toxins. Anti-
bodies,  or  immunoglobulins,  are  an  incredibly  diverse 
family of proteins, each with a binding site that accom-
modates  one  of  millions  of  different  ligands  termed  
antigens.  Antigens  include  proteins,  polysaccharides, 
nucleic  acids,  lipids,  and  small  organic  molecules  pro-
duced  biologically  or  chemically.  Antibody  binding  
can  mark  an  antigen  for  phagocytosis  or  neutralize  
its toxicity.

The huge repertoire of antigen-binding sites present 
in the collection of antibodies that circulate in a single 
individual arises through rearrangement and somatic 
mutations  of  Ig  genes  (Fig.  28.10).  This  remarkable 

B

C

Granule

C from Thomas Lentz

FIGURE  28.8  MAST  CELLS.  A,  Light  micrograph  of  loose  con-
nective tissue, stained with toluidine blue, illustrating mast cells scat-
tered along a blood vessel (drawn in to enhance the contrast). Large 
mast cell granules stain intensely purple with basic thiazine dyes such 
as toluidine blue. B, Transmission electron micrograph of a thin section 
of a mast cell. C, Drawing of a mast cell. (A–B, Courtesy D.W. Fawcett, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA. C, Modified from T. Lentz, Yale 
Medical School, New Haven, CT.)

bacterial toxins, and venoms are less-specific stimuli, but 
can  also  trigger  secretion.  Outside  the  cell,  the  carrier 
proteins release heparin and histamine.

On the positive side, secretion of histamine and other 
granule contents rapidly attracts other cells to fight infec-
tions  as  part  of  “immediate  hypersensitivity”  reactions. 
On the negative side, histamine binds to cellular recep-
tors, causing plasma to leak from blood vessels, contrac-
tion  of  smooth  muscle,  and  itching  sensations.  This 
results in congestion and constriction of the respiratory 
tract in allergic reactions and swelling of the skin after 
an insect bite. Secreted fibrinolysin and heparin inhibit 
blood clotting. Stimulated mast cells also secrete TNF-α 
and eicosanoids, contributing to the activation of other 
inflammatory  cells  in  chronic  conditions  including 
asthma and arthritis.

Basophils and mast cells both arise from bone marrow 
myeloid stem cells (Fig. 28.4B), with mast cells differen-
tiating on a different, and still uncertain, pathway from 
that of basophils and other granulocytes. After arising in 
the bone marrow immature mast cells move quickly to 
other  tissues  where  they  mature  and  distribute  along 

 

CHAPTER 28  n  Cells of the Extracellular Matrix and Immune System  

501

A. Proliferation and genetic recombination

Lymphoid
stem cell

B-cell lineage

Helper T-cell lineage

Killer T-cell lineage

Ig

CD4

TCR

CD8

TCR

B

Ag

Soluble antigen

Ig • Ag

Ag binds a 
subset of cells

MHC II

Proliferation

Growth factors
stimulate B cells

C

Clone of cells
secretes antibody
to specifec antigen

Ab

Ig'

MHC class II displays
digested Ag on
macrophages and
other antigen-
presenting cells

MHC II • Ag

CD4
TCR
Subset of
T cells binds
macrophage

MHC I

MHC class I displays
digested Ag on
virus-infected
somatic cells

MHC I • Ag

CD8
TCR
Subset of
T-cells binds
infected cell

Proliferation

Clone of helper
T cells secretes
growth factors

Proliferation

Clone of killer
T cells targets
virus-infected cell

CD4
TCR

CD8
TCR

FIGURE 28.9  THE IMMUNE RESPONSE BY THREE CLASSES OF LYMPHOCYTES THROUGH THREE PARALLEL STEPS. A, Genetic 
recombination produces populations of cells with a wide variety of antigen specificities provided by cell-surface immunoglobulins (Ig) or T-cell 
receptors (TCR). B, The binding of specific antigens (Ag) to surface immunoglobulins or TCRs selects a subset of the cells for proliferation. MHC, 
major histocompatibility complex. C, Proliferation of clones of selected cells yields many cells specialized to produce antibody (Ab) to soluble 
antigens, secretion of growth factors by helper T cells in response to ingested and degraded antigens, or killing of virus-infected cells identifiable 
by the viral peptides on their surface. The helper and killer T cells use a common set of TCRs and are guided to the appropriate target cells by 
the CD4 and CD8 accessory molecules. See Figs. 27.8 and 46.9 for details on T-lymphocyte activation and selection, respectively. 

process  was  exploited  during  evolution  specifically  
for  the  use  of  the  immune  system.  Immunoglobulins  
of  most  mammals  are  composed  of  four  polypeptide 
chains—two  identical  heavy  chains  and  two  identical 
light  chains—each  encoded  by  different  genes  (Fig. 
28.10). Light chains and heavy chains both contribute to 
the antigen-binding site. Camels and llamas are an excep-
tion; their antibodies consist of a single polypeptide.

Immunoglobulin  genes  exist  in  segments  aligned 
along  a  vertebrate  chromosome.  Several  of  these  gene 
segments  must  be  combined  in  the  proper  order  to  
make a functional antibody gene. Some gene segments 
encode the framework of the antibody protein, which is 
essentially  identical  within  each  antibody  class.  Other 
gene segments, present in many variations, encode the 
part  of  the  polypeptide  chain  that  forms  the  antigen-
binding site.

During maturation of a particular B cell, recombina-
tion  enzymes  (RAG1  and  RAG2)  assemble  immuno-
globulin gene segments into one unique full-length gene 

for a heavy chain and one for a light chain. As a result 
of random gene arrangements, each B cell assembles and 
expresses novel immunoglobulin genes. The process is 
precise  in  that  the  right  number  of  segments  is  always 
chosen to make a heavy chain or a light chain, but it is 
also random in that any one of the variable segments may 
be chosen. The resulting antibody contains two identical 
but  unique  antigen-binding  sites.  The  gene  segments  
can  be  assembled  in  many  different  combinations,  and 
most heavy chains can assemble with most light chains. 
The  diversity  arising  from  the  combinatorial  process  is 
expanded further in two ways. First, the recombination 
process inserts a variable number of nucleotides between 
the gene segments. Second, pre–B cells use enzymes to 
mutate  codons  for  amino  acids  in  the  antigen-binding 
site,  creating  unique  variations  in  the  antigen-binding 
specificity in different cells. In principle, approximately 
3000 different light chains and 60,000 heavy chains can 
combine to produce approximately 100 million different 
antibodies—even without taking mutations into account. 

502 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

A. Germline DNA
5’

V segments

B. Pro–B-cell DNA

5’

V

D segments

J segments C segments

3’

Rearrangement of D and J

DJ

C

3’

Variable

antigen-binding

sites

Constant
region

IgG antibody

C. Pre–B-cell
     DNA
5’

V

Rearrangement of V

DJ

C

3’

Somatic mutations of 
VDJ sequences and
rearrangement of C

V

DJ

C

3’

D. B-cell
     DNA
5’

E. Messenger
     RNA

5’

V DJ C

Gene expression with
alternative splicing
of C domains

3’

FIGURE  28.10  ASSEMBLY  OF  IMMUNOGLOBULIN  GENES  BY  REARRANGEMENT  OF  GENE  SEGMENTS.  A,  Region  of  germline 
DNA with multiple, tandem V, D, J, and C segments for assembling an immunoglobulin (Ig) heavy chain. B, Same region after rearrangement of 
D and J segments in a Pro–B cell. C, After rearrangement of V in a Pre–B cell. D, B cell. E, Immunoglobulin messenger RNA produced by a B 
cell. (Modified from Chiorazzi N, Rai KR, Ferrarini M. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2005;352:804–815.)

Accordingly,  it  is  possible  experimentally  to  find  in  a 
mouse an antibody that is specific for almost any natu-
rally occurring or synthetic chemical.

Infection  by  a  pathogen  results  in  the  selection  of 
antibodies that bind to the pathogen, but not to any of 
the  individual’s  own  molecules.  This  response  comes 
from  activation  and  proliferation  of  preexisting  B  cells 
making antibodies that bind to molecules of the patho-
gen. Activation requires a chance encounter of particular 
B cells with T cells presenting antigenic molecules from 
the pathogen (see later) and stimulates the cell to mature 
into a factory for secreting antibodies. Alternate splicing 
of  messenger  RNA  (mRNA  [see  Fig.  11.6])  selects 
domains required to direct the same antibody to either 
the plasma membrane or the secretory pathway.

Antigen  binding  to  the  surface  immunoglobin  dis-
played  on  a  particular  B  cell  stimulates  that  cell  to  go 
through multiple rounds of cell division, giving rise to a 
clone of cells, all making the same antibody. In an animal, 
this  process  of  clonal  expansion  amplifies  multiple 
clones of B cells. All the clones produce antibodies that 
react with the antigen, but most clones make novel anti-
bodies to that antigen. Therefore, an animal makes many 
different  antibodies  to  the  same  antigen.  By  isolating 
single B cells and expanding their numbers in the labora-
tory,  one  may  obtain  enough  identical  cells  to  make 
useful  amounts  of  the  same  exact  antibody,  called  a 
monoclonal antibody, because it arose from the pro-
liferation of a single cell into a clone of cells.

The  B-cell  response  produces  two  types  of  mature 
cells. Plasma cells are each highly specialized to secrete 
large  amounts  of  one  specific  antibody.  Long-lived 
memory  cells  display  a  specific  antibody  on  their 
surface, ready to mount an amplified response on subse-
quent exposure to the same antigen. This immunologic 
memory explains why exposure to a particular pathogen 
or vaccination against a pathogen results in protection, 
in the form of antibodies, for many years.

Specialized  B  lymphocytes  and  plasma  cells  secrete 
different  antibody  isoforms  or  isotypes.  Formation  of 
immunoglobulins  with  the  various  isotypes  requires 
further recombination events to join the variable region 
containing  the  antigen-binding  site  to  the  isotype  con-
stant  domain.  IgG  isotypes,  produced  in  lymph  nodes 
and spleen, circulate in blood and tissue fluids. IgA iso-
types,  secreted  by  B  cells  in  lymphoid  nodules  of  the 
respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts and by mammary 
glands,  are  taken  up  by  epithelial  cells  and  resecreted 
into  the  lumens  of  these  organs  (transcytosis  [see  Fig. 
22.6]). IgE isotypes bind to receptors on the surface of 
mast cells and basophils (see earlier discussion).

T  lymphocytes  provide  cellular  responses  to  patho-
gens. Cytotoxic T cells kill tumor cells and virus-infected 
cells. Helper T cells stimulate antibody production by B 
cells.  The  specificity  of  these  responses  is  provided  by 
variable  cell  surface  receptors  called  T-cell  receptors 
(see  Fig.  27.8).  A  set  of  segmented  genes  analogous  
to  immunoglobulin  genes  encodes  T-cell  receptors.  In 

 

CHAPTER 28  n  Cells of the Extracellular Matrix and Immune System  

503

contrast to antibodies, T-cell receptors do not bind free 
antigens but rather recognize peptide antigens bound to 
proteins called MHC antigens on the surface of a target 
cell (see Fig. 27.8). These highly variable MHC proteins 
are  responsible  for  the  rejection  of  tissue  grafts  from 
nonidentical individuals.

The  two  types  of  MHC  proteins—class  I  and  class 
II—acquire  their  antigenic  peptides  differently.  All 
somatic cells produce class I MHC proteins. In cells that 
have been infected by a virus, cytoplasmic proteasomes 
degrade  some  viral  proteins  to  peptides  (see  Chapter 
23),  which  ABC  transporters  (TAP1,  TAP2)  move  from 
the cytoplasm (see Fig. 14.9) into the endoplasmic retic-
ulum (ER). In the lumen of the ER, peptides insert into 
the binding site of compatible class I molecules and the 
complex  moves  to  the  plasma  membrane.  In  contrast, 
macrophages and other antigen-presenting cells, such 
as dendritic cells, ingest foreign matter and degrade it 
in  endosomes  and  lysosomes.  Such  peptide  fragments 
bind to class II proteins in endosomes and thence move 
to the cell surface of these antigen-presenting cells.

T  lymphocytes  patrol  the  body,  inspecting  the  sur-
faces of other cells. A chance encounter with a cell dis-
playing  a  peptide-MHC  complex  complementary  to  its 
T-cell receptor stimulates the T cell (see Fig. 27.8). The 
response  is  proliferation  and  expansion  of  a  clone  of 
identical T cells. Accessory membrane proteins CD4 and 
CD8  on  the  T-cell  surface  cooperate  with  T-cell  recep-
tors to direct the two types of T cells to target cells with 
the appropriate MHC proteins. T-cell receptors provide 
antigen  specificity.  Immature  T-cells  express  both  CD4 
and CD8 but lose one of them as they mature into cyto-
toxic (CD8+) or helper (CD4+) T cells.

CD8-positive cytotoxic T cells are specialized to kill 
cells infected with viruses. The presence of virus inside 
is revealed by MHC class I proteins displaying vital pep-
tides on the surface of the infected cell. CD8 binds to a 
constant  region  of  MHC  class  I  proteins  carrying  viral 
peptides. Cytotoxic T cells use three weapons to kill the 
target cell: First, T cells carry a ligand for the Fas receptor 
on  the  target,  which  stimulates  apoptosis  of  the  target 
cell (see Fig. 46.18). Second, activated T cells bind to the 
target cell, forming an immunological synapse (see Fig. 
27.8) into which the T cell secretes perforin, a protein 
that inserts into the plasma membrane of the target cell, 
forming large (10 nm) pores that leak cytoplasmic con-
tents and ultimately lyse the cell. Third, T cells secrete 
toxic  enzymes  into  the  synapse  that  enter  target  cells 
through the plasma membrane pores.

CD4  on  helper  T  cells  binds  a  constant  part  of  the 
MHC class II protein and targets helper T cells to cells 
presenting ingested antigens. The progeny of stimulated 
helper  T  cells  secrete  growth  factors  (lymphokines  or 
interleukins)  in  the  vicinity  of  B  cells  with  the  foreign 
antigen  bound  to  immunoglobulins  on  their  surface. 

Helper T cells are required for B cells to make antibodies 
against  most  antigens.  This  explains  how  HIV  causes 
AIDS.  The  virus  uses  CD4  as  a  receptor  to  infect  and 
eventually  kill  helper  T  cells.  Loss  of  helper  T  cells 
severely  limits  the  capacity  of  B  cells  and  cytotoxic  T 
cells (which also require T-cell help) to mount antibody 
and cellular responses to microorganisms. Infections that 
the immune system normally dispatches with ease then 
become life-threatening.

Genetic  defects  cause  a  wide  variety  of  immuno-
deficiency  diseases.  For  example,  defects  in  Bruton 
tyrosine  kinase  result  in  failure  to  produce  B  cells. 
Remarkably,  humans  who  lack  function  of  the  enzyme 
adenosine deaminase have no B cells or T cells, but are 
otherwise normal. Deficiencies of many specialized lym-
phocyte proteins (cytokine receptors, interleukin recep-
tors, Lck tyrosine kinase, ZAP-70 [zeta-associated protein 
of 70 kD] tyrosine kinase, RAG1 or RAG2, TAP1 or TAP2) 
also lead to immunodeficiencies.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We  thank  Matthew  Rodeheffer  for  suggestions  on  revi-
sions to this chapter.

SELECTED READINGS

Berry R, Rodeheffer MS, Rosen CJ, et al. Adipose tissue residing pro-

genitors. Curr Mol Biol Rep. 2015;1:101-109.

Beutler B. Inferences, questions and possibilities in Toll-like receptor 

signalling. Nature. 2004;430:257-263.

Bianco P. “Mesenchymal” stem cells. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2014;30:

677-704.

Boes  M,  Ploegh  HL.  Translating  cell  biology  in  vitro  to  immunity  in 

vivo. Nature. 2004;430:264-271.

Busiello  RA,  Savarese  S,  Lombardi  A.  Mitochondrial  uncoupling  pro-

teins and energy metabolism. Front Physiol. 2015;6:36.

Call ME, Wucherpfennig KW. The T cell receptor: Critical role of the 
membrane  environment  in  receptor  assembly  and  function.  Annu 
Rev Immunol. 2005;23:101-125.

Chakraborty AK, Weiss A. Insights into the initiation of TCR signaling. 

Nat Immunol. 2014;15:798-807.

Eaves CJ. Hematopoietic stem cells: concepts, definitions, and the new 

reality. Blood. 2015;125:2605-2613.

Gay NJ, Symmons MF, Gangloff M, Bryant CE. Assembly and localiza-
tion of Toll-like receptor signalling complexes. Nat Rev Immunol. 
2014;14:546-558.

Grinnell F. Fibroblast biology in three-dimensional collagen matrices. 

Trends Cell Biol. 2003;13:264-269.

Hargreaves  DC,  Medzhitov  R.  Innate  sensors  of  microbial  infection.  

J Clin Immunol. 2005;25:503-510.

Hartwig J, Italiano J Jr. The birth of the platelet. J Thromb Haemost. 

2003;1:1580-1586.

Ho MS, Medcalf RL, Livesey SA, et al. The dynamics of adult haemato-
poiesis in the bone and bone marrow environment. Br J Haematol. 
2015;170:472-486.

Howell WM. HLA and disease: guilt by association. Int J Immunogenet. 

2014;41:1-12.

Hubbi  ME,  Semenza  GL.  Regulation  of  cell  proliferation  by  hypoxia-
inducible factors. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2015;309:C775-C782.

504 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

Lacy  P,  Rosenberg  HF,  Walsh  GM.  Eosinophil  overview:  structure, 
biological  properties,  and  key  functions.  Methods  Mol  Biol.  2014;
1178:1-12.

Mitchell  WB,  Bussel  JB.  Thrombopoietin  receptor  agonists:  a  critical 

review. Semin Hematol. 2015;52:46-52.

Schmetzer O, Valentin P, Church MK, Maurer M, Siebenhaar F. Murine 
and  human  mast  cell  progenitors.  Eur  J  Pharmacol.  2016;778:
2-10.

Schroder K, Tschopp J. The inflammasomes. Cell. 2010;140:821-832.
Segal AW. How neutrophils kill microbes. Annu Rev Immunol. 2005;

Morrison SJ, Scadden DT. The bone marrow niche for haematopoietic 

23:197-223.

stem cells. Nature. 2014;505:327-334.

Trombetta  ES,  Mellman  I.  Cell  biology  of  antigen  processing  in  vitro 

Murray  PJ,  Wynn  TA.  Protective  and  pathogenic  functions  of  macro-

and in vivo. Annu Rev Immunol. 2005;23:975-1028.

phage subsets. Nat Rev Immunol. 2011;11:723-737.

Varol  C,  Mildner  A,  Jung  S.  Macrophages:  development  and  tissue 

Perez-Lopez A, Behnsen J, Nuccio SP, et al. Mucosal immunity to patho-

specialization. Annu Rev Immunol. 2015;33:643-675.

genic intestinal bacteria. Nat Rev Immunol. 2016;16:135-148.

Waggoner  SN,  Reighard  SD,  Gyurova  IE,  et al.  Roles  of  natural  killer 

Raje N, Dinakar C. Overview of Immunodeficiency Disorders. Immunol 

cells in antiviral immunity. Curr Opin Virol. 2015;16:15-23.

Allergy Clin North Am. 2015;35:599-623.

Wynn TA, Chawla A, Pollard JW. Macrophage biology in development, 

Rockey  DC,  Bell  PD,  Hill  JA.  Fibrosis—a  common  pathway  to  organ 

homeostasis and disease. Nature. 2013;496:445-455.

injury and failure. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:1138-1149.

Rosen  ED,  Spiegelman  BM.  What  we  talk  about  when  we  talk  about 

fat. Cell. 2014;156:20-44.

Rot A, von Adrian UH. Chemokines in innate and adaptive host defense: 
Basic chemokinese grammar for immune cells. Annu Rev Immunol. 
2004;22:891-928.

Yang D, Biragyn A, Hoover DM, et al. Multiple roles of antimicrobial 
defensins, cathelicidins, and eosinophil-derived neurotoxin in host 
defense. Annu Rev Immunol. 2004;22:181-215.

C H A P T E R 

29 

Extracellular Matrix Molecules

This  chapter  introduces  the  macromolecules  of  the 

extracellular matrix. Although the extracellular matrix is 
composed  of  only  five  classes  of  macromolecules—
collagens, elastin, proteoglycans, hyaluronan, and adhe-
sive  glycoproteins—it  can  take  on  a  rich  variety  of 
different forms with vastly different mechanical proper-
ties. This is possible for two reasons. First, each of these 
classes of macromolecule comes in a number of variants 
(encoded by different genes or produced by alternative 
splicing),  each  with  distinctive  properties.  Second,  the 
cells that constitute the extracellular matrix secrete dif-
ferent proportions of these isoforms in various geometri-
cal arrangements. As a result, the extracellular matrix in 
different  tissues  is  adapted  to  particular  functional 
requirements,  which  vary  widely  in  tendons,  blood 
vessel  walls,  cartilage,  bone,  the  vitreous  body  of  the 
eye,  and  subcutaneous  fat.  Beyond  providing mechani-
cal support, the extracellular matrix also strongly influ-
ences  embryonic  development,  provides  pathways  for 
cellular migration, provides essential survival signals, and 
sequesters important growth factors.

Collagen
The  collagen  family  is  the  most  abundant  and  versatile 
classes of proteins in the human body. Collagens form a 
wide  range  of  different  structures  with  remarkable 
mechanical  properties.  Weight  for  weight,  fibrous  
collagens  are  as  strong  as  steel.  Their  name,  which  
comes  from  the  Greek  words  for  “glue”  and  “produc-
ing,”  reflects  the  long-known  adhesive  properties  of 
denatured collagen extracted from animal tissues.

The  defining  feature  of  collagens  is  a  rod-shaped 
domain composed of a triple helix of polypeptides (Fig. 
29.1). Each polypeptide folds into a left-handed polypro-
line II helix that repeats every third residue with the side 
chains  on  the  outside.  Three  of  these  helices  associate 
to  form  a  triple  helix  that  may  be  up  to  420 nm  long. 

The triple helical domains have a repeating amino acid 
sequence: glycine-X-Y, where X is most often proline and 
Y is most often hydroxyproline. The small glycine resi-
dues allow tight contact between the polypeptides in the 
core  of  the  triple  helix.  Larger  residues,  even  alanine, 
interfere  with  packing.  Poly-L-proline  has  a  strong  ten-
dency to form a left-handed helix like individual collagen 
chains but does not form a triple helix, owing to steric 
interference. The triple helix is most stable if all X resi-
dues are proline and all Y residues are hydroxyproline, 

A

B

C

Chain B

Y

X

G

G

Y

G
G

G

G

X

Chain A

X

Chain C

FIGURE  29.1  COLLAGEN  TRIPLE  HELIX.  A,  End-on  view  of 
three  left-handed  polyproline  type  II  helices  with  glycines  (G)  in  the 
core. B, Longitudinal view of the strands of a triple helix. C, Space-
filling model of the structure of a short collagen triple helix. (A, Modified 
from van der Rest M, Garrone A. Collagen family of proteins. FASEB 
J. 1991;5:2814–2823. C, See Protein Data Bank [PDB; www.rcsb.org] 
file 1BKV.)

 505

506 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

but other residues at some of these positions are essen-
tial for collagen to assemble higher-order structures.

Humans have approximately 100 genes with collagen 
triple  repeats,  and  more  than  20  specialized  collagen 
proteins  have  been  characterized  (Fig.  29.2  and  
Appendix  29.1).  Most  are  components  of  the  extracel-
lular  matrix,  but  a  few  are  transmembrane  proteins  
(see  Fig.  31.8C).  Collagen  proteins  were  named  with 
Roman  numerals  in  the  order  of  their  discovery.  The 
polypeptides  are  called  α-chains  and  numbered  sepa-
rately.  Appendix  29.1  groups  collagens  according  to 
function.

The  size  and  shape  of  collagens  vary  according  to 
function. Some collagens are homotrimers of three iden-
tical α-chains. Others are heterotrimers of two or three 

different α-chains. Some chains (eg, [α1(II)]) are used in 
more than one type of collagen.

Other  proteins,  including  the  extracellular  enzyme 
acetylcholine  esterase  (see  Fig.  17.9)  and  some  cell 
surface receptors, have similar triple helical domains but 
are not classified as collagens. To be a collagen, a protein 
must also form fibrils or other assemblies in the extracel-
lular matrix. Nematodes, which lack connective tissue, 
seem  to  have  lost  the  genes  for  fibrillar  collagens  but 
have elaborated a family of 160 genes for collagens that 
form their cuticle.

Collagen  biochemistry  is  challenging,  because  many 
tissue  collagens  are  insoluble,  owing  to  covalent  cross-
linking  between  proteins.  Historic  purification  proto-
liberate 
cols  began  with  proteolytic  digestion  to 

MOLECULES

AGGREGATES

AGGREGATE MICROGRAPHS

A. Fibrillar collagens

N

C

Types I, II, III, V, and XI

B. Sheet-forming collagens

7S

NC1

N

Type IV

C

Overlaps

Gaps

7S

NC1

Tetramer ("spider")

NC1

(NC1)2

7S

C
N
Type X(?)

N
C
Type VIII

C. Anchoring/linking collagens

Dimer

Tetramer

N
Type VI

C

Beaded filament

Dimer

NC1

NC1

NC1

N

Type VII

C

Anchoring 
fibril (Af)

NC4

N

GAG
Type IX

C

N

Type XII and XIV

C

NC4

Type IX

Type II
collagen
fibril

100 nm

AF

BL

FIGURE 29.2  COMPARISON OF MAJOR COLLAGEN FAMILIES. Scale drawings and micrographs of collagen molecules and their assem-
bly into higher-order structures. AF, anchoring fibrils; BL, basal lamina; NC1, noncollagenous domain 1; NC4, noncollagenous domain 4; 7S, a 
domain of type IV collagen. (Modified from van der Rest M, Garrone R. Collagen family of proteins. FASEB J. 1991;5:2814–2823.)

 

CHAPTER 29  n  Extracellular Matrix Molecules 

507

protease-resistant  triple  helical  fragments.  Now  intact 
collagens can be isolated after secretion by cells in tissue 
culture.

Fibrillar Collagens
Triple  helical  rod-shaped  collagen  molecules  about 
300 nm  long  self-associate  to  form  strong  but  flexible 
banded fibrils (Fig. 29.2) that reinforce all the tissues of 
the body. Collagen fibrils form a variety of higher-order 
structures. Loose connective tissue (see Fig. 32.1A) has 
an open network of individual fibrils or small bundles of 
fibrils that support the cells. In many tissues, the fibrils 
of type I and associated collagens aggregate to form the 
so-called collagen fibers that are visible by light micros-
copy (Fig. 29.3A). In extreme cases, such as in tendons, 
the  extracellular  matrix  consists  almost  exclusively  of 
tightly  packed,  parallel  bundles  of  collagen  fibers  (see 
Fig. 32.1B). In bone, type I collagen fibrils form regular 
layers reinforced by calcium phosphate crystals (see Fig. 
32.4).  Layers  of  orthogonal  collagen  fibers  make  the 
transparent cornea through which one sees (Fig. 29.3C). 
In cartilage and the vitreous body of the eye, type II col-
lagen fibrils trap glycosaminoglycans and proteoglycans, 
which retain enough water for the matrix to resist com-
pression  (see  Fig.  32.3)  and,  in  the  case  of  the  eye,  to 
provide an optically clear path for light.

Fibrillar collagens are widespread in nature and have 
been  highly  conserved  during  evolution,  so  the  homo-
logs from sponges to vertebrates are similar. Each fibril-
lar collagen can form homopolymers in vitro; but in vivo, 
most form heteropolymers with at least one other type 
of  fibrillar  collagen  (Appendix  29.1).  This  mix  of  the 
fibrillar collagen subunits is one factor that regulates the 
size of collagen fibers. Proteoglycans also participate in 
regulating collagen assembly (Appendix 29.2).

Biosynthesis and Assembly of Fibrillar Collagens
The biosynthesis of collagen is noteworthy for the exten-
sive number of processing steps required to prepare the 

protein  for  assembly  in  the  extracellular  matrix  (Fig. 
29.4).  Fibroblasts  synthesize  type  I  collagen.  Collagen 
follows  the  exocytic  pathway  used  by  other  secreted 
proteins (see Chapter 21), but along the way it undergoes 
several rounds of precise proteolytic cleavage, glycosyl-
ation, catalyzed folding, and chemical crosslinking. The 
final product is a smooth fibril with staggered molecules 
crosslinked  to  their  neighbors.  Other  fibrillar  collagens 
are likely to be produced by similar mechanisms.

Large  genes  with  42  exons  encode  the  α-chains  of 
type I collagen. All the exons for the triple helical domain 
were derived during evolution by duplication and diver-
gence  from  a  primordial  exon  of  54  base  pairs  (bp) 
coding  for  18  amino  acids  or  six  turns  of  polyproline 
helix. Approximately half of the exons consist of 54 bp; 
a few with 45 bp have lost one Gly-X-Y; and the rest are 
108 (2 × 54) or 162 (3 × 54) bp. Distinctive exons encode 
the N- and C-terminal globular domains.

The initial transcript, referred to as preprocollagen, 
translocates  into  the  lumen  of  the  rough  endoplasmic 
reticulum,  where  intracellular  processing  begins  (Fig. 
29.4).  First,  removal  of  the  N-terminal  signal  sequence 
yields procollagen with unfolded α-chains with N- and 
C-terminal  nonhelical  propeptides.  Second,  enzymes 
hydroxylate  most  prolines  and  some  lysines  in  the 
Y-position. Third, enzymes add sugars (gal-glu or gal) to 
the  delta-carbon  of  some  lysines,  by  a  mechanism  dis-
tinct  from  the  typical  glycosylation  of  asparagine  or 
serine (Fig. 3.26).

A novel mechanism initiates the folding of collagen in 
the  endoplasmic  reticulum:  the  C-terminal  propep-
tides  of  three α-chains  form  a  globular  structure  stabi-
lized  by  cysteines  linked  with  disulfide  bonds.  The 
enzyme protein disulfide isomerase catalyzes the for-
mation  of  these  disulfides.  Formation  of  this  globular 
domain  has  three  important  consequences.  First,  it 
ensures the correct selection of α-chains (two α1-chains 
and one α2-chain in the case of type I collagen). Second, 
it  aligns  the  three  polypeptides  with  their  C-terminal 

A

B

C

Fibroblast

Collagen
  longitudinal
  sections

Collagen
  cross
  sections

Elastic fiber

FIGURE  29.3  MICROGRAPHS OF COLLAGEN FIBRILS IN CONNECTIVE TISSUES. A, Collagen fibrils  (pink) in the dense connective 
tissue of the dermis. B, Electron micrograph of a thin section of a fibroblast, collagen fibrils, and elastic fibers. C, Orthogonal layers of collagen 
fibrils  in  the  cornea  of  the  eye.  (A,  Courtesy  D.W.  Fawcett,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Boston,  MA.  B,  Courtesy  J.  Rosenbloom,  University  of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia. C, Courtesy E.D. Hay, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.)

508 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

A

Glc–Gal

Gal

Chain selection
and registration

N
Glc–Gal

Gal

Folding

Folded procollagen

B

C

Proteolytic
trimming

Collagen
molecule
assembly

Crosslinking

FIGURE  29.4  BIOSYNTHESIS  AND  ASSEMBLY  OF  FIBRILLAR  COLLAGEN  ILLUSTRATING  DETAILS  COVERED  IN  THE  TEXT. 
A, Translation of α-chains, chain registration, and folding. B, Secretion, assembly, and crosslinking. (Modified from Prokop DJ. Mutations in col-
lagen genes as a cause of connective tissue diseases. N Engl J Med. 1992;326:540–546. Copyright 1992 Massachusetts Medical Society. All 
rights reserved.)

Gly-X-Y repeats in register, ensuring that the triple helix 
forms with all three chains in phase. Third, the globular 
propeptides prevent assembly of procollagen into insol-
uble fibrils during transit through the secretory pathway. 
Given  their  repeating  Gly-X-Y  structure,  separated  col-
lagen  chains  without  propeptides  associate  indiscrimi-
nately and out of register with other chains. For example, 
gelatin  is  simply  a  mixture  of  collagen  chains  without 
propeptides.  Boiling  dissociates  the  chains  from  each 
other. When cooled, the chains randomly associate out 
of  register  at  random  positions  along  their  lengths, 
forming a branching network that solidifies into the gel 
that is used in food preparation.

Following  selection  and  registration  of  the  three 
α-chains, the helical rod domains zip together, beginning 
at  the  C-terminus.  Correct  folding  of  the  triple  helix 
requires all-trans peptide bonds. Because proline forms 
cis and trans peptide bonds randomly, the slow isomeri-
zation of cis prolyl-peptide bonds to trans limits the rate 
of  triple  helix  folding  in  vitro.  The  enzyme  prolyl-
peptide  isomerase  catalyzes  the  interconversion  of 
these prolyl-peptide bonds and speeds up folding of the 
triple helix in vivo. The resulting rod-shaped, triple-helix 
glycoprotein is called procollagen.

Procollagen  is  too  large  (>300 nm  long)  to  fit  into 
conventional  COPII  coated  vesicles  that  bud  from  the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) with cargo destined for the 
Golgi apparatus (see Fig. 21.3), so accessory proteins are 
required.  These  transmembrane  proteins  interact  with 
both  procollagen  inside  the  ER  and  the  forming  COPII 

coat  on  the  cytoplasmic  side  of  the  membrane.  They 
allow the COPII vesicle to grow large enough to accom-
modate protocollagen. The COPII vesicles deliver proto-
collagen to the Golgi apparatus. Humans with mutations 
in the gene for the COPII protein Sec23A have defects 
in collagen secretion and bone formation.

Less is known about the path of procollagen through 
the  Golgi  apparatus  and  vesicles  that  transport  proto-
collagen to the cell surface, where it is secreted. Some 
cells have specialized collagen assembly sites (Fig. 29.4). 
Like  a  spider  trailing  its  silk  web  behind,  fibroblasts  
help  determine  the  arrangement  of  collagen  fibrils  as 
they  move  through  tissues  (Fig.  29.3C).  Outside  the  
cell,  matrix  metalloproteinases  (Fig.  29.19)  cleave  the 
propeptides  from  the  triple  helical  domain,  forming  
the  mature  collagen  molecule 
(formerly  called 
tropocollagen).

Relieved  of  its  inhibitory  propeptides,  collagen  self-
assembles  into  fibrils  by  a  classical  entropy-driven 
process (Fig. 29.5). Weak, noncovalent bonds between 
collagen molecules specify the self-assembly of fibrils but 
provide  little  tensile  strength.  Adjacent  collagen  mole-
cules are staggered by 67 nm, so a 35-nm gap is required 
between the ends of the collagen molecules (5 staggers 
at 67 nm = 335 nm = 1 molecular length of 300 nm + a 
35-nm gap). The size of the fibrils is influenced by incor-
poration of minor fibrillar collagens (eg, collagen V) and 
interactions  of  FACIT  (fibril-associated  collagens  with 
interrupted  triple  helices)  collagens  and  other  matrix 
molecules with their surfaces.

 

CHAPTER 29  n  Extracellular Matrix Molecules 

509

The  great  tensile  strength  of  mature  collagen  fibrils 
comes from covalent crosslinking between the inex-
tensible  triple  helices.  For  most  fibrillar  collagens,  the 
enzyme lysyl oxidase catalyzes the formation of cova-
lent  bonds  between  the  ends  of  collagen  molecules 
(Figs. 29.4 and 29.6). The enzyme oxidizes the ε amino 
groups  of  selected  lysines  and  hydroxylysines  to  alde-
hydes. These aldehydes react spontaneously with nearby 
lysine and hydroxylysine side chains to form a variety of 
covalent crosslinks between two or three polypeptides. 
Disulfide bonds, rather than modified lysine side chains, 
crosslink type III collagen fibrils.

Point mutations or deletions in collagen genes or lack 
of function of one of the enzymes that processes colla-
gen  (lysyl  hydroxylase,  lysyl  oxidase,  or  procollagen  
proteases)  can  each  cause  defective  collagen  fibrils 
(Appendix  29.1).  These  defects  cause  a  number  of 
deforming  and  even  lethal  human  diseases:  brittle  
bones (osteogenesis imperfecta), fragile cartilage (several  
forms of dwarfism), and weak connective tissue (Ehlers-
Danlos syndrome). Chapter 32 discusses these diseases 
in more detail.

Sheet-Forming Collagens
Collagens  in  this  second  group  polymerize  into  sheets 
rather  than  fibrils  (Fig.  29.2).  These  sheets  surround 

organs,  epithelia,  or  even  whole  animals.  Six  different 
human genes for type IV collagen encode proteins that 
form  net-like  polymers  that  assemble  into  the  basal 
lamina beneath epithelia (Fig. 29.7) and around muscle 
and nerve cells. The concluding section of this chapter 
provides  details  about  basal  lamina  structure,  function, 
and diseases. Hexagonal nets of type VIII collagen form 
a  special  basement  membrane  (Descemet  membrane) 
under the endothelium of the cornea. Related collagens 
form the cuticle of earthworms and the organic skeleton 
of sponges.

Linking Collagens
Specialized  connecting  and  anchoring  collagens  (also 
called  FACIT)  link  fibrillar  and  sheet-forming  collagens 

EPIDERMAL CELL

IFs

Hemidesmosomes

Basal
lamina

Anchoring

fibrils

64 nm

64 nm

64 nm

FIGURE  29.5  STRUCTURE  OF  COLLAGEN  FIBRILS.  Electron 
micrographs and drawing of molecular packing. (Micrographs courtesy 
Alan Hodges, Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA.)

335 nm

Gold-labeled
antibody to
type VII
collagen

DERMIS

FIGURE 29.7  ANCHORING FIBRILS OF TYPE VII COLLAGEN. 
Electron  micrograph  of  a  thin  section  of  human  skin  reacted  with  a 
gold-labeled antibody to the C-terminal domain of type VII collagen. 
Top to bottom, Basal epithelial cell with keratin intermediate filaments 
(IFs)  attached  to  hemidesmosomes,  which  link  to  the  basal  lamina. 
Short  fibrils  of  type  VII  collagen  link  the  basal  lamina  to  plaques  in  
the  dermis.  Both  ends  of  these  bipolar  fibrils  (Fig.  29.2)  are  labeled  
with  gold.  Bar  is  0.1 µm.  (Courtesy  D.R.  Keene,  Portland  Shriners 
Hospital, OR.)

Collagen chain 1

Lysine Hydroxylysine

OH

NH2

NH2

NH2

C

O

OH

H

NH

OH

Oxidation by
lysyl oxidase

H

O

C

OH

Condensation

Hydroxylysine
Collagen chain 2

Hydroxypyridinium

crosslink

C
C

C

N

OH

C
C

OH

FIGURE  29.6  COVALENT  CROSSLINKING  OF  COLLAGEN  MOLECULES.  After  lysyl  oxidase  oxidizes  hydroxylysine  side  chains,  the 
aldehydes condense with each other and a lysine to form two- and three-membered (shown) crosslinks between adjacent collagen molecules. 

510 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

to  other  structures  (Fig.  29.2).  For  example,  type  VII 
collagen forms anchoring fibrils that link of the type 
IV collagen in the basal lamina of stratified epithelia to 
plaques in the underlying connective tissue (Fig. 29.7). 
The type VII collagen homotrimer has an exceptionally 
long triple-helix domain with nonhelical domains at the 
N-terminus of each chain. The tails of type VII molecules 
overlap to form antiparallel dimers that associate laterally 
to form anchoring fibrils. Mutations in type VII collagen 
cause  both  dominant  and  recessive  forms  of  a  severe 
blistering  disease,  dystrophic  epidermolysis  bullosa. 
In  heterozygotes,  mutated  chains  interfere  with  the 
assembly of anchoring fibrils by normal type VII collagen 
chains.  Without  anchoring  fibrils,  the  basal  lamina 
adheres  weakly  to  the  connective  tissue  matrix.  Even 
mild physical trauma to the skin causes the epithelium 
to  pull  away  from  the  connective  tissue,  forming  a 
blister. Mutations in intermediate filaments cause similar 
defects (see Fig. 35.6).

Type  IX  collagen  heterotrimers  do  not  polymerize. 
Instead,  they  associate  laterally  with  type  II  collagen 
fibrils with an N-terminal helical segment and a glycos-
aminoglycan on a serine projecting from the surface (Fig. 
29.2). In the vitreous body of the eye, these polysaccha-
rides fill most of the extracellular space.

Elastic Fibers
Rubber-like  elastic  fibers  are  found  throughout  the  
body  and  are  prominent  in  the  connective  tissue  of  
skin, the walls of arteries (Fig. 29.8), and the lung. They 
are entropic springs that recoil passively after tissues are 
stretched. For example, each time the heart beats, pres-
surized blood flows into and stretches the large arteries. 
Energy stored in elastic fibers pushes blood through the 
circulation between heartbeats.

Elastic  fibers  are  composite  materials;  a  network  of 
fibrillin  microfibrils  is  embedded  in  an  amorphous 
core of crosslinked elastin, which makes up 90% of the 
organic mass (Fig. 29.9). Fibroblasts produce both com-
ponents. Loose bundles of microfibrils initiate assembly. 
A third protein, called fibulin, is required for elastin sub-
units to assemble between the microfibrils.

A

B

Endothelium

Internal elastic lamina

Smooth muscle

FIGURE  29.8  ELASTIC  FIBERS  IN  THE  WALL  OF  A  SMALL 
ARTERY. A, Light micrograph of a cross section stained to bring out 
the  internal  elastic  lamina  (box)  and  wavy  elastic  fibers  among  the 
muscle  cells.  The  boxed  area  includes  the  internal  elastic  lamina 
between  the  endothelial  cells  lining  the  lumen  and  the  underlying 
smooth  muscle  cells.  B,  Electron  micrograph  of  a  longitudinal  thin 
section illustrating the internal elastic lamina. In such standard prepara-
tions,  elastic  fibers  stain  poorly  and  appear  amorphous  except  for 
occasional  10-nm  microfibrils  on  the  surface.  (Courtesy  Don  W. 
Fawcett, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.)

A

B

FIGURE 29.9  ELECTRON MICROGRAPHS OF DEVELOPING ELASTIC FIBERS FROM A FETAL CALF. A, Longitudinal section. B, Cross 
section. Fibrillin microfibrils form a scaffolding for elastin, which stains darkly in this preparation. (Courtesy J. Rosenbloom, University of Pennsyl-
vania, Philadelphia.)

 

CHAPTER 29  n  Extracellular Matrix Molecules 

511

Fibrillin is the primordial component of elastic fibers, 
having  arisen  in  Cnidarians  (see  Fig.  2.8).  It  is  a  long, 
floppy  protein  consisting  of  a  tandem  array  of  domains 
some of which are glycosylated (Fig. 29.10). Humans have 
three fibrillin genes. Fibrillin-1 is the main component of 
10-nm  microfibrils,  along  with  several  glycoproteins. 
Microfibrils  are  composed  of  parallel  fibrillin  molecules 
that  interact  head  to  tail,  reinforced  by  disulfide  bonds 
made  by  the  first  hybrid  domains.  Parts  of  neighboring 
subunits overlap in globular beads connected by flexible 
arrays of domains. Microfibrils are about 100 times stiffer 
than elastin, and they stretch by rearrangement of mole-
cules  and  domains  rather  than  unfolding.  Fibrillins  and 
related proteins called latent-TGFβ (transforming growth 
factor-β)-binding  proteins,  act  as  repositories  for  TGFβ 
family proteins in connective tissues.

Elastin subunits are a family of closely related 60-kD 
proteins  called  tropoelastins,  the  products  of  alterna-
tive splicing from a single elastin gene. Long sequences 
rich  in  hydrophobic  residues  are  interrupted  by  short 
sequences with pairs of lysines separated by two or three 
small amino acids (Fig. 29.11). Lysine-rich sequences are 

thought to form α-helices with pairs of lysines adjacent 
on the surface.

As  tropoelastin  assembles  on  the  surface  of  elastic 
fibers,  lysyl  oxidase  oxidizes  paired  lysines  of  tropo-
elastin  to  aldehydes.  Oxidized  lysines  condense  into  a  
desmosine  ring  that  covalently  crosslinks  tropoelastin 
molecules to each other (Fig. 29.11). The four-way cross-
links,  involving  pairs  of  lysines  from  two  tropoelastin 
molecules, are unique to elastin. The same enzyme cata-
lyzes the crosslinking of collagen, but it forms only two- 
and three-way crosslinks.

Elastic fibers are similar to rubber except that elastic 
fibers  require  water  as  a  lubricant.  Hydrophobic  seg-
ments between the crosslinks are thought to form exten-
sible random coils that extend and become aligned when 
an  elastic  fiber  is  stretched  (Fig.  29.11C).  A  difference  
in  entropy  of  the  polypeptide  in  the  contracted  and 
stretched  states  is  thought  to  be  the  physical  basis  
for  the  elasticity  (see  the  Gibbs-Helmhotz  equation  in 
Chapter  4).  Stretched  fibers  store  energy,  owing  to 
ordering (low entropy) of the polypeptide chains. Fibers 
shorten  when  the  resistance  is  reduced,  because  the 

N

TB 8 cysteine

EGF-like

Calcium-binding 
EGF-like

Hybrid domains

Proline-rich

FIGURE 29.10  DOMAIN ORGANIZATION OF HUMAN FIBRILLIN-1. A tandem array of independently folded domains, including 47 epi-
dermal growth factor–like (EGF-like) domains, forms a linear molecule. (Modified from Rosenbloom J, Abrams WR, Mecham R. Extracellular matrix 
4: the elastic fiber. FASEB J. 1993;7:1208–1218.)

C

A

K
K

K

K

K

K

K

KK
K K

K
K

C

K
K K

K

K

K

K K

K

B. Crosslinking reactions

NH2

OHC

CH2
CHO
CHO

CH2

CH2 NH2

CHO

C

NH

OHC

C

CH2
CH2

N

CH2

CH

N
C
Desmosine

C

C

C
C

CH2

HN
LNL

CH2

Contracted,
low energy,
high entropy

Stretched,
high energy,
low entropy

FIGURE  29.11  ELASTIN  POLYPEPTIDES  AND  CROSSLINKING  REACTIONS.  A,  Lysine-rich  helical  domains  separate  random  chains 
rich in hydrophobic residues. B–C, Lysyl oxidase converts lysine amino groups to aldehydes, which react with other lysines to form simple linear 
crosslinks or six-membered rings linking two polypeptides. If the peptide bonds are hydrolyzed experimentally (not shown here), the linear crosslink 
is released as leucyl-norleucine (LNL) and the six-membered crosslink is released as the amino acid desmosine. C, Comparison of the contracted 
state with low-energy disordered chains having high entropy with the stretched state with high-energy ordered chains having low entropy. Elastin 
polypeptides  form  a  continuous,  covalently  bonded  network.  Application  of  force  stretches  the  chains  between  the  crosslinks.  This  is  a  low-
entropy, high-energy state. Reduced force allows the chains to contract into a more disordered, higher-entropy state with lower energy. (Modified 
from Rosenbloom J, Abrams WR, Mecham R. Extracellular matrix 4: the elastic fiber. FASEB J. 1993;7:1208–1218.)

512 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

polypeptide  chains  return  to  their  disordered,  lower-
energy, higher-entropy state.

Only  embryonic  and  juvenile  fibroblasts  synthesize 
elastic fibers, which turn over slowly, if at all, in adults. 
Consequently,  adults  must  make  do  with  the  elastic 
fibers that are formed during adolescence. Fortunately, 
these fibers are amazingly resilient. Arterial elastic fibers 
withstand more than 2.5 billion cycles of stretching and 
recoil  during  a  human  life.  Many  tissues  become  less 
elastic with age, particularly the skin, which is subjected 
to  damage  from  ultraviolet  irradiation.  Compare,  for 
example,  how  readily  the  skin  of  a  baby  recoils  from 
stretching  compared  with  that  of  an  aged  person.  The 
loss of elastic fibers in skin is responsible for wrinkles. 
Dominant mutations in the elastin gene cause a human 
disease  called  cutis  laxa.  The  skin  and  other  tissues  of 
patients with this disease lack resilience.

Collagens are found across the phylogenetic tree, but 
only vertebrates are known to produce elastin. Inverte-
brates evolved two completely different elastic proteins. 
Mollusks  have  elastic  fibers  composed  of  the  protein 
abductin.  Insects  use  another  protein,  called  resilin,  to 
make elastic fibers.

Dominant  mutations  in  the  fibrillin-1  gene  cause 
Marfan syndrome and illustrate the physiological func-
tions  of  elastic  fibers.  Most  of  the  thousand  known 
fibrillin-1 mutations make the protein unstable and sus-
ceptible to proteolysis. Other point mutations interfere 
with folding. All patients are heterozygotes.

Elastic  fibers  of  patients  with  Marfan  syndrome  are 
poorly formed, accounting for most of the pathological 
changes.  Most  dangerously,  weakness  of  elastic  fibers  
in the aorta leads to an enlargement of the vessel, called 
an aneurysm, which is prone to rupture, with fatal con-
sequences.  Prophylactic  replacement  of  the  aorta  with  
a  synthetic  graft  and  medical  treatment  with  drugs  
that  block  β-adrenergic  receptors  (see  Fig.  27.3)  allow 
patients  a  nearly  normal  life  span.  In  some  patients,  a 
floppy  mitral  valve  in  the  heart  causes  reflux  of  blood 
from  the  left  ventricle  back  into  the  left  atrium.  Weak 
elastic  fibers  that  suspend  the  lens  of  the  eye  result  in 
dislocation of the lens and impaired vision. Weak elastic 
fibers result in lax joints and curvature of the spine. Most 
affected patients are tall, with long limbs and fingers, but 
the connection of these features to fibrillin is not known. 
The manifestations of the disease are quite variable, even 
within one family, for reasons that are not understood. 
Mutations  in  the  fibrillin-2  gene  cause  congenital  con-
tractural arachnodactyly, a disease characterized by joint 
stiffness.

Glycosaminoglycans and Proteoglycans
Glycosaminoglycans  (GAGs,  formerly  called  mucopoly-
saccharides) are long polysaccharides made up of repeat-
ing  disaccharide  units,  usually  a  hexuronic  acid  and  a 

hexosamine (Fig. 29.12). With one important exception—
hyaluronan—GAGs  are  synthesized  as  covalent,  post-
translational  modifications  of  a  large  family  of  proteins 
called  proteoglycans.  These  proteins  vary  in  structure 
and  function,  but  their  associated  GAGs  confer  some 
common features.

All  vertebrate  cells  synthesize  proteoglycans.  Most  
are secreted into the extracellular matrix, where they are 
major constituents of cartilage, loose connective tissue, 
and  basement  membranes.  Mast  cells  package  the  pro-
teoglycan serglycin, along with other molecules in secre-
tory granules. A few proteoglycans, including syndecan 
and CD44, are transmembrane proteins with their GAGs 
exposed on the cell surface.

Of  the  known  GAGs,  hyaluronan  (formerly  called 
hyaluronic  acid)  is  exceptional  in  two  regards.  First, 
enzymes  on  the  cell  surface  synthesize  the  alternating 
polymer of [D-glucuronic acid β (1 → 3) D-N-acetyl glu-
cosamine β (1 → 4)]n (Fig. 29.12). Other GAGs are syn-
thesized  as  posttranslational  modifications  of  a  core 
protein.  Second,  hyaluronan  is  not  modified  postsyn-
thetically,  as  are  all  other  GAGs.  The  linear  polymer, 
often  exceeding  20,000  disaccharide  repeats  (a  length 
>20 µm) is released into the extracellular space.

In  contrast  to  proteins,  nucleic  acids,  and  even 
N-linked  oligosaccharides,  which  are  precisely  deter-
mined  macromolecular  structures,  the  GAG  chains  of 
proteoglycans  appear  to  vary  both  in  length  and  the 
sequence of the sugar groups. The four-step synthesis of 
GAGs (Fig. 29.12) explains this variability:
1.  Ribosomes  associated  with  ER  synthesize  the  core 

protein, which enters the secretory pathway.

2.  In compartments between the ER and the trans-Golgi 
apparatus,  glycosyltransferases  initiate  GAG  syn-
thesis  by  adding  one  of  three  different,  short,  link 
oligosaccharides  to  serine  or  asparagine  residues 
of  the  core  proteins  (Fig.  29.12A–B).  The  structural 
clues  identifying  these  sites  are  not  understood,  as 
they  do  not  have  a  common  amino  acid  sequence 
motif.  A  tetrasaccharide  attached  to  serine  anchors 
dermatan  sulfate,  chondroitin  sulfate,  and  heparan 
sulfate.  Branched  oligosaccharides  anchor  keratan 
sulfate to serine or asparagine.

3.  In the trans-Golgi network, other glycosyltransferases 
elongate  the  polysaccharide  by  adding,  sequentially, 
two  alternating  sugars  to  the  growing  chain  (Fig. 
29.12D–F). The primary products are homogeneous, 
linear  polymers,  each  with  one  pair  of  alternating 
sugars.

4.  Enzymes modify some but not all the residues along 
these alternating sugar polymers by adding sulfate to 
hydroxyl or amino groups, or by isomerizing certain 
carbons  to  convert  D-glucuronic  acid  to  its  epimer 
L-iduronic acid (Fig. 29.12D–F). The result is a hetero-
geneous  polymer.  The  mechanisms  that  select  par-
ticular sites for modification are not understood.

 

CHAPTER 29  n  Extracellular Matrix Molecules 

513

A

CS

3

N

U

HS

4

H

U

n

n

U

G

G

2
X

O

Ser

B

3

4

H

G

S

KS

S

3

4

H

G

3

G

S

6
N
3

4

O

Ser (Thr)

O-linked

3

3

S

S

4

2

M

H

G

F
6
H

4

H

4

6
M
3

4

2

H

G

M
N-linked

U

G

Glucuronic acid
Galactose
Phosphate

S

H

X

Sialic acid
glcNAc
Xylose

F

M

N

Fucose
Mannose
galNAc

C. Hyaluronan
-1,4-glcUA-β-1,3glcNAc-β-

O

4

CO2

–

HO

4

O

CH2OH
O

HO

3

O

1

3

OH

O

1

n

NH
Ac

Direction of
synthesis

D. Chondroitin/Dermatan Sulfate
-1,4-glcUA-β

-1,4-idoUA-α

-1,3-galNAc-β-

SO3

–

SO3

–

O

4

CO2

–

O

HO

4

CH2OH
O

Direction of
synthesis

HO

3

O

1

3

OH

1

O
n

NH
Ac

E. Keratan Sulfate
-1,3-gal-β-1,4-glcNAc-β-

SO3

–

O
C

Asn

N
H

Direction of
synthesis

HO

4

O

CH2OH
O

3

OH

1

O

4

CH2OH
O

F. Heparan Sulfate/Heparin
-1,4-glcUA-β

-1,4-idoUA-α

-1,4-glcNAc-α-

O

4

CO2

O

HO

3

O

1

n

NH
Ac

SO3

–

Direction of
synthesis

HO

3

1

O

4

OH

CH2OH
O

HO

3

SO3

–

NH
Ac

1

O
n

FIGURE  29.12  SYNTHESIS  OF  GLYCOSAMINOGLYCANS  (GAGS).  A–B,  Three  short  oligosaccharides  link  GAGs  (left)  to  proteoglycan 
core proteins (right). A, A tetrasaccharide anchors chondroitin sulfate (CS), dermatan sulfate, and heparan sulfate (HS) to serine residues. B, Two 
different, branched oligosaccharides link keratan sulfate (KS) to either serine or asparagine. C–F, Four parent polymers and postsynthetic modi-
fications. C, Hyaluronan [D-glucuronic acid β (1 → 3) D-N-acetylglucosamine β (1 → 4)]n (n ≥25,000) is not modified postsynthetically. D, Chon-
droitin sulfate and dermatan sulfate are synthesized as [D-glucuronic acid β (1 → 3) D-N-acetylgalactosamine β (1 → 4)]n (n usually <250) and 
then modified. Some N-acetylgalactosamines are sulfated. In dermatan sulfate, D-glucuronic acids are epimerized to L-iduronic acid. E, Keratan 
sulfate is synthesized as [D-galactose β (1 → 4) D-N-acetylglucosamine β (1 → 3)]n (n usually = 20–40) and then modified by sulfation. F, Heparan 
sulfate/heparin is synthesized as [D-glucuronic acid β (1 → 4) D-N-acetylglucosamine α (1 → 4)]n (n usually <100) and then modified by sulfation 
and by epimerization of D-glucuronic acid to L-iduronic acid. galNAc, N-acetylgalactosamine; glcNAc, N-acetylglucosamine. (Modified from Wright 
TN, Heinegard DK, Hascall VC. Proteoglycans, structure and function. In Hay ED, ed. Cell Biology of the Extracellular Matrix, 2nd ed. New York: 
Plenum Press; 1991:45–78.)

The present nomenclature for proteoglycans is based 
on the core protein. The historic nomenclature based on 
the  identity  of  the  GAGs  was  imprecise,  as  more  than 
one type of proteoglycan can carry the same GAG. The 
weakness  of  the  new  system  is  that  the  protein  name 
reveals nothing about the associated GAGs. This informa-
tion  is  important,  because  various  cells  add  different 
GAGs to the same core protein or can modify the same 
GAG in different ways.

Cells  secrete  many  proteoglycans  into  the  extracel-
lular  matrix,  but  they  retain  some  types  on  the  plasma 
membrane  through  transmembrane  polypeptides  or  a 
glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor (Appendix 29.2 and 
Fig. 29.13). The core proteins vary in size from 100 to 
4000 amino acids. Many are modular, consisting of famil-
iar structural domains found in epidermal growth factor 
(EGF),  complement  regulatory  protein,  leucine-rich 
repeats, or lectin. Three collagens carry GAG side chains: 

Types  IX  and  XII  have  chondroitin  sulfate  chains,  and 
type XVII has heparin sulfate chains.

The  number  of  GAGs  attached  to  the  core  protein 
varies from one (decorin) to more than 200 (aggrecan) 
(Fig. 29.13). A particular core protein can have identical 
(fibroglycan,  glypican,  versican)  or  different  (aggrecan, 
serglycin, syndecan) types of GAGs. Some cell types add 
different GAGs to the same core protein or secrete a core 
protein without GAGs.

Given  their  physical  properties  and  distribution 
among the fibrous elements of the extracellular matrix, 
proteoglycans and hyaluronan are thought to be elastic 
water-trapping  space  fillers.  Each  hydrophilic  disaccha-
ride  unit  bears  a  carboxyl  or  sulfate  group  or  both,  so 
GAGs are highly charged  polyanions  that  extend  them-
selves  by  electrostatic repulsion in solution and attract 
up to 50 g of water per gram of proteoglycan. Hyaluro-
nan, the largest GAG, occupies a vast volume. A single 

514 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

Aggrecan

Hyaluronan

G1

G2

N

KS-rich
region
insert

Decorin

N

C

Leucine-rich
repeats

N-linked oligo
KS (ser/thr)
CS/DS (ser/gly)
HS/Hep (ser/gly)

G3

C

C

GPI
anchor

Serglycin

Perlecan

Syndecan

N

N

N

C

Glypican

C

N

FIGURE 29.13  SCALE DRAWINGS OF A VARIETY OF PROTEOGLYCANS. Core proteins are purple except for the red leucine-rich repeats 
of decorin and the glycosaminoglycans are color-coded. Proteins were named according to the following: aggrecan aggregates along hyaluronan; 
decorin decorates collagen fibrils; perlecan resembles a string of pearls; serglycin has 24 Ser-Gly repeats; syndecan (syndein = link) links cells to 
the matrix; glypican has a glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) membrane anchor. CS, chondroitin sulfate; DS, dermatan sulfate; Hep, heparin; HS, 
heparan sulfate; KS, keratan sulfate. (Modified from Wright TN, Heinegard DK, Hascall VC. Proteoglycans, structure and function. In Hay ED, ed. 
Cell Biology of the Extracellular Matrix, 2nd ed. New York: Plenum Press; 1991:45–78.)

hydrated  molecule  of  25,000 kD  has  a  diameter  of 
200 nm,  larger  than  a  synaptic  vesicle.  Retention  of 
water  by  hyaluronan  and  aggrecan-keratan  sulfate/
chondroitin  sulfate  proteoglycan  is  essential  for  the 
mechanical properties of cartilage (see Fig. 32.3). In the 
extracellular matrix of other tissues, networks of densely 
charged hyaluronan restrict water flow, limit diffusion of 
solutes  (especially  macromolecules),  and  impede  the 
passage  of  microorganisms.  Hyaluronan  and  proteogly-
cans  also  act  as  lubricants  in  joint  cavities  and  as  an 
optically  transparent,  space-filling  medium  in  the  vitre-
ous body of the eye. Exceptionally high concentrations 
of hyaluronan in the tissues of subterranean naked mole 
rats  seem  to  protect  them  from  cancer  and  give  them 
life spans much longer than any other rodent. The mech-
anism is not known.

Beyond  these  mechanical  functions,  proteoglycans 
influence cellular behavior such as adhesion or motility. 
Transmembrane proteoglycans can link cells to fibronec-
tin and connective tissue collagens. Syndecan provides 
a particularly clear example. Lymphocytes express syn-
decan twice: early in their maturation, when they adhere 
to matrix fibers in the bone marrow, and later, when, as 
mature plasma cells, they adhere to the matrix of lymph 
nodes. In between, syndecan expression is lower while 
the lymphocytes circulate in the blood.

Carefully  regulated  expression  allows  proteoglycans 
to influence embryonic development and wound healing 
in  at  least  three  different  ways.  First,  both  decorin  
and  fibromodulin  regulate  assembly  of  collagen  fibrils. 
Second,  many  polypeptide  growth  factors  (including 
platelet-derived growth factor and TGFβ) bind to proteo-
glycans in the extracellular matrix. This allows the matrix 
to  concentrate  circulating  growth  factors  at  specific  
locations  and  to  release  them  locally  over  time.  Third, 
membrane-bound  proteoglycans,  including  syndecan 
and glypican, act as coreceptors for growth factors.

The well-known anticoagulant effects of heparin and 
heparan  sulfate  are  attributable  to  their  ability  to  bind 
both  thrombin  (the  proteolytic  enzyme  that  converts 
fibrinogen to fibrin) and a thrombin inhibitory protein. 
This promotes interaction of the inhibitor with thrombin 
and inactivates the clotting cascade. A short sequence of 
five modified sugars has the anticoagulant activity.

Adhesive Glycoproteins
In  principle,  the  macromolecules  of  the  extracellular 
matrix and the constituent cells might interact relatively 
nonspecifically,  but  the  evidence  suggests  that  specific 
molecular interactions mediate most of the interactions 
that  organize  the  matrix  and  the  associated  cells.  Most 

 

CHAPTER 29  n  Extracellular Matrix Molecules 

515

interactions are between proteins, but some are between 
proteins and sugars. Although some of these interactions 
are direct (with some cell surface receptors binding col-
lagen  directly),  adapters  called  adhesive  glycoproteins 
mediate many of the interactions (Appendix 29.3).

Adhesive glycoproteins were discovered by using bio-
chemical assays for factors that favor particular interac-
tions, such as adherence of cells to a matrix component. 
Further  work  revealed  that  adhesive  glycoproteins  are 
more than molecular glue; they also provide cells with 
signals  required  for  the  development  and  repair  of 
tissues.  Cells  receive  these  signals  when  they  bind  to  
the  matrix  components.  Chapter  30  focuses  on  their 
receptors.

Adhesive  glycoproteins  provide  specific  molecular 
interactions  in  the  matrix  by  binding  to  cells,  matrix 
macromolecules,  or  both.  Adhesive  proteins  with  mul-
tiple  binding  sites  for  cell  surface  receptors  link  cells 
together.  For  example,  fibrinogen  aggregates  platelets 
during  blood  clotting  (see  Fig.  30.14).  Other  adhesive 
proteins link cells to the extracellular matrix. Thus, fibro-
nectin  mediates  the  attachment  of  cells  to  fibrin  and 
collagen (Fig. 29.14). A third group of adhesive proteins 
links  matrix  macromolecules  together.  For  instance, 
nidogen  attaches  laminin  to  collagen  and  link  protein 
attaches aggrecan-proteoglycan to hyaluronan.

The  repertoire  of  adhesive  proteins  extends  far 
beyond the number of named proteins (Appendix 29.3). 
Multiple genes or, more commonly, alternative splicing 
of the product of a single gene (see Fig. 11.6), generate 
multiple,  functionally  distinct  isoforms  of  most  of  the 
proteins. Particular isoforms are often expressed in spe-
cific tissues at predictable times during development.

Most  adhesive  glycoproteins  are  constructed  of  a 
series of compact modules (see Fig. 3.13 and Appendix 
29.3). During evolution, duplication and recombination 
of the coding sequences for these domains produced the 

genes encoding these large proteins. In addition to the 
familiar domains, each of these proteins also contains a 
significant fraction of unique sequences.

Heterodimeric transmembrane receptors called inte-
grins  bind  most  adhesive  glycoproteins  that  interact 
with  cells  (see  Fig.  30.9).  Remarkably,  the  integrin-
binding  sites  of  many  adhesive  proteins  include  the 
simple  tripeptide  arginine-glycine-aspartic  acid  (RGD; 
Fig. 29.14), which acts as a universal “zip code.”

Establishing the biological functions of adhesive gly-
coproteins  is  challenging  because  of  their  overlapping 
functions and large sizes. Initial hypotheses were based 
on  the  identification  of  binding  partners  and  the  time 
and place of expression of each protein. Later, antibod-
ies or peptides were used to disrupt specific molecular 
interactions  in  live  organisms.  Disruption  of  the  gene  
for each protein or its receptors provides definitive data, 
and  the  consequences  can  be  surprising.  Some  pheno-
types  proved  to  be  milder  than  expected  from  earlier 
studies. These results argue that the adhesive glycopro-
teins function as a complementary system with partially 
overlapping functions. Two examples illustrate what we 
know about adhesive glycoproteins.

Fibronectin
Fibronectins  are  large  proteins  composed  of  two  poly-
peptides  of  approximately  235 kD  linked  by  disulfide 
bonds  near  their  C-termini  (Fig.  29.14).  In  electron 
micrographs,  fibronectin  appears  as  a  V-shaped  pair  of 
long, flexible rods connected at one end. In solution, the 
molecule  is  probably  more  compact.  Each  polypeptide 
is  a  linear  array  of  three  types  of  domains  called  FN-I, 
FN-II, and FN-III (for fibronectin-I, -II and -III). All three 
types  of  fibronectin  domains  consist  of  antiparallel  β 
strands  with  conserved  residues  in  their  hydrophobic 
cores.  Two  disulfide  bonds  stabilize  FN-I  and  FN-II 
domains,  whereas  FN-III  domains  have  no  disulfide 

FN I

FN II

FN III

Crosslinking
  site

Fibrin

Matrix
  assembly

N

F1

F2

F1

Matrix
  assembly
Heparin

Collagen
Gelatin

Fibronectin dimer

Cell

ASRA

ASRC

F1

C

Fibrin

Heparin
Chondroitin
  sulfate

ASRB

F3

RGD

Cell

FIGURE 29.14  DOMAIN ORGANIZATION OF FIBRONECTIN. A linear array of FN-I (45 residues), FN-II (45 residues), and FN-III (90 residues) 
domains forms a rod-shaped subunit. Disulfide bonds near the C-termini covalently link two identical subunits in the dimeric molecule. Ligand-
binding sites are indicated. The FN-III domain 10 contains the RGD (arginine-glycine-aspartic acid) sequence that binds cell surface integrins. 
Binding sites for fibrin, collagen, and glycosaminoglycans are indicated. Alternative splicing at sites ASRB, ASRA, and ASRC creates different 
isoforms. (For reference, see PDB files 1PDC and 1FNA and Potts JR, Campbell ID. Fibronectin structure and assembly.  Curr Opin Cell Biol. 
1994;6:648–655.)

516 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

bonds. FN-I and FN-II domains consist of approximately 
45 residues; FN-III domains are twice as large. FN-I and 
FN-II  domains  are  present  in  a  few  other  proteins, 
whereas  the  human  genome  contains  about  170  genes 
with FN-III domains, including proteins in the extracel-
lular matrix (Appendix 29.3), on the cell surface (human 
growth hormone receptor; see Fig. 24.6), and inside cells 
(titin; see Fig. 39.7).

Fibronectin  binds  a  variety  of  ligands,  including  cell 
surface  receptors,  collagen,  proteoglycans,  and  fibrin 
(another  adhesive  protein).  Thus,  it  contributes  to  the 
adhesion of cells to the extracellular matrix, guides the 
assembly of collagens and fibrillins and may also cross-
link matrix molecules. The RGD sequence that contrib-
utes to binding integrins is on an exposed loop of FN-III 
domain  10,  but  some  binding  sites  are  exposed  only 
when  the  protein  is  stretched.  The  variably  spliced  V 
domain  included  in  plasma  fibronectin  has  a  second 
integrin-binding  site.  Chapter  30  provides  additional 
details on integrins.

Two pools of fibronectin have different distributions 
and solubility properties. Tissue fibronectin forms insol-
uble  fibrils  in  connective  tissues  throughout  the  body, 
especially  in  embryos  and  healing  wounds.  Fibroblasts 
use an integrin-dependent process to assemble fibronec-
tin dimers into fibrillar aggregates large enough to visual-
ize by light microscopy (Fig. 29.15). Denaturing agents 
and  disulfide  reduction  are  required  to  solubilize  these 
fibrils.  Fibronectin  fibrils  seem  to  bind  cells  more 

A

B

FIGURE 29.15  FLUORESCENCE MICROGRAPHS OF FIBRO-
NECTIN  NETWORKS  IN  TISSUE  CULTURE.  A,  This  fibroblast 
expressed  fibronectin-YFP  (fibronectin  fused  to  yellow  fluorescent 
protein,  appearing  yellow-green)  and  moesin-CFP  (moesin  fused  to 
cyan  fluorescent  protein,  appearing  red).  The  fibronectin  assembled 
an extracellular network. Moesin is associated with actin filaments in 
stress fibers. B, Lower magnification of a fibronectin network. (Cour-
tesy T. Ohashi and H.P. Erickson, Duke University, Durham, NC.)

efficiently than soluble fibronectin, and may have addi-
tional activities important for biological functions.

Soluble  plasma  fibronectin  dimers  circulate  in  the 
body  fluids.  The  protein  differs  from  tissue  fibronectin 
as  a  result  of  alternate  splicing  of  the  messenger  RNA 
(mRNA).  In  blood  clots,  the  enzyme  transglutaminase 
covalently couples plasma fibronectin to fibrin, forming 
a provisional matrix for wound repair (see Fig. 32.11).

Early embryos form an initial extracellular matrix from 
fibronectin  that  is  replaced  by  collagen  as  the  embryo 
matures. Embryonic cells, such as neural crest cells (pre-
cursors  of  pigment  cells,  sympathetic  neurons,  and 
adrenal  medullary  cells),  migrate  along  tracks  in  the 
extracellular, fibronectin-rich matrix. Antibodies or fibro-
nectin fragments that interfere with the adhesion of cells 
to fibronectin inhibit neural crest cell migration, gastrula-
tion,  and  the  formation  of  many  embryonic  structures 
derived from mesenchymal cells.

Surprisingly, mouse embryos without fibronectin can 
develop  almost  normally  up  to  about  day  8  (when  the 
basic body plan is already determined). Thereafter homo-
zygous null mutant mice die from defects in mesodermal 
structures, including the notochord, muscles, heart, and 
blood  vessels.  Mice  with  null  mutations  in  the  main 
fibronectin receptor, integrin α5, have similar but slightly 
milder defects. Other adhesive glycoproteins and recep-
tors must compensate for fibronectin during the first few 
days of development.

Tenascin
Tenascins  are  a  family  of  four  giant  proteins  with  six 
arms  (Fig.  29.16),  found  in  the  extracellular  matrix  of 
many  embryonic  tissues,  wounds,  and  tumors.  The 
N-terminal ends of three subunits self-associate in a triple 
helical coiled-coil. Disulfides covalently link two of these 
three-chain units to make the hexameric molecule. The 
arms  of  the  four  isoforms  consist  of  different  numbers 
of EGF and FN-III domains, terminated by three similar 
FN-III domains and a fibrinogen-like domain. The expres-
sion  of  tenascins-C,  -R,  -W,  and  -X  hardly  overlap  in  
adult tissues.

All vertebrates express tenascin, but it has yet to be 
found  in  an  invertebrate.  Vertebrates  have  maintained 
the  tenascin  genes  over  hundreds  of  millions  of  years, 
and each isoform is expressed selectively in embryonic 
tissues,  so  it  was  surprising  that  mice  with  disrupted 
tenascin-C  or  tenascin-R  genes  are  viable.  However, 
careful  analysis  showed  that  both  have  defects  in  their 
brains and responses to injury. Tenascin-C null mice also 
have defects in their lungs and stem cell compartments. 
Genetic  deficiency  of  tenascin-X  causes  Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome, a human condition with hyperextensible skin 
and lax joints that is most often caused by mutations in 
collagen type V gene.

Tenascins  bind  to  fibronectin,  integrins,  proteogly-
cans, and immunoglobulin-superfamily receptors on the 

 

CHAPTER 29  n  Extracellular Matrix Molecules 

517

A

EGF domain

B

C. Tenascin-R (chicken, mouse)

Universal FN-III
domain

Alternatively spliced
FN-III domain

TNfbg domain

TN-C

D. Tenascin-C (human, pig, mouse, chicken, newt)

S–S

N

E. Tenascin-X (human)

S–S

N

Shared

S–S

N

(One of 6 arms
displayed in full)

C

C

C

FIGURE  29.16  DOMAIN  ORGANIZATION  OF  THE  THREE  ISOFORMS  OF  TENASCIN.  A,  Domains.  TNfbg,  fibrinogen-like  domain. 
B, Electron micrograph of tenascin-C. C, Tenascin-R. D, Tenascin-C. E, Tenascin-X. Each of these tenascin molecules has six identical chains. 
One is shown in its entirety. Five chains are represented only by a few of their N-terminal EGF domains. (Courtesy H.P. Erickson, Duke University, 
Durham, NC.)

cell surface. Depending on the cell and the experimental 
situation,  tenascin  can  promote  or  inhibit  adhesion  of 
cells to various substrates. This may contribute to spread-
ing of cancer cells.

Basal Lamina
The basal lamina, a thin, planar assembly of extracellular 
matrix proteins, supports all epithelia, muscle cells, and 
nerve  cells  outside  the  central  nervous  system  (Fig. 
29.17).  This  two-dimensional  network  of  protein  poly-
mers forms a continuous rug under epithelia and a sleeve 
around muscle and nerve cells. In addition, basal laminae 
can  act  as  semipermeable  filters  for  macromolecules,  a 
particularly important role that they play in the conver-
sion of blood plasma into urine in the kidney. The genes 
for  basal  lamina  components  are  very  ancient,  having 
arisen in early metazoans.

In  electron  micrographs  of  thin  sections  of  tissues 
prepared  by  chemical  fixation,  the  basal  lamina  is  a 
homogenous, finely fibrillar material close to the plasma 
membrane (Fig. 29.17D). Collagens type VI, VII, XV, and 
XVIII connect the lamina to the underlying connective 
tissue.  The  basal  lamina  and  associated  collagen  fibrils 
form the “basement membrane” that is observed in his-
tologic  preparations  of  epithelia.  A  basal  lamina  alone 
cannot  be  seen  by  light  microscopy  without  special 
labels, such as those used in Fig. 29.17A and C.

Although  many  proteins  contribute  to  the  stability  
of the basal lamina (Fig. 29.18), only the adhesive glyco-
protein  laminin  is  essential  for  the  initial  assembly  of 
basal laminae during embryogenesis. The C-terminal end 

of the cross-shaped laminin molecule binds to cell surface 
receptors  (integrins,  see  Fig.  30.9;  dystroglycan;  see 
Fig. 39.17). Laminins self-assemble into continuous, two-
dimensional networks through noncovalent interactions 
of their short arms. Mouse embryos that lack dystrogly-
can or laminin die early in development, owing to failure 
to make basal laminae.

The subsequent addition of other proteins reinforces 
the laminin network. A two-dimensional network of col-
lagen  IV  self-assembles  through  head-to-head  interac-
tions  of  the  N-termini  of  four  molecules  and  tail-to-tail 
interactions of the C-terminal NC1 domains of two mol-
ecules  (Fig.  29.2).  The  networks  of  both  laminin  and 
collagen  IV  lie  relatively  parallel  to  the  cell  surface. 
Mouse embryos that lack collagen IV make nascent basal 
laminae  composed  of  laminin  but  eventually  die  from 
defects in basal lamina functions.

Other proteins reinforce the collagen IV and laminin 
in basal laminae. The rod-shaped protein nidogen cross-
links  laminin  to  type  IV  collagen.  Perlecan,  a  heparan 
sulfate  proteoglycan,  provides  additional  crosslinks.  It 
binds  to itself  in  addition to  laminin, nidogen,  and col-
lagen  IV.  These  crosslinks  help  determine  the  porosity 
of the basal lamina and thus the size of molecules that 
can filter through it. Fibrillin and an associated protein, 
fibulin, are also present.

Epithelial  and  muscle  cells  secrete  laminin  and  the 
other  components  of  basal  lamina.  Two  different  cells 
can  cooperate  to  produce  a  basal  lamina  between  two 
tissues. For example, epithelial cells make laminin, and 
mesenchymal cells contribute nidogen to the same basal 
lamina.

518 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

A

C

B

D

BLOOD

CONNECTIVE TISSUE

MUSCLE

NEURON

E

SCHWANN
CELL

AXON

FIGURE 29.17  MICROGRAPHS OF THE BASAL LAMINA. A and C, Fluorescence micrographs of tissue sections stained with fluorescent 
antibodies to type IV collagen, a major component of basal laminae. A, Kidney with basal laminae around the tubules and blood vessels, including 
those of the glomerulus in the center. C, Skeletal muscle with basal laminae around the muscle cells. B, D, and E, Electron micrographs of thin 
sections showing basal laminae (colored pink). B, Endothelial cell lining a blood vessel with a platelet in the lumen. D, Neuromuscular junction. 
E, Unmyelinated nerve with numerous axons (yellow) surrounded by invaginations of Schwann cells (blue). (A and C, From Odermatt BF, Lang 
AB, Ruttner JR, et al. Monoclonal antibody to human type IV collagen. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1984;81:7343–7347. B and E, Courtesy Don 
W. Fawcett, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA. D, Courtesy J. Heuser, Washington University, St. Louis, MO.)

Nidogen

Laminin

Type IV collagen

Perlecan

FIGURE 29.18  MOLECULAR MODEL OF THE BASAL LAMINA. 
The drawing shows the sizes and shapes of the component molecules 
and  their  postulated  three-dimensional  arrangement  in  the  basal 
lamina.  (From  Yurchenco  P,  Cheng  YS,  Colognato  H.  Laminin  forms 
an  independent  network  in  basement  membranes.  J  Cell  Biol. 
1992;117:1119–1133.)

The  interwoven  network  of  protein  fibers  provides 
the physical basis for the two main functions of the basal 
lamina:  mechanical  support  and  selective  permeability. 
The  basal  lamina  is  a  scaffold  that  anchors  epithelial, 
muscle,  and  nerve  cells.  In  epithelia,  all  the  basal  cells 

attach to the underlying basal lamina, which is, in turn, 
attached to the underlying connective tissue. Thus, force 
applied to an exposed epithelial surface, such as skin, is 
transmitted through the basal lamina to the connective 
tissue. Similarly, all epithelial cells in tubular structures, 
such as blood vessels and glands, adhere to a cylindrical 
basal  lamina  that  contributes  to  the  integrity  of  the  
tube.  In  muscle,  the  basal  lamina  around  each  cell  
transmits  the  contractile  forces  between  cells  and  
to tendons.

The fibrous network in the basal lamina also acts as a 
filter for macromolecules and a permeability barrier for 
cellular migration. In kidney, a basal lamina sandwiched 
between  two  sheets  of  epithelial  cells  filters  the  blood 
plasma to initiate the formation of urine. The molecular 
weight  threshold  for  the  filter  is  approximately  60 kD, 
so most serum proteins are retained in the blood, whereas 
salt and water pass into the excretory tubules. The high 
charge  of  basal  lamina  proteoglycans  contributes  to  
filtering  by  electrostatic  repulsion.  Basal  laminae  also 
confine epithelial cells to their natural compartment. If 
neoplastic  transformation  occurs  in  an  epithelium,  the 
basal  lamina  prevents  the  spread  of  the  tumor  until 
matrix  metalloproteinases  (see  “Matrix  Metalloprotein-
ases” below) break down the basal lamina.

The  major  basement  membrane  type  IV  collagen  
consists of two α1(IV) chains and one α2(IV) chain. No 

 

CHAPTER 29  n  Extracellular Matrix Molecules 

519

Inherited Diseases or Mutant 

TABLE 29.1 
Phenotypes of Basal Lamina Components
Protein Subunit
Collagen α3IV

Distribution

Disease or Mutant Phenotype

Human autoantibodies cause 
Goodpasture syndrome of 
renal failure.

Collagen α5IV

Laminin α1

Laminin α2

Laminin γ2

Perlecan

Many 

tissues

Kidney, 
muscle

Many 

tissues
Muscle, 

heart

Human mutation causes Alport 

syndrome of renal failure.

Fly null mutation is lethal 

during embryogenesis.

Mouse dy mutation causes 

muscular dystrophy.

Epidermis

Human mutation causes 

Many 

tissues

Herlitz junctional 
epidermolysis bullosa.
Worm unc-52 mutation 
disrupts myofilament 
attachment to membrane.

human  mutations  in  the  two  major  type  IV  collagen 
genes have been observed, presumably because they are 
lethal, as observed in Drosophila.

Restricted human tissues express four additional type 
IV  collagens.  Remarkably,  each  has  been  implicated  in 
human  disease  (Table  29.1).  More  than  200  different 
point  mutations  and  deletions  in  the  α5(IV)  collagen 
gene  cause  Alport  X-linked  familial  nephritis.  These 
mutations  interfere  with  folding  of  the  collagen  mole-
cule  and  disrupt  the  basement  membranes  that  form  
the  blood  filtration  barrier  in  the  glomerulus  of  the 
kidney,  causing  progressive  kidney  failure.  They  also 
cause defects in the eye and ear, other places where the 
α5(IV) collagen gene is expressed. Patients with autoso-
mally inherited Alport syndrome have mutations in their 
α3(IV)  or  α4(IV)  collagen  genes.  In  Goodpasture  syn-
drome, the immune system produces autoantibodies to 
the  C-terminal  NC1  domain  of  α3(IV)  collagen.  The 
protein  sequences  that  elicit  autoantibody  production 
are buried in the NC1 domain, so they may be exposed 
by  bacterial  infections  or  organic  solvents,  predispos-
ing events that trigger the syndrome. Antibodies bound 
to  basement  membranes  in  the  kidney  and  lung  cause 
inflammation that leads to kidney failure and bleeding in 
the lungs.

Matrix Metalloproteinases
Many physiological processes depend on the controlled 
degradation of the extracellular matrix. Examples include 
tissue remodeling during embryogenesis (eg, resorption 
of  a  tadpole  tail),  wound  healing,  involution  (massive 
shrinkage  secondary  to  loss  of  cells  and  extracellular 
matrix)  of  the  uterus  after  childbirth,  shedding  of  the 
uterine endometrium during menstruation, and invasion 
of the uterine wall by the embryonic trophoblast during 
implantation.  Conversely,  uncontrolled  destruction  of 

A. Domain architecture

N

C

Matrilysin
MMP-7
Stromelysin 1 MMP-3
Gelatinase A MMP-2
Gelatinase B MMP-9
MMP-11
Stromelysin-3
MMP-14
MT1-MMP

TM

Signal peptide

Propeptide
Catalytic
domain

Linker
Hemopexin-
like domain
Fibronectin
type II domain

Cytoplasmic
domain

Stretch with 
furin-recognition
sequence

B. ProMMP-2 structure

Catalytic
domain

Propeptide

C

Fibronectin
type II
domain 2

Fibronectin
type II
domain 1

Fibronectin
type II
domain 3

N

Hemopexin
domain

FIGURE  29.19  MATRIX  METALLOPROTEINASE 
(MMP) 
STRUCTURES.  A,  Domain  organization  of  MMP  isoforms.  All  have 
an N-terminal cleaved signal sequence, a propeptide that binds to the 
active  site  and  inhibits  the  protease  activity,  and  a  catalytic  domain. 
Gelatinases  have  fibronectin  (FN)-II  domains  inserted  in  the  catalytic 
domain. Matrilysin lacks the C-terminal domain. MMP-14 has a trans-
membrane  segment  near  its  C-terminus.  B,  Atomic  structure  of 
MMP-2 showing the arrangement of the domains and the propeptide 
occupying the active site. (For reference, see PDB file 1CK7.)

extracellular matrix contributes to degenerative diseases, 
such  as  emphysema  and  arthritis.  In  addition  to  their 
roles in remodeling, many of these enzymes cleave and 
release  biologically  active  fragments  from  matrix  or 
membrane proteins. Three classes of Zn-dependent pro-
teases account for both the physiological and pathologi-
cal  degradation  of  diverse  extracellular  matrix  and  cell 
surface proteins.

The first class is called matrix metalloproteinases 
(MMPs).  These  24  homologous  enzymes  share  a  zinc-
protease domain (Fig. 29.19) similar to bacterial thermo-
lysin.  All  have  an  N-terminal  signal  sequence  and  are 
processed through the secretory pathway. Between the 
signal  sequence  and  catalytic  domain,  all  MMPs  have  
an autoinhibitory propeptide, including a conserved 
cysteine  that  binds  to  the  zinc  ion  in  the  catalytic  
site.  Most  MMPs  have  a  C-terminal  regulatory  domain 
that  influences  the  substrate  specificity  of  the  catalytic 
domain. Some MMPs have three FN-II domains inserted 
into the sequence of the catalytic domain (Fig. 29.10B).
Most  inactive  pro-MMPs  are  secreted  and  then  bind 
directly or indirectly to cell surface receptors. However, 

520 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

several MMPs are anchored to the plasma membrane by 
a  C-terminal  transmembrane  domain  or  a  glycosylphos-
phatidylinositol tail.

MMP  activity  is  carefully  regulated  at  three  levels, 
normally restricting proteolysis to sites of tissue remodel-
ing  or  physiological  breakdown.  First,  only  particular 
connective tissue, inflammatory, and epithelial cells are 
genetically  programmed  to  express  MMP  genes  and  to 
respond  to  growth  factors  and  cytokines  to  increase 
production  under  appropriate  circumstances.  Second, 
autoinhibited MMPs on the cell surface require propep-
tide cleavage for activation. Proteolytic cleavage and dis-
sociation of the propeptide activate the enzyme. Cellular 
movements then deliver the active protease to specific 
substrates.  For  example,  membrane-anchored  MMP-14 
directly activates MMP-2, which then degrades basement 
membrane collagen and other substrates. Third, secreted 
proteins  called  tissue  inhibitors  of  metalloprotein-
ases (TIMPs) and the plasma protein α2-macroglobulin 
bind  to  the  active  site  of  MMPs,  keeping  their  activity  
in check.

Each MMP is selective for targets in the extracellular 
matrix. In some cases, proteolysis disrupts the mechani-
cal integrity of the matrix. In others, cleavage of a col-
lagen isoform or other matrix protein releases a fragment 
that favors or inhibits the formation of blood vessels. For 
example, the N-terminal domain cleaved from collagen 
XVIII  is  an  inhibitor  of  angiogenesis  that  is  called  end-
ostatin. Mice survive null mutations in any one of several 
MMPs tested, but the loss of an MMP may alter the sus-
ceptibility to disease dramatically. Mice without MMP-12 
(macrophage  elastase)  are  resistant  to  cigarette  smoke, 
which  causes  emphysema  in  normal  mice.  Without 
MMP-12,  smoke  fails  to  stimulate  elastin  degeneration, 
which weakens lung tissue and mediates inflammation. 
MMPs  contribute  to  the  spread  of  tumors  in  mice,  
but  disappointingly  small-molecule  inhibitors  of  MMPs  
have not proven useful for treatment of advanced tumors 
in humans.

The second class of Zn-dependent proteases consists 
of approximately 20 proteases called ADAMs (a disinte-
grin and metalloproteinase). These enzymes are anchored 
to  the  plasma  membrane  by  a  single  transmembrane 
domain.  Like  other  metalloproteinases,  they  are  inhib-
ited  by  TIMPs.  ADAMs  cleave  and  release  extracellular 
domains  of  cell  surface  proteins,  some  of  which  are 
important  informational  molecules  (eg,  tumor  necrosis 
factor  [TNF]-α;  transforming  growth  factor  [TGF]-α). 
ADAM-17 null mutations are lethal during embryogene-
sis,  owing  to  a  lack  of  TGF-α  or  other  ligands  for  EGF 
receptors. A polymorphism in the ADAM-33 gene is asso-
ciated with some types of human asthma, although the 
mechanism is not understood.

A  third  class  of  Zn-dependent  proteases  is  called 
ADAMTS,  ADAMs  with  a  thrombospondin  domain. 
These  secreted  proteases  cleave  specific  matrix  sub-
strates,  such  as  the  cartilage  proteoglycan  aggrecan. 
Experiments  with  mice  show  that  inactivation  of  the 
protease domain of ADAMTS5 reduces the development 
of the common joint disease osteoarthritis.

SELECTED READINGS

Buehler MJ. Nature designs tough collagen: Explaining the nanostruc-
ture  of  collagen  fibrils.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  USA.  2006;103:12285-
12290.

Capila  I,  Linhardt  RJ.  Heparin-protein  interactions.  Angew  Chem  Int 

Ed Engl. 2002;41:390-412.

Chiquet-Ehrismann  R,  Tucker  RP.  Tenascins  and  the  importance  of 
adhesion  modulation.  Cold  Spring  Harb  Perspect  Biol.  2011;3:
a004960.

Hacker U, Nybakken K, Perrimon N. Heparan sulphate proteoglycans: 
The  sweet  side  of  development.  Nat  Rev  Mol  Cell  Biol.  2005;6:
530-541.

Halper J, Kjaer M. Basic components of connective tissues and extra-
cellular  matrix:  elastin,  fibrillin,  fibulins,  fibrinogen,  fibronectin, 
laminin, tenascins and thrombospondins. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014;
802:31-47.

Hudson  BG,  Tryggvason  K,  Sundaramoorthy  M,  Neilson  EG.  Alport’s 
syndrome, Goodpasture’s syndrome and type IV collagen. N Engl J 
Med. 2003;348:2543-2556.

Iozzo RV. Basement membrane proteoglycans: From cellar to ceiling. 

Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2005;6:646-656.

Kim EB, Fang X, Fushan AA, et al. Genome sequencing reveals insights 
into physiology and longevity of the naked mole rat. Nature. 2011;
479:223-227.

Lu P, Takai K, Weaver VM, Werb Z. Extracellular matrix degradation 
and  remodeling  in  development  and  disease.  Cold  Spring  Harb 
Perspect Biol. 2011;3:a005058.

Malhotra V, Erlmann P. The pathway of collagen secretion. Annu Rev 

Cell Dev Biol. 2015;31:109-124.

Mienaltowski MJ, Birk DE. Structure, physiology, and biochemistry of 

collagens. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014;802:5-29.

Mithieux  SM,  Weiss  AS.  Elastin.  Adv  Protein  Chem.  2005;70:437-

461.

Ricard-Blum S. The collagens family. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 

2011;3:a004978.

Saito  K,  Katada  T.  Mechanisms  for  exporting  large-sized  cargoes  
from  the  endoplasmic  reticulum.  Cell  Mol  Life  Sci.  2015;72:
3709-3720.

Schwarzbauer  JE,  DeSimone  DW.  Fibronectins,  their  fibrillogenesis, 
and  in  vivo  functions.  Cold  Spring  Harb  Perspect  Biol.  2011;3:
a005041.

Sugahara K, Mikami T, Uyama T, et al. Recent advances in the structural 
biology  of  chondroitin  sulfate  and  dermatan  sulfate.  Curr  Opin 
Struct Biol. 2003;13:612-620.

Taylor  KR,  Gallo  RL.  Glycosaminoglycans  and  their  proteoglycans: 
Host-associated molecular patterns for initiation and modulation of 
inflammation. FASEB J. 2005;20:9-22.

Timpl  R,  Sasaki  T,  Kostka  G,  Chu  ML.  Fibulins:  A  versatile  family  
of  extracellular  matrix  proteins.  Nat  Rev  Mol  Cell  Biol.  2003;4:
479-489.

Yurchenco PD. Basement membranes: cell scaffoldings and signaling 

platforms. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2011;3:a004911.

Chains

Type
Fibrillar Collagens
I

α1.α1.α2(I)

II

III
V

Fibrils

Self; types III and V 
collagen; types XII 
and XIV collagen

Bone, tendons, 

ligaments, skin, 
dentin

[α1(II)]3

Fibrils

Self; type IX and XI 

Hyaline cartilage, 

collagen

vitreous body

Osteogenesis imperfecta; Ehlers-

Danlos syndrome type VII; Kniest 
dysplasia; Stickler syndrome
Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia; 

hypochondrogenesis; 
achondrogenesis; Kniest 
dysplasia; Stickler syndrome

[α1(III)]3
α1.α1.α2(V)
α1.α2.α3(V)

α1(XI)α2(XI)α1(II)

XI
Sheet-Forming Collagens
IV

α1.α1.α2(IV)
α3.α4.α5(IV)
α5.α5.α6(IV)

Fibrils
Fibrils

Fibrils

Nets

Self; type I collagen
Self; type I collagen

Skin, blood vessels
Fetal membranes, 

Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome

skin, bone, placenta, 
synovial membranes

Self; type II collagen

Hyaline cartilage

Stickler’s syndrome

Self; perlecan 

Basement membranes

Autoantigen in Goodpasture 

laminin, nidogen, 
integrins

syndrome; α3(IV), α4 (IV), & 
α5(IV) mutated in Alport 
nephritis & porencephaly

VIII

X

[α1(VIII)]?
[α2(VIII)]?
[α1(X)]3

Hexagonal net

Self

Descemet membrane 

Posterior polymorphous corneal 

(cornea)

dystrophy

?

?

Hypertrophic cartilage

Schmid metaphyseal 

chondrodysplasia

Connecting and Anchoring Collagens (Fibril-Associated Collagens With Interrupted Triple Helices [FACIT])
VI

Vessels, skin, 

Beaded fibrils

Self; type IV 

α1.α2.α3(VI)

Bethlem myopathy, atopic 

Anchoring fibril

Self; type IV 

Epidermal–dermal 

Dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa

collagen

intervertebral disk

dermatitis

 

CHAPTER 29  n  Extracellular Matrix Molecules 

521

APPENDIX 29.1 
Collagen Families

Assembly

Interactions

Distribution

Disease Mutations

VII

IX

XII

[α1(VII)]3

α1.α2.α3(IX)

[α1(XII)]3

XIV

[α1(XIV)]3

[α1(XVIII)]3

XVIII
Transmembrane
XIII

[α1(XIII)]3

Linker

? Linker

? Linker

? Linker

Transmembrane

collagen

junction

Covalent GAG; type 

Hyaline cartilage, 

Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia

II collagen
GAG; type I 

collagen

GAG; ? type I 

collagen

GAG

Integrin α1β1, 
fibronectin
Basal lamina

vitreous body

Embryonic tendon, 

Not known

skin

Fetal tendon, skin

Not known

Basal lamina

Not known

Not known

Hemidesmosomes, 
epidermal–dermal 
junction

Blistering conditions; antigen in 

bullous pemphigoid

XVII

[α1(XVII)]3

Transmembrane

522 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

APPENDIX 29.2 
Proteoglycans

Core Protein

Name
Secreted Proteoglycans
Aggrecan

Glycosaminoglycans

Expression

Functions

One-gene, 250-kD protein with 

100–150 keratin sulfate 

Cartilage

link protein, EGF, lectin & 
complement regulatory 
domains

chains >150 
chondroitin sulfate 
chains

Binds hyaluronan and link 
protein; hydrates and fills 
the ECM; no known diseases

Biglycan

One-gene, 38-kD protein

2 Chondroitin sulfate or 

Developing muscle, 

Associated with cell surfaces; 

Decorin

One-gene, 38-kD protein

Fibromodulin

One-gene, 43-kD protein

Perlecan

One-gene, 400-kD protein

dermatan sulfate 
chains

bone, cartilage, and 
epithelia

no known ligands or 
functions

1 Chondroitin sulfate or 
dermatan sulfate chain

Connective tissue 

fibroblasts

Binds collagen fibrils and 
modifies their assembly

4 Asparagine-linked 

keratin sulfate chains

3 Heparan sulfate 

chains of 30–60 kD

Cartilage, skin, tendon

Binds collagen I and II; limits 

All cells making 

basement membranes 
(epithelia, muscle, 
peripheral nerve)

size of collagen fibrils

Self-associates; binds laminin 
in basal lamina; binds basic 
fibroblast growth factor

Serglycin

One-gene, 12-kD protein; 24 

Heparin or chondroitin 

White blood cells, mast 

Binds histamine in secretory 

serine-glycine repeats

sulfate

cells

granules

Versican

One-gene, 260-kD protein with 
link-protein, GAG attachment, 
2 EGF, lectin & complement 
regulatory domains
Membrane-Associated Proteoglycans
Fibroglycan

One-gene, integral membrane 

protein of 20 kD

12–15 chondroitin 
sulfate chains N- 
and O-linked 
oligosaccharides

Fibroblasts; ? other 

cells

May bind hyaluronan; 
functions unknown

Heparan sulfate chains

Fibroblasts

Binds collagen I and 

fibronectin; cell adhesion to 
ECM

Glypican

62-kD protein with 

4 Heparan sulfate 

Lung, skin, epithelia, 

Binds fibronectin, collagen I, 

glycosylphosphatidylinositol 
anchor to membrane on 
C-terminus

chains

Syndecan

One-gene, integral membrane 

Variable number of 

protein of 33 kD

heparan sulfate and 
chondroitin sulfate 
chains

endothelium, smooth 
muscle

and antithrombin III; cell 
adhesion to ECM

Embryonic epithelia 
and mesenchyme, 
developmentally 
regulated in adult 
lymphocytes

Binds fibronectin; collagens I, 
III, and V; thrombospondin; 
basic fibroblast growth 
factor; cell adhesion to ECM

ECM, extracellular matrix; EGF, epidermal growth factor; GAG, glycosaminoglycan.

 

CHAPTER 29  n  Extracellular Matrix Molecules 

523

APPENDIX 29.3 
Adhesive Glycoproteins

Name(s)

Agrin

Fibrinogen

Composition

Expression

Ligands

Functions and Diseases

One-gene, 205-kD protein 
with cysteine-rich, EGF, 
and Kazal protease 
inhibitor domains

2 × 67 kD Aα chains, 
2 × 56 kD Bβ chains, 
2 ×–47 kD γ chains, 
joined by disulfide bonds; 
N-linked CHO on Bβ & 
γ chains

Motor neurons secrete 

? Acetylcholine 

Aggregates acetylcholine 

into basal lamina of 
neuromuscular 
junction

receptor

receptors

Hepatocytes secrete into 

Platelet integrin 

blood

GPIIb/GPIIIa

Thrombin cleavage releases 
fibrin, which polymerizes 
into fibrils stabilized by 
covalent crosslinking by 
transglutaminase; 
deficiency or defects 
cause bleeding

Fibronectin

One gene; RNA splicing 

Many tissues; increased 

Fibrin, heparin, 

Assembles fibrils in ECM; 

Fibulin

HB-GAM (heparin-
binding, growth-
associated molecule)

Laminin

isoforms of 235–270 kD; 
dimers disulfide-bonded; 
12 FN-I, 2 FN-II and 
15–17 FN-III domains; 
N- and O-linked CHO

One gene; RNA splicing 
generates monomeric 
isoforms of 566, 601 and 
683 residues with 9 EGF 
and 3 complement-like 
domains; N- and O-linked 
CHO

136 residues, 5 internal 

disulfide bonds

1 × 200–400 kD A chain, 

1 × 200 kD B1 chain, 
1 × 200 kD B2 chain, 
several isoforms of  
each; poly-N-acetyl 
galactosamine

with wounding

cells via integrins, 
collagen

promotes cellular 
adhesion to ECM and 
migration

Fibroblasts; present in 

plasma and some 
basement membranes

Ca2+, fibronectin, 

fibrinogen

Required for elastin 

assembly; mutated in 
some patients with 
macular degeneration

Brain, uterus, intestine, 
kidney, muscle, lung, 
skin

Epithelium, endothelium, 

smooth & striated 
muscle, peripheral 
nerve, myotendinous 
junction

Heparin

? Neuronal differentiation

Nidogen, 6 integrins 
perlecan, collagen 
IV, α-dystroglycan

Self-associates into network 

in basement membrane 
linked to collagen IV 
network by nidogen; 
promotes cell adhesion 
and migration

Laminin-binding 
protein (Mac-2)

Soluble S-type monomeric 

lectin of 29–35 kD

Macrophages, epithelia, 
fibroblast, trophoblast, 
cancer cells

Poly-N-acetyl 

?

galactosamine on 
laminin

Link protein

One gene; alternative 

Cartilage

splicing generates 
isoforms of 41, 46, & 
51 kD with two 
4-cysteine & one 
immunoglobulin domains; 
CHO content variable

Aggrecan and 

hyaluronan

Links aggrecan to 

hyaluronan

Mucins

Heterogeneous secreted & 

GI tract, salivary glands

Selectins

Lubricates mucous 

membranes

transmembrane 
glycoproteins

Nidogen (entactin)

One-gene, 148-kD 

monomeric protein with 
8 EGF & 2 EF hand 
domains; N- & O-linked 
CHO

Basement membranes of 
epithelia, muscles, and 
nerves

Laminin, collagen 

Links collagen IV to laminin 

IV, Ca2+

in basement membrane

Osteopontin (secreted 

Monomer of ~300 residues, 

Bone, milk, kidney, 

phosphoprotein)

phosphorylated, N- & 
O-linked CHO, including 
sialic acid

uterus, ovary

? Vitronectin 
receptor; ? 
hydroxyapatite

Promotes cell adhesion to 

ECM, including 
osteoclasts to bone

Continued

524 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

APPENDIX 29.3 
Adhesive Glycoproteins—cont’d

Name(s)
Restrictin

SPARC (secreted 
protein rich in 
cysteine); 
osteonectin

Composition
3 × 180 kD chains linked 
by disulfide bonds; each 
has 1 cysteine-rich, EGF, 
9 FN-III and 1 fibrinogen-
like domains

Expression
A limited number of 

neurons in embryonic 
nervous systems

Ligands
Cells, receptor 

unknown

Functions and Diseases
? Cell adhesion

One-gene; 32-kD monomer

Bone, skin, connective 

Collagens III and  

? Wound healing, 

tissue

V, Ca2+, 
hydroxyapatite, 
cells

development

Tenascin (cytotactin)

Four genes (C, R, X, Y) and 

Embryonic mesenchyme; 

Integrins, Ig-CAMs, 

Tenascin-X mutated in 

alternate splicing; EGF, 
FN-III, and fibrinogen-like 
domains; chains linked by 
disulfides

adult perichondrium, 
periosteum, tendon, 
ligament, myotendinous 
junction, wounds

proteoglycans

some patients with 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome; 
mice with tenascin-C null 
mutation develop 
normally

Thrombospondin

420-kD protein with 

procollagen, EGF, and 
complement-like domains

Vitronectin

One-gene, 75-kD protein 

with N-linked CHO, 
phosphorylated, sulfated 
Secreted by liver into 
blood

Platelets, fibroblasts, 

embryonic heart, 
muscle, bone, brain

Integrin αVβ3, heparin, 

glass, plastic

von Willebrand factor

One-gene, 2050-residue 

Endothelium, platelets

protein that forms head 
to head and tail to tail 
disulfide-linked oligomers, 
N- & O-linked CHO

Integrin αvβ3, CD36 

Platelet aggregation; 

cell surface 
receptor, 
syndecan, Ca2+

Promotes cell 

adhesion, 
inactivates 
heparin, stabilizes 
plasminogen 
activator inhibitor
Factor VIII, heparin, 

collagen, platelet 
integrin GPIIb/
GPIIIa

stimulates proliferation of 
smooth muscle; inhibits 
proliferation of 
endothelium

Promotes adhesion of 
platelets to collagen  
and each other; required 
to control bleeding; 
deficiency causes most 
common congenital blood 
clotting abnormality

CHO, oligosaccharide chains; ECM, extracellular matrix; EF hand, calcium binding motif of calmodulin family; EGF, epidermal growth factor;  
GPI, glycosylphosphatidylinositol; FN, fibronectin; Ig-CAM, immunoglobulin cell adhesion molecule.

C H A P T E R 

30 

Cellular Adhesion

All cells interact with molecules in their environment, 

in many cases relying on cell-surface adhesion proteins 
to  bind  these  molecules.  Multicellular  organisms  are 
particularly dependent on adhesion of cells to each other 
and the extracellular matrix (ECM). During development, 
carefully  regulated  genetic  programs  specify  cell-cell  
and cell-matrix interactions that determine the architec-
ture of each tissue and organ. Some adhesive interactions 
are  stable.  Muscle  cells  must  adhere  firmly  to  each  
other and to the connective tissue of tendons to transmit 
force to the skeleton (see Chapter 39). Skin cells must 
also bind tightly to each other and the underlying con-
nective  tissue  to  resist  abrasion  (see  Fig.  35.6).  On  the 
other  hand,  many  cellular  interactions  are  transient  
and  delicate.  At  sites  of  inflammation,  leukocytes  roll 
along  endothelial  cells  lining  small  blood  vessels  and 
then  interact  weakly  with  the  ECM  as  they  migrate 
through  connective  tissue  (look  ahead  to  Figs.  30.13  
and 30.14).

Cells  use  a  relatively  small  repertoire  of  adhesion 
mechanisms  to  interact  with  matrix  molecules  and  
each  other.  A  conceptual  breakthrough  came  when 
comparisons  of  amino  acid  sequences  showed  that 
most  adhesion  proteins  fall  into  five  large  families  
(Fig.  30.1).  Within  each  of  these  distinctive  families, 
ancestral  genes  duplicated  and  diverged  during  evolu-
tion,  giving  rise  to  adhesion  proteins  with  the  many 
different  specificities  required  for  embryonic  develop-
ment,  maintenance  of  organ  structure,  and  migrations 
of  cells  of  our  defense  systems.  General  principles 
emerged  from  characterizing  a  few  examples.  Several 
important  adhesion  proteins  fall  outside  the  five  major 
families,  and  additional  families  may  emerge  from  con-
tinued research.

Many  adhesion  proteins  were  named  before  they 
were  classified  into  families.  Tables  30.1  through  30.5 
are  designed  to  help  the  reader  with  the  challenging 
nomenclature.  Many  adhesion  proteins  are  named  

Immunoglobulin
family (ICAM-1)

CD54

E-cadherin

Integrin αLβ2
(LFA-1)

CD11a/CD18

CD62P

CD43

P-selectin

Mucin

FIGURE  30.1  CLASSES  OF  ADHESION  PROTEINS.  Immuno-
globulin cell adhesion molecules (IgCAMs) have one or more extracel-
lular  domains  folded  like  an  immunoglobulin  domain  (orange). 
Cadherins  have  five  or  more  extracellular  CAD  (cadherin)  domains 
(maroon) that typically bind the same class of cadherin on a neighbor-
ing  cell.  Ca2+  stabilizes  the  interaction  of  neighboring  CAD  domains. 
Their  cytoplasmic  tails  bind  β-catenin  (blue)  and  other  adapter  pro-
teins. Integrins are heterodimers of α and β subunits that bind a wide 
range of matrix molecules by combinations of 1 of 16 α-chains and 
1 of 8 β-chains. Selectins have a Ca2+-dependent lectin (carbohydrate-
binding) domain (green), an epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like domain 
(blue),  and  a  variable  number  of  complement  regulatory  domains 
(red).  Mucins  use  multiple  carbohydrates  for  interactions  with  other 
cells.  CD  numbers  refer  to  the  names  of  representative  adhesion 
molecules using the “clusters of differentiation” nomenclature (see the 
text). Single transmembrane helices anchor all these receptors to the 
plasma membrane. Adapter proteins link the cytoplasmic tails of most 
adhesion proteins to the actin cytoskeleton or, in the case of special-
ized  cadherins  and  integrins,  to  intermediate  filaments.  ICAM,  inter-
cellular  adhesion  molecule;  LFA,  lymphocyte  function–associated 
antigen.  (Modified  from  van  der  Merwe  PA,  Barclay  AN.  Transient 
intercellular adhesion: the importance of weak protein-protein interac-
tions. Trends Cell Biol. 1994;19:354–358.)

 525

526 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

“CD” followed by a number. This stands for “clusters of 
differentiation,” a term used to classify cell-surface anti-
gens recognized by monoclonal antibodies. These names 
were given without knowledge of the structure or func-
tion of the antigen. Hence, members of the four major 
families of adhesion proteins have CD numbers.

This  chapter  first  highlights  some  general  features  
of  adhesion  proteins  and  then  introduces  the  five  
major families: immunoglobulin–cell adhesion molecules  
(IgCAMs),  cadherins, 
integrins,  selectins,  and 
mucins.  While  learning  about  each  family,  the  reader 
should  bear  in  mind  that  these  receptors  rarely  act 
alone.  Rather,  they  usually  function  as  parts  of  multi-
component  systems.  Two  examples  at  the  end  of  the 
chapter  illustrate  the  cooperation  that  is  required  for 
leukocytes to respond to inflammation and for platelets 
to repair damaged blood vessels. Chapter 31 on intercel-
lular  junctions,  Chapter  32  on  specialized  connective 
tissues,  and  Chapter  38  on  cellular  motility  provide 
more  examples  of  cellular  adhesion.

General Principles of Cellular Adhesion
First Principle of Adhesion
Cells  define  their  capacity  for  adhesion  by  selectively 
expressing  plasma  membrane  receptors  (cell  adhesion 
molecules  [CAMs])  with  selective  ligand-binding  activ-
ity.  Generally,  expression  of  the  proper  mix  of  recep-
tors is part of a genetic program for cell differentiation. 
In  some  cases,  extracellular  stimuli  control  expression 
of  adhesion  receptors.  For  example, 
inflammatory 
hormones  or  endotoxin  stimulate  endothelial  cells  to 
produce  E-selectin  on  demand.

Second Principle of Adhesion
Many  adhesion  proteins  bind  one  main  ligand,  and 
many  ligands  bind  a  single  type  of  receptor  (refer  to 
Tables  30.1  through  30.5).  If  this  one-to-one  pairing 
were  the  rule,  adhesion  would  be  simple  indeed. 
However,  many  exceptions  exist,  particularly  in  the 
integrin  family  of  receptors  (Table  30.3),  which  gener-
ally  bind  more  than  one  ligand,  and  some  ligands,  
such  as  fibronectin,  bind  more  than  one  integrin.  One 
can generalize about the ligands for the several families 
of  CAMs:
•  Most  cadherins  prefer  to  bind  themselves,  so  they 
promote the adhesion of like cells. These homophilic 
interactions  (association  of  like  receptors  on  two 
cells) require Ca2+.

•  Most  IgCAMs  bind  other  cell-surface  adhesion  pro-
teins. These heterophilic interactions (association 
of unlike receptors) may occur between the same or 
different cell types.

•  Selectins  bind  anionic  polysaccharides  like  those  on 
mucins.  Generally,  such  interactions  bind  together 
two different types of cells.

A

a

b

Dissociated cells

of two types

Cluster of cells sorted

with b cells inside

High level
of cadherin

Low level
of cadherin

B

Cluster with cells expressing

a high level of cadherin

on the inside

FIGURE 30.2  SORTING OF EMBRYONIC CELLS. A, When cells 
from different tissues are dissociated and mixed together, they spon-
taneously sort themselves into two layers, with the more adherent cells 
inside  the  less-adherent  cells.  B,  Cells  with  high  concentrations  of 
cadherin  sort  inside  less-adherent  cells.  (Based  on  the  work  of  M. 
Steinberg, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ.)

•  Integrins  stand  apart  because  they  bind  a  variety  of 
ligands:  matrix  macromolecules,  such  as  fibronectin 
(see  Fig.  29.14)  and  laminin  (see  Fig.  39.9);  soluble 
proteins,  such  as  fibrinogen  in  blood;  and  adhesion 
proteins  on  other  cells,  including  IgCAMs  and  one 
cadherin.

Third Principle of Adhesion
Cells  modulate  adhesion  by  controlling  the  surface 
density,  state  of  aggregation,  and  state  of  activation  of 
their  adhesion  receptors.  Surface  density  reflects  not 
only  the  level  of  synthesis  but  also  the  partitioning  of 
adhesion molecules between the plasma membrane and 
intracellular storage compartments. For example, endo-
thelial cells express P-selectin constitutively but store it 
internally in membranes of cytoplasmic vesicles. When 
inflammatory cytokines activate endothelial cells, these 
vesicles  fuse  with  the  plasma  membrane,  exposing 
P-selectin on the cell surface, where it binds white blood 
cells  (Fig.  30.13).  The  importance  of  surface  density  is 
illustrated by an experiment with mixtures of cells that 
express different levels of the same cadherin. Over time, 
they sort from each other, with the more adherent cells 
forming a cluster surrounded by the less-adherent cells 
(Fig.  30.2).  Such  differential  expression  of  cadherin 
determines the position of the oocyte in Drosophila egg 
follicles. A variety of extracellular stimuli activate intra-
cellular  signaling  pathways  in  lymphocytes,  platelets, 
and other cells. These pathways enhance or inhibit the 
ligand-binding activity of integrins already located on the 
cell surface.

Fourth Principle of Adhesion
The rates of ligand binding and dissociation are impor-
tant determinants of cellular adhesion. Many cell-surface 

 

CHAPTER 30  n  Cellular Adhesion 

527

adhesion  proteins  (including  IgCAMs,  cadherins,  integ-
rins, and selectins) bind their ligands weakly compared 
with  other  specific  macromolecular  interactions,  such  
as antigens and antibodies, hormones and receptors, or 
transcription  factors  and  DNA.  The  measured  dissocia-
tion equilibrium constants for adhesion receptors are in 
the range of 1 to 100 µM, reflecting high rate constants 
(>1 s−1)  for  dissociation  of  ligand.  This  actually  makes 
good  biological  sense.  Rapidly  reversible  interactions 
allow white blood cells to roll along the endothelium of 
blood vessels (Fig. 30.13). Transient adhesion also allows 
fibroblasts  to  migrate  through  connective  tissue.  In 
contrast, the interactions of cells in epithelia and muscle 
appear  to  be  more  stable,  perhaps  owing  to  multiple 
weak  interactions  between  clustered  adhesion  pro-
teins  cooperating  to  stabilize  adherens  junctions  and 
desmosomes  (see  Fig.  31.8).  The  combined  strength  
of  these  bonds  is  said  to  increase  the  “avidity”  of  the 
interaction.

Fifth Principle of Adhesion
Many adhesion receptors interact with the cytoskeleton 
inside  the  cell.  Adapter  proteins  link  cadherins  and 
integrins  to  actin  filaments  or  intermediate  filaments. 
These  interactions  provide  mechanical  continuity  from 
cell  to  cell  in  muscles  and  epithelia,  allowing  them  to 
transmit forces and resist mechanical disruption.

Sixth Principle of Adhesion
Association of ligands with adhesion receptors activates 
intracellular  signal  transduction  pathways,  leading  to 
changes  in  gene  expression,  cellular  differentiation, 
secretion, motility, receptor activation, and cell division. 
Signaling  through  adhesion  receptors  allows  cells  to 
adjust their behavior based on physical interactions with 
the surrounding matrix or cells.

Identification and Characterization  
of Adhesion Receptors
The  ability  of  mixed  populations  of  cells  to  sort  into 
homogeneous  aggregates  revealed  that  mechanisms 
exist  to  bind  like  cells  together.  Similar  experiments 
showed that cells also bind matrix macromolecules, such 
as  fibronectin,  laminin,  collagen,  and  proteoglycans. 
Biochemical  isolation  of  the  responsible  adhesion  pro-
teins  was  challenging,  but  progressed  rapidly  once 
monoclonal antibodies (see Fig. 28.10) that inhibit adhe-
sion were available. These antibodies provided assays for 
purification  of  adhesion  proteins  and  cloning  of  their 
complementary  DNAs  (cDNAs).  With  representatives 
from  each  family  in  hand,  cloning  cDNAs  for  related 
proteins  was  straightforward.  Once  the  first  crystal 
structures  were  determined,  the  structures  of  other 
family members could be modeled using the structures 
of shared functional domains.

Insights  about  the  functions  of  adhesion  receptors 
came in several steps. Localization of a protein on spe-
cific cells frequently provided the first clues. Typically, 
the expression of each protein is restricted to a subset 
of cells or to a specific time during embryonic develop-
ment or both. Next, investigators used specific antibod-
ies to test for the participation of the adhesion protein 
in cellular interactions in vitro or in tissues. Both human 
genetic diseases and mutations in mice and other organ-
isms produce defects caused by the absence of adhesion 
proteins. Blistering skin diseases called pemphigus illus-
trate the serious consequences when pathological auto-
antibodies disrupt adhesion between skin cells expressing 
the  antigen  (see  Fig.  31.8).  In  leukocyte  adhesion  defi-
ciency,  white  blood  cells  lack  the  β2-integrin  that  is 
required  to  bind  the  endothelial  cells  that  line  blood 
vessels. These defective white blood cells fail to bind to 
blood  vessel  walls  or  to  migrate  into  connective  tissue 
at  sites  of  infection.  Patients  with  a  bleeding  disorder 
called  Bernard-Soulier  syndrome  lack  one  of  the  adhe-
sion receptors for von Willebrand factor, a protein that 
promotes platelet aggregation. Loss of cadherins contrib-
utes to the spread of some cancer cells.

Immunoglobulin Family of Cell  
Adhesion Molecules
The IgCAM family includes hundreds of adhesion proteins 
that  bind  ligands  on  the  surfaces  of  other  cells.  Some 
interactions are homophilic binding to the same IgCAM 
on  another  cell;  others  are  heterophilic  with  different 
IgCAMs, integrins, other proteins or proteins with sialic 
acid. These interactions help specify interactions between 
different cell types in developing and mature animals.

IgCAMs have one to seven extracellular immunoglobu-
lin  domains  anchored  to  the  plasma  membrane  by  a 
single  transmembrane  helix  (Fig.  30.3  and  Table  30.1). 
The compact immunoglobulin (Ig) domains consist of 90 
to 115 residues folded into seven to nine β-strands in two 
sheets,  usually  stabilized  by  an  intramolecular  disulfide 
bond. The N- and C-termini are at opposite ends of the 
Ig domains, so they can form linear arrays. Some nervous 
system IgCAMs have three or four fibronectin III (FN-III) 
domains  (see  Fig.  13.13)  between  the  Ig  domains  and 
the membrane anchor. Most IgCAMs consist of a single 
polypeptide, but others are multimeric, with two (CD8) 
or four subunits (see Fig. 27.8 for the T-cell receptor).

The  C-terminal  cytoplasmic  tails  of  these  receptors 
vary  in  sequence  and  binding  sites  for  intracellular 
ligands.  The  cytoplasmic  domains  of  the  lymphocyte 
accessory receptors CD4 and CD8 bind protein tyrosine 
kinases required for cellular activation (see Fig. 27.8 for 
CD4).  The  cytoplasmic  domains  of  neuronal  IgCAMs 
bind  PDZ  domain  proteins  or  the  membrane  skeleton 
(see Fig. 13.11). An adapter protein links IgCAMs in the 
nectin family to cytoplasmic actin filaments.

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

528 

A

Differentiated  metazoan  cells  express  IgCAMs  selec-
tively, especially during embryonic development, when 
they contribute to the specificity of cellular interactions 
required  to  form  the  organs.  Neurons  and  glial  cells 
express  specific  IgCAMs  that  guide  the  growth  of  
neurites,  mediate  synapse  formation,  and  promote  
the formation of myelin sheaths. In adults, interaction of 
endothelial cell intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1 
with a white blood cell integrin is essential for adhesion 
and  movement  of  the  leukocytes  into  the  connective 
tissue at sites of inflammation (Fig. 30.13).

Like other cell adhesion proteins, IgCAMs participate 
in signaling processes. Best understood are interactions 
of  lymphocytes  with  antigen-presenting  cells  during 
immune responses. IgCAMs reinforce the interaction of 
T-cell receptors with major histocompatibility complex 
molecules  carrying  appropriate  antigens  on  other  cells 
(see  Fig.  27.8).  Although  individual  interactions  are 
weak, the combination of specific (T-cell receptor) and 
nonspecific (CD2 and CD4) interactions with the target 
cell suffices to initiate signaling.

Cadherin Family of Adhesion Receptors
The complex architecture of organs in vertebrates relies 
on Ca2+-dependent associations between the cells medi-
ated by more than 80 cadherins (Table 30.2). Their name 
derives  from  “calcium-dependent  adhesion”  protein. 

2

1

3

4
5

1

2

3

1

2

1

3

2

2

3

2

5

3

6
7

1

1

4

5

6
7

1

2

3

ICAM-1
CD54

Nectin

ICAM-2
CD102

VCAM-1
CD106

MAdCAM-1

B

CD4D1D2

CD4D3D4

CD8α/α

FIGURE 30.3  STRUCTURES OF REPRESENTATIVE IMMUNO-
GLOBULIN  CELL  ADHESION  MOLECULES.  A,  Domain  maps  of 
examples with their common names and CD num bers. B, Ribbon dia-
grams of the lymphocyte coreceptors CD4 (domains 1 and 2 on the left 
and domains 3 and 4 in the middle) and CD8. ICAM, intercellular adhe-
sion  molecule;  MAdCAM,  mucosal  addressin  cell  adhesion  molecule; 
VCAM, vascular cell adhesion molecule. (For reference, see Protein Data 
Bank [PDB; www.rcsb.org] files 3CD4, 1CID, and 1CD8.)

TABLE 30.1 

Immunoglobulin Family of Cell Adhesion Molecules*

Examples
CD2†
CD4†
CD8†
C-CAM
F11 (contactin)
ICAM-1†
ICAM-2
L1 (Ng-CAM) [mouse]
LFA-3 (CD58)

MAG
NCAM
Neurofascin [chick]
PECAM-1 (CD31)

Structure

2Ig-1TM
4Ig-1TM
Dimer: 1Ig-1TM
4Ig-1TM
6Ig-4FN-II-1TM
5Ig-1TM
2Ig-1TM
6Ig-3FN-III-1TM
2Ig-1TM or GPI 

anchor
5Ig-1TM
5Ig-3FN-III-1TM
6Ig-4FN-III-1TM
6Ig-1TM

Extracellular 
Ligands

LFA-3 (CD58)
Class II MHC
Class I MHC
Self

LFA-1, MAC-1

Self
CD2

Neurons
Self
? Self
Self

Intracellular 
Ligands

Lck
Lck

Ankyrin

Ankyrin

TAG-1
VCAM-1

6Ig-4FN-III-GPI anchor
7Ig-1TM

? Self
WBC α4 integrin

Expression

Functions

T cells
T cells, macrophages
Cytotoxic; other T cells
Liver, intestine, WBCs
Neurons
Epithelia, WBCs
Endothelium, WBCs
Neurons, Schwann cells
WBCs, epithelia, 

fibroblasts

Glial cells
Neurons, other cells
Neurites
Platelets, endothelium, 

myeloid cells

Neurons
Endothelium 
(regulated)

T-cell activation
T-cell coreceptor
T-cell coreceptor
Cell adhesion
Neurite fasciculation
WBC adhesion

Adhesion
Adhesion

Myelin formation
Adhesion
Bundling neurites
Adhesion

Neuron migration
WBC/endothelium 

adhesion

CAM, cell adhesion molecule; CD, cellular differentiation antigen; FN-III, fibronectin-III domain; GPI, glycosylphosphatidylinositol; ICAM, intercellular 
adhesion molecule; Ig, immunoglobulin domain; Lck, nonreceptor tyrosine kinase; LFA, lymphocyte function–associated antigen; MAG, myelin-associated 
glycoprotein; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; NCAM, neural cell adhesion molecule; PECAM, platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule; TAG, 
transient axonal glycoprotein; TM, transmembrane domain; VCAM, vascular cell adhesion molecule; WBC, white blood cells.
*Hundreds are known.
†Partial atomic structure.

 

CHAPTER 30  n  Cellular Adhesion 

529

TABLE 30.2  Cadherin Family of Adhesion Molecules*
Type (Examples)
Classic Cadherins
E-cadherin
N-cadherin

Catenins (actin)
Catenins (actin)

Self
Self

Extracellular Ligands

Intracellular Ligands

R-cadherin
Desmosomal Cadherins
Desmocollins

Self

Catenins (actin)

Expression

Functions

Epithelia, others
Neurons, muscle, 

endothelium

Retina, neurons

Adherens junctions
Adhesion

Adhesion

Self, desmogleins

Plakoglobin (desmoplakin, 

Epithelia

Desmosomes

plackophilin, IF)

Desmogleins

Self, desmocollins

Plakoglobin (desmoplakin, 

Epithelia, heart

Desmosomes

plackophilin, IF)

Atypical Cadherins
T-cadherin
Protocadherins
α-, β-, and 

γ- Protocadherins
Signaling Cadherins
RET protooncogene

Self

Self

Self

None (GPI anchor)

Early embryos, neurons

Intercellular adhesion

Fyn tyrosine kinase (some)

Vertebrate neurons, 

Self-avoidance

other cells

None

Endocrine glands, 

Intercellular adhesion

neurons

GPI, glycosylphosphatidylinositol; IF, intermediate filament.
*More than 80 are known. Plakoglobin is also known as γ-catenin.

Genes  for  cadherin  domains  appeared  in  unicellular 
precursors of sponges, representing an early step toward 
the evolution of metazoan organisms.

Cadherins  generally  interact  with  like  cadherins  on 
the  surfaces  of  other  cells  in  a  calcium-dependent 
fashion,  but  some  cadherins  form  heterophilic  interac-
tions. Homophilic interactions of cadherins link epithelial 
and muscle cells to their neighbors, especially at special-
ized adhesive junctions called adherens junctions and 
desmosomes (Fig. 30.4; also see Fig. 31.8).

The structural hallmark of the cadherin family is the 
CAD  domain  (Figs.  30.5  and  30.6),  which  consists  of 
approximately  110  residues  folded  into  a  sandwich  
of  seven  β-strands.  This  fold  resembles  Ig  and  FN-III 
domains, but appears to be a case of convergent evolu-
tion.  N-  and  C-termini  are  on  opposite  ends  of  CAD 
domains.  Ca2+  bound  to  three  sites  between  adjacent 
CAD domains links them together into rigid rods. Without 
Ca2+,  the  domains  rotate  freely  around  their  linker 
peptides.

Classic cadherins interact head to head through their 
N-terminal  CAD1  domains  (Fig.  30.6D)  forming  strong 
“trans-interactions”  with  a  partner  on  another  cell. 
Cadherins  on  the  same  cell  can  interact  laterally  in  
“cis-interactions.”  Three-dimensional  reconstructions  of 
electron micrographs of desmosomes show both trans- 
and  cis-interactions  (Fig.  30.6B).  Cadherins  are  synthe-
sized  with  a  small  domain  before  the  N-terminal 
interaction strand, which must be removed by proteoly-
sis to allow binding to another cadherin.

A  single  α-helix  links  classic  cadherins  and  desmo-
somal cadherins to the plasma membrane, but T-cadherin 

A. Desmosome

B. Adherens junction

Cadherins

Cadherins

FIGURE  30.4  ELECTRON  MICROGRAPHS  OF  ROD-LIKE 
CADHERINS  CONNECTING  THE  PLASMA  MEMBRANES  OF 
ADJACENT  CELLS.  Intestinal  epithelial  cells  were  prepared  by 
rapid  freezing,  freeze-fracture,  deep  etching,  and  rotary  shadowing.  
A,  Desmosome  with  associated  intermediate  filaments  in  the  cyto-
plasm. B, Adherens junction with associated actin filaments. (Courtesy 
N. Hirokawa, University of Tokyo, Japan. Modified from Hirokawa N, 
Heuser  J.  Quick-freeze,  deep-etch  visualization  of  the  cytoskeleton 
beneath surface differentiations of intestinal epithelial cells. J Cell Biol. 
1981;91:399–409, copyright The Rockefeller University Press.)

has  a  glycosylphosphatidylinositol  (GPI)  anchor  (see  
Fig. 13.10). Cytoplasmic domains vary in size, sequence, 
and  binding  sites  for  associated  proteins.  The  protoon-
cogene  RET  is  a  cadherin  with  a  cytoplasmic  tyrosine 
kinase domain.

Adapter  proteins  link  the  cytoplasmic  domains  of 
cadherins  to  actin  filaments  or  intermediate  filaments  

530 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

E-cadherin

Desmocollin-1a

Desmoglein-1

T-cadherin

Protocadherins

RET

β-catenin binding

ICS

ICS

ICS

Glycosylphosphatidyl-
inositol anchor

Src-family
kinase binding

Tyrosine kinase

FIGURE 30.5  DOMAIN MAPS OF CADHERINS. All have extra-
cellular CAD domains. A single transmembrane segment anchors five 
examples. A glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) tail anchors T-cadherin. 
Intracellular  cadherin  segment  (ICS)  domains  interact  with  catenin 
adapters  to  link  E-cadherin  to  actin  filaments  and  desmocollin  and 
desmoglein to intermediate filaments. 

to reinforce adhesion and maintain the physical integrity 
of tissues (see Fig. 31.8). The cytoplasmic tails of classic 
cadherins  bind  along  the  entire  length  of  the  adapter 
protein  β-catenin  (catenin  is  “link”  in  Greek),  a  long, 
twisted  coil  of  36  short  α-helices  (see  Fig.  13.10F). 
Monomers  of  α-catenin  link  β-catenin  to  actin  fila-
ments, an interaction strengthened by tension. α-Catenin 
dimers  also  stabilize  actin  filaments.  The  more  compli-
cated  cytoplasmic  domains  of  desmosomal  cadherins 
(desmocollins and desmogleins) interact with γ-catenin 
(a  relative  of  β-catenin  also  called  plakoglobin)  and 
desmoplakin.  Desmoplakin  links  these  cadherins  to 
keratin intermediate filaments (see Fig. 31.8B). The tails 
of  some  cadherins  interact  with  formins,  proteins  that 
nucleate and elongate actin filaments (see Fig. 33.14).

Signaling by Cadherins and Catenins
In  addition  to  helping  with  the  mechanical  sorting  of 
embryonic  cells,  cadherins  produce  signals  that  influ-
ence cellular proliferation, migration, and differentiation. 
For example, interactions between cadherins on epithe-
lial cells result in “contact inhibition” of both growth 
and motility (see Figs. 41.3 and 41.11). Rho-family gua-
nosine  triphosphatases  (GTPases)  (see  Fig.  33.19) 
mediate  contact  inhibition  of  movements.  The  GTPase 
Rho stimulates contraction at the contact site, while the 
GTPase  Rac  drives  protrusion  of  the  side  of  the  cell 
facing  away  from  the  contact  site.  Both  cadherins  and 

Eph receptor tyrosine kinases participate in this reaction 
to cell-cell contact. Engagement of cadherins at sites of 
contact  also  stops  cellular  proliferation  through  the 
Hippo signaling pathway of protein kinases. This pathway 
inhibits expression of genes required for cell cycle pro-
gression such as cyclin-dependent kinases (see Fig. 41.3). 
The mechanism involves phosphorylation of a transcrip-
tion factor, excluding it from the nucleus.

Contact inhibition of growth and motility suppresses 
the  spread  of  cancer  cells,  so  mutations  disabling 
E-cadherin can contribute to the transition from benign 
to  invasive  malignant  tumors.  For  example,  genetic 
defects  in  E-cadherin  predispose  people  to  stomach 
cancer. The oncogenic tyrosine kinase Src (see Box 27.5) 
phosphorylates  both  E-cadherin  and  β-catenin.  This 
phosphorylation  is  associated  with  loss  of  adhesion  of 
epithelial cells, suggesting one way in which transforma-
tion might alter cellular adhesion.

In  addition  to  linking  cadherins  to  actin  filaments, 
β-catenin  is  an  active  component  in  the  Wnt  signal 
transduction  pathway  that  regulates  gene  expression 
during  differentiation  of  embryonic  cells  (Fig.  30.7). 
Extracellular signaling proteins called Wnts regulate the 
concentration  of  β-catenin  available  to  regulate  gene 
expression. The pathway was discovered in Drosophila, 
where it helps to  determine the polarity of segments in 
early  embryos.  Wnts  were  named  from  the  original 
Drosophila  gene  Wingless  and  the  mouse  protoonco-
gene Int-1. The human genome encodes 29 Wnts.

Most  β-catenin  in  cells  is  bound  to  cadherins,  but  a 
second pool exchanges between the cytoplasm and the 
nucleus, where it recruits transcription factors to regu-
late the expression of genes for cellular proliferation and 
tissue differentiation. Cells synthesize β-catenin continu-
ously, but it turns over rapidly in resting cells, so little 
accumulates  in  the  nucleus.  A  cytoplasmic  complex 
controls degradation of β-catenin. The complex consists 
of  two  kinases—glycogen  synthase  kinase  (GSK)  and 
casein  kinase-1α—and  the  product  of  the  APC  gene 
(defective in patients with familial adenomatous polypo-
sis  coli,  giving  rise  to  multiple  precancerous  polyps  in 
the large intestine). Phosphorylated β-catenin is ubiqui-
tylated and degraded by proteasomes.

Wnts suppress the degradation of β-catenin by binding 
to seven-helix receptors and another class of receptors 
in  the  plasma  membrane.  Several  steps  downstream  in 
an incompletely characterized pathway, the Wnt signal 
inhibits  GSK  and  casein  kinase-1α.  Inhibition  of  the 
kinases stops proteolysis of β-catenin, so ongoing synthe-
sis  of  β-catenin  raises  the  concentration  that  is  free  to 
accumulate in the nucleus. Stem cell proliferation is one 
of many developmental events influenced by Wnt signal-
ing  and  adhesion  by  cadherins  (see  Box  41.2).  Wnt 
binding its receptors also activates a parallel “noncanoni-
cal pathway” involving Rho-family GTPases that control 
the cytoskeleton during cell migration.

 

CHAPTER 30  n  Cellular Adhesion 

531

A. EM data

D. Crystal structures

B. 3D reconstruction from EM

C. Atomic models fit to EM surfaces

E-CAD1

E-CAD2

E-CAD3

E-CAD4

E-CAD5

β-catenin

FIGURE 30.6  ADHESION BY CADHERINS. A, Electron micrograph of a thin section of a desmosome, colorized to emphasize the plasma 
membranes (red) and cadherin extracellular domains (blue). B, Three-dimensional reconstructions of the plasma membrane and cadherin extracel-
lular domains. C, Crystal structure of the C-cadherin extracellular domains fit into electron microscopic reconstructions of intercellular links between 
the cells. D, Ribbon diagrams of the crystal structure of a dimer of C-cadherin extracellular domains compared with the book icon for cadherins. 
The inset highlights the antiparallel intermolecular interaction of the two CAD1 domains mediated by flexible N-terminal peptides. A conserved 
tryptophan fits into a hydrophobic pocket of the partner CAD1 domain, forming the reciprocal interactions. Calcium ions (blue) stabilize interactions 
between CAD domains. (A–C, From He W, Cowin P, Stokes DL. Untangling desmosomal knots with electron tomography. Science. 2003;302:109–
113,  copyright  the  American  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science.  D,  For  reference,  see  PDB  file  1L3W  and  Boggen  TJ,  Murray  J, 
Chappuis-Flament S, et al. C-Cadherin ectodomain structure and implications for cell adhesion mechanisms. Science. 2002;296:1308–1313.)

Cadherin

CYTOPLASM

Wnt

Wnt receptor

β-catenin bound
to cadherin

Free β-catenin

APC

β-catenin
bound to
APC

Casein
kinase 1α

GSK

Transcription
factors

Tcf

NUCLEUS

DNA

Gene

expression

E3 ubiquitin
ligase SCFβTRCP
Degradation
of β-catenin by
proteasomes

FIGURE 30.7  PARTICIPATION OF β-CATENIN IN GENE EXPRESSION. Free β-catenin is in equilibrium with binding sites on cadherins 
and APC (adenomatous polyposis coli) and may also enter the nucleus, where it combines with Tcf/LEF-1 transcription factors. When β-catenin 
concentrations are low in the nucleus, Tcf/LEF-1 represses gene expression, but the complex of β-catenin with Tcf/LEF-1 activates the expression 
of  genes  for  cellular  growth  and  differentiation.  Synthesis  of β-catenin  is  constant,  so  degradation  determines  its  concentration  in  cytoplasm: 
glycogen synthetase kinase (GSK) and casein kinase-1α phosphorylate β-catenin bound to APC, triggering its ubiquitinylation and degradation. 
Extracellular Wnt acts through a seven-helix receptor and another receptor to promote gene expression by inhibiting the phosphorylation and 
degradation of β-catenin. 

532 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

Mutations can alter the balance of β-catenin synthesis 
and turnover. Loss of APCs or mutations of phosphoryla-
tion  sites  on  β-catenin  result  in  excess  β-catenin  that 
enters the nucleus and stimulates proliferation.

The  cadherin  expressed  from  the  RET  protoonco-
gene  signals  through  its  cytoplasmic  tyrosine  kinase 
domain  (Fig.  30.5).  Point  mutations  in  the  segment 
between  the  CAD  domains  and  the  plasma  membrane  
or tyrosine kinase of RET cause constitutive dimerization 
of  the  receptor  or  activation  of  the  tyrosine  kinase  
or  both.  These  mutations  cause  dominantly  inherited 
cancers of endocrine glands. On the other hand, muta-
tions  that  disable  RET  cause  Hirschsprung  disease. 
Autonomic  nerves  in  the  wall  of  the  intestines  fail  to 
develop, causing severe dysfunction.

Roles of Cadherins in Organ Formation
Differential expression and regulation of cadherins help 
guide  organ  formation  during  embryonic  development 
(Fig. 30.8). Cells with matching cadherins bind together 
and  exclude  cells  without  those  cadherins  (or  other 
appropriate  adhesion  receptors),  although  the  mecha-
nism  is  more  complicated  than  differential  affinities  of 
cadherins for each other. For example, cadherins can be 
activated or inactivated from inside the cell by signaling 
pathways  in  response  to  growth  factors  or  other  adhe-
sion  proteins.  In  other  situations,  IgCAMs  facilitate  the 
assembly of cadherins in adhesive junctions.

All  cells  of  early  embryos  express  several  different 
cadherins, but as soon as the embryo forms three germ 
layers,  the  ectoderm  on  the  outside  surface  expresses 
E-cadherin.  In  its  absence,  embryos  die.  Subsequently, 
when  ectoderm  folds  inward  to  form  the  neural  tube, 
those  cells  switch  to  expressing  N-cadherin.  Neurons  
use  protocadherins  to  avoid  making  synapses  with  
themselves  (see  below).  Later  in  development,  cells  
in  specialized  organs  typically  express  characteristic 

A

B

Ectoderm

Neural tube

L-CAM (E-cadherin)
Cadherin 6B
N-cadherin

FIGURE  30.8  RESTRICTED  EXPRESSION  OF  CADHERINS 
DURING FORMATION OF THE NEURAL TUBE. A, Distribution of 
three cadherins before and after the neural tube forms. B, Fluorescent 
antibody  staining  reveals  the  selective  expression  of  cadherin  6B 
(green) and N-cadherin (red) in the neural tube of a developing chick 
embryo. (Courtesy M. Takeichi, Kyoto University, Japan.)

cadherins,  such  as  those  in  osteoblasts  (OB-cadherin), 
kidney  (K-cadherin),  and  muscle  (M-cadherin).  A  giant-
sized cadherin links sensory stereocilia on the hair cells 
in the inner ear. These tip links pull open ion channels 
when the stereocilia move in response to sound waves.

Integrin Family of Adhesion Receptors
Integrins  are  the  main  cellular  receptors  for  ECM  mol-
ecules  (Table  30.3),  but  some  integrins  bind  adhesion 
molecules  on  other  cells.  Their  genes  arose  early  in 
metazoan evolution, so they are present in sponges and 
corals  that  branched  early  in  the  evolution  of  animals 
(see  Fig.  2.8).  Fibroblasts  and  white  blood  cells  use 
integrins  to  adhere  to  fibronectin  and  collagen  as  they 
move  through  the  ECM.  Integrins  bind  epithelial  and 
muscle cells to laminin in the basal lamina, providing the 
physical  attachments  necessary  to  transmit  internal 
forces to the matrix and to resist external forces (see Fig. 
31.8).  These  interactions  generate  signals  that  control 
cell growth and structure. When defects in small blood 
vessels  need  repair,  integrins  allow  platelets  to  adhere  
to  basement  membrane  collagen  and  to  each  other  via 
plasma  fibrinogen  (see  Fig.  30.14).  Together,  these 
interactions  are  essential  for  tissue  development  and 
integrity  in  multicellular  organisms.  Genetic  losses  of 
integrin function result in several human diseases.

Structure of Integrins
Integrins are heterodimers of two transmembrane poly-
peptides called α- and β-chains, which both contribute 
to ligand-binding specificity (Fig. 30.9). Vertebrate cells 
use  a  combinatorial  strategy  to  establish  their  integrin 
repertoire by selectively expressing a subset of 18 differ-
ent α-chains  and  eight β-chains.  These  chains  combine 
to  form  at  least  24  different  kinds  of  dimers  that  bind 
different  ligands.  Alternative  messenger  RNA  (mRNA) 
splicing (see Fig. 11.6) adds to the diversity of integrin 
isoforms.

The  ligand-binding  domains  of  the  α-  and  β-chains 
form a globular head connected to the plasma membrane 
by 16-nm legs (Fig. 30.9). More than 25 disulfide bonds 
stabilize these domains. All integrin β-chains and a subset 
of integrin α-chains have an I domain (inserted domain) 
with  a  bound  divalent  cation  that  interacts  with  acidic 
residues  of  ligands.  All  α-chains  have  an  N-terminal 
β-propeller  domain  similar  to  a  trimeric  G  protein 
β-subunit  (see  Fig.  25.9).  Interaction  of  the  α-chain 
propeller  domain  with  the  β-chain  I  domain  holds  the 
integrin dimer together. Single transmembrane segments 
anchor both integrin chains to the cell membrane. Short 
(α ≤77 residues; β = 40 to 60 residues, except β4 = 1000 
residues) C-terminal cytoplasmic tails contribute to effi-
cient heterodimer assembly.

The I domains and the β-propeller bind at least two 
sites  on  ligands.  For  instance,  integrin  α5β1  binds  two 

 

CHAPTER 30  n  Cellular Adhesion 

533

TABLE 30.3 

Integrin Family of Cell Adhesion Molecules*

Examples

Fibronectin receptors
GPIIb/GPIIIa

Structure
α5β1, others
αIIbβ3

Laminin receptor
LFA-1 (CD11/CD18)

α6β1, α7β1
αLβ2

MAC-1

Vitronectin receptor

VLA-4

αMβ2

αVβ3

α2β1

Extracellular 
Ligands

Fibronectin
Fibrinogen, von 

Willebrand factor

Laminin
Ig-CAM-1, -2, -3

Ig-CAM-1, 

fibrinogen
Vitronectin, 
fibronectin

Collagen, laminin

Me2+
Ca
Ca

Yes
Mg

Yes

Ca

Mg

Intracellular 
Ligands

Talin, paxillin
Talin, paxillin

Expression

Function

Fibroblasts, other cells
Platelets

Cell-matrix adhesion
Platelet aggregation

Talin, paxillin
Talin, paxillin

Epithelia, muscle
All WBCs

Talin, paxillin

WBCs except 
lymphocytes

Talin, paxillin

Endothelium, smooth 

muscle, others

Cell-matrix adhesion
WBC/endothelium 

adhesion

WBC/endothelium 

adhesion

Talin, paxillin

WBCs, epithelium, 

endothelium

WBC/matrix 

adhesion

CD, cellular differentiation antigen; GP, glycoprotein; ICAM, intercellular adhesion molecule; LFA, lymphocyte function–associated antigen; Me2+, divalent 
cation dependence; VLA, very late antigen; WBC, white blood cell.
*Twenty-four are known.

sites  on  fibronectin:  an  arginine-glycine-aspartic  acid 
(RGD) sequence on a surface loop of FN-III domain 10 
and  a  secondary  site  on  the  adjacent  FN-III  domain  9  
(see Fig. 29.14). Both sites are required for binding, so 
simple RGD peptides can compete fibronectin from the 
integrin.  Integrin  binding  sites  of  some  ligands  are  on 
separate  polypeptide  chains.  The  RDD  binding  site  for 
integrin α1β1 is on three different polypeptide chains of 
the type IV collagen triple helix.

Binding of extracellular ligands (outside-in signaling) 
and intracellular ligands (inside-out signaling) influences 
the  conformation  and  activity  of  integrins  (Fig.  30.10). 
Without  bound  ligands  integrins  bend  over  on  closely 
spaced  legs  held  together  by  interactions  of  the  trans-
membrane  helices.  This  closed  state  has  a  low  affinity 
for  extracellular  ligands  owing  to  an  occluded  binding 
site. Ligand binding inside or outside the cell favors an 
open  state  with  widely  spaced,  extended  legs  holding 
the head above the membrane. In this conformation the 
exposed  ligand-binding  site  has  the  highest  affinity  for 
extracellular ligands.

Extracellular Ligands
Integrins  are  more  promiscuous  than  most  adhesion 
receptors, as some bind to several protein ligands, and 
many matrix molecules bind to more than one integrin. 
For example, fibronectin binds to at least nine different 
integrins,  and  both  laminin  and  von  Willebrand  factor 
bind  at  least  five  different  integrins.  This  promiscuity 
reflects  common  motifs  in  the  ligands.  Approximately 
one-third  of  matrix  ligands  for  integrins  involve  the 
sequence motif RGD or other simple sequences in oth-
erwise unrelated proteins.

Even in the open state (legs apart), integrins generally 
have a low affinity for extracellular ligands. For example, 
the micromolar Kd for integrin α5β1 binding fibronectin 

A

β-propeller

Optional
I domain

Ig domains

I domain

Ig-like

EGF

domains

αV

β

B

C

(Book integrin icon)

α
β

I domain

β-propeller

α1, α2, αL, αM, αX
(~ 1200 aa)
α3, α5, α6, αIIb, αV
(~1000 aa)

I domain

EGFs

β subunit 
(~750 aa)

FIGURE 30.9 
INTEGRIN ARCHITECTURE. A, Ribbon diagram of 
integrin αVβ3 based on a crystal structure of the extracellular domain. 
The  I  domain  is  inserted  into  the  sequence  of  an  immunoglobulin- 
like  domain.  B,  Integrin  icon  used  throughout  this  book.  C,  Domain 
models  of  integrin  polypeptides.  Both  α-chains  and  β-chains  have 
single  transmembrane  segments  and  cytoplasmic  tails  that  vary  in 
length.  All  β-chains  and  some  α-chains  have  an  I  domain  (red)  that 
binds a divalent cation and participates in ligand binding. The seven 
blades of the α-chain β-propeller domains are shown in orange. The 
α-chain I domain, if present, is inserted between the second and third 
of the seven blades of its propeller domain. (A, Based on an atomic 
model.  For  reference,  see  PDB  file  1JV2  and  Xiong  JP,  Stehle  T, 
Diefenbach B, et al. Crystal structure of the extracellular segment of 
integrin αVβ3. Science. 2001;294:339–345. C, Modified from Kuhn K, 
Eble J. The structural basis of integrin-ligand interactions. Trends Cell 
Biol. 1994;4:256–261.)

534 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

B. Open State

β-propeller

I-domain

C. Open state with
     ligand bound

Ligand
binding
site

A. Low affinity
     closed state

t
i
n
u
b
u
s
-
α

t
i
n
u
b
u
s
-
β

Talin 
FERM
domain

FIGURE  30.10  CONFORMATIONAL  STATES  OF  INTEGRINS. 
Drawings based on atomic models derived from crystal structures and 
electron  microscopy.  The  bent  closed  conformation  observed  in  all 
crystal structures is inactive. Binding of either an extracellular ligand to 
the head or an activated signal transduction protein such as talin to 
the  cytoplasmic  domains  can  favor  the  open  active  state.  (Modified 
from Xiao T, Takagi J, Coller BS, et al. Structural basis for allostery in 
integrins  and  binding  to  fibrinogen-mimetic  therapeutics.  Nature. 
2004;432:59–67.)

A

results  in  rapid  association  and  dissociation,  allowing 
cells to adjust their grip on fibronectin in the matrix as 
they move through connective tissue. Nonadhesive RGD 
proteins, such as tenascin (see Fig. 29.16), may modulate 
these  interactions  by  competing  with  fibronectin  and 
other ligands for binding integrins.

Intracellular Ligands
Cytoplasmic  tails  of  integrins  interact  directly  or  indi-
rectly  with  a  remarkable  variety  of  signaling  and  struc-
tural  proteins  (Fig.  30.11).  These  interactions  are  best 
understood  at  focal  contacts,  specialized  sites  where 
integrins  cluster  together  to  transduce  transmembrane 
signals and link actin filaments across the plasma mem-
brane to the ECM. The adapter proteins talin and vin-
culin  link  the  cytoplasmic  domains  of  β-integrins  to 
actin filaments at the ends of stress fibers. Paxillin links 
integrins to signaling proteins, forming a scaffold for Src 
family tyrosine kinases (see Fig. 25.3) and focal  adhe-
sion kinase (an essential tyrosine kinase).

Several  types  of  integrins  associate  laterally,  in  the 
plane of the bilayer, with other transmembrane proteins. 
The  best  characterized  is  CD47  (also  called  integrin-
associated protein), an IgCAM with five transmembrane 

B

GLASS SLIP

Actin

ECM

PM

C

EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX

Integrins

VASP

?

Src

FAK (focal
  adhesion
  kinase)

Paxillin

Crk (SH3 /SH2
  adaptor)

Cas (adaptor)

Csk

Talin

Vinculin

FIGURE 30.11  FOCAL CONTACTS OF EPITHELIAL CELLS WITH THE EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX (ECM). A, Fluorescence micrograph 
of parts of two vertebrate tissue culture cells with focal contacts labeled with a fluorescent antibody to phosphotyrosine (orange). Actin filament 
stress fibers are stained green with phalloidin. B, Electron micrograph of a thin section of two focal contacts showing fine connections to the 
ECM deposited on the surface of the glass coverslip and cross-sections of actin filaments in the cytoplasm. This HeLa (Henrietta Lacks) cell was 
grown on a glass coverslip, fixed, and cut perpendicular to the substrate. C, Drawing of the interactions of some of the proteins concentrated 
on the cytoplasmic face of the membrane at focal contacts. For clarity, the actin filament interactions (left) are shown separately from some signaling 
proteins (right). The rod-shaped dimeric protein talin interacts with the cytoplasmic domains of β-integrins and actin filaments. Vinculin interacts 
with membrane phospholipids, actin filaments, and talin. An unidentified protein (the question mark) links the adapter protein paxillin to integrins. 
Paxillin anchors tyrosine kinases (FAK and Src) and, after phosphorylation, the adapter proteins Crk and Cas. (A, Courtesy K. Burridge, University 
of  North  Carolina,  Chapel  Hill.  B,  Courtesy  Pamela  Maupin,  Johns  Hopkins  University,  Baltimore,  MD.  From  Maupin  P,  Pollard  TD.  Improved 
preservation and staining of HeLa cell actin filaments. J Cell Biol. 1983;96:51–62, copyright the Rockefeller University Press. C, For reference, 
see  Turner  C.  Paxillin  and  focal  adhesion  signaling.  Nat  Cell  Biol.  2000;2:E231–E236;  and  Critchley  DR.  Focal  adhesions—the  cytoskeletal 
connection. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2000;12:133–139.)

 

CHAPTER 30  n  Cellular Adhesion 

535

segments. Binding of the adhesive glycoprotein, throm-
bospondin, to the extracellular Ig-like domain of CD47 
generates  a  transmembrane  signal  through  trimeric 
G-proteins  that  contributes  to  neutrophil  and  platelet 
activation.

Outside-in Signaling From Integrins
Integrin  binding  to  matrix  ligands  initiates  signals  that 
modify cellular adhesion, locomotion, and gene expres-
sion,  with  the  responses  depending  on  the  particular 
integrin and cell. Extracellular ligands stabilize the open 
state  with  wide  spacing  of  the  cytoplasmic  domains. 
Presumably this physical change influences the activities 
of signal transduction proteins associated with the cyto-
plasmic domains, but the details are not known. Within 
seconds, the cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases shown in Fig. 
30.11  phosphorylate  several  focal  adhesion  proteins, 
including  paxillin,  tensin,  and  focal  adhesion  kinase, 
which  has  a  central  role  in  transducing  these  signals. 
Within a minute, some cells raise their cytoplasmic Ca2+ 
concentration  high  enough  to  initiate  many  calcium-
dependent processes (see Chapter 26).

Over a period of minutes, ligand binding to integrins 
also  activates  Rho-family  GTPases  that  stimulate  actin 
assembly  (see  Fig.  33.19)  and  spreading  of  the  cell  on  
ligand-coated  surfaces.  Other  Rho-family  GTPases  drive  
contraction  of  the  trailing  edge  of  moving  cells  (see  
Fig.  38.6).  Integrins  cluster  together  in  small  “focal 
complexes”  at  the  leading  edge  and  grow  into  mature 
focal contacts (Fig. 30.11A), also called focal adhesions, 
which  anchor  actin  filament  stress  fibers  to  the  cell 
membrane.  Contraction  of  stress  fibers  applies  tension 
to  the  focal  contacts,  which  remain  stationary  as  the  
cell  advances  past  them.  Rapid  rearrangements  of  the 
linker  proteins  between  the  integrins  and  actin  serve  
as  a  molecular  clutch  to  transmit  forces,  even  as  actin 
assemble and disassembles. A Ca2+-mediated signal inac-
tivates obsolete attachments at the rear of the cell.

The adhesiveness of a cell for its substrate (a function 
of  integrin  density  on  the  cell,  ligand  density  on  the 
substratum,  and  their  affinity)  determines  the  rate  of 
movement.  The  maximum  rate  occurs  at  intermediate 
adhesiveness.  Rapid  association  and  dissociation  of 
integrins on matrix ligands allow cells to rearrange their 
hold on the matrix as they move.

After several hours of integrin engagement, activation 
of  the  Ras/mitogen-activated  protein  kinase  pathway 
(see  Fig.  27.6)  turns  on  expression  of  selected  genes. 
These changes in gene expression contribute to cellular 
differentiation during development. Integrins allow cells 
to include the ECM as a signaling input along with other 
stimuli operating through different receptors.

Inside-Out Signaling to Integrins
Cells fine-tune their interactions with matrix molecules 
by  regulating  the  activity  of  cell-surface  integrins.  For 

example, integrins on white blood cells (Fig. 30.13) and 
platelets  (Fig.  30.14)  require  “inside-out”  activation 
before they can bind their extracellular ligands. Integrin 
activation  also  regulates  cellular  interactions  during 
development.  Cytoplasmic  proteins,  talin  and  kindlins, 
activate integrins by binding the cytoplasmic tail of the 
β-integrin  and  separating  the  two  transmembrane 
domains.  One  pathway  downstream  from  seven-helix 
receptors  uses  a  membrane-bound  GTPase  and  an 
adapter protein to bring together talin and the β-integrin.
Some  cells  can  mobilize  a  reserve  pool  of  integrins 
stored  in  cytoplasmic  vesicles  within  minutes.  For 
example,  chemoattractants  stimulate  white  blood  cells 
to  fuse  storage  vesicles  containing  integrins  with  the 
plasma  membrane  (Fig.  30.13).  Both  intracellular  and 
extracellular  ligands  can  cluster  integrins  in  focal  com-
plexes and focal adhesions and increase their activities.

Biological Functions of Integrins
With  the  exception  of  red  blood  cells,  integrins  are 
present in the plasma membranes of most animal cells. 
Experiments  with  neutralizing  antibodies,  genetic  dis-
eases,  and  experimental  gene  disruptions  revealed  the 
functions of integrin isoforms. For example, many verte-
brate cells express β1 and β3 integrins for adhesion to the 
ECM,  so  integrin  antibodies  inhibit  cell  migration  and 
embryonic development by competing with fibronectin. 
Like  null  mutations  in  the  fibronectin  gene  (see  Fig. 
29.14), homozygous disruption of the integrin α4 or α5 
genes  is  lethal  during  development.  Only  white  blood 
cells express β2-integrins, which they use to bind endo-
thelial cells lining the walls of blood vessels.

Other  integrins  bind  adhesion  molecules  on  other 
cells. For example, mouse sperm bind integrins on the 
egg  membrane  during  fertilization.  Integrins  cooperate 
with  adhesion  receptors  of  the  IgCAM,  mucin,  and 
selectin families to facilitate the adhesion of white blood 
cells  to  endothelial  cells  at  sites  of  inflammation  (Fig. 
30.13). Other cells supplement the functions of integrins 
with structurally distinct matrix adhesion proteins, such 
as muscle dystroglycans and platelet GPIb-IX-V.

Integrins  also  participate  in  the  decision  of  cells  to 
undergo apoptosis, programmed cell death (see Chapter 
46).  Normal  epithelial  cells  require  anchorage  to  the 
basal  lamina  by  β4-integrins  to  grow  and  divide.  When 
forced  to  live  in  suspension  or  when  dissociated  from 
the  matrix  by  RGD  peptides,  these  cells  arrest  in  the  
G1 phase of the cell cycle (see Chapter 41) and eventu-
ally  undergo  apoptosis.  Loss  of  contact  with  the  basal 
lamina  may  contribute  to  the  terminal  differentiation  
and  death  of  cells  in  the  upper  levels  of  stratified  
epithelia,  such  as  skin  (see  Figs.  35.6  and  40.1).  Epi-
thelial  cancers  typically  lose  this  integrin-mediated, 
anchorage  dependence  for  growth,  which  is  one  of  
the  normal  limitations  on  uncontrolled  proliferation  in 
inappropriate locations.

536 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

Snake  venoms  contain  small,  monomeric  RGD  pro-
teins  that  inhibit  blood  clotting  by  competing  with 
fibrinogen for binding the integrins that activated plate-
lets use for aggregation. These “disintegrins” are potential 
inhibitors of the pathological thrombosis that contributes 
to  heart  attacks  and  strokes.  Both  small-molecule  and 
antibody antagonists for integrins are now used as clini-
cal treatments for heart attacks and stroke.

Selectin Family of Adhesion Receptors
White  blood  cells  and  platelets  use  three  selectin  pro-
teins to interact with vascular endothelial cells and each 
other. In lymph nodes or at sites of inflammation, selec-
tins  snare  circulating  white  blood  cells,  allowing  them 
to roll over the surface of endothelial cells and eventually 
to exit the blood (Fig. 30.13). Selectins (Table 30.4) also 
contribute  to  adhesion  in  other  systems,  including  the 
initial binding of early mammalian embryos to the wall 
of the mother’s uterus.

The defining feature of selectins is a calcium-dependent 
lectin  domain  (Fig.  30.12)  that  binds  O-linked  sulfated 
oligosaccharides  containing  sialic  acid  and  fucose.  The 
lectin domain sits at the end of a rod-shaped projection 
composed  of  complement  regulatory  domains  that  is 
anchored to the plasma membrane by a single transmem-
brane sequence.

Natural ligands for selectins are mucin-like glycopro-
teins  expressed  on  endothelial  and  white  blood  cells. 
Specific binding to mucins requires selectins to interact 
with  both  the  oligosaccharide  and  mucin  protein.  The 
affinity is low (millimolar Kds), and not highly selective 
among  oligosaccharides.  Interaction  with  the  mucin 
protein is less well understood, but one or more sulfated 
tyrosine  residues  on  the  leukocyte  mucin  called  P- 
selectin  glycoprotein  ligand  (PSGL)-1  participate  in 
binding P-selectin.

Bonds between selectins and their mucin ligands have 
high  tensile  strength  (withstanding  forces  greater  than 
100 piconewtons [pN]) but form and dissociate rapidly, 

TABLE 30.4  Selectin Family (Lec-CAM) of Cell Adhesion Molecules
Examples
Extracellular Ligands

Structure

E-selectin (CD62E, ELAM-1)

Lectin-EGF-6CR-1TM

L-selectin

L-selectin (CD62L, gp90M)

Lectin-EGF-2CR-1TM

E-selectin, mucins

P-selectin (CD62P, 

GMP-140)

Lectin-EGF-9CR-1TM

Mucins

Me2+
Ca

Ca

Ca

Expression

Functions

Endothelium 
(regulated)

Lymphocytes, 
other WBCs
Endothelium, 

platelets

WBC-endothelium 

adhesion

WBC-endothelium 

adhesion

WBC-endothelium 

adhesion

CD, cellular differentiation antigen; CR, complement regulatory domain; EGF, epidermal growth factor; ELAM-1, endothelial-leukocyte adhesion molecule 
1; GMP-140, granule membrane protein 140; gp, glycoprotein; Me2+, divalent cation dependence; TM, transmembrane domain; WBC, white blood cell.

A. Leukocyte

L-selectin

PSGL-1

N-linked oligosaccharide
O-linked oligosaccharide

Complement

regulatory domains

?

Lectin domain
EGF domain

B. Endothelium

Gly-CAM-1

CD34

MAdCAM-1

P-selectin

E-selectin

FIGURE 30.12  STRUCTURE OF SELECTINS AND THEIR MUCIN LIGANDS. Domain architecture of selectins and mucins exposed on 
the surfaces of leukocytes (A) and endothelial cells (B). Complement regulatory domains of the selectins are shown in red. EGF, epidermal growth 
factor; MAdCAM, mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule; PSGL, P-selectin glycoprotein ligand. (Modified from Rosen SD, Bertozzi CR. The 
selectins and their ligands. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 1994;6:663–673.)

 

CHAPTER 30  n  Cellular Adhesion 

537

Selectins

1. Attachment

2. Rolling

Chemoattractants

Integrins

3. Activation

4. Arrest and adhesion
    strengthening

Leukocyte

Endothelium
Basement
membrane

Chemoattractant
source

5. Transendothelial
    migration

BLOOD

TISSUE

FIGURE  30.13  MIGRATION  OF  A  NEUTROPHIL  FROM  THE 
BLOOD TO THE CONNECTIVE TISSUE. Endothelial cells exposed 
to inflammatory agents like histamine move selectins to their surfaces 
and snare mucins on neutrophils flowing in the bloodstream (1). As a 
neutrophil rolls along the surface (2), chemotactic factors and engage-
ment  of  mucins  activate  their  integrins  (3),  causing  the  neutrophil 
to  bind  tightly  to  immunoglobulin  cell  adhesion  molecules  (IgCAMs)  
on  the  endothelium  (4).  The  neutrophil  then  migrates  between  the 
endothelial  cells  into  the  connective  tissue  (5).  (For  reference,  see 
Springer T. Traffic signals for lymphocyte and leukocyte emigration: the 
multi-step paradigm. Cell. 1994;76:301–314.)

on  a  second  time  scale.  Low  forces  on  these  bonds 
prolong their lifetimes modestly by altering the confor-
mation  of  the  selectin,  whereas  high  forces  promote 
dissociation.  Consequently,  few  selectin-mucin  bonds 
are required to tether white blood cells to the endothe-
lium,  whereas  the  brief  lifetime  of  the  bonds  allows 
blood flow to propel the cells with a rolling motion over 
the surface of the endothelium (Fig. 30.13).

Engagement  of  selectins  with  mucins  stimulates 
signals in both cells that activate integrins and promote 
adhesion.  The  process  resembles  T-cell  activation  and 
includes  Src-family  kinases  and  adapter  proteins  with 
tyrosine phosphorylation sites. However, the links from 
the cytoplasmic domains of selectins and mucins to the 
signaling proteins is not established.

Inflammatory mediators regulate selectins in multiple 
ways.  Activation  of  endothelial  cells  with  histamine  or 
platelets with thrombin causes vesicles storing P-selectin 
to fuse with the plasma membrane, exposing the selec-
tins  on  the  cell  surface.  Various  inflammatory  agents 
stimulate  endothelial  cells  to  synthesize  E-selectin  and 
P-selectin. Activation of white blood cells increases the 
affinity  of  L-selectin  for  mucins  and  later  leads  to  its 
proteolytic release from the cell surface.

Mucins
The extracellular segments of mucins are rich in serine 
and  threonine,  which  are  heavily  modified  with  acidic 
oligosaccharide  chains  (Fig.  30.12).  Because  of  their 

strong negative charge, these proteins extend like rods 
up to 50 nm from the cell surface. Mucins on endothelial 
cells or white blood cells interact with complementary 
selectins on the other cell type. Endothelial mucin CD34 
interacts with white blood cell L-selectin, whereas endo-
thelial P-selectin interacts with white blood cell PSGL-1 
mucin.  These  interactions  depend  on  anchoring  of  the 
cytoplasmic domain of PSGL-1 to the actin cytoskeleton. 
Other mucins are displayed on the surface of or secreted 
by  epithelia  lining  the  respiratory  and  gastrointestinal 
tracks.

Other Adhesion Receptors
Table 30.5 lists a variety of adhesion receptors that fall 
outside the five main families. See Fig. 25.6 for the CD45 
phosphatase,  Fig.  31.3  for  claudins  and  Fig.  31.7  for 
connexins.

Galactosyltransferase
The  enzyme  galactosyltransferase  is  also  an  adhesion 
receptor. This enzyme is a resident protein in the Golgi 
apparatus  where  it  glycosylates  proteins  (see  Chapter 
21).  However,  the  mRNA  for  galactosyltransferase  has 
two  alternative  initiation  sites,  one  of  which  adds  13 
amino  acids  to  the  cytoplasmic,  N-terminus  of  this 
transmembrane  protein.  The  longer  enzyme  moves  to 
the cell surface rather than being retained in the Golgi 
apparatus.  On  the  cell  surface,  the  enzyme  can  bind 
oligosaccharides that terminate in N-acetylglucosamine, 
which  is  found  on  both  cell  surface  and  matrix  pro-
teins.  The  complex  of  transferase  and  ligand  oligosac-
charide 
is  stable,  because  the  galactose-nucleotide 
substrate  added  to  the  oligosaccharide  in  the  Golgi 
apparatus  is  not  available  outside  the  cell  to  complete 
the  reaction.

During  fertilization,  a  surface  galactosyltransferase 
mediates  the  initial  contact  of  mouse  sperm  with  the 
matrix surrounding the egg (called the zona pellucida). 
This  association  induces  secretion  of  the  contents  of 
the sperm acrosomal vesicle, including an enzyme that 
destroys  the  transferase  binding  site  on  the  matrix  
so  that  the  sperm  can  proceed  through  the  zona  to  
fuse with the egg. The enzyme is present on the surface 
of  many  cells  that  migrate  during  embryogenesis  
and  may  contribute  to  their  interactions  with  the 
matrix.

Adhesion Receptors With Leucine-Rich  
Repeats (GPIb-IX-V)
The  platelet  receptor  for  the  adhesive  glycoprotein 
called  von  Willebrand  factor  (Fig.  30.14)  is  a  disulfide-
bonded  complex  of  four  transmembrane  polypeptides: 
GPIbα,  GPIbβ,  GPIX,  and  GPV.  Leucine-rich  repeats  at 
the end of a long stalk bind von Willebrand factor (see 
Fig. 28.6 for other receptors with leucine-rich repeats). 

538 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

TABLE 30.5  Other Cell Adhesion Molecules

Examples

CD44

Structure

Extracellular 
Ligands

Link protein-1TM

Hyaluronan

Me2+

Intracellular 
Ligands

Ankyrin

Expression

Lymphocytes

Functions

Adhesion to 

endothelium

CD44E

Link protein-HS/

Claudins

CS-1TM
Four TM

Fibronectin, 
hyaluronan

Claudins

Connexins

Multispan, hexamer

Self

Dystroglycans

Multisubunit, TM

Laminin, agrin

No

No

No

Ca

Many epithelial cells

Adhesion to 

ZO-1, ZO-2, 

Epithelia

ZO-3, cingulin

matrix

Tight junctions

ZO-1

Epithelia, muscle, 

Gap junctions

Dystrophin

nerve
Muscle

Adhesion, synapse 

formation

Galactose transferase-

N-acetylglucosamine

No

? Actin 

Many cells, including 

Adhesion to cells 

Galactosyl-

transferase

Glypican

1TM

filaments

sperm

4HS-GPI anchor

Fibronectin,

No

None

Endothelium, smooth 

muscle, epithelium

GPIB-IX

7 leucine-rich-1TM

von Willebrand 

Filamin, actin

Platelets, 

LCA (CD45)

50 kD-1TM-tyrosine 

phosphatase

factor

endothelium

WBCs

and matrix
Adhesion to 

matrix
Adhesion

Tyrosine 

phosphatase

Mucins (CD34, 

Sialylated 

Selectins

No

Epithelia, leukocytes

Intercellular 

CD43)

oligosaccharide-1TM

adhesion

CD, cellular differentiation antigen; CS, chondroitin sulfate; GPI, glycosylphosphatidylinositol; HS, heparan sulfate; LCA, leukocyte common antigen; 
Me2+, divalent cation dependence; TM, transmembrane domain; WBC, white blood cell.

Platelets  bind  to  von  Willebrand  factor  to  initiate  the 
repair  of  damaged  blood  vessels.  This  interaction  also 
generates  an  intracellular  signal  that  enhances  affinity  
of  integrin  αIIbβ3  for  fibrinogen  and  reorganizes  the 
cytoskeleton.

Dystroglycan/Sarcoglycan Complex
In muscles, a complex of transmembrane glycoproteins 
links a network of dystrophin and actin filaments on the 
inside  of  the  plasma  membrane  to  two  proteins  of  the 
extracellular  basal  lamina,  α2  laminin  and  agrin  (see 
Fig.  39.17).  These  protein  associations  stabilize  the 
muscle  plasma  membrane  from  inside  and  outside, 
similar  to  the  actin-spectrin  network  of  red  blood  
cells  (see  Fig.  13.11).  Genetic  defects  or  deficiencies  
in  dystrophin,  transmembrane  linker  proteins  of  the 
dystroglycan/sarcoglycan  complex,  or  α2-laminin  cause 
muscular  dystrophy  in  humans,  most  likely  owing  to  
the  mechanical  instability  of  the  membrane,  leading  to 
cellular  damage  and  eventual  atrophy  of  the  muscle. 
Chapter 39 provides details on their role in muscle func-
tion and disease.

Nonmuscle  cells  in  other  tissues  express  many  of 
these  proteins  (or  their  homologs),  where  they  may 
contribute  to  adhesion  to  the  ECM.  Some  pathogens  
use  the  dystroglycan  complex  to  bind  their  cellular 
targets.  Arenavirus,  the  cause  of  Lassa  fever,  binds 
directly  to  α-dystroglycan,  and  the  leprosy  bacterium 
binds laminin-2.

Examples of Dynamic Adhesion
Adhesion of Leukocytes to Endothelial Cells
Movement of white blood cells from blood into connec-
tive tissue illustrates how cells integrate the activities of 
selectins,  mucins,  integrins,  IgCAMs,  and  chemoattrac-
tant receptors. Infection or inflammation in connective 
tissue  attracts  lymphocytes  as  well  as  neutrophils  and 
monocytes,  the  main  phagocytes  circulating  in  blood 
(see Fig. 28.7). Blood cell precursors use a similar mecha-
nism to enter lymphoid organs and bone marrow.

In the absence of inflammation, neutrophils flow over 
endothelial cells without binding, because the appropri-
ate  pairs  of  adhesion  molecules  are  not  exposed  or 
activated.  Infection  or  other  inflammation  in  nearby 
tissues causes neutrophils to bind to the vascular endo-
thelium  and  to  move  out  of  the  blood  into  the  tissue. 
Neutrophils adhere to the endothelium in three sequen-
tial but overlapping steps (Fig. 30.13):
1.  Locally generated inflammatory molecules, including 
histamine (secreted by mast cells), bind to seven-helix 
receptors  on  endothelial  cells  and  stimulate  fusion  
of cytoplasmic vesicles (called Weibel-Palade bodies) 
with the plasma membrane. This exposes P-selectin, 
formerly  stored  in  the  vesicle  membranes,  on  the  
cell  surface  facing  the  blood.  Selectins  bind  mucins 
that  are  constitutively  exposed  on  the  surface  of 
neutrophils, tethering them to the surface. The bonds 
form  and  break  rapidly,  allowing  the  neutrophil  

 

A
Platelet
Endothelium

Basal lamina

CHAPTER 30  n  Cellular Adhesion 

539

B
Damage exposes
basal lamina
Platelet
binds

C
Activated platelets
secrete ADP

ADP

ADP

D
Activated platelets
aggregate over 
defect

E

F. Resting platelet

Fibrinogen

Inactive fibrinogen
receptor
(integrin αIIbβ3)

GP1B

Vesicle
containing
ADP

R E STIN G PLATELET
IN TA C T E N D O T H ELIU M
B A S AL LA MIN A

Active collagen receptor 
(integrin α2β1)
7-helix ADPreceptor
7-helix thrombin receptor

l

e
a
c
s
 

o

t
 
t

o
n

 
s
n
e

i

t

o
r
P

G. Activated platelet

Three independent
stimuli activate
platelets

Platelets aggregate

when fibrinogen

crosslinks

(3) ADP activates
7-helix receptors

vWF

vWF binds
to collagen

(2) Thrombin activates
7-helix receptors

ADP secretion

αIIbβ3 integrin
(active) binds

fibrinogen

αIIbβ3 integrin

(inactive)

Two pathways
activate αIIbβ3

GPIb
binds
to vWF

(1) Integrin α2β1
binds collagen in
basal lamina

FIGURE 30.14  PLATELET ACTIVATION AND AGGREGATION AT A DEFECT IN THE ENDOTHELIUM. A–D, Steps in platelet activation 
and aggregation. E, Electron micrograph of a thin section of a platelet adhering to the basal lamina through a tiny defect in the endothelium. 
F, Resting platelets circulate in the blood without interacting with the intact endothelium lining the vessel. G, Platelets are activated in three ways. 
(1) Binding of α2β1 integrins to collagen results in firm adhesion. Where the basal lamina is exposed, von Willebrand factor (vWF) binds the collagen. 
(2) Platelet GPIb-IX binds weakly to von Willebrand factor, allowing platelets to adhere to the exposed matrix. (3) Thrombin activates seven-helix 
receptors.  These  interactions  stimulate  secretion  of  adenosine  diphosphate  (ADP),  which  binds  seven-helix  receptors  and  activates  the  αIIbβ3 
integrins; then αIIbβ3 integrins bind dimeric fibrinogen and aggregate platelets together. Platelet proteins are not to scale. 

to  roll  along  the  surface  of  the  endothelium  at  
rates greater than 10 µm/s as the blood flow pushes 
them along.

2.  Two  signaling  pathways  (seven-helix  receptors  for 
chemotactic factors and P-selectin glycoprotein ligand 
[PSGL])  activate  leukocyte  integrins  from  inside  the 
cell (Fig. 30.10). Activation of approximately 10% of 
the  neutrophil  integrins  increases  their  affinity  for 
their  ligand  by  200-fold,  making  the  third  step 
possible.

3.  Activated  integrins  bind  tightly  to  IgCAMs  on  the 
surface  of  endothelial  cells,  immobilizing  the  leuko-
cyte  despite  the  force  of  the  blood  flow.  Within  2 
minutes,  the  leukocyte  opens  the  tight  junctions 
between  endothelial  cells  (see  Chapter  31)  and 
squeezes into connective tissue toward the source of 
the  chemoattractant.  The  leukocyte  and  endothelial 
cells interact closely during this passage, because they 
share a self-associating IgCAM called platelet endothe-
lial cell adhesion molecule (PECAM).

Defects  in  either  the  weak  or  strong  interactions 
compromise  the  movement  of  leukocytes  into  connec-
tive  tissue,  increasing  the  risk  of  acute  and  chronic 
infections.  One  type  of  human  leukocyte  adhesion 
deficiency  is  caused  by  a  genetic  defect  in  fucose 
metabolism  that  interferes  with  the  synthesis  of  a  car-
bohydrate  ligand  on  leukocytes  that  binds  endothelial 
selectins.  Cells  cannot  roll,  so  they  fail  to  initiate  the 
emigration process. A genetic deficiency of β2-integrins 
causes a second type of leukocyte adhesion deficiency. 
White  blood  cells  that  lack  β2-integrins  roll  on  the 
endothelium  through  the  selectin  mechanism  but  do 
not  bind  tightly  enough  to  migrate  out  of  the  circula-
tion. Consequently, these individuals are susceptible to 
bacterial infections.

On the other hand, neutrophils also generate reactive 
oxygen species that can damage tissues at sites of inflam-
mation  or  at  sites  that  are  temporarily  deprived  of 
oxygen.  Thus,  movement  of  white  blood  cells  into 
tissues  contributes  to  damage  that  occurs  when  blood 

540 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

flow  is  restored  to  an  ischemic  tissue.  Therefore  adhe-
sion proteins might be targeted therapeutically to miti-
gate damage after heart attacks or severe frostbite.

A  similar  mechanism  and  a  partially  overlapping  set 
of receptors attract blood monocytes and eosinophils to 
sites of inflammation. Once they are in connective tissue, 
interactions of monocyte integrins with matrix molecules 
trigger the expression of genes required for differentia-
tion into macrophages (see Fig. 28.7).

Lymphocytes  (see  Fig.  28.9)  patrol  the  body,  circu-
lating  from  the  blood  through  organs  to  lymphoid 
tissues  and  through  the  lymphatic  circulation  back  to 
the blood. This “recirculation” requires lymphocytes to 
recognize  endothelial  cells  in  organs  and  specific  lym-
phoid tissues where they exit from the blood. Lympho-
cytes use L-selectin, three different mucin-like proteins, 
and  α4β2  integrins  to  bind  to  these  target  endothelial 
cells.  Lymphocytes  from  mice  that  lack  L-selectin  
do  not  roll  on  endothelial  cells  or  accumulate  in  
lymph  nodes.

Platelet Activation and Adhesion
Platelets  aggregate  at  sites  where  damage  to  vascular 
endothelial  cells  exposes  the  underlying  basal  lamina 
(Fig.  30.14).  This  process  requires  the  coordinated 
activity  of  a  variety  of  receptors,  including  integrins, 
leucine-rich  repeat  adhesion  proteins,  and  seven-helix 
receptors.  These  reactions  prevent  bleeding  and  bruis-
ing,  but  inappropriate  activation  of  platelets  produces 
clots in blood vessels, causing heart attacks and strokes. 
To  understand  the  good  effects  and  avert  the  bad, 
investigators  have  studied  platelet  activation  and  adhe-
sion in great detail.

Resting  platelets  have  a  low  tendency  to  aggregate, 
even though they circulate in a sea of ligands, including 
fibrinogen and the adhesive glycoprotein von Willebrand 
factor.  Multiple  mechanisms  limit  the  reactivity  of 
resting  platelets.  First,  the  major  integrin,  αIIbβ3,  has  a 
low affinity (Kd ≫ µM) for its plasma ligand, fibrinogen. 
Similarly,  the  GPIb-IX-V  complex  has  a  low  affinity  
for  soluble  von  Willebrand  factor.  Third,  the  endothe-
lium  masks  potential  ligands,  collagen,  and  von  Wille-
brand  factor  in  the  basal  lamina.  The  concentrations  
of  soluble  activators,  such  as  adenosine  diphosphate 
(ADP)  and  thrombin,  are  low  under  physiological 
conditions.

Damage  to  the  endothelium  usually  initiates  platelet 
activation  by  exposing  platelets  to  von  Willebrand 
factor  and  collagen  in  the  basal  lamina.  Under  condi-
tions  of  high  shear,  GPIb-IX-V  interacts  strongly  with 
von  Willebrand  factor  bound  to  basal  lamina  collagen. 
This interaction transiently tethers platelets to the basal 
lamina  and  favors  binding  of  integrin α2β1  to  collagen. 
Exposure  to  soluble  agonists  such  as  ADP  or  thrombin 
also  activates  platelets  and  promotes  their  aggregation. 
Within  seconds  of  activation,  platelet  αIIbβ3  integrins 

convert  to  a  high-affinity  state  (Kd  <  µM)  and  bind 
tightly  to  fibrinogen.  Dimeric  fibrinogen  links  platelets 
into  aggregates.

Agonists  activate  platelet  αIIbβ3  integrins  through 

three different pathways:
1.  Collagen  binding  to α2β1  integrin  directly  stimulates 
platelets to activate αIIbβ3 integrins, secrete ADP, and 
synthesize the lipid second messenger thromboxane 
A2 (see Fig. 26.9).

2.  Damage to blood vessels activates the blood-clotting 
proteolytic enzyme thrombin, which binds two related 
seven-helix  receptors  and  signals  through  trimeric 
G-proteins (see Fig. 25.9) to activate integrin αIIbβ3.

3.  von Willebrand factor binding to the platelet receptor 

GPIb-IX-V activates αIIbβ3 integrins.
Two  additional  mechanisms  augment  all  these 
responses. Activated platelets secrete ADP, which binds 
two  types  of  seven-helix  receptors  that  amplify  the 
response to thrombin. Aggregation of platelets by binding 
dimeric  fibrinogen  further  stimulates  their  response  to 
ADP and thrombin.

Platelet aggregation is disadvantageous in the normal 
circulation,  so  several  mechanisms  actively 
inhibit 
platelet  activation.  Endothelial  cells  produce  both  
nitric  oxide  and  an  eicosanoid,  prostacyclin  (PGI2), 
which  inhibit  platelet  activation  (see  Fig.  26.9).  Nitric 
oxide  acts  through  cyclic  guanosine  monophosphate 
(cGMP), and PGI2 acts through cyclic adenosine mono-
phosphate  (cAMP;  see  Fig.  26.1).  Antibodies  and  small 
molecule drugs that inhibit αIIbβ3 are used to treat heart 
attacks.

The  most  common  human  bleeding  disorder  is  
von  Willebrand  disease,  caused  by  mutations  in  von  
Willebrand factor or its receptor, the GPIbα subunit of 
GPIb-IX-V. Some mutations reduce the concentration of 
the factor in blood or reduce the affinity of the factor for 
its receptor. Remarkably, mutations in either the factor 
or  receptor  that  increase  their  affinity  for  each  other  
also  cause  bleeding.  These  high-affinity  interactions 
cause  platelets  to  aggregate  and  be  removed  from  the 
blood.  Loss-of-function  mutations  in  GPIbα  cause  the 
human  bleeding  disorder  called  Bernard-Soulier  syn-
drome.  Individuals  with  Glanzmann  thrombasthenia 
bleed  abnormally  because  αIIbβ3  integrin  is  absent  or 
defective, and their platelets do not aggregate.

Self-Avoidance in the Nervous System
Surprisingly,  neurons  use  adhesion  proteins  to  avoid 
forming  synapses  with  themselves  by  repelling  axons 
and  dendrites  from  the  same  cell  (Fig.  30.15).  Insects 
use a family of DSCAM1 IgCAMs for this self-avoidance. 
Alternative splicing of the pre-mRNA in each cell gener-
ates  a  subset  of  the  many  thousands  of  different 
DSCAM1  isoforms.  These  large  IgCAMs  have  10  Ig- 
domains  and  six  FN-III  domains  that  make  homophilic 
interactions between three Ig-domains of each protein. 

 

CHAPTER 30  n  Cellular Adhesion 

541

N-cadherins  and  other  adhesion  proteins  to  specify 
synaptic  connections.  A  point  mutation  in  one  proto-
cadherin  gene  is  a  common  cause  of  human  deafness 
and  blindness.

SELECTED READINGS

Campbell ID, Humphries MJ. Integrin structure, activation, and interac-

tions. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2011;3:a004994.

Case LB, Waterman CM. Integration of actin dynamics and cell adhe-
sion  by  a  three-dimensional,  mechanosensitive  molecular  clutch. 
Nat Cell Biol. 2015;17:955-963.

Chen  WV,  Maniatis  T.  Clustered  protocadherins.  Development. 

2013;140:3297-3302.

Constantin B. Dystrophin complex functions as a scaffold for signalling 

proteins. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014;1838:635-642.

Gérard  C,  Goldbeter  A.  Dynamics  of  the  mammalian  cell  cycle  in 
physiological  and  pathological  conditions.  Wiley  Interdiscip  Rev 
Syst Biol Med. 2016;8:140-156.

Gumbiner BM. Regulation of cadherin-mediated adhesion in morpho-

genesis. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2005;6:622-634.

Harwood A, Coates JC. A prehistory of cell adhesion. Curr Opin Cell 

Biol. 2004;16:470-476.

Hernández  AR,  Klein  AM,  Kirschner  MW.  Kinetic  responses  of  
β-catenin  specify  the  sites  of  Wnt  control.  Science.  2012;338:
1337-1340.

Livne A, Geiger B. The inner workings of stress fibers—from contractile 
machinery  to  focal  adhesions  and  back.  J  Cell  Sci.  2016;129:
1293-1304.

Logan CY, Nusse R. The Wnt signaling pathway in development and 

disease. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2004;20:781-810.

McEver RP. Selectins: initiators of leucocyte adhesion and signalling at 

the vascular wall. Cardiovasc Res. 2015;107:331-339.

McEver  RP,  Zhu  C.  Rolling  cell  adhesion.  Annu  Rev  Cell  Dev  Biol. 

2010;26:363-396.

Roycroft A, Mayor R. Molecular basis of contact inhibition of locomo-

tion. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2016;73:1119-1130.

Rosen SD. Ligands for L-selectin: Homing, inflammation, and beyond. 

Annu Rev Immunol. 2004;22:129-156.

Samanta D, Almo SC. Nectin family of cell-adhesion molecules: struc-
tural and molecular aspects of function and specificity. Cell Mol Life 
Sci. 2015;72:645-658.

Shattil SJ, Kim C, Ginsberg MH. The final steps of integrin activation: 

the end game. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2010;11:288-300.

Yu FX, Zhao B, Guan KL. Hippo Pathway in Organ Size Control, Tissue 

Homeostasis, and Cancer. Cell. 2015;163:811-828.

Zipursky SL, Grueber WB. The molecular basis of self-avoidance. Annu 

Rev Neurosci. 2013;36:547-568.

Axon

Cell
body

100 µm

FIGURE  30.15  SELF-AVOIDANCE  OF  NEURITES  OF  CLASS 
IV  SENSORY  NEURONS  OF  A  DROSOPHILA  LARVA.  Stack  of 
fluorescence  micrographs  ~20  µm  thick  of  neurons  expressing  a 
mouse  transmembrane  protein  called  CD8  tagged  with  GFP.  False 
coloring  is  used  to  distinguish  the  cells.  The  central  neuron  is  red. 
(Courtesy Sujoy Ganguly and Jonathan Howard, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT.)

Contacts  between  neurites  with  the  same  isoforms 
cause  repulsion.

Self-avoidance  of  vertebrate  neurons  depends  on  a 
family  of  48  cadherins  called  protocadherins.  Alterna-
tive  splicing  of  transcripts  from  three  gene  clusters 
produces  a  unique  mixture  of  protocadherins  on  each 
neuron.  These  protocadherins  form  random  dimers  in 
the  membrane  and  the  extracellular  domains  bind 
homophilically to like protocadherins. When a process 
from a neuron contacts another part of itself, extensive 
interactions  between  like  protocadherins  somehow 
create  a  signal  that  repels  the  neurite.  Weaker  interac-
tions  between  mixtures  of  protocadherins  on  different 
cells  do  not  generate  a  repulsive  signal  and  allow 

This page intentionally left blank

C H A P T E R 

31 

Intercellular Junctions

The  mechanical  integrity  of  animal  tissues  such  as 

epithelia, nerves, and muscles depends on the ability of 
the cells to interact with each other and the extracellular 
matrix. Plasma membrane specializations, called cellular 
junctions,  mediate  these  interactions.  Physical  connec­
tions  from  the  extracellular  matrix  or  adjacent  cells 
through these junctions and the associated cytoskeletal 
filaments  inside  cells  impart  mechanical  strength  to 
tissues.

Investigation of junctions began when microscopists 
and physiologists recognized that epithelial and muscle 
cells adhere to each other and the underlying extracel­
lular  matrix.  They  also  discovered  that  some  epithelia 
form a tight barrier between the luminal surface and the 
underlying  tissue  spaces.  The  physical  basis  of  these 
interactions became clear during the 1960s, when elec­
tron  micrographs  of  thin  sections  of  vertebrate  tissues 
revealed four types of intercellular junctions that connect 
the plasma membranes of adjacent cells (Table 31.1 and 
Fig.  31.1)  and  two  types  of  junctions  to  bind  to  the 
extracellular  matrix.  Subsequent  research  established 
the molecular architecture of these junctions, each based 
on a different transmembrane protein:

Adherens  junctions:  Transmembrane  proteins  called 
cadherins  (see  Fig.  30.5)  link  neighboring  cells  and 
connect to actin filaments in the cytoplasm.

Desmosomes:  Another  type  of  cadherin  links  cells 
together  and  connects  to  cytoplasmic  intermediate 
filaments.

Tight junctions: Transmembrane proteins called claudins 
join  the  plasma  membranes  of  two  cells  to  create  a 
barrier that limits diffusion of ions and solutes between 
the cells and molecules between apical and basolateral 
domains of the plasma membrane.

Gap  junctions:  Transmembrane  proteins  called  con­
nexins  form  channels  for  small  molecules  to  move 
between the cytoplasms of neighboring cells.

Hemidesmosomes:  Integrins  (see  Fig.  30.9)  connect 
cytoplasmic intermediate filaments to the basal lamina 
across the plasma membrane.

Focal  adhesions: Integrins associated with cytoplasmic 

actin filaments adhere to the extracellular matrix.

Each tissue uses a selection of junctions suited to its 
physiological functions. Columnar epithelial cells in the 
intestine  interact  with  their  neighbors  using  all  four 
types  of  intercellular  junctions  (Fig.  31.1B–D).  Belt­like 
tight junctions and adherens junctions encircle the apex 
of the cell. Desmosomes and gap junctions form patch­
like lateral connections between the cells. Hemidesmo­
somes  anchor  the  cells  to  the  basal  lamina.  Stratified 
epithelial cells in the skin (Fig. 31.1A) use desmosomes 
and intermediate filaments (Fig. 31.1B) to resist mechani­
cal  forces  but  also  interact  via  claudins  and  adherens 
junctions.  Desmosomes  and  adherens  junctions  link 
muscle  cells  to  the  surrounding  basal  lamina  (see  Fig. 
29.17C).  Gap  junctions  connect  heart  and  smooth 
muscle  cells,  but  not  skeletal  muscle  cells.  Most  nerve 
cells  communicate  chemically,  but  some  use  gap  junc­
tions for electrical communication.

Invertebrate animals assemble junctions from homolo­
gous  proteins  but  with  different  organization  than  the 
junctional complex of vertebrate epithelia. Insect epithe­
lia have apical adherens junctions and more basal “septate 
junctions” built from claudins and cytoplasmic proteins 
with sequence homology to the tight junction proteins 
ZO­1  and  ZO­2.  Nematode  epithelia  have  one  type  of 
junction with adherens functions and claudins.

Tight Junctions
Tight junctions form a belt­like adhesive seal that selec­
tively  limits  the  diffusion  of  water,  ions,  and  larger 
solutes between epithelial cells (Fig. 31.2). This allows 
epithelia  to  separate  the  interior  of  the  body  from  the 

 543

544 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

Target Molecule

Adhesive Protein

TABLE 31.1  Molecular Components of Cell-Cell and Cell-Matrix Junctions
Junction
Sealing of the Extracellular Space
Tight junction
Claudin
Communication Between Cells
Gap junction
Adhesion to Other Cells
Zonula adherens
Desmosome

Claudin

Connexin

Connexin

ZO­1, drebrin

Cadherin
Desmoglein
Desmocollin

Cadherin
Desmoglein
Desmocollin

Cytoplasmic Proteins

ZO­1, ZO­2, cingulin, spectrin

Catenins, plakoglobin
Plakoglobin, desmoplakin

Adhesion to the Extracellular Matrix
Hemidesmosome
Focal contact

Laminin
Fibronectin

Integrin
Integrin

Plectin, BP 180
Talin, vinculin, α­actinin

A. Skin

B. Epithelium

C. Epithelium
C. Epithelium

Desmosome

Cytoskeletal Filaments

Actin

Actin

Actin
Intermediate

Intermediate
Actin

D. Epithelium

Zonula occludens

(tight junction)
Zonula adherens

Macula adherens

(desmosome)
Gap junction

Hemidesmosome

Basal lamina

Zonula occludens

(tight junction)

Zonula adherens

Macula adherens

(desmosome)

Gap junction

FIGURE  31.1  LIGHT AND ELECTRON MICROGRAPHS OF JUNCTIONS. A, Desmosomes. Left, Light micrograph of a section of skin 
showing  numerous  desmosomes  as  pink  dots  between  the  cells.  Right,  Electron  micrograph  of  a  thin  section  of  skin  showing  desmosomes. 
B, Light micrograph of a section of intestinal epithelium stained with hematoxylin and eosin, showing the junctional complex (also called “terminal 
bars”) as bright pink dots between the cells near their apex, just below the microvilli of the brush border. C, Electron micrograph of a thin section 
of intestinal epithelial cells, showing the junctional complex consisting of a belt-like tight junction (also called the zonula occludens), a belt-like 
adherens junction (also called the zonula adherens), and desmosomes (also called the macula adherens), all in their characteristic relation to each 
other. The circumferential tight junction seals the extracellular space. The zonula adherens is anchored to the actin cytoskeleton. Desmosomes 
are attached to cytoplasmic intermediate filaments. D, Drawing showing the position of the junctional complex in the cell and the locations of 
gap junctions, basal lamina, and hemidesmosomes. (A, Courtesy Don W. Fawcett, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA. C, Courtesy Marilyn 
Farquhar, University of California, San Diego.)

 

CHAPTER 31  n  Intercellular Junctions 

545

external world. Tight junctions also define the boundary 
between the biochemically distinct apical and basolat-
eral  domains  of  the  plasma  membrane  of  polarized 
epithelial cells.

Tight  junctions  were  first  recognized  in  electron 
micrographs of thin sections as places where the plasma 
membranes of adjacent cells appear to fuse together in 
one or more contacts (Fig. 31.2). Freeze­fracture images 
revealed  that  these  contacts  correspond  to  continuous 
strands of intramembranous particles that form a branch­
ing network in the plane of the lipid bilayer.

A

B

C

Plasma
membrane

Strands of
claudins
Intercellular
space

FIGURE  31.2  EPITHELIAL  TIGHT  JUNCTIONS.  A,  Electron 
micrograph  of  a  thin  section  of  endothelial  cells,  showing  a  point  of 
contact  between  the  plasma  membranes  at  a  tight  junction  (arrow). 
B,  Electron  micrograph  of  a  replica  of  a  freeze-fractured  cell.  This 
method exposes proteins within the lipid bilayer and reveals strands 
aligned along the points of contact between the plasma membranes. 
C, Drawing showing the strands of transmembrane proteins at points 
of  contact.  (A,  Courtesy  George  Palade,  University  of  California, 
San  Diego.  B,  Courtesy  Don  W.  Fawcett,  Harvard  Medical  School, 
Boston, MA.)

Transmembrane proteins forming the strands observed 
by freeze­fracture were difficult to identify until investi­
gators  found  a  monoclonal  antibody  that  bound  to  the 
cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane at tight junc­
tions.  They  used  this  antibody  to  isolate  an  integral 
membrane  protein  and  named  it  occludin.  The  amino 
acid  sequence  of  occludin  suggested  four  transmem­
brane strands and two hydrophobic extracellular loops. 
However, mice lacking their single occludin gene survive 
with  normal  tight  junctions.  Subsequently,  these  scien­
tists  discovered  claudins,  the  main  structural  proteins 
of  tight  junction  strands  (Fig.  31.3A).  Humans  have  a 
family of 27 homologous claudin genes that are expressed 
selectively in various tissues.

Claudins consist of four highly conserved transmem­
brane helices with two extracellular loops that fold into 
a  small  β­sheet  and  single  helix.  Close  associations 
between claudins form barriers to diffusion in the plane 
of the membrane and between the cells.
•  The barrier in the membrane bilayer: Intimate lateral 
interactions of claudins within the lipid bilayer (Fig. 
31.3B)  block  diffusion  of  lipids  and  proteins  in  the 
plane of the membrane. This barrier separates differ­
ent pumps, carriers, receptors and lipids in the apical 
and basolateral domains of the plasma membrane.

•  The  barrier  between  cells:  The  small  extracellular 
domains of claudins interact with their neighbors in 
intramembrane  strands  and  with  claudins  in  similar 
strands on adjacent cells to make barriers interrupted 
by  rows  of  pores.  These  pores  block  diffusion  of 
solutes  larger  than  approximately  1 nm  in  diameter, 
but  selectively  allow  the  passage  of  small  cations  or 
anions.  Most  tight  junctions  are  more  permeable  to 
cations than to anions. Permeability in the two direc­
tions across the junction is identical.

N

A

C

B

90°

C

Pores

Claudin

ZO-2

ZO-1

Actin

FIGURE  31.3  STRUCTURE  OF  TIGHT  JUNCTIONS.  A,  Ribbon  diagram  of  the  transmembrane  domains  of  claudin-15.  B,  Interactions 
between the molecules in crystals of claudin-15 that are thought to represent contacts in tight junctions. C, Model of tight junction structure with 
claudins linking the two membranes together and peripheral protein ZO-1 linking the cytoplasmic tail of claudins to actin filaments. (For reference, 
see Protein Data Bank [PDB; www.rcsb.org] file 4P70 and Suzuki H, Nishizawa T, Tani K, et al. Crystal structure of a claudin provides insight into 
the architecture of tight junctions. Science. 2014;344:304–307.)

546 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

Adapter proteins with PDZ protein­interaction domains 
(see  Fig.  25.10)  link  tight  junctions  to  the  cytoskeleton. 
These  adapters  are  called  ZO-1,  ZO-2,  and  ZO-3.  They 
interact  with  the  long  C­terminal  cytoplasmic  tail  of 
claudin  and  JAM  (junctional  adhesion  molecule)  in  the 
membrane. In the cytoplasm they interact with actin fila­
ments,  a  small  guanosine  triphosphatase  (GTPase)  and 
other proteins that regulate actin polymerization and the 
adapter  protein  cingulin.  ZO­2  and  cingulin  are  specific 
for tight junctions, but ZO­1 also associates with cadherins 
in adherens junctions and connexins in gap junctions.

These two barrier functions of tight junctions set up 
the two conditions required for many physiological pro­
cesses.  The  actions  of  pumps,  carriers,  and  channels 
located selectively in the apical or basolateral domains of 
the plasma membrane allow polarized cells to create dif­
ferent extracellular environments on the two sides of the 
epithelium. Maintaining these environments depends on 
the selective permeability across the epithelium through 
the extracellular pores of tight junctions. For example, 
tight junctions are essential for intestinal epithelial cells 
to take up nutrients from the lumen of the intestine and 
transport them into the extracellular space beneath the 
cells (see Fig. 17.2) and for other physiological processes 
(see  Figs.  17.3  and  17­4).  Restricting  the  diffusion  of 
macromolecules across epithelia can regulate some types 
of signaling. For instance, airway epithelial cells release 
the growth factor heregulin from the apical surface, but 
restrict its receptor tyrosine kinase erbB2 (see Fig. 24.5B 
for a related receptor) to the basolateral surface. Thus, 
the receptor is activated only if the epithelium is damaged 
or the tight junctions compromised.

Sheets  of  epithelial  cells  vary  by  several  orders  of 
magnitude in the quality of the seal created by circum­
ferential  tight  junctions  between  adjacent  cells.  The 
tightness of the barrier to diffusion of ions in the extra­
cellular space determines the electrical resistance across 
the epithelium and depends on the claudin isoform and 
the number and continuity of the strands. Epithelia also 
appear to differ in the ability of water to flow through 
tight  junctions.  Extremely  tight  barriers  with  many 
strands and distinct claudin forms are found where epi­
thelia  must  maintain  high  ion  gradients,  such  as  in  the 
distal tubules of the kidney, where urine is concentrated. 
Leaky  tight  junctions  with  fewer  strands  and  different 
claudins are found where ion gradients across epithelia 
are small but a barrier is required for large solutes, pro­
teins, and leukocytes (eg, in most blood vessels).

Intracellular  and  extracellular  factors  regulate  the 
transepithelial  barrier  established  by  tight  junctions. 
These regulators include hormones such as vasopressin 
and  aldosterone  and  cytokines  such  as  tumor  necrosis 
factor (see Fig. 24.9) that act through second messengers 
(eg, Ca2+ and cyclic adenosine monophosphate [cAMP]; 
see  Chapter  26),  and  effectors  (eg,  protein  kinases  A 
and  C;  see  Chapter  25).  The  mechanisms  are  not  yet 

well  understood,  but  posttranslational  modifications  of 
tight junctions might modulate their assembly. Tension 
on  associated  actin  filaments  may  physically  open  pas­
sages  through  tight  junctions.  The  metabolic  state  of 
the  cell  also  influences  tight  junctions;  depletion  of 
adenosine  triphosphate  (ATP)  causes  tight  junctions  to 
leak  without  destroying  the  barrier  between  the  apical 
and basolateral domains of the plasma membrane. White 
blood  cells  migrating  across  epithelia  from  the  blood  
to  the  connective  tissue,  open  tight  junctions  locally 
without  disrupting  the  tight  seal  across  the  epithelium 
(see  Fig.  30.13).  A  localized  increase  in  cytoplasmic 
Ca2+ in the epithelial cells is required to open the tight 
junctions.

Several  bacterial  toxins  affect  the  tight  junction 
barrier.  The  ZO­toxin  of  Vibrio  cholerae  induces  diar­
rhea  by  loosening  tight  junctions,  independent  of  the 
classic cholera toxin, which induces secretion of salt and 
water.  Helicobacter  pylori  injects  a  protein  toxin  into 
the  cells  lining  the  stomach.  This  toxin  disrupts  tight 
junctions, breaking the barrier that protects the underly­
ing tissues and predisposing to ulcers.

Mutations of human claudin genes cause highly selec­
tive defects in epithelial barriers. One example is reduced 
ability of the kidney to reabsorb potassium (claudin­16). 
Another  is  deafness  due  to  loss  of  ion  gradients  in  the 
inner ear (claudin­14).

Gap Junctions
The idea that channels might couple cells arose relatively 
late, because electrophysiological experiments on nerves 
and  skeletal  muscles  reinforced  the  widespread  belief 
that cells were autonomous. However, nerve and skeletal 
muscle  cells  later  turned  out  to  be  exceptions  to  the 
general  principle  that  cells  in  animal  tissues  communi­
cate  with  each  other  by  gap  junctions.  Cells  in  plant 
tissues also communicate with each other, but they use 
direct cytoplasmic connections, called plasmodesmata, 
rather than gap junctions (Box 31.1 and Fig. 31.4).

The  first  convincing  evidence  for  direct  electrical 
communication  between  cells  came  around  1960  
from electrophysiological experiments on the synapses 
between giant axons and the motor neurons that drive 
the  flipper  muscles  of  crayfish.  These  electrical  syn-
apses transmit action potentials (see Fig. 17.6) directly 
from one cell to the next without the delay required for 
secretion  and  reception  of  a  chemical  transmitter  (see 
Fig. 17.10). Similar electrical junctions were subsequently 
found to connect heart muscle cells (see Fig. 39.18).

Over the next decade, physiologists used microelec­
trodes to establish that plasma membrane depolarization 
of  one  cell  can  be  transmitted  with  little  resistance  to 
adjacent epithelial cells (Fig. 31.5B), although the ampli­
tude  of  the  response  declined  with  distance.  Similarly, 
fluorescent molecules, radioactive tracers, and essential 

 

CHAPTER 31  n  Intercellular Junctions 

547

BOX 31.1  Plasmodesmata

Most cells in plant tissues maintain cytoplasmic continuity 
with  their  neighbors  through  plasmodesmata,  channels 
across the cell wall lined by plasma membrane across the 
cell  wall  (Fig.  31.4).  These  connections  form  by  incom­
plete cytokinesis, but secondary plasmodesmata can form 
independently.  Plasmodesmata  are  essential  for  plant 
viability.

A  narrow  tubule  of  modified  endoplasmic  reticulum 
(ER) fills most of the pore and is linked to the surround­
ing  plasma  membrane  by  a  number  of  proteins.  The 
protein spokes connecting the ER and plasma membrane 
are  not  yet  well  characterized,  but  candidates  include 
proteins  that  participate  in  membrane  contact  sites  
in  animals  and  fungi  such  as  synaptotagmins  (see  
Chapter  21),  synaptobrevin  (see  Chapter  21),  lipid 
exchange  proteins  (see  Fig.  20.17),  junctophilins,  and 
stromal  interaction  molecules  (STIMs)  (see  Fig.  26.12).

Molecules  smaller  than  about  1 kD  diffuse  freely 
through the narrow cylinder of cytoplasm in plasmodes­
mata,  but  larger  molecules,  even  nucleic  acids  pass 
selectively through these channels. Constitutive diffusion 
of  small  molecules  allows  exchange  of  metabolites  and 
hormones  between  cells.  Regulated  passage  of  larger 
molecules, including double­stranded RNAs and proteins 
such as transcription factors, allows developmental signals 
to  move  between  cells  and  tissues.  Specialized  viral 
“movement  proteins”  allow  some  viruses  to  move  their 
whole genomes between cells.

Permeability varies among tissues and with physiologi­
cal states and developmental stages. For example, all cells 
in  plant  embryos  are  connected,  whereas  cells  in  some 
adult tissues are isolated. Reversible deposition of callose 
and other molecules in the cell wall surrounding plasmo­
desmata regulates their diameter and permeability. Actin 
filaments contribute to regulation of the pore size, but the 
mechanism  and  signals  controlling  permeability  are  not 
known.

Integral membrane proteins of the ER and
plasma membrane

Annulus
Desmotubule

ENDOPLASMIC

RETICULUM

CELL WALL

100 nm

FIGURE  31.4  A  PLASMODESMATA  CONNECTING  TWO 
PLANT  CELLS.  The  plasma  membrane  is  continuous  between  the 
two cells. The space between the tubule of endoplasmic reticulum and 
the surrounding plasma membrane allows molecules in the cytoplasm 
to move between the two cells. ER, endoplasmic reticulum. 

A

Fluorescein

2

1

3x

4

5

Halothane

3

4

5

2

1

B
I1

V1

I2

V2

C

I1
I2

open

close

A
p
 
0
0
1

V
m
0
1

 

A
p

 

0
1

10 sec

2 sec

FIGURE  31.5  GAP  JUNCTION  PHYSIOLOGY.  A,  Drawing  and 
fluorescence  micrograph,  showing  the  movement  of  a  tracer  dye 
between epithelial cells from the salivary gland of Chironomus. Cell 3 
was injected with fluorescein (molecular weight: 330), which spread to 
adjacent cells via gap junctions. B–C, Electrical recordings from pairs 
of cells coupled by gap junctions. B, Two cells (1 and 2) were voltage-
clamped  (see  the  text  that  describes  Fig.  17.6)  and  subjected  alter-
nately to small depolarizing voltage changes (V1, V2). Being electrically 
coupled,  they  responded  with  opposite  currents  (I1,  I2).  Transient 
exposure  to  the  anesthetic  halothane  (horizontal  bar)  closes  most 
of  the  channels,  reducing  the  current  in  response  to  depolarization.  
C, When the cells are held at a constant depolarizing voltage in the 
presence of halothane, current records reveal the opening and closing 
of  individual  gap  junction  channels  as  opposite  step  changes  in 
current. (A, From Lowenstein W. Junctional intercellular communica-
tion:  the  cell-to-cell  membrane  channel.  Physiol  Rev.  1981;61:829. 
B and C, From Eghbali B, Kessler JA, Spray DC. Expression of gap 
junction channels in communication-incompetent cells. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A. 1990;87:1328–1331.)

nutrients can pass from the cytoplasm of one cell to the 
cytoplasm of neighboring cells.

Electron  microscopy  revealed  that  low­resistance 
communication  between  cells  is  associated  with  the 
presence of plasma membrane specializations that were 
called  gap  junctions  owing  to  the  regular  2­  to  4­nm 
separation  of  the  adjacent  cell  membranes  (Fig.  31.6). 
Gap  junctions  are  plaques  composed  of  large  intercel-
lular channels that connect the cytoplasms of a pair of 
cells. These plaques exclude other transmembrane pro­
teins  and  contain  a  few  to  thousands  of  channels.  Half 

548 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

A

B

C

D

FIGURE 31.6  LIGHT AND ELECTRON MICROGRAPHS OF GAP JUNCTIONS. A, Thin section of embedded cells, showing the closely 
apposed membranes of adjacent cells separated by a gap of 2 nm. B, Replica of a freeze-fractured cell, showing an irregular array of particles 
exposed in the plane of the lipid bilayer. C, Fluorescence micrograph of a gap junction plaque (red and green) between cultured HeLa (Henrietta 
Lacks) cells expressing connexin-43 with a tetracysteine peptide tag. The cells were first exposed to a green fluorescent dye that binds tightly 
to the tetracysteine tag and then, after 4 hours of growth without the green dye, the same cells were incubated with a second red fluorescent 
dye that binds to the tetracysteine tag on newly synthesized connexin-43. The older central part of this plaque is green. The newer peripheral 
regions of the plaque are red. D, Negative staining of an isolated gap junction reveals the intercellular connexon channels packed together in a 
regular, two-dimensional array. Each connexon has a central channel filled with stain. (A–B and D, Courtesy Don W. Fawcett, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA; from the work of N.B. Gilula, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA. C, Courtesy Mark Ellisman, University of California, 
San  Diego  and  from  Gaietta  G,  Deernick  TJ,  Adams  SR,  et al:  Multicolor  and  electron  microscopic  imaging  of  connexin  trafficking.  Science. 
2002;296:503–507.)

channels in each membrane called connexons are each 
formed  from  six  protein  subunits,  named  connexins 
(Fig. 31.7).

Structure of Gap Junction Channels
A hexagonal ring of connexins forms a central aqueous 
channel  across  the  lipid  bilayer  and  pairs  with  a  con­
nexon  in  an  adjacent  cell  to  connect  their  cytoplasms. 
Four transmembrane α­helices of each connexin subunit 
span the lipid bilayer and two loops between the helices 
form small extracellular domains (Fig. 31.7). Connexons 
on  adjacent  cells  dock  to  form  a  continuous  pore 
between the pair of cells. Tight interactions between the 
subunits seal the pore and preclude leakage of ions out 
of either cell.

The transmembrane pore begins with a funnel from 
the  cytoplasm  that  narrows  to  a  diameter  of  1.4 nm, 
larger than the pores of tetrameric S5­P­S6 ion channels 
(see Fig. 16.5) or pentameric ligand­gated ion channels 
(see Fig. 16.12). This pore passes hydrophilic molecules 
up  to  approximately  1 kD  in  size,  including  ions  (to 
establish electrochemical continuity between the cells), 
second messengers (to establish a common network of 
information),  small  peptides,  and  metabolites  (to  allow 
sharing of resources). Connexon hemichannels (the ring 
of  six  connexins  in  one  plasma  membrane)  also  open 
infrequently  for  the  nonspecific  release  of  ions  and 
solutes as large as ATP from the cell.

Connexin Gene Families and Evolution
Humans  have  genes  for  21  connexin  isoforms,  ranging 
in  size  from  26  to  60 kD.  Connexins  are  named  by 
molecular  weight;  for  instance,  connexin­43  (Cx­43)  is 
the name for the 43­kD isoform. All connexins have the 
conserved  features  required  to  form  the  connexon 
channel  but  variable  N­  and  C­terminal  cytoplasmic 
sequences.  The  various  connexin  isoforms  make  chan­
nels  that  differ 
in  their  permeability  and  charge 
selectivity.

Remarkably, gap junction genes seem to have arisen 
more than once during evolution. Connexins are found 
exclusively  in  chordates,  while  invertebrate  gap  junc­
tions  are  composed  of  innexins  (invertebrate  connex­
ins).  Innexins  have  four  transmembrane  helices  but 
lack  any  sequence  similarity  to  connexins  and  form 
intercellular  junctions  from  two  octameric  hemichan­
nels.  Vertebrates  have  a  few  genes  related  to  innexins 
called  pannexins.  Rather  than  forming  gap  junctions, 
pannexins form plasma membrane channels that release 
solutes  including  ATP  from  the  cytoplasm.  The  ATP 
activates seven­helix receptors (see Fig. 24.2) and chan­
nels activated by adenine nucleotides (see Fig. 16.2) as 
part  of  local  signaling  pathways  in  the  immune  and 
nervous  systems.  Many  animals  have  another  channel, 
calcium homeostasis modulator 1, that shares structural 
features  with  connexins,  pannexins,  and  innexins. 

 

A

C

B

Conserved
regions

EXTRACELLULAR

E

H1

H2

H3

H4

N

38 – 56 aa

18 – 195 aa

C
CYTOPLASM

Open

N-terminal
helix plug

Closed

CHAPTER 31  n  Intercellular Junctions 

549

D

INTRA–

CELLULAR

EXTRA–
CELLULAR

INTRA–

CELLULAR

N-terminal
helix plug

Negatively
charged
patches

FIGURE 31.7  STRUCTURE OF THE GAP JUNCTION CONNEXON CHANNEL. A, Drawing of gap junction connexons forming channels 
between  the  cytoplasms  of  adjacent  cells.  B,  Transmembrane  topology  of  connexins.  Four  α-helices  cross  the  lipid  bilayer.  Conserved 
residues (maroon) form the transmembrane and extracellular loops are required for channel assembly. Cytoplasmic loops between helix 2 and 
helix 3 and the C-terminal tails vary in length among connexin isoforms. Removal of the C-terminal tail from connexin-43 alters its gating properties. 
C, Diagram showing how the N-terminal α-helices of Cx26 may form a plug that blocks the pore of the closed channel. D–E, Crystal structure 
of the connexin 26 the gap junction channel. C–D, Top and side views of a ribbon diagram with each of the six subunits a different color. The 
two extracellular loops of each subunit associate with the other half channel to span the 4-nm gap between the membranes. The upper panel 
of  D  shows  as  a  space-filling  model  cut  through  the  middle  of  the  transmembrane  pore.  (For  reference,  see  PDB  file  2ZW3  and  Maeda  S, 
Nakagawa S, Suga M, et al. Structure of the connexin 26 gap junction channel at 3.5 A resolution. Nature. 2009;458:597–602.)

However, the lack of sequence homology suggests that 
this  gene  may  have  arisen  separately.

Assembly of Gap Junctions
Connexin proteins turn over on a time scale of several 
hours and are replaced by new connexons that assemble 
in vesicles along the secretory pathway. New connexons 
add around the periphery of gap junction plaques in the 
plasma membrane and old connexons are removed from 
the middle of plaques (Fig. 31.6C).

Many  gap  junctions  are  composed  of  one  connexin 
isoform  and  pass  molecules  equally  well  in  both  direc­
tions.  However,  some  connexons  assemble  from  mix­
tures  of  subunits  creating  hybrid  gap  junctions  with 
novel  properties.  Furthermore,  some  connexons  can 
pair with a different type of connexon on the neighbor­
ing  cell.  Such  hybrid  channels  may  pass  fluorescent 
tracers more readily in one direction than the other or 
react more sensitively to the transjunctional potential of 
one polarity than the other. This might explain the asym­
metrical  coupling  that  is  sometimes  observed  between 
both excitable and nonexcitable cells, such as neuronal 
gap junctions, which pass action potentials in one direc­
tion but not the other.

Regulation of Gap Junction Permeability
Electrophysiological  measurements  showed  that  con­
nexons  alternate  between  open  and  closed  states  (Fig. 
31.5C). The structural basis for this gating is not estab­
lished definitively, but a plug­gating mechanism is plau­
sible. In this model N­terminal helices can either form a 
plug that blocks the pore or pull back against the wall 
of  the  channel  to  create  the  1.4­nm  pore  (Fig.  31.7E). 
This  would  allow  the  two  connexins  to  gate  the  pore 
independently; both must be open to connect the two 
cytoplasms.  Cytoplasmic  loops,  C­terminal  tails  or  the 
extracellular loops may also contribute to gating.

The pores of gap junction channels are large enough 
to pass all common inorganic ions as well as nucleotides, 
amino  acids,  and  even  small  peptides  and  RNAs.  The 
conductance of the open state depends on the connexin 
isoform  and  varies  from  about  30  psec  to  300  psec. 
Given  the  permeability  of  gap  junctions  to  relatively 
large solutes, it is surprising that their conductance is in 
the same range as narrower ligand­ and voltage­gated ion 
channels. Both the greater length and the arrangement 
of charged residues lining the channel may contribute to 
the low conductance of connexons.

550 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

Gap junctional communication depends on both the 
number of channels and the fraction of those channels 
that is open or closed. The fraction of open channels is 
usually less than 1.0; it is approximately 0.2 in heart and 
as low as 0.01 in one nerve cell that was tested.

Many factors regulate the opening and closing of con­
nexon  channels.  The  transjunctional  potential  (ie,  the 
potential  difference  between  the  coupled  cells)  gates 
most  connexons,  regardless  of  the  plasma  membrane 
potentials of these cells. Like other voltage­gated chan­
nels, individual transitions are fast, but the response to 
potential changes, on the scale of seconds, is very slow 
in  comparison  with  other  channels  (see  Fig.  16.7). 
Unphysiological concentrations of cytoplasmic Ca2+ (100 
to 500 µM) and cytoplasmic acidification also close con­
nexons.  These  effects  of  membrane  potential,  H+,  and 
Ca2+ allow cells to terminate communication with neigh­
boring cells that are damaged (depolarizing the plasma 
membrane and admitting high concentrations of Ca2+) or 
metabolically compromised (allowing Ca2+ to leak out of 
intracellular stores and acidifying the cytoplasm).

Chemicals  also  modulate  gap  junctions.  Oleamide,  a 
fatty  acid  amide  produced  by  the  brain,  blocks  gap 
junctional communication and induces sleep in animals. 
Organic  alcohols  (heptanol  and  octanol)  and  general 
anesthetics (halothane) can also close gap junction chan­
nels reversibly (Fig. 31.5), but these agents are not spe­
cific for gap junctions.

Signaling  pathways  control  gap  junction  activity 
through  phosphorylation  of  numerous  sites  by  several 
kinases. For example, on a time scale of seconds, cAMP 
activates  protein  kinase  A,  which  phosphorylates  the 
C­terminal tail of some connexins, increasing or decreas­
ing  the  fraction  of  open  channels  (depending  on  the 
connexin  isoform  and  the  cell  type).  On  a  time  scale  
of  hours  cAMP  also  promotes  the  assembly  of  gap 
junctions.

Physiological Functions of Gap Junctions
Cells in most metazoans communicate by gap junctions. 
Coupled  cells  in  vertebrates  include  epithelial  cells  of 
the skin, endocrine glands, exocrine glands, gastrointes­
tinal  tract,  and  renal­urinary  tract  as  well  as  smooth 
muscle,  cardiac  muscle,  bone,  some  neurons,  and  glial 
cells. Epithelial cells can coordinate their activities with 
their neighbors. This is used to synchronize the beats of 
cilia  (see  Fig.  38.12C).  Fragments  of  viral  proteins  can 
spread  from  infected  cells  to  neighboring  cells,  which 
then  become  targets  for  cytotoxic  T  lymphocytes  (see 
Fig.  28.9).  Gap  junctions  allow  osteocytes  buried  deep 
in  bone  to  maintain  a  cellular  supply  line  to  acquire 
nutrients  from  distant  blood  vessels  (see  Fig.  32.4). 
Passage of action potentials between cardiac and smooth 
muscle  cells  sets  off  waves  of  contraction  (see  Fig. 
39.18).  Electrical  synapses  between  neurons  can  trans­
mit  action  potentials  at  very  high  frequencies  (>1000 

TABLE 31.2  Phenotypes of Humans With Mutations 
in Gap Junction Subunits
Connexin
Cx­26β2

Phenotype
Dominant and recessive mutations with deafness; 

Cx­30β6
Cx­31β3
Cx­32β1

Cx­37α4

Cx­40α5
Cx­43α1
Cx­46α3
Cx­50α8

skin disease

Recessive deafness; skin disease
Recessive deafness; skin disease
Point mutations, defective myelin, peripheral 

nerve degeneration in X­linked Charcot­Marie­
Tooth disease; deafness

Female infertility, defect in communication of 

granulosa cells with oocyte

Partial block of impulse conduction in heart
Deafness; many mutations may be lethal as in mice
Cataracts in lens of the eye
Cataracts in lens of the eye

Note: Mutations are homozygous loss of function mutations unless noted 
otherwise. The nomenclature used here combines the Cx­“molecular 
mass in kD” and molecular phylogeny αβ­number systems.

per  second).  In  some  parts  of  the  brain,  gap  junctions 
also  coordinate  action  potentials  in  groups  of  neurons. 
Even white blood cells may form transient gap junctions 
with endothelial cells.

Gap Junctions in Disease
Point  mutations  in  connexin  genes  cause  remarkably 
specific defects in humans (Table 31.2), considering that 
most connexins are expressed in several tissues. Reces­
sive  mutations  in  the  connexin­26  gene  are  the  most 
common causes of inherited human deafness. As many 
as 1 in 30 people are carriers, and their mutations may 
contribute to hearing loss late in life. Connexin­26 par­
ticipates in the transport of K+ in the epithelia supporting 
the  sensory  hair  cells  in  the  ear.  Patients  with  one  of 
more  than  100  different  mutations  in  the  connexin­32 
gene  can  suffer  from  degeneration  of  the  myelin  
sheath  around  axons,  an  X­linked  variant  of  Charcot-
Marie-Tooth  disease.  Many  human  tissues  express 
connexin­32,  but  the  pathology  is  confined  to  myelin. 
The stability of myelin might depend on intracellular gap 
junctions  between  layers  of  the  myelin  sheath  that 
provide a pathway between the metabolically active cell 
body  and  the  deep  layers  of  the  sheath  near  the  axon. 
Defects in myelin membrane proteins cause other forms 
of Charcot­Marie­Tooth disease.

Adherens Junctions
Adherens junctions use homophilic (like­to­like) interac­
tions  of  E-cadherins  (see  Fig.  30.5)  to  bind  epithelial 
cells to their neighbors. Adherens junctions are essential 
for viability from the earliest stages of animal embryonic 
development.  In  mature  epithelia,  a  belt­like  adherens 
the  zonula  adherens,  encircles 
junction,  called 

 

CHAPTER 31  n  Intercellular Junctions 

551

the  cells  near  their  apical  surface  (Fig.  31.1D)  and  
maintains  the  physical  integrity  of  the  epithelium.  
Adherens  junctions  also  anchor  muscle  cells  to  the 
extracellular matrix.

Adherens  junctions  can  transmit  mechanical  forces 
between  cells  and  reinforce  tissues,  because  the  cyto­
plasmic  domains  of  the  E­cadherins  are  linked  to  the 
actin cytoskeleton. Adapter proteins connect cadherins 
to  actin  filaments  and  signaling  proteins  including 
guanine nucleotide exchange proteins for the Rho­family 
GTPases that promote actin assembly and force genera­
tion  by  myosin  (see  Fig.  33.19F).  The  adapter  proteins 
include β­catenin,  a  related  protein  called  plakoglobin, 
p120­catenin,  and  the  actin­binding  protein  α­catenin. 
Moderate  physical  forces  stabilize  this  link  from  the 
cadherin  tail  through  β­catenin  and  α­catenin  to  actin 
filaments.

Adherens  junctions  are  the  first  connections  estab­
lished  within  developing  sheets  of  epithelial  cells. 
Contact begins when cadherins on the tips of filopodia 
engage  partner  cadherins  of  the  same  type  on  another 
cell. The contact spreads laterally as more cadherins are 
recruited along with associated actin filaments, as illus­
trated by dorsal closure of the ectoderm by Drosophila 
embryos  (see  Fig.  38.5).  These  pioneering  adherens  
junctions  eventually  allow  like  cells  to  associate  in  
epithelial  sheets  (see  Fig.  30.8)  and  to  influence  the 
maturation of the epithelium. Adherens junctions are a 
prerequisite  for  the  assembly  of  tight  junctions  that 
allow epithelial cells to establish polarity with different 
proteins and lipids in the apical and basal plasma mem­
branes.  The  shapes  of  cells  in  epithelial  sheets  depend 
on  Rho  family  GTPases  and  protein  kinases  associated 
with the adherens junction, which regulate the assembly 
and contraction of the associated actin cytoskeleton.

The  junctions  and  polarity  of  the  cells  determine  
the  orientation  of  the  mitotic  spindle  and  the  plane  of 
division.  This  allows  for  asymmetrical  division  of  stem 
cells, such as those at the base of stratified epithelia (see 
Figs. 35.6 and 41.4).

Desmosomes
Desmosomes  (desmos =  “bound,”  soma =  “body”)  use 
cadherins  to  provide  strong  adhesions  reinforced  by 
intermediate  filaments  between  epithelial  and  muscle 
cells. In epithelia, these junctions are small, disk­shaped, 
“spot welds” between adjacent cells. Desmosomes in the 
heart are more complicated because they are mixed with 
adherens junctions (see Fig. 39.18).

Two  families  of  desmosomal  cadherins,  named  des-
mogleins and desmocollins, mediate cellular adhesion 
at  desmosomes  (see  Fig.  30.5  and  Table  30.2).  The  
most  distal  of  five  extracellular  CAD  domains  interact 
head  to  head  with  CAD1  domains  from  the  partner  
cells  and  laterally  with  other  cadherins  in  a  dense  

tangle  midway  between  the  two  plasma  membranes 
(see Fig. 30.6).

Desmosomal cadherins connect to cytoplasmic inter­
mediate  filaments  via  adapter  proteins  analogous  to 
those that connect adherens junction cadherins to actin 
filaments. Two proteins related to β­catenin, plakoglo-
bin  and  plakophilin,  bind  to  cytoplasmic  domain 
of  desmosomal  cadherins  and  form  a  physical  link  to 
desmoplakin, a dimeric protein related to plectin (see 
Fig. 35.7). The C­terminus of desmoplakin binds directly 
to  the  N­terminal,  nonhelical  domains  of  epidermal 
keratin  intermediate  filaments.  Mutations  in  this 
part of epidermal keratins cause blistering skin diseases 
by  compromising  the  integrity  of  desmosomes  (see  
Fig. 35.6).

Although all desmosomes share a common plan, selec­
tive expression of isoforms of their component proteins 
give  desmosomes  unique  molecular  compositions  in 
various  cells.  For  example,  in  epidermis,  desmoglein­1 
and  desmocollin­1  are  found  only  in  the  upper  layers, 
whereas desmoglein­3 is in the basal layers. This explains 
the pathology in autoimmune blistering diseases. Patients 
with pemphigus foliaceus make antibodies that react 
with desmoglein­1 and disrupt desmosomes in the upper 
layers of the epidermis, whereas patients with pemphi-
gus  vulgaris  produce  autoantibodies  to  desmoglein­3 
that disrupt the basal layers. These antibodies are directly 
responsible  for  the  disease;  transfusion  of  human  auto­
antibodies  into  a  mouse  reproduces  the  disease.  Other 
organs are spared, owing to the restricted expression of 
these  two  isoforms.  Mutations  in  the  corresponding 
desmoglein genes in mice compromise desmosomes and 
cause skin blisters similar to pemphigus.

The  development  of  animal  tissues  depends  on  
desmosomes.  Loss­of­function  mutations  can  lead  to 
mechanical failures. For example, mutations in the plako­
globin  gene  can  be  lethal  in  mice  and  humans  during 
embryogenesis,  owing  to  disruption  of  the  heart.  Simi­
larly, mutations in the desmoplakin gene cause skin and 
cardiac  defects  that  can  be  fatal.  Desmosomal  proteins 
also  participate  in  signal  transduction.  For  example, 
plakoglobin  and  desmoglein  suppress  proliferation  and 
promote  differentiation  by  competing  with  β­catenin 
for  binding  DNA  (see  Fig.  30.7)  and  inhibiting  the 
mitogen­activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway. Loss of 
desmosomes is associated with the spread of epithelial 
cancer cells.

Adhesion to the Extracellular Matrix: 
Hemidesmosomes and Focal Contacts
Adhesion  to  the  extracellular  matrix  is  fundamentally 
different  from  intercellular  adhesion  because  integrins, 
rather than homophilic interactions of cadherins, provide 
the  transmembrane  link  between  the  cytoskeleton  and 
ligands in the extracellular matrix (see Fig. 30.9). At focal 

552 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

contacts  and  related  assemblies,  transmembrane  integ­
rins link cytoplasmic actin filaments to the extracellular 
matrix (see Fig. 30.11).

Hemidesmosomes are another type of integrin­based 
adhesive  junction  that  links  cytoplasmic  intermediate 
filaments  to  the  basal  lamina.  The  morphologic  resem­
blance  of  hemidesmosomes  to  half  of  a  conventional 
desmosome  belies  the  fact  that  they  are  fundamentally 
different at the molecular level (Fig. 31.8C). Like desmo­
somes,  hemidesmosomes  have  a  dense  plaque  on  the 
cytoplasmic  surface  of  the  plasma  membrane  that 

anchors  loops  of  intermediate  filaments.  The  similarity 
ends there.

The  hemidesmosomes  of  simple  epithelia  use  α6β4 
integrin  to  adhere  to  laminin-5  in  the  basal  lamina. 
Plectin (see Fig. 35.7) links the large cytoplasmic domain 
of β4­integrin to keratin intermediate filaments.

More complex hemidesmosomes of stratified epithe­
lial  cells  have,  in  addition  to  α6β4­integrin,  a  second 
transmembrane adhesion protein, type XVII collagen. 
The  type  XVII  collagen  trimer  forms  an  extracellular 
collagen  triple  helix  (see  Fig.  29.1)  that  anchors  the 

A. Adherens junction

B. Desmosome

C. Hemidesmosome

Tight
junction

Adherens
junction

2 nm/mm
CELL 1

4 nm/mm

CELL 2 CELL 1

β-catenin

Actin

E-cadherin

2 nm/mm

2 nm/mm

CELL 2

IF

Desmoplakin

130 nm

BP230

IF

Plectin

BP180

Plakoglobin

α6

β4

Integrin

Laminin

BPAG2

BASAL LAMINA

FIGURE 31.8  COMPARISON OF ADHERENS JUNCTION, DESMOSOME, AND HEMIDESMOSOME. Top, Electron micrographs of thin 
sections. Bottom, Molecular models. A, Adherens junction. Electron micrograph from the intestinal epithelium. E-cadherins link two cells together. 
β-Catenin and α-catenin link the cytoplasmic domain of E-cadherin to actin filaments. B, Desmosome. Two types of cadherins—desmoglein and 
desmocollin—link adjacent cells together. The central dense stratum seen in the micrograph presumably corresponds to the interaction sites of 
the cadherins, although accessory proteins may participate. Desmoplakin and other accessory proteins link the cadherins and associated plako-
globin (related to catenin) to keratin intermediate filaments. Desmoplakin molecules are shown extended to their full length in the middle drawing, 
whereas in desmosomes, they must be kinked or folded (as shown in the upper drawing) because the thickness of the desmoplakin layer is half 
that  expected  from  extended  molecules.  C,  Hemidesmosome.  Integrin  α6β4  and  type  XVII  collagen  (also  called  BPAG2  [bullous  pemphigoid 
antigen-2]) attach to the basal lamina. Plectin, BP230, and BPAG1 (bullous pemphigoid antigen-1) link the membrane proteins to keratin intermedi-
ate filaments. (A–B, Micrographs courtesy Hilda Pasolli and Elaine Fuchs, Rockefeller University, New York and from Perez-Moreno M, Jamora 
C,  Fuchs  E.  Sticky  business:  orchestrating  cellular  signals  at  adherens  junctions.  Cell.  2003;112:535–548.  C,  Micrograph  courtesy  Jonathan 
Jones, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL.)

 

CHAPTER 31  n  Intercellular Junctions 

553

membrane to the basal lamina. In a blistering skin disease 
called  bullous  pemphigoid,  autoantibodies  attack 
type XVII collagen, so the protein is also called bullous 
pemphigoid antigen­2, or BPAG2. This clinical observa­
tion  and  genetic  deletions  established  that  both  α6β4­
integrin and type XVII collagen are required for assembly 
of  stable  hemidesmosomes  in  skin.  BPAG1  (bullous 
pemphigoid  antigen­1;  also  called  BP230)  is  related  to 
plectin  and  helps  connect  the  integrin  to  intermediate 
filaments.

Mutations in the genes for any of the hemidesmosome 
proteins cause blistering skin diseases known as epider­
molysis bullosa. Pathology can also occur in other tissues 
that depend on hemidesmosomes, including the cornea, 
gastrointestinal tract, and muscles. Mutations in keratin 
genes also cause epidermolysis bullosa (see Fig. 35.6).

SELECTED READINGS

Nielsen  MS,  Axelsen  LN,  Sorgen  PL,  et al.  Gap  junctions.  Compr 

Physiol. 2012;2:1981­2035.

Niessen  CM,  Leckband  D,  Yap  AS.  Tissue  organization  by  cadherin 
adhesion molecules: dynamic molecular and cellular mechanisms of 
morphogenetic regulation. Physiol Rev. 2011;91:691­731.

Oshima A. Structure and closure of connexin gap junction channels. 

FEBS Lett. 2014;588:1230­1237.

Oshima  A,  Matsuzawa  T,  Murata  K,  et al.  Hexadecameric  structure  
of  an  invertebrate  gap  junction  channel.  J  Mol  Biol.  2016;428:
1227­1236.

Padmanabhan  A,  Rao  MV,  Wu  Y,  et al.  Jack  of  all  trades:  functional 
junction.  Curr  Opin  Cell  Biol. 

in  the  adherens 

modularity 
2015;36:32­40.

Powell AM, Sakuma­Oyama Y, Oyama N, et al. Collagen XVII/BP180: A 
collagenous  transmembrane  protein  component  of  the  dermoepi­
dermal  anchoring  complex.  Clin  Exp  Dermatol.  2005;30:682­
687.

Scemes  E.  Nature  of  plasmalemmal  functional  “hemichannels.” 

Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012;1818:1880­1883.

Siebert AP, Ma Z, Grevet JD, et al. Structural and functional similarities 
of  calcium  homeostasis  modulator  1  (CALHM1)  ion  channel  with 
connexins,  pannexins,  and  innexins.  J  Biol  Chem.  2013;288:
6140­6153.

Broussard JA, Getsios S, Green KJ. Desmosome regulation and signaling 

Stahley  SN,  Kowalczyk  AP.  Desmosomes  in  acquired  disease.  Cell 

in disease. Cell Tissue Res. 2015;360:501­512.

Tissue Res. 2015;360:439­456.

Buckley  CD,  Tan  J,  Anderson  KL,  et al.  Cell  adhesion.  The  minimal 
cadherin­catenin  complex  binds  to  actin  filaments  under  force. 
Science. 2014;346:1254211.

Evans  WH.  Cell  communication  across  gap  junctions:  a  historical  
perspective and current developments. Biochem Soc Trans. 2015;
43:450­459.

Gumbiner BM. Regulation of cadherin­mediated adhesion in morpho­

genesis. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2005;6:622­634.

Johnson  JL,  Najor  NA,  Green  KJ.  Desmosomes:  regulators  of  cellular 
signaling and adhesion in epidermal health and disease. Cold Spring 
Harb Perspect Med. 2014;4:a015297.

Suzuki  H,  Nishizawa  T,  Tani  K,  et al.  Crystal  structure  of  a  claudin 
provides  insight  into  the  architecture  of  tight  junctions.  Science. 
2014;344:304­307.

Tilsner  J,  Nicolas  W,  Rosado  A,  et al.  Staying  tight:  plasmodesmal 
membrane contact sites and the control of cell­to­cell connectivity 
in plants. Annu Rev Plant Biol. 2016;67:337­364.

Van  Itallie  CM,  Anderson  JM.  Architecture  of  tight  junctions  and 
principles  of  molecular  composition.  Semin  Cell  Dev  Biol. 
2014;36:157­165.

Walko G, Castañón MJ, Wiche G. Molecular architecture and function 

of the hemidesmosome. Cell Tissue Res. 2015;360:529­544.

Lee JY. Plasmodesmata: a signaling hub at the cellular boundary. Curr 

Yap  AS,  Gomez  GA,  Parton  RG.  Adherens  junctions  revisualized: 

Opin Plant Biol. 2015;27:133­140.

organizing cadherins as nanoassemblies. Dev Cell. 2015;35:12­20.

This page intentionally left blank

C H A P T E R 

32 

Connective Tissues

Animals use different proportions of matrix macromol-

ecules  to  construct  connective  tissues  with  a  range  of 
mechanical properties to support their organs. Bone is a 
stiff, hard solid; blood vessel walls are flexible and elastic; 
and  the  vitreous  body  of  the  eye  is  a  watery  gel.  Plant 
and fungal cell walls are functionally similar to the animal 
extracellular matrix but are composed of completely dif-
ferent molecules. This chapter begins with a discussion 
of simple connective tissues then concentrates on carti-
lage, bone, development of the skeleton, and the mecha-
nisms that repair wounds, finishing with a discussion of 
the plant cell wall.

Loose Connective Tissue
Loose connective tissue consists of a sparse extracellular 
matrix  of  hyaluronan  and  proteoglycans  supported 
by a few collagen fibrils and elastic fibrils. In addition 
to  fibroblasts,  the  cell  population  is  heterogeneous, 
including  both  indigenous  and  emigrant  connective 
tissue cells (see Fig. 28.1). The loose connective tissue 
underlying the epithelium in the gastrointestinal tract is 
a good example of this heterogeneity (Fig. 32.1A), with 
lymphocytes,  plasma  cells,  macrophages,  eosinophils, 
neutrophils,  and  mast  cells,  as  well  as  fibroblasts  and 
occasional fat cells (see Chapter 28 for details on these 
cells). This variety of defensive cells is appropriate for a 
location near the lumen of the intestine, which contains 
microorganisms and potentially toxic materials from the 
outside world. Loose connective tissue is also found in 
and  around  other  organs.  In  the  optically  transparent 
vitreous  body  of  the  eye,  fibroblasts  produce  a  highly 
hydrated  gel  of  hyaluronan  and  proteoglycans,  sup-
ported by a loose network of type II collagen. Few defen-
sive cells are required, as the interior of the eye is sterile.

Dense Connective Tissue
Collagen fibers, with or without elastic fibers, make up 
the bulk of dense connective tissue (Fig. 32.1B). Sparse 

A

Columnar
epithelium

B

Transitional
epithelium

LOOSE CT

DENSE CT

FIGURE  32.1  CONNECTIVE  TISSUES.  A,  Loose  connective 
tissue (CT) underlying the columnar epithelium of the small intestine. 
Light  micrograph  of  a  section  stained  with  Masson  trichrome  stain.  
B,  Dense  connective  tissue  (CT)  underlying  transitional  epithelium  in 
the  wall  of  the  ureter.  Light  micrograph  of  a  section  stained  with 
hematoxylin-eosin. (Courtesy D.W. Fawcett, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA.)

fibroblasts  are  present  to  manufacture  extracellular 
matrix. Other connective tissue cells are even rarer, as 
these tissues are not usually exposed to microorganisms. 
Collagen fibers can be arranged precisely, as in tendons 
or cornea (see Fig. 29.3), or less so, as in the wall of the 
intestine or the skin. Tendons consist nearly exclusively 
of type I collagen fibers, all aligned along the length of 
the tendon to provide the tensile strength that is required 
to transmit forces from muscle to bone. The cornea that 
forms the transparent front surface of the eye is also well 
organized into orthogonal layers of collagen fibrils.

Dense  connective  tissues  can  also  be  elastic.  For 
example,  the  walls  of  arteries  (see  Fig.  29.8)  and  the 
dermal layer of skin consist of both collagen and elastic 
fibers. Energy from each heartbeat stretches the elastic 
fibers in the walls of arteries. Recoil of these elastic fibers 
propels blood between heartbeats and affects the blood 
pressure.

 555

556 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

Approximately one in 5000 humans inherits a muta-
tion  in  a  gene  for  fibrillar  collagens  type  I,  type  III,  or 
type V, which causes a range of connective tissue defects 
called  Ehlers-Danlos  syndrome.  Most  affected  indi-
viduals  have  thin  skin  and  lax  joints.  Severe  mutations 
lead to rupture of arteries, bowel, or uterus, often with 
fatal  consequences.  Ehlers-Danlos  syndrome  illustrates 
the  importance  of  these  collagens  with  regard  to  the 
integrity of the affected tissues. Inheritance is dominant, 
as  these  collagens  consist  of  trimers  of  three  identical 
subunits.  Given  one  mutant  gene,  only  one  in  eight  
(½ × ½ × ½) procollagen molecules is normal.

Cartilage
Cartilage (Fig. 32.2) is tough, resilient connective tissue 
that performs a variety of mechanical roles. It covers the 
articular  surfaces  of  joints  and  supports  the  trachea, 
other  large  airways,  the  nose,  and  ears.  Cartilage  also 
forms  the  entire  skeleton  of  sharks  and  the  embryonic 
precursors  of  many  bones  in  higher  vertebrates.  The 
mechanical  properties  of  cartilage  are  attributable  to 
abundant extracellular matrix consisting of fine collagen 
fibrils  and  high  concentrations  of  glycosaminoglycans 
and proteoglycans (Fig. 32.3).

Chondrocytes  synthesize  and  secrete  macromole-
cules  for  the  cartilage  matrix,  which  eventually  sur-
rounds  them  completely.  Chondrocytes  replenish  the 

matrix as the macromolecules turn over slowly, but their 
ability  to  remodel  and  repair  the  matrix  is  limited.  No 
blood  vessels  penetrate  cartilage,  owing  to  production 
of several inhibitors of endothelial cell growth by chon-
drocytes.  Thus,  all  nutrients  must  diffuse  into  cartilage 
from the nearest blood vessel in the perichondrium, a 
dense  capsule  of  fibrous  connective  tissue  that  covers 
the surface of cartilage. This capsule contains mesenchy-
mal  stem  cells  (see  Box  41.2  and  Fig.  28.1)  that  are 
capable of differentiating into chondrocytes.

A meshwork of type II collagen fibrils, accounting 
for approximately 25% of the dry mass, fills the extracel-
lular  matrix.  These  slender  collagen  fibrils  are  hard  to 
see  even  in  electron  micrographs  but  are  quite  stable, 
with lifetimes estimated to be many years. Fibrils tend to 
line  up  parallel  to  surfaces  but  otherwise  are  arranged 
randomly. Minor collagen type IX crosslinks type II col-
lagen fibrils and collagen type XI binds to the surface of 
type II fibrils. Expression of type X collagen is restricted 
to cartilage that is undergoing conversion to bone. The 
matrix  contains  several  minor  adhesive  proteins,  and 
other proteins inhibit invasion of blood vessels.

Glycosaminoglycans, including hyaluronan, constitute 
the second major class of matrix macromolecules. Mol-
ecules of the proteoglycan aggrecan attach to a hyaluro-
nan  backbone  like  the  bristles  of  a  test  tube  brush, 
forming  so-called  megacomplexes  (see  Fig.  29.13). 
Aggrecan  also  binds  type  II  collagen.  Highly  charged 

A

Epithelium
Perichondrium

Chondrocytes

B. Chondrocyte

ER

C. Matrix

Type II collagen

FIGURE 32.2  CARTILAGE AND CHONDROCYTES. A, Light micrograph of a section of hyaline cartilage in the wall of the respiratory tree 
stained with periodic acid–Schiff stain and Alcian blue. The cartilage capsule of dense connective tissue (perichondrium) and the columnar epi-
thelium lining the respiratory passage are at the top. Inset, Light micrograph of hyaline cartilage stained with toluidine blue. The proteoglycans 
in the matrix stain pink. The rough endoplasmic reticulum stains blue. Shrinkage during fixation and embedding creates the artifactual cavity or 
lacuna around each cell. B, Electron micrograph of a thin section of hyaline cartilage showing chondrocytes embedded in dense extracellular 
matrix. C, Electron micrograph of cartilage matrix at high magnification. This specimen was rapidly frozen and prepared by freeze-substitution to 
avoid collapse of the proteoglycans during dehydration and embedding. ER, endoplasmic reticulum. (A, Courtesy D.W. Fawcett and E.D. Hay, 
Harvard  Medical  School,  Boston,  MA.  B,  Courtesy  of  E.D.  Hay,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Boston,  MA.  C,  Courtesy  E.B.  Hunziker,  M.  Müller 
Institute, University of Bern, Switzerland.)

 

A

+

+

Water

Uncapped bottle

compresses

Capped bottle full of

water resists compression

B. Hyaluronan megacomplex trapped by
     collagen attracts water

Aggrecan

Hyaluronan

Type II
collagen

FIGURE  32.3  MACROMOLECULAR  STRUCTURE  AND 
MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF HYALINE CARTILAGE MATRIX. 
A, Hydrostatic model of the mechanical properties of cartilage. Water 
trapped in the extracellular matrix resists compression. Neither water 
alone  (in  beaker)  nor  a  pliable  container  (uncapped  plastic  bottle) 
resists compression. However, if water fills a capped bottle, it resists 
compression. B, In the cartilage matrix, flexible strands of type II col-
lagen  trap  proteoglycans,  which  attract  large  amounts  of  water. 
Trapped  water  resists  compression  because  its  “container,”  the 
network of collagen fibrils, does not stretch. 

glycosaminoglycans fill the extracellular space and attract 
water, the most abundant component of the matrix.

A  hydrostatic  mechanism  allows  cartilage  to  resist 
deformation  (Fig.  32.3).  Collagen  fibrils  provide  tensile 
strength  (ie,  resistance  to  stretching)  but  do  not  resist 
compression  or  bending.  Glycosaminoglycans  strongly 
attract water, resulting in an internal swelling pressure 
that pushes outward against collagen fibrils aligned paral-
lel to the surface of the cartilage. The force of internal 
hydrostatic  swelling  pressure  balances  the  force  pro-
duced by tension on the collagen fibrils. Remarkably, this 
internally  stressed  material  can  resist  strong  external 
forces such as those on the articular surfaces of joints. A 
macroscopic analog is a thin-walled plastic bottle filled 
with water. One can stand on the bottle provided that it 
is sealed, whereas neither the empty bottle nor the water 
could separately support any weight.

Specialized Forms of Cartilage
Hyaline  cartilage  provides  mechanical  support  for  the 
respiratory tree, nose, articular surfaces, and developing 
bones.  Elastic  cartilage  has  abundant  elastic  fibers  in 
addition  to  collagen,  making  the  matrix  much  more 
elastic  than  hyaline  cartilage.  Elastic  cartilage  supports 
structures subjected to frequent deformation, including 

CHAPTER 32  n  Connective Tissues 

557

the larynx, epiglottis, and external ear. Fibrocartilage has 
features of both dense connective tissue (an abundance 
of thick collagen fibers) and cartilage (a prominent gly-
cosaminoglycan  matrix).  It  is  tough  and  deformable, 
appropriate for its role in intervertebral disks and inser-
tions of tendons.

Differentiation and Growth of Cartilage
Cartilage grows by expansion of the extracellular matrix 
either from within or on the surface. For surface growth, 
mesenchymal  cells  in  the  perichondrium  differentiate 
into  chondrocytes  that  synthesize  and  secrete  matrix 
materials. For internal growth, chondrocytes trapped in 
the  matrix  divide  and  manufacture  additional  matrix, 
which  is  sufficiently  deformable  to  allow  for  internal 
expansion.  Cartilage  has  a  limited  capacity  to  repair 
damage, but stem cell transplants can help some patients.
Many growth factors and their receptors cooperate to 
influence the differentiation of precursor cells into chon-
drocytes, the proliferation of chondrocytes, and the pro-
duction  of  cartilage  matrix  molecules.  These  include 
Indian hedgehog (Ihh), members of transforming growth 
factor-β family (TGF-β and bone morphogenetic proteins 
[BMPs]), multiple fibroblast growth factors (FGFs), para-
thyroid  hormone–related  protein  (PTHrP),  and  insulin-
like  growth  factors  (IGF-1  and  IGF-2).  Chondrocytes 
produce some of these growth factors (TGF-β, FGFs, and 
IGFs). During development, adjacent tissues can induce 
cartilage formation by secreting TGF-β and FGF. SOX9 is 
the  key  transcription  factor  mediating  expression  of 
cartilage-specific genes.

Diseases of Cartilage
Cartilage  fails  in  common  human  diseases,  including 
arthritis and ruptured intervertebral disks. Osteoarthritis, 
degeneration  of  cartilage  on  joint  surfaces,  is  very 
common  in  older  people  and  has  a  complex  genetic 
component  attributable  to  variations  in  many  genes. 
Rarely, human diseases are caused by mutations in single 
genes  for  cartilage  proteins,  growth  factors  or  growth 
factor  receptors  (Appendix  32.1).  For  example,  more 
than 25 different mutations of the human gene for type 
II collagen cause disorders of cartilage, ranging in sever-
ity  from  death  in  utero  to  dwarfism  or  osteoarthritis. 
Mutations  in  genes  for  minor  cartilage-associated  colla-
gens  cause  a  variety  of  symptoms,  including  degenera-
tive  joint  disease.  A  premature  stop  codon  in  chicken 
aggrecan causes lethal skeletal malformations.

Bone
For most vertebrates, bones provide mechanical support 
and serve as a storage site for calcium. The great strength 
and  light  weight  of  bones  are  attributable  both  to  the 
mechanical  properties  of  the  extracellular  matrix  and  
to  efficient  overall  design,  including  tubular  form  and 

558 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

A. Gross-cut section

Spongy

bone

Compact

bone

C. H&E stained

Blood vessels in 
Haversian canal

Osteocyte in lacunae

Compact

bone

D. Dry bone

B. Histological section
Circumferential
lamellae

Blood
vessels

Haversian
lamellae

Interstitial
lamellae

Sharpey's
fibers

Trabeculae

Volkmann's
canals

E. Osteocyte

Haversian
canal

Spongy

bone

Compact

bone

Marrow
cavity

Calcified
matrix

Collagen
fibrils

Filopodia in
cannaliculus

Gap junctions
Gap junctions
between cells
between cells

FIGURE 32.4  ORGANIZATION OF LONG BONES. A, Longitudinal section of a shoulder joint of a dried bone specimen. Struts of trabecular 
spongy  bone  reinforce  compact  bone  in  the  cortex.  B,  A  wedge  of  long  bone.  Circumferential  lamellae  form  the  outer  layer  just  beneath  the 
periosteum (blue) covering the surface. Osteons (Haversian systems) consist of concentric lamellae of calcified matrix and osteocytes arranged 
around a channel containing one or two capillaries or venules. Interstitial lamellae are fragments of osteons that remain after remodeling (Fig. 
32.10). Radial vascular channels connect longitudinal vascular channels to the medullary cavity or periosteum. C, Light micrograph of a cross 
section stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) showing circumferential lamellae on the left and two Haversian canals. D, Light micrograph of 
a cross section of dried bone showing a central interstitial lamella surrounded by three osteons. Narrow canaliculi connect the lacunae housing 
osteocytes. E, An osteocyte surrounded by calcified matrix and extending filopodia into canaliculi. (Micrographs courtesy D.W. Fawcett, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA.)

lamination  (Fig.  32.4).  A  superficial  layer  of  compact 
bone surrounds a central cavity that is filled with marrow, 
fat, or both and is supported by struts of bone arranged 
precisely along lines of mechanical stress. External sur-
faces  of  bones  are  covered  either  by  dense  connective 

tissue,  called  periosteum,  or  by  cartilage  at  joint  sur-
faces. Two cell types make bone matrix: osteoblasts cov-
ering the internal surfaces and osteocytes embedded in 
the bone. A third cell type, called the osteoclast, degrades 
bone,  recycling  matrix  components.  Blood  vessels 

 

CHAPTER 32  n  Connective Tissues 

559

penetrate compact bone through a network of channels 
to  supply  the  central  cavity.  Although  bone  is  durable 
and  strong,  continuous  remodeling  makes  bone  much 
more dynamic than it appears.

Extracellular Matrix of Bone
Bone is a composite material consisting of type I collagen 
fibrils (providing tensile strength) embedded in a matrix 
of  calcium  phosphate  crystals  (providing  rigidity)  (Fig. 
32.4E).  The  calcium-phosphate  crystals  are  similar  to 
hydroxyapatite [Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2] and make up about 
two-thirds  of  the  dry  weight  of  bone.  Macroscopic 
analogs  of  the  bone  matrix  are  concrete  reinforced  
by steel rods and fiberglass consisting of a brittle plastic 
reinforced  by  glass  fibers.  Each  of  these  composites  is 
stronger  than  its  separate  components.  Simple  extrac-
tion experiments illustrate the contributions of the two 
components  of  bone.  After  removal  of  calcium  phos-
phate with a calcium chelator, bone is so rubbery that it 
bends  easily.  After  destruction  of  collagen  by  heating, 
bone is hard but brittle.

Fibrils of type I collagen, the dominant organic com-
ponent of the matrix (Table 32.1), are arranged in sheets 
or a meshwork. Covalent crosslinks between the colla-
gen  molecules  in  fibrils  make  them  inextensible.  The 
matrix  also  contains  more  than  100  minor  proteins, 
including growth factors, proteins that promote hydroxy-
apatite  deposition  and  adhesive  glycoproteins,  but  few 
proteoglycans.

Cells that make bone lay down type I collagen as the 
substrate for crystallization of calcium phosphate. Some 
calcium  phosphate  crystallizes  directly  in  the  collagen 

matrix. Other crystals form in small “matrix vesicles” that 
bud from the plasma membranes of osteoblasts and use 
pumps  and  carriers  to  concentrate  calcium  and  phos-
phate. After being released from these vesicles, tiny crys-
tals associate with collagen fibrils. The crystals grow and 
eventually  fill  spaces  between  the  collagen  molecules 
within the fibrils.

Bone Cells
Overview
A balance among the activities of osteoblasts, osteocytes, 
and  osteoclasts  forms,  grows,  and  maintains  bones. 
Osteoblasts and osteocytes produce extracellular matrix 
and establish conditions for its calcification. Osteoclasts 
resorb and remodel bone. An imbalance of these oppos-
ing cellular activities causes human diseases.

Properties of Osteoblasts
A monolayer of osteoblasts on the surface of growing 
bone tissue uses a well-developed secretory pathway to 
synthesize  and  secrete  the  organic  components  of  the 
matrix (Fig. 32.5). Osteoblasts also act as endocrine cells, 
secreting growth factors that control the differentiation 
of osteoclasts (Fig. 32.6), as well as cells in other organs. 
They also help to form the niche in the bone marrow for 
hematopoietic stem cells (see Fig. 41.4).

Regulation of Osteoblast Development
Osteoblasts arise from the same mesenchymal stem cells 
that  give  rise  to  fibroblasts  and  chondrocytes  (see  Fig. 
28.1).  Growth  factors  control  the  differentiation  from 
mesenchymal cells. They include Ihh, a subset of BMPs 

TABLE 32.1  Bone Proteins
Name

Content

Functions

Bone 

Minor

Transforming growth factor 

morphogenic 
proteins

(TGF)-β homologs; cartilage 
stimulation and bone 
development and repair

Collagen type I
Osteocalcin

90%
1%–2%

Forms fibrils in the bone matrix
Network of aspartic acid and 

γ-carboxylated glutamic acid side 
chains bind hydroxyapatite; 
promotes calcification; attracts 
osteoclasts and osteoblasts

Osteonectin

2%

Synthesized in developing and 

regenerating bone; binds 
collagen and hydroxyapatite; may 
nucleate hydroxyapatite 
crystallization in bone matrix

Osteopontin

Minor

Arginine-glycine-aspartic acid 

(RGD) sequence; binds osteoclast 
integrins to bone surface

Proteoglycans

Minor

Decorin, biglycan, osteoadherin; 

may bind TGF-β

Sialoproteins

2%

RGD sequence; binds osteoclast 

integrins to bone surface

A

B

Bone

Calcified
cartilage

Osteoblasts

Secretory
vesicle

Type I
collagen

Golgi

ER

Calcified
matrix

FIGURE  32.5  OSTEOBLASTS. A, Light micrograph of a section 
of  forming  bone  stained  with  toluidine  blue.  Osteoblasts  with  abun-
dant, blue-stained, rough endoplasmic reticulum lay down bone matrix 
(light green) on the surface of calcified cartilage (light pink). B, Drawing 
of  osteoblasts.  ER,  endoplasmic  reticulum.  (A,  Courtesy  R.  Dintzis 
and  from  the  work  of  D.  Walker,  Johns  Hopkins  Medical  School,  
Baltimore, MD.)

560 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

A. Osteoclast genesis

Monocytes

Osteoclast
precursors

RANKL binding to RANK stimulates
precursors to fuse and differentiate

into a multinucleated osteoclast

M-CSF

RANK

RANKL

OPG
 blocks
 RANKL

Supporting cells,

osteoblasts

Wnt

Sclerostin

B. Bone remodeling

C. Osteoclast

Osteocyte

Proteins
not to scale

Bone

Osteoclast

Calcified
cartilage

Bone

Osteoclast

Cathepsin-K
secreted

Sealing
zone

H+ ATPase and
Cl– channels
secrete HCl

Sealing
zone

Ruffled
membrane

FIGURE 32.6  OSTEOCLASTS. A, Formation of a multinucleated osteoclast by fusion of monocytes stimulated by the receptor activator of 
nuclear factor κB ligand (RANKL), macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF), and other factors. B, Light micrograph of a section of forming 
bone stained with toluidine blue showing two osteoclasts degrading bone and calcified cartilage. C, An osteoclast attached to the bone matrix 
by a sealing zone, forming a resorption cavity (pink). The cell pumps H+ and secretes lysosomal enzymes into this cavity to resorb the surface of 
the  matrix.  ATPase,  adenosine  triphosphatase;  OPG,  osteoprotegerin  (OPG);  RANK,  receptor  activator  of  nuclear  factor  κB.  (B,  Courtesy  R. 
Dintzis and from the work of D. Walker, Johns Hopkins Medical School, Baltimore, MD.)

(see Fig. 24.7), and some Wnts (see Fig. 30.7). Humans 
with loss-of-function mutations in a Wnt coreceptor have 
few  osteoblasts  and  low  bone  density,  whereas  loss-of-
function mutations in a BMP competitor have the oppo-
site  effect.  On  the  other  hand,  osteocytes  secrete  a 
protein called sclerostin that blocks the Wnt corecep-
tor (Fig. 32.6), so loss-of-function mutations of sclerostin 
strengthen Wnt signals and promote bone formation.

Inside  osteoblasts,  Runx2/Cbfa1  is  the  master  tran-
scription factor controlling the expression of genes that 
are required to make bone matrix. Runx2/Cbfa1 is part 
of  a  network  of  transcription  factors  and  microRNAs 
with  positive  and  negative  influences  on  osteoblast  
differentiation  and  function.  Mouse  embryos  lacking 
Runx2/Cbfa1  have  no  osteoblasts  or  osteoclasts.  They 
make a cartilage skeleton that never transforms to bone. 
Humans  and  mice  with  just  one  active  Runx2/Cbfa1 
gene  lack  collarbones  and  experience  a  delay  in  the 
fusion  of  joints  between  skull  bones.  This  syndrome  is 
the most common human skeletal defect.

Osteocyte Properties
Once  an  osteoblast  has  enclosed  itself  within  bone 
matrix,  it  is  called  an  osteocyte.  Long-lived,  metaboli-
cally  active  osteocytes  are  connected  to  each  other  by 

many  long,  slender  filopodia  that  run  through  narrow 
channels  in  the  matrix  (Fig.  32.4D–E).  Gap  junctions 
between  the  processes  of  osteocytes  provide  a  con-
tinuous  network  of  intercellular  communication  that 
stretches from cells adjacent to blood vessels to the most 
deeply embedded osteocyte.

Osteocytes  can  either  lay  down  or  resorb  matrix  in 
their immediate vicinity. Circulating hormones influence 
the activity of osteoblasts and osteocytes. In response to 
the calcium concentration in blood, parathyroid glands 
secrete parathyroid hormone, which stimulates osteo-
cytes to mobilize calcium from the surrounding matrix. 
This  feedback  loop  maintains  a  constant  concentration 
of calcium in the blood.

Osteoclast Properties
Osteoclasts  form  by  fusion  of  blood  monocytes  and 
resorb  bone,  as  required  for  growth  and  remodeling. 
Osteoclasts  are  multinucleated  giant  cells  specialized 
for bone resorption (Fig. 32.6). They attach like a suction 
cup  to  the  surface  of  bone.  Interactions  of  a  plasma 
membrane  integrin  (αVβ3)  with  bone  matrix  proteins 
(osteopontin and sialoprotein) help to create a leakproof 
compartment  on  the  bone  surface.  Osteoclasts  amplify 
the plasma membrane lining this closed space, forming 

 

CHAPTER 32  n  Connective Tissues 

561

a “ruffled border” composed of microvilli enriched with 
H+-transporting V-type rotary adenosine triphosphatase 
(ATPase)  pumps  (see  Fig.  14.6)  and  chloride  channels 
(see Fig. 16.13). The combined activities of the H+ pump 
and  chloride  channels  allow  the  cell  to  secrete  hydro-
chloric  acid  into  the  sealed  extracellular  compartment 
on the bone surface. This closed space acts like an extra-
cellular  lysosome:  Acid  dissolves  calcium  phosphate 
crystals,  and  secreted  proteolytic  enzymes,  including 
cathepsin  K,  digest  collagen  and  other  organic  com-
ponents. Degradation products are taken up by endocy-
tosis  and  transported  across  the  cell  in  vesicles  for 
secretion  on  the  free  surface.  Amino  acids  are  reused, 
but  collagen  crosslinking  groups  are  not,  so  they  are 
excreted  in  the  urine,  where  their  concentration  is  a 
measure of bone turnover.

Osteoclast Formation
Bone marrow supporting cells, osteoblasts, and activated 
T  lymphocytes  produce  two  proteins  that  stimulate 
blood monocytes to fuse and differentiate into multinu-
cleated  osteoclasts  (Fig.  32.6).  These  key  factors  are 
macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) and 
RANKL  (receptor  activator  of  nuclear  factor  kappa  B 
[NF-κB] ligand, also called osteoprotegerin ligand [OPGL] 
or tumor necrosis factor–related activation-induced cyto-
kine  [TRANCE]).  Both  factors  are  produced  locally  in 
bone  marrow  as  transmembrane  proteins  with  the 
growth factor domain on the cell surface. These proteins 
control  differentiation  through  binding  to  their  recep-
tors on monocytes by either direct cell-to-cell contact or 
release  of  the  active  domain  by  proteolytic  cleavage. 
First, M-CSF activates a cytokine receptor (see Fig. 24.6) 
on  monocytes,  stimulating  a  JAK  (just  another  kinase) 
kinase–signal  transducer  and  activator  of  transcription 
(JAK-STAT)  pathway  (see  Fig.  27.9)  and  turning  on 
expression  of  genes  required  for  the  monocyte  to  dif-
ferentiate  into  a  preosteoclast.  An  important  change  is 
the expression of a receptor called RANK (receptor for 
activation  of  NF-κB,  a  member  of  the  tumor  necrosis 
factor  [TNF]  receptor  family;  see  Fig.  24.9).  Once  this 
receptor  is  expressed,  RANKL  can  activate  preosteo-
clasts  through  the  transcription  factor  NF-κB  (see  Fig. 
10.21C) to express the proteins required for cell fusion 
and  further  differentiation  into  an  osteoclast.  Mice  
that  lack  RANKL  form  no  osteoclasts,  so  bone  resorp-
tion fails.

Other growth factors, including TNF itself, contribute 
to  this  process  by  acting  directly  on  osteoclasts,  but 
many stimulators of osteoclast differentiation (eg, para-
thyroid  hormone,  vitamin  D,  leptin)  act  indirectly  
by  stimulating  supporting  cells  to  make  RANKL.  For 
example, leptin, a satiety hormone secreted by fat cells, 
acts  on  neurons  of  the  hypothalamus  in  the  brain  that 
regulate  not  only  appetite  but  also  bone  metabo-
lism  indirectly  via  the  sympathetic  nervous  system.  

Norepinephrine  released  by  sympathetic  nerves  acti-
vates  osteoblasts  to  secrete  RANKL.  This  explains  why 
animals  and  people  that  lack  leptin  or  its  receptor  not 
only  are  obese  but  also  have  dense  bones.  Osteoclast 
growth factors RANKL, TNF, and interleukin-1 mediate 
excess bone resorption at sites of chronic inflammation 
in rheumatoid arthritis and gum diseases.

Differentiation  of  osteoclasts  is  subject  to  negative 
regulation  by  a  soluble  decoy  receptor  for  RANKL 
called OPG (osteoprotegerin), which binds RANKL and 
competes for activation of RANK (Fig. 32.6). Estrogens 
inhibit  osteoclast  differentiation  by  stimulating  osteo-
blasts  to  produce  OPG,  so  circulating  OPG  declines  in 
parallel with estrogen levels after menopause. The result-
ing  increase  in  osteoclasts  contributes  to  bone  loss 
(osteoporosis) in older women.

Formation and Growth of the Skeleton
Both genetic and environmental information direct for-
mation  of  the  skeleton.  Genetic  information  predomi-
nates  in  the  master  plan  and  initial  development  of 
skeletal  tissues,  as  the  size  and  shape  of  bones  are  
characteristic  for  each  species.  Subsequently,  environ-
mental  information  is  important  in  remodeling  of  the 
skeleton in response to use. Mutations in genes for struc-
tural  and  informational  molecules  have  provided  valu-
able  clues  about  the  genetic  blueprint  for  the  skeleton 
(Appendix 32.1).

Genetic information is read out on at least two levels. 
First, master genetic regulators—including transcription 
factors encoded by HOX (homeobox) and PAX (paired 
box)  genes—specify  the  developmental  fate  of  each 
embryonic  segment.  Homeoboxes  are  DNA  sequences 
that encode a family of 60-residue protein domains that 
bind DNA (see Fig. 15.14). The human genome contains 
39  HOX  genes  arrayed  in  four  linear  arrays,  similar  to 
those in other animals. HOX genes were discovered in 
flies as a result of mutations that cause “homeotic con-
version,” whereby the fate of one segment is converted 
into  another,  such  as  the  substitution  of  a  leg  for  an 
antenna. The same thing happens in vertebrates: Mouse 
embryos  express  Hoxd-4  in  the  second  cervical  (neck) 
vertebra  and  more  posterior  segments.  Mutation  of 
Hoxd-4 results in the second cervical vertebra taking on 
some of the features of the first cervical vertebra. Muta-
tions  in  other  HOX  genes  cause  congenital  malforma-
tions  in  humans.  The  pathways  from  HOX  genes  to 
determinants  of  three-dimensional  architecture  are  still 
incompletely understood.

Both  systematically  circulating  and  locally  secreted 
growth factors control the proliferation and differentia-
tion of the cells of cartilage and bone. Mutations in these 
factors  and  their  receptors  also  cause  surprisingly  spe-
cific human skeletal malformations (Appendix 32.1). Cir-
culating  growth  hormone  produced  by  the  pituitary 

562 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

gland is a major determinant of skeletal size. Individuals 
deficient in growth hormone are short in stature. Locally 
produced growth factors, including BMPs and FGFs and 
their receptors, control the development and growth of 
cartilage and bone during embryogenesis, in addition to 
stimulating repair after fractures. FGF receptors are tyro-
sine kinases (see Fig. 24.4). BMPs are related in structure 
and  mechanism  to  TGF-β  and  are  expressed  in  tissues 
other than bone and cartilage (see Fig. 24.7). BMPs are 
part  of  a  system  of  positive  and  negative  factors  that 
regulates  formation  of  cartilage,  bone,  and  joints.  For 
example,  a  BMP  called  GDF-5  specifies  the  position  of 
joints, but joints form only if noggin protein, an inhibitor 
of other BMPs, is present.

Embryonic Bone Formation
Bone  always  forms  by  replacement  of  preexisting  con-
nective  tissue.  During  embryonic  development,  flat 
bones, such as the skull and shoulder blades, form from 
neural crest cell precursors in loose connective tissue 
(Fig. 32.7). Somehow, information in the genome is read 
out as the three-dimensional pattern of a skull. Growth 
factors,  vitamins  (eg,  retinoic  acid),  and  local  matrix 
molecules, such as glycosaminoglycans, all influence the 
differentiation of these cells into osteoblasts at specific 
locations  in  connective  tissue.  Osteoblasts  lay  down 
struts of bone matrix in the loose connective tissue. As 
new  bone  is  laid  down  on  the  surface  of  these  bone 
spicules,  some  osteoblasts  are  trapped  and  become 
osteocytes.

During embryonic and postnatal development, genetic 
information  precisely  controls  changes  in  the  size  and 
proportions of flat bones. For example, for the skull to 
increase  in  size  both  externally  and  internally,  osteo-
clasts  on  the  outer  surface  lay  down  new  bone  at  
the  same  rate  as  osteoclasts  resorb  old  bone  inside  
(Fig. 32.8A). These cellular activities are carefully coor-
dinated  to  change  the  proportions  of  the  skull  as  the 
individual matures.

Long bones, such as the humerus, begin as cartilage 
models that are replaced by bone (Fig. 32.9). Multiple, 
genetically programmed factors induce clusters of mes-
enchymal cells at specific locations to differentiate into 
chondrocytes  that  secrete  type  II  collagen  and  glycos-
aminoglycans.  This  produces  a  miniature  cartilaginous 
version of the adult bone.

Bone  replaces  this  cartilage  precursor  in  a  series  of 
steps  that  are  coordinated  locally  by  production  of 
growth  factors.  Perichondrial  cells  and  proliferating 
chondrocytes secrete PTHrP, which promotes chondro-
cyte  division  and  growth.  In  supporting  roles,  BMPs 
promote and FGFs inhibit the growth and differentiation 
of chondrocytes by acting upon populations of cells that 
express particular receptors for these molecules (Appen-
dix 32.1). Active FGF receptors stimulate STAT transcrip-
tion  factors  (see  Fig.  27.9)  and/or  mitogen-activated 
protein  (MAP)  kinase  pathways  (see  Fig.  27.6).  More 
mature  chondrocytes  produce  Ihh,  which  directs  the 
terminal differentiation of neighboring chondrocytes.

For a long bone to maintain its shape as it grows in 
size,  deposition  and  removal  of  bone  tissue  must  be 
highly selective. For the shaft to grow in diameter, new 
bone is laid down on the outer surface by osteoblasts at 
the  same  time  as  old  bone  is  removed  inside  by  osteo-
clasts (Figs. 32.8B and 32.9).

Bones grow longer as a result of interstitial growth of 
cartilage  in  the  epiphyseal  plate  and  its  continual 
replacement  by  bone.  Chondrocytes  contribute  to  the 
elongation of bones in two ways: chondrocytes continu-
ously proliferate in one zone and then rapidly increase 
in mass and swell in the adjacent zone next to forming 
bone  (Fig.  32.9B).  The  hypertrophic  chondrocytes 
secrete type X collagen and use matrix metalloprotein-
ases  to  resorb  some  of  their  surrounding  matrix.  They 
also direct the calcification of the cartilage matrix before 
undergoing apoptosis or differentiating into osteoblasts. 
Osteoblasts lay down bone matrix on the surface of the 
cavities in the calcified cartilage. Hypertrophic cartilage 

A

B

Osteocyte

Bone
Osteoclast

Blood
  vessel

Osteoblast

Mesenchymal

  cells

FIGURE 32.7  BONE FORMATION BY INTRAMEMBRANOUS OSSIFICATION. A, Light micrograph of a section of forming bone stained 
with  hematoxylin  and  eosin.  Calcified  bone  matrix  is  maroon.  B,  Interpretive  drawings.  Connective  tissue  mesenchymal  cells  differentiate  into 
osteoblasts, which lay down bone matrix (blue). Osteoblasts become trapped as the matrix grows. (A, Courtesy D.W. Fawcett, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA.)

 

A

Hyaline cartilage

B

Bone collar
Primary
ossification
center

Periosteal bud
blood vessel

New
spongy
bone

Cartilage
eroded

Periosteal
bud invades

Medullary
cavity formed

Medullary
cavity

Epiphyses
erode

Epiphyses
ossify

Secondary
ossification
center

Epiphyseal
blood vessel

Articular
cartilage

CHAPTER 32  n  Connective Tissues 

563

1

Proliferating
 chondrocytes

2

Hypertrophic
 chondrocytes

3

Calcified
 cartilage
 apoptosis

4

Invasion of
 cartilage
 with bone
 deposition

Epiphyseal
plate (cartilage)

Epiphyseal
plate (ossified)

FIGURE 32.8  FORMATION OF A LONG BONE BY REPLACEMENT OF CARTILAGE. A, The shaft grows in diameter as osteoblasts lay 
down bone (tan) on the outer surface of the primary collar of bone and osteoclasts remove bone from the inner surface to form and maintain 
the marrow cavity. The bone grows in length by interstitial expansion of the cartilage in the epiphyseal plate and its replacement by bone. B, Light 
micrograph of a section of an epiphyseal plate stained with toluidine blue. Cartilage growth, differentiation, and replacement by bone occur in 
several zones. Proliferation of chondrocytes and their production of matrix (pink) containing type II collagen are solely responsible for the longi-
tudinal growth of the bone (1). Hypertrophic chondrocytes enlarge and make type X collagen, as well as matrix metalloproteinases that resorb 
some of the surrounding matrix (2). Chondrocytes die by apoptosis (see Chapter 46), and the matrix calcifies (3). Blood vessels and osteoblasts 
move into spaces vacated by chondrocytes and lay down bone (blue) on the surface of calcified cartilage (4). (Micrograph courtesy R. Dintzis 
and from the work of D. Walker, Johns Hopkins Medical School, Baltimore, MD.)

A. Skull growth

B. Long bone growth

Osteoclast

25 years

6 years

Newborn

7 month

fetus

Growth
plate

Bone

deposition

(osteoblasts)

Bone

removal

(osteoclasts)

FIGURE 32.9  BONE GROWTH. A, Light micrograph of a section of skull stained with Mallory’s trichrome stain and an interpretive drawing. 
The skull expands during fetal development and growth to adulthood as osteoblasts lay down new bone on the outer surface (blue) and osteo-
clasts resorb bone (pink) on the inner surface. B, Long bones grow entirely by expansion of cartilage in the epiphyseal plate and its replacement 
by bone (tan), followed by resorption (pink). (A, Courtesy D.W. Fawcett, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.)

564 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

ceases  to  make  the  factors  that  inhibit  endothelial  cell 
growth,  allowing  FGF-2,  TGF-β,  and  vascular  endothe-
lium  growth  factor  to  attract  capillaries  as  part  of  the 
transformation of cartilage to bone.

Growth  of  long  bones  stops  at  puberty,  when  high 
concentrations of estrogen and testosterone stop prolif-
eration of epiphyseal chondrocytes so that bone replaces 
this cartilage. This closure of the epiphyses throughout 
the body occurs over several years in a predictable order, 
so  one  can  judge  the  maturity  of  a  child  by  examining 
epiphyses  by  radiographic  studies.  Genetic  variations  
in this process of maturation give rise to differences in 
stature.  Metabolic  and  endocrine  disorders  can  also 
affect the timing of epiphyseal closure.

Bone Remodeling
Bone  is  amazingly  dynamic  and  is  remodeled  continu-
ously in response to stresses. Bone cells and matrix turn 
over  every  few  years.  Reorganization  of  bone  requires 
two carefully coordinated steps: breakdown of preexist-
ing bone by osteoclasts and replacement with new bone 
by osteoblasts. More than 100 years ago, Wolff realized 
that the strength of a bone depends on use. For example, 
bones  of  the  racquet  arm  of  tennis  players  are  more 
robust than the bones of their other arm. Thus, mechani-
cal forces on the bones must generate modulatory signals 

that control remodeling. Sensory nerves are involved in 
some way, but most research has focused on how cells 
detect fluid flow through canaliculi.

Primary cilia have been implicated in both the differ-
entiation of bone cells and their responses to mechanical 
forces. Part of their function must be in hedgehog signal-
ing (see Chapter 38), but they probably also sense fluid 
flowing through canaliculi as a result of mechanical force 
on the bone. Accordingly, some mutations in genes for 
components  of  the  intraflagellar  transport  machinery 
(see Fig. 38.18) cause severe skeletal defects.

Formation of the cylindrical units of long bones called 
osteons is a good example of well-coordinated remodel-
ing.  The  process  involves  two  steps  (Fig.  32.10).  First, 
osteoclasts  resorb  preexisting  bone  to  form  long,  
cylindrical, resorption channels in the same way that a 
plumber’s  snake  clears  debris  from  drain  pipes.  The 
second step is slower, as osteoblasts take weeks to fill in 
these channels by depositing concentric layers of lamel-
lar bone against the walls. They lay down matrix at a rate 
of about 1 µm of thickness per day until bone completely 
surrounds the blood vessels trapped in the middle of the 
newly formed osteon. Because resorption channels cut 
randomly through the bone, fragments of older osteons 
are  left  behind  during  the  remodeling  of  mature  bone. 
These  fragments  are  called  interstitial  lamellae. 

C

D

A
Cutting
cone

Reversal
zone

i

T
m
e

Closing
cone

B

Osteoclast

Blood
vessel
Fibroblast
Osteoblasts

Quiescent
osteoblast

Forming
resorption
cavity

Resorption
cavity

Forming
Haversian
system

Completed
Haversian
system

FIGURE 32.10  BONE REMODELING. A–B, Longitudinal and cross sections of a time line illustrating the formation of an osteon. Osteoclasts 
cut a cylindrical channel through bone. Osteoblasts follow, laying down bone on the surface of the channel until the matrix surrounds the central 
blood vessel of the newly formed osteon. C, Steps in the formation of a new osteon. Parts of older osteons are left behind as interstitial lamellae. 
D, Microradiograph of a cross section of a long bone, illustrating the range of ages of the structures. A section of bone is placed on x-ray film, 
exposed to x-rays, developed, and examined by light microscopy. Older parts of the bone, such as the interstitial lamellae, are more heavily calci-
fied and therefore absorb more of the x-rays, appearing lighter. Newly formed osteons appear the darkest, as they are the least calcified. Vascular 
spaces  are  empty  and  fully  exposed  by  the  x-rays.  (A,  Modified  from  Parfitt  AM.  The  action  of  parathyroid  hormone  on  bone.  Metabolism. 
1976;25:809–844. D, Courtesy D.W. Fawcett, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.)

 

CHAPTER 32  n  Connective Tissues 

565

Resorption  may  release  growth  and  differentiation 
factors from the mineralized matrix that provide a local 
stimulus for the next round of bone formation by new 
osteoblasts.

Bone Diseases
Osteoporosis, a thinning of bones, is common in elderly 
people  as  a  result  of  an  imbalance  of  bone  resorption 
over renewal. In the United States, osteoporosis results 
in 1.5 million painful fractures, costing nearly $20 billion 
annually. Almost half of women suffer from such a frac-
ture  at  some  time  in  their  lives,  typically  as  estrogen 
levels decline after menopause. Osteoporosis also occurs 
at reduced gravitational forces during space flight. The 
pathogenesis is not understood, but both behavioral (eg, 
inactivity, poor nutrition, smoking) and multiple genetic 
factors have modest effects. Among many genetic factors, 
one might be naturally occurring variants of the nuclear 
receptor for vitamin D. This receptor is a transcription 
factor  required  for  vitamin  D  to  stimulate  intestinal 
calcium  uptake  and  calcification  of  bone.  Variations  in 
the genes for type I collagen or bone growth factors may 
also contribute.

Two strategies are used to treat osteoporosis. The first 
is to reduce bone resorption using with bisphosphonates 
(pyrophosphate  mimics)  or  injection  of  either  OPG  or 
antibodies  to  RANKL,  which  interfere  with  osteoclast 
formation. New inhibitors of cathepsin K are also being 
tested.  The  other  approach  is  to  promote  bone  forma-
tion with vitamin D, estrogen, calcium, or strontium, but 
these measures are only partially effective. More prom-
ising  is  injection  of  an  analog  of  parathyroid  hormone  
or  antibodies  to  sclerostin,  which  promote  osteoblast 
activity.

Osteopetrosis is failure of bone resorption, leading 
to  an  imbalance  of  renewal  over  resorption.  This  rare 
disease of osteoclasts is fatal in humans, owing to bone 
marrow failure. Recessive mutations in the gene for the 
V-type proton-ATPase pump (60%), two genes for a chlo-
ride channel (∼15%), and two genes for proteins involved 
with  the  secretory  pathway  account  for  most  human 
cases.  Naturally  occurring  or  engineered  mutations  in 
the genes for essentially any protein required for osteo-
clast  differentiation  or  function  cause  osteopetrosis  in 
mice. Osteoclasts are present in bone but fail to function 
properly. The disease can be cured in humans and mice 
by transplantation of bone marrow stem cells to replace 
defective  osteoclast  precursors,  an  early  example  of  
stem cell therapy. If the mutation is in the gene encod-
ing  RANKL,  replacement  of  this  growth  factor  cures  
the disease.

Osteogenesis imperfecta is the name of a variety of 
congenital  fragile  bone  syndromes.  Severely  affected 
fetuses die in utero from multiple broken bones. Mildly 
affected individuals are born but suffer multiple fractures 
resulting in skeletal deformities. All of the patients have 

mutations in the gene for type I collagen. Some are dele-
tions  or  insertions,  which  may  be  mild.  Most  patients 
with  severe  disease  have  point  mutations  leading  to 
replacement  of  a  glycine  by  a  larger  amino  acid.  This 
prevents  the  zipper-like  folding  of  the  collagen  triple 
helix (see Fig. 29.1), even if only one chain is defective 
per  molecule.  This  poisons  assembly  and  accounts  for 
the  dominant  phenotype.  No  one  knows  why  these 
mutations in type I collagen do not affect other tissues, 
such as skin, which are rich in type I collagen.

Repair of Wounds and Fractures
Healing  of  minor  skin  wounds  is  a  familiar  occurrence 
that illustrates the mechanisms controlling the assembly 
of connective tissue. Repair of connective tissue in the 
dermis  underlying  the  epithelium  proceeds  in  three 
stages: formation of a blood clot, assembly of provisional 
connective  tissue,  and  remodeling  of  the  connective 
tissue (Fig. 32.11).

Tissue  damage  ruptures  blood  vessels,  releasing  
blood  that  clots  to  stem  the  hemorrhage  and  fill  the 
damaged  area.  Thrombin,  a  proteolytic  enzyme  in 
blood  plasma,  drives  the  clotting  reaction  by  cleaving  
the  plasma  protein  fibrinogen  to  form  fibrin.  Fibrin 
spontaneously  polymerizes  and  is  crosslinked  to  itself 
and  to  plasma  fibronectin.  This  provisional  extracel-
lular  matrix  of  fibrin  and  fibronectin  provides  physical 
integrity  for  the  clot  and  an  environment  for  wound 
repair. Thrombin also activates seven-helix receptors on 
platelets  (see  Fig.  30.14),  stimulating  them  to  secrete 
matrix  molecules  (thrombospondin,  fibrinogen,  fibro-
nectin,  and  von  Willebrand  factor)  and  growth  factors 
(platelet-derived growth factor [PDGF], TGF-β, and TGF-
α) that initiate the cellular events required to complete 
wound repair.

Chemotactic  factors  attract  phagocytes  from  the 
blood into the wound. These factors include PDGF, che-
mokines, peptides cleaved from fibrinogen by thrombin, 
and  peptides  from  any  contaminating  bacteria.  Neutro-
phils  arrive  first  from  the  nearby  blood  vessels,  having 
attached  to  activated  endothelial  cells  (see  Fig.  30.13) 
and migrated into the connective tissue and clot. They 
ingest  any  bacteria.  Then  monocytes  (using  a  similar 
mechanism) migrate into the clot and clear foreign mate-
rial  and  any  dead  neutrophils.  The  environment  in  a 
wound promotes transformation of monocytes into mac-
rophages  (see  Fig.  28.6),  which  synthesize  and  secrete 
cytokines  and  growth  factors  that  mediate  the  cellular 
events  that  complete  the  repair  process.  In  this  way, 
platelets, monocytes, and fibroblasts form a relay, passing 
information from one cell to the next.

During the next phase of repair, macrophages, fibro-
blasts,  and  capillary  endothelial  cells  migrate  into  the 
fibrin clot and reestablish the connective tissue. Endothe-
lial cells form capillary loops that allow blood to flow and 

566 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

A

B

C

D

E

Blood

Wound in connective tissue

Clot of fibrin and
  fibronectin forms

Platelets secrete
  PDGF and TGF-β

Peptides released from
  fibrin attract neutrophils
  and monocytes

Neutrophils ingest bacteria

Monocytes differentiate
  into macrophages

Macrophages secrete
  cytokines

Cytokines attract capillaries
  and fibroblasts

Fibroblasts secrete
  collagen III and
  hyaluronan, which
  replace the fibrin coat

Provisional matrix is
  replaced by collagen I

to  provide  oxygen.  Initially,  the  endothelial  cells  are 
attracted  by  growth  factors  released  by  platelets,  but 
macrophages  and  dissolution  of  fibrin  provide  a  more 
sustained supply of chemoattractants and growth factors. 
Integrin  receptors  for  fibronectin  allow  fibroblasts  to 

FIGURE  32.11  REPAIR  OF  A  WOUND  IN  CONNECTIVE 
TISSUE.  A,  Wounding  removes  some  tissue  and  damages  blood 
vessels, releasing blood into the defect. B, Blood forms a clot of fibrin 
and fibronectin, releasing fibrin peptides, and platelets secrete platelet-
derived growth factor (PDGF) and transforming growth factor (TGF)-β, 
all of which attract neutrophils and monocytes. C, Neutrophils ingest 
any bacteria. Monocytes clean up debris and differentiate into macro-
phages,  which  secrete  cytokines,  attracting  fibroblasts  and  blood 
vessels. D, Fibroblasts secrete type III collagen and hyaluronan, which, 
in turn, replace the fibrin clot. E, Fibroblasts remodel the provisional 
connective tissue with type I collagen, and blood vessels grow back 
into the new tissue. 

migrate into the clot. They secrete more fibronectin as 
they  move.  Within  the  clot,  PDGF  and  TGF-β  from 
macrophages stimulate fibroblasts to secrete type III col-
lagen,  hyaluronan,  SPARC  (secreted  protein  acidic  and 
rich  in  cysteine),  and  tenascin.  Initially,  this  loose  con-
nective  tissue  is  disorganized  and  weak.  Hyaluronan  
predominates transiently, but after about five days, it is 
gradually replaced by proteoglycans and type I collagen.
Two events complete the repair of the matrix. First, 
fibroblasts differentiate into (smooth muscle–like) myo-
fibroblasts, which contract the collagen matrix, closing 
the edges of the wound. This step is particularly impor-
tant  for  large  wounds.  Second,  fibroblasts  remodel  the 
provisional  connective  tissue  to  restore  its  original  
architecture with nearly normal physical strength. This 
requires  resorption  of  provisional  collagen  fibrils  by 
metalloproteinases (see Fig. 29.19) and assembly of more 
robust type I collagen fibrils.

While fibroblasts repair the connective tissue, the epi-
thelium  bordering  the  wound  spreads  by  cell  division 
and migration to cover the defect. This process of migra-
tion is initiated within hours of wounding. Both the loss 
of  contacts  with  neighboring  cells  at  the  edge  of  the 
wound and the release of growth factors in the wound 
are  thought  to  transform  the  static  epithelial  cells  into 
migrating cells. Keratin filaments that predominate in the 
cytoskeleton  of  skin  epithelial  cells  are  replaced  with 
actin  filaments.  Hemidesmosomes  that  anchor  the  skin 
epithelial cells to the basal lamina are lost, and the cells 
migrate over the surface of the underlying matrix, which 
consists  initially  of  fibrin  and  fibronectin  and  later  of 
collagen.  As  they  go,  epithelial  cells  lay  down  a  new 
basal lamina. Depending on the size of the defect, pro-
liferation  of  epithelial  cells  might  be  required  to  com-
plete  coverage  of  the  surface.  When  it  is  covered,  the 
cells begin to differentiate into stratified epithelium.

Many  parallels  exist  between  repair  of  a  fractured 
bone  and  repair  of  a  skin  wound.  Blood  escapes  from 
damaged  blood  vessels  and  clots  at  the  fracture  site. 
PDGF  released  by  platelets  stimulates  mesenchymal  
cells  to  proliferate  in  the  surrounding  tissue.  These  

 

CHAPTER 32  n  Connective Tissues 

567

cells migrate into the clot along with blood vessels and 
macrophages. Stimulated by growth factors released ini-
tially  by  platelets  and  in  a  more  sustained  fashion  by 
macrophages, mesenchymal cells differentiate into chon-
drocytes  and  osteoblasts  that  recapitulate  the  develop-
ment of new bone to fill in the defect. Although the bone 
that  is  initially  produced  to  join  the  fractured  ends  is 
poorly  organized,  fractures  are  mechanically  stable 
within  approximately  6  weeks.  The  fibrin  clot  is  con-
verted directly into bone if the broken bone is immobi-
lized.  A  cartilage  intermediate  may  form  first  if  the 
fracture  is  allowed  to  move.  Over  a  period  of  months, 
remodeling reestablishes the normal pattern of the bone. 
With  time,  remodeling  can  even  straighten  out  bones 
that are mildly bent at fracture sites.

In  all  of  these  examples,  wound  healing  is  coordi-
nated  by  a  variety  of  growth  factors  and  cytokines  
and  is  supported  by  the  environment  provided  by  the 
extracellular matrix. For example, PDGF from platelets 
stimulates  the  proliferation  of  fibroblasts  and  attracts 
them  to  the  fibrin  clot  at  the  site  of  a  wound.  TGF-β 
inhibits fibroblast proliferation but stimulates fibroblasts 
to  make  matrix  molecules.  The  actions  of  cytokines  
and  growth  factors  depend  on  the  local  environment  
in the matrix. In a fibrin clot, TGF-β binds to its recep-
tor  on  cells  rather  than  the  matrix.  In  the  normal  con-
nective  tissue  matrix,  TGF-β  binds  to  proteoglycans  in 

preference  to  its  cell  surface  receptors,  limiting  its 
effects.  In  a  fibrin/fibronectin  clot,  cellular  fibronectin 
receptors  bind  the  matrix,  stimulating  production  of 
matrix  metalloproteinases  that  are  appropriate  for 
remodeling the matrix. In normal connective tissue with 
less fibronectin, cells produce less metalloproteinase.

The  mechanisms  that  mediate  physiological  wound 
repair can also contribute to disease. For example, PDGF 
that  is  released  from  activated  platelets  in  clots  at  the 
sites  of  wounds  initiates  the  cellular  events  that  are 
required for repair. On the other hand, when the endo-
thelium lining of large arteries is damaged, binding to the 
exposed basal lamina activates platelets. This stimulates 
them to release PDGF, which promotes proliferation of 
fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells in the artery wall, an 
early step in the development of arteriosclerosis.

Plant Cell Wall
The  cell  walls  of  land  plants  are  composite  materials 
consisting of cellulose, other polysaccharides, and glyco-
proteins  (Figs.  32.12  and  32.13).  Wood  and  cotton  are 
two  familiar  examples  of  cell  wall  material  that  is  left 
behind after plant cells have died. Like the extracellular 
matrix  of  animals,  plant  cell  walls  not  only  provide 
mechanical  support  but  also  may  influence  develop-
ment. Because of these robust cell walls, plant cells are 

A

BB

CC

Microfibrils
Microfibrils

CYTOPLASM
CYTOPLASM
OF CELL 1
OF CELL 1

CELL
CELL
WALL
WALL

MIDDLE
MIDDLE
LAMELLA
LAMELLA

CELL
CELL
WALL
WALL

CYTOPLASM
CYTOPLASM
OF CELL 2
OF CELL 2

Microtubules
Microtubules

CYTOPLASM
CYTOPLASM

FIGURE  32.12  PLANT  CELL  WALL.  A,  Confocal  fluorescence  micrograph  of  an  Arabidopsis  leaf  with  cell  walls  stained  by  the  periodic 
acid–Schiff reaction using Acriflavine as the Schiff reagent. B–C, Electron micrographs of thin sections of cell walls in the root-like appendages 
of  the  parasitic  weed  dodder.  B,  Two  cells  are  separated  by  an  electron-translucent  cell  wall  consisting  of  cellulose,  xyloglycan,  and  pectins. 
The  darker  area  between  the  two  cell  walls  is  the  middle  lamella,  which  contains  a  high  concentration  of  pectins.  C,  At  high  magnification, 
an  oblique  section  through  the  plasma  membrane  and  cell  wall  shows  cellulose  microfibrils  aligned  roughly  parallel  to  cortical  microtubules  
inside the plasma membrane. (A, Courtesy Steven E. Ruzin, University of California, Berkeley. B–C, Courtesy K.C. Vaughn, U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Stoneville, MD.)

568 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

A

C

CYTOPLASM

ECM

Golgi vesicle
with matrix
glycans

Cellulose synthase

complex with 6
enzyme trimers

B. Cellulose synthase
     monomer 

Active
site

Cellulose

Matrix
glycans

Microfibrils of
~18 cellulose
polymers

FIGURE 32.13  CELL WALL SYNTHESIS. A, Confocal fluorescence micrograph of an Arabidopsis hypocotyl epidermal cell expressing tubulin 
tagged with cyan fluorescent protein (CFP, shown in magenta) and cellulose synthase CESA6 tagged with yellow fluorescent protein (YFP, shown 
in green). This is a superimposition of five successive images taken at 10-second intervals to show green particles of CESA aligned with the 
magenta microtubules. B, Ribbon diagram and space-filling module of the crystal structure of a bacterial cellulose synthase showing the eight 
transmembrane helices, the glycosyltransferase domain in the cytoplasm between helices 4 and 5, and the growing cellulose polymer (white and 
red) threading across the membrane. C, Schematic showing the biosynthesis of the cell wall. ECM, extracellular matrix. (A, Courtesy R. Gutierrez, 
J. Lindeboom, and D. Erhardt, Stanford University. For reference, see Paredez AR, Somerville CR, Ehrhardt DW. Visualization of cellulose synthase 
demonstrates functional association with microtubules. Science. 2006;312:1491–1495. B, For reference, see Protein Data Bank [www.rcsb.org] 
file  4HG6  and  Morgan  JL,  Strumillo  J,  Zimmer  J.  Crystallographic  snapshot  of  cellulose  synthesis  and  membrane  translocation.  Nature. 
2013;493:181–186. C, Modified from Cosgrove DJ. Loosening of plant cell walls by expansins. Nature. 2000;407:321–326.)

not motile. Therefore the morphology of plants is estab-
lished by the orientation of the cell divisions that occur 
during  their  development.  Two  types  of  forces  act  on 
cell walls. Internally, the vacuole of the plant cell applies 
a high turgor pressure on the order of one atmosphere. 
Cell  walls  also  resist  a  variety  of  external  mechanical 
forces that tend to deform the cell.

The  main  constituent  of  cell  walls  is  cellulose,  the 
most  abundant  biopolymer  on  earth.  It  is  a  long, 
unbranched polymer of glucose (see Fig. 3.25). Cellulose 
polymers  associate  laterally  into  5-  to  7-nm  bundles 
called  microfibrils  (Fig.  32.13C).  Two  types  of 
branched 
and 
pectins—associate  with  cellulose  microfibrils  along 
with many proteins. Plasma membrane enzymes synthe-
size  cellulose,  while  the  other  components  come  from 
the  secretory  pathway  and  associate  with  cellulose 
outside the cell. Products of more than 1000 genes are 
thought to participate in cell wall synthesis.

polysaccharides—hemicelluloses 

Plants inherited their genes for cellulose synthases 
from bacteria. Arabidopsis has genes for approximately 
10 different cellulose synthases. These enzymes consist 
of  eight  transmembrane  helices  with  a  cytoplasmic 
β-glycosyltransferase  domain  similar  to  hyaluronan  syn-
thase  and  chitin  synthase  (Fig.  32.13B).  The  active  site 
is exposed to the cytoplasm to provide access to uridine 
diphosphate  (UDP)-glucose  that  supplies  the  glucose 
added  to  the  polymer.  The  transmembrane  helices  

form  a  channel  for  the  cellulose  polymer  across  the 
membrane.  These  transmembrane  enzymes  form  a 
rosette  of  six  particles  that  are  visible  by  electron 
microscopy,  each  particle  likely  to  consist  of  three 
enzyme subunits.

Outside the cell the cellulose polymers assemble into 
linear  crystals  called  microfibrils.  The  number  of  poly-
mers per microfibril was long thought to be 36, but 18 
is now the accepted number. Hydrogen bonds constrain 
the glucose units to face in alternate directions in planar 
ribbons  (Fig.  3.25A).  These  ribbons  self-assemble  later-
ally into planar crystalline sheets, which stack vertically 
into  paracrystalline  bundles  that  are  held  together  by 
C-H•••O hydrogen bonds.

Cellulose  synthesis  moves  the  rosettes  of  cellulose 
synthase  in  the  plane  of  the  plasma  membrane  along 
paths defined by cytoplasmic microtubules (Fig. 32.13A). 
Typically,  cytoplasmic  microtubules,  the  tracks  of  cel-
lulose  synthases,  and  the  cellulose  microfibrils  are  all 
aligned  like  barrel  hoops  perpendicular  to  the  axis  of 
cellular  growth  to  allow  for  directed  (or  anisotropic) 
expansion of the cell wall. Cellulose synthesis continues 
without  microtubules  but  it  is  not  so  well  organized. 
Newly  synthesized  microfibrils  are  deposited  between 
the cell surface and older cell wall components.

A  large  number  of  glycosyltransferases  and  other 
enzymes  in  the  Golgi  apparatus  synthesize  pectins  and 
hemicelluloses, which are transported in vesicles to the 

 

CHAPTER 32  n  Connective Tissues 

569

surface for secretion. Pectins are acidic polysaccharides 
that form a gel between microfibrils and play important 
roles in cell wall expansion during growth and develop-
ment. Hemicelluloses are branched polysaccharides that 
coat  microfibrils  but  are  less  important  than  pectins. 
Primary  cell  walls,  laid  down  at  the  time  of  cellular 
growth and expansion, mature with the addition of gly-
coproteins and organic molecules, such as lignins (poly-
mers  of  phenylpropanoid  alcohols  and  acids),  which 
contribute to the integrity of the “secondary” cell wall. 
Covalent and noncovalent bonds are thought to link cel-
lulose  and  these  other  matrix  molecules.  The  great 
strength  and  flexibility  of  tree  branches  illustrate  the 
remarkable mechanical properties of mature cell walls.

Cellulose  microfibrils  are  flexible  and  have  a  tensile 
strength greater than that of steel, so they do not stretch. 
For  a  plant  tissue  to  expand,  microfibrils  and  bonds 
among wall components must rearrange, processes facil-
itated  in  plants  and  bacteria  by  matrix  proteins  called 
expansins.  The  mechanism  is  still  being  investigated, 
but expansins may break noncovalent links between the 
polymers transiently, allowing turgor pressure to expand 
the  volume  of  the  cell.  Genetic  defects  in  expansins 
inhibit  the  growth  of  plant  tissues  and  the  ripening  of 
some fruits, such as tomatoes. Expansins in grass pollen 
are  one  allergen  responsible  for  hay  fever.  Localized 
chemical  modifications  of  pectins  can  also  loosen  the 
cell wall and contribute to expansion of plant cells.

Little  is  known  about  the  molecular  basis  of  plant  
cells adhering to their cell walls. By virtue of their phy-
sical connection with their product, cellulose synthases 
offer one means of attachment. Other plasma membrane 
proteins, including a family of serine/threonine kinases 
and  some  proteins  with  glycosylphosphatidylinositol 
anchors,  may  contribute  to  adhesion  by  binding  
cell  walls.  Integrins  are  conspicuously  missing  from 
plant cells.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

We thank David Ehrhardt for his suggestions on revisions 
of this chapter.

SELECTED READINGS

Capulli M, Paone R, Rucci N. Osteoblast and osteocyte: games without 

frontiers. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2014;561:3-12.

Charles JF, Aliprantis AO. Osteoclasts: more than “bone eaters.” Trends 

Mol Med. 2014;20:449-459.

Cosgrove DJ. Loosening of plant cell walls by expansins. Nature. 2000;

407:321-326.

Georgelis N, Nikolaidis N, Cosgrove DJ. Bacterial expansins and related 
proteins  from  the  world  of  microbes.  Appl  Microbiol  Biotechnol. 
2015;99:3807-3823.

Goldring MB, Berenbaum F. Emerging targets in osteoarthritis therapy. 

Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2015;22:51-63.

Golub  EE.  Role  of  matrix  vesicles  in  biomineralization.  Biochim 

Biophys Acta. 2009;1790:1592-1598.

Martin TJ. Bone biology and anabolic therapies for bone: current status 

and future prospects. J Bone Metab. 2014;21:8-20.

McFarlane HE, Döring A, Persson S. The cell biology of cellulose syn-

thesis. Annu Rev Plant Biol. 2014;65:69-94.

Newman RH, Hill SJ, Harris PJ. Wide-angle x-ray scattering and solid-
state nuclear magnetic resonance data combined to test models for 
cellulose microfibrils in mung bean cell walls. Plant Physiol. 2013;
163:1558-1567.

Ornitz  DM,  Marie  PJ.  Fibroblast  growth  factor  signaling  in  skeletal 

development and disease. Genes Dev. 2015;29:1463-1486.

Peaucelle A, Wightman R, Höfte H. The control of growth symmetry 
breaking  in  the  Arabidopsis  hypocotyl.  Curr  Biol.  2015;25:
1746-1752.

Sobacchi C, Schulz A, Coxon FP, Villa A, Helfrich MH. Osteopetrosis: 
genetics, treatment and new insights into osteoclast function. Nat 
Rev Endocrinol. 2013;9:522-536.

Tao J, Battle KC, Pan H, et al. Energetic basis for the molecular-scale 

organization of bone. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2015;112:326-331.

Yuan X, Serra RA, Yang S. Function and regulation of primary cilia and 
intraflagellar transport proteins in the skeleton. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 
2015;1335:78-99.

Zhong R, Ye ZH. Secondary cell walls: biosynthesis, patterned deposi-
tion  and  transcriptional  regulation.  Plant  Cell  Physiol.  2015;56:
195-214.

570 

SECTION VIII  n  Cellular Adhesion and the Extracellular Matrix

APPENDIX 32.1 
Genetic Defects of Cartilage and Bone

Protein
Growth Factors
BMP-4
BMP-5
CSF-1
GDF-5 (TGF-β family)
Growth hormone
OPG (osteoprotegerin)
PTHrP
RANKL
Sclerostin
Wnt1
Signal Transduction Components
c-Src
Connexin 43
FGF receptor 1
FGF receptor 2
FGF receptor 2
FGF receptor 3
LRP5 Wnt coreceptor
Transcription Factors
c-fos
hoxa-2
hoxd-13
msx-1
msx-2
Runx2/Cbfa-1

Species

Human
Mouse
Mouse
Mouse
Human
Human
Human
Mouse
Human
Human

Mouse
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human

Mouse
Mouse
Mouse
Mouse
Mouse
Human
Mouse
Human

COL2

COL9A2

COL10A1
COL11A2

Lysyl hydroxylase
Perlecan
Proton ATPase
Sulfate transporter

Human
Human
Human

Human
Human
Human
Human
Mouse
Human
Human

Mutation

Phenotype

Overexpression
Null
Null
Null
Null
Null
Null
Null
Loss of function
Loss of function

Null
Point mutations
Point mutation
Point mutation
Point mutation
Point mutation
Loss of function

Fibrodysplasia progressiva; ectopic bone formation
Defective ears and sternum (short ear mutation)
Osteopetrosis; reduced osteoclasts (osteopetrotic mutation)
Reduced size of long bones; no joints (brachypodism mutation)
Reduced size of bones
Recessive juvenile Paget disease with excess bone remodeling
Reduced chondrocyte growth; epiphyseal plates fused at birth
Osteopetrosis; no osteoclasts
Dense bones, van Buchem disease
Osteoporosis

Osteopetrosis; osteoclasts fail to attach to or degrade bone
Dominant oculodentodigital dysplasia
Pfeiffer syndrome; cranial synostosis; long bone defects
Jackson-Weiss syndrome; cranial synostosis; long bone defects
Crouzon disease; cranial synostosis
Gain-of-function mutation; achondroplasia; short, wide bones
Osteoporosis-pseudoglioma syndrome

Null
Null
Null
Null
Null
+/–
Null
Point mutations

Missense
Deletion
Point mutations
Missense, 
deletions
Nonsense
Point mutations
Splicing 

mutation

Point mutations
Exon skipping
Point mutation
Point mutation
Deletion
Point mutations
DTDST gene

Osteopetrosis; no osteoclasts
Deletion of the second branchial arch; duplication of first branchial arch
Deletion fourth sacral derivatives; duplication third sacral derivatives
Cleft palate
Craniosynostosis (fusion of skull bones)
Dominant skeletal defects (cleidocranial dysplasia)
No osteoblasts or bone
Dominant cartilage and skeletal defects (campomelic dysplasia)

Recessive cartilage deficiency; dwarfism; cleft palate
Osteopetrosis
Osteopetrosis
Dominant osteogenesis imperfecta; fragile bones

Dominant Stickler syndrome; chondrodysplasia, eye defects
Dominant chondrodysplasia and osteoarthritis of variable severity
Defective cartilage with degeneration of knee joint

Dominant Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia with short bones
Dominant Stickler syndrome; chondrodysplasia, eye defects
Recessive severe chondrodysplasia; deafness; cleft palate
Bruck disease; fragile bones
Recessive defects in cartilage and bone formation
Osteopetrosis
Recessive cartilage defects; short limbs; joint deformation

SOX9
Collagen and Other Structural Components of Cartilage and Bone
Aggrecan
Cathepsin-K
CLC7
COL1

Mouse
Mouse
Human
Human

ATPase, adenosine triphosphatase; BMP, bone morphogenetic protein; CSF, colony stimulating factor; FGF, fibroblast growth factor; PTHrP, parathyroid 
hormone–related protein; RANKL, receptor activator of nuclear factor κB ligand; TGF, transforming growth factor.

S E C T I O N   IX 

Cytoskeleton and  
Cellular Motility

This page intentionally left blank

SECTION  IX  OVERVIEW
The seven chapters in this section cover the cytoskel-

eton  and  cellular  motility.  These  topics  are  intimately 
related, because two of the protein polymers constitut-
ing  the  cytoskeleton—the  internal  scaffolding  of  the 
cell—are also tracks for motor proteins that power many 
cellular  movements.  Assembly  and  disassembly  of  the 
cytoskeletal  polymers  also  produce  some  types  of  cell 
movements.

Most  organisms  depend  on  motility  to  sustain  life 
itself.  Without  a  motile  sperm  the  egg  would  not  be 
fertilized. Without cellular motility a fertilized egg would 
not  progress  past  the  single-cell  stage.  Without  active 
changes  in  cell  shape  and  cellular  migrations  complex 
embryos  would  not  form.  Without  cellular  motility  
white  blood  cells  would  neither  accumulate  at  sites  of 

ingest 

inflammation  nor 
invading  microorganisms. 
Without  active  and  rapid  movements  of  organelles  in 
axons and large plant cells the peripheral parts of these 
cells would not be nourished. Without muscle contrac-
tions we would be paralyzed and unable to move. Even 
a yeast, prevented from locomotion by its rigid cell wall, 
depends  on  internal  movements  for  cell  division  and 
endocytosis.  Many  prokaryotes  use  rotary  flagella  for 
locomotion. Consequently, an understanding of the basis 
of cellular motility is central to our understanding of the 
functioning of all cells and organisms.

This  section  starts  with  Chapters  33  to  35,  which 
introduce the three cytoskeletal polymers, and Chapter 
36,  which  explains  the  mechanisms  of  motor  pro-
teins.  Three  concluding  chapters  show  how  cells  use 

Actin Ch 33

Microtubules Ch 34

Intermediate filaments Ch 35

Motors
Ch 36

Intracellular transport Ch 37

Muscle contraction Ch 39

Cellular
motility
Ch 38

 573

cytoskeletal  polymers  and  motors  to  produce  a  vast 
variety of movements: intracellular movements (Chapter 
37); cell shape changes, cellular locomotion, and swim-
ming  (Chapter  38);  and  muscle  contraction  (Chapter 
39). Mitosis and cytokinesis appear in our discussion of 
the cell cycle (Chapter 44).

Actin  filaments  (Chapter  33)  and  microtubules 
(Chapter  34)  have  much  in  common,  including  their 
evolutionary origins in prokaryotes. Both assemble spon-
taneously into polymers that are used as tracks by molec-
ular motors. The protein subunits of both polymers bind 
a nucleoside triphosphate: adenosine triphosphate (ATP) 
in  the  case  of  actin  and  guanosine  triphosphate  (GTP) 
for  tubulin.  After  polymerization,  hydrolysis  of  these 
bound  nucleotides  and  dissociation  of  the  γ-phosphate 
destabilize  the  polymer,  much  more  so  in  the  case  of 
microtubules  than  in  the  case  of  actin  filaments.  Both 
polymers  can  turn  over  rapidly  in  cells  or  remain  as 
stable components. Cells use many proteins to regulate 
the assembly of these polymers: Some proteins bind to 
the  cytoplasmic  pools  of  the  subunit  proteins;  others 
initiate the assembly; some stabilize the polymers, others 
sever  or  depolymerize  them;  still  others  link  the  poly-
mers  together  or  to  other  cellular  constituents.  During  
divergent evolution from the common ancestor, contem-
porary organisms came to use actin filaments and micro-
tubules  for  some  of  the  same  functions.  For  example, 
microtubules  separate  chromosomes  in  eukaryotes, 
while  homologs  of  actin  separate  plasmids  in  bacteria. 
Actin filaments are tracks for long distance transport in 
plants, whereas microtubules serve the same purpose in 
animal nerve cells.

Actin  filaments  and  microtubules  cooperate  with  a 
third polymer called intermediate filaments (Chapter 
35) to form a cytoskeleton, which resists deformation 
and transmits mechanical forces. Microtubules are rigid, 
hollow  reinforcing  rods  that  sustain  both  compression 
and  tension.  These  mechanical  properties  make  micro-
tubules useful for supporting asymmetrical cellular pro-
cesses  and  for  bidirectional  traffic  generated  by  the 
motor  proteins  kinesin  and  dynein.  Actin  filaments  are 
more flexible, so they must be crosslinked into bundles 
to bear compression forces or support asymmetrical pro-
cesses.  High  tensile  strength  allows  actin  filaments  to 
bear forces produced by myosins. Intermediate filaments 
are flexible cables that have considerable tensile strength 
but little capacity to resist compression. Both intermedi-
ate filaments and actin filaments reinforce whole tissues 
by  anchoring  cadherins,  transmembrane  proteins  used 
for  cell-to-cell  adhesion  (see  Chapter  30).  Intermediate 
filaments prevent excessive stretching of cells by exter-
nal  forces  in  multicellular  animals.  If  intermediate  fila-
ments are defective, tissues are mechanically fragile.

Most movements of eukaryotic cells depend on actin 
filaments  and  microtubules.  Assembly  and  disassembly 
of  actin  filaments  and  microtubules  produce  force  for 
several types of cellular movements (Chapter 37). Actin 
polymerization  drives  extension  of  pseudopods  at  the 
leading edge of motile cells. Hydrolysis of ATP bound to 
actin  regulates  recycling  of  subunits  rather  than  being 
used directly to produce force. Growth of microtubules 
supports  the  extension  of  some  asymmetrical  cellular 
processes, including nerve cell processes.

Many other cellular movements result from the physi-
cal  movements  of  protein  motors  (Chapter  36)  along 
actin filaments and microtubules in cytoplasm. Different 
motors move along these two polymers: myosins move 
on  actin  filaments,  and  dyneins  and  kinesins  move 
along  microtubules.  These  motors  use  energy  released 
from the hydrolysis of ATP to take nanometer steps along 
their  protein  polymer  tracks.  These  small  steps  apply 
force and move cargo attached to the motor. The cargo 
includes  membrane-bound  organelles,  macromolecular 
complexes,  and  cytoskeletal  polymers.  Microtubule 
motors  power  most  organelle  movements  in  animal  
cells  (Chapter  37),  chromosomal  movements  during 
mitosis  (Chapter  44),  and  beating  of  cilia  and  flagella 
(Chapter 38). The actin–myosin system is responsible for 
cytokinesis (see Chapter 44), some organelle movements 
(especially in plants and fungi [Chapter 37]), and muscle 
contraction (Chapter 39).

Several  motility  systems  do  not  depend  on  actin  
filaments  or  microtubules  (Chapter  38).  Nematode 
sperm  use  the  reversible  assembly  of  another  protein  
to  make  pseudopods  for  their  movements.  Calcium- 
sensitive  contractile  fibers  cause  rapid  contractions  of 
some protozoa. A proton or sodium ion gradient across 
the  plasma  membrane  powers  the  rotary  motor  that 
turns bacterial flagella. Although not usually considered 
to  be  molecular  motors,  nucleic  acid  polymerases  and 
helicases use ATP hydrolysis to move along polymers of 
DNA or RNA.

The  ability  of  actin  filaments  and  microtubules  to 
resist  mechanical  deformation  and  to  transmit  forces 
from  motors  allows  the  cytoskeletal-motility  system  to 
determine  cell  shape  and  hence  the  structure  of  both 
tissues and whole organisms. Furthermore, the dynamic 
nature  of  cytoskeletal  polymers  allows  cells  to  change 
shape rapidly, in a time frame of seconds. Active exten-
sion  of  cellular  processes  and  active  changes  in  shape 
produce asymmetrical cell shapes. Movements of chro-
mosomes  during  mitosis  and  organelles  in  cytoplasm 
determine the cellular distribution of these components 
that  are  otherwise  too  large  to  move  by  diffusion. 
Together  with  the  extracellular  matrix,  the  shapes  of 
individual cells define the shapes of tissues and organs.

574

C H A P T E R 

33 

Actin and Actin-Binding Proteins

Actin filaments form cytoskeletal and motility systems 

in all eukaryotes (Fig. 33.1). Crosslinked actin filaments 
resist deformation, transmit forces, and restrict diffusion 
of  organelles.  A  network  of  cortical  actin  filaments 
excludes  organelles  (Fig.  33.2C),  reinforces  the  plasma 
membrane, and restricts the lateral motion of some inte-
gral membrane proteins. The cortex varies in thickness 
from  a  monolayer  of  actin  filaments  in  red  blood  cells 
(see  Fig.  13.11)  to  more  than  1 µm  in  amoeboid  cells 
(Fig. 33.2C). Like fingers in a glove, bundles of actin fila-
ments support slender protrusions of plasma membrane 
called  microvilli  or  filopodia  (Fig.  33.2B).  Microvilli 
expand  the  cell  surface  for  transport  of  nutrients  and 
participate in sensory processes, including hearing. The 
actin cytoskeleton complements and interacts physically  
with  cytoskeletal  structures  composed  of  microtubules 

(see  Chapter  34)  and 
Chapter 35).

intermediate  filaments  (see  

Actin  contributes  to  cell  movements  in  two  ways. 
First,  polymerization  and  depolymerization  of  the 
network of actin filaments just inside the plasma mem-
brane  contribute  to  the  extension  of  pseudopods,  
cell  locomotion  (Fig.  33.2D–E),  and  phagocytosis  (see 
Fig.  22.3).  Second,  actin  filaments  are  tracks  for  move-
ments of the myosin family of motor proteins (see Fig. 
36.7).  Actin  filaments  and  myosin  filaments  form  the 
highly  ordered,  stable  contractile  apparatus  of  muscles 
(Fig.  33.3B;  also  see  Fig.  39.3),  as  well  as  the  transient 
contractile  ring that helps separate the two daughter 
cells  at  the  end  of  mitosis  (Fig.  33.3A;  also  see  Fig.  
44.24).  Myosins  also  power  movements  of  membranes 
and  other  cargo  along  actin  filaments,  complementing 

A

B

C

D

FIGURE 33.1  FLUORESCENCE MICROGRAPHS ILLUSTRATING THE DISTRIBUTION OF ACTIN FILAMENTS IN CELLS. A, Intestinal 
epithelial cells stained red with rhodamine-labeled phalloidin, a cyclic peptide that binds actin filaments. Actin filaments are concentrated in a 
band of microvilli bordering the intestinal lumen. Nuclei are stained blue with DAPI (4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole). B, Cultured vascular smooth 
muscle cells. Actin filaments, stained red with a fluorescent antibody, are concentrated in stress fibers and in the cortex around the edges of 
these cells. C, Maize epidermis with actin filaments stained with rhodamine-labeled phalloidin in the cortex and in cytoplasmic bundles. D, Fission 
yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe, stained with rhodamine-labeled phalloidin. Actin filaments are found in patches at the tips of growing cells 
and in the cleavage furrow of dividing cells. Scale bars are 10 µm. (A, Courtesy C. Rahner, Yale University, New Haven, CT. B, Courtesy I. Herman, 
Tufts Medical School, Boston, MA. C, Courtesy M. Frank, University of California, San Diego. D, Courtesy W.-L. Lee, Salk Institute, La Jolla, CA.)

 575

576 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

A

B

C

E

D

FIGURE 33.2  ELECTRON MICROGRAPHS OF ACTIN FILAMENTS. A, Filaments of purified actin prepared by negative staining. B, A thin 
section of an intestinal epithelial cell illustrating finger-like microvilli with tightly packed bundles of actin filaments linked to the surrounding plasma 
membrane by myosin-I. The barbed ends of these filaments (see Fig. 33.8) are located at the tips of the microvilli. C, A thin section of Acan-
thamoeba showing the actin filament meshwork in the cortex (the gray area here) beneath the plasma membrane. D, Fluorescence micrograph 
of a cultured fish scale keratocyte fixed while actively migrating toward the top of the figure. Actin filaments are stained blue with phalloidin and 
myosin  II  stained  red  with  antibodies.  E,  Electron  micrographs  of  actively  migrating  fish  scale  keratocytes  fixed  and  extracted  to  remove  the 
plasma membrane and soluble components prior to coating the cytoskeleton with platinum. A meshwork of branched filaments concentrates 
near the leading edge with longer, unbranched filaments deeper in the cytoplasm. Most filaments are oriented with their barbed ends forward. 
(A, Courtesy U. Aebi, University of Basel, Switzerland. B, Courtesy M. Mooseker, Yale University, New Haven, CT. D–E, Courtesy T. Svitkina and 
G. Borisy, University of Wisconsin, Madison.)

organelle  movements  along  microtubules  powered  by 
other  motors  (see  Fig.  37.1).  Actin,  myosin,  and  acces-
sory  proteins  form  intracellular  bundles  called  stress 
fibers (Fig. 33.1B) that apply tension between adhesive 
junctions  on  the  plasma  membrane  (see  Fig.  30.11), 
where cells attach to each other or to the extracellular 
matrix. Stress fibers are prominent in tissue culture cells 
grown on glass or plastic and in endothelial cells lining 
major arteries.

Actin is often the most abundant protein in eukaryotic 
cells, composing up to 15% of total protein, and the many 
types of actin-binding proteins may account for another 

10%  of  cellular  protein.  In  muscle,  actin  and  myosin 
constitute more than 60% of the total protein. Given this 
abundance,  it  is  curious  that  actin  was  discovered  in 
muscle only in the 1940s and in nonmuscle cells in the 
late  1960s.  Since  the  1970s,  scientists  have  discovered 
new actin-binding proteins every year, but the inventory 
is probably still incomplete. Genetic defects in compo-
nents of the actin cytoskeletal and motility system cause 
many human diseases, including muscular dystrophy (see 
Table  39.3),  hereditary  fragility  of  red  blood  cells  (ie, 
hemolytic anemias, see Fig. 7.11), and hereditary heart 
diseases called cardiomyopathies (see Table 39.1).

 

CHAPTER 33  n  Actin and Actin-Binding Proteins 

577

Actin Molecule
Actin  is  folded  into  two  domains  that  are  stabilized  by 
an adenine nucleotide lying in between (Fig. 33.4). The 
polypeptide  of  375  residues  crosses  twice  between  
the  two  domains,  with  the  N-  and  C-termini  located  
near each other. The two domains are folded similarly, 

A

B

C

FIGURE  33.3  MICROGRAPHS  OF  CONTRACTILE  BUNDLES 
OF  ACTIN  FILAMENTS.  A,  Fluorescence  micrograph  of  a  dividing 
normal rat kidney cell stained with fluorescein-phalloidin to mark actin 
filaments  in  the  contractile  ring  of  the  cleavage  furrow.  The  drawing 
illustrates the filaments in the contractile ring. B, Fluorescence micro-
graph  of  a  myofibril  isolated  from  skeletal  muscle  and  stained  with 
fluorescein-phalloidin to label actin filaments (green) and rhodamine-
antibody to α-actinin to label Z disks (yellow). C, Electron micrograph 
of  a  thin  section  of  skeletal  muscle.  (A,  Micrograph  courtesy  Y.-L. 
Wang, University of Massachusetts, Worcester. B, Courtesy V. Fowler, 
Scripps  Research  Institute,  La  Jolla,  CA.  C,  Courtesy  H.E.  Huxley, 
Brandeis University, Waltham, MA.)

suggesting that the actin gene arose by duplication of an 
ancestral gene.

Actin binds adenosine triphosphate (ATP) or adenos-
ine  diphosphate  (ADP)  and  a  divalent  cation,  Mg2+,  in 
cells,  with  nanomolar  affinity.  Actin  binds  ATP  with 
higher affinity than ADP, so given the higher concentra-
tion  of  ATP  in  cells,  unpolymerized  actin  is  saturated 
with  ATP.  The  bound  nucleotide  exchanges  relatively 
slowly with nucleotide in the medium (Fig. 33.11). Dif-
ferent  actin  monomer–binding  proteins  can  inhibit  
or  promote  nucleotide  exchange.  Bound  nucleotide  
stabilizes  the  molecule  but  is  not  required  for  polym-
erization  in  vitro.  However,  ATP-actin  and  ADP-actin 
polymerize at different rates.

Posttranslational modifications of actins include acety-
lation of the N-terminus and (in most cases) methylation 
of histidine-68. In some insect flight muscles, the small 
protein ubiquitin (see Fig. 23.2) is attached covalently to 
approximately  one  in  six  actin  molecules,  yielding  a 
55-kD polypeptide that is incorporated with unmodified 
actin into filaments. Some invertebrate actins are phos-
phorylated on tyrosine-211. The functional significance 
of these modifications is still being investigated.

Evolution of the Actin Family
The actin gene is ancient, with roots before the universal 
common  ancestor.  The  primordial  gene  apparently 
encoded  a  nucleotide-binding  protein  and  gave  rise  to 
actin, the glycolytic enzyme hexokinase (see Fig. 3.12) 
and  the  heat  shock  protein  Hsc70.  The  three  proteins 
have similar folds with a central ATP binding site, but dif-
ferent functions. The actin genes diversified extensively 
in prokaryotes giving rise to families of genes for actins 
with distinct functions: MreB involved with cell shape, 

Pointed end

4

3

A

2

ATP

C

N

1

B

Barbed end

FIGURE 33.4  STRUCTURE OF ACTIN. A, Ribbon model showing the polypeptide fold and the location of Mg-ATP (magnesium–adenosine 
triphosphate), shown as space-filling. Numbers 1 to 4 indicate the four subdomains. B, Surface rendering. ATP is almost completely buried in 
the cleft between the two lobes of the protein. The barbed end of the molecule (this is a way to describe the polarity of the actin filament; see 
Fig. 33.8) is at the bottom in this orientation. (For reference, see Protein Data Bank [PDB; www.rcsb.org] file 1ATN and Kabsch W, Mannherz 
HG, Suck D, et al. Atomic structure of the actin-DNase I complex. Nature. 1990;347:37–44.)

578 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

FtsA that participates in cytokinesis, ParM that separates 
plasmids,  and  more  than  30  other  actin-like  proteins 
expressed from plasmids or by bacteriophages.

The  original  eukaryotic  actin  gene  came  from  an 
archaeal  cell  related  to  Lokiarchaeota  (see  Fig.  2.4B). 
Eukaryotic  actin  genes  are  highly  conserved,  likely 
because  of  constraints  imposed  by  the  interactions 
required to form polymers and numerous regulatory pro-
teins. However, through divergent evolution, the genes 
encode subtly different proteins, some with novel func-
tions. Most organisms have multiple actin genes, and all 
known actin isoform diversity arises from multiple genes 
rather than from alternative splicing of messenger RNAs 
(mRNAs).  Humans  have  six  actin  genes;  Dictyostelium 
has  more  than  10;  but  budding  yeast  has  only  one. 
Muscle actin genes diverged from cytoplasmic actins in 
primitive chordates (see Fig. 2.8). To fulfill special devel-
opmental  functions,  plant  actin  genes  diverged  among 
themselves more than animal actin genes.

The biochemical similarities of eukaryotic actin iso-
forms are more impressive than their differences. The 
sequences of pairs of actins are generally more than 90% 
identical,  even  between  highly  divergent  eukaryotes. 
Humans express β and γ isoforms in nonmuscle cells and 
four different α and β isoforms in various muscle cells. 
Many nonmuscle cells express both the β and γ isoforms, 
but red blood cells use only β-actin.

In every case examined, actin isoforms copolymerize 
in the test tube, so it is remarkable and still unexplained 
that cells can sort actin isoforms into different structures. 
For  example,  β-actin  is  concentrated  near  the  plasma 
membrane of cultured cells, whereas γ-actin is concen-
trated in stress fibers (Fig. 33.5). In muscle, α-actin forms 
the thin filaments of the contractile apparatus, whereas 
γ-actin localizes around mitochondria.

Actin-Related Proteins
Genes for actin-related proteins (Arps) diverged from 
actin genes before the last eukaryote common ancestor 
(Fig. 33.6). Arps share with actin the fold of the polypep-
tide  chain  and  residues  forming  the  nucleotide-binding 
site,  but  fewer  than  60%  of  the  overall  residues  are 

FIGURE 33.5  SORTING OF ACTIN ISOFORMS IN CELLS. Fluo-
rescence micrograph of cultured cells doubly stained with fluorescent 
antibodies  specific  for  β-actin  concentrated  at  the  leading  edge 
(orange) and γ-actin concentrated in stress fibers (green). Nuclei are 
stained  blue  with  DAPI  (4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole).  (Courtesy  I. 
Herman, Tufts Medical School, Boston, MA.)

Yeast
Human
Amoeba

Fly Arp53

Actin

Other
families
of Arps

Yeast
ACT3
Fly
Arp13E

Yeast

Amoeba

Fly

Arp3

Worm

Human
Fly

Worm

Yeast

Arp1

(Dynactin complex)

Amoeba

Fly

Worm

Yeast

Cow

Worm

(Arp2/3 complex)

Arp2

FIGURE  33.6  COMPARISON  OF  ACTIN  AND  ACTIN-RELATED  PROTEINS.  Space-filling  models  of  actin  and  Arps  showing  residues 
identical to actin (yellow), conservative substitutions compared with actin (green), nonconservative substitutions (blue), and insertions (red). The 
phylogenetic tree, based on sequence comparisons, shows divergence from a common ancestor. Arps, Actin-related proteins. (Modified from 
Mullins RD, Kelleher JF, Pollard TD. Actin’ like actin. Trends Cell Biol. 1996;6:208–212.)

 

CHAPTER 33  n  Actin and Actin-Binding Proteins 

579

identical to actin. Divergent surface residues allow Arps 
to  participate  in  molecular  interactions  different  from 
actin. Arp1 forms a short filament as part of the dynactin 
complex that promotes cargo movement by the micro-
tubule motor dynein (see Fig. 37.2). Arp2 and Arp3 are 
two of seven subunits in a protein complex that nucle-
ates  branched  actin  filaments  in  the  cell  cortex  (Fig. 
33.12). Eight additional types of Arps are widespread in 
eukaryotes.  Several  participate  in  complexes  that  regu-
late chromatin structure.

Actin Polymerization
Actin filaments are polarized, owing to the uniform ori-
entation of the asymmetrical subunits along the polymer 
(Fig. 33.7). The subunits, all pointed in the same direc-
tion, form a double helix with the subunits in the two 
strands staggered by half. One end is called the barbed 
end, the other is called the pointed end. This nomencla-
ture  arises  from  the  asymmetrical  arrowhead  pattern 
seen when myosin heads bind along the length of actin  
filaments (Fig. 33.8).

Actin  self-assembles  into  filaments  by  means  of  a 
series  of  bimolecular  reactions  (Fig.  33.9;  see  also  Fig. 
5.6). Actin is isolated from cells as a monomer at low salt 
concentrations. Physiological concentrations of monova-
lent  and  divalent  cations  bind  to  low-affinity  sites  on 
actin and promote polymerization. In vitro, actin trimers 
appear to be the nucleus that initiates polymer growth. 

s
r
e
m
o
n
o
m
d
e

 

t
t
i

F

y
t
i
s
n
e
D
M
E

 

A

B

C

D

FIGURE 33.7  STRUCTURE OF THE ACTIN FILAMENT. A, Elec-
tron micrograph of a negatively stained actin filament. B, Reconstruc-
tion  of  the  actin  filament  from  electron  cryomicrographs  at  0.66 nm 
resolution. C, Surface rendering of the molecular model. Subunits in 
the two long-pitch helices are shown as yellow-orange and blue-green 
(see Fig. 5.5 for nomenclature). The short pitch helix, including every 
subunit, follows a yellow-green-orange-blue pattern. D, Scale drawing 
used throughout this text. (B, Data from Fujii T, Iwane AH, Yanagida T, 
Namba  K.  Direct  visualization  of  secondary  structures  of  F-actin  by 
electron cryomicroscopy. Nature. 2010;467:724–728.)

The reactions required to form trimers are very unfavor-
able in comparison with reactions for elongation of poly-
mers larger than trimers. To initiate new filaments, cells 
use  regulatory  proteins  to  overcome  these  unfavorable 
nucleation reactions.

Actin filaments grow and shrink by the addition and 
loss  of  subunits  at  the  two  ends  of  the  polymer.  The 
reactions  at  the  two  ends  have  different  rate  constants 
(Fig. 33.8). Subunit association is a diffusion-limited reac-
tion (see Chapter 4) at the rapidly growing barbed end 
and  somewhat  slower  at  the  pointed  end.  Subunit  dis-
sociation  is  relatively  slow  at  both  ends,  between  0.3  
and 8 subunits per second. The rates of these reactions 
depend on the nucleotide bound to the monomer asso-
ciating with or dissociating from a filament.

In  the  presence  of  ATP,  purified  actin  assembles 
almost  completely,  leaving  as  monomers  the  critical 
concentration of ~0.1 µM ATP-actin. The critical con-
centration is the monomer concentration at which equal 
rates  of  association  and  dissociation  occur,  1.4 s−1  at 
the barbed end (see Fig. 5.6). The critical concentration 

T

1.3

ATP

D

0.8

0.3

0.16

K = 0.6 µM

K = 2.0 µM

Pointed end
growth

Decorated
seed

Barbed end
growth

100 nm

K = 0.12 µM

K = 2.0 µM

1.4

8

12

4

ATP

T

D

A

B

FIGURE  33.8  ACTIN  FILAMENT  ELONGATION.  A,  Electron 
micrograph  of  growth  from  an  actin  filament  “seed”  decorated  with 
myosin heads to reveal the polarity. Growth is faster at the barbed end 
than  at  the  pointed  end.  B,  Rate  constants  for  association  (units: 
µM−1 s−1)  and  dissociation  (units:  s−1)  for  Mg-ATP-actin  (T)  and  Mg-
ADP-actin (D) were determined by measuring the rate of elongation at 
the two ends as a function of monomer concentration. Ratios of the 
rate constants yield critical concentrations (K, units: µM) for each reac-
tion. Critical concentrations at the two ends are the same for ADP-actin 
but differ for ATP-actin. ADP, adenosine diphosphate. (A, Courtesy M. 
Runge, Johns Hopkins Medical School, Baltimore, MD. B, Data from  
Pollard  TD.  Rate  constants  for  the  reactions  of  ATP-  and  ADP-actin 
with the ends of actin filaments. J Cell Biol. 1986;103:2747–2754.)

580 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

A.  Actin filament nucleation

10

~106

10

~103

10

1

B

P

B.  ATP hydrolysis

ATP

ADP + Pi

ADP

Seed

Barbed

end

ATP
hydrolysis

t1/2 = 2 s

Pointed

end

Phosphate
dissociation

t1/2 = 350 s

FIGURE  33.9  ACTIN  FILAMENT  NUCLEATION,  GROWTH, 
AND  NUCLEOTIDE  HYDROLYSIS.  A,  Nucleation.  Formation  of 
dimers and trimers is very unfavorable, owing to rapid dissociation of 
subunits. Actin trimers are called nuclei, because they initiate the highly 
favorable  elongation  reactions.  Rate  constants  estimated  by  kinetic 
modeling have units of µM−1 s−1 for association reactions and s−1 for 
dissociation  reactions.  B,  ATP  hydrolysis  by  a  polymer  of  ATP-actin 
(yellow subunits) is random and irreversible at a rate of 0.3 s−1, yielding 
subunits  with  bound  ADP  and  inorganic  phosphate  (orange).  Phos-
phate (Pi) dissociates slowly at a rate of 0.002 s−1, converting half of 
the newly polymerized subunits to ADP-actin (pink) in 6 minutes. ADP 
bound to polymerized subunits does not exchange with nucleotide in 
the  medium.  Phosphate  binding  is  reversible,  but  the  affinity  is  low, 
so  most  subunits  dissociate  phosphate.  (For  reference,  see  Pollard 
TD,  Blanchoin  L,  Mullins  RD.  Biophysics  of  actin  filament  dynam-
ics  in  nonmuscle  cells.  Annu  Rev  Biophys  Biomol  Struct.  2000;29:
545–576.)

for ADP-actin is approximately 20 times higher than for 
ATP-actin.

Hydrolysis  of  bound  ATP  and  dissociation  of  the 
γ-phosphate after assembly modify the behavior of actin 
filaments, including their affinity for regulatory proteins. 
Following  incorporation  of  an  ATP-actin  subunit into a 
filament,  bound  ATP  is  hydrolyzed  irreversibly  to  ADP 
and phosphate with a half-time of 2 s (Fig. 33.9). These 
ADP-Pi  subunits  behave  much  like  ATP  subunits.  Phos-
phate  dissociates  slowly  and  reversibly  over  several 
minutes.  This  yields  filaments  with  a  core  of  subunits 
with  tightly  bound  ADP.  At  the  millimolar  concentra-
tions of phosphate in cytoplasm, phosphate is bound to 
some ADP-actin subunits.

The critical concentrations for ATP-actin differ at the 
two  ends  of  the  filament.  This  results  from  differences 
in  the  probability  of  nucleotide  hydrolysis  and  phos-
phate  release  at  the  two  ends,  which  is  more  likely  to 
expose  ADP-subunits  at  the  pointed  end.  At  steady  
state in the presence of ATP, the actin monomer concen-
tration  falls  between  the  critical  concentrations  at  the 

two ends. Though the polymer and monomer concentra-
tions  remain  constant,  net  addition  of  subunits  at  the 
barbed end and net loss of subunits at the pointed end 
result  in  the  slow  migration  of  subunits  through  the 
polymer from the barbed end to the pointed end. This 
slow process is called treadmilling. Neither end exhibits 
rapid  fluctuations  in  length  like  those  of  microtubules 
(see Fig. 34.6).

Actin-Binding Proteins
In contrast to the slow turnover of filaments of purified 
actin  at  steady  state,  actin  filaments  in  live  cells  can 
polymerize  and  depolymerize  rapidly.  This  requires  
the  control  of  more  than  60  families  of  actin-binding 
proteins (Fig. 33.10 and Appendix 33.1). Broadly, these 
proteins fall into families that bind monomers, sever fila-
ments,  cap  filament  ends,  nucleate  filaments,  promote 
polymerization,  crosslink  filaments,  stabilize  filaments, 
or  move  along  filaments.  Like  actin,  genes  for  many  
of  these  actin-binding  proteins  arose  in  early  eukary-
otes  and  are  found  in  protozoa,  yeast,  plants,  and 
vertebrates.

This  section  introduces  examples  of  each  class  of 
actin-binding protein. However, no actin-binding protein 
functions  in  isolation,  so  the  chapter  concludes  by 
explaining  how  ensembles  of  these  proteins  work 
together to regulate actin filament dynamics in cells.

Actin Monomer–Binding Proteins
Proteins  that  bind  actin  monomers  cooperate  with 
capping  proteins  to  maintain  a  pool  of  unpolymerized 
actin in cells and regulate the nucleotide bound to actin.
Profilins are abundant proteins, found in all branches 
of  the  eukaryotic  tree.  Cells  require  three  different  
profilin activities for viability: binding actin monomers, 
catalyzing  the  exchange  of  nucleotides  bound  to  actin 
(Fig.  33.11)  and  binding  to  polyproline  sequences  on 
other protein such as formins (Fig. 33.14). Profilins also 
bind membrane polyphosphoinositides. The nucleotide 
bound  to  actin  monomers  determines  the  affinity  for 
profilin: highest for nucleotide-free actin monomers, fol-
lowed by ATP-actin and ADP-actin. Profilins bind to the 
barbed  end  of  actin  monomers.  This  sterically  blocks 
nucleation and pointed end elongation but not associa-
tion  of  the  profilin-actin  complex  with  the  barbed  end 
of filaments. Profilin dissociates rapidly after the profilin-
actin complex binds to a barbed end.

Found only in vertebrates, β-thymosins are extended 
peptides of just 43 residues. α-Helices at both ends block 
the barbed and pointed ends of the actin monomer. They 
bind ATP-actin monomers with higher affinity than ADP-
actin  monomers  and  inhibit  both  actin  polymerization 
and nucleotide exchange. Thymosin-β4 is the most abun-
dant actin-binding protein in some animal cells, where it 
sequesters most of the unpolymerized actin.

 

CHAPTER 33  n  Actin and Actin-Binding Proteins 

581

Monomer
binding

Monomers

Polymerization

Branching

Arp2/3
complex

Elongation
by formin

Elongation
and capping

Crosslinking

Long
filament

Bundle

Network

Profilin-actin

on FH1 domain

Capped 
filaments

Severing

Annealing

Short

filaments

FIGURE  33.10  FAMILIES  OF  ACTIN-BINDING  PROTEINS.  Summary  of  the  reactions  of  regulatory  proteins  with  actin  monomers  and 
filaments. 

Profilin

ADF/cofilin
Thymosin

Profilin

ADP

Inhibiting

Promoting

ADP

ATP

ATP

Profilin

Nucleotide-free

ATP

FIGURE  33.11  REGULATION  OF  ACTIN  NUCLEOTIDE 
EXCHANGE BY ACTIN-BINDING PROTEINS. The rate-limiting step 
is dissociation of the bound nucleotide from the nucleotide cleft. ADF/
cofilins  and  β-thymosins  inhibit  dissociation  of  both  ATP  and  ADP. 
Profilin competes with both inhibitors for binding actin monomers and 
increases the rates of both nucleotide dissociation and binding. The 
ability of profilin to promote nucleotide exchange, the higher affinity of 
actin for ATP than for ADP, and the higher concentration of ATP than 
ADP  in  cytoplasm  drive  the  reactions  to  the  right,  so  essentially  all 
unpolymerized actin in cells has bound ATP. 

Members  of  the  ADF/cofilin  family  bind  ADP-actin 
monomers with higher affinity than ATP-actin and inhi-
bit  nucleotide  exchange  but  not  polymerization.  As 
explained  below,  their  main  function  is  to  sever  ADP-
actin filaments (Fig. 33.16). These proteins are essential 
for the viability of many eukaryotes.

Actin Filament Nucleating Proteins
Spontaneous  nucleation  of  filaments  from  actin  mono-
mers is intrinsically unfavorable and inhibited by profilin, 
so  cells  use  proteins  to  specify  when  and  where  new 
filaments  form.  The  best  characterized  are  Arp2/3 
complex,  formins  and  proteins  with  multiple  WH2 
(WASp homology 2) domains such as spire. Each of these 
has a different evolutionary origin, mechanism of action, 
and physiological functions.

Arp2/3  complex  consists  of  Arp2  and  Arp3  tightly 
bound to five novel proteins (Fig. 33.12). Arp2/3 complex 

binds to the side of actin filaments and forms branches 
with the Arps as the first two subunits at the pointed end 
of the new filament. Growth of the free barbed ends of 
these  branches  produces  force  that  pushes  the  plasma 
membrane  forward  at  the  leading  edge  of  motile  cells 
(Fig. 33.2E).

Arp2/3  complex  is  intrinsically  inactive,  but  is  stimu-
lated  to  initiate  a  branch  by  interactions  with  actin  fila-
ments  and  nucleation-promoting  factors  such  as  WASp 
(Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein). The name comes 
from  Wiskott-Aldrich  syndrome,  a  genetic  disorder  with 
defects  in  blood  cells  causing  immunodeficiency  and 
bleeding.  Other  tissues  use  a  closely  related  nucleation-
promoting  factor  called  N-WASP.  The  C-terminal  VCA 
(verprolin  homology,  connecting,  and  acidic)  motifs  of 
WASp activate Arp2/3 complex. The V motif (also called 
WH2 for WASp homology 2) binds an actin monomer and 
the CA motif binds to two sites on Arp2/3 complex (Fig. 
33.13). These interactions promote the binding of Arp2/3 
complex to the side of a filament, bringing about a large 
conformational  change  that  positions  Arp3  and  Arp2  to 
initiate a branch. Signaling molecules overcome intramo-
lecular  interactions  that  autoinhibit  WASp  and  N-WASP 
(Fig.  33.13);  Rho-family  GTPases  (guanosine  triphospha-
tases)  and  membrane  polyphosphoinositides  bind  near 
the middle of the protein, and proteins with SH3 domains 
bind proline-rich sequences.

Additional  nucleation  promoting  factors  with  VCA 
motifs regulate Arp2/3 complex in specific cellular loca-
tions.  For  example,  Scar/WAVE  is  active  at  the  leading 
edge  of  motile  cells,  WASH  participates  in  membrane 
traffic from endosomes and WHAMM is associated with 
the  Golgi  apparatus.  The  small  GTPase  Rac  regulates 
Scar/WAVE and WASH by freeing them of inhibition by 
homologous regulatory complexes of four proteins.

Spire was discovered in Drosophila as a gene required 
for  the  development  of  eggs  and  embryos  and  later 
found  in  other  metazoans  but  not  fungi  or  protozoa. 

582 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

A. Arp2/3 complex

p34

Arp3

4

p21

2

p20

p16

3

4

p40

2

Arp2

1

C. Branching pathway

WASp/
Scar

Arp2/3
complex

1

2

WASp/Scar nucleation promoting

factors bind an actin monomer

and then Arp2/3 complex

B. Model of branch

D1

1

4

3

2

D2

ArpC2

Arp3

3

1

3

1

90°

ArpC3

ArpC4

ArpC5

ArpC1

Arp2

Binding to mother filament
activates polymerization

Mother
 filament

3

B

4

Daughter
filament

70˚

B

Elongation

P

FIGURE 33.12  NUCLEATION OF BRANCHED ACTIN FILAMENTS BY ARP2/3 COMPLEX. A, Ribbon diagram of the crystal structure of 
Arp2/3 complex. The seven subunits are color coded and labeled. Numbers label the subdomains of Arp2 and Arp3. B, Model of a branch based 
on a three-dimensional reconstruction from electron micrographs. C, Steps in branch formation: (1) A nucleation-promoting factor binds an actin 
monomer. (2) These binary complexes bind two sites on Arp2/3 complex, bringing together two actin subunits with Arp2 and Arp3. (3) The ternary 
complex binds to the side of an actin filament, completing the activation process. (4) A new daughter filament grows at its barbed end from the side 
of the older mother filament. B is the barbed end. P is the pointed end. WASH, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP) and Scar homolog; 
WHAMM,  WASP  homologue  associated  with  actin,  membranes,  and  microtubules.  (A,    For  reference,  see  PDB  file  1K8K  and  Robinson  R, 
Turbedsky K, Kaiser DA, et al. Crystal structure of Arp2/3 complex. Science. 2001;294:1679–1684. B, From Rouiller I, Xu X-P, Amann KJ et al. The 
structural basis of actin filament branching by the Arp2/3 complex. J Cell Biol. 2008;180:887–895.)

WASp domain map
Ligands:
WIP
Domains:

EVH1

N

PIP2

Cdc42

PIP2

Cdc42

Src, Btk
Nck, Grb2

Actin

Arp2/3
complex
C

Basic GBD

Proline-rich

V C A

Activated
WASp

Actin
Actin

+

Arp2/3 complex
Arp2/3 complex

GBD
GBD

Autoinhibited WASp

Actin filament

branch

FIGURE  33.13  WASP 
(WISKOTT-ALDRICH  SYNDROME 
PROTEIN) NUCLEATION PROMOTING FACTOR. The V (verprolin 
homology) motif binds an actin monomer, and the CA (connecting and 
acidic)  motifs  bind  Arp2/3  complex.  Intramolecular  association  of  C 
with  the  GBD  (GTPase-binding  domain)  autoinhibits  the  protein. 
Membrane-bound  Rho-family  guanosine  triphosphatases  (GTPases) 
and  polyphosphoinositides  compete  C  from  GBD,  releasing  VCA  to 
interact with actin and Arp2/3 complex. SH3 domain proteins such as 
Nck  also  activate  WASp  by  binding  the  proline-rich  domain.  The 
N-terminal  EVH1  (Ena-VASP  [vasodilator-stimulated  protein]  homol-
ogy) domain binds WIP (WASp interacting protein). 

Spire proteins have multiple WH2 domains (correspond-
ing  to  the  V  domains  in  Fig.  33.13)  that  bind  formins, 
actin  monomers,  and  nucleate  unbranched  filaments. 
One function is to build a meshwork of actin filaments 
in  the  oocyte  cytoplasm.  Other  proteins  with  WH2 
domains also nucleate filaments.

Actin Filament Polymerases
Formins  not  only  initiate  unbranched  actin  filaments 
but  remain  associated  with  the  elongating  barbed  end 
and promote its growth. Filaments produced by formins 
are incorporated into the contractile ring and bundles in 
yeast  (see  Fig.  37.11)  and  stress  fibers  in  animal  cells  
(Fig.  33.1B).  The  three  formins  in  fission  yeast  each 
assemble  actin  filaments  for  specific  structures,  cytoki-
netic contractile ring, interphase actin cables, or mating 
structures.  The  specific  functions  of  the  15  different 
mammalian formins are still being investigated.

The  characteristic  feature  of  formins  is  a  formin 
homology-2  (FH2)  domain  (Fig.  33.14)  that  forms  a 
doughnut-shaped  homodimer  around  the  barbed  end  
of an actin filament. Interactions of the FH2 dimer with 
two actin monomers nucleate a filament. Then the FH2 
domain  tracks  the  growing  barbed  end  by  faithfully 

 

CHAPTER 33  n  Actin and Actin-Binding Proteins 

583

A. Formin domain map

B. Formin FH2 domain model

D. VASP domain map

Regulatory domain

N

FH1

FH2

GTPases

Profilin

Actin

FH1 attaches here

N

C1205

Lasso

Linker

αC

Knob

αD

C. Formin elongation mechanism

Coiled-coil

FH2 binds two subunits

to nucleate filament

Actin

Profilin

Profilin-actin bound to FH1

transfers rapidly to barbed end;

FH2 steps onto new subunit

C

αT

αM

Post

Actin

Pointed

Profilin & SH3
domains

PKA phosphorylation site
Actin monomers

Actin filaments

EVH1

Proline-rich

EVH2

CC

Proline-rich
ligands

N

Self
association

C380

E. VASP elongation mechanism

VASP binds near end of filament;
profilin-actin bound to VASP
transfers to barbed end
(details under investigation)

FIGURE 33.14  ACTIN FILAMENT POLYMERASES. A–C, Formins. A, Domain structure of a generic, dimeric formin similar to mouse mDia1. 
Binding of Rho-family guanosine triphosphatases (GTPases) activates formins by disrupting intramolecular associations that autoinhibit the formin 
homology-2 (FH2) domains. B, Ribbon diagram of the structure of the homodimer of FH2 domains of budding yeast Bni1p. The linker segments 
extend when the dimer fits around an actin filament. C, Pathway of actin filament nucleation and elongation by formin FH1 and FH2 domains. Multiple 
polyproline sequences in FH1 bind profilin-actin for rapid transfer to the barbed end of the filament. D, VASP (vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein). 
The EVH1 domain (see Fig. 25.11B) binds polyproline ligands, including vinculin and zyxin, in focal contacts; the proline-rich domain binds profilin-
actin complexes; the EVH2 domain binds both actin monomers and filaments; and the C-terminal coiled-coil (CC) mediates the formation of VASP 
tetramers. E, The diagram shows a VASP tetramer delivering profilin-action onto the barbed end of the filament. (B, See PDB file 1UX5.)

stepping onto each new subunit as it is added. The FH2 
domain also protects the barbed end from capping pro-
teins. Polyproline sequences in the flexible FH1 domain 
next to FH2 bind multiple profilin-actin complexes that 
transfer rapidly to the barbed end, enhancing the rate of 
elongation.  Some  formins  are  autoinhibited  by  interac-
tions  between  parts  of  the  polypeptide  flanking  the 
FH1-FH2 domains. Rho family GTPases activate formins 
by overcoming this autoinhibition.

An  unrelated  protein  called  VASP  (vasodilator-
stimulated  phosphoprotein)  also  stimulates  the  growth 
of  actin  filament  barbed  ends  and  protects  them  from 
capping  in  filopodia  and  at  the  leading  edge  of  motile 
cells  (Fig.  33.14D–E).  VASP  tetramers  bind  near  the 
barbed end of actin filaments, allowing their proline-rich 
domains  to  bind  and  deliver  profilin-actin  complexes  
to  the  growing  barbed  end,  similar  to  formins.  EVH1 
domains allow VASP and related proteins to bind proline-
rich ligands in focal adhesions and on the surface of the 
bacterium  Listeria  where  it  stimulates  actin  filament 
elongation.

Actin Filament–Capping Proteins
Capping proteins bind to and stabilize either the barbed 
or  pointed  end  of  actin  filaments  (Fig.  33.15).  Some 
capping proteins also stimulate the formation of new fila-
ments and/or sever actin filaments.

Gelsolins  consist  of  six  domains  with  similar  folds 
but different sequences and activities. They bind tightly 
to the sides and barbed ends of actin filaments, blocking 

Gelsolin

Fragmin /
severin

Capping
protein

Barbed

Pointed

Tropomodulin
+ tropomyosin

Arp2/3
complex

Capping protein

Tropomodulin
Tropomyosin

FIGURE 33.15  ACTIN FILAMENT–CAPPING PROTEINS. Inter-
actions of capping proteins with the ends of actin filaments. Most of 
these proteins bind with high affinity to a filament end. Tropomodulin 
requires tropomyosin for high-affinity binding. (Roberto Dominguez of 
the University of Pennsylvania created the PDB file used for the space-
filling model of the capped filament with tropomyosin.)

both the association and dissociation of actin subunits. 
Gelsolin also binds actin dimers, forming a nucleus that 
grows  at  the  pointed  end.  Fragmin  and  severin,  are 
similar in structure and function to the first three domains 
of  gelsolin.  Genes  for  these  capping  proteins,  found 
widely among eukaryotes, are likely to have duplicated 
during evolution to give rise to gelsolin genes.

Heterodimeric  capping  proteins  consist  of  two 
homologous subunits of ~30 kD. They cap barbed ends 

584 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

with high affinity and promote nucleation of new pointed 
ends by stabilizing small actin oligomers. Heterodimeric 
capping proteins are found in most eukaryotic cells. In 
striated  muscle,  they  cap  the  barbed  end  of  actin  fila-
ments  in  the  Z  disk  (see  Fig.  39.5).  Several  different 
proteins regulate capping protein by interfering directly 
or indirectly with its binding to barbed ends.

Tropomodulin caps the pointed end of stable actin 
filaments  in  muscle,  red  blood  cells,  and  other  animal 
cells.  High-affinity  binding  to  pointed  ends  requires 
tropomyosin,  an  α-helical  protein  that  binds  along  the 
length of actin filaments (Fig. 33.15).

Actin Filament–Severing Proteins
Four  classes  of  proteins  just  introduced—ADF/cofilin, 
some formins, fragmin/severin, and gelsolin—also sever 
actin  filaments  into  short  fragments  (Fig.  33.16).  ADF/
cofilins bind ADP-actin subunits in filaments and promote 
severing  and  depolymerization.  A  few  formin  isoforms 
can sever actin filaments. Ca2+ triggers gelsolin, fragmin, 
and severin to sever actin filaments. Domain 2 of gelsolin 
binds to the side of an actin filament, positioning domain 
1 to bind between subunits and disrupt the filament. One 
gelsolin isoform is found inside cells; another is secreted 
into  blood  plasma,  where  it  may  sever  actin  filaments 
released from damaged cells.

Proteins That Bind the Side of Actin Filaments
Tropomyosin, nebulin, and caldesmon are extended 
proteins  that  bind  along  the  sides  of  actin  filaments. 
Tropomyosin increases the tensile strength of actin fila-
ments in striated muscles, it is also an essential compo-
nent  of  the  Ca2+-sensitive  regulatory  machinery  that 
controls  the  interaction  of  myosin  and  actin  (see  Fig. 
39.4). Nebulin is one factor that determines the length 
of the actin filaments in skeletal muscle (see Chapter 39). 
Caldesmon,  together  with  tropomyosin  and  Ca2+-
calmodulin, regulates interaction of actin and myosin in 
smooth muscle (see Fig. 39.24) and nonmuscle cells.

Actin Filament Crosslinking Proteins
Possession  of  two  actin  filament-binding  sites  enables 
crosslinking proteins (Fig. 33.17) to bridge filaments and 
to  stabilize  higher-order  assemblies  of  actin  filaments. 
Some  have  a  greater  tendency  to  crosslink  filaments  
in regular bundles, like those in microvilli (Fig. 33.2B), 
but  depending  on  protein  concentrations  and  filament 
lengths,  most  of  these  proteins  can  form  both  random 
networks of crosslinked filaments and regular bundles of 
filaments.

Many  of  these  proteins  have  actin  binding  domains 
consisting of two calponin-homology domains. α-Actinin 
is found in the cortical actin network, at intervals along 
stress  fibers,  on  the  cytoplasmic  side  of  cell  adhesion 
plaques  (see  Fig.  30.11),  and  in  the  Z-disk  of  striated 
muscles  (see  Fig.  39.5).  Ca2+  binding  to  EF  hands  (see 

Polymerized actin subunits:

Cofilin

ADP + Pi

ADP

Cofilin binds ADP-actin filament

Severing

Both new ends free

FIGURE  33.16  ACTIN  FILAMENT  SEVERING  BY  COFILIN. 
ADF/cofilins bind to ADP-actin filaments and stabilize a rare, but natu-
rally  occurring,  tighter  helical  twist.  This  destabilizes  and  severs  the 
filament. The products are two uncapped ends that are available for 
subunit  association  and  dissociation.  Pi,  phosphate.  (For  reference, 
see  Elam  WA,  Kang  H,  De  la  Cruz  EM.  Biophysics  of  actin  filament 
severing by cofilin. FEBS Lett. 2013;587:1215–1219.)

Chapter 26) of some α-actinins inhibits binding to actin. 
Fimbrin  and  villin  (a  relative  of  gelsolin  with  an  extra 
actin-binding  site)  stabilize  the  regular  actin  filament 
bundles in microvilli. Filamin crosslinks filaments in the 
cortex of many cells and also anchors these filaments to 
an  integrin,  a  plasma  membrane  receptor  for  adhesive 
glycoproteins (see Fig. 30.11). Actin filament crosslink-
ing proteins of the plasma membrane skeleton, such as 
spectrin  (see  Fig.  7.11)  and  dystrophin  (see  Fig.  39.9), 
are anchored to integral membrane proteins.

Functional Redundancy of Actin-Binding Proteins
The  diversity  and  the  apparent  redundancy  of  actin-
binding  proteins  are  striking.  Why  should  most  organ-
isms retain genes for 60 or more actin-binding proteins 
if  they  have  such  a  limited  repertoire  of  functions: 
monomer binding, nucleation, capping, severing, cross-
linking,  stabilizing,  and  motility?  Null  mutations  show 
that some proteins are essential for normal physiology. 
These include myosin-II, Arp2/3 complex, profilin, and 
cofilin  in  yeast.  On  the  other  hand,  organisms  can 
survive  genetic deletion of some actin-binding proteins, 
suggesting  that  parts  of  the  system  are  redundant.  For 
example,  in  a  laboratory  environment,  Dictyostelium 
tolerates  the  loss  of  crosslinking  proteins  (α-actinin  or 

 

CHAPTER 33  n  Actin and Actin-Binding Proteins 

585

Class I
Fimbrin/plastin

ABD ABD

Class II
α-Actinin
ABD

ABD

40 nm

Spectrin/fodrin
ABD

Dystrophin

ABD

Class III
ABP-120

ABD

ABD

35 nm

β-Sheet domain

EF hand

Actin-binding domain

Triple-stranded α-helical domain

2-fold symmetry

Ankyrin

20 nm

Dimer

β-Subunit
α-Subunit

95–125 nm

Filamin/ABP

ABD

ABD

GPIB/IX
binding domain

80 nm

FIGURE 33.17  Actin filament crosslinking proteins sharing homologous actin-binding domains (red). Crosslinking requires two actin-binding 
sites,  which  can  be  part  of  one  polypeptide  (fimbrin)  or  on  different  subunits  of  dimeric  proteins  (α-actinin,  filamin).  Dystrophin  has  a  second 
actin-binding site in the middle of the tail of triple helical repeats. (Modified from Matsudaira P. Modular organization of actin cross-linking proteins. 
Trends Biochem Sci. 1991;16:87–92.)

ABP-120),  severin,  or  one  of  two  profilin  genes  with  
only  minor  defects  in  behavior  and  growth.  Humans 
who  lack  dystrophin  develop  and  grow  normally  for  a 
few  years  but  later  succumb  to  muscle  wasting  (see 
Table  39.3).  Mice  without  their  single  gelsolin  gene 
reproduce normally, with only mild defects in platelets 
and other cells.

These  observations  suggest  that  each  actin-binding 
protein has a distinct function, conferring a small selec-
tive  advantage.  Multiple  proteins  sharing  overlapping 
functions make the actin system relatively failsafe so that 
it is difficult to detect the phenotypic consequences of 
the loss of particular proteins in mutant animals. Alter-
natively,  these  proteins  may  be  retained  owing  to 
unknown functions distinct from actin binding.

Actin Dynamics in Live Cells
Cellular actin filaments vary widely in stability. Filament 
lifetimes  are  seconds  in  motile  cells  such  as  amoebae  
and  white  blood  cells,  tens  of  minutes  in  stress  fibers  
and  microvilli,  and  days  in  red  blood  cells  and  striated 
muscles where capping protein on the barbed end and 
tropomodulin on the pointed end limit the exchange of 
subunits and tropomyosin provides mechanical stability 
(see Figs. 7.11, 33.15, and 39.4).

Biochemical  and  genetic  experiments  identified  the 
proteins  that  orchestrate  actin  filament  assembly  and 

disassembly. Essential features are a pool of unpolymer-
ized actin, mechanisms to initiate and terminate new fila-
ments  and  control  disassembly.  Reconstitution  of  the 
actin  filament  comet  tail  of  the  intracellular  bacterium 
Listeria (see Fig. 37.12) showed that the minimal require-
ments  for  rapid  assembly  and  turnover  are  actin,  ADF/
cofilin, Arp2/3 complex, a capping protein, and profilin, 
in  addition  to  a  nucleation  promoting  factor  on  the 
surface of the bacterium.

Methods to Document Actin Filament Turnover
The  original  approach  to  observe  actin  turnover  was 
treatment with drugs that bind actin monomers such as 
cytochalasin or latrunculin (Box 33.1). Neither disas-
sembles actin filaments directly, but both interfere with 
assembly from monomers, so their effects reveal if fila-
ments are turning over naturally. Muscle actin filaments 
are  relatively  resistant  to  these  drugs,  but  they  disrupt 
the cortical networks of actin filaments in other cells in 
seconds  (Fig.  33.18).  When  the  drug  is  removed,  the 
cortical actin network reforms rapidly from the leading 
edge.  This  response  indicates  that  many  cellular  fila-
ments turn over rapidly.

Much  more  has  been  learned  about  actin  filament 
turnover by light microscopy of live cells. Although indi-
vidual  actin  filaments  are  not  resolved  when  crowded 
together  in  cytoplasm,  networks  or  bundles  of  actin  
filaments  can  be  imaged  by  differential  interference  

586 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

BOX 33.1  Tools to Study the Actin System

Actin Filament Destabilizers
Sponges synthesize toxins that destabilize actin filaments in 
cells by sequestering actin monomers (latrunculin A and B) 
or  severing  actin  filaments  (swinholide  A).  Latrunculins 
bind  in  the  nucleotide  binding  cleft  of  monomers  and 
prevent  their  polymerization,  making  them  very  useful 
experimentally.  Cytochalasins  (meaning  “cell  relaxing”) 
were so named, because they cause regression of the cleav-
age furrow during cytokinesis and disrupt actin filaments in 
cells.  These  complex  organic  compounds  synthesized  by 
fungi  bind  in  the  barbed  end  groove  of  actin  and  inhibit 
subunit  association  and  dissociation  at  the  barbed  ends  of 
filaments. In addition low-affinity binding to actin monomers 
promotes their dimerization and the hydrolysis of ATP bound 
to one subunit, converting ATP-actin to ADP-actin. Given the 
complicated mechanism of action, their effects on cells must 
be interpreted cautiously.

C2  toxin  produced  by  Clostridium  botulinum  is  an 
enzyme  that  catalyzes  the  ADP-ribosylation  of  cytoplasmic 
actins  on  arginine-177.  Clostridium  perfringens  iota  toxin 
does the same to muscle actin. ADP-ribosylated actin polym-
erizes poorly and caps the barbed end of actin filaments. The 
ability  of  these  protein  toxins  to  penetrate  live  cells,  cap 
actin filaments, and alter actin polymerization accounts for 

their  disruption  of  the  actin  cytoskeleton  in  cells  and  may 
contribute to their toxicity.

Actin Filament Stabilizers
Phallotoxins  (such  as  phalloidin),  cyclic  peptides  synthe-
sized  by  poisonous  mushrooms,  and  the  sponge  toxin  
jasplakinolide both stabilize actin filaments. They bind to fila-
ments between three subunits and reduce the rate of subunit 
dissociation  to  near  zero  at  both  ends  of  the  polymer.  Jas-
plakinolide can enter cells but phalloidin must be microin-
jected. They inhibit processes that depend on actin filament 
turnover,  including  amoeboid  movement.  Phallotoxins  are 
toxic to humans, because they interfere with bile secretion. 
Fluorescent  derivatives  of  phallotoxins  are  widely  used  to 
localize  actin  filaments  in  permeabilized  cells  and  tissues 
(see  Fig.  33.1),  as  well  as  to  quantify  polymerized  actin  in 
cells and cell extracts.

Inhibitors of Actin-Binding Proteins
Small,  drug-like  molecules  are  available  to  inhibit  Arp2/3 
complex  and  formins.  CK666  blocks  the  conformational 
change that activates Arp2/3 complex and inhibits actin fila-
ment branch formation in cells. A molecule called SMIFH2 
inhibits nucleation and elongation by many different formins.

A

B

Control

60 s

F-actin

D

C

E

FIGURE  33.18  ACTIN FILAMENT DYNAMICS AT THE LEADING EDGE OF A GIANT GROWTH CONE OF A NEURON ISOLATED 
FROM THE MOLLUSK APLYSIA. A network of actin filaments forms continuously at the leading edge of the growth cone, moves inward by 
retrograde flow, and disassembles near the central organelle-rich zone. A–C, Effect of the drug cytochalasin D on the growth cone. A, (left and 
middle) Differential interference contrast (DIC) micrographs before and 60 s after applying the drug, which disrupts the network of actin filaments 
at the leading edge. The double-headed arrow marks the zone cleared of actin filaments, stained with rhodamine phalloidin in the right panel. A 
narrow rim of filaments survives at the leading edge. B, Time series of DIC micrographs at 6-s intervals, showing that retrograde flow of existing 
filaments (and small beads on the surface) continued toward the cell body after cytochalasin blocked the formation of new filaments at the leading 
edge. C, Detail of this growth cone after fixing after 60 s and staining with rhodamine-phalloidin. If cytochalasin is removed from a live cell, the 
actin filament network recovers, beginning near the leading edge. D–E, Fluorescence speckle microscopy of a growth cone injected with a low 
concentration of Alexa 488 actin monomers. D, Distribution of actin in lamellar regions between radial bundles. E, Vectors showing the velocities 
of actin speckles. False color indicates velocities ranging from (dark blue) zero to (red) 7 µm per second. (Courtesy Paul Forscher, Yale University, 
New Haven, CT, and modified from Forscher P, Smith SJ. Actions of cytochalasins on the organization of actin filaments and microtubules in a 
neuronal growth cone. J Cell Biol. 1988;107:1505–1516, and Yang Q, Zhang XF, Pollard TD, Forscher P. Arp2/3 complex-dependent actin net-
works constrain myosin II function in driving retrograde actin flow. J Cell Biol. 2012;197:939–956.)

 

CHAPTER 33  n  Actin and Actin-Binding Proteins 

587

contrast  or  phase  contrast  microscopy.  For  example, 
networks of actin filaments in nerve growth cones con-
stantly assemble and move away from the leading edge 
(Fig. 33.18).

Fluorescence microscopy is even more informative if 
actin is labeled with a fluorescent probe. Purified actin 
can be labeled with a fluorescent dye and microinjected 
into  live  cells,  where  it  is  incorporated  into  the  actin-
containing structures (Fig. 33.18D). Expression of actin 
tagged  with  fluorescent  protein  is  more  convenient, 
although  the  fluorescent  protein  tag  interferes  with 
polymerization by formins. Alternatively, the fluorescent 
protein  can  be  attached  to  an  actin  binding  domain  to 
label cellular actin filaments indirectly.

Fluorescent  actin  incorporates  quickly  into  most  of 
the filaments in nonmuscle cells. If low levels of fluores-
cent actin are used, random incorporation into filaments 
can result in fluorescent “speckles” that can be used to 
follow  the  movements  and  turnover  of  these  subunits 
(Fig. 33.18D). Fig. 38.9 illustrates how bleaching or acti-
vating  fluorescent  actin  in  a  live  cell  can  reveal  where 
filaments assemble and disassemble at the leading edge 
of motile cells.

Pool of Unpolymerized Actin
Cells  can  respond  rapidly  to  stimuli  such  as  chemoat-
tractants  by  assembling  actin  filaments  where  needed, 
because they have a large pool of unpolymerized actin 
to grow the new filaments. Roughly half of the actin in 
the cytoplasm of cells other than muscle is unpolymer-
ized, corresponding to 50 to 100 µM monomers, 500 to 
1000 times higher than the critical concentration.

The combination of monomer binding to profilin and 
capping barbed ends allows cells to maintain a large pool 
of  actin  subunits  ready  to  elongate  any  barbed  ends 
created by uncapping, severing, or nucleation. In verte-
brate cells, thymosin-β4 augments the effects of profilin 
by  sequestering  a  fraction  of  the  actin  monomers.  The 
concentrations  of  profilin  and  thymosin-β4  exceed  the 
concentration  of  unpolymerized  actin,  and  these  pro-
teins  bind  tightly  enough  to  reduce  the  free  monomer 
concentration to the micromolar level. Actin monomers 
bound  to  profilin  or  thymosin-β4  do  not  nucleate  new 
filaments. However, for profilin and thymosin-β4 to main-
tain  a  monomer  pool,  most  actin  filament  barbed  ends 
must be capped as rapid addition of actin-profilin com-
plexes  to  free  barbed  ends  would  quickly  deplete  the 
pool of unpolymerized actin. Cells contain enough het-
erodimeric  capping  protein  (augmented  by  gelsolin  in 
some cells) to cap the barbed ends of most filaments.

Initiation and Termination of Actin Filaments
A variety of external agonists and internal signals stimu-
late  the  assembly  of  actin  filaments.  Examples  include 
the ability of chemoattractants to direct pseudopod for-
mation in amoebas (see Fig. 38.10) and white blood cells 
(see Fig. 30.13), and the influence of the mitotic spindle 

on the assembly of the cytokinetic contractile ring (see 
Fig.  44.24).  Polymerization  depends  on  creation  of 
barbed  ends,  which  grow  rapidly  at  rates  estimated  to 
be  50  to  500  subunits  per  second,  depending  on  the 
concentration of actin-profilin.

Three mechanisms are thought to create free barbed 
ends:  uncapping,  severing,  and  de  novo  formation  of 
new  barbed  ends.  In  many  cases,  new  barbed  ends 
appear  to  form  de  novo.  At  the  leading  edge  of  motile 
cells,  Rho-family  GTPases  associated  with  the  plasma 
membrane  and  polyphosphoinositides  activate  nucle-
ation  promoting 
factors,  which  stimulate  Arp2/3 
complex to form branches with free barbed ends (Figs. 
33.2D  and  33.12).  Formins  nucleate  filaments  for  the 
cleavage  furrow  and  initiate  or  sustain  the  growth  of 
actin filaments in filopodia (see Fig. 38.3A). When throm-
bin activates platelets (see Fig. 30.14), plasma membrane 
polyphosphoinositides uncap barbed ends by dissociat-
ing  gelsolin.  Dephosphorylation  activates  ADF/cofilin 
proteins, which can sever and nucleate filaments, creat-
ing free barbed ends.

The duration of the growth of a cellular actin filament 
depends  on  the  nucleation  mechanism  and  the  local 
environment. At the leading edge, new branches nucle-
ated by Arp2/3 complex grow rapidly but transiently, as 
the concentration of free capping protein is high enough 
to  terminate  growth  by  capping  barbed  ends  in  a  few 
seconds.  On  the  other  hand,  barbed  ends  growing  in 
association  with  a  formin  are  protected  from  capping 
and grow persistently, as is observed at the tips of filo-
podia and the barbed ends of actin cables located in the 
buds of yeast cells.

Actin Filament Turnover and Subunit Recycling
Actin filaments are long lived if protected by tropomyo-
sin and capping, as in muscle and stress fibers, but many 
actin  filaments,  such  as  those  at  the  leading  edge  of 
motile cells, turn over quickly (see Fig. 38.7). Turnover 
starts with hydrolysis of ATP bound to the actin subunits 
and  dissociation  of  the  γ-phosphate,  reactions  that 
provide a timer to mark older filaments for depolymeriza-
tion. ADF/cofilin proteins bind ADP-actin subunits in fila-
ments and sever these older filaments (Fig. 33.16). This 
creates more ends available for dissociation of ADP-actin. 
Profilin stimulates the exchange of ADP for ATP on actin 
monomers and restores the pool of ATP-actin monomers 
bound  to  profilin  available  for  polymerization.  In  cells 
with a high concentration of thymosin-β4, much of the 
ATP-actin is stored bound to thymosin. Rapid exchange 
allows  actin  monomers  to  move  from  thymosin-β4  to 
profilin, ready for polymerization.

How Do Cells Organize Actin Assemblies?
Cells organize actin filaments in a variety of structures, 
including cortical networks, microvilli or filopodia, and 
contractile  bundles  (Figs.  33.1  to  33.3).  Each  cell  in  a 
population  is  unique,  but  all  cells  of  a  particular  type 

588 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

achieve  a  similar  pattern  of  organization.  The  mecha-
nisms appear to depend on expression of an appropriate 
mixture of actin-binding proteins to assemble particular 
structures. For example, actin forms bundles similar to 
microvilli  and  filopodia  when  polymerized  in  the  pres-
ence  of  fimbrin  and  villin,  the  major  crosslinking  pro-
teins in microvilli. Overexpression of villin induces cells 
to  extend  existing  filopodia  and  form  new  ones.  Thus, 
the pool of villin and fimbrin and other components may 
set the number of microvilli.

Many actin filament barbed ends are oriented toward 
the plasma membrane allowing their growth to push on 
the  inside  of  the  membrane  (Fig.  33.2).  Other  barbed 
ends are anchored in structures including adhesion sites 
(see  Fig.  30.11),  the  cleavage  furrow  (Fig.  33.3),  and 
Z-disks of muscles (see Fig. 39.5). These anchors trans-
mit forces on these filaments produced by myosin to the 
plasma membrane or the rest of the contractile appara-
tus  in  muscles.  This  makes  mechanical  sense,  as  actin 
filaments  sustain  tension  better  than  compression,  and 
because  (with  one  interesting  exception)  all  known 
myosins  pull  filaments  in  a  direction  away  from  the 
barbed end.

The  Rho-family  GTPases  Cdc42,  Rac,  and  Rho 
regulate  the  assembly  of  many  actin  filaments  (Fig. 
33.19). A complex of proteins, including Cdc42, in the 
bud  of  yeast  cells  anchors  formins,  which  mediate  the 
continuous  assembly  of  a  cable  of  actin  filaments  (see 
Fig. 37.11). The formins anchor the growing barbed ends 
as the pointed ends extend into the mother cell. These 
cables  are  tracks  for  myosin-V  to  move  cargo  into  the 
bud. In motile cells, signals downstream of chemotactic 
receptors activate Cdc42 and Rac (see Fig. 38.7), which 
activate  nucleation-promoting  factors.  They,  in  turn, 
stimulate  Arp2/3  complex  to  generate  the  branched  
filament  network  that  pushes  the  membrane  forward. 
Listeria use a surface protein, ActA, to activate Arp2/3 

complex,  which  generates  a  “comet  tail”  of  actin  fila-
ments to push the bacterium through the cytoplasm (see 
Fig.  37.12).  Proteins  that  mediate  endocytosis  activate 
homologs of WASp and other proteins to assemble actin 
patches  in  budding  yeast  (see  Fig.  37.11)  and  fission 
yeast (Fig. 33.1D).

Physical  forces  also  help  organize  actin  filaments. 
Tension generated by myosin II contributes to the align-
ment of actin filaments in stress fibers (Fig. 33.1) and the 
contractile  ring  during  cytokinesis  (Fig.  33.3;  also  see 
Fig. 44.24). Rho activates myosin II by stimulating two 
kinases that phosphorylate its regulatory light chain and 
inhibit a phosphatase that reverses the light chain phos-
phorylation (see Fig. 39.24). Crosslinking proteins, such 
as α-actinin, help maintain the integrity of these bundles 
under mechanical stress.

Mechanical Properties of Cytoplasm
Actin  filaments  account  for  many  of  the  mechanical 
properties  of  cytoplasm,  a  complicated,  viscoelastic 
material.  Viscoelastic  means  that  cytoplasm  can  both 
resist flow, like a viscous liquid (eg, molasses), and store 
mechanical energy when stretched or compressed, like 
a spring.

The physical properties of actin filaments depend on 
their  lengths  and  their  interactions.  At  physiological 
concentrations, purified actin filaments are viscoelastic. 
At  high  concentrations,  actin  filaments  also  align  spon-
taneously into large parallel arrays called liquid crystals. 
Crosslinking  actin  filaments  increases  both  their  vis-
cosity  and  stiffness.  Severing  actin  filaments  decreases 
their  viscoelasticity.  On  the  other  hand,  shorter  fila-
ments  have  a  higher  tendency  to  form  bundles  in  the 
presence  of  crosslinking  proteins,  so  severing  can  
actually  promote  the  formation  of  rigid  actin  filament 
bundles.

A. Control

B. Cdc 42

C. Rac

D. Rho

FIGURE 33.19  RHO-FAMILY GTPASES PROMOTE THE ASSEMBLY OF ACTIN-BASED STRUCTURES. Fluorescence micrographs of 
Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts stained with rhodamine-phalloidin to reveal actin filaments. A, Resting cells. B, Cells microinjected with activated Cdc42 
form many filopodia. C, Cells microinjected with activated Rac have a thick cortical network of actin filaments around the periphery. D, Stress 
fibers anchored at their ends by focal contacts are abundant in cells microinjected with an activated form of Rho. (Courtesy Alan Hall, University 
of London, United Kingdom.)

 

CHAPTER 33  n  Actin and Actin-Binding Proteins 

589

A. Static

B. Rapid

C. Slow

FIGURE 33.20  DYNAMIC CROSSLINKING OF ACTIN FILAMENTS. Rapid binding and dissociation of crosslinking proteins allow networks 
of actin filaments to resist rapid deformations but to change shape passively when force is applied for a prolonged time. A, Crosslinked network 
in a static region. B, Crosslinking proteins resist deformation if force is applied rapidly. C, Crosslinking proteins provide little resistance to defor-
mation if force is applied slowly because the crosslinks rearrange faster than the filaments are displaced. (Modified from Pollard TD, Satterwhite 
L, Cisek L, et al. Actin and myosin biochemistry in relation to cytokinesis. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1990;582:120–130.)

Many crosslinking proteins, including α-actinin, have 
low  affinities  for  actin  filaments  with  Kds  in  the  micro-
molar range. At steady state in vitro, these crosslinking 
proteins bind to and dissociate from actin filaments on 
a  second  or  subsecond  time  scale.  Consequently,  
gels  of  actin  filaments  and  α-actinin  are  much  more 
rigid  when  deformed  rapidly  than  when  the  deforma-
tions are slower (Fig. 33.20), because crosslinks resisting 
the displacement of the filaments can rearrange if given 
sufficient  time.  Dynamic  crosslinks  between  filaments 
allow actin networks to remodel passively as cells move. 
Cells  also  remodel  the  actin  cytoskeleton  actively  by 
nucleating, severing or depolymerizing filaments.

SELECTED READINGS

Allingham  JS,  Klenchin  VA,  Rayment  I.  Actin-targeting  natural  prod-
ucts: structure, properties and mechanisms of action. Cell Mol Life 
Sci. 2006;63:2119-2134.

Bravo-Cordero  JJ,  Magalhaes  MA,  Eddy  RJ,  Hodgson  L,  Condeelis  J. 
Functions of cofilin in cell locomotion and invasion. Nat  Rev  Mol 
Cell Biol. 2013;14:405-415.

Campellone KG, Welch MD. A nucleator arms race: cellular control of 

actin assembly. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2010;11:237-251.

Chen Z, Borek D, Padrick SB, et al. Structure and control of the actin 

regulatory WAVE complex. Nature. 2010;468:533-538.

Derman AI, Becker EC, Truong BD, et al. Phylogenetic analysis identi-
fies many uncharacterized actin-like proteins (Alps) in bacteria: regu-
lated polymerization, dynamic instability and treadmilling in Alp7A. 
Mol Microbiol. 2009;73:534-552.

Dominguez  R,  Holmes  KC.  Actin  structure  and  function.  Annu  Rev 

Biophys. 2011;40:169-186.

Edwards  M,  Zwolak  A,  Schafer  DA,  et al.  Capping  protein  regulators 
fine-tune  actin  assembly  dynamics.  Nat  Rev  Mol  Cell  Biol.  2014;
15:677-689.

Elam WA, Kang H, De la Cruz EM. Biophysics of actin filament severing 

by cofilin. FEBS Lett. 2013;587:1215-1219.

Gunning PW, Ghoshdastider U, Whitaker S, Popp D, Robinson RC. The 
evolution  of  compositionally  and  functionally  distinct  actin  fila-
ments. J Cell Sci. 2015;128:2009-2019.

Higgs HN, Peterson KJ. Phylogenetic analysis of the formin homology 

2 domain. Mol Biol Cell. 2005;16:1-13.

Janmey PA, Weitz DA. Dealing with mechanics: mechanisms of force 

transduction in cells. Trends Biochem Sci. 2004;29:364-370.

Löwe J, van den Ent F, Amos LA. Molecules of the bacterial cytoskel-

eton. Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct. 2004;33:177-198.

McCullagh  M,  Saunders  MG,  Voth  GA.  Unraveling  the  mystery  of  
ATP  hydrolysis  in  actin  filaments.  J  Am  Chem  Soc.  2014;136:
13053-13058.

Nag  S,  Larsson  M,  Robinson  RC,  Burtnick  LD.  Gelsolin:  the  tail  of  a 

molecular gymnast. Cytoskeleton (Hoboken). 2013;70:360-384.

Paul A, Pollard TD. Review of the mechanism of processive actin fila-
ment  elongation  by  formins.  Cell  Motil  Cytoskeleton.  2009;66:
606-617.

Pollard TD. Actin and actin binding proteins. Cold  Spring  Harb  Per-

spect Biol. 2016;8:8.

Quinlan M, Heuser JE, Kerkhoff E, Mullins RD. Drosophila Spire is an 

actin filament nucleation factor. Nature. 2005;433:382-388.

Rotty JD, Wu C, Bear JE. New insights into the regulation and cellular 
functions  of  the  ARP2/3  complex.  Nat  Rev  Mol  Cell  Biol.  2013;
14:7-12.

Stossel  TP,  Condeelis  J,  Cooley  L,  et al.  Filamins  as  integrators  of  
cell  mechanics  and  signalling.  Nat  Rev  Mol  Cell  Biol.  2001;2:
138-145.

Svitkina  T.  Actin  cytoskeleton  and  actin-based  motility.  In:  The  Cyto-
skeleton.  Cold  Spring  Harbor,  NY:  Cold  Spring  Harbor  Laboratory 
Press; 2016;281-302.

590 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

APPENDIX 33.1 
Classification of Actin-Binding Proteins

Distribution

Subunits (N × kD)

Kd Actin Binding

Other Ligands

Diseases

1 × 5
1 × 29

1 × 13–15

1 × 58

0.7 µM monomer
0.1 nM monomer and 

pointed end

0.1 µM monomer

1 nM monomer

—
Ca2+, DNA

—
—

PIP2, VASP, formins

Amyotrophic lateral 

Vitamin D, C5A 

complement

sclerosis

Obstructive lung 

diseases

Protein
Monomer Binding
β Thymosins
DNase I

Profilin

An
An

Eu

Vitamin D–binding 

An

protein (Gc 
globulin)

Small Severing
ADF/cofilin  

(actophorin, 
depactin, destrin)

Nucleation and Elongation
Arp2/3 complex
Eu

Formins

Spire
Capping
Capping protein 

(CapZ)

Eu

An

Eu

Eu

1 × 15–19

0.1 µM ADP monomer, 
0.5 µM ADP filament

PIP2

Cancer, 

neurodegenerative 
diseases

1 each of 49, 44, 

40, 35, 21, 20, 16

10 nM pointed end 

0.5 µM filament side

Dimers range of 

Barbed end

Profilin, Scar, WASp, 

Psychiatric diseases 

cortactin

Profilin, spire

(?)

Glomerular sclerosis

sizes
1 × 84

Side

Formins

1 × 32–36(α) + 1 × 

28–32(β)

<1 nM barbed end

CARMIL, V-1

—

—

—

Fragmin (severin, 

Am, An

1 × 40

1 nM barbed end

—

gCAP39)

Gelsolin (scinderin)

Am, An

1 × 80 or 83

50 nM barbed end, µM 

Ca2+, PIP2

Finnish amyloidosis

Tropomodulin

An

Villin (Cap 100)

Am, An

1 × 40

1 × 93

Filament Side Binding
Abp1p
Adducin
Caldesmon
Calponin
Coronin
Drebrin
Nebulin
Tropomyosin

An, Fu
An
An
An
Am, An, Fu
An
An
Am, An, Fu

1 × 67
1 each 100 and 105
1 × 90 or 1 × 61
1 × 34
1 × 51
1 × 95
1 × 750
Homodimers of 

28–32

dimers, sides

Pointed end, 1 nM  

TM

with TM

7 µM filament, 0.3 µM 

Ca2+, PIP2

filament for head 
domain

—

—

—
Spectrin
CM, TM, myosin

0.3 µM filament
1 µM filament with TM
0.2 µM filament with TM CM, TM
5–40 nM filament
0.1 µM filament
Filament
Filament, cooperative

—
—

Self, troponin, 

caldesmon, calponin

TM, Ca2+

Yst
Hypertension
—
—
—
—
Nemaline myopathy
Cardiomyopathy

Cardiomyopathy

Troponin

An

1 each 18 (TNC), 21 

Filament

(TNI), 31 (TNT)

Cross Linking
α-Actinin 

(actinogelin)

Am, An, Fu

2 × 100

1–5 µM filament

Vinculin, zyxin, integrin, 

Muscular dystrophy

Anillin
Dematin (Band 4.9)
Espin
Fascin

An, Fu
An
An
An

1 × 132
3 × 43–45
1 × 95 or 29
1 × 56

Filament
Filament
0.1–0.2 µM filaments
Filament

NMDAR, selectin

Myosin, IQGAP
GLUT1
—
β-catenin

—
—
Deafness
—

 

CHAPTER 33  n  Actin and Actin-Binding Proteins 

591

APPENDIX 33.1 
Classification of Actin-Binding Proteins—cont’d

Protein
Filamin (ABP-280)

Distribution
An

Subunits (N × kD)
2 × 240–280

Kd Actin Binding
0.5 µM filament

Other Ligands
GP1Bh1X, several 

receptors

Fimbrin (plastin)
Scruin
Membrane Associated
Annexin-II

Dystrophin/

utrophin

Ezrin/moesin/

radixin

Protein 4.1

An

An

An

Eu
An

1 × 68
1 × 102

Filament
Filament

Ca2+
CM

An, Pl

2 × 38 + 2 × 10

0.2 µM filament

1 × 427/1 × 395

Filament, head 44 µM, 

tail 0.5 µM

1 × 68 + oligomers

Filament

Self

—

Ca2+, acidic, 

phospholipids
β-Dystroglycan

Diseases
Skeletal & lung 

dysphasias, 
periventricular 
heterotopia

Yst
—

—

Muscular dystrophies

1 × 80

Filament

Spectrin (fodrin, 

Am, An

calspectin)

Talin

Am, An

2 × 280 (α) + 2 × 

246 (β)
1 × 272

1–25 µM filament

Filament, 0.25 µM 

monomer

Spectrin, band 3, 

glycophorin

Hereditary 

elliptocytosis

Ca2+, ankyrin, CM, band 

Hereditary 

4.1, adducin Hs

spherocytosis

Vinculin, integrins, 

—

p125FAK

An
An

Microtubule Binding
MAP-2
Tau
Intermediate Filament Binding
BPAG1
Motors
Myosins I–XII

An

Eu

1 × 210
1 × 43–86

Filament sides
Filament sides

Microtubules, PKA, IF
Microtubules

—
Alzheimer disease

? × 280 or ? × 230

0.2 µM filaments

IF

Bullous pemphigoid

Various

1–100 µM with ATP, 

4nM without ATP

Various (self, 
membranes)

Cardiomyopathy, 

deafness, retinitis

ADF, actin depolymerizing factor; ADP, adenosine diphosphate; Am, amoebas; An, animals; Arp, actin-related protein; CARMIL, capping protein, Arp2/3, 
and myosin I linker; CM, calmodulin; DNase, deoxyribonuclease; Eu, all eukaryotes; Fu, fungi; GLUT1, glucose transporter 1; Hs, Homo sapiens; IF, 
intermediate filaments; MAP-2, microtubule-associated protein 2; NMDAR, N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor; PIP2, phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate; 
PKA, protein kinase A; Pl, plants; TM, tropomyosin; TNC, troponin C; TNI, troponin I; TNT, troponin T; VASP, vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein; 
WASp, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein; Yst, yeast.

This page intentionally left blank

C H A P T E R 

34 

Microtubules and Centrosomes

Microtubules  are  stiff,  cylindrical  polymers  of  α-
tubulin and β-tubulin (Fig. 34.1) that provide support 
for  a  variety  of  cellular  structures  and  tracks  for  move-
ments  powered  by  motor  proteins  called  kinesins  and 
dyneins.  Microtubules  help  organize  the  cytoplasm 
during interphase and form the mitotic spindle, which 
separates duplicated chromosomes.

Microtubules  are  25 nm  in  diameter  and  can  grow 
longer  than  20 µm  in  cells  and  much  longer  in  vitro. 
The head-to-tail arrangement of dimers of α-tubulin and 
β-tubulin in the walls of microtubules give the polymer 
a molecular polarity. The “plus” (β-tubulin) end grows 
faster than the “minus” (α-tubulin) end.

A simplifying principle is that microtubule organiz-
ing centers (MTOCs) containing γ-tubulin nucleate and 
anchor  the  minus  ends  of  many  microtubules.  In  the 
simplest  case,  the  centrosome  is  the  main  MTOC  in 
many  animal  cells,  so  the  microtubules  are  arranged 
radially  with  plus  ends  in  the  periphery  (Fig.  34.2A). 
Some of these radially arranged microtubules are associ-
ated with the nearby Golgi apparatus. However, micro-
tubules  are  not  arranged  radially  in  neurons,  muscles, 
and  many  epithelial  cells.  Microtubules  in  polarized 

epithelial cells originate from a broad zone with γ-tubulin 
near the apical surface and extend the length of the cell 
(Fig.  34.2B).  Microtubules  in  dendrites  of  nerve  cells 
have mixed orientations. Most plant cells lack centrioles  
and  centrosomes.  During  interphase,  γ-tubulin  and 
microtubules are found throughout the cortex, and they  
form  a  bipolar  mitotic  spindle  during  cell  division 
(Fig. 34.2C).

the  active  component 

The  centrosome  (covered  in  detail  later  in  “Centro-
somes  and  Other  Microtubule  Organizing  Centers”) 
consists of a pair of centrioles and a surrounding matrix 
containing 
in  microtubule 
nucleation—a complex of proteins including the special-
ized  tubulin  isoform  γ-tubulin.  The  centrosome  dupli-
cates  during  interphase,  and  as  cells  enter  mitosis  the 
two  centrosomes  separate  to  form  the  poles  of  the 
mitotic spindle. Animal cells and protozoa with cilia and 
flagella  use  centrioles  as  basal  bodies  (Fig.  34.3B)  to 
nucleate  the  assembly  of  microtubules  for  their  motile 
structure,  called  an  axoneme  (see  Fig.  38.14).  Microtu-
bules  in  fungi  grow  from  a  spindle  pole  body  (Fig. 
34.2D), an organizing center containing γ-tubulin associ-
ated with the nuclear envelope (see Fig. 34.20).

A
A

B
B

FIGURE  34.1  MICROTUBULES  (ARROWS)  VISUALIZED  IN  ELECTRON  MICROGRAPHS  OF  THIN  SECTIONS  OF  A  CULTURED 
MAMMALIAN CELL. A, Longitudinal section. B, Cross section. Insets, Electron micrographs of microtubules in frozen hydrated rat hepatoma 
cells.  (Main  panels,  Courtesy  R.  Goldman,  Northwestern  University,  Evanston,  IL.  Insets,  Courtesy  Cédric  Bouchet-Marquis  and  Jacques 
Dubochet, University of Lausanne, Switzerland.)

 593

594 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

A

B

C

D

FIGURE 34.2  ARRANGEMENTS OF MICROTUBULES IN VARIOUS CELLS. A–C, Fluorescence micrographs of microtubules stained with 
antibodies to tubulin. A, Vertebrate tissue culture cells. Green microtubules radiate from the red centrosome near the blue nucleus of an interphase 
cell (upper panel). A HeLa (Henrietta Lacks) cell in mitosis with green microtubules radiating from the two poles toward the blue chromosomes 
and  red  centromeres  (stained  with  anticentromere  antibody)  (lower  panel).  B,  Columnar  epithelial  cells  in  tissue  culture.  Three-dimensional 
reconstructions show microtubules oriented along the long axis of the cell. C, Plant cells. Maize epidermal cells with green microtubules in the 
cortex and in the mitotic spindles of three dividing cells near the middle of the field. Chromosomes are stained orange. D, Live budding yeast. 
Two interphase cells with microtubules radiating from the spindle pole bodies (arrows) associated with the nuclear envelope; these microtubules 
are marked with dynein fused to green fluorescent protein (upper panel). A cell late in mitosis with a bundle of microtubules extending from one 
spindle pole body to the other inside the nucleus; these microtubules are marked with tubulin fused to green fluorescent protein (lower panel). 
(A, Top, Courtesy A. Khodjakov, Wadsworth Center, Albany, NY; bottom, courtesy D.W. Cleveland, University of California, San Diego. B, Courtesy 
R. Bacallao, University of Indiana Medical School, Indianapolis. C, Courtesy L. Smith, University of California, San Diego. D, Courtesy P. Maddox, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.)

A

C
C

10 µm10 µm

0.2 µm
0.2 µm

B

0.2 µm

Axoneme

MV

Basal
Basal
body
body

FIGURE 34.3  CILIA ON MUSSEL GILL EPITHELIAL CELLS. A, A scanning electron micrograph reveals how the bending movements of 
the thread-like cilia are coordinated in waves. B–C, Transmission electron micrographs of cilia. B, Longitudinal section showing basal bodies and 
proximal parts of two cilia along with adjacent microvilli (MV). C, Cross section of many cilia showing the nine outer doublets and the central 
pair  of  microtubules.  (Courtesy  P.  Satir,  Albert  Einstein  College  of  Medicine,  Bronx,  NY.  For  reference,  see  Satir  P.  How  cilia  move.  Sci  Am. 
1974;231:44–52.)

 

CHAPTER 34  n  Microtubules and Centrosomes 

595

BOX 34.1  Pharmacologic Tools for Studying 
Tubulin and Microtubules

Tubulin binds several therapeutically active plant alkaloids 
and  synthetic  chemicals,  including  two  of  the  most  suc-
cessful drugs used to treat cancer. Vinblastine (from peri-
winkle) interferes with microtubule dynamics by binding 
between tubulin dimers at the ends of microtubules. This 
inhibits mitosis. Taxol (from the bark of the Western yew) 
binds  β-tubulin  and  stabilizes  microtubules.  At  substoi-
chiometric  concentrations,  vinblastine  and  Taxol  are 
effective in cancer chemotherapy because they interfere 
with  the  dynamic  instability  of  mitotic  spindle  microtu-
bules and block cell division. Colchicine (from the autumn 
crocus)  and  nocodazole  (a  synthetic  chemical)  inhibit 
microtubule  assembly  by  binding  dissociated  tubulin 
dimers.  Colchicine  binds  dimers  between  the  two  sub-
units, stabilizing a bent conformation that cannot fit into 
the microtubule lattice. Colchicine is used empirically to 
treat gout, a painful condition that results from the accu-
mulation  of  uric  acid  crystals  in  joints  and  other  tissues, 
but no one knows precisely how it works or why it is not 
more toxic.

Microtubules  vary  considerably  in  stability.  Microtu-
bules  in  axonemes  of  eukaryotic  cilia  and  flagella  are 
stable for days to weeks. Cytoplasmic microtubules turn 
over  much  more  rapidly,  within  minutes  during  inter-
phase and tens of seconds in the mitotic spindle. These 
dynamic  microtubules  randomly  undergo  periods  of 
rapid  depolymerization  and  then  regrow  over  a  period 
of  seconds  to  minutes.  This  “dynamic  instability” 
constantly  remodels  the  network  of  microtubules  in 
cytoplasm and contributes to the assembly of the mitotic 
spindle  (see  Fig.  44.12).  Drugs  that  depolymerize  or 
stabilize microtubules (Box 34.1) are useful for exploring 
their functions in cells and in cancer therapy.

The  same  tubulin  dimers  can  form  dynamic  single 
microtubules in the cytoplasm and stable doublet micro-
tubules  in  axonemes,  a  difference  explained  by  post-
translational  modifications  and  accessory  proteins. 
Various  families  of  microtubule-associated  proteins 
(MAPs) bind tubulin dimers, stabilize polymers, associ-
ate with microtubule ends, or sever cytoplasmic micro-
tubules. In the axonemes of cilia and flagella, more than 
100  accessory  proteins  organize  and  stabilize  the  array 
of  nine  outer  doublet  microtubules  and  two  central 
single microtubules (see Fig. 38.14).

Microtubule  motor  proteins  (see  Figs.  36.13  and 
36.14)  power  movements  ranging  from  the  slow  
movements of chromosomes on the mitotic spindle (see 
Fig.  44.14)  to  the  rapid  beating  of  cilia  and  flagella  
(see  Fig.  38.14).  Different  motors  move  toward  the  
plus and minus ends of microtubules. The main minus-
end-directed  motor,  dynein,  drives  the  beating  of  cilia 
and flagella. Dynein cooperates with the kinesin family 

of plus-end motors to move membrane-bound organelles, 
RNA  particles,  viruses,  and  other  cargo  along  microtu-
bules (see Fig. 37.7). These active movements determine, 
to a great extent, the distribution of cellular organelles 
and the shape of cells (see Chapter 37).

Structure of Tubulin and Microtubules
The tubulin molecule is a heterodimer of α and β sub-
units that share a common fold and 40% identical residues 
(Fig. 34.4B). Dimers of α-tubulin and β-tubulin are stable 
and rarely dissociate at the 10- to 20-µM concentrations 
of tubulin found in cells.

Each  tubulin  subunit  binds  a  guanine  nucleotide, 
either  guanosine  triphosphate  (GTP)  or  guanosine 
diphosphate  (GDP).  Neither  the  overall  fold  nor  the 
GTP-binding site of tubulin resembles those of the large 
family  of  guanosine  triphosphatases  (GTPases)  related 
to  Ras  (see  Figs.  4.6  and  25.7).  GTP  on  α-tubulin  is 
buried in the dimer, so it does not exchange with GTP 
in  solution.  Its  binding  site  is  called  the  nonexchange-
able site. GTP on β-tubulin is exposed in the dimer and 
exchanges slowly (Kd = 50 nM), so this is known as the 
exchangeable  site.  When  incorporated  into  a  microtu-
bule,  contacts  with  the  adjacent  α  subunit  bury  the 
GTP  on  the  β  subunit.  This  promotes  its  hydrolysis. 
Subsequent  dissociation  of  the γ-phosphate  profoundly 
affects  microtubule  stability.  Neither  bound  guanine 
nucleotide can exchange in the wall of a microtubule.

Tubulin Evolution and Diversity
The tubulin gene arose in the common ancestor of life 
on earth. Today, most Archaea and Bacteria have a gene 
for  the  protein  FtsZ  with  the  same  fold  as  tubulin  but 
with  highly  divergent  sequences.  FtsZ  polymers  are 
required for cytokinesis of prokaryotes (see Fig. 44.21). 
All  eukaryotes  have  genes  for  α-tubulin  and  β-tubulin. 
One group of Bacteria lost their FtsZ but acquired genes 
for  both  α-tubulin  and  β-tubulin,  most  likely  by  lateral 
transfer from a eukaryote. Genes for δ-tubulin, ε-tubulin, 
ζ-tubulin, and η-tubulin are found in protozoa, algae, and 
animals  where  they  are  components  of  centrioles  and 
basal bodies. Their absence from fungi and most plants 
may explain their lack of centrioles.

The sequences of eukaryotic tubulins are remarkably 
conserved, with more than 75% of the residues of animal 
α- or β-tubulins identical to their plant homologs. On the 
other hand, species differ considerably in the number of 
tubulin  genes.  Vertebrates  have  six  to  eight  genes  for 
both α-tubulin and β-tubulin, whereas unicellular ciliates 
such  as  Tetrahymena  assemble  a  greater  variety  of 
microtubule-based  structures  than  humans  with  only 
one α-tubulin and one β-tubulin polypeptide. Most ver-
tebrate cells express several tubulin isoforms, but excep-
tional cases, such as bird red blood cells, express a single 
α-tubulin and β-tubulin.

596 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

A

B

β

α

(+) end

C

GDP

C

N

GTP

N

C

(–) end

(+)

(–)

D

(+)

(–)

FIGURE 34.4  STRUCTURE OF THE α-TUBULIN/β-TUBULIN DIMER AND THE MICROTUBULE. A, Electron micrograph of negatively 
stained  microtubules.  B,  Ribbon  diagram  with  space-filling  guanosine  triphosphate  (GTP)  on  α-tubulin  and  guanosine  diphosphate  (GDP)  on 
β-tubulin. This historic structure was the first high-resolution structure of a nonmembrane protein to be determined by electron crystallography, 
using sheets of tubulin protofilaments as the specimen. Each subunit consists of approximately 450 residues arranged in two domains. Each 
domain is a β-sheet flanked by α-helices. The nucleotides bind in pockets similar to the binding site for nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) 
on the enzyme glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. C, Reconstructions from electron micrographs of frozen GTPγS (a slowly hydrolyzed 
analog of GTP) microtubules decorated with the small protein EB3 (blue) showing a side view and cross section. D, Drawing of the microtubule 
used throughout this book. Both C and D show the longitudinal seam between two protofilaments, which breaks the helical repeat of tubulin 
dimers. (A, Courtesy D.B. Murphy, Johns Hopkins Medical School, Baltimore, MD. B, For reference, see Protein Data Bank [PDB; www.rcsb.org] 
file 1TUB and Nogales E, Downing K. Structure of the α/β tubulin dimer by electron crystallography. Nature. 1998;391:199–203. C, For reference, 
see  Electron  Microscopy  Data  Bank  [www.emdatabank.org]  file  6347  and  Zhang  R,  Alushin  GM,  Brown  A,  Nogales  E.  Mechanistic  origin  of 
microtubule dynamic instability and its modulation by EB proteins. Cell. 2015;162:849–859.)

Two  views  rationalize  the  significance  of  multiple 
α-tubulin and β-tubulin isoforms. On the one hand, iso-
forms  have  different  assembly  properties  and  affinities 
for  MAPs  that  may  confer  specific  properties  to  the 
microtubules. This is illustrated by the failure of paralo-
gous tubulin genes to substitute for each other in flies. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  proteins  themselves  may  be 
largely interchangeable (and all isoforms appear to copo-
lymerize), but different genes may be required to ensure 
precise  control  of  biosynthesis  in  particular  cells  at 
appropriate times during development. For example, the 
two α-tubulin proteins of the filamentous fungus Asper-
gillus  can  substitute  for  each  other,  but  two  genes  are 
required to control the expression of tubulin at specific 
times in the life cycle.

The  most  variable  regions  of  both  α-tubulin  and 
β-tubulin  are  the  negatively  charged  C-terminal  tails 
where  most  posttranslational  modifications  (some 
unique to tubulins) are made. Over time, a carboxypep-
tidase  removes  the  C-terminal  tyrosine  from  α-tubulin, 
leaving  a  glutamic  acid  exposed  on  many,  but  not  all, 
stable  microtubules.  Another  enzyme,  tyrosine-tubulin 
ligase, can replace the tyrosine. The presence or absence 
of this tyrosine is a code that can be read by the motor 
protein  CENP-E  (see  Chapter  45).  Both  α-tubulin  and 
β-tubulin  can  also  be  modified  by  the  addition  of  a 
polymer  of  up  to  six  glutamic  acid  residues  to  the 

γ-carboxyl  groups  of  glutamic  acid  residues  in  the 
C-terminal  tails.  Addition  of  one  or  more  glycines  to  
the γ-carboxyl of other glutamate residues stabilizes the 
central  pair  of  microtubules  in  axonemes  (see  Fig. 
38.16). Lysine-40 in the microtubule lumen is acetylated 
on  α-tubulin  in  axonemes,  basal  bodies,  and  a  few 
cytoplasmic microtubules, but the impact of this modi-
fication on function is not yet clear. Stable microtubules 
accumulate  several  of  these  modifications,  but  much 
work will be required to establish cause and effect and 
learn  how  each  modification  influences  interactions 
with motors and MAPs.

Structure and Physical Properties  
of Microtubules
Microtubules are cylinders constructed of longitudinally 
oriented  protofilaments  with  a  4-nm  longitudinal 
repeat arising from the tubulin subunits (Fig. 34.5). Most 
cytoplasmic microtubules have 13 protofilaments (~1600 
tubulin dimers per µm), but microtubules in some cells 
have 11, 15, or 16 protofilaments. Microtubules assem-
bled in vitro can have 11 to 15 protofilaments, but 13 is 
the  favored  number.  Microtubules  with  13  protofila-
ments have a longitudinal seam or discontinuity between 
two  of  the  protofilaments  with  α-tubulin  next  to 
β-tubulin,  disrupting  the  helical  lattice  of  the  subunits 

 

100

i

0

l

) 50
s
/
s
r
e
m
d
(
 
n
o
i
t
a
g
n
o
e
 
f
o
 
e
t
a
R

–100

–50

k+

Plus
end

Minus
end

GTP tubulin

k–

Critical concentration = k– / k+ 

GDP-tubulin dissociation

–1000

0

5

10

15

[Tubulin] µM

FIGURE  34.5  ELONGATION  OF  PURE  TUBULIN  MICROTU-
BULES. The rate of elongation at plus and minus ends depends on 
the  concentration  of  GTP-tubulin  dimers.  Slopes  give  apparent 
association  rate  constants,  x-intercepts  give  the  critical  concentra-
tions,  and  the  y-intercepts  (after  linear  extrapolation  [dashed  lines] 
from positive growth rates to the  y-axis) give the apparent dissocia-
tion  rate  constants  for  GTP  tubulin.  The  dissociation  rate  of  GDP 
tubulin is shown as a single point at 733 s−1 on the y-axis. (Data from 
Walker  RA,  O’Brien  ET,  Pryer  NK,  et al.  Dynamic  instability  of  indi-
vidual microtubules. J Cell Biol. 1988;107:1437–1448.)

(Fig. 34.5D). Throughout the microtubule, including the 
seam, the contacts along the length of the protofilaments 
are much more robust than the lateral contacts between 
protofilaments.

Microtubules  are  polar,  because  all  the  dimers  have 
the same longitudinal orientation. β-Tubulin is oriented 
toward  the  plus  end;  α-tubulin  is  oriented  toward  the 
minus end. The plus end grows faster and is less stable 
than  the  minus  end.  For  the  purpose  of  determining 
microtubule  polarity  in  electron  micrographs,  microtu-
bules  in  extracted  cells  can  be  decorated  with  either 
exogenous  dynein  or  with  excess  tubulin,  which  can 
form curved “hooks.” These hooks provided the original 
evidence  that  the  minus  ends  are  usually  associated 
with MTOCs.

As expected from their cylindrical structure, microtu-
bules are much stiffer than are either actin filaments or 
intermediate  filaments.  If  enlarged  1  million–fold  to  
a diameter of 25 mm, microtubules would have mechani-
cal  properties  similar  to  those  of  a  plastic  pipe:  quite  
stiff  locally  but  flexible  over  distances  of  several  
meters  (micrometers  in  the  cell).  On  the  same  scale, 
actin filaments would be like an 8-mm plastic rod, and 
intermediate filaments would be akin to 10-mm braided 
plastic rope.

The  stiffness,  length,  and  polarity  of  microtubules 
make  them  valuable  both  for  cytoskeletal  support  and 
as  tracks  for  microtubule-based  motors.  Because  they 

CHAPTER 34  n  Microtubules and Centrosomes 

597

resist  compression,  microtubules  were  adapted  more 
frequently than actin filaments or intermediate filaments 
to  support  asymmetrical  cellular  structures,  including 
axonemes,  the  mitotic  spindle,  and  elaborate  surface 
processes  of  some  protozoa  (see  Fig.  38.4).  Plants 
provide  a  spectacular  example  of  the  influence  of 
microtubules on morphology: Point mutations in tubulin 
influence whether climbing plants wrap in a left-handed 
or  right-handed  helix  around  their  supports.  Interac-
tions  of  microtubules  with  both  actin  filaments  and 
intermediate  filaments  reinforce  the  cytoskeleton  (see 
Fig. 35.7).

Microtubule Assembly and  
Dynamic Stability
Pioneering  light  microscopic  observations  of  live  cells 
established  that  mitotic  spindle  fibers  (later  shown  to 
be  microtubules)  are  sensitive  to  both  cold  and  high 
hydrostatic pressure. This cold sensitivity makes it pos-
sible  to  purify  microtubules  and  tightly  associated  pro-
teins  by  cycles  of  depolymerization  in  the  cold  and 
repolymerization  when  rewarmed  to  higher  tempera-
tures.  Pelleting  in  a  centrifuge  separates  microtubules 
and any associated proteins from soluble contaminants. 
This cycle of cooling → pelleting; rewarming/reassembly 
→  pelleting  →  recooling,  and  so  on  is  repeated  until 
the  desired  degree  of  purity  is  achieved.  Adaptations  
of  tubulins  or  accessory  proteins  allow  cold-water 
organisms  to  assemble  microtubules  at  temperatures 
near freezing.

Pure  GTP-tubulin  subunits  assemble  microtubules 
much like adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-actin polymer-
izes into filaments (see Figs. 5.6 and 33.8). However, the 
spontaneous  nucleation  of  microtubules  from  tubulin 
dimers  is  so  unfavorable  that  cells  must  use  various 
templates to initiate most microtubules.

Superficially,  microtubule  elongation  is  a  simple 
bimolecular  reaction  of  GTP-tubulin  dimers  with  the 
ends  of  the  polymer.  Growth  is  faster  at  the  plus  end 
than at the minus end (Fig. 34.5), and assembly of GTP-
tubulin is vastly more favorable than that of GDP-tubulin. 
Above the critical concentration at each end the rate 
of  elongation  depends  on  the  concentration  of  GTP-
tubulin dimers.

Elongation of microtubules differs from actin in two 
ways. First, GDP-tubulin depolymerizes very fast, on the 
order  of  1000  subunits  per  second.  Second,  the  rate 
constant  for  GTP-tubulin  dissociation  from  a  growing 
end depends on the concentration of GTP-tubulin dimers. 
This  surprising  feature  may  arise  from  an  effect  of  the 
elongation rate on the structure of the growing end. At 
high growth rates individual protofilaments may extend 
further beyond the tip than at slow growth rates. If so, 
GTP-tubulin  dimers  may  dissociate  faster  owing  to  the 
lack of support from adjacent protofilaments.

598 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

Steady-State Dynamics of Microtubules in Vitro
If the GTP-tubulin reactions were all that contributed to 
assembly, microtubules would grow until the concentra-
tion  of  free  tubulin  dimers  decreased  to  the  critical 
concentration, after which polymers would be relatively 
stable,  as  the  critical  concentrations  are  similar  at  the 
two ends. This appeared to be what happens in experi-
ments  looking  at  bulk  properties  of  pure  GTP-tubulin,  
as  the  overall  microtubule  polymer  and  monomer  
concentrations  are  stable  over  time.  However,  it  was 
observed  that  the  microtubule  number  declines  as  
some  microtubules  disappear,  and  the  survivors  grow 
longer.  Direct  observation  by  light  microscopy  (Fig. 
34.6A)  showed  that  this  redistribution  of  tubulin  is 
attributable  to  random  fluctuations  in  the  lengths  of 
microtubules. Amazingly, growing and shrinking micro-
tubules coexist at steady state; some shrinking microtu-
bules  dis appear  while  others  grow.  This  behavior  is 
called dynamic instability.

At steady-state in excess GTP, individual microtubules 
grow slowly until they undergo a random transition to a 
phase  of  rapid  shortening.  This  transition  is  called  a 
catastrophe.  As  the  microtubule  shortens,  tubulin  is 
lost  from  the  end  at  a  rate  of  nearly  1000  dimers  per 
second,  so  the  polymer  shrinks  more  than  0.5 µm  per 
second.  Electron  micrographs  of  rapidly  shortening 
microtubules  show  curved  segments  of  protofilaments 
peeling out from the end (Fig. 34.6B). Dimers dissociate 
from  these  curved  protofilaments  and  sheets  before  or 
after they break free from an end.

Rapid  shortening  can  be  terminated  by  another  sto-
chastic event called a rescue, after which the microtu-
bule  grows  again  at  a  steady  rate.  Occasionally,  a 
microtubule  disappears  completely  during  a  shorten-
ing  phase  if  its  length  reaches  zero  before  a  rescue  
event occurs.

Hydrolysis of GTP bound to the (exchangeable) E-site 
on β-tubulin drives dynamic instability. Dimeric tubulin 

0            10            20            30              40              50            60            70             74            80

(+)

(–)

Elongation

Catastrophe

Shortening

A
A

B
B

Catastrophe

Rapid  
shortening

Elongation

Rescue

C

)

m
µ
(
 

h

t

g
n
e
L

15

10

5

0

GTP

D

GDP

(+)

(–)

0

50

150
100
Time (sec)

200

250

Elongation

Catastrophe

Rescue

Rapid

shortening

FIGURE 34.6  DYNAMIC INSTABILITY OF MICROTUBULES IN VITRO. A, Time series of differential interference contrast light micrographs 
of a microtubule growing from the broken end of an axoneme in the presence of 11 µM GTP tubulin. At 70 seconds, a catastrophe occurs, and 
the microtubule shortens rapidly. B, Electron micrographs of frozen samples. Growing microtubules have flat or oblique ends interpreted as sheets 
of polymerized tubulin that have not yet closed up into a tube. Rapidly shortening microtubules have protofilaments and sheets peeling from the 
end.  C,  Time  course  of  the  fluctuations  in  the  length  of  a  microtubule  from  an  experiment  similar  to  A.  D,  Model  for  the  transitions  during 
steady-state dynamic instability of microtubules in vitro. GTP tubulin is blue-green; GDP tubulin is red-orange. (A, From Walker RA, O’Brien ET, 
Pryer  NK,  et al.  Dynamic  instability  of  individual  microtubules.  J  Cell  Biol.  1988;107:1437–1448,  copyright  The  Rockefeller  University  Press. 
B, From Mandelkow E-M, Mandelkow E, Milligan RA. Microtubule dynamics and microtubule caps: a time-resolved cryo-electron microscopy 
study.  J  Cell  Biol.  1991;114:977–991,  copyright  The  Rockefeller  University  Press.  C,  For  reference,  see  Erickson  HP,  O’Brien  E.  Microtubule 
dynamic instability and GTP hydrolysis. Annu Rev Biophys. 1992;21:145–166.)

 

CHAPTER 34  n  Microtubules and Centrosomes 

599

hydrolyzes GTP very slowly, because the active site on 
the β  subunit  depends  on  residues  from  a  neighboring 
α subunit. However, each new dimer added to the plus 
end  of  a  protofilament  stimulates  GTP  hydrolysis  250-
fold  (k  =  0.3 s−1,  corresponding  to  a  half  time  of  ~2 
seconds) on the adjacent β subunit already incorporated 
into the polymer. At the minus end, the same mechanism 
presumably  stimulates  hydrolysis  of  GTP  bound  to  the 
incoming subunit. The γ-phosphate then dissociates (k = 
0.02 s−1,  corresponding  to  a  half  time  of  35  seconds). 
Neither  dimeric  nor  polymeric  tubulin  hydrolyzes  GTP 
bound to the α subunit, because the β subunit does not 
provide the residues required to complete the active site. 
Thus, “GDP-tubulin” has GDP on the β subunit and GTP 
on the α subunit. Microtubules composed of GDP-tubulin 
are  extremely  unstable  in  comparison  to  microtubules 
assembled  from  dimers  with  slowly  hydrolyzed  GTP 
analogs bound to the β subunit.

Converting GTP-tubulin to GDP-tubulin after assembly 
creates a polymer that is poised for explosive disassembly. 
Tubulin dimers with bound GDP pack more compactly 
than  GTP-tubulin  in  the  wall  of  the  microtubule,  and 
protofilaments of GDP-tubulin tend to be curved rather 
than  straight.  These  structural  changes  following  GTP 
hydrolysis and γ-phosphate dissociation create microtu-
bules with an unstable, strained GDP-tubulin core capped 
at both ends with less-dynamic GTP-tubulin.

When exposed at the end of a microtubule during a 
catastrophe,  these  strained  GDP-protofilaments  curve 
and peel from the cylinder, promoting disassembly. The 
energy  derived  from  GTP  hydrolysis  is  released  during 
disintegration of the end of the microtubule, so hydroly-
sis  prepares  the  polymer  for  rapid  depolymerization. 
Michael  Caplow  of  the  University  of  North  Carolina 
provides this apt description: “A catastrophe of an elon-
gating  microtubule  is  like  removing  the  cork  from  a 
shaken bottle of champagne.”

Because GDP-tubulin is constrained in a straight lattice 
but  would  prefer  to  be  in  curved  protofilaments,  the 
lattice actually stores the energy released by GTP hydro-
lysis.  During  disassembly,  the  curving  protofilaments 
release  enough  energy  to  do  significant  work,  such  as 
moving  huge  chromosomes  through  the  cytoplasm  of 
dividing cells.

Loss  of  the  GTP  cap  causes  a  catastrophe,  but  the 
number  of  terminal  subunits  with  GDP  required  for  a 
catastrophe is still being studied. The size of the GTP cap 
is  difficult  to  measure,  as  few  subunits  are  involved 
compared with the large number of GDP subunits in the 
core of a microtubule. GTP caps are maintained at steady 
state by exchange of GTP-tubulin dimers at the ends and 
by direct exchange of GTP onto the β-tubulin subunits 
exposed at the plus end. If the GTP cap is lost, the end 
shortens  rapidly,  because  of  the  large  dissociation  rate 
constant  of  GDP  tubulin.  Catastrophes  liberate  GDP-
tubulin  subunits  that  exchange  their  bound  GDP  for 

TABLE 34.1  Rate Constants for the Assembly of 
Microtubules in Vitro and in Cells
Reaction
In Vitro Elongation of Purified Tubulin
Association of guanosine 

Plus End

Minus End

9 µM−1 s−1

4 µM−1 s−1

triphosphate (GTP) tubulin

Dissociation of GTP tubulin
Association of guanosine 

diphosphate (GDP) tubulin
Dissociation of GDP tubulin
Steady-State Dynamic Instability
Frequency of catastrophe in vitro at 

7 µM tubulin

44 s−1
Unknown

23 s−1
Unknown

733 s−1

915 s−1

0.0045 s−1

0.003 s−1

Frequency of rescue in vitro at 7 µM 

0.02 s−1

0.06 s−1

tubulin

Microtubule Dynamic Instability in Live Cells
Frequency of catastrophe in vivo 

0.014 s−1

(interphase)

Frequency of catastrophe in vivo 

(mitosis)

Frequency of rescue in vivo 

(interphase)

0.017 s−1

0.046 s−1

Frequency of rescue in vivo (mitosis)

0

Data from Walker RA, O’Brien ET, Pryer NK, et al. Dynamic instability of 
individual microtubules. J Cell Biol. 1988;107:1437–1448.

GTP.  This  maintains  a  pool  of  GTP-tubulin  dimers  to 
support  elongation  of  the  surviving  microtubules.  
Proteins  discussed  in  the  next  section  (“Microtubule 
Dynamics  in  Cells”)  can  promote  catastrophes,  while 
others stabilize microtubules.

If  rapid  dissociation  of  GDP-tubulin  drives  shorten-
ing,  it  is  logical  to  assume  that  recapping  with  GTP-
tubulin  might  rescue  shortening  microtubules.  This 
hypothesis  is  likely  to  be  true,  but  the  actual  mecha-
nism  is  complicated  and  not  well  understood.  For 
example, the frequency of rescue depends only weakly 
on  the  concentration  of  GTP  tubulin.

Dynamic instability has been studied more thoroughly 
at the plus end than the minus end, where catastrophes 
are less frequent and rescues are more likely than at the 
plus end (Table 34.1).

Microtubule Dynamics in Cells
Microtubule  dynamics  in  cells  (Fig.  34.7A)  are  remark-
ably  similar  to  those  in  simple  buffers  in  vitro  (Table 
34.1).  At  any  moment  in  time,  the  plus  ends  of  many 
microtubules are likely to be growing, as revealed by the 
presence  of  tip-binding  proteins  (Fig.  34.14).  Despite 
catastrophes  approximately  once  each  minute  (k  = 
0.01 s−1), during which they shorten rapidly (−0.28 µm 
s−1),  many  interphase  microtubules  are  long,  both 
because the chance of rescue is high (k = 0.05 s−1) and 
because steady growth during the elongation phase (at 

600 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

a  rate  of  0.11 µm  s−1)  restores  their  length  before  the 
next catastrophe. As a result of dynamic instability, the 
bulk  of  interphase  microtubules  have  a  half-life  of 
approximately  10  minutes.  Many  microtubule  minus 
ends  are  stabilized  by  γ-tubulin  ring  complexes  (Fig. 
34.16)  in  MTOCs  or  by  other  proteins  (Fig.  34.8),  but 
some minus ends are free to elongate and shorten.

Dynamic instability allows the plus ends of microtu-
bules to explore the entire cytoplasm as they search for 
targets  such  as  kinetochores  on  chromosomes  during 
mitosis  (Fig.  34.2A).  It  also  concentrates  tip-binding 
proteins, including signaling proteins, at the cell cortex. 
Fluctuations  in  microtubule  length  can  use  the  energy 
stored  in  the  lattice  to  do  mechanical  work  such  as 
moving cargo away from the center of the cell (see Fig. 
37.6), positioning the nucleus in the center of cells as in 
fission yeast, or locating the mitotic spindle off center in 
cells  that  divide  asymmetrically.  Reciprocally,  the  local 
environment can influence the behavior of the microtu-
bules  as  they  explore  the  cytoplasm.  For  example, 

3 µm

3 µm

0

0

12

12

24

24

36

36

FIGURE 34.7  DYNAMIC INSTABILITY OF MICROTUBULES IN 
VIVO. Time series of fluorescence micrographs of a cultured vertebrate 
cell microinjected with rhodamine-labeled tubulin. Upper row, The plus 
ends  of  microtubules  anchored  at  the  centrosome  grow  and  shrink 
randomly  in  the  same  cell  (arrows).  Lower  row,  Free  microtubules 
treadmill, growing at their plus end at about the same rate as shorten-
ing proceeds at their minus end. Marking a spot on such microtubules 
shows that this is treadmilling rather than transport of a stable micro-
tubule through cytoplasm. (Courtesy G. Borisy, University of Wisconsin, 
Madison.)

signaling  pathways  in  the  cortex  involving  Rho-family 
GTPases  and  kinases  can  stabilize  microtubules  locally 
and polarize the microtubule array.

Microtubules  can  also  treadmill  in  the  cytoplasm, 
growing  at  one  end  and  shrinking  at  the  other.  This 
behavior is common in plants in which dynamic instabil-
ity at the plus end is biased toward net growth and minus 
ends depolymerize steadily. Treadmilling is seen in some 
animal  cells  when  a  microtubule  detaches  from  the 
centrosome  (Fig.  34.7B),  but  the  minus  ends  of  many 
microtubules are stable.

Regulation by Microtubule-Associated 
Proteins
The properties of pure tubulin cannot explain all micro-
tubule  behavior  in  cells.  For  example,  microtubules  in 
ciliary  axonemes  are  stable  for  days,  even  under  con-
ditions  that  would  depolymerize  cytoplasmic  microtu-
bules,  even  though  tubulin  purified  from  axonemes 
forms microtubules that are just as dynamic as cytoplas-
mic microtubules. The explanation is that MAPs stabilize 
microtubules in axonemes. Other MAPs regulate micro-
tubule  initiation,  elongation,  shortening,  catastrophes, 
and  rescues  (Appendix  34.1  and  Fig.  34.8).  Cells  can 
modulate  the  activity  of  MAPs  to  change  the  dynamics 
of  microtubules,  as  when  dynamic  instability  becomes 
more pronounced during mitosis (Fig. 34.2A). Develop-
mentally  programmed  gene  expression  establishes  the 
mix of MAPs in each cell type.

MAPs  were  discovered  as  proteins  that  copurified 
along  with  microtubules  from  vertebrate  brains  during 
cycles of microtubule assembly and disassembly. Copu-
rification  selects  a  subset  of  MAPs  that  bind  tightly  to 
microtubules,  but  it  misses  important  proteins  that  
bind weakly. Functional assays yielded additional MAPs. 
For example, a light microscopic assay for microtubule 
fragmentation led to the discovery of the severing protein 
katanin.  Genetic  screens  have  also  uncovered  proteins 
that regulate microtubules, such as specialized kinesins 

A. Stabilizing

Minus-end binding
  γ-tubulin ring complex
  CAMSAPs

(–)

Side binding
  MAP2, tau

Plus-end binding
  Capping (STOP)
  +TIPS (CLIP170, EB1)
  Dis1/TOG

(+)

Tubulin
dimer

Minus-end depolymerizing
  Kinesin-13
B. Destabilizing

Severing
  Katanin

Plus-end depolymerizing
  Kinesin-8
  Kinesin-13

Dimer binding
  Stathmin

FIGURE  34.8  FAMILIES  OF  MICROTUBULE-BINDING  PROTEINS.  A,  Proteins  that  stabilize  microtubules.  B,  Proteins  that  destabilize 
microtubules.  These  microtubule-associated  proteins  (MAPs)  can  bind  to  the  end  or  the  side  of  the  polymer  or  to  tubulin  dimers.  CAMSAP, 
calmodulin-regulated spectrin-associated protein. 

 

CHAPTER 34  n  Microtubules and Centrosomes 

601

and  several  plus-end-binding  proteins.  The  following 
sections group MAPs according to their activities.

Microtubule-Stabilizing Proteins
At  least  a  dozen  distinct  MAPs  stabilize  microtubules 
(Appendix 34.1). Most bind along the length of microtu-
bules, but some interact only at or near ends. Some are 
expressed widely, but others are restricted to specialized 
cells.  Members  of  the  tau  family,  including  MAP2  and 
MAP4, differ in size and pattern of expression but share 
many  common  features  (Fig.  34.9).  These  MAPs  are 

A

Actin binding

Microtubule-

binding repeats

B

MAP2
MAP4
tau
N1115tau

FIGURE  34.9  TAU,  MICROTUBULE-ASSOCIATED  PROTEIN 
(MAP)-2,  AND  MAP4.  A,  Comparison  of  the  domain  organization, 
showing the homologous tubulin-binding motifs. B, The tubulin-binding 
motifs bind to either α-tubulin or β-tubulin and are thought to exchange 
rapidly among tubulin subunits along a protofilament. (Modified from 
Butner KA, Kirschner M. Tau protein binds to microtubules through a 
flexible array of distributed weak sites. J Cell Biol. 1991;115:717–730. 
For reference, see Al-Bassam J, Ozer RS, Safer D, et al. MAP2 and 
tau bind longitudinally along the outer ridges of microtubule protofila-
ments. J Cell Biol. 2002;157:1187–1196.)

AA

B

abundant  in  brain,  the  historical  tissue  of  choice  for 
isolating microtubules.
•  They  share  similar  tubulin-binding  motifs  consisting 
of three or four, short, imperfect, tandem repeats that 
each binds independently to tubulin subunits.

•  N-terminal  domains  of  tau  family  members  project 
from  the  surface  of  microtubules  (Fig.  34.10).  The 
long  side  arm  of  MAP2  excludes  other  structures, 
including microtubules (see Fig. 35.9), accounting for 
the wider spacing of microtubules in dendrites com-
pared  with  axons,  where  the  smaller  tau  predomi-
nates. Neither tau nor MAP2 crosslinks microtubules, 
but MAP2 links microtubules to actin filaments.

•  Tau family MAPs stabilize microtubules. For example, 
in the presence of tau, microtubules grow three times 
faster, shorten slower, and have catastrophes 50 times 
less  frequently  than  pure  tubulin  microtubules.  The 
rapid equilibrium of individual tubulin-binding repeats 
with  the  microtubule  surface  might  allow  tau  to 
dampen  microtubule  dynamics  without  stopping 
tubulin association and dissociation altogether.

•  Phosphorylation of the microtubule-binding motifs of 
these MAPs inhibits microtubule binding and destabi-
lizes microtubules. The negatively charged phosphate 
groups  are  repelled  from  the  negatively  charged 
surface of the microtubule.
Tau,  named  for  tubulin-associated  protein,  is  the 
major MAP in the axons of neurons in vertebrate brains 
(Fig.  34.11B).  It  is  also  present  in  some  neuronal  cell 
bodies and glial cells. Alternate splicing produces seven 
tau  isoforms  from  a  single  tau  gene.  Most  of  these  iso-
forms  have  molecular  weights  of  40  to  50 kD,  but  a 
higher-molecular-weight  tau  is  found  in  peripheral 
nerves. As is expected from its ability to stabilize micro-
tubules  in  vitro,  reduction  in  the  tau  concentration  in 
cultured nerve cells by depletion of the messenger RNA 

FIGURE 34.10  ELECTRON MICROGRAPHS OF TAU AND MAP-2 BOUND TO MICROTUBULES. A, Frozen, deep-etched, and shad-
owed specimens of microtubules with tau (top) and pure tubulin microtubules (bottom). B, Thin sections of microtubules with MAP2 showing 
40- to 100-nm projections (top) and bare pure tubulin microtubules (bottom). (A, Courtesy N. Hirokawa, Tokyo University, Japan. For reference, 
see Hirokawa N, Shiomura Y, Okabe S. Tau proteins: the molecular structure and mode of binding on microtubules. J Cell Biol. 1988;107:1449–1459. 
B, Courtesy D.B. Murphy, Johns Hopkins Medical School, Baltimore, MD.)

602 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

A

B

C

A

D

B

E

C

F

G

FIGURE 34.11  DISTRIBUTIONS OF TAU AND MAP-2 IN SEC-
TIONS  OF  THE  CEREBELLUM  FROM  RAT  BRAIN  LABELED 
WITH  ANTIBODIES  AND  SUBJECTED  TO  HISTOCHEMICAL 
STAINING.  A,  MAP2  (black)  is  concentrated  in  the  cell  bodies  and 
dendrites  of  Purkinje  cells.  B,  Tau  is  concentrated  in  the  axons  of 
granule cells, which appear here as small dark dots. C, Tau staining 
in the cell body and neurites of a pyramidal cell from another part of 
the  brain.  Scale  bar  is  20 µm.  (Courtesy  L.  Binder,  Northwestern 
University Medical School, Evanston, IL.)

reduces  the  numbers  of  microtubules.  Nevertheless, 
mice survive the loss of their single tau gene with only 
minor  alterations  of  their  neurons.  Compensation  by 
other MAPs is postulated to compensate for the chronic 
loss of tau.

in  neurodegenerative  diseases 

Fragments  of  tau  form  intracellular  paired  helical 
filaments (Fig. 34.12) that aggregate in “neurofibrillary 
tangles” 
including 
Alzheimer  disease,  the  most  common  dementia  of 
older  persons.  The  number  of  tangles  judged  by  light 
microscopy correlates with the severity of the dementia. 
Dozens  of  different  tau  mutations  cause  rare  inherited 
dementias,  but  for  individuals  with  normal  tau,  excess 
phosphorylation  can  dissociate  tau  from  microtubules 
and lead to its fragmentation by proteolysis. Over time, 
short,  phosphorylated  tau  fragments  assemble  into 
highly insoluble paired helical filaments and tangles. It is 
not known which molecular species along this pathway 
cause neuronal degeneration.

Unlike tau, MAP2 concentrates in dendrites of neurons 
(Fig. 34.11A). The mechanism giving preferential distri-
bution of MAP2 in dendrites and tau in axons of the same 
cell is still largely a mystery.

A  variety  of  other  proteins  stabilize  microtubules  in 
distinct  ways.  Vertebrates  have  a  protein  called  STOP 
that binds microtubules, making them resistant to depo-
lymerization by cold, dilution, or drugs. Bird red blood 
cells  express  syncolin,  which  stabilizes  the  marginal 
band of microtubules. Tektins are fibrous proteins that 
stabilize microtubules in axonemes (see Fig. 38.14) and 
centrioles.

100 nm

100 nm

FIGURE  34.12  NEUROFIBRILLARY  TANGLES  OF  PAIRED 
HELICAL  FILAMENTS  IN  THE  BRAINS  OF  PATIENTS  WITH 
ALZHEIMER  DISEASE.  A–C,  Light  micrographs  of  sections  of  the 
hippocampus  of  human  brains  stained  with  silver  for  neurofibrillary 
tangles.  A,  Stage  I  with  few  tangles.  B,  Stage  III  with  moderate 
numbers of tangles. C, Stage V, advanced Alzheimer disease, showing 
abundant  tangles.  D,  Electron  micrograph  of  paired  helical  filaments 
isolated from Alzheimer neurofibrillary tangles and prepared by nega-
tive  staining.  E,  Electron  micrograph  of  a  negatively  stained,  paired, 
helical  filament  reassembled  in  vitro  from  recombinant  tau  protein. 
F–G,  High-powered  micrographs  of  neurofibrillary  tangles  from  the 
brain of an Alzheimer patient stained brown with an antibody to tau. 
(A–C  and  G,  Courtesy  E.  and  H.  Braak,  University  of  Frankfurt, 
Germany.  D–E,  Courtesy  E.-M.  Mandelkow,  Max  Planck  Institute, 
Hamburg,  Germany.  F,  Courtesy  L.  Binder,  Northwestern  University 
Medical School, Evanston, IL.)

Microtubule-Destabilizing Proteins
Cells  destabilize  microtubules  in  three  different  ways. 
First,  the  small  protein  stathmin  destabilizes  microtu-
bules  by  sequestering  tubulin  dimers.  Stathmin  has  a 
long  α-helix  that  binds  laterally  to  a  pair  of  tubulin 
dimers,  blocking  their  polymerization.  This  sequestra-
tion of dimers may promote catastrophes. Thus, overex-
pression of stathmin in cell lines reduces tubulin available 
for  polymerization.  Mitotic  kinases  phosphorylate 
tubulin-interacting  sites  on  stathmin.  This  releases 
tubulin  and  promotes  assembly  of  the  mitotic  spindle. 
Many  malignant  cells  express  unusually  high  levels  of 
stathmin (hence its synonym Op18, for oncoprotein 18).
In a second mechanism, three classes of microtubule 
motor  proteins,  kinesin-8,  kinesin-13,  and  kinesin-
14,  promote  microtubule  disassembly  by  removing 
subunits from the polymer ends. Independent discovery 
of  these  kinesins  in  several  systems  led  to  a  variety  of 
historic  names.  Kinesin-8  walks  to  the  plus  end  of  the 
microtubule  and  uses  energy  from  ATP  hydrolysis  to 
remove  tubulin.  Rather  than  using  ATP  hydrolysis  to 
walk  along  a  microtubule  (see  Fig.  36.13),  kinesin-13 
accumulates at both ends, probably by diffusion. There 

 

CHAPTER 34  n  Microtubules and Centrosomes 

603

it  uses  energy  from  ATP  hydrolysis  to  remove  tubulin 
subunits. This promotes catastrophes and regulates the 
lengths  of  the  microtubules  in  the  mitotic  spindle  (see 
Chapter 44).

In  the  third  mechanism,  AAA  adenosine  triphospha-
tases  (ATPases;  see  Box  36.1)  called  katanin  and 
spastin, use energy from ATP hydrolysis to disrupt the 
noncovalent bonds between the subunits in the micro-
tubule wall. This destabilizes and severs the microtubule. 
Tubulin dimers dissociate from the cut ends and return 
to  the  cytoplasmic  pool  for  reassembly.  Activation  of 
severing  at  the  onset  of  mitosis  might  contribute  to 
remodeling  the  interphase  microtubule  network.  Auto-
somal  dominant  mutations  in  the  human  spastin  gene 
cause hereditary spastic paraplegia.

Proteins Associated With Microtubule Ends
A  number  of  proteins  bind  near  microtubule  ends.  
They use different mechanisms and impact assembly in 
different ways.

Proteins called +TIPs concentrate at sites of microtu-
bule growth, which are largely plus ends in cells where 
the  minus  ends  are  anchored  by  MTOCs  (Fig.  34.13). 
Two families of +TIPs concentrate at growing microtu-
bule  ends  independent  of  other  proteins,  while  other 
“hitchhiker” proteins locate at ends by binding to one of 
these core proteins.

The  “end  binding  protein”  (EB)-1  (and  homologs 
EB2 and EB3) are dimers held together by a coiled-coil. 
N-terminal  calponin  homology  domains  (similar  to  the 
actin  binding  domain  of  α-actinin;  see  Fig.  33.1)  bind 
the  ends  of  a  growing  microtubule  at  a  site  between 
protofilaments  composed  of  newly  incorporated  GTP-
tubulin  (Fig.  34.6D).  This  interaction  can  stabilize  plus 
ends  by  reducing  the  frequency  of  catastrophes,  but  it 
may  also  stimulate  GTP  hydrolysis  under  some  circum-
stances.  After  tubulin  hydrolyzes  its  bound  GTP,  EBs 
dissociate from the microtubule owing to lower affinity 

for the more compact lattice of older parts of microtu-
bules  with  bound  GDP.  The  C-terminal  domain  of  EBs 
interacts  with  hitchhiker  +TIPs  in  two  ways.  Several 
have  a  microtubule  tip  localization  sequence  (S/TxIP 
[serine  or 
threonine–any  amino  acid–isoleucine–
proline])  that  binds  to  receptor  sites  at  the  C-terminus 
of  EB  proteins.  One  example  is  stromal  interaction 
molecule  (STIM)-1,  a  transmembrane  protein  of  the 
endoplasmic  reticulum  that  anchors  the  membrane  to 
EB1  for  transport  on  the  growing  microtubule  tip  (see 
Fig.  37.6).  Alternatively,  an  EEY/F  (glutamic  acid-
glutamic acid-tyrosine or phenylalanine) sequence motif 
of EB binds to domains of proteins such as cytoplasmic 
linker protein (CLIP)-170. This interaction allows the 
fission  yeast  EB  protein  to  anchor  CLIP-170  and  an 
associated fission yeast protein, Tea1p, to the plus ends 
microtubules  (see  Fig.  6.3D).  A  kinesin  delivers  this 
complex  to  the  ends  of  the  cell  where  Tea1p  directs 
polar  growth.  EBs  or  CLIPs  target  cytoplasmic  linker-
associated  proteins  (CLASPs)  to  plus  ends,  where  they 
promote microtubule elongation near the cell cortex in 
interphase and at kinetochores during mitosis.

The Dis1/TOG family of proteins (called XMAP215 in 
frogs)  associate  with  microtubule  plus  ends  indepen-
dently of EBs. The TOG domains have higher affinity for 
curved tubulin dimers than straight tubulin. These pro-
teins  have  multiple  TOG  domains  allowing  them  to 
associate  with  both  curved  protofilaments  at  growing 
microtubule  plus  ends  and  multiple  tubulin  dimers. 
Transfer of tethered tubulin dimers to the growing end 
promotes  elongation.  These  proteins  help  to  organize 
the mitotic spindle poles in animals and the cortical array 
of microtubules in plants. Mixtures of tubulin, XMAP215, 
and a depolymerizing kinesin-13 or an EB can recapitulate 
microtubule dynamic instability in test tubes very similar 
to that seen in extracts from mitotic cells. Members of 
the Dis1/TOG family may also stabilize microtubule plus 
ends by reducing the frequency of catastrophes.

0 s

20 s

35 s

50 s

5 µm5 µm

FIGURE 34.13  Time series of fluorescence micrographs of a Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell expressing the microtubule tip-binding protein 
CLIP-170 tagged with green fluorescence protein (GFP) (red) and microinjected with Cy3-tubulin to mark microtubules (green). CLIP-170 con-
centrates at the plus ends of growing microtubules but dissociates from shrinking microtubules. CLIP, cytoplasmic linker protein. (Courtesy Yulia 
Komarova, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL. Modified from Komarova Y, Vorobjev IA, Borisy GG. Life cycle of microtubules: persistent growth 
in the cell interior, asymmetric transition frequencies and effects of the cell boundary. J Cell Sci. 2002;115:3527–3539.)

604 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

Several other proteins that function at or near the plus 
ends  of  microtubules  are  not  classical  +TIPs.  These 
include  the  chromosomal  passenger  protein  INCENP 
(inner centromere protein; see Fig. 44.10), which targets 
the Aurora-B kinase to the central spindle and regulates 
its kinase activity toward spindle components.

The  γ-tubulin  ring  complex  (Fig.  34.15)  nucleates 
microtubules  and  caps  their  minus  ends,  but  if  minus 
ends arise from severing or other means, proteins called 
CAMSAPs (calmodulin-regulated spectrin-associated pro-
teins) bind along microtubule walls near the minus ends. 
This  association  depends  on  growth  of  the  minus  end, 
but  the  mechanism  is  still  being  investigated.  Minus  
ends  associated  with  CAMSAPs  are  stabilized  from 
depolymerization.

Microtubule Linker Proteins
Protein  connectors  link  microtubules  to  many  other 
cellular  structures.  For  example,  MAP2  and  spectrapla-
kins  link  microtubules  to  actin  filaments,  and  plectin 
links  microtubules  to  intermediate  filaments.  Gephyrin 
binds microtubules and is required for clustering glycine 
receptors  (see  Fig.  16.12)  in  the  plasma  membrane  of 
neurons.

Centrosomes and Other Microtubule 
Organizing Centers
Most  microtubules  arise  from  assemblies  of  γ-tubulin 
located  in  MTOCs.  The  main  organizing  centers  in 
animal  cells  are  centrosomes  (Figs.  34.2A,  34.14,  and 
34.15).  A  typical  centrosome  in  animal  cell  consists  of 
a  “centriole”  that  organizes  the  pericentriolar  mate-
rial  where  most  γ-tubulin  resides.  In  addition  to  orga-
nizing  the  pericentriolar  material,  centrioles  also 
directly  initiate  microtubules  for  cilia  and  flagella  (Fig. 
34.3  and  see  Fig.  38.17).  Some  cells,  such  as  mature 
eggs  in  animals  and  all  cells  in  higher  plants,  lack  cen-
trosomes.  The  MTOCs  of  fungi  (“spindle  pole  bodies”) 
lack  centrioles.  Microtubules  are  also  nucleated  by 
γ-tubulin  recruited  to  the  Golgi  apparatus,  nuclear 
envelope, or in the cortex of epithelial cells (Fig. 34.2B). 
Additional  microtubules  also  arise  within  the  mitotic 
spindle. This process depends on a complex of proteins 
called augmin that interacts with both microtubules and 
γ-tubulin,  but  the  nucleation  mechanism,  in  which  the 
new  microtubules  branch  from  the  sides  of  existing 
spindle microtubules, is still being investigated.

Overview of Centrosomes
When Flemming and Van Beneden discovered the cen-
trosome  in  1875,  it  was  regarded  as  one  of  the  three 
main  cellular  components,  together  with  the  nucleus 
and the cell body. In fact, it was correctly identified as 
the  organelle  that  regulates  mitosis  and  was  called  the 
“dynamic centre” of the cell by Boveri, who coined the 

Centrosome

Centriole

Spindle

Chromosomes

FIGURE 34.14  METAPHASE SPINDLE IN AN EGG OF PARAS-
CARIS  EQUORUM.  In  this  micrograph  taken  from  a  classic  slide 
prepared  by  Boveri  in  the  early  20th  century,  the  centrosomes  are 
particularly prominent, and the centrioles are clearly visible within them. 
(Courtesy Joseph Gall, Carnegie Institution, Baltimore, MD.)

term  centrosome.  Large  centrosomes  of  certain  eggs 
appeared to contain one or two central granules, which 
Boveri  called  “centrioles”  (Fig.  34.14).  Electron  micro-
scopy later showed that centrioles are cylinders of nine 
microtubule  triplets  or  doublets  approximately  0.5 µm 
long (Fig. 34.15). Centrioles help organize centrosomes, 
although  centrosomes  in  some  cells  lack  centrioles. 
Among  the  major  cytoplasmic  organelles,  centrosomes 
are  unique  in  lacking  a  bounding  membrane  and  in 
duplicating  semiconservatively  in  a  process  that  takes 
more than one complete cell cycle.

The  centrosome  is  the  dominant  MTOC  during 
interphase  and  mitosis  in  most  animal  somatic  cells. 
Centrosome-associated  microtubules  emanate  from  γ-
tubulin  ring  complexes (usually abbreviated γTuRC) 
located  in  pericentriolar  material  surrounding  two 
centrioles.  Centrosomes  also  have  roles  in  cytokinesis, 
cell  polarity,  and  organization  of  primary  cilia.  Many 
cancer  cells  have  structural  and  numerical  centrosome 
aberrations.

The last common ancestor of eukaryotes had centri-
oles to serve as basal bodies for its flagella (see Fig. 2.4B). 
Many eukaryotes inherited the genes for centrioles, but 
multiple lineages lost these genes. The male gametes of 
lower plants such as ferns have basal bodies, but most 
plants and fungi lost centrioles, so other structures serve 
as  MTOCs.  Metazoa  have  centrioles,  which  organize 
centrosomes in most cells. Some multinucleated animal 
cells such as megakaryocytes (see Fig. 28.4) and osteo-
clasts  (see  Fig.  32.6)  have  multiple  centrosomes,  but 
mature  oocytes  and  multinucleated  vertebrate  muscle 
cells have none.

 

CHAPTER 34  n  Microtubules and Centrosomes 

605

A. SAS-6 structure

Spokes

C. Centrosome organization

Central
hub

Pinhead

Mother
centriole

B. Micrograph

50 nm

Microtubules

Distal appendage

Subdistal appendage
  ninein, centriolin

Pericentriolar material (PCM)
  γ-tubulin ring complexes
  pericentrin, GMAP210
  microtubule nucleation

Centrioles

C

e

n

t

r

o
s
o
m
e

Pericentriolar
material (PCM)

Linkers: C-NAP1, rootletin,
kinase Nek2, protein
phosphotase PP1

Daughter
centriole

FIGURE 34.15  STRUCTURE OF CENTRIOLES. A, Model for how the crystal structure of the protein SAS-6 can form a unit with ninefold 
symmetry and a drawing showing how this unit may fit into the center of the centriole. B, Electron micrograph of a thin section of paired centrioles 
surrounded by pericentriolar material at telophase in a PtK1 (rat kangaroo) cell. C, Diagram of the structure of the centrioles with the locations 
of some of the constituent proteins. (A, Based on the work of Kitagawa D, Vakonakis I, Olieric N, et al. Structural basis of the 9-fold symmetry 
of centrioles. Cell. 2015;144:364–475, for reference, see PDB file 4CKP. B, Courtesy Conly Rieder, Wadsworth Center, Albany, NY.)

Protein Composition of Centrioles
Centrioles are cylindrical structures typically composed 
of  nine  triplet  microtubules  (Fig.  34.15),  but  some  are 
simpler: doublet microtubules in flies and single micro-
tubules  in  nematodes.  The  older  mother  centriole  in 
each pair has appendages lacking on the new daughter 
centriole.  Electron  microscopy  revealed  the  overall 
structure  and  crystal  structures  of  component  proteins 
are filling in details. The most abundant protein compo-
nents of centrioles are α-tubulin and β-tubulin. Centriolar 
microtubules  are  more  stable  than  most  cytoplasmic 
microtubules,  exchanging  only  approximately  10%  of 
their  tubulin  per  cell  cycle.  Like  other  stable  microtu-
bules,  the  α-  and  β-tubulins  of  centrioles  are  highly 
modified  by  polyglutamylation.  Microinjection  of  cells 
with  antibodies  to  glutamylated  tubulin  disassembles 
both centrioles and the pericentriolar material.

Less-abundant  proteins  form  other  centriolar  struc-
tures  (Appendix  34.2).  Oligomers  of  the  protein  SAS-6 
form  a  ring  or  spiral  with  ninefold  symmetry  that  tem-
plates  the  cartwheel  pattern  of  triplet  microtubules 
during centriole formation (Fig. 34.15A). This framework 
is  usually  absent  in  mature  mother  centrioles.  Distal 
appendages anchor the mother centriole to the plasma 
membrane  when  it  serves  as  the  basal  body  for  cilia  
(see  Fig.  38.17).  Other  minor  proteins  form  subdistal 
appendages on mother centrioles (Fig. 34.15C). Ninein 
helps  anchor  the  minus  ends  of  microtubules  to  the 

centrosome  and  centriolin  appears  to  anchor  proteins 
that control the cell cycle and regulate microtubule sta-
bility. Two large coiled-coil proteins, C-NAP1 and root-
letin, form fibers that connect the pericentriolar material 
around the two centrioles (Fig. 34.15C).

Centrioles  also  contain  multiple  isoforms  of  centrin 
(see Fig. 38.21), an EF-hand, Ca2+ binding protein similar 
to  calmodulin  (see  Fig.  3.12).  Centrin  filaments  link 
centrioles to the nucleus in Chlamydomonas, but most 
centrins are in the cytoplasm, where their functions are 
not established.

Protein Composition of the Pericentriolar Material
Large  coiled-coil  proteins  surrounding  the  mother  cen-
triole organize the pericentriolar material. This scaffold 
accommodates  a  network  of  γTuRC,  kinases,  phospha-
tases,  and  more  than  100  other  proteins.  Electron 
micrographs of thin sections show that the pericentriolar 
material excludes organelles but do not reveal any inter-
nal regular structure (Fig. 34.15A). Superresolution fluo-
rescence microscopy and crystal structures of individual 
components  are  uncovering  the  organization  of  the 
proteins.

The size of the pericentriolar material changes across 
the  cell  cycle.  During  interphase,  a  single  layer  of  the 
protein pericentrin forms the scaffold. One end of peri-
centrin  binds  to  centriolar  microtubules  and  the  other 
end  extends  radially  to  interact  with  the  γTuRC  and 

606 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

A. γ-tubulin ring complex

γ-tubulin

Seam

(+) end

B. Centrosome maturation

β-tubulin

α-tubulin

γ-tubulin

Other subunits
of γ-TURC

PCM proteins
γ-tubulin
ring complexes

Polo kinase
Aurora-A kinase

Pericentriolar material (PCM)
with γ-tubulin ring complexes

Interphase

G2 / M

FIGURE 34.16  γ-TUBULIN RING COMPLEX. A, Reconstruction of yeast γ-tubulin small complex from electron micrographs and (right) a 
model of active γ-tubulin ring complex (γTuRC) on the minus end of a microtubule. Color code: yellow, γ-tubulin; light gray, α-tubulin; dark gray, 
β-tubulin; dark blue, light blue, and green other subunits of γTuRC. B, Microtubule nucleation by γTuRC in the pericentriolar material. As cells 
enter mitosis γTuRC are recruited in response to activation of Polo-like and Aurora-A kinases. (A, Based on the work of Kollman JM, Greenberg 
CH, Li S, et al. Ring closure activates yeast γTuRC for species-specific microtubule nucleation. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2015;22:132–137.)

other  proteins.  Later  in  the  cell  cycle,  mitotic  kinases 
(Polo-like kinase and Aurora kinase) drive expansion of 
the  pericentriolar  material,  which  accumulates  more 
copies of γTuRC and other pericentriolar proteins. The 
larger  mitotic  centrosome  nucleates  new  microtubules 
at higher rates than during interphase.

The γTuRC is an assembly of 14 γ-tubulin molecules 
supported by accessory proteins that form a dislocated 
ring  similar  to  a  left-handed  lock  washer  (Fig.  34.16).  
The  conserved  building  block  of  γTuRC  is  a  small 
complex  of  two  γ-tubulins  with  two  of  the  support-
ing proteins. This γTuRC template initiates assembly of 
α/β-tubulin dimers into a microtubule with 13 protofila-
ments  and  a  seam  (Fig.  34.16A).  The  γTuRC  caps  the 
minus  end  of  the  new  microtubule  as  it  grows  at  its  
free plus end.

Centrosome Duplication During the Cell Cycle
The  cycle  of  semiconservative  centrosome  duplication 
and division is closely linked to the cell cycle (Fig. 34.18; 
see  Chapter  40  for  an  introduction  to  the  cell  cycle). 
Centrosome replication begins during S phase, when the 
nuclear DNA is replicated (see Chapter 42). The process 
depends on cyclin dependent kinase Cdk2 (activated by 
cyclin E and/or cyclin A). These kinases turn off ubiquitin 
E3  ligase  APC/CCDH1  (see  Fig.  40.15),  allowing  accu-
mulation  of  proteins  to  replicate  the  centriole.  Equally 
important a polo-like kinase (PLK4 in humans) turns on 
at this time.

Each centriole initiates formation of a new centriole 
oriented  at  right  angles  to  its  proximal  end.  Thus  the 
previous daughter centriole becomes into a new mother 
centriole, Mnew. An adapter protein located on one side 
of  each  mother  centriole  recruits  a  polo-like  kinase, 
which activates proteins that allow SAS-6 to assemble a 
large  cartwheel  with  ninefold  radial  symmetry  (Fig. 
34.15A). Depending on the species, SAS-6 forms a stack 

of rings or a spiral that cooperates with another protein 
(SAS-4) to template the assembly of a ring of nine single 
microtubules, the procentriole (Fig. 34.18). The ring is 
converted  into  an  array  of  nine  triplet  microtubules  in 
a  process  that  depends  on  δ-tubulin  and  ε-tubulin  in 
most organisms. The absence of δ-tubulin and ε-tubulin 
in  Drosophila  and  Caenorhabditis  elegans  likely  con-
tributes to the fact that most of their centrioles are built 
of doublet or singlet microtubules. Daughter centrioles 
elongate  gradually  during  the  remainder  of  the  cell 
cycle, reaching their mature length just before mitosis. 
Then  Mnew  acquires  distal  and  subdistal  appendages 
and  becomes  morphologically  and  functionally  equiva-
lent to Mold.

Thus cells about to enter mitosis have three types of 
centrioles that differ in age, structure, and activity (Fig. 
34.17).  Two  distinct  mother  centrioles,  Mold  and  Mnew, 
are each paired to one of two identical daughter centri-
oles.  Mold  was  assembled  at  least  two  cell  cycles  previ-
ously. Mnew was assembled in the previous cell cycle, and 
the  daughter  centrioles  were  assembled  during  the  S 
phase  of  the  present  cell  cycle.  The  SAS-6  cartwheel 
disappears  from  the  daughter  centriole  at  this  stage  in 
human cells.

The  relationships  among  the  four  centrioles  change 
as the cell enters mitosis. Around the time of the transi-
tion from G2 to M the kinase Nek2 phosphorylates the 
fiber protein C-NAP1 and fibers linking the two pairs of 
replicated centrioles break down, allowing them to sepa-
rate.  During  prophase  kinesin-5  and  other  mechanisms 
drive the two pairs of centrioles apart over the surface 
of the nuclear envelope to set up the two poles of the 
mitotic  spindle.  During  anaphase  a  cascade  of  mitotic 
kinases (Cdk1 → Aurora A → polo-like kinase 1) releases 
the new daughter centriole from the side of their mother 
centriole, but the two remain attached by flexible linkers 
between their proximal ends (Fig. 34.15C).

 

Mitotic

exit

C-NAP1

Mother

Daughter

G1

CHAPTER 34  n  Microtubules and Centrosomes 

607

Mold

S phase

Mnew

Mnew

Late G2/M

Cdk 2–cyclin E

or

Cdk 2–cyclin A

Centrin

SPD-2
Polio-like

kinase

SAS-6
SAS-4

Procentriole

δ-tubulin
ε-tubulin

Mold

s

e  
n   a

r t )

a

p

a

h

Pro p
(Migratio

Daughter

Mother

S

G2

M

FIGURE 34.17  THE PATHWAY OF CENTRIOLE DUPLICATION IS LINKED TO THE CELL CYCLE. 

If  centrosomes  are  surgically  removed  from  normal 
cells,  the  cell  enters  mitosis  and  assembles  a  bipolar 
mitotic  spindle  using  motor  proteins  to  bundle  and 
remodel the microtubules. These cells slowly complete 
mitosis and about 40% divide by cytokinesis. These cells 
assemble new centrioles de novo during S-phase of the 
next  cell  cycle  and  recover.  Continued  suppression  of 
centrosome  formation  with  a  drug  interferes  indirectly 
with  proliferation,  because  of  errors  in  chromosome 
segregation.

Functions of Centrosomes
The main functions of centrosomes are to nucleate and 
anchor microtubules that organize the cytoplasm during 
both interphase and mitosis. Other mechanisms, includ-
ing  motor  proteins,  must  be  active  because  plants  and 
some  animal  cells  can  organize  mitotic  spindles  and 
other microtubule structures without centrosomes. Simi-
larly,  much  of  the  development  of  a  fruit  fly  can  take 
place without centrosomes, but the lack of cilia is even-
tually lethal.

The  γTuRC  in  the  pericentriolar  material  around 
the  mother  centriole  nucleates  microtubules  with 
capped  (stabilized)  minus  ends  and  plus  ends  probing 
the  cytoplasm  as  they  undergo  dynamic  instability.  
The  distal  and  subdistal  appendages  of  centriole  Mold 
help  anchor  the  minus  ends  of  these  microtubules.  
This creates a radial array of microtubules with centriole 
Mold at the center (Fig. 34.2A). The pericentriolar mate-
rial expands as cells enter mitosis, increasing the capa-
city  to  nucleate  microtubules  for  the  mitotic  spindle  
(Fig. 34.16B).

After  experimental  disruption  of  centrosomes,  cyto-
plasmic  microtubules  emanating  from  the  centrosome 
disappear,  but  other  cytoplasmic  microtubules  persist 
(Fig.  34.18).  In  many  differentiated  cells,  microtubules 
initially  nucleated  at  centrosomes  subsequently  detach 
and become anchored back to the centrosome or else-
where  in  the  cytoplasm;  for  example,  at  the  apical 
membrane  in  epithelial  cells  (Fig.  34.2B).  In  neurons, 
microtubules detach from the centrosome and are trans-
ported along axons and dendrites (see Fig. 37.5).

FIGURE  34.18  Destruction  of  the  centrosome  with  a  laser  does 
not  prevent  the  assembly  of  cytoplasmic  microtubules,  but  they  are 
disorganized. Centrioles, green; nuclei, blue; microtubules, red. 

The  array  of  polarized,  dynamic  microtubules  
radiating  from  the  centrosome  strongly  influences  the 
distributions  of  membrane  bound  organelles  in  the 
cytoplasm.  The  endoplasmic  reticulum  is  typically  dis-
persed throughout the peripheral cytoplasm by transport 
away  from  the  centrosome  by  kinesins  and  growing 
microtubule plus ends (see Fig. 37.6). Thus the position 
of  the  centrosomes  and  their  associated  microtubules 
can polarize the secretory pathway. For example, cyto-
toxic  T  lymphocytes  move  the  centrosome  to  the  cell 
cortex adjacent to their target cells so that secretion of 
pore-forming proteins can lyse target cells (see Fig. 27.8). 
On the other hand, the Golgi apparatus and endosomes 
accumulate near the centrosome by transport toward the 
minus ends of the microtubules by cytoplasmic dynein 
(see Fig. 21.20). Close association of centrosomes with 
the nucleus allows the microtubule network to anchor 
the  nucleus  to  the  cell  cortex  during  cell  migration. 
Anchoring to the nucleus is important for nuclear posi-
tioning  and  migration  in  fungi,  as  well  as  during  brain 
development in vertebrates.

Centrosomes  and  their  radiating  microtubules  also 
help specify the position of the contractile ring during 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

608 

A

Tumor

Normal
centrosomes

Nontumor

Tumor

Abnormal
centrosomes

B

DNA
Microtubules

Nucleus

FIGURE 34.19  CENTROSOMES AND CANCER. A, Centrosomes are often abnormal in human tumors. Prostate tissue labeled by antibodies 
coupled to an enzyme (peroxidase) that produces a brown stain shows single uniform centrosomes in normal tissue (left, arrows) and abnormal 
centrosomes in tumor cells (right). Abnormal centrosomes are greater in number, elongated, and much larger than those in normal cells. Centro-
some defects lead to spindle abnormalities, mistakes in the segregation of chromosomes, and abnormal numbers of chromosomes, a hallmark 
of tumors. B, Tumor cells have abnormal centrosomes. Fluorescence micrograph of a single prostate tumor cell: DNA is stained blue with DAPI 
(4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole),  microtubules  are  stained  red  with  a  fluorescent  antibody,  and  pericentrin  in  the  centrosomes  is  stained  green 
(showing as yellow where it overlaps red) with a second fluorescent antibody. Cells were treated with nocodazole to depolymerize microtubules 
and were then released briefly to allow microtubule regrowth before processing. Tumor cells have abnormal numbers of centrosomes, which are 
heterogeneous in size, but they remain competent to nucleate microtubules. Normal cells typically have a single centrosome with a single focus 
of microtubules (not shown). (Courtesy S. Doxsey, G. Pihan, and A. Purohit, University of Massachusetts, Worcester.)

cytokinesis  (see  Fig.  44.21).  As  the  cleavage  furrow 
forms during late anaphase, mother and daughter centri-
oles detach from each other. In some cells, the mother 
centriole moves transiently into the intercellular bridge 
between the two daughter cells just before they separate. 
These  movements  of  the  mother  centriole  might 
somehow influence the cleavage of the bridge.

Centrioles  serve  as  basal  bodies  that  template  and 
anchor  axonemes  of  cilia  (Fig.  34.3B).  Centrosomal 
centrioles in most vertebrate tissues have the capacity to 
grow  a  nonmotile  primary  cilium,  which  serves  as  a 
sensory  organelle  (see  Fig.  38.19).  When  the  cell  exits 
from  the  cell  cycle,  the  mother  centriole  docks  on  
the  inside  of  the  plasma  membrane  and  nucleates  
an  axoneme  consisting  of  nine  doublet  microtubules. 
Defects in primary cilia cause polycystic kidney disease 
and a spectrum of other diseases (see Chapter 38).

Centrioles  also  form  basal  bodies  for  motile  cilia  of 
many protists, most animal sperm and ciliated epithelia 
(Fig.  34.3;  also  see  Fig.  38.17).  These  cells  assemble  a 
basal  body  for  each  cilium  de  novo,  rather  than  only 
templating on the side of a preexisting mother centriole 
only once per cycle.

Centrosomes and Cancer
Human  cancer  cells  rarely  have  mutations  in  genes  
for centrosomal proteins, but often have abnormal cen-
trosomes. One study found that 96% of high-grade tumors 
had abnormal centrosomes, including larger sizes (5 to 

10 times normal), unusual shapes, and increased numbers 
(Fig.  34.19).  Researchers  are  investigating  how  these 
defects in centrosomes might contribute to tumor forma-
tion or if they accumulate as a secondary consequence 
of other mutations that actually drive malignancy.

The  most  likely  mechanism  whereby  defective  cen-
trosomes might promote cancer is mistakes in chromo-
some  segregation  during  mitosis.  The  most  drastic 
alternation of chromosome numbers results from failure 
to complete cytokinesis, producing progeny with twice 
the  normal  content  of  DNA,  number  of  chromosomes, 
and  number  of  centrosomes.  The  loss  or  gain  of  chro-
mosomes  can  contribute  to  uncontrolled  cell  pro-
liferation,  if  the  balance  between  growth-promoting 
oncogenes  and  growth-regulating 
tumor-suppressor 
genes is upset.

Most  vertebrate  cells  with  abnormal  numbers  of 
chromosomes  arrest  the  cell  cycle  or  die  by  apoptosis 
(see  Chapter  46).  However,  many  human  cancer  cells 
lack this control, owing to loss-of-function mutations of 
the  tumor-suppressor  p53  (see  Figs.  41.15  and  43.11). 
Cells  lacking  this  transcription  factor  survive  with 
abnormal  centrosomes  and/or  chromosomes.  In  these 
examples the centrosome defects appear to be a conse-
quence of the underlying mutation rather than a cause 
of the cancer.

Several other mechanisms may contribute to defects 
in centrosomes and contribute to cancer. For example, 
overexpression  of  enzymes  that  regulate  the  centriole 

 

CHAPTER 34  n  Microtubules and Centrosomes 

609

cycle  might  produce  extra  centrosomes.  Indeed,  some 
cancer  cells  amplify  the  Aurora-A  genetic  locus.  The 
resulting overexpression of the Aurora-A protein kinase 
can cause centrosomal abnormalities and interfere with 
normal  growth  regulation.  Such  cells  form  tumors  
when injected into mice. Centrosomal defects may also 
compromise regulation of proliferation by primary cilia, 
promote the migration of metastatic cancer cells or alter 
the behavior of cancer stem cells.

Spindle Pole Body, the “Centrosome” of Yeasts
For  many  fungi,  including  budding  and  fission  yeasts, 
the  spindle  pole  body  (SBP)  plays  the  role  of  the 
centrosome  by 
initiating  microtubules,  particularly 
during mitosis. Rather than being in the cytoplasm like 
the centrosome, SPBs are plaque-like structures embed-
ded in the nuclear envelope for the entire cell cycle in 
budding  yeast  (Fig.  34.20)  and  most  of  the  cell  cycle 
in  fission  yeast.  SPBs  contain  centrin  and  γ-tubulin 

NPC

NM

B

SPB

A

NM

HB

SPB

NPC

IP
CP

OP

C

SPB

Half-bridge

Nuclear envelope

Satellite

Satellite

assembles

Nuclear
microtubules

Spindle disassembly
New cell cycle begins

SPBs separate

Half-bridge severed

Spindle forms

Satellite enlarges forming

duplication plaque

Half-bridge elongates

Half-bridge retracts
Nuclear SPB assembles on
inner face of duplication plaque

SPB assembly

completed

Half-bridge (HB)

Cytoplasmic
microtubules

Outer plaque (OP)

Half-bridge outer layer

Nuclear
membrane (NM)

Central plaque (CP)

Inner plaque (IP)

Spindle microtubules

NUCLEUS

Duplication
plaque

Half-
bridge
fuses

FIGURE 34.20  STRUCTURE AND DUPLICATION OF THE BUDDING YEAST SPINDLE POLE BODY. A, Electron micrograph of a thin 
section of the mitotic spindle of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, with both poles ending in an spindle pole body (SPB). B, Diagram of the parts of the 
SPB. C, Pathway of duplication of the budding yeast SPB. (A, Courtesy John Kilmartin. For reference, see Adams IR, Kilmartin JV. Spindle pole 
body duplication: a model for centrosome duplication? Trends Cell Biol. 2000;10:329–335.)

610 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

complexes, but few of the other 45 proteins identified 
in  SPBs  have  been  found  in  vertebrate  centrosomes. 
SPB  duplication  is  tightly  linked  to  cell  cycle  progres-
sion. Similar to centrioles, a new SPB forms adjacent to 
and  attached  to  the  original  SPB  during  the  S  phase  of 
the  cell  cycle.  The  slime  mold  Dictyostelium  has  a 
centrosome with features of both yeast SPBs (integrated 
into  the  nuclear  envelope  during  mitosis)  and  animal 
centrosomes  (free  in  the  cytoplasm).

In  another  similarity  to  centrosomes,  fungal  SPBs 
concentrate proteins that regulate mitosis and cytokine-
sis. In fission yeast, a GTPase and a series of three kinases 
associate  transiently  with  SPBs  before  triggering  con-
striction of the contractile ring and formation of a septum 
(see Fig. 44.24). In budding yeast, a protein resembling 
part of mammalian centriolin anchors the corresponding 
GTPase  to  the  SPB.  The  guanine  nucleotide  exchange 
factor  that  activates  the  GTPase  is  concentrated  in  the 
bud,  far  from  either  SPB,  until  the  elongating  mitotic 
spindle  relocates  one  SPB  to  the  bud  during  anaphase. 
Only  then  can  the  guanine  nucleotide  exchange  factor 
activate the GTPase and trigger a signaling cascade that 
ultimately drives the cell out of mitosis.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We  thank  Anna  Akhmanova,  Holly  Goodson,  Alexey 
Khodjakov, Laurence Pelletier, and Jordan Raff for their 
suggestions on revisions of this chapter.

SELECTED READINGS

Akhmanova A, Steinmetz MO. Control of microtubule organization and 
dynamics: two ends in the limelight. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2015;
16:711-726.

Al-Bassam  J,  Chang  F.  Regulation  of  microtubule  dynamics  by  TOG-
domain proteins XMAP215/Dis1 and CLASP. Trends Cell Biol. 2011;
21:604-614.

Bowne-Anderson H, Zanic M, Kauer M, Howard J. Microtubule dynamic 
instability: a new model with coupled GTP hydrolysis and multistep 
catastrophe. Bioessays. 2013;35:452-461.

Conduit PT, Wainman A, Raff JW. Centrosome function and assembly 

in animal cells. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2015;16:611-624.

Coombes CE, Yamamoto A, Kenzie MR, Odde DJ, Gardner MK. Evolv-
ing tip structures can explain age-dependent microtubule catastro-
phe. Curr Biol. 2013;23:1342-1348.

Dong G. Building a ninefold symmetrical barrel: structural dissections 

of centriole assembly. Open Biol. 2015;5:pii: 150082.

Fu J, Hagan IM, Glover DM. The centrosome and its duplication cycle. 

Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2015;7:a015800.

Gardner MK, Charlebois BD, Janosi IM, et al. Rapid microtubule self-

assembly kinetics. Cell. 2011;146:582-592.

Gönczy P. Centrosomes and cancer: revisiting a long-standing relation-

ship. Nat Rev Cancer. 2015;15:639-652.

Gupta KK, Li C, Duan A, et al. Mechanism for the catastrophe-promoting 
activity  of  the  microtubule  destabilizer  Op18/stathmin.  Proc  Natl 
Acad Sci USA. 2013;110:20449-20454.

Honnappa S, Gouveia SM, Weisbrich A, et al. An EB1-binding motif acts 

as a microtubule tip localization signal. Cell. 2009;138:366-376.

Kapitein  LC,  Hoogenraad  CC.  Building  the  neuronal  microtubule 

cytoskeleton. Neuron. 2015;87:492-506.

Kollman  JM,  Merdes  A,  Mourey  L,  et al.  Microtubule  nucleation  by 

γ-tubulin complexes. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2011;12:709-721.

Lin  TC,  Neuner  A,  Schiebel  E.  Targeting  of  γ-tubulin  complexes  to 
microtubule  organizing  centers:  conservation  and  divergence. 
Trends Cell Biol. 2015;25:296-307.

Mandelkow  EN,  Mandelkow  E.  Biochemistry  and  cell  biology  of  tau 
protein in neurofibrillary degeneration. Cold Spring Harb Perspect 
Med. 2012;2:a006247.

Mennella V, Agard DA, Huang B, et al. Amorphous no more: subdiffrac-
tion  view  of  the  pericentriolar  material  architecture.  Trends  Cell 
Biol. 2014;24:188-197.

Sanchez-Huertas C, Luders J. The Augmin connection in the geometry 

of microtubule networks. Curr Biol. 2015;25:R294-R299.

Suozzi  KC,  Wu  X,  Fuchs  E.  Spectraplakins:  master  orchestrators  of 

cytoskeletal dynamics. J Cell Biol. 2012;197:465-475.

Yu I, Garnham CP, Roll-Mecak A. Writing and reading the tubulin code. 

J Biol Chem. 2015;290:17163-17172.

Zhang R, Alushin GM, Brown A, et al. Mechanistic origin of microtu-
bule  dynamic  instability  and  its  modulation  by  EB  proteins.  Cell. 
2015;162:849-859.

Dendrites of vertebrate 

One gene, 4 isoforms 

neurons

42–200 kD

MAP4 (MAP3, 

MAPU)

Vertebrate brain glia, 

many other cell types

1 × 135 kD

Vertebrate cells

100 kD

ATP-dependent MT severing
ATP-dependent MT severing 

(hereditary spastic paraplegia)

Promotes MT assembly; binds 

regulatory subunit of PKA; 
binds actin

Promotes MT assembly and 

stability

Stabilizes MT against cold 

depolymerization

Rod with three or four 
18-residue MT-binding 
repeats

Rod with three or four 
18-residue MT-binding 
repeats

Inhibited by 

Ca-calmodulin or 
phosphorylation

Severing
Katanin
Spastin

Stabilizers
MAP2a, b, c

STOP

Tau

Tektin

Linkers
Gephyrin

 

CHAPTER 34  n  Microtubules and Centrosomes 

611

APPENDIX 34.1 
Some Microtubule-Associated Proteins

 

Name (Synonyms)
Destabilizers
Stathmin/Op18

Distribution

Composition

Properties

Functions (Diseases)

Vertebrate cells

1 × 18 kD

Binds tubulin dimers

Sequesters tubulin; enhances 

Kinesin-8
Kinesin-13 (MCAK)

Eukaryotes
Eukaryotes

Kinesin-14 (NCD)

Eukaryotes

2 × 82 kD
2 × 82 kD

2 × 82 kD

Plus end motor
Lacks motor activity

dynamic instability; null mice 
viable without defects

Removes tubulin from plus ends
Removes tubulin from both 

ends

Minus end motor

Removes tubulin from minus 

ends

Metazoans, plants
Metazoans, plants

6 × 84 kD, 6 × 60 kD
6 × 86 kD

AAA ATPase
AAA ATPase

Axons of vertebrate 

One gene, 6 isoforms  

Three or four 18-residue 

Promotes MT assembly and 

neurons

Metazoan axonemes 

and cytoplasmic MTs

1 × 40–80 kD

2 × 47–53 kD

MT-binding repeats

stability (Alzheimer disease)

Coiled-coil protein

Stabilizes MTs in axonemes and 

centrioles

Vertebrate neurons

? × 93 kD

Spectraplakin family

Metazoans

>500 kD (multiple genes 

Calponin homology 

& splice isoforms)

domain, various other 
domains

+Tips (Plus End Binding Proteins)
APC

Vertebrates, insects

CLASP (Mast/Orbit)

Eukaryotes

1 × 300 kD

? × 165 kD

Binds EB1 and β-catenin

Regulates β-catenin; tumor 
suppressor (colon cancer)

Binds CLIP-170 and EB1

Regulates MT dynamics in the 

Anchors glycine receptors to 

MTs

Crosslinks MT to actin and 

intermediate filaments

CLIP-170

Eukaryotes

170 kD

Binds EB; 

phosphorylation 
inhibits MT binding

cell cortex and at kinetochores
Binds endosomes to plus ends 

of MT

Regulates MT dynamics and 

spindle pole

Eukaryotes

215 kD, other variants

Dis1/TOG family 

(XMAP215, others)
EB-1, -2, -3 (Bim1p, 

Mal3p)

KMN network

Eukaryotes

Eukaryotes

30 kD

Binds MT plus ends and 

Promotes MT assembly

APC

Many subunits including 
KNL-1, Mis12 complex, 
NCD80 complex

Kinetochore MT binding 

complex

−Tips (Minus End Binding Proteins)
Augmin
CAMSAP-1, -2, -3 

Metazoa

435,000
>200 kD

(Patronin)

γ-Tubulin ring 

complex

Eukaryotes

14 × 50 kD γ-tubulin + 8 

other proteins

Eight different subunits
Calponin homology 

domain, coiled-coils
Polymeric lockwasher

Binds γ-tubulin ring complex
Binds near plus ends; stabilizes 

end

Nucleates MT assembly from 

minus end

ATP, adenosine triphosphate; ATPase, adenosine triphosphatase; CAMSAP, calmodulin-regulated spectrin-associated protein; CLIP, cytoplasmic linker 
protein; EB, end-binding protein; MAP, microtubule-associated protein; MT, microtubule; PKA, protein kinase A.

612 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

APPENDIX 34.2 
Centrosomal Structural Proteins

 

Name

C-NAP1

Distribution

Metazoa

Centriolin

Metazoa

Composition  
(Subunit Size)
2 × 250 kD

2 × 240 kD

γ-Tubulin ring 

complex

Eukaryotes

Ninein

Metazoa

14 × 50 kD γ-tubulins + 

eight other proteins

2 × 236 kD

Pericentrin 
(Kendrin)

Animals
Plants

2 × 380 kD

Properties

Functions (Diseases)

Coiled-coil protein

Fibers connecting PCM of two centrioles, 

regulated by the protein kinase Nek2

Coiled-coil protein

Located in in subdistal appendages (stem 

cell myeloproliferative disorder)

Polymeric lockwasher

Nucleates MT assembly from minus end

Coiled-coil protein

Located in in subdistal appendages; MT 
anchoring (Seckel syndrome; prenatal 
dwarfism)

Coiled-coil protein

PCM scaffold; binds calmodulin, dynein, 

γ-tubulin ring complex, kinases, and 
phosphatases (human autoantigen; 
microcephalic osteodysplastic 
primordial dwarfism)

Rootletin

Many eukaryotes

2 × 230 kD

Coiled-coil protein

Fibers connecting PCM of two centrioles 

SAS-4
SAS-6

Many eukaryotes
Many eukaryotes

2 × 92 kD
2 × 74 kD

MT, microtubule; PCM, pericentriolar material.

and anchoring basal bodies

Coiled-coil protein
Coiled-coil protein with 

globular domains

Part of centriole scaffold with SAS-6
Forms 9-fold scaffold for centrioles 

(microcephaly 14)

C H A P T E R 

35 

Intermediate Filaments

Intermediate filaments (Fig. 35.1) are strong but flexible 

polymers that provide mechanical support for metazoan 
cells.  These  filaments  are  composed  of  many  different 
but  homologous  proteins.  The  filaments  were  named 
intermediate,  because  their  10-nm  diameters  are  inter-
mediate  between  those  of  the  thick  and  thin  filaments 
in  striated  muscles,  where  they  were  first  recognized 
(see Figs. 39.3 and 39.8). They are not found in plants, 
fungi,  or  prokaryotes,  although  one  bacterial  species  
has a coiled-coil protein with some properties of inter-
mediate  filaments.  Cytoplasmic  intermediate  filaments, 
in particular keratin filaments, tend to cluster into wavy 

bundles that vary in compactness, forming a branching 
network between the plasma membrane and the nucleus. 
Intercellular junctions called desmosomes anchor inter-
mediate  filaments  to  the  plasma  membrane  (see  Fig. 
31.8B) and thereby transmit mechanical forces between 
adjacent  cells.  Hemidesmosomes  connect  intermediate 
filaments  across  the  plasma  membrane  to  the  extracel-
lular matrix (see Fig. 31.8C).

The  continuum  of  intermediate  filaments  and  junc-
tions  prevents  excessive  stretching  of  cells  and  gives 
tissues such as epithelia and heart muscle their mechani-
cal  integrity.  Skin  appendages  built  from  crosslinked 

D

E

A

B

C

FIGURE 35.1  LIGHT AND ELECTRON MICROGRAPHS OF INTERMEDIATE FILAMENTS. A, Fluorescence light micrograph of a cultured 
fibroblast  stained  with  antibodies  to  vimentin  (red)  and  nuclear  lamins  (green)  and  with  DAPI  (4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole)  for  DNA  (blue). 
B, Fluorescence micrograph of cultured epithelial cells stained with antibodies to keratin intermediate filaments (orange). Desmosomes are stained 
green. Scale bar is ~10 µm. C, Fluorescence micrograph of crescentin labeled with a red fluorescent dye in the bacterium Caulobacter crescentus. 
Scale bar is 2 µm. D–E, Electron micrographs of thin sections of a cultured baby hamster kidney cell showing longitudinal (arrows) and cross 
sections (arrowheads) of vimentin intermediate filaments. (A, Courtesy U. Aebi, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland, and H. Herrmann, 
German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany. B, Courtesy E. Smith and E. Fuchs, University of Chicago, IL. C, Courtesy M. Cabeen 
and C. Jacobs-Wagner, Yale University, New Haven, CT. D–E, Courtesy R.D. Goldman, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL.)

 613

614 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

keratin  intermediate  filaments  such  as  hair  and  whale 
baleen, illustrate their flexibility and high tensile strength. 
Molecular defects in cytoplasmic intermediate filaments 
or  junctions  associated  with  them  result  in  rupture  of 
skin cells and blistering diseases. Defects in lamins asso-
ciated  with  the  nuclear  envelope  cause  a  bewildering 
array of diseases (see Fig. 9.10).

Structure of Intermediate  
Filament Subunits
Spectroscopic  data  and  X-ray  fiber  diffraction  of  mate-
rials  composed  of  intermediate  filaments,  like  wool,  
established the α-helical coiled-coil as their basic struc-
ture.  However,  the  proteins  forming  intermediate  fila-
ments can vary greatly in size, in contrast to the uniform 
sizes  of  actins  and  tubulins.  Eventually  amino  acid 
sequences  of  several  intermediate  filament  proteins  in 
the 1980s established that they all have a central α-helical 
segment  that  forms  a  rod  domain  flanked  by  variable 
N-  and  C-terminal  end  domains  (Fig.  35.2).  Gene 
sequences allow grouping of the proteins into five amino 
acid sequence homology classes (Table 35.1).

Head

6–180 AA

N

Rod

309–355 AA

Coil 1A

Coil 1B

Coil 2A

Coil 2B

L1

L12

Rod domain of vimentin

Tail

6–1200 AA

C

IF protein domains

Keratin

180

71

83

70

100

100

CK 19

Vimentin

NFL

NFM

NFH

Lamin A

Lamin B

9

55

151

142

312

319

326

331

319

313

497

607

33

35

λ

355

λ

355

42

276

197

INTERMEDIATE  FILAMENT 

FIGURE  35.2 
(IF)  PROTEINS 
HAVE A CENTRAL ROD DOMAIN FLANKED BY HEAD AND TAIL 
DOMAINS OF VARIABLE LENGTHS. The ribbon diagram shows a 
crystal  structure  of  the  vimentin  rod  domain  (see  Protein  Data  Bank 
[www.rcsb.org] file 1GK7). Rod domains consist of an α-helical coiled-
coil of 310 residues and are 46 nm long. Lamins have an additional 
42 residues in the rod domain (λ). The residues that are most important 
for assembly are at the beginning and end of the rod. End domains 
differ in sequence and size from 6 to 1200 residues. (Model of vimentin 
courtesy H. Herrmann, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, 
Germany.)

The characteristic feature of all intermediate filament 
proteins  is  a  dimeric,  parallel,  α-helical  coiled-coil  rod 
domain  that  forms  the  backbone  of  the  filaments.  The 
rod  domains  of  cytoplasmic  intermediate  filament  pro-
teins  are  approximately  46 nm  long.  Those  of  nuclear 
lamins  are  6 nm  longer  (see  Fig.  35.2  and  Fig.  35.3A). 
Like other coiled-coils (see Fig. 3.10), intermediate fila-
ment rod domains have a heptad repeat pattern of amino 
acids with the first and fourth residues providing a con-
tinuous row of hydrophobic interactions along the inter-
face of the two α-helices (see Fig. 3.10). The rod domains 
have  two  highly  conserved  sites  with  interruptions  in  
the coiled-coil termed L1 and L12. Zones of positive and 
negative charge alternate along the rod. When staggered 
appropriately, these zones provide complementary elec-
trostatic  bonds  for  assembly  into  filaments.  Approxi-
mately 20 highly conserved residues at each end of the 
rod  are  essential  for  filament  elongation  through  head-
to-tail  interactions  of  dimeric  molecules.  Studies  with 
mutant proteins show that assembly of filaments depends 
on  both  head-to-tail  overlaps  and  lateral  associations 
between rod domains.

The N- and C-terminal end domains flanking the rod 
are  largely  unstructured  and  vary  considerably  in  size 
(see Fig. 35.2). The N-terminal end (“head”) domains are 
essential for assembly whereas the C-terminal end (“tail”) 
domains  protrude  from  the  filament  surface  (see  Fig. 
35.3C) to control filament diameter and/or interact with 
other cellular components.

Each class of intermediate filament molecule forms in 
a characteristic manner. Keratins are obligate heterodi-
mers of one acidic (class I) and one basic (class II) keratin 
polypeptide. Vimentin and desmin (class III) and nuclear 
lamins (class V) form parallel dimers of identical poly-
peptides (see Fig. 35.3A). The intermediate filament pro-
teins  in  the  nervous  system  (class  IV)  form  complex 
mixtures of filaments, and it is not yet clear if they are 
mainly homodimers or if some are heterodimers.

Two molecules of cytoplasmic intermediate filament 
proteins  associate 
in  an  antiparallel,  half-staggered 
manner to form stable apolar dimers, sometimes called 
“tetramers”  because  they  consist  of  four  polypeptides 
(see  Fig.  35.3D).  These  tetramers  are,  at  least  in  vitro, 
the principal intermediates in filament assembly as they 
further associate laterally and longitudinally.

Evolution of Genes for Intermediate 
Filament Proteins
Well  after  the  genes  for  intermediate  filament  proteins 
were  discovered  in  the  higher  branches  of  the  animal 
lineage,  whole-genome  sequencing  established  their 
presence  in  a  wide  range  of  other  organisms  that 
descended  from  the  last  common  eukaryotic  ancestor 
(see  Fig.  2.4B).  Genes  for  animal  intermediate  filament 
proteins  arose  in  early  metazoan  cells  from  genes 

 

CHAPTER 35  n  Intermediate Filaments 

615

TABLE 35.1  Classification of Intermediate Filament Proteins Based on Rod Domain Sequences

Class

Type

Number of 
Human Genes Molecule

Distribution

Diseases

Acidic keratin

Basic keratin

28

26

I

II

III

Desmin
GFAP
Peripherin

Synemin

Vimentin

IV

Neurofilament
NFL

NFM

NFH

Nestin

α-Internexin
Lamins

V

40–65 kD, obligate 

heterodimer with class II

51–68 kD, obligate 

heterodimer with class I

53 kD, homopolymers
50 kD, homopolymers
57 kD

Epithelial cells and 
their appendages
Epithelial cells and 
their appendages

Muscle cells
Glial cells
Peripheral > CNS 

neurons

190 kD, interacts with 

Muscle cells

other class III IFs

Blistering skin, corneal dystrophy, brittle 

hair and nails
Similar to class I

Cardiac and skeletal myopathies
Alexander disease; mouse null viable

54 kD, homopolymers and 

Mesenchymal cells

Mouse null viable

heteropolymers

Obligate heteropolymers 

Neurons

Mouse null viable; human neuropathies

with NFM, NFH

Obligate heteropolymers 

Neurons

with NFL, NFH

Obligate heteropolymers 

Neurons

Mutations a risk factor in amyotrophic 

with NFL, NFM

230 kD, homopolymers

55 kD, homopolymers
7 Isoforms, 62–72 kD, 

homodimers

Embryonic neurons, 
muscle, other cells
Embryonic neurons
Metazoan nuclei, 
some protozoa

lateral sclerosis

Cardiomyopathy, lipodystrophy, one form 

of Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy, 
two forms of progeria, plus many others

1
1
1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1
3

CNS, central nervous system; GFAP; glial fibrillary acidic protein; IF, intermediate filament; NFH, neurofilament heavy; NFL, neurofilament light; NFM, 
neurofilament medium.
For reference, see Omary MB, Coulombe PA, McLean WH: Intermediate filament proteins and their associated diseases. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:2087–
2100. For current information see: http://www.interfil.org/.

encoding nuclear lamins (see Fig. 14.7). Most metazoans, 
including  chordates,  mollusks,  insects,  and  nematodes 
(see Fig. 2.8), retain genes for lamins.

The gene for cytoplasmic intermediate filaments arose 
from a duplicated lamin gene in an invertebrate organism 
in  the  lineage  leading  to  chordates.  One  copy  of  the 
duplicated gene was modified by deletion of the nuclear 
localization  sequence  and  the  CAAX  box  (a  C-terminal 
prenylation  site;  see  Fig.  13.10).  After  deletion  of  the 
codons  for  42  residues  (6  heptads)  in  coil  1B  and  the 
immunoglobulin domain in the “tail” in early chordates, 
further gene duplications and divergence produced the 
four families of genes for cytoplasmic intermediate fila-
ments of vertebrates (see Table 35.1). The unique func-
tional  requirements  for  each  class  of  intermediate 
filament  protein  have  conferred  strong  selective  pres-
sure  on  their  genes,  so  that  orthologs  are  much  more 
similar  than  the  paralogs.  For  example,  human  desmin  
is  much  more  similar  to  frog  desmin  than  it  is  to  
human keratin.

The bacterium Caulobacter crescentus has a gene for 
a  coiled-coil  protein,  crescentin,  with  some  features  of 
intermediate filament proteins (see Fig. 35.1C). However, 
it lacks some of the highly conserved residues in the rod 
domain of animal intermediate filament proteins, includ-
ing  those  vital  for  filament  elongation.  Crescentin  is 

required for the asymmetrical shape of Caulobacter cells 
and when expressed in Escherichia coli makes the cells 
spiral  shaped.  The  origin  of  this  gene  is  unknown,  but 
lateral transfer from a eukaryote followed by divergence 
is possible.

Filament Structure and Assembly
Intermediate filaments are approximately 10 nm in diam-
eter with wavy profiles in electron micrographs of thin 
sections of cells (see Fig. 35.1B) or after negative staining 
of isolated filaments (see Fig. 35.3B). In some cases, such 
as neurofilaments, parts of the head domains and most 
of  the  tail  domains  project  radially  from  the  filament 
core, forming a type of bottlebrush (see Fig. 35.3C). The 
most  carefully  studied  intermediate  filaments  are  built 
from  octameric  complexes  (ie,  two  laterally  associated 
molecular  dimers)  that  associate  end  to  end  to  form 
protofibrils like the strands of a rope (see Fig. 35.3D). In 
cross section, a standard intermediate filament has up to 
16  coiled-coils,  but  their  exact  internal  arrangement  is 
not known. Because the molecular dimers lack polarity, 
intermediate  filaments  are  considered  to  be  apolar  (ie, 
both ends of the filament are equivalent; see Fig. 35.3D). 
This is a striking difference from actin filaments (see Fig. 
33.8)  and  microtubules  (see  Fig.  34.4),  which  depend  

616 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

A

D

B

C

Apolar assembly unit

~32 coiled-coils in

cross section

Head

Tail

Polar coiled-coil dimer 46 nm

Dimer of coiled-coil rod domains

Intermediate filament
10-nm diameter

FIGURE 35.3 
INTERMEDIATE FILAMENTS ARE CONSTRUCTED LIKE A MULTISTRAND ROPE. A–C, Electron micrographs. A, Metal-
shadowed  lamin  molecules  consisting  of  two  polypeptides  joined  by  a  long α-helical  coiled-coil  with  globular  tail  domains  at  the  C-terminus. 
B,  Negatively  stained  vimentin  intermediate  filaments.  C,  Rotary  shadowed  intermediate  filament  showing  radial  projections.  D,  A  model  for 
intermediate filament structure. The building blocks are antiparallel complexes of two coiled-coil molecular dimers. The ribbon diagram is a model 
of the dimer of vimentin rod domains. Assembly occurs via the formation of unit-length filaments, the products of the lateral association of eight 
antiparallel  dimers,  which  then  longitudinally  anneal  into  intermediate  filaments.  This  model  is  consistent  with  x-ray  fiber  diffraction  patterns, 
chemical crosslinking, and other data, but details of the subunit packing remain to be determined. (A and C, Courtesy U. Aebi, University of 
Basel, Switzerland. B, Courtesy H. Herrmann, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany. D, Top, Data from Steinert P, Marekov 
LN, Parry DA. Conservation of the structure of keratin intermediate filaments. Biochemistry. 1993;32:10046–10056. D, Bottom, Model courtesy 
H. Herrmann, German Cancer Research center, Heidelberg, Germany. For reference, see Chernyatina AA, Nicolet S, Aebi U, Herrmann H, Strelkov 
SV. Atomic structure of the vimentin central α-helical domain and its implications for intermediate filament assembly. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2012;109:13620–13625.)

on their polarity for many functions, including the uni-
directional motion of motor proteins. Furthermore, the 
number  of  protofilaments  can  vary  along  a  single  fila-
ment,  making  them  much  more  heterogeneous  than 
actin filaments or microtubules.

Intermediate filaments are insoluble under physiologi-
cal conditions, but can be dissociated in buffers of low 
ionic strength and high pH. Under physiological  condi-
tions  isolated  subunits  spontaneously  repolymerize in a 
few  minutes.  The  first  assembly  product  observed  is  a 
“unit-length filament” consisting of eight laterally associ-
ated  molecular  dimers  with  the  length  (60 nm)  of  a 
molecular dimer. Intermediate filaments grow by longi-
tudinal  annealing  of  unit-length  filaments  at  both  ends, 
in contrast to growth of actin filaments and microtubules 
by addition of single subunits at their ends. The nucle-
ation  mechanism  that  initiates  polymerization  and  the 
elongation reactions are still being investigated, but it is 
clear that no nucleotides or other cofactors are needed 
for  assembly.  Most  of  the  head  domain  is  required  to 
assemble  intermediate  filaments  in  vitro  and  in  vivo.  
The  tail  domain  is  dispensable  for  assembly,  although 
more molecular dimers can pack laterally into a filament 
in its absence.

Intermediate  filaments  are  among  the  most  chemi-
cally stable cellular structures, resisting solubilization by 
extremes of temperature as well as high concentrations 
of salt and detergents (Fig. 35.4). Nevertheless, interme-
diate  filaments  in  some  cells  exchange  their  subunits 
within minutes to hours during interphase. For example, 
if vimentin is labeled with a fluorescent dye and injected 
into live cells or GFP-vimentin is expressed, fluorescent 
vimentin incorporates into cytoplasmic filaments. After 
a spot of fluorescent filaments is photobleached with a 
laser, the fluorescence recovers over a period of several 
minutes,  indicating  that  subunits  along  the  length  of  
the  filaments  exchange  with  a  pool  of  unpolymerized 
molecules.  (Fig.  38.8  shows  a  similar  experiment  
with actin.)

Although no known motors move on the apolar inter-
mediate  filaments,  motor  proteins  move  intermediate 
filaments along microtubules. A spectacular example is 
found in nerve cells (see Fig. 37.5C).

Posttranslational Modifications
Phosphorylation  dramatically  affects  polymer  assembly 
and  dynamics  of  many  types  of  intermediate  filaments. 

 

CHAPTER 35  n  Intermediate Filaments 

617

The  process  is  complex  and  incompletely  understood, 
as several different kinases phosphorylate many different 
sites and these phosphates tend to turn over rapidly. The 
impact of phosphorylation depends critically on the par-
ticular residue modified.

The  best  example  of  phosphorylation  destabilizing  
an intermediate filament is the breakdown of the nuclear 
lamina during mitosis (see Fig. 44.6). The mitotic kinase 
Cdkl-cyclin  B  phosphorylates  two  sites  immediately 

L

V

B

A

FIGURE 35.4 
INTERMEDIATE FILAMENTS RESIST SOLUBILI-
ZATION WHEN CELLS ARE EXTRACTED. A, A fluorescence micro-
graph shows the network of vimentin intermediate filaments remaining 
after extraction of a Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell with the deter-
gent Triton X-100, DNase, and a high concentration of salt to remove 
lipids,  DNA,  and  soluble  proteins.  B,  Gel  electrophoresis  of  these 
extracted cells reveals that lamins (L) and vimentin (V) are among the 
few proteins remaining in the detergent-resistant cytoskeletal fraction. 
(Courtesy R. Goldman, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL.)

flanking the rod domains of lamins, disrupting the head-
to-tail overlap required for the interactions of molecules 
that mediate filament elongation and lateral association 
of  subunits.  Cytoplasmic  vimentin  filaments  also  disas-
semble  in  some  cell  types  during  mitosis  (Fig.  35.5B), 
but  the  process  is  more  complex.  Vimentin  lacks  the 
Cdk1-recognition sites immediately flanking the α-helical 
rod  domain  and  coassembly  with  another  intermediate 
filament protein, nestin, appears to be a prerequisite for 
phosphorylation to mediate disassembly. In contrast the 
organization  of  keratins  changes  only  subtly  during 
mitosis (Fig. 35.5C). The role of phosphorylation of inter-
mediate filaments during interphase is less clear, but it 
might  influence  the  structure  of  the  cytoskeleton  in 
response to various signals.

Neurofilaments, abundant intermediate filaments in 
nerve axons and dendrites (see Fig. 35.9), are an excep-
tion  to  the  rule  that  phosphorylation  destabilizes  inter-
mediate  filaments.  The  most  stable  neurofilaments  are 
heavily phosphorylated in their large C-terminal tail end 
domain (see Fig. 35.2), whereas the pool of unpolymer-
ized  of  NFM  (neurofilament  medium)  and  NFH  (neuro-
filament  heavy)  molecules  is  not  phosphorylated.  The 
NFM and NFH end domains are not essential for assem-
bly, so phosphorylation might influence other functions 
of neurofilaments.

Keratin intermediate filaments in hair are chemically 
crosslinked  to  each  other  and  associated  with  matrix 
proteins  by  disulfide  bonds  and  amide  bonds  between 
lysines and acidic residues, creating a tough composite 
material built on the same principles as fiberglass. Beauti-
cians  take  advantage  of  these  crosslinks  to  modify  the 

A

5 µm

B

C

FIGURE  35.5  FLUORESCENCE MICROGRAPHS OF INTERMEDIATE FILAMENTS. A, A cultured fibroblast stained with antibodies to 
vimentin intermediate filaments (red) and microtubules (green) and fluorescent phalloidin for actin filaments (blue). B, Vimentin intermediate fila-
ments dispersed in mitosis. C, Dividing epithelial cells stained with an antibody to keratin, which remains polymerized during mitosis. (A, Courtesy 
U. Aebi, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland, and H. Herrmann, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany. B, Courtesy 
R.D. Goldman, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL. C, Courtesy H. Herrmann, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany.)

618 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

shape  of  hairs  during  “permanents.”  They  first  reduce 
disulfide bonds and then reform them after molding the 
hair into a new shape.

Expression of Intermediate Filaments in 
Specialized Cells
Animal  cells  express  at  least  one  of  the  three  major 
nuclear  lamins,  whereas  the  repertoire  of  cytoplasmic 
intermediate filament proteins varies greatly in different 
cell types (see Table 35.1). Most cells express predomi-
nantly one class—or at the most two classes—of cytoplas-
mic intermediate filament proteins, presumably making 
use  of  their  unique  properties.  For  example,  epithelial 
cells express class 1 and class 2 keratins, whereas muscle 
cells  express  desmin  and  mesenchymal  cells  express 
vimentin.  A  few  cells,  such  as  the  basal  myoepithelial  
cells of the mammary gland, express two types of inter-
mediate filament proteins that sort into separate filaments 
with  different  distributions  in  the  cytoplasm.  Similarly, 
microinjection or expression of foreign intermediate fila-
ment  subunits  usually  (but  not  invariably)  results  in 
correct sorting to the homologous class of filaments.

In tissues such as skin and brain, cells express a suc-
cession of intermediate filament isoforms as they mature 
and differentiate. For example, dividing cells at the base 
of  the  epidermis  of  skin  express  mainly  keratins  5  and 
14,  whereas  terminally  differentiating  cells  express  
keratins  1  and  10  (Fig.  35.6).  The  switch  in  keratin  

expression is associated with a marked increase in fila-
ment  bundling,  a  feature  that  might  contribute  to  the 
resistance  of  the  surface  layers  of  the  skin  to  chemical 
dissociation  and  mechanical  rupture.  In  the  nervous 
system, supporting glial cells express a class III interme-
diate filament protein, whereas embryonic neurons first 
express  the  class  IV α-internexin  and  later  express  the 
three  other  class  IV  neurofilament  isoforms  (see  Table 
35.1). Although the smallest neurofilament isoform (NFL 
[neurofilament light]) can assemble on its own in vitro, 
the  formation  of  intermediate  filaments  in  neurons 
requires NFL and one of the larger isoforms NFM of NFH, 
which are encoded by distinct genes.

Tumors  often  express  the  intermediate  filament 
protein  that  is  characteristic  of  the  differentiated  cells 
from which they arose. This is helpful to pathologists in 
diagnosing  poorly  differentiated  or  metastatic  cancers. 
For  example,  tumors  of  muscle  cells  express  desmin 
rather  than  keratin  (expressed  in  epithelial  cells)  or 
vimentin (expressed in mesenchymal cells). This rule is 
not  absolute,  as  some  tumors  arising  in  epithelia  turn 
down the expression of keratin and turn up the expres-
sion of vimentin before invading surrounding tissues.

Proteins Associated With  
Intermediate Filaments
A  number  of  proteins  bind  intermediate  filaments  and 
link them to membranes and other cytoskeletal polymers 

Skin
  surface

Stratum 
  corneum
Granular

Spinous
  (K1 / K10)

Basal 
  (K5 / K14)

Dermis

A. Histology

B. K14

C. K10

D. Keratin mutations

Autosomal
dominant
mutation

E. Hyperkeratosis
    (K10 mutant)

Minor
mechanical
stress

Great

Null
mutation

mechanical

stress

Lysis

FIGURE 35.6  EXPRESSION OF KERATINS AND EFFECTS OF KERATIN MUTATIONS ON THE STRATIFIED SQUAMOUS EPITHE-
LIUM OF SKIN. A, Light micrograph of a section of mouse skin stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). B, Localization of keratin 14 in a 
section of skin using antibodies and a histochemical procedure that leaves a brown deposit. Proliferating cells in the basal layer express keratin 
5 and keratin 14. C, Localization of keratin 10 to differentiating cells in intermediate layers of the epithelium. These cells eventually lose their nuclei 
and form the surface layers of cornified cells. D, Drawings illustrating the effects of keratin mutations on the structure of the epithelium. Dominant 
negative  keratin  mutations  affect  the  assembly  of  keratin  filaments  wherever  they  are  expressed.  Human  patients  with  epidermolysis  bullosa 
simplex have point mutations in keratin 5 or keratin 14 that disrupt the filaments in the basal cells of the stratified epithelium, causing mechanical 
fragility and cellular rupture with mild trauma, resulting in blisters. Mutations in keratin 1 or keratin 10 cause cell rupture in the middle layers of 
the epithelium where they are expressed. Null mutations in keratin genes disrupt the epithelium to a lesser extent than dominant negative point 
mutations. E, Light micrograph of a histologic section of skin illustrating how a mutation in keratin 10 disrupts cells in the spinous layer of the 
epithelium and causes hyperkeratosis (excess scaling of surface layers). (A–C and E, Courtesy P. Coulombe, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 
MD. D, Modified from Fuchs E, Cleveland DW. A structural scaffolding of intermediate filaments in health and disease. Science. 1998;279:514–519. 
Copyright 1998 American Association for the Advancement of Science.)

 

CHAPTER 35  n  Intermediate Filaments 

619

TABLE 35.2  Proteins Associated With Intermediate Filaments
Name
Plakins
BPAG-1

Multiple splice isoforms  

Molecule

Distribution

(a, b, e, n)

Desmoplakin

Two splice isoforms

a: Hemidesmosomes
b: Muscle, cartilage
e: Epithelial hemidesmosomes
n: Neurons
Desmosomes

Partners

Diseases

IFs, MTs, actin

Autoimmune bullous 

pemphigoid

IFs; cadherin and 

Autoimmune pemphigus; 

other desmosome 
proteins

genetic striate palmoplantar 
keratoderma

Plectin

Multiple splice isoforms

Most tissues except neurons

IFs, actin, MTs, 

Autoimmune pemphigus; 

spectrin, β4-integrin

genetic epidermolysis bullosa 
with muscular dystrophy

Epidermal
Filaggrin

Ten 37-kD filaggrins cut by 

Cornified epithelia

Aggregates keratin

?

proteolysis from 
profilaggrin

Lamin Associated
LAP1

57–70-kD isoforms

LAP2

LBR

Emerin

50 kD

73 kD

34 kD

Integral nuclear membrane 

Binds lamins to 

proteins

nuclear envelope

Integral nuclear membrane 

Binds lamins to 

protein

nuclear envelope

Integral nuclear membrane 

protein

? Peripheral protein of the 
inner nuclear membrane

Pelger-Huët anomaly; 

Greenberg skeletal dysplasia

Binds actin filaments 

Emery-Dreifuss muscular 

to the nuclear 
envelope

dystrophy

ABD, actin binding domain; IFs, intermediate filaments; MTs, microtubules.

(Table 35.2). Integral membrane proteins, called nuclear 
envelope  transmembrane  proteins,  anchor  nuclear 
lamins to the nuclear membrane (see Fig. 9.8). Filaggrin 
mediates  the  aggregation  of  keratin  filaments  in  the 
upper layers of skin.

Plakins are giant proteins that link cytoskeletal poly-
mers  to  each  other  and  to  membranes  by  virtue  of 
binding  sites  for  cytoskeletal  polymers  and  proteins  of 
adhesive  junctions.  Like  several  other  plakins,  plectin 
has globular domains on both ends of a 200-nm coiled-
coil.  Binding  sites  in  both  globular  domains  enable 
plectin to crosslink intermediate filaments to each other, 
to  actin  filaments,  and  microtubules  (Fig.  35.7).  Reces-
sive  mutations  in  human  plectin  cause  a  rare  form  of 
muscular  dystrophy  associated  with  skin  blisters.  The 
null  mutation  in  mice  is  lethal.  Plectin  and  two  other 
plakins  link  keratin  filaments  to  three  different  plasma 
membrane  adhesion  proteins  at  desmosomes  and 
hemidesmosomes  (see  Fig.  31.8).  Similarly, desmopla-
kin  anchors  keratin  filaments  to  cadherins  at  desmo-
somes (see Fig. 31.8B). At hemidesmosomes plectin 1a 
links  keratin  to  β4-integrins,  while  the  plakin  BPAG1e 
(bullous pemphigoid antigen 1-e) links keratin filaments 
to the transmembrane protein, BPAG2 (bullous pemphi-
goid antigen 2). BPAG1e is one of the many splice forms 
of the dystonin gene, which is mutated in some patients 
with neuropathies and one form of epidermolysis bullosa.

Functions of Intermediate Filaments  
in Cells
Intermediate  filaments  function  primarily  as  flexible 
intracellular  tendons  (analogous  to  nylon  rope)  that 
prevent excessive stretching of  cells  that  are  subjected 
to  external  or  internal  phy sical forces. This function is 
complemented by their interactions with microtubules, 
actin filaments, and membranes. For example, if a relaxed 
smooth muscle is stretched, the intracellular network of 
desmin filaments between cytoplasmic dense bodies and 
the  plasma  membrane  (see  Fig.  39.23)  is  transformed 
from a polygonal three-dimensional network into a con-
tinuous strap that runs the length of the cell (Fig. 35.8). 
Up  to  the  point  at  which  this  network  is  taut,  the  cell 
offers  little  resistance  to  stretching.  Beyond  this  point, 
the  cell  strongly  resists  further  stretching.  Actin  fila-
ments  anchored  to  dense  bodies  interact  with  myosin 
(see Fig. 39.23) to apply contractile force to the network 
of intermediate filaments.

Although the geometry of the network of intermedi-
ate filaments is different in striated muscles, the concept 
is  remarkably  similar  to  smooth  muscle.  Desmin  fila-
ments  surround  the  Z  disks  in  addition  to  forming  a 
looser,  longitudinal  basket  around  the  myofibrils  (see 
Fig. 39.8). The ends of both skeletal and cardiac muscle 
cells  must  be  anchored  to  transmit  their  contractile 

620 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

N*

D
B
A

Actin
β4-Integrin

s
t

a
e
p
e
r
 

n
i
r
t
c
e
p
S

l
i

o
c
-
d
e

l
i

o
C

MAP2, tau

BB

l

r
a
u
p
o
g

l

i

n
a
m
o
d

l

i

a
n
m
r
e

t
-

C

β4-Integrin
Intermediate
  filaments
β dystroglycan

C
C

CA
FIGURE  35.7  PLECTIN STRUCTURE AND ACTIVITIES. A, Domain structure of plectin with the some of its known ligands listed to the 
right: the N-terminal actin-binding domain and the spectrin repeats are similar to those of α-actinin (see Fig. 33.17); the 170-nm long, α-helical 
coiled-coil forms dimers; six C-terminal repeats form a large globular domain. B, Electron micrograph of plectin molecules. C, Electron micrograph 
of an extracted fibroblast reacted with gold-labeled antibodies to plectin. Gold particles (yellow) identify plectin molecules (blue) as linkers between 
intermediate filaments (orange) and microtubules (red). The specimen was prepared by rotary shadowing. The molecules are pseudocolored for 
clarity. To visualize these interactions numerous actin filaments were removed by incubation with a gelsolin fragment. D, Drawing of plectin (blue) 
connecting  cytoskeletal  polymers  to  each  other.  (B,  Courtesy  G.  Wiche,  University  of  Vienna,  Austria.  C,  Courtesy  G.  Borisy,  University  of 
Wisconsin, Madison.)

D

Unstretched

Stretched

)
g
(
 

i

n
o
s
n
e

t
 

i

e
v
s
s
a
P

15

10

5

0

14

17

20

23
Length (mm)

26

FIGURE 35.8  SMOOTH MUSCLE CELL INTERMEDIATE FILA-
MENTS  FORM  AN  INTRACELLULAR  TENDON  THAT  RESISTS 
EXCESSIVE STRETCHING. The graph shows that a relaxed smooth 
muscle resists stretching very little up to a length of 21 mm. Resistance 
(passive tension) increases dramatically with further stretching. At short 
lengths, the three-dimensional network of intermediate filaments and 
dense  bodies  is  open,  offering  little  resistance  to  stretching.  At  the 
inflection  point  of  the  resistance  curve,  the  filaments  are  extended 
linearly  from  one  end  of  the  cell  to  the  other  and  so  resist  further 
stretching.  (Data  from  Cooke  P,  Fay  R.  Correlation  between  fiber 
length, ultrastructure, and the length tension relationship of mammalian 
smooth muscle. J Cell Biol. 1972;52:105–116.)

forces.  This  is  accomplished  by  intercellular  junctions 
that  combine  features  of  desmosomes  or  hemidesmo-
somes (anchoring intermediate filaments) and adherens 
junctions  (anchoring  actin  filaments).  In  heart  muscle 
cells, these hybrid junctions are called intercalated disks 
(see Fig. 39.18).

Keratin intermediate filaments are the major proteins 
in the epithelial cells of the skin, where they form a dense 
network  connected  to  numerous  desmosomes  and 
hemidesmosomes (see Figs. 35.1 and 35.6). These junc-
tions  anchor  a  physically  continuous  network  of  inter-
mediate filaments, imparting mechanical stability to the 
epithelium.  If  either  the  junctions  or  keratin  filaments 
fail, cells pull apart or rupture, and the skin blisters.

Mutations that compromise keratin intermediate fila-
ment  assembly  or  the  junctions  to  which  they  are 
anchored illustrate the importance of this network. Point 
mutations near the ends of the keratin rod cause espe-
cially  severe  forms  of  skin  diseases  (such  as  epider-
molysis  bullosa  simplex)  characterized  by  blistering 
and  sensitivity  to  mechanical  stress.  Similar  mutations 
engineered  in  transgenic  mice  faithfully  reproduce  the 
human disease. The expression pattern of the defective 
keratin  determines  which  epithelial  cells  are  affected. 
For example, a mutation in the rod domain of keratin 14 
or keratin 5 leads to disruption of the basal cells in the 
epidermis where these keratins are expressed. Similarly, 
mutations in keratin 10 or keratin 1 cause cellular rupture 
at higher cell layers in the epidermis where those kera-
tins  are  found  (see  Fig.  35.6E).  Similarly,  mutations  in 
keratin 12 or keratin 3 cause sores on the cornea of the 
eye, where they are expressed.

A mutant keratin can cause disease in heterozygotes 
that  express  one  normal  keratin  gene.  This  is  called  
a  dominant  negative  mutation  (or  autosomal  domi-
nant  mutation).  Defective  keratin  subunits  assemble 

 

CHAPTER 35  n  Intermediate Filaments 

621

50 nm

MT

A

IFs

B

FIGURE 35.9  ELECTRON MICROGRAPHS OF INTERMEDIATE FILAMENTS (CALLED NEUROFILAMENTS) IN AXONS OF NERVE 
CELLS. A, A thin cross section shows clusters of intermediate filaments and microtubules. B, A longitudinal freeze-fracture preparation shows 
a microtubule (MT [red]) with associated vesicles and many intermediate filaments (IF [orange]). (A, Courtesy P. Eagle, Kings College, London, 
United Kingdom. B, Courtesy N. Hirokawa, University of Tokyo, Japan.)

imperfectly  with  normal  keratin  subunits  and  thereby 
compromise  the  physical  integrity  and  strength  of  the 
filaments. The affected epithelial cells can grow, divide, 
and even form desmosomes with neighboring cells, but 
they tear apart physically when subjected to the shearing 
forces that affect the skin during normal activities. Young 
children are severely affected, but some patients improve 
with  age.  They  learn  to  avoid  physical  trauma  to  their 
skin and may also adapt biochemically in some way.

In contrast to these dominant negative keratin muta-
tions, complete loss of a keratin subunit by a null muta-
tion can be less severe (see Fig. 35.6D). Mice and humans 
that lack keratin 14 suffer from milder blistering than do 
patients  with  dominant  negative  point  mutations  of 
keratin 14. Mice without functional keratin 8 or keratin 
18  genes  may  die  during  embryonic  development,  but  
a  few  survive  with  only  modest  defects  in  their  colon 
and  liver.  Remarkably,  mice  also  survive  deletion  of  
both  copies  of  the  gene  for  desmin  have  only  mildly 
disorganized  muscle  architecture,  although  vigorous 
exercise  is  fatal.  In  contrast  humans  heterozygous  for 
many  different  desmin  mutations  may  suffer  severely 
from generalized muscle failure. Other desmin mutations 
cause  severe  dilated  cardiomyopathy  requiring  heart 
transplantation.

In addition to providing mechanical stability neurofila-
ments have a second function of equal importance. Once 
a  nerve  cell  forms  synapses  (see  Figs.  17.9  and  17.10),  
it  produces  neurofilaments,  apparently  to  expand  the 
diameter of the axon (Fig. 35.9). This enhances electrical 
communication  in  the  nervous  system,  because  the 
velocity  of  action  potentials  (see  Fig.  17.6)  depends  

on the diameter of the axon. Japanese quail with a trun-
cation mutation of NFL gene are viable, but the diame-
ters  of  their  axons  are  smaller  than  normal  and  their 
coordination is defective.

Lamins were originally thought to be a simple support 
network for the nuclear envelope, but they have other 
important functions. For example, mutations that create 
toxic  fragments  of  lamins  may  perturb  lamin  assembly 
and thereby interfere with DNA replication. This effect 
may reflect a role for the lamina in organizing the chro-
mosomal  architecture  in  the  interphase  nucleus.  Most 
remarkably,  more  than  400  human  mutations  in  the 
lamin  A/C  gene  LMNA  cause  diverse  human  diseases. 
These include premature aging (progeria) (see Fig. 9.10), 
the Emery-Dreifuss form of muscular dystrophy, and mul-
tiple  disorders  of  fat  tissue  and  nerves.  These  tissue-
specific deficiencies are remarkable given the ubiquitous 
expression of lamins A and C in all tissues.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We  thank  Ueli  Aebi  and  Harald  Herrmann  for  their 
detailed suggestions on the revision of this chapter and 
their contributions of new illustrations.

SELECTED READINGS

Bouameur  JE,  Favre  B,  Borradori  L.  Plakins,  a  versatile  family  of 
cytolinkers: roles in skin integrity and in human diseases.  J  Invest 
Dermatol. 2014;134:885-894.

Chernyatina AA, Guzenko D, Strelkov SV. Intermediate filament struc-
ture:  the  bottom-up  approach.  Curr  Opin  Cell  Biol.  2015;32:
65-72.

622 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

Chernyatina AA, Nicolet S, Aebi U, Herrmann H, Strelkov SV. Atomic 
structure  of  the  vimentin  central α-helical  domain  and  its  implica-
tions for intermediate filament assembly. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 
2012;109:13620-13625.

Clemen  CS,  Herrmann  H,  Strelkov  SV,  Schröder  R.  Desminopathies: 

Leung CL, Green KJ, Liem RKH. Plakins: a family of versatile cytolinker 

proteins. Trends Cell Biol. 2002;12:37-45.

Lowery J, Kuczmarski ER, Herrmann H, Goldman RD. Intermediate fila-
ments play a pivotal role in regulating cell architecture and function. 
J Biol Chem. 2015;290:17145-17153.

pathology and mechanisms. Acta Neuropathol. 2013;125:47-75.

Moller-Jensen  J,  Löwe  J.  Increasing  complexity  of  the  bacterial  cyto-

Erber  A,  Riemer  D,  Bovenschulte  M,  Weber  K.  Molecular  phylogeny  
of  metazoan  intermediate  filament  proteins.  J  Mol  Evol.  1998;47:
751-762.

Helfand BT, Chang L, Goldman RD. The dynamic and motile properties 
of  intermediate  filaments.  Annu  Rev  Cell  Dev  Biol.  2003;19:
445-467.

Herrmann  H,  Aebi  U.  Intermediate  filaments:  molecular  structure, 
assembly mechanism, and integration into functionally distinct intra-
cellular scaffolds. Annu Rev Biochem. 2004;73:749-789.

Jefferson JJ, Leung CL, Liem RK. Plakins: goliaths that link cell junctions 

and the cytoskeleton. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2004;5:542-553.

Kirmse R, Portet S, Mücke N, et al. A quantitative kinetic model for the 
in vitro assembly of intermediate filaments from tetrameric vimen-
tin. J Biol Chem. 2007;282:18563-18572.

Köster S, Weitz DA, Goldman RD, Aebi U, Herrmann H. Intermediate 
filament mechanics in vitro and in the cell: from coiled coils to fila-
ments, fibers and networks. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2015;32:82-91.

skeleton. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2005;17:75-81.

Nöding  B,  Herrmann  H,  Köster  S.  Direct  observation  of  subunit 
exchange along mature vimentin intermediate filaments. Biophys J. 
2014;107:2923-2931.

Omary MB, Coulombe PA, McLean WH. Intermediate filament proteins 

and their associated diseases. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:2087-2100.

Peter A, Stick R. Evolutionary aspects in intermediate filament proteins. 

Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2015;32:48-55.

Szeverenyi  I,  Cassidy  AJ,  Chung  CW,  et al.  The  Human  Intermediate 
Filament  Database:  comprehensive  information  on  a  gene  family 
involved in many human diseases. Hum Mutat. 2008;29:351-360.

Wiche G. Role of plectin in cytoskeleton organization and dynamics.  

J Cell Sci. 1998;111:2477-2486.

Worman HJ, Courvalin J-C. The nuclear lamina and inherited disease. 

Trends Cell Biol. 2002;12:591-598.

C H A P T E R 

36 

Motor Proteins

Molecular  motors  use  adenosine  triphosphate  (ATP) 

hydrolysis  to  power  movements  of  subcellular  com­
ponents,  such  as  organelles  and  chromosomes,  along  
the  two  polarized  cytoskeletal  fibers:  actin  filaments  
and  microtubules.  No  motors  are  known  to  move  on  
intermediate  filaments.  Motor  proteins  also  produce 
force  locally  within  the  network  of  cytoskeletal  poly­
mers,  which  transmits  these  forces  to  determine  
the shape of each cell and, ultimately, the architecture 
of  tissues  and  whole  organisms.  Chapters  37  to  39  
and  44  illustrate  how  motors  move  cells  and  their  
internal parts.

Just  three  families  of  motor  proteins—myosin, 
kinesin, and dynein—power most eukaryotic cellular 
movements (Fig. 36.1 and Table 36.1). During evolution, 
myosin,  kinesin,  and  Ras  family  guanosine  triphospha­
tases (GTPases) appear to have shared a common ances­
tor (Fig. 36.1), whereas dynein is a member of the AAA 
adenosine  triphosphatase  (ATPase)  family  (Box 
36.1). Although the ancestral genes appeared in prokary­
otes, and prokaryotes have homologs of both actin and 
tubulin,  none  of  these  motor  proteins  has  been  found  
in  prokaryotes.  Over  time,  gene  duplication  and  diver­
gence  in  eukaryotes  gave  rise  to  multiple  genes  for 
myosin,  dynein,  and  kinesin,  each  encoding  proteins 

Primodial NTPase

with  specialized  functions.  Even  the  slimmed  down 
genome of budding yeast includes genes for five myosins, 
six  kinesins,  and  one  dynein.  Table  36.1  lists  other 
protein  machines  that  produce  molecular  movements 
during  protein  and  nucleic  acid  synthesis,  proton 
pumping, and bacterial motility.

Motor proteins have two parts: a motor domain that 
uses  ATP  hydrolysis  to  produce  movements  and  a  tail 
that  allows  the  motors  to  self­associate  and/or  to  bind 
particular cargo. Within the three families, the tails are 
more diverse than the motor domains, allowing for spe­
cialized functions of each motor isoform.

All motor proteins are enzymes that convert chemical 
energy stored in ATP into molecular motion to produce 
force  upon  an  associated  cytoskeletal  polymer  (Fig. 
36.2). If the motor is anchored, the polymer may move. 
If the polymer is anchored, the motor and any attached 
cargo  may  move.  If  both  are  anchored,  the  force 
stretches  elastic  elements  in  the  molecules  transiently, 
but nothing moves, and the energy is lost as heat. Cells 
use all these options (see Chapters 37 to 39).

Biochemists  originally  discovered  and  purified  these 
motors  using  enzyme  (eg,  ATP  hydrolysis)  or  in  vitro 
motility assays (Fig. 36.11). With the prototype motors 
identified,  investigators  found  further  examples  and 

Primodial GTPase

Primodial myosin

Primodial kinesin

Primodial AAA ATPase

Many

contemporary

GTPases

Many

contemporary

myosins

Many

contemporary

kinesins

Dyneins

Other AAA-
ATPases

FIGURE 36.1  Evolution of myosin, kinesin, and dynein adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) motors from genes that encoded two primordial 
proteins that bound and hydrolyzed nucleoside triphosphates. Gene duplication and divergence created genes for many contemporary motors. 

 623

624 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

Direction

Cargo

Microtubule
Microtubule

Microtubule
Microtubule

Track

Actin
Actin
Actin
Actin
Actin

Minus end
Minus end

Plus end
Minus end

Microtubules
Membranes, chromosomes

Barbed end
Barbed end
Barbed end
Barbed end
Pointed end

Myosin filament
Myosin, actin
Membranes
Organelles
Endocytic vesicles

TABLE 36.1  Mechanochemical Enzymes and Other Proteins That Produce Movements
Families
ATPases
Myosins
Muscle myosin
Myosin II
Myosin I
Myosin V
Myosin VI
Dyneins
Axonemal
Cytoplasmic
Kinesins
Kinesin­1
Kinesin­14
Other Mechanochemical Systems
Polymerases and Helicases
Ribosome
DNA polymerase
RNA polymerase
CMG DNA helicase
RNA helicases
Conformational System
Spasmin/centrin
Polymerizing Systems
Actin filaments
Microtubules
Worm sperm MSP
Rotary Motors
Bacterial flagella
F­type ATPase
V­type ATPase pump

None

None
None
None

None
None
None

5′ to 3′
5′ to 3′
5′ to 3′
—
—

None

Membranes
Chromosomes
Cytoskeleton

Barbed end
Plus end
Not polar

Bidirectional
Bidirectional

mRNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
RNA

Cell, basal body

None
None
None
DNA
RNA

Cell
None
None

Membranes, intermediate filaments
? Microtubules

Energy

ATP
ATP
ATP
ATP
ATP

ATP
ATP

ATP
ATP

GTP
ATP
ATP
ATP
ATP

Ca2+

ATP
GTP

H+ or Na+ gradient
H+ or ATP
ATP

ATP, adenosine triphosphate; ATPase, adenosine triphosphatase; GTP, guanosine triphosphate; mRNA, messenger RNA; MSP, major sperm protein. The 
terms “barbed” and “pointed” end refer to the appearance of actin filaments decorated with a myosin fragment (Fig. 33.8).

variant  isoforms  of  each  by  purifying  proteins,  cloning 
complementary DNAs (cDNAs), sequencing genomes, or 
genetic screening.

Myosins
Myosins are the only motors that are known to use actin 
filaments  as  tracks.  Members  of  the  diverse  myosin 
superfamily arose from a common ancestor and share a 
motor unit called a myosin “head” that produces force 
on  actin  filaments  (Fig.  36.3).  One  or  two  heads  are 
attached  to  various  types  of  tails  that  are  adapted  
for  diverse  purposes,  including  polymerization  into  
filaments,  binding  membranes,  and  interacting  with 
various cargos.

Myosin heads consist of two parts. A catalytic domain 
at the N­terminus of the myosin heavy chain binds and 
hydrolyzes ATP and interacts with actin filaments. Light 
chain  domains  consist  of  an  α­helical  extension  of  the 

heavy  chain  from  the  catalytic  domain  associated  with 
one  to  seven  light  chains.  Light  chains  are  related  to 
calmodulin (see Fig. 3.12), which also serves as a light 
chain for many myosins.

Myosin Mechanochemistry
Myosin  was  discovered  in  skeletal  muscle  and  used  to 
establish general principles that apply, with interesting 
variations, to energy transduction by all myosins. Muscle 
myosin  is  responsible  for  the  forceful  contraction  of 
skeletal  muscle  (see  Chapter  39).  Like  other  types  of 
myosin­II, it has two heads on a long tail formed from an 
α­helical coiled­coil. These tails polymerize into bipolar 
filaments (see Figs. 5.7 and 39.6).

The head of muscle myosin was originally isolated as 
a proteolytic fragment called subfragment­1 (Fig. 36.3). 
The N­terminal 710 residues of the heavy chain form the 
globular catalytic domain. The nucleotide binding site 
in the core of the catalytic domain is formed by a β­sheet 

 

CHAPTER 36  n  Motor Proteins 

625

Generic motor with stretched spring

Force

Cytoskeletal
fiber

ATP

ADP + Pi

Motor

Spring

Force

Support or 
cargo

Resulting movement with anchored motor

Fiber moves

Support

Resulting movement with anchored fiber

Motor and cargo move

Cargo

Result with anchored fiber and anchored motor

Force

Force

Support

Spring stretched, force transmitted through 
fiber to anchoring sites, no movement, 
energy lost as heat

FIGURE  36.2  GENERAL  FEATURES  OF  ATPase  MOTORS. 
Motors bind stably to a support or cargo and transiently to a cytoskel-
etal fiber (actin filament or microtubule). Energy liberated by adenosine 
triphosphate  (ATP)  hydrolysis  produces  force  to  stretch  an  elastic 
element somewhere in the physical connection between the cargo and 
the  cytoskeletal  fiber.  The  resulting  motion  depends  on  whether  the 
force in the spring exceeds the resistance of the fiber or the cargo. 

flanked  by  α­helices  with  a  topology  similar  to  Ras 
GTPases (see Fig. 4.6) despite little sequence similarity. 
The γ­phosphate of ATP inserts deeply into the nucleotide­
binding  site  with  the  adenine  exposed  on  the  surface. 
Actin binds more than 4 nm away from the nucleotide 
on the other side of the head. A region of the heavy chain 
called the converter subdomain is attached to the light-
chain domain composed of an essential light chain and 
a regulatory light chain wrapped around and stabilizing 
a  long  α­helix  formed  by  the  heavy  chain.  The  inter­
action  of  light  chains  with  the  heavy  chain  α­helix 

BOX 36.1  AAA Adenosine Triphosphatases

The common ancestor of life on the earth had a gene for 
a versatile adenosine triphosphate (ATP)­binding domain. 
Through gene duplication and divergence this progenitor 
gave rise to the AAA family of adenosine triphosphatases 
(ATPases)  in  all  branches  of  the  phylogenic  tree.  Given 
the remarkable variety of functions of the contemporary 
proteins,  the  name  “ATPases  Associated  with  Diverse 
Activities”  is  apt.  The  family  now  includes  regulatory 
subunits  of  proteasomes  (see  Fig.  23.8);  proteases  from 
prokaryotes,  chloroplasts,  and  mitochondria;  Hsp100 
protein  folding  chaperones;  dynein  microtubule  motors 
(Fig. 36.14); the microtubule severing protein katanin (see 
Fig.  34.8);  activators  of  origins  of  replication  (including 
ORC1, 4, and 5 and Mcm­7 [see Fig. 42.8]); clamp loader 
proteins  for  DNA  polymerase  processivity  factors  (see 
Fig.  42.12);  two  proteins  required  for  peroxisome  bio­
genesis (see Table 18.1); and proteins involved in vesicular 
traffic such as NSF (the N­ethylmaleimide­sensitive factor  
[see Fig. 21.15]).

AAA domains have a common fold with a catalytic site 
that  binds  and  hydrolyzes  ATP.  A  “Walker  A”  motif  of 
conserved residues interacts with the β­ and γ­phosphates 
of ATP, and “Walker B” motif residues participate in ATP 
hydrolysis. Many AAA ATPases form ring­shaped hexamers 
of  identical  subunits  or  up  to  six  different  AAA  subunits 
although the dynein heavy chain has six AAA domains in 
one large polypeptide. Often, an arginine residue from the 
adjacent subunit in the hexamer inserts into the active site 
and facilitates conformational changes in response to ATP 
binding and release of the γ­phosphate.

A

Actin-binding
site

B

Actin-binding
site

Active
site

Active
site

ELC

ELC

RLC

RLC

FIGURE  36.3  ATOMIC  STRUCTURE  OF  THE  HEAD  OF 
MUSCLE  MYOSIN.  A,  Ribbon  drawing  of  the  polypeptide  back-
bones.  B,  Space-filling  model.  Heavy  chain  residues  4–204  (green); 
heavy  chain  residues  216–626  (red);  heavy  chain  residues  647–843 
(purple): essential light chain (ELC [yellow]); regulatory light chain (RLC 
[orange]).  The  myosin  light  chains  consist  of  two  globular  domains 
connected  by  an  α-helix,  like  calmodulin  and  troponin  C.  (For  refer-
ence, see Protein Data Bank [PDB; www.rcsb.org] file 2MYS.)

626 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

A

B

C

D

Beginning
of stroke

Pointed end

Catalytic
domain

End of
stroke

FIGURE 36.4  ACTIN FILAMENTS DECORATED WITH MYOSIN HEADS. A, Electron micrograph of frozen-hydrated actin filaments fully 
occupied with myosin heads. B, Three-dimensional reconstruction from electron micrographs of an actin filament saturated with myosin heads. 
C, Superimposition of atomic models of the actin filament and one myosin head on the reconstruction of the decorated filament (blue cage-like 
surface). D, Space-filling atomic model of an actin filament with one attached muscle myosin head showing the light-chain domain in two posi-
tions:  (1)  the  end  of  the  power  stroke  as  observed  in  the  absence  of  ATP (blue),  and  (2)  the  postulated  beginning  of  the  power  stroke (pink) 
deduced from X-ray structures of isolated heads and spectroscopic studies. The catalytic domain (red) is fixed in one position on actin (yellow). 
(Courtesy R. Milligan, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA.)

resembles calmodulin binding to its target proteins (see 
Fig. 3.12).

Myosin  heads  bind  tightly  and  rigidly  to  actin  fila­
ments  in  the  absence  of  ATP.  This  is  called  a  rigor 
complex, because it forms in muscle during rigor mortis 
when ATP is depleted after death. Myosin heads bound 
along an actin filament form a polarized structure, resem­
bling a series of arrowheads when viewed from the side 
(Fig. 36.4). The heads bind at an angle and wrap around 
the  filament.  Their  orientation  defines  the  barbed  and 
pointed  ends  of  the  actin  filament  (see  Fig.  33.8).  All 
known  myosins,  except  myosin­VI,  move  toward  the 
barbed end of the filament.

The  atomic  structures  of  the  myosin  head  and  
actin filament fit nicely into the three­dimensional struc­
ture  of  the  decorated  filament  determined  by  electron 
microscopy,  providing  the  structural  starting  point  
for  understanding  the  mechanics  of  force  production 
(Fig.  36.4).  Each  myosin  head  contacts  two  adjacent  
actin subunits.

Actomyosin Adenosine Triphosphatase Cycle
Myosin uses energy from ATP hydrolysis to move actin 
filaments, so an appreciation of the mechanism requires 
an  understanding  of  the  biochemical  steps  along  the 
reaction  pathway.  Fig.  36.5A  looks  intimidating,  but 
working  through  it  one  step  at  a  time  reveals  its  logic 
and simplicity. Note that the mechanism consists of two 
parallel  lines  of  chemical  intermediates.  First,  consider 
the bottom line showing the reactions that explain why 
myosin alone turns over ATP remarkably slowly, at a rate 
of only approximately 0.02 s−1:

Step 1. At physiological concentrations of ATP, myosin 
binds ATP in less than 1 millisecond. Energy from ATP 
binding allows a conformational change in the myosin 

that can be detected by a change in the intrinsic fluo­
rescence of the protein itself.

Step 2. The enzyme catalyzes the hydrolysis of ATP. This 
reaction is moderately fast (>100 s−1) and readily revers­
ible.  The  equilibrium  constant  for  hydrolysis  on  the 
enzyme is near 1, so each ATP is hydrolyzed to adenos­
ine  diphosphate  (ADP)  and  inorganic  phosphate  and 
the triphosphate is resynthesized several times before 
the products dissociate from the enzyme. ATP splitting 
provides energy for a second conformational change, 
reflected  in  a  further  increase  in  the  fluorescence  of 
the  myosin.  These  conformational  changes  reorient  
the  converter  subdomain  and  the  light  chain  domain 
poised to undergo the molecular rearrangements that 
subsequently produce movement.

Step 3. Inorganic phosphate (P) slowly dissociates from 
the active site (at a rate of approximately 0.02 s−1) by 
escaping through a narrow “back door” on the far side 
of  the  enzyme.  This  is  the  rate­limiting  step  in  the 
pathway. The loss of phosphate is coupled to confor­
mational changes that return myosin toward its basal 
state. The phosphate dissociation step has the largest 
negative  free  energy  change,  so  it  is  presumed  that 
energy derived from ATP binding and hydrolysis and 
stored in conformational changes in the myosin head 
is used to do work or dissipated as heat at this point 
in the reaction pathway.

Step 4. Once phosphate dissociates, ADP leaves rapidly 

from the “front door.”

To summarize, in the absence of actin filaments, ATP 
binds rapidly to myosin and is rapidly but reversibly split, 
and the products slowly dissociate from the active site. 
The overall cycle of the enzyme is limited by the slow 
conformational  change  coupled  to  phosphate  dissocia­
tion. Energy derived from ATP binding and hydrolysis is 

 

CHAPTER 36  n  Motor Proteins 

627

A

Strong

Weak

Strong

A–M

A–M*T

A–M**DP

A–MD

A–M

Myosin bound to actin

1′
1

2′
2

3′
3

4′
4

M

M*T

M**DP

MD

M

Free myosin

≥ 1000 s-1

100 s-1

10 s-1

1 s-1

0.1 s-1

B

P

ADP

ATP

ADP
+ Pi

B

ADP
+ Pi

Rapid equilibrium
  free and bound

Pi

Phosphate
  dissociates
Light chain
  domain rotates

ADP dissociates

ATP binding
Head dissociates

ATP hydrolysis

FIGURE  36.5  MYOSIN ATPase MECHANISMS. A, A diagram of the actomyosin ATPase cycle of striated muscle myosin-II showing the 
actin filament (A), myosin head (M), ATP (T), adenosine diphosphate (ADP) (D), and inorganic phosphate (P). Transient-state kinetics revealed the 
major chemical intermediates and the rate constants for their transitions. Arrow sizes are proportional to the rates of the reactions, with second-
order reactions adjusted for physiological concentrations of reactants. One or two asterisks indicate conformational changes in the myosin head 
induced by ATP binding and hydrolysis. Myosin without nucleotide (M) and myosin with ADP (MD) bind much more tightly to actin filaments than 
do AMT and AMDP. The weakly bound AMT and AMDP intermediates are in a rapid equilibrium with free MT and MDP. The beige shading shows 
the main pathway through the reaction. B, The postulated force-producing structural changes in the orientation of the light-chain domain (purple 
and blue) coupled to the myosin ATPase cycle. (B, Data from R. Vale, University of California, San Francisco, and R. Milligan, Scripps Research 
Institute, La Jolla, CA.)

used  for  a  conformational  change  in  the  myosin  head 
that is dissipated when phosphate dissociates.

The upper line in Fig. 36.5A shows myosin associated 
with  an  actin  filament.  The  chemical  intermediates  
are the same, but some of the key rate constants differ 
for the actin­bound and free myosin. Steps 1 and 2 are 
similar to those of free myosin, but step 3—the dissocia­
tion of phosphate—is much faster when a head is bound 
to an actin filament. As a result, myosin bound to actin 
traverses  the  ATPase  cycle  approximately  200  times 
faster than myosin free in solution, and ATP hydrolysis 
becomes  the  rate­limiting  step.  This  effect  of  actin  is 
referred to as “actin activation of the myosin ATPase.” A 
practical advantage of this mechanism is that the ATPase 
cycle  is  essentially  turned  off  unless  the  head  interacts 
with an actin filament.

Finally, consider the vertical arrows representing tran­
sitions  between  bound  and  free  states  of  each  myosin 
chemical  intermediate.  All  myosin  intermediates  bind 
rapidly  to  actin  filaments,  but  the  dissociation  rate  
constants  vary  over  a  wide  range  depending  on  the 

nucleotide that is bound to the active site of the myosin. 
Myosin  with  no  nucleotide  or  with  bound  ADP  alone 
dissociates  very  slowly  and  therefore  binds  tightly  to 
actin  filaments.  Myosin  with  bound  ATP  or  ADP+Pi 
dissociates  rapidly  from  actin,  so  these  states  bind  
actin weakly.

One cycle of ATP hydrolysis takes about 50 millisec­
onds, but a single pathway cannot be drawn through the 
reaction mechanism of ATP, myosin, and actin owing to 
the rapid equilibrium of myosin intermediates (MT and 
MDP) hopping on and off actin filaments on a millisec­
ond time scale. Starting with AM, ATP binds very rapidly 
and sets up a rapid, four­way equilibrium including AMT, 
MT,  AMDP,  and  MDP—the  major  intermediates  during 
steady­state  ATP  turnover  in  muscle  (see  Chapter  39). 
Because the products of ATP hydrolysis dissociate much 
more  rapidly  from  AMDP  than  from  MDP,  the  favored 
pathway  out  of  this  four­way  equilibrium  is  through 
AMDP to AMD and back to AM. The overall ATPase rate 
depends on the actin concentration, which determines 
the  fraction  of  myosin  heads  bound  to  actin  in  the  

628 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

AMDP state. At the high actin concentrations in cells, a 
significant  fraction  of  myosin  heads  is  associated  with 
actin  (approximately  10%  in  contracting  muscle),  but 
each  molecule  continues  to  exchange  on  and  off  
actin filaments.

Transduction of Chemical Energy Into  
Molecular Motion
Myosin heads produce force during the transition from 
the AMDP state to the AMD and AM states. Production 
of force at this step makes sense for two reasons: First, 
the  large  free­energy  difference  between  AMDP  and 
AMD  provides  sufficient  energy  to  produce  force; 
second, the force­producing AMD and AM intermediates 
bind tightly to actin, so any force between the motor and 
the  actin  track  is  not  dissipated.  However,  for  many 
myosins, including skeletal muscle myosin, these force­
producing  states  occupy  a  small  fraction  of  the  whole 
ATPase cycle. The fraction of the time in force producing 
states is called the duty cycle. ADP dissociates rapidly 
from  AMD,  and  ATP  binds  rapidly  to  AM,  dissociating 
myosin  from  the  actin  filament  and  initiating  another 
ATPase cycle.

Fifty years of research using a combination of mechan­
ical  measurements,  static  atomic  structures  of  myosin 
heads  with  various  bound  nucleotides,  and  spectro­
scopic observations of contracting muscle revealed the 
structural  basis  for  the  conversion  of  free  energy  into 
force: a dramatic conformational change in the orienta­
tion of the light­chain domain associated with phosphate 
dissociation (Fig. 36.5B).

Elegant  mechanical  experiments  measured  the  size 
of  the  mechanical  step  produced  by  a  myosin  during 
one  cycle  of  ATP  hydrolysis.  These  experiments  on 
live  muscles  first  suggested  that  each  cycle  of  ATP 
hydrolysis  moves  an  actin  filament  approximately  5 
to  10 nm  relative  to  myosin.  Now  one  may  observe 
myosin  moving  single  actin  filaments  by  fluorescence 
microscopy.  An  array  of  myosin  heads  attached  to  a 
microscope  slide  can  use  ATP  hydrolysis  to  push  actin 
filaments  over  the  surface  (Fig.  36.6A–C).  Assays  with 
single  myosin  molecules  show  that  each  cycle  of  ATP 
hydrolysis can move an actin filament up to 5 to 15 nm 
and develop a force of about 3 to 7 piconewtons (pN) 
(Fig.  36.6D).  At  low  ATP  concentrations,  the  interval 
between  the  force­producing  step  and  the  binding 
of  the  next  ATP  is  relatively  long,  so  single  steps  can  
be observed.

Further insights emerged from biophysical studies of 
muscle and purified proteins using x­ray diffraction (see 
Fig.  39.11),  electron  microscopy,  electron  spin  reso­
nance  spectroscopy,  and  fluorescence  spectroscopy. 
These experiments showed that the light­chain domain 
pivots around a fulcrum, the converter subdomain within 
the catalytic domain, which is stationary relative to the 
actin  filament.  For  example,  spectroscopic  probes  on 

light  chains  revealed  a  change  in  orientation  when 
muscle is activated to contract, whereas probes on the 
catalytic  domain  do  not  rotate.  Crystal  structures  of 
myosin heads with various bound nucleotides and nucle­
otide analogs show that the light­chain domain can pivot 
up to 90 degrees (Fig. 36.4D). The light­chain domain is 
bent more acutely in the AMT and AMDP intermediates 
and pivots to a more extended orientation when phos­
phate  dissociates  (Fig.  36.3).  ADP  dissociation  extends 
this rotation of some classes of myosin. Consistent with 
rotation of the light­chain domain producing movement, 
the  rate  of  actin  filament  gliding  in  an  in  vitro  assay  is 
proportional to the length of the light­chain domain. The 
observed range of orientations of the light­chain domain 
relative  to  the  catalytic  domain  can  account  for  the 
observed  step  size  of  10 nm  for  muscle  myosin.  Some 
aspects of these conformational changes and their rela­
tion  to  phosphate  release  are  similar  to  Ras  family 
GTPases (see Fig. 4.6).

Rotation  of  the  light­chain  domain  is  believed  to 
produce  movement  indirectly  in  the  sense  that  force­
producing intermediates stretch elastic elements in the 
system.  This  mechanism  is  represented  by  a  spring  
in  Fig.  36.2.  The  elastic  elements  in  the  myosin­actin 
complex are most likely to be mainly in the myosin head, 
with small contributions from the actin and myosin fila­
ments. Movement of the light­chain domain tensions the 
spring transiently in the AMD and AM states. Dissociation 
of  ADP  and  rebinding  of  ATP  to  the  AM  intermediate 
reverts  the  system  to  the  rapid  equilibrium  of  mostly 
dissociated  weakly  bound  intermediates.  Any  force  left 
in the spring is lost as soon as the head dissociates from 
the actin filament.

The actual motion produced depends on the mechani­
cal  resistance  in  the  system  (Fig.  36.2).  If  both  myosin 
and actin are fixed, elastic elements are stretched for the 
life of the force­producing states (AMD and AM), and the 
energy  is  lost  as  heat  when  the  head  dissociates.  This 
happens when one tries to lift an immovable object. If 
the  resistance  is  less  than  the  force  in  the  stretched 
elastic  elements,  the  actin  filament  moves  relative  to 
myosin,  as  in  muscle  contraction.  The  distance  moved 
in  each  step  depends  on  the  resistance,  as  the  spring 
stops shortening when the forces are balanced.

Myosin Superfamily
Eukaryotes  have  35  classes  of  myosin  and  many  other 
examples of unique myosins in single species (Fig. 36.7). 
All  arose  from  a  gene  similar  to  myosin­I  in  the  last 
eukaryote  common  ancestor  more  than  a  billion  years 
ago. The primordial gene then gave rise to the gene for 
myosin­V, so this class is also widespread. Gene duplica­
tion, divergence, and acquisition of extra domains pro­
duced  many  other  myosin  genes  encoding  proteins 
specialized for particular biological functions made pos­
sible by variations of the mechanochemical ATPase cycle 

 

A

C

GLASS

CHAPTER 36  n  Motor Proteins 

629

B

D

Actin

filament

Myosin

Events

0.5

1.0

1.5

Time (s)

Step

Return

40

20

0

)

m
n
(
 

e
c
n
a

t
s
D

i

–20

0

Actin

ATP

ADP
+ Pi

Myosin

FIGURE 36.6 
IN VITRO MOTILITY ASSAYS WITH PURIFIED MUSCLE MYOSIN AND ACTIN FILAMENTS. A–C, Actin filament gliding 
assays. A, Filaments are labeled with rhodamine-phalloidin to render them visible by light microscopy. ATP hydrolysis by myosin moves actin fila-
ments over the surface with the pointed end leading as the myosins walk toward the barbed end of the filaments. B–C, Drawings of actin filaments 
moving  over  myosin  heads  immobilized  on  a  glass  coverslip.  D,  Measurement  of  the  muscle  myosin  step  size.  An  actin  filament  is  attached 
between  two  plastic  beads,  which  are  suspended  by  laser  optical  traps.  The  optical  traps  move  the  filament  near  a  myosin  molecule  on  the 
surface of another bead attached to the microscope slide, allowing a myosin head to attach to the actin filament. When supplied with ATP, a 
single myosin head can move the actin filament a short distance corresponding to the step size. The graph shows the time course of displace-
ments of the actin filament and attached beads. Brownian motion limits the precision of the measurement of the size of these steps to a range 
of 5 to 15 nm. The duration of the step depends on the ATP concentration, because ATP dissociates the force-producing AM state, allowing  
the  force  of  the  optical  traps  to  return  the  beads  and  the  actin  filament  to  their  original  position.  Pi,  inorganic  phosphate. 
(A, Courtesy A. Bresnick, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York. D, For reference, see Finer JT, Simmons RM, Spudich JA. Single myosin 
molecule mechanics: piconewton forces and nanometer steps. Nature. 1994;368:113–119.)

and  acquisition  of  diverse  tails  to  interact  with  cargo. 
Within a myosin class, the tails are similar to each other, 
but  between  classes,  tails  are  diverse  in  terms  of  their 
ability  to  polymerize  and  interact  with  other  cellular 
components  including  membranes  and  ribonucleopro­
tein particles.

No  organism  has  genes  for  all  35  classes  of  myosin 
and a few species, including Giardia lamblia, have no 
myosin  genes.  Myosin­I  is  most  widespread,  but  plants 
and related organisms lost this gene. A primitive myosin­V 
gene gave rise to plant myosin­VIII and myosin­XI, which 
move at very high speeds (see Fig. 37.9). Organisms on 
the  branch  including  amoebas,  yeast  and  animals  have 
genes  for  myosins  types  I,  II,  and  V,  but  myosin  genes 
diversified in animals, so humans have 40 myosin genes 
from 13 classes. Gene duplications gave rise to multiple 

isoforms within most classes of myosin. For instance, the 
vertebrate smooth muscle myosin gene arose from dupli­
cation of a gene for a cytoplasmic myosin­II.

Establishing  the  biological  functions  of  the  various 
myosins has been challenging. Biochemical characteriza­
tion of cargo and localization in cells provide some clues, 
but  genetic  or  biochemical  knockouts  often  have  mild 
effects, probably owing to overlapping functions of the 
myosins and the capacity of some cells to adapt to their 
loss, at least under laboratory conditions.

Myosin-I  was  the  first  “unconventional  myosin” 
discovered—unconventional in the sense that it differed 
from the type II myosin originally isolated from skeletal 
muscle.  These  myosins  have  one  head  and  short  tails 
with various types of domains, including a basic domain 
with  affinity  for  acidic  phospholipids.  The  presence  of 

630 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

Class

Example

I.

Dictyostelium MyoB

I.

Bovine BB myosin-I

II.

Chicken muscle myosin-II

III.

Drosophila ninaC long

Kinase

V.

Chicken myosin V/dilute

VI.

Porcine myosin VI

VII.

Human myosin VIIA

VIII.

Arabidopsis ATM1

IX.

Human myosin IXb

X.

Bovine myosin X

XI.

Arabidopsis MYA1

XII.

C. elegans Myo12

Heavy chain domains
Head

Membrane

binding

GPQ

SH3

IQ motif

+ +

Coiled-coil

Architecture

Distribution

Absent

Most eukaryotes, 
stramenopiles, others

Plants, ampicomplexa

Amoebas, fungi, animals

Plants, others

+ +

Arthropods, chordates

Fungi, plants, others

TH4 Talin

pH domains

Amoebas, fungi, animals

Plants, stramenopiles

Animals

Animals

Fungi, plants, others

Fungi, plants, others

Algae, plants

Fungi, plants, others

Animals

Fungi, plants, others

Deuterostomes, Cnidaria 

Other animals, others

Algae, plants

Fungi, animals, others

Nemotodes only

All others

XIV.

Toxoplasma gondii myosin A

+

= 100 amino acids

Ampicomplexa only

All others

FIGURE 36.7  THE MYOSIN FAMILY. Drawing of myosin heavy chain domains and molecular models of myosin isoforms showing catalytic 
domains (rose); IQ motifs, light-chain–binding sites (rose bars); basic domains with affinity for membrane lipids (violet); SH3 (Src homology 3) 
domains  (dark  green);  coiled-coil  (orange);  kinase  domain  (light  blue);  and  pleckstrin  homology  domain  (blue).  (For  reference,  see  Odronitz  F, 
Kollmar  M.  Drawing  the  tree  of  eukaryotic  life  based  on  the  analysis  of  2,269  manually  annotated  myosins  from  328  species.  Genome  Biol. 
2007;8:R196. See also Myosin Home Page, available at http://www.mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk/myosin/myosin.html.)

an Src homology 3 (SH3) domain (see Fig. 25.10) allows 
some  type  I  myosins  to  bind  proline­rich  sequences  in 
other  proteins.  Those  with  an  actin  filament–binding 
domain  separate  from  the  motor  domain  can  crosslink 
actin filaments. With duty cycles of less than 10%, mul­
tiple  myosin  heads  must  work  together  in  concert  to 
move membranes. Mutations show that myosin­I partici­
pates in endocytosis, as expected from its concentration 
at sites of phagocytosis and macropinocytosis. In micro­
villi of intestinal epithelial cells, myosin­I links actin fila­
ments laterally to the plasma membrane (see Fig. 33.2B). 
Heavy­chain  phosphorylation  activates  myosin­I  from 
lower eukaryotes, whereas calcium binding to calmodu­
lin  light  chains  regulates  myosin­I  from  the  intestinal  
brush border.

The  myosin-II  class  includes  various  muscle  and 
cytoplasmic  myosins  that  also  have  two  heads,  two  IQ 
motifs,  and  long  coiled­coil  tails.  Assembly  of  tails  into 
bipolar  filaments  (see  Fig.  5.7)  allows  myosin­II  to  pull 
together  oppositely  polarized  actin  filaments  during 
muscle contraction (see Chapter 39) and cytokinesis (see 
Fig. 44.24). As in smooth muscle (see Fig. 39.23), phos­
phorylation  of  the  regulatory  light  chain  activates 
myosin­II  in  animal  nonmuscle  cells.  In  addition,  phos­
phorylation  of  the  heavy  chain  regulates  the  enzyme 
activity and/or polymerization of some myosin­IIs.

Myosin-V  moves  pigment  granules,  ribonucleopro­
tein  particles  and  other  cellular  components  (see  Fig. 
37.11). A long light­chain domain with seven IQ motifs 

allows  myosin­V  to  take  long  steps  along  the  actin  fila­
ment  (Fig.  36.8).  These  steps  are  processive,  because 
slow ADP dissociation from the AMD intermediate allows 
time for the other head to take a long step and bind an 
actin  subunit  36 nm  beyond  the  first  head  toward  the 
barbed  end  of  the  filament.  Mechanical  strain  after  the 
step may modestly increase the rate of ADP dissociation 
from  the  trailing  head.  This  cooperation  between  the 
heads initiates ATP binding and the next ATPase cycle, 
as the motor walks deliberately along the filament. These 
features  make  myosin­V  a  valuable  model  for  the  lever 
arm for movements of the whole myosin family.

Myosin-VI  arose  in  metazoan  cells  and  is  the  only 
myosin known to move toward the pointed end of actin 
filaments. Unique features of the converter domain result 
in the lever arm swinging opposite to the conventional 
direction. The lever arm is a long, single α­helix begin­
ning with a single IQ­motif associated with calmodulin. 
Lacking  coiled­coil,  myosin­VI  is  a  monomer  unless 
adapter proteins bring together the C­terminal globular 
cargo­binding domains of two molecules. These dimers 
can  take  huge  steps  of  approximately  30 nm,  but 
myosin­VI  can  also  act  as  a  tether,  because  the  force­
producing AMD and AM states occupy a large fraction of 
the ATPase cycle, owing to slow ADP dissociation from 
AMD state and slow ATP binding to AM. These features 
allow  myosin­VI  to  move  endocytic  vesicles  from  the 
plasma membrane into the cytoplasm and to contribute 
to  the  formation  of  autophagosomes.  Myosin­VII  and 

 

CHAPTER 36  n  Motor Proteins 

631

A

Strong

Weak

Strong

A–M

A–M*T

A–M**DP

A–MD

A–M

M

M*T

M**DP

MD

M

≥ 1000 s-1

100 s-1

10 s-1

1 s-1

0.1 s-1

B

Pointed

ADP

ADP

ATP

ADP

ADP

ADP

ADP

ADP

Barbed

ADP-Pi

ADP

Force produced by

leading head

dissociates ADP
from trailing head

ATP binds trailing

head which
dissociates

Trailing head steps
forward 72 nm and

hydrolyzes ATP

New leading head

binds actin

Pi dissociates

FIGURE 36.8  MYOSIN-V MECHANISM. A, ATPase cycle with ADP release as the rate-limiting step rather than phosphate dissociation as 
for muscle myosin (see Fig. 36.5A). B, Relationship of mechanical steps to the ATPase cycle. Shown are actin filament (A), myosin head (M), ATP 
(T),  ADP  (D),  and  inorganic  phosphate  (Pi).  (For  reference,  see  De  La  Cruz  EM,  Ostap  EM.  Relating  biochemistry  and  function  in  the  myosin 
superfamily. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2004;16:61–67. For a movie of myosin-V stepping on actin filaments, see Kodera N, Yamamoto D, Ishikawa R, 
et al. Video imaging of walking myosin V by high-speed atomic force microscopy. Nature. 2010;468:72–76.)

myosin­X are also monomers with single chain α­helices 
as lever arms.

Myosin mutations cause human diseases. Loss­of­func­
tion  mutations  in  the  genes  for  myosins­IIA,  ­IIIA,  ­VI, 
­VIIA, and ­XV cause deafness and vestibular dysfunction. 
Mutations in the genes for cardiac muscle myosin heavy 
and  light  chains  are  responsible  for  many  cases  of  car­
diomyopathies (see Table 39.1).

Microtubule Motors
The kinesin and dynein families of molecular motors use 
energy from ATP hydrolysis to move vesicles, membrane­
bound organelles, chromosomes, and other cargo along 
microtubules (see Fig. 37.1). Dynein also powers bend­
ing  motions  of  eukaryotic  flagella  and  cilia  (see  Fig. 
38.14). Dyneins move themselves and any cargo toward 
the  minus  end  of  microtubules.  Most  kinesins  move  
in  the  opposite  direction,  toward  the  plus  end,  but  
some  kinesin  family  members  are  minus­end­directed  
motors  and  others  promote  microtubule  disassembly. 

Like  myosins,  microtubule  motors  have  heads  with 
ATPase activity and tails that interact with cargo.

Kinesins
Kinesin­1 is a processive motor that moves cargo, such 
as  an  organelle,  continuously toward the  plus  end of  a 
microtubule. The two heads are attached to an α­helical 
coiled­coil  tail,  much  like  myosin­II,  except  both  the 
heads and coiled­coil are smaller (Fig. 36.9). Each head, 
consisting of approximately 340 residues, is a motor unit 
that  binds  microtubules  and  catalyzes  ATP  hydrolysis. 
Light  chains  associated  with  the  C­terminal  bifurcation 
of the tail bind cargo molecules (Fig. 36.9E).

Because the kinesin head is less than half the size of 
a myosin head and because the proteins lack appreciable 
sequence  homology,  the  atomic  structure  of  kinesin­1 
(Fig. 36.9C) revealed a major surprise: The small kinesin 
head  is  folded  like  the  core  of  the  catalytic  domain  of 
myosin!  In  fact,  this  core,  which  consists  of  a  central, 
mixed  β­sheet  flanked  by  helices,  is  similar  to  the 

632 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

A

N

1

B

Head

Neck

Tail

C
o

i
l

e
d
-
c
o

i
l

D. Structural overlap

α3

Myosin

Kinesin

β4

β6

β7

β3

β8
β1

β2

C. Kinesin structure

α2

α1

l
i

a
T

ATP

955

C

Light
chains

E. Kinesin light chain with
     cargo peptide

Cargo
peptide

FIGURE 36.9  STRUCTURE OF KINESINS. A, Domain architecture of the polypeptide sequence of the heavy chain of kinesin-1. B, Sketch 
of kinesin-1 showing two heads and the coiled-coil tail with light chains bound at the distal end. C, Ribbon diagram of the polypeptide backbone 
of  the  kinesin  head  showing  ATP  as  a  space-filling  model  (green),  the  neck-linker  residues  (red),  and  the  proximal  part  of  the  coiled-coil  tail. 
D, Superimposition of the core of the kinesin-1 head on the catalytic domain of myosin showing the structural homology of the proteins. The 
detailed ribbon diagram shows only the homologous elements of secondary structure. The overview (right) shows kinesin-1 (blue) superimposed 
on  the  structure  of  the  whole  head  of  skeletal  muscle  myosin  (pink).  E,  Ribbon  model  of  a  kinesin-1  light  chain  (purple)  with  a  bound  cargo 
peptide (green) with a DWED motif. (C, For reference, see PDB file 3KIN and Sack S, Muller J, Marx A, et al. X-ray structure of motor and neck 
domains  from  rat  brain  kinesin.  Biochemistry.  1997;36:16155–16165.  D,  Superimposed  ribbon  diagrams  courtesy  of  R.  Vale,  University  of 
California, San Francisco. E, For reference, see PDB file 3ZFW and Pernigo S, Lamprecht A, Steiner RA, et al. Structural basis for kinesin-1:
cargo recognition. Science. 2013;340:356–359.)

considerably  smaller  Ras  family  GTPases  (see  Fig.  4.6). 
This provided strong evidence that all three families of 
nucleoside  triphosphatases  evolved  from  a  common 
ancestor (Fig. 36.1). ATP binds to a site on kinesin that 
is  homologous  to  the  guanosine  triphosphate  (GTP)­
binding  site  of  Ras,  but  the  enzyme  mechanisms  differ 
in important ways. The microtubule­binding site is some 
distance from the ATP­binding site (Fig. 36.10).

Kinesin Mechanochemistry
Single  kinesin­1  heads,  produced  experimentally  from 
truncated  cDNAs,  traverse  a  microtubule­stimulated 
ATPase cycle much like myosin (Fig. 36.11A). Both bind 
and hydrolyze ATP rapidly followed by slower release of 
phosphate  and  ADP.  However,  in  contrast  to  muscle 
myosin, kinesin heads may remain bound to the micro­
tubule through multiple cycles of ATP hydrolysis rather 
than dissociating when bound to ATP or ADP­Pi.

In  vitro  motility  assays  (Fig.  36.12)  revealed  that  a 
two­headed  kinesin­1  can  move  along  a  single  (or  two 
parallel)  microtubule  protofilaments  for  long  distances 
at  0.8  µm/s.  The  motor  makes  discrete  steps  of  8 nm, 
the  spacing  of  successive  tubulin  dimers  in  a  microtu­
bule.  Each  step  takes  10  milliseconds  when  kinesin  is 
moving  at  full  speed.  This  step  is  remarkably  large  for 
the small (<10 nm) kinesin heads linked together at the 
neck region. Kinesin is very powerful, stalling at a force 
of  6  pN.  This  allows  single  molecules  to  move  large 
organelles through the cytoplasm.

Docked neck linker
for kinesin-ATP

Disordered 
neck linker for 
kinesin without
nucleotide

(–) α-tubulin

β-tubulin

(+)

FIGURE  36.10 
INTERACTION  OF  KINESIN-1  WITH  MICRO-
TUBULES. A, Three-dimensional reconstructions from electron micro-
graphs of kinesin-1 heads (blue) bound to a microtubule (yellow and 
red). The kinesin head on the left has bound ATP and the neck linker 
(green) docked. The kinesin head on the right has no bound nucleotide 
and  the  neck  linker  (red)  is  disordered.  Ribbon  diagrams  show  how 
the neck linker of the leading head (right) must be unfolded to connect 
to the trailing head at the beginning of the coiled-coil tail. (From Charles 
Sindelar, Yale University, based on Shang Z, Zhou K, Xu C, et al. High-
resolution  structures  of  kinesin  on  microtubules  provide  a  basis  for 
nucleotide-gated force-generation. Elife. 2014;3:e04686.)

 

CHAPTER 36  n  Motor Proteins 

633

A

Strong

> 100 s-1

Weak

80 s-1

Strong

300 s-1

Mt–K

Mt–KT

Mt–KDP

Mt–KD

Mt–K

KDP

KD

≥ 1000 s-1

100 s-1

10 s-1

1 s-1

0.1 s-1

B

(+)

α
β

0

ADP

(–)

ATP

ADP

ADP

ADP

ATP

ADP
+ Pi

0

Pi

ADP

Trailing head weakly
  associates with MT

ATP binds

  leading head
Trailing head

  rotates

New trailing head
  hydrolyzes ATP
New leading head

  binds MT and

  dissociates ADP

Pi dissociates

  from trailing head
  weakening head's

  binding to MT

FIGURE 36.11  KINESIN-1 ATPase MECHANISM. A, A diagram of the kinesin-microtubule ATPase cycle for a single kinesin-1 head showing 
the kinesin (K), microtubule (Mt), ATP (T), ADP (D), and inorganic phosphate (P). Arrow sizes are proportional to the rates of the reactions, with 
second-order reactions adjusted for physiological concentrations of reactants. The beige shading shows two pathways through the reaction, one 
along the top line without dissociation, and the other with dissociation from the microtubule. B, Hand-over-hand, processive stepping of kinesin 
along a microtubule. The empty, microtubule-bound head binds and hydrolyzes ATP resulting in a conformational change favoring docking of its 
neck-linker  (green),  thereby  moving  forward  the  detached  head  with  its  undocked  (pink)  neck-linker.  Binding  of  the  new  leading  head  to  the 
microtubule causes a conformation change that dissociates ADP. Dissociation of the γ-phosphate from the trailing head results in its dissociation 
from the microtubule. This returns the heads to their original condition, but with the motor advanced 8 nm with the heads in the opposite chemi-
cal states. Pi, inorganic phosphate. (B, Data from R. Vale, University of California, San Francisco, and R. Milligan, Scripps Research Institute, La 
Jolla, CA. For reference, see Cao L, Wang W, Jiang Q, et al. The structure of apo-kinesin bound to tubulin links the nucleotide cycle to move-
ment. Nat Commun. 2014;5:5364.)

Processive  movement  depends  on  the  ability  of 
kinesin  to  remain  associated  with  the  microtubule 
through more than a hundred cycles of ATP hydrolysis. 
This is made possible by cooperation between the two 
heads  that  ensures  at  least  one  head  is  bound  to  the 
microtubule throughout the ATPase cycle (Fig. 36.11B). 
Reciprocal  affinities  for  nucleotide  and  microtubules 
allow  the  two  heads  to  alternate  between  microtubule 
binding and dissociation. For example, if kinesin­1 with 
ADP bound to both heads is mixed with microtubules, 
one head binds a microtubule and rapidly dissociates its 
ADP,  leaving  the  other  head  dissociated  with  bound 
ADP. Binding and hydrolysis of ATP on the open site of 
the head associated with the microtubule, drives a con­
formational  change  that  repositions  the  trailing  head 
forward so it can pass the bound head and bind the next 
tubulin dimer toward the plus end of the microtubule. 
Association  of  the  new  leading  head  with  the  microtu­
bule promotes dissociation of its bound ADP. Dissocia­
tion  of  the  γ­phosphate  from  the  new  trailing  head 

weakens its affinity for the microtubule. Its detachment 
from the microtubule with bound ADP brings the cycle 
back to its starting point with kinesin having advanced 
8 nm  (Fig.  36.12).  Experiments  with  single  kinesin­1 
molecules  labeled  with  fluorescent  dyes  showed  that 
they  alternate  steps  on  the  right  and  left  sides  of  the 
microtubule like a gymnast walking on a balance beam.
The  mechanism  of  stepping  is  postulated  to  be  the 
docking  and  undocking  of  a  segment  of  the  kinesin­1 
heavy chain linking the motor domain to the coiled­coil 
neck  and  tail  (Fig.  36.10).  With  ATP  bound  the  motor 
domain has a conformation that favors association of the 
“neck­linker” peptide, as in the X­ray structure of dimeric 
kinesin (Fig. 36.9C). When either no nucleotide or ADP 
is bound, the conformation of the motor domain releases 
the neck­linker peptide.

Kinesin Superfamily
The last eukaryotic common ancestor had only a single 
myosin  but  already  had  at  least  11  families  of  kinesins 

634 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

A

(–)

Microtubule movement

Kinesin stepping
toward (+) end

(+)

B

(–)

C

)

m
n
(
 
e
c
n
a
t
s
D

i

96

80

64

48

32

16

0

Bead
movement

Kinesin stepping
toward (+) end

(+)

1

2

3

4

5

Time (s)

FIGURE 36.12 
IN VITRO MOTILITY ASSAYS FOR MICROTUBULE MOTORS. A, Gliding assay. Kinesin or dynein that is attached to a 
microscope slide uses ATP hydrolysis to move microtubules over the surface. A single kinesin-1 molecule can move a microtubule in this assay. 
Microtubules can be imaged by video-enhanced differential interference contrast microscopy (see Fig. 34.6) or fluorescence microscopy. B, Bead 
assay. Kinesin or dynein that is attached to a plastic bead uses ATP hydrolysis to move the bead along a microtubule attached to the microscopic 
slide. C, Experimental measurement of the kinesin-1 step size using the bead assay. The bead is held in a laser optical trap so that 8-nm steps 
can be recorded, as a single, two-headed kinesin-1 moves a bead processively along a microtubule, as in B. The position of the bead is recorded 
with nanometer precision by interferometry. (For reference, see Svoboda K, Schmidt CF, Schnapp BJ, et al. Direct observation of kinesin stepping 
by optical trapping interferometry. Nature. 1993;365:721–727.)

Kinesin structures
N-terminal motor

Example

Heavy chain domains

Architecture

Kinesin-1

Hs Kif5B

Head Coiled-coil Tail

85
95

Kinesin-2

Sp Krp85/95

Kinesin-3

Mm Kif1b

Kinesin-4

Xl KIp1

Kinesin-5

Dm Klp61f

Kinesin-7

Hs CENP-E

Internal motor

Kinesin-13

Xl MCAK

C-terminal motor

Kinesin-14

Dm Ncd

FIGURE  36.13  KINESIN  FAMILY.  A,  Phylogenetic  relationships  of  some  of  the  kinesins  based  on  the  sequences  of  the  motor  domains. 
B, Drawing of kinesin heavy chain domains and molecular models of kinesin isoforms showing the catalytic domain (red), coiled-coil tail (orange), 
and tail piece (blue). (Data from R. Case and R. Vale, University of California, San Francisco. For reference, see Lawrence CJ, Dawe RK, Christie 
KR,  et al.  Standardized  kinesin  nomenclature.  J  Cell  Biol.  2004;167:19–22;  and  Dagenbach  EM,  Endow  SA.  A  new  kinesin  tree.  J  Cell  Sci. 
2004;117:3–7. See also the Kinesin Home Page at https://labs.cellbio.duke.edu/kinesin.)

with motor domains associated with a variety of coiled­
coil  stalks  and  tails  (Fig.  36.13  and  Table  36.2).  Thus 
the microtubule system was much more developed than 
the  actin  system  at  this  point  in  evolution.  Contempo­
rary  eukaryotes  have  genes  for  17  families  of  kinesins 

(often  with  multiple  isoforms)  plus  a  few  more  para­
logs  identified  in  isolated  species.  On  the  other  hand, 
many  eukaryotes  have  lost  one  or  more  kinesin  genes; 
for  example,  amoebas  lack  kinesin­2  and  alveolates  
lack kinesin­7.

 

CHAPTER 36  n  Motor Proteins 

635

Examples

Subunits (kD)

Velocity (µm s−1)

TABLE 36.2  Kinesin Superfamily: Classification and Examples of Kinesin-Family Motor Proteins
Class
Functions
N-Terminal Motor
Kinesin­1
Kinesin­2
Kinesin­3
Kinesin­4
Kinesin­5
Kinesin­7
Internal Motor
Kinesin­13
C-Terminal Motor
Kinesin­14

2 × 110, 2 × 70
1 × 79, 1 × 84, 1 × 115
1 × 130
2 × 139
4 × 121
2 × 340

Human KHC
Urchin KRP85/95
Mouse KIF1B
Xenopus Kp11
Fly KLP61F
Human CENP­E

+0.9
+0.4
+0.7
+0.2
+0.04
+0.1

MCAK

Fly Ncd

2 × 83

2 × 78

Organelle movement
Organelle movement
Mitochondria movement
Chromosome movement
Pole separation, mitosis
Kinetochore­microtubule binding

—

−0.2

Microtubule disassembly

Mitotic/meiotic spindle

Modified from Vale RD, Fletterick RJ. The design plan of kinesin motors. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 1997;13:745–777. More data on kinesins are available 
at the Kinesin Home Page, https://labs.cellbio.duke.edu/kinesin.

All members of the kinesin family have similar motor 
domains  attached  to  a  variety  of  tails  that  interact  
with  cargo  (Fig.  36.13).  Motor  domains  are  generally 
found  at  the  N­terminus,  but  may  be  located  in  the 
middle  (kinesin­13)  or  at  the  C­terminus  (kinesin­14). 
Regardless of their location, motor domains have similar 
structures.

Most  kinesins  are  dimeric,  with  two  polypeptides 
joined  in  a  coiled­coil.  Most  are  homodimers,  but 
kinesin­2 not only forms homodimers but also heterotri­
mers  consisting  of  two  different  polypeptides  with 
motor  domains  plus  another  large  subunit.  Tetrameric 
kinesin­V  molecules  bind  to  two  microtubules  with 
opposite polarities and move them apart.

Most kinesins move toward the plus end of the micro­
tubule,  but  C­terminal  kinesin­14  motors  move  toward 
the minus end. The reverse direction of kinesin­14 move­
ment is not explained by either the architecture of the 
motor domain, the ATPase mechanism, which is similar 
to kinesin­1, or the attachment of the N­terminus of the 
motor domain to the stalk. Instead, the proximal part of 
the  Ncd  coiled­coil  stalk  rotates  approximately  70 
degrees toward the minus end of the microtubule when 
ATP binds to the active site.

Kinesins transport a variety of cargo, including chro­
mosomes and organelles, along microtubules. Kinesin­1 
moves membrane vesicles toward the plus end of micro­
tubules  away  from  the  centrosome  and  along  axons  of 
neurons  (see  Fig.  37.1).  The  light  chain  links  the  end  
of  the  kinesin­1  tail  to  cargo  proteins  (Fig.  36.9E). 
Kinesin­2  is  the  motor  for  anterograde  intraflagellar 
transport,  movement  of  particles  toward  the  tip  of  
the  axoneme  in  cilia  and  flagella  (see  Fig.  38.18).  It  
also transports a variety of cargos over long distances in 
the  cytoplasm.  Kinesin­4  motors  (also  called  chromo-
kinesins) bind both DNA and microtubules. In neurons, 
they  move  cargo  along  axons.  In  dividing  cells  they  
participate  in  the  formation  of  condensed  mitotic 

chromosomes (see Fig. 44.7). Kinesin­7 (originally called 
CENP-E)  concentrates  at  kinetochores  where  it  helps 
move the chromosome toward the middle of the mitotic 
spindle prometaphase (see Fig. 44.5). Bipolar kinesin-5 
motors form an antiparallel tetramer of two dimeric kine­
sins  that  bridge  a  pair  of  oppositely  polarized  microtu­
bules and push apart the poles of the mitotic spindle (see 
Fig. 44.7).

Both kinesin­8 and kinesin­13 use cycles of ATP hydro­
lysis to remove tubulin dimers from the ends of micro­
tubules. Kinesin­8 motors to the plus end where it works, 
whereas kinesin­14 lacks motor activity but can diffuse 
on  the  microtubule  surface  to  reach  either  end.  This 
depolymerizing activity is important for mitosis.

Most kinesins appear to be constitutively active, but 
intramolecular interactions autoinhibit kinesin­1. The tail 
folds back and binds between the heads, shutting off the 
motor. Adapter proteins compete the tail from the head, 
freeing the motor to be active.

Dyneins
Dynein microtubule­based motors are AAA ATPases (Box 
36.1), so their evolutionary origin differs from myosins 
and kinesins (Fig. 36.1). Most AAA ATPases consist of six 
separate ATPase domains, but in dynein these domains 
(AAA1–AAA6) are concatenated in a giant heavy chain of 
nearly  500 kD  rather  than  separate  polypeptides  (Fig. 
36.14A).  Cytoplasmic  dynein  is  a  dimer  of  two  heavy 
chains  plus  accessory  polypeptides  that  bring  the  total 
molecular  weight  to  approximately  1.4  MDa.  The 
N­terminal  quarter  of  the  heavy  chain  forms  a  tail  that 
interacts  with  intermediate  chains,  light  intermediate 
chains, dimers of light chains, and cargo molecules (Fig. 
36.14B).  A  linker  domain  connects  the  tail  to  AAA1.  A 
segment of the dynein heavy chain within AAA4 forms 
an antiparallel coiled­coil stalk with a small microtubule­
binding domain at the tip.

636 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

A

N

0

B. Whole dynein molecule

C

Linker

AAA1

D

“Pre power stroke”
ATP analog
in AAA1

“Post power stroke”
ADP in AAA1

DHC
 dimerization 
   domain

DIC WD40

Tail

DLIC

Tail

1388

Linker

LC8

Tctex

Coiled-coil
stalk
Microtubule
binding site

1

2

3

4

5

6

C

4730

i

s
n
a
m
o
d
 
e
s
a
P
T
A
A
A
A

-

AAA6

AAA5

AAA2

AAA3

Buttress
of AAA5

Motors

AAA4

Coiled-coil
stalk of AAA4

Microtubule binding
domain of AAA4

FIGURE  36.14  DYNEIN  STRUCTURE.  A,  Domain  organization  of  a  dynein  heavy  chain  showing  the  six  AAA  ATPase  modules  and  two 
sequences that form an antiparallel coiled-coil stalk with an ATP-sensitive microtubule-binding site at the tip. The first AAA domain is the catalytic 
site. AAA domains 2, 3, and 4 bind ATP, but hydrolysis is not coupled to movement. AAA domains 5 and 6 do not bind ATP. B, Model for cyto-
plasmic dynein-1 based on crystal structures of motor domains and reconstructions of electron micrographs of the dynactin complex. C, Ribbon 
diagram of crystal structures of cytoplasmic dynein-1 motor domains (Apo) without nucleotide bound to AAA1. The linker domain is purple. AAA 
domains are color coded as in A, with the stalk and microtubule binding domain extending from AAA3. D, Space-filling models of dynein with 
(ADP-Vo) with ADP and the phosphate analog vanadate bound to AAA1 the “pre power stroke” state and ADP bound to AAA1 the “post power 
stroke state.” The AAA hexamer is more compact with bound ADP-Vo. These two structures differ in the conformations of the AAA hexamer, 
linker domain and stalk. (For reference, see EMData Bank files 2861 and 2862 and Schmidt H, Zalyte R, Urnavicius L, et al. Structure of human 
cytoplasmic dynein-2 primed for its power stroke. Nature. 2015;518:435–438; and Urnavicius L, Zhang K, Diamant AG, et al. The structure of 
the dynactin complex and its interaction with dynein. Science. 2015;347:1441–1446.)

Dynein Mechanochemistry
Sufficient information is available from enzyme kinetics, 
crystal  structures,  and  motility  assays  to  construct  a 
mechanochemical  cycle  for  dynein  interacting  with  a 
microtubule (Fig. 36.15A). The AAA1 domain binds and 
hydrolyzes ATP during force­producing interactions with 
microtubules. Full motor function requires ADP or ATP 
binding  to  AAA  domains  2  to  4,  but  ATP  hydrolysis  by 
these  domains  is  not  coupled  directly  to  motility.  AAA 
domains  5  and  6  do  not  bind  nucleotides.  The  dynein 
ATPase cycle of AAA1 resembles the actomyosin ATPase 
mechanism in broad outline.

When AAA1 is free of nucleotide, dynein binds tightly 
to a microtubule at a site between the α­ and β­tubulin 
subunits with the stalk pointing toward the minus end 
of the polymer. ATP binding to AAA1 causes compaction 
of the whole AAA hexamer and produces two important 
conformational changes (Fig. 36.14). First, the “buttress” 
on  AAA5  communicates  the  conformational  change  in 
the hexamer to the stalk by displacing the stalk helices 
relative to each other. This, in turn, changes the confor­
mation  of  the  microtubule­binding  domain  more  than 
20 nm distant from the ATP binding site and reduces its 
affinity  for  the  microtubule.  Thus,  dynein­ATP  dissoci­
ates  from  the  microtubule.  Second,  the  linker  domain 
bends in the middle, moving to the “pre power stroke 
state.”  After  ATP  hydrolysis,  dynein­ADP­Pi  also  binds 

weakly  to  microtubules,  but  phosphate  dissociation 
during one of the transient interactions with a microtu­
bule reverses both conformational changes produced by 
ATP.  The  linker  domain  straightens  out,  producing  a 
power  stroke  that  moves  the  tail  and  any  associated 
cargo  (including  the  other  subunit  of  a  dynein  dimer) 
toward  the  minus  end  of  the  microtubule.  In  addition, 
the  affinity  for  microtubules  increases,  allowing  trans­
mission  of  force  from  the  microtubule  to  the  cargo. 
Binding to a microtubule also stimulates the rate of ADP 
dissociation  from  dynein  approximately  10­fold,  from 
approximately  3 s−1  to  approximately  33 s−1,  restarting 
the ATPase cycle.

Yeast dynein dimers can walk processively toward the 
minus  end  of  a  microtubule  in  in  vitro  motility  assays. 
The mechanism likely involves steps by the two motor 
domains on adjacent protofilaments of the microtubule. 
The  size  of  the  mechanical  step  associated  with  each 
ATP  hydrolysis  in  most  often  8 nm,  but  cytoplasmic 
dynein can take larger steps up to 24 nm when the load 
is  low.  Yeast  dynein  produces  a  force  of  5  to  7  pN, 
similar to kinesin.

Dynein Superfamily
Dynein  genes  are  ancient,  arising  well  before  the  last 
common  eukaryotic  ancestor  (see  Fig.  2.4B),  but  they 
were lost multiple times during evolution, so neither red 

 

CHAPTER 36  n  Motor Proteins 

637

Apo

S

Strong

Mt–Dy

Dy

ATP

W

ADP•P

W

Weak

Mt–DyT

?

Mt–DyDP

DyT

ATP

DyDP

ADP•P

ADP

S

Apo

S

Strong

30 s-1

Mt–DyD

Mt–Dy

DyD

3 s-1

Dy

P

P

≥ 1000 s-1

100 s-1

10 s-1

1 s-1

0.1 s-1

FIGURE  36.15  DYNEIN-MICROTUBULE  ATPase  MECHANISM.  Chemical  pathway  and  structures.  Arrow  sizes  are  proportional  to  the 
rates of the reactions, with second-order reactions adjusted for physiological concentrations of reactants. The beige shading shows the main 
pathway  through  the  reaction.  D,  ADP;  Dy,  dynein;  Mt,  microtubule;  P,  inorganic  phosphate;  T,  ATP.  The  drawings  are  interpretations  of  the 
intermediates in the cycle based on crystal structures. (Modified from Cianfrocco MA, DeSantis ME, Leschziner AE, et al. Mechanism and regula-
tion of cytoplasmic dynein. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2015;31:83–108.)

algae  nor  flowering  plants  now  have  dynein  genes. 
Animals  have  two  genes  for  cytoplasmic  dynein  heavy 
chains and multiple isoforms of intermediate, light inter­
mediate, and light chains. Alternative splicing, especially 
of intermediate chains, further increases the complexity.
Cytoplasmic  dyneins  are  dimeric  proteins  (Fig. 
36.14B). Cytoplasmic dynein­2 moves cargo for intrafla­
gellar  transport  (see  Fig.  38.18).  Cytoplasmic  dynein­1 
has diverse functions around the entire cell cycle. During 
interphase,  dynein­1  transports  organelles,  RNAs,  and 
some  viruses  toward  the  minus  ends  of  microtubules 
(see  Fig.  37.2)  generally  moving  cargo  toward  the  cell 
center  where  the  centrosome  and  Golgi  apparatus  are 
located. In neurons, dynein­1 moves cargo inside axons 
toward  the  cell  body  (see  Fig.  37.3).  During  mitosis, 
dynein­1 in the cell cortex and bound to kinetochores of 
chromosomes applies forces to microtubules and helps 
to position the mitotic spindle (see Fig. 44.7).

Given these diverse activities, it is not surprising that 
dynein mutations cause serious phenotypes and contrib­
ute to disease. A null mutation in the gene for a mouse 
cytoplasmic dynein­1 heavy chain leaves the Golgi appa­
ratus  dispersed  throughout  the  cytoplasm  and  is  lethal 
during embryogenesis. A temperature­sensitive mutation 
in  Caenorhabditis  elegans  dynein­1  causes  defects 
in  mitosis  at  the  restrictive  temperature.  Mutations  of 
dynein­1  and  associated  proteins  contribute  to  human 
neurodegenerative diseases including some cases of Par­
kinson disease and spinal muscular atrophy.

Accessory  proteins  regulate  the  enzyme  activity  
and  movements  of  cytoplasmic  dyneins.  Transport  by 
mammalian dynein depends on the dynactin complex 

(see Fig. 37.2), a huge complex of 23 subunits (11 dif­
ferent proteins) with a total molecular weight of approx­
imately  1.2  MDa.  Dynactin  and  an  adapter  protein  not 
only link cytoplasmic dynein­1 to cargo, but also stimu­
late  its  motor  activity,  perhaps  by  positioning  the  two 
motors in a productive way.

A  complex  of  proteins  (Lis-1  and  Nudel/NudE) 
increases  dynein’s  affinity  for  microtubules,  slows  the 
motor, and may increase force production. Nudel/NudE 
binds  intermediate  chains  and  tethers  Lis­1  to  dynein. 
Lis­1,  a  β­propeller  protein,  interacts  directly  with  the 
AAA  hexamer  and  sterically  blocks  a  movement  of  the 
linker  domain  that  is  required  for  microtubule  release. 
Genetic  experiments  suggest  that  Lis1  is  a  dynein  acti­
vator,  but  how  tight  binding  to  microtubules  activates 
dynein  remains  unclear.  Loss­of­function  mutations 
of  the  Lis1  genes  interfere  with  development  of  the 
cerebral  cortex,  which  lacks  gyres  and  is  smooth  in  
affected humans.

Humans have 14 genes for axonemal dyneins, which 
consist of one to three heavy chains. In axonemes of cilia 
and flagella, at least seven different dynein isoforms bind 
to  unique  sites  on  the  outer  doublets  (see  Fig.  38.14). 
Calcium and a cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)–
dependent  protein  kinase  (see  Fig.  25.3D)  regulate 
dynein in cilia and flagella.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Andrew Carter, Erika Holzbaur, Samara Reck­
Peterson, and Lee Sweeney for their suggestions on revi­
sions to this chapter.

638 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

SELECTED READINGS

Hartman MA, Spudich JA. The myosin superfamily at a glance.  J  Cell 

Sci. 2012;125:1627­1632.

Bhabha G, Johnson GT, Schroeder CM, et al. How dynein moves along 

King  SM.  Integrated  control  of  axonemal  dynein  AAA(+)  motors. 

microtubules. Trends Biochem Sci. 2016;41:94­105.

J Struct Biol. 2012;179:222­228.

Bloemink MJ, Geeves MA. Shaking the myosin family tree: biochemical 
kinetics defines four types of myosin motor. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 
2011;22:961­967.

Buss F, Spudich G, Kendrick­Jones J. Myosin VI: Cellular functions and 

motor properties. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2004;20:649­676.

Carter AP, Diamant AG, Urnavicius L. How dynein and dynactin trans­
port cargos: a structural perspective. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2016;
37:62­70.

Cianfrocco  MA,  DeSantis  ME,  Leschziner  AE,  et al.  Mechanism  and 
regulation  of  cytoplasmic  dynein.  Annu  Rev  Cell  Dev  Biol.  2015;
31:83­108.

Kull FJ, Endow SA. Force generation by kinesin and myosin cytoskeletal 

motor proteins. J Cell Sci. 2013;126:9­19.

Milic  B,  Andreasson  JO,  Hancock  WO,  et al.  Kinesin  processivity  is 
gated  by  phosphate  release.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  USA.  2014;111:
14136­14140.

Odronitz F, Kollmar M. Drawing the tree of eukaryotic life based on 
the analysis of 2,269 manually annotated myosins from 328 species. 
Genome Biol. 2007;8:R196.

Preller  M,  Manstein  DJ.  Myosin  structure,  allostery,  and  mechano­

chemistry. Structure. 2013;21:1911­1922.

Roberts AJ, Kon T, Knight PJ, et al. Functions and mechanics of dynein 

Cross RA, McAinsh A. Prime movers: the mechanochemistry of mitotic 

motor proteins. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2013;14:713­726.

kinesins. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2014;15:257­271.

De La Cruz EM, Ostap EM. Relating biochemistry and function in the 

myosin superfamily. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2004;16:61­67.

Erzberger  JP,  Berger  JM.  Evolutionary  relationships  and  structural 
mechanisms of AAA+ proteins. Annu  Rev  Biophys  Biomol  Struct. 
2006;35:93­114.

Fu MM, Holzbaur EL. Integrated regulation of motor­driven organelle 
transport  by  scaffolding  proteins.  Trends  Cell  Biol.  2014;24:
564­574.

Geeves MA, Holmes KC. Structural mechanism of muscle contraction. 

Annu Rev Biochem. 1999;68:687­728.

Greenberg  MJ,  Ostap  EM.  Regulation  and  control  of  myosin­I  by  the 
motor  and  light  chain­binding  domains.  Trends  Cell  Biol.  2013;
23:81­89.

Hammer JA 3rd, Sellers JR. Walking to work: roles for class V myosins 

as cargo transporters. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2011;13:13­26.

Hartman MA, Finan D, Sivaramakrishnan S, et al. Principles of uncon­
ventional myosin function and targeting. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 
2011;27:133­155.

Schmidt H, Zalyte R, Urnavicius L, et al. Structure of human cytoplas­
mic  dynein­2  primed  for  its  power  stroke.  Nature.  2015;518:435­
438.  For  video  of  conformational  change  see <http://www.nature
.com/nature/journal/v518/n7539/fig_tab/nature14023_SV6.html>.

Scholey  JM.  Kinesin­2:  a  family  of  heterotrimeric  and  homodimeric 
motors with diverse intracellular transport functions. Annu Rev Cell 
Dev Biol. 2013;29:443­469.

Sun  Y,  Goldman  YE.  Lever­arm  mechanics  of  processive  myosins. 

Biophys J. 2011;101:1­11.

Tumbarello  DA,  Kendrick­Jones  J,  Buss  F.  Myosin  VI  and  its  cargo 
adaptors­linking  endocytosis  and  autophagy.  J  Cell  Sci.  2013;126:
2561­2570.

Walczak  CE,  Gayek  S,  Ohi  R.  Microtubule­depolymerizing  kinesins. 

Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2013;29:417­441.

Wickstead B, Gull K, Richards TA. Patterns of kinesin evolution reveal 
a complex ancestral eukaryote with a multifunctional cytoskeleton. 
BMC Evol Biol. 2010;10:110.

C H A P T E R 

37 

Intracellular Motility

Virtually every component inside living cells moves to 

some extent (Fig. 37.1), but the magnitude and velocity 
of these movements vary by orders of magnitude (Table 
37.1). At one extreme, the bulk cytoplasm of algae and 
giant amoebas streams tens of micrometers per second, 
but most cytoplasm is generally less dynamic. The cyto-
plasmic network of cytoskeletal polymers has a pore size 
of  less  than  50 nm  (see  Fig.  1.13).  This  allows  small 
molecules  and  macromolecules  to  diffuse  essentially 
unimpaired. Particles larger than the pores must be trans-
ported actively. For example, lysosomes, mitochondria, 
secretory  vesicles,  and  endosomes  all  move  actively  in 
cytoplasm, frequently between the centrosome and the  
cell periphery. Similarly, messenger RNA (mRNA) moves 
from its site of synthesis in the nucleus through nuclear 
pores into the cytoplasm and then may be carried actively 
to specific parts of the cell. Intracellular pathogenic bac-
teria and viruses take advantage of the host cell’s actin 
system  to  propel  themselves  through  the  cytoplasm. 
Virus particles can also move along microtubules.

Two  ancient  mechanisms  (Fig.  37.1C)  account  for 
most  intracellular  movements  in  eukaryotes.  Transport 
along  microtubules  by  kinesin  or  dynein  predominates 
in animal cells. Transport along actin filaments by myosin 
is  more  important  in  plants  and  fungi.  Specialized  iso-
forms  of  myosin,  kinesin,  and  dynein  are  dedicated  to 
particular  movements.  Experiments  with  drugs  that 
depolymerize or stabilize actin filaments or microtubules 
(see Boxes 33.1 and 34.1) originally identified the cyto-
skeletal polymers that support various biological move-
ments.  Discovering  the  motors  was  more  challenging, 
given multiple genes for myosin, kinesin, and dynein in 
most organisms and a limited choice of pharmacologic 
agents (Box 37.1). Even loss of function mutations and 
depletion  by  RNA  interference  (RNAi;  see  Fig.  11.12) 
have limitations, because some motors are essential for 
viability  while  others  contribute  redundantly  to  trans-
port.  For  example,  dynein  contributes  to  mitosis,  but 
Drosophila  tissue  culture  cells  depleted  of  dynein  can 

complete mitosis, because other motors take over allow-
ing mitosis to proceed, albeit more slowly.

The  diversity  of  cargo,  motors,  and  tracks  poses  a 
traffic control challenge, which cells manage by specify-
ing the organization of microtubules and actin filaments, 
matching appropriate motors to specific cargo and regu-
lating  motor  activity.  Most  cargos  associate  with  more 
than one type of motor, so their activities must be coor-
dinated.  For  example,  some  cargos  with  two  motors 
reverse  their  direction  either  along  the  way  or  after 
reaching their destination. Local or global signaling path-
ways influence many of these choices, allowing cells to 
adjust transport to adapt to environmental conditions.

This chapter takes a broad view across biology, high-
lighting  the  wide  range  of  mechanisms  that  produce 
intracellular transport. In most cases, transport involves 
single  organelles  on  an  actin  filament  or  microtubule,  
but organelle transport can result in bulk movement of  
the cytoplasm. The chapter also considers mechanisms 
that  produce  special  types  of  intracellular  movements: 
cytoplasmic  contractions  generated  by  myosin  and  
actin  filaments  that  propel  cytoplasmic  streaming;  and 
polymerization  and  depolymerization  of  microtubules 
and actin filaments. Chapters on membrane traffic (see 
Chapters 20 to 22) and mitosis (see Chapter 44) cover 
more examples of intracellular movements.

Rapid Intracellular Movements  
on Microtubules
Organelles  in  most  eukaryotic  cells  can  move  along 
linear microtubule tracks at relatively high velocities, on 
the  order  of  1 µm s−1  (Table  37.1)  at  least  part  of  the 
time.  The  physical  organization  of  microtubules  deter-
mines the patterns of these movements (Fig. 37.1; also 
see Fig. 34.2). In cells with a radial arrangement of micro-
tubules (Fig. 37.1) organelles and other cargos associated 
with  kinesin-1  move  toward  microtubule  plus  ends 
located at the periphery of cells. Cargo associated with 

 639

640 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

A

Neuron

Axon

Fibroblast

B

C

Nitella streaming

Synapse

Kinesin

Myosin

Dynein

FIGURE 37.1  MECHANISMS OF INTRACELLULAR MOVEMENT. A, Fibroblasts and neurons move organelles bidirectionally along micro-
tubules  (red).  B,  The  green  alga  Nitella  moves  cytoplasmic  organelles  along  bundles  of  actin  filaments  located  in  the  cell  cortex. 
C, Microtubule-based and actin filament–based motors. 

TABLE 37.1  Velocities of Intracellular Movements
System
Microtubule Motors
Anterograde fast axonal transport, squid
Retrograde fast axonal transport, squid
Chromosome movement in anaphase of mitosis
Endoplasmic reticulum sliding, newt cell
Slow axonal transport, rat nerves
Microtubule Polymerization
Endoplasmic reticulum tip elongation, Newt cell
Actin-Myosin Motors
Cytoplasmic streaming, Nitella
Cytoplasmic streaming, Physarum
Actin Polymerization
Actin-propelled comet, Listeria

Velocity (µm s−1)

Mechanism

1
2
0.003–0.2
0.1
0.002–0.1 net 1 (intermittent)

0.1

60
500

0.5

Individual kinesin motors
Individual dynein motors
Motors plus depolymerization
Individual kinesin motors
Motors on microtubules

Microtubule polymerization

Myosin motors on tracks
Actin–myosin contraction

Actin polymerization

dynein  moves  in  the  opposite  direction.  These  motors 
are processive (see Chapter 36), so  they  can  work  alone 
or  in  small  numbers.  Intraflagellar transport of proteins 
in cilia and flagella (see Fig. 38.18) shares many features 
with the movements of organelles.

The chemistry of individual microtubules subtly influ-
ences  the  delivery  of  cargo  to  specific  locations,  as  
some motors favor microtubules composed of particular 
tubulin isoforms or with posttranslational modifications. 
For  example,  kinesin-1  favors  acetylated  microtubules, 

and CENP-E favors tyrosinated microtubules in the center 
of the mitotic spindle. In addition, microtubule-associated 
proteins, such as tau, can influence the choice of tracks 
by  reducing  the  run  lengths  of  motors  under  some 
circumstances.

Matching Microtubule Motors With Cargo
Pairing motors with appropriate cargo and regulation of 
motor  activity  control  the  traffic  along  microtubules. 
Coupling  can  be  as  simple  as  kinesin  binding  to  a 

p25/p27

p62

Arp11

-actin
Arp1
Arp1

 

A
Pointed
end

Filament

Barbed
end

Shoulder
p150Glued/p135
p50, p24

(+)

Bottom protofilament

Top protofilament

Capping protein

CHAPTER 37  n  Intracellular Motility 

641

B

Cargo

Dynactin

BICD2

C

Arl8-GTP

Lysosome

Dynein
(ADP.Pi)
Dyenin
(ADP)

R

U

N

WD

KLC

SKIP

P H

Kinesin-1

Anterograde
movement

(–)

Microtubule

(–)

(+)

FIGURE 37.2  ATTACHMENT OF CYTOPLASMIC MICROTUBULE MOTORS TO MEMBRANES. A, Ribbon diagram of the structure of 
the core of the dynactin complex determined by electron cryomicroscopy. The short filament of Arp1 is capped by capping protein on the barbed 
end and by Arp11 on the pointed end. The shoulder is formed by part of the p150 molecule, most of which was disordered in these samples. 
B, Drawing showing dynein linked to a vesicle by dynactin complex and moving toward the minus end of a microtubule. C, Coupling of kinesin-1 
to a lysosome. Guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) Arl8 on the lysosome membrane engages the adapter protein SKIP (SifA-kinesin interacting 
protein), which binds to the kinesin light chain as shown in Fig. 36.9E. (A, From Urnavicius L, Zhang K, Diamant AG, et al. The structure of the 
dynactin complex and its interaction with dynein. Science. 2015;347:1441–1446. B, From Cianfrocco MA, DeSantis ME, Leschziner AE, Reck-
Peterson SL. Mechanism and regulation of cytoplasmic dynein. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2015;31:83–108. C, Based on a drawing from Rosa-
Ferreira C, Munro S. Arl8 and SKIP act together to link lysosomes to kinesin-1. Dev Cell. 2011;21:1171–1178.)

BOX 37.1  Tools for Studying Motor Proteins

A  small  compound  named  monastrol  inhibits  kinesin-5, 
resulting  in  monopolar  mitotic  spindles  that  fail  to  
segregate  the  chromosomes.  Higher-affinity  inhibitors  of 
kinesin-5  are  being  tested  for  cancer  therapy.  The  small 
molecule  blebbistatin  inhibits  cytoplasmic  and  skeletal 
muscle myosin-II (but not smooth muscle myosin-II) and 
blocks cytokinesis. Vanadate and ultraviolet light can inac-
tivate  dynein.  Vanadate  binds  to  the  γ-phosphate  site  of 
dynein–adenosine  diphosphate  (ADP),  but  it  binds  simi-
larly to other adenosine triphosphatases (ATPases), so it is 
not specific. However, ultraviolet light has a novel effect 
on  the  dynein–ADP–vanadate  complex:  It  cleaves  and 
inactivates the dynein heavy chain.

transmembrane  protein  on  a  cargo  vesicle,  but  usually 
involves adapter proteins that recognize a molecule on 
the surface of the cargo and one or more motors. Dynein 
associates  with  the  dynactin  complex  (Fig.  37.2B). 
About  a  dozen  other  known  adapter  proteins  also  
interact with the dynactin complex, kinesins or both to 
direct  traffic  to  specific  locations  (Table  37.2).  Local 
conditions in the cell regulate both coupling of motors 
to cargo and the activity of the motors. Other proteins 
tether some organelles to immobilize them and prevent 
their transport.

The 1 mDa dynactin complex consists of a short fila-
ment of actin-related protein Arp1 capped on its barbed 
end  by  capping  protein  and  on  its  pointed  end  by  the 
most divergent actin-related protein, Arp11 (Fig. 37.2A). 

Other subunits at the pointed end serve as cargo adap-
tors.  Association  of  the  dimeric  tail  of  dynein  with  the 
dynactin  complex  and  adapter  proteins  activates  its 
motor activity. The 150-kD dynactin subunit (p150Glued) 
includes a long extension that links the Arp1 filament to 
both an intermediate chain of dynein and a microtubule. 
The  two  dynein  motor  domains  take  steps  of  variable 
size as they pull the cargo along the microtubule. Muta-
tions of p150Glued cause developmental defects in the eye 
and  brain  of  Drosophila  plus  some  forms  of  Parkinson 
disease and motor neuron degeneration in humans.

Most  proteins  known  to  link  organelles  and  ribonu-
cleoprotein  particles  to  microtubule  motors  interact 
with both dynein and kinesins, but some are specific for 
one or the other (Table 37.2). These interactions often 
activate  or  inhibit  motor  activity,  coupling  physical  
association  with  transport.  For  example,  some  cargo 
adapters overcome autoinhibitory interactions between 
the heads and tails of kinesins-1, -2, and -3 by binding to 
the kinesin tail or light chains.

Other  than  their  linker  and  regulatory  activities, 
adapter  proteins  have  little  in  common,  so  they  likely 
had  independent  evolutionary  origins.  The  following 
sample illustrates the diversity of these adapters.

Motors  and  adapter  proteins  are  targeted  to  cargo 
membranes  by  integral  membrane  proteins,  peripheral 
proteins or lipids. Kinesin binds directly to a few trans-
membrane  proteins,  so  no  adapter  is  required.  For 
example,  calsyntenin  and  alcalpha  on  certain  neuronal 
vesicles  have  short  sequences  with  acidic  residues  
flanking a key tryptophan that bind kinesin light chains 

642 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

TABLE 37.2  Adapters for Microtubule Motors

Links to Motors

Links to Cargos

Cargo

Destination

Regulation

Dynein IC, 

p150Glued, other 
adapters listed 
here

Endosomes, 

mitochondria, 
Golgi membranes

Dynactin

Rab7, spectrin

Late endosomes

Trans-Golgi 

Rab7 GTPase

network

Disease 
Connection

Mutations 

cause neuron 
degeneration

Adapter Protein
Dynein Only
Dynactin 
complex

RILP (Rab7-

interacting 
lysosomal 
protein)

SNX6 (sorting 

Dynactin

Other retromer 

Endosome vesicles 

Trans-Golgi 

PI4P on trans-

nexin 6)

proteins

with recycling 
receptors

network

Golgi 
membranes 
releases dynactin

Kinesin Only
DENN/MADD 

(Rab3 guanine 
nucleotide 
exchange 
factor)

Kinesin-3

Synaptic vesicles 

Synapse

Rab3 GTPase

with Rab3

Mint1 (Munc18-

Kinesin-2 tail

interacting 
protein)

SKIP (SifA-kinesin 

Kinesin-1 LC

Vesicles with 

NMDA glutamate 
receptors
Lysosomes

Synapse

Phosphorylation 

by CaMKII

Periphery

Arl8 GTPase

Arl8 GTP → 

lysosome

interacting 
protein)

Dynein and Kinesin
Hook
Huntingtin

Dynein, kinesin-3
Dynein IC, HAP1 

→ dynactin, 
kinesin-1 HC 
and LC

HAP40 → Rab5, 
Optineurin → 
myosin-VI

JIP1 (JNK 

interacting 
protein)

Either dynactin or 

JNK, vesicles 

kinesin-1 stalk, 
tail & LC with 
aid of FEZ1

with amyloid 
precursor 
protein

JIP3/JIP4 (JNK 

Dynactin, 

JNK, Arf6

Synaptic vesicles  

interacting 
protein)

kinesin-1 tail 
and LC, JIP1

to synapse, 
endosomes with 
nerve growth 
factor to cell 
body

La

Dynein IC, 

kinesin-1 HC

RNPs

Ribonucleoprotein 

Bidirectional

particles

Bidirectional
Bidirectional

Phosphorylation 
of Huntingtin 
and motors

Traffic defects 
and massive 
neuronal 
degeneration 
in Huntington 
disease

Bidirectional

Early endosomes
Endosomes, 
lysosomes, 
autophagosomes, 
vesicles with  
APP or GABA 
receptors, mRNA
Synaptic vesicles, 

autophagosomes, 
mitochondria, 
vesicles with APP

Phosphorylation 
by JNK favors 
kinesin-1 binding 
and transport to 
plus end

Phosphorylation 

of DIC

SUMOylation may 
reverse direction 
at periphery

Milton/TRAK

Dynactin, 

Miro/RhoT2 

Mitochondria

Bidirectional

Local 

kinesin-1 HC

transmembrane 
GTPase

concentrations 
of ATP and Ca2+

Parkinson 

disease (?)

Data from Fu MM, Holzbaur EL: Integrated regulation of motor-driven organelle transport by scaffolding proteins. Trends Cell Biol 2014;24:564–574.
APP, amyloid precursor protein; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; CaMKII, calcium/calmodulin-dependent serine protein kinase; FEZ1, fasciculation  
and elongation protein zeta 1; GABA, γ-aminobutyric acid; GTP, guanosine triphosphate; GTPase, guanosine triphosphatase; HC, heavy chain; 
IC, intermediate chain; JNK, c-Jun N-terminal kinase; LC, light chain; mRNA, messenger RNA; NMDA, N-methyl-D-aspartate; RNP, ribonucleoprotein; 
PI4P, phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate.

 

CHAPTER 37  n  Intracellular Motility 

643

(see Fig. 36.9E). In other cases an adapter protein links 
a  transmembrane  protein  to  a  motor.  For  instance,  a 
transmembrane  protein  called  Miro  on  the  surface  of 
mitochondria  interacts  with  adapter  protein  Milton/
TRAK1, which binds both the kinesin-1 heavy chain and 
dynactin for bidirectional transport in axons.

Guanosine  triphosphatases  (GTPases)  on  organelle 
membranes  interact  with  other  adapter  proteins.  For 
instance,  different  GTPases  target  kinesin  and  dynein 
to  lysosomes.  Lysosomes  with  Arl8-GTP  (guanosine  tri-
phosphate)  bind  the  adapter  SKIP  (SifA-kinesin  inter-
acting protein). An acidic/tryptophan sequence in SKIP 
interacts  with  kinesin  light  chains  (Fig.  37.2C)  during 
transport  to  the  periphery.  This  interaction  with  SKIP 
also turns on the kinesin motor by overcoming the auto-
inhibitory  interaction  of  the  motor  domains  with  the  
tail. Similarly, vesicles containing transmembrane recep-
tors  (mannose-6-phosphate  receptor,  for  example)  bud 
from  late  endosomes  with  the  GTPase  Rab7  on  their 
surface.  Rab7-GTP  binds  the  adapter  protein  RILP 
(Rab7-interacting  lysosomal  protein),  which  anchors 
dynactin  and  dynein  for  vesicle  transport  to  the  trans-
Golgi  network  (see  Fig.  22.12).  Phosphatidylinositol 
4-phosphate  (see  Fig.  26.7)  on  the  Golgi  membranes 
binds sorting nexin 6 (part of the retromer complex; see 
Fig. 22.12) and releases dynactin and dynein.

Many cargo particles associate with both a kinesin and 
dynein. In this case, regulatory mechanisms responsive 
to  local  conditions  must  coordinate  their  activities  to 
achieve net transport. One example is the adapter protein 
La,  which  links  ribonucleoprotein  particles  to  both 
dynein and kinesin. After being carried to the cell periph-
ery by kinesin, covalent modification of La with a SUMO 
protein inactivates kinesin, allowing for reverse transport 
back to the cell center by dynein. Phosphorylation regu-
lates the adapter protein JIP1 (JNK interacting protein-1), 
which  binds  either  kinesin  or  dynein.  Phosphorylated 
JIP1  binds  and  activates  kinesin,  favoring  anterograde 
transport. Mitochondria move both directions in axons, 

but some stop moving in regions with limited adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP). A local high concentration of cyto-
plasmic calcium binds to EF-hands (Ca2+ binding site in 
calmodulin consisting of α-helices E and F) of the anchor 
protein Miro. Calcium binding turns off both kinesin and 
dynein, keeping mitochondria in place until ATP concen-
trations  return  to  normal.  Another  protein  anchors  sta-
tionary mitochondria to microtubules.

Faulty axonal transport resulting in clumps of vesicles 
is  observed  in  human  degenerative  diseases  of  the 
nervous system including Alzheimer and Parkinson dis-
eases,  but  cause-and-effect  relationships  are  still  under 
investigation.  One  intriguing  part  of  this  story  is  that  
the transmembrane amyloid precursor protein not only 
binds directly to kinesin-1 light chain, but also is cleaved 
in  Alzheimer  disease  to  produce  amyloid-β  peptide—a 
toxic peptide that is implicated in neuronal death. Hun-
tingtin,  the  giant  (350 kD)  adapter  protein  mutated  in 
Huntington  disease,  normally  participates  in  bidirec-
tional axonal transport of multiple cargos (Table 37.2). 
Other membrane-associated scaffold proteins, including, 
JIP-1 and JIP-3, bind kinases from the mitogen-activated 
protein (MAP) kinase cascade (see Fig. 27.6) in addition 
to kinesin-1 light chains.

Fast Axonal Transport
Analysis of microtubule-based movements is particularly 
favorable  in  axons  of  neurons,  because  axons  are  long 
(up to 1 m) but narrow, the microtubules have a uniform 
polarity,  and  organelles  move  at  steady  rates  in  both 
directions.  Furthermore,  nerve  cells  contain  high  con-
centrations  of  microtubules  and  microtubule  motors; 
indeed,  cytoplasmic  tubulin,  cytoplasmic  dynein,  and 
kinesin were all originally isolated from brain.

High-contrast light microscopy of living axons reveals 
that  most  membrane-bound  organelles  move  either 
toward  (anterograde)  or  away  from  (retrograde)  the  
end of the axon (Fig. 37.3) with some pauses and even 

0 sec

3 sec

5 sec

2

1

A

3

4

2

1

2

1

4

4

B

3

3

FIGURE 37.3  FAST TRANSPORT IN CYTOPLASM ISOLATED FROM SQUID GIANT AXONS. A, Three frames from a series of video-
enhanced differential interference contrast micrographs show movement of organelles in both the anterograde (rightwards) and retrograde (left-
wards) directions. Four large organelles are marked with numbers and colored green at zero time, blue at 3 seconds, and red at 5 seconds. 
Movement (arrows in right panel) is from the white to the black number. The original video record shows hundreds of smaller organelles moving 
steadily in either an anterograde or a retrograde direction at 1 to 2 µm/s. B, Electron micrograph of a thin section showing vesicles associated 
with microtubules in axoplasm. (A, Courtesy S. Brady, University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas. B, Courtesy R.H. Miller, Case 
Western Reserve Medical School, Cleveland, OH.)

644 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

A

Proximal

B

Ligature

Distal

FIGURE  37.4  ELECTRON  MICROGRAPHS  SHOWING  THE  RESULT  OF  NERVE  LIGATION.  These  are  longitudinal  sections  of  axons 
surrounded by a darkly stained myelin sheath. A, The cytoplasm proximal to the ligation demonstrates the accumulation of vesicles and mito-
chondria, which were being transported toward the nerve terminal to the right. B, The cytoplasm distal to the ligation shows the accumulation 
of  lysosomes,  multivesicular  bodies,  and  mitochondria,  which  were  being  transported  toward  the  cell  body  to  the  left.  (B,  From  Hirokawa  N, 
Sato-Yoshitake R, Yoshida T, et al. Brain dynein (MAP1C) localizes on both anterogradely and retrogradely transported membranous organelles 
in vivo. J Cell Biol. 1990;111:1027–1037.)

occasional  changes  of  direction.  Retrograde  move-
ments (2.5 µm s−1 or 22 cm/day) are faster than antero-
grade  movements  (0.5 µm s−1  or  4 cm/day).  These 
rates are remarkable given the densely packed microtu-
bules,  intermediate  filaments,  and  vesicles  in  the  cyto-
plasm  (Fig.  37.4;  see  also  Fig.  35.9).  At  these  rates,  a 
round trip from a nerve cell body in the spinal cord of 
a  human  to  the  foot  and  back  takes  only  3  weeks.  If  a 
0.1-µm vesicle were the size of a small car, it would move 
anterogradely  at  50  miles  per  hour  and  retrogradely  at 
250 miles per hour. In the axons of vertebrate neurons, 
mitochondria  move  back  and  forth  in  both  directions. 
Their  net  movement  toward  the  nerve  terminal  or  cell 
body depends on physiological conditions.

Biochemical reconstitution showed that the plus-end 
motors of the kinesin family are responsible for antero-
grade  movements  toward  the  nerve  terminal  and  the 
minus-end motor dynein is responsible for movement in 
the retrograde direction. Accordingly, kinesin mutations 
in  flies  result  in  paralysis  of  the  back  half  of  larvae, 
because  transport  fails  in  the  longest  axons.  Mutations 
in three different kinesin genes also cause human nerve 
degeneration.

Classic nerve ligation experiments revealed the cargo 
carried  in  each  direction  by  fast  transport  (Fig.  37.4). 
Different organelles pile up on either side of a mechani-
cal constriction that blocks transport. Small, round, and 
tubular vesicles, including components of synaptic vesi-
cles (see Fig. 17.8), accumulate on the side near the cell 
body.  Fast  anterograde  transport  carries  these  cargoes 
from the cell body toward the end of the axon, where 
they  enter  the  cycle  of  synaptic  vesicle  turnover  (see 

Figs.  17.8  and  17.9).  Endosomes  and  multivesicular 
bodies  moving  by  fast  retrograde  transport  pile  up  on 
the  distal  side  of  the  constriction.  Autophagic  vesicles 
also  move  primarily  in  the  retrograde  direction.  Retro-
grade transport can also move signals from nerve termi-
nals to the cell body. For example, kinesin carries vesicles 
with  the  nerve  growth  factor  TrkA  receptor  tyrosine 
kinase (see Fig. 24.4) to nerve terminals where it joins 
the plasma membrane. When activated by nerve growth 
factor, TrkA is taken up by endocytosis for transport by 
dynein back to the perinuclear region. Once the vesicle 
reaches  the  cell  body  TrkA  activates  the  MAP  kinase 
pathway to regulate cell growth (see Fig. 27.6). Herpes 
virus  and  rabies  virus  also  use  dynein  for  long-distance 
transport on microtubules from the terminals of sensory 
nerves  to  the  cell  body,  where  viral  DNA  enters  the 
nucleus for replication.

Many  questions  remain  regarding  the  control  of 
microtubule motors during fast transport, including how 
kinesins  remain  active  and  dynein  remains  inactive 
during the long trip out to the nerve terminal, how cyto-
plasmic  dynein  on  retrograde  cargo  is  activated  locally 
at the nerve terminal and kept active during movement 
to the cell body, and how defects in fast transport may 
contribute to neurodegenerative diseases.

Slow Transport of Cytoskeletal Polymers 
and Associated Proteins in Axons
Many neuronal proteins move slowly from their site of 
synthesis in the cell body toward the ends of axons and 
dendrites.  This  transport  is  essential,  as  most  protein 

 

CHAPTER 37  n  Intracellular Motility 

645

A.  Radiolabeling pulse-chase protocol

B. Photobleaching

Inject radiolabeled amino acids into eye
where neurons synthesize them into proteins

Inject fluorescently
labeled tubulin

C. Fluorescence microscopy of a
     neurofilament moving through
     a bleached zone in an axon

Anterograde

Wave of labeled proteins
moves along axons
toward brain

Uniformly fluorescent
axon

Photobleach
discrete zone

)
c
e
s
(
 
e
m
T

i

Bleached zone

Wave of labeled proteins
progresses 1-2 mm/day

Zone remains
stationary

Bleached zone

0

56

64

72

80

88

96

FIGURE  37.5  EXPERIMENTS ON SLOW AXONAL TRANSPORT. A, Pulse-chase experiment. Radioactive amino acids are injected into 
the eye of an experimental animal. In the nerve cell body, radioactive tracer is incorporated into proteins, which are transported along the axon. 
Some  proteins  are  incorporated  into  stationary  structures  and  are  left  along  the  way.  B,  Photobleaching  experiment.  A  cultured  nerve  cell  is 
injected with tubulin labeled with a fluorescent dye. Tubulin fills the cytoplasm and axon as it grows out. A section of the axon is then bleached 
with a strong pulse of light. This bleached zone is stationary over a period of minutes. C, Fluorescence micrographs of the axon of a cultured rat 
neuron showing rapid transport of a short neurofilament labeled with subunits fused to green fluorescence protein (GFP). Note the photobleached 
region (bracket) and the ends of the moving neurofilament (arrows). The neurofilament moves rapidly into the bleached region, but the bleached 
region does not move because most of the neurofilaments are stationary. Scale bar is 5 µm. (A–B, Modified from Cleveland DW, Hoffman PN. 
Slow axonal transport models come full circle. Cell. 1991;67:453–456. C, From Wang L, Brown A. Rapid intermittent movement of axonal neu-
rofilaments observed by fluorescence photobleaching. Mol Biol Cell. 2001;12:3257–3267, 2001.)

synthesis  occurs  in  the  cell  body,  whereas  more  than 
99%  of  cell  volume  can  be  in  axons  and  dendrites.  If 
nerve cells were smaller, shorter lived or less asymmetri-
cal,  we  might  not  even  notice  such  slow  movements. 
Labeling  proteins  with  radioactive  amino  acids  during 
their synthesis in the cell body allows for tracking their 
movements  along  axons  (Fig.  37.5A).  Proteins  that  are 
moved by slow axonal transport are classified into two 
groups  based  on  their  velocities.  Tubulin,  intermediate 
filament  proteins,  and  spectrin,  which  compose  the 
“slow component–a,” move exceedingly slowly, approx-
imately 0.1 to 1.0 mm per day (or 1 to 10 nm s−1). In a 
human,  these  molecules  take  more  than  3  months  to 
travel  from  their  site  of  synthesis  in  the  spinal  cord  to 
the foot. “Slow component–b” moves approximately 10 
times  faster  and  includes  10  times  more  protein  than 
slow  component–a.  It  is  a  heterogeneous  mixture  of 

many  proteins,  including  clathrin,  glycolytic  enzymes, 
and actin.

Defining  the  mechanism  of  slow  transport  was  
challenging  because  various  experimental  approaches 
yielded apparently conflicting results. Radioactive label-
ing  showed  that  the  moving  proteins  are  spread  out  
and  diluted  as  they  move  away  from  the  cell  body  
(Fig. 37.5A). Photobleaching of fluorescent tubulin and 
actin  in  axons  of  cultured  neurons  demonstrated  that  
the  bulk  of  those  cytoskeletal  polymers  is  stationary  
(Fig. 37.5B).

This  puzzle  was  solved  for  slow  component–a  by 
imaging  single  fluorescent  intermediate  filaments  in 
axons of live nerve cells. These filaments are stationary 
most  of  the  time  (up  to  99%),  but  occasionally,  they 
move rapidly (0.2 to 2 µm s−1) for up to 20 µm. Most of 
these  intermittent  movements  are  away  from  the  cell 

646 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

body,  accounting  for  the  net  anterograde  movement. 
These  rapid  but  intermittent  movements  depend  on 
microtubules  and  are  presumably  driven  by  kinesin, 
although how the motor is linked to the filaments is not 
known. A few intermediate filaments move in the retro-
grade direction explaining why waves spread in pulse–
chase  experiments  (Fig.  37.5A).  The  movements  of 
whole microtubules are similar to those of intermediate 
filaments. Thus, what appears to be slow bulk transport 
is caused by fast but intermittent movement of cargos. 
Slow component–b proteins seem move by alternatively 
hitchhiking  transiently  on  some  moving  structures  and 
diffusing locally between movements.

Other Microtubule-Dependent Movements
Other  cells  use  the  same  molecular  mechanisms  as 
neurons to move organelles in the cytoplasm. Secretory 
vesicles  use  plus–end  motors  to  move  from  the  Golgi 
apparatus to the plasma membrane (see Fig. 21.1). Endo-
somes use dynein to move from the plasma membrane 
toward the centrosome.

The  intracellular  distributions  of  the  endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) depend on microtubules. Strands of the 
ER align with microtubules in cultured cells (Fig. 37.6). 
This codistribution is achieved in two ways: (a) Motors 
transport strands of ER bidirectionally on microtubules, 
and (b) other strands of the ER attach to the plus end of 
microtubules  and  ride  the  microtubule  tip  as  it  grows 
and  shrinks  during  dynamic  instability.  The  +TIP  EB1 
(see  Fig.  34.8)  interacts  with  transmembrane  protein 
STIM1 to couple the ER to growing microtubules. STIM1 
has  another  role  in  maintaining  a  supply  of  Ca2+  inside 
the ER (see Fig. 26.12). This is the best example of move-
ment of an organelle driven by forces generated directly 
by microtubule assembly.

Microtubules and motors also distribute other organ-
elles inside cells. The concentration of the Golgi appara-
tus  near  the  centrosome  depends  on  microtubules, 
because dynein motors transport Golgi vesicles toward 
the minus ends of the microtubules nucleated at centro-
somes (see Fig. 21.20). Mitochondria move bidirection-
ally on microtubules in animal cells but depend on actin 
filaments  in  yeast.  Thus,  not  only  the  dynamics  of  the 
organelles  but  also  the  overall  organization  of  a  cell 
depend  on  microtubules  and  associated  motors.  As  a 
result,  cellular  architecture  is  determined  actively,  not 
passively.

The  intracellular  distribution  of  nucleoprotein  com-
plexes  also  depends  on  active  movements.  The  most 
obvious  example  is  the  movement  of  chromosomes 
during mitosis, which depends on microtubule assembly 
and  microtubule  motors  (see  Fig.  44.7).  Microtubules 
and motors can also produce asymmetrical distributions 
of mRNAs in cells. The adapter protein La links kinesins 
and  dynein  to  specific  ribonucleoprotein  particles  for 

A

B

C

00:00

06:24

12:48

00:00

00:00

00:35

01:00

00:42

02:00

00:49

02:10

02:06

02:49

03:02

03:30

03:30

04:00

03:58

04:10

19:15

04:40

04:40

FIGURE 37.6  TWO MODES OF MICROTUBULE-DEPENDENT 
MOVEMENT OF THE ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM IN A NEWT 
EPITHELIAL  CELL.  The  cell  was  microinjected  with  rhodamine-
labeled tubulin, which incorporates into microtubules, and a lipophilic 
green-fluorescent  dye  (DiOC6  [3,3′-dihexyloxacarbocyanine  iodide]), 
which  labels  endoplasmic  reticulum  (ER).  Time  series  are  indicated 
in  minutes  and  seconds.  Scale  bar  for  all  panels  is  5  µM.  A,  This 
column  of  fluorescence  micrographs  illustrates  the  dynamics  of 
microtubules  (red)  and  ER  (green),  over  a  period  of  19  minutes. 
Note  the  strand  of  ER  moving  away  from  the  leading  edge  (arrow-
heads).  B,  Time  course  of  the  movement  of  a  strand  of  ER  toward 
the end of a microtubule, followed by retraction. This type of move-
ment  is  thought  to  be  driven  by  a  kinesin  motor  attached  to  the 
tip  of  the  elongating  membrane  (arrowhead).  C,  Time  course  of  the 
movement  of  a  strand  of  ER  attached  to  the  tip  of  a  growing 
microtubule  (arrowhead),  followed  by  retraction  of  the  membrane 
along  the  microtubule.  (Courtesy  C.  Waterman-Storer  and  E.D. 
Salmon, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. For reference, see 
Waterman-Storer  C,  Salmon  ED.  Endoplasmic  reticulum  membrane 
tubules.  Curr  Biol.  1998;8:798–806.)

 

CHAPTER 37  n  Intracellular Motility 

647

(–)

Nucleus

RNA granules

Disperse
RNA

Branch

Membrane

Immobile granules

(+)

Mobile granules

Disperse RNA

FIGURE  37.7  TRANSPORT  OF  MESSENGER  RNA  (mRNA) 
FOR  MYELIN  BASIC  PROTEIN  IN  A  CULTURED  OLIGODEN-
DROCYTE, A GLIAL CELL ISOLATED FROM BRAIN. mRNA syn-
thesized  in  the  cell  body  (or,  in  this  case,  labeled  with  a  fluorescent 
dye and microinjected into the cell body) is packaged with proteins in 
a  ribonucleoprotein  particle,  transported  from  the  cell  center  along 
microtubules  at  a  steady  rate  of  0.2 µm s−1,  and  released  at  the 
periphery, where it moves randomly at 1 µm/s. (Modified from Ainger 
K, Avossa D, Morgan F, et al. Transport and localization of exogenous 
myelin basic protein mRNA microinjected into oligodendrocytes. J Cell 
Biol. 1993;123:431–441.)

long distance transport to sites of local protein synthesis 
(Fig. 37.7). For example, localization of certain mRNAs 
in fly oocytes helps establish the polarity of the embryos.

Intracellular Movements Driven by 
Microtubule Polymerization
Microtubule polymerization and depolymerization have 
long been known to play a central role in the assembly 
of the mitotic apparatus and the movement of chromo-
somes  (see  Fig.  44.7),  as  well  as  the  establishment  of 
cellular asymmetry (see Fig. 34.2). Polymerizing micro-
tubules  can  exert  substantial  forces,  but  strong  forces 
buckle microtubules longer than approximately 10 µm. 
Consequently,  microtubule  pushing  mechanisms  work 
best  over  short  distances,  such  as  positioning  the  ER  
(Fig.  37.6),  the  nucleus  in  fission  yeast  cells  (see  Fig. 
6.3D)  and  the  mitotic  spindle  in  budding  yeast  cells  
(see Fig. 34.2D).

Remarkably,  the  end  of  a  depolymerizing  microtu-
bule can also pull on attached cargo. An in vitro proof-
of-principle  experiment 
that 
chromosomes could ride on the end of a depolymerizing 
microtubule, even in the absence of ATP or GTP. Linker 
proteins  associated  with  the  kinetochore  region  of  the 

(Fig.  37.8)  showed 

0

42

51

63

75

FIGURE 37.8  TRANSPORT OF AN ISOLATED CHROMOSOME 
ON A SHORTENING MICROTUBULE IN VITRO. A microtubule was 
grown from brain tubulin nucleated by a basal body in the extracted 
carcass of a ciliate, Tetrahymena. A chromosome (arrow) was added 
as a test cargo and captured by the end of the microtubule. When the 
concentration of tubulin was reduced, the microtubule shortened, car-
rying along the chromosome attached to its tip. This transport occurs 
in the absence of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) or guanosine triphos-
phate (GTP). (Courtesy J.R. McIntosh, University of Colorado, Boulder.)

chromosome make multiple weak bonds with the walls 
of the microtubule end (see Figs. 8.21 and 8.22). These 
interactions rearrange rapidly enough to maintain attach-
ment, even as tubulin subunits dissociate from the end.

Bulk Movement of Cytoplasm Driven by 
Actin and Myosin
Bulk streaming of cytoplasm is most spectacular in plant 
cells (Fig. 37.1B). Although confined within rigid walls, 
plant  cell  cytoplasm  streams  vigorously  at  very  high 
velocities  (up  to  60 µm s−1).  At  this  rate,  cytoplasm 
moves  5 m/day!  Such  cytoplasmic  streaming  is  best 
understood  in  the  giant  cells  of  the  green  alga  Nitella. 
Streaming  occurs  continuously  in  a  thin  layer  of  cyto-
plasm  between  the  large  central  vacuole  and  chloro-
plasts  immobilized  in  the  cortex.  On  each  side  of  the 
cell,  a  zone  of  stationary  cytoplasm  separates  streams 
moving 
in  opposite  directions.  The  physiological  
function of this streaming is not clearly understood.

Bulk streaming in Nitella is brought about by move-
ment of ER along tracks consisting of bundles of polar-
ized  actin  filaments  associated  with  chloroplasts  (Fig. 
37.9C). All the actin filaments in these bundles have the 
same  polarity,  and  cytoplasm  streams  toward  their 
barbed  ends.  In  Nitella  extracts,  membrane  vesicles 
move  along  actin  filament  bundles  at  the  same  high 
velocities as the cytoplasmic streaming. A type XI myosin 
(see  Fig.  36.7)  pulls  the  ER  along  these  cortical  actin 
tracks,  dragging  along  other  cytoplasmic  components, 
including organelles and soluble molecules. This myosin 
moves  nearly  10  times  faster  than  the  fastest  muscle 
contraction, apparently by taking large steps rapidly and 
by the cooperation of several motors working rapidly on 
the same membrane.

A  completely  different  actomyosin  mechanism  pro-
duces equally spectacular cytoplasmic streaming in the 
acellular  slime  mold  Physarum.  In  these  giant,  multi-
nucleated  cells,  cytoplasm  flows  back  and  forth  rhyth-
mically  at  high  velocities  through  tubular  channels  
(Fig.  37.10).  Cycles  of  contraction  and  relaxation  of 

648 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

A

B

C

D

E

F

FIGURE  37.9  CYTOPLASMIC  STREAMING  IN  THE  GREEN  ALGA  NITELLA.  A,  A  pair  of  differential  interference  contrast  (DIC)  light 
micrographs showing the movement of organelles in cytoplasm. Note the strand of endoplasmic reticulum (ER [arrow]). B, Time series of DIC 
light micrographs showing movement of a vesicle isolated from Nitella along a bundle of actin filaments isolated from Nitella. C, Scanning electron 
micrographs  of  the  cortex  isolated  from  Nitella  showing  the  bundles  of  actin  filaments  associated  with  chloroplasts.  D,  Transmission  electron 
micrographs of a freeze-fracture preparation (upper) and thin section (lower) showing ER associated with actin filament bundles. E, Freeze-fracture 
preparation of a vesicle associated with an actin filament bundle. F, Movement of ER along actin filament bundles dragging along bulk cytoplasm. 
(Courtesy B. Kachar, National Institutes of Health. For reference, see Kachar B, Reese T. The mechanism of cytoplasmic streaming in characean 
algal cells: sliding of endoplasmic reticulum along actin filaments. J Cell Biol. 1988;106:1545–1552.)

cortical  actin  filament  networks  push  relatively  fluid 
endoplasm back and forth in a manner akin to squeezing 
a  toothpaste  tube.  Myosin-II  is  thought  to  generate  the 
cortical  contraction,  as  it  is  present  in  high  concentra-
tion  in  this  cell  and  can  contract  actin  filament  gels  in 
vitro. (This was the first nonmuscle myosin to be purified 
in the late 1960s.) Cortical contractions similar to those 
of Physarum are used by giant amoebas for cell locomo-
tion  (see  Fig.  38.1),  and  by  other  cells  for  cytokinesis 
(see  Fig.  44.23),  and  movements  of  some  embryonic 
tissues (see Fig. 38.5).

Actin-Based Movements of Organelles in 
Other Cells
Like Nitella, budding yeast cells transport vesicles along 
bundles  of  actin  filaments  from  the  mother  to  the  bud 

(Fig.  37.11),  although  the  movements  of  these  solitary 
vesicles do not produce cytoplasmic streaming. Myosin-V 
is the motor (see Fig. 36.7), so vesicles fail to move from 
mother  to  bud  in  null  mutants  of  myosin-V  genes. 
Myosin-V also transports certain mRNAs along actin fila-
ment  cables  from  the  mother  to  the  bud,  where  they 
determine  cell  fate.  Similarly  myosin-VII  and  myosin-X 
transport cytoplasmic and membrane proteins in filopo-
dia of animal cells.

Animal cells generally use extended microtubules for 
long-distance movements and shorter actin filaments for 
local transport of vesicles and RNAs. Fish skin cells use 
both  systems  to  change  color:  dynein  aggregates  and 
kinesin disperses pigment granules called melanophores 
along  radial  microtubule  tracks.  Myosin-V  contributes  
by  moving  dispersed  melanophores  laterally  between 
microtubules.

 

CHAPTER 37  n  Intracellular Motility 

649

M

M

B

A

C

B

D

FIGURE 37.11  Fluorescence micrographs (A–D) showing actin fila-
ment bundles and patches at various stages in the cell cycle of the 
budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Myosin-V uses these actin 
filament  bundles  to  deliver  vesicles  (including  the  vacuole),  certain 
messenger RNAs (mRNAs), and at least one enzyme (chitin synthase) 
from  the  mother  to  the  bud.  (Courtesy  J.A.  Cooper,  Washington  
University, St. Louis, MO.)

Movements Driven by  
Actin Polymerization
Some  intracellular  pathogenic  bacteria,  including  Liste-
ria  and  Shigella,  use  actin  polymerization  to  move 
through the cytoplasm of their animal cell hosts at about 
0.5 µm s−1  (Fig.  37.12A).  These  bacteria  hijack  the 
machinery  normally  used  to  move  the  leading  edge  of 
motile cells to polymerize a comet tail of actin filaments 
that pushes the bacterium forward. One end of the bac-
terium has a concentration of proteins that directly (Lis-
teria)  or  indirectly  (Shigella)  activate  Arp2/3  complex 
to polymerize a network of branched actin filaments (see 
Fig.  33.12).  Growth  of  this  network  at  its  trailing  end 
pushes the bacterial cell forward. The comet tail of cross-
linked  actin  filaments  is  stationary  and  depolymerizes 
distally  at  the  same  rate  at  which  it  grows  next  to  the 
bacterium, so it remains a constant length.

Vaccinia  viruses  attached  to  the  outer  surface  of 
animal  cells  move  by  a  related  mechanism.  They  use 
transmembrane  proteins  to  activate  the  cytoplasmic 
actin assembly system to drive their movements at one 
stage in its life cycle (Fig. 37.12B). Placement of a plastic 
bead coated with adhesion proteins on the plasma mem-
brane of some animal cells can induce similar propulsive 
actin comet tails in the cytoplasm.

Fungal and animal cells use Arp2/3 complex to assem-
ble actin filaments at sites of clathrin-mediated endocy-
tosis.  Polymerization  of  these  filaments  assists  with 
vesicle  separation  from  the  plasma  membrane.  Nucle-
ation  promoting  factors  associated  with  some  endo-
somes  stimulate  Arp2/3  complex  to  assemble  actin 
filament comets and move similar to Listeria.

5
 
c
m

A

24

20

16

12

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

)
r
e
t
a
w

 

 
f
o
m
c
(
 

e
r
u
s
s
e
r
p
-
e
c
n
a
a
B

l

C

5

10

Time (min)

FIGURE  37.10  CYTOPLASMIC  STREAMING  IN  THE  ACEL-
LULAR SLIME MOLD PHYSARUM POLYCEPHALUM. A, Photo-
graph  of  Physarum  polycephalum,  a  giant  multinucleated  single  cell 
growing in a baking dish. B, Blur photomicrograph made with polariza-
tion optics by taking a time exposure showing the bulk streaming of 
the  endoplasm  in  a  cytoplasmic  strand  (long  arrow).  M,  Mucus. 
C, Time course of pressure changes produced by shuttle streaming 
of cytoplasm through a strand. (B, From Nakajima H. The mechano-
chemical system behind streaming in Physarum. In Allen RD, Kamiya 
N, eds. Primitive Motile Systems in Cell Biology. New York: Academic 
Press; 1964:111–123. C, For reference, see Kamiya N. The mecha-
nism of cytoplasmic movement in a myxomycete plasmodium. Symp 
Soc Exp Biol. 1968;22:199–214.)

The  direction  of  movement  depends  on  the  motor 
and  the  organization  of  the  actin  filaments.  Although 
many  actin  filaments  in  animal  cells  are  not  uniformly 
polarized, those in the cortex tend to have their barbed 
ends near the plasma membrane, allowing for local direc-
tional transport. For example, myosin-V moves recycling 
endosomes  toward  the  plasma  membrane.  Similarly, 
myosin-V  transports  pigment  granules  called  melano-
somes within and between cells in the skin. In both cases 
a small GTPase and an adapter protein link melanosomes 
to  the  tail  of  myosin-V.  Mutations  of  myosin-V,  the 
GTPase,  or  the  adapter  protein  in  mice  and  humans 
cause not only pigmentation defects but also neurologi-
cal  problems  owning  to  faulty  mRNA  transport  in 
neurons. Other adapter proteins link myosin-VI to newly 
internalized endosomes with various types of receptors 
for transport away from the plasma membrane.

650 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

A.  Listeria
A.  Listeria

B. Vaccinia virus
B. Vaccinia virus

5 µm

FIGURE 37.12  Fluorescence micrographs of actin filament comet tails in animal epithelial cells infected with the bacterium Listeria monocy-
togenes  (A)  or  vaccinia  virus  (B).  Both  pathogens  are  stained  green  with  fluorescent  antibodies.  They  use  host  cell  proteins  to  assemble  a 
crosslinked network of actin filaments shaped like a comet tail. Actin filaments are stained red with rhodamine-phalloidin. A, The comet tail pushes 
Listeria in a PtK cell through the cytoplasm and into projections of the plasma membrane at the edge of the cell. B, When the replicated vaccinia 
viruses in this HeLa cell reach the cell surface 8 hours after infection, they activate Arp2/3 complex to assemble a cytoplasmic comet tail of actin 
filaments that are thought to enhance the spread of the virus from cell to cell. Actin-based motility of vaccinia virus depends on tyrosine phos-
phorylation of a viral transmembrane protein A36R that remains inserted in the plasma membrane. (A, Courtesy K. Skoble, D. Portnoy, and M. 
Welch, University of California, Berkeley. B, Courtesy T.P. Newsome and M. Way, Cancer Research UK, London. For reference, see Frischknecht 
F, Moreau V, Rottger S, et al. Actin-based motility of vaccinia virus mimics receptor tyrosine kinase signaling. Nature. 1999;401:926–929.)

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Anthony Brown, Erika Holzbaur, and Margaret 
Titus for suggestions on revising this chapter.

SELECTED READINGS

Brown A. Slow axonal transport. Encyclopedia of Neuroscience, 2009. 
Update.  October  28,  2014.  Reference  Module  in  Biomedical  Sci-
ences.  Available  at  <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801238-
3.04765-6>, 2014.

Bullock  SL.  Messengers,  motors  and  mysteries:  sorting  of  eukaryotic 
mRNAs  by  cytoskeletal  transport.  Biochem  Soc  Trans.  2011;39:
1161-1165.

Carter AP, Diamant AG, Urnavicius L. How dynein and dynactin trans-
port cargos: a structural perspective. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2016;
37:62-70.

Cossart  P,  Pizarro-Cerdá  J,  Lecuit  M.  Invasion  of  mammalian  cells  by 
Listeria  monocytogenes:  Functional  mimicry  to  subvert  cellular 
functions. Trends Cell Biol. 2003;13:23-31.

Encalada  SE,  Goldstein  LS.  Biophysical  challenges  to  axonal  trans-
port:  motor-cargo  deficiencies  and  neurodegeneration.  Annu  Rev 
Biophys. 2014;43:141-169.

Frank DJ, Noguchi T, Miller KG. Myosin VI: A structural role in actin 
organization  important  for  protein  and  organelle  localization  and 
trafficking. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2004;16:189-194.

Franker MA, Hoogenraad CC. Microtubule-based transport-basic mech-
anisms, traffic rules and role in neurological pathogenesis. J Cell Sci. 
2013;126:2319-2329.

Fu MM, Holzbaur EL. Integrated regulation of motor-driven organelle 
transport  by  scaffolding  proteins.  Trends  Cell  Biol.  2014;24:
564-574.

Hammer JA 3rd, Sellers JR. Walking to work: roles for class V myosins 

as cargo transporters. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2011;13:13-26.

Hancock  WO.  Bidirectional  cargo  transport:  moving  beyond  tug  of 

war. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2014;15:615-628.

Hartman MA, Finan D, Sivaramakrishnan S, et al. Principles of uncon-
ventional myosin function and targeting. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 
2011;27:133-155.

Hirokawa N, Niwa S, Tanaka Y. Molecular motors in neurons: transport 
mechanisms and roles in brain function, development, and disease. 
Neuron. 2010;68:610-638.

Lopez de Heredia M, Jansen R-P. mRNA localization and the cytoskel-

eton. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2004;16:80-85.

Mooren OL, Galletta BJ, Cooper JA. Roles for actin assembly in endo-

cytosis. Annu Rev Biochem. 2012;81:661-686.

Pruyne  D,  Legesse-Miller  A,  Gao  L,  et al.  Mechanisms  of  polarized 
growth and organelle segregation in yeast. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 
2004;20:559-591.

Saxton  WM,  Hollenbeck  PJ.  The  axonal  transport  of  mitochondria.  

J Cell Sci. 2012;125:2095-2104.

Shimmen T, Yokota E. Cytoplasmic streaming in plants. Curr Opin Cell 

Biol. 2004;16:68-72.

Titus  MA.  Myosin-driven  intracellular  transport.  In:  Pollard  TD, 
Goldman  R,  eds.  The  Cytoskeleton.  Cold  Spring  Harbor  Press; 
2016;265-280.

Urnavicius  L,  Zhang  K,  Diamant  AG,  et al.  The  structure  of  the  dyn-
actin  complex  and  its  interaction  with  dynein.  Science.  2015;347:
1441-1446.

C H A P T E R 

38 

Cellular Motility

Cells  move  at  rates  that  range  over  four  orders  of 

magnitude  (Fig.  38.1  and  Table  38.1).  At  one  extreme, 
ciliates, bacteria, and sperm swim rapidly through water, 
and giant amoebas crawl rapidly over solid substrates. At 
the  other  extreme,  fungal,  algal,  and  plant  cells  with  
rigid  cell  walls  are  immobile.  However,  even  some  
plant  cells  move,  such  as  pollen,  which  extends  

Velocity (µm/sec)

10-2 10-1 100 101 102 103

E. coli

Sperm

Tetrahymena

Amoeba proteus

White blood cell

Pollen tube

Fibroblast

Nerve

FIGURE  38.1  VELOCITIES  OF  MOVING  CELLS  SPAN  MORE 
THAN  FOUR  ORDERS  OF  MAGNITUDE.  Scale  drawings  of  cells 
with a range of velocities. E. coli, Escherichia coli. 

tubular  pseudopods.  Most  cells,  including  white  blood 
cells,  nerve  growth  cones,  and  fibroblasts  move  at  
intermediate rates.

Cells  produce  forces  for  motility  in  many  different 
ways, most commonly using the same four mechanisms 
that produce intracellular movements (see Chapter 37): 
contraction  of  actin–myosin  networks,  movement  of 
motors on microtubules, reversible assembly of actin fila-
ments,  or  reversible  assembly  of  microtubules.  These 
mechanisms often complement each other, even where 
movement depends mainly on one system. For example, 
microtubules  contribute  to  actin-based  pseudopod 
extension by helping to specify the polarity of the cell. 
This chapter compares these common mechanisms with 
a few more unusual, but informative mechanisms: con-
traction of calcium-sensitive fibers of ciliates, reversible 
assembly  of  novel  cytoskeletal  polymers  of  nematode 
sperm, and rotation of bacterial flagellar motors.

Most  cells  possess  all  proteins  required  for  cellular 
motility, so the striking variation in their rates of move-
ment arises from differences in the abundance, organiza-
tion, and activities of this machinery. For example, both 
nonmotile  yeasts  and  contractile  muscle  cells  contain 
actin, myosin-II, heterodimeric capping protein, α-actinin, 
and tropomyosin. Yeasts use these proteins for cytokine-
sis  (see  Fig.  44.25),  while  muscle  assembles  high  con-
centrations  of  similar  proteins  into  sarcomeres  (see 
Figs. 39.2 and 39.3) for powerful, fast contractions.

Cell Shape Changes Produced by 
Extension of Surface Processes
Alteration of cellular shape can be most simply brought 
about  by  assembly  of  new  cytoskeletal  polymers  or  by 
rearrangement  of  preexisting  assemblies  of  actin  fila-
ments or microtubules.

 651

652 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

TABLE 38.1  Velocities of Cellular Movements

System

Striated muscle contraction (biceps)
Filopodium extension, Thyone sperm
Pseudopod extension, fibroblast
Pseudopod extension, human neutrophil
Pseudopod extension, Amoeba proteus
Pseudopod extension, nematode sperm
Retraction of axopodium, heliozoan
Spasmoneme contraction, Vorticella
Swimming, Escherichia coli
Swimming, sea urchin sperm

Unitary Velocity  
(µm s−1)
5–10
10
0.02
0.1
?
1
>100
?

Summed Velocity  
(µm s−1)
4–8 × 105
10
0.02
0.1
10
1
>100
23,000
25
15

Motile Mechanism

Actin-myosin adenosine triphosphatase
Actin polymerization
Actin polymerization
Actin polymerization
Actin-myosin ATPase
Assembly of major sperm protein
Disassembly of microtubules
Calcium-induced conformational change
Flagellum powered by rotary motor
Microtubule-dynein ATPase

Note: Unitary velocity refers to a single molecular unit. Summed velocity is the overall motion of the cell.

EGG

JELLY

Egg stimulates 

secretion of

acrosomal contents

A

Filopodia

B

Actin polymerization

extends the 
acrosomal
process

Bundle
of actin
filaments

Ruffles

Packet
of actin
and profilin
Nucleus
Axoneme

FIGURE 38.2  THYONE SPERM ACROSOMAL PROCESS. Actin 
polymerization  drives  the  growth  of  the  acrosomal  process  of  the 
sperm of the sea slug, Thyone. The acrosome (red) is a membrane-
bound secretory vesicle, which fuses with the plasma membrane and 
releases  its  hydrolytic  enzymes  prior  to  growth  of  the  acrosomal 
process. When the acrosomal process reaches the egg, the plasma 
membranes  of  the  two  cells  fuse.  (Based  on  the  work  of  L.  Tilney, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.)

Studies  of  echinoderm  sperm  revealed  that  actin 
polymerization drives the formation of cell surface pro-
jections called filopodia. To fertilize the egg the sperm 
extends  a  long  filopodium  to  penetrate  the  protective 
jelly surrounding the egg (Fig. 38.2). Actin subunits for 
this acrosomal process are stored with profilin (see Figs. 
1.4 and 33.11) in a novel concentrated packet near the 
nucleus. Contact with an egg stimulates actin filaments 
to  polymerize,  starting  from  a  dense  structure  near  
the nucleus. Addition of subunits to the distal (barbed) 
end  of  growing  filaments  drives  the  elongation  of  the 
process and the surrounding membrane at a rate of 5 to 
10 µm s−1 (an astounding maximum of 3700 subunits per 
second!).  Actin  subunits  diffuse  rapidly  enough  from 
their  storage  site  to  drive  this  rapid  elongation.  The 
number  of  filaments  declines  from  approximately  150 

10 µm

FIGURE  38.3  FILOPODIA.  A,  Fluorescence  micrograph  of  the 
edge of a mouse NIH 3T3 cell expressing formin mDia2 and activated 
Rif,  a  Rho-family  guanosine  triphosphatase  (GTPase)  that  activates 
mDia2. mDia2 concentrated at the tips of filopodia is stained red with 
fluorescent  antibodies.  B,  Scanning  electron  micrograph  of  mouse 
macrophages spreading on a glass slide, illustrating the flat peripheral 
lamellae, wave-like “ruffles” on the upper surface, and finger-like filo-
podia.  (A,  From  Pellegrin  S,  Mellor  H.  The  Rho  family  GTPase  Rif 
induces  filopodia  through  mDia2.  Curr  Biol.  2005;15:129–133. 
B, From Chitu V, Pixley FJ, Macaluso F, et al. The PCH family member 
MAYP/PSTPIP2  directly  regulates  F-actin  bundling  and  enhances 
filopodia formation and motility in macrophages. Mol Biol Cell. 2005;16:
2947–2959.)

near the base to less than 20 at the tip of the process, 
presumably from capping. The molecules (if any) guiding 
the growth of the filaments are not known.

Bundles of actin filaments support filopodia of a more 
modest  size  on  many  other  cells.  Filopodia  on  macro-
phages  (Fig.  38.3),  nerve  growth  cones  (Fig.  38.6A), 
fibroblasts, and epithelial cells grow much more slowly 
and  depend  on  formins  and  vasodilator-stimulated 
protein (VASP) at their tips (Fig. 38.3) to guide barbed-
end assembly of actin filaments crosslinked by a protein 
called fascin. Microvilli of the brush border of epithelial 
cells  (see  Fig.  33.2)  are  short,  stable  filopodia.  The 

 

A

B

C

CHAPTER 38  n  Cellular Motility 

653

FIGURE 38.4  DYNAMIC CELL SURFACE PROJECTIONS SUPPORTED BY MICROTUBULES. A–B, Drawings of the radiolarian Echi-
nospherium (a protozoan) showing projections called axopodia, which capture prey and draw them toward the cell body by transport on surface 
of the projection or collapse of the projection. C, Electron micrograph of a thin section across an axopodium, showing the double spiral array of 
microtubules. (Courtesy L. Tilney, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.)

A. Epithelial folding

Apex

Apical contraction
folds the epithelium

B. Neural tube formation

Basal lamina

Base

C. Drosophila ectoderm contraction
C. Drosophila ectoderm contraction

FIGURE 38.5  ACTOMYOSIN CONTRACTIONS MOLD THE SHAPE OF EPITHELIA DURING EMBRYONIC DEVELOPMENT. A, Folding 
of a planar epithelium into a tube. B, Formation of the neural tube by contraction of the apical pole of columnar epithelial cells resulting in shape 
change and invagination of the epithelium. C, Contraction around the margin of the ectoderm pulls this epithelium over the surface of a Drosophila 
embryo. The scanning electron micrographs (SEMs [left and right]) show the steps in the dorsal closure of the epithelium. The time series of fluo-
rescence micrographs (center) shows live embryos expressing an actin-binding fragment of the protein moesin, fused to green fluorescent protein. 
(C, SEMs courtesy Thom Kaufman, Indiana University, Bloomington [see his movie “Fly Morph-o-genesis” at http://www.sdbonline.org/archive/
dbcinema/kaufman/kaufman.html]; light micrographs courtesy D. Kiehart, Duke University, Durham, NC. For reference, see Kiehart DP, Galbraith 
CG,  Edwards  KA,  et al.  Multiple  forces  contribute  to  cell  sheet  morphogenesis  for  dorsal  closure  in  Drosophila.  J  Cell  Biol.  2000;149:
471–490.)

bundles  of  actin  filaments  supporting  microvilli  are 
crosslinked  to  each  other  by  fimbrin  and  villin  and  to 
the  plasma  membrane  by  myosin-I.  Synthesis  of  these 
accessory  proteins  triggers  assembly  of  microvilli  on 
epithelial  cells  as  well  as  cells  that  normally  have  few  
microvilli.

Some embryonic cells grow long filopodia to contact 
cells micrometers distant. These filopodia create physical 
contacts  that  allow  the  cells  to  send  or  receive  signals 
that  influence  developmental  decisions.  Long  filopodia 
between  some  pairs  of  cells  even  make  gap  junctions 
(see Fig. 31.6).

654 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

A. Growth cone

Lamellum

Filopodia

n

Axo

Leading
edge

Leading
edge

Keratocyte

Cytoplast

Continuous
gliding

Protrusion
& adhesion

B

C

Tail
retraction

Repeated cycles

FIGURE 38.6  MOTILITY BY PSEUDOPOD EXTENSION. A, Phase-contrast micrographs of a cultured nerve cell’s growth cone at 1-minute 
intervals. The growth cone extends filopodia and fills in the space between with an actin-filled lamella. B, Gliding movements of a fish epidermal 
keratocyte and a keratocyte cytoplast, a cell fragment consisting of the leading edge with most of the cell body including the nucleus removed. 
Differential interference contrast micrographs at 15-second intervals were superimposed. Drawing shows the pattern of movement. C, Phase-
contrast micrograph of a keratocyte on glass. This cell moved toward the upper right using cycles of expansion of the broad leading lamella and 
retraction  of  the  trailing  edge  from  the  surface  as  shown  by  the  drawings.  (A,  Courtesy  D.  Bray,  University  of  Cambridge,  United  Kingdom. 
B, From Pollard TD, Borisy GG. Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin filaments. Cell. 2003;112:453–465. C, Courtesy 
J. Lee, University of Connecticut, Storrs.)

A group of protists called heliozoans, named for their 
similarity to a cartoon of the sun, are a rare example of 
using microtubules instead of actin filaments to extend, 
support,  and  retract  long,  thin  processes  bounded  by  
the plasma membrane (Fig. 38.4). Microtubules in these 
axopodia  are  crosslinked  into  a  precise  geometrical 
array accounting for the rigidity of these long processes. 
Axopodia  capture  prey  organisms  and  transport  them 
toward  the  cell  body  for  phagocytosis  by  two  mecha-
nisms. Some move along the surface of axopodia (similar 
to  intraflagellar  transport;  Fig.  38.18).  Other  axopodia 
collapse owing to rapid depolymerization of the micro-
tubules and drag the prey with them. Ca2+ influx appears 
to trigger depolymerization of the microtubules, but the 
details of the mechanism are not known.

Cell Shape Changes Produced  
by Contraction
Cells  can  change  shape  by  localized  or  oriented  cyto-
plasmic  contractions.  Muscle  contraction  (Chapter  39) 
and cytokinesis (Chapter 44) are the best examples, but 

contractions also remodel many embryonic tissues. Local-
ized contractions at the base or apex of cells in a planar 
epithelium cause evaginations or invaginations (Fig. 38.5) 
such as those that form the neural tube (see Fig. 30.8) 
and  glands  that  bud  from  the  gastrointestinal  tract  and 
branches of the respiratory tract. Closure of the epider-
mis over a Drosophila embryo also requires contraction 
of  a  circumferential  ring  of  cells  (Fig.  38.5C).  Tension 
generated by myosin-II and actin filaments deforms each 
cell  and,  collectively,  the  whole  epithelium.  Similarly, 
contraction  of  a  ring  of  actin  filaments  associated  with 
the  zonula  adherens  of  intestinal  epithelial  cells  helps 
regulate the permeability of the tight junctions that seal 
sheets of epithelial cells (see Fig. 31.2).

Locomotion by Pseudopod Extension
The  ability  to  crawl  over  solid  substrates  or  through 
extracellular matrix is essential for many cells. Perhaps 
the  most  spectacular  example  is  the  slowly  moving 
growth  cone  of  a  nerve  axon  (Fig.  38.6A).  Although 
moving  less  than  50 nm s−1,  growth  cones  navigate 

 

CHAPTER 38  n  Cellular Motility 

655

Extracellular stimuli

Arp2/3
complex

B. Signals activate
     WASp/Scar
     proteins

E. Growing filaments push membrane forward

G

.
 

A

C. WASp/Scars and existing
     filaments activate
     Arp2/3 complex to
     form a branch

T

P

-

h

70˚

y

d

r

o

l

y

s

i

s

 

a

n

d

 

P

i 

d

i

s

s

o

c

i

a

t
i

o

n

A. Pool of ATP-actin
    bound to profilin

Profilin

F. Capping protein
    terminates
    elongation

D. Elongation

PAK

J. LIM-kinase
    inhibits 
    ADF / cofilin

H. ADF/cofilin severs
    ADP-actin filaments
    that depolymerize

ADF / cofilin

Profilin/Actin
complexes

I. Profilin catalyzes exchange
   of ADP for ATP

FIGURE 38.7  A MODEL FOR ACTIN FILAMENT ASSEMBLY AND DISASSEMBLY AT THE LEADING EDGE. The reactions are separated 
in space for clarity but actually occur together along the leading edge. A, Cells contain a large pool of unpolymerized actin bound to profilin. 
B,  Stimulation  of  cell  surface  receptors  produces  activated  Rho-family  guanosine  triphosphatases  (GTPases)  and  other  signals  that  activate 
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASp)/Scar proteins. C, These proteins, in turn, activate nucleation of new actin filaments by Arp2/3 complex 
on the side of existing filaments. D, The new filaments grow at their barbed ends until they are capped (see F). E, Growing filaments push the 
plasma membrane forward. F, Capping protein terminates elongation. G, Polymerized adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-actin (yellow) hydrolyzes the 
bound  adenosine  triphosphate  (ATP)  to  adenosine  diphosphate  (ADP)  and  inorganic  phosphate  (Pi)  (orange),  followed  by  slow  dissociation  of 
phosphate  yielding  ADP-actin  (red).  H,  ADF/cofilins  bind  and  sever  ADP-actin  filaments  and  that  disassemble,  releasing  ADP-actin.  I,  Profilin 
promotes the exchange of ADP for ATP, restoring the pool of unpolymerized ATP-actin bound to profilin. J, Some of the same stimuli that initiate 
polymerization can also stabilize filaments when LIM-kinase phosphorylates actin-depolymerizing factor (ADF)/cofilins, inhibiting their depolymer-
izing activity. Inset, Electron micrograph of the branched network of actin filaments at the leading edge. PAK, p21-activated kinase. (Modified 
from  Pollard  TD,  Blanchoin  L,  Mullins  RD.  Biophysics  of  actin  filament  dynamics  in  nonmuscle  cells.  Annu  Rev  Biophys  Biomol  Struct. 
2000;29:545–576. Inset, Courtesy T. Svitkina and G. Borisy, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.)

precisely  over  distances  ranging  from  micrometers  to 
meters  to  establish  all  the  connections  in  the  human 
nervous  system,  which  consists  of  billions  of  neurons 
and  approximately  1.6  million  kilometers  of  cellular 
processes.  Some  epithelial  cells  (Fig.  38.6B)  and  white 
blood  cells  move  much  faster,  about  0.5 µm s−1.  These 
movements enable epithelial cells to cover wounds and 
allow leukocytes to move from the blood circulation to 
sites of inflammation (see Fig. 30.13) where they engulf 
microorganisms by phagocytosis (see Fig. 22.3). During 
vertebrate embryogenesis, neural crest cells migrate long 
distances through connective tissues before differentiat-
ing  into  pigment  cells  and  sympathetic  neurons.  Fibro-
blasts lay down collagen fibrils as they move through the 
extracellular matrix (see Fig. 29.4).

The  best-characterized  motile  system  is  animal  and 
amoeboid cells moving on a flat surface such as a micro-
scope slide that may be coated with extracellular matrix 
molecules.  These  cells  use  actin  polymerization  to 

extend the leading edge, then adhere to the underlying 
substrate, and (if the whole cell is to move) release and 
retract any attachments of its tail to the substrate. Animal 
cells  move  in  other  environments,  such  as  three-
dimensional extracellular matrix, using variations of this 
theme as described at the end of the section.

Lamellar Motility on Flat Surfaces by  
Pseudopod Extension
Pseudopods that lead the way in cell migration are filled 
with a dense network of branched actin filaments with 
their  fast-growing  barbed  ends  generally  facing  out 
towards the plasma membrane (Fig. 38.7). The leading 
lamella  is  autonomous  for  locomotion,  and  moves  nor-
mally  after  amputation  from  the  rest  of  the  cell  (Fig. 
38.6B). Generally, the leading lamella is very flat, on the 
order of 0.25 µm thick, but some cells extend the lamellae 
up from the substrate into a wave-like fold called a ruffle 
(Fig.  38.3).  Microtubules  help  maintain  the  polarized 

656 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

24 s

77 s

133 s

274 s

48 s

81 s

0 s

A
5 µm

B

4 s

10 µm

FIGURE  38.8  DOCUMENTATION  OF  ACTIN  FILAMENT 
DYNAMICS  AT  THE  LEADING  EDGE  WITH  FLUORESCENT 
ACTINS. A, Fluorescence photobleaching experiment with a stationary 
cell.  Fluorescent  actin  is  injected  into  a  cultured  epithelial  cell  and 
allowed to incorporate into filaments. A laser pulse bleaches some of 
the fluorescent actin, leaving a dark spot (arrow) that reveals movement 
of the filaments toward the cell center. The spot recovers fluorescence 
as diffusing fluorescent actin assembles new filaments in the bleached 
zone. B, Caged fluorescent actin experiment with a motile cell. Fluo-
rescent dye bound to actin is masked with a chemical group preventing 
fluorescence. After incorporation into actin filaments of a fish keratocyte 
(see Fig. 33.2E), dyes in one area of the cell are uncaged with a light 
pulse (arrow), and red fluorescence is followed with time. Fluorescent 
actin filaments are stationary with respect to the substrate as the cell 
moves  forward  (upward).  The  fluorescent  spot  of  marked  filaments 
fades with time, owing to depolymerization and dispersal of the fluo-
rescent subunits. (A, From Wang Y-L. Exchange of actin subunits at 
the  leading  edge  of  living  fibroblasts:  possible  role  of  treadmilling.  
J  Cell  Biol.  1985;101:597–602,  copyright  The  Rockefeller  University 
Press. B, From Theriot JA, Mitchison TJ. Actin microfilament dynamics 
in locomoting cells. Nature. 1991;352:126–131.)

shape that is required for persistent directional locomo-
tion, but are not required for pseudopod extension.

Actin  filaments  assemble  continuously  near  the 
leading  edge  of  pseudopods  and  turn  over  rapidly 
deeper in the cytoplasm (Fig. 38.8). Thus, the inhibitor 
cytochalasin  stops  actin  polymerization  at  the  leading 
edge (see Fig. 33.18). Purified actin was labeled with a 
fluorescent dye and microinjected into live cells, where 
it  incorporated  into  actin-containing  structures,  includ-
ing the cortical network, pseudopods, stress fibers, and 
surface  microspikes.  Photobleaching  (Fig.  38.8A)  or 
photoactivating the fluorescent actin (Fig. 38.8B) showed 
that actin assembles at the leading edge and then turns 
over. Alternatively, if a low concentration of fluorescent 
actin  is  injected  it  will  incorporate  irregularly  into  fila-
ments,  producing  tiny  “speckles”  of  fluorescence  that 
can be tracked over time to reveal sites of assembly and 
disassembly (see Fig. 33.18D–E).

Arp2/3  complex  (see  Fig.  33.12)  and  formins 
cooperate  with  VASP  (see  Fig.  33.14)  to  initiate  and 
elongate  actin  filaments  at  the  leading  edge  of  motile 
cells. Chemotactic stimuli (Fig. 38.10) or intrinsic signals 

transduced  by  Rho-family  guanosine  triphosphatases 
(GTPases),  membrane  polyphosphoinositides,  and 
proteins  with  SH3  (Src  homology  3)  domains  activate 
Wiskott-Aldrich  syndrome  protein  (WASp)/Scar 
proteins  (see  Fig.  33.13),  which  promote  the  forma-
tion of actin filament branches by Arp2/3 complex. The 
pool of unpolymerized actin maintained by profilin (and 
thymosin-β4, where it is present) drives the elongation of 
actin filament branches at 50 to 500 subunits per second. 
Growing  filaments  are  generally  oriented  toward  the 
leading edge and push against the inside of the plasma 
membrane  with  forces  in  the  piconewton  (pN)  range. 
These forces bend the filaments, which favors branching 
on  their  convex  surface,  facing  the  leading  edge.  Het-
erodimeric capping protein (see Fig. 33.15) terminates 
elongation  of  these  branches  before  they  grow  longer 
than 1 µm. Longer filaments are less effective at pushing, 
since  they  buckle  under  piconewton  forces.  A  similar 
mechanism  assembles  actin  filaments  in  comet  tails  on 
intracellular  bacteria  and  viruses  (see  Fig.  37.12)  and 
endocytic actin patches in yeast (see Figs. 6.3 and 37.11).
The  recycling  of  actin  and  accessory  proteins  is  
essential for thousands of rounds of assembly as the cell 
moves forward. Actin-depolymerizing factor (ADF)/
cofilins (see Fig. 33.16) bind and sever aged adenosine 
diphosphate  (ADP)-actin  filaments  located  away  from 
the  leading  edge.  The  fragments  may  be  capped,  in 
which  case  they  slowly  depolymerize  at  the  pointed 
ends.  This  recycling  mechanism  is  so  efficient  that  the 
branched network is disassembled in seconds.

Formins assemble long unbranched filaments (see Fig. 
33.2E)  in  the  flat  region  of  the  cell  just  behind  the 
branched  network  at  the  leading  edge.  Some  of  these 
filaments form bundles that protrude as filopodia beyond 
the leading edge (Fig. 38.3), where VASP (see Fig. 33.14)
promotes their elongation. The tropomyosin binds along 
the sides of these long filaments, protecting them from 
severing by ADF/cofilins.

Actin filament crosslinking proteins stabilize pseudo-
pods. Human melanoma cells that lack the crosslinking 
protein filamin (see Fig. 33.17) form unstable pseudo-
pods  all  around  their  peripheries  and  locomote  abnor-
mally (Fig. 38.9). These tumor cells recover their normal 
behavior  if  provided  with  filamin.  Similarly,  Dictyoste-
lium  cells  that  lack  a  homolog  of  filamin  form  fewer 
pseudopods.

Influence of the Substrate on Lamellar Motility
The growing actin network at the leading edge will either 
push the membrane forward or slip backward depending 
on how well it is connected to the substrate across the 
plasma membrane. In highly motile cells such as epithelial 
cells  from  fish  scales  (Fig.  38.6B)  transmembrane  
adhesion  proteins  anchor  the  actin  filament  network  
to the substrate, so the polymerization results in forward 
motion  (Fig.  38.8B).  In  stationary  cells  (Fig.  38.8A;  

 

A

Migration

B

FIGURE  38.9  CONTRIBUTION  OF  THE  ACTIN  FILAMENT 
CROSSLINKING PROTEIN FILAMIN TO THE STABILITY OF THE 
LEADING EDGE OF HUMAN MELANOMA CELLS. Pairs of phase-
contrast light micrographs, taken at different times, of living cells grown 
in serum-containing medium on a plastic surface. A, Melanoma cells 
expressing  filamin  have  normal  leading  lamella.  B,  Melanoma  cells 
lacking filamin form spherical blebs around their margins and migrate 
very little. (Courtesy C. Cunningham and T.P. Stossel, Harvard Medical 
School,  Boston,  MA.  For  reference,  see  Cunningham  C,  Gorlin  JB, 
Kwiatkowski  DJ,  et al.  Actin-binding  protein  requirement  for  cortical 
stability and efficient locomotion. Science. 1992;255:325–327.)

also see Fig. 33.18D–E), actin polymerizes at the edge of 
the  cell  causing  the  entire  network  to  move  en  masse 
away from the membrane, a phenomenon called retro-
grade flow. Fibroblasts are an intermediate state, in which 
actin polymerization produces some forward movement 
but also considerable retrograde flow.

Movement driven by adhesion requires a compromise. 
Adhesion must be strong enough for the internal forces 
to propel the cell forward but not so strong that it pre-
vents  movement.  Transmembrane  adhesion  proteins 
such as integrins (see Fig. 30.9) both anchor the cell and 
transmit  the  presence  of  their  ligands  and  the  stiffness 
of the environment to Rho-family GTPases that regulate 
actin assembly and myosin contractility. Rapidly revers-
ible binding of integrins and other adhesion proteins to 
extracellular  matrix  molecules,  such  as  fibronectin, 
allows adhesion without immobilization. Rapidly moving 
white blood cells attach weakly and transiently, whereas 
slowly moving fibroblasts form longer-lasting focal con-
tacts (see Fig. 30.11). Cells tend to move up gradients of 
adhesiveness  but  stop  if  adhesion  is  too  strong.  This 
graded response to adhesion allows neural crest cells to 
migrate  preferentially  through  regions  of  embryonic 
connective tissue marked by adhesive proteins.

Tail Retraction and Other Roles for Myosin  
in Motility
Growth cones of neurons draw out a long process from 
a  stationary  cell  body,  but  most  cells  must  break  adhe-
sions at their trailing edge to advance. Adherent, slowly 
moving cells such as fibroblasts exert significant tension 

CHAPTER 38  n  Cellular Motility 

657

on the underlying substrate, when myosin pulls on the 
bundles of actin filaments associated with focal contacts 
(see  Fig.  30.11).  When  tension  overcomes  the  attach-
ments, the rear of the cell shortens elastically and then 
contracts further (Fig. 38.6C). Myosin also contributes to 
the retrograde flow of actin filaments in the zone between 
the leading edge and the cell body.

Other Modes of Motility
Cells that move in two-dimensions by pseudopod exten-
sion and tail retraction repurpose the same proteins to 
behave  differently  in  other  environments.  In  the  extra-
cellular  matrix  of  connective  tissues  (see  Chapter  29) 
cells must squeeze between three-dimensional networks 
of  fibers  using  forces  produced  by  myosin  to  generate 
hydrostatic  pressure  to  push  forward  and  to  pull  the 
relatively  stiff  nucleus  forward.  In  other  circumstances 
cells can expand by forming blebs of plasma membrane 
lacking networks of actin filaments. Nerve growth cones 
(Fig. 38.6A) extend filopodia and then fill the spaces in 
between them with a lamella containing new, branched 
actin filaments. Superfast giant amoebas (Fig. 38.1) use 
myosin  to  generate  contractions  in  the  cortex  or  the 
front  of  the  pseudopod  to  drive  the  bulk  streaming  of 
cytoplasm into advancing pseudopods.

Chemotaxis of Motile Cells
Extracellular chemical clues direct locomotion by influ-
encing  the  formation  and  persistence  of  pseudopods. 
Movement toward a positive signal is called chemotaxis. 
The best-characterized example is the attraction of Dic-
tyostelium to cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) 
(Fig.  38.10),  the  extracellular  chemical  that  these 
amoebas  use  to  communicate  as  they  form  colonies 
before making spores. Remarkably, these cells can sense 
a  gradient  of  cAMP  corresponding  to  a  concentration 
difference of less than 2% along their length. This small 
difference  is  amplified  into  strong  internal  signals  that 
control motility. Binding of cAMP to seven-helix recep-
tors in the plasma membrane activates trimeric G-proteins 
inside  the  cell  (see  Fig.  25.9).  The  G-proteins  activate 
pathways  that  regulate  the  activity  of  enzymes  that 
control the concentration of the lipid second messenger 
phosphatidylinositol  3,4,5-trisphosphate  (PIP3)  in  the 
plasma membrane: phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) 
synthesizes  PIP3  and  PTEN  (phosphatase  and  tensin 
homolog) degrades it. (See Fig. 26.7 for details on poly-
phosphoinositides.) A fast positive pathway that is sensi-
tive  to  local  receptor  occupancy  and  a  slower  global 
negative  signal  that  is  proportional  to  total  receptor 
occupancy produce a gradient of PI3K activity inside the 
cell  that  is  highest  near  the  external  source  of  cAMP. 
These pathways concentrate PTEN on the plasma mem-
brane away from the source of cAMP. This complemen-
tary regulation of the kinase and phosphatase creates an 
internal  gradient  of  PIP3  three  to  seven  times  steeper 

658 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

A. Time course of turning toward gradient of cAMP

0

15

30

45

60

75

90

105

120

135

150

B. Amplification of the shallow external gradient of cAMP
     into a sharp biochemical gradient inside the cell:

Source
of cAMP

Shallow gradient
of cAMP outside

Membrane
Receptor

C. Concentration of plasma
     membrane PIP3 toward
     the source of cAMP

Gradient of

PIP3 on inside

of plasma
membrane

0 sec

8 sec

20 sec

Fast, local excitation

Slow, global inhibition

Response

FIGURE  38.10  CHEMOTAXIS  OF  A  DICTYOSTELIUM  AMOEBA  TOWARD  CYCLIC  ADENOSINE  MONOPHOSPHATE.  A,  Live  cell 
attracted to cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) (gold) released from a micropipette. A time series of differential interference micrographs 
shows the rapid formation of a new pseudopod and reorientation of the direction of movement when the position of the micropipette is moved 
at the 60-second time point. B, Cells have a uniform distribution of cAMP receptors (yellow and red dots) over their surface. A shallow gradient 
of cAMP activates these seven-helix receptors (red), which activate a trimeric G-protein and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, an enzyme that rapidly 
converts phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate (PIP2) to phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3). On a slower time scale, the active G-protein 
activates phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), a PIP3 phosphatase, throughout the cell. The combination of these two signals creates a 
steep gradient of PIP3 across the cell. C, Fluorescence micrograph of a cell exposed to a point source of cAMP (yellow). A green fluorescence 
protein (GFP)-pleckstrin homology (PH) domain fusion protein (green) inside the cell binds to PIP3 on the inside of the plasma membrane, revealing 
the steep gradient of PIP3. (A, Courtesy Susan Lee and Richard Firtel, University of California, San Diego. B, Modified from a sketch by Pablo 
Iglesias,  Johns  Hopkins  University,  Baltimore,  MD.  C,  Courtesy  Pablo  Iglesias,  Johns  Hopkins  University,  Baltimore,  MD.  For  reference,  see 
Janetopoulos C, Ma L, Devreotes PN, Iglesias PA. Chemoattractant-induced phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5 trisphosphate accumulation is spatially 
amplified and adapts, independent of the actin cytoskeleton. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004;101:8951–8956.)

than the external gradient of cAMP. Transduction of this 
internal gradient of PIP3 into motility requires Rho-family 
GTPases  and  formation  of  new  actin  filaments.  Local 
polymerization and crosslinking of these actin filaments 
expand the cortex facing the source of cAMP into a new 
pseudopod and move the cell toward the cAMP.

Leukocytes are attracted to chemokines and bacterial 
metabolites  at  sites  of  infection  (see  Fig.  30.13),  espe-
cially  small  peptides  derived  from  the  N-termini  of  
bacterial  proteins,  such  as  N-formyl-methionine-
leucine-phenylalanine  (referred  to  as  FMLP  in  the 
scientific literature). Similar to Dictyostelium, activation 
of  seven-helix  receptors  and  trimeric  G-proteins  ampli-
fies  shallow  external  gradients  of  FMLP  into  steeper  
internal gradients of PIP3 and other signals that control 
pseudopod formation.

Negative signals also influence pseudopod persistence 
and  the  direction  of  motility.  A  classic  example  is  the 
negative  effect  of  contact  with  another  cell.  Loss  of 

contact  inhibition  of  motility  by  tumor  cells  contrib-
utes to their tendency to migrate among other cells and 
spread throughout the body.

Growth Cone Guidance: A Model for Regulation  
of Motility
Growth cones of embryonic nerve cells use a combina-
tion of positive and negative cues to navigate with high 
reliability  to  precisely  the  right  location  to  create  a 
synapse (Fig. 38.11). This combinatorial strategy is much 
more complex than the simple chemoattraction of Dic-
tyostelium to cAMP, as expected for the more compli-
cated  task  of  connecting  billions  of  neurons  to  each 
other  or  specific  muscle  cells.  Cues  for  growth  cone 
guidance  come  from  soluble  factors  and  cell  surface 
molecules, each with a specific receptor on the growth 
cone. As in other systems, extracellular matrix molecules 
provide the substrate for growth cone movements. Pre-
cisely positioned expression of cue molecules and their 

 

A

Midline

Netrin
gradient

B

Neurons with
ipsilateral
projections

Two commissures
per segment

Longitudinal
axon bundles

Slit in matrix repels 
growth cones
with Robo1

High Robo1 repels
growth cone from
midline

Frazzled receptor
(DCC) for netrin attracts 
growth cone to midline

Comm on glial cells
downregulates
Robo1 expression and
allows growth cone
to pass midline

High Robo1 drives
growth cone out of
midline and prevents
recrossing

FIGURE  38.11  DROSOPHILA  GROWTH  CONE  GUIDANCE. 
A,  Light  micrograph  of  a  filleted  embryo  showing  the  nerve  cord 
stained brown with an axon marker. The axons of approximately 90% 
of neurons cross the midline a single time in a transverse nerve bundle 
called a commissure before running longitudinally in fascicles on each 
side of the midline. B, Drawing showing the ligands and receptors that 
guide growth cones across the midline and prevent their return to the 
ipsilateral (original) side. Frazzled receptors for netrin attract the growth 
cone to the midline where Comm downregulates the activity of Robo1, 
a  repulsive  receptor  for  Slit,  allowing  axons  to  cross  the  midline.  
(A, Courtesy John Thomas, Salk Institute, La Jolla, CA.)

receptors  guides  growth  cones  along  a  staggering 
number  of  different  pathways,  as  illustrated  by  the  fol-
lowing well-characterized examples.

Localized  cells  in  the  nervous  system,  such  as  those 
in the floor plate of the developing spinal cord, secrete 
soluble  guidance  proteins  such  as  netrin.  Gradients 
of netrin provide long-range guidance for growth cones 
of  cells  that  possess  netrin  receptors.  Some  netrin 

CHAPTER 38  n  Cellular Motility 

659

receptors, such as members of the DCC family, steer the 
growth cone toward a netrin source by activating actin 
polymerization  by  VASP.  Other  netrin  receptors  repel 
the  growth  cone  from  netrin.  Growth  cones  without 
these receptors are insensitive to this cue.

Slit, a large extracellular matrix protein, repels growth 
cones  with  Slit  receptors,  which  are  immunoglobulin 
cell adhesion molecules (IgCAMs) called Robo1, Robo2, 
and  Robo3.  Mutations  in  the  genes  for  these  receptors 
cause growth cones to ignore Slit.

IgCAM cell surface adhesion proteins (see Fig. 30.3), 
such as fasciculin II, prompt growing axons to bundle 
together in bundles called fascicles by homophilic inter-
actions.  Growth  cones  can  be  attracted  out  of  these 
bundles to particular targets, such as muscle cells, that 
secrete  chemoattractants  or  proteins  that  antagonize 
fasciculin II adhesion.

The  effects  of  mutations  in  genes  for  receptors  and 
their ligands revealed how growth cones in Drosophila 
embryos  navigate  using  multiple  guidance  cues  (Fig. 
38.11).  Growth  cones  of  neurons  on  one  side  of  the 
nerve  cord  migrate  across  the  midline  to  the  opposite 
side and then navigate faithfully to their targets. Netrins 
secreted  by  cells  at  the  midline  attract  growth  cones 
expressing the DCC (Frazzled) netrin receptor. However, 
midline cells also secrete high levels of the matrix protein 
Slit, which repels growth cones. Growth cones cross the 
midline by downregulating the slit receptor. Once across 
the midline, the growth cones upregulate the slit recep-
tor, so they never cross back to the side of origin. Local 
cues alert particular growth cones of motor neurons to 
branch  off  of  fascicles  to  innervate  individual  muscle 
cells. Path finding by capillaries uses some of the same 
guidance mechanisms to grow blood vessels.

Eukaryotic Cilia and Flagella
Axonemes  built  from  microtubules  and  powered 
by  dynein  produce  the  beating  of  cilia  and  flagella  
(Fig. 38.12). These exceedingly complex structures are 
remarkably ancient. More than 1 billion years ago the last 
common  eukaryotic  ancestor  (see  Fig.  2.4)  had  motile 
flagella with all the essential features of human cilia and 
flagella,  as  evidenced  by  motile  axonemes  in  most 
branches of eukaryotes. However, most fungi and plants 
lost the genes for axonemal proteins.

Animal cells make three types of axonemes, all with 
nine  outer  doublet  microtubules  anchored  by  a  basal 
body  at  the  cortex  of  the  cell  and  surrounded  by  
plasma membrane (Fig. 38.12B). Motile axonemes have 
dynein  motors,  a  central  pair  of  single  microtubules  
and radial spokes (Figs. 38.14 and 38.15). Rotating nodal 
cilia (see below for the biological context) have dynein 
arms  but  no  central  pair  or  radial  spokes.  Immobile 
primary cilia lack dynein, central pairs and radial spokes. 
This section begins with motile cilia and flagella.

660 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

A. Flagella

Cell motion

C. Cilia metachronal wave

B. Cilia

Ciliary motion

Fluid motion

No motion

Flagellar motion

Effective
stroke

Recovery
stroke

Cell motion

Beating

Rotary

Primary

Adapted from P. Satir

9 + 2 + dynein + radial spokes

9 + 0 + dynein

9 + 0

FIGURE 38.12  BEATING PATTERNS OF CILIA AND FLAGELLA. A, Waves of a sperm flagellum. B, Behavior of three types of cilia with 
cross sections of their axonemes below. Left, Ciliary power and recovery strokes of a beating cilium. Middle, Rotary cilium. Right, Primary cilium. 
C,  Coordinated  beating  of  cilia  on  the  surface  of  an  epithelium.  (Modified  from  a  drawing  by  P.  Satir,  Albert  Einstein  College  of  Medicine, 
New York, NY.)

Properties of Cilia and Flagella
Cilia  and  flagella  are  distinguished  from  each  other  by 
their beating patterns (Fig. 38.12), but are nearly identi-
cal  in  structure.  In  fact,  the  flagella  of  the  green  alga 
Chlamydomonas  can  alternate  between  propagating 
waves typical of flagella and the oar-like rowing motion 
of cilia. So one can use the terms cilia and flagella inter-
changeably.  Subtle  differences  in  the  mechanism  that 
converts  the  dynein-powered  sliding  of  the  axonemal 
microtubules into movements determine which beating 
pattern is produced.

Both  cilia  and  flagella  can  propel  cells  as  they  cycle 
rapidly, beating up to 100 times per second. Propagation 
of bends along the length of individual flagella pushes a cell 
such as sperm forward (Figs. 38.1 and 38.15). Coordinated 
beating of many cilia can also move large cells (Fig. 38.13A). 
Reversal  of  the  direction  of  the  power  stroke  allows  a 
unicellular  ciliate  to  swim  forward  or  backward.  Alterna-
tively,  if  the  cell  is  immobilized,  like  the  epithelial  cells 
lining an animal respiratory tract or forming the embryonic 
skin (Fig. 38.13B), coordinated beating of cilia propels fluid 
and  particles  over  their  apical  surface.  Ctenophores  fuse 
the membranes of many cilia together to make macrocilia 
that propel the organism in a manner similar to that of fins.

Structure of the Axoneme
The nine outer doublet microtubules of all axonemes 
consist of one complete A-microtubule with the usual 13 
protofilaments,  bearing  an  incomplete  B-microtubule 
composed  of  10  protofilaments  attached  to  its  side  by 
distinct junctional structures on either side. The filamen-
tous protein tektin associates with one protofilament in 
the  wall  of  the  A-microtubule.  The  central  pair  are 
typical 13-protofilament microtubules. The plus ends of 
all axonemal microtubules are at the distal tip.

More than 200 accessory proteins associate with the 
9 + 2 microtubules (Fig. 38.14A), making axonemes stiff 

10 µm

A

B

FIGURE  38.13 
IMAGES OF CILIA. A, Scanning electron micro-
graph  of  Paramecium  showing  waves  of  effective  strokes  passing 
regularly over the cell surface from one end to the other to keep the 
cell  moving  steadily  forward.  B,  Fluorescence  micrograph  of  cilia 
(green, stained with fluorescent antibodies to tubulin) on epithelial cells 
of frog skin also stained with Alexa 647-phalloidin for actin filaments. 
(A,  Courtesy  T.  Hamasaki,  Albert  Einstein  College  of  Medicine,  New 
York, NY. From Lieberman SJ, Hamasaki T, Satir P. Ultrastructure and 
motion analysis of permeabilized Paramecium. Cell Motil Cytoskeleton. 
9:73–84, 1988. B, Courtesy Brian J Mitchell of Northwestern Univer-
sity. From Werner ME, Hwang P, Huisman F, et al. Actin and microtu-
bules  drive  differential  aspects  of  planar  cell  polarity  in  multiciliated 
cells. J Cell Biol. 2011;195:19–26.)

but elastic. Pioneering genetic analyses and more recent 
proteomic  studies  established  the  locations  of  many  of 
these  polypeptides,  such  as  the  17  proteins  that  make 
up  the  radial  spokes  between  the  central  sheath  and  
the  outer  doublets  and  the  11  protein  subunits  of  the  
nexin-dynein  regulatory  complex  that  links  outer  dou-
blets to each other. A long coiled-coil protein acts as a 
molecular  ruler  to  specify  the  longitudinal  positions  of 

 

CHAPTER 38  n  Cellular Motility 

661

A
**
**
Large
Large
Large
*
*

*

****
***

*
*

*
*

D

ODA

BtBtBt

AtAtAt

B

A

E

A-tubule

B-tubule

(–)

*
*

*
*

*
*

*
*

(+)

*
*
*
*

*
*

Small
Small
Small

*
*

B

N-RDC

IDA

24 nm

C. Cilium with axoneme viewed from tip
C. Cilium with axoneme viewed from tip
C. Cilium with axoneme viewed from tip

Outer doublet
microtubule

Membrane
Radial spoke
Central sheath

Outer
dynein
arm

Inner
dynein
arm

Central singlet tubule

Link to membrane

Spoke

S1

24 nm

S2

32 nm

S3

40 nm

S4

96 nm

FIGURE 38.14  COMPOSITION AND STRUCTURE OF THE AXONEME. A, Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis separating more than 100 
polypeptides of the axoneme of Chlamydomonas. Marked polypeptides (blue asterisks) are components of radial spokes. B, Electron micrograph 
of a thin cross section of a ciliary axoneme stained with tannic acid. C, Drawing of a cross section of a cilium. D, Three-dimensional reconstruction 
of  one  outer  doublet  and  radial  spoke  based  on  electron  microscopy  tomography  showing  inner  (IDA)  and  outer  dynein  arms  (ODA)  and  a 
nexin-dynein regulatory complex (N-DRC; blue). E, A short section of an outer doublet. In this example, the outer arm dyneins have two heads. 
In some species, they have three heads. The dimensions indicate the longitudinal spacing between dynein arms and radial spokes. (A, Courtesy 
B.  Huang,  Scripps  Research  Institute,  La  Jolla,  CA.  B,  Courtesy  R.  Linck,  University  of  Minnesota,  Minneapolis.  D,  From  Song  K,  Awata  J, 
Tritschler  D,  Bower  R,  et  al.  In  situ  localization  of  N  and  C  termini  of  subunits  of  the  flagellar  nexin-dynein  regulatory  complex  (N-DRC)  using 
SNAP tag and cryo-electron tomography. J Biol Chem. 2015;290:5341–5353. E, From a Chlamydomonas axoneme modified from Amos LA, 
Amos WB. Molecules of the Cytoskeleton. New York: Guilford Press; 1991.)

many of these proteins with a 96 nm periodicity along 
the  outer  doublet  microtubules.  Central  pair  microtu-
bules are connected by a bridge and decorated by elabo-
rate projections. Mutations of these genes compromise 
axonemal function in experimental animals and human 
patients.

A  family  of  axonemal  dyneins  bound  to  outer  dou-
blets generates force for movement. Each dynein consists 
of  a  large  heavy  chain  forming  a  globular  AAA  ATPase 
(adenosine triphosphatase) domain and a tail anchored 
to  an  A-tubule  by  light  and  intermediate  chains.  A  thin 
stalk  projecting  from  the  catalytic  domain  exerts  force 
on the adjacent B-tubule during part of the ATPase cycle 
(see Figs. 36.14 and 36.15). Like other axonemal proteins 
the  pattern  of  dynein  arms  repeats  every  96 nm  along 
the  A-tubule  of  each  outer  doublet  (Fig.  38.14D).  The 
outer  row  of  dynein  arms  consists  of  four  copies  of 
three-headed molecules in each repeat. The inner dynein 
arms are more complicated: seven different dynein heavy 
chains form six arms with one head plus one arm with 
two heads in each repeat.

Mechanism of Axoneme Bending
Dynein-powered  sliding  of  outer  doublets  relative  to 
each  other  bends  axonemes.  Sliding  was  first  inferred 
from  electron  micrographs  of  the  distal  tips  of 

microtubules  in  bent  cilia.  Later,  sliding  was  observed 
directly  by  loosening  connections  between  outer  dou-
blets with proteolytic enzymes and then adding adenos-
ine  triphosphate  (ATP)  to  allow  dynein  to  push  the 
microtubules past each other (Fig. 38.15B). Sliding can 
be  followed  in  axonemes  stripped  of  their  membrane  
by  marking  outer  doublets  with  small  gold  beads  (Fig. 
38.15A).  As  outer  doublets  slide  past  each  other,  the 
relative positions of the beads change. Dynein attached 
to one doublet “walks” toward the base of the adjacent 
microtubule,  pushing  its  neighbor  toward  the  tip  of  
the axoneme.

Biochemical extraction or genetic deletion of specific 
dynein  isoforms  alters  the  frequency  and  waveform  of 
axonemal  bending.  Inner  dynein  arms  are  required  for 
flagellar  beating,  and  deletion  of  even  a  single  type  of 
inner-arm dynein can alter the waveform. Outer dynein 
arms are not essential but influence the beat frequency 
and add power to the inner arms. Humans with Karta-
gener  syndrome  lack  visible  dynein  arms  and  have 
immotile sperm and cilia. As a result, affected males are 
infertile, and both men and women have serious respira-
tory infections, owing to poor clearance of bacteria and 
other foreign matter from the lungs.

The mechanism of beating is intrinsic to the axoneme. 
Thus, sperm tail axonemes swim normally when provided 

662 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

A

B

C

FIGURE 38.15  SLIDING MOVEMENTS OF OUTER DOUBLETS OF AXONEMES. A–B, Time series of darkfield light micrographs. A, Sea 
urchin sperm extracted with the detergent Triton X-100 and reactivated with ATP. Gold microbeads attached to two different outer doublets allow 
the visualization of their displacement as the tail bends. B, Fragment of a sea urchin flagellar axoneme treated with trypsin. The addition of ATP 
results in outer doublets sliding past each other out of the ends of the axonemal fragment. C, Electron micrograph of two outer doublets that 
have slid past each other in an experiment similar to that in panel B. (A, From Brokaw CJ. Microtubule sliding in swimming sperm flagella. J Cell 
Biol.  1991;114:1201–1215,  copyright  The  Rockefeller  University  Press.  B,  Courtesy  Ian  Gibbons,  University  of  California,  Berkeley.  For  more 
information,  see  Summers  KE,  Gibbons  I.  ATP-induced  sliding  of  tubules  in  trypsin-treated  flagella  of  sea-urchin  sperm.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci 
U  S  A.  1971;68:3092–3096.  C,  Courtesy  P.  Satir,  Albert  Einstein  College  of  Medicine,  New  York,  NY.  For  more  information,  see  Sale  WS, 
Satir P. Direction of active sliding of microtubules in Tetrahymena cilia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1977;74:2045–2049.)

with ATP, even without the plasma membrane or soluble 
cytoplasmic  components  (Fig.  38.15A).  Experiments 
with  these  demembranated  sperm  models  revealed  
that  the  dynein  ATPase  activity  is  tightly  coupled  
to  movement.  The  beat  frequency  is  proportional  to 
ATPase activity, regardless of whether the frequency is 
limited  by  increasing  the  viscosity  of  the  medium  or 
the  enzyme  activity  is  limited  by  decreasing  the  ATP 
concentration.

The  bending  that  produces  the  bending  waves  of 
flagella or the power and recovery strokes of cilia results 
from local variation in the rate of sliding of pairs of outer 
doublet  microtubules  along  the  length  of  an  axoneme. 
Coordination  of  these  events  is  still  being  investigated, 
but at least two factors are involved. Mutations show that 
the  central  pair  and  radial  spokes  help  coordinate  the 
activity  of  the  dyneins  around  the  circumference  of  
the  axoneme  as  it  bends.  Mechanical  constraints  are  
also  required  to  convert  microtubule  sliding  into  local 
bending. Destruction of the links between outer doublets 
frees them to slide past each other rather than bending 
the axoneme.

Although  axonemes  function  autonomously,  signal 
transduction  pathways  regulate  their  activities.  Photo-
taxis of Chlamydomonas is a particularly clear example 
of how fluctuations in intracellular Ca2+ can modify fla-
gellar activity. The release of Ca2+ affects the two flagella 
of  the  organism  differentially  and  allows  a  cell  to  steer 

toward or away from light (Fig. 38.16). Ciliates also have 
mechanosensitive  channels  that  depolarize  the  plasma 
membrane when the organism collides with something. 
Depolarization opens voltage-sensitive plasma membrane 
Ca2+ channels, admitting Ca2+ into the cell. This reverses 
the  direction  of  ciliary  beat.  Both  calcium  and  cAMP-
dependent  phosphorylation  of  outer-arm  dynein  can 
change the beat frequency (all the way to zero) or alter 
the waveform.

Basal Bodies and Axoneme Formation
The  mother  centriole  matures  into  a  basal  body  that 
anchors and templates the axoneme (Fig. 38.17; see also 
Fig.  34.3B).  After  migrating  to  the  cortex  during  inter-
phase,  its  distal  appendages  dock  on  the  plasma  mem-
brane  and  the  nine  outer  doublet  microtubules  of  the 
axoneme grow directly from the nine outer triplet micro-
tubules of the basal body. This differs from microtubule 
nucleation  in  the  pericentriolar  material  during  inter-
phase (see Fig. 34.15). Some protozoa use basal bodies 
as  centrioles  during  mitosis.  Multiciliated  cells  form  a 
basal body for each axoneme de novo. Basal bodies are 
typically anchored by protein fibers called rootlets. Cilia 
seem  to  function  normally  in  mice  lacking  the  major 
rootlet  protein,  but  are  unstable  over  the  long  term. 
Mutations of genes for basal body proteins compromise 
axonemal  function  in  experimental  animals  and  cause 
human diseases.

 

A. Normal forward
     swimming

CHAPTER 38  n  Cellular Motility 

663

A

B

B. Phototaxis

D. Photoshock

hν

hν

Ca2+

C

Ca2+

C. Normal swimming parallel to new light direction

Central
singlet
micro-
tubule

Membrane

Outer
doublet
micro-
tubules

Matrix

Triplet

microtubules

Cartwheel
stucture

FIGURE  38.16  CHLAMYDOMONAS  PHOTOTAXIS.  A,  Normal 
swimming toward the light using a cilia-like rowing motion of the fla-
gella. Absorption of light by a sensory rhodopsin (related to sensory 
rhodopsins  in  Archaea)  in  the  eyespot  keeps  the  cell  oriented. 
B,  Moderate-intensity  light  from  the  side  causes  Ca2+  to  enter  the 
cytoplasm  from  outside  the  cell.  The  two  flagella  react  differently, 
causing the cell to turn toward the light. C, Once the cell is reoriented, 
the flagella beat equally, and the cell swims toward the light. D, High-
intensity light releases a high concentration of Ca2+ and causes transient 
wave-like motion of the flagella. This backward swimming allows the 
cell to reorient and to swim away from the light. 

FIGURE  38.17  BASAL  BODIES.  A,  Electron  micrograph  of  a 
thin  cross  section  of  a  basal  body.  B,  Electron  micrograph  of  thin 
longitudinal  section  of  basal  bodies  and  proximal  axonemes  of  cilia.  
C, Drawings of cross sections and a three-dimensional (3D) drawing 
of the basal body and proximal flagella of Chlamydomonas. In the 3D 
drawing, the near side outer doublets are cut away to reveal the central 
pair  microtubules.  (A–B,  Courtesy  D.W.  Fawcett,  Harvard  Medical 
School, Boston, MA. C, Modified from Amos LA, Amos WB. Molecules 
of the Cytoskeleton. New York: Guilford Press; 1991.)

664 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

A

B

Regenerating,
short flagella
Tagged
tubulin

Axonemes
grow at
distal tips

C

D
Turnaround
zone

Mate

2 hours

Fusing cell

Fused cell

Cut

D
y
n
e
n

i

Cell
body

i

K
n
e
s
n
 
2

i

A
n
t
e
r
o
g
r
a
d
e

I

F
T
 
p
a
r
t
i
c
e

l

I

 

F
T
p
a
r
t
i
c
e

l

R
e

t
r
o
g
r
a
d
e

FIGURE 38.18  FLAGELLAR GROWTH AND INTRAFLAGELLAR TRANSPORT. A, Incorporation of protein subunits at the tip of growing 
Chlamydomonas flagella is revealed by an experiment involving the fusion of two cells, one expressing tubulin with an epitope tag that reacts 
with a specific antibody and the other regenerating its flagella. As is shown in the fluorescence micrograph, tagged tubulin is incorporated only 
at the distal tips of the growing flagella. Cells with paralyzed flagella made this experiment more convenient. B, Time course of regeneration of 
Chlamydomonas  flagellum  following  amputation  of  one  flagellum.  The  surviving  flagellum  shortens  transiently  before  both  grow  out  together. 
C, Electron micrographs of thin sections of Chlamydomonas flagella showing intraflagellar transport particles (arrows). D, Model for intraflagellar 
transport (IFT). (A, Courtesy K. Johnson, Haverford College, Haverford, PA. Inset, From Johnson KA, Rosenbaum JL. Polarity of flagellar assembly 
in Chlamydomonas. J Cell Biol. 1992;119:1605–1611, copyright The Rockefeller University Press. B, Based on the work of J. Rosenbaum, Yale 
University, New Haven, CT. C, Courtesy Joel Rosenbaum, Yale University, New Haven, CT.)

Some organisms regenerate flagella if they are severed 
from the cell (Fig. 38.18A–B). Absence of the flagellum 
activates expression of genes required to supply subunits 
for regrowth of the axoneme. In approximately 1 hour, 
the cell regrows a replacement flagellum, and the genes 
are turned off. Even more remarkably, if only one of the 
two  flagella  is  lost,  the  remaining  flagellum  shortens 
rapidly  to  provide  components  required  to  make  two 
half-length flagella (Fig. 38.18B). Then protein synthesis 
slowly  provides  additional  subunits  to  restore  both  fla-
gella to full length.

Axonemes  grow  at  their  tips  by  incorporation  of 
subunits  synthesized  in  the  cytoplasm  (Fig.  38.18A).  A 
process  called  intraflagellar  transport  (IFT)  (Fig. 
38.18C–D) carries individual proteins and subassemblies 
such as radial spokes to the growing tip. These cytoplas-
mic  cargo  proteins  bind  one  of  two  IFT  complexes, 
which  associate  1 : 1  to  form  larger  “trains”  visible  of 
electron microscopy (Fig. 38.18C). Kinesin-2 moves IFT 
trains  toward  the  tip  of  the  axoneme  along  the  outer 
doublets  just  beneath  the  plasma  membrane.  Cytoplas-
mic dynein 1b transports particles back toward the cell 

body. A separate complex, called a BBSome, associates 
with  IFT  trains  and  transports  transmembrane  proteins 
(including  signaling  receptors)  bidirectionally  along 
microtubules of the underlying axoneme. Movements of 
transmembrane  proteins  allows  Chlamydomonas  to 
glide on surfaces including the flagellum of a partner cell 
during  mating.  Because  this  motion  does  not  require 
beating of the axoneme, the mechanism may represent 
an early stage in the evolution of flagella.

IFT is remarkably similar to fast axonal transport (see 
Figs. 37.1 and 37.3) but on a smaller scale. Cargo proteins 
are loaded onto IFT complexes at the base of the cilium 
and then must pass through filters located just above the 
basal body. These filters have a cutoff of approximately 
50 kD  but  pass  much  larger  IFT  complexes.  Proteins, 
including the Ran GTPase, importins, and proteins of the 
nuclear pore complex (see Chapter 9), participate in this 
filtration system. After transport cargo proteins dissoci-
ate at the flagellar tip. Phosphorylation of kinesin at the 
tip of the axoneme may reverse transport for the return 
trip to the cell body. Trains are full of tubulin and other 
axonemal  proteins  in  growing  cilia;  they  keep  moving 

 

CHAPTER 38  n  Cellular Motility 

665

bidirectionally but are largely empty when cilia are not 
growing.

Rotary Cilia
Single cilia on the epithelial cells of the “ventral node” 
of  vertebrate  embryos  are  required  for  the  asymmetric 
location of some internal organs, such as the heart and 
liver,  on  opposite  sides  of  the  body.  These  nodal  cilia 
lack  the  central  pair  microtubules  and  radial  spokes. 
Rather  than  beating,  the  activity  of  the  dynein  arms 
causes the tip of the cilia to rotate clockwise. This rotary 
motion  propels  the  extracellular  fluid  carrying  certain 
growth factors toward the left side of the embryo. The 
absence  of  this  flow  explains  why  patients  with  Karta-
gener syndrome and mice missing a single dynein heavy 
chain  have  an  equal  chance  of  having  their  internal 
organs,  such  as  heart  and  liver,  positioned  normally  or 
on the opposite side, a condition called situs inversus. 
Rotary  cilia  may  provide  clues  about  an  intermediate 
stage in the evolution of axonemes.

Primary Cilia
Except for blood cells, differentiated cells in vertebrate 
tissues produce a single primary cilium by growth of an 
axoneme from their older mother centriole (Fig. 38.19). 

Golgi

Flagellum
with 9 + 0
axoneme

Centriole

Golgi

FIGURE 38.19  PRIMARY CILIUM. Electron micrograph of a thin 
section of a mesenchymal cell with a primary cilium assembled from 
one  of  the  two  centrioles,  which  serves  as  the  basal  body.  (From 
Fawcett DW. The Cell. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1981.)

The axonemes lack the central pair, and most lack dynein, 
so they are immotile (Fig. 38.12B).

Primary cilia are sensory organelles for both chemicals 
and mechanical forces. For example, odorant receptors 
of nematode olfactory neurons concentrate in the mem-
branes of primary cilia. Rod and cone photoreceptors in 
the eye are modified cilia with a basal body and a vestigial 
axoneme (see Fig. 27.2). Primary cilia on the epithelial 
cells of kidney tubules act as flow sensors, admitting Ca2+ 
into  the  cilium  through  mechanosensitive  channels  in 
the plasma membrane when bent. Many receptors con-
centrate in primary cilia including those for developmen-
tal morphogens such as sonic hedgehog and Wnt, growth 
factors  including  platelet-derived  growth  factor,  and 
hormones like somatostatin. Some ligands activate local 
Ca2+ release into the cilium.

Ciliopathies
Genetic deficiencies in the assembly of cilia or IFT result 
in a remarkably wide range of human disease syndromes, 
known  collectively  as  ciliopathies.  The  underlying 
mutations  are  found  in  more  than  20  genes  encoding 
proteins for axonemes, basal bodies, and IFT. The defects 
can appear in virtually any organ, illustrating the diverse 
functions of primary and motile cilia. An early example 
was polycystic kidney disease, the most common cause 
of  kidney  failure.  The  most  frequent  mutations  are  in 
genes for a Trp-family calcium channel, but other patients 
have mutations in genes for IFT proteins. Kidney epithe-
lial cells form abnormal cysts rather than tubules, perhaps 
as  a  result  of  abnormal  cell  division.  Other  ciliopathy 
mutations  cause  defects  in  the  central  and  peripheral 
nervous  systems,  olfactory  neurons,  ear,  liver,  retina, 
skeleton,  and  reproductive  organs.  Patients  with  some 
ciliopathy syndromes are obese or have extra digits.

Box 38.1 discusses exotic eukaryotic motility systems.

Bacterial Flagella
Bacteria use a reversible, high-speed, rotary motor driven 
by H+ or Na+ gradients to power their flagella (Figs. 38.24 
and 38.25). Bacterial flagella differ in every respect from 
eukaryotic cilia and flagella. The bacterial flagellum is an 
extracellular protein wire (see Fig. 5.8), not a cytoskel-
etal structure like an axoneme inside the plasma mem-
brane. Bacteria with multiple flagella are more common 
than those with single flagellum. The principles derived 
from studies of Escherichia coli and a few other bacteria 
apply  generally,  although  other  species  exhibit  many 
variations on this theme.

A  motor,  embedded  in  the  plasma  membrane,  turns 
the bacterial flagellum either clockwise or counterclock-
wise  (viewed  from  the  tip  of  the  flagellum)  like  the 
propeller  of  a  motorboat.  In  contrast  to  a  motorboat, 
moving bacteria have no momentum, so they stop in a 
fraction  of  a  nanometer  if  the  motor  stops.  When 

666 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

BOX 38.1  Exotic Eukaryotic Motility Systems

In contrast to conventional motility systems used by eukary-
otic  cells  discussed  in  the  main  text,  a  few  eukaryotes 
evolved exotic motility systems, four examples of which are 
described here.

A Preformed Actin Filament Spring
Sperm of the horseshoe crab, Limulus, use a novel acroso-
mal process to fertilize an egg (Fig. 38.20). They preassemble 
a  coiled  bundle  of  actin  filaments  crosslinked  by  a  protein 
called  scruin.  This  bundle  is  a  tightly  coiled  spring.  An 
encounter  with  an  egg  stimulates  rearrangement  of  the 
crosslinks,  causing  the  actin  bundle  to  unwind.  Uncoiling 
drives the bundle through a channel in the nucleus followed 
by extension of a process surrounded by plasma membrane 
that literally screws its way through the egg jelly to fuse with 
the egg plasma membrane.

Calcium-Sensitive Contractile Fibers
The ciliate Vorticella avoids predators by contracting a stalk 
that anchors the cell to leaves or other supports (Fig. 38.21). 
The  contractile  fibril,  called  a  spasmoneme,  contracts 
faster  than  any  muscle.  Ca2+  released  from  tubular  mem-
branes  associated  with  the  spasmoneme  triggers  contrac-
tions,  when  it  binds  to  spasmin,  a  calmodulin-like  protein 
that  forms  3-nm  filaments.  Ca2+  binding  changes  the  con-
formation  of  spasmin  and  results  in  rapid  shortening,  
because many spasmin subunits are assembled in series. The 

Actin bundle
extends
acrosomal 
process

B
B

C
C

A. Limulus

Egg stimulates

secretion of acrosome
and uncoiling of actin

filament bundle

Acrosome

Nucleus

Coiled 
bundle
of actin 
filaments

Axoneme

spasmoneme  relaxes  when  Ca2+  dissociates.  Energy  for 
contraction  is  supplied  indirectly  when  ATP-driven  pumps 
create a Ca2+ gradient between the lumen of the membrane 
system and cytoplasm. Movement of Ca2+ down this gradient 
drives contraction.

Proteins  similar  to  spasmin  are  found  in  other  ciliates, 
algae, fungi, and animals, where they are called centrin or 
caltractin.  These  calmodulin-like  proteins  form  fibrils  that 
anchor centrosomes and the basal bodies of cilia and flagella. 
Mutations that inactivate caltractin in algae or yeast compro-
mise  the  functions  of  the  microtubule  organizers  (centro-
somes  or  spindle  pole  bodies;  see  Figs.  34.15  and  34.20) 
used for mitosis.

Major Sperm Protein, an Actin Substitute in 
Nematode Sperm
Nematode  sperm  use  amoeboid  movements  to  find  an  egg 
rather  than  swimming  with  flagella  like  other  sperm  (Fig. 
38.22). The behavior of these sperm is so similar to a small 
amoeba cell that anyone would have guessed that it is based 
on the assembly of actin filaments. However, actin is a minor 
protein in nematode sperm. Instead, sperm pseudopods are 
filled  with  10-nm  wide,  apolar  filaments  assembled  from 
dimers of a 14-kD protein with an immunoglobulin-like fold 
called major sperm protein. Proteins in the cytoplasm and 
associated with the plasma membrane guide the assembly of 
the  filaments,  which  function  remarkably  like  actin,  even 
though they have no bound nucleotide and no known associ-
ated  motor  protein.  The  10-nm  filaments  assemble  at  the 
leading edge of the pseudopod and remain stationary with 
respect  to  the  substrate  as  the  expanding  pseudopod 

C

A

B

FIGURE 38.20  LIMULUS SPERM ACROSOMAL PROCESS. 
A, Uncoiling of a bundle of actin filaments extends the acrosomal 
process of the sperm of the horseshoe crab, Limulus. B–C, Electron 
micrograph of the actin filament bundle from the acrosomal process 
of Limulus and a three-dimensional reconstruction of one filament 
(yellow)  decorated  with  crosslinking  proteins  (green).  (Based  on 
the  work  of  L.  Tilney,  University  of  Pennsylvania,  Philadelphia.  
B–C, Courtesy W. Chiu, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX.)

FIGURE 38.21  CALCIUM-SENSITIVE CONTRACTILE FIBERS. 
A–B, Light micrographs of a group of vorticellid protozoa suspended 
from the bottom of a leaf, taken before (A) and after (B) contraction 
of their spasmonemes. C, Electron micrograph of a thin section of 
contractile  fibers  and  tubular  membranes  that  store  and  release 
calcium.  (Courtesy  W.B.  Amos,  MRC  Laboratory  of  Molecular 
Biology, Cambridge, United Kingdom.)

 

CHAPTER 38  n  Cellular Motility 

667

BOX 38.1  Exotic Eukaryotic Motility Systems—cont’d

A

E

B

C

D

F

Cell movement

pH 7.0

pH 6.8

FIGURE  38.22  MOTILITY  OF  NEMATODE  SPERM.  A,  Scanning  electron  micrograph  of  an  amoeboid  sperm  showing  the  anterior 
pseudopod and trailing cell body. B–C, Time series of differential interference contrast light micrographs showing movement of a live sperm 
by assembly of a network of fibers at the leading edge. Arrows mark the same point in the network, which is stationary with respect to the 
substrate. D, Transmission electron micrograph of an extracted sperm showing the fibers. E, Atomic model of a short segment of the sperm 
filaments consisting of a polymer of major sperm protein (MSP).  F, Cycle of MSP assembly at the leading edge and disassembly at the 
cell body. (Courtesy T. Roberts, Florida State University, Tallahassee, and M. Stewart, MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom.)

advances.  Filament  bundles  depolymerize  at  the  interface 
between the pseudopod and the spherical cell body. A pH 
gradient  promotes  assembly  of  major  sperm  protein  at  the 
front  and  disassembly  at  the  rear  of  the  pseudopod.  This 
highly  efficient  motility  system  is  still  unknown  in  other 
parts of the phylogenetic tree.

Axostyles, Specialized Microtubular 
Organelles
Some protozoa use dynein to generate beating movements 
of large arrays of cytoplasmic microtubules called axostyles 
(Fig.  38.23).  The  mechanism  seems  to  be  similar  to  an 
axoneme,  although  the  organization  clearly  differs.  Cross-
linking  structures  hold  together  sheets  of  singlet  microtu-
bules, which slide past each other as a result of the action 
of  dynein  motors  on  adjacent  sheets.  Coordinated  beats  of 
the axostyle distort the whole organism, allowing it to wiggle 
about.

A

B

CC

8 µm

FIGURE 38.23  MOTILE AXOSTYLE OF SACCINOBACULUS, 
A PROTOZOAN PARASITE OF TERMITES. The twisting motions 
of this intracellular assembly of microtubules cause the whole para-
site  to  twist  and  turn  in  the  gut  of  termites.  A,  Polarization  light 
micrograph of an isolated axostyle. B, Drawing of part of the axo-
style showing the arrangement of sheets of crosslinked microtubules. 
C,  Transmission  electron  micrograph  of  a  cross  section  of  the 
axostyle showing microtubules crosslinked into sheets with dynein 
arms between the sheets. (Courtesy R. Linck, University of Minne-
sota,  Minneapolis.  From  Woodrum  D,  Linck  R.  Structural  basis  
of  motility  in  the  microtubular  axostyle.  J  Cell  Biol.  1980;87:
404–414, copyright The Rockefeller University Press.)

668 

A

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

Flagella rotating counterclockwise at
(60 – 270 Hz) form a bundle that
propels the cell

B

Clockwise rotation during
tumble (100 Hz)

C

Tethered cell (20 – 50 Hz)

D

Bead on polyhook (170 Hz)

FIGURE 38.24  DIFFERENT MANIFESTATIONS OF THE ROTA-
TION OF FLAGELLA. A, If the flagella rotate counterclockwise, they 
form a bundle that propels the cell forward. B, If one or more flagella 
rotate  clockwise,  the  bundle  falls  apart  and  the  cell  tumbles  in  one 
place. C, If a flagellum is tethered to a surface, the bacterium rotates. 
D, If the flagellar filament is replaced by an elongated hook region with 
an attached bead, the bead rotates. (Modified from Schuster SD, Khan 
S.  The  bacterial  flagellar  motor.  Annu  Rev  Biophys  Biomol  Struct. 
1994;23:509–539.)

multiple flagella are present, counterclockwise rotation 
forms a bundle. Four flagella propel E. coli 30 µm s−1, a 
velocity of 15 cell lengths per second, equivalent to 400 
miles  per  hour  if  the  bacterium  were  the  size  of  an 
automobile.  When  one  or  more  flagella  reverse  their 
direction  and  rotate  clockwise,  the  bundle  flies  apart, 
and the cell tumbles in one place. Figs. 27.12 and 27.13 
explain how chemotactic stimuli control the probability 
of clockwise rotation, favoring steady runs toward nutri-
ents and allowing for more frequent tumbles to change 
direction to avoid harm.

Assays  for  rotation  of  single  flagella  provide  insights 
about  the  mechanism  of  flagellar  motion  (Fig.  38.24). 
When a flagellum is attached to a glass slide by means of 
antibodies to the flagellar filament, the bacterium rotates, 
providing  decisive  evidence  for  rotation  of  flagella. 

Similarly, beads attached to short flagella are observed to 
rotate. The rotational speed depends on the resistance. 
The motor of a single immobilized flagellum can rotate 
a  whole  E.  coli  10  to  50  times  per  second,  whereas  in 
some species unloaded motors rotate up to 1600 times 
per second (100,000 rpm)!

The  rotary  engine  driving  the  flagellar  filament  is 
constructed  from  a  rotor  and  stator.  The  cylindrical 
basal body on the end of the filament rotates inside the 
stator,  a  ring  of  stationary  proteins  embedded  in  the 
plasma  membrane  and  anchored  to  the  peptidoglycan 
layer  (Fig.  38.25).  Genetic  screens  for  motility  mutants 
identified all the protein components of the motor, and 
their functions were defined by analysis of the behavior 
of these mutants. Most of these proteins are present in 
isolated basal bodies. The functional units of the stator 
consist  of  four  MotA  subunits  and  two  MotB  subunits. 
MotA has four hydrophobic segments that are believed 
to be transmembrane helices and a substantial cytoplas-
mic domain. MotB has one transmembrane segment and 
a large periplasmic domain anchored to the peptidogly-
can  layer.  Flagella  and  basal  bodies  assemble  but  are 
immotile in cells lacking either of these transmembrane 
proteins. If the missing protein is replaced by initiating 
its biosynthesis, the paralyzed flagellum begins to turn, 
increasing its speed of rotation in a stepwise fashion, as 
10  to  12  independent,  torque-producing  MotA4MotB2 
units are added one after another.

The  energy  to  turn  the  motor  comes  from  protons  
(or,  in  some  bacteria,  Na+  ions)  that  move  down  an 
electrochemical  gradient  from  outside  the  bacterium 
through the MotA4MotB2 units to the cytoplasm. Transfer 
of  one  proton  across  the  membrane  provides  approxi-
mately  the  same  energy  as  the  hydrolysis  of  an  ATP. 
Pumps driven by light, oxidation, or ATP hydrolysis (see 
Table 14.1) generate the proton gradient. MotA is part 
of  the  proton  channel,  because  mutations  in  its  gene 
inhibit  both  flagellar  rotation  and  proton  permeability. 
The MotB transmembrane helix has a conserved aspartic  
acid  residue  that  interacts  with  the  proton  crossing  
the membrane.

The  mechanism  producing  rotation  is  still  under 
investigation, but it involves interaction of the cytoplas-
mic domain of MotA with FilG subunits on the top of the 
C-ring. The transfer of a proton across the plasma mem-
brane  results  in  a  conformational  change  in  MotA  that 
moves the C-ring. Roughly 1000 protons cross the mem-
brane  for  each  rotation,  corresponding  to  two  protons 
for  each  tiny  rotational  step.  Proton  transfer  is  tightly 
coupled to rotation of the basal body, and the efficiency 
is near 100%.

 

Cap

Up to 2500 nm

Filament

CHAPTER 38  n  Cellular Motility 

669

Hook

Stator complex
D

MotB

B

C

Outer membrane
Peptidoglycan

Cytoplasmic membrane

A

C-ring switch complex

L-ring
P-ring

MS-ring
motor

Cytoplasmic

structure:
Fli G
Fli N
Fli M

MotA

MotB

MotA

E

MotA

FIGURE 38.25  BACTERIAL ROTARY MOTOR. A, Drawing of the flagellar filament and rotary motor. B–C, Three-dimensional reconstruction 
and schematic cross section of basal body of the flagellar motor from Escherichia coli. D, Details of the stator, with schematic diagrams of the 
transmembrane and cytoplasmic parts of MotA4MotB2 hexamer. E, Electron micrograph of a freeze-fractured bacterium illustrating the ring of 
intramembranous particles comprising the stator of MotA4 MotB2 hexamers. (A, Modified from Schuster SD, Khan S. The bacterial flagellar motor. 
Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct. 1994;23:509–539. B–C, From Zhao X, Norris SJ, Liu J. Molecular architecture of the bacterial flagellar motor 
in cells. Biochemistry. 2014;53:4323–433. D, Stator unit with a ribbon diagram of the C-terminal domain of MotB. Schematic diagrams of MotA 
and MotB based on Kojima S, Imada K, Sakuma M, et al. Stator assembly and activation mechanism of the flagellar motor by the periplasmic 
region of MotB. Mol Microbiol. 2009;73:710–718. E, Courtesy S. Khan, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, NY.)

SELECTED READINGS

Blanchoin  L,  Boujemaa-Paterski  R,  Sykes  C,  et al.  Actin  dynamics, 
architecture, and mechanics in cell motility. Physiol Rev. 2014;94:
235-263.

Martin AC, Goldstein B. Apical constriction: themes and variations on 
a cellular mechanism driving morphogenesis. Development. 2014;
141:1987-1998.

Mizuno  N,  Taschner  M,  Engel  BD,  et al.  Structural  studies  of  ciliary 

components. J Mol Biol. 2012;422:163-180.

Carmeliet  P,  Tessier-Lavigne  M.  Common  mechanisms  of  nerve  and 

Mogilner A, Rubinstein B. The physics of filopodial protrusion. Biophys 

blood vessel wiring. Nature. 2005;436:193-2000.

J. 2005;89:782-795.

Condeelis J, Singer RH, Segall JE. The great escape: When cancer cells 
hijack  the  genes  for  chemotaxis  and  motility.  Annu  Rev  Cell  Dev 
Biol. 2005;21:695-718.

Moriyama  Y,  Okamoto  H,  Asai  H.  Rubber-like  elasticity  and  volume 
changes  in  the  isolated  spasmoneme  of  giant  Zoothamnium  sp. 
under Ca2+-induced contraction. Biophys J. 1999;76:993-1000.

Daniels  DR.  Effect  of  capping  protein  on  a  growing  filopodium. 

Petrie RJ, Yamada KM. Fibroblasts lead the way: a unified view of 3D 

Biophys J. 2010;98:1139-1148.

cell motility. Trends Cell Biol. 2015;25:666-674.

Devreotes P, Horwitz AR. Signaling networks that regulate cell migra-

Pigino G, Ishikawa T. Axonemal radial spokes: 3D structure, function 

tion. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2015;3:a005959.

and assembly. Bioarchitecture. 2012;2:50-58.

Gambardella  L,  Vermeren  S.  Molecular  players 

in  neutrophil 
chemotaxis—focus  on  PI3K  and  small  GTPases.  J  Leukoc  Biol. 
2013;94:603-612.

Goetz SC, Anderson KV. The primary cilium: a signalling centre during 

vertebrate development. Nat Rev Genet. 2010;11:331-344.

Pollard TD, Borisy GG. Cellular motility driven by assembly and disas-

sembly of actin filaments. Cell. 2003;112:453-465.

Reiter  JF,  Blacque  OE,  Leroux  MR.  The  base  of  the  cilium:  roles  for 
transition fibres and the transition zone in ciliary formation, mainte-
nance and compartmentalization. EMBO Rep. 2012;13:608-618.

Kim S, Dynlacht BD. Assembling a primary cilium. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 

Ridge KD. Algal rhodopsins: Phototaxis receptors found at last. Curr 

2013;25:506-511.

Biol. 2002;12:R588-R590.

Kolodkin AL, Tessier-Lavigne M. Mechanisms and molecules of neuro-
nal wiring: a primer. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2011;3:a001727.
Lechtreck  KF.  IFT-cargo  interactions  and  protein  transport  in  cilia. 

Trends Biochem Sci. 2015;40:765-778.

Levin M. Left-right asymmetry in embryonic development: A compre-

Ridley AJ, Schwartz MA, Burridge K, et al. Cell migration: Integrating 

signals from front to back. Science. 2003;302:1704-1709.

Rørth P. Reach out and touch someone. Science. 2014;343:848-849.
Smith HE. Nematode sperm motility. WormBook. 2014;4:1-15.
Witman  G.  Chlamydomonas  phototaxis.  Trends  Cell  Biol.  1993;3:

hensive review. Mech Dev. 2005;122:3-25.

403-408.

Lin J, Okada K, Raytchev M, et al. Structural mechanism of the dynein 

Zhao X, Norris SJ, Liu J. Molecular architecture of the bacterial flagellar 

power stroke. Nat Cell Biol. 2014;16:479-485.

motor in cells. Biochemistry. 2014;53:4323-4433.

This page intentionally left blank

C H A P T E R 

39 

Muscles

Muscles  use  actin  and  myosin  to  generate  powerful, 

unidirectional  movements  (Fig.  39.1).  The  molecular 
strategies  are  specialized  versions  of  those  used  by  
other  cells  to  produce  contractions,  to  adhere  to  each 
other and the extracellular matrix, and to control their 
activity.

Vertebrates have three types of specialized contractile 
cells:  smooth  muscle,  skeletal  muscle,  and  cardiac 
muscle. These muscles have much in common, but differ 
in their activation mechanisms, arrangement of contrac-
tile filaments, and energy supplies. The nervous system 
controls the timing, force, and speed of skeletal muscle 
contraction over a wide range. Cardiac muscle generates 
its  own  rhythmic  contractions  that  spread  through  the 
heart  in  a  highly  reproducible  fashion.  Neurotransmit-
ters,  acting  like  hormones,  regulate  the  force  and  
frequency  of  heartbeats  over  a  narrow  range.  Nerves, 
hormones,  and  intrinsic  signals  control  the  activity  of 
smooth  muscles,  which  contract  slowly  but  maintain 
tension very efficiently. This chapter explains the molec-
ular and cellular basis for these distinctive physiological 
properties of the three types of muscle.

Skeletal Muscle
Skeletal  muscle  cells  (also  called  muscle  fibers  in  the 
physiological  literature)  are  among  the  largest  cells  of 
vertebrates.  During  development,  mesenchymal  stem 
cells  give  rise  to  progenitor  cells  with  a  single  nucleus 
called myoblasts. A family of master transcription factors, 
including MyoD and myogenin, coordinates the expres-
sion of specialized muscle proteins. As they differentiate, 
myoblasts  fuse  and  elongate  to  form  muscle  cells  with 
multiple nuclei and lengths ranging from millimeters to 
tens of centimeters. The number of muscle cells is deter-
mined genetically and is relatively stable throughout life 
even as the size of the cells varies with the level of exer-
cise and nutrition.

A  basal  lamina  (see  Fig.  29.17C)  surrounds  and  sup-
ports  each  muscle  cell.  At  the  ends  of  each  cell,  actin 
thin filaments are anchored to the plasma membrane at 
myotendinous junctions, which are similar to adherens 
junctions (see Fig. 31.8). There, integrins spanning the 
membrane link actin filaments to the basal lamina and to  
collagen  fibrils  of  tendons.  These  physical  connections 
transmit contractile force to the skeleton.

Mature  muscles  harbor  small  numbers  of  long-lived 
stem  cells  (see  Fig.  41.14)  with  the  potential  to  repair 
damage. They are called satellite cells because they are 
located inside the basal lamina next to the muscle cells. 
Some of these cells are capable of both self-renewal and, 
when the muscle is injured, producing progeny that can 
differentiate into myoblasts that can fuse with each other 
or existing muscle cells to repopulate the muscle. These 
features have made satellite cells a focus of research to 
treat degenerative diseases of muscle.

Organization of the Actomyosin Apparatus
Skeletal  muscle  cells  are  optimized  for  rapid,  forceful 
contractions. Accordingly, they have a massive concen-
tration of highly ordered contractile units composed of 
actin, myosin, and associated proteins (Fig. 39.2). Actin 
and  myosin  filaments  are  organized  into  sarcomeres, 
aligned  contractile  units  that  give  the  cells  a  striped 
appearance in the microscope. For this reason, they are 
called  striated  muscles.  Myosin  uses  adenosine  triphos-
phate  (ATP)  hydrolysis  to  power  contraction,  which 
results from myosin-powered sliding of actin-based thin 
filaments past myosin-containing thick filaments. Speed 
of  contraction  is  achieved  by  linking  many  sarcomeres 
in series. Power (force) is achieved by linking multiple 
sarcomeres in parallel. Nerve impulses stimulate a tran-
sient rise in cytoplasmic calcium that activates the con-
tractile proteins.

Interdigitation of thick, bipolar, myosin filaments and 
thin  actin  filaments  in  the  sarcomeres  of  living  muscle 

 671

672 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

A. Skeletal muscle

B. Cardiac muscle

C. Smooth muscle

Section of
sarcomere

Myofibril

Muscle
cell

Muscle

FIGURE  39.2  CONTRACTILE  APPARATUS  OF  STRIATED 
MUSCLES.  The  contractile  unit  is  the  sarcomere,  an  interdigitating 
array of thick and thin filaments. Sarcomeres are arranged end to end 
into long, rod-shaped myofibrils that run the length of the cell. Mito-
chondria  and  smooth  endoplasmic  reticulum  separate  myofibrils, 
which can readily be isolated for functional and biochemical studies. 

myosin heads only a few nanometers away from adjacent 
actin filaments. The alignment and interdigitation of the 
filaments  facilitate  the  sliding  interactions  required  to 
produce contraction.

An important, simplifying architectural feature is that 
sarcomeres  are  symmetrical  about  their  middles  (Fig. 
39.3).  Consequently,  the  polarity  of  myosin  relative  to 
the actin filaments is the same in both halves of the sar-
comere, allowing the same force-generating mechanism 
to  work  at  both  ends  of  the  bipolar  myosin  filaments. 
Sarcomeres  are  organized  end  to  end  into  long,  rod-
shaped  assemblies  called  myofibrils  (Fig.  39.2)  that 
retain their contractility even after isolation from muscle.

Thin Filaments
Thin filaments are a polymer of actin with tightly bound 
regulatory  proteins  troponin  and  tropomyosin  (Fig. 
39.4). When the cytoplasmic Ca2+ concentration is low, 
troponin  and  tropomyosin  inhibit  the  actin-activated 
adenosine  triphosphatase  (ATPase)  of  myosin.  Tropo-
myosin,  a  40-nm  long  coiled-coil  of  two α-helical  poly-
peptides  (see  Fig.  3.10),  binds 
laterally  to  seven 

FIGURE  39.1  LIGHT  MICROGRAPHS  AND  INTERPRETIVE 
DRAWINGS  OF  HISTOLOGIC  SECTIONS  OF  SKELETAL, 
CARDIAC, AND SMOOTH MUSCLES. A, Skeletal muscle cells are 
shaped  like  cylinders  and  may  be  up  to  50 cm  long.  Multiple  nuclei 
are  located  at  the  periphery  near  the  plasma  membrane.  Striations  
are  seen  in  the  inset,  a  longitudinal  section  at  high  magnification.  
B,  Cardiac  muscle  cells  are  striated  and  have  one  or  two  nuclei. 
Adhesive junctions called intercalated disks (bright pink vertical bars in 
the longitudinal section, top left arrows) bind these short cells together 
end to end. C, Smooth muscle cells are spindle shaped with homo-
geneous cytoplasm and single nuclei. 

cells  is  so  precise  (Fig.  39.3)  that  it  yields  an  X-ray  dif-
fraction pattern (see Fig. 39.11) revealing the spacing of 
the filaments and the helical repeats of their subunits to 
a resolution of about 3 nm. Z disks at both ends of the 
sarcomere anchor the barbed ends of the actin filaments, 
so  their  pointed  ends  are  near  the  center  of  the  sarco-
mere.  Myosin  heads  project  from  the  surface  of  thick 
filaments,  whereas  their  tails  form  the  filament  back-
bone.  Thick  and  thin  filaments  overlap,  with  the 

 

A

B

Z disk

A band

M line

CHAPTER 39  n  Muscles 

673

A

Tropomyosin

Tropomodulin

Barbed

B

Troponin

Pointed

C

N

C

N

C

D

I band

Troponin C alone

Troponin C on TNI peptide

C
FIGURE  39.4  THIN  FILAMENT  STRUCTURE.  A,  Three-
dimensional  reconstruction  from  electron  micrographs  of  a  thin  fila-
ment from vertebrate skeletal muscle showing actin and the position 
of tropomyosin in relaxed muscle. B, Drawing of a model of a thin fila-
ment from active muscle based on reconstructions of electron micro-
graphs  and  crystal  structures  of  troponin  and  tropomodulin.  Each 
troponin–tropomyosin  unit  is  associated  with  seven  actin  subunits.  
C, Ribbon diagrams of the atomic structures of troponin C, free and 
bound to a troponin I peptide. Two divalent cation-binding EF hands 
are found at each end, separated by a long α-helix. In cells, two high-
affinity sites at the C-terminal end are permanently occupied with Mg2+. 
Two low-affinity sites at the other end are unoccupied in relaxed muscle 
but  bind  Ca2+  when  muscle  is  activated.  (A,  Based  on  Protein  Data 
Bank  [www.rcsb.org]  file  1AX2,  created  by  Roberto  Dominguez,  
University of Pennsylvania.)

are empty. Ca2+ binding to the low-affinity sites (two in 
fast skeletal muscle; one in slow muscle) during muscle 
activation exposes a new binding site for TNI. The result-
ing conformational change in TNI allows tropomyosin to 
move  away  from  the  myosin-binding  sites  on  the  actin 
filament.

A protein meshwork in the Z disk anchors the barbed 
end  of  each  thin  filament  (Fig.  39.5).  Some  crosslinks 
between actin filaments consist of α-actinin, a short rod 
with actin-binding sites on each end (see Fig. 33.17). At 
least a half dozen structural proteins stabilize the Z disk 
through  interactions  with  α-actinin,  actin,  and  titin. 
Some of these proteins also have signaling functions.

Proteins cap both ends of thin filaments. Cap-Z, the 
muscle isoform of capping protein (see Fig. 33.15), binds 
the barbed ends of thin filaments with high affinity, limit-
ing actin subunit addition or loss. Tropomodulin asso-
ciates  with  both  tropomyosin  and  actin  to  cap  and 
stabilize the pointed end of the thin filament (Fig. 39.4B).
Tropomyosin  and  a  gigantic  filamentous  protein, 
nebulin, stabilize thin filaments laterally. Nebulin con-
sists  of  185  imperfect  repeats  of  a  35-amino-acid  motif 

Actin
polarity

Myosin
polarity

Myosin
polarity

E
FIGURE  39.3  ELECTRON  MICROGRAPHS  AND  DRAWINGS 
OF SARCOMERES. A, Longitudinal thin section showing the array of 
thin filaments anchored to Z disks and overlapping bipolar thick fila-
ments crosslinked in the middle at the M line. B, Longitudinal freeze-
fractured,  etched,  and  shadowed  sarcomere  showing  myosin 
cross-bridges  attached  to  thin  filaments  near  the  bare  zone  in  the 
center  (right)  of  a  sarcomere.  C–D,  Cross-sections  of  insect  flight 
muscle and vertebrate skeletal muscle showing the double hexagonal 
arrays of thick and thin filaments. E, Drawings indicating the polarity 
of  the  thick  and  thin  filaments.  (A  and  C,  Courtesy  H.E.  Huxley, 
Brandeis  University,  Waltham,  MA.  B  and  D,  Courtesy  J.  Heuser, 
Washington University, St. Louis, MO.)

contiguous actin subunits as well as head to tail to neigh-
boring tropomyosins, forming a continuous strand along 
the whole thin filament. Troponin (TN) consists of three 
different subunits called TNC, TNI, and TNT (see Table 
39.1). TNT anchors one troponin complex to each tropo-
myosin  coiled-coil.  TNC  is  a  dumbbell-shaped  protein 
with four EF-hand motifs to bind divalent cations similar 
to calmodulin (see Fig. 3.12 and Chapter 26). In resting 
muscle,  the  C-terminal  globular  domain  of  TNC  binds 
two  Mg2+  ions  and  an  α-helix  of  TNI,  while  the  low-
affinity  sites  in  the  N-terminal  globular  domain  of  TNC 

674 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

A. Longitudinal section

Z disk

B. Cross section

C

C

A

B

D

M line

E

FIGURE 39.5  Z DISK STRUCTURE. A–B, Electron micrographs 
of  thin  sections  perpendicular  to  and  in  the  plane  of  the  Z  disk.  
C, Three-dimensional reconstruction, based on electron micrographs 
of the Z disk, showing the network of protein crosslinks that anchor 
the barbed ends of the yellow actin filaments. (Courtesy J. Deatherage, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD and modified from Cheng 
NQ, Deatherage JF. Three dimensional reconstruction of the Z disk of 
sectioned bee flight muscle. J Cell Biol. 1989;108:1761–1774.)

that interact with each actin subunit, tropomyosin, and 
troponin along the length of thin filaments. Interactions 
with tropomodulin and Z disk proteins anchor nebulin 
at the two ends of the thin filament. These interactions 
influence the length of thin filaments, but nebulin does 
not act simply as a molecular ruler.

Thick Filaments
The self-assembly of myosin II (see Fig. 5.7) establishes 
the  bipolar  architecture  of  striated  muscle  thick  fila-
ments  (Fig.  39.6).  Some  features  of  thick  filaments  are 
invariant, such as a superhelical backbone consisting of 
myosin tails, a surface array of myosin heads, the 14.3-nm 
stagger between rows of heads, and a central bare zone 
formed by antiparallel packing of tails. Phosphorylation 
of  the  myosin  regulatory  light  chains  favors  release  of 
the  myosin  heads  from  the  surface  of  the  filament  in 
preparation  for  engagement  with  actin.  Filaments  may 

Bare zone

FIGURE 39.6  STRUCTURE OF BIPOLAR THICK FILAMENTS. 
A, Electron micrograph of a thick filament isolated directly from skeletal 
muscle and prepared by negative staining. A single myosin molecule 
is shown at the same magnification at the lower left. The myosin tails 
form  the  backbone  of  the  thick  filament  and  allow  the  two  myosin 
heads  to  swing  out  from  the  side  (see  the  enlarged  inset  on  the 
right).  B,  Reconstruction  from  cryoelectron  micrographs  of  part  of  a 
tarantula skeletal muscle thick filament with the bare zone (not shown) 
to the right. The tails form the backbone of the filament and the myosin 
heads are folded back toward the bare zone. Space-filling models of 
the  two  heads  of  one  myosin  molecule  are  superimposed  on  the 
reconstruction.  The  catalytic  domains  are  green  and  blue;  the  light 
chains are pink, orange, yellow, and tan. C, Cross section of vertebrate 
skeletal muscle showing the double hexagonal arrays of thick and thin 
filaments. D, Electron micrograph of a highly stretched sarcomere with 
the M line in the middle. Note the nine faint stripes of myosin-binding 
protein C along both halves of the think filaments. E, Drawing of protein 
links between thick filaments in the M line. (A, Courtesy John Trinick, 
University  of  Bristol,  United  Kingdom.  For  reference,  see  Knight  P, 
Trinick J. Structure of the myosin projections on native thick filaments 
from  vertebrate  skeletal  muscle.  J  Mol  Biol.  1984;177:461–482. 
B, Courtesy J. Woodhead and R. Craig, University of Massachusetts 
Medical  School,  Worcester,  MA.  For  reference,  see  Woodhead  JL, 
Zhao  FQ,  Craig  R,  et  al.  Atomic  model  of  a  myosin  filament  in  the 
relaxed state. Nature. 2005;436:1195–1199. C, Courtesy J. Heuser, 
Washington  University,  St.  Louis,  MO.  D,  Courtesy  H.E.  Huxley, 
Brandeis University, Waltham, MA.)

vary in length, diameter, and organization of the helical 
array of heads in various species. Invertebrate thick fila-
ments  have  a  core  of  paramyosin,  a  second  coiled-coil 
protein, which is not found in vertebrates.

Accessory proteins stabilize thick filaments in striated 
muscles (Table 39.1). Myosin-binding protein C, with 

 

CHAPTER 39  n  Muscles 

675

its  fibronectin  III  and  immunoglobulin  domains,  forms 
nine stripes along both halves of the thick filament (Fig. 
39.6D)  and  also  interacts  with  thin  filaments.  It  fine-
tunes  the  interactions  of  myosin  heads  with  both  fila-
ments,  maintaining  the  relaxed  state  but  also  favoring 
crossbridge formation when the muscle is activated. The 
“M line” in the center of the sarcomere of most types 
of  muscle  (Fig.  39.6D)  is  a  three-dimensional  array  of 
protein crosslinks. These elastic crosslinks maintain the 
precise registration of thick filaments but also allow the 
filaments to move apart as the sarcomere shortens while 
maintaining a constant volume. At least three structural 
proteins  and  the  enzyme  MM-creatine  phosphokinase 
(which transfers phosphate from creatine-phosphate to 
adenosine diphosphate [ADP]) are located in the M line.

Titin Filaments
Titin, the largest protein encoded by the human genome, 
forms a third array of filaments lying parallel to the thin 
and  thick  filaments  and  connecting  the  Z  disk  to  the 
thick  filaments  and  the  M  line  (Fig.  39.7).  Three  titins 
flank each half thick filament. Although titin is the third 
most abundant protein in muscle, it is hard to preserve 
for electron microscopy, so these diaphanous filaments 
escaped notice for years. Each filament is a single poly-
peptide  named  after  a  mythological  giant  owing  to  its 
remarkable size: several splice isoforms consist of 27,000 
to 33,000 amino acids folded into a linear array of up to 
300  fibronectin  III  and  immunoglobulin  (Ig)  domains 
measuring more than 1.2 µm long.

The elasticity of titin molecules provides passive resis-
tance to stretching of relaxed muscle. Titin connections 
to the Z disk and thick filaments provide physical continu-
ity from one sarcomere to the next and keep the thick fila-
ments  centered  in  the  sarcomere  during  contraction. 
Differential  splicing  creates  titin  isoforms  that  differ  in 
stiffness for various types of muscle. If titin molecules are 
broken experimentally, thick filaments slide out of regis-
ter toward one Z disk during contraction. Two features 
provide  the  elasticity  during  short  (~0.3 µm  per  titin), 
physiological stretching (Fig. 39.7). The irregular chain of 
Ig domains in the I band straightens out, and a segment 
of the polypeptide rich in proline, glutamic acid, valine, 
and  lysine  (the  PEVK  domain)  partly  unfolds.  This 
decreases  entropy  and  provides  the  energy  for  elastic 
recoil (an entropic spring; see also Fig. 29.11). Extreme 
stretching unfolds Ig domains one by one. Titin not only 
responds  to  phosphorylation  but  also  binds  signaling 
proteins that influence the performance of muscle in the 
short and long term.

Intermediate Filaments
Desmin  intermediate  filaments  (see  Chapter  35)  help 
align the sarcomeres laterally (Fig. 39.8) by linking each 
Z  disk  to  its  neighbors  and  to  specialized  attachment 
sites  on  the  plasma  membrane  called  costameres.  In 

PEVK

PEVK

Ig domains

Titin

PEVK
unfolds

Sarcomere length = 2.4 µm

Chain of Ig domains
stretched

Stretched to 3.2 µm

(physiological stretch length)

Ig domains unfold

Stretched to 3.6 µm

FIGURE  39.7  TITIN  FILAMENTS.  Top  panel,  Electron  micro-
graphs  of  single,  isolated  titin  molecules  prepared  by  heavy  metal 
shadowing. Titin molecules are long enough to extend from the Z disk 
to the M line. Middle panel, Drawing of a sarcomere, to the same scale 
as the electron micrograph, with the thick filaments removed from the 
bottom half to illustrate how titin molecules anchor thick filaments to 
the Z disk and extend to the M line. Bottom panel, Drawing illustrating 
a model for the elasticity of titin. Modest stretches within the physio-
logical  range  reversibly  extend  the  chain  of  immunoglobulin  (Ig) 
domains in the I-band and the PEVK domain. Extreme extension can 
unfold Ig domains. (Modified from Reif M, Gautel M, Oesterhelt F, et al. 
Reversible  unfolding  of  individual  titin  immunoglobulin  domains  by 
AFM. Science. 1997;276:1090–1092. For reference, see Leake MC, 
Wilson  D,  Gautel  M,  Simmons  RM.  The  elasticity  of  single  titin  
molecules  using  a  two-bead  optical  tweezers  assay.  Biophys  J. 
2004;87:1112–1135.)

Intermediate
filaments

Z disk

M line

FIGURE 39.8  DESMIN INTERMEDIATE FILAMENTS IN SKEL-
ETAL MUSCLE. Desmin filaments connect Z disks laterally to each 
other  and  to  the  plasma  membrane  at  specializations  called  costa-
meres. (Modified from Lazarides E. Intermediate filaments as mechani-
cal integrators of cellular space. Nature. 1980;283:249–256.)

676 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

A. Relaxed and stretched

b

a

B. Contracted

C. Rigor showing crossbridges

e
c
r
o
F

0
A

c

Sarcomere length

e
c
r
o
F

0
C

Velocity

Crossbridges

a

b

FIGURE  39.9  SLIDING  FILAMENTS.  Electron  micrographs  and 
interpretive  drawings  of  longitudinal  sections  of  a  sarcomere  from  a 
relaxed muscle (A) and a contracted skeletal muscle (B). The lengths 
of the thin and thick filaments are constant as the sarcomere shortens, 
demonstrating that the filaments slide past each other during contrac-
tion. C, Crossbridges between thick and thin filaments from a muscle 
in  rigor.  (Micrographs  courtesy  H.E.  Huxley,  Brandeis  University, 
Waltham, MA.)

addition  to  desmin,  costameres  contain  clathrin  plus 
several  cytoskeletal  proteins  (vinculin,  talin,  spectrin, 
and ankyrin) found in focal contacts and adherens junc-
tions  of  nonmuscle  cells  (see  Figs.  30.11  and  31.8). 
Desmin  mutations  in  humans  cause  disorganization  of 
myofibrils, resulting in generalized muscle failure.

Molecular Basis of Skeletal Muscle Contraction
Sliding Filament Mechanism
The  key  to  understanding  muscle  contraction  was  the 
discovery that thick and thin filaments maintain constant 
lengths and slide past each other as sarcomeres (and the 
muscle) shorten (Fig. 39.9). About the same time, it was 
discovered  that  crossbridges  (now  recognized  to  be 
myosin heads) can connect actin and myosin filaments, 
and that tension produced during contraction is propor-
tional to the overlap of actin and myosin filaments (Fig. 
39.10).  Supported  by  biochemical  and  ultrastructural 
evidence for actin–myosin interaction, these pioneering 
observations led to the theory that crossbridges between 
the thick and thin filaments produce the force for con-
traction.  Sixty  years  of  research  on  crossbridges  have 
yielded a detailed picture of the chemistry and molecular 
mechanics  underlying  the  force-producing  reactions.  A 
review of the steps of the actomyosin–ATPase cycle (see 
Fig.  36.5)  is  helpful  in  understanding  the  contraction 
mechanism.  Three  different  physiological  states  reveal 
information about crossbridge mechanisms.

Relaxed.  One  extreme  is  relaxed  muscle.  When  the 
concentration of cytoplasmic Ca2+ is low, tropomyosin 

c

B
FIGURE 39.10  PHYSIOLOGICAL PROPERTIES OF SKELETAL 
MUSCLE.  A,  Dependence  of  maximum  tension  on  the  length  of 
the  sarcomeres.  B,  Interpretive  drawings.  Each  relates  to  a  point 
on A. C, Relationship of force and velocity during muscle contraction. 
(A, For reference, see Gordon AM, Huxley AF, Julian F. The variation 
in isometric tension with sarcomere length in vertebrate muscle fibres.  
J  Physiol.  1964;171:28P–30P.  C,  From  Ruch  TC,  Patton  HD  (eds). 
Physiology  and  Biophysics,  19th  ed.  Philadelphia:  WB  Saunders; 
1965.)

and troponin inhibit the interaction of myosin heads 
with  actin  filaments,  resulting  in  few  myosin  heads 
being bound. Lacking long-lived physical connections 
between  the  filaments,  muscle  offers  little  resistance 
to  passive  stretching.  X-ray  diffraction  (Fig.  39.11) 
shows  that  the  myosin  heads  (with  bound  ATP  or  
ADP  and  phosphate)  are  closely  associated  with  the 
backbone of thick filaments and arranged in a helical 
array  determined  by  the  thick  filament  structure  
(Fig. 39.6B).

Rigor. The other extreme occurs after death. Depletion 
of  ATP  allows  all  myosin  heads  to  bind  tightly  to  
actin filaments (Figs. 39.3B and 39.9C). By X-ray dif-
fraction,  the  myosin  heads  bound  to  actin  filaments 
contribute  to  the  strength  of  the  reflections  from  
the actin filament helix. Strong physical connections 
between  the  filaments  prevent  stretching,  making  
the  muscle  stiff  (hence  the  term rigor  mortis).  This 
extreme condition illustrates what happens structur-
ally  and  mechanically  when  all  the  crossbridges 
engage actin filaments.

Contracting.  The  most  interesting,  but  most  compli-
cated,  state  is  actively  contracting  muscle.  Myosin 
heads  “walk”  along  actin  filaments  toward  their 
barbed  ends,  pulling  Z  disks  toward  the  center  of  
the  sarcomere.  Thousands  of  sarcomeres  shorten  in 
series,  causing  the  whole  muscle  to  shorten.  ATP  is 
consumed and force is produced. The thick filament 

 

CHAPTER 39  n  Muscles 

677

A

B. Relaxed

C. Contracting

Myosin
head
helix

Actin
helix

Actin
helix

Heads along thick filament

Dancing heads

FIGURE  39.11  CROSSBRIDGE  DYNAMICS  REVEALED  BY  X-RAY  DIFFRACTION  PATTERNS  OF  WHOLE  MUSCLE.  A,  Electron 
micrograph showing the orientation of the muscle in the x-ray beam in B and C. B–C, Fiber diffraction patterns from relaxed and contracting 
skeletal muscles with interpretive drawings of crossbridges in each state. Reflections from myosin heads arranged on the thick filament helix are 
strong in relaxed muscle. Reflections from the actin helix are stronger than the thick filament helix in contraction. The myosin and actin reflections 
are each labeled in only one of four equivalent quadrants. During contraction, a few myosin heads attach transiently to actin, increasing the strength 
of the actin helix reflections, but most are disordered. (Micrograph and x-ray patterns courtesy H.E. Huxley, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA.)

helical  pattern  is  very  weak  by  X-ray  diffraction  
(Fig.  39.11C).  Actin  reflections  are  stronger  than 
relaxed muscle but not as strong as rigor. Disordered 
myosin heads are distributed between the thick and 
thin filaments as each one dances asynchronously on 
and off of actin filaments.

Most myosin heads in contracting muscle have bound 
ATP or ADP-Pi (adenosine diphosphate–inorganic phos-
phate),  allowing  them  to  exchange  rapidly  among  the 
four “weakly bound” states illustrated in Fig. 36.5. During 
some of the transient interactions of myosin–ADP-Pi with 
actin, phosphate dissociates from myosin, and the light-
chain domain rapidly reorients (see Figs. 36.4 and 36.5). 
This stretches elastic elements in the myosin heads and 
both  thick  and  thin  filaments.  Energy  in  these  elastic 
elements  can  be  used  over  a  period  of  milliseconds  to 
displace the actin filament relative to the crossbridge and 
contract  the  muscle.  When  ADP  dissociates  from  the 
actin–myosin–ADP  intermediate,  ATP  rapidly  binds  to 
the actin–myosin complex, dissociating the crossbridge 
and starting a new ATPase cycle.

Relationship of Crossbridge Behavior to  
the Mechanical Properties of Muscle
Normally,  each  sarcomere  shortens  less  than  1 µm. 
However,  the  whole  muscle  shortens  macroscopically, 
because  it  has  thousands  of  sarcomeres  in  series.  For 

example, a human biceps muscle 20 cm long has approx-
imately  80,000  sarcomeres  in  series  from  end  to  end. 
When  each  contracts  0.25 µm,  the  muscle  shortens 
2 cm. Because the system maintains a constant volume, 
each sarcomere and the whole muscle increase in diam-
eter  as  they  shorten.  Although  the  individual  filaments 
slide past each other relatively slowly (about 2 µm s−1 in 
both halves of each sarcomere), muscles contract rapidly 
because  the  motion  of  each  sarcomere  in  the  series  is 
added together. In our example, without  resistance,  the 
biceps  contracts  approximately 3 cm in 100 ms during 
which most crossbridges pull just once.

Crossbridge  behavior  explains  why  the  velocity  of 
muscle contractions of an active muscle depends on the 
external load (Fig. 39.10). When opposed by no load the 
molecular  motion  stored  in  elastic  elements  of  each 
crossbridge is largely converted into movement of actin 
filaments  relative  to  myosin  filaments  and  contraction 
velocity  is  maximal.  Under  these  conditions,  the  fila-
ments in muscle slide past each other at a rate of about 
5 µm  s−1,  the  same  speed  observed  for  free  actin  fila-
ments moving over myosin heads in vitro (see Fig. 36.6). 
For this rapid sliding to occur, myosin heads that do not 
produce  force  must  not  impede  movement.  If  bound 
tightly to actin, they would interfere mechanically with 
rapid sliding. This is avoided by the rapid equilibrium of 
the myosin intermediates between being bound to actin 
and  being  free.  Transient  interactions  of  myosin  heads 

678 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

bound to ATP or ADP-Pi with actin do not produce force 
or retard sliding driven by force-producing crossbridges.
Muscle produces maximum force when the contrac-
tion rate is zero (Fig. 39.10). The conformational change 
in  the  myosin  head  stretches  elastic  elements  in  the 
crossbridge,  but  the  force  cannot  overcome  the  resis-
tance  from  the  load  on  the  muscle.  Consequently,  the 
filaments do not slide, and energy stored in each stretched 
elastic element is lost as heat when the crossbridge dis-
sociates at the end of the ATPase cycle. The maximum 
force depends on the numbers of sarcomeres in parallel, 
that  is,  the  cross-sectional  area  of  the  muscle.  This 
explains  why  muscles  respond  to  strengthening  exer-
cises by growing in diameter.

Regulation of Skeletal Muscle Contraction
Although  skeletal  muscle  cells  have  only  two  states—
inactive  (relaxed)  or  active  (contracting)—skeletal 
muscles produce a wide range of contractions, varying 
from  slow  and  delicate  to  rapid  and  forceful.  These 
graded  contractions  are  achieved  by  varying  the 
number of muscle cells activated by voluntary or reflex 
signals from the nervous system (Fig. 39.12).

Control of Skeletal Muscle by Motor Neurons
Neural stimuli that activate skeletal muscles arise in two 
ways  (Fig.  39.12).  In  organisms  with  well-developed 
central nervous systems, most neural signals that activate 
skeletal muscles result from conscious decisions, provid-
ing voluntary control over skeletal muscles. Other signals 

Sensory neuron

Dorsal root

Brain

Ventral root

Sensory nerve

Motor neuron

Motor nerve

Spinal
cord

Neuromuscular
junction

Skeletal
muscle cell

Sensory
muscle
spindle cell

FIGURE 39.12 
INNERVATION OF SKELETAL MUSCLE. Motor 
neurons  in  the  spinal  cord  stimulate  one  or  (usually)  more  skeletal 
muscle  cells.  Two  neural  pathways  control  motor  neurons.  Some 
stimuli come from neurons in higher centers of the brain. This pathway 
provides voluntary control over muscle contraction. Other stimuli come 
through local reflex circuits from sensory detectors, including muscle 
spindle  cells.  These  signals  help  coordinate  muscle  contraction  in 
response to changing forces on and within the muscle. 

result  from  reflex  responses  to  stimulation  of  sensory 
nerves.  Specialized  muscle  cells  innervated  with  both 
motor and sensory nerves function as stretch receptors, 
relaying  information  about  length  and  tension  back  to 
the  spinal  cord,  where  reflexes  coordinate  the  motor 
neuron  output.  Neural  inputs  from  both  sources  con-
verge on motor neurons located in the brainstem and 
spinal cord of vertebrates. Axons of these motor neurons 
branch in a muscle to contact one or more muscle cells. 
A  motor  neuron  together  with  its  target  muscle  cells 
forms  a  motor  unit.  In  the  most  precisely  controlled 
muscles,  such  as  the  extraocular  muscles  in  the  eye, 
some motor neurons innervate single muscle cells.

The contractile activity of a muscle is graded in terms 
of the speed and force of the contraction, so individual 
muscles can produce both delicate and powerful move-
ments.  Nerve  stimulation  determines  the  contractile 
force in two ways: (a) The number of active motor units 
determines how many muscle cells produce force, and 
(b)  the  rate  of  stimulation  adjusts  the  force  produced  
by active cells. Every time a muscle cell is stimulated, all 
the  sarcomeres  are  activated,  but  the  force  that  they 
produce  increases  as  the  rate  of  stimulation  increases, 
up  to  a  maximum  of  approximately  200  stimuli  per 
second.  The  shortening  velocity  of  an  active  muscle 
depends  on  the  ratio  between  force  produced  and  the 
resistance (Fig. 39.10C). If a large force or high velocity 
of contraction is required, many motor units are called  
into  action.  To  sustain  contraction,  motor  nerves  fire 
repeatedly.  By  varying  the  number  of  active  cells  in  a 
muscle and the rate of stimulation, the nervous system 
sets the force required for a particular movement.

Synaptic Transmission at Neuromuscular Junctions
The terminal branch of each motor neuron axon forms 
a large synapse called the motor end plate or neuro-
muscular  junction  on  the  muscle  surface  (see  Fig. 
17.9). These nerve endings are filled with synaptic vesi-
cles  containing  the  neurotransmitter  acetylcholine. 
Arrival  of  an  action  potential  at  the  nerve  terminal  
stimulates  fusion  of  synaptic  vesicles  with  the  nerve 
plasma membrane, releasing acetylcholine into the cleft 
between  nerve  and  muscle.  In  less  than  a  millisecond, 
acetylcholine  diffuses  across  the  extracellular  space  
and  binds  to  acetylcholine  receptors  concentrated  in  
the  adjacent  muscle  plasma  membrane.  Acetylcholine 
binding  opens  the  receptor  cation  channel,  initiating  a 
new  action  potential  that  spreads  over  the  muscle  cell 
plasma membrane and intracellularly into the T tubules.

Coupling Action Potentials to Contraction
The plasma membrane of skeletal muscle cells, like that 
of  nerve  cells,  is  excitable  (see  Fig.  17.6)  but,  unlike  
that in nerves, it invaginates deeply to form T tubules 
that  run  across  the  entire  cell  (Fig.  39.13).  Depending 
on  the  species  and  type  of  striated  muscle  (skeletal 

 

A

Plasma
membrane

Entrance to
T tubule

T tubule
Smooth

endoplasmic

reticulum

B

C. Skeletal muscle

T tubule

Smooth ER

D. Cardiac muscle 

Smooth ER

T tubule

CHAPTER 39  n  Muscles 

679

versus  cardiac),  T  tubules  may  be  located  either  at  the 
level of the Z disks or at the thick filament ends. Inside 
the muscle cell, T tubules interact extensively with the 
smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER) surrounding each 
myofibril. Historically, this SER was called sarcoplasmic 
reticulum. Terminal cisternae of SER are closely associ-
ated  with  T  tubules  at  foot  processes  that  can  be  
visualized by electron microscopy. Together, T tubules 
and  SER  constitute  a  signal-transducing  apparatus  that  
converts  depolarizations  of  the  plasma  membrane  
into  a  spike  of  cytoplasmic  Ca2+  to  trigger  contraction 
(Fig. 39.14).

transduction  process 

An  action  potential  moving  through  a  T  tubule  trig-
gers the release of Ca2+ from SER into the cytoplasm (Fig. 
39.14). Ca2+ binding to troponin allows myosin to inter-
act  with  the  thin  filament,  initiating  contraction.  This 
is  called  excitation–
signal 
contraction coupling. Three transmembrane proteins 
located  in  the  T  tubule  and  the  terminal  cisternae  of  
the SER cooperate to generate the transient Ca2+ signal 
(Fig. 39.14).
1.  A voltage-sensitive calcium channel (see Chapter 16) 
senses action potentials in the T tubule. These chan-
nels are called dihydropyridine (DHP) receptors, 
owing  to  their  affinity  for  this  class  of  drugs.  The 
actual Ca2+ channel of DHP receptors is not essential 
for skeletal muscle contraction, as external Ca2+ is not 
required for contraction in the short term.

2.  Ca2+  release  channels  (see  Fig.  26.13),  concentrated 
in the terminal cisternae of SER, release Ca2+ into the 
cytoplasm. A drug called ryanodine binds these chan-
nels  and  inhibits  Ca2+  release.  Every  second  ryano-
dine  receptor  is  connected  to  cytoplasmic  loops 
of  four  DHP  receptors,  forming  bridges  called  foot 
processes between the T tubule and the endoplasmic 
reticulum (Fig. 39.13B).

FIGURE  39.13  PLASMA  MEMBRANE  SPECIALIZATIONS  OF 
STRIATED MUSCLES. A–B, Electron micrographs of thin sections of 
fish skeletal muscle showing plasma membrane invaginations called T 
tubules, which cross the whole muscle cell and associate closely with 
smooth endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The complex of a T tubule with 
smooth ER on both sides is called a triad. A, A longitudinal section of 
two T tubules. B, A cross section of a T tubule flanked on two sides 
by smooth ER. Foot processes, consisting of voltage-sensitive calcium 
channels in the T tubule paired with calcium release channels in the 
ER, connect the T tubule to the smooth ER (see Fig. 39.14 for molecu-
lar details). C–D, The three-dimensional arrangement of T tubules and 
smooth ER relative to the sarcomeres in skeletal and cardiac muscle. 
(A–B,  Courtesy  C.  Franzini-Armstrong  and  K.  Porter,  University  of 
Pennsylvania.)

3.  The  P-type  calcium-ATPase  (see  Fig.  14.7)  actively 
pumps  Ca2+  from  cytoplasm  into  the  endoplasmic 
reticulum  against  a  concentration  gradient  greater 
than  104.  Inside  the  SER  several  low-affinity,  high-
capacity  Ca2+-binding  proteins  buffer  the  millimolar 
concentration  of  Ca2+.  For  example,  numerous  car-
boxyl  groups  on  the  surface  of  calsequestrin  bind  
Ca2+ with a millimolar Kd. This rapidly reversible reac-
tion increases the Ca2+ storage capacity of endoplas-
mic  reticulum  without  sacrificing  the  speed  of  Ca2+ 
release.  Accessory  subunits  anchor  calsequestrin  to 
Ca2+ release channels, ensuring a local supply of Ca2+ 
for release into cytoplasm when muscle is activated.
An action potential in a T tubule results in a transient 
rise  in  cytoplasmic  Ca2+,  from  0.1 µM  to  about  2 µM 
(Fig.  39.15),  as  follows.  The  action  potential  causes  a 
short-lived conformational change in the DHP receptors 
that is transmitted mechanically to associated ryanodine 
receptor  Ca2+  release  channels.  Many  Ca2+  channels 
open transiently, allowing Ca2+ to diffuse down the steep 

680 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

A. Skeletal muscle

MYOFIBRIL

B. Cardiac muscle

∆V

T TUBULE

Voltage-
sensitive
channel

SER

Ca2+

Ca2+

SER

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

∆V

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

ADP
ATP
Ca2+

ATP
ADP

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

∆V

ADP
ATP
Ca2+

Ca2+

∆V

ADP
ATP
Ca2+

FIGURE 39.14  MECHANISM OF CALCIUM RELEASE IN SKELETAL AND CARDIAC MUSCLES. Both muscle types use voltage-sensitive 
calcium channels in the T tubule membranes and calcium release channels in the smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER). A, Direct coupling in 
skeletal muscle. An action potential in the T tubule (ΔV) activates the voltage sensor (turning from gray to blue). This direct contact opens the 
calcium release channel (turning from gray to pink). Cytoplasmic Ca2+ levels rise only briefly because calcium–ATPase (adenosine triphosphatase) 
pumps Ca2+ back into the lumen of the SER. B, Calcium-induced Ca2+ release in cardiac muscle. An action potential opens the voltage-sensitive 
Ca2+ channel in the T tubule, releasing Ca2+ into the cytoplasm. This Ca2+ opens the calcium release channel in the SER. ADP, adenosine diphos-
phate; ATP, adenosine triphosphate. 

concentration gradient from the SER lumen to the cyto-
plasm.  Physical  connections  between  ryanodine  recep-
tors  may  spread  their  activation  laterally,  ensuring 
synchronous activation of a patch of channels.

After a single action potential, the free Ca2+ in the cyto-
plasm rises for only a few milliseconds for three reasons. 
First, Ca2+ release channels close quickly. Second, cyto-
plasmic  Ca2+  binds  to  troponin  C  and  other  proteins. 
Third, Ca2+ pumps efficiently transport cytoplasmic Ca2+ 
back into the lumen of the SER, even before the muscle 
develops maximum force. Ca2+ pumps are continuously 
active, keeping the cytoplasmic Ca2+ concentration low. 

This  is  why  repeated  action  potentials  are  required  to 
prolong the rise in cytoplasmic Ca2+ (Fig. 39.15B).

Transduction of the Calcium Spike Into Contraction
Troponin–tropomyosin  on  thin  filaments  cooperates 
with myosin to turn on contraction in response to a Ca2+ 
spike.  At  rest,  two  Ca2+-binding  sites  of  fast  skeletal 
muscle  troponin  C  are  largely  unoccupied  (owing  to 
their  low  affinity  for  Ca2+  and  the  low  Ca2+  concentra-
tion).  As  a  result,  the  troponin–tropomyosin  complex 
partially  blocks  the  binding  site  for  myosin  heads  on 
actin (Fig. 39.16). This prevents most of the weak-binding 

 

A. Twitch

Stimulus

+
2
a
C

B. Tetanus

Stimulus

+
2
a
C

Force

Ca2+

Milliseconds

F
o
r
c
e

F
o
r
c
e

Force

Ca2+

Milliseconds

FIGURE  39.15  CA2+  TRIGGERS  CONTRACTION  OF  SKELE-
TAL  MUSCLE.  In  these  experiments,  the  Ca2+-sensitive  protein 
aequorin was injected into live muscle cells to provide a signal for the 
cytoplasmic Ca2+ concentration. A, Single stimulus. Cytoplasmic Ca2+ 
concentration  increases  transiently,  followed  by  a  short  contraction. 
This brief contraction persists after cytoplasmic Ca2+ decreases to the 
resting level. B, Multiple stimuli. Each stimulus releases a new pulse 
of Ca2+, prolonging the contraction in so-called tetanus. (For reference, 
see  Ridgway  EB,  Ashley  CC.  Calcium  transients  in  single  muscle 
fibers. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1967;29:229–234.)

A

B

CHAPTER 39  n  Muscles 

681

e
tiv
c
A

e
tiv
c
a
 
tially

r
a
P

d
e
x
ela
R

Myosin-
binding site

Relaxed

Partially active

Active

myosin  intermediates  with  ATP  or  ADP-Pi  in  the  active 
site from binding the thin filament. When released into 
cytoplasm,  Ca2+  binds  troponin  C,  causing  a  conforma-
tional  change  that  creates  a  binding  site  for  a  helical 
region of TNI. This interaction attracts the C-terminus of 
TNI away from actin and tropomyosin, allowing a small 
shift in the position of tropomyosin on the thin filament. 
This  shift  increases  the  probability  that  myosin-ADP-Pi 
heads  will  bind  to  the  thin  filament,  dissociating  their 
bound Pi and producing force. Activation is cooperative  
for  three  reasons:  Ca2+  must  occupy  both  binding  sites 
on  troponin  C,  the  effects  of  Ca2+  binding  and  myosin 
binding  are  transmitted  to  neighboring  tropomyosins 
through their end-to-end attachments, and every myosin 
that binds accentuates the response. This cooperativity 
makes the on–off switch respond very sharply to a rela-
tively small, 10- to 20-fold change in the cytoplasmic Ca2+ 
concentration.  The  efficiency  of  this  switch  is  under-
scored  by  the  fact  that  the  energy  consumption  of  a 
muscle  cell  increases  more  than  1000-fold  when  it  is 
activated. Activation of slow skeletal muscle (Table 39.3) 
and cardiac muscle is less cooperative, as their troponin 
C has only one Ca2+-binding site.

Note  that  the  muscle  produces  force  well  after  the 
cytoplasmic Ca2+ concentration returns to resting levels 
(Fig. 39.15). The Ca2+-sensitive switch is sharp but rela-
tively slow owing to the slow response of thin filaments 

FIGURE  39.16  THIN  FILAMENT  ACTIVATION  MECHANISM. 
Reconstructions from electron micrographs showing a short segment 
of  thin  filament  (A)  and  a  cross  section  of  a  thin  filament  (B).  Ca2+ 
binding to troponin C partially activates the filament by moving tropo-
myosin away from its lateral position in relaxed muscle, where it over-
laps  the  myosin-binding  site  on  actin  (red).  Myosin  binding  to  the 
partially activated filament shoves tropomyosin further out of the way 
into the active position. (Data from W. Lehman, Boston University, MA.)

to  Ca2+  binding.  Ca2+  binds  troponin  C  rapidly  (milli-
seconds)  but  dissociates  slowly  (tens  of  milliseconds). 
Thus, after the Ca2+ spike saturates troponin C and the 
thin  filament  turns  on,  the  muscle  remains  active  even 
after  free  Ca2+  has  returned  to  resting  levels.  Force 
declines slowly as Ca2+ dissociates from troponin C and 
returns to the SER without raising the cytoplasmic Ca2+ 
concentration.

A single action potential produces a short contractile 
“twitch” (Fig. 39.15). Maximum contractile force is pro-
duced  by  a  series  of  closely  spaced  action  potentials, 
leading to a sustained rise in cytoplasmic Ca2+ and pro-
longed activation of actomyosin. The extended contrac-
tion is called tetanus.

Regulation by Myosin Light Chains
The participation of skeletal muscle myosin light chains 
in  the  regulation  of  contraction  varies  among  species. 
The skeletal muscles of mollusks are one extreme. Their 

682 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

TABLE 39.1  Sarcomere Proteins of Vertebrate Striated Muscles
Name
Thick Filament
Myosin

ATPase, coiled-coil

Size (kD)

2 × 200

Domains

Functions

Regulatory light chain
Essential light chain
Myosin-binding protein C
Titin

2 × 19
2 × 18 or 25
141
3700

EF-hands
EF-hands
Ig, FNIII
FNIII, IgC2, kinase

IgC2, FNIII

IgC2, FNIII

Coiled-coil

EF-hands

2 × 43
165

185

43
2 × 35

18
21
31
43

M Line
MM-creatine phosphokinase
M protein

Myomesin (skelemin)
Thin Filament
Actin
Tropomyosin

Troponin C
Troponin I
Troponin T
Tropomodulin

Nebulin
Z Disk
α-Actinin

CapZ

Desmin

Disease Manifestations

HCM, HF, arrhythmias

HCM, arrhythmias
HCM, arrhythmias
HCM, DCM, arrhythmias
DCM, HF, muscular dystrophy

Motor, backbone of 

thick filament

Stabilizes lever arm
Stabilizes lever arm
Stabilizes thick filament
Elastic connection from 

Z disk to M line

Glycolytic enzyme
M-line fast skeletal 

muscle

Link M-disk to desmin

None yet known

Thin filaments backbone
Blocks myosin binding 

DCM, HF, myopathies
HCM, DCM, arrhythmias, myopathies

to actin filament

Calcium-binding
Inhibitory component
Tropomyosin binding
Caps actin filament 

pointed end

DCM likely
HCM, arrhythmias, myopathies
HCM, DCM, arrhythmias, myopathies
None yet known

500–900

185 × 35 residues

Binds thin filament

Nemaline myopathy

2 × 100

31 + 32

2 × 53.5

Actin-binding, 

spectrin repeats

Crosslinks thin filaments 

Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis

in the Z disk

Caps actin filament 

None yet known

barbed end

Intermediate filament

Anchors Z disk

DCM, myopathy

DCM, dilated cardiomyopathy; EF, calcium-binding helices E and F of calmodulin; FN, fibronectin; HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; HF, heart failure; 
Ig, immunoglobulin; MLCK, myosin light-chain kinase.

myosin light chains bind Ca2+ and provide the main on–
off switch for contraction. When the Ca2+ concentration 
is  low  in  resting  muscle,  no  Ca2+  binds  to  light  chains, 
and the actin–myosin ATPase is off. Ca2+ that is released 
during  activation  binds  to  the  light  chains,  turning  on 
the  ATPase  and  contraction.  At  the  other  extreme,  the 
light chains of vertebrate skeletal muscle myosin do not 
bind Ca2+, but their phosphorylation modulates contrac-
tile activity by increasing force production at suboptimal 
Ca2+  concentrations.  Horseshoe  crab  skeletal  muscle 
uses a dual system: Ca2+ binding to troponin–tropomyosin 
on thin filaments and Ca2+-regulated phosphorylation of 
myosin light chains both stimulate contraction.

Specialized Skeletal Muscle Cells
All skeletal muscle cells are built on the same principles, 
but  vertebrates  actually  have  several  different  types  of 
skeletal muscle cells, each with distinct isoforms of con-
tractile protein and metabolic enzymes. The six myosin 
heavy chains and three actin isoforms are coded by dif-
ferent  genes.  In  contrast,  alternative  splicing  of  one 

TABLE 39.2  Muscle Cell Types
Physiological Type

Myosin Type

Fast, white
Intermediate
Fast, red
Slow, red

Fast
Fast
Fast
Slow

Mitochondria

Fatigue

Few
Medium
Many
Many

Rapid
Medium
Slow
Slow

primary transcript (see Fig. 16.6) creates more than 50 
isoforms  of  troponin  T.  Mutations  in  the  genes  for 
myosin, actin, desmin, nebulin, tropomyosin, troponin-I, 
and troponin-T can each cause defects in human skeletal 
muscles (Table 39.1).

Physiological properties, such as the speed of contrac-
tion and the rate of fatigue, provide criteria for classify-
ing  muscle  cells  (Table  39.2).  The  isoforms  of  myosin 
(and probably the other contractile proteins) determine 
the speed of contraction, whereas the content of mito-
chondria  and  the  oxygen-carrying  protein  myoglobin 

 

CHAPTER 39  n  Muscles 

683

determines  the  endurance  and  overall  color  of  the 
muscle. White muscle cells depend largely on glycolysis 
to  supply  ATP,  accounting  for  their  rapid  fatigue  com-
pared  with  red  muscle  cells,  which  are  specialized  for 
oxidative  metabolism  with  abundant  mitochondria  and 
myoglobin.

Some muscles consist of only fast-twitch white muscle 
cells or slow-twitch red muscle cells, but most muscles 
are mixtures of two or more cell types. For example, in 
chickens,  the  leg  muscles  that  are  responsible  for  sup-
porting the body, walking, and maintaining balance over 
long periods of time are rich in red muscle cells (“dark” 
meat). On the other hand, the chicken breast muscles, 
used for energetic flapping of the wings for short periods, 
are mainly white muscle cells (“light” meat).

Remarkably, the pattern of nerve stimulation deter-
mines the muscle cell type by controlling which genes 
are  expressed  (and,  presumably,  how  the  troponin  T 
messenger  RNA  is  processed).  This  was  demonstrated  
by  transplanting  motor  nerves  between  fast  and  slow 
muscles. Over a period of weeks, slow isoforms replaced 
fast  isoforms  and  vice  versa.  Even  more  surprising,  
the  same  result  is  achieved  by  stimulating  muscles  
electrically  with  fast  or  slow  patterns  of  impulses. 
Chronic  low-level  stimulation  biases  gene  expression 
toward the proteins that are found in slow muscle cells.
Calcium and calmodulin provide one prominent link 
between activity and gene expression. The concentration 
of active calmodulin tracks with the pattern of stimula-
tion,  because  Ca2+  is  released  in  the  cytoplasm  each 
time  a  muscle  contracts.  Among  other  things,  calcium-
calmodulin activates protein phosphatase PP2b (calcineu-
rin; see Fig. 25.6), which dephosphorylates transcription 
factors  (see  Fig.  10.21).  These  activated  transcription 
factors  move  into  the  nucleus  and  help  to  establish  a 
transcription  program  that  turns  on  expression  of  pro-
teins  found  in  slow  muscles.  These  include  contractile 
proteins and enzymes for oxidative metabolism.

The  proportions  of  slow  and  fast  muscle  cells  are 
determined genetically, so world-class sprinters (with a 
high  proportion  of  fast,  white  fibers)  and  marathoners 
(with a high proportion of slow, red fibers) are born with 
advantages  for  their  specialties.  Training  can  lead  to 
hypertrophy of specific muscle cell types and improved 
performance.  Endurance  training  also 
leads  to  an 
increased  proportion  of  slow  cells.  Without  training, 
muscle strength declines with age; cell number remains 
constant, but each cell decreases in size.

Structural Proteins of the Plasma Membrane:  
Defects in Muscular Dystrophies
In  addition  to  providing  a  permeability  barrier,  the 
plasma  membrane  of  the  muscle  cell  must  maintain  its 
integrity  while  being  subjected  to  years  of  forceful  
contractions.  Occasional  breaches  of  the  membrane  
are  inevitable,  so  muscle  cells  also  depend  on  a  repair 

process that reseals holes. If membrane damage exceeds 
the repair capacity, muscle cells degenerate locally (seg-
mental  necrosis)  or  globally.  Cell  death  beyond  the 
ability  of  muscle  stem  cells  to  regenerate  the  tissue 
results in muscular dystrophy.

The  proteins  that  stabilize  muscle  membranes  were 
discovered  in  the  late  1980s,  when  mutations  in  the 
dystrophin  gene  on  the  X-chromosome  were  linked 
to  Duchenne  muscular  dystrophy,  the  most  common 
human  form  of  the  disease.  Dystrophin  is  an  enor-
mous  member  of  the  α-actinin  superfamily  of  actin-
binding  proteins  (see  Fig.  33.17).  The  dystroglycan–
sarcoglycan complex (Fig. 39.17 and Table 39.3) was 
found when it copurified with dystrophin after solubiliz-
ing the membrane with detergents.

More  than  40  proteins  are  required  to  maintain  the 
integrity  of  the  plasma  membrane  as  shown  by  muta-
tions  that  cause  muscular  dystrophies  (Table  39.3). 
Disease-causing  mutations  in  genes  for  proteins  of  the 
dystroglycan–sarcoglycan complex typically lead to sec-
ondary loss of the other proteins in the complex. O-linked 
glycosylation  by  Golgi  apparatus  glycosyltransferases  is 

A
A

B
B

C

Laminin

Sarcoglycan
complex
Sarcospan

Plasma membrane

Dystrophin

Actin filament

Dystroglycan
complex

Syntrophin
complex

FIGURE  39.17  DYSTROPHIN  AND  ASSOCIATED  PROTEINS 
STABILIZE THE PLASMA MEMBRANE OF SKELETAL MUSCLE. 
A–B, Fluorescent antibody staining of cross sections of human skeletal 
muscle showing the localization of dystrophin at the plasma membrane 
of a normal individual (A) and its absence in an individual with Duch-
enne muscular dystrophy (B). C, Model of the transmembrane complex 
of  proteins  that  links  dystrophin  and  actin  filaments  in  cytoplasm  to 
laminin in the basal lamina outside the cell. (A–B, Courtesy L. Kunkel, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA. C, Based on a drawing by K. 
Amann and J. Ervasti, University of Wisconsin, Madison.)

684 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

Partners/Functions

Expression

β-Dystroglycan, actin
β-Dystroglycan, actin
Dystrophin
Dystrophin, utrophin

TABLE 39.3  Proteins Required to Stabilize and Repair Muscle Plasma Membranes
Protein
Membrane Skeleton
Dystrophin
Utrophin
α-Syntrophins
β-Syntrophins
Transmembrane Proteins
Caveolin-3
α-Dystroglycan
β-Dystroglycan
α-Sarcoglycan
β-Sarcoglycan
γ-Sarcoglycan
Integrin α7
Extracellular Matrix
Collagen VI α1, α2, α3

Cholesterol
Laminin, agrin
Dystrophin, utrophin
Sarcoglycans, biglycan
Sarcoglycans
Sarcoglycans, biglycan
Laminin

Muscle
Many tissues
Many tissues
Muscle
Muscle
Muscle
Many tissues

Muscle, brain
Muscle, other tissues
Muscle > other tissues
Muscle > other tissues

Muscle, other tissues

Biglycan

Myosin, Z-disk
α-actinin, Z-disk

α-Dystroglycan
α-Dystroglycan, AChR

α2-Laminin
Agrin
Sarcomeric Proteins
Titin
Myotilin
Golgi Enzymes That Process Membrane and ECM Proteins
Fukutin
LARGE
POMGnT1
POMTi
Membrane Repair Machinery
Dysferlin
Nuclear Envelope Proteins
Emerin
Lamin A/C

Glycosyltransferase
Glycosyltransferase
Glycosyltransferase
O-mannosyltransferase

Lamins, actin
Nuclear envelope

Muscle, other tissues
Muscle

Muscle
Muscle

Many tissues
Many tissues
Many tissues
Many tissues

Muscle

All cells
All cells

Inheritance, Diseases

X-linked, DMD, BMD

None detected in humans
None detected in humans

AD, LGMD
Embryonic lethal
Embryonic lethal
AR, LGMD, cardiomyopathy
AR, LGMD
AR, LGMD
AR, CMD

AD, Bethlem myopathy, Ulrich 

syndrome

AR, CMD, dy/dy mouse
Null mouse perinatal lethal

AR, LGMD, tibial MD
AR, LGMD

AR, Fukuyama CMD
AR, CMD
AR, Muscle eye brain disease
AR, Walker-Warburg syndrome

AR, LGMD, Miyoshi myopathy

XR, Emery-Dreifuss MD
AD/AR, LGMD, Emery-Dreifuss MD

AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; BMD, Becker muscular dystrophy; CMD, childhood muscular dystrophy; DMD, Duchenne muscular 
dystrophy; dy, dystrophia muscularis; ECM, extracellular matrix; LGMD, limb-girdle muscular dystrophy; MD, muscular dystrophy.

required  for  dystroglycan  to  bind  to  its  extracellular 
ligands including α2-laminin in the basal lamina. Proteins 
in  cytoplasmic  vesicles  are  used  to  repair  damaged 
plasma  membranes.  The  mechanical  activity  of  muscle 
cells might make them more sensitive than other cells to 
deficiencies  in  proteins  that  support  the  nuclear  enve-
lope (lamin A/C and emerin). Some of these mutations 
also affect the nervous system.

Other than the X-linked dystrophin mutations, muta-
tions causing muscular dystrophies are usually autosomal 
recessive. About one in several thousand humans devel-
ops  some  form  of  muscular  dystrophy,  because  they 
inherit mutations in both copies of one of the sensitive 
genes.  The  mechanism  of  disease  in  muscular  dystro-
phies  is  similar  to  that  in  hereditary  spherocytosis,  in 
which deficiencies of the membrane skeleton make red 
blood  cells  susceptible  to  mechanical  damage  (see  Fig. 

13.11). The age of onset and clinical features of inherited 
muscular  dystrophies  depend  on  the  molecular  defect. 
Patients with severe defects develop progressive muscle 
weakness  as  children.  Ultimately,  failure  of  respiratory 
muscles is fatal.

Dystroglycans  and  a  dystrophin  homolog,  utrophin, 
participate  in  clustering  acetylcholine  receptors  at  the 
neuromuscular junction, the chemical synapse between 
motor  neurons  and  skeletal  muscle  (see  Fig.  17.9).  
When,  during  development,  a  motor  neuron  contacts 
the surface of its target muscle cell, the neuron secretes 
a proteoglycan called agrin, which is incorporated into 
the adjacent basal lamina. Agrin binds dystroglycan and 
a  receptor  tyrosine  kinase  in  the  muscle  plasma  mem-
brane, which position associated acetylcholine receptors 
at the site where they receive acetylcholine secreted by 
the nerve in response to an action potential.

 

CHAPTER 39  n  Muscles 

685

Cell A
Cell A

Cell B
Cell B

Sarcomere

Intercalated disk

Gap junction

FIGURE 39.18  ELECTRON MICROGRAPHS OF A LONGITUDINAL SECTION OF TWO CARDIAC MUSCLE CELLS. Sarcomeres are 
similar  to  skeletal  muscle.  Intercalated  disks  anchor  neighboring  cells  together,  and  gap  junctions  couple  the  cells  electrically.  (Courtesy  D.W. 
Fawcett, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.)

Cardiac Muscle
To  maintain  the  circulation  of  blood,  heart  muscle  is 
specialized  for  repetitive  (~100,000  times  per  day), 
fatigue-free  contractions  driven  at  regular  intervals  by 
action  potentials  from  specialized  pace-making  cells 
within the heart. Gap junctions allow these action poten-
tials to spread from one muscle cell to the next. Unlike 
skeletal  muscle,  the  heart  does  not  regenerate  after 
injury,  so  efforts  are  being  made  to  reprogram  cardiac 
cells to recapitulate their normal development.

Contractile Apparatus of Cardiac Muscle
The  architecture  of  the  sarcomeres  is  very  similar  in 
cardiac and skeletal muscle, but cardiac muscle has more 
mitochondria, larger T tubules, and less SER (Fig. 39.18). 
The human atrium has one major myosin isoform. Two 
ventricular myosin isoforms (one shared with slow skel-
etal muscle) differ in ATPase activity and speed of con-
traction. Humans almost exclusively express only one of 
these isoforms. Myosin-binding protein C binds at inter-
vals along the backbone of the thick filaments, interacts 
with actin, and modulates the myosin cross-bridges. The 
thin  filaments  are  composed  of  a  cardiac  isoform  of α-
actin,  tropomyosin,  troponin,  and  a  smaller  version  of 
nebulin called nebulette. When the cells are damaged by 
a heart attack or other disease, these proteins leak into 
the blood. Cardiac isoforms TNI and TNT in blood are a 
sensitive measure for cellular damage.

Short, modestly branched, cardiac muscle cells have 
centrally located nuclei and squared-off ends (Fig. 39.1) 
where  cadherins  (see  Fig.  30.5)  attach  neighboring  
cells  to  each  other  at  specialized  adhesive  junctions 
called intercalated disks (Fig. 39.18). These junctions 
have  features  of  both  adherens  junctions  (links  to  

Atrioventricular
node

Sinoatrial
node

L

R

Atria

Bundle
of His

Ventricles

Purkinje
fibers

FIGURE 39.19  ACTIVATION OF CARDIAC CONTRACTION. An 
action potential (yellow arrows) starts at the sinoatrial node and travels 
through  atrial  muscle  cells  to  the  atrioventricular  node.  After  a  short 
delay at the atrioventricular node, the action potential spreads through 
the  interventricular  septum  in  modified  cardiac  muscle  cells,  called 
Purkinje fibers, and then through muscle cells to the whole ventricle. 
The  action  potential  follows  the  same  path  each  time,  giving  rise  to 
electrical signals that can be detected on the body surface by electro-
cardiogram. Damage during myocardial infarctions changes the elec-
trocardiographic pattern and may cause arrhythmias. 

actin filaments) and desmosomes (links to intermediate 
filaments).

Pacemaker Cells
Intrinsically  excitable  pacemaker  cells  in  the  sino-
atrial  node  drive  rhythmic  contractions  of  the  heart 
(Fig. 39.19). The membrane potential of these cells drifts 
spontaneously  toward  threshold,  setting  off  action 
potentials  about  once  each  second  (Box  39.1).  Each 

686 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

BOX 39.1  Action Potentials in Cardiac Pacemaker Cells

Spontaneous action potentials of cardiac pacemaker cells in 
the  sinoatrial  node  are  more  complicated  than  those  of 
nerves (Fig. 39.20). Seven different plasma membrane chan-
nels determine their frequency:
1.  Voltage-gated Na+ channels. As in nerves, these channels 
rapidly activate at membrane potentials above threshold 
and then rapidly inactivate.

0

-15

-30

-45

-70

V
o
l
t
a
g
e
 
(

m
V

)

2

3
1

7

4

2

3
1

7

4

100

200

300

400

Time (msec)

Na+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Na+

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Voltage-gated
Na+-channel

T-type voltage-gated
Ca2+-channel

L-type voltage-gated
Ca2+-channel

Voltage-gated
delayed-rectifier
K+-channel (HERG)

Kir3.1 inward-
rectifier K+-channel

Kir6.2 inward-
rectifier K+-channel

Nonselective
K+/ Na+-channel

1 µm

 i
]
+
2
a
C

[

0

0

A

K+

K+

K+

K+

B

FIGURE  39.20  MECHANISM  OF  SPONTANEOUS  CARDIAC 
PACEMAKER  ACTION  POTENTIALS.  Sequential  activation  and 
inactivation of seven different plasma membrane channels account for 
the  time  course  of  action  potentials  and  cytoplasmic  Ca2+  transients 
in pacemaker cells of the sinoatrial node. A, Time courses of the fluc-
tuations  in  membrane  potential  (orange)  and  cytoplasmic  Ca2+  con-
centration  (blue).  Colored  boxes  indicate  when  the  various  channels 
enumerated  in  part  B  are  open.  Kir3.1  and  Kir6.2  are  inactive  under 
these conditions. B, Channels contributing to pacemaker activity. 

2.  T-type,  voltage-gated  Ca2+  channels.  These 

low-
conductance  channels  activate  transiently  at  membrane 
potentials more negative than Na+ channels, about −70 mV.
3.  L-type,  voltage-gated  Ca2+  channels.  These  high-
conductance  channels  slowly  activate  and  inactivate 
when the membrane depolarizes to about −40 mV. Sym-
pathetic  nerve  stimulation  sensitizes  these  channels  to 
membrane depolarization. Drugs called dihydropyridines 
block these channels.

4.  Delayed-rectifier, voltage-gated K+ channels. As in nerves, 
these  HERG  channels  activate  and  inactivate  slowly  
in  response  to  membrane  depolarization.  Sympathetic 
nerves stimulate these channels.

5.  Kir3.1  inward-rectifier  K+  channels.  These  channels 
conduct K+ over a limited range of membrane potential, 
between about −30 and −80 mV. Parasympathetic nerve 
stimulation activates these channels.

6.  Kir6.2  inward-rectifier  K+  channels.  Normal  levels  of 
cytoplasmic  ATP  inhibit  these  channels.  Depletion  of 
cytoplasmic ATP activates these channels.

7.  Nonselective  K+/Na+  channels.  Repolarization  of  the 
these  HCN  (hyperpolarization- 
membrane  activates 
activated cyclic nucleotide-gated) channels, which slowly 
depolarize the membrane.

Acting  together,  these  channels  produce  a  spontaneous 
cycle of pacemaker action potentials. At the threshold poten-
tial  (about  −40  mV),  voltage-gated  Na+  channels  open  syn-
chronously  and  rapidly  depolarize  the  membrane.  As  they 
inactivate, L-type Ca2+ channels open, prolonging the depo-
larization and admitting Ca2+; this, in turn, triggers contrac-
tion by releasing more Ca2+ from internal stores (Fig. 39.14B). 
As these Ca2+ channels slowly inactivate, delayed-rectifier K+ 
channels open and drive the membrane potential toward EK, 
the  K+  equilibrium  potential.  As  the  membrane  potential 
reaches a minimum, delayed-rectifier K+ channels inactivate, 
but  the  two  Kir  channels  open.  In  the  absence  of  other 
channel activity, the membrane potential would remain near 
EK, but the nonselective Na+/K+ channels open and the mem-
brane  slowly  depolarizes,  drifting  toward  threshold.  T-type 
Ca2+ channels contribute to the slow, spontaneous depolar-
ization. At threshold, the cycle repeats.

Channels similar to those in the sinoatrial node generates 
action potentials in cardiac muscle cells and stimulate con-
traction.  Cardiac  muscle  cells  can  generate  spontaneous 
action potentials, but they have fewer T-type Ca2+ channels 
and more Kir K+ channels, so the rate of spontaneous action 
potentials is lower than that of pacemaker cells. Except in 
disease, pacemaker cells drive action potentials throughout 
the rest of the heart. Later in life, cells in the pulmonary veins 
can also generate action potentials. This is one cause of atrial 
fibrillation, a common arrhythmia in older humans.

action  potential  spreads  from  cell  to  cell  through  gap 
junctions (see Fig. 31.6), activating all cells in the atrium 
within a few hundred milliseconds. After a brief delay in 
the  atrioventricular  node,  the  action  potential  and 
contraction  spreads  from  cell  to  cell  through  the  ven-
tricle.  This  highly  reproducible  pattern  of  electrical 

activity  can  be  recorded  on  the  surface  of  the  body  as 
an electrocardiogram.

Mutations  in  six  different  human  ion  channel  genes 
including  voltage-gated  sodium  channels  (SCN5A)  and 
potassium  channels  (HERG,  KVLAT1,  and  minK)  cause 
disorders  of  cardiac  muscle  electrophysiology.  These 

 

CHAPTER 39  n  Muscles 

687

A. Sympathetic stimulus
Norepinephrine

B. Parasympathetic stimulus

Ca2+

K+

Acetylcholine

β-Adrenergic
receptor

Adenylyl
cyclase

L-type

Ca-channel

Kir 3.1

K-channel

Muscarinic Ach
receptor

     D
Gαs

     T
Gαs
Activates

Inhibits

ATP

cAMP

Active
PKA

Inactive

PKA

Gβγ+

     T
Gα ι Gα ιβγ

     D

FIGURE 39.21  Regulation of the rate of cardiac pacemaker cells by sympathetic (A) and parasympathetic (B) nerves. GTP-Gαs stimulates 
adenylyl cyclase. GTP-Gαi inhibits adenylyl cyclase. D is GDP associated with G protein α-subunits; T is GTP. Ach, acetylcholine; cAMP, cyclic 
adenosine monophosphate; GDP, guanosine diphosphate; GTP, guanosine triphosphate; PKA, protein kinase A. 

inherited diseases are called long-QT syndrome because 
the  interval  between  the  initial  depolarization  of  the 
muscle  cells  and  their  relaxation  is  prolonged.  This 
change  predisposes  the  person  to  abnormal  cardiac 
rhythms that are potentially fatal.

Excitation Contraction Coupling
As 
in  skeletal  muscle,  plasma  membrane  action 
potentials  stimulate  cardiac  muscle  cells  to  contract 
by  releasing  cytoplasmic  Ca2+  to  activate  troponin-
tropomyosin (Fig. 39.14B). Calcium ATPase pumps (see 
Fig. 14.7) in SER and plasma membrane maintain the low 
cytoplasmic  Ca2+  concentration  with  some  help  from 
plasma membrane Na+/Ca2+ antiporters.

In both cardiac and skeletal muscle action potentials 
activate  L-type  voltage-sensitive  Ca2+  channels  (DHP 
receptors) in T tubules, but subsequent events differ as 
revealed by a requirement for extracellular Ca2+ in heart 
but not skeletal muscle (Fig. 39.14). Rather than interact-
ing  directly  with  ryanodine  receptors  as  in  skeletal 
muscle,  the  active  cardiac  L-type  voltage-sensitive  Ca2+ 
channels  admit  extracellular  Ca2+.  This  opens  nearby 
ryanodine receptors in the SER, releasing a flood of Ca2+ 
to  trigger  contraction.  This  is  called  calcium-induced 
calcium release.

Excitation-contraction  coupling  can  be  defective 
when  heart  muscle  cells  grow  larger  in  response  to 
abnormal  demands,  such  as  high  blood  pressure.  The 
defect may be explained by growth separating T tubules 
from  SER,  either  physically  or  functionally,  thereby 
decreasing  the  probability  that  Ca2+  entering  through 
DHP  receptors  will  trigger  Ca2+  release  from  the  endo-
plasmic reticulum.

Seven-Helix Receptors and Trimeric G-Proteins 
Regulate Heart Rate and Contractility
Motor  nerves  do  not  stimulate  cardiac  muscle  directly. 
Instead,  molecules  secreted  by  autonomic  nerves  
and  the  adrenal  gland  modulate  the  rate  and  force  of 

contraction  (Fig.  39.21).  Acetylcholine  from  parasym-
pathetic  nerves  slows  the  heartbeat,  whereas  norepi-
nephrine from sympathetic nerves and epinephrine 
from the adrenal gland speed the rate and increase the 
strength  of  contraction  (Fig.  39.21).  These  neurotrans-
mitters  target  channels  indirectly  by  activating  two  
different  seven-helix  receptors  and  their  associated  
trimeric  G-proteins  (see  Fig.  25.9).  The  resting  
rate reflects a compromise in the competition between 
these two inputs.

Norepinephrine  and  epinephrine  increase  the  heart 
rate and force of contraction by modulating L-type Ca2+ 
channels (Fig. 39.21A). Both bind β-adrenergic receptors 
that  activate  trimeric  G  proteins,  which  stimulate  the 
production of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) 
by  adenylyl  cyclase  (see  Fig.  26.2).  cAMP  activates 
protein  kinase  A  (PKA)  (see  Fig.  25.3)  that  phosphory-
lates  three  types  of  channels.  Phosphorylated  L-type, 
voltage-gated  Ca2+  channels  are  more  likely  to  open  in 
response  to  membrane  depolarization  and  admit  more 
Ca2+  to  activate  the  contractile  machinery  more  fully. 
Phosphorylated  nonspecific  HCN  (hyperpolarization-
activated cyclic nucleotide-gated) cation channels push 
the membrane potential toward threshold. Both increase 
the  frequency  of  action  potentials  and  the  heart  rate. 
Phosphorylated  delayed-rectifier  K+  channels  are  more 
active  in  repolarizing  the  membrane,  so  they  prevent 
activated  Ca2+  channels  from  prolonging  the  action 
potential. Phosphorylation of phospholamban, the regu-
latory subunit of the calcium pump in the endoplasmic 
reticulum, increases its activity, which speeds relaxation 
These changes allows heart muscle cells to keep up with 
stimuli generated at a higher rate from pacemaker cells. 
PKA  also  targets  sarcomeric  proteins:  phosphorylation 
of troponin-I and myosin-binding protein C each increases 
the  rate  of  crossbridge  cycling  and  the  strength  of 
contraction.

Acetylcholine  released  by  parasympathetic  nerves 
that 

inward-rectifier  K+  channels 

activates  Kir3.1 

688 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

slow  the  heartbeat  (Fig.  39.21B).  Acetylcholine  binds 
seven-helix  receptors,  called  muscarinic  acetylcholine 
receptors (because they bind muscarine. These are dis-
tinct from pentameric nicotinic acetylcholine receptors 
(see Fig. 16.12). Active muscarinic receptors catalyze the 
exchange  of  guanosine  diphosphate  (GDP)  for  guano-
sine triphosphate (GTP) on the Gαi subunit of a trimeric 
G  protein,  releasing  the  Gβγ  subunits  to  activate 
Kir3.1/3.4 channels. When open, these channels reduce 
the rate at which the membrane potential drifts toward 
threshold. The free GTP-Gαi subunits inhibit cAMP pro-
duction and reduce Ca2+ channel phosphorylation. This 
decreases  the  probability  that  Ca2+  channels  are  open, 
contributing to a lowering of the heart rate. If the energy 
supply of the heart is compromised, ATP levels fall. This 
activates Kir6.2 channels, which reduce the rate of spon-
taneous  depolarization  and  lower  the  heart  rate  until 
ATP levels are restored.

Therapeutic Effect of Digitalis in Congestive  
Heart Failure
In  congestive  heart  failure,  cardiac  contraction  fails  to 
produce enough force to maintain adequate circulation 
of blood. Digitalis from the foxglove plant was the first 
drug  to  treat  heart  failure.  Digitalis  and  related  com-
pounds  strengthen  cardiac  contraction  indirectly  by 
inhibiting the α2 isoform of Na+K+-ATPase in the plasma 
membrane (Fig. 39.22). Reduced sodium pump activity 
lowers the Na+ gradient across the membrane, providing 
less  driving  force  for  Na+/Ca2+  antiporters  to  exchange 
extracellular  Na+  for  cytoplasmic  Ca2+.  The  slightly 
higher  steady-state  concentration  of  Ca2+  in  cytoplasm 
strengthens contraction.

3 Na+

3 Na+

Ca2+

2 K+

ATP

ADP

3 Na+

3 Na+

Ca2+
Na+ / Ca2+
Antiporter

Na+ K+–ATPase
(target of cardiac
glycosides)

FIGURE 39.22  CHEMIOSMOTIC CYCLE THAT HELPS CLEAR 
CA2+  FROM  THE  CYTOPLASM  OF  CARDIAC  MUSCLE  CELLS. 
Na+K+-ATPase pumps create a Na+ gradient (purple triangle) to drive 
the Na+/Ca2+ antiporter to transport Ca2+ up its concentration gradient 
(blue triangle) out of the cell. Cardiac glycosides such as digitalis inhibit 
the  cardiac  isoform  of  Na+K+-ATPase,  raising  the  concentration  of 
cytoplasmic Ca2+ and strengthening cardiac contraction. K+ channels 
(left) allow K+ to circulate. 

Molecular Basis of Inherited Heart Diseases
Because the heart is so vital to survival, relatively minor 
molecular defects command attention in humans. Nearly 
1% of individuals carry an inherited or de novo mutation 
in  a  gene  for  a  sarcomeric  protein  that  compromises 
cardiac function. The most common mutations are in the 
genes  for  myosin  heavy  chain,  myosin-binding  protein  
C,  and  titin,  but  virtually  every  sarcomeric  protein  is 
affected (Table 39.1). Long, noncoding RNAs participate 
in regulating the stress response that leads to cardiomy-
opathies.  Patients  are  typically  heterozygous  for  these 
mutations (ie, they are dominant negative mutations). In 
hypertrophic  cardiomyopathies,  the  heart  attempts 
to  compensate 
for  abnormal  contractility  (either 
increased  or  decreased  depending  on  the  mutation) 
through hypertrophy, but the thickened heart wall com-
promises  cardiac  relaxation  and  refilling  the  chambers 
with  blood.  In  dilated  cardiomyopathies,  the  ventri-
cles swell and their walls thin. Both types are associated 
with heart failure and abnormal cardiac rhythms that can 
be fatal. The rate of progress of these diseases depends 
on not only the particular mutation but also other factors 
that vary from person to person. Individuals with defects 
in  myosin-binding  protein  C  develop  hypertrophy  in 
their  fifties  but  can  live  normal  life  spans.  By  contrast, 
those with defects in troponin T can be affected as teen-
agers  and  die  of  arrhythmias  in  their  twenties.  These 
severe mutations of cardiac contractile proteins account 
for about half of the deaths of apparently healthy young 
athletes.

Smooth Muscle
Contractile Apparatus
Smooth muscle cells are specialized for slow, powerful, 
efficient  contractions  under  the  control  of  a  variety  of 
involuntary mechanisms. Smooth muscle cells are gener-
ally  confined  to  internal  organs,  such  as  blood  vessels 
(where they regulate blood pressure), the gastrointestinal 
tract (where they move food through the intestines), and 
the respiratory system (where they control the diameters 
of the air passages; their excessive contraction contrib-
utes  to  asthma  and  other  allergic  reactions).  The  cyto-
plasm of spindle-shaped smooth muscle cells (Fig. 39.1) 
appears homogeneous by light microscopy, because the 
contractile  proteins  are  not  organized  in  regular  arrays 
like  sarcomeres  of  skeletal  and  cardiac  muscle.  A  basal 
lamina  and  variable  amounts  of  collagen  and  elastic 
fibers  surround  each  cell.  Smooth  muscle  cells  rarely 
divide  in  adults,  but  they  are  capable  of responding 
to  local  physiological  conditions  by  remodeling  their 
structure, as in atherosclerosis and hypertension.

In  terms  of  organization  and  biochemistry,  smooth 
muscle cells (Fig. 39.23) resemble nonmuscle cells more 
than skeletal or cardiac muscle. For example, the gene 
for smooth muscle myosin arose relatively recently from 
a cytoplasmic myosin II gene. These myosins also share 

CHAPTER 39  n  Muscles 

689

Dense plaque
on plasma
membrane

Dense body
in cytoplasm

Myosin
filament

Intermediate
filament

Actin filament

DD

Dense
Dense
body
body
Myosin
Myosin
ActinActin
IFIF

C

B

 

AA

EE

FIGURE 39.23  CONTRACTILE APPARATUS OF SMOOTH MUSCLE. A, Electron micrograph of a thin cross section of two smooth muscle 
cells. B–C, Organization of the contractile units, which stretch across the cell between plasma membrane attachment plaques. Contractile units 
consist of myosin filaments connecting thin filaments attached to a dense body or plasma membrane plaque. D, High-power electron micrograph 
showing a dense body and cross sections of three types of filaments. E, Electron micrograph of a longitudinal section of an extracted vascular 
smooth muscle cell illustrating associations of actin filaments and intermediate filaments (IF) with dense bodies, and myosin filaments interacting 
with actin filaments. (A, D, and E, Courtesy A.V. Somlyo and A.P. Somlyo, University of Virginia, Charlottesville. For reference, see Somlyo AP, 
Devine CE, Somlyo AV, Rice RV. Filament organization in vertebrate smooth muscle. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 1973;265:223–229; 
Bond M, Somlyo AV. Dense bodies and actin polarity in vertebrate smooth muscle. J Cell Biol. 1982;95:403–413.)

the same regulatory light chain. Long myosin thick fila-
ments are interspersed among the thin filaments, but not 
in a regular way as in striated muscles. Thin filaments are 
composed  of  actin  and  tropomyosin,  along  with  two 
regulatory proteins, caldesmon and calponin, rather than 
troponin.  Thin  filaments  are  arranged  obliquely  in  the 
cell,  some  with  their  barbed  ends  attached  to  dense 
plaques  on  the  plasma  membrane,  others  to  dense 
bodies in the cytoplasm. Like Z disks in striated muscles, 
dense  bodies  anchor  desmin  intermediate  filaments, 
forming  a  continuous,  inextensible,  internal  “tendon” 

running from end to end of the cell, preventing excess 
stretching (see Fig. 35.8).

Smooth  muscle  cells  contract  like  a  concertina  (Fig. 
39.24), because tension generated by myosin and actin 
is  applied  to  discrete  spots  on  the  plasma  membrane. 
This  compression  can  be  seen  in  light  micrographs  as 
irregular  cells  with  “corkscrew”  nuclei.  Given  that 
smooth  muscle  cells  have  less  myosin  than  striated 
muscle  cells  do,  it  is  remarkable  that  they  develop  the 
same  force.  This  is  explained  by  two  factors.  First,  the 
force-generating  unit,  the  myosin  filament,  is  larger  in 

690 

SECTION IX  n  Cytoskeleton and Cellular Motility

Relaxed

Contracted

Stimulus

+
2
a
C

A

Ca2+

Seconds

Stimulus

Calmodulin
Ca2+

Ca-CM

Force

Myosin-LC-P

MLCK
inactive

MLCK
active

–Ca2+

IP3

Trimeric
G-protein

Phospholipase C

Myosin
inactive

P

Myosin
active

P

Myosin-LC
Phosphatase

active

RhoGTP

Rho-kinase

Phosphatase

B

P-MLC-

Phosphatase

inactive

FIGURE  39.24  ACTIVATION  OF  SMOOTH  MUSCLE  CON-
TRACTION.  A,  The  spindle-shaped  smooth  muscle  cell  develops 
accordion pleats as it contracts, owing to the attachment of the actin 
filaments at intervals along the plasma membrane. The graph shows 
the time course of activation, consisting of the release of Ca2+ into the 
cytoplasm, phosphorylation of myosin regulatory light chains, and then 
the  slow  development  of  force.  Myosin  light-chain  phosphorylation 
(LC-P)  is  required  to  initiate,  but  not  to  sustain,  the  contraction  of 
smooth muscle. B, Biochemical pathways controlling phosphorylation 
of  myosin  regulatory  light  chains.  Receptor  stimulation  leads  to  pro-
duction  of  IP3  (inositol  1,4,5-triphosphate)  by  phospholipase  C  and 
release  of  Ca2+  into  cytoplasm.  Ca2+  binds  calmodulin  (CM),  which 
activates  myosin  light-chain  kinase  (MLCK)  by  binding  the  kinase’s 
autoinhibitory  peptide  and  displacing  it  from  the  active  site.  Active 
MLCK  phosphorylates  activating  sites  on  the  regulatory  light  chain. 
Light-chain phosphatase reverses phosphorylation of myosin. Activa-
tion  of  the  small  GTPase  (guanosine  triphosphatase)  Rho  with  GTP 
stimulates  Rho-kinase,  which  phosphorylates  and  inactivates  light-
chain  phosphatase.  This  makes  the  system  more  sensitive  to  Ca2+ 
levels,  as  light-chain  phosphorylation  is  prolonged.  LC,  light  chain; 
P-MLC-,  phosphorylated  myosin  light  chain.  (A,  Modified  from  the 
work  of  K.  Kamm  and  J.  Stull,  University  of  Texas  Southwestern 
Medical School, Dallas.)

Regulation of Smooth Muscle Contraction
A wide range of stimuli trigger smooth muscle contrac-
tion, but they all seem to act through seven-helix recep-
tors coupled to trimeric G-proteins. Hormones stimulate 
contraction of the uterus, whereas motor nerves stimu-
late intrinsic eye muscles that close the pupil.

Depending  on  the  particular  smooth  muscle,  Ca2+ 
for  contraction  enters  the  cytoplasm  through  either 
voltage-dependent calcium channels in the plasma mem-
brane  or  IP3  (inositol  1,4,5-triphosphate)  receptor  Ca2+ 
release channels in the SER (Fig. 39.24). Drugs that block 
plasma  membrane  calcium  channels  can  distinguish 
these two pathways experimentally. In intestines, para-
sympathetic  nerves  release  acetylcholine  to  stimulate 
seven-helix muscarinic receptors (Fig. 39.21). Associated 
trimeric G-proteins activate cation channels that depolar-
ize  the  plasma  membrane  and  allow  Ca2+  to  enter 
through  voltage-sensitive  calcium  channels.  Conse-
quently, calcium channel blockers strongly inhibit activa-
tion  of  gut  smooth  muscle.  Gap  junctions  couple  gut 
smooth muscle cells, allowing excitation to spread from 
cell to cell. At the other end of the spectrum, vascular 
smooth muscle depends on IP3 to release Ca2+ from intra-
cellular  stores  rather  than  depending  on  Ca2+  from 
outside the cell.

Following  stimulation,  intracellular  Ca2+  increases 
rapidly  but  transiently,  declining  to  a  value  above 
resting level as the receptors desensitize (see Fig. 24.3). 
Ca2+  pumps  in  both  SER  and  plasma  membrane  clear 
the  cytoplasm  of  Ca2+  so  that  Ca2+  levels  decrease  to 
resting  levels  and  the  muscle  eventually  relaxes  when 
the activating stimulus declines. Relaxing agents, acting 
through  cyclic  guanosine  monophosphate  (cGMP)  or 
cAMP  (see  Fig.  26.1),  promote  clearance  of  cytoplas-
mic  Ca2+.  Epinephrine  relaxes  smooth  muscles  of  the 
respiratory  system  by  another  mechanism.  Stimulation 
of  β-adrenergic  receptors  activates  potassium  channels 
that  hyperpolarize  the  plasma  membrane  and  reduce 
Ca2+ entry. This approach is widely used to treat asthma.
After  a  considerable  delay  (>200 ms)  following 
the  Ca2+  spike,  contractile  force  develops  slowly.  The 
delay is attributable to the time required for a sequence 
of three biochemical reactions: Ca2+ binding to calmodu-
lin,  calcium-calmodulin  activation  of  myosin  light-
chain  kinase  (see  Fig.  25.4),  and  phosphorylation  of 
myosin  regulatory  light  chains,  turning  on  the  myosin-
actin  ATPase  cycle  (Fig.  39.24).  Unphosphorylated 
myosin-II  from  smooth  muscle  and  vertebrate  nonmus-
cle cells is inactive.

smooth  muscle  than  in  skeletal  muscle.  Deploying  a 
given amount of myosin in large, thick filaments in a long 
sarcomere  produces  more  force  than  does  the  same 
myosin in smaller filaments arranged in a series of short 
sarcomeres.  Second,  individual  smooth  muscle  myosin 
molecules  produce  a  larger  force  than  skeletal  muscle 
myosin, at least in vitro assays.

Phosphorylation of myosin light chains is required to 
initiate but not maintain contraction, so slowly cycling, 
unphosphorylated  myosins  maintain  peak  force  with 
little expenditure of energy. Regulation of unphosphory-
lated  crossbridges  is  not  well  understood,  but  they 
appear to be activated cooperatively by a small popula-
tion  of  phosphorylated  myosin  heads.  Caldesmon,  a 

 

CHAPTER 39  n  Muscles 

691

calcium-calmodulin-binding  protein  associated  with 
tropomyosin on actin filaments, may contribute to activa-
tion and/or allow myosin heads to cycle very slowly even 
in the presence of ATP.

The sensitivity of light-chain phosphorylation to Ca2+ 
depends  on  a  parallel  signaling  pathway  that  partially 
inhibits myosin phosphatase, thus increasing the number 
of  phosphorylated  myosin  cross-bridges  and  force  at  
any  given  Ca2+  concentration  (Fig.  39.24).  Receptors 
coupled  to  trimeric  G-proteins  activate  the  small  
guanosine 
(GTPase)  RhoA,  which  
stimulates  a  protein  kinase  that  inhibits  myosin  light-
chain phosphatase.

triphosphatase 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Lee Sweeney and John Solaro for their sugges-
tions on revisions to this chapter.

SELECTED READINGS

Agarkova  I,  Perriard  J-C.  The  M-band:  an  elastic  web  that  crosslinks 
thick  filaments  in  the  center  of  the  sarcomere.  Trends  Cell  Biol. 
2005;15:477-485.

Alexander MR, Owens GK. Epigenetic control of smooth muscle cell 
differentiation  and  phenotypic  switching  in  vascular  development 
and disease. Annu Rev Physiol. 2012;74:13-40.

Bolton  TB,  Prestwich  SA,  Zholos  AV,  Gordienko  DV.  Excitation-
contraction coupling in gastrointestinal and other smooth muscles. 
Annu Rev Physiol. 1999;61:85-115.

Butler  T,  Paul  J,  Europe-Finner  N,  Smith  R,  Chan  EC.  Role  of  serine-
threonine phosphoprotein phosphatases in smooth muscle contrac-
tility. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2013;304:C485-C504.

Cahill TJ, Ashrafian H, Watkins H. Genetic cardiomyopathies causing 

heart failure. Circ Res. 2013;113:660-675.

Clark KA, McElhinny AS, Beckerle MC, Gregorio CC. Striated muscle 
cytoarchitecture: an intricate web of form and function. Annu Rev 
Cell Dev Biol. 2002;18:637-706.

Doles JD, Olwin BB. Muscle stem cells on the edge. Curr Opin Genet 

Dev. 2015;34:24-28.

Franzini-Armstrong C, Protasi F, Ramesh V. Comparative ultrastructure 
of Ca2+ release units in skeletal and cardiac muscle. Ann N Y Acad 
Sci. 1998;853:20-30.

Gao  N,  Huang  J,  He  W,  et al.  Signaling  through  myosin  light  chain 

kinase in smooth muscles. J Biol Chem. 2013;288:7596-7605.

Geeves MA, Holmes KC. Structural mechanism of muscle contraction. 

Annu Rev Biochem. 1999;68:687-728.

Gokhin  DS,  Fowler  VM.  A  two-segment  model  for  thin  filament  
architecture  in  skeletal  muscle.  Nat  Rev  Mol  Cell  Biol.  2013;14:
113-119.

Gordon AM, Homsher E, Regnier M. Regulation of contraction in stri-

ated muscle. Physiol Rev. 2000;80:853-924.

Guiraud  S,  Aartsma-Rus  A,  Vieira  NM,  et al.  The  pathogenesis  and 
therapy of muscular dystrophies. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet. 
2015;16:281-308.

Han  R,  Campbell  KP.  Dysferlin  and  muscle  membrane  repair.  Curr 

Opin Cell Biol. 2007;19:409-416.

Hidalgo C, Granzier H. Tuning the molecular giant titin through phos-
phorylation:  role  in  health  and  disease.  Trends  Cardiovasc  Med. 
2013;23:165-171.

Hinson JT, Chopra A, Nafissi N, et al. Titin mutations in iPS cells define 
sarcomere  insufficiency  as  a  cause  of  dilated  cardiomyopathy. 
Science. 2015;349:982-986.

Hwang PM, Sykes BD. Targeting the sarcomere to correct muscle func-

tion. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2015;14:313-328.

Hwang JH, Zorzato F, Clarke NF, Treves S. Mapping domains and muta-
tions on the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor channel. Trends Mol 
Med. 2012;18:644-657.

Lehrer  SS,  Geeves  MA.  The  myosin-activated  thin  filament  regulatory 
state,  M−-open:  a  link  to  hypertrophic  cardiomyopathy  (HCM). 
J Muscle Res Cell Motil. 2014;35:153-160.

Marx  SO,  Marks  AR.  Dysfunctional  ryanodine  receptors  in  the  heart: 
new  insights  into  complex  cardiovascular  diseases.  J  Mol  Cell 
Cardiol. 2013;58:225-231.

Moss RL, Fitzsimons DP, Ralphe JC. Cardiac MyBP-C regulates the rate 
and  force  of  contraction  in  mammalian  myocardium.  Circ  Res. 
2015;116:183-192.

Murthy KS. Signaling for contraction and relaxation in smooth muscle 

of the gut. Annu Rev Physiol. 2006;68:345-374.

Myhre JL, Pilgrim D. A Titan but not necessarily a ruler: assessing the 
role of titin during thick filament patterning and assembly. Anat Rec 
(Hoboken). 2014;297:1604-1614.

Rao JN, Madasu Y, Dominguez R. Mechanism of actin filament pointed-

end capping by tropomodulin. Science. 2014;345:463-467.

Somlyo  AP,  Somlyo  AV.  Ca2+-sensitivity  of  smooth  and  non-muscle 
myosin II: modulation by G Proteins, kinases and myosin phospha-
tase. Physiol Rev. 2003;83:1325-1358.

Spudich  JA.  Hypertrophic  and  dilated  cardiomyopathy:  four  decades 
of basic research on muscle lead to potential therapeutic approaches 
to  these  devastating  genetic  diseases.  Biophys  J.  2014;106:
1236-1249.

Takamori  M.  Structure  of  the  neuromuscular  junction:  function  and 
cooperative  mechanisms  in  the  synapse.  Ann  N  Y  Acad  Sci. 
2012;1274:14-23.

Takeda  S,  Yamashita  A,  Maeda  K,  Maeda  Y.  Structure  of  the  core 
domain  of  human  cardiac  troponin  in  the  Ca2+-saturated  form. 
Nature. 2003;424:35-41.

Teekakirikul  P,  Padera  RF,  Seidman  JG,  Seidman  CE.  Hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy:  translating  cellular  cross  talk  into  therapeutics.  
J Cell Biol. 2012;199:417-421.

Tskhovrebova L, Trinick J. Making muscle elastic: the structural basis 

of myomesin stretching. PLoS Biol. 2012;10:e1001264.

von der Ecken J, Müller M, Lehman W, et al. Structure of the F-actin-

tropomyosin complex. Nature. 2014;519:114-117.

Wang  YX,  Dumont  NA,  Rudnicki  MA.  Muscle  stem  cells  at  a  glance.  

J Cell Sci. 2014;127:4543-4548.

Wehrens XH, Lehnart SE, Marks AR. Intracellular calcium release and 

cardiac disease. Annu Rev Physiol. 2005;67:69-98.

This page intentionally left blank

S E C T I O N   X 

Cell Cycle

This page intentionally left blank

SECTION  X  OVERVIEW
This last section of the book draws together principles 

from previous chapters to explain some of the rules that 
govern the lifestyles of cells. Cells exhibit a remarkable 
diversity  in  their  patterns  of  growth,  proliferation,  and 
death.  For  example,  some  human  cells  (neurons)  are 
born around the time of birth and live until the person 
dies—more  than  100  years  in  a  few  cases.  The  fate  of 
other  cells  is  to  live  for  only  a  day  or  two  (eg,  cells  in 
the gut lining). Many differentiated cells form by elabo-
rate  pathways  that  employ  a  carefully  choreographed 
series  of  cues  from  within  the  cell  and  from  its  neigh-
bors. Other cells, such as many in the immune system, 
are spawned in excess, followed by selection of the few 
with correctly rearranged genes or with productive con-
nections to partner cells. The unlucky majority of their 
siblings  whose  differentiation  did  not  go  so  well  ulti-
mately commit suicide.

Very different strategies maintain populations of cells. 
Long-lived cells divide seldom, if at all. In contrast, the 
cells that are involved in producing the gut lining grow 
and divide at top speed. Most human cells differentiate 

to carry out specific functions and then no longer pro-
liferate. How do cells decide whether to proliferate, to 
stop proliferating and differentiate, or to die? This section 
answers these and other questions.

Chapter  40  begins  the  section  with  an  introduction 
to the language of the cell cycle. The cell cycle is driven 
by changing states of the cytoplasm created by shifting 
balances  of  protein  phosphorylation,  dephosphoryla-
tion, and degradation machinery. For the cell cycle, the 
key  kinases  are  cyclin-dependent  kinases  (Cdks), 
which require an associated cyclin subunit for activity. 
Cdks  are  also  regulated  by  phosphorylation  and  by  
additional  protein  cofactors  that  bind  and  inactivate 
them. Cdks are usually stable, but cyclin levels fluctuate, 
owing  to  targeted  destruction  at  particular  points  in  
the  cell  cycle.  In  fact,  targeted  proteolytic  destruction  
by the proteasome is a key aspect of cell-cycle control. 
Each cell-cycle phase is characterized by the activity of 
one or more E3 ubiquitin ligases. Each of these targets 
particular  proteins  for  destruction  by  decorating  them 
with chains of ubiquitin, a protein that was introduced 

Meiosis Ch 45

Mitosis Ch 44

Programmed cell death Ch 46

G2 phase and
control of entry
into mitosis Ch 43

Active CDK
Introduction to the

cell cycle Ch 40

S phase and DNA
replication Ch 42

G1 phase and the
regulation of cell
proliferation Ch 41

Normal cell arrested
at restriction point

STOP

Rb

Cancer cell passes

restriction point

Rb

GO

Danger

 695

in Chapter 23. This sequential destruction of key factors 
gives cell-cycle transitions their irreversible character.

The  chapters  that  follow  explain  how  the  cell-cycle 
machinery  controls  each  step  in  the  proliferation  and 
differentiation  of  cells.  Chapter  41  begins  with  newly 
born cells in the G1 phase of the cell cycle. These cells 
must decide whether to commit themselves to a round 
of proliferation or to withdraw from the proliferation rat 
race  and  enter  a  nondividing  differentiated  state  called 
G0.  Cells  that  will  proliferate  must  first  pass  a  control 
point known as the restriction point. This is a control 
circuit  that  determines  whether  internal  and  external 
conditions are suitable for proliferation. Malfunctions of 
the  restriction  point  lead  to  one  of  the  most  terrifying 
perturbations of the cell cycle: cancer. If DNA damage 
is  detected  during  G1  phase,  a  checkpoint  halts  cell 
cycle progression until either the damage is repaired or 
the  cell  dies.  The  chapter  includes  a  section  on  stem 
cells  and  concludes  by  considering  the  role  of  one  of 
the  most  famous  cell-cycle  proteins,  p53,  in  cell-cycle 
control.

Cells  that  decide  to  proliferate  must  replicate  their 
DNA  in  a  timely  and  accurate  manner.  Chapter  42 
explains the mechanism of DNA replication during the 
S phase, including the selection of sites on DNA to initi-
ate  replication,  the  enzymes  that  copy  the  DNA,  the 
regulation  of  replication  by  the  cell-cycle  machinery,  
the organization of replicating chromosomes within the 
nucleus, and the checkpoints that help the cells to cope 
with  various  problems  that  they  encounter  along  the 
way. Chapter 43 discusses the G2 phase, during which 
cells conduct a final “cockpit check” before embarking 
on  the  irreversible  process  of  division.  This  is  also  the 
last  point  in  the  cell  cycle  at  which  the  genome  is 
scanned  for  damage  so  that  it  can  be  repaired  before 
division. A checkpoint restrains cells from entering into 
mitosis  if  damaged  DNA  is  detected,  and  the  chapter 
briefly explains the major pathways of DNA repair.

Chapter  44  describes  mitosis,  certainly  the  most 
dramatic and complex program in the cell cycle. Mitosis 

has been studied since the 1800s, but technical advances 
have  considerably  advanced  our  understanding  of  how 
it  is  accomplished  at  the  molecular  level.  Division 
requires wholesale reorganization of cellular structures, 
including  chromosome  condensation  and  the  assembly 
of the mitotic spindle. In many cells, the nuclear enve-
lope  breaks  down.  Once  the  chromosomes  are  all 
attached to the microtubules of the mitotic spindle (yet 
another important checkpoint here), they are separated 
equally  and  form  two  daughter  nuclei.  Finally,  cytoki-
nesis separates the two daughter cells.

Chapter 45 considers meiosis, a specialized form of 
division  that  produces  the  gametes  required  for  sexual 
reproduction. In this division, DNA recombination is key 
to segregation of the chromosomes. A number of arcane 
terms  are  used  to  describe  the  specialized  structures  
and processes involved. The chapter then explains how 
problems with meiosis can lead to genetic diseases and 
how studies of chromosome segregation in yeast led to 
an  understanding  of  why  birth  defects  become  more 
prevalent as human mothers age.

Chapter 46 closes the book with a discussion of what 
happens  when  cells  commit  suicide  by  apoptosis, 
necroptosis, and autophagy. This is not, strictly speak-
ing, a cell-cycle event but instead represents several alter-
native  pathways,  each  with  its  own  machinery  and 
signaling systems. Apoptosis sometimes results when it 
all “runs off the rails” and cells receive insults from which 
they  cannot  recover.  But  cell  death  is  not  always  bad: 
apoptosis  is  an  essential  part  of  development  of  meta-
zoan organisms, homeostasis of their organs and tissues, 
and  can  be  a  last-ditch  defense  against  viral  infection. 
Malfunctions of apoptotic pathways can lead to cancer.
The concepts that are discussed in this section of the 
book  build  on  the  ideas  in  earlier  sections.  Cells  are 
wonderfully complex systems whose behavior is driven 
by the laws of chemistry and physics. A major challenge 
for cell biology in the future is to devise molecular expla-
nations  for  the  complex  behaviors  exhibited  in  this 
closing section of our book.

696

C H A P T E R 

40 

Introduction to the Cell Cycle

The cell cycle is the series of events that leads to the 

duplication and division of a cell. Research on the molec-
ular events of cell-cycle control revealed that variations 
of  similar  mechanisms  operate  the  cell  cycles  of  all 
eukaryotes  from  yeasts  to  humans.  Furthermore,  the 
components that regulate cell growth and division also 
play  key  roles  in  the  cessation  of  cell  division  that  is 
required  for  cells  to  differentiate.  Control  of  the  cell 
cycle  is  of  major  importance  to  human  health  because 
cancer  is  usually  caused  by  perturbations  of  cell-cycle 
regulation. Based on 2010 to 2012 data, 40% of Ameri-
cans will develop cancer during their lifetime.

Although animal cells have a wide variety of special-
ized  cell  cycles,  the  cells  in  the  stratified  epithelium  
that forms skin illustrate the most common types of cell 
cycles  (Fig.  40.1).  The  basal  layer  of  the  epithelium  is 
composed  of  stem  cells  that  divide  only  occasionally 
(see  Box  41.2).  They  can  activate  the  cell  cycle  on 
demand and then return to a nondividing state. Stem cell 
populations  can  replenish  themselves  by  symmetrical 
division, but when specific signals induce them to pro-
liferate, usually one daughter cell remains a stem cell and 
the  other  enters  a  pool  of  rapidly  dividing  cells.  The 
dividing  cells  populate  the  upper  layers  of  the  epithe-
lium,  stop  dividing,  and  gradually  differentiate  into  the 
specialized cells that cover the surface.

Like  stem  cells,  fibroblasts  of  the  connective  tissue 
(see  Fig.  28.2)  typically  are  in  a  nondividing  state,  but 
they can be stimulated to enter the cell cycle following 
wounding or other stimuli (see Fig. 32.11). In the most 
extreme  case,  the  nervous  system  contains  a  few  stem 
cells  and  a  few  dividing  glial  cells,  but  most  neurons, 
once  differentiated,  can  live  for  more  than  100  years 
without dividing again.

Principles of Cell-Cycle Regulation
The  goal  of  the  cell  cycle  in  most  cases  is  to  produce 
two daughter cells that are accurate copies of the parent 

(Fig. 40.2). The cell cycle integrates a continuous growth 
cycle  (an  increase  in  cell  mass)  with  a  discontinuous 
division  or  chromosome  cycle  (the  replication  and 
partitioning of the genome into two daughter cells). The 
chromosome  cycle  is  driven  by  a  sequence  of  enzy-
matic  cascades  that  produce  a  sequence  of  discrete 
biochemical “states” of the cytoplasm. Progress through 
the cell cycle is ratchet-like and irreversible because each 
new state arises not only by expression or activation of 
a  new  cohort  of  activities,  but  also  by  destruction  or 
inactivation  of  key  activities  characteristic  of  the  pre-
ceding  state.  Later  sections  of  this  chapter  explain  
these mechanisms.

Phases of the Cell Cycle
In describing the cell cycle, it is convenient to divide the 
process into several phases. Recognition of these phases 
began  in  1882,  when  Flemming  named  the  process  of 
nuclear  division  mitosis  (from  the  Greek  mito,  or 
“thread”) after he first observed the condensed chromo-
somes. Mitosis was a clear cell cycle landmark, and the 
rest of the cell cycle between mitoses was called inter-
phase (Box 40.1).

Once DNA was recognized as the agent of heredity in 
the  1940s,  it  was  deduced  that  it  must  be  duplicated  
at  some  time  during  interphase  so  that  daughter  cells  
can each receive a full complement of genetic material. 
In  1953,  a  key  experiment  identified  the  relationship 
between  the  timing  of  DNA  synthesis  and  the  mitotic 
cycle (Fig. 40.3). This defined the four cell-cycle phases 
as they are known today (see Fig. 40.2).

Each cell is born at the completion of the M phase, 
which includes mitosis, the partitioning of the chromo-
somes and other cellular components, and cytokinesis, 
the division of the cytoplasm. The chromosomal DNA is 
replicated during S phase (synthetic phase). The remain-
ing  two  phases  are  gaps  between  mitosis  and  the  S 
phase.  The  G1  phase  (first  gap  phase)  is  the  interval 

 697

698 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

Death

Activation

Final stage of
differentiation
in skin

Cessation
of cycling
Terminal
differentiation

Rapid
cell cycles
Expansion of
population

Infrequent
cell cycles
Renewal of
stem cell
population

A

B

Stem cell

FIGURE 40.1  CELL CYCLES IN A STRATIFIED EPITHELIUM. A, Light micrograph of a section of skin, a stratified squamous epithelium, 
stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). B, Diagram showing the different types of cell cycles at the various levels of this epithelium. 

A. Cell-cycle details
     (not to scale)

Mitosis

M

Check for
damaged or
unduplicated

DNA

Check for

chromosome
attachment to
mitotic spindle

Cytokinesis

DNA

ENLARGED VIEW
OF CHROMOSOME

G0

Growth
in mass

G1

Cohesion
established
in S phase

Check for

DNA damage

Restriction point:

pass only if environmental

conditions favorable

G2

Check for DNA

damage or stalled
replication forks

S

Chromosome
duplication

Centrosome

duplication starts

B. Cycle phases in cultured cell

Cell-cycle phase

Length (hours)

G1
S
G2
M

Generation time

10

7.5

3.5

1.0

22

C. Time-scaled diagram
     (times in hours)

21

22 0
M

G2

17.5

G1

S

10

FIGURE 40.2 
the cell cycle. B, Length of cell-cycle phases in cultured cells. C, Time scale of cell-cycle phases. 

INTRODUCTION TO THE CELL-CYCLE PHASES. A, Diagrams of cellular morphology and chromosome structure across 

 

CHAPTER 40  n  Introduction to the Cell Cycle 

699

BOX 40.1  Selected Key Terms

M  phase: Cell division, comprising mitosis, when a fully 
grown cell segregates the replicated chromosomes to 
opposite  ends  of  a  molecular  scaffold,  termed  the 
spindle, and cytokinesis, when the cell cleaves between 
the separated chromosomes to produce two daughter 
cells. In general, each daughter cell receives a comple-
ment  of  genetic  material  and  organelles  identical  to 
that of the parent cell.

Interphase: The portion of the cell cycle when cells grow 
and replicate their DNA. Interphase has three sections. 
The G1 (first gap) phase is the interval between mitosis 
and  the  onset  of  DNA  replication.  The  S  (synthetic) 
phase  is  the  time  when  DNA  is  replicated.  The  G2 
(second gap) phase is the interval between the termina-
tion  of  DNA  replication  and  the  onset  of  mitosis.  In 
multicellular  organisms,  many  differentiated  cells  no 
longer actively divide. These nondividing cells (which 
may physiologically be extremely active) are in the G0 
phase, a branch of the G1 phase.

Checkpoints: Biochemical circuits that regulate cell-cycle 
transitions  in  response  to  the  physiological  condition 
of  the  cell  and  signals  from  its  environment.  Check-
points  detect  damage  to  the  DNA  due  to  external 
agents  or  problems  that  arise  during  DNA  replication 
and  trigger  the  DNA  damage  response.  Other  check-
points detect problems that arise during attachment of 
chromosomes to the spindle.

Nucleus

Cell synthesizing DNA

Add 32P, incubate briefly,
then wash out free 32P

Photographic
emulsion

Cell exposes 
photographic
emulsion 

VIEW IN

MICROSCOPE

between  mitosis  and  the  start  of  DNA  replication.  The 
G2 phase (second gap phase) is the interval between the 
completion  of  DNA  replication  and  mitosis.  All  cycling 
cells  have  an  M  phase  and  an  S  phase.  The  G1  and  G2 
phases  vary  in  length  and  are  very  short  in  some  early 
embryos. The following sections describe the stages of 
the cell cycle, starting just after the birth of the cell.

G1 Phase
G1  is  typically  the  longest  and  most  variable  cell-cycle 
phase.  When  cells  are  “born”  at  cytokinesis,  they  are 
roughly  half  the  size  they  were  before  mitosis,  and 
during  G1,  they  grow  back  toward  an  optimal  size. 
During  this  time,  many  activities  involved  in  cell-cycle 
progression are repressed so that the cell cannot initiate 
a  new  round  of  proliferation.  This  repressive  control 
system is called the restriction point. If the supply of 
nutrients  is  poor  or  if  cells  receive  an  antiproliferative 
stimulus such as a signal to embark on terminal differen-
tiation, they delay their progress through the cell cycle 
in G1 or exit the cycle to enter G0 (see “G0 and Growth 
Control” below). However, if appropriate positive stimuli 
are received, cells overcome the restriction point block 
and trigger a program of gene expression that commits 
them to a new cycle of DNA replication and cell division. 
Cancer  cells  often  have  defects  in  restriction  point 

20% of cells turn the emulsion black

FIGURE 40.3  DISCOVERY OF CELL-CYCLE STAGES. To deter-
mine whether cells synthesize DNA during a defined portion of the cell 
cycle or constantly throughout the entire cycle (as is the case in bac-
teria, for example), Howard and Pelc fed a radioactive component of 
DNA (32P) to onion root tip cells, spread the cells in a thin layer on a 
microscope slide, washed away the  32P that had not become incor-
porated into DNA, and overlayered the slide with photographic emul-
sion. After incubation in the dark, the emulsion was developed like film 
and  examined  with  a  light  microscope.  The  nuclei  of  cells  active  in 
replicating  their  DNA  incorporated  the  radioactive  32P  into  DNA  and 
exposed  the  photographic  emulsion  above  them.  Two  possible  out-
comes  were  predicted.  If  cells  synthesized  DNA  constantly  during 
interphase, then all cells would incorporate the radioactive label. Con-
versely, if each cell synthesized DNA only during a discrete portion of 
the cell cycle, then only cells engaged in active replication during the 
period of exposure to  32P would expose the photographic emulsion. 
When the slides were examined, 20% of the interphase cell nuclei were 
labeled,  proving  that  cells  synthesize  DNA  only  during  a  discrete 
portion of interphase. Mitotic cells were unlabeled. Assuming that the 
cells traverse the cycle at a more or less constant rate, it was possible 
to calculate the length of the synthetic phase. Overall, the time between 
successive  divisions—the  generation  time—was  approximately  30 
hours  in  the  root  tip  cells.  If  approximately  20%  of  the  cells  were 
labeled, then approximately 20% of the 30-hour generation time must 
be spent in DNA synthesis. Thus, 0.2 × 30, or 6 hours, was spent in 
replication.  (Data  from  Pelc  HA  Sr.  Synthesis  of  DNA  in  normal  and 
irradiated  cells  and  its  relation  to  chromosome  breakage.  Heredity 
Suppl. 1953;6:261–273.)

700 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

control and continue to grow and attempt to divide even 
in the absence of appropriate environmental signals.

G0 and Growth Control
Most  cells  of  multicellular  organisms  differentiate  to 
carry  out  specialized  functions  and  no  longer  divide. 
Such  cells  are  considered  to  be  in  the  G0  phase.  Cells 
often enter G0 directly as they exit their last mitosis. G0 
cells  are  not  dormant;  indeed,  they  are  often  actively 
engaged in protein synthesis and secretion, and they may 
be highly motile. Many G0 cells have a nonmotile primary 
cilium, which is an important sensory organelle (see Fig. 
38.19).  The  G0  phase  is  not  necessarily  permanent.  In 
some  specialized  cases,  G0  cells  may  be  recruited  to 
reenter  the  cell  cycle  in  response  to  specific  stimuli. 
Cell-cycle  reentry  involves  changes  in  gene  expression 
and  protein  stability  and  disassembly  of  the  primary 
cilium, if present. This process must be highly regulated, 
as  the  uncontrolled  proliferation  of  cells  in  a  multicel-
lular organism can lead to cancer.

S Phase
Chromosomes  of  higher  eukaryotes  are  so  large  that 
replication of the DNA must be initiated at many differ-
ent  sites,  termed  origins  of  replication.  In  budding 
yeast,  the  approximately  400  origins  are  spaced  an 
average  of  30,000  base  pairs  apart.  An  average  human 
chromosome  contains  about  150  ×  106  base  pairs  of 
DNA,  approximately  10  times  the  size  of  the  entire 
budding  yeast  genome,  so  many  more  origins  are 
required.  Each  region  of  the  chromosome  that  is  repli-
cated from a single origin is referred to as a replicon. 
Groups of neighboring replicons cluster in topologically 
associating domains (TADs) (see Chapter 8).

Proliferating  diploid  cells  replicate  their  DNA  once, 
and only once, each cell cycle. Each origin of replication 
is prepared for replication by the formation of a prerep-
lication complex during G1 (a process that is referred to 
as licensing). As each origin “fires” during S phase, the 
prereplication  complex  is  dismantled  and  cannot  be 
reassembled  until  the  next  G1  phase.  This  ensures  that 
each  origin  fires  only  once  per  cell  cycle.  The  cyclic 
nature  of  origin  licensing  is  driven  at  least  in  part  by 
fluctuations  in  the  activity  of  cyclin-dependent  kinases 
and protein destruction machinery (discussed later).

During  replication,  the  duplicated  DNA  molecules, 
called sister chromatids, become linked to each other 
by a protein complex called cohesin (see Fig. 8.18). This 
pairing of sister chromatids is important for their orderly 
segregation later in mitosis (see Fig. 44.16).

G2 Phase
In most cells of metazoans, G2 is a relatively brief period 
during  which  key  enzymatic  activities  that  will  trigger 
the entry into mitosis gradually accumulate and are con-
verted  to  active  forms.  When  these  activities  reach  a 

critical threshold level, the cell enters mitosis. Along the 
way,  the  chromatin  and  cytoskeleton  are  prepared  for 
the  dramatic  structural  changes  that  will  occur  during 
mitosis. If damaged DNA is detected during G2, a check-
point  activates  the  DNA  damage  response  and  delays 
entry of the cell into mitosis.

M Phase
During M phase (mitosis and the subsequent cytokine-
sis),  chromosomes  and  cytoplasm  are  partitioned  into 
two daughter cells. Mitosis is normally divided into five 
discrete phases.

Prophase  is  defined  by  the  onset  of  chromosome 
condensation and is actually the final part of G2 phase. 
TADs disassemble inside the intact nucleus and mitotic 
chromosomes  begin  to  form  their  characteristic  array  
of  loops  (see  Chapter  8).  In  the  cytoplasm,  a  dramatic 
change  in  the  dynamic  properties  of  the  microtubules 
decreases their half-lives from approximately 10 minutes 
to  approximately  30  seconds.  The  duplicated  centro-
somes (centrioles and associated pericentriolar material 
in animal cells; see Fig. 34.14) separate and form the two 
poles of the mitotic spindle.

Prometaphase  begins  when  the  nuclear  envelope 
breaks  down  (in  higher  eukaryotes)  and  chromosomes 
begin  to  attach  randomly  to  microtubules  emanating 
from the two poles of the forming mitotic spindle. Other 
microtubules originate on chromosomes and within the 
mitotic spindle. As both kinetochores on a pair of sister 
chromatids attach to microtubules from opposite spindle 
poles,  the  pair  of  chromatids  slowly  moves  to  a  point 
midway between the poles. When all chromosomes are 
properly attached, the cell is said to be in metaphase.
The exit from mitosis begins at anaphase with abrupt 
separation  of  the  two  sister  chromatids  from  one 
another. Most cohesion molecules linking sister chroma-
tids are removed without cleavage during prophase in a 
process  initiated  by  mitosis-specific  phosphorylation. 
Proteolytic cleavage of the remaining cohesin molecules 
triggers the metaphase-anaphase transition. During ana-
phase, the separated sister chromatids move to the two 
spindle  poles  (anaphase  A),  which  themselves  move 
apart  (anaphase  B).  As  the  chromatids  approach  the 
spindle  poles,  the  nuclear  envelope  reforms  on  the 
surface of the chromatin. At this point, the cell is said to 
be in telophase.

Finally, during telophase, a contractile ring of actin 
and  myosin  assembles  as  a  circumferential  belt  at  the 
cortex midway between spindle poles and constricts the 
equator of the cell. The separation of the two daughter 
cells from one another is called cytokinesis.

Control of Cell-Cycle Progression
Control  networks  and  checkpoints  regulate  progres-
sion  of  the  cell  cycle.  Checkpoints  are  biochemical 

 

CHAPTER 40  n  Introduction to the Cell Cycle 

701

circuits that detect external or internal stimuli and send 
appropriate signals to the cell-cycle system. The restric-
tion  point  in  G1  phase  is  a  control  network  that 
integrates  the  physiological  state  of  the  cell  with  its 
environment,  including  input  from  other  cells  and  
interactions  with  the  surrounding  extracellular  matrix.  
Cells  must  receive  appropriate  growth  stimuli  from  
their  environment  to  progress  past  this  point  in  the  
G1  phase;  if  not  they  may  live  on  without  dying  or 
commit suicide by apoptosis (see Chapter 46).

DNA  damage  checkpoints  operate  throughout 
inter phase.  If  damage  is  detected,  the  DNA  damage 
response  initiates  a  cascade  of  events  that  blocks  cell-
cycle progression and can also trigger cell death by apop-
tosis. Problems with DNA replication generally produce 
single-stranded  DNA  and  activate  the  DNA  damage 
response.  This  response  stabilizes  stalled  replication 
forks  so  that  they  can  be  repaired.  During  mitosis,  the 
spindle  assembly  checkpoint  delays  the  onset  of 
chromosome  segregation  until  all  chromosomes  are 
attached properly to the mitotic spindle.

The  DNA  damage  response  regulates  cell-cycle  pro-
gression in a three-tier pathway (Fig. 40.4). First sensors 
detect  DNA  damage.  These  sensors  activate  transduc-
ers,  which  include  both  protein  kinases  and  transcrip-
tional  activators.  The  transducers  act  on  effectors  that 
ultimately  block  cell-cycle  progression  and  may  also 
fulfill  other  functions.  Two  key  protein  kinases,  ataxia-
telangiectasia  mutated  (ATM)  and  ataxia-telangiectasia 
and Rad9 related (ATR), lie at the head of the pathway 
and may also act as sensors of DNA damage. They acti-
vate two transducer kinases, Chk1 and Chk2, as well as 
a transcription factor called p53 that induces the expres-
sion of a cohort of genes that halt cell-cycle progression 
by inhibiting cyclin-dependent kinases as well as genes 

DNA breaks

Problems at

replication forks

Genotoxic

stress

ATM
dimer

ATM

monomer

ATR + cofactors

bind ssDNA

Sensors

Chk2
kinase

p53

transcription

factor

Chk1
kinase

Transducers

Cell cycle proteins
DNA repair proteins

Effectors

Apoptosis

Cell-cycle

arrest

DNA repair

Responses

FIGURE  40.4  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  DNA  DAMAGE  CHECK-
POINT  AND  RESPONSE  SYSTEM.  ATM,  ataxia-telangiectasia 
mutated; ATR, ataxia-telangiectasia and Rad9 related; ssDNA, single-
stranded DNA. 

that trigger cell death by apoptosis. Chapters 41 and 43 
discuss these proteins in detail.

Biochemical Basis of Cell-Cycle Transitions
Transitions between cell-cycle phases are triggered by a 
network  of  protein  kinases  and  phosphatases  that  is 
linked to the discontinuous events of the chromosome 
cycle  by  the  periodic  accumulation,  modification,  and 
destruction of several key components. This section pro-
vides a general introduction to the most important com-
ponents of this network.

Cyclin-Dependent Kinases
Genetic  analysis  of  the  cell  cycle  in  the  fission  yeast 
Schizosaccharomyces  pombe  identified  a  gene  called 
cell  division  cycle–2+  (cdc2+)  that  is  essential  for  cell-
cycle progression during both the G1 → S and G2 → M 
transitions (Box 40.2). The product of this gene, a protein 
kinase of 34,000 Da originally called p34cdc2, is the pro-
totype for a family of protein kinases that is crucial for 
cell-cycle progression in all eukaryotes. This mechanism 
of cell-cycle control is so well conserved that a human 
homolog of p34cdc2 can replace the yeast protein, restor-
ing  a  normal  cell  cycle  to  a  cdc2  mutant  yeast.  Boxes 
40.3 and 40.4 present a number of the key experiments 
and  experimental  systems  that  led  to  the  identification 
of the molecules that drive the cell cycle.

Humans  have  more  than  10  distinct  protein  kinases 
related  to  p34cdc2,  although  only  a  few  are  involved  in 
cell-cycle control. To be active, each enzyme must associ-
ate with a regulatory subunit called a cyclin. Thus, they 
have been termed cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks). 
p34cdc2, now termed Cdk1, seems to function primarily 
in the regulation of the G2 → M transition in animal cells. 
Cdk2 (plus Cdk4 and Cdk6 in some cell types) is involved 
in passage of the restriction point during G1. Cdk2 also 
contributes to the G2 → M transition, although Cdk1 is 
the only Cdk absolutely essential for this step (Appendix 
40.1).  Cdk7  is  important  for  activation  of  other  Cdks,  
and  also  appears  to  participate  in  transcribing  RNA  
and repairing damaged DNA. Other Cdks participate in 
diverse processes ranging from transcriptional regulation 
to neuronal differentiation. Surprisingly, fibroblasts from 
mice  that  lack  Cdk2,  Cdk4,  or  Cdk6  are  viable;  other 
Cdks can drive the cell cycle if necessary. The mice suffer 
developmental  difficulties  because  those  genes  are 
needed for the differentiation of particular cell types.

Cyclins
Cdks  require  cyclin  binding  for  catalytic  activity  (Fig. 
40.13). Cyclins were discovered in rapidly dividing inver-
tebrate  embryos  as  proteins  that  accumulate  gradually 
during  interphase  and  are  abruptly  destroyed  during 
mitosis (see Fig. 40.11). This process of cyclic accumula-
tion and destruction inspired their name.

702 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

BOX 40.2  Use of Genetics to Study the Cell Cycle

Studies  of  the  distantly  related  budding  and  fission  yeasts 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Schizosaccharomyces pombe 
(see  Fig.  2.8)  were  important  for  understanding  the  cell 
cycle for several reasons. First, the proteins that control the 
cell  cycle  are  remarkably  conserved  between  yeasts  and 
mammals. Second, both yeast genomes are small, simplifying 
the  discovery  of  important  gene  products.  Third,  genetic 
analysis is straightforward, as both yeasts can grow as hap-
loids, and both efficiently incorporate cloned DNA into their 
chromosomes by homologous recombination.

These two yeasts evolved very different strategies for cell 
division.  Budding  yeasts  divide  by  assembling  a  single  bud 
on  the  surface  of  the  cell  every  cell  cycle.  Fission  yeasts 
divide  by  fission  across  the  center  of  an  elongated  cell.  A 
useful  feature  of  using  yeast  to  study  the  cell  cycle  is  that 
the stage of the cell cycle is revealed by the cellular morphol-
ogy  in  the  light  microscope.  For  budding  yeast,  unbudded 
cells are in G1, cells with buds smaller than the mother cell 
are  in  S  phase,  and  cells  whose  buds  are  similar  in  size  to 
the mother cell are in G2 or M. For fission yeast, cell length 
provides a yardstick for estimating cell-cycle position.

The cell cycles of both yeasts differ from those of animal 
cells. In budding yeast, much of the 90-minute cell cycle is 
spent in G1. Thus, the networks controlling the G1 → S transi-
tion are particularly amenable to study. In contrast, a fission 
yeast  spends  most  of  its  2-hour  cell  cycle  in  G2.  S  phase 
follows separation of sister chromatids and occurs prior to 
cytokinesis.  Thus,  the  control  of  the  G2  →  M  transition  is 
readily  studied  in  fission  yeast.  During  mitosis,  the  nuclear 
envelopes  of  both  yeasts  remain  intact,  so  chromosomes 
segregate on a spindle inside the nucleus.

Genetic  studies  revealed  that  the  yeast  cell  cycle  is  a 
dependent pathway whereby events in the cycle occur nor-
mally  only  after  earlier  processes  are  completed.  The  cell 
cycle  can  be  modeled  as  a  line  of  dominoes,  each  domino 
corresponding to the action of a gene product that is essen-
tial for cell-cycle progression (Fig. 40.5) and the nth domino 

Model of the cell cycle as a
simple dependent pathway

falling  only  when  knocked  down  by  the  (n-1)th  domino. 
According to the model, mutations in genes that are essential 
for cell-cycle progression cause an entire culture of yeast to 
accumulate  at  a  single  point  in  the  cell  cycle  (the  point  at 
which the defective gene product first becomes essential). 
This is referred to as the arrest point. Fig. 40.5 shows this 
by including a “mutant” domino that does not fall over when 
struck by the upstream domino. Mutants that meet this cri-
terion  are  called  cell  division  cycle  mutants  or  CDC 
mutants. Genetic screens for CDC mutants have identified 
many important genes involved in cell-cycle control.

Because  CDC  genes  are  essential  for  cell-cycle  progres-
sion,  it  is  impossible  to  propagate  strains  of  yeast  carrying 
CDC mutants unless the mutants have a conditional lethal 
phenotype.  The  most  commonly  used  conditional  lethal 
mutations  are  temperature  sensitive  (ts).  Many  yeast 
temperature-sensitive  mutants  are  viable  at  23°C  (the  per-
missive  temperature),  but  cease  dividing  at  36°C  (the 
restrictive  temperature).  Temperature-sensitive  proteins 
often have an altered amino acid sequence, but occasionally, 
the lack of a gene product can cause a ts phenotype. More 
recently, the use of auxin-inducible degrons (see Chapters 6 
and  23)  has  enabled  experimenters  to  study  the  conse-
quences  of  depleting  an  essential  protein  from  yeast  in  a 
matter of minutes.

Fission yeasts with CDC mutants affecting the entry into 
mitosis have distinctive morphologies. Cells mutant in Wee1 
(a kinase that keeps cyclin-dependent kinase–1 [Cdk1] inac-
tive  prior  to  mitosis)  enter  mitosis  prematurely  and  are 
shorter  than  normal  (Fig.  40.6B).  In  contrast,  cells  lacking 
Cdc25 (a phosphatase that counteracts Wee1 and activates 
Cdk1)  are  unable  to  undergo  mitosis  but  continue  their 
growth  cycle,  therefore  becoming  greatly  elongated  (Fig. 
40.6C).  This  simple  morphologic  assay  allowed  straightfor-
ward classification of yeast CDC genes into those that stimu-
late progression through mitosis and those that retard entry 
into mitosis.

A. Wild type

B. Wee1 mutant C. Cdc25 mutant

Wild type

CDC mutant

FIGURE  40.5  THE CELL CYCLE MAY BE MODELED AS A 
SIMPLE  DEPENDENT  PATHWAY.  A  cell  division  cycle  (CDC) 
mutation  can  block  further  progression  along  the  pathway  at  a 
characteristic point in the cell cycle. 

FIGURE  40.6  FLUORESCENCE  MICROGRAPHS  OF 
FISSION  YEAST  CELLS  ILLUSTRATING  PHENOTYPES  OF 
CELL-CYCLE  MUTATIONS.  Cell  walls  and  nuclei  are  stained. 
A, Wild-type cells. B, A wee1 mutation that accelerates entry into 
mitosis  at  the  restrictive  temperature.  C,  A  cdc25  mutation  that 
delays entry into mitosis at the restrictive temperature. (Courtesy H. 
Ohkura, Wellcome Trust Institute for Cell Biology, University of Edin-
burgh, United Kingdom.)

 

CHAPTER 40  n  Introduction to the Cell Cycle 

703

BOX 40.3  Studies of the Cell Cycle in Vitro

Amphibian oocytes and eggs are storehouses of most compo-
nents needed for cell-cycle progression. Oocytes are arrested 
in G2 until a surge of the hormone progesterone causes them 
to “mature” into eggs, which are then naturally arrested in 
metaphase of the second meiotic division (see Chapter 45). 
After  fertilization,  the  embryo  of  the  South  African  clawed 
frog (Xenopus  laevis) undergoes a rapid burst of cell divi-
sions. An initial cell cycle 90 minutes long is followed by a 
rapid  succession  of  11  cleavages  spaced  only  30  minutes 
apart to produce an embryo of 4096 cells (Fig. 40.7).

Thirty minutes per cycle is insufficient to transcribe and 
translate all the genes needed to make the daughter cells that 
are produced at each division. The frog solves this problem 

1 Cleavage
90 minutes

A

B

11 Cleavages
30 minutes

apart

C

Somatic cell enlarged ×10

FIGURE  40.7  CLEAVAGES  SUBDIVIDE  THE  EGG  DURING 
XENOPUS EARLY DEVELOPMENT. A, Fertilized egg. B, Two-cell 
stage.  C,  Multicellular  embryo.  Compare  size  of  somatic  cell  and 
egg. 

A. Tightly
packed
eggs

B. Eggs crushed
by centrifugation

C. Added sperm

nucleus with
membrane
removed

by  making  oocytes  extremely  large  (~500,000  times  the 
volume  of  a  typical  somatic  cell)  and  storing  within  them 
vast stockpiles of the structural components needed to make 
cells. As a result, only DNA and a very few proteins need be 
synthesized during early embryonic divisions. In addition to 
structural  components,  many  factors  that  regulate  normal 
cell-cycle progression are also stockpiled in oocytes. These 
features make Xenopus oocytes an excellent source of mate-
rial for biochemical analysis of the cell cycle.

Remarkably, it is possible to make cell-free extracts from 
Xenopus eggs that progress through the cell cycle in vitro 
(Fig.  40.8).  Nuclei  from  G1  cells  or  haploid  sperm  nuclei, 
when added to these extracts, efficiently replicate their DNA 
and  proceed  through  the  cell  cycle  into  mitosis,  complete 
with  chromosome  condensation,  nuclear  envelope  break-
down,  chromosome  alignment  on  a  spindle,  and  anaphase 
segregation  of  sister  chromatids  without  any  additions  to  
the  tube.  Because  these  events  occur  in  a  cell-free  milieu, 
they are readily accessible to biochemical manipulation. For 
example, antibodies and other proteins can be added to the 
extracts,  and  their  effect  on  the  cell  cycle  can  readily  be 
determined. Thus, the Xenopus extract system offers a pow-
erful tool for testing the role of various proteins in the cell 
cycle in higher eukaryotes.

D. Reassembly

of nucleus

E. DNA replication

F. Mitosis

Centrifuge

hard

Xenopus
eggs

Lipid

Extract

Pellet

FIGURE  40.8  USE  OF  XENOPUS  EGG  EXTRACTS  TO  STUDY  THE  CELL  CYCLE.  A–B,  Making  a  Xenopus  egg  extract  that  is 
competent to carry out cell-cycle oscillations in vitro. C–F, A cycling Xenopus extract undergoes alternating S and M phases. G1 and G2 
phases are minimal (as they are during early development of the frog). 

Humans have at least 16 different cyclin proteins that 
range in size from 35 to 130 kD. The highly conserved 
cyclin box domain, which docks with the Cdk partners, 
is the defining structural feature of these proteins. Only 
a  handful  of  cyclin  isoforms  are  involved  in  cell-cycle 
control.  Of  those  that  are,  some  function  during  G1 
phase,  others  during  G2  phase,  and  still  others  during 
M phase.

Positive Regulation of Cyclin-Dependent Kinase 
Structure and Function
Cdks monomers are intrinsically inactive, so they depend 
on activation by cyclins and are regulated by positive and 

negative controls. Like other eukaryotic protein kinases 
(see Fig. 25.3), Cdks have a bilobed structure with the 
active site in a deep cleft between a small N-terminal and 
larger C-terminal domain. Monomeric Cdks have a flex-
ible T loop that blocks the mouth of the catalytic pocket. 
In  addition,  a  short α-helix  is  oriented  such  that  a  glu-
tamic  acid  required  for  adenosine  triphosphate  (ATP) 
hydrolysis  points  away  from  the  catalytic  cleft.  As  a 
result,  ATP  bound  by  the  monomeric  kinase  cannot 
transfer  its  α-phosphate  to  protein  substrates  (see 
Fig. 40.13A).

Several  different  mechanisms  regulate  Cdk  activity 
(Fig.  40.14).  On  one  hand,  cyclin  binding  and 

704 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

BOX 40.4  Discovery of Factors Essential for Cell-Cycle Progression

The best early evidence for the existence of positive induc-
ers of cell-cycle transitions in mammals was obtained in cell 
fusion  experiments.  When  cultured  cells  in  S  phase  were 
fused with cells in G1, the G1 nuclei initiated DNA replication 
shortly  thereafter.  In  contrast,  if  S  phase  cells  were  fused 
with  G2  cells,  the  G2  nuclei  did  not  rereplicate  their  DNA 
until after passing through mitosis. The most dramatic results 
were  obtained  when  mitotic  cells  were  fused  with  inter-
phase  cells.  This  caused  the  interphase  cells  to  enter  into 
mitosis abruptly (as judged by nuclear envelope breakdown 
and  chromosome  condensation).  The  phenomenon  was 
termed  premature  chromosome  condensation  (PCC). 
The mitotic inducer could work in any cell-cycle phase (Fig. 
40.9).  If  mitotic  cells  were  fused  with  cells  in  G1  phase, 
interphase  chromosomes  condensed  into  long,  single  fila-
ments. If the interphase cell was in G2 phase, the duplicated 
chromosomes  appeared  as  double  filaments.  If  the  inter-
phase cell was in the S phase, the partially replicated chro-
mosomes  condensed  into  a  complex  pattern  of  single  and 
double  condensed  regions  separated  by  regions  of  decon-
densed  chromatin  corresponding  to  sites  where  DNA  was 
actively replicating at the time of fusion.

Working  independently,  developmental  biologists  who 
were  interested  in  the  control  of  cell  division  during  early 
development in frogs also discovered an activity that could 
cause  interphase  cells  to  enter  the  M  phase.  They  used  a 
micropipette to extract a tiny bit of cytoplasm from a mature 
egg  that  was  arrested  in  metaphase  of  meiosis  II  and  
inject it into oocytes (which are in G2 phase). The oocytes 
rapidly  entered  M  phase,  with  concomitant  chromosome 
condensation and nuclear envelope disassembly (Fig. 40.10). 
This  stimulation  to  enter  M  phase  is  called  maturation, 
and  the  unknown  factor  present  in  the  egg  cytoplasm  
that  induced  oocyte  maturation  was  termed  MPF,  or 
maturation-promoting  factor  (now  often  referred  to  as 
M  phase–promoting  factor).  It  was  realized  early  on  that 

MPF might be related to the inducer of mitosis detected in 
the  PCC  experiments.  In  fact,  extracts  from  mitotic  tissue 
culture cells could induce meiotic maturation when injected 
into  oocytes.  Similar  extracts  from  cells  in  other  phases  
of  the  cell  cycle  did  not  cause  the  G2/M  phase  transition 
in oocytes.

Other cell biologists studying protein synthesis in starfish 
and  sea  urchin  embryos  noticed  a  curious  protein  that 
seemed  to  accumulate  across  the  cell  cycle  but  was  then 
destroyed during mitosis. They were well aware of the work 
on  MPF,  and  immediately  suspected  that  their  protein,  
which  they  called  cyclin,  might  be  somehow  involved  in 
MPF activity (Fig. 40.11).

In  a  third  line  of  investigation,  geneticists  working  on 
yeasts realized that the cell cycle could be dissected through 
the isolation of cell division cycle (CDC) mutants (see Box 
40.2).  The  analysis  of  the  cell  cycle  with  these  mutants 
dominated  cell-cycle  research  to  such  an  extent  that  many 
human  genes  that  are  important  in  cell-cycle  control  bear 
the CDC name if they are related to well-characterized yeast 
genes.  The  best-known  genes  to  emerge  from  this  analysis 
were  Cdc2  (Cdk1)  and  Cdc25,  both  of  which  were  deter-
mined genetically to encode proteins that actively promote 
the G2/M transition. Other genes, such as Wee1, were found 
to  encode  activities  that  act  as  antagonists  that  inhibit  the 
G2/M transition.

When eventually purified from Xenopus eggs (Fig. 40.12), 
active MPF consisted primarily of two polypeptides of 32,000 
and  45,000 Da.  The  smaller  component  of  MPF  is  the 
Xenopus equivalent of the fission yeast Cdc2 gene product 
(now  known  as  Cdk1).  The  larger  component  of  Xenopus 
MPF is a B-type cyclin. Only 15 years later was it recognized 
that  fully  functional  MPF  also  requires  Greatwall  kinase  
and its small substrates to inhibit protein phosphatase PP2A-
B55δ and give Cdk activity a chance to take off and trigger 
mitotic entry.

A. M–G1 fusion

B. M–S fusion

C. M–G2 fusion

FIGURE 40.9  FUSION WITH MITOTIC CELLS CAUSES INTERPHASE CELLS TO ENTER MITOSIS PREMATURELY, NO MATTER 
WHERE THEY ARE IN THE CELL CYCLE. The resulting prematurely condensed chromosomes are single threads if the interphase cell 
was in G1 phase (A), double threads if the cell was in G2 phase (C) and a complex mixture of both interspersed with uncondensed regions 
if the cell was in S phase (B). M, mitosis. (From Hanks SK, Gollin SM, Rao PN, et al. Cell cycle-specific changes in the ultrastructural orga-
nization of prematurely condensed chromosomes. Chromosoma. 1983;88:333–342.)

5 µm

 

CHAPTER 40  n  Introduction to the Cell Cycle 

705

BOX 40.4  Discovery of Factors Essential for Cell-Cycle Progression—cont’d

A

Meiotic
spindle

B

C

D

Nucleus

Nuclear disassembly

and chromosome

condensation

Meiotic
spindle

Suck out
cytoplasm

Inject it

into oocyte

Oocyte enters

M phase

Egg

Fully grown oocyte

Egg

FIGURE 40.10  THE EXPERIMENT THAT IDENTIFIED MATURATION-PROMOTING FACTOR. A, The box shows the meiotic spindle 
in a Xenopus egg arrested in metaphase II of meiosis. B, The box shows the interphase nucleus in a mature oocyte. Following injection of 
MPF, the nucleus disassembles, mitotic chromosomes form (C), and the cell assembles a meiotic spindle (D). Disassembly of the oocyte 
nucleus and entry into M phase is called maturation, and the factor triggering this event was named maturation-promoting factor (MPF). 

A

B

75

50

25

B
 
d
n
a
 
A
 
s
d
n
a
b
 
f
o
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I

0

0

A. SDS gel of
     proteins in
     purified MPF
97

B

)
a
D
k
(
 
t

i

h
g
e
w

l

 
r
a
u
c
e
o
M

l

67

43

30

Cyclin B

Cdk 1

Induction of M phase (%)

0

0

0

0

50

85

25

0

0

0

A

Cleavage
index

1

Time (hours)

2

B. H1 kinase
     activity

FIGURE  40.11  EXPERIMENTAL  IDENTIFICATION  OF  A 
CYCLIN. Newly synthesized proteins (labeled with 35S-methionine) 
in fertilized sea urchin eggs were separated by sodium dodecylsul-
fate (SDS) polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. It was noted that the 
protein labeled A (which was named cyclin) first accumulated, was 
greatly  reduced  at  the  metaphase/anaphase  transition,  and  then 
began  to  accumulate  again.  Protein  B,  which  is  not  involved  in  
cell-cycle  regulation,  accumulated  progressively  over  this  time. 
“Cleavage index” refers to the percentage of dividing cells observed 
in the microscope at varying times after fertilization. (From Evans T, 
Rosenthal  ET,  Youngblom  J,  et al.  Cyclin:  a  protein  specified  by 
maternal mRNA in sea urchin eggs that is destroyed at each cleav-
age division. Cell. 1983;33:389–396.)

Fraction number

6

9

12

15

FIGURE  40.12  PURIFICATION OF MATURATION-PROMOT-
ING  FACTOR  (MPF).  A,  Sodium  dodecylsulfate  (SDS)  polyacryl-
amide  gel  electrophoresis  of  fractions  from  the  final  step  of  the 
purification.  The  numbers  at  the  bottom  show  the  percentage  of 
oocytes that entered M phase when a portion of each column frac-
tion was injected (the classical MPF assay). The roughly 32-kD band 
is Cdk1 (p34cdc2). The roughly 45-kD band is cyclin B. B, Assay of 
the ability of the column fractions to phosphorylate histone Hl. This 
is a standard assay for active Cdk enzymes. (Modified from Lohka 
M, Hayes MK, Maller JL. Purification of maturation-promoting factor, 
an intracellular regulator of early mitotic events. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
U S A. 1988;85:3009–3013.)

phosphorylation of the T loop stimulate enzyme activity. 
On the other, Cdks are inhibited by phosphorylation of  
residues adjacent to the ATP-binding site and binding of 
inhibitory proteins.

Cyclin binding causes the T loop to retract away from 
the  mouth  of  the  catalytic  pocket  (see  Fig.  40.13B).  In 
addition,  the  secondary  structure  of  the  N-terminal 

domain is altered, allowing the bound ATP to assume a 
conformation suitable for reaction with substrates.

Despite  these  changes,  the  Cdk–cyclin  complex  has 
low  catalytic  activity.  Full  activation  of  most  Cdks 
requires  a  kinase  called  Cdk-activating  kinase  (CAK), 
which phosphorylates a threonine in the T loop of the 
Cdk  (this  threonine  gives  the  loop  its  name).  In 

706 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

A. Cdk2

N lobe

Active site
ATP

PSTAIR
helix

T loop

B. Cdk2–cyclin A

C. Active Cdk2–cyclin A

C lobe

Cyclin A

Phosphorylation
site

FIGURE 40.13  ATOMIC STRUCTURES OF CYCLIN-DEPENDENT KINASES. A, Cdk2. The PSTAIR helix, found in most Cdks, is named 
after a sequence of six amino acids that binds to cyclins (one letter code). (For reference, see Protein Data Bank [PDB; www.rcsb.org] file 1DM2.) 
B, Cdk2–cyclin A (kinase at basal activity level). (PDB file 1FIN.) C, Cdk2–cyclin (kinase fully active following phosphorylation of threonine160). (PDB 
file 1JST.) ATP, adenosine triphosphate. 

vertebrates,  CAK  is  composed  of  Cdk7-cyclin  H.  The 
phosphorylated threonine fits into a charged pocket on 
the  surface  of  the  enzyme,  flattening  the  T  loop  back 
even farther from the mouth of the catalytic pocket (see  
Figs.  40.13C  and  40.14A).  This  stimulates  the  catalytic 
activity  up  to  300-fold,  in  part  because  the  flattened  
T loop forms part of the substrate-binding surface. Threo-
nine  phosphorylation  also  stabilizes  the  association  of 
Cdk2 with cyclin A.

In  addition  to  their  cyclin  partner,  Cdk1  and  Cdk2 
bind an additional small Cdc kinase subunit (Cks) protein 
to  their  C-terminal  domain,  away  from  the  active  site. 
Bound  Cks  enables  the  kinase  to  better  hold  onto  its 
substrates and increases the efficiency with which Cdks 
can  phosphorylate  substrates  at  multiple  sites  (a  hall-
mark of Cdk target phosphorylation).

Negative Regulation of Cyclin-Dependent Kinase 
Structure and Function
At least two mechanisms slow or stop the cell cycle by 
inactivating Cdks (see Fig. 40.14). During G2 phase, the 
protein kinases Myt1 and Wee1 hold Cdk1 in check by 
phosphorylating threonine14 and tyrosine15 in the roof of 
the  ATP-binding  site.  These  phosphates  interfere  with 
ATP binding and hydrolysis. Threonine14 and tyrosine15 
are  accessible  to  the  regulatory  kinases  only  following 
cyclin binding, so this phosphorylation of Cdks depends, 
at least in part, on the availability of cyclins.

In  mammals,  three  Cdc25  phosphatases  (see  Fig. 
25.5) reverse these inhibitory phosphorylations. Cdc25A 
regulates both the G1 → S and G2 → M transitions and 
is essential for life of the cell. Ccd25B is dispensable for 
mitosis, but it is essential for the production of gametes 
in  meiosis.  Cdc25C  is  a  target  of  the  G2  DNA  damage 
checkpoint that prevents cells from undergoing mitosis 
with damaged DNA (see Fig. 43.11), but cells can survive 
without it.

A  parallel  mechanism  for  inactivating  Cdks  involves 
binding of subunits from two families of small inhibitory 

A. Kinase activation

B. Inactive forms

Cdk

Inactive kinase

Cyclin

INK4

INK4

Cyclin

Cyclin
cannot
bind

p27

Interference
with ATP use

CAK
phosphorylation

ATP
cannot
bind

Wee1 and Myt1
phosphorylation

Cdc25

phosphatase

dephosphorylation

Active kinase

Interference
with ATP use

FIGURE  40.14  POSITIVE  AND  NEGATIVE  REGULATION  OF 
CYCLIN-DEPENDENT KINASES. A, Pathway of activation by cyclin 
binding and phosphorylation. B, Pathways of inactivation by inhibitor 
binding  and  phosphorylation.  When  INK4  binds,  twisting  of  the  Cdk 
upper  lobe  blocks  cyclin  binding  or  interferes  with  ATP  hydrolysis. 
When p27 binds, a loop insinuates into the upper lobe of the Cdk and 
blocks ATP binding. (For reference, see PDB files 1B17 [Cdk2-INK4], 
1FIN  and  1BI7  [Cdk2-INK4-cyclin],  and  1JSU  [Cdk2-p27-cyclin  A].) 
CAK, Cdk-activating kinase. 

 

CHAPTER 40  n  Introduction to the Cell Cycle 

707

proteins  called  the  cyclin-dependent  kinase  inhibitors 
(CKIs) and inhibitors of Cdk4 (INK4) (for their names, 
see Appendix 40.1). When activated in the DNA damage 
response pathway, p53 turns on transcription of the CKI 
p21, which inhibits Cdk-cyclin A. CKI p27Kip1 inactivates 
complexes of Cdk2 and cyclin A by having a protein loop 
invade the N-terminal domain of the Cdk, disrupting its 
structure  and  competing  with  ATP  for  binding  to  the 
active site (see Fig. 40.14B).

Members of the INK4 family preferentially inactivate 
Cdk4  and  Cdk6  in  two  ways  (see  Fig.  40.14B).  First, 
binding  to  monomeric  Cdk  distorts  the  orientation  of  
the N- and C-terminal lobes, so cyclin D does not bind. 
INK4  family  inhibitors  also  inhibit  preformed  Cdk4/6–
cyclin  D  complexes  by  binding  the  Cdk  and  distorting 
the ATP-binding site so that the kinase uses ATP much 
less efficiently.

Cdk  inhibitors  are  important  for  growth  regulation 
during the G1 and G0 phases of the cell cycle (see Chapter 
41). They also play a critical role in the cell-cycle arrest 
that occurs in response to DNA damage and to antipro-
liferative signals. Mutations in the INK4 locus are strongly 
linked to cancer.

Role of Phosphatases in  
Counter-Balancing Cdk Activity
Two important phosphatases counter-balance Cdk activ-
ity  in  mitosis.  Just  as  Cdks  exhibit  cyclic  behavior  and 
are  activated  in  mitosis,  these  counteracting  phospha-
tases  must  also  be  cyclic—but  they  are  inhibited  in 
mitosis.  Protein  phosphatase  1  (PP1),  associates  with 
numerous targets on chromosomes and the mitotic appa-
ratus,  and  is  highly  active  during  mitotic  exit.  Many 
target  proteins  have  a  simple  loop  with  the  sequence 
RVS/TF that inserts into a groove on the enzyme. During 
mitosis,  Cdk  phosphorylation  of  adjacent  sites  often 
blocks  this  interaction  with  substrates.  Cdk1-cyclin  B 
also  phosphorylates  the  PP1  catalytic  subunit  during 
mitosis, thereby inactivating the enzyme.

PP2A  is  more  directly  involved  in  Cdk  regulation.  It 
is  a  trimeric  enzyme  with  catalytic,  scaffolding,  and 
regulatory  subunits.  The  latter  include  B55α-δ  and 
B56α-ε  (see  Appendix  40.1).  PP2A-B55δ  is  largely 
responsible  for  removing  phosphates  added  by  Cdks. 
Consequently  PP2A-B55δ  must  be  inhibited  to  allow 
Cdks to drive the cell into mitosis. The Greatwall (Gwl) 
kinase  regulates  PP2A.  Gwl  is  unusual,  because  500 
amino acids are inserted into its large lobe roughly adja-
cent  to  the  T  loop  (see  Fig.  40.13).  Phosphorylation  
by  Gwl  allows  two  small  proteins,  Arpp19  (cyclic  
adenosine  monophosphate  [cAMP]-regulated  phospho-
protein  19)  and  ENSA  (α-endosulfine),  to  bind  and 
inhibit  PP2A-B55δ.  Thus,  Gwl  confers  the  necessary 
cyclic  behavior  on  PP2A.  Understanding  how  Gwl  is 
turned  on  and  off  is  important  for  developing  a  full 

picture  of  mitotic  regulation,  and  this  is  a  subject  of 
active  study.

Role of Protein Destruction in  
Cell-Cycle Control
During mitosis active Cdk1–cyclin B–Cks phosphorylates 
key substrates leading to dramatic reorganization of the 
cell and, ultimately, to separation of sister chromatids on 
the mitotic spindle. Once chromatids are separated, the 
cell must return to a state with low levels of Cdk activity 
so  that  nuclear  envelope  reassembly,  spindle  disassem-
bly, and cytokinesis can occur.

Exit  from  mitosis  requires  Cdk  inactivation  by  the 
ubiquitin-directed  proteolytic  machinery.  The  destruc-
tion of A- and B-type cyclins inactivates Cdk1 and Cdk2. 
This allows PP1, PP2A-B55δ, and other phosphatases to 
reverse the action of Cdks and bring mitosis to a close. 
Ubiquitylation  also  results  in  proteolysis  of  a  protein 
called securin, which regulates the onset of sister chro-
matid separation at anaphase.

Ubiquitin-mediated  destruction  of  cyclins  involves  a 
cascade of three enzymes described in Chapter 23 (see 
Fig.  23.3).  First,  an  E1  enzyme  (ubiquitin-activating 
enzyme)  activates  the  small  protein  ubiquitin  by 
forming  a  thioester  bond  between  the  ubiquitin 
C-terminus and a cysteine on the enzyme. Activated ubiq-
uitin is next transferred to another thioester bond on an 
E2  enzyme  (ubiquitin-conjugating  enzyme).  The  E2 
often  cooperates  with  an  E3,  which  is  important  for 
imparting  substrate  specificity,  to  transfer  ubiquitin  to 
the  ε-amino  group  of  a  lysine  on  a  target  protein.  The 
resulting  polyubiquitinated  proteins  are  usually  targets 
for destruction by the cylindrical 26S proteasome (see 
Fig.  23.8).  This  large  multienzyme  complex  functions 
like a cytoplasmic garbage disposal, grinding target pro-
teins  down  to  short  peptides  and  spitting  out  intact 
ubiquitin  monomers  for  reuse  in  further  rounds  of 
protein degradation. Its role was originally thought to be 
the  removal  of  damaged  proteins  from  the  cytoplasm; 
however, it is now recognized as a central factor in cell-
cycle control.

The key E3 ligase regulating cyclin proteolysis is a large 
(15-subunit)  complex  called  the  anaphase-promoting 
complex/cyclosome (APC/C) (Fig. 40.15). The APC/C 
is  inactive  during  the  S  and  G2  phases  of  the  cell  cycle. 
Phosphorylation  by  Cdk1-cyclin  B-Cks1  and  binding  of  
the  protein  coactivator  Cdc20  activate  the  APC/C  in  
early  mitosis.  APC/CCdc20  then  triggers  the  metaphase–
anaphase transition.

An  important  checkpoint,  the  spindle  assembly 
regulates  APC/CCdc20  during  mitosis, 
checkpoint, 
keeping  it  inactive  until  all  kinetochores  are  produc-
tively attached to spindle microtubules. The checkpoint 
effector is the mitotic checkpoint complex whose for-
mation  is  triggered  by  unattached  kinetochores.  This 

708 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

APC/CCdc20
(active)
Cdc20

APC/CCdh1
(active)
Cdh1

SCFSkp2, SCFβ–TrCP

SCFSkp2

E2

Cdk
cyclin

Cdh1

APC

Degron

P M A T

P M

G1

S

G2

P M A T

P M

G1

APC/CCdh1 surface and backbone

FIGURE 40.15  TWO FORMS OF THE ANAPHASE-PROMOTING COMPLEX/CYCLOSOME (APC/C) CONTROL THE CELL CYCLE. 
At the metaphase-anaphase transition, the APC/C with associated Cdc20 triggers the onset of anaphase by signaling the degradation of securin 
and cyclin B. During mitosis Cdh1 phosphorylated by Cdk1–cyclin B is unable to bind the APC/C, so APC/CCdh1 activity is low. As Cdk1–cyclin 
B activity declines in anaphase, Cdh1 binds the APC/C and APC/CCdh1 drives the exit from mitosis into G1. APC/CCdh1 remains active throughout 
G1 but is inactivated following synthesis of the specific inhibitor Emi1. After the onset of S phase, SCF (shown here adding a ubiquitin chain to 
a docked substrate) directs the degradation of cell-cycle substrates such as p27Kip1, following their phosphorylation by protein kinases. 

complex inhibits APC/CCdc20 by acting as a competitive 
substrate. As a result, cyclin B and securin are stable until 
the  checkpoint  is  satisfied.  A  few  substrates,  including 
cyclin  A,  bind  directly  to  the  APC/C  without  requiring 
Cdc20,  so  they  are  marked  for  degradation  even  when 
the checkpoint is active.

Exiting  from  mitosis  and  allowing  the  G1  cell  to 
prepare chromatin for DNA replication (see Chapter 42) 
requires low Cdk activity and destruction of Cdc20. This 
is  accomplished  late  in  mitosis  by  Cdh1,  a  different 
co-activator of the APC/C. Phosphorylation of Cdh1 by 
Cdks  blocks  its  binding  to  the  APC/C  early  in  mitosis. 
Thus, APC/CCdh1 forms only after cyclin levels (and there-
fore  Cdk  activity)  decline  late  in  mitosis.  As  cells  pass 
from  G1  into  S  phase,  a  newly  synthesized  inhibitory 
protein,  Emi1,  binds  to  and  inactivates  APC/CCdh1.  This 
allows  cyclins  to  accumulate  during  S  and  G2.  Remark-
ably,  APC/CCdh1  is  also  involved  with  regulating  the 
activity of synapses in nondividing neurons.

After the G1 → S transition and throughout the remain-
der  of  interphase  members  of  a  different  family  of  E3 
activities called SCF regulate the levels of proteins that 
control  Cdk  and  other  cell  cycle  factors.  SCF  is  named 
after  three  of  its  four  subunits:  Skp1,  cullin,  and  F-box 
protein (Fig. 40.16). SCF is a molecular toolbox built on 
a bow-shaped scaffold formed by the cullin subunit. The 
fourth subunit, Rbx1, binds near the C-terminus of cullin 
and uses a protein motif called a RING finger to dock to 
a  ubiquitin-linked  E2  enzyme.  Skp1  binds  to  the  other 
end of the cullin, where it provides a docking site for an 
F-box  protein  that  recognizes  and  binds  the  substrate. 
(The F-box got its name because it was first discovered 
in cyclin F.) Humans have 78 F-box proteins, giving SCF 
enormous versatility. Two examples shown in Fig. 40.16 
are Skp2, which targets the Cdk inhibitor p27 helping to 
drive  the  G1 →  S  transition,  and β-Trcp,  which  targets 
Cdc25A, Wee1, and Emi1.

A. Structure of SCFSkp2-E2 complex

Skp 2

~50 Å

Skp 1

Cullin 1

E2

RbX 1

B. Some F-box proteins C. Their target substrates

F

F box

Skp 1

F

Skp 1

Skp 2

E2F-1:  Cell-cycle regulator
p27Kip1:  Cdk2 inhibitor

β-TrCP1

Cdc25A:  Cdk1 activator

Wee1:  Cdk1 inhibitor  
Emi1:  APC/CCdh1 inhibitor
β-Catenin:  Cell-proliferation
                  regulator

FIGURE  40.16  STRUCTURE  AND  FUNCTION  OF  SCF. 
A, Structure of SCFSkp2. Left, SCF recognizes target proteins through 
its F-box subunit (Skp2 in this case). Right, Ubiquitin is then transferred 
from an E2 enzyme. The whole is assembled on a rigid bow-like scaf-
fold composed of the cullin subunit. Structures of F-box proteins Skp2 
and β-Trcp (B) and a list of several of their known target proteins (C). 

SCF  is  fundamentally  different  from  the  APC/C, 
because it is constitutively active. However, it ubiquity-
lates  substrates  only  after  they  have  been  phosphory-
lated,  often  by  Cdks.  This  feature  links  SCF  activity  to 
the cell cycle.

 

CHAPTER 40  n  Introduction to the Cell Cycle 

709

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

Cdk2-cyclin E

Cdk1-cyclin B

Cdk2-cyclin A

P M A T

P M

G1

S

G2

P M A T

P M

G1

APC/CCdh1

APC/CCdc20

Emi1
SCFSkp2, SCFβ–TrCP
PP2AB55δ, PP1

y
t
i
v
i
t
c
a
 
k
d
C
 
g
n
s
a
e
r
c
n
I

i

y
t
i
v
i
t
c
a
 
C
P
A
 
g
n
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

I

FIGURE  40.17  DIAGRAM  SHOWING  THE  CHANGING  STATES  OF  THE  CYTOPLASM  AS  CELLS  TRAVERSE  THE  CELL  CYCLE. 
Between G2 and G1 are shown the various stages of mitosis: P, prophase; PM, prometaphase; M, metaphase; A, anaphase; T, telophase. The 
states of the cytoplasm discussed in the text are shown as green arrows across the top. Increased Cdk activity is shown as peaks upwards from 
the central bar. Increasing anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) activity is shown as a mirror image, with peaks going down from 
the central bar. APC, anaphase-promoting complex; PP1, protein phosphatase 1; PP2A, protein phosphatase 2A. 

Changing States of the Cytoplasm During 
the Cell Cycle
The cell cycle is characterized by five discrete physiolog-
ical states of the cytoplasm (Fig. 40.17). Changing levels 
of  Cdk  activity  drive  transitions  between  these  states, 
sometimes  counteracted  and  sometimes  reinforced  by 
targeted proteolysis.
1.  Early  mitosis.  Cdk2-cyclin  A  peaks  in  prophase,  
followed  by  Cdk1-cyclin  B.  When  the  nuclear  enve-
lope  breaks  down,  the  APC/CCdc20  starts  degrading 
cyclin A, but the spindle checkpoint inhibits destruc-
tion  of  other  substrates.  When  the  last  chromo-
some has attached correctly to spindle microtubules 
(metaphase),  the  checkpoint  is  satisfied,  and  APC/
CCdc20 starts to degrade cyclin B and securin, an inhibi-
tor of a key protease called separase. Their degrada-
tion continues throughout metaphase.

2.  Anaphase  and  mitotic  exit.  When  securin  levels  fall 
below a critical threshold, active separase cleaves a key 
component  of  the  cohesin  ring  (see  Fig.  8.18).  This 
triggers sister chromatid separation. Cyclin destruction 
continues  throughout  anaphase  and  telophase,  and 
falling Cdk1 activity allows the formation of APC/CCdh1, 
which  marks  Cdc20  for  destruction  along  with  the 
remaining B-type cyclins. SCFβ-Trcp destruction of Emi1 
allows APC/CCdh1 to be active when it forms.

3.  G1  phase.  APC/CCdh1  and  Cdk  inhibitors  of  the  CKI 
and  Ink4  families  cooperate  to  inhibit  Cdk  activity. 

Low Cdk activity is required for cytokinesis, spindle 
disassembly,  chromosome  decondensation,  nuclear 
envelope  reassembly,  reactivation  of  transcription, 
reassembly  of  the  Golgi  apparatus,  and  assembly  of 
prereplication complexes on the chromosomes.

4.  G1–S phase transition. Growth signals from the envi-
ronment  promote  the  transcription  of  Cyclin  E.  If  
the  levels  pass  a  critical  threshold,  a  burst  of  Cyclin 
E-Cdk2 activity allows the cell to pass the restriction 
point,  leading  to  synthesis  of  proteins  required  for 
DNA replication and cell-cycle progression. Cdk phos-
phorylation  targets  the  CKI  peptides  for  destruction 
by  SCF  allowing  Cdk2  to  become  activated.  In  addi-
tion,  APC/CCdh1  is  inactivated  by  newly  synthesized 
Emi1.

5.  S–G2 phase. Cdk activity remains high throughout the 
remainder  of  the  cell  cycle,  and  SCF  continues  to 
degrade selected proteins tagged by Cdk phosphoryla-
tion. SCFβ-Trcp destruction of Cdc25A keeps Cdk1 inac-
tive,  preventing  a  premature  entry  into  mitosis.  The 
APC/C  remains  inactive,  allowing  mitotic  cyclins  to 
accumulate. It is not known what ultimately triggers 
entry into mitosis, but an important factor may be a 
switch  in  the  specificity  of  SCFβ-Trcp,  which  spares 
Cdc25A  and  instead  degrades  the  Cdk-inhibitory 
kinase Wee1.
Although  this  sounds  complicated,  the  underlying 
principles are actually quite straightforward. The follow-
ing chapters discuss the cell-cycle transitions in greater 

710 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

detail  and  show  how  the  process  is  modulated  in 
response to a changing environment.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Tim Hunt, David Morgan, and Jonathon Pines 
for their suggestions on revisions to this chapter.

SELECTED READINGS

Hunt  T.  On  the  regulation  of  protein  phosphatase  2A  and  its  role  in 
controlling entry into and exit from mitosis. Adv Biol Regul. 2013;
53:173-178.

Lorca T, Castro A. The Greatwall kinase: a new pathway in the control 

of the cell cycle. Oncogene. 2013;32:537-543.

Morgan  DO.  The  Cell  Cycle:  Principles  of  Control.  London:  New 

Science Press; 2007: 297p.

Nasmyth K. A prize for proliferation. Cell. 2001;107:689-701.
Nurse P. A long twentieth century of the cell cycle and beyond. Cell. 

2000;100:71-78.

Primorac I, Musacchio A. Panta rhei: the APC/C at steady state. J Cell 

Bartek J, Lukas J. DNA damage checkpoints: from initiation to recovery 

Biol. 2013;201:177-189.

or adaptation. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2007;19:238-245.

Qian J, Winkler C, Bollen M. 4D-networking by mitotic phosphatases. 

Brown JS, Jackson SP. Ubiquitylation, neddylation and the DNA damage 

Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2013;25:697-703.

response. Open Biol. 2015;5:150018.

Craney  A,  Rape  M.  Dynamic  regulation  of  ubiquitin-dependent  cell 

cycle control. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2013;25:704-710.

Stukenberg  PT,  Burke  DJ.  Connecting  the  microtubule  attachment 
status of each kinetochore to cell cycle arrest through the spindle 
assembly checkpoint. Chromosoma. 2015;124:463-480.

Hartwell LH, Weinert TA. Checkpoints: Controls that ensure the order 

Wieser S, Pines J. The biochemistry of mitosis. Cold Spring Harb Per-

of cell cycle events. Science. 1989;246:629-634.

spect Biol. 2015;7:a015776.

APPENDIX 40.1
Inventory of the Enzymes of the Cell-Cycle Engine

Cyclin-Dependent Kinases and Their Cyclin Partners
Kinase
Cdk1 (p34cdc2)

Cyclin (+ Other) Partner
A
B1, B2 (Xenopus has 5 B-type 

cyclins)

Cdk1–cyclin B binds Cks1 

(Cdc kinase subunit)

Cdk2
Cdk4, Cdk6

A, E
D1–D3

Cdk5
Cdk7 (CAK)

CDK5R1 or CDK5R2
H; also binds assembly factor 

Cdk8
Cdk9
Cyclin Inhibitors
Inhibitor
CKI: p21Cip1/Waf1 most 

Cdk-cyclin complexes

MAT1

C
T

Cdk Substrates
Most Cdk-cyclin complexes

CKI: p27Kip1

Most Cdk-cyclin complexes

CKI: p57Kip2
INK4: p15Ink4b

Most Cdk-cyclin complexes
Cdk4, Cdk6

INK4: p16Ink4a

Cdk4, Cdk6

Function
Mammals: triggers G2 → M transition. Yeasts: triggers G1 → S and G2 → 

M transitions. Cyclin A is synthesized in S and destroyed starting at 
prometaphase. Cyclins B are synthesized in S/G2 and destroyed 
following the completion of chromosome attachment to the spindle. 
Cyclins A1, B3 function preferentially in meiosis.

Triggers G1 → S transition. Can be replaced by other Cdks in mouse.
Phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma susceptibility protein (pRb) in G1. 
Triggers passage of the restriction point and cyclin E synthesis in some 
cell types. Extracellular growth factors control synthesis of D cyclins. 
Can be replaced by other Cdks in mouse.
Neuronal differentiation, sensory pathways.
Cdk activation by phosphorylation of the T loop. Also in TFIIH, important 

for regulation of RNA polymerase II transcription and DNA repair.

Regulation of RNA polymerase II transcription.
Regulation of RNA polymerase II transcription.

Function
Induced by p53 tumor suppresser. Cell-cycle arrest after DNA damage. 

Binds PCNA (proliferating cell nuclear antigen; see Chapter 42) and 
inhibits DNA synthesis. Promotes cell cycle arrest in senescence and 
terminal differentiation. At low levels, may help assemble active 
Cdk-cyclin complexes.

Cell cycle arrest in response to growth suppressers like TGF-β and in 

contact inhibition and differentiation.
Important in development of the palate.
Cell-cycle arrest in response to transforming growth factor (TGF)-β. 

Altered in many cancers.

Cooperates with the retinoblastoma susceptibility protein (pRb) in 

growth regulation. Cell-cycle arrest in senescence. Altered in a high 
percentage of human cancers. This gene overlaps the gene for p19ARF, 
an important regulator of the p53 tumor-suppresser protein.

INK4: p18Ink4c
INK4: p19Ink4d

Cdk4, Cdk6
Cdk4, Cdk6

Cell-cycle arrest in response to growth suppressers.
Cell-cycle arrest in response to growth suppressers.

 

CHAPTER 40  n  Introduction to the Cell Cycle 

711

APPENDIX 40.1
Inventory of the Enzymes of the Cell-Cycle Engine —cont’d

Other Components
Enzyme
Wee1 kinase
Myt1 kinase
Greatwall (Gwl) kinase 

(MASTL in humans)
Cdc25A phosphatase

Cdc25B phosphatase
Cdc25C phosphatase

Substrates
Cdk1 Y15
Cdk1 T14 + Y15
Arpp19, ENSA (α-endosulfine)

Cdk1 T14, Y15

Cdk1 T14, Y15
Cdk1 T14, Y15

PP2A phosphatase

Many proteins phosphorylated 

by Cdk1-cyclin B

PP1 phosphatase

Many targets

Functions
Nuclear kinase. Inhibits Cdk1-cyclin B in G2.
Cytoplasmic kinase. Inhibits Cdk1-cyclin B in G2.
Phosphorylated Arpp19 and ENSA inhibit PP2a, allowing active Cdk1-

cyclin B to accumulate and trigger mitotic entry

Promotes G1 → S transition and G2 → M transition. Essential for life of 

the cell.

Promotes G2 → M transition. Essential in meiosis.
Promotes G2 → M transition. Dephosphorylates Cdk1 complexed to 

cyclins A, B at T14 and Y15. Not essential for life.

Regulated by ENSA/Greatwall. With its targeting subunits B55α-δ and 

B56α-ε it regulates many activities during mitotic exit and cytokinesis.
Associates with many “targeting subunits,” which can be, for example, 

regulatory proteins, such as RepoMan or can be structural subunits  
of the kinetochore (see Chapter 8). It is inactivated by Cdk 
phosphorylation during mitosis, but has a key role in mitotic exit.

APC/CCDC20

Cyclin B, securin many others

E3 ubiquitin ligase active during M. Requires high Cdk activity to 

function. Destruction of cyclins and other substrates essential for exit 
from mitosis. Contains 15 subunits plus the specificity factor Cdc20.

APC/CCdh1

Cyclins A, B, many others

E3 ubiquitin ligase active during G1. Requires low Cdk activity to 

SCF

Cyclin E, many others

function. Keeps Cdk activity low in G1 through cyclin proteolysis. 
Contains 15 subunits plus the specificity factor Cdh1.

Class of E3 ubiquitin ligases containing Skp1 + cullin + Rbx1 + an F-box 

protein. Humans have 78 F-box proteins (Caenorhabditis elegans 
has more than 300), acting as specificity factors for substrates 
phosphorylated at specific sites, including cyclin E and Cdk inhibitors.

This page intentionally left blank

C H A P T E R 

41 

G1 Phase and Regulation of 
Cell Proliferation

During the G1 phase of the cell cycle, each cell makes 

a  key  decision:  whether  to  continue  through  another 
cycle  and  divide  or  to  remain  in  a  nondividing  state 
either temporarily or permanently. During development 
of  metazoans,  cells  exit  the  cell  cycle  as  the  first  step 
toward  forming  differentiated  tissues.  In  adults,  strict 
regulation of the timing and location of cell proliferation 
is critical to avoid cancer.

Cells enter G1 phase at the end of a proliferation cycle, 
after completing mitosis. To be free to decide whether 
to proliferate or differentiate, the cell must inactivate the 
remnants  of  the  proliferation  machinery  from  the  pre-
ceding  cell  cycle.  This  is  initiated  in  late  M-phase  by 
inactivating cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks [see Chapter 
40]) via proteolytic destruction of their cyclin subunits. 
This continues in G1 phase and is accompanied by syn-
thesis  and  stabilization  of  Cdk-inhibitory  proteins.  The 
absence  of  Cdk  activity  activates  a  regulatory  network 
that  represses  the  transcription  of  many  genes  that 
promote  cell-cycle  progression.  While  this  repressive 
network  is  active,  the  cell  cannot  proceed  through  
the cell cycle. The repression can be switched off if the 
cell is stimulated by specific signals from the surround-
ing  medium,  extracellular  matrix,  and  other  cells  (see  
Chapters 27 and 30). If these signals are diffusible sub-
stances,  they  are  known  as  mitogens.  Mitogens  can 
trigger  another  round  of  DNA  replication  and  mitosis, 
but first, the cell must pass a major decision point in G1 
called the restriction point (Fig. 41.1).

In metazoans, many cells cease cycling, either tempo-
rarily or permanently, exiting the cell cycle into a state 
known  as  G0  (Fig.  41.1).  This  frequently  accompanies 
their acquisition of specialized, differentiated character-
istics. Occasionally, it is desirable in tissues for cells in 
G0 to reenter the cell cycle to replace lost cells. Special-
ized  cells  called  stem  cells  fulfill  this  role  in  tissue 
maintenance.

This  chapter  describes  how  cells  decide  whether  to 
exit from the cell cycle into the G0 phase, how they return 

to the cycle from G0, and how they regulate their progress 
through the G1 phase. It also considers some of the points 
at which defects in cell cycle control lead to cancer.

G0 Phase and Growth Control
Cells  stop  cycling  in  three  ways.  First,  they  may  receive 
external  signals  instructing  them  to  withdraw  from  the  
cell  cycle,  enter  into  G0,  and  differentiate,  as  discussed 
later. Second, cells may find themselves in an environment 
with  insufficient  mitogens  to  drive  proliferation.  Under 
these conditions many cell types enter a transient nondi-
viding  state  known  as  quiescence,  while  they  wait  for 
conditions to improve. Third, cells that have suffered DNA 
damage  because  of  a  loss  of  cell-cycle  control  undergo 
senescence,  or  may,  in  some  cases,  commit  suicide  by 
apoptosis  (see  Chapter  46).  Senescence  is  a  permanent 
nondividing  state  that  is  physiologically  distinct  from  G0 
and from which cells normally cannot exit. One physiolog-
ical signal that can lead to senescence is a critical shorten-
ing of the telomere regions of the chromosomes in cells 

G2

M

Lack of mitogens
Antiproliferation signals
  (eg, contact inhibition,
  TGF-β telomere damage)

G0

Restriction point:
  Regulates G1 progression
  to S phase
  Blocks cell-cycle progression
  unless nutrients & mitogens
  are continuously present

G1

S

Proliferation signals
Nutrients

FIGURE 41.1  CELL CYCLE SHOWING MAJOR LANDMARKS 
IN THE G1 PHASE. TGF-β, transforming growth factor–β. 

 713

714 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

TUMOR

Blood vessels

Normal epithelial cells

NORMAL

FIGURE 41.2  DISRUPTION OF NORMAL TISSUE ARCHITEC-
TURE  BY  UNCONTROLLED  PROLIFERATION  OF  CANCER 
CELLS. Lower right, Normal thyroid tissue. Upper left, A thyroid tumor 
with  loss  of  the  normal  gland  structure.  (Courtesy  Clara  Sambade, 
IPATIMUP, Porto, Portugal.)

that  have  divided  more  than  a  critical  number  of  times. 
Overexpression  of  telomerase  (see  Fig.  7.14)  can,  when 
combined  with  suitable  mitogenic  stimuli,  prevent  cells 
from undergoing senescence in tissue culture.

Most cells in multicellular organisms are differentiated 
(adapted  to  carry  out  specialized  functions)  and  no 
longer  divide.  They  typically  form  specialized  tissues, 
each  with  a  distinctive  structural  organization  that  is 
important for its function. Unscheduled cell division can 
severely  disrupt  the  organization  of  such  tissues  (Fig. 
41.2). Accordingly, tissues strictly regulate both the loca-
tion and the frequency of cell division. In most tissues, 
divisions  normally  occur  at  a  low  rate,  producing  new 
cells in numbers just sufficient to replace those that die. 
Under  special  circumstances,  however,  such  as  in 
response to wounding (see Fig. 32.11), the rate of cell 
division  may  increase  dramatically.  This  highlights  an 
important constraint on cell-cycle control in multicellular 
organisms:  To  make  organized  tissues,  cells  must  exit 
from the cell cycle, but some cells must also retain the 
ability  to  reenter  the  active  cell  cycle  when  needed  to 
repair injuries or replace worn-out cells.

Cells that stop cycling to differentiate are said to have 
left the cycle and entered a nonproliferating state called 
G0 (Fig. 41.1). G0 may last hours or days, or even for the 
life  of  the  organism,  as  it  does  for  most  neurons.  It  is 
important  to  note  that  nondividing  cells  are  not 
dormant: G0 cells can be biochemically very active and 
continue  to  expend  large  amounts  of  energy  for  many 

Contact
inhibition

Differentiation
signals

Senescence

p27

p21
p16

p15

R

TGF-β

Cdk2–cyclin E–p21
Cdk2–cyclin E–p27

(inactive)

Cdk2–cyclin E

Cdk4–cyclin D–p27

p27

Cdk4-p15
Cdk4-p16
(inactive)

Cyclin D

(degraded)

Various signals
stimulate synthesis
of Cdk inhibitors

Cdks inactive
Hypophosphorylated Rb
binds E2F and inactivates genes
required for cell-cycle progression

FIGURE 41.3  HOW EXTERNAL STIMULI ACT ON CDK INHIBI-
TORS TO CAUSE CELLS TO ENTER A NONDIVIDING G0 STATE. 
TGF-β, transforming growth factor–β. 

BOX 41.1  Cdk Inhibitor Scorecard

The  regulation  of  G1  progression  requires  the  action  of 
two families of Cdk inhibitory proteins (see Chapter 40). 
Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (CKIs), which include 
p21Cip1 and p27Kip1, usually inhibit all Cdks and block cell-
cycle progression, but under special circumstances, they 
can  actually  activate  Cdk4/6-cyclin  D  and  promote  cell 
proliferation during G1. Cell-cycle blocks imposed by CKIs 
tend  to  be  temporary.  INK  inhibitors,  which  include 
p15Ink4B and p16Ink4a, are specialized at inhibiting Cdk4/6-
cyclin D. These can promote a profound and often perma-
nent cell-cycle arrest by activating the Rb pathway of gene 
repression.

ongoing  processes.  Because  of  turnover,  all  cells  must 
continuously  synthesize  housekeeping  proteins.  They 
must  also  expend  energy  to  maintain  intracellular  pH 
and ionic composition and to power intracellular motil-
ity. In addition, many specialized G0 cells consume large 
amounts  of  energy  to  synthesize  and  secrete  protein 
products and generate action potentials. Energy metabo-
lism  is  particularly  dramatic  in  muscle  cells  that  are 
responsible for all body movements. Thus, most G0 cells 
should  be  regarded  as  active  cells  that  just  happen  no 
longer to be engaged in cell division.

Transforming growth factor–β (TGF-β) is an example 
of  an  external  signal  that  arrests  progress  through  the 
cycle  and  regulates  differentiation  and  tissue  morpho-
genesis  (Fig.  41.3).  TGF-β  stimulates  a  receptor  serine/
threonine  kinase  that  activates  SMAD  transcription 
factors (see Fig. 27.10). SMADs suppress Cdk-4 synthesis 
and increase expression of CKI (cyclin-dependent kinase 
inhibitor)  and  Ink4  class  Cdk  inhibitors  (Box  41.1). 
p15Ink4B  preferentially  inactivates  Cdk4–cyclin  D  and 
Cdk6-cyclin  D  complexes.  It  also  displaces  CKI  class 

 

CHAPTER 41  n  G1 Phase and Regulation of Cell Proliferation 

715

inhibitors  from  the  Cdk4–cyclin  D,  permitting  them  to 
transfer to Cdk2–cyclin E complexes in the nucleus. This 
further inhibits cell-cycle progression.

The CKI p27Kip1 helps arrest the cell cycle of normal 
cells when they become crowded by neighboring cells 
(contact  inhibition;  see  ahead,  Fig.  41.11)  or  if  their 
environment  lacks  mitogens.  Genetic  analysis  in  mice 
revealed that p27Kip1 also regulates cell-cycle progression 
during development. Mice lacking p27Kip1 are 30% larger 
than  their  normal  littermates  by  several  weeks  of  age. 
This  is  at  least  partly  because  cells  in  many  organs 
undergo extra rounds of cell division.

An  analogous  mechanism  limits  proliferation  during 
the  differentiation  of  muscle.  The  transcription  factor 
MyoD  drives  expression  of  the  CKI  inhibitor  p21Cip1, 
which helps arrest proliferation and start muscle differ-
entiation (Fig. 41.3). p21Cip1 stops cell-cycle progression 
in at least two ways. First, it binds Cdk–cyclin complexes 
and  stops  them  from  promoting  cell-cycle  progression. 
It  also  blocks  DNA  replication  by  inhibiting  the  DNA 
replication  factor  proliferating  cell  nuclear  antigen 
(PCNA [see Chapter 42]) that is required for DNA poly-
merase δ activity.

Both p21Cip1 and p16Ink4a contribute to the permanent 
cell-cycle  arrest  of  senescent  cells.  p16Ink4a  activates 
inhibitory  proteins  of  the  retinoblastoma  protein  (Rb) 
and E2F families (see later) that bind to promoters and 
recruit histone methyltransferases, forming heterochro-
matin  that  permanently  inactivates  genes  required  for 
proliferation  (see  Fig.  8.7).  Once  cells  exit  the  cycle, 
multiple redundant pathways block reentry by reinforc-
ing the primary inhibition of Cdk activity. In addition, a 
specialized  histone  variant  H1o  replaces  histone  H1  in 
G0  cells,  resulting  in  more  condensed  chromatin.  This 
represses transcription generally. However, not all gene 
expression is suppressed in differentiated cells, many of 
which synthesize large amounts of specific proteins (eg, 
digestive enzymes secreted by the pancreas).

Moving Into and Out of G0: Stem Cells
Stem  cells  are  professionals  at  moving  back  and  forth 
between  G0  and  proliferative  cell  cycles.  One  of  their 
roles is to replace worn-out parts of tissues as differenti-
ated cells age or die as a result of various misadventures. 
Box 41.2 provides a brief introduction to stem cells.

BOX 41.2  Stem Cells in Mammals

The defining feature of stem cells is their capacity to self-
renew while producing daughter cells with the capacity to 
differentiate into more specialized cells under the control of 
intrinsic and environmental cues. Stem cells play a key role 
in  the  development  of  multicellular  organisms  in  addition  
to  providing  cells  for  the  renewal  and  regeneration  of  
adult tissues.

Each multicellular organism begins as a single cell (a fertil-
ized egg) with a genome encoding the information required 
to produce an adult. The divisions prior to implantation in 
the uterine wall produce a small group of epiblast cells that 
go on to form the embryo. The other cells that are produced 
at this stage are specialized to support the embryo. Epiblast 
cells  are  termed  pluripotent  because  their  progeny  can 
form all the specialized cells of the adult. Although the plu-
ripotent  cells  disappear  as  the  embryo  develops,  epiblast 
cells  can  be  propagated  and  maintained  permanently  in 
culture  without  losing  their  pluripotency  if  optimal  condi-
tions  are  provided.  These  cell  lines  are  called  embryonic 
stem cells (ES cells).

Most adult tissues set aside a few tissue stem cells that 
have  the  capacity  to  renew  themselves  and  to  produce 
daughter cells that differentiate into a limited range of spe-
cialized cells (see Figs. 28.1, 28.4, and 40.1). Adult stem cells 
have  diverse  patterns  of  cell-cycle  regulation.  Some  tissue 
stem  cells  continue  the  cell  cycle  throughout  life.  For 
example, epithelial stem cells give rise to mature cells that 
continuously replace the skin and the lining of the gastroin-
testinal  tract.  Hematopoietic  stem  cells  in  bone  marrow  
give  rise  to  both  short-lived  and  long-lived  differentiated 
blood cells. In other organs, such as liver and skeletal muscle, 

tissue  stem  cells  are  held  in  reserve  unless  the  tissue  is 
damaged,  when  they  produce  daughter  cells  to  repair  the 
damage.  Stem  cells  are  present  even  in  organs  that  have  a 
limited  capacity  for  renewal  and  regeneration,  such  as  the 
nervous  system.  The  potential  for  regeneration  from  stem 
cells has stimulated research to find ways of using embryonic 
or tissue stem cells to repair damaged or diseased organs in 
human patients. Stem cells have also been useful for produc-
tion of transgenic animals for scientific research (eg, knock-
out mice).

Discovery and Defining Features of  
Stem Cells
Pioneering work on blood cell development (see Fig. 28.4) 
established the existence of stem cells and defined many of 
the  concepts  that  apply  to  all  types  of  stem  cells.  The  key 
experiment was to inject bone marrow cells from a normal 
mouse into a mouse that had been irradiated to kill all the 
cells  that  produce  blood  cells.  Transplantation  of  bone 
marrow  cells  rescued  the  irradiated  mice  from  death  from 
anemia,  bleeding,  and  infections.  The  transplanted  bone 
marrow  contained  precursor  cells  that  formed  colonies  of 
proliferating  cells  that  regenerated  the  full  range  of  blood 
cells.  The  blood-forming  colonies  in  the  spleen,  each  of 
which formed from a single stem cell, contained either one 
or, infrequently, several types of differentiating blood cells.
This experimental system first revealed the existence of 
several  different  types  of  progenitor  cells  in  bone  marrow 
with the dual capacity to proliferate and to give rise to more 
differentiated  cells  (see  Fig.  28.4).  These  committed  pro-
genitor cells have a limited proliferation capacity and can 

Continued

716 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

BOX 41.2  Stem Cells in Mammals—cont’d

give  rise  to  only  to  specific  subsets  of  blood  cells,  such  as 
red  blood  cells,  platelets,  granulocytes,  or  lymphocytes.  In 
contrast,  there  are  a  very  few  multipotent  hematopoietic 
stem cells in bone marrow. They replenish the pool of com-
mitted  progenitor  cells,  ultimately  acting  as  a  source  of  all 
types of blood cells, while maintaining themselves through-
out the life of the individual. Antibodies for surface markers 
can now be used to distinguish and purify the various types 
of hematopoietic progenitors as well as stem cells from mice 
and  humans.  Once  separated  from  the  far  more  numerous 
mature and differentiating cells in bone marrow, stem cells 
can  be  used  for  transplantation  into  patients  with  bone 
marrow defects.

Most multipotent hematopoietic stem cells are in the G0 
phase of the cell cycle. A low level of metabolic activity is 
thought  to  contribute  to  their  longevity,  which  can  poten-
tially exceed the life span of the individual. When stimulated 
by demand for more blood cells, growth factors drive multi-
potent  stem  cells  into  a  cell  cycle  that  culminates  in  an 
asymmetrical division. One daughter cell is another multipo-
tent stem cell. The second daughter cell enters the proliferat-
ing pool of blood cell precursors as a committed progenitor 
cell. Committed progenitor cells and their progeny prolifer-
ate vigorously and differentiate into mature blood cells. An 
adult  human  produces  more  than  one  million  blood  cells 
every second.

Cytokines and other growth factors regulate proliferation 
and differentiation at every stage of blood cell production. 
The later stages are best understood. For example, the cyto-
kine erythropoietin acts through a kinase-coupled receptor 
to activate a cytoplasmic transcription factor that stimulates 
the  proliferation  and  differentiation  of  the  red  blood  cell 
lineage. Other cytokines guide the differentiation of granu-
locytes and monocytes. Hematopoietic stem cells respond to 
the same families of growth factors that control other aspects 
of development, including Wnts (see Fig. 30.7), Notch (see 
Chapter  24),  fibroblast  growth  factor  (see  Fig.  24.4),  and 
insulin-like growth factor (see Fig. 24.4). However, too little 
is known about these regulatory mechanisms to grow hema-
topoietic stem cells in the laboratory.

Properties of Adult Stem Cells
Years of detailed analysis in the laboratory and clinic estab-
lished hematopoietic stem cells as a model for stem cells in 
other tissues. General features include the capacity for self-
renewal and the production of daughters that proliferate and 
differentiate. This dichotomy can be achieved by asymmetri-
cal cell divisions guided by the same types of internal cues 
that control unequal divisions of cells in early embryos (Fig. 
41.4).  Symmetrical  divisions  yielding  two  daughter  stem 
cells  can  also  expand  the  numbers  of  stem  cells  during 
growth  to  maturity  and  during  regeneration  of  damaged 
tissues.

Stem cells depend on local environmental cues to main-
tain  their  status  as  stem  cells.  These  special  environments, 
called stem cell niches, are created by tissue cells and the 
extracellular matrix. Niche cells anchor stem cells with adhe-
rens junctions and provide cell surface and secreted proteins 
that  activate  the  signaling  pathways  that  regulate  the  cell 

Niche cell

Stem cell

Adherens
junction

Asymmetrical

division

Stem cell

+

Committed
cell

Symmetrical

division

2 stem cells

Differentiated
progeny

FIGURE  41.4  TWO  PATTERNS  OF  STEM  CELL  DIVISION. 
Asymmetrical divisions create two daughter cells: a stem cell that 
remains associated with its niche cell to maintain the pool of stem 
cells and one that is committed to multiply and produce differenti-
ated  progeny.  Symmetrical  divisions  produce  two  stem  cells  to 
expand the pool of stem cells. 

cycle of the stem cell. Some of these factors stimulate divi-
sion; others inhibit differentiation. The niches occupied by 
germ cells and neural stem cells from invertebrates are par-
ticularly  well  characterized.  During  asymmetrical  divisions 
of  these  stem  cells,  the  renewed  stem  cell  stays  behind  in 
the niche, while the daughter that is destined to differentiate 
into an egg, sperm, or neuron is released. In bone marrow, 
osteoblasts  (see  Fig.  32.5)  and  endothelial  cells  (see  Fig. 
30.13) provide niches for hematopoietic stem cells.

Epidermal Stem Cells
Skin is an example of a continuously renewing organ with a 
considerable capacity for regeneration (see Fig. 40.1). Mul-
tipotential  and  committed  stem  cells  contribute  to  both 
renewal  and  regeneration.  Committed  stem  cells  reside  in 
the basal layer of the epidermis. Asymmetrical cell divisions 
oriented  at  right  angles  to  the  basal  lamina  produce  two 
daughter  cells.  The  daughter  touching  the  basal  lamina 
carries on as the stem cell. The apical daughter cell divides 
multiple times and differentiates into an ascending column 
of cells, forming the superficial layers of the epidermis (see 
Fig. 35.6). Multipotent stem cells associated with hair folli-
cles give rise to all the cells of the hair follicle and also serve 
as a reserve for the committed epidermal stem cells in the 
event of injury (Fig. 41.5).

Skeletal Muscle Stem Cells
Small  numbers  of  stem  cells  reside  in  a  niche  sandwiched 
between  the  basal  lamina  and  the  giant  multinucleated 
muscle cells. If the muscle is damaged, these quiescent “satel-
lite cells” multiply and produce muscle cells that regenerate 
the tissue. Positive signals for proliferation and differentiation 
come  through  receptor  tyrosine  kinases  and  the  mitogen-
activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway (see Fig. 27.6) and 
other  pathways.  Restraining  signals  are  provided  by  myo-
statin, a member of the transforming growth factor (TGF)-β 
family (see Fig. 27.10). Inactivation of the myostatin pathway 
results  in  massive  enlargement  of  muscles  in  mice  and 
humans. Muscles are capable of regenerating multiple times, 

 

CHAPTER 41  n  G1 Phase and Regulation of Cell Proliferation 

717

BOX 41.2  Stem Cells in Mammals—cont’d

Epidermis

B

a

sal l

ayer

air shaft

H

Dermis

Sebaceous
gland

Bulge

A

B

Hair
bulb

C

FIGURE 41.5  STEM CELLS FROM SKIN. Multipotent stem cells of the skin reside in the hair follicle bulge (green cells in A, diagram 
in C). They move up and repair the epidermis during wound healing, and they move down and generate new hair growth during the hair 
cycle. B, Depicts a Nude mouse grafted with the cultured cell progeny of a single “bulge” stem cell and displaying a large tuft of hair, all 
derived from that single stem cell. (A and C, From Fuchs E, Tumbar T, Guasch G. Socializing with the neighbors: stem cells and their niche. 
Cell. 2004;116:769–778. B, From Blanpain C, Lowry WE, Geoghegan A, et al. Self-renewal, multipotency, and the existence of two cell 
populations within an epithelial stem cell niche. Cell. 2004;118:635–648.)

so the stem cell population renews itself during regeneration 
or is augmented by stem cells that migrate through the blood 
from bone marrow or other tissues.

Cancer Stem Cells
Stem cells may play a role in cancer, acting as a source for 
proliferating cells that make up the bulk of the tumor. If true, 
this concept helps explain why it is relatively easy to reduce 
the size of tumors by targeting dividing cells but difficult to 
completely eliminate residual tumor stem cells, which may 
divide less frequently. It is thought that the spread of cancer 
from  the  primary  tumor  to  other  tissues  (metastasis) 
requires  circulating  cancer  cells  to  find  locations  (niches) 
where they can establish themselves as stem cells.

Meristematic Stem Cells in Plants
The growth of plants depends on carefully orchestrated pro-
liferation and differentiation of cells derived from stem cells 
called  meristems.  Through  asymmetrical  divisions,  these 
relatively inactive cells give rise to daughters that proliferate 
at  the  tips  of  shoots  and  roots.  The  proliferating  cells  dif-
ferentiate into specialized tissues such as flowers, while the 
stem  cells  maintain  a  pool  of  slowly  replicating  cells  in  a 
special niche.

Use of Stem Cells to Make  
Transgenic Animals
Because embryonic stem cells grow in culture, they can be 
manipulated  experimentally.  They  can  be  transfected  with 
DNA, and if the proper sequences are present, this DNA can 
replace a region of the endogenous chromosome by homolo-
gous  recombination.  If  the  modified  embryonic  stem  cells 
are  subsequently  injected  into  developing  embryos  at  the 
blastocyst stage, they are, with low frequency, able to colo-
nize the cell population that will produce germ cells. When 
such chimeric embryos grow to adulthood, a proportion of 
their gametes will carry a chromosome with the modification 
engineered  in  the  embryonic  stem  cells.  Furthermore,  this 
chromosome  will  now  be  inherited  by  all  progeny  of  that 
embryo,  giving  rise  to  a  line  of  transgenic  animals.  This 
method  is  widely  used  in  research  to  knock  out  genes  by 

designing the original DNA construct so that when it enters 
the  chromosome  by  homologous  chromosome,  a  critical 
region  of  a  target  gene  is  deleted  or  disrupted.  The  use  of 
knockout mice has revolutionized the study of developmen-
tal biology by allowing investigators to determine the func-
tion of specific genes in living animals.

Note  the  distinction  between  transgenic  animals  and 
reproductive  cloning.  “Cloned”  animals  are  produced  by 
introducing  a  somatic  cell  nucleus  into  an  enucleated  egg. 
Experiments  first  in  frogs  and  later  in  mammals,  such  as 
Dolly the sheep, established that egg cytoplasm can repro-
gram  gene  expression  of  differentiated  cell  nuclei,  and 
enable  the  development  of  a  cloned  animal.  Transfer  of 
nuclei  from  lymphocytes  and  olfactory  neurons  has  been 
used  to  derive  healthy  adult  mice.  This  approach  involves 
the reversal of epigenetic changes in the nucleus that drove 
the  differentiation  of  the  adult  cell.  The  molecular  mecha-
nisms  underlying  reprogramming  are  not  well  understood 
and  the  success  rate  at  obtaining  healthy  animals  through 
nuclear  cloning  is  very  low.  This  cloning  does  not  involve 
the  use  of  stem  cells,  but  embryonic  stem  cells  can  be 
derived from the blastocyst stage of the cloned embryos.

Therapeutic Applications of Stem Cells
Where committed stem cells can be isolated from an adult 
organ, it is now possible to regenerate damaged tissues by 
transplanting  these  stem  cells  from  patients  themselves  or 
from  donors.  The  best  example  is  transplantation  of  bone 
marrow stem cells to treat patients whose bone marrow has 
been  damaged  by  cancer,  chemotherapy,  or  other  disease. 
Adverse  immunologic  reactions  are  a  challenge  for  trans-
plants  from  donors  other  than  an  identical  twin.  On  one 
hand,  the  immune  system  of  the  recipient  can  reject  the 
transplanted cells. On the other hand, lymphocytes contami-
nating  the  donor  stem  cells  can  mount  an  immunologic 
attack on the recipient. Using purified hematopoietic stem 
cells (ideally, the patient’s own stem cells) rather than mixed 
bone  marrow  cells  avoids  this  problem.  Knowing  how  to 
expand hematopoietic stem cells in vitro would be helpful. 
This approach is already used for treating burns with epider-
mal stem cells. Normal skin is used as a source of committed 

Continued

718 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

BOX 41.2  Stem Cells in Mammals—cont’d

skin stem cells, which are multiplied in culture and used to 
regenerate all the layers of the skin.

Stem  cells  might  be  used  to  regenerate  other  damaged 
tissues, including the insulin-producing cells that are lost in 
Type I diabetes, but appropriate stem cells are not available 
for  many  organs,  including  the  pancreas,  brain,  and  heart. 
Indeed,  even  with  appropriate  stem  cells  in  hand,  much 
remains  to  be  learned  about  how  to  grow  them  and  then 
direct them to differentiate into mature tissues.

Embryonic stem cells can potentially supply all cells nec-
essary to replace any damaged tissue, but sources of human 
embryonic stem cells are limited, and acquiring them from 
early  embryos  discarded  by  fertility  clinics  is  unacceptable 
to  some  people.  Patient-specific  (autologous)  embryonic 
stem  cells  can  be  derived  via  somatic  cell  nuclear  transfer 
(cloning)  followed  by  expansion  of  epiblast  cells  from  the 
embryo. However, the production of such “artificial” human 
embryos is also highly controversial.

Adult  stem  cells  are  an  alternative  to  embryonic  stem 
cells.  This  approach  has  the  advantage  that  stem  cells  can 
be  isolated  from  bone  marrow,  blood,  and  skin  by  using 
antibodies that recognize specific surface protein “markers”; 
however,  these  specialized  stem  cells  normally  do  not 
produce differentiated cells for regeneration of other tissues.
An alternative method to generate pluripotent stem cells 
is based on the transient reintroduction into a differentiated 
cell  of  a  group  of  specific  transcription  factors  commonly 
expressed in stem cells. These include Sox2, Oct4, Klf4, and 

Myc.  When  these  factors  are  ectopically  expressed  in  dif-
ferentiated cells, they can induce the expression of proteins 
required  for  pluripotency,  as  well  as  factors  required  to 
change the epigenetic landscape of the cell. This results in 
a stable perpetuation of pluripotency. These induced plu-
ripotent stem (iPS) cells, offer the promise that they can 
be  differentiated  into  any  desired  specific  cell  type  for 
medical applications. This procedure potentially eliminates 
the  problem  of  the  availability  of  autologous  stem  cells  as 
many  cell  types  can  be  reprogrammed  to  iPS  cells.  This 
technology is rapidly developing, as researchers attempt to 
improve the generation of functional cell types from iPS cells
When injected into immunodeficient mice, iPS cells make 
tumors containing all cell types, called teratocarcinomas. 
This  clearly  shows  that  the  iPS  cells  are  pluripotent.  They 
can also generate all cell types in tissue culture when appro-
priate growth factors necessary for self-renewal are removed 
from culture media. However, this differentiation is difficult 
to control. We cannot yet generate specific fully functional 
cell  types  necessary  for  therapies  with  high  purity  from 
pluripotent  stem  cells,  except  for  a  few  cell  types  such  as 
retinal  pigment  epithelial  (RPE)  cells.  iPS  cell-derived  RPE 
cells were transplanted for the treatment of macular degen-
eration in 2014, and appeared to be successful in blocking 
the  degeneration.  However,  as  of  2016,  this  was  the  only 
clinical trial performed with iPS cell-derived cells. Investiga-
tion on how to control iPS cell differentiation is one of the 
main obstacles to be overcome for regenerative medicine.

Reentry Into the Cell Cycle
Cells  in  the  G0  phase  may  reenter  the  growth  cycle 
in  response  to  specific  stimulation  by  mitogens,  often 
induced by injury or normal cell turnover. Cultured fibro-
blasts are favored for laboratory studies of this process, 
as  they  readily  enter  a  quiescent  state  mimicking  G0 
phase when deprived of serum (ie, mitogens and growth 
factors)  and  rapidly  reenter  the  cell  cycle  when  serum  
is  restored.  This  response  reproduces  that  found  in 
wounded tissues. When a living tissue is wounded (see 
Fig.  32.11),  fibroblasts  are  exposed  to  serum  that  has 
leaked  from  damaged  blood  vessels.  In  response,  they 
divide  and  colonize  the  wound,  where  they  lay  down 
new extracellular matrix to repair the damage.

Serum  stimulates  three  waves  of  gene  expression  in 
cultured  quiescent  fibroblasts  (Fig.  41.6).  The  first 
includes  more  than  100  “immediate  early”  genes. 
These include transcription factors of the Jun, fos, myc, 
and  zinc  finger  families  (see  Chapter  10)  that  activate 
numerous  downstream  genes  required  for  cell  growth 
and division. Other immediate early genes encode tissue 
remodeling factors, cytokines (growth factors), extracel-
lular  matrix  components  (fibronectin),  plasma  mem-
brane  adhesion  proteins  (integrins),  and  cytoskeletal 
proteins  (actin,  tropomyosin,  vimentin),  as  well  as  

i

n
o
s
s
e
r
p
x
e

 
f

o

l

 
s
e
v
e
L

Immediate early
transcription factors

Delayed
early genes
Immediate early
structural proteins

Immediate early
tissue repair
proteins

0

1

3

2
4
Time (hours)

5

6

Cdk inhibitors

Addition
of serum or
growth factor

FIGURE  41.6  PATTERNS  OF  EXPRESSION  OF  IMMEDIATE 
AND  DELAYED  EARLY  GENES  DURING  THE  RETURN  OF 
GROWTH-ARRESTED  FIBROBLASTS  FROM  G0  TO  ACTIVE 
PROLIFERATION AND THE CELL CYCLE. 

activities  involved  in  angiogenesis  (blood  vessel  forma-
tion),  inflammation,  and  coagulation.  These  proteins 
facilitate the movement of fibroblasts into wounds and 
initiate the repair of tissue damage.

Expression  of  a  second  wave  of  “delayed  early” 
genes encoding a variety of proteins that are required for 
cell  growth  and  proliferation,  including  cyclin  D,  pre-
cedes the onset of the S phase. Genes activated after the 
onset of the S phase are referred to as “late” genes. Both 

 

CHAPTER 41  n  G1 Phase and Regulation of Cell Proliferation 

719

delayed early and late gene transcription require synthe-
sis  of  the  transcription  factors  encoded  by  immediate 
early genes.

These waves of transcription in response to mitogens 
enable the G0 cells to pass through a “gate” and reenter 
the active cell cycle. This gate is analogous to the restric-
tion point, a critical aspect of G1 control that regulates 
the proliferation of all normal cells.

The Restriction Point: A Critical G1 
Decision Point
All  eukaryotes  have  a  mechanism  that  operates  during 
the G1 phase to ensure that cells duplicate their genome 
only when the environment is supportive and the chro-
mosomes  are  undamaged.  Healthy  yeast  cells  do  not 
embark on a round of DNA replication and division until 
they reach an appropriate minimum size (actually, they 
probably  measure  their  ribosome  content  and  ongoing 
rate of protein synthesis). This is important because after 
cell division, the daughter cell (bud) is smaller than the 
mother and needs more time to grow before it divides 
if  the  population  is  to  maintain  a  constant  cell  size. 
Whether  dividing  mammalian  cells  also  monitor  their 
size is not yet settled.

The  influence  of  cell  size  on  the  division  cycle  was 
first  demonstrated  in  an  elegant  microsurgery  experi-
ment (Fig. 41.7). Two Amoeba proteus cells were grown 
under identical conditions in parallel cultures. Each day, 
a  portion  of  the  cytoplasm  was  amputated  from  one 
amoeba, and the other was left untouched as a control. 
Under  those  circumstances,  the  cell  that  suffered  the 
amputations did not divide for 20 days. During this time, 
the  control  amoeba  divided  11  times.  When  the 

amputations  were  stopped,  the  amoeba  that  had  been 
operated on divided within 38 hours. The interpretation 
of  this  experiment  was  that  the  repeated  amputations 
prevented the experimental amoeba from ever attaining 
a  size  sufficient  to  turn  on  the  division  program.  Evi-
dence  suggests  that  some  types  of  human  cells  have  a 
similar size control while others do not.

An  essential  aspect  of  growth  control  during  the  G1 
phase  involves  monitoring  the  external  environment  
for  nutrient  availability  and  for  signals  to  proliferate 
(mitogenic  signals)  coming  from  other  cells  and  from 
the extracellular matrix. In a classic experiment, when 
three flasks containing populations of cultured cells were 
starved  by  deprivation  of  amino  acids,  serum,  or  phos-
phate respectively, they all stopped cycling in G1. When 
the missing ingredients were restored, cells in all three 
flasks resumed the cell cycle and entered the S phase at 
about the same time. This was surprising because amino 
acids are needed to make protein, serum provides growth 
factors and mitogens, and phosphate is needed for syn-
thesis of DNA and phospholipids (needed to make mem-
branes).  This  experiment  was  interpreted  as  evidence 
that all three types of starvation caused cells to arrest at 
a  single  point  in  the  G1  phase,  termed  the  restriction 
point. The restriction point is now defined as the point 
after which the cell cycle will proceed even if mitogenic 
factors are withdrawn (Fig. 41.8). This supremely impor-
tant aspect of cell-cycle control prevents cells from divid-
ing  at  inappropriate  times  and  in  inappropriate  places. 
Defects in restriction point control are among the most 
common causes of cancer.

Genetic analysis also revealed a point in the G1 phase 
after which budding yeast cells appear to be committed 
to  completion  of  the  cycle.  Cells  that  are  starved  for 

Amoeba

A. Control

Nucleus

B. Experiment

FIGURE 41.7  A MICROSURGERY EXPERIMENT DEMONSTRATES THAT AMOEBAE WILL NOT DIVIDE IF THEY ARE PREVENTED 
FROM ATTAINING A SUFFICIENT SIZE. A, Control cell continues to divide. B, Experimental cell does not divide. (For reference, see Prescott 
DM. Relation between cell growth and cell division. II: The effect of cell size on cell growth rate and generation time in Amoeba proteus. Exp Cell 
Res. 1956;11:86–98.)

720 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

Restriction point

M

G1

S

Cell continues to cycle only if

extracellular signals are received

Cell committed

to cycle

FIGURE 41.8  RESTRICTION POINT. During late G1, cells assess 
external and internal stimuli and decide whether to commit to a further 
round of DNA replication and division. 

nutrients  arrest  at,  or  just  prior  to,  this  point,  termed 
START.  The  mammalian  restriction  point  resembles 
yeast  START  in  a  number  of  aspects,  but  they  are  not 
exactly equivalent, owing to differences between animal 
and yeast cell cycles.

Regulation of Cell Proliferation by  
the Restriction Point
The  restriction  point  is  a  molecular  “gate”  that  regu-
lates the expression of genes required for cell-cycle pro-
gression. The gate is based on proteins that are related 
to the Rb susceptibility protein and a family of essential 
transcription factors known as E2F.

In brief, E2F is a master transcriptional regulator that 
activates many of the genes whose products drive DNA 
replication  and  cell-cycle  progression.  Rb  regulates  the 
cell  cycle  by  binding  to  E2F  and  converting  it  into  a 
repressor  of  those  same  cell-cycle  genes.  When  Rb  is 
bound to E2F, the cell is said to be arrested at the restric-
tion point. Escape from this arrest involves Cdk activa-
tion  and  subsequent  Rb  phosphorylation.  This  releases 
E2F, which then drives cell-cycle progression. An alterna-
tive  way  to  pass  the  restriction  point  gate  depends  on  
a  potent  regulator  called  Myc,  which  is  discussed  
separately later.

Mammals have three Rb-related proteins (pRb, p107, 
and p130) and approximately eight E2F family members. 
These  together  constitute  a  complex  multifunctional 
network. This chapter refers to the families generically 
as  Rb  and  E2F.  Some  E2F  proteins  form  a  heterodimer 
with one of three DP (differentiation-regulated transcrip-
tion factor-1 protein) family members. This dimer associ-
ates  with  the  promoter  region  of  E2F  target  cell-cycle 
genes (Fig. 41.9A). Rb binding converts E2F/DP from a 
transcriptional activator to the Rb/E2F/DP repressor. Rb 
also recruits histone deacetylases, enzymes that remove 
acetyl groups from a wide range of proteins, including 
the  aminoterminal  tails  of  histones  (see  Fig.  8.7).  This 
causes compaction of chromatin structure and represses 
genes required for cell-cycle progression.

Nonproliferating  cells  have  low  Cdk  activity  in  G1 
before  the  restriction  point.  First,  cyclin  D  messenger 
RNA  (mRNA)  levels  are  low,  so  little  protein  is  made. 
Second, any cyclin D that is made is retained in the cyto-
plasm, where it is phosphorylated by glycogen synthase 

kinase (GSK)-β (see Fig. 30.7) and marked by SCF (Skp, 
Cullin, F-box containing complex) for degradation (see 
Fig. 40.16). Rb/E2F/DP represses the expression of the 
genes for cyclins E and A required for Cdk2 activation. 
Furthermore, high levels of the CKI class Cdk inhibitor 
p27Kip1 inhibit any Cdk2–cyclin E or Cdk2–cyclin A that 
happens to be present (see Fig. 40.14).

Signals  from  mitogens  and  the  extracellular  matrix 
open the restriction point gate. Stimulation of receptor 
tyrosine  kinases  (see  Chapters  25  and  27)  or  integrins 
(see Chapter 30) activates Ras and the mitogen-activated 
protein  (MAP)  kinase/extracellular  signal–regulated 
kinase (ERK) cascade (see Fig. 27.6). The output of this 
cascade stimulates transcription of D-type cyclins (Figs. 
41.9  and  41.10)  and  also  inactivates  GSK.  This  allows 
cyclin D to accumulate in nuclei. Nuclear cyclin D binds 
to and activates Cdk4 and Cdk6 (referred to hereafter as 
Cdk4/6–cyclin  D),  producing  an  initial  pulse  of  Cdk 
activity  that  is  later  amplified  by  Cdk2–cyclin  E  and 
Cdk2–cyclin  A.  Cdk  activity  in  early  G1  is  regulated  by 
adjusting  the  relative  levels  of  the  three  D-type  cyclins 
as  well  as  the  levels  of  Ink4  and  CKI  inhibitors.  This 
regulation of cyclin D levels and Cdk inhibitors provides 
the crucial link between extracellular mitogens and the 
cell cycle.

Mitogens also stimulate transcription of the CKI class 
Cdk  inhibitor  p27Kip1.  This  protein  actually  activates 
Cdk4/6–cyclin  D  complexes  in  two  ways.  First,  the 
receptor  associated  tyrosine  kinases  Jak  or  Src  phos-
phorylate p27, inducing a structural change within the 
Cdk4/6–cyclin  D-p27Kip1  complex  that  activates  the 
kinase.  This  links  mitogen  signaling  to  Cdk-4/6  activa-
tion.  It  also  promotes  the  nuclear  import  of  Cdk4/6–
cyclin  D.  This  both  leads  to  full  activation  of  Cdks  by 
Cdk-activating  kinase,  a  nuclear  enzyme  (see  Chapter 
40),  and  increases  the  stability  of  cyclin  D.  All  of  this 
depends  on  the  continuous  presence  of  mitogenic 
signals;  if  these  cease,  then  cyclin  D  stability  rapidly 
declines again, since following dephosphorylation, p27 
and p21 again act as Cdk4/6–cyclin D inhibitors.

Cdks push the cell past the restriction point by phos-
phorylating  Rb,  causing  it  to  dissociate  from  E2F  (Fig. 
41.9B; see also Chapter 40 and Appendix 40.1). The E2F/
DP heterodimer remains bound to promoter regions and 
now  potently  activates,  rather  than  represses,  the  tran-
scription  of  genes  that  stimulate  cell  proliferation.  The 
proteins produced synthesize DNA (DNA polymerase α, 
accessory  factors,  and  enzymes  that  synthesize  nucleo-
tide precursors; see Chapter 42), promote cell-cycle pro-
gression (cyclins E and A, Cdk1, and Cdc25), and regulate 
cell-cycle progression (pRb, p107, Emi1).

The chain of events as mitogens break the blockade 
on cell-cycle progression imposed by Rb involves a posi-
tive  feedback  loop  as  follows.  Cdk4/6–cyclin  D  com-
plexes  begin  to  phosphorylate  Rb.  This  releases  some 
E2F  and  permits  the  initial  expression  of  genes  that 

 

CHAPTER 41  n  G1 Phase and Regulation of Cell Proliferation 

721

A. Absence of mitogens

Tyrosine
kinase
receptor

Ras

Seven-helix
receptors

M

G1

E2F/DP

Rb

Gene off

Restriction
point

S

External
signals

Cyclin D

Transcription

Cyclin D
(stable)

+ Cdk 4/6

Kinase phosphorylates
tyrosine on p27

p27

p27-P

Cdk 4/6–cyclin D–p27-P

(active kinase)

Enters
nucleus

S

G2

M

Nucleosome

Histone

deacetylase

Histone

N-terminal tails

Histone deacetylation results in chromatin
compaction and repression of transcription

B. Mitogens present

Phosphorylates Rb

Passage of
restriction point

G1

Tyrosine
kinase
receptor

Ras

Raf

M

4/6

D

Cdk 4/6
cyclin D

Steroid
receptors

MEK

ERK

G1

Seven-helix
receptors

cAMP

PKA
Synthesis and stability of
cyclin D, etc

S

Rb

Histone
deacetylase

E2F/DP

RNA
pol II

Cell-cycle genes

(cyclins A, E, Cdk1)

DNA replication genes

AC

AC

AC

AC

AC

AC
Acetylated "open" chromatin favors transcription

AC

AC

AC

AC

FIGURE 41.9  REGULATION OF CELL-CYCLE PROGRESSION 
BY  THE  E2F/DP/RB  COMPLEX.  A,  The  Rb/E2F/DP  complex 
recruits histone deacetylases (see Chapter 8) and represses specific 
genes  that  are  required  for  cell-cycle  progression.  This  blocks  cell-
cycle progression at the restriction point. B, Phosphorylation of Rb by 
Cdks alleviates this block and permits passage of the restriction point. 
cAMP,  cyclic  adenosine  monophosphate;  MEK,  mitogen-activated 
protein kinase kinase; PKA, protein kinase A. 

encode  cyclin  E,  cyclin  A,  and  CDC25A.  Active  Cdk2-
cyclin E can initiate p27Kip1 degradation, permitting the 
rapid accumulation of active Cdks. The restriction point 
probably  is  passed  here,  and  from  this  point  on  Cdks 
remain active until cyclin destruction in late mitosis.

Cdk2–cyclin  E  participates  in  a  second  wave  of  Rb 
phosphorylation on many sites, leading to the wholesale 
liberation of E2F/DP and a surge in transcription of genes 
that trigger the onset of DNA replication (S phase entry) 
and promote progression through the cell cycle. As the 
cell  cycle  proceeds,  Rb  phosphorylation  is  maintained 
first by Cdk2–cyclin A and then later by Cdk1–cyclin B 

FIGURE 41.10  HOW GROWTH FACTORS REGULATE CDK4/6 
ACTIVITY: THE ROLE OF D-TYPE CYCLINS AND P21. Mitogen-
induced  tyrosine  phosphorylation  of  p27  determines  if  it  assembles 
active  or  inactive  CDK4/6–cyclin  D  complexes–linking  assembly  of 
active kinase to mitogens. 

until the exit from mitosis. Rb is dephosphorylated at the 
mitosis-G0 or G1 transition. This enables it once again to 
bind E2F and close the restriction point gate to exit from 
the next G1.

The  transcriptional  regulator  Myc  drives  an  alterna-
tive  pathway  for  G1  exit  that  is  also  stabilized  by 
mitogenic signals. Association of myc with one partner 
activates the transcription of cyclins E and D2. Associa-
tion  with  a  different  partner  downregulates  the  tran-
scription  of  Cdk  inhibitors  of  both  the  CKI  and  INK 
classes. These activities partly explain why Myc can act 
as an oncogene—a protein that helps transform normal 
cells into cancer cells (explained further later).

Restriction Point and Cancer
Cancer is a complex class of diseases in which genetic 
changes within clones of cells lead to production of cell 
populations  whose  uncontrolled  growth  can  disrupt 
tissue function and ultimately kill the individual. Two in 
five  Americans  will  be  affected  by  cancer  during  their 
lifetimes.  This  sounds  very  high,  but  considering  the 
number  of  cell  cycles  that  are  required  to  produce  a 
human composed of approximately 1014 cells, and con-
sidering the over 1 million cell divisions that occur per 
second in a healthy adult, the disease is actually remark-
ably rare on a per cell basis. This is at least partly because 
multiple genetic alterations are required to transform a 
normal cell into a cancer cell. Furthermore, the cell cycle 
is highly regulated by a web of negative feedback path-
ways  that  hold  in  check  activities  driving  cellular 

722 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

Cells traversing the cell cycle

Normal

Cancer

Contact inhibition:

Signaling from cadherin-based
adherens junctions stops cells
from cycling.  They arrest in G1.

Transformed cells
continue to cycle

FIGURE  41.11  LOSS  OF  GROWTH  CONTROL  IN  TRANS-
FORMED CELLS. 

proliferation.  In  fact,  many  cancer-causing  mutations 
that disturb growth control pathways are actually delete-
rious in normal cells and cause them to undergo senes-
cence or commit suicide by apoptosis (see Chapter 46).
Dysregulation  of  cell  proliferation  in  the  G1  phase 
causes most types of cancer. This is readily seen in the 
laboratory when cells are grown on plastic tissue culture 
dishes. Most normal cells proliferate until they cover the 
surface  completely,  forming  a  monolayer.  When  the 
monolayer  is  confluent  (ie,  when  cells  are  touched  by 
other  cells  on  all  sides),  signaling  initiated  by  cadherin 
proteins  (see  Fig.  30.7)  causes  cells  to  express  p27Kip1 
and  to  arrest  their  cell-cycle  progression  in  G1.  This  is 
called  contact  inhibition  of  growth  (see  Chapter  30, 
in the section titled “Cadherin Family of Adhesion Recep-
tors”). Cancer cells lack this control, so they keep pro-
liferating and piling up on top of one another as long as 
nutrient and mitogen supplies last (Fig. 41.11). Cells that 
lose  this  aspect  of  growth  regulation  are  said  to  be 
transformed.

Malfunction  of  the  restriction  point  is  an  extremely 
common contributor to transformation. Indeed, one or 
more components of the p16/cyclin D/Cdk-4/Rb system 
are mutated in most human cancers. In addition, several 
cancer-causing  viruses,  such  as  simian  virus  40  (SV40), 
papillomaviruses,  and  adenovirus,  make  proteins  that 
facilitate  the  G1  →  S  transition  by  binding  Rb  and 
liberating E2F.

Most cancer cells have abnormalities in the activities 
of  two  classes  of  genes.  Oncogenes  are  genes  whose 
inappropriate  activation  can  cause  oncogenic  (cancer-
ous)  transformation  of  cells.  The  protein  products  of 
most  oncogenes  regulate  cellular  growth  and  prolifera-
tion.  They  are  typically  components  of  signal  trans-
duction  pathways  that  are  controlled  by  feedback 
mechanisms.  Tumor  suppressors  are  genes  whose 
inactivation can lead to cancerous transformation. Their 

protein products typically inhibit products of oncogenes 
or  negatively  regulate  cell  proliferation.  Several  genes 
that are involved in restriction point control can act as 
either oncogenes or tumor suppressors.

More than 100 oncogenes have been identified thus 
far. Most normally function in signal transduction path-
ways  that  lie  downstream  of  mitogens  that  stimulate 
cell-cycle  progression.  Their  inappropriate  activation 
can  mimic  the  effects  of  persistent  mitogenic  stimula-
tion, thereby uncoupling cells from normal environmen-
tal controls and leading to uncontrolled proliferation and 
cancer. For example, Ras activates the MAP/ERK kinase 
cascade  and  accumulation  of  cyclin  D  (Fig.  41.9).  Ras 
genes  are  mutated  in  approximately  15%  of  human 
cancers.  Inappropriate  activation  of  Ras  tricks  the  cell 
into  thinking  that  it  is  receiving  mitogenic  signals, 
leading  it  to  express  cyclin  D,  phosphorylate  Rb,  and 
proliferate.

Fortunately,  in  most  cells,  mutations  that  result  in 
uncontrolled  proliferation  usually  lead  to  DNA  damage 
(oncogenic  stress)  and  activate  a  protective  pathway 
leading to senescence. Other proteins involved in restric-
tion point control can also act as oncogenes if hyperac-
tivated. These include E2F1, cyclin D (overexpressed in 
50% of breast cancers), and Cdk4. In each case, activa-
tion of the protein causes inappropriate transcription of 
genes  promoting  cell-cycle  progression,  bypassing  the 
restriction point, and leading to uncontrolled cell cycles 
and cancerous transformation (Fig. 41.12).

Rb is one of the best-characterized tumor-suppressor 
genes. As discussed earlier, a primary function of Rb is 
to block cell-cycle progression until sustained mitogenic 
stimulation results in its inactivation. It is therefore not 
surprising that loss of Rb can lead to inappropriate cell-
cycle  progression  and  cancer.  Rare  individuals  who 
inherit one defective Rb gene tend to develop retinoblas-
tomas  as  children  and  osteosarcomas  as  adults.  The 
cancer arises when the “good” allele is inactivated in a 
proliferating cell (this is called a somatic mutation). Such 
cancers are rare and occur only later in life in individuals 
who  inherit  two  good  Rb  genes,  as  two  independent 
somatic mutations (two “hits”) are required in the same 
proliferating cell. Homozygous loss of Rb is lethal during 
embryogenesis.  This  is  partly  because  under  some  cir-
cumstances,  the  unleashed  E2F  can  act  as  a  potent 
inducer of apoptotic cell death (see Chapter 46).

P16Ink4a 

is  another 

important  tumor  suppressor 
involved  in  G1  growth  control.  Normally,  it  suppresses 
Cdk4/6  activity  in  nondividing  cells  (see  next  section; 
also  see  Chapter  40),  thereby  reinforcing  the  ability  of 
Rb to maintain the growth arrest of G1 cells (Fig. 41.12). 
Mutations  in  the  p16Ink4a  gene  are  very  common  in 
cancer,  but  this  is  partly  because  this  gene  is  fascinat-
ingly complex (Fig. 41.16). Mutations in other INK4 Cdk 
inhibitors and the CKI protein p27Kip1 are also found in 
cancer, although less frequently.

 

CHAPTER 41  n  G1 Phase and Regulation of Cell Proliferation 

723

KEY

Transcription
prevented
Transcription of cyclins A, E,
Cdk 1 DNA replication genes

=

=

+1

No external signals

External signals

Cdk 4/6–cyclin D

(active)

No external signals

Normal cell arrested
at restriction point

STOP

Rb

Normal cell passes

restriction point

Rb

GO

+1

Rb mutant cell passes

restriction point

GO

Rb

Danger

+1

No external signals
Active oncogene
mimics external
signals

Cdk 4/6–cyclin D

(active)

Cell with active oncogene
passes restriction point

Rb

GO

Danger

+1

Cdk 4/6–p16Ink4a

(inactive)

Differentiated cell expressing

p16 does not cycle

External signals
may be present

STOP

Rb

*p16Ink4a

Cdk 4/6

Differentiated cell mutant for
p16 passes restriction point

External signals
may be present

Cdk 4/6–cyclin D

(active)

Rb

GO

Danger

+1

FIGURE  41.12  HOW  ACTIVATED  ONCOGENES  OR  MUTA-
TIONS  IN  THE  RB  OR  P16  TUMOR  SUPPRESSOR  PROTEINS 
CAN  LEAD  TO  ABNORMAL  PASSAGE  OF  THE  RESTRICTION 
POINT AND CANCER. 

Nutrients
Mitogens

Cdk2–cyclin E

Cdk4/6–cyclin D

M

G1

Restriction point

S

y
t
i
v
i
t
c
a
 
k
d
C
 
g
n
s
a
e
r
c
n
I

i

y
t
i
v
i
t
c
a
 
e
s
a
g

i

i
l
 
n
i
t
i
u
q
b
u
 
g
n
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

APC/CCdh1

Emi1
SCFSkp2
SCFβ-TrCP

Degraded proteins:

Cyclins

Cdc25A

p27Kip1

I

FIGURE 41.13  PROTEOLYTIC ACTIVITIES IN G1 PHASE. 

Phosphorylated  p27Kip1  is  recognized  by  a  specific  E3 
ubiquitin ligase called SCFSkp2 (see Figs. 40.15 and 40.16). 
The  resulting  destruction  of  p27Kip1  permits  a  burst  of 
Cdk2-cyclin E activation in a positive feedback loop that 
rapidly  amplifies  Cdk  activity  at  the  initiation  of  the  S 
phase. Later in the S phase, phosphorylation of the DP 
subunit of E2F causes its dissociation from DNA, recogni-
tion  by  SCF,  and  destruction.  This  is  essential  to  com-
plete  S  phase.  SCF  also  targets  cyclins  D1  and  E  for 
destruction, the former when mitogens are limiting and 
the latter following autophosphorylation during progres-
sion through the S phase.

Progression  throughout  G1  requires  the  activity  of 
a  second  E3  ubiquitin  ligase  known  as  the  anaphase-
promoting  complex  or  cyclosome  (APC/C).  A  specific 
cofactor,  Cdc20,  activates  the  APC/C  to  trigger  the 
metaphase-to-anaphase  transition  (see  Chapter  40).  As 
the cell leaves mitosis, Cdh1 replaces Cdc20 and targets 
many  cell-cycle  regulatory  proteins  for  degradation, 
including  Cdc20,  A-  and  B-type  cyclins,  and  factors 
involved in DNA replication. Destruction of these target 
proteins  during  mitotic  exit  and  G1  (Fig.  41.13)  likely 
contributes to the requirement for transcription and de 
novo  synthesis  of  these  proteins  at  the  moment  cells 
decide whether to enter or not a new cycle of genome 
replication.

Proteolysis and G1 Cell-Cycle Progression
Just  as  controlled  destruction  of  proteins  is  key  to  the 
transition  of  cells  from  mitosis  to  the  G1  phase  (see 
Chapter  40),  proteolysis  also  fulfills  several  key  roles 
during progression from G1 into the S phase (Fig. 41.13). 
For example, when Cdk2–cyclin E is activated following 
cyclin D synthesis, it phosphorylates its inhibitor p27Kip1. 

Integrity of Cellular DNA Monitored by  
a G1/S Checkpoint
The S phase is a point of no return in the history of any 
dividing cell. Given the semiconservative mechanism of 
DNA replication, whereby existing DNA strands serve as 
templates for newly synthesized strands, any DNA defect 
that  passes  unnoticed  through  the  S  phase  becomes 

724 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

Undamaged DNA

dsDNA breaks

ssDNA

(ATM)2
inactive

ATR not
signaling

(ATM)2

ATM
active

E2F drives

expression of
cell cycle genes

p53 present

in low amounts
in cytoplasm

E2F
active

Mdm2
inactive

p53
active

in nucleus

p21

Normal cell-cycle progression

Apoptosis

Stable cell-
cycle arrest

ATR active
localized to
damage site

Chk1
kinase

Cdc25A

Degraded

Rapid cell-
cycle arrest

FIGURE 41.14  THE G1/S CHECKPOINT AND DNA DAMAGE RESPONSE. 

perpetuated as a mutation that is transmitted to all future 
progeny  of  the  cell.  Furthermore,  any  single-stranded 
nick  in  DNA  may  become  a  full-fledged  chromosome 
break if present during replication. To avoid these prob-
lems,  cells  have  a  quality  control  mechanism  to  block 
entry into the S phase if damaged DNA is detected.

This  quality  control  mechanism  involves  a  check-
point  that  operates  throughout  the  G1  and  S  phases 
(Fig. 41.14). Checkpoints are biochemical circuits super-
imposed on the normal cell cycle. When activated, the 
G1/S  checkpoint  triggers  a  DNA  damage  response 
that  blocks  cell-cycle  progression.  The  block  may  be 
temporary  but,  in  some  cases,  checkpoint  activation 
leads  to  senescence  or  cell  death  by  apoptosis.  Sensor 
proteins  detect  DNA  damage  and  activate  this  check-
point.  In  the  subsequent  DNA  damage  response,  the 
sensor proteins activate protein kinases and a key tran-
scriptional  regulator  that  block  cell-cycle  progression 
(see Fig. 40.4).

The DNA damage response has fast and slow compo-
nents: The former is analogous to applying the brakes in 
a car; the latter is analogous to removing the wheels and 
putting  it  up  on  blocks.  Both  components  start  with  
the protein kinases, ATM and ATR (see Fig. 40.4). ATM 
and ATR are related to the lipid kinase phosphatidylino-
sitol  3-kinase  (see  Fig.  26.7),  but  their  only  known  
substrates are proteins (see Chapter 40). People lacking 
ATM  have  the  disease  ataxia-telangiectasia,  which  is 
characterized  by  immunodeficiency,  photosensitivity, 
cerebellar  degeneration,  and  an  elevated  incidence  of 
leukemias and lymphomas. Loss of ATR is fatal.

DNA  damage  that  disrupts  ongoing  DNA  replication 
and produces single-stranded DNA activates ATR, which 
phosphorylates and activates a downstream kinase called 
Chk1.  Chk1  targets  the  essential  phosphatase  CDC25A 
(Fig. 41.14), marking it for destruction. Because CDC25A 
is required to remove inhibitory phosphate groups from 
inactive  Cdks,  its  destruction  applies  a  rapid  brake  to 
cell-cycle progression.

DNA  double-strand  breaks  vigorously  activate  ATM, 
which  directly  and  indirectly  stabilizes  and  activates  a 
critical tumor suppressor, p53. This transcription factor 
has been called the “guardian of the genome,” because 
in response to DNA damage it also applies a rapid brake 
to cell cycle progression. In some cases this arrest leads 
to  senescence,  a  permanent  cessation  of  the  cell  cycle 
(putting the car up on blocks).

p53 is very powerful medicine for the cell cycle and 
must  be  carefully  regulated  by  a  ubiquitin  ligase  (E3) 
called Mdm2 (mouse double-minute 2; the human ortho-
log  is  Hdm2)  that  keeps  p53  levels  low  when  the  cell 
cycle  is  running  normally  (Fig.  41.15A).  Both  p53  and 
Mdm2  protein  shuttle  in  and  out  of  the  nucleus  (see 
Chapter 9). When the two proteins associate in the cyto-
plasm,  Mdm2  promotes  rapid  degradation  of  p53  
by  the  ubiquitin/proteasome  system  (see  Chapter  23). 
Because p53 directly stimulates expression of Mdm2, a 
feedback loop keeps levels of p53 low. Loss of the Mdm2 
gene in mice is lethal unless the p53 gene is also lost.

Both  p53  and  Mdm2  are  phosphorylated  following 
DNA  damage  (Fig.  41.15B).  These  phosphorylations 
prevent Mdm2 from binding, so p53 is stabilized, and its 
concentration in the nucleus increases dramatically. The 
phosphorylations also make p53 a more potent transcrip-
tional activator. The result is a burst of transcription of 
p53-regulated genes.

p53 is rapidly activated in response to DNA damage 
resulting from hyperproliferation of cells following loss 
of  restriction  point  control  (oncogenic  stress).  It  also 
responds to DNA damage induced by the environment. 
If the damage is rapidly repaired, cells continue to cycle, 
but if the damage is too severe, p53 induces senescence 
or apoptotic cell death (see next paragraph).

In  the  case  of  oncogenic  stress  following  loss  of 
restriction point control (eg, by Ras mutations) E2F stim-
ulates  the  expression  of  the  tumor  suppressor  protein 
p19Arf (alternate reading frame). This binds and seques-
ters Mdm2 in the nucleolus (Fig. 41.15C), allowing p53 

 

CHAPTER 41  n  G1 Phase and Regulation of Cell Proliferation 

725

A. Healthy cell
Mdm2 ubiquitin ligase
directs destruction of
p53 in cytoplasm

B. Irradiation
ATM phosphorylates and activates
p53, which blocks Mdm2 binding

C. Oncogene activation
First the irradiation pathway is
activated, then phosphorylation
of E2F promotes transcription of
p19Arf, which sequesters Mdm2
in nucleoli, releasing active p53

Nucleolus

p53-Mdm2

p53-Mdm2

Ub

Ub

Ub

p53-Mdm2

DNA

damage

ATM

p53
activated

p53

Mdm2
cannot
bind

E2F

p19Arf
Mdm2

p19Arf
p53
activated

Mdm2

p53

Active nuclear p53 drives expression
of proteins that arrest the cell cycle
and promote cell death (apoptosis)

Active nuclear p53 drives expression
of proteins that arrest the cell cycle
and promote cell death (apoptosis)

p 53

+

Mdm2

p53 levels low
throughout cell

p53

activated

Mdm2

Active p53 also drives expression of the ubiquitin
ligase Mdm2, providing negative feedback on p53

FIGURE  41.15  P53  REGULATION  AND  THE  DNA  DAMAGE  CHECKPOINT  IN  G1.  A,  Healthy  cell.  B,  After  irradiation,  Mdm2  (mouse 
double-minute 2) can no longer bind p53, which accumulates in active form in the nucleus. C, After oncogene activation, Mdm2 is sequestered 
in the nucleolus, and active p53 accumulates in the nucleus. Activated p53 can induce either cell-cycle arrest or cell death. 

to  accumulate  in  the  nucleoplasm.  There,  it  activates 
transcription of the CKI p21, stopping the cell cycle. If 
this  arrest  is  prolonged,  p16INK4A  is  induced,  activating 
Rb  and  leading  to  permanent  cell  cycle  arrest  (senes-
cence). p53 activation can also induce apoptosis by acti-
vating transcription of genes for proapoptotic proteins, 
including Bax, BH3-domain proteins, Puma, CD95 (Fas/
Apo1), and Apaf-1 (Fig. 41.15; also discussed in Chapter 
46).  The  decision  whether  to  induce  senescence  or 
death is very complex and may be regulated by different 
posttranslational  modifications  of  p53.  One  way  or  the 
other, p53 serves its function as guardian, as the outcome 
is  that  aberrantly  proliferating  cells  are  either  perma-
nently silenced or removed, and the body is protected.
p53 is mutated or deleted in about half of all human 
cancers.  Families  that  carry  a  mutated  p53  allele  have 
Li-Fraumeni syndrome with an elevated risk of cancers. 
Mice  lacking  p53  are  viable  but  a  defective  G1  DNA 
damage checkpoint results in cancers while young. This 
illustrates  a  common  theme  that  in  many  cases  check-
point  components  are  not  essential  for  life  as  long  as 
nothing  untoward  occurs.  Checkpoints  exist  primarily 
to  deal  with  problems  that  arise  during  cell-cycle  pro-
gression.  However, 
in 
Li-Fraumeni  syndrome  patients  indicate  that  although 
p53 is not essential for the passage of every cell cycle, it 
is essential for long-term genetic stability and for main-
taining  a  proper  balance  among  cell  proliferation,  dif-
ferentiation, and death during the lifetime of a mammal.
The p19Arf protein (in humans, the protein is smaller 
and  so  is  called  p14Arf)  is  extremely  unusual,  as  it  is 
encoded  in  a  common  gene  with  the  Cdk  inhibitor 

the  elevated  cancer  rates 

A. One gene, two promoters

1β

1α

2

3

Ink4a
Arf

B. Two key proteins
p16Ink4a

Ink4a/Arf

p19Arf

Cdk4-cyclin D1

Rb

Mdm2

p53

FIGURE  41.16  DUAL  CONTROL  OF  G1  PROGRESSION  BY 
THE P16INK4A/P19ARF GENE. This gene encodes two completely dif-
ferent  proteins  that  are  key  to  avoiding  cancer.  A,  The  intron–exon 
structure of the p16Ink4A/p19Arf gene. B, p16Ink4A and p19Arf negatively 
regulate the restriction point via Rb and the DNA damage checkpoint 
via p53, respectively. 

p16Ink4a (Fig. 41.16). Despite having different promoters 
(that  respond  to  different  stimuli),  the  two  genes  not 
only overlap but also share a common exon. Neverthe-
less,  the  two  proteins  have  no  common  amino  acid 
sequences because the shared exons are read in different 
frames in the mature mRNAs (mRNAs) for the two pro-
teins.  Thus,  the  p16Ink4a/p14Arf  locus  encodes  two  vital 
protective factors with different jobs. It is not surprising 
that  mutations  in  this  key  locus  are  found  in  between 
25% and 70% of human cancers.

G1 Regulation: A Matter of Life and Death
To  commit  to  a  new  cycle  of  proliferation,  cells  must 
pass through the restriction point gate. The key to this 

726 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

gate  is  the  phosphorylation  of  Rb  by  Cdks,  so  signals 
such  as  mitogens  that  activate  Cdks  set  up  a  feedback 
loop that promotes passage of the gate. Of course, in the 
real world, accidents happen, and the G1/S checkpoint 
and  DNA  damage  response  provide  a  way  to  block  
cell-cycle  progression  even  in  the  presence  of  growth 
factors  and  mitogens.  The  complex  G1  regulatory  net-
works  have  a  potential  impact  on  all  of  us.  If  they  are 
disrupted by mutations or damage, the result is cancer. 
In  fact,  very  few  cancers  have  intact  restriction  point 
control networks.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Jiri Bartek, Ludger Hengst, Keisuke Kaji, and 
Marcos Malumbres for their suggestions on revisions to 
this chapter.

SELECTED READINGS

Childs  BG,  Baker  DJ,  Kirkland  JL,  Campisi  J,  van  Deursen  JM.  Senes-
cence  and  apoptosis:  dueling  or  complementary  cell  fates?  EMBO 
Rep. 2014;15:1139-1153.

Clevers  H.  The  intestinal  crypt,  a  prototype  stem  cell  compartment. 

Cell. 2013;154:274-284.

Dick FA, Rubin SM. Molecular mechanisms underlying RB protein func-

tion. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2013;14:297-306.

Fuchs  E,  Tumbar  T,  Gausch  G.  Socializing  with  the  neighbors:  Stem 

cells and their niche. Cell. 2004;116:769-778.

Goldstein M, Kastan MB. The DNA damage response: implications for 
tumor  responses  to  radiation  and  chemotherapy.  Annu  Rev  Med. 
2015;66:129-143.

Jackson SP, Bartek J. The DNA-damage response in human biology and 

disease. Nature. 2009;461:1071-1078.

Johnson A, Skotheim JM. Start and the restriction point. Curr Opin Cell 

Biol. 2013;25:717-723.

Rando  TA.  Stem  cells,  ageing  and  the  quest  for  immortality.  Nature. 

2006;441:1080-1086.

Sage  J.  The  retinoblastoma  tumor  suppressor  and  stem  cell  biology. 

Genes Dev. 2012;26:1409-1420.

Scadden  DT.  The  stem-cell  niche  as  an  entity  of  action.  Nature. 

2006;441:1075-1079.

Sherr CJ. The INK4a/ARF network in tumour suppression. Nat Rev Mol 

Cell Biol. 2001;2:731-737.

Blanpain C, Fuchs E. Epidermal stem cells of the skin. Annu Rev Cell 

Shi X, Garry DJ. Muscle stem cells in development, regeneration and 

Dev Biol. 2006;22:339-373.

disease. Genes Dev. 2006;20:1692-1708.

Bryder D, Rossi DJ, Weissman IL. Hematopoietic stem cells: The para-
digmatic tissue-specific stem cell. Am J Pathol. 2006;169:338-346.
Cardozo T, Pagano M. The SCF ubiquitin ligase: Insights into a molecu-

Silverman JS, Skaar JR, Pagano M. SCF ubiquitin ligases in the mainte-

nance of genome stability. Trends Biochem Sci. 2012;37:66-73.

Sperka T, Wang J, Rudolph KL. DNA damage checkpoints in stem cells, 

lar machine. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2004;5:739-751.

Chandler H, Peters G. Stressing the cell cycle in senescence and aging. 

Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2013;25:765-771.

Chen HZ, Tsai SY, Leone G. Emerging roles of E2Fs in cancer: an exit 

from cell cycle control. Nat Rev Cancer. 2009;9:785-797.

ageing and cancer. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2012;13:579-590.

Takahashi  K,  Yamanaka  S.  A  decade  of  transcription  factor-mediated 
reprogramming  to  pluripotency.  Nat  Rev  Mol  Cell  Biol.  2016;17:
183-193.

Veit B. Stem cell signalling networks in plants. Plant Mol Biol. 2006;

Cheung TH, Rando TA. Molecular regulation of stem cell quiescence. 

60:793-810.

Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2013;14:329-340.

C H A P T E R 

42 

S Phase and DNA Replication

Accurate replication of DNA, which is crucial for cel-

lular propagation and survival, occurs during the S phase 
(DNA  synthesis  phase)  of  the  cell  cycle.  This  chapter 
begins with a brief primer on the events of replication 
and  then  discusses  its  regulation.  Next,  the  chapter 
covers the proteins at origins of replication that ensure 
that each region of DNA is replicated once and only once 
per cell cycle. It closes by discussing how the structure 
of the nucleus influences replication.

DNA Replication: A Primer
One  of  the  most  exciting  byproducts  of  the  Watson-
Crick  model  for  the  structure  of  DNA  was  a  predicted 
mechanism  for  DNA  replication.  Because  DNA  strand 
pairing  is  determined  by  complementary  base  pairing,  
it  was  logical  to  propose  the  existence  of  “DNA  poly-
merases,” enzymes that would move along a single strand 
of  DNA,  recognize  each  base  in  turn,  and  insert  the 
proper complementary base at the end of the growing 
chain.  Thus,  one  might  have  surmised  that  only  a 
single enzyme was required for DNA synthesis. In fact, 
DNA  replication  in  cells  involves  a  complex  macromo-
lecular machine.

In  the  chemical  reaction  of  DNA  replication,  the  3′ 
hydroxyl at the end of the growing DNA strand makes a 
nucleophilic attack on the α-phosphate of the incoming 
nucleoside triphosphate to form a phosphodiester bond. 
This incorporates the nucleotide into the growing chain 
and  releases  pyrophosphate  (Fig.  42.1).  This  reaction 
requires the presence of a template strand of DNA that 
specifies, via base pairing, which of the four nucleoside 
triphosphates is added to the growing molecule.

The exact site on the chromosomal DNA where replica-
tion begins is termed the origin of bidirectional repli-
cation.  As  the  term  bidirectional  implies,  two  sets  of 
DNA replication machinery head off in opposite directions 
from  the  origin.  At  the  replication  fork,  one  parental 
DNA molecule splits into two daughters (Fig. 42.2). The 

protein complex associated with the fork that is actively 
replicating the DNA is known as the replisome. Accumu-
lating evidence suggests that the replisome is stationary at 
the fork as it “reels in” replicating DNA rather than moving 
along the DNA like a train on a track.

Replicating DNA

Mechanism of
chain elongation

OO

P

O O–
O

H2C

H H

Base 1

H

H

H

OO

P

O O–
O

H2C

H H

OO

P

O O–
O

H2C

Base 2

H

H

H

Growing DNA chain

Free 3'-hydroxyl end

Base 3

H H
OH

H

H

H

O

P

O–

O–

OO

P

Nucleophilic
attack

O

O

P

O O–
O

H2C

O–

Base 4

Entering dNTP

H H
OH

H

H

H

FIGURE  42.1  MECHANISM OF DNA POLYMERIZATION. A 3′ 
OH group at the end of a growing DNA chain makes a nucleophilic 
attack on the α-phosphate of a triphosphate precursor in the active 
site of polymerase (enzyme not shown here). dNTP, deoxynucleoside 
triphosphate. 

 727

728 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

Lagging strand

polymerase complex

Nascent DNA

(Okazaki fragment)

Origin of
bidirectional
replication

5'

3'

5'

3'

Lagging strand

RNA
primer

Replisome

Nascent DNA

Leading strand

Polymerase/

primase

RPA

Replication
fork

CMG
Helicase
3'

5'

Leading strand
polymerase complex

FIGURE  42.2  KEY  COMPONENTS  AND  EVENTS  AT  THE  REPLICATION  FORK.  All  enzymes  are  closely  associated  in  the  replisome 
complex, but are shown separate here for clarity. 

The bidirectional nature of DNA replication causes a 
fundamental problem, as the chemical reaction of DNA 
synthesis  invariably  proceeds  in  a  5′  to  3′  direction. 
Replication  of  the  so-called  leading  strand,  in  which 
DNA  polymerase  ε  moves  in  a  3′  to  5′  direction  along 
the  template  (laying  down  nascent  DNA  in  a  5′  to  3′ 
direction)  poses  no  problems;  the  polymerase  simply 
chases behind the replication fork (Fig. 42.2). However, 
the other template strand faces in the opposite direction, 
apparently  requiring  a  DNA  polymerase  to  synthesize 
DNA  in  the  wrong  direction  as  the  replication  fork 
progresses away from the origin (ie, adding nucleotides 
in  a  3′  to  5′  direction).  No  DNA  polymerase  with  this 
polarity  has  been  found.  Instead,  this  lagging  strand 
replicates  in  a  series  of  short  segments.  Every  time 
the  DNA  strands  have  been  peeled  apart  (unwound) 
by  200  nucleotides  or  so,  probably  corresponding  to 
the  unwinding  of  a  single  nucleosome,  a  polymerase/
primase  complex  (Figs.  42.2  and  42.12)  initiates  DNA 
synthesis  on  the  lagging  strand,  and  DNA  polymerase 
δ runs away from the fork, back toward the replication 
origin,  again  synthesizing  nascent  DNA  in  a  5′  to  3′ 
direction.  Thus,  lagging  strand  synthesis  proceeds  in 
bursts  in  a  direction  opposite  to  the  overall  direction 
of  fork  movement.  Synthesis  of  each  lagging  strand 
fragment stops when DNA polymerase runs into the 5′ 
end of the previous fragment, displacing the RNA primer 
with which it was initiated (see later). Thus, the lagging 
strand is copied in a highly discontinuous fashion into 
short fragments known as Okazaki fragments (named 
after  their  discoverer  [Fig.  42.2]).  Fig.  42.12  describes 
the  enzymes  and  events  at  the  replication  fork  in  
greater detail.

Origins of Replication
Bacteria such as Escherichia coli replicate their circular 
chromosomes using two replication forks starting from 
a single origin of replication (Fig. 42.3A), but eukary-
otes must use multiple origins of replication to duplicate 

A. E. coli chromosome

Origin
oriC

500,000 bp

B. Portion of eukaryotic chromosome
Active
origin

Active
origin

Dormant
origins

Dormant
origins

130,000 bp

FIGURE  42.3  A,  The  Escherichia  coli  chromosome  is  a  simple 
replicon  with  a  single  origin  of  replication.  In  cells,  this  chromosome 
has  a  complex,  highly  supercoiled  structure.  B,  Eukaryotic  chromo-
somes  have  multiple  origins  of  replication,  most  of  which  remain 
dormant unless needed. 

their large genomes during the S phase, which can be as 
short  as  a  few  minutes  in  some  early  embryos.  These 
numerous origins are distributed along the chromosome: 
up to 600 to 700 in budding yeast and more than 100,000 
in human cells. The origins are distributed so that all the 
DNA is replicated in the available time, and many more 
origins are prepared than are actually needed.

How is the “firing” of all these origins orchestrated so 
that each is used no more than once per S phase? Cells 
manage this problem by a mechanism termed licensing, 
which  ensures  that  each  segment  of  DNA  is  replicated 
just once per cell cycle. Replication of the origin removes 
the license, which cannot normally be renewed until the 
cell  has  completely  traversed  the  cycle  and  has  passed 
through mitosis.

The portion of chromosomal DNA replicated by the 
two  bidirectional  forks  initiated  at  a  single  origin  is 

 

CHAPTER 42  n  S Phase and DNA Replication 

729

termed  a  replicon.  The  classic  replicon  is  the  E.  coli 
chromosome (which is 4 × 106 base pairs [bp] in size) 
with  a  single  genetically  defined  replicator  site  called 
oriC (Fig. 42.3). An initiator protein (product of the E. 
coli  DnaA  gene  [Fig.  42.13])  binds  to  this  origin  and 
either directly or indirectly promotes melting of the DNA 
duplex, giving the replication machinery access to two 
single  strands  of  DNA.  Other  factors  unwind  the  DNA, 
leading  to  the  full  assembly  of  the  replisome,  which 
powers a wave of DNA replication proceeding outward 
in both directions along the DNA (a replication “bubble”) 
at approximately 750 to 1250 bases per second.

An  average  human  chromosome  contains  approxi-
mately  150  ×  106  bp  of  DNA.  Because  the  replication 
machinery in mammals moves only approximately 20 to 
40  bases  per  second  (partly  reflecting  the  fact  that  the 
DNA is packaged into chromatin and partly reflecting the 
slower speed of the eukaryotic replisome), it would take 
up to 2000 hours to replicate this length of DNA from a 
single  origin.  In  most  human  cells  the  S  phase  takes 
approximately  10  hours.  This  means  that  at  least  25  
to  125  origins  of  replication  are  required  to  replicate  
an  average  chromosome  in  the  allotted  time.  In  fact, 
origins  of  replication  are  much  more  closely  spaced  
than this. It is estimated that 30,000 to 50,000 origins of 
replication  “fire”  during  each  cell  cycle  to  replicate  
the  entire  human  genome,  but  many  more  dormant  
origins are licensed for use if necessary. These dormant 
origins  are  essential  for  resolving  replication  stress  
(see later).

To  explain  the  events  at  origins  of  replication,  the 
budding  yeast  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae  serves  as  a 
good example. Its DNA replication is better understood 
than that of any other eukaryote and although its origins 
of  replication  are  specialized,  the  proteins  that  act  on 
them are conserved across metazoa.

Replication Origins in Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Approximately  400  origins  of  replication  participate  in 
replicating  the  budding  yeast  genome.  A  major  break-
through  in  understanding  DNA  replication  in  S.  cerevi-
siae  was  the  identification  of  short  (100  to  150 bp) 
segments of DNA that act as replication origins in vivo 
when  cloned  into  a  yeast  plasmid  (circular  DNA  mole-
cule).  These  autonomously  replicating  sequences 
(or ARS elements) allow yeast plasmids to replicate in 
parallel with the cellular chromosomes (Fig. 42.4). ARS 
elements are often, although not always, bona fide rep-
lication  origins  in  their  native  chromosomal  context. 
Replication always initiates within ARS elements, but not 
all  ARS  elements  act  as  origins  of  DNA  replication  in 
every cell cycle.

Yeast  replication  origins  are  spaced  approximately 
every 30,000 bp, with a maximum separation of approxi-
mately  130,000 bp.  Even  this  longest  interval  should 
replicate  easily  within  the  30  minutes  available  during 

A

Plasmid

Selectable
marker gene

Introduce into

yeast cells

B

ARS

Plasmid

Selectable
marker gene

Introduce into

yeast cells

Grow cells

under selective

conditions

Grow cells

under selective

conditions

FIGURE 42.4  PLASMID ASSAY FOR IDENTIFICATION OF AN 
AUTONOMOUSLY  REPLICATING  SEQUENCE  (ARS)  ELEMENT 
(ORIGIN  OF  DNA  REPLICATION)  IN  BUDDING  YEAST.  The 
plasmid  has  a  selectable  marker  gene  (eg,  a  gene  required  for  the 
synthesis of an essential amino acid) plus (in panel B) an ARS element. 
This plasmid is transferred into growing yeast cells that are defective 
in the marker gene carried by the plasmid; these cells are then plated 
out on agar medium that lacks the essential amino acid. A, A plasmid 
lacking an ARS fails to replicate and is lost from the cells. These cells 
cannot grow into colonies on plates that lack the essential amino acid. 
B, If the plasmid contains an ARS element, it replicates along with the 
chromosomal  DNA  and  is  maintained  in  the  population.  These  cells 
grow into colonies in the absence of the essential amino acid. 

the S phase. Because the number of origins exceeds the 
number  required  to  replicate  the  genome  within  the 
allotted  time,  some  origins  need  not  “fire”  every  cell 
cycle. The probability that any given origin will be used 
in a given cell cycle ranges from less than 0.2 to greater 
than  0.9.  It  is  important  to  note  that  replication  by  a 
passing fork coming from an adjacent origin inactivates 
dormant origins. This prevents re-replication of genomic 
regions during the cell cycle.

The  ARS  element  does  two  things  to  establish  an 
origin  of  replication.  First,  its  conserved  sequences  act 
as  binding  sites  for  a  protein  complex  that  marks  it  as  
a potential origin. Second, it has nearby sequences that 
are  readily  induced  to  unwind  by  separating  the  base-
paired strands.

Budding  yeast  ARS  elements  share  a  common  DNA 
sequence  motif  called  the  ARS  core  consensus 
sequence:  5′-(A/T)TTTAT(A/G)TTT(A/T)-3′  (Fig.  42.5). 
Single  base  mutations  at  several  locations  within  this 
sequence completely inactivate ARS activity. Other, less 
well-conserved  DNA  sequences  also  contribute  to  the 
activity of the ARS as a replication origin. One of these, 
termed B1, together with the ARS core, forms the bind-
ing site for a complex of six proteins termed the origin 

730 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

ABF-1

B3

ORC

complex

EdU

PCNA (t + 30 min)

Merge

ATP

90°
ATP

OBR

(origin of

bidirectional
replication)

B2 DNA

unwinding
element

B1

ARS
core
A
G

A
T T T A T   T T T
T

A
T

5 µm

FIGURE  42.5  ORGANIZATION  OF  THE  AUTONOMOUSLY 
REPLICATING  SEQUENCE  (ARS)-1  ELEMENT.  The  ORC  (origin 
recognition  complex)  binds  to  the  ARS  core  sequence  plus  element 
B1. B2 is a sequence that can readily be induced to unwind. The OBR 
(origin  of  bidirectional  replication)  is  the  site  where  DNA  synthesis 
actually begins. B3 is a binding site for an auxiliary factor called ABF-1 
that  is  both  a  transcriptional  activator  and  an  activator  of  the  ARS 
element. ATP, adenosine triphosphate. (For reference, see Protein Data 
Bank [PDB; www.rcsb.org] file 4X6C.)

FIGURE  42.6  SUPERRESOLUTION VIEW OF ACTIVE REPLI-
CONS IN A HELA (HENRIETTA LACKS) CELL. EdU (red) was used 
to label sites of active replication for 15 minutes followed by washing 
out for 15 minutes. Then antibody recognizing proliferating cell nuclear 
antigen  (PCNA)  was  used  to  stain  all  active  replicons  in  the  cell. 
Thousands  of  replicons  can  be  seen,  and  it  is  clear  that  in  the  30 
minutes  between  the  labelling  of  the  red  and  green  channels,  many 
new origins of replication have been activated. Scale bar = 5 µm. OMX 
superresolution. (Microscopy by Vadim Chagin and Cristina Cardoso, 
Technical University of Darmstadt, Germany.)

recognition  complex  (ORC  [see  later  section]).  The 
DNA unwinding element is another short sequence (B2) 
located  a  bit  further  along  the  DNA.  DNA  synthesis 
begins  at  an  origin  of  bidirectional  replication  midway 
between the ORC binding site and the DNA unwinding 
element.

ORC was identified by its ability to bind the 11-bp ARS 
core sequence (Fig. 42.5). This binding has two notewor-
thy features. First, the subunits of the ORC complex are 
AAA adenosine triphosphatases (ATPases; see Box 36.1) 
and adenosine triphosphate (ATP) hydrolysis is required 
for  ORC  to  bind  ARS  DNA.  Second,  in  yeast,  the  ORC 
complex  remains  bound  to  the  origins  of  replication 
across the entire cell cycle. Thus, something other than 
the presence of ORC must regulate the periodic activa-
tion  of  origins  in  the  S  phase  (Fig.  42.14).  In  some 
metazoan  cells,  ORC  behavior  is  more  complex—for 
example,  the  largest  subunit,  Orc1,  is  degraded  during 
part of the cell cycle.

ARS  elements  often  contain  binding  sites  for  other 
sequence-specific DNA binding proteins, including tran-
scription  factors.  For  example,  a  transcription  factor 
called  ARS-binding  factor  1  (ABF-1)  binds  to  the  B3 
sequence within the ARS1 element (Fig. 42.5). Deletion 
of the ABF-1 binding site only slightly reduces the ability 
of ARS1 to act as a replication origin in vivo and other 
transcription factors can substitute for ABF-1.

In  addition  to  their  role  in  DNA  replication,  several 
ORC  subunits  also  regulate  heterochromatin  formation 
and transcription (see Chapters 8 and 10). This crosstalk 
between the machinery used for transcription and DNA 
replication  may  explain  why  regions  of  chromosomes 
with actively transcribed genes typically replicate early 
in  the  S  phase  (see  the  next  section  below).  In  some 
metazoan  cells,  the  Orc6  subunit  also  functions  during 
cytokinesis,  apparently  via  interactions  with  cytoskel-
etal filament proteins independent of its role at replica-
tion origins.

Replication Origins in Mammalian Cells
Less is known about the structure and function of mam-
malian  origins  of  DNA  replication  than  about  ARS  ele-
ments in budding yeast. Attempts to develop a mammalian 
equivalent  to  the  yeast  ARS  assay  had  few  successes. 
Over  the  years  approximately  30  metazoan  origins  of 
replication were identified by painstaking methods, but 
more recently, high throughput methods, including the 
sequencing of short nascent strands of replicating DNA 
have  identified  thousands  of  mammalian  replication 
origins. Superresolution microscopy can now resolve the 
thousands of replicons active at any one time in a human 
cell (Fig. 42.6).

Overall,  the  chromatin  landscape  influences  mam-
malian origins. Important factors include DNA sequence, 
DNA  modifications,  chromatin  structure,  and  nuclear 
organization.  Although  high  throughput  sequencing 
revealed no sequences as specific as the yeast ARS ele-
ments, many origins are associated with short regions of 
G-rich DNA. These G-rich regions can form specialized 
structures  that  have  fewer  nucleosomes  and  are  there-
fore more accessible to the DNA replication machinery. 
Indeed, replication origins tend to be located near gene 
promoters,  where  the  density  of  nucleosomes  is  low. 
Such  actively  transcribed  regions  of  the  genome  are 
packaged into euchromatin with modified histones and 
tend to replicate earlier during S phase than regions of 
the genome that are not transcribed.

A  typical  mammalian  replicon  encompasses  about 
130 kb and contains approximately four or five licensed 
origins-only,  one  of  which  is  typically  used.  The  first 
replicon  to  be  mapped  lies  just  downstream  of  the 
hamster  gene  for  dihydrofolate  reductase,  an  enzyme 
that is essential for biosynthesis of thymidine. Investiga-
tors selected cells with this chromosomal region ampli-
fied as hundreds or even thousands of copies (Fig. 42.7) 
and looked for the first regions of the amplified DNA to 

 

CHAPTER 42  n  S Phase and DNA Replication 

731

Mapping a cellular replication origin

Add high

concentration
of methotrexate

Cells die

CYTOPLASM

Add gradually

increasing concentration

of methotrexate over

many generations

Cells live in high
concentration of

methotrexate

Geminin degraded

Cdks inactive

Prereplication

complex

ORC

Cdc6

Cdt1

Mcm2-7
double
hexamer

Loop domain containing

dihydrofolate reductase gene

Chromosome with
amplified domain

Potential OBRs
(origins of bidirectional
replication)

NUCLEUS

Restriction

point

G1

Cultured cells

Normal

chromosome

Base of
domain

DHFR gene

Dormant
origins

Dormant
origins

Active
origin

β

Active
origin

γ

Dormant
origins

Next gene
70

60

50

DHFR gene
–20

–10

0

–30

10

40
Number of bases (kb)

30

20

Initiation zone

FIGURE 42.7  MAP OF DNA REPLICATION LANDSCAPE NEAR 
THE DIHYDROFOLATE REDUCTASE (DHFR) GENE. Normal cells 
are  killed  by  exposure  to  methotrexate,  but  it  is  possible  to  select 
resistant cell lines by growing them in progressively increasing concen-
trations of the drug, selecting at each stage for cells that survive. Use 
of this procedure on hamster cells resulted in a cell line that contains 
approximately  1000  copies  of  a  230,000-bp  chromosomal  domain 
containing  the  DHFR  gene.  This  region  of  DNA  is  replicated  using 
origins found within a 55,000-bp region adjacent to the DHFR gene. 
Most initiation occurs at two specific origins, called β and γ, but other 
dormant origins are scattered throughout the entire 55,000-bp region. 

replicate.  They  found  that  DNA  replication  can  initiate 
with  low  efficiency  at  a  number  of  sites  distributed 
across a broad region of approximately 55,000 bp. Two 
of these sites, termed Ori-β and Ori-γ (Fig. 42.7) account 
for approximately 20% of all initiation in the region.

The emerging view is that the replication machinery 
is  highly  conserved  between  budding  yeasts  and  verte-
brates but that the location of replication origins is more 
flexible in vertebrates. This might reflect both the differ-
ing chromatin landscapes across metazoan genomes (see 
Chapter 8) and the diverse range of cell cycles required 
to make a complex metazoan.

Origin Licensing and Assembly of  
the Prereplication Complex
To preserve the integrity of the genome, each origin of 
replication must “fire” no more than once per cell cycle. 
We now have a reasonable understanding of the various 

Cdt1

Geminin

Cdk phosphorylation
triggers other CMG

components to assemble

3’

3’

5’

5’

Cdc45

GINS

CMG helicases

unwind DNA

S

FIGURE  42.8  COMPONENTS  OF  THE  PREREPLICATION 
COMPLEX  BEFORE  AND  AFTER  THE  INITIATION  OF  DNA 
REPLICATION. CMG, Cdc45, Mcm2–7, and GINS (Go-Ichi-Ni-San). 
(For  reference,  see  PDB  files  3JA8  [for  CMG  helicase  with  Cdk45 
bound], 3JC5 [for Mcm2–7], and 5F9R [for ORC].)

solutions  to  this  problem  that  have  been  reached  by 
yeasts and vertebrates.

Recall  that  yeast  ORC  is  stably  bound  to  replication 
origins throughout the cell cycle. However, ORC is not 
the  trigger  for  DNA  replication.  Rather,  it  acts  as  a 
“landing pad” for assembly of a prereplication complex 
of other proteins that initiates DNA replication.

Formation  of  the  prereplication  complex  “licenses” 
each origin for a single initiation event as follows. During 
late  anaphase  or  very  early  G1  phase,  several  proteins, 
including Cdc6 and Cdt1, bind to the ORC complex at 
origins  of  replication  (Table  42.1).  Before  the  onset  of 
the S phase ORC-Cdc6-Cdt1 loads a double hexamer of 
Mcm proteins (minichromosome maintenance) on the 
origin DNA (Fig. 42.8). Mcm proteins were identified in 
a screen for genes of budding yeast that are required for 
the stability of small artificial chromosomes. Six of these 
Mcm  genes  encode  a  structurally  related  group  of  pro-
teins, termed Mcm2–7, that is required for DNA replica-
tion. ORC-Cdc6–Cdt1 uses ATP hydrolysis to crack open 
two hexameric Mcm2-7 rings so they can wrap around 
DNA in a head-to-head orientation.

Replication starts when each Mcm2–7 hexamer asso-
ciates with the GINS (Go-Ichi-Ni-San; 5-1-2-3 in Japanese) 
complex and the Cdc45 protein to form the replicative 
CMG helicase (Cdc45-Mcm-GINS). This helicase forms 
the  core  of  the  replisome  and  uses  ATP  hydrolysis  to 
separate DNA strands (Fig. 42.8). As the two CMG heli-
cases move away from each other, the origin is converted 
from  a  licensed  to  an  unlicensed  state.  Because  origin 
licensing  by  Mcm2–7  loading  can  only  occur  prior  to 
entry into S phase, origins only fire once per cell cycle.
In  mammals,  licensing  occurs  in  the  early  G1  phase 
before passage of the restriction point (see Chapter 41). 
At the exit from mitosis, destruction of cyclins and syn-
thesis of inhibitory proteins inactivates Cdks. This creates 
a window of time between anaphase and the restriction 

732 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

TABLE 42.1  Biochemical Activities Required for Replication of DNA in Eukaryotes
Activity

Name of Protein

Origin recognition
Prereplication complex

Origin activation

ORC (origin recognition complex; five of six subunits are AAA ATPases)
Cdc6 (recruits Mcm2–7)
Cdt1 (recruits Mcm2–7)
Cdc7-Dbf4
Cdk (in human, Cdk2-cyclin A) phosphorylation of Sld2/RecQ4 (yeast/human names) 

and Sld3/treslin recruits Dbp11/TopBP1 and initiates CMG assembly to trigger the 
actual start of replication

DNA unwinding (helicase)

CMG helicase is made up of:

Stabilization of single-stranded DNA
Replicative polymerases

Processivity factor

PCNA loader

Closing Factors
Removal of RNA primer

Ligation of discontinuous DNA fragments
Releasing superhelical tension
Disentangling daughter strands

•  Mcm2–7 (assemble double hexamer before other CMG components)
•  Cdc45 and the GINS complex (4 proteins)

RPA (binds single-stranded DNA)
DNA polymerase α/primase (no editing function) starts synthesis of the leading 

strand and each Okazaki fragment

DNA polymerase δ replicates the lagging strand
DNA polymerase ε replicates the leading strand (both δ and ε have 3′–5′ exonuclease 

editing capability)

PCNA (ring-shaped clamp that slides along the DNA. Keeps polymerases δ and ε 

attached to the template strand so that they make longer chains; coordination of 
cell-cycle control and replication; role in repair)

RF-C (Binds primer: template junction. AAA ATPase. Loading factor for PCNA, 

important for polymerase switch)

Fen1 5′–3′ exonuclease
Dna2 helicase and endonuclease
RNase H
DNA ligase I
DNA topoisomerase I
DNA topoisomerase II

ATPase, adenosine triphosphatase; CMG, Cdc45, Mcm2–7, and GINS; GINS, Go-Ichi-Ni-San; PCNA, proliferating cell nuclear antigen; RPA, replication 
protein A.

point for licensing replication origins (Fig. 42.9). Mam-
malian cells pass the restriction point when the levels of 
Cdk2–cyclin  E,  and  subsequently,  Cdk2–cyclin  A  rise 
(see Fig. 40.17). This prevents the relicensing of replica-
tion  origins  until  after  the  next  mitosis.  In  yeasts,  the 
single Cdk that is complexed with B-type cyclins inhibits 
origin  licensing.  Experimental  inactivation  of  CdkCdc2 
during the G2 phase in the fission yeast Schizosaccharo-
myces  pombe  demonstrated  the  importance  of  Cdk 
activation: Cells lacking CdkCdc2 activity loaded Mcm2–7 
onto already replicated DNA and then carried out further 
rounds of “illegal” DNA replication without division. Cdk 
regulation  of  origin  licensing  during  G1  phase  actually 
provides  one  explanation  for  oncogenic  stress  (see 
Chapter 41), in which inappropriate activation of onco-
genes  leads  to  cell-cycle  arrest  followed  by  death  or 
senescence. Inappropriate oncogene activation can lead 
to  premature  stabilization  of  cyclins  D  and  cyclin  E, 
resulting in premature activation of Cdks. This, in turn, 
can lead to an insufficient number of replication origins 
being  licensed,  thereby  inhibiting  the  cell’s  ability  to  
deal with replication stress (see later) and its associated 
DNA damage.

Different cell types use various combinations of several 
different  pathways  to  downregulate  the  activity  of  the 
licensing system once cells enter S phase. In metazoans, 
the  most  important  pathways  reduce  Cdt1  activity  by 
degradation  in  S  and  G2  phases.  After  the  cell  passes 
the  restriction  point,  Cdks  phosphorylate  Cdt1.  This 
promotes its ubiquitylation by the SCFSkp2 and  degrada-
tion.  In  addition,  the  key  replisome  component prolif-
erating  cell  nuclear  antigen  (PCNA)  recruits  another 
ubiquitin  ligase  that  causes  Cdt1  degradation  during  S 
phase. In some cell types, Cdks phosphorylate Cdc6 and 
Orc1, leading to their ubiquitylation and degradation.

Vertebrates use a protein called geminin as an alter-
native  regulator  of  origin  licensing  by  Cdt1  (Fig.  42.8). 
Geminin binds to Cdt1 and prevents it from loading Mcm 
proteins onto DNA. The anaphase-promoting complex/
cyclosome (APC/C; see Fig. 40.15) triggers degradation 
of  geminin,  keeping  its  concentration  very  low  from 
anaphase through the late G1 phase, allowing prereplica-
tion  complexes  to  assemble.  Accumulation  of  geminin 
starting  in  the  S  phase  inhibits  the  assembly  of  new 
prereplication  complexes  until  after  the  next  mitosis. 
Yeasts control origin licensing without geminin.

 

d
e
s
a
e
r
c
n
I

y
t
i
v
i
t
c
a
 
k
d
C

d
e
s
a
e
r
c
n
I

y
t
i
v
i
t
c
a
 
C
P
A

CHAPTER 42  n  S Phase and DNA Replication 

733

Cdk2-cyclin E

Origin licensing

Cdk2-cyclin A

HUMAN CERVICAL EPITHELIUM STAINED WITH ANTI-MCM5

A. Normal

B. Low-grade

lesion

C. High-grade

lesion

Cdk4/6-cyclin D

G1

Restriction point

APC/CCdh1

S

Geminin
Emi1
SCFSkp2
SCFβ-TrCP

APC/CCdh1
Geminin
Cdc6
Cyclins

SCFβ-TrCP
Emi1
Cdc25A

SCFSkp2 Other SCF
Cyclin D
DP1
Cdt1

p27Kip1
Orc1

FIGURE  42.9  PROTEIN  DEGRADATION  REGULATES  DNA 
REPLICATION. Degradation of geminin, Cdc6, Cdc25A, and cyclins 
during the G1 phase keeps Cdk activity low and allows prereplication 
complex  formation.  Degradation  of  p27Kip1  and  inactivation  of  the 
APC/CCdh1 by Emi1 allows the activation of Cdks to levels sufficient for 
the initiation of the S phase. Once cells enter the S phase, the G1/S 
regulatory machinery (cyclins D and E and the E2F cofactor DP1) is 
degraded.  Degradation  of  Cdt1  and  accumulation  of  geminin  block 
reassembly  of  prereplication  complexes.  APC,  anaphase-promoting 
complex; SCF, Skp2 (S-phase kinase-associated protein), cullin, and 
F-box proteins. 

A third way to regulate origin licensing is to sequester 
molecules  required  to  assemble  the  prereplication 
complex in the cytoplasm following the onset of S phase. 
This  was  first  suggested  by  studies  of  DNA  replication  
in Xenopus egg extracts (see Fig. 40.8) in which intact 
nuclei replicate their DNA only once but re-replicate if 
the  nuclear  membrane  is  disrupted.  In  different  cell  
types, nuclear exclusion of ORC, Cdc6, Cdt1, or Mcm2–7 
all contribute to limiting licensing during S and G2 phases.
Components of the prereplication complex are absent 
from nondividing differentiated cells. In fact, detection 
of these proteins with antibodies in cells from cervical 
smears can be used as a sensitive method for the early 
detection of cancer cells (Fig. 42.10).

Signals That Start Replication
A classic experiment (Fig. 42.11) demonstrated that (a) 
a  cytoplasmic  inducer  triggers  the  transition  into  the  S 
phase and (b) this inducer triggers DNA replication in a 
G1  nucleus  but  not  in  a  G2  nucleus.  The  inducer  is  a 
combination  of  protein  kinases,  including  Cdk–cyclin 
pairs,  as  well  as  a  specialized  kinase,  Cdc7-Dbf4.  In 
mammals, Cdk2–cyclin E activity peaks at the G1/S transi-
tion (Fig. 42.9) and phosphorylates pRb, thereby opening 
the  restriction  point  “gate.”  This  allows  the  E2F/DP 
dimer to function as a transcription factor and stimulate 

FIGURE  42.10  SECTIONS  OF  HUMAN  CERVIX  STAINED 
WITH ANTIBODIES TO MCM5. A, Normal G0 cells in this stratified 
epithelium  lack  Mcm5  and  other  replication  proteins.  B–C,  Cancer 
cells express Mcm5 at higher levels as they become more malignant. 
Bound  antibodies  were  detected  with  peroxidase  coupled  to  a  sec-
ondary  antibody  (brown  reaction  product)  and  lightly  counterstained 
with hematoxylin (blue). (Modified from Williams GH, Romanowski P, 
Morris L, et al. Improved cervical smear assessment using antibodies 
against  proteins  that  regulate  DNA  replication.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci 
U S A. 1998;95:14932–14937.)

the  transcription  of  genes  involved  in  DNA  replication 
(see Fig. 41.9). In addition to cyclin E itself, E2F drives 
expression  of  cyclin  A,  Cdc25A,  enzymes  required  for 
synthesis  of  DNA  precursors  (dihydrofolate  reductase, 
thymidine  kinase,  and  thymidylate  synthase),  origin-
binding  proteins  (Cdc6,  Orc1,  Cdt1  and  its  inhibitor 
geminin),  and  two  components  of  the  replication 
machinery (DNA polymerase α and PCNA; see Fig. 42.9).
In  the  S  phase,  the  SCFSkp2  ubiquitin  ligase  complex 
targets the Cdk inhibitor p27Kip1 for destruction by pro-
teasomes (see Fig. 40.16). SCF gets its name from three 
of its components: Skp2, cullin, and F-box proteins (see 
Fig.  40.16).  Skp2,  which  is  short  for  “S-phase  kinase-
associated  protein,”  was  identified  in  a  complex  with 
Cdk2–cyclin A. SCF recognizes and ubiquitylates many of 
its substrates only after they are phosphorylated by Cdk2-
cyclin A. Cdk2–cyclin A also targets E2F/DP and cyclin E 
for degradation when cells enter the S phase (Fig. 42.9).
For DNA replication to start, the paired strands of the 
double helix must be separated so DNA polymerase can 
recognize the bases and begin synthesizing the daughter 
strand.  The  multi-subunit  CMG  DNA  helicase  uses  ATP 
hydrolysis  to  peel  apart  the  paired  strands  of  the  DNA 
double helix. Prior to S phase each origin of replication 

734 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

A

+

Cell in S phase

Cell in G1 phase

Heterokaryon

(cell with two nuclei)

Fusion of 

S and G1 cells
G1 cell alone

B

100

e
s
a
h
p
 
S

 
r
e
t
n
e
 
t
a
h
t
 
s

l
l

e
c
 
1
G
%

 

50

Advancement
due to inducer

0

0

4

8

12

16

Hours after fusion

FIGURE  42.11  CELL  FUSION  EXPERIMENT  REVEALS  THE 
EXISTENCE  OF  A  POSITIVE  INDUCER  OF  THE  S  PHASE. 
A,  Synchronized  cells  in  different  stages  of  the  cycle  were  fused  to 
yield two nuclei in a single cytoplasm. B, If the fusion involved G1 and 
S cells, the G1 nucleus was induced to enter the S phase sooner than 
expected. If the fusion involved S and G2 cells, the G2 nucleus failed 
to rereplicate its DNA (not shown). (Modified from Rao PN, Johnson 
RT: Mammalian cell fusion: studies on the regulation of DNA synthesis 
and mitosis. Nature. 1970;225:159–164.)

is licensed by assembly of a double hexamer of Mcm2–7 
complexes.  Cdc7  kinase  with  its  associated  regulatory 
subunit  Dbf4  phosphorylates  the  Mcm  complex.  Next, 
Cdks  phosphorylate  other  proteins  that  recruit  GINS  
and  Cdc45  to  the  phosphorylated  Mcm2–7  hexamer, 
thereby  producing  the  CMG  helicase  (Table  41.1  and  
Fig. 42.12A). Subsequent activation of the helicase initi-
ates replication.

Mechanism of DNA Synthesis
Replication  initiates  when  the  activated  CMG  helicase 
starts to separate the DNA strands, which move outward 
in  both  directions  as  the  replisome  assembles  at  the 
origin of bidirectional replication. The newly unwound 
DNA binds the single-strand DNA-binding protein, RPA 
(replication  protein  A),  ensuring  that  the  separated 
strands  do  not  base-pair  with  one  another  again  (Fig. 
42.12B). Table 42.1 describes several other proteins that 
also bind at this time. Box 42.1 provides an introduction 
to DNA replication in E. coli.

The separated DNA strands are ready for replication, 
but DNA synthesis always involves addition of an incom-
ing nucleoside triphosphate to a free 3′ OH group at the 
terminus  of  a  preexisting  nascent  polynucleotide  (Fig. 
42.1). In the absence of a nascent DNA chain, how does 
DNA polymerase get started? This problem is solved on 
the lagging strand by a DNA-dependent RNA polymerase 

called  a  primase,  which,  like  other  RNA  polymerases, 
can  initiate  synthesis  de  novo  without  the  need  for  a 
3′OH group. In eukaryotes, all DNA chains are started by 
a complex of DNA polymerase α and a primase subunit, 
collectively  known  as Pol α/Primase.  Primase  synthe-
sizes an RNA chain of approximately seven nucleotides 
to  which  DNA  polymerase  α  adds  another  20  to  25 
nucleotides  of  so-called  initiator  DNA  (iDNA)  (Fig. 
42.12D–E).  These  initiating  reactions  are  potentially 
risky,  because  DNA  polymerase  α  lacks  proofreading 
ability.  To  avoid  errors  created  by  mismatching  of  an 
incoming base, the RNA primer and most or all the iDNA 
laid down by Pol α/Primase are subsequently replaced.
Once  Pol  α/Primase  has  done  its  job,  two  further 
essential factors act to complete replisome assembly. A 
pentameric protein complex called replication factor 
C (RFC) binds the 3′ end of the iDNA. RFC uses energy 
from ATP hydrolysis to load the trimeric protein PCNA 
onto  the  DNA  (Fig.  42.12E–G).  The  PCNA  trimer  is 
doughnut-shaped, and when the DNA is inserted into its 
central hole, it is topologically locked onto the DNA. RFC 
binding and PCNA loading displace Pol α/Primase from 
the DNA, and PCNA then recruits DNA polymerases δ 
and ε to the DNA. With PCNA acting as a sliding platform, 
DNA  is  reeled  through  the  replisome  and  polymerase  
ε  synthesizes  DNA  continuously  on  the  leading  strand 
(Fig. 42.12G).

On the lagging strand, polymerase δ synthesizes DNA 
in bursts of approximately 250 bp, each initiated by Pol 
α/Primase  and  roughly  correlating  with  the  passage  of 
one nucleosome by the replication fork. The replisome 
contains  a  chromatin  remodeling  activity  that  removes 
nucleosomes  from  the  DNA  ahead  of  the  fork  and 
replaces them after the fork passes.

Both polymerases δ and ε have associated exonuclease 
activities.  This  enables  them  to  proofread  the  newly 
synthesized  DNA  and  correct  most  mistakes  that  they 
have  made.  The  combination  of  selecting  the  correct 
nucleotides  and  efficient  correction  of  mistakes  may 
explain  the  amazing  fidelity  of  DNA  replication,  with 
typically only one error per 109 bp polymerized.

Locally, the final steps of DNA replication are removal 
of the RNA primer (and probably iDNA) and ligation of 
adjacent  stretches  of  newly  synthesized  DNA.  Removal 
of  the  primer  can  be  accomplished  in  two  ways  (Fig. 
42.12H).  On  one  hand,  an  RNA  exonuclease  called 
RNase  H  can  chew  in  from  the  5′  end  of  the  primer. 
However, this enzyme cannot remove the last ribonucle-
otide that is joined to iDNA. That requires the nucleases 
Fen1  (Flap  endonuclease)  or  Dna2.  Fen1  requires  a 
helicase to peel the RNA (and possibly the iDNA) away 
from  the  template,  creating  a  sort  of  flap.  Fen1  then 
cleaves at the junction where the flap is anchored to the 
DNA  template,  removing  the  oligomer  of  unwanted 
nucleotides in one step. Alternatively, the Dna2 nuclease 
can do the whole job itself because it also has helicase 

 

5’

3’

A. Activation of origin

Cdc7

Dbf4

Cyclin A

Cdk2

ORC

Mcm2-7
double hexamer

Cdc6 and Cdt1 leave

B. Binding of Cdc45, GINS and RPA

RPA

Cdc45

GINS

Active
CMG helicase

CHAPTER 42  n  S Phase and DNA Replication 

735

F. RFC binds iDNA, evicting polymerase α / primase,
    loading PCNA

RFC

ATP

PCNA

Polymerase α and primase leave

G. PCNA recruits polymerase ε to leading strand

Polymerase ε

C. Cdc45 recruits polymerase α / primase

H. Processive DNA
     synthesis starts

Primase

Polymerase α

D. Synthesis of RNA primer

RNA
primer

E. Synthesis of i-DNA

RNA
primer

5’

3’

i-DNA

RFC

PCNA

Nascent
DNA

I. Primer and
   i-DNA removal

RNase H

Fen1

J. DNA synthesis completed by polymerase ε 
    followed by ligation of strands;
    p97/Cdc48 removes
    Mcm2-7 and replisome
    disassembles

p97/Cdc48

FIGURE 42.12  MAIN EVENTS OF DNA REPLICATION ON THE LEADING STRAND. For a more detailed description, including events on 
the lagging strand, see the text. (For reference, see PDB files 1A76 [for Fen1], 1SXJ [for RFC/PCNA], 2ZXX [for Cdt1], and 3CF2 [for p97/Cdc48].)

activity.  Most  of  these  maturation/processing  enzymes 
are recruited by interacting with the PCNA trimer. The 
individual interactions are transient while PCNA remains 
as a stable loading platform.

Following removal of initiator RNA, the Pol δ/PCNA 
complex  extends  the  upstream  nascent  chain  until  it 
runs into the downstream 5′ end created by Fen1. DNA 
ligase  I  then  joins  the  two  stretches  of  DNA  together 
(Fig. 42.12I).

When the DNA is ligated, the replisome must be disas-
sembled. This is an active process triggered by ubiquity-
lation  of  the  Mcm7  subunit  of  the  CMG  helicase.  The 
AAA-ATPase  p97/Cdc48  (which  also  extracts  proteins 
from  the  endoplasmic  reticulum  in  the  endoplasmic 

reticulum-associated  degradation  [ERAD]  pathway;  see 
Chapter 23) recognizes this ubiquitin and then actively 
separates the Mcm2–7 hexamer from Cdc45 and GINS, 
causing the replisome to fall apart.

Higher-Order Organization of DNA 
Replication in the Nucleus
The  term  S  phase  gives  the  impression  that  all  DNA 
replicates more or less synchronously, but this is far from 
true. At any given time during the S phase, only 10% to 
15%  of  the  replicons  actively  synthesize  DNA.  Some 
replicate  early,  others  late.  This  pattern  of  replication  
is  not  random;  some  segments  of  DNA  consistently 

736 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

BOX 42.1  DNA Replication in Escherichia coli

The  DNA  replication  system  of  Escherichia  coli  has  been 
reconstituted entirely from purified components. Analysis of 
this system reveals many similarities with eukaryotic replica-
tion, indicating that this process is highly conserved. E. coli 
DNA replication can be subdivided into three phases: initia-
tion,  elongation,  and  termination.  Thus  far,  at  least  28 
polypeptides are known to be involved.

Initiation
E.  coli  chromosomal  DNA  replication  initiates  within  a 
245-bp region, termed oriC. This region contains four 9-bp 
binding sites for the E. coli initiator protein, DnaA. Nearby 
are  three  repeats  of  a  13-bp  A/T-rich  sequence.  oriC  also 
contains  specific  binding  sites  for  two  small  histone-like 
proteins called HU and IHF. Replication is initiated with the 
cooperative  binding  of  10  to  20  DnaA  monomers  to  their 
specific binding sites (Fig. 42.13). To be active, these mono-
mers must each have bound ATP. Binding of DnaA permits 
unwinding  of  the  DNA  at  the  13-bp  repeats,  in  a  reaction 

R1

R2 R3 R4

oriC DNA

13-mers

DnaA sites

DnaA + ATP
HU or IHF

DnaC

+

DnaB

ATP

DnaB•DnaC

complex

DnaC

DnaA

SSB
ATP

ADP

A

B

C

D

FIGURE 42.13  FACTORS INVOLVED IN THE INITIATION OF 
DNA REPLICATION IN ESCHERICHIA COLI. A, DNA sequences 
at OriC. B, Unwinding of the origin. C, Binding of helicase. D, The 
template, now ready for binding of DNA polymerase. ADP, adenos-
ine diphosphate; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; SSB, single-stranded 
DNA binding protein. (Modified from Baker TA, Wickner SH. Genet-
ics and enzymology of DNA replication in Escherichia coli. Annu Rev 
Genet. 1992;26:447–477.)

that requires the histone-like proteins. Next, DnaC binds to 
DnaB and escorts it to the unwound DNA. DnaB is the key 
helicase  that  will  drive  DNA  replication  by  unwinding  the 
double  helix,  but  it  binds  DNA  poorly  on  its  own  in  the 
absence  of  its  DnaC  escort.  Once  DnaB  has  docked  onto  
the DNA, DnaC is released, and the helicase can then start 
to unwind the DNA, provided that ATP, SSB, and DNA gyrase 
are  present.  SSB  is  a  single-stranded  DNA  binding  protein 
that  stabilizes  the  unwound  DNA,  and  DNA  gyrase  is  a 
topoisomerase  (see  Chapter  8)  that  removes  the  twist  that 
is generated when the two strands of the double helix are 
separated.

Elongation
As in eukaryotes, E. coli DNA replication involves a leading 
strand, with the daughter DNA synthesized as a single con-
tinuous molecule, as well as a lagging strand, with the DNA 
synthesized as discontinuous Okazaki fragments. All daugh-
ter  strands  are  started  by  an  RNA  primase  that  deposits 
primers  of  11  ±  1  nucleotides.  The  enzyme  that  actually 
synthesizes  the  DNA  is  the  polymerase  III  holoenzyme, 
which has at least 10 subunits. This contains polymerase and 
proofreading subunits and is held to the DNA by a doughnut-
like “sliding clamp” (β). The β is loaded onto the DNA by a 
pentameric  complex  in  a  process  that  requires  ATP.  The 
parallel with PCNA and RFC in eukaryotes is striking. Activi-
ties specific for the lagging strand include RNase H, which 
removes the RNA primers; DNA polymerase I, which fills in 
the  gaps  left  behind  by  primer  removal;  and  DNA  ligase, 
which links the Okazaki fragments together. DNA replication 
in E. coli is significantly faster than it is in eukaryotes, with 
the  fork  moving  at  a  rate  of  approximately  1000  bp  per 
second. This higher speed is presumed to be at least partially 
attributable to the absence of nucleosomes on the bacterial 
chromosome,  but  the  eukaryotic  enzymes  may  also  be 
intrinsically slower.

Termination
A  specialized  termination  zone  is  found  on  the  circular  E. 
coli chromosome opposite oriC. This zone contains binding 
sites called ter sites, to which the ter binding protein binds. 
This  protein  appears  to  block  the  movement  of  DNA  heli-
cases,  such  as  DnaB,  thereby  stalling  the  DNA  replication 
fork.  Following  termination  of  replication,  a  specialized 
topoisomerase,  the  product  of  the  parC  and  parE  genes, 
is  required  to  separate  the  daughter  chromosomes  from  
one another.

replicate  early  in  the  S  phase,  whereas  others  consis-
tently replicate late in the S phase.

Up  to  1000  sites  of  replication,  called  replication 
foci are active at any one time during the S phase in a 
mammalian  cell  nucleus  (Figs.  42.6  and  42.14B–C  and 
E–F). Given that each of these replication foci is active 
for  only  about  30  minutes  out  of  the  8-  to  10-hour  S 
phase, a cell will replicate DNA at approximately 10,000 

of these foci. There are roughly 60,000 origins in a mam-
malian cell, so each replication focus represents five or 
six  replication  origins  that  are  activated  coordinately. 
The replication foci correspond to structural domains of 
chromosomes  that  are  now  called  TADs  (topologically 
associating  domains)  (see  Fig.  8.13).  The  function  of 
each  TAD,  measured  by  replication  timing,  chromatin 
composition  and  transcriptional  output,  can  change 

 

CHAPTER 42  n  S Phase and DNA Replication 

737

A. BrdUTP
O–
P

O–

O

O

O

O–

P

O–

O

O

P

O

CH2
H

H

OH

B

Br

O

H

H

NH

O

O

N

H

C

Incorporated

into cellular DNA

by replication

Fed to cells

D

Fluorescein-dUTP
Bodipy-TR-dUTP
  at same time

5 µm
Fluorescein-dUTP
Bodipy-TR-dUTP
  3 hrs later

5 µm

IdU
CIdU
  4 hrs later

E

F

FIGURE  42.14  VISUALIZATION  OF  DNA  REPLICATION 
WITHIN THE NUCLEUS. A, BrdUTP is introduced into DNA in place 
of dTTP to label newly replicated DNA. The incorporated BrdU (bro-
modeoxyuridine) molecules are detected with fluorescent antibodies. 
B, In a related approach, green-dUTP (deoxyuridine triphosphate) and 
red-dUTP, when added together, show the many sites of DNA replica-
tion in a cell nucleus. Because both UTP (uridine triphosphate) analogs 
are incorporated simultaneously into the DNA, the sites of replication 
appear yellow. C, Green-dUTP is followed by red-dUTP added 3 hours 
later. The later sites of DNA replication show very little overlap with the 
earlier sites. D, Mitotic chromosome from a cell that was labeled early 
in the S phase with IdU (green), and then 4 hours later with CldU (red). 
The late-replicating and early replicating regions of the chromosome 
are segregated into discrete bands. E, CldU (green) added early in the 
S phase and IdU (red) added 4 hours later show relatively little overlap. 
F,  CldU  (green)  added  early  in  the  S  phase  and  IdU  (red)  added  6 
hours later show no overlap. The large red blocks of labeling seen with 
the IdU are characteristic of the pattern of replicating heterochromatin 
seen late in the S phase. Bodipy-TR-dUTP, a red fluorescent form of 
dUTP;  BrdUTP,  bromodeoxyuridine  triphosphate;  CldU,  chlorine-
dUTP;  Fluorescein-dUTP,  a  green  fluorescent  form  of  dUTP;  IdU, 
iodine-dUTP.  All  are  used  in  place  of  dTTP  (deoxythymidine  triphos-
phate)  in  DNA  synthesis.  (B–C,  Courtesy  P.R.  Cook,  University  of 
Oxford, United Kingdom. From Manders EMM, Kimura H, Cook PR. 
Direct imaging of DNA in living cells reveals the dynamics of chromo-
some  formation.  J  Cell  Biol.  1999;144:813–821,  copyright  The 
Rockefeller  University  Press.  D,  Courtesy  A.I.  Lamond,  University  of 
Dundee, United Kingdom. From Ferreira J, Paolella G, Ramos C, et al. 
Spatial organization of large-scale chromatin domains in the nucleus: 
a  magnified  view  of  single  chromosome  territories.  J  Cell  Biol. 
1997;139:1597–1610,  copyright  The  Rockefeller  University  Press. 
E–F,  From  Ma  H,  Samarabandu  J,  Devdhar  RS,  et al.  Spatial  and 
temporal dynamics of DNA replication sites in mammalian cells. J Cell 
Biol. 1998;143:1415–1425. Copyright 1998 The Rockefeller University 
Press.)

5 µm

5 µm

CIdU added for 2 min
IdU added 4 hrs
  later for 5 min

CIdU added for 2 min
IdU added 6 hrs
  later for 5 min

coordinately  during  differentiation.  Thus,  TADs  with 
similar  function  tend  to  end  up  close  to  each  other 
forming larger compartments—for example, euchroma-
tin and heterochromatin.

Evidence  for  the  replication  of  clusters  of  replicons 
within the nucleus was first obtained by fiber autoradi-
ography. Cells were fed radioactive precursors for DNA 
synthesis  and  then  examined  by  electron  microscopy. 
(For  an  explanation  of  this  technique,  see  Fig.  40.3.) 
Clusters of replicating DNA regions were observed.

Several  methods  are  available  to  observe  the  spatial 
distribution of DNA replication during the S phase. One 
can employ a pulse of nucleotide base analogs that are 
incorporated  into  DNA  and  later  detected  by  fluores-
cence microscopy. For example, thymidine analogs such 
as  BrdU  (bromodeoxyuridine  triphosphate),  IdU  (iodo-
deoxyuridine),  and  CldU  (chlorodeoxyuridine)  can  be 
detected  in  fixed  cells  by  reaction  with  fluorescent 
antibodies  (BrdU  is  called  by  its  correct  name  BrdUTP  
in  Fig.  42.14).  Alternatively  analogs  labeled  with  a 

fluorescent  dye  allow  the  newly  replicated  DNA  to  be 
observed directly in living cells.

The  time  at  which  each  replicon  fires  during  the  S 
phase can be seen clearly by synchronizing cells at the 
beginning of the S phase, releasing them from cell-cycle 
arrest, and then exposing them to BrdU at various times 
thereafter. This experiment reveals very distinctive pat-
terns  of  DNA  synthesis  occurring  at  different  times 
during  the  S  phase  (Fig.  42.14B–C  and  E–F).  Early  on, 
euchromatin  replicates  throughout  the  nucleus.  Later, 
replicating  regions  are  concentrated  around  nucleoli  
and  other  areas  of  constitutive  and  facultative  hetero-
chromatin  (see  Chapter  8).  Toward  the  end  of  the  
S  phase,  replication  is  largely  concentrated  in  blocks  
of  heterochromatin.  These  observations  show  that  
DNA  replication  occurs  throughout  the  nucleus,  wher-
ever  DNA  is  located.  DNA  does  not  move  to  a  small 
number  of  discrete  sites  to  be  replicated  (as  was  once 
thought).

The  timing  of  replication  of  particular  replication 
origins  was  studied  in  detail  in  budding  yeast  using  a 
modification  of  the  BrdU  labeling  method.  First,  a  

738 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

procedure was developed whereby all cells in a popula-
tion  entered  S  phase  synchronously.  Next,  the  shift  in 
the  density  of  the  DNA  following  BrdU  incorporation 
was  used  to  distinguish  DNA  that  had  replicated  from 
DNA  that  had  not  (Fig.  42.15).  Incorporation  of  BrdU 
into  DNA  makes  the  newly  synthesized  daughter  DNA 
strand heavier, allowing its separation from the parental 
DNA  by  centrifugation  on  a  cesium  chloride  density 
gradient (see Chapter 6). It was then relatively simple to 
take DNA probes from different regions of the chromo-
some and determine when each replicated (changed its 

density)  during  the  S  phase.  This  experiment  demon-
strated that each ARS element replicates at a character-
istic time during the S phase. More recently, genome-wide 
maps  of  replication  timing  have  been  constructed  by 
isolating newly replicated DNA at various times during S 
phase and identifying the chromosome regions involved 
by high-throughput DNA sequencing.

The  most  striking  aspect  of  these  patterns  of  DNA 
synthesis is their reproducibility from one cell cycle to 
the next. For example, regions of DNA labeled early in 
the S phase overlap little or not at all with DNA labeled 

A

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

2

3
*

Origin

3

3

3

Heavy:
Heavy

Heavy:Heavy +

Heavy:Light

Heavy:
Light

4

4

4

5

5

5

= Restriction enzyme
   cutting site

Initiation

Replication

4

5

Heavy:Light +
Heavy:Heavy

Heavy:
Heavy

Isolated DNA
digested with
restriction enzyme

H:L

H:H

G force

H:L
H:H

B

100

A
N
D

 
f

o

 
t

n
u
o
m
A

50

0

C

100

1,5

k
a
e
p

 

:

L
H
n

 

3

HL

2,4

Top

Density

HH

Bottom

I
 

%

50

0

0

3

1,5

2

4

6

8

Time of replication (min)

D

100

d
e

t

a
c

i
l

p
e
R
%

 

50

0

0

Centromeres
replicate early

a

b

Telomeres
replicate late

14

28

42

56

Time in S phase (min)

FIGURE  42.15  MEASUREMENT OF THE TIME OF REPLICATION OF PARTICULAR CHROMOSOMAL REGIONS IN  SACCHARO-
MYCES CEREVISIAE. A–C, This protocol is based on a classic density shift experiment of Messelson and Stahl that proved that DNA replication 
is semiconservative. S. cerevisiae cells are grown for several generations in a medium containing 13C and 15N so that their DNA is fully substituted 
with heavy isotopes. At the beginning of the experiment, the cells are synchronized so that they enter the S phase in a single wave. At the same 
time, the heavy (H) isotope medium is removed and replaced with “light medium” (L) containing 12C and 14N. At various times after the initiation 
of the S phase, aliquots of cells are removed, and the DNA is isolated. The DNA is then cleaved with restriction enzymes so that the chromosomes 
are cut into many fragments. DNA from each time point is then subjected to CsCl density gradient centrifugation. When any local region of DNA 
is replicated, its density alters from heavy/heavy to heavy/light. After very short incubations with light isotopes, only DNA near the origin of replication 
will be heavy/light; all other DNA will be heavy/heavy. These two populations of molecules are separated from one another by density gradient 
centrifugation. To examine the timing of replication of a specific gene, a cloned segment of DNA corresponding to the region of interest is used 
to probe (by DNA hybridization) the heavy/heavy and heavy/light peaks from each gradient. The time of replication of each locus is the time at 
which the restriction fragment being detected by DNA hybridization moves from the heavy/heavy peak to the heavy/light peak. The numbers in 
panels  B  and  C  refer  to  the  numbered  regions  of  the  chromosomes  shown  in  A.  D,  Data  from  a  replication  timing  experiment  show  that  in 
budding yeast, centromeres replicate early in the S phase and telomeres replicate late. To generate curve a, fractions from a gradient like that 
shown in panel B were hybridized to a cloned centromere region. To generate curve b, fractions from the same gradient were hybridized to a 
cloned telomere region probe. Note that in mammalian cells, centromeres replicate late and telomeres replicate earlier. (Based on the work of the 
laboratory of B.J. Brewer and W.L. Fangman. For reference, see Meselson M, Stahl FW. The replication of DNA in Escherichia coli. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A. 1958;44:671–682.)

 

CHAPTER 42  n  S Phase and DNA Replication 

739

3 hours later (Fig. 42.14C and E). However, DNA labeled 
at corresponding points of the S phase in two successive 
cell  cycles  superimposes  almost  entirely.  This  strongly 
suggests  that  particular  TADs  initiate  DNA  synthesis 
during preferred “windows” during S phase.

At least three mechanisms may explain the sequence 
of replication patterns for different chromosomal regions:
1.  Local chromatin structures, established as a result of 
gene  expression  influence  the  time  of  replication, 
particularly  in  metazoans.  Thus,  transcriptionally 
active  loci  (where  transcription  factors  are  already 
bound)  have  a  head  start  over  other  regions  of  the 
chromosomes, permitting them to initiate DNA repli-
cation first. In general, euchromatin (which has low 
DNA methylation and high histone acetylation) repli-
cates  first,  followed  by  facultative  heterochromatin 
(including the inactive X) and, finally, the constitutive 
pericentric  heterochromatin  (which  has  heavy  DNA 
methylation and low histone acetylation). This mecha-
nism can explain why a particular locus may replicate 
at different times in two cell types. For example, one 
origin in mammalian genomes is located just upstream 
of the DNA encoding the β-globin gene (encoding a 
protein subunit of hemoglobin). This region of more 
than 200-kb of DNA replicates early in erythroid cells 
that express the β-globin gene, but later in other cells 
where the gene is inactive.

2.  The higher-order packing of chromatin in the nucleus 
may influence when origins replicate. It is likely that 
replication origins fire in a sequence that is imposed 
on them at the same time that the TAD organization 
of  interphase  chromosomes  is  reestablished  during 
mitotic exit and early G1 phase.

3.  Limiting  amounts  of  certain  essential  proteins  may 
contribute  to  the  sequential  replication  of  different 
chromatin  domains.  These  proteins  accumulate  
on  replisomes  assembled  on  early-firing  replicons  
and  only  become  available  to  later-firing  replicons 

following  completion  of  DNA  synthesis  at  the  early 
replicons and disassembly of those replisomes.

Replication Stress and  
the Intra-S Checkpoint
The  textbook-smooth  DNA  double-helix  is  actually  lit-
tered  with  problems  and  obstacles,  including  DNA 
damage,  ribonucleotides  inserted  by  mistake  into  the 
DNA,  and  awkward  secondary  structures  caused,  for 
example,  by  base-pairing  within  single  DNA  strands  as 
opposed  to  between  strands.  In  addition,  if  cell-cycle 
regulation is perturbed, cells can simply run out of either 
the  deoxynucleotide  triphosphate  (dNTP)  precursors 
that  they  need  to  synthesize  DNA  or  a  number  of  key 
proteins that are also present in very low amounts. The 
replication fork may stall as result of these problems and 
often needs help to complete replication.

An intra-S checkpoint responds to stalled replication 
forks, probably as a result of detecting excessive single-
stranded DNA (Fig. 42.16). Replication forks stall if they 
encounter  a  damaged  DNA  base,  bases  that  the  repli-
some cannot “read” or a DNA secondary structure that 
it cannot unfold. DNA damage can result from ultraviolet 
light, mutagens or chemicals such as aldehydes produced 
as a by-product of ethanol metabolism.

Replication  blockage  leads  to  a  condition  known  
as  replication  stress  in  which  single-stranded  DNA 
accumulates.  Replication  stress  with  stalled  forks  can 
also  result  from  inappropriate  activation  of  genes  that 
promote  cell  cycle  progression  (oncogenic  stress;  see 
Chapter 41). Possible reasons include insufficient licens-
ing of origins during the G1 phase, depletion of nucleo-
side triphosphate pools, or insufficient pools of essential 
replication  factors.  Surprisingly,  cells  make  a  number  
of  essential  components—including  the  dNTPs—in 
amounts  just  sufficient  for  replication,  so  there  is  little 
margin for error.

dsDNA
breaks

Unreplicated

DNA

RPA

RPA

(ATM)2

2x ATM
active

ATR actived by
excess ssDNA
stabilizes stalled
replication forks

DNA damage

*

Stalled fork

Fork approaches

from activated
dormant origin

Chk1/Chk2

Cdc25A

Degraded

Block initiation of new replication foci
Block cell cycle progression

FIGURE  42.16  REPLICATION STRESS AND THE INTRA-S CHECKPOINT. If DNA breaks are detected, the ATM (ataxia-telangiectasia 
mutated) kinase activates downstream kinases Chk1 and Chk2, leading to phosphorylation of Cdc25A and its subsequent ubiquitin tagging and 
degradation. This blocks the initiation of new replication forks as well as cell-cycle progression more generally. If DNA persists in unreplicated 
form, or if replication forks stall, the ATR (ataxia-telangiectasia and Rad3–related) kinase activates a similar downstream response. ATR stabilizes 
stalled replication forks to give nearby dormant origins time to fire and replicate the DNA downstream of the block. 

740 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

     Transcription
     increases

     Processing of mRNA
     increases

Primary
transcript

Mature mRNA
exported to
cytoplasm

     Stability of the mRNA
     (on free ribosomes)
     increases

Degrading
enzymes

Histone
gene

3' ends of pre-mRNA
remain behind

NUCLEUS

FIGURE 42.17  THREE MECHANISMS THAT ELEVATE HISTONE EXPRESSION DURING THE S PHASE. 

In  conditions  of  replication  stress,  the  ATM  (ataxia-
telangiectasia  mutated)  and  ATR  (ataxia-telangiectasia 
and  Rad3–related)  kinases  activate  the  DNA  damage 
response (see Box 43.1). The activities of these kinases 
and their downstream effectors result in the degradation 
of Cdc25A, the phosphatase that triggers entry of the cell 
into  mitosis.  The  resulting  inactivation  of  Cdks  during  
the S phase prevents replication initiation within other 
unreplicated domains.

A key aspect of this response unique to S phase is that 
ATR-activated  by  the  presence  of  excessive  levels  of 
single-stranded  DNA  associated  with  RPA  protects  the 
stalled  forks  from  disassembly,  known  as  replication 
fork collapse. This response is critical, because replica-
tion forks with unwound and nicked DNA molecules can 
turn into breaks if the fork disassembles before replica-
tion is complete and all the DNA is ligated. Error-prone 
mechanisms  tend  to  repair  DNA  damage  that  arises 
during  replication  stress.  The  resulting  mutations  are 
thought to contribute to oncogenic transformation.

Of course, stalled replication forks must not only be 
protected, but they must also somehow be rescued. At 
moderate  levels  of  replication  stress,  ATR  activation 
blocks the activation of new replication foci, but allows 
dormant  origins  to  fire  near  stalled  forks  in  replication 
domains that are already active. This results in the arrival 
of  a  converging  fork  on  the  downstream  side  of  the 
damaged DNA, leaving only a very small gap that can be 
repaired by a specialized DNA polymerase in a process 
known as translesion synthesis. Thus, in the real world 
where  replication  forks  routinely  encounter  problems 
that  cause  them  to  stall,  a  pool  of  dormant  licensed 
replication origins is essential for integrity of the genome.

Synthesis of the Histone Proteins
Chromatin contains approximately equal masses of DNA 
and core histones. Human cells require about 62 × 106 
copies of each core histone, assuming a genome size of 
6.2  ×  109 bp  and  200 bp  per  nucleosome.  Because 
approximately  90%  of  histone  transcription  occurs 
during the S phase, enormous amounts of these proteins 

are made during a relatively brief period. Histone synthe-
sis  apparently  keeps  pace,  in  part,  because  there  are 
approximately 40 sets of histone genes.

Synthesis  of  histones  during  the  S  phase  is  tightly 
coupled  to  ongoing  DNA  replication  and  a  controlled 
supply of histones is essential for normal replication. If 
replication is blocked either by addition of drugs or by 
temperature-sensitive mutants, histone synthesis declines 
abruptly shortly thereafter, possibly because nucleosome 
deposition appears to be linked to lagging strand synthe-
sis. Indeed, the chaperone that assembles histones into 
nucleosomes is associated with the replisome. This link 
between histone synthesis and DNA replication appears 
to involve at least three processes (Fig. 42.17).

First, transcription  of  the  histone  genes  rises three-
fold to fivefold as cells enter the S phase. Each histone 
gene has a cell-cycle-responsive element in its promoter 
to which a transcription factor binds specifically during 
the S phase.

Second,  the  processing  of  histone  messenger  RNAs 
(mRNAs)  increases  six-  to  10-fold  as  cells  enter  the  S 
phase. Histone mRNAs are not polyadenylated, and the 
primary  transcripts  are  considerably  longer  than  the 
mature  forms.  Processing  of  the  3′  end  of  histone  pre-
mRNAs involves the U7 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein 
(snRNP) (see Chapter 11), a portion of which recognizes 
histone mRNA and base-pairs with it during processing. 
Cell-cycle-dependent regulation of processing appears to 
involve  changes  in  the  accessibility  of  the  necessary 
portion  of  U7  small  nuclear  RNA  (snRNA).  This  region  
is  inaccessible  in  G0  cells  but  becomes  accessible 
when cells that reenter the cycle and begin the S phase. 
The  mechanism  for  this  change  in  RNA  conformation  
is not known.

Third, changes in the stability of the mRNA also regu-
late  histone  synthesis.  Normally,  the  level  of  histone 
mRNA on free polysomes drops rapidly by approximately 
35-fold  as  cells  enter  the  G2  phase.  If  DNA  synthesis  is 
interrupted during the S phase, a region at the 3′ end of 
the mature message targets the mRNA for degradation. 
If  this  region  is  removed  from  the  3′  terminus  of  the 
histone  mRNA,  the  normal  link  between  ongoing 

 

CHAPTER 42  n  S Phase and DNA Replication 

741

replication and mRNA stability is lost. Furthermore, this 
sequence,  transposed  onto  the  3′  terminus  of  a  globin 
mRNA,  renders  that  mRNA  sensitive  to  degradation  if 
DNA synthesis is blocked. Degradation of histone mRNA 
requires  ongoing  protein  synthesis,  and  it  has  been 
speculated  that  histones  themselves  participate  in  the 
control.

As  discussed  in  Chapter  8,  specialized  variant  forms 
of  histones  are  synthesized  and  inserted  into  the  chro-
matin  outside  of  S  phase.  These  histones  are  encoded  
by  mRNAs  with  introns  and  normal  poly(A)  tails  and  
are  therefore  not  processed  by  the  specific  S  phase–
associated  pathway  (see  Chapter  11).  Their  insertion 
into  chromatin  is  typically  correlated  with  RNA  tran-
scription rather than DNA replication and involves spe-
cific chromatin-remodeling factors.

Other Events of the S Phase
Although  the  bulk  of  attention  on  the  S  phase  focuses 
on  the  duplication  of  the  chromosomes,  centrosomes 
also  duplicate  at  this  time.  Duplication  of  the  centro-
somes  is  essential  for  stability  of  the  genome,  because 
they  set  up  the  poles  of  the  mitotic  spindle  that  is 
responsible  for  accurate  partitioning  of  the  replicated 
chromosomes.  Interestingly,  Orc1  functions  indepen-
dent of DNA replication with cyclin A to limit centriole 
duplication to once per cell cycle. (See Fig. 34.17 for a 
discussion of centrosome duplication.)

With the completion of DNA replication and duplica-
tion  of  the  centrosomes,  the  cell  is  ready  to  divide.  As 
the levels of Cdk activity rise toward the threshold that 
is  sufficient  to  trigger  mitotic  entry  and  other  factors 
necessary for mitosis accumulate, the cell continues to 
screen  the  integrity  of  the  DNA  to  ensure  that  the 

genome  has  been  replicated  completely  and  that  no 
harmful DNA damage is present. These checks, together 
with  other  ongoing  preparations  for  mitosis,  are  the 
principal events of the G2 phase (see Chapter 43).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We  thank  Hiro  Araki,  Julian  Blow,  Cristina  Cardoso, 
David  Gilbert,  and  Julian  Sale  for  suggestions  on  revi-
sions to this chapter.

SELECTED READINGS

Boos D, Frigola J, Diffley JF. Activation of the replicative DNA helicase: 

breaking up is hard to do. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2012;24:423-430.

Costa A, Hood IV, Berger JM. Mechanisms for initiating cellular DNA 

replication. Annu Rev Biochem. 2013;82:25-54.

Deegan  TD,  Diffley  JF.  MCM:  one  ring  to  rule  them  all.  Curr  Opin 

Struct Biol. 2016;37:145-151.

Hills SA, Diffley JFX. DNA replication and oncogene-induced replicative 

stress. Curr Biol. 2014;24:R435-R444.

Labib K. How do Cdc7 and cyclin-dependent kinases trigger the initia-
tion  of  chromosome  replication  in  eukaryotic  cells?  Genes  Dev. 
2010;24:1208-1219.

McIntosh D, Blow JJ. Dormant origins, the licensing checkpoint, and 
the response to replicative stresses. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 
2012;4:a012955.

Méchali M, Yoshida K, Coulombe P, Pasero P. Genetic and epigenetic 
determinants  of  DNA  replication  origins,  position  and  activation. 
Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2013;23:124-131.

O’Donnell M, Langston L, Stillman B. Principles and concepts of DNA 
replication  in  bacteria,  archaea,  and  eukarya.  Cold  Spring  Harb 
Perspect Biol. 2013;5:a010108.

O’Donnell  M,  Li  H.  The  eukaryotic  replisome  goes  under  the  micro-

scope. Curr Biol. 2016;26:R247-R256.

Rhind N, Gilbert DM. DNA replication timing. Cold Spring Harb Per-

spect Biol. 2013;5:a010132.

Zeman  MK,  Cimprich  KA.  Causes  and  consequences  of  replication 

stress. Nat Cell Biol. 2014;16:2-9.

This page intentionally left blank

C H A P T E R 

43 

G2 Phase, Responses to DNA 
Damage, and Control of Entry  
Into Mitosis

The  G2  phase  is  the  gap  between  the  completion  of 
DNA replication and the onset of mitosis. This chapter 
begins with the biochemical basis for the G2/mitosis (M) 
transition and discusses how the G2/M checkpoint delays 
this  transition  if  DNA  damage  is  detected.  Finally,  the 
chapter introduces the major pathways that cells use to 
repair damaged DNA.

Enzymology of the G2/Mitosis Transition
The transition from the G2 phase into mitosis is the most 
profound  morphologic  and  physiological  change  that 
occurs  during  the  life  of  a  proliferating  cell.  Entry  into 
mitosis  is  controlled  by  a  network  of  stimulatory  and 
inhibitory  protein  kinases  and  phosphatases,  presided 
over  by  Cdk1–cyclin  B1.  (Chapter  40  introduced  the 
components involved in the G2/M transition.)

Cdk1,  the  driving  force  for  entry  into  mitosis,  is 
present at a constant level throughout the cell cycle. The 

multifaceted regulation of Cdk1 (see Fig. 40.14) includes 
binding  of  cyclin  cofactors,  inhibition  and  activation  
by  phosphorylation,  binding  of  inhibitory  molecules, 
changes  in  subcellular  localization  and  changes  in  the 
activities of competing protein phosphatases (Fig. 43.1). 
These various factors are finely balanced, until a positive 
feedback loop enables the cells to make an abrupt and 
decisive entry into mitosis.

Mammals have at least three B-type cyclins: B1, B2, 
and  B3.  Cyclin  B1  is  essential  for  triggering  the  G2/M 
transition. Cyclin B1, newly synthesized during the latter 
part of the cell cycle, binds Cdk1 and shuttles it in and 
out of the nucleus. Importin β carries the Cdk1–cyclin 
B1  complex  into  the  nucleus,  and  then  Crm1  rapidly 
exports it back to the cytoplasm (see Chapter 9). Cdk1–
cyclin  B2  associates  with  the  Golgi  apparatus  during 
interphase  and  might  function  in  Golgi  disassembly 
during  mitosis  (see  Fig.  44.4).  Cyclin  B3  may  function 
only during meiosis in mammals.

Wee1/Myt1 phosphorylates Cdk1

on T14 & Y15 (inhibitory)

Cyclin B1

Wee1 Myt1

T14

Y15

Cyclin B1
T161

Cdk1
Inactive
kinase

Cdk1
Inactive
kinase

Cdk1
Inactive
kinase

Cyclin B1
T161

Cdk1
Active
kinase

Cdk1
Inactive
kinase

Cyclin B1
degraded

CAK

CAK phosphorylates

Cdk1 on T161 (stimulatory)

Cdc25A,B,C

Cdc25

dephosphorylates

T14 and Y15

Cyclin B1

S

G2

M

G1

FIGURE  43.1  REGULATION  OF  CDK1  BY  CYCLIN  BINDING  AND  PROTEIN  PHOSPHORYLATION  FROM  THE  LATE  S  PHASE 
THROUGH MID-MITOSIS. (For reference, see Protein Data Bank [PDB; www.rcsb.org] file 1X8B and Squire CJ, Dickson JM, Ivanovic I, et al. 
Structure of human Wee1A kinase: kinase domain complexed with inhibitor PD0407824. Structure. 2005;13:541–550.) 

 743

744 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

As  cells  approach  the  G2/M  transition,  phosphoryla-
tion simultaneously activates and inhibits Cdk1 bound to 
cyclin A or B. Cdk-activating kinase (CAK-actually Cdk7–
cyclin H), located in the nucleus, phosphorylates Cdk1 
on T161 (Fig. 43.1). This triggers a refolding of the active 
site cleft that allows the enzyme to bind substrates (see 
Fig.  40.13).  This  phosphorylation  activates  Cdk1-cyclin 
kinases in the nucleus (Fig. 43.1).

At the same time, Wee1 and Myt1 kinases phosphory-
late  T14  and  Y15  to  turn  the  enzyme  off.  Wee1  in  the 
nucleus  phosphorylates  Cdk1  on  Y15  adjacent  to  the 
adenosine  triphosphate  (ATP)-binding  site.  This  stops 
the kinase from using ATP to phosphorylate substrates. 
While Cdk-cyclin complexes are in the cytoplasm, they 
are phosphorylated on T14 and Y15 by Myt1 kinase associ-
ated  with  the  Golgi  apparatus  and  endoplasmic  reticu-
lum.  The  role  of  Wee1  as  a  mitotic  inhibitor  is  clearly 
demonstrated  in  Schizosaccharomyces  pombe:  overex-
pression  of  Wee1  delays  or  prevents  the  entry  of  cells 

into mitosis (Fig. 43.2). Together, Wee1 and Myt1 ensure 
that Cdk1 remains inactive as it shuttles into and out of 
the nucleus (Fig. 43.3).

This combination of stimulatory and inhibitory phos-
phorylations holds Cdk1–cyclin complexes poised for a 
burst of activation.

That burst occurs when one of three Cdc25 protein 
phosphatases  removes  the  inhibitory  phosphates  from 
T14  and  Y15  (Figs.  43.1  and  43.8).  Cdc25s  are  “dual-
specificity”  protein  phosphatases  (see  Fig.  25.5)  that 
remove phosphates from serine (S), threonine (T), and 
tyrosine (Y) residues. Of the three Cdc25 phosphatases, 
only Cdc25A is indispensable for life. It functions at both 
the  G1/S  and  G2/M  transitions,  whereas  Cdc25B  and 
Cdc25C have roles only in the G2/M transition.

Because  Cdc25  phosphatases  trigger  mitotic  entry, 
their  regulation 
important  and  elaborate.  
Cdc25A and Cdc25C are held inactive during interphase 
by  mechanisms  involving  stimulatory  and  inhibitory 

is  both 

A. Wee1 ⴚ

B. Wee1+

C. Wee1+ (3x)

D. Wee1+ (5x)

FIGURE  43.2  EFFECT  OF  CHANGING  CELLULAR  LEVELS  OF  WEE1  PROTEIN  ON  CELL-CYCLE  PROGRESSION  IN  FISSION 
YEAST. A, Cells that lack functional Wee1 protein enter mitosis too soon in the cell cycle and are smaller than wild-type cells (B). C–D, Cells 
that express excess Wee1 protein are too effective at inactivating Cdk1 and are severely delayed in their ability to enter mitosis (hence their larger 
size). (From Russell P, Nurse P. Negative regulation of mitosis by Wee1+, a gene encoding a protein kinase homolog. Cell. 1987;49:559–567.)

AT

ADP

14-3-3
14-3-3

Cdc25C
(Inactive)

14-3-3
14-3-3

Cdc25C
(Inactive)

14-3-3
14-3-3

Wee1
(Active)

Cdc25A

(Inactive/unstable)

Cyclin B1
docking
site

Myt1

(Active)

T14

Y15

Cyclin B1
T161

NES

Cdk1

(Inactive)

CYTOPLASM
NUCLEUS

14-3-3
14-3-3

AT

ADP

Y15

Cyclin B1
T161

NES

T14

Cdk1

(Inactive)
Cyclin B1 nuclear
export signal inactivated

Cyclin B1
docking site
blocked

Myt1

(Inactive)

Wee1

(Inactive)

Cyclin B1
T161

NES

Cdk1
(Active)

S phase

G2 phase

Mitosis

FIGURE 43.3  CDK REGULATION IN INTERPHASE AND MITOSIS. Inhibitory phosphorylation and shuttling of components between the 
nucleus and cytoplasm regulate Cdk1 activity in interphase and mitosis. Cdc25, which would remove the inhibitory phosphates, is held inactive 
until  its  activation  by  Polo  kinase  and  Cdk1-cyclin  B  stimulates  mitotic  entry  (not  shown  here).  ADP,  adenosine  diphosphate;  ATP,  adenosine 
triphosphate; NES, nuclear export sequence. (Based on an original figure by Helen Piwnica-Worms. For reference, see PDB file 1YWT.)

 

CHAPTER 43  n  G2 Phase, Responses to DNA Damage, and Control of Entry Into Mitosis 

745

Interphase

Low Cdc25C activity, cytoplasmic

Mitosis

Enhanced Cdc25C activity, nuclear,

S216 phosphorylation blocked

14-3-3
14-3-3

14-3-3
14-3-3

Phosphorylated
S216 binds
14-3-3 protein

T14

Cdc25C

Y15

Cyclin B1
T161

Cdk1

(Inactive)

Cdc25C

Cyclin B1
T161

Cdk1
(Active)

Cdc25A

Cyclin B1/Cdk1
docking site

Low Cdc25A protein levels due to proteolysis

Reduced interactions with Cdk1-cyclin B1

due to 14-3-3 binding at the Cdc25

 C-terminus

Cdc25A

Cdc25A accumulates due to increased stability

Enhanced interaction with Cdk1-cyclin B1
complexes due to loss of 14-3-3 binding

Enhanced activity due to

mitotic-specific phosphorylation

FIGURE 43.4  REGULATION OF CDC25A AND CDC25C ACTIVITY IN INTERPHASE AND MITOSIS. (Based on an original figure by Helen 
Piwnica-Worms.)

phosphorylation,  binding  to  a  14-3-3  adapter  protein, 
alterations in their subcellular localization, and ubiquitin-
mediated proteolysis (Fig. 43.4).

Phosphorylation on a serine residue of Cdc25 creates 
a binding site for a 14-3-3 adapter protein that interacts 
with the phosphoserine and several flanking amino acids 
(see Fig. 25.10). Association with 14-3-3 interferes with 
Cdc25A binding to Cdk1–cyclin B1. Phosphorylation at 
other  sites  also  targets  Cdc25A  for  ubiquitination  by 
SCFβTrCP and destruction by proteasomes. Cdc25C has a 
nuclear  export  sequence  (see  Fig.  9.17),  so  Cdc25C 
bound to 14-3-3 is primarily cytoplasmic (Fig. 43.3).

Following the theme of phosphorylation having both 
positive  and  negative  effects,  full  activation  of  Cdc25s 
requires phosphorylation of other residues in the amino-
terminal  region.  A  protein  kinase  called  Polo  (see  next 
paragraph)  initiates  this  phosphorylation  of  Cdc25,  
followed  by  more  extensive  phosphorylation  by  
Cdk1–cyclin B1, the substrate of Cdc25. This action of 
Cdk1–cyclin  B1  on  Cdc25  creates  a  powerful  positive 
feedback amplification loop that provides a burst of Cdk 
activity and triggers entry into mitosis (Fig. 43.7).

A  molecular  trigger  is  required  to  start  the  ampli-
fication  cycle  in  which  Cdk1–cyclin  B1  and  Cdc25  
activate  each  other.  Members  of  the  Polo  family  of 
protein kinases are candidates for this role, by activat-
ing  Cdc25.  These  kinases  possess  amino  acid  motifs 
called  “polo  boxes”  that  bind  to  protein  partners  after 
they have been “primed” by phosphorylation by another 
kinase.  Interestingly,  the  most  common  “priming 
kinases”  for  polo  are  Cdk–cyclin  pairs.  This  creates 
another  positive  amplification  loop  that  allows  for  
additional levels of control and rapid activation of Cdk–
cyclin complexes. In addition to activating Cdks by phos-
phorylating Cdc25, polo family kinases are involved in a 
variety of mitotic events, including formation of a bipolar 
spindle,  cytokinesis,  and  passage  through  certain  cell-
cycle checkpoints.

For cells to enter and complete mitosis, protein phos-
phatase 2A (PP2A, a protein serine/threonine phospha-
tase;  see  Fig.  25.6)  must  be  inactivated.  PP2A  removes 
the phosphates that Cdk1 puts on its target proteins. If 
PP2A is not inhibited, cells enter mitosis, but they then 
slip back into interphase. PP2A inhibition involves three 
steps.  Newly  active  Cdk1  phosphorylates  a  protein 
kinase called Greatwall (a name from Drosophila genet-
ics). Greatwall phosphorylates a small target protein that 
then  binds  to  the  substrate-binding  pocket  of  PP2A, 
acting as a competitive inhibitor. Cdk1 activation at the 
onset of anaphase eventually leads to dephosphorylation 
of  the  small  protein  and  activation  of  PP2A,  thereby 
allowing cells to exit mitosis.

Changes in Subcellular Localization at  
the G2/M Transition
Late  in  G2,  phosphorylation  inactivates  the  nuclear 
export  signal  of  cyclin  B1  (see  Chapter  9).  As  a  result, 
Cdk1–cyclin  B1  accumulates  in  the  nucleus  within  5 
minutes  (Figs.  43.3  and  43.5).  Cdc25C  also  stops  shut-
tling at the G2/M transition, probably as a result of Polo 
kinase phosphorylation. The Cdk1–cyclin B that accumu-
lates  in  the  nucleus  is  thought  to  be  already  active,  so 
the  reason  for  this  rapid  nuclear  localization  is  not 
entirely clear. The concentration of Cdk–cyclin B com-
plexes  together  with  Cdc25A  and  Cdc25C  in  the  con-
fined volume of the nucleus may contribute to the final 
burst of Cdk1–cyclin B1 activation.

Cdk1 Activity and the Initiation  
of Prophase
Cdk2–cyclin  A  plays  a  critical  role  during  the  S  phase 
(see Chapter 42), but also helps trigger the G2/M transi-
tion.  Cdk–cyclin  A  activity  peaks  at  G2/M,  before  the 
peak  of  Cdk1–cyclin  B1  activity,  and  inactivation  of 

746 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

cyclin  A  in  Drosophila  or  mammalian  cultured  cells 
arrests the cell cycle in G2. Furthermore, G2 cells enter 
mitosis prematurely if injected with active Cdk2–cyclin 
A  complexes  just  completing  S  phase.  Finally,  microin-
jection  of  a  selective  inhibitor  of  Cdk–cyclin  A  causes 
prophase cells to return rapidly to interphase; chromo-
somes decondense, rounded prophase cells flatten, and 
the interphase microtubule network returns.

Cdk activity regulates several events during the G2-to-
prophase  transition.  In  the  cytoplasm,  the  half-life  of 
microtubules drops dramatically from approximately 10 
minutes  to  approximately  30  seconds  late  in  G2  (see 
Table  44.1).  This,  coupled  with  an  enhanced  ability  of 
centrosomes  to  initiate  microtubule  polymerization, 
completely  transforms  the  organization  of  the  microtu-
bule cytoskeleton. Centrosomes take on the appearance 
of  spindle  poles  and  migrate  apart  over  the  surface  of 
the nucleus. While this is happening, chromatin begins 
to  condense  in  the  nucleus.  A  protein  complex  called 
condensin  is  required  for  this  condensation  to  begin 
during prophase (see Fig. 8.18). Cdks activate condensin 
by phosphorylation of two of its subunits in late G2.

G2 phase

Prophase

Metaphase

FIGURE  43.5  CYCLIN B1 LOCALIZATION DURING MITOSIS. 
Cyclin  B1  moves  rapidly  from  the  cytoplasm  into  the  nucleus  at  the 
onset  of  prophase  and  subsequently  associates  with  the  spindle 
during  mitosis.  (Courtesy  Christina  Karlsson  and  Jonathon  Pines, 
Wellcome/CRC Institute, Cambridge, UK.)

These events occur while most Cdk1–cyclin B1 is in 
the  cytoplasm.  It  appears  most  likely,  therefore,  that 
Cdk1–cyclin  A  triggers  at  least  the  nuclear  events  of 
prophase  (Fig.  43.6).  Commitment  to  mitosis  appears  
to  be  irreversible  only  after  Cdk1–cyclin  B1  enters  
the nucleus.

Recap of the Main Events of  
the G2/M Transition
Synthesis of cyclin B1 in the latter portion of the S and 
G2 phases leads to assembly of Cdk1–cyclin B heterodi-
mers that shuttle into and out of the nucleus, spending 
most  of  their  time  in  the  cytoplasm  associated  with 
microtubules.  In  late  G2  phase,  Cdk1–cyclin  A  activity 
initiates  mitotic  prophase,  beginning  with  changes  in 
microtubule  dynamics  and  chromosome  condensation. 
Several  events  trigger  entry  into  the  active  phase  of 
mitosis. Cdc25A accumulates and no longer binds 14-3-3 
proteins,  allowing  it  to  interact  more  effectively  with 
Cdk1–cyclin B. The phosphoserine-binding site for 14-3-3 
proteins  on  Cdc25C  is  dephosphorylated,  allowing 
Cdc25C to accumulate in the nucleus. In addition, phos-
phorylation  of  cyclin  B1  blocks  its  export  from  the 
nucleus  and  promotes  its  import,  thus  causing  Cdk1–
cyclin  B1  to  accumulate  rapidly  in  the  nucleus.  The 
inhibitory kinase Wee1 is also phosphorylated, causing 
its activity to drop. Cdc25A and Cdc25C activate Cdk1–
cyclin B1 by removing inhibitory phosphates on T14 and 
Y15. This starts in the cytoplasm and then may be stimu-
lated as the proteins concentrate in the nucleus. There, 
the action of Cdk1–cyclin B1 on the nuclear lamina trig-
gers  nuclear  envelope  breakdown  and  drives  the  cell 
into  mitosis.  Fig.  43.7  highlights  the  positive  feedback 
loop between Cdc25 and Cdk1–cyclin B that drives the 
cell into mitosis.

Cyclin B1

Cyclin B1

Cyclin B1

Cdk1

Cdk1

Shuttling

Cyclin B1

Cdk1

CYTOPLASM

NUCLEUS

Cdk1

Cdk1

Cyclin A

Cyclin A

Cdk2

Cdk2

G1

S

G2/M transition events:
  Microtubule stability drops
  Centrosomes migrate apart
  Chromosomes condense
  Kinetochore assembly starts

Cyclin B1

Cdk1

Cyclin B1
degraded

Cyclin A

Cyclin A
degraded

Cdk1

G2

Prophase

M

FIGURE 43.6  CDK1 REGULATION. Locations and patterns of activation of Cdk1 complexed to cyclin A versus cyclin B across the cell cycle. 

 

CHAPTER 43  n  G2 Phase, Responses to DNA Damage, and Control of Entry Into Mitosis 

747

Cdc25 phosphatase
dephosphorylation

Wee1 and Myt1
phosphorylation

Cell-cycle arrest in Rad9+ and rad9 cells
with DNA damage

cdc13tsRad9+

cdc13tsRad9-

Inactive
kinase

Active Cdk1
protein kinase

T161
CAK

Cells on
plates

Activated by Polo kinase
and amplified by
positive feedback
from Cdk1–cyclin B

Cdc25
protein

phosphatase

S

G2

Myt1,
Wee1
protein
kinases

M

FIGURE 43.7  SUMMARY OF THE CDK1 FEEDBACK REGULA-
TION MECHANISM AT THE G2/M TRANSITION. 

Why did such an elaborate system evolve to regulate 
the  G2/M  transition?  The  answer  appears  to  lie  in 
the  exquisite  sensitivity  provided  by  the  interlocking 
network of stimulatory and inhibitory activities. On the 
one  hand,  this  network  ensures  a  rapid,  almost  explo-
sive,  final  transition  into  mitosis.  On  the  other,  it  pro-
vides  a  number  of  ways  to  delay  the  G2/M  transition  if 
the  cell  detects  damage  to  chromosomes.  Attempting 
mitosis with chromosomal damage can lead to cell death 
or contribute to cancer.

G2/M Checkpoint
Separation of sister chromatids during mitosis is a poten-
tial danger point for a cell. After DNA is replicated each 
chromosome  consists  of  paired  sister  chromatids  held 
together by cohesin. Therefore, if the DNA is damaged, 
the cell can use information present in the undamaged 
chromatid  to  guide  the  repair  process.  However,  once 
sisters separate, this corrective mechanism can no longer 
operate. In addition, if a cell enters mitosis before com-
pleting replication of its chromosomes, attempts to sepa-
rate  sister  chromatids  damage  the  chromosomes.  To 
minimize these hazards, a checkpoint operates in the G2 
phase to block mitotic entry if DNA is damaged or DNA 
replication is incomplete.

Just  as  DNA  damage  can  arrest  the  cell  cycle  in  G1 
phase, damaged or unreplicated DNA also halts the cell 
cycle temporarily in the G2 phase. Interestingly, the G1 
checkpoint—which  can  be  activated  by  a  single  DNA 
break in human cells—is more sensitive than the G2/M 
checkpoint,  which  requires  10  to  20  breaks  to  block 
cell-cycle progression. The G2/M checkpoint may be less 
sensitive  then  the  G1  checkpoint,  because  G2  cells  are 
already  primed  to  enter  mitosis.  Consequently,  human 
cells can enter mitosis with limited amounts of damaged 
or  unreplicated  DNA.  These  problem  regions  can  be 

Bud

DNA

damage

t y p e   p h e n o t y p e

W il d -

G2 arrest

Nucleus

No delay

Phenotype of rad9 mutant
Cells keep dividing and die
with fragmented nuclei

FIGURE  43.8  GENETIC 
IDENTIFICATION  OF  THE  G2/M 
CHECKPOINT. Cells defective in the G2/M checkpoint (Rad9 mutants 
of budding yeast) cannot delay their entry into mitosis in the presence 
of damaged DNA and therefore divide themselves to death. Budding 
yeast Rad9 is an ortholog of the ATM (ataxia-telangiectasia mutated) 
adapter protein 53BP1 (see text). Confusingly, budding yeast Rad9 is 
not related to fission yeast Rad9, which gives the 9-1-1 complex its 
name (see text). (Courtesy Ted Weinert, University of Arizona, Tucson.)

detected and repaired in the daughter cells after division 
(see later).

Studies  of  radiation-induced  G2  delay  in  budding 
yeast identified a major cell-cycle checkpoint that is sen-
sitive to the status of the cellular DNA. Cells defective in 
this  checkpoint  are  more  sensitive  than  wild-type  cells 
to  radiation  injury  because  they  continue  to  divide, 
despite  the  presence  of  broken  or  otherwise  damaged 
chromosomes (Fig. 43.8). The cells die, presumably from 
chromosomal  defects  or  loss.  In  metazoans,  the  G2/M 
checkpoint delays entry into mitosis until the damage is 
either fixed, triggers cell suicide by apoptosis, or causes 
cells  to  enter  a  nonproliferating  (senescent)  state.  The 
checkpoint  works  by  modulating  the  activities  of  the 
components that control the G2/M transition.

DNA Damage Response
Considering  that  it  is  the  blueprint  for  life,  DNA  
is  remarkably  accident-prone,  and  organisms  have  an 
elaborate  network  of  mechanisms  to  repair  those  acci-
dents.  This  complex  network  is  known  as  the  DDR 

748 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

(DNA  damage  response).  This  section  discusses  a  few 
key  components  of  the  DDR,  and  Box  43.1  (see  later) 
explains several mechanisms that repair damaged DNA.
The minimal machinery of a DNA damage checkpoint 
(see Fig. 40.4) involves SENSORS that detect DNA damage, 
TRANSDUCERS  (usually  protein  kinases)  that  produce  a 

γH2AX
BRCA1

G1 nucleus

G2 nucleus

FIGURE  43.9 
INDUCTION  OF  DNA  DAMAGE  FOCI  USING  A 
HIGH-ENERGY LASER. Laser-induced DNA damage results in acti-
vation  of  the  DDR  with  production  of  γH2AX  (red)  at  damage  sites 
followed by binding of other factors, including BRCA1 (green). DNA is 
blue. The left cell is not yellow because BRCA1 is not present in G1-
phase cells. Micrograph taken 30 minutes after induction of damage. 
(Micrograph courtesy Martin Mistrik and Jiri Bartek.)

biochemical  signal  as  a  result  of  the  detected  damage, 
and EFFECTORS (both protein kinases and transcriptional 
activators) that coordinate repair pathways to block cell-
cycle progression and repair the damage.

When DNA is damaged, several proteins concentrate 
at the damage site within seconds to minutes, forming a 
focus that activates the G2/M checkpoint and repairs the 
damage. The use of high-energy lasers to “draw” patterns 
of  DNA  damage  onto  cell  nuclei  revolutionized  our 
understanding  of  the  DDR  by  allowing  a  minute-by- 
minute  mapping  of  the  events  during  focus  formation 
and leading to DNA repair (Fig. 43.9).

If a single strand of DNA is broken, the SENSOR enzyme 
poly(adenosine  diphosphate  [ADP]-ribose)  polymerase, 
binds to the broken end and immediately starts polymer-
izing a chain of ADP-ribose (which it makes from nico-
tine adenine dinucleotide [NAD]). Several proteins bind 
to poly(ADP-ribose) chains and recruit the critical TRANS-
DUCER ATM kinase (ataxia-telangiectasia mutated) to the 
break  together  with  its  partner  NBS1,  a  subunit  of  the 
MRN complex (Fig. 43.10A). ATM is usually present in 
the nucleus as an inactive dimer. Interactions with MRN 
separate  the  dimer  into  ATM  monomers  that  are  acti-
vated  by  MRN  docked  to  the  broken  end  of  a  DNA 
molecule.

The  MRN  complex  is  a  SENSOR  that  detects  double-
strand  DNA  breaks.  In  this  case,  the  NBS1  subunit  of 
MRN recruits ATM kinase to the break site. MRN is also 
a nuclease with a key role in repairing those breaks. Its 
job is to chew back (resect) one DNA strand in a 5′ → 
3′ direction at the site of a DNA break, leaving a stretch 

A

B

DNA damage

DNA breaks

MRN complex
binds to DNA break

Active ATM binds
MRN complex

DNA strand
with damage
removed

RPA
binds ssDNA

ATRIP

ATR

ATRIP binds
to RPA

ATRIP

ATR

ATR active

ATM
dimer (inactive)

AT

ATM
autophosphorylation

ADP

ATM monomer
(active)

γ-H2AX
phosphorylated

FIGURE 43.10  MECHANISMS FOR LOCALIZING ATM AND ATR TO SITES OF DNA DAMAGE. ATR, ataxia-telangiectasia and Rad3 
related; ssDNA, single-stranded DNA. 

 

CHAPTER 43  n  G2 Phase, Responses to DNA Damage, and Control of Entry Into Mitosis 

749

of single-stranded DNA that becomes coated with RPA, 
the protein that also coats single-stranded DNA at repli-
cation  forks  (Fig.  42.12).  RPA  then  attracts  a  protein 
called ATRIP plus its partner, the second key TRANSDUCER, 
ATR kinase (ataxia-telangiectasia and Rad3 related).

ATM and ATR stay bound to the chromatin, which is 
remodeled  by  reactions  involving  protein  phosphoryla-
tion, acetylation/deacetylation, methylation, and ubiqui-
tylation.  The  response  is  very  complex.  For  example, 
several  hundred  phosphorylation  events  have  been 
detected during the DDR. These chromatin changes are 
likely part of a response to suppress transcription so that 
RNA polymerase does not collide with the damage and 
cause more problems. The histone modifications associ-
ated with the DDR generally tend to create “open” chro-
matin  that  is  more  accessible  to  the  DNA  repair 
machinery. Repair foci are often found just adjacent to 
heterochromatin, and indeed, DNA repair appears to be 
more efficient in euchromatin than heterochromatin.

ATR  tends  to  stay  on  the  single-stranded  DNA  close 
to  the  break,  but  ATM  spreads  along  the  chromatin 
through  a  cycle  of  reactions  involving  its  most  famous 
substrate, the specialized histone isoform H2AX (Figs. 
43.9 and 43.11). H2AX phosphorylated by ATM is known 
as γ-H2AX. γ-H2AX forms very rapidly in a focus of modi-
fied  chromatin  immediately  surrounding  the  damage. 
This  amplifies  and  spreads  the  response  to  damage, 
because  γ-H2AX  binds  a  SENSOR  protein,  MDC1  that 
recruits  more  ATM  and  repair  factors.  The  response 
spreads  along  the  chromatin  as  ATM  creates  more  γ-
H2AX,  so  that  after  a  few  minutes  the  γ-H2AX  focus 
covers about a megabase of DNA.

MDC1  has  two  BRCT  domains  that  bind  the  phos-
phorylated site on γ-H2AX. BRCT domains were discov-
ered in BRCA1, one of the first genes whose mutations 
were linked to familial breast cancer. BRCA1 is mutated 
in  90%  of  families  where  inherited  predisposition  to 

ovarian cancer coexists with breast cancer. BRCA1 is a 
very large, complex protein with numerous roles in DNA 
repair that are still being determined.

ATM  (Table  43.1)  is  dispensable  for  life,  though 
people  lacking  it  have  ataxia-telangiectasia—a  disorder 
associated with degeneration of cerebellar neurons, dila-
tion  of  blood  vessels,  a  very  high  predisposition  for 
cancer, and a number of other symptoms. The NBN gene 
is  mutated  in  humans  with  Nijmegen  breakage  syn-
drome, a rare inherited disorder featuring chromosomal 
instability and a predisposition to cancer. ATR is essen-
tial for life, presumably because it has a key role in ensur-
ing  that  replication  forks  are  stabilized  until  all  the 
single-stranded DNA created during S phase is replicated. 

ATM/ATR

H2AX

Chk1

activated

Chk2

activated

MDM2

sequestered

γ-H2AX
Chromatin effects:
  Cohesin binding
  Focus formation
  Recruitment of
    repair machinery

p53

stabilized

Other
kinases

Cdc25A
inhibited
degraded

p21

transcribed

14-3-3σ

transcribed

Wee1

activated

Cdc25C
inhibited

sequestered

Cdk1–cyclin A

inhibited

S

Cdk1–cyclin B1

inhibited

G2

M

G1

FIGURE  43.11  THE  G2/M  CHECKPOINT  BLOCKS  THE  G2/M 
TRANSITION FOLLOWING ACTIVATION OF ATM AND/OR ATR 
BY DNA DAMAGE. Dotted lines show activities that are switched off 
by the checkpoint. The dashed line between ATM/ATR and the kinase 
that  inhibits  Cdc25C  indicates  that  this  pathway  is  not  yet  known.  
(Based on an original figure by Helen Piwnica-Worms.)

TABLE 43.1  Key DNA Repair Gene Defects Associated With Human Disease
Human Disease

Pathway

Defective Genes*

Ataxia-telangiectasia (AT)
Seckel syndrome
Xeroderma pigmentosum
Cockayne syndrome
Trichothiodystrophy
Hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer
AT-like disorder
Nijmegen breakage syndrome
Breast cancer predisposition
LIG4 syndrome
Severe combined immune deficiency

Checkpoint
Checkpoint
NER
NER
NER
MMR
DSB repair
DSB repair
HR
NHEJ
NHEJ

ATM
ATR
XP-A, XP-B, XP-C, XP-D, DDB-2, XP-F, XP-G, POLH
XP-B, XP-D, CSA, CSB
XP-D
MSH2, PMS2, MLH1
MRE11
NBN
BRCA1, BRCA2
LIGIV
ARTEMIS

ATM, ataxia-telangiectasia mutated; ATR, ataxia-telangiectasia and Rad3 related; DSB, double-strand break; HR, homologous recombination;  
MMR, mismatch repair; NER, nucleotide excision repair; NHEJ, nonhomologous end joining.
*This list is an outline. For an updated list of the human DNA repair genes known to date, the reader is referred to http://sciencepark.mdanderson.org/labs/ 
wood/.

750 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

Table 43.1 shows only a few of the diseases associated 
with  mutations  in  proteins  involved  in  repairing  DNA 
breaks. (See Box 43.1 for a discussion of the major DNA 
repair pathways.) It is likely that new components of this 
pathway remain to be identified.

From the DNA Damage Response to  
the G2/M Checkpoint
ATM and ATR at damage foci cooperate with adapters to 
phosphorylate and activate the two key EFFECTOR kinases 

BOX 43.1  DNA Repair in Vertebrates*

Every  human  cell  experiences  approximately  105  DNA 
damage  events  each  day.  These  are  mostly  repaired  accu-
rately,  so  only  about  100  mutations  are  passed  on  in  each 
new  human  generation.  In  cancer,  the  spontaneous  muta-
tion frequency can be at least 200-fold higher. Cell division 
must  not  occur  with  inaccurately  replicated  or  damaged 
genomes, as this may cause cell death or heritable mutation. 
A number of systems have evolved to repair particular forms 
of  DNA  damage  sustained  by  the  cell  (Fig.  43.12).  These 

A. Type of DNA
     lesion

B. Repair
     pathway

U

Base damage:
deamination of
cytosine to uracil

Base
excision
repair

Base damage:
methylation of
guanosine

Incorporation
of mismatched
base

Mismatch
repair

Formation of UV
photoproduct:
6-4 thymidine
dimer

Nucleotide
excision
repair

C

T

T

G

A

3' OH

Double-strand
break

3' OH

G

C

Double-strand
break repair
• Homologous
 recombinational
 repair
• Nonhomologous
 end joining

DNA double

helix expanded

FIGURE 43.12 
INTRODUCTION TO DNA REPAIR. Examples 
of DNA damage and the repair pathways that respond to different 
types of lesion. 

repair mechanisms act in concert with the apoptotic machin-
ery to ensure that the cell will die if the DNA damage cannot 
be repaired (see Chapter 46). DNA damage checkpoints are 
a critical component of the cellular response to DNA damage 
(see Fig. 40.4), as they impose a delay in the cell cycle during 
which cells have a chance to repair their genomes. Promis-
ing new strategies for cancer treatment include use of agents 
that  actually  cause  DNA  damage,  with  the  goal  of  over-
whelming the already defective defenses in cancer cells, and 
causing them to activate cell death pathways.

Base Excision Repair
Bases in DNA can become oxidized, reduced, alkylated, or 
deaminated owing to endogenous activities or environmen-
tal stress. Damaged bases are cut away from the DNA sugar–
phosphate backbone by a damage-recognizing glycosylase, 
leaving an abasic site (Fig. 43.13A). Abasic sites, which also 
can be generated directly by DNA damage, are then removed 
by  cleavage  of  the  sugar–phosphate  backbone  mediated  
by  certain  glycosylases  and  endonucleases.  The  missing 
sequence  is  then  reconstructed  from  its  complementary 
strand  by  DNA  polymerase  β,  with  DNA  ligase  III-Xrcc1 
completing the repair by sealing the gaps in the backbone.

Nucleotide Excision Repair
Bulky DNA adducts caused by chemical agents or environ-
mental  stress  (particularly  UV  radiation  from  sunlight)  are 
excised  by  a  complex,  though  well-understood,  reaction 
(Fig.  43.13B).  Defects  in  nucleotide  excision  repair  genes 
cause  the  human  genetic  disease  xeroderma  pigmento-
sum  (XP),  which  is  characterized  by  hypersensitivity  to 
sunlight  and  predisposition  to  skin  cancer.  Eight  proteins 
encoded  by  genes  mutated  in  xeroderma  pigmentosum 
(Table 43.1) take part in nucleotide excision repair, provid-
ing one of the best examples in which human genetics has 
helped to unravel a complicated biological process. Recog-
nition  of  the  DNA  lesion  involves  the  heterotrimeric  rep-
lication  protein  RPA,  XPA,  and  XPC,  and  the  nine-subunit 
transcription  factor  TFIIH,  which  contains  XPB  and  XPD. 
ATP-dependent  unwinding  of  the  DNA  by  XPB  and  XPD 
forms  a  preincision  complex.  XPG,  which  replaces  XPC 
in the complex, makes an incision six to nine bases 3′ of 
the damaged base, and XPF-Ercc1 cuts 20 to 25 bases 5′ of 
the  damage  site.  This  releases  a  short  single-stranded  DNA 
fragment containing the damaged DNA. After excision, DNA 
polymerases δ or ε fill in the gap by copying the undamaged 
strand. Prokaryotes have a similar system of adduct recogni-
tion, removal, and repair involving the UvrA, UvrB, and UvrC 
proteins;  however,  the  enzymes  that  are  involved  are  not 
conserved between kingdoms.

 

CHAPTER 43  n  G2 Phase, Responses to DNA Damage, and Control of Entry Into Mitosis 

751

BOX 43.1  DNA Repair in Vertebrates*—cont’d

A. Base excision repair

B. Nucleotide excision repair

DNA damage

DNA damage

C. Mismatch repair
Mismatch

Glycosylase
removes
damaged base

Abasic site

Recognition

RPA, XPA, XPC
TFIIH (contains XPB
  and XPD)

Recognition

MSH2/MSH6 dimer

Nick

DNA polymerase β
DNA ligase III-Xrcc1

ATP-dependent
unwinding by
XPB, XPD

RPA, XPA, XPC, TFIIH

Sliding clamp
searches for nick
(Okazaki frag.)

Msh2/Msh6 dimer plus
Mlh1/Pms2 dimer
form sliding clamp

Preincision
complex forms

XPF-Ercc1 nicks
  20–25 bp to 5'

XPG nicks 6–9 bp
to 3'

Exonuclease
degrades back
to mismatch

May travel thousands
of bases

Exo1

DNA polymerase δ, ε

DNA polymerase δ, ε

FIGURE 43.13  PATHWAYS FOR THE REPAIR OF BASE DAMAGE, BULKY ADDUCTS SUCH AS THYMIDINE DIMERS FORMED 
BY  ULTRAVIOLET  LIGHT,  OR  MISMATCHED  BASES.  For  detailed  descriptions,  see  the  text.  The  inset  in  panel  A  shows  human 
3-methyladenine  DNA  glycosylase  complexed  to  DNA.  This  enzyme  scans  the  DNA  for  bases  that  are  not  strongly  H-bonded,  uses  its 
“finger” to swing them up into the pocket for scanning, and, if they are damaged, catalyzes excision of that base. (Inset illustration by Graham 
Johnson [www.fivth.com] for the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, copyright 2004, all rights reserved. For reference, see PDB file 1BNK 
and Lau AY, Scharer OD, Samson L, et al. Crystal structure of a human alkylbase-DNA repair enzyme complexed to DNA: mechanisms for 
nucleotide flipping and base excision. Cell. 1998;95:249–258.)

Mismatch Repair
Errors in DNA replication missed by the proofreading activity 
of the DNA polymerase are recognized by a dimer consisting 
of  the  MSH2  and  MSH6  proteins.  When  a  mismatch  is 
detected,  this  heterodimer  undergoes  an  ATP-dependent 
transition to a sliding clamp and recruits a second heterodi-
mer, consisting of MLH1 and PMS2 (Fig. 43.13C). To distin-
guish  between  the  original  (“correct”)  sequence  and  the 
newly synthesized DNA strand, this sliding clamp complex 
can then translocate along the DNA until a break is reached, 
such as that found between Okazaki fragments. The broken 
strand is therefore identified as the newly synthesized DNA 
strand. The mismatch repair complex then recruits the exo-
nuclease  EXO1  and  degrades  the  newly  synthesized  DNA 
strand  all  the  way  back  to  the  misincorporated  base.  The 
resultant long, single-stranded region is stabilized by binding 
of RPA and eventually filled in by the replicative DNA poly-
merases δ  and/or ε.  A  second  type  of  “mismatch”  involves 
mistaken  incorporation  of  ribonucleotides  into  DNA  by 
either DNA polymerases δ and ε. Specialized ribonuclease H 
(RNAse H) enzymes detect and cleave DNA/RNA hybrids and 
remove the ribonucleotides.

Double-Strand Break Repair
DNA double-strand breaks can be caused by ionizing radia-
tion  or  radiomimetic  drugs  or  arise  spontaneously  after  
replication. They are particularly hazardous forms of damage, 
as  they  carry  the  risk  of  losing  chromosomal  material  or,  
if  misrepaired,  causing  chromosomal  translocations.  Two 
major  pathways  repair  double-strand  breaks.  Homologous 
recombinational repair uses undamaged DNA as a template 
for the accurate repair of double-strand breaks, this sequence 
usually being derived from the sister chromatid after replica-
tion.  Nonhomologous  end  joining  (NHEJ)  repairs  double-
strand  breaks  with  no  requirement  for  homology.  NHEJ  is 
the predominant activity that repairs double-strand breaks in 
the G1 and early S phase, whereas homologous recombina-
tion  becomes  more  important  in  the  late  S  and  G2  phase. 
Homologous  recombinational  repair  is  normally  extremely 
accurate,  but  NHEJ  often  introduces  errors,  as  it  can  join 
both  related  and  unrelated  DNA  ends  together.  Both  path-
ways  require  the  activity  of  the  MRN  protein  complex 
(Mre11/RAD50/Nbs1), which localizes to DNA double-strand 
breaks and is also found at telomeres. The exonuclease activ-
ity of this complex resects (chews back) broken DNA ends 

Continued

752 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

BOX 43.1  DNA Repair in Vertebrates*—cont’d

to  provide  single-stranded  DNA  substrates  for  the  repair 
systems. These mechanisms repair also repair double-strand 
breaks during genome editing (see Fig. 6.16).

The  key  protein  required  for  homologous  recombina-
tional  repair  in  cells  is  Rad51,  the  eukaryotic  homologue 
of  Escherichia  coli  RecA  (Fig.  43.14A).  Rad51  forms  an 
extended  nucleoprotein  filament  on  single-stranded  DNA, 
replacing  RPA,  which  acts  like  a  placeholder  when  single-
stranded  DNA  is  produced.  Rad51  catalyses  the  search  for 
homologous sequences, strand pairing, and strand exchange. 

A number of proteins, including BRCA1 and BRCA2, control 
the activity of mammalian Rad51 in homologous recombina-
tional repair. Inactivation of BRCA1 and BRCA2 predisposes 
to  cancer.  The  helicase  Rad54  facilitates  strand  invasion, 
when the single-stranded region forces its way into the com-
plementary DNA duplex on the undamaged sister chromatid. 
Following  invasion  of  the  recombining  DNA  strands,  poly-
merase  activity  extends  the  DNA  beyond  the  site  of  the 
double-strand break, leading to the formation of a Holliday 
junction (Fig. 43.14B). Resolution of the Holliday junction 

A. Homologous recombinational repair

C. Nonhomologous end joining

DNA break

Double-strand break

5' to 3' resection

MRN complex
Rad50/Mre11/Nbs1

3'

Binds ends
Recruits DNA-
dependent
  protein kinase

Ku70/
Ku80 ring

Aligns broken ends MRN complex

Other repair factors

Initial strand invasion
New DNA synthesis

Rad51

5'

3'

5'

Ends sealed DNA ligase IV/

Xrcc4

5'

3'
5'

3'

B. Holliday junction structure
5'

3'

Second end capture,
synthesis, ligation

= Resolvase cutting sites

5'

Holliday junction resolution

5'

3'
5'

3'

+

Holliday 
junction

3'

3'

5'

5'
3'
Repair complete
5'

3'

5'

3'

FIGURE 43.14  PATHWAYS FOR THE REPAIR OF DNA DOUBLE-STRAND BREAKS. A double-strand break is recognized by the 
MRN complex, which recruits ATM (ataxia-telangiectasia mutated). The break is then bound by repair factors involved in either the homolo-
gous recombination or nonhomologous end-joining pathway of DNA repair. A, Homologous recombination pathway of DNA repair. The MRN 
complex in conjunction with other nucleases chews back (resects) the DNA at a break, leaving a single-stranded overhang that is stabilized 
by RPA (not shown). This recruits ATR (ataxia-telangiectasia and Rad3 related) to the damage site. It is believed that the MRN complex also 
plays a role in keeping the broken ends close to one another. Next, RAD51 forms a nucleoprotein filament on the single-stranded DNA, 
displacing the RPA. The Rad51 nucleoprotein filament then initiates homology searching and repairs the DNA break by inserting the extended 
single-stranded DNA into homologous sequences (usually on the sister chromatid [blue]) and allowing homologous recombination and DNA 
repair/resynthesis to occur. Capture of the second single-stranded DNA end allows the formation of a joint molecule with a double Holliday 
junction. Resolution of this Holliday junction structure results in accurate, templated repair of the double-strand break. B, A Holliday junction 
formed by four complementary oligonucleotides complexed to the enzyme Cre (not shown). The Holliday junction is a dynamic structure 
(arrows) that can migrate along the DNA. C, Nonhomologous end-joining pathway of DNA repair. This pathway is initiated by break recogni-
tion  by  the  Ku70/Ku80  heterodimer,  which  recruits  DNA-PK  and  tethers  the  broken  ends.  The  breaks  are  then  processed  in  a  reaction 
involving the MRN complex and other repair factors. DNA-PK’s precise role is not yet entirely clear. Next, DNA ligase IV/XRCC4 is recruited 
to the processed double-strand break, which is ligated back together. (B, For reference, see PDB files 3CRX and 2CRX and Gopaul DN, 
Guo  F,  Van  Duyne  GD:  Structure  of  the  Holliday  junction  intermediate  in  Cre-loxP  site-specific  recombination.  EMBO  J  1998;17:
4175–4187.)

 

CHAPTER 43  n  G2 Phase, Responses to DNA Damage, and Control of Entry Into Mitosis 

753

BOX 43.1  DNA Repair in Vertebrates*—cont’d

and filling-in of the repaired DNA sequences results in com-
plete repair of the lesion. One of two known human Holliday 
junction  resolvases  is  the  Gen1  nuclease,  a  relative  of  the 
Fen1 flap endonuclease that functions during DNA replica-
tion  (see  Fig.  42.12).  (The  other  more  complex  resolvase  
is  the  product  of  four  genes.)  Cells  must  have  one  or  the 
other of these enzymes or they die during mitosis because 
of an inability to separate DNA strands that have undergone 
repair in the previous cell cycle. Note that Fig. 43.14 shows 
only a subset of the proteins involved in homologous recom-
binational  repair.  It  is  likely  that  new  factors  remain  to  
be identified.

NHEJ is initiated at a DNA double-strand break by binding 
of the Ku70 and Ku80 heterodimer as a ring that binds the 

*By Ciaran Morrison, National University of Ireland, Galway.

catalytic  subunit  of  the  DNA-dependent  protein  kinase, 
stimulating  other  repair  factors  and  aligning  the  broken  
ends  of  the  DNA  (Fig.  43.14C).  A  complex  of  the  protein 
XRCC4  with  DNA  ligase  IV  seals  the  ends  of  the  broken  
DNA.  NHEJ  is  also  necessary  for  V(D)J  recombination  
and  therefore  for  the  development  of  the  immune  system 
(see Fig. 28.10).

Given  the  importance  of  accurate  transmission  of  the 
genetic material, deficiencies in DNA repair and checkpoint 
genes are associated with a number of diseases (Table 43.1). 
Note  that  several  DNA  repair  activities  are  essential  for  
life,  so  their  inactivation  has  not  been  described  in  any 
human diseases.

Chk1  and  Chk2.  Phosphorylation  of  the  ATM  adapter, 
53BP1 (p53-binding protein 1), recruits Chk2 for activa-
tion  by  ATM.  The  trimeric  9-1-1  complex  is  required 
for  Chk1  activation  by  ATR.  This  complex,  which  gets 
its name from its subunits Rad9, Hus1, and Rad1, resem-
bles  proliferating  cell  nuclear  antigen  (PCNA),  the 
doughnut-shaped  processivity  factor  that  is  indispens-
able  during  DNA  replication  (see  Fig.  42.12).  PCNA  is 
loaded onto DNA by replication factor C (RFC, a penta-
meric  AAA-ATPase)  and  anchors  DNA  polymerases  and 
other factors to DNA. A similar ATPase composed of one 
special  subunit,  Rad17,  plus  the  four  small  subunits  of 
RFC loads the 9-1-1 complex onto DNA at or near sites 
of damage. Mutants in those four RFC subunits are defec-
tive  in  G2/M  checkpoint  control  in  yeasts,  Drosophila 
and Caenorhabditis elegans. RPA stimulates loading of 
the 9-1-1 complex at damage sites, making it specific for 
regions of single-stranded DNA.

Phosphorylation releases Chk1 and Chk2 from chro-
matin,  so  they  can  diffuse  throughout  the  nucleus  and 
cell to implement the DDR. They also trigger the G2/M 
checkpoint response by altering the cell cycle machinery 
and inducing the transcription of key EFFECTORS. In some 
cases their actions trigger cell death by apoptosis.

Activation of Chk1 is important to establish the G2/M 
checkpoint response because Chk1 phosphorylates the 
Cdc25A  and  Cdc25C  protein  phosphatases  thereby 
blocking cell-cycle progression (Fig. 43.11). Phosphory-
lation  produces  binding  sites  for  a  14-3-3  protein  that 
blocks  Cdc25A  from  activating  Cdk1–cyclin  B.  Chk1 
phosphorylation  also  targets  Cdc25A  for  ubiquitin-
mediated  proteolysis  ensuring  that  levels  of  Cdc25A 
remain low.

The transcription factor p53 (see Fig. 41.15), another 
EFFECTOR of the G2/M checkpoint, is phosphorylated and 
activated following DNA damage (Fig. 43.11). Activated 

p53 stimulates transcription of the Cdk inhibitor p21. 
Although  p21  is  best  known  for  promoting  cell-cycle 
arrest in G1 cells as part of the G1 DNA damage check-
point, it can also act in G2. Expression of p21 is an effec-
tive way of blocking the initiation of prophase, because 
it inhibits Cdk1–cyclin A approximately 100-fold better 
than it inhibits Cdk1–cyclin B1.

Active p53 also drives the expression of 14-3-3σ, an 
adapter  protein  that  interferes  with  shuttling  of  Cdk1–
cyclin  B1  between  the  nucleus  and  cytoplasm  (Fig. 
43.11). Binding of 14-3-3σ maintains the Wee1 inhibitory 
kinase  in  a  more  active  state,  ensuring  that  the  Cdk1–
cyclin  B1  complex  remains  inactive.  Disruption  of  the 
gene  for  14-3-3σ  is  fatal  for  cells  with  DNA  damage. 
Instead of activating their G2/M checkpoint, they enter 
an aberrant state with characteristics of both mitosis and 
apoptosis, and then die.

Typically, G2/M checkpoint activation has one of three 
outcomes. If DNA damage is so extensive that it cannot 
be repaired, the cell either enters a non-proliferating state 
known  as  senescence  or  commits  suicide  by  apoptosis 
(see  Chapter  46).  Less-serious  damage  can  be  repaired 
by one of the systems described in Box 43.1.

Transition to Mitosis
The complex web of stimulatory and inhibitory activities 
in the G2 phase poises Cdk1–cyclin B in a state ready for 
the explosive burst of activation that triggers the G2/M 
transition.  These  complex  regulatory  pathways  are  the 
basis of the G2/M checkpoint control that prevents cells 
from  segregating  their  chromosomes  if  genomic  DNA 
cannot meet stringent quality control standards. Eventu-
ally, however, if all goes well, Cdk1–cyclin A and Cdk1–
cyclin B1 are activated, and the cell embarks on mitosis, 
probably the most dramatic event of its life.

754 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We  thank  Anton  Gartner,  Ciaran  Morrison,  and  Ashok 
Venkitaraman  for  their  suggestions  on  revisions  to  this 
chapter.

SELECTED READINGS

Ciccia A, Elledge SJ. The DNA damage response: making it safe to play 

with knives. Mol Cell. 2010;40:179-204.

Hartwell LH, Weinert TA. Checkpoints: Controls that ensure the order 

of cell cycle events. Science. 1989;246:629-634.

Jackson SP, Bartek J. The DNA-damage response in human biology and 

disease. Nature. 2009;461:1071-1078.

Mehta A, Haber JE. Sources of DNA double-strand breaks and models 
of  recombinational  DNA  repair.  Cold  Spring  Harb  Perspect  Biol. 
2014;6:a016428.

Melo  J,  Toczyski  D.  A  unified  view  of  the  DNA-damage  checkpoint. 

Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2002;14:237-245.

Morgan  DO.  The  Cell  Cycle:  Principles  of  Control.  London:  New 

Science Press; 2007.

Parrilla-Castellar ER, Arlander SJ, Karnitz L. Dial 9-1-1 for DNA damage: 
the  Rad9-Hus1-Rad1  (9-1-1)  clamp  complex.  DNA  Repair  (Amst). 
2004;3:1009-1014.

Paull TT. Mechanisms of ATM activation. Annu Rev Biochem. 2015;84:

711-738.

Pearl LH, Schierz AC, Ward SE, et al. Therapeutic opportunities within 

the DNA damage response. Nat Rev Cancer. 2015;15:166-180.

Polo  SE,  Jackson  SP.  Dynamics  of  DNA  damage  response  proteins  at 
DNA breaks: a focus on protein modifications. Genes Dev. 2011;25:
409-433.

Smits VA, Medema RH. Checking out the G(2)/M transition. Biochim 

Biophys Acta. 2001;1519:1-12.

Wieser S, Pines J. The biochemistry of mitosis. Cold Spring Harb Per-

spect Biol. 2015;7:a015776.

Wood  RD,  Mitchell  M,  Sgouros  J,  et al.  Human  DNA  repair  genes. 

Science. 2001;291:1284-1289.

C H A P T E R 

44 

Mitosis and Cytokinesis

Mitosis  is  the  division  of  a  somatic  cell  (a  vegetative 

cell in yeast) into two daughter cells. The daughters are 
usually identical copies of the parent cell, but the process 
can be asymmetrical. For example, division of some stem 
cells gives rise to one stem cell and another daughter cell 
that goes on to mature into a differentiated cell. See Box 
41.2 for examples.

Traditionally,  mitotic  events  are  subdivided  into  six 
phases:  prophase,  prometaphase,  metaphase,  ana-
phase,  telophase,  and  cytokinesis  (Fig.  44.1).  The 
dramatic  reorganization  of  both  the  nucleus  and  cyto-
plasm  during  the  mitotic  phases  is  brought  about  by 
activation  of  a  number  of  protein  kinases,  including 
Cdk1–cyclin B–cks (abbreviated here as “Cdk1 kinase”; 
see Chapter 40). After activation by Cdc25 phosphatase, 
Cdk1 kinase accumulates in the nucleus, where it joins 
Cdk1–cyclin  A–cks,  which  was  activated  somewhat 
earlier (see Fig. 43.6). These two Cdk1 kinase complexes 
operate as both master controllers and workhorses that 
directly phosphorylate many proteins whose functional 
and  structural  status  is  altered  during  mitosis.  Their 
progressive  inactivation  following  the  correct  attach-
ment of the chromosomes to spindle microtubules drives 
the orderly exit of cells from mitosis.

Mitosis is an ancient process, and a number of varia-
tions emerged during eukaryotic evolution. Many single-
celled  eukaryotes,  including  yeast  and  slime  molds, 
undergo a closed mitosis, in which spindle formation 
and  chromosome  segregation  occur  within  an  intact 
nuclear  envelope  to  which  the  spindle  poles  are 
anchored.  This  chapter  focuses  on  open  mitosis,  as 
used by most plants and animals, in which the nuclear 
envelope  disassembles  before  the  chromosomes  segre-
gate. Fig. 44.2 summarizes some of the important events 
during the various mitotic phases.

Prophase

Early prometaphase

CDK activity high

Late prometaphase

Metaphase

Anaphase

Telophase

APC/C activity high

Early cytokinesis

Late cytokinesis

FIGURE  44.1  OVERVIEW  OF  THE  PHASES  OF  MITOSIS. 
APC/C, anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome. 

Prophase
Prophase,  the  transition  from  G2  into  mitosis,  begins 
with the first visible condensation of the chromosomes 
and  disassembly  of  the  nucleolus  (Fig.  44.3).  In  the 

 755

756 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

A. Interphase

B. Prophase

C. Prometaphase

D. Metaphase

Nucleus

Centrosome
Chromosomes

NE

Microtubules

Centrosomes separate
Chromosomes condense

Begins with nuclear
  envelope (NE) break-down
Chromosomes attach
  to spindle

Chromosomes align
  on spindle equator

E. Anaphase A

F. Anaphase B

G. Telophase

H. Cytokinesis

NE

CS

CF

CS

CF

Midbody

CS remnant

Sister chromatids separate
  and move to poles

Pole

Organized central spindle (CS)
  assembles
Poles (arrows) separate
Cleavage Furrow (CF)
  assembles

Cleavage furrow (CF) constricts
Nuclear envelope (NE)
  reassembles

Chromosomes decondense
Interphase microtubule
  network reforms
Daughter cells separate

FIGURE 44.2  KEY EVENTS OF MITOSIS. A–C, Prophase–prometaphase: Cdk1 kinase triggers condensation of replicated sister chromatids, 
disassembly of the nuclear envelope and Golgi, and a dramatic reorganization of the cytoskeleton. As the barrier between the chromosomes and 
cytoplasm is abolished, microtubules contact the condensed chromosomes and attach at the kinetochores (see Fig. 8.21). Interaction of kineto-
chores with dynamic microtubules culminates with the chromosomes aligned at the midplane of the bipolar spindle. D–F, Metaphase–anaphase: 
Once all chromosomes achieve a bipolar attachment to the spindle, an inhibitory signal is silenced, leading to activation of a proteolytic network 
that destroys proteins responsible for holding sister chromatids together and also inactivates Cdk1 by destroying its cyclin B cofactor (see Fig. 
40.15). Sister chromatids separate and move toward opposite spindle poles, which themselves move apart. G–H, Telophase–cytokinesis: Targeting 
of nuclear envelope components back to the surface of the chromatids leads to the reformation of two daughter nuclei. In most cells, the two 
daughter nuclei and the surrounding cytoplasm are partitioned by cytokinesis. (Micrographs courtesy William C. Earnshaw.)

cytoplasm, the interphase network of long microtubules 
centered  on  a  single  centrosome  (see  Fig.  34.18)  is 
converted  into  two  radial  arrays  of  short  microtubules 
called asters. Most types of intermediate filaments disas-
semble, the Golgi apparatus and endoplasmic reticulum 
fragment,  and  both  endocytosis  and  exocytosis  are 
curtailed.

Nuclear Changes in Prophase
Chromosome  condensation,  the  landmark  event  at  the 
onset  of  prophase,  often  begins  in  isolated  patches  of 
chromatin at the nuclear periphery. Later, chromosome 
condense  into  two  threads  termed  sister  chromatids 
that are closely paired along their entire lengths. Although 
chromosome condensation was first observed more than 

a  century  ago,  the  biochemical  mechanism  remains  a 
mystery.  Protein  kinases  trigger  mitotic  chromosome 
condensation  and  onset  of  condensation  is  correlated 
with phosphorylation of histones H1 by Cdk1 kinase and 
H3 by Aurora-B protein kinase. However, chromosomes 
still  condense  when  both  of  these  phosphorylation 
events are blocked. It is possible that a combination of 
histone modifications promotes mitotic chromatin con-
densation (see Fig. 8.3).

Two  pentameric  protein  complexes,  condensin  I 
and condensin II are major regulators of mitotic chromo-
some architecture. These complexes share the SMC2 and 
SMC4  (structural  maintenance  of  chromosomes)  ABC 
adenosine triphosphatases (ATPases), but have two dif-
ferent  sets  of  three  auxiliary  proteins  (see  Fig.  8.18). 

 

CHAPTER 44  n  Mitosis and Cytokinesis 

757

A. Prophase

Phosphorylated
condensin enters nucleus

Histone H3
phosphorylation
begins

Cell surface
markers
internalized
Intracellular membrane
networks remodeled

B

Chromosome
condensation
begins

Duplicated 
centrioles begin
to separate

Microtubule half-
life decreases
and asters form

Cell begins to
round up

DNA
Microtubules
Centrosomes

FIGURE 44.3 
INTRODUCTION TO PROPHASE. A, Summary of the major events of prophase. B, Distribution of DNA (blue), microtubules 
(red), and γ-tubulin (centrosomes  [green]) in a prophase human cell. (B, Images were recorded by Dr. Melpomeni Platani on the University of 
Dundee’s School of Life Sciences Imaging Facility OMX 3DSIM Microscope and stored and processed in OMERO.)

Condensins are required to disassemble the topologically 
associating domains (TAD) of interphase chromatin (see 
Fig. 8.13) and promote the formation of the linear array 
of  loops  that  characterizes  mitotic  chromosomes  (see 
Fig. 8.14). The decisive experiment was to target SMC2 
for  rapid  degradation,  with  the  result  that  no  well-
organized mitotic chromosomes formed. The chromatin 
compacted but was less organized. Slower depletion of 
condensins  by  RNA  interference  (RNAi)  or  conditional 
gene disruption gave less-dramatic results.

Condensin  complexes  can  encircle  DNA  and  also 
promote its supercoiling in vitro, but how these activi-
ties help them to orchestrate the changes in chromatin 
architecture is not known. Condensin II is nuclear during 
interphase, and has an important role in prophase chro-
mosome  formation  following  its  activation  by  phos-
phorylation.  Condensin  I  acts  both  in  prophase  and 
prometaphase in further compacting the chromosomes. 
DNA  topoisomerase  II  and  other  scaffold  proteins  also 
function  during  mitotic  chromosome  formation,  but 
condensin appears to play the major role.

Cytoplasmic Changes in Prophase
Most  of  the  cytoskeleton  reorganizes  during  prophase. 
The  microtubule  array  changes  from  an  extensive 
network  permeating  the  cytoplasm  into  two  dense, 
radial arrays of short, dynamic microtubules around the 
duplicated  centrosomes  (see  Fig.  34.17).  Each  of  these 
asters  eventually  becomes  one  pole  of  the  mitotic 
spindle. During prophase, the two asters usually migrate 
apart across the surface of the nuclear envelope, signal-
ing the start of spindle assembly (Fig. 44.3).

Mitotic microtubules behave like interphase microtu-
bules  in  many  ways  (see  Chapter  34).  They  are  mostly 
nucleated at their minus ends, they grow by addition of 
tubulin  subunits  at  their  plus  ends,  and  they  undergo 
random catastrophes during which they rapidly shorten. 
To a large extent, the prophase changes in microtubule 
organization can be explained by two simple biochemi-
cal changes: (a) increased microtubule-nucleating activ-
ity  of  centrosomes  and  (b)  altered  dynamic  instability 

TABLE 44.1  Comparison of Microtubule Dynamics 
in Interphase and Mitotic Newt Lung Cells
Parameter

Interphase
7 µm/min
71 s

Mitosis
14 µm/min
60 s

Elongation rate
Elongation time before 

catastrophe

Shortening rate
Probability of rescue 

from catastrophe*

Length

17 µm/min
0.046/s

17 µm/min
0

100 µm

14 µm

*Most cellular microtubules grow constantly by addition of subunits to 
their free ends but they occasionally stop growing and begin shrinking 
rapidly (a “catastrophe”). Unless shrinking is reversed (a “rescue”), the 
microtubule completely disappears.
Data from Gliksman NR, Skibbens RV, Salmon ED: How the transition 
frequencies of microtubule dynamic instability regulate microtubule 
dynamics in interphase and mitosis. Mol Biol Cell. 1993;4:1035–1050.

properties  of  the  microtubules  (Table  44.1;  also  see 
Chapter 34). Interphase microtubules have a high prob-
ability  of  recovering  from  catastrophes,  so  they  grow 
quite  long.  Mitotic  microtubules  grow  more  rapidly  
but  exist  only  transiently,  because  rescues  are  rare  fol-
lowing  a  catastrophe.  Thus,  they  usually  shorten  all  
the  way  back  to  the  centrosome,  with  little  chance  of 
rescue. These differences in dynamic instability can be 
reproduced  in  vitro  in  mitotic  and  interphase  cellular 
extracts.  They  appear  to  arise,  at  least  in  part,  from 
counterbalancing 
interactions  between  microtubule-
associated  proteins  that  promote  microtubule  stability, 
and kinesin-13 (see Fig. 36.13), which promotes micro-
tubule disassembly.

Other  cytoskeletal  elements  that  disassemble  during 
prophase include many, but not all, classes of interme-
diate  filaments  (including  the  nuclear  lamins)  (see  
Fig.  35.1A)  and  specialized  actin  filament  structures, 
such as stress fibers. However, the junctional complexes 
between  adjoining  cells  are  maintained  in  epithelial 
cells. As a result of the cytoskeletal reorganization, most 
cells  round  up  during  prophase.  This  is  particularly 
evident  for  animal  cells  that  are  cultured  on  a  flat  

758 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

substrate,  but  cells  in  tissues  also  change  their  shape 
dramatically during mitosis.

RNA transcription of the chromosomes stops during 
mitosis  except  for  highly  specialized  transcription  at 
centromeres.  Phosphorylation  of  components  of  the 
transcriptional machinery by Cdk1 kinase appears to be 
responsible  for  this  shutoff.  Cdk1  kinase  phosphoryla-
tion of ribosomal elongation factor 2a (EF2a) also stops 
most (but not all) ongoing protein synthesis and assem-

Interphase

Mitosis

Golgi

Ministacks

Golgi stacking
proteins

GM130

p115

Cdk1–

cyclin B–p9

FIGURE  44.4  GOLGI  APPARATUS  DYNAMICS  IN  INTER-
PHASE  AND  MITOSIS.  Disassembly  in  mitosis  is  driven  by  phos-
phorylation of components blocking fusion of Golgi membranes. 

bly of new ribosomes. Phosphorylation of several nucleo-
lar proteins leads to disassembly of the nucleolus.

The Golgi apparatus and endoplasmic reticulum frag-
ment and disperse during prophase (Fig. 44.4). Several 
kinases,  including  Cdk1  drives  Golgi  apparatus  disas-
sembly,  the  first  step  being  fragmentation  into  smaller 
ministacks following phosphorylation of Golgi stacking 
proteins  and  tethers.  Later  steps  are  still  being  investi-
gated.  Many  lines  of  evidence  argue  that  Cdk1  phos-
phorylation  of  key  components  prevents  the  fusion  of 
transport  vesicles  back  into  Golgi  stacks  (see  Chapter 
21), the net result being that the Golgi buds away into 
small vesicles that disperse throughout the mitotic cell 
cytoplasm. Other evidence suggests that an imbalance of 
vesicle  flow  between  the  Golgi  and  the  endoplasmic 
reticulum  results  in  the  Golgi  being  absorbed  into  the 
endoplasmic  reticulum  during  mitosis.  Whatever  the 
mechanism  of  its  disassembly,  Golgi  reassembly  begins 
again  during  late  anaphase/early  telophase,  following 
inactivation of Cdk1 kinase.

Prometaphase
In  cells  that  undergo  an  open  mitosis,  prometaphase 
begins abruptly with disassembly of the nuclear envelope 
(Fig.  44.5).  Microtubules  growing  outward  from  the 
spindle  poles  penetrate  holes  in  the  nuclear  envelope, 
make contact with the chromosomes, and attach to them 

A. Early prometaphase

C. Late prometaphase

2

1

3

(+) ends

1. Nuclear envelope disassembles

2. Microtubules grow and shrink in aster

3. Kinetochore captures microtubule

4

6

5

4. Chromosome slides rapidly poleward
    along microtubule
5. Microtubule from opposite pole is
    captured by sister kinetochore
6. Chomosome attached to both poles
    congresses to middle of spindle

B

D

DNA
Microtubules
Centrosomes

E. Kinetochore attachments
     to the spindle

Tension

Amphitelic (correct)

Syntelic (errors)

Merotelic (errors)

FIGURE 44.5 
INTRODUCTION TO PROMETAPHASE. A, Summary of the key events of early prometaphase. B, Distribution of DNA (blue), 
microtubules (red), and γ-tubulin (centrosomes [green]) in early prometaphase human cells. C, Summary of the key events of late prometaphase. 
D,  Distribution  of  DNA,  actin,  microtubules,  and  centrosomes  in  late  prometaphase  PtK1  cells.  E,  Terms  used  to  describe  the  orientation  of 
kinetochore attachments to the mitotic spindle. (B and D, Images were recorded by Dr. Melpomeni Platani on the University of Dundee’s School 
of Life Sciences Imaging Facility OMX 3DSIM Microscope and stored and processed in OMERO.)

 

CHAPTER 44  n  Mitosis and Cytokinesis 

759

at  specialized  structures  called  kinetochores  (see  Fig. 
8.19). Interactions of the two opposing kinetochores of 
paired sister chromatids with microtubules from oppo-
site poles of the spindle ultimately result in alignment of 
the chromosomes in a group midway between the poles. 
An  important  cell-cycle  checkpoint  (see  Chapter  40) 
known  as  the  spindle  assembly  checkpoint  (SAC) 
delays  the  onset  of  chromosome  segregation  until  all 
kinetochores are attached to microtubules.

Nuclear Envelope Disassembly in Prometaphase
Nuclear  envelope  disassembly  involves  the  removal  of 
two membrane bilayers coupled with disassembly of the 
nuclear  pores  and  the  fibrous  nuclear  lamina  mesh-
work  that  underlies  the  inner  bilayer  (Fig.  44.6).  Phos-
phorylation causes the nucleoporin Nup98 to dissociate 
from  nuclear  pores.  This  removes  the  permeability 
barrier  between  nucleus  and  cytoplasm.  Phosphoryla-
tion of other proteins causes the pore to disassemble to 
soluble  subcomplexes.  Phosphorylation  of  the  nuclear 
lamins  at  two  sites  flanking  the  coiled-coil  causes  the 
lamina network to disassemble into subunits. Interaction 
between  microtubules  and  dynein  associated  with  the 
nuclear envelope can rip holes in the envelope, although 
this is not required for nuclear envelope disassembly.

Nuclear  envelope  membranes  are  dispersed  in  the 
cytoplasm  from  prometaphase  until  telophase  (Fig. 
44.6),  but  the  mechanism  is  not  settled.  Some  experi-
ments suggest that the nuclear membranes break up into 
small  vesicles  that  disperse  in  the  cytoplasm.  Other 
experiments  suggest  that  the  nuclear  envelope  is 
absorbed into the endoplasmic reticulum, which remains 

as an extensive tubular (or flattened cisternal network—
another  source  of  discussion)  throughout  mitosis. 
Further  experiments  are  required  to  answer  this  ques-
tion,  and  both  mechanisms  could  contribute.  Lamin  B 
remains associated with the dispersed nuclear envelope, 
whereas lamins A and C and many proteins of the nuclear 
pore complexes disperse as soluble subunits.

During  prophase,  kinetochores  transform  from  non-
descript balls of condensed chromatin into structures on 
the surface of the chromosomes. By early prometaphase, 
the characteristic trilaminar disk structure (see Fig. 8.19) 
can  be  seen.  Each  sister  chromatid  has  a  kinetochore. 
Sister  kinetochores  are  located  on  opposite  faces  of 
the mitotic chromosome.

Organization of the Mitotic Spindle
The  mature  metaphase  spindle  is  a  bilaterally  sym-
metrical  structure  with  centrally  located  chromosomes 
flanked  by  arrays  of  microtubules  radiating  from  the 
poles (Fig. 44.7).

Three  predominant  classes  of  microtubules  are 
present in the metaphase spindle (Fig. 44.12). Kineto-
chore microtubules have their plus ends embedded in 
the  kinetochore  and  their  minus  ends  at  or  near  the 
spindle pole. They characteristically form bundles, called 
kinetochore  fibers,  which  contain  anywhere  from  1 
microtubule  in  the  budding  yeast  to  more  than  200 
microtubules in some higher plants. Each human kineto-
chore  binds  approximately  20  microtubules.  Up  to 
approximately  80%  of  the  approximately  2200  spindle 
microtubules in humans may be present in kinetochore 
fibers, but not all microtubules in those fibers stretch all 

A. Interphase

B. Mitosis

C

D. Lamins A and C

E. Lamin B

Nuclear
membrane:
  Outer
  Inner

Nuclear
lamina
Condensing
chromosomes

Endoplasmic
reticulum

Lamina
disassembly

Interphase

HO

–
PO4

O

O

OCH3

C

Cdk1–

cyclin B–p9

G2 / M

PO4

Eggs?

Somatic
cells?

Lamin B

or

Earliest

prometaphase

OH

–
O PO4

–
PO4

O

G2 / M

PO4
O

OCH3

C

OH

C

O
O–

C

O
O–

–
O PO4

+

Chromosomes

Vesicles derived
from the nuclear

envelope

Lamin B

dispersed through the
endoplasmic reticulum

Metaphase

Lamina

Soluble
subunits

Lamina

Subunits on

membrane vesicles

FIGURE 44.6  DISASSEMBLY OF THE NUCLEAR ENVELOPE DURING MITOSIS. A–B, Two contrasting models to explain the fate of the 
nuclear envelope during the transition from interphase to mitosis in a higher eukaryote. C, Micrographs showing solubilization of lamin A fused 
to green fluorescent protein (GFP) (green) during mitosis. DNA is blue. Scale bar is 10 µm. D–E, Reversible disassembly of lamins A, C, and B 
is driven by posttranslational modifications of the lamin polypeptides. (C, Courtesy William C. Earnshaw.)

760 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

A. Metaphase–forces balanced, spindle length stable

B. Anaphase–forces elongating the spindle dominate

(+)

(+)

(+)

(–)

(–) (–)
(–)
(–)

Kinesin-13

(–)

Microtubule disassembly at kinetochores
plus flux moves sister chromatids toward poles

(+)

(+)

Ordered central

spindle assembles

(–)

(–)

(–)

(–)
(–)

(+)

(+)

(+)

Cytoplasmic dynein moves
toward minus (–) end

Microtubule

(+)

Flux

(–)

(–)

(–)

(–)

(+)

(–)

(+)

(+)

(+)

(+)

(+)

(+)

(–)

(+)

(+)

(–)

NuMA

(–)

(+)

Inward force from minus-end–directed kinesin-14 and microtubule
  disassembly at poles by kinesin-13 is balanced by outward force
  from kinesin-5 plus dynein stretching poles apart

Bipolar plus-end–directed kinesin-5 dominates
to elongate spindle, pushing poles apart

Microtubule assembly at kinetochores and disassembly at poles causes tubulin subunit flux along kinetochore microtubules

FIGURE  44.7  ROLE  OF  MOTOR  PROTEINS  IN  SPINDLE  DYNAMICS.  Mitotic  spindle  structure  depends  on  microtubule  assembly/
disassembly  plus  balanced  forces  that  slide  microtubules  relative  to  one  another  and  to  pull  the  poles  together  or  push  them  apart.  A,  In 
metaphase,  the  structure  is  at  steady  state.  Forces  that  tend  to  elongate  the  spindle,  including  cytoplasmic  dynein  (which  moves  toward 
microtubule minus ends, pulling the poles out toward the cell cortex) and bipolar kinesin-5 (which moves toward microtubule plus ends, pushing 
the poles apart), are counterbalanced by cohesion between sister chromatids and kinesin-14, which moves toward microtubule minus ends (and 
pulls the poles together) and microtubule disassembly at the spindle poles. Dynein and its associated protein, NuMA (nuclear mitotic apparatus), 
also help to organize a focused spindle pole. B, In anaphase, sister chromatids separate, the balance of kinesin activity shifts, microtubule disas-
sembly at the poles declines, and the spindle undergoes a dramatic elongation. During anaphase, bipolar kinesin-5, chromokinesin KIF4A, and 
protein regulated in cytokinesis 1 (PRC1) also have important roles in organizing the central spindle, which is essential for subsequent assembly 
and function of the cleavage furrow. 

the  way  from  the  kinetochores  to  the  spindle  poles. 
Interpolar  microtubules  are  distributed  throughout 
the  body  of  the  spindle  and  do  not  attach  to  kineto-
chores. Many interpolar microtubules penetrate between 
and  through  the  chromosomes  and  extend  for  some 
distance beyond them. Thus, the central spindle contains 
a  large  number  of  interdigitated  antiparallel  microtu-
bules. Tracking these spindle microtubules by electron 
microscopy  revealed  a  tendency  for  the  interdigitated 
microtubules  of  opposite  polarity  to  pack  next  to  one 
another. During late anaphase, these antiparallel micro-
tubules  bundle  to  form  a  structure  called  the  central 
spindle  that  plays  important  roles  in  signaling  during 
cytokinesis. Astral microtubules project out from the 
poles  and  have  a  role  in  orienting  and  positioning  the 
spindle  in  the  cell  through  interactions  with  the  cell 
cortex  in  somatic  cells.  All  microtubules  within  each 
aster  have  the  same  polarity,  with  their  minus  ends 
proximal to the pole. Each unit of a spindle pole, with 
its  associated  kinetochore  and  interpolar  and  astral 
microtubules, is referred to as a half-spindle.

Spindle structure is largely determined by a combina-
tion of microtubule dynamics plus the action of at least 
seven different types of kinesins and cytoplasmic dynein 
(see Chapter 36). These motors often work in opposition 
to one another. Furthermore, forces exerted by motors 
can  influence  the  dynamic  assembly/disassembly  of 

microtubules.  As  a  result,  the  highly  dynamic  spindle 
changes  shape  as  a  delicate  balance  of  forces  shifts 
between  the  various  motors.  For  example,  inactivating 
one  or  more  kinesins  with  drugs  or  switching  a 
temperature-sensitive  mutant  to  the  nonpermissive 
temperature  can  cause  the  spindle  to  collapse  rapidly  
on itself.

Spindle Assembly
In metazoans, spindle assembly starts in prophase with 
the separation of the asters. In most cells, each aster is 
organized around a centrosome, consisting of a centriole 
pair  and  associated  pericentriolar  material.  γ-Tubulin 
ring complexes in the pericentriolar material efficiently 
nucleate microtubules (see Fig. 34.16), so each centro-
some  acts  as  a  microtubule  organizing  center 
(MTOC). By the end of prophase, the spindle consists of 
two  asters  linked  by  a  few  interpolar  microtubules. 
Cytoplasmic dynein at the cell cortex exerts an outward 
force  separating  the  centrosomes,  whereas  kinesin-14 
motors  (which  move  toward  microtubule  minus  ends) 
on the interpolar microtubules exert a counterbalancing 
force holding the asters together.

This  balance  of  forces  changes  when  the  nuclear 
envelope  breaks  down.  Bipolar  kinesin-5  motors  phos-
phorylated  by  Cdk1  kinase  concentrate  in  the  central 
spindle,  where  they  crosslink  adjacent  antiparallel 

 

CHAPTER 44  n  Mitosis and Cytokinesis 

761

interpolar  microtubules.  Kinesin-5  moves  toward  the 
plus  ends  of  microtubules,  so  when  attached  to  two 
adjacent  antiparallel  microtubules,  its  action  will  cause 
them  to  slide  and  push  the  spindle  poles  apart  (Fig. 
44.7).  However,  the  two  half-spindles  do  not  separate 
because  they  are  physically  linked  via  the  chromo-
somes,  with  sister  kinetochores  attached  to  opposite 
spindle poles.

Also  at  this  time,  the  asters  mature  into  focused 
spindle  poles.  The  pericentriolar  material  efficiently 
nucleates the assembly of new microtubules with their 
minus  ends  at  the  pole.  Microtubule  assembly  at  two 
other  sites  also  contributes  to  spindle  morphology.  At 
kinetochores, a complex derived from interphase nuclear 
pores  recruits γ-tubulin.  This  locally  nucleates  microtu-
bules that grow by inserting subunits at the kinetochores, 
pushing the minus ends with γ-tubulin outwards toward 
the  spindle  poles.  These  preformed  kinetochore  fibers 
are  then  incorporated  into  the  spindle.  In  the  central 
spindle, microtubules are nucleated on the walls of other 
microtubules by γ-tubulin recruited by the multi-subunit 
augmin complex. The action of augmin creates branched 
microtubules throughout the central spindle, contribut-
ing to an even fir tree-like distribution of microtubules. 
The  daughter  microtubules  may  be  released  from  their 
nucleation site, free at both ends, and move toward the 
spindle  poles  as  part  of  the  flux  of  tubulin  from  the 
center of the spindle toward the centrosomes.

The  microtubule  array  focuses  at  the  poles  partly 
because  centrosomes  tether  microtubules,  and  partly 
due to the concerted action of various motors and micro-
tubule crosslinking proteins such as dynein and nuclear 
mitotic  apparatus  (NuMA)  protein.  NuMA  is  released 
from  the  nucleus  when  the  nuclear  envelope  breaks 
down,  and  it  accumulates  near  the  poles  at  the  minus 
ends of microtubules.

Large cells that lack centrosomes, such as eggs, form 
spindles by an alternative pathway that also functions in 
the  background  in  cells  with  centrosomes  (Fig.  44.8). 
This mechanism hijacks the nuclear trafficking system to 

enable  chromosomes  to  control  the  activity  of  key 
spindle assembly factors. The nuclear import receptors 
importin α and β bind these factors, as though they were 
going  to  transport  them  into  the  nucleus.  This  blocks 
their spindle assembly activity. During mitosis, chromo-
somes bind high levels of RCC1, the guanine exchange 
factor for Ran (Ran-GEF in Fig. 9.18). This RCC1 creates 
a  gradient  of  the  active  guanosine  triphosphatase 
(GTPase) Ran-GTP (guanosine triphosphate) around the 
chromosomes.  During  interphase,  Ran-GTP  is  confined 
to  the  nucleus,  where  it  releases  importins  from  their 
cargo.  In  mitosis  the  chromosome-associated  cytoplas-
mic Ran-GTP gradient locally liberates the spindle assem-
bly  factors  including  motor  proteins  and  NuMA  from 
sequestration  by  importins.  They  then  stabilize  nearby 
microtubules and organize them into a bipolar spindle.

If centrosomes are removed or destroyed experimen-
tally in cells about to enter mitosis, somatic cells can also 
use motor proteins to organize microtubules into bipolar 
spindles  that  lack  asters  but  are  otherwise  remarkably 
normal.  Most  treated  cells  manage  to  complete  mitosis 
successfully  but  normal  mammalian  cells  then  either 
arrest in the next cell cycle prior to replicating their DNA 
or commit suicide. Both outcomes depend on the pres-
ence of the important tumor suppressor protein p53 (see 
Fig. 43.11). Thus, centrosomes are not required to form 
spindles, but they contribute to cell-cycle progression in 
many  cells.  This  dependence  on  centrosomes  is  not 
universal;  Drosophila,  for  example,  can  live  without 
centrosomes.

Chromosome Attachment to the Spindle
Dynamic microtubules of prometaphase asters scan the 
cytoplasm  effectively  “searching”  for  binding  sites  that 
will capture and stabilize their distal plus ends. Captured 
microtubules  are  approximately  fivefold  less  likely  to 
depolymerize  catastrophically  than  free  microtubules. 
When catastrophes do occur, the microtubules depoly-
merize back to the pole, recycling tubulin subunits for 
incorporation into other, growing microtubules.

Unstable microtubule
  g r adient

P

T

an-G

R

Stabilized

microtubules
accumulate on
chromosomes

Microtubule
stabilized by
Ran-GTP
gradient

Motors sort
microtubules,
which bind to
kinetochores

Other motors and

(–) end-binding proteins
organize spindle poles
(note absence of asters)

FIGURE 44.8  ASSEMBLY OF A BIPOLAR SPINDLE IN THE ABSENCE OF CENTROSOMES. A gradient of Ran-guanosine triphosphate 
(GTP) stabilizes microtubules around chromosomes, which contain high concentrations of bound Ran GEF RCC1. This releases spindle assembly 
factors from importin α and β. Microtubules that accumulate around the chromosomes are sorted, organized, and focused to make poles by 
motors and (−) end-binding proteins such as NuMA. These spindle poles lack prominent astral microtubules. 

762 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

Breakdown  of  the  nuclear  envelope  makes  the  con-
densed  chromosomes  accessible  to  the  microtubules. 
Chance  encounters  allow  kinetochores  to  capture  
microtubule  plus  ends.  Capture  probably  involves  the 
nine-component KMN network, which includes the rod-
shaped Ndc80 complex (see Fig. 8.21) that binds along 
the sides of microtubules near their plus ends. Another 
member  of  the  complex,  the  scaffolding  protein  Knl1 
(its  name  in  vertebrates—the  “K”  of  KMN;  see  later), 
anchors Ncd80 in the kinetochore.

Historically,  it  was  thought  that  forces  generated  by 
bipolar attachment of the kinetochores of sister chro-
matids  center  chromosomes  midway  between  the  two 
spindle poles. This hypothesis was based on the observa-
tion that when a kinetochore first attaches to a microtu-
bule,  the  chromosome  moves  along  the  side  of  that 
microtubule toward the spindle pole (Fig. 44.9). Subse-
quent  capture  of  a  microtubule  emanating  from  the 
opposite  spindle  pole  by  the  sister  kinetochore  would 
provide a counterforce pulling the chromosome in the 
opposite direction. Chromokinesin family motor proteins 
distributed  along  the  chromosome  arms  were  also 
thought  to  contribute  to  the  gradual  movement  of  the 

chromosome  toward  the  middle  of  the  spindle.  These 
movements are accompanied by coordinated shrinkage 
of  the  microtubules  at  the  leading  kinetochore  and 
growth of microtubules at the trailing kinetochore.

More  recent  studies  revealed  that  chromosomes 
attached to only one spindle pole can move away from 
that pole if the unattached kinetochore associates with 
the kinetochore fiber of a chromosome already aligned 
at the spindle equator. In this case, the kinetochore of 
the  mono-oriented  chromosome  glides  toward  the 
equator, where it is more likely to capture microtubules 
emanating from the opposite pole. This motion of one 
chromosome  along  the  kinetochore  fiber  of  another 
chromosome  requires  the  kinesin-7  motor  centromere 
protein E (CENP-E) (see Fig. 36.13) associated with the 
kinetochore of the moving chromosome. Recognition of 
a tubulin posttranslational modification leads CENP-E to 
move  the  chromosome  toward  the  spindle  equator, 
rather than out into the aster.

The attachment of microtubules to kinetochores can 
be reconstituted in vitro from mixtures of chromosomes, 
isolated  centrosomes,  and  tubulin  subunits.  The  plus 
ends  of  microtubules  grow  out  from  centrosomes  and 

E

Spindle
pole

d
r
a
w
o

t
 

l

d
e
e
v
a
r
t
 

e
c
n
a

t
s
D

i

)

m
µ
(
 

l

e
o
p

 

l

e
d
n
p
s

i

4

3

2

1

0

–1

–2

Spindle pole

Microtubule

Kinetochore

Start of
movement

0

20

40

60
Time (seconds)

80

D

Kinetochore

Microtubule

A

B

C

m
µ
0
1

 

FIGURE 44.9 
INITIAL CHROMOSOMAL MOVEMENTS DURING PROMETAPHASE. A–B, Capture of a microtubule by the kinetochore 
results first in movement along the side of the microtubule toward the pole from which that microtubule originated. These images come from a 
study in which living cells, observed by differential interference microscopy, were subjected to rapid chemical fixation just after a chromosome 
had attached to the spindle (arrow). C, Attachment of the chromosome to the spindle was confirmed by indirect immunofluorescence staining 
for tubulin and thin-section electron microscopy (D). E, The graph shows the movements of the chromosome before and after attachment. (From 
Rieder CL, Alexander SP, Rupp G. Kinetochores are transported poleward along a single astral microtubule during chromosome attachment to 
the spindle in newt lung cells. J Cell Biol. 1990;110:81–95, copyright The Rockefeller University Press.)

 

CHAPTER 44  n  Mitosis and Cytokinesis 

763

attach to the chromosomes. Surprisingly, chromosome-
bound  microtubules  can  either  lengthen  or  shorten  at 
the  attached  end  without  detaching  from  the  chromo-
some.  Similar  experiments  with  kinetochores  isolated 
from budding yeast cells showed that kinetochores can 
remain  attached  to  a  shortening  microtubule  plus  end 
even  against  an  applied  force  of  9  pN  (piconewtons). 
Physiological  levels  of  tension  actually  stabilize  the 
attachments of kinetochores to microtubules in vitro, as 
in vivo. This tethering of kinetochores to disassembling 
microtubules  is  essential  for  chromosome  movements 
during mitosis.

Correcting Errors in Chromosome Attachment to  
the Spindle
The goal of mitosis is to partition the replicated chromo-
somes accurately between two daughter cells. Therefore, 
all chromosomes must attach correctly to both spindle 
poles  (known  as  amphitelic  attachment;  Fig.  44.5) 
before being segregated. Three other sorts of attachment 
are seen: (a) chromosomes with one kinetochore lacking 
attached  microtubules  (known  as  monotelic  attach-
ment;  this  is  a  normal  intermediate),  (b)  chromosomes 
with  both  sister  kinetochores  attached  to  the  same 
spindle  pole  (known  as  syntelic  attachment),  and  (c) 
chromosomes with a single kinetochore attached simul-
taneously  to  both  spindle  poles  (known  as  merotelic 
attachment).  Correcting  monotelic  and  syntelic  errors 
takes  time,  and  the  SAC  (see  “Finding  Time  to  Fix 

Chromosome Attachment Errors: The Spindle Assembly 
Checkpoint” below) delays mitotic progression to allow 
the correction process to occur.

When syntelic attachments occur, one or both kineto-
chores  must  detach  for  the  chromosome  to  achieve  a 
bipolar  orientation.  Chromosome  attachment  to  oppo-
site  spindle  poles  is  more  stable  than  attachment  to  a 
single  pole,  because  the  tension  generated  by  bipolar 
attachment (where forces pull a chromosome simultane-
ously toward opposite spindle poles) preferentially sta-
bilizes  microtubule  connections  to  both  kinetochores. 
Merotelic attachments are more dangerous, as the kineto-
chore is under tension and the attachments are therefore 
stable.  Merotelic  attachments  are  the  most  common 
cause  of  chromosome  segregation  errors  in  cultured 
mammalian cells.

Syntelic and merotelic chromosome attachments are 
corrected through the action of Aurora B protein kinase, 
which  forms  the  chromosomal  passenger  complex 
(CPC), along with inner centromere protein (INCENP), 
survivin,  and  borealin  (Fig.  44.10).  The  other  subunits 
target Aurora B to its various sites of action during mitosis 
and  regulate  the  kinase  activity.  The  complex  concen-
trates at inner centromeres (the heterochromatin beneath 
and  between  the  two  sister  kinetochores)  during  pro-
metaphase and metaphase. At anaphase onset, the CPC 
moves to the overlapping interpolar microtubules of the 
central spindle and to the cell cortex, where the cleav-
age  furrow  will  form,  ultimately  winding  up  in  the 

A

Borealin

B

C

DNA
Survivin
Microtubules

D

E. CPC
INCENP

Aurora-B

F

Borealin

Survivin

Histone H3 phosphorylation

Kinetochore targets

Central spindle targets
Cleavage furrow targets

FIGURE  44.10  CHROMOSOMAL  PASSENGER  COMPLEX  (CPC)  REGULATES  MITOTIC  EVENTS.  The  CPC  (green)  is  present  at 
centromeres  in  prometaphase  and  metaphase  (B),  but  transfers  to  the  spindle  midzone  at  anaphase  (C)  and  midbody  at  anaphase  (D). 
E, Diagram of Aurora B protein kinase complexed with INCENP (inner centromere protein), survivin, and borealin with some key targets of the 
CPC. F, If CPC function is inhibited (in this case by RNA interference [RNAi] depletion of borealin), chromosome attachment errors are common 
and many chromosomes fail to segregate properly in anaphase. Distribution of DNA  (blue), microtubules  (red), and survivin–green fluorescent 
protein  (GFP)  (green)  in  human  mitotic  cells.  Inset  in  A,  Distribution  of  kinetochores  (red),  and  borealin  (green)  in  a  prometaphase  cell. 
(A–D, Micrographs by Sally Wheatley and William C. Earnshaw. F and Inset in A, Micrographs by Ana Carvalho, Reto Gassmann, and William 
C. Earnshaw. Insets in A and F, From Gassmann R, Carvalho A, Henzing AJ, et al. Borealin: a novel chromosomal passenger required for stability 
of the bipolar mitotic spindle. J Cell Biol. 2004;166:179–191, copyright The Rockefeller University Press. A–C, From Wheatley SP, McNeish IA. 
Survivin: a protein with dual roles in mitosis and apoptosis. Int Rev Cytol. 2005;247:35–88.)

764 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

intercellular  bridge  during  cytokinesis.  The  CPC  regu-
lates mitotic events from prophase through cytokinesis. 
Along  the  way  it  contributes  to  the  correction  of  
chromosome attachment errors and to the operation of 
the checkpoint that delays the cell cycle in response to 
those errors.

Aurora B corrects chromosome attachment errors by 
phosphorylating Ndc80 in the microtubule-binding KMN 
complex  (see  Fig.  8.21).  Aurora  B  phosphorylation 
strongly inhibits Ndc80 binding to microtubules, causing 
the kinetochore to release attached microtubules. When 
a  chromosome  is  correctly  attached  to  both  spindle 
poles, tension stretches the kinetochore away from the 
CPC buried in the chromatin beneath. This can stabilize 
chromosome–microtubule  interactions  by  preventing 
the kinase from phosphorylating Ndc80.

Finding Time to Fix Chromosome Attachment Errors: 
The Spindle Assembly Checkpoint
Segregation  of  replicated  chromosomes  into  daughter 
cells is extremely accurate. For example, budding yeasts 

lose a chromosome only once in 100,000 cell divisions. 
The  frequency  of  chromosome  loss  may  be  20-fold  to 
400-fold  higher  for  human  cells  grown  in  culture.  To 
achieve  even  this  level  of  accuracy,  most  cells  delay 
entry into anaphase until all chromosomes have achieved 
amphitelic  attachment  to  the  spindle.  This  delay  is 
caused by the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC), which 
senses the completion of microtubule binding to kineto-
chores at metaphase (Fig. 44.11). The spindle checkpoint 
differs from DNA damage checkpoints in that its default 
setting is “on” as cells enter mitosis. It is silenced only 
when  every  chromosome  is  properly  attached  to  the 
spindle.

The SAC involves the products of the mitotic arrest–
defective  (MAD)  genes,  the  budding-uninhibited-by-
benzimidazole  (BUB)  genes,  the  monopolar  spindle 
(Mps1)  kinase  and  the  CPC.  The  MAD  and  BUB  genes 
were  identified  in  yeast  genetic  screens  for  cells  that 
continued  to  divide  (and  die)  when  the  spindle  was 
disassembled  by  drugs.  These  genes  are  conserved  
from  yeast  to  humans.  SAC  proteins  accumulate  at 

A

Time

B

Time

C

Destroy free kinetochore
with blast of laser light

23 minutes

Microtubule

Checkpoint proteins
not on kinetochore

Go!

Kinetochore•
Mad1 • Mad2

Mad2

APC/C

BubR1

Wait!

Mad2

Cdc20MCC

MCC

D

C

23 minutes

Seat
belt

N

Mad1 • Mad2

APC/C
substrate

APC/C
MCC

Wait G

o

APC/C
Cdc20APC/C

Cdc20APC/C

UbUb

Ub

Ub

Proteins not to scale relative to kinetochore

Substrate

FIGURE 44.11  SPINDLE CHECKPOINT. Signaling by unattached kinetochores stops the cell from entering anaphase until all chromosomes 
have made a proper bipolar spindle attachment. A, As long as there is a chromosome that is not properly attached to the spindle (beige cells), 
the cell does not enter anaphase. The cell enters anaphase approximately 20 minutes after chromosome attachment is complete (green cells). 
B, In a cell with a persistently maloriented chromosome, anaphase entry is delayed (beige cells). If the unattached kinetochore is destroyed with 
a high-powered laser, the cell enters anaphase about 20 minutes later. This proves that the unattached kinetochore sends an inhibitory signal. 
C, Overview of the spindle assembly checkpoint (see text for details). D, Structure of the Mad1/Mad2 complex. 

 

CHAPTER 44  n  Mitosis and Cytokinesis 

765

kinetochores  early  in  mitosis,  when  the  checkpoint  is 
“on” (ie, during prophase  or  prometaphase),  and  are 
gradually  displaced as microtubules bind and the kineto-
chores come under tension.

The target of the SAC is the APC/CCdc20, the anaphase-
promoting  complex/cyclosome 
(APC/C)  ubiquitin-
protein ligase (an E3 enzyme; see Figs. 23.3 and 40.16) 
with its substrate recognition factor Cdc20 bound, APC/
CCdc20  ubiquitylates  target  proteins  to  mark  them  for 
destruction  by  proteasomes.  Key  APC/CCdc20  substrates 
are proteins that must be degraded for the cell to move 
from  metaphase  to  anaphase,  including  cyclin  B  and 
securin, an inhibitor of the enzyme that triggers separa-
tion of sister chromatids at anaphase (Fig. 44.16).

During  mitosis,  Cdk1  activates  the  APC/C  by  phos-
phorylating  an  auto-inhibitory  loop,  allowing  Cdc20  to 
bind.  The  SAC  is  an  additional  regulatory  circuit  that 
inactivates  APC/CCdc20  until  all  kinetochores  attach  to 
spindle microtubules. Kinetochores without microtubules 
attract  proteins  that  assemble  the  mitotic  checkpoint 
complex (MCC), the inhibitor that inactivates APC/CCdc20.
Checkpoint  activation  starts  when  Aurora  B  in  the 
CPC activates Mps1 kinase, allowing it to phosphorylate 
Knl1  in  the  kinetochore  at  several  sites.  Mps1  phos-
phorylation of Knl1 creates a binding site that results in 
Mad1 recruitment to the kinetochore. Mad1 then recruits 
Mad2 to form a stable complex (Fig. 44.11). A loop on 
Mad2  wraps  around  Mad1  like  a  safety  belt  making  
the  complex  particularly  stable.  This  form  of  Mad  2  is 
known  as  “closed”  Mad2.  Mad1/Mad2  can  transiently 
bind soluble Mad2 molecules (known as “open” Mad2), 
load them onto Cdc20 in the closed safety belt conforma-
tion (this loading probably occurs at kinetochores), then 
release them to form the soluble MCC of Mad2/Cdc20/
BubR1/Bub3.  The  MCC  associates  with  the  APC/CCdc20, 
interfering with binding of cyclin B and other key sub-
strates. As each chromosome becomes attached to both 
poles of the spindle it stops producing MCC. When the 
last chromosome has achieved a proper attachment, the 
last source of MCC is extinguished, and entry into ana-
phase can proceed.

Silencing of the checkpoint involves several pathways. 
Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) and protein phosphatase 
1  (PP1)  are  recruited  to  the  kinetochore  in  feedback 
loops  involving  the  CPC  and  other  checkpoint  compo-
nents.  They  dephosphorylate  Knl1  so  that  it  releases 
Mad1.  When  microtubules  bind,  cytoplasmic  dynein 
motors  actively  strip  checkpoint  components  from  the 
kinetochore,  dragging  them  away  toward  the  centro-
somes.  In  yeast,  access  of  Mps1  to  its  target  sites  on  
Knl1  is  physically  blocked  when  microtubules  bind. 
Exactly how this interaction is regulated in metazoans is 
still  actively  studied.  In  addition,  the  SAC  appears  to 
crosstalk  with  the  DNA  damage  response  (see  Chapter 
43),  since  DNA  damage  response  components  activate 
SAC components and vice versa. However, the network 
of interactions is very complex and details are still being 
worked out.

Experimental  inactivation  of  the  spindle  checkpoint 
causes  a  catastrophic,  premature  entry  into  anaphase, 
regardless of the status of chromosome alignment. This 
leads to an unequal distribution of sister chromatids and 
genetic  imbalance  between  daughter  cells  known  as 
aneuploidy.  Yeasts  can  live  without  the  checkpoint 
genes, but their loss is lethal for mice, which die early 
during  embryogenesis.  Mice  heterozygous  for  various 
checkpoint  components  show  increased  aneuploidy. 
Humans with mutations in BubR1 have mosaic variegated 
aneuploidy  syndrome  (extra  copies  or  loss  of  various 
chromosomes in a variety of tissues), which is associated 
with  microcephaly  (decreased  brain  size)  and  an 
increased cancer risk.

Metaphase
When  all  the  chromosomes  have  attained  amphitelic 
orientations  and  moved  to  positions  roughly  midway 
between the two spindle poles, the cell is said to be in 
metaphase (Fig. 44.12). The compact grouping of chro-
mosomes  at  the  middle  of  the  spindle  is  referred  to  as 
the metaphase plate. In many cells, even though chro-
mosomes remain, on average, balanced at the middle of 

A. Metaphase

Kinetochore
microtubules

B

Astral
microtubules

Interpolar
microtubules

Cyclin B and
securin degraded

Chromosomes oscillate

DNA
Microtubules
Centrosomes

FIGURE 44.12 
INTRODUCTION TO METAPHASE. A, Summary of the major events of metaphase. B, Distribution of DNA (blue), microtu-
bules (red), and gamma tubulin (centrosomes [green]) in a metaphase human cell. (B, Images were recorded by Dr. Melpomeni Platani on the 
University of Dundee’s School of Life Sciences Imaging Facility OMX 3DSIM Microscope and stored and processed in OMERO.)

766 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

A

E

B

C

D

F

Spindle pole

G

P

AP

AP

P

2 µm

2 min

Spindle pole

FIGURE 44.13  KINETOCHORE OSCILLATIONS BETWEEN P (POLEWARD) AND AP (AWAY FROM THE POLE) MOVEMENT DURING 
LATE PROMETAPHASE AND ANAPHASE IN PTK1 (RAT KANGAROO) CELLS. A–D, Images showing the movements of several pairs of sister 
kinetochores, labeled with green fluorescent protein (GFP)-Cdc20 (green), combined with phase-contrast images of the cell (red). E and G, Higher-
magnification views of sister kinetochores (marked with dashed lines) in prometaphase and anaphase, respectively. F, Kymograph (collage of images 
of a vertical strip showing the same two kinetochores at various time points during the movie) showing the movements of these two kinetochores. 
Movements toward (P) and away from (AP) spindle poles are indicated. P movement involves microtubule shrinkage at the leading kinetochore and 
microtubule growth at the trailing kinetochore (which is undergoing AP movement away from its associated kinetochore). Spindle poles are near 
the top and bottom of panels E to G. (Micrographs courtesy E.D. Salmon, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.)

the spindle, they jostle one another and undergo numer-
ous  small  excursions  toward  one  pole  or  the  other 
throughout metaphase (Fig. 44.13).

Metaphase  can  also  be  defined  biochemically  as  the 
time of destruction of cyclin B and securin (Fig. 44.16), 
because  this  begins  as  soon  as  the  last  chromosome 
achieves amphitelic orientation. Degradation of cyclin A 
begins  earlier,  at  the  entry  into  prometaphase,  and  is 
largely complete before metaphase. Loss of securin initi-
ates a process leading to the separation of sister chroma-
tids and the onset of anaphase.

Microtubule Flux Within the Metaphase Spindle
Although  the  average  length  of  the  kinetochore  micro-
tubules  is  roughly  constant  during  metaphase,  the 
microtubules  change  continuously  in  three  ways.  First, 
there  is  constant  net  addition  of  new  tubulin  subunits 
(approximately 10 subunits per second) to the plus end 
of  the  microtubules,  where  they  are  attached  to  the 
kinetochore.  Second,  a  comparable  number  of  tubulin 
subunits  is  continuously  lost  from  the  minus  end  of  
the  kinetochore  tubules  at  the  spindle  poles.  There-
fore,  tubulin  subunits  slowly  migrate  through  kineto-
chore  microtubules  from  the  kinetochore  to  the  pole 
(Fig. 44.14). This subunit flux or treadmilling in kineto-
chore microtubules is caused by microtubule depolymer-
ization at the poles driven by kinesin-13 family members. 
In addition, tubulin moves toward the poles as by micro-
tubules  are  transported  towards  the  pole  (many  nucle-
ated  by  the  augmin  complex)  within  the  kinetochore 
fiber.  All  microtubules  attached  to  each  kinetochore 

A

B

0 sec

10 sec

20 sec

P

P

P

30 sec

C

P

P

Fluorescent tubulin
speckles move
toward poles

P

FIGURE 44.14  MICROTUBULE FLUX IN METAPHASE. A, Cells 
entering  mitosis  were  injected  with  tubulin  subunits  modified  chemi-
cally  by  attachment  of  a  caged  fluorescent  dye.  This  dye  becomes 
fluorescent  after  being  irradiated  with  UV  light.  When  cells  entered 
metaphase,  the  spindle  was  illuminated  with  a  narrow  stripe  of  UV 
light,  activating  a  narrow  band  of  fluorescent  tubulin  subunits.  With 
time,  these  subunits  approach  the  spindle  poles  (P).  Because  the 
length  of  kinetochore  microtubules  is  constant  during  this  time,  the 
labeled tubulin molecules must migrate along the microtubules toward 
the  pole  (arrows).  This  can  occur  if  new  subunits  are  added  to  the 
microtubule at the kinetochore and old subunits are removed at the 
pole. B, Microtubule flux at metaphase in a Drosophila embryo visual-
ized by fluorescence speckle microscopy. Embryos were injected with 
very low levels of fluorescent tubulin, which appears as speckles dis-
tributed  along  the  microtubules.  If  a  very  sensitive  camera  is  used, 
these speckles can be seen to move toward the poles, reflecting the 
flux in the underlying microtubules. Scale bar is 5 µm. C, Movement 
of  labeled  tubulin  speckles  toward  the  spindle  poles.  (A,  Courtesy 
Arshad Desai and the MBL Cell Division Group, Marine Biology Labo-
ratory,  Woods  Hole,  MA;  from  Mitchison  TJ,  Salmon  ED.  Mitosis:  a 
history  of  division.  Nat  Cell  Biol.  2001;3:E17–E21.  B,  Courtesy  Paul 
Maddox and Arshad Desai, University of California, San Diego.)

 

CHAPTER 44  n  Mitosis and Cytokinesis 

767

change  coordinately  in  length  during  chromosomal 
oscillations.

Anaphase
The separation of sister chromatids at anaphase is one of 
the  most  dramatic  events  of  the  entire  cell  cycle  (Fig. 
44.15). Sister chromatids move to opposite spindle poles 
(anaphase A), and the poles move apart (anaphase B). 
Anaphase  is  also  the  time  when  the  mitotic  spindle 
activates the cell cortex in preparation for cytokinesis.

Two forms of the APC/C (see Fig. 40.15) trigger the 
transition from metaphase to anaphase by degrading key 
proteins.  APC/CCdc20  targets  cyclin  B  for  degradation, 
causing Cdk activity to fall (see Fig. 40.17). This decline 
in Cdk activity allows for activation of APC/CCdh1, because 
Cdh1 phosphorylated by Cdk1 kinase cannot bind to the 
APC/C.  APC/CCdh1  targets  polypeptides  whose  destruc-
tion  by  the  proteasome  is  required  for  the  cell  to  exit 
from mitosis and return to interphase. APC/CCdh1 remains 
active  during  G1  phase,  where  it  is  essential  for  the 
licensing of DNA replication origins (see Fig. 42.28).

Biochemical Mechanism of  
Sister Chromatid Separation
Separation of sister chromatids is regulated by the chro-
mosomes themselves, not by the mitotic spindle. Under 
certain circumstances, sister chromatids can separate in 
the  absence  of  microtubules,  ruling  out  a  requirement 
for forces from the spindle in the process.

Three  factors  regulate  sister  chromatid  separation:  a 
protein complex known as cohesin, a protease known 
as  separase,  and  an  inhibitor  of  separase  known 
as securin (Fig. 44.16). This system is conserved from 
yeast  to  human.  Chapter  8  discusses  the  functions  of 
cohesin in interphase.

Cohesin is a complex of four proteins that resembles 
the condensin complex (see Fig. 8.18). Like condensin, 
cohesin  has  two  large  subunits  from  the  SMC  ATPase 
family. These proteins, SMC1 and SMC3, are complexed 
with  proteins  called  Scc1  (which  has  other  names 

omitted here for simplicity) and Scc3. Additional proteins 
are required to stabilize the loading of this complex onto 
DNA. Cells with mutations in cohesin components sepa-
rate  sister  chromatids  prematurely  in  mitosis,  resulting 
in  chaotic  chromosome  missegregation.  This  system  is 
very  ancient,  as  bacteria  depend  on  an  SMC-related 
protein for orderly chromosome segregation.

A  variety  of  evidence  suggests  that  cohesin  forms  a 
ring with a diameter of 35 nm, large enough to encircle 
two sister chromatids like a lasso. In yeast, the complex 
functions  only  if  it  binds  chromosomes  during  DNA 
replication.  Cohesin  accumulates  at  preferred  sites  on 
the  chromosomes,  often  near  centromeres  in  budding 
yeast  or  in  regions  of  heterochromatin  in  fission  yeast. 
In vertebrates, most cohesin dissociates from the chro-
mosome arms by late metaphase, owing to the action of 
the  protein  kinases  Plk1  and  Aurora  B.  Importantly,  a 
critical fraction remains associated with heterochromatin 
flanking  centromeres  where  it  is  protected  from  cleav-
age by shugoshin until the onset of anaphase (see follow-
ing paragraphs and Chapter 45).

Sequential cleavage of two key proteins triggers sister 
chromatid separation at anaphase. This proteolysis makes 
anaphase onset an irreversible transition. The first target, 
securin,  inhibits  the  separase  protease.  After  the  last 
chromosome  forms  an  amphitelic  attachment  to  the 
spindle,  the  spindle  checkpoint  is  silenced.  This  allows 
APC/CCdc20  to  tag  securin  with  ubiquitin,  leading  to  its 
destruction by proteasomes throughout metaphase. When 
securin  levels  fall  below  a  critical  threshold,  separase  is 
unleashed to cleave the Scc1 subunit of cohesin. Cleavage 
of  Scc1  breaks  the  cohesin  ring,  allowing  the  sister  
chromatids  to  separate  triggering  the  onset  of  anaphase 
(Fig. 44.16B).

Efficient  Scc1  cleavage  requires  that  the  protein  be 
phosphorylated  near  its  cleavage  site.  This  allows  a  
mode  of  regulation  where  shugoshin  (Japanese  for 
“guardian  spirit”)  recruits  PP2A  to  centromeres.  PP2A 
keeps Scc1 dephosphorylated. This inhibits its cleavage 
and protects cohesin until shugoshin is released follow-
ing  amphitelic  attachment  of  the  chromosome.  This 

A. Anaphase

Cohesin
  degrades

B

Sister chromatids separate
Anaphase A: Chromatids approach
  poles (APC/CCdc20 active)

Interdigitated interpolar
  microtubules bundled by PRC1 
  and stem body material to 
  form central spindle

Anaphase B: Spindle poles
  migrate  apart (APC/C Cdh1active)

DNA
Microtubules
Centrosomes

FIGURE 44.15 
INTRODUCTION TO ANAPHASE. A, Summary of the major events of anaphase. B, Distribution of DNA (blue), microtubules 
(red), and gamma tubulin (centrosomes [green]) in a mid-anaphase human cell. APC/C, anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome; PRC1, protein 
regulated in cytokinesis 1. (B, Images were recorded by Dr. Melpomeni Platani on the University of Dundee’s School of Life Sciences Imaging 
Facility OMX 3DSIM Microscope and stored and processed in OMERO.)

768 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

A. S phase

Hinge

Replication

fork

Cohesin
complex

3
c
m
S

Scc1

SA1

1
c
m
S

Separase
Securin

APC/C

Ubiquitin

Cohesin

Proteasome

B
Chromatin
loops

Sister
chromatids

C

D

E

Sister
chromatids
separate

Mitotic
chromosome

Active
separase
cleaves Scc1

S phase

Early mitosis

Metaphase/
anaphase
transition

Anaphase

FIGURE 44.16  REGULATION OF SISTER CHROMATID PAIRING BY THE COHESIN COMPLEX. A–B, The cohesin complex forms a 
35-nm diameter ring that links sister chromatids during DNA replication. At anaphase onset, degradation of its securin inhibitor liberates active 
separase enzyme. C–E, Separase then cleaves cohesin subunit Scc1, and the two sister chromatids are freed to separate from one another and 
move toward opposite spindle poles. 

mechanism  is  absolutely  essential  during  meiosis,  as 
without it, it would not be able to segregate homologous 
chromosomes from each other (see Fig. 45.12).

Securin  can  act  as  an  oncogene  in  cultured  cells  
and  is  overexpressed  in  some  human  pituitary  tumors. 
Overexpression  of  securin  may  dis rupt  the  timing  of 
chromosome  segregation,  leading  to  chromosome  loss 
and, ultimately, contributing to cancer progression.

Mitotic Spindle Dynamics and Chromosome 
Movement During Anaphase
Anaphase  is  dominated  by  the  orderly  movement  of 
sister  chromatids  to  opposite  spindle  poles  brought 
about  by  the  combined  action  of  motor  proteins  and 
changes  in  microtubule  length.  There  are  two  compo-
nents to anaphase chromosome movements (Fig. 44.15). 
Anaphase A, the movement of the sister chromatids to 
the  spindle  poles,  requires  a  shortening  of  the  kineto-
chore fibers. During anaphase B, the spindle elongates, 
pushing  the  spindle  poles  apart.  The  poles  separate 
partially because of interactions between the antiparallel 
interpolar  microtubules  of  the  central  spindle  and  par-
tially because of intrinsic motility of the asters. Most cells 
use both components of anaphase, but one component 
may predominate in relation to the other.

Microtubule disassembly on its own can move chro-
mosomes  (see  Fig.  37.8).  Energy  for  this  movement 
comes  from  hydrolysis  of  GTP  bound  to  assembled 
tubulin,  which  is  stored  in  the  conformation  of  the 
lattice  of  tubulin  subunits.  Microtubule  protofilaments 
are  straight  when  growing,  but  after  GTP  hydrolysis 
protofilaments  are  curved,  so  they  peel  back  from  the 
ends  of  shrinking  microtubules  (see  Fig.  34.6).  Several 
kinesin “motors” influence the dynamic instability of the 
spindle  microtubules.  Members  of  the  kinesin-13  class, 
which  encircle  microtubules  near  kinetochores  and  at 
spindle poles, use adenosine triphosphate (ATP) hydro-
lysis to remove tubulin dimers and promote microtubule 
disassembly rather than movement.

Kinetochores  are  remarkable  in  their  ability  to  hold 
onto  disassembling  microtubules.  In  straight  (growing) 
microtubules, the Ndc80 complex is mostly responsible 
for microtubule binding. It binds to the interface between 
α and β tubulin subunits. This interface bends in curved 
(shrinking)  microtubules,  so  Ndc80  cannot  bind.  This 
could  allow  it  to  redistribute  onto  straight  sections  of  
the  lattice  and  thereby  move  away  from  the  curved 
protofilaments  at  the  disassembling  end.  In  metazoans 
the Ska complex in the outer kinetochore binds α and β 
tubulin subunits away from the interface, so it can bind 

 

CHAPTER 44  n  Mitosis and Cytokinesis 

769

to curved (disassembling) protofilaments. At yeast kineto-
chores  the  Dam1  ring  (green  in  Fig.  8.21)  couples  the 
kinetochore to disassembling microtubules.

Anaphase A chromosome movement involves a com-
bination of microtubule shortening and translocation of 
the  microtubule  lattice  that  result  from  flux  of  tubulin 
subunits  (Fig.  44.14).  The  contributions  of  the  two 
mechanisms vary among different cell types. When living 
vertebrate  cells  are  injected  with  fluorescently  labeled 
tubulin subunits, the spindle becomes fluorescent (Fig. 
44.17). If a laser is used to bleach a narrow zone in the 
fluorescent  tubulin  across  the  spindle  between  the 
chromosomes and the pole early in anaphase, the chro-
mosomes approach the bleached zone much faster than 
the  bleached  zone  approaches  the  spindle  pole.  This 
shows that the chromosomes “eat” their way along the 

A

Photobleached

zone

Time

Microtubule
disassembly

B

42

70

212

422

5 µm

C

40

92

210

436

FIGURE  44.17  CHROMOSOMES  MOVE  ON  SHRINKING 
MICROTUBULES  DURING  ANAPHASE.  A,  Mitotic  cells  were 
injected with a fluorescently labeled tubulin that was incorporated into 
the  spindle.  Just  after  anaphase  onset,  a  laser  was  used  to  photo-
bleach a stripe (white) across the spindle near the upper pole. The live 
cell was monitored over time by fluorescence (B) and phase-contrast 
(C) microscopy. In this mammalian cell, the chromosomes approach 
the bleached stripe much faster than the stripe approaches the spindle 
pole. In other organisms with higher rates of microtubule flux in their 
spindles, the bleached zone would also move appreciably toward the 
pole.  The  numbers  are  time  in  seconds.  (B–C,  From  Gorbsky  GJ, 
Sammak  PJ,  Borisy  GG.  Microtubule  dynamics  and  chromosome 
motion visualized in living anaphase cells. J Cell Biol. 1988;106:1185–
1192, copyright The Rockefeller University Press.)

kinetochore  microtubules  toward  the  pole.  In  these 
cells,  subunit  flux  accounts  for  only  20%  to  30%  of 
chromosome movement during anaphase A, and this flux 
is dispensable for chromosome movement. In Drosophila 
embryos,  in  which  subunit  flux  accounts  for  approxi-
mately 90% of anaphase A chromosome movement, the 
chromosomes  catch  up  with  a  marked  region  of  the 
kinetochore fiber slowly, if at all.

Anaphase B appears to be triggered at least in part by 
the  inactivation  of  the  minus-end–directed  kinesin-14 
motors,  so  that  all  the  net  motor  force  favors  spindle 
elongation. Four factors contribute to overall lengthen-
ing of the spindle: release of sister chromatid cohesion, 
sliding apart of the interdigitated half-spindles, microtu-
bule  growth,  and  intrinsic  motility  of  the  poles  them-
selves (Fig. 44.7). During the latter stages of anaphase B, 
the spindle poles, with their attached kinetochore micro-
tubules,  appear  to  move  away  from  the  interpolar 
microtubules  as  the  spindle  lengthens.  This  movement 
of  the  poles  involves  interaction  of  the  astral  microtu-
bules  with  cytoplasmic  dynein  molecules  anchored  at 
the cell cortex.

Anaphase  B  spindle  elongation  is  accompanied  by 
reorganization  of  the  interpolar  microtubules  into  a 
highly organized central spindle between the separat-
ing chromatids (Fig. 44.15). Within the central spindle, 
an amorphous dense material called stem body matrix 
stabilizes bundles of antiparallel microtubules and holds 
together  the  two  interdigitated  half-spindles.  Proteins 
concentrated in the central spindle help regulate cytoki-
nesis. One key factor, PRC1 (protein regulated in cytoki-
nesis 1), is inactive when phosphorylated by Cdk kinase 
and  functions  only  during  anaphase  when  Cdk  activity 
declines and phosphatases remove the phosphate groups 
placed  on  target  proteins  by  Cdks  and  other  mitotic 
kinases. PRC1 directs the binding of several kinesins to 
the central spindle. The kinesin KIF4A targets Aurora B 
kinase  to  a  particular  domain  of  the  central  spindle, 
where phosphorylation of key substrates then regulates 
spindle elongation and cytokinesis.

How can protein kinases such as Aurora B continue 
to function during anaphase while protein phosphatases 
are  removing  phosphate  groups  placed  there  by  Cdks 
and, indeed, Aurora B during early mitosis? One answer 
is that the phosphatase activity is highly localized, con-
trolled by specific targeting subunits. Cdk phosphoryla-
tion can inhibit targeting subunits such as the exotically 
named Repo-Man (recruits PP1 onto mitotic chromatin 
at  anaphase)  from  binding  protein  phosphatase  1  or 
localizing to targets, such as chromatin in early mitosis. 
When  Cdk  activity  drops,  Repo-Man  (and  other  similar 
targeting subunits) is dephosphorylated, and now targets 
PP1 to chromatin, where it removes phosphates placed 
there by Aurora B in the CPC. As long as phosphatases 
are  not  specifically  targeted  to  the  cleavage  furrow, 
Aurora  B  can  continue  to  control  events  there  during 

770 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

mitotic  exit  by  phosphorylating  key  target  proteins 
required for cytokinesis.

Telophase
During telophase, the nuclear envelope reforms on the 
surface  of  the  separated  sister  chromatids,  which  typi-
cally cluster in a dense mass near the spindle poles (Fig. 
44.18).  Some  further  anaphase  B  movement  may  still 
occur, but the most dramatic change in cellular structure 
at this time is the constriction of the cleavage furrow and 
subsequent cytokinesis.

Reassembly of the Nuclear Envelope
Nuclear  envelope  reassembly  begins  during  anaphase 
and  is  completed  during  telophase  (Fig.  44.19).  As  in 
spindle  assembly,  Ran-GTP  promotes  early  steps  of 
nuclear envelope assembly at the surface of the chromo-
somes  by  releasing  key  components  sequestered  by 
importin  β.  These  include  several  nuclear  pore  com-
ponents, and one of the earliest events in nuclear enve-
lope  reassembly  involves  binding  of  the  nuclear  pore 

scaffold protein ELYS to chromatin. ELYS can recognize 
DNA  regions  rich  in  A : T  base  pairs,  so  it  is  likely  to  
bind  directly  to  the  DNA.  ELYS  then  recruits  other  
components  of  the  nuclear  pore  scaffold  and  nuclear 
pore  trans-membrane  proteins.  The  pore  subsequently 
matures as various peripheral components and elements 
of the permeability barrier are added.

The  mechanism  of  nuclear  membrane  reassembly  is 
debated.  In  cells  where  nuclear  membranes  fragments 
into  vesicles  during  mitosis,  a  Ran-GTP–dependent 
pathway  directs  at  least  two  discrete  populations  of 
vesicles  to  chromatin  where  they  fuse  to  reform  the 
nuclear envelope. In cells where the nuclear membrane 
is  absorbed  into  the  endoplasmic  reticulum  during 
mitosis, reassembly involves lateral movements of mem-
brane  components  within  the  membrane  network  and 
their stabilization at preferred binding sites at the periph-
ery of the chromosomes.

Lamin subunits disassembled in prophase are recycled 
to reassemble at the end of mitosis. Lamina reassembly 
is  triggered  by  removal  of  mitosis-specific  phosphate 
groups  and  methyl-esterification  of  several  COOH  side 

A. Telophase

Nuclear envelope
reassembles around
chromosomes

Cleavage plane
specified

B

Organized
central spindle
assembles

Poles
continue
to separate

DNA
Microtubules
Centrosomes

FIGURE 44.18 
INTRODUCTION TO TELOPHASE. A, Summary of the major events of telophase. B, Distribution of DNA (blue), microtubules 
(red), and γ-tubulin (centrosomes [green]) in a telophase human cell. (B, Images were recorded by Dr. Melpomeni Platani on the University of 
Dundee’s School of Life Sciences Imaging Facility OMX 3DSIM Microscope and stored and processed in OMERO.)

A

B

C

0 min

8–10 min

333 nm

≥ 25 min

FIGURE  44.19  SCANNING  ELECTRON  MICROSCOPY  OF  THE  STAGES  OF  ASSEMBLY  OF  MEMBRANE  VESICLES  ON  THE 
SURFACE OF CHROMOSOMES IN A XENOPUS EGG CYTOSOLIC EXTRACT. A cell lysate containing membrane vesicles was added to 
isolated chromatin from Xenopus sperm, fixed, and then imaged by scanning electron microscopy. Each panel shows the time of incubation prior 
to fixation. (Micrographs courtesy of K.L. Wilson, Johns Hopkins Medical School, Baltimore, MD. A and C, From Wiese C, Goldberg MW, Allen 
TD, et al. Nuclear envelope assembly in Xenopus extracts visualized by scanning EM reveals a transport-dependent “envelope smoothing” event. 
J Cell Sci. 1997;110:1489–1502.)

 

CHAPTER 44  n  Mitosis and Cytokinesis 

771

chains on lamin B (Fig. 44.6). Together with ELYS, B-type 
lamins are among the earliest components of the nuclear 
envelope  to  target  to  the  surface  of  the  chromosomes 
during mid-anaphase. Either at this time or shortly there-
after,  other  proteins  associated  with  the  inner  nuclear 
membrane,  including  BAF,  LAP2,  and  lamin  B  receptor 
(see Fig. 9.10), join the forming envelope. Later during 
telophase  when  nuclear  import  is  reestablished,  lamin 
A  enters  the  reforming  nucleus  and  slowly  assembles 
into  the  peripheral  lamina  over  several  hours  in  the 
G1  phase.  If  lamin  transport  through  nuclear  pores  is 
prevented, chromosomes remain highly condensed fol-
lowing cytokinesis, and the cells fail to reenter the next  
S phase.

Cytokinesis
Cytokinesis divides a mitotic cell into two daughter cells 
(Fig.  44.20).  Cytokinesis  depends  on  signals  to  specify 
the  cleavage  plane  (Fig.  44.21),  assembly  and  constric-
tion of the contractile apparatus, specific alterations of 
the cell membrane, and the final separation (abscission) 
of the two daughter cells.

In  animals,  protozoa,  and  most  fungi,  a  contractile 
ring of actin filaments and myosin-II guides the separa-
tion  of  daughter  cells  at  the  end  of  mitosis  (Fig.  44.2). 
Myosin-II  pulls  on  the  ring  of  actin  filaments,  applying 
tension to the plasma membrane, much like contraction 
of smooth muscle (see Figs. 39.23 and 39.24). Because 

A. Early cytokinesis
New membrane
inserted
Actomycin

Actomycin 
  contractile
  ring forms

Midbody 
  begins 
  to form

B. Late cytokinesis

Chromatin decondenses
Nuclear substructures
  reform
Interphase microtubule
  array reassembles
Midbody

C

ESCRT III action leads to

separation (abscission) of the two cells

FIGURE  44.20 
INTRODUCTION  TO  CYTOKINESIS.  A–B,  Summary  of  the  major  events  of  cytokinesis.  C,  Distribution  of  DNA  (blue), 
microtubules (red), and γ-tubulin (centrosomes [green]) in a human cell undergoing cytokinesis. ESCRT, endosomal sorting complexes required 
for transport. (C, Images were recorded by Dr. Melpomeni Platani on the University of Dundee’s School of Life Sciences Imaging Facility OMX 
3DSIM Microscope and stored and processed in OMERO.)

A. Evidence that the cleavage furrow is positioned
     midway between asters in eggs

B. An organized central spindle is required for
     cleavage furrow formation and/or function

Glass rod pushed
down into egg

TOP VIEW

90°

Microtubules
Chromosomes

Ectopic furrow

Sand dollar egg

Actin
ring

Metaphase 1

Cytokinesis 1

Metaphase 2

Cytokinesis 2

Wild type

Profilin
mutant

FIGURE 44.21 
IN EGGS, A CLEAVAGE FURROW FORMS MIDWAY BETWEEN SPINDLE ASTERS. IN ANIMAL CELLS, THE CENTRAL 
SPINDLE IS IMPORTANT. A, A classic experiment in which a sand-dollar egg is caused to adopt a toroid shape. At cytokinesis 2, the egg 
cleaves into four cells, and a furrow forms between the back sides of the two spindles. (For a description of this and other classic experiments 
in cytokinesis, see the book by Rappaport in the “Selected Readings” list.) B, Left, A wild-type Drosophila spermatocyte undergoing cytokinesis, 
with  the  contractile  ring  stained  in  yellow.  Right,  In  a  profilin  mutant,  no  central  spindle  forms,  and  the  cell  fails  to  form  a  contractile  ring. 
(Micrographs courtesy Professor Maurizio Gatti, University of Rome, Italy. B, From Giansanti MG, Bonaccorsi S, Williams B, et al. Cooperative 
interactions between the central spindle and the contractile ring during Drosophila cytokinesis. Genes Dev. 1998;12:396–410.)

772 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

the  contractile  ring  is  confined  to  a  narrow  band  of 
cortex around the equator, it forms a cleavage furrow, 
constrict ing  the  plasma  membrane  locally  like  a  purse 
string (Fig. 44.20). Signals from the mitotic spindle and 
cell cycle machinery control the position of this ring (ie, 
the  relative  sizes  of  the  two  daughter  cells)  and  the 
timing of its constriction.

Protozoa, animals, fungi, and plants use an evolution-
arily conserved set of components to implement differ-
ent  strategies  to  separate  daughter  cells.  For  example, 
both  fission  yeast  and  metazoan  cells  use  signals  from 
polo kinase and a Rho-GTPase to direct the assembly of 
a contractile ring of actin, myosin-II, and other conserved 
components, even though the yeast has a closed mitosis 
and  the  metazoans  have  an  open  mitosis.  In  animal  
cells, contractile ring constriction provides the force that 
remodels the cortex to generate the two daughter cells. 
In contrast, in yeasts, which have a cell wall, contractile 
ring constriction is thought to guide the orderly centrip-
etal growth of the cell wall septum, which contributes 
force  to  overcome  turgor  pressure  and  invaginate  the 
plasma membrane. Plants lack myosin-II, so they divide 
by targeted fusion of membrane vesicles to build a new 
cell wall rather than constricting a cleavage furrow (Box 
44.1  and  Fig.  44.26).  These  differences  reflect  the  fact 
that widely divergent eukaryotes use variations of similar 
themes  for  cytokinesis.  Cytokinesis  in  prokaryotes  is 
genuinely different, since completely different proteins 
are involved (Box 44.2 and Fig. 44.27).

Although  cytokinesis  has  been  studied  for  more  
than 100 years, it has posed a number of challenges due 
to  its  complexity  at  the  molecular  level.  For  example 
genetic  analysis  of  fission  yeast  revealed  more  than  
150  genes  that  contribute  to  cytokinesis.  RNAi-based 
protein  knockdown  and  molecular  replacement  analy-
sis  indicates  that  similar  proteins  participate  in  cytoki-
nesis  of  Caenorhabditis  elegans,  Drosophila,  and 
vertebrate tissue culture cells. Cytokinesis research typi-
cally  employs  living  cells,  although  progress  is  being 
made toward reconstituting some aspects of the process 
in cell-free systems.

Signals Regulating the Position of  
the Cleavage Furrow
Elegant experimental data from classic studies on fertil-
ized echinoderm eggs suggest that a cleavage stimulus, 
emitted by the mitotic spindle, specifies the position of 
the  cleavage  furrow  midway  between  the  poles  and 
perpendicular  to  the  long  axis  of  the  spindle,  thereby 
ensuring that the cleavage process separates the daugh-
ter nuclei (Fig. 44.21). In fertilized eggs, the poles, with 
their large astral arrays of microtubules (see Fig. 6.4B), 
were regarded as the source of the cleavage stimulus, as 
furrows  can  be  induced  to  form  midway  between  two 
poles, even when no chromosomes are present. In addi-
tion, a signal emitted by the bundled microtubules of the 

central spindle appeared to modulate the behavior of the 
furrow  signaled  by  the  poles.  We  now  know  that  the 
central  spindle  does  emit  a  positive  signal  directing  a 
cleavage furrow to form above it, while the poles con-
tribute by focusing that furrow at a point on the cortex 
midway between them.

The molecular nature of the cleavage stimulus is now 
beginning to be understood in animals. The following is 
a simplified scenario:
1.  During anaphase, overlapping microtubules between 
the separating chromatids establish an ordered array 
known as the central spindle. A key protein compo-
nent of this array is a protein heterodimer known as 
centralspindlin. Centralspindlin is normally seques-
tered  in  the  cytoplasm,  but  phosphorylation  by  the 
CPC  enables  it  to  target  to  the  central  spindle.  Dro-
sophila  mutants  that  fail  to  form  a  central  spindle 
cannot initiate cytokinesis (Fig. 44.21B). In contrast, 
C.  elegans  embryos  that  lack  a  central  spindle  can 
initiate but not complete the process.

2.  One of the components of centralspindlin recruits a 
GEF (guanine exchange factor; see Figs. 4.6 and 4.7) 
for the small GTPase RhoA. This Rho-GEF, Ect2, also 
has a motif for targeting to the inside surface of the 
equatorial plasma membrane.

3.  Membrane  associated  Ect2  locally  activates  RhoA, 
which then stimulates localized actin filament assem-
bly  and  activation  of  myosin-II  to  begin  assembly  of 
the contractile ring.
Signals from the poles of the mitotic spindle contribute, 
particularly in large invertebrate embryos, by confining 
the  zone  of  active  RhoA  to  a  narrow  equatorial  band 
between the separating sister chromatids.

Assembly and Regulation of the Contractile Ring
Exposure  of  the  cell  cortex  to  the  cleavage  stimulus 
culminates in the assembly of a contractile ring consist-
ing of a very thin (0.1 to 0.2 µm) array of actin filaments 
attached to the plasma membrane at many sites around 
the equator (Fig. 44.22). Polymerization of the actin fila-
ments depends on formins (see Fig. 33.14). Small, bipolar 
filaments  of  myosin-II  are  interdigitated  with  actin  fila-
ments.  The  plasma  membrane  adjacent  to  this  actin-
myosin ring undergoes alterations in its lipid composition 
that may help recruit proteins important for the function 
of the contractile ring.

Membrane  furrowing  requires  actin  and  the  motor 
activity of myosin-II (see Fig. 36.7). In animals, the small 
GTPase RhoA regulates actin polymerization by formins 
as well as constriction of the ring. Many other proteins 
are required for cytokinesis to go to completion. In their 
absence,  furrowing  begins,  but  the  cleavage  furrows 
ultimately  regress,  producing  binucleated  cells.  These 
supporting proteins include anillin, actin filament cross-
linking  proteins,  the  CPC  (Fig.  44.10)  and  the  central-
spindlin  complex,  among  many  others.  Anillin  helps 

 

CHAPTER 44  n  Mitosis and Cytokinesis 

773

A. Early anaphase

B. Late anaphase

Actin pointed en d s

Actin barbed en d s

F

G

C

D

INCENP
Myosin II

INCENP
Myosin II

E. Myosin confocal

H. Contractile mechanism

Central optical section
I. Equatorial section
I. Equatorial section

Actin

Myosin II

J. Grazing saggital section

FIGURE 44.22  ORGANIZATION OF THE CONTRACTILE RING. A, Organization of actin at the cell cortex prior to cytokinesis. B, Distribution 
of actin and myosin at the start of ring contraction. C, INCENP (inner centromere protein) (red) concentrates at the site where the cleavage furrow 
will form just before myosin (green). D, INCENP and myosin concentrate in the contractile ring during contraction. E, Confocal micrograph shows 
the distribution of myosin in an optical cross-section contracting contractile ring. F–G, Dividing invertebrate egg with DNA (blue) and actin (red) 
in  the  contractile  ring.  H,  Organization  of  actin  and  myosin  filaments  during  cytokinesis.  I–J,  Electron  micrographs  showing  actin  filaments  in 
the contractile ring. Note the thick filaments that are thought to be myosin-II filaments (red arrowheads) and the thinner actin filaments (yellow 
arrows). (C–D, Courtesy William C. Earnshaw. E, I, and J, Courtesy P. Maupin, Johns Hopkins Medical School, Baltimore, MD. F–G, Courtesy 
Professor Issei Mabuchi, University of Tokyo, Japan. For reference, see Maupin P, Pollard TD. Arrangement of actin filaments and myosin-like fila-
ments in the contractile ring and actin-like filaments in the mitotic spindle of dividing HeLa cells. J Ultrastruct Res. 1986;94:92–103; Maupin P, 
Phillips CL, Adelstein RS, et al: Differential localization of myosin-II isozymes in human cultured cells and blood cells. J Cell Sci. 1994;107:3077–3090; 
and Eckley DM, Ainsztein AM, MacKay AM, et al. Chromosomal proteins and cytokinesis. J Cell Biol. 1997;136:1169–1183.)

keep active myosin-II focused into an organized contrac-
tile ring throughout cytokinesis.

The  CPC  and  the  centralspindlin  complex  are  both 
required for animal cells to assemble the central spindle. 
Consequently,  if  either  of  the  two  complexes  is  elimi-
nated in C. elegans, a contractile ring fails to form. Thus, 
they appear to contribute to the cleavage stimulus, and 
indeed, both require microtubules to localize to the site 
of cleavage furrow formation as originally shown for the 
cleavage  stimulus.  In  addition,  the  CPC  regulates  the 
timely completion of cytokinesis by blocking premature 
activation of the ESCRT (endosomal sorting complexes 

required for transport) complex, which has a key role in 
the final separation of daughter cells (see later).

In  fission  yeast,  with  closed  mitosis,  the  nucleus 
determines the position of cleavage. Fission yeast assem-
ble  a  contractile  ring  along  a  well-defined  pathway  by 
recruiting proteins from cytoplasmic pools (Fig. 44.23). 
During  interphase,  assemblies  of  proteins  called  nodes 
form on the inside of the plasma membrane around the 
middle  of  cell.  Prior  to  mitosis,  an  anillin-like  protein 
leaves  the  nucleus  and  joins  these  nodes.  During  pro-
phase,  myosin-II,  a  formin  and  other  contractile  ring 
proteins  join  the  nodes.  When  the  formin  polymerizes 

774 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

-60

Mid1p (anillin-like
protein) exits nucleus

-10

Nodes containing
anillin, myosin-II and formin
assemble around equator

0

SPBs separate

+5

Anaphase A

+10

Anaphase B
elongates mitotic
spindle

)
n
m

i

(
 
e
m
T

i

+30

End Anaphase B

+40

Constriction begins

+70

Constriction ends

Interphase
actin patches

Anillin-like

Cell wall

Formin

Myosin-II

Profilin

Nodes condense into
a contractile ring of

actin filaments and myosin-II

Contractile ring

matures by addition of
actin binding proteins

Signal from cell cycle via SIN
pathway triggers constriction of
contractile ring and deposition of
cell wall material to form a septum

Plasma membrane fusion

completes cytokinesis

FIGURE 44.23  CYTOKINESIS IN FISSION YEAST SCHIZOSACCHAROMYCES POMBE. During interphase, microtubules (red) position 
the nucleus in the middle of the cell. Actin filaments concentrate in small patches (yellow) in the cortex at the two growing ends of the cell (see 
Fig. 33.1). The mitotic spindle is inside the nucleus, as the nuclear membrane does not break down during mitosis. As the cell enters mitosis, 
an anillin-like protein moves from the nucleus to the equatorial cortex, where it sets up nodes of proteins, including myosin-II and a formin. The 
formin grows actin filaments (yellow), and myosin-II pulls the nodes together into a continuous contractile ring. At the end of anaphase a signaling 
system consisting of a GTPase and three protein kinases (the septation initiation network [SIN]) triggers constriction of the contractile ring and 
associated synthesis of new cell wall to form a septum. The septum is a three-layered structure, with the primary septum flanked by two secondary 
septae. Digestion of the primary septum separates the daughter cells. (For reference, see Wu J-Q, Kuhn JR, Kovar DR, et al. Spatial and temporal 
pathway for assembly and constriction of the contractile ring in fission yeast cytokinesis. Dev Cell. 2004;5:723–734.)

actin filaments, myosin-II pulls the nodes together into a 
ring around the equator of the cell (Fig. 44.23).

Contractile ring assembly in animal cells shares many 
properties  with  fission  yeast,  but  is  less  completely 
understood.  The  decline  in  the  activity  of  cell  cycle 
kinases  at  the  onset  of  anaphase  is  part  of  the  trigger, 
since  they  inhibit  centralspindlin  components  through 
metaphase.  INCENP  and  anillin  move  from  the  inter-
phase nucleus to the cortex around the cell equator in 
early anaphase (Fig. 44.22). Formins and profilin polym-
erize some new actin filaments, but preexisting actin fila-
ments  are  recruited  into  the  contractile  ring  from 
adjacent  areas  of  the  cortex.  Myosin-II  is  dispersed 
throughout the cytoplasm until anaphase, when it con-
centrates  in  the  cortex,  especially  around  the  equator 
where the furrow forms. The myosin-II is derived from 
various interphase structures including stress fibers (see 
Fig. 33.1) that break down during prophase.

Constriction of the Cleavage Furrow
Contractile  rings  of  echinoderm  eggs  produce  enough 
force to invaginate the plasma membrane and form the 
cleavage  furrow,  although  many  details  are  still  being 
studied.  Constriction  of  the  ring  probably  involves  a 
sliding filament mechanism similar to muscle (see Figs. 
39.9  and  39.23),  but  little  is  known  about  how  the 
contractile  ring  is  attached  to  the  plasma  membrane. 
During  the  early  stages  of  furrowing,  contractile  rings 
maintain  a  constant  volume,  but  then  disassemble  as 
they constrict further.

The role of myosin-II as the motor for cytokinesis was 
established  by  microinjection  of  inhibitory  antibodies 
into  echinoderm  embryos  and  confirmed  by  genetic 
inactivation in the slime mold Dictyostelium. Slime mold 
amoebas  lacking  the  myosin-II  heavy  chain  round  up 
during mitosis and complete nuclear division but cannot 

 

CHAPTER 44  n  Mitosis and Cytokinesis 

775

form a normal cleavage furrow. Mutant cells accumulate 
many nuclei, because the mitotic cycle continues. Mutant 
cells  can  divide  on  a  substratum  using  pseudopods  to 
pull themselves apart into smaller cells.

Constriction of the contractile ring is regulated so that 
it  does  not  begin  until  after  the  onset  of  anaphase  B, 
when  sister  chromatids  are  well  separated.  In  fission 
yeast, a signaling pathway called the septation initiation 
network (SIN) initiates constriction. Much less is known 
in other cells.

Abscission
As the contractile ring pulls the cell membrane inward, 
the  single  cell  that  entered  mitosis  is  gradually  trans-
formed into two daughters joined by a thin intercellular 
bridge  (Fig.  44.20).  This  process  requires  a  significant 
net increase in the surface area of the cell. New plasma 
membrane  is  inserted  adjacent  to  the  leading  edge  of  
the furrow. The source of the new membrane appears 
to be recycling endosomes (see Chapter 22), so addition 
of membrane to the cleavage furrow is a specialized form 
of  exocytosis.  Fusion  of  vesicles  providing  the  new 
membrane  depends  on  specific  syntaxins,  t-SNAREs 
(soluble  N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive  factor  attachment 
protein receptors) (see Fig. 21.15) that promote vesicle 
fusion along the secretory pathway.

The  plasma  membrane  in  the  cleavage  furrow  has  a 
discrete  composition.  In  budding  yeast,  this  compart-
ment  is  delineated  by  rings  made  from  polymers  of 
septins,  a  family  of  GTP-binding  proteins  recruited  by 
anillin. Septins are essential for cytokinesis in Saccharo-
myces cerevisiae but not fission yeast.

In  most  animal  cells,  constriction  of  the  cleavage 
furrow ultimately reduces the cytoplasm to a thin inter-
cellular  bridge  between  the  two  daughter  cells.  The 
intercellular bridge contains a highly ordered, antiparal-
lel array of microtubules derived from the spindle with 
a  dense  knob,  the  midbody,  at  its  center  (Fig.  44.20). 
Isolated midbodies contain more than 160 proteins, with 
approximately  one-third  involved  in  various  aspects  of 
membrane trafficking.

The midbody is encircled by a dense ring of proteins 
that includes centralspindlin, anillin, and a centrosomal 
protein  known  as  Cep55.  Interactions  between  anillin 
and  membrane-associated  septin  filaments  tether  the 
membrane to the ring. Cep55 recruits the ESCRT (endo-
somal  sorting  complexes  required  for  transport)  III 
complex,  proteins  with  important  roles  in  vesicle 
budding  events  such  as  formation  of  multivesicular 
bodies  (see  Chapters  22  and  23).  In  the  intercellular 
bridge,  ESCRT  III  forms  a  helical  filament  that  spirals 
around  the  inner  surface  of  the  membrane,  becoming 
more  and  more  constricted  as  it  grows  away  from  the 
midbody (Fig. 44.24). ESCRT III also recruits factors that 
disassemble the bundled microtubules in the intercellu-
lar bridge, allowing the membrane to constrict further. 

A

B. Abscission

Midbody ring

(centralspindlin, anillin, cep55)

Midbody

Microtubules

ESCRT I and ESCRT II

ESCRT III
Vps4

ESCRT I

FIGURE  44.24  ABSCISSION  IN  ANIMAL  CELLS.  Proteins 
associated with overlapping bundles of microtubules form the midbody. 
The midbody ring links the midbody to the membrane, and nucleates 
the  formation  of  ESCRT  (endosomal  sorting  complexes  required  for 
transport)  III  filaments  that  constrict  the  membrane  to  divide  the 
daughter cells. 

FIGURE  44.25 
INCOMPLETE  CYTOKINESIS  IN  A  DRO-
SOPHILA  EGG  CHAMBER  LEAVES  CELLS  JOINED  BY  RING 
CANALS.  Colocalization  of  actin  (red)  and  the  ring  canal  protein 
HtsRC  (green)  in  the  ring  canals  makes  them  appear  yellow.  In  the 
Drosophila egg chamber, ring canals connect nurse cells to each other 
and to the oocyte. Late in oocyte development, nurse cell contraction 
forces their cytoplasmic contents through the ring canals and into the 
oocyte. This helps the oocyte gain the stockpile of components that 
is needed for early development of the fly embryo. (Courtesy Andrew 
Hudson and Lynn Cooley, Yale University, New Haven, CT.)

Ultimately, disassembly of the ESCRT filaments leads to 
separation of the two daughter cells—abscission.

In some tissues, intercellular bridges remain open as 
ring  canals.  After  several  rounds  of  nuclear  division 
with incomplete cytokinesis, the network of cells main-
tains  cytoplasmic  continuity  as  each  former  contractile 
ring matures into a larger ring canal. During Drosophila 
oogenesis,  four  rounds  of  nuclear  division  with  persis-
tent ring canals creates 15 nurse cells, all in continuity 
with the oocytes (Fig. 44.25). The cytoplasmic continu-
ity  through  ring  canals  allows  nurse  cells  to  transfer  

776 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

BOX 44.1  Cytokinesis in Plants

Chromosome segregation is similar in plants and animals, but 
cytokinesis  is  very  different  because  plants  lack  myosin-II 
and do not form a conventional contractile ring (Fig. 44.26). 
Myosin-II appeared during evolution in the common ances-
tor  of  amoebas,  fungi  and  animals,  after  branching  from 
plants (see Fig. 2.4B). Plants also lack dynein, so microtubule 
dynamics in mitosis are regulated by some of the more than 
20 different plus-end– and minus-end–directed kinesins that 
are  expressed  in  mitotic  cells.  In  a  further  difference  from 
animals, plants also lack centrosomes, and during interphase, 
microtubules radiate out from the surface of the cell nucleus 
in  all  directions.  In  mitosis,  the  spindle  does  not  focus  to 
sharp poles at metaphase; instead, it assumes a barrel shape 
with  broad,  flat  poles.  Early  in  mitosis,  a  band  of  microtu-
bules  and  actin  filaments  forms  around  the  equator  of  the 
cell adjacent to the nucleus. This so-called preprophase band 
disassembles as cells enter prometaphase. Because the entire 
cell  cortex  is  covered  by  a  meshwork  of  actin  filaments, 
disassembly of the preprophase band actually leaves an actin-
poor zone in a ring where cytokinesis will ultimately occur. 
This is called the cortical division site, and it is marked by 
the  tethering  of  specific  kinesin  motors.  In  late  anaphase, 
two  nonoverlapping,  antiparallel  arrays  of  microtubules 
form over the central spindle. This structure, the phragmo-
plast,  gradually  expands  laterally  until  it  makes  a  mirror-
symmetric  double  disk  of  short  microtubules  oriented 
parallel to the spindle axis with their plus ends abutting the 
plane  of  cell  cleavage.  Golgi  vesicles,  containing  cell  wall 

materials (see Fig. 32.13), move along phragmoplast micro-
tubules to the equator, where they fuse due to the action of 
cytokinesis-specific soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor 
(NSF)  attachment  protein  receptor  (SNARE)  proteins  (see 
Fig. 21.15), forming a membrane network that becomes the 
new  plasma  membrane  and  laying  down  the  material  that 
will become the new cell wall. Dynamin-related proteins also 
participate in shaping the newly forming plasma membrane. 
Thus, the membrane fusion machinery used for cytokinesis 
by eukaryotes likely came from the last eukaryotic common 
ancestor.  Actin  filaments  polymerized  by  formins  and 
myosin-VIII  help  position  the  phragmoplast  in  the  cell.  As 
the zone of newly deposited membrane expands radially, the 
ring of microtubules surrounding it similarly expands. Even-
tually, the new membrane reaches the lateral cell periphery, 
and  fusion  with  the  plasma  membrane  separates  the  two 
daughter  cells.  The  cortical  division  site,  not  the  spindle, 
determines the site of cleavage. This was shown by centri-
fuging mitotic cells to displace the spindle from the central 
location where it initially formed. Late in mitosis, the phrag-
moplast formed at the midzone of the displaced spindle, but 
this phragmoplast then migrated to the plane of the prepro-
phase  band,  where  cytokinesis  occurred.  Since  plant  cells 
have cell walls and do not move, the orientation of cleavage 
planes critically determines the morphology of the organism. 
The  hormone  auxin  can  influence  cleavage,  giving  rise  to 
asymmetric  division  of  daughter  cells,  but  the  underlying 
mechanism is not yet known.

Chromosomes

Cytokinesis in higher plants

Early phragmoplast

Late phragmoplast

Cortical
actin

Preprophase
band
(microtubules)

Cortical
actin-
depleted
zone

Golgi

vesicles

Prophase

Metaphase

Early cytokinesis

Late cytokinesis

Daughter cells

FIGURE 44.26  CYTOKINESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS. See the text for details. 

their  cytoplasm  into  the  developing  egg,  thus  greatly 
increasing its stockpile of proteins and messenger RNAs 
available  for  use  in  early  development.  In  mammals, 
incomplete cytokinesis in the testis results in ring canals 
connecting several hundred developing sperm cells.

Exit From Mitosis
To  exit  from  mitosis,  cells  must  inactivate  the  Cdk1 
kinase.  This  reverses  the  biochemical  and  structural 
changes  that  are  characteristic  of  mitosis  and  prepares 
the cell for proliferation in the next cell cycle.

Yeast  cells  use  a  signaling  pathway  to  terminate 
mitosis, promote contraction of the contractile ring, and 
initiate septation. These pathways, called the mitotic exit 
network (MEN) in budding yeast and the SIN in fission 
yeast, involve a small GTPase and protein kinases. Cdk 
kinase  activity  suppresses  the  pathway  until  anaphase, 
when  Cdk  activity  drops  sharply.  The  MEN  GTPase  is 
associated with one spindle pole body (the yeast version 
of  the  centrosome),  while  its  key  regulator,  a  GTP 
exchange factor, is located in the bud. Elongation of the 
mitotic  spindle  during  anaphase  B  moves  the  GTPase 
into the bud, where it is activated.

 

CHAPTER 44  n  Mitosis and Cytokinesis 

777

BOX 44.2  Cytokinesis in Bacteria

The strategy for cytokinesis in bacteria is similar to that in 
animal cells (Fig. 44.27), but the molecules are completely 
different.  Cleavage  of  most  bacterial  cells  depends  on  
a ring of the FtsZ protein (filamentous temperature-sensitive; 
mutants in fts genes cannot divide and make long filaments 
on  cells).  This  is  called  the  Z  ring.  FtsZ  is  the  prokaryotic 
homolog  of  eukaryotic  tubulins,  but  it  assembles  into  fila-
ments  rather  than  tubules.  As  for  tubulins  (see  Fig.  34.4), 
FtsZ  polymerization  requires  bound  GTP  and  hydrolysis  of 
this  GTP  destabilizes  the  polymers.  Although  purified  FtsZ 
forms rings that use energy from GTP hydrolysis to deform 
lipid vesicles, the main function of the Z ring seems to be to 
coordinate the assembly of a complex of proteins (divisome) 
including an actin homolog FtsA and number of transmem-
brane proteins. The transmembrane proteins synthesize cell 
wall materials to form the cleavage furrow.

The Z ring is positioned at the cell equator of Escherichia 
coli by the action of three gene products: MinC, MinD, and 
MinE (minicell mutants divide at inappropriate locations and 
give birth to tiny cells). MinD is an enzyme that recruits MinC 

to the cell cortex, where it inhibits Z-ring formation. MinE 
is an antagonist of MinC/MinD action. This system works in 
a truly remarkable way. MinE forms a ring at the cell equator 
that migrates along the inner surface of the cell membrane 
until it reaches the end of the cell, at which point it disas-
sembles. The ring then reforms in the center of the cell and 
sweeps toward the other end of the cell. As it moves, MinE 
inactivates  the  MinC/MinD  inhibitory  complex  on  the  cell 
cortex. The inhibitory complex rapidly reestablishes itself on 
the  cell  cortex  behind  the  moving  MinE  ring.  It  takes 
approximately  2  minutes  for  each  sweep  of  the  MinE  ring 
along half of the cell, and this cycle is repeated continuously 
until  the  FtsZ  ring  assembles  at  the  cell  center.  Bacillus 
subtilis uses an alternative mechanism to position the Z ring 
for cytokinesis.

Chloroplasts use a homolog of FtsZ for their division, and 
FtsZ has been detected in mitochondria of certain primitive 
eukaryotes. Mitochondria of higher eukaryotes appear to use 
another  GTPase,  dynamin,  to  coordinate  their  fission  (see 
“Biogenesis of Mitochondria” in Chapter 19).

Min C/D
inhibitor

Min E

Nucleoid

Cytokinesis in E. coli

FtsZ ring

2 minutes

FIGURE 44.27  CYTOKINESIS IN THE BACTERIUM ESCHERICHIA COLI. See the text for details. 

Zone of minimal
Min C/D

The MEN kinases downstream of the GTPase activate 
the phosphatase Cdc14p by releasing it from sequestra-
tion in the nucleolus. Cdc14p inhibits Cdk kinase activity 
in  two  ways:  (a)  it  inhibits  the  degradation  of  a  Cdk 
inhibitor  protein,  and  (b)  it  dephosphorylates  Cdh1, 
which binds the APC/C and triggers the degradation of 
B-type cyclins and other proteins. Cdc14p also triggers 
other events during anaphase, including the transfer of 
chromosomal passenger proteins to the central spindle.
In metazoans mitotic exit is triggered by the inactiva-
tion  of  Cdk1  and  other  mitotic  kinases.  This  transition  
is  irreversible,  in  part  because  cyclins  and  Aurora  
(and other kinases) are degraded. PP2A and its inhibitory 
kinase  Greatwall  (see  Chapter  40)  replace  Cdc14  
in  mitotic  regulation  in  metazoans.  Greatwall  activity 
requires  Cdks,  so  when  Cdk  activity  declines,  PP2A  
is  released  from  inhibition.  When  directed  to  targets 

throughout  cells  by  their  specificity,  determining  sub-
units  PP2A  and  PP1  remove  many  of  the  phosphates 
placed on target proteins by the mitotic kinases. Targets 
include  chromatin,  where  phosphorylation  during 
mitosis  had  displaced  factors  involved  in  both  gene 
activation and repression. Removal of those phosphates 
allows  the  interphase  regulation  of  gene  expression  to 
resume.  Dephosphorylation  of  other  targets  allows 
intermediate filaments to reform, nuclear envelope reas-
sembly plus the resumption of RNA transcription, protein 
translation, and membrane trafficking.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We  thank  David  Burgess,  Iain  Cheeseman,  Per  Paolo 
D’Avino, Arshad Desai, Tatsuo Fukagawa, Gary Gorbsky, 
Karen Oegema, Jonathon Pines, and Graham Warren for 

778 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

their suggestions on revisions to this chapter. We thank 
the Dundee Imaging Facility for access to the OMX and 
help with microscopy.

SELECTED READINGS

Carmena  M,  Wheelock  M,  Funabiki  H,  et al.  The  chromosomal  pas-
senger complex (CPC): from easy rider to the godfather of mitosis. 
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2012;13:789-803.

Collas P, Courvalin J-C. Sorting nuclear membrane proteins at mitosis. 

Trends Cell Biol. 2000;10:5-8.

Glotzer  M.  Cytokinesis  in  metazoa  and  fungi. Cold  Spring  Harb  Per-

spect Biol. 2016;(in press).

Jürgens G. Plant cytokinesis: Fission by fusion. Trends Cell Biol. 2005;

15:277-283.

McIntosh JR. Mitosis. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2016;(in press).
Müller  S,  Jürgens  G.  Plant  cytokinesis—no  ring,  no  constriction  but 
centrifugal construction of the partitioning membrane. Semin Cell 
Dev Biol. 2016;53:10-18.

Nasmyth K, Haering CH. Cohesin: its roles and mechanisms. Annu Rev 

Genet. 2009;43:525-558.

Qian J, Winkler C, Bollen M. 4D-networking by mitotic phosphatases. 

Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2013;25:697-703.

Rappaport  R.  Cytokinesis  in  Animal  Cells:  Developmental  and  Cell 
Biology Series. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press; 1996.
Sánchez-Huertas C, Lüders J. The augmin connection in the geometry 

of microtubule networks. Curr Biol. 2015;25:R294-R299.

Green RA, Paluch E, Oegema K. Cytokinesis in animal cells. Annu Rev 

Sharp  DJ,  Rogers  GC,  Scholey  JM.  Microtubule  motors  in  mitosis. 

Cell Dev Biol. 2012;28:29-58.

Nature. 2000;407:41-47.

Haeusser DP, Margolin W. Splitsville: structural and functional insights 
into  the  dynamic  bacterial  Z  ring.  Nat  Rev  Microbiol.  2016;14:
305-319.

Stukenberg  PT,  Burke  DJ.  Connecting  the  microtubule  attachment 
status of each kinetochore to cell cycle arrest through the spindle 
assembly checkpoint. Chromosoma. 2015;124:463-480.

C H A P T E R 

45 

Meiosis

Meiosis  (from  the  Greek,  meaning  “reduction”)  is  a 

specialized program of two coupled cell divisions used 
by  eukaryotes  to  maintain  the  proper  chromosome 
number  for  the  species  during  sexual  reproduction.  It 
also  generates  novel  combinations  of  genes.  Meiosis  is 
an ancient process that occurs in virtually all eukaryotes, 
including the animal, fungal, and plant kingdoms, and is 
thought  to  have  been  present  in  the  last  eukaryotic 
common ancestor.

Sexually reproducing organisms are typically diploid, 
with  pairs  of  homologous  chromosomes,  the  two 
highly  similar  but  nonidentical  copies  of  each  chromo-
some,  one  inherited  from  each  parent.  The  number  of 
chromosomes is halved during meiosis to form haploid 
gametes  carrying  just  one  set  of  chromosomes.  The 
subsequent fusion of male and female gametes restores 
the diploid chromosome number. This pairing and sub-
sequent  separation  of  homologous  chromosomes  is 
made possible by genetic recombination, which occurs 
during  the  lengthy  and  complex  prophase  of  the  first 
meiotic division.

Each human somatic cell has 23 pairs of chromosomes 
(46  in  all).  Females  have  23  homologous  pairs,  while 
males  have  22  “autosomal”  pairs  and  two  different  sex 
chromosomes  that  share  a  region  of  homology  known 
as  the  pseudoautosomal  region.  One  of  each  pair  is 
contributed by each parent in the egg and sperm, respec-
tively. The number of chromosome pairs, 23, is known 
as  the  haploid  chromosome  number.  In  animals,  the 
only haploid cells are gametes (sperm and eggs). At fer-
tilization, haploid gametes fuse to form a zygote, restor-
ing  the  diploid  chromosome  number  of  46.  In  plants, 
the  haploid  phase  is  represented  by  gametophytes, 
which  produce  ovules  and  pollen.  In  most  fungi,  such 
as yeasts, haploid and diploid forms are alternate phases 
of the life cycle, and both can propagate by mitosis.

Meiosis  changes  the  genetic  makeup  of  offspring 
relative  to  parents  in  two  ways:  the  first  round  of 
meiotic  segregation  produces  novel  combinations  of 

chromosomes  from  the  two  parents  in  each  gamete, 
and  recombination  between  parental  chromosomes 
produces  novel  chromosomes.  It  works 
like  this. 
During meiosis, one round of DNA replication and two 
rounds of chromosome segregation reduce the number 
of  chromosomes  from  2n  to  1n.  Each  haploid  gamete 
is  endowed  with  a  random  set  of  the  homologous 
chromosomes  from  the  two  parents.  Prior  to  meiosis 
I  the  chromosomes  duplicate  (just  like  mitosis)  (Fig. 
45.1A),  but  during  the  first  round  of  segregation  (Fig. 
45.1C) the duplicated chromatids remain paired and the 
homologous chromosomes separate randomly between 
the two daughter cells. Thus each daughter cells ends up 
with just one of each pair of homologous chromosomes. 
This differs from mitosis where the duplicated chroma-
tids  separate,  so  both  daughter  cells  get  the  full  set  of 
homologous  chromosomes  from  both  parents.  During 
meiosis  II  the  duplicated  chromatids  separate  and  are 
partitioned  equally  between  the  two  daughter  cells. 
Equally important, homologous chromosomes exchange 
DNA  sequences  during  meiotic  prophase  I,  generating 
novel chromosomes.

The  unique  segregational  events  of  meiosis  usually 
occur in the first division, termed meiosis I (Figs. 45.1 
and 45.2). Because it culminates in daughter cells carry-
ing just one set of chromosomes instead of two, meiosis 
I is also known as the reductional division. The second 
division, meiosis II, is similar in most respects to mitosis: 
sister chromatids segregate, and the number of chromo-
somes remains the same (Box 45.1; see also Chapter 44). 
Meiosis II is called the equational division.

Meiosis: An Essential Process for  
Sexual Reproduction
Sexual  reproduction  is  an  important  survival  strategy 
that offers organisms an accelerated mechanism for alter-
ing  the  genetic  makeup  of  offspring.  Without  meiosis, 
there would be no sex, because fusion of diploid gametes 

 779

780 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

Preparation for meiosis (This step duplicates each chromatid)

A a

B b

Two pairs of
homologous
chromosomes

Centromere

Premeiotic
S phase

Fused sister
centromeres

Meiotic
prophase

Meiotic prophase (Recombination drives pairing of homologous chromosomes and produces novel chromosomes)

A

a

b

B

A

B

a

b

Recombination
nodules

Chiasmata

Meiosis I

Leptotene stage

Bouquet

Zygotene stage

Pachytene stage

Diplotene stage

Diakinesis stage

Meiosis I (Homologous chromosomes randomly separate from one another producing haploid progeny)

Chiasmata

A

a

b

B

A

a

b

B

Meiosis I

Metaphase I

Anaphase I

A

b

B

Interphase 
(no S phase)

a

Meiosis II

Meiosis II (Sister chromatids separate producing one or more gametes)

A

b

B

a

Prophase II

Metaphase II

Anaphase II

Haploid gametes

FIGURE 45.1  OVERVIEW OF THE PHASES OF MEIOSIS. Shown are important structures and the outcome of each stage for a homologous 
pair of metacentric chromosomes (A, a) and a homologous pair of telocentric chromosomes (B, b). 

would  double  the  number  of  chromosomes  in  the 
progeny at every generation.

Meiosis I produces random combinations of homolo-
gous  maternal  and  paternal  chromosomes.  For  each  
pair of homologs, orientation on the spindle is random 
during  meiosis  I  (ie,  each  homolog  has  two  equivalent 
options for the direction to migrate). Thus, for humans 
(with  23  pairs  of  homologous  chromosomes),  each 
gamete  has  one  of  223  (more  than  8  million)  possible 
complements  of  maternal  and  paternal  chromosomes. 
This  process  does  not  create  new  versions  of  genes,  
but  it  guarantees  the  offspring  will  have  novel  combi-
nations  of  subtly  different  (due  to  polymorphisms) 
chromosomes.

Meiosis I also produces novel versions of genes and 
chromosomes  by  recombinational  exchange  of  DNA 
segments  between  homologs.  This  occurs  because  to 
segregate  from  one  another,  each  pair  of  homologous 

chromosomes must first find each other. They do this by 
undergoing reciprocal recombination (crossover) events 
that then hold them together until anaphase of meiosis 
I.  Chromosomes  and  the  genes  they  carry  vary  hugely 
between  individuals.  In  humans  an  average  genome 
varies  from  the  “reference  genome”  (see  Chapter  7)  at  
4 to 5 × 106 sites. These include not only polymorphisms 
(differences  of  single  base  pairs),  but  also  thousands  
of  longer  insertions,  deletions,  and  rearrangements. 
Recombination  events  that  result  in  a  crossover  and 
exchange chromosomal segments produce new chromo-
somes  that  are  a  patchwork  of  segments  from  the 
maternal and paternal homologs. The combined effects 
of  recombination  and  random  assortment  of  homologs 
in meiosis I yields a vast number of genetically different 
gametes.  This  genetic  diversity  increases  the  ability  of 
eukaryotic  populations  to  adapt  to  changing  environ-
mental conditions.

 

CHAPTER 45  n  Meiosis 

781

A. Metaphase I
Paired sister kinetochores
being pulled toward poles

Spindle
pole

C. Late
     anaphase I

Spindle
pole

Spindle
pole

X

Chiasma

Chiasma

B. Early
     anaphase I

Spindle
pole

Spindle
pole

X

Spindle
pole

X

D. Telophase I

Paired sister kinetochores
moving toward poles

Spindle
pole

Spindle
pole

FIGURE  45.2  FIRST  MEIOTIC  DIVISION  STAGES  FROM  THE  GRASSHOPPER  PYRGOMORPHA  CONICA  (2N  IN  MALES  =  18 
AUTOSOMES + 1 X CHROMOSOME). A, Metaphase I. B, Early anaphase I. C, Late anaphase I. D, Telophase I spermatocytes stained with 
lactopropionic  orcein.  All  chromosomes  are  telocentric  (see  Fig.  7.2).  Seven  bivalents  shown  in  the  metaphase  I  spermatocyte  have  a  single 
chiasma, whereas the two bivalents at the far right and far left have two chiasmata. The sex chromosome (X) remains unpaired and moves to a 
single spindle pole. (Courtesy José A. Suja and Julio S. Rufas, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Spain.)

The Language of Meiosis
Meiosis  has  a  language  of  its  own,  characterized  by  a 
number  of  unusual  terms,  and  is  easiest  to  understand 
by focusing on the essential biological processes that are 
involved. This reduces the process to only three essential 
key terms: pairing, homologous recombination, and 
segregation. This chapter discusses each step in detail, 
so they are defined only briefly here.

Pairing is a two-step alignment of homologous chro-
mosomes with one another in the nucleus. In alignment, 
corresponding  DNA  sequences  on  the  homologous 
chromosome find each other among the billions of base 
pairs  of  DNA  in  the  nucleus.  In  many  organisms,  early 
events  of  recombination  drive  the  homologous  pairing 
process.  In  the  second  stage,  synapsis,  the  paired 
homologous  chromosomes  become  intimately  aligned 
along  their  entire  lengths  with  one  another  separated  
by  approximately  100  nm.  A  specialized  scaffolding 
structure  called  the  synaptonemal  complex  mediates  
this process.

Homologous  recombination  results 

in  physical 
exchange  of  DNA  between  homologous  chromosomes 
(a crossover event) and is a key determinant of chromo-
some behavior during meiotic prophase. Recombination 
drives  the  pairing  process  in  many  organisms  and  can 
occur  without  synapsis  under  certain  circumstances. 
Crossover recombination sites are detected by microscopy 

as  chromatin  structures  called  chiasmata  (singular: 
chiasma, from the Greek, meaning “X-shaped cross”).

Segregation of homologous chromosomes in meiosis 
I differs from the segregation of sister chromatids during 
mitosis  (Box  45.1),  because  the  paternal  and  maternal 
homologous  chromosomes  segregate  randomly  to  the 
two daughter cells. When homologs orient at the meta-
phase plate of the meiosis I spindle, centromeres belong-
ing to the two sister chromatids are fused to form a single 
kinetochore that binds microtubules. Cohesion between 
chromosome  arms  distal  to  chiasmata  (ie  on  the  other 
side  from  the  centromere;  Figs.  45.2  and  45.10)  keeps 
homologous  chromosomes  paired  with  one  another 
until  anaphase  of  meiosis  I,  counteracting  the  bipolar 
pulling force of the spindle on the homologs (Fig. 45.2). 
At anaphase I the distal cohesion is released from chro-
mosomes  allowing  the  chiasmata  to  separate,  and  the 
two sister chromatids (at least one of which has under-
gone a crossover exchange) move as a single unit toward 
the same spindle pole while the sister chromatids from 
other parent move to the other daughter cell. As a result, 
the  two  daughter  cells  produced  in  meiosis  I  have  a 
haploid number of chromosomes derived randomly from 
the two parents, each with two sister chromatids. Each 
of the four daughter cells produced in meiosis II has one 
sister chromatid for each homologous chromosome (ie, 
half the number of chromatids as there are chromosomes 
in somatic cells).

782 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

BOX 45.1 
and Mitosis

Important Differences Between Meiosis 

Meiosis involves two cell divisions. The two meiotic 
divisions  are  preceded  by  a  round  of  DNA  replication. 
There  is  no  DNA  replication  between  meiosis  I  and  
meiosis II.

The products of meiosis are haploid. The products 

of mitosis are diploid.

The products of meiosis are genetically different. 
After recombination and random assortment of homologs 
in meiosis I, the sister chromatids that segregate in meiosis 
II are different from each other. In normal mitosis, sister 
chromatids are identical.

Prophase is longer in meiosis I. Proper orientation 
and segregation of homologous chromosomes is achieved 
thanks  to  the  pairing,  synapsis  (synaptonemal  complex 
formation), and recombination that occur in a lengthened 
prophase during meiosis I. In humans, prophase in mitosis 
takes an hour, whereas meiotic prophase lasts many days 
in males and many years in females.

Recombination  is  increased  in  meiosis.  The 
recombination rate is 100- to 1000-fold higher in prophase 
I  of  meiosis  than  in  mitosis.  The  process  has  two  main 
consequences: the formation of chiasmata and the intro-
duction of genetic variation. Chiasmata are structures that 
physically link the homologous chromosomes after cross-
over  and  play  an  essential  role  in  meiotic  chromosome 
segregation.

Kinetochore  behavior  differs  in  meiosis.  During 
meiosis  I,  kinetochores  of  sister  chromatids  attach  to 
spindle  microtubules  emanating  from  the  same  pole. 
Homologous kinetochore pairs connect to opposite poles. 
In  mitosis  and  meiosis  II,  sister  kinetochores  attach  to 
spindle microtubules coming from opposite poles.

Chromatid  cohesion  differs  in  meiosis.  Sister 
chromatid cohesion is essential for orientation of bivalents 
(paired  homologous  chromosomes)  on  the  metaphase  
I  spindle.  During  anaphase  of  meiosis  I,  cohesion  is 
destroyed between sister chromatid arms, and chiasmata 
are released to allow segregation of homologs. Cohesion 
at sister centromeres persists until the onset of anaphase 
II, when it is lost to permit segregation of sisters. In pro-
metaphase of meiosis II, sister chromatids are joined only 
by the centromeres, whereas at the beginning of mitotic 
prometaphase, sisters are joined all along the arms.

Recombination
Although meiotic recombination is similar to the process 
of homologous recombinational repair of double-strand 
DNA breaks in somatic cells (review Box 43.1 and Fig. 
43.14 as a prelude to studying meiotic recombination), 
the two processes differ in two respects. First, meiotic 
cells  use  a  specialized  enzyme  called  Spo11  to  create 
double-strand DNA breaks on purpose. Second, somatic 
cells  with  replicated  chromosomes  usually  repair  DNA 

breaks  using  the  corresponding  DNA  sequence  on  a 
sister chromatid as a template. Meiotic cells usually use 
a  homologous  chromosome.  The  mechanism  for  this 
difference in selectivity is not yet fully understood.

Spo11,  together  with  essential  accessory  proteins, 
generates programmed double-strand DNA breaks early 
during  meiotic  prophase  (Fig.  45.3).  Similar  to  type  II 
DNA topoisomerases (see Fig. 8.16), Spo11 cleaves both 
DNA  strands  in  a  reaction  that  produces  a  covalent 
linkage between a tyrosine of the enzyme and the cleaved 
phosphodiester  backbone.  However,  Spo11  does  not 
reseal  the  breaks;  instead  it  remains  attached  to  one 
strand of DNA at the broken end. In mice, Spo11 creates 
about 10-fold more DNA breaks than ultimately recom-
bine  to  produce  reciprocal  DNA  exchanges  between 
homologous  chromosomes  or  crossovers.  Repair  of 
Spo11-mediated  DNA  double-strand  breaks  can  also 
result in noncrossover events known as gene conver-
sions (Box 45.2 and Fig. 45.3I–J).

DNA  double-strand  breaks  generated  by  Spo11  are 
required for the initial lengthwise alignment of homolo-
gous chromosomes in many organisms, including mice, 
plants, and yeast. In mice lacking Spo11, recombination 
is not initiated, and synapsis, if it occurs at all, is aberrant, 
often  involving  nonhomologous  chromosomes  (Fig. 
45.4).  Gametes  in  these  mutant  mice  die  by  apoptosis 
early in meiotic prophase. Spo11-induced double-strand 
breaks  are  not  required  for  synapsis  of  homologous 
chromosomes in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans 
and  the  fruit  fly  Drosophila  melanogaster.  How  these 
organisms pair their homologs without recombination is 
still mysterious.

Once  the  DNA  double-strand  breaks  are  produced, 
the  MRN  (Mre11/Rad50/Nbs1)  endonuclease  nicks  the 
single-stranded  DNA,  releasing  Spo11.  The  DNA  ends 
that lost Spo11 then undergo further processing, as Exo1 
exonuclease,  chews  back  the  5′  strands  of  the  double 
helix (a process called resection) leaving single-stranded 
DNA tails with 3′ termini (Fig. 45.3C; see also Fig. 43.14). 
The  MRN  and  Exo1  nucleases  also  function  in  somatic 
DNA repair.

Next, the Rad51 and Dmc1 proteins drive a search of 
the 3′ single-stranded DNA tails for complementary DNA 
sequences of the other chromosomes. Rad51 and Dmc1 
are related to the Escherichia coli RecA protein used for 
homologous recombination in bacteria. Rad51 and Dmc1 
coassemble  along  3′  single-stranded  DNA  tails  and  use 
adenosine  triphosphate  (ATP)  hydrolysis  to  catalyze  a 
strand  exchange  reaction  with  an  intact  homologous 
DNA  duplex.  The  Rad51-and-Dmc1-decorated  nucleo-
protein  filament  disrupts  the  targeted  homologous 
double  helix,  displacing  one  of  the  two  DNA  strands. 
This  allows  formation  of  new  Watson-Crick  base  pairs 
between  the  invading  3′  single-stranded  DNA  and  the 
complementary  strand  of  the  target  DNA.  Following 
strand  invasion  and  exchange,  new  DNA  synthesis 

Cohesin

Paired homologous
chromosomes

3'

5'
3'
5'
3'

5'
3'
5'

Double-strand break

Spo11 cuts DNA, remaining
covalently attached to one strand

5'

3'
5'
3'
5'

3'
5'
3'

A

B

Red enzymes are
meiosis specific

Green enzymes also
function in somatic
repair

C

5' to 3' resection

Spo11 released by MRN complex (Rad50/
                                                   Mre11/Nbs1)
Exo1 resects one DNA strand

Initial strand invasion,
DNA synthesis

Rad51 + Dmc1

D

Second end capture,
synthesis, ligation

E

Formation of double
Holliday junction

F

G

Holliday 
junction

Holliday junction
resolution

= Resolvase cutting sites

H

I

J

Strand displacement

Strand annealing

Synthesis, ligation

+

+

Crossover

Noncrossover

FIGURE  45.3  EVENTS  OF  RECOMBINATION.  Recombination  occurs  between  homologous  chromosomes  rather  than  between  sister 
chromatids. A, Paired homologous chromosomes. Sister chromatids are held tightly together by cohesin, shown here schematically as hoops. 
B, Spo11 makes a double-strand break, remaining attached to the DNA. C, Removal of Spo11 and resection of the break. D, First strand invasion. 
At  this  point,  the  pathway  splits  in  two,  one  outcome  leading  to  a  crossover  and  the  other  to  a  noncrossover.  Crossover  pathway:  E,  The 
second resected strand establishes base-pairing interactions with the displaced DNA strand of its homologous partner. New DNA synthesis fills 
the gaps. F, The resulting molecule contains a double Holliday junction in which the DNA is fully base-paired (see Fig. 43.14B). If the resolvase 
(nuclease) cuts the double Holliday junction asymmetrically as shown (ie, one vertical and one horizontal cut), the result is a crossover (G). If the 
cuts are symmetrical, a noncrossover molecule is produced. Noncrossover pathway: H, In most cases, the invading DNA, strand is ejected 
prior to stabilization and formation of a double Holliday junction. I, DNA gap-filling and ligation yield a noncrossover chromosome (J). 

784 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

BOX 45.2  Brief Overview of Genetic Terminology

A  comprehensive  introduction  to  the  field  of  genetics  is 
beyond the scope of this text. However, here are a number 
of terms used by geneticists that will assist in the understand-
ing of the discussion of genetic recombination and its role 
in meiosis (also see Box 6.1).

The  genotype  of  an  organism  is  the  combination  of 
genes  present  on  the  chromosomes  of  that  organism.  The 
phenotype  is  the  physical  manifestation  of  the  action  of 
these gene products (ie, the appearance and macromolecular 
composition of the organism). In discussing recombination, 
scientists typically refer to the presence or absence of spe-
cific genetic markers. Each genetic marker is a particular 
DNA sequence in or around a gene that can be monitored 
by  examining  the  phenotypes  of  the  cells  that  carry  it.  
A  genetic  marker  might  be  the  presence  of  a  functional  
gene, a mutation with altered activity, or simply a polymor-
phism  of  DNA  sequence  that  has  no  known  functional 
consequence.

A haploid organism has one copy of each chromosome. 
A  diploid  organism  has  two  homologous  copies  of  each 
chromosome. A diploid organism that is homozygous for a 
particular  genetic  marker  has  the  same  sequence  of  that 
particular  region  of  the  DNA  on  both  the  maternal  and 
paternal homologous chromosomes. A heterozygous organ-
ism  has  different  forms  of  the  genetic  marker  on  the  two 
homologous chromosomes. Although the physical events of 
genetic recombination occur in both homozygotes and het-
erozygotes, they are most readily detected in the latter.

Two genetic markers located on different chromosomes 
will separate from one another in the anaphase of meiosis I 

A

B

FIGURE 45.4  PAIRING OF HOMOLOGOUS CHROMOSOMES 
IS  SEVERELY  DISRUPTED  IN  THE  SPO11  MUTANT.  Pachytene 
chromosomes from wild-type mice (A) and mice in which the Spo11 
gene has been disrupted (B). SYC3 (axial elements) and centromeres 
are  red.  SYCP1  (in  transverse  filaments,  which  are  seen  only  when 
synapsis has occurred) is green. (From Baudat F, Manova K, Yuen JP, 
et al. Chromosome synapsis defects and sexually dimorphic meiotic 
progression in mice lacking Spo11. Mol Cell. 2000;6:989–998.)

50%  of  the  time  as  a  result  of  the  random  distribution  of 
chromosomes  to  the  two  spindle  poles.  If  they  are  on  the 
same chromosome, they will be linked to one another unless 
the chromosome undergoes a genetic recombination event 
between  them.  The  greater  the  separation  of  two  markers 
along  one  chromosome,  the  more  likely  it  is  for  such  an 
intervening recombination event to occur.

Two types of recombination events occur during meiosis 
(Fig.  45.3).  The  first  of  these—noncrossover  events  (fre-
quently referred to as gene conversion)—may involve the 
loss  of  one  or  more  genetic  markers.  Noncrossover  events 
are the most common outcome of the programmed double-
strand  DNA  breaks  that  occur  during  leptotene.  They  are 
thought to involve the invasion of a double helix by a region 
of  single-stranded  DNA  with  complementary  sequence  but 
then ejection of this sequence before assembly of a Holliday 
junction and completion of recombination.

The  second  type  of  recombination  event—crossing 
over—involves the physical breakage and reunion of DNA 
strands on two different chromosomes, typically producing 
a balanced exchange of DNA sequences. This is what most 
people think of as recombination. In recombination by cross-
ing over, the makeup of genetic markers remains constant; 
it is the linkage between different markers that changes.

The normal separation of chromosomes or chromatids is 
referred to as disjunction (disjoining). Mistakes in this sepa-
ration are referred to as nondisjunction. Nondisjunction in 
meiosis  I  and  II  results  in  the  production  of  gametes  with 
either  too  many  or  too  few  chromosomes,  a  condition 
known as aneuploidy.

restores sequences that may have been lost or damaged 
at the position of the original DNA double-strand break.
Mutants  lacking  Dmc1  are  defective  in  homologous 
chromosome  pairing  and  interhomolog  recombination. 
As a result, Dmc1 is thought to facilitate the search for 
homologous  chromosomes  as  a  DNA  repair  template, 
rather than sister chromatids as in somatic DNA  repair. 
Rad51p  and  Dmc1p  are  found  in  structures  called 
early  recombination  nodules  that  are  distributed 
along the chromosome axes early in meiosis (Fig. 45.9). 
Dmc1  functions  only  in  meiosis,  but  Rad51  has  other 
essential functions.

It  is  now  believed  that  noncrossover  events  arise 
primarily from recombination intermediates that involve 
a  relatively  transient  single  strand  invasion  of  the 
homologous chromosome followed by restorative DNA 
synthesis and disassembly of the joint molecule interme-
diate. Crossovers, on the other hand, are thought to arise 
predominantly  through  a  pathway  that  involves  stable 
branched  intermediates  known  as  Holliday  junctions 
(Fig.  45.3F–G;  see  also  Fig.  43.14B),  which  are  then 
cleaved by resolvases such as Gem1 to form (predomi-
nantly) crossover products.

 

CHAPTER 45  n  Meiosis 

785

Most  sexually  reproducing  organisms  depend  on 
recombination  during  meiosis  to  produce  haploid 
gametes, but fruit flies and yeast have other systems for 
segregating  homologs  in  meiosis  I.  These  mechanisms, 
collectively  known  as  achiasmate  segregation,  allow 
the  segregation  of  chromosomes  that  have  not  under-
gone crossover recombination. One model for the achi-
asmate segregation in flies proposes that nonrecombined 
chromosomes remain paired at the end of meiotic pro-
phase owing to stickiness of heterochromatin and, as a 
result, segregate properly during anaphase I of meiosis. 
In a rare but notable example, the spermatocytes of D. 
melanogaster  males  do  not  recombine  at  all,  yet  still 
segregate  their  chromosomes  happily  during  meiosis  I. 
This  might  be  regarded  as  a  cruel  joke  of  evolution  by 
those students who find all the Greek terms of meiotic 
nomenclature to be daunting. However, meiosis without 
recombination  is  clearly  the  exception,  and  in  most 
species meiosis depends on recombination in both males 
and females.

Tracking the Homologous Chromosomes 
Through the Stages of Meiotic Prophase I
Pairing and recombination of homologous chromosomes 
take place during prophase of meiosis I. Five stages of 
meiotic prophase are used to describe the process: lep-
totene,  zygotene,  pachytene,  diplotene,  and  diakinesis 
(Fig. 45.1B).

Leptotene (from the Greek, meaning “thin ribbon”) 
starts with the first visible condensation of the chromo-
somes. Paired sister chromatids become visible as linear 
arrays of loops flanking a single dense protein-containing 
axis  (Fig.  45.5A–B).  This  axis  consists  of  proteins  that 
play a role in mitotic chromosome structure as well as 
proteins  specialized  for  meiotic  chromosomes.  For 
example, the cohesin complex with several specialized 
meiosis-specific  subunits  is  a  prominent  component  of 
this axial structure (see Fig. 8.18). According to recent 
models, recombination begins during leptotene with the 
formation  of  DNA  double-strand  breaks.  By  the  end  of 

A. Early leptotene

C. Early zygotene

E. Pachytene

B. Late leptotene

D. Late zygotene

F. Diplotene

Sex
chromosomes

Chiasma

FIGURE  45.5 
IMMUNOFLUORESCENCE  IMAGES  OF  PROPHASE  I  SUBSTAGES  IN  MOUSE  SPERMATOCYTES.  These  images 
demonstrate  the  pairing  and  synapsis  of  homologous  chromosomes  revealed  by  visualizing  the  synaptonemal  complex  proteins  SYCP3  (a 
component of the axial elements [red]) and SYCP1 (a component of the transverse filaments that is present only when homologs are synapsed 
[green]). Centromeres are blue. (Courtesy Paula Cohen, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY.)

786 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

A

H

I

B

C

D

E

F

G

0 hr

2 hr

8 hr

Telomere

Nuclear
envelope

FIGURE 45.6  CHROMOSOMAL MOVEMENTS DURING EARLY MEIOTIC PROPHASE. A–G, Pairing of homologous chromosomes during 
leptotene in the ascomycete Sordaria. Scale bar is 1 µm in A–F and 5 µm in G. A–B, In early leptotene, homologous chromosomes (visualized 
in panels A–F by electron microscope reconstructions of serial-sectioned nuclei) are not yet aligned with one another. C–E, In mid-leptotene, 
regions of some homologs begin to align. (In panel D, only the telomeres have aligned. In panel E, the pair of homologs is fully aligned.) F, The 
alignment of homologs is complete by late leptotene. G, The alignment of homologs also can be seen by light microscopy using Spo76-GFP, a 
component of the chromosome axes. H–I, Stages of formation of the bouquet arrangement in rye. H, Telomeres (green) were detected in nuclei 
by  in  situ  hybridization  (see  Fig.  8.10)  after  0,  2,  and  8  hours  in  culture.  Chromatin  is  red.  I,  Three-dimensional  models  of  the  nuclei  (nuclear 
periphery [red dots], telomere position [green stars]). (A–G, Modified from Tesse S, Storlazzi A, Kleckner N, et al. Localization and roles of Ski8p 
protein in Sordaria meiosis and delineation of three mechanistically distinct steps of meiotic homolog juxtaposition. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2003;100:12865–12870. Copyright 2003 National Academy of Sciences. H–I, Modified from Carlton PM, Cowan CR, Cande WZ. Directed motion 
of telomeres in the formation of the meiotic bouquet revealed by time course and simulation analysis. Mol Biol Cell. 2003;14:2832–2843.)

leptotene, homologous chromosomes are aligned loosely 
about 400 nm apart (Fig. 45.6D–G).

During leptotene, one or both telomeres attach to the 
inner surface of the nuclear envelope and move actively 
around the nuclear surface until they coalesce near the 
centrosome  (spindle  pole  body  in  yeasts  [Fig.  45.6]). 
These  movements  and  clustering  of  telomeres  depend 
on  cytoplasmic  microtubules.  Telomeres  are  linked  to 
microtubules through a pair of nuclear envelope proteins 
known as the LINC (linker of nucleoskeleton and cyto-
skeleton)  complex  (see  Fig.  9.8).  Telomere  clustering 
peaks  at  the  leptotene–zygotene  transition  with  the 
chromosomes  radiating  into  the  nuclear  interior  like  a 
bouquet of flowers, hence the name “bouquet stage.”

Bouquet formation is a nearly universal feature of this 
phase  of  meiosis  and  the  movements  of  tethered  telo-
meres help homologs find each other through physical 
alignment. Thus, telomere clustering per se may not be 
the goal of this movement. The details vary among dif-
ferent  organisms.  In  fission  yeast  dynein  motors  and 
microtubule  dynamics  in  the  cytoplasm  move  the  telo-
mere cluster from one end of the cell to the other every 
10 minutes or so. These “horsetail movements” stretch 

the  chromosomes  parallel  to  each  other.  In  C.  elegans 
special chromosome regions known as “pairing centers” 
mediate  chromosome  movement  instead  of  telomeres; 
in budding yeast, the telomeres are linked to actin instead 
of  microtubules,  and  D.  melanogaster  may  have  lost 
such a mechanism altogether.

During the transition from leptotene to the zygotene 
(Greek,  “yoke  ribbon”)  stage  of  prophase,  clustering  
of  chromosome  ends  at  the  nuclear  envelope  reaches  
its  peak,  with  the  “bouquet”  arrangement  of  chromo-
somes.  During  this  stage  homologous  chromosomes 
begin  to  achieve  their  maximal  alignment  as  well, 
through the initiation of synapsis (Fig. 45.5C–D). Syn-
apsis involves the assembly of the axial element. This 
protein  scaffold  forms  part  of  the  synaptonemal 
complex when pairing is complete.

In  pachytene  (from  the  Greek,  meaning  “thick 
ribbon”),  synapsis  is  complete,  with  the  homologous 
chromosome  axes  joined  together  along  their  lengths  
by synaptonemal complexes (Fig. 45.5E). During pachy-
tene, crossover-designated recombination intermediates 
mature 
junction-containing  structures 
within  the  context  of  the  full-length  synaptonemal 

into  Holliday 

 

CHAPTER 45  n  Meiosis 

787

complex.  The  final  resolution  of  these  recombination 
intermediates into crossovers occurs close to the time of 
synaptonemal  complex  disassembly,  dispersal  of  the 
bouquet of chromosomes and exit from pachytene. The 
crossovers then mature into structures called chiasmata 
that  link  homologous  chromosomes  through  meiosis  I 
metaphase.

Early in diplotene (from the Greek, meaning “double 
ribbon”),  the  synaptonemal  complex  disassembles, 
telomeres detach from the nuclear membrane, and chro-
mosomes begin to condense in preparation for division 
(Fig.  45.5F).  The  duplicated  sister  chromatids  remain 
closely associated, and chiasmata hold the homologous 
chromosomes together, although their axes tend to drift 
apart  in  the  absence  of  synaptonemal  complex.  This 
part  of  meiotic  prophase  may  last  for  days  or  years, 
depending on the sex and organism (up to 45 years or 
more in female humans).

Oocytes  (immature  eggs)  actively  transcribe  their 
chromosomes during diplotene, as they store up materials 
for use during the first few divisions of embryonic devel-
opment. Transcription can be so active that DNA loops 
are massively coated with nascent RNA transcripts whose 
associated  proteins  are  visible  by  light  microscopy  in 
oocytes  of  most  animals  (except  mammals).  Chromo-
somes at this stage are known as lampbrush chromo-
somes (see Fig. 8.12).

Diakinesis (from the Greek, meaning “across move-
ment”)  is  the  prometaphase  of  meiosis  I.  Following 
nuclear  envelope  breakdown,  homologous  chromo-
somes shorten and condense. At metaphase I, the biva-
lents  (pairs  of  homologous  chromosomes)  are  aligned  
at  a  metaphase  plate  (Figs.  45.1,  45.2,  and  45.12).  The 
two homologs (each a pair of tightly linked sister chro-
matids)  are  attached  to  opposite  poles  of  the  meiotic 
spindle,  which  applies  force,  attempting  to  pull  them 
apart.  Cohesion  of  the  arms  distal  to  chiasmata  resists 
these  pulling  forces.  The  homologs  separate  and  move 
to  opposite  spindle  poles  during  anaphase  I  when  the 
cohesion  along  the  chromosome  arms  is  released.  The 
sister  chromatids  move  together  to  one  pole,  because 
they  remain  linked  by  cohesion  at  their  centromeres, 
where the cohesion complex is protected by a shugoshin 
protein (see later).

After  telophase  I,  cells  enter  a  brief  interkinesis 
during which there is no DNA replication. The second 
meiotic  division  is  mechanistically  similar  to  mitosis 
except that the number of chromosomes is reduced by 
half. Additionally, in the eggs of most female vertebrates, 
meiosis is arrested at metaphase II until fertilization.

Pairing and Synapsis in More Detail
Pairing describes the side-by-side alignment of homolo-
gous  chromosomes  at  a  distance.  Homologs  are  paired 
in nonmeiotic (somatic) cells in a few organisms, such 
as the fruit fly D. melanogaster, but not in vertebrates.

The  earliest  pairing  events  in  meiosis  involve  a  ten-
dency  of  homologous  chromosome  territories  to  move 
together in the nucleus even before leptotene chromo-
some  condensation.  The  mechanism  is  unknown.  As 
double-strand  breaks  created  by  Spo11  initiate  the 
recombination pathway during leptotene, the condensing 
homologous  chromosomes  align  with  one  another  at  a 
distance of about 400 nm (Figs. 45.6 and 45.7). Genetic 
analysis in budding yeast revealed that mutants defective 
in the earliest stages of recombination are also defective 
in homolog pairing.

Interphase

Sister
chromatid 1

Replicating DNA
Sister
chromatid 3
Sister
chromatid 2

Sister
chromatid 4

Cohesin

Sister chromatids
linked by cohesin
in premeiotic
S phase

Leptotene

Initiation of
recombination

Pairing of
homologous
chromosomes

Zygotene

Assembling
central element of
synaptonemal complex

Pachytene

Diplotene followed
     by diakinesis

Disassembling
synaptonemal
complex

i

T
m
e

Chromatid
axis

Synapsis 

Axial
(lateral)
elements
Transverse
filaments

Central
element

Chromatin
loops

Chiasma

FIGURE  45.7  CHROMOSOMAL  PAIRING  IN  MEIOTIC  PRO-
PHASE.  Structural  organization  of  homologous  chromosomes  and 
synaptonemal complex during various stages of meiotic prophase. 

788 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

The  process  of  homolog  alignment  almost  certainly 
involves  the  invasion  of  neighboring  DNA  duplexes  by 
single-stranded DNA complexed with Rad51 and Dmc1. 
Thus,  recombination  has  important  roles  both  in  the 
exchange  of  genetic  material  and  in  the  mechanics  of 
chromosome behavior during meiotic prophase. Recom-
bination is probably not the only factor driving homolog 
pairing,  however.  Pairing  is  reduced  but  not  absent  in 
yeast  meiotic  cells  lacking  both  Rad51  and  Dmc1,  and 
homologous chromosomes still pair in some systems that 
lack recombination (eg, certain D. melanogaster recom-
bination  mutants),  synaptonemal  complex  formation 
(asynaptic  mutants  in  yeast),  or  both  (eg,  normal  D. 
melanogaster males).
Homolog  pairing 

leptotene  be-
comes  much  more  intimate  during  synapsis  as  the 
chromosomes  are  linked  by  transverse  fibers  to  form 
the  synaptonemal  complex.  This  structure  looks 
roughly  like  railroad  tracks  linked  by  transverse  bands 
(Figs.  45.7  and  45.8).  Each  of  the  two  outer  rails,  90 
to 100 nm apart, is the axis of a pair sister chromatids. 
They  are  traditionally  termed  lateral  elements,  but 
for  the  sake  of  simplicity,  we  refer  to  them  as  axial 
elements.  Thin  transverse  filaments  oriented  perpen-
dicular to the axial elements appear to connect homolog 
axes  to  each  other  and  to  the  central  element  (the 
“third  rail”).  Synaptonemal  complex  formation  begins 
during  zygotene  at  a  limited  number  of  sites  along  the  
paired homologous chromosomes where recombination 

initiated  during 

events  will  mature  into  crossovers.  By  pachytene,  a 
continuous synaptonemal complex assembles along the 
full  length  of  the  aligned  homologous  chromosomes  
(Fig. 45.5C–E).

It was once thought that the synaptonemal complex 
aligns  homologous  chromosomes  in  preparation  for 
recombination, but it is now clear that homolog pairing 
and (in many organisms) the initiation of recombination 
precedes  synapsis.  Thus,  synapsis  is  a  downstream  
consequence  of  early  steps  in  recombination  in  some 
well-studied  organisms  including  yeast  and  mammals. 
However,  under  certain  artificial  circumstances,  even 
nonhomologous chromosomes can undergo synapsis.

Another longstanding model proposed that the synapto-
nemal  complex  promotes  the  resolution  of  crossover-
designated recombination intermediates. However, analysis 
of  budding  yeast  mutants  missing  certain  synaptonemal 
complex  proteins  indicates  that  the  structure  per  se  is 
dispensable  for  the  formation  of  crossovers  and  that  the 
resulting  chiasmata  can  hold  homologous  chromosomes 
paired until anaphase of meiosis I.

What  then  is  the  function  of  the  synaptonemal 
complex? One possibility is that it may have a key role 
in crossover interference (see later), which ensures that 
crossovers  are  distributed  broadly  across  the  genome. 
Another 
is  that  the  synap-
tonemal  complex  communicates  information  about 
meiotic chromosomes (such as homolog alignment and 
the  formation  of  crossover-designated  recombination 

interesting  possibility 

A

B

C

CE

LE

C
E

FIGURE  45.8  ELECTRON MICROGRAPHS OF THE SYNAPTONEMAL COMPLEX. A, Low-magnification view of maize synaptonemal 
complexes stained with silver. The lateral (LE) and central elements (CE) are clearly seen. B, A negatively stained cricket synaptonemal complex 
following treatment with deoxyribonuclease (DNase). The central element (CE) and transverse filaments (arrow) are visible. C, A whole mount of 
a silk moth zygotene chromosome. Cells in meiotic prophase were swollen and then lysed under gentle conditions with detergent. The chromo-
somes were then centrifuged onto thin carbon films so that they could be examined by electron microscopy. The axial elements are easily seen 
on this chromosome. Chromatin loops radiate outward from both the unpaired axial elements and the paired lateral elements (where synapsis 
has  occurred).  (A,  Modified  from  Gillies  CB.  Electron  microscopy  of  spread  maize  pachytene  synaptonemal  complexes.  Chromosoma. 
1981;83:575–591. B, Modified from Solari AJ, Moses MJ. The structure of the central region in the synaptonemal complexes of hamster and 
cricket spermatocytes. J Cell Biol. 1973;56:145–152, copyright the Rockefeller University Press. C, From Rattner JB, Goldsmith M, Hamkalo BA. 
Chromatin organization during meiotic prophase of Bombyx mori. Chromosoma. 1980;79:215–224.)

 

CHAPTER 45  n  Meiosis 

789

intermediates)  to  the  cell-cycle  pathways  that  control 
progression  through  the  substages  of  meiosis.

Synaptonemal Complex Components
Both  genetic  and  biochemical  approaches  have  identi-
fied  components  of  the  synaptonemal  complex.  The 
budding  yeast  protein  Zip1  (mammalian  SYCP1)  com-
prises the transverse filaments oriented perpendicular to 
chromosome  axes  in  mature  synaptonemal  complex, 
between  the  axial  elements  (Fig.  45.9).  Mammalian 
SYCP1 and Zip1 both consist of an extensive coiled-coil 
flanked  by  two  globular  domains  but  lack  amino  acid 
sequence  similarity.  Altering  the  length  of  the  Zip1 
coiled-coil changes the spacing between axial elements 
in the synaptonemal complex.

SYCP3 +
SYCP2,
Cohesin

Leptotene

Paired sister
chromatids

Axial element
(chromosome axis)

Chromatin loops

Rad51, Dmc1

i

T
m
e

Early recombination
nodule (may be site of
noncrossover events)

Zygotene

Synaptonemal complex
assembles from
site of crossover (late
recombination nodule)

SYCP1
(yeast Zip1)

Zip2/Zip4, Zip3
(yeast synapsis
initiation complex)
Mlh1/Mlh3,
Msh4/Msh5

SYCE2,
TEX12

FIGURE 45.9  PROTEINS OF THE SYNAPTONEMAL COMPLEX. 
Homologous chromosomes and synaptonemal complex showing the 
locations of some protein constituents. 

Several  protein  components  of  the  axial  elements 
(sister chromatid axes) have also been identified. One of 
these,  SYCP3,  interacts  with  both  the  cohesin  complex 
(see Fig. 8.18) and Rad51p and Dmc1p. In SYCP3 knock-
out mice, the axial elements are much less prominent, and 
the axis of the condensed chromosome is about twofold 
longer.  Other  proteins  of  the  synaptonemal  complex, 
including SYCP1, do not assemble properly, and as a result 
chromosomes  in  male  germ  cells  lack  chiasmata,  are 
unpaired, and cells die in pachytene/diplotene. Humans 
with mutations in genes for cohesin subunits lack chias-
mata, fail to complete meiosis, and are infertile.

Chiasmata
Chiasmata are specialized chromatin structures that link 
homologous  chromosomes  together  until  anaphase  I 
(Figs.  45.1  and  45.10).  They  form  at  sites  where  pro-
grammed DNA breaks generated by Spo11 undergo the 
full recombination pathway to generate crossovers.

It is not known how crossover events, which repre-
sent exchanges of DNA sequence information, are turned 
into chiasmata. The ultrastructure of chiasmata remains 
a mystery, but presumably each chiasma consists of two 
unperturbed sister chromatid arms intertwined with two 
recombinant arms in which the DNA molecules and their 
associated  protein  structures  have  been  spliced.  This 
DNA  complex  is  held  in  place  on  the  chromosome  by 
cohesion of the distal sister chromatid arms between the 
chiasma and the telomeres. Chiasmata too close to telo-
meres  can  be  unstable,  presumably  because  the  short 
length of sister chromatid arms between them and the 
telomeres  is  insufficient  for  stable  cohesion.  This  can 
lead to failure of chromosome segregation in meiosis.

A single chiasma can link homologous chromosomes 
together  during  meiosis  I.  Humans  have  39  such  arms  

A

B

C

Arrows point to chiasmata

AIR-2
REC-8

REC-8

Microtubules
Fused sister
kinetochores

Paired sister
chromatids
(maternal 
homolog)

Distal cohesin
and Aurora B

Chiasma

Paired sister
chromatids
(paternal
homolog)

FIGURE  45.10  BIVALENTS  (PAIRED  HOMOLOGOUS  CHROMOSOMES)  ARE  HELD  TOGETHER  BY  CHIASMATA  AFTER  DISAS-
SEMBLY OF THE SYNAPTONEMAL COMPLEX. A, Three diplotene bivalents from the grasshopper species Chorthippus jucundus are held 
together by three (left), one (middle), and four (right) chiasmata. The middle cross-shaped bivalent is telocentric; the other two longer bivalents 
are submetacentric. (For an explanation of the terminology, see Fig. 7.2.) Lactopropionic orcein staining. B, Caenorhabditis elegans chromosomes 
at  metaphase  I.  Aurora  B  kinase  AIR-2  (red)  is  located  distal  to  chiasmata.  Cohesin  subunit  REC-8  (green)  is  all  along  the  chromosomes. 
C, Explanatory diagram. (A, Courtesy José A. Suja and Julio S. Rufas, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Spain. B, Courtesy Josef Loidl, Max 
Perutz Labs, Vienna Biocenter, Austria.)

790 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

A. Normal

B. Infertile male

SB

SB

FIGURE 45.11  ABNORMAL PACHYTENE CHROMOSOMES IN AN INFERTILE MALE. A, Normal pachytene chromosome spread from 
a testis biopsy showing synaptonemal complexes (red), MLH1 foci (recombination sites [green]), and centromeres (blue). B, Abnormal pachytene 
spread  from  an  infertile  patient  containing  one  synaptonemal  complex  with  an  area  of  asynapsis  and  one  synaptonemal  complex  with  a  gap 
(arrows). SB, sex body (the paired X and Y chromosomes). (Courtesy Renée H. Martin, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.)

on  the  23  pairs  of  homologous  chromosomes,  if  one 
excludes the five acrocentric short arms, which do not 
normally undergo crossovers. Remarkably, there is typi-
cally only one chiasma produced for most arms; human 
males  typically  have  46  to  53  chiasmata  (Fig.  45.11). 
Even  more  remarkably,  that  single  chiasma  can  hold 
homologous  stably  paired  for  over  40  years  in  human 
females,  yet  still  be  released  on  schedule  when  the 
oocyte matures into an egg.

Only a small fraction of DNA breaks formed by Spo11 
mature into full crossovers, because a mechanism called 
crossover  interference  decreases  the  likelihood  that 
DNA breaks near a crossover-designated recombination 
event  will  also  become  crossovers.  This  interference 
tends  to  spread  crossovers  apart  across  the  genome.  If 
all breaks had an equal probability of forming crossovers, 
small chromosomes might be left without a crossover in 
a  significant  fraction  of  meiotic  nuclei  if  large  chromo-
somes  used  all  of  the  structural  components  necessary 
to form crossovers and chiasmata.

Crossover  interference  has  been  defined  genetically 
for  almost  100  years,  but  its  mechanism  is  not  certain. 
Interference  may  be  mediated  by  the  synaptonemal 
complex. Organisms such as the fission yeast Schizosac-
charomyces pombe and the mold Aspergillus nidulans 
that  naturally  lack  synaptonemal  complex  also  lack 
interference.  Furthermore,  the  frequency  of  meiotic 
recombination  is  directly  proportional  to  the  length  of 
the  synapsed  chromosome  axis  (ie,  the  length  of  the 
synaptonemal  complex),  rather  than  the  actual  length  
of  DNA  in  the  chromosome.  For  example,  in  human 
females,  the  synaptonemal  complex  is  roughly  50% 
longer  than  in  males,  and  females  undergo  recombina-
tion about twice as frequently as males. However, other 
observations suggest that interference may be established 
before the synaptonemal complex forms.

Cohesion and Chromosomal Movements 
During Meiosis I
Chromosomes in mitosis achieve a dynamic alignment at 
metaphase as a result of a balance of forces in the spindle. 
In mitosis, the two kinetochores of the sister chromatids 
are  attached  to  microtubules  emanating  from  opposite 
spindle poles, and each chromatid is pulled toward the 
pole that its kinetochore faces (Fig. 45.12A).

In  meiosis  I,  homologs  linked  by  chiasmata  (called 
bivalents) are balanced at the metaphase plate, but the 
organization differs in three important ways from mitosis. 
First, the two kinetochores of the sister chromatids are 
fused and act as a single unit oriented toward one spindle 
pole. The structure of the meiosis I kinetochore is most 
easily explained if the two kinetochores are each rotated 
90 degrees toward one another relative to their position 
on mitotic chromosomes and then fused (Fig. 45.12A). 
In yeast, this coorientation of sister kinetochores requires 
the presence of a meiosis-specific kinetochore protein—
spo13  (meikin  in  vertebrates)—that  associates  with 
sister  kinetochores  from  pachytene  until  anaphase  of 
meiosis  I.  Spo13/meikin  recruits  polo  kinase  to  kineto-
chores, but the critical kinase substrates are not known.
Second,  the  physical  connection  between  the  fused 
kinetochores is not broken in anaphase I. As a result, at 
anaphase  the  two  homologs  with  their  paired  sister 
chromatids move in opposite directions.

A third major difference between bivalents in meiosis 
I and mitotic chromosomes is that cohesion of homolo-
gous  chromosome  arms  distal  to  chiasmata  (Figs.  45.2 
and 45.10) rather than cohesion between sister chroma-
tids  at  centromeres  resists  the  poleward  pulling  of  
the kinetochores at the spindle midzone at metaphase I 
(Fig.  45.12B).  This  reflects  specialized  behavior  of  the 
meiotic cohesin complex in which the meiosis-specific 

 

CHAPTER 45  n  Meiosis 

791

A. Kinetochore movement

Kinetochore

Microtubules

Sister chromatids

90° rotation

of kinetochores

Mitosis

Meiosis

Meiosis

B. Centromere behavior in meiosis

Chiasmata

Arms of sisters

separate

Paired

homologs

Paired sister
kinetochores
Microtubules

Recombination

Homolog
pairing

2×

Paired sister
chromatids

Anaphase I

Metaphase I

Leptotene

Chiasmata released
Homologs separate

Sister

centromeres

separate

Sisters

segregate

Paired
sisters

Anaphase I

Metaphase II

Anaphase II

FIGURE 45.12  CHROMOSOMAL BEHAVIOR DURING MEIOSIS I AND II. During meiosis I, sister chromatids are tightly paired along their 
lengths, sister kinetochores are fused, and homologs are held together at the metaphase plate by chiasmata. During anaphase I, loss of cohesion 
between the arms of sister chromatids releases the chiasmata and allows homologous chromosomes to segregate to opposite spindle poles. 
During metaphase of meiosis II, sister chromatids are held together only at their centromeres. Release of centromeric cohesion at meiosis II allows 
the sister chromatids to segregate to opposite spindle poles. 

Rec8  and  Rad21L  proteins  replace  Scc1  (see  Figs.  8.18 
and  44.16).  After  premeiotic  DNA  replication,  the 
meiotic  cohesion  complex  keeps  sister  chromatids 
together all along the arms. The cohesin complex plus 
synaptonemal  complex  proteins  SYCP3  and  SYCP2  are 
required  for  assembly  of  the  dense  axial  elements  that 
extend  along  the  length  of  the  chromosome  during 
synapsis.

In mitosis, cohesion is released between sister chro-
matid  arms  during  prometaphase,  but  in  meiosis  I  it  is 
retained distal to chiasmata until the onset of anaphase 
(Figs.  45.7  and  45.12),  when  Rec8  and  Rad21L  along  
the chromosome arms are cleaved by a protease called 
separase (see Fig. 44.16). Separation of sister chromatid 
arms  allows  the  chiasmata  to  resolve  (untangle),  and  
the  homologous  chromosomes  segregate  to  opposite 
spindle poles.

In the meantime, the Rec8 and Rad21L at centromeres 
are  protected  from  cleavage  and  continue  to  hold  the 

sister  chromatid  centromeres  tightly  paired  until  ana-
phase  of  meiosis  II.  This  protection  requires  a  class  of 
proteins called Shugoshins (from the Japanese, meaning 
“guardian spirit”), which recruit the protein phosphatase 
2A (PP2A). Rec8 must be phosphorylated for separase to 
cleave  it  efficiently,  so  the  localized  phosphatase  can 
block  the  cleavage  reaction.  Cleavage  of  centromeric 
Rec8 releases sister chromatid cohesion at the onset of 
anaphase  II  similar  to  the  release  of  cohesion  during 
mitosis (see Fig. 44.16).

Behavior of the Sex Chromosomes  
in Meiosis
Of the 46 human chromosomes, two sex chromosomes 
carry  genes  that  define  the  sex  of  the  individual.  The 
other 22 pairs of chromosomes are called autosomes.

If  genetic  recombination  is  required  to  stabilize 
homologous  chromosomes  at  the  metaphase  plate  in 

792 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

C

2

X

Y

9

A

B

Synapsed pseudoautosomal region

Y

X

Condensed unpaired portion
of X and Y chromosomes

FIGURE  45.13  SEX  CHROMOSOMES  OF  A  CHINESE 
HAMSTER AT PACHYTENE. A–B, The X and Y chromosomes are 
synapsed  at  the  pseudoautosomal  region.  Elsewhere,  the  unpaired 
chromatin  adopts  a  highly  condensed  morphology.  C,  In  the  same 
preparation, autosomes are completely synapsed and show a lesser 
degree of condensation. (From Dresser ME, Moses MJ. Synaptonemal 
complex karyotyping in spermatocytes of the Chinese hamster (Crice-
tulus  griseus).  IV.  Light  and  electron  microscopy  of  synapsis  and 
nucleolar  development  by  silver  staining.  Chromosoma.  1980;76:
1–22.)

meiosis  I,  how  is  this  accomplished  for  the  X  and  Y 
chromosomes? The answer in most mammals is that the 
X  and  Y  chromosomes  have  a  short  region  of  homolo-
gous sequence (approximately 2.6 million base pairs in 
humans) that does pair and undergo genetic recombina-
tion  during  meiosis.  This  pseudoautosomal  region 
must undergo genetic recombination in every meiosis I 
cell  for  the  X  and  Y  chromosomes  to  be  partitioned 
correctly. Thus, the X and Y chromosomes act like short 
homologous  chromosomes  with  large  regions  of  unre-
lated  DNA  attached  (Fig.  45.13).  Unpaired  regions  of  
the X and Y chromosomes acquire a distinct chromatin 
structure during late pachytene.

Cell-Cycle Regulation of Meiotic Events
Meiosis  employs  the  full  set  of  functions  that  regulate 
the  division  of  somatic  cells  (see  Chapters  40  to  43). 
However,  the  peculiarities  of  the  meiotic  cell  cycle 
require additional regulation. One major difference from 
somatic cells is that meiotic chromosomes must undergo 
recombination and form chiasmata to segregate properly 
at  the  first  meiotic  division.  Like  somatic  cells,  meiotic 
cells have a DNA damage response that arrests cell-cycle 
progression  in  the  presence  of  DNA  breaks  (see  Fig. 
43.11).  In  addition,  they  have  a  “crossover  assurance” 
checkpoint  that  can  detect  the  presence  of  stalled  or 
abnormal recombination intermediates. Such intermedi-
ates  accumulate  if  there  are  problems  with  the  core 

recombination  enzymes  or  if  the  assembly  of  the  syn-
aptonemal  complex  (required  for  the  completion  of 
recombination)  is  defective.  When  such  problems  are 
detected, cells arrest in meiotic prophase I. In yeast, this 
has been called the pachytene checkpoint, as cells arrest 
late in meiotic prophase with nuclear morphology remi-
niscent  of  the  pachytene  stage.  Apoptosis  eliminates 
mammalian  germ  cells  that  arrest  owing  to  defects  in 
recombination.

Suppression of DNA Replication Between 
Meiosis I and Meiosis II
Meiosis is unique in that it involves two M phases with 
no  intervening  S  phase.  On  exit  from  meiosis  I,  Cdk1 
kinase is reactivated immediately. This blocks assembly 
of  prereplication  complexes  (see  Fig.  42.8),  thereby 
blocking DNA replication. At least two pathways contrib-
ute to reactivation of Cdk1.

The  first  involves  downregulation  of  translation  of 
Wee1 protein kinase in meiosis. Wee1 is a mitotic inhibi-
tor (see Fig. 43.3) that inactivates Cdk1 by phosphoryla-
tion at Tyr15. The absence of Wee1 in meiosis I was first 
observed in Xenopus laevis but this seems to be a uni-
versally conserved way of reactivating Cdk1 without an 
S phase. Ectopic expression of Wee1 in mature X. laevis 
oocytes prevents reactivation of Cdk1 immediately after 
the  meiosis  I  division.  As  a  result,  the  oocytes  reenter 
interphase  and  replicate  their  DNA.  Meiotic  cells  also 
express a specialized isoform of Cdc25, the phosphatase 
that counteracts Wee1 (see Fig. 43.1).

Metaphase II Arrest and  
the Mitogen-Activated Protein  
Kinase Pathway
Following  their  activation  and  release  from  the  ovary 
(ovulation), oocytes of many vertebrates arrest in meta-
phase II of meiosis until they are fertilized. The activity 
that  is  responsible  for  this  arrest  was  discovered  in  
X. laevis eggs arrested in metaphase of meiosis II and is 
called  cytostatic  factor  (CSF).  Injection  of  cytoplasm 
containing  CSF  into  one  blastomere  of  a  two-cell  frog 
embryo  blocks  the  next  cell  cycle  at  metaphase,  just  
like  the  egg  (Fig.  45.14).  Therefore,  CSF  can  even  
block  somatic  cells  indefinitely  in  mitotic  metaphase. 
CSF  activity  appears  in  meiosis  II  and  disappears  after 
fertilization.

One active component of CSF is the X. laevis homolog 
of a well-known viral oncogene, v-mos, the transforming 
gene of the Moloney murine sarcoma virus, which causes 
solid  tumors  in  mice.  The  v-mos  gene  is  a  mutated 
form  of  the  cellular  c-mos  gene.  Vertebrates  express 
c-mos (a mitogen-activated protein [MAP] kinase kinase 
kinase;  see  Fig.  27.5)  exclusively  in  oocytes  and  eggs. 
Injection of either v-Mos or c-Mos proteins into dividing 

 

A. Two-cell embryo

Inject egg cytosol,

with activated
c-Mos, into one

blastomere

B

C

c-Mos removed

by antibody

before injection

D. The MAP kinase cascade that arrests eggs
     in metaphase of meiosis II:

c-Mos

MEK

MAPK

p90Rsk

[Emi2]

CSF

FIGURE  45.14  ROLE  OF  C-MOS  IN  THE  CYTOSTATIC 
FACTOR  PATHWAY.  A,  Diagram  of  the  experiment  that  identified 
c-Mos as an essential component of cytostatic factor (CSF) required 
for arrest of eggs in meiotic metaphase. One blastomere of an Xenopus 
laevis embryo at the two-cell stage was injected with cytoplasm from 
a metaphase-arrested egg containing CSF activity. B, This blastomere 
(right half of the embryo) remained blocked in metaphase while the left 
blastomere  divided  many  times.  C,  The  same  experiment  was  per-
formed, but prior to injection, the c-Mos was removed from the egg 
cytoplasm  by  absorption  with  a  specific  antibody.  Both  the  injected 
and  uninjected  blastomeres  continued  to  divide  normally.  D,  The 
mitogen-activated  protein  (MAP)  kinase  (MAPK)  pathway  leading  to 
metaphase  II  arrest  in  vertebrate  eggs.  (B–C,  Micrographs  courtesy 
George Vande Woude, NCI, Frederick, MD. Modified from Sagata N, 
Watanabe  N,  Vande  Woude  GF,  et al.  The  c-Mos  proto-oncogene 
product is a cytostatic factor responsible for meiotic arrest in vertebrate 
eggs. Nature. 1989;342:512–518.)

blastomeres  of  early  frog  embryos  arrests  the  cells  at 
metaphase  (Fig.  45.14).  These  experiments  led  to  a 
proposal that c-Mos is CSF.

CSF  arrest  requires  the  MAP  kinase  (MAPK)  signal 
transduction pathway (see Fig. 27.5). Mos activates the 
pathway by phosphorylating mitogen activated protein/
extracellular  signal-related  kinase  kinase  (MEK),  which 
then activates MAPK. MAPK then activates a downstream 
kinase  called  p90Rsk  (Fig.  45.14D).  Introduction  of 
constitutively active c-Mos or p90Rsk into X. laevis eggs 
induces metaphase arrest like CSF. However, this is not 
the whole story, because metaphase arrest is maintained 
in extracts depleted of p90Rsk. Thus the pathway must 
include at least one unidentified step beyond p90Rsk.

The extra component of CSF is an anaphase-promoting 
complex/cyclosome  (APC/C)  inhibitor  called  Emi2.  A 
burst of cytoplasmic Ca2+ released at fertilization (see Fig. 
26.15)  activates  Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent  protein 
kinase  II  (CaMKII),  which  phosphorylates  Emi2.  This 

CHAPTER 45  n  Meiosis 

793

modification creates a binding site for polo kinase, which 
then also phosphorylates Emi2. Emi2 phosphorylated by 
polo kinase is recognized by SCFβTrCP, which ubiquitylates 
it, marking it for destruction. This results in activation of 
the APC/C (see Fig. 40.15), termination of the CSF meta-
phase arrest, and completion of meiosis II.

Timing of Meiosis in Humans
The fate of cells undergoing meiosis, as well as the timing 
of  meiotic  events,  differs  significantly  between  human 
males and females.

Males produce approximately 100 million sperm a day 
in  a  process  called  spermatogenesis.  This  process 
continues  throughout  adult  life.  Spermatogenesis  starts 
with  the  division  of  stem  cells  called  spermatogonia 
and  involves  eight  divisions  prior  to  meiosis.  These  
divisions  are  unusual  in  that  cytokinesis  is  incomplete, 
and the cells remain connected by intercellular bridges. 
The process could produce up to 256 cells, but usually 
some cells die and others fail to divide, so a more typical 
number  is  around  200  cells  arising  from  the  initial  
stem  cell  division.  When  these  cells  pass  through  
meiosis (they are then referred to as spermatocytes) the 
final  result  is  approximately  800  postmeiotic  sperma-
tids.  Spermatids  then  undergo  a  complex  program  of 
differentiation,  resulting  in  the  production  of  highly 
specialized  spermatozoa.  The  entire  process  of  sper-
matogenesis  takes  approximately  64  days,  the  bulk  of 
which is spent in meiosis I. Approximately 16 days are 
spent  in  pachytene,  the  longest  stage  of  the  meiosis  I 
prophase.  In  contrast,  only  about  8  hours  are  spent  in 
meiosis II.

By  the  twentieth  week  of  fetal  life  each  ovary  of  a 
human female contains approximately 3 × 106 primordial 
follicles, each with an oocyte arrested in the diplotene 
stage of meiosis. This lengthy arrested stage is referred 
to  as  dictyate.  Thereafter,  arrested  primordial  follicles  
are  recruited  continuously  to  mature  into  growing 
primary follicles. However, successful follicular growth 
depends on follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), so before 
puberty—when the hypothalamus-pituitary-ovarian axis 
matures—all  activated  oocytes  undergo  programmed 
cell death and degenerate in a process known as atresia. 
At  birth,  the  ovary  contains  approximately  1,000,000 
germ cells of which approximately 300,000 to 400,000 
remain at puberty. Following puberty and in response to 
high levels of FSH each month, a cohort of follicles with 
their  dictyate-arrested  oocytes  is  activated  to  complete 
meiosis and grow. Only one of these activated oocytes 
matures fully and is shed from the ovary in response to 
a surge of luteinizing hormone. The other follicles degen-
erate  by  atresia.  As  the  successful  oocyte  is  shed  from 
the ovary, it completes meiosis I and is arrested at meta-
phase  of  meiosis  II  by  CSF.  It  remains  arrested  at  this 
stage until fertilization occurs. By the time of menopause 

794 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

First polar body

Metaphase II oocyte

50 µm

FIGURE 45.15  POLAR BODY FORMATION. Asymmetric cleav-
age during mouse oogenesis produces a large oocyte and small polar 
body.  (Modified  from  Jiao  ZX,  Xu  M,  Woodruff  TK.  Age-associated 
alteration of oocyte-specific gene expression in polar bodies: potential 
markers of oocyte competence. Fertil Steril. 2012;98:480–486.)

the ovarian reserve is almost depleted, leaving approxi-
mately 1000 primordial follicles in the ovary.

In human females, meiosis produces only one mature 
egg.  Both  meiotic  cell  divisions  are  asymmetrical,  pro-
ducing one large and one very small and short-lived cell. 
The small cells are called polar bodies (Fig. 45.15).

Meiotic Defects and Human Disease
Abnormalities in meiosis are surprisingly common but are 
not widely observed in human populations because their 
consequences  are  extremely  severe.  In  fact,  meiotic 
abnormalities  are  a  leading  cause  of  fetal  death,  particu-
larly  during  the  first  trimester  of  pregnancy  in  humans. 
The  two  major  causes  of  problems  are  chromosome 
nondisjunction during the meiotic divisions and the gen-
eration  of  unbalanced  chromosomal  rearrangements  via 
faulty recombination.

When chromosomes fail to segregate properly in one 
or both meiotic divisions (nondisjunction), the daughter 
cells  lack  the  normal  haploid  complement  of  chromo-
somes. Embryos that have gained an entire set of chro-
mosomes  are  referred  to  as  polyploid.  In  human 
embryos, polyploidy is a common type of chromosomal 
abnormality. It is estimated that 1% to 3% of all concep-
tions are triploid (69 chromosomes; 23 from one parent 
and 46 from the other parent). Two-thirds of these arise 
from two sperm fertilizing one egg (nothing wrong with 
meiosis there). In other cases, they come from a diploid 
gamete,  the  result  of  a  defective  meiotic  segregation. 
Very few triploid embryos survive to birth.

Most chromosomal abnormalities in human embryos 
result from the loss or gain of one or more chromosomes 
during  meiosis.  This  condition  is  called  aneuploidy. 
Most  zygotes  that  arise  from  aneuploid  gametes  die 

Meiotic  errors 

during fetal development. (Any fetal death is a spontane-
ous abortion, commonly called a miscarriage.) It is now 
thought  that  at  least  30%  of  all  conceptions  result  in 
spontaneous abortions. Furthermore, more than 60% of 
those spontaneous abortions are aneuploid. These figures 
probably underestimate the frequency of meiotic abnor-
malities.  Many  spontaneous  abortions  occur  very  early 
during  pregnancy  and  many  are  never  detected  at  all. 
Few fetuses lost in the first 4 to 6 weeks of gestation are 
tested in a laboratory, so their karyotypes are unknown.
involving  certain  autosomes  can 
produce fetuses that survive to birth. Females with three 
or more copies of the gene-rich X chromosome survive, 
because  all  but  one  X  chromosome  are  inactivated 
(silenced) in somatic cells (see Fig. 8.6). Rare individuals 
with three copies of chromosome 13 or chromosome18 
survive to birth; but those who do typically die shortly 
thereafter.  The  exception  is  individuals  trisomic  for 
chromosome  21  (a  condition  that  is  commonly  known 
as  Down  syndrome).  These  individuals  have  intellec-
tual disability as well as other characteristic phenotypic 
features,  including  decreased  life  expectancy.  Why  do 
individuals with Down syndrome survive whereas others 
affected  by  aneuploidy  do  not?  Perhaps  the  very  small 
number  (233)  of  coding  genes  on  chromosome  21 
includes none whose dosage is critical for survival.

The frequency of certain types of aneuploidy, such as 
trisomy for chromosome 21, increases with the ages of 
the mother and father. Only 0.04% of children of 20-year-
old  mothers  old  have  trisomy  21.  This  number  rises 
dramatically with maternal age; nearly 5% of the concep-
tions  in  mothers  45  years  old  have  trisomy  21  (Fig. 
45.16).  This  maternal  age  effect  is  a  leading  cause  of 
human  genetic  disease.  Some  believe  that  during  the 
many  years  of  arrest  of  oocytes  in  meiosis  I  dictyate, 
chiasmata  joining  homologous  chromosomes  gradually 
dissociate.  A  mechanism  to  explain  this  might  be  the 
progressive loss of cohesion between sister chromatids 
as the mother ages. There appears to be no mechanism 
to replace cohesin complexes that are gradually lost in 
dictyate oocytes. Mice with a mutation in a key subunit 
of  the  cohesin  complex  (Fig.  45.7;  see  also  Fig.  8.18) 
exhibit  a  pattern  of  chromosome  nondisjunction  with 
increasing  maternal  age  that  looks  much  like  that  seen 
in  aging  human  mothers.  Another  potential  source  of 
errors  lies  in  the  mechanism  of  spindle  assembly  in 
oocytes,  which  does  not  involve  centrosomes  and 
appears to be more prone to errors than in somatic cells 
(see Chapter 44).

Not all cases of human aneuploidy originate from the 
mother.  One  of  the  most  common  aneuploidies,  45,X 
(see  Table  45.1  for  an  explanation  of  nomenclature) 
involves the loss of the paternal X or Y chromosome 70% 
to 80% of the time. This aneuploidy accounts for nearly 
10% of spontaneous abortions. In addition, about 7% of 

 

CHAPTER 45  n  Meiosis 

795

TABLE 45.1  Aneuploidies Involving the Sex Chromosomes in Newborn Humans
Karyotype

Comments

Frequency

Sex

47,XXY*

47,XYY

Other X or Y aneuploidy

47,XXX

45,X

Other X or Y aneuploidy

1/1000

1/1000

1/1350

1/900

1/4000

1/2700

M

M

F

F

Klinefelter syndrome. Increased height, sterile, a proportion may 

have some learning difficulties.

Increased height, generally fertile, typically with chromosomally 

normal offspring. A proportion may have some learning difficulties.

Total: 1 in 360 male births
Increased height, generally fertile, typically with chromosomally 

normal offspring. A proportion have serious learning difficulties.
Turner syndrome. Reduced height, infertile, normal intelligence.  

Of 45,X embryos, 99% terminate as spontaneous abortions.

*This number gives the total number of chromosomes, followed by the complement of sex chromosomes.
Modified from Nussbaum RL, McInnes RR, Willard HF. Genetics in Medicine. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 2001:150.

Total: 1 in 580 female births

i

s
e
m
o
s
i
r
T
%

 

3.0

2.0

1.0

0
<19

Chromosome number

16

21

18

20–24

25–29
Maternal age [years]

30–34

35–39

40

FIGURE  45.16  RELATIONSHIP  BETWEEN  MATERNAL  AGE 
AND  THE  INCIDENCE  OF  HUMAN  TRISOMIES.  (Modified  from 
Nagaoka SI, Hassold TJ, Hunt PA. Human aneuploidy: mechanisms 
and  new  insights  into  an  age-old  problem.  Nat  Rev  Genet.  2012;
13:493–504.)

instances  of  trisomy  21  are  of  paternal  origin.  Clearly, 
more than one mechanism is responsible for the genera-
tion of aneuploid offspring.

These rather sobering statistics reveal two important 
facts  about  human  reproduction.  First,  the  production  
of gametes is error prone. This has been confirmed by 
direct  studies,  in  which  20%  of  eggs  and  3%  to  4%  of 
sperm were found to have chromosomal abnormalities. 
Second,  the  much  lower  rates  of  chromosomal  abnor-
malities seen in live births (approximately 0.3% overall 

[Table 45.1]) reveal that spontaneous abortion is a highly 
efficient  protective  mechanism  for  the  elimination  of 
chromosomal  imbalances  that  arise  from  errors  in 
meiosis.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Abby Dernburg, Jim Haber, Scott Hawley, Amy 
MacQueen, Adele Marston, and Alberto Pendas for their 
suggestions on revisions to this chapter.

SELECTED READINGS

de  Massy  B.  Initiation  of  meiotic  recombination:  how  and  where? 
Conservation and specificities among eukaryotes. Annu Rev Genet. 
2013;47:563-599.

Duro E, Marston AL. From equator to pole: splitting chromosomes in 

mitosis and meiosis. Genes Dev. 2015;29:109-122.

Fraune  J,  Schramm  S,  Alsheimer  M,  Benavente  R.  The  mammalian 
synaptonemal complex: protein components, assembly and role in 
meiotic recombination. Exp Cell Res. 2012;318:1340-1346.

Gutiérrez-Caballero  C,  Cebollero  LR,  Pendás  AM.  Shugoshins:  from 
protectors  of  cohesion  to  versatile  adaptors  at  the  centromere. 
Trends Genet. 2012;28:351-360.

Hiraoka  Y,  Dernburg  AF.  The  SUN  rises  on  meiotic  chromosome 

dynamics. Dev Cell. 2009;17:598-605.

Lam I, Keeney S. Mechanism and regulation of meiotic recombination 

initiation. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2014;7:a016634.

Nagaoka SI, Hassold TJ, Hunt PA. Human aneuploidy: mechanisms and 
new  insights  into  an  age-old  problem.  Nat  Rev  Genet.  2012;13:
493-504.

Scherthan  H.  A  bouquet  makes  ends  meet.  Nat  Rev  Mol  Cell  Biol. 

2001;2:621-627.

Schmidt A, Rauh NR, Nigg EA, Mayer TU. Cytostatic factor: an activity 

that puts the cell cycle on hold. J Cell Sci. 2006;119:1213-1218.

Subramanian  VV.  Hochwagen  A:  The  meiotic  checkpoint  network: 
step-by-step through meiotic prophase. Cold Spring Harb Perspect 
Biol. 2014;6:a016675.

Zickler D, Kleckner N. Recombination, Pairing, and Synapsis of Homo-

logs during Meiosis. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2015;7(6).

This page intentionally left blank

C H A P T E R 

46 

Programmed Cell Death

Necessity for Cell Death in  
Multicellular Organisms
The  ability  to  undergo  programmed  cell  death  (Box 
46.1) is a built-in latent capacity in most cells of multi-
cellular organisms. Cell death is important for embryonic 
development, maintenance of tissue homeostasis, estab-
lishment  of  immune  self-tolerance,  killing  by  immune 
effector cells, and regulation of cell viability by hormones 
and  growth  factors.  Both  extrinsic  signals  and  internal 
imbalances can lead cells to kill themselves. Furthermore, 
many metazoan cells will die if they fail to receive sur-
vival  signals  from  other  cells.  Abnormalities  of  the  cell 
death program contribute to several important diseases, 
including  cancer,  Alzheimer  disease,  and  AIDS.  Cell 
death programs are ancient: much of the current network 
was  present  in  the  last  eumetazoan  common  ancestor 
(see Fig. 2.8).

Programmed Cell Death Versus Accidental 
Cell Death: Apoptosis Versus Necrosis
Although cells die in many ways, it is useful to focus on 
two poles of this spectrum: apoptosis and necrosis. Fig. 
46.1  summarizes  the  major  pathways  of  programmed 
cell death. (Details are filled in as we progress through 
the  chapter.)  Apoptosis,  the  most  widely  studied 
pathway for programmed cell death, is cellular suicide 
resulting  from  activation  of  a  dedicated  intracellular 
program.  Fig.  46.2  shows  a  detailed  description  of  the 
events  of  apoptosis.  At  the  other  end  of  the  spectrum 
necrosis, also called accidental cell death, occurs when 
cells  sustain  a  structural  or  chemical  insult  that  causes 
the  cells  to  swell  and  undergo  membrane  lysis  (Fig. 
46.3).  Examples  of  such  insults  include  extremes  of 
temperature and physical trauma. Cells can also initiate 
active  programmed  necrosis  in  response  to  certain 

stimuli,  particularly  when  induction  of  apoptosis  is 
inhibited.  Programmed  necrosis  looks  morphologically 
like accidental cell death. A third pathway leading to cell 
death  involves  autophagy  (see  Fig.  23.7).  Although 
usually regarded as a protective response to starvation, 
autophagy  has  been  implicated  in  certain  examples  of 
cell death, particularly during development.

Necrosis  corresponds  to  what  most  of  us  naively 
imagine cell death would be like. Owing to lack of cel-
lular  homeostasis,  water  rushes  into  the  dying  cell, 
causing it to swell until the plasma and organelle mem-
branes burst. As a result, the cell undergoes a generalized 

NEIGHBORING CELL

Fas ligand

Fas receptor

TNF

TNF
receptor

Extrinsic
pathway

DISC

Bcl2
killer

Complex II

Complex I

Active

caspases

Necroptosis

Apoptosis

Inflammation

S
u
r
v
v
a

i

l

MITOCHONDRION

Apoptosome

Bcl2
killer

Signaling
platforms

Intrinsic
pathway

DNA damage, etc

Pyroptosis

Inflammasome

Pathogen

attack

NUCLEUS

FIGURE  46.1  OVERVIEW  OF  PROGRAMMED  CELL  DEATH 
DISCUSSED IN THIS CHAPTER. All these types of death hinge on 
the assembly of a signaling platform (boxed) that is often involved in 
activating  proteases  called  caspases.  These  pathways  are  all  dis-
cussed in greater detail in the text. 

 797

798 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

BOX 46.1  Key Terms

Apoptosis

Apoptosis:  Type  of  programmed  cell  death  that  was 
identified  due  to  a  particular  pattern  of  morphologic 
changes but now is defined by the action of molecular 
pathways involving cell surface receptors or mitochon-
dria and resulting in the activation of specialized pro-
teases. The name comes from the Greek, referring to 
shedding  of  the  petals  from  flowers  or  leaves  from 
trees.  Apoptotic  death  occurs  in  two  phases.  During 
the latent phase, the cell looks morphologically normal 
but  is  committed  to  death.  The  execution  phase  is 
characterized  by  a  series  of  dramatic  structural  and 
biochemical  changes  that  culminate  in  fragmentation 
of the cell into membrane-enclosed apoptotic bodies. 
Activities that cause cells to undergo apoptosis are said 
to  be  proapoptotic.  Activities  that  protect  cells  from 
apoptosis are said to be antiapoptotic.

Autophagic  Cell  Death:  It  is  still  debated  how  widely 
autophagy is used as a pathway for cell death, although 
it  is  accepted  that  the  pathway  (which  is  widely 
assumed to be primarily a survival pathway when cells 
are starved for nutrients) can promote cell death during 
development.  Autophagy  may  also  either  promote  or 
inhibit apoptosis under specialized circumstances.

Necroptosis:  Programmed  necrosis  that  occurs  when 
tumor  necrosis  factor  (TNF)  and  certain  other  cell-
surface  receptors  are  activated.  Activation  of  these 
receptors normally leads to a proinflammatory response 
and cell survival, but can lead to apoptosis. If certain 
components  of  the  apoptotic  pathway  are  missing, 
cells  instead  undergo  necroptosis,  apparently  as  a 
backup pathway.

Necrosis  (Accidental  Cell  Death):  Death  that  results 
from  irreversible  injury  to  the  cell.  Cell  membranes 
swell  and  become  permeable.  Lytic  enzymes  destroy 
the cellular contents, which then leak out into the inter-
cellular space, leading to an inflammatory response.

Programmed  Cell  Death:  Any  active  cellular  process 
that  culminates  in  cell  death.  This  may  occur  in 
response  to  developmental  or  environmental  cues  or 
as a response to physiological damage detected by the 
cell’s internal surveillance networks.

Pyroptosis: Often in response to intracellular pathogens, 
this  involves  activation  of  caspase  1.  The  infected  
cells  secrete  interleukin-1β  and  interleukin-18,  which 
promote an inflammatory response, and also undergo 
a form of cell death that resembles necrosis.

FIGURE  46.2  APOPTOSIS—ACTIVE  SUICIDE—TYPICALLY 
AFFECTS SINGLE CELLS. Neighboring cells remain healthy. Apop-
totic cell death usually does not lead to an inflammatory response. 

Junctions

Mitochondria

Nucleus

Microvilli contract
Intercellular junctions break
Chromatin begins to condense

Cell shrinks
Chromatin condenses around
  nuclear periphery

Cell blebs violently
Chromatin condensation 
  continues

Cell fragments into membrane- 
  enclosed apoptotic bodies 

Apoptotic bodies phagocytosed
  by neighboring cells and 
  roving macrophages 

 

CHAPTER 46  n  Programmed Cell Death 

799

Trauma

Necrosis

Dissolution of
  cellular structures

Junctions

Mitochondria

Nucleus

Cells and organelles swell
Chromatin condenses
Membranes compromised:
  fluid rushes in

H2O

H2O

Cell lysis
Invasion of phagocytic cells
Inflammation

FIGURE 46.3  NECROSIS USUALLY RESULTS FROM IRREVERSIBLE INJURY TO CELLS. Typically, groups of cells are affected. In most 
cases, necrotic cell death leads to an inflammatory response (red “activated” macrophages). 

Insult

Point of
no return

Reprieve
(very rare)

Latent

Condemned
Rescue by 

survival factors

Committed

Rescue usually

impossible

Execution

Morphologic

changes

FIGURE 46.4  TWO PHASES OF APOPTOSIS. The latent phase 
can be subdivided into two stages: a condemned stage, during which 
the  cell  is  proceeding  on  a  pathway  toward  death  but  can  still  be 
rescued  if  it  is  exposed  to  antiapoptotic  activities,  and  a  committed 
stage, beyond which rescue is usually impossible. 

process of autodigestion and dissolution, until it spills its 
cytoplasmic  contents  out  into  the  surroundings  (Fig. 
46.3).  This  produces  local  inflammation  as  phagocytic 
cells are activated, flock to the site, and ingest the debris 
(see Figs. 22.3 and 30.13). Because agents that damage 
cells act over areas that are large in comparison to the 
size of a single cell, necrosis often involves large groups 
of neighboring cells.

In  contrast  to  necrosis,  apoptotic  cells  shrink  rather 
than swelling and they typically do not lyse (Fig. 46.2). 
Apoptosis  is  a  two-stage  process.  On  receipt  of  the 
proapoptotic signal that triggers the pathway to death, 
cells enter a latent phase of apoptosis (Fig. 46.4). The 
duration of the latent phase of apoptosis, during which 
cells appear healthy, can be extremely variable, ranging 
from a few hours to several days.

FIGURE  46.5  SCANNING  ELECTRON  MICROGRAPH  OF 
INTACT AND APOPTOTIC MOUSE SARCOMA CELLS. Intact cells 
are  covered  with  microvilli,  whereas  apoptotic  cells  have  numerous 
smooth blebs. These cells were stimulated to undergo apoptosis as a 
result of interference with RNA metabolism. (From Wyllie AH, Kerr JFR, 
Currie  AR.  Cell  death:  the  significance  of  apoptosis.  Int  Rev  Cytol. 
1980;68:251–306.)

Ultimately,  the  cells  enter  the  execution  phase 
of  apoptosis,  lasting  about  an  hour,  during  which 
they  undergo  dramatic  morphologic  and  physiological 
changes. These include:
•  Loss of microvilli and intercellular junctions (Fig. 46.5)
•  Shrinkage of the cytoplasm

800 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

•  Dramatic changes in cytoplasmic motility with activa-

tion of violent blebbing (Fig. 46.6)

•  Loss  of  plasma  membrane  lipid  asymmetry  (see  Fig. 
13.7),  so  the  distribution  of  phosphatidylserine  is 
randomized and it appears in the outer leaflet of the 
membrane

•  Hypercondensation of the chromatin and its collapse 

against the nuclear periphery

•  The  “explosive”  fragmentation  of  the  cell 

into 
membrane-enclosed  apoptotic  bodies  that  contain 
remnants  of  the  nucleus,  mitochondria,  and  other 
organelles.
All  these  changes  are  instigated  by  the  action  of  a 
specific set of death-inducing proteases and are discussed 
at length later.

In  tissues,  surrounding  cells  rapidly  phagocytose 
apoptotic bodies in response to the phosphatidylserine 
and other markers on their surfaces (Fig. 46.7). Apoptosis 
can thus be considered to be the disassembly of the cell 
into  “bite-sized”  membrane-bound  vesicles,  so  the  cel-
lular contents are not usually released into the environ-
ment unless phagocytosis is delayed. Surface markers on 
apoptotic bodies cause cells that ingest them to secrete 
antiinflammatory cytokines. As a result, apoptotic death 
usually  does  not  lead  to  an  inflammatory  response  and 
apoptotic  cells  seem  to  vanish  from  tissues  without  
a trace.

0 min

114

116

118

120

148

FIGURE 46.6  APOPTOSIS OF A TRANSFORMED PIG KIDNEY 
CELL FOLLOWING EXPOSURE TO ETOPOSIDE, A DRUG USED 
IN CANCER CHEMOTHERAPY. The dramatic cytoplasmic blebbing 
results in the disassembly of the cell into membrane-enclosed vesicles. 
(Courtesy L.M. Martins and K. Samejima, Wellcome Trust Institute for 
Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom.)

A. Attraction of phagocytes via
     soluble “find me” signals

D

n

M

i

g

r

a

t

i

o
n

 signals

Phagocyte

Apoptotic
cell

B. Recognition and phagocytosis via
     displayed “eat me” signals and
     lack of “don’t eat me” signals

C. Production of antiinflammatory
     cytokines

IL-10
TGF-β

FIGURE 46.7  PHAGOCYTOSIS OF APOPTOTIC CELLS. A–C, Phagocytosis that occurs when cells express “eat me” signals results in the 
production of antiinflammatory cytokines. D, Electron micrograph of a phagocytosed apoptotic body containing a nuclear fragment. The nucleus 
(n)  of  the  epithelial  cell  that  engulfed  this  apoptotic  body  is  shown  at  top.  In  this  case,  apoptosis  occurred  during  allograft  rejection  in  a  pig. 
(A, Modified from Lauber K, Blumenthal SG, Waibel M, et al. Clearance of apoptotic cells: getting rid of the corpses. Mol Cell. 2004;12:277–287. 
B, From Wyllie AH, Kerr JFR, Currie AR. Cell death: the significance of apoptosis. Int Rev Cytol. 1980;68:251–306.)

 

CHAPTER 46  n  Programmed Cell Death 

801

Examples of Cells That Undergo 
Programmed Cell Death
The  following  are  six  common  causes  of  programmed 
cell death (Fig. 46.8).

Developmentally Defective Cells
During  molecular  maturation  of  T-lymphocyte  antigen 
receptors (see Figs. 27.8 and 28.9), immature T cells in 
the thymus (known as thymocytes) rearrange the genes 
encoding  the  receptor  α  and  β  chains.  To  function 

properly, the T-cell receptor must recognize major his-
tocompatibility complex (MHC) glycoproteins on other 
thymic cells during antigen presentation (see Fig. 27.8). 
T  lymphocytes  whose  T-cell  receptors  cannot  interact 
with the spectrum of MHC glycoproteins expressed in a 
given individual are ineffective in the immune response. 
These cells die by apoptosis in a process known as posi-
tive selection (Fig. 46.9).

Many of the newly created receptors bind to foreign 
antigens,  but  others  interact  with  self-antigens.  The  
latter are potentially harmful and are eliminated through 

A
Epithelial cells must die
to allow fusion of palate

Mammary epithelium
cells die when deprived
of hormones at end of
lactation

Cells of Müllerian
ducts die in males

Prostate cells die
when deprived of
hormone

B
B

C

D

Up to 80% of 
neurons die in 
some ganglia

Over 95% of 
immature 
T cells die 
in thymus

E12.5

E
E

Cells of 
interdigital
webbing die

E13.5

E14.5

Dying cells
(yellow)

FIGURE  46.8  PROGRAMMED  CELL  DEATH  DURING  DEVELOPMENT.  A,  Examples  of  cells  that  undergo  programmed  cell  death. 
B–D, Programmed cell death in the embryonic mouse paw. At day 12.5 of development, the digits are fully connected by webbing. By day 13.5, 
the webbing has started to die, and by day 14.5, all the webbing cells are gone. E, Cells undergoing programmed cell death take up acridine 
orange, whereas cells of the surrounding healthy tissue do not. (Micrographs courtesy William Wood and Paul Martin, Department of Anatomy 
and Developmental Biology, University College of London, United Kingdom.)

THYMUS

TCR-β gene
rearrangement

Pre-TCR

TCR-α gene
rearrangement

TCR

PERIPHERY, SPLEEN, AND LYMPH NODES

T-cell

stimulation

Common T-cell
  precursor

No IL-7R signal

Pro-T4 cell

Immature
  thymocyte

No productive
  TCR-β gene
  rearrangement

No TCR signal (no
  positive selection)
No productive TCR-α
  gene rearrangement

Mature
  thymocyte

Autoreactive
  TCR (negative
  selection)

Mature T-cell

T-cell blast

Lack of TCR
  signal

No growth-
  factor signals
Strong TCR
  restimulation

APOPTOSIS

FIGURE  46.9  EXAMPLES  OF  SIGNALS  THAT  PROMOTE  DIFFERENTIATION  OR  PROGRAMMED  CELL  DEATH  OF  IMMATURE 
THYMOCYTES IN THE THYMUS AND MATURE T CELLS IN THE PERIPHERY. Thymocytes that make functional T-cell receptors (TCRs) 
and  do  not  recognize  self-antigens  mature,  provided  that  they  receive  survival  signals,  such  as  interleukin-7.  Pro-T  cells  are  also  known  as 
double-negative thymocytes (referring to their lack of the two cell-surface markers CD4 and CD8). Immature thymocytes express CD4 and CD8 
and are known as double-positive thymocytes. Thymocytes undergo apoptosis if they produce defective T-cell receptor, recognize self-antigens, 
suffer DNA damage, or receive a death stimulus (glucocorticoid hormone). More than 98% of immature thymocytes die without leaving the thymus. 
(Modified from Strasser A. The role of BH3-only proteins in the immune system. Nat Rev Immunol. 2005;5:189–200.)

802 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

apoptosis  in  a  process  known  as  negative  selection 
(Fig. 46.9). The drug cyclosporine, which inhibits apop-
tosis  in  thymocytes,  can  cause  autoimmune  disease. 
Overall, defects in T-cell receptor assembly are extremely 
common,  and  up  to  98%  of  immature  T  cells  die  by 
apoptosis without leaving the thymus.

Similar  positive  and  negative  selection  steps  occur 
during the maturation of B lymphocytes (see Fig. 28.10), 
which  is  accomplished  by  a  combination  of  gene  rear-
rangements and facilitated mutagenesis. B lymphocytes 
expressing  antibodies  directed  against  self-antigens  or 
producing antibodies whose affinity for antigen is below 
a critical threshold are eliminated through apoptosis.

Excess Cells
Programmed  cell  death  is  also  widely  used  for  quality 
control during development. For example, in the brain, 
embryonic ganglia often have many more neurons than 
are required to enervate their target muscles. Production 
of excess cells is part of a Darwinian strategy to ensure 
that  a  sufficient  number  of  axons  reach  their  targets. 
Programmed  cell  death  eliminates  excess  neurons  that 
fail  to  make  appropriate  connections.  Up  to  80%  of 
neurons  in  certain  developing  ganglia  die  in  this  way. 
Because of the importance of apoptosis during its devel-
opment,  the  brain  is  often  seriously  affected  in  mice 
engineered to lack components of the apoptotic pathway.

Cells That Serve No Function
The  elimination  of  obsolete  cells  whose  function  has 
been  completed  is  most  evident  in  organisms,  such  as 
insects  and  amphibians  that  undergo  metamorphosis 
during  development.  For  example,  a  burst  of  thyroid 
hormone initiates programmed cell death for resorption 
of the tadpole tail.

Mammals also use programmed cell death to eliminate 
obsolete  tissues  during  development.  For  example, 
during  human  embryonic  development,  the  digits  of 
hands and feet are connected by a tissue webbing that 
is eliminated by programmed cell death (Fig. 46.8).

During  craniofacial  development,  the  hard  palate 
develops from two lateral precursors, each covered in a 
protective  layer  of  epithelial  cells.  As  the  two  halves 
grow together at the midline of the nasopharynx, they 
remain  separated  by  this  epithelial  covering  until,  in 
response to a developmental cue, the epithelial cells at 
the  midline  undergo  programmed  cell  death.  Then  the 
two halves of the palate can fuse. Failure of the epithelial 
cells to die at the appropriate time can interfere with the 
fusion of the bone, causing cleft palate.

Populations  of  cells  that  are  fully  functional  may 
become  obsolete  as  a  result  of  physiological  changes  
in  the  status  of  an  organism.  For  example,  in  male 
mammals, the prostate and other accessory glands of the 
reproductive system are regulated by the levels of circu-
lating  male  hormone.  If  hormone  levels  fall  below  a 

critical  threshold,  these  organs  virtually  disappear  in  a 
relatively  brief  time  as  their  constituent  cells  undergo 
massive  apoptotic  death.  Should  levels  of  circulating 
androgens rise again, the remaining prostatic stem cells 
proliferate and reconstruct the gland. A similar cycle of 
growth and involution is seen in the mammary gland of 
female mammals, which exhibits substantial differences 
in  size  and  cellular  composition  in  the  lactating  and 
nonlactating states. Interference with survival signaling 
by sex hormones is one important strategy that is com-
monly used in the treatment of breast and prostate cancer.
Programmed cell death also eliminates certain popula-
tions of cells that never serve any function. The müllerian 
ducts  develop  into  the  female  oviduct.  Male  embryos 
also develop progenitors of these ducts, which serve no 
purpose and are eliminated by apoptosis.

Cells With Perturbed Cell Cycles
Chapters  40  to  43  describe  how  biochemical  circuits 
called checkpoints regulate the cell cycle. Cells respond 
to DNA damage by blocking cell-cycle progression while 
attempting  to  repair  the  DNA.  The  p53  transcription 
factor,  an  important  downstream  checkpoint  EFFECTOR 
induces the expression of genes encoding proteins that 
arrest the cell cycle. p53 also turns on genes encoding 
proteins  that  induce  cell  death.  It  is  generally  thought 
that if the damage cannot be repaired quickly, the pro-
death  factors  win  out,  and  the  outcome  is  apoptosis. 
Double-strand DNA breaks induced by ionizing radiation 
and DNA damage induced by chemotherapeutic agents 
frequently result in cell death rather than repair.

A  second  important  cell-cycle  checkpoint  regulates 
the transition from the G1 phase to S phase. Passing the 
restriction point (see Fig. 41.8) represents the commit-
ment of the cell to undergo another cycle of DNA repli-
cation and division. Restriction point control centers on 
the regulation of the E2F family of transcription factors. 
E2F regulates genes that promote cell-cycle progression. 
E2F also regulates the expression of genes that promote 
apoptosis.  If  activated  too  strongly,  E2F  can  initiate 
apoptosis  as,  for  example,  after  DNA  damage  (see  Fig. 
41.14)  or  when  restriction  point  control  has  broken 
down.  Cells  that  die  in  response  to  inappropriate 
signals  to  proliferate  include  those  infected  by  certain 
viruses or overexpressing genes that drive cell prolifera-
tion (such as c-myc and c-fos [see Fig. 46.15]). Apoptotic 
death of cells with an inappropriate stimulus to prolifer-
ate is an important defense against cancer.

Virus-Infected Cells
Cytotoxic  T  lymphocytes  eliminate  virus-infected  cells 
by  causing  them  to  undergo  programmed  cell  death 
either by apoptosis or by a second related pathway. For 
example,  programmed  cell  death  accounts  for  at  least 
part of the loss of mature CD4+ T-helper cells (see Fig. 
28.9) in people infected with HIV-1. When exposed to 

 

CHAPTER 46  n  Programmed Cell Death 

803

agents  that  normally  stimulate  cell  proliferation,  these 
cells instead undergo apoptosis. Paradoxically, it appears 
that many of the dying cells are not themselves infected 
with HIV.

Chemotherapeutic Killing of Cells
Exposure of cancer cells to many of the agents used in 
chemotherapy  does  not  kill  the  cells  outright.  Instead, 
they  die  because  the  drugs  cause  intracellular  damage 
that  acts  as  a  signal  for  the  induction  of  apoptotic  cell 
death. Thus, the treated cancer cells kill themselves.

Genetic Analysis of Apoptosis
Several  key  components  that  are  involved  in  the  apop-
totic execution of mammalian cells were discovered by 
genetic analysis of the nematode worm Caenorhabditis 
elegans. Because  C.  elegans is optically clear, it is pos-
sible  to  see  every  cell  in  a  developing  worm  using  dif-
ferential interference contrast optics (see Fig. 6.2). This 
enabled investigators to trace the lineage of every cell in 
an adult worm back to the fertilized egg. These studies 
led  to  the  surprising  discovery  that  programmed  cell 
death is one of the most common fates for newborn C. 
elegans cells. Of the 1090 somatic cells that are produced 
during embryogenesis of the C. elegans hermaphrodite, 
131  undergo  programmed  cell  death  at  reproducible 
locations and times.

Mutations  in  at  least  14  C.  elegans  genes  affect  pro-
grammed cell death (Fig. 46.10). These are divided into 
three  classes:  (a)  genes  that  mark  cells  for  subsequent 
programmed  death;  (b)  genes  that  are  involved  in  cell 
killing and its regulation; and (c) genes that are involved 

egl-1

Determination

ced-9

ced-3
ced-4

Killing

Dead cell

ced-1, -6, -7
ced-2, -5, -10, -12

Engulfment

nuc-1

Degradation

Mammalian homologs

ced-9 protein = Bcl-2 family (antiapoptotic)
egl-1  protein = Bcl-2 family (BH3-only proapoptotic)
ced-4 protein = Apaf-1
ced-3 protein = initiator caspases

FIGURE  46.10  GENETIC  DISSECTION  OF  PROGRAMMED 
CELL DEATH. The ced (cell death abnormal) mutants of the nematode 
worm Caenorhabditis elegans affect the killing, engulfment, and deg-
radation stages of programmed cell death. 

in  the  phagocytosis  and  subsequent  processing  of  the 
cell  corpses.  These  mutants  are  collectively  known  as 
“cell death abnormal” (ced) mutants. Interestingly, this 
repertoire  of  nematode  genes  is  vastly  simplified  from 
the  apoptosis  genes  in  the  last  eumetazoan  com mon 
ancestor  (see  Fig.  2.8).  By  contrast,  humans  have 
approximately 300 genes involved in apoptosis.

The three best-known worm cell death genes are ced-
3, ced-4, and ced-9. If either ced-3 or ced-4 is inactivated, 
all  cells  throughout  the  organism  that  should  die  by 
apoptosis are reprieved. These cells remain alive and are 
apparently  functional.  Interestingly,  these  worms  have 
normal  life  spans.  This  suggests  that  programmed  cell 
death is not involved in the normal aging process, at least 
not  in  C.  elegans.  Ced-9  negatively  regulates  ced-3  and 
ced-4.  In  worms  with  ced-9  loss-of-function  mutations 
many cells die that normally stay alive. This is deleterious 
for  the  organism,  so  ced-9  mutants  die.  The  key  gene 
triggering  apoptosis  is  egl-1.  Its  regulation  appears  to 
govern  apoptosis  in  the  worm.  All  these  genes  have 
mammalian counterparts (discussed more fully later).

Ced-3  is  a  member  of  a  specialized  family  of  cell 
death proteases called caspases. Ced-4 is a scaffolding/
adapter protein that plays an essential role in the activa-
tion of Ced-3 from its zymogen precursor. The mamma-
lian counterpart of Ced-4 is apoptotic protease-activating 
factor-1 (Apaf-1). Ced-9 is a member of the Bcl-2 family 
of  cell  death  regulators  (Fig.  46.14).  Some  Bcl-2  family 
members protect against cell death, but others actively 
promote  cell  death.  Egl-1  is  a  BH3-only  proapoptotic 
regulator.

Phagocytosis turned out to be surprisingly complex, 
with  eight  C.  elegans  genes  encoding  proteins  that 
are  involved  in  the  engulfment  and  processing  of  cell 
corpses.  Several  are  signaling  proteins  that  reorganize 
the cytoskeleton to permit the cell to move toward and 
engulf its target. Another, the nuc-1 gene, encodes one of 
several nucleases that digest the DNA of the dead cell in 
lysosomes of cells that ingest the corpse. In mammals, this 
digestion typically is initiated within the dying cell itself.

Signals and Pathways of Apoptosis
Two principal pathways lead to cell death by apoptosis. 
These  are  introduced  only  briefly  here  and  expanded 
upon  later.  The  intrinsic  pathway  (see  Fig.  46.17)  is 
activated by internal surveillance mechanisms or signals 
sent (or not sent) by other cells. Signals that induce this 
pathway  include  DNA  damage,  exposure  to  chemicals 
that  interfere  with  a  variety  of  cellular  pathways  and 
excessive  activation  of  factors  that  promote  cell-cycle 
progression. Withdrawal of nutrients or survival signals 
from  the  environment  also  activates  the 
intrinsic 
pathway.  Those  survival  signals  include  lymphokines, 
such as interleukin-2 and interleukin-3, which are essen-
tial  for  survival  of  thymocytes;  nerve  growth  factor, 
which  is  required  for  survival  of  many  neurons;  and 

804 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

extracellular  matrix,  which  is  required  for  survival  of 
epithelial cells. Signals that activate the intrinsic pathway 
converge  on  mitochondria,  which  release  key  factors 
that drive the apoptotic response.

Signals from other cells are the primary triggers of the 
extrinsic pathway (see Fig. 46.18). Direct contact of a 
killer cell with the target cell activates specific receptors 
that  initiate  this  pathway,  starting  at  the  plasma  mem-
brane. Activation of the extrinsic pathway is one strategy 
that  cytotoxic  T  lymphocytes  use  to  kill  cells  that  are 
recognized  as  foreign  (or  as  harboring  foreign  patho-
gens).  This  pathway  is  also  widely  used  to  control  cell 
populations  in  the  immune  system.  In  many  cells,  the 
extrinsic pathway activates the intrinsic pathway, which 
is then responsible for killing the cell.

Protein Regulators and Effectors of Apoptosis
Because  the  penalty  for  misregulation  of  apoptosis  is 
death,  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  process  is  carefully 
regulated.  This  is  essential  for  cells  but  complicates 
matters  for  students.  This  section  first  lays  out  the 
over all  strategy  in  generic  terms  and  then  fills  in  some 
important details.

A cascade of proteases called caspases drives apop-
tosis. Each caspase is harmless until activated (usually by 
dimerization for initiator caspases and proteolytic cleav-
age for effector caspases). Activation of a small number 
of initiator caspases triggers a cascade that amplifies the 
response and results in activation of numerous effector 
caspases.  The  ability  of  effector  caspases  to  activate 
further  initiators  and  effectors  further  amplifies  the 
response.

This strategy of employing amplification and positive 
feedback  has  two  powerful  advantages.  First,  it  can 
provide a very rapid change in the state of the cytoplasm, 
from  pro-life  to  pro-death  within  seconds.  Second,  the 
relatively small number of initiator caspases that trigger  
the cascade constitutes a feasible target for negative regu-
lators that can rapidly quell responses that are initiated 
under borderline conditions or by mistake. This is benefi-
cial but also complicates the overall system. If initiator 
caspases  start  apoptosis  and  are  then  inactivated  by 
suppressers, how does the response ever take hold? The 
answer is at least one more level of regulation: inhibitors 
of  the  inhibitors.  This  additional  layer  of  regulation  is 
thought to enable the rapid burst of caspase activation 
that triggers the onset of apoptotic execution.

The  following  sections  discuss  the  workhorses  of 
apoptosis—the caspases—followed by regulation of the 
response.

Caspases
Caspases (cysteine aspartases) are specialized proteases 
with a cysteine in their active site that cleave their targets 
on  the  C-terminal  side  of  aspartate  residues.  Caspases 
generally 
inactivate  cellular  survival  pathways  and 

specifically activate other factors that promote cell death. 
In certain specialized instances caspases can participate 
in  pathways  leading  to  activation  of  nuclear  factor  κB 
(NF-κB;  see  Figs.  10.21  and  27.8)  and  the  immune 
response  and  also  in  terminal  differentiation.  These 
nonlethal roles of caspases are not discussed further here.
C. elegans has three caspases, one of which (Ced-3) 
is essential for cell death. In contrast, mammals have as 
many as 17 caspase-related genes (Fig. 46.11A). Analysis 
based  on  sequence  comparisons  divides  caspases  into 
two major subfamilies. The caspase 1 subfamily encodes 
enzymes that process pro–interleukin-1β to yield mature 
interleukin-1β  and  pro–interleukin-18  to  yield  mature 
interleukin-18.  Macrophages  secrete  these  cytokines, 
which cause fever and inflammation. The second caspase 
3  subfamily  of  enzymes  participates  almost  exclusively 
in apoptotic cell death.

Like  many  proteases,  caspases  are  synthesized  as  
inactive  zymogens,  known  as  procaspases.  All  living 
vertebrate  cells  synthesize  procaspases  constitutively. 
Procaspases  typically  consist  of  three  domains:  an  N- 
terminal  prodomain  followed  by  the  large  and  small 
subunits  of  the  mature  enzyme  (Fig.  46.11A–B).  Aspar-
tate  residues  between  these  three  domains  are  targets 
for cleavage by caspases. Procaspases are activated either 
by  multimerization  or  by  cleavage  and  release  of  the 
prodomains.  Following  procaspase  cleavage,  the  two 
large  and  two  small  subunits  associate  in  a  compact, 
block-like  heterotetrameric  molecule  (Fig.  46.11B–D). 
Depending on the enzyme, multimerization or cleavage 
of the procaspase permits a major conformational change 
in the polypeptide, creating two stable active site pockets 
between the large and small subunits.

Two  classes  of  caspases  are  involved  in  cell  death. 
Initiator caspases have long prodomains (Fig. 46.11A). 
They exist as monomers in cells and become autoactivated 
when  scaffolding  cofactors  promote  their  aggregation. 
Activation is induced by dimerization and does not require 
proteolytic cleavage (although cleavage typically follows 
activation).  Sequences  within  the  extended  prodomains 
are involved in targeting the initiator procaspases to the 
appropriate  cellular  locations  and  in  interactions  with 
scaffolding factors.

Effector  caspase  zymogens  are  monomers  with 
short prodomains. These inactive enzymes are typically 
incapable  of  autoactivation.  Instead,  they  are  activated 
through cleavage by initiator caspases or by other active 
effector caspases.

Scaffolding proteins and adapters play an essential 
role  in  activating  initiator  caspases  by  forming  multi-
protein activation platforms. For the intrinsic pathway 
of  cell  death,  factors  released  from  mitochondria  (dis-
cussed later) activate the scaffold protein Apaf-1, which 
is  related  to  AAA  ATPases  (adenosine  triphosphatases) 
(see Box 36.1). Active Apaf-1 forms a ring-like structure 
with seven spokes called the apoptosome (Fig. 46.17). 

 

CHAPTER 46  n  Programmed Cell Death 

805

B. Caspase maturation

Procaspases (zymogens)

Active enzyme

Pro

Prodomain

DED

LS

DED

SS
Caspase 8 (an initiator caspase)

SS
Caspase 3 (an effector caspase)

LS

C. Caspase 1

D. Caspase 3

A

Effector caspases

~p20

~p10

280

175

Casp-3

Casp-7

Casp-6

Initiator caspases

Casp-8

DED

DED

Casp-10

DED

DED

Casp-9

Casp-2

Card

Card

Proinflammatory caspases

Casp-4

Casp-5

Casp-11

Casp-12

Card

Card

Card

Card

LS

LS

LS

LS

LS

LS

LS

LS

LS

SS

SS

SS

SS

SS

SS

SS

SS

SS

Casp-1 (ICE)

Card

LS

SS

Casp-14

277

303

293

479

521

416

435

377

418

373

419

404

242

FIGURE 46.11 
INTRODUCTION TO CASPASES. A, The 13 enzymatically active mammalian caspases fall into three groups. Where it has 
been determined, the portions of the zymogens that give rise to the large (blue) and small (yellow) subunits are shown. B, Initiator caspases have 
large  prodomains  that  participate  in  subcellular  targeting.  Two  initiator  procaspases  come  together  to  form  the  active  enzyme.  C–D,  Ribbon 
diagrams of crystal structures of caspases 1 and 3. The catalytic residues come primarily from the large subunit (blue). The space-filling structure 
(red) represents a peptide inhibitor covalently bound in the active site of the enzyme. 

Binding of procaspase 9 zymogen to this platform pro-
motes dimerization and activation of the enzyme.

The scaffold proteins for the extrinsic death pathway 
are cytoplasmic domains of cell-surface receptors. When 
these receptors bind their ligands on the surface of other 
cells,  they  form  stable  trimeric  complexes  that  recruit 
adapter proteins to form a signaling complex called the 
“death-inducing signaling complex (DISC).” Interac-
tions  involving  multiple  protein–protein  interaction 
motifs link the procaspase 8 zymogen to the DISC (Box 
46.2), resulting in dimerization, activation, self-cleavage, 
and release of active caspase 8.

Caspases  cleave  as  many  as  1000  cellular  proteins 
(Fig.  46.12).  Some  targets  are  structural  proteins,  but 
many  are  involved  in  cellular  signaling.  For  example, 
caspases  cleave  several  protein  kinases.  Many  kinases 
have pseudosubstrate motifs that autoinhibit the kinase 
and can be moved out of the way in response to physi-
ological  stimuli  (see  Fig.  25.4).  Caspase  cleavage  often 
neatly  clips  off  these  regulatory  domains,  thereby  pro-
ducing constitutively active enzymes. These unregulated 
kinases  may  alter  signaling  pathways  to  promote  cell 
death.  Caspases  also  cleave  and  inactivate  several  pro-
teins that normally function in the detection and repair 
of DNA damage.

Caspases can also create factors that directly promote 
cell death. The most obvious example is caspase activa-
tion  of  other  caspases  in  the  death  cascade.  Caspases 

also  act  indirectly  to  cause  mitochondria  to  release 
factors  that  promote  cell  death  through  the  intrinsic 
pathway. Caspase cleavage of an inhibitory chaperone is 
responsible for activation of the nuclease that ultimately 
destroys the chromosomal DNA of most cells undergoing 
apoptosis (see section on CAD nuclease).

Natural Caspase Inhibitors
Because most healthy cells express initiator procaspases 
with  the  potential  to  oligomerize  and  kill  the  cell,  it  is 
important to have a mechanism that dampens any poten-
tial “noise” in the pro-apoptotic pathway. The inhibitor 
of apoptosis protein (IAP) family is defined by the pres-
ence of a motif of approximately 80 amino acids known 
as  a  baculovirus  IAP  repeat  (BIR)  domain.  This  is  a 
type of Zn2+ finger (see Fig. 10.14) that mediates protein–
protein interactions. IAP proteins inhibit caspases in two 
ways. First, they bind the caspase and invade the active 
site,  thereby  blocking  its  access  to  substrates.  Second, 
several IAPs are E3 ubiquitin ligases (see Fig. 23.3) that 
ubiquitylate  caspases  and  tag  them  for  destruction  by 
proteasomes.

If  IAP  proteins  inactivate  caspases,  then  how  is  the 
apoptotic  response  ever  initiated?  Cells  also  express 
several molecules that can bind and inactivate IAPs. The 
best characterized of these, is the second mitochondrial 
activator  of  caspases  (Smac  or  DIABLO).  Smac  is  nor-
mally sequestered in mitochondria, but is released into 

806 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

BOX 46.2  Matchmaking for Cell Death: the Key Is in the Domains

There are so many different proteins involved in apoptosis 
that  even  experts  have  a  difficult  time  keeping  them  all 
straight. However, an understanding of the general principles 
is  much  simplified  if  we  recognize  that  most  proteins 
involved  in  apoptosis  regulation  are  built  from  a  relatively 
limited number of modules, which act as sites for protein–
protein interactions. The following are the most important 
modules for apoptosis.

Bcl-2  family  members  are  defined  by  the  presence  of 
short  regions  of  conserved  sequence,  referred  to  as  BH 
domains  (Bcl-2  homology).  One  of  these,  the  approxi-
mately  20-residue  BH3  domain,  found  in  all  Bcl-2  family 
members,  promotes  complex  formation  between  Bcl-2 
family  members  by  docking  into  a  so-called  BH3  binding  
groove.

Four  domains  regulate  caspase  targeting  and  activation. 
Although the amino acid sequences of these domains have 
diverged extensively, all are regions of approximately 80 to 
90 residues that form a characteristic bundle of six α-helices. 
These  domains  all  were  present  in  the  last  eumetazoan 
common ancestor.

1.  The death domain (DD) is found in many proteins that 
are involved in signaling pathways related to cell death. 
These  include  cell  death  receptors,  such  as  Fas  (and 
others),  and  adapter  molecules,  such  as  FADD  (Fas-
associated death domain).

2.  The  death  effector  domain  (DED)  is  found  in  adapters 
such as FADD, the prodomains of caspases 8 and 10, and 
certain inhibitors of apoptosis.

3.  The  Pyrin  domain (PYD) is found in proteins involved 
in  inflammation  (such  as  microbial  sensors)  and  the 
activation of caspase 1.

4.  The  caspase  recruitment  domain  (CARD)  is  found  in 
several adapter proteins involved in cell death, including 
CED-4 and Apaf-1, and in caspases 1, 2, and 9.
The domains have similar folds, but different distributions 
of  surface  charge.  As  a  result,  they  prefer  to  interact  with 
themselves (ie, DD–DD, DED–DED, PYD–PYD, and CARD–
CARD). Such interactions are said to be homophilic. When 
a new apoptosis effector protein is identified, it is possible 
to predict from an analysis of its amino acid sequence which 
of the known proteins it is most likely to interact with.

A. Inactivation of protective factors and activation
     of proapoptotic factors by caspases

p53

pRb
mdm2

Surface
receptors

Ras

Raf

FAK

Focal
contact
Paxillin

Cdk/cyclins

active

p27
Wee1
APC

p21

MEK

PP2A

Cdk/cyclin

inactive

Cell-cycle

arrest

NF-κB

STAT1

Survival

ERK

ICAD/
DFF45

CAD

PKCθ
PKCδ

?

Death

JNK-p38

B. Pathway of nuclear apoptosis

CYTOPLASM

Initiator
caspases
(8, 9, etc.)

Effector
caspases

(3, 6, 7, etc.)

Cytoplasmic
targets

CAD /
 ICAD

CAD

I CAD
Domain
nuclease

PARP

P A

RP

Caspase-6

Lamins

NA
I
M S

L

NUCLEUS

Fragmentation
nuclease

RasGAP
Actin
Gas2

Cb1/1b

PI3K

Akt

?

Bad
Bcl-2
Bcl-XL

Bid

MEKK1

PAK2

Mst1/Krs

FIGURE 46.12  SOME WAYS THAT CASPASES PROMOTE CELL DEATH. A, A few of the many proteins cleaved by caspases in apoptotic 
cell death. Proteins shown in green normally have a role in keeping the cell alive and are inactivated by caspases. Proteins shown in  red are 
turned into active death-promoting factors as a result of caspase cleavage. Proteins shown in black are not cleaved and are included to show 
the pathways that are affected by cleavage. Caspases inactivate a number of pathways that promote cell survival, thereby strongly reinforcing 
the decision of the cell to die. B, Some of the roles of caspases in disassembly of the nucleus. CAD, caspase-activated deoxyribonuclease; ERK, 
extracellular  signal-regulated  kinase;  ICAD,  inhibitor  of  caspase-activated  deoxyribonuclease;  JNK,  c-Jun  N-terminal  kinase;  MEK,  mitogen 
activated protein/extracellular signal-related kinase kinase; NF-κB, nuclear factor κB; PI3K, phosphatidylinositol 3′-kinase; PKC, protein kinase 
C; STAT, signal transducer and activator of transcription. 

the cytoplasm when the intrinsic pathway of apoptosis 
is  initiated  as  a  result  of  permeabilization  of  the  mito-
chondrial  outer  membrane.  It  then  binds  to  the  BIR 
domain,  inactivating  the  IAPs.  Mathematical  modeling 
shows  that  inactivation  of  IAPs  by  Smac  is  needed  to 
make  the  proapoptotic  signal  act  like  a  switch  rather 
than a graded response.

IAPs  were  discovered  in  studies  of  the  mechanisms 
viruses  use  to  avoid  being  eliminated  by  cell  death. 
When viruses infect cells and disassemble their capsids, 
they become vulnerable to suicide defense mechanisms: 
If cells can kill themselves before the virus has time to 
complete its life cycle, they will take the virus with them, 
and  the  organism  will  survive.  To  defend  against  this, 

 

CHAPTER 46  n  Programmed Cell Death 

807

viruses pilfer genes encoding cellular proteins and adapt 
them for their own means. For example, insect baculo-
viruses make two proteins that inhibit apoptosis, keeping 
the  cell  alive  long  enough  for  the  virus  to  reproduce. 
One of these, IAP, was derived from a cellular gene. The 
origin of the second IAP inhibitor, p35, is less clear. p35 
is a broad-spectrum caspase inhibitor that is thought to 
work  by  a  serpin-like  mechanism.  Serpins  are  special 
protease  substrates  that,  after  cleavage,  form  a  tight 
complex  with  the  enzyme  and  inactivate  it.  Several 

A. DNA cleavage during apoptosis

mammalian pox viruses also make a serpin-like inhibitor 
of certain caspases called CrmA.

CAD Nuclease and Its Chaperone ICAD
The  chromosomal  DNA  is  destroyed  during  apoptosis. 
The  nucleases  involved  in  cleaving  the  cellular  DNA 
during  (and  after)  apoptotic  cell  death  fall  into  two 
classes. Cell autonomous nucleases degrade the DNA 
within  the  dying  cell  (Fig.  46.13A).  The  best  known  is 

B. Active CAD nuclease

DNA

Proapoptotic
stimulus

Execution

Engulfment

Clearance

Large

fragments

Nucleosomal

fragments

Further digestion

within phagocytic cell

Cell autonomous

nucleases

Waste management

nucleases

Necrosis

Lysis

Extracellular digestion

C. ICAD regulates CAD function

Apoptotic stimuli
Caspase activation

D. Drug-induced DNA
     cleavage in vivo

E. Effect of purified CAD on
     isolated nuclei in vitro

CAD /
 ICAD

ICAD
protein

CAD mRNA

Inactive
ICAD

Active
CAD

Dimerized CAD
cleaves DNA

23
9.4
6.6

2.0

0.56

CYTOPLASM

NUCLEUS

10

2 3 4 6 h

1

2

3

4

3 ICAD/CAD
   + Casp-3

FIGURE  46.13  NUCLEASES DIGEST THE CELLULAR DNA DURING APOPTOSIS. A, In apoptosis, the DNA is digested first to large 
fragments and later to nucleosome-sized pieces (see Fig. 13.1) by cell autonomous nucleases expressed within the dying cell. Waste management 
nucleases made by other cells also have an essential role in cleaning up apoptotic and necrotic debris. B, The predominant cell autonomous 
nuclease (CAD) has a scissors-like structure. C, ICAD is an inhibitory chaperone for CAD, promoting its folding on the ribosome and continuing 
as an inhibitor when CAD is stored in the nucleus. ICAD cleavage leads to CAD activation. D, Cleavage of the chromosomal DNA by CAD during 
chemotherapy-induced apoptosis of a leukemia cell line. DNA separated according to size by electrophoresis on an agarose gel was stained with 
ethidium bromide. The ladder of bands reflects cleavage between adjacent nucleosomes. E, Activated CAD causes chromatin condensation and 
appearance of an apoptotic morphology in isolated cell nuclei. Cloned CAD and ICAD were expressed together in Escherichia coli and incubated 
with nuclei. ICAD cleavage with caspase 3 released active CAD, which degrades the nuclear DNA (Lane 3). Other lanes: DNA gel size markers 
(left); nuclei incubated with buffer or caspase 3 alone (Lanes 1 and 2, respectively); same experiment as in Lane 3 but performed by using a 
mutant  ICAD  that  could  not  be  cleaved  by  caspase  3  (Lane  4).  To  the  right  is  an  electron  micrograph  of  a  thin  section  of  one  nucleus  with 
condensed chromatin at the nuclear periphery. CAD, caspase-activated deoxyribonuclease; ICAD, inhibitor of caspase-activated deoxyribonucle-
ase; mRNA, messenger RNA. (A, Modified from Samejima K, Earnshaw WC. Trashing the genome: The role of nucleases during apoptosis. Nat 
Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2005;6:677–688. B, For more information, see Protein Data Bank [PDB; www.rcsb.org] file 1V0D from Woo EJ, Kim YG, Kim 
MS, et al. Structural mechanism for inactivation and activation of CAD/DFF40 in the apoptotic pathway. Mol Cell. 2004;14:531–539. D, From 
Kaufmann SH. Induction of endonucleolytic DNA cleavage in human acute myelogenous leukemia cells by etoposide, camptothecin, and other 
cytotoxic  anticancer  drugs:  a  cautionary  note.  Cancer  Res.  1989;49:5870–5878.  E,  Courtesy  K.  Samejima,  Wellcome  Trust  Institute  for  Cell 
Biology, University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom.)

808 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

the caspase-activated DNase (CAD; see later discussion). 
A mitochondrial nuclease known as endonuclease G may 
also degrade DNA in some cell types. Cell autonomous 
nucleases are dispensable for cell death and for the life 
of the organism. They might have evolved to eliminate 
viral  DNA  as  part  of  the  suicide  defense  response 
described in the previous section.

Waste management nucleases clean up the debris 
after cells die. They either function within lysosomes of 
cells that have ingested apoptotic cell fragments or are 
secreted  into  the  extracellular  space.  DNase  II,  one  of 
the  most  important  waste  management  nucleases,  is 
essential  for  life.  Mouse  embryos  that  lack  DNase  II 
become overwhelmed with undegraded DNA and die.

Cell  autonomous  nucleases  act  in  two  stages.  After  
an  initial  cleavage  of  the  chromosomes  into  fragments  
of  roughly  50,000  base  pairs,  DNA  is  usually  cleaved 
between  nucleosomes,  producing  a  characteristic 
“ladder” of DNA fragments with a periodicity of approxi-
mately  200  base  pairs.  This  ladder  is  seen  when  DNA 
isolated from apoptotic cells is subjected to gel electro-
phoresis. The responsible nuclease is CAD. CAD is nor-
mally present in a complex with ICAD (inhibitor of CAD 
[Fig.  46.13C]).  The  complex  of  CAD  and  ICAD  is  also 
known  as  DNA  fragmentation  factor  (DFF).  ICAD  is  a 
chaperone required to fold CAD into an active conforma-
tion during translation on the ribosome. However, ICAD 
also inhibits the nuclease activity of CAD. This dual func-
tion of ICAD guarantees that only inactive CAD can be 
synthesized in healthy cells. During apoptosis, caspase 3 
cleaves ICAD and releases active CAD nuclease.

Bcl-2 Proteins and the Intrinsic Pathway 
of Apoptotic Cell Death
As mentioned previously, mitochondria are key players in 
a pathway to cell death that is triggered by a variety of 
toxic  insults  (Fig.  46.17).  The  Bcl-2  family  of  proteins 
regulates these mitochondrial events. The following sec-
tions describe this important protein family and the regu-
lation of the intrinsic pathway of apoptosis.

Bcl-2 Proteins
Bcl-2 proteins can be grouped into three subfamilies (Fig. 
46.14).  Bcl-2  protectors  protect  cells  against  apoptosis. 
Bcl-2 killers (eg, Bax and Bak) are proapoptotic proteins 
that actively kill cells. Bcl-2 regulators (widely known as 
BH3-only proteins) promote cell killing by either interfer-
ing  with  the  protectors  or  activating  the  killers.  Bcl-2 
proteins primarily regulate the release of death-promoting 
factors  from  mitochondria  when  cells  receive  signals 
that activate the intrinsic pathway.

C. elegans genetics identified a gene, ced-9, that pro-
tects  cells  against  apoptosis  and  another  gene,  egl-1, 
that inactivates ced-9 protein and triggers apoptosis. In  
ced-9 mutants, many cells die during development that 

Bcl-2 family

Killers
Bax
Bak
Bok / Mtd
Bcl-xS

Protectors
Bcl-2
Bcl-xL
Bcl-W
Mcl-1
A1
Boo/Diva
C. elegans ced-9
Adenovirus E1B19K
Epstein-Barr virus BHRF1

Regulators
Bad
Bid
Bim
BmF
Hrk
C. elegans Egl-1

Bik / Nbk
HRK
Puma
Noxa

BH4

BH3

BH1

BH3

BH1

BH3

BH2

BH2

Protectors

Killers

Regulators

FIGURE 46.14  THE BCL-2 FAMILY OF APOPTOTIC REGULA-
TORS. C. elegans, Caenorhabditis elegans. 

normally  survive  into  the  adulthood.  A  Ced-9  mutation 
kills the worm. Human Bcl-2 is functionally and structur-
ally homologous to C. elegans Ced-9 and can substitute 
for  it  in  living  worms.  This  ability  of  a  human  gene  to 
protect nematodes reveals that the fundamental machin-
ery of apoptotic cell death has been conserved over great 
evolutionary distances.

Bcl-2 family members are defined by the presence of 
one to four short blocks of conserved protein sequence 
called  BH  (Bcl-2  homology)  domains.  Antiapoptotic 
Bcl-2  protectors  typically  have  four  of  the  domains. 
Proapoptotic  Bcl-2  killers  typically  have  three  of  these 
domains,  while  the  Bcl-2  regulators  have  only  the  BH3 
domain.  The  BH3  domain  is  a  short  helix  that  fits  into 
a  groove  on  the  surface  of  both  Bcl-2  protectors  and 
killers, forming complexes that regulate their activity. It is 
believed that the Bcl-2 protectors regulate the behavior of 
Bcl-2 killers by a similar interaction. For example, the Bcl-2 
protein forms a complex with a proapoptotic Bcl-2 killer 
called Bax, thereby interfering with the ability of Bax to 
kill cells. Binding of BH3-only proteins to Bcl-2 protectors 
can  inactivate  their  antiapoptotic  functions.  Egl-1  is  a 
BH3-only protein and this is how it triggers apoptosis. A 
new generation of BH3 mimetic drugs induces apoptosis 
of cancer cells by mimicking this second mechanism.

Genetic experiments in mice revealed several differ-
ent  functions  for  Bcl-2  family  members.  Mice  born 
without  Bcl-2  have  deficiencies  of  the  immune  system 
that are best understood if one role of this protein in vivo 
is to render lymphocytes resistant to proapoptotic signals 
during immune system maturation. Mice lacking another 
pro-life family member, Bcl-xL, die during embryogenesis, 
apparently  as  a  result  of  widespread  death  of  neurons  
in  the  central  and  peripheral  nervous  systems  and 

 

CHAPTER 46  n  Programmed Cell Death 

809

hematopoietic cells in the liver. In contrast, loss of the 
killers Bax plus Bak makes cells highly resistant to apop-
tosis by a wide variety of intrinsic pathway stimuli.

Bcl-2 Family Members and Cancer
A gene that prevents cells from dying poses a potential 
danger in multicellular organisms, in which rates of cell 
proliferation  and  death  must  be  balanced  carefully.  In 
fact, the name Bcl-2 comes from the discovery that this 
gene is the culprit responsible for certain types of B-cell 
lymphoma.  These  particular  lymphomas  arise  when  a 
chromosome  translocation,  involving  chromosomes  14 
and 18, moves the Bcl-2 gene into the immunoglobulin 
heavy-chain  gene  cluster,  a  site  of  very  active  gene 
transcription in B lymphocytes. Elevated transcription of 
Bcl-2 is thought to be directly responsible for the cancer-
ous phenotype in these patients, making Bcl-2 a cancer-
promoting oncogene (see Chapter 41).

Unlike  many  other  oncogenes,  Bcl-2  overexpression 
does  not  cause  cell  proliferation.  Instead,  it  disrupts  
the balance of regulation between life and death. Cells 
that overexpress Bcl-2 protein actually grow somewhat 
slower  than  normal  but  are  highly  resistant  to  many 
stimuli that normally promote cell death. The net result 
is  an  accumulation  of  B  cells:  a  lymphoma.  Other  anti-
apoptotic Bcl-2 family members are amplified in a variety 
of solid tumors and loss of microRNAs directed at Bcl-1 
is thought to play a major role in development of chronic 
lymphocytic leukemia. Fig. 46.15 shows an example of 
Bcl-2 conferring resistance to death when the cell cycle 
is perturbed by expression of an oncogene.

Intrinsic Pathway of Apoptotic Death
In addition to their role in energy production, mitochon-
dria have an essential role as sensors of the health of the 
cell. If cells sense insults from which they cannot recover, 
mitochondria  trigger  the  intrinsic  pathway  of  cell 
death  (Fig.  46.17).  Bcl-2  family  members  regulate  this 
pathway.  The  regulation  seems  straightforward  in  C. 
elegans, in which the protector CED-9 (Bcl-2–like) binds 
to the CED-4 scaffolding protein (Apaf-1-like) and inter-
feres with its activation of the CED-3 caspase. Apoptosis 
is  induced  when  the  regulator  BH3-only  protein  EGL-1 
binds to CED-9 and blocks it from inactivating CED-4.

In  mammals,  the  situation  is  more  complex,  partly 
because Bcl-2 family members are more numerous and 
partly because they do not interact in such a straightfor-
ward  fashion.  In  mammals,  two  of  the  killer  proteins, 
Bax and Bak, are essential for activation of the intrinsic 
pathway.  In  healthy  cells,  Bak  is  loosely  associated  
with the mitochondrial outer membrane, and Bax is in 
the cytoplasm (Fig. 46.17). On receipt of a proapoptotic 
stimulus, Bax and Bak insert deeply into the mitochon-
drial  outer  membrane  and  form  oligomeric  membrane 

)
l
o
r
t
n
o
c
 
%

(
 
y
t
i
l
i

i

b
a
v
 
l
l

e
C

100

80

60

40

20

0

Normal levels of c-myc
Overexpressed c-myc
and overexpressed Bcl-2

Overexpressed c-myc

0

30

60

90

120

c-myc induction (min)

FIGURE 46.15  BCL-2 PROTECTS CELLS FROM ONCOGENE-
INDUCED CELL DEATH. Chinese hamster ovary cells die when they 
are  induced  to  express  abnormally  high  levels  of  the  c-myc  protein, 
but simultaneous expression of the Bcl-2 protein rescues them from 
this effect. These cells contain many copies of the c-myc gene under 
control  of  a  promoter  that  is  activated  when  the  cells  are  briefly 
exposed to high temperature (43°C for 90 minutes). The curves show 
the percentage of viable cells remaining at various times following the 
induction  of  c-myc  expression.  The  Bcl-2  gene  was  introduced  into 
these cells on a plasmid under the control of a promoter that is always 
active. The blue line represents the parental cell line lacking either the 
cloned c-myc or Bcl-2 genes. (Note that approximately 40% of these 
cells die following the heat treatment used to induce  c-myc expres-
sion.) The yellow line shows that the cells that produce high levels of 
c-myc protein alone rapidly die (by apoptosis). The red line shows that 
cells expressing both the c-myc and Bcl-2 proteins survive the treat-
ment  almost  as  well  as  the  parental  cells.  (From  Bissonnette  RP, 
Echeverri F, Mahboubi A, et al. Apoptotic cell death induced by c-myc 
is inhibited by bcl-2. Nature. 1992;359:552–554.)

pores that allow the release of pro-apoptotic factors from 
the  mitochondrial  intermembrane  space.  Binding  of 
antiapoptotic Bcl-2 family members to Bax/Bak somehow 
prevents  mitochondrial  outer  membrane  permeabiliza-
tion.  BH3-only  family  members  can  either  directly 
promote death by facilitating Bax/Bak oligomerization or 
indirectly  promote  it  by  binding  and  neutralizing  anti-
apoptotic Bcl-2 family members.

The proapoptotic factors released from the mitochon-
drial intermembrane space by Bax and Bak include the 
electron transport protein cytochrome c (see Fig. 19.5), 
Smac, and endonuclease G (Fig. 46.16). These mitochon-
drial proteins actively promote apoptotic cell death. In 
the  cytoplasm,  cytochrome  c  binds  to  the  scaffolding 
protein  Apaf-1,  a  mammalian  homolog  of  C.  elegans 
CED-4  protein,  causing  it  to  undergo  a  conformational 
change that exposes a hidden bound adenosine diphos-
phate (ADP) to solvent. Exchange of this ADP for deoxy-
adenosine triphosphate (dATP) allows Apaf-1 to form a 
wheel-like structure with seven spokes called the apopto-
some (Fig. 46.17). Apaf-1 in the apoptosome binds caspase 
9 through an N-terminal caspase recruitment domain.
Binding  to  the  apoptosome  elevates  the  catalytic 
activity of procaspase 9 approximately 2000-fold without 
the need for its cleavage. Thus, the active form of caspase 
9  is  an  oligomeric  complex  of  the  procaspase  with  
the  apoptosome.  Activated  caspase  9  then  cleaves 

810 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

A. Life

Intermembranous
space

Mitochondrial

outer membrane
permeabilization

B. Death

Caspases

Bid

Activation of
downstream

caspases

Other
targets

Other
signals

Caspase 9
activation

To nucleus

Nuclear

disassembly

Bax
Bak

Cytochrome c
Smac, AIF
Endonuclease G
Others?

Cytochrome c
Smac

AIF
Endonuclease G

Others

Other
targets

FIGURE  46.16  MITOCHONDRIA  INTEGRATE  A  CELL’S  LIFE 
AND  DEATH  DECISIONS.  A,  In  healthy  cells,  a  number  of  factors 
that promote apoptosis are stored in the intermembrane space of the 
mitochondria.  B,  In  cells  undergoing  apoptosis,  BH3-only  proteins 
trigger the proapoptotic Bcl-2 family members to induce the release 
of these death-promoting factors; this initiates an amplifying cycle that 
ultimately  leads  to  cell  death.  AIF,  apoptosis-inducing  factor;  Smac, 
second mitochondrial activator of caspases. 

multiple  procaspase  3  zymogens,  amplifying  the  cell 
death cascade. It also cleaves itself, triggering its release  
from  the  apoptosome  with  a  resulting  loss  of  activity. 
This  autocleavage  acts  like  a  timer  limiting  apopto-
some activity.

This cascade can be further amplified in at least two 
ways.  First,  caspase  3  cleaves  other  effector  caspases, 
directly  amplifying  the  cascade.  In  addition,  active  cas-
pases cleave the BH3-only protein Bid, which then acti-
vates  more  Bax  and  Bak  in  a  feedback  loop,  thereby 
promoting the release of more cytochrome c and Smac, 
and enhancing caspase 9 activation.

It  was  extremely  surprising  to  find  that  an  essential 
metabolic  protein  such  as  cytochrome  c  has  a  second 
function  that  is  essential  for  death.  Among  the  studies 
supporting the Jekyll-and-Hyde–like nature of this protein 
in  life  and  death  was  the  engineering  of  mice  whose 
cytochrome  c  can  function  in  electron  transport  but 
cannot bind Apaf-1. These mice die as a result of brain 
abnormalities caused by insufficient cell death.

Extrinsic Pathway of Apoptotic Death
Cells express at least six different cell surface molecules, 
collectively  termed  death  receptors,  that  can  trigger 
apoptotic death. Protein ligands on the surface of other 

A. Life

Metabolites up
to 10,000 D

MOMP

Bak

VDAC

Bax

Bid

3

3

6

Caspases
cleave Bid

tBid

i

t

P
r
o
e
n
s
 
n
o

C. Apoptosome
     (Apaf-1 scaffold)

3

9

Activation of
downstream
caspases

Autoactivation
of caspase 9 (stays
bound to apoptosome)

B. Death

9

Procaspase 9
Procaspase CARD domain

9

t
 
t

o
 
s
c
a
e

l

Apaf-1
CARD
domain

Cytochrome c

dADP

***

Smac, AIF

endonuclease G

Apaf-1
(ATP)

Aggregation 
of Apaf-1 scaffold
(apoptosome)

Conformational
change in Apaf-1
(exchanges dADP for ATP)

27nm

FIGURE 46.17 
INTRINSIC CELL DEATH PATHWAY. A–B, Following activation by the BH3-only protein Bid, Bax and Bak form a pore that 
releases  cytochrome  c.  Released  cytochrome  c  binds  to  Apaf-1,  inducing  a  conformational  change  leading  to  formation  of  the  apoptosome, 
which binds and activates procaspase 9 via scaffold-induced oligomerization. Activated caspase 9 subsequently activates downstream effector 
caspases, leading to cell death. C, Molecular organization of the apoptosome. (C, Modified from PDB file 3JBT from Zhou M, Li Y, Hu Q, et al. 
Atomic structure of the apoptosome: mechanism of cytochrome c- and dATP-mediated activation of Apaf-1. Genes Dev. 2015;29:2349–2361.)

 

CHAPTER 46  n  Programmed Cell Death 

811

cells bind and activate these receptors, turning on path-
ways that can lead to apoptotic death.

One well-characterized death receptor called Fas (also 
known  as  Apo1  or  CD95)  is  a  member  of  the  tumor 
necrosis  factor  receptor  family  (see  Fig.  24.9).  Fas  is  a 
type  I  membrane  protein  whose  extracellular  domain 
consists of three cysteine-rich domains (Fig. 24.9 shows 
the atomic structure of the related trimeric tumor necro-
sis factor receptor with bound ligand). The cytoplasmic 
domain  of  Fas  contains  a  death  domain  of  approxi-
mately  80  residues,  which  is  shared  by  all  the  death 
receptors (see Box 46.2).

The Fas ligand is a trimeric 40-kD intrinsic membrane 
protein found on the surface of cells. Cytotoxic T lym-
phocytes use Fas ligand to rid the body of virally infected 
cells. When a cytotoxic T lymphocyte contacts a target 
cell, the Fas ligand on the lymphocyte surface binds to 
Fas on the target cell and initiates the extrinsic pathway 
of apoptotic death (Fig. 46.18). Ligand binding activates 
signaling  from  the  intracellular  death  domain  of  Fas, 
possibly  by  stabilizing  Fas  trimers  or  by  altering  their 
conformation.  Activated  Fas  binds  an  adapter  protein 

called  FADD  (Fas-associated  protein  with  a  death 
domain), assembling the DISC. The DISC is an activation 
platform  that  binds  procaspase  8  through  interactions 
involving another type of motif called the death effec-
tor  domain,  which  is  present  on  both  FADD  and 
the prodomain of procaspase 8. Procaspase 8 monomers 
dimerize  on  the  DISC  and  acquire  catalytic  activity. 
These  dimers  can  cleave  neighboring  dimers,  creating 
and  releasing  heterotetrameric  active  caspase  8,  which 
can initiate the caspase cascade by activating downstream 
effector caspases. Frequently, caspase 8 cleaves the BH3-
only  protein  Bid,  thereby  activating  the  intrinsic  death 
pathway (Fig. 46.17).

The extrinsic pathway poses considerable risk for the 
cell.  Fas  is  constitutively  present  in  the  cell  membrane 
and can form at least transient trimers in the absence of 
binding by its ligand. How do cells avoid the accidental 
activation  of  apoptosis  caused  by  chance  binding  of 
procaspase 8 to naturally occurring transient Fas trimers?
Cells  express  a  caspase-related  protein  called  cFLIP 
(FLICE-like inhibitory protein; FLICE is another name for 
caspase 8) that looks very much like a catalytically dead 

Unfolded FasR
binding domains

FasR CD95 APO-1

A. Preligation

KILLER
CELL

Monomers

8

TARGET
CELL

8

C. Release of active caspase 8

8

8

Fas
ligand

Trimers

FADD

Death domain
Death effector
domain

8

Procaspase 8

B. Ligand docked on a trimerized receptor

Molecular
scaffold forms

8

8

8

8

Clustering of
caspase 8

Uncleaved caspase 8
active on DISC

Released active
caspase 8

8

8

8

DISC

(signaling
platform)

Caspase 8
cleaves Bid

Procaspases 3,6,7

Bid

3

6

7

E. Activation of the
     intrinsic death
     pathway (see 
     Fig. 46.17)

D. Activation
     of effector 
     caspases
Active caspases 3,6,7

7

F. Death

6

3

FIGURE 46.18  EXTRINSIC CELL DEATH PATHWAY. The pathways shown are downstream of the Fas cell death receptor. A, Preligation. 
B, Ligand docked on a trimerized receptor. C, Release of active caspase. D, Activation of effector caspases. E, Activation of the intrinsic death 
pathway (Fig. 46.17). F. Death (see the text for a detailed description). DISC, death-inducing signaling complex; FADD, Fas-associated death 
domain. 

812 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

version of procaspase 8. When expressed at high levels, 
cFLIP  coassembles  with  procaspase  8  monomers  creat-
ing an enzyme with altered activity that does not trigger 
cell death. This role of cFLIP may be to dampen the Fas 
response locally to ensure that the cascade does not get 
activated by mistake. Another role of FLIP is to combine 
with  caspase  8  to  ensure  that  TNFα  (tumor  necrosis 
factor α) signaling, which occurs in many immune cells, 
promotes  inflammation  rather  than  killing  cells  by 
necroptosis (see later).

Role of the Fas Death Receptor in Normal 
and Diseased Cells
Fas  is  important  for  regulation  of  the  immune  system, 
but also has a very unexpected role in cancer cells. Mice 
with mutated  Fas (the  lpr mutation) or Fas ligand (the 
gld mutation) accumulate excessive lymphocytes. In the 
appropriate  genetic  background,  these  mice  tend  to 
develop autoimmune disorders.

Fas is important in regulating the life span of activated 
tissue T and B lymphocytes. Normally, T cells die within 
a few days of their activation during an immune response. 
Activation initiates the expression of Fas ligand on the T 
cells  themselves.  This  new  Fas  ligand  interacts  by  an 
unknown mechanism with Fas already on the cell surface, 
causing  the  cell  to  commit  apoptotic  suicide.  T-cell 
activation  also  downregulates  the  expression  of  cFLIP, 
thus permitting activated caspase 8 to more effectively 
kill  the  cell.  A  similar  mechanism  (export  of  Fas  and  
Fas ligand to the surface of the same cell) is responsible 
for some examples of p53-induced cell death and some 
instances  of  cell  death  following  exposure  to  chemo-
therapeutic agents.

These features of Fas might seem to make this system 
useful  in  the  treatment  of  cancer.  Unfortunately  this  is 
not  the  case,  because  Fas  does  more  than  signal  to 
promote cell death. It can also signal to several pathways 
to promote cell survival and migration. In fact, Fas signal-
ing in cancer cells can actually promote tumor growth 
and  metastasis.  This  serves  as  an  example  of  the  com-
plexity of cell signaling networks.

Some tissues, like the lens of the eye and the testis, 
avoid  immune  and  inflammatory  responses  by  express-
ing  Fas  ligand.  Immune  effector  cells  (which  express  
Fas on their surface) that enter these tissues encounter 
Fas ligand and die by apoptosis. These tissues are known 
as  immune-privileged.  Not  surprisingly,  certain  tumor 
cells  subvert  this  strategy  as  protection  against  the 
immune  system.  Melanoma  cells  expressing  Fas  ligand 
establish  tumors  particularly  efficiently.  Some  tumor 
cells, especially those from colon and lung cancers, also 
defend  themselves  against  immune  surveillance  with 
so-called  decoy  receptors.  A  secreted  Fas  decoy 
receptor  blocks  Fas  ligand  on  cytotoxic  T  cells  so  that  
it  cannot  engage  Fas  on  the  surface  of  the  tumor  

cells.  Other  decoy  receptors  remain  membrane  bound 
but  do  not  signal  cell  death  when  they  bind  ligand 
because their intracellular domains lack functional death 
domains.

Linking Apoptosis to the Cell Cycle  
by p53
No  obligate  link  exists  between  particular  cell-cycle 
phases and apoptosis. Noncycling G0 cells can undergo 
apoptosis,  and  cycling  cells  appear  able  to  do  so  from 
any cell-cycle phase. However, one link between apop-
tosis and the cell-cycle machinery is firmly established. 
This  involves  the  p53  tumor  suppresser  and  DNA  
damage.

The p53 transcription factor is one of the downstream 
EFFECTORS  of  the  DNA  damage  response  pathway  (see 
Fig. 43.11). When cells sense DNA damage induced by 
agents such as ionizing radiation, p53 levels rise dramati-
cally. When stabilized and activated by phosphorylation 
(see  Fig.  41.14)  p53  upregulates  the  expression  of  a 
number of genes, including the Cdk inhibitor p21, which 
blocks the entry into the S and M phases. p53 also can 
trigger an apoptotic response in instances in which the 
DNA  damage  is  too  severe  to  repair  (Fig.  46.19).  This 
tumor-suppressor protein is critical in the body’s defense 
against  cancer.  Mutations  in  the  p53  gene/protein  are 
found in approximately 50% of all human cancers.

A  direct  connection  between  p53  and  apoptosis  
was  revealed  by  overexpressing  the  cloned  p53  gene  
in different cell types. In most cells, overexpression of  
p53  arrests  the  cell  cycle  at  the  G1/S  boundary. 
However,  ectopic  expression  of  cloned  p53  in  certain 
cancer-derived  cell  lines  causes  the  cells  to  undergo 
apoptosis.

The role of p53 in apoptosis was confirmed in trans-
genic mice lacking a functional p53 gene (p53 knockout 
mice). These mice develop normally but are extremely 
prone to cancer at a very young age. Thymocytes isolated 
from  p53  knockout  mice  are  highly  resistant  to  the 
induction  of  apoptosis  by  ionizing  radiation  and  other 
agents  that  cause  DNA  breaks  (Fig.  46.19B).  However, 
p53 is not involved in all types of apoptosis. For example, 
the same thymocytes isolated from p53 knockout mice 
show normal induction of apoptosis following exposure 
to glucocorticoid hormone (Fig. 46.19).

p53 promotes apoptosis by functioning as a transcrip-
tional  activator.  It  controls,  among  others,  the  well-
studied death-promoting genes Bax, Fas (CD95/APO-1), 
and APAF-1. However, the key target gene is PUMA (p53 
modulated upregulator of apoptosis), a BH3-only protein 
that promotes apoptotic cell death by activating Bax and 
Bak.  PUMA  knockout  mice  show  defects  in  cell  death 
pathways  that  are  essentially  identical  to  those  seen  in 
p53 knockout mice and not seen in mice that lack Bax, 
Fas, or Apaf-1.

 

CHAPTER 46  n  Programmed Cell Death 

813

A. Glucocorticoid
     hormone–treated

B. Irradiated

inflammation as this can trigger an immune response in 
the early phases of infection.

)

%

(
 
y
t
i
l
i

i

b
a
v
 
l
l

e
C

100

80

60

40

20

0

)

%

(
 
y
t
i
l
i

i

b
a
v
 
l
l

e
C

100

80

60

40

20

0

p53
– / –

p53
+ / –
+ / +

0

5

15

20
10
Time (h)

25

0

5

15

20
10
Time (h)

25

C. Control

D. Irradiated

Pyroptosis 

(proinflammatory  programmed  cell 
death) occurs when signaling by a variety of cytoplasmic 
receptors in response to pathogen infection leads to the  
formation of the inflammasome, a cytosolic complex 
that contains numerous caspase 1 activation sites. Pyrin 
domains (PYDs) in these receptors are linked to caspase 
recruitment  domains  (CARDs),  which  in  turn  recruit 
caspases 1, 4, and 5 (1 and 11 in mice). Despite being 
the first caspase to be described, caspase 1 was the last 
to be shown to be involved in a programmed cell death 
response.

The function of caspase 1 is to produce interleukin-1β 
(IL-1β) and interleukin-18 (IL-18) by proteolytic process-
ing  of  their  precursors.  These  proteins  are  secreted 
together with caspase 1 by an unconventional pathway 
that is still being investigated and may involve cell lysis. 
IL-1β  is  a  proinflammatory  cytokine  that  triggers  the 
fever  response  by  acting  on  the  hypothalamus.  It  also 
promotes the proliferation of immune cells, among other 
activities. IL-18 promotes increased immune cell recruit-
ment and activation, as well as modifying local cells to 
facilitate adaptive immune responses. This proinflamma-
tory  signaling  facilitates  a  ramping  up  of  the  immune 
response to the pathogen.

FIGURE  46.19  LINK  BETWEEN  p53  AND  DNA  DAMAGE-
INDUCED APOPTOTIC DEATH. A–B, Survival of thymocytes from 
three strains of mice after exposure to glucocorticoids or irradiation. 
Cell death was from apoptosis. The strains were as follows: wild-type 
mice  (yellow),  heterozygous  mice  having  one  good  copy  of  the  p53 
gene  and  one  defective  copy  (red),  and  mice  lacking  any  functional 
copy of the p53 gene (blue). Thymocytes that lack p53 are resistant 
to radiation-induced apoptosis but show normal induction of apopto-
sis following exposure to glucocorticoid hormone. C–D, Induction of 
p53  accumulation  following  radiation  of  the  small  intestine.  Black 
arrows indicate cells with increased levels of p53. Red arrows indicate 
apoptotic cells. (A–B, From Lowe SW, Schmitt EM, Smith SW, et al. 
p53 is required for radiation-induced apoptosis in mouse thymocytes. 
Nature. 1993;362:847–849. C–D, Courtesy John Hickman, Molecular 
and  Cellular  Pharmacology  Group,  University  of  Manchester,  United 
Kingdom.)

Other Types of Programmed Cell Death
The  terms  apoptosis  and  programmed  cell  death  are 
sometimes viewed as synonymous. However, a number 
of  specific  examples  of  programmed  cell  death  have 
been  described  that  lack  the  features  that  classically 
define apoptosis.

Inflammatory Cell Death: Pyroptosis  
and Necroptosis
One  of  the  defining  features  of  apoptosis  is  that  dying 
cells  disappear  without  causing  an 
inflammatory 
response. However, in certain instances, it is protective 
for  the  body  to  have  cell  death  be  accompanied  by 

How pyroptosis leads to cell death is still being inves-
tigated, but the morphology of the dying cells resembles 
that seen in necrosis. As a result, the internal components 
of  the  cell  are  released  into  the  extracellular  space, 
provoking a strong inflammatory response (as in necro-
sis, above, and necroptosis, below).

Necroptosis  (programmed  necrosis)  is  a  cell  death 
pathway that may function as a backup when the extrinsic 
pathway of apoptosis is not functioning. Activation of the 
CD95 (Fas) and TNFR1 (tumor necrosis factor receptor 
1)  cell-surface  receptors  can  have  three  possible  out-
comes. TNFR1 can signal via complex I (which contains 
protective IAP proteins) to activate the canonical NF-κB 
pathway to promote cell survival (Fig. 46.1). Alternatively 
TNFR1 can activate receptor interacting protein kinases 1 
and 3 (RIPK1/RIPK3) and signal to form complex II (con-
taining FADD, TRADD [tumor necrosis factor receptor-
associated death domain], caspase 8, and cFLIP). When 
caspase 8 is associated with cFLIP, it inactivates RIPK3 
and  cells  survive.  Complex  II  activates  necroptosis  if 
either  caspase  8  or  cFLIP  is  missing  or  inactivated  and 
if  RIPK1/RIPK3  are  active.  RIPK1/RIPK3  activity  leads 
to permeabilization of the cell membrane, cell lysis and 
death. As in other forms of necrosis, the released cellular 
contents cause a local inflammatory response.

Necroptosis  is  thought  to  be  a  backup  pathway  for 
apoptosis  during  viral  infection.  Mouse  kidney  cells 
infected with a virus that encodes a caspase 8 inhibitor 
proceed down the necroptosis death pathway. Removal 
of  the  gene  from  the  virus  restores  apoptosis.  Mice 

814 

SECTION X  n  Cell Cycle

lacking  RIPK3  show  increased  susceptibility  to  viral 
infection. Murine cytomegalovirus has proteins that help 
it to evade both apoptosis and necroptosis, supporting 
this argument.

Autophagic Death
Autophagy is a catabolic, energy producing process that 
allows cells to survive in adverse conditions by recycling 
amino acids liberated by degradation of cellular proteins 
and  organelles  (see  Fig.  23.7).  Autophagy  can  be  acti-
vated by a wide range of stimuli, including nutrient and 
oxidative  stress,  accumulation  of  unfolded  proteins, 
intracellular bacterial infection, and oncogenic stress. In 
addition to being a response to starvation, autophagy can 
also participate in antiviral responses by participating in 
antigen presentation by immune cells.

Connections  between  autophagy  and  cell  death  are 
complex and debated. In certain cases during develop-
ment,  autophagic  pathways  can  lead  directly  to  cell 
death.  These  dying  cells  lack  chromatin  condensation 
and exhibit extreme vacuolization of the cytoplasm. In 
some  cells,  autophagy  can  regulate  apoptosis.  For 
example, degradation of proapoptotic BH3-only proteins 
by  autophagy  provides  a  mechanism  protecting  cells 
against  apoptosis.  Alternatively,  degradation  of  protec-
tive  proteins  can  cause  autophagy  to  actively  promote 
apoptotic cell death.

Connections  between  autophagy  and  cancer  are 
complex.  It  has  been  argued  that  by  promoting  cell 
survival under adverse conditions, autophagy might help 
promote  the  establishment  of  cancers  particularly  in 
avascular  areas  and  by  helping  cancer  cells  to  survive 
chemotherapy. However, mice heterozygous for Beclin1 
(a scaffolding protein that functions early in assembly of 
the  phagophore  membrane;  see  Fig.  23.7)  develop 
cancers, suggesting that Beclin-1 is a tumor suppressor 
and  that  autophagy  may  protect  against  tumorigenesis. 
Interestingly, Beclin-1 has a BH3 domain, and although 
it is not a canonical BH3-only proapoptotic protein, its 
function is negatively regulated by Bcl-2. Also, autophagy 
is activated in oncogene-induced senescence and inhibit-
ing autophagy delays senescence. Thus autophagy might 
prevent  cancer  formation  by  helping  damaged  cells  to 
become senescent.

Importance of Programmed Cell Death in 
Human Disease
Why  have  studies  of  programmed  cell  death  so  caught 
the scientific eye? One likely answer is that cell death is 
a point of intersection between cell signaling pathways, 
cell  structure,  the  cell  cycle,  and,  of  course,  human 
disease. This chapter has mentioned the roles that aber-
rations  in  programmed  cell  death  play  in  the  etiology 
of autoimmunity, AIDS, and cancer. Cell death is firmly 
established as a key factor in neurodegenerative diseases, 

Primary
lesion

Penumbra: zone of apoptotic
death starting within 24 hours

of the initial lesion

Primary focus

of necrotic death

FIGURE  46.20  BRAIN  DAMAGE  IN  STROKE.  Secondary  pro-
grammed cell death caused by oxygen deprivation in the penumbra 
greatly increases the size of the affected area of the brain in stroke. 

such  as  Huntington  disease  and  Alzheimer  disease,  as 
well as in myocardial infarction and stroke (Fig. 46.20). 
At a practical level, the realization that many successful 
chemotherapeutic  agents  act  by  inducing  cancer  cells 
to  undergo  apoptosis  motivated  searches  for  newer 
and better drugs that elicit this response. The generally 
disappointing  outcome  of  those  studies  may  largely  be 
because other pathways (eg, necroptosis) kick in when 
apoptosis  is  inhibited.  Alternatively,  as  more  is  learned 
about mechanisms of necroptosis and pyroptosis, these 
alternative types of programmed death become attractive 
therapeutic targets, as their induction may not only kill 
the  target  cells,  but  also  provoke  a  localized  immune 
response  that  might  attack  cancer  cells  or  pathogens. 
With such important practical problems to be solved, pro-
grammed cell death will continue to occupy a prominent 
position in cell biology research over the coming years.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We  thank  Charles  Earnshaw,  Scott  Kaufmann,  Luis 
Miguel Martins, and Andrew Thorburn for their sugges-
tions on revisions to this chapter.

SELECTED READINGS

Breckenridge  DG,  Xue  D.  Regulation  of  mitochondrial  membrane 
permeabilization by BCL-2 family proteins and caspases. Curr Opin 
Cell Biol. 2004;16:647-652.

Czabotar PE, Lessene G, Strasser A, Adams JM. Control of apoptosis by 

the BCL-2 protein family. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2014;15:49.

 

CHAPTER 46  n  Programmed Cell Death 

815

Deretic V, Saitoh T, Akira S. Autophagy in infection, inflammation and 

Raff MC. Social control on cell survival and cell death. Nature. 1992;

immunity. Nat Rev Immunol. 2013;13:722-737.

356:397-400.

Earnshaw WC, Martins LM, Kaufmann SH. Mammalian caspases: Struc-
ture,  activation,  substrates  and  functions  during  apoptosis.  Annu 
Rev Biochem. 1999;68:383-424.

Fitzwalter  BE,  Thorburn  A.  Recent  insights  into  cell  death  and 

autophagy. FEBS J. 2015;282:4279-4288.

Savill J, Fadok V. Corpse clearance defines the meaning of cell death. 

Nature. 2000;407:784-788.

Silke  J,  Meier  P.  Inhibitor  of  apoptosis  (IAP)  proteins–modulators  of 
cell death and inflammation. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2013;
5:a008730.

Lamkanfi  M,  Festjens  N,  Declercq  W,  et al.  Caspases  in  cell  survival, 

Taylor  RC,  Cullen  SP,  Martin  SJ.  Apoptosis:  controlled  demolition  at 

proliferation and differentiation. Cell Death Differ. 2007;14:44-55.

the cellular level. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2008;9:231.

Lauber K, Blumenthal SG, Waibel M, et al. Clearance of apoptotic cells: 

Getting rid of the corpses. Mol Cell. 2004;14:277-287.

Meier  P,  Finch  A,  Evan  G.  Apoptosis  in  development.  Nature.  2000;

407:796-801.

Metzstein MM, Stanfield GM, Horvitz HR. Genetics of programmed cell 
death in C. elegans: Past, present and future. Trends Genet. 1998;
14:410-416.

Pasparakis  M,  Vandenabeele  P.  Necroptosis  and  its  role  in  inflamma-

tion. Nature. 2015;517:311-320.

Wallach D, Kang TB, Dillon CP, et al. Programmed necrosis in inflam-
mation:  Toward  identification  of  the  effector  molecules.  Science. 
2016;352:aaf2154.

Wyllie AH, Kerr JFR, Currie AR. Cell death: The significance of apop-

tosis. Int Rev Cytol. 1980;68:251-305.

Zmasek  CM,  Godzik  A.  Evolution  of  the  animal  apoptosis  network. 

Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2013;5:a008649.

This page intentionally left blank

Cell SnapShots

SnapShot 1: Histone Modifications
See Chapter 8.

The  histone  proteins  are  decorated  by  a  variety  of 
protein  posttranslational  modifications  (also  called 
histone  marks).  Histone  marks  are  critical  to  dynamic 
modulation of chromatin structure and function, contrib-
uting to the cellular gene expression program. In addi-
tion  to  the  well-studied  acetylation  and  methylation 
modifications, recent studies have revealed several new 
types of histone marks, including lysine propionylation, 
lysine butyrylation, lysine crotonylation, lysine 2-hydroxy-
isobutyrylation, lysine malonylation, and lysine succinyl-
ation.  Preliminary  studies  on  some  of  the  new  histone 
marks  (eg,  crotonylation  and  2-hydroxyisobutyrylation) 
suggest that their effects on chromatin function are dis-
tinct  from  those  of  lysine  acetylation.  Given  that  the 
newly discovered lysine acylation reactions likely use the 
corresponding acyl-CoA (acyl-coenzyme A) molecules as 
cofactors, it is proposed that histone acylations provide 
a  link  between  cellular  metabolism  and  epigenetic 
mechanisms.

This  SnapShot  summarizes  the  reported  human, 
mouse, and rat histone marks, including recently identi-
fied lysine acylation marks.

From Huang H, Sabari BR, Garcia BA, et al. SnapShot: 

histone modifications. Cell. 2014;159(2):458–458.e1.

SnapShot 2: Nuclear Transport
See Chapter 9.

Exchange  of  macromolecules  between  the  nucleus 
and  the  cytoplasm  occurs  through  nuclear  pore  com-
plexes (NPCs), large proteinaceous structures embedded 
within the nuclear envelope. Small molecules (<30 kD) 
can  passively  diffuse  through  NPCs.  Nuclear  transport 
receptors are required to facilitate import and export of 
large molecules (>30 kD). This includes the karyopherin-β 
(Kapβ) receptor family wherein each associates directly 
with  the  NPC  and  has  cargo  binding  controlled  by  the 
asymmetric distribution of Ran-GTP (guanosine triphos-
phate)  and  the  Ran  cycle.  Nuclear  localization  of  the  
Ran guanine-nucleotide exchange factor (Ran-GEF; Prp20 
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae) via chromatin association 
maintains  high  concentrations  of  Ran-GTP  (guanosine 
triphosphate)  in  the  nucleus.  Conversely,  Ran-GDP 
(guanosine diphosphate) predominates in the cytoplasm 
through the combined action of cytoplasmically localized 
Ran-binding  protein  1  (RanBP1;  Yrb1  in  S.  cerevisiae) 
and  Ran  GTPase  (guanosine  triphosphatase)-activating 
protein (Ran-GAP; Rna1 in S. cerevisiae). During import, 

Kapβ  receptors  interact  with  cytoplasmic  cargos  and 
traverse the NPC. In the nucleus, Ran-GTP binds to the 
importing Kapβ and triggers cargo release. Conversely, 
during export, Ran-GTP stabilizes the association of Kapβ 
receptors with nuclear cargo. Hydrolysis of GTP to GDP 
at  the  cytoplasmic  NPC  face  promotes  disassembly  of 
the export receptor-cargo complex. Transport receptors 
are categorized based on transport direction, the use of 
cargo adaptors, and transport of specialized cargo such 
as Ran-GDP, ribosomes, and/or messenger RNA (mRNA):
I.  Import  receptor  complexes  with  adaptors:  Kap60-
Kap95 (importin-α-importin-β in metazoa) is the pro-
totypical  import  receptor.  Cargo  with  a  classical 
nuclear localization signal (cNLS) is recognized by the 
adaptor  Kap60,  which  binds  the  receptor  Kap95. 
Whereas  yeast  has  only  one  importin-α,  metazoans 
have several importin-α homologs (not shown).

II.  Import  receptors  that  bind  cargo  directly:  Many 
Kapβs,  including  Kap104,  can  bind  directly  to  their 
cargo.

III.  Bidirectional  transport  receptors:  The  receptor 
Msn5  has  the  striking  capacity  to  function  in  both 
import and export.

IV.  Export  receptor  complexes:  The  first  identified 
export receptor, Crm1, recognizes leucine-rich nuclear 
export sequences (NES) in cargo proteins.

V.  Export of ribosomal subunits: Large cargos, such as 
ribosomal  subunits,  require  multiple  receptors  for 
transport. Export of the assembled 60S subunit requires 
Crm1 (with the adaptor Nmd3) and, in S. cerevisiae, 
the Mex67-Mtr2 heterodimer as well as Arx1. Export 
of the 40S subunit also requires Crm1 and possibly the 
adaptor Ltv1.

VI.  Export  of  mRNA:  Export  of  most  mRNA  is  Ran 
independent and, instead, requires the nonkaryopherin 
Mex67-Mtr2 (TAP/NXF1 and p15/NXT1 in metazoans, 
respectively).  Mex67-Mtr2  binds  mRNA  thorough 
association  with  mRNA-binding  proteins,  or  some 
metazoan  mRNAs  can  recruit  TAP/NXF1  by  directly 
binding a specific RNA element, the CTE (not shown). 
CTEs are also present in some viral RNAs. Directional-
ity  of  mRNA  export  is  determined  by  the  adenosine 
triphosphatase  (ATPase)  Dbp5,  whose  activation  is 
controlled by spatially restricted inositol hexakisphos-
phate (IP6)-bound Gle1.

Consensus Sequences
cNLS:  PKKKRKV  (monopartite)  or  KRX(10–12)KRRK 
(bipartite);  PY-NLS:  ϕ(G/S/A)ϕϕX(5–10)(R/H/K)X(2–5)PY 
(hPY-NLS) or basic-enriched(5–8)X(2–7) (R/H/K)X(2–5)PY 

 817

818 

CELL SNAPSHOTS

)

T

 
,

S

 
,

K

(
 

l

n
o
i
t
a
y
t
e
c
A

)

R

 
,

K

(
 

l

n
o
i
t
a
y
h
t
e
M

)

K

(
 

l

n
o
i
t
a
y
n
o
p
o
r
P

i

)

K

(
 

l

n
o
i
t
a
y
n
o
t
o
r
C

)

K

(
 

l

n
o
i
t
a
y
r
y
t
u
B

)

K

(
 

l

n
o
i
t
a
y
n
o
a
M

l

)

K

(
 

l

n
o
i
t
a
y
n
c
c
u
S

i

)

K

(
 

l

n
o
i
t
a
y
m
r
o
F

)

K

(
 

n
o
i
t
a
n
i
t
i
u
q
b
U

i

)

H

 
,

Y

 
,

T

 
,

S

(
 

l

n
o
i
t
a
y
r
o
h
p
s
o
h
P

)

Y

(
 

l

n
o
i
t
a
y
x
o
r
d
y
H

)

R

(

n
o
i
t
a
n

i
l
l

u
r
t
i

C

)

T

 
,

S

(
 

l

n
o
i
t
a
y
c
A
N
c
G
-
O

l

)

E

 
,

K

(
 

l

n
o
i
t
a
y
s
o
b
i
r
 
P
D
A

e
M

c
A

r
P

u
B

r

C

i

b
H

a
M

u
S

o
F

b
U

t
i

C

h
P

H
O

g
O

r
A

O

O

c
A
T
/
S

N

2
H
N

N

N N

O

O

O

P

O

O

P

H
O

H
O

e
M
K

O

O

e
g
n
a
h
c

 

e
v
i
t
i
s
o
P

e
g
r
a
h
c

 

e
v
i
t
a
g
e
N

+

-

r
A
E
/
K

H
O

H
O

H
O

H
O

+

N

+

HN

+

N
2
H

n
i
t
i

i

u
q
b
U

O

N
H

-

O

N
H

-

O

O

O

O

/

O
N

H
O

H
O

N
H
c
O A

H
O

H
O

H
O

b
U
K

O

u
S
K

-

O

-

P OO

a
M
K

N

N

N
H

H
O

O

N
H

O

N
H

O

O

O

O

N
H

N
H

N
H

H

N
H

i

b
H
K

r
C
K

u
B
K

r
P
K

c
A
K

o
F
K

O

- -

P OO

N

N

-

O

O

OP

O

-

H
N

O

N
2
H

H
N

+

N
H

2
H
N

+

N

2
H
N

+

N
H

H
N

H
N

H
N

e
M

i

b
H

b
U

c
A

i

b
H

b
U

e
M

i

b
H

u
S

0
0
1

0
9

b
U

e
M

i

b
H

0
8

i

b
H

o
F

b
U

h
P

e
M

i

b
H

i

b
H

r

C

o
F

b
U

h
P

r

C
/
c
A
/
e
M

b
U
/
b
H

i

e
M

c
A

h
P

h
P

e
M

c
A

i

b
H

0
3
1

7
2
1

1
2
1

4
1
1

6
0
1

0
8

8
7

2
6

5
5

0
4

0
3

0
2

0
1

-

I

 

O
O
C
-
A
R
E
G
R
R
R
A
…
D
K
P
…
R
K
A
…
N
T
D
…
S
S
Q
F
R
L
D
T
K
F
…
L
K
R

I
 

…
T
S
K
Q
…
V
T
G
P
R
Y
R
H
P
K
K
V
G
G
T
A
P
A
S
K
R
A
A
K
T
A
L
Q
K
R
P
A
K
G
G
T
S
K
R
A
T
Q
K
T
R
A
-
N
3
H
+

-

 

O
O
C
-
G
G
F
G
Y
L
T
R
G
Q
R
K
L
A
Y
V
V
D
M
A
T
V
T
K
R
K
A
H
E
T
Y
T
V
A
D
R
V
…
V
K
L
V
G
R
T
E
E
Y
L
G
S
R
K
V
…
R
R
A
P
K
T
G
Q

I

I

I

I

I

b
U

/
o
F
/
u
S
/
b
H

i

r

C
/
u
B

/
r
P
/
c
A

u
B

/
r
P
/
c
A
/
e
M

o
F
/
u
S
/
b
H

i

b
U

/
o
F
/
u
S
/
b
H

i

r

C
/
u
B

/
r
P
/
c
A
/
e
M

e
M

h
P

H
O

e
M

h
P

h
P

e
M

e
M

r

C

i

b
H

o
F

b
U

e
M

h
P

H
O

h
P

g
O

r
P

u
B

i

b
H

e
M

b
U

/
o
F
/
u
S
/
b
H

i

u
B

/
r
P
/
c
A
/
e
M

 
I

N
D
R
L
V
K
R
H
R
K
A
G
G
K
G
L
G
K
G
G
K
G
R
G
S
-
N
H
c
A

e
M

e
M
e
M

c
A

t
i

C
h
P

e
M

t
i

C

u
B

/
r
P
/
c
A
/
e
M

r
A
/
b
H

i

/
r

C

u
B

/
r
P
/
c
A
/
e
M

o
F
/
u
S
/
b
H

i

/
r

C

u
B

/
r
P
/
c
A

i

b
H

/
r

C

r
P
/
c
A
/
e
M

i

b
H

/
r

C
/
u
B

e
M

t
i

C

h
P

4
H

c
A

c
A

e
M

r
P

r

C

b
U

h
P

h
P

r

C

b
U

r

C
/
c
A
/
e
M

b
U

/
o
F
/
b
H

i

h
P

g
O

e
M

b
U

/
o
F
/
u
S
/
b
H

i

r

C
/
u
B

/
r
P
/
c
A
/
e
M

e
M

c
A

i

b
H

/
r

C
/
c
A

b
U

/
o
F
/
u
S

e
M

i

b
H
b
H

i

e
M

h
P

h
P

e
M

H
O

e
M

0
0
1

0
9

0
8
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0
7

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5
6

0
6

0
5

3
4

0
3

0
2

c
A

b
U

c
A

b
U

r
A

e
M

0
1

e
M

c
A

i

b
H

u
S

c
A

u
B

i

b
H

e
M

t
i

C

h
P

A
2
H

-

O
O
C
-
K
G
K
A
K
H
H
S
E
T
K
K
P
L
L
…
T
V
K
G
L
L
K
N
L
E

I

 

I

E
D
N
R
…
T
K
K
N
D
R
A
…
A
T
L
…
L
Y
V
P

.
.
.

 

V
R
E
A
Y
N
G
K
R
L
L
R
H
V
R
G
V
P
F
Q
L
G
A
R
S
S
R
T
K
A
K
A
R
A
K
G
G
Q
K
G
R
G
S
-
N
H
c
A

c
A

c
A

i

b
H

u
S

o
F

b
U

i

b
H

/
r

C
/
c
A
/
e
M

b
U

/
o
F
/
u
S
/
a
M

b
U

/
o
F
/
u
S

i

b
H

/
r

C
/
c
A
/
e
M

h
P

h
P

e
M

e
M
h
P

h
P
h
P
e
M

e
M

c
A

i

b
H

u
S

H
O

e
M

h
P

h
P

b
U
h
P

h
P

e
M

c
A

i

b
H

i

b
H
/
u
B
/
c
A
/
e
M

b
U

/
o
F
/
u
S

0
2
1

5
1
1

0
0
1

0
9

7
8

0
7

0
6

8
5

0
5

8
4

0
4

e
M

c
A

i

b
H

u
S

o
F

0
3

0
2

H
O
g
O

h
P

i

b
H

/
r

C
/
e
M

b
U

/
o
F
/
u
S

h
P

r
A

c
A

i

b
H
b
H

i

e
M

c
A

u
B

r

C

u
B
/
c
A
/
e
M

b
U
/
b
H

i

/
r

C

c
A

c
A

u
B

r

C

e
M

c
A

u
B

r

C

h
P

0
1

e
M

c
A

u
B
c
A

r

C
u
B

i

b
H

r

C

o
F
/
u
S
/
b
H

i

r

C
/
u
B
/
c
A
/
e
M

h
P

r
A

B
2
H

0
2
1

4
1
1

7
0
1

0
0
1

8
9

0
9

0
8

5
7

4
6

2
5

2
4

0
3
9
2

0
2

0
1

-

O
O
C
-
K
A
S
T
Y
K
T
V
A
K
T
G
…
H
K
A
…
L
R
V
…
E
R
S
T
T
S
R
K
N
Y
H
A
L
R
S
A
E
S

I

.
.
.

S

.
.
.

K
S
S
G
T

I

.
.
.

K
L
V
K
Y
…
S
Y
S

E
K
R
S
R
K
R
…
D
K
K
Q
A
K
T
V
A
K
K
S
G
K
K
P
…
A
S
K
A
P
E
P
-
N
3
H
+

e
M

c
A

u
S

b
U

h
P

i

b
H

/
r

C
/
c
A
/
e
M

b
U

/
o
F
/
u
S

i

b
H

/
r

C
/
c
A
/
e
M

i

b
H

/
r

C
/
c
A

b
U

/
o
F
/
u
S

o
F
/
u
S

i

b
H

o
F

c
A

i

b
H

o
F

b
U

h
P

H
O

b
U

/
o
F
/
u
S

i

b
H

/
r

C
/
c
A
/
e
M

o
F
/
u
S

i

b
H

/
c
A
/
e
M

h
P

t
i

C

e
M

c
A

i

b
H

b
U

c
A

b
U

/
o
F

u
S
/
b
H

i

/
c
A

h
P

c
A

h
P

b
U

/
o
F
/
u
S

i

b
H

/
r

C
/
c
A
/
e
M

e
M

e
M

c
A

i

b
H
b
H

i

i

b
H

e
M

c
A

e
M

c
A

o
F

K
N
L
K
F
S
G
S
A
G
T
G
K
T
Q
V
L
T
G
K
S
V
L
S
K
L
G
L
K
R
S
N
N
K
E
V
D
Y
G

I

I

.
.
.
L
A
K
K
L
A
A
L
S
V
G
S
R
E
K
S
A
A
V
A
K
T
L
E
S
V
P
P
G
S
A
K
R
P
T
G
G
A
K
K
A
A
K
K
K
V
P
A
K
E

.
.
.

A
T
E
S
-
N
3
H
+

h
P

r
A
h
P

1
H

e
M

r

C
/
u
B
/
c
A
/
e
M

b
U
/
o
F
/
u
S
/
b
H

i

c
A

u
B

h
P

h
P

e
M

c
A

h
P

r

C
/
u
B
/
c
A
/
e
M

b
U

/
o
F
/
u
S
/
b
H

i

e
M

c
A

i

b
H

i

b
H

/
r

C

/
r
P
/
c
A
/
e
M

b
U

/
o
F
/
a
M
/
u
S

o
F

e
M

h
P

h
P

e
M
h
P
e
M

e
M

e
M

c
A

c
A
b
H

i

r
A

b
U

g
O

c
A

h
P

e
M

t
i

C

b
U

/
o
F
/
u
S
/
b
H

i

c
A

r

C
/
u
B
/
c
A
/
e
M

r
A
/
b
U
/
u
S
/
b
H

i

r

C
/
u
B

/
r
P
/
c
A
/
e
M

b
U

/
o
F
/
b
H

i

e
M

t
i

C

r

C
/
u
B
/
c
A
/
e
M

u
B
/
c
A
/
e
M

b
U
/
u
S
/
b
H

i

c
A

h
P

h
P
g
O
b
H

i

t
i

C

r

C
e
M

e
M

c
A

u
B

h
P

i

b
H
h
P

e
M

c
A

r

C

e
M

t
i

C

 

3
H

SNAPSHOT 1  HISTONE MODIFICATIONS.

0
7
9
6

0
6

0
5

0
4

0
3

0
2

5
1

0
1
1

0
2
1

0
3
1

0
4
1

4
4
1

7
5
1

0
6
1

0
7
1

0
8
1

5
8
1

0
9
1

9
0
2

K
A
A
S
G
E
A
K
P
K
V
K
K
A
G
G
T
K
P
K
K
P
V
G
A
A
K
K
P
K
K
A
…
A
T
P
K
K
S
…
A
K
K
P
A
A
A
T
V
T
K
K
V
A
K
S
P
K
K
A
K
V
T
K
P
…
A
K
S
A
A
K
A
…
P
K
K
K
-
O
O
C

-

 

e
t
a
c
d
n

i

i
 
s
e
x
o
B

i

n
a
m
o
d
 
r
a
u
b
o
g

l

l

g
O
T
/
S

H
O
Y

h
P
H

h
P
Y
/
T
/
S

t
i

C
R

e
M
R

 

CELL SNAPSHOTS 

819

Transport 
Complex 
Category

S. cerevisiae 
Karyopherins 

& Other 
Receptors

Cargo(s)

Essential

I

Kap95

Kap60 adaptor 
for cNLS proteins 

Yes

II

Kap95

—

Kap104

Kap123

Kap111/Mtr10

Kap121/Pse1

Kap119/Nmd5

Kap108/Sxm1

Kap114

Kap122/Pdr6

Kap120

—

Ntf2

Kap142/Msn5

Nab2, Hrp1 
(mRNA-binding 
proteins)

SRP proteins, 
histones, ribo-
somal proteins

Npl3 (mRNA-
binding protein), 
tRNAs

ribosomal 
proteins, Yra1, 
Spo12, Ste12, 
Yap1, Pho4, 
histones

ribosomal pro-
teins, histones, 
Hog1, Crz1, Dst1

Lhp1, ribosomal 
proteins

TBP, histones, 
Nap1, Sua7

Toa1 and Toa2, 
TFIIA

Rpf1 

—

Ran/Gsp1 (GDP-
bound form)

Replication pro-
tein A (import), 
Pho4, Crz1, 
Cdh1 (export)

—

—

t
r
o
p
m

I

t III
r
o
p
x
E
/
t
r
o
p
m

I

IV

Crm1/Xpo1

Leucine-rich NES 
sequences

Kap109/Cse1

Kap60/Srp1

Kap127/Los1

tRNAs

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

t
r
o
p
x
E

V

Crm1/Xpo1

Nmd3 adaptor 
for 60S ribosomal 
subunit

Mex67-Mtr2

60S via 5S rRNA

Arx1

Crm1/Xpo1

VI Mex67-Mtr2

60S ribosomal 
subunit

Ltv1 putative 
adaptor for 
40S ribosomal 
subunit

Npl3, Yra1, and 
Hpr1 adaptors 
for mRNA

Yes

t.s.

No

t.s.

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

—

Yes

No

—

Yes

Yes

No

—

—

—

—

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Metazoan 

Karyopherins 

& Other 
Receptors

Importin-β1

Importin-β1

Transportin or 
Transportin 2

Importin 4

Transportin SR1 
or SR2

Cargo(s)

Importin-β adaptor 
for cNLS proteins, 
Snurportin adaptor 
for U snRNPs

SREBP-2, HIV Rev 
and TAT, Cyclin B

PY-NLS-containing 
proteins, mRNA-
binding proteins, 
histones, ribosomal 
proteins

histones, ribosomal 
protein S3a, 
Transition Protein 2

SR proteins, HuR

Importin 5/
Importin-β3/ 
RanBP5

histones, ribosomal 
proteins

Importin 7

GR, ribosomal pro-
teins, Smad, ERK

Importin 8

SRP19, Smad

Importin 9

histones, ribosomal 
proteins

—

—

—

—

Importin 11

UbcM2, rpL12

NTF2

—

Ran (GDP-bound 
form)

—

Importin 13

UBC9, Y14 (import),  
eIFIA (export)

CRM1/
Exportin 1

CAS

Exportin-t

Exportin 4

Exportin 5

Exportin 6

RanBP16/ 
Exportin 7

CRM1/
Exportin 1

—

—

Leucine-rich NES 
sequences

Importin-β family 
members

tRNAs

eIF5A

pre-miRNA

Proﬁlin, actin

p50-RhoGAP

NMD3 adaptor 
for 60S ribosomal 
subunit

—

—

CRM1/
Exportin 1

40S ribosomal 
subunit

TAP/NXF1-p15/
NXT1

REF/Aly adaptor for 
mRNA

SNAPSHOT 2  NUCLEAR TRANSPORT.

820 

CELL SNAPSHOTS

(bPY-NLS),  ϕ  denotes  hydrophobic  residue;  NES:  (L/V)
X(2–3)(ψ/F)X(2–3)LXψ, ψ  denotes  large  aliphatic  residue 
(I, V, L, M).

Abbreviations
NLS,  nuclear  localization  signal;  NES,  nuclear  export 
signal; t.s., temperature sensitive; U snRNP, uridine-rich 
small  nuclear  ribonucleoprotein  complex;  SR,  serine/
arginine-rich;  TBP,  TATA-binding  protein;  SRP,  signal 
recognition  particle;  hnRNP,  heterogeneous  nuclear 
ribonucleoprotein.

From Tran EJ, Bolger TA, Wente SR: SnapShot: nuclear 

transport. Cell. 2007;131(2):420.

SnapShot 3: mTORC1 Signaling at  
the Lysosomal Surface
See Chapter 23.

In  mammals,  the  mTOR  (mechanistic  target  of  rapa-
mycin)  complex  1  (mTORC1)  ser/thr  kinase  regulates 
cellular and organismal growth in response to a variety of 
environmental  and  intracellular  stimuli.  Amino  acid 
levels mediate the first step in the bipartite activation of 
mTORC1 by promoting its translocation from a cytosolic 
compartment  to  the  lysosomal  surface.  By  a  poorly 
understood  mechanism,  amino  acid  sensing  initiates 
from within the lysosomal lumen and, in a process requir-
ing the v-ATPase (vacuolar H+-adenosine triphosphatase), 
activates the guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) 
activity  of  the  Ragulator  complex  toward  RagA  within 
the  heterodimeric  Rag  (ras-related  guanosine  triphos-
phate  binding)  GTPases  (guanosine  triphosphatases). 
Upon GTP binding, RagA recruits mTORC1 to the lyso-
somal  surface,  allowing  it  to  interact  with  the  small 
GTPase Rheb (ras homolog enriched in brain), a potent 
stimulator  of  mTORC1  kinase  activity.  Regulation  of 
nucleotide binding state of Rheb by the tumor suppres-
sor  TSC,  which  is  found  at  the  lysosomal  surface,  is  
the second step in the activation of mTORC1. Many of 
the  environmental  and  intracellular  cues  that  impinge  
on  mTORC1  funnel  through  TSC  (tuberous  sclerosis 
complex) and regulate its guanosine triphosphatase–acti-
vating protein (GAP) activity toward Rheb. Among them, 
growth  factor  signaling  through  the  PI3K  (phosphati-
dylinositide 3′-kinase) or Ras pathways leads to the acti-
vation of the protein kinases Akt and Rsk1, respectively, 
which  phosphorylate  and  inhibit  TSC  function.  The 
AMPK  (5′-adenosine  monophosphate–activated  protein 
kinase)  pathway  becomes  activated  upon  low  energy 
levels and in a p53-dependent manner by DNA damage, 
leading  to  phosphorylation  and  activation  of  TSC  and 
phosphorylation and inactivation of mTORC1. Reduction 
in  oxygen  levels  induces  Redd1  (protein  regulated  in 
development and DNA damage response 1) expression, 
which by an ill-defined process maintains TSC function.

Once activated, mTORC1 enables growth by promot-
ing  anabolic  programs  while  repressing  catabolic  pro-
cesses.  mTORC1  phosphorylates  key  effectors  such  as 
z1 and 4EBP1 (4E-binding protein 1) to activate transla-
tion  and  inhibits  autophagy  by  phosphorylating  and 
inactivating  ATG13  (autophagy-related  protein  13)  and 
ULK1 (unc-51-like kinase 1). As a master regulator of cell 
metabolism,  deregulation  of  the  mTORC1  pathway  is 
common in many human diseases. Cancers with aberrant 
mTORC1  activity,  such  as  tuberous  sclerosis  and 
advanced  renal  cell  carcinoma,  are  increasingly  treated 
with  analogs  of  the  mTORC1  inhibitor  rapamycin.  Fur-
thermore,  overactivation  of  this  pathway  leads  to  the 
downregulation  of  IRS1  (insulin  receptor  substrate  1) 
and  progression  of  type  2  diabetes.  Although  the 
mTORC1 pathway is absolutely required for mammalian 
development,  reduction  of  mTORC1  activity  in  mice 
models  through  pharmacological  inhibition  not  only 
enhances adult stem cell numbers, function, or both, but 
also extends murine life span.

Abbreviations
mTOR, mechanistic target of rapamycin; raptor, regula-
tory  associated  protein  of  mTOR;  mLST8,  mammalian 
lethal  with  SEC13  protein  8;  pras40,  proline-rich  Akt 
substrate 40 kDa; Rheb, ras homolog enriched in brain; 
TSC,  tuberous  sclerosis  complex;  Rag,  ras-related  GTP 
binding; MP1, MAPK scaffold protein 1; HBXIP, hepatitis 
B  virus  X-interacting  protein;  v-ATPase,  vacuolar  H+-
adenosine triphosphatase ATPase; GEF, guanine nucleo-
tide  exchange  factor;  GAP,  GTPase-activating  protein; 
ULK1,  unc-51-like  kinase  1;  ATG13,  autophagy-related 
protein 13; FIP200, FAK family kinase-interacting protein 
of  200 kDA;  S6K1,  p70  ribosomal  S6  kinase  1;  4EBP1, 
4E-binding protein 1; Redd, protein regulated in develop-
ment and DNA damage response 1; TFEB, transcription 
factor  EB;  HIF1a,  hypoxia-inducible  factor  1a;  LKB1, 
serine/threonine-protein  kinase  STK11;  SREBP1,  sterol 
regulatory  element  binding  protein-1;  AMPK,  5’-AMP-
activated  protein  kinase;  PIP2,  phosphatidylinositol 
4,5-bisphosphate;  PIP3,  phosphatidylinositol  3,4,5- 
trisphosphate; PTEN, phosphatase and tensin homolog; 
PI3K, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; GRB2, growth factor 
receptor-bound  protein  2;  SOS,  son-of-sevenless;  NF1, 
neurofibromin  1;  PDK1,  phosphoinositide  dependent 
kinase 1; IRS1, insulin receptor substrate 1; IGF, insulin-
like growth factor; TNFa, tumor necrosis factor a; IKKB, 
inhibitor  of  nuclear  factor  k-B  kinase  subunit  b;  WNT, 
wingless; Dsh1, dishevelled 1; GSK3, glycogen synthase 
kinase  3;  TK,  tyrosine  kinase;  SLC1A5,  solute  carrier 
family  1  member  5;  SLC7A5,  solute  carrier  family  7 
member 5; FKBP12, FK506-binding protein 12 KDa.

From  Bar-Peled  L,  Sabatini  DM:  SnapShot:  mTORC1 
signaling at the lysosomal surface. Cell. 2012;151(6):1390–
1390.e1.

 

CELL SNAPSHOTS 

821

r
o
t
p
e
c
e
r

F
N
T

F
N
T

F
N
T

g
n

i
l

a
n
g
s

i

e
n

i

s
o
r
y
T

e
s
a
n

i

k

r
o
t
p
e
c
e
r

F
G

I

d
e

l

z
z

i
r
F

t
n
W

g
n

i
l

h
t
w
o
r
G

i

a
n
g
s
 
r
o
t
c
a
f

g
n

t
n
W

i
l

a
n
g
s

i

3
P
I
P

n
e
t

P

2

PIP

K
3
P

I

1
S
IR

2
B
R
G

S
O
S

1
h
s
D

s

l

P
M
A
/
P
T
A

e
v
e

l
 
y
g
r
e
n
E

A
N
D

e
g
a
m
a
d

s

l

e
v
e

l

2

O

1
C
R
O
T
m

)

e
v

i
t
c
a
n

i
(

5
A
7
C
L
S

5
A
1
C
L
S

u
e
L

l

n
G

l

n
G

i

d
c
a

 

i

o
n
m
A

r
e
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t

u
e
L

g
n

i
l

i

a
n
g
s
 
t
n
e

i
r
t
u
N

l

n
G

i

o
n
m
A

s
d
c
a

i

1
K
D
P

1
F
N

P
A
y G
v

t
i

y
t
i

v

i
t
c
a

F
E
G

i
t
c
a

P
T
G

s
a
R

f
a
R

k
e
M

K
P
M
A

n
i
r
t
s
e
S

 
l

3
K
S
G

1
B
K
L

3
5
p

1
d
d
e
R

a
m
o
s
o
s
y

l
 

e
h
t

 

t
n
e
m
e
v
o
M

m
o
r
f
 
y
a
w
a

e
c
a
f
r
u
s

P
D
G
A
g
a
P R
T
G
A
g
a
R

n

i

c
y
m
a
p
a
R

2
1
P
B
K
F

e
h
t
 

o
t
 
t
n
e
m
e
v
o
M

e
c
a
f
r
u
s
 
l

a
m
o
s
o
s
y

l

β
K
K

I

1
t
k
A

1
k
s
R

2
/
1
k
r
E

M
S
A
L
P
O
T
Y
C

y
t
i

v

i
t
c
a
 

F
E
G

e
s
a
P
T
A
-
v

e
t
a
r
t
s
b
u
s
 

1
C
R
O
T
m

e
n
e
g
o
c
n
O

r
o
s
s
e
r
p
p
u
s
 
r
o
m
u
T

l

x
e
p
m
o
c
 
C
S
T

y
t
i

v

i
t
c
a
 

P
A
G

b
e
h
R

P
T
G

1
C
R
O
T
m

)

e
v

i
t
c
a

(

P
T
G
A
A
g
g
a
a
R
R

P
D
G
C
g
a
R

l

r
o
t
a
u
g
a
R

?

S
M
A
R
G
O
R
P

 

R
A
L
U
L
L
E
C

 

Y
T

I

V

I

T
C
A

 

1
C
R
O
T
m

 

Y
B

 

D
E
T
A
L
U
G
E
R

M
A
E
R
T
S
N
W
O
D

s

i

s
e
h
t
n
y
s
 

i

n
e
t
o
r
P

m
s

i
l

o
b
a
t
e
m
 
y
g
r
e
n
E

1
K
6
S

1
P
B
E
4

α
1
F
H

I

s

i

s
e
n
e
g
o
b

i

 
e
m
o
s
o
s
y
L

B
E
F
T

7
D
1
C
B
T

1
C
S
T

s

i

s
e
h
t
n
y
s
o
b

i

i

d
p
L

i

y
g
a
h
p
o
t
u
A

2
/
1
P
B
E
R
S

FIP200

3
1
G
T
A

1
K
L
U

1
-
n
p
L

i

i

2
C
S
T

h
t

w
o
r
G

E
M
O
S
O
S
Y
L

E
C
A
F
R
U
S

 

L
A
M
O
S
O
S
Y
L

 

E
H
T

 

T
A

 

S
E
X
E
L
P
M
O
C

deptor

8
T
S
L
m

R
O
T
m

r
o
t
p
a
r

0
4
s
a
r
p

9
5
f
r
o
7
C

I

P
X
B
H

1
P
M

4
1
p

B

8
1
p

c

G

E

B

C

A D

c

F
d c

A

B

A

E

G

H

a

i

o
n
m
A

s
d
c
a

i

x
e

l

p
m
o
c
C
S
T

 

1
C
R
O
T
m

x
e

l

p
m
o
c

 
r
o
t
a

l

u
g
a
R

e
s
a
P
T
A
-
v
 
l

a
m
o
s
o
s
y
L

SNAPSHOT 3  mTORC1 SIGNALING AT THE LYSOSOMAL SURFACE.

This page intentionally left blank

Glossary

+TIPs.  Family of proteins that associate with the plus ends of 

elongating microtubules

3′ untranslated region (3′ UTR).  Region of an mRNA after 
the stop codon, often containing regulatory signals govern-
ing further RNA processing

5′  cap.  Modified  guanosine  residue  on  the  5′  end  of  mRNAs 

that protects against degradation

5′ exonuclease.  Enzyme that degrades RNA or DNA from the 

5′ end

5-lipoxygenase.  Enzyme  that  synthesizes  leukotrienes  and 

lipoxins from arachidonic acid

ADAR  (adenosine  deaminase  acting  on  RNA).  Enzyme 
converts  adenine  (which  base-pairs  with  uracil)  to  inosine 
(which  base-pairs  with  cytosine)  by  deamination,  thereby 
potentially altering the protein encoded by the mRNA

Adenine.  Purine base found in ATP, DNA, and RNA; H-bonds 

with thymine or uracil

Adenosine  triphosphate  (ATP).  The  common  energy-
carrying molecule for cellular metabolism; enzymes use the 
energy  released  from  the  hydrolysis  of  its  γ-phosphate  for 
many cellular processes

Adenylylcyclase.  Enzyme  that  converts  ATP  into  3′  to  5′ 

5S  RNA.  Smallest  RNA  component  of  the  ribosome,  tran-

cyclic AMP

scribed by RNA polymerase III

ADF/cofilin.  Protein that severs actin filaments and promotes 

9-1-1  complex.  Trimeric  doughnut-like  complex  that  is 
responsible for loading enzymes onto sites of DNA damage
14-3-3 domain.  Adapter domain that binds serine-phosphate 

ligands

30-nm  fiber.  Compacted  filament  of  chromosomal  DNA 

depolymerization

Adherens junction.  Intercellular junction that uses cadherins 

for adhesion and is anchored to actin filaments

Adipocyte.  Fat cell
Adrenergic  receptor.  Seven  helix  receptor  activated  by 

made up of closely packed nucleosomes

epinephrine or norepinephrine

AAA  ATPase.  Family  of  multimeric  enzymes  that  use  ATP 
hydrolysis  to  do  work  in  DNA  replication,  membrane  traf-
ficking, and microtubule-dependent motility

A-band.  Region  of  striated  muscle  sarcomere  with  myosin 

thick filaments

ABC  transporter.  Family  of  enzymes  that  pumps  diverse 

Affinity chromatography.  Use of an immobilized ligand to 

purify interacting macromolecules

Aggrecan.  Core  protein  for  a  proteoglycan  that  associates 

with hyaluronan in cartilage

Agonist.  Ligand molecule that activates a receptor
Alpha-actinin.  Actin filament cross-linking protein, found in 

solutes and flips lipids across membranes

striated muscle Z-disks

Abscission.  Final  separation  of  two  daughter  cells 

in 

Alpha  and  beta  tubulin.  Isoforms  of  tubulin  that  form  the 

cytokinesis

heterodimeric building blocks of microtubules

Acetylcholine.  Neurotransmitter for the neuromuscular junc-

Alpha-catenin.  Adapter  protein  between  cadherins,  beta-

tion and other synapses

Acetylcholine esterase.  Enzyme that degrades acetylcholine
Acrosomal  process.  Projection  of  the  sperm  plasma  mem-

brane supported by actin filaments

Actin.  Subunit  protein  of  cytoplasmic  microfilaments  and 

muscle thin filaments

Actin-related  protein  (Arp).  Family  of  proteins  sharing  a 

common origin and fold with actin

catenin, and actin filaments

Alpha-helix.  Common  element  of  protein  secondary  struc-
ture,  right-handed  helix  with  3.6  amino  acid  residues  per 
turn

Alpha  satellite.  Repeated  DNA  sequences  found  in  human 
centromeres, composed of monomers ~171 base pairs long, 
some with binding sites for centromeric protein CENP-B

ALT.  Pathway  using  recombination  to  lengthen  telomeres 

Action  potential.  Self-propagating,  transient  change  in  the 

without telomerase

membrane potential

Activating transcription factor 6.  A transmembrane protein 
of the ER that participates in the unfolded proteins response; 
it  is  cleaved  to  release  a  transcription  factor  that  regulates 
expression of genes for ER proteins

Activation  loop.  Region  of  protein  kinases  that  must  be 

phosphorylated for the kinase to be fully activated

Active chromatin hub.  Region of chromatin with a relatively 
high  concentration  of  chromatin  marks  associated  with 
active transcription

Acyl-CoA-cholesterol  transferase  (ACAT).  Enzyme  of  ER 
membranes that catalyzes the formation of cholesterol esters
Adaptive  immunity.  Process  that  selects  for  proliferation 
antibody producing B-lymphocytes and T-lymphocytes with 
receptors for specific antigens

Alternative  splicing.  Production  of  more  than  one  mRNA, 
and therefore more than one protein product, from a gene 
by alternative exclusion of exons or inclusion of introns from 
the initial transcript

Alzheimer disease.  Most common dementia of older people, 
characterized by loss of neurons and formation of intracel-
lular paired helical filaments of tau that aggregate in neuro-
fibrillary tangles

Amide  nitrogen.  Nitrogen  contributed  by  an  amino  acid  to 

the peptide bonds of proteins

Amiloride-sensitive  channels.  Cation  channels  consisting 

trimers of subunits with two transmembrane helices

Amino acid.  Building block of proteins, including an amino 
group, a central α-carbon with a side chain (or R group), and 
a carboxyl group

 823

824 

GLOSSARY

Aminoacyl-tRNA  synthetases.  Enzymes  that  catalyze  cova-

Archaea.  One of the three domains of life, along with Bacteria 

lent coupling of an amino acid to its cognate tRNA

and Eukaryotes

Amino terminus.  End of a polypeptide with a free amino group
Amphitelic attachment.  Proper chromosome attachment to 
the  spindle  with  sister  kinetochores  attached  to  opposite 
spindle poles

Anaphase  A.  The  stage  of  mitosis  when  sister  chromatids 
separate  from  each  other  by  moving  to  the  poles  of  the 
mitotic  spindle,  initiated  by  degradation  of  proteins  that 
regulate sister chromatid cohesion

Anaphase  B.  The  stage  of  mitosis  when  the  poles  of  the 

mitotic spindle move apart

Anaphase-promoting  complex/cyclosome  (APC/C).  A 
ubiquitin-conjugating  (E3)  enzyme  complex  that  targets 
proteins,  including  cyclins  and  securin,  for  degradation 
during mitosis and G1

Aneuploidy.  Excess  or  missing  chromosomes  caused  by 

errors in mitosis or meiosis

Anillin.  Adapter protein for contractile ring organization and 

cytokinesis

Antagonist.  Ligand molecule that inhibits receptor
Anterograde  traffic.  Movement  of  cargo  and  lipid  forward 

through the secretory system toward the plasma membrane

Anterograde 

transport.  Microtubule-based  movements 

away from the cell center, generally powered by dynein

Antigen-presenting  cell.  Macrophages,  dendritic  cells  and 
other  cells  that  display  antigenic  peptides  on  cell  surface 
major histocompatibility complexes

Antigen-presenting compartment.  Phagolysosome special-

ized for loading MHC Class II molecules with peptides

Antiporter.  Carrier  proteins  that  catalyze  movements  of 
solutes across membranes up concentration gradients at the 
expense of transport of a second solute down its concentra-
tion gradient in the opposite direction

AP1  complex.  Protein  complex  that  directs  clathrin  coat 

assembly at the TGN

Apaf-1.  See apoptotic protease activating factor 1
APC.  Product of the adenomatous polyposis coli gene; muta-

tions predispose to colon polyps and cancer

APC/C.  See Anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome
Apical plasma membrane.  Region of plasma membrane on 
the free surface of epithelial cells separated from the baso-
lateral membrane by a ring of tight junctions

Apoptosis.  A  type  of  programmed  cell  death  triggered  by 
internal  signals  or  external  stimuli  and  accompanied  by 
characteristic morphologic and biochemical changes

Apoptosome.  Seven-spoked  ring-like  structure  containing 
Apaf-1 and procaspase 9 that starts the proteolytic cascade 
in the intrinsic (mitochondrial) pathway of apoptosis

ARE-mediated degradation.  Pathway triggered by the pres-
ence  of  sequence  motifs  referred  to  as  A+U-rich  elements 
(AREs) that targets for rapid turnover of mRNAs that encode 
proteins  for  which  limited  and  transient  expression  is 
important

Arf.  Family of small GTPases, including Sar1 and Arf1-6, that 
mediate  membrane  traffic  by  associations  of  protein  effec-
tors with specific membranes; Arf1 recruits either COPI coat 
complexes or clathrin to Golgi-like membranes

Arp2/3 complex.  Protein complex including Arp2 and Arp3 

that nucleates branched actin filaments

Arrestin.  Protein  that  binds  and  inhibits  phosphorylated 

seven-helix receptors

ARS  core  consensus  sequence.  DNA  sequence  that  binds 
the origin recognition complex (ORC) and defines the posi-
tion  of  DNA  replication  origins  in  budding  yeast  (ARS, 
autonomously replicating sequence)

Assembly  proteins  (AP1,  AP2).  Clathrin  coat  constituents 

that regulate clathrin coat assembly

Aster.  Radial array of dynamic microtubules emanating from 
the  duplicated  centrosomes  at  the  poles  of  the  mitotic 
spindle; has a role in orienting the spindle in the cell through 
interactions with the cell cortex

Astral  microtubules.  Microtubules  that  emanate  from  the 
poles of the mitotic spindle towards the cell cortex (ie, away 
from the central spindle)

Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM).  Large protein kinase 
that can initiate the response to DNA damage by activating 
the downstream kinases Chk1 and Chk2

ATF6 (atlastin).  Dynamin-related GTPase that inserts into the 

ER membrane and promotes fusion of ER tubules

ATP.  See adenosine triphosphate
ATP-gated  channels.  Family  of  cation  channels  gated  by 
extracellular  ATP;  trimers  of  subunits  with  two  transmem-
brane helices

ATP  synthase.  Reversible,  rotary  mitochondrial  transmem-
brane protein that can either hydrolyze ATP to pump protons 
or  use  the  passage  of  protons  down  a  gradi ent  across  the 
membrane to synthesize ATP (see F-type ATPase)

ATR (ATM and Rad3 related).  Protein kinase that responds 
to abnormal accumulation of single-stranded DNA by activat-
ing downstream kinases Chk1 and Chk2

Atresia.  Programmed cell death and degeneration of activated 

oocytes that do not undergo full maturation to form eggs

A-type rotary ATPase.  Archaeal rotary ATPase pumps
Augmin.  Protein  complex  that  promotes  the  nucleation  of 

microtubules along the sides of other microtubules

Apoptotic  bodies.  Membrane-enclosed  remnants  of  apop-

Aurora A.  Part of a network of mitotic kinases that regulate 

totic cells

centriole division

Apoptotic  protease  activating  factor  1  (Apaf-1).  Protein 
activated by cytochrome c that binds procaspase 9 to form 
the apoptosome, initiating the intrinsic pathway of apoptotic 
cell death

Aquaporins.  Membrane channels selective for water
Arabidopsis thaliana.  Mustard weed; popular genetic model 

organism favored by plant biologists

Arachidonic  acid.  A  20-carbon  fatty  acid  with  four  double 
bonds; common constituent of membrane lipids and precur-
sor of eicosanoids

Aurora  B.  Protein  kinase  in  the  chromosomal  passenger 
complex that regulates chromosome attachment and cytoki-
nesis during mitosis

Autolysosome.  Compartment containing acid hydrolases for 
intracellular  degradation  formed  by  fusion  of  a  nascent 
autophagic vacuole with a late endosome or lysosome

Autonomic  nerve.  Nerves  of  the  sympathetic  and  parasym-

pathetic peripheral nervous systems

Autonomously replicating sequences (ARS).  Short (100 to 
150 bp) DNA segments that act as replication origins in yeast

 

GLOSSARY 

825

Autophagic vacuole.  Compartment for intracellular degrada-
tion formed when a flattened membrane cisterna encloses a 
region of cytoplasm in a vesicle with two membranes

Autophagosome.  Membrane  compartment  formed  during 
autophagy in which cellular contents are enclosed and des-
tined for degradation

Autophagy.  Degradation  of 

intracellular 

substrates 

in 

membrane-bounded compartments

Beta-sheet.  Common element of protein secondary structure 
consisting of parallel or antiparallel strands of polypeptides 
linked by backbone hydrogen bonds

BH (Bcl-2 homology) domains.  Short blocks of conserved 

protein sequence characteristic of Bcl-2 family members

Bilayer.  Planar  assembly  of  lipids  with  hydrophobic  fatty 
acid  chains  inside  and  hydrophilic  head  groups  on  both 
surfaces

Autosomes.  Chromosomes that do not carry genes that define 

BiP.  HSP70 family chaperone protein that promotes folding of 

the sex of the individual

proteins in the ER lumen

Auxin.  Plant  hormone  that  activates  gene  transcription  by 
triggering the degradation of transcriptional inhibitors; used 
in a synthetic degron system for conditional destruction of 
proteins in animal cells

Axial element.  Protein scaffold along the axis of paired sister 
chromatids  in  the  synaptonemal  complex  (also  known  as 
lateral elements)

Axon.  Process of a neuron capable of propagating an action 
potential  and  forming  synapses  with  other  neurons  or 
muscles

Axoneme.  Microtubule-based structural framework of eukary-

otic cilia and flagella

Bacteriorhodopsin.  Light-driven  proton  pump  with  seven 
transmembrane  helices  from  the  plasma  membrane  of  a 
halophilic bacterium

Bag6 complex.  Cytoplasmic protein complex involved with 
degradation of unfolded proteins transported out of the ER 
lumen

Barbed end.  Fast-growing end of an actin filament
BAR domain protein.  Dimeric, alpha-helical peripheral mem-

brane proteins that induce or stabilize curved membranes

Bipolar attachment.  Attachment of the kinetochores of two 
sister chromatids to microtubules emanating from opposite 
poles of the mitotic spindle

BIR  (baculovirus  IAP  repeat).  Type  of  Zn2+  finger  found 
in  IAP  proteins  that  promotes  interactions  with  other 
proteins

Bivalents.  Paired  homologous  chromosomes  consisting  of 
four  sister  chromatids  held  together  by  chiasmata  during 
meiosis I

B-lymphocyte.  Antibody producing cells
Bone  morphogenetic  proteins  (BMP).  Growth  factors 

related to TGF-β

Branch point.  Site of attachment of the 5′ end of an intron 
to  an  adenosine  in  the  lariat  intermediate  during  RNA 
splicing

BRdU.  Uridine with a bromine linked to the 5-position of the 
pyrimidine ring is recognised by DNA polymerases as thymi-
dine and can be detected in DNA using antibodies

Brefeldin A (BFA).  Fungal metabolite used experimentally to 
disassemble the Golgi apparatus by preventing activation of 
Arf1 by GTP binding

Barr  body.  Inactivated  X  chromosome  forming  a  discrete 

Bright  field.  Light  microscopic  imaging  system  without 

patch of heterochromatin at the nuclear periphery

Basal body (axonemal).  Cylindrical microtubule organizing 
center composed of nine triplet microtubules located at the 
base of cilia and flagella

Basal  body  (bacterial).  A  transmembrane  complex  of  pro-

teins forming the rotary motor for bacterial flagella

Basal  lamina.  A  thin,  planar  specialization  of  extracellular 
matrix  beneath  epithelia  and  around  muscle  cells  and 
peripheral nerve cells

Base  excision  repair.  Process  that  replaces  oxidized, 

reduced, alkylated, or deaminated DNA bases

Basolateral  plasma  membrane.  Domain  of  the  cell  mem-
brane  of  epithelial  cells  facing  neighboring  cells  and  the 
basal lamina, separated from the apical domain by a ring of 
tight junctions

Bax and Bak.  Bcl-2 family proteins that activate the intrinsic 
pathway of apoptosis by inserting into mitochondrial outer 
membranes and releasing pro-apoptotic factors

Bcl-2  proteins.  Three  subfamilies  of  proteins  with  BH 
domains that regulate the release of death-promoting factors 
from mitochondria: Bcl-2 protectors inhibit apoptosis; Bcl-2 
killers  promote  apoptosis;  Bcl-2  regulators  interfere  with 
protectors or activate killers

Beige fat cells.  Cells that store fat and dissipate energy as heat
Bestrophin.  Family  of  pentameric  chloride  channels;  muta-

optical elements to vary the phase or polarity of the light

Bromodomain.  Protein motif that binds acetylated N-terminal 

histone tails

Brown fat.  Fat cells with numerous mitochondria specialized 

for heat production

Budding  uninhibited  by  benzimidazole  (BUB).  Conserved 

genes encoding proteins essential for the spindle checkpoint

Ca-ATPase  pump.  P-type  membrane  pump  that  uses  ATP 
hydrolysis to transport Ca2+ into the endoplasmic reticulum 
or out of the cell

CAD domain.  Extracellular domains of the cadherin family of 

adhesion proteins

Cadherin.  Adhesion  proteins  that  typically  bind  to  like  cad-

herins on other cells

Caenorhabditis  elegans.  Small  nematode  worm;  genetic 

model organism favored by developmental biologists

Cajal bodies (coiled bodies).  Nuclear structures that accu-
mulate  many  factors  involved  in  mRNA  processing  and 
within which specific nucleotides in snRNAs are modified

Calcineurin.  See PP2B
Calcium-sensitive dye.  Dye that changes its fluorescence on 

Ca2+ binding

Caldesmon.  Protein associated with thin filaments in smooth 

muscle

Calmodulin.  Small calcium ion binding protein that activates 

tions cause retinal degeneration

numerous effector proteins

Beta-catenin.  Adapter  protein  between  the  cytoplasmic 
domain  of  cadherins, α-catenin,  and  actin  filaments;  also  a 
transcription factor regulated by Wnt signaling pathways

Calmodulin-regulated 

spectrin  associated  proteins 
(CAMSAP).  Proteins  that  associate  with  growing  minus 
ends of microtubules

826 

GLOSSARY

Calnexin.  Sugar-binding, lectin-like protein in ER lumen
Calnexin  cycle.  Cycle  of  modifications  that  help  glycopro-

teins fold in the ER

Calreticulin.  Protein in the ER lumen that binds Ca2+ and acts 

as a chaperone for protein folding

Calsequestrin.  Ca2+ binding protein in the ER lumen of stri-

ated muscle

cAMP.  See Cyclic adenosine monophosphate
cAMP-gated channel.  Family of cation ion channels activated 

by cAMP binding to a cytoplasmic domain

cAMP  response  element.  Conserved  DNA  sequence  that 
binds CREB, the mediator of the transcriptional response to 
cAMP

Cap  recognition  complex.  Proteins  that  recognize  5′  caps 
on mRNAs, targeting them for export from the nucleus and 
to preinitiation complexes on ribosomes

Capping protein.  Heterodimeric protein that caps the barbed 

ends of actin filaments

Cap  Z.  Isoform  of  heterodimeric  capping  protein  that  binds 
barbed ends of thin filaments in the Z-disk of striated muscles
Carbohydrate.  Sugar molecules with the chemical composi-

tion (CH2O)n

Carbonyl oxygen.  The oxygen atom on the carbon atom of 

peptide bonds

Carboxyl-terminal  domain  (CTD).  Region  of  RNA  poly-
merase II that participates in initiation and coordinates RNA 
splicing reactions

Carboxyl  terminus.  The  end  of  a  polypeptide  with  a  free 

carboxyl group

Cardiac muscle.  The striated muscle of the heart
Cardiomyopathy.  Genetic  diseases  of  heart  muscle  leading 

to heart failure or abnormal rhythms

CD4.  Ig-CAMs  on  helper  T-lymphocytes  that  bind  constant 
regions  of  class  I  major  histocompatibility  complexes;  also 
an HIV receptor

CD8.  Ig-CAMs on cytotoxic T-lymphocytes that bind constant 

regions of class II major histocompatibility complexes

CD45 (RPTPc phosphatase).  Abundant transmembrane pro-

tein tyrosine phosphatase on while blood cells

Cdc20.  Target  of  the  spindle  checkpoint;  thought  to  be  a 

substrate recognition factor for the APC/C

Cdc25.  Three  protein  phosphatases  that  remove  inhibitory 
phosphates  from  T14  and  Y15  of  Cdk-cyclin  complexes, 
thereby triggering kinase activation
family  GTPase 

that  regulates  actin 

Cdc42.  Small  Rho 

assembly

CDC  mutants  (cell  division  cycle  mutants).  Mutations  in 
genes essential for cell cycle progression that cause yeast to 
accumulate at a single point in the cell cycle

Cdc45p.  Protein  recruited  to  active  origins  of  replication  to 
activate  Mcm  proteins,  promote  RPA  binding,  and  recruit 
DNA polymerase

Cdk.  See Cyclin-dependent kinase
Cdk-activating kinase (CAK).  Complex of Cdk7 and cyclin 
H  that  phosphorylates  Cdk1  on  T161,  the  final  step  in  its 
activation

Cdk1–cyclin  B.  Cell  cycle  kinase  with  critical  roles  in  the 

G2/M transition and mitosis

Cdk2–cyclin A.  Cell cycle kinase with critical roles in S phase 

and G2/M transition

cDNA.  A DNA copy of a messenger RNA
Ced (cell death abnormal) mutants.  Mutations in C. elegans 

genes that affect programmed cell death

Cell  cortex.  Region  of  cytoplasm  beneath  the  plasma  mem-

Cargo selection.  Mechanism for cargo sorting into membrane-

brane, typically rich in actin filaments

bound transport carriers

Carrier  vesicles.  Tubules  or 

structures  that  mediate  transport  among 
compartments

larger  membrane-enclosed 
intracellular 

Cartilage.  Specialized  connective  tissue  consisting  largely  of 
collagen  fibrils,  proteoglycans,  and  water  found  in  joints, 
respiratory tract, and developing bones

CAS.  Nuclear  export  receptor  that  works  with  RanGTP  to 

displace cargo from importin α

Caspase-activated  DNase  (CAD).  Endonuclease  activated 
during apoptotic execution to cleave the nuclear DNA into 
fragments of about 200 base pairs

Caspase recruitment domain (CARD).  Protein interaction 
domain  found  in  cell  death  adapter  proteins  and  certain 
caspases

Caspases  (cysteine  aspartases).  Proteases  with  an  active 
site  cysteine  that  cleave  at  aspartate  residues  and  whose 
activation triggers apoptotic cell death

Catastrophe.  Random  change  of  state  whereby  an  end  of  a 

microtubule stops growing and rapidly depolymerizes

Cathepsin  K.  Proteolytic  enzyme  secreted  by  osteoclasts  to 

digest organic components of bone

Caveolae.  Small  (~50 nm)  flask-shaped 

invaginations  of 
plasma membrane enriched in caveolin, cavin, cholesterol, 
and signaling molecules

Caveolin.  Major protein component of caveolae
Cavin.  Alpha-helical protein that coats the cytoplasmic surface 

of caveolae

Cellulose.  Long, unbranched polymer of glucose in plant cell 

walls; most abundant biopolymer on earth

Cellulose synthases.  Plasma membrane enzymes that synthe-

size cellulose

Cell wall.  Extracellular matrix of plants and fungi
CENP-A.  Histone H3 variant, an integral component of kineto-

chores in species ranging from yeast to man

CENP-B.  Protein  that  binds  a  17-bp  sequence  in  α-satellite 
DNA and establishes an epigenetic state favoring kinetochore 
assembly on α-satellite DNA arrays

CENP-C.  Protein that appears to bridge between the inner and 

outer kinetochore

CEN  sequences.  Short  DNA  sequences  in  budding  yeast 
chromosomes that specify protein-binding sites for assembly 
of kinetochores

Central pair.  Two microtubules located in the middle of nine 

outer doublet microtubules in axonemes

Central  spindle.  Antiparallel  bundle  of  microtubules  that 
appears  late  in  anaphase  and  has  an  important  role  during 
cytokinesis

Centralspindlin  complex.  Protein  complex  that  recruits 
RhoGEF ect2 to help to establish the site where the cleavage 
furrow will form during telophase

Centrifuge.  Machine  that  spins  a  sample  holder  to  generate 

force to sediment particles in liquid samples

Centrin.  Family  of  EF-hand,  Ca2+  binding  proteins  similar  to 
calmodulin that are essential for the biogenesis of centrioles 
(and spindle pole bodies of yeast)

 

GLOSSARY 

827

Centrioles.  Barrel-shaped structures composed of nine micro-

Chondrocyte.  Cell that synthesizes and secretes the extracel-

tubule triplets that organize centrosomes (see Basal body)

lular matrix of cartilage

Centromere.  Chromosomal  locus,  defined  by  specific  DNA 
sequences  and  associated  proteins  that  regulates  chromo-
somal movements during mitosis and meiosis

Centrosome.  Pair of centrioles and surrounding matrix con-
taining  proteins  including  γ-tubulin  that  nucleate  microtu-
bules and serve as the microtubule-organizing center in most 
animal cells

Ceramide.  Backbone  of  all  sphingolipids  that  is  converted 
in  the  Golgi 

to  glucosylceramide  and  sphingomyelin 
apparatus

Ceramide  transport  protein  (CERT).  Removes newly syn-
thesized  ceramide  from  the  ER  for  transport  to  the  Golgi 
apparatus

cFLIP  (FLICE-like  inhibitory  protein).  Co-assembles  with 
procaspase  8  monomers  creating  an  enzyme  with  altered 
activity  that  does  not  trigger  cell  death;  FLICE  is  another 
name for caspase 8

cGMP.  See Cyclic guanosine monophosphate
Channelrhodopsin.  Light-sensitive cation channel protein of 

green algae used in optogenetics

Chaperone.  Protein that assists the folding of other proteins
Chaperone-mediated  autophagy  (CMA).  Quality  control 
mechanism  to  eliminate  soluble  cytoplasmic  proteins  that 
are incorrectly folded or assembled

Charcot-Marie-Tooth  disease.  Degeneration  of  peripheral 
motor and sensory nerves caused by a variety of mutations
Checkpoint.  Biochemical  circuit  that,  when  active,  blocks 
progression through the cell cycle, either temporarily or, in 
some cases, permanently

Checkpoint  kinases  1/2  (Chk1/Chk2).  Protein  kinases 
activated  by  ATM  and  ATR  that  phosphorylate  Cdc25A 
protein phosphatase and other substrates, thereby blocking 
cell cycle progression

Chemiosmotic  cycle.  A  series  of  reactions  across  a  lipid 
bilayer  that  couples  the  creation  of  an  ion  gradient  by  an 
energy-consuming transmembrane pump to energy-requiring 
transport  or  ATP  synthesis  by  a  second  transmembrane 
protein

Chemotaxis.  Process by which a cell moves up a concentra-

tion gradient of a chemical attractant

Chiasmata.  Chromatin  structures  at  sites  where  recombina-
tion  has  been  completed;  keep  homologous  chromosomes 
paired until anaphase of meiosis I

ChIP-seq.  High  throughput  technique  in  which  classes  of 
chromatin are purified using antibodies recognizing histone 
MARKS or other chromatin proteins followed by sequencing 
the DNA

Chromatid.  A  single  chromosomal  DNA  molecule  plus  its 

attendant proteins

Chromatin.  DNA plus the proteins that package it within the 

cell nucleus

Chromatography.  Method  to  separate  chemicals  based  on 
interactions with an immobile matrix such as a gel or paper; 
with the matrix in a tubular column or on a plate

Chromodomain  (chromatin  modification  organizer). 
Motif of 50 amino acids that binds to histone H3 trimethyl-
ated on lysine

Chromokinesin.  Kinesin  that  binds  to  chromatin  and  chro-
mosomes;  may  have  roles  that  do  not  involve  movement 
along microtubules

Chromonema  fiber.  A  chromatin  fiber,  100  to  300 nm  in 
diameter, thought to be an element of higher-order packing 
of chromatin within chromosomes

Chromosomal passenger complex.  A complex of Aurora B 
kinase,  inner  centromere  protein  (INCENP),  survivin,  and 
borealin that is required to correct chromosome attachment 
errors,  for  the  spindle  checkpoint,  and  to  complete 
cytokinesis

Chromosome.  DNA molecule with its attendant proteins that 
behaves as an independent unit during mitosis and meiosis
Chromosome cycle.  Replication and partitioning of chromo-

somes into two daughter cells

Chromosome scaffold.  Biochemical fraction of non-histone 
proteins  thought  to  play  a  role  in  organizing  chromosome 
structure

Chromosome territories.  Discrete regions of the interphase 

nucleus occupied by particular chromosomes

Ciliopathy.  Diverse diseases caused by mutations in genes for 

ciliary proteins

Cilium.  Cell surface organelle of eukaryotes based on a micro-
tubule  axoneme,  usually  capable  of  generating  waves  or 
other motions but sometimes immotile sensory structures

Citric acid cycle.  Biochemical reactions in the mitochondrial 

matrix that derives energy by breaking down acetyl-CoA

Clathrin.  Protein  that  forms  a  three-legged  triskelion  and  a 
lattice on the cytoplasmic surface of membranes during the 
formation of buds

Clathrin-coated pit.  Invaginated patch of membrane formed 
by a lattice of clathrin triskelions and adapter molecules on 
the cytoplasmic surface

Clathrin-mediated endocytosis.  Selective uptake of ligands 

bound to receptors that concentrate in clathrin-coated pits
Claudins.  Transmembrane  proteins  that  link  plasma  mem-

branes together at tight junctions

Chloride channel.  Transmembrane ion channel selective for 

ClC chloride channel.  Family of channels with 18 transmem-

chloride ions

Chlorophyll.  Organic  molecule  that  absorbs  photons  and 

uses the energy to boost electrons to an excited state

Chloroplast.  Eukaryotic  organelle  derived  from  a  symbiotic 

cyanobacterium specialized for photosynthesis

Chloroplast  stroma.  Compartment  inside  the  inner  chloro-
plast membrane devoted to synthesis of three-carbon sugar 
phosphates, chloroplast proteins, and fatty acids

Cholesterol.  Polycyclic  lipid  with  one  polar  atom  found  in 
biological  membranes;  also  the  precursor  for  steroid  hor-
mones and bile acids

brane helices selective for chloride

Cleavage furrow.  Constriction of the plasma membrane that 
pinches a cell in two during cytokinesis as a result of action 
of a contractile ring of actin filaments and myosin-II

Cleavage  stimulus.  Signal  emitted  by  the  mitotic  spindle 
that  specifies  the  position  of  the  cleavage  furrow  midway 
between the poles and perpendicular to the long axis of the 
spindle

CLIP-170.  Protein that concentrates on plus ends of growing 
microtubules;  involved  in  transport  of  membranes  and 
behavior of microtubules at kinetochores

828 

GLOSSARY

Clonal  expansion.  The  process  that  produces  a  clone  of 

Confocal  microscope.  Imaging  system  using  pinholes  to 

identical lymphocytes arising from a single precursor cell

restrict the illumination to a thin plane in the specimen

Closed  mitosis.  Form  of  mitosis  in  single-celled  eukaryotes, 
including yeast and slime molds in which the mitotic spindle 
forms and chromosomes segregate within an intact nuclear 
envelope to which the spindle poles are anchored

CMG (Cdc45, MCM2-7, GINS) helicase.  Helicase that sepa-

rates DNA strands for replication

c-Mos.  A  MAP  kinase  kinase  kinase  and  component  in 
the  cytostatic  factor  (CSF)  pathway,  which  holds  mature 
eggs  in  meiotic  metaphase  until  they  are  fertilized  by  a  
sperm

Coactivator.  Protein  complex  that  facilitates  loading  of  the 
transcriptional  apparatus  onto  a  gene,  often  by  modifying 
N-terminal histone tails to “open” the chromatin

Coatomer  complex.  Proteins  forming  the  COPI  coat  on 

vesicles budding from the ER

Codon.  Three  successive  nucleic  acid  bases  in  mRNA  that 
specify the position of a particular amino acid in a polypep-
tide during synthesis on a ribosome

Cohesin.  Complex of four proteins that holds sister chroma-
tids together from their replication during the S phase until 
their separation at the onset of anaphase

Coiled-coil.  Left-handed helix of two α-helical polypeptides; 

either parallel or antiparallel

Colchicine.  Drug isolated from the autumn crocus that inhib-
its  microtubule  assembly  by  binding  dissociated  tubulin 
dimers

Collagen.  Chief  fibrous  protein  of  connective  tissues,  com-
posed of three rod-shaped polypeptides, each folded in type 
II polyproline helix; many isoforms specialized for cartilage, 
basal lamina and other connective tissues

Committed progenitor cells.  Stem cells with a limited pro-
liferation capacity that can give rise to only specific subsets 
of differentiated cells

Complex I (NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase).  Complex 
of proteins in mitochondrial inner membranes and bacterial 
plasma membranes, which takes electrons from NADH and 
transfers protons out of the mitochondrial matrix and bacte-
rial cytoplasm

Complex  II  (succinate:ubiquinone  reductase).  A  trans-
membrane enzyme complex from mitochondria and Bacteria 
that takes part in the citric acid cycle, by coupling oxidation 
of  succinate  to  reduction  of  flavin  adenine  dinucleotide 
(FAD) to FADH2

Complex  III  (cytochrome  bc1).  Transmembrane  protein 
complex from mitochondria and Bacteria that couples oxida-
tion and reduction of ubiquinone to the transfer of protons 
out of the matrix

Complex IV (cytochrome oxidase).  Transmembrane protein 
complex  of  mitochondria  and  Bacteria  that  takes  electrons 
from  four  cytochrome  c  molecules  to  reduce  molecular 
oxygen to two waters, as well as to pump four protons out 
of the mitochondrial matrix or bacterial cytoplasm

Condenser.  Lenses in microscopes that focus the illuminating 

beam on the specimen

Condensin  I  and  II.  Two  pentameric  protein  complexes 

with an essential role in chromosome architecture

Conditional  mutation.  A  mutation  that  gives  an  abnormal 
phenotype  only  under  certain  conditions  such  as  high 
temperature

Conformational  change.  Change 

in 

the  shape  of  a 

macromolecule

Connexin.  Protein subunit of gap junction channels
Connexon.  Hexamer  of  connexin  subunits  making  up  gap 
junction  channels  connecting  the  cytoplasm  of  adjacent  
cells

Conserved oligomeric Golgi (COG).  A multi-subunit tether-

ing protein for Golgi apparatus trafficking

Constitutive heterochromatin.  Inactive form of chromatin 
that remains condensed throughout the cell cycle owing to 
the  presence  of  special  proteins  and  modifications  of  the 
histone proteins

Constitutive  secretion.  Exocytosis  without  special  stimuli 

being received by the cell

Contact inhibition.  Arrest of cell movements and cell-cycle 
progression  in  G1  when  cells  growing  in  culture  contact 
other cells, mediated by interactions of cadherins

Contractile  ring.  Band  of  actin  filaments,  myosin-II,  and 
other proteins attached to the plasma membrane around the 
cortex midway between spindle poles that pinches daughter 
cells in two like a purse string during cytokinesis

Convergent evolution.  The process that can produce genes 
encoding  proteins  with  similar  structures  starting  from 
unrelated ancestral genes

COPI  coat  complex.  Assembly  of  Arf1  GTPase,  coatomer, 
and a GAP on the cytoplasmic face of VTCs and Golgi mem-
branes to mediate protein sorting, budding, and retrograde 
transport back to the ER

COPII 

coat 

complex.  Assembly  of 

Sar1p  GTPase, 
Sec23p•Sec24p,  and  Sec13p•Sec31p  on  the  cytoplasmic 
face of the ER to mediate sorting and trafficking of secretory 
cargo out of the ER

Core histones.  Histones H2A, H2B, H3, and H4, which form 

the disk-like octameric core of nucleosomes

Core  mannose  oligosaccharide.  Branched  oligosaccharide 
rich in mannose that is transferred from dolichol phosphate 
to  the  side  chain  of  an  asparagine  of  a  newly  synthesized 
protein in the ER lumen

Core  protein.  Protein  modified  with  glycosaminoglycans  to 

make a proteoglycan

Cotranslational  translocation.  Movement  of  a  protein 
across the ER membrane concurrent with its synthesis by a 
membrane-bound ribosome

Covariance  method.  Prediction  of  secondary  structure  in 
RNAs  from  comparisons  of  sequences  in  divergent  organ-
isms; bases that hydrogen bond usually vary together

CpG  islands.  Regions  of  DNA  rich  in  CpG  found  in  and 

around gene promoters

Crinophagy.  Fusion  of  lysosomes  directly  with  secretory 

vesicles resulting in the degradation of secretory proteins

CRISPR/Cas9 system.  Method using bacterial proteins and a 
guide  RNA  to  direct  the  Cas9  nuclease  to  make  a  double-
strand break in a specific genomic DNA sequence
Cristae.  Folds of the inner mitochondrial membrane
Critical concentration.  The concentration of unpolymerized 
subunits giving equal rates assembly and disassembly at an 
end of a polymer

Crossbridge.  Force-producing connection of a motor protein 

between its cytoskeletal track and its cargo

 

GLOSSARY 

829

Crossover.  Physical breakage and reunion of DNA strands on 
two different chromosomes, typically producing a balanced 
exchange of DNA sequences

Crossover  interference.  Uncharacterized  mechanism  that 
locally limits the number of DNA breaks that are processed 
to form crossovers and chiasmata during meiosis

c-Src.  Nonreceptor tyrosine kinase important in signaling
Cyanobacteria.  Photosynthetic Bacteria (formerly called blue-
green  algae)  with  both  types  of  photosystems  as  well  as  a 
manganese enzyme that splits water

Cyclic  adenosine  monophosphate  (cAMP).  Nucleotide 
with  an  adenine  base  and  a  cyclic  phosphodiester  bond 
linking  the  3′  and  5′  hydroxyls;  an  important  signaling 
second messenger

Cyclic-ADP-ribose.  Derivative of NAD that sets the sensitivity 
of ryanodine receptor calcium release channels to the cyto-
plasmic Ca2+ concentration

Cyclic  guanosine  monophosphate  (cGMP).  Nucleotide 
with  a  guanine  base  and  a  cyclic  phosphodiester  bond 
linking the 3′ and 5′ hydroxyls

Cyclic  nucleotide–dependent  protein  kinases.  Kinases 
regulated  by  binding  of  cyclic  nucleotides  to  part  of  the 
enzyme or to a separate regulatory subunit

Cyclic  nucleotide–gated  channels.  Cation  channels  regu-
lated  by  binding  of  cyclic  nucleotides  to  cytoplasmic  
domains

Cyclin.  Class  of  subunits  required  for  activity  of  cyclin-
dependent kinases that undergo cyclic patterns of accumula-
tion and destruction during the cell cycle

Cytotoxic  T  lymphocytes  (killer  T  cells).  Lymphocytes 
with receptors for specific antigens displayed by major his-
tocompatibility complexes on target cells that they then kill
Cytostatic factor (CSF).  A biochemical activity, including the 
APC/C  inhibitor  Emi2,  that  arrests  vertebrate  oocytes  in 
metaphase II of meiosis until they are fertilized

Dam1 complex.  Ring-like complex of proteins at the kineto-
chore  of  budding  yeast  that  links  the  kinetochore  to  disas-
sembling microtubules

Dark  reactions.  Biochemical  reactions  in  chloroplasts  that 
convert carbon dioxide into three-carbon sugar phosphates
Deadenylases.  Enzymes  that  catalyze  the  stepwise  removal 
of the poly(A) tail of mRNAs, signaling their degradation by 
removing  binding  sites  for  the  poly(A)-binding  protein 
(PABP),  which  when  present  inhibits  cap  removal  at  the 
other end of the RNA

Death domain (DD).  Protein interaction domain in proteins 
from cell death signaling pathways, including Fas cell death 
receptors and FADD adapter molecules

Death  effector  domain  (DED).  Protein  interaction  domain 
in adapters such as FADD, the prodomains of caspases 8 and 
10, and in certain inhibitors of apoptosis

Death-inducing  signaling  complex  (DISC).  Signaling 
complex formed on the intracellular domains of trimerised 
CD95  during  the  extrinsic  cell  death  pathway  to  promote 
activation of caspase-8

Debranching  enzyme.  Linearizes  the  lariat  mRNA  splicing 

intermediate for degradation by exonucleases

Decapping complex.  Removes the 5′ cap from mRNAs, trig-

Cyclin-dependent kinase.  Class of serine/threonine kinases 

gering their rapid degradation

regulated by cyclins. See Cdk

Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor (CKI).  Class of proteins 
that negatively regulate Cdks to block cell cycle progression
Cyclooxygenase.  Enzymes that convert arachidonic acid into 

prostaglandin H2

Cyclosporine.  Drug based on a natural product that inhibits 

calcineurin and the cellular immune response

Cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator (CFTR).  An ABC 
transporter that acts as a chloride channel; mutated in cystic 
fibrosis

Deconvolution.  Computational  method  to  remove  out  of 

focus fluorescent light from a microscopic image

Decoy receptors.  Receptors for surface proteins such as FAS/
CD95 that lack transmembrane domains and are shed from 
tumor  cells  to  protect  them  against  killing  by  cytotoxic 
immune cells

Degron.  Peptide sequence that targets the protein for ubiqui-

tylation and degradation by proteasomes

Delta.  Cell surface protein that stimulates Notch receptors on 

other cells; influence many developmental processes

Cytochalasin.  Fungal  product  used  experimentally  to  depo-

Dendrite.  Nerve  cell  process  specialized  for  receiving  syn-

lymerize actin filaments in cells

apses from other neurons

Cytochrome c.  Small heme protein, part of electron transport 
pathway  of  oxidative  phosphorylation  and,  when  released 
from mitochondria, a trigger for apoptosis

Cytochrome P450.  Enzymes of the smooth ER that detoxify 
endogenous  steroids,  carcinogenic  compounds,  and  lipid-
soluble molecules from the environment

Dense  body.  Attachment  sites  for  actin  filaments  and  inter-
mediate filaments in the cytoplasm of smooth muscle cells
Dense  fibrillar  component.  Regions  of  nucleoli  surround-

ing fibrillar centers

Dephosphorylation.  Reaction  that  removes  a  phosphate 

from a protein side chain

Cytokine.  Diverse  family  of  protein  hormones  and  growth 

Desmin.  Intermediate filament isoform expressed by muscle 

factors

cells

Cytokine receptor.  Transmembrane receptors for cytokines 

linked to JAK kinases in the cell

Cytokinesis.  Division  of  the  cytoplasm  into  two  daughter 

Desmocollin.  Types of cadherins found in desmosomes
Desmoglein.  Types of cadherins found in desmosomes
Desmoplakin.  Protein  link  between  desmosomal  cadherins 

cells at the end of mitosis

and intermediate filaments

Cytoplasmic  streaming.  Bulk  movement  of  organelles  and 

Desmosome.  Intercellular  junction  mediated  by  cadherins 

cytoplasm

and anchored to cytoplasmic intermediate filaments

Cytosine.  Pyrimidine base present in DNA and RNA; H-bonds 

De-ubiquitylating  enzyme  (DUB).  Enzymes  that  remove 

with guanine

Cytoskeleton.  The ensemble of protein polymers (including 
actin  filaments,  intermediate  filaments,  and  microtubules) 
forming the mechanical scaffold for the cytoplasm

ubiquitin from target proteins

Diacylglycerol (DAG).  Diglyceride with two fatty acids and 

no head group; activates PKC isoforms

Diakinesis.  Prometaphase of meiosis I

830 

GLOSSARY

Dicer.  Double-strand-specific RNA endonuclease in the RNAi 
pathway that generates short RNA duplexes that are incor-
porated into the RISC complex

Dictyostelium  discoideum.  A  cellular  slime  mold;  model 
and 

chemotaxis,  motility, 

studying 

or gan ism 
differentiation

for 

Differential interference contrast (DIC).  Light microscopy 
optics generating contrast from local differences in refractive 
index

Dihydropyridine  (DHP)  receptor.  Voltage-gated  calcium 
channels  that  couple  plasma  membrane  depolarization  
to  the  release  of  calcium  from  internal  stores  in  striated 
muscles

Dileucine-based  sorting  motifs.  A  sequence  that  directs 

Dolichol  phosphate.  Long-chained,  unsaturated  isoprenoid 
alcohol with pyrophosphate at one end that is the substrate 
for the synthesis of oligosaccharide precursors in the cyto-
plasm and subsequent transfer to asparagines of proteins in 
the ER lumen

Dominant  negative  mutation.  Mutation  giving  rise  to  a 
deleterious phenotype even in the presence of a wild-type 
allele

Double-strand  break  repair.  Processes  that  repair  double-
strand breaks in DNA either without a template (nonhomolo-
gous  end-joining)  or  using  undamaged  DNA  as  a  template 
(homologous recombinational repair) for accurate repair

Down  syndrome.  Common  human  aneuploidy  with  three 

copies of chromosome 21

proteins into clathrin-coated pits on the plasma membrane

DP1/YOP1.  Protein that mediates formation of tubules by ER 

Dilysine sorting motif.  Sequence that directs proteins from 

membranes

the Golgi apparatus to the ER

Diploid chromosome number (2n).  Total number of chro-
mosomes in a diploid organism, comprising pairs of homolo-
gous  chromosomes,  one  donated  by  the  mother  and  the 
other by the father

Diplotene.  Fourth  stage  of  meiotic  prophase  with  decon-
densed  chromosomes  held  together  by  chiasmata  (can  last 
for decades in female humans)

Drosha.  Nuclear  double-strand-specific  endonuclease  that 

releases individual pre-miRNAs from their precursors

Drosophila melanogaster.  Fruit fly, genetic model organism 

popular for studying development

Dynactin complex.  Protein complex linking dynein to mem-

brane cargo

Dynamic instability.  Behavior of microtubules with growing 

and shrinking microtubules coexisting at steady state

Disjunction  (disjoining).  Normal  separation  of  chromo-

Dynamin.  GTPase  that  coordinates  the  internalization  of 

somes or chromatids in meiosis or mitosis

clathrin-coated vesicles

Disks.  Membrane  compartments  in  photoreceptor  cells  rich 

in rhodopsin

Dis1/TOG family (called XMAP215 in frogs).  Proteins that 
associate with microtubule plus ends to regulate microtubule 
assembly and dynamics; required for organization of mitotic 
spindle poles in animals and cortical arrays of microtubules 
in plants

Disulfide bond.  S-S bond formed by oxidation between two 

cysteine residues

Dmc1.  Together  with  Rad51,  drives  a  search  of  3′  single-
stranded  DNA  tails  for  complementary  DNA  sequences  of 
the other chromosomes during recombination

DNA.  Polymer  of  phosphate-linked  sugars  (deoxyribose) 
linked  to  purine  and  pyrimidine  bases  that  constitutes  the 
genetic information for most organisms

DNA  damage  checkpoints.  Biochemical  pathways  that 
detect  damaged  DNA  and  then  either  block  cell  cycle  pro-
gression or trigger cell death by apoptosis

DNA  damage  response  (DDR).  Complex  network  that 
recognizes  DNA  damage  and  activates  the  cell  and  repair 
mechanisms

DNA-dependent protein kinase.  Key factor in DNA repair 

by non-homologous end joining

DNA  polymerases  δ  and  ε.  Enzymes  that  use  PCNA  to 
help  them  process  along  the  DNA,  synthesizing  DNA  con-
tinuously on the leading strand. On the lagging strand, they 
synthesize Okazaki fragments of about 250 bp

DNA  replication.  Synthesis  of  two  complementary  strands 

from a DNA double helix; duplication of the genome

DNA replication checkpoint.  Biochemical mechanism that 
detects unreplicated DNA or stalled DNA replication forks, 
stabilizing the latter so that they can be repaired

DNA  topoisomerase  IIα.  An  enzyme  found  in  the  mitotic 
chromosome  scaffold  that  alters  DNA  topology  by  passing 
one double-helix strand through another

Dynein.  Motor  proteins  that  use  ATP  hydrolysis  to  move 
toward  the  minus  ends  of  microtubules,  members  of  AAA 
ATPase family

Dystroglycan/sarcoglycan  complex.  Transmembrane  com-
plex  that  stabilizes  muscle  plasma  membranes  through 
interactions with the cytoskeleton and the basal lamina

Dystrophin.  Giant protein that links the dystroglycan/sarco-
glycan  complex  to  cytoplasmic  actin  filaments;  mutations 
cause the most common form of muscular dystrophy

Early  recombination  nodules.  Sites  along  chromosomes 
where DNA strand breaks have occurred and recombination 
is initiated early in meiosis

EB1.  Protein  that  binds  growing  microtubule  plus  ends  and 

associates with APC

E-cadherin.  Isoform of cadherin adhesion protein expressed 

by epithelial cells

EDEM.  See  ER  degradation-enhancing  α-mannosidase-like 

protein

EDITOR.  Enzymes  that  either  place  or  remove  a  MARK  on 

chromatin

EEA1.  Tethering factor in the early endosomal membranes
E1  enzyme  (ubiquitin-activating  enzyme).  Activates  the 
small  protein  ubiquitin  by  forming  a  thioester  bond 
between the C-terminus of ubiquitin and a cysteine on the 
enzyme

E2 enzyme (ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme).  Either trans-
fers ubiquitin directly to the ε amino group of a lysine of a 
target protein or combines with a third component (an E3 
or ubiquitin-protein ligase) to do so

E3 enzyme (ubiquitin-protein ligase).  Facilitates the trans-
fer of ubiquitin from an E2 enzyme to the ε amino group of 
a lysine of a target protein

E2F.  Family of 10 transcription factors in mammals that regu-
late genes promoting cell cycle progression at the restriction 
point and can trigger cell death by apoptosis

 

GLOSSARY 

831

Effector caspases.  “Downstream” caspases activated through 
cleavage  by  initiator  caspases  and  responsible  for  most 
intracellular proteolysis during apoptosis

Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.  Human genetic disease with thin 
skin  and  lax  joints  owing  to  mutations  in  the  genes  for 
fibrillar collagens type III or type IV

Eicosanoids.  Diverse class of lipid second messengers derived 

from arachidonic acid

Elastin.  Protein subunit of elastic fibers
Electrical potential.  Voltage difference across a membrane
Electrical synapse.  Site of rapid transmission of action poten-

Epidermolysis  bullosa.  Genetic  disease  with  mutations  in 

keratins resulting in fragility and blistering of skin

Epifluorescence.  Fluorescence  microscopy  method  using 
the  objective  as  both  the  condenser  to  focus  the  exciting 
light  on  the  specimen  and  to  image  fluorescence  emitted 
from the specimen

Epigenetic 

trait.  Inheritable  property  of  chromosomes 
carried by enzymatic modification of DNA or proteins associ-
ated with DNA rather than being encoded in the nucleotide 
sequence

Epiphyseal  plate.  Disk  of  cartilage  whose  expansion  is 

tials between neurons through gap junctions

responsible for the growth of long bones

Electron  cryomicroscopy.  Transmission  electron  micro-

Epithelial sodium channel.  Channel protein formed by four 

scopy of frozen specimens

Electron  transport  pathway.  Sequence  of  reactions  in  the 
inner  mitochondrial  membrane  and  bacterial  plasma  mem-
brane  that  uses  energy  from  the  passage  of  electrons  to 
generate a proton gradient across the membrane to power 
a chemiosmotic cycle to synthesize ATP

Electrostatic  interaction.  Attraction  of  oppositely  charged 

atoms

Elongation  factors.  Proteins  that  facilitate  the  synthesis  of 

polypeptides on ribosomes

Elongation factor Tu (eEF-1 in animals).  GTPase that deliv-
ers tRNAs charged with amino acids to ribosomes and is the 
timer for the proofreading reaction

ELYS protein.  Nuclear pore protein whose binding to chro-
matin  during  telophase  is  one  of  the  first  steps  in  nuclear 
envelope reassembly in metazoans

Embryonic  stem  cells.  Precursors  of  the  entire  embryo, 

produced by the first embryonic cell divisions

Emi2.  An  inhibitor  of  the  APC/C  and  a  key  component  of 

cytostatic factor

Endocannabinoids.  Endogenous fatty acid amides that stimu-

late Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol receptors

Endocytosis.  Process  by  which  extracellular  materials  are 
captured and enclosed within membrane-bound carriers that 
invaginate and pinch off into the cytoplasm from the plasma 
membrane

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER).  Large, membrane-delineated, 
intracellular compartment that collects proteins synthesized 
in the cytoplasm for modification and delivery into the secre-
tory pathway

Endosome.  A membrane-bounded compartment for process-

ing materials taken in by endocytosis

Enhancer.  Complex  cluster  of 

transcriptional  regulator 
binding sites on DNA that increases the rate of initiation from 
a basal promoter; can function even if located up to 10 kb 
upstream  or  downstream  from  the  promoter  or  in  either 
orientation relative to it

Enthalpy.  The  internal  energy  of  a  system  plus  the  product 
of  its  volume  times  its  pressure;  the  pressure-volume  term 
rarely  applies  to  biological  systems,  so  the  internal  energy 
corresponds to the heat contained in the chemical bonds

Entropy.  Measure of the disorder in a system
Eosinophil.  A  type  of  white  blood  cell  with  large  granules 

that stain with eosin; active against parasites

Epiblast.  Embryonic  cells  produced  by  divisions  prior  to 

implantation in the uterine wall that form the embryo

Epidermal  growth  factor.  Protein  hormone  that  activates  a 
receptor tyrosine kinase and promotes growth of epithelial cells

subunits with two transmembrane segments

Equilibrium  constant.  Thermodynamic  parameter  describ-
ing  the  extent  of  a  reaction  at  equilibrium;  related  to  the 
change in free energy and to the ratio of the rate constants 
for the forward and reverse reactions

ERAD.  See ER-associated protein degradation
ER-associated  protein  degradation  (ERAD).  Process  to 
move  misfolded  proteins  out  of  the  ER  into  the  cytoplasm 
for degradation by proteasomes

ER  degradation-enhancing  α-mannosidase-like  protein 
(EDEM).  Protein  in  the  ER  lumen  that  directs  unfolded 
proteins into the cytoplasm for degradation

ER export domain.  Site of secretory cargo export from ER
Erythropoietin.  Cytokine driving red blood cell production, 

produced by the kidney

Escherichia  coli.  Gram-negative  colon  bacterium;  popular 

genetic model organism

ESCRT III.  Protein complex that pinches membranes apart in 
multivesicular  body  formation  and  in  the  final  abscission 
stage of cytokinesis

ESCRT  complex.  Protein  complex  that  sorts  ubiquitinated 
receptors  in  early  endosomes  and  drives  them  into  the 
membrane invaginations of multivesicular bodies

E3 ubiquitin ligase.  See E3 enzyme
Euchromatin.  Transcriptionally  active  or  potentially  active 

chromatin, containing most of the genes

Eukaryote.  Organism with the genome packaged in a nucleus
Excitable membrane.  Plasma membrane with voltage-gated 

Na- and K-channels that propagates action potentials

Excited  state.  High-energy  state  of  an  electron  achieved  by 
absorption of a photon or a chemical reaction, used to gener-
ate  proton  gradients  across  membranes  in  photosynthesis 
and  oxidative  phosphorylation  or  to  emit  a  photon  during 
fluorescence

Execution phase.  Final phase of apoptosis in which activated 

caspases stimulate the disassembly of the cell

Exocyst.  A  multi-subunit  tethering  protein  on  the  plasma 

membrane for secretory vesicles

Exome.  The portion of the genome that encodes proteins
Exonic  splicing  enhancers  (ESEs).  RNA  sequences  that 
bind  SR-proteins  and  stimulate  the  use  of  the  flanking  5′ 
and  3′  splice  sites,  promoting  inclusion  of  the  exon  in  the 
mRNA

Exon-junction complex (EJC).  Protein complex deposited 
on mRNA during splicing in the nucleus and retained follow-
ing  export  to  the  cytoplasm,  where  it  marks  mRNAs  on 
which translation terminated prematurely

Exons.  Regions of genes that appear in mature RNAs

832 

GLOSSARY

Exosome (endocytosis).  Vesicles of invaginated membrane 
inside  multivesicular  bodies  that  are  released  from  cells 
when MVBs fuse with the plasma membrane

Exosome (RNA processing).  Complex of multiple different 
3′  to  5′  exonucleases  that  degrade  nuclear  RNAs  and  turn-
over mRNAs in the cytoplasm

Expansins.  Plant  proteins  that  break  noncovalent 

links 
between  cellulose  polymers  transiently,  allowing  turgor 
pressure to expand the volume of the cell

Expressed sequence tag (EST).  DNA sequences collected by 

sequencing random cDNAs

Extracellular  matrix.  Fibrous  proteins,  polysaccharides, 
proteoglycans,  and  adhesive  glycoproteins  providing  the 
mechanical support for tissues in animals and plants

Extrinsic pathway of cell death.  Process initiated when cell 
surface ligands activate receptors on target cells, triggering 
the apoptotic pathway in the target cells

Facultative  heterochromatin.  DNA  sequences  located  in 
heterochromatin in some cells and in euchromatin in others; 
X chromosome inactivation is a classic example of facultative 
heterochromatin in mammals.

FADD  (Fas-associated  protein  with  a  death  domain). 
Adapter  protein  that  promotes  association  of  activated  
Fas receptor with procaspase 8, triggering the extrinsic cell 
death pathway

Farnesyl.  A15 carbon isoprenyl group used to anchor periph-
eral proteins to membrane bilayers; conjugated to a cysteine 
side chain near the C-terminus of the protein

Fas  (also  known  as  Apo1  or  CD95).  A  death  receptor  of 
the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor family with a death 
domain (DD) in the cytoplasmic tail

Fas  ligand.  Trimeric  cell  surface  protein  that  initiates  the 
extrinsic pathway of apoptotic death when it binds Fas on 
a target cell

Fast axonal transport.  Bidirectional transport of membrane-
bound  vesicles  and  organelles  on  microtubules  in  nerve 
axons;  anterograde  movements  powered  by  kinesin;  retro-
grade movements powered by dynein

Fatty  acid  oxidation.  Biochemical  reactions  that  produce 

acetyl-CoA from the breakdown of fatty acids

Fen1 (flap nuclease).  Nuclease that removes the RNA primer 

(and probably initiator DNA) during DNA replication

Fibrillar centers.  Regions of nucleoli containing rRNA genes, 

RNA polymerase I, and associated transcription factors

Fibrillin microfibril.  A polymer of the protein fibrillin, the 

Flagellin.  Protein subunit of bacterial flagella
Flagellum  (bacterial).  Helical  protein  polymer  forming  the 

propeller for bacterial motility

Flagellum 

(eukaryotic).  Motile  cell  surface  organelle 

powered by an axoneme; plural = flagella

Flippase.  P-type  adenosine  triphosphatase  (ATPase)  pumps 

that move lipids from one side of a bilayer to the other

Floppase.  ABC transporter pumps that move lipids from one 

side of a bilayer to the other

Flotillin.  Protein that clusters proteins in caveoli
Fluid-phase  endocytosis.  Ingestion  of  extracellular  fluid  in 

a vesicle formed by the plasma membrane

Fluorescence.  Emission of light from a molecule after excita-

tion by a shorter-wavelength, more energetic photon

Fluorescence  correlation  spectroscopy  (FCS).  A  micro-
scopy method to measure diffusion coefficients of molecules 
as they pass through a narrow beam of light

Fluorescence  recovery  after  photobleaching  (FRAP).  A 
fluorescent probe in bleached with intense light in part of a 
living  cell  followed  by  observation  of  the  redistribution  of 
the remaining fluorescence molecules into the bleached area 
by diffusion or transport

Fluorescence  resonance  energy 

transfer  (FRET).  A 
method  to  measure  distances  on  a  nanometer  scale  by  the 
transfer  of  energy  from  the  excited  state  of  a  fluorescent 
donor molecule to an acceptor fluorescent molecule

F-met-leu-phe.  A chemotactic tripeptide released by Bacteria 

that attracts white blood cells

Focal adhesion kinase.  A nonreceptor tyrosine kinase active 

in focal contacts

Focal contact.  Plasma membrane specialization with integrins 
to adhere to the extracellular matrix; associated with cyto-
plasmic signaling proteins and actin filaments

Formin.  Dimeric  protein  that  nucleates  actin  filaments  and 
remains attached to the growing barbed end during assembly 
of  contractile  rings,  filopodia,  and  other  bundles  of  actin 
filaments

Free energy.  Thermodynamic energy in a system available to 

do work

Freeze  fracture.  A  method  to  prepare  specimens  for 
electron  microscopy  involving  freezing,  fracturing,  etching 
(sublimation) of water from the fractured surface, and rotary 
shadowing with metal

FtsA.  Prokaryotic actin homolog used during cytokinesis
FtsZ.  Protein with the same fold as tubulin that participates in 

scaffold for laying down elastin in elastic fibers

cytokinesis in Bacteria and Archaea

Fibrin.  Blood protein that polymerizes to clot blood
Fibrinogen.  Blood  protein  precursor  of  fibrin  and  also  an 

adhesion protein for platelets

Fibroblast.  Cell  that  synthesizes  most  of  the  extracellular 

matrix in connective tissues

F-type ATPase.  Reversible, rotary membrane pumps that use 
transport  of  protons  down  a  concentration  gradient  to  
drive  the  synthesis  of  ATP  or  use  ATP  hydrolysis  to  pump 
protons

Fusion protein (membrane traffic).  Protein that mediates 

Fibroblast  growth  factor  receptor.  A  receptor  tyrosine 

fusion of a carrier with an acceptor membrane

kinase for fibroblast growth factor

Fibronectin.  Adhesive glycoprotein that connects fibers and 
cells in the extracellular matrix; multiple isoforms, one cir-
culating in blood forms a provisional matrix in wounds

Filamin.  Large  actin  filament  crosslinking  protein  with  Ig-

Fusion  protein  (molecular  biology).  Fusion  of  coding 

sequences from two proteins to produce a hybrid protein

G0  phase.  Cell  cycle  state  of  nondividing  (often  terminally 

differentiated) cells

G1  phase  (first  gap  phase).  Interval  in  cell  cycle  between 

domains linking actin-binding domains

mitosis and DNA replication

Filopodium  (also  microspike).  Finger-like  extension  of 
plasma membrane supported by a bundle of actin filaments

First-order reaction.  A reaction with one reactant

G2  checkpoint.  Cell  cycle  checkpoint  operating  in  the  G2 
phase  to  block  mitotic  entry  if  DNA  is  damaged  or  DNA 
replication is incomplete

 

GLOSSARY 

833

G2  delay.  Temporary  halt  in  cell  cycle  progression  in  cells 
with  damaged  DNA  as  a  result  of  function  of  the  G2 
checkpoint

G2 phase (second gap phase).  Interval between the comple-

Glycophorin.  Glycoprotein  of  red  blood  cell  membranes 

with a single transmembrane helix

Glycoprotein.  Protein modified with one or more sugars
Glycosaminoglycan.  Polysaccharide  polymers,  generally 

tion of DNA replication and mitosis

composed of a repeated pair of sugars

Gα.  Membrane-anchored  GTP-binding  subunit  of  trimeric 

Glycosidases.  Enzymes 

that 

remove 

sugars 

from 

G-proteins

Gβ.  Subunit of trimeric G-proteins
Gγ.  Membrane-anchored subunit of trimeric G-proteins
Gamma-tubulin.  Tubulin  isoform  crucial  for  microtubule 

glycoproteins

Glycosidic bond.  Ether bond between sugar residues
Glycosphingolipid.  Sphingolipid modified with one or more 

sugars

nucleation by ring complexes in pericentriolar material

Glycosylase.  Enzyme that cuts damaged bases from the DNA 

Gamma-tubulin ring complex (gTuRC).  Complex of 10 to 
13  γ-tubulin  molecules  and  8  associated  polypeptides  that 
nucleates microtubule assembly

GAP.  See GTPase activating protein
Gap junction.  Intercellular junction composed of connexons, 

channels that conduct molecules of <1 kD between cells

sugar-phosphate backbone leaving an abasic site

Glycosylation.  Process that conjugates sugars with proteins 

and lipids

Glycosylphosphatidylinositol  tail.  Phosphoglyceride  that 
is linked to the C-terminus of a protein by a short oligosac-
charide and a phosphatidylinositol head group

Gating.  The process that controls the transitions between the 

Glycosyltransferases.  Enzymes  that  add  sugar  residues  to 

open and closed states of channels

proteins

GEF.  See Guanine nucleotide exchange factors
Gel  electrophoresis.  Use  of  an  electric  field  to  separate 
molecules according to their size and charge in a gel matrix
Gel  filtration  chromatography.  Method  to  separate  mol-

ecules based on their size (hydrodynamic radius)

Gelsolin.  Calcium-sensitive  actin  filament  severing  and 

capping protein

Geminin.  Cell cycle–regulated protein that regulates “licens-
ing” of origins of DNA replication in metazoans by binding 
Cdt1 and preventing preinitiation complex assembly

Gene.  Segment of DNA encoding a functional RNA or protein
General  transcription  factors  (GTF).  Conserved  protein 

complex that recruits RNA polymerase to promoters

Genetic  code.  The  correspondence  between  nucleotide 
triplets  in  mRNAs  to  amino  acids  in  a  polypeptide;  one  to 
six different triplet codons encode each amino acid

Genetic marker.  Particular DNA sequence that can be moni-
tored by examining the phenotypes of the cells that carry it

Genome.  The entire DNA complement of an organism
Genome  editing.  Modification  of  genomic  DNA  using 

molecular biological methods

Genomics.  The study of genomes by cloning and sequencing 

the DNA and by analyzing and comparing the sequences

Genotype.  Combination  of  genes  present  on  the  chromo-

somes of an organism

GET1,  2,  3.  Cytoplasmic  proteins  that  direct  tail-anchored 

proteins to organelle membranes

GLUT4.  The  glucose  carrier  (uniporter)  that  mediates  the 

response of muscle and fat cells to insulin

Glutamate.  Amino acid and neurotransmitter
Glutamate  receptor.  Cation  channel  activated  by  binding 

glutamate

Glycerol.  Three-carbon  molecule  with  a  hydroxyl  group  on 

each carbon

Glycerolphospholipid.  See Phosphoglyceride
Glycoconjugate.  Protein modified with one or more sugars
Glycogen synthase kinase (GSK).  Protein serine/threonine 

kinases with numerous substrates.

Glycolipid.  Lipid modified with one or more sugars
Glycolysis.  Biochemical reactions that derive energy from the 
breakdown of glucose to form ATP and other energy-carrying 
metabolites

Golgi apparatus.  Major compartment of the secretory mem-
brane system for processing glycoproteins and sorting mol-
ecules in the lumen and lipid bilayer

G-protein.  GTPase subunit of trimeric GTPases
G-protein-coupled 

receptor  kinase.  Serine/threonine 
kinases  activated  by  G-protein  beta-subunits,  which  phos-
phorylate and inactivate seven helix receptors

Granular component.  Region of the nucleolus for ribosome 

subunit assembly

Grb2.  Adapter protein consisting of two SH3 domains and one 

SH2 domain

Greatwall (Gwl) kinase.  Regulates protein phosphatase 2A, 
the  phosphatase  that  removes  many  phosphate  groups 
placed on target proteins by Cdks

Green  fluorescent  protein.  Jellyfish  protein  that  absorbs 
blue light and emits green light; often fused to other proteins 
for observing their distribution in live cells

GroEL.  Barrel-shaped chaperonins that use ATP hydrolysis to 

assist the folding of nascent polypeptides

Growth cone.  Motile tip of a growing nerve cell process
Growth cycle.  Increase in cellular mass
Growth factors.  Proteins that promote growth of cell mass
Growth hormone.  Pituitary hormone that controls body size
GST  fusion  protein.  Hybrid  protein  consisting  of  a  protein 
of  interest  fused  to  glutathione-S-transferase,  which  allows 
purification  by  binding  to  glutathione  immobilized  on  
beads

GTPase.  Family of proteins activated by GTP binding (allow-
ing  interactions  with  effector  proteins)  and  inactivated  by 
GTP hydrolysis and γ-phosphate dissociation

GTPase  activating  protein  (GAP).  Proteins  that  stimulate 
GTP hydrolysis by small GTPases, reversing the association 
of the GTPase with effector proteins

GTP  exchange  factor.  See  Guanine  nucleotide  exchange 

factors (GEF)

Guanine.  Purine base in DNA and RNA; H-bonds with cytosine
Guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitor (GDI).  Protein 
that prevents exchange of GDP for GTP on Rabs and other 
small GTPases

Guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEF).  Proteins that 
bind  small  GTPases  and  stimulate  the  dissociation  of  GDP, 
allowing GTP binding to activate the GTPase

834 

GLOSSARY

Guanylylcyclase.  Transmembrane and cytoplasmic enzymes 

that synthesize cGMP from GTP

Half-spindle.  Portion  of  mitotic  spindle  consisting  of  a 
spindle pole with its associated kinetochore and interpolar 
and astral microtubules

Haploid  chromosome  number  (n).  Number  of  chromo-
somes  donated  by  the  mother  or  the  father  in  a  diploid 
organism; only haploid cells in animals are sperm and eggs
Hedgehog.  Signaling protein that helps to establish boundar-

ies between cells of different fates during embryogenesis

Helicase.  Enzyme  that  uses  ATP  hydrolysis  to  dissociate 
complementary strands of nucleic acids or remove second-
ary structure or bound proteins from nucleic acids

Helix-loop-helix  proteins.  Transcription  factors  with  a 
basic region to recognize specific DNA sequences plus two 
helical dimerization domains separated by a loop region

Helix-turn-helix  proteins.  Transcription  factors  composed 
of two helices, one of which binds a recognition sequence 
of 6 bp in the major groove of DNA

Helper T cells.  Lymphocytes selected by virtue of their recep-
tors  for  specific  antigens  that  produce  growth  factors  for 
antibody-producing B-cells

Hematopoietic stem cells.  Bone marrow cells that give rise 

to both short-lived and long-lived differentiated blood cells

Hemicellulose.  Branched  polysaccharide  associated  with 

cellulose in microfibrils in plant cell walls

Hemidesmosome.  Plasma  membrane  specialization  with 
integrins to bind the basal lamina and anchored to intermedi-
ate filaments in the cytoplasm

Hepatocyte  growth  factor–regulated  tyrosine  kinase 
substrate (HRS).  Protein that sorts ubiquitinated proteins 
in multivesicular bodies

Hereditary spherocytosis.  Condition with fragile red blood 

cells owing to defects in the membrane skeleton

Holocentric  chromosomes.  Chromosomes  with  centro-
mere  activity  distributed  along  the  whole  surface  of  the 
chromosome during mitosis

Homeodomain.  DNA-binding  domains  of  60  amino  acids 
found  in  transcription  factors  that  specify  body  segments 
during development

Homogenize.  Grind up or physically disrupt cells or tissues
Homologous  chromosomes.  Pairs  of  chromosomes  (in 
diploid organisms) one donated by the mother and the other 
by the father

Homologous recombination.  Physical exchange of regions 
of  the  genome  between  homologous  chromosomes  or 
between a plasmid and a chromosome

Homology-directed  repair.  Mechanism that repairs double 
strand breaks in DNA using a homologous DNA sequence as 
a guide

Homology  model.  Model  of  an  atomic  structure  built  by 
fitting  an  amino  acid  sequence  into  the  known  atomic 
structure of a related protein followed by refinement

Homophilic  interactions.  Interactions  between  like  mol-

ecules such as adhesion proteins on two cells

Homotypic 

fusion  and  vacuolar  protein  sorting 
(HOPS).  A multi-subunit tethering protein promoting fusion 
of endosomes and lysosomes

Homozygous.  In a diploid organism, the condition in which 
a particular genetic marker has the same sequence on both 
the maternal and paternal homologous chromosomes

Hormone  response  elements.  DNA  sequences  to  which 

steroid hormone receptors bind to stimulate transcription

HOX (homeobox) gene.  Genes for transcription factors that 

specify the development of embryonic segments

Hsp70.  Protein chaperones that use ATP hydrolysis to drive a 
cycle of binding and release of short hydrophobic segments 
to promote polypeptide folding

Heterochromatin.  Transcriptionally  inert,  condensed  chro-

Hsp90.  Protein chaperones that maintain steroid receptors in 

matin rich in histone H3 trimethylated on lysine 9

an “open” state, ready to bind their ligands

Heterochromatin  protein  1  (HP1).  Protein  that  binds 
nucleosomes containing histone H3 trimethylated on lysine 
9 and recruits other components of heterochromatin

Heterogeneous  nuclear  RNA.  Incompletely  processed  pre-

cursors of mRNA

Heterophilic  interactions.  Interactions  between  different 

molecules such as adhesion proteins on two cells

Heterozygous.  In a diploid organism, the condition in which 
a particular genetic marker has different forms on the two 
homologous chromosomes
Hexose.  A six-carbon sugar
HIF-1α.  Hypoxia inducible (transcription) factor regulates the 

hTERT.  The reverse transcriptase subunit of telomerase
Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome.  Genetic disorder 
with premature ageing, caused by mutations in lamin genes
Hyaluronan.  Very  large  glycosaminoglycans  consisting  of 

alternating D-glucuronic acid and D-N-acetylglucosamine

Hydrogen  bond.  Weak  bonds  between  an  H  atom  with  a 
partial positive charge and an oxygen or nitrogen atom with 
a partial negative charge; contribute to stabilizing macromol-
ecule secondary structure and interactions

Hydrophilic.  Molecules or groups of atoms in molecules with 

favorable interactions with water

Hydrophobic.  Molecules  or  groups  of  atoms  in  molecules 

expression of erythropoietin and other genes

with unfavorable interactions with water

Histone acetyltransferase (HAT).  An EDITOR that acetylates 

lysine residues of histones and other proteins

Histone  code  hypothesis.  Proposal  that  posttranslational 
modifications  of  histones  determine  the  level  of  functional 
activity of particular regions of chromatin

Histone  isoform  H2AX.  Phosphorylation  of  this  histone  to 
create γ-H2AX to recruit repair factors to sites of DNA damage
HMG-CoA reductase.  ER membrane enzyme that catalyzes a 

step in cholesterol biosynthesis; inhibited by statins

Holliday  junctions.  Intermediates  in  the  recombination 
process  consisting  of  branched  DNA  structures  formed 
between two recombining DNA molecules

Hydrophobic  effect.  Phenomenon  whereby  exclusion  of 
water  from  complementary  surfaces  favors  macromolecu-
lar associations; driven by increases in the entropy of water
Hydroxyapatite.  Crystals of [Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2] in bone matrix
I-band.  Region of a striated muscle sarcomere with thin fila-

ments but no thick filaments

ICAD.  See Inhibitor of CAD
Icosahedron.  Closed polyhedron with 12 fivefold vertices
Ig-CAM.  Family  of  cell  adhesion  proteins  with  extracellular 

immunoglobulin-fold domains

IgG, IgA, IgE.  Classes of immunoglobulin proteins produced 

by different B-lymphocytes

 

GLOSSARY 

835

Image processing.  Optical and computation methods to remove 

Inositol triphosphate (IP3).  Cyclohexanol with the 1, 4, and 

noise, average or make 3D reconstructions of micrographs

5 hydroxyls phosphorylated

Immediate early genes.  Genes expressed soon after stimula-

Insulators.  DNA sequences that protect regions of a chromo-

tion of cultured fibroblasts in G0 with serum

Immunologic  synapse.  Junction  between  T-lymphocytes 
and antigen presenting cells where major histocompatibility 
complexes engage and activate T-cell receptors

Immunoprecipitation.  Method  using  antibodies  to  isolate 

specific proteins from cell extracts

Immunoproteasome.  Specialized  proteasomes  that  partici-
pate in ubiquitin-independent cleavage of intracellular anti-
gens, such as viral proteins, into peptides of uniform length 
for  presentation  by  MHC  class  I  on  the  surface  of  antigen-
presenting cells

Importin  α.  Adapter  protein  that  recognizes  small  basic 
nuclear localization sequences and works with the transport 
receptor importin β in nuclear import

Importin  β  (karyopherin  β).  One  class  of  receptor  for 
proteins  with  nuclear  localization  sequences,  regulated  by 
Ran  GTPase;  also  functions  as  a  chaperone  regulating  the 
assembly  of  subcellular  structures,  including  the  mitotic 
spindle and nuclear envelope

Import  receptor.  Proteins  that  bind  cargo  proteins  with 
nuclear  localization  sequences  directly  or  in  combination 
with adapter molecules and facilitate their transport into the 
nucleus (see Importin β)

Imprinting.  Epigenetic  mechanism  that  turns  a  gene  off 
during formation of the egg or sperm and keeps the gene off 
in all cells that develop from that gamete

Inactivation.  Processes operating in parallel with gating that 

stop the flux of ions through active channels

Inactivation peptide.  A segment of polypeptide that blocks 

an open ion channel

Induced  pluripotent  (iPS)  stem  cells.  Expression  of  a 
group of specific transcription factors in differentiated cells 
induces the expression of proteins required for pluripotency, 
creating cells that can be differentiated into many different 
specific cell types

Inhibitor  of  apoptosis  protein  (IAP).  Family  of  proteins 
that inhibit caspases characterized by a motif of ~80 amino 
acids known as a baculovirus IAP repeat (BIR)

Inhibitor  of  CAD  (ICAD).  Chaperone  required  to  fold 
caspase-activated  DNase  (CAD)  that  inhibits  the  nuclease 
until cleaved by a caspase, releasing active CAD

Initiation codon.  Nucleotide triplet AUG in mRNA that speci-

fies methionine, which begins polypeptide chains

Initiation  factors.  Proteins  that  coordinate  assembly  of 
mRNA  and  ribosomal  subunits  to  begin  the  synthesis  of  a 
polypeptide

some from the effects of neighboring regions

Insulin  receptor.  Receptor  tyrosine  kinase  activated  by 

insulin binding

Integral membrane protein.  Protein embedded, at least in 

part, in a membrane lipid bilayer

Integrin.  Family  of  heterodimeric  plasma  membrane  adhe-
sion  proteins  that  generally  bind  extracellular  matrix  mol-
ecules and other cells

Intercalated  disk.  Adhesive  junction  linking  the  ends  of 
cardiac  muscle  cells,  anchored  to  cytoplasmic  actin  and 
intermediate filaments

Intercellular  bridge.  Thin  connection  between  daughter 
cells at the end of cytokinesis containing an antiparallel array 
of microtubules derived from the mitotic spindle

Interchromatin  granules.  Intranuclear  concentrations  of 

factors for RNA processing

Interchromosomal  domain.  Region  of  nucleoplasm 

between adjacent chromosome territories

Interkinesis.  Interphase  period  between  the  two  meiotic 

divisions characterized by lack of an S phase

Interleukin.  Family of proteins secreted by white blood cells 
that regulate the proliferation and differentiation of immune 
cells and inflammation

Intermediate  filaments.  Family  of  10-nm  filaments  com-

posed of α-helical subunits related to keratin

Interphase  (or  “resting  stage”).  Part  of  the  cell  cycle  in 

which cells are not engaged in division

Interpolar microtubules.  Microtubules distributed through 
the  mitotic  spindle,  apparently  free  at  both  ends,  that 
bundle  to  form  the  central  spindle  during  anaphase  and 
telophase

Intraflagellar transport.  Bidirectional transport of proteins 

along the axonemes of cilia and flagella

Intra-S checkpoint.  Stalling of the replication fork at a base 
that  it  cannot  “read”  results  in  a  response  that  keeps  the 
replication  fork  from  disassembling  until  the  situation  is 
rescued by DNA replication moving upstream from an origin 
of replication further along the DNA

Intrinsically disorder protein.  Segments of polypeptides or 
whole  proteins  with  little  or  no  secondary  or  tertiary 
structure

Intrinsic  pathway  of  cell  death.  Apoptotic  pathway  trig-
gered by release of pro-apoptotic factors from mitochondria 
and regulated by Bcl-2 family members

Introns.  Regions  of  genes  that  are  removed  from  immature 

RNA molecules by splicing

Initiator.  DNA  sequences  in  promoters  near  transcription 

Inward  rectifying  channel.  Channels  with  higher  conduc-

start sites of many genes

tivity into than out of cells

Initiator  caspases.  Caspases  that  are  autoactivated  by  asso-
ciation  with  scaffolding  cofactors  and  propagate  apoptosis 
by cleaving and activating effector caspase zymogens

Innate immunity.  Defense against microorganisms by white 
blood cells using Toll-like receptors to recognize repeating 
structures of macromolecules

Ion  exchange  chromatography.  Separation  of  molecules 

based on their affinity for charged beads

Inositol requiring 1 (IRE1).  A transmembrane protein of the 
ER  that  participates  in  the  unfolded  proteins  response  by 
splicing  the  mRNA  for  a  transcription  factor  that  regulates 
the expression of genes for ER proteins

Inner  nuclear  membrane.  The  internal  lipid  bilayer  sur-

Insulin receptor substrate (IRS).  Cytoplasmic adaptor protein 

rounding the nucleus; associated with nuclear lamina

phosphorylated by the insulin receptor tyrosine kinase

Inner segment.  Part of photoreceptor cells between the cell 

IP3  receptor.  Channels  activated  by  IP3  to  release  calcium 

body and light-absorbing outer segment

from the ER

836 

GLOSSARY

Isoforms.  Related  proteins  encoded  by  different  genes  or 

alternatively spliced mRNAs

Isoprenoid  tail.  Lipids  consisting  of  three  to  six  isoprenyl 

units (see Farnesyl)

JAK.  Family  of  tyrosine  kinases  associated  with  cytokine 

receptors, playfully named “just another kinase”

Laminopathy.  Inherited  diseases  associated  with  mutations 
in  genes  encoding  lamin  proteins  or  proteins  that  interact 
with lamins

Lampbrush  chromosomes.  Actively  transcribed  chromo-
somes  with  prominent  loops  visible  during  the  diplotene 
stage of meiosis in animals

Kartagener syndrome.  Genetic disease with immobile cilia 

Lariat.  Circular  RNA  molecule  with  a  tail  created  early  in 

owing to a defect in dynein

mRNA splicing

Karyopherin.  Another term for importins and exportins
KASH domain protein.  Huge proteins of the outer nuclear 
envelope  with  KASH  (Klarsicht,  ANC-1,  Syne  Homology) 
domains that link SUN domain proteins to the cytoskeleton
Katanin.  AAA  ATPase  that  uses  energy  from  ATP  hydrolysis 

to sever microtubules

Last  eukaryotic  common  ancestor  (LECA).  Cell(s)  that 
gave rise by divergent evolution to virtually all contemporary 
eukaryotic species

Late endosomes.  Mature multivesicular bodies that have not 

yet fused with lysosomes

Latent phase.  Phase of apoptotic death when a cell becomes 

KcsA.  Bacterial  K-channel;  first  crystal  structure  of  an  ion 

committed to death but shows no phenotypic signs of this

channel

Lateral  gene  transfer.  Movement  of  entire  genes  between 

KDEL.  C-terminal tetrapeptide sequence used to retain soluble 

organisms

proteins in the ER

Latrunculin.  Natural product the binds actin monomers and 

KEN  box.  A  degron  recognized  by  the  APC/C  consisting  of 

prevents their polymerization

lysine-glutamic acid-asparagine

Leading  edge.  Advancing  pseudopod  of  motile  cells  driven 

Keratin.  Family  of  intermediate  filament  proteins  expressed 

by actin polymerization

in epithelial cells

Kinesin.  Family  of  motor  proteins  using  ATP  hydrolysis  to 

walk along microtubules, generally toward their plus end

Kinesin  isoforms.  Family  of  motor  proteins  that  share 

homologous catalytic domains coupled to a variety of tails.

Kinesin-13/kinesin-8.  Kinesins  that  remove  subunits  from 

the ends of microtubules

Kinetochore.  Structure at the surface of centromeric chroma-
tin  that  binds  microtubules  and  directs  the  movements  of 
chromosomes in mitosis

Kinetochore  fibers.  Bundles  of  microtubules  attached  to 
kinetochores consisting of one microtubule in budding yeast 
to more than 200 microtubules in higher plants

Kinetochore  microtubules.  Class of mitotic spindle micro-
tubules with their plus ends embedded in the kinetochore 
and minus ends at or near the spindle pole

K+  leak  channel.  Potassium  channel  that  helps  to  maintain 

the resting potential of excitable cell membranes

Kleisin.  Protein  family  that  links  together  the  heads  of  SMC 

proteins in cohesin and condensin complexes

KMN network.  Protein network composed of KNL1 and the 
Mis12 and NDC80 complexes that is responsible for micro-
tubule binding by kinetochores

Lactacystin.  Antibiotic that reacts covalently with threonine 

residues to inactivate proteasomes

Lagging  strand.  During  DNA  replication,  the  DNA  strand 
along  which  replication  occurs  in  a  direction  opposite  to 
that  of  the  replication  fork,  so  that  the  newly  synthesized 
DNA is laid down as a series of short discontinuous segments 
known as Okazaki fragments

Lamin A.  Nuclear lamin encoded by a gene that is subject to 
many  mutations  that  cause  at  least  16  human  genetic  dis-
eases, including Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy

Lamina  associated  domains  (LAD).  Regions  of  chromo-

somes localized near the nuclear lamina

Lamin  B.  Type  V  intermediate  filament  protein  associated 

with the inner nuclear envelope

Lamin B receptor.  Protein of the inner nuclear envelope that 

binds lamin B and heterochromatin protein HP1

Laminin.  Adhesive glycoprotein of the basal lamina

Leading  strand.  During  DNA  replication,  the  DNA  strand 
along  which  replication  moves  continuously  in  the  same 
direction as the replication fork

Lectin.  Protein that binds particular sugar molecules
Leptin.  Satiety  hormone  secreted  by  fat  cells  and  acting  on 
neurons  of  the  hypothalamus  in  the  brain  that  regulate 
appetite and bone metabolism

Leptotene.  First  stage  of  meiotic  prophase,  defined  by  the 
first  visible  condensation  of  chromosomes,  during  which 
homologous chromosome pairing and alignment occur

Leucine  zipper  protein.  Dimeric transcription factors with 
basic  regions  that  recognize  specific  DNA  sequences  held 
together by a coiled-coil stabilized by leucine residues

Leukocyte.  White blood cell
Leukotrienes.  Lipid second messengers derived from arachi-

donic acid that participate in inflammatory responses

Ligand.  Molecule that binds to a receptor
Light-harvesting  complexes.  Small,  transmembrane  pro-
teins that absorb light and transfer energy to a photosynthetic 
reaction center

Light reactions.  Steps in photosynthesis that depend on the 
continuous absorption of light, including production of high-
energy  electrons,  electron  transport  to  make  NADPH,  cre-
ation of a proton gradient for synthesis of ATP, and generation 
of oxygen

Light  sheet  microscopy.  Illumination  method  for  fluores-
cence  microscopy  that  creates  thin  optical  sections  by 
focusing laser light into a sheet 2–8 µm thick and passing it 
through an illumination objective to focus onto the sample
Lignins.  Polymers of phenylpropanoid alcohols and acids in 

“secondary” cell walls of plants

LINC complex.  Nuclear envelope proteins that link telomeres 
in  the  nucleus  to  microtubules  in  the  cytoplasm  to  enable 
chromosome movements that promote homolog pairing

Long  interspersed  nuclear  elements  (LINES).  Common 
class of human retrotransposons with a consensus sequence 
of 6 to 8 kb that make up about 20% of the human genome

Linker DNA.  DNA that links adjacent nucleosomes
Linker  histone  (H1).  Binds  to  linker  DNA,  participates  in 

formation of 30-nm fibers and chromatin compaction

 

GLOSSARY 

837

Lipid  gradient.  Variation  in  the  lipid  composition  of  the 
membranes along the secretory pathway from the ER to the 
plasma membrane

Lipid raft.  Microdomain in a lipid bilayer enriched in sphin-

golipids and cholesterol

Macropinocytosis.  Ingestion  of  extracellular  fluid  into  a 

large endocytic structure

Major histocompatibility complex (MHC).  Diverse family 
of  cell  surface  proteins  that  carry  antigenic  peptides  for 
activating immune cells

Lipid-transfer  protein  (LTP).  Protein  catalyzes  exchange 

Major sperm protein.  Nematode protein that assembles fila-

but not net transfer of lipids between membranes

ments for the movements of sperm

Lipoxins.  Lipid  second  messengers  related  to  leukotrienes 
and derived from arachidonic acid that participate in inflam-
matory responses

Listeria.  Gram-negative  intracellular  pathogenic  Bacterium 

that uses actin polymerization for motility

Localization microscopy (independently named FPALM, 
PALM  and  STORM).  Super-resolution  fluorescence  micro-
scopy  method;  a  few  widely  separated,  photoconvertable 
fluorescent  molecules  are  activated  and  their  positions  are 
determined precisely until they are photobleached; an image 
is built up by thousands of cycles of photoactivation/conver-
sion, imaging, and photobleaching

Locus  control  regions  (LCRs).  Short  regions  of  DNA  rich 
in  binding  sites  for  transcriptional  regulators,  that  create 
“open”  chromatin  promoting  the  expression  of  nearby  
genes

Lokiarchaeota.  Contemporary  archaeon 

in  an 
environmental DNA sample that is the closest known living 
relative of the ancient archaeon that became the eukaryote
Long noncoding RNA (lncRNA).  RNA that does not encode 

identified 

any known protein

Long-QT  syndrome.  Prolonged  action  potentials  in  cardiac 
muscle  resulting  from  mutations  in  sodium  or  potassium 
channels; predispose to arrhythmias

Long-term depression.  Response of synapses to prolonged, 
slow stimulation that weakens neurotransmission for hours
Long-term  potentiation.  Response  of  synapses  to  strong 

stimulation that strengthens neurotransmission for days

Low-density 

lipoproteins  (LDLs).  Particles  containing 
dietary  and  de  novo–synthesized  cholesterol,  which  are 
secreted into the blood for transport to other tissues

Lsm proteins (“like Sm”).  Nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins 
that  participate  in  decapping  mRNA  precursors  that  are 
destined for degradation

LUCA,  last  universal  common  ancestor.  Cell(s)  that  gave 

rise to all forms of life on earth

Mannose-6-phosphate  receptors.  Integral  membrane  pro-
teins that bind lysosomal hydrolases modified with mannose-
6-phosphate  in  the  trans-Golgi  network  for  delivery  to 
endosomes and lysosomes

MAP-2.  High-molecular-weight microtubule associated protein 

in the tau family

MAP kinase.  Serine/threonine kinases activated by phosphory-
lation in the cytoplasm that move to the nucleus to activate 
transcription factors required for cell growth and division

MAP  kinase  kinase.  Kinases  that  activate  MAP  kinases  by 

phosphorylation of serine and tyrosine

MAP kinase kinase kinase.  Serine kinases that activate MAP 

kinase kinases

MARK.  A chemical modification (e.g. methylation, acetylation) 

placed on chromatin by an EDITOR

Mass spectrometry.  Analytical method to measure the mass 

of molecules with high accuracy

Mast  cell.  Connective  tissue  cell  activated  by  binding  of 
antigens  to  cell  surface  immunoglobulins  causing  it  to 
secrete granules containing histamine

Matrix  metalloproteinase.  Zinc  proteases  that  digest  the 

extracellular matrix of connective tissues

Matrix  (mitochondrial).  Innermost  compartment  of  mito-
chondria with enzymes for the citric acid cycle and fatty acid 
oxidation

Maturation-promoting factor, M phase–promoting factor 
(MPF).  Activity that causes interphase cells to enter mitosis; 
consists of an active Cdk with a cyclin partner

Mcm (minichromosome maintenance) proteins.  Six AAA 
ATPases  that  form  a  hexameric  complex  thought  to  have 
helicase activity to separate DNA strands during replication
Mdm2.  E3  ubiquitin  ligase  that  regulates  p53  stability  (the 

human protein is Hdm2)

Mediator.  Complex  of  26  polypeptides  that  interacts  with 
general transcription factors on promoters and recruits RNA 
polymerase II to initiate transcription

Lymphocyte.  White  blood  cell  of  the  adaptive  immune 

Megacomplex.  Complex  of  many  aggrecan  proteoglycans 

system

Lysobisphosphatidic acid.  Lipid that promotes bilayer cur-
vature  during  invagination  and  formation  of  intralumenal 
vesicles in multivesicular bodies

Lysosomal  hydrolase.  Enzymes  concentrated  in  lysosomes 
that  catalyze  degradation  of  macromolecules  by  breaking 
covalent bonds by the addition of water

Lysosomal  storage  disease.  Genetic  diseases  arising  from 

absence of or defects in lysosomal hydrolases

Lysosome.  Membrane-bound  organelle  containing 

acid 
hydrolases, including proteases; provides an acidic environ-
ment for digestion of contents

Lysyl oxidase.  Extracellular enzyme that catalyzes the cross-

linking of collagen and elastin

Macroautophagy.  Engulfment into an autophagic vacuole of 
large volumes of cytoplasm that can include glycogen gran-
ules, ribosomes, and organelles

with hyaluronan in cartilage

Megakaryocyte.  Polyploid  bone  marrow  cell  that  produces 

platelets by a budding process

Meiosis.  Specialized  program  of  two  coupled  cell  divisions 
used  by  eukaryotes  to  maintain  the  proper  chromosome 
number for the species during sexual reproduction

Meiosis  I.  First  division  of  meiosis,  in  which  homologous 
chromosomes separate, also known as the reductional divi-
sion because the number of chromosomes is halved

Meiosis  II.  Second  division  of  meiosis  (also  called  the  equa-
tional  division);  in  this  division,  as  in  mitosis,  sister  chro-
matids  segregate  from  each  other  and  the  number  of 
chromosomes remains the same

Membrane  carriers.  Enzyme-like  proteins  that  catalyze 

movements of solutes across membranes

Membrane channels.  Protein pores for rapid movement of 

specific ions and solutes across membranes

838 

GLOSSARY

Membrane contact sites.  Regions of ER closely associated with 
the plasma membrane or organelle membranes with proteins 
that facilitate transfer of lipids between the membranes

Membrane  peroxisomal  targeting  sequence  (mPTS). 
Amino  acid  sequences  that  target  proteins  to  peroxisomal 
membranes

Membrane potential.  Voltage difference across a lipid bilayer
Membrane  pumps.  Transmembrane  enzymes  that  use  ATP 
hydrolysis or another energy source to move solutes across 
membranes up concentration gradients

Membrane skeleton.  Network of actin filaments and acces-
sory proteins associated with the cytoplasmic face of cellular 
membranes

Merotelic  attachment.  Defective  chromosome  attachment 
to the mitotic spindle with a single kinetochore attached to 
both spindle poles

Messenger  RNA  (mRNA).  RNA  molecules  transcribed  by 
RNA  polymerase  II  and  containing  the  sequence  of  bases  
that  specify  the  sequences  of  amino  acids  in  polypeptide 
chains

Metaphase.  Third  phase  of  mitosis  with  all  chromosomes 
attached to both spindle poles and aligned near the equator 
of the mitotic spindle

Metaphase plate.  Compact grouping of chromosomes at the 
middle of the mitotic spindle with all pairs of sister chroma-
tids attached to both spindle poles

Metastasis.  Exit of cancer cells from the primary tumor where 

the cancer started and growth elsewhere in the body

Microarray.  Ordered  pattern  of  spots  of  nucleic  acids  or 
proteins  on  a  glass  slide  used  for  large-scale  automated 
binding reactions such as measuring levels of mRNAs

Mitochondrial  matrix.  Innermost  compartment  of  mito-
chondria  with  enzymes  for  citric  acid  cycle  and  fatty  acid 
oxidation

Mitogen/mitogenic signals.  Factors or signals coming from 
other  cells  and  from  the  extracellular  matrix  that  promote 
cell cycle progression

Mitosis (M phase).  Cell cycle phase that partitions chromo-
somes  and  other  cellular  components  to  two  daughter  
cells

Mitotic arrest-defective (MAD) genes.  Encode proteins that 
execute the spindle checkpoint, delaying anaphase until all 
kinetochores are attached correctly to the spindle

Mitotic  checkpoint  complex  (MCC).  Complex  of  Mad2, 
Cdc20, BubR1 and Bub3 proteins that binds the APC/C and 
blocks  mitotic  progression  if  the  spindle  assembly  check-
point is activated

Mitotic exit network.  Budding yeast signaling pathway that 
terminates mitosis, promotes constriction of the contractile 
ring,  and  initiates  septation;  called  septation  initiation 
network in fission yeast; related to Hippo pathway of animals.
Mitotic  spindle.  Framework  of  microtubules  (between  two 
centrosomes  in  animal  cells  or  two  spindle  pole  bodies  in 
fungi) that segregates chromosomes during mitosis

M  line.  Network  of  proteins  that  crosslink  the  middles  of 

thick filaments in striated muscles

Model  organism.  Species  widely  used  in  experimental 
biology, typically with fully a sequenced genome and facile 
methods to manipulate the genome including genetic crosses
Molecular dynamics simulation.  Computational simulation 
of motions of atoms in macromolecules from thermal energy 
using Newton’s laws of motion

Microelectrode.  Glass  capillary  with  a  micrometer  tip  used 

Monoclonal  antibody.  Homogeneous  antibodies  produced 

to record the membrane potential of a single cell

by the progeny of a single B-lymphocyte

Micro-RNA  (miRNA).  Small  RNAs  of  about  22  nucleotides 
excised from larger precursors and associated with the RISC 
complex  that  represses  translation  of  target  mRNAs  or 
directs their cleavage by the slicer endonuclease

Microtubule.  Stiff  cylindrical  polymers  of  α-  and  β-tubulin 
that  support  a  variety  of  cellular  structures  and  serve  as 
tracks  for  movements  powered  by  motor  proteins  called 
kinesins and dyneins

Microtubule-associated  proteins  (MAPs).  Proteins  that 
regulate microtubule properties by binding tubulin dimers, 
by  stabilizing  or  severing  polymers,  or  by  associating  with 
microtubule ends

Microtubule-organizing  center  (MTOC).  Structures  con-
taining  γ-tubulin  that  nucleate  microtubule  assembly  and 
usually anchor microtubule minus ends

Microvillus.  Finger-like extension of plasma membrane sup-

ported by a bundle of actin filaments

Midbody.  Dense knob surrounding antiparallel microtubules 
in  the  thin  intercellular  bridge  between  daughter  cells  fol-
lowing constriction of the cleavage furrow

Minus end.  Slower-growing end of a microtubule terminating 

with α-tubulin

Mismatch  repair.  DNA  repair  process  that  removes  errors 

that occur during DNA replication

Mitochondria.  Eukaryotic  organelle  derived  from  a  symbi-
otic proteobacterium specialized for oxidative phosphoryla-
tion  to  form  ATP,  fatty  acid  oxidation,  and  the  citric  acid 
cycle

Monocyte.  White blood cell, precursor of tissue macrophages 

and osteoclasts

Motor end plate.  See Neuromuscular junction
Motor  nerve.  Axon  of  a  neuron  in  the  brain  stem  or  spinal 

cord that controls muscle contraction

Motor proteins.  Enzymes that used energy from ATP hydro-
lysis  to  produce  force  and  motion  on  actin  filaments  or 
microtubules

Motor unit.  All of the skeletal muscle cells controlled by one 

motor neuron

MreB.  Family of prokaryotic actins
mRNA.  See Messenger RNA
MRN  complex.  A  SENSOR  that  detects  double-strand  DNA 
breaks and then chews back the DNA, leaving a single-stranded 
overhang that activates downstream repair pathways

mTor  kinase  (mechanistic  target  of  rapamycin).  Large 
protein kinase that is the lynchpin for key signaling pathways 
that control cell responses to nutrient levels

Mucin.  Heavily glycosylated cell surface proteins, ligands for 

selectins

Multiple  drug  resistance  proteins.  ABC  transporters  that 

pump drugs and other hydrophobic molecules out of cells

Multivesicular body (MVB).  Endocytic compartment derived 
from early endosomes by the inward invagination of vesicles 
for degradation of lipids and membrane proteins

Mus musculus.  The mouse; commonly studied as a represen-

tative mammal with highly developed genetics

Mutation.  Any alternation of genomic DNA sequences

 

GLOSSARY 

839

Myc.  Transcriptional factor that promotes expression of genes 
for cell cycle progression (cyclins E and D2) and represses 
expression of Cdk inhibitors (CKI and INK)

Myelin sheath.  Insulating layer around some neuronal axons 

formed from the plasma membrane of glial cells

Myofibril.  Contractile  unit  of  striated  muscle  composed  of 

many sarcomeres in series

Myofibroblast.  Hypertrophied  fibroblast  with  abundant 
contractile  proteins  to  contract  connective  tissue  damaged 
by a wound

dissociate cis-SNARE complexes and recycles the SNAREs for 
another round of membrane fusion

Netrin.  Diffusible protein that signals attraction or repulsion 

of growth cones and capillaries

Neural  crest  cell.  Embryonic  cells  that  form  sympathetic 
nervous  system,  pigment  cells  of  skin,  adrenal  medullary 
cells, and many other cells

Neurofilament.  Intermediate filaments of neurons
Neuromuscular  junction.  Synapse  between  a  motor  nerve 

and a skeletal muscle cell

Myosin.  Family  of  motor  proteins  using  ATP  hydrolysis  to 

Neurotransmitter.  Small organic ions used for chemical com-

apply tension to actin filaments

munication between nerves and nerves and other cells

Myosin II.  Principal myosin of muscles and contractile rings 

Neutrophil.  White  blood  cell  specialized  for  phagocytosis 

of dividing cells

Myosin-binding  protein  C.  Stabilizes  myosin 

thick 
in  striated  muscles;  mutations  cause  some 

filaments 
cardiomyopathies

Myosin  isoforms.  Family  of  motor  proteins  that  share 
homologous catalytic domains coupled to a variety of tails.
Myosin  light  chain  kinase.  Serine/threonine  kinase  acti-
vated by calcium-calmodulin that phosphorylates the regula-
tory light chain of myosin-II to trigger contraction of smooth 
muscle

Myosin  light  chains.  Proteins  related  to  calmodulin  that 

and destruction of bacteria

NF-κB.  A family of transcription factors that controls diverse 
cellular  processes  including  immune  and  inflammatory 
responses, development, cell growth, and apoptosis

N-formyl-methionine-leucine-phenylalanine 

(FMLP). 
Bacterial  peptide  that  attracts  white  blood  cells  to  sites  of 
infection

Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor.  Cation channel activated 

by binding acetylcholine

Nitric  oxide.  Gas  that  serves  as  a  second  messenger,  by 

activating guanylylcyclase

reinforce the myosin lever arm

Nitric  oxide  synthase.  Enzyme  that  liberates  nitric  oxide 

Myristoyl  tail.  Fourteen-carbon  fatty  acid  added  to  the 
N-terminus of peripheral membrane proteins including c-Src
Myt1.  Cytoplasmic  kinase  that  phosphorylates  at  T14  and  Y15 
in  the  active  site  of  Cdk1  inhibiting  its  activity  until  it  is 
activated by dephosphorylation during M phase

from arginine

N-linked oligosaccharide.  Sugar polymer conjugated to side 

chain of a protein asparagine residue

Nocodazole.  Synthetic  chemical  that  inhibits  microtubule 

assembly by binding dissociated tubulin dimers

NADH.  Reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; 

Nonclathrin/noncaveolae  endocytosis.  Endocytic  events 

an energy carrier in cells

Na+K+-ATPase.  P-type  pump  using  ATP  hydrolysis  to  pump 

Na+ out of and K+ into animal cells

Natural killer cells.  T-lymphocytes with receptors to recog-

nize and attack cells infected with viruses

Nebulin.  Giant  protein  that  extents  from  end  to  end  of  stri-

ated muscle thin filaments

Necroptosis  (programmed  necrosis).  Alternate  backup 
pathway of cell death downstream of the CD95 (Fas) recep-
tor  that  is  triggered  when  key  components  of  the  CD95 
pathway are missing or defective

Necrosis.  Cell death resulting from irreversible injury involv-
ing leaking cell membranes, destruction of cellular contents 
lysosomal enzymes, and local inflammation

Negative  selection.  Apoptotic  cell  death  of  potentially 
harmful  lymphocytes  with  T-cell  receptors  that  recognize 
self-antigens

independent of clathrin and caveolin

Noncoding RNA (ncRNA).  An RNA that does not encode any 

known protein

Noncrossover (gene conversion).  Most common outcome 
of  programmed  double-strand  DNA  breaks  during  meiotic 
prophase; may involve loss of one or more genetic markers
Nondisjunction.  Mistakes in the separation of chromosomes 
or chromatids in meiosis or mitosis resulting in aneuploidy, 
daughter cells with too many or too few chromosomes

Nonhistone  proteins.  Proteins  of  chromatin  and  chromo-

somes that are not histones

Nonhomologous  end  joining.  Mechanism  that  repairs 
double  strand  breaks  in  DNA  without  using  a  homologous 
DNA sequence as a guide

Nonsense  mediated  decay  (NMD).  Process  by  which  the 
presence  of  a  premature  translation  termination  signal  (or 
nonsense codon) strongly destabilizes mRNA

Negative staining.  Method to prepare specimens for electron 

Nonstop decay.  Pathway for destruction of improperly pro-

microscopy by drying in a puddle of heavy metal salts

cessed mRNAs that lack a stop codon

N-end rule.  Presence of certain amino acids at the N-terminus 
of  a  protein  causes  it  to  be  ubiquitinated  by  a  specific  E3 
enzyme and subsequently destroyed

Neocentromere.  Functional centromeres that form rarely on 

noncentromeric DNA

Nernst equation.  Relation between the concentrations of an 
ion on the two sides of a selectively permeable membrane 
and the equilibrium membrane potential

Nerve ending.  See Synapse
N-ethyl  maleimide  (NEM)-sensitive  factor  (NSF).  AAA 
ATPase  that  uses  the  energy  from  ATP  hydrolysis  to 

Nonvesicular 

transport  pathway.  Transport  of 

lipids 

between membranes at contact sites

Notch.  Cell surface receptors for Delta ligand on other cells; 

influence many developmental processes

NSF.  See N-ethyl maleimide (NEM)-sensitive factor
N-terminal tails.  About 30 amino acids at the N-terminus of 

core histones that regulate chromatin compaction

Nuclear basket.  Filaments that extend from the nuclear pore 

into the nuclear interior

Nuclear  envelope.  Double  lipid  bilayer  that  encloses  the 

nucleus; outer membrane contiguous with the ER

840 

GLOSSARY

Nuclear  export  sequence  (NES).  Short  peptide  sequence 
recognized  by  carrier  proteins  that  direct  a  protein  for 
transport out of the nucleus

Nuclear  factor-activated  T  cell  (NA-AT).  Transcription 

factor activated by dephosphorylation by calcineurin

Nuclear lamina.  Meshwork of intermediate filaments (nuclear 

lamins) that stabilizes the inner nuclear envelope

Olfactory sensory neuron.  Cells in the nose that detect and 
signal the presence of odorant molecules by sending action 
potentials into the central nervous system

Oligosaccharyl  transferase.  ER  enzyme  associated  with 
translocons  that  transfers  core  oligosaccharides  from  doli-
chol to an asparagine in an appropriate polypeptide sequence
O-linked  oligosaccharide.  Glycosaminoglycans  conjugated 

Nuclear lamins.  Type V intermediate filament proteins that 

to a serine or threonine side chain

make up the nuclear lamina

Nuclear 

localization  sequence  (NLS).  Short  peptide 
sequence  recognized  by  carrier  proteins  (transport  recep-
tors) that direct the protein for transport into the nucleus

Nuclear matrix or nucleoskeleton.  Residual structures that 
remain when isolated nuclei are subjected to digestion with 
nucleases and extraction of the bulk of the histones

Nuclear  mitotic  apparatus  protein  (NuMA).  Protein  col-
laborates with dynein to focus microtubules at spindle poles
Nuclear pore complexes.  Channels bridging both the inner 
and outer nuclear membranes for communication between 
the nucleus and cytoplasm during interphase

Nuclear receptor.  Family of transcription factors activated by 
lipid  soluble  ligands,  including  steroid  hormones;  active 
receptors enter the nucleus to regulate gene expression

Nucleation.  Initial steps in the assembly of polymeric macro-

molecular structures

Nucleic  acid.  Polymers  of  nucleotides  linked  by  phosphodi-

ester bonds, RNA, and DNA

Nucleolar  organizer  regions.  Regions  of  chromosomes 
containing ribosomal RNA genes, whose transcription signals 
the formation of a nucleolus

Nucleolus.  Nuclear subdomain for ribosome biogenesis
Nucleolus-organizing 

(NORs).  Remnants  of 
nucleolar fibrillar centers that remain associated with rRNA 
genes in condensed mitotic chromosomes

regions 

Nucleoplasm.  The cellular region within the nuclear envelope
Nucleoporins.  Family  of  about  30  structural  proteins  that 

regulate access through the nuclear pore

Nucleoside.  Five-carbon sugar (ribose or deoxyribose) with a 

base on C1

Nucleosome.  Complex  of  165  base  pairs  of  DNA  wrapped 
twice around a protein core consisting of two copies each 
of the histones H2A, H2B, H3, and H4

Nucleosome core particle.  146 base pairs of DNA wrapped 

around a core consisting of a histone octamer

Nucleosome  remodeling  complex.  Enzyme  using  energy 
from  ATP  hydrolysis  to  alter  locations  of  nucleosomes  on 
DNA

Nucleotide.  Five-carbon sugar (ribose or deoxyribose) with a 

base on C1 and one to three phosphates on C5

Nucleotide  excision  repair.  Process  that  replaces  chemi-

cally modified bases in DNA

Nucleus.  Membrane-bounded  compartment 

in  eukaryotes 
containing genomic DNA and machinery for RNA synthesis 
and processing

Objective.  Microscope  lens  that  collects  light  scattered  by 

specimens

Occludin.  Transmembrane protein subunit of tight junctions
Odorant.  Vast array of volatile organic molecules that activate 

olfactory receptors to detect smells

Okazaki  fragment.  Short  segments  of  newly  synthesized 

DNA formed during replication of the lagging DNA strand

Oncogene.  Gene  that  predisposes  to  oncogenic  (cancerous) 
transformation of cells when the protein product is activated 
inappropriately;  generally  components  of  signal  transduc-
tion pathways that regulate cellular growth and proliferation
Oncogenic  stress.  Excessive  stimulation  of  cell  cycle  pro-
gression  results  in  shortages  of  factors  essential  for  DNA 
replication, thereby causing DNA damage

Open  mitosis.  Mitosis  where  the  nuclear  envelope  disas-
sembles  before  chromosomes  segregate,  as  in  most  plants 
and animals

Open  probability.  Fraction of the time that an ion channel 

is open

Operon.  Prokaryotic transcription units containing more than 

one gene, often encoding physiologically related proteins

Op18/stathmin.  Protein  that  binds  two  tubulin  dimers  and 

inhibits their assembly

Optogenetics.  Method  to  control  the  excitability  of  cells 
using  light  to  open  genetically-engineered  and  expressed 
channel rhodopsins

Orai channel.  Plasma membrane calcium channels regulated 

by STIM proteins for store-operated Ca2+ entry

Origin of replication (defined genetically as a replicator 
element).  Positions on the chromosome where DNA repli-
cation initiates

Origin recognition complex (ORC).  AAA ATPase bound to 

origins of replication across the entire cell cycle

Orthologous  genes.  Homologous  genes  separated  during 

evolution by a speciation event

Osteoblast.  Cell secretes organic components of bone matrix
Osteoclast.  Multinucleated  cell  formed  by  fusion  of  mono-

cytes, specialized for bone resorption

Osteocyte.  Cell surrounded by the bone matrix; can lay down 

or resorb matrix locally

Osteogenesis  imperfecta.  A  variety  of  congenital  fragile 

bone syndromes often caused by mutations in collagen

Osteon  (Haversian  system).  Rod-shaped  element  of  long 
bones formed by concentric layers of bone laid down on the 
inner surface of a resorption canal

Osteopetrosis.  Disease with overgrown, dense bones owing 

to a failure of bone resorption due to lack of osteoclasts

Osteoporosis.  Disease characterized by loss of bone tissue
Outer  doublet.  Pair  of  one  complete  and  one  incomplete 

microtubule in a ring of nine in axonemes

Outer nuclear membrane.  Lipid bilayer continuous with the 

ER and sharing its functions

Outer  segment.  Part  of  photoreceptor  cells  with  light-

absorbing membranes; a modified cilium

Oxidative phosphorylation.  Biochemical reactions in mito-
chondria  and  certain  bacteria  that  utilize  energy  from  the 
breakdown of nutrients to synthesize ATP from ADP

p21.  Protein  that  blocks  cell  cycle  progression  by  inhibiting 
Cdk1-cyclin A; its expression is turned on by p53 in response 
to DNA damage

 

GLOSSARY 

841

p53.  Transcription  factor  activated  in  response  to  DNA 
damage,  which  turns  on  expression  of  proteins  that  block 
cell-cycle progression or induce apoptosis

Peroxisomal  targeting  signal  type  1  (PTS1).  Three  C-
terminal  amino  acids  target  enzymes  to  the  lumen  of 
peroxisomes

p62.  The  defining  member  of  the  FG-rich  p62  complex  of 

Peroxisomal  targeting  signal  type  2  (PTS2).  N-terminal 

three nucleoporins

sequences target proteins to the lumen of peroxisomes

Pacemaker.  Heart  muscle  cells  that  spontaneously  generate 

Peroxisomes.  Membrane-bounded  organelles  containing 

action potentials and drive rhythmic contractions

oxidative enzymes

Pachytene.  Third  stage  of  meiotic  prophase,  during  which 

synapsis is complete and crossovers mature into chiasmata

Pairing.  Side-by-side alignment of homologous chromosomes 

Phagocytosis.  Process  by  which  cells  ingest  large  particles 
such as bacteria, foreign bodies, and remnants of dead cells
Phagolysosome.  Organelle formed on fusion of a phagosome 

at a distance during meiotic prophase

with a lysosome

Paralogous genes.  Homologous genes created during evolu-

Phagophore.  Cup-like  membrane 

intermediate  on 

the 

tion by duplication within a species

pathway of autophagosome formation

Parathyroid  hormone.  Stimulates  osteocytes  to  mobilize 

Phagosome.  Membrane-bounded  compartment  containing 

calcium from bone matrix

ParM.  Family of prokaryotic actins
Patch clamp.  Glass micropipette that is applied to the surface 
of a cell or a piece of membrane to record electrical events 
in single ion channels

Patched.  Cell surface receptor for Hedgehog proteins; partici-

pates in many developmental processes

Pathogen  associated  molecular  patterns 

(PAMPs). 
Repeated  features  of  pathogen  macromolecules  such  as 
bacterial flagella

Pattern recognition receptors.  See Toll-like receptors
PAX  (paired  box)  genes.  Class  of  genes  that  specify  the 

development of embryonic segments

ingested particles such as bacteria

Phalloidin.  Cyclic  peptide  produced  by  poisonous  mush-
rooms  that  has  a  high  affinity  for  and  stabilizes  actin  fila-
ments; when conjugated with fluorescent dye, it is used to 
label actin filaments in cells

Phase contrast.  Microscopic optical system generating con-
trast  from  differences  in  refractive  index  between  a  speci-
men and a reference beam

PH domain.  Protein domains that bind polyphosphoinositides
Phenotype.  Physical manifestation of the action of the geno-
type  of  an  organism  (refers  to  both  the  appearance  and 
macromolecular composition of the organism)

Phorbol  esters.  Plant  natural  products  stimulate  protein 

PDZ  domain.  Family  of  adapter  domains  that  recognize 

kinase C

C-terminal sequences of target proteins

Phosphatidylcholine.  Glycerolphospholipid  with  a  choline 

Pectin.  Branched polysaccharide associated with cellulose in 

head group

microfibrils in plant cell walls

Phosphatidylethanolamine (PE).  A phosphoglyceride with 

P element.  Transposable element widely used in Drosophila 

an ethanolamine head group

genetic manipulations

Pentose.  Five-carbon sugar
Peptide  bond.  Amide  bond  between  the  amino  group  of 
one  amino  acid  and  the  carboxyl  group  of  another  amino 
acid

Peptidyl  prolyl  isomerase.  ER  enzyme  catalyzes  the  inter-
conversion of cis and trans peptide bonds involving proline
Pericentriolar material (PCM).  Matrix surrounding pairs of 
centrioles  that  links  them  together  and  contains  gamma-
tubulin ring complexes, which nucleate microtubules

Perichondrium.  Capsule of connective tissue that covers the 

surface of cartilage

Perichromatin  fibrils.  Nucleoplasmic  structures  on  the 
surface of condensed chromatin that contain splicing factors 
and RNA packaging proteins

Perichromosomal  layer.  Ill-defined  layer  on  the  surface  of 
mitotic chromosomes rich in nucleolar proteins and RNAs; 
may keep mitotic chromosomes from sticking to one another
Perinuclear space.  Compartment continuous with the lumen 
of  the  ER  that  separates  the  inner  and  outer  nuclear 
membranes

Periosteum.  Connective tissue on the surface of bones
Peripheral  membrane  protein.  Protein  associated  with 
either  surface  of  a  biological  membrane  by  a  covalently 
attached lipid, electrostatic interactions, or partial insertion 
into the bilayer; can be extracted by a basic solution

Peroxins.  Proteins that deliver proteins to peroxisomes
Peroxisomal  biogenesis  disorders.  Diseases  arising  from 

defects in peroxisome formation

Phosphatidylinositol.  Glycerolphospholipid  with  an  inosi-
tol  (cyclohexanol)  head  group  that  can  be  phosphorylated 
on  carbons  3,  4,  and  5  either  singly  or  in  combination  to 
produce polyphosphoinositides

Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2).  Phosphati-
dylinositol  with  phosphate  esterified  to  the  hydroxyls  of 
inositol C4 and C5

Phosphatidylinositol  3-kinase.  Lipid  kinase  that  phos-

phorylates the C3 hydroxyl of phosphatidylinositol

Phosphatidylserine.  Glycerolphospholipid  with  a  serine 

head group

Phosphodiester bond.  Phosphate esterified to two hydrox-
yls  (can  link  either  different  molecules  or  within  the  same 
molecule in cyclic phosphodiesters)

Phosphodiesterase.  Enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of 
3′  5′  cyclic  nucleotides  to  the  corresponding  nucleoside 
monophosphate

Phosphoglyceride 

(glycerolphospholipid).  Lipid  with 
fatty acids esterified to the C1 and C2 hydroxyls of glycerol 
and phosphate on C3

Phospholamban.  Regulatory  subunit  of  P-type  ATPase 
calcium pumps consisting of a single transmembrane domain, 
regulated itself by protein kinase A

Phospholipase  A2.  Enzyme  that  catalyzes  cleavage  of  the 
ester  bond  between  glycerol  C2  and  the  fatty  acid  of  a 
phosphoglyceride

Phospholipase C.  Enzyme that catalyzes cleavage of the ester 
bond  between  glycerol  C3  and  the  phosphate  link  to  the 
head group of a phosphoglyceride

842 

GLOSSARY

Phospholipase  D.  Enzyme  that  catalyzes  cleavage  of  the 
ester bond between the phosphate and the head group of a 
phosphoglyceride

Phosphorylation.  Formation  of  an  ester  bond  between  a 
phosphate and a hydroxyl of an amino acid, sugar, lipid, or 
other molecule

Photoreceptor cells.  Sensory cells that express rhodopsin or 
other  photoreceptor  molecules  and  respond  to  absorption 
of photons

Photosynthesis.  Biochemical  reactions  in  chloroplasts  and 
certain  bacteria  that  utilize  energy  from  absorption  of 
photons to synthesize ATP

Photosynthetic  reaction  center.  Transmembrane  protein 
complex with light absorbing pigments that converts energy 
from  absorbed  photons  into  free  electrons  that  reduce 
acceptor molecules during photosynthesis.

Photosystem I.  Light-absorbing and electron carrier proteins 
in  the  membranes  of  purple  bacteria,  green  filamentous 
bacteria,  cyanobacteria,  and  chloroplasts  that  use  energy 
from the absorption of photons to produce a proton gradient 
across the membrane to drive the synthesis of ATP

Photosystem II.  Light-absorbing and electron carrier proteins 
in  the  membranes  of  green  sulfur  bacteria,  heliobacteria, 
cyanobacteria,  and  chloroplasts  that  use  energy  from  the 
absorption of photons to produce a proton gradient across 
the membrane to drive the synthesis of ATP

Phragmoplast.  Arrays of microtubules formed by plant cells 
to deliver vesicles from the Golgi apparatus and ER to form 
new plasma membrane for cytokinesis

Physcomitrella patens.  Experimentally tractable Moss used 

as a model organism among plants

Pinocytosis.  Ingestion  of  extracellular  fluids  by  vesicles 

formed from the plasma membrane

piRNAs.  See Piwi-interacting RNAs
Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs).  Part of a silencing system 
in  germ-line  cells  that  blocks  expression  of  transposons  to 
protect the DNA against recombination and mutation

PKB/Akt.  Protein kinase activated by binding PI3P; regulates 

metabolism

PKR-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase/pancreatic eIF2a 
kinase  (PERK/PEK).  A  transmembrane  protein  of  the  ER 
that participates in the unfolded protein response by activat-
ing a translation initiation factor that stimulates the synthesis 
of ER proteins

Plakins.  A  family  of  giant  proteins  that  link  cytoskeletal 

polymers to each other and to membranes

Plakoglobin.  Adapter protein linking cadherins and interme-

diate filaments in desmosomes

Plasma  cell.  Mature  B-lymphocyte  specialized  to  produce  a 

particular antibody molecule

Plasmadesmata.  Intercellular  junction  between  plant  cells 

providing continuity between their cytoplasms

Plasma membrane.  Membrane forming the cellular boundary
Plasmid.  Circular DNA molecule that can replicate and propa-

gate through generations in cells

Plasmid cloning.  Isolation of a piece of DNA by propagation 

in a plasmid from a single founder cell

Plastid.  Organelles of plants and algae derived from cyanobac-

teria, including chloroplasts

Platelet.  Small cellular fragments in blood responsible for patch-

Platelet-derived  growth  factor.  Protein  growth 

factor 
released by activated platelets that stimulates proliferation of 
cells expressing the appropriate receptor tyrosine kinase

Pleckstrin homology (PH) domain.  Adapter domains that 

bind phosphorylated inositides; found in multiple proteins

Plectin.  Protein that links intermediate filaments to integrins, 

microtubules and actin filaments

P-loop.  Polypeptide  segments  of  cation  ion  channels  that 

form selectivity pores

Pluripotent.  Refers to stem cells that can develop into many 

different types of differentiated cells

Plus  end.  Faster-growing  end  of  a  microtubule  terminating 

with β-tubulin

Point  centromere.  Budding  yeast  centromeres  defined  by 

sequence-specific binding of proteins

Pointed end.  Slower-growing end of actin filaments
Polar bodies.  Small cells produced by asymmetrical cell divi-

sions during female meiosis

Polarized  cell.  Cell  with  functionally  distinct  apical  and 
basolateral  plasma  membrane  domains  separated  by  tight 
junctions; internal contents are also polarized

Polo.  Protein  kinases  regulating  several  aspects  of  cell  cycle 
control;  active  on  substrates  that  have  been  “primed”  by 
prior phosphorylation by another kinase

Polyadenylation.  Posttranscriptional  addition  of  a  chain  of 
adenine residues to the 3’ end of a mRNA – often important 
in regulation of RNA stability

Poly-A tail.  Fifty to 200 adenine residues added posttranscrip-

tionally to the 3′ end of most eukaryotic mRNAs

Polycomb  repressive  complex.  One of several complexes 
that  either  EDIT  or  READ  chromatin  MARKS  and  promote  a 
state repressive for transcription

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR).  Method using heat-stable 
DNA  polymerases  to  amplify  DNA  sequences  by  cycles  of 
replication, strand dissociation, and further replication in the 
presence of excess primer sequences

Polymerase  α/primase.  Enzyme  that  initiates  DNA  replica-
tion by synthesizing an RNA chain of about 10 nucleotides 
to which DNA polymerase α adds another 20 to 30 nucleo-
tides of “initiator DNA,” all subsequently replaced

Polypeptide.  Polymer of amino acids linked by peptide bonds
Polyploidy.  Common  chromosomal  abnormality  with  an 

entire extra set of chromosomes

Polysomes.  Complex  of  a  mRNA  with  multiple  ribosomes, 

each synthesizing the same polypeptide

Polytene  chromosomes.  Giant  chromosomes 

in  some 
tissues of insect larvae, consisting of more than 1000 identi-
cal DNA molecules packed side by side in register

Polytopic protein.  Protein spans a membrane multiple times
Porins.  Transmembrane  proteins  of  the  outer  membrane  of 
gram-negative  bacteria  and  mitochondria  forming  channels 
for passage of molecules of less than 5000 D

Position  effect.  Repression  of  an  actively  transcribed  gene 
when translocated into close proximity to constitutive het-
erochromatin,  due  to  spreading  of  heterochromatin  across 
the gene

Positive  selection.  Pathway  of  apoptotic  death  of  lympho-
cytes that will be ineffective in immune responses because 
they express T-cell receptors that fail to interact with any of 
the MHC glycoproteins expressed by the individual

ing defects in small blood vessels and promoting clotting

Postsynaptic.  On the receiving side of a synapse

 

GLOSSARY 

843

Posttranslational  translocation.  Translocation  of  a  fully  syn-
thesized  polypeptide  from  the  cytoplasm  into  the  ER,  mito-
chondria, chloroplasts, or peroxisomes or out of prokaryotes
PP2B  (calcineurin).  Phosphatase  activated  by  calcium-
calmodulin; inhibition by cyclosporine blocks T-lymphocyte 
activation and allows organ transplantation

pRb.  Family of transcriptional regulators (three in mammals) 
that  control  the  activity  of  E2F  family  transcription  factors 
and cell cycle progression at the restriction point

Preinitiation  complex  (transcription).  Complexes  of 
TATA  box–binding  protein  and  associated  factors  that 
promote the initiation of transcription

Preinitiation  complex  (translation).  Assembly  of  mRNA 

and proteins on a small ribosomal subunit

Prenucleolar bodies.  Particles containing nucleolar compo-

nents that associate with NORs during nucleolar assembly

Prophase.  First  phase  of  mitosis,  defined  by  chromosome 
condensation inside an intact nuclear envelope accompained 
by changes in the dynamics of cytoplasmic microtubules

Prostaglandins.  Family  of  lipid  second  messengers  derived 

from arachidonic acid

Proteasome.  Barrel-shaped  multienzyme  complex 

that 
degrades  target  proteins  (typically  tagged  with  chains  of 
ubiquitin) into short peptides while recycling ubiquitin

Protein.  One  or  more  polypeptides  folded  into  a  functional 

three-dimensional structure

Protein coats.  Polymeric structures on the cytoplasmic surface 

of membranes that promote formation of coated vesicles

Protein  disulfide 

isomerase  (PDI).  Enzyme  catalyzes 
exchange of protein of disulfide (S-S) bonds in the ER lumen

Protein domain.  Independently folded part of a protein
Protein folding.  Conversion a linear polypeptide into a par-

Prenylation.  Lipid  modification  that  anchors  proteins  on 

ticular three-dimensional structure

cytoplasmic surfaces of membranes (see Isoprenoid tail)

Protein  kinase.  Enzyme  that  catalyzes  formation  of  phos-

Preprocollagen.  Precursor to collagen with a signal sequence 

phate esters on hydroxyl groups of proteins

and assembly domains at both ends

Protein kinase A (PKA).  Protein kinase regulated by cAMP 

Prereplication  complex.  Protein  complex  of  ORC,  Cdc6p, 
CDT1,  and  Mcm  proteins  assembles  at  each  replication 
origin once per cell cycle before the onset of S phase

Presequences.  Amino  acid  sequences  that  target  polypep-

tides to mitochondria

Presynaptic.  On the sending side of a synapse
Primary  cilium.  Nonmotile  cilium  that  serves  as  a  sensory 

organelle; found on most animal cells

Primary constriction.  Waist-like stricture at the centromere 
of  mitotic  chromosomes  where  the  two  sister  chromatids 
are most intimately paired

Primitive mesenchymal cell.  Stem cell for connective tissue 

cells

Proapoptotic.  Signal  or  protein  that  triggers  the  apoptotic 

pathway of cell death

Processed pseudogenes.  DNA sequences created by reverse 
transcription of mature mRNAs by a LINE reverse transcrip-
tase and insertion back into the genome

Procollagen.  Trimeric precursor of collagen held together by 

C-terminal assembly domains

Profilin.  Protein that binds polyproline and actin monomers, 

catalyzes actin nucleotide exchange

Programmed cell death.  Active cellular process that culmi-
nates  in  cell  death  in  response  to  developmental  signals, 
environmental cues, or physiological damage

Prohormone convertases.  Proteolytic enzymes in the Golgi 
large 

apparatus  cleave  small  peptide  hormones  from 
precursors

Proliferating  cell  nuclear  antigen  (PCNA).  Doughnut-
shaped  trimer  topologically  locked  onto  the  DNA  by  RFC 
that  acts  as  a  molecular  “tool  belt”  to  which  numerous 
proteins involved with DNA replication and repair bind

Proliferation.  Expansion of cell numbers by division
Prometaphase.  Phase  of  mitosis  beginning  with  nuclear 
envelope breakdown (in higher eukaryotes) and attachment 
of chromosomes to microtubules from the two poles of the 
forming mitotic spindle

Promoter.  Assembly  of  DNA  sequences  required  to  form  a 

preinitiation complex and initiate transcription

Promyelocytic leukemia (PML) bodies.  Nuclear structures 
of unknown function containing an E3 ubiquitin ligase PML

binding to a regulatory subunit

Protein kinase C (PKC).  Protein kinase regulated by binding 
of diacylglycerol or other lipids and calcium to its regulatory 
domains

Protein  phosphatase.  Enzyme  that  catalyzes  the  hydrolysis 

(removal) of phosphate from hydroxyl groups of proteins

Protein  phosphatase  2A  (PP2A).  Family  of  protein  phos-
phatases that antagonizes CDK activity and is inactivated by 
Greatwall Kinase to promote mitotic entry

Protein  targeting.  Mechanisms  that  deliver  a  protein  to  a 

particular location in a cell

Proteoglycans.  Proteins modified with O-linked glycosamino-
glycans, found in secretory granules and extracellular matrix
Protocadherin.  A  large  class  of  cadherins  that  regulate  cel-

lular interactions between neurons

Protofilaments.  Longitudinally  oriented  filaments  of  tubulin 
dimers; 13 make up the cylindrical wall of most microtubules
Pseudoautosomal  region.  Region  of  sequence  homology 
between  male  and  female  sex  chromosomes  that  must 
undergo genetic recombination in meiosis I for sex chromo-
somes to partition correctly

Pseudogene.  Nonfunctional  DNA  sequences  derived  from 
gene  transcripts  that  have  been  reverse  transcribed  and 
inserted back into the chromosome

Pseudopod.  Cellular  protrusion  responsible 

for  cellular 

locomotion

Pseudosubstrate.  Region of polypeptide similar to a substrate 
in a kinase or a kinase regulatory subunit that inhibits access 
of substrates to the kinase by binding the active site

PTB domain.  Adapter domain that binds particular peptides 

with a phosphotyrosine, found in multiple proteins

PTEN  phosphatases.  Family  of  phosphatases  that  remove 

phosphate from the D-3 position of polyphosphoinositides

P4-type ATPase (flippase).  Variant P-type ATPase pump that 

flips lipids between the leaflets of bilayers

Pyrin  domain  (PYD).  Protein  interaction  motif  found  in 

proteins involved in inflammation and caspase 1 activation

Pyroptosis (pro-inflammatory programmed cell death). 
Reaction  to  pathogen  infection  leading  to  formation  of 
inflammasomes,  cytosolic  complexes  containing  caspase  1 
that promote a necrosis-like death

844 

GLOSSARY

Quiescence.  A  transient  nondividing  state  from  which  cells 

exit given appropriate signals

Rab.  Family  of  small  GTPases  that  control  protein-protein 
interactions  between  transport  carriers  and  docking  com-
plexes on target membranes

Rac.  Small  GTPases  related  to  Rho  that  regulate  actin 

assembly

RAD51.  Eukaryotic homolog of E. coli RecA, associates with 
single-stranded  DNA  and  catalyzes  the  search  for  homolo-
gous sequences, strand pairing, and strand exchange during 
DNA recombination and repair

Radial  spoke.  Multiprotein  connection  between  the  central 

pair and outer doublets of axonemes

Raf.  MAP kinase kinase kinase activated by Ras
Ran.  Small  GTPase  that  provides  direction  to  nuclear  trans-
port;  within  the  nucleus,  Ran-GTP  dissociates  imported 
proteins from their carriers and binds proteins for export to 
their carriers; also functions in spindle assembly in eggs

Ran-GAP1.  GTPase activating protein for Ran associated with 
cytoplasmic filaments nuclear pores; converts Ran-GTP from 
the nucleus into inactive Ran-GDP in the cytoplasm

RANKL (RANK ligand, also called osteoprotegerin ligand 
[OPGL] or TRANCE).  “Receptor activator of nuclear factor 
κB ligand” a secreted protein that stimulates the differentia-
tion of osteoclasts

Rapamycin.  Fungal  product  from  Rapa  Nui  (Easter  Island) 

that inhibits mTOR kinase

Ras.  Small GTPase couples activation of growth factor recep-
tor  tyrosine  kinases  to  Raf  at  the  start  of  the  MAP  kinase 
pathway

Ras-GEF.  Nucleotide  exchange  factor  called  SOS  (son  of 

sevenless) that activates Ras

Reductional division.  First division of meiosis when homolo-
gous  chromosomes  separate  and  the  chromosome  number 
halves

Reductionism.  Experimental strategy relying on characteriza-
tion and reconstitution of isolated molecular components of 
complex biological systems

Regional  centromere.  A  centromere  with  the  kinetochore 
histone  CENP-A  distributed  across  a  broad  region  of  DNA; 
defined  by  epigenetic  marks  rather  than  specific  DNA 
sequences

Regulated secretory pathway.  Route for concentrating and 
packaging  proteins  in  storage  granules  for  discharge  from 
the cell in response to hormonal or neural stimulation

Regulator  of  chromosome  condensation  1  (RCC1).  GEF 
for  the  small  GTPase  Ran;  associated  with  chromatin  and 
insures a gradient of active Ran near chromatin

Repetitive  DNA.  Sequences  present  in  many  copies  (thou-

sands, in some cases) in eukaryotic genomes

Replication factor C (RFC).  Protein complex that binds the 
3′ end of initiator DNA and uses energy from ATP hydrolysis 
to load the trimeric protein PCNA onto the DNA

Replication foci.  One thousand or more sites of replication 
in eukaryotic nuclei during S phase, each representing five 
or six coordinately activated replication origins

Replication  fork.  Site  of  DNA  replication  consisting  of  a 
parental  DNA  molecule  unwound  into  two  strands  along 
with the replication machinery on both strands

Replication fork collapse.  Disassembly of stalled replication 

forks

Replication  stress.  Situation  in  which  stopping  replication 
leads to an accumulation of single-stranded DNA, activating 
a pathway to try and prevent replication fork collapse

Rate  constant.  Proportionality  constant  between 

the 

Replicator.  Genetically defined site at which replication of a 

concentration(s) of reactant(s) and the rate of a reaction

bacterial chromosome initiates

RCC1.  See Regulator of chromosome condensation 1
Reaction  center.  Complex  of  proteins  with  light-absorbing 
chromophores  and  electron  transfer  cofactors  that  absorb 
light and initiate an electron transport pathway that pumps 
protons out of Bacteria and thylakoids of chloroplasts

READER.  A  protein  or  protein  complex  that  binds  to  a  MARK 
and then establishes a chromatin state, either directly or by 
recruiting other factors

Receptor.  Macromolecule  that  selectively  binds  particular 

partner molecules (ligands), initiating a cellular response

Receptor-mediated  endocytosis.  Facilitated  uptake  of  an 
extracellular  ligand  due  to  its  binding  to  a  receptor  that 
undergoes endocytosis

Receptor serine/threonine kinase.  Family of receptors that 
bind ligands related to transforming growth factor beta and 
initiate  signaling  through  cytoplasmic  serine/threonine 
kinase domains

Receptor  tyrosine  kinase.  Family  of  receptors  that  bind 
growth  factors  and  initiate  signaling  through  cytoplasmic 
tyrosine kinase domains

Recombination.  Physical exchange of DNA strands between 
homologous chromosomes, during meiosis 1 drives chromo-
somal pairing and formation of chiasmata that are critical for 
segregation of homologous chromosomes

Recycling endosome.  Endosomes located in the perinuclear 
Golgi  region  where  receptors  returning  to  the  cell  surface 
accumulate

Replicon.  Region  of  chromosomal  DNA  replicated  from  a 

single origin of replication

Replisome.  Multiprotein  complex  containing  helicases  and 

polymerases that replicates the DNA

Rescue  (in  dynamic  instability).  Random  transition  of  a 

microtubule from a phase of rapid shortening to regrowth

Resection.  Process of trimming DNA back from the site of a 
Spo11 break to create 3’ single-stranded DNA tails that can 
search for homologous sequences on other chromosomes

Residual  body.  Mature  lysosome  containing  a  large  amount 

of undegraded material

Restriction  point.  Checkpoint  in  late  G1  phase  that  blocks 
cells  from  committing  to  a  proliferation  cycle  unless  nutri-
ents and mitogens are present and the cell senses appropri-
ate interactions with the surrounding extracellular matrix

Reticulon.  Proteins  that  bend  membranes  by  inserting  into 

the lipid bilayer

Retina.  Epithelium at the back of the vertebrate eye with an 

array of photoreceptor cells

Retinal.  Vitamin A derivative that serves as the chromophore 

for rhodopsin, the photon receptor in the eye

Retrieval pathway.  Recycling of proteins and lipids from the 

Golgi back to the ER

Retrograde  traffic.  Flow  of  cargo  and  lipids  back  toward  the 

ER

Retrograde  transport.  Movement  of  membrane-bound  par-

ticles toward the cell body of neurons

 

GLOSSARY 

845

Retromer.  Protein  complex  involved  in  transport  from  late 

endosomes to trans-Golgi network

Retrotranslocon.  Channel  proposed  to  export  proteins 
from  the  ER  lumen  or  membrane  into  the  cytoplasm  for 
degradation

Retrotransposons.  Transposable elements of DNA that move 

via RNA intermediates

Reverse  genetics.  Study  of  gene  function  by  engineering 

desired mutations into cloned coding regions of genes

RNase H.  Exonuclease that removes the RNA primer used to 

start DNA replication by chewing in from the 5′ end

RNase  MRP.  Eukaryotic  enzyme  that  cleaves  preribosomal 

RNA between the small and large subunit rRNAs

RNase  P.  RNA-protein  enzyme  that  cleaves  pre-tRNAs  at  the 

5′ end of the mature tRNA sequence in all organisms

RNA world.  Early stage of evolution of life on earth consist-
ing  of  self-replicating  RNA  polymers  sheltered  inside  lipid 
vesicles

Reverse  transcriptase.  Specialized  DNA  polymerase  that 

Rod.  Photoreceptor  cell  for  sensitive  detection  of  a  broad 

copies RNA into DNA

range of wavelengths

RGD  motif.  Tripeptide  (arginine-glycine-aspartic  acid)  used 

Rotary  ATPase.  ATP-driven  proton  pumps  with  a  rotor  and 

by several extracellular ligands to bind integrins

RGS  proteins.  Proteins  that  stimulate  GTP  hydrolysis  by 

α-subunits of trimeric G-proteins

Rho.  Family of small GTPases that regulate contraction medi-
ated by myosin-II and other aspects of the actin cytoskeleton; 
essential for cytokinesis

Rhodopsin.  Seven-helix  receptor  protein  with  covalently 

bound retinal that absorbs photons in the retina

stator; some use a proton gradient to synthesize ATP

Rough  endoplasmic  reticulum.  Subdomain  of  ER  with 
associated ribosomes synthesizing proteins for secretion and 
insertion into membranes and specialized for protein folding
RPA.  Single-strand  DNA-binding  protein  recruited  by  Cdc45 
and  Mcm  proteins  to  stabilize  separated  strands  of  DNA 
during replication and repair

R  (regulatory)  subunits.  Proteins  that  inhibit  PKA  but  dis-

Rho-GDI.  Protein  that  binds  Rho-GDP  and  blocks  activation 

sociate when they bind cAMP

by GEFs

Ribose.  Five-carbon sugar, component of RNA
Ribosomal  RNA  (rRNA).  Three  of  the  four  RNA  molecules 
forming  the  bulk  of  ribosomes  including  the  catalytic  site; 
precursor  RNA  cotranscribed  by  RNA  polymerase  and  pro-
cessed into 18S, 5.8S, and 25S/28S rRNAs

Ribosome.  Complex  of  ribosomal  RNAs  with  multiple  pro-

teins that catalyzes the synthesis of polypeptides

Riboswitch.  RNA  sequences  that  bind  small  molecules  and 

regulate gene expression

Ribozymes.  RNAs  with  catalytic  activity  independent  of 
proteins, including group I and group II self-splicing introns
Ribulose  phosphate  carboxylase  (RUBISCO).  Most  abun-
dant  protein  on  earth,  catalyzes  the  combination  of  a  five-
carbon sugar with carbon dioxide to form two molecules of 
the three-carbon sugar 3-phosphoglycerate in chloroplasts

Ryanodine  receptor.  Calcium  release  channel  of  the  endo-

plasmic reticulum

S  phase  (synthetic  phase).  Portion  of  the  cell  cycle  when 

DNA is replicated

Saccharomyces  cerevisiae.  Budding  yeast;  popular  genetic 

model organism for studying basic cell biology

SAM  complex  (sorting  and  assembly  machinery  of  the 
outer  membrane).  Protein  complex  for  translocation  of 
proteins into chloroplasts

Sar1.  Small GTPase that recruits COPII coat complexes to the 

ER membrane

Sarcomere.  Contractile  unit  of  striated  muscle  consisting  of 

a bipolar array of overlapping actin and myosin filaments

Sarcoplasmic  reticulum.  Smooth  ER  of  striated  muscles 
specialized for rapid release and reuptake of the calcium ions 
that regulate contraction

Rickettsia.  Alpha proteobacteria closely related to mitochon-

SAS-6.  Forms  a  complex  with  9-fold  radial  symmetry;  tem-

dria; cause of typhus and other diseases

plates the formation of centrioles

Ring canals.  Intercellular bridges that remain open following 
incomplete  cytokinesis  to  maintain  cytoplasmic  continuity 
between daughter cells in specialized tissues

RISC.  See RNA-induced silencing complex
RNA.  Polymer  of  phosphate-linked  sugars  (ribose)  linked  to 
purine and pyrimidine bases used to carry genetic informa-
tion, catalyze reactions, bind ligands, or assemble with pro-
teins in macromolecular complexes

RNA  editing.  Covalent  modifications  of  individual  nucleo-
tides,  which  alter  their  base-pairing  potential  and  thereby 
change  the  amino  acid  that  is  incorporated  during  protein 
synthesis;  increasing  the  diversity  of  protein  products  that 
can be coded by the genome

RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC).  Multienzyme com-
plex that promotes the maturation of miRNAs and can cleave 
target  RNAs,  repress  translation  of  mRNAs,  or  inhibit  tran-
scription of target genes via formation of heterochromatin

RNA  interference  (RNAi).  Experimental  use  of  double-
stranded RNAs complementary to a target mRNA to trigger 
its cleavage by RISC complex

RNA polymerase.  Enzyme that transcribes (synthesizes) RNA 

complementary to a DNA template

Satellite cells.  Stem cells in striated muscles
Satellite DNAs.  Repeated DNAs clustered in discrete areas of 

chromosomes, e.g., flanking centromeres

Scaffold/matrix attachment regions (SMARs).  Regions of 
DNA that associate with the nuclear matrix and chromosome 
scaffold in biochemical fractionation experiments

Scanning  electron  microscope.  Optical  system  to  scan  a 
fine electron beam over a metal-coated specimen and create 
an image from secondary electrons emitted from the surface
SCF.  Class  of  E3  ubiquitin  ligase  containing  Skp1/Skp2, 
a  cullin,  and  an  F-box  protein;  regulate  the  cell  cycle  by 
proteolysis

Schizosaccharomyces pombe.  Fission yeast; popular gene-

tic model organism for studying the cell cycle

Sec61 complex.  See Translocon
SecA.  Bacterial  enzyme  that  uses  ATP  hydrolysis  to  promote 

the translocation of proteins through SecYE translocons

SecB.  Bacterial  chaperone  for  newly  synthesized  proteins  to 

prevent folding before translocation

Second  messengers.  Calcium  ions  and  small  molecules 
including cyclic nucleotides and lipids that carry biochemi-
cal signals inside cells

846 

GLOSSARY

Secondary  constriction.  Region  of  a  chromosome  associ-

Signal transduction.  Reactions that convert a stimulus into 

ated with the nucleolus-organizing region

a change in the behavior of a cell

Secondary structure.  Regular structures formed by polypep-

tides, especially α-helices and beta-sheets

Second-order reaction.  Reaction with two reactants
Secretory  cargo.  Transmembrane  and 
transported through the secretory system

lumenal  proteins 

Sinoatrial  node.  Cluster of heart muscle cells that generate 

the action potentials that produce rhythmic contractions

siRNAs.  See Small interfering RNAs
Sister chromatids.  Products of DNA replication, two identi-

cal DNA molecules, each packaged by chromatin proteins

Secretory  granule.  Membrane-bounded  packets  of  concen-

Situs inversus.  Major organs are located on the opposite side 

trated secretory proteins prepared for secretion

of the body from normal

Secretory  membrane  system.  Distributes  proteins  and 
lipids  synthesized  in  the  ER  to  other  sites  using  vesicular 
intermediates for transport between the ER, Golgi apparatus, 
and plasma membrane

Securin.  Inhibitor  of  the  separase  protease  that  cleaves  pro-

teins to trigger sister anaphase chromatid separation

Sedimentation  coefficient.  Ratio  of  the  sedimentation 

velocity to the centrifugal force

Sedimentation 

ultracentrifuge 
method where the specimen is centrifuged until the molecules 
reach an equilibrium between diffusion and sedimentation

equilibrium.  Analytical 

Sedimentation  velocity.  Analytical  ultracentrifuge  method 
measuring  the  rate  that  a  molecule  moves  in  a  centrifugal 
force field

Segmental  duplications.  Regions  of  DNA ≥1000  base  pairs 
with ≥90% sequence identity that are present in more than 
one copy but are not transposons

Selectin.  Plasma membrane adhesion receptor for mucins on 

other cells

Self-assembly.  Capacity  of  macromolecules  to  form  large 

structures without guidance by templates

Self-cleaving  ribozymes.  RNAs  with  the  capacity  to  cleave 

themselves in the absence of proteins

Senescence.  Terminal  G0  state  with  viable  but  nondividing 

cells

Separase.  Protease that cleaves a component of cohesin, trig-

gering the onset of anaphase sister chromatid separation

Seven-helix  receptor.  A  large  class  of  receptor  proteins 
composed  of  seven  transmembrane  α-helices,  coupled  to 
cytoplasmic trimeric G-proteins

Sex  chromosomes.  Chromosomes  that  carry  genes  that 

define the sex of an organism

SH2 domain.  Adapter domains that bind peptides including 

a phosphorylated tyrosine, in many signaling proteins

SH3  domain.  Family  of  adapter  domains  that  bind  proline-

rich peptides, found in many signaling proteins

Shelterin.  Protein complex that associates with and protects 

the ends of chromosomes in metazoans

Short interspersed nuclear elements (SINES).  Retrotrans-
posons of ~300 bp making up ~13% of the human genome
Shugoshin.  From  the  Japanese  “guardian  spirit”;  a  protein 
complex involved in the protection of sister chromatid cohe-
sion near centromeres

Side chain.  Chemical group on the α-carbon of an amino acid
Signal peptidases.  Enzymes that cleave signal peptides from 

proteins after translocation of proteins across membranes

Signal  recognition  particle  (SRP).  RNA-protein  complex 
that recognizes signal sequences emerging from ribosomes 
and  directs  the  ribosome  to  a  translocon  of  endoplasmic 
reticulum

Skeletal  muscle.  Striated  muscle  cells  controlled  by  motor 

neurons in the spinal cord and brain stem

Slicer (Ago2).  Component of the RISC complex that cleaves 
target RNA sequences that are perfectly complementary to 
miRNAs associated with RISC

Slow  axonal  transport.  Transport  of  structural  proteins  and 
cytoplasmic  enzymes  from  their  site  of  synthesis  near  the 
nucleus along nerve cells process; some of these components 
move by rare short bursts of fast transport along microtubules
Smac/DIABLO (second mitochondrial activator of apop-
tosis/ direct IAP binding protein with low pI).  Inhibitor 
of  IAP  proteins  released  from  mitochondria  to  promote 
apoptosis

Smad.  Family of cytoplasmic transcription factors activated to 
enter the nucleus after phosphorylation by receptor serine/
threonine kinases activated by binding ligands

Small  heterochromatic  RNAs  (now  more  commonly 
known  as  siRNAs).  RNAs  generated  by  transcription  of 
both strands of DNA that associate with a nuclear complex 
called  RITS  (RNA-induced  transcriptional  silencing),  which 
is related to the cytoplasmic RISC complex and induce het-
erochromatin  formation  and  silencing  of  the  transcribed 
locus

Small  interfering  RNAs  (siRNAs).  22-nucleotide  double-
stranded  RNAs,  either  introduced  into  cells  or  expressed 
from a short hairpin RNA (shRNA) sequence to trigger the 
destruction  of  target  complementary  RNAs  by  the  RISC 
(RNA-induced silencing) complex

Small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs).  RNAs that function in com-
plexes  with  proteins  in  small  nuclear  ribonucleoprotein 
(snRNP) particles to recognize signals in the pre-mRNA that 
identify introns and exons during splicing

Small  nucleolar  RNAs  (snoRNAs).  Small  RNAs,  mostly 
excised from introns of RNAs transcribed by RNA polymerase 
II, that are involved in selection of the sites of modification 
of RNA bases during the maturation of functional RNAs

Small  ubiquitin-like  modifier  (SUMO).  Ubiquitin-like  pro-
tein  conjugated  to  the  same  residues  on  target  proteins  as 
ubiquitin, but typically regulates protein-protein interactions 
rather than promoting degradation

SMC proteins (structural maintenance of chromosomes). 
ATPases that form part of the condensin and cohesin com-
plexes that are essential for mitotic chromosome structure, 
regulation of sister chromatid pairing, DNA repair and repli-
cation, and regulation of gene expression

Smooth endoplasmic reticulum.  Subdomain of ER lacking 
ribosomes and dedicated to drug metabolism, steroid synthe-
sis, and calcium homeostasis

Smoothened.  Unusual seven-helix receptor inhibited by the 

patched receptor for Hedgehog proteins

Signal sequence.  N-terminal hydrophobic polypeptide signal 

Smooth muscle.  Muscle without highly organized sarcomeres 

that directs proteins to the ER

found in the walls of blood vessels and internal organs

 

GLOSSARY 

847

Sm  proteins.  Seven  closely  related  proteins  that  assemble 

into a heptameric ring structure on snRNAs

SNAP  receptor  (SNARE).  Family  of  proteins  participates  in 
fusion of carriers with appropriate acceptor compartments
Sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS).  Ionic detergent used to solu-
bilize proteins for separation by size by gel electrophoresis
Somatic  mutation.  Mutations  in  genomes  of  developing  lym-
phocytes generate diversity in antibodies and T-cell receptors
Sortilin.  Transmembrane protein directs proteins to lysosomes
Sorting  nexin.  Subunits  of  the  retromer  complex  used  for 

recycling protein from endosome to the Golgi apparatus

Spastin.  AAA  ATPase  that  severs  microtubules;  mutations 

cause autosomal dominant spastic paraplegia

Speckles.  Clusters of nucleoplasmic interchromatin granules 

containing factors involved in RNA processing

Spectrin.  Actin-binding protein of the membrane skeleton of 

the plasma membrane and some cytoplasmic organelles

Spermatids.  Male germ cells that have completed meiosis but 

not yet differentiated into mature sperm

Spermatogenesis.  Process that produces sperm
Spermatogonia.  Stem cells that give rise to sperm
Spermatozoa.  Mature sperm
Sphingomyelin.  Sphingolipid with a choline or ethanolamine 

head group

Stem  cells.  Cells  with  the  capacity  to  produce,  through 
intermittent asymmetrical cell division, both a self-renewing 
stem cell and a second cell with the capacity to differentiate 
into more specialized cells

Stem  loop.  RNA  sequence  that  forms  an  antiparallel  double 

helix with a loop at the end

Step  size.  Distance  moved  by  a  motor  protein  during  one 

cycle of ATP hydrolysis

Steroid  regulator  element-binding  proteins  (SREBP). 
Family of transcription factors that regulate the expression 
of genes for proteins involved with steroid biosynthesis

STIM.  Integral  protein  of  the  ER  membrane  that  aggregates 
when Ca2+ is depeleted from the lumen of the ER and stimu-
lates  Orai  channels  to  admit  Ca2+  through  the  plasma 
membrane

Stimulated  emission  depletion  (STED).  Super  resolution 
fluorescence microscopy method by scanning the specimen 
with  two  superimposed  beams,  one  that  suppresses  emis-
sions from all by a tiny spot in the middle of the second beam
Store-operated Ca2+ entry.  Response of cells to depletion of 
Ca2+ from the lumen of the ER, acting through STIM and Orai 
channels

Stratified  epithelium.  Form  of  epithelium  with  multiple 

layers of cells on a basal lamina

Sphingomyelinase.  A  phospholipase  C  that  removes  the 

Stress  fiber.  Bundle  of  actin  filaments,  myosin-II,  and  other 

head group from sphingomyelin

Spindle  assembly  checkpoint  (SAC).  Signalling  pathway 
that delays the onset of anaphase until all chromosomes have 
stable bipolar attachment to spindle microtubules

Spindle pole.  One of the duplicated centrosomes that nucle-

ates microtubules during mitosis

Spindle  pole  body.  Plaque-like  structure  embedded  in  the 
nuclear envelope of fungi that contains γ-tubulin and acts as 
the microtubule organizing center for mitosis

Spire.  Protein that promotes actin filament nucleation
Splice site.  Sites where RNAs are cleaved during splicing
Splicing.  RNA  maturation  reactions  that  cut  out  specific 

regions (introns) and rejoin the remaining RNA (exons)

proteins linking focal adhesions in nonmuscle cells

Striated  muscle.  Skeletal  and  cardiac  muscles  that  have  a 

striped appearance owing to alignment of the sarcomeres

Structured  illumination  microscopy  (SIM).  Super  resolu-
tion fluorescence microscopy method using superimposition 
on the image of an intense, scanned and rotated bar pattern 
to improve the resolution

Subunit.  Macromolecular building block of a larger structure
Subunit  flux  (treadmilling).  Flow  of  actin  or  tubulin  sub-
units  through  their  polymers  as  a  result  of  net  addition  of 
subunits  to  one  end  and  loss  of  subunits  from  the  other  
end

Sulfonylurea receptor.  ABC transporters that regulate potas-

Spo11.  Enzyme  that  creates  double-stranded  DNA  breaks  to 

sium channels that are sensitive to cytoplasmic ATP

initiate recombination during meiosis

SREBP  cleavage-activating  protein  (SCAP).  Transmem-
brane  ER  protein  that  anchors  SREBP  when  cholesterol  is 
abundant in the membrane

sRNAs.  See Small RNAs
SRP receptor.  Transmembrane receptor in ER that binds the 
complex  of  ribosome,  nascent  polypeptide  chain,  and  SRP 
prior to cotranslational translocation

SR proteins.  Protein factors important for alternative splicing 

that contain domains rich in serine-arginine dipeptides

START.  Point  in  the  G1  phase  of  budding  yeast  after  which 

cells are committed to complete the cell cycle

SUN  proteins.  Proteins  of  the  inner  nuclear  envelope  with 
SUN (Sad1p, UNC-84) domains that link lamin A inside the 
nucleus  to  KASH  domain  proteins  in  the  outer  nuclear 
envelope and cytoplasm

Super  resolution  microscopy.  Fluorescence  microscopy 
methods with resolution better than the classical Abbe dif-
fraction limit

Survival  of  motor  neurons  (SMN)  protein.  Subunit  of  a 
large  protein  complex  that  promotes  the  assembly  of  Sm-
proteins on snRNA, gene mutated in spinal muscular atrophy

SWEET carrier.  Plant carrier protein for glucose
Switch  I/II.  Regions  of  GTPases  that  change  conformation 

STAT.  Family of cytoplasmic transcription factors activated to 

depending on binding of GTP or GDP

enter nucleus after phosphorylation by JAK kinases

Stathmin.  See Op18/stathmin
Statin.  Family of drugs based on a natural product that inhibit 

HMG-CoA reductase and cholesterol biosynthesis

Stem  body.  Remnant  of  the  central  spindle  composed  of 

antiparallel microtubules in a dense matrix of proteins

Stem cell niche.  Special environments created by tissue cells 
and  the  extracellular  matrix  that  help  stem  cells  maintain 
their status as stem cells

Symporter.  Carrier  proteins  that  catalyze  movements  of 
solutes across membranes up concentration gradients at the 
expense of transport of a second solute down its concentra-
tion gradient in the same direction

Synapse.  Specializations of nerve cells for rapid communica-
tion with other nerve and muscle cells in which the sending 
cell concentrates vesicles with a neurotransmitter prepared 
for  secretion  and  the  receiving  cell  concentrates  receptors 
for that neurotransmitter

848 

GLOSSARY

Synapsis.  Intimate  pairing  of  homologous  chromosomes 

Tetanus.  Maximal contraction of skeletal muscle achieved by 

during zygotene of meiosis-I

repetitive stimulation by the motor neurons

Synaptic vesicle.  Small vesicles filled with neurotransmitter 

Tethering factors.  Proteins that tether membrane carriers to 

concentrated in presynaptic endings
complex.  Protein 

Synaptonemal 

assembled 
between  homologous  chromosomes  during  synapsis  in 
meiotic prophase; looks like railroad tracks with a third rail 
running down the center

scaffold 

Synaptotagmin.  Calcium-binding protein that triggers assem-

bly of SNAREs and membrane fusion

Syntelic  attachment.  A  form  of  defective  chromosome 
attachment  to  the  spindle  with  sister  kinetochores  both 
attached to a single spindle pole

Synthetic genetic interaction.  Phenotype of double mutants 
more  severe  than  expected  from  the  phenotypes  of  the 
individual mutations

the cytoskeleton and target organelles prior to fusion

TGF-β.  See Transforming growth factor–β
Thapsigargin.  Plant  lactone  that  inhibits  membrane  Ca2+ 

pumps

Thermogenesis.  Dissipation of energy as heat by futile cycles 
of proton transfer across the mitochondrial inner membrane 
of brown and beige fat cells

Thick  filament.  Large  bipolar  filaments  of  myosin-II  in  stri-

ated muscles; interleaved with thin filaments

Thin  filament.  Actin-based  filaments  in  muscle  cells;  inter-

leaved with thick filaments

Thin section.  Slice of plastic-embedded tissue for viewing by 

transmission electron microscopy

Tail-anchored  protein.  Protein  inserted  into  membranes 

Threshold.  Membrane potential required to activate voltage-

posttranslationally using a hydrophobic C-terminal anchor

gated Na-channels and initiate an action potential

Talin.  Adapter protein between integrins and actin filaments 

Thrombin.  Blood  enzyme  that  cleaves  the  plasma  protein 

in focal contacts

fibrinogen into fibrin during clotting

Targeting signals.  Amino acid sequences that are necessary 

Thromboxanes.  Lipid  second  messengers  derived  from 

and sufficient to guide proteins to their destinations

prostaglandin H that promote platelet aggregation

TATA box.  Promoter element for many genes transcribed by 
RNA polymerase II, with the consensus sequence TATAAAA, 
recognized by TATA box–binding protein (TBP)

TATA  box–binding  protein  (TBP).  Protein  that  binds  the 
TATA box, bending the DNA and promoting the assembly of 
the RNA polymerase preinitiation complex

Tau.  Family of microtubule-associated proteins, including tau, 
MAP2, and MAP4, characterized by conserved microtubule-
binding motifs that stabilize microtubules

Taxol.  Cancer chemotherapeutic drug from bark of the Western 

yew that binds β-tubulin and stabilizes microtubules

TBP-associated factors (TAFs).  Proteins that associate with 
TATA  binding  protein  (TBP)  at  promoters  and  activate 
transcription above basal levels

T-cell  antigen  receptor.  Cell  surface  receptors  with  highly 
variable  structures  allowing  interactions  with  major  histo-
compatibility complexes carrying a specific peptide antigen
Telomerase.  Specialized  form  of  reverse  transcriptase,  con-
taining both RNA and protein subunits that is responsible for 
maintaining DNA sequences at telomeres

Thylakoid membranes.  Chloroplast membranes containing 

proteins for photosynthesis

Thymine.  Pyrimidine  base  found  in  DNA;  H-bonds  with 

adenine

Thymosin β-4.  Small protein sequesters actin monomers
Tic  (translocon  at  the  inner  membrane  of  chloro-
plasts).  Integral membrane proteins specialized to transport 
proteins across the inner chloroplast membrane

Tight junction.  Intercellular junction that occludes the extra-
cellular space and regulates the passage of solutes between 
epithelial cells

Tim complexes (translocase of the inner mitochondrial 
membrane).  Integral and peripheral proteins of the inner 
mitochondrial  membrane  that  transport  proteins  into  the 
matrix or inner membrane

Tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs).  Secreted 

proteins that bind and inhibit matrix metalloproteinases

Tissue  stem  cells.  Stem  cells  with  the  capacity  to  renew 
themselves and to produce daughter cells that differentiate 
into a limited range of specialized cells

Telomere.  Structure at both ends of chromosomal DNA that 

Titin.  Giant  striated  muscle  protein  that  extends  between 

protects ends and ensures their complete replication

Z-disks and M-lines

Telophase.  Fifth phase of mitosis, initiated by reformation of 

T-lymphocyte.  Immune cells that promote antibody produc-

the nuclear envelope on the surface of the chromatin

tion or kill cells infected with viruses

Temperature-sensitive  (ts)  mutants.  Conditional  mutants, 
functional  at  a  low  permissive  temperature  but  not  at  a 
higher restrictive temperature

Toc  (translocon  at  the  outer  membrane  of  chloro-
plasts).  Integral membrane proteins that transport proteins 
across the outer chloroplast membrane

Tenascin.  Six-legged  adhesive  glycoproteins  in  the  extracel-

Toll-like receptors (TLRs).  Plasma membrane receptors that 

lular matrix

Teratocarcinoma.  Tumor  arising  from  germ  cells  and  con-

taining a wide variety of cell types

Termination.  Reactions  specified  by  a  termination  codon 
(UAA, UAG, or UGA) at the 3′ end of the coding sequence 
of  an  mRNA  that  complete  the  synthesis  of  a  polypeptide 
and release the polypeptide and mRNA from a ribosome

Termination  codons.  The  nucleotide  triplets  (UAA,  UGA, 

UAG) that stop peptide synthesis

Terminator.  Sequences  in  bacterial  RNAs  that  trigger  disso-
ciation  of  a  transcript  and  RNA  polymerase  when  RNA 
polymerase reaches the end of a gene or operon

bind certain repeated features of macromolecules

Tom  complex  (translocase  of  the  outer  mitochondrial 
membrane)  Integral  and  peripheral  membrane  protein 
complex of the outer mitochondrial membrane that translo-
cates polypeptides into mitochondria

Tomography.  Computational  reconstruction  of  3D  images 
from a series of images taken at a wide range of angles rela-
tive to optical axis of the microscope

Topologically associating domains (TADs).  Chromosomal 

regions that localize near one another in the nucleus

TORC1 complex.  Complex containing mTOR kinase that regu-
lates catabolism in response to amino acid levels in lysosomes

 

GLOSSARY 

849

Total internal reflection fluorescence.  Illumination method 
for  fluorescence  microscopy;  a  beam  of  exciting  light  is 
reflected from the interface between the slide and the aqueous 
specimen, setting off an evanescent wave that penetrates the 
specimens only ~100 nm

Transcription.  Synthesis  of  RNA  complementary  to  a  DNA 

template strand

Transcription  elongation.  Phase  of  transcription  in  which 
RNA polymerase synthesizes an RNA strand complimentary 
to the sequence of the template DNA

Transcription export (TREX) complex.  Complex of mRNA 
and protein that docks on the inner surface of the nuclear 
pore,  where  the  RNA  they  contain  is  subjected  to  quality 
control by the exosome prior to export to the cytoplasm

Transcription factor.  Proteins that associate with promoter 
sequences  and  are  necessary  for  specific  transcription  by 
purified RNA polymerases in vitro

Transcription initiation.  First phase of transcription includ-
ing formation of a preinitiation complex leading to an open 
complex  with  unwound  DNA  and  formation  of  the  first 
phosphodiester bond between the first two complementary 
ribonucleotides

Transcription  termination.  Final  phase  of  transcription 
when RNA polymerase reaches a signal on DNA that causes 
an  extended  pause  in  elongation,  release  of  the  nascent 
transcript, and base pairing of the DNA

Transcription  unit.  Gene-coding  and  regulatory  (cis-acting) 
DNA  sequences  that  direct  transcription  initiation,  elonga-
tion, and termination

Transcytosis.  Vesicular  transport  of  extracellular  ligands 

Translocon-associated  protein  (TRAP).  ER  protein  that 

facilitates docking of ribosomes with the Sec61 complex

Transmembrane  segment.  Part  of  a  polypeptide  that 

extends into or through a lipid bilayer

Transmission  electron  microscope.  Optical  system  that 
uses a beam of electrons focused by electromagnetic lenses 
to produce an image

Transporter  associated  with  antigen  processing  (TAP). 
ABC transporter that translocates peptides generated by the 
immunoproteasome  into  the  ER  for  loading  onto  class  I 
major histocompatibility complex I for presentation on the 
cell surface to immune cells

Transport  protein  particle  (TRAPP  I).  A  multi-subunit 

tethering protein on the Golgi apparatus for ER vesicles

Transposable  elements  (transposons).  DNA  segments 
dispersed throughout a genome, that either are now or were 
formerly capable of moving from place to place in the DNA

Transposons.  See Transposable elements
Treadmilling.  See Subunit flux
Trigger  factor.  Protein  chaperone  associated  with  bacterial 

ribosomes

Trimeric G-protein.  Signal transduction complex consisting 
of  a  GTPase  (alpha  subunit),  beta  subunit  and  gamma  sub-
unit;  GTP  binding  to  the  alpha  subunit  dissociates  it  from 
beta/gamma; both alpha and beta-gamma subunits can acti-
vate target molecules

Triskelion.  A three-legged clathrin molecule
tRNA.  See Transfer RNA
Tropomodulin.  Protein that blocks the pointed end of actin 

filaments and binds tropomyosin

through the cytoplasm across a cell

Tropomyosin.  Alpha-helical  coiled-coil  protein  that  binds 

Transducin.  Trimeric  G-protein  coupled  to  rhodopsin  in 

end to end along actin filaments

photoreceptor cells

Transesterification.  Reactions during RNA splicing coupling 
formation of a new phosphodiester bond with breaking old 
bonds, so, input of energy is not required

Transfer  RNA  (tRNA).  Small  RNA  adaptors  between  amino 
acids and mRNA codons during protein carrying a particular 
amino acid on one end and with a sequence of bases (anti-
codon)  on  the  other  end  complementary  for  the  mRNA 
codons that specify that amino acid

Transformed  cell.  Cell  lacking  normal  growth  control  that 
proliferates  as  long  as  nutrient  and  mitogen  supplies  last 
regardless  of  whether  or  not  it  is  touching  neighboring  
cells

Transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β).  Activates a serine/
threonine  kinase  receptor  and  pathways  that  promote  the 
differentiation of mesenchymal cells

Transgenic.  Organism  with  a  genome  containing  foreign 

genes

Trans-Golgi network (TGN).  Exit face of the Golgi appara-

tus specialized for sorting cargo to various destinations

Transit  sequences.  Amino  acid  sequences  that  target  poly-

peptides to chloroplasts

Translation.  Protein  synthesis  catalyzed  by  ribosomes  and 
guided by the sequence of nucleotides in mRNA that speci-
fies the sequence of amino acids in a polypeptide

Translocating  chain-associating  membrane  protein 
(TRAM).  ER  protein  that  facilitates  docking  of  ribosomes 
with the Sec61 complex

Troponin.  Trimeric protein that binds calcium and cooperates 

with tropomyosin to regulate striated muscle contraction

TRP  channels.  Family  of  cation  channels  that  serve  as  tem-

perature sensors among other functions

t-SNARE.  See SNAP receptor
T tubule.  Plasma membrane in invaginations of striated muscles 
that communicate action potentials deep into the cytoplasm
Tumor necrosis factor.  Inflammatory protein that activates 

trimeric receptors

Tumor  suppressor.  Gene  that  predisposes  to  cancer  when 
inactivated;  protein  products  are  typically  negative  regula-
tors of cell proliferation

Tunicamycin.  Drug  inhibits  glycosylation  of  dolichol  phos-
phate and therefore the formation of N-linked glycoproteins

Two-component signaling.  Signaling pathways that consist 
of a minimum to proteins, a histidine kinase and its cytoplas-
mic  substrate  protein  that  regulates  cellular  processes 
including gene expression and flagellar rotation

Two-hybrid assay.  Bioassay for protein interactions based on 
interacting proteins reconstituting a split transcription factor 
and activating a reporter gene

Type  1  transmembrane  protein.  Transmembrane  protein 
with its N-terminus facing the ER lumen or cell exterior, and 
C-terminus in the cytoplasm

Type 2 transmembrane protein.  Protein with its N-terminus 
in  the  cytoplasm,  C-terminus  facing  the  ER  lumen  or  cell 
exterior  and  transmembrane  segment  acting  as  an  internal 
signal sequence

Translocon.  Protein-conducting channel composed of Sec61 

Tyrosine-based  sorting  motif.  A  sequence  that  directs 

complex in the ER and SecYE complex in Bacteria

proteins into clathrin-coated pits on the plasma membrane

850 

GLOSSARY

Ubiquitin.  Small  protein  that  when  attached  to  the ε  amino 
group of a lysine of a target protein, either signals the target 
protein for destruction or marks it for other interactions

Ubiquitin-activating enzyme.  See E1 enzyme
Ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme.  See E2 enzyme
Unfolded protein response (UPR).  Response pathway trig-
gered by excess misfolded proteins in the ER that leads to 
activation of genes controlling ER function

Uniporter.  Carrier  proteins  that  catalyze  movements  of 

solutes across membranes down concentration gradients

Unique-sequence DNA.  DNA sequences typically present in 
a single copy per haploid genome, often coding regions of 
genes

Unprocessed  pseudogenes.  DNA  sequences  created  by 
reverse transcription of unspliced precursor mRNAs or local 
duplications  of  the  chromosome  that  generally  occur  as  a 
result of recombination between transposable elements

Uracil.  Pyrimidine base found in RNA; H-bonds with adenine
Vacuolar ATPase.  V-type H+ rotary ATPase pump that acidi-

fies the compartments along the endocytic pathway

VAMP (vesicle associated membrane protein) associated 
protein (VAP).  Transmembrane protein that anchors other 
proteins at membrane contact sites

von  Willebrand  factor.  Adhesive  glycoprotein  that  partici-

pates in platelet aggregation and blood clotting

v-SNARE.  See SNAP receptor
WASp.  Protein  that  activates  Arp2/3  complex  to  form 
branched  actin  filaments;  product  of  the  gene  mutated  in 
Wiskott-Aldrich  syndrome,  an  X-linked  immunodeficiency 
and bleeding disorder

Wee1.  Nuclear protein kinase phosphorylates Y15 in the active 
site of Cdk1, inhibiting its function as part of a mechanism 
that holds Cdk1-cyclin B1 poised for a burst of activation

Wnt,  wingless.  Secreted  growth  factors  that  influence  stem 

cell proliferation and many steps in tissue morphogenesis

Wortmannin.  Inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
WW  domain.  Adapter  domains  bind  certain  phosphoserine 

and phosphothreonine peptides; found in many proteins

Xeroderma  pigmentosum  (XP).  Human  genetic  disease 
with hypersensitivity to sunlight and predisposition to skin 
cancer  caused  by  defects  in  nucleotide  excision  repair  
genes

Xist.  Large  non-coding  RNA  expressed  by  the  inactive  X 

chromosome and playing a key role in its inactivation

Z-disk.  Anchoring site for the barbed ends of striated muscle 

actin filaments

van der Waals interaction.  Distance-dependent attraction or 

Zeta-associated protein–70 kD (ZAP-70).  Cytoplasmic tyro-

repulsion of closely spaced atoms

VASP.  An actin polymerase that promotes elongation of actin 

filament barbed ends

Vesicle-tubule  carrier  (VTC).  Pleomorphic  transport  inter-

mediates ferry secretory cargo from ER to Golgi apparatus

Vesicular  transport.  Delivery  of  cargo  between  donor  and 
acceptor  membrane-bound  compartments  involving  small 
vesicles or tubular-vesicular carriers

Vimentin.  Intermediate filaments in mesenchymal cells
Vinblastine.  Drug from periwinkle that interferes with micro-

tubule dynamics; useful in cancer treatment

Vinculin.  Actin-binding adapter protein in focal contacts
Voltage-gated  channel.  Ion  channels  with  a  domain  that 
senses  the  electrical  potential  across  the  membrane  and 
opens the channel gate above a certain threshold

sine kinases mediate signals from lymphocyte receptors

Zinc  finger  TF.  Transcription  factors  composed  of  small 
domains stabilized by a single Zn2+ ion that each recognize 
three base pairs in DNA sequences

Zip1  (mammalian  SYCP1).  Forms  transverse  filaments  ori-
ented perpendicular to chromosome axes between the axial 
elements in mature synaptonemal complex

ZO-1, -2, and -3.  Adapter proteins between claudins in tight 

junctions and the cytoskeleton

Zonula adherens.  Ring-shaped adhesive junction around the 
apex of epithelial cells based on cadherins and anchored to 
cytoplasmic actin filaments

Zygotene.  Second  stage  of  meiotic  prophase;  pairing  of 
homologous chromosomes and clustering of telomeres gives 
rise to a “bouquet” arrangement of chromosomes

Index

Page numbers followed by “f ” indicate figures, “t” indicate tables, and “b” indicate boxes.

A
A kinase-anchoring proteins (AKAPs), 429
A site of tRNAs, 213
AAA ATPase family, 623, 623f, 625b, 636f
Aa-tRNA synthetases. See Aminoacyl-tRNA 

(aa-tRNA) synthetases.

A-band, 673f
Abasic sites, 750
ABC transporters, 244t, 250–252, 250f–251f, 

346–347, 347f

degradation by proteasomes and, 401
protein translocation across plasma 

membrane by, 311, 314f

type I, 314f, 315
ABP-280, 590t–591t
Abp1p, 590t–591t
Abscission, 771f, 775–776, 776f–777f
Accidental cell death, 798, 798b

programmed cell death vs., 797–800, 

797f–800f

Acetylated N-terminus, 34f
Acetylcholine (ACh), 291f, 295

neuromuscular junctions and, 294
skeletal muscle contraction and, 678

Acetylcholine (ACh) receptors, 294

muscarinic, 293–294
nicotinic, 273–275, 274f, 279

Acetylcholinesterase, 294
Acetyl-CoA, 319, 321f
ACh. See Acetylcholine (ACh).
ACh receptors. See Acetylcholine (ACh) 

receptors.

Achiasmate segregation, 785
Acrosomal process, 652f, 666f
Actin, 575–576, 576f

Actin filaments (Continued)

Actomyosin apparatus, organization of 

initiation of, 587
mechanical properties of cytoplasm and, 

(Continued)

thick filaments and, 671–672, 674–675, 

588–589, 589f

organization of, 587–588, 588f
polymerization and, 579–580, 579f–580f, 

582–583, 583f

related proteins (Arp), 578–579, 578f, 

581–582, 582f, 641, 641f

stabilizers of, 586b
subunit recycling and, 587
termination of, 587
turnover of, 585–587, 586b, 586f

Actin isoforms, 578, 578f
Actin-binding proteins, 580–585, 581f
actin filament nucleation factors as, 

581–582, 582f

binding sides of filaments, 584
capping, 583–584, 583f, 590t–591t
classification of, 590t–591t
crosslinking, 584, 584f, 590t–591t
filament-severing, 583f, 584, 588
functional redundancy of, 584–585
inhibitors of, 586b
intermediate filament binding, 590t–591t
membrane associated, 590t–591t
microtubule binding, 590t–591t
monomer-binding, 580–581, 581f, 

590t–591t

α-actinin, 584, 590t–591t, 682t
Actin-myosin motors, 640t
Actin-related proteins (Arps), 578–579, 578f, 

581f

actin filament nucleation factors and, 

581–582, 582f

674f, 682t

thin filaments and, 671–674, 673f–674f, 

682t

titin filaments and, 675, 675f

Actomyosin ATPase cycle, 626–628, 627f
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), 

145–146
ADAMa, 520
ADAMTS, 520
Adaptation, 412

bacterial chemotaxis and, 483f, 485–486, 

485f

odor detection and, 464f, 465–466
robust, 486

Adapter domains, molecular recognition by, 

437–440, 437t, 438f–439f

adapters with proline-rich ligands and, 

439f, 440

EH domains and, 440
PDZ domains and, 440
phosphorylation-sensitive adapters and, 

439–440

Adapters, nuclear traffic and, 155–156, 157f, 

804–805

Adaptive immune system, 500, 501f
Adaptive immunity, 500–503, 501f–502f
Adaptor proteins, 361, 362f
ADAR (adenosine deaminase acting on 

RNA), 195f, 204f

Adducin, 590t–591t
Adenine, 42, 44f
Adenosine deaminase acting on RNA 

bulk movement of cytoplasm driven by, 

adapter proteins and, 584–585

(ARAD), 195f, 204f

647–648, 648f–649f

Action potentials, 261

triggering of, by cyclic nucleotide-gated 

247–248

polymerization of, 579–580, 579f–580f, 

channels, 465

640t

Activated state of seven-helix receptors, 

cytoplasm movements driven by, 649, 

413, 413f

650f

Activation loop, 428, 473f, 475

F0F1-ATPase family and, 244t, 246f
F-type ATPases and, 245f–246f, 247
P-type cation pumps and, 244t, 

248–250, 248f–249f

of skeletal muscle, 682t
substitute for nematode sperm, 666–667, 

667f

unpolymerized, pool of, 587

Actin filaments, 6f, 12–13, 13f, 574–575, 

575f–577f, 579

assembly of, 69–70, 69f
exotic eukaryotic motility systems and, 

of receptor tyrosine kinase catalytic 

rotary ATPases in, 243–248, 244t, 

domain, 414–415

Active chromatin hubs, 135
Active state, channels and, 265
Activins, 417

signal transduction and, 481

245f–247f

V-type ATPases and, 247, 247f

synthesis of, 21. See also Photosynthesis.

by dual photosystems, 328
by oxidative phosphorylation, 317, 

Actomyosin apparatus, organization of, 

319–322, 320f–321f

671–676, 672f–673f

Adenosine triphosphate-gated channels,  

666b–667b

intermediate filaments and, 675–676, 675f

267

 851

contractile ring of, 771–772
critical concentration of, 579–580
dynamics of, in live cells, 585–588, 586b, 

586f, 588f

evolution of, 577–578, 578f
molecule of, 577, 577f
movements of organelles based on, 

648–649, 649f

in cardiac pacemaker cells, 686b, 686f
channels generating, 290
description of, 289–290, 289f
membrane depolarization and, 290
myelin sheaths and, 291, 291f
skeletal muscle contraction and, 678–680, 

679f–681f

Adenosine diphosphate (ADP), 42
Adenosine monophosphate (AMP), 42
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 3–4, 44f

membrane pumps driven by, 243–248, 

244t

ABC transporters and, 244t, 250–252, 

250f–251f

A-type ATP synthases and, 245f, 

852 

INDEX

Adenylyl cyclases, 444, 445f, 687
metabolic regulation and, 471
odor detection and, 465

ADF/cofilins, 581, 584–585, 584f, 587, 

590t–591t, 655f, 656

Adherens junctions, 490, 529, 529f, 529t, 

543, 550–551, 552f

Adhesion

cellular. See Cellular adhesion.
pseudopods and, 654f, 656–657, 656f

Adhesion proteins, 9, 525, 525f
Adhesive glycoproteins, 523

in extracellular matrix, 514–517, 515f, 

523

fibronectin as, 515–516, 515f–516f, 

523

tenascin as, 516–517, 517f

Adipocytes, 491f, 492, 493f
ADP. See Adenosine diphosphate (ADP).
ADP-ribosyl cyclase, 457, 457f
ADP-ribosylation Factor GTPases, 355, 356f
Adrenal gland, 687
Adrenaline, metabolic regulation and, 

469–472, 470f, 471t

β-adrenergic receptor kinase, 472
Adrenergic receptors, 469–470

metabolic regulation through, 469–472, 

470f, 471t

Affinity chromatography, 91b, 91f, 96
Agarose gels, 89b, 108f
Aggrecan, 513–514, 514f, 522, 556–557
Aging, telomeres and, 121–122, 122f
Agonists, 410, 446–447
Agrin, 523, 684t
Agrobacterium, 313–315
AKAPs. See A kinase-anchoring proteins 

(AKAPs).

Alanine, structure of, 33f
Aldosterone, amiloride-sensitive channels 

and, 267

Algae

blue-green, 20
green, 22–23, 23f, 660
red, 22–23, 23f

Alleles

definition of, 86b
mutant, conditional, 87

All-trans retinal, 468
ALT (alternative lengthening of telomeres), 

120

Alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT). 

See ALT (alternative lengthening of 
telomeres).

Alternative splicing, 193–194, 195f
Alzheimer disease, 602, 602f
protein misfolding in, 219b

Amide nitrogen, 34f
Amide protons, 35–36
Amiloride-sensitive channels, 266–267
Amino acids, 29

properties of, 32–35, 33f–35f
sequence of, transmembrane sequence 

identification by, 234b

Amino groups, 34, 34f
Amino terminus, 36
Aminoacyl-tRNA (aa-tRNA) synthetases, 

210–212, 211f

γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), 291f
synaptic transmission and, 295

α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole 

propionate (AMPA) receptors

glutamate and, 273
long-term potentiation and, 296–297, 296f

Apical plasma membrane, 551
tight junctions and, 543–546
trafficking to plasma membrane and, 

372–373, 372f

APL. See Acute promyelocytic leukemia 

(APL).

Ammonia channels, 276–277, 276f, 277b
Amoeba proteus, restriction point in, 719, 

Aplastic anemia, 493–494
Apoptosis, 12, 696, 798b, 798f

719f

AMP. See Adenosine monophosphate (AMP).
AMPA receptors. See α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-
methyl-4-isoxazole propionate (AMPA) 
receptors.

Amphiphilic, fatty acids as, 229
Amphitelic attachment, 763, 763f
Amyloid fibrils, 219b
Anaphase, 700, 755, 755f–756f, 767–770, 

767f

biochemical mechanism of sister 

chromatid separation in, 767–768, 
768f

cytoplasm during, 709
mitotic spindle dynamics and 

chromosome movement during, 
768–770, 769f

Anaphase A, 700, 767–769
Anaphase B, 700, 767–769
Anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome 

(APC/C), 710t–711t

formation of, 708
geminin degradation by, 731f, 732
inactivation of, 707–708, 708f
spindle checkpoint and, 764–765, 764f

autophagy and, 399
execution phase of, 798b, 799–800, 799f
extrinsic pathway of, 804–805, 810–812, 

811f

genetic analysis of, 803–807, 803f

p53 gene and, 812, 813f
protein regulators and effectors of, 

804–807, 805f–806f, 806b

signals and pathways of apoptosis and, 

803–804

human disease and, 814
intrinsic pathway of, 803–804, 803f, 

808–810, 808f, 810f

latent phase of, 798b, 799, 799f
necrosis vs., 797–800, 797f–800f

Apoptosomes, 804–805
Apoptotic bodies, 798b, 799–800
APs. See Assembly proteins (APs).
Aquaglyceroporins, 277
Aquaporins, 276f, 277
Aqueous phase of cytoplasm, 51–52, 52f
Arabidopsis thaliana

cellulose synthase genes of, 568, 568f
genome of, 109t
mitochondria of, 318

Anchoring fibrils, 506f, 509–510, 509f, 521
Anemia, aplastic, 493–494
Anesthetics, local, sodium channels and, 

Arachidonic acid, 449, 450f–451f
Archaea, 3, 3f–4f

evolution of, 15f, 19f

270

Aneuploidy, 765, 784b, 794–795, 795t
Anillin, 590t–591t
Animal cells, 4f

Golgi apparatus in, 367f

Animals, time line for divergence of, 16f
Annelid worms, 25
Annexin-II, 590t–591t
Anopheles gambiae, genome of, 109t
Antagonists, 410
Anterograde movements, 643–644
Anterograde traffic, 351f, 352
Anterograde transport, 640t, 643–646, 

643f–645f

Antiapoptotic activities, 798b
Antibodies, 43f, 500, 502
Anticodon, 210
Antidiuretic hormone, 277
Antigen-presenting cells, 477f, 478–479, 

503

Antigen-presenting compartment, 381
Antigens, 500

Rh, 276–277, 277b

Antiporters, 254, 254f–255f, 256–257, 257t
AP1 complex, 361
AP2 complex, 361
Apaf-1, 803–805, 803f, 809, 810f
APC gene, 530
APC/C. See Anaphase-promoting complex/

cyclosome (APC/C).

Apical domain of tight junctions, 543–545

ARE-mediated decay, 190f
AREs. See A+U-rich elements (AREs).
Arf, 355, 356f, 366f, 373f
Arf1, 355, 356f, 365–367, 366f, 369
Arf 6, 355
Arf GTPases, 355, 356f, 360f, 361, 365–366, 

442t

Arginine, structure of, 33f
Arp2/3 complex, 581, 582f, 590t–591t, 

655f, 656

Arps. See Actin-related proteins (Arps).
Arrest point, 702b, 702f
Arrestins, 413f, 414, 466, 469
β-arrestins, 472
ARS core consensus sequence, 729–730, 

730f

Arteriosclerosis, 475
Arthropods, 25
Asparagine, 33f, 342, 343f
Aspartate, phosphorylation and, 425
Aspartic acid, structure of, 33f
β-aspartyl phosphate intermediate, 248
Assembly proteins (APs), 361, 362f
Association rate, 54–55, 67
Asters in prophase of mitosis, 757, 757f
Astral microtubules, 759–760
AT-AC introns, 193, 193f
Ataxia-telangiectasia, 749t
ATF6, 345–346, 345f
Atlastins, 333f, 334
AT-like disorder, 749t

 

ATM, DNA damage response and, 701,  

Basal bodies

701f, 724, 724f–725f, 748f–749f, 
750–753

ATP. See Adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
ATP synthases, 20, 321f, 322

membrane pump driven by, 245f, 

247–248

ATP-gated channels, 267
ATR, DNA damage response and, 724, 724f, 

748f–749f, 750–753

Atrial natriuretic factor, 419
Atrial natriuretic peptide, 267
Atrioventricular node, 685–686, 685f
Attachment in phagocytosis, 378–379
A-type ATP synthases, membrane pumps 

and, 245f, 247–248
Atypical cadherins, 529t
A+U-rich elements (AREs), 190f, 197
Aurora-B protein kinase, 756
Autoinhibitory propeptides, 519
Autolysosomes, 398–399, 398f
Autonomously replicating sequences (ARS 

elements), 729–730, 729f–730f

Autophagic vacuoles, 398–399
Autophagosomes, 398, 398f
Autophagy, 302, 396, 696, 797, 798b, 814

degradation by, 397f–398f, 398–399
Autosomal negative mutation, 620–621
Autosomes, 791
Axial elements, 788
Axon hillock, 295
Axonal transport

fast, 640t, 643–644, 643f–644f
slow, 640t, 644–646, 645f

Axonemes, 595, 659–665, 660f–664f
Axons, 464

growth cone of, 654–655, 654f

Axopodia, 653f, 654
Axostyles, 667, 667f

B
B lymphocytes, 500, 501f
Bacillus subtilis, 47–48, 311

cytokinesis in, 777b
genome of, 109t

Bacteria, 3, 3f–4f. See also specific Bacteria.

cytokinesis in, 774f, 777b
evolution of, 15f, 19f
flagella of

assembly of, 70–71, 70f–71f
motility by, 665–668, 668f–669f
gram-negative, outer membrane of

protein insertion in, 313
secretion across, 314f

Bacterial chemotaxis, 483f–485f, 485–486

adaptation and, 483f, 485–486, 485f
extended range of response and, 486
temporal sensing of gradients and, 485, 

485f

Bacteriochlorophylls, 326
Bacteriophage T4, 68, 73–74, 73f
Bacteriopheophytin b, 326
Bacteriorhodopsin, light-driven proton 

pumping by, 235f, 242–243, 243f, 412

Baculovirus IAP repeat (BIR), 805
Barr bodies, 128f, 129–130
β-barrels, 39, 305–306

axonemal, 593, 594f, 595–596, 605, 608, 

662–665, 663f–664f

bacterial, 668, 669f
Basal lamina, 489, 509

of extracellular matrix, 509f, 517–519, 

518f, 519t

Base excision repair, 750, 751f
Bases of nucleotides, 42, 44f
Basic region zipper, 179f
Basolateral domains of plasma membrane, 

543–545

Basolateral plasma membrane

tight junctions and, 543–546
trafficking to plasma membrane and, 

372–373, 372f

Basophils, 494t, 497f, 499–500
Batrachotoxin, 279
Bax, 812
Bcl-2 proteins

apoptosis and, 803, 803f, 808–809, 808f
cancer and, 809, 809f

Beige fat cells, 491f, 492–493
Benzodiazepines, 275
Berns, Sam, 152f
Bestrophin channels, 275–276, 275f
B-form DNA, 43–44, 46f
BH domains, 806b, 808
Biglycan, 522
Bilayer, lipid. See Lipid bilayer.
Bim1p, 611
BiP, 341–342
Bipolar attachment, 762
Bipolar kinesin-5 motors, 635
BIR. See Baculovirus IAP repeat (BIR).
Bivalents, 790
Blood cells

origin and development of, 493–495, 

494f, 494t

platelets, 493–496, 494f, 494t, 496f
red, 494f, 494t, 495
white, 497, 497f

Blood clotting, 496, 540
Blotting, 89b
Blue-green algae, 20
BMPs. See Bone morphogenetic proteins 

(BMPs).

Bonds. See Chemical bonds.
Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), 417, 

557

signal transduction and, 481

Bones, 557–561, 558f

bone cells and, 559–561, 559f–560f
diseases of, 565, 570
extracellular matrix of, 558f, 559, 559t
fractures of, 566–567
skeleton formation and growth and, 

561–565

embryonic, 562–564, 562f–563f
remodeling and, 564–565, 564f

Bordetella pertussis, 313–315
Bouquet stage of meiosis, 780f, 785–786, 

785f

BPAG1, 552–553, 552f, 590t–591t, 619t
BPAG2, 552–553, 552f
BPAG1e, 619
Brachiopods, 25

INDEX 

853

Brain, odor detection and, 464f, 466, 466b
Brain damage in stroke, 814, 814f
Branch point, 192
Breast cancer, predisposition to, 749t
Brefeldin A, 355, 356f
Bright field microscopy, 76, 76t, 77f
Bromodomains, 178, 178t
Brown fat cells, 491f, 492–493
B-type cyclins, 743, 743f

initiation of prophase and, 745–746,  

746f

subcellular localization changes and, 744f, 

745, 746f

BUB (budding uninhibited by 
benzimidazole), 764–765

Budding yeast. See Saccharomyces 

cerevisiae.

Bulky DNA adducts, 750, 751f
Bullous pemphigoid, 552–553, 552f
α-Bungarotoxin, 274, 279

C
CΓ channels, 295
Ca2+ calmodulin, 428–429
Ca2+-ATPase, 248–250, 248f–249f, 292f, 294
CAD domain, 529, 530f–531f
CAD nuclease, 807–808, 807f
Cadherins, 489–490, 526, 528–532, 

529f–532f, 529t

CADPribose. See Cyclic adenosine 

diphosphate-ribose (cADPribose).

Caenorhabditis elegans

apoptosis in, 803–804, 803f
centromeres in, 140
centrosomes of, 606
cytokinesis in, 772
dynein heavy chain of, 637
genome of, 109–110, 109t
meiosis in, 782
seven-helix receptors of, 412

Cajal bodies, 145, 145t, 194, 202
CAK (Cdk-activating kinase), 705–706, 706f, 

710t–711t, 744

Calcineurin, 429–430, 430t, 478–479
Calcium as second messenger, 409, 

452–459

calcium dynamics in cells and, 457–458, 

459f

calcium targets and, 458–459, 462
calcium-release channels and, 453f, 

454–457, 455f–457f, 455t

overview of calcium regulation and, 

452–453, 453f, 453t, 462

removal from cytoplasm, 453f, 454, 454t

Calcium channels, 453, 453f

agonist-gated, 453f, 454–457, 454t–455t

inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor 
and, 454–456, 455f–456f, 455t

ryanodine receptor, 454, 455f, 455t, 

456–457, 457f

voltage-gated, 270–271, 271t, 292f, 
294–295, 453f, 454, 455f, 455t, 
456–457, 686b

Calcium spark, 458
Calcium spike, contraction and, 681, 690, 

690f

Calcium-ATPase pump, 453, 453f, 679

854 

INDEX

Calcium-release channels, 271–272, 453f, 

Cargo proteins, 352–353, 352f

454–457, 455f–457f, 455t

Calcium-sensitive contractile fibers, 666, 

666f

Calcium-sensitive fluorescent dyes, 458
Caldesmon, 584, 590t–591t
Calmodulin, 41, 42f, 272, 457, 466, 584, 

683, 690–691, 690f

clathrin coats and, 361
Golgi apparatus and, 367–369, 368f
protein-based machinery and, in 

membrane trafficking, 352–353, 352f, 
357–362, 358f–359f, 361f

in secretory transport from endoplasmic 

reticulum, 365, 367

Calmodulin-regulated spectrin associated 

sorting from trans-Golgi network and, 

proteins. See CAMSAPs.

Calnexin, 343
Calnexin cycle, 343–344, 344f, 347f
Calponin, 590t–591t
Calreticulin, 343, 454
Calsequestrin, 454
Calspectin, 590t–591t
Caltractin, 666
Calveolae-mediated endocytosis, 377, 378f, 

382–384, 382f–383f

Calveolin, 382
CAMP. See Cyclic adenosine 

3′,5′-monophosphate (cAMP).
CAMP response element, 185–186
CAMP response element-binding (CREB) 

protein, 185–186

CAMP signaling. See Cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate (cAMP) signaling.

CAMP-gated channel, 272, 444f, 462
CAMSAPs, 604
Cancer

Bcl-2 proteins and, 809, 809f
breast, predisposition to, 749t
centrosomes and, 608–609, 608f–609f
G1 regulation and, 699–700, 725–726
restriction point and, 699–700, 721–722, 

722f–723f

telomeres and, 121–122, 122f

Cancer stem cells, 717
Cap 100, 590t–591t
Cap recognition complexes, 214
Capacitance of membrane, 282
Capping proteins, 590t–591t, 655f, 656

heterodimeric, 583–584
CapZ, 590t–591t, 673, 682t
Carbohydrates

complex, 29, 48
structure of, 48–51, 50f–51f
synthesis of, 328
α-carbons, 34, 34f
Carbonyl oxygen, 34f, 35–36
Carboxyl groups, 34, 34f
Carboxyl terminus, 36
Carboxyl-terminal domain, 168–169
CARD. See Caspase recruitment domain 

(CARD).

Cardiac glycosides, 249–250
Cardiac muscle, 672f, 685–691

congestive heart failure and, 688, 688f
contractile apparatus of, 685, 685f
excitation contraction coupling and, 679, 

680f, 685f

molecular basis of inherited heart disease 

and, 682t, 688

pacemaker cells of, 685–687, 685f–686f, 

686b

smooth and, 672f, 688–691, 689f–690f

Cardiomyopathies, hypertrophic, 688

371–375, 371f, 373f

Carrier proteins, 226, 253–259, 370

definition of, 241
diversity of, 255f, 257–259
physiology and mechanisms of, 253–257, 

253f, 255f, 257t

of antiporters, 254, 254f–255f, 

256–257, 257t
discovery of, 255b
of symporters, 254–256, 254f–255f, 

257t

of uniporters, 253f–254f, 254, 256, 

257t

structures of, 255f
tools for studying, 257t

Carrier vesicles, 352, 352f, 359, 366f

multivesicular bodies and, 377–378, 386, 

388f–389f, 389–390

protein sorting and

by lipid gradients, 354
protein-based machinery for, 354–355, 

357f, 358–359

Carriers, membrane-enclosed, 352, 352f
Cartilage, 556–557, 556f–557f
diseases involving, 557, 570
specialized forms of, 557, 557f

CAS, 158
Caspase recruitment domain (CARD), 806b, 

809, 810f

Caspases

apoptosis and, 804–805, 805f
degradation by proteasomes and, 402
effector, 804, 805f
initiator, 804, 805f
natural inhibitors of, 805–807, 806b, 806f
Catalytic cycle in transcription elongation, 

173, 174f

Catalytic domain of myosin, 624–626
Catastrophe, 598
α-catenin, 529–530, 551, 552f
β-catenin, 529–530, 531f–532f, 532, 551, 

552f

γ-catenin, 529–530
Cathepsin K, 560–561
Cation channels, synaptic transmission and, 

295

Caulobacter crescentus, intermediate 

filaments of, 615

Caveolae, 377, 378f, 382–384, 382f–383f, 

390, 390f–391f

Caveolae-dependent uptake, 377
Caveolin, 382
Caveolin-3, 684t
Caveosomes, 390f
Cavins, 382, 383f
Cbl, 475–476
C-CAM (C-cell adhesion molecule), 528t
CD45, 431–432, 478, 538t

CD2 cells, 528t
CD4 cells, 478, 503, 528t
CD8 cells, 478, 503, 528t
CD31 cells, 528t
CD34 cells, 538t
CD43 cells, 538t
CD44 cells, 538t
CD58 cells, 528t
Cdc2. See Cdk1.
Cdc6, 731, 732t
Cdc20, 707–709, 708f, 710t–711t, 764f, 

765, 766f

Cdc25, 432, 704, 710t–711t, 744–745
Cdc42, 588, 588f
CDC mutants. See Cell division cycle (CDC) 

mutants.

Cdc25A, 744–745, 745f
Cdc25C, 744–745, 745f

subcellular localization changes and, 744f, 

745

CD11/CD18 cells, 533t
CD44E cells, 538t
CDE I, 114, 114f, 141
CDE II, 114, 114f, 141
CDE III, 114, 114f
Cdk1, 704, 710t–711t, 743, 743f–744f

initiation of prophase and, 745–746, 746f
subcellular localization changes and, 744f, 

745

Cdk inhibitor p21, 714b, 753
Cdk inhibitors, 706–707, 710t–711t, 714b, 

714f, 715

Cdks. See Cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks).
CDNA. See Complementary DNA (cDNA).
Cdt1, 731, 732t
Ced (cell death abnormal) mutants, 803, 

803f, 806b

Cell adhesion molecules

immunoglobulin, 489–490, 526–528, 

528f, 528t

integrin, 532, 533t
selectin, 536t

Cell adhesion proteins, 9, 525, 525f

growth cones and, 659

Cell autonomous nucleases, 807–808, 807f
Cell cortex, 4f, 575, 640f, 647, 648f, 649
Cell culture, 86–87
Cell cycle, 7–8, 8f, 13–14, 63f, 697–710, 

698f

apoptosis and, 812, 813f
biochemical basis of transitions during, 

701–707

cyclin-dependent kinases and, 701, 

702b–704b, 702f–705f, 710t–711t

cyclins and, 701–703, 705f–706f
negative regulation of cyclin-dependent 
kinase structure and function and, 
706–707, 706f, 710t–711t

positive regulation of cyclin-dependent 
kinase structure and function and, 
703–706, 706f

centrosome duplication during, 8f, 

605f–607f, 606–607

changing states of cytoplasm during, 

709–710, 709f

factors essential for progression of, 
discovery of, 704b, 704f–705f

 

INDEX 

855

Cell cycle (Continued)

Cellular motility (Continued)

CERT. See Ceramide transport protein 

genetics for study of, 702b, 702f
perturbation of, programmed cell death 

produced by extension of surface 
processes, 651–654, 652f–653f

(CERT).

CFTR. See Cystic fibrosis transmembrane 

and, 802

by cilia and flagella, 659–665, 660f–665f

regulator (CFTR).

phases of, 697–700, 698f–699f, 699b

bacterial flagella and, 665–668, 

checkpoints and, 699b, 700–701, 701f
G0 phase as, 696, 698f, 700, 713–715, 

713f–714f, 714b, 718–719, 718f

G1 phase as. See G1 phase.
G2 phase as. See G2 phase.
M phase as, 697–700, 698f, 699b
S phase as. See S phase.

phosphatases in counter-balancing of 

Cdks and, 706f, 707, 710t–711t

progression, control of, 700–701, 701f
protein destruction in control of, 

707–708, 708f

regulation of, principles of, 697, 698f
regulation of meiotic events, 792
in vitro studies of, 703b, 703f

Cell death

accidental, 798

programmed cell death vs., 797–800, 

797f–800f

programmed. See Apoptosis; Programmed 

cell death.

Cell division cycle (CDC) mutants, 702b, 

702f, 704

Cell functions, strategy for understanding, 

59–60

Cell lines, 86–87
Cell shape, cellular motility in alteration of

contraction and, 653f, 654
extension of surface processes and, 

651–654, 652f–653f

Cell walls of plants, 567–569, 567f–568f
Cells

eukaryotic. See Eukaryotic cells.
prokaryotic vs. eukaryotic, 4f, 8–9
universal principles of, 4–8, 5f–8f

Cellular adhesion, 525–541, 525f

adhesion receptors and

cadherin family of, 528–532, 529f–532f, 

529t

668f–669f

CGMP. See Cyclic guanosine 

3′,5′-monophosphate (cGMP).

exotic eukaryotic motility systems and, 

CGMP-gated ion channels, 418, 421–423, 

665, 666b–667b

468–469, 469b

primary cilia and, 660f, 665, 665f

by pseudopod extension, 654–659, 654f

chemotaxis of motile cells and, 

657–658, 658f

growth cone guidance and, 658–659, 

659f

CGMP-stimulated protein kinases, 418, 428f
CGN. See Cis-Golgi network (CGN).
α-chains in extracellular matrix, 506–508
Channelrhodopsins, 243
Channels, 226, 241–242. See also Calcium 

channels; Membrane channels.

lamellar motility on flat surfaces and, 

Chaperone pathway, prokaryotic protein 

654f–657f, 655–656

myosin and, 657
substrate and, 654f, 656–657, 656f

Cellulose, 49, 51f, 568
Cellulose synthases, 568, 568f
CEN sequences, 113–114, 114f
CENP-A, 115–117, 117f, 140, 140f
CENP-B, 111, 116, 116f, 140, 140f
CENP-C, 117f, 140–141, 140f
CENP-E, 634f, 635, 635t
CENPs (centromere proteins)
of budding yeast, 141, 141f
mammalian, 140–141, 140f

CENP-T, 140–141
Central nervous system, synapses of, 293f, 

294–295

modification by drugs and disease, 295
modification by use, 295–297, 296f

Central pair, 660
Central spindle, 759–760

of microtubules, 769

Centralspindlin, 772
Centrifugation, 88–90
Centrin, 666
Centrioles, 604–605, 605f, 607f, 612
Centriolin, 612
Centromere anticentromere antibodies, 140f
Centromere proteins (CENPs). See CENPs 

(centromere proteins).

export via, 313, 314f

Chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA), 399
Chaperones, 209
molecular, 68
prokaryotic protein export via, 313, 314f
protein folding assisted by, 218–221, 

220f–222f

Chaperonins, 220–221, 220f, 222f
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, 550, 550t
Charge movement

net current through ion-selective channels 

and, 283

redistribution by electrical conduction, 

284, 284f

for small cells, 282–283
through channels, rate of, 283

CheA, 482b, 483f, 484–485
CheB, 485–486, 485f
Checkpoints

cell cycle and, 14, 696, 699b, 700–701, 

701f

G1 phase and, 700–701, 723–725, 

724f–725f

G2 phase and, 700, 747–750, 747f–751f, 

749t, 750b–753b

G2/M, from DNA damage response to, 

749f, 750–753

intra-S, 739–740, 739f
spindle, 764–765, 764f

dystroglycan/sarcoglycan complex as, 

Centromeres, 10, 107, 108f, 113–117, 140, 

Chemical bonds, 58–59, 58f

538, 538t

galactosyltransferase as, 537, 538t
identification and characterization of, 

527

integrin family of, 532–536, 533f–534f, 

533t, 537f, 539f

with leucine-rich repeats, 537–538, 

538t, 539f

selectin family of, 536–537, 536f–537f, 

536t

140f

of budding yeasts, 114, 141, 141f
definition of, 108b
DNA of, 114–115, 114f, 141f

mammalian, 115–117, 116f–117f, 141

point centromere, 114
regional, 114
RNAi at, 141–142
variation in organization among species, 

covalent, 58, 58f

in nucleic acids, 42–43, 44f–45f

electrostatic (ionic), 58f, 59
hydrogen, 58, 58f
peptide, 32, 34f
phosphodiester, 42, 44f
Chemical genetics, 99–100
Chemiluminescence, 89b
Chemiosmotic cycles, 256, 285–286, 285f, 

113–115, 114f

321f, 325f

dynamic, 538–541, 541f

Centrosomes, 4f, 12–13, 63f, 593, 594f, 

Chemoattractants, growth cones and, 

of leukocytes to endothelial cells, 537f, 

604–610, 604f–605f

538–540

platelet activation and, 539f, 540
self-avoidance in nervous system and, 

540–541

general principles of, 525f–526f, 526–

527

IgCam and, 527–528, 528f, 528t

Cellular motility, 651–669, 651f, 652t

by cell shape changes

produced by contraction, 653f, 654

cancer and, 608–609, 608f–609f
duplication of, 8f, 605f–607f, 606–607
functions of, 607–608, 607f–609f
proteins of, 605–606, 605f–606f, 612
of yeasts, 608f–609f, 609–610

Ceramide, 419–420, 446

synthesis of, in endoplasmic reticulum, 

348

658–659

Chemokine receptors, 497
Chemokines, 497
Chemotaxis

bacterial, 483f–485f, 485–486

adaptation and, 483f, 485–486, 485f
extended range of response and, 486
temporal sensing of gradients and, 485, 

485f

Ceramide signaling pathways, 452, 452f
Ceramide transport protein (CERT), 349

of motile cells, 657–658, 658f

Chemotherapeutic killing of cells, 803

856 

INDEX

CheR, 485–486, 485f
CheY, 37f, 482b, 483f–485f, 484
CheZ, 484–485, 485f
Chiasmata, 785f, 786–787, 789–790, 

789f–790f

ChIP-seq. See Chromatin 

immunoprecipitation coupled with 
high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq).

Chk1, 749f, 750–753
Chk2, 750–753
Chlamydomonas, 22–23

axonemes of, 662, 663f–664f, 664
centrosomes of, 605
flagella of, 660

Chloride channels, 275–276, 275f–276f
Chlorophyll, 323
Chlorophyll b, 326
Chloroplast stroma, 324, 324f–325f, 327f, 

328

Chloroplasts, 301–302, 323–328

inner membrane of, 324
origins and evolution of, 22–23, 23f
outer membrane of, 324
photosynthesis and

carbohydrate synthesis and, 328
energy capture and transduction by 

photosystem I, 327–328

energy capture and transduction by 

type II photosystems and 
photosystem II, 326, 327f

light and dark reactions and, 325–326, 

325f

light harvesting and, 326–327, 327f
oxygen-producing synthesis of NADPH 

and ATP by dual photosystems, 
328

plastids and, 324
structure and evolution of 

photosynthesis systems, 323–324, 
324f–325f

protein transport into, 303f, 307–309, 

308f

stroma of, 324, 324f–325f, 327f, 328

Cholera toxin, 436–437, 436t
Cholesterol, 229–230, 230f, 353–354, 

353f–354f

covalently bound, 420
endoplasmic reticulum and, 347–348, 

347f–348f

homeostasis of, 402–404, 403f–404f

Chondrocytes, 491f

in cartilage, 556, 556f
hypertrophic, 562–564, 563f

Chordata, 25
Chromatids, 108b, 108f, 700

separation of, in anaphase of mitosis, 

767–768, 768f

sister, 107, 108b, 700, 756

Chromatin, 4f, 123

definition of, 108b
functional compartmentation of, 128–130, 

128f–129f, 131f, 134

Chromatin (Continued)

nucleosomes and

modification and regulation of function 

of, 123–125, 125f

regulation of structure of, by histone 

N-terminal tails, 125–127, 
125f–126f

TADs and, 134–137, 134f
transcription and, 177–184, 177f, 178t
combinatorial control and, 183–184
gene-specific eukaryotic GTFs and, 

178–180, 179f

transcription factor activity and, 

180–184, 180f–184f

Chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled 

with high-throughput sequencing 
(ChIP-seq), 177, 177f

Chromatography, 90, 91b, 91f
Chromodomains, 129, 178, 178t
Chromokinesins, 635
Chromonema fibers, 130–131
Chromosomal passenger complex (CPC), 

763–764, 763f

Chromosome banding, 137f
Chromosome conformation capture (3C), 

133–134, 134f

Chromosome cycle, cell cycle and, 697
Chromosome number

diploid, 86b, 779, 784b
haploid, 86b, 779, 784b

Chromosome scaffold, 136–137, 138f
Chromosome territories, 143
Chromosomes

acrocentric, 108f
attachment to spindle, in prometaphase 

Chromosomes (Continued)

pseudogenes and, 112
secondary constriction of, 147
submetacentric, 108f
telocentric, 108f
telomeres and, 117–122

aging and, 121–122, 122f
cancer and, 121–122, 122f
replication of ends of chromosomal 

DNA, 118–120, 118f–119f

structural proteins of, 120–121, 

120f–121f

structure of telomeric DNA, 118

transposons and, 110–112, 111f

CIC chloride channels, 275, 275f–276f
Cilia, 8, 12

motility by, 659–665, 660f–661f, 663f, 

665f

exotic eukaryotic motility systems and, 

665, 666b–667b

primary, 608, 660f, 665, 665f
rotary, 665
sensory, 464

Ciliopathies, 665
Circadian cycle, visual system and, 469b
Cis-Golgi network (CGN), 367
Citric acid cycle, 319, 321f
CKIs (cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors), 

706–707, 710t–711t, 714–715

CLASPs, 603, 611
Clathrin coats, 302, 357–362, 357f–358f, 

362f–365f

Clathrin-coated pits, 383f, 384–386
Clathrin-coated vesicles, 378f, 383f–384f, 

384–385

of mitosis, 761–764, 762f–763f

Clathrin-mediated endocytosis, 377, 378f, 

centromeres and, 113–117, 116f–117f

variation in organization among 

383f–384f, 384–385

compartments associated with, 386–390, 

species, 113–115, 114f

definition of, 108b
dicentric, 117f
DNA of, 107–108, 107f–108f

packaging in interphase nuclei, 

130–131, 131f

telomeric replication of, 118–120, 

118f–119f

gene organization in, 108–110, 109t, 110f
holocentric, 115
homologous, 779

in prophase I of meiosis, 785–787, 

785f–786f

human genome segmental duplications 

and, 112–113, 113f

387f–389f

Claudins, 538t, 544t, 545, 545f
Cleavage furrow

constriction in cytokinesis, 774–775
signals regulating position of, in 

cytokinesis, 771–772, 771f

Cleavage stimulus, 771f, 772
CLIP-170, 603, 611
Clonal expansion, 502
Cloning, 90–92, 93f
Closed complex, 169–170, 170f
Closed mitosis, 755
Clostridium botulinum, 436–437
Clostridium difficile, 436–437
CMA. See Chaperone-mediated autophagy 

interphase, with clearly resolved loop 

(CMA).

structures, 132–133, 133f

kinetochore and, 139–140, 139f
lampbrush, 132, 133f, 787
metacentric, 108f
mitochondrial, 318
mitotic, 135–136, 136f–137f, 147
morphology of, 107, 108f
movement of, in anaphase of mitosis, 

CMG helicase, 731, 731f, 732t
C-NAP1, 612
Cnidarians, 25
Coactivators, 126, 126f, 182, 182f
Coat protein I. See COPI coat.
Coat protein II. See COPII coat.
Coated pits, 4f, 383f, 384
Coatomer complex, 359–360, 360f
α-Cobra toxin, 279
Cockayne syndrome, 749t
Codons, 209–210
Cohesin, 137–138, 139f, 767, 768f, 790–791
Cohesin complex, 790–791

inner nuclear membrane proteins and, 

640t, 768–770, 769f

150f

macromolecular assembly and, 5–6
30-nm fiber, 130–131, 131f, 135
nuclear lamina and, 151f

nomenclature for, 107
nonhistone proteins and, 136–139, 136f, 

138f–139f

polytene, 132–133, 133f

INDEX 

857

Connexins, 538t, 544t, 547–549

mutations in, 550, 550t

Connexons, 547–548, 549f
ω-conotoxin, 271, 271t, 279
µ-Conotoxins, 279
Consensus target sequence, 426–428
Constitutive heterochromatin, 115, 129, 

129f

Cristae, 318, 318f
Critical concentration, 69–70

of actin, 579–580
of GTP-tubulin dimers, 597

Crossbridges, skeletal muscle contraction 

and, 676f–677f, 677–678

Crossing over, 784b
Crosslinking of actin filaments, 584, 584f, 

Constitutive protein turnover, 393–396, 

589, 589f, 590t–591t, 657f

394f–395f, 395t

Constitutive secretion, 22f, 467f
Constriction

primary, 113
secondary, 147

Contact inhibition, 530, 658, 722
Contactin, 528t
Contractile ring, 575–576, 700, 771–772

assembly and regulation of, in cytokinesis, 

772–774, 775f

active, of muscles, 676–677, 677f
of cardiac muscle, 685, 685f
in cell shape changes, 653f, 654
graded, 678, 678f
of skeletal muscle

molecular basis of, 676–678, 676f–677f
regulation of, 678–682, 678f–681f

of smooth muscle, 688–691, 689f–690f

COPI coat, 357–362, 357f–358f, 360f–361f
COPII coat, 357–362, 357f–359f
Corals, 25
Core enzyme, 167
Core histones, 123, 124f
Core mannose oligosaccharide, 343f–344f, 

344

Core protein, 512
Corepressors, 126
Corona of kinetochore, fibrous, 139, 139f
Coronin, 590t–591t
Cortex, 4f, 575
Cotranslational translocation, 335–342

Crossover interference, 790
Crossovers, 782, 783f, 784b
Cryomicroscopy, electron, 82
CSF. See Cytostatic factor (CSF).
C-Src, 427f, 472, 479b
CTCF, 130, 131f, 134–137
C-terminal domain (CTD), 190–191
C-terminal propeptides, 507–508
C-terminus, 36
Curare, 274
Cutis laxa, 512
Cyanobacteria, 19f, 20

photosystems of, 324, 324f–325f

Cyclic adenosine diphosphate-ribose 

(cADPribose), 457–458, 457f

Cyclic adenosine 3′,5′-monophosphate 

(cAMP)

odor detection and production of, 465
as second messenger, 443–445, 444f–445f

Cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) 

signaling, 185–186

Cyclic guanosine 3′,5′-monophosphate 

(cGMP), 443–445, 444f

Cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases, 418
Cyclic nucleotide-gated ion channels, 272, 

272f, 443–444, 465

Cyclic nucleotides, 409, 443–445, 444f–445f
Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors. See Cdk 

inhibitors.

Cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks), 429, 

695–696, 701, 702b–704b, 702f–705f, 
710t–711t

Common ancestor, 3, 3f, 15, 15f

Contractions

 

Coiled-coils, 40, 40f, 70, 135, 672–674
Colchicine, 595b
Collagen fibrils, 489, 555
Collagens, 505–510, 505f–506f

diseases involving, 519, 519t, 556
fibrillar, 506f–507f, 507, 521–522

biosynthesis and assembly of, 507–509, 

508f–509f, 521

linking, 506f, 509–510, 509f
sheet-forming, 506f, 509, 509f, 521
type I, 556, 559, 559t
type II, 556, 556f
type IV, 517–519, 518f, 519t
type VI, 684t
type XVII, 552–553

Color vision, 467b
Committed progenitor cells, 715–716
Committed stem cells, 494, 494f, 496, 

715–716

last, divergent evolution from, 16f–17f, 

17–18, 18b

Compartmentalization, eukaryotic, 21–22, 

21f–22f

Compartments

chromatin, 134
endocytic, 386–390, 387f–390f

Complementary DNA (cDNA), 32, 88

isolation of genes and, 90–92, 92f–93f
Complementary surfaces, specificity by 

multiple weak bonds on, 64–65

Complementation, 86b, 87
Complex carbohydrates, 29, 48
Complex I, 322
Complex II, 322
Complex III, 322
Concentration

critical, 69–70

of GTP-tubulin dimers, 597

of reactants, 54b

Concentration gradients, 284
Condenser lens, 76, 77f
Condensin, 137, 138f–139f, 756–757
Conditional lethal phenotype, 702b
Conditional mutant alleles, 87
Conditional mutants, 99–100
Conditional mutations, 86b, 100
Conductance, 283
Cone photoreceptors, 467–468, 467b
Confocal microscopy, 79–81, 79f–81f
Conformational changes, 30, 41, 42f, 49f, 

426, 427f

Congestive heart failure (CHF), 688, 688f
Connective tissues, 555–570

bones as, 557–561, 558f

cells of, 559–561, 559f–560f
diseases of, 565, 570
extracellular matrix of, 558f, 559, 559t
fractures of, 566–567
skeleton formation and growth of, 

561–565, 562f–564f

cartilage as, 556–557, 556f–557f, 570
collagen fibrils in, 507f
dense, 555–556, 555f
loose, 555, 555f
plant cell walls as, 567–569, 567f–568f
wound repair in, 565–567, 566f

insertion of membrane proteins into ER 

phosphatases’ role in counter-balancing 

bilayer, 339f, 340

lipid-anchored protein association with 
cytoplasmic surface of ER and, 340

Sec61 complex and, 337–338, 338f
signal recognition particle and signal 

recognition particle-receptor and, 
335–337, 336f–337f

signal sequences and, 335
of soluble proteins into lumen of ER, 

338–340, 339f

tail-anchored protein association with ER 
membrane and, 335t, 341–342, 342f

Covalent bonds. See Chemical bonds.
Covalent crosslinking, 508f–509f, 509
Covalently attached lipids, 433–434
Covalently bound cholesterol, 420
Covariance method, 45–46
COX-2. See Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2).
CPC. See Chromosomal passenger complex 

(CPC).

CpG islands, 129–130
Crane, H. R., 64b
CREB protein. See CAMP response 

of, 706f, 707, 710t–711t

regulation of structure and function of
negative, 706–707, 706f, 710t–711t
positive, 703–706, 706f

Cyclins, 429

B-type, 743, 743f

initiation of prophase and, 745–746, 

746f

subcellular localization changes and, 

744f, 745, 746f

cell-cycle transitions and, 701–703, 

705f–706f, 710t–711t

Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), 450
Cyclophilin, 429–430
Cyclosporine, 429–430, 479
Cysteine, structure of, 33f
Cysteine disulfide, 34f
Cystic fibrosis, 346, 402
Cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator 

(CFTR), 250, 252, 287–288, 287f, 402

Cytochalasins, 585, 586b
Cytochrome bc1, 322
Cytochrome C, 321f, 322, 323f, 325f, 

element-binding (CREB) protein.

326–328, 327f, 809, 810f

CRISPR/Cas9 system, 94–95

Cytochrome oxidase, complex IV, 322

858 

INDEX

Cytochrome P450, 333
Cytokine receptors, 416–417, 417f, 421–423

signal transduction and, 479–481, 480f

Cytokines, 479, 566f
Cytokinesis, 8f, 14, 696–699, 698f, 755, 

755f–756f, 771–776, 771f, 773f–774f

in bacteria, 774f, 777b
cleavage furrow constriction in, 774–775
contractile ring assembly and regulation 

in, 772–774, 775f

exit from mitosis and, 776–777
membrane addition and abscission in, 

771f, 775–776, 776f–777f

in plants, 772, 773f, 776b
signals regulating cleavage furrow 

position and, 771f, 772

Cytoplasm

aqueous phase of, 51–52, 52f
changes during prophase of mitosis, 

757–758, 757f–758f, 757t

changing states of, during cell cycle, 

709–710, 709f

mechanical properties of, 588–589, 589f
movement of

driven by actin and myosin, 647–648, 

648f–649f

driven by actin polymerization, 649, 

650f

DDR. See DNA damage response (DDR).
Deadenylases, 197
Deafness, 546, 550
Death domain (DD), 806b, 811
Death effector domain (DED), 806b, 811
Death-inducing signaling complex (DISC), 

805

Debranching enzyme, 192
Decapping complex, 197
Deconvolution, 79, 79f
Decorin, 514f, 522
Decoy receptors, 561, 812
DED. See Death effector domain (DED).
Defensins, 379–381
Degradation, 393–405

by constitutive protein turnover, 

393–396, 394f–395f, 395t

lipid turnover and, 402–404, 403f–404f
in lysosomes, 396–399, 397f

autophagy and, 397f–398f, 398–399
delivery to lysosomes via endocytic 

pathway in, 397–398, 397f

of mRNAs, 190f, 196–197, 196f
by proteasomes, 399–402, 400f

elimination of misfolded proteins from 

endoplasmic reticulum and, 402

intracellular proteolysis and, 402
motifs specifying ubiquitination and, 

traffic between nucleus and, 152–159, 

395t, 401–402

154f–157f

defective, disorders associated with, 

159

mRNA export and, 158
nuclear import and export components 

and, 155–157, 157f

regulation of transport across nuclear 

envelope, 158–159, 159f

single import cycle and, 157–158, 157f

Cytoplasmic dyneins, 612, 624t, 637
Cytoplasmic linker protein (CLIP)-170.  

See CLIP-170.

Cytoplasmic polyadenylation, 196
Cytoplasmic protein tyrosine kinases

ubiquitination modification of proteins 

and, 394–396, 394f–395f, 395t

of protein in endoplasmic reticulum, 344, 

344f

Degrons, 99, 393
Delayed early” genes, 718–719, 718f
Delta proteins, 420
Dematin, 590t–591t
Dendritic cells, 499, 503
Dense bodies in smooth muscle, 688–689, 

689f

Dense connective tissue, 555–556, 555f
Dense fibrillar component of nucleolus, 147
Deoxyribonucleic acid. See DNA 

JAKs, 416–417, 417f, 421–423, 479–481, 

(deoxyribonucleic acid).

480f

Src family, 427f–428f, 428–429, 431–432, 

437, 479b

T-lymphocyte pathways through, 477f, 

478–479, 479b, 480f–481f

Cytoplasmic ring, nuclear pore complex, 

151, 153f

Cytoplasmic streaming, 640t, 647–648, 

648f–649f

Cytosine, 42, 44f

deamination to uracil, 195, 195f

Depactin, 590t–591t
Dephosphorylation, 429–432, 439
Depolarization, membrane, 290
Depression, long-term, 295–296
Desensitized state, 294
Desmin, 614, 615t, 675–676, 675f
Desmocollins, 529t, 544t, 551
Desmogleins, 529t, 544t, 551
Desmoplakin, 551, 619, 619t
Desmosine, 511
Desmosomes, 490, 529, 529f, 529t, 543, 

Cytoskeleton, 12–13, 12f–13f, 574–575, 

544f, 544t, 551, 552f

576f, 586b, 619, 620f

Cytostatic factor (CSF), 792–793, 793f
Cytotactin, 523
Cytotoxic T lymphocytes, 500, 501f

D
DAG. See Diacylglycerol (DAG).
Dam1 complex, 141
Dark reactions, 326
Dark-field microscopy, 76–78, 76t
Daughter centrioles, 605, 605f

Destrin, 590t–591t
Deubiquitylating enzymes (DUBs), 395–396, 

399–400

Development, transcription factors in, 185f, 

186

Developmentally defective cells, 801–802, 

801f

DHP receptors. See Dihydropyridine (DHP) 

receptors.

Diabetes mellitus, 375
Diacylglycerol (DAG), 446, 452

Diakinesis, 787
DIC microscopy. See Differential 

interference contrast (DIC) microscopy.

Dicer, 202
Dictyostelium discoideum

cAMP as extracellular signal in, 444–445
chemotaxis in, 657–658, 658f
histidine kinases in, 482

Differential interference contrast (DIC) 

microscopy, 76, 76t, 77f, 79f

Diffusion, facilitated, 254
Diffusion coefficients, 54–55
Diffusion potentials, 281, 281f
Digitalis in congestive heart failure, 688, 

688f

Dihydropyridine (DHP) receptors, 679
Dihydropyridines, 279
Dilated cardiomyopathies, 688
Dileucine-based sorting motifs, 361
Dilysine sorting motif, 360
Dimerization, induced, 415, 416f
Diploid chromosome number, 86b, 779, 

784b

Diplotene, 785f, 787
Directed maturation, 379
Directionality/recycling factors, 156–157
DISC. See Death-inducing signaling complex 

(DISC).

Diseases. See also specific diseases..

of bone, 565, 570
of cartilage, 557, 570
centrosomes and, 608–609, 608f–609f, 

612

of cilia, 665
collagen and, 519, 519t, 556
DNA repair defects associated with, 749t, 

753

elastic fibers and, 512
endoplasmic reticulum and, 334, 346
of endoplasmic reticulum folding, 346, 

402

gap junctions in, 550, 550t
GTPases in, 436–437, 436t
heart, molecular basis of, 682t, 688
immunodeficiency, 503
kinases and, 429, 430f, 430t
meiotic defects and, 794–795, 795f, 795t
mitochondria and, 322–323, 323f
nuclear envelope defects leading to, 

150–151, 152f

peroxisomal biogenesis disorders as, 309, 

328–329

programmed cell death and, 814, 814f
red blood cell, 495
seven-helix receptors and, 414, 414t
of skeletal muscle plasma membrane, 

682t, 683–684, 683f, 684t

tau and, 602, 602f

Disjunction, 784b
Disks of outer segment of photoreceptors, 

468

Dissociation rate, 53–55, 67
Dis1/TOG proteins, 603, 611
Disulfide bonds, 34f
Disulfide isomerase, 342, 507–508
Divergent evolution, 41–42
DNA2. See Fen1 (Flap endonuclease).

 

DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid), 3–4, 5f

bases of, 42, 44, 44f
B-form, 43–44, 46f
chromosomal, 107–108, 107f–108f
packaging in interphase nuclei, 

130–131, 131f

telomeric replication of, 118–120, 

118f–119f

complementary, 32
damage to, checkpoints and. See 

Checkpoints.

linker, 127
of mammalian centromeres, 115–117, 

116f–117f

protein binding to specific domains of, 

179–180, 179f

repetitive sequences of, 110–111
replication. See DNA replication.
satellite, 111
secondary structure of, 43–45, 46f
sequences associated with chromosome 

scaffold and nuclear matrix, 136–137, 
138f

sugar of, 42
synthesis of, mechanism of, 734–735, 

735f, 736b

unique-sequence, 110

DNA damage checkpoints, 701, 701f
G1 phase and, 723–725, 724f–725f
G2 phase and, 700, 747–750, 748f–751f, 

749t, 750b–753b
intra-S, 739–740, 739f

DNA replication checkpoint, 701
DNA topoisomerase IIα, 138–139
DNA transcription, 163, 167
DNA-dependent protein kinase, 752f, 753
DNase I, 590t–591t
Dolichol phosphate, 342–343, 343f
Domains in proteins, modular, 41–42, 43f
Dominant mutations, 86b, 87
Dominant negative gene, 87
Dominant negative mutants, 100
Dominant negative mutation, 620–621
Dopamine, 291f
Double arginine pathway, prokaryotic 

protein export via, 315

Double helix, 43–44, 46f
Double-strand break repair, 749t, 750f, 

751–753, 752f

Down syndrome, 794
Downregulation, 381–382
DP1/YOP1 proteins, 333–334, 333f
Drebrin, 590t–591t
Drosha, 202
Drosophila melanogaster

centromere organization of, 115
centrosomes of, 606
chromosomes of, 120
cytokinesis in, 772, 775–776, 777f
dynein in, 639, 641
genome of, 109–110, 109t, 110f
growth cone guidance, 659, 659f
Hedgehog receptors of, 420
meiosis in, 782, 787–788

DNA damage response (DDR), 747–750, 

DUBs. See Deubiquitylating enzymes 

748f–751f, 749t, 750b–753b

(DUBs).

DNA “libraries”, 90–92
DNA methyltransferases, 129f, 204
DNA polymerase δ, 728, 732t, 734, 735f
DNA polymerase ε, 728, 732t, 734
DNA polymerases, 90, 92f, 111, 118, 118f, 

127, 624t, 727–728, 732t, 734–735, 
735f, 736b, 747, 747f

DNA repair in vertebrates, 750b–753b, 750f

base excision repair, 750, 751f
of double-strand breaks, 749t, 750f, 

751–753, 752f

mismatch, 751, 751f
nucleotide excision repair, 749t, 750, 751f

DNA replication, 727–741, 727f–728f

bidirectional, origin of, 727
in Escherichia coli, 728, 728f, 736b
higher-order organization of, in nucleus, 

Duty cycle, myosins and, 628
Dynactin complex, 637, 640–641, 641f, 

642t

Dynamic instability, 595, 598, 598f, 599t, 

600f

Dynamin, 361, 384–385
Dynamin-related GTPases, 437, 442t
Dyneins, 574, 595, 624t, 631, 635–637, 

636f, 639

axonemal, 661, 661f–662f
evolution of, 623, 623f
mechanochemistry of, 636, 636f–637f
superfamily of, 636–637, 636f

Dysferlin, 684t
Dystroglycans, 517, 538, 538t, 684, 684t
Dystroglycan/sarcoglycan complex, 538, 

683, 683f, 684t

735–739, 737f–738f

Dystrophin, 590t–591t, 683–684, 683f, 684t

histone protein synthesis and, 740–741, 

740f

intra-S checkpoint and, 739–740, 739f
mechanism of DNA synthesis and, 

E
E1 enzyme (ubiquitin-activating enzyme), 

394, 395f, 396

734–735, 735f, 736b

E2 enzyme (ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme), 

between meiosis I and meiosis II, 

394–396, 395f

suppression of, 792
origins of, 728–731, 728f

in mammalian cells, 730–731, 

730f–731f

in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, 729–730, 

E3 enzyme (ubiquitin ligase), 394–396, 395f, 

395t

E2F, 720–721, 721f, 802
E site of tRNAs, 213
Early endosomal compartment, 387–389, 

729f–730f

388f

INDEX 

859

Early recombination nodules, 784, 789f
EB-1, 603, 611
Ebola, 389
E-cadherins, 529t, 550–551
Echinoderms, 25
ECM. See Extracellular matrix (ECM).
EDEM, 344
Editing

genome, 85t, 94
of mRNAs, 195–196, 195f

Edman degradation, 32
EEA1. See Early endosome antigen 1 (EEA1).
EEG. See Electroencephalogram (EEG).
Effector caspases, 804, 805f
Effectors

DNA damage checkpoints and, 701, 748, 

753

for G-protein isoforms, 435t

EFs. See Elongation factors (EFs).
EF-Tu. See Elongation factor Tu (EF-Tu).
EGF. See Epidermal growth factor (EGF).
EH domains, 440
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, 556
Eicosanoids, 446, 450, 450f
EJC. See Exon-junction complex (EJC).
Elastic cartilage, 557
Elastic fibers in extracellular matrix, 489, 

510–512, 510f–511f, 555

Electrical circuits in photoreceptors, 469b
Electrical potential, 261
Electrical recordings, 279–280, 280f
Electrical synapses, 291, 546
Electroencephalogram (EEG), 280
Electromyography (EMG), 280
Electron cryomicroscopy, 82
Electron microscopy, 77f, 82–85, 83f–84f
Electron transport pathway, 319, 321f, 325f
Electrophoresis, gel, 88, 89b, 89f

pulsed-field, 108f

Electrostatic bonds, 58f, 59
Electrostatic interaction, 31–32, 32f, 58, 237
11-cis retinal, 412f, 413, 467f, 468
Elongation

actin filament, 579, 579f
in DNA replication, 736b
in transcription, 165–166, 165f, 171f, 

172–173, 174f

in translation, 215–217, 216f–217f, 220f

Elongation factor Tu (EF-Tu), 432f, 433
Elongation factors (EFs), 215, 432f, 433, 442t
Embryonic stem (ES) cells, 715
Emerin, 619t, 684t
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy, nuclear 

envelope defects and, 150, 152f
EMG. See Electromyography (EMG).
Emi1, 708–709, 708f–709f
Endocannabinoids, 451–452
Endocytic pathway, 302, 397–398, 397f
Endocytosis, 377–392, 378f

calveolae-mediated, 377, 378f, 382–384, 

382f–383f

clathrin-mediated, 377, 378f, 383f–384f, 

384–385

compartments and pathways of, 386–390, 

prereplication complex assembly and, 

Early endosome antigen 1 (EEA1), 387–388, 

387f–390f

731–733, 731f, 732t, 733f

388f

macropinocytosis and, 377, 378f, 

signals starting, 732t, 733–734, 733f–735f

Early endosomes, 377–378, 386, 387f–388f

380f–381f, 381–382

860 

INDEX

Endocytosis (Continued)

Engulfment in phagocytosis, 378–379, 

Escherichia coli (Continued)

nonclathrin/noncaveolar, 377, 385–386, 

379f–380f, 380b

385f

phagocytosis and, 377–381, 378f–379f
alternative fates of ingested particles 

and, 379–381, 381b
attachment in, 378–379
engulfment in, 378–379, 379f–380f, 

380b

fusion with lysosomes and, 379–381, 

379f

signaling and, 389f–390f, 390–391
viruses and protein toxins as 

Enhancer elements, 180–184, 181f–183f
Enhancer mutations, 96–97, 96f
Enhancers, 163
Entactin, 523
Entamoeba, mitochondria of, 318
Entamoeba histolytica, 21
Enterotoxin, 419
Enthalpy, 57
Entropy, 57
Entry face of Golgi apparatus, 367
Environmental conditions, regulation of 

“opportunistic endocytic ligands” in, 
391, 391f

assembly by, 68

Enzymes

DNA replication in, 728, 728f, 736b
flagella of, 665–668, 669f
genome of, 109t, 110
histidine kinases in, 482–483
Lac Y symporter of, 255f
poly(A) tails in, 198
SRP of, 313

ESCRT-I, -II, and -III (endosomal sorting 

complexes required for transport-I, -II, 
and -III), 389, 389f

E-selectin, 536t
ESEs. See Exonic splicing enhancers (ESEs).
Espin, 590t–591t
ESTs. See Expressed sequence tags (ESTs).
Eucarya, 3, 3f, 15f
Euchromatin, 128–130, 128f
Euglena, 23–24, 324
Eukaryotes

enhancer elements of, 180–184, 

181f–183f

evolution of

compartmentalization in, 21–22, 

21f–22f

divergence from last eukaryotic 

common ancestor, 23–24, 24f

in first billion years, 19f, 20–23, 

21f–23f

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER), 6, 7f, 8, 10–11, 

11f, 301–302, 331–351, 331f

ceramide synthesis in, 348
cholesterol synthesis, metabolism, and, 

347–348, 347f–348f

functions of, 331–333, 332f, 332t
lipids in

biosynthesis of, 346
transport of, 341t, 348–349, 349f

membrane contact sites of, 334, 334f, 

341t

protein degradation in, 344, 344f
protein folding and oligomerization in, 

342–344, 343f–344f
diseases and, 346, 402

protein translocation into, 335–342

insertion of membrane proteins into ER 

bilayer, 339f, 340

lipid-anchored protein association with 
cytoplasmic surface of ER and, 340

posttranslational, 335, 340–341, 341f
Sec61 complex and, 337–338, 338f
signal recognition particle and signal 

recognition particle-receptor and, 
335–337, 336f–337f

signal sequences and, 335
of soluble proteins into lumen of ER, 

338–340, 339f

tail-anchored protein association with 

ER membrane and, 335t, 341–342, 
342f

refilling with calcium, 453f, 454
rough, 4f, 332, 332f
secretory transport to Golgi apparatus 

from, 352, 352f, 365–367, 366f

shaping and fusion proteins, 333–334, 

333f

smooth, 333, 678–679, 679f–680f
stress responses of, 345–346, 345f
structure of, 331f–332f, 332–333, 332t, 

336f

Endosomal membrane system, 377–378
Endosome/lysosomal system, sorting from 

trans-Golgi network and, 373–374, 
373f

Endosomes, 11, 396, 498f

early, 377–378, 386, 387f–388f
early/recycling, 377–378, 386, 388f
late, 377–378, 386, 388f, 390
recycling, 377–378, 386, 388f

Endothelial cells, cellular adhesion of 

leukocytes to, 537f, 538–540

debranching, 192
mechanism of, analysis of, 60–62, 60f–61f
oxidative, 309
reactions producing lipid second 

messengers, 445–446

recombination, 501–502
ubiquitin-activating, 394, 395f, 707
ubiquitin-conjugating, 394, 395f, 707

Eosinophils, 491f, 494t, 497f, 499
Epiblast cells, 715
Epidermal growth factor (EGF)

receptor tyrosine kinase activation by, 

414

receptor tyrosine kinase pathway through 

multicellular, 3, 3f, 24–25, 24f

Ras to MAP kinase, 473f–474f, 
474–475, 483f

Epidermal keratins, 618, 618f, 619t
Epidermal stem cells, 716, 717f
Epidermolysis bullosa, 509–510, 620
Epifluorescence, 78–79, 79f
Epigenetic activation, 114–115
Epigenetic controls, 5
Epigenetic regulation, 117f, 125
Epinephrine, 469–472, 470f, 471t, 687
Epiphyseal plate, 562–564, 563f
Epithelial transport, 286–288, 286f

cystic fibrosis as transporter disease and, 

287–288, 287f

food production and, 288
of glucose, in intestine. kidney, fat, and 

muscle, 286–287, 286f

of salt and water in kidney, 287

Epitope tags, 90
EpsinR, 374
Equational division, 779
Equilibrium, sedimentation, 88–90
Equilibrium constants, 29, 53, 55–56, 97–98
Equilibrium potential, 281
ER. See Endoplasmic reticulum (ER).
ER export domains, 332, 365, 366f
ERAD (ER-associated protein degradation), 

344, 344f, 402

ER-associated degradation (ERAD), 344, 

344f, 402

Erythrocytes, 494f, 494t, 495
Erythropoietin, 416, 494–495
ES cells. See Embryonic stem (ES) cells.
Escherichia coli

ABC transporters in, 250–251
bacteriophage T4 assembly and, 73–74, 

73f

cytokinesis in, 774f, 777b

general transcription factors of, 170, 

178–180, 179f

origin of, 3, 3f, 19f, 20, 21f
promoter proximal elements of, 176f, 

180–184, 181f

RNA processing in. See MRNA (messenger 
RNA): synthesis of; RNA (ribonucleic 
acid)..

transcription factors of, gene-specific, 

176–180, 176f, 179f
translation in, 214f, 216f

Eukaryotic cells

cell cycle of, 7–8, 8f, 13–14
cytoskeleton and motility apparatus of, 

12–13, 12f–13f

endoplasmic reticulum of, 7f, 8, 10–11, 

11f

exotic eukaryotic motility systems and, 

665, 666b–667b

Golgi apparatus of, 8, 11, 11f
lysosomes of, 8, 11
mitochondria of, 3f, 8, 11–12, 11f
nucleus of, 10, 10f
organization and functions of, 9–14, 9f
peroxisomes of, 8, 12
plasma membrane of, 6f, 9, 9f
prokaryotic cells vs., 4f, 8–9
ribosomes and protein synthesis in, 7f, 10

EVH1 domains, 439f, 440
Evolution

of actin family, 577–578, 578f
connexin gene families and, 548–549
divergent, 41–42
of genes for intermediate filament 
proteins, 613f, 614–615, 615t
of membrane channels, 262, 263f

Evolution of life on earth, 15–26

of chloroplasts, 22–23, 23f

INDEX 

861

F
Facilitated diffusion, 254
Facultative heterochromatin, 128–130, 128f
FADD (Fas-associated protein with a death 

domain), 842b, 811

Flavin adenine dinucleotide, reduced form 

of (FADH2), 319

Flippases, 233
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), 

78, 132f–133f

FADH2. See Flavin adenine dinucleotide, 

Fluorescence microscopy, 76t, 77f, 78, 

 

Evolution of life on earth (Continued)

divergent evolution from last common 
ancestor and, 16f–17f, 17–18, 18b

of eukaryotes, 19f, 20, 21f

divergence from last eukaryotic 

common ancestor, 23–24, 24f

in first billion years, 19f, 20–23, 

21f–23f

multicellular, 24–25, 24f

of membrane-bounded organelles, 21–22, 

21f–22f

of mitochondria, 20–21, 317–318, 

317f–318f

reduced form of (FADH2).

Farnesyl, 149, 230
Farnesyl-pyrophosphate, 347, 347f
Fasciculin II, 659
Fascin, 590t–591t
Fas-ligand, 419, 419f, 811

in normal and diseased cells, 812

prebiotic chemistry leading to RNA World 

Fast axonal transport, 640t, 643–644, 

and, 15–17, 16f

of prokaryotes, 18–20, 19f

Excess cells, programmed cell death and, 

802

Excitable cells, 261
Excitable membranes, 289–291, 289f, 291f. 

See also Action potentials.

Excitation contraction coupling, 679, 680f, 

685f

Excitatory neurotransmitter carriers, 258
Excitatory synapses, 295, 296f
Excited state, 326
Exocytosis, focal, 379
Exome, 110
Exon definition, 192
Exonic splicing enhancers (ESEs), 192
Exon-junction complex (EJC), 197
Exons, 109, 163, 192
5′ exonuclease, 190f
Exosome (RNA processing), 190f, 196–197, 

196f

Exosomes, 389–390
Exotic eukaryotic motility systems, 665, 

666b–667b
Expansins, 569
Expressed sequence tags (ESTs), 88
Extracellular electrical measurements, 280
Extracellular ligands, 538t

of integrins, 533–535, 533t
of selectins, 536t

Extracellular matrix (ECM), 9, 9f, 489, 

505–523

adhesion to, 525, 551–553, 552f
adhesive glycoproteins in, 514–517, 515f, 

523

fibronectin as, 515–516, 515f–516f, 523
tenascin as, 516–517, 517f

basal lamina of, 509f, 517–519, 518f, 519t
of bones, 558f, 559, 559t
collagen in, 505–510, 505f–506f, 521

fibrillar, 506f–509f, 507–509, 521
linking, 506f, 509–510, 509f
sheet-forming, 506f, 509, 509f, 521

elastic fibers in, 489, 510–512, 510f–511f
glycosaminoglycans in, 512–514, 

513f–514f, 522

643f–644f

Fat, glucose transport in, 286–287
Fat cells

brown and beige, 491f, 492–493
white, 491f, 492, 493f

Fatty acid oxidation, 319, 320f
Feedback loops, 409
Feedback mechanisms, 7–8, 8f
Fen1 (Flap endonuclease), 734–735, 750f, 

752–753

FFAT motif, 334
Fibrillar centers, 147
Fibrillar collagens, 506f–507f, 507, 521–522

biosynthesis and assembly of, 507–509, 

508f–509f, 521

Fibrillin microfibrils, 510, 510f
Fibrinogen, 523
Fibroblasts, 489, 491–492, 491f–492f, 566, 

566f

Fibroglycan, 522
Fibromodulin, 522
Fibronectin receptors, 533t
Fibronectins

in extracellular matrix, 515–516, 

515f–516f, 523

plasma, 516
tissue, 516, 516f

Fibrous corona of kinetochore, 139, 139f
Fibulin, 523
Filaggrin, 619t
Filamin, 590t–591t, 656, 657f
Filopodia, 575, 651–654, 652f–653f
First-order reactions, 53–54, 54b, 54f
FISH. See Fluorescence in situ hybridization 

(FISH).

Fission yeast. See Schizosaccharomyces 

pombe.

5′ cap, 189–190, 191f, 210, 210f
5′ splice site, 192–193, 193f
5S RNA, 167, 167f
FK506, 429–430
FK-binding protein, 429–430
Flagella, 12
bacterial

assembly of, 70–71, 70f–71f
motility by, 665–668, 668f–669f

matrix metalloproteinases in, 519–520, 

eukaryotic, motility by, 659–660, 660f, 

519f

662, 662f–664f, 664

79f–82f, 81t, 130–131, 131f

Fluorescence photoactivation localization 

microscopy (FPALM), 81–82, 81t

Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching 

(FRAP), 78, 146f, 237–238, 238f

Fluorescence resonance energy transfer 

(FRET), 78, 327

Fluorescent dyes

Ca2+-sensitive, 458
for membrane potential measurement, 

279–280

Fluorescent probes, 78, 79f
F-met-leu-phe, 421–423
FMLP. See N-formyl-methionine-leucine-

phenylalanine (FMLP).

Focal adhesion kinase, 534, 534f
Focal adhesions, 534f, 535, 543
Focal contacts, 534, 534f, 544t, 551–552
Focal exocytosis, 379
Fodrin, 590t–591t
Food production, epithelial transport and, 288
Formins, 582–583, 583f, 656
N-formyl-methionine-leucine-phenylalanine 

(FMLP), 658

Forskolin, 444
FPALM, 81–82, 81t
Fractures, 566–567
Fragmin, 583–584, 583f, 590t–591t
FRAP. See Fluorescence recovery after 

photobleaching (FRAP).

Free energy, 56–57
Freeze-fracture method, 83f–84f, 84
FRET. See Fluorescence resonance energy 

transfer (FRET).

Fruit fly. See Drosophila melanogaster.
FtsZ, 595, 774f, 777b
F-type ATPases, membrane pumps and, 

245f–246f, 247

Fukutin, 684t
Fungi, time line for divergence of, 16f
Fusion protein (molecular biology), 78
Fyn, 478
FYVE-domain, 387–388

G
G0 phase, 696, 698f

exit from, 715
growth control and, 700, 713–715, 
713f–714f, 714b, 718–719, 718f
G1 phase, 696–700, 698f, 713–726, 713f

checkpoints and, 700, 723–725, 724f–725f
cytoplasm during, 709
proteolysis and, 723, 723f
regulation of, cancer and, 699–700, 725–726
restriction point and, 699–700, 713, 

719–720, 719f–720f

proteoglycans in, 512–514, 513f–514f, 

exotic motility systems and, 666b–667b

cancer and, 699–700, 721–722, 

522

Flagellar pathway, prokaryotic protein 

722f–723f

Extrinsic pathway of apoptosis, 804–805, 

export via, 314f, 315

regulation of cell proliferation by, 

810–812, 811f

Ezrin, 590t–591t

Flap endonuclease. See Fen1 (Flap 

endonuclease).

720–721, 721f

stem cells and, 713

Genetic mapping, 87
Genetic markers, 784b
Genetically encoded control circuits, 5
Genetics

chemical, 99–100
key terms in, 86b
reverse, 88
in search for partners for genetic 

mutation, 96–97, 96f–97f

Genome engineering, 85t, 92–95, 94f
Genomes

definition of, 86b
DNA content of, 108–110, 109t, 110f
human, 109t, 110, 113

pseudogenes and, 112
segmental duplications in, 112–113, 

113f

Glycosphingolipids, 229, 230f, 371
Glycosylase, 750, 751f
Glycosylation

N-linked, 342–343, 343f
O-linked, 370

Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) tails, 

236–237

Glycosylphosphatidylinositols (GPIs), 339f, 

340

Glycosyltransferases, 51, 370, 512, 513f
Glypican, 514f, 522, 538t
Golgi apparatus, 6, 8, 11, 11f, 302, 351

functions of, 367, 367f
Golgi-specific processing activities and, 

369–371, 370f

lipid biosynthesis and metabolism and, 

371

transposable elements of, 110–112, 111f

morphology and dynamics of, 367–369, 

mapping transcription components on, 

367f–369f

177–178, 177f

proteolytic processing of protein 

nuclear envelope in genome organization, 

precursors and, 371

862 

INDEX

G2 checkpoint, 747–750, 747f–751f, 749t, 

750b–753b

G2 delay, 747, 747f
G2 phase, 696–700, 698f
cytoplasm during, 709
G2/mitosis transition and, 753

Cdk1 activity and initiation of prophase 

in, 745–746, 746f

enzymology of, 743–745, 743f–745f
G2 checkpoint and, 747, 747f, 749f, 

750–753

subcellular localization changes in, 

744f, 745, 746f

summary of main events of, 746–747, 

747f

GAGs. See Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs).
Galactosyltransferase, 369f, 537, 538t
Gap junctions, 490, 543, 544f, 544t, 

546–550, 547b, 547f–549f

in disease, 550, 550t

GAPs (GTPase-activating proteins). See 
GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs).

Gating, 45, 262–265, 265f, 283
“Gating current”, 268–269
GC globulin, 590t–591t
GCAP39, 590t–591t
GDI. See Guanine nucleotide dissociation 

inhibitor (GDI).

GEFs. See Guanine nucleotide exchange 

factors (GEFs).

Gel electrophoresis, 88, 89b, 89f
Gel filtration, 91f
Gel state, 231
Gelsolins, 583, 583f, 590t–591t
Geminin, 731f, 732
Gene conversions, 782, 783f, 784b
Gene deserts, 110
Gene duplication, 17–18, 41–42
Gene expression, 123, 126, 165–187

β-catenin in, 530, 531f
signaling pathways influencing, 472–473, 

472f–474f, 476f–477f, 480f–481f
transcription and. See Transcription; 

Transcription factors (TFs).

Gene silencing, 130, 131f
General transcription factors (GTFs), 170
Genes, 8, 86b. See also specific genes.

divergence of, 17, 18b
dominant negative, 87
duplication of, divergence and, 17–18, 

18b

essential, 86b
identification of, through mutations, 

87–88

for intermediate filament proteins, 

evolution of, 613f, 614–615, 615t
isolation of cDNA and, 90–92, 92f–93f
organization of, on chromosomes, 

108–110, 109t, 110f

tumor suppressor, 722, 723f

DNA-binding domains and, 179–180, 179f
in eukaryotes, 176–180, 176f, 179f
mapping transcription components on 

the genome, 177–178, 177f

in prokaryotes, 175–176, 176f

Genetic code, 209–210, 210f

150, 151f

Genomics, 88
Genotype, 86b, 784b
Gephyrin, 611
Geranyl isoprenoids, 230
Geranylgeranyl isoprenoids, 230
GFAP, 615t
GFP. See Green fluorescent protein (GFP).
Giant cells, 499
Giardia lamblia, 21, 629
Glucocorticoid receptor, 179f
Glucose transport, in intestine, kidney, fat, 

and muscle, 286–287, 286f

GLUT4, 475–478, 476f
GLUT1 uniporter, 253f, 254–255
Glutamate, 291f

synaptic transmission and, 295

Glutamate receptors, 273, 273f
Glutamic acid, structure of, 33f
Glutamine, structure of, 33f
Glutathione-S-transferase (GST), 90, 451f
Glycerophospholipids, 353–354, 353f–354f
Glycine

structure of, 33f
synaptic transmission and, 291f, 295

Glycoconjugates, 48–51, 51f
Glycogen, 49, 51f
Glycogen synthetase, 476
Glycolipids

Golgi apparatus processing of, 369–371, 

370f

in lipid bilayer, 230
Glycolysis, 319, 320f
Glycophorin, transmembrane segment of, 

235f

Glycoproteins, 50–51

adhesive, 523

in extracellular matrix, 514–517, 

515f–517f, 523

370f

GPIIb/GPIIIa, 533t

secretory transport from endoplasmic 

reticulum to, 365–367, 366f
Goodpasture syndrome, 519, 519t
GPI-anchored proteins, 233, 236–238, 236f
GPIb-IX-V, 537–538, 538t, 539f
GPIIb/GPIIIa, 533t
G-protein relay, 465
G-protein-coupled, seven-helix 

transmembrane receptors, signal 
transduction by, 463

G-protein-coupled receptor kinases, 414
Graded contractions, 678, 678f
Granular component of nucleolus, 147
Granules, secretory, 374–376, 374f–375f
Granules in mast cells, 499–500, 500f
Grb2, 431f, 439f, 440, 475, 476f–477f, 

478–481

Green algae, 22–23, 23f, 660
Green fluorescent protein (GFP), 78, 79f, 

87–88, 130–131

GRK1, 469
GroEL, 220–221, 222f
GroES, 220–221, 222f
Group I self-splicing introns, 205, 206f
Group II self-splicing introns, 205, 206f
Growth

contact inhibition of, 722
control of, G1 phase and, 713–715, 
713f–714f, 714b, 718–719, 718f

in G0 phase, 700
loss of control of, cancer and, 722, 722f
of membranes, 6, 7f

Growth cones

of axons, 654–655, 654f
guidance of, 658–659, 659f

Growth cycle, cell cycle and, 697
Growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase 

pathway through Ras to MAP kinase, 
473f–474f, 474–475, 483f

Growth factors, blood cells and, 494–495
Growth hormone, 416–417, 417f

skeletal growth and development and, 

Gene-specific transcription, 175–177

Golgi apparatus processing of, 369–371, 

Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), 512–514, 

561–562

513f–514f, 522

Glycosidases, 370
Glycosidic bonds, 48–50, 50f–51f

GST. See Glutathione-S-transferase (GST).
GTFs. See General transcription factors 

(GTFs).

 

GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs), 60f–61f, 

62, 433, 433f, 435, 437t

GTPases, 409, 432–437, 432f–433f, 442t
analysis of enzyme mechanisms with, 

60–62, 60f–61f

in disease, 436–437, 436t
dynamin-related, 437, 442t
elongation factors as, 432f, 433, 442t
ER shaping and, 333f, 334
experimental tools for, 437
G-protein relay and, 465
regulation of membrane trafficking, 

355–357

Arf family, 355, 356f, 366f, 373f
Rab, 355–357, 357f

signal transduction by G-protein–coupled, 
seven-helix transmembrane receptors 
and, 463

small, 432f, 433–434, 442t
translocation, 442t
trimeric, 434–437, 434f, 442t

guanosine triphosphatase cycle and, 

434f, 435–436

INDEX 

863

Helix-turn-helix (HTH) proteins, 179–180
Helper T cells, 500, 501f
Hematopoietic stem cells, 494, 715–716
Hemicelluloses, 568
Hemidesmosomes, 543, 544f, 544t, 

551–553, 552f, 566

Heptad repeats, 40
Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer, 

749t

Hereditary spherocytosis, 495
Heterochromatin, 128–130, 128f–129f, 131f, 

143f, 189

constitutive, 115, 129, 129f
facultative, 128–130, 128f
functional compartmentalization of 

chromatin and, 128–130, 128f–129f, 
131f

Homogenizers, 88
Homologous chromosomes, 779, 782, 

784f–786f, 785–787

Homologous proteins, 41–42
Homologous recombination, 85t, 94, 94f, 

781

Homologous RNAs, 45–46
Homologs, 18b
Homology models, 37
Homology-directed repair, 92–94
Homophilic interactions, 526
Homozygous organisms, 784b
Hormone response elements, 184–185
HOX (homeobox) genes, 561
HP1. See Heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1).
HRS (hepatocyte-growth-factor-regulated 
tyrosine kinase substrate), 389, 389f

Heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1), 129–130, 

Hsp70, protein transport to mitochondria 

129f

Heterodimeric capping proteins, 583–584
Heterogeneous nuclear RNA (hnRNA), 167
Heterophilic interactions, 526
Heterotetrameric adapter protein complexes 

mechanisms of effector activation and, 

(AP1 to AP4), 361

436

subunit cycles and, 436
subunit diversity of, 435, 435t

GTP-Giα, 444
GTP-Gsα, 444, 445f
Guanine, 44f, 47–48, 49f
Guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitor 

(GDI), 356

Guanine nucleotide exchange factors 

(GEFs), 61–62, 157, 157f, 433, 476

Guanosine, 42
Guanosine triphosphatase cycle, 434f, 

435–436

Heterozygous organisms, 784b
Hexose, 48
H3:H4 heterodimers, 123
HI-C, 133–135, 134f
Hippocampus, synaptic transmission and, 

295–296, 296f

Hirschsprung disease, 532
His-tag, 90
Histamine in mast cells, 499–500
Histidine

phosphorylation and, 425
structure of, 33f

Histidine kinases, 482b, 483f

Guanosine triphosphatases (GTPases).  

phosphorylation and, 428, 441t

See GTPases.

Guanylyl cyclase receptors, 418–419, 418f, 

421–423

Guanylyl cyclases, 445, 468

H
H1 histone, 127, 128f
H19 locus, 131f
H2A:H2B heterodimers, 123
Half-spindles, 759–760
Halobacteria halobium, 242, 323
Haploid chromosome number, 86b, 779, 784b
Haploinsufficiency, 87
HB-GAM (heparin-binding, growth 

associated molecule), 523

Heart disease, inherited molecular basis of, 

682t, 688

Heart rate and contractility, regulation of

seven-helix receptors and trimeric 

G-proteins in, 687–688, 687f

Heavy chains of myosin, 624
Hedgehog receptors, 420–421
HeLa cells, 86–87, 131f, 730f
Helicases, 172, 214
α-helices, 36–40, 38f–40f
β-helices, 40
Helicobacter pylori, 546
Helix, 64b, 65f
Helix-loop-helix proteins, 179

Histone code, 125, 125f
Histone deacetylase, 129f
Histone proteins, synthesis of, 740–741, 740f
Histones

3′ end formation on RNAs of, 191–192
core, 123, 124f
epigenetics and histone code and, 125
linker DNA and linker histone H1, 127, 

128f

modifications, gene expression and, 178, 

178t

nucleosome assembly and, 127
regulation of chromatin structure by 

histone N-terminal sites and, 
125–127, 125f–126f

variants of, 127
HIV, 389–390, 503
HMG-CoA reductase, 347, 403–404, 404f
HnRNA. See Heterogeneous nuclear RNA 

(hnRNA).

Holliday junctions, 750f, 752–753, 752f, 

783f, 784

Holocentric chromosomes, 115
Holoenzyme, 167, 169–170, 170f
Homeodomains, 179–180, 179f
Homo sapiens, genome of, 109t, 110, 113

pseudogenes and, 112
segmental duplications in, 112–113, 113f
transposable elements of, 110–112, 111f

and, 305

Hsp70 chaperones, 220, 221f, 305
Hsp90 chaperones, 220, 221f
HTERC, 119–120
HTERT, 119–120, 122, 122f
HTH proteins. See Helix-turn-helix (HTH) 

proteins.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), 

389–390

Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome, 150, 

152f

Hyaline cartilage, 557, 557f
Hyaluronan, 512, 513f, 555
Hydrogen bonds, 58, 58f
Hydropathy, 234
Hydrophilic effect, 229
Hydrophobic effect, 31–32, 58–59, 58f, 229
Hydroxyapatite, 559
Hydroxyproline, 34f
Hyperthermia, malignant, 457
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathies, 688
Hypertrophic chondrocytes, 562–564, 563f
Hypothyroidism, 346

I
IAP (inhibitor of apoptosis protein), 

805–807

I-band, 675f
ICAD, 807–808, 807f
ICAMs. See Intercellular adhesion molecules 

(ICAMs).

Icosahedrons, 66, 66f
IFT. See Intraflagellar transport (IFT).
IgA. See Immunoglobulin A (IgA).
IgCAMs (immunoglobulin cell adhesion 

molecules), 489–490, 526–528, 528f, 
528t

IgE. See Immunoglobulin E (IgE).
IGF2 locus, 131f
IgG. See Immunoglobulin G (IgG).
Imaging, 75–76

electron microscopy in, 77f, 82–85, 83f–84f
light microscopy methods in. See Light 

microscopy methods.

“Immediate early” genes, 718, 718f
Immigrant cells, 491
Immunity

adaptive, 500–503, 501f–502f
innate, 496–500, 497f–498f, 500f

Inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3), 471t, 690, 

Interphase, 63f, 697, 699b

690f

signaling pathways and, 474f, 477f
T lymphocyte activation and, 477f, 

478–479

Inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3) receptor 

calcium channels, 454–456, 455f–456f, 
455t

Inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3) receptors, 

435, 435t, 454

Insulators, 130, 131f, 134–135
Insulin, synthesis of, 374f, 375
Insulin pathways to GLUT4 and MAP kinase, 

475–478, 476f

Insulin receptor, 415f, 475–478, 476f
Insulin receptor substrates. See IRS (insulin 

chromosomal DNA packaging in, 

130–131, 131f

chromosomes with clearly resolved loop 

structures, 132–133, 133f
Interpolar microtubules, 759–760
Interstitial lamellae, 564–565
Intestine, glucose transport in, 286–287, 286f
Intracellular ligands, 538t

of integrins, 533t, 534–535, 534f
of selectins, 536t

Intracellular motility, 639–650, 640f

actin-based movements of organelles in 
other cells and, 647f, 648–649, 649f

driven by microtubule polymerization, 

640t, 646f–647f, 647

in movement of cytoplasm

Immunoreceptor tyrosine activation motifs 

receptor substrates).

(ITAMs), 478

Insulin receptor tyrosine kinase, 427f, 475, 

driven by actin and myosin, 647–648, 

476f

648f–649f

Integral membrane proteins, 227, 234–237, 

driven by actin polymerization, 649, 650f

864 

INDEX

Immunoblot, 140f
Immunodeficiency diseases, 503
Immunofluorescence, 78, 79f
Immunoglobulin A (IgA), 502
Immunoglobulin cell adhesion molecules. 

See IgCAMs (immunoglobulin cell 
adhesion molecules).

Immunoglobulin E (IgE), 499–500, 502
Immunoglobulin Fc receptors, 379
Immunoglobulin G (IgG), 502
Immunoglobulins, rearrangement and 

somatic mutations of, 500–501, 502f

Immunological synapse, 477f, 479
Immunoprecipitation, 96
Immunoproteasomes, degradation by 

proteasomes, 401

Immunosuppressive drugs, 479
Immunotoxins, 391
Import receptors, 155
Importin β, 156, 159
Imprinting, 130, 131f
Inactivating inhibitors, 420
Inactivation of channels, 265–266, 265f
Inactivation peptide, 269, 269f
Incisions, 750
Indigenous cells, 491

of connective tissue, 491–493, 491f–

493f

Induced dimerization, 415, 416f
Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells, 718
Inflammation

cellular adhesion between endothelial 

fates of, 379–381, 381b
Inhibitor of NF-KB, 185f, 186
Inhibitory synapses, 295
Initiation

of DNA replication, 736b
of prophase, Cdk1 and, 745–746, 746f
of protein synthesis, 214–215, 216f
of transcription, 165–166, 165f, 169–173, 

170f, 170t

in prokaryotes, 175–176, 176f

Initiation codons, 209–210
Initiator, 169
Initiator caspases, 804, 805f
Initiator proteins, 728–729
INK inhibitors, 714b
Innate immunity, cellular basis of, 496–500, 

497f–498f

eosinophils and, 499
macrophages and, 499
mast cells, basophils, and, 499–500, 500f
neutrophils and, 494t, 497f, 498–499

Inner kinetochore, 139, 139f
Inner membrane

of chloroplasts, 324
mitochondrial, 304, 305f–306f, 306–307, 

318, 318f

Inner nuclear membrane, 148
proteins of, 149–150, 150f

Inner segment of photoreceptors, 468

cells and leukocytes in response to, 
537f, 538–540

adherens, 490, 529, 529f, 529t, 543, 

550–551, 552f

NF-KB and, 186

desmosomes as, 490, 529, 529f, 529t, 

AT-AC, 193, 193f

Ingested particles in endocytosis, alternative 

543, 544f, 544t, 551, 552f

234b, 235f, 237f
α6β4-integrin, 552–553
Integrin α7, 684t
Integrins, 489–490, 515, 515f, 526, 

532–536, 533f–534f, 533t, 537f, 
539f

Intercalated disks, 685, 685f
Intercellular adhesion molecules (ICAMs), 

528t

Intercellular communication, lipid-derived 

second messengers for, 449–452, 
450f–451f

Intercellular junctions, 543–553, 544f, 

544t

focal contacts as, 534, 534f, 544t, 

551–552

gap, 490, 543, 544f, 544t, 546–550, 547b, 

547f–549f, 550t

hemidesmosomes as, 543, 544f, 544t, 

551–553, 552f

tight, 490, 543–546, 544f–545f, 544t
Interchromatin granules, 144, 144f, 194
Interchromosomal domain, 143
α-interferons, degradation by proteasomes 

rapid movements on microtubules and, 

639–643, 640f–641f, 640t, 642t

fast axonal transport and, 640t, 

643–644, 643f–644f

slow transport of cytoskeletal polymers 

and associated proteins in axons 
and, 640t, 644–646, 645f

Intraflagellar transport (IFT), 651, 664–665, 

664f

Intra-S checkpoint, 739–740, 739f
Intrinsic pathway of apoptosis, 803–804, 

803f, 808–810, 808f, 810f

Intrinsic terminators, 174
Intrinsically disordered regions of proteins, 41
Intron branch point, 192
Introns, 109, 163, 192

Inward rectifiers, 268
Ion exchange chromatography, 91b
Ion flux, 264–265
Ionic bonds, 59
IP3. See Inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3).
IP3 receptor calcium channels. See Inositol 

1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3) receptor 
calcium channels.

IP3 receptors. See Inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate 

(IP3) receptors.

IPS cells. See Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) 

and, 401

cells.

Interkinesis, 787
Interleukins, 416
Intermediate filaments, 574, 613–622, 613f, 

675–676, 675f

assembly of, 615–616, 617f
expression in specialized cells, 615t, 618, 

618f

functions of, 619–621, 620f–621f
posttranslational modifications of, 

616–618, 617f

proteins, evolution of genes for, 613f, 

614–615, 615t

proteins associated with, 618–619, 619t, 

620f

structure of, 613f, 615–616, 616f

of subunits, 614, 614f, 615t, 616f

Intermembrane space, 304, 318
α-Internexin, 615t

IRE1, 345–346, 345f
IRS (insulin receptor substrates), 475–476
Isoelectric focusing, 89b
Isoforms, 194

actin, 578, 578f

Isoleucine, structure of, 33f
Isomers, stereochemical, 48
Ïsopentyl, 230
Isoprenoid tails, 236
Isoprenoids, 230
ITAMs. See Immunoreceptor tyrosine 

activation motifs (ITAMs).

J
JAKs, 416–417, 417f, 421–423
JAK/STAT pathways, signal transduction 

and, 479–481, 480f

Jellyfish, 25, 78

 

K
Kainate, glutamate receptors and, 273
Kartagener syndrome, 661
Karyopherins, 156
Katanin, 603, 611
KcsA, 262–265, 264f–265f, 267–268
KDEL, 342
Kendrin, 612
Keratins, 614, 614f, 615t, 616f, 618, 618f, 

619t

epidermal, 551

Kidneys, glucose transport in, 286–287
Killer T cells, 500, 501f
Kinases

cell-dependent, cell-cycle transitions and, 

702b, 702f

cooperation between phosphatases and, 

432

receptor, 417–418, 417f–418f, 421–423
Kinesin-1, 631–633, 632f, 634f, 635, 635t
Kinesin-5, 634f, 635, 635t
Kinesin-7, 634f, 635, 635t
Kinesin-8, 602–603
Kinesin-13, 602–603, 634f, 635t
Kinesin-14, 602–603, 634f, 635t
Kinesin head, 631–632, 632f
Kinesins, 13, 574, 611, 624t, 631–635

evolution of, 623, 623f
mechanochemistry of, 632–633, 

632f–634f

superfamily of, 633–635, 634f, 635t

Kinetics, 29
Kinetochore fibers, 759–760
Kinetochore microtubules, 759–760, 765f
Kinetochores, 113, 139–141, 139f–141f, 

758–759

definition of, 108b
sister, 759
Kleisin, 137
KMN network, 611

L
L1, 528t
Lac operon, 175–176, 176f
Lactacystin, 399–400
LADs. See Lamina-associated domains 

(LADs).

Lagging strand, 728, 728f
Lamellar motility on flat surfaces by 

pseudopod extension, 654f–657f, 
655–656
Lamin A, 148
Lamin AC, 684t
Lamin B, 148
Lamin C, 148
Lamina-associated domains (LADs), 150, 151f
Laminin receptor, 533t
Laminin-binding protein (Mac-2), 523
Laminins, 517, 518f, 519t, 523, 532–533, 

533t, 538, 538t, 684t

Laminopathies, 150–151, 152f
Lamins, 614, 614f, 615t, 616f
Lamp1, 388f, 390
Lamp2, 388f, 390
Lampbrush chromosomes, 132, 133f, 787
LAP1, 619t
LAP2, 619t

LARGE, 684t
Large subunits of ribosomal RNA, 205, 212, 

213f

Lariat (pre-mRNA splicing), 192, 193f
Last eukaryotic common ancestor (LECA), 

19f, 20, 23–24

Last universal common ancestor (LUCA), 

17–18, 17f, 18b

Late endosomes, 377–378, 386, 388f, 390
Lateral transfer, 18
Latrunculins, 585, 586b
Lax, Henrietta, 86–87
LBR, 619t
LCA (leukocyte common antigen), 538t
Lck, 468, 478
LCRs. See Locus control regions (LCRs).
LDLs. See Low-density lipoproteins (LDLs).
Leading edge, 655f–657f, 656
Leading strand, 728, 728f
LECA. See Last eukaryotic common ancestor 

(LECA).

Lectin, 536, 536f, 536t
Leptin, 492

bone and, 561

Leptotene, 785–786, 785f–786f
Lethal mutations, synthetic, 96–97, 96f
Leucine, structure of, 33f
Leucine zipper proteins, 179–180, 179f
Leukemia, 495
Leukocytes, cellular adhesion between 

endothelial cells and, 537f, 538–540

Leukotrienes, 446, 450, 451f
LFA-1 (lymphocyte function associated 

antigen-1), 533t

LFA-3 cells (lymphocyte function associated 

antigen-3 cells), 528t
“Libraries” of DNA, 90–92
Licensing in DNA replication, 728
Liddle syndrome, 267
Lidocaine, 279
Life, evolution of. See Evolution of life on 

earth.

LIG4 syndrome, 749t
Ligands, 426, 437–440, 437t, 438f–439f

for integrins, 533–535, 533t, 534f
plasma membrane receptors and, 

411–412, 411f, 421–423

cytokine, 416–417, 417f, 421–423
guanylyl cyclase, 418–419, 421–423
Notch, 420–423
receptor serine/threonine kinases and, 

417–418, 417f, 421–423

INDEX 

865

Light microscopy methods (Continued)

fluorescence, 76t, 77f, 78, 79f–82f, 81t
phase-contrast, 76, 76t, 77f
polarization, 76–78, 76t, 77f

Light reactions, 325
Light sheet microscopy, 80f–81f, 81
Light-chain domain of myosins, 624–626
Light-harvesting complexes, 326–327, 327f
LINES (long interspersed nuclear elements), 

111–112, 111f

Link oligosaccharides, 512, 513f
Link protein, 523
Linked reactions, 57–58, 57f
Linker DNA, 127
Linker histone, 127, 128f
Linker proteins, 604, 611
Linking collagens, 506f, 509–510, 509f
Lipid asymmetry of organelle membranes, 

232–233, 233f

Lipid bilayer, 225, 228–230

electrostatic interaction with 

phospholipids in, 237

glycolipids and, 230
partial penetration of, 237
peripheral membrane proteins with, 236, 

236f

phosphodiglycerides and, 228–229, 228f, 

229t

physical structure of, 230–234, 231f–

233f

sphingolipids and, 229, 230f
sterols and, 229–230, 230f
triglycerides and, 230

Lipid domains, 353–354, 353f
Lipid droplets, 492, 493f
Lipid kinases

phosphorylation and, 426
reactions producing lipid second 

messengers and, 446

Lipid phosphatases, 446
Lipid rafts, 371, 383f
Lipid turnover, degradation and, 402–404, 

403f–404f

Lipid-anchored proteins, association with 

cytoplasmic surface of ER, 340

Lipid-derived second messengers, 445–452, 

446f

agonists and receptors and, 446–447
cross talk and, 452
enzyme reactions producing, 445–446
for intercellular communication, 449–452, 

450f–451f

receptor tyrosine kinases and, 414–415, 

phosphatidylcholine signaling pathways 

415f, 421–423

and, 449, 449f

seven-helix, 412–414, 412f–413f, 

phosphoinositide signaling pathways and, 

421–423

tumor necrosis factor family of, 

419–420, 419f
proline-rich, 439f, 440
for selectins, 536–537, 536f, 536t

448–449, 448f

protein kinase C and, 447f, 448
sphingomyelin/ceramide signaling 

pathways and, 452, 452f

targets of, 447–448, 447f–448f

Light chains of myosin, 624, 681–682
Light microscopy methods, 76–78, 81t

Lipids, 29, 228–230

biosynthesis of

bright field, 76, 76t, 77f
confocal, 79–81, 79f–81f
dark-field, 76–78, 76t
differential interference contrast, 76, 76t, 

77f, 79f

in endoplasmic reticulum, 346
in Golgi apparatus, 371

covalently attached, 433–434
gradient of, in membrane trafficking, 

353–354, 353f–354f

866 

INDEX

Lipids (Continued)

movement between organelles, 341t, 

348–349, 349f

as second messengers, 409
transport of, in endoplasmic reticulum, 

341t, 348–349, 349f

Lipid-transfer proteins (LTPs), 341t, 

348–349, 349f

Lipoproteins, low-density, 372, 403–404, 

403f

Lipoxins, 450, 451f
5′-lipoxygenase, 451
Liquid disordered phase, 231, 231f
Lis-1, 637
Listeria, actin polymerization by, 640t, 649, 

650f

Lysosomes (Continued)

fusion with, 379–381, 379f
proteolysis and, 396

Lysyl oxidase, 509, 509f

M
M2 channel, 266
M line, 674–675, 674f, 682t
M phase, 697–700, 698f, 699b
MAC-1, 533t
Macroautophagy, 398–399, 398f
Macromolecular assembly, 63–74

MAPU, 611
Marfan syndrome, 512
Marx, Jean, 475
Mass spectrometry, 90
Mast cells, 491f, 499–500, 500f
Mathematical models of systems, 100
Matrix (mitochondrial), 304, 305f–306f, 
306–307, 318, 318f, 320f–321f, 323f

Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), 519–520, 

519f

Maturation-promoting factor (MPF), 704b, 

705f

assembly pathways and reactions in, 67
regulation at multiple steps on sequential 

MCAK, 611
Mcm proteins (minichromosome 

assembly pathways and, 67–74

by accessory proteins, 68–74, 69f, 

maintenance), 731, 732t, 733–734, 733f

M-CSF. See Macrophage colony-stimulating 

LncRNAs. See Long noncoding RNAs 

71f–73f

by changes in environmental 

conditions, 68

by covalent modification of subunits, 68
of nucleation, 68–69, 69f
by subunit biosynthesis and 

degradation, 68

specificity by multiple weak bonds on 

complementary surfaces and, 64–65

subunits and, 63–64, 63f, 64b, 65f
symmetrical structures constructed from 

identical subunits with equivalent 
bonds and, 65–67, 66f

factor (M-CSF).

Mdm2, 724–725, 724f–725f
MDR1, 251, 251f
MDR2, 251–252, 251f
Mechanosensitive channels, 266, 267f
Megacomplexes, 556–557
Megakaryocytes, 495
Meiosis, 696, 779–795, 780f–781f

bouquet stage of, 780f, 785–786, 785f
cell-cycle regulation of events of, 792
chiasmata and, 785f, 786–787, 789–790, 

789f–790f

defects and human disease, 794–795, 

Macrophage colony-stimulating factor 

795f, 795t

(M-CSF), 561

Macrophages, 491f, 497f, 499
Macropinocytosis, 377, 378f, 380f–381f, 

381–382

Macropinosomes, 381–382, 381f
Mad1/Mad2 complex, 764f, 765
MAG (myelin associated glycoprotein), 528t
Major facilitator superfamily (MFS), 258–259
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) 

antigens, 477f, 478, 502–503

class I, degradation by proteasomes and, 

401, 501f, 503

class II, 503

Major sperm protein, 666–667, 667f
Malignant hyperthermia, 457
Mal3p, 611
Mammalian cells, replication origins in, 

730–731, 730f–731f

mitosis contrasted with, 782b
pairing in, 781, 786f–788f, 787–789
prophase I of, homologous chromosomes 

in, 785–787, 785f–786f

recombination and, 781–785, 783f–784f, 

784b

sex chromosome behavior in, 791–792, 

792f

sexual reproduction and, 779–780
synapsis in, 787–789, 787f–788f
synaptonemal complex and, 785f, 

786–789, 787f–789f

terminology for, 781, 781f
timing of, in humans, 793–794, 794f

Meiosis I, 779, 780f–781f

cohesion and chromosomal movements 

during, 790–791, 791f

suppression DNA replication between 

Mannose-6-phosphate receptors (MPRs), 

meiosis II and, 792

373, 373f

Meiosis II, 779

(lncRNAs).

Local anesthetics, sodium channels and, 270
Localization

of molecules, 98
of pre-mRNA splicing, 194

Localization microscopy, 81–82, 81t, 82f
Locus control regions (LCRs), 135
Lokiarchaeota, 19f, 20, 432
Long bones, 558f, 562, 563f, 564
Long interspersed nuclear elements (LINES). 

See LINES (long interspersed nuclear 
elements).

Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs), 110
Long QT syndrome, 269–270, 686–687
Long-term depression (LTD), 295–296
Long-term potentiation (LTP), 295–297, 296f
Loose connective tissue, 555, 555f
Low-density lipoproteins (LDLs), 370–371, 

403–404, 403f

LPA, 451
L-selectin, 536t
Lsm proteins, 202
LTD. See Long-term depression (LTD).
LTP. See Long-term potentiation (LTP).
LTPs. See Lipid-transfer proteins (LTPs).
LUCA. See Last universal common ancestor 

(LUCA).

Luminal ring, 151
Luminal space, 148
Lymphocytes, 491f, 494t

B, 500, 501f
cytotoxic T (killer T cells), 500, 501f
helper, 500, 501f
pathways through nonreceptor tyrosine 

kinases, 477f, 478–479, 479b, 
480f–481f
Lysines, 33f, 507
Lysobisphosphatidic acid, 388f, 390, 402
Lysophosphatidic acid, 446
Lysophosphoglyceride, 446
Lysosomal hydrolase, 379–381, 386, 388f, 

389, 396, 402

degradation in lysosomes and, 396

MAP2, 590t–591t, 601–602, 601f–602f, 611
MAP 3, 611
MAP 4, 601, 601f–602f, 611
MAP kinase kinase, 473f, 475
MAP kinase kinase kinase, 473f
MAP kinase pathways

metaphase II arrest and, 792–793, 793f
to nucleus, 473–474, 473f–474f, 

metaphase II arrest and MAP kinase 

pathway and, 792–793, 793f

suppression DNA replication between 

meiosis I and, 792

MEK, 473, 475
Membrane capacitance, 282
Membrane carrier proteins, 226, 253–259

definition of, 241
diversity of, 255f, 257–259
physiology and mechanisms of, 253–257, 

253f, 255f, 257t

Lysosomal storage diseases, 405
Lysosome-associated membrane proteins 

476f–477f, 483f

MAP kinases, 432, 473, 474f

(Lamp1 and Lamp2), 388f, 390

growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase 

of antiporters, 254, 254f–255f, 

Lysosomes, 8, 11, 302, 386

degradation in, 396–399, 397f

autophagy and, 397f–398f, 398–399
delivery to lysosomes via endocytic 

pathway in, 397–398, 397f

pathway through Ras to, 473f–474f, 
474–475, 483f

insulin pathways to, 475–478, 476f

MAPs. See Microtubule-associated proteins 

(MAPs).

256–257, 257t
discovery of, 255b
of symporters, 254–256, 254f–255f, 257t
of uniporters, 253f–254f, 254, 256, 

257t

 

INDEX 

867

Membrane carrier proteins (Continued)

Membrane pumps

structures of, 255f
tools for studying, 257t

Membrane channels

activity of, 265–266, 265f
ammonia, 276–277, 276f, 277b
blockers of, 279
charge movement and

ATP-driven, 243–248, 244t

ABC transporters and, 244t, 250–252, 

250f–251f

A-type ATP synthases and, 245f, 247–248
F0F1-ATPase family and, 244t, 246f
F-type ATPases and, 245f–246f, 247
P-type cation pumps and, 244t, 

Memory cells, 502
Menkes syndrome, 249–250
Meristematic stem cells, 717
Merotelic attachment, 763
Mesenchymal stem cells, 491, 491f–492f
Messenger RNA. See MRNA (messenger 

RNA).
Metabolism

net current through ion-selective 

248–250, 248f–249f

endoplasmic reticulum and, 347–348, 

channels and, 283

rate of, 283
for small cells, 282–283

charge redistribution by electrical 

conduction and, 284, 284f

chloride, 275–276, 275f–276f
definition of, 241–242
diversity of, 262
evolution of, 262, 263f
gated by extracellular ligands, 272–275

glutamate receptors and, 273, 273f
nicotine acetylcholine receptor and, 

273–275, 274f

generating action potentials, 290
with one transmembrane segment, 266
opening simultaneously, consequences of 

multiple types of, 283–284, 284f

Piezo2 as, 278
porins as, 277–278
S5-S6 channel family, 267–272

rotary ATPases and, 243–248, 244t, 

347f–348f

245f–247f

V-type ATPases and, 247, 247f

diversity of, 242, 242f, 242t
light-driven pumping by bacteriorhodopsin 

and, 242–243, 243f

Golgi apparatus and, 371
regulation of, through β-adrenergic 
receptors, 469–472, 470f, 471t

Metalloproteinases, matrix, 519–520, 519f
Metaphase, 133f, 700

membrane permeability and, 241–242, 

of mitosis, 755, 755f–756f, 765–767, 

241f

Membrane skeleton, 237, 237f, 684t
Membrane structure, 227–239

development of ideas about, 227–228, 227f
lipid bilayer of, 228–230

amino acid sequences identifying 

transmembrane segments and, 234b

electrostatic interaction with 

phospholipids in, 237

glycolipids and, 230
partial penetration of, 237
peripheral membrane proteins with, 

236, 236f

765f–766f

Metaphase II arrest in meiosis, 792–793, 793f
Metaphase plate, 765–766
Metarhodopsin II, 468
Metastasis, 717
Metazoans, 24–25
Methionine, structure of, 33f
Methylation of receptors, 485, 485f
MFS. See Major facilitator superfamily (MFS).
MHC antigens. See Major histocompatibility 

complex (MHC) antigens.

Micro RNAs (miRNAs), 167, 202–204, 

203f–204f

calcium release channels, 271–272, 

phosphodiglycerides and, 228–229, 

Microarrays, large-scale screening with, 97, 

454–456, 455f–456f, 455t

228f, 229t

channels gated by intracellular ligands, 

physical structure of, 230–234, 

272, 272f

channels with four transmembrane 

helices, 268

inward rectifiers, 268
transient receptor potential (TRP) 

channels, 271–272, 271f

voltage-gated cation channels.  
See Voltage-gated channels.

structure of, 262–265, 264f
TMBIM channels, 278
with two transmembrane segments, 

266–267

231f–233f

sphingolipids and, 229, 230f
sterols and, 229–230, 230f
triglycerides and, 230

proteins and, 234–239

dynamic behavior of, 237–239, 238f
electrostatic interaction with 

phospholipids, 237

integral, 227, 234–237, 234b, 235f, 237f
peripheral, 227, 236–237, 236f

Membranes

cellular volume regulation and, 288–289, 

amiloride-sensitive channels as, 

288f

98f

Microautophagy, 399
Microdomains, 353
Microelectrodes, intracellular, 279–280, 

280f

Microfibrils, 567f, 568–569

fibrillin, 510, 510f

Microscopy, 75–76

electron, 77f, 82–85, 83f–84f
light, 76–78, 81t

bright field, 76, 76t, 77f
confocal, 79–81, 79f–81f
dark-field, 76–78, 76t
differential interference contrast, 76, 

76t, 77f, 79f

266–267

ATP-gated channels as, 267
mechanosensitive channels as, 266, 

267f

water, 276f, 277

Membrane contact sites, 334, 334f
Membrane depolarization, 290
Membrane peroxisomal targeting sequences 

(mPTSs), 310, 310f, 310t

Membrane potentials, 261, 284f

biophysical basis of, 280–282, 281f

diffusion potentials and, 281, 281f
Nernst potential and, 281–282, 282f
qualitative relationships and, 281–282

measurement of, 279–280, 280f

Membrane proteins, 234–239

dynamic behavior of, 237–239, 238f
electrostatic interaction with 

phospholipids, 237

insertion of, into ER bilayer, 339f, 340
integral, 227, 234–237, 234b, 235f, 237f
peripheral, 227, 236–237, 236f

chemiosmotic cycles and, 256, 285–286, 

fluorescence, 76t, 77f, 78, 79f–82f, 81t, 

285f

endoplasmic reticulum and, 334, 334f, 

341t

130–131, 131f

phase-contrast, 76, 76t, 77f
polarization, 76–78, 76t, 77f

epithelial transport and, 286–288, 286f
cystic fibrosis as transporter disease 

and, 287–288, 287f

food production and, 288
of glucose, in intestine, kidney, fat, and 

Microtubule motors, 631–633, 633f–634f

matching cargo with, 640–643, 641f, 642t
velocities of, 640t

Microtubule organizing centers (MTOCs), 

593, 594f, 604, 760

muscle, 286–287, 286f

Microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs), 

of salt and water in kidney, 287

excitable, 289–291, 289f, 291f
growth of, 6, 7f
secretory. See Secretory membrane 

system.

structure of. See Membrane structure.
synaptic transmission and, 291–297, 

291f–293f

central nervous system synapses and, 

293f, 294–297, 296f

595, 611

associated with growing microtubule plus 

ends, 600–601, 600f, 611

linker, 604, 611
MAP2, 590t–591t, 601–602, 601f–602f, 

611

MAP3, 611
MAP4, 601, 601f–602f, 611
microtubule regulation by, 600–604, 600f, 

611

neuromuscular junction and, 292f, 294

associated with microtubule ends, 

thylakoid, 324

603–604, 603f

868 

INDEX

Microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs) 

(Continued)
linker, 604
microtubule-destabilizing, 602–603, 

603f

Mitogenic signals, 719
Mitogens, 713
Mitosis, 7–8, 8f, 10, 63f, 696–697, 698f, 

MM-creatine phosphokinase, 682t
MMPs. See Matrix metalloproteinases 

(MMPs).

755–778, 755f–756f

Mobile kinases, gene expression and, 472, 

anaphase of, 700, 755, 755f–756f, 

473f–474f, 476f–477f

microtubule-stabilizing, 601–602, 

767–770, 767f

601f–602f, 611

Microtubules, 12–13, 13f, 63f, 139f, 140, 

574, 593, 593f, 595

biochemical mechanism of sister 

chromatid separation in, 767–768, 
768f

Mobile transcription factors, gene 

expression and, 472–473, 477f, 
480f–481f

Model organisms for biological research, 

assembly from GTP tubulin, 597–599, 

mitotic spindle dynamics and 

85–86, 86b

598f, 599t, 600f

astral, 759–760
axostyles as, 667, 667f
central spindle of, 769
dynamics of, 595

in cells, 599–600, 599t, 600f
steady-state, in vitro, 598–599, 598f, 

599t, 600f

ER remodeling and, 334
flux within spindle, in metaphase of 

mitosis, 766–767, 766f

interpolar, 759–760
kinetochore, 759–760, 765f
outer doublet, 660
pharmacologic tools for studying, 595b
polymerization of, intracellular motility 

driven by, 640t, 646f–647f, 647
rapid movements on, 639–643, 640f–

641f, 640t, 642t

fast axonal transport and, 640t, 

643–644, 643f–644f

chromosome movement during, 
768–770, 769f

closed, 755
cytokinesis and. See Cytokinesis.
cytoplasm during, 709, 757–758, 

757f–758f, 757t

exit from

in cytokinesis, 776–777
cytoplasm and, 709

meiosis contrasted with, 782b
metaphase of, 755, 755f–756f, 765–767, 

765f–766f

nucleolus disassembly during, 146f, 147
open, 755
prometaphase of, 755, 755f–756f, 

758–765, 758f

chromosome attachment to spindle in, 

761–763, 762f

Modular domains in proteins, 41–42, 43f
Moesin, 590t–591t
Mold, 4f
Molecular chaperones, 68
Molecular clock, 18
Molecular movements, 6, 7f
Molecular structure, 95
Mollusks, 25
Monoclonal antibody, 502
Monocytes, 491f, 494t, 497f, 499
Mono-methylarginine, 34f
Monosaccharides, 29
Monotelic attachment, 763
Mother centrioles, 605, 605f
Motility. See Cellular motility; Intracellular 

motility.

Motor domain of motor proteins, 623
Motor end plate, synaptic transmission at, 

correction of errors in chromosome 

678

attachment to spindle in, 763–764, 
763f

Motor neurons, skeletal muscle contraction 

and, 678, 678f

slow transport of cytoskeletal polymers 

mitotic spindle organization in, 

Motor proteins, 6, 7f, 12, 13f, 595, 623–638, 

and associated proteins in axons 
and, 640t, 644–646, 645f

regulation by microtubule-associated 

proteins, 600–604, 600f–603f, 611

structure of, 595–597, 596f–597f

Microvillii, 575
Midbody, 771f, 775
Minichromosome maintenance (Mcm) 

proteins. See Mcm proteins 
(minichromosome maintenance).

MinK molecules, 266
Minus End Binding Proteins, 611
Minus end of microtubules, 593, 599t
MiRNAs. See Micro RNAs (miRNAs).
Mismatch repair, 751, 751f
Mitochondria, 3f, 6, 8, 11–12, 11f, 301–302, 

317–323

ATP synthesis by oxidative 

759–760, 760f, 765f

nuclear envelope disassembly in, 759, 

759f

spindle assembly in, 760–761, 760f–761f
spindle checkpoint and, 764–765, 764f

prophase of, 755–758, 755f–757f

cytoplasmic changes in, 757–758, 

757f–758f, 757t

nuclear changes in, 756–757

623f, 624t, 625f. See also Intracellular 
motility.

dyneins as, 624t, 631, 635–637, 636f

evolution of, 623, 623f
mechanochemistry of, 636, 636f–637f
superfamily of, 636–637, 636f

kinesins as, 624t, 631–635
evolution of, 623, 623f
mechanochemistry of, 632–633, 

telophase of, 755, 755f–756f, 770–771, 770f

632f–634f

nuclear envelope reassembly in, 

superfamily of, 633–635, 634f, 635t

770–771, 770f

transition to, 753. See also G2 phase: G2/

mitosis transition and..

motor domain of, 623
myosins as, 624–631, 624t, 625f

actomyosin ATPase cycle and, 626–628, 

Mitotic chromosomes, 135–136, 136f–137f, 

627f

147

Mitotic exit, 776–777

cytoplasm during, 709

evolution of, 623, 623f
mechanochemistry of, 624–626, 

625f–626f

phosphorylation and, 317, 319–322, 
320f–321f

Mitotic spindle, 13, 63f, 593, 594f, 595, 700
assembly of, in prometaphase of mitosis, 

superfamily of, 628–631, 630f–631f
transduction of chemical energy into 

biogenesis of, 318–319, 319f
disease and, 322–323, 323f
evolution of, 20–21, 317–318, 317f–318f
protein transport into, 303f, 304–307, 

760–761, 760f–761f

chromosome attachment to

correction of errors in, 763–764, 763f
in prometaphase of mitosis, 761–763, 

762f

molecular motion, 627f, 628, 
629f
tail of, 623
tools for studying, 641b

MPF. See Maturation-promoting factor 

305f–307f

structure of, 318, 318f

Mitochondrial carrier proteins, 255f, 

257–258

Mitochondrial inner membrane, 304, 

305f–306f, 306–307, 318, 318f

Mitochondrial matrix, 304, 305f–306f, 

306–307, 318, 318f

Mitochondrial outer membrane, 304, 306, 

306f, 318, 318f

protein transport across, 305–306, 306f

dynamics of, chromosome movement 

(MPF).

and, in anaphase of mitosis, 768–770, 
769f

MPRs. See Mannose-6-phosphate receptors 

(MPRs).

microtubule flux within, in metaphase of 

MPTSs. See Membrane peroxisomal 

mitosis, 766–767, 766f

targeting sequences (mPTSs).

organization of, in prometaphase of 

MRNA (messenger RNA), 5, 5f, 163–164, 

mitosis, 759–760, 760f, 765f

poles of, 757, 757f
spindle assembly checkpoint and, 701
spindle checkpoint, 764–765, 764f

167, 646–647, 647f

degradation of, 190f, 196–197, 196f
editing of, 195–196, 195f
export from nuclei, 158

 

MRNA (messenger RNA) (Continued)

Mutations

polyadenylation and, 189–190, 191f, 196
pre-mRNA surveillance of, 190f
processing of

alternative splicing and, 195f
pre-mRNA splicing and, 194f–195f
role of snRNAs and, 194f

surveillance of, 197–198
synthesis of, 189–194, 190f

cytoplasmic polyadenylation and, 196
editing of mRNAs and, 195–196, 195f
links between RNA processing and 
transcription in, 190–192, 190f

mRNA capping and polyadenylation in, 

189–190, 191f

mRNA degradation and surveillance 

and, 196–197, 196f

pre-mRNA splicing and, 192–194, 

193f–195f

translation and, 209–210, 209f–210f

MRNA turnover, 190f
MTOCs. See Microtubule organizing centers 

(MTOCs).

Mucins, 523, 526, 536f, 536t, 537, 538t
Multiangle laser light scattering, 95
Multidrug carriers, 258
Multiple drug resistance proteins, 251–252, 

251f

basal lamina, 519, 519t
in collagen, 556
conditional, 86b, 100
definition of, 86b
dominant, 86b, 87, 620–621
enhancer, 96–97, 96f
in gap junction subunits, 550, 550t
gene identification through, 87–88
lethal, synthetic, 96–97, 96f
null, 92–94
recessive, 86b, 87
seven-helix receptors and, 414, 414t
suppressor, 96–97, 96f
temperature sensitive, 702b

MVBs. See Multivesicular bodies (MVBs).
Myasthenia gravis, 275
Myc, 721
Mycoplasma genitalium, 18
genome of, 108–109, 109t

Myelin sheaths, 291, 291f
Myosin filaments, assembly of, 70, 70f
Myosin head, 624, 625f, 626, 628
Myosin light chain kinase, 690, 690f
Myosin-binding protein C, 674–675, 682t
Myosin-I, 624t, 629–630, 630f
Myosin-II, 70, 70f, 588, 624t, 629–630, 630f, 

771–772

Multivesicular bodies (MVBs), 377–378, 386, 

Myosins, 12, 574, 590t–591t, 624–631, 624t, 

388f–389f, 389–390

625f

Mus musculus, genome of, 109t
Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor, 293–294
Muscle myosin, 624t
Muscles, 671–691, 672f

action potentials and, 289
cardiac, 672f, 685–691

congestive heart failure and, 688,  

688f

contractile apparatus of, 685, 685f
excitation contraction coupling and, 

679, 680f, 685f

molecular basis of inherited heart 

disease and, 682t, 688

647–648, 648f–649f

catalytic domain of, 624–626
duty cycle and, 628
evolution of, 623, 623f
heavy chains of, 624
light chains of, 624

skeletal muscle contraction regulation 

by, 681–682

light-chain domain of, 624–626
mechanochemistry of, 624–626, 

INDEX 

869

NcRNAs. See Nonprotein coding RNAs 

(ncRNAs).

Nebulin, 584, 590t–591t, 673–674
Necroptosis, 696, 798b, 813–814
Necrosis, 798, 798b

apoptosis vs., 797–800, 797f–800f

Negative feedback, seven-helix receptors 

and, 413f, 414

Negative selection, 801–802, 801f
Nematode sperm, actin substitute in, 

666–667, 667f

N-end rule, 401
Neocentromeres, 116–117, 117f
Nernst potential, 281–282, 282f
Nerve growth factor, 419
Nervous system, self-avoidance in, 540–541
NESs. See Nuclear export sequences (NESs).
Nestin, 615t
Netrin, 659
Neural crest cells, 561, 562f
Neurofascin, 528t
Neurofilaments, 615t, 617, 621, 621f
Neuromuscular junctions, 292f, 294

synaptic transmission at, 678

Neurons

action potentials and, 289, 464
growth cone, 657, 659, 659f
motor neurons, 678, 678f
olfactory, 464, 464f
photoreceptor, 466–468
sympathetic, 469, 687

Neutrophils, 494t, 497f, 498–499, 537f
NF-AT. See Nuclear factor-activated T cells 

(NF-AT).

NFH, 615t
NF-KB. See Nuclear factor KB (NF-KB).
NFL, 615t
NFM, 615t
NhaA family of carriers, 258
NHEJ. See Nonhomologous end joining 

(NHEJ).

Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 

phosphate (NADPH), 328

Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, 273–275, 

274f, 279

Nidogen, 517, 518f, 523
Nijmegen breakage syndrome, 749t
Ninein, 612
Nitella, cytoplasmic streaming in, 640t, 647, 

648f

Nitric oxide, 418

as second messenger, 459–461, 460f

Nitric oxide synthases, 460, 460f
N-linked oligosaccharides, 342, 343f, 370f, 

actomyosin ATPase cycle and, 626–628, 

627f

Neurotransmitters, synaptic transmission 

bulk movement of cytoplasm driven by, 

and, 291–294, 291f

pacemaker cells of, 685–687, 685f–

625f–626f

686f, 686b

glucose transport in, 286–287
skeletal, 671–684, 672f

actomyosin apparatus of, 671–676, 

672f–675f, 682t

molecular basis of contraction of, 

676–678, 676f–677f

rigor complex of, 626
of skeletal muscle, 682t
superfamily of, 628–631, 630f–631f
tail retraction and, 657
transduction of chemical energy into 

molecular motion, 627f, 628, 629f

Myosin-V, 624t, 629–630, 630f–631f, 

regulation of contraction of, 678–682, 

648–649, 649f

678f–681f

specialized cells of, 682–684, 682t, 

683f, 684t

smooth, 672f, 688–691, 689f–690f

Myosin-VI, 624t, 630–631, 630f
Myotilin, 684t
Myristoyl tails, 236
Myt1, 706, 706f, 710t–711t, 743f–744f, 744, 

Muscular dystrophies, 682t, 683–684, 683f, 

747f

513f

684t

Emery-Dreifuss, nuclear envelope defect 

and, 150, 152f

Mutagenesis, site-directed, 92, 93f
Mutant alleles, conditional, 87
Mutants

ced (cell death abnormal), 803, 803f
conditional, 99–100
definition of, 86b
dominant negative, 100

N
E-N-Acetyl lysine, 34f
NADH, 319, 320f, 321–322
NADPH. See Nicotinamide adenine 

NLSs. See Nuclear localization sequences 

(NLSs).

NMD. See Nonsense-mediated decay (NMD).
NMDA receptors. See N-Methyl-D-aspartate 

(NMDA) receptors.

dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH).

Na+K+-ATPase, 248
Natural killer cells, 498
N-cadherin, 529t
NCAM (neural cell adhesion molecule), 528t

N-Methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors

glutamate and, 273
long-term potentiation and, 296–297, 296f

NMR spectroscopy. See Nuclear magnetic 

resonance (NMR) spectroscopy.

870 

INDEX

Nocodazole, 595b
Nonclathrin/noncaveolar endocytosis, 377, 

385–386, 385f

Noncrossovers (gene conversions), 782, 

783f, 784b

spectroscopy, 35, 95
Nuclear matrix, 136–137
Nuclear membrane

inner, 148

Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) 

Nucleus (Continued)

nuclear envelope structure and, 147–152, 

147f

defects leading to human diseases and, 

150–151, 152f

in genome organization, 150, 151f
inner nuclear membrane proteins and, 

Nondisjunction, 784b
Nonhistone proteins, chromosome structure 

proteins of, 149–150, 150f

outer, 148

and, 136–139, 136f, 138f–139f

Nuclear mitotic apparatus (NuMA) protein, 

149–150, 150f

Nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ), 92–94, 

761

nuclear laminar and, 148–149, 

121

Nuclear pore complexes, 147f–148f, 148, 

148f–149f

Nonprotein coding RNAs (ncRNAs), 189
Nonreceptor tyrosine kinases. See 

Cytoplasmic protein tyrosine kinases.

Nonsense-mediated decay (NMD), 190f, 197
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs 

(NSAIDs), 451

Nonstop decay, 190f, 198
Nonstop mRNAs, 198
Nonvesicular transport pathways, 371
Norepinephrine, 291f, 469
NORs. See Nucleolus-organizing regions 

(NORs).

Notch receptors, 420–423
NSAIDs. See Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory 

drugs (NSAIDs).

151–152, 153f

Nuclear pores, 6, 10, 10f, 143f, 148f, 153f
Nuclear receptors, 472
Nuclear rings, 151, 153f
Nuclear speckles, 194
Nuclear transport receptors, 156, 157f
Nucleases, 807–808, 807f
Nucleation, 67, 69, 69f

actin filament, 580f, 581–582, 582f
regulation of assembly by, 68

Nucleic acids, 29

building blocks of, 42, 44f
structure of, 42–48

covalent, 42–43, 44f–45f
DNA secondary structure and, 43–45, 

NSF (N-ethylmaleimide [NEM]-sensitive 

46f

nuclear pore complexes and, 151–152, 

153f

organization of, 143–147

nucleolus and, 146–147, 146f
specialized subdomains and, 143–146, 

144f, 145t

structural compartmentation of, 131–133, 

132f–133f

traffic between cytoplasm and, 152–159, 

154f–157f

defective, disorders associated with, 

159

mRNA export and, 158
nuclear import and export components 

and, 155–157, 157f

regulation of transport across nuclear 

RNA secondary and tertiary structures 

envelope, 158–159, 159f

and, 45–48, 47f–49f

single import cycle and, 157–158,  

Nucleolus, 10, 10f, 143f, 145t, 146–147, 

157f

factor), 364, 379

N-terminal tails, 123, 125–127, 125f–126f
N-terminus, 36
Nuclear actin-binding protein, 590t–591t
Nuclear basket, 151
Nuclear envelope, 8, 10, 10f, 143f, 331, 

331f

146f

disassembly during mitosis, 146f, 147
ribosomal biogenesis in, 146f, 147
ribosome synthesis in, 199, 200f

disassembly of, in prometaphase of 

Nucleolus-organizing regions (NORs), 146f, 

mitosis, 759, 759f

reassembly in telophase of mitosis, 

770–771, 770f

regulation of transport across, 158–159, 

159f

structure of, 147–152, 147f

defects in, human diseases associated 

147

Nucleoporins, 151, 153f
Nucleoside, 42–43
Nucleoskeleton, 136–137
Nucleosome core particles, 123, 124f
Nucleosome remodeling complexes, 178
Nucleosomes, 123–127, 124f, 131f, 136f

with, 150–151, 152f

chromatin and

in genome organization, 150, 151f
inner nuclear membrane proteins and, 

149–150, 150f

nuclear lamina and, 148–149, 

148f–149f

nuclear pore complexes and, 151–152, 

153f

Nuclear export, 156–157, 156f
Nuclear export sequences (NESs), 155, 156f
Nuclear factor KB (NF-KB), 158–159, 159f, 

472–473, 472f, 477f, 478–479

inhibitor of, 185f, 186

Nuclear factor-activated T cells (NF-AT), 

429–430, 478–479

Nuclear import, 156, 156f–157f
Nuclear lamina, 4f, 148, 151f, 759, 759f
structure and assembly of, 148–149, 

148f–149f

Nuclear lamins

modifications and regulation of 

function, 123–125, 125f

regulation of structure by histone 

N-terminal tails, 125–127, 
125f–126f

core histones and, 123, 124f
histone deposition during assembly of, 

127

histone variants and, 127
linker DNA and linker histone H1 and, 

127, 128f

Nucleotide excision repair, 749t, 750, 751f
Nucleotides, 29, 42, 44f

cyclic, 443–445, 444f–445f

Nucleus, 6, 10, 10f, 143–160, 143f

changes in, during prophase of mitosis, 

746f, 756–757

DNA replication in, higher-order 

organization of, 735–739, 737f–738f

inner nuclear membrane proteins and, 

functional compartmentation of, 128–130, 

149–150, 150f

128f–129f, 131f

structure and assembly of, 148–149, 

interphase, chromosomal DNA packaging 

148f–149f

in, 130–131, 131f

Nuclear localization sequences (NLSs), 

MAP kinase pathways to, 473–474, 

154–155, 154f–155f

473f–474f, 476f–477f, 483f

Null mutation, 92–94
NuMA protein. See Nuclear mitotic 

apparatus (NuMA) protein.

O
Objective lens, 76–78, 77f
Occludin, 545
Odor detection, 463–466

adaptation and, 464f, 465–466
cAMP production and, 465
cyclic nucleotide-gated channels and, 465
odorant receptors and, 464f, 465
processing in brain and, 464f, 466, 466b
sensory neurons and, 464, 464f

Odorant-binding proteins, 463
Odorants, 463
Ohm’s law, 283
Okazaki fragments, 728, 728f
Olfactory bulb, 464
Olfactory receptor kinase, 464f, 466
Olfactory sensory neurons, 464, 464f
Olfactory system

odor detection by. See Odor detection.
second, sex and, 466b

Oligosaccharides
link, 512, 513f
N-linked, 342, 343f, 370f, 513f

Oligosaccharyl transferase, 342
O-linked glycosylation, 370
O-linked oligosaccharide, 513f
Omega loops, 38f, 39
Oncogenes, 474, 721–722
Oncogenic stress, 722, 723f
Open complexes, 165–166, 169–170, 170f
Open mitosis, 755
Operons, 166, 166f
Optical trap, 237–238, 238f, 629f
Optogenetics, 243

 

INDEX 

871

ORC. See Origin recognition complex 

(ORC).

Ordered liquid phase, 232
Organelles, 6, 301–302

actin-based movements of, 648–649, 649f
lipid movement between, 341t, 348–349, 

349f

membrane-bounded, evolution of, 21–22, 

21f–22f

membranes of, lipid asymmetry of, 

232–233, 233f

purification of, 88–90

P loops, 262–264, 264f, 267–268
P site of tRNAs, 213
P53 tumor suppressor gene, 696

apoptosis and, 812, 813f

Pacemaker cells of cardiac muscle, 685–687, 

685f–686f, 686b

Pachytene, 785f, 786–787
PAF, 451
Paired helical fragments, 602, 602f
Pairing in meiosis, 781, 786f–788f, 787–789
PALM. See Photoactivated localization 

Peroxisomes, 8, 12, 301–302, 328–329, 329f

origins of, 22
protein transport into, 303f, 309–311, 

309f–310f, 310t

Pertussis toxin, 436–437, 436t
PH domains. See Pleckstrin homology (PH) 

domains.

Phagocytic cells, 489
Phagocytic cup, 379
Phagocytosis, 302, 377–381, 378f–379f, 

800f

microscopy (PALM).

alternative fates of ingested particles and, 

Organisms for biological research, choice 

of, 85–87, 86b

Paralogs, 17–18, 18b
Parasympathetic nerves, heart rate and, 687, 

Origin recognition complex (ORC), 

687f

729–731, 730f

Origins of bidirectional replication, 727
Origins of replication, 700, 728–731, 728f
in mammalian cells, 730–731, 730f–731f
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, 729–730, 

729f–730f

Orphan receptors, 412
Orthologs, 17, 18b
Oryza sativa japonica, genome of, 109t
Osteoblasts, 491f, 559–560, 559f–560f
Osteocalcin, 559t
Osteoclasts, 499, 560–561, 560f
Osteocytes, 558f, 560
Osteogenesis imperfecta, 346, 565
Osteonectin, 523, 559t
Osteons, 564–565
Osteopetrosis, 565
Osteopontin, 523, 559t
Osteoporosis, 565
Outer doublets, 660, 662f
Outer kinetochore, 139, 139f
Outer membrane

of chloroplasts, 324
of gram-negative bacteria

insertion of proteins in, 313
secretion across, 314f

of mitochondria, 304, 306, 306f, 318, 318f
protein transport across, 305–306, 306f
Outer membrane autotransporter pathway, 

313, 314f

Outer membrane single accessory pathway, 

prokaryotic protein export via, 313

Outer nuclear membrane, 148
Outer plate, 139, 139f
Outer segment of photoreceptors, 468
Overexpression, 100
Oxidation, fatty acid, 319, 320f
Oxidative enzymes, 309
Oxidative phosphorylation, 317, 319–322, 

320f–321f

Oxygen

atmospheric, 22
carbonyl, 34f, 35–36
oxidative phosphorylation, 317, 319–322, 

320f–321f

photosynthesis, 328

P
P62, 152, 153f
P21-activated kinase, 434
P21 Cdk inhibitor, 714b
P element, 111

Parathyroid hormone, 560
Parkinson disease, protein misfolding in, 

219b, 402

Passive transporters, 241–242
Patch clamps, 279, 280f
Patched protein, 420
PAX (paired box) genes, 561
Paxillin, 534, 534f
PCC. See Premature chromosome 

condensation (PCC).

PCNA, 715, 734, 735f
PCR. See Polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
PDGF. See Platelet-derived growth factor 

(PDGF).

PDI. See Protein disulfide isomerase (PDI).
PDZ domains, 440
PECAM-1 (platelet/endothelial cell adhesion 

molecule), 528t

Pectins, 568
Pedigree, definition of, 86b
Pemphigus foliaceus, 551
Pemphigus vulgaris, 551
Pentameric ligand-gated ion channels, 

273–275, 274f

Pentose, 48
Peptide bonds, 32, 34f, 36
Peptides, inactivation, 269, 269f
Peptidyl prolyl isomerase, 437t
Perforin, 503
Pericentrin, 612
Pericentriolar material, 604–607, 605f–606f, 

608f–609f

Perichondrium, 556
Perichromatin fibrils, 144
Perichromosomal layer, 147
Perinuclear space, 147f
Periosteum, 557–559
Peripheral membrane proteins, 227, 

236–237, 236f

Peripherin, 615t
PERK/PEK, 345, 345f
Perlecan, 514f, 517, 518f, 519t, 522
Permeability, selective, 281
Permissive conditions, 87
Permissive temperature, 702b
Peroxins, 309, 310f, 310t
Peroxisomal biogenesis disorders, 309, 

328–329

Peroxisomal targeting signal, type 1 (PTS1), 

309, 309f, 310t

379–381, 381b

engulfment in, 378–379, 379f–380f, 380b
fusion with lysosomes and, 379–381, 379f

Phagolysosomes, 379, 379f
Phagophores, 398, 398f
Phagosomes, 11
Phase-contrast microscopy, 76, 76t, 77f
Phenotype, 86b, 784b
Phenylalanine, structure of, 33f
Phorbol esters, 448
Phosphatases

cooperation between kinases and, 432
in counter-balancing Cdks, 706f, 707, 

710t–711t

pharmacologic agents for studying, 432
protein tyrosine, 430t, 431–432, 

431f–432f

Phosphatidic acid, 229, 446, 446f
Phosphatidylcholine, 229, 346, 347f, 445, 

446f

Phosphatidylcholine signaling pathways, 

449, 449f

Phosphatidylethanolamine, 229, 346, 347f
Phosphatidylglycerol, 229
Phosphatidylinositol (PI), 346, 380b, 380f, 

445, 446f, 448f

Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-biphosphate (PIP2), 

380b, 380f, 446, 448–449, 448f

Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), 475, 

483f

Phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate (PIP), 446
Phosphatidylinositol phospholipase Cs 

(PI-PLCs), 446–447, 452

Phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate 

(PIP3), 379, 380b, 380f, 446

Phosphatidylinositol-4-P-5 kinase, 380b
Phosphatidylserine, 229, 346, 347f
Phosphodiester bonds, 42, 44f
Phosphodiesterases, 443–444, 444f–445f

cyclic nucleotide, 418
odor detection and, 465
visual signal processing and, 467f, 468, 

469b

Phosphoglycerides, 228–229, 228f, 229t
Phosphohistidine, 34f, 426f
Phosphoinositide 3-kinase, 415
Phosphoinositide signaling pathways, 

448–449, 448f

Phospholamban, 454
Phospholipase A2 (PLA2), 446, 446f
Phospholipase C (PLC), 446, 446f
Phospholipase Cβ, 435, 435t, 453f
Phospholipase Cγ, 415–416, 439–440, 439f, 

Peroxisomal targeting signal, type 2 (PTS2), 

453f, 475

309

Phospholipase D (PLD), 446, 446f

Phosphorylation (Continued)

Photosynthesis (Continued)

protein structure and function and, 

426, 426f–427f

protein tyrosine phosphatases and, 

430t, 431–432, 431f–432f

P-type ATPases and, 248–250, 248f–249f
receptor tyrosine kinases and, 414–416, 

415f–416f

reversible, 34–35

regulation of nuclear lamina assembly 

by, 68

by rhodopsin kinase, 469
seven-helix receptors and, 412–414, 

412f–413f, 414t

energy capture and transduction by type 
II photosystems and photosystem II, 
326, 327f

light and dark reactions and, 325–326, 

325f

light harvesting and, 326–327, 327f
oxygen-producing synthesis of NADPH 
and ATP by dual photosystems, 328

plastids and, 324
structure and evolution of systems in, 

323–324, 324f–325f

Photosynthetic reaction centers, 18–20, 

323–324, 325f, 326, 327f

sex chromosomes in meiosis and, 

Photosystem I, 323–324

791–792, 792f

SH2 domains and, 439
signaling cascades and, 399, 401
signaling pathways and

energy capture and transduction by, 

327–328

oxygen-producing synthesis of NADPH 

and ATP by dual photosystems and, 
328

Photosystem II, 323–324

872 

INDEX

Phospholipases, 402, 446, 446f, 449f
Phospholipids in bilipid layer, electrostatic 

interaction with, 237

Phosphoprotein, secreted, 523
Phosphorylase b, metabolic regulation and, 

471

Phosphorylase kinase, metabolic regulation 

and, 471

Phosphorylation

14-3-3 proteins and, 439
actin-based motility of vaccinia virus and, 

650f

β-adrenergic receptor and, 469–472, 470f, 

471t

cell cycle and, 7–8
cell cycle progression and, 723, 723f
cell proliferation and, 720–721, 721f
cell-cycle regulation of meiotic events 

and, 792

changing states of cytoplasm during cell 

cytokine receptor, JAK/STAT, 479–481, 

cycle and, 709–710, 709f

480f

condensin binding to chromosomes and, 

growth factor, 473f–474f, 474–475, 

energy capture and transduction by, 326, 

137

CTD, 168–169, 172, 190–191
cyclin-dependent kinase structure and 

function and, 703–707, 706f

cytoplasmic changes in prophase and, 

757–758, 757f–758f, 757t
dephosphorylation and, 380b
detection of proteins introduced by, 89b
of dynein, 662
of glycogen phosphorylase, 41
G2/mitosis transition and, 743–747, 

743f–747f

inhibition of nuclear import by, 158
integrity of cellular DNA monitored by a 

G1 checkpoint and, 723–725, 
724f–725f

of light chains, 588

483f

327f

influencing gene expression, 472–473, 

oxygen-producing synthesis of NADPH 

472f–474f, 476f–477f, 480f–481f

serine/threonine kinase receptor, 

and ATP by dual photosystems and, 
328

through Smads, 481–482, 481f

Phylogenetic tree, 3f–4f, 4, 15, 15f, 19f, 24, 

T-lymphocyte, through nonreceptor 
tyrosine kinase, 477f, 478–479, 
479b, 480f–481f

Src, of E-cadherin and β-catenin, 530
suppression of DNA replication  

between meiosis I and meiosis II 
and, 792

transcription factors and, 183–184, 

184f–185f

two-component phototransfer systems 

and, 482–486, 482b, 483f

24f

Physarum, cytoplasmic streaming in, 640t, 

647–648, 649f

Physiological function tests

anatomic, 98–99
physiological, 99–100
reconstitution as, 98

PI. See Phosphatidylinositol (PI).
PI-3 kinases, 449
Piezo2, 278
PI3K. See Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase 

bacterial chemotaxis and, 483f–485f, 

(PI3K).

in vertebrate skeletal muscle, 681–682, 

485–486

690–691, 690f

of mannose 6-hydroxyl, 372
by MAPs, 601–602, 611
marking of proteins for destruction by, 

393

metaphase II arrest and MAP kinase 

pathway and, 792–793, 793f

tyrosine, 382
WW domains and, 439
Phosphoserine, 34f, 426f
Phosphothreonine, 34f, 426f
Phosphotransfer systems, two-component, 

482–486, 482b, 483f

bacterial chemotaxis and, 483f–485f, 

by mitotic kinases, intermediate filaments 

485–486

and, 616–617, 617f

myosin-I activation by, 629–630
nucleus disassembly and, 147
oxidative, 317, 319–322, 320f–321f
PH domains and, 439–440
phosphotyrosine-binding domains and, 

415, 415f, 439

Phosphotyrosine, 34f, 426f, 475
Phosphotyrosine-binding (PTB) domains, 

415, 415f, 439

Photoactivated localization microscopy 

(PALM), 81–82, 81t

Photobleaching, 237–238, 238f, 656
Photon detection by vertebrate retina, 

posttranslational histone modification 

466–469

and, 125–126, 125f

protein destruction in cell-cycle control 

and, 707–708, 708f

protein kinases and, 441t
of proteins, 425–432, 426f

overview of, 466–468, 467b, 467f
positive arm of signal cascade and, 

468–469, 469b

recovery and adaptation and, 469, 469b
rhodopsin and, 467f, 468

cooperation between kinases and 

Photoreceptor cells, 466–467, 467b, 467f

phosphatases and, 432

pharmacologic agents for studying 
protein phosphatases and, 432

protein kinases and, 426–429, 

427f–428f, 430f, 430t, 441t

electrical circuits in, 469b

Photosynthesis, 317

carbohydrate synthesis and, 328
energy capture and transduction by 

photosystem I, 327–328

PIKA. See Polymorphic interphase 
karyosomal association (PIKA).

PIP. See Phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate 

(PIP).

PIP2. See Phosphatidylinositol 

4,5-biphosphate (PIP2).

PIP3. See Phosphatidylinositol 
3,4,5-triphosphate (PIP3).

PI-PLCs. See Phosphatidylinositol 
phospholipase Cs (PI-PLCs).

PiRNAs. See Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs).
Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs), 204
PKA. See Protein kinase A (PKA).
PKB/Akt, 429, 439–440, 449, 476, 476f
PKC. See Protein kinase C (PKC).
PKG. See Protein kinase G (PKG).
PKR, 112
PLA2. See Phospholipase A2 (PLA2).
Plakins, 619, 619t, 620f
Plakoglobin, 529–530, 529t, 551
Plakophilin, 551
Plant cell walls, 567–569, 567f–568f
Plant cells, 4f, 547f
Plants

cytokinesis in, 772, 773f, 776b
time line for divergence of, 16f

Plasma cells, 491f, 502
Plasma fibronectin, 516

 

Plasma membrane, 6f, 9, 9f

constitutive transport of cargo to, 
trans-Golgi network and, 371f

depolarization by cyclic nucleotide-gated 

channels, 465

posttranslational targeting of proteins to 

surfaces of, 311

Polycomb group proteins, 130
Polycythemia vera, 495
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 90, 92f
Polymerase I, 163
Polymerase II, 163, 176f
Polymerase III, 163
Polymorphic interphase karyosomal 

protein translocation across, by ABC 

association (PIKA), 145t

transporters, 311, 314f

Polypeptides, 5, 5f

structural proteins of, defects in muscular 

dystrophies and, 682t, 683–684, 
683f, 684t

folding of, 36–40, 37f–40f
posttranslational targeting and, 303f–304f, 

304

trafficking to, in polarized cells, 372–373, 

structure of, 32, 33f–34f, 34–36

INDEX 

873

Preinitiation complexes, 165–166, 170–172, 

171f–172f, 214

Premature chromosome condensation 

(PCC), 704, 704f

Pre-mRNA splicing, 192–194

alternative splicing and, 193–194, 195f
AT-AC introns and, 193, 193f
localization of, 194
signals for, 192, 193f
splicing reaction and, 192–193, 193f–194f

Prenucleolar bodies, 147
Prenylation, 615
Preprocollagen, 507, 508f
Prereplication complex, 731–733, 731f, 

732t, 733f

Presequences, 305
Presynaptic, definition of, 291
Primary active transporters, 241. See also 

Membrane pumps.

Primary cilia, 660f, 665, 665f

of centrosomes, 608

Primary constriction, 113, 147
Prions, 219b
Proapoptotic activities, 798b, 799
Probability, 53–54
Probability of a channel being open (PO), 

266

Processed pseudogenes, 112
Procollagen, 507
Profilins, 580, 581f, 583f, 584–585, 587, 

590t–591t, 655f

Programmed cell death, 797–815, 798b

Polyphosphoinositides, 229, 380b, 380f, 

439–440
Polyploid, 794
Polyproline helices, type II, 440
Polysomes, 217
Polytene chromosomes, 132–133, 133f
Polytopic proteins, 339f, 340
Polyubiquitin chain, 394f, 395–396, 401
POMGnT1, 684t
POMTi, 684t
Pore helices, 262–264
Porifera, 24–25
Porins, 277–278, 318, 318f
Position effect, 129, 129f
Positive selection, 801–802, 801f
Postsynaptic, definition of, 291
Postsynaptic potential (PSP), 295
Posttranslational modifications, 32, 34–35, 

34f, 125, 131f

372f

Plasma membrane receptors, 411–423, 411f

cytokine, 416–417, 417f, 421–423
guanylyl cyclase, 418–419, 418f, 421–423
Hedgehog, 420–421
Notch, 420–423
receptor serine/threonine kinases and, 

417–418, 417f–418f, 421–423

receptor tyrosine kinases and, 414–416, 

415f–416f, 421–423

seven-helix, 412–414, 412f–413f, 414t, 

421–423
toll-like, 420
tumor necrosis factor family of, 419–420, 

419f

Plasmid cloning, 93f
Plasmids, 86b, 87
Plasmodesmata, 546, 547b, 547f
Plasmodium, mitochondria of, 318
Plasticity, synaptic, 295–296, 296f
Plastids, 22, 324
Plastin, 590t–591t
Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), 495

growth factor signaling pathways and, 

474

receptor tyrosine kinase activation by, 

414

Platelets, 493–496, 494f, 494t, 496f

activation and adhesion of, 539f, 540
wound healing and, 565, 566f, 567

Platyhelminths, 28, 25
PLC. See Phospholipase C (PLC).
PLD. See Phospholipase D (PLD).
Pleckstrin, 439–440
Pleckstrin homology (PH) domains, 429, 

439–440

Plectin, 619, 619t, 620f
Pluripotent stem cells, 493–494, 494f, 715
Plus End Binding Proteins, 600–601, 600f, 

611

Plus end of microtubules, 593
PML (promyelocytic leukemia) bodies, 144f, 

145, 145t

Point centromeres, 114
Pol α/Primase, 734, 735f
Polar bodies, 794, 794f
Polarity, 69
Polarization microscopy, 76–78, 76t, 77f
Polarized cells, 372–373, 372f, 543–546
Polo family of protein kinases, 745
Poly(A) tails, 198, 210
Polyacrylamide gels, 89b
Polyadenylation, 189–190, 191f, 196
Polycomb group bodies, 145t

of intermediate filaments, 616–618, 617f

accidental cell death vs., 797–800, 

Posttranslational targeting of proteins, 

797f–800f

303–315, 303f–304f

prokaryotic protein export, 311–315

pathways dependent on SecYE 

translocon in, 311–315, 312f, 
314f

pathways independent of SecYE 

translocon in, 314f, 315

to surfaces of plasma membrane, 311
translocation across plasma membrane by 

ABC transporters, 311, 314f
transport into chloroplasts, 303f, 

307–309, 308f

apoptotic. See Apoptosis.
examples of cells undergoing, 801–803, 

801f

cells serving no function as, 801f, 802
cells with perturbed cell cycles as, 802
chemotherapeutic killing of cells as, 

803

developmentally defective cells as, 

801–802, 801f
excess cells as, 802
virus-infected cells as, 802–803

Fas death receptor and, in normal and 

transport into mitochondria and, 303f, 

diseased cells, 812

304–307, 305f–307f

transport into peroxisomes, 303f, 

309–311, 309f–310f, 310t

Posttranslational translocation, 335, 

340–341, 341f

importance of, in human disease, 814, 

814f

key terms in, 798b
necessity for, 797
nonapoptotic, 813–814

Potassium channels, voltage-gated, 269–270, 

269f, 290, 295, 686b

PP1, 429–431, 430f, 430t, 707, 710t–711t
PP2A, 429–431, 430f, 430t, 707, 710t–711t, 

745, 765

PP2B, 429–430, 430t
PPM family of serine/threonine phosphates, 

Prohormone convertases, 371
Prokaryotes. See also Bacteria.

compartmentalization of, 21–22, 21f
evolution of, 18–20, 19f
transcription initiation in, regulation of, 

175–176, 176f

Prokaryotic cells, eukaryotic cells vs., 4f, 

430t, 431

8–9

PPP family of serine/threonine kinases 

Prokaryotic protein export, 311–315

phosphorylation and, 429–431, 430f, 
430t
PRb, 720
Prebiotic chemistry, leading to RNA World, 

15–17, 16f

Preincision complexes, 750

pathways dependent on SecYE translocon 

in, 311–315, 312f, 314f

pathways independent of SecYE 

translocon and, 314f, 315

Proliferation, 720–721, 721f
Proline, structure of, 33f

phosphatases as, 429–431, 430f, 430t

protein tyrosine phosphatases as, 

structures of, 255f
tools for studying, 257t

874 

INDEX

Prolylpeptide isomerase, 508
Prometaphase of mitosis, 700, 755, 

755f–756f, 758–765, 758f

Protein kinases (Continued)
DNA-dependent, 752f, 753
phosphorylation and, 425–428, 427f–

chromosome attachment to spindle in, 

428f, 441t

761–763, 762f

correction of errors in chromosome 

attachment to spindle in, 763–764, 
763f

disease and, 429, 430f, 430t
regulation of, 428–429, 430f

PKR, 112

Protein phosphatases, phosphorylation and, 

mitotic spindle organization in, 759–760, 

425, 429–431, 430f, 430t

760f, 765f

nuclear envelope disassembly in, 759, 

759f

spindle assembly in, 760–761, 760f–761f
spindle checkpoint and, 764–765, 764f

Promoter clearance, 173
Promoter proximal elements, 176f, 

180–184, 181f

Promoters, 163, 165–166, 169, 169f
Promyelocytic leukemia (PML) bodies. See 
PML (promyelocytic leukemia) bodies.

Prophase, 700

Cdc25 subfamily of, 432
dual-specificity subfamily of, 432
PPM family of serine/threonine 
phosphatases as, 430t, 431
PPP family of serine/threonine 

431–432, 431f

PTP subfamily of, 431–432, 431f

Protein targeting, 6, 7f, 354–356, 362–363, 

372f, 373. See also Posttranslational 
targeting of proteins.

initiation of, Cdk1 activity and, 745–746, 

protein translocation into endoplasmic 

746f

of mitosis, 755–758, 755f–757f

cytoplasmic changes in, 757–758, 

reticulum and. See Protein 
translocation: into endoplasmic 
reticulum.

757f–758f, 757t

Protein toxins as “opportunistic endocytic 

nuclear changes in, 756–757

Prophase I of meiosis, homologous 

chromosomes in, 785–787, 785f–786f
Prostaglandin H synthetase, 450–451, 450f
Prostaglandin isomerases, 450
Prostaglandins, 446, 450, 450f
Proteases, proteolysis and, 396
Proteasomes, 707

degradation by, 399–402, 400f

elimination of misfolded proteins from 

endoplasmic reticulum and, 402

intracellular proteolysis and, 402
motifs specifying ubiquitination and, 

395t, 401–402

ligands”, 391, 391f

Protein translocation

across plasma membrane by ABC 

transporters, 311, 314f

into endoplasmic reticulum, 335–342

insertion of membrane proteins into ER 

bilayer, 339f, 340

Sec61 complex and, 337–338, 338f
signal recognition particle and signal 

recognition particle-receptor and, 
335–337, 336f–337f

signal sequences and, 335
of soluble proteins into lumen, 

338–340, 339f

ubiquitination modification of proteins 

tail-anchored protein association with 

and, 394–396, 394f–395f, 395t

proteolysis and, 396
Protein 4.1, 590t–591t
Protein disulfide isomerase (PDI), 342, 

507–508

Protein domains, 41–42, 43f
Protein folding, 36–40, 331–332, 332t

chaperone-assisted, 218–221, 220f–222f
in endoplasmic reticulum, 342–344, 

343f–344f

diseases and, 346

misfolding in diseases and, 219b, 402
spontaneous, 218, 219b

Protein kinase A (PKA), 185–186, 426–430, 

427f–428f, 441t, 444, 445f, 457, 
469–472, 470f

consensus target sequence for, 426–428, 

427f

Protein kinase C (PKC), 427f–428f, 

428–429, 439–440, 441t, 444, 447f, 
448–449, 452, 457f, 474f, 475, 
476f–477f

Protein kinase G (PKG), 460–461
Protein kinases, 13, 34f, 409

cGMP-stimulated, 418, 428f, 443–444, 

444f

ER membrane and, 335t, 341–342, 
342f

lipid-anchored protein association with 
cytoplasmic surface of ER and, 340
into mitochondria, 305–306, 305f–306f
posttranslational, 335, 340–341, 341f
Protein turnover, constitutive, 393–396, 

394f–395f, 395t

Protein tyrosine kinases, Src family of, 479b
Protein tyrosine phosphatases, 430t, 

431–432, 431f–432f

Proteins, 3–4, 29

14-3-3, 439
accessory, regulation of assembly by, 

68–69

of actin filaments, 69–70, 69f
of bacterial flagella, 70–71, 70f–71f
of bacteriophage T4, 73–74, 73f
of tobacco mosaic virus, 68–69, 71–72, 

71f

of tomato bushy stunt virus, 72–73, 72f
actin-binding. See Actin-binding proteins.
adaptor, 361, 362f
assembly, 361, 362f
associated with intermediate filaments, 

Proteins (Continued)

Bcl-2

apoptosis and, 803, 803f, 808–809, 808f
cancer and, 809, 809f

binding to specific DNA sequences, 

179–180, 179f

calcium-regulated, 462
capping, 590t–591t, 655f, 656
carrier, 253–259, 370

definition of, 241
discovery of, 255b
diversity of, 255f, 257–259
physiology and mechanisms of, 

253–257, 253f, 255f, 257t

cell adhesion, 9, 525, 525f, 659
centromere

of budding yeast, 141, 141f
mammalian, 140–141, 140f

of centrosomes, 605–606, 605f–606f, 612
of chromosome scaffold, 136–137, 138f
conformational changes of, 41
CTCF, 130, 131f, 134–135
degradation of

in endoplasmic reticulum, 344, 344f
selective, 99

Delta, 420
destruction of, cell cycle control and, 

707–708, 708f
Dis1/TOG, 603, 611
dynamics of, 41, 42f
ER shaping and fusion, 333–334, 333f
folding and oligomerization in 

endoplasmic reticulum, 342–344, 
343f–344f

diseases and, 346
unfolded protein response and, 

345–346, 345f

folding of, 36–40, 331–332, 332t

chaperone-assisted, 218–221, 220f–222f
misfolding in diseases and, 219b, 402
spontaneous, 218, 219b

functions of, phosphorylation and, 426, 

426f–427f

GPI-anchored, 233, 236–238, 236f
green fluorescent, 78, 79f, 87–88
GTP-binding. See GTPases.
helix-loop-helix, 179
helix-turn-helix, 179–180
histone, synthesis of, 740–741, 740f
of inner nuclear membrane, 149–150, 150f
interactions with solvent, 40–41, 41f
intermediate filaments, evolution of genes 

for, 613f, 614–615, 615t
leucine zipper, 179–180, 179f
lipid-anchored, 340
lipid-transfer, 341t, 348–349, 349f
major sperm, 666–667, 667f
membrane, 234–239

dynamic behavior of, 237–239, 238f
electrostatic interaction with 

phospholipids, 237

insertion of, into ER bilayer, 339f, 340
integral, 227, 234–237, 234b, 235f, 

237f

618–619, 619t, 620f

peripheral, 227, 236–237, 236f

 

Proteins (Continued)

Proteins (Continued)

transport of, within secretory system, 

subunits.

INDEX 

875

Puromycin, 215–216, 220f
Pyrin domain (PYD), 806b
Pyroptosis, 798b, 813

Q
Quantum mechanical tunneling, 326
Quasi-equivalent packing, 72
Quiescence, 713–714
Quinone, reduced, 326

R
R groups, 34
R (regulatory) subunits. See Regulatory (R) 

Rab5 GTPase, 387–388
Rab GTPases, 355–357, 357f
Rac, 588, 588f
RAD51, 752–753, 752f
Radial spoke, 659–662, 660f–662f, 664–665
Radixin, 590t–591t
Raf, 439, 441t–442t, 474f, 475, 477f
Rafts, 233, 233f
Ran, 155–159, 157f
Ran-BP1, 156–157
Ran-BP2, 156–157
Ran-GAP1, 156–157
Ran-GDP, 156–157, 157f, 159
Ran-GTP, 156–157, 157f, 159
RANKL, 561, 565
Ras, 415, 432–434, 432f–433f, 442t, 475
analysis of enzyme mechanism with, 

60–62, 60f–61f

growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase 
pathway through, to MAP kinase, 
473f–474f, 474–475, 483f

Ras-GAP, 434, 475
RAS-GTP, 474f, 475, 476f–477f
Rate constants, 53, 97–98

first-order, half-time related to, 54b
Rattus norvegicus, genome of, 109t
Rb genes, 722
RBCs. See Red blood cells (RBCs).
Rb-related proteins, 720–721, 721f
R-cadherin, 529t
RCC1. See Regulator of chromosome 

condensation 1 (RCC1).

Reaction centers, 323–324, 325f, 326, 327f
Reactions

first-order, 53–54, 54b, 54f
half-time of, first-order rate constant 

related to, 54b

light and dark, 325–326, 325f
linked, 57–58, 57f
reversible, 55–56
second-order, 54–55, 55f, 67
thermodynamics and, 56–57

Rearrangement of immunoglobulin genes, 

500–501, 502f

Receptor isoforms, 411
Receptor kinases, G-protein-coupled, 414
Receptor serine/threonine kinases, 417– 
418, 417f–418f, 421–423, 481–482, 
481f

Receptor tyrosine kinases, 414–416, 

415f–416f, 421–423, 449f

pathway through Ras to MAP kinase, 

473f–474f, 474–475, 483f

microtubule-associated. See Microtubule-

associated proteins (MAPs).

misfolded

degradation of, 393, 399, 401–402
disease and, 219b
elimination from endoplasmic 

reticulum by proteasomes, 402
modular, transcription factors as, 180, 

180f

motor. See Intracellular motility; Motor 

proteins.

multiple drug resistance, 251–252, 251f
NF-KB and, 186
nonhistone, chromosome structure and, 

136–139, 136f, 138f–139f

odorant-binding, 463
Patched, 420
phosphorylation of. See Phosphorylation: 

of proteins.

polycomb group, 130
polytopic, 339f, 340
precursors of, proteolytic processing of, 

371

RGS, 435, 469
scaffolding, 68, 474, 804–805
signal sequences in, 305, 307, 309–315, 

309f, 312f, 314f

SMC, 137–138, 138f–139f
Smoothened, 420–421
SNARE, 363–364, 364f
soluble

cycling during protein synthesis, 213
purification of, 90, 91b, 91f
translocation of, into lumen of ER, 

338–340, 339f

termination phase of, 217, 217f
tRNAs and, 210–212, 211f

tail-anchored, association with ER 

membrane, 335t, 341–342, 342f

targeting and, 6, 7f, 354–356, 362–363, 

372f, 373

TATA box-binding, 170
transmembrane, 684t

type 1, 339f, 340
type 2, 339f, 340
unfolded protein response and, 

345–346, 345f

protein-based machinery for, 
354–365, 356f

Arf family GTPases as, 355, 356f
clathrin coats as, 357–362, 357f–358f, 

362f–365f

COPI coat as, 357–362, 357f–358f, 

360f–361f

COPII coat as, 357–362, 357f–359f
GTPases as, 355–357
membrane budding coat complexes 

and, 357–362, 357f–358f

Rab GTPases as, 355–357, 357f

WASp/Scar, 655f, 656
zinc finger, 179–180, 179f

α-proteobacterium, 20, 21f
Proteoglycans, 370, 555, 559t

in extracellular matrix, 512–514, 

513f–514f, 522

Proteolysis, 348f, 396, 402, 723, 723f
Protocadherins, 529t
Protofilaments, 596–597, 597f
Proton gradient, 242–244, 317–319, 318f, 

sorting of, across secretory membrane 

321f, 322–323, 325–328, 668

system

lipid gradients in, 353–354, 353f–354f
protein-based machinery in, 354–365, 

356f

structural

Protons, amide, 35–36
P-selectin, 536t
Pseudoautosomal region, 791–792, 792f
Pseudogenes, 112
Pseudopod extension, locomotion by, 

of skeletal muscle plasma membrane, 

654–659, 654f

682t, 683–684, 683f, 684t

of telomeres, 120–121, 120f–121f

structure of, 32–42, 33f

amino acid properties and, 32–35, 

33f–35f

architecture of, 35–36, 36f
intrinsically disordered regions of, 41
modular domains in, 41–42, 43f
phosphorylation and, 426, 426f–427f
polypeptide folding in, 36–40, 37f–40f
protein dynamics and, 41, 42f
protein interactions with solvent and, 

40–41, 41f

secondary, 36–39, 38f–39f

chemotaxis of motile cells and, 657–658, 

658f

growth cone guidance and, 658–659, 659f
lamellar motility on flat surfaces and, 

654f–657f, 655–656

myosin and, 657
substrate and, 654f, 656–657, 656f

Pseudosubstrate, 428–429, 428f
Pseudosubstrate sequence, 448
PSP. See Postsynaptic potential (PSP).
PTB domains. See Phosphotyrosine-binding 

(PTB) domains.

PTEN phosphatases, 432, 449
PTS1. See Type 1 peroxisomal targeting 

synthesis of, 209–213, 209f. See also 

signal (PTS1).

Translation.

PTS2. See Type 2 peroxisomal targeting 

elongation phase of, 215–217, 217f, 

signal (PTS2).

220f

higher order features of, 217–218
initiation phase of, 214–215, 216f
mRNAs and, 209–210, 210f
ribosomes and, 7f, 10, 212–213, 

212f–214f

soluble protein factors and, 213

P4-type ATPase, 346–347, 347f
P-type cation pumps, 244t, 248–250, 

248f–249f

Pulsed-field gel, 108f
Pumps, 225–226, 241. See also Membrane 

pumps.

Ca2+, 453, 453f

876 

INDEX

Receptor-mediated endocytosis, 384f, 403, 

Research (Continued)

403f

imaging in, 75–76

Receptors, 6–7, 7f, 409, 446–447

electron microscopy, 77f, 82–85, 

methods.

Ribulose phosphate carboxylase (RUBISCO), 

Riboswitches, 42
Ribozymes, 16, 46, 48f, 205
large subunit rRNA as, 205
RNase P and RNase MRP as, 205
self-splicing introns as, 205, 206f

328

Rickettsia prowazekii

genome of, 109, 109t
mitochondria and, 317

Rigor complex of myosin, 626
Rigor of skeletal muscle, 676, 676f
Ring canals, 775–776, 777f
RISC. See RNA-induced silencing complex 

(RISC).

RITS (RNA-induced transcriptional 

silencing), 204

RNA (ribonucleic acid), 3–4

bases of, 42, 44f
biogenesis of, 166–167, 167f
depletion of, 99
heterogeneous nuclear, 167
long noncoding, 110
messenger. See MRNA (messenger RNA).
micro, 167, 202–204, 203f–204f
Piwi-interacting, 204
ribosomal. See RRNA (ribosomal RNA).
secondary structure of, 45–48, 47f–48f
small nuclear, 166–167, 189

maturation of, 201–202, 201f
pre-mRNA splicing and, 192, 194f

sugar of, 42
tertiary structure of, 46–48, 48f–49f
transfer, 46, 47f, 164, 166–167
synthesis of, 198–199, 198f
translation and, 209–212, 209f, 211f

RNA helicases, 193
RNA interference (RNAi), 88, 99, 129, 

141–142, 164, 189

RNA polymerase I, 172, 172f
RNA polymerase II, 170–172, 170t, 171f, 

201f

RNA polymerase III, 172, 172f
RNA polymerase preinitiation complex, 

165–166, 170–172, 171f–172f

transcriptional activation and, 182, 182f

RNA polymerases, 165–169, 165f, 168f, 624t

promoters of, 169, 169f

RNA processing, 144–145, 144f, 145t, 

163–164

RNA World, 15–17, 16f
RNAi. See RNA interference (RNAi).
RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), 

202–204

RNase H, 734–735
RNase MRP, 205
RNase P, 205
Robust adaptation, 486
Rod domain, intermediate filament, 614, 

614f, 615t

Rod photoreceptors, 467–468, 467b, 467f
Rotary ATPases and membrane pumps, 

243–248, 244t, 245f–247f

Rotary cilia, 665
Rough endoplasmic reticulum, 4f, 332, 332f
RPA, 734, 735f
RPTPc. See CD45.

decoy, 561, 812
glutamate, 273, 273f
for G-protein isoforms, 435t
list of, 421–423
nuclear transport, 156, 157f
odorant, 464f, 465
orphan, 412
plasma membrane. See Plasma membrane 

receptors.

signal recognition particle, 335–337,  

337f

steroid, 179, 179f, 421–423
Recessive mutations, 86b, 87
Recognition of DNA lesions, 750
Recombination

homologous, 85t, 94, 94f
in meiosis, 781–785, 783f–784f, 784b
recessive, 86b

Recombination enzymes, 501–502
Recombination nodules, 784, 789f
Reconstitution of function from isolated 

components, 98

Rectification, 283
Recycling endosomes, 377–378, 386, 388f
Red algae, 22–23, 23f
Red blood cells (RBCs), 233–234, 233f, 

235f, 237–238, 237f, 494f, 494t, 495

Reduced quinone, 326
Reductional division, 779, 780f–781f

suppression DNA replication between 

meiosis II and, 792

Reductionism, 30, 75
“Reference genome”, 113
Regional centromere, 114
Regulated secretory pathway, 374–376, 

374f–375f

Regulator of chromosome condensation 1 

(RCC1), 157

Regulatory (R) subunits, 428–430, 430t, 

444, 445f

Relaxed skeletal muscle, 676, 677f
Repetitive DNA, 110–111
Replication factor C (RFC), 734, 735f
Replication foci, 736–737, 737f
Replication fork, 727, 728f
Replication fork collapse, 740
Replication stress, 739–740, 739f
Replicators, 728–729, 728f
Replicons, 700, 728–729, 730f
Replisome, 728–729
Reporter gene, 181f
Rescue, 598–600, 598f, 599t
Research, 75–101

choice of organisms for, 85–87, 86b
gene and protein discovery and, 87–92

83f–84f

light microscopy. See Light microscopy 

mathematical models of systems and, 100
partners and pathways and, 95–97

biochemical methods for, 96
genetics and, 96–97, 96f–97f
large-scale screening with microarrays 

and, 97, 98f

rates and affinities and, 97–98
tests of physiological function and

anatomic tests and, 98–99
physiological tests and, 99–100
reconstitution of function from isolated 

components and, 98

Residual bodies, 379–381, 398–399, 398f
Response regulators, 482, 482b, 483f
Resting state of seven-helix receptors, 413, 

413f

Restrictin, 523
Restriction point, 699–700, 713, 713f, 

719–720, 719f–720f

cancer and, 699–700, 721–722, 722f–723f
regulation of cell proliferation by, 

720–721, 721f

Restrictive conditions, 87
Restrictive temperature, 702b
RET protooncogene, 529t, 530f, 532
Retina, 466–469
Retinal, 412f, 413
Retrograde movements, 643–644
Retrograde traffic, 351f, 352
Retrograde transport, 640t, 643–644
Retromer, 374, 390
Retrotransposons, 111, 111f
Reversal potential, 283
Reverse genetics, 88
Reverse transcriptase, 111
Reverse turns, 39
Reversible reactions, 55–56
RFC. See Replication factor C (RFC).
RGD sequence motif, 532–533, 535–536
RGS proteins, 435, 469
Rh antigens, 276–277, 277b
Rho, 588, 588f
Rho family GTPases, 434, 588, 588f
Rho-dependent terminators, 175f
Rhodopseudomonas viridis, reaction center 

of, 326, 327f

Rhodopsin, 412f, 413, 467f, 468
Rhodopsin kinase, 469
Rho-GDI, 433–434, 442t
Rho-independent terminators, 174, 175f
Rho-kinase, 434
Ribonucleic acid. See RNA (ribonucleic 

biochemical fractionation and, 88–90, 

acid).

89b, 89f, 91b, 91f

genomics and reverse genetics and,  

88

isolation of genes and cDNAs and, 

90–92, 92f–93f

molecular structure and, 95
through mutations, 87–88

Ribose, 42, 44f
Ribosomal RNA. See RRNA (ribosomal RNA).
Ribosomes, 3–4, 46, 209, 209f

free, 4f
macromolecular assembly and, 5–6
protein synthesis and, 7f, 10, 212–213, 

212f–214f

genome engineering and, 85t, 92–95, 94f

synthesis of, 199–201, 200f

 

INDEX 

877

RRNA (ribosomal RNA), 146, 166, 212–213, 

Second messengers, 409, 443–462

Segregation

calcium as, 409, 452–459

calcium dynamics in cells and, 

457–458, 459f

calcium targets and, 458–459, 462
calcium-release channels and, 453f, 

454–457, 455f–457f, 455t

overview of calcium regulation and, 

452–453, 453f, 453t, 462

removal from cytoplasm, 453f, 454, 

454t

cyclic nucleotides as, 443–445, 444f–445f
lipid-derived, 445–452, 446f

agonists and receptors and, 446–447
cross talk and, 452
enzyme reactions producing, 445–446
for intercellular communication, 

achiasmate, 785
in meiosis, 781, 781f

Selectins, 489–490, 526, 536–537, 536f–

537f, 536t

Selective permeability, 281
Selectivity filter, 262–264, 264f
Self-assembly, 5–6, 6f, 63. See also 

Macromolecular assembly.

Self-avoidance in nervous system, 540–541
Self-correcting signal complexes, 432
“Selfish DNA” hypothesis, 112
SemiSWEET sugar carriers, 258
SEMs. See Scanning electron microscopes 

(SEMs).

Senescence, 121, 713–714
Sensors, DNA damage checkpoints and, 701, 

449–452, 450f–451f

748

actin-based movement of organelles in, 

and, 448–449, 448f

212f, 214f

5S rRNA, 166–167

RUBISCO. See Ribulose phosphate 

carboxylase (RUBISCO).

Runx2/Cbfa1, 560
Ryanodine receptor, 679
Ryanodine receptor calcium channels, 454, 

455f, 455t, 456–457, 457f, 679

S
S phase, 696–700, 698f, 741

cytoplasm during, 709
DNA replication during. See DNA 

replication.

histone protein synthesis and, 740–741, 

740f

intra-S checkpoint and, 739–740, 739f

SAC. See Spindle assembly checkpoint 

(SAC).

Saccharomyces cerevisiae

649f

centromeres of, 116, 141, 141f
cytokinesis in, 775
genetics for study of, 702b
genome of, 109–110, 109t, 110f
Golgi apparatus of, 369
replication origins in, 729–730, 729f–

730f

Salt transport in kidney, 287
SAM complex (sorting and assembly 

machinery of the outer membrane), 
304–305

Sar1, 355
Sarcoglycans, 538, 684t
Sarcomeres, 671–672, 672f–673f
Sarcoplasmic reticulum, 454
SAS-6, 612
α-satellite DNA, 116–117, 116f
Satellite DNAs, 111, 116, 116f
Saxitoxin, 279
Scaffold proteins, 68, 474, 804–805
Scanning electron microscopes (SEMs), 85
SCAP. See SREBP cleavage-activating protein 

(SCAP).

ScaRNAs. See Small Cajal body RNAs 

(scaRNAs).
Scc1, 137–138
SCF, 708, 708f, 710t–711t, 723, 723f
Schizosaccharomyces pombe

cell cycle in, 701, 702b
centromere organization of, 113–115, 

114f

cytokinesis in, 773–774, 775f
genome of, 109, 109t
RNAi at, 141–142

Scinderlin, 590t–591t
Scleroderma, 140f
Sclerostin, 559–560, 560f
Scorpion toxin, 279
Scruin, 590t–591t
SDS. See Sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS).
Sec61 complex, 337–338, 338f–339f
SecA, 312, 312f
SecB, 311–312, 312f
Seckel syndrome, 749t

phosphatidylcholine signaling pathways 

and, 449, 449f

phosphoinositide signaling pathways 

protein kinase C and, 447f, 448
sphingomyelin/ceramide signaling 

pathways and, 452, 452f

targets of, 447–448, 447f–448f

nitric oxide as, 459–461, 460f
seven-helix receptors and, 413f, 414

Secondary constriction of chromosomes, 147
Secondary structures, 36–39, 38f–39f

of DNA, 43–45, 46f
of RNA, 45–48, 47f–48f

Secondary transporters, 241
Second-order reactions, 54–55, 55f, 67
Secreted phosphoprotein, 523
Secretory granules, 374–376, 374f–375f
Secretory membrane system, 351–353, 

351f–352f

lipid gradients in membrane trafficking of, 

353–354, 353f–354f

protein-based machinery in membrane 

trafficking of, 354–365, 356f

Arf family GTPases as, 355, 356f
clathrin coats as, 357–362, 357f–358f, 

362f–365f

COPI coat as, 357–362, 357f–358f, 

360f–361f

COPII coat as, 357–362, 357f–359f
GTPases as, 355–357
membrane bending proteins as, 

364–365, 365f

membrane budding coat complexes 

and, 357–362, 357f–358f

Rab GTPases as, 355–357, 357f
SNAP receptor components as, 

363–364, 364f

Sensory cilia, 464
Sensory neurons, olfactory, 464, 464f
Separase, 767, 768f
SER. See Smooth endoplasmic reticulum 

(SER).

Serglycan, 514f, 522
Serine

phosphorylation and, 425
structure of, 33f

Serine/threonine kinase receptor pathways 

through Smads, 481–482, 481f

Serine/threonine kinases phosphorylation 

and, 426, 427f–428f, 428

PPP family of, 429–431, 430f, 430t

Serine/threonine phosphates, PPM family of, 

430t, 431

Serotonin, 291f, 295
Seven-helix receptors, 412–414, 412f–413f, 

414t, 421–423, 434f, 449f, 463

cardiac muscle and, 687–688, 687f

Severe combined immunodeficiency, 749t
Severin, 583–585, 583f, 590t–591t
Sex, second olfactory system and, 466b
Sex chromosomes in meiosis, behavior of, 

791–792, 792f

Sexual reproduction, meiosis and, 779–780
SH2. See Src homology 2 (SH2).
SH2 domains, 43f, 415, 437, 439, 474f, 

475–476, 477f, 478, 479b, 480

SH3 domains, 43f, 439f, 440, 475, 479b
SHC, 475–476
Sheet-forming collagen, 506f, 509, 509f, 521
β-sheets, 36–37, 38f–39f, 39
Shelterin associates, 120, 120f
Shigella, actin polymerization and, 649
Short interspersed nuclear elements (SINES). 

See SINES (short interspersed nuclear 
elements).

tethering factors as, 362–363, 363f

ShRNAs. See Small heterochromatic RNAs 

Secretory pathway, 302, 374–376, 

(shRNAs).

374f–375f

Sec-signal sequences, 311–312
Securin, 767, 768f
SecYE translocon, 311–315, 312f, 314f
Sedimentation coefficient, 95
Sedimentation equilibrium, 88–90
Sedimentation velocity, 88–90
Segmental duplications in human genome, 

112–113, 113f

Sialoproteins, 559t
Sickle cell disease, 495
Side chains, 34, 36
Signal peptidases, 312, 338–340
Signal recognition particle (SRP), 335–337, 

336f–337f

translocation dependent on, 313

Signal recognition particle-receptor, 

335–337, 337f

878 

INDEX

Signal sequences, 10–11

in proteins, 305, 307, 309–315, 309f, 

312f, 314f, 335

Signal transduction, 6–7

Site-directed mutagenesis, 92, 93f
Skelemin, 682t
Skeletal muscle stem cells, 716–717
Skeletal muscles, 671–684, 672f

cytokine receptors, JAK/STAT pathways 

actomyosin apparatus of, 671–676, 

and, 479–481, 480f

by G-protein-coupled, seven-helix 
transmembrane receptors, 463

672f–673f

intermediate filaments and, 675–676, 

675f

growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase 

thick filaments and, 671–672, 674–675, 

Smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER), 333, 

678–679, 679f–680f

Smooth muscle, 672f, 688–691, 689f–690f
Smooth swimming, 483–484, 484f
Smoothened protein, 420–421
SNAP receptor, 363–364, 364f
SNARE pin, 363
SNARE proteins, 363–364, 364f
SnoRNAs. See Small nucleolar RNAs 

pathway through Ras to MAP kinase 
and, 473f–474f, 474–475, 483f

insulin pathways to GLUT4 and MAP 

kinase and, 475–478, 476f

MAP kinase pathways to nucleus and, 

473–474, 473f–474f, 476f–477f, 483f
metabolic regulation through β-adrenergic 

receptor and, 469–472, 470f, 471t

674f, 682t

(snoRNAs).

thin filaments and, 671–674, 673f–674f, 

682t

titin filaments and, 675, 675f

molecular basis of contraction of, 

676–678

crossbridge behavior and, 676f–677f, 

677–678

SnRNAs. See Small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs).
SnRNP particles. See Small nuclear 

ribonucleoprotein (snRNP) particles.

Sodium channels, voltage-gated, 269f, 270, 

290, 293f, 295, 686b

Sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS), 89b
Solvent, protein interaction with, 40–41,  

odor detection by olfactory system and, 

sliding filament mechanism and, 

41f

463–466

adaptation and, 464f, 465–466
cAMP production and, 465
cyclic nucleotide-gated channels and, 

465

odorant receptors and, 464f, 465
processing in brain and, 464f, 466, 

466b

sensory neurons and, 464, 464f

photon detection by vertebrate retina 

and, 466–469

overview of, 466–468, 467b, 467f
positive arm of signal cascade and, 

468–469, 469b

recovery and adaptation and, 469, 469b
rhodopsin and, 467f, 468

676–677, 676f–677f

plasma membrane system and

smooth endoplasmic reticulum and, 

678–679, 679f–680f

structural proteins of, muscular 

dystrophy defects and, 682t, 
683–684, 683f, 684t

regulation of contraction of, 678–682, 678f
action potential coupling to contraction 

and, 678–680, 679f–681f

calcium spike transduction into 

contraction and, 680–681, 681f
motor neuron control and, 678, 678f
by myosin light chains, 681–682
synaptic transmission at neuromuscular 

junctions and, 678

serine/threonine kinase receptor 

specialized cells of, 682–684, 682t, 683f, 

pathways through Smads and, 
481–482, 481f

684t

Skeleton, formation and growth of, 

signaling pathways influencing gene 

561–565, 562f–564f

expression and, 472–473, 472f–474f, 
476f–477f, 480f–481f

T-lymphocyte pathways through 

nonreceptor tyrosine kinases and, 
477f, 478–479, 479b, 480f–481f

Skin wounds, repair of, 565–567, 566f
Sliding clamp, 751
Sliding filament mechanism of skeletal 

muscle contraction, 676–677, 
676f–677f

transcription factors and, 184–186

cAMP signaling and, 185–186
NF-KB signaling and, 185f, 186
steroid hormone receptors and, 

184–185, 185f

transcription factors in development 

and, 185f, 186

two-component phosphotransfer systems 

and, 482–486, 482b, 483f

Slit, 659
Slow axonal transport, 640t, 644–646, 645f
Smads (Sma- and Mad-related proteins)

serine/threonine kinase receptor 

pathways through, 417, 421–423
signal transduction and, 481–482, 481f

Small Cajal body RNAs (scaRNAs), 202
Small cross-linking proteins, 590t–591t
Small heterochromatic RNAs (shRNAs), 204, 

bacterial chemotaxis and, 483f–485f, 

204f

Somatic mutations of immunoglobulins, 

500–501, 502f
Sorting nexins, 390
SOS, 475, 476f–477f
SPARC (secreted protein rich in cysteine), 

523

Spasatin, 603
Spasmoneme, 666, 666f
SPBs. See Spindle pole bodies (SPBs).
Speckles (nuclear domains), 144–145, 144f, 

145t

Spectrin, 237, 237f, 590t–591t
Sperm, nematode, actin substitute in, 

666–667, 667f

Spermatids, 793
Spermatogenesis, 131f, 793
Spermatogonia, 793
Spermatozoa, 793
Spherocytosis, hereditary, 495
Sphingolipids, 353–354, 353f–354f

in lipid bilayer, 229, 230f

Sphingomyelin, 371
Sphingomyelinase, 452, 452f
Sphingomyelin/ceramide signaling 

pathways, 452, 452f

Sphingomyelins, 229, 230f, 445, 446f
Sphingosine, 229, 230f, 452
Sphingosine-1-phosphate, 452
Spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC), 701, 

707–708, 758–759, 763–764, 764f

Spindle checkpoint, 764–765, 764f
Spindle pole, 757, 757f

in anaphase, 768–770, 769f
assembly of, 760–761, 760f–761f
chromosome attachment to, 761–764, 

485–486

Small interfering RNAs (siRNAs), 189, 

762f–763f

Signaling cadherins, 529t
Signaling cascade, 425
SIM. See Structured illumination microscopy 

203–204, 203f

Small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP) 

particles, 192

in metaphase, 766–767, 766f
organization of, 759–760, 760f, 765f
Spindle pole bodies (SPBs), 593, 593f, 

(SIM).

Small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs), 166–167, 189

608f–609f, 609–610

SINES (short interspersed nuclear elements), 

111–112, 111f

Sinoatrial node, 685–686, 685f
SiRNAs. See Small interfering RNAs 

(siRNAs).

Sister chromatids, 107, 108b, 700, 756

separation of, in anaphase of mitosis, 

767–768, 768f

Sister kinetochores, 759

maturation of, 201–202, 201f
pre-mRNA splicing and, 192, 194f

Small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs), 199, 

200f–201f, 202

Small subunits of ribosomes, 212, 213f
SMC2, 137, 138f, 756–757
SMC proteins, 137–138, 138f–139f
SMN (survival of motor neurons) protein, 

145, 145t, 201–202

Spire, 581–582
Splice sites, 192–193, 193f
Spliceosomes, 42
Splicing, pre-mRNA, 192–194

alternative splicing and, 193–194, 195f
AT-AC introns and, 193, 193f
localization of, 194
signals for, 192, 193f
splicing reaction and, 192–193, 193f–194f

 

Spoke ring, 151, 153f
Sponges, 24–25
Spontaneous protein folding, 218, 219b
Src family protein tyrosine kinases, 479b
Src homology 2 (SH2), 415, 416f
Src homology (SH) domains, 437
SREBP. See Steroid regulator element-

binding protein (SREBP).

Structured illumination microscopy (SIM), 

80f–81f, 81t, 82

Strychnine, 275
Substrate, pseudopods and, 654f, 656–657, 

656f

Subunit flux. See Treadmilling.
Subunit molecules, 63. See also 

Macromolecular assembly.

SREBP cleavage-activating protein (SCAP), 

assembly of macromolecular structures 

347–348, 348f

SRNAs, 202
SRP. See Signal recognition particle (SRP).
SRP receptors, 336–337, 337f
SR-proteins, 192
Starch, 49, 328
START, 719–720
STAT (signal transducer and activator of 

transcription), 479–481, 480f

Stathmin, 602–603
STED microscopy. See Stimulated emission 

depletion (STED) microscopy.

Stem body matrix, 769
Stem cell factor. See SCF.
Stem cell niches, 716
Stem cells, 696–697, 713, 715, 715b–718b

adult, properties of, 716
cancer, 717
committed, 715–716
discovery and defining features of, 

715–716

embryonic, 715
epidermal, 716, 717f
hematopoietic, 494, 715–716
meristematic, 717
mesenchymal, 491, 491f–492f
pluripotent, 493–494, 494f, 715
skeletal muscle, 716–717
therapeutic applications of, 717–718
tissue, 715
transgenic animals and, 717

Stem-loop structure, 46
Stereochemical isomers, 48
Steroid hormone receptors, gene expression 

regulation by, 184–185, 185f

Steroid receptors, 179, 179f, 421–423
Steroid regulator element-binding protein 

(SREBP), 347–348, 348f

Sterols, 229–230, 230f
Stimulated emission depletion (STED) 

microscopy, 81t, 82

Stochastic optical reconstruction 

microscopy (STORM), 81–82, 81t

Stokes radius, 91b
STOP, 611
Store-operated Ca2+ entry, 453f, 454
STORM. See Stochastic optical 

reconstruction microscopy (STORM).

Stratified epithelium, 543, 544f
Streptomyces lividans, as membrane 

channel model, 262–265, 264f

Stress fibers, 575–576, 576f
Stress responses of endoplasmic reticulum, 

345–346, 345f

Striated muscle, 672f, 679f, 688–689
Stroke, brain damage in, 814, 814f
Stroma of chloroplasts, 324, 324f–325f, 

327f, 328

from, 63–64, 63f, 64b, 65f

reactions in, 67
of symmetrical structures, 65–67, 66f

biosynthesis and degradation of, 
regulation of assembly by, 68

covalent modification of, regulation of 

assembly by, 68

in hexagonal arrays in plane sheets, 65, 

66f

polymerization of, 65–66
proteins, composition of, 95
regular polygons of, spherical assemblies 

formed by, 66f

Sugars, 29, 48–51, 50f–51f, 342–343, 

343f–344f, 399, 512, 513f, 514–515

Sulfonylurea receptors (SURs), 268
Supercoils, 44–45, 46f
Superhelices, 44–45, 46f
Superresolution fluorescence microscopy, 

81–82, 81t, 82f, 130–131, 131f

Suppressor mutations, 96–97, 96f
SURs. See Sulfonylurea receptors (SURs).
Surveillance complex, 197
Survival of motor neurons (SMN) protein. 
See SMN (survival of motor neurons) 
protein.

SWEET sugar carriers, 258
Switch I/II, 60–61, 60f, 432–433, 432f
Symmetry, laws of, 64b, 65f
Sympathetic nerves, heart rate and, 687, 

687f

Symporters, 254–256, 254f–255f, 257t
Synapses, 291–297, 292f–293f

of central nervous system, 293f, 294–295
modification by drugs and disease, 295
modification by use, 295–297, 296f

excitatory, 295, 296f
inhibitory, 295
neuromuscular junction and, 292f, 294

Synapsis, 785f, 786–789, 787f–788f
Synaptic plasticity, 295–296, 296f
Synaptic transmission, 678
Synaptic vesicles

, 292f–293f, 294–296, 296f

Synaptonemal complex, 785f, 786–789, 

787f–789f

Syndecan, 514, 514f, 522
Synemin, 615t
Syntelic attachment, 763
Synthetic lethal mutations, 96–97, 96f

T
T cells. See Lymphocytes.
T tubules, 678–679, 679f–680f
Tacket, John, 152f
TADs, 134–138, 134f
TAFIIs. See TBP-associated factors (TAFIIs).
TAG-1 (transient axonal protein-1), 528t

INDEX 

879

Tail of motor proteins, 623
Tail retraction, myosin and, 657
Tail-anchored proteins, association with ER 

membrane, 335t, 341–342, 342f

Talin, 534, 534f, 590t–591t
TAP, 401
TAP1, 251
TAP2, 251
TAP (transporter associated with antigen 

presentation), 401

TAP tagging, 96
Tar receptors, 482b, 483f–485f, 485–486
Targeting signals, 303–304
TATA box, 169
TATA box-binding protein, 170
TATAAA, 170–171
Tau, 590t–591t, 601–602, 601f–602f, 611
Taxol, 595b
TBP-associated factors (TAFIIs), 170–171, 

170t, 171f

TBSV. See Tomato bushy stunt virus (TBSV).
T-cadherin, 529t
T-cell antigen receptors, 477f, 478–479, 

481f, 502–503

Tektin, 611
Telomerase, 112, 118–120, 119f–120f
Telomeres, 10, 10f, 107–108, 117–122

aging and, 121–122, 122f
cancer and, 121–122, 122f
definition of, 108b
DNA structure of, 118
replication of ends of chromosomal DNA 

by, 118–120, 118f–119f

structural proteins of, 120–121, 120f–121f

Telophase, 700, 755, 755f–756f, 770–771, 

770f

nuclear envelope reassembly in, 770–771, 

770f

Temperature, 702b
Temperature sensitive (ts) mutations, 702b
Tenascin, 516–517, 517f
Teratocarcinomas, 718
Termination

of DNA replication, 736b
of transcription, 165–166, 165f, 173–175, 

174f–175f

of translation, 216f–217f, 217

Termination codons, 209–210
Terminators, 174, 175f
Tertiary structures of RNA, 46–48, 48f–49f
Tetanus, 681, 681f
Tethering factors, 362–363, 363f
Tetrahymena, linker histone genes in, 127
Tetramers, 614
Tetrodotoxin, 279
TFIIA, 170t, 171–172
TFIIB, 170t, 171f, 172
TFIID, 170–171, 170t
TFIIE, 170t, 172
TFIIF, 170t, 171f, 172
TFIIH, 170t, 172
TFs. See Transcription factors (TFs).
TGF-β. See Transforming growth factor-β 

(TGF-β).

TGN. See Trans-Golgi network (TGN).
Thapsigargin, 454
Thermodynamics, 29, 56–57

880 

INDEX

Thermogenesis, 493
Thick filaments of skeletal muscle, 671–672, 

674–675, 674f, 682t

673f–674f, 682t

Thin sections, 82, 83f
30-nm fibers, 123, 130–131, 131f, 135
3′ splice site, 192
Threonine

phosphorylation and, 425
structure of, 33f

Threshold, 289, 289f
Thrombopoietin, 495
Thrombospondin, 523
Thromboxanes, 446, 450, 450f
Thylakoid membranes, 324
Thymine, 42, 44f
β-thymosins, 580, 590t–591t
Thymosin-β4, 580, 587, 590t–591t
Tic, 307–308, 308f
Tight junctions, 490, 543–546, 544f–545f, 

544t

TIM complexes, 304–307, 305f–306f
TIMPs. See Tissue inhibitors of 
metalloproteinases (TIMPs).

+TIPs, 603–604, 603f, 611
-TIPs, 611
TIRF microscopy. See Total internal 
reflection fluorescence (TIRF) 
microscopy.

(TIMPs), 520

Tissue stem cells, 715
Titin filaments, 675, 675f, 682t
T-loop, 120f
TLRs. See Toll-like receptors (TLRs).
T-lymphocyte pathways through 

nonreceptor tyrosine kinases, 477f, 
478–479, 479b, 480f–481f

TMBIM channels, 278
TMV. See Tobacco mosaic virus (TMV).
TNF. See Tumor necrosis factor (TNF).
Tobacco mosaic virus (TMV)

assembly of, 68–69, 71–72, 71f
conservation of genome by, 63–64

TOC, 307–308, 308f
Toll-like receptors (TLRs), 420, 496–497, 

498f

TOM complexes, 304–305, 305f–306f, 307
Tomato bushy stunt virus (TBSV), 72–73, 

72f

Tomography, 82–84, 83f
Topoisomerases, 45
Tor kinase, 393–394, 394f
Torpedo model (transcription termination), 

191

Total internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF) 

microscopy, 79, 80f–81f

Transcription, 10, 165–169, 165f

activation of, 182, 182f
arrest of, 173–174, 174f
catalytic cycle in, 173, 174f
chromatin and, 177–184, 177f, 178t

combinatorial control and, 183–184

Transducin, 468

Thin filaments of skeletal muscle, 671–674, 

transcription factor activity and, 

Transcription (Continued)

Transduction, 409. See also Signal 

gene-specific eukaryotic GTFs and, 

transduction.

178–180, 179f

180–184, 180f–184f

closed complex, 169–170, 170f
elongation in, 165–166, 165f, 171f, 

172–173, 174f

factor interactions and, 180, 180f

Transesterification, 193
Transfer RNAs. See TRNAs (transfer RNAs).
Transformed cells, 722, 722f
Transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), 
417–418, 481–482, 481f, 714–715

Transgenic animals, 717
Trans-Golgi network (TGN)

transcriptional repressors and, 182, 

to endosome/lysosomal system, 373–374, 

182f

gene-specific, 175–177

373f

secretory granules and, 374–376, 

DNA-binding domains and, 179–180, 

374f–375f

179f

in eukaryotes, 176–180, 176f, 179f
mapping transcription components on 

the genome, 177–178, 177f

in prokaryotes, 175–176, 176f

initiation of. See Transcription initiation.
mRNA processing and, 190–192, 190f
open complex, 165–166, 169–170, 170f
pausing of, 173–174, 174f
preinitiation complex, 165–166, 170–172, 

171f–172f

repressors of, 182, 182f
RNA biogenesis and, 166–167, 167f
RNA polymerases and, 167–169, 

168f–169f

sorting from, 371–376, 371f–375f
trafficking to plasma membrane in 

polarized cells and, 372–373, 372f

transport of cargo to the plasma 

membrane and, 371f

Transient receptor potential (TRP) channels, 

271–272, 271f

Transit sequences, 307
Translation, 8–9, 166–167, 189–190, 190f, 

209, 209f

elongation phase of, 215–217, 217f, 

220f

higher order features of, 217–218
initiation phase of, 214–215, 216f
ribosomes and, 7f, 10, 212–213, 

termination of, 165–166, 165f, 173–175, 

212f–214f

Tissue culture, 86–87
Tissue fibronectin in extracellular matrix, 

transcription unit and, 166, 166f

Transcription elongation, 165–166, 165f, 

516, 516f

171f, 172–173, 174f

Tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases 

Transcription factors (TFs), 10, 125, 125f, 

174f–175f

165

binding to eukaryotic promoter proximal 

and enhancer elements, 180–184, 
181f–183f

in development, 185f, 186
gene-specific, eukaryotic, 178–180
as modular proteins, 180, 180f
modulation of activity of, 184, 184f
signal transduction and, 184–186

cAMP signaling and, 185–186
NF-KB signaling and, 185f, 186
steroid hormone receptors and, 

184–185, 185f

Transcription initiation, 165–166, 165f, 

169–173, 170f, 170t

general eukaryotic transcription factors 

and, 170

in prokaryotes, 175–176, 176f
RNA polymerase I factors and, 172, 172f
RNA polymerase II factors and, 170–172, 

170t, 171f

RNA polymerase III factors and, 172, 172f
transcriptional activation and, 182, 182f
transcriptional repressors and, 182, 182f
Transcription termination, 165–166, 165f, 

173–175, 174f–175f

Transcription unit, 166, 166f
Transcytosis, 382f
Transducers, DNA damage checkpoints and, 

701, 748

mRNAs and, 209–210, 210f

soluble protein factors and, 213
termination phase of, 217, 217f
tRNAs and, 210–212, 211f

Translocation. See Protein translocation.
Translocation GTPases, 442t
Translocons, 304, 304f, 307–308, 312f, 

335–336

SecYE, 311–315, 312f, 314f
Transmembrane proteins, 684t

type 1, 339f, 340
type 2, 339f, 340
unfolded protein response and, 345–346, 

345f

Transmembrane segments, 234–236, 235f
amino acid sequence identification of, 

234b

channels with one transmembrane 

segments and, 266–267

amiloride-sensitive, 266–267
ATP-gated, 267
mechanosensitive, 266, 267f

channels with four transmembrane 

segments and, 268

Transmission electron microscopy, 82, 83f
Transphorylation, growth factor signaling 

pathways and, 473f, 475

Transposable elements, 111
Transposition, 41–42, 111f
Transposons, 110–112, 111f
Treadmilling, 580, 766–767, 766f
Trichothiodystrophy, 749t
Trigger factor, protein folding and, 218–220, 

220f

Triglycerides, 492

in lipid bilayer, 230

transcription factors in development 

segment, 266

and, 185f, 186

channels with two transmembrane 

 

Trimeric G-proteins, 421–423, 434–437, 

Type 2 peroxisomal targeting signal (PTS2), 

309

Type 1 transmembrane proteins, 339f, 340
Type 2 transmembrane proteins, 339f, 340
Type I ABC transporters, 314f, 315
Type II collagen, 556, 556f
Type II photosystems, energy capture and 

transduction by, 326, 327f
Type II polyproline helices, 440
Type II secretion, prokaryotic protein 

export via, 313, 314f

INDEX 

881

Van der Waals interactions, 58–59
VAP, 334, 349
Vasodilator-stimulated protein. See VASP.
VASP, 583, 583f, 652–653, 656
VCAM-1 (vascular cell adhesion molecule-1), 

528t

Versican, 522
Vesicles, clathrin-coated, 378f, 383f–384f, 

384–385

Vesicular trafficking, 301–302
Vesicular tubular carriers (VTCs), 352, 352f, 

Type III secretion, prokaryotic protein 

359, 366f

export via, 314f, 315

Type IV secretion, prokaryotic protein 

export via, 313, 314f

Type XVII collagen, 552–553
Tyrosine

phosphorylation and, 425
structure of, 33f

Tyrosine kinases, 426, 441t

nonreceptor

Vibrio cholerae, ZO-toxin of, 546
Villin, 590t–591t
Vimentin, 614, 614f, 615t, 616–617, 617f
Vinblastine, 595b
Vinculin, 534, 534f
Viruses

HIV, 389–390
as “opportunistic endocytic ligands”, 391, 

391f

JAK, 416–417, 417f, 421–423, 479–481, 

programmed cell death and, 802–803

480f

Src, 427f–428f, 428–429, 431–432, 437, 

Viscoelasticity, 588
Visual signal processing

T-lymphocyte pathways through, 477f, 

478–479, 479b, 480f–481f

receptor, 414–416, 415f–416f, 421–423, 

449f

Tyrosine-based sorting motifs, 361

U
U1 snRNA, 192–193
U2 snRNA, 192–193
U4 snRNA, 192–193
U5 snRNA, 192–193
U6 snRNA, 192–193
Ubiquitin, 302, 707

overview of, 466–468, 467b, 467f
positive arm of signal cascade and, 468, 

469b

recovery and adaptation and, 469, 469b
rhodopsin and, 468

Vitamin D-binding protein, 590t–591t
Vitronectin, 523
Vitronectin receptor, 533t
VLA-4 (very late antigen-4), 533t
Voltage-gated channels, 268–269, 269f

calcium, 270–271, 271t, 292f, 294–295, 

453f, 454, 455f, 455t, 456–457, 686b

potassium, 269–270, 269f, 290, 295, 

686b

in protein degradation, 394–396, 

sodium, 269f, 270, 290, 293f, 295, 686b

394f–395f, 395t

Ubiquitin ligases, 394–395, 395f, 395t
Ubiquitin-activating enzyme, 394, 395f, 707
Ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme, 394–395, 

395f, 707

Ubiquitin-interacting motifs (UIMs), 388f
Ubiquitylation

modification of proteins by, 394–396, 

394f–395f, 395t

motifs specifying, 395t, 401–402

UIMs. See Ubiquitin-interacting motifs 

(UIMs).

Unfolded protein response (UPR), 345–346, 

345f

Uniporters, 253f–254f, 254, 256, 257t
Unique-sequence DNA, 110
Unprocessed pseudogenes, 112
3′ untranslated region (3′ UTR), 191–192
UPR. See Unfolded protein response (UPR).
Uracil, 42, 44f

Voltage-sensing domains, 268–269, 269f
Volume regulation, 288–289, 288f
von Willebrand factor, 523

platelet receptor for, 537–538, 539f

V-SNAREs, 363, 365–366, 375
VTCs. See Vesicular tubular carriers (VTCs).
V-type ATPases, 247, 560–561
V-type rotary ATPases, 387, 388f

W
WASp. See Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome 

protein (WASp).

WASp/Scar proteins, 655f, 656
Waste management nucleases, 808
Water

channels, 276f, 277
molecular structure of, 31–32
transport of, 287

WD repeats, 434–435
Wee1 kinase, 702, 702f, 710t–711t, 744, 

Tropomyosin, 584, 590t–591t, 672–674, 

479b

434f, 442t

cardiac muscle and, 687–688, 687f
in disease, 436–437, 436t
guanosine triphosphatase cycle and, 434f, 

435–436

mechanisms of effector activation and, 

436

signal transduction by seven-helix 

receptors coupled to, 463

subunit cycles and, 436
subunit diversity of, 435, 435t

Trimeric GTP-binding proteins, 412
Tri-methyllysine, 34f
Triple helix of polypeptides in collagen, 

505–506, 505f

Trisomy 21, 794–795, 795f
TRNAs (transfer RNAs), 164, 166–167

crystal structures of, 46, 47f
synthesis of, 198–199, 198f
translation and, 209–212, 209f, 211f

Tropoelastins, 511
Tropomodulin, 584, 590t–591t, 673, 673f, 

682t

673f, 682t

Troponins, 672–673, 673f, 682t
TRP channels. See Transient receptor 

potential (TRP) channels.

Trypanosoma brucei, 236–237
Tryptophan, structure of, 33f
T-SNAREs, 363, 375
α-tubulin, 593

of centrioles, 605
structure of, 595–596, 596f

β-tubulin, 593

of centrioles, 605
hydrolysis of GTP bound to, 598–599
microtubule structure and, 596–597
pharmacologic tools for studying, 595b
structure of, 595–596, 596f

γ-tubulin, 593, 612, 760
of centrioles, 604, 606
microtubule-organizing centers and, 600f
γ-tubulin ring complexes (γTuRC), 604–607, 

606f

Tubulins, 593, 593f

evolution and diversity of, 595–596
pharmacologic tools for studying, 595b
structure of, 595–596, 596f

Tumble, 483–484, 484f
Tumor necrosis factor (TNF), 419–420, 419f

sphingomyelin/ceramide signaling 

pathways and, 452, 452f

Tumor necrosis factor receptor family, 

419–420, 419f

Tumor suppressor genes, 722, 723f
γTuRC. See γ-tubulin ring complexes 

(γTuRC).

Two-component phosphotransfer systems, 

cytosine deamination to, 195, 195f

744f, 749f

482–486, 482b, 483f

Usher pathway, prokaryotic protein export 

bacterial chemotaxis and, 483f–485f, 

via, 313, 314f

485–486

Utrophin, 590t–591t, 684t

Two-component receptors, 421–423, 482b
Two-hybrid assay, 97, 97f
Type 1 peroxisomal targeting signal (PTS1), 

309, 309f, 310t

V
Vacuoles, autophagic, 398–399
Valine, structure of, 33f

Cdk inactivation and, 706, 706f
SCF and, 708, 708f

White blood cells, 497, 497f
White fat cells, 491f, 492, 493f
Wild type, 86b, 87
Williams-Beuren syndrome, 113, 113f
Wilson disease, 249–250

882 

INDEX

Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASp), 

Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), 749t, 750, 

434, 581, 582f

751f

Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASp)/

Scar proteins, 655f, 656

Wnts, 420–423, 530, 531f
Wortmannin, 449
Wound repair, 565–567, 566f
WW domains, 439

X
Xenopus laevis

cell cycle in, 703b, 703f, 704, 705f
DNA replication in, 733
meiosis in, 792

XP. See Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP).
X-ray crystallography, 35, 36f, 95, 357, 358f

Y
Yeasts, 4f

budding. See Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
fission. See Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
spindle pole bodies and, 608f–609f, 

609–610

Yersinia, 315

Z
Z disks, 671–672, 673f, 675–676, 682t
ZAP-70, 477f, 478, 503
Z-DNA, 44
Zinc finger proteins, 179–180, 179f
ZO-1, ZO-2, and ZO-3, 546
Zonula adherens, 544f, 544t, 550–551
Zonula occludens, 544f
Zygotene, 785f, 786

This page intentionally left blank

This page intentionally left blank

This page intentionally left blank

Any screen.  
Any time.  
Anywhere.

Access additional resources online  
at no extra charge by scratching  
the pin code at the bottom right  
and redeeming the code at 
ebooks.elsevier.com 

Unlock your additional resources today.
1    Visit ebooks.elsevier.com.
2    Select English to continue.
3      Scratch off your code; enter your code in the 

box and click next.

4    Follow the on-screen instructions. An email 

will then be sent to you with final instructions 
for accessing your online-only materials.

It’s that easy!

Place Peel Off 
Sticker Here

For technical assistance:  
email studentconsult.help@elsevier.com 
call +1-314-447-8200 (outside the US) 

Use of the current edition of the electronic materials is subject to the terms of the nontransferable, limited license granted on studentconsult.inkling.com.   
Access to the electronic materials is limited to the first individual who redeems the PIN, located on the inside cover of this book, at studentconsult.inkling.com 
and may not be transferred to another party by resale, lending, or other means. 

2015v1.0

