Irmersity of Alherta Library 

0  16251699  5597 

Commercial 

Greenhouse  Production 

vn 

SB 
416 
C34 
2002 
c .2 
SCI/TECH 

/dlberra 

AGRICULTURE,  FOOD  AND 
RURAL  DEVELOPMENT 

Published  by: 

Alberta  Agriculture,  Food  and  Rural  Development 
Information  Packaging  Centre 
7000  -  113  Street,  Edmonton,  Alberta 
Canada  T6H  5T6 

Production  Editor:  Chris  Kaulbars 
Graphic  Designer:  John  Gillmore 
Electronic  Publishing  Operator:  Gladys  Bruno 

Copyright  ©  2002. 
Her  Majesty  the  Queen  in  Right  of  Alberta. 
All  rights  reserved. 

No  part  of  this publication  may  be  reproduced,  stored 
in  a  retrieval  system,  or transmitted  in  any form  or by 
any  means,  electronic,  mechanical  photocopying, 
recording,  or  otherwise  without  written  permission 
from  the  Information  Packaging  Centre,  Alberta 
Agriculture,  Food  and  Rural  Development. 

ISBN  0-7732-6152-4 

Copies  of  this publication  may  be  purchased  from: 

Publications  Office 
Alberta  Agriculture, Food  and  Rural  Development 
Phone:  1-800-292-5697  (toll  free  in  Canada) 

(780)  427-0391 

or 
see  our  website  < www.agric.gov.ab.ca>  for 
information  on  other  publications, videos  and 
CD-Roms. 

Printed  in  Canada 

UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY  OF ALBERTA 

Table  of  Contents 

Introduction 
Optimizing the Greenhouse 
Environment for Crop Production 

Photosynthesis 

Transpiration 

Respiration 

Strategies 

Environmental  Control 
of the Greenhouse 

The Greenhouse Structure 
Header house 
Plant  nursery 

Heating the Greenhouse 
Heating the air and plant canopy 
Heating the root zone 
Heating the plant heads 

Ventilation and Air Circulation 
Ventilation  systems 
Air circulation: horizontal  air flow 
(HAF)  fans 

Cooling and Humidification 
Pad and fan  evaporative cooling 
Mist  systems 

Greenhouse  Floors 

Carbon Dioxide Supplementation 
C02  supplementation  via  combustion 
Natural gas C02 generators 
Boiler stack  recovery systems 
Liquid  CO, supplementation 

Irrigation and Fertilizer  Feed Systems 

1 

3 

3 

3 

4 

4 

i 

7 
8 
8 

9 
9 
9 
9 

1 o 
10 

11 

11 
11 
12 

12 

12 
13 
13 
13 
13 

14 

Computerized Environmental Control Systems ...14 

Properties and measurement of light 
Plant light use 

Accessing  available  light 

Supplementary Lighting 

Temperature  Management 
Managing air temperatures 
Precision  heat  in the canopy 
Managing root zone temperatures 
Managing Relative Humidity 
Using Vapour Pressure Deficits 

Carbon Dioxide Supplementation 

Air Pollution in the Greenhouse 

Growing Media 
Media used for seeding and propagation 
Growing media  for  the  production 
greenhouse 

Managing  Irrigation  and Fertilizer 

Water 
Water  quality 

Electrical Conductivity of Water 

pH 

Mineral Nutrition of Plants 

Fertilizer  Feed Programs 
Feed targets and plant balance 
Designing a fertilizer  feed  program 
Moles and millimoles in  the greenhouse 
Water  volumes 
Accounting for  nutrients in raw water 
Accounting  for  nutrients provided by 
pH adjustment  of water 
Determining fertilizer  amounts to 
meet feed targets 
Rules for Mixing Fertilizers 
Fertilizer  and water  application 

17 
18 

19 

20 

21 
21 
21 
22 

23 

26 

27 

28 
28 

29 
31 

31 
31 

32 

32 

33 

35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
39 

39 

40 
43 
44 

47 
48 

Managing the Greenhouse 
Environment 

Light 

17 

17 

Conclusion 
Bibliography 

Acknowledgements 
The author wishes to give special recognition  to Pat Cote and Scott Graham, the other  members of the 
Greenhouse  Crops Team  at the Crop Diversification  Centre South in Brooks, whose technical expertise in 
greenhouse  sweet pepper  production  in Alberta  forms  the basis for  specific cultural  recommendations. 

Thanks  to the  many reviewers who provided  critical  input: 

Ms. Shelley Barklcy, Crop Diversification  Centre South, AAFRD. 

Mr. Donald  Elliot, Applied  Bio-nomics  Ltd. 

Ms. Janet  Feddes-Calpas, Crop Diversification  Centre South, AAFRD. 

Mr. Jim and Mrs. Lynn  Fink, J.L. Covered  Gardens. 

Dr. M. Mirza, Crop Diversification  Centre  North, AAFRD. 

This manual was submitted  in  fulfillment  of the course  requirements  for  AFNS 602 (Graduate  Reading  Project) 
as part  of the requirements of the  Ph.D. program at  the University of Alberta  supervised by Dr. J.P. Tewari. 

NOTE: 
The depiction  of certain brands or products in the images in this publication does not constitute an  endorsement 
of any brand or manufacturer.  The images were chosen to illustrate certain aspects of commercial  greenhouse 
production only, and the author  does not wish to suggest that  the brands or products shown are in anyway superior 
to others.  Growers should note that  there are many products on the market, and buyers should research these 
products carefully  before  purchasing them. 

Indicators provide  information  concerning  complex 
systems, information  that  makes the  systems  more 
easily understandable.  Indicators  quickly  reveal 
changes in  the greenhouse, which  may  cause  growers 
to alter  the  management  strategies. Indicators  also 
help identify  the specific  changes  in  crop  management 
that  need  to be  made. 

The  purpose  of  this publication  is to  provide 
information  regarding  greenhouse  management.  It 
presents basic indicators to help  growers  evaluate  the 
plant-environment  interaction  as they move  towards 
optimizing  the  environment  and  crop  performance. 
Over  time and  with  experience,  growers will be  able 
to build  on  their  understanding  of  these  basic 
indicators  to improve  their  ability to  respond  to 
changes  in  the crop and  to anticipate  crop needs. 

Introduction 
A greenhouse  is a controllable, dynamic  system 

managed  for  intensive  production  of  high 
quality, fresh  market  produce.  Greenhouse 
production  allows for  crop production  under 
very diverse conditions.  However, 

greenhouse  growers  have to manage  a number  of 
variables to obtain  maximum  sustainable  production 
from  their  crops. These variables  include  the 
following: 

•  air  temperature 

•  root  zone  temperature 

•  vapour  pressure  deficit 

•  fertilizer  feed 

•  carbon  dioxide  enrichment 

•  growing  media 

•  plant  maintenance 

The task  of  managing  these  related  variables 
simultaneously  can  appear  overwhelming;  however, 
growers do have successful  strategies to  manage  them. 
The  main  approach  is to try to optimize  these 
variables  to get  the best  performance  from  the  crop 
over the  production  season. 

Optimization  is the  driver  used  to determine  how  to 
control  these variables  in the greenhouse  for 
maximum  yield and  profit,  taking into  account  the 
costs of operation  and  increased  value of the  product 
grown  in the  modified  environment.  The  greenhouse 
system  is complex; to simplify  the  decision-making 
process, growers use indicators. An  indicator  can  be 
thought  of as a small window  to  a bigger world; you 
don't  get the entire  picture, when you  see an  indicator, 
but you do gain an  understanding  of what  is 
happening. Another  way to look  at it  is to  understand 
the basic rules of thumb, which  can  be  used  to get 
insights on  the direction  and  dynamics of  the  crop-
environment  interaction. 

Optimizing the Greenhouse 
Environment for Crop 
Production 
G reenhouse vegetable crop production is based 

on controlling the environment  to provide the 
conditions most favorable  for maximum yield. 
A plant's ability to grow and develop depends 
on the photosynthetic process. In the presence 

of light, the plant combines carbon dioxide and  water 
to form sugars, which are then utilized for growth and 
fruit  production. Optimizing the greenhouse environ(cid:173)
ment is directed at optimizing the photosynthetic 
process in the plants, enhancing the plant's ability to 
utilize light at maximum  efficiency. 

Photosynthesis 

6 CO z +  12 I I 2 0  - Light energy - >C 6H, 20 6  + 
6 0 2  +  6 H20 

Photosynthesis is one of the most significant  life 
processes; all the organic matter in living things comes 
about through photosynthesis. 

The above formula is not quite complete as 
photosynthesis will only take place in the presence of 
chlorophyll, certain enzymes and cofactors. Without 
discussing all these requirements in detail, let it be 
enough to say that these cofactors, enzymes, and 
chlorophyll will be present if the plant  receives 
adequate nutrition. One other point to clarify is that it 
takes 673,000 calories of light energy to drive the 
equation. 

Photosynthesis requires certain inputs to get the 
desired outputs. Carbon dioxide and water are 
combined and modified to produce sugar. The sugars 

are further  used to form more complex carbohydrates, 
oils and so on. Along with the photosynthetic process 
are many more processes in the plant that help ensure 
the plant can grow and develop using the energy  from 
the light energy. From the grower's point of view, the 
result of photosynthesis is the production of fruit. This 
outcome serves to remind that the management 
decisions made in growing crops affect  the outcome of 
how well the plant is able to run its photosynthetic 
engines to manufacture  those products that are 
shipped to market. 

Growers provide the nutrition and environment that 
direct the plant to optimize photosynthesis and fruit 
development. Crop management decisions require a 
knowledge of how to keep the plants in balance so that 
yield and the productive life of the crop are maximized. 

Transpiration 

Closely associated with the photosynthetic process is 
the process of transpiration. Transpiration can be 
defined  as the evaporation of water from plants, and it 
occurs through pores in the leaf surface called stomata 
(Figure 1). 

As  water is lost from the leaf, a pressure is built up that 
drives the roots to find additional water to compensate 
for the loss. The evaporation of the water from  the leaf 
serves to cool the leaf, ensuring that optimum leaf 
temperatures are maintained. As the roots bring 
additional water into the plant, they also bring in 
nutrients that are sent throughout the plant along with 
the water. 

o 

mesophyll 

cuticle 

upper  epidermis 
palisade  parenchyma 

bundle sheath 

xylem 
phloem 

spongy  parenchyma 

intercellular  space 

lower  epidermis 
cuticle 

stomata 

Figure I. Cross seciion oj leaf showing stomala 

Water is a key component of photosynthesis, as is 
carbon dioxide (C02), which is often  the limiting 
component  of the process. The plant's source of 
carbon dioxide is the atmosphere, as carbon dioxide 
exists as a gas at temperatures in the growing 
environment. Carbon  dioxide enters the plant through 
the stomata in the leaves. This is the stage where it can 
be seen why transpiration represents a compromise to 
photosynthesis for the plant. 

Plants have control over whether the stomata are open 
or closed. They are closed at night and then open in 
response to the increasing light intensity that comes 
with the morning sun. The plant begins to photo-
synthesize, and the stomata open to allow more carbon 
dioxide into the leaf. As light intensity increases, so 
does leaf temperature, and water vapour is lost  from 
the leaf, which serves to cool the leaf. 

The compromise with photosynthesis occurs when the 
heat stress in the environment causes such a loss of 
water vapour through the stomata that the movement 
of carbon  dioxide into the leaf is reduced. The other 
factor involved with this process is the relative 
humidity in the environment.  The transpiration stress 
on a leaf and the plant at any given temperature is 
greater at a lower relative humidity than at a higher 
relative humidity. There also comes a point where the 
transpiration stress on the plant  is so great that the 
stomata close and photosynthesis stops completely. 

Respiration 

Respiration is another process tied closely to 
photosynthesis. All living cells respire continuously, 
and the overall process involves the breakdown of 
sugars within the cells, resulting in the release of 
energy that is then used for growth. Through 
photosynthesis, plants utilize light energy to form 
sugars, which are then broken down by the respiration 
process, releasing the energy required by plant cells 
for growth and development. 

Strategies 

Photosynthesis responds instantaneously to changes in 
light, as light energy is the driving force behind the 
process. Light is generally a given, with greenhouse 
growers relying on natural light to grow their crops. 
Optimum photosynthesis can occur through providing 
supplemental lighting when natural light is limiting. 
This strategy is not common in Alberta greenhouses, 
with the economics involved in supplemental  lighting 
being the determining  factor. 

The common strategy for optimizing photosynthesis 
comes about through optimizing transpiration. If, 
under any given level of light, transpiration is 
optimized such that the maximum amount of carbon 
dioxide is able to enter the stomata, then 

o 

photosynthesis is also optimized. The  benefit  of 
optimizing photosynthesis through  controlling 
transpiration  is that  the  optimization  can  occur  over 
both  low and  high  light levels, even  though 
photosynthesis  proceeds  at  a lower rate  under  lower 
light levels. Supplemental  lighting is only  useful  in 
optimizing photosynthesis when  light levels are  low. 

Inherent  to high yielding  greenhouse  crop  production 
are the concepts  of  plant  balance  and  directed  growth. 
A  plant  growing  in  the optimum  environment  for 
maximum  photosynthetic  efficiency  may not  be 
allocating the resulting  production  of sugars  for 
maximum  fruit  production. Greenhouse  vegetable 
plants respond  to a number  of environmental  triggers, 
or cues, and  can  alter  their  growth  habits  as a  result. 

The  simplest  example  is to consider whether  the  plants 
have  a vegetative  focus  or  a generative  focus. A  plant 
with  a vegetative  focus  is primarily growing  roots, 
stems and  leaves, while  a plant  with  a generative  focus 
is concentrating  on  flowers  and  fruit  production. 
Vegetative  and  generative  plant  growth  can  be  thought 
of  as two opposite  ends of  a continuum; the  point 
where maximum  sustained  fruit  production  takes  place 
is where vegetative  growth  is balanced with  generative 
growth.  Complete  optimization  of  the  growing 
environment  for  crop production  also  includes 
providing  the correct  environmental  cues to  direct 
plant  growth  to maintain  a  plant  balance  for  profitable 
production. 

The critical  environmental  parameters  affecting  plant 
growth  that  growers can  control  in  the greenhouse  are 
as follows: 

temperature 

relative  humidity 

carbon  dioxide 

nutrition 

availability  of  water 

growing  media 

The way the environment  affects  plant  growth  is not 
necessarily straightforward,  and  the  effect  of  one 
parameter  is mediated  by the others. The  presence  of 
the crop  canopy  also exerts considerable  influence  on 
the  greenhouse  environment. The  ability of growers  to 
provide  the  optimal  environment  for  their  crops 
improves  over  time, with experience.  There  is a 
conviction  that  environmental  control  of  greenhouses 
is an  art  that  expert  growers practice  to  perfection. 
That  being  said, there  are basic rules  and 
environmental  setpoints  that  beginning growers  can 
follow  as a blueprint  to grow a  successful  crop. 

As the  plants develop from  the seedling  phase  to 
maturity, the conditions that  determine  the  optimum 
environment  for  the crop also change. Even when  the 
crop  is into  full  production, modifications  of  the 
environment  may be necessary  to ensure  maximum 
production  is maintained.  For  example,  the plants may 
start  to move out-of-balance  to become  too  vegetative 
or  too generative. Through  all stages of the  crop cycle, 
growers  must  train  themselves  to recognize  the 
indicators displayed  by the  crop to determine  what 
adjustments  in the  environment  are necessary, if  any. 

t. 

Environmental Control of the 
Greenhouse 

G reenhouse production is a year-round 

proposition. In Alberta, this concept means 
providing an optimal indoor growing environ(cid:173)
ment when the outside environment can be 
warmer, or colder and drier, than what the 
crop plants require. Winter temperatures in Alberta 
can drop to - 30 to - 40CC, so the temperature  differen(cid:173)
tial between the greenhouse environment  and the 
outdoors can range from  50 to 60°C. By contrast, 
during the summers, the outdoor temperatures can rise 
to  +35°C under the intense Alberta sun; this situation 
is especially true in southern  Alberta. 

Greenhouse temperatures rise under intense sunlight. 
This rise in temperature is referred  to as "solar gain." 
To  enter the greenhouse, light has to travel through the 
greenhouse covering. In doing so, the light loses some 
of its energy, which is converted to heat. Without a 
cooling system, the temperature within the greenhouse 
can rise to over  + 45°C. To successfully  optimize the 
environment within the greenhouse means countering 
the adverse effects of the external environment as it 
varies over the seasons of the year. 

The effectiveness  of greenhouses to allow for 
environmental control depends on the component 
parts. This section of the publication describes the 
component  parts of a typical Alberta vegetable 
production greenhouse, recognizing that  specific 
systems for environmental control can vary and change 
from one greenhouse to the next. Over time, as new 
technology is developed and  commercialized, the 
environmental control systems will change with the 
technology. 

There are basic requirements for  environmental 
control that all greenhouses must meet to be able to 
produce a successful  crop. The simplest example of 
these requirements is that  a structure is required. 

Beyond this fundamental  requirement, a number of 
options can be included. The most precise control of 
an environment invariably comes with the inclusion of 
more technology and equipment, with the associated 
higher cost. The driving forces for inclusion of newer 
or more complex systems are the effect  on the 
financial bottom  line and the availability of capital. 

The Greenhouse  Structure 

The greenhouse structure represents both the barrier 
to direct contact with the external environment and 
the containment of the internal environment to be 
controlled. By design, the covering material allows for 
maximum light penetration for growing crops. A 
number of commercial greenhouse manufacturers  and 
greenhouse designs are suitable for greenhouse 
vegetable crop production. The basic greenhouse 
design used for vegetable production,  is a gutter 
connect greenhouse. 

By design, a gutter connect greenhouse allows for 
relatively easy expansion of the greenhouse when 
additions are planned.  Gutter connect  greenhouses 
are composed of a number of "bays" or compartments 
running side by side along the length of the 
greenhouse (Figure 2). 

Typically, these compartments are  approximately 
37 meters (120 feet) long by 6.5 to 7.5 meters (21  to 
25 feet) wide. The production area is completely open 
between the bays inside the greenhouse. The roof  of 
the entire structure consists of a number of arches, 
with each arch covering one bay, and the arches are 
connected at the gutters where one bay meets the next. 
The design of a gutter connect greenhouse allows for a 
single bay greenhouse of 240 m2  (2,500 feet) to easily 
expand by the addition of more bays to cover an area 
of  1 hectare (2.5 acres) or more. 

o 

Figure 2. Typical gutter conned, double poly, vegetable 
production greenhouse 

With a gutter connect greenhouse, the lowest parts of 
the roof are the gutters, the points where the  adjacent 
arches begin and end. The trend for gutter heights in 
modern greenhouses is to increase, with  greenhouses 
getting taller. 

The reasons for this change are two-fold: firstly, newer 
vegetable crops like peppers require a  higher growing 
environment. Peppers will often  reach 3.5 meters 
(12 feet) in height during the course of the production 
cycle, so taller greenhouses allow for more options in 
crop handling and training. 

Secondly, taller greenhouses allow for a larger air 
mass to be contained within the structure. The 
advantage is that a larger air mass is easier to control, 
with respect  to maintaining  an optimum  environment, 
than a smaller air mass. Once a grower has established 
an environment in the larger air mass, it is easier  to 
maintain  the environment. 

Typical gutter heights for modern  greenhouse 
structures are 4 to 4.25 meters (13 to 14 feet)  and are 
quite suitable for greenhouse pepper production. 
The trend for future  gutter height is to increase 
further, with new construction  designs moving to 
4.9 to 5.5 meters (16 to 18 feet)  (Figure 3). 

There arc a number of options for  greenhouse 
covering materials: glass panels, polycarbonate  panels 
and polyethylene skins. Each of the coverings has 
advantages and disadvantages, the main  determining 
factors usually being the trade-off  between cost and 
length of service. Glass is more expensive, but will 
generally have a longer service life than either 
polycarbonate or polyethylene. 

Figure 3. New greenhouse under construction 

Typical Alberta vegetable production greenhouses are 
constructed with double polyethylene skins. Two layers 
of polyethylene are used, with pressurized air filling 
the space between  the two layers to provide rigidity to 
the covering. The life expectancy of a polyethylene 
greenhouse covering is about four years. 

Energy conservation is also an important factor. The 
covering must allow light into the greenhouse and yet 
reduce the heat loss from the greenhouse to the 
environment  during the winter. 

New coverings are being developed that  selectively 
exclude certain wavelengths of light and, as a result, 
can help in reducing insect and disease problems. 

Header  house 
The header house is an important component of the 
greenhouse design. The header house serves as a 
loading dock where produce is shipped and supplies 
are received. It also serves to house the nerve center 
of the environmental control system, as well as 
housing boilers and the irrigation  and fertilizer  tanks. 
The header house is kept separate from the main 
greenhouse, with access gained through doors. 

Lunchroom  and washroom facilities are also located in 
the header house. These facilities should be placed so 
that they satisfy all food safety requirements with 
respect  to the handling of produce. 

Plant  nursery 
The greenhouse design can also include a plant 
nursery for those vegetable growers interested in 
starting their own plants from seed. The alternative is 
to contract  another greenhouse to grow and deliver 
young plants ready to go into the main  production 
area. For example, pepper plants are transplanted  into 
the main greenhouse at about six weeks of age. 

o 

Growers starting their  plants from  seed  must  have  a 
nursery  area  in which  to do  this. It  is important  to  have 
a nursery of adequate size to supply  enough 
transplants for  the  entire  area  of the  production 
greenhouse.  Generally  speaking, the nursery area  is 
built  so that  growers  can  achieve a higher degree  of 
specific environmental  control  than  the  main 
production  area  of  the greenhouse  since young  plants 
are more  sensitive to the environment.  The  nursery 
area can  be used  for  production  once  the  seedlings 
have been  moved  out.  Heated  benches  or  floors  are  a 
must,  as is supplemental  lighting. The  specific 
requirements  for  pepper  seedling  production  are 
discussed  in  detail in Alberta  Agriculture's 
Commercial  Greenhouse  Bell Pepper Production  in 
Alberta  manual. 

Heating the  Greenhouse 

An  adequately-sized  heating system  is a  must  for 
greenhouse  production  in Alberta. The  output  of  the 
system must  be able  to maintain  optimal  temperatures 
on  the coldest  clays of  the year.  Beyond  the  actual  size 
of the system,  and  deciding what  form  of heating  to 
use,  i.e. forced  air, boiler heat, or both;  there  are 
special  factors  to consider  as to where  the heat  is 
applied. 

Heat  applied  to the  air is directed  at influencing  the 
plant  canopy;  heat  is applied  to the floor  to  influence 
the root system. The basic premise behind  this concept 
of directing  heat  to both  the  air and  the  floor  is that  it 
is difficult  to provide  optimum  root  zone  temperatures 
during  the cold  period  of  the year  by heating the  air 
only. 

Beside the difficulty  in  driving warm  air  down  to  the 
greenhouse  floor, there is also the associated  problem 
of having to provide  too much  heat  to the  canopy  as 
growers try to optimize  root  zone  temperature. 
Conversely,  although  floor  heat  (usually  hot  water 
systems) can easily maintain  root  zone  temperature, 
floor  heat systems cannot  be used  to optimize  air 
temperatures without  causing  excessive root  zone 
temperatures. 

It is also important  to note  that  heating  systems  can 
also be employed  in combination  with  controlled 
venting  to dehumidify  the  greenhouse. 

Heating the air and plant canopy 
Forced  air systems are common  in  Alberta 
greenhouses. Overhead  natural  gas burning  furnaces 
are normally  located  at  one  end  of  the  greenhouse. 
These  systems move the heated  air down  the  length  of 
the greenhouse  to the  far  end.  There  are a  number  of 
types of forced  air systems, and  all try to ensure  the 
heat is adequately  distributed  throughout  the 
greenhouse  to maintain  the  air temperature  set  points. 

Boilers and  pipe and  fin  systems can  also be used  to 
provide  heat  to the  air.  The  main  consideration  for 
heating  the  air is uniform  distribution  of  the  heat 
throughout  the entire greenhouse so that  the  entire 
plant  canopy  is affected  equally. 

Heating the root zone 
The  most  common  system  to provide  heat  to  the 
floor  or  root  zone is the "pipe  and  rail" system.  A 
5 centimeter  (2 inch) diameter  steel pipe is placed  on 
the  floor  between  the  rows of the  crop so that  the  pipe 
runs down  and  returns along  the same  row 
approximately  45 centimeters  (18 inches)  apart. 
Boilers deliver hot  water through  this heating  pipe. 

The  delivery  and  return  pipe run  parallel  to  one 
another,  forming  a "rail" that  can be used  by carts  to 
run  up  and  down  the rows (Figure 4). The  carts  are 
useful  when  working with the  plants during  pruning 
and  harvest.  With this application,  the heating  pipes 
serve a dual  purpose. 

Heating the plant  heads 
The  term  "plant  head" is not  likely to be found  in  any 
botany  textbook.  Greenhouse  vegetable growers  use 
the  term  to refer  to the tops  of  the plant where  the 
growing  points are  actively developing  new  shoots, 
leaves,  flowers  and young  fruit.  Some growers  run  hot 
water  fin  pipe  15 centimeters  (6 inches)  above  the 
plant  heads to obtain  a more  precise  temperature 
control.  ITiis approach  optimizes  pollination  of  the 
flowers  as well  as enhancing the  early stages of  fruit 
and  leaf  development.  This pipe is then  raised  as the 
crop grows. Currently, this system  is not  commonly 
employed  by Alberta  greenhouse vegetable  growers. 

o 

Figure 5. Ridge vent 

The important consideration when bringing cold air in 
is proper mixing with the main mass of greenhouse air 
to minimize the negative effects  of the cold air 
contacting the plants.  Maximum winter ventilation 
rates in Alberta usually do not exceed fifteen  air 
changes per hour. 

Under Alberta conditions, summer ventilation  serves 
primarily to help cool the crop; venting for 
dehumidification  is not usually the goal. In fact in 
southern Alberta, maintaining humid air is often  the 
concern. Summer ventilation is triggered primarily by 
temperature set points, and as air is moved through 
the greenhouse to remove heat, humidity is also lost. 
So much so that it is difficult  to maintain  optimum 
relative humidity levels without also having mist 
systems or other cooling systems in place. Maximum 
summer air exchange rates are in the range of one 
complete air exchange every 45 to 60 seconds. 

Ventilation systems can be primarily mechanical, 
relying on exhaust fans, or natural, relying on the 
natural upward movement of hot air to exit the 
greenhouse through ridge or gutter vents (Figure 5). 
The mechanical or forced  air ventilation  equipment 
can be costly both to purchase and to operate. 
However, forced ventilation is required for some 
evaporative cooling systems to function. 

Figure 4. Pipe and  rail floor  heal  and  electric cart 

Ventilation and Air 
Circulation 
Ventilation  systems 
The ventilation system provides the means by which 
the greenhouse air is circulated, mixed and exchanged. 
The system allows for a more uniform climate and 
helps to distribute heat from the heating system as well 
as to remove heat from  the greenhouse when cooling 
is required. In combination with the heating system, 
ventilation also provides a means for  dehumidifying 
the greenhouse  environment. 

Ventilation is required throughout the year; however, 
the ventilation  required varies depending on the 
outside environment. During the winter months, 
ventilation is required primarily for  dehumidification 
as warm, humid air is exhausted and cool, dry air is 
brought  in. 

© 

Pad and fan evaporative cooling 
As the name implies, evaporative cooling pads are 
used in conjunction with mechanical ventilation 
systems to reduce the temperatures inside the 
greenhouse. The principle of the system is that outside 
air is cooled by drawing it through  continually wetted 
pads (Figure 6). Pad systems work best in tightly-built 
greenhouses because these systems require that the air 
entering the greenhouse must first pass through  the 
pad rather than holes or gaps in the walls. If the 
greenhouse  is not tightly built, the incoming air will 
bypass the evaporative pads as the pads provide more 
resistance to air movement than do holes or gaps. 
Exhaust fans at the opposite end of the greenhouse 
provide the necessary energy to draw the outside air 
through  the pads. As the air passes through  the pad 
and is cooled, the air also takes up water vapour and 
adds humidity to the greenhouse. 

Air circulation, horizontal air  flow 
(HAF)  fans 
Additional  air circulation within the greenhouse can 
provide for more uniform  distribution of carbon 
dioxide, humidity and temperature, especially during 
the winter. Used in combination with the ventilation 
system, recirculating fan systems ensure the cold air 
brought in by the ventilation system mixes uniformly 
with the warm inside air. The fans are relatively 
inexpensive to operate and are located  in such a way 
so as to move air along the length of the greenhouse, 
with the direction of movement  alternating between 
adjacent  bays. 

The fans must be of adequate size to ensure that 
proper mixing of the air occurs without the fans being 
over-sized, which can cause excessive air movement 
and a reduction in yield. The general  recommendation 
for sizing is a fan capacity of 0.9 to 1.1 cubic meters 
per minute per square meter of floor  area, with a 
velocity no greater that  1 meter per second across the 
plants. 

Cooling and  Humidification 

During periods of high light intensity, air  temperatures 
rise inside the greenhouse, and cooling is required. 
Increasing ventilation rates serves to bring cooler 
outside air into the greenhouse. But during the typical 
Alberta summer months, ventilation  alone is often  not 
enough to maintain optimum greenhouse air 
temperatures. 

Alberta growers depend on cooling systems to ensure 
optimum growing temperatures are maintained. These 
cooling systems also serve to humidify  the greenhouse. 
Requirements for cooling and humidification vary 
depending on location within the province. Southern 
Alberta growers generally contend with harsher 
summer growing conditions, higher outside temper(cid:173)
atures and lower outside relative humidity than 
growers in central Alberta. In areas of the province 
where cooling is required, evaporative cooling systems 
are used. Evaporative cooling is most effective  in areas 
where the outside relative humidity is less than 
60 per cent. 

Figure 6. Evaporative  pad 

o 

Mist  systems 
Both high and low-pressure mist systems are used for 
cooling and adding humidity to the greenhouse. Mist 
systems can be employed in both mechanically and 
naturally ventilated greenhouses. Mist systems work 
by forcing water through  nozzles that break up the 
water into fine droplets. This process allows the 
droplets to evaporate fairly quickly into the air. 
Because the evaporation of water requires heat  from 
the environment, the air is cooled (Figure 7). 

Misting systems must be carefully  controlled for two 
reasons: to provide the required cooling without 
increasing the relative humidity beyond  optimum 
levels for plant performance  and to prevent free water 
from forming on the plants, which can encourage the 
development of disease. 

If the quality of the water used for misting is poor, 
there is the possibility of mineral salts being deposited 
on the leaves and fruit, which could result in reduced 
fruit  quality and yield loss. 

Figure  7. High pressure mist nozzle 

Greenhouse  Floors 

Preparation of the greenhouse floor for greenhouse 
vegetable production is important  to the overall 
operation of the greenhouse. The floor is contoured so 
.that low spots, which would allow for the pooling of 
water, are eliminated. Small channels are placed in 
alignment with the crop rows, with one channel 
running the length of the single or double  row.  These 
channels allow for any drainage from irrigation to the 
plants to be carried to one end of the greenhouse to 
the holding tanks for  recirculation. 

These channels are approximately  15 centimeters wide 
by 15 centimeters deep (6 inches by 6 inches). The 
depth varies slightly from  one end of the channel to 
the other, so the water drains  towards a common end 
of the greenhouse. Another channel then carries the 
water towards a reservoir in the floor  located in one 
corner of the greenhouse. 

The floor is covered with white plastic film to seal off 
the soil from  the greenhouse environment, reducing 
the problems associated with soil borne plant diseases 
and weed problems. The plants are rooted in bags or 
slabs of growing media placed  on top of the plastic 
floor. The white plastic also serves to reflect any light 
reaching the floor back up into the plant canopy. 
Estimates place the amount  of light reflected  back into 
the crop by white plastic floors to be about  13 per cent 
of the light reaching the floor. This reflected  light can 
increase crop yield. 

Due to the large area under production, concrete 
floors arc generally too expensive for greenhouses. 
A concrete walkway is a practical necessity, usually 
running the width of the greenhouse along one end 
wall. This walkway allows for the efficient,  high  traffic 
movement of staff within the greenhouse and the 
subsequent movement  of produce out of the 
greenhouse. 

Carbon  Dioxide 
Supplementation 

Carbon dioxide (C02) plays an important  role in 
increasing crop productivity. An actively 
photosynthesizing crop will quickly deplete the C02 
from  the greenhouse environment. In summer, even 
with maximum ventilation, C0 2  levels within the 
typical Alberta vegetable production  greenhouse 
typically fall below ambient levels of COz  [below 
350 parts per million (350 ppm)]. It has been 
estimated that if the amount of C02 in the atmosphere 
doubled to 700 ppm, the yield of field crops should 
increase by 33 per cent. Optimum  CO, targets in the 
greenhouse atmosphere  are generally accepted to be 
approximately 700 to 800 ppm. 

o 

C02  supplementation  via 
combustion 
As carbon dioxide is one of the products of 
combustion, this process can be used to introduce 
C02 into the greenhouse. The major concern with using 
combustion is that CO, is only one of the products of 
combustion. Other gases that can be produced by the 
combustion process are detrimental  to crop production 
(see the section on "Air Pollution in the Greenhouse" 
later in this publication). The production of pollutant 
gases from combustion depends on the type and quality 
of the fuel used for combustion and whether complete 
combustion occurs. Faulty burners could result in 
incomplete combustion. 

Natural gas C0 2 generators 
One method of C02 supplementation  in Alberta 
greenhouses is the use of natural gas burning C02 
generators placed throughout the greenhouse  above 
the crop canopy (Figures 8 and 9). Under lower light, 
low ventilation  conditions, these generators can 
effectively  maintain optimum  C02 levels. However, 
during periods of intense summer sunlight, it is still 
difficult  to maintain  ambient  C02 levels in the crop. 
Also, since the combustion process takes place in the 
greenhouse, the heat of combustion contributes to 
driving the greenhouse temperatures higher, increasing 
the need for cooling.  Even distribution of the C02 
throughout the crop is also difficult  to obtain  because 
the C0 2 originates from point sources above the 
canopy. A fresh  air intake should be provided when 
using these generators to ensure adequate combustion 
air. 

Boiler stack recovery  systems 
Stack recovery systems are receiving more attention by 
Alberta growers. These systems require a clean 
burning, high output boiler and a system to recover the 
C0 2 from  the exhaust stack for distribution to the 
crop. The C0 2 is directed through  pipes placed within 
the crop rows. With this method, the CO,  distribution 
is improved by introducing the C02 right to the plant 
canopy. Carbon monoxide can also be present in the 
exhaust gas, and sensors are used to regulate the 
delivery of exhaust gas into the greenhouse and ensure 
that  carbon monoxide levels do not rise to unsafe 
levels. 

Liquid C0 2  supplementation 
Liquid C02  is another alternative for supplement(cid:173)
ation. The advantage with liquid CO, is that it is a 
clean source of C02 for the greenhouse because the 
other by-products of combustion  are not present. As a 
result, liquid C02 is especially advantageous for use on 
sensitive seedling plants early in the crop season. 
Distribution  to the crop can be achieved through a 
system of delivery pipes to the crop canopy, similar to 
the stack recovery systems. 

The drawback with the use of liquid C02 has been  the 
cost. Historically, it has been less expensive to obtain 
C02 through the combustion of natural gas than by 
buying liquid carbon dioxide. Recent work at the Crop 
Diversification  Centre South in Brooks has developed 
a cost effective  method for liquid C02 supplement(cid:173)
ation under Alberta greenhouse growing conditions. 

Figure 8. Natural gas CO2 generators 

Figure 9. Liquid C02 tank 

o 

Irrigation and Fertilizer 
Feed Systems 

The fertilizer  and irrigation systems provide  control 
of the delivery of water and nutrients to the plants. 
The two systems complement each other to deliver 
precise amounts of water  and fertilizer to the plants as 
frequently  as required. The systems can be  configured 
a number of ways;  however, the basic requirements 
are that incoming water is injected  or amended with 
precise amounts of fertilizer  before being delivered to 
the plants. The key point to keep in mind is that  every 
time a plant is watered, it also receives fertilizer. 

Pumps deliver the fertilizer  and water through  hoses 
running the length of each of  row.  Small diameter 
tubing, spaghetti tubes, come off the main hoses with 
one tube generally feeding one plant. 

The systems are designed so the amount of fertilizer 
and water delivered to the plants is equal throughout 
the greenhouse. Larger greenhouses are  often 
partitioned into a number of zones for watering, with 
each zone watered sequentially in turn. The watering 
is modified  independently  in each zone as required. 

Recirculating systems add another level of complexity 
to the process. In most modern vegetable greenhouses, 
a certain  percentage of the water delivered to the 
plants on a daily basis is allowed to flow past the root 
system. The water that flows past the plant  roots is 
referred to as the "leachate." The principles of 
leaching, as well as how to fertilize and water the crop, 
are explained  in more detail in the section on 
"Fertilizer and Water Application." 

Recirculating systems are designed to collect the 
leachate for reuse in the crop. Reusing the leachate 
minimizes the loss of fertilizer  and water from  the 
greenhouse to the environment. Before the leachate 
can be reused, it must first be treated to kill any 
disease organisms that may have accumulated in the 
system. A number of treatment methods are available 
and include UV light, ozone treatment, heat 
pasteurization and  biofiltration. 

Computerized 
Environmental Control 
Systems 

Computerized environmental control systems allow 
growers to integrate the control of all systems involved 
in manipulating the greenhouse environment. The 
effect  is to turn the entire greenhouse and its 
component systems into a single instrument for control, 
where optimum  environmental parameters are defined, 
and control is the result of the on-going input of the 
component systems acting in concert (Figure 10). 

Virtually all computer programs for controlling the 
greenhouse environment provide for optimal  plant 
growth. A wide variety of computerized control systems 
are on the market. Generally, the higher the degree of 
integration of control of the various component 
systems, i.e. heating, cooling, ventilation  and  irrigation 
systems, the higher the cost of the computer system. 

Figure  10.  Computerized environmental control system 

Optimizing the environment  for maximum  crop 
production requires timely responses to changes in the 
environment  and the changing requirements of the 
crop. The greenhouse environment changes as the crop 
responds to its environment, and the environment 
changes in response to the activity of the crop. Fast crop 
processes such as photosynthesis arc considered  to 
respond instantaneously to the changing environment. 
Due to the dynamics of the greenhouse and the  inertia 
of the environment, it takes longer to implement 
changes to the environment, upwards of 15 minutes. 

© 

Much of the disturbance to the greenhouse 
environment  is due to the following factors: the 
normal cycle of the day/night periods, the outside 
temperature and the effects  of scattered clouds on an 
otherwise sunny day. The environmental control 
system has to continually work to modify  the 
environment to optimize crop performance in 
response to ongoing change of the dynamic 
environment. 

The computer system's ability to control  the 
environment is only as good as the information  it 
receives from  the environment. The computer's 
contact with the environment occurs through various 
sensors recording temperature, relative humidity, light 
levels and C02 levels. It is important  that quality 
sensors be used and routinely maintained to ensure 
they are operating properly (Figure 11). 

Sensor placement is also important to ensure  accurate 
readings of the crop environment. For example, a 
temperature sensor placed in direct sunlight is going 
to give a different  set of readings than a temperature 
sensor placed within the crop canopy. 

Managing  the  Greenhoase 
Environment 
T his section  looks at how the  environmental 

control  tools that  growers have at  their  disposal 
are manipulated, with  respect  to the  important 
environmental  influences  on  plant  growth  and 
development, to optimize  the  greenhouse 

required  to support  the continued  production 
of fruit.  The  appropriate  cues are provided  through  the 
manipulation  of  the environment  and  are  subject  to 
change  depending on  the  behavior  of the  crop. 

Careful  attention  must  be paid  to the  signals given  by 
the  plant, the  indicators  of which  direction  the  plant  is 
primarily  headed, vegetative  or generative, and  how 
corrective  action  is applied  through  further 
manipulation  of the  environment. 

environment. As noted  earlier in  this publication,  the 
primary goal of  optimizing  the greenhouse  environ(cid:173)
ment  is to maximize  the photosynthetic  process in  the 
crop. The  strategy  used  to maximize  photosynthesis  is 
to manage  transpiration. Therefore,  ongoing 
modifications  are made  to the greenhouse  environment 
to manage  the  transpiration  of  the crop  to match  the 
maximum  rate of  photosynthesis. 

Growth  can  be defined  as an increase  in  biomass  or  the 
increase  in size of a plant  or  other  organism.  Plant 
growth  is associated  with changes  in  the numbers  of 
plant  organs  occurring  through  the  initiation  of  new 
leaves, stems and  fruit,  abortion  of  leaves and  fruit  and 
the  physiological  development  of  plant  organs  from 
one  age class to the  next. 

Managing  the growth  and  development  of  an  entire 
crop for  maximum  production  involves  the 
manipulation  of temperature  and  humidity to  obtain 
both  the  maximum  rate  of photosynthesis under  the 
given light  conditions  and  the  optimum  balance  of 
vegetative  and  generative  plant  growth  for  sustained 
production  and  high yields. This statement  implies  that 
growers can direct  the results of photosynthesis  (the 
production  of  assimilates, sugars and starches)  towards 
both  vegetative  and  generative  growth, in a  balance. 

Generative  growth  is the growth  associated with  fruit 
production.  For  maximum  fruit  production  to  occur, 
the  plant  has to be provided with both  the  appropriate 
cues to trigger  the setting  of  fruit  and  the cues  to 
maintain  adequate  levels of stem  and  leaf  development 
(vegetative  growth). The balance  is achieved when  the 
assimilates  from  photosynthesis  are  directed  towards 
maintaining  the production  of  the  new leaves and  stems 

Light 

Light  limits the photosynthetic  productivity  of  all  crops 
and  is the  most  important  variable  affecting  product(cid:173)
ivity in the  greenhouse. The  transpiration  rate of  any 
greenhouse  crop is the  function  of three  variables: 
ambient  temperature,  humidity  and  light. Of  these 
three  variables, light is the  given, the  natural  light 
received  from  the  sun. 

Supplementary  lighting does offer  the opportunity  to 
increase  yield during  low light  periods, but  it is 
generally  considered  commercially  unprofitable.  The 
other  means  for  manipulating light  are limited  to 
screening or shading, and  these  approaches  are 
employed  when  light intensities  are  too high.  However, 
general  strategies  help to maximize  the  crop's  access to 
the  available  light  in  the  greenhouse. 

Properties  and  measurement  of 
light 
To understand  how to control  the environment  to  make 
the maximum  use  of  the  available  light  in  the 
greenhouse, it  is important  to know  about  the 
properties  of  light  and  how light  is measured. 
Considerable  confusion  has existed  regarding  the 
measurement  of light; however, it  is worthwhile  for 
growers to approach  the  subject. 

o 

Light has both wave properties and properties of 
particles or photons. Depending on how light is 
considered, the measurement of light can reflect  either 
its wave or particle properties. Different  companies 
provide a number of different  types of light sensors for 
use with computerized environmental control systems. 
It is important  that the sensors measure the amount of 
light available to the plants. For practical purposes, it 
is not as important  how the light is measured  as it is 
for growers to understand how these  measurements 
relate to crop performance. 

Wavelength  (nanometers) 

Ultra-violet 

Visible 

Figure 12. The visible spectrum 

Light is a form of radiation produced by the sun, 
electromagnetic radiation. A narrow range of this 
electromagnetic  radiation falls within the range of 
400 to 700 nanometers (nm) of wavelength, one nano(cid:173)
meter being equal to 0.000000001 meters. The portion 
of the electromagnetic spectrum that falls between 400 
to 700 nm is referred  to as the spectrum of visible 
light, which is essentially the range of the 
electromagnetic spectrum that can be seen. Plants 
respond to light in the visible spectrum, and they use 
this light to drive photosynthesis (Figure 12). 

Photosynthetically Active Radiation  (PAR) is defined 
as radiation in the 400 to 700 nm waveband. PAR is 
the general term that covers both photon terms and 
energy terms. The rate of flow of radiant (light) energy 
in the form of an electromagnetic wave is called  the 
radiant  flux, and the unit used to measure this rate is 
the Watt (W). The units of Watts per square meter 
(W/m2) are used by some light meters and represent 
an example of an "instantaneous" measurement of 
PAR. Other meters commonly seen in greenhouses 
take "integrated" measurements, reporting in units of 
joules per square centimeter (j/cm2). Although  the 
units seem fairly similar, there is no direct  conversion 
between the two. 

Photosynthetic Photon Flux Density (PPFD) is 
another term associated with PAR, but refers to the 
measurement of light in terms of photons or particles. 
PPFD is also sometimes referred  to as Quantum Flux 
Density. Photosynthetic Photon  Flux Density is 
defined  as the number of photons in the 400 - 700 nm 
waveband  reaching a unit surface  per unit of time. The 
units of PPFD are micromoles per second per square 
meter  (/nmol/s m2). 

As the scientific community begins to agree on how 
best to measure light, there may be more 
standardization in light sensors and the units used to 
describe the light radiation reaching a unit  area. 
Greenhouse growers will still be left with the task of 
making day-to-day meaning of the light readings with 
respect to control of the overall environment. 
Generally speaking, the more intense the light, the 
higher the rate of photosynthesis and  transpiration 
(increased humidity), as well as solar heat gain in the 
greenhouse. Of these factors, it is heat gain that 
usually calls for modification  of the environment  as 
temperatures rise on the high end of the optimum 
range for photosynthesis, and ventilation  and cooling 
begins. Plants also require more water under 
increasing light levels. 

Plant  light  use 
Plants use the light in the 400 to 700 nm range for 
photosynthesis, but they make better use of some 
wavelengths than others. Figure  13 presents the 
photosynthetic action spectrum of plants, the relative 
rate of photosynthesis of plants over the range of PAR, 

+•• 

«»  100 -
• 
• •5  80 
•* 
c >• 
o  60 
o 
.c 
* 
«^ o 
« 
S  20 
cc 
0 
0 

40 

i 
I 
400 

i 
I 
500 

i 

• 

600 

i 

i 
1 
700 

1 
r 

Wavelength  (nanometers) 

Figure 13. The photosynthetic action spectrum 

o 

photosynthctically  available  light. All  plants show a 
peak  of light  use in the  red  region,  approximately 
650 nm  and  a smaller  peak in  the blue  region  at 
approximately  450  nm. 

Plants  are relatively  inefficient  at  using light  and  are 
only able  to use  about  a maximum  of 22 per  cent of 
the  light absorbed  in  the 400 to 700 nm  region.  Light 
use efficiency  by plants  depends  not  only on  the 
photosynthctic  efficiency  of  plants, but  also on  the 
efficiency  of the  interception  of  light. 

Accessing available  light 
The  high cost  of greenhouse production  requires 
growers  to maximize  the  use of light falling  on  the 
greenhouse  area.  Before  the  crops are  able to  use  the 
light, it  first  has to pass through  the  greenhouse 
covering, which  does not  transmit  light  perfectly.  The 
greenhouse  intercepts  a percentage  of  light falling  on 
it, allowing a  maximum  of 80 per  cent  of  the  light  to 
reach  the  crop  at  around  noon, with  an  overall  average 
of 68 per cent  over  the  day. However,  the  greenhouse 
covering also partially  diffuses  or scatters  the  light 
coming into  the greenhouse  so that  the  light is  not  all 
moving in one  direction.  The  implication  of  this 
outcome  is that  scattered  light  tends  to reach  more 
leaves in the  canopy  rather  than  directional  light, 
which  throws more  shadows. 

The  crop should  be oriented  in such  a way that  the 
light  transmitted  through  the  structure  is optimized  to 
allow for  efficient  distribution  to the  canopy. 
Greenhouse vegetable  crops have a vertical  structure 
in the greenhouse, so light  filters  down  through  "layers" 
of  leaves before  a smaller percentage  actually  reaches 
the  floor. 

Leaf  area  index  (LAI)  is widely  used  to  indicate  the 
ratio of the  area of leaves over the  area  of ground  the 
leaves cover. The  optimum  leaf  area  index varies with 
the  amount  of sunlight  reaching the  crop. Under  full 
sun,  the optimum  LAJ  is 7, at  60 per  cent  full  sun,  the 
optimum  is 5, at  23 per  cent  full  sunlight, the  optimum 
is only  1.5.  Leaf  area indexes of up to  8 are  common  for 
many mature  crop communities, depending on  species 
and  planting  density.  Mature  canopies of  greenhouse 
sweet  peppers  have a  relatively high  leaf area  index of 
approximately  6.3 when  compared  to  greenhouse 
cucumbers  and  tomatoes  at  3.4 to 2.3  respectively. 

In  Alberta, vegetable  crops  are seeded  in  November 
to  December,  the  low light  period  of the year.  Young 
crops have lower  leaf  area indexes, which  increase  as 
the crop ages. Under  this crop cycle, the plants  are 
growing  and  increasing their LAI  as the  light 
conditions  improve. Crop productivity increases with 
LAI  up to a certain  point  because  of  more  efficient 
light interception. As LAI  increases beyond  this  point, 
no further  efficiency  increases are  realized,  and  in 
some  cases, decreases  occur. 

There  is also a suggestion  that  an  efficient  crop  canopy 
must  allow some  penetration  of  PAR  below the  upper(cid:173)
most  leaves, and  the sharing  of light by many  leaves is 
a prerequisite  for  high productivity.  Leaves can  be 
divided  into two groups: sun  leaves that  intercept  direct 
radiation  and  shade  leaves that  receive  scattered 
radiation. 'Ihe  structures  of  these  leaves are  distinctly 
different. 

The  major  greenhouse vegetable  crops  (tomatoes, 
cucumbers  and  peppers)  are  arranged  in  cither  single 
or  double  rows. These  arrangements  of the  plants,  and 
subsequent  leaf canopy, represent  an  effective 
compromise  between  accessibility  to work  the  crop  and 
light interception  by the  crop. For  a greenhouse  pepper 
crop, this canopy  provides  for  light interception  exceed(cid:173)
ing 90 per  cent  under  overcast  skies and  94 per  cent  for 
much  of  the day under  clear skies. 

There  is a dramatic decrease  in interception  that  occurs 
around  noon, and  lasts for  about an hour, when the  sun 
aligns along  the axis of  north-south  aligned  crop  rows. 
Interception  falls  to 50 per  cent  at  the gap  centers 
where  the  remaining light reaches  the ground,  and  the 
overall interception  of  the  canopy  drops  to 80 per  cent. 

A  strategy  to reduce  this light  loss would  be to align  the 
rows east-west, instead  of  north-south. The  reduced 
light interception  would  then  occur when  the sun  aligns 
with  the rows early  and  late in the  day when  the  light 
intensities are  already  quite  low. The  use  of  white 
plastic ground  cover  can  reflect  back light  that  has 
penetrated  the canopy  and  can  result  in  an  overall  light 
increase  of  13 per cent  over  crops without  white  plastic 
ground  cover. 

The  effect  of  row orientation  varies with time  of  the 
day, season, latitude  and  canopy  geometry. It  has  been 
demonstrated  that  at 34° latitude, north-south  oriented 
rows of tall  crops, such as  tomatoes, cucumbers  and 

o 

peppers, intercepted more radiation over the growing 
season than  those oriented  east-west. This finding was 
completely the opposite for  crops grown at 51.3° 
latitude. The majority  of greenhouse vegetable crop 
production  in Alberta occurs between 50°  (Redcliff) 
and 53° (Edmonton) North. 

This situation would suggest that the optimum row 
alignment  of tall crops for maximum light  interception 
over the entire season in Alberta would be east-west. 
However, in Alberta, high yielding greenhouse 
vegetable crops are grown in greenhouses with north-
south aligned rows as well as in greenhouses with east-
west aligned rows. 

Alberta is known for its sunshine, and the sun is not 
usually limiting during the summer. In fact, many 
vegetable growers apply whitewash shading to the 
greenhouses during the high light period of the year 
because the light intensity and associated solar heat 
gain can be too high for optimal crop  performance. 

The strategies for increasing light interception by the 
canopy should  focus specifically  on the times in year 
when light is limiting. For Alberta, this period  occurs 
in early spring and late fall. When light is limiting, a 
linear function  exists between light reduction and 
decreased growth, with a  1 per cent increase in growth 
occurring with a  1 per cent increase in light, at light 
levels below 200 W/m2. 

Supplementary  Lighting 

When light levels are limiting, supplementary  lighting 
will increase plant growth and yield. However, the use 
of supplemental  lighting has its limits as well. For 
example, using supplemental  lighting to increase the 
photoperiod  to 16 and 20 hours increased the yield of 
pepper plants while continuous light decreased yields 
compared to the 20-hour photoperiod. 

The economics of artificial light  supplementation 
generally do not warrant the use of supplementary 
light on a greenhouse vegetable crop in  full 
production. However, supplementary lighting of 
seedling vegetable plants before  transplanting into the 
production greenhouse is recommended for  those 
growers growing their own plants from  seed. 

Light is generally limiting in Alberta when greenhouse 
vegetable seedlings are started in November to 
December. Using supplemental  lighting for  seedling 
transplant production when natural light is limiting has 
been shown to result in increased weight of tomato 
and pepper transplants grown under supplemental 
light compared to control transplants grown under 
natural light. Also, young plants exposed to 
supplemental light were ready for transplanting one to 
two  weeks earlier than plants grown under natural 
light. 

When supplemental lighting was combined with 
carbon  dioxide supplementation  at 900 ppm, not only 
did the weight of the transplants increase, but  total 
yield of the tomato crop was also higher by 10 per cent 
over the control plants. 

It is recommended that  supplementary lighting be 
used for the production of vegetable transplant 
production in Alberta during the low light period of 
the year. This translates to about four to seven weeks 
of lighting, depending on the crop. Greenhouse sweet 
peppers are transplanted  into the production 
greenhouse at six to seven weeks of age. 

The amount of light required varies with the crop but 
ranges between  approximately  120 -180 W/m2, coming 
from  400 W lights (Figure  14). A typical arrangement 
of lights for the seedling/transplant  nursery would 
include lights in rows 1.8 m (6 ft)  off the floor, spaced 
at 2.7 m (9 ft.)  along a row, with 3.6 m (12 ft) between 
rows. 

Figure  14. High pressure 400 W sodium light 

UJ 

Natural light levels vary throughout  the province, with 
areas in southern Alberta at 50° latitude  receiving 
13 per cent more light annually than areas around 
Edmonton  at 53° latitude. 

Strategies to optimize the use of available light  for 
commercial greenhouse production  involve a number 
of crop management variables. Row orientation, plant 
density, plant training and pruning, maintaining 
optimum growing temperatures and relative humidity 
levels, C0 2  supplementation  and even light supple(cid:173)
mentation  all play a role. All the variables must be 
optimized for a given light level for a given crop, and 
none of these variables are independent of one 
another. If a grower manipulates one variable, then 
the others will be  affected. 

Temperature  Management 

The development  and flowering of the plants relates to 
both root zone and air temperature, and  temperature 
control is an important  tool for the control of crop 
growth. 

Managing air  temperatures 
The optimum temperature is determined by the 
processes involved in the utilization  of assimilate 
products of photosynthesis, i.e. distribution of dry 
matter to shoots, leaves, roots and fruit. For the 
control of crop growth, the average temperature over 
one or several days is more important than the day/ 
night temperature differences. This average 
temperature  is also referred  to as the 24-hour average 
temperature or 24-hour mean temperature. Various 
greenhouse crops show a very close relationship 
between growth, yield and the 24-hour mean 
temperature. 

With the goal of directing growth and maintaining 
optimum plant balance for sustained high yield 
production, the 24-hour mean temperature can be 
manipulated  to direct the plant to be more generative 
in growth or more vegetative in growth. Optimum 
photosynthesis occurs between 21° to 22°C. This 
temperature serves as the target for  managing 
temperatures during the day when photosynthesis 
occurs. 

Optimum temperatures for vegetative growth for 
greenhouse peppers is between  21° to 23°C, with the 
optimum temperature  for yield about 21°C. Fruit set, 
however, is determined  by the 24-hour mean temp(cid:173)
erature and the difference  in day/night  temperatures, 
with the optimum  night temperature for flowering and 
fruit setting at  16° to 18 °C. Target 24-hour mean 
temperatures for the main greenhouse vegetable crops 
(cucumbers, tomatoes, peppers) can vary from  crop to 
crop with differences  even between cultivars of the 
same crop. 

The 24-hour mean temperature optimums for 
vegetable crops generally range between 21° to 23°C, 
depending on light intensity. The general management 
strategy for directing the growth of the crop is to raise 
the 24-hour average temperature  to push the plants in 
a generative direction  and to lower the 24-hour 
average temperature to encourage vegetative growth. 
Adjustments to the 24-hour mean temperature are 
made usually within only 1° to 1.5°C, with  careful 
attention paid to the crop response. 

One assumption made when using air temperature as 
the guide to directing plant growth is to assume that it 
represents the actual plant temperature. The role of 
temperature in the optimization  of plant  performance 
and yield is ultimately based on the temperature of the 
plants. 

Plant temperatures are usually within a degree of air 
temperature; however, during the high light periods of 
the year, plant tissues exposed to high light can reach 
10 ° to 12 °C higher than air temperatures. It is 
important to be aware of this fact  and to use strategies 
such as shading and evaporative cooling to reduce 
overheating of the plant tissues. Infra-red  thermo(cid:173)
meters are useful  for determining actual leaf 
temperature. 

Precision  heat in the canopy 
Precision heating of specific areas within the crop 
canopy adds another dimension of air temperature 
control beyond maintaining optimum temperatures of 
the entire greenhouse air mass.  Using heating pipes 
that can be raised and lowered, heat can be applied 
close to flowers and developing fruit  to provide 

o 

optimum  temperatures  for  maximum  development  in 
spite of  the day-night  temperature  fluctuations 
required  to signal the  plant  to produce  more  flowers. 
The  rate of fruit  development  can be  enhanced  with 
little effect  on  overall plant balance  and flower  set. 

The  precise  application  of heat  in  this manner  can 
avoid the  problem  of low temperatures  to the  flowers 
and fruit,  a situation  known  to disturb  flowering  and 
fruit  set. The functioning  of pepper  flowers  is  affected 
below  14°C; the  number  of pollen  grains per flower  are 
reduced,  and  fruit  set  under  low night  temperatures  are 
generally  deformed. 

Problems with low night  temperatures  can  be  sporadic 
in  the greenhouse  during the  cold winter months  and 
can  occur  even if the  environmental  control  system  is 
apparently  meeting and  maintaining the  set  optimum 
temperature  targets. There can  be  a number  of  reasons 
for  this situation, but  the primary  reasons  include: 

• 

lags in response  time between  the  system's  detection 
of the heating setpoint  temperature  and  when  the 
operation  of the  system  is able to provide  the 
required  heat  throughout  the  greenhouse 

•  specific temperature  variations  in  the  greenhouse 

due  to drafts  and "cold  pockets" 

Managing root zone  temperatures 
Root  zone  temperatures  are  managed  primarily  to 
remain  in a narrow range  to ensure  proper  root 
functioning.  Target  temperatures for  the  root  zone  are 
18° to 21°C. Control  of the  root  zone  temperature  is 
primarily  a concern  for  Alberta  growers in winter,  and 
this control  is obtained  through  the  use of bottom  heat 
systems such  as pipe  and  rail systems. Control  is 
maintained  by monitoring  the  temperature  at  the  roots 
and  then  subsequently  maintaining  the pipe  at  a 
temperature  that  ensures optimum  root  zone 
temperature. 

The  use of tempered  irrigation water  is also a  strategy 
employed by some growers. Maintaining  warm 
irrigation water  (20°C is optimum)  minimizes  the  shock 
to the  root system  associated with the  delivery of  cold 
irrigation water.  In some  cases during  the  winter 
months, in the  absence  of  a pipe  and  rail system,  root 
zone  temperatures can  drop  to  15°C or lower.  The 
performance  of most  greenhouse vegetable  crops is less 
than  optimum  at  this low root  zone  temperature. 

Using  tempered  irrigation water  alone is not  usually 
successful  in  raising and  maintaining  root  zone 
temperatures  to optimum  levels. The  reasons for  this 
are twofold.  Firstly, the volume  of water  required  for 
irrigation  over the  course  of  the day during the  winter 
months  is too  small to allow for  the  adequate, 
sustained  warming  of  the root  zone. Secondly,  the 
temperature  of the  irrigation water would  have  to be 
almost  hot  to effect  any immediate  change  in  root 
zone  temperature. Root  injury  can  begin  to occur  at 
water  temperatures in excess of  23°C in  direct  contact 
with  the roots. The recommendation  for  irrigation 
water  temperature  is not  to exceed  24° to  25°C. 

The  purpose  of  the irrigation  system  is to optimize  the 
delivery  of water  and  nutrients  to the  root  systems of 
the plants. Using the system  for  any other  purpose 
generally compromises  the  main  function  of  the 
irrigation  system. 

Systems for  controlling root  zone  temperatures  are 
confined  primarily to providing  heat  during  the  winter 
months. During  the hot summer  months,  temperatures 
in  the root  zone  can climb to over  25°C if the  plants 
are  grown in sawdust  bags or rockwool  slabs and  if  the 
bags are  exposed to prolonged  direct  sunlight. 
Avoiding high root zone  temperatures  is  accomplished 
primarily  by ensuring  an  adequate crop  canopy  to 
shade  the  root  system. Also, since larger volumes  of 
water  are applied  to the plants  during the  summer, 
ensuring  that  the irrigation  water is relatively  cool, 
approximately  18°C (if  possible), will help in 
preventing excessive root  zone  temperatures. 

One  important  point to keep  in  mind with  respect  to 
irrigation water  temperatures during  the  summer 
months  is that  irrigation  pipe  exposed  to the  direct  sun 
can  cause  the standing water  in  the  pipe to  reach  very 
high  temperatures, over 35°C! Irrigation  pipe  is  often 
black  to prevent light  penetration  into the line, which 
can  result  in the  development  of  algae  and  the 
associated  problems with clogged drippers.  It is 
important  to monitor irrigation water temperatures  at 
the  plant, especially during  the first  part  of  the 
irrigation  cycle, to ensure  the temperatures  are  not 
too  high. All exposed  irrigation  pipe should  be  shaded 
with white plastic or moved  out  of  the direct  sunlight if 
a  problem  is detected. 

Q 

Managing  Relative 
Humidity  Using Vapour 
Pressure  Deficits 

Plants exchange energy with the environment  primarily 
through the evaporation of water, the process of 
transpiration. Transpiration is the only type of  transfer 
process in the greenhouse that  has both a physical basis 
as well as a biological one. This plant  process is almost 
exclusively responsible for the subtropical  climate in 
the greenhouse. Seventy per cent of the light energy 
falling on a greenhouse crop goes towards transpir(cid:173)
ation, the changing of liquid water to water vapour, 
and most of the irrigation water applied to the crop is 
lost through  transpiration. 

Relative humidity (RH) is a measure of the water 
vapour content of the air. The use of relative humidity 
to measure the amount  of water in the air is based on 
the fact  that the ability of the air to hold water vapour 
depends on the air temperature. Relative humidity is 
defined  as the amount  of water vapour in the air 
compared to the maximum amount  of water vapour the 
air is able to hold at that temperature. The  implication 
of this concept is that  a given reading of relative 
humidity reflects different  amounts of water vapour in 
the air at different  temperatures. For example, air at a 
temperature  of 24°C at a RH of 80  per cent is actually 
holding more water vapour than air at a temperature 
of 20°C at a RH of 80  per cent. 

Using relative humidity to control water content of the 
greenhouse air mass has commonly been  approached 
by maintaining the relative humidity below threshold 
values, one for the day and one for the night. This type 
of humidity control was directed  at preserving mini(cid:173)
mum humidity levels, and avoiding humidity levels high 
enough to favour the development  of disease.  There 
are  better approaches to control the humidity levels in 
the greenhouse environment than relying exclusively on 
relative humidity. 

The sole use of relative humidity as the basis of 
controlling the water content of greenhouse air does 
not allow for optimization  of the growing environment, 

as it does not provide a firm basis for dealing with 
plant processes, such as transpiration, in a direct 
manner. The common purpose of humidity control is 
to sustain a minimal rate of transpiration. 

The transpiration rate of a given greenhouse crop is a 
function  of three in-house variables: 

temperature 

• 
•  humidity 
•  light 

Light is the one variable usually outside the control of 
most greenhouse growers. If the existing natural light 
levels are accepted, then crop transpiration is 
primarily determined by the temperature and humidity 
in the greenhouse. Achievement of the optimum 
"transpiration set point" depends on the management 
of temperature and humidity within the greenhouse. 
More specifically, at each level of natural light 
received into the greenhouse, a transpiration set point 
should allow for the determination of optimal 
temperature and humidity set points. 

The relationship between transpiration  and humidity is 
awkward to describe because it is largely related to the 
reaction of the stomata to the difference  in vapour 
pressure between the leaves and the air. The most 
certain piece of knowledge about how stomata behave 
under an increasing vapour pressure  difference 
depends on the plant species in question. However, 
even with the current  uncertainties with understanding 
the relationships and determining mechanisms 
involved, the main point to remember about 
environmental control of transpiration is that  it is 
possible. 

The concept of vapour pressure difference  or vapour 
pressure deficit  (VPD) can be used to establish set 
points for temperature and relative humidity in 
combination to optimize transpiration under any given 
light level. VPD is one of the important  environmental 
factors influencing the growth and development of 
greenhouse crops and offers  a more accurate 
characteristic for describing water saturation of the air 
than relative humidity because VPD is not 
temperature dependent. 

© 

Vapour  pressure  can be  thought  of as the  concentra(cid:173)
tion  or level of saturation  of water existing as a gas in 
the air. Since warm  air can hold  more water  vapour 
than  cool  air, the vapour  pressures   of water in warm 
air can reach  higher values than   in cool  air. There  is a 
natural  movement  from  areas  of high concentration  to 
areas of low concentration.  Just   as heat  naturally  flows 
from  warm  areas  to cool  areas, so does water  vapour 
move from  areas  of high vapour  pressure,  or high 
concentration,  to areas of low vapour pressure,  or low 
concentration.  This  situation   is true for any given air 
temperature. 

The vapour  pressure  deficit   is used  to describe the 
difference  in water vapour  concentration  between  two 
areas. The size  of the difference  also indicates the 
natural  "draw"  or force  driving the water vapour to 
move  from  the area  of high  concentration  to low 
concentration. The rate of transpiration  or water 
vapour loss from  a leaf into the air around  the leaf can 
be  thought  of and managed  using the concept of 
vapour  pressure  deficit  (VPD). Plants  maintained 
under low VPD  have lower  transpiration  rates while 
plants  under  high   VPD can  experience  higher 
transpiration  rates and greater water  stress. 

A key point  when  considering   the concept  of VPD as 
it  applies to controlling  plant  transpiration   is that  the 
vapour  pressure   of water vapour  is always higher 
inside the leaf  than  outside   the leaf.  That  means  the 
concentration  of water vapour  is always greater  within 
the  leaf than   in the greenhouse  environment, with  the 
possible  exception  of having a very  undesirable 
100 per cent  relative  humidity   in the greenhouse 
environment. Thus,  the natural  tendency of  movement 
of water vapour   is from  within  the leaf into the 
greenhouse  environment. 

The  rate  of movement  of water  from  within  the leaf 
into the greenhouse  air, or transpiration, is governed 
largely by the difference  in the vapour  pressure  of 
water in the greenhouse  air and the  vapour  pressure 
within  the leaf. The  relative humidity  of the air within 
the  leaf  can be considered  to always be  100 per  cent, 
so by optimizing  the temperature  and relative 
humidity  of the greenhouse  air, growers can establish 
and  maintain  a certain  rate of water  loss from   the leaf, 
a certain  transpiration  rate.  The ultimate  goal is to 

establish  and maintain  the optimum  transpiration  rate 
for  maximum  yield. Crop yield   is linked  to the  relative 
increase or decrease in transpiration. A  simplified 
relationship  relates increase  in yield to increase in 
VPD. 

Transpiration  is a key plant  process for cooling the 
plant, bringing  nutrients   in from  the root system and 
for  allocating  resources within   the plant.  Transpiration 
rate can determine  the maximum  efficiency  by which 
photosynthesis  occurs, how efficiently  nutrients are 
brought  into the plant  and combined  with the  products 
of photosynthesis, and how these  resources  for growth 
are distributed  throughout   the plant.  Since the 
principles of VPD can be  used  to control the 
transpiration  rate, there   is a range of optimum  VPDs 
corresponding  to optimum  transpiration  rates  for 
maximum  sustained  yield. 

The  measurement   of VPD  is done  in terms of 
pressure, using units such  as millibars (mb) or 
kilopascals (kPa) or units of concentration,  grams per 
cubic meter  (g/m 3). The units of measurement  can vary 
from  sensor  to sensor  or between  the various  systems 
used  to control  VPD.  The optimum  range  of VPD is 
between  3 to 7 g/m3, and regardless of how VPD is 
measured,  maintaining  VPD in the  optimum  range 
can be obtained  by meeting  specific  corresponding 
relative humidity  and temperature  targets. Table  1 
presents the temperature-relative  humidity 
combinations  required  to maintain  the range of 
optimal V PD in the  greenhouse  environment.   It is 
important  to remember  that  this table only  displays 
the  temperature   and humidity targets to obtain the 
range of optimum VPDs;  it does not consider the 
temperature  targets that   are optimal  for specific  crops. 
There  is a range of optimal  growing  temperatures   for 
each  crop that will determine   a narrower  band  of 
temperature-humidity  targets  for optimizing VPD. 

The plants themselves exert  tremendous influence   on 
the greenhouse  climate. Transpiration   not only  serves 
to add moisture to the  environment,  but it is also the 
mechanism  by which  plants  cool  themselves   and add 
heat  to the  environment. 

Optimization  of transpiration  rates through   the 
management  of air temperature  and relative  humidity 
can change  over  the course of the season. Early in the 
season, when  plants  are young and the outside 

o 

0.6 

3.7 

3.3 

Table 1. Relative humidity and temperature targets to obtain optimal vapour pressure deficits  -  g/m"  and millibars (mb) 
Humidity ^ • • ^ • n H H H HI 
ISIl^^ 
60 per  cent 
Temp 
Temp 

50 per cent 
95 per cent 
gm/m3  mb  gm/m3  mb  gm/m1  mb  gm/m3  mb  gm/m'  mb  gm/m3  mb  gm/m3  mb  gm/m5  mb  gm/m3 i  mb  gnVrn3  mb 
0.5 
7.2 

'SHMMHHII 

85 per cent 

75 percent 

70 per cent 

65 per cent 

55 per cent 

90 per cent 

80 per cent 

2.2 

2.2 

2.9 

2.8 

1.1 

1.4 

1.7 

6.6 

5.5 

4.3 

3.9 

5.1 

4.4 

5.8 

5.0 

0.6 

0.6 

.07 

.07 

.08 

.08 

.09 

.09 

1.0 

1.0 

1.1 

1.2 

1.3 

0.8 

0.8 

0.9 

0.9 

1.0 

1.0 

1.2 

1.2 

1.3 

1.3 

1.4 

1.6 

1.7 

1.4  1 1.8 

1.4 

|  1,8 

1.2 

1.3 

1.3 

1.4 

1.5 

1.6 

1.7 

1.8 

2.0 

2.0 

2.2 

2.4 

2.5 

2.7 

2.8 

1.6 

1.7 

1.7 

1.8 

2.0 

2.1 

2.2 

2.4 

2.6 

2.6 

2.9 

3.2 

3.3 

3.6 

3.7 

1.8 

1.9 

2.0 

2.1 

2.2 

2.4 

2.6 

2.7 

3.0 

3.0 

3.3 

3.6 

3.7 

4.1 

4.2 

2.4 

2.5 

2.6 

2.8 

2.9 

3.2 

3.4 

3.6 

3.9 

3.9 

4.3 

4.7 

4.9 

5.4 

5.5 

2.3 

2.5 

2.7 

2.9 

3.0 

3.3 

3.5 

3.7 

3.9 

4.1 

4.4 

4.7 

5.0 

5.3 

5.7 

3.0 

3.3 

3.6 

3.8 

3.9 

4.3 

4.6 

4.9 

5.1 

5.4 

5.8 

6.2 

6.6 

7.0 

7.5 

2.9 

3.1 

3.3 

3.6 

3.8 

4.1 

4.3 

4.6 

4.9 

5.2 

5.5 

5.9 

6.3 

6.7 

7.1 

3.8 

4.1 

4.3 

4.7 

5.0 

5.4 

5.7 

6.1 

6.4 

6.8 

7.2 

7.8 

8.3 

8.8 

9.3 

3.5 

3.7 

4.0 

4.3 

4.5 

4.9 

5.2 

5.5 

5.8 

6.2 

6.6 

7.1 

7.5 

8.0 

8.5 

4.6 

4.9 

5.3 

5.6 

5.9 

6.4 

6.8 

7.2 

7.6 

8.1 

8.7 

9.3 

9.9 

10.1 

11.2 

4.1 

4.3 

4.6 

5.0 

5.3 

5.7 

6.0 

6.4 

6.8 

7.2 

7.7 

8.3 

8.7 

9.3 

9.9 

5.4 

5.6 

6.1 

6.6 

7.0 

7.5 

7.9 

8.4 

8.9 

9.5 

10.1 

10.9 

11.4 

12.2 

4.7 

5.0 

5.3 

5.7 

6.1 

6.5 

6.8 

7.4 

7.8 

8.2 

8.8 

9.4 

9.9 

6.2 

6.6 

7.0 

7.5 

8.0 

8.6 

8.9 

9.7 

10.3 

10.7 

11.6 

5.3 

5.6 

5.9 

6.4 

6.8 

7.3 

7.7 

8.3 

8.8 

9.2 

9.9 

7.0 

7.4 

7.8 

8.4 

8.9 

9.6 

10.1 

10.9 

11.6 

5.8 

6.2 

6.6 

7.1 

7.5 

8.1 

8.6 

9.2 

9.7 

7.6 

8.1 

8.7 

9.3 

9.9 

10.7 

14.8 

12.1 

12.7 

12.1  10.3 

13.6 

13.0 

11.0 

14.5 

12.3 

10.6 

13.9 

11.7 

15.4 

13.0 

11.2 

14.7 

12.4 

16.3 

10.8 

14.2 

11.9 

15.6 

13.2 

17.4 

13.0 

11.3 

14.8 

12.7 

16.7 

14.0 

18.4 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 

* Optimum range 3 to 7g/m'or  3.9 to 9.2 mb 

temperatures are cold, both heat and humidity  (from 
mist systems) can be applied  to maintain  temperature 
and humidity targets. As the season progresses and the 
crop matures, increasing light intensity increases the 
transpiration  rate and the moisture content of the air. 

obtained  at relatively low light intensities, not in 
brightest sunlight. Considering the supply of light to 
available land area on which a crop is growing, the 
overall yield efficiencies  are always well below 
22 per cent. 

To maintain optimum  rates of transpiration, venting is 
employed to reduce the relative humidity in the  air. 
However under typical summer conditions in Alberta, 
particularly in the south, ventilation is almost 
exclusively triggered by high temperature set points 
calling for cooling.  Under these conditions, ventilation 
can occur continuously throughout  the daylight period 
and will result in very low relative humidity in the 
greenhouse. As the hot, moist air is vented, it is 
replaced by warm, dry air. 

Southern  Alberta is a dry environment with the relative 
humidity of the air in summer regularly falling below 
30 per cent. Under these conditions, some form of 
additional cooling (mist systems or pad and fan 
evaporative cooling) is required to both reduce the 
amount  of ventilation for cooling as well as to add 
moisture to the air. 

Carbon Dioxide 
Supplementation 

Carbon dioxide (C02) is one of the inputs of 
photosynthesis, and as such, C02 plays an important 
role in increasing crop productivity. Optimal  C02 
concentrations for the greenhouse atmosphere fall 
within the range of 700  to 900 ppm (parts per million). 
Carbon  dioxide enrichment  to 1,200 ppm increases the 
maximum conversion efficiency  of light to chemical 
energy in photosynthesis by a substantial  amount 
(between 28 to 59 per cent). Crop productivity  depends 
not only on efficiency  of interception of light but  also 
on the efficiency  with which light is converted  to 
chemical energy in photosynthesis. 

Photosynthetic efficiencies  appear to never exceed 
about 22 per cent of the absorbed light energy in the 
400 to 700 nm range. The maximum efficiency  is 

The use of C02  in greenhouses can give light use 
efficiencies  exceeding those of field crops. Greenhouse 
crops with CO, enrichment  achieve maximum 
efficiency  of light energy utilization between  12  to 
13 per cent. The ability of plants to utilize C02 
depends on the presence of light. For this reason, it is 
only useful  to supplement CO, during the daylight 
hours. 

The key enzyme for CO, fixation  is rubisco. The 
activity of rubisco depends on the ratio of the 02 and 
C0 2  concentration  in the atmosphere. The major  effect 
of C02 enrichment  is the shift  in balance in the 02 and 
C02  ratio, which improves the rubisco activity. The 
effect  is just as important at low  light levels as at high 
ones since the percentage effect  on relative growth  rate 
is about the same over a range of light levels. 

Transpiration  rates are reduced under C0 2 enrichment 
conditions by 34 per cent. Increased net leaf 
photosynthesis rate and decreased transpiration  rate 
under C0 2 enrichment is well documented. One of the 
most important effects  of C02 enrichment is the 
increased water use  efficiency. 

The technique of enriching the greenhouse  atmosphere 
with C02 to maximize yield is standard practice. The 
largest increase in growth rate achieved with  C02 
enrichment is obtained with high light intensities. 
A high C0 2 concentration  may partially compensate 
for low light levels. There is obviously a potential  for 
synergism between C02 and light; however, the 
relationship between C0 2  and light conditions may 
be relatively loose. 

When greenhouse ventilation rates are high, the cost 
of C02 supplementation  can rise steeply. This situation 
is particularly true with a ventilation regime where 
ventilation  is triggered  at temperatures between 
19 to 21°C. 

o 

Investigations into delaying ventilation  to increase  the 
cost  effectiveness  of C 0 2 supplementation  have  shown 
that  the  amounts of C 0 2  supplied  to the  greenhouse 
could  be reduced  by 23 to 35 per  cent while still  main(cid:173)
taining  the  C 0 2 content  of  the greenhouse  atmosphere 
above  ambient  CO, concentrations. Delaying  venti(cid:173)
lation  to conserve  CO, resulted  in higher  greenhouse 
temperatures with  fruit  temperatures  exceeding  30°C. 
Total  marketable yield fell  by  11 per  cent,  and  the 
proportion  of fruit  graded  as Class  1 was reduced  by 
20 per  cent  on  average. 

The  best  advice for  C 0 2  supplementation  under  high 
ventilation  rates is to maintain  the  CO, concentration  at 
or just  above the  normal  ambient  level of  approxi(cid:173)
mately 350 ppm. This is a highly  efficient  way of  using 
C0 2  supplementation.  Maintaining  the  C 0 2  concen(cid:173)
tration  at  the  same level as ambient  means  there  can 
be no  net  exchange  of  C 0 2 with  the  outside  air  through 
leakage  or ventilation.  For  practical  purposes,  the 
input  of CO, is therefore  equal  to that  being  assimilated 
by the  crop during photosynthesis,  i.e. the  utilization  of 
supplementary  CO, is totally  efficient.  The  main  point 
being  that  ventilation  and  economical  C 0 2  enrichment 
may be applied  simultaneously. 

At higher  temperatures, such  as 25 °C, net  photo(cid:173)
synthesis begins to decline  and  the  supplementation 
of  C 0 2  above  this temperature  is not  considered  cost 
effective  in some  areas.  During  longer  periods  of 
elevated  CO 2(800  to  1,000  ppm),  the stomata  remain 
partially closed, and  the reduction  of  transpiration  may 
cause insufficient  cooling, hence,  heat  damage  to  the 
leaves under  intense  light conditions.  However,  the 
increased  VPD  associated with  the higher  temperatures 
has been  shown  to counteract  the  effect  of  stomatal 
closure  due  to high  C 0 2 supplementation.  This  situation 
is true  in Alberta where  high  C 0 2 levels with  higher 
temperatures  and  light intensities  do not  result  in  heat 
damage  to the  leaves. 

Since young  plants grow nearly  exponentially,  they  can 
benefit  more  from  optimal  growing  conditions  than 
mature  plants. Carbon  dioxide enrichment  results in 
heavier  transplants  and  can be used  to accelerate  the 
growth  as well  as improve  the  quality  of the  transplants. 
Carbon  dioxide may increase  sugar  translocation  in  the 
roots as well as facilitate  the movement  of  nitrogen  and 
carbon  compounds  directed  towards the  development  of 
new roots. In short, C 0 2 supplementation  shortens  the 
nursery  period  and  results in sturdier,  higher  quality 
plants. 

Air Pollution in the 
Greenhouse 

Air  pollutants  can be a concern  for  greenhouse 
production. The  incidence of  air pollutant  injury  to 
plants is increasing  as more growers use  double  plastic 
greenhouses or  other  forms of greenhouse  sealing  to 
reduce  energy loss. Air pollutants can  cause  both 
visible injury  to the  leaves, and  reduced  growth  rates. 
Tomatoes and  cucumbers  are particularly sensitive  to 
air pollutant  injury.  When  considering  the effects  of 
greenhouse  air pollutants, it  is also important  to 
remember  that  these  pollutants  pose significant  health 
risks for  people working the  crops. 

Common  pollutants  are often  the by-products  of 
combustion. Although  sources of  pollutants  can  be 
outside  the greenhouse, a number  of pollutant  sources 
can  also be  found  within  the  greenhouse.  Pollutants 
can  be produced  by direct-fired  heating units, gas 
supply lines or  carbon  dioxide generators that  burn 
hydrocarbon  fuels  such  as natural  gas.  Significant 
sources of pollutants outside  the greenhouse  can 
include  industrial  plants or vehicle exhaust  (Table 2). 

Table 2. Maximum  ace 
Table 2. Maximum  ace 
of some  noxious gases 
of some  noxious gases for  humans a 

pntahlp  nnnnp n* r a*' nn  fnnm\* 
It"!*—! 

" « - • " "•  
nd plants. 

Gas 

Humans 

Carbon dioxide  (C02) 

5,000 

Carbon monoxide  (CO) 

Sulfur dioxide  (S02) 

47 

3.5 

Hydrogen Sulfide (H2S) 

10.5 

Ethylene  (C2H4) 

Nitrous  oxide (NO) 

Nitrogen dioxide  (N02) 

5.0 

5.0 

5.0 

Plants 

4,500 

100 

0.1 

0.01 

0.01 

0.01  to  0.1 

0.2  to  2.0 

(Adapted from Portree 1996)  *ppm =  parts per million 

Air pollution  from  sources within  the  greenhouse 
commonly  occurs through  cracked  heat  exchangers  on 
furnaces  or  incomplete  combustion  in the  furnace  or 
CO,  generators.  Heaters  and generators should  be 
checked  at  the beginning of the  cropping season  to 
ensure  they are operating properly  and  that  complete 
combustion  is occurring. The  most  common  air 

0 

pollutants resulting from incomplete combustion 
include nitrogen  oxides, nitric oxide (NO) and nitrogen 
dioxide (NOz), sulfur dioxide (SOj), 
ethylene (C2H4), propylene (C3H6), ozone (O,), carbon 
monoxide (CO) and hydrogen sulfide (H2S). 

Symptoms of air pollutant  injury vary with the specific 
gases involved.  The common symptoms  of  sulfur 
dioxide injury are characterized by severe leaf burn 
appearing withing 24 to 36 hours of exposure to high 
levels of the gas. There is a distinct line between  the 
affected  and unaffected  areas on the leaves, and young 
leaves are more susceptible to injury than mature 
leaves.  Symptoms of NO, injury include darker lhan 
normal green leaves, with downward  curling leaf 
margins and dead  areas on (he leaves in severe cases. 

Ethylene functions as a plant growth regulator, 
involved in seed germination, root development, flower 
development and leaf abscission. Ethylene injury can 
include a reduction in growth, shortening and 
thickening of stems and twisting of stems, as well as 
premature leaf and flower drop. Propylene injury is 
similar to ethylene, but usually occurs at 
concentrations  100 times higher than those for 
ethylene. Ozone injury is characterized by mottling, 
necrotic flecking or bronzing necrosis of leaves, 
premature leaf drop and decreased growth. 

Growing Media 

Most commercial vegetable production  greenhouses in 
Alberta use some form of "hydroponic culture." The 
term hydroponics essentially translates as "water 
culture." It is an advanced  form of crop culture that 
allows for specific control of the delivery of nutrients to 
the plants. The term hydroponics can bring to mind a 
number of variations on the same theme. Hydroponic 
growing systems can include: 

•  substrate culture where the roots are allowed to 

grow in an inert  or semi-inert  media 

•  solution culture where the roots are immersed in 

ponds of nutrient  solution 

•  NFT culture (nutrient  film technique) where the 

roots are contained such that a thin film of nutrient 
solution constantly runs by the roots 

•  aeroponics where the root systems are suspended 

within an enclosed area and are misted with 
nutrient solution 

A general working definition  of hydroponic culture 
that would include all the above systems would be a 
plant culture where the plants receive  fertilizer 
nutrients every time they receive water. 

Using this working definition of hydroponics also 
leaves room for the inclusion of soil as a growing 
medium. However, soil culture is not widely practiced 
in commercial vegetable greenhouses in Alberta. The 
main reason for moving out of soil into soilless culture 
is to escape problems due to soil borne diseases that 
can build up in the soil that is used year after year. 
Soilless media such as rockwool and sawdust offer an 
initially disease-free growing medium.  There are 
other advantages to moving the root system out of the 
soil and into confined  spaces such as sawdust bags or 
rockwool slabs. The main advantages are realized in 
the improved management of watering and nutrition, 
topics discussed in more detail in following sections. 

Media  for  seeding and  propagation 
Rockwool plugs are the most common media used for 
seeding. Rockwool is manufactured  by subjecting rock 
mineral materials to very high temperatures and then 
spinning the materials into a fibre. The plugs can be 
square (2 cm x 2 cm by 4 cm deep) and can come 
joined together as a rockwool "flat" that fits into 
standard 28 cm x 54 cm plastic seeding flats. As the 
seed germinates and the seedlings are ready for their 
first transplanting, the plugs easily separate from each 
other when the seedlings are transplanted into 
rockwool blocks. 

Rockwool blocks are typically around  10 cm x 10 cm 
by 8 cm deep, with a depression cut into the upper 
surface  to receive the rockwool plug at the first 
transplanting. As the seedling continues to grow, the 
root system develops from  the rockwool plug into the 
confines of the block.  When the seedling is ready for 
transplanting into the main production greenhouse at 
"house set," the bottom of the rockwool block is 
placed in direct contact with the larger volume of 
growing media used in the production house. 

o 

Growing media  for the  production 
greenhouse 
The  majority  of Alberta's  commercial  greenhouse 
vegetable  production  is based  on  substrate  culture 
where  the plants  are grown  in sawdust  or  rockwool. 
These substrates  contain  practically nothing  in the way 
of  plant  nutrients  and  serve as a medium  for  the  root 
system to  anchor  the plant. The  growing  media plays a 
significant  role  in defining  the  environment  of  the  root 
system  and  allows for  the transfer  of water  and 
nutrients  to the  plant. 

Typically for  sawdust  culture, two or three  plants  are 
grown  in 20 to 25 litre white plastic bags  (white 
reflects  more  light) filled  with  spruce  and/or  pine 
sawdust. Rockwool  culture  uses  approximately 
16 litres of  rockwool  substrate  for  every two to  three 
plants. The  sawdust  bags or rockwool  slabs  are  placed 
directly  on  the white plastic  floor  of the  greenhouse. 

Sawdust  is less expensive  than  rockwool  in initial  cost; 
however, standard  density  rockwool  slabs can  be 
pasteurized  and  reused for  up to three  years. Sawdust 
is a waste product  of the  lumber  milling process, which 
is usually burned,  so the use of  sawdust as a  growing 
media  is an  environmentally  sound  practice. 

For sawdust  culture, it is important  to  use  a 
moderately  fine sawdust.  Lumber  mills in  Alberta 
understand  the sawdust  requirements  for  plant 
production  and  will supply "horticultural  grade" 
sawdust  if they  are made  aware  the sawdust  is to be 
used  for  plant  culture. Sawdust  that  is too fine will 
break down  over  the  production  season, with  a 
resulting loss of  airspace  around  the roots that  can 
lead  to root  death. 

There  is always some sawdust  decomposition  during 
the growing season, which  makes  the product  useful 
for  further  composting  or  adding  to mineral  soils  to 
improve  soil quality.  Through  the continued  action  of 
soil microbes, the sawdust  residue  is returned  to  the 
environment  in an  ecologically  sound  manner  at  the 
end  of  the cropping season. The waste from  sawdust 
culture  is confined  to the  plastic bags  themselves, 
which  are recovered  when  the  sawdust  bags  are 
dumped. These  bags can  be recycled where  facilities 
exist. 

Managing  Irrigation  and 
Fertilizer 

n  hydroponic crop production  systems, water 
application  is integrated  with fertilizer  feed 
application. The  management  of  fertilizer 
application  to the  plants is  therefore 
integrated  with  the  management  of watering.  The 

management  of watering  and  nutrition  is focused  on 
the  optimal  delivery of water  and  nutrients  over  the 
various growth  stages of the  plant  to maximize  yield 
through  the changing growing  environment  over  the 
production  year. 

Water 
Water  quality 
Plants are comprised  of  80 to 90 per  cent  water,  and 
the  availability  of  adequate  quality water  is very 
important  to successful  crop production. Water  quality 
is determined  by what  is contained  in  the water  at  the 
source  (well, dugout,  town  or  city water supply)  and 
the  acidity  or  alkalinity  of  the  water. 

Water  is a solvent, and  as such, it  can  contain  or hold  a 
certain  quantity of soluble  salts in solution.  Fertilizers, 
by their  nature, are soluble  salts, and  growers  dissolve 
fertilizers  in water to obtain  nutrient  solutions  to 
provide  the plants with adequate  nutrition. 

Before  using any source  of water  for  crop  production, 
it  is important  to have the water quality  tested.  Water 
quality  tests determine  the  amount  of various  salts 
commonly  associated  with water  quality  concerns. 
The  maximum  desirable  concentrations, in parts  per 
million  (ppm), for  specific salt  ions in water  for 
greenhouse  crop  production  are presented  in Table 3. 

Parts per million  are one  unit  of measurement  of  the 
amount  of dissolved  ions, or salt  in water,  and  are  also 
used  to measure  the  level of dissolved  fertilizer  salts in 
nutrient  solutions. The  level of nutrients  as  dissolved 

Table  3. The  maximum  desirable  concentrations, in 
parts per  million (ppm), for  specific  salt  ions in 

water  for  greenhouse  crop  production. 

Element 

Maximum  Desirable  (ppm) 

Nitrogen  (N03 - N) 

Phosphorus  (H2P0A - P) 

Potassium  (K+) 

Calcium  (Ca++) 

Magnesium  (Mg++) 

Chloride  (CI) 

Sulphate  (SO,-) 

Bicarbonate  (HC03) 

Sodium  (Na++) 

Iron  (Fe +' +) 

Boron (B) 

Zinc  (Zn^) 

Manganese  (Mn* +) 

Copper  (Cu++) 

Molybdenum  (Mo) 

Fluoride (F-) 

pH 

E.C. 

5 

5 

5 

120 

25 

100 

200 

60 

30 

5 

0.5 

0.5 

1.0 

0.2 

0.02 

1 

7.5 

1.0  mmho 

ions in water  can  also be  reported  in  milligrams/Litre 
of solution. There  is a direct  relationship  between 
milligrams/Litre  (mg/L) and  ppm, where  1 mg/L  = 
1 ppm.  Another  common  unit  of  measure  for  dissolved 
fertilizer  salts is the  millimole  (mM). The  concept  of 
millimoles  and  the  relationship  between  millimoles 
and  ppm  is explained  in the  "Feed  Targets and  Plant 
Balance" section. Water  quality tests will also  report 
the  pH,  the  acidity or  alkalinity  of  the  water. 

© 

Once  the water  source  has been  determined  to  be 
suitable  for  greenhouse  crop  production,  it  is also 
important  to have the water  tested  routinely  to  ensure 
any fluctuations  in  quality  that  may occur  do  not 
compromise  crop  production. 

Electrical Conductivity of 
Water 

Water  quality  analyses  also  report  the  electrical 
conductivity or  E.C. of the water. The  ability of  water 
to conduct  an  electrical  current  depends  on  the 
amount  of  ions or salts dissolved  in  the water.  The 
greater  the  amount  of dissolved  salts in  the water,  the 
more  readily the  water will conduct  electricity. 

Electrical  conductivity is an  indirect  measure  of  the 
level of  salts in  the water  and  can  be  a useful  tool  for 
both  determining the  general  suitability  of water  for 
crop  production  and for  the  ongoing  monitoring of  the 
fertilizer  feed  solution. Using  electrical  conductivity  as 
a measure  to maintain  E.C. targets  in the  nutrient 
solution  and  the  root  zone  can  be  a management  tool 
for  making decisions  regarding  the  delivery of 
fertilizer  solution  to the  plants. 

Electrical  conductivity  is measured  and  reported  using 
a number  of  measurement  units including  millimhos 
per  centimeter  (mmho/cm), millisiemens  per 
centimeter  (mS/cm)  or  microsiemens  per  centimeter 
(/iS/cm).  Water suitable  for  greenhouse  crop 
production  should  not  have  a E.C. of  more  than 
1.0  mmho/cm. 

1  m m h o / cm  =  l m S / cm  =  1000/xs/cm 

pH 

The  relative  acidity  and  alkalinity of the  water  is 
expressed  as pH, and is measured  on  a scale from  0  to 
14.  The  lower  the  number,  the  more  acidic the water  or 
solution; the  higher the  number,  the more  alkaline. 
The  pH  scale is a logarithmic scale, meaning  that  every 
increase  of one  number, i.e. 4 to 5, represents  a  tenfold 
increase  in  alkalinity. Conversely, every single  number 
decrease, i.e. 5 to 4, represents  a tenfold  increase in 
acidity. 

Most  water supplies in Alberta  arc alkaline, with 
typical  pH  levels of 7.0 to 7.5. Alkalinity  of  the  water 
increases  with  increasing  levels of  bicarbonate. The  pH 
measurement  reflects  the chemistry  of  the water  and 
nutrient  solution. The  pH  of a fertilizer  solution  has a 
dramatic determining effect  on  the solubility  of 
nutrients  and  how  available  nutrients  are to  the  plant. 

The  optimum  pH  of  a feed  solution, with  respect  to  the 
availability of  nutrients  to plants, falls within  the  range 
of 5.5 to 6.0. The  pH  of  a solution  can  be  adjusted 
through  the use of acids, such  as phosphoric or  nitric 
acid, or potassium  bicarbonate, depending on  which 
direction  the  feed  solution  needs  to be adjusted.  When 
acids or  bases are used to  adjust  the pH  of the  feed 
solution, the  nutrients  added  by the  acid  (nitrogen, 
phosphorus)  must be  accounted for  when  the  feed 
solution  is calculated.  Most water  supplies in  Alberta 
are basic in pH  and  require  the  use of acid  for  pH 
correction. 

The  amount  of  acid  required  to adjust  the  pH  usually 
depends  on  the bicarbonate  (HC0 3-)  level  in  the  water. 
The  amount  of  bicarbonate  in the water supply can  be 
determined  by a water analysis and is reported  in  parts 
per million  (ppm). A good  target  pH  for  nutrient  feed 
solutions  is 5.8, and  as a general  rule, this  pH 
corresponds  to a bicarbonate  level  of  about  60 ppm. If 
the incoming water has, for  example, a pH  of 8.1 and  a 
bicarbonate  level reported  at  207 ppm, then  207 ppm  -
60 ppm  =  147 ppm  of bicarbonate, which  needs to  be 
neutralized  by  acid  to reduce  the  pi I from  8.1 to  5.8. 

O 

To neutralize  61 ppm  or  1 milliequivalent  of 
bicarbonate, it  takes about  70 ml  of  85 per  cent 
phosphoric  acid, or  about  76 ml  of  67 per cent  nitric 
acid  per  1,000  litres of water. To neutralize  147 ppm 
of bicarbonate, the following  approach  could  be  used: 

There  are  12 mineral  elements considered  essential 
for  plant  growth.  Water  (HjO)  and  carbon  dioxide 
(C0 2)  are  also necessary  for  plant  growth  and  supply 
hydrogen, carbon  and  oxygen  to the  plants,  bringing 
the  total  to 15 essential  elements. 

Using 85% phosphoric  acid: 

140  •*•  61  =  2.3  milliequivalents  of  bicarbonate 
to be  neutralized. 
2.3 milliequivalents x 70 ml  of  85%  phosphoric 
acid  for  each  milliequivalent  =  2.3 x 70 ml  = 
161 mis of 85% phosphoric  acid  for  every  1,000 
litres of  water. 

Using 67%  nitric  acid: 

2.3 milliequivalents of bicarbonate  to  be 
neutralized. 
2.3 milliequivalents  x 76 ml  per  milliequivalent 
=  2.3 x 76 ml  =  175 mis of  67% nitric acid  for 
every  1,000  litres of  water. 

These  calculations have to be made  for  each  water 
sample based  on  the  results of  a water  analysis 
reporting  the level of  bicarbonates.  In  addition  to 
phosphoric and  nitric acid, sulfuric  and  hydrochloric 
acids can  also be used  to adjust  the pH  of  the  water 
down. 

Acids are corrosive. Special  care  and  attention  must  be 
used when  handling  them  for  pH  correction.  The 
common  acids used  to lower the  pH  are  phosphoric 
acid  (85 per  cent)  and  nitric acid  (67 per  cent). Of 
these two, nitric acid  is the  most corrosive  and  must  be 
handled very carefully.  Acid  resistant safety glasses, 
rubber  gloves and  a rubber  apron  should be  the 
minimum  safety  equipment  used when  handling  acids. 

Mineral  Nutrition of Plants 

To support  optimum  growth, development  and  crop 
yield, the fertilizer  feed  solution  has to  continually 
meet  the  nutritional  requirements of the  plants. 
Although  the  mineral  nutrition  of  plants is complex, 
experience  in  crop culture  has determined  basic 
requirements  for  the successful  hydroponic culture  of 
plants. 

A  criterion  to determine  whether  an  element  is 
essential  to plants is to determine  if the  plant  cannot 
complete  its life  cycle in the  complete  absence  of  the 
clement. 

Other  elements, although  not  necessarily  considered 
universally  essential, can  affect  the  growth  of  plants. 
Sodium  (Na), chloride  (CI) and  silicon  (Si) are in  this 
category. All  three  of  these nutrients  either  enhance 
the  growth  of  plants or  are considered  essential 
nutrients  for  some  plant  species. 

The  essential  nutrients  can be grouped  into  two 
categories  that  reflect  the  quantities  of  the  nutrients 
required  by plants. Macronutrients,  or  major  elements, 
are required  by plants in larger  quantities than  the 
amounts  of  micronutrients, or  trace elements,  required 
for  growth  (Table 4). 

Another  useful  grouping  of  the mineral  nutrients is 
based  on  the  relative  ability of  the plant  to  translocate 
the  nutrients  from  older  leaves to younger  leaves. 
Mobile  nutrients  are  those that  can  be moved  readily 
by the plant  from  older leaves to younger  leaves. 
Nitrogen  is an  example  of  a mobile  nutrient.  Calcium 
is an example  of an  immobile  nutrient,  one which  the 
plant  is not  able  to move after  it  has initially  been 
translocated  to a specific  location. 

The  discussion  of  plant  nutrients  only as elements  does 
not  allow for  a more complete  discussion  of  how  plants 
access the  elements  from  the  root  environment  and 
how hydroponic growers  ensure  their  crop plants  are 
adequately  supplied with  nutrients. The  term 
"element" can  be defined  as a substance  that  cannot 
be broken  down  into simpler  substances  by chemical 
means; the  basic unit  of  an  element  is the  atom.  With 
the  simplest  or purest  form  of plant  nutrients  being  the 
atom, nutrients  are  often  not  available  to plants in 
their  purest  form.  Pure  nitrogen  is an  example of  a 
nutrient  element  represented  by its  atom. 

© 

Table  4.  Essential  mineral  elements for  plants. 

Symbol  Type 

Mobility  in  Plant 

Symptoms  of  Deficiency 

Element 

Nitrogen 

Phosphorus 

Potassium 

Magnesium 

N 

P 

K 

macronutrient 

macronutrient 

macronutrient 

Mg 

macronutrient 

mobile 

mobile 

mobile 

mobile 

Plant  light  green, lower  (older)  leaves  yellow. 

Plant  dark  green turning to  purple. 

Yellowish  green margins  on older  leaves. 

Chlorosis  between the  veins  on older  leaves 
first, turning to  necrotic  spots, flecked 
appearance at first. 

Young  leaves  of  terminal  bud dying back  at  tips 
and margins.  Blossom  end rot  of fruit  (tomato 
and pepper). 

Calcium 

Ca 

macronutrient 

immobile 

Sulfur 

Iron 

Manganese 

Boron 

Copper 

Zinc 

Molybdenum 

S 

Fe 

Mn 

B 

Cu 

Zn 

Mo 

macronutrient 

immobile 

Leaves  appear  light green. 

micronutrient 

immobile 

micronutrient 

micronutrient 

immobile 

immobile 

Yellowing  between veins  on young  leaves 
(interveinal chlorosis), netted pattern. 

Interveinal  chlorosis,  netted pattern. 

Leaves  of terminal  bud  becoming  light  green at 
bases,  eventually  dying.  Plants  "brittle." 

micronutrient 

immobile 

Young  leaves  dropping, wilted  appearance. 

micronutrient 

mobile 

Interveinal  chlorosis  of  older  leaves. 

micronutrient 

immobile 

Lower  leaves  pale, developing a  scorched 
appearance. 

When the atoms of different  elements combine, they 
can form other substances that are based on a 
particular combination  of atoms, substances based on 
molecules. Nitrate (N03-), is a molecule based on 
nitrogen and oxygen atoms; nitrate is absorbed by 
plant roots as a source of nitrogen. Nitrate is an 
"available" form of nitrogen  (Table 5). The nitrate 
molecule has an overall negative charge, which causes 
the molecule to be fairly reactive chemically and 
therefore  more available. 

The availability of nutrient elements to plants is 
generally based on the existence of the nutrient 
element as a charged particle, either a charged  atom 
or charged molecule. An atom or molecule that carries 
an electric charge is called an ion. Positively charged 
ions are called cations, while negatively charged ions 
are called anions. The nitrate molecule (NO,") is an 
anion, while the iron atom can exist as the Fe+2 
(ferrous) or Fe+3 (ferric)  cations.  Plants are able to 
acquire the essential mineral elements via the root 
system utilizing the chemical properties of ions. In 

particular, to acquire negatively charged  anions, the 
plant  roots have sites that are positively charged. The 
plant  is also able to attract  positively charged cations to 
negatively charged sites on the root. 

Water is a very important component  in the plants 
acquisition of nutrient elements because the nutrient 
ions exist only when they are in solution, when they are 
dissolved in water. As solids, the ions generally exist as 
salts; a salt can be defined  as any compound of anions 
and cations. In the absence of water, the nutrient ions 
form compounds with ions of the opposite charge. 
Anions combine with cations to form  a stable solid 
compound. 

For example, the nitrate anion (N0 3)  commonly 
combines with the calcium (Ca*2) or potassium  (K*) 
cations forming the larger calcium nitrate Ca(N03)2 or 
potassium  nitrate (KN03) salt molecules. As salts are 
added to water, they dissolve, or dissociate, into their 
respective anion and cation components. Once in 
solution, these components become available to plants. 

o 

Table  5.  Forms of nutrient  elements  commonly available  to  plants. 

• ™ ™ t t ™ « » * M p M H ^M 

Macronutrients: 

Nitrogen 

Phosphorus 

Potassium 

Calcium 

Magnesium 

Sulfur 

Chlorine 

Micronutrients: 

Iron 

Manganese 

Boron 

Copper 

Zinc 

Molybdenum 

N 

P 

K 

Ca 

Mg 

S 

CI 

FG 

Mn 

B 

Cu 

Zn 

Mo 

Nitrate  ion 

Ammonium  ion 

Monovalent  phosphate  ion 

Divalent  phosphate  ion 

Potassium  ion 

Calcium  ion 

Magnesium  ion 

Divalent  sulfate  ion 

Chloride ion 

Ferrous ion 

Ferric  ion 

Manganous  ion 

Boric  acid 

Cupric  ion chelate 

Cuprous  ion chelate 

Zinc ion 

Molybdate  ion 

N03 

H2P0; 

HPO,2 

K* 

Ca*2 
Mg*2 

SO,2 

ci-

Fe+2 

Fe+3 

Mn+2 

H3B04 

Cu*2 

Cu+ 

Zn+2 

Mo04 

An important point to remember is that different  salts 
have different  solubilities; that is, some salts dissolve 
readily in water (highly soluble), and some salts do 
not. Calcium sulfate  (CaS04) is a relatively insoluble 
salt and would be a poor choice as a fertilizer  because 
very little of the calcium would go into solution  as the 
calcium cation (Ca*+) and be available to plants. 
Fertilizer salts, by their very nature, are useful  because 
they go into solution readily.  In hydroponic culture, 
greenhouse growers formulate  and make a water-
based nutrient  solution by dissolving fertilizer salts. 

In addition to existing as salts, some of the 
micronutrients  (iron, zinc, manganese and copper) 
exist in chelates. A chelate is a soluble product 
formed when certain atoms combine with certain 
organic molecules. The sulphate salts of iron, zinc, 
manganese and copper are relatively insoluble, and 
chelates function  to make these mineral nutrients 
more readily available in quantity to the plants. 

Fertilizer  Feed Programs 

Fertilizer nutrient solutions are formulated  to meet the 
needs of the plants using a combination of component 
fertilizer salts. The amounts of the various fertilizers 
used depend on target levels that have been 
determined to be optimal for the crop in question. 

Although there is considerable similarity between 
fertilizer  programs for the various vegetable crops, 
there can be some differences  reflecting  the  different 
crop requirements. In any event, when mixing 
fertilizer  solutions, only high quality, water-soluble 
fertilizers should be used. 

The required nutrient levels, or target nutrient levels, 
of the various essential elements are often  expressed as 
the desired parts per million (ppm) in the final  nutrient 
solution. The recommended nutrient  fertilizer  feed 
targets for greenhouse peppers are listed in Table 6. 

© 

Table 6. Nutrient feed targets (ppm) for greenhouse 
sweet peppers grown in sawdust. 

Nutrient 

Nitrogen 

Phosphorus 

Potassium 

Calcium 

Magnesium 

Iron 

Manganese 

Copper 

Molybdenum 

Zinc 

Boron 

Target (ppm) 

200 

55 

318 

200 

55 

3.00 

0.50 

0.12 

0.12 

0.20 

0.90 

Even though all 12 mineral elements are essential  for 
plant growth and development, nutrient  targets for 
sulfur  and chlorine (not considered  universally 
essential) are not listed. The reason  for this omission 
is that adequate amounts of sulfur  are obtained  from 
the use of sulfate fertilizers, potassium sulfate  or 
magnesium sulfate. Chloride is assumed  to be present 
in adequate amounts as a contaminant in a number of 
fertilizers. 

As the purity of fertilizers has improved, growers will 
have to pay more attention to ensuring these other 
elements, particularly chloride, are present in 
adequate amounts. Once the recommended  nutrient 
targets are known, calculations arc made to determine 
how much of each fertilizer  is needed  to meet  these 
targets. 

To make these calculations, some other basic 
information  is required: 

• 

the volume of water that will be used to make the 
feed  solution. 

•  the types of fertilizers available and the relative 

amounts of each nutrient present in the  fertilizer. 

Every greenhouse must be able to supply water and 
nutrients to the plants on an ongoing basis. During 
hot, dry Alberta summers, mature pepper plants can 
use approximately 3.5 to 4.0 litres of water per plant 
per day, while cucumbers can require over 6 litres and 
tomatoes up to 3 litres. This water always contains 
fertilizer, which is added as the water comes into the 
greenhouse, before it is pumped to the plants. 
Greenhouses may vary in their delivery systems, but 
some form of fertilizer injection  system is used in all 
commercial scale greenhouses. 

Feed targets  and  plant  balance 
The first approach  to altering the feed solution in 
response to a crop that is overly vegetative is to 
increase the feed electrical conductivity (E.C.) to 
direct the plants to become more generative and set 
and fill more fruit.  The feed E.C. can be increased 
from  2.5 mmhos to approximately 3.0 mmhos over the 
course of a few days. 

Dialing up the feed E.C. increases the absolute 
amounts of fertilizer  nutrients in the feed, but does not 
affect  the ratio of the nutrient  levels with respect to 
one another. Increasing the feed  E.C. increases the 
level of fertilizer salts in the root zone, increasing the 
stress on the plant as it becomes more difficult  for the 
plant to take up water. The plant responds to the stress 
by putting more emphasis on fruit  production, a 
stressed plant begins preparations for the end by trying 
to ensure that the next generation will carry forward. 
The fruit  holds the seed, and in plant terms, develop(cid:173)
ing fruit  means that the next generation will survive 
and carry on. Plants don't  think these things out, but 
stressing the plant does direct the plant to set more 
fruit. There is a limit to how far growers can go with 
this technique because a successful  crop requires 
having enough vegetative growth to continually fill a 
high volume of fruit  consistently throughout the 
season. 

Another option is available for affecting  the 
vegetative/generative  balance of the plants through 
manipulating  the nutrient  ratios, particularly the 
nitrogen-potassium ratio (Table 7). 

When considering what volume of water to use for the 
nutrient solution, it is first important to understand  the 
delivery of the nutrient solution  to the plants as 
discussed  earlier in the "Irrigation  and Fertilizer 
Feed" section. 

o 

Table  7.  Typical  absolute  value  and  relative  ration targets for  N*,  K*,  and  Ca*  in vegetable  feed 
programs  (E.C. of  2.5  mmhos)  for  Southern  Alberta  production  conditions. 

Nutrient Targets 

Crop 

K 
302 

318 

N 
200 
214 

Nutrient  Ratio 

(ppm) 

Ca 
173 
200 

N 

1.00 

1.00 

K 

1.51 

1.48 

Ca 

0.86 

0.93 

cucumber 

pepper 

'  N  =  Nitrogen, K =  Potassium, Ca  =  Calcium 

The  N:K  ratios presented  in the  table  are  all  about 
1:1.5. Increasing the  level  of  potassium, with  respect  to 
nitrogen, and  increasing the  ratio to  1:1.7  will  direct 
the  plant  to be  more  generative. The  reason  for  this 
change  is that  nitrogen  promotes vegetative  growth 
while potassium  promotes mature  growth,  generative 
growth.  Calcium  is also important  for  promoting 
strong tissues, fruit  and  mature  growth. Shifting  the 
feed  program  to favor  potassium  over  nitrogen  will 
direct  the  plant  to be generative.  Calcium  is  important 
in the equation  in  that  it should  always  be 
approximately  equal  to the  amount  of  nitrogen.  A 
N:Ca  ration  of  1:1 works for  both  tomatoes  and 
peppers, while a N:Ca  ratio  of   1:0.85 has shown  to 
work well for  cucumbers. 

Changes  to the  N:K ratio should  be  made  carefully. 
The  above  ratios come  from  the  feed  programs  of 
successful  Alberta  growers  and  can  serve as a guide. 
The place to start  is to determine the ratios in  the 
current  feed  program  and  examine  the performance  of 
the crop. If  it is determined  that  there  is room  for 
improving  the  balance  of  the  plants, alterations in  the 
nutrient  ratios can be  undertaken. 

Always be aware  that  many  factors  influence  plant 
balance: day/night  temperature  split, 24-hour  average 
temperature, relative humidity  and  watering.  These 
factors  should  be  optimized  before  feed  ratios  are 
changed.  You have  to know where  the  crop is in  order 
for  you to make  sound  decisions  on where it should  be 
and  how to get  there. 

Due  to the large volumes  of  fertilizer  feed  solution 
that  can be  required  daily, it  is impractical  to make  the 
fertilizer  feed  on  a day-to-day basis. Instead,  the 
required  fertilizers  can  be mixed  in a  concentrated 
form,  usually  100 to 200 times  the strength  delivered 

to the plants. Injectors  or  ratio feeders  are then  used 
to "meter-out"  the  correct  amount  of fertilizer  into  the 
water that  make  up the  nutrient  solution  going to  the 
plants. 

By using concentrated  volumes of the  fertilizer  feed 
held  in "stock  tanks," growers arc  able to reduce  the 
number  of fertilizer  batches they have to  make. 
Depending on  the  number  of plants  in the  crop,  the 
size of  the stock  tanks  and  the strength  of  the 
concentrate, growers may  only have to mix  fertilizer 
once every  two to four  weeks. 

Designing  a fertilizer  feed  program 
The  design  of  a fertilizer  feed  program  is a  relatively 
straightforward  process once  the  nutrient  target  levels 
are decided  and  basic information  about  the  water 
quality, feed  delivery system  and  component  fertilizers 
is known.  Fertilizer  targets  and  the  component 
fertilizers  used to make  the fertilizer  solution  can 
change  over  the course  of  the year, depending on  the 
crop  and  the  knowledge of  the grower. The  changes 
are  often  slight  adjustments  in the  relative  proportion 
of the  macronutrients  from  one  to  another, 
particularly the  nitrogen/phosphorus/potassium 
(N:P:K)  ratio. 

Changes  can  also include  the  addition  of  alternate 
forms  of  a nutrient  in question. A common  example  is 
the  use of  ammonium  nitrogen  (NH 4 • N) in addition  to 
nitrate  nitrogen  ( N 0 3  N) during the  summer  months. 
Ammonium  nitrate  is the  common  source  of 
ammonium  nitrogen, which  is a more  readily  available 
form  of nitrogen  that works to promote  vegetative 
growth.  During  the  summer  months, a target  of 
approximately  17 ppm  of  ammonium  nitrogen  is 
recommended  to  help optimize  plant  balance  and  crop 
production. 

© 

Moles and millimoles in the greenhouse 

Some greenhouse  vegetable growers hove been concerned about 
millimoles  and moles. Not to worry, these growers are not referring to 
four-legged moles. Rather, they are using another  unit of measure to 
discuss fertilizer  feed targets and root zone targets. 

A millimole  is one thousandth of a mole, and a mole, is defined as the 
amount of a substance of a system that contains as many elementary 
entities as there are atoms in exactly 12 grams of Carbon 12. The 
concept of the mole has come out of stoichiometry, a  bronch of 
chemistry that studies the quantities of reactants and products in 
chemical reactions. 

Chemists and physicists have argued for a long time over  how to 
measure the masses of individual elements (some of those same 
elements that growers feed their crops in fertilizer feed solutions), and 
in 1961, they settled on using the mole. 

A good way to understand what a mole is and why to use it is to relate 
it to the concept of a dozen. We understand that a dozen is twelve of 
something, be it cucumbers, eggs or whatever. A mole is 6.02 x 10" of 
some entity, and chemists usually refer to actual molecules of a 
substance when they talk about moles, although you could have a mole 
of eggs or a mole of cucumbers. 

You would be quite the grower to grow a mole of cucumbers, tomatoes 
or peppers. The number 6.02 x 10", which in longhand is 
602 000 000 000 000 000 000 000, is called Avogadro's  number after 
the nineteenth century chemist who did some pioneering work on gases 
and was largely  ignored for  his trouble. 

Moles do relate to parts per million  (ppm). Both concepts are ways to 
measure how much of a given nutrient we are dealing with in a 
fertilizer  feed sample, leachate or tissue sample. The difference  is that 
ppm is a measure of mass (e.g. 1 ppm  =  1 milligram/litre)  while 
moles measure amounts. One mole of any substance contains 
Avogadro's  number of entities or basic units. Those entities, as 
mentioned earlier, can be atoms or  molecules or whatever you want. 

When we talk about one mole of nitrate nitrogen, N03, we are referring 
to 6.02 x 10" molecules of N03, because the basic N03 entity is mode up 
of one atom of nitrogen (N) and three atoms of oxygen (0). If we are 
talking about a mole of iron, Fe, we are talking about atoms, because 
the basic entity of iron is the iron atom. 

The molecular weight of oxygen is 16 grams/mole. This means that 6.02 
x 10" atoms of oxygen weights  16 grams. One mole of nitrogen weighs 
14 grams. By combining all the atoms that make up molecules we can 
arrive at the molecular weights. Therefore, the molecular weight of N03 
would equal 14 +  3(16)  grams/mole or 
62 grams/mole.  One last thing to remember is that moles are  related 
to millimoles in the same way that grams are related to milligrams. So 
if moles are related in the range of grams, millimoles are in the range 
of  milligrams. 

We know thot  1 ppm is equal to 1 milligram/litre, so to convert ppm to 
millimoles, divide ppm by the molecular weight of the element you are 
working with. For example: 

1 ppm of  N03  =  1  mg/litre 

1 mg/ litre of N0 3  •*•  62 mg/mole  =  0.016  millimoles of 
N03 in one litre. 

1 ppm of  Fe =  1 mg/litre 

1 mg/litre of Fe *•  56 mg/millimole  =  0.018  millimoles of Fe 
in one litre. 

1 ppm of  magnesium  (Mg)  =  1 mg/litre 

1 mg/litre  of Mg  *  24 mg/millimole  =  0.041  millimoles of Mg 
in one litre. 

As these examples show, a solution containing 1 ppm of various 
elements or molecules will contain different  mole or millimole  amounts 
of these same elements. 

To convert  millimoles  to  ppm: 

ppm  =  millimoles/litre  x molecular weight 
(mg/millimole) 

Example: 

ppm N03  =  0.016  millimoles of N03 in one litre x 
62  mg/millimole 

=  1 ppm N03 

All atoms and molecules  have different  basic weights, some being 
heavier than others. If we talk about  1 ppm of N03 versus 1 ppm of Fe, 
we are talking about the same mass of each, i.e., 1 milligram/litre. 
However, there will be a different  number of basic entities or moles of 
N03 and Fe in a solution that contains 1 ppm each of N03 and Fe. 

The atomic weights of all the elements can be found on the periodic 
table. The atomic weights of the elements are given in grams per mole. 

Once you can work  back and forth between ppms and millimoles, you 
might  be asking  if there is any benefit to working  in millimoles  rather 
than ppm. If you are comfortable working with ppms and you are 
comfortable with designing and managing your fertilizer feed 
programs  in ppms, slick to what you know. However, if you want to be 
working with actual amounts of atoms and molecules of the nutrients 
you are feeding, then you may want to work with millimoles. Whatever 
the case, with a little practice you can work with either  unit. 

o 

Water volumes 
Calculating the required amounts of the various 
fertilizers depends on the volume of water to be used. 
This figure  is determined by the volume of the stock 
tank (e.g. 200 litres) multiplied by the injection  ratio 
(e.g. 100:1 or 200:1).  For example, using a 200 litre 
fertilizer concentrate stock tank and a 200:1 injection 
ratio, the volume of water that will be used to calculate 
the amount  of fertilizer to add will be: 

200 litres (stock tank volume) x 200 (injector  ratio) 
=  40,000  litres 

Calculations in the following sections on fertilizer  and 
water will be based on 200 litre stock tanks and a  1:200 
injection  ratio. 

Accounting for nutrients  in raw 
water 
Assuming the water quality analysis has determined 
the water is suitable for greenhouse crop production, 
the first step is to account for the nutrients already 
contained  in the water. This information  comes 
directly from the water analysis report. 

Accounting for nutrients  provided 
by pH adjustment  of water 
Next, determine if the pH needs adjusting, and if so, 
decide on the amount of acid (or base) required to 
meet the target pH of 5.8.  Once the amount of acid to 
be added has been determined, the levels of nutrients 
present in the acid have to be accounted  for. 

Using the example in the previous section on pH, 
where it was determined that  161 ml of 85 per cent 
phosphoric acid would be required to adjust the pH 
from 8.1 to 5.8 for every 1,000 litres of water, the 
amount of acid required for 40,000 litres would be 
(161 ml/1,000 litres x 40,000 litres  =) 6,440 mis. 
Knowing the volume of acid required  and the specific 
gravity of the acid makes it is possible to calculate the 
weight of acid that will be used. 

6,440 mis (85% phosphoric  acid) x 1.41  grams/ml 
•  9,080 grams  of phosphoric  acid 

Table  8. The specific  gravity of 85 per cent 
phosphoric  acid  and 67 per cent  nitric  acid. 

Phosphoric acid (85 per cent) 

Nitric acid (67  per cent) 

1.14  grams/ml 

1.28  grams/ml 

Having the weight of the acid, it is now possible to 
determine the amount of phosphorus contributed  to 
the pH-adjusted  water by 85 per cent phosphoric acid. 
One more piece of information  is required; phosphoric 
acid contains 32 per cent  available phosphorus, which 
is also referred  to as the fertilizer  grade of the acid. 

Table 9. Fertilizer "grades"  of phosphoric and 
nitric  acid. 

Phosphoric acid 

j j ^ J f **   available  PhoPhorous 

Nitric  acid 

22 Per cent available nitrogen 
(N0-N) 

Now, using the following  formula: 

Formula  1  (from Mirza and Younus, 1994) 

ppm = grams of acid x grade of acid x 10 

litres of water 

the amount of phosphorus (in ppm) contributed by 
7,857 grams of 85%  phosphoric acid 

= 9,080 grams x 32% x 10 

40,000 

= 73 ppm of phosphorus, actual "P" 

This same sequence of calculations can be used to 
determine the amount of nitrogen contributed if 
67 per cent nitric acid was used. In this example, 
49 ppm of nitrogen would be contributed if 67 per cent 
nitric acid was used. 

o 

However, since nitrogen is also present in calcium 
nitrate, it is important  to keep track of how much 
nitrogen  is contributed. After  all, there is also an 
optimum target for nitrogen. Calcium nitrate is 
19 per cent calcium and 15.5 per cent nitrogen, so for 
every 100 grams of calcium nitrate, there will be 
19 grams of calcium and 15.5 grams of nitrogen. 

The percentage of the relative nutrient components of 
a fertilizer is also sometimes referred  to as the 
"grade." As the fertilizer calculations are made, an 
ongoing tally is kept on what nutrients are being 
supplied by the various fertilizers until all the feed 
targets have been  met. 

With the information  of stock tank size, injector  ratio 
and the nutrients contributed by each fertilizer, the 
same relatively simple formula  (Formula  1) can be 
modified  and used to determine the amount of each 
fertilizer  required  to meet the parts per million  (ppm) 
feed targets of the essential nutrients. 

F o r m u la  2  (from  Mirza and  Younus,  1994) 

grams of fertilizer  required  = 

ppm desired x litres of water 

grade of fertilizer  x 10 

This formula  can be rearranged to calculate ppm if the 
amount of fertilizer added is known. 

ppm  = grams of fertilizer  x grade of fertilizer x 10 

litres of water 

Assumptions with the example include using 200 litre 
stock tanks, a 200:1 injector  ratio, meeting a calcium 
target in the nutrient solution of  180 ppm and 
obtaining all the calcium from  calcium nitrate. The 
formula can be used to determine the amount of 
calcium nitrate required to meet the calcium target, as 
well as determining the levels of nitrogen  (in ppm) 
contributed by the calcium nitrate. 

Determining  fertilizers  amounts to 
meet feed  targets 
For the purposes of this discussion of designing a 
fertilizer program, only component fertilizers will be 
considered. A list of the common component 
fertilizers for greenhouse crop production is presented 
in Table 10. The fertilizers are identified  by their 
chemical name and their fertilizer  number 
designation, i.e. 0-53-35 for  monopotassium 
phosphate. The "grade" of the fertilizer with respect to 
the different  nutrients supplied by the fertilizer is also 
provided. 

It is important  to know that the three-number 
designation of the fertilizer  represents the percentages 
or grade of nitrogen  (N), phosphorus (P) and 
potassium  (K), in that order, present in the  fertilizer. 
However, it is very important to note when the 
percentages for phosphorus and potassium are used, 
the number on the bag represents the percentages of 
phosphate (P205) and potash (I^O) and not actual 
phosphorus and potassium. Phosphate is only 
43 per cent actual phosphorus and potash is only 
83 per cent actual potassium. For this reason, 
monopotassium phosphate, 0-53-35, is listed as 
containing 23 per cent phosphorus (53 per cent 
x 0.43 = 23 per cent), and 29 per cent potassium 
(35 per cent x 0.83 =  29 per  cent). 

Blended or premixed fertilizers are also used by some 
growers. A common  premixed fertilizer  is 20-20-20. If 
these fertilizers are used, it is important to account  for 
all the nutrients provided in the fertilizer, both macro 
and micronutrients. As well, although  the  fertilizer 
20-20-20 contains 20 per cent nitrogen, for  the 
purposes of calculating actual phosphorus (P) and 
actual potassium  (K), 20-20-20 should actually be 
considered  as 20-8.6-16.6. 

In determining the amount of fertilizer to add, it is 
important  to remember that  as salts, fertilizers  often 
contain more than just one plant nutrient. For 
example, calcium nitrate (Ca(N03)2) provides both 
calcium and nitrogen. Calcium nitrate is commonly 
used in commercial vegetable greenhouses as the only 
source of calcium. The amount of calcium nitrate 
added depends on how much is required to meet the 
calcium  target. 

o 

Calcium  required  =  180 ppm,  from  calcium  nitrate, 
19% calcium,  15.5%  nitrogen. 

grams of  calcium  nitrate  required  = 

180 ppm  x (200 x 200) litres of  water 

1 9 % x l0 

=  180 ppm  x 40,000 litres of  water 

190 

=  37,894  grams 

=  37.9  kilograms 

The  amount  of  nitrogen  contributed: 

ppm  of nitrogen  =  37,894 grams x 15.5% x  10 

40,000  litres 

=  146.8  =  147 ppm  of  nitrogen 

By repeating  this type  of  calculation  using the  various 
component  fertilizers,  including  the  micronutrient 
chelates,  all  the  individual  nutrients  coming  from  each 
fertilizer  can  be  accounted  for  until  all the  nutrient 
targets  are  met  and  balanced  in the  final  feed 
program. 

r 

.  *  ^^..i^«" 

«._• 

_ 

, 

is for hydroponic  greenhouse  vegetable 
is for hydroponic  greenhouse  vegetable 

Table  10. Some component lemnzers  mr lormuiaung  nuineni iceu  prograi 
crops. 
uKillP 
Macronutrients  Fertilizer  • 

Nutrients 

Element 

Macronutrients  Fertilizer 

H S H H H M H H H S H 9 W M M MH 

Nutrients 

Nitrogen 
Nitrogen 

Calcium nitrate 
Calcium nitrate 
15.5-0-0 
15.5-0-0 

Phosphorus 

Potassium 
Potassium 

Potassium nitrate 
Potassium nitrate 
13-044 
13-044 

Ammonium nitrate 
Ammonium nitrate 
34-0-0 
34-0-0 

Monopotassium 
phosphate 
0-53-35 

Potassium nitrate 
Potassium nitrate 
13-0-44 
13-0-44 

Potassium sulfate 
Potassium sulfate 
0-0-50 
0-0-50 
Monopotassium 
Monopotassium 
phosphate 
phosphate 
0-53-35 
0-53-35 

15.5% nitrogen 
15.5% nitrogen 
(N03-N) 
(N03-N) 
19% calcium 
19% calcium 

13 % nitrogen 
13 % nitrogen 
(N03 - N) 
(N03 - N) 
37% potassium 
37% potassium 

17% nitrogen 
17% nitrogen 
(NOj-N) 
(NOj-N) 
17% nitrogen 
17% nitrogen 
(NH4-N) 
(NH4-N) 

23% phosphorus 
29% potassium 

37% potassium 
37% potassium 
13% nitrogen 
13% nitrogen 
(N0,-N) 
(N0,-N) 

41.5% potassium 
41.5% potassium 
17% sulfur 
17% sulfur 

23% phosphorus 
23% phosphorus 
29% potassium 
29% potassium 

Calcium 

Calcium nitrate 
15.5-0-0 

19% calcium 
15.5%(N03-N) 

Calcium chloride 
CaCI2 - 2H20 

27% calcium 
48% chlorine 

Magnesium 
Magnesium 

Magnesium sulfate 
Magnesium sulfate 
MgSO, - 7H20 
MgSO, - 7H20 

10% magnesium 
10% magnesium 
13% sulfur 
13% sulfur 

Magnesium nitrate 
Magnesium nitrate 
Mg (N0,)2- 6H20 
Mg (N0,)2- 6H20 

Sulfur 

Magnesium sulfate 
MgS04 - 7H20 

10% magnesium 
10% magnesium 
11% nitrogen 
11% nitrogen 
(N03 - N) 
(N03 - N) 

10% magnesium 
13% sulfur 

Potassium sulfate 
0-0-50 

41.5% potassium 
17% sulfur 

Chlorine 

Calcium chloride 
CaCI2 - 2H20 

48% chlorine 
27% calcium 

Potassium chloride 
Potassium chloride 
0-0-60 
0-0-60 

49% potassium 
49% potassium 
26% chlorine 
26% chlorine 

Potassium chloride 
0-0-60 

26% chlorine 
49% potassium 

Micronutrients 

Fertilizer 

Iron 

Iron chelate 

Nutrients 

13% iron 

Micronutrients 

Fertilizer 

Zinc 

Zinc chelate 

Nutrients 

13% zinc 

Manganese 

Manganese chelate 

13% manganese  Molybdenum 

Sodium molybdate 

39% molybdenum 

Copper 

Copper chelate 

14% copper 

Boron 

Borax 

15% boron 

o 

Rules for Mixing  Fertilizers 

Once  the  amounts of the various fertilizers  have  been 
determined,  the next step  is to mix the  fertilizers  in  the 
stock  tanks. Most  commercial  vegetable  greenhouses 
use a two-stock-tank  system  for  mixing  fertilizers, 
although  some  systems involve three  stock  tanks with 
the  third  tank  containing  the  acid  or  bicarbonate  for 
pH  adjustment. 

Before  mixing fertilizers,  ensure that  a dust  mask  and 
gloves are worn  to avoid  inhaling the  fertilizer  dusts  or 
coming  into contact  with the  fertilizer  concentrates. 

'Die  first  rule in mixing fertilizers  is to always use  high 
quality, water soluble "greenhouse grade"  fertilizers. 
Second, when  working with stock  tank  concentrates, 
never  mix calcium  containing fertilizers  (e.g.  calcium 
nitrate) with any fertilizers  containing  phosphates 
(e.g. monopotassium  phosphate)  or  sulfates 
(e.g. potassium  sulfate,  magnesium  sulfate).  When 
fertilizers  containing  calcium,  phosphates  or  sulfates 
are mixed  together  as concentrates,  the  result  is 
insoluble  precipitates  of calcium  phosphate  and 
calcium  sulfate.  Essentially, the  calcium  combines  with 
the phosphate  or sulfate  in the  solution  and  comes  out 
of the solution  as a solid. This solid forms a  "sludge" 
at  the bottom  of  the fertilizer  tank, which  can  plug  the 
irrigation  lines. 

This reaction  between  calcium, phosphate  and  sulfate 
can  be avoided  if a one-times  strength  fertilizer  is 
being  mixed, as it is considerably  more  dilute. 
However,  mixing fertilizers  to make  a  one-times 
strength  fertilizer  solution  is impractical  for  a 
commercial  greenhouse  operation  since it would  mean 
that  someone  would  be mixing fertilizers  almost 
continuously. 

The  third  rule  for mixing fertilizers  is to dissolve  the 
fertilizers  for  each  tank  together  in hot water.  The 
components of  tank one  are dissolved  together  as  are 
the components of  tank two. The  micronutrients  are 
added  to the tanks when  the solution  is warm, not  hot. 
The  fourth  rule is to continually  agitate  the solution  in 
the stock  tanks as the fertilizers  are  being  added. 

Using the  two-stock  tank system,  the fertilizers  should 
be mixed  as  follows: 

Using the  two-tank  stock tank  system, the  fertilizer 
should  be  mixed  as follows: 

Tank  A 

calcium  nitrate 

TankB 

potassium  nitrate 
(one  half the total  amount) 

potassium  nitrate 
(one half  the total  amount) 

magnesium  sulfate 

iron  chelate 

monopotassium  phosphate 

potassium  sulfate 

manganese  chelate 

zinc  chelate 

copper  chelate 

sodium  molybdate 

boric  acid 

If  other  fertilizers  arc used, ensure  that  mixing 
calcium-containing  fertilizers  with phosphate  or 
sulfate-containing  fertilizers  is avoided.  Generally, 
other  nitrate  fertilizers  can be  added  to the "A" tank, 
while with  all  others  mixed  in  the " B" tank.  Note  that 
iron  is always added  to the  "A" tank  to avoid  mixing it 
with phosphate  fertilizers, which  can  cause  the 
precipitation  of iron  phosphates, resulting in iron 
deficiency  in  the  plants. If  acids are  used  for  pH 
correction,  they can  be  added  to either  the "A" or " B" 
tank, or they can  be  added  to a third  stock  tank, a " C" 
tank.  If potassium  bicarbonate  is required  for  pH 
correction, it should  be  added  to  a third  tank, the  " C" 
tank, to avoid  the  risk of  raising the  pH  in the  other 
stock  tanks, which  could  result  in the  other  fertilizers 
coming out  of  solution. 

The  fertilizer  feed  program  is designed to  supply 
specific  quantities  of  the nutrient  elements to  the 
plants per every unit  volume  of nutrient  feed  delivered 
to the plant. The  absolute  quantities  of these  nutrients 
is measured  by the  parts per  million  (ppm)  targets. In 
addition  to the  absolute  quantities of the  nutrients  in 
the  feed,  the  relative  ratios of one  nutrient  to  another 
(particularly  the  N:P:K  ratio)  are also an  important 
component  of the  feed  program. 

© 

Direct measurement of the various component 
nutrients contained  in the feed solution and the 
determination  of the relative ratio of the nutrients 
comes from  a lab analysis of the feed solution. It is 
useful  to have the feed solution tested regularly to 
monitor the actual nutrient  levels being delivered to 
the plants. Lab analysis of the feed solution takes time, 
and it is also important  to be able to monitor the feed 
on a ongoing basis throughout the day.  Measuring the 
electrical conductivity (E.C.) of the feed solution  is a 
very useful  tool in the day-to-day management  of the 
fertilizer  feed  solution. 

Measuring the E.C. of the fertilizer feed  solution 
delivered  to the plants can be used as an indirect 
measure of the level of nutrients reaching the plants. 
The feed program contains the appropriate  quantities 
of dissolved fertilizer salts required  to meet the 
nutrient requirements of the plants, and this solution 
has a corresponding E.C. In fact, the corresponding 
E.C. of most feed solutions delivered to the plants, 
when based on a nitrogen target of 200 ppm, is about 
2.5 mmho. Of course, the other nutrients are present 
in their relative amounts with respect to nitrogen. 
Once the feed  solution has been mixed to meet  the 
targets, measuring the E.C. of the one-times strength 
solution can serve as the point of reference  for 
delivering the nutrients to the plants. 

The day-to-day management of the delivery of feed  to 
the crop can vary and is based on the salt level of the 
feed solution. The feed solution can be used as a 
management  tool to direct the development of the 
crop towards a vegetative or generative direction. The 
basis for this approach is that the higher the level of 
salts delivered  to the root zone, the more stress is 
placed on the plants. The more stress the plant is 
under, the more emphasis the plant puts on producing 
fruit  and the less emphasis on stems and leaves. 

There are limits to the salt stresses that can be placed 
on the plants while still maintaining optimum 
production, as a high sustained yield is obtained 
through  a balance of leaves and fruit  throughout  the 
season. However, using the feed solution to help 
optimize plant balance is a management  tool. On 
cloudy days, plants can make use of higher  fertilizer 
levels, more so than on sunny days when the plant has 
greater demands for water. Raising the feed  E.C. 
(0.3 mmho) on a cloudy day will provide more 
nutrients to the plants; lowering the fertilizer E.C. 

on a sunny day will provide a greater  relative 
proportion of water to the plants. The saltier the 
fertilizer solution, the harder the plant has to work to 
extract the water from the root zone. 

Management  of the daily application  of fertilizer  to the 
crop is based on varying the E.C. of the feed  solution. 
The general rules for managing the feed E.C. and the 
total amount  of nutrient solution volume delivered to 
the crop on a daily basis is presented in the next 
section. 

Fertilizer and water application 
Water and fertilizer are delivered  simultaneously to the 
crop through the nutrient solution, and the amounts of 
water and fertilizer delivered vary with the changing 
requirements of the plants. The plants requirements 
change as they develop from seedlings to mature plants 
and in accordance with the day-to-day changes in the 
growing environment. To manage the delivery of 
nutrients and water to the plant, it is important  to have 
a way of determining the crop's requirements for 
fertilizer and water. 

Feed monitoring stations are established  throughout 
the crop. One or two stations per every 0.4 hectare 
(I  acre) of greenhouse  area are usually sufficient,  but 
having one monitoring station for every watering 
"zone" of the greenhouse is a good idea. The purpose 
of the monitoring station is to measure the volume of 
feed delivered to the individual plants and to determine 
the volume of feed solution leachate, or "overdrain," 
flowing past the plants and out of the root zone over 
the course of the day. The E.C. and pH of the feed 
solution  are taken on a daily basis, as are the E.C. and 
pH of the leachate (Figure 15). 

Figure 15. Typical fertilizer feed system with two fertilizer 
stock tanks and computerized control ofpH and E.C. 

Q 

The  daily monitoring of  the percentage  of  feed 
solution  volume  flowing  through  the  root  zone 
environment,  the  sawdust  bags or  rockwool  slabs, etc. 
is used  to adjust  the volume  of feed  solution  delivered 
to the  plants. The  E.C. of the  leachate is used  to  make 
adjustments  to the feed  solution  E.C. Monitoring  the 
pH  of  the feed  and  leachate  helps  to ensure  the 
correct  pH is being fed  to the  crop. It  also gives  an 
indication  of what  is happening  in  the  root  zone with 
respect  to  pH. 

Optimum  feed  pH  is approximately  5.8, and  this  pH 
optimum  also applies  to the  root  environment  as well. 
Generally, the  activity of  the  roots  tends  to raise  the 
pH  in  the  root  environment,  and  feeding  at  a lower  pH 
can help  counteract  this rise in  pH. 

The  amount  of nutrient  solution  delivered  to the  plant 
on  a daily basis can be determined  by the  percentage 
overdrain  or leachate recovered  from  the plants  over 
the course  of  the day. Leaching, or  allowing  a  certain 
percentage  of nutrient  solution  applied  to the crop  to 
pass through  the root  system, allows for  a flushing  of 
the  root  zone  to avoid  the  accumulation  of salts. 

Generally, when  the plants are young, a  percentage 
leachate  of  10 to  15 per  cent  is a good  target. As  the 
plants develop,  the  amount  of water  required  to  attain 
this overdrain  target  increases. As the  season 
progresses  and the light  levels increase  and the  plants 
mature  and  begin  to bear fruit,  the  overdrain  targets 
increase  to 20 to 30 per  cent. Generally,  these  higher 
overdrain  targets  apply  as the  high  light period of  the 

Figure 16. General schematic  of a nutrient feed  monitoring  station 

It is not  a good  idea  to feed  at  a  pH  of  lower  than 
5.5 when  attempting  to lower  the  pH  in  the  root  zone. 
In  addition  to feeding  at  a pH  of 5.5,  ammonium 
nitrate  at  2 to 5 ppm  of  ammonium  nitrogen  (NH, -  N) 
will help lower  the pH  of  the  root  zone,  due  to  the 
acidifying  effect  of  this  fertilizer. 

year begins, usually  in June.  As the  percentage 
overdrain  decreases, the  leachate  E.C. increases,  that 
is, the  amount  of salts in  the root  zone increases. The 
general  rule for  managing the  level  of  salts in the  root 
zone  is that  the  root  zone E.C. should  not  be  greater 
than  1.0 mmho  above the  feed  E.C. 

A  schematic of  a  typical  feed  monitoring  station  is 
presented  in  Figure  16. In  addition  to monitoring  the 
feed  and  leachate, recording the  leachate  percentage, 
feed  and  leachate  E.C. and  pH  can  be used  as a  tool  to 
chart  the performance  of  the  crop with  respect  to  these 
recorded values over  time  and  in relationship to  other 
parameters, including  the  amount  and  intensity  of 
available  light. 

Feed  solution  design  is based  on  delivering  adequate 
nutrition  to the  plants, and  these  feed  programs 
usually have an  E.C. 2.5 mmho  (this largely  depends 
on  the  E.C. of the  irrigation  water). With the  optimum 
feed  solution  E.C. at  approximately  2.5 - 3.0  mmho, 
the salt  levels in the  root  zone  should  be maintained  at 
around  3.5 - 4.0  mmho. 

© 

Early  in the  crop cycle, the  salt  levels in the  root  zone 
can  be maintained  at  the  proper  target  fairly  easily by 
increasing  the volume  of  nutrient  solution  delivered  to 
the  plant  to ensure  a  10 to  15 per cent  overdrain.  As 
the  season  progresses  and  the water has  been 
increased  so that  the  upper  limit  of  30 per  cent 
overdrain  has been  reached,  and  the  E.C. of  the 
overdrain  continues  to climb  above the  target  of 
3.5 - 4.0 mmhos, the  E.C. of  the solution  can  be 
dropped. 

The  reduction  in  feed  solution  E.C. is accomplished  in 
stages, with  gradual, incremental  reductions in  feed 
E.C. in the  order  of 0.2 mmho  every two to three  days. 
It  is never  advisable  to apply  straight water  to  the 
plants  to lower  the  root  zone  E.C. since  the  rapid 
reduction  in  root  zone  E.C.  and  increased  pH  can 
compromise  the  health  of the  roots and  reduce  the 
performance  of the  crop. 

During periods when  the plants  are in  a rapid  stage  of 
growth,  the E.C. in the  root  zone  can  be below  that  of 
the feed  solution.  For  example, the feed  can  be  at 
2.5 mmho while the leachate  E.C. may  be  at 
2.0 mmho. This  result  is an  indicator  that  the  plants 
require  more  nutrients, and  the  feed  E.C. should  be 
increased  in increments in  the order  of 0.2  mmho/day 
until  the  E .C  in the  root  zone  begins to approach  the 
upper  target  limit of 4.0  mmho. 

By varying the volume  and  E.C. of nutrient  solution 
delivered  to  the plants, in accordance  with  the 
leachate  overdrain  and  E.C. targets,  it is possible  to 
optimize  the  delivery of water  and  nutrients  to  the 
crop without  overwatering  and  over-fertilizing. 
Applying  too  much  or too little water  can  compromise 
the  health  and  performance  of the  crop. 

Water  delivery  to the  plants  occurs over  the course  of 
the  entire  day. Watering can  be scheduled  by using a 
time  clock,  or  in more  sophisticated  systems,  watering 
can  be triggered  by the  amount  of incoming  light 
received  by the greenhouse.  In general, the greater  the 
ability to control  the  delivery of water, the  greater  the 
ability  to maximize  crop  performance. 

A  starting point  for  watering the  crop  early in  the  crop 
cycle would  be to apply water every half hour  from  one 
half hour  after  sunrise to approximately  one  hour 
before  sunset. The  amount  of water  required  to  meet 
the  overdrain  target  is divided  among  the waterings, 
based  on  the  duration  of  the  individual  waterings. 

For  example, if a 40-sccond  watering  delivers  100 ml 
of water, then  10 watering  events are  required  to 
deliver  1 litre of water.  When  more  than  a litre  of 
water is required  in one  day,  the duration  of  the 
individual  watering  events can be  increased,  or  the 
number  of watering events can  be increased  or  both. 

Generally,  as the  crop  matures, it is better  to  increase 
the  frequency  of watering events  than  the duration  of 
each  event. If  the watering  system  allows the  variation 
of  the frequency  and  duration  of the watering  events 
over  the  course  of the  day, then  it is possible  to 
increase the frequency  and/or  duration  of the  watering 
events during the  high  light period  of the  day, without 
necessarily increasing  the duration  of the  early 
morning or  late  afternoon  watering  events. 

Watering  frequency  can  be  used  to  help direct  the 
vegetative/generative  balance  of  the  plant.  For  any 
given volume of water that  is delivered  to the  plants, 
the more  frequent  the waterings  throughout  the  day, 
the  more  the plant  will be  directed  to grow 
vegetatively. The  longer  the  duration  between 
waterings, the stronger  the generative  signal sent  to 
the plant.  Frequent  watering  during the  summer 
months  in Alberta  can  help  balance  plants  that  are 
overly gener-ative due  to the intense sunlight, high 
temperatures  and  low relative  humidity. 

With  regard  to the  concept  of per cent  overdrain,  it is 
preferable  to obtain  the majority  of  the  overdrain 
during the  high  light  period  of the  day. The  first  of  the 
overdrain  should  start  to occur  at  10:00 a.m.,  and  the 
greater  part  of the  daily overdrain  target  should  be 
reached  by 2:00  to 3:00 p.m.  Being  able  to vary  the 
duration  of the watering  events over the  course  of  the 
day  allows for  more  nutrient  feed  being  delivered  to 
the  plants between  10:00 a.m.  and  2:00 to 3:00  p.m. 

The  use of overdrain  targets  is one way to ensure  the 
plants  are receiving adequate  water  throughout  the 
day. A  strong  indicator  of whether  or  not  the  plants 
have received  adequate  water during the  previous day 
is whether  the growing  points  or  the  tops of  the  plants 
have a  light green  color  early  in  the  morning.  Over  the 
course  of the day when  the  plant is under  transpiration 
stress, the  color  of  the  plants will  progress  from  a light 
green  to  a darker  blue- green.  If  the  plants  have 
received  adequate water throughout  the  previous  day, 
the  light green  color will return  overnight  as the  plant 
recovers  and  improves its water  status. 

O 

If the  plants remain  a darker  bluish-green  in  the  early 
morning,  the  amount  of water delivered  the  previous 
day was inadequate.  Usually, this result  means  that  the 
overdrain  targets  for  the previous  day have not  been 
met,  and the  amount  of  nutrient solution  delivered  to 
the  plants  has to be  increased. 

During  the summer  months, under  continuous  periods 
of intense  light, the  plants may not  have  recovered 
their water status  overnight  even when  the  daily 
overdrain  targets  have been  met. The  plants begin  the 
day a dark  blue-green  color, an  indication  that  they  are 
already  under  water stress, even  though  the  day  has 
just  begun.  Under  these circumstances the  overdrain 
targets for  the  day could  be  increased, but  there  is the 
associated  risk of overwatering and  decreasing  root 
health  and  performance. 

In these  cases, it is advisable  to consider  one  or  two 
night waterings,  one  at  approximately  10:00 p.m.  or 
one  at  2:00 a.m. or both.  Usually, the  night  waterings 
are  the same  length  of  time  as the  minimum  watering 
duration  applied  during the  day. Night  watering  can 
also help increase  the  rate  of fruit  development,  but 
there  is an  associated  risk  of  fruit  splitting if too  much 
water  is applied  at  night. The  night  waterings  should 
not  be continued  indefinitely,  and  the  decision  to  use 
night watering events  and  to continue with  night 
watering  has to be based on  the  assessed needs of  the 
crop. 

Management  of  the  feed  solution  and  its delivery  to 
the crop  has to be  relatively  flexible  to meet  the 
changing  crop needs. With  experience, growers gain 
more  confidence  and  skill in meeting  and  anticipating 
the  changing crop  needs  throughout  the crop  cycle  and 
through  periods of  fluctuating  light levels. The  general 
information  presented  in this section  serves as a 
starting  point.  By following  the principles  of  overdrain 
management,  electrical  conductivity  and  pH 
monitoring and  correction,  a successful  strategy  for 
water  and  nutrient  delivery  can be  established. 

As with many  things, there  is no one  "right" way  to 
apply water  and  nutrients to the crop. The  use of 
leaching,  although  ensuring that  salt  levels do  not 
accumulate  to high  levels  in the  root  zone, does  result 
in some  "waste" of  fertilizer  solution  as   runoff. 

Strategies  can  be employed  to minimize  the  waste 
associated  with  leaching.  Collection  and  recirculation 
of  the leachate, with  an  associated  partial  sterilization 
or  biofiltration  of  the nutrient  solution, is  one 
approach. The  sterilization  or  biofiltration  steps  are 
required  to minimize the  disease  risk  associated  with 
recycling nutrient  solutions. Some  estimates  place  the 
fertilizer  cost  savings at  between  30 to 40 per  cent 
when  recirculation  is used.  In addition  to being 
economical,  recycling  nutrient  solutions is an 
environmentally  sound  practice. 

There  is a limit  to how long  nutrient  solutions  can  be 
recirculated,  because  prolonged  recycling of the  same 
solution  can negatively  affect  growth  and  yield. This 
result  is primarily  associated with  the  accumulation  of 
sulfate  ions in the  solution.  In  addition  to  sulfates, 
chlorides  and  bicarbonates  also have  a tendency  to 
accumulate  and  can  influence  crop  growth.  The 
progressive  accumulation  of  sulfates  in  recirculating 
solutions requires occasional  "refreshing"  of  the 
solution, where  the solution  would  have to be  allowed 
to leave the  greenhouse  as waste. 

Conclusion 

Commercial  greenhouse  management  in  Alberta 
growing  conditions  requires knowledge  and  the use of 
particular  systems. Since greenhouse  systems  are 
complex, many growers simplify  the  many  decisions 
they must make by using specific  indicators. 

Indicators quickly  reveal  changes  in the  greenhouse 
that  may require  changes  in  management  strategies. 
Knowing and  understanding  these basic indicators will 
help in three ways: 

• 

• 

to evaluate  the  greenhouse  environment 

to implement  ways to enhance  the  greenhouse 
environment 

• 

to achieve  optimum  crop  performance 

Anticipating crop needs  and  responding effectively  to 
crop changes will  lead  to successful  greenhouse  crop 
production. 

o 

Bibliography 

Abou-Hadid,  A.F., M.Z  El-Shinawy, A.S.  El-Beltagy, 
and  S.W.  Burrage.  1992. Relation  between water  use 
efficiency  of sweet  pepper  grown  under  nutrient  film 
technique  and  rockwool  under  protected  cultivation. 
Ada  Horticulturae  323:89-95. 

Adams,  P. and  L.C. Ho.  1995. Differential  effects  of 
salinity  and  humidity  on  growth  and  Ca status  of 
tomato  and  cucumber  grown  in hydroponic  culture. 
Acta  Horticulturae  401:357-363. 

Adams,  P. and  R.  Holder.  1992. Effects  of  humidity, 
Ca  and salinity  on  the  accumulation  of  dry matter  and 
Ca  by the  leaves and  fruit  of  tomato  (Lycopersicon 
esculentum).  Journal  of Horticultural  Science  67(1)137-
142. 

Anonymous.  1973. Growelectnc  Handbook  2; Lighting 
in greenhouses. The  Electricity  Council.  London 
England. 

Bakker, J.C.  1989. The effects  of  temperature  on 
flowering,  fruit  set  and  fmit  development  of 
glasshouse sweet  pepper  (Capsicum  annuum  L.). 
Journal  of Horticultural  Science  <54(3):313-320. 

Benoit,  F. and  N. Ceustermans.  1994. Growing  pepper 
on  ecologically sound  substrates. Acta  Horticulturae 
361:167-178. 

Berkelmann,  B., W. Wohanka  and  G.A.  Wolf.  1994. 
Characterization  of  the bacteria] flora  in  circulating 
nutrient  solutions  of  a hydroponic system  with 
rockwool. Acta  Horticulturae  361:372-381. 

Blom, T.J.  1998. Air pollution  in  greenhouses. 
Regulatory  Horticulture  24:1-5. 

Blom, TJ., W. Brown, and J.  Hughes. 1991. 
Greenhouses. Ontario  Ministry  of Agriculture  and 
Food.  Publication  40. 

Boikess, R.S. and  E.  Edelson.  1981. Chemical 
Principles  2nd  Edition. Harper  & Row  Publishers, 
New  York. 

Boivin, C,  A.  Gosselin, and  M. J. Trudel.  1987.  Effect 
of supplementary  lighting on  transplant  growth  and 
yield  of greenhouse  tomato.  HortScience 
22(6):1266-1268. 

Brugger, M.F., T H.  Short  and  W.L. Bauerle.  1987. An 
evaluation  of  horizontal  air flow  in six commercial 
greenhouses. American  Society  of  Agricultural 
Engineers  1987 summer  meeting  presentation  number 
37-4020. 

Butt, J.  1993. Bedding  Plant  Production  Workshop 
Manual. Crop  Diversification  Centre  South 
Publication. 

California  Fertilizer Association,  1975. Western 
Fertilizer  Handbook  5th edition, the  Interstate 
Printers & Publishers, Inc. Danvill, Illinois. 

Calpas, J. T  1998. First  confirmed  report  of  pepper 
mild  mottle  virus in Alberta.  Greenhouse  Coverings 
98(4):l-2. 

Cerkauskas, R.F., J. Brown, G. Ferguson  and  S. 
Khosla. First  report  of powdery mildew of  greenhouse 
pepper  caused by Leveillula  taurica  in  Canada 
(abstract).  Plant  Disease  83:781. 

Chang, J.  1996. Screening  greenhouse  vents for  insect 
pest  control. Alberta  Agriculture,  Food  and  Rural 
Development  Engineering  Services  Publication. 

De  Koning, A.N.M.  1989. Development  and  growth  of 
a commercially  grown  tomato   crop. Acta  Horticulturae 
260:267-270. 

De  Koning, A.N.M.  1996. Quantifying  the  responses 
to temperature  of different  plant  processes  involved  in 
growth  and  development  of glasshouse  tomato.  Acta 
Horticulturae  406:99-104. 

Demers, D.A., J. Charbonneau,  J. and  A  Gosselin. 
1991. Effects  of supplementary  lighting  on  the  growth 
and  productivity  of greenhouse  sweet  pepper. Can J. 
Plant.  Sci.  71:587-594. 

o 

Demers, D.A.,  and  A. Gossclin.  1998. Effects  of 
supplemental  light duration  on  greenhouse  sweet 
pepper  plants  and  fruit  yields.  J. Amer.  Soc  Hort.  Sci. 
123(2):202-207. 

Esiyok, D., E. Ozzambak  and  B. Eser.  1994. The 
effects  of stem  pruning  on  the yield  and  earliness of 
greenhouse  peppers  (Capsicum  annum  L.  grossum  cv. 
Kandil  and  11B-14). Acta  Horticulturae  366:293-300. 

Fierro, A., N. Tremblay  and  A.  Gosselin.  1994. 
Supplemental  carbon  dioxide and  light  improved 
tomato  and pepper  seedling growth  and yield. 
HortScience  29(3):152-154. 

Fricke, A. and  H.  Krug.  1997. Influence  of 
humidification  and  dehumidification  on  greenhouse 
climate  as well  as water  relations  and  productivity  of 
cucumber  II. Influences  on  plants. 
Gartenbauwissenshaft  62(6):241-248. 

Gagne, S.L. Dehbi, D. Le  Quere, F. Cayer, J.L.  Morin, 
R.  Lemay and  N. Fournier.  1993. Increase  of 
greenhouse  tomato  fruit  yields by plant  growth 
promoting  rhizobacteria  (PGPR)  inoculated  into  the 
peat-based  growing  media. Soil  Biol.  Biochem. 
25(2):269-272. 

Gauthier,  L.  1992. GX: A small talk-based  platform 
for  greenhouse  environmental  control.  Part  I. 
Modeling  and  managing the  physical  system. 
Transactions  oftheASAE 

35(6):2003-2009. 

Gauthier,  L.  1992. GX: A  small talk-based  platform 
for greenhouse  environmental  control. Part  II. 
Supporting  and  implementing control  strategies. 
Transactions  oftheASAE 

35(6):2011-2020. 

Girardin, P., C. Bockstaller,  and  H. Van der   Werf. 
1999. Indicators: Tools to evaluate  the  environmental 
impacts  of farming  systems. Journal  of  Sustainable 
Agriculture  13(4):5-21. 

Gul, A.  and  A. Sevican.  1992. Effect  of  growing  media 
on  glasshouse  tomato yield  and  quality.  Acta 
Horticulturae  303:145-150. 

Hand,  D.W., J.W. Wilson  and  M.A.  Hannah.  1993. 
Light  interception  by a row  crop  of  glasshouse 
peppers. Journal  of Horticultural  Science  68:695-703. 

Hansen,  C.W. and J.  Lynch.  1998. Response  to 
phosphorus  availability during vegetative  and 
reproductive  growth  of  chrysanthemum: II. Biomass 
and  phosphorus  dynamics. /. Amer.  Soc.  Hort.  Sci. 
123(2):223-229. 

Hansen,  C. W., J. Lynch  and  C. O.  Ottosen.  1998. 
Response  to phosphorus availability during  vegetative 
and  reproductive growth  of  chrysanthemum:  I. Whole-
plant  carbon  dioxide exchange. /. Amer.  Soc.  Hort.  Sci. 
132  (2):215-222. 

Hardgrove,  M. R.  1992. Recirculation  systems  for 
greenhouse vegetables. Acta  Horticulturae  303:85-92. 

Horbowicz, M, and  A. Stepowska.  1995. Effect  of 
growing conditions  at greenhouse  on vitamin  E 
content  in sweet  pepper  (Capsicum  annuum  L.)  fruits. 
Acta  Agrobotanica  48:61-67. 

Howard,  R.J., J.A. Garland  and  W.L. Seaman.  1994. 
Diseases and  pests of vegetable  crops  in Canada.  The 
Canadian  Phytopathological  Society  and  the 
Entomological  Society of  Canada. 

Jarvis, WR.  1992. Managing  Diseases  in  Greenhouse 
Crops. APS Press, St. Paul,  Minnesota. 

Jespersen,  L. M. and  J. Willumscn.  1993. Production 
of  compost in a  heat  composting  plant  and  test  of 
compost  mixtures as a growing  media  for  greenhouse 
cultures. Acta  Horticulturae  342:127-142. 

Jolliet, O., B.J.  Bailey, D.J. Hand,  and  K.  Cockshull. 
1993. Tomato yield in greenhouses  related  to  humidity 
and  transpiration. Acta  Horticulturae  328:115-124. 

Jones, J.B. Jr.,  1998. Plant  Nutrition  Manual.  CRC 
Press, New  York. 

Jones, J.W,  E. Dayan, P. Jones, Y Hwang, and  B. 
Jacobson.  1988. Modeling tomato growth  for 
greenhouse  environment  control. American  Society 
of Agricultural  Engineers  December  1988 winter 
meeting  presentation  number   88-7501. 

Jones, J.W,  E.  Dayan, H.  Van  Keulan, and  H.  Challa. 
1989. Modeling tomato growth  for  optimizing 
greenhouse  temperatures  and  carbon  dioxide 
concentrations. Acta  Horticulturae  248:285-294. 

o 

Jones, J.W,  E. Dayan, L. H.  Allen,  H.  Van  Keulen,  H. 
Challa.  1991. A dynamic  tomato growth  and  yield 
model  (TOMGRO).  Transactions of  the  ASAE 
34(2):663-672. 

Khah,  E.M.  and  H.C. Passam.  1992. Flowering,  fruit 
set  and development  of the  fruit  and  seed  of  sweet 
pepper  (Capsicum  annuum  L.) cultivated  under 
conditions of high  ambient  temperature. Journal  of 
Horticultural  Science  67(2)251-258. 

Nash.  1993. Mineral  nutrient  concentration  and 
uptake  by tomato  irrigated  with  recirculating 
aquaculture water  as influenced  by quantity of  fish 
waste products supplied. Journal  of Plant  Nutrition 
16(3):407-419. 

Morard,  P., A. Pujos, A. Bernadac, and  G.  Bertoni. 
1996. Effect  of temporary calcium  deficiency  on 
tomato  growth  and  mineral  nutrition. Journal  of  Plant 
Nutrition  19(1):115-127. 

Khosla,  S.  1999. In  "Greenhouse  Vegetable  Experts 
Discuss the  Future  of the  Industry",  Tomato 
Magazine, August,  1999. Yakima  Washington. 

Mohyuddin,  M.  1990. Greenhouse  Vegetable 
Production  Guide  1990-91. Alberta  Agriculture 
Publication. AGDEX  250/15 - 1. 

Koppert  Biological  Systems  1999 "Bio-Plus" Technical 
Information  Bulletin 

Lange,  D. and  II.J. Tantau.  1996.  Climate 
management  for  disease  control  investigations  on 
control  strategies, plant  densities  and  irrigation 
systems. Acta  Horticulturae  406:105-113. 

LI-COR  Inc. Radiation  Measurement  - LI  COR 
"technical  Bulletin. 

Lin, W.C., J.W. Hall,  and  M.E. Saltveit Jr. 1993. 
Ripening  stage  affects  the  chilling sensitivity  of 
greenhouse-grown  peppers. J. Amer.  Soc.  Hart.  Sci. 
118(6):791-795. 

Lin, W.C. and  G.S. Block.  1997. Determination  of 
water vapor in  a small  air sample  by a  non-dispersive 
infrared  gas analyzer. HortScience  32(2):278-281. 

Longuenesse, J.J., and  C. Leonardi.  1994. Some 
ecophysiological  indicators  of salt  stress in  greenhouse 
tomato plants. Acta  Horticulturae  336:461-467. 

Manrique,  L.M.  1993. Greenhouse  crops: A  review. 
Journal  of Plant  Nutrition 

l6(12):2411-2477. 

Maree,  P. C. J.  1994. Using bio-degradable  material  as 
a growing  media  in hydroponics  in  the  republic of 
South Africa. Acta  Horticulturae  361:141-150-

McGrady, J.J.,  and  D.J.  Cotter.  1989. Fresh  conifer 
bark reduces root-knot  nematode  galling of 
greenhouse  tomatoes. HortScience  24(6):973-975. 

McMurtry,  M.R., D.C. Sanders, P.V. Nelson, and  A. 

Mirza, M.  and  M. Younus.  1995. Plant  Nutrition  and 
Fertilizer  Management.  Alberta  Tree Nursery  and 
Horticulture  Centre  Publication  #95-G12. 

Nederhoff,  E.M., A.A.  Rijsdijk  and  R.  de  Graaf.  1992. 
Leaf  conductance  and  rate  of crop transpiration  of 
greenhouse grown  sweet  pepper  (Capsicum 
annuum  L.)  as affected  by carbon  dioxide.  Scientia 
Horticulturae,  52:283-301. 

Nederhoff,  E.M., A.N. M. De  Konong and  A.A. 
Rijsdijk.  1992. Leaf  deformation  and  fruit  production 
of glasshouse  grown  tomato  (Lycopersicon  esculentum 
Mill.)  as affected  by C 0 2, plant  density and  pruning. 
Journal  of Horticulture  Science  67(3):411-420. 

Nederhoff,  E.M.  1994. Effects  of  C 02  concentration 
on  photosynthesis, transpiration  and production  of 
greenhouse  fruit  vegetable  crops. University  of 
Wageningen, The  Netherlands. 

Nederhoff,  E. M. and J. G. Vegter.  1994. Canopy 
photosynthesis of tomato, cucumber  and  sweet  pepper 
in greenhouses:  measurements  compared  to  models. 
Annals  of Botany  73: pp 412 - 427. 

Ng, K. and T  van der Gulick, 1999.  Bio-Sand 
Filtration.  British  Columbia  Ministry of  Agriculture 
and  Food  Factsheet   99-01. 

Padem  H.  and  R. Alan.  1994. The  effects  of  some 
substrates  on yield and  chemical  composition  of 
pepper  under greenhouse  conditions.  Acta 
Horticulturae  366:445-451. 

© 

Papadakis,  G., A.  Frangoudakis, and  S. Kyritsis. 1994. 
Experimental  investigation  and  modelling  of  heat  and 
mass transfer  between  a tomato  crop and  the 
greenhouse  environment.  J, Agric.  Engng  Res. 
57:217-227. 

Papadopoulos, A.P., and  S. Pararajasingham.  1997. 
The influence  of  plant  spacing  on  light  interception 
and  use in greenhouse  tomato  (Lycopersicon 
esculentum  Mill.):  A  review. Scientia  Horticulturae 
69:1-27. 

Pfadt,  R.E.  ed.  1978. Fundamentals of  Applied 
Entomology  3rd  edition. Macmillan  Publishing Co., 
Inc. New  York. 

Portree, J.  1996. Greenhouse  vegetable  production 
guide  for  commercial  growers. Province  of  British 
Columbia  Ministry  of Agriculture,  Fisheries  and  Food. 

Pressman,  E.,  II. Moshkovitch,  K. Rosenfeld,  R. 
Shaked,  B. Gamliel  and  B. Aloni.  1998. Influence  of 
low night  temperatures  on  sweet  pepper  flower  quality 
and  the effect  of  repeated  pollinations, with  viable 
pollen, on  fruit  setting. Journal  ofHorticultural  Science 
& Biotechnology  73(1)131-136. 

Pulupol, L.U.,  M.H.  Bchboudian,  and  K.J.  Fisher. 
1996. Growth, yield  and  postharvest  attributes 
produced  under  deficit  irrigation.  HortScience 
31(6):926-929. 

Rijkdijk,  A. A.  and  G. Houter.  1993. Validation  of  a 
model for  energy consumption,  C 02  consumption  and 
crop production  (ECP-model).,4cta  Horticulturae 
328:125-131. 

Rodov, V, S. Bcn-Ychoshua,  T. Fierman  and  D.  Fang. 
1995. Modificd-humidity  packaging reduces decay  of 
harvested  red  bell  pepper  fruit.  HortScience  30(2):299-
302. 

Romero-Aranda,  R.  and J.J.  Longuenesse.  1995. 
Modelling the  effect  of  air vapour pressure  deficit  on 
leaf photosynthesis of greenhouse tomatoes:  The 
importance  of leaf  conductance  to C 0 2. Journal  of 
Horticultural  Science  70(3):423-432. 

Salisbury,  F.B., and  C.W. Ross. 1978. Plant  Physiology 
2nd  edition.  Wadsworth  Publishing  Company,  Inc. 
Belmont  California. 

Savage, Adam J.  1996. Planning a  profitable 
hydroponic greenhouse  business/by Adam  J.  Savage. 
1st ed. Sark, Channel  Islands, U.K.  Sovereign 
University  Pub.  House. 

Schon, M.K.  1993. Effects  of foliar  antitranspirant  or 
calcium  nitrate  applications  on  yield and  blossom-end 
rot  occurrence  in greenhouse-grown  peppers.  Journal 
of Plant  Nutrition  16(6):1137 -1149. 

Seginer, I. and  R.W. McClendon.  1992. Methods  for 
optimal  control  of the  greenhouse  environment. 
Transactions  of  the  ASAE  35  (4)1299-1307. 

Seginer, 1.1996. Optimal  control  of the  greenhouse 
environment:  an  overview. Acta  Horticulturae  406:191-
201. 

Seginer, I., Y. Hwang, T  Boulard,  J.W. Jones. 1996. 
Mimicking  an  expert  greenhouse  grower  with  a neural-
net  policy.  Transactions  of  the ASAE  39(l):299-306. 

Shina, G.  and  I. Seginer.  1989. Optimal  management 
of  tomato  growth in greenhouses. Acta  Horticulturae 
248:307-313. 

Simon, L., TJ. Smalley, J. Benton  Jones Jr.,  and  ET 
Lasseigne.  1994. Aluminum  toxicity in tomato. Part  1. 
Growth  and  mineral  nutrition. Journal  of  Plant 
Nutrition  17(2&3):293-306. 

Simon,  L., M.  Kicgcr, S.S. Sung, and  T  J.  Smalley. 
1994. Aluminum  toxicity  in  tomato.  Part  2. Leaf  gas 
exchange, chlorophyll  content,  and  invertase  activity. 
Journal  of Plant  Nutrition  17(2&3):307-317. 

Slack, G., J.S. Fenlon  and  D.W. Hand.  1988. The 
effects  of summer  C 02  enrichment  and  ventilation 
temperatures  on  the yield, quality  and  value of 
glasshouse  tomatoes. Journal  of Horticultural  Science 
63(1):119-129. 

Stanghellini, C,  W.Th.M.  Van Meurs.  1992. 
Environmental  control  of greenhouse  crop 
transpiration. J. Agric.  Engng  Res. 51:297-311. 

Styer, R.C. and  D.S. Koranski.  1997. Plug  and 
transplant  production,  a grower's guide. Ball 
Publishing,  Batavia,  Illinois.  USA. 

© 

Zekki,  H.. L. Gauthier  and  A.  Gosselin.  1996. Growth, 
productivity,  and  mineral  composition  of 
hydroponically  cultivated  greenhouse  tomatoes, with 
or  without  nutrient  solution  recycling.  J. Amer.  Soc. 
Hort.  Sci.  121(6): 1082-1088. 

Tilley, D.E.  1979. Contemporary  College  Physics. 
Benjamin/Cummings  Publishing  Company.  Menlo 
Park,  California. 

Tootil, E.  and  S. Blackmorc.  1984. The  Facts on  File 
Dictionary  of Botany.  Market  House  Books  Ltd. 
Aylesbury,  U.K. 

Tremblay, N. and  A. Gosselin.  1998. Effect  of  carbon 
dioxide  enrichment  and  light. HortTechnology  8(4):524-
528. 

Van Meurs, W.Th.M., and  C  Stanghellini.  1992. 
Environmental  control  of a tomato  crop using a 
transpiration  model. Acta  Horticulturae  303:23-30. 

Weiler, T.C. and  M.  Sailus. 1996. Water  and  nutrient 
management  for  greenhouses.  Northeast  Regional 
Agricultural  Engineering Service  Cooperative 
Extension. Ithaca, New York,  USA. 

Whaley-Emmons,  C.L., and  J.W. Scott. 1997. 
Environmental  and  physiological  effects  on  cuticle 
cracking  in tomato.  7. Amer.  Soc.  Hort.  Sci.  122(6):797-
801. 

Wilson,  C.L., and  W E.  Loomis.  1967. Botany  4th 
edition.  Holt, Rinehart  and  Winston. New  York,  USA. 

Wilson, J.W,  D.W  Hand  and  M.A.  Hannah.  1992. 
Light  interception  and  photosynthetic efficiency  in 
some  glasshouse  crops. Journal  of Experimental  Botany 
43(248):363-373. 

Wittwer,  S.H.  and  S. Honma.  1979.  Greenhouse 
tomatoes, lettuce  and  cucumbers.  Michigan  State 
University  Press. East  Lansing,  USA. 

Wolfe,  E.W,  D.T. Topoleski, N.A. Gundersheim  and 
B.A. Ingall.  1995. Growth  and  yield sensitivity of  four 
vegetable  crops to soil compaction. /. Amer.  Soc.  Hort. 
Sci.  120(6):956-963. 

Zabri, A.W,  and  S.W  Burrage. 1997. The  effects  of 
vapour pressure  deficit  (VPD)  and  enrichment  with 
C 02  on water  relations, photosynthesis,  stomatal 
conductance  and  plant  growth  of sweet  pepper 
(Capsicum  annum  L.) grown  by  NFT.Acta 
Horticulturae  449(2):561-567. 

o 

