Handbook of Poisonous
and Injurious Plants

Second Edition

SECOND EDITION
SECOND EDITION

HANDBOOK OF
HANDBOOK OF
POISONOUS
POISONOUS
AND INJURIOUS
AND INJURIOUS
PLANTS
PLANTS

Lewis S. Nelson, M.D.
Richard D. Shih, M.D. 
Michael J. Balick, Ph.D.
Foreword by Lewis R. Goldfrank, M.D.
Introduction by Andrew Weil, M.D.

Handbook of Poisonous
and Injurious Plants

Lewis S. Nelson, M.D.
Richard D. Shih, M.D.
Michael J. Balick, Ph.D.

Lewis S. Nelson, MD
New York University

School of Medicine
New York City Poison 

Control Center

New York, NY 10016
USA

Richard D. Shih, MD
New Jersey Medical School
Newark, NJ 07103
Morristown Memorial Hospital
Morristown, NJ 07962
Emergency Medical Associates
Livingston, NJ 07039
USA

Michael J. Balick, PhD
Institute of Economic Botany
The New York Botanical Garden
Bronx, NY, 10458
USA

Library of Congress Control Number: 2005938815

ISBN-10: 0-387-31268-4
ISBN-13: 978-0387-31268-2

e-ISBN-10: 0-387-33817-9

e-ISBN-13: 978-0387-33817-0

Printed on acid-free paper.

© 2007 The New York Botanical Garden, Lewis S. Nelson, Richard D. Shih, and Michael J. Balick
First edition, AMA Handbook of Poisonous and Injurious Plants, was published in 1985, by the
American Medical Association. All rights reserved. This work may not be translated or copied
in  whole  or  in  part  without  the  written  permission  of the  publisher  (Springer  Science+
Business Media, LLC, 233 Spring Street, New York, NY 10013, USA), except for brief excerpts
in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis. Use in connection with any form of infor-
mation storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dis-
similar methodology now known or hererafter developed is forbidden.
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar terms, even
if they are not identiﬁed as such, is not to be taken as an expression of opinion as to whether
or not they are subject to proprietary rights.

9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

springer.com

Contents

Foreword by Lewis R. Goldfrank

Acknowledgments

Introduction by Andrew Weil

Authors’ Note

Section 1. Botanical Nomenclature and Glossary of Botanical Terms

Botanical Nomenclature

Glossary of Botanical Terms

Section 2. Poisons, Poisoning Syndromes, and Their Clinical 

Management

Section 3. Plant-Induced Dermatitis (Phytodermatitis)

Section 4. Gastrointestinal Decontamination

Section 5. Individual Plants

Photographers’ Credits

Index

Disclaimer

vii

ix

xiii

xv

1

3

9

19

35

49

55

307

311

339

v

Foreword

This  second  edition  of the  Handbook  of Poisonous  and  Injurious  Plants is  a
remarkable  improvement  to  a  great  book. The  ﬁrst  edition, The AMA  Hand-
book of Poisonous and Injurious Plants, offered a major advance in linking high-
quality botany, pharmacognosy, ﬁne graphics, and a limited amount of clinical
medicine. The ﬁrst edition’s authors, Kenneth Lampe and Mary Ann McCann,
established a standard for quality at the interface between botany and medicine.
Their vision, the increasing societal use of herbal preparations, and the investi-
gatory spirit of those working in Poison Control Centers and emergency depart-
ments have led to the dramatic intellectual, organizational, and photographic
advances seen in this second edition.

In the 20 years that have passed since the publication of the ﬁrst edition,
both  Poison  Control  Centers  and  emergency  departments  have  dramatically
expanded their roles in society with regard to intentional and unintentional poi-
soning  caused  by  plant  exposure. The  staff of emergency  departments  and
poison control centers have developed close working relationships that have had
salutary effects on clinical care and risk assessment in our country and through-
out the world.

The authors of this second edition represent a fusion of clinical and botan-
ical worlds. Drs. Lewis Nelson and Richard Shih are both physicians educated
in  emergency  medicine  and  medical  toxicology, and  Dr. Michael  Balick  is  a
botanist trained in the study of useful and harmful plants. Their collaborative
efforts have created a handbook that meets the clinician’s needs. This text has
enhanced the previous edition’s botanical rigor with that of pharmacognosy and
clinical medicine. This second edition is created to assist the clinician in address-
ing the needs of a poisoned child or adult. The authors have created a rigorous
approach that starts with the physician addressing the patient’s signs and symp-
toms by symptom complexes. In a structured fashion, the text suggests common
plants  that  might  lead  to  the  development  of the  symptom  complex  and
describes the mechanisms of action of the implicated toxin, additional clinical
manifestations, and  speciﬁc  therapeutics  for  each  presentation. The  photo-
graphs of frequently encountered and clinically important plants are elegantly
presented to permit the clinician to assist in the evaluation of potential toxic
plant ingestions.

vii

viii

Foreword

The botanical descriptions of the several hundred cited potentially toxic and
injurious plants are precise, detailed, and ideally suited for all of us (clinicians
and nonclinicians) who venture into the outdoors. This book will obviously be
a  vital  resource  not  only  for  the  staff of emergency  departments  and  Poison
Control Centers but also for many generalists. The barriers between botanists
and physicians are so effectively broken down that the unreasonable fears and
ignorance  about  plant  ingestions  are  substantially  alleviated. The  authors’
efforts should be pleasurable reading for all who enjoy investigating the beauty
and unknown characteristics of our natural environment.

This book is a demonstration of how successful a cooperative venture can
be  among  rigorous  thinkers  and  investigators  from  different  intellectual
domains. This text will expand our understanding of nature while permitting
more expeditious and higher-quality clinical care.

Lewis R. Goldfrank, M.D.
Professor and Chair
Department of Emergency Medicine
New York University School of Medicine
Director, Emergency Medicine
Bellevue Hospital/NYU Hospitals/VA Medical Center
Medical Director, New York City Poison Control Center

Acknowledgments

Many people contributed to the production of this book. It is a revision of the
wonderful work of Kenneth F. Lampe and Mary Ann McCann, originally pub-
lished in 1985 by the American Medical Association (AMA) as The AMA Hand-
book  of Poisonous  and  Injurious  Plants. Several  years  ago, that  organization
solicited a revised version of the book, and when this revision was completed,
we  learned  that  it  was  no  longer  within  the  subject  matter  published  by  that
organization. Given  our  interest  in  seeing  this  volume  appear  in  print, we
requested  that  it  be  released  for  publication  elsewhere, and  the  AMA  was 
kind  enough  to  agree  to  the  release. One  signiﬁcant  difference  in  this 
second  edition  is  that  toxic  mushrooms  are  not  discussed  by  us. Since  the 
original  publication, many  ﬁne  books  on  mushrooms  and  their  toxicity  and
management have appeared, such as Mushrooms: Poisons and Panaceas: A Hand-
book  for  Naturalists, Mycologists, and  Physicians  (Denis  R. Benjamin, W.H.
Freeman  &  Company, 1995), Hallucinogenic  and  Poisonous  Mushrooms:  Field
Guide (Gary P. Menser, Ronin Publishing, 1996), and National Audubon Society
Field Guide to North American Mushrooms (Gary A. Lincoff, Knopf, 1981), and
given their depth and scope, we decided not to include this topic in the second
edition.

The subject matter in this book reﬂects a partnership between botany and
medicine, and many specialists were consulted from each area. We are grateful
to Willa Capraro and Tom Zanoni for their contributions to the botanical side
of the manuscript, updating some of the nomenclature and taxonomy used in
the book. Irina Adam and Rebekka Stone Profenno worked diligently to secure
and organize the photographs and drawings that appear in the book. The United
States  National  Herbarium  at  the  National  Museum  of Natural  History
(NMNH) kindly provided elements of the newly accessioned photographic col-
lection of the late Harvard Professor Richard A. Howard, noted international
authority on the botany of toxic plants, in order that they be available for this
book. We  thank  George  F. Russell  of the  NMNH  for  collaboration  in  that
endeavor. Elizabeth  Pecchia  produced  manuscript  copy  of the  original  book,
and it was through her patient and capable labors that we were able to work
from a typewritten copy of the original text. Some of the plant descriptions were
based  on  information  from  Steven  Foster  and  Roger  Caras’s  book  Venomous
Animals & Poisonous Plants (The Peterson Field Guide Series, Houghton Mifﬂin
ix

x

Acknowledgments

Company, New York, 1994), Hortus Third (L.H. Bailey and E.Z. Bailey and The
Staff of the Liberty Hyde Bailey Hortorium, Macmillian Publishing Co., New
York, 1976), and  Manual  of Vascular  Plants  of Northeastern  United  States  and
Adjacent Canada, Second Edition (Henry A. Gleason and Arthur Cronquist, The
New York Botanical Garden, Bronx, New York, 2004), and we are most grateful
to the authors of these important works. In contemporary times, websites are
also valuable scholarly resources, and in working on this book botanical data
were  gathered  from  W3TROPICOS  of The  Missouri  Botanical  Garden
(http://mobot.mobot.org/W3T/Search/vast.html), IPNI—The International Plant
Names  Index  (http://www.ipni.org/index.html), and  The  New  York  Botanical
Garden  Virtual  Herbarium  (http://sciweb.nybg.org/science2/VirtualHerbarium.
asp), as  well  as  from  numerous  other  sites  on  individual  plants  or  images  as 
necessary.

We  are  grateful  to  all  the  photographers  who  provided  material  for  this
book, in particular, Steven Foster, Richard W. Lighty, Irina Adam, and the late
Richard  A. Howard, as  well  as  the  third  author; this  group  collectively  con-
tributed the bulk of the photographs used in this book. Others who provided
photographs include Scooter Cheatham, Peter Goltra, Hans-Wilhelm Gromp-
ing, Flor Henderson, Andrew Henderson, Fredi Kronenberg, George K. Linney,
John Mickel, Michael Nee, Kevin Nixon, Thomas Schoepke, and Dennis Wm.
Stevenson. As  a  collection, these  images  have  greatly  enhanced  the  Second
Edition, making it much more user friendly. We are grateful for Bobbi Angell’s
wonderful botanical illustrations that make the glossary so much more under-
standable. We turned to the excellent bibliographic resources of The LuEsther
T. Mertz Library of The New York Botanical Garden in the search for plates of
speciﬁc  plants  that  were  otherwise  not  available  from  the  photographers  we
queried, and  are  grateful  to  the  entire  staff, in  particular, Stephen  Sinon  and
Marie Long, for their patient assistance in our search for appropriate illustra-
tions. We  thank  the  Archives  of The  New  York  Botanical  Garden  for  use  of
photographic  images  from  its  collections. The  New  York  Botanical  Garden’s
living collections were an important resource for illustrating this book and for
understanding the plants we discuss herein, and we are grateful to Carlo Bal-
istrieri, Margaret Falk, Francesca Coelho, Todd Forrest, Jolene Yukes, and Kim
Tripp for their help and interest in this project. Dennis Wm. Stevenson was gen-
erous in providing information on cycad toxicity and images, and William Buck,
Scott Mori, and Michael Nee were kind enough to provide their insight on some
of our botanical questions. Richard Schnall and the staff of Rosedale Nurseries
allowed us to wander in their nursery and photograph interesting cultivars. Paul
Schulick and Tom Newmark of New Chapter, Inc., very kindly made their Costa
Rican farm, Luna Nueva, available to us for photographing.

Acknowledgments

xi

Lewis Nelson and Richard Shih acknowledge Lewis Goldfrank, M.D., who
spurred our initial interest in the toxic properties of poisonous plants during
our years of medical training under his tutelage. Dr. Goldfrank would regularly
bring  to  our  workplace  examples  of poisonous  plants  that  he  found  in  his
garden  and  enlighten  us  on  the  clinical  implications  of such  exposure. We
express  our  deep  appreciation  to  Oliver  Hung, M.D., and  Richard  Hamilton,
M.D., both of whom provided insight during both the formative and ﬁnal stages
of book production.

Michael Balick wishes to thank two of the mentors who helped guide him
through his graduate and undergraduate studies of useful and harmful plants,
the late Richard Evans Schultes at Harvard University and Richard W. Lighty at
the University of Delaware. He also wishes to acknowledge the support of the
Philecology Trust and the MetLife Foundation, through his appointment as a
MetLife Fellow.

Finally, we  thank  our  families  for  their  patience  and  support  during  the
research  and  writing  of this  book. Richard  Shih  wishes  to  speciﬁcally  thank
Laura, Catherine, Randy, Anne, Helen, and Chi Kai. Lewis Nelson is grateful to
Laura, Daniel, Adina, and Benjamin as well as Myrna and Irwin. Michael Balick
thanks Daniel and Tammy Balick and Roberta Lee. They have each given us the
most  precious  contribution—time  and  understanding—which  ultimately
resulted in the volume you have before you. We hope you will ﬁnd it worthy of
their sacriﬁce.

Lewis S. Nelson, M.D.
Richard D. Shih, M.D.
Michael J. Balick, Ph.D.

Introduction

I  studied  botany  before  I  studied  medicine, having  had  the  good  fortune  to
pursue  an  undergraduate  degree  under  the  direction  of the  late  Dr. Richard
Evans Schultes, longtime director of the Harvard Botanical Museum and god-
father of modern ethnobotany. Schultes was an expert on psychoactive and toxic
plants, especially of the New World tropics. Initially, through his stories of the
indigenous lifestyle of Amazonian peoples, and later by helping me undertake
ﬁeldwork in this region, he awoke in me a keen interest in the botany of useful
plants  that  led  me  to  become  ﬁrst  an  investigator  and  later  a  practitioner  of
botanical medicine.

When I moved on to Harvard Medical School, I was dismayed to ﬁnd that
none  of my  teachers, even  of pharmacology, had  ﬁrsthand  knowledge  of the
plant sources of drugs. Since then I have been continually struck by the lack of
awareness of the medicinal and toxic properties of plants in our culture. Exam-
ples  are  unfounded  fears  of poisoning  by  common  ornamentals  such  as  the
poinsettia, exaggerated fears of herbal remedies such as Chinese ephedra, igno-
rance of the vast medicinal importance of such spices as turmeric and ginger,
and lack of awareness of the toxic and psychoactive properties of other spices,
for example, nutmeg and mace.

At the root of this problem is the distance that exists between plant scien-
tists and health scientists. Because I am trained in both worlds, I have been very
conscious of it all my professional life. This intellectual gap creates difﬁculties
for botanists who want to learn the medical signiﬁcance of plants with phar-
macological  effects  and  for  physicians, nurses, and  pharmacists  who  want  to
learn how plants inﬂuence health, whether for good or ill.

By bringing together specialists from both sides of this divide, the present
book does a great service. It gives different perspectives on poisonous and inju-
rious plants while remaining grounded in the integrative science of modern eth-
nobotany. I wish it had been available when I was ﬁrst practicing medicine and,
because  of my  background  in  botany, was  often  asked  questions  about  the
harmful potentials of plants and products derived from them.

I  meet  many  people  who  imagine  that  most  wild  plants  are  dangerous,
who think that if you pick and eat plants at random in the backyard or woods
you  will  die. In  fact, the  percentage  of plants  that  are  really  harmful  is 
quite small, as is the percentage that are really beneﬁcial. If you wish to get to
xiii

xiv

Introduction

know plants, a good place to start is to learn about those that can kill or cause
serious harm. This handbook will be an invaluable resource in that educational
process.

Andrew Weil, M.D.
Director, Program in Integrative Medicine
Clinical Professor of Medicine
University of Arizona Health Sciences Center
Tucson, Arizona, USA

Authors’ Note

Poison Control Centers across the United States received more than 57,000 calls
relating to plant exposure in 2003 (Watson et al., 2004), of which more than
85% involved children under the age of 6 years. Plant exposures account for the
seventh most common form of reported toxic exposure in children (Table 1).
This demographic is consistent with the ready availability of plants at home and
in public locations and suggests that most plant exposures are unintentional.
Similarly, the vast majority of these exposures result in no toxicity, an impor-
tant fact that should be both settling and troublesome. Although it is likely that
the majority of these plant exposures (Table 2) are nontoxic, it is certainly likely
that most of these “exposures” were simply that—exposures. That is, no toxin
was ingested, or if a small piece of plant was ingested, it was in a quantity insuf-
ﬁcient to cause problems. However, the possibility of disregarding as nontoxic
the rare patient with a substantial exposure is ever present. For this reason, a
comprehensive understanding of the types of toxins present in a plant and the
likely clinical manifestations following exposure is critical and the focus of this
book.

Speciﬁc identiﬁcation of a plant may guide management by revealing poten-
tial toxins, placing the risk in context, and providing a time frame for the devel-
opment of clinical ﬁndings. Care should be taken to avoid misidentiﬁcation, a
particular problem when plants are discussed by their common rather than by
their  botanical  name. Although  management  of a  patient  with  an  identiﬁed
exposure is generally preferable to managing a patient with an “exposure to an
unknown plant,” many plant-exposed cases are managed successfully without
knowledge  of the  culprit  plant. However, adverse  events  may  result  by  the
attempted  management  of a  misidentiﬁed  plant. Each  plant  description  in
Section 5 is accompanied by one or more photographs to help the user of the
book  to  qualitatively  and  tentatively  identify  an  implicated  plant  (as  well  to
provide a visual cue to those using the book as a learning tool). Not every spe-
ciﬁc plant discussed in the book is illustrated, nor are all the horticultural vari-
eties  illustrated. Some  groups  of ornamental  plants  may  have  hundreds  of
cultivars  that  have  been  named, each  with  a  slightly  different  appearance  or
characteristic. Thus, many of the plants shown in the photographs are repre-
sentative of the appearance of only a small group of species cultivars within the
family or genus that might have toxic properties. The assistance of management
xv

xvi

Authors’ Note

TABLE 1. Substances Most Frequently Involved in Pediatric Exposures (Children Under 6
Years) in 2003
Substance
Cosmetics and personal care products
Cleaning substances
Analgesics
Foreign bodies
Topicals
Cough and cold preparations
Plants
Pesticides
Vitamins
Antimicrobials
Antihistamines
Arts/crafts/ofﬁce supplies
Gastrointestinal preparations
Hormones and hormone antagonists
Electrolytes and minerals
Data from Watson et al. (2004)

Number
166,874
121,048
97,463
92,166
92,091
68,493
57,778
50,938
45,352
35,152
32,622
31,211
29,770
23,787
22,337

Percent
13.4
9.7
7.8
7.4
7.4
5.5
4.6
4.1
3.6
2.8
2.6
2.5
2.4
1.9
1.8

Common name

Frequency

TABLE 2. Frequency of Plant Exposures by Plant Type in 2003
Botanical name
Spathiphyllum spp.
Philodendron spp.
Euphorbia pulcherrima
Ilex spp.
Phytolacca americana
Ficus spp.
Toxicodendron radicans
Dieffenbachia spp.
Crassula spp.
Epipremnum aureum
Capsicum annuum
Rhododendron spp.
Chrysanthemum spp.
Nerium oleander
Schlumbergera bridgesii
Hedera helix
Eucalyptus spp.
Malus spp.
Nandina domestica
Saintpaulia ionantha
Note: This table provides the frequency of involvement of plants in exposures reported to poison centers.
These data do not imply actual exposure, poisoning, or any judgment with regard to toxicity. Several of the
plants on the list pose little, if any, ingestion hazard.
Data from Watson et al. (2004)

Peace lily
Philodendron
Poinsettia
Holly
Pokeweed, inkberry
Rubber tree, weeping ﬁg
Poison ivy
Dumbcane
Jade plant
Pothos, devil’s ivy
Pepper
Rhododendron, azalea
Chrysanthemum
Oleander
Christmas cactus
English ivy
Eucalyptus
Apple, crabapple(plant parts)
Heavenly bamboo
African violet

3,602
2,880
2,620
2,427
1,863
1,612
1,500
1,324
1,146
1,083
1,049
1,047
869
847
841
769
727
703
694
685

Authors’ Note

xvii

algorithms and of books that help in plant identiﬁcation is always appreciated,
although this is unlikely to replace the assistance of a trained professional who
is able to correctly identify plants. This person may typically be a professional
botanist  or  a  horticulturist, although  some  nurseries  (Rondeau  et  al., 1992),
which are more readily available, may have adequate expertise, particularly for
common plants. A positive identiﬁcation of an individual plant is most likely
when a freshly collected part of the plant containing leaves and ﬂowers or fruits
is  presented  to  the  knowledgeable  botanist  or  horticulturist. Poison  Control
Centers generally have relationships with the botanical community should the
need for plant identiﬁcation arise. Section 1 (Botanical Nomenclature and Glos-
sary of Botanical Terms) provides an overview of botanical terms to ensure that
the interaction between the botanical and medical communities is clear and efﬁ-
cient; this is critical to ensuring both safe and timely communication to meet
the exacting demands of a clinical situation.

As most exposures result in little or no toxicity, the initial management of
most incidents involving children who are asymptomatic should be expectant.
This approach includes observation, at home or in the hospital as appropriate,
depending  on  the  nature  of the  exposure, and  supportive  care. For  example,
patients with several episodes of vomiting may beneﬁt from an antiemetic agent
and  oral  rehydration  or, occasionally, intravenous  ﬂuids. Perhaps  the  greatest
paradigm  shift  since  the  publication  of the  earlier  edition  of this  book  is  the
current deemphasis of aggressive gastrointestinal decontamination (see Section
4). Syrup of ipecac, for example, is almost never recommended, and orogastric
lavage  should  be  reserved  for  those  patients  with  a  reasonable  likelihood  of
developing consequential poisoning. This group should include the minority of
patients exposed to plants. Although oral activated charcoal is effective at reduc-
ing the absorption of many chemicals, its beneﬁt following the vast majority of
plant  exposures  has  never  been  speciﬁcally  studied. However, given  the
extremely  low  risk  of administration  of oral  activated  charcoal  to  an  awake
patient  who  is  able  to  drink  spontaneously, its  use  should  be  considered  in
patients with plant exposures. For complete information on the initial decont-
amination of the poisoned patient, call your regional Poison Control Center or
refer to a textbook of medical toxicology, emergency medicine, or pediatrics.

Sections  2  (“Poisons, Poisoning  Syndromes, and  Their  Clinical  Manage-
ment”), 3 (Plant-Induced Dermatitis [Phytodermatitis]), and 4 (Gastrointesti-
nal Decontamination) include descriptions of the clinical ﬁndings and focused
descriptions  of management  strategies  for  patients  with  plant  poisonings.
Although very few antidotes are available to treat the effects of the innumerable
toxins available in plants, rarely are antidotes actually necessary. Much of our
understanding of poisoning syndromes derives from toxicity associated with the

xviii

Authors’ Note

use  of puriﬁed  plant  toxins  as  pharmaceuticals  (e.g., morphine  from Papaver
somniferum). The amount of a toxin present in a plant is unpredictable, whereas
the amount in a tablet is always deﬁned. There is generally a lower concentra-
tion of “toxin” in the plant than there is of “drug” in a tablet. However, this by
no means should minimize the clinical concern following exposure to a plant
containing a consequential toxin, such as Colchicum autumnale, which contains
colchicine.

As already suggested, there is little adequate evidence to precisely direct the
management of any speciﬁc plant poisoning. The limited knowledge relates to
the wide diversity of available plants and the limited quality of available case
data (e.g., did they eat it?). The cost and effort associated with proving an expo-
sure (e.g., toxin levels in blood) makes this task (unfortunately but appropri-
ately)  of low  priority  to  the  physician  involved  with  the  care  of the  exposed
patient. As  with  many  other  clinical  situations, bedside  care  of patients  with
toxic plant exposures should be managed primarily based on their clinical man-
ifestations  and  responses  to  therapy  and  only  secondarily  on  the  basis  of the
toxin to which they are presumably exposed. The dictum has been and remains
“Treat the patient, not the poison”. . . . but don’t ignore the poison.

References
Rondeau ES, Everson GW, Savage W, Rondeau JH. Plant nurseries: A reliable resource for
plant identiﬁcation? Vet Hum Toxicol 1992;34:544–546.
Watson WA, Litovitz TL, Klein-Schwartz W, et al. 2003 Annual report of the American
Association of Poison Control Centers Toxic Exposure Surveillance System. Am J Emerg
Med 2004;22:335–404.

SECTION 1.

Botanical Nomenclature and
Glossary of Botanical Terms

1

Botanical Nomenclature

Before the work of Carolus Linnaeus (1707–1778), the botanist who established
the binomial system of plant nomenclature, a plant sometimes had a name that
consisted of many descriptive words. Linnaeus helped to standardize botanical
nomenclature by establishing a genus and species name for each plant, followed
by  its  designator. A  clinical  report  involving  a  plant  must  always  include  the
plant’s  botanical  (binomial)  name, which  consists  of both  the  genus  and  the
species, for  example, Duranta repens. By  convention, both  are  italicized  or
underlined. Duranta is the name of the genus and the ﬁrst letter is always cap-
italized. A genus (the plural of which is genera) may be composed of a single
species or several hundred. The second part of the binomial, in this case repens,
is the particular species within the genus, and it is always in lowercase letters. It
is important to include the name of the person (often abbreviated) who named
the  particular  species, as  part  of the  scientiﬁc  name, to  minimize  confusion
between  similar  or  related  plant  species. For  example, in  the  case  above, the
complete name, which would allow the most precise identiﬁcation, is Duranta
repens L.; L. is the accepted abbreviation for Carolus Linnaeus.

Over time, as botanists continue to revise the classiﬁcation systems of their
speciﬁc  plant  families  or  groups  to  reﬂect  additional  knowledge  and  a  more
natural, evolutionarily based system, plants are periodically moved into different
genera or sometimes families. A species may be split into several species or vari-
eties, or lumped together with plants of other species to comprise a single species,
all based on the expertise of the taxonomist utilizing characteristics from other
specialties ranging from gross morphology to molecular biology. One shortcom-
ing of this ﬂuid system is that scientists can have differing opinions as to how to
classify a speciﬁc plant. To limit confusion with regard to nomenclature, when
previously  employed  names  are  changed  as  part  of a  more  recent  taxonomic
study, they become recognized as synonyms. In this book, the most common
current synonyms are included in parentheses with an equal sign, for example,
Duranta repens L. (= D. plumferi Jacq.). Some species are divided further into sub-
species  (ssp.), varieties  (var.), cultivated  varieties  (cultivars  (cv.)), and  forms 
(fo.); for example, Philodendron scandens C. Koch & H. Sello ssp. oxycardium
(Schott)  Bunt. In  this  instance, the  plant  was  ﬁrst  named  Philodendron  oxy-
cardium by Heinrich Schott, but was reevaluated and then transferred to become
a  subspecies  of Philodendron  scandens by  George  Bunting. Hybrid  names  are
3

4

Botanical Nomenclature    and Glossary  of Botanical Terms

indicated by an × (multiplication symbol), as in Brugmansia × candida. Horti-
cultural names are not italicized but are capitalized and set in single quotation
marks, for example, Ilex glabra cv. ‘Compacta.’ A printed work can never be fully
up  to  date  from  a  taxonomic  standpoint  because  taxonomists  are  constantly
reﬁning the classiﬁcation systems of the groups on which they work. At the same
time, there may be a signiﬁcant volume of medical literature based on an “older”
name, and  thus, for  most  efﬁcient  and  rapid  use  of the  information  in  this
volume, some of the older names used in the ﬁrst edition are retained.

Associations of like genera are placed in a family. The family name is not
italicized, but the initial letter is always capitalized. Botanists have changed the
status of some families to reﬂect a more natural evolutionary lineage, either by
incorporating them into other families and dropping their original designation
or by creating entirely new families. Since the publication of the original edition
of this Handbook, family names for some of the genera have been changed, but
in this new edition the older name has been maintained to facilitate rapid con-
sultation of the toxicological literature, and the new name is added in paren-
theses, for  example, Umbelliferae  (= Apiaceae). We  also  head  many  of the
poisoning syndromes in Section 2 with the name of the genus followed by the
word “species” (spp.) to indicate that there are several to many species in this
genus having toxic properties.

If an individual species cannot be found, but the genus is listed, it should
be assumed, conservatively, that the species has a potential for toxicity similar
to another member of that genus. To a lesser extent, such an association may
exist for members of the same family (Table 3). These relationships are far from
exact, and inconsistencies in the clinical presentation or therapeutic response
of an  exposed  patient  should  prompt  immediate  consultation  with  a  Poison
Control  Center  or  other  expert  source. The  botanical  nomenclature  used  in 
this  book  has  been  derived  from  various  sources, as  well  as  the  opinions  of
specialist reviewers.

There  are  no  rules  for  establishing  common  names  of plants. Common
names  can  be  highly  misleading  and  may  erroneously  suggest  toxicity  or  the
lack of toxicity. For example, a plant known as a “pepper” plant could be the
sweet  pepper  commonly  eaten  as  a  vegetable  (Capsicum  annuum L. var.
annuum); or one of the extremely hot, virtually “inedible” peppers (particularly
when eaten in quantity and certainly depending on the person’s palate) used as
a decorative houseplant in that same species but containing signiﬁcant quanti-
ties of capsaicin; or the spice plant from which we derive black pepper (Piper
nigrum); or  the  pepper  bush  (Leucothoe  species)  containing  grayanotoxins;
or  the  pepper  tree  (Schinus  molle)  with  triterpene-containing  berries; or  any
number of other species with “pepper” as part of its common name. Another

Botanical Nomenclature

5

TABLE 3. Examples of Plants Producing Systemic Poisoning in Humans Arranged by Family
and Genus
Amaryllidaceae

Euphorbiaceae

Berberidaceae

Amaryllis
Hippeastrum
Clivia
Crinum
Galanthus
Hymenocallis
Lycoris
Narcissus
Zephyranthes

Anacardiaceae

Schinus

Apocynaceae
Acokanthera
Adenium
Allamanda
Nerium
Pentalinon
Thevetia

Aquifoliaceae

Ilex

Araceae
Arum
Alocasia
Anthurium
Arisaema
Caladium
Calla
Colocasia
Dieffenbachia
Epipremnum
Raphidophora
Monstera
Philodendron
Spathiphyllum
Symplocarpus
Xanthosoma
Zantedeschia

Araliaceae
Hedera

Asclepiadaceae

Calotropis
Cryptostegia

Caulophyllum
Podophyllum

Boraginaceae

Echium
Heliotropium

Calycanthaceae

Calycanthus

Campanulaceae

Hippobroma
Lobelia

Caprifoliaceae

Lonicera
Sambucus
Symphoricarpos

Celastraceae

Celastrus
Euonymus

Compositae

Senecio

Coriariaceae

Coriaria

Cornaceae
Aucuba

Corynocarpaceae

Corynocarpus

Cucurbitaceae
Momordica

Cycadaceae

Cycas

Ericaceae
Kalmia
Leucothoe
Lyonia
Pernettya
Pieris
Rhododendron

Aleurites
Euphorbia
Hippomane
Hura
Jatropha
Manihot
Pedilanthus
Ricinus

Ginkgoaceae

Ginkgo

Guttiferae

Calophyllum
Clusia

Hippocastanaceae

Aesculus

Iridaceae

Iris

Leguminosae

Abrus
Baptisia
Caesalpinia
Cassia
Crotalaria
Gymnocladus
Laburnum
Leucaena
Pachyrhizus
Robinia
Sesbania
Sophora
Wisteria

Lilliaceae
Allium
Aloe
Bulbocodium
Colchicum
Convallaria
Gloriosa
Ornithogalum
Schoenocaulon
Scilla
Urginea
Veratrum
Zigadenus

6

Botanical Nomenclature    and Glossary  of Botanical Terms

TABLE 3. Continued
Loganiaceae
Gelsemium
Spigelia
Strychnos

Loranthaceae

Phoradendron
Viscum

Meliaceae

Melia
Swietenia

Menispermaceae
Menispermum

Myoporaceae
Myoporum

Oleaceae

Ligustrum

Palmae

Caryota

Papaveraceae
Chelidonium

Phytolaccaceae

Phytolacca
Rivina

Polygonaceae

Rheum

Ranunculaceae

Solanaceae

Aconitum
Actaea
Adonis
Anemone
Caltha
Clematis
Helleborus
Pulsatilla
Ranunculus

Rhamnaceae
Karwinskia
Rhamnus

Rosaceae

Eriobotrya
Malus
Prunus
Rhodotypos

Rutaceae

Poncirus

Sapindaceae

Blighia
Sapindus

Saxifragaceae
Hydrangea

Scrophulariaceae

Digitalis

Atropa
Capsicum
Cestrum
Datura
Brugmansia
Hyoscyamus
Lycium
Nicotiana
Physalis
Solandra
Solanum

Taxaceae
Taxus

Thymelaeaceae

Daphne
Dirca

Umbelliferae

Aethusa
Cicuta
Conium
Oenanthe

Verbenaceae

Duranta
Lantana

Zamiaceae

Zamia

problem associated with common names is that they can sometimes lead to the
assumption  that  plants  are  related—either  botanically  or  toxicologically. For
example the “hellebore,” Helleborus niger L., is in the family Ranunculaceae, but
it bears no relationship to the “false hellebore,” Veratrum viride Aiton, a member
of the family Liliaceae; the former species contains toxic glycosides and saponins
and the latter contains toxic alkaloids. The botanical (binomial) nomenclature
is essential for ensuring proper plant identiﬁcation.

Common names are included throughout this book only to facilitate in the
identiﬁcation of a particular plant in question. Many common names are no
longer in use and others have been developed, but there is no way to verify con-
temporary use except by interviewing the inhabitants of a region and record-

Botanical Nomenclature

7

ing their responses. Thus, for a compilation of common names in this text we
depended  on  the  literature. The  common  names  of native  species  from  the
United States and Canada are taken from Kartesz and Kartesz (1980). Names
for West Indian species and Guam were selected from the ﬂoras listed in the ref-
erences. Common names for cultivated plants were taken primarily from Hortus
Third. In  addition  to  ﬂoras, Hawaiian  names  are  from  Neal  (1965), Cuban
names from Roig y Mesa (1953), and Mexican names from Aguilar and Zolla
(1982). Many less-common, older names for plants in the United States were
selected from Clute (1940). When bolded, the common name connotes the most
widely employed name in contemporary use in the United States.

Care must be exercised when evaluating poisonous plant literature. In some
instances, information on the toxicity of plants in grazing animals is extrapo-
lated to predict that which may occur in humans. Unsubstantiated plant lore
has passed through generations of textbooks; we have attempted to remove as
much lore as possible. Even evaluations based on human case reports, which act
as the foundation for this book, may be ﬂawed by erroneous identiﬁcation of
the plants or inappropriate attribution of the clinical effects to the plant.

Glossary of Botanical Terms

This list of botanical and horticultural terms is provided to aid in understand-
ing the plant descriptions found in the text. The terms have mostly been taken
from two primary references, Manual of Vascular Plants of Northeastern United
States  and  Adjacent  Canada, Second  Edition  (Henry  A. Gleason  and  Arthur
Cronquist, 1991) and Hortus Third: A Concise Dictionary of Plants Cultivated in
the United States and Canada (Liberty Hyde Bailey and Ethel Zoe Bailey, Revised
and Expanded by The Staff of the Liberty Hyde Bailey Hortorium, 1976). Some
deﬁnitions  have  been  modiﬁed  from  the  original  for  ease  of use  and  under-
standing by the nonbotanist, and the reader is urged to consult a botanical text-
book if greater detail is required. The botanical illustrations are by Bobbi Angell.

Alternate: Arranged singly 
at different 
heights and on 
different sides 
of the stem—
as in alternate 
leaves.

Annual: Yearly; a plant that germinates,
ﬂowers, and  sets  seed  during  a  single
growing season.
Anther: The portion of the stamen of a 
ﬂower that contains the pollen, usually
having two connected pollen sacs.
Aril: A specialized, usually 
ﬂeshy outgrowth that is 
attached to the mature seed;
more loosely, any appendage 
or thickening of the seed coat.
Bark: Outer  surface  of the  trunk  of a
tree or woody shrub.
Bearded: Bearing a tuft or ring of rather
long hairs.

aril➛

Berry: The most gener-
alized type of ﬂeshy 
fruit, derived from a sin-
gle pistil, ﬂeshy through-
out, and containing usually 
several or many seeds; more 
loosely, any pulpy or juicy fruit.
Biennial: Living  2  years  only  and
blooming the second year.
Blade: The  expanded, terminal  portion
of a  ﬂat  organ  such  as  a  leaf, petal, or
sepal, in contrast to the narrowed basal
portion.
Bony: Hard surface as in a bone.
Bract: Any  more  or  less  reduced  or
modiﬁed  leaf associated  with  a  ﬂower 
or  an  inﬂorescence  that  is  not  part  of
the ﬂower itself.
Bulbil, bulblet: Diminutive of bulb; one
of the  small  new  bulbs  arising  around
the  parent  bulb; a  bulblike  structure
produced by some plants in the axils of
leaves or in place of ﬂowers.

9

10

Botanical Nomenclature    and Glossary  of Botanical Terms

Bulb: A short vertical,
underground shoot that 
has modiﬁed leaves 
or thickened leaf
bases prominently 
developed as food-
storage organs.

➛ ➛

bulb

bulblet

Buttress: Flattened support structures at
the base of the trunk of certain types of
trees, particularly in the tropics.

buttress

➛

Calyx: All the sepals 
of a ﬂower,
collectively.

➛ ➛

petal

calyx

Capsule: A  dry, dehiscent  fruit  com-
posed of more than one carpel.

Carpel: The fertile leaf of an angiosperm
that bears the ovules. The pistil (female
part of the ﬂower) is made up of one or
more carpels, where the seeds normally
are found.

Climbing: Growing  more  or  less  erect
without fully supporting its own weight,
instead leaning, scrambling, twining, or
attaching  onto  some  other  structure
such as a tree or wall.
Coarse: Rough, as  in  the  texture  of a
leaf.
Compound leaf:
A leaf with two 
or more distinct 
leaﬂets.

leaflet➛

Cone: A cluster of sporophylls or ovulif-
erous scales on an axis; a strobilus, as in
pine or cycad cones.

Corolla: All the petals of a ﬂower 
collectively.

corona➛

Corona: A set of
petal-like structures 
or appendages 
between the corolla 
and the androecium 
(male element of
the ﬂower).

Creeping: Growing  along  (or  beneath)
the surface of the ground and rooting at
intervals, usually at the nodes.

Cultivar: A  horticultural  variety  origi-
nating from a cultivated plant, possess-
ing  interesting  or  important  characters
such  as  color, smell, taste, or  disease
resistance  that  make  it  worthy  of dis-
tinction through naming.

Cuttings: Small pieces of stems or roots
that can be put in soil to develop into a
complete plant.

Glossary  of Botanical Terms

11

Cyme: A broad class of
inﬂorescences char-
acterized by 
having the termi-
nal ﬂower bloom ﬁrst,
commonly also with the 
terminal ﬂower of each 
branch blooming before 
the others on that branch.

Deciduous:Falling after completion of the
normal function. A deciduous tree is one
that  normally  loses  its  leaves  at  the
approach of winter or the dormant season.

Dehiscent: Opening  when  mature,
exposing or releasing the contents, as in
a fruit releasing it seeds.

Dicotyledons: One  of the  two  major
divisions  of the  angiosperms  (a  group
characterized by having ovules borne in
ovaries)  bearing  two  (or  rarely  more)
cotyledons  or  seed  leaves, comprising
most of the familiar seed plants.

Divided: Cut into distinct parts, as a leaf
that is cut to the midrib or the base.

Drupe: A ﬂeshy fruit with 
a ﬁrm endocarp (“pit”
or “stone”) that 
permanently encloses the 
usually solitary seed, or 
with a portion of the endocarp separately
enclosing each of two or more seeds.

Ellipsoid: Elliptical in long section and
circular in cross section (applied only to
three-dimensional bodies).

Elliptic: With approximately the 
shape of a geometric ellipse 
(applied only to ﬂat bodies).

Erect: Upright.

Escaped: As  in  an  introduced  plant
species  that  has  escaped  from  cultiva-
tion into the wild.

Evergreen: Remaining  green  through-
out the winter, as in a tree that keeps its
leaves throughout the year.

Feathery: Feather  shaped  in  outline, as
in leaves.

Female  ﬂowers: Referring  to  ﬂowers
that  are  pistillate, having  pistils  but  no
stamens.

Filament: The stalk of a stamen, that is,
the part that supports the anther.

Finely toothed leaves: Leaves with small
serrations on the edges.

Fishtail-shaped: As in 
leaﬂets of some palms 
that have a somewhat 
irregularly triangular or 
“ﬁshtail” outline.

Fleshy: Thick and juicy; succulent.

Floral bracts: Greatly reduced leaf asso-
ciated with a ﬂower, usually at its base.

Floral  branches: Branches  or  axes  on
which ﬂowers are formed.

Flower: An  axis  bearing  one  or  more
pistils or one or more stamens or both.

Fruit: A  ripened  ovary  along  with  any
other  structures  that  may  ripen  with  it
and form a unit with it.

Fruit  pulp: Fleshy  material  inside  of a
fruit, often  the  part  that  is  eaten  by
humans or animals.

12

Botanical Nomenclature    and Glossary  of Botanical Terms

Funnel-form: Shaped 
like a funnel, as in a 
ﬂower.

Furrowed (stems): Having longitudinal
channels or grooves along the stem.

Glaucous: Covered  with  a  ﬁne, waxy,
removable  powder 
imparts  a
whitish or bluish cast to the surface, as
in a prune or a cabbage leaf.

that 

Globose: More or less spherical.

Glossy: Shiny.

Head: A  cluster  of ﬂowers  crowded
closely  together  at  the  tip  of a  ﬂoral 
stem.

Herb: A plant, either annual, biennial, or
perennial, with the stems dying back to
the  ground  at  the  end  of the  growing
season, and without woody stems.

Herbaceous: Adjectival  form  of herb;
also, leaﬂike  in  color  or  texture, or  not
woody.

Hilum: The scar of the 
seed at its point of
attachment.

hilum➛

Horticultural varieties: As in cultivars.
Hybrid: A plant that results from a cross
between  two  parent  species  that  are
genetically different.

Indehiscent: Remaining 
maturity.

closed 

at 

Inﬂorescence: A  ﬂower  cluster  of a
plant; the arrangement of the ﬂowers on
the axis.

in

leatherlike 

Juvenile  leaves: A  younger  form  or
shape  of the  leaves  of a  plant, which
change when the plant reaches maturity.
Lacy  leaves: As  in  the  shape  of leaves
with many tears or cuts.
Lance-shaped: As  in  leaves  that  are
several  times  longer  than  broad  and
widest below the middle, tapering with
convex sides upward to the tip.
Latex: A  colorless, white, yellow, or
reddish liquid, produced by some plants,
characterized by the presence of colloidal
particles of terpenes dispersed in water.
Leaﬂet: An ultimate unit of a compound
leaf. (see Compound leaf)
Leathery: Thick  and 
texture, as in a leaf.
Lobe: A projecting segment of an organ,
too large to be called a tooth, but with
the adjoining sinuses usually extending
less than halfway to the base or midline.
Mature  fruit: A  fruit  that  has  ripened;
often a different color from when it was
young.
Midrib: The  main  rib  or  longitudinal
vein  (an  externally  visible  vascular
bundle) of a leaf or leaﬂet.
Milky latex: White-colored sap of a plant.
Monocotyledons: One of two major divi-
sions of the angiosperms (a group of plants
characterized  by  having  ovules  borne  in
ovaries), bearing  only  one  cotyledon  or
seed  leaf, for  example, the  grasses, lilies,
bromeliads, orchids, and palms.
Native: Having its origins in a particular
geographic  area, as  in  a  plant  native  to
the Western United States.
Naturalized: Thoroughly established in
a particular geographic region, but orig-
inally coming from another geographic
area.

Glossary  of Botanical Terms

13

New  World: Pertaining  to  the  Western
Hemisphere, particularly  the  Americas,
as in a plant native to that region.

Ovate: Shaped like a long 
section through a hen’s egg,
with the larger end toward 
the base.

Nut: A  relatively  large, dry, indehiscent
fruit  with  a  hard  wall, usually  contain-
ing only one seed.

Oblong: Shaped more or less like 
a geometric rectangle (other 
than a square).

Ovule: A young or undeveloped seed.
Palmately compound: As 
in a leaf with three 
or more lobes 
arising from a 
common point.

Panicle: A branching 
indeterminate 
inﬂorescence, usually 
broadest near the 
base and tapering 
upwards.

Obovate: Similar to ovate but 
larger toward the tip of the 
leaf.

Old World: Pertaining to Europe,Asia, and
Africa, as in a plant native to that region.

Opposite: Situated 
directly across from 
each other at the same 
node or level, as in 
the leaves or leaﬂets 
of some plants;
situated directly in front of (on the same
radius  as)  another  organ, as  stamens
opposite the petals.

throughout 

the

as 

in  pendant

Pantropical: Found 
tropical regions.
Pedicellate: Borne on a pedicel (stalk of
a single ﬂower in an inﬂorescence).
Pendant: Hanging,
racemes of ﬂowers.
Perennial: A  plant  living  more  than  2
years.
Petal: A  member  of the  inner  set  of
ﬂoral  leaves, usually  colored  or  white
and serving to attract pollinators.
Pistil: The  female  organ  of a  ﬂower,
ordinarily  differentiated  into  an  ovary,
style, and stigma.
Pit: Hardened  covering  enclosing  seed
or seeds in a fruit, as in a peach.

14

Botanical Nomenclature    and Glossary  of Botanical Terms

Pleated: When young, as in a leaf, folded
several times along the length.

Pod: Any kind of dry,
dehiscent fruit.

Rosette: A cluster of leaves 
or other organs 
arranged in a circle or 
disk, often in a 
basal position.

Prickle: A sharp outgrowth from 
the epidermis or bark.

Propagated: As  in  multiplying  a  plant
through  making  cuttings  and  planting
them.
Pubescent: Bearing hairs (trichomes) of
any sort.
Raceme: A more or less 
elongate inﬂorescence with 
pedicellate ﬂowers arising in 
a sequence from the bottom 
up from an unbranched 
central axis.

Recurved petals: Flower  petals  that  are
curved downward or backward.
Resinous: Containing resin.
Rhizome: A creeping underground stem.

Runner: A long, slender, prostrate stem
rooting at the nodes and tip.
Sap: Liquid contained within the stem.
Scale: Any small, thin, or ﬂat structure.
Scaly: Covered with scales or bracts.
Scorpioid cyme: A coiled 
inﬂorescence with ﬂowers 
developing alternately to 
left and right in a zigzag 
fashion.

Seed coat: Outside coating of a seed.
Seedpods: As in a fruit or pod contain-
ing seeds.
Sepal: One of the outermost set of
ﬂoval leaves. (see Calyx)
Serrate: Toothed along the 
margin with sharp, forward-
pointing teeth.

Serrated  leaf: Saw  toothed, with  teeth
pointing forward toward the tip of the leaf.
Showy: Conspicuous and ornamental.
Shrub: A woody plant that remains low
and produces shoots or trunks from its
base.
Silky: A covering of ﬁne, soft hairs.
Simple leaf: A leaf with the blade all in
one  piece  (although  it  may  be  deeply
cleft), not compound.
Sinus: The  cleft  between  two  lobes  or
segments of a leaf.

Glossary  of Botanical Terms

15

Spadix: The thick or ﬂeshy ﬂower spike
of certain plants, usually surrounded by
or  subtended  by  a  bract, as  in  the
Araceae.

Sporophyll: A  modiﬁed  leaf that  bears
or  subtends  the  spore-bearing  cases 
in  certain  plants  such  as  ferns  and
cycads.

➛

spadix

Sprays: Clusters of ﬂowers.

Stamen: The  male  organ  of a  ﬂower,
consisting  of an  anther  usually  on  a 
ﬁlament.

➛

spathe

Spathe: A  large, usually  solitary  bract
subtending and often enclosing an inﬂo-
rescence; the  term  is  used  only  in  the
monocotyledons.
Spearhead-shaped: As  in  a  leaf shaped
like the head of a spear.
Spike: A more or less elongate 
inﬂorescence, with sessile 
(lacking a stalk) ﬂowers 
attached directly by their 
base.

stamen

➛
pistil ➛

Stipule: One of a pair 
of basal appendages 
found on the leaf
petiole of many 
species.

stipule➛

Spine: A  ﬁrm, slender, sharp-pointed
structure, representing  a  modiﬁed  leaf
or  stipule; more  loosely, a  structure
having 
true 
spine.

the  appearance  of

a 

spine ➛

Strap-shaped, straplike: As  in  a  long,
narrow, thick leaf.

Strobilus: A  cluster  of sporophylls  or
ovule-bearing scales on an axis, such as
in a cone.

Tendril: A slender, coiling,
or twining organ 
(representing a 
modiﬁed stem or leaf
or part thereof) by 
which a climbing plant 
grasps its support.

tendril ➛

16

Botanical Nomenclature    and Glossary  of Botanical Terms

Terminal  clusters: As  in  ﬂowers  clus-
tered at the end or tip of a branch.

thorn➛

Thorn: A  stiff, woody, modiﬁed  stem
with a sharp point.

Throat: The  opening  or  oriﬁce  of a
fused corolla or calyx, or the somewhat
expanded part between the proper tube
and  the  limb;
in  grasses, the  upper
margins of the sheath.
Tooth: Serration, as on the edge of a leaf
(plural, teeth).

Tuberous: Thickened like a tuber, as in
roots.
Variegated: Differently colored areas, as
in a leaf with streaks, marks, or patterns
of various colors on its surface.
Variety: A  subdivision  of a  species
ranking lower than a subspecies.
Velvety: With erect, straight, moderately
ﬁrm hairs, such as on a stem or leaf.
Warty: Covered with wartlike structures.
Weed: A  plant  that  aggressively  colo-
nizes disturbed habitats or places where
it is not wanted.
Winged fruit/seed: A thin, ﬂat 
extension or projection 
from the side or tip 
of a seed.

Botanical References for This Volume
Adams CD. Flowering Plants of Jamaica. University of West Indies, Mona, Jamaica, 1972.
Aguilar Contreras A, Zolla C. Plantas Tóxicas de México. Subdirección General Médica,
División de Información Ethnobotánica, Unidad de Investigación Biomédica en Medicina
Tradicional y Herbolaria del Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, Mexico D.F., México,
1982.
Bailey LH, Bailey EZ, Liberty Hyde Bailey Hortorium Staff. Hortus Third. Macmillan, New
York, 1976.
Barker HD, Dardeau WS. Flore d’Haïti. Publié sous la direction du Service technique du
Département de l’agriculture et de l’enseignement professionnel. Port-au-Prince, Haiti, 1930.
Clute WN. American Plant Names, 3rd ed. Willard N. Clute, Indianapolis, 1940.
Correll DS, Correll HB. Flora of the Bahama Archipelago. Vaduz J. Cramer, Germany, 1982.
Gleason HA, Cronquist A. Manual of Vascular Plants of Northeastern United States and
Adjacent Canada, 2nd ed. The New York Botanical Garden, New York, 2004.
Gooding EGB, Loveless AR, Proctor GR. Flora of Barbados. Her Majesty’s Stationery Ofﬁce,
London, 1965.
Howard RA (ed) Flora of the Lesser Antilles: Leeward and Windward Islands. Arnold
Arboretum, Harvard University, Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts, 1974.
Kartesz JT, Kartesz R. A Synonymized Checklist of the Vascular Flora of the United States,
Canada, and Greenland. University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, 1980.

Glossary  of Botanical Terms

17

Kuijt J. Monograph of Phoradendron (Viscaceae). Systematic Botany Monographs, vol 66. The
American Society of Plant Taxonomists, University of Wyoming, Laramie, 2003.
León Hermano (Sauget J). 1946. Flora de Cuba, vol 1. Museum de Historia Natural del
Collegio de La Salle, Havana, 1957.
León Hermano (Sauget J), Hermano Alain (Liogier H). Flora de Cuba, vols 2–4. Museum de
Historia Natural del Collegio de La Salle, Havana, 1951–1957.
Liogier AH. Flora de Cuba, vol 5. Editorial Universitario, Universidad de Puerto Rico, Rio
Piedras, Puerto Rico, 1962.
Liogier AH. Flora de Cuba, Supplemento. Editorial Sucre, Caracas, 1969.
Liogier AH. Diccionario Botánico de Nombres Vulgares de la Español. Jardín Botaníco Dr.
Rafael Moscoso, Santo Domingo, 1974.
Liogier AH, Martorell LF. Flora of Puerto Rico and Adjacent Islands: A Systematic Synopsis.
Rio Piedras, P.R., Editorial de la Universidad de Puerto Rico, 1982.
Neal MC. In Gardens of Hawaii. Bishop Museum Press, Honolulu, 1965.
Roig y Mesa JT. Diccionario Botanico de Nombres Vulgares Cubanos. Bulletin 45. Ministry of
Agriculture, Havana, 1953.
Scoggan HJ. Flora of Canada (4 vols). National Museum of Natural Sciences, Ottawa,
1978–1979.
Stone BC. The ﬂora of Guam. Micronesica 1970;6:1–659.
Tutin TG, Heywood VH, Burgess NA, Valentine DH, Walters SM, Webb DA. Flora Europaea
(5 vols). Cambridge University Press, New York, 1964–1980.
Note: Relevant medical references are included in the description of each plant. Several
books were used as general references, particularly for less-common plant exposures.
Although every attempt was made to provide literature-based support for our clinical and
therapeutic descriptions, in certain instances we needed to rely on these older
publications.
Frohne D. A Colour Atlas of Poisonous Plants: A Handbook for Pharmacists, Doctors,
Toxicologists, and Biologists. Wolfe, London, 1984.
Kingsbury JM. Poisonous Plants of the United States and Canada, 3rd ed. Prentice Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1964.
Kingsbury JM. Deadly Harvest: A Guide to Common Poisonous Plants. Holt, Rinehart &
Winston, New York, 1965.
Leopold WC. Poisonous Plants of the United States. Macmillan, New York, 1951.

SECTION 2.

Poisons, Poisoning Syndromes,
and Their Clinical Management

19

This section includes detailed scientiﬁc and clinical toxicological information.
For nonphysicians, this scientiﬁc and medical information should be utilized for
informational purposes only; certain medical terms utilized in this section terms
are  not  deﬁned. For  physicians, clinical  care  should  not  simply  focus  on  the
potential plant exposure, although this information is obviously helpful in many
situations. Rather, clinical care should take into account the patient’s current and
prior  medical  history, physical  examination, appropriate  diagnostic  testing,
response to therapy, and all other factors normally utilized in the provision of
clinical care. That is, the patient should be managed based on his or her clinical
condition rather than just on the knowledge of an exposure or suspicion of a
toxin. Appropriate clinical judgment should be exercised in the management of
all patients. The information in this section should be supplemented by consul-
tation with a Poison Control Center, medical toxicologist or other expert, or the
use of a medical textbook or other appropriate reference.

General  initial  medical  management  strategies  that  are  required  for  all
plant-exposed  patients  include, but  are  not  necessarily  limited  to, vital  sign
assessment, consideration of the need for immediate interventions (e.g., venti-
lation and oxygenation, blood glucose), determination of the need for labora-
tory  or  other  diagnostic  testing, and  the  consideration  of
the  need  for
gastrointestinal decontamination (see Section 4). Intervention at any point that
is  deemed  appropriate  to  correct  or  prevent  progression  of a  clinical  abnor-
mality  is  critical. Speciﬁc  considerations  and  interventions  follow. Additional
information  and  references  are  found  in  the  individual  plant  descriptions  in
Section 5.

Poisoning by Plants with Anticholinergic (Antimuscarinic) Poisons
Examples of plant genera associated with this syndrome:
Atropa
Hyoscyamus

Brugmansia
Solandra

Datura
Solanum

Toxic Mechanism
Competitive  antagonism  of acetylcholine  at  the  muscarinic  subtype  of the
acetylcholine  receptor, which  is  primarily  located  in  the  parasympathetic
nervous system and the brain.

21

22

Poisons, Poisoning Syndromes,  and Their Clinical Management

Clinical Manifestations
The  classically  described  anticholinergic  syndrome  includes  dry, warm, and
ﬂushed  skin, parched  mucous  membranes, garbled  speech, sinus  tachycardia,
adynamic  ileus  (absent  bowel  motility), urinary  retention, and  delirium  with
hallucinations. The  hallucinations  may  be  quite  troubling  to  the  patient, and
patients  may  develop  severe  dysphoria  or  agitated  delirium  along  with  their
sequelae. The patient’s temperature may be slightly elevated, and is rarely above
102°F unless he or she is severely agitated or convulsing. Seizures may occur but
generally only in patients who have other clinical ﬁndings consistent with anti-
cholinergic poisoning. Complete clinical recovery even in the absence of com-
plications may take many hours to days.

Speciﬁc Therapeutics
Given the common clinical presentation of altered mental status in association
with elevated body temperature, patients should be evaluated for other medical
problems, including  sepsis  and  meningitis, unless  the  diagnosis  is  certain.
Patients  who  are  seriously  poisoned  by  an  antimuscarinic  agent, particularly
those with an appropriate conﬁrmatory history, should receive either sedation
with  a  benzodiazepine  or  reversal  of their  clinical  syndrome  with  physostig-
mine. This  antidote, a  cholinesterase  inhibitor, raises  intrasynaptic  levels  of
acetylcholine  by  preventing  the  neurotransmitter’s  enzymatic  metabolism 
by the enzyme cholinesterase and allows acetylcholine to successfully compete
with the toxin for the muscarinic receptor. The initial dose of physostigmine is
1–2 mg in adults (0.02mg/kg in children) administered intravenously over no
less than 5 minutes. Lack of clinical improvement suggests that either the diag-
nosis is incorrect or the dose of physostigmine is insufﬁcient. Failure to develop
cholinergic  ﬁndings  (e.g., salivation, bradycardia)  following  physostigmine
raises the likelihood of the diagnosis of anticholinergic poisoning, and admin-
istration of increasing doses of the drug (up to 5 mg total dose in adults over
30 minutes) may be appropriate. The duration of action of some of the antimus-
carinic  alkaloids  may  be  longer  than  that  of physostigmine, and  repeated
administration of the latter may be required; alternatively, once the diagnosis is
conﬁrmed by an appropriate response to antidote, the patient may be sedated
with a benzodiazepine and observed.

References
Burns MJ, Linden CH, Graudins A, Brown RM, Fletcher KE. A comparison of physostigmine
and benzodiazepines for the treatment of anticholinergic poisoning. Ann Emerg Med
2000;35:374–81.
Howland MA. Physostigmine salicylate. In: Flomenbaum NE, Goldfrank LR, Hoffman RS,
Howland MA, Lewin NA, Nelson LS. Goldfrank’s Toxicologic Emergencies, 8th Edition.
McGraw-Hill. New York, NY. 2006. p. 794–797.

Poisons, Poisoning Syndromes,  and Their Clinical Management

23

Poisoning by Plants with Calcium Oxalate Crystals
Examples of plant genera associated with this syndrome:
Alocasia
Caladium
Dieffenbachia
Philodendron

Arisaema
Caryota
Epipremnum
Spathiphyllum

Brassaia
Colocasia
Monstera

Calcium oxalate crystals at high magniﬁcation*
Toxic Mechanism
Upon  mechanical  stimulation, as  occurs  with  chewing, crystalline  calcium
oxalate needles, bundled in needle-like raphides, release from their intracellu-
lar  packaging  (idioblasts)  in  a  projectile  fashion. These  needles  penetrate  the
mucous membranes and induce the release of histamine and other inﬂamma-
tory mediators.

Clinical Manifestations
After biting or chewing, there is rapid onset of local oropharyngeal pain, which
typically limits continued exposure, as well as local swelling and garbled speech.
If swallowed, inﬂammation of the posterior oropharynx or larynx may rarely
produce oropharyngeal edema and airway compromise. Endoscopic evaluation
of the patient’s airway, esophagus, or stomach may be necessary. Ocular expo-
sure produces extreme pain, keratoconjunctival injection, and chemosis, with
the potential for severe ocular damage and vision loss. Extensive dermal contact
may  produce  pain  and  signs  of irritation. In  contrast  to  that  occurring  with
soluble oxalate ingestion, in which profound hypocalcemia may occur, there is
generally no associated systemic toxicity.

Speciﬁc Therapeutics
Airway  assessment  and  management  is  of the  highest  priority  following 
ingestion. Oropharyngeal  or  dermal  pain  may  be  managed  with  appropriate

24

Poisons, Poisoning Syndromes,  and Their Clinical Management

demulcents, viscous  lidocaine, analgesics  or  with  copious  irrigation. Further
evaluation  of the  patient’s  pharyngeal, respiratory, and  gastrointestinal  tract
may  be  necessary. Eye  exposure  generally  requires  extensive  irrigation  and 
analgesia. Ophthalmologic consultation should be considered as needed.

References
*Franceschi VR, Nakata PA. Calcium oxalate in plants: Formation and function. Annu Rev
Plant Biol. 2005;56:41–71.
Gardner DG. Injury to the oral mucous membranes caused by the common houseplant,
Dieffenbachia. A review. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol. 1994;78:631–633.
Palmer M, Betz JM. Plants. In: Flomenbaum NE, Goldfrank LR, Hoffman RS, Howland MA,
Lewin NA, Nelson LS. Goldfrank’s Toxicologic Emergencies, 8th Edition. McGraw-Hill. New
York, NY. 2006. p. 1577–1602.

Poisoning by Plants with Cardioactive Steroids/Cardiac Glycosides
Examples of plant genera associated with this syndrome:
Acokanthera
Calotropis
Helleborus
Nerium
Urginea

Adenium
Cryptostegia
Ornithogalum
Pentalinon
Strophanthus

Adonis
Digitalis
Convallaria
Thevetia
Scilla

Toxic Mechanism
Cardioactive  steroids, termed  cardiac  glycosides  when  sugar  moieties  are
attached, inhibit the cellular Na+/K+-ATPase. The effect is to indirectly increase
intracellular Ca2+ concentrations in certain cells, particularly myocardial cells.
Therapeutically, this both enhances cardiac inotropy (contractility) and slows
the  heart  rate. However, excessive  elevation  of the  intracellular  Ca2+ also
increases myocardial excitability, predisposing to the development of ventricu-
lar  dysrhythmias. Enhanced  vagal  tone, mediated  by  the  neurotransmitter
acetylcholine, is common with poisoning by these agents, and produces brady-
cardia and heart block.

Clinical Manifestations
Ingestion of plants containing cardioactive steroids may cause abdominal pain
and  induce  vomiting, which  serves  both  as  an  early  sign  of toxicity  and  a 
mechanism to limit poisoning. Cardiovascular and electrocardiographic effects
include sinus and junctional bradycardia as well as ventricular tachydysrhyth-
mias, including  ventricular  tachycardia  and  ventricular  ﬁbrillation. Hyper-
kalemia  may  develop  and  is  associated  with  poor  patient  outcome. Serum
digoxin  concentrations  may  be  obtained  but  should  not  be  relied  upon  to
exclude  toxicity  as  other  cardioactive  steroids  will  have  unpredictable  assay

Poisons, Poisoning Syndromes,  and Their Clinical Management

25

cross-reactivity. Consequently, treatment, if clinically  indicated, should  not
await laboratory conﬁrmation.

Speciﬁc Therapeutics
Most of the available clinical experience with cardioactive steroid poisoning is
related to digoxin toxicity. In these patients, standard supportive medical man-
agement is often inadequate. Therefore, any patient with consequential digoxin
poisoning  should  receive  digoxin-speciﬁc  Fab. This  product  contains  the
antigen-binding  regions  (Fab)  of animal-derived  antidigoxin  antibodies.
Although  speciﬁcally  designed  for  the  management  of digoxin  poisoning,
digoxin-speciﬁc  Fab  appears  to  have  sufﬁcient  cross-recognition  of other 
cardioactive  steroids  to  warrant  its  administration  in  other  nondigoxin 
cardioactive steroid poisonings. The empiric dose is 10 vials (400 mg) adminis-
tered intravenously in both adults and children, with additional dosing based
on clinical response or additional information. Indications for its use include
signiﬁcant  bradycardia, tachydysrhythmias, or  hyperkalemia, with  or  without
an elevated serum digoxin concentration, in any patient seriously believed to be
poisoned by a cardioactive steroid-containing plant.

References
Eddleston M, Persson H. Acute plant poisoning and antitoxin antibodies. J Toxicol Clin
Toxicol 2003;41:309–315.
Hack JB, Lewin NA. Cardioactive steroids. In: Flomenbaum NE, Goldfrank LR, Hoffman RS,
Howland MA, Lewin NA, Nelson LS. Goldfrank’s Toxicologic Emergencies, 8th Edition.
McGraw-Hill. New York, NY. 2006. p. 971–982.
Howland MA. Digoxin-speciﬁc antibody fragments. In: Flomenbaum NE, Goldfrank LR,
Hoffman RS, Howland MA, Lewin NA, Nelson LS. Goldfrank’s Toxicologic Emergencies, 8th
Edition. McGraw-Hill. New York, NY. 2006. p. 983–988.
Newman LS, Feinberg MW, LeWine HE. Clinical problem-solving: A bitter tale. N Engl J
Med 2004;351:594–599.

Poisoning by Plants with Convulsant Poisons (Seizure)
Examples of plant genera associated with this syndrome:
Aethusa
Caltha
Clematis
Gymnocladus
Lobelia
Nicotiana
Sophora

Anemone
Caulophyllum
Conium
Hippobroma
Menispermum
Pulsatilla
Spigelia

Blighia
Cicuta
Coriaria
Laburnum
Myoporum
Ranunculus
Strychnos

26

Poisons, Poisoning Syndromes,  and Their Clinical Management

Toxic Mechanism
A convulsion is the rhythmic, forceful contraction of the muscles, one cause of
which are seizures. Seizures are disorganized discharges of the central nervous
system that generally, but not always, result in a convulsion. There are various
toxicological  mechanisms  that  result  in  seizures  including  antagonism  of
gamma-aminobutyric  acid  (GABA)  at  its  receptor  on  the  neuronal  chloride
channel,
imbalance  of acetylcholine  homeostasis, excitatory  amino  acid
mimicry, sodium channel alteration, or hypoglycemia. Strychnine and its ana-
logues  antagonize  the  postsynaptic  inhibiting  activity  of glycine  at  the  spinal
cord  motor  neuron. Strychnine  results  in  hyperexcitability  of the  motor
neurons, which manifests as a convulsion.

Clinical Manifestations
Unless an underlying central nervous system lesion exists, patients with plant-
induced  seizures  generally  present  with  generalized, as  opposed  to  focal,
seizures. Most patients develop generalized tonic-clonic convulsions, in which
periods  of shaking  movement  (convulsion  or  clonus)  are  interspersed  with
periods  of hypertonicity. Occasionally, patients  may  not  have  overt  motor 
activity (i.e., nonconvulsive seizure), or may present in the postictal period (par-
tially  or  fully  recovered  from  their  seizure). The  diagnosis  in  this  situation 
may  be  difﬁcult  to  determine. Patients  who  are  having  a  generalized  seizure
should  have  loss  of consciousness  as  a  result  of central  nervous  system  dys-
function, and often have urinary or fecal incontinence, tongue biting, or other
signs of trauma.

Conscious patients who are manifesting what appear to be generalized con-
vulsions  may  have  myoclonus  or  strychnine  poisoning. Strychnine-poisoned
patients manifest symmetrical convulsive activity, but because the activity is the
result  of spinal  cord  dysfunction, there  is  no  loss  of consciousness  (i.e., no
seizure) until metabolic or other complications intercede.

Speciﬁc Therapeutics
Once  hypoglycemia  and  hypoxia  have  been  excluded  (or  treated), a  rapidly
acting  anticonvulsant  benzodiazepine  (e.g., diazepam, 5–10 mg  in  adults
(0.1–0.3mg/kg in children) or lorazepam, 2 mg in adults, or 0.1mg/kg in chil-
dren), should  be  administered  parenterally  for  persistent  seizures. Although
diazepam and lorazepam are nearly equivalent in time to onset, lorazepam has
a  substantially  longer  duration  of anticonvulsant  effect. Lorazepam  can  be
administered intramuscularly, though this route is not ideal because of a slow
absorptive  phase. Dosing  may  be  repeated  several  times  as  needed. Inability 
to  expeditiously  control  seizures  with  benzodiazepines  may  necessitate  the

Poisons, Poisoning Syndromes,  and Their Clinical Management

27

administration of barbiturates, propofol, or another anticonvulsant medication.
There  is  generally  no  acute  role  for  phenytoin  or  other  maintenance 
anticonvulsants in patients with toxin-induced seizures.

References
Chan YC. Strychnine. In: Flomenbaum NE, Goldfrank LR, Hoffman RS, Howland MA,
Lewin NA, Nelson LS. Goldfrank’s Toxicologic Emergencies, 8th Edition. McGraw-Hill. New
York, NY. 2006. p. 1492–1496.
Philippe G, Angenot L, Tits M, Frederich M. About the toxicity of some Strychnos species
and their alkaloids. Toxicon 2004;44:405–416.
Wills B, Erickson T. Drug- and toxin-associated seizures. Med Clin North Am 2005;89:
1297–1321.

Poisoning by Plants with Cyanogenic Compounds
Examples of plant genera associated with this syndrome:
Eriobotrya
Prunus

Hydrangea
Sambucus

Malus

Toxic Mechanism
Cyanogenic  compounds, most  commonly  glycosides, must  be  metabolized  to
release  cyanide. Cyanide  inhibits  the  ﬁnal  step  of the  mitochondrial  electron
transport chain, resulting rapidly in cellular energy failure.

Clinical Manifestations
Because  the  cyanogenic  glycosides  must  be  hydrolyzed  in  the  gastrointestinal
tract before cyanide ion is released, the onset of toxicity is commonly delayed.
Abdominal  pain, vomiting, lethargy, and  sweating  develop  initially, followed
shortly by altered mental status, seizures, cardiovascular collapse, and multisys-
tem organ failure. Laboratory testing may reveal an elevated blood lactic acid;
cyanide levels are not generally available rapidly. Thiocyanate, a metabolite of
cyanide, may be measured in the patient’s blood, and although often conﬁrma-
tory in retrospect, immediate results are not readily available.

Speciﬁc Therapeutics
Initial  management  includes  aggressive  supportive  care,
intravenous  ﬂuid
therapy, and correction of consequential metabolic acidosis using intravenous
sodium bicarbonate as appropriate. Antidotal therapy, available in the form of
a  prepackaged  cyanide  antidote  kit, should  be  administered  to  any  patient
believed to be suffering from cyanide poisoning. Before the establishment of an
intravenous  line, an  amyl  nitrite  pearl  may  be  broken  and  held  under  the
patient’s nose for 30 seconds each minute. In patients with intravenous access,

28

Poisons, Poisoning Syndromes,  and Their Clinical Management

10 ml  of 3%  sodium  nitrite  in  an  adult, or  in  an  appropriate  pediatric  dose
(guidelines supplied with the kit), should be administered intravenously; this
should be followed rapidly by 50 ml of 25% sodium thiosulfate intravenously
in  an  adult, or  1.65 ml/kg  in  children. In  certain  circumstances, for  example,
when the diagnosis is uncertain, administration of only the sodium thiosulfate
component of the antidote kit may be appropriate. Outside of the United States,
hydroxocobalamin, an alternative antidote, may be available.

References
Holstege CP, Isom G, Kirk MA. Cyanide and hydrogen sulﬁde. In: Flomenbaum NE,
Goldfrank LR, Hoffman RS, Howland MA, Lewin NA, Nelson LS. Goldfrank’s Toxicologic
Emergencies, 8th Edition. McGraw-Hill. New York, NY. 2006. p. 1716–1724.
Howland MA. Nitrites. In: Flomenbaum NE, Goldfrank LR, Hoffman RS, Howland MA,
Lewin NA, Nelson LS. Goldfrank’s Toxicologic Emergencies, 8th Edition. McGraw-Hill.
New York, NY. 2006. p. 1725–1727.
Howland MA. Sodium thiosulfate. In: Flomenbaum NE, Goldfrank LR, Hoffman RS,
Howland MA, Lewin NA, Nelson LS. Goldfrank’s Toxicologic Emergencies, 8th Edition.
McGraw-Hill. New York, NY. 2006. p. 1728–1730.
Vetter J. Plant cyanogenic glycosides. Toxicon 2000;38:11–36.

Poisoning by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins
Many and various plant genera are associated with this syndrome.

Irritant  toxins 

indirectly  stimulate  contraction  of

Toxic Mechanism
Several different mechanisms are utilized by plant toxin to produce gastroin-
testinal effects, generally described as either mechanical irritation or a pharma-
cologic  effect.
the
gastrointestinal smooth muscle. The pharmacologically active agents most com-
monly work by stimulation of cholinergic receptors in the gastrointestinal tract
to  induce  smooth  muscle  contraction  [e.g., cholinergic  (including  nicotine-
like)] alkaloids. Some plant toxins (e.g., mitotic inhibitors, toxalbumins) alter
the normal development and turnover of gastrointestinal lining cells and induce
sloughing of this cellular layer. Hepatotoxins may directly injure the liver cells,
commonly through the production of oxidant metabolites. Indirect hepatotox-
icity  may  occur, as  with  the  pyrrolizidine  alkaloids  (see “Poisoning  by  Plants
with Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids”, p 31).

Clinical Manifestations
Nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramping, and diarrhea are the hallmarks. Vom-
iting  may  be  bloody  or  may  contain  acid-degraded  blood  (“coffee  grounds”)
leaked  secondary  to  gastric  irritation. Extensive  diarrhea  and  vomiting  may
produce acid–base, electrolyte, and ﬂuid abnormalities, leading to hypokalemia

Poisons, Poisoning Syndromes,  and Their Clinical Management

29

and  profound  volume  depletion. Small  children  in  particular  may  become
rapidly volume depleted and it may be more difﬁcult to diagnose than in adults.
Certain  plant  toxins  that  produce  prominent  gastrointestinal  ﬁndings  may 
subsequently produce systemic toxicity following absorption. For agents in this
group (e.g., mitotic inhibitors, toxalbumins), the gastrointestinal manifestations
serve as a warning for potential systemic toxicity.

Speciﬁc Therapeutics
Vomiting may be mitigated by antiemetic agents such as metoclopramide; occa-
sionally, resistant emesis may require a serotonin antagonist such as ondansetron.
Speciﬁc treatment of a patient’s diarrhea (e.g., loperamide) is generally unneces-
sary. Assessment for and correction of volume depletion and metabolic changes
are critical. For most patients, intravenous rehydration should be initiated using
normal saline or lactated Ringer’s solution and adjusted based on clinical or lab-
oratory  criteria. Oral  rehydration  therapy  may  be  attempted  in  patients  with
minor  clinical  abnormalities. Electrolyte  and  acid–base  derangements  usually
resolve with supportive care but may occasionally require speciﬁc therapy. Phar-
macotherapies for the prevention of treatment of hepatotoxicity are varied, but
empiric therapy with N-acetylcysteine is often suggested.

References
Palmer M, Betz JM. Plants. In: Flomenbaum NE, Goldfrank LR, Hoffman RS, Howland MA,
Lewin NA, Nelson LS. Goldfrank’s Toxicologic Emergencies, 8th Edition. McGraw-Hill. New
York, NY. 2006. p. 1577–1602.

Poisoning by Plants with Mitotic Inhibitors
Examples of plant genera associated with this syndrome:
Bulbocodium
Gloriosa

Catharanthus
Podophyllum

Colchicum

Toxic Mechanism
These  agents  interfere  with  the  polymerization  of microtubules, which  must
polymerize for mitosis to occur, leading to metaphase arrest. Rapidly dividing
cells  (e.g., gastrointestinal  or  bone  marrow  cells)  typically  are  affected  earlier
and to a greater extent than those cells that divide slowly. In addition, micro-
tubules are important in the maintenance of proper neuronal function.

Clinical Manifestations
Patients typically have early gastrointestinal abnormalities, including vomiting
and  diarrhea. Oral  ulcers  and  frank  gastrointestinal  necrosis  can  occur.
Multisystem organ failure may follow. Bone marrow toxicity typically manifests

30

Poisons, Poisoning Syndromes,  and Their Clinical Management

as an initial leukocytosis, due to release of stored white blood cells, followed by
leukopenia. Death may occur from direct cellular toxic effects or from sepsis.
Nervous system toxicity, including ataxia, headache, seizures, and encephalopa-
thy, may develop initially, and peripheral neuropathy may develop in patients
who survive.

Speciﬁc Therapeutics
Initial  management  includes  aggressive  supportive  and  symptomatic  care. In
patients with profound bone marrow toxicity, colony-stimulating factors may
be beneﬁcial. Consultation with appropriate specialists, such as a hematologist,
should be strongly considered.

References
Mullins ME, Carrico EA, Horowitz BZ. Fatal cardiovascular collapse following acute
colchicine ingestion. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 2000;38:51–54.
Schier J. Colchicine and podophylline. In: Flomenbaum NE, Goldfrank LR, Hoffman RS,
Howland MA, Lewin NA, Nelson LS. Goldfrank’s Toxicologic Emergencies, 8th Edition.
McGraw-Hill. New York, NY. 2006. p. 580–589.

Poisoning by Plants with Nicotine-Like Alkaloids
Examples of plant genera associated with this syndrome:
Baptisia
Gymnocladus
Lobelia

Caulophyllum
Hippobroma
Nicotiana

Conium
Laburnum
Sophora

Toxic Mechanism
These  agents  are  direct-acting  agonists  at  the  nicotinic  subtype  of the  acetyl-
choline  receptor  in  the  ganglia  of both  the  parasympathetic  and  sympathetic
limbs  of the  autonomic  nervous  system  (NN receptors), the  neuromuscular
junction (NM receptors), and the brain.

Clinical Manifestations
Sympathetic stimulation, including hypertension, tachycardia, and diaphoresis,
and  parasympathetic  stimulation,
including  salivation  and  vomiting, are
common (NN). Hyperstimulation at the NM results in fasciculations, muscular
weakness, and, rarely, depolarizing  neuromuscular  blockade. Seizures  may
occur as a result of effects at cerebral nicotinic receptors.

Speciﬁc Therapeutics
Control of the patient’s autonomic hyperactivity is generally not needed unless
secondary  complications, such  as  myocardial  ischemia, develop  or  are  anti-

Poisons, Poisoning Syndromes,  and Their Clinical Management

31

cipated. In this case, the vital sign abnormalities may be corrected through the
judicious  use  of antihypertensive  drugs, including  nitroprusside  or  diltiazem,
as  appropriate. Neuromuscular  symptoms  cannot  be  effectively  antagonized
because  effective  agents  (e.g., curare-like  drugs)  would  also  produce  neuro-
muscular  blockade. Patients  with  inadequate  ventilatory  effort  should  be
managed supportively. Seizures should respond to intravenous benzodiazepine,
such as lorazepam or diazepam.

References
Palmer M, Betz JM. Plants. In: Flomenbaum NE, Goldfrank LR, Hoffman RS, Howland MA,
Lewin NA, Nelson LS. Goldfrank’s Toxicologic Emergencies, 8th Edition. McGraw-Hill. New
York, NY. 2006. p. 1577–1602.
Rogers AJ, Denk LD, Wax PM. Catastrophic brain injury after nicotine insecticide ingestion.
J Emerg Med 2004;26:169–172.
Solomon ME. Nicotine and tobacco preparations. In: Flomenbaum NE, Goldfrank LR,
Hoffman RS, Howland MA, Lewin NA, Nelson LS. Goldfrank’s Toxicologic Emergencies, 8th
Edition. McGraw-Hill. New York, NY. 2006. p. 1221–1230.
Vetter J. Poison hemlock (Conium maculatum L.). Food Chem Toxicol 2004;42:
1373–82.

Poisoning by Plants with Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids
Examples of plant genera associated with this syndrome:
Crotalaria
Senecio

Echium
Sesbania

Heliotropium

Toxic Mechanism
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids are metabolized to pyrroles, which are alkylating agents
that injure the endothelium of the hepatic sinusoids or pulmonary vasculature.
Endothelial repair and hypertrophy result in venoocclusive disease. Centrilob-
ular  necrosis  may  occur  following  acute, high-dose  exposures, presumably
caused by the overwhelming production of the pyrrole. Chronic use is also asso-
ciated with hepatic carcinoma.

Clinical Manifestations
Acute  hepatotoxicity  caused  by  massive  pyrrolizidine  alkaloid  exposure 
produces  gastrointestinal  symptoms, right  upper  quadrant  abdominal  pain,
hepatosplenomegaly, and jaundice as well as biochemical abnormalities consis-
tent  with  hepatic  necrosis  [e.g., aspartate  ammotransferase  (AST), bilirubin,
increased international normalized ratio (INR)].Prolonged,lower-level exposure
produces more indolent disease,and patients may present with cirrhosis or ascites

32

Poisons, Poisoning Syndromes,  and Their Clinical Management

caused by hepatic venous occlusion. This syndrome is clinically and pathologi-
cally similar to the Budd–Chiari syndrome.

Certain  pyrrolizidine  alkaloids  (e.g., that  from Crotalaria  spectabilis)  pro-
duce pulmonary vasculature occlusion and the syndrome of pulmonary hyper-
tension in animals, but it is not known whether there is an analogous human
response.

Speciﬁc Therapeutics
Standard supportive care may allow for some spontaneous repair. There are no
known speciﬁc therapies. Liver transplantation may be an option for patients
with severe hepatotoxicity or cirrhosis.

References
Palmer M, Betz JM. Plants. In: Flomenbaum NE, Goldfrank LR, Hoffman RS, Howland MA,
Lewin NA, Nelson LS. Goldfrank’s Toxicologic Emergencies, 8th Edition. McGraw-Hill. New
York, NY. 2006. p. 1577–1602.
Stewart MJ, Steenkamp V. Pyrrolizidine poisoning: A neglected area in human toxicology.
Therapeutic Drug Monitoring 2001;23:698–708.

Poisoning by Plants with Sodium Channel Activators
Examples of plant genera associated with this syndrome:
Aconitum
Lyonia
Rhododendron
Zigadenus

Kalmia
Pernettya
Schoenocaulon

Leucothoe
Pieris
Veratrum

Toxic Mechanism
These agents stabilize the open form of the voltage-dependent sodium channel
in  excitable  membranes, such  as  neurons  and  the  cardiac  conducting  system.
This  causes  persistent  sodium  inﬂux  (i.e., persistent  depolarization)  and 
prevents adequate repolarization leading to seizures and dysrhythmias, respec-
tively. In  the  heart, the  excess  sodium  inﬂux  activates  calcium  exchange, and 
the  intracellular  hypercalcemia  increases  both  inotropy  and  the  potential  for
dysrhythmias.

Clinical Manifestations
Vomiting  is  very  common  and  occurs  through  a  central  nervous  system-
mediated mechanism. Sodium channel effects on sensory neurons may produce

Poisons, Poisoning Syndromes,  and Their Clinical Management

33

paresthesias in a perioral and distal extremity distribution. Persistent depolar-
ization  of motor  neurons  produces  fasciculations, motor  weakness, and  ulti-
mately paralysis. In the heart, the effects of sodium channel opening have been
compared  to  that  of the  cardioactive  steroids: atropine-sensitive  sinus  brady-
cardia, atrioventricular blocks, repolarization abnormalities, and, occasionally,
ventricular  dysrhythmias. However, although  the  clinical  ﬁndings  are  similar,
the underlying mechanisms and treatments may differ.

Speciﬁc Therapeutics
Normal  saline  should  be  rapidly  infused  into  patients  with  hypotension, and
atropine  is  often  therapeutic  for  sinus  bradycardia  and  conduction  blocks.
Hypotension may require pressor agents such as norepinephrine. Mechanism-
based therapy suggests the use of sodium channel blocking drugs such as lido-
caine or amiodarone. None has been proven superior, and the agent used should
probably be based on the comfort level of the provider. Although the clinical
presentation is similar to poisoning by cardioactive steroids, there is no deﬁned
role for digoxin-speciﬁc Fab.

References
Lewin NA, Nelson LS. Antidysrhythmics. In: Flomenbaum NE, Goldfrank LR, Hoffman RS,
Howland MA, Lewin NA, Nelson LS. Goldfrank’s Toxicologic Emergencies, 8th Edition.
McGraw-Hill. New York, NY. 2006. p. 959–971.
Lin CC, Chan TY, Deng JF. Clinical features and management of herb-induced aconitine
poisoning. Ann Emerg Med 2004;43:574–579.
Palmer M, Betz JM. Plants. In: Flomenbaum NE, Goldfrank LR, Hoffman RS, Howland MA,
Lewin NA, Nelson LS. Goldfrank’s Toxicologic Emergencies, 8th Edition. McGraw-Hill. New
York, NY. 2006. p. 1577–1602.

Poisoning by Plants with Toxalbumins
Examples of plant genera associated with this syndrome:
Abrus
Momordica
Robinia

Hura
Phoradendron

Jatropha
Ricinus

Toxic Mechanism
The protein toxins derived from these plants work speciﬁcally by inhibiting the
function  of ribosomes, the  subcellular  organelle  responsible  for  protein  syn-
thesis. The  toxins  typically  have  two  linked  polypeptide  chains. One  of the
chains binds to cell-surface glycoproteins to allow endocytosis into the cell. The
other  chain  upon  cell  entry  binds  the  60S  ribosomal  subunit  and  impairs  its
ability to synthesize protein.

34

Poisons, Poisoning Syndromes,  and Their Clinical Management

Clinical Manifestations
Clinical  manifestations  depend  largely  on  the  route  of exposure. Following
ingestion, local gastroenteritis produces diarrhea and abdominal pain. Because
the seed coat of many toxalbumin containing seeds is tough, chewing is gener-
ally a prerequisite for toxicity. Absorption of toxin into the systemic circulation
allows  widespread  distribution  and  multisystem  organ  failure. Parenteral
administration  via  injection  similarly  produces  diffuse  organ  dysfunction.
Following  inhalation  of aerosolized  toxin, localized  pulmonary  effects  are  of
greatest concern, although systemic toxicity is possible. Depending on the dose
and route administered, the development of ﬁndings may be delayed.

Speciﬁc Therapeutics
Death  from  multisystem  organ  failure  is  best  prevented  through  aggressive
support of vital organ function and prevention of infection. Work is progress-
ing on the use of antiricin antibodies, but it is not in current clinical use.

References
Audi J, Belson M, Patel M, Schier J, Osterloh J. Ricin poisoning: A comprehensive review.
JAMA 2005;294:2342–2351.
Bradberry SM, Dickers KJ, Rice P, Grifﬁths GD, Vale JA. Ricin poisoning. Toxicol Rev 2003;
22:65–70.

SECTION 3.

Plant-Induced Dermatitis
(Phytodermatitis)

35

Skin-associated  complaints  are  the  most  common  form  of plant  poisoning
reported  to  Poison  Control  Centers. Dermatologists  often  see  patients  with
complaints  directly  or  indirectly  related  to  plant  exposures  (Table  4). For
example, outdoor workers may directly develop dermatitis from the toxin-laden
pollen  from  the  various  plants  in  the  family  Compositae  (Asteraceae)  (e.g.,
chrysanthemums, which contain sesquiterpene lactones). Indirectly, the use of
perfume or other lotions that contain plant derivatives may produce dermati-
tis in an unsuspecting user.

Plant-induced  dermal  disorders  are  frequently  categorized  into  several
groups  to  generalize  their  clinical  effects  and  management, but  plant-speciﬁc
mechanisms and therapies may exist:

1. Mechanical irritants
2. Chemical irritants
3. Allergens
4. Phototoxins
5. Pseudophytodermatitides

The majority of these complaints are managed by primary care physicians
or dermatologists. This section provides a brief overview of the problem and
should be supplemented by the use of a reference text or the advice of a der-
matologist. Poison Control Centers, physicians, botanists, and toxicologists are
frequently  confronted  by  situations  in  which  a  plant  is  implicated  in  the 
formation  of a  rash, suggesting  that  the  ability  to  recognize  plant-induced 
dermatitis is important for all.

Mechanical Irritants
Mechanical  injury, sometimes  called  toxin-mediated  urticaria, is  generally
induced by plants with obvious physical characteristics that directly injure the
skin, such as the barbs of aloe or the trichomes of stinging nettles (Urtica dioica)
(Table  5). In  the  latter  case, the  stingers  are  fragile  hypodermic  syringe-like
tubules that contain a mixture of irritant chemicals which are injected into the
skin after the trichome breaks the dermal barrier. Following exposure, patients
rapidly develop short-lived wheals with intense pruritis. Less-obvious exposures
occur when the idioblasts found in common houseplants such as Dieffenbachia
37

38

Plant-Induced Dermatitis (Phytodermatitis)

TABLE 4. Representative Plants Causing Contact Dermatitis
Botanical name
Amaryllidaceae

Narcissus species

Anacardiaceae
See Table 8
Annonaceae

Asimina triloba (L.) Dunal

Apocynaceae

Allamanda cathartica L.
Nerium oleander L.

Araceae

See Table 6

Araliaceae

Hedera canariensis Willd.
H. helix L.

Aristolochiaceae

Aristolochia elegans M.T. Mast
A. gigantea Mart. & Zucc. non Hook.
A. grandiﬂora Swartz

Asclepiadaceae

See Table 7
Bignoniaceae

Campsis radicans (L.) Seem.

Bromeliaceae

Ananas comosus (L.) Merrill

Chenopodiaceae

Sarcobatus vermiculatus (Hook.) Torr.

Common name

Daffodil, Narcissus,

Jonquil

Pawpaw

Allamanda, Canario
Oleander

Algerian Ivy
English Ivy

Calico Flower

Pelican Flower

Trumpet Creeper

Pineapple

Greasewood

Commelinaceae

Rhoeo spathacea (Swartz) Stearn (= R. discolor (L’Her.) Hance)
Setcreasea pallida Rose cv. ‘Purple Heart’ (= S. purpurea Boom)

Moses-in-a-Boat,
Oyster Plant
Purple Queen

Compositae (Asteraceae)

Ambrosia species
Artemisia species
Aster species
Chrysanthemum species

Ragweed
Mugwort
Aster, Daisy
Chrysanthemum, Daisy,
Feverfew, Marguerite

Erigeron species
Franseria acanthicarpa (Hook.) Coville (= Ambrosia 

acanthicarpa Hook.)

Gaillardia species
Helenium autumnale L.
H. microcephalum DC.
Iva species
Lactuca sativa L.
Oxytenia acerosa Nutt. (= Iva acerosa (Nutt.) R.C. Jackson)

Fleabane
Poverty Weed

Gaillardia
Sneezeweed

Marsh Elder
Lettuce
Copper Weed

Plant-Induced Dermatitis (Phytodermatitis)

39

TABLE 4. Representative Plants Causing Contact Dermatitis, Continued
Botanical name

Parthenium argentatum Gray
P. hysterophorus L.
Rudbeckia hirta L. (=R. serotina Nutt.)
Soliva pterosperma (Juss.) Less.
Tanacetum vulgare L.
Tagetes minuta L.
Xanthium species
See Table 9

Convolvulaceae

Dichondra repens J.R. & G. Forst.

Cornaceae

See Table 5

Euphorbiaceae

Hura crepitans L.

Ricinus communis L.

See Table 7
Fumariaceae

Dicentra spectabilis (L.) Lem.

Ginkgoaceae

Ginkgo biloba L.

Gramineae (Poaceae)

Oryza sativa L.
Panicum glutinosum Sw.
Secale cereale L.

Hydrophyllaceae

Common name
Guayule
Parthenium
Black-eyed Susan
Spurweed
Tansy
Mexican Marigold
Cocklebur

Monkey Pistol,

Sandbox Tree, Javillo

Castor Bean,

Higuereta, Ricino

Bleeding Heart

Ginkgo,

Maidenhair Tree

Rice
Sticky Grass
Rye

Phacelia campanularia Gray
P. crenulata Torr. ex S. Wats.
P. minor (Harv.) Thell. ex F. Zimm. (= P. whitlavia A. Gray;

California Bluebell
Scorpion Flower,
Scorpion Weed

Whitlavia

Whitlavia grandiﬂora Harv.)

P. parryi Torr.
P. viscida (Benth. ex Lindl.) Torr.
See Table 5
Juglandaceae

Juglans nigra L.

Black Walnut

Leguminosae (Fabaceae)

Prosopis glandulosa Torr. (= P. juliﬂora (Sw.) DC. var glandulosa  Mesquite

(Torr.) Cockerell) 

See Table 5

Liliaceae

Allium cepa L.
A. sativum L.
Hyacinthus species
Tulipa species

Onion, Cebolla
Garlic, Ajo
Hyacinth
Tulip

40

Plant-Induced Dermatitis (Phytodermatitis)

TABLE 4. Representative Plants Causing Contact Dermatitis, Continued
Botanical name
Loranthaceae

Common name

Phoradendron serotinum (Raf.) M.C.

Johnst. (= P. ﬂavescens (Pursh) Nutt.)

Magnoliaceae

Magnolia grandiﬂora L.

Moraceae

Maclura pomifera (Raf.) C.K. Schneid.
See Table 9

Myrtaceae

Eucalyptus globulus Labill.

Orchidaceae

Cypripedium species

Palmae (Arecaceae)

See Table 6

Pinaceae

Abies balsamea (L.) Mill.

Primulaceae

Primula farinosa L.
P. obconica Hance

Proteaceae

Grevillea banksii R. Br.
G. robusta A. Cunn.

Ranunculaceae

See Table 7

Rosaceae

Agrimonia species
Rosa odorata (Andr.) Sweet
See Table 9

Rutaceae

See Table 9
Saxifragaceae

Hydrangea species

Solanaceae

Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.
Solanum carolinense L.
S. tuberosum L.

Thymelaeaceae

See Table 7

Ulmaceae

Ulmus glabra Huds.
U. procera Salisb.

Umbelliferae (Apiaceae)

See Table 9

Urticaceae

See Table 5

(American) Mistletoe

Magnolia, Bull Bay

Osage Orange

Blue Gum, Eucalyptus

Lady’s Slipper

Balsam Fir

Birdseye Primrose
Primula, German 

Primrose

Kahili Flower
Silk(y) Oak

Agrimony
Tea Rose

Hydrangea

Tomato
Horse Nettle
Potato

Wych Elm, Scotch Elm
English Elm

Plant-Induced Dermatitis (Phytodermatitis)

41

TABLE 4. Representative Plants Causing Contact Dermatitis, Continued
Botanical name

Common name

Vitaceae

See Table 6

Zygophyllaceae

Larrea tridentata (Sesse & Moc. ex DC.)

Coville (= L. glutinosa Englem.)

Creosote Bush

TABLE 5. Representative Plants with External Irritant, Stinging Hairs, or Detachable Needles
Botanical name
Cactaceae

Common name

Opuntia species (e.g., O. microdasys (Lehm.) Pfeiff.)

Bunny Ears, Prickly Pear

Cannabaceae

Humulus lupulus L.

Cornaceae

Cornus sanguinea L.

Euphorbiaceae

Acidoton urens Sw.
Cnidoscolus chayamansa McVaugh
C. stimulosus (Michx.) Engelm.
C. texanus (Muell. Arg.) Small
C. urens (L.) Arth. (= Jatropha urens L.)
Dalechampia scandens L.
Platygyne hexandra (Jacq.) Muell. Arg.
Tragia volubilis L.

Hydrophyllaceae

Phacelia imbricata Greene
P. malvifolia Cham.
Wigandia caracasana H.B.K.
W. urens (Ruiz & Pav.) H.B.K.

Leguminosae (Fabaceae)

Lupinus hirsutissimus Benth.
Mucuna deeringiana (Bort) Merrill 
(= Stizlobium deeringianum Bort)
M. pruriens DC. (= Stizlobium pruriens

(L.) Medik.; Dolichos pruriens L.)

M. urens (L.) DC.

Malpighiaceae

Malpighia polytricha A. Juss.
M. urens L.
Sterculiaceae

Hops

Bloodtwig Dogwood

Mountain Cowitch
Chaya
Tread Softly, Bull Nettle

Liane Gratte
Pringamosa
Pringamosa

Stinging Phacelia

Stinging Lupine
Velvet Bean
Cowhage, Cowitch, Pica-Pica,
Pois Gratté, Vine Gungo Pea

Bejuco Jairey, Ox-Eye Bean,
Yeaux Bourrique, Torteza

Touch-Me-Not
Cowitch Cherry

Urticaceae

Sterculia apetala (Jacq.) Karst. (in exposed fruit)
Laportea aestuans (L.) Chew (= Fleurya aestuans (L.) Gaud.)
L. canadensis (L.) Weddell
Urera baccifera (L.) Weddell
Urtica dioica L.
U. urens L.

Pica-Pica
Wood Nettle
Ortiga Brava
Stinging Nettle
Stinging Nettle

42

Plant-Induced Dermatitis (Phytodermatitis)

spp. injure the skin. These idioblasts contain both needle-like calcium oxalate
crystals  (mechanical  irritants)  in  a  soup  of
irritant  chemicals  (chemical 
irritants; Table 6). The crystals are forcibly injected into the skin or mucosa fol-
lowing mechanical stimulation of the idioblasts. Depending on the anatomical 
location of the crystal deposition, the clinical effects can be minor (e.g., skin),
consequential  (e.g., eye), or  rarely  lethal  (e.g., airway). Treatment  is  generally 
supportive  and  symptomatic  in  nature. Skin  involvement  with  a  mechanical
irritant  should  be  treated  with  demulcent  cremes,
ice, and  analgesics,
and perhaps removal of the offending agent if appropriate. Ocular involvement
is similarly managed with symptomatic care that may include ocular irrigation
and  systemic  analgesics, and  most  exposures  should  prompt  consultation 
with  an  ophthalmologist. Oropharyngeal  exposures  mandate  rigorous 
attention  to  the  airway, and  patients  may  require  corticosteroids  to  limit 
pharyngeal swelling. Endoscopy is likely indicated in any patient with clinical
ﬁndings  consistent  with  airway  involvement  (e.g., dysphonia, dysphagia,
stridor).

Chemical Irritants
Chemical  irritants  differ  from  the  mechanical  irritants  in  that  they  produce 
their clinical effects on the basis of a physicochemical quality of the toxin rather
than  through  overt  mechanical  means  (Table  7). Some  of
these  toxins 
may be introduced along with mechanical irritants, as already noted. Chemical
irritants may be directly irritating on the basis of pH or other chemical effects
(e.g., solubility), mimicry of an endogenous compound (e.g., acetylcholine or
histamine), enzymatic  damage, or  activation  of inﬂammation. These  agents 
may  be  protoxins  that  require  metabolic  transformation  to  produce  the  ulti-
mate toxin [e.g., sinigrin in Brassicaceae (mustard) plants forms allyl isothio-
cyanate]. Chili  peppers  (Capsicum  spp.)  contain  capsaicin, which  induces  the
release  of stored  neurotransmitter  from  sensory  neurons  (substance  P)  and 
produces the deep aching pain characteristic of the “Hunan hand” syndrome,
for example. Treatment of chemical-induced irritation includes decontamina-
tion  by  thorough  washing  of the  affected  area, analgesics, and  symptomatic 
care.

Allergens
Although any type of allergic response may occur, a type IV, or delayed, hyper-
sensitivity response, also known as allergic contact dermatitis (ACD), is by far
the  most  common  caused  by  plants  (Table  8). Many  occupations, such  as
ﬂorists, gardeners, and even outdoor workers uninvolved with plant work, are
at risk for the development of ACD. Among ﬂorists, exposure to Peruvian lily,

Plant-Induced Dermatitis (Phytodermatitis)

43

TABLE 6. Representative Plants Containing Irritant Raphides
Botanical name
Araceae

Common name

Alocasia species (e.g., A. macrorrhiza (L.) G. Don)
Anthurium andreanum Linden
Arum italicum Mill.
A. maculatum L.
Caladium bicolor (Ait.) Venten.
Calla palustris L.
Colocasia species (e.g., C. esculenta (L.) Schott
Dieffenbachia species
Epipremnum aureum (Linden & André)

Bunt. (= Pothos aureus Linden & André;

Raphidophora aurea (Linden & André)
Birdsey; Scindapsus aureus (Linden & André) Engl. & 

K. Krause)

Elephant’s Ear, Taro
Flamingo Lily
Italian Arum
Cuckoopint
Caladium
Water Arum, Marsh Marigold
Elephant’s Ear
Dumbcane
Pothos

Philodendron scandens C. Koch & H. Sello ssp. oxycardium Heartleaf Philodendron

(Schott) Bunt.

P. selloum C. Koch
Palmae (Arecaceae)

Caryota mitis Lour.

Vitaceae

Parthenocissus quinquefolia (L.) Planch.
P. triscuspidata (Siebold & Zucc.) Planch.

Fishtail Palm

Virginia Creeper
Boston Ivy

the very common centerpiece ﬂower, results in ACD because of the common
sensitizer tulipin A. The general pathogenesis of this reaction involves a primary
exposure to a toxin resulting in an immune response (i.e., sensitization) devel-
oping in the affected individual. In some cases, particularly with toxins that are
too small to elicit an immune response, the binding of the toxin or its metabo-
lite to an endogenous compound (i.e., as a hapten) results in immunological
recognition. Upon reexposure to the same, or closely related, toxin the primed
immune system recognizes the antigen (or haptenized endogenous compound),
and an immunological response is triggered. The result is a slowly developing
(over  hours  to  days)  rash, consisting  typically  of pain, itch, redness, swelling,
and blisters localized to the affected area. The sensitizing potential of the various
plant-borne toxins varies, but urushiol is among the most potent, and “poison
ivy” is among the most frequently encountered sensitizers. Nearly everyone is
capable  of being  sensitized  to  urushiol, accounting  for  the  reason  that “Rhus
dermatitis” is given its own moniker. Although the reaction resembles irritant
dermatitis, it  is  more  slow  to  develop  and  requires  previous  exposure. Many

44

Plant-Induced Dermatitis (Phytodermatitis)

TABLE 7. Representative Plants Containing an Irritant Sap or Latex
Botanical name
Agavaceae

Common name

Agave species (e.g., A. americana L.)

Century Plant, Maguey

Apocynaceae

Acokanthera oblongifolia (Hochst.) Codd (= A. spectabilis

Bushman’s Poison, Wintersweet

(Sond.) Hook. f.)

Plumeria species

Asclepiadaceae

Calotropis gigantea (L.) Ait. f.
C. procera (Ait.) Ait. f.

Euphorbiaceae

Euphorbia cotinifolia L.
E. gymnonota Urb.
E. lactea Haw.
E. lathyris L.
E. marginata Pursh
E. milii Ch. des Moulins
E. myrsinites L.
E. tirucalli L.
Excoecaria agallocha L. var. orthostichalus Muell. Arg.
Grimmeodendron eglandulosum (A. Rich.) Urb.
Hippomane mancinella L.
Pedilanthus tithymaloides (L.) Poit.
Sapium hippomane G.F.W. Mey.

S. laurocerasus Desf.
Stillingia sylvatica Gard.
Synadenium grantii Hook. f.

Ranunculaceae

Frangipani

Crown Flower
Algodón de Seda

Poison Spurge, Carrasco

Candelabra Cactus
Caper Spurge, Mole Plant
Snow-on-the-Mountain
Crown-of-Thorns
Creeping Spurge
Pencil Cactus
Blinding Tree
Poison Bush
Beach Apple, Manzanillo
Slipper Flower

Hinchahuevos
Queen’s Delight
African Milkbush

Caltha palustris L.
Clematis species (e.g., C. virginiana L.) Pulsatilla patens

Mill. (= Anemone patens L.)

Ranunculus species (e.g., R. acris L.)

Pasque Flower
Marsh Marigold
Virgin’s Bower
Buttercup, Crowfoot

Thymelaeaceae

Daphne mezereum L.
Dirca palustris L.

Daphne
Leatherwood, Wicopy

related  urushiol-like  compounds  from  diverse  sources  [e.g., from  mango
(Mangifera indica) or cashew nut (Anacardium occidentale)] produce identical
reactions in patients sensitized to urushiol.

Diagnosis  includes  the  use  of patch  testing, in  which  a  single  or  several
known  allergens  are  applied  to  the  skin  and  a  reaction  is  sought  and  is 

Plant-Induced Dermatitis (Phytodermatitis)

45

TABLE 8. Anacardiaceae Producing Allergic Contact Dermatitis
Botanical name
Anacardium occidentale L.
Comocladia species (e.g., C. dodonaea (L.) Urban)
Cotinus coggygria Scop. (= Rhus cotinus L.)
Mangifera indica L.
Metopium toxiferum (L.) Krug & Urban
Schinus terebinthifolius Raddi
Toxicodendron diversilobum (Torr. & A. Gray) Greene  Western Poison Oak

Common name
Cashew, Marañón
Guao
Smoke Tree
Mango
Poisonwood, Cedro Prieto
Brazilian Pepper Tree, Florida Holly

(= Rhus diversiloba Torr. & A. Gray)

T. pubescens P. Mill. (= T. toxicarium (Salisb.) Gillis;

Rhus toxicodendron L.; R. quercifolia (Michx.) 
Steudel)

T. radicans (L.) Kuntze (=Rhus radicans L.)
T. rydbergii (Small) Greene
T. vernix (L.) Kuntze (= Rhus vernix L.)

Poison Ivy
Western Poison Ivy
Eastern Poison Oak

Poison Sumac

generally  conﬁrmatory. Although  more  advanced  testing  is  available, this  is  a
common  initial  screen  for  contact  allergens. Occasionally, irritant  dermatitis
may result and be misinterpreted as ACD, so expert interpretation is needed.
The risk of patch screening by this method is that sensitization to any of the
tested  compounds  may  occur  just  from  the  testing  alone, so  often  the  most
strongly sensitizing plants are excluded from testing.

The primary therapy, of course, is avoidance of the known allergen. Because
this is difﬁcult or impossible in some situations, the use of barrier protection
may  provide  a  sufﬁcient  impediment  to  dermal  exposure. Barriers  include 
the use of clothing or of barrier creams that can be applied if an exposure is
anticipated. Treatment  of the ACD  once  it  has  occurred  is  generally  sympto-
matic, with  the  use  of analgesics, antipruritic  medications  (e.g., hydroxyzine,
diphenydramine), occasionally  corticosteroids  (generally  topically  applied),
and rarely immune modulating agents (e.g., tacrolimus ointment). Desensiti-
zation  may  be  attempted  for  patients  with  severe  reactions  or  unavoidable 
exposures.

Phototoxins
This  is  a  relatively  uncommon  clinical  entity, in  which  certain  compounds
increase the sensitivity of the skin (photodermatitis) to ultraviolet light (e.g.,

46

Plant-Induced Dermatitis (Phytodermatitis)

TABLE 9. Representative Plants Producing Phytophotodermatitis
Botanical name
Compositae (Asteraceae)
Achillea millefolium L.
Anthemis cotula L.

Common name

Yarrow, Milfoil, Milenrama
Dog Fennel, Mayweed

Moraceae

Ficus carica L.
F. pumila L.

Rosaceae

Agrimonia eupatoria L.

Rutaceae

Citrus aurantiifolia (Christm.) Swingle
Dictamnus albus L.
Pelea anisata H. Mann
Ruta graveolens L.

Umbelliferae (Apiaceae)

Ammi majus L.
Anthriscus sylvestris (L.) Hofmann
Daucus carota L. var. carota
Daucus carota var. sativus Hoffm.
Heracleum lanatum Michx.
H. mantegazzianum Sommier & Levier
H. sphondylium L.
Pastinaca sativa L.

Fig
Creeping Fig, Creeping Rubber
Plant

Agrimony

Lime
Gas Plant, Burning Bush
Mokihana
Rue, Ruda

Bishop’s Weed

Queen Anne’s Lace, Wild Carrot
Carrot
Cow Parsnip
Giant Hogweed, Wild Rhubarb
Cow Parsnip
Parsnip

sunlight)  (Table  9). Classically, psoralen, a  furocoumarin  derived  from  celery
and other plants, enters the skin either directly by contact or via the systemic
circulation following ingestion. In the skin, the psoralen is activated by sunlight
to  produce  oxidant  skin  damage, which  manifests  as  burning, erythematous
skin in sun-exposed areas, which may blister severely (i.e., sunburn). Interest-
ingly, psoralens  may  be  administered  therapeutically  to  patients  with  dermal 
disorders such as psoriasis to increase the sensitivity of the skin to therapeutic
ultraviolet light.

Pseudophytodermatitides
Given  the  ubiquity  of plants  and  the  constant  interaction  of humans  with
plants, many dermatological disorders are often attributed to a contemporane-
ous plant exposure. However, mimics of plant dermatitis are common and may
be  missed  due  to  the  often-simultaneous  nature  of the  two  exposures. For
example, pesticides, fungicides, insects, and soil products may each induce der-
matitis  that  is  often  indistinguishable  from  one  of the  foregoing  syndromes.

Plant-Induced Dermatitis (Phytodermatitis)

47

Without  intense  investigation  or  advanced  medical  testing, this  link  may  be
missed  and  the  patient  advised  incorrectly  to  avoid  a  certain  plant  exposure.
More consequentially, the patient may not be aware of the dermatitis trigger.
The best method by which to distinguish pseudophytodermatitis from phyto-
dermatitis is by having the necessary clinical suspicion and attentiveness to the
exposure. Even then, this link is often difﬁcult to make.

SECTION 4.

Gastrointestinal
Decontamination

49

Gastrointestinal  (GI)  decontamination  is  the  use  of medical  methods  to
decrease absorption of ingested toxins. Not long ago, it was widely believed that
the proper initial approach to the management of all patients with toxic expo-
sures  included  an  aggressive  attempt  at  gastrointestinal  decontamination. Its
widespread use was based on the assumption that these methods were effective
at toxin removal and that they improved patient outcomes. Despite the fact that,
for most toxins, until the toxin is absorbed into the body it is not “poisonous,”
it  has  been  quite  difﬁcult  to  prove  that  preventing  absorption  improves
outcome.

Over the past decade, with the publication of several studies of the efﬁcacy
of GI decontamination for poisonings in general, it has become clear that what
was not adequately considered previously was the risk of the decontamination
procedure  itself. That  is, if a  type  of procedure  harms  more  patients  than  it
helps, then  that  procedure  should  not  generally  be  employed. An  even  more
reﬁned approach would take into consideration the individual patient; that is,
if a given procedure is more likely to harm rather than help a given patient, then
it  should  not  be  utilized  for  that  patient. Fortunately, the  risk  of all  gastro-
intestinal decontamination procedures is quite small, but it is this very fact that
had obscured their potential for harm; that is, to ﬁnd a small risk of harm to a
population, very large numbers of patients need to be studied. The vast major-
ity of plant exposures are to nontoxic plants or to nontoxic amounts of poten-
tially toxic plants. However, to optimize outcome, as the risk of harm or death
from a poisoning rises, the acceptable risk from a gastrointestinal decontami-
nation becomes larger.

This new concept places an unseen burden on those at the interface of tox-
icology and medicine, including botanists and physicians, to better understand
the  risks  truly  associated  with  any  speciﬁc  type  of plant  exposure. Realize 
that the operative word here is “exposure,” because most cases discussed with
Poison Control Centers and faced by emergency physicians and other clinicians
are  not  actually  poisonings  but  rather  “potential  poisonings.” That  is, it  is
common, particularly  in  children, that  either  the  ingestion  of the  plant  did 
not actually occur or that if it did occur it was in a subtoxic quantity. Thus, the
perceived risk of harm from the poison must be tempered by the risk that the
exposure was consequential, and both balanced against the risk of harm from
51

52

Gastrointestinal Decontamination

the  therapy. Because  there  are  not  very  large  numbers  of plant-poisoned
patients, particularly those poisoned by any single type of plant, determination
of the risk of most plants has been elusive.

Described  next  is  a  rational  approach  to  the  initial  management  of
patients  with  plant  poisonings, speciﬁcally  gastrointestinal  decontamination.
The remainder of the book contains details concerning the known and assumed
risks associated with exposure to the various plants.

Syrup of Ipecac
There are few circumstances in which the induction of emesis (vomiting) is the
preferred method of gastrointestinal decontamination. Depending on the plant
ingested and the time since exposure, syrup of ipecac may be able to evacuate
a substantial amount of the toxin before its absorption into the systemic circu-
lation. In the interest of preventing iatrogenic harm, no patient who has ingested
an irritant plant should receive ipecac, as it is likely that the irritated esophagus
and  oral  cavity  are  likely  to  be  reinjured  with  vomiting. The  speciﬁc  circum-
stance  in  which  ipecac  may  be  useful  is  when  a  prolonged  transport  time  to
healthcare coupled with a very recent time of ingestion (within 15 minutes) is
expected for a patient who has likely ingested a toxic quantity of a poisonous
plant. Discussion with a Poison Control Center or knowledgeable physician is
probably most appropriate before administration. Ipecac is unlikely to be nec-
essary for plant-poisoned patients once they are in the hospital, although there
may be rare exceptions. The availability of syrup of ipecac has been dramati-
cally reduced over the past few years, making it less likely that it will be used in
most circumstances.

Orogastric Lavage
Orogastric lavage involves the insertion of a tube through the mouth or nose
into  the  stomach  to  evacuate  the  stomach  contents  (“pump  the  stomach”).
Water is then instilled through the tube and removed several times to “wash”
the stomach free of its contents. Depending on the plant ingested and the time
since exposure, orogastric lavage may be able to evacuate a substantial amount
of the  toxin  before  its  absorption  into  the  systemic  circulation. However,
because orogastric lavage is not without risk of complication (e.g., esophageal
injury, pulmonary  aspiration), the  use  of this  technique  should  be  limited  to
patients who have ingested a toxic plant that is likely to carry signiﬁcant con-
sequences. In general, performance of this technique is limited to trained hos-
pital personnel and should, in most cases, be done in consultation with a Poison
Control Center or medical toxicologist.

Gastrointestinal Decontamination

53

Activated Charcoal
Certain patients should receive oral activated charcoal. This substance is capable
of adsorbing  many  diverse  toxins  to  its  porous  surface  and  can  prevent  the
absorption of toxins into the body. Clearly, the ability of activated charcoal to
adsorb the vast majority of plant-derived toxins is poorly studied (and unlikely
to be studied in the near future). However, based on current understanding of
the  adsorption  characteristics  of activated  charcoal  and  the  physicochemical
properties  of many  plant  toxins  (e.g., small  molecular  weight, uncharged),
there is likely to be some beneﬁt provided to most patients. This, coupled with
a low risk of side effects (e.g., pulmonary aspiration) makes oral activated char-
coal  the  method  of choice  for  most  poisoned  patients  who  require  gastro-
intestinal  decontamination. Oral  activated  charcoal  should  not  be  given  to
patients  who  have  ingested  injurious  plant  substances, those  likely  to  vomit 
(particularly if they are likely to lose consciousness or seize), or those who are
not presumed to have ingested a consequential quantity of a toxic plant (i.e., as
punishment).

Whole Bowel Irrigation
Because many plant-borne toxins are ingested in an impervious seed, it is likely
that  there  will  be  a  delay  to  the  release  of the  toxic  compound. In  many  of
these  cases, and  perhaps  in  several  other  situations, the  use  of whole-bowel 
irrigation with polyethylene glycol electrolyte  solution may be able  to “ﬂush”
the  entire  gastrointestinal  tract  free  of plant  material  before  the  toxin  release
occurs. As  with  the  other  gastrointestinal  decontamination  techniques, there 
are  few  or  no  plant-speciﬁc  studies  of the  utility  or  safety  of this  technique.
However, based  on  the  known  efﬁcacy  and  general  safety  in  other  poisoned
patients, whole-bowel irrigation should be considered in patients who ingest a
signiﬁcant amount of a plant likely to be slowly released from its vehicle (typ-
ically  its  seed). Oral  activated  charcoal  administered  concomitantly  is  often 
appropriate.

Summary
Despite  the  lack  of evidence  proving  a  beneﬁt, consideration  of the  need  for 
a  gastrointestinal  decontamination  procedure  is  indicated  for  all  poisoned
patients. Among the factors that inﬂuence the choice of procedure is likelihood
of and time since ingestion, quantity and nature of the plant and its toxin, the
clinical  characteristics  of the  patient, and  the  risk–beneﬁt  relationship  of the
gastrointestinal  decontamination  method. Each  case  needs  to  be  individually
considered. Consultation  with  a  medical  toxicologist, Poison  Control  Center,
and/or a botanist is often necessary.

54

Gastrointestinal Decontamination

References
American Academy of Clinical Toxicology; European Association of Poisons Centres and
Clinical Toxicologists. Position paper: Cathartics. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 2004;42(2):243–253.
American Academy of Clinical Toxicology; European Association of Poisons Centres and
Clinical Toxicologists. Position paper: Whole bowel irrigation. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 2004;
42(2):843–854.
American Academy of Clinical Toxicology; European Association of Poisons Centres and
Clinical Toxicologists. Position paper: Gastric lavage. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 2004;42(2):
933–943.
American Academy of Clinical Toxicology; European Association of Poisons Centres and
Clinical Toxicologists. Position paper: Ipecac syrup. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 2004;42(2):
133–143.
American Academy of Clinical Toxicology; European Association of Poisons Centres and
Clinical Toxicologists. Position paper: Single-dose activated charcoal. Clin Toxicol (Phila)
2005;43(2):61–87.
American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Injury, Violence, and Poison Prevention.
Poison treatment in the home. American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Injury,
Violence, and Poison Prevention. Pediatrics 2003;112(5):1182–1185.
Christophersen ABJ, Hoegberg LCG. Techniques used to prevent gastrointestinal absorption.
In: Goldfrank LR, Hoffman RS, Howland MA, Lewin NA, Nelson LS. Goldfrank’s Toxicologic
Emergencies, 8th Edition. McGraw-Hill. Hew York, NY. 2006. p. 109–123.
de Silva HA, Fonseka MM, Pathmeswaran A, et al. Multiple-dose activated charcoal for
treatment of yellow oleander poisoning: A single-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled
trial. Lancet 2003;361:1935–1938.
Manoguerra AS, Cobaugh DJ. Guidelines for the Management of Poisoning Consensus
Panel. Guideline on the use of ipecac syrup in the out-of-hospital management of ingested
poisons. Clin Toxicol (Phila) 2005;43(1):1–10.

SECTION 5.

Individual Plants

55

Abrus

57

Abrus precatorius, close-up of seed pod (above)

Abrus precatorius, necklace made from seeds
(smaller seeds are of this species, larger seeds are
from an unidentiﬁed species) (below)

Abrus precatorius L.
Family: Leguminosae 

(Fabaceae)

Common Names: Bead Vine,
Black Eyed Susan,Coral Bead
Plant, Crab’s  Eyes, Graines
d’Église,
Indian  Licorice,
Kolales  Halomtano, Jequir-
ity/Jequirty  Bean,
Jumbee
Beads, Jumbi  Beeds, Jumbo
Beads, Licorice Vine, Liane á
Réglisse, Love  Bead, Love
Pea, Ojo  de  Pájaro, Ojo  de
Cangrejo, Peonia, Precatory
Bean,Prayer Beads,Pukiawe-
Lei, Red Bead Vine, Réglisse,
Rosary  Pea,
Semilla  de
Culebra,
Seminole  Bead,
Weather Plant,Weather Vine,
Wild Licorice

leaves 

short 

generally 

Description: The rosary pea
is  a  slender, twining  vine
with  a  woody  base. It  is 
supported 
on
other plants or a fence. The
have
compound 
numerous 
leaﬂets,
which  are  sensitive  to  light
and  droop  at  night  and  on
cloudy days. The inconspic-
uous  ﬂowers  are  a  pale
reddish-purple. The  fruit, a
pea-shaped  pod  about  1.5
inches long, splits open as it
dries  to  reveal  three  to  ﬁve
hard-coated, brilliant  scar-
let, pea-sized  seeds  with  a
small  enamel-black  spot  at
attachment
the  point  of

58

Abrus

(hilum). This hilar spot serves to distinguish them from look-alike seeds from
Mexican vines of the genus Rhynchosia, in which the black and red colors are
reversed.

Distribution: This weed is common throughout the tropics and subtropics. The
seeds  are  used  in  jewelry, in  handicrafts, and  as  good-luck  charms. Tourists,
usually unaware of the toxicity of the seeds, often import them into the United
States as keepsakes and gifts.

Toxic Part: The toxin is contained within the hard, water-impermeable coat of the
seeds. The toxin is not released unless the seed is chewed and digested or the seed
coat is otherwise broken (for example, when the seeds are pierced and threaded
on a string as in a necklace).

Toxin: Abrin, a plant lectin (toxalbumin) related to ricin, inhibits cellular protein
synthesis and may be extremely toxic.

Clinical Findings: Ingested seeds generally remain intact as they pass through
the gastrointestinal tract without releasing any toxin and causing any toxicity.
However, if the seeds are chewed, pulverized, or digested (i.e., if passage through
the  gastrointestinal  tract  is  delayed), then  the  toxin  is  absorbed  by  intestinal
cells, causing mild to severe gastrointestinal toxicity. Symptoms depend upon
the amount of toxin exposure and include nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramp-
ing, diarrhea, and  dehydration. Variations  in  the  severity  of toxicity  may  be
related to the degree to which the seeds are ground or chewed before ingestion.
Parenteral administration (such as by injection or inhalation), or perhaps large
ingestion, may produce life-threatening systemic ﬁndings, including multisys-
tem organ failure, even with small exposures.

Management: Ingestion of intact seeds does not cause toxicity in the majority
of cases and requires no therapy. Cases associated with gastrointestinal symp-
tomatology need to be assessed for signs of dehydration and electrolyte abnor-
malities. Activated  charcoal  should  be  administered. Intravenous  hydration,
antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement may be necessary in severe cases, par-
ticularly those involving children. Consultation with a Poison Control Center
should be considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Toxalbumins,” p. 33.

References
Benson S, Olsnes S, Pihl A. On the mechanism of protein-synthesis inhibition by abrin and
ricin. Eur J Bioochem 1975;58:573–580.
Davies JH. Abrus precatorius (rosary pea): The most common lethal plant poison. J Fla Med
Assoc 1978;65:188–191.
Dickers KJ, Bradberry SM, Rice P, Grifﬁths GD, Vale JA. Abrin poisoning. Toxicol Rev
2003;22:137–142.
Fernando C. Poisoning due to Abrus precatorius (jequirity bean). Anaesthesia
2001;56:1178–1180.

Acokanthera

59

Hart M. Hazards to health: jequirty-bean poisoning. N Engl J Med 1963;269:885–886.
Kinamore PA. Abrus and Ricinus ingestion: Management of three cases. Clin Toxicol 1980;
17:401–405.
Olsnes S. The history of ricin, abrin and related toxins. Toxicol 2004;44:361–370.

Acokanthera species
Family: Apocynaceae
Acokanthera longiﬂora Stapf
Acokanthera oblongifolia (Hochst.) Codd (=A. spectabilis (Sond.) Hook. f.)
Acokanthera oppositifolia (Lam.) Codd
Acokanthera oblongifolia

Common Names: Bushman’s Poison, Poison Bush, Poison Tree; Wintersweet
(A. oblongifolia)

Description: These dense evergreen shrubs or small trees are native to Africa.
The leaves are large, leathery, and have smooth edges. The fragrant ﬂowers are
tubular with a ﬂat ﬂare at the mouth and are borne in clusters. The fruit resem-
bles a small, ellipsoidal plum and turns reddish to purple-black at maturity; it

Acokanthera oppositifolia (left)

Acokanthera oppositifolia, close-up of
branch showing opposite leaves (below)

60

Aconitum

contains  one  to  two  seeds. Injury  to  the  plant  causes  exudation  of copious
amounts of white latex, as is characteristic of this plant family.

Distribution: These plants are grown fairly commonly, often as hedges in Cali-
fornia, to a much lesser extent in Florida and Hawaii, and as a greenhouse plant
elsewhere.

Toxic Part: The fruit pulp contains only traces of toxin and, in some species, is
considered edible. The seeds contain the greatest concentration, but the toxin
is distributed in substantial amounts throughout the plant, including the wood.

Toxin: Cardioactive steroids resembling digitalis.

Clinical Findings: Poisoning may cause clinical ﬁndings typical of cardioactive
steroids. Toxicity  has  a  variable  latent  period  that  depends  on  the  quantity
ingested. Dysrhythmias are usually expressed as sinus bradycardia, premature
ventricular  contractions, atrioventricular  conduction  defects, or  ventricular
tachydysrhythmias. Hyperkalemia, if present, may be an indicator of toxicity.

Management: Gastrointestinal  decontamination  as  appropriate, serial  electro-
cardiograms, and  serum  potassium  determinations  should  be  performed. If
serious cardioactive steroid toxicity is considered, digoxin-speciﬁc Fab should be
administered. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be considered.
See “Poisoning by Plants with Cardioactive Steroids/Cardiac Glycosides,” p. 24.

References
Kingston DG, Reichstein T. Cytotoxic cardenolides from Acokanthera longiﬂora Stapf. and
related species. J Pharm Sci 1974;63:462–464.
Menziani E, Sancin P, Pertusato G. On the determination of ouabain in Acokanthera
abyssinica seeds. Boll Chim Farm 1964;103:825–828.
Omino EA, Kokwaro JO. Ethnobotany of Apocynaceae species in Kenya. J Ethnopharmacol
1993;40:167–180.
Radford DJ, Gillies AD, Hinds JA, Duffy P. Naturally occurring cardiac glycosides. Med J
Aust 1986;144:540–544.

Aconitum species
Family: Ranunculaceae
Aconitum columbianum Nutt.
Aconitum napellus L.
Aconitum reclinatum Gray
Aconitum uncinatum L.

Common  Names: Aconite, Friar’s  Cap, Helmet  Flower, Monkshood, Soldier’s
Cap, Trailing Monkshood, Wild Monkshood, Wolfsbane

Description: These perennial plants are usually erect, sometimes branched, 2 to
6 feet in height, and have tuberous roots. They resemble delphiniums. The char-

Aconitum

61

acteristic helmet-shaped ﬂowers grow in a raceme at the top of the stalk and
appear in summer or autumn. The ﬂowers are usually blue but may be white,
pink, or ﬂesh toned. The dried seedpods contain numerous tiny seeds. Aconi-
tum napellus is the commonly cultivated monkshood.

Distribution: North America, Eurasia. Aconitum columbianum grows in mon-
taine meadows and open woods in the Western United States, north to British
Columba and Alaska. Aconitum napellus is cultivated and naturalized in New
York, Ontario, and Newfoundland. Aconitum reclinatum is found in woods and
marshes  from  Pennsylvania  to  West  Virginia, Virginia, North  Carolina, and
Georgia. Aconitum uncinatum is found in woods from Pennsylvania to Ohio,
Indiana, North Carolina, Georgia, and Tennessee.

Toxic Part: The whole plant is poisonous, especially the leaves and roots.

Toxin: Aconitine and related alkaloids, sodium channel activators.

Clinical Findings: Exposures are relatively uncommon. However, these plants are
utilized in some herbal products (e.g., chuanwu, caowu, fuzi). Symptoms are pre-
dominantly neurological and cardiac. There is transient burning in the mouth
after ingestion, followed after several hours by increased salivation, vomiting,
diarrhea, and a tingling sensation in the skin (paresthesia). The patient may com-
plain of headache, muscular weakness, and dimness of vision. Bradycardia and
other cardiac dysrhythmias can be associated with severe blood pressure abnor-
malities. Coma may develop, and convulsions may be a terminal event.

Aconitum napellus (left)

Aconitum napellus, close-up of ﬂowers (below)

62

Actaea

Management: Fluid replacement should be instituted with respiratory support
if indicated. Heart rhythm and blood pressure should be monitored and treated
with appropriate medications and supportive care. Recovery is generally com-
plete  within  24  hours. Consultation  with  a  Poison  Control  Center  should  be
strongly considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Sodium Channel Activators,”
p. 32.

References
Chan TYK, Tomlinson B, Critchley JAJH. Aconitine poisoning following the ingestion of
Chinese herbal medicine: A report of eight cases. Aust N Z J Med 1993;23:268–271.
Lin CC, Chan TY, Deng JF. Clinical features and management of herb-induced aconitine
poisoning. Ann Emerg Med 2004;43:574–579.
Martens PR, Vandevelde K. A near lethal case of combined strychnine and aconitine
poisoning. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1993;31:133–138.
Tai YT, But PPH, Young K, et al. Cardiotoxicity after accidental herb-induced aconite
poisoning. Lancet 1992;34:1254–1256.

Actaea species
Family: Ranunculaceae
Actaea pachypoda Elliott (=Actaea alba (L.) Mill.)
Actaea rubra (Aiton) Willd.
Actaea spicata L.

Common Names: Baneberry, Cohosh, Dolls Eyes, Herb-Christopher, Necklace
Weed, Poison de Couleuvre, Pain de Couleuvre, Snakeberry, White Baneberry,
White Cohosh

Description: The baneberries are perennial herbs that are 1 to 2 feet in height
with large compound leaves. Small white ﬂowers form in terminal racemes in
the spring. Berry-like fruit forms in the summer or early autumn; their color
depends  upon  the  species  (Actaea  pachypoda, white; A. rubra, red; A. spicata,
purplish-black).

Distribution: Actaea species grow throughout the north temperate zone: Actaea
pachypoda, Nova Scotia to Georgia west to Minnesota and Missouri; A. rubra,
Alaska to California east through Canada and the United States to the Atlantic
and south through the Rockies to New Mexico; A. spicata, only in cultivation.

Toxic Part: Only the fruit and roots are poisonous.

Toxin: Not fully identiﬁed.

Clinical Findings: The juice exerts a direct irritant and vesicant action on the
skin and mucous membranes. After ingestion, blistering and ulceration of the
mucous  membranes  associated  with  salivation  can  occur. Nausea, vomiting,
abdominal cramping, and diarrhea may occur.

Actaea

63

Actaea pachypoda, mature fruit

Actaea spicata, fruit

Management: The irritant effect of the toxin usually limits the amount ingested.
Intravenous hydration, antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement may be neces-
sary for patients with severe gastrointestinal symptoms, particularly in children.
Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See “Poison-
ing by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

Actaea rubra, close-up of fruit

Actaea rubra

64

Adenium

References
Bacon A. An experiment with the fruit of red baneberry. Rhodora 1903;5:77–79.
Hegnauer R. Chemotaxonomie der Pﬂanzen, eine Ubersicht uber die Verbreitung und die
systematische Bedeutung der Planzenstoffe. Birkhauser Verlag, Basel, 1962.

Adenium species
Family: Apocynaceae

Common Names: Desert Rose, Mock Azalea

Description: These shrubs or trees are 6 to 10 feet in height with swollen trunk
and  branches  and  ﬂeshy  dark  green  leaves  with  milky  sap. Bright  and  showy
funnel-form pink or purple ﬂowers cluster at the branch tips.

Distribution: Adenium are  cultivated  as  houseplants  and  may  be  grown  out-
doors in hot dry areas.

Toxic part: The whole plant is poisonous.

Toxin: Cardioactive  steroids
resembling digitalis.

Adenium sp., ﬂowering branch

Adenium sp., branch with ﬂowers and leaves

of

Clinical  Findings: There  are
no  adequately  documented
human poisonings, and clin-
ical descriptions are derived
primarily  from  animal  re-
ports. Substantial  ingestion
may lead to toxicity. Poison-
ing  would  be  expected  to
produce  clinical  ﬁndings
typical 
cardioactive
steroids. Toxicity has a vari-
able 
that
depends  on  the  quantity 
ingested. Dysrhythmias  are
usually  expressed  as  sinus
bradycardia, premature ven-
tricular  contractions, atrio-
ventricular  conduction  de-
fects, or  ventricular  tach-
ydysrhythmias. Hyperkale-
mia, if present, may  be  an
indicator of toxicity.

latent  period 

Adonis

65

Management: Gastrointestinal  decontamination  as  appropriate, serial  electro-
cardiograms, and  serum  potassium  determinations  should  be  performed. If
serious cardioactive steroid toxicity is considered, digoxin-speciﬁc Fab should be
administered. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be considered.
See “Poisoning by Plants with Cardioactive Steroids/Cardiac Glycosides,” p. 24.

References
Omino EA, Kokwaro JO. Ethnobotany of Apocynaceae species in Kenya. J Ethnopharmacol
1993;40:167–180.
Yamauchi T, Abe F. Cardiac glycosides and pregnanes from Adenium obesum: studies on the
constituents of Adenium. I. Chem Pharm Bull 1990;38:669–672.

Adonis species
Family: Ranunculaceae
Adonis aestivalis L.
Adonis amurensis Regel and

Radde

Adonis annua L.
Adonis vernalis L.

Common  Names: Flor  de
Adonis, Gota  de  Sangre,
Pheasant’s  Eye, Red  Moro-
cco

Description: These 
small
herbaceous perennial plants
have  feathery  leaves, thick
roots,
conspicuous
yellow  or  crimson  spring
ﬂowers that are 2 to 3 inches
across on short stems.

and 

in 

Distribution: Adonis species
are found primarily in culti-
vation, usually 
rock
gardens, in  the  north  tem-
perate  zones  of the  United
States. They are alpine plants
from  southern  Europe, Asia
Minor, and Asia.

Toxic  Part: The  whole  plant
is poisonous.

Adonis amurensis (above)

Adonis amurensis, close-up of ﬂower (below)

66

Aesculus

Toxin: Cardioactive  steroids
resembling digitalis.

Clinical  Findings: There  are
no  adequately  documented
human  poisonings,
and 
clinical  descriptions 
are
derived 
from
animal  reports. Substantial
ingestion may lead to toxic-
ity. Poisoning  would  be  ex-
pected  to  produce  clinical
Adonis annua
ﬁndings typical of cardioac-
tive steroids. Toxicity has a variable latent period that depends on the quantity
ingested. Dysrhythmias are usually expressed as sinus bradycardia, premature
ventricular  contractions, atrioventricular  conduction  defects, or  ventricular
tachydysrhythmias. Hyperkalemia, if present, may be an indicator of toxicity.

primarily 

Management: Gastrointestinal decontamination as appropriate, serial electrocar-
diograms, and serum potassium determinations should be performed. If serious
cardioactive steroid toxicity is considered, digoxin-speciﬁc Fab should be admin-
istered. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See
“Poisoning by Plants with Cardioactive Steroids/Cardiac Glycosides,” p. 24.

References
Cheung K, Hinds JA, Duffy P. Detection of poisoning by plant-origin cardiac glycoside with
the Abbott TDx analyzer. Clin Chem 1989;35:295–297.
Davies RL. Whyte PB. Adonis microcarpa (pheasant’s eye) toxicity in pigs fed ﬁeld pea
screenings. Aust Vet J 1989;66:141–143.

Aesculus species
Family: Hippocastanaceae
Aesculus californica (Spach) Nutt.
Aesculus × carnea Hayne
Aesculus ﬂava Sol. (=A. octandra Marsh)
Aesculus glabra Willd.
Aesculus hippocastanum L.
Aesculus pavia L.
Aesculus sylvatica Bartr.

Common Names: Buckeye, Bongay, Conquerors, Fish Poison, Horse Chestnut,
Marronnier, Marronnier d’Inde

Description: There  are  about  13  species  of Aesculus; they  are  large  trees  or
shrubs. These plants have palmately compound leaves, usually with ﬁve leaﬂets

Aesculus

67

and showy clusters of ﬂowers, which may be white, white blotched with red and
yellow, pink, yellow and red, or red. The seedpod is leathery and may be smooth
or warty. The common name, buckeye, is derived from the seed, which is glossy
brown with a white scar.

Distribution: These plants occur primarily in the central and eastern temperate
zone to the Gulf Coast and California, southern Ontario, southwestern Quebec,
and Newfoundland.

Toxic  Part: The  seeds  and  twigs  are  poisonous. People  unfamiliar  with  the 
toxicity of these species could ingest the seeds, thinking them a form of edible
chestnut.

Toxin: Aescin, a complex mixture of saponins.

Clinical Findings: Most ingestions result in little or no toxicity. The saponins are
poorly  absorbed, but  with  large  exposures, gastrointestinal  effects  including
nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramping, and diarrhea may occur. Allergic sen-
sitization to this plant is common and can cause severe allergic reactions.

Management: If severe gastrointestinal symptoms occur, intravenous hydration,
antiemetics, and  electrolyte  replacement  may  be  necessary  for  patients  with
severe gastrointestinal symptoms, particularly in children. Consultation with a
Poison  Control  Center  should  be  considered. See “Poisoning  by  Plants  with 
Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

Aesculus californica, ﬂower

Aesculus glabra

68

Aethusa

Aesculus hippocastanum

Aesculus hippocastanum, leaves and seeds

References
Jaspersen-Schib R, Theus L, Guirguis-Oeschger M, et al. Serious plant poisonings in
Switzerland 1966–1994. Case analysis from the Swiss Toxicology Information Center.
Schweiz Med Wochenschr 1996;126:1085–1098.
Matyunas N, Krenzelok E, Jacobsen T, et al. Horse chestnut (Aesculus spp.) ingestion in the
United States 1985–1994. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1997;35:527–528.
Oschmann R, Biber A, Lang F, et al. Pharmacokinetics of beta-escin after administration of
different Aesculus extract-containing formulations. Pharmazie 1996;51:577–581.
Popp W, Horak F, Jager S, et al. Horse chestnut (Aesculus hippocastanum) pollen: A Frequent
cause of allergic sensitization in urban children. Allergy 1992;47:380–383.
Zhang Z, Koike K, Jia Z, Nikaido T, Guo D, Zheng J. New saponins from the seeds of
Aesculus chinensis. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo) 1999;47:1515–1520.

Aethusa cynapium L.
Family: Umbelliferae (Apiaceae)

Common Names: Dog  Parsley, Dog  Poison, False  Parsley, Fool’s  Cicely, Fool’s
Parsley, Lesser Hemlock, Small Hemlock

Aethusa

69

Description: This carrot-like
plant is 8 to 24 inches high.
The  leaves  resemble  parsley
but  have  a  glossy  shine  on
both  sides  and  an  unpleas-
ant  garlic-like  odor. The
white  ﬂowers  and  seedpods
are  inconspicuous  and  are
formed on the stem tips. As
the common name suggests,
this plant may be consumed
if mistaken for parsley.

is 
Distribution: Aethusa
from  Europe
naturalized 
and  grows  in  waste  places 
in 
the  extreme  northern
United States  from  Min-
nesota  to  Maine  and  south
to  Delaware, Pennsylvania,
and  Ohio, and  in  south-
western  British  Columbia,
Ontario, Quebec, New
Brunswick, and Nova Scotia.

Toxic  Part: The  whole  plant
is poisonous.

Toxin: Unsaturated aliphatic
alcohols (e.g., aethusanol A)
closely  related  to  cicutoxin
(from  Cicuta species)  and
traces of coniine.

Aethusa cynapium

Clinical  Findings: Ingestion  can  cause  nausea, vomiting, diaphoresis, and
headache. Toxicity  resembles  poisoning  from  cicutoxin  (see  Cicuta species).
However, the concentration of toxin is insufﬁcient to cause serious effects in most
cases. If poisoning occurs, onset of effect is rapid, usually within 1 hour of inges-
tion. Symptoms include nausea, vomiting, salivation, and trismus. Generalized
seizures also may occur. Death may occur if seizures do not terminate.

Management: If toxicity develops, supportive care—including airway manage-
ment and protection against rhabdomyolysis and associated complications (e.g.,
electrolyte abnormalities and renal insufﬁciency)—is the mainstay of therapy.
Rapidly  acting  anticonvulsants  (i.e., diazepam  or  lorazepam)  for  persistent
seizures  may  be  needed. Consultation  with  a  Poison  Control  Center  should 

70

Aleurites

be  considered. See “Poisoning  by  Plants  with  Convulsive  Poisons  (Seizures),”
p. 25.

References
Bohlmann F, Mannhard HJ. Polyenes from Aethusa cynapium L. Chem Ber 1960;93:981–987.
Teuscher E, Greger H, Adrian V. Investigation of the toxicity of Aethusa cynapium L.
(Hundspetersilie). Pharmazie 1990;45:537–538.

Aleurites species
Family: Euphorbiaceae
Aleurites cordata (Thunb.) Steud.
Aleurites fordii Hemsl.
Aleurites moluccana (L.) Willd.
Aleurites montana (Lour.) E.H. Wilson
Aleurites trisperma Blanco

Aleurites moluccana, fruiting branch

Common Names:
Aleurites cordata: Japan Oil Tree
Aleurites fordii: Aceite, Chinawood Oil Tree, Tung Nut, Tung Oil Tree
Aleurites moluccana: Avellano, Candleberry, Candlenut, Country Walnut, Indian
Walnut,
Jamaican  Walnut,
Otaheite  Walnut, Kukui,
Lumbang, Nogal de la India,
Noix  de  Bancoul, Noisette
des Grands-Fonds, Noix des
Molluques, Nuez de la India,
Nuez  Nogal, Palo  de  Nuez,
Raguar
Aleurites  montana:  Mu, Mu

Oil Tree

Aleurites  trisperma:  Banu-

calad

Description: These medium-
sized  trees  have  a  milky
latex,
a  characteristic  of
this  plant  family. The  large
simple 
leaves  are  often
lobed. Flowers occur in large
clusters  and  are  white  or
white  with  red  or  orange
veins. The  fruit  of Aleurites
fordii
is  green  turning  to
the
brown  at  maturity;

Allamanda

71

capsule is 2 to 3 inches long and contains three to seven hard seeds with a white
ﬂesh. The  unhulled  seed  resembles  an  unshelled  hickory  nut; the  hulled  seed
looks like a chestnut.

Distribution: Aleurites species grow in the West Indies, states bordering the Gulf
of Mexico, Hawaii, and Guam.

Toxic Part: The whole plant is poisonous, but seeds are involved most often in
human exposures.

Toxin: A derivative of phorbol, an irritant.

Clinical  Findings: A  sensation  of discomfort, warmth, and  nausea  develops
shortly after ingestion. This may be followed by vomiting, abdominal cramp-
ing, diarrhea, dehydration, and electrolyte imbalance.

Management: Intravenous hydration, antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement
may be necessary for patients with severe gastrointestinal symptoms, particu-
larly  in  children. Consultation  with  a  Poison  Control  Center  should  be  con-
sidered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

References
Balthrop E, Gallagher WB, McDonald TF, Camariotes S. Tung nut poisoning. J Fla Med
Assoc 1954;40:813–820.
Lin TJ, Hsu CI, Lee KH, et al. Two outbreaks of acute Tung Nut (Aleurites fordii) poisoning.
J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1996;34:87–92.

Allamanda cathartica L.
Family: Apocynaceae

Common  Names: Allamanda, Canario, Cautiva, Flor  de  Barbero, Lani-Ali’i,
Nani-Ali’i, Yellow Allamanda

Description: This  ornamental  sprawling  shrub  or  woody  climber  has  large
yellow ﬂowers and opposite lance-shaped leaves that are 4 to 6 inches long. Alla-
manda  cathartica usually  is  propagated  by  cuttings, which  do  not  fruit. Alla-
manda neriifolia Hook., cultivated in the same geographic area, is a bush with
more diminutive leaves and ﬂowers; it frequently fruits. The stems and leaves
contain irritating latex.

Distribution: Allamanda species  are  commonly  cultivated  in  the West  Indies,
Florida, and Hawaii, and elsewhere in the tropics. In the temperate zone, it is
sometimes found as a houseplant. Allamanda cathartica was introduced from
Brazil and, as the name implies, was once used as a cathartic.

Toxic Part: Bark, leaves, fruit, seeds, and sap are poisonous.

Toxin: Plumericin, a weak gastrointestinal irritant.

72

Allium

Allamanda cathartica, close-up of ﬂowering
branch 

Allamanda cathartica

Clinical Findings: Exposure may cause abdominal cramping and diarrhea. Large
exposures may cause dehydration and electrolyte abnormalities.

Management: Most  cases  require  no  therapy. Intravenous  hydration, antie-
metics, and electrolyte replacement may be necessary for patients with severe
gastrointestinal  symptoms, particularly  in  children. Consultation  with  a 
Poison  Control  Center  should  be  considered. See “Poisoning  by  Plants  with 
Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

References
Abdel-Kader MS, Wisse J, Evans R, et al. Bioactive iridoids and a new lignan from
Allamanda cathartica and Himatanthus fallax from the Suriname rainforest. J Nat Prod
1997;60:1294–1297.

Allium species
Family: Liliaceae

Common Names:
Allium canadense L.: Wild Garlic, Ail du Canada, Meadow Garlic, Meadow Rose

Leek, Onion Tree, Wild Onion.

Allium cepa L.: ‘Aka’akai, Onion, Zongnon
Allium sativum L.: Ajo, ‘Aka’akai-pilau, Clown Treacle, Garlic, Lai, Poor Man’s

Treacle

Allium vineale L.: Field Garlic, Crow Garlic

Allium

73

Allium canadense

Allium canadense, young bulbs

Description: There are about 400 species of Allium, each with a strong-smelling
bulb when it is crushed or scraped. The plants are perennial, with long, slender
leaves that are ﬂat or tubular. Flowers are white to pink or purple. The species
listed above are most often implicated in human toxicity.

Distribution: There are many cultivated and native species of Allium through-
out the United States, including Hawaii and Alaska. Allium canadense may be
found from Minnesota to Ontario, south to Texas, east to Quebec and western
New Brunswick, and south to Florida.

Toxic Part: Bulbs, bulblets, ﬂowers, and stems are “poisonous” when consumed
in  large  quantities, but  onion  (A. cepa)  and  garlic  (A. sativum)  are  of course
grown commercially and consumed in smaller quantities for the most part with
no ill effects.

Toxin: N-Propyl sulﬁde, methyl disulﬁde, and allyl disulﬁde.

Clinical Findings: Most exposures lead to no or minimal symptoms. Substan-
tial ingestion can cause nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramping, diarrhea, and
dehydration. Platelet aggregation is inhibited, and the current practice of ingest-
ing large amounts of garlic supplements for cancer prevention and cardiovas-
cular  beneﬁts  may  lead  to  bleeding. Chronic  ingestion  of the  bulblets  may
diminish iodine uptake by the thyroid.

Management: Most  cases  require  no  therapy. Intravenous  hydration, antie-
metics, and electrolyte replacement may be necessary for patients with severe
gastrointestinal symptoms, particularly in children. Bleeding, depending on its
location, may require speciﬁc diagnostic testing and therapy. Consultation with

74

Alocasia

a Poison Control Center should be considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with
Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

References
Amagase H, Petesch BL, Matsuura H, Kasuga S, Itakura Y. Intake of garlic and its bioactive
components. J Nutr 2001;131:955S–962S.
Ariga T, Tsuj K, Seki T, Moritomo T, Yamamoto JI. Antithrombotic and antineoplastic effects
of phyto-organosulfur compounds. Biofactors 2000;13:251–255.
Le Bon AM, Siess MH. Organosulfur compounds from Allium and the chemoprevention of
cancer. Drug Metabol Drug Interact 2000;17:51–79.

Alocasia species
Family: Araceae

Common Names: Ahe Poi, ‘Ape, Cabeza de Burro, Chine Ape, Elephant’s Ear,
Malanga Cara de Chivo, Malanga de Jardín, Papao-Apaka, Papao-Atolong, Taro

Description: These  erect  perennials  have  single, long-stemmed, spearhead-
shaped leaves that are prominently veined and often varicolored. Flowers appear
on  a  spadix  subtended  by  a  greenish  spathe  similar  to  Colocasia. Individual
plants may develop from runners (rhizomes).

Distribution: Species of the genus Alocasia are popularly cultivated throughout
the United States and are hardy in tropical and subtropical areas. Tubers of some
species of Alocasia are eaten after cooking.

Alocasia cv. ‘Hilo’s Beauty’

Alocasia macrorrhiza cv. ‘Variegata’

Alocasia

75

Alocasia × amazonica

Alocasia watsoniana

Toxic Part: The leaves, stems, and tubers may be injurious.

Toxin: Raphides  of water-insoluble  calcium  oxalate  and  unveriﬁed  proteina-
ceous toxins.

Clinical  Findings: A  painful  burning  sensation  of the  lips  and  mouth  result 
from  ingestion. There  is  an  inﬂammatory  reaction, often  with  edema  and 
blistering. Hoarseness, dysphonia, and dysphagia may result.

Management: The pain and edema recede slowly without therapy. Cool liquids
or demulcents held in the mouth may bring some relief. Analgesics may be indi-
cated. The  insoluble  oxalate  in  these  plants  does  not  cause  systemic  oxalate 
poisoning. Consultation  with  a  Poison  Control  Center  should  be  considered.
See “Poisoning by Plants with Calcium Oxalate Crystals,” p. 23.

References
Chan TY, Chan LY, Tam LS, Critchley JA. Neurotoxicity following the ingestion of a Chinese
medicinal plant, Alocasia macrorrhiza. Hum Exp Toxicol 1995;14:727–728.
Franceschi VR, Nakata PA. Calcium oxalate in plants: Formation and function. Annu Rev
Plant Biol 2005;56:41–71.
Lin TJ, Hung DZ, Hu WH, Yang DY, Wu TC, Deng JF. Calcium oxalate is the main toxic
component in clinical presentations of Alocasia macrorrhiza (L.) Schott and Endl.
poisonings. Vet Hum Toxicol 1998;40:93–95.
Rauber A. Observations on the idioblasts of Dieffenbachia. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1985;
23:79–90.

76

Aloe

Aloe species
Family: Liliaceae

Common Names: Aloe, L’Aloé, Panini-’Awa’ Awa, Star Cactus, Sábila, Semper-
vivum, Sinkam Bible, Zábila, Závila

Description: There are about 250 species of Aloe, which are perennial herbs. The
leaves  usually  appear  in  compact  rosettes  and  are  ﬂeshy, thick, hard, and
pointed; they may have teeth or spines on the margins. The ﬂowers are usually
red or yellow. Seedpods split on drying.

Distribution: Aloes are cultivated extensively in the West Indies, Florida, Texas,
southern California, Hawaii, and Guam. They commonly appear as a summer
planting or houseplant. Some aloes, for example, Aloe vera (L.) Burm. f. (=A.
barbadensis Mill.), known as Barbados Aloe, Curaçao Aloe, Medicinal Aloe, or
Unguentine Cactus, are grown commercially for the cathartic glycosides in the
latex  and  for  their  mucilaginous  gel, which  is  employed  as  a  skin  moistener.
Although Aloe is sold in health food stores as an intestinal tonic, excessive oral
consumption can cause symptoms of toxicity.

Toxic Part: The latex juice within the leaves.

Toxin: Barbaloin, an anthraquinone glycoside.

Aloe speciosa, ﬂower (right)

Aloe vera (below)

Amaryllis

77

Clinical Findings: Most exposures cause minimal or no toxicity. Large exposures
may  cause  gastrointestinal  irritation. Some  references  suggest  that  aloe  can
cause nephritis, or kidney inﬂammation, although no human cases support this
purported  effect. Contact  dermatitis  and  allergic  reactions  can  occur  with 
exposure to this plant.

Management: Most cases require no therapy. In severe cases, intravenous hydra-
tion, antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement may be necessary, particularly in
children. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See
“Poisoning by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

References
Hunter D, Frumkin A. Adverse reactions to vitamin E and Aloe vera preparations after
dermabrasion and chemical peel. Cutis 1991;47:193–196.
Ishii Y, Tanizawa H, Takino Y. Studies of aloe. III. Mechanism of cathartic effect. (2). Chem
Pharm Bull (Tokyo) 1990;38:197–200.
Ishii Y, Takino Y, Toyo’oka T, Tanizawa H. Studies of aloe. VI. Cathartic effect of
isobarbaloin. Biol Pharm Bull 1998;21:1226–1227.
Spoerke DG, Elkins BR. Aloe vera—fact or quackery? Vet Hum Toxicol 1980;22:418–424.

Amaryllis species
Hippeastrum species
Family: Amaryllidaceae

Common  Names: Amaryllis (Amaryllis  species  of horticulture, except  A. bel-
ladonna L., are  species  of Hippeastrum), Azucena, Barbados  Lily, Belladonna
Lily, Cape Belladonna, Lirio, Naked Lady Lily, Saint Joseph Lily, Tararaco

Hippeastrum cv. ‘Basuto,’ close-up of
ﬂowers (left)

Hippeastrum sp., close-up of ﬂowers 
(below)

78

Anemone

Description: Amaryllis and  Hippeas-
trum have  variously  colored  ﬂowers,
but shades of red or pink with white
are  most  common. Bulbs  usually
extend  partly  above  ground. The
leaves  are  shiny,
thick, and  strap
shaped.

Distribution: These  plants  occur  as
cultivated ornamentals only. They are
extremely  popular  as  a  summer
garden  plant  in  temperate  zones  and
as a potted plant throughout the year.

Toxic Part: Bulbs are poisonous.

Toxin: Lycorine  and  related  phenan-
thridine alkaloids (see Narcissus).

Hippeastrum puniceum

Clinical  Findings: Ingestion  of small
amounts  produces  few  or  no  symptoms. Large  exposures  may  cause  nausea,
vomiting, abdominal  cramping, diarrhea, dehydration, and  electrolyte 
imbalance.

Management: Most  exposures  result  in  minimal  or  no  toxicity. Intravenous
hydration, antiemetics, and  electrolyte  replacement  may  be  necessary  for
patients with severe gastrointestinal symptoms, particularly in children. Con-
sultation with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See “Poisoning by
Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

References
Mugge C, Schablinski B, Obst K, Dopke W. Alkaloids from Hippeastrum hybrids. Pharmazie
1994;49;444–447.

Anemone species
Pulsatilla species
Family: Ranunculaceae
Anemone canadensis L.
Anemone coronaria L.
Pulsatilla patens (L.) Mill. (=A. nuttalliana DC.; A. patens L.)
Pulsatilla vulgaris Mill. (=A. pulsatilla L.)

Common Names: Anemone, April Fools, Cat’s Eyes, Gosling, Hartshorn Plant,
Lily  of the  Field, Lion’s  Beard, Nightcaps, Nimble  Weed, Pasque  Flower 
(Pulsatilla species), Prairie  Crocus, Prairie  Hen  Flower, Prairie  Smoke,
Thimbleweed, Wild Crocus, Windﬂower

Anemone

79

Anemone coronaria

Anemone canadensis

Pulsatilla patens, close-up of ﬂowers

Description: These perennial
herbs are often used in rock
gardens  because  they  are
usually no more than 1 foot
high. The  divided  ﬂowers
appear singly on the stem and
may  be  showy  yellow, red,
white, or purple. Anemone is
also sold as a cut ﬂower.

Distribution: There 
are
many species of Anemone in
Canada, Alaska, and 
the
north temperate  zone  of
the  United  States. Pulsatilla
vulgaris and P. patens are of
European origin.

Toxic  Part: The  whole  plant
is poisonous.

80

Anemone

Pulsatilla vulgaris cv. ‘Papageno’ (above)

Pulsatilla vulgaris, close-up of ﬂower (below)

Toxin: Protoanemonin, an 
irritant.

from 

Clinical  Findings: There  are
no  adequately  documented
human poisonings, and clini-
cal  descriptions  are  derived
primarily 
animal
reports.
Intense  pain  and
inﬂammation  of the  mouth
with  blistering, ulceration,
and  profuse  salivation  can
occur. Bloody  emesis  and
diarrhea  develop  in  associa-
tion  with  severe  abdominal
cramps. Central  nervous
system involvement is mani-
fested by dizziness, syncope,
and seizures.

Management:Most exposures
result in minimal or no toxic-
ity.
Intravenous  hydration,
antiemetics, and  electrolyte
replacement  may  be  neces-
sary  for  patients  with  severe
gastrointestinal 
symptoms,
particularly in children. Con-
sultation  with  a  Poison
Control  Center  should  be
considered. See “Poisoning by
Plants  with  Gastrointestinal
Toxins,”p. 28.

If seizures occur, rapidly
acting anticonvulsants, such
as 
intravenous  diazepam,
should be utilized along with
other supportive measures. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be
strongly  considered. See  “Poisoning  by  Plants  with  Convulsant  Posisons
(Seizures) p. 25.

References
Aaron TH, Muttitt EL. Vesicant dermatitis due to prairie crocus (Anemone patens L.). Arch
Dermatol 1964;90:168–171.

Anthurium

81

Turner NJ. Counter-irritant and other medicinal uses of plants in Ranunculaceae by native
peoples in British Columbia and neighbouring areas. J Ethnopharmacol 1984;11:
181–201.
Vance JC. Toxic plants of Minnesota: skin toxicity of the Prairie Crocus (Anemone patens L.).
Minn Med 1982;65:149–151.

Anthurium species
Family: Araceae

Common Names: Anthurium, Anturio, Crystal Anthurium, Flamingo  Flower,
Flamingo  Lily, Flor  de  Culebra, Hoja  Grande, Lengua  de  Vaca, Lombricero,
Oilcloth Flower, Pigtail Plant, Strap Flower, Tail Flower

Description: The most common species of Anthurium grow about 2 feet high
and  have  dark  green, heart-shaped, leathery  leaves. The  spadix  is  a  persistent
scarlet, white, or green spike, subtended by a showy spathe that is white, pink,
or  red  in  color. Flowering  may  be  followed  by  colorful, showy  berries. Other
species, particularly  wild
forms, have  shiny, broad
leaves that grow to 3 feet in
length. In  these  types, the
ﬂoral  bracts  (spathes)  are
usually green or maroon and
less conspicuous.

Anthurium × ferrierense, ﬂower

Distribution: These plants are
native  to  tropical  America.
They are houseplants in most
areas, but  may  be  grown  in
gardens in south Florida and
Hawaii.

Toxic Part: Leaves and stems
are injurious.

Toxin: Raphides  of water-
insoluble  calcium  oxalate
and  unveriﬁed  proteina-
ceous toxins.

Clinical  Findings: A  painful
burning  sensation  of
the 
lips  and  oral  cavity  results 
from 
is 
an  inﬂammatory  reaction,

ingestion. There 

82

Arisaema

Anthurium × roseum (above)
Anthurium wildenowii (right)

often  with  edema  and  blistering. Hoarseness, dysphonia, and  dysphagia  may
result.

Management: The pain and edema recede slowly without therapy. Cool liquids
or demulcents held in the mouth may bring some relief. Analgesics may be indi-
cated. The  insoluble  oxalate  in  these  plants  does  not  cause  systemic  oxalate 
poisoning. Consultation  with  a  Poison  Control  Center  should  be  considered.
See “Poisoning by Plants with Calcium Oxalate Crystals,” p. 23.

Reference
Rauber A. Observations on the idioblasts of Dieffenbachia. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol
1985;23:79–90.

Arisaema species
Family: Araceae
Arisaema dracontium (L.) Schott
Arisaema triphyllum (L.) Schott (includes subsp. stewardsonii (Britton) Huttl. and

subsp. triphyllum [=A. atrorubens (Aiton) Blume])

Common Names:
Arisaema dracontium: Dragon Arum, Dragon Root, Dragon Tail, Dragon Head,
Green Dragon, Jack-in-the-Pulpit
Arisaema  triphyllum:  Bog  Onion, Brown  Dragon, Cuckoo  Plant, Devil’s  Ear,
Indian  Jack-in-the-Pulpit, Indian  Turnip, Jack-in-the-Pulpit, Memory  Root,
Pepper Turnip, Petit Précheur, Priests Pentle, Small Jack -in-the-Pulpit, Starch-
wort, Three Leaved Indian Turnip, Wake Robin

Arisaema

83

Description: Arisaema  dra-
contium has  a  single  3-foot
stalk with 7 to 13 leaﬂets at
the tip. Several inches below
the  leaﬂets, a  single  green
“ﬂower” (spathe)  up  to  3
inches  long  emerges  from
the  stalk. This  spathe  has  a
slender, funnel-shaped, pro-
truding  hood  that  extends
backward. The 
spikelike,
erect  spadix  inside  extends
for  several  inches. Berries 
are  orange-red  when  ripe.
Arisaema 
triphyllum has 
two  leaves  branching  from
the  stalk  with  three  lance-
shaped  leaﬂets  at  the  end.
The spathe appears between
the  branching  of
the  two
leaves  and  may  be  green,
green striped with brown, or
brown. It  is  shaped  like  a
pulpit  with  a  long  pointed
hood  extending  over  the
short  blunt  spadix. Berries
are red when ripe. Arisaema species bloom from late spring to early autumn,
and grow from swollen underground stems (bulbs).

Arisaema dracontium

Distribution: Arisaema species  grow  in  damp  shady  areas  from  Quebec  to
Florida west to Ontario and southwest to Minnesota and Texas.

Toxic Part: Whole plant.

Toxin: Raphides  of water-insoluble  calcium  oxalate  and  unveriﬁed  proteina-
ceous toxins.

Clinical  Findings: A  painful  burning  sensation  of the  lips  and  mouth  results
from  ingestion. There  is  an  inﬂammatory  reaction, often  with  edema  and 
blistering. Hoarseness, dysphonia, and dysphagia may result.

Management: The  pain  and  edema  recede  slowly  without  therapy. Cool 
liquids  or  demulcents  held  in  the  mouth  may  bring  some  relief. Analgesics 
may  be  indicated. The  insoluble  oxalate  in  these  plants  does  not  cause 
systemic oxalate poisoning. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should
be  considered. See  “Poisoning  by  Plants  with  Calcium  Oxalate  Crystals,”
p. 23.

84

Arum

Arisaema triphyllum, close-up of ﬂower

References
Rauber A. Observations on the idioblasts of Dieffenbachia. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol
1985;23:79–90.

Arum species
Family: Araceae
Arum italicum Mill.
Arum maculatum L.
Arum palaestinum Boiss.
Common Names:
Arum italicum: Italian Arum, Italian Lords-and-Ladies
Arum maculatum: Adam  and  Eve, Bobbins, Cuckoopint, Flekkmunkehette,

Lords-and-Ladies, Munkehette, Starch Root

Arum palaestinum: Arum Sanctum, Black Calla, Solomon’s Lily
Description: Arums are stemless plants with 8- to 10-inch ovate leaves and tuber-
ous  roots. The  showy  “ﬂower,” a  spathe,
is  generally  dullish  purple  in 
the above species and encloses a spike (spadix) on which brilliant red fruits form.

Arum

85

Distribution: These  common  houseplants  are  hardy  outdoor  plants  in  the
South. All these species originated in Europe and the Near East.

Toxic  Part: The  whole  plant  is  injurious. Most  exposures  occur  because  of
ingestion of the colorful fruit
that attracts children.

Toxin: Poorly identiﬁed gas-
trointestinal 
toxin. Previ-
ously  thought  to  contain
calcium  oxalates;
this  has
not been clearly established.

Clinical  Findings: Mucous
membrane  irritation, burn-
ing  sensation, and  possible
ulceration.Nausea,vomiting,
abdominal  cramping, diarr-
hea, and  dehydration  can
occur with large exposures.

Arum italicum, leaf

Arum italicum, unripe fruit

Arum italicum, ripe fruit

86

Astralagus

Management: Oral lesions are treated with cool liquids and possibly analgesics.
Intravenous hydration, antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement may be neces-
sary for patients with severe gastrointestinal symptoms, particularly in children.
Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See “Poison-
ing by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

References
Jaspersen-Schib R, Theus L, Guirguis-Oeschger M, Gossweiler B, Meier-Abt PJ. Serious plant
poisonings in Switzerland 1966–1994. Case analysis from the Swiss Toxicology Information
Center. Schweiz Med Wochenschr 1996;126:1085–1098.
Stahl E, Kaitenbach U. Die basischen Inhaltsstoffe des Aronstabes (Arum maculatum L.)
Arch Pharm (Weinheim) 1965;298:599.

Astralagus species
Family: Leguminosae (Fabaceae)

Astralagus mollissimus, ﬂowers and fruit

Astralagus layneae Greene
Astralagus calycosus Torr. ex.

S. Wats.

Astralagus lentiginosus

Dougl. ex. Hook.

Astralagus mollissimus Torr.
Astralagus wootonii Sheldon

Common Names:
Astralagus  layneae: Layne’s

Locoweed

Astralagus  calycosus: King’s

Locoweed

Astralagus 

lentiginosus:
Speckled Loco, Freckled
Milkvetch

Astralagus 

WoolyLoco,
Loco

mollissimus:
Purple

Astralagus wootonii: Wooton
Loco,Garbancillo,Wooton
Milkvetch

Description: Astragalus com-
prises  about  1,000  species 
of herbaceous  plants. The
leaves are alternate, pinnate,
with  entire  leaﬂets;
some
species  are  covered  with

Astralagus

87

silvery  hairs. Depending  on
the  species, ﬂowers  can  be
white, pink, red, purple, or
yellow, with ﬁve petals, three
upper  ones  and  two  lower
fused  ones. Fruits  are  ﬂeshy
or papery legumes.

Distribution: This  genus  is
found 
in  many  areas  of
the  Northern  Hemisphere,
especially in the arid western
United  States. Some  species
of European, African, or
Asian  origin  have  been
introduced 
cultiva-
tion.

into 

Toxic Part: Whole plant.

Swainsonine,
Toxin:
indolizidine  alkaloid 
inhibits 
mannosidase.

an
that
lysosomal  alpha-

Astralagus wootonii, leaves and fruit

Clinical Findings: There are no adequately documented human poisonings, and
clinical descriptions are derived primarily from animal reports. Astragalus mem-
branaceus is used in herbal medicine for the treatment of viral myocarditis. In
animals, swainsonine  produces  a  lysosomal  storage  disease  that  manifests  as
locoism. Locoism  includes  hyperactive  and  aggressive  behavior, a  stiff and
clumsy gait, seizures, increasing miscoordination, weakness, and death. Locoism
may also develop in livestock that feed on Oxytropis sp., Sida carpinifolia, and
Ipomoea carnea, plants that also contain swainsonine.

Management: Symptomatic  and  supportive  care. Consultation  with  a  Poison
Control Center should be considered.

References
James LF, Panter KE, Gafﬁeld W, Molyneux RJ. Biomedical applications of poisonous plant
research. J Agric Food Chem 2004;52:3211–3230.
Pﬁster JA, Stegelmeier BL, Gardner DR, James LF. Grazing of spotted locoweed (Astragalus
lentiginosus) by cattle and horses in Arizona. J Anim Sci 2003;81:2285–2293.

88

Atropa

Atropa belladonna L.
Family: Solanaceae

Common  Names: Belladonna, Black  Nightshade, Deadly  Nightshade, Night-
shade, Sleeping Nightshade

Description: These  perennial  plants  are  about  3  feet  high  and  are  often 
cultivated  in  ﬂower  gardens. The  stems  are  very  branched  with  6-inch  ovate
leaves. Solitary  ﬂowers, which  emerge  from  the  leaf axils, are  blue-purple  to 
dull red and about 1 inch long. The fruit is nearly globular, about 0.5 inch in
diameter, and is purple to shiny black when mature. The root is a thick rhizome.
The sap is reddish.

Toxic Part: The whole plant is toxic.

Atropa belladonna (above)

Atropa belladonna, mature fruit (below)

Toxin: Atropine,
lamine,
cholinergic alkaloids.

scopo-
and  other  anti-

Clinical  Findings: Intoxica-
tion  results  in  dry  mouth
with dysphagia and dyspho-
nia, tachycardia, and urinary 
retention. Elevation of body
temperature may be accom-
panied by ﬂushed, dry skin.
Mydriasis, blurred  vision,
excitement  and  delirium,
headache,
and  confusion
may be observed.

Management: Initially, sym-
supportive
ptomatic  and 
care  should  be  given.
If
the  severity  of the  intoxica-
tion  warrants  intervention
delirium),
(hyperthermia,
an 
antidote,
physostig-
mine, is available. Consulta-
tion  with  a  Poison  Control
Center  should  be  consid-
ered. See  “Poisoning  by
Plants  with  Anticholinergic
(Antimuscarinic)  Poisons,”
p. 21.

Aucuba

89

References
Caksen H, Odabas D, Akbayram S, et al. Deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna)
intoxication: An analysis of 49 children. Hum Exp Toxicol 2003;22:665–668.
Joshi P, Wicks AC, Munshi SK. Recurrent autumnal psychosis. Postgrad Med J 2003;79:
239–240.
Schneider F, Lutun P, Kintz P, et al. Plasma and urine concentrations of atropine after the
ingestion of cooked deadly nightshade berries. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1996;34:113–117.
Trabattoni G, Visintini D, Terzano GM, et al. Accidental poisoning with deadly nightshade
berries: A case report. Hum Toxicol 1984;3:513–516.

Aucuba japonica Thunb.
Family: Cornaceae

Common Names: Japanese Aucuba, Japanese Laurel, Spotted Laurel

Description: This  evergreen  usually  is  grown  as  a  large  bush. The  opposite 
leaves are about 7 inches long and coarsely toothed. There are numerous horticul-
tural  varieties  that  differ  in
leaf shape  and  color. Purple
ﬂowers are borne in panicles
at the ends of branches. The
fruit is a scarlet berry,matures
in early winter,and contains a
single seed.

Aucuba japonica

Distribution:This plant is cul-
tivated as an ornamental in the
Atlantic Gulf states from Texas
to Washington,DC,and along
the Paciﬁc Coast, and is also a
houseplant.

Toxic  Part: Although 
the
toxin is present in every part
of the  plant, the  majority 
of
exposures 
involve  the 
colorful fruit.

Toxin: Aucubin, an  acid-
labile glycoside.

Findings: Most
Clinical 
exposures cause minimal or
no  toxicity. Large  exposures
can cause nausea, vomiting,
and abdominal cramping.

90

Baptisia

Aucuba japonica, immature fruit

Aucuba japonica

Management: Most  cases  require  no  therapy.
Intravenous  hydration, anti-
emetics, and  electrolyte  replacement  may  be  necessary  for  patients  with  severe  gas-
trointestinal symptoms, particularly in children. Consultation with a Poison Control
Center should be considered.See “Poisoning by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,”p.28.

References
Chang LM, Yun HS, Kim YS, Ahn JW. Aucubin: potential antidote for alpha-amanitin
poisoning. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1984;22:77–85.
Leaveau AM, Durand M, Paris RR. Sur la toxicite des fruits de l’Aucuba japonica
(Cornacees). Plant Med Phytother 1979;13:199.

Baptisia species
Family: Leguminosae (Fabaceae)
Common Names: Cloverbloom, False Indigo, Horse Flea Weed, Horseﬂy, Horse-
ﬂy  Weed, Indigo  Weed, Prairie  Indigo, Rattlebush, Rattleweed, Shooﬂy, Wild
Indigo, Yellow Indigo

Baptisia

91

Baptisia tinctoria

Baptisia alba, ﬂower

Baptisia cv. ‘Purple Smoke,’ ﬂowers

Description: There  are  about  30
species of Baptisia. These herbs grow
to about 3 feet and have oval leaﬂets.
The  sweetpea-like  ﬂowers  are  blue,
yellow, or white and grow in racemes.
The fruit is a pealike pod.
Distribution: Baptisia species are native
throughout the United States from Texas,
Missouri, and  Minnesota  east  to  the
Atlantic coast,south to Florida,and north
to Massachusetts. In Canada, the genus
occurs only in southern Ontario.
Toxic Part: The entire plant is toxic.
Toxin: Cytisine  and  other  related 
nicotine-like alkaloids.
Initial  gastroin-
Clinical  Findings:
testinal  effects  may  be  followed  by 
those  typical  of nicotine  poisoning;
these 
large
pupils, sweating, and perhaps seizures.

include  hypertension,

92

Blighia

Severe  poisoning  produces  coma, weakness, and  paralysis  that  may  result  in
death due to respiratory failure.
Management: Symptomatic and supportive care should be given, with attention
to  adequacy  of ventilation  and  vital  signs. Atropine  may  reverse  some  of the
toxic effects. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be strongly con-
sidered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Nicotine-like Alkaloids,” p. 30.
References
Daly JW. Nicotinic agonists, antagonists, and modulators from natural sources. Cell Mol
Neurobiol 2005;25:513–552.
Klocking H-P, Richter M, Damm G. Pharmacokinetic studies with 3H-cytisine. Arch Toxicol
1980;4(suppl):312–314.
Wagner H, Horhammer L, Budweg W, et al. Investigation of the glycosides from Baptisia
tinctoria. 3. Synthesis of pseudobaptisins. Chem Ber 1969;102:3006–3008.

Blighia sapida K.D. Koenig
Family: Sapindaceae
Common Names: Ackee, Akee, Aki, Arbre Fricassé, Isin, Ishin, Seso Vegetal
Description: The ackee is a tree growing about 30 to 40 feet in height. It has com-
pound leaves with ﬁve pairs of leaﬂets; the longest is about 6 inches at the tip.There
are small, greenish-white ﬂowers.A conspicuous reddish fruit splits at maturity to
reveal three shiny black seeds embedded in a snowy white waxy aril.
Distribution: Blighia grows in the West Indies, Florida, and Hawaii.
Toxic Part: In the unripe fruit, the toxin is concentrated in the seeds and, espe-
cially, in the unripe aril that surrounds the seeds. Consumption of the aril from
unripe fruit has resulted in fatalities. When ripe, Akee is a traditional food in
Jamaica, where the aril is cooked with codﬁsh.

Blighia sapida, fruit

Toxin: Hypoglycin A, a cyclo-
propyl amino acid.This toxin
and  its  metabolites  inhibit
fatty  acid  metabolism  and
gluconeogenesis, leading  to
elevated  dicarboxylic  acid
levels, hypoketonemia, and
liver  failure  (microvesicular
steatosis  similar  to  Reye’s
syndrome).

Clinical Findings: Ingestion of
the  unripe  fruit  gives  rise  to
“Jamaican vomiting sickness,”
a condition of severe vomiting
that  usually  occurs  shortly

Blighia

93

ingestion.

Lethargy,
after 
paraesthesias, hypoglycemia,
hypokalemia, metabolic  aci-
dosis, seizures, and coma may
occur.With chronic exposure,
hepatotoxicity may develop as
a result of the altered fatty acid
metabolism. Mortality  may
occur  from  either  acute  or
chronic  poisoning. Conﬁr-
mation  of
suspected  cases 
can  be  made  by  measuring 
elevated  dicarboxylic  acid 
levels 
in  urine  by  gas 
chromatography.

Blighia sapida, open fruit revealing white arils and
seeds

Management: Treatment  is  supportive  because  no  speciﬁc  antidote  exists.
Patients with suspected ingestion should have early gastrointestinal decontam-
ination, if appropriate, due  to  the  potency  of the  toxin. Fluid  hydration,
antiemetics, electrolyte correction, glucose infusion, and supportive care should
be utilized as needed. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be con-
sidered.

References
Barennes H, Valea I, Boudat AM, Idle JR, Nagot N. Early glucose and methylene blue are
effective against unripe ackee apple (Blighia sapida) poisoning in mice. Food Chem Toxicol
2004;42:809–815.
Chase GW Jr, Landen WO Jr, Soliman AG. Hypoglycin A content in the aril, seeds,
and husks of ackee fruit at various stages of ripeness. J Assoc Off Anal Chem 1990;73:
318–319.
McTague JA, Forney R. Jamaican vomiting sickness in Toledo, Ohio. Ann Emerg Med 1994;
23:1116–1118.
Meda HA, Diallo B, Buchet JP, et al. Epidemic of fatal encephalopathy in preschool children
in Burkina Faso and consumption of unripe ackee (Blighia sapida) fruit. Lancet 1999;353:
536–540.
Moya J. Ackee (Blighia sapida) poisoning in the Northern Province, Haiti, 2001. Epidemiol
Bull 2001;22:8–9.
Sherratt HAS. Hypoglycin, the famous toxin of the unripe Jamaican ackee fruit. Trends
Pharmacol Sci 1986;7:186–191.
Tanaka K, Kean EA, Johnson G. Jamaican vomiting sickness. N Engl J Med 1976;295:
461–467.

94

Brassaia

Brassaia actinophylla Endl.
(=Schlefﬂera actinophylla (Endl.) Harms)
Family: Araliaceae

Common Names: Australian Ivy Palm, Australian Umbrella Tree, Octopus Tree,
Queensland Umbrella Tree, Queen’s Umbrella Tree, Schefﬂera, Starleaf

Description: An  evergreen  tree  growing  to  40  feet, on  stout  stems  with  a  few
short  branches  at  the  top. Leaves  are  spreading, 2  to  4  feet  long  and  glossy,
usually with 7 to 16 leaﬂets. Flowers are small, red, and clustered, and are formed
in racemes above the foliage.

Brassaia actinophylla, branch with leaves (above)

Brassaia actinophylla, ﬂowers (below)

Distribution: Native to Aus-
tralia, New Guinea, and Java,
the  plant  was  introduced 
to  many  other  tropical  and
subtropical regions where it
is cultivated as an ornamen-
tal  and  naturalized  into  the
landscape. It is also grown as
a pot plant in homes and in
tubs  for  interior  landscapes
such as malls.

The 

leaves 
Toxic  Part:
primarily. In addition, expo-
sure  to  the  sap  from  the
plant or leaves may produce
contact dermatitis.

Toxin: Raphides  of water-
insoluble  calcium  oxalate
and  unveriﬁed  proteina-
ceous toxins.

ingestion. There 

Clinical  Findings: A  painful
burning  sensation  of
the 
results 
lips  and  mouth 
from 
is 
an  inﬂammatory  reaction,
often  with  edema  and  blis-
tering. Hoarseness, dyspho-
nia,
and  dysphagia  may
result.

Caesalpinia

95

Management: The  pain  and  edema  recede  slowly  without  therapy. Cool 
liquids  or  demulcents  held  in  the  mouth  may  bring  some  relief. Analgesics 
may be indicated. The insoluble oxalate in these plants does not cause systemic
oxalate  poisoning. Consultation  with  a  Poison  Control  Center  should  be 
considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Calcium Oxalate Crystals,” p. 23.

References
Franceschi VR, Nakata PA. Calcium oxalate in plants: formation and function. Annu Rev
Plant Biol 2005;56;41–71.
Mitchell JC. Allergic contact dermatitis from Hedera helix and Brassaia actinophylla
(Araliaceae). Contact Dermatitis 1981;7:158–159.
Rauber A. Observations on the idioblasts of Dieffenbachia. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1985;23:
79–90.

Caesalpinia species
Family: Leguminosae (Fabaceae)
Caesalpinia bonduc (L.) Roxb. (=C. crista L.; C. bonducella Flem.)
Caesalpinia drummondii (Torr. & A. Gray) Fisher
Caesalpinia gilliesii (Hook.) Dietrich (=Poinciana gilliesii Hook.)
Caesalpinia mexicana A. Gray
Caesalpinia pulcherrima (L.) Sw. (=Poinciana pulcherrima L.)
Caesalpinia vesicaria L.

Caesalpinia bonduc, close-up of ﬂower (left)

Caesalpinia bonduc, seeds in open fruit (below)

96

Caesalpinia

Caesalpinia gilliesii, close-up of ﬂower (above)

Caesalpinia pulcherrima (below)

Common Names:
Caesalpinia  bonduc:  Brier,
Grey  Nicker  Bean, Gua-
calote  Amarillo, Haba  de 
San  Antonio, Horse  Nicker,
Mato  Azul, Mato  de  Playa,
Nickal
Caesalpinia 
drummondii:
There  are  no  common
names  in  our  geographic
area.
Caesalpinia gilliesii: Barbados
Pride, Bird  of Paradise,
Brazilwood, Dwarf Ponciana,
Espiga de Amor,Flower Fence,
Ponciana
Caesalpinia mexicana: Mexi-
can Bird of Paradise, Medi-
can Poinciana
Caesalpinia pulcherrima: Bar-
bados  Flower,
Barbados
Pride, Dwarf
Poinciana,
Carzazo, Clavellina, Doddle-
Do, Dul-Dul, Fench, Flor  de
Camarón,
Flower  Fence,
Francillade,Guacamaya,Mar-
avilla,
‘Ohai-Ali’i, Peacock
Flower, Spanish  Carantion,
Tabachin
Caesalpinia  vesicaria:  Brasil,
Brasiletto, Indian Savin Tree,
Poinciana

Description: There are about 150 species of Caesalpinia distributed throughout
the world.
Caesalpinia bonduc: This scrambling shrub rarely grows erect. The stems have
numerous  prickles, and  the  leaves  are  doubly  compound. Yellow  ﬂowers
grow in racemes. Fruits are dark brown, 3 inches long and 1.5 inches wide,
covered with prickles, and contain two ﬂattened, globular seeds about 1 inch
in diameter.

Caesalpinia  drummondii:  This  shrublet  grows  about  8  inches  high. Fruits 

are slightly less than 1 inch long and contain one or two seeds.

Caesalpinia gilliesii: This shrub is 15 feet tall and has no spines. The leaves are 
compound. The  yellow  ﬂowers  have  bright  red, protruding  ﬁlaments.

Caesalpinia

97

The fruit is about 4 inches long, 0.75 inches wide, and contains six to eight
seeds.

Caesalpinia mexicana: This small, spineless tree has yellow ﬂowers. The fruit is

a ﬂat pod about 2.5 inches long.

Caesalpinia  pulcherrima:  This  upright  shrub  has  scattered  thorns  and  yellow
ﬂowers with red streaks that grow in terminal racemes. The fruit is a ﬂat
pod about 4 inches long containing ﬁve to eight shiny brown, ﬂat, beanlike
seeds about 3/8 inch long.

Caesalpinia vesicaria: This small tree has an aromatic odor. Its trunk and branches
are  prickly. Yellow  ﬂowers  are  streaked  with  red  and  form  in  terminal
racemes. The fruit is a ﬂat pod about 4 inches long and less than 1 inch wide.

Distribution:
Caesalpinia bonduc: This weedlike plant is common in the West Indies from the

Bahamas to Barbados.

Caesalpinia  drummondii:  This  rare  species  is  a  native  of southern  Texas  and

Mexico.

Caesalpinia gilliesii: Bird of Paradise plants are cultivated extensively in Florida

and the Gulf coast states to Texas and in Arizona.

Caesalpinia  mexicana:  This  ornamental  is  cultivated  in  southern  Texas  and

Mexico.

Caesalpinia  pulcherrima:  Barbados  Pride  is  cultivated  extensively  in  the  West
Indies from the Bahamas to Barbados and in Hawaii, Guam, and frost-free
areas of Florida, Texas, and Arizona.

Caesalpinia  vesicaria:  This  tree  is  native  to  the  Bahamas, Cuba, Jamaica, and

Haiti. It is not found in Puerto Rico.

Toxic Part: The seeds are poisonous. The immature seeds of some species (e.g.,
Caesalpinia  pulcherrima) are  edible; roasting  the  seeds  of some  other  species
(e.g., C. bonduc) abolishes toxicity.

Toxin: Tannins, protein precipitants that are gastrointestinal irritants.

Clinical Findings: After a latent period of 30 minutes to 6 hours, nausea, vom-
iting, abdominal cramping, diarrhea, and dehydration can occur.

Management: Intravenous hydration, antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement
may be necessary for patients with severe gastrointestinal symptoms, particu-
larly in children. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be consid-
ered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

References
Adam F, Adam JC, Hasselot N. Intoxication par ingestion de ditakh. Med Trop 1991;51:
455–458.
Anonymous. Toxicity studies of Arizona ornamental plants. Ariz Med 1958;15:512–514.
Che CT, McPherson DD, Cordell GA, et al. Pulcherralpin, a new diterpene ester from
Caesalpinia pulcherrima. J Nat Prod 1986;49:561–569.

98

Caladium

Caladium bicolor (Aiton) Vent.
Family: Araceae

Common Names: Angel Wings, Caládio, Caladium, Cananga, Capotillo, Courer
Saignant, Corazón  de  Cabrito, Elephant’s  Ear, Heart-of-Jesus, Lágrimas  de
María, Mother-in-Law Plant, Paleta de Pintor

Description: Caladiums  have  showy, heavy, variegated, prominently  veined,
heart-shaped  leaves. Leaf coloration  may  vary  from  white  to  orange  or  red,
depending on species.

Distribution: These  plants  may  be  cultivated  in  gardens  year-round  in  sub-
tropical climates and during the summer in temperate zones. They are popular
houseplants and are commonly sold in ﬂoral shops and nurseries in the winter
months.

Toxic Part: The whole plant is injurious.

Toxin: Raphides  of water-insoluble  calcium  oxalate  and  unveriﬁed  proteina-
ceous toxins.

Clinical  Findings: A  painful  burning  sensation  of the  lips  and  mouth  results
from  ingestion. There  is  an  inﬂammatory  reaction, often  with  edema  and 
blistering. Hoarseness, dysphonia, and dysphagia may result.

Caladium bicolor

Caladium bicolor

Calla

99

Management: The pain and edema recede slowly without therapy. Cool liquids
or demulcents held in the mouth may bring some relief. Analgesics may be indi-
cated. The insoluble oxalate in these plants does not cause systemic oxalate poi-
soning. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See
“Poisoning by Plants with Calcium Oxalate Crystals,” p. 23.

References
Armien AG, Tokarnia CH. Experiments on the toxicity of some ornamental plants in sheep.
Pesqui Vet Bras 1994;14:69–73.
Franceschi VR, Nakata PA. Calcium oxalate in plants: Formation and function. Annu Rev
Plant Biol 2005;56:41–71.
Rauber A. Observations on the idioblasts of Dieffenbachia. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol
1985;23:79–90.
Schilling R, Marderosian A, Speaker J. Incidence of plant poisonings in Philadelphia noted as
poison information calls. Vet Hum Toxicol 1980;22:148–150.

Calla palustris

Calla palustris L.
Family: Araceae

Female
Common  Names:
Water Dragon, Water Arum,
Water Dragon, Wild Calla

small
This 
Description:
plant 
heart-shaped
has 
leaves that are 4 to 6 inches
long  and  borne  on  10-inch
stalks. The spathe, or ﬂower
bract, is about 2 inches long,
inconspicuous, green on the
outside, and  white  on  the
inside. Red  berries  form  on
the  spadix  of the  ﬂower  in
thick clusters.

Distribution: This  plant  is
found  in  wet, boggy  areas
from  Quebec  to  Alberta  to
north  central  Alaska  and
south central Yukon south to
Colorado,Texas,and Florida.

Toxic Part: The whole plant,
particularly 
is 
injurious.

root,

the 

100

Calophyllum

Toxin: Raphides  of water-insoluble  calcium  oxalate  and  unveriﬁed  proteina-
ceous toxins.

Clinical Findings: A painful burning sensation of the lips and oral cavity results
from ingestion. There is an inﬂammatory reaction, often with edema and blis-
tering. Hoarseness, dysphonia, and dysphagia may result.

Management: The pain and edema recede slowly without therapy. Cool liquids
or demulcents held in the mouth may bring some relief. Analgesics may be indi-
cated. The insoluble oxalate in these plants does not cause systemic oxalate poi-
soning. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See
“Poisoning by Plants with Calcium Oxalate Crystals,” p. 23.

References
Airaksinen MM, Peura P, Ala-Fossi-Salokangas L, et al. Toxicity of plant material used as
emergency food during famines in Finland. J Ethnopharmacol 1986;18:273–296.
Rauber A. Observations on the idioblasts of Dieffenbachia. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol
1985;23:79–90.

Calophyllum inophyllum L.
Family: Guttiferae (Clusiaceae)

Common  Names: Alexandrian  Laurel, Beautyleaf, Indian  Laurel, Kamani,
Laurelwood, María Grande, Mastwood, Poonay Oil Plant

Description: This  low-branched  tree  grows  to  40  feet  or  more. The  trunk  is
covered by light gray bark with a pink inner bark. The paired leaves are shiny
green  and  leathery  with  a  prominent  midrib, 3  to  8  inches  long  and 
elliptical with a slight notch at the tip. The ﬂowers form small clusters resem-
bling orange blossoms and are fragrant. The fruit is globose, 1.25 to 1.5 inches
in  diameter, and  becomes  yellowish-brown  at  maturity. It  contains  one  large
seed  with  a  bony  shell. The
plant  has  a  cream-colored,
resinous latex.

Calophyllum inophyllum, fruiting branch

Distribution: This  tree 
is
native  to  India  and  the
Malay  Peninsula.
is  a 
commonly  planted  orna-
mental  in  the  West  Indies,
south  Florida, Hawaii, and 
Guam.

It 

Toxic Part: The seed kernel is
poisonous.

Calophyllum

101

Calophyllum inophyllum, leaf and fruit
(above)

Calophyllum inophyllum, ﬂowers (left)

Toxin: Inophyllum A-E, calophyllolide, calophynic acid.

Clinical Findings: Ingestion can cause nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramping,
diarrhea, and dehydration. The latex is used as a home remedy in the West Indies
and the Paciﬁc and appears to be nontoxic, although it may cause keratocon-
junctivitis on contact with the cornea.

Management: Most  exposures  do  not  lead  to  signiﬁcant  toxicity. Intravenous
hydration, antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement may be necessary in severe
cases, particularly  in  children. Consultation  with  a  Poison  Control  Center
should be considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,”
p. 28.

References
Holdsworth DK, So-On NC. Medicinal and poisonous plants from Manus Island. Sci New
Guinea 1973;1:11–16.
Itoigawa M, Ito C, Tan HT, et al. Cancer chemopreventive agents, 4-phenylcoumarins from
Calophyllum inophyllum. Cancer Lett 2001;169:15–19.
Ravelonjato B, Libot F, Ramiandrasoa F, Kunesch N, Gayral P, Poisson J. Molluscicidal
constituents of Calophyllum from Madagascar: activity of some natural and synthetic
neoﬂavonoids and khellactones. Planta Med 1992;58:51–55.

102

Calotropis

Calotropis species
Family: Asclepiadaceae
Calotropis gigantea (L.) W.T. Aiton
Calotropis procera (Aiton) W.T. Aiton

Common Names:
Calotropis gigantea: Bowstring Hemp, Crown Flower, Giant Milkweed, Mudar,

Mudar Crown Plant, Pua Kalaunu

Calotropis procera: Algodón de Seda, French Jasmine, Giant Milkweed, Mudar,

Mudar Small Crown Flower, Small Crown Flower, Tula

Description: These  treelike  shrubs  have  ovate  or  elliptical  thick, glaucous,
rubbery, opposite leaves. The ﬂowers appear in clusters along the branches; they
have a prominent crown with recurved petals and a sweet, pleasant odor. Colors
vary from creamy white to lilac, mauve, and purple. The seeds have silky attach-
ments (like other types of milkweed seeds), which emerge from pods as they
split on drying. The two species differ in size: Calotropis gigantea grows to 15
feet; C. procera generally grows to under 6 feet and has correspondingly more
diminutive plant parts.

Distribution: Crown  ﬂowers  are  cultivated  in  south  Florida, California, and
Hawaii. Calotropis procera is a weed in the West Indies.

Toxic  Part: The  latex  has  a  direct  irritant  action  on  mucous  membranes,
particularly  in  the  eye. Skin  reactions  to  this  plant  may  be  caused  by  allergy
rather  than  to  a  direct  irri-
tant  action. All  parts  of the
plant  contain  a  cardioactive
steroid  and  calcium  oxalate
crystals.

Calotropis gigantea, tip of branch with leaves and
ﬂowers

Toxin: An unidentiﬁed vesi-
cant  allergen  in  the  latex,
calcium oxalate crystals, and
cardioactive  steroids  resem-
bling digitalis.

Clinical  Findings: Human
intoxications from this plant
have  not  been  reported  in
modern  times. Ingestion  of
calcium  oxalates  causes  a
painful burning sensation of
the lips and mouth. There is
an  inﬂammatory  reaction,

Calotropis

103

often  with  edema  and  blistering. Hoarseness, dysphonia, and  dysphagia  may
result.

Poisoning  would  be  expected  to  produce  clinical  ﬁndings  typical  of
cardioactive  steroids. Toxicity  has  a  variable  latent  period  that  depends  on 
the  quantity  ingested. Dysrhythmias  include  sinus  bradycardia, premature 
ventricular  contractions, atrioventricular  conduction  defects, or  ventricular
tachydysrhythmias. Hyperkalemia,
indicator  of
toxicity.

if present, may  be  an 

Management:
Calcium  oxalate 
toxicity:
The  pain  and  edema  recede
slowly without therapy. Cool
liquids  or  demulcents  held
in  the  mouth  may  bring
some  relief. Analgesics  may
be  indicated. The  insoluble
oxalate  in  these  plants  does
not  cause  systemic  oxalate
poisoning. See  “Poisoning
by  Plants  with  Calcium
Oxalate Crystals,” p. 23.

Calotropis procera

Calotropis procera, tip of branch with
leaves and ﬂowers

Calotropis procera, mature fruits opening
to release seeds

104

Caltha

Cardioactive  steroid  toxicity: Gastrointestinal  decontamination  as  appro-
priate, serial electrocardiograms, and serum potassium determinations should
be  performed. If serious  cardioactive  steroid  toxicity  is  considered, digoxin-
speciﬁc  Fab  should  be  administered. Consultation  with  a  Poison  Control 
Center  should  be  considered. See  “Poisoning  by  Plants  with  Cardioactive
Steroids/Cardiac Glycosides,” p. 24.

References
Handa F, Sadana JK, Sharma PK. Allergic contact dermatitis due to the plant Calotropis
procera. A case report. Indian J Dermatol 1984;29:27–29.
Radford DJ, Gillies AD, Hinds JA, Duffy P. Naturally occurring cardiac glycosides. Med J
Aust 1986;144:540–544.
Rutten AM, Statius van Eps LW. Poisoning with toxic plants in Curaçao in 1766. Ned
Tijdschr Geneeskd 1998;142:2796–2798.

Caltha species
Family: Ranunculaceae
Caltha leptosepala DC.
Caltha palustris L.

Common Names: American Cowslip, Bull Flower, Cowslip, Gools, Horse Blob,
Kingcup, Marsh  Marigold, May, Meadow  Bright, Meadow  Gowan, Populage,
Soldier’s Buttons, Souci d’Eau, Water Goggles

Caltha palustris (right)

Caltha palustris, ﬂowers (below)

Caltha

105

Description: These  plants  are  perennial  herbs  of the  marshy  wetlands. Their
large, kidney-shaped  leaves  are  about  7  inches  wide. The  stems  are  8  to  24 
inches long, smooth, hollow, and furrowed. Caltha palustris blooms in April or
early  May; the  bright  yellow  ﬂowers  are  about  2  inches  in  diameter  and  are 
followed by short, ﬂat, many-seeded pods. Caltha leptosepala is an alpine bog
plant that often blossoms at the lower edge of the retreating snow line in the
spring.

Distribution: Caltha palustris grows in Alaska, Canada to the Arctic, and in the
southeastern  United  States  into  North  Carolina  and  Tennessee. Caltha  lep-
tosepala is  found  in  Montana, Washington, British  Columbia, Alberta, and
Alaska. Other species, some with white ﬂowers, also may be found in the north-
western states.

Toxic Part: All parts of the mature plant are poisonous. Before ﬂowering, the
immature plant may be boiled and eaten as greens.

Toxin: Protoanemonin, an irritant.

Clinical Findings: There are no adequately documented human poisonings, and
clinical descriptions are derived primarily from animal reports. Intense pain and
inﬂammation of the mouth with blistering, ulceration, and profuse salivation
can  occur. Bloody  emesis  and  diarrhea  develop  in  association  with  severe
abdominal cramps. Central nervous system involvement is manifested by dizzi-
ness, syncope, and seizures.

Management: Most  exposures  result  in  minimal  or  no  toxicity. Intravenous
hydration, antiemetics, and  electrolyte  replacement  may  be  necessary  for
patients  with  severe  gastrointestinal  symptoms, particularly  in  children. If
seizures  occur, rapidly  acting  anticonvulsants, such  as  intravenous  diazepam,
should be utilized along with other supportive measures. Consultation with a
Poison Control Center should be strongly considered. See “Poisoning by Plants
with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

References
Bruni A, Bonora A, Dall’Olio G. Protoanemonin detection in Caltha palustris. J Nat Prod
1986;49:1172–1173.
Turner NJ. Counter-irritant and other medicinal uses of plants in Ranunculaceae by 
native peoples in British Columbia and neighbouring areas. J Ethnopharmacol 1984;11:
181–201.

106

Calycanthus

Calycanthus species
Family: Calycanthaceae
Calycanthus ﬂoridus L.
(=Calycanthus fertilis Walter)
Calycanthus occidentalis Hook. & Arn.

Common  Names: American  Allspice, Bubbie, Bubby  Blossoms, Bubby  Bush
Calycanth, Carolina  Allspice, Pineapple  Shrub, Spicebush, Strawberry  Bush,
Strawberry Shrub, Sweet Shrub, Sweet Bettie

Description: Calycanthus grows as a shrub up to 12 feet in height. These plants
have opposite leaves that are up to 6 inches long.The ﬂowers are large (2 to 3 inches
across), showy, and brownish-red or purple (rarely cream) with a pleasant, sweet,
fragrant  odor; they  grow  at
the  tips  of small  branchlets
along the branches. The fruit
is  ﬁg  shaped  and  contains
large glossy brown seeds.

Calycanthus ﬂoridus, ﬂowering branch (above)

Calycanthus ﬂoridus, close-up of ﬂower (below)

is  native 

Calycanthus
Distribution:
ﬂoridus
in  the
eastern  United  States  from
Pennsylvania 
to  northern
Florida  and  west  to  Ala-
bama. Calycanthus  occiden-
talis grows 
in  California.
These  plants  also  are  culti-
vated in parks in these areas.

Toxic  Part:
poisonous.

Seeds 

are 

and
Toxin: Calycanthin 
related 
These
toxins  resemble  the  toxin
strychnine.

alkaloids.

Clinical  Findings: There  are
no  adequately  documented
human poisonings, and clin-
ical  descriptions  are  based 
on  the  nature  of the  toxin.
Animals  given  the  alkaloids
experience strychnine-like con-
vulsions, muscular  hyper-
activity, myocardial  depres-
sion, and hypertension.

Capsicum

107

If

toxicity
Management:
occurs,
treatment  entails
aggressive  management  of
muscle  contractions  with
muscle  relaxants  and  other
supportive  measures. Con-
sultation  with  a  Poison
Control  Center  should  be
considered. See  “Poisoning
by  Plants  with  Convulsive
Poisons (Seizures),” p. 25.

References
Bradley RE, Jones TJ. Strychnine-like toxicity of Calycanthus. Southeast Vet 1963;14: 40, 71, 73.
Collins RP, Halim AF. Essential leaf oils in Calycanthus ﬂoridus. Planta Med 1971;20:241–243.

Calycanthus ﬂoridus cv. ‘Athens’

Capsicum species
Family: Solanaceae
Capsicum annuum L. var. annuum
Capsicum annuum var. glabriusculum (Dunal) Heiser & Pickersgill
Capsicum chinense Jacq.
Capsicum frutescens L.

Common Names:
Capsicum annuum var. annuum: Ají de Gallina, Ají Guaguao, Cayenne Pepper,
Cherry  Pepper, Chili  Pepper, Hot  Pepper, Long  Pepper, Nioi, Nioi-Pepa,
Piment Bouc, Red Pepper, Sweet or Bell Pepper
Capsicum annuum var. glabriusculum: Bird Pepper
Capsicum chinense: Habañero, Scotch Bonnet, Squash Pepper
Capsicum frutescens: Ají Caballero, Ají Picante, Piment, Tabasco Pepper

Description: There are about 20 species of Capsicum. These perennial herbs are
native to tropical America. The leaves are alternate, elliptical, and smooth edged.
The ﬂowers appear at the point of stem branching and are usually white with
a  purple  tinge. The  fruit  is  a  pod  containing  many  seeds; depending  on  the
species  and  cultivar, the  mature  fruit  can  be  variously  colored—red, purple,
orange, or yellow.

Toxic Part: The fruit and seeds of most peppers, with the exception of the sweet
or bell pepper, are injurious.

Toxin: Capsaicin is a mucous membrane irritant that causes release of substance
P from sensory nerve ﬁbers. Substance P leads to stimulation of pain ﬁbers and
release of inﬂammatory mediators.

108

Caryota

Capsicum annuum, fruit

Clinical Findings: Biting into
a fruit leads to a burning or
stinging sensation of the oral
mucous  membranes. Skin
exposure  may  cause  ery-
thema  but  not  vesiculation.
Exposure to abraded skin can
produce  moderate  to  severe
pain  lasting  several  hours.
(Paradoxically, capsaicin  is
available  as  a  nonprescrip-
tion  medication 
is
applied to painful lesions to
deplete  the  sensory  nerve
endings  of substance  P  and
provide analgesia.) Eye expo-
sure to juice from this plant
may lead to moderate chem-
ical conjunctivitis and pain.
Management: Pain  is  man-
aged by irrigation to remove
remaining  toxin  and  the
administration of analgesics.
Inﬂammatory 
reactions,
particularly  in  the  eye, may

that 

necessitate extensive irrigation with water and the use of topical analgesics.
References
Tominack RL, Spyker DA. Capsicum and capsaicin—a review: Case report of the use of hot
peppers in child abuse. Clin Toxicol 1987;25:591–601.
Virus RM, Gebhart T. Pharmacologic actions of capsaicin: Apparent involvement of
substance P and serotonin. Life Sci 1979;25:1273–1284.
Weinberg RB. Hunan hand. N Engl J Med 1981;31:1020.

Caryota species
Family: Palmae (Arecaceae)
Caryota mitis Lour.
Caryota urens L.
Common Names: Burmese Fishtail Palm, Cariota, Clustered Fishtail Palm, Fish-
tail Palm, Grifﬁthii, Toddy Fishtail Palm, Tufted Fishtail Palm, Wine Palm
Description: These palms grow to 40 feet tall and have compound leaves up to 
20 feet in length with small ﬁshtail-shaped leaﬂets. The red or black fruits are
about 0.5 inch in diameter and form on clusters of long, stringlike ﬂoral branches.

Caryota

109

Caryota urens

Caryota gigas, leaf

Caryota sp., inﬂorescences on tree (left)

Caryota mitis, embryo showing calcium
oxalate crystals (magniﬁed ×20) (below)

110

Cassia

Distribution: Caryota are native to Asia, but are commonly grown in Florida,
Guam, Hawaii, and the West Indies.

Toxic Part: The fruit pulp is injurious.

Toxin: Raphides  of water-insoluble  calcium  oxalate  and  unveriﬁed  proteina-
ceous toxins.

Clinical Findings: A painful burning sensation of the lips and oral cavity results
from ingestion. There is an inﬂammatory reaction, often with edema and blis-
tering. Hoarseness, dysphonia, and dysphagia may result.

Management: The pain and edema recede slowly without therapy. Cool liquids
or demulcents held in the mouth may bring some relief. Analgesics may be indi-
cated. The insoluble oxalate in these plants does not cause systemic oxalate poi-
soning. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See
“Poisoning by Plants with Calcium Oxalate Crystals,” p. 23.

References
Rauber A. Observations on the idioblasts of Dieffenbachia. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1985;
23:79–90.
Snyder DS, Hatﬁeld GM, Lampe KF. Examination of the itch response from the raphides of
the ﬁshtail palm Caryota mitis. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 1979;48:287–292.

Cassia ﬁstula L.
Family: Leguminosae (Fabaceae)

Common  Names: Cañafístola, Casse, Golden  Rain, Golden  Shower, Indian
Laburnum, Pudding-Pipe Tree, Purging Fistula

Cassia ﬁstula, tree in ﬂower

Description: The  golden
shower  belongs  to  a  genus
with  about  500 
species 
of extremely  showy, ﬂower-
ing  ornamental  trees  and
shrubs. This tree grows to 30
feet  and  has  compound
leaves  that  are  1  foot  long
with  three  to  eight  pairs  of
leaﬂets  that  are  2  to  6 
inches in length. Large clus-
ters  of golden  ﬂowers  in
pendant  racemes  are  fol-
lowed by fruits that are long,
narrow cylinders containing

Cassia

111

Cassia ﬁstula, close-up of ﬂowers

to  100  ﬂat  seeds  embedded 

up 
compartments.

Cassia ﬁstula, branch showing ﬂowers
and seed pods

in  a  sticky  pulp 

in  partitioned 

Distribution: The  golden  shower  is  cultivated  in  subtropical  areas, the  West
Indies, southern  Florida, the  coast  of southern  California, and  Hawaii. Many
related species of shrubs are native in the West Indies and have escaped from
cultivation in Hawaii and Guam.

Toxic  Part: The  sticky  fruit  pulp  is  poisonous. The  leaves  and  bark  are  less 
toxic.

Toxin: Emodin glycoside (senna), an anthraquinone cathartic.

Clinical Findings: Ingestion can cause nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramping,
diarrhea, and dehydration. Emodin can also cause benign discoloration of the
urine (yellowish-brown in acid urine, red or violet in basic urine).

Management: Intravenous hydration, antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement
may be necessary for patients with severe gastrointestinal symptoms, particu-
larly in children. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be consid-
ered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

References
Barthakur NN, Arnold NP, Alli I. The Indian laburnum (Cassia ﬁstula L.) fruit: An analysis
of its chemical constituents. Plant Foods Hum Nutr 1995;47:55–62.

112

Cassia

Mahesh VK, Sharma R, Singh RS, Upadhya SK. Anthraquinones and kaempferol from Cassia
species section ﬁstula. J Nat Prod 1984;47:733.

Cassia occidentalis L.
(=Senna occidentalis (L.) Link)
Family: Leguminosae (Fabaceae)

Common Names: ‘Auko’I, Biche Prieto, Casse Puante, Coffee Senna, Hedionda,
Mukipalaoa, Piss-a-Bed, Stinking  Weed, Styptic  Weed, Wild  Coffee, Yerba
Hedionda

Description: This annual herb grows to a height of 3 feet. The smooth leaves
are pinnately compound with an even number of leaﬂets. The ﬂowers are yellow
but dry to a paler shade or white. The fruit is about 4.5 inches long and 0.25
inches wide. The seeds are dark olive-green.

Cassia occidentalis

Distribution: Cassia occiden-
talis is  common  in  waste
places, particularly  along
highways  and  coastal  areas.
It  is  probably  native  to  the
southeastern  United  States
from  Virginia  to  Texas  and
the  West  Indies  but  is  now
pantropical, including Hawaii
and Guam.

Toxic Part: The  whole  plant
is  toxic; human  intoxica-
tions  usually  involve  raw
seeds. The roasted seed may
be  used  safely  as  a  coffee
substitute.

irritant  chry-
Toxin: The 
(1,8-trihydroxy-3-
sarobin 
the
methyl-9-anthrone),
cathartic 
(1,8-
emodin 
trihydroxy-6-methyl-9,10-
anthracenedione),
and  a
(toxalbumin)  have
lectin 
been reported.

Clinical Findings: This plant
is a major toxin in contami-
nated animal feed. Exposures
in humans are rare. Ingestion
of the  raw  seeds  may  exert

Catharanthus

113

gastrointestinal symptoms in humans. Chronic ingestion of seeds or other plant
parts by animals leads to myodegeneration, muscle necrosis, and death.

Management: Intravenous hydration, antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement
may be necessary for patients with severe gastrointestinal symptoms, particu-
larly in children. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be consid-
ered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

References
Calore EE, Cavaliere MJ, Haraguchi M, et al. Toxic peripheral neuropathy of chicks fed
Senna occidentalis seeds. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 1998;39:27–30.
Marrero Faz E, Bulnes Goicochea C, Perez Ruano M. Cassia occidentalis toxicosis in heifers.
Vet Hum Toxicol 1998;40:307.
O’Hara PJ, Pierce KR, Reid WK. Degenerative myopathy associated with ingestion of Cassia
occidentalis: clinical and pathologic features of the experimentally induced disease. Am J Vet
Res 1969;30:2173–2180.
Suliman HB, Shommein AM. Toxic effect of the roasted and unroasted beans of Cassia
occidentalis in goats. Vet Hum Toxicol 1986;28:6–11.

Catharanthus roseus (L.) G. Don
(=Vinca rosea L.)
Family: Apocynaceae

Catharanthus roseus

Common  Names: Madagas-
car periwinkle, Bigleaf Peri-
winkle, Large  Periwinkle,
Periwinkle, Vinca  (formerly
known as Vinca rosea)

as 

cultivated 

Description: The  Madagas-
car periwinkle is a perennial
herb  with  milky  sap  that  is
often 
an
annual. It  has  erect  stems
that  bear  dark  glossy  green,
opposite, oblong-lanceolate
leaves, 1  to  2  inches  long,
and  bear  solitary  rose  pink
to  white  ﬂowers  about  1.5
inches across.

Distribution: Native  from
the
Madagascar  to  India,
plant  has  now 
spread
throughout  the  tropics  and
is cultivated in many areas of
the  world  as  an  ornamental

114

Catharanthus

Catharanthus roseus, close-up of ﬂower (above)

Catharanthus roseus, close-up of ﬂowers (below)

garden  plant. In  temperate
parts of the United States, it
is  cultivated  as  a  summer
annual.

Toxic Part: The  whole  plant
is  poisonous. A  tea  made
from the leaves and stems is
used in folk medicine in the
Carribean and elsewhere.

Toxin: Vinca  alkaloids  (e.g.,
vincristine),clinically similar
to  colchicine, a  cytotoxic
alkaloid capable of inhibiting
microtubule formation.

Clinical  Findings: Ingestion
may  cause  initial  oropha-
ryngeal  pain  followed 
in
several  hours  by 
intense 
gastrointestinal  symptoms.
Abdominal pain and severe,
profuse, persistent  diarrhea
may  develop  causing  exten-
sive  ﬂuid  depletion  and  its
sequelae. Vinca  alkaloids
may  subsequently  produce
peripheral neuropathy, bone
marrow  suppression, and
cardiovascular collapse.

Management: Aggressive sym-
ptomatic and supportive care
is  critical, with  prolonged
observation of symptomatic
patients. Consultation  with  a  Poison  Control  Center  should  be  strongly 
considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Mitotic Inhibitors,” p. 29.

References
Dufﬁn J. Poisoning the spindle: serendipity and discovery of the anti-tumor properties of
the Vinca alkaloids. Pharm Hist 2002;44:64–76.
Wu ML, Deng JF, Wu JC, Fan FS, Yang CF. Severe bone marrow depression induced by an
anticancer herb Catharanthus roseus. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 2004;42:667–671.

Caulophyllum

115

Caulophyllum thalictroides (L.) Michx.
Family: Berberidaceae

Common Names: Blueberry Root, Blue Cohosh, Blue Ginseng, Papoose Root,
Squaw Root, Yellow Ginseng

Description: The blue cohosh is an erect herb, 1 to 3 feet tall. The leaﬂets are
lobed  above  the  middle. The  ﬂowers  are  yellowish-green  or  greenish-purple,
about 0.5 inch across, and occur in small clusters. The seeds are globose with a
thin, ﬂeshy blue coat.

Distribution: This plant is found in moist woody areas in Canada from south-
east Manitoba to New Brunswick south to Alabama and west to Missouri.

Toxic Part: The seeds and roots are cytotoxic.

Toxin: Saponins and N-methylcytisine, a nicotine-like alkaloid.

Clinical Findings: The extremely bitter taste usually limits the quantity ingested.
The  saponins  are  gastrointestinal  irritants  that  can  cause  nausea, vomiting,
abdominal cramping, diarrhea, and dehydration. The N-methylcytisine causes
nicotine-like clinical effects. Initial gastrointestinal effects may be followed by
those  typical  of nicotine  poisoning; these  include  hypertension, large  pupils,
sweating, and perhaps seizures. Severe poisoning produces coma, weakness, and
paralysis that may result in death from respiratory failure.

Caulophyllum thalictroides, leaves (left)

Caulophyllum thalictroides, ﬂowers (below)

116

Celastrus

Management: If severe gastrointestinal symptoms occur, intravenous hydration,
antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement may be necessary, particularly in chil-
dren. See “Poisoning by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28. Symptomatic
and supportive care should be given, with attention to adequacy of ventilation
and  vital  signs. Atropine  may  reverse  some  of the  toxic  effects. Consultation
with a Poison Control Center should be strongly considered. See “Poisoning by
Plants with Nicotine-like Alkaloids,” p. 30.

References
Betz JM, Andrzejewski D, Troy A, et al. Gas chromatographic determination of toxic
quinolizidine alkaloids in blue cohosh (Caulophyllum thalictroides (L.) Michx.). Phytochem
Anal 1998;9:232–236.
Jones TK, Lawson BM. Profound neonatal congestive heart failure caused by maternal
consumption of blue cohosh herbal medication. J Pediatr 1998;132:550–552.
Rao RB, Hoffman RS. Nicotinic foxicity from tincture of blue cohosh (Caulophyllum
thalictroides) used as an abortifacient. Vet Hum Toxicol 2002;44:221–222.

Celastrus orbiculatus Thunb.
Celastrus scandens L.
Family: Celastraceae

Celastrus scandens, fruiting branch

Common Names:
Celastrus orbiculatus: Oriental Bittersweet
Celastrus scandens: American Bittersweet,Bittersweet, Bourreau des Arbres,Climb-
ing  Bittersweet, Climbing
Orange  Root, False  Bitter-
sweet, Fever  Twig, Frobusk,
Red Root, Roxbury Waxwork,
Shrubby  Bittersweet, Staff
Tree, Staff Vine

Description: The bittersweet
is a climbing, vinelike shrub
that may grow to a height of
25  feet. Its  ovate, toothed,
alternate  leaves  are  about  4
inches long. The ﬂowers are
inconspicuous. The  mature
fruit  is  a  0.5-inch, orange-
yellow capsule, which opens
to reveal a crimson pulp sur-
rounding each seed.

Celastrus

117

Celastrus scandens, ﬂowers (above)

Celastrus scandens (left) and C. orbiculatus
(right), showing mature fruit (below)

Distribution: Celastrus grows
in southeastern Saskatchewan
to  Quebec, south  to  North
Carolina, and  west  to  New
Mexico. It is much employed
for dried arrangements in the
fall  and  is  readily  available
from  ﬂorists  at  that  time.
Celastrus orbiculatusis a native
of eastern Asia  and  now  has
become an abundant invasive
vine  in  areas  of the  United
States. Celastrus  scandens is
native to North America.

fruit 

Toxic  Part: The 
is
reputed to be poisonous; all
parts  of this  plant  may  be
toxic.

Toxin: An  unknown  gastro-
intestinal irritant.

Clinical Findings: Exposures
are rare. Ingestion may cause
nausea, vomiting, abdomi-
nal cramping, diarrhea, and
dehydration.

Intravenous
Management:
hydration, antiemetics, and
electrolyte replacement may
be  necessary  for  patients
with  severe  gastrointestinal
symptoms, particularly 
in
children. Consultation  with
a  Poison  Control  Center
should  be  considered. See
“Poisoning  by  Plants  with
Gastrointestinal 
Toxins,”
p. 28.

118

Cestrum

Reference
Rzadkowska-Bodalska H. Isolation and identiﬁcation of ﬂavonoids from leaves of Celastrus
scandens L., C. rugosa Rehd. et Wills., C. gemmata Loes. and C. loeseneri Rehd. et Wills. Pol J
Pharmacol Pharm 1973;25:407–416.

Cestrum species
Family: Solanaceae
Cestrum diurnum L.
Cestrum nocturnum L.

Common Names:
Cestrum diurnum: Chinese Inkberry, Dama de Día, Day Blooming Jessamine,

Day Blooming Cestrum, Day Jessmine, Galán de Día, Makahala

Cestrum nocturnum: ‘Ala-Aumoe, Chinese  Inkberry, Dama  de  Noche, Galán 
de  Noche, Huele  de  Noche, Jasmín  de  Nuit, Kupaoa, Lilas  de  Nuit,
Night  Blooming  Jessamine, Night  Blooming  Cestrum, Onaona-
Iapana

Description: The  day-blooming  jessamine  is  an  evergreen  shrub  or  tall  bush
with smooth-edged ovate leaves about 2 to 4 inches long. The tubular ﬂowers
are  white  and  appear  in  small  clusters. They  are  fragrant  by  day. The  mature
fruit is a globose, black berry. The night-blooming jessamine has longer leaves
(4 to 8 inches). The ﬂowers are very fragrant at night and have a sweet odor.
The mature fruit is white.

Cestrum diurnum, ﬂowers

Distribution: Both  species
are native to the West Indies.
They have escaped from cul-
tivation  in  Florida, Texas,
and Guam.

Toxic Part: Leaves.

Toxin: Calcinogenic  glyco-
sides  of vitamin  D  (1,25-
dihydroxy  vitamin  D3)  are
found  in  Cestrum diurnum;
Cestrum nocturnum con-
tains 
anti-
atropine-like 
cholinergic alkaloids.

Clinical  Findings: There  are
no  adequately  documented
and 
human 

poisonings,

Cestrum

119

Cestrum nocturnum, ﬂowers (above)

Cestrum nocturnum, fruiting branch (below)

clinical  descriptions  are  de-
rived  primarily  from  animal
reports. Consumption  of
calcinogenic  glycosides  by
grazing  animals  has  caused
vitamin D intoxication, lead-
ing  to  hypercalcemia, hy-
pophosphatemia, bone soften-
ing,and deposition of calcium
in the soft tissues (calcinosis),
such  as  the  kidney  (nephro-
calcinosis).

Anticholinergic  alkaloid
intoxication  results  in  dry
mouth  with  dysphagia  and
dysphonia, tachycardia, and
urinary  retention. Elevation
of body  temperature  may 
be  accompanied  by  ﬂushed,
dry  skin. Mydriasis, blurred
vision, excitement and delir-
ium, headache, and  confu-
sion may be observed.

Intravenous
Management:
hydration, antiemetics, and
electrolyte  correction  may
be  necessary. If the  severity
of the anticholinergic alkaloid intoxication warrants intervention (hyperther-
mia, delirium), an  antidote, physostigmine, is  available. Consultation  with  a
Poison Control Center should be considered for either syndrome. See “Poison-
ing by Plants with Anticholinergic (Antimuscarinic) Poisons,” p. 21.

References
Halim AF, Collins RP, Berigari MS. Alkaloids produced by Cestrum nocturnum and Cestrum
diurnum. Planta Med 1971;20:44–53.
Kasali OB, Krook L, Pond WG, Wasserman RH. Cestrum diurnum intoxication in normal
and hyperparathyroid pigs. Cornell Vet 1977;67:190–221.
Sarkar K, Narbaitz R, Pokrupa R, Uhthoff HK. The ultrastructure of nephrocalcinosis
induced in chicks by Cestrum diurnum leaves. Vet Pathol 1981;18:62–70.

120

Chelidonium

Chelidonium majus L.
Family: Papaveraceae

Common  Names: Celandine, Celandine  Poppy, Elon  Wort, Felonwort, Rock
Poppy, Swallow Wort, Tetterwort

Description: This herb grows 1 to 3 feet in height. The yellow ﬂower is 0.5 to
0.75 inch in diameter with four petals. Leaves are divided into three to ﬁve lobes.
The leaves, stems, and buds are whitish and hairy. The sap is reddish-orange.
This plant blooms from March to August.

Toxic Part: The whole plant is poisonous.

Toxin: Chelidonine, an isoquinoline alkaloid.

Clinical Findings: This plant is seldom ingested because of its unpleasant smell
and taste. However, it is used as an herbal preparation for assorted maladies.
Acute ingestions may cause nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramping, diarrhea,
and dehydration. Chronic ingestions of herbals or extracts containing chelido-
nium may cause cholestatic liver toxicity.

Management: For acute toxicity, intravenous hydration, antiemetics, and elec-
trolyte replacement may be necessary for patients with severe gastrointestinal
symptoms, particularly  children. Consultation  with  a  Poison  Control  Center
should be considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,”
p. 28.

Chelidonium majus (left)

Chelidonium majus, close-up of leaves
and ﬂowers (below)

Chrysanthemum

121

References
Benninger J, Schneider HT, Schuppan D, Kirchnor T, Hahn EG. Acute hepatitis induced 
by greater celandine (Chelidonium majus). Gastroenterology 1999;117:1234–
1237.
Greving I, Meister V, Monnerjahn C, Muller KM, May B. Chelidonium majus: Rare reason
for severe hepatotoxic reaction. Drug Saf 1998;7(suppl 1):S66–S69.
Spegazzini E, Najera M, Carpano S, Bergamini L, Esposito P. Valuation of chelidonine in
Chelidonium majus L. (Papaveraceae) cultivated in Argentina. Acta Farm Bonaerense 1993;
12:69–72.

Chrysanthemum species
Family: Compositae (Asteraceae)

Common  Names: Chrysanthemum,
Mum

Description: The  chrysanthemum  is 
a  very  commonly  cultivated  plant
consisting  of 100  to  200  species  of
annuals or perennials, with innumer-
introduced 
able  hybrids 
into  the 
horticultural 
trade. They  can  be 
low growing and shrubby or 3 feet or
more  in  height, depending  on  the
species and the way it is grown. Leaves
are  alternate,
forming 
a  basal  rosette, and  often  aromatic.
The  ﬂowers  are  solitary  or  in  clus-
ters, and  are  white, yellow, orange,
pink, red, or purple, and very showy.

sometimes 

Distribution: Native  mostly 
to
Europe  and  Asia  with  some  from
South  Africa, these  plants  are  very
common  in  annual  and  perennial
gardens  and  borders, as  pot  plants,
and in the ﬂoral trade.

Toxic Part: Flower head.

Chrysanthemum sp., ﬂower (above)

Chrysanthemum sp. (below)

122

Cicuta

Chrysanthemum sp., ﬂower

Toxin: Arteglasin  A, and
other sesquiterpene lactones.

Clinical  Findings: Contact
dermatitis caused by contact
sensitization  is  a  common
complaint  among  handlers
Immediate
of
this  plant.
hypersensitivity 
(allergic)
reactions are common.

Management: Symptomatic
and  supportive  care. Con-
sultation  with  a  Poison
Control  Center  should  be
considered.

References
de Jong NW, Vermeulen AM, van Wijk RG, de Groot H. Occupational allergy caused by
ﬂowers. Allergy 1998;53:204–209.
Kuno Y, Kawabe Y, Sakakibara S. Allergic contact dermatitis associated with 
photosensitivity, from alantolactone in a chrysanthemum farmer. Contact Dermatitis
1999;40:224–225.

Cicuta species
Family: Umbelliferae (Apiaceae)
Cicuta bulbifera L.
Cicuta douglasii J. M. Coult. & Rose
Cicuta maculata L.

Common  Names: Water  Hemlock, Beaver  Poison, Children’s  Bane, Cicutaire,
Death-of-Man, Musquash Poison, Musquash Root, Spotted Cowbane

Description: Most species of Cicuta have a similar appearance and may grow to
a height of 6 feet. The leaves are two or three times pinnately compound. The
ﬂowers are small, whitish, and heavily scented. In the underground portion of
mature plants, there is a bundle of chambered tuberous roots. A yellow, oily sap
emerges from the cut stem and has a distinct odor of raw parsnip. These plants
are found only in wet or swampy ground.

Distribution: Species of Cicuta are found throughout the United States (except
Hawaii) and Canada and are among the most toxic plants in North America.

Toxic Part: The whole plant, particularly the roots, is poisonous.

Cicuta

123

Toxin: Cicutoxin, an unsatu-
rated,
long-chain  aliphatic
alcohol, a gamma-aminobu-
tyric  acid  (GABA)  receptor
antagonist  or  potassium
channel blocker.

Toxic
Clinical  Findings:
ingestions often occur when
the  plant  is  mistaken  for  a
similar appearing but edible
wild  plant  such  as  Daucus
carota L.
(Queen  Anne’s
lace). Onset of symptoms is
rapid, usually within 1 hour
of
Symptoms
include  nausea, vomiting,
salivation, and trismus. Gen-
eralized  seizures  also  may
occur. Death  may  occur  if
seizures do not terminate.

ingestion.

Management: Supportive care,
including airway management
and  protection  against  rhab-
domyolysis-associated  com-
plications (e.g., electrolyte abnormalities and renal insufﬁciency) should be given.
Rapidly acting anticonvulsants, such as diazepam or lorazepam, should be adminis-
tered for persistent seizures.Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be con-
sidered.See “Poisoning by Plants with Convulsive Poisons (Seizures),”p.25.

Cicuta maculata

References
Carlton BE, Tufts E, Girard DE. Water hemlock poisoning complicated by rhabdomyolysis
and renal failure. Clin Toxicol 1979;14:87–92.
CDC. Water hemlock poisoning—Maine 1992. MMWR (Morb Mortal Wkly Rep) 1994;43:
229–331.
Heath KB. A fatal case of apparent water hemlock poisoning. Vet Hum Toxicol 2001;43:
35–36.
Knutsen OH, Paszkowshi P. New aspects in the treatment of water hemlock poisoning.
J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1984;122:157–166.
Straub U, Wittstock U, Schubert R, et al. Cicutoxin from Cicuta virosa—a new and potent
potassium channel blocker in T lymphocytes. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1996;219:
332–336.

124

Clematis

Clematis species
Family: Ranunculaceae

Common Names: Clematis, Blue Jessamine, Bluebell, Cabeza de Viejo, Cascarita,
Clematite, Curly Heads, Devil’s Hair, Devil’s Thread, Flamula, Headache Weed,
Leather Flower, Herbe aux Geaux, Curl Flower, Liane Bon Garçon, Pipe-stem,
Sugar-bowls, Traveler’s  Joy, Vase  Flower, Vase  Vine, Virgin’s  Bower, Yerba  de 
Pordioseros.

Description: There are many species of this perennial ﬂowering herb and climber.
The leaves are usually compound and have a superﬁcial resemblance to poison
ivy. The ﬂowers can range from small in the native species to large and very showy
in  the  hybrid  cultivars. The
fruits  are  small, ﬂattened,
and terminated by a plume of
white hairs.

Clematis cv. ‘Jackmanii,’ close-up of ﬂower (above)

Clematis cv. ‘Niobe’ (below)

Distribution: Clematis are
native  to  Canada  and  the
north 
temperate  United
States; cultivated  varieties
are  available  commercially
throughout 
the  United
States  and  West  Indies  and
are commonly used as vines
in gardens.

Toxic Part: The  whole  plant
is toxic.

Toxin: Protoanemonin, an
irritant.

from 

Clinical  Findings: There  are
no  adequately  documented
human poisonings, and clin-
ical descriptions are derived
primarily 
animal
reports. Intense  pain  and
inﬂammation  of the  mouth
with  blistering, ulceration,
and  profuse  salivation  can
occur. Bloody  emesis  and
diarrhea develop in associa-
tion  with  severe  abdominal

Clematis

125

Clematis paniculata

Clematis virginiana

cramps. Central  nervous  system  involvement  is  manifested  by  dizziness,
syncope, and seizures.

Management: Most  exposures  result  in  minimal  or  no  toxicity. Intravenous
hydration, antiemetics, and  electrolyte  replacement  may  be  necessary  for
patients with severe gastrointestinal symptoms, particularly in children. Con-
sultation with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See “Poisoning by
Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

If seizures  occur, rapidly  acting  anticonvulsants, such  as  intravenous
diazepam, should be utilized along with other supportive measures. Consulta-
tion with a Poison Control Center should be strongly considered.

References
Cos P, Hermans N, De Bruyne T, et al. Further evaluation of Rwandan medicinal plant
extracts for their antimicrobial and antiviral activities. J Ethnopharmacol 2002;79:155–163.
Kern JR, Cardellina JH. Native American medicinal plants. Anemonin from the horse
stimulant Clematis hirsutissima. J Ethnopharmacol 1983 Jul;8:121–123.
Lancaster AH. Clematis dermatitis. South Med J 1937;30:207.
Shao B, Qin G, Xu R, Wu H, Ma K. Triterpenoid saponins from Clematis chinensis.
Phytochemistry 1995;38:1473–1479.
Turner NJ. Counter-irritant and other medicinal uses of plants in Ranunculaceae by native
peoples in British Columbia and neighbouring areas. J Ethnopharmacol 1984;11:181–201.

126

Clivia

Clivia species
Family: Amaryllidaceae

Common Name: Kafﬁr Lily

Description: Straplike leaves arise from a swollen leaf base (bulb) and may be
arranged  in  two  opposing  rows. The  showy  orange  or  red  ﬂowers  form  in  a
cluster on a leaﬂess stalk. The mature fruit is a red, pulpy berry.

Distribution: Although native
to Africa, this lily is commonly
cultivated as a house or garden
plant.

Toxic  Part: All  parts  of this
plant are toxic.

Toxin: Lycorine  and  related
phenanthridine alkaloids (see
Narcissus).

Clinical  Findings: Ingestion
of small  amounts  produces
few  or  no  symptoms. Large
exposures may cause nausea,

Clivia miniata

Clivia nobilis (right)

Clivia nobilis, ﬂowers (below)

Clusia

127

vomiting, abdominal  cramping, diarrhea, dehydration, and  electrolyte 
imbalance.

Management: Intravenous hydration, antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement
may be necessary for patients with severe gastrointestinal effects, particularly in
children. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See
“Poisoning by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

References
Amico A, Stefanizzi L, Bruno S. Osservazioni morfologiche, estrazione e localizzazione di
alcaloidi in Clivia miniata Regel. Fitoterapia 1979;50:157.
Morton JF. Plants Poisonous to People in Florida and Other Warm Areas. Hurricane Press,
Miami, 1971.

Clusia rosea Jacq.
Family: Guttiferae (Clusiaceae)

Common Names: Autograph tree, Balsam Apple, Copey, Cupey, Figuier Maudit
Marron, Pitch Apple, Scotch Attorney, Wild Mamee

Description: This tree may be 20 to 50 feet high and grows on rocks or other
trees. The leaves are ovate and leathery, 3 to 8 inches in diameter. The ﬂowers
are white tinged with pink and have a golden center. Globulose fruit, the size of
a golf ball, turn brown and open when mature.

Distribution: Species  of Clusia grow  in  the  West  Indies, southern  Florida, and 
Hawaii.

Toxic Part: The golden viscous sap and the fruit are toxic.

Clusia rosea, close-up of ﬂower

Toxin: An  unidentiﬁed  gas-
trointestinal  irritant  (possi-
bly nemorosone).

Clinical  Findings: Nausea,
vomiting, abdominal cramp-
ing, and diarrhea may occur.

If
severe 
Management:
symptoms
gastrointestinal 
occur,
intravenous  hydra-
tion, antiemetics, and  elec-
trolyte  replacement  may  be
necessary, particularly 
in
children. Consultation  with
a  Poison  Control  Center

128

Colchicum

Clusia rosea, open fruit (above)

Clusia rosea, fruit (right)

should be considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,”
p. 28.

Reference
Cuesta-Rubio O, Velez-Castro H, Frontana-Uribe BA, Cardenas J. Nemorosone, the major
constituent of ﬂoral resins of Clusia rosea. Phytochemistry 2001;57:279–283.

Colchicum species
Bulbocodium species
Family: Liliaceae
Bulbocodium vernum L. (=Colchicum vernum (L.) Ker-Gawl.)
Colchicum autumnale L.
Colchicum speciosum Steven

Common  Names: Autumn  Crocus, Crocus, Fall  Crocus, Meadow  Saffron,
Mysteria, Naked Boys, Vellorita, Wonder Bulb

Description: Colchicum species  are  members  of the  Lily  family  and  are  culti-
vated for their long, tubular, purple or white ﬂowers, which emerge from the
underground bulb. Colchicum autumnale is a species that produces ﬂowers in
the following autumn, which then die back, and its leaves appear only during
the spring.

Colchicum

129

Colchicum autumnale, ﬂowers in Autumn
(above)

Colchicum autumnale, ﬂowers in Autumn
(left)

Colchicum autumnale, leaves appearing in Spring

Distribution: Colchicum species
are grown outdoors in gardens
or may be forced into bloom in
pots.

Toxic Part: The  whole  plant
(Colchicum
is  poisonous.
autumnale
is  a  commer-
cial  source  for  medicinal
colchicine.)

Toxin: Colchicine, a  cyto-
toxic  alkaloid  capable  of
inhibiting  microtubule  for-
mation.

Clinical  Findings: Ingestion
may cause initial oropharyngeal pain followed in several hours by intense gas-
trointestinal  symptoms. Abdominal  pain  and  severe, profuse, persistent  diar-
rhea may develop, causing extensive ﬂuid depletion and its sequelae. Colchicine
may  subsequently  produce  peripheral  neuropathy, bone  marrow  suppression,
and cardiovascular collapse.

Management: The intoxication has a prolonged course due to the slow absorp-
tion of colchicine. Aggressive symptomatic and supportive care is critical, with
prolonged  observation  of symptomatic  patients. Consultation  with  a  Poison

130

Colocasia

Control  Center  should  be  strongly  considered. See “Poisoning  by  Plants  with
Mitotic Inhibitors,” p. 29.

References
Brvar M, Kozelj G, Osredkar J, Mozina M, Gricar M, Bunc M. Acute poisoning with autumn
crocus (Colchicum autumnale L.). Wien Klin Wochenschr. 2004;116:205–208.
Danel VC, Wiart JF, Hardy GA, Vincent FH, Houdret NM. Self-poisoning with Colchicum
autumnale L. ﬂowers. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 2001;39:409–411.
Harris R, Marx G, Gillett M, Kark A, Arunanthy S. Colchicine-induced bone marrow
suppression: Treatment with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. J Emerg Med
2000;18:435–440.
Klintschar M, Beham-Schmidt C, Radner H, Henning G, Roll P. Colchicine poisoning by
accidental ingestion of meadow saffron (Colchicum autumnale): Pathological and
medicolegal aspects. Forensic Sci Int 1999;106:191–200.
Mullins ME, Carrico EA, Horowitz BZ. Fatal cardiovascular collapse following acute
colchicine ingestion. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 2000;38:51–54.

Colocasia species
Family: Araceae
Colocasia esculenta (L.) Schott (=C. esculenta (L.) Schott var. antiquorum (Schott) 

F. T. Hubb. & Rehder; C. antiquorum Schott)

Colocasia gigantea (Blume) Hook. f.

Common  Names: Caraibe, Cocoyam, Dasheen, Eddo, Elephant’s  Ear, Kalo,
Malanga Islena, Malanga deux Palles, Taro, Tayo Bambou, Yautía Malanga

Colocasia esculenta (right)

Colocasia esculenta (below)

Conium

131

Description: These  large  ornamentals  are  grown  for  their  huge, shiny, heart-
shaped leaves or for their edible tuber. The ﬂowers are in a short spadix sur-
rounded by a yellow spathe.

Distribution: Elephant’s ear grows in the West Indies, south Florida, southern
California, Guam, and Hawaii as landscape plants or for food. They are some-
times used as indoor plants in the remainder of the country.

Toxic Part: The leaves are injurious.

Toxin: Insoluble crystals (raphides) of calcium oxalate.

Clinical  Findings: A  painful  burning  sensation  of the  lips  and  mouth  result 
from ingestion. There is an inﬂammatory reaction, often with edema and blis-
tering. Hoarseness, dysphonia, and dysphagia may result.

Management: The pain and edema recede slowly without therapy. Cool liquids
or demulcents held in the mouth may bring some relief. Analgesics may be indi-
cated. The insoluble oxalate in these plants does not cause systemic oxalate poi-
soning. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See
“Poisoning by Plants with Calcium Oxalate Crystals,” p. 23.

References
Mihailidou H, Galanakis E, Paspalaki P, Borgia P, Mantzouranis E. Pica and the elephant’s
ear. J Child Neurol 2002;17:855–856.
Tagwireyi D, Ball DE. The management of Elephant’s Ear poisoning. Hum Exp Toxicol
2001;20:189–192.

Conium maculatum L.
Family: Umbelliferae (Apiaceae)

Common Names: Bunk, California Fern, Cashes, Cigue, Herb Bonnett, Kill Cow,
Nebraska  Fern, Poison  Hemlock, Poison  Parsley, Poison  Root, St. Bennett’s
Herb, Snake  Weed, Spotted  Hemlock, Spotted  Parsley, Winter  Fern, Wode
Whistle

Description: This plant resembles wild carrot (Daucus carota L.) with large lacy
leaves, but  the  root  is  white. The  leaves  may  extend  to  4  feet, and  both  stem 
and leaves may be spotted with purple. When crushed, the leaves produce an 
offensive  “mousy” odor. The  small  white  ﬂowers  are  borne  in  ﬂat  clusters
(umbels).

Distribution: This  plant  is  now  naturalized  in  most  of the  northern  and 
temperate zones of the United States and Canada (but not Alaska).

Toxic Part: The whole plant is poisonous, particularly the root and seeds.

132

Conium

Conium maculatum, close-up of ﬂowers
(above)

Conium maculatum (right)

Conium maculatum, leaves

Toxin: Coniine  and  related
nicotine-like alkaloids.

Clinical  Findings: Given  its
resemblance  to  wild  carrot,
misidentiﬁcation 
accounts
for  most  poisonings. Initial
gastrointestinal  effects  may
be followed by those typical
of nicotine  poisoning; these
include  hypertension,
large
pupils, sweating, and perhaps
seizures. Severe  poisoning
produces  coma, weakness,
and paralysis that may result
in  death  from  respiratory
failure.

Management: Symptomatic and supportive care should be given, with attention
to  adequacy  of ventilation  and  vital  signs. Atropine  may  reverse  some  of
the  toxic  effects. Consultation  with  a  Poison  Control  Center  should  be 
strongly  considered. See  “Poisoning  by  Plants  with  Nicotine-like  Alkaloids,”
p. 30.

Convallaria

133

References
Drummer OH, Roberts AN, Bedford PJ, Crump KL, Phelan MH. Three deaths from
hemlock poisoning. Med J Aust 1995;162:592–593.
Frank BS, Michelson WB, Panter KE, Gardner DR. Ingestion of poison hemlock (Conium
maculatum). West J Med 1995;163:573–574.
Lopez TA, Cid MS, Bianchini ML. Biochemistry of hemlock (Conium maculatum L.)
alkaloids and their acute and chronic toxicity in livestock. A review. Toxicon 1999;37:
841–865.
Vetter J. Poison hemlock (Conium maculatum L.). Food Chem Toxicol 2004;42:1373–1382.

Convallaria majalis L.
Family: Liliaceae

Common Names: Conval Lily, Lilia-O-Ke-Awawa, Lily-of-the-Valley, Mayﬂower,
Muguet

Description: These small perennials have two oblong leaves and a ﬂower stalk
bearing  small, drooping, bell-shaped  white  ﬂowers  on  one  side. Occasionally,
orange-red  ﬂeshy  berries  form. Convallaria spreads  by  underground  roots  to
form thick beds.

Distribution: These Eurasian plants have escaped from cultivation throughout
the  northern  and  temperate  United  States  and  eastern  Canada. They  are 

Convallaria majalis, individual plant in
ﬂower (left)

Convallaria majalis, used as ground cover
(below)

134

Coriaria

commonly sold as potted plants in the ﬂorist trade, especially during the winter
months when they are forced into ﬂower, as well as used in landscaping.

Toxic Part: The whole plant is poisonous, as is the water in which ﬂowers have
been kept.

Toxin: Convallotoxin, a digitalis-like cardioactive steroid, and irritant saponins.

Clinical Findings: Most exposures result in minimal or no toxicity. Large expo-
sures have the potential to cause systemic toxicity. Pain in the oral cavity, nausea,
emesis, abdominal  pain, cramping, and  diarrhea  develop  after  ingestion.
Dysrhythmias  have  a  variable  latent  period  that  depends  on  the  quantity
ingested. Symptoms are usually expressed as sinus bradycardia, premature ven-
tricular contractions, atrioventricular conduction defects, or ventricular tachy-
dysrhythmias. Hyperkalemia, if present, may be an indicator of toxicity.

Management: Gastrointestinal  decontamination  as  appropriate, serial  electro-
cardiograms, and  serum  potassium  determinations  should  be  performed. If
poisoning is seriously considered, digoxin-speciﬁc Fab should be administered.
Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See “Poison-
ing by Plants with Cardioactive Steroids/Cardiac Glycosides,” p. 24.

References
Edgerton PH. Symptoms of digitalis-like toxicity in a family after accidental ingestion of lily-
of-the-valley plant. J Emerg Nurs 1989;15:220–223.
Krenzelok EP, Jacobsen TD, Aronis J. Lily-of-the-valley (Convallaria majalis) exposures: Are
the outcomes consistent with the reputation? J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1996;34:601.
Lamminpaa A, Kinos M. Plant poisonings in children. Hum Exp Toxicol 1996;15:245–249.
Moxley RA, Schneider NR, Steinegger DH, Carlson MP. Apparent toxicosis associated with
lily-of-the-valley (Convallaria majalis) ingestion in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1989;195:
485–487.

Coriaria myrtifolia L.
Family: Coriariaceae

Common Names: Myrtle-leaved Sumac, Myrtle-leaved Tanner’s Sumac, Redoul

Description: Species of Coriaria are shrubs or small trees with opposite leaves,
small greenish ﬂowers, and a purple-black berry-like fruit.

Distribution: Coriaria are in cultivation as an ornamental shrub in the south-
ern United States and California.

Toxic Part: The fruit is poisonous.

Toxin: Coriamyrtin, a gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) antagonist.

Clinical Findings: Exposures often involve ingestion of the berries. Most cases
have few or no symptoms. Substantial ingestion causes excitatory neurological
effects including seizures.

Corynocarpus

135

Coriaria myrtifolia, close-up of leaves and
fruit (above)

Coriaria myrtifolia (left)

Management: Gastrointestinal decontamination. If seizures occur, rapidly acting
anticonvulsants, such  as  intravenous  diazepam, should  be  utilized  along  with
other supportive measures. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should
be  considered. See “Poisoning  by  Plants  with  Convulsive  Poisons  (Seizures),”
p. 25.

References
Alonso Castell P, Moreno Galdo A, Sospedra Martínez E, Rogueta Mast, Hidalgo Albert E,
Iglesias Birengve J. Serious intoxication by Coriaria myrtifolia: A case study. An Esp Pediatr
1997;46:81–82.
de Haro L, Pommier P, Tichadou L, Hayek-Lanthois M,Arditti J. Poisoning by Coriaria 
myrtifolia Linnaeus: a new case report and review of the literature Toxicon 2005;64:600–603.
Skalli S, David JM, Benkirane R, Zaid A, Soulaymani R. Acute intoxication by redoul
(Coriaria myrtifolia L.). Three observations. Presse Med 2002;31:1554–1556.

Corynocarpus laevigatus J.R. Forst. & G. Forst.
Family: Corynocarpaceae

Common Names: This species is referred to as Karaka nut in New Zealand.

Description: Corynocarpus is  a  tree  with  thick, dark  green, glossy  leaves. The
greenish-yellow ﬂowers are borne in panicles. The plum-shaped fruit is green,
turning to orange when mature, and 1 to 1.5 inches long.

136

Corynocarpus

Corynocarpus laevigatus, close-up of
ﬂower buds (above)

Corynocarpus laevigatus (left)

Distribution: Corynocarpus is native to New Zealand and has been introduced
in California, Mexico, and the Gulf Coast.

Toxic Part: The uncooked seeds are poisonous, but the ripe ﬂesh of the fruit is
edible.

Toxin: Hydrolysis of the prototoxin karakin yields the toxin beta-nitropropionic
acid, an  irreversible  inhibitor  of succinate  dehydrogenase, a  mitochondrial
Krebs cycle enzyme.

Clinical Findings: There are no adequately documented human poisonings, and
clinical  descriptions  are  derived  primarily  from  animal  reports, in  which
admininstration produces convulsions followed by cardiovascular collapse.

Management: Symptomatic and supportive care should be given. Consultation
with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See “Poisoning by Plants
with Convulsive Poisons (Seizures),” p. 25.

Reference
Bell ME. Toxicology of karaka kernel, karakin, and beta-nitropropionic acid. N Z J Sci
1974;17:327–334.

Crassula

137

Crassula argentea Thunb.
Family: Crassulaceae

Common  Names: Baby  Jade, Cauliﬂower  Ears, Chinese  Rubber  Plant, Dollar
Plant, Dwarf Rubber Plant, Jade Plant, Jade Tree, Japanese Rubber Plant

Description: This is a small pot plant that can grow as a shrub to 10 feet tall. The
leaves are obovate in shape, thick and ﬂeshy, 1 to 2 inches long, and sometimes
tinged in red along the margins. Some cultivars of this species are variegated with
white, blue, and  cream. The  plant  has  white  or  pink  ﬂowers  when  planted 
outdoors but rarely ﬂowers when kept as a pot plant indoors in cooler climates.

Distribution: A plant originally from Southern Africa, it is grown indoors as an
ornamental where it is common, and outdoors in warmer areas that do not go
below 40°F.

Toxic Part: It is unclear what toxin is responsible for toxicity when it occurs.

Toxin: Unknown.

Clinical Findings: This plant is commonly ingested by children because of its wide
availability as a household plant. Typical ingestions do not lead to systemic toxic-
ity. Exposure to the sap from the plant or leaves may produce contact dermatitis.

Management: Symptomatic  and  supportive  care. Consultation  with  a  Poison
Control Center should be considered.

Crassula argentea (left)

Crassula argentea, close-up of leaves and
ﬂowers (below)

138

Crinum

Reference
Krenzelok EP, Jacobsen TD. Plant exposures: A national proﬁle of the most common plant
genera. Vet Hum Tox 1997;39:248–249.

Crinum species
Family: Amaryllidaceae
Crinum asiaticum L.
Crinum bulbispermum (Burm.) Milne-Redh. & Schweick.

Common Names: Crinum Lily, Lirio, Lys, Spider Lily
Description: These  plants  have  onion-like  bulbs. The  straplike  leaves  are
arranged  in  a  spiral. Lily-like  ﬂowers  appear  on  a  solid, leaﬂess  stem  and  are
usually white but may be pink or red.
Distribution: Some species are native to the southern United States and the West
Indies. Crinum bulbispermum, from  South  Africa, and  C. asiaticum  L., from
tropical Asia, are most frequently encountered in cultivation.
Toxic Part: All parts of the plant are toxic, particularly the bulb.
Toxin: Lycorine and related phenanthridine alkaloids (see Narcissus).
Clinical Findings: Toxicity is uncommonly reported in humans.Ingestion of small
amounts produces few or no symptoms. Large exposures may cause nausea, vom-
iting, abdominal cramping, diarrhea, dehydration, and electrolyte imbalance.

Crinum asiaticum, close-up of ﬂowers

Crinum bulbispermum, young plants
showing bulbs

Crotalaria

139

Management: Intravenous hydration, antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement
may be necessary for patients with severe gastrointestinal symptoms, particu-
larly in children. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be consid-
ered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

References
Beutner D, Frahm AW. New alkaloids from Crinum asiaticum. Planta Med 1986;52:523.
Fennell CW, van Staden J. Crinum species in traditional and modern medicine.
J Ethnopharmacol 2001;78:15–26.

Crotalaria species
Family: Leguminosae (Fabaceae)
Crotalaria fulva Roxb. (= C. berteriana DC.)
Crotalaria incana L.
Crotalaria juncea L.
Crotalaria lanceolata E. Mey.
Crotalaria retusa L.
Croatalaria sagittalis L.
Crotalaria spectabilis Roth

Crotalaria sagittalis

Common  Names: Ala  de 
Pico, Cascabeillo, Helio-
trope, Maromera, Pete-Pete,
Rabbit-Bells, Rattle  Box,
Rattleweed, Shake-Shake

Description: These  coarse
herbs  have  stout  branches
and  sweetpea-like  ﬂowers
that  are  usually  yellow. The
seeds in the persistent dried
fruits  cause  a  rattling  noise
when the fruit is shaken.

Distribution: Crotalaria retusa
is cultivated in Florida. Other
species  of Crotalaria
are
common  weeds  with  wide 
distribution in the West Indies
and all parts of North America
except Alaska and Canada.

140

Cryptostegia

Toxic Part: The whole plant is poisonous.

Toxin: Monocrotaline and other pyrrolizidine alkaloids.

Clinical Findings: Intoxication may result from contamination of grain by Crota-
laria seeds or use of the plant in herbal teas as a folk remedy. Substantial short-
term exposure (particularly to Crotalaria fulva and C. juncea) may cause acute
hepatitis, and chronic exposure to lower levels may cause hepatic veno-occlusive
disease (Budd–Chiari syndrome) and in some cases pulmonary hypertension.

Management: There is no known speciﬁc therapy. Consultation with a Poison
Control  Center  should  be  considered. See  “Poisoning  by  Plants  with
Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids,” pp. 31.

References
Brooks SHE, Miller CG, McKenzie K, Avdrctsch JJ, Bras G. Acute veno-occlusive disease of
the liver. Arch Pathol 1970;89:507–520.
Copple BL, Ganey PE, Roth RA. Liver inﬂammation during monocrotaline hepatotoxicity.
Toxicology 2003;190:155–169.
Roth RA, Ganey PE. Platelets and the puzzles of pulmonary pyrrolizidine poisoning. Toxicol
Appl Pharmacol 1988;93:463–471.
Stewart MJ, Steenkamp V. Pyrrolizidine poisoning: A neglected area in human toxicology.
Ther Drug Monit 2001;23:698–708.
Tandon BN, Tandon RK, Tandon HD, Narndranathan M, Joshi YK. An epidemic of
veno-occlusive disease of liver in central India. Lancet 1976;2:271–272.

Cryptostegia species
Family: Asclepiadaceae
Cryptostegia grandiﬂora R. Br.
Cryptostegia madagascariensis Bojer ex Decne.

Cryptostegia grandiﬂora, vine

Common Names: Purple Alla-
manda, Alamanda  Morada
Falsa,Caoutchouc,Estrella del
Norte, India  Rubber  Vine,
Pichuco, Rubber Vine

These 
are
Description:
that  some-
woody  vines 
times  appear  shrubby. The
smooth, shiny  green  leaves
are oblong and about 3 to 4
inches long. When the leaves 
or  stems  are  injured, they
exude  a  milky  latex  that  is

Cryptostegia

141

Cryptostegia grandiﬂora, leaf
showing milky latex

Cryptostegia grandiﬂora leaves

Cryptostegia madagascariensis

characteristic  of this  family.
The  ﬂowers  are  purple;
those of Cryptostegia grandi-
ﬂora are  more  lilac, and
those of C. madagascariensis
are  more  red. These  species
may be distinguished by the
length  of
the  calyx  (the
green  envelope  holding  the
ﬂower), being  0.5  inch  and
1.25 
respec-
tively. Hybrids  of the  two
species  are  also  found. The
seeds are contained in fruits
typical  of
the  Milkweed
family.

inches 

long,

Distribution: These plants are cultivated in south Florida and are common in
the West Indies and Guam.

Toxic Part: All parts of this plant are poisonous.

Toxin: Cardioactive steroids resembling digitalis.

Clinical Findings: There are no adequately documented human poisonings, and
clinical  descriptions  are  derived  primarily  from  animal  reports. Substantial
ingestion may lead to toxicity. Poisoning would be expected to produce clinical

142

Cycas

ﬁndings typical of cardioactive steroid poisoning. Toxicity has a variable latent
period  that  depends  on  the  quantity  ingested. Dysrhythmias  are  usually
expressed  as  sinus  bradycardia, premature  ventricular  contractions, atrioven-
tricular conduction defects, or ventricular tachydysrhythmias. Hyperkalemia, if
present, may be an indicator of toxicity.

Management: Gastrointestinal  decontamination  as  appropriate, serial  electro-
cardiograms, and  serum  potassium  determinations  should  be  performed. If
serious cardioactive steroid toxicity is considered, digoxin-speciﬁc Fab should
be administered. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be consid-
ered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Cardioactive Steroids/Cardiac Glycosides,”
p. 24.

References
Brain C, Fox VE. Suspected cardiac glycoside poisoning in elephants (Loxodonta africana).
J S Afr Vet Assoc 1994;65:173–174.
Kamel MS, Assaf MH, Abe Y, Ohtani K, Kasai R, Yamasaki K. Cardiac glycosides from
Cryptostegia grandiﬂora. Phytochemistry 2001;58:537–542.
Mathur KS, Dube BK, Kumar P. Cryptostegia grandiﬂora poisoning simulating digitalis
toxicity. J Indian Med Assoc 1964;42:381–385.

Cycas species
Family: Cycadaceae
Cycas circinalis L.
Cycas revoluta Thumb.

Common Names:
Cycas  circinalis: Crozier  Cycas, False  Sago  Palm, Fern  Palm, Queen  Sago,

Sago Palm

Cycas revoluta: Japanese Fern Palm, Japanese Sago Palm, Sago Palm

Description: Cycas species have stems from 3 to15 feet tall or sometimes higher
(C. revoluta sometimes  grows  to  21  feet  in  height). They  are  evergreen
shrubs/trees  with  glossy  green  pinnate  leaves  from  4  to  8  feet  long. Cycas 
revoluta has basal leaﬂets gradually reduced to spines whereas C. circinalis does
not have spines at the leaf base. The ﬂeshy seeds are borne on small modiﬁed
leaves.

Distribution: Cycas  circinalis is  native  to  India  and  is  now  widely  cultivated.
Cycas revoluta, originally native to Japan, is also widely cultivated.

Toxic Part: Seeds, leaves, unprocessed stem ﬂour.

Cycas

143

Cycas revoluta (above)

Cycas circinalis (left)

Toxin: Beta-methylamino-l-alanine (BMAA), a neurotoxic amino acid that is 
a  N-methyl-d-aspartate  (NMDA)  receptor  agonist  (produced  by  a  symbiotic
cyanobacteria on the roots of the plants).

Clinical Findings: Acute ingestion of large amounts produces nausea, vomiting,
and abdominal cramping, and diarrhea may be profound. Chronic consump-
tion  of BMAA, either  directly  or  by  eating  ﬂying  foxes  that  have  bioaccumu-
lated  the  toxin  by  eating  the  seeds, is  associated  with  a  neurodegenerative
disorder that is similar to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Alzheimer’s disease.

Management: If severe gastrointestinal symptoms occur, intravenous hydration,
antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement may be necessary, particularly in chil-
dren. The  progressive  neurologic  disease  does  not  have  any  known  therapy.
Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See “Poison-
ing by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

References
Chang SS, Chan YL, Wu ML, et al. Acute Cycas seed poisoning in Taiwan. J Toxicol Clin
Toxicol 2004;42:49–54.
Cox PA, Sacks OW. Cycad neurotoxins, consumption of ﬂying foxes, and ALS-PDC disease
in Guam. Neurology 2002;58:956–959.
Murch SJ, Cox PA, Banack SA. A mechanism for slow release of biomagniﬁed cyanobacterial
neurotoxins and neurodegenerative disease in Guam. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2004;101:12228–12231.
Shaw CA, Wilson JM. Analysis of neurological disease in four dimensions: Insight from ALS-
PDC epidemiology and animal models. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2003;27:493–505.

144

Daphne

Daphne mezereum L.
Family: Thymelaeaceae
Common Names: Bois Gentil, Bois Joli, Daphne, Dwarf Bay, February Daphne,
Flax Olive, Lady Laurel, Mezereum, Mezereon, Spurge Laurel, Spurge Olive
Description: Daphne species  are  deciduous  rounded  shrubs  that  grow  4  to 
5 feet in height. Leaves are elliptical, 3.5 by 0.75 inches. Flowers are lilac-purple
or  white  and  grow  in  clusters. They  appear  before  the  leaves. Fruits  are 
scarlet or yellow and have a pit.

Daphne mezereum, Spring ﬂowers and young
leaves (above)

Daphne mezereum var. album, close-up of ﬂowers
(below)

Distribution: This  Eurasian
plant has escaped from cul-
tivation  in  the  northeastern
United  States  and  eastern
Canada.
Toxic Part: The  whole  plant
is  poisonous, including  the
ﬂower, but  most  intoxica-
tions  have  been  associated
with the fruit and seeds.
Toxin: Daphnin, the  gluco-
side of daphnetin (a hydrox-
ycoumarin), and  mezerein
(a vesicant).
Clinical  Findings: There  are
no  adequately  documented
and 
human  poisonings,
clinical  descriptions 
are
based  on  the  nature  of the
toxin. Ingestion  of the  fruit 
or  chewing  the  bark  may
produce oropharyngeal pain,
vesication, and  dysphagia.
This  may  be  followed  by
vomiting,abdominal cramp-
ing, diarrhea, dehydration,
and electrolyte imbalance.
Management: Symptomatic
and  supportive  care  should
be  given. Consultation  with
a  Poison  Control  Center is
strongly suggested. See “Poi-
soning  by  Plants  with  Gas-
trointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

Datura

145

Daphne mezereum, fruit and ﬂowers

Reference
Noller HG. Mezereon poisoning in a child: A contribution towards recognition of Daphne
poisoning. Monatsschr Kinderheilkd 1955;103(7):327–330.

Datura species
Brugmansia species
Family: Solanaceae
Datura inoxia Mill. (= D.

Datura metel

meteloides DC.)

Datura metel L. (= D. fastuosa L.)
Datura stramonium L.
Datura stramonium L. var. tatula
(L.) Torrey (= D. tatula L.; this
name was used for purple-
ﬂowered plants)
Datura wrightii Regel 
Brugmansia arborea (L.) Lagerh.
Brugmansia × candida Pers. (=

Datura × candida (Pers.) Saff.)

Datura sanguinea Ruiz & Pav. (=

Brugmansia sanguinea (Ruiz &
Pav.) D. Don)

146

Datura

Datura metel cv. ‘Cornucopaea’ (above)

Datura stramonium (below)

Datura stramonium, fruit and leaves

Brugmansia suaveolens
(Humb. & Bonpl. ex
Willd.) Bercht. & J. Presl.
(= Datura suaveolens
Humb. & Bonpl. ex
Willd.)

Sorciers,

Common Names:
Datura metel: Devil’s Trumpet,
Downy Thorn Apple, Horn of
Plenty
Datura 
stramonium: Bel-
ladona  de  Pobre, Chamico,
Concombre  Zombi, Devil’s
Trumpet, Estramonio, Herbe
aux 
Jamestown
Weed, Jimson Weed, Kikania,
La’Au-Hano, Mad Apple, Peo
de  Fraile, Pomme  Épineuse,
Stink  Weed, Thorn  Apple,
Toloache
Datura wrightii: Indian Apple,
Sacred Thorn Apple
Brugmansia  arborea: Angel’s
Trumpet,Maikoa,Tree Datura
B r u g m a n s i a × c a n d i d a :
Angel’s Trumpet, Belladonna,
Campana, Cornucopia, Flori-
pondio,Nana-Honua
Brugmansia suaveolens: Flori-
fundia

Description: Datura stramo-
nium is an annual. The stem
is  stout, hollow,
simple,
upright, or  branched  and
grows upright to 3 to 4 feet.
The leaves have a long stem,
are 6 to 8 inches long, lobed,
and have an offensive smell.
The  white  ﬂowers  are  fun-
nel-form, large  and  showy,

Datura

147

Datura wrightii

Brugmansia candida, ﬂowers

and point upward. The prickly fruits are capsules about 2 inches long, which
split open along four seams to expose numerous small, kidney-shaped, brown-
ish-black  seeds  when  mature  and  dry. Brugmansia × candida may  grow  to  20
feet in height. The leaves are ovate, usually have smooth edges, and are pubes-
cent. The ﬂowers are white, yellowish-white, or pinkish-white; they are 10 to 12
inches long, funnel-form, have distinct teeth, and hang downward. The fruit of
Brugmansia is  smooth  and  does  not  split  open  after  drying. Other  species  of
Datura and  Brugmansia generally  resemble  the  respective  foregoing  descrip-
tions.

Distribution: Datura stramonium is a weed throughout the West Indies, Canada,
and  the  United  States, including  Hawaii  but  not Alaska. Datura  inoxia grows 
in the West Indies, Texas, and New Mexico. Datura metel, a native of China, is
cultivated  as  an  ornamental  and  has  escaped  in  portions  of the  West  Indies.
Datura wrightii is native to Mexico and the southwestern United States and is
widely cultivated. Brugmansia species are native to South America. They are cul-
tivated as ornamentals in the West Indies, Hawaii, and warmer regions of the
United States.

148

Datura

Brugmansia suaveolens (above)

Datura sanguinea, ﬂower (right)

Toxic Part: The  whole  plant  is  toxic, including  the  nectar; however, seeds  are
most often implicated in poisoning. Both the seeds and dried leaves are used to
deliberately  induce  intoxications  when  a  hallucinogenic  action  is  sought.
The dried leaves of Datura stramonium are used by herbalists in the treatment
of a number of conditions, including asthma and spastic cough, even though
the plant is known to be toxic.

Toxin: Atropine, scopolamine, and other anticholinergic alkaloids.

Clinical Findings: Intoxication  results  in  dry  mouth  with  dysphagia  and  dys-
phonia, tachycardia, and urinary retention. Elevation of body temperature may
be accompanied by ﬂushed, dry skin. Mydriasis, blurred vision, excitement and
delirium, headache, and confusion may be observed.

Management: Initially, symptomatic and supportive care should be given. If the
severity  of the  intoxication  warrants  intervention  (hyperthermia, delirium),
an  antidote, physostigmine, is  available. Consultation  with  a  Poison  Control
Center  should  be  considered. See  “Poisoning  by  Plants  with  Anticholinergic
(Antimuscarinic) Poisons,” p. 21.

References
Chang SS, Wu ML, Deng JF, Lee CC, Chin TF, Liao SJ. Poisoning by Datura leaves used as
edible wild vegetables. Vet Hum Toxicol 1999;41:242–245.
Francis PD, Clarke CF. Angel trumpet lily poisoning in ﬁve adolescents: clinical ﬁndings and
management. J Paediatr Child Health 1999;35:93–95.
Isbister GK, Oakley P, Dawson AH, Whyte IM. Presumed Angel’s trumpet (Brugmansia)
poisoning: Clinical effects and epidemiology. Emerg Med (Fremantle) 2003;15:376–382.
Klein-Schwartz W, Oderda GM. Jimsonweed intoxication in adolescents and young adults.
Am J Dis Child 1984;138:737–739.

Dieffenbachia

149

Miraldi E, Masti A, Ferri S, Barni Comparini I. Distribution of hyoscyamine and
scopolamine in Datura stramonium. Fitoterapia 2001;72:644–648.
Sopchak CA, Stork CM, Cantor RM, Ohara PE. Central anticholinergic syndrome due to
Jimson weed: physostigmine therapy revisited? J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1998;36:43–45.
Tiongson J, Salen P. Mass ingestion of Jimson Weed by eleven teenagers. Del Med J
1998;70:471–476.

Dieffenbachia species
Family: Araceae
Dieffenbachia seguine (Jacq.) Schott (Note: D. seguine (Jacq.) Schott ‘maculata’ is

a cultivar [= D. maculata (Lodd.) G. Don; D. picta Schott]

Common Names: Camilichigui, Canne-á-gratter, Canne-madère, Dicha, Dum-
bcane, Dumb Plant, Mother-in-Law’s Tongue, Pela Puerco, Rábano, Tuft Root

Description: These  tall, erect, unbranched  plants  often  are  planted  in  pots  in
homes or are planted outdoors in tropical areas. Their leaves are large, oblong,
pointed, and have variegated coloration; for example, different shades of green
on a leaf or green splotched with ivory markings.

Distribution: Species of Dieffenbachia may be cultivated outdoors in southern
Florida  and  Hawaii. These  are  among  the  most  decorative  pot  plants  for 
malls, ofﬁces, waiting  rooms, and  lobbies, as  they  require  low  light  and  little
care.

Toxic Part: The whole plant is injurious.

Toxin: Raphides  of water-insoluble  calcium  oxalate  and  unveriﬁed  proteina-
ceous toxins.

Dieffenbachia seguine

Clinical  Findings: Chewing
leaf produces  an
on  the 
almost 
immediate 
intense
pain.

Management: The  pain  and
edema  in  the  oral  cavity
recede slowly without treat-
ment. Cool liquids or demul-
cents held in the mouth may
bring some relief. Analgesics
may be indicated. The insol-
uble oxalates in these plants
do not produce systemic poi-
soning in humans. Consulta-
tion  with  a  Poison  Control

150

Digitalis

Center should be considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Calcium Oxalate
Crystals,” p. 23.

References
Chitre A, Padmanabhan S, Shastri NV. A cysteine protease of Dieffenbachia maculata. Indian
J Biochem Biophys 1998;35:358–363.
Cumpston KL, Vogel SN, Leikin JB, Erickson TB. Acute airway compromise after brief
exposure to a Dieffenbachia plant. J Emerg Med 2003;25:391–397.
Franceschi VR, Nakata PA. Calcium oxalate in plants: Formation and function. Annu Rev
Plant Biol 2005;56:41–71.
Mrvos R, Dean BS, Krenzelok EP: Philodendron/Dieffenbachia ingestions: Are they a
problem? Clin Toxicol 1991;29:485–491.
Pedaci L, Krenzelok EP, Jacobsen TD, Aronis J. Dieffenbachia species exposures: An evidence-
based assessment of symptom presentation. Vet Hum Toxicol 1999;41:335–338.
Rauber A. Observations on the idioblasts of Dieffenbachia. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol
1985;23:79–90.
Watson JT, Jones RC, Siston AM, et al. Outbreak of food-borne illness associated with plant
material containing raphides. Clin Toxicol (Phila) 2005;43:17–21.

Digitalis purpurea L.
Family: Scrophulariaceae

Common Names: Digitalis, Fairy Bells, Fairy Cap, Fairy Glove, Fairy Thimbles,
Folks  Glove, Foxglove, Ladies’ Thimbles, Lion’s  Mouth, Pop-Dock, Rabbit
Flower, Thimbles, Throatwort, Witches’ Thimbles

Description: These biennial plants, growing to 3 feet tall, are commonly culti-
vated in gardens. Drooping ﬂowers form along the central stalk. They may be
purple, pink, or white and are usually spotted on the inside.
Digitalis purpurea

Distribution: Digitalis
is
grown in cultivation and has
escaped  locally. Plants  are
hardy  in  the  north  temper-
ate  zones  including  Canada
and Alaska.

Toxic Part: The  whole  plant
is  poisonous. Leaves  from
the  plant  are  a  commercial
source of the drug digitalis.

Toxin: Digitoxin, digoxin
(cardioactive  steroids), irri-
tant saponins.

Digitalis

151

Digitalis purpurea, leaves

Digitalis purpurea, close-up of ﬂowers

Clinical Findings: Pain in the mouth, nausea, emesis, abdominal pain, cramp-
ing, and diarrhea develop after ingestion. Toxicity has a variable latent period
that  depends  on  the  quantity  ingested. Dysrhythmias  are  usually  expressed 
as  sinus  bradycardia, premature  ventricular  contractions, atrioventricular 
conduction defects, or ventricular tachydysrhythmias. Hyperkalemia, if present,
may be an indicator of toxicity.

Management: Gastrointestinal  decontamination  as  appropriate, serial  electro-
cardiograms, and  serum  potassium  determinations  should  be  performed. If
serious cardioactive steroid toxicity is considered, digoxin-speciﬁc Fab should
be administered. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be consid-
ered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Cardioactive Steroids/Cardiac Glycosides,”
p. 24.

References
Barrueto F, Jortani S, Valdes R, Hoffman RS, Nelson LS. Cardioactive steroid poisoning from
an herbal cleansing product. Ann Emerg Med 2003;41:396–399.
Newman LS, Feinberg MW, LeWine HE. Clinical problem-solving. A bitter tale. N Engl J
Med 2004;351:594–599.
Simpkiss M, Holt D. Digitalis poisoning due to the accidental ingestion of foxglove leaves.
Ther Drug Monit 1983;5:217.
Slifman NR, Obermeyer WR, Aloi BK, et al. Contamination of botanical dietary
supplements by Digitalis lanata. N Engl J Med 1998;339:806–811.

152

Dirca

Woolf AD, Wenger T, Smith TW, Lovejoy FH Jr. The use of digoxin-speciﬁc Fab fragments
for severe digitalis intoxication in children. N Engl J Med 1992;326:1739–1744.

Dirca palustris L.
Family: Thymelaeaceae

Common Names: American Mezereon, Bois de Plomb, Leather Bush, Leather-
wood, Leaver Wood, Moosewood, Rope  Bark, Swamp Wood, Wickerby  Bush,
Wickup, Wicopy

Description: This  deciduous  shrub  grows  to  6  feet. The  leaves  are  2  to  3 
inches long and elliptical. Pale yellow ﬂowers on short stalks appear from the
branches before leaﬁng. The
fruit is green to reddish and
about 0.25 inch in diameter.

Dirca palustris, branch with leaves (above)

Dirca palustris, close-up of ﬂowers (below)

Distribution: Dirca grows in
woods from New Brunswick
to  Ontario  and  Minnesota
south to Florida and west to
Louisiana and Oklahoma.

Toxic Part: The  whole  plant
is 
the
bark.

toxic, particularly 

Toxin: Unidentiﬁed.

Clinical Findings: No serious
intoxications  have  been
reported, probably  because
chewing on the plant causes
immediate  burning  and  has
a nauseating taste. The bark
can produce severe dermati-
tis, particularly during ﬂow-
ering and fruiting periods.

Management: Symptomatic
and  supportive  care. Con-
sultation  with  a  Poison
Control  Center  should  be
considered.

Duranta

153

Reference
Ramsewak RS, Nair MG, DeWitt DL, Mattson WG, Zasada J. Phenolic glycosides from Dirca
palustris. J Nat Prod 1999;62:1558–1561.

Duranta repens L.
(= D. plumferi Jacq.)
Family: Verbenaceae

Common Names: Azota  Caballo, Bois  Jambette, Cuentas  de  Oro, Garbancillo,
Golden Dewdrop, Lila, Mais Bouilli, Pigeon Berry, Skyﬂower, Velo de Novia

Description: A large shrub,Duranta is frequently cultivated as a hedge.Flowers are
small and light blue or white. The plant forms masses of persistent orange fruits.

Distribution: Golden  dewdrop  is  native  to  Key  West, Florida. It  and  related
species are naturalized in southern Texas, are common in the West Indies, and
are cultivated elsewhere, particularly in Hawaii and Guam.

Toxic Part: The fruit is poisonous.

Toxin: Saponin.

Clinical Findings: There are no adequately documented human poisonings, and
clinical descriptions are based on the nature of the toxin. Poisoning is reputed
to  cause  somnolence, increased  body  temperature, mydriasis, tachycardia,
edema  of lips  and  eyelids, and  convulsions. Gastrointestinal  irritation  may
occur.

Duranta repens, close-up of ﬂowers and fruit
(left)

Duranta repens, ﬂowering shrub with mature
fruit (below)

154

Echium

Management: If severe gastrointestinal symptoms occur, intravenous hydration,
antiemetics, and  electrolyte  replacement  may  be  necessary, particularly  in 
children. Consultation  with  a  Poison  Control  Center  should  be  considered.
See “Poisoning by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

Reference:
Takeda Y, Morimoto Y, Matsumoto T, et al. Iridoid glucosides from the leaves and stems of
Duranta erecta. Phytochemistry 1995;35:829–833.

Echium species
Family: Boraginaceae
Echium plantagineum L. (= E. lycopsis L.)
Echium vulgare L.

Echium vulgare

Common  Names: Paterson’s
Curse, Blue  Devil  or  Weed,
Snake Flower,Viperine,Viper’s
Bugloss

Echium are
Description:
biennial  plants. The  erect,
bristly  stems  grow  to  a
height  of about  2  feet  and
are  speckled  with  red. The
alternate  leaves  are  oblong,
prickly, and  about  6  inches
long. The bright blue ﬂowers
grow in recurved spikes. The
fruits are small nutlets.

Distribution: These Eurasian
plants  are  now  widespread
weeds 
in  eastern  North
America; they  are  encoun-
tered  infrequently  west  of
the  Mississippi  but  grow
throughout  transco  tinental
Canada. They  are  present
also in Hawaii.

Toxic Part: The  whole  plant
is poisonous.

Toxin: Pyrrolizidine  alka-
loids.

Ephedra

155

Clinical Findings: There are no adequately documented human poisonings, and
clinical descriptions are based on the nature of the toxin. Substantial short-term
exposure may cause acute hepatitis, and chronic exposure to lower levels may
cause  hepatic  veno-occlusive  disease  (Budd–Chiari  syndrome)  and  in  some
cases pulmonary hypertension.

Management: There is no known speciﬁc therapy. Consultation with a Poison
Control  Center  should  be  considered. See  “Poisoning  by  Plants  with
Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids,” p. 31.

Reference
Dellow J, Seaman J. Distribution of Echium plantagineum and its association with
pyrrolizidine alkaloid poisoning in horses in New South Wales. Plant Prot Q 1985;1:79–83.

Ephedra species
Family: Ephedraceae

Common Names: Clapweed, Ephedra, Joint Fir, Ma Huang, Mormon Tea

Description: This evergreen shrub ranges from 1.5 to 4 feet tall, depending on
the species. It has long narrow stems and scalelike leaves with small cones borne
at the nodes.

Distribution: Ephedra  sinica, one  species  of Ephedra, is  a  plant  native  to 
northern  China  and  has  been  utilized  as  a  Chinese  herbal  preparation  for 

Ephedra gerardiana, close-up of stems (left)

Ephedra gerardiana (below)

156

Epipremnum

thousands  of years. Many  other  species  of Ephedra are  native  to  the  western
United States.

Toxic Part: All parts of the plant contain the active alkaloid ephedrine. However,
the largest concentration is found in the stems. As a Chinese herbal remedy, ma
huang is derived from the dried crushed stem of this plant.

Toxin: Ephedrine, a sympathomimetic alkaloid, as well as pseudoephedrine and
norpseudoephedrine.

Clinical Findings: Ephedrine is a stimulant that is similar in chemical structure
and  clinical  effect  to  amphetamine. Ingestion  of this  compound  occurs  most
commonly  as  an  herbal  product  and  is  associated  with  nausea, vomiting,
increased heart rate, increased blood pressure, sweating, light-headedness, and
weakness. Excessive  dosing, such  as  when  used  for  its  amphetamine-like  psy-
choactive effects, can lead to cardiovascular complications such as stroke, heart
attack, heart conditions, and sudden death.

Management: Most  ingestions  result  in  little  or  no  toxicity. Many  of the 
amphetamine-like effects can be reduced with use of benzodiazepines, such as
diazepam. In addition, symptomatic and supportive care should be instituted.
The blood pressure may need to be reduced using appropriate antihypertensive
agents, such  as  phentolamine  or  nitroprusside. The  administration  of beta-
adrenergic antagonists, including labetalol, alone is contraindicated. Consulta-
tion with a Poison Control Center should be strongly considered.

References
Haller CA, Benowitz NL. Advance cardiovascular and central nervous system events
associated with dietary supplements containing ephedra alkaloid. N Engl J Med
2000;343:1833–1838.
Naik SD, Freudenberger RS. Ephedra-associated cardiomyopathy. Ann Pharmacother
2004;38:400–403.
Samenuk D, Link MS, Homoud MK, et al. Adverse cardiovascular events temporally
associated with ma huang, an herbal source of ephedrine. Mayo Clin Proc 2002;77:12–16.
Soni MG, Carabin IG, Grifﬁths JC, Burdock GA. Safety of ephedra: Lessons learned. Toxicol
Lett 2004;150:97–110.

Epipremnum aureum (Linden & André) Bunt.
(= Pothos aureus Linden & André; Raphidophora aurea (Linden & André)

Birdsey; Scindapsus aureus (Linden & André) Engl. & K. Krause)

Family: Araceae

Common  Names: Amapalo, Amarillo, Devil’s  Ivy, Golden  Ceylon  Creeper,
Golden  Hunter’s  Robe, Golden  Pothos, Hunter’s  Robe, Ivy  Arum, Malanga,
Trepadora Pothos, Solomon Island Ivy, Taro Vine, Variegated Philodendron

Eriobotrya

157

Description: The pothos is a
climbing vine with large (up
to  30  inches)  heart-shaped
leaves 
are  usually
streaked with yellow.

that 

Distribution: Pothos  is  an
outdoor  plant  in  the  West
Indies,
southern  Florida,
Hawaii, and Guam, growing
on  trees  for  support  up 
to  a  height  of 40  feet. It  is
ubiquitous  elsewhere  as  an
indoor  pot  plant,
either 
in  hanging
supported  or 
baskets, where  the 
leaves
grow to only a few inches in
length.

Epipremnum aureum

Toxic Part: The whole plant is injurious.

Toxin: Raphides  of water-insoluble  calcium  oxalate  and  unveriﬁed  proteina-
ceous toxins.

Clinical Findings: Chewing on the leaf produces an almost immediate intense
oral pain.

Management: The pain and edema in the mouth recede slowly without treatment.
Cool liquids or demulcents held in the mouth may bring some relief. Analgesics
may be indicated. The insoluble oxalates in these plants do not produce systemic
poisoning in man. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be consid-
ered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Calcium Oxalate Crystals,” p. 23.

References
Paulsen E, Skov P, Andersen K. Immediate skin and mucosal symptoms from pot plants and
vegetables in gardeners and greenhouse workers. Contact Dermatitis 1998;39:166–170.
Rauber A. Observations on the idioblasts of Dieffenbachia. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol
1985;23:79–90.

Eriobotrya japonica (Thunb.) Lindl.
Family: Rosaceae

Common Names: Japanese Medlar, Japanese Plum, Loquat

Description: This  small  evergreen  tree  grows  to  about  20  feet. The  large  stiff
leaves are rough to the touch and 8 to 12 inches in length. The fragrant, dingy

158

Eriobotrya

white  ﬂowers  grow  in  clus-
ters. The fruit is pear shaped,
yellow, and  about  3  inches
long.

Distribution: The loquat, an
edible  fruit, is  cultivated  in
California, Florida, the West
Indies, the Gulf Coast states,
and Hawaii.

Toxic Part: The pit kernel is
toxic; the  unbroken  seed  is
harmless.

Toxin: Amygdalin, a  cyano-
genic glycoside.

Clinical  Findings: There  are 
no  adequately  documented
human poisonings, and clini-
cal  descriptions  are  derived 
primarily from animal reports.
Because the cyanogenic glyco-
sides  must  be  hydrolyzed  in 
the gastrointestinal tract before
cyanide ion is released, several
hours may elapse before poi-
soning occurs. Abdominal pain, vomiting, lethargy, and sweating typically occur ﬁrst.
Cyanosis does not occur.In severe poisonings,coma develops and may be accompanied
by convulsions and cardiovascular collapse.

Eriobotrya japonica, young fruit

Management: Symptomatic  and  supportive  care  should  be  given. Antidotal
therapy is available. Consultation with a Poison Control Center is strongly sug-
gested. See “Poisoning by Plants with Cyanogenic Compounds,” p. 27.

Reference
Weber MA, Garner M. Cyanide toxicosis in Asian small-clawed otters (Amblonyx cinereus)
secondary to ingestion of loquat (Eriobotrya japonica). J Zoo Wildl Med 2002;33:
145–146.

Euonymus

159

Euonymus americanus, fruit (above)

Euonymus americanus, close-up of mature fruit
(below)

Euonymus species
Family: Celastraceae
Euonymus americanus L.
Euonymus atropurpureus Jacq.
Euonymus europaeus L.
Euonymus occidentalis Nutt.

ex Torrey

Common Names:
Euonymus americanus: Burs-
ting Heart, Hearts-Bursting-
with-Love, Strawberry Bush
Euonymus atropurpureus: Burn-
ing Bush, Indian Arrow Wood,
Wahoo
Euonymus  europaeus: Euro-
pean  Spindle  Tree, Spindle
Tree
Euonymus occidentalis: Wes-
tern Burning Bush

Description:
Euonymus  americanus: This
small  shrub  has  green
stems and almost stemless
leaves  that  are  bright
green  and  ovate, coming
to  a  sharp  point. The
ﬂowers are green-purple.
The fruit is a warty capsule
that is red when mature; it
splits open to reveal a con-
spicuous, scarlet, ﬂeshy
aril  in  which  the  seed  is
enclosed.

Euonymus atropurpureus: This
small tree branches close
to  the  ground  and  has
thin  gray  bark. The 
leaves  are  opposite  and
ﬁnely toothed along the 

160

Euonymus

Euonymus atropurpureus, close-up of mature fruit

margin. Flowers  and 
mature  fruit  are  purple.
The fruit is a four-lobed
capsule with scarlet arils
and  a 
small  brown 
seed. The  fruit  persists
through winter.

Euonymus  europaeus: The
European  spindle  tree
resembles  E. atropur-
pureus, but  the  ﬂowers
are  yellow-green,
the
mature  capsule  is  pink,
and  the  aril  is  bright
orange.

Euonymus  occidentalis: This
small  tree  grows  to  20
feet. The  leaves  are  op-
posite, broadest  at  the
base  (0.5  to  2  inches),
and  1.2  to  3.5  inches
long;
they  are  ﬁnely
toothed  on  the  margin.
Flowers  are  brownish-
purple. The fruit capsule
has 
lobes  and 
is  reddish-purple  when
mature. The aril is red.

three 

Distribution:
Euonymous  americanus: This  species  grows  from  southeastern  New  York  to

Florida, west to southern Illinois, Missouri, Oklahoma, and Texas.

Euonymous atropurpureus: This species grows in Ontario and New York, south
to Georgia, and west to North Dakota and Texas (excluding South Carolina
and Louisiana).

Euonymous europaeus: The European spindle tree was introduced from Europe.
It  has  spread  from  cultivation  in  Massachusetts  to  Wisconsin  and 
southward.

Euonymous occidentalis: The Western burning bush grows on the Paciﬁc Coast

from British Columbia to southern California.

Toxic Part: Intoxications have been reported only from the fruit of Euonymus
europaeus. The bark from E. atropurpureus once was used medicinally (Euony-
mus N.F. VII).

Euonymus

161

Euonymus europaeus, close-up of ﬂowers (above)

Euonymus europaeus, close-up of mature fruit (below)

Toxin: Euonymus  europaeus
contains  a  digitalis-like  car-
dioactive 
a
number  of alkaloids  with 
gastrointestinal irritant prop-
erties.

steroid 

and 

Clinical  Findings: There  are
few reported human cases of
human  exposure, and  they
are  not  readily  accessible.
Ingestion  of
the  fruit  of
Euonymus  europaeus may
lead to persistent emesis and
watery diarrhea after a delay
of 10  to  12  hours. Fever,
hallucinations, somnolence,
coma, and convulsions have
been  reported. The  bark  of
E. atropurpureus is cathartic
and may produce emesis.

Intravenous
Management:
hydration, antiemetics, and
electrolyte replacement may
be  necessary  for  patients
with  severe  gastrointestinal
symptoms, particularly 
in
children. Consultation  with
a  Poison  Control  Center
should  be  considered. See
“Poisoning  by  Plants  with
Cardioactive Steroids/Cardiac
Glycosides,” p. 24.

References
Cooper MR, Johnson AW. Poisonous Plants in Britain and Their Effects on Animals and Man.
Her Majesty’s Stationery Ofﬁce, London, England, 1984, p 305.
Frohne D, Pfander HJ. A Colour Atlas of Poisonous Plants. Wolfe, London, England, 1983,
p 291.

162

Euphorbia

Euphorbia species
Family: Euphorbiaceae
Euphorbia cotinifolia L.
Euphorbia cyathophora Murray (= Poinsettia cyathophora (Murray) Klotzsch &

Garcke)

Euphorbia lactea Haw.
Euphorbia lathyris L.

Euphorbia marginata Pursh
Euphorbia milii Des Moul.
Euphorbia myrsinites L.
Euphorbia pulcherrima
Willd.ex Klotzsch 

(= Poinsettia pulcherrima
(Klotzsch) Graham)

Euphorbia tirucalli L.

Common Names:
Euphorbia  cotinifolia: Car-
rasco, Mala  Mujer, Mexican
Shrubby Spurge, Red Spurge,
Yerba Lechera
Euphorbia  cyathophora: Cor-
azón de María, Fiddler’s

Euphorbia cyathophora

Euphorbia lactea

Euphorbia lactea, close-up of stem

Euphorbia

163

Euphorbia lactea (above)

Spurge, Fire-on-the-Moun-
tain, Maravilla, Mexican
Fire  Plant, Painted  Leaf
lactea: Cande-
Euphorbia 
labra  Cactus, Candelero,
Cardón, Dragon  Bones,
False 
Hatrack
Cactus, Mottled Spurge
Euphorbia 
Spurge, Mole Plant
Euphorbia marginata: Ghost-
weed,Mountain Snow,Snow-
on-the-Mountain
Euphorbia milii: Christ Plant,
Christ  Thorn, Corona  de
Cristo, Couronne du Christ,
Crown of Thorns, Gracia de
Dios
Euphorbia myrsinites: Creep-
ing  Spurge, Donkey  Tail
Spurge, Myrtle Spurge
Euphorbia 
pulcherrima:
Christmas  Flower, Christ-
mas  Star, Easter  Flower,
Feuilles  St-Jean, Flor  de
Flor  de
Noche  Buena,
Pascua,
Plant,
Mexican Flame Leaf, Painted
Leaf, Poinsettia
Euphorbia  tirucalli: Disci-
plinilla, Esqueleto, Finger
Tree, Indian  Spurge  Tree,
Malabar Tree, Monkey Fiddle, Milkbush, Pencil Tree, Rubber Euphorbia

Euphorbia lathyris, fruit (below)

Cactus,

lathyris: Caper

Lobster 

Description: The  genus  Euphorbia contains  about  1,600  species  of extremely
variable form; plants may appear as herbs, shrubs, or trees. Many are cactuslike
with thorns. Some species contain a milky latex.

Distribution: Species  of Euphorbia are  found  throughout  the  United  States,
except  Alaska. There  are  approximately  20  species  in  Canada. The  genus  is 
widespread in the West Indies and Guam. Their predominant use is as house or
garden plants.

164

Euphorbia

Toxic Part: The latex of some species is poisonous.

Toxins: Differ  based  on  species, but  include  complex  diterpene  esters  (e.g.,
phorbol esters) and mitogenic lectins.

Clinical Findings: Ingestion may produce gastrointestinal symptoms. Skin expo-
sure may produce an irritant
dermatitis  or  be  corrosive,
depending on the species of
Euphorbia. Ocular  exposure
may  produce  an 
irritant 
keratoconjunctivitis.

Most  inquiries  on  poi-
soning concern the poinset-
tia (Euphorbia pulcherrima),
which  produces  either  no
effect (orally or topically) or
occasional  cases  of vomit-
ing. This  plant  does  not
contain irritant diterpenes.

Management: Symptomatic
and  supportive  care. Con-
sultation  with  a  Poison
Control  Center  should  be
considered. See  “Poisoning
by Plants with Gastrointesti-
nal Toxins.” p. 28.

Euphorbia marginata, leaves and ﬂowers

Euphorbia milii var. splendens, leaves and
ﬂowers

Euphorbia milii, close-up of ﬂowers
and leaves

Ficus

165

Euphorbia pulcherrima

Euphorbia tirucalli

References
D’Archy WG. Severe contact dermatitis from poinsettia. Arch Dermatol 1974;109:909–910.
Krenzelok EP, Jacobsen TD, Aronis JM. Poinsettia exposures have good outcomes . . . just as
we thought. Am J Emerg Med 1996;14:671–674.
Winek CL, Butala J, Shanor SP, Fochtman FW. Toxicology of poinsettia. Clin Toxicol 1978;13:27–45.

Ficus species
Family: Moraceae
Ficus benjamina L.
Ficus elastica Roxb. ex. Hornem.
Ficus pumila L.

166

Ficus

Ficus benjamina, branch (above)

Ficus benjamina, close-up of leaves and fruit
(below)

Common Names:
Ficus  benjamina: Benjamin
Tree, Weeping  Fig, Java  Fig,
Laurel, Tropic  Laurel, Weep-
ing Laurel, Small-leaved Rub-
ber Plant
Ficus elastica: Indian Rubber
Tree, Rubber  Tree, Rubber
Plant, Assam Rubber
Ficus  pumila: Creeping  Fig,
Climbing Fig, Creeping Rub-
ber Plant

Description: There are about
800 species of trees, shrubs,
and  vines  in  this  family, all
with milky sap in their leaves
and stems, some with cling-
ing roots, native to the trop-
ical regions, primarily of the
Old World.

Ficus  benjamina: This  is  a
commonly cultivated tree
or  shrub, with  drooping
branches, and thin, leath-
ery, ovate-elliptical leaves
to 5 inches long.There are
several  forms, cultivated
both indoors in pots and
tubs  and  outdoors 
in
warm  areas  where  it  can
grow to 75 feet tall.

Ficus elastica: This is another
commonly cultivated species,
with  large  stems, and  thick,
oblong  or  elliptical  leaves,
growing  to  12  inches  long  and  glossy. The  juvenile  form  is  often  cultivated
indoors in pots and tubs,and outdoors this species grows to 50 feet tall when cul-
tivated or 100 feet tall in its native habitat.

Ficus pumila: This vining species is often cultivated as a pot plant indoors or outdoors
in warm areas against walls and other supporting structures.The creeping stems
have leaves to 1 inch long, while on the fruiting branches the leaves are 2 to 4
inches long. The fruits are pear shaped, to 2 inches long.

Galanthus

167

and
Distribution: These 
other Ficus species are com-
monly  cultivated  as  pot
plants in the home,tub plants
in  interior  landscapes, and
outdoors in warm climates.

Toxic  Part: The  sap  of the
plant.

Toxin: Furocoumarins, pso-
ralens, ﬁcin, sesquiterpenoid
glucosides, and  triterpines.
It  is  unclear  which  of these
are primarily responsible for
the dermatologic effects.

Clinical  Findings: Exposure
to the sap from the plant or
leaves  may  produce  contact
dermatitis.

Ficus elastica, branch

Management: Symptomatic  and  supportive  care. Consultation  with  a  Poison
Control Center should be considered.

References
Kitajima J, Kimizuka K, Tanaka Y. Three new sesquiterpenoid glucosides of Ficus pumila
fruit. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo) 2000;48:77–80.
Paulsen E, Skov PS, Andersen KE. Immediate skin and mucosal symptoms from pot 
plants and vegetables in gardeners and greenhouse workers. Contact Dermatitis
1998;39:166–170.
Ragasa CY, Juan E, Rideout JA. A triterpene from Ficus pumila. J Asian Nat Prod Res
1999;1:269–275.

Galanthus nivalis L.
Family: Amaryllidaceae

Common Names: Snowdrop

Description: The snowdrop blooms in early spring. Two grasslike leaves about
4 inches long appear with the ﬂower. The single drooping ﬂower is about 1 inch
long and white marked with green. The fruit is a berry.

Distribution: This  plant  is  native  to  Europe  and  is  cultivated  in  the  northern
United States.

Toxic Part: The bulb is poisonous.

Toxin: Lycorine and related phenanthridine alkaloids (see Narcissus).

168

Gelsemium

Clinical  Findings: Ingestion
of small  amounts  produces
few  or  no  symptoms. Large
exposures may cause nausea,
vomiting, abdominal cramp-
ing, diarrhea, dehydration,
and electrolyte imbalance.

Management: Human  poi-
sonings  are  uncommon  be-
cause  of
the  small  con-
centration  of alkaloids  in
this  plant. Intravenous  hy-
dration,
and
electrolyte replacement may
be  necessary  for  patients
with  severe  gastrointestinal
symptoms, particularly  in  children. Consultation  with  a  Poison  Control 
Center 
“Poisoning  by  Plants  with 
Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

Galanthus nivalis

antiemetics,

should  be 

considered.

See 

Reference
Plaitakis A, Duvoison RC. Homer’s moly identiﬁed as Galanthus nivalis (L.): Physiologic
antidote to stramonium poisoning. Clin Neuropharmacol. 1983;6:1–5.

Gelsemium sempervirens (L.) Aiton
Family: Loganiaceae

Common  Names: Carolina  Jasmine, Carolina  Yellow  Jasmine, Carolina  Wild
Woodbine, Evening  Trumpet  Flower, Madreselva, Wood  Vine, Yellow  Jes-
samine, Yellow False Jessamine

Description: This perennial evergreen shrubby climber has lance-shaped, paired
leaves that are about 4 inches long. The ﬂowers are funnel-form, fragrant, and
bright yellow; they are occasionally solitary, but usually grow in clusters of up
to 6. The fruit is a small ﬂattened capsule with winged seeds.

Distribution: Gelsemium is  found  in  woodlands  from  eastern  Virginia  to 
Tennessee  and  Arkansas, south  to  Florida, and  west  to  Texas. It  is  also  in 
cultivation in these regions and in southern California.

Toxic Part: Most  intoxications  are  associated  with  herbal  preparations  of this
plant; however, there are cases of children who were poisoned after sucking on
the ﬂowers.

Ginkgo

169

Gelsemium sempervirens, ﬂowering shrub
(above)

Gelsemium sempervirens, close-up of ﬂower
(left)

Toxin: Gelsemine, gelsemicine, and related alkaloids.

Clinical Findings: Headache, dizziness, visual disturbances, and dry mouth with
dysphagia and dysphonia result from poisoning. In severe cases, muscular weak-
ness  occurs  and  may  be  manifested  by  falling  of the  jaw  and  marked  ptosis.
There may be signs of strychnine-like action, for example, tetanic contractions
and extensor spasms of the extremities following tendon taps, general rigidity,
trismus, rarely convulsions.

Management: Symptomatic and supportive care should be given. Consultation
with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See “Poisoning by Plants
with Convulsive Poisons (Seizures),” p. 25.

Reference
Blaw ME, Adkisson MA, Levin D, Garriott JC, Tindall RS. Poisoning with Carolina jessamine
(Gelsemium sempervirens [L.] Ait.). J Pediatr 1979;94:998–1001.

Ginkgo biloba L.
Family: Ginkgoaceae

Common Names: Ginkgo, Maidenhair Tree

Description: This is a very common street or ornamental deciduous tree found
in  the  temperate  zone, growing  to  120  feet  tall  with  fan-shaped  green  leaves 
2 to 3 inches long, and yellow drupe-like fruits to 1.2 inches long that smell foul

170

Ginkgo

when  ripe. Some  cultivars
have  variegated  leaves  with
yellow and green color.

Distribution: Native to China,
it is no longer common in the
wild but has been introduced
to temperate regions through-
out the world.

Toxic part: Seeds.

4-O-Methylpyridox-
Toxin:
ine;
inhibits  glutamic  acid
decarboxylase  and  prevents
formation of gamma-amino-
butyric acid (GABA).

Clinical  Findings: Ingestion
of large  amounts  of seeds
may produce seizures, which
may be delayed and may be
recurrent. Typically, vomit-
ing and diarrhea are present
before the onset of seizure.

If

Ginkgo biloba, close-up of branch and leaves

seizures
Management:
occur, rapidly  acting  anti-
convulsants, such  as  intra-
venous diazepam, should be
utilized  along  with  other
supportive  measures. Based  on  the  nature  of the  toxin  and  one  human  case
report, intravenous pyridoxine, dosed as in isoniazid poisoning, may be helpful.
Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See “Poison-
ing by Plants with Convulsive Poisons (Seizures),” p. 25.

References
Hori Y, Fujisawa M, Shimada K, Oda A, Katsuyama S, Wada K. Rapid analysis of 4-O-
methylpyridoxine in the serum of patients with Ginkgo biloba seed poisoning by ion-pair
high-performance liquid chromatography. Biol Pharm Bull 2004;27:486–491.
Kajiyama Y, Fujii K, Takeuchi H, Manabe Y. Ginkgo seed poisoning. Pediatrics 2002;
109:325–327.
Miwa H, Iijima M, Tanaka S, Mizuno Y. Generalized convulsions after consuming a large
amount of gingko nuts. Epilepsia 2001;42:280–281.
Sasaki K, Hatta S, Wada K, Ohshika H, Haga M. Bilobalide prevents reduction of gamma-
aminobutyric acid levels and glutamic acid decarboxylase activity induced by 4-O-
methylpyridoxine in mouse hippocampus. Life Sci 2000;67:709–715.

Gloriosa

171

Gloriosa superba L.

(= G. rothschildiana
O’Brien)

Family: Liliaceae

Common  Names: Climbing
Lily, Gloriosa  Lily, Glory
Lily, Pipa de Turco

lance-shaped 

Description: These climbing
lilies  have  tuberous  roots
and 
leaves
tipped  with  tendrils. The
ﬂowers  are  striking, bright
crimson, and  yellow  with
separated, ﬁnger-like  petals.
The  fruits  are  oblong, 2–5
inches in length and contain globose red seeds.

Gloriosa superba, close-up of ﬂowers

Distribution: The Gloriosa Lily is primarily cultivated and rarely has escaped in
the extreme southern United States, the West Indies, and Hawaii.

Toxic Part: The whole plant is poisonous, particularly the tubers.

Toxin: Colchicine (Colchicum autumnale is a commercial source of this drug.),
a cytotoxic alkaloid capable of inhibiting microtubule formation.

Clinical  Findings: May  cause  initial  oropharyngeal  pain  followed  in  several
hours  by  intense  gastrointestinal  symptoms. Abdominal  pain  and  severe,
profuse, persistent diarrhea may develop, causing extensive ﬂuid depletion and
its sequelae. Colchicine may subsequently produce peripheral neuropathy, bone
marrow suppression, and cardiovascular collapse.

Management: The  intoxication  has  a  prolonged  course  because  of the  slow
absorption of colchicine. Aggressive symptomatic and supportive care is criti-
cal, with prolonged observation of symptomatic patients. Consultation with a
Poison Control Center should be strongly considered. See “Poisoning by Plants
with Mitotic Inhibitors,” p. 29.

References
Aleem HMA. Gloriosa superba poisoning. J Assoc Physicians India 1992;40:541–542.
Mendis S. Colchicine cardiotoxicity following ingestion of Gloriosa superba tubers. Postgrad
Med J 1989;65:752–755.

Note: There is one species for this genus, although many have been recognized in the past.
(Field DV. The genus Gloriosa. Lilies and other Liliaceae. Bulletin (Royal Horticultural Society)
1973:93–95.)

172

Gymnocladus

Milne ST, Meek PD. Fatal colchicine overdose: Report of a case and review of the literature.
Am J Emerg Med 1998;16:603–608.
Nagaratnam N, DeSilva DPKM, DeSilva N. Colchicine poisoning following ingestion of
Gloriosa superba tubers. Trop Geogr Med 1973;25:15.

Gymnocladus dioicus (L.) K. Koch
Family: Leguminosae (Fabaceae)

Common  Names: American  Coffee  Berry, Chicot  Févier, Coffee  Bean, Gros
Févier, Kentucky  Coffee  Bean, Kentucky  Mahogany, Kentucky  Coffee  Tree,
Nicker Tree, Stump Tree

Description: Gymnocladus is a large tree that grows up to 100 feet. Leaves are
alternate, twice compound, and feather like. The greenish-white ﬂowers form
in bunches. The distinctive ﬂat, bulging fruits are 3 to 6 inches long and 1 to 
2  inches  wide; thick  black  seeds  are  embedded  in  a  sticky  green  pulp. The 
pods persist through winter.

Distribution: Gymnocladus grows in southern Ontario south to New York and
Virginia and west to eastern Nebraska; the trees are most common in western
Ohio to Missouri, and are widely cultivated.

Gymnocladus dioicus, leaves

Gymnocladus dioicus, fruit with seeds

Hedera

173

Toxic Part: Seeds and the pulp between the seeds are toxic.

Toxin: Cytisine, a nicotine-like alkaloid.

Clinical Findings: There are no adequately documented human poisonings, and
clinical descriptions are based on the nature of the toxin. The cytisine content
of the  seeds  is  quite  low; and  chewing  one  or  two  would  not  be  expected  to
produce  toxic  effects. The  roasted  seeds  have  been  employed  as  a  coffee  sub-
stitute. Initial gastrointestinal effects may be followed by those typical of nico-
tine poisoning; these include hypertension, large pupils, sweating, and perhaps
seizures. Severe  poisoning  produces  coma, weakness, and  paralysis  that  may
result in death from respiratory failure.

Management: Symptomatic and supportive care should be given, with attention
to  adequacy  of ventilation  and  vital  signs. Atropine  may  reverse  some  of the
toxic effects. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be strongly con-
sidered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Nicotine-like Alkaloids,” p. 30.

Hedera species
Family: Araliaceae
Hedera canariensis Willd.
Hedera helix L.

Common Names:
Hedera canariensis: Algerian Ivy, Canary Ivy, Madeira Ivy
Hedera helix: English Ivy, Common Ivy, Ivy, Yedra

Description: Hedera  species  are  climbing  vines  commonly  cultivated  as  wall
covers. The leaves usually have ﬁve lobes on juvenile shoots and on root-bearing
stems. Mature sections usually have nonlobed leaves on rootfree stems. Its fruits
are berries that are black and globular at maturity.

Distribution: Ivy is commonly employed as an outdoor landscape plant in the
northeastern  United  States, but  is  cultivated  everywhere. These  plants  have
escaped in many areas, particularly in Virginia. They are common houseplants.

Toxic Part: The berry and leaf are poisonous.

Toxin: Hederin, a saponin.

Clinical Findings: There are no adequately documented human poisonings, and
clinical descriptions are based on the nature of the toxin. Most ingestions should
cause little to no toxicity. The saponins are poorly absorbed, but with large expo-
sures, gastrointestinal symptoms of nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramping, and
diarrhea may occur. Allergic sensitization to this plant is common and can cause
severe allergic reactions, particularly contact dermatitis.

174

Heliotropium

Hedera helix, variegated form with fruit (above)

Hedera helix, in Autumn (below)

Management: If severe gastrointestinal symptoms occur, intravenous hydration,
antiemetics, and  electrolyte  replacement  may  be  necessary  for  patients  with
severe  gastrointestinal  symptoms, particularly  children. Consultation  with  a
Poison Control Center should be considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Gas-
trointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

Reference
Garcia M, Fernandez E, Navarro J, del Poz MD, Fernandez de Corres L. Allergic contact
dermatitis from Hedera helix L. Contact Dermatitis 1995;33:133–134.

Heliotropium species
Family: Boraginaceae
Heliotropium angiospermum Murray (= H. parviﬂorum L.)
Heliotropium curassavicum L.
Heliotropium indicum L.

Heliotropium

175

Common Names:
Heliotropium  angiospermum:
Alacrancillo, Crête  de
Coq, Cotorrilla, Dog’s
Tail, Mocos de Pavo, Rabo
de  Alacrán, Scorpion’s
Tail,White or Wild Clary
curassavicum:
Alacrancillo de Playa,Cot-
orrera  de  Playa, Kipikai,
Nena, Salt  Heliotrope,
Seaside Heliotrope, Wild
or Small Seaside Lavender
Heliotropium indicum: Alac-

Heliotropium 

Heliotropium indicum, ﬂowers

rancillo, Cotorrera, Yerba Cotorra or Pico de Cotorra, Indian Heliotrope,
Moco de Pavo, Scorpion Weed, Wild Clary

Description: Heliotropium species are ﬂeshy herbs, mostly annuals that grow to
2 to 4 feet tall. The ﬂowers are white, blue, purple, or pink and appear in scor-
poid clusters (cymes). The fruit is a nutlet that separates into two parts, each
with two nuts.

Distribution: Heliotropium  curassavicum  is  widespread  in  the  United  States
(except Alaska), in southwestern Canada, Mexico, the West Indies, and elsewhere
throughout  the  world. Heliotropium  angiospermum and  H. indicum, an  Old
World plant, are pantropical species in Florida and the West Indies.

Toxic Part: The whole plant is poisonous.

Toxin: Pyrrolizidine alkaloids.

Clinical  Findings: Substantial  short-term  exposure  may  cause  acute  hepatitis,
and  chronic  exposure  to  lower  quantities  may  cause  hepatic  veno-occlusive
disease (Budd–Chiari syndrome) and in some cases pulmonary hypertension.

Management: There is no known speciﬁc therapy. Consultation with a Poison
Control  Center  should  be  considered. See  “Poisoning  by  Plants  with
Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids,” p. 31.

References
Chauvin P, Dillon JC, Moren A, Talbak S, Barakaev S. Heliotrope poisoning in Tadjikistan.
Lancet 1993;341:1663.
Stewart MJ, Steenkamp V. Pyrrolizidine poisoning: A neglected area in human toxicology.
Ther Drug Monit 2001;23:698–708.
Tandon BN, Tandon RK, Tandon HD, et al. An epidemic of veno-occlusive disease of liver in
central India. Lancet 1976;2:271–272.

176

Helleborus

Helleborus niger L.
Family: Ranunculaceae

Common Names: Christmas Rose, Black Hellebore, Hellebore

Description: This evergreen, early-spring-blooming perennial herb grows to 2
feet with stout rootstocks and ovate leaves that are slightly toothed at the apex.
The ﬂower is 2 to 3 inches across with ﬁve white or pinkish-white petals. The
fruit is a small capsule with many glossy black seeds.

Distribution: Hellebores are of European origin and have escaped from culti-
vation  in  the  northern  United  States  and  across  Canada. Other  Helleborus
species, for example, H. foetidus L. and H. viridis L., also have escaped in the
northeastern United States.

Helleborus niger (above)

Helleborus niger cv. ‘Maximus,’ ﬂowers (below)

Toxic Part: The  whole  plant
is poisonous.

Toxin: Hellebrin, helleborin,
and  helleborein,
cardio-
active  steroids  resembling 
digitalis.

Clinical  Findings: Pain  in 
the  mouth, nausea, emesis,
abdominal  pain, cramping,
and  diarrhea  develop  after
ingestion. Poisoning  would
be  expected 
to  produce
Clinical  ﬁndings  typical  of
cardioactive  steroid  poison-
ing. Toxicity  has  a  variable
latent  period  that  depends
on  the  quantity  ingested.
Dysrhythmias  are  usually
expressed as sinus bradycar-
dia, premature  ventricular
contractions, atrioventricu-
lar  conduction  defects, or
ventricular 
tachydysrhyth-
mias. Hyperkalemia,
if
present, may be an indicator
of toxicity.

Do  not  confuse  with
false  hellebore  (Veratrum
viride Aiton, in Liliaceae).

Hippobroma

177

Management: Gastrointestinal  decontamination  as  appropriate, serial  electro-
cardiograms, and  serum  potassium  determinations  should  be  performed. If
serious cardioactive steroid toxicity is considered, digoxin-speciﬁc Fab should
be administered. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be consid-
ered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Cardioactive Steroids/Cardiac Glycosides,”
p. 24.

References
Bossi M, Brambilla G, Cavalli A, Marzegalli M, Regalia F. Threatening arrhythmia by
uncommon digitalic toxicosis. G Ital Cardiol 1981;11:2254–2257.
Holliman A, Milton D. Helleborus foetidus poisoning of cattle. Vet Rec 1990;127:
339–340.

Hippobroma longiﬂora (L.) G. Don
(= Isotoma longiﬂora (L.) C. Presl.; Laurentia longiﬂora (L.) Peterm.)
Family: Campanulaceae

Common Names: Cipril, Feuilles  Crabe, Ginbey, Horse  Poison, Madame  Fate,
Pua-Hoku, Revienta Caballos, Star-of-Bethlehem, Tibey

Description: Hippobroma species are mostly unbranched perennial herbs with
a milky latex. The simple alternate leaves are about 8 inches long. The funnel-
form ﬂower is long (2 to 3 inches), narrow (0.25 inch), and white. The fruit is
a 0.75-inch-long capsule with many small brown seeds.

Distribution: This plant is a weed in the tropics, throughout the West Indies,
Hawaii, and Guam.

Toxic Part: All parts of this plant are poisonous.

Toxin: Diphenyl lobelidiol, a
nicotine-like alkaloid.

Hippobroma longiﬂora

Clinical  Findings: There  are
no  adequately  documented
and 
human  poisonings,
clinical  descriptions 
are
based  on  the  nature  of the
toxin. Initial gastrointestinal
effects  may  be  followed  by
those  typical  of nicotine 
poisoning;
include
hypertension,
large  pupils,
sweating,
perhaps
seizures. Severe  poisoning

these 

and 

178

Hippomane

produces coma, weakness, and paralysis that may result in death from respira-
tory failure.

Management: Symptomatic and supportive care should be given, with attention
to  adequacy  of ventilation  and  vital  signs. Atropine  may  reverse  some  of the
toxic effects. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be strongly con-
sidered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Nicotine-like Alkaloids,” p. 30.

Hippomane mancinella L.
Family: Euphorbiaceae

Common Names: Manchineel Tree, Beach Apple, Mancenillier, Manzanillo

Description: This deciduous tree, native to Central America and the West Indies,
grows  to  about  30  feet, and  has  thick  gray  bark. The  leaves  are  elliptical  and
glossy, and  the  ﬂowers  are  small, greenish-yellow  to  rose  colored. The  fruit
resembles a small crabapple
and has a pleasant odor. The
white 
latex  blackens  on
exposure to air.

Hippomane mancinella (above)

Hippomane mancinella, fruit (below)

Distribution: This  plant
grows  in  the  Florida  Ever-
glades and is common in the
West Indies.

Toxic Part: The latex is found
in all parts of the plant and
is toxic.

Toxin: Hippomane A and B,
diterpenes with a daphnane
skeleton; hippomane  A  (or
M),
identical  to  huratoxin
(from Hura crepitans L.).

Irritant
Clinical  Findings:
damage 
mucosal 
upon
ingestion,
including  severe
gastrointestinal  effects. The
latex  produces  both  direct
and allergic contact dermati-
tis  and  keratoconjunctivitis.
Inhalation  of
the  sawdust
causes cough, rhinitis, laryn-
gitis, and bronchitis.

Hura

179

Management: Symptomatic and supportive care should be given. Extensive irri-
gation should be performed for ocular or dermal exposure. Consultation with
a Poison Control Center should be considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with
Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

References
Adolf W, Hecker E. On the active principles of the spurge family. X. Skin irritants,
cocarcinogens, and cryptic cocarcinogens from the latex of the manchineel tree. J Nat Prod
1984;47(3):482–496.
Rao KV. Toxic principles of Hippomane mancinella. Planta Med 1974;25(2):166–171.

Hura crepitans L.
Family: Euphorbiaceae

Common  Names: Sandbox
Tree, Javillo, Molinillo, Mon-
key’s  Dinner  Bell, Monkey
Pistol, Possum Wood, Sablier,
Salvadera

Hura crepitans, ﬂowers and leaves (above)

Hura crepitans, necklace of seed capsule parts and
Canavalia rusiosperma seeds (below)

Description: This tree grows
to a height of 60 feet or more
with  a  trunk  diameter  of
more  than  3  feet  at  the 
base. The trunk and exposed
roots are covered with short
woody thorns. The leaves are
oval,
slightly  serrate, and
approximately 7 to 8 inches
long. The  green,
inverted,
cone-shaped  male  ﬂowers
are  1.5  to  2  inches  long;
female  ﬂowers  are  bright
red. The woody fruits resem-
ble a small pumpkin and are
about 3 inches wide and 1.5
inches  thick. The  fruit  pod
explodes  with  considerable
force on drying and makes a
popping  noise  that  is  the
basis 
its
common  names. The  seeds
are round and ﬂat.

several  of

for 

180

Hydrangea

Distribution: Hura  crepitans has  limited  distribution  in  southern  Florida  and
Hawaii; it is common in the West Indies.

Toxic Part: The seeds are poisonous.

Toxin: Hurin, a plant lectin (toxalbumin) related to ricin and huratoxin, an ester
of the diterpene daphnane, an irritant.

Clinical  Findings: Irritant  mucosal  damage, including  severe  gastrointestinal
effects, occurs on ingestion. The latex produces both direct and allergic contact
dermatitis  and  keratoconjunctivitis. Inhalation  of the  sawdust  causes  cough,
rhinitis, laryngitis, and bronchitis. Although undescribed, parenteral adminis-
tration  (such  as  by  injection  or  inhalation), or  perhaps  large  ingestion, may
produce life-threatening systemic ﬁndings, including multisystem organ failure,
even  with  small  exposures. The  patient’s  lymphocyte  count  may  be  elevated
because of the mitogenic properties of hurin.

Management: Symptomatic and supportive care should be given. Extensive irri-
gation should be performed for ocular or dermal exposure. Consultation with
a Poison Control Center should be strongly considered. See “Poisoning by Plants
with Toxalbumins,” p. 33.

References
Stirpe F, Gasperi-Campani A, Barbieri L, Falasca A, Abbondanza A, Stevens WA. Ribosome-
inactivating proteins from the seeds of Saponaria ofﬁcinalis L. (soapwort), of Agrostemma
githago L. (corn cockle) and of Asparagus ofﬁcinalis L. (asparagus), and from the latex of
Hura crepitans L. (sandbox tree). Biochem J 1983;216:617–625.
Thumm EJ, Bayerl C, Goerdt S. Allergic reaction after contact with Hura crepitans (Sandbox
tree). Hautarzt 2002;53:192–195.

Hydrangea macrophylla (Thunb.) Ser.
Family: Saxifragaceae

Common Names: Hydrangea, Hills-of-Snow, Hortensia, Popo-Hau, Seven Bark

Description: Hydrangea is a large bush of up to 15 feet. The stems and twigs are
usually brown. The leaves are 6 inches or longer, dark green above, grayish and
fuzzy  beneath, and  scalloped  around  the  margin. The  tiny  white  ﬂowers  are
borne in huge clusters. The many horticultural varieties may have either rose,
deep  blue, or  greenish-white  blossoms. The  ﬂowers  are  persistent, turning
brown as they dry. The fruit is a capsule.

Distribution: Hydrangea is  cultivated  in  all  parts  of the  United  States  and
Canada.

Hydrangea

181

Hydrangea macrophylla, close-up of ﬂowers 
(above)

Hydrangea macrophylla, close-up of ﬂowers (below)

Hydrangea sp.

Toxic  Part: The  ﬂower  bud  is 
poisonous.

Toxin: Hydrangin, a  cyanogenic
glycoside.

Clinical  Findings: There  are  no  adequately  documented  human  poisonings,
and  clinical  descriptions  are  based  on  the  nature  of the  toxin. Because  the
cyanogenic  glycosides  must  be  hydrolyzed  in  the  gastrointestinal  tract  before
cyanide  ion  is  released, several  hours  may  elapse  before  poisoning  occurs.
Abdominal pain, vomiting, lethargy, and sweating typically should occur ﬁrst.
Cyanosis does not occur. In severe poisonings, coma may develop and may be
accompanied by convulsions and cardiovascular collapse. Many clinical reports
describe occupational dermatitis.

Management: Symptomatic  and  supportive  care  should  be  given. Antidotal
therapy is available. Consultation with a Poison Control Center is strongly sug-
gested. See “Poisoning by Plants with Cyanogenic Compounds,” p. 27.

Reference
Rademaker M. Occupational contact dermatitis to hydrangea. Australas J Dermatol 2003;
44:220–221.

182

Hydrastis

Hydrastis canadensis L.
Family: Ranunculaceae

Common Names: Goldenseal, Orangeroot

Description: A low-growing perennial herb to 1 foot tall, with a hairy stem, and
a thick yellow rhizome. The stem usually bears one 5-lobed basal leaf low to the
ground  and  two  smaller  leaves  near  the  tip, and  has  a  small  greenish-white
ﬂower. The fruits, when mature, are dark red berries.

Distribution: Found native in the deep, rich woodlands of the eastern United
States and cultivated in other areas.

Toxic Part: The alkaloid can be found in all parts of the plant. The roots and
rhizomes are typically ground and used as an herbal product.

Toxin: Berberine.

Clinical Findings: Hydrastis is most commonly ingested as a medicinal herbal
product known popularly as goldenseal. Used in this form, there is a relatively low
risk of acute toxicity. However, herbal usage may cause skin photosensitivity. In
addition, goldenseal  alters  the  function  of cytochrome  P-450  enzymes, the
enzyme  system  involved  in  metabolism  of common  medications  such  as
cyclosporine, digoxin, and  theophylline. Berberine  has  cardiovascular  effects 

Hydrastis canadensis

Hydrastis canadensis, ﬂower

Hymenocallis

183

that may be therapeutic or, at
higher  doses  or  in  certain
patients,toxic.Adverse cardiac
effects  are  not  yet  reported 
in  humans. When 
large 
amounts  of this  plant  are
ingested, nausea, vomiting,
abdominal  cramping, and
diarrhea may occur.

Intravenous
Management:
hydration, antiemetics, and
electrolyte replacement may
be  necessary  for  patients
with  severe  gastrointestinal
symptoms, particularly 
in
children. Electrocardiographic and hemodynamic monitoring seems appropri-
ate. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See “Poi-
soning by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

Hydrastis canadensis, fruit

References
Gurley BJ, Gardner SF, Hubbard MA, et al. In vivo effects of goldenseal, kava kava, black
cohosh, and valerian on human cytochrome P450 1A2, 2D6, 2E1, and 3A4/5 phenotypes.
Clin Pharmacol Ther 2005;77:415–426.
Lau CW, Yao XQ, Chen ZY, Ko WH, Huang Y. Cardiovascular actions of berberine.
Cardiovasc Drug Rev 2001;19:234–244.
Palanisamy A, Haller C, Olson KR. Photosensitivity reaction in a woman using an herbal
supplement containing ginseng, goldenseal, and bee pollen. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 2003;
41:865–867.

Hymenocallis species
Family: Amaryllidaceae

Common Names: Spider Lily, Alligator Lily, Basket Flower, Crown Beauty, Lirio,
Tararaco Blanco, Sea Daffodil

Description: The  spider  lilies  arise  from  bulbs  and  have  straplike  leaves  that
emerge from the ground. The white or yellow ﬂowers form in a cluster at the
end of a solid, leaﬂess stem. The fruit is a capsule.

Distribution: These  plants  are  native  to  the  southeastern  United  States  and 
tropical  America. They  are  popular  for  cultivation, primarily  in  tropical 
areas.

Toxic Part: The bulbs are poisonous.

184

Hyoscyamus

Hymenocallis caribaea, ﬂowers (above)

Hymenocallis declinata (below)

Toxin: Lycorine  and  related
phenanthridine alkaloids (see
Narcissus).

Clinical  Findings: Ingestion
of small  amounts  produces
few  or  no  symptoms. Large
exposures may cause nausea,
vomiting, abdominal cramp-
ing, diarrhea, dehydration,
and electrolyte imbalance.

Management: Human poison-
ings are uncommon because of
the  small  concentration  of
alkaloids  in  this  plant. Intra-
venous hydration,antiemetics,
and  electrolyte  replacement
may be necessary for patients
with  severe  gastrointestinal
symptoms, particularly 
in 
children. Consultation with a
Poison Control Center should
be considered. See “Poisoning
by Plants with Gastrointestinal
Toxins,”p.28.

References
Antoun MD, Mendoza NT, Rios YR, et al. Cytotoxicity of Hymenocallis expansa alkaloids.
J Nat Prod 1993;56:1423–1425.
Lin LZ, Hu SF, Chai HB, et al. Lycorine alkaloids from Hymenocallis littoralis.
Phytochemistry 1995;40:1295–1298.

Hyoscyamus niger L.
Family: Solanaceae

Common Names: Henbane, Beleño, Fetid Nightshade, Insane Root, Jusquiame,
Poison Tobacco, Stinking Nightshade, Black Henbane

Hyoscyamus

185

Description: These are hairy,
erect, annual  or  biennial
weeds  2  to  6  feet  high  with
spindle-shaped  roots. The
large  leaves  (8  inches)  are
coarsely and somewhat irreg-
ularly  toothed. The  ﬂowers
emerge singly from the main
stem  just  above  the  leaves.
They  are  greenish-yellow 
to  yellowish-white  with  a
purple throat and veins. The
fruit is a capsule.

Distribution: Henbane  was
introduced from Europe and
is  found  mostly  in  waste
areas  of
the  northeastern
United States. It also can be
found  sporadically  across
the  United  States  to  the
Paciﬁc  Coast, generally  in
sandy  prairie. Henbane  has
been  reported  in  all  south-
ern  Canadian  provinces. It
has  not  been  reported  in
Hawaii and Alaska.

Hyoscyamus niger, close-up of ﬂower

Toxic Part: All parts of the plant are poisonous. The leaves are one source of the
drug hyoscyamine.

Toxin: Atropine, scopolamine, and other anticholinergic alkaloids.

Clinical  Findings: Intoxication  results  in  dry  mouth  with  dysphagia  and  dys-
phonia, tachycardia, and urinary retention. Elevation of body temperature may
be accompanied by ﬂushed, dry skin. Mydriasis, blurred vision, excitement and
delirium, headache, and confusion may be observed.

Management: Initially, symptomatic and supportive care should be given. If the
severity of the intoxication warrants intervention (hyperthermia, delirium), an
antidote, physostigmine, is available. Consultation with a Poison Control Center
should be considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Anticholinergic (Antimus-
carinic) Poisons,” p. 21.

186

Hypericum

References
Manriquez O, Varas J, Rios JC, Concha F, Paris E. Analysis of 156 cases of plant intoxication
received in the Toxicologic Information Center at Catholic University of Chile. Vet Hum
Toxicol 2002;44(1):31–32.
Sands JM, Sands R. Henbane chewing. Med J Aust 1976;2:55, 58.
Spoerke DG, Hall AH, Dodson CD, Stermitz FR, Swanson CH Jr, Rumack BH. Mystery root
ingestion. J Emerg Med 1987;5:385–388.
Urkin J, Shalev H, Sofer S, Witztum A. Henbane (Hyoscyamus reticulatus) poisoning in
children in the Negev. Harefuah 1991;120:714–716.

Hypericum perforatum L.
Family: Clusiaceae

Common Name: St. John’s Wort

Description: This  is  a  perennial  plant  growing  to  2  feet  tall, with  numerous
upright stems, and oblong to linear leaves to 1 inch in length. The many yellow
ﬂowers are in rounded or ﬂattened compound cymes, and have black dots near
their margins. The fruit is a capsule containing many small brown seeds.

Distribution: This species is native to Europe, where it is quite common, and is
naturalized throughout much of the United States and Canada, where it is found
in abundance as a weed in ﬁelds, meadows, and along roads.

Hypericum perforatum

Toxic Part: Entire plant.

Toxin: Hypericin and hyperforin.

Clinical  Findings: Hypericum  is  most
commonly  ingested  as  a  medicinal
herbal  product. Used  in  this  form,
there  is  a  relatively  low  risk  of acute
toxicity. There  are  reported  cases  of
the development of the serotonin syn-
drome, particularly  when  St. John’s
wort is used in conjunction with other
agents that increase serotonin neuro-
transmitter  availability. Patients  with
the  serotonin  syndrome  develop  al-
tered mental status, altered vital signs,
muscle  rigidity, and  life-threatening
elevation  of their  body  temperature.
Of less  consequence, St. John’s  wort
may  cause 
skin  photosensitivity.
In  addition, this  plant  may  alter  the

Ilex

187

function  of the  cytochrome
P-450  enzymes, resulting  in
altered  metabolism 
of
certain medications.

Management: Symptomatic
and supportive care. Patients
the  serotonin  syn-
with 
drome  require 
immediate
cooling. Consultation with a
Poison  Control  Center
should  be  strongly  consid-
ered.

Hypericum perforatum, close-up of ﬂower

References
Brockmöller J, Reum T, Bauer S, Kerb R, Hubner WD, Roots I. Hypericin and
pseudohypericin: pharmacokinetics and effects on photosensitivity in humans.
Pharmacopsychiatry 1997;30:94–101.
Brown TM. Acute St. John’s wort toxicity. Am J Emerg Med 2000;18:231–232.
Bryant SM, Kolodchak J. Serotonin syndrome resulting from an herbal detox cocktail. Am J
Emerg Med 2004;22:625–626.
Markowitz JS, Donovan JL, DeVane CL, et al. Effect of St. John’s wort on drug metabolism
by induction of cytochrome P450 3A4 enzyme. JAMA 2003;290:1500–1504.
Philipp M, Kohnen R, Hiller KO. Hypericum extract versus imipramine or placebo in
patients with moderate depression: Randomized multicenter study of treatment for eight
weeks. BMJ 1999;319:1534–1539.
Suzuki O, Katsumata Y, Oya M. Inhibition of monoamine oxidase by hypericin. Planta Med
1984;50:272–274.

Ilex species
Family: Aquifoliaceae
Ilex aquifolium L.
Ilex opaca Aiton
Ilex vomitoria Aiton

Common Names:
Ilex aquifolium: Holly, English Holly, European Holly, Oregon Holly
Ilex opaca: American Holly
Ilex  vomitoria: Yaupon, Appalachian  or  Carolina  Tea, Cassena, Deer  Berry,

Emetic Holly, Evergreen Cassena, Indian Black Drink

188

Ilex

Ilex opaca, ﬂowering branch (above)

Ilex opaca, branches with fruit (below)

Ilex vomitoria, fruits

Description: Ilex species  are
evergreen  trees  with  alter-
nate, stiff
leathery  leaves.
Flowers are small and white.
Fruits  are  usually  bright 
red at maturity.

Distribution: Ilex  opaca is
native  from  Massachusetts
to  Florida  west  to  Missouri
and  Texas. Ilex  aquifolium
is  cultivated  from  Virginia 
to  Texas, the  Paciﬁc  Coast
states, and British Columbia.
Ilex  vomitoria is  native  to 
the Atlantic  and  Gulf Coast
states and North Carolina to
Texas and Arkansas.

Toxic  Part: The  fruit  is  poi-
sonous. The leaves are non-
toxic, and  those  of some
species  (e.g., Ilex  paraguar-
iensis, or  Maté)  are  brewed
as  a  beverage 
their
content of caffeine (or other
xanthines).

for 

Toxin: Saponins.

in 

to 

Findings: Most
Clinical 
ingestions  result 
little 
or no toxicity. The saponins
are  poorly  absorbed, but
with  large  exposures  gas-
trointestinal  symptoms  of
nausea, vomiting, abdomi-
nal  cramping, and  diarrhea
may  occur. Allergic  sensiti-
zation 
is
common  and  can  cause
severe allergic reactions.

this  plant 

Iris

189

Management: If severe gastrointestinal symptoms occur, intravenous hydration,
antiemetics, and  electrolyte  replacement  may  be  necessary  for  patients  with
severe gastrointestinal symptoms, particularly in children. Consultation with a
Poison Control Center should be considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Gas-
trointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

Reference
Rodrigues TD, Johnson PN, Jeffrey LP. Holly berry ingestion: case report. Vet Hum Toxicol
1984;26:157–158.

Iris species
Family: Iridaceae
Iris germanica L.
Iris pseudacorus L.

Common Names: Flag, Iris, Fleur-de-Lis, Lirio Cárdeno, Orris

Description: Iris species are perennial herbaceous plants with a bulb or rhizome,
forming two-ranked, linear to sword-shaped leaves. There are many cultivars of
Iris germanica with showy ﬂowers in a wide range of colors. Iris pseudacorus has
a bright yellow ﬂower with purple-veined leaves.

Distribution: Irises are popular garden ﬂowers. Iris pseudacorus, which is native
to  western  Europe  and  northern  Africa, has  become  naturalized  in  eastern
North America.

Toxic Part: The rootstock and leaves are toxic.

Iris germanica, ﬂowers

Toxin: Unidentiﬁed (may be
an irritant resin).

Clinical Findings: Older texts
and  references  discuss  the 
possibility  of gastrointestinal
symptoms. However,
no
human  case  reports  exist 
substantiating this toxicity.

is  unlikely.

Management: Toxicity 
in
humans  after  ingestion  of
this  plant 
If
gastrointestinal 
symptoms
develop, intravenous  hydra-
tion  and  antiemetics  may 
be useful. Consultation with

190

Jatropha

Iris pseudacorus (above)

Iris pseudacorus, close-up of ﬂowers (right)

a Poison Control Center should be considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with
Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

Jatropha species
Family: Euphorbiaceae
Jatropha cathartica Terán & Berland.
Jatropha curcas L.
Jatropha gossypifolia L.
Jatropha integerrima Jacq. and varieties
Jatropha macrorhiza Benth.
Jatropha multiﬁda L.
Jatropha podagrica Hook.

Common Names:
Jatropha cathartica: Jicamilla
Jatropha  curcas: Barbados  Nut, Cuipu, Medecinier  Beni, Physic  Nut, Piñón,

Piñón Botija, Purging Nut, Ratanjyot, Tártago

Jatropha  gossypifolia: Bellyache  Bush, Frailecillo, Higuereta  Cimarrona, Mala

Mujer, Medicinier Barachin, Tautuba, Túatúa

Jatropha integerrima: Peregrina, Rose-Flowered Jatropha, Spicy Jatropha
Jatropha macrorhiza: Jicamilla
Jatropha  multiﬁda: Coral  Plant, Don  Tomás, Medecinier  Espagnol, Papaye

Sauvage, Piñón Purgante, Tártago Emético, Yuca Cimarrona

Jatropha

191

Jatropha curcas, branch with ﬂowers and fruit (above)

Jatropha curcas, branch with fruit (below)

Jatropha  podagrica: Gout
Stalk, Coral  Vegetal,
Tinaja

Description: This  is  a  large
genus of shrubs or small trees
with variously formed leaves
and ﬂowers. The ﬂowers are
usually  red, and  some  re-
semble  coral. Except 
in 
some  Mexican  species  not
included  here, the  fruit  is 
a  three-sided  capsule, each
section containing one seed.
Jatropha  gossypifolia usually
is  an  annual, regardless  of
growing 
the
stems  of J. macrorhiza die
aboveground  in  winter; all
other  species  are  perennials
of tropical origin.

conditions;

Distribution: Jatropha cathar-
tica grows in Texas; J. macro-
rhiza is found in Texas, New
Mexico,and Arizona.All other
species  are  of New  World
origin but are now pantropical
in  distribution. Jatropha is
popularly in cultivation.

Toxic  Part: The  seeds  are
poisonous. Various  parts  of
Jatropha  curcas are  used  in
folk medicine.

Toxin: Jatrophin (curcin), a plant lectin (toxalbumin) related to ricin.

Clinical Findings: In  contrast  to  poisoning  with  other  plants  containing  toxic
lectins, the  onset  of effect  (nausea, vomiting, and  diarrhea)  is  usually  rapid.
Other  symptoms  are  probably  secondary  to  ﬂuid  and  electrolyte  loss  and 
suppression of intestinal function. Severe poisoning may follow ingestion of a
single seed.

192

Kalmia

Jatropha podagrica, close-up of ﬂowers and
fruit (above)

Jatropha podagrica (right)

Management: Cases associated with gastrointestinal symptomatology need to be
assessed for signs of dehydration and electrolyte abnormalities. Activated char-
coal should be administered. Intravenous hydration, antiemetics, and electrolyte
replacement may be necessary in severe cases, particularly those involving chil-
dren. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be strongly considered.
See “Poisoning by Plants with Toxalbumins,” p. 33.

References
Abdu-Aguye I, Sannusi A, Alaﬁya-Tayo RA, Bhusnurmath SR. Acute toxicity studies with
Jatropha curcas L. Hum Toxicol 1986;5:269–274.
Gandhi VM, Cherian KM, Mulky MJ. Toxicological studies on ratanjyot oil. Food Chem
Toxicol 1995;33:39–42.
Levin Y, Sherer Y, Bibi H, Schlesinger M, Hay E. Rare Jatropha multiﬁda intoxication in two
children. J Emerg Med 2000;19:173–175.

Kalmia species
Family: Ericaceae
Kalmia angustifolia L.
Kalmia latifolia L.
Kalmia microphylla (Hook.) A. Heller

Common  Names: Mountain  Laurel, American  or  Dwarf or  Sheep  or  Wood
Laurel, Big Leaf Ivy, Calf-, Kid-or Lamb-Kill, Calico Bush, Ivy Bush, Spoonwood,
Spoonwood Ivy, Wicky

Kalmia

193

Kalmia angustifolia (above)

Kalmia latifolia cv. ‘Pink Surprise’ (below)

Kalmia latifolia, fruit (below)

Description: These  ever-
green shrubs and small trees
have alternate leathery leaves
and  white, pink, or  purple
ﬂowers. The fruit is a capsule
with many seeds.

Distribution: Kalmia  angus-
tifolia grows in eastern North
America  from  Ontario  to
Labrador east to Nova Scotia
and south to Michigan, Vir-
ginia, and  Georgia. Kalmia
latifolia grows in the north-
eastern  United  States  south
to the Gulf Coast and north-
ern Florida to Louisana, but
not in Canada.Kalmia micro-
phylla occurs from Alaska to
central  California. These
plants are found in wooded
areas, moist  meadows, and
bogs.

Toxic  Part: The  leaves  and
nectar  (in  honey)  are  poi-
sonous.

Toxin: Grayanotoxins (andro-
medotoxins), sodium  chan-
nel activators.

Clinical Findings: Symptoms
are  predominantly  neuro-
logical and cardiac. There is
transient  burning 
in  the
mouth  after  ingestion, fol-
lowed after several hours by
increased  salivation, vomit-
ing, diarrhea, and a tingling
sensation in the skin (pares-
thesia). The  patient  may
complain of headache, mus-
cular weakness, and dimness
of vision. Bradycardia  and

194

Kalmia

Kalmia latifolia, close-up of ﬂowers

other cardiac dysrhythmias can be associated with severe blood pressure abnor-
malities. Coma may develop, and convulsions may be a terminal event.

Management: Fluid replacement should be instituted with respiratory support
if indicated. Heart rhythm and blood pressure should be monitored and treated
with  appropriate  medications  and  supportive  care. Recovery  is  generally 
complete within 24 hours. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should
be strongly considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Sodium Channel Activa-
tors,” p. 32.

References
Ergun K, Tufekcioglu O, Aras D, Korkmaz S, Pehlivan S. A rare cause of atrioventricular
block: Mad honey intoxication. Int J Cardiol 2005;99:347–348.
Gossinger H, Hruby K, Haubenstock A, Pohl A, Davogg S. Cardiac arrhythmias in a patient
with grayanotoxin-honey poisoning. Vet Hum Toxicol 1983;25:328–329.
Lampe KF. Rhododendrons, mountain laurel, and mad honey. JAMA 1988;259:2009.
Puschner B, Holstege DM, Lamberski N. Grayanotoxin poisoning in three goats. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2001;218:573–575.
Sandulescu C. A mass poisoning by honey . . . in the days of the Anabasis. Presse Med
1965;73:2070.
Yavuz H, Ozel A, Akkus I, Erkul I. Honey poisoning in Turkey. Lancet 1991;337:789–790.

Karwinskia

195

Karwinskia humboldtiana (Roem. & Schult.) Zucc.
Family: Rhamnaceae

Common names: Buckthorn, Coyotillo, Tullidora

Description: This shrubby tree grows to 20 feet. Leaves are opposite and ellip-
tical, 1 to 3 inches long and have prominent veins. The berry-shaped fruit turns
black when mature and contains a pit.

Distribution: Karwinskia grows  in  western  Texas, New  Mexico, Arizona, and
Nevada.

Toxic Part: The fruit is poisonous.

Toxin: Anthracenones (also known as buckthorn toxins: T-496, T-514, T-544)
with a polycyclic polyphenol structure cause demyelination.

Clinical Findings: Weakness occurs after a latent period of several weeks, and
paralysis may progress for a month or more. The syndrome may be clinically
indistinguishable  from  Guillain–Barré  syndrome. This  may  terminate  in 
respiratory  paralysis. Cases  are  reported  relatively  frequently  in  southwestern
United States. Toxins from the fruit of this plant can be measured in serum by

Karwinskia humboldtiana, close-up of
ﬂowers

Karwinskia humboldtiana, branch with
fruit

196

Laburnum

thin-layer chromatography (TLC) to help establish the diagnosis in unknown
cases.

Management: Treatment is supportive. Mechanical ventilation may be required
to  treat  respiratory  failure  caused  by  progressive  weakness. In  patients  who
survive, improvement progresses slowly to almost complete functional recov-
ery. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be strongly considered.

References
Bermudez-de Rocha MV, Lozano-Melendez FE, Tamez-Rodriguez VA, Diaz-Cvello G,
Pineyro-Lopez A. The incidence of poisoning by Karwinskia humboldtiana in Mexico. Salud
Publ Mex 1995;37:57–62.
Bermudez MV, Gonzalez-Spencer D, Guerrero M, Waksman N, Pineyro A. Experimental
acute intoxication with ripe fruit Karwinskia humboldtiana (Tullidora) in rat, guinea pig,
hamster and dog. Toxicon 1992;30:1493–1496.
Heath JW, Ueda S, Bornstein MB, Davies GD Jr, Rames CS. Buckthorn neuropathy in vitro:
evidence for a primary neuronal effect. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1982;41:204–220.
Martinez HR, Bermudez MV, Rangel-Guerra RA, de Leon Flores L. Clinical diagnosis in
Karwinskia humboldtiana polyneuropathy. J Neurol Sci 1998;154:49–54.

Laburnum anagyroides Medik.
(= Cytisus laburnum L.)
Family: Leguminosae (Fabaceae)

Common names: Golden Chain Tree, Golden Rain, Bean Tree, Laburnum

Laburnum anagyroides, close-up of ﬂowers
(right)

Laburnum anagyroides, ﬂowering tree (below)

Lantana

197

Description: This  small  tree  grows  to  30  feet  and  bears  alternate, compound
leaves with three leaﬂets and golden-yellow, sweetpea-shaped ﬂowers in masses.
Fruits contain up to eight seeds in ﬂattened pods.

Distribution: Laburnum is widely cultivated in the southern United States.

Toxic Part: All parts of the plant, particularly the seeds, are poisonous.

Toxin: Cytisine, a nicotine-like alkaloid.

Clinical Findings: Initial gastrointestinal effects may be followed by those typical
of nicotine poisoning; these include hypertension, large pupils, sweating, and
perhaps seizures. Severe poisoning produces coma, weakness, and paralysis that
may result in death from respiratory failure.

Management: Symptomatic and supportive care should be given, with attention
to  adequacy  of ventilation  and  vital  signs. Atropine  may  reverse  some  of the
toxic effects. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be strongly con-
sidered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Nicotine-like Alkaloids,” p. 30.

References
Forrester RM. “Have you eaten Laburnum?” Lancet 1979;1:1073.
Klocking HP, Damm G, Richter M. The inﬂuence of drugs on the acute toxicity of cytisine.
Arch Toxicol Suppl 1980;4:402–404.
Scane TMN, Hawkins DF. Laburnum “poisoning.” Br Med J 1982;284:116.

Lantana camara L.
Family: Verbenaceae

Common Names: Bonbonnier or Herbe a Plomb, Cariaquillo, Cinco Negritos,
Filigrana, Lakana, Lantana, Mikinolia-Hihiu, Shrub Verbena, Yellow Sage

Description: Lantanas  are  sprawling  shrubs  with  squarish  prickly  stems. The
opposite leaves are coarse and have a pronounced aromatic odor when crushed.
Flowers grow in ﬂat clusters. The individual ﬂowers in a cluster change color
gradually over 24 hours after opening, from yellow to orange, then to red. The
outer ﬂowers open ﬁrst, and the ﬂowers assume the appearance of concentric
circles with a bull’s-eye effect; the most common species has a yellow center, a
surrounding circle of orange, and an outermost circle of red. Horticultural vari-
eties may exhibit other color combinations. Fruits are small, round, and ﬂeshy
drupes, turning purple-black when mature.

Distribution: Lantanas are native to tropical America and are weeds in south-
ern Florida, Texas, California, Hawaii, Guam, and the West Indies. In more tem-
perate areas, these plants are cultivated as ornamentals, for example, in hanging
baskets and window boxes.

198

Lantana

Lantana camara, ﬂowers (above)

Lantana camara, leaves and fruit (below)

Toxic  Part: The  immature
berries  are  poisonous. No
intoxications  have  been
reported following ingestion
of mature  fruit. The  leaves
are also reported to be toxic
to livestock.

Toxin: Unknown  (probably
not  the  phototoxin,
lan-
tadene  A, as  stated  in  some
publications).

Clinical Findings: Reports of
human  toxicity  are  rare.
Effects may be delayed for 2
to  6  hours  after  ingestion.
Effects  are  most  commonly
gastrointestinal,
including
nausea, vomiting, abdomi-
nal cramping, and diarrhea.
Severe  toxicity  may  cause
weakness,
large
pupils, and  respiratory  de-
pression. Reports  of animal
toxicity  are  more  common.
Liver  toxicity  (cholestasis),
and photosensitization have
been  reported  in  poisoned
cattle.

lethargy,

Management: If severe  gastrointestinal  effects  occur, intravenous  hydration,
antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement may be necessary, particularly in chil-
dren. Observe  for  abdominal  pain  or  jaundice. Consultation  with  a  Poison
Control Center should be considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Gastroin-
testinal Toxins,” p. 28.

References
Morton JF. Lantana, or red sage (Lantana camara L., Verbenaceae), notorious weed 
and popular garden ﬂower; some cases of poisoning in Florida. Econ Bot 1994;48:
259–270.
Sharma OP, Makkar HP, Dawra RK. A review of the noxious plant Lantana camara. Toxicon
1988;26:975–987.
Wolfson SL, Solomons TWG. Poisoning by fruit of Lantana camara. An acute syndrome
observed in children following ingestion of the green fruit. Am J Dis Child 1964;107:
173–176.

Leucaena

199

Leucaena leucocephala (Lam.) deWit
(= L. glauca sense of Britton & Millsp. not (L.) Benth.)
Family: Leguminosae (Fabaceae)

Common  Names: Acacia, Acacia  Pálida, Aroma  Blanca, Campeche, Cowbush,
Ekoa, False  Koa, Grains  de  Lin  Pays, Granadino, Guacis, Hediondilla, Jimbay
Bean, Jumbie  Bean, Jump-and-Go, Koa-Haole, Lead  Tree, Leucaena, Tantan,
White Popinac, Wild Tamarind, Zarcilla

Description: These shrubs or small trees, growing to 30 feet tall, have feathery,
twice-compound leaves with blades to 0.25 to 0.75 inch long. The ﬂowers are
creamy white or pink and grow clustered in heads that are 1 inch in diameter.
Fruits are legume pods that turn reddish when mature; each pod contains 18
to 25 brown seeds.

Distribution: Leucaena  leucocephala is  native  to  tropical America; it  grows  in
Florida, Texas, Hawaii, Guam, the Bahamas, and throughout the West Indies to
Barbados. The seeds are commonly used for novelty jewelry.

Toxic Part: All parts of this plant are toxic, but it is commonly eaten in the West
Indies and Indonesia after cooking.

Toxin: Mimosine, a  heat-labile  toxic  amino  acid,
through iron chelation.

inhibits  DNA  synthesis

Leucaena leucocephala, ﬂower (left)

Leucaena leucocephala, branch with fruit
(below)

200

Leucothoe

Clinical Findings: There are no adequately documented human poisonings, and
clinical  descriptions  are  derived  primarily  from  animal  reports. The  toxin  is
destroyed  by  roasting  or  cooking  and  appears  to  cause  problems  more  fre-
quently in grazing ruminants. In animals, ingestion is associated with delayed
growth, esophageal lesions, and impaired thyroid function.

Management: No  speciﬁc  treatment  is  available. Poisoning  is  managed  with
general supportive care. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be
considered.

References
Hammond AC. Leucaena toxicosis and its control in ruminants. J Anim Sci 1995;73:
1487–1492.
Kulp KS, Vulliet PR. Mimosine blocks cell cycle progression by chelating iron in
asynchronous human breast cancer cells. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 1996;139:356–364.

Leucothoe species
Family: Ericaceae

Common Names: Dog  Hobble, Dog  Laurel, Fetter  Bush, Pepper  Bush, Switch
Ivy, Sweet Bells, White Osier

Description: These deciduous or evergreen shrubs have simple alternate leaves
and white or pink urn-shaped ﬂowers that grow in clusters.The fruits are capsules.

Distribution: Leucothoe grows  from Virginia  to  Florida, Tennessee, Louisiana,
and California.

Toxic Part: The leaves and nectar (in honey) are toxic.

Toxin: Grayanotoxins (andromedotoxins), sodium channel activators.

Leucothoe sp., ﬂowering branch

Findings: Most 
Clinical 
cases  of exposure  to  this
plant  manifest  minimal  or
no  toxicity. Symptoms  are 
predominantly  neurological
and  cardiac. There  is  tran-
sient  burning  in  the  mouth
ingestion,
after 
followed
after 
several  hours  by
increased  salivation, vomit-
ing, diarrhea, and a tingling
sensation  in  the  skin. The
patient  may  complain  of
headache, muscular  weak-
ness, and dimness of vision.

Ligustrum

201

Bradycardia and other cardiac dysrhythmias can be associated with severe blood
pressure abnormalities. Coma may develop, and convulsions may be a terminal
event.

Management: Fluid replacement should be instituted with respiratory support if
indicated. Heart rhythm and blood pressure should be monitored and treated
with appropriate medications and supportive care.Recovery is generally complete
within 24 hours. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be strongly
considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Sodium Channel Activators,” p. 32.

Reference
Ergun K, Tufekcioglu O, Aras D, Korkmaz S, Pehlivan S. A rare cause of atrioventricular
block: Mad Honey intoxication. Int J Cardiol 2005;99:347–348.
Puschner B, Holstege DM, Lamberski N. Grayanotoxin poisoning in three goats. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2001;218:573–575.
Terai T, Araho D, Osakabe K, et al. Isolation of iso-grayanotoxin II from leaves of Leucothoe
grayana Max. Its X-ray crystallographic analysis and acute toxicity in mice. Chem Pharm
Bull 2000;48:142–144.
Yavuz H, Ozel A, Akkus I, Erkul I. Honey poisoning in Turkey. Lancet 1991;337:789–790.

Ligustrum japonicum, close-up of leaves

Ligustrum Species
Family: Oleaceae
Ligustrum japonicum Thunb.
Ligustrum lucidum Aiton
Ligustrum vulgare L.

Common Names:
Ligustrum  japonicum: Wax
Leaf Privet, Japanese Privet
Ligustrum  lucidum: Glossy
Privet, Chinese Privet, Nepal
Privet, Wax Leaf Privet
Ligustrum  vulgare: Hedge
Plant, Lovage, Prim, Com-
mon Privet

Description: These  semide-
ciduous  shrubs  have  oppo-
site leaves, mostly oblong or
ovate, with smooth margins.
Small  white  ﬂowers  form 
in  terminal  panicles; these
become  large  numbers  of
blue  or  black  wax-coated

202

Ligustrum

Ligustrum lucidum, seeds (above)

Ligustrum lucidum (right)

which 

berries,
persist
through  winter. Ligustrum
japonicum is 6 to 20 feet tall,
with  leathery  leaves  3  to  4
inches long and ﬂower pan-
icles to 6 inches long. Ligus-
trum  lucidum grows  to  30
feet tall with shiny leves to 4
to  6  inches  long  and  ﬂower
panicles  to  10  inches  long.
Ligustrum  vulgare grows  to
15 feet tall with leaves to 2.5
inches  long  and  panicles  of
ﬂowers to 1.5 inches long.

Ligustrum vulgare, close-up of ﬂowers

to 

is  native 

Distribution: The  Common
Privet 
the
Mediterranean  region. It  is
cultivated  as  a  hedge  plant
throughout  most  of
the
northern  United  States  and
Canada, and it is naturalized
in eastern North America. It
also  is  cultivated  in  Hawaii.
A  number  of other  species

Lobelia

203

having a generally similar appearance are in cultivation as well and have become
naturalized, particularly Ligustrum sinense Lour., and are thought to be toxic.
Toxic Part: The whole plant, including the berries, is toxic.
Toxin: Syringin (ligustrin), an irritant glycoside.
Clinical  Findings: Nausea, vomiting, abdominal  cramping, and  diarrhea  may
occur. There are no reported cases of poisoning in humans. In ruminants, neu-
rotoxicity (unsteady gait, weakness) is reported to occur.
Management: If severe gastrointestinal symptoms occur, intravenous hydration,
antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement may be necessary, particularly in chil-
dren. Consultation  with  a  Poison  Control  Center  should  be  considered. See
“Poisoning by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.
Reference
Kerr LA, Kelch WJ. Fatal privet (Ligustrum amurense) toxicosis in Tennessee cows. Vet Hum
Toxicol 1999;41:391–392.

Lobelia cardinalis, close-up of ﬂowers

Lobelia species
Family: Campanulaceae
Lobelia cardinalis L.
Lobelia inﬂata L.
Lobelia siphilitica L. (Note:
Sometimes spelled L.
syphilitica)

inﬂata:

Common Names:
Lobelia  cardinalis: Cardenal
de Maceta, Cardinal Flower,
Hog  Physic,
Indian  Pink,
Red Lobelia, Scarlet Lobelia
Lobelia 
Asthma
Weed, Bladderpod  Lobelia,
Emetic  Weed, Eye  Bright,
Gag  Root, Indian  Tobacco,
Kinnikinnik, Low Belia, Puke
Weed, Wild Tobacco
Lobelia siphilitica: Blue Car-
dinal  Flower, Great  Blue
Lobelia, Great Lobelia, High
Belia, Louisiana Lobelia

204

Lobelia

Lobelia inﬂata, close-up of ﬂowers

Lobelia siphilitica, close-up of ﬂowers

Description: Lobelia species are erect annual or perennial herbs with alternate,
simple leaves that are primarily lanceolate. The tubular ﬂowers are distinctive
in having two small petals opposed by three large petals. The ﬂowers may be
blue, pink, red, yellow, or white, in terminal racemes. The fruit is a capsule.

Distribution: The lobelias are annual weeds in most of the United States, and
some (e.g., Lobelia cardinalis) are widely cultivated. Lobelia inﬂata is cultivated
as  a  pharmaceutical  plant. Lobelia  cardinalis grows  in  damp  areas  (shores,
meadows, and swamps) in Minnesota east to Michigan, north to Ontario, east
to New Brunswick, south to eastern Texas, and east to Florida. Lobelia inﬂata
grows  by  roadsides  and  in  open  woods  in  New  Brunswick  and  Nova  Scotia,
west  to  Ontario, and  south  to  Kansas, Arkansas, and  Georgia. Lobelia 
siphilitica occurs in rich moist woods and swamps in southwest Manitoba, east
of Ontario, south  to  Texas  and  Louisiana, and  from  Maine  south  to  North 
Carolina.

Toxic Part: The whole plant is poisonous.

Toxin: Lobeline and related nicotine-like alkaloids.

Lonicera

205

Clinical Findings: Poisoning is rare and may occur when plant extracts are used
as  home  remedies  and  smoking  cessation  aides. Initial  gastrointestinal  effects
may  be  followed  by  those  typical  of nicotine  poisoning; these  include  hyper-
tension, large pupils, sweating, and perhaps seizures. Severe poisoning produces
coma, weakness, and paralysis that may result in death from respiratory failure.

Management: Symptomatic and supportive care should be given, with attention
to  adequacy  of ventilation  and  vital  signs. Atropine  may  reverse  some  of the
toxic effects. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be strongly con-
sidered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Nicotine-like Alkaloids,” p. 30.

References
Daly JW. Nicotinic agonists, antagonists, and modulators from natural sources. Cell Mol
Neurobiol 2005;25:513–552.
Lopez R, Martinez-Burnes J, Vargas G, et al. Taxonomical, clinical and pathological ﬁndings
in moradilla (Lobelia-like) poisoning in sheep. Vet Hum Toxicol 1994;36:195–198.

Lonicera species
Family: Caprifoliaceae
Lonicera periclymenum L.
Lonicera tatarica L.
Lonicera xylosteum L.

Common  Names: Chèvrefeuille, Fly  Honeysuckle, Fly  Tataria, Honeysuckle
Bush, Madreselva, Medaddy Bush, Sweet Honeysuckle, Woodbine Honeysuckle

Lonicera periclymenum, close-up of ﬂowers
(left)

Lonicera periclymenum, close-up of ﬂowers
(below)

206

Lonicera

Lonicera tatarica (above)

Lonicera tatarica, branch with fruit (below)

Description: Lonicera spe-
cies  are  shrubs  or  climbing
woody  vines  with  opposite
leaves.The ﬂowers are tubular,
two-lipped, and yellow, pink,
white,or rose.The fruit is a red
berry.

Distribution: Honeysuckles
are  extensively  cultivated  in
the  northeastern  United
States and Canada (Ontario,
Quebec)  and  have  escaped
cultivation in these areas.

Toxic Part: Berries.

Toxin: Undescribed  gastro-
intestinal toxins.

Clinical  Findings: Older
reports  cite  symptoms  of
gastrointestinal, cardiac, and
neurological toxicity. Recent
evidence  suggests  that  most
cases involve little or no tox-
icity. Substantial  ingestion
may cause nausea, vomiting,
abdominal  cramping, and
diarrhea.

Management: If severe  gas-
trointestinal  symptoms  oc-
cur, intravenous  hydration,
antiemetics, and  electrolyte
replacement  may  be  necessary, particularly  in  children. Consultation  with  a
Poison Control Center should be considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Gas-
trointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

References
Spoerke DG, Temple AR. One year’s experience with potential plant poisonings reported to
the intermountain regional poison control center. Vet Hum Toxicol 1978;20:85–89.
Webster RM. Honeysuckle contact dermatitis. Cutis. 1993;51(6):424.

Lupinus

207

Lupinus species
Family: Leguminosae (Fabaceae; Papilionaceae)
Lupinus hirsutissimus Benth
Lupinus perennis L.

Common Name: Lupine

Description: This  genus  comprises  approximately  200  species  of annual  and
perennial herbs or small shrubs. The leaves are simple or palmately compound;
the  ﬂowers  are  in  terminal  spikes  or  racemes, and  are  usually  very  showy  in
colors  ranging  from  white  to  yellow, pink, blue, violet, and  deep  purple, and
variously spotted. Fruits are a ﬂat legume, often constricted between the seeds.

Distribution: Commonly cultivated in gardens, as well as found in the wild, par-
ticularly in western North America.

Toxic Part: The entire plant is toxic. However, ingestion of uncooked beans is
the most common cause of poisoning.

Toxin: Quinolizidine  alkaloids  such  as  lupinine,
described variably as nicotine like or anticholinergic.

lupanine, and  sparteine,

Lupinus perennis

Clinical  Findings: Most  in-
gestions cause no symptoms.
Ingestion of large amounts of
these plants may result in dry
mouth  with  dysphagia  and
dysphonia, tachycardia, and
urinary  retention. Elevation
of body temperature may be
accompanied  by  ﬂushing  of
the  skin. Mydriasis, blurred
vision, excitement and delir-
ium, headache, and  confu-
sion may be observed. Rarely,
cross-allergenicity  in  those
with  peanut  allergy  may
occur.

Management: Initially, symp-
tomatic and supportive care
should be given. If the sever-
ity of the anticholinergic syn-
drome warrants intervention
(hyper-thermia, delirium),
an  antidote, physostigmine,

208

Lycium

is available. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See
“Poisoning by Plants with Anticholinergic (Antimuscarinic) Poisons,” p. 21 and
See “Poisoning by Plants with Nicotine-like Alkaloids,” p. 30.

References
Di Grande A, Paradiso R, Amico S, et al. Anticholinergic toxicity associated with lupin seed
ingestion: Case report. Eur J Emerg Med 2004;11:119–120.
Faeste CK, Lovik M, Wiker HG, Egaas E. A case of peanut cross-allergy to lupine ﬂour in a
hot dog bread. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 2004;135:36–39.
Smith R. Potential edible lupine poisonings in humans. Vet Hum Toxicol 1987;29:444–445.
Tsiodras S, Shin RK, Christian M, Shaw LM, Sass DA. Anticholinergic toxicity associated
with lupine seeds as a home remedy for diabetes mellitus. Ann Emerg Med 1999;33:715–717.

Lycium species
Family: Solanaceae
Lycium carolinianum Walter
Lycium halmifolium Mill.

Common Names: Box Thorn, Christmas Berry, False Jessamine, Matrimony Vine
Description: These upright or spreading shrubs grow to 10 feet tall. The numer-
in 
ous  branches  sometimes  have  woody  thorns. The  ﬂowers  appear 
clusters  and  are  a  dull
lilac  to  pinkish  color.
The fruit is an elliptical
scarlet berry about 0.75
inch in length.

Lycium carolinianum, branch with fruit and ﬂowers

from  Texas 

Distribution: Lycium car-
olinianum is  native  to 
the  southeastern  United
States 
to
Florida  and  north  to
South  Carolina. Lycium
halmifolium, a  Eurasian
plant, is  cultivated  in  all
north temperate zones. It
has escaped in the north-
eastern  United  States  as
far  south  as  South  Car-
olina  and  west  to  Ten-
nessee  and  Kentucky,
across southern Canada,
and in California.

Lycoris

209

Toxic Part: The leaves contain the toxin.

Toxin: Damascenone, a terpenoid essential oil.

Clinical  Findings: There  are  no  adequately  documented  human  poisonings;
however, this genus belongs to a family that contains many poisonous plants.
Ripe fruits are generally edible. The thorns may produce an irritant dermatitis.

Management: Symptomatic  and  supportive  care. Consultation  with  a  Poison
Control Center should be considered.

References
Hansen AA. Stock poisoning by plants in the nightshade family. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1927;71:221.
Muenscher WC. Poisonous Plants of the United States, Revised Edition. Collier Books, New
York, 1975.

Lycoris species
Family: Amaryllidaceae
Lycoris africana (Lam.) M. Roem. (=L. aurea (L’Hér.) Herb).
Lycoris radiata (L’ Hér.) Herb.
Lycoris squamigera Maxim. (=Amaryllis ballii Hovey ex Baker)

Common Names:
Lycoris africana: Golden Hurricane Lily, Golden Spider Lily
Lycoris radiata: Red Spider Lily, Spider Lily
Lycoris squamigera: Magic Lily, Resurrection Lily

Description: Lycoris species grow from bulbs. The linear leaves emerge from the
ground and die back before the ﬂowers emerge. The red, pink, white, or yellow
ﬂowers  are  borne  on  a  long, leaﬂess  stalk. The  fruit  is  a  capsule  with  a  few
smooth, black seeds.

Distribution: These plants are native to the Far East. All are cultivated exten-
sively. Lycoris radiata has become naturalized in the southern United States.

Toxic  Part: The  bulbs  are  poisonous  and  may  be  mistaken  for  onions  or 
scallions.

Toxin: Lycorine and related phenanthridine alkaloids (see Narcissus).

Clinical Findings: Ingestion of small amounts produces few or no symptoms.
Large  exposures  may  cause  nausea, vomiting, abdominal  cramping, diarrhea,
dehydration, and electrolyte imbalance.

Management: If severe  gastrointestinal  effects  occur, intravenous  hydration,
antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement may be necessary, particularly in chil-
dren. Consultation  with  a  Poison  Control  Center  should  be  considered. See
“Poisoning by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

210

Lyonia

Lycoris radiata, close-up of ﬂowers

Reference
Junko I, Akiko T, Yumiko K, et al. Poisoning by Lycoris radiata plants. Pharm Mon (Gekkan
Yakuji) 1994;36:855–857.

Lyonia species
Family: Ericaceae
Common Names: Cereza, Clavellina, Fetter Bush, He Huckleberry, Male Berry,
Male Blueberry, Pepper Bush, Pipe Stem, Privet Andromeda, Seedy Buckberry,
Stagger Bush, Swamp Andromeda, Tetter Bush, Wicopy, Wicks
Description: These small evergreen or deciduous shrubs have alternate, simple
leaves, with clusters of white or urn-shaped pink ﬂowers. The fruit is a capsule.
Distribution: Lyonia grows along the Atlantic coastal plain from Rhode Island
to Florida, west to Arkansas and Louisiana, and is common in the West Indies.
This genus is native to Eastern Asia and North America.
Toxic Part: The leaves and nectar (in honey) are toxic.
Toxin: Lyoniol  A  (lyoniatoxin), chemically  related  to  the  grayanotoxins
(andromedotoxins), a sodium channel activator.

Malus

211

Clinical  Findings: There  are
no  adequately  documented
human poisonings, and clin-
ical descriptions are derived
primarily  from  animal  re-
ports. If human toxicity were
to  occur, symptoms  would
likely resemble grayanotoxin
poisoning. Symptoms  are
predominantly  neurological
and  cardiac. There  is  tran-
sient  burning  in  the  mouth
after ingestion, followed after
several  hours  by  increased
salivation, vomiting, diarrhea, and a tingling sensation in the skin. The patient
may complain of headache, muscular weakness, and dimness of vision. Bradycar-
dia and other cardiac dysrhythmias can be associated with severe blood pressure
abnormalities. Coma may develop, and convulsions may be a terminal event.
Management: Fluid replacement should be instituted with respiratory support if
indicated. Heart rhythm and blood pressure should be monitored and treated
with appropriate medications and supportive care.Recovery is generally complete
within 24 hours. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be strongly
considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Sodium Channel Activators,” p. 32.

Lyonia sp., ﬂowers

Malus sp., fruit

Malus species
Family: Rosaceae
Common  Names: Apple,
Crabapple, Manzana, Pom-
mier
Description: The  apple  is  a
deciduous  tree  with  ﬂowers
that  form  in  simple  clusters.
The fruit is a pome with seeds.
Distribution: Apple trees are
widely cultivated in temper-
ate climates.The fruit is avail-
able commercially.
Toxic Part: Seeds are poison-
ous.
Toxin: Amygdalin, a  cyano-
genic glycoside.

212

Manihot

Clinical Findings: Apple seeds that are swallowed whole or chewed and eaten in
small quantities are harmless. A single case of fatal cyanide poisoning has been
reported in an adult who chewed and swallowed a cup of apple seeds. Because
the cyanogenic glycosides must be hydrolyzed in the gastrointestinal tract before
cyanide  ion  is  released, several  hours  may  elapse  before  poisoning  occurs.
Abdominal pain, vomiting, lethargy, and sweating typically occur ﬁrst. Cyanosis
does not occur. In severe poisonings, coma develops and may be accompanied
by convulsions and cardiovascular collapse.

Management: Symptomatic  and  supportive  care  should  be  given. Antidotal
therapy is available. Consultation with a Poison Control Center is strongly sug-
gested. See “Poisoning by Plants with Cyanogenic Compounds,” p. 27.

Reference
Holzbecher MD, Moss MA, Ellenberger HA. The cyanide content of laetrile preparations,
apricot, peach and apple seeds. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1984;22:341–347.

Manihot esculenta Crantz
(=M. utilissima Pohl; M. manihot (L.) Cockerell)
Family: Euphorbiaceae

Common Names: Cassava, Juca, Manioc, Manioka, Sweet Potato Plant, Tapioca,
Yuca, Yuca Brava

Description: This bushy shrub grows to 9 feet. It has milky juice and alternate
leaves that are deeply parted into three to several lobes. The roots are long and
tuberous.

Manihot esculenta (right)

Manihot esculenta, ﬂowers (below)

Manihot

213

Manihot esculenta, roots with lower right root cut in
half (above)

Manihot esculenta, roots in ﬁeld (below)

The 

Distribution: Cassava is cul-
tivated  in  Guam, Hawaii,
West Indies, Florida, and the
Gulf Coast  states. It  is  also
cultivated  throughout  the
Tropics.
so-called
“sweet” variety with a lower
cyanide  content 
is  most
commonly  found  in  com-
merce; the so-called “bitter”
variety  contains  far  more
cyanide  and  requires  exten-
sive  preparation  and  pro-
cessing before eating.

Toxic  Part: Primarily  the
roots  are  poisonous;
the
leaves  contain  variable  con-
centrations  of toxin. Proper
processing  of
the  cassava
root  is  required  to  remove
the  toxin  to  allow  for  safe
consumption.

Toxin: Linamarin  and  lot-
australin, cyanogenic  glyco-
sides.

Clinical  Findings: Because
the  cyanogenic  glycosides
must be hydrolyzed in the gastrointestinal tract before cyanide ion is released,
several hours may elapse before poisoning occurs. Abdominal pain, vomiting,
lethargy, and sweating typically occur ﬁrst. Cyanosis does not occur. In severe
poisonings, coma develops and may be accompanied by convulsions and car-
diovascular collapse.

Cyanide intake from a cassava-dominated diet has been proposed as a con-
tributing factor to two forms of nutritional neuropathies found in Africa: trop-
ical ataxic neuropathy and epidemic spastic paraperesis.

Management: Symptomatic  and  supportive  care  should  be  given. Antidotal
therapy  is  available. Consultation  with  a  Poison  Control  Center  is  strongly 
suggested. See  “Poisoning  by  Plants  with  Cyanogenic  Compounds,”
p. 27.

214

Melia

References
Banea-Mayambu JP, Tylleskar T, Tylleskar K, Gebre-Medhin M, Rosling H. Dietary cyanide
from insufﬁciently processed cassava and growth retardation in children in the Democratic
Republic of Congo (formerly Zaire). Ann Trop Paediatr 2000;20:34–40.
Cliff J, Lundqvist P, Martensson J, Rosling H, Sorbo B. Association of high cyanide and low
sulphur intake in cassava-induced spastic paraparesis. Lancet 1985;2:1211–1213.
Espinoza OB, Perez M, Ramirez MS. Bitter cassava poisoning in eight children: A case
report. Vet Hum Toxicol 1992;34:65.
Onabolu AO, Oluwole OS, Bokanga M, Rosling H. Ecological variation of intake of cassava
food and dietary cyanide load in Nigerian communities. Public Health Nutr 2001;4:871–876.
Vetter J. Plant cyanogenic glycosides. Toxicon 2000;38:11–36.

Melia azedarach L.
Family: Meliaceae

Common Names: African Lilac Tree, Árbol del Quitasol, Bead Tree, Chinaberry,
China Tree, False Sycamore, Hog Bush, Indian Lilac, Japanese Bead Tree, Inia,
Lilas, Lilaila, Alelaila, Pasilla, Paradise  Tree, Paraíso, Persian  Lilac, Pride  of
China, Pride of India, Syrian Bead Tree, Texas Umbrella Tree, West Indian Lilac,
White Cedar

Melia azedarach

Melia azedarach

Menispermum

215

Description: The Chinaberry is a tree that grows to 50 feet. The compound leaves
are composed of many leaﬂets that are 2 inches long and serrated. The delicate
purplish ﬂowers are fragrant and grow in many clusters. The fruit is a 0.5-inch-
wide globose berry that turns from green to yellow when mature and persists after
the leaves have been shed. It contains three to ﬁve smooth, black, ellipsoidal seeds.

Distribution: The trees are native to Asia but are cultivated as ornamentals in
warmer  regions  of the  world. They  have  escaped  widely  in  the  south  from 
Virginia to Florida, west to Texas, in Hawaii, and in the West Indies and Guam.

Toxic  Part: The  fruit  and  bark  are  poisonous. There  are  genetic  variations  in
toxin content. The fruit may be eaten with impunity in some areas.

Toxin: Tetranortriterpene neurotoxins and unidentiﬁed gastrointestinal toxins.

Clinical Findings: There are no adequately documented human poisonings, and
clinical descriptions are derived primarily from animal reports. There may be a
prolonged  latent  period  following  ingestion. Nausea, vomiting, and  diarrhea
may occur as may weakness, ataxia, and tremor.

Management: If severe gastrointestinal symptoms occur, intravenous hydration,
antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement may be necessary, particularly in chil-
dren. Consultation  with  a  Poison  Control  Center  should  be  considered. See
“Poisoning by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

References
Hare WR. Chinaberry (Melia azedarach) poisoning in animals. In: Garland T, Barr AC (eds).
Toxic Plants and Other Natural Toxicants. Cab International, Wallingford, England, 1998,
pp 514–516.
Hare WR, Schutzman H, Lee BR, Knight MW. Chinaberry poisoning in two dogs. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 1997;210:1638–1640.
Kiat TK. Melia azedarach poisoning. Singap Med J 1969;10:24–28.

Menispermum canadense L.
Family: Menispermaceae

Common  Names: Canada  Moonseed, Moonseed, Raisin  de  Couleuvre, Texas
Sarsaparilla, Yellow Parilla, Yellow Sarsaparilla

Description: This woody twining vine grows to 12 feet. The large broad leaves
are 8 inches long and slightly lobed, resembling grape leaves but with smoother
edges. The grapelike fruit forms in clusters and is bluish-black with a crescent-
shaped pit. The plant may be confused with wild grape.

Distribution: Moonseed is native to North America. It grows in moist wooded
areas from western Quebec to Manitoba and south to Georgia and Oklahoma.
Occasionally it is seen in cultivation on arbors or fences.

216

Menispermum

Menispermum canadense (above)

Menispermum canadense (below)

Toxic  Part: The 
poisonous.

fruit 

is 

Toxin: Dauricine.

Clinical  Findings: There  are 
no  adequately  documented
human poisonings, and clini-
cal  descriptions  are  based 
on  the  nature  of the  toxin.
Dauricine possesses inhibitory
effects at the cardiac potassium
channel  that  may 
lead  to
cardiac dysrhythmia. Substan-
tial ingestion may cause excita-
tory  neurological  symptoms
including  seizures, although
some  suggest  that  dauricine
may produce a neuromuscular
blocking effect akin to curare.

decontamination.

Management: Aggressive gas-
tric 
If
seizures occur, rapidly acting
anticonvulsants,such as intra-
venous  diazepam, should  be
utilized along with other sup-
portive  measures. Dysrhyth-
mia  should  be  treated  with
standard management proto-
cols. Consultation  with  a
Poison Control Center should
be strongly considered.

References
Doskotch R, Knapp J. Alkaloids from Menispermum canadense. Lloydia 1971;34:292–300.
Qian JQ. Cardiovascular pharmacological effects of bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloid
derivatives. Acta Pharmacol Sin 2002;23:1086–1092.
Xia JS, Guo DL, Zhang Y, Zhou ZN, Zeng FO, Hu CJ. Inhibitory effects of dauricine on
potassium currents in guinea pig ventricular myocytes. Acta Pharmacol Sin 2000;21:
60–64.

Momordica

217

Momordica species
Family: Cucurbitaceae
Momordica balsamina L.
Momordica charantia L.

Common Names:
Momordica balsamina: Balsam Apple
Momordica  charantia: Balsam  Pear, Bitter  Cucumber, Bitter  Gourd, Bitter
Melon, Cundeamor, Fuqua, Momordique  a  Feuilles  de Vigne, Sorci, Sor-
rosie, Wild Balsam Apple, Yesquin

Description: Momordica species are creeping vines with deeply cut leaves, trail-
ing tendrils, and tubular yellow ﬂowers. The warty, yellow-orange, pear-shaped
or oval fruit contains bright red pulp. The fruit splits open at maturity to reveal
the pulp and seeds.

Distribution: These plants are common weeds in the Gulf Coast states, Florida,
the West Indies, Hawaii, and Guam.

Toxic Part: The seeds and outer rind of ripe fruit are poisonous. The red aril
surrounding the seeds is edible. Boiled leaves drained of the cooking water are
eaten  as  vegetables  in  the  Philippines. A  cultivated  form  of the  bitter  melon,
much larger than the wild type, is used commonly in Asian cuisine. The leaves
and fruit of Momordica charantia are used in folk medicine in the Caribbean
and  as  an  herbal  medicine  in  the  United  States  for  the  treatment  of diabetes
mellitus.

Momordica charantia

Momordica charantia, close-up of fruit,
with lower right fruit opened to show
mature seeds

218

Monstera

Toxin: Momordin, a plant lectin (toxalbumin) related to ricin. Trehalose may
be the antihyperglycemic principle.

Clinical Findings: The  taste  of Momordica fruit  is  disagreeable, and  the  plant
lectin  is  relatively  weak; therefore, intoxications  are  unlikely  but  potentially
serious. Delayed  nausea, emesis, and  diarrhea  result  from  ingestion. Hypo-
glycemia is unlikely but possible.

Management: Care should be taken to replace ﬂuid and electrolyte losses. Intra-
venous hydration, antiemetics, glucose and electrolyte replacement may be nec-
essary for patients with severe gastrointestinal effects, particularly in children.
Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See “Poison-
ing by Plants with Toxalbumins,” p. 33.

References
Basch E, Gabardi S, Ulbricht C. Bitter melon (Momordica charantia): A review of efﬁcacy
and safety. Am J Health Syst Pharm 2003;60:356–359.
Matsuur H, Asakawa C, Kurimoto M, Mizutani J. Alpha-glucosidase inhibitor from the seeds
of balsam pear (Momordica charantia) and the fruit bodies of Grifola frondosa. Biosci
Biotechnol Biochem 2002;66:1576–1578.

Monstera deliciosa Liebm.
Family: Araceae

Common Names: Breadfruit Vine, Casiman, Cerimán, Cerimán de Méjico, Cut
Leaf Philodendron, Fruit  Salad  Plant, Hurricane  Plant, Mexican  Breadfruit,
Monstera, Pinonona, Shingle  Plant, Split  Leaf Philodendron, Swiss  Cheese
Plant, Window Plant, Windowleaf

Description: Monstera species  are  woody  stemmed  climbers  native  to  Mexico
and Central America. Their large heart-shaped leaves are perforated with irreg-
ularly shaped and placed holes. A 1-foot-long, white spathe encloses a 10-inch
spadix that is aromatic and edible.

Distribution: Monstera is native to Mexico. It is cultivated in the West Indies,
Hawaii, and Guam, and grown as a greenhouse plant elsewhere.

Toxic  Part: The  leaves, which  contain  raphides  of water-insoluble  calcium
oxalate and unveriﬁed proteinaceous toxins, are injurious. The spadix of some
Monstera species is edible.

Clinical Findings: There are no adequately documented human poisonings, and
clinical descriptions are based on the nature of the toxin. A painful burning sen-
sation of the lips and mouth results from ingestion. There is an inﬂammatory
reaction, often with edema and blistering. Hoarseness, dysphonia, and dyspha-
gia may result.

Monstera

219

The 

therapy.

pain 
Management:
and  edema  recede  slowly
without 
Cool
liquids  or  demulcents  held
in  the  mouth  may  bring
some  relief. Analgesics  may
be  indicated. The  insoluble
oxalate  in  these  plants  does
not  cause  systemic  oxalate
poisoning.
Consultation
with  a  Poison  Control
Center 
should  be  con-
sidered. See  “Poisoning  by
Plants with Calcium Oxalate
Crystals,” p. 23.

Monstera deliciosa, leaf with unripe fruit

Monstera deliciosa, mature fruit (left)

Monstera deliciosa, ﬂower (below)

220

Myoporum

Reference
Rauber A. Observations on the idioblasts of Dieffenbachia. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1985;23:
79–90.

Myoporum laetum G. Forst.
Family: Myoporaceae

Common Names: In Australia it is called Ngaio tree.

Description: Myoporum is  a  large  tree  with  a  thick  trunk  that  often  has  but-
tresses. The bark is pale grayish-white. The leaves are elliptical, coarsely toothed,
and about 3 inch long. A leaf held up to the light shows numerous distinctive
small dark spots (glands) that make this tree easy to identify. Many small ﬂowers
form along the terminal branches. The fruit is a small ball, less than 0.25 inch
in diameter, containing a single seed.

Distribution: This tree is native to New Zealand but is planted extensively along
streets in northern California.

Toxic Part: The  greatest  amount  of toxin  is  contained  in  the  leaves; however,
reported intoxications in humans have involved only the fruit.

Toxin: Ngaione, an  essential  oil  (oil  of Ngaio), is  a  furanoid  sesquiterpene
ketone.

Clinical Findings: There are no adequately documented human poisonings, and
clinical  descriptions  are  derived  primarily  from  animal  reports. Substantial
ingestion can produce gastrointestinal and neurological effects. Nausea, vomit-

Myoporum laetum (right)

Myoporum laetum, ﬂower (below)

Narcissus

221

ing, abdominal cramping, and diarrhea may occur. Seizures may occur. Hepatic
toxicity occurs in experimental models.

Management: Intravenous hydration, antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement
may be necessary for patients with severe gastrointestinal symptoms, particu-
larly in children. If seizures occur, rapidly acting anticonvulsants, such as intra-
venous  diazepam, should  be  utilized  along  with  other  supportive  measures.
Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See “Poison-
ing by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

References
Allen JG, Seawright AA, Hrdlicka J. The toxicity of Myoporum tetrandrum (Boobialla) and
myoporaceous furanoid essential oils for ruminants. Aust Vet J 1978;54:287–292.
Raposo JB, Mendez MC, Riet-Correa F, de Andrade GB. Experimental intoxication by
Myoporum laetum in sheep. Vet Hum Toxicol 1998;40:132–135.
Seawright AA, O’Donahoo RM. Light and electron microscope observations of the liver of
the mouse after a single dose of ngaione. J Pathol 1972;106:251–259.

Narcissus species
Family: Amaryllidaceae
Narcissue cyclamineus DC.
Narcissus jonquilla L.
Narcissus poeticus L.
Narcissus pseudonarcissus L.
Narcissus tazetta L.

Common  Names: Daffodil,
Jonquil, Narciso, Narcissus,
Paciencia

Narcissus poeticus

is  grown 
that 

Description: The narcissus is
native to Europe and North
Africa; plants  grown  in  the
New  World  are  mostly 
horticultural  hybrids. The
from  a 
plant 
bulb 
in 
structure and appearance to
an  onion. The  leaves  arise
from  the  ground. One  or
more  ﬂowers  arise  from  a
stalk (scape); the blooms are
usually white or yellow with

is 

similar 

222

Narcissus

Narcissus pseudonarcissus L.

Narcissus pseuedonarcissus L.

six spreading petal-like parts and an erect, tubular trumpet emerging from the
center.

Toxic Part: Bulb.

Toxin: Lycorine and related phenanthridine alkaloids.

Clinical Findings: Human poisoning has been associated only with ingestion of
the  bulbs, which  were  mistaken  for  onions. Ingestion  of large  quantities  may
produce  nausea, vomiting, abdominal  cramping, and  diarrhea. Livestock  fed
narcissus  bulbs  in  the  Netherlands  during  wartime  were  also  poisoned. Note
that  packaged  bulbs  sometimes  contain  insecticidal  or  antifungal  agents.
Contact dermatitis due to contact sensitization is a common complaint among
Narcissus bulb handlers.

Management: Most  exposures  result  in  minimal  or  no  toxicity. Intravenous
hydration, antiemetics, and  electrolyte  replacement  may  be  necessary  for
patients with severe gastrointestinal symptoms, particularly in children. Con-
sultation with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See “Poisoning by
Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

References
de Jong NW, Vermeulen AM, Gerth van Wijk R, de Groot H. Occupational allergy caused by
ﬂowers. Allergy 1998;53:204–209.
Gude M, Hausen BM, Heitsch H, Konig WA. An investigation of the irritant and allergenic
properties of daffodils (Narcissus pseudonarcissus L., Amaryllidaceae). A review of daffodil
dermatitis. Contact Dermatitis 1988;19:1–10.
Litovitz TL, Fahey BA. Please don’t eat the daffodils. N Engl J Med 1982;306:547.

Nerium

223

Nerium oleander L.
(=N. indicum Mill.)
Family: Apocynaceae

Common  Names: Adelfa, Alhelí  Extranjero, Laurier  Rose, Oleander, ‘Oliwa,
‘Oleana, ‘Olinana, Rosa Laurel, Rose Bay, Rosa Francesa

Description: The oleander is an evergreen shrub that grows to 20 feet and con-
tains a clear, sticky sap. The long, leathery, narrow leaves are up to 10 inches in
length  and  are  opposite  or  occur  in  groups  of three  about  the  stem. Flowers
form in small clusters at the ends of branches and are red, pink, or white. The
ﬂuffy winged seeds develop in long narrow fruits (capsules) which are 3/8 inch
in diameter by 5 inches long.

Distribution: The oleander is native to the Mediterranean. It is widely cultivated
outdoors in warm climates and as a tub plant elsewhere.

Toxic Part: The whole plant is toxic.

Toxin: Oleandrin, a cardioactive steroid resembling digitalis.

Clinical  Findings: Poisoning  has  been  reported  from  inhaling  smoke  from 
burning Nerium, use of the sticks to roast marshmallows, and drinking the water 
in  which  the  ﬂowers  have  been  placed. Poisoning  produces  clinical  ﬁndings 

Nerium oleander

Nerium oleander, close-up of ﬂower and
leaves

224

Nicotiana

typical of cardioactive steroid
poisoning. Toxicity has a vari-
able latent period that depends
on the quantity ingested. Dys-
rhythmia is usually expressed
as  sinus  bradycardia, prema-
ture  ventricular  contractions,
atrioventricular 
conduction
defects, or  ventricular  tachy-
dysrhythmias. Hyperkalemia,
if present, may be an indicator
of toxicity.

Nerium oleander, fruits

Management: Gastrointestinal
decontamination as appropri-
ate, serial  electrocardiograms,
and serum potassium determinations should be performed. If serious cardioactive
steroid toxicity is considered, digoxin-speciﬁc Fab should be administered. Consulta-
tion with a Poison Control Center should be strongly considered. See “Poisoning by
Plants with Cardioactive Steroids/Cardiac Glycosides,”p.24.

References
Cheung K, Hinds JA, Diffy P. Detection of poisoning by plant-origin cardiac glycoside with
the Abbott TDx analyzer. Clin Chem 1989;35:295–297.
Langford SD, Boor PJ. Oleander toxicity: An examination of human and animal toxic
exposures. Toxicology 1996;109:1–13.
LeCouteur DG, Fisher AA. Chronic and criminal administration of Nerium oleander. J
Toxicol Clin Toxicol 2002;40:523–524.
Radford DJ, Gillies AD, Hinds JA, et al. Naturally occurring cardiac glycosides. Med J Aust
1986;144:540–544.
Safadi R, Levy I, Amitai Y, Caraco Y. Beneﬁcial effect of digoxin-speciﬁc Fab antibody
fragments in oleander intoxication. Arch Intern Med 1995;55:2121–2125.

Nicotiana species
Family: Solanaceae
Nicotiana attenuata Torr. ex S. Watson
Nicotiana glauca Graham
Nicotiana longiﬂora Cav.
Nicotiana rustica L.
Nicotiana tabacum L.

Common Names: Paka, Tabac, Tabaco, Tobacco

Nicotiana

225

Nicotiana glauca (above)

Nicotiana rustica (left)

Nicotiana tabacum

Description:Nicotianaspecies
may  be  annual  or  perennial;
the  latter  generally  are  large
shrubs or small trees.The ﬁve-
lobed ﬂowers, in large termi-
nal  panicles, are  distinctively
tubular, ﬂare  at  the  mouth,
and  may  be  white, yellow,
greenish-yellow, or  red. The
fruit  is  a  capsule  with  many
minute  seeds. The  leaves  are
simple  and  alternate, usually
have smooth edges, and often
are broad, hairy, and sticky.

Distribution: Nicotiana atten-
uata grows from Idaho to Baja
California east to Texas. Nico-
tiana  glauca is  from  South
America  and  naturalized  in
the 
southwestern  United
States,Hawaii,Mexico,and the West Indies,and often grown as an ornamental.Nico-
tiana longiﬂora is commonly cultivated as a garden ornamental. It has been natural-
ized in the United States along the Gulf of Mexico from Texas to Florida and north to
the Great Lakes.

226

Oenanthe

Nicotiana rustica is from South America and has been naturalized sporadically
in  eastern  North  America  from  Massachusetts  to  Florida  and  in  southern
Ontario, and from Minnesota to New Mexico in the western United States.
Nicotiana tabacum is the principal cultivated smoking tobacco.

Toxic Part: The whole plant is poisonous.

Toxin: The speciﬁc toxin depends on the species but involves chemically related
alkaloids, for example, nicotine in Nicotiana tabacum, anabasine in N. glauca.

Clinical  Findings: Acute  intoxications  result  from  ingestion  of the  leaves  as  a
salad (particularly Nicotiana glauca), from the use of N. tabacum infusions in
enemas as a home remedy, from the cutaneous absorption of the alkaloid during
commercial tobacco harvesting, or from the ingestion of cigarettes or puriﬁed
nicotine. Initial gastrointestinal symptoms may be followed by those typical of
nicotine  poisoning; these  include  hypertension, large  pupils, sweating, and
perhaps seizures. Severe poisoning produces coma, weakness, and paralysis that
may result in death from respiratory failure.

Management: Symptomatic and supportive care should be given, with attention
to  adequacy  of ventilation  and  vital  signs. Atropine  may  reverse  some  of the
toxic effects. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be strongly con-
sidered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Nicotine-like Alkaloids,” p. 30.

References
Arcury TA, Quandt SA, Preisser JS, Norton D. The incidence of green tobacco sickness
among Latino farmworkers. J Occup Environ Med 2001;43:601–609.
Castorena JL, Garriott JC, Barnhardt FE, Shaw RF. A fatal poisoning from Nicotiana glauca. J
Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1987;25:429–435.
Daly JW, Nicotinic agonists, antagonists, and modulators from natural sources, Cell Mol
Newobial 2005;25:513–552.
Lewander WJ, Wine H, Carnevale R, et al. Ingestion of cigarettes and cigarette butts by
children: Rhode Island, January 1994–July 1996. MMWR (Morb Mortal Wkly Rep) 1997;
46:125–128.

Oenanthe aquatica (L.) Poiret
Oenanthe crocata L.
Family: Umbelliferae (Apiaceae)

Common Names: Oenanthe aquatica: Fineleaf Water Dropwort, Water-Fennel.
Oenanthe  crocata:  Dead  Men’s  Fingers, Hemlock  Water  Dropwort, Water 
Dropwort

Description: Oenanthe aquatica: A perennial plant that has ﬂoating or prostrate 
stems, with multiple compound, fernlike leaves, and terminal umbels of white 

Oenanthe

227

ﬂowers. Oenanthe  crocata:
This perennial grows to 5 feet.
Its bundle of spindle-shaped
roots  (dead  men’s  ﬁngers)
contains  white  latex, which
turns orange on exposure to
air. The  stem  is  hollow  and
much  branched. The  leaves
are pinnately compound,and
white ﬂowers form in termi-
nal umbels.

Oenanthe
Distribution:
aquatica is native to Eurasia,
and the plant is known from
Washington, DC, Ohio, and
elsewhere. Oenanthe  crocata
is a European plant and has
been 
introduced  acciden-
tally  into  marshy  areas  sur-
rounding  Washington, DC.
sarmentosa C.
Oenanthe 
Presl  ex  DC., which 
is
common on the West Coast
from  southwest  Alaska  and
western British Columbia to
central  California,
is  not
known to be toxic.

Oenanthe crocata

Toxic Part: The whole plant is poisonous, but most intoxications have involved
ingestion of the roots, which have been described as having a pleasant taste.

Toxin: Oenanthotoxin, an  unsaturated  aliphatic  compound,
cicutoxin.

similar  to 

Clinical Findings: Onset of symptoms is rapid, usually within 1 hour of inges-
tion; symptoms include nausea, vomiting, salivation, and trismus. Generalized
seizures also may occur. Death may occur if seizures do not terminate.

Management: Supportive  care  including  airway  management  and  protection
against  rhabdomyolysis  and  associated  complications  (e.g., electrolyte  abnor-
malities and renal insufﬁciency) is the mainstay of therapy. Rapidly acting anti-
convulsants  (e.g., diazepam  or  lorazepam)  for  persistent  seizures  may  be
needed. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be strongly consid-
ered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Convulsive Poisons (Seizures),” p. 25.

228

Ornithogalum

References
Ball MJ, Flather ML, Forfar JC. Hemlock water dropwort poisoning. Postgrad Med J 1987;
63:363–365.
Downs C, Phillips J, Ranger A, Farrell L. A hemlock water dropwort curry: A case of
multiple poisoning. Emerg Med J 2002;19(5):472–473.
Mitchell MI, Routledge PA. Hemlock water dropwort poisoning: A review. J Toxicol Clin
Toxicol 1978;12:417–426.

Ornithogalum species
Family: Liliaceae
Ornithogalum thyrsoides Jacq.
Ornithogalum umbellatum L.

Common Names:
Ornithogalum thyrsoides: African Wonderﬂower, Chincherinchee, Star-of-Beth-

lehem, Wonder Flower

Ornithogalum  umbellatum: Dove’s  Dung, Nap-at-Noon, Star-of-Bethlehem,

Summer Snowﬂake

Description: These plants have onionlike bulbs and grasslike leaves. The ﬂowers
are borne in a cluster on an upright spike. Flowers of Ornithogalum thyrsoides

Ornithogalum thyrsoides

Ornithogalum thyrsoides, close-up of
ﬂowers

Ornithogalum

229

are  white, and  those  of O.
umbellatum are  green  and
white. Seeds are contained in
a capsule.

lilies 
Distribution: These 
are  of Old  World  origin.
Ornithogalum  umbellatum
has  escaped  and  become
naturalized in the southeast-
ern  United  States,
in  the
prairies of Mississippi, Mis-
souri, Kansas, and  in  the
northeastern  United  States.
Both  species  are  common
garden plants.

Toxic  Part: All  parts  of the
plant  are  poisonous, partic-
ularly the bulb.

Ornithogalum umbellatum

Toxin: Convallatoxin  and  convalloside, cardioactive  steroids  resembling  digi-
talis; similar to those of lily-of-the-valley (Convallaria majalis).

Clinical Findings: There are no adequately documented human poisonings, and
clinical  descriptions  are  derived  primarily  from  animal  reports. Substantial
ingestion may lead to toxicity. Poisoning would be expected to produce clinical
ﬁndings typical of cardioactive steroid poisoning. Toxicity has a variable latent
period  that  depends  on  the  quantity  ingested. Dysrhythmias  are  usually
expressed  as  sinus  bradycardia, premature  ventricular  contractions, atrioven-
tricular conduction defects, or ventricular tachydysrhythmias. Hyperkalemia, if
present, may be an indicator of toxicity.

Management: Gastrointestinal  decontamination  as  appropriate, serial  electro-
cardiograms, and  serum  potassium  determinations  should  be  performed. If
serious cardioactive steroid toxicity is considered, digoxin-speciﬁc Fab should
be administered. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be strongly
considered. See “Poisoning  by  Plants  with  Cardioactive  Steroids/Cardiac  Gly-
cosides,” p. 24.

References
Bamhare C. Suspected cardiac glycoside intoxication in sheep and goats in Namibia due to
Ornithogalum nanodes (Leighton). Onderstepoort J Vet Res 1988;65:25–30.
Ferth R, Kopp B. Cardenolides from Ornithogalum umbellatum. Pharmazie 1992;47:
626–629.

230

Pachyrhizus

Pachyrhizus erosus (L.) Urb.
Family: Leguminosae (Fabaceae)

Common  Names: Chopsui  Potato, Habilla, Jícama  de  Agua, Jicama, Pois
Cochon, Pois Manioc, Sargott, Wild Yam Bean, Yam Bean

Description: Yam bean is a twining vine with large tuberous roots. The violet,
sweetpea-like  ﬂowers  grow  in  racemes  and  produce  fruits  4  to  6  inches  long.
Seeds are ﬂat, square or rounded, and yellow, brown, or red.

Distribution: This  plant  is  cultivated  in  the  southern  Gulf Coast  states  and 
has  become  naturalized  in  Florida, Hawaii, the  West  Indies, and  Guam. The
roots  are  commonly  sold  as  a  food  in  supermarkets, especially  in  urban 
areas.

Toxic Part: The seeds and mature fruit pods are toxic. The ﬂeshy roots and the
immature pods are edible.

Toxin: Gastrointestinal  irritant  and  may  contain  rotenone, a  mitochondrial

Pachyrhizus erosus

poison.

Clinical  Findings: Nausea,
vomiting,abdominal cramp-
ing, and diarrhea may occur.
Rotenone may produce mul-
tiple organ system failure.

Intravenous
Management:
hydration, antiemetics, and
electrolyte replacement may
be  necessary  for  patients
with  severe  gastrointestinal
effects, particularly  in  chil-
dren. Consultation  with  a
Poison  Control  Center
should  be  strongly  consid-
ered. See  “Poisoning  by
Plants  with  Gastrointestinal
Toxins,” p. 28.

Pedilanthus

231

References
De Wilde AR, Heyndrickx A, Carton D. A case of fatal rotenone poisoning in a child. J
Forensic Sci 1986;31:1492–1498.
Narongchai P, Narongchai S, Thampituk S. The ﬁrst fatal case of yam bean and rotenone
toxicity in Thailand. J Med Assoc Thai 2005;88:984–987.

Pedilanthus tithymaloides (L.) Poit.
Family: Euphorbiaceae

Common Names: Candelilla,
Christmas  Candle, Devil’s
Backbone, Fiddle  Flower,
Itamo  Real, Japanese  Poin-
settia,
Jew  Bush, Redbird
Flower  or  Cactus, Ribbon
Slipper  Flower,
Cactus,
Slipper Plant

Description: Slipper ﬂower is
a  shrubby, succulent  plant
characterized  by  numerous
zigzag  stems. The  leaves  are
alternate  and  ovate, 2  to  4
inches  long, green  or  with
white  variegations,
some-
times  with  a  pink  tinge,
pointed  at  the  tip, and  fall
shortly  after  developing.
Red  or  purple  shoe-shaped
“ﬂowers”
(actually  ﬂoral
bracts) appear on the ends of
the 
stems. Milky  white 
latex  appears  if the  stem  is
cut. Fruits are 0.25 inches in
diameter.

Distribution: This  common
houseplant  is  cultivated  in
warm areas and grows in the
West  Indies, Florida, Cali-
fornia, Hawaii, and Guam.

Toxic Part: Milky sap found
in all parts of the plants.

Pedilanthus tithymaloides (above)

Pedilanthus tithymaloides (below)

232

Pentalinon

Toxin: Euphorbol and other terpenes that have gastrointestinal and dermal irri-
tant effects.

Clinical  Findings: Nausea, vomiting, abdominal  cramping, and  diarrhea  may
occur. This plant may cause very severe dermatological reactions.

Management: Intravenous hydration, antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement
may be necessary for patients with severe gastrointestinal symptoms, particu-
larly in children. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be consid-
ered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

Reference
Lim TK, Soepadmo E. Eye injury from plant sap of Pedilanthus tithymaloides Poit. Singap
Med J 1984;25:412–419.

Pentalinon luteum (L.) B.F. Hansen & R.P. Wunderlin.
(=Urechites lutea (L.) Britton)
Family: Apocynaceae

Common Names: Babeiro Amarillo, Bejuco Ahoja Vaca, Catesby’s Vine, Corne
Cabrite, Curamaguey, Nightsage, Wild  Allamanda, Wild  Nightshade, Wild
Unction, Yellow Nightshade

Description: Yellow nightshade is a shrubby vine with milky sap. The opposite
leaves are 2 inches wide and 3.5 inches long, obtuse at both the tip and base.
The ﬂowers grow in a cluster (cyme), and only a few are open at one time. There
are ﬁve yellow petals, which may be marked with red on the inside. The fruit
usually appears in pairs as thin, woody, slightly curved pods up to 8 inches long.
The pod contains winged seeds.

Distribution: This  plant  grows  in  Florida, the  Bahamas, and  the  Greater  and
Lesser Antilles south to St. Vincent.

Pentalinon luteum

Toxic  Part: The  leaf is  poi-
sonous.

Toxin: Urechitoxin, a  car-
dioactive steroid resembling
digitalis.

Clinical  Findings: There  are
no  adequately  documented
and 
human  poisonings,
clinical  descriptions 
are
derived 
from
animal  reports. Substantial
to 
ingestion  may 

primarily 

lead 

Pernettya

233

Pentalinon luteum

toxicity. Poisoning would be expected to produce clinical ﬁndings typical of car-
dioactive steroid poisoning. Toxicity has a variable latent period that depends on
the quantity ingested. Symptoms are usually expressed as sinus bradycardia, pre-
mature ventricular contractions, atrioventricular conduction defects, or ventric-
ular tachydysrhythmias. Hyperkalemia, if present, may be an indicator of toxicity.
Management: Gastrointestinal decontamination as appropriate, serial electrocar-
diograms, and serum potassium determinations should be performed. If serious
cardioactive steroid toxicity is considered, digoxin-speciﬁc Fab should be admin-
istered. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See
“Poisoning by Plants with Cardioactive Steroids/Cardiac Glycosides,” p. 24.
References
Faz EM. Urechites lutea (L.) Britton toxicity in cattle. Vet Hum Toxicol 1996;38:
313–314.
Marrero E, Alfonso HA, Fajardo M. Cardiotonic effect of different glycoside extracts of
Urechites lutea. Rev Salud Anim 1985;7:79–90.

Pernettya species
Family: Ericaceae
Common Name: Pernettya.
Description: Pernettya species are small evergreen shrubs with simple, alternate,
leathery leaves. The white urn-shaped ﬂowers usually appear singly. The fruit is
a white or brightly colored berry that persists through the winter.
Distribution: Pernettya species are native to Central and South America, New
Zealand, and Tasmania. They are only in cultivation in the United States.

234

Pernettya

Pernettya mucronata, close-up of ﬂowers

Pernettya mucronata, branch with fruit

Toxic Part: Leaves, berries, nectar from ﬂowers (in honey).

Toxin: Grayanotoxins (andromedotoxins), sodium channel activators.

Clinical Findings: There are no adequately documented human poisonings, and
clinical  descriptions  are  based  on  the  nature  of the  toxin. Symptoms  are
expected to be predominantly neurological and cardiac. There may be transient
burning in the mouth after ingestion, followed after several hours by increased
salivation, vomiting, diarrhea, and a tingling sensation in the skin. The patient
may  complain  of headache, muscular  weakness, and  dimness  of vision.
Bradycardia and other cardiac dysrhythmias can be associated with severe blood
pressure abnormalities. Coma may develop, and convulsions may be a terminal
event.

Management: Fluid replacement should be instituted with respiratory support
if indicated. Heart rhythm and blood pressure should be monitored and treated
with appropriate medications and supportive care. Recovery is generally com-
plete  within  24  hours. Consultation  with  a  Poison  Control  Center  should  be
strongly considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Sodium Channel Activators,”
p. 32.

References
Ergun K, Tufekcioglu O, Aras D, Korkmaz S, Pehlivan S. A rare cause of atrioventricular
block: Mad Honey intoxication. Int J Cardiol 2005;99:347–348.
Masutani T, Seyama I, Narahashi T, Iwasa J. Structure-activity relationship for grayanotoxin
derivatives in frog skeletal muscle. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1981;217:812–819.

Philodendron

235

Puschner B, Holstege DM, Lamberski N. Grayanotoxin poisoning in three goats. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2001;218:573–575.
Yavuz H, Ozel A, Akkus I, Erkul I. Honey poisoning in Turkey. Lancet 1991;337:789–790.

Philodendron species
Family: Araceae

Common Names: Bejuco de Lombriz, Paisaje, Philodendron

Description: Philodendrons  are  mostly  climbing  vines  with  aerial  roots. The
adult leaves are often large and variable, and two types are encountered: the ﬁrst
resembles Alocasia but has more pronounced irregular notching around the leaf
margin, and the other form (e.g., Philodendron scandens C. Koch & H. Sello and
its variants), which is widely available, has heart-shaped or oblong leaves with
smooth margins, sometimes with variegated patterns. Juvenile leaves are smaller
and do not vary much by species, making identiﬁcation at this stage difﬁcult.

Distribution: Philodendron grows outdoors in warm climates. It is probably the
most popular indoor houseplant in the United States.

Toxic Part: The leaves are injurious.

Toxin: Insoluble calcium oxalate crystals.

Philodendron sp., ﬂowers (left)

Philodendron selloum (below)

236

Phoradendron

Clinical Findings: Although  this  plant  contains  calcium  oxalates, they  are  not
well organized and therefore not typically associated with the same toxicity as
dumbcane (Dieffenbachia species). Substantial ingestion may cause some gas-
trointestinal  irritation  including  nausea, vomiting, and  diarrhea. Most  cases
result in no symptoms.

Management: Most cases result in no toxicity. Intravenous hydration, antiemet-
ics, and electrolyte replacement may be necessary for patients with severe gas-
trointestinal  symptoms, particularly  in  children. Consultation  with  a  Poison
Control Center should be considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Calcium
Oxalate Crystals,” p. 23.

References
Franceschi VR, Nakata PA. Calcium oxalate in plants: Formation and function. Annu Rev
Plant Biol 2005;56:41–71.
McIntire MS, Guest JR, Porterﬁeld JF. Philodendron—an infant death. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol
1990;28:177–183.
Mrvos R, Dean BS, Krenzelok EP. Philodendron/Dieffenbachia ingestions: Are they a
problem? J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1991;29:485–491.

Phoradendron species
Family: Loranthaceae
Phoradendron quadrangulare (Kunth) Griseb. (Note: P. rubrum misapplied)
Phoradendron serotinum (Raf.) M.C. Johnst. var. serotinum (Note: P. ﬂavescens

misapplied)

Phoradendron serotinum (Raf.) M.C. Johnst. var. tomentosum (DC.) Kuijt

Common Names:
Phoradendron quadrangulare: Cepa Caballero
Phoradendron serotinum: American Mistletoe, False Mistletoe, Mistletoe
Phoradendron tomentosum: Injerto

Description: These  species  are  parasitic  plants  that  grow  on  the  trunks  and
branches of trees. They have thick, leathery, smooth-edged, opposite leaves and
tiny ﬂowers that grow in small spikes. The fruits are globose white berries and
translucent  in  Phoradendron  serotinum and  P. tomentosum, and  pinkish  in 
P. quadrangulare.

Distribution: Phoradendron  quadrangulare is  parasitic  only  on  the  mahogany
(Swietenia  mahogani)  throughout  its  entire  range: southernmost  Florida, the
Bahamas, Cuba, Jamaica, Haiti, Dominican  Republic, and  Puerto  Rico.
Phoradendron serotinum is the mistletoe plant sold at Christmas. It is parasitic
on deciduous trees in the southeast from New Jersey to Florida, west to south-
ern  Illinois  and  Texas. Phoradendron  tomentosum grows  from  Kansas  to

Phoradendron

237

Phoradendron serotinum, growing on tree (above)

Phoradendron serotinum (below)

Louisiana, west to Texas and
into Mexico.

Toxic  Part: The  leaves  and
stems  are  toxic. The  berries
may be toxic if consumed in
large amounts.

Toxin: Phoratoxin, a  plant
lectin  (toxalbumin)  related
to ricin.

large  amounts.

Clinical Findings: Most expo-
sures result in minimal or no
toxicity. However, the  pres-
ence of phoratoxin raises con-
cerns following the ingestion
of
Initial
symptoms  depend  on  the
amount of toxin exposure and
include  nausea,
vomiting,
abdominal  cramping, diar-
rhea, and dehydration. More
severe toxicity involves multi-
ple organ system failures.

Management: Cases  associ-
ated  with  gastrointestinal
efforts  need  to  be  assessed
for signs of dehydration and
electrolyte 
abnormalities.
Activated charcoal should be
administered.
Intravenous
hydration, antiemetics, and
electrolyte replacement may
be necessary in severe cases,
particularly  those  involving  children. Consultation  with  a  Poison  Control
Center should be strongly considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Toxalbu-
mins,” p. 33.

References
Hall AH, Spoerke DG, Rumack BH. Assessing mistletoe toxicity. Ann Emerg Med 1986;15:
1320–1323.

238

Physalis

Krenzelok EP, Jacobsen TD, Aronis J. American mistletoe exposures. Am J Emerg Med
1997;15:516–520.
Spiller HA, Willias DB, Gorman SE, Sanftleban J. Retrospective study of mistletoe ingestion.
J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1996;34:405–408.

Physalis species
Family: Solanaceae

Common  Names: Alquerquenje, Barbados  Gooseberry, Battre  Autour, Cape
Gooseberry, Chinese Lantern Plant, Coque Molle, Coqueret, Farolito, Ground
Cherry, Gooseberry Tomato, Huevo de Gato, Husk Tomato, Jamberry, Maman
Laman, Japanese  Lantern  Plant, Mexican  Husk  Tomato, Pa‘Ina, Poha,
Sacabuche, Strawberry  Tomato, Tomates, Tope-Tope, Vejiga  de  Perro, Winter
Cherry, Yellow Henbane

Description: There are about 17 species of Physalis growing in the United States.
A large number are cultivated for their attractive Chinese lantern-like fruit pods.
Inside the paper-like “pod”(enlarged calyx) is a globose fruit (berry) with minute
seeds. When mature, the raw or cooked berries of some species are edible.

Physalis alkekengi

Distribution: Physalis plants
are  both  native  and  culti-
vated throughout the United
States  (including  Hawaii),
central and eastern Canada,
the West Indies, and Guam.

Toxic  Part: The  unripe
berries are poisonous.

Toxin:Solanine glycoalkaloids
have predominantly gastroin-
testinal irritant effects.

Clinical  Findings: Nausea,
vomiting,abdominal cramp-
ing, and diarrhea may occur.
Central  nervous 
system
effects  of delerium, halluci-
nations, and  coma  have 
been reported, but the mech-
anism for these effects is not
known.

Phytolacca

239

Physalis alkekengi, fruit cut in half (above)

Physalis crassifolia (below)

Management: Intravenous hydration, antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement
may be necessary for patients with severe gastrointestinal effects, particularly in
children. Central  nervous  system  effects  are  managed  with  supportive  and
symptomatic care. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be con-
sidered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” pp. 28.

References
McMillan M, Tompson JC. An outbreak of suspected solanine poisoning in schoolboys.
Examination of solanine poisoning. Q J Med 1979;48:227–243.
Slanina P. Solanine (glycoalkaloids) in potatoes: Toxicological evaluation. Food Chem
Toxicol 1990;28:759–761.

240

Phytolacca

Phytolacca americana L. (=P. decandra L.)
Family: Phytolaccaceae

Cocum,

Common  Names: American
Nightshade,
Bledo  Car-
bonero, Cancer Jalap, Chon-
grass,
Cokan,
Coakum, Crow Berry, Garget,
Indian  Polk,
Ink  Berry,
Pigeonberry, Pocan  Bush,
Poke, Pokeberry, Pokeweed,
Red  Ink  Plant, Red  Weed,
Scoke

Description: The  pokeweed
has  a  large  perennial  root-
stock  (up  to  6  inches  in
diameter) from which stout,
purplish, branching  stems
emerge  up  to  12  feet  in
height. The  plant  has  a
strong, unpleasant odor. The
simple, alternate leaves are 4
to 12 inches long. Flowers are
greenish-white  to  purplish
and small; they appear on the
drooping or erect stalk. The

Phytolacca americana, branch with fruit
dark berries are purplish to black and are attached to the stalk by a short stem.

Distribution: Pokeweed grows in damp ﬁelds and woods from Maine to Min-
nesota, southern  Ontario  to  southwest  Quebec, south  to  the  Gulf of Mexico,
Florida, and Texas, and in Hawaii. It has been introduced in California where it
is an occasional weed.
Toxic  Part: The  leaves  and  roots  are  poisonous. In  some  regions, the  young
sprouts and stems are boiled and eaten after discarding the cooking water; the
cooked  product  may  also  be  purchased  commercially  in  cans. The  mature
berries  are  relatively  nontoxic. Intoxications  generally  arise  from  eating
uncooked leaves in salads or mistaking the roots for parsnips or horseradish.
Toxin: Phytolaccatoxin and related triterpenes.
Clinical Findings: After  a  delay  of 2  to  3  hours, nausea, vomiting, abdominal
cramping, and diarrhea occur. Effects may last for as long as 48 hours. An ele-
vated white blood cell count may occur due to the presence in the plant of a
mitogen and is generally of no consequence.

Pieris

241

Management: Intravenous hydration, antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement
may be necessary for patients with severe gastrointestinal effects, particularly in
children. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See
“Poisoning by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.
References
Hamilton RJ, Shih RD, Hoffman RS. Mobitz type I heart block after pokeweed ingestion. Vet
Hum Toxicol 1995;1:66–67.
Roberge R, Brader E, Martin ML, et al. The root of evil-pokeweed intoxication. Ann Emerg
Med 1986;15:470–473.

Pieris species
Family: Ericaceae
Pieris ﬂoribunda (Pursh) Benth. & Hook. f.
Pieris japonica (Thunb.) D. Don

Common  Names:
bush,
Bush, Japanese Pieris

Fetter-
Lily-of-the-Valley

are 

leaves 

Description: Pieris are  ever-
green  shrubs  or  small  trees.
The 
simple,
usually  alternate, and  leath-
ery. The  ﬂowers  are  usually
white  and  grow  in  urn-
shaped clusters.

Pieris ﬂoribunda, close-up of ﬂowers (above)

Pieris japonica (below)

Distribution: Pieris  ﬂori-
bunda is  a  bush  that  grows
from  Virginia  to  Georgia.
Pieris  japonica, a  shrub  or
small  tree  from  Japan,
is
widely cultivated in temper-
ate  climates, particularly  on
the Paciﬁc coast. Numerous
horticultural varieties exist.

Toxic  Part: The  leaves  and
nectar from ﬂowers (in honey).

Toxin: Grayanotoxins (andro-
medotoxins), sodium channel
activators.

Clinical Findings: Symptoms
are predominantly neurolog-
ical  and  cardiac. There  is 

242

Podophyllum

Pieris japonica, ﬂowering shrub

in 

the
transient  burning 
mouth  after  ingestion, fol-
lowed  after  several  hours  by
increased  salivation, vomit-
ing, diarrhea, and  a  tingling
sensation  in  the  skin. The
patient  may  complain  of
headache, muscular  weak-
ness, and  dimness  of vision.
Bradycardia and other cardiac
dysrhythmias  can  be  associ-
ated with severe blood pres-
sure  abnormalities. Coma
may develop,and convulsions
may be a terminal event.

Management: Fluid replacement should be instituted with respiratory support if
indicated. Heart rhythm and blood pressure should be monitored and treated
with appropriate medications and supportive care.Recovery is generally complete
within 24 hours. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be strongly
considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Sodium Channel Activators,” p. 32.

References
Ergun K, Tufekcioglu O, Aras D, Korkmaz S, Pehlivan S. A rare cause of atrioventricular
block: Mad Honey intoxication. Int J Cardiol 2005;99:347–348.
Puschner B, Holstege DM, Lamberski N. Grayanotoxin poisoning in three goats. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2001;218:573–575.
Tschekunow H, Klug S, Marcus S. Symptomatic poisoning from ingestion of Pieris japonica.
A case report. Vet Hum Toxicol 1989;31:360.
Yavuz H, Ozel A, Akkus I, Erkul I. Honey poisoning in Turkey. Lancet 1991;337:789–790.

Podophyllum peltatum L.
Family: Berberidaceae

Common Names: American  Mandrake, Behen, Devil’s  Apple, Hog  Apple,
Indian  Apple, May Apple, Raccoon  Berry, Umbrella  Leaf, Wild  Jalap, Wild
Lemon

Description: This herb grows to 1.5 feet and has two large (up to 1 foot across)
umbrella-like leaves, each with ﬁve to nine lobes. Between the leaf stems emerges a
single, white, nodding ﬂower with a 2-inch diameter. The yellowish-green fruit is
about the size and shape of an egg. Sterile (nonﬂowering) plants have a single leaf.

Distribution: May  apples  grow  in  moist  woodlands  from  Quebec  to  Florida,
west to southern Ontario, Minnesota, and Texas.

Toxic Part: The whole plant, except the fruit (which causes, at most, only slight
catharsis), is poisonous.

Podophyllum

243

Podophyllum peltatum (above)

Podophyllum peltatum, close-up of ﬂower
(left)

Toxin: Podophyllotoxin, and  alpha-  and  beta-peltatin, similar  to  colchicine, a
cytotoxic  alkaloid  capable  of inhibiting  microtubule  formation. Available  for
clinical use as podophyllin resin.

Clinical Findings: Ingestion of podophyllin resin may cause initial oropharyn-
geal pain followed, in several hours, by intense gastrointestinal effects. Abdom-
inal  pain  and  severe, profuse, persistent  diarrhea  may  develop, with 
the  latter  causing  extensive  ﬂuid  depletion  and  electrolyte  abnormalities.
Podophyllin  may  subsequently  produce  peripheral  neuropathy, bone  marrow
suppression, and cardiovascular collapse. Topical application may lead to skin
necrosis or systemic poisoning.

Management: The intoxication has a prolonged course due to the slow absorp-
tion of the toxin. Aggressive symptomatic and supportive care is critical, with
prolonged  observation  of symptomatic  patients. Consultation  with  a  Poison
Control  Center  should  be  strongly  considered. See “Poisoning  by  Plants  with
Mitotic Inhibitors,” p. 29.

References
Cassidy DE, Drewry J, Fanning JP. Podophyllum toxicity: A report of a fatal case and a review
of the literature. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1982;19:35–44.
Damayanthi Y, Lown JW. Podophyllotoxins: current status and recent developments. Curr
Med Chem 1998;5:205–252.
Frasca T, Brett AS, Yoo SD. Mandrake toxicity. A case of mistaken identity. Arch Intern Med
1997;157:2007–2009.
Givens ML, Rivera W. Genital burns from home use of podophyllin. Burns 2005;31:394–395.
Schwartz J, Norton SA. Useful plants of dermatology. VI. The mayapple (Podophyllum). J Am
Acad Dermatol 2002;47:774–775.

244

Poncirus

Stoehr GP, Peterson AL, Taylor NJ. Systemic complications of local podophyllin therapy, Ann
Intern Med 1978;89:362–363.

Poncirus trifoliata (L.) Raf.
Family: Rutaceae

Common  Names: Bitter  Orange, Hardy  Orange, Mock Orange, Trifoliate
Orange

Description: This  small  deciduous  tree  has  green  stems  with  stiff thorns  that
may be 2.5 inches long. The white ﬂowers are 2 inches across and form at the
base of the thorns before leaﬁng. Leaves are shiny, thick, and leathery with three
leaﬂets. The fruit resembles a small orange and has a pronounced aroma. It is
ﬁlled with an acrid pulp.

Distribution: Poncirus is  used  in  the  southern  United  States  and  along  both
coasts as a hedge plant. It also is cultivated extensively to obtain rootstock for
citrus grafts.

Toxic Part: The fruit is toxic.

Toxin: Acridone alkaloid, a gastrointestinal toxin.

Clinical Findings: There are no adequately documented human poisonings, and
clinical descriptions are based on the nature of the toxin. Serious intoxications
are unlikely because of the bitter taste of the fruit; nausea, vomiting, abdomi-
nal cramping, and diarrhea may occur.

Poncirus trifoliata, close-up of ﬂowers (right)

Poncirus trifoliata, tree showing fruit (below)

Prunus

245

Management: Intravenous hydration, antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement
may be necessary for patients with severe gastrointestinal symptoms, particu-
larly in children. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be consid-
ered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

Reference
Lee HT, Seo EK, Chung SJ, Shim CK. Prokinetic activity of an aqueous extract from dried
immature fruit of Poncirus trifoliata (L.) Raf. J Ethnopharmacol 2005;102:131–136.

Prunus species
Family: Rosaceae

Common  Names: Apricot,
Cherry,Choke Cherry,Peach,
Plum,Sloe

Description: Prunus species
are trees and shrubs, usually
with  deciduous  leaves  that
are  alternate  and  mostly
serrate. The  ﬂowers  are
white  or  pink  with  ﬁve
sepals  and  ﬁve  petals. The
fruit is a drupe with a ﬂeshy
outer  layer  over  a  stone  or
pit.

Prunus
in 

is
Distribution:
widely  cultivated 
the
north  temperate  zone, and
there are a number of native
species. A  large  number  of
fruit  varieties  are  available
commercially.

Toxic Part: The kernel in the
pit  is  poisonous. Most  fatal
intoxications  involve  inges-
tion of apricot pits or prod-
ucts derived from them.

Toxin: Amygdalin, a  cyano-
genic glycoside.

Prunus pendula var. adscendens, ﬂowering tree (above)

Prunus pendula var. adscendens, ﬂowers (below)

246

Prunus

Prunus spp., assorted fruits (above)

Prunus laurocerasus, branch with ﬂowers
(right)

Prunus serotina, branch with ﬂowers

Clinical Findings: Because the
cyanogenic glycosides must be
hydrolyzed  in  the  gastroin-
testinal  tract  before  cyanide
ion  is  released, several  hours
may  elapse  before  poisoning
occurs.Abdominal pain,vom-
iting, lethargy, and  sweating
typically occur ﬁrst. Cyanosis
does not occur. In severe poi-
sonings, coma  develops  and
may be accompanied by con-
vulsions  and  cardiovascular
collapse.

Management: Symptomatic  and  supportive  care  should  be  given. Antidotal
therapy is available. Consultation with a Poison Control Center is strongly sug-
gested. See “Poisoning by Plants with Cyanogenic Compounds,” p. 27.

References
Pentore R, Venneri A, Nichelli P. Accidental choke-cherry poisoning: early symptoms and
neurological sequelae of an unusual case of cyanide intoxication. Ital J Neurol Sci 1996;
17:233–235.
Sayre JW, Kaymakcalan S. Hazards to health: Cyanide poisoning from apricot seeds among
children in central Turkey. N Engl J Med 1964;270:1113–1115.

Pteridium

247

Pteridium aquilinum (L.) Kuhn
Family: Dennstaedtiaceae

Common Names: Bracken Fern, Brake, Hog Pasture Break, Pasture Break

Description: This  is  an  aggressively  spreading, very  common  fern  that  covers
large areas. The fronds are 2 to 4 feet tall, triangular, divided into three main
parts, with  coarse  pinnae  that  are  wooly  on  their  underside. The  fronds  are
borne on erect stalks.

Distribution: Bracken Fern is found in many areas of the United States, partic-
ularly on barren or abandoned land, and in tropical and temperate areas of the
world. It can be found in cultivation as well.

Toxic  Part: Entire  plant. “Fiddleheads,” the  tender  unfolding  leaves  of this
species, are prepared like asparagus.

Toxin: Perhaps ptaquiloside, a sesquiterpene.

Clinical Findings: Acute ingestion of bracken fern by cattle may cause a poten-
tially fatal syndrome characterized by fever, lethargy, and bleeding. Human tox-
icity has not been reported. However, ingestion of large amounts would likely

Pteridium aquilinum, “ﬁddleheads”
(unfolding leaves) (left)

Pteridium aquilinum (below)

248

Ranunculus

produce toxicity. Animal studies suggest that chronic ingestion of Bracken Fern
can lead to intestinal and bladder tumors. No report of human tumor devel-
opment is noted; however, they are thought to be related to the high incidence
of stomach cancer in Japan, where they are commonly eaten.

Management: Symptomatic  and  supportive  care. Consultation  with  a  Poison
Control Center should be considered.

References
Alonso-Amelot ME, Avendano M. Human carcinogenesis and bracken fern: A review of the
evidence. Curr Med Chem 2002;9:675–686.
Marliere CA, Wathern P, Castro MC, O’Connor, Galvao MA. Bracken fern (Pteridium
aquilinum) ingestion and oesophageal and stomach cancer. IARC Sci Publ 2002;156:
379–380.

Ranunculus species
Family: Ranunculaceae
Ranunculus acris L.
Ranunculus bulbosus L.
Ranunculus sceleratus L.

Ranunculus acris, ﬂowers

Common  Names: Bassinet,
Blister  Flower, Blister  Wort,
Bouton  d’Or, Butter-Cress,
Buttercup, Butter  Daisy,
Butter Flower, Crain, Crow-
foot, Devil’s Claws, Figwort,
Goldballs, Goldweed, Horse
Gold, Hunger  Weed, Lesser
Celandine, Pilewort, Ram’s
Claws, Renoncule, St. Anth-
ony’s  Turnip, Sitfast, Spear-
wort,
Starve-Acre, Water
Crowfoot, Yellow Gowan

Description: These  annual
or perennial herbs have large
basal 
leaves  and  yellow,
white, or, rarely, red ﬂowers.
They  are  a  few  inches  to
under 3 feet in height.

Buttercups
Distribution:
grow mainly in wet, swampy

Ranunculus

249

areas throughout the United
States,
including  Hawaii,
Alaska, and Canada.

Toxic Part: The  sap  is  toxic.
Poisoning  has  occurred  in
children who ate the bulbous
roots  of Ranunculus bulbo-
sus.

Toxin: Protoanemonin, an
irritant.

primarily 

Clinical  Findings: There  are
no  adequately  documented
human  poisonings,
and 
are
clinical  descriptions 
derived 
from
animal reports. Intense pain
and  inﬂammation  of
the
blistering,
mouth  with 
ulceration, and profuse sali-
vation  can  occur. Bloody
emesis and diarrhea develop
in  association  with  severe
abdominal  cramps. Central
nervous system involvement
is manifested by dizziness, syncope, and seizures.

Ranunculus sceleratus

Management: Most  exposures  result  in  minimal  or  no  toxicity. Intravenous
hydration, antiemetics, and  electrolyte  replacement  may  be  necessary  for
patients with severe gastrointestinal effects, particularly in children. Consulta-
tion  with  a  Poison  Control  Center  should  be  considered. See “Poisoning  by
Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28. If seizures occur, rapidly acting anti-
convulsants, such as intravenous diazepam, should be utilized along with other
supportive  measures. Consultation  with  a  Poison  Control  Center  should  be
strongly  considered. See  “Poisoning  by  Plants  with  Convulsive  Poisons
(Seizures),” p. 25.

Reference
Turner NJ. Counter-irritant and other medicinal uses of plants in Ranunculaceae by native
peoples in British Columbia and neighbouring areas. J Ethnopharmacol 1984;11:181–201.

250

Rhamnus

Rhamnus species
Family: Rhamnaceae
Rhamnus californica Eschsch.
Rhamnus cathartica L.
Rhamnus frangula L.
Rhamnus purshiana DC.

Common Names: Alder Buckthorn, Arrow Wood, Bearberry, Berry Alder, Black
Dogwood, Buckthorn, Cáscara, Cáscara  Sagrada, Hart’s  Horn, May  Thorn,
Nerprun, Persian Berry, Purging Buckthorn, Rhine Berry
Rhamnus californica: Coffeeberry

Rhamnus cathartica, fruiting branch (above)

Rhamnus cathartica, fruiting branch (below)

Description: Buckthorns  are
shrubs  or  small  trees, 6  to 
12  feet  tall. The  ﬂowers  are
small and greenish or green-
ish-white.The fruits are “dru-
paceous,”that is, they contain
two or more hard “stones” or
“pits,” each enclosing a single
seed. Rhamnus californica is
an  evergreen  with  ﬁnely
toothed  leaves. The  ﬂowers
form in a ﬂat-topped cluster.
The  fruit  is  red  at  ﬁrst,
turning 
to  black  when
mature. Rhamnus cathartica
has  spine-tipped  branchlets;
opposite,
leaves;
scaly  buds; and  greenish-
white  ﬂowers  that  grow  in
clusters. The  mature  fruit  is
black  and  contains  an  even
number  of stones, usually
four. Rhamnus frangula does
not  have  spines  and, unlike
the preceding two species, its
leaves  have  smooth  margins
(i.e., not toothed) with occa-
sional  glands. The  buds  of
R.
frangula are  hairy. The
ﬂowers grow in a ﬂat cluster.
The fruit is red when young,

toothed 

Rheum × cultorum

251

black when mature, and contains two to three stones. Rhamnus purshiana is larger
than others discusssed here (grows to 20 feet). Leaves are ﬁnely toothed; ﬂowers
grow in ﬂat-topped clusters; mature fruits are black.

Distribution: Rhamnus cathartica and  R. frangula have  been  introduced  from
Europe  and  are  naturalized  in  the  northeastern  United  States  and  Canada.
Rhamnus californica grows in California. Related species are found throughout
the north temperate zone.

Toxic Part: Fruit and bark are poisonous. However, the fruits of Rhamnus cathar-
tica have  long  been  used  as  a  laxative, hence  its  species  name. The  bark  of
Rhamnus purshiana, a plant of the western United States, also produces a very
strong laxative, known as cascara sagrada.

Toxin: Hydroxymethylanthraquinone, a gastrointestinal irritant.

Clinical  Findings: Nausea, vomiting, abdominal  cramping, and  diarrhea  may
occur.

Management: Intravenous hydration, antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement
may be necessary for patients with severe gastrointestinal effects, particularly in
children. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See
“Poisoning by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

References
Giavina-Bianchi PF Jr, Castro FF, Machado ML, Duarte AJ. Occupational respiratory allergic
disease induced by Passiﬂora alata and Rhamnus purshiana. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol
1997;79:449–454.
Lichtensteiger CA, Johnston NA, Beasley VR. Rhamnus cathartica (buckthorn) hepatocellular
toxicity in mice. Toxicol Pathol 1997;25:449–452.
van Gorkom BA, de Vries EG, Karrenbeld A, Kleibeuker JH. Review article: Anthranoid
laxatives and their potential carcinogenic effects. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 1999;13:
443–452.

Rheum ¥ cultorum Thorsrud & Reisaeter
(=R. rhabarbarum L.) (Note: this plant is an ancient hybrid probably

involving Rheum rhaponticum L.)

Family: Polygonaceae

Common Names: Pie Plant, Rhubarb, Rhubarbe, Wine Plant

Description: This  perennial  has  leaf stalks  that  grow  several  feet  long  and
become red at maturity. The large ovate leaves are wrinkled with wavy margins,
and the plant produces white ﬂowers in a tall terminal cluster.

252

Rhododendron

Distribution: Rhubarb 
widely  cultivated 
for 
edible leaf stalk.

is
its

Toxic  Part: Raw  leaf blades
are  toxic  if eaten  in  large
quantity.

Toxin: Anthraquinone  gly-
cosides and soluble oxalates.

Rheum × cultorum

Clinical  Findings: Toxicity
often  results  when  novices
mistakenly  prepare  the  leaf
blades  instead  of the  edible
leaf stalks. Effects are caused
by  the  cathartic  effect  of
anthraquinone  glycosides. Nausea, vomiting, abdominal  cramping, and  diar-
rhea may occur. Ingestion of a sufﬁcient amount of the leaf can lead to systemic
hypocalcemia, caused  by  absorption  of soluble  oxalates  with  subsequent  pre-
cipitation of calcium oxalate crystals in body ﬂuids. In the urine, this effect may
produce renal damage.

Management: Intravenous hydration, antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement
(particularly  calcium  and  potassium)  may  be  necessary. Close  monitoring  of
urine output and renal function is important to detect renal injury. Consulta-
tion  with  a  Poison  Control  Center  should  be  considered. See “Poisoning  by
Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

References
Jacobziner H, Raybin HW. Rhubarb poisoning. NY State J Med 1962;62:1676–1678.
Sanz P, Reig R. Clinical and pathological ﬁndings in fatal plant oxalosis. A review. Am J
Forensic Med Pathol 1992;13:342–345.

Rhododendron species
Family: Ericaceae

Common Names: Azalea, Rhododendron, Rhodora, Rosa Laurel, Rosebay

Description: There are about 800 species of Rhododendron, divided into eight
subgenera. The  genus  includes  the  former  genus  Azalea. Rhododendrons  are

Rhododendron

253

Rhododendron cv. ‘Yaku Princess,’ branch with
ﬂowers (above)

Rhododendron cv. ‘Rosebud,’ ﬂowers (below)

Rhododendron cv. ‘PMJ,’ branch with ﬂowers

semievergreen,
evergreen,
or  deciduous  shrubs  with
simple, alternate leaves. The
ﬂowers 
various 
colors  and  bell  shaped  or
funnel-form.

are  of

Rhododen-
Distribution:
in
drons  are  cultivated 
the
Canada  and  most  of
the
United  States  with 
exception  of
the  north
central  states  and  subtropi-
cal  Florida. A  number  of
native  species  exist  in  the
same geographic range.

Toxic  Part: The  leaves  are
toxic, as is honey made from
ﬂower nectar.

Toxin: Grayanotoxins (andro-
medotoxins), sodium channel
activators.

Clinical Findings: Symptoms
are  predominantly  neuro-
logical and cardiac. There is
transient  burning 
in  the
mouth  after  ingestion, fol-
lowed after several hours by
increased  salivation, vomit-
ing, diarrhea, and a tingling
sensation  in  the  skin. The
patient  may  complain  of
headache, muscular  weak-
ness, and dimness of vision.
Bradycardia 
other
cardiac  dysrhythmias  can 
be  associated  with  severe
blood  pressure  abnormali-
ties. Coma may develop, and
convulsions may be a termi-
nal event.

and 

254

Rhodotypos

Management: Fluid replacement should be instituted with respiratory support
if indicated. Heart rhythm and blood pressure should be monitored and treated
with appropriate medications and supportive care. Recovery is generally com-
plete  within  24  hours. Consultation  with  a  Poison  Control  Center  should  be
strongly considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Sodium Channel Activators,”
p. 32.

References
Ergun K, Tufekcioglu O, Aras D, Korkmaz S, Pehlivan S. A rare cause of atrioventricular
block: Mad honey intoxication. Int J Cardiol 2005;99:347–348.
Puschner B, Holstege DM, Lamberski N. Grayanotoxin poisoning in three goats. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 2001;218:573–575.
Sutlupinar N, Mat A, Satganoglu Y. Poisoning by toxic honey in Turkey. Arch Toxicol
1993:67;148–150.
von Malottki K, Wiechmann HW. Acute life-threatening bradycardia due to poisoning with
Turkish wild honey. Dtsch Med Wochenschr 1996;121:936–938.
Yavuz H, Ozel A, Akkus I, Erkul I. Honey poisoning in Turkey. Lancet 1991;337:
789–790.

Rhodotypos scandens (Thunb.) Makino
(=R. kerrioides Siebold & Zucc.; R. tetrapetala (Sielbold) Makino)
Family: Rosaceae

Common Names: Jetbead, White Kerria

Description: This spreading, deciduous shrub grows 3 to 6 feet high. The leaves
are  opposite, toothed, and  2  inches  long. The  ﬂowers  are  white  and  about  2

Rhodotypos scandens

Rhodotypos scandens, mature fruit

Ricinus

255

inches in diameter with four petals. The fruit is a shiny black drupe about 0.25
inch in diameter.

Distribution: Jetbead is hardy in the northern United States and is a popular
ornamental.

Toxic Part: Fruits may be toxic.

Toxin: Not known (reputed to contain a cyanogenic glycoside).

Clinical Findings: In the only report of human poisoning, the patient exhibited
severe hypoglycemia, ketosis, hyperthermia, and convulsions.

Management: The  patient  was  treated  with  antipyretics  and  anticonvulsants.
Recovery was complete by day 5. No speciﬁc antidote exists. If toxicity occurs,
treatment is aimed at supportive measures. Consultation with a Poison Control
Center should be strongly considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Cyanogenic
Compounds,” p. 27.

Reference
Rascoff H, Wasser S. Poisoning in a child simulating diabetic coma. JAMA 1953:152:1134–
1135.

Ricinus communis L.
Family: Euphorbiaceae

Common Names: African Coffee Tree, Castor Bean, Castor Oil Plant, Higuereta,
Higuerilla, Koli, La‘Au-‘Aila, Man’s  Motherwort, Mexico Weed, Pa‘Aila, Palma
Christi, Ricin, Ricino, Steadfast, Wonder Tree

Description: This annual grows to 15 feet or higher in the tropics. The large,
lobed leaves are up to 3 feet across. It is also grown as a summer ornamental in
temperate areas where, depending on the cultivar, the leaves can be green to red-
purple. Spiny fruits form in clusters along spikes. The fruits contain plump seeds
resembling  fat  ticks  in  shape, usually  mottled  black  or  brown  on  white. The
highly toxic seeds have a pleasant taste.

Distribution: The castor bean grows throughout the West Indies and is a natu-
ralized weed in Florida, along the Gulf Coast in Texas, along the Atlantic Coast
to New Jersey, in southern California, and in Hawaii. It is widely planted else-
where for its foliage and is grown commercially in some of the Gulf Coast states
and Guam.

Toxic Part: The toxin is contained within the hard, water-impermeable coat of
the  seeds. The  toxin  is  not  released  unless  the  seed  coats  are  broken  (e.g.,
chewed) and the contents digested.

256

Ricinus

Ricinus communis

Ricinus communis

Ricinus communis, fruits

Ricinus communis, seeds

Rivina

257

Toxin: Ricin.

Clinical Findings: Ingested seeds that remain intact as they pass through the gas-
trointestinal tract generally do not release toxin or cause toxicity. However, if
the seeds are chewed, pulverized, or digested (i.e., if passage through the gas-
trointestinal  tract  is  delayed), then  the  toxin  is  absorbed  by  intestinal  cells
causing mild to severe gastrointestinal toxicity. Effects depend upon the amount
of toxin exposure and include nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramping, diarrhea,
and  dehydration. Variations  in  the  severity  of toxicity  may  be  related  to  the
degree  to  which  the  seeds  are  ground  or  chewed  before  ingestion. Parenteral
administration  (such  as  by  injection  or  inhalation), or  perhaps  a  large  inges-
tion, may  produce  life-threatening  systemic  ﬁndings, including  multisystem
organ failure, even with small exposures.

Management: Ingestion of intact seeds does not cause toxicity in the majority
of cases and requires no therapy. Cases associated with gastrointestinal effects
need to be assessed for signs of dehydration and electrolyte abnormalities. Acti-
vated charcoal should be administered. Intravenous hydration, antiemetics, and
electrolyte  replacement  may  be  necessary  in  severe  cases, particularly  in  chil-
dren. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be strongly considered.
See “Poisoning by Plants with Toxalbumins,” p. 33.

References
Aplin PJ, Eliseo T. Ingestion of castor oil plant seeds. Med J Aust 1997;167:260–261.
Audi J, Belson M, Patel M, Schier J, Osterlob J. Ricin poisoning: A comprehensive review.
JAMA 2005;294:2342–2351.
Bradberry SM, Dickers KJ, Rice P, Grifﬁths GD, Vale JA. Ricin poisoning. Toxicol Rev
2003;22:65–70.
Doan LG. Ricin: mechanism of toxicity, clinical manifestations, and vaccine development. A
review. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 2004;42:201–208.
Hartley MR, Lord JM. Cytotoxic ribosome-inactivating lectins from plants. Biochim Biophys
Acta 2004;1701:1–14.
Metz G, Bocher D, Metz J. IgE-mediated allergy to castor bean dust in a landscape gardener.
Contact Dermatitis 2001;44:367.
Olsnes S, Kozlov JV. Ricin. Toxicon 2001;39:1723–1728.

Rivina humilis L.
Family: Phytolaccaceae

Common Names: Baby Pepper, Bloodberry, Caimonicillo, Carmín, Cat’s Blood,
Coral Berry, Coralitos, Pigeon Berry, Rouge Plant

Description: This small shrub grows to 4 feet. The leaves are ovate and about 4
inches  long. The  greenish  to  pinkish  ﬂowers  grow  in  hanging  sprays  up  to  8
inches in length. The fruit is a shiny bright crimson or orange berry.

258

Robinia

Rivina humilis, mature fruits on stems

Distribution: Rouge  plant
grows  in  Hawaii, southern
United  States 
from  New
Mexico  to  Florida, and  the
West  Indies. It  is  a  popular
houseplant elsewhere.

Toxic  Part: The  leaves  and
roots  are  poisonous. The
absence  of reports  of poi-
soning  from  the  attractive
berries  suggests  that  they 
do  not  contain  clinically 
signiﬁcant concentrations of
toxin.

Toxin: An unknown toxin similar to that in Phytolacca americana.

Clinical  Findings: Nausea, vomiting, abdominal  cramping, and  diarrhea  may
occur.

Management: Intravenous hydration, antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement
may be necessary for patients with severe gastrointestinal effects, particularly in
children. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See
“Poisoning by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

Reference
Smith GW, Constable PD. Suspected pokeweed toxicity in a boer goat. Vet Hum Toxicol
2002;44:351–353.

Robinia pseudoacacia L.
Family: Leguminosae (Fabaceae)

Common  Names: Bastard  Acacia, Black  Acacia, Black Locust, False  Acacia,
Green  Locust, Pea  Flower  Locust, Post  Locust, Silver  Chain, Treesail, White
Honey Flower, White Locust, Yellow Locust

Description: The locust tree grows to 80 feet. The alternate compound leaves
have 7 to 19 elliptical leaﬂets, 1 inch in length. There is a pair of woody spines
on  the  branch  where  the  leaf stem  emerges. The  white, fragrant  ﬂowers  are
borne  in  drooping  clusters  (racemes). The  fruit  is  a  ﬂat, reddish-brown  pod,
about 4 inches long, which persists over the winter.

Distribution: The locust is native to the Appalachian Mountains and the Ozarks.
It is widely planted in the north temperate zones, particularly in the east, and
in Ontario east to Nova Scotia and southern British Columbia.

Robinia

259

Toxic  Part: The  bark, seeds,
and leaves are toxic.

Toxin: Robin, a  plant  lectin
(toxalbumin) related to ricin.

Robinia pseudoacacia, ﬂowering tree (above)

Robinia pseudoacacia, close-up of ﬂowers (below)

but 

Clinical  Findings: Poisoning
from  this  tree  is  potentially
serious,
exceedingly
uncommon. Effects  depend
upon  the  amount  of toxin
exposure and include nausea,
vomiting, abdominal cramp-
ing, diarrhea, and  dehydra-
tion. Variations in the severity
of toxicity  may  be  related  to
the degree to which the seeds
are ground or chewed before
ingestion.Parenteral adminis-
tration (such as by injection or
inhalation), or perhaps a large
ingestion, may  produce  life-
threatening systemic ﬁndings,
including  multisystem  organ
failure,
small 
exposures.

even  with 

Management: Cases  associ-
ated with gastrointestinal effects need to be assessed for signs of dehydration and
electrolyte  abnormalities. Activated  charcoal  should  be  administered. Intra-
venous hydration, antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement may be necessary in
severe cases, particularly those involving children. Consultation with a Poison
Control Center should be strongly considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Tox-
albumins,” p. 33.

References
Artero Sivera A, Arnedo Pena A, Pastor Cubo A. Clinico-epidemiologic study of accidental
poisoning with Robinia pseudoacacia L. in school children. An Esp Pediatr 1989;30:
191–194.
Costa Bou X, Soler i Ros JM, Seculi Palacios JL. Poisoning by Robinia pseudoacacia. An Esp
Pediatr 1990;32:68–69.

260

Sambucus

Hui A, Marraffa JM, Stork CM. A rare ingestion of the Black Locust tree. J Toxicol Clin
Toxicol 2004;42:93–95.
Mejia MJ, Morales MM, Llopis A, Martinez I. School children poisoned by ornamental trees.
Aten Primaria 1991;8:88, 90–91.

Sambucus species
Family: Caprifoliaceae
Sambucus nigra L.
Sambucus nigra L. ssp. caerulea (Raf.) R. Bolli (=S. caerulea Raf.)
Sambucus nigra L. ssp. canadensis (L.) R. Bolli (=S. canadensis L.; S. simpsonii

Rehder; S. mexicana C. Presl ex DC.)

Sambucus melanocarpa A. Gray
Sambucus racemosa L.

Common  Names: American  Elder, Dauco, Elderberry, Fleur  Sureau, Saúco
Blanco, Surreau

Sambucus nigra, close-up of fruit

Description: The common elderberry (Sambucus nigra ssp. canadensis) in the
eastern half of the United States and Canada is a 6- to 12-foot shrub with much
branched stems. The compound leaves usually have seven serrated oval leaﬂets.
The small, white ﬂowers are
borne in ﬂat-topped, termi-
nal  clusters. The  purplish-
black  fruits  are  about  0.35
inch  in  diameter. Flowers
and  fruit  may  be  borne
simultaneously.

Species  of
Distribution:
elderberry  may  be  found  in
all  states  including  Hawaii
and  Alaska, across  Canada,
and in the Greater Antilles.

Toxic Part: The whole plant is
poisonous, particularly  the
root. The  ripe  fruit  is  ren-
dered  harmless  by  cooking.
Sambucus nigra is now used
to  make  a  popular  herbal
remedy, sold  as  a  syrup  or
lozenge, that  has  been  used 
to  treat  the  inﬂuenza  virus.
The  ﬂowers  are  probably
nontoxic.

Sambucus

261

Sambucus nigra ssp. caerulea, branch with
fruit (above)

Sambucus nigra ssp. canadensis, close-up of
ﬂowers (left)

Toxin: Cyanogenic  glyco-
sides and/or toxalbumin.

Sambucus racemosa, branch with fruit

Clinical  Findings: There  are
no  adequately  documented
human  cyanide  poisonings
from  this  plant  genus, and
clinical descriptions are based
on  the  nature  of the  toxin.
Because  the  cyanogenic  gly-
cosides  must  be  hydrolyzed 
in  the  gastrointestinal  tract
before  cyanide  ion  is  relea-
sed, several hours may elapse
before  poisoning  occurs.
Abdominal pain, vomiting, lethargy, and sweating typically occur ﬁrst. Cyanosis
does not occur. In severe poisonings, coma develops and may be accompanied by
convulsions and cardiovascular collapse.

Toxalbumin ingestions typically cause mild to severe gastrointestinal toxic-
ity, although parenteral administration (such as by injection or inhalation), or
perhaps large ingestion, may produce life-threatening systemic ﬁndings, includ-
ing multisystem organ failure, even with small exposures.

262

Sanguinaria

Management: Symptomatic  and  supportive  care  should  be  given. Antidotal
therapy is available. Consultation with a Poison Control Center is strongly sug-
gested. See “Poisoning by Plants with Cyanogenic Compounds,” p. 27. and See
“Poisoning by Plants with Toxalbumins,” p. 33.

References
Battelli MG, Citores L, Buonamici L, et al. Toxicity and cytotoxicity of nigrin b, a two-chain
ribosome-inactivating protein from Sambucus nigra: Comparison with ricin. Arch Toxicol
1997;71:360–364.
Buhrmester RA, Ebinger JE, Seigler DS. Sambunigrin and cyanogenic variability in
populations of Sambucus canadensis L. (Caprifoliaceae). Biochem Syst Ecol 2000;28:
689–695.
Kunitz S, Melton RJ, Updyke T, Breedlove D, Werner SB. Poisoning from elderberry juice—
California. MMWR (Morb Mortal Wkly Rep) 1984;33:173–174.

Sanguinaria canadensis L.
Family: Papaveraceae

Common Names: Bloodroot, Red Puccoon

Description: This  perennial  herb  has  a  simple  leaf that  is  palmately  lobed, to
about 6 inches across, and contains yellow sap in its stem. The ﬂowers are white,
sometimes with a tinge of pink, and on stems about 8 inches tall. The fruit is a
capsule. The prominent rhizomes contain red sap and are dried for medicinal use.

Distribution: Found in the deep, rich woodlands of the eastern half of North
America.

Sanguinaria canadensis, close-up of ﬂower

Toxic  Part: All  parts  of the
plant  contain  alkaloids  that
are  similar  to  ones  derived
from 
the  related  opium
poppy. However, these alka-
loids  are  most  concentrated
in the root.

Toxin: Sanguinarine, chel-
erythrine, protopine, and
homochelidonine, all 
iso-
quinoline alkaloids. It is not
clear  which  of these  is  the
toxic component.

Clinical  Findings: Blood-
root  is  a  traditional  herbal

Sapindus

263

remedy utilized by Native Americans of North America. It continues to be used
as a medicinal agent and an oral dentriﬁce. Used this way, there are few reports
of toxicity. However, because of its similarity to the opium poppy, patients with
substantial ingestion should be observed for altered mental status and respira-
tory depression.

Management: Patients  that  manifest  mental  status  alteration  may  theoreti-
cally  beneﬁt  from  the  use  of naloxone. However, no  case  reports  document 
the  efﬁcacy  of this  agent. In  addition, symptomatic  and  supportive  care 
should  be  instituted. Consultation  with  a  Poison  Control  Center  should  be 
considered.

References
Becci PJ, Schwartz H, Barnes HH, Southard GL. Short-term toxicity studies of sanguinarine
and of two alkaloid extracts of Sanguinaria canadensis L. J Toxicol Environ Health 1987;
20:199–208.
Kosina P, Walterova D, Ulrichova J, et al. Sanguinarine and chelerythrine: Assessment of
safety on pigs in ninety days feeding experiment. Food Chem Toxicol 2004;42:85–91.

Sapindus species
Family: Sapindaceae
Sapindus saponaria L. (=S. marginatus Willd.)
Sapindus drummondii Hook. & Arn.

Common Names:
Sapindus drummondii: Western Soapberry
Sapindus saponaria: A‘e, Bois  Savonnette, False  Dogwood, Indian  Soap  Plant,
Jaboncillo, Manele, Savonnier, Soapberry, Wild  China  Tree, Wingleaf
Soapberry

Description: Sapindus drumondii: A deciduous tree growing to 50 feet tall with
pinnate leaves containing 8 to 10 leaﬂets, each about 3 inches long. Flowers are
small, yellowish-white, in panicles. Fruits are yellow, turning black, to 0.5 inch
long. Sapindus saponaria: A tropical evergreen tree growing to 30 feet. Leaves
with 7 to 9 leaﬂets, each to 4 inches long. Flowers are white, and fruits are shiny
orange-brown, about 0.75 inch in diameter. The fruit of these species has been
employed as soap.

Distribution: Sapindus drummondii grows from Arizona to Louisiana north to
Kansas. Sapindus saponaria grows  in  Florida, the  West  Indies, Mexico, and 
Hawaii.

Toxic Part: The fruit is poisonous.

264

Schinus

Toxin: Saponin, a  gastroin-
testinal 
a
and 
dermal irritant/sensitizer.

irritant,

Clinical  Findings: Most
ingestions  result  in  little  or
no toxicity. The saponins are
poorly  absorbed, but  with
large  exposures  gastroin-
testinal  effects  of nausea,
vomiting,abdominal cramp-
ing, and diarrhea may occur.
Allergic sensitization to this
plant  is  common  and  can
cause severe dermatitis.

If

severe 
Management:
gastrointestinal  effects  occur,
intravenous  hydration, anti-
emetics,and electrolyte replace-
ment  may  be  necessary,
particularly in children.Consul-
tation  with  a  Poison  Control
Center  should  be  considered.
See “Poisoning  by  Plants  with
Gastrointestinal Toxins,”p.28.

Sapindus saponaria, fruiting branch

Reference
Morton JF. Ornamental plants with poisonous properties. II. Proc Fla Hortic Soc 1962;
75:484.

Schinus species
Family: Anacardiaceae
Schinus molle L.
Schinus terebinthifolius Raddi

Common Names:
Schinus molle: Árbol  del  Perú, California  Pepper  Tree, Pepper Tree, Peruvian

Mastic Tree, Pimiento de América

Schinus terebinthifolius: Brazilian  Pepper  Tree, Christmas Berry Tree, Copal,

Florida Holly, Nani-O-Hilo, Pimienta del Brazil, Pink Pepper, Wilelaiki

Schinus

265

Schinus molle (above)

Schinus molle, fruiting branch (left)

Schinus terebinthifolius, fruiting branch

Description:
Schinus molle: This 

twisted 

tree
grows  to  a  height  of
about  35  feet  and  often
has  a 
trunk.
When  viewed  from  a
distance, the compound
leaves 
hanging
branches  are  markedly
similar  to  the  willow.
Schinus bears  small  red
fruits.
crushed
leaves  emit  a  distinct
odor of black pepper.

and 

The 

Schinus terebinthifolius: This
tree  or

fast-growing 
shrub usually attains a height of about 20 feet. The leaves are compound;
individual leaﬂets are about 2.5 inches long. The leaves emit a pepper-like
odor when crushed, but it is not as pronounced as with S. molle. The fruit
forms in persistent clusters.

Distribution: Schinus molle is  cultivated  in  California, Hawaii, and  the  West
Indies. Schinus terebinthifolius, an introduced weed tree, is becoming common
in south Florida, Hawaii, Guam, and the West Indies.

266

Schoenocaulon

Toxic Part: Fruits  are  poisonous. Sometimes  they  are  eaten  when  mixed  with
white or black peppercorns (both from Piper nigrum) to which they have been
added for color.

Toxin: Triterpenes are gastrointestinal irritants.

Clinical Findings: Skin contact can cause contact dermatitis. Nausea, vomiting,
abdominal cramping, and diarrhea may occur.

Management: Intravenous hydration, antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement
may be necessary for patients with severe gastrointestinal effects, particularly in
children. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See
“Poisoning by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” p. 28.

References
Campello J de P, Marsaioli AJ. Triterpenes of Schinus terebenthefolius. Phytochemistry
1974;13:659–660.
Stahl E, Keller K, Blinn C. Cardanol, a skin irritant in pink pepper. Planta Med 1983;48:
P5–P9.

Schoenocaulon species
Family: Liliaceae
Schoenocaulon drummondii A. Gray
Schoenocaulon texanum Scheele

Common Names:
Schoenocaulon drummondii: Green Lily
Schoenocaulon texanum: Texas Green Lily

Description: These two species are similar, and their botanical names once were
considered to be synonyms. They are perennial herbs growing from bulbs. The
leaves  are  grasslike, emerging  only  at  the  base. The  ﬂowering  stalk  is  leaﬂess.
Flowers grow in a dense raceme and are pale green to yellowish-white. Schoeno-
caulon drummondii usually  ﬂowers  in  the  fall, S. texanum during  spring  and
summer. The  fruit  is  a  persistent, three-lobed  capsule; each  capsule  contains
four or more seeds.

Distribution: Schoenocaulon is a New World genus of about 10 species distrib-
uted mostly in Mexico south to Peru. Schoenocaulon drummondii is found in
the central coastal prarie of Texas to the central Rio Grande Plains, and north-
eastern Mexico; S. texanum is found from the northeastern Rio Grande Plains
westward through the Trans-Pecos and southeastern part of New Mexico and
northern Mexico.

Toxic Part: The whole plant, particularly the seeds, is toxic.

Schoenocaulon

267

Toxin: Veratrum  alkaloids
(steroidal alkaloids), sodium
channel 
and
unidentiﬁed gastrointestinal
toxins.

activators;

followed 

Clinical  Findings: Reports 
of poisoning are infrequent.
Symptoms  are  predomi-
nantly  neurological 
and
cardiac. There  is  transient
burning  in  the  mouth  after
ingestion,
after
several  hours  by  increased
salivation, vomiting, diar-
rhea, and  a  tingling  sensa-
tion in the skin. The patient
may  complain  of headache,
muscular  weakness,
and
dimness of vision. Bradycar-
dia  and  other  cardiac  dys-
rhythmias can be associated
with  severe  blood  pressure
abnormalities. Coma  may
develop,
and  convulsions
may be a terminal event.

Management: Fluid  replace-
ment  should  be  instituted
with  respiratory  support  if
indicated. Heart rhythm and
blood pressure should be monitored and treated with appropriate medications
and supportive care. Recovery is generally complete within 24 hours. Consul-
tation with a Poison Control Center should be strongly considered. See “Poi-
soning by Plants with Sodium Channel Activators,” p. 32.

Schoenocaulon drummondii, close-up of
inﬂorescence

References
Grancai D, Grancaiova Z. Veratrum alkaloids I. Ceska Slov Farm 1994;43:147–154.
Gaillard Y, Pepin G. LC-EI-MS determination of Veratridine and Cevadine in two fatal cases
of veratrum album poisoning. J Anal Toxicol 2001;25:481–485.

268

Scilla

Scilla species
Family: Liliaceae

Common  Names: Cuban  Lily, Hyacinth-of-Peru, Jacinto  de  Perú, Peruvian
Jacinth, Sea Onion, Squill, Star Hyacinth

Description: This plant arises from a bulb, has straplike leaves, and grows 6 to
12 inches tall. The ﬂowers of this hyacinth-like plant are usually blue, purple,
or white.

Distribution: These European or Asian plants are hardy perennials in the north
temperate zones to British Columbia and Quebec to Newfoundland. They are
often cultivated.

Toxic Part: The whole plant is poisonous.

Toxin: Cardioactive steroids resembling digitalis.

Clinical Findings: There are no adequately documented human poisonings, and
clinical  descriptions  are  derived  primarily  from  animal  reports. Substantial
ingestion may lead to toxicity. Poisoning would be expected to produce Clini-
cal  Findings  typical  of cardioactive  steroid  poisoning. Toxicity  has  a  variable
latent period that depends on the quantity ingested. Dysrhythmias are usually
expressed  as  sinus  bradycardia, premature  ventricular  contractions, atrioven-
tricular conduction defects, or ventricular tachydysrhythmias. Hyperkalemia, if
present, may be an indicator of toxicity.

Management: Gastrointestinal  decontamination  as  appropriate, serial  electro-
cardiograms, and  serum  potassium  determinations  should  be  performed. If
serious cardioactive steroid toxicity is considered, digoxin-speciﬁc Fab should

Scilla peruviana (right)

Scilla hispanica (below)

Senecio

269

Scilla siberica (above)

Scilla sinensis (left)

be administered. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be consid-
ered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Cardioactive Steroids/Cardiac Glycosides,”
p. 24.

References
Aliotta G, De Santo NG, Pollio A, Sepe J, Touwaide A. The diuretic use of Scilla from
Dioscorides to the end of the 18th century. J Nephrol 2004;17:342–347.
Verbiscar AJ, Patel J, Banigan TF, Schatz RA. Scilliroside and other Scilla compounds in red
squill. J Agric Food Chem 1986;34:973–979.
Von Wartburg A, Kuhn M, Huber K. Cardiac glycosides from the white sea onion or squill.
The constitution of the scilliphaeosides and glucoscilliphaeosides. Helv Chim Acta 1968;
51:1317–1328.

Senecio species
Family: Compositae (Asteraceae)
Senecio douglasii DC. var. longilobus (Benth.) L. Benson
Senecio jacobaea L.
Senecio vulgaris L.

Common Names:
Senecio jacobaea: Hierba de Santiago, Ragwort, Stinking Willie, Tansy Ragwort
Senecio douglasii var. longilobus: Threadleaf Groundsel
Senecio vulgaris: Common Groundsel, Groundsel

Description: There are 2,000 to 3,000 species of Senecio, many of which contain
a toxic concentration of pyrrolizidine alkaloids.

270

Senecio

Senecio jacobaea: This
biennial or perennial
herb grows to 4 feet.It
has  yellow  ﬂowers
and  a  shrubby  form
with many branching
stems  arising  from
the  base. The  new
stems and leaves have
a cottony covering.

Senecio

douglasii

var.
longilobus: This  very
showy  perennial  has
yellow  ﬂowers. Sim-
ilar to S. jacobaea, its
growth 
is
shrubby, with  many
branching 
stems
arising from the base,
and its new stems and
leaves have a cottony
covering.

form 

Senecio douglasii

Senecio

stems 

grows 

vulgaris: This
to
annual 
about  1  foot  high.
Young 
are
cottony  but  become
smooth  with  aging.
The  leaves  are  soft,
ﬂeshy, and somewhat
lobed.The ﬂowers are
golden-yellow.

Distribution: Senecio jacobaea is of Old World origin and has become naturalized
as a weed in Newfoundland, Quebec, and Ontario south to Massachusetts; on the
West  Coast, it  has  become  naturalized  in  British  Columbia, Washington, and
Oregon west of the Cascade Mountain range. Senecio douglasii var. longilobus
grows in Colorado and Utah south to western Texas and northern Mexico. Senecio
vulgaris is a European plant that has become naturalized as a weed in Alaska, all
the Canadian provinces, and most of the continental United States.

Toxic Part: The whole plant is poisonous. Milk from animals who have grazed
on  these  plants  and  honey  made  from  nectar  of Senecio contain  the  toxic 
alkaloids.

Sesbania

271

Toxin: Pyrrolizidine  alka-
loids.

Clinical  Findings: Substan-
tial 
short-term  exposure
may  cause  acute  hepatitis,
and  chronic  exposure  to
lower 
(including
Senecio in  herbal  teas)  may
cause hepatic veno-occlusive
disease  (Budd–Chiari  syn-
drome)  and  in  some  cases
pulmonary hypertension.

levels 

is 

Management: There  is  no
known  antidote. Supportive
care 
the  mainstay  of
therapy. Consultation  with 
a  Poison  Control  Center
should  be  considered. See
“Poisoning  by  Plants  with
Pyrrolizidine 
Alkaloids,”
p. 31.

Senecio jacobaea

References
Fox DW, Hart MC, Bergeson PS, Jarrett PN, Stillman AE, Huxtable RJ. Pyrrolizidine
(Senecio) intoxication mimicking Reye’s syndrome. J Pediatr 1978;93:980–982.
Ortiz Cansado A, Crespo Valades E, Morales Blanco P, et al. Veno-occlusive liver disease due
to intake of Senecio vulgaris tea. Gastroenterol Hepatol 1995;18:413–416.
Radal M, Bensaude RJ, Jonville-Bera AP, et al. Veno-occlusive disease following chronic
ingestion of drugs containing Senecio. Therapie 1998;53:509–511.
Stegelmeier BL, Edgar JA, Colegate SM, et al. Pyrrolizidine alkaloid plants, metabolism and
toxicity. J Nat Toxins 1999;8:95–116.
Stewart MJ, Steenkamp V. Pyrrolizidine poisoning: A neglected area in human toxicology.
Ther Drug Monit 2001;23:698–708.

Sesbania species
Family: Leguminosae (Fabaceae)

Common Names: Báculo, Coffeeweed, Colorado River Hemp, Egyptian Rattle-
pod, Gallito, ‘Ohai, ‘Ohai-Ke‘Oke‘O, ‘Ohai-‘Ula’Ula, Pois  Valière, Rattlebox,
Scarlet Wisteria Tree, Sesban, Vegetable Humming Bird

272

Sesbania

Sesbania grandiﬂora, leaves and ﬂowers
(above)

Sesbania grandiﬂora, branch with ﬂowers and
seed pods (right)

Description: These annuals have green stems 3 to 8 feet tall that become woody;
the entire plant can be shrublike. The compound leaves have numerous linear
leaﬂets. The small, sweetpea-shaped ﬂowers are yellow dotted with purple. The
fruits are curved seed pods.

Distribution: Sesbania grows in southern California, the south Atlantic and Gulf
Coast states, Hawaii, Guam, and the West Indies.

Toxic Part: All parts of this plant are poisonous.

Toxin: Pyrrolizidine alkaloids.

Clinical Findings: There are no adequately documented human poisonings, and
clinical descriptions are based on the nature of the toxin. Substantial short-term
exposure may cause acute hepatitis, and chronic exposure to lower levels may
cause  hepatic  veno-occlusive  disease  (Budd–Chiari  syndrome)  and  in  some
cases pulmonary hypertension.

Management: There is no known antidote. Supportive care is the mainstay of
therapy. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See
“Poisoning by Plants with Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids,” p. 31.

Reference
Smith LW, Culvenor CCJ. Plant sources of hepatoxic pyrrolizidine alkaloids. J Nat Prod
1981;44:129–152.

Solandra

273

Solandra species
Family: Solanaceae

Common Names: Bejuco de Peo, Chalice Vine, Chamico Bejuco, Cup-of-Gold,
Palo Guaco, Silver Cup, Trumpet Plant

Description: These climbing
or erect tropical woody vines
have 
large, showy, yellow 
or  creamy-yellow  trumpet-
shaped ﬂowers. The fruit is a
ﬂeshy, elongated berry.

to 

Distribution: These  plants
are  native 
tropical
America  and  Mexico. They
are  cultivated  outdoors  in
Florida, the West Indies, and
Hawaii.

Solandra grandiﬂora, ﬂower

Solandra guttata, ﬂowers (left)

Solandra guttata (below)

274

Solanum

Toxic Part: All parts of this plant are toxic, including the ﬂower nectar.

Toxin: Atropine, scopolamine, and other anticholinergic alkaloids.

Clinical Findings: Intoxication  results  in  dry  mouth  with  dysphagia  and  dys-
phonia, tachycardia, and urinary retention. Elevation of body temperature may
be accompanied by ﬂushed, dry skin. Mydriasis, blurred vision, excitement and
delirium, headache, and confusion may be observed.

Management: Initially, symptomatic and supportive care should be given. If the
severity of the intoxication warrants intervention (hyperthermia, delirium), an
antidote, physostigmine, is available. Consultation with a Poison Control Center
should be considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Anticholinergic (Antimus-
carinic) Poisons,” p. 21.

Reference
Lozoya X, Meckes-Lozoya M, Chavez MA, Becerril G. Pharmacological and phytochemical
study of 2 species of Solandra native to Mexico. Ars Pharm 1988;29:35–42.

Solanum species
Family: Solanaceae
Solanum americanum Mill., S. nigrum L., S. ptychanthum Dunal, and the S.

nigrum-complex

Solanum capsicoides All. (=S. aculeatissimum sensu Britton & Millsp. non Jacq.; S.

ciliatum Lam.)

Solanum americanum, ﬂowers and young
fruit (right)

Solanum americanum, close-up of fruit
(below)

Solanum

275

Solanum capsicoides, fruit (above)

Solanum capsicoides (left)

Solanum dulcamara, branch with fruit

Solanum carolinense L.
Solanum dulcamara L.
Solanum linnaeanum
Hepper & Jaeger
(=Solanum sodomeum
of authors not L.)

Solanum mammosum L.
Solanum pseudocapsicum L.
(=Solanum capsicastrum
Link ex Schauer)

Solanum seaforthianum

Andrews

Solanum tuberosum L.

Common Names:
Solanum americanum, S. nigrum, and the S. nigrum complex: Black Nightshade,
Deadly Nightshade, Hierba Mora, Lanment, Mata Gallina, Nightshade, Poi-
sonberry, Pop-Bush, Tue Chien, Yerba Mora

Solanum capsicoides: Berenjena  de  Jardín, Cockroach  Berry, Kikinia-Lei, Love

Apple, Pantomina, Soda-Apple Nightshade, Thorny Popolo

Solanum carolinense: Ball Nettle, Ball Nightshade, Bull Nettle, Carolina Horse

Nettle, Sand Briar, Tread Softly

276

Solanum

Solanum dulcamara, close-up of ﬂowers (above)

Solanum mammosum, fruiting shrub (below)

Solanum mammosum, fruit cut in half

Solanum dulcamara: Agridulce,
Bittersweet,
Climbing
Nightshade, Deadly Night-
shade, Dog-Wood, Fellen,
Felonwort,Morelle Douce-
Amère,
Poison  Berry,
Scarlet Berry, Snake Berry,
Woody Nightshade

Solanum mammosum: Beren-
jena de Cucarachas, Beren-
jena de Marimbo,Berenjena
de  Gallina, Guirito, Love
Apple,Nipplefruit,Pomme
d’Amour,Tété Jeune Fille

Solanumpseudocapsicum:Christ-
masOrange,Coral,Jerusalem
Cherry

Solanum seaforthianum: Brazil-
ian  Nightshade, Falsa  Bel-
ladona, Jazmin  de  Italia,
Lilas,Star-PotatoVine

Solanum sodomeum: Apple
of Sodom, Dead  Sea
Apple, Popolo-Kikania,
Thorny  Popolo, Yellow
Popolo

Solanum tuberosum: Papa,
‘Uala-

Patate, Potato,
Kahiki

Description: Solanum is  a
very large genus with 1,700
species, most of which have
not  been  evaluated  toxico-
logically. These  plants  are
mostly  herbs  (sometimes
climbing)  or  shrubs. They
are  often  spiny, hairy, or
have  stinging  hairs. The
ﬂowers have ﬁve spreading
petals, are often showy, and usually white or blue with ﬁve erect yellow stamens.
The berries are black, orange, yellow, or red.

Solanum

277

Solanum pseudocapsicum (above)

Solanum seaforthianum (left)

Distribution:
The Solanum nigrum complex includes several very similar and easily confused
species, and the name S. nigrum is often applied to all of them. Solanum pty-
chanthum grows primarily in the eastern United States, Nova Scotia to Florida,
west to North Dakota and Texas. Solanum americanum is found in tropical areas
of the  southern  United  States, the  West  Indies, Guam, and  Hawaii. Solanum
nigrum has been introduced from Europe and Asia to both coasts of the United
States. Solanum capsicoides grows in Hawaii, on the coastal plain from Texas to
North  Carolina, and  in  the  West  Indies. Solanum  carolinense grows  from
Nebraska  to  Texas  east  to  the  Atlantic, in  extreme  northern  Ohio, southern
Ontario, and  southern  California. Solanum  dulcamara is  a  naturalized  weed
from Eurasia that is now common in the northern United States and Canada,
and  south  in  the  mountains  of North  Carolina  and  Tennessee. Solanum  lin-
naeanum is a common weed in Hawaii. Solanum mammosum grows in the West
Indies and tropical America. Solanum pseudocapsicum, a decorative pot plant,
has  escaped  from  cultivation  in  Hawaii  and  the  Gulf Coast  states. Solanum
seaforthianum is a South American plant cultivated in warmer areas, including
Hawaii; it  has  become  naturalized  in  Florida. Solanum  tuberosum, the  white
potato  of commerce, is  a  widely  cultivated  vegetable. An  occasional  plant
escapes from cultivation or from dumps.

Toxic Part: In Solanum tuberosum, the uncooked sprout and sun-greened skin
are toxic. In the remaining species, human poisoning is generally attributed to
immature fruit. Several species produce dermatitis.

278

Solanum

Toxin: Solanine  glycoalka-
loids  have  predominantly
gastrointestinal  irritant  ef-
fects. There  have  been 
reports  of
atropine-like 
poisoning, but atropine and
related alkaloids are not gen-
erally found in these plants.

Clinical  Findings: Nausea,
vomiting, abdominal cramp-
ing, and  diarrhea  may  oc-
cur. Central  nervous  system
effects of delerium, hallucina-
tions, and  coma  have  been
reported, but  the  mecha-
nisms for these effects are not
known.

Solanum tuberosum

Intravenous
Management:
hydration, antiemetics, and
electrolyte replacement may
be necessary for patients with severe gastrointestinal effects, particularly in chil-
dren. Central nervous system effects are managed with supportive measures and
typically resolve without sequalae. Consultation with a Poison Control Center
should be considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,”
p. 28.

References
Ceha LJ, Presperin C, Young E, Allswede M, Erickson T. Anticholinergic toxicity from
nightshade berry poisoning responsive to physostigmine. J Emerg Med 1997;15(1):
65–69.
Hornfeldt CS, Collins JE. Toxicity of nightshade berries (Solanum dulcamara) in mice. J
Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1990;28:185–192.
Korpan YI, Nazarenko EA, Skryshevskaya IV, Martelet C, Jaffrezic-Renault N, El’skaya AV.
Potato glycoalkaloids: True safety or false sense of security? Trends Biotechnol 2004;22:
147–151.
McMillan M, Tompson JC. An outbreak of suspected solanine poisoning in schoolboys.
Examination of solanine poisoning. Q J Med 1979;48:227–243.
Patil BC, Sharma RP. Evaluation of solanine toxicity. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1972;10:
395–398.
Phillips BJ, Hughes JA, Phillips JC, Walters DG, Anderson D, Tahourdin CS. A study of the
toxic hazard that might be associated with the consumption of green potato tops. Food
Chem Toxicol 1996;34:439–448.

Sophora

279

Sophora species
Family: Leguminosae 

(Fabaceae)

Sophora secundiﬂora

(Ortega) Lag. ex DC.

Sophora tomentosa L.

Common Names:
Sophora  secundiﬂora: Burn
Bean, Coral  Bean, Col-
orines, Frijolillo, Mescal
Bean, Pagoda  Tree, Red
Bean, Red  Hots, Texas
Mountain Laurel

Sophora  tomentosa: Neckla-
cepod  Sophora, Silver
Bush, Tambalisa

Sophora secundiﬂora, fruiting branch (above)

Sophora secundiﬂora, close-up of ﬂowers (below)

Description: Sophora  secun-
diﬂora is  a  shrub  or  small 
tree  with  small  compound
leaﬂets; the  leaﬂets  grow  to 
2 inches in length and occur
in  three  to  ﬁve  pairs. The
purple  ﬂowers  cluster 
in
showy  racemes. Seeds  are
bright red and are contained
in woody fruit pods. Sophora
tomentosa is  a  shrub  with
numerous  branches  and
leaves. Bright
compound 
yellow  ﬂowers  grow 
in
racemes.The yellow seeds are
pealike and are contained in fruit pods.

Distribution: Sophora  secundiﬂora grows  in  Texas, New  Mexico, Mexico, the
coastal dunes of Baja, California, Hawaii, and Guam. Its brightly colored seeds
are used in jewelry. Sophora tomentosa grows in Florida, Bermuda, and the West
Indies from the Bahamas to Barbados.

Toxic Part: The seeds are most poisonous but have a hard coat. The leaves and
ﬂowers contain the toxin as well.

Toxin: Cytisine and related nicotine-like alkaloids.

280

Sophora

Sophora secundiﬂora, necklace made
from seeds

Sophora secundiﬂora, fruit with
mature seeds

Clinical Findings: There are no adequately documented human poisonings, and
clinical  descriptions  are  derived  primarily  from  animal  reports. Initial  gas-
trointestinal  effects  may  be  followed  by  those  typical  of nicotine  poisoning;
these include hypertension, large pupils, sweating, and perhaps seizures. Severe
poisoning produces coma, weakness, and paralysis that may result in death from
respiratory failure. Despite the similar-sounding names, mescal bean does not
contain mescaline.

Management: Symptomatic and supportive care should be given, with attention
to  adequacy  of ventilation  and  vital  signs. Atropine  may  reverse  some  of the
toxic effects. Consultation with a Poison Control center should be strongly con-
sidered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Nicotine-like Alkaloids,” p. 30.

References
Bourn WM, Keller WJ, Bonﬁglio J. Comparisons of mescal bean alkaloids with mescaline,
delta 9-THC and other psychotogens. Life Sci 1979;25:1043–1054.
Izaddoost M, Harris BG, Gracy RW. Structure and toxicity of alkaloids and amino acids of
Sophora secundiﬂora. J Pharm Sci 1976;65:352–354.
Knauer KW, Reagor JC, Bailey EM Jr, Carriker L. Mescalbean (Sophora secundiﬂora) toxicity
in a dog. Vet Hum Toxicol 1995;37:237–239.
Sullivan G, Chavez PI. Mexican good-luck charm potentially dangerous. Vet Hum Toxicol
1980;23:259–260.
Wellmann KF. North American Indian rock art and hallucinogenic drugs. JAMA 1978;239:
1524–1527.

Spathiphyllum

281

Spathiphyllum species
Family: Araceae

Common Names: Peace Lily, Spathe Flower, White Anthurium

Description: Spathiphyllum species  are  tropical  perennial  herbs  that  grow  to
about 2 feet. The elliptical leaves grow on short stems and emerge in clusters.
The  ﬂower  has  a  white  or  greenish  spathe  with  a  short, usually  white, spadix
resembling a miniature ear of corn.

Distribution: These plants are primarily of South American origin and may be
grown  outdoors  in  subtropical  climates. They  are  commonly  cultivated  as
indoor plants elsewhere.

Toxic Part: All parts of this plant are injurious.

Toxin: Raphides  of water-insoluble  calcium  oxalate  and  unveriﬁed  proteina-
ceous toxins.

Clinical  Findings: A  painful  burning  sensation  of the  lips  and  mouth  results
from ingestion. There is an inﬂammatory reaction, often with edema and blis-
tering. Hoarseness, dysphonia, and dysphagia may result.

Management: The pain and edema recede slowly without therapy. Cool liquids
or  demulcents  held  in  the  mouth  may  bring  some  relief. Analgesics  may  be 

Spathiphyllum sp.

Spathiphyllum sp., close-up of ﬂowers
showing spadix enclosed by spathe

282

Spigelia

indicated. The insoluble oxalate in these plants does not cause systemic oxalate
poisoning. Consultation  with  a  Poison  Control  Center  should  be  considered.
See “Poisoning by Plants with Calcium Oxalate Crystals,” p. 23.

References
Franceschi VR, Nakata PA. Calcium oxalate in plants: formation and function. Annu Rev
Plant Biol 2005;56:41–71.
Kanerva L, Estlander T, Aalto-Korte K. Occupational protein contact dermatitis and
rhinoconjunctivitis caused by spathe (Spathiphyllum) ﬂowers. Contact Dermatitis
2000;42:369–370.
Krenzelok EP, Mrvos R, Jacobsen TD. Contrary to the literature, vomiting is not a common
manifestation associated with plant exposures. Vet Hum Toxicol 2002;44:298–300.

Spigelia species
Family: Loganiaceae
Spigelia anthelmia L.
Spigelia marilandica L.

Common Names:
Spigelia  anthelmia: Espigelia, Herbe-à-Brinvilliers, Loggerhead  Weed, Lom-

bricera, Pink Weed, Waterweed, West Indian Pinkroot, Worm Grass
Spigelia marilandica: Carolina Pink, Indian Pink, Pinkroot, Worm Grass

Description: Spigelia anthelmia is an annual herb that grows to about 1.5 feet. The
opposite leaves have very short stems and are about 6 inches long and 3 inches
wide. The tubular ﬂowers grow in a terminal spike and ﬂare into ﬁve petals. Petals
are pink; the tube is white with magenta stripes. Fruits are globose and two lobed.
Spigelia marilandica is a perennial herb growing to 2 feet. The ovate opposite
leaves are about 4 inches long. The tubular ﬂowers are about 2 inches long, red
on the outside, and yellow on the inside.

Distribution: Spigelia anthelmia grows in southern Florida, the Bahamas, and
the  West  Indies  to  Barbados. Spigelia  marilandica grows  in  Florida  to  Texas
north to southern Indiana and North Carolina.

Toxic Part: The whole plant is poisonous.

Toxin: Spigeline, a strychnine-like alkaloid.

Clinical  Findings: Toxicity  from  this  plant  is  not  commonly  reported. In
instances  of toxicity, gastrointestinal  effects  occur  early  and  are  followed  by
muscle spasms that can be severe and strychnine like. If extreme muscle activ-
ity occurs, then rhabdomyolysis and renal injury are concerns.

Management: Muscle spasms should be controlled with benzodizepines. Fluids
and  electrolyte  balance  needs  to  be  maintained  to  avoid  dehydration  and 
minimize  the  renal  complications  of rhabdomyolysis. Consultation  with  a

Strychnos

283

Spigelia anthelmia

Spigelia marilandica, close-up of ﬂower

Poison Control Center should be strongly considered. See “Poisoning by Plants
with Convulsive Poisons (Seizures),” p. 25.

References
Achenbach H, Hubner H, Vierling W, et al. Spiganthine, the cardioactive principle of Spigelia
anthelmia. J Nat Prod 1995;58:1092–1096.
Camurca-Vasconcelos AL, Nascimento NR, et al. Neuromuscular effects and acute toxicity of
an ethyl acetate extract of Spigelia anthelmia Linn. J Ethnopharmacol 2004;92:257–261.
Esposito-Avella M, Brown P, Tejeira I, et al. Pharmacological screening of Panamanian
medicinal plants. Part 1. J Crude Drug Res 1985;23:17–25.

Strychnos nux-vomica L.
Family: Loganiaceae

Common Names: Nux-Vomica Tree, Strychnine

Description: This small tree has ovate leaves growing to about 2 by 3.5 inches.
The yellowish-white tubular ﬂowers grow in terminal clusters. The fruit is 1.5
inches  across  and  hard  shelled; it  varies  in  color  from  yellow  to  orange  and
resembles a small grapefruit. It contains several gray velvety seeds that look like
nickel-sized buttons.

Distribution: Strychnos nux-vomica is native to Asia, and cultivated in Hawaii;
it is used to produce strychnine.

284

Swietenia

Toxic Part: The whole plant,
including  the  seeds, is  poi-
sonous.

Toxin: Strychnine.

Clinical Findings: Poisoning
from plant ingestion is rare.
Despite  the  known  toxicity,
the  seeds  continue  to  be
used in some countries as a
medicinal  herbal  product.
Initially  the  patient  may
experience  feelings  of rest-
lessness  and  anxiety,
fol-
lowed  by  fasciculations  and
hyperreﬂexia. In severe poi-
soning, generalized  symmetrical  tonic  spasms  with  opisthotonic  posturing
develop. Although  resembling  seizures, consciousness  is  maintained. The
extreme muscle spasms can last from seconds to minutes and are triggered by
movement or excitement. Rhabdomyolysis and hyperthermia can develop.

Strychnos nux-vomica, fruiting branch

Management: Aggressive control of muscle spasms is the goal of therapy. Use of
intravenous benzodiazepines may not be adequate. Persistent convulsions may
require use of a neuromuscular blockade. Hyperthermia may need to be managed
with  external  cooling  measures. Fluid  and  electrolyte  balance  needs  to 
be  maintained  to  avoid  dehydration  and  minimize  the  renal  complications 
of rhabdomyolysis. Consultation  with  a  Poison  Control  Center  should  be 
strongly  considered. See  “Poisoning  by  Plants  with  Convulsive  Poisons
(Seizures),” p. 25.

References
Philippe G, Angenot L, Tits M, Frederich M. About the toxicity of Strychnos species and
their alkaloids. Toxicon 2004;44:405–416.
Ryan CJ, Anderson J. Strychnine poisoning. N Engl J Med 2001;345:1577.
Starretz-Hacham O, Sofer S, Lifshitz M. Strychnine intoxication in a child. Isr Med Assoc J
2003;5:531–532.
Wood D, Webster E, Martinez D, Dargan P, Jones A. Survival after deliberate strychnine 
self-poisoning, with toxicokinetic data. Crit Care 2002;6:456–459.
Zhang YG, Huang GZ. Poisoning by toxic plants in China: report of 19 autopsy cases. Am J
Forensic Med Pathol 1988;9:313–319.

Swietenia mahagoni (L.) Jacq.
Family: Meliaceae

Common Names: Caoba, Mahogany

Swietenia

285

Swietenia mahagoni (above)

Swietenia mahagoni, close-up of fruit and
leaves (left)

Description: This large tree has dark brown, rough bark and alternate, pinnately
compound leaves with an even number of leaﬂets. The tree is semideciduous;
older leaves are discarded in the spring during the period of new growth. The
ﬂowers occur in inconspicuous clusters. Usually a single ﬂower in each cluster
develops into an erect, ﬁve-lobed, woody fruit pod, which splits from the base
to release winged seeds about 1 inch long.

Distribution: The  mahogany  is  native  to  south  Florida, the  Bahamas, Cuba,
Jamaica, Haiti, the  Dominican  Republic, and  Puerto  Rico. It  is  cultivated  in
Hawaii.

Toxic Part: Seeds are poisonous.

Toxin: An unidentiﬁed toxin.

Clinical  Findings: A  single  case  report  involving  an  adult  describes  gastroin-
testinal, central nervous system, and cardiac effects after the ingestion of two
seeds. The patient had multiple episodes of vomiting followed by coma, brady-
cardia, and hypotension. He was treated with ﬂuids, atropine, and vasopressors,
with recovery occurring over the ensuing 48 hours.

Management: If poisoning occurs, then treatment is supportive in nature. Intra-
venous  hydration, antiemetics, and  electrolyte  replacement  may  be  necessary
for patients with severe gastrointestinal effects. Cardiovascular support may be
necessary  if bradycardia  or  hypotension  develop. Consultation  with  a  Poison
Control Center should be considered.

Reference
Raghuraman V, Raveendran M. Mahogany seeds: An unusual poison. J Indian Med Assoc
1982;78:186–188.

286

Symphoricarpos

Symphoricarpos species
Family: Caprifoliaceae
Symphoricarpos albus (L.) S.F. Blake (=S. racemosus Michx.)
Symphoricarpos occidentalis Hook.
Symphoricarpos orbiculatus Moench

Common Names:
Symphoricarpos albus: Belluaine, Buck Brush, Snowberry, Waxberry
Symphoricarpos occidentalis: Western Snowberry, Wolfberry
Symphoricarpos orbiculatus: Coralberry, Devil’s Shoestring, Indian Currant

Description: These  deciduous  shrubs  grow  to  about  3  to  7  feet. Leaves  are
simple, opposite, up  to  3  inches  long. The  small  bell-shaped  ﬂowers  of Sym-
phoricarpos  albus  and  S. occidentalis are  pink, and  those  of S. orbiculatus  are
white. They grow in small clusters along the main stem. The fruit of Symphori-
carpos albus and S. occidentalis is a white berry, while that of S. orbiculatus is
coral red. The fruits contain two seeds.

Indian 

Symphoricarpos albus, close-up of fruit

Distribution: Snowberry  grows  in  woods  and  open  slopes  in  southeastern
Alaska (but not in the Yukon), Alberta to Quebec, south to California, Colorado,
Nebraska, and eastern North
America.
currant
grows 
in  eastern  North
America  and  Texas. Wolf-
berry  is  most  common  in
the  northern  Great  Plains,
and  grows 
from  British
Columbia  to  Ontario, as 
well  as  Washington, Utah,
New  Mexico, Oaklahoma,
Missouri,
and  Michigan.
Symphoricarpos  species  are
cultivated elsewhere as well.

Toxic  Part: The  berries  are
toxic.

Toxin: Saponin, and  small
quantities of chelidonine, an
isoquinoline  alkaloid. (See
also  Chelidonium  majus,
p. 120.)

Clinical Findings: With sub-
stantial ingestion of berries,

Symplocarpus

287

nausea, vomiting, abdomi-
nal  cramping, and  diarrhea
may occur.

Intravenous
Management:
hydration, antiemetics, and
electrolyte replacement may
be  necessary  for  patients
with  severe  gastrointestinal
effects, particularly  in  chil-
dren. Consultation  with  a
Poison  Control  Center
should  be  considered. See
“Poisoning  by  Plants  with
Gastrointestinal 
Toxins,”
p. 28.

Symphoricarpos orbiculatus, close-up of fruit and
leaves

References
Lamminpaa A, Kinos M. Plant poisonings in children. Hum Exp Toxicol
1996;15(3):245–249.
Lewis WH. Snowberry (Symphoricarpos) poisoning in children. JAMA 1979;242:2663.

Symplocarpus foetidus (L.) Nutt.
Family: Araceae

Common Names: Chou Puant, Polecat Weed, Skunk Cabbage, Tabac du Diable

Description: The ﬂowering spathe appears before the leaves in the spring. The
spathe is 3 to 6 inches long and may be green, purple, or brown, and striped or
spotted. The  leaves  eventually  reach  3  feet  in  length  and  1  foot  in  width. All
parts of this plant have an unpleasant odor.

Distribution: Skunk  cabbage  grows  from  Quebec  to  Nova  Scotia  to  North 
Carolina  and  Iowa. Its  natural  habitats  are  moist  areas  such  as  wet  woods 
and swamps.

Toxic Part: The leaves are injurious.

Toxin: Raphides  of water-insoluble  calcium  oxalate  and  unveriﬁed  proteina-
ceous toxins.

Clinical  Findings: A  painful  burning  sensation  of the  lips  and  mouth  results
from ingestion. There is an inﬂammatory reaction, often with edema and blis-
tering. Hoarseness, dysphonia, and dysphagia may result.

288

Taxus

Symplocarpus foetidus, leaves

Symplocarpus foetidus, close-up of
ﬂowers

Management: The pain and edema recede slowly without therapy. Cool liquids
or demulcents held in the mouth may bring some relief. Analgesics may be indi-
cated. The  insoluble  oxalate  in  these  plants  does  not  cause  systemic  oxalate 
poisoning. Consultation  with  a  Poison  Control  Center  should  be  considered.
See “Poisoning by Plants with Calcium Oxalate Crystals,” p. 23.

References
Rauber A. Observations on the idioblasts of Dieffenbachia. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1985;23:
79–90.
Watson JT, Jones RC, Siston AM, et al. Outbreak of food-borne illness associated with plant
material containing raphides. Clin Toxicol (Phila) 2005;43:17–21.

Taxus species
Family: Taxaceae
Taxus baccata L.
Taxus brevifolia Nutt.
Taxus canadensis Marsh.
Taxus cuspidata Siebold & Zucc.
Taxus ﬂoridana Nutt.

Common Names: Ground Hemlock, Yew
Taxus baccata: English Yew
Taxus brevifolia: Western Yew
Taxus canadensis: Canadian Yew, Buis de Sapia
Taxus cuspidata: Japanese Yew
Taxus ﬂoridana: Florida Yew

Description: These Taxus species are evergreen trees and shrubs with alternate
branchlets and reddish-brown, thin, scaled bark. They can grow to 60 feet or

Taxus

289

Taxus brevifolia

Taxus brevifolia, branch with fruit

Taxus cuspidata cv. ‘Aurescens,’ shrub

more, but  some  species  are
commonly  pruned 
into
hedges  or  low  shrubs. The
ﬂat,
alternate, needle-like
leaves are about 1 inch long.
The hard seeds are green to
black  and  partially  exposed
in a ﬂeshy red cup (aril).

Distribution: Taxus  baccata
is cultivated in the southern
United States. Taxus brevifo-
lia grows from Alaska south
along coastal British Colum-
bia  to  western  Washington,
Oregon, northern  Califor-
nia, Idaho, and Montana and southern Alberta. Taxus canadensis grows in North
Carolina, Virginia, Pennsylvania, West Virginia to Iowa north to southeastern
Manitoba to Nova Scotia. Taxus cuspidata is cultivated in the north temperate
zones. Taxus ﬂoridana is found in northwestern Florida.

Toxic Part: Most of the plant including the seeds, but not the red aril, is toxic.

Toxin: Taxine alkaloids, block sodium and calcium currents.

290

Thevetia

Clinical Findings: Most pediatric cases involve ingestions of the seed and aril,
and  patients  are  minimally  symptomatic. Substantial  ingestion  of the  leaves
causes gastrointestinal, neurological, and cardiovascular effects. Dizziness, dry
mouth, and mydriasis develop within 1 hour, followed by abdominal cramping,
salivation, and  emesis. There  is  generalized  weakness, and  the  patient  may
become comatose. Sinus bradycardia, premature ventricular contractions, atri-
oventricular conduction defects, or ventricular tachydysrhythmias may occur.
Hyperkalemia, if present, may be an indicator of toxicity. Deaths are caused by
cardiac dysrhythmias. Allergic reactions may result from chewing the needles.

Management: Gastrointestinal  decontamination  as  appropriate, serial  electro-
cardiograms, and  serum  potassium  determinations  should  be  performed.
Because  of the  clinical  similarity  to  cardioactive  steroid  toxicity, digoxin-
speciﬁc Fab fragments have been used to treat serious dysrhythmias, but there
is no evidence that cardioactive steroids are present in Yew. Consultation with
a Poison Control Center should be strongly considered.

References
Cummins RO, Haulman J, Quan L. Near-fatal yew berry intoxication treated with external
cardiac pacing and digoxin-speciﬁc Fab antibody fragments. Ann Emerg Med
1990;19:77–82.
Ingen GV, Visser R, Peltenbury H, et al. Sudden unexpected death due to Taxus poisoning. A
report of ﬁve cases with review of the literature. Forensic Sci Int 1992;56:81–87.
Ruha AM, Tanen DA, Graeme KA, et al. Hypertonic sodium bicarbonate for Taxus media-
induced cardiac toxicity in swine. Acad Emerg Med 2002;9:179–185.
Werth J, Murphy JJ. Cardiovascular toxicity associated with yew leaf ingestion. Br Heart 
J 1994;72:92–93.
Willaert W, Claessens P, Vankelecom B, Vanderheyden M. Intoxication with Taxus baccata:
cardiac dysrhythmias following yew leaves ingestion. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol
2002;5:511–512.
Wilson CR, Sauer J, Hooser SB. Taxines: A review of the mechanism and toxicity of yew
(Taxus spp.) alkaloids. Toxicon 2001;39:175–185.

Thevetia peruviana (Pers.) K. Schum.

(=T. neriifolia A. Juss. ex Steud. =Cascabela thevetia (L.) Lippold)

Family: Apocynaceae

Common  Names: Ahouai  des  Antilles, Be-Still  Tree, Cablonga, Flor  del  Perú,
Lucky Nut, Noho-Malie, Retama, Serpent, Yellow Oleander

Description: This small tree is 10 to 20 feet tall with leaves resembling those of
the  Nerium  oleander, but  Thevetia has  a  milky  sap. Flowers  are  yellow  with  a
peach tinge. The small (about 1 inch), clam-shaped fruit contains two to four
ﬂat seeds.

Thevetia

291

Distribution: Thevetia grows
in  south  Florida  and  the
southwestern  United  States,
the  West  Indies, Sri  Lanka,
Hawaii, and Guam.

Toxic  Part: All  parts  of the
plant, particularly the seeds,
are poisonous.

Toxin: Thevetin A & B, theve-
toxin, and peruvoside, cardi-
oactive  steroids  resembling
digitalis.

Clinical  Findings: Poisoning
produces 
clinical  ﬁndings 
typical  of cardioactive  ste-
roid poisoning. Toxicity has a
latent  period  that
variable 
depends  on 
the  quantity
ingested. Dysrhythmias  are
usually  expressed  as  sinus
bradycardia, premature  ven-
tricular contractions,atrioven-
tricular  conduction  defects,
or  ventricular  tachydysrhyth-
mias.Hyperkalemia,if present,
may be an indicator of toxicity.

Thevetia peruviana, branch with ﬂower

Management: Gastrointestinal  decontamination  as  appropriate, serial  electro-
cardiograms, and  serum  potassium  determinations  should  be  performed. If
serious cardioactive steroid toxicity is considered, digoxin-speciﬁc Fab should
be administered. Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be strongly
considered. See “Poisoning  by  Plants  with  Cardioactive  Steroids/Cardiac  Gly-
cosides,” p. 24.

References
De Silva HA, Fonseka MM, Pathmeswaran A, et al. Multiple dose activated charcoal for
treatment of yellow oleander poisoning: A single-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled
trial. Lancet 2003;361:1935–1938.
Eddleston M, Ariaratnam CA, Sjostrom L, et al. Acute yellow oleander (Thevetia peruviana)
poisoning: cardiac dysrhythmias, electrolyte disturbances, and serum cardiac glycoside
concentrations on presentation to hospital. Heart 2000;83:301–306.
Eddleston M, Rajapakse S, Rajakanthan, et al. Anti-digoxin Fab fragments in cardiotoxicity
induced by ingestion of yellow oleander: A randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2000;355:
967–972.

292

Toxicodendron

Eddleston M, Ariaratnam CA, Meyer WP, et al. Epidemic of self-poisoning with seeds of the
yellow oleander tree (Thevetia peruviana) in northern Sri Lanka. Trop Med Int Health
1999;4:266–273.

Toxicodendron species
Family: Anacardiaceae
Toxicodendron diversilobum (Torr. & A. Gray) Greene (=Rhus diversiloba Torr. & 

A. Gray)

Toxicodendron pubescens P. Mill. (=Rhus toxicarium Salisb.; Toxicodendron

toxicarium (Salisb.) Gillis)

Toxicodendron radicans (L.) Kuntze (=Rhus radicans L.)
Toxicodendron rydbergii (Small) Greene
Toxicodendron vernix (L.) Kuntze (=Rhus vernix L.)

Toxicodendron diversilobum

Common Names:
Toxicodendron  diversilobum:
Western Poison Oak
Toxicodendron pubescens:East-
ern Poison Oak
Toxicodendron radicans: Poison
Ivy
Toxicodendron rydbergii:West-
ern Poison Ivy
Toxicodendron vernix: Poison
Sumac

Description: Toxicodendron
diversilobum is  an  erect
shrub  3  to  6  feet  tall  with
three  round  or  even-lobed
leaves  and  producing  white
fruits. Toxicodendron  pubes-
cens is a simple or sparingly
branched  shrub  growing  to
about  3  feet, with  3  blunt-
lobed leaﬂets and yellowish-
white  fruits. Toxicodendron
radicans is  a  climbing  vine
covered  with  numerous 
aerial  roots, with  3  ovate 
to  elliptical 
leaﬂets  with
pointed  teeth  or  shallow
lobes. Toxicodendron  ryd-

Toxicodendron

293

Toxicodendron radicans

Toxicodendron radicans, with Autumn
color

Toxicodendron vernix

bergii is  a  shrub  growing  3 
to 9 feet tall, with leaves hav-
ing  pointed  teeth  on  their
margins. Toxicodendron ver-
nix is a shrub to small tree, 6
to  15  feet  tall, branched  at
the  base, with  compound
leaves having 7 to 13 leaﬂets
with 
smooth  edges  and 
producing 
grayish-white
fruits.

Poison 

Western
Distribution:
Poison  Oak  (West  of
the
Rocky  Mountains): Eastern
Poison  Oak  (New  Jersey
southward);
Ivy
(Eastern  North  America);
Western  Poison  Ivy  (wide-
spread 
the  Western
United States extending East
into  the  Northern  United
States and Southern Canada
to  Nova  Scotia  and  New

in 

294

Urginea

York); Poison Sumac (swampy areas in Florida, Northeast and Nova Scotia to
Minnesota).

Toxic Part: All parts of the plant contain the oily resin that contains the toxin.

Toxin: Urushiol, an antigenic catechol.

Clinical Findings: All these plants can cause mild to severe contact dermatitis 
in  patients  previously  sensitized  to  urushiols, and  there  is  cross-reactivity
among  the  various  species. The  skin  rash  typically  develops  within  24  hours 
following  exposures, although  in  more  highly  allergic  individuals  it  may 
develop within several hours. The rash often appears in a linear pattern consis-
tent with brushing up against the plant. More than 50% of the population is
sensitized to urushiol and will get rhus dermatitis on contact with a plant of
this genus.

Management: Symptomatic and supportive care; this includes the potential use
of topical or oral antihistamines and possibly corticosteroids. Consultation with
a Poison Control Center should be considered.

References
Crawford GH, McGovern TW. Poison ivy. N Engl J Med 2002;347:1723–1724.
Guin JD. Treatment of toxicodendron dermatitis (poison ivy and poison oak). Skin Ther
Lett 2001;6:3–5.
Oh SH, Haw CR, Lee MH. Clinical and immunologic features of systemic contact 
dermatitis from ingestion of Rhus (Toxicodendron). Contact Dermatitis 
2003;48:251–254.
Park SD, Lee SW, Chun JH, Cha SH. Clinical Future if 31 patients with systemic 
contact dermatitis due to the ingestion of Rhus (lagver). Br J Dermatol 
2000;142:937–942.

Urginea maritima (L.) Baker
(=Scilla maritima L.)
Family: Liliaceae

Common Names: Red Squill, Sea Onion, Squill

Description: Urginea grows from an onion-like bulb. The leaves are 1.5 feet long
and 4 inches wide. Whitish to pink ﬂowers appear in dense clusters at the tips
of the stems.

Distribution: Red  squill  is  native  to  Eurasia, the  Mediterranean, and  South
Africa. It  is  primarily  in  cultivation  for  the  commercial  extraction  of squill
(known also as red squill) for use as a rat poison.

Toxic Part: The bulbs are poisonous.

Urginea

295

Toxin: Scillarin, a  cardio-
active 
resembling 
digitalis.

steroid 

Clinical  Findings: Substan-
tial  ingestion  may  lead  to
toxicity. Poisoning produces
clinical  ﬁndings  typical  of
cardioactive  steroid  poison-
ing. Toxicity  has  a  variable
latent  period  that  depends
on  the  quantity  ingested.
Dysrhythmias  are  usually
expressed as sinus bradycar-
dia, premature  ventricular
contractions, atrioventricu-
lar  conduction  defects, or
tachydysrhyth-
ventricular 
mias. Hyperkalemia,
if
present, may be an indicator
of toxicity.

and 

Management: Gastrointesti-
nal  decontamination 
as
appropriate, serial  electro-
cardiograms,
serum
potassium  determinations
should  be  performed.
If
serious  cardioactive  steroid
toxicity  is  considered, dig-
oxin-speciﬁc Fab should be administered. Consultation with a Poison Control
Center  should  be  considered. See  “Poisoning  by  Plants  with  Cardioactive
Steroids/Cardiac Glycosides,” p. 24.

Urginea maritima

References
el Bahri L, Djegham M, Makhlouf M. Urginea maritima L. (Squill): A poisonous plant of
North Africa. Vet Hum Toxicol 2000;42:108–110.
Foukaridis GN, Osuch E, Mathibe L, Tsipa P. The ethnopharmacology and toxicology of
Urginea sanguinea in the Pretoria area. J Ethnopharmacol 1995;49:77–79.
Tuncok Y, Kozan O, Cavdar C, Guven H, Fowler J. Urginea maritima (squill) toxicity.
J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1995;33:83–86.

296

Veratrum

Veratrum species
Family: Liliaceae
Veratrum album L.
Veratrum californicum Durand
Veratrum parvifolium Michx.
Veratrum tenuipetalum A. Heller
Veratrum viride Aiton

Common  Names: American  White  Hellebore, Corn  Lily, Earth  Gall, Green
Hellebore, False Hellebore, Indian Poke, Itch Weed, Pepper-Root, Rattlesnake
Weed, Skunk Cabbage, Swamp Hellebore, Tickle Weed, White Hellebore

Description: Veratrum species  are  tall  perennial  herbs  with  alternate, pleated
leaves. The ﬂowers are white, marked with green on the top portion of the stalk.
The fruit is a small pod containing winged seeds.

Distribution: Veratrum album grows in the Aleutian Islands, Alaska. Veratrum
californicum grows  on 
to  Baja,
California, east to Montana, Colorado, and New Mexico. Veratrum parvifolium
southern

from  Washington 

the  West  Coast 

Veratrum californicum

in 

the 

grows 
Appalachian Mountains.
Veratrum  tenuipetalum grows
in  Colorado  and  Wyoming.
Veratrum  viride grows 
in
Alaska,
the  Yukon, British
Columbia, Alberta, Oregon,
Montana, Minnesota,
and
Quebec  south  to  Tennessee 
and Georgia.

Toxic  Part: All  parts  of this
plant are poisonous.

Toxin: Veratrum  alkaloids,
sodium channel activators.

Clinical Findings: Symptoms
are predominantly neurolog-
ical and cardiac.There is tran-
sient  burning  in  the  mouth
after ingestion, followed after
several  hours  by  increased
salivation, vomiting, diar-
rhea, and  a  prickling  sensa-
tion in the skin. The patient

Veratrum

297

may  complain  of headache,
muscular  weakness,
and
dimness of vision. Bradycar-
dia  and  other  cardiac  dys-
rhythmias  can  be  associated
with  severe  blood  pressure
abnormalities. Coma  may
develop,and convulsions may
be a terminal event.

Management: Fluid  replace-
ment  should  be  instituted
with  respiratory  support  if
indicated. Heart rhythm and
blood  pressure  should  be
monitored  and  treated  with
appropriate medications and
supportive care. Recovery is
generally complete within 24
hours. Consultation  with  a
Poison  Control  Center
should  be  strongly  consid-
ered. See  “Poisoning  by
Plants with Sodium Channel
Activators,” p. 32.

Veratrum viride

References
Dunnigan D, Adelman RD, Beyda DH. A young child with altered mental status. Clin
Pediatr (Phila) 2002;41:43–45.
Gaillard Y, Pepin G. LC-EI-MS determination of veratridine and cevadine in two fatal cases
of Veratrum viride poisoning. J Anal Toxicol 2001;25:481–485.
Jaffe AM, Gephardt D, Courtemanche L. Poisoning due to ingestion of Veratrum viride (false
hellebore). J Emerg Med 1990;8:161–167.
Prince LA, Stork CM. Prolonged cardiotoxicity from poisonlilly (Veratrum viride). Vet Hum
Toxicol 2000;42:282–285.
Quatrehomme G, Bertrand F, Chauvet C, et al. Intoxication from Veratrum album. Hum Exp
Toxicol 1993;12:111–115.

298

Viscum

Viscum album L.
Family: Loranthaceae (Viscaceae)

Viscum album, branch with immature fruit

Common  Names: European
Mistletoe, Mistletoe

Description: This  parasite
grows  primarily  on 
the
trunks  of deciduous  trees,
particularly the apple. Stems
are much branched, and the
leaves are 2 to 3 inches long,
thick, leathery, and  usually 
a 
yellowish-green.
The  fruit  is  a  sticky  white 
berry.

pale 

Distribution: This European
plant  was  introduced  into
Sonoma County, California.

Toxic  Part: Only  the  leaves
and  stems  are  toxic. The
berries  have  very  low  toxin
concentration  and  cause
toxicity  only  if ingested  in
large quantities.

Toxin: Viscumin, a  plant
lectin  (toxalbumin)  related
to ricin.

Clinical Findings: The toxin is similar in action to the lectins contained in Abrus
precatorius and Ricinus communis but is less potent. Following a latent period
of many hours, nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramping, diarrhea, and dehydra-
tion occur.

Management: Patients  with  symptoms  need  to  be  assessed  for  signs  of dehy-
dration  and  electrolyte  abnormalities. Activated  charcoal  should  be  adminis-
tered. Intravenous hydration, antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement may be
necessary  in  severe  cases, particularly  those  involving  children. Consultation
with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See “Poisoning by Plants
with Toxalbumins,” p. 33.

References
Franz H. Mistletoe lectins and their A and B chains. Oncology 1986;43(suppl 1):
23–34.

Wisteria

299

Gorter RW, van Wely M, Stoss MM, Wollina U. Subcutaneous inﬁltrates induced by
injection of mistletoe extracts (Iscador). Am J Ther 1998;5:181–187.
Stirpe F. Mistletoe toxicity. Lancet 1983;1:295.

Wisteria species
Family: Leguminosae (Fabaceae)
Wisteria ﬂoribunda (Willd.) DC.
Wisteria sinensis (Sims) Sweet

Common Names: Kidney Bean Tree, Wisteria, Wistaria

Description: These woody vines bear drooping masses of sweetpea-like ﬂowers,
which are usually blue, but pink and white varieties also exist. The fruit pods of
Wisteria  ﬂoribunda are  smooth; those  of W. sinensis are  covered  with  velvety
down. The pods persist through winter.

Distribution: Wisterias  are  hardy  in  the  north  but  are  most  common  in  the
southeastern  United  States
as far west as Texas.

Wisteria ﬂoribunda, ﬂowering vines

Toxic  Part: All  parts  of this
plant  are  toxic. Although 
the  ﬂowers  are  sometimes
considered nontoxic, reports
suggest otherwise.

Toxin: Wistarine, a  glyco-
side.

Clinical  Findings: Nausea,
vomiting,abdominal cramp-
ing, and diarrhea may occur.

Intravenous
Management:
hydration, antiemetics, and
electrolyte replacement may
be  necessary  for  patients
with  severe  gastrointestinal
effects, particularly  in  chil-
dren. Consultation  with  a
Poison  Control  Center
should  be  considered. See
“Poisoning  by  Plants  with
Gastrointestinal 
Toxins,”
p. 28.

300

Xanthosoma

Wisteria sinensis, leaves with ﬂowers

Wisteria sinensis, fruit with seeds

References
Piola C, Ravaglia M, Zoli MP. Poisoning of Wisteria sinensis seeds. Two clinical cases. Boll
Soc Ital Farm Osp 1983;29:333–337
Rondeau ES. Wisteria toxicity. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1993;31:107–112.

Xanthosoma species
Family: Araceae

Common Names: ‘Ape, Blue ‘Ape, Blue Taro, Caraibe, Malanga, Yautía

Description: Xanthosoma species  resemble  Caladium, but  the  leaves  are  more
spear shaped. The tubers or rhizomes are thick, and the sap is milky.

Distribution: This plant is in cultivation in the southern United States, Hawaii,
the West Indies, and Guam.

Toxic  Part: The  leaves  are  injurious. Some  species  are  grown  for  their  edible
tubers.

Toxin: Raphides  of water-insoluble  calcium  oxalate  and  unveriﬁed  proteina-
ceous toxins.

Zamia

301

Xanthosoma violacea

Xanthosoma sagittifolium, close-up of ﬂower

Clinical Findings: A painful burning sensation of the lips and mouth may result
from ingestion. There is an inﬂammatory reaction, often with edema and blis-
tering. Hoarseness, dysphonia, and dysphagia may result.

Management: The pain and edema recede slowly without therapy. Cool liquids
or demulcents held in the mouth may bring some relief. Analgesics may be indi-
cated. The  insoluble  oxalate  in  these  plants  does  not  cause  systemic  oxalate 
poisoning. Consultation  with  a  Poison  Control  Center  should  be  considered.
See “Poisoning by Plants with Calcium Oxalate Crystals,” p. 23.

Reference
Sakai WS, Hanson M, Jones RC. Raphides with barbs and grooves in Xanthosoma
sagittifolium (Araceae). Science 1972;178:314–315.

Zamia species
Family: Zamiaceae
Zamia furfuracea Aiton
Zamia integrifolia Aiton
Zamia pumila L.

Common  Names: Bay  Rush, Camptie, Cardboard  Palm, Coontie, Guayiga,
Florida Arrowroot, Marunguey, Mexican Cycad, Palmita de Jardín, Sago Cycas,
Seminole Bread, Yugulla

Description: The  short  trunk  of these  Zamia species  may  be  entirely  under-
ground; Z. furfuracea has 6 to 30 or rarely 40 leaves, with sparsely to densely
prickled petioles, whereas Z. integrifolia has 2 to 15 leaves with smooth petioles.
Zamia  pumila  has  2  to  15  leaves  and  petioles  with  stipules. The  leaves  are
pinnate, somewhat palmlike, and both male and female cones are produced.

302

Zamia

Distribution: Zamia integrifolia grows on the southeastern coast of Georgia and
throughout Florida, as well as on the Bahamian Islands, Cuba, and the Cayman
Islands. Found  at  one  time  in  Puerto  Rico, it  is  now  probably  extinct  there.
Zamia furfuracea is native to southeastern Veracruz, Mexico, and is cultivated
elsewhere. Zamia pumila is native to the Dominican Republic and Central Cuba.

Toxic  Part: All  parts  of all  Zamia species  are  poisonous. The  toxin  can  be
removed from the grated root by water; treated plant material was a commer-
cial source of starch in Florida until the 1920s.

Toxin: Cycasin, an azoglyco-
side  that  releases  methyla-
zoxymethanol  (responsible
for toxicity) on hydrolysis.

occurs,

Clinical Findings: If poison-
ing 
the  most
common  effects  are  nausea,
vomiting, and  abdominal
cramping. Other  symptoms
may 
include  visual  com-
plaints,
in
extreme cases, coma.

lethargy, and,

Zamia integrifolia

Zamia pumila

Zamia pumila, with cone

Zantedeschia

303

Management: Intravenous hydration, antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement
may be necessary for patients with severe gastrointestinal symptoms, particu-
larly  in  children. There  are  no  speciﬁc  antidotes  for  the  CNS  manifestations.
Consultation with a Poison Control Center should be considered. See “Poison-
ing by Plants with Gastrointestinal Toxins,” page 28.

References
Hall WTK. Cycad (Zamia) poisoning in Australia. Aust Vet J 1987;64:149–151.
Norstog KJ, Nichols TJ. The Biology of the Cycads. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, 1997.
Schneider D, Wink M, Sporer F, Lounibos P. Cycads: Their evolution, toxins, herbivores and
insect pollinators. Naturwissenschaften 2002;89:281–294.
Yagi F. Azoxyglycoside content and beta-glycosidase activities in leaves of various cycads.
Phytochemistry 2004;65:3243–3247.

Zantedeschia aethiopica (L.) Spreng.
Family: Araceae

Common Names: Arum Lily, Calla, Calla Lily, Lirio Cala

Description: This  is  the  calla  of gardeners  or  the “ﬂowers  of ﬂorists,” not  the
true  calla  (Calla  palustris). This  plant  has  smooth-edged, arrowhead-shaped
leaves that are sometimes mottled with white and grow on long, stout stalks.
The  showy  ﬂowering  spathe  ﬂares  out  like  a  lily. It  is  white  or  green  in  this
species but may be pink or yellow in others. The spadix is yellow.

Distribution: Zantedeschia is grown outdoors in mild climates and as a green-
house or houseplant elsewhere.

Toxic Part: The leaves are injurious.

Zantedeschia aethiopica, close-up of ﬂower

Toxin: Raphides  of water-
insoluble  calcium  oxalate
and  unveriﬁed  proteina-
ceous toxins.

Clinical  Findings: A  painful
burning  sensation  of
the 
lips and mouth results from
ingestion. There  is  an  in-
ﬂammatory  reaction, often
with  edema  and  blistering.
Hoarseness, dysphonia, and
dysphagia may result.

Management: The  pain  and
edema  recede  slowly  with-

304

Zephyranthes

out  therapy. Cool  liquids  or  demulcents  held  in  the  mouth  may  bring  some
relief. Analgesics may be indicated. The insoluble oxalate in these plants does
not  cause  systemic  oxalate  poisoning. Consultation  with  a  Poison  Control
Center should be considered. See “Poisoning by Plants with Calcium Oxalate
Crystals,” p. 23.

Reference
Rauber A. Observations on the idioblasts of Dieffenbachia. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1985;
23:79–90.

Zephyranthes atamasco (L.) Herb.
(= Amaryllis atamasco L.)
Family: Amaryllidaceae

Common Names: Atamasco Lily, Fairy Lily, Rain Lily, Zephyr Lily

Description: The  grassy  leaves  of Zephyranthes emerge  from  the  ground  and
grow to a length of 1 foot. The single, erect ﬂowers form on a hollow, leaﬂess
stalk and are usually white but may be tinged with purple. The plant is propa-
gated by bulbs.

Distribution: Zephyranthes grows in wet areas from Virginia to Florida west to
Alabama.

Toxic Part: The bulb is poisonous.

Toxin: Lycorine and related phenanthridine alkaloids (see Narcissus).

Clinical  Findings: Ingestion  of small  amounts  produces  little  or  no  symp-
toms. Large  exposures  may  cause  nausea, vomiting, abdominal  cramping,
diarrhea, dehydration, and electrolyte imbalance.

Zephyranthes atamasco

Management: Most  ex-
posures result in minimal
or no toxicity. Intravenous
hydration,
antiemetics,
and  electrolyte  replace-
ment may be necessary for
patients  with  severe  gas-
trointestinal 
symptoms,
particularly  in  children.
Consultation  with 
a
Poison  Control  Center
should be considered. See
“Poisoning by Plants with
Gastrointestinal  Toxins,”
p. 28.

Zigadenus

305

Reference
Jasperson-Schib R. Toxic Amaryllidaceae. Pharm Acta Helv 1970;45:424–433.

Zigadenus species (sometimes written Zygadenus)
Family: Liliaceae

Common Names: Alkali Grass, Death Camas, Hog’s Potato, Poison Sego, Sand
Corn, Soap Plant, Squirrel Food, Water Lily, Wild Onion

Description: These  perennial  herbs  have  grasslike  leaves  up  to  1.5  feet  long.
The ﬂowers form along the top of the central stalk and are usually yellow or
whitish-green. Most species of Zigadenus have an onion-like bulb, but none has
the characteristic onion odor.

Distribution: Zigadenus species are found throughout the United States except
in the extreme southeast and Hawaii; they also are found across Canada and in
Alaska.

Zigadenus fremontii

Toxic  Part: All  parts  of the
plant, including the ﬂowers,
are toxic.

Toxin: Zygadenine, zygacine,
isogermidine, neogermidine,
and protoveratridine, sodium
channel activators.

Clinical Findings: Symptoms
are  predominantly  neuro-
logical and cardiac. There is
transient  burning 
in  the
mouth  after  ingestion, fol-
lowed after several hours by
increased  salivation, vomit-
ing, diarrhea, and a tingling
sensation  in  the  skin. The
patient  may  complain  of
headache, muscular  weak-
of
ness,
vision.
and
other  cardiac  dysrhythmias
can be associated with severe
blood  pressure  abnormali-
ties. Coma may develop, and

Bradycardia 

and 

dimness 

306

Zigadenus

convulsions may be a termi-
nal event.

Management: Fluid  replace-
ment  should  be  instituted
with  respiratory  support  if
indicated. Heart 
rhythm 
and  blood  pressure  should
be  monitored  and  treated
with  appropriate  medica-
tions  and  supportive  care.
Recovery  is  generally  com-
plete  within  24  hours.
Consultation  with  a  Poison
Control  Center  should  be
strongly 
See
“Poisoning  by  Plants  with
Sodium  Channel  Activa-
tors,” p. 32.

considered.

Zigadenus nuttallii

References
Grover J, Dahl B, Caravati M. Death camus: Mistaken identity at an herb farm. J Toxicol
Clin Toxicol 1999;37:618–619.
Heilpern KL. Zigadenus poisoning. Ann Emerg Med 1995;25:259–262.
Peterson MC, Rasmussen GJ. Intoxication with foothill camas (Zigadenus paniculatus). J
Toxicol Clin Toxicol 2003;41:63–65.
Wagstaff DJ, Case AA. Human poisoning by Zigadenus. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1987;25:
361–367.

Photographers’ Credits

Adam, Irina
Acokanthera  oppositifolia (2  photos), Alocasia cv. Hilo’s  Beauty, Alocasia watsoniana,
Alocasia  × amazonica, Arum  italicum, Aucuba  japonica (3  photos), Brassaia  actinophylla,
Caladium bicolor (2 photos), Clivia nobilis (2 photos), Colocasia esculenta, Crassula argentea
(2  photos), Cycas  circinalis, Ephedra  gerardiana (2  photos), Ficus  benjamina, Gingko  biloba,
Hydrangea sp., Ligustrum japonicum, Malus sp., Prunus sp., Ricinus communis, Spathiphyllum
sp., Swietenia mahagoni, Wisteria sinensis, Xanthosoma violacea, Zamia integrifolia

Balick, Michael
Abrus precatorius (2 photos), Adenium sp., Adonis amurensis (2 photos), Allamanda cathartica
(2  photos), Allium  canadense (2  photos), Hippeastrum ‘Basuto’, Anemone  coronaria,
Pulsatilla  vulgaris ‘Papageno’, Anthurium × roseum, Arum  italicum, Atropa  belladonna,
Baptisia  cv. ‘Purple  Smoke’, Blighia  sapida, Brassaia  actinophylla, Calycanthus  ﬂoridus  cv.
‘Athens’, Catharanthus  roseus (3  photos), Celastrus  scandens, Cestrum  nocturnum, Chelido-
nium  majus, Chrysanthemum  sp. (3  photos), Clematis  jackmanii, Clematis cv.
‘Niobe,’
Colchicum  autumnale (3  photos), Conium  maculatum (2  photos), Convallaria  majalis (2
photos), Crinum  bulbispermum, Cryptostegia  sp. (2  photos), Cycas  revoluta, Datura  stra-
monium (2  photos), Digitalis  purpurea (2  photos), Epipremnum  aureum, Euphorbia  milii,
Ficus  benjamina, Ficus  elastica, Galanthus  nivalis, Hedera  helix, Helleborus  niger, Helleborus 
niger cv. ‘Maximus’, Hippobroma longiﬂora, Hura crepitans & Canavalia rusiosperma, Hydrangea
macrophylla, Hypericum  perforatum (2  photos), Iris  pseudoacorus (2  photos), Jatropha 
curcas, Kalmia  angustifolia, Kalmia  latifolia ‘Pink  Surprise’, Lantana  camara (2  photos),
Lonicerca  tatarica, Manihot  esculenta (3  photos), Melia  azedarach, Monstera  deliciosa,
Narcissus  poeticus, Narcissus  pseudonarcissus, Narcissus  sp., Nerium  oleander (2  photos),
Ornithogalum thyrsoides (2 photos), Ornithogalum umbellatum, Pentalinon luteum, Philoden-
dron selloum, Pieris ﬂoribunda, Pieris japonica (2 photos), Prunus pendula var. adscendens (2
photos), Prunus  serotina, Prunus  laurocerasus, Pteridium  acquilinium, Rhamnus  cathartica,
Rhododendron cv. ‘Yaku Princess’, Rhododendron cv. ‘Rosebud’, Rhododendron × PMJ, Robinia
pseudoacacia, Scilla peruviana, Scilla siberica, Sophora secundiﬂora, Symplocarpus foetidus, Tox-
icodendron radicans, Veratrum viride, Wisteria sinensis.

Cheatham, Scooter
Astralagus mollissimus, Astralagus wootonii, Karwiskia humboldtiana (2 photos), Sophora secun-
diﬂora (2 photos), Symphoricarpos orbiculatus

Foster, Steven
Aconitum napellus, Actaea rubra, Aesculus californica, Aesculus glabra, Aesculus hippocastanum
(2 photos), Aloe vera, Anemone canadensis, Pulsatilla patens, Pulsatilla vulgaris, Arisaema dra-
contium, Arisaema  triphyllum, Atropa  belladonna, Baptisia  alba, Blighia  sapida, Capsicum
annuum, Caulophyllum thalictroides (2 photos), Chelidonium majus, Cicuta maculata, Clema-
tis  virginiana, Clivia  miniata, Colocasia  esculenta, Conium  maculatum, Crinum  asiaticum,
Datura wrightii, Digitalis purpurea, Dirca palustris, Eriobotrya japonica, Euonymus americanus,
Euonymus  atropurpurea, Euphorbia  marginata, Euphorbia  pulcherrima, Gelsemium  semper-
virens, Gymnocladus dioicus, Hydrastis canadensis (3 photos), Hypericum perforatum, Ilex opaca,
Lantana camara, Ligustrum lucidum (2 photos), Lobelia cardinalis, Lobelia inﬂata, Lobelia siphi-
307

308

Photographers’ Credits

litica, Lupinus perennis, Lycoris radiata, Lyonia sp., Menispermum canadense, Momordica cha-
rantia, Nerium  oleander, Nicotiana  rustica, Nicotiana  tabacum, Phoradendron  serotinum (2
photos), Physalis crassifolia, Phytolacca americana, Podophyllum peltatum (2 photos), Poncirus
trifoliata, Ranunculus  acris, Ranunculus  sceleratus, Rhamnus  cathartica, Rheum × cultorum,
Ricinus  communis (2  photos), Robinia  pseudoacacia, Sambucus  nigra, Sambucus  nigra  subsp.
caerulea, Sambucus nigra subsp. canadensis, Sanguinaria canadensis, Schinus molle, Schinus tere-
binthifolius, Senecio  douglasii, Senecio  jacobea, Spigelia  marilandica, Symphoricarpos  albus,
Taxus brevifolia (2 photos), Thevetia peruviana, Veratrum californicum, Viscum album, Zant-
edeschia aethiopica, Zigadenus fremontii, Zigadenus nuttallii

Goltra, Peter
Calophyllum inophyllum (2 photos)

Gromping, Hans-Wilhelm
Hyoscyamus niger

Henderson, Flor
Caryota mitis (embryo)

Henderson, Andrew
Caryota urens, Caryota gigas

Howard, Richard A.
Aconitum  napellus, Actaea  pachypoda, Actaea  rubra, Actaea  spicata, Adenium  sp., Aleurites
moluccana, Aloe  speciosa, Hippeastrum  sp., Hippeastrum  puniceum, Anthurium  × ferrierense,
Anthurium wildenowii, Baptisia tinctoria, Caesalpinia bonduc (2 photos), Caesalpinia gilliesii,
Calophyllum  inophyllum, Calotropis  gigantea, Calotropis  procera  (2  photos), Caltha  palustris,
Calycanthus ﬂoridus (2 photos), Cassia ﬁstula  (3 photos), Celastrus scandens, Celastrus scan-
dens & C. orbiculatus, Cestrum nocturnum, Clematis paniculata, Clusia rosea (3 photos), Daphne
mezereum, Datura  metel, Datura  metel  cv. Cornucopaea, Brugmansia  candida, Datura  san-
guinea, Dieffenbachia seguine, Dirca palustris, Euonymus americanus, Euonymus europaeus (2
photos), Euphorbia  cyathophora, Euphorbia  lactea  (3  photos), Euphorbia  lathyris, Euphorbia
milii  var. splendens, Euphorbia  tirucalli, Gelsemium  sempervirens, Gloriosa  superba, Hedera
helix, Heliotropium indicum, Hippomane mancinella (2 photos), Hura crepitans, Hymenocallis
caribaea, Hymenocallis declinata, Ilex opaca, Ilex vomitoria, Iris germanica, Jatropha curcas, Jat-
ropha podagrica (2 photos), Kalmia latifolia (2 photos), Laburnum anagyroides, Leucaena leu-
cocephala (2 photos), Leucothoe sp., Lonicera periclymenum, Lycium carolinianum, Momordica
charantia Monstera deliciosa (2 photos), Nicotiana glauca, Pedilanthus tithymaloides (2 photos),
Pentalinon luteum, Philodendron sp., Physalis alkekengi (2 photos), Poncirus trifoliata, Ricinus
communis, Rivina humilis, Sambucus racemosa, Sapindus saponaria, Schinus molle, Scilla his-
panica, Sesbania  grandifolia  (2  photos), Solandra  guttata  (2  photos), Solanum  dulcamara  (2
photos), Solanum mammosum, Solanum seaforthianum, Spathiphyllum sp., Spigelia anthelmia,
Strychnos nux-vomica, Taxus cuspidata cv. ‘Aurescens’, Urginea maritimae, Wisteria ﬂoribunda,
Xanthosoma sagittafolium.

Kronenberg, Fredi
Sophora secundiﬂora

Lighty, Richard W.
Abrus  precatorius, Adonis  annua, Arum  italicum, Caesalpinia  pulcherrima, Caryota  sp.,
Cryptostegia grandiﬂora, Cryptostegia madagascariensis, Daphne mezereum, Duranta repens (2

Photographers’ Credits

309

photos), Hydrangea  macrophylla, Laburnum  anagyroides, Lonicera  periclymenum, Lonicera
tatarica, Manihot esculenta, Rhodotypos scandens (2 photos), Scilla sinensis, Zephyranthes ata-
masco

Linney, George K.
Corynocarpus laevigatus

Mickel, John
Pteridium aquilinum

Nee, Michael
Cestrum  diurnum, Brugmansia  suaveolens, Solandra  grandiﬂora, Solanum  americanum  (2
photos), Solanum mammosum, Solanum pseudocapsicum, Solanum tuberosum

The New York Botanical Garden
Illustrations from LuEsther T. Mertz Library:
Aethusa  cynapium, Caltha  palustris, Cassia  occidentalis, Coriaria  myrtifolia  (2  illustrations),
Corynocarpus  laevigatus, Daphne  mezereum, Echium  vulgare, Gymnocladus  dioicus, Melia
azedarach, Menispermum canadense, Myoporum laetum, Oenanthe crocata, Pachyrhizus erosus,
Swietenia mahagoni, Toxicodendron diversilobum, Toxicodendron radicans, Toxicodendron vernix
Photos from Archives:
Alocasia macrorrhiza cv. ‘variegata’, Crotalaria sagittalis, Pernettya mucronata, Schoenocaulon
drummondii

Nixon, Kevin
Pernettya mucronata

Schoepke, Thomas
Ligustrum vulgare, Myoporum laetum

Stevenson, Dennis Wm.
Zamia pumila (2 photos)

Index

Note: page numbers followed by f indicate ﬁgures.
Note: page numbers followed by t indicate tables.

A

Abrin, 58, 59
Acacia, False (Robinia pseudoacacia),

258–259

Acacia (Leucaena leucocephala), 199
ACD (allergic contact dermatitis), 95, 104,

122, 174, 178, 180

Aceite, 70
Acid-labile glycosides, 89
Ackee, 92–93
Acokanthera

longiﬂora, 59–60
oblongifolia, 59–60
oppositifolia, 59–60

Aconite, 60, 62
Aconitine, 61–62
Aconitum

columbianum, 60–61
napellus, 60–61, 61f
reclinatum, 60–61
uncinatum, 60–61
Acridone alkaloid, 244
Actaea

pachypoda, 62–63, 63f
rubra, 62–63, 63f
spicata, 62–63, 63f

Activated charcoal, 58, 192, 237, 257, 259,

291, 298

Adam and Eve, 84
Adelfa, 223
Adenium species, 64
Adonis

aestivalis, 65–66
amurensis, 65–66
annua, 65–66
vernalis, 65–66

A’e, 263
Aescin, 67
Aesculus

californica, 66–67, 67f
ﬂava, 66–67
glabra, 66–67, 67f

hippocastanum, 66, 68,

68f

pavia, 66–68
sylvatica, 66–68
× carnea, 66–68

Aethusa cynapium, 68–70
African Coffee Tree, 255
African Lilac Tree, 214
African Wonderﬂower, 228
Agridulce, 276
Ahe Poi, 74
Ahouai des Antilles, 290
Ail du Canada, 72
Aji Caballero, 107
Aji de Gallina/Guaguao, 107
Aji Picante, 107
Ajo, 72
‘Aka’akai, 72
Akee/Aki, 92
Aki, 305
Ala de Pico, 139
‘Ala-Aumoe, 118
Alacrancillo, 175
Alacrancillo de Playa, 175
Alamanda Morada Falsa,

140

Alder Buckthorn, 250
Alelaila, 214
Aleurites

cordata, 70–71
fordii, 70–71
moluccana, 70–71
montana, 70–71
trisperma, 70–71

Alexandrian Laurel, 100
Algerian Ivy, 173
Algodon de Seda, 102
Alheli Extranjero, 223
Aliphatic alcohols, 69
Alkali Grass, 305
Alkaloids

aconitine-related, 61–62

311

312

Index

Alkaloids (Continued)

anticholinergic, 88–89, 118–119, 148–149,

185–186, 274
berberine, 182–183
calycanthin-related, 106–107
cytotoxic, 114–115, 129–130, 171–172
ephedrine, 156
gelsamine-like, 169
glycoalkaloids, 238–239, 278
indolizidine-related, 87–88
isoquinolone-related, 120–121, 262–263,

286–287

nicotine-like, 30, 91–92, 115–116,
132–133, 173, 177–178, 197,
204–205, 226, 279–281

phenanthridine-related, 78, 126–127,

138–139, 167, 184, 209–210,
222–223, 304–305

pyrrolizidine-related, 31–32, 140–141,

154–155, 175–176, 269–270, 271–272

quinolizadine, 116–117, 207–208
solanine-related, 278–279
steroidal, 267–268
strychnine-like, 282–283
taxine-related, 289–290
veratrum-related, 267–268, 296–297
vinca-related, 114–115

Allamanda (Allamanda cathartica), 71–72
Allamanda cathartica, 71–72
Allamanda (Cryptostegia species), 140
Allergens, 37, 42–45, 102, 207, 222
Allergic contact dermatitis (ACD), 95, 104,

122, 174, 178, 180

Alligator Lily, 183
Allium

canadense, 72–74, 73f
cepa, 72–74
sativum, 72–74
vineale, 72–74

Allspice, 106
Allyl disulﬁde, 73
Alocasia

cv. ‘Hilo’s Beauty,’ 74–76, 74f
macrorrhiza cv. ‘Variegata’, 74–76, 74f
watsoniana, 75–76, 75f
× amazonica, 75–76, 75f

Aloe, 76–77
Aloe

speciosa, 76–77, 76f
vera, 76–77, 76f
Alpha-peltatin, 243
Alquerquenje, 238
ALS (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis), 143
Altered mental status, 22, 27

Alternate leaf arrangement, 9
Alzheimer’s disease, 143
Amarillo, 96, 156
Amaryllidaceae family, 5t, 77, 126, 138, 167,

183, 209, 221–222, 304–305

Amaryllis, 77–78
Amaryllis species, 77
American Allspice, 106
American Bittersweet, 116
American Coffee Berry, 172
American Cowslip, 104
American Elder, 260
American Holly, 187
American Mandrake, 242
American Mezereon, 152
American Mistletoe, 236, 238
American Nightshade, 240
American White Hellebore, 296
Ampalo, 156
Amygdalin, 158, 211, 245
Amyl nitrite pearls, 27
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), 143
Anabasine, 226
Anacardiaceae family, 5t, 45t, 264, 292
Anemone, 78–81
Anemone

canadensis, 78–81, 79f
coronaria, 78–81, 79f

Angel’s Trumpet, 146, 148
Angel’s Wings, 98
Annual plants, 9
Anther, 9
Anthracenones, 195
Anthraquinone glycosides, 76, 111, 252
Anthurium, 81–82
Anthurium

wildenowii, 82, 82f
× ferrierense, 81–82, 81f
× roseum, 82, 82f

Anthurium, White, 281
Anticholinergic alkaloids, 88, 118, 148, 185, 274
Anticholinergic/antimuscarinic genera, 21–22

Atropa, 88–89, 88f
Brugmansia, 145–148, 147f, 148f
Datura, 145–148, 145f, 146f, 147f, 148f
Hyoscyamus, 184–185, 185f
Solandra, 273–274, 273f
Solanum, 274–278, 274f, 275f, 276f, 277f,

278f

Anticonvulsants, 27, 69, 80, 105, 123, 125,

135, 170, 216, 221, 227, 249, 255

Antidotes/reversers

atropine as, 33, 88–89, 118–119, 148–149,

178, 185–186, 226, 274, 280

Index

313

for cyanides, 212, 261–262
naloxone, 263
physostigmine, 22, 88–89, 148–149,

185–186, 208, 274, 278–279

Antiemetic agents, 29
Antigenic catechols, 294
Antihypertensives, 31
Anturio, 81
’Ape, 74, 300
Apocynaceae family, 5t, 59–60, 64–65, 71,

113, 223, 232, 290

Appalachian Tea, 187
Apple (Malus species), 211
Apple of Sodom, 276
Apricot, 245–246
April Fools, 78
Aquifoliaceae family, 5t, 187
Araceae family, 5t, 74, 81–82, 84, 98–99, 130,
149, 156, 218, 235, 281, 287, 300–301,
303

Araliaceae family, 5t, 94, 173
Arbol de Peru, 264
Arbol de Quitasol, 214
Arbre Fricasse, 92
Aril, 9
Arisaema

dracontium, 82–84, 83f
triphyllum, 82–84, 84f

Aroma Blanca, 199
Arrow Wood, 250
Arrowroot, 301
Arteglasin A, 122
Arum

italicum, 84–85, 85f
maculatum, 84, 86
palaestinum, 84–86

Arum Lily, 303
Arum Sanctum, 84
Asclepiadaceae family, 5t, 102, 140
Assam Rubber, 166
Asthma Weed, 203
Astralagus

calycosus, 86–88
laryneae, 86–88
lentiginosus, 86–87
mollissimus, 86–88
wootonii, 86–87, 87f

Atamasco Lily, 304
Atrioventricular blocks, 33
Atropa

belladona, 88–89, 88f

Atropine, 33, 88–89, 92, 116, 118, 132, 148, 173,

178, 185, 197, 205, 226, 274, 278, 280

Aucuba japonica, 89–90, 89f

Aucubin, 89–90
‘Auko’I, 112
Australian Ivy Palm, 94
Australian Umbrella Tree, 94
Autumn Crocus, 128, 130
Avellano, 70
Azalea, 64, 252
Azoglycoside, 302
Azota Caballo, 153
Azucena, 77

B
Babeiro Amarillo, 232
Baby Jade, 137
Baby Pepper, 257
Baculo, 271
Ball Nettle/Nightshade, 275
Balsam Apple (Clusia rosea), 127
Balsam Apple (Momordica balsamina), 217
Balsam Pear, 217–218
Baneberry, 62, 64
Banucalad, 70
Baptista

alba, 91–92, 91f
cv. ‘Purple Smoke,’ 91–92, 91f
tinctoria, 91–92, 91f

Barbados Flower, 96
Barbados Gooseberry, 238
Barbados Lily, 77
Barbados Nut, 190
Barbados Pride, 96–97
Barbaloin, 76–77
Bark, 9
Barrier protection, 45
Basket Flower, 183
Bassinet, 248
Bastard Acacia, 258
Battre Autour, 238
Bay Rush, 301
Beach Apple, 178
Bead Tree, 214
Bead Vine, 57
Bean Tree, 196, 299
Bearberry, 250
Bearded shape, 9
Beautyleaf, 100
Beaver Poison, 122
Bee-Still Thee, 290
Behen, 242
Bejuco Ahoja Vaca, 232
Bejuco de Lombriz, 235
Bejuco de Peo, 273
Beleño, 184
Belladonna (Atropa belladona), 88–89

314

Index

Belladonna (Brugmansia species), 146
Belladonna de Pobre, 146
Belladonna Lily, 77
Bell/Sweet Pepper, 107
Bellyache Bush, 190
Benjamin Tree, 166
Benzodiazepines, 22, 26, 156
Berberidaceae family, 5t, 115–116, 242–243
Berberine, 182
Berenjena de Cucarachas/de Marimbo/de

Gallina, 276

Berenjena de Jardin, 275
Berry Alder, 250
Berry, deﬁned, 9
Beta-methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA), 143
Beta-nitropropionic acid, 136
Beta-peltatin, 243
Biche Prieto, 112
Biennial plants, 9
Big Leaf Ivy, 192
Bigleaf Periwinkle, 113
Bird of Paradise, 96–97
Bird Pepper, 107
Bitter Cucumber, 217
Bitter Gourd, 217
Bitter Melon, 217
Bitter Orange, 244
Bittersweet (Celastrus orbiculatus), 116–117
Bittersweet (Solanum dulcamara), 274–278
Black Acacia, 258
Black Calla, 84
Black Dogwood, 250
Black Hellebore, 176
Black Henbane, 184
Black Locust, 258–260
Black Nightshade (Atropa belladonna), 88
Black Nightshade (Solanum nigrum), 277
Black-Eyed Susan, 57
Bladderpod Lobelia, 203
Blade shape, 9
Bledo Carbonero, 240
Blighia sapida, 92–93, 92f
Blister Flower, 248
Blister Wort, 248–249
Blisters/vesicant action, 62
Block sodium, 289
Bloodberry, 257
Bloodroot, 262
Blue ‘Ape, 300
Blue Cardinal Flower, 203–205
Blue Cohosh, 115–116
Blue Devil/Weed, 154
Blue Ginseng, 115–116

Blue Jessamine, 124
Blue Taro, 300
Bluebell, 124
Blueberry Root, 115
Bobbins, 84
Body temperature, 71, 119, 153, 185–186
Bois de Plomb, 152
Bois Gentil, 144
Bois Jambette, 153
Bois Joli, 144
Bois Savonnier, 263
Bonbonnier, 197
Bone marrow toxicity, 29–30
Bongay, 66
Bony texture, 9
Boraginaceae family, 5t, 154–155, 174–175
Borreau des Arbres, 116
Bouton d’Or, 248
Bowstring Hemp, 102
Box Thorn, 208
Bracken Fern, 247–248
Bracts, 9
Bracts, ﬂoral, 11
Bradycardia, 23, 33, 60, 64, 142, 151, 193,

233, 268, 290

Brake, 247
Brasiletto, 96
Brassaia actinophylla, 94–95, 94f
Brazil/Brazilwood, 96
Brazilian Nightshade, 276
Brazilian Pepper Tree, 264
Breadfruit Vine (Monstera deliciosa),

218–219

Brier, 96
Brugmansia

arborea, 145–148
suaveolens, 145–148, 148f
× candida, 145–148, 147f

Bubbie, 106
Bubby Blossoms/Bush, 106
Bulbil, bulblet, 9
Buck Brush, 286–287
Buckeye, 66–67
Buckthorn (Karwinskia humboltiana),

195–196

Buckthorn (Rhamnus species), 250–251
Budd-Chiari syndrome, 140, 175, 271
Buis de Sapia, 288
Bulbocodium vernum, 128–129
Bulbs, 10
Bull Flower, 104
Bull Nettle, 275
Bunk, 131

Burmese Fishtail Palm, 108
Burn Bean, 279
Burning Bush, 159–160
Bursting Hearts, 159
Bushman’s Poison, 59–60
Butter Daisy/Flower, 248
Butter-Cress, 248
Buttercup, 248
Buttresses, 10

C

Cabeza de Burro, 74
Cabeza de Viejo, 124
Cablonga, 290
Caesalpinia bonduc, 95–97, 96f

drummondii, 95–97
gilliesii, 95–97, 96f
mexicana, 95–97
pulcherrima, 95–97, 96f
vesicaria, 95–97

Caimonicillo, 257
Caladio, 98
Caladium, 98–99, 300–301
Caladium bicolor, 98–99
Calcinogenic glycosides, 118–119
Calcium currents, 289
Calcium oxalate crystal genera,

24–25

Alocasia, 74–75, 74f–75f
Arisaema, 82–84, 83f–84f
Brassaia, 94–95, 94f
Caladium, 98–99, 98f
Colocasia, 130–131, 130f
Caryota, 24
Dieffenbachia, 37, 42, 149–150, 149f
Epipremnum, 156–157, 157f
Monstera, 218–220, 219f
Philodendron, 33, 235–236, 235f
Spathiphyllum, 281–282, 281f

Calf/Kid/Lamb Kill, 192
Calico Bush, 192
California Fern, 131
California Pepper Tree,

264

Calla pallustris, 99–100, 99f
Calla Lily, 303–304
Calla, Wild, 99–100
Callophyllum inophyllum, 100–101, 101f
Calophylolide, 101
Calophynic acid, 101
Calotropis

gigantea, 102–104, 102f
procera, 102–104, 103f

Index

Caltha

315

leptosepala, 104–105, 104f
palustris, 104–105, 105f

Calycanth, 106
Calycanthaceae family, 5t, 106–107
Calycanthin alkaloids, 106
Calycanthus

fertilis, 106–107
ﬂoridus, 106–107, 106f–107f
occidentalis, 106–107

Calyx, 10
Camilichigui, 149
Campana, 146
Campanulaceae family, 5t, 177–178,

203–205
Campeche, 199
Camptie, 301
Camus, 306
Canada Moonseed, 215
Canadian Yew, 288–290
Cananga, 98
Canario, 71
Canary Ivy, 173
Cancer Jalap, 240
Candelabra Cactus, 163
Candelero, 163
Candelilla, 231
Candleberry, 70
Candlenut, 70–71
Cañaﬁstola, 110
Canne-a-gratter, 149
Canne-madere, 149
Caoba, 284
Caoutchouc, 140
Cape Belladonna, 77
Cape Gooseberry, 238
Caper Spurge, 163
Capotillo, 98
Caprifoliaceae family, 5t, 205–206, 260–262,

286–287

Capsaicin, 42, 108
Capsicum

annum, 107–108
annuum var. annuum, 107–108, 108f
annuum var. glabriusculum, 107–108
chinense, 107–108
frutescens, 107–108

Capsule shape, 10
Caraibe (Colocasia species), 130
Caraibe (Xanthosoma species), 300
Carasco, 162
Cardboard Palm, 301
Cardenal de Maceta, 203

316

Index

Cardiac glycosides, 24
Cardinal Flower, 203–205
Cardioactive steroids/cardiac glycoside

genera, 24–25

Acokanthera, 59–60, 59f
Adenium, 64–65, 64f
Adonis, 65–66, 65f–66f
Calotropis, 102–104, 102f–103f
Convallaria, 133–134, 133f
Cryptostegia, 140–142, 140f–141f
Digitalis, 150–151, 150f–151f
Helleborus, 176–177, 176f
Nerium, 223–224, 223f–224f
Ornithogalum, 228–229, 228f–229f
Pentalinon, 232–233, 232f–233f
Scilla, 268–269, 268f–269f
Strophanthus, 24
Thevetia, 290–292, 291f
Urginea, 294–295, 295f

Cardon, 163
Cariaquillo, 197
Cariota, 108
Carmin, 257
Carolina Allspice, 106–107
Carolina Horse Nettle, 274–278
Carolina Jasmine, 168
Carolina Pink, 282
Carolina Tea, 187–188
Carolina Wild Woodbine, 168
Carpel, 10
Carrot, Wild, 123
Carrot, Wild (Daucus carota), 131
Caryota

gigas, 108–110, 109f
mitis, 108–110, 109f
urens, 108–110, 109f

Carzazo, 96
Cascabeillo, 139
Cascara, 250–251
Cascarita, 124
Cashes, 131
Casiman, 218
Cassava, 212–213
Casse, 110
Casse Puante, 112
Cassena, 187
Cassia

ﬁstula, 110–112, 111f
occidentalis, 112–113, 112f

Castor Bean, 255, 257
Castor Oil Plant, 255
Catechols, 294
Catesby’s Vine, 232

Catharanthus roseus, 113–114, 113f–114f
Cathartic glycosides, 76
Cat’s Blood, 257
Cat’s Eyes, 78
Cauliﬂower Ears, 137
Caulophyllum thalictroides, 115–116
Cautiva, 71
Cayenne Pepper, 107
Celandine (Chelidonium majus), 120–121
Celandine Poppy, 120
Celastraceae family, 5t, 116–117, 159–161

orbiculatus, 116–118, 117f
scandens, 116–118, 116f–117f

Cepa Caballero, 236–237
Cereza, 210
Ceriman de Mejico, 218
Cestrum

diurnum, 118–119, 118f
nocturnum, 118–119, 119f

Chalice Vine, 273–274
Chamico, 146
Chamico Bejuco, 273
Cheladonine alkaloid, 120–121
Chelerythrine, 262
Chelidonine, 262, 286
Chelidonium majus, 120–121, 120f
Chemical irritants, 37, 42
Cherry, 245–246
Cherry Pepper, 107
Chevrefeuille, 205
Chicot Fevier, 172
Children’s Bane, 122
Chili Pepper (Capsicum annum), 42,

107

China Tree, 214
Chinaberry, 214–215
Chinawood Oil Tree, 70
Chincherinchee, 228
Chine Ape, 74
Chinese Inkberry, 118
Chinese Lantern Plant, 238
Chinese Privet, 201
Chinese Rubber Plant, 137
Choke Cherry, 245–246
Cholinesterase inhibitors, 22
Chongrass, 240
Chopsui Potato, 230
Chou Puant, 287
Christ Plant/Thorn, 163
Christmas Berry Tree, 264–266
Christmas Candle, 231
Christmas Flower/Star, 163
Christmas Orange, 276

Christmas Rose, 176
Chrysanthemum, 121–122
Chrysanthemum species, 121
Chrysarobin, 112
Cicuta

bulbifera, 122–123
douglasii, 122–123
maculata, 122–123, 123f

Cicutaire, 122
Cicutoxin, 123, 227
Cigue, 131
Cinco Negritos, 197
Cipril, 177
Clapweed, 155
Clavellina, 96, 210
Clematis, 124–125
Clematis

cv. ‘Jackmanii,’ 124f
cv. ‘Niobe,’ 124f
paniculata, 125f
virginiana, 125f

Clematite, 124
Climbing Bittersweet, 116
Climbing Fig, 166
Climbing growth, 10
Climbing Lily, 171
Climbing Nightshade, 276
Climbing Orange Root, 116
Clivia

miniata, 126f
nobilis, 126f
Cloverbloom, 90
Clown Treacle, 72
Clusia rosea, 127–128, 127f–128f
Clusiaceae family, 186
Clustered Fishtail Palm, 108
Coakum, 240
Coarse texture, 10
Cockroach Berry, 275
Cocoyam, 130
Cocum, 240
Coffee Bean, 172
Coffee Senna, 112
Coffeeberry, 250
Coffeeweed, 271
Cohosh, 62
Cokan, 240
Colchicine, 114, 130, 171–172, 243
Colchicum

autumnale, 128–130, 129f
speciosum, 128–130
vernum, 128–130

Colocasia esculenta, 130–131, 130f

Index

317

Colorado River Hemp, 271
Colorines, 279
Coma, 93, 132, 161, 194, 238, 278, 285, 290,

297, 302, 305

Common Groundsel, 269
Common Ivy, 173
Common names, overview of, 4, 6–7
Common Privet, 201–202
Compositae (Asteraceae) family, 5t, 37, 121,

269

Compound leaf arrangement, 10
Concombre, 146
Cones, 10
Coniine, 132
Conium maculatum, 131–133
Conquerors, 66
Contact dermatitis. See Phytodermatitis
Conval Lily, 133
Convallaria majalis, 133–134, 229
Convallotoxin/convalloside, 229
Convulsant (seizure) poisons genera, 25–26

Aethusa, 68–70, 69f
Anemone, 78–81, 79f
Blighia, 92–93, 92f–93f
Caltha, 104–105, 104f
Caulophyllum, 115–116, 115f
Cicuta, 122–123, 123f
Conium, 131–133, 132f
Coriaria, 134–135, 135f
Gymnocladus, 172–173, 172f
Hippobroma, 177–178, 177f
Laburnum, 196–197, 196f
Lobelia, 203–205, 203f–204f
Menispermum, 215–216, 216f
Myoporum, 220–221, 220f
Nicotiana, 224–226, 225f
Pulsatilla, 78–80, 79f–80f
Ranunculus, 248–249, 248f–249f
Sophora, 279–280, 279f–280f
Spigelia, 282–283, 283f
Strychnos, 283–284, 284f

Convulsions/seizures, 25–27, 93, 105–106, 115,

123, 132, 136, 153, 161, 170, 177, 255

Coontie, 301
Copal, 264
Copey, 127
Coque Molle, 238
Coqueret, 238
Coral, 276
Coral Bead Plant, 57
Coral Bean, 279
Coral Berry, 257
Coral Plant, 190

318

Index

Coral Vegetal, 191
Coralberry, 286
Corazon de Cabrito, 98
Coriamytrin, 134
Coriaria myrtifolia, 134–135, 135f
Coriariaceae family, 5t, 134–135
Corn Lily, 296
Cornaceae family, 5t, 89–90
Corne Cabrite, 232
Cornucopia, 146
Corona, 10
Corona de Christo, 163
Corozon de Maria, 162
Corynocarpaceae family, 5t, 135–136
Corynocarpus laevigatus, 135–136, 136f
Cotorrera, 175
Cotorrera de Playa, 175
Cotorrilla, 175
Calophyllum inophyllum, 100–101,

101f

Country Walnut, 70
Courer Saignant, 98
Couronne du Christ, 163
Cowbush, 199
Cowslip, 104
Coyotillo, 195
Crab’s Eyes, 57
Crain, 248
Crassula argentea, 137, 137f
Crassulaceae family, 137
Creeping Fig, 166
Creeping growth, 10
Creeping Rubber Plant, 166
Creeping Spurge, 162–163
Crete de Coq, 174
Crinum

asiaticum, 138–139, 138f
bulbispermum, 138–139, 138f

Crocus, 128
Crotalaria

fulva, 139–140
incana, 139–140
juncea, 139–140
lanceolata, 139–140
retusa, 139–140
sagittalis, 139–140, 139f
spectabilis, 139–140

Crow Berry, 240
Crow Garlic, 72
Crowfoot, 248
Crown Beauty, 183
Crown Flower, 102
Crown of Thorns, 162–163

Crozier Cycas, 142
Cryptostegia

grandiﬂora, 140–142, 141f
madagascariensis, 140–142, 141f

Crystal Anthurium, 81
Cuban Lily, 268
Cuckoopint, 84–86
Cucurbitaceae family, 5t, 217–218
Cuentas de Oro, 153
Cuipu, 190
Cultivars/horticultural varieties, 10
Cundeamor, 217
Cupey, 127
Cup-of-Gold, 273
Curamaguey, 232
Curcin, 191
Curl Flower, 124
Curly Heads, 124
Cut Leaf Philodendron, 218
Cuttings, 10
Cyanide poisoning, 27, 181, 212–213,

245–246, 261

Cyanogenic compound genera, 27

Eriobotrya, 157–158
Hydrangea, 180–181, 181f
Malus, 211–212, 211f
Prunus, 245–246, 246f
Sambucus, 260–262

Cycadaceae family, 5t, 142–143
Cycas

circinalis, 142–143, 143f
revoluta, 142–143, 143f

Cycasin, 302
Cyme, 10–11, 14
Cytisine, 91, 173, 197, 279
Cytotoxic alkaloids, 114, 129, 171

D
Daffodil, 183, 221–222
Dama de Dia, 118
Dama de Noche, 118
Damascenone, 209
Daphne mezereum, 144–145, 144f
Daphnin-related glucosides, 144
Dasheen, 130
Datura

inoxia, 145–148
metel, 145–148, 146f
sanguinea, 145–148
stramonium, 145–148, 146f
stramonium L.var.tatula, 145–148
wrightii, 145–148, 147f

Dauco, 260

Index

319

Daucus carota, 123, 131
Dauricine, 216
Day Blooming Cestrum, 118
Day Blooming Jessamine, 118
Day Jessmine, 118
Dead Men’s Fingers, 226
Dead Sea Apple, 276
Deadly Nightshade (Atropa belladonna),

89

Deadly Nightshade (Solanum americanum,

S. nigrum), 274–278

Deadly Nightshade (Solanum dulcamara),

276

Death Camus, 305–306
Death-of-Man, 122
Deciduous plants, 11
Deer Berry, 187
Dehiscence/indehiscence, 11, 12
Delirium, 22
Delphiniums, resemblance to,

60

Dennstaedtiaceae family, 247
Dermatitis, plant-induced. See

Phytodermatitis

Desert Rose, 64
Devil’s Apple, 242
Devil’s Backbone, 231
Devil’s Claws, 248
Devil’s Hair, 124
Devil’s Ivy, 156
Devil’s Shoestring, 286
Devil’s Thread, 124
Devil’s Trumpet, 146
Diaphoresis/sweating, 27, 30, 69, 91, 115,

156, 226, 246, 261, 280

Diarrhea, 28, 29, 34, 80, 105, 115, 124, 193,

249, 253, 267

Diazepam, 26, 123, 125, 170, 216,

227

Dicha, 149
Dieffenbachia seguine, 149, 149f
Digitalis purpurea, 150–151, 150f
Digitalis (digitoxin, digoxin), 150–151

resemblance to, 124, 132

Dog Laurel, 200
Dog Parsley, 68
Dog Poison, 68
Dog’s Tail, 175
Dog-Wood, 276
Dollar Plant, 137
Doll’s Eyes, 62
Don Tomas, 190
Donkey Tail Spurge, 163
Dove’s Dung, 228
Downy Thorn Apple, 146
Dragon Arum, 82
Dragon Bones, 163
Dragon Root, 82
Dragon Tail/Head, 82
Drugs

anticonvulsants, 26, 123, 125, 170, 216,

227

antiemetic agents, 29
antihypertensives, 31, 156
atropine, 33, 88, 118–119, 148, 178, 185,

226, 274, 280

benzodiazepines, 22, 26, 156
cholinesterase inhibitors, 22

digitalis, 150–151

digoxin-speciﬁc Fab, 23–24, 60, 142, 151,

229, 268

hyoscyamine, 185
physostigmine, 22, 88, 148–149,

185

scopolamine, 88, 148–149, 185, 274

Drupe, 11
Dul-Dul, 96
Dumbcane/Dumb Plant, 149–150
Duranta repens, 153
Dwarf Bay, 144
Dwarf Ponciana, 96
Dwarf Rubber Plant, 137
Dysphagia, 88, 144, 148, 169, 274
Dysrhythmias

atrioventricular block, 33
bradycardia, 22, 24–25, 60, 64, 142, 151,

193, 233, 268, 290

tachycardia, 22, 24, 30, 88, 148, 153, 185,

Digoxin-speciﬁc Fab, 25, 60, 134, 142, 151,

207, 274

229, 268

Diphenyl lobelidiol, 177
Dirca palustris, 152–153, 152f
Disciplinilla, 163
Diterpenes, 178
Divided structure, 11
Doddle-Do, 96
Dog Hobble, 200

ventricular ﬁbrillation, 24

E

Earth Gall, 296
Easter Flower, 163
Eastern Poison Oak, 292–293
Echium plantagineum, 154–155
Eddo, 130

320

Index

Edema/swelling, oropharyngeal, (most

poisonous species ingestions)

Egyptian Rattlepod, 271
Ekoa, 199
Elderberry, 260, 262
Electrolyte balance, 23–24, 60, 65, 71, 282,

284, 304

Elephant’s Ear (Alocasia species), 74
Elephant’s Ear (Caladium bicolor), 98
Elephant’s Ear (Colocasia esculenta), 130–131
Ellipsoid shape, 11
Elliptic shape, 11
Elon Wort, 120
Emetic Holly, 187
Emetic Weed, 203
Emodin, 111, 112
English Holly, 187
English Ivy, 173
English Yew, 288
Ephedra, 155–156
Ephedra gerardiana, 155, 155f
Ephedrine alkaloid, 156
Epipremnum aureum, 156–157, 157f
Erect growth, 11
Ericaceae family, 5t, 200–201, 210–211,

233–234, 241–242, 252–254
Eriobotrya japonica, 157–158, 158f
Escaped status, 11, 111, 133–134, 144–145,

150, 206, 208–209

Espiga de Amor, 96
Espigelia, 282
Esqueleto, 163
Estramonio, 146
Estrella de Norte, 140
Euonymous

americanus, 159, 159f
atropurpureus, 159–161, 160f
europaeus, 159–161, 161f
occidentalis, 159–160

Euphorbal, 232
Euphorbia

continifolia, 162–165
cyanthophora, 162–165, 162f
lactea, 162–164, 163f, 162f
lathyris, 162–164, 163f, 163f
marginata, 162–164, 164f
milii, 162–164, 164f, 164f
myrsinites, 162–164
pulcherrima, 162–164, 165f
tirucalli, 162–164, 165f

Euphorbiaceae family, 5t, 70–71, 162–165,

178–179, 190, 212, 231, 255

European Holly, 187

European Mistletoe, 298
European Spindle Tree, 159–160
Evening Trumpet Fower, 168
Evergreen Cassena, 187
Evergreen plants, 11
Eye Bright, 203

F

Fairy Cap/Glove/Thimbles, 150
Fairy Lily, 304
Fairy’s Bells, 150
Fall Crocus, 128
Falsa Belladonna, 276
False Acacia, 258
False Bittersweet, 116
False Cactus, 163
False Dogwood, 263
False Hellebore, 296–297
False Indigo, 90
False Jessamine, 208
False Koa, 199
False Mistletoe, 236
False Parsley, 68
False Sago Palm, 142
False Sycamore, 214
Family names (plants), overview of, 4

See also speciﬁc plant families

Farolito, 238
Fasciculations, 30, 33, 284
Feathery shape, 11
February Daphne, 144
Fellen, 276
Felonwort, 120, 276
Female Water Dragon, 99
Fench, 96
Fern Palm, 142
Ferns, ﬁddleheads of, 247
Fetid Nightshade, 184
Fetter Bush (Leucothoe species), 200
Fetter Bush (Lyonia species), 210
Fetterbush (Pieris species), 241
Feuilles Crabe, 177
Feuilles St-Jean, 163
Fever, 161, 247
Fever Twig, 116
Fibrillation, ventricular, 24
Ficin, 167
Ficus

benjamina, 165–167, 166f
elastica, 165–167, 167f
pumila, 165–167, 166f

Fiddle Flower, 231
Fiddler’s Spurge, 162

Figuier Maudit Marron, 127
Filaments, 11
Filigrana, 197
Fineleaf Water Dropwort, 226
Finger Tree, 163
Fire-on-the-Mountain, 163
Fish Poison, 66
Fishtail Palm, 108, 110
Fishtail shape, 11
Flamingo Flower/Lily, 81
Flamula, 124
Flax Olive, 144
Flekkmunkehette, 84
Fleshy texture, 11
Fleur Sureau, 260
Fleur-de-Lis, 189
Flor de Adonis, 65
Flor de Barbero, 71
Flor de Camaron, 96
Flor de Culebra, 81
Flor del Peru, 290
Flor de Noche Buena/Pascua, 163
Florida Arrowroot, 301–302
Florida Holly, 264
Florida Yew, 288
Florifunda, 145–147
Floripondio, 146
Flower Fence, 96
Flower structure and arrangement, 11
Fly Honeysuckle, 205
Fly Tataria, 205
Folks Glove, 150
Fool’s Cicely, 68
Fool’s Parsley, 68–69
Foxglove, 150–151
Frailecillo, 190
Francillade, 96
Freckled Milkvetch, 86
French Jasmine, 102
Friar’s Cap, 60
Frijolillo, 279
Frobusk, 116
Fruit, 11
Fruit Salad Plant, 218
Fungicides, 46
Funnel-form shape, 12
Fuqua, 217
Furanoid sesquiterpene ketones, 220
Furocoumarins, 167

G

Index

321

Gag Root, 203
Galan de Dia, 118
Galan de Noche, 118
Galanthus nivalis, 167–168, 168f
Gallito, 271
Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)

antagonists, 134, 156, 167, 205, 226

Garbancillo (Astralagus wootonii), 86
Garbancillo (Duranta repens), 153
Garget, 240
Garlic/Onion, Wild, 72–74
Gastrointestinal decontamination, 51–53
Gastrointestinal toxins, 28–29

(many and various plant genera)

Gelsamine, 169
Gelsemium sempervirens, 168–169, 169f
Genera

with anticholinergic/antimuscarinic

poisons, 21

with calcium oxalate crystals, 23, 75
with cardioactive steroids/cardiac

glycosides, 24

with convulsant (siezure) poisons, 25
with cyanogenic compounds, 27
with gastroinestinal toxins, 28
with mitotic inhibitors, 29
with nicotine-like alkaloids, 30
overview of, 3
with pyrrolizidine alkaloids, 31, 140,

154–155

with sodium channel activators, 32
with toxalbumins, 33
See also speciﬁc genus

Genus. See Genera; speciﬁc genus
Ghostweed, 163
Giant Milkweed, 102
Ginbey, 177
Ginkgoaceae family, 5t, 169
Ginkgo biloba, 169–170, 170f
Ginseng, 115
Glaucous appearance, 12
Globose shape, 12
Gloriosa superba, 171–172, 171f
Gloriosa Lily, 171
Glory Lily, 171
Glossary of botanical terms, 9–16
Glossy appearance, 12
Glossy Privet, 201
Glucosides

daphnin-related, 144
sesquiterpenoid, 167, 169

GABA (gamma-aminobytyric acid)

antagonists, 134, 156, 167, 205, 226

Glutamic acid decarboxylase inhibitors, 170
Glycoalkaloids, 238–239, 278

322

Glycosides

acid-labile, 89
anthraquinone, 76, 111–112, 252
calcinogenic, 118–119
cardiac, 24
cathartic, 71–72, 76
cyanogenic, 27, 158, 181, 211–214,

245–246, 255, 261

emodin, 111, 112
syringin, 203
wistarine-related, 299

Golden Ceylon Creeper, 156
Golden Chain, 196
Golden Dewdrop, 153
Golden Hunter’s Robe, 156
Golden Hurricane Lily, 209
Golden Pothos, 156
Golden Rain, 110, 196
Golden Shower, 110–111
Golden Spider Lily, 209
Goldenseal, 182–183
Gools, 104
Gooseberry, 238
Gooseberry Tomato, 238
Gosling, 78
Gota de Sangre, 65
Gout Stalk, 191
Gracia de Dios, 163
Graines d’Eglise, 57
Grains de Lin Pays, 199
Granadino, 199
Grayanotoxins, 193, 200, 234, 241, 253
Great Blue Lobelia, 203
Great Lobelia, 203
Green Dragon, 82
Green Hellebore, 296
Green Lily, 266
Green Locust, 258
Grey Nicker, 96
Grifﬁthii, 108
Gros Fevier, 172
Ground Cherry, 238
Groundsel, 269
Growth patterns
climbing, 10
creeping, 10
erect, 11

Guacalote Amarillo, 96
Guacamaya, 96
Guacis, 199
Guayiga, 301
Guillain-Barré syndrome, 195
Guirito, 276

Index

Guttiferae (Clusiaceae) family, 5t, 100,

127

Gymnocladus dioicus, 172–173, 172f

H

Haba de San Antonio, 96
Habanero, 107
Habilla, 230
Hallucinations, 22, 161, 238, 278
Hardy Orange, 244
Hart’s Horn, 250
Hartshorn Plant, 78
Hatrack Cactus, 163
He Huckleberry, 210
Head structure, 12
Headache, 69, 169, 267, 297, 305
Headache Weed, 124
Heart rates. See Dysrhythmias
Heart-of-Jesus, 98
Hearts-Bursting-with-Love, 159
Hedera

canariensis, 173–174
helix, 173–174, 174f

Hederin, 173
Hedge Plant, 201
Hedionda, 112
Hediondilla, 199
Heliotrope, 139
Heliotropium

angiospermum, 174–175
atropurpureus, 159–161, 160f
curassavicum, 174–175
indicum, 174–175, 175f

Hellebore, 176
Hellebore (Veratrum species), 296–297
Helleborus niger, 176–177, 176f
Hellebrin/helleborin/helleborein, 176
Helmet Flower, 60
Hemlock Water Dropwort, 226, 228
Henbane, 184–185
Hepatitis, 121, 140, 155, 175, 271–272
Hepatotoxicity/hepatosplenomegaly, 31
Herb Bonnett, 131
Herb-Christopher, 62
Herbe a Plomb, 197
Herbe aux Geaux, 124
Herbe aux Sorciers, 146
Herbe-a-Brinvilliers, 282
Herbs/herbaceous, 12
Hierba Mora, 275
High Belia, 203
Higuereta/Higuerilla, 255
Higuerta Cimarrona, 190

Hills-of-Snow, 180
Hilum, 12
Hippeastrum

cv. ‘Basuto,’ 77–78, 77f
puniceum, 77–78, 78f

Hippobroma longiﬂora, 177–178, 177f
Hippocastanaceae family, 5t, 66
Hippomane mancinella, 178–179,

178f

Hippomane A and B, 178
Hog Apple, 242
Hog Bush, 214
Hog Pasture Break, 247
Hog Physic, 203
Hog’s Potato, 305
Hoja Grande, 81
Holly, 187, 189
Homochelidonine, 262
Honeysuckle Bush, 205
Horn of Plenty, 146
Horse Blob, 104
Horse Chestnut, 66–68
Horse Flea Wood, 90
Horse Nicker, 96
Horse Poison, 177
Horseﬂy/Horseﬂy Weed, 90
Hortensia, 180
Hot Pepper, 107–108
Huele de Noche, 118
Huevo de Gato, 238
Hunter’s Robe, 156
Hura crepitans, 178–180, 179f
Huratoxin, 178, 180
Hurin, 180
Hurricane Plant, 218
Husk Tomato, 238
Hyacinth, 268
Hyacinth-of-Peru, 268
Hybrid, 12
Hydrangea, 180–181
Hydrangea macrophylla, 180–181, 181f
Hydrangin, 181
Hydrastis canadensis, 182–183, 182f, 183f
Hydroxymethylanthraquinone,

251

Hymenocallus

caribaea, 183–184, 184f
declinata, 183–184, 184f

Hyoscyamine, 185
Hyoscyamus niger, 184–186, 185f
Hyperforin, 186
Hypericin, 186
Hypericum perforatum, 186–187, 186f, 187f

Index

323

Hyperkalemia, 60, 64, 66, 103, 134, 142, 151,

176, 184, 224, 229, 233, 268, 290–291, 295
Hypertension, 91, 106, 115, 132, 140, 155, 173,

175, 177, 197, 205, 226, 271–272, 280
Hyperthermia, 55, 88, 119, 148, 185, 207,

255, 274, 284
Hypocalcemia, 252
Hypoglycemia, 93, 218, 255
Hypoglycin A, 92–93
Hypokalemia, 93
Hypotension, 33, 285

Idioblasts, 75, 82, 84, 95, 99–100, 110, 150,

I

157, 220, 288, 304

Ileus, adynamic, 22
Ilex

aquifolium, 187–189
opaca, 187–189, 188f
vomitoria, 187–189, 188f

India Rubber Vine, 140
Indian Apple, 146, 242
Indian Arrow Wood, 159
Indian Black Drink, 187
Indian Currant, 286
Indian Heliotrope, 175
Indian Laburnum, 110, 111
Indian Laurel, 100
Indian Licorce, 57
Indian Lilac, 214
Indian Pink, 203, 282
Indian Poke, 296
Indian Polk, 240
Indian Rubber Tree, 166
Indian Savin Tree, 96
Indian Soap Plant, 263
Indian Spurge Tree, 163
Indian Tobacco, 203
Indian Walnut, 70
Indigo Weed, 90
Indolizadine alkaloids, 88
Inﬂorescence, 12
Inia, 214
Injerto, 236
Ink Berry, 240
Inophyllum A-E, 101
Insane Root, 184
Insects, 303
Iridaceae family, 5t, 189
Iris, 189–190
Iris

germanica, 189–190, 189f
pseudacorus, 189–190, 190f

324

Index

Isin/Ishin, 92
Isogermidine, 305
Isoquinolone alkaloids, 120, 216, 262, 286
Italian Arum, 84
Italian Lords-and-Ladies, 84
Itamo Real, 231
Itch Weed, 296
Ivy Arum, 156
Ivy Bush, 192
Ivy (Hedera species), 173

Jicama de Agua, 230
Jicama, 230
Jicamilla, 190
Jimbay Bean, 199
Joint Fir, 155
Jonquil, 221
Juca, 212
Jumbee/Jumbi/Jumbo Beads, 57
Jumbie Bean, 199
Jump-and-Go, 199
Jusquiame, 184

J

Jaboncillo, 263
Jacinto de Peru, 268
Jack-in-the-Pulpit, 82
Jade Tree/Plant, 137
Jamaican vomiting sickness, 92–93
Jamaican Walnut, 70
Jamestown Weed, 146
Japan Oil Tree, 70
Japanese Aucuba, 89
Japanese Bead Tree, 214
Japanese Fern Palm, 142
Japanese Lantern Plant, 238
Japanese Laurel, 89
Japanese Medlar, 157
Japanese Pieris, 241
Japanese Plum, 157
Japanese Poinsettia, 231
Japanese Privet, 201
Japanese Rubber Plant, 137
Japanese Sago Palm, 142
Japanese Yew, 288
Jasmin de Nuit, 118
Jasmine, 102, 168
Jatropha

cathartica, 190–192
curcas, 190–192, 191f
gossypifolia, 190–192
integerrima, 190–192
macrorhiza, 190–192
multiﬁda, 190–192
podagrica, 190–192, 192f

Jatrophin, 191
Jaundice, 31
Java Fig, 166
Javillo, 179
Jazmin de Italia, 276
Jequirity/Jequirty Bean, 57
Jerusalem Cherry, 276
Jetbead, 254–255
Jew Bush, 231
Jewelry, seeds used in, 58, 199, 279

K

Kafﬁr lily, 126
Kalmia

angustifolia, 192, 193, 193f
latifolia, 192–193, 193f–194f
microphylla, 192–193

Kalo, 130
Kamani, 100
Karaka, 135–136
Karakin, 136
Karwinskia humboltiana, 195–196
Kentucky Coffee Bean/Tree, 172
Kentucky Mahogany, 172
Keratoconjunctivitis, 101, 164, 178, 180
Kidney Bean Tree, 299
Kikania, 146
Kikinia-Lei, 275
Kill Cow, 131
Kingcup, 104
King’s Locoweed, 86
Kinnikinnik, 203
Kipikai, 175
Koa-Haole, 199
Kolales Halomtano, 57
Koli, 255
Kukui Lumbang, 70
Kupaoa, 118

L

La‘Au-‘Aila, 255
La’Au-Hano, 146
Laburnum anagyroides, 196–197, 196f
Lactones, 122
Ladies’ Thimbles, 150
Lady Laurel, 144
Lagrimas de Maria, 98
Lai, 72
Lakana, 197
L’Aloe, 76
Lance shape, 12
Lani-Ali’i, 71

Lanment, 275
Lantana, 197–198
Lantana camara, 197–198, 198f
Large Periwinkle, 113
Latex, 12, 44t, 60, 70–71, 76, 100–102,

140–141, 163, 177, 179–180

Laurel (Acuba japonica), 89
Laurel (Ficus species), 166
Laurel (Kalmia species), 192
Laurelwood, 100
Laurier Rose, 223
Layne’s Locoweed, 86
Lead tree, 199
Leaf structure and arrangement, 9–14
Leaﬂets, 12
Leather Bush, 152
Leather Flower, 124
Leatherwood, 152
Leathery texture, 12
Leaver Wood, 152
Lectins, mitogenic, 164, 180, 191, 218, 237,

259, 298

Leguminosae (Fabaceae) family, 5t, 57, 86,

90, 95, 110, 112, 139, 172, 196, 199,
207, 230, 258, 271, 279, 299

Lengua de Vaca, 81
Lesser Hemlock, 68
Lethargy, 93, 158, 181, 198, 212–213,

246–247, 261, 302

Leucaena leucocephala, 199–200, 199f
Leucothoe species, 200–201
Liane á Réglisse, 57
Liane bon Garçon, 124
Licorce Vine, 57
Ligustrin, 203
Ligustrum

japonicum, 201–202, 201f
lucidum, 201–203, 202f
vulgare, 201–203, 202f

Lila, 153
Lilas de Nuit, 118
Lilas/Lilaila, 214, 276
Liliaceae family, 5t, 72, 76, 128, 133, 171,

Index

325

Lion’s Beard, 78
Lion’s Mouth, 150
Lirio, 77, 138, 183
Lirio Cala, 303
Lirio Cardeno, 189
Liver toxicity/failure, 92, 120, 140, 175, 198,

221

Lobe structure, 12
Lobelia

cardinalis, 203–204, 203f
inﬂata, 203–204, 204f
siphilitica, 203–204, 204f

Lobeline, 204
Lobster Plant, 163
Locoism, 87
Locoweed, 86–87
Locust, 258, 260
Loganiaceae family, 6t, 168, 282–283
Loggerhead Weed, 282
Lombricera, 282
Lombricero, 81
Long Pepper, 107
Lonicera

periclymenum, 205–207, 205f
tatarica, 205–207, 206f
xylosteum, 205

Loquat, 157–158
Loranthaceae family, 6t, 236, 298
Lorazepam, 26, 69, 123, 125, 227
Lords-and-Ladies, 84
Lotaustralin, 213
Louisiana Lobelia, 203
Lovage, 201
Love Apple (Solanum capsicoides), 275
Love Apple (Solanum mammosum), 276
Love Bead/Pea, 57
Low Belia, 203
Lucky Nut, 290
Lupine, 207–208
Lupinine/lupanine, 207–208
Lupinus

hirsutissimus, 207–208
perennis, 207–208

228, 266, 268, 294, 296, 305

Lycium

Lilia-O-Ke-Awawa, 133
Lily, Calla, 303
Lily, Green, 266
Lily of the Field, 78
Lily, Rain, 304
Lily-of-the-Valley Bush (Pieris species), 241
Lily-of-the-Valley (Convallaria majalis),

133–134, 229

Linamarin, 213

carolinianum, 208–209
halmifolium, 208–209

Lycorine, 78, 126, 138, 167, 184, 209, 222,

304

Lycoris

africana, 209–210
radiata, 209–210
squamigera, 209–210
Lyonia species, 210–211

326

Lyoniol, 210
Lys, 138

M

Ma Huang, 155–156
Mad Apple, 146
Madagascar Periwinkle, 113
Madame Fate, 177
Madiera Ivy, 173
Madreselva, 168, 205
Magic Lily, 209
Mahogany, 172, 236, 284–285
Maidenhair Tree, 169
Maikoa, 146
Makahala, 118
Mala Mujer, 162, 190
Malabar Tree, 163
Malanga Cara de Chivo, 74
Malanga de Jardin, 74
Malanga deux Palles, 130
Malanga Islena, 130
Malanga (Xanthosoma species), 300–301
Male Berry/Blueberry, 210
Malus species, 211
Mancenillier, 178
Manchineel Tree, 178–179
Manele, 263
Manihot esculenta, 212–214, 212f–213f
Manioc/Manioka, 212
Man’s Motherwort, 255
Manzana, 211
Manzanillo, 178
Maravilla, 96, 163
Maria Grande, 100
Maromera, 139
Marronnier d’ Inde, 66
Marsh Marigold, 104
Marunguey, 301
Mas Bouilli, 153
Mastwood, 100
Mata Gallina, 275
Mato Azul, 96
Mato de Playa, 96
Matrimony Vine, 208
May, 104–105, 121, 171, 242, 250
May Apple (Clusia rosea Jacq.), 127
May Apple (Podophyllum peltatum),

242–243

May Thorn, 250
Mayﬂower, 133
Meadow Bright, 104
Meadow Garlic, 72
Meadow Gowan, 104

Index

Meadow Rose Leek, 72
Meadow Saffron, 128, 130
Mechanical irritants, 37, 41t, 42
Medaddy Bush, 205
Medecinier Barachin, 190
Medecinier Beni, 190
Medecinier Espagnol, 190
Medican Poinciana, 96
Melia azedarach, 214–215, 214f
Meliaceae family, 6t, 214, 284
Menispermaceae family, 6t, 215
Menispermum canadense, 215–217, 216f
Mental status, altered, 22, 27
Mescal Bean, 279–280
Metabolic acidosis, 27, 93
Methyl disulﬁde, 73
Methylazoxymethanol, 302
4-O-Methylpyridoxine, 170
Mexican Bird of Paradise, 96
Mexican Breadfruit, 218
Mexican Cycad, 301
Mexican Fire Plant, 163
Mexican Flame Leaf, 163
Mexico Weed, 255
Mezeremu, 144–145
Midrib/longitudinal vein, 12
Mikinolia-Hihiu, 197
Milkbush, 163
Milkweed, resemblance to, 141
Milky latex, 12, 70, 140–141, 163, 177
Mimosine, 199–200
Mistletoe (Phoradendron serotinum),

236

Mistletoe (Viscum album), 298
Mitotic inhibitor genera, 28–29

Bulbocodium, 128–130
Catharanthus, 113–115, 113f–114f
Colchicum, 128–130, 171, 129f
Gloriosa, 171–172, 171f
Podophyllum, 242–243, 243f

Mock Azalea, 64
Mock Orange, 244
Mocos De Pavo, 175
Mole Plant, 163
Molinillo, 179
Momordica

balsamina, 217–218
charantia, 217–218, 217f

Momordin, 218
Momordique a Feuilles de Vigne, 217
Monkey Fiddle, 163
Monkey Pistol, 179
Monkey’s Dinner Bell, 179

Index

327

Monkshood, 60–61
Monocotyledons, 12
Monocrotaline, 140
Monstera deliciosa, 218–219, 219f
Moonseed, 215
Moosewood, 152
Moraceae family, 165
Morelle Douce-Amere, 276
Mormon Tea, 155
Mother-in-Law Plant (Caladium bicolor), 98
Mother-in-Law’s Tongue (Dieffenbachia

species), 149–150

Mottled Spurge, 163
Mountain Laurel, 192–194, 279
Mountain Snow, 163
Mu, 70
Mu Oil Tree, 70
Mucous membranes

blistered/ulcerated, 62, 80, 105, 124, 249
dry/parched, 22

Mudar Small Crown Flower, 102
Mudar/Mudar Crown Plant, 102
Muguet, 133
Mukipalaoa, 112
Multiple organ system failure, 230
Mum, 121
Munkehette, 84
Muscle spasms, 169, 282, 284
Muscular weakness, 30, 61, 169, 193, 200,

211, 234, 242, 253, 267, 297, 305

Musquash Poison/Root, 122
Mydriasis, 88, 119, 148, 153, 185, 209, 274,

290

Myoporaceae family, 220
Myoporum laetum, 220–221, 220f
Myrtle-leaved sumac, 134
Mysteria, 128

N

Naked Boys, 128
Naked Lady Lily, 77
Naloxone, 263
Nana-Honua, 146
Nani-Ali’i, 71
Nani-o-Hilo, 264
Nap-at-Noon, 228
Narciso, 221
Narcissus, 221
Narcissus

cyclamineus, 221–222
jonquilla, 221–222
poeticus, 221–222, 221f
pseudonarcissus, 221–222, 222f

tazetta, 221–222

Native plants, 12
Naturalized plants, 12
Nebraska Fern, 131
Necklace Weed, 62
Necklacepod Sophora, 279
Nena, 175
Neogermadine, 305
Nepal Privet, 201
Nerium oleander, 223–224, 223f, 224f
Nerprun, 250
New World plants, 13
Ngaio Tree, 220
Ngaione, 220
Nickal, 96
Nicker Tree, 172
Nicotiana

attenuata, 224–226
glauca, 224–226, 225f
longiﬂora, 59–60, 177, 224–226
rustica, 224–226, 225f
tabacum, 224–226, 225f

Nicotine-like alkaloid genera

Baptista, 90–92
Caulophyllum, 115–116
Conium, 131–133
Gymnocladus, 172–173, 172f
Hippobroma, 177–178, 177f
Laburnum, 196–197, 196f
Lobelia, 203–205, 204f
Nicotiana, 224–226, 225f
Sophora, 279–280, 279f, 280f

Night Blooming Cestrum (Cestrum

nocturnum), 118

Night Blooming Jessamine (Cestrum

nocturnum), 118

Nightcaps, 78
Nightsage, 232
Nightshade (Atropa belladonna), 89
Nightshade (Hyoscyamus niger), 184–185
Nightshade (Pentalinon luteum), 232–233
Nightshade (Solanum americanum, S.

nigrum), 275
Nimble Weed, 78
Nioi/Nioi-Pepa, 107
Nipplefruit, 276
Nitroprusside, 156
N-methy-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor

agonist, 143

N-methylcytisine, 115
Nogal de la India, 70
Noho-Malie, 290
Noisette des Grands-Fonds, 70

328

Index

Noix de Bancoul, 70
Noix de Molluques, 70
Nomenclature, botanical, 3–7
Norepinephrine, 33
Norpseudoephedrine, 156
N-Propyl sulﬁde, 73
Nuez de la India, 70
Nuez Nogal, 70
Nutritional neuropathies, 213
Nuts, 13
Nux-Vomica Tree, 283

O

Oak, Poison, 292–294
Oblong shape, 13
Obovate shape, 13
Octopus Tree, 94
Odors/fragrances
garlic-like, 69
jasmine-like, 102, 168
mousy, 131
offensive/foul, 131, 146
of orange, 197
strong, unpleasant, 240

Oenanthotoxin, 227
Oenenthe

aquatica, 226–228
crocata, 226–228, 227f

‘Ohai-Ali’i, 96
‘Ohai/‘Ohai-Ke ‘Oke‘O, 271
‘Ohai-‘Ula’Ula, 271
Oilcloth Flower, 81
Ojo de Cangrejo, 57
Ojo de Pajaro, 57
Old World plants, 13
Oleaceae family, 6t, 201
‘Oleana/‘Olinana, 223
Oleander, 223–224, 290
Oleander, Yellow, 223, 290
‘Oliwa, 223
Onaona-Iapana, 118
Onion Tree, 72
Onion, Wild (Allium species),

72

resemblance to, 124, 132

Onion, Wild (Zigadenus species),

305

Opisthotonic posturing, 284
Opposite leaf arrangement, 13
Orange, 116, 244, 276
Orangeroot, 182
Oregon Holly, 187
Oriental Bittersweet, 116

Ornithogalum

thyrosides, 73, 228–229, 228f
umbellatum, 228–229

Orogastric lavage, 52
Orris, 189
Otaheite Walnut, 70
Ovate shape, 13
Ovules, 13

P

Pa’Aila, 255
Pachyrhizus erosus, 230–231, 230f
Paciencia, 221
Pagoda Tree, 279
Pain

abdominal, (most poisonous species

ingestions), 24, 27–31
dermal, 179–180, 232, 264
ocular, 23
oropharyngeal, (most poisonous species

ingestions), 23

Pain de Couleuvre, 62
Pa’Ina, 238
Painted Leaf, 163
Paisaje, 235
Paka, 224
Paleta de Pintor, 98
Palma Christi, 255
Palmae (Arecaceae) family, 108
Palmae family, 6t
Palmately compound leaf arrangement, 13
Palmita de Jardin, 301
Palo de Nuez, 70
Palo Guaco, 273
Panicle, 13
Pa-Nini-Awa-Awa, 76
Pantomina, 275
Pantropical plants, 13
Papao-Apaka/-Atolong, 74
Papa/Patate, 276
Papaveraceae family, 6t, 120, 262
Papaye Sauvage, 190
Papoose Root, 115
Paradise Tree, 214
Paraiso, 214
Paralysis, 92, 115, 132, 175, 178, 195, 197,

205, 226, 280

Paresthesias, 33, 61, 193
Parsley, False, 68
Pasilla, 214
Pasque ﬂower, 78
Pasture Break, 247
Paterson’s Curse, 154

Index

329

Pea Flower Locust, 258
Peace Lily, 281
Peach, 245
Peacock Flower, 96
Pedicellate arrangement, 13
Pedilanthus tithymaloides, 231–232, 231f
Pela Puerco, 149
Pendant shape, 13
Pentalinon luteum, 232–233, 232f, 233f
Peo de Fraile, 146
Peonia, 57
Pepper Bush (Leucothoe species), 200
Pepper Bush (Lyonia species), 210
Pepper (Capsicum species), 107
Pepper Tree (Schinus molle), 264
Pepper-Root, 296
Peregrina, 190
Perennial plants, 13
Periwinkle, 113
Pernettya mucronata, 233–235, 234f
Persian Berry, 250
Persian Lilac, 214
Peruvian Jacinth, 268
Peruvian Lily, 42–43
Peruvian Mastic Tree, 264
Peruvoside, 291
Pesticides, 46
Petals, 13, 14
Pete-Pete, 139
Pheasant’s Eye, 65–66
Phenanthridine alkaloids, 78, 126, 138, 167,

184, 209, 222, 304

Phentolamine, 156
Philodendron

scandens, 235–236
selloum, 235–236, 236f

Philodendron (Monstera deliciosa),

218–219

Philodendron (Philodendron species),

235–236
Phoradendron

quadrangulare, 236–238
serotinum, 236–238, 237f
tomentosum, 236–238

Phoratoxin, 237
Phorbol, 71, 164
Phototoxins/photodermatitis, 45–46
Physalis

alkekengi, 238–239, 238f, 239f
crassifolia, 238–239, 239f

Physic nut, 190
Physostigmine, 22, 88, 119, 148, 149, 185,

274, 278, 208

Phytodermatitis, 37–47

causative agent categories of, 37

allergens, 37, 42–45
chemical irritants, 37, 42
mechanical irritants, 37, 42
phototoxins, 45–46
pseudophytodermatitides, 46–47

plants related to, 38–46

Phytolacca americana, 240–241, 257–258, 240f
Phytolaccaceae family, 6t, 240, 257
Phytolaccatoxin, 240
Pichuco, 140
Pie Plant, 251–252
Pieris

ﬂoribunda, 241–242, 241f
japonica, 241–242, 241f

Pigeon Berry (Duranta repens), 153
Pigeon Berry (Rivina humilis), 257
Pigeonberry (Phytolacca species), 240
Pigtail Plant, 81
Piment/Piment Bouc, 107
Pimienta del Brazil, 264
Pimiento de America, 264
Pineapple Shrub, 106
Pink Pepper, 264, 266
Pink Weed, 282
Pinkroot, 282
Piñon Botija, 190
Piñon Purgante, 190
Pinonona, 218
Pipa de Turco, 171
Pipe Stem (Clematis species), 124
Pipe Stem (Lyonia species), 210
Piss-a-Bed, 112
Pistils, 13
Pitch Apple, 127
Pits, 13
Plants

annual, 9
biennial, 9
contact dermatitis-related, 38–41
deciduous, 11
evergreen, 11
with external irritants, stinging hairs, or

detachable needles, 41t

herbs/herbaceous, 12
hybrid, 12
with irritant raphides. See Raphides,

irritant

with irritant sap or latex, 44
native, 12
naturalized, 12
New World/Old World, 13

330

Index

Plants (Continued)
pantropical, 13
perennial, 13
photodermatitis-related, 46
poisoning from. See Poisons/poisoning

syndromes

systemic poisoning-related, 5t, 6t
See also speciﬁc plants

Pleated shape, 14
Plum, 245
Plumericin, 71
Pocan Bush, 240
Podophyllotoxin, 243
Podophyllum peltatum, 242–244
Pods, 14
Poha, 238
Poinsettia, 162–165
Pois Cochon/Manioc, 230, 231
Pois Valiere, 271
Poison Berry, 276
Poison Bush/Tree, 59
Poison de Couleuvre, 62
Poison Hemlock, 131–133
Poison Ivy, 43–45, 124, 292–294
Poison Oak, 292–294
Poison Parsley/Root, 131
Poison Sego, 305
Poison Sumac, 292–294
Poison Tobacco, 184
Poisonberry, 275
Poisons/poisoning syndromes, 19–34

allergens, 42–45
anticholinergic/antimuscarinic, 21–22
calcium oxalate crystals, 23, 42, 75
cardioactive steroids/cardiac glycosides,

24

chemical irritants, 42
convulsant (siezure) poisons, 25
cyanogenic compounds, 27
gastrointestinal toxins, 28
mechanical irritants, 37, 42
mitotic inhibitors, 28–29
nicotine-like alkaloids, 30
pyrrolizidine alkaloids, 28, 31–32
sodium channel activators, 32
toxalbumins, 28–29, 33

Poke/Pokeweed/Pokeberry, 240
Polecat Weed, 287
Polygonaceae family, 6t, 251
Pomme d’Amour, 276
Pomme Epineuse, 146
Pommier, 211, 135
Ponciana, 96
Poncirus trifoliata, 244–245

Poonay Oil Plant, 100
Poor Man’s Treacle, 72
Pop-Bush, 275
Pop-Dock, 150
Popo-Hau, 180
Popolo-Kikania, 276
Populage, 104
Possum Wood, 179
Post Locust, 258
Potassium, serum, 24–25, 60, 65, 66, 104,

134, 142, 151, 177, 224, 229, 233, 268,
290–291, 295

Potato, 212, 230, 276–278, 305
Pothos, 156–157
Prairie Crocus, 78
Prairie Hen Flower, 78, 80–81
Prairie Indigo, 90
Prairie Smoke, 78
Prayer Beads, 57
Precatory Bean, 57
Premature ventricular contractions (PVCs),
60, 64, 66, 103, 134, 142, 151, 176, 224,
229, 233, 268, 290–291, 295

Prickle, 14
Pride of China, 214
Pride of India, 214
Prim, 201
Privet Andromeda, 210
Privet (Ligrustrum species), 201–203
Propagation, 14
Protoanemonin, 80, 105, 124, 249
Protopine, 262
Protoveratridine, 305
Prunus

laurocerasus, 245–247
pendula var. adscendens, 245–247, 245f
serotina, 245–247, 246f

Pseudoephedrine, 156
Pseudophytodermatitides, 46–47
Psoralens, 46, 167
Ptaquiloside, 247
Pteridium aquilinum, 247–248, 247f
Pua Kalaunu, 102
Pua-Hoku, 177
Pubescence, 14
Pudding-Pipe Tree, 110
Puke Weed, 203
Pukiawe-Lei, 57
Pulp, fruit, 11
Pulsatilla

patens, 78–81, 79f
vulgaris, 78–81

Pupils, dilated, 91, 115, 132, 153, 173, 177,

197–198, 205, 226, 280

Index

331

Purging Buckthorn, 250
Purging Fistula, 110
Purging Nut, 190
Purple Alamanda, 140
Purple Loco, 86
Pyridoxine, 170
Pyrrolizidine alkaloid genera, 31–32

Crotalaria, 139–140
Echium, 154–155
Heliotropium, 174–176
Senecio, 269–271
Sesbania, 271–272

Q

Queen Anne’s Lace (Daucus carota), 123,

131

Queen Sago, 142
Queensland/Queen’s Umbrella Tree, 94
Quinolizidine alkaloids, 116, 207

R

Rabano, 149
Rabbit Flower, 150
Rabbit-Bells, 139
Rabo de Alacran, 175
Racemes, 14
Racoon Berry, 242
Raguar, 70
Ragwort, 269
Rain Lily, 304
Raisin de Couleuvre, 215
Ranunculaceae family, 6t, 60, 62, 65, 78,

81, 104–105, 124–125, 176, 182,
248–249

Ranunculus

acris, 248–250
bulbosus, 248–250
sceleratus, 248–250

Red Pucoon, 262
Red Root, 116
Red Spider Lily, 209
Red Spurge, 162
Red Squill, 294
Red Weed, 240
Redbird Flower/Cactus, 231
Réglisse, 57
Renoncule, 248
Resin/resinous, 14
Respiratory paralysis, 195
Resurrection Lily, 209
Retama, 290
Revienta Caballos, 177
Rhabdomyolysis, 69, 123, 227, 282, 284
Rhamnaceae family, 6t, 195–196, 250
Rhamnus

californica, 250–251
cathartica, 250–251
frangula, 250–251
purshiana, 250–251

Rheum

rhaponticum, 251–252
× cultorum (R. rhabarbarum),

251–252
Rhine Berry, 250
Rhizomes, 14
Rhododendron, 252–253
Rhododendron

cv. ‘PMJ,’ 252–254, 253f
cv. ‘Rosebud,’ 252–254, 253f
cv. ‘Yaku Princess,’ 252–254, 253f

Rhodora, 252
Rhodotypos scandens, 254–255, 254f
Rhubarb, 251–252
Ribbon Cactus, 231
Ribey, 177
Ricin, 255–257, 305, 256f

Raphides, irritant, 43, 75, 81, 83, 94, 98, 100,

resemblance to, 124–126, 131–133

110, 131, 149–150, 157, 218, 281,
287–288, 300–301, 303

Ratanjyot, 190
Rattle Box, 139
Rattlebush, 90
Rattlesnake Weed, 296
Rattleweed (Baptista species), 90
Rattleweed (Crotalaria species), 139
Red Bead Vine, 57
Red Bean, 279
Red Hots, 279
Red Ink Plant, 240
Red Lobelia, 203
Red Morocco, 65
Red Pepper, 107

Ricino, 255
Ricinus communis, 255–257, 298–299, 256f
Rivina humilis, 257–258
Robin, 259
Robinia pseudoacacia, 258–260
Rock Poppy, 120
Rope Bark, 152
Rosa Laurel/Francesca (Nerium oleander),

223

Rosa Laurel (Rhododendron species), 252
Rosaceae family, 6t, 157, 211, 245, 254
Rosary Pea, 57–58
Rose Bay (Nerium oleander), 223
Rosebay (Rhododendron species), 252
Rose-Flowered Jatropha, 190

332

Index

Rosette shape, 14
Rotenone, 230–231
Rouge Plant, 257–258
Roxbury Waxwork, 116
Rubber Euphorbia, 163
Rubber Plant, 137, 166
Rubber Tree/Plant, 165–167
Rubber Vine, 140
Runners, 14
Rutaceae family, 6t, 244

S

Sábila, 76
Sablier, 179
Sacabuche, 238
Sacred Thorn Apple, 146
Sago Cycas, 301
Sago Palm, 142
Saint Joseph Lily, 77
Salivation, increased, 30, 61, 80, 123, 124,

193, 200, 211, 227, 234, 242, 249, 253,
267, 296, 305

Salvadera, 179
Sambucus

melanocarpa, 260–262
nigra, 260–262, 261f
racemosa, 260–262, 261f

Sand Briar, 275
Sand Corn, 305
Sandbox Tree, 179–180
Sanguinaria canadensis, 262–263
Sanguinarine, 262–263
Sap, irritant

deﬁned, 14
milky, 64–65, 165–167, 231–233
representative plants with, 44
toxic, 248–250

Sapindaceae family, 6t, 92, 263
Sapindus

drummondii, 263–264
saponaria, 263–264

Saponins, 67–68, 115, 125, 134, 150, 173,

188, 264, 286

Sargott, 230
Sarsaparilla, 215
Sauco Blanco, 260
Savonnier, 263
Sawdust, 178, 180
Saxifragaceae family, 6t, 180
Scale/scaly texture, 14
Scarlet Berry, 89, 208, 276
Scarlet Lobelia, 203
Scarlet Wisteria Tree, 271

Schefﬂera, 94
Schinus

molle, 264–266, 265f
terebinthifolius, 264–266, 265f

Schoenocaulon

drummondii, 266–268
texanum, 266–268

Scilla

hispanica, 268–269, 268f
peruviana, 268–269, 268f
siberica, 268–269, 269f
sinensis, 268–269, 269f

Scillarin, 295
Scoke, 239–240
Scopolamine, 88, 148–149, 185, 274
Scorpioid Cyme, 14
Scorpion Weed, 175
Scorpion’s Tail, 175
Scotch Attorney, 127
Scotch Bonnet, 107
Scrophulariaceae family, 6t, 150
Sea Daffodil, 183
Sea Onion, 268, 294
Seaside Heliotrope, 175, 269
Seed structure and arrangement, 14, 16
Seeds used in jewelry, 57, 62, 199, 280
Seedy Buckberry, 210
Seizures. See Convulsions/seizures
Semilla de Culebra, 57
Seminole Bead, 57
Seminole Bread, 301
Semper-Vivum, 76
Senecio

douglasii, 269–271, 270f
douglasii var. longilobus, 269–271
jacobaea, 269–271
vulgaris, 269–271
Senna, 111–112, 113
Serotonin syndrome, 186–187
Serpent, 290
Serrate shape, 14
Sesban, 271–272
Sesbania grandiﬂora, 271–273, 272f
Seso Vegetal, 92
Sesquiterpenoid glucosides, 167, 220
Sesquiterpenoid lactones, 122, 247
Seven Bark, 180
Shake-Shake, 139
Shingle Plant, 218
Shooﬂy, 90
Showy appearance, 14
Shrub Verbena, 197
Shrubby Bittersweet, 116

Shrubs, 14
Silky texture, 14
Silver Bush, 279
Silver Chain, 258
Silver Cup, 273
Simple leaf arrangement, 14
Sinkle Bible, 76
Sinus, leaf, 14
Sinus tachycardia, 22
Sitfast, 248
Skin

blistered/ulcerated, 62, 292–294
burning sensation of, 107–108
dry, warm, ﬂushed, 22, 148
prickling sensation of, 61, 193, 234, 241,

253, 267, 297, 305

rash on, 294
See also Phytodermatitis

Skunk Cabbage (Symplocarpus foetidus),

287–288

Skunk Cabbage (Veratrum species),

296–297
Skyﬂower, 153
Sleeping Nightshade, 88
Slipper Flower, 231
Slipper Plant, 231
Sloe, 245
Small Crown Flower, 102
Small Hemlock, 68
Small Seaside Lavender, 175
Small-Leaved Rubber Plant, 166
Snake Berry, 276
Snake Flower, 154
Snake Weed, 131
Snakeberry (Actaea species), 62
Snowberry, 286–287
Snowdrop, 167
Snow-on-the-Mountain, 163
Soap Plant, 263, 305
Soda-Apple Nightshade, 275
Sodium channel activator genera, 32–33

Aconitum, 60–61, 61f
Kalmia, 192–194, 193f, 194f
Leucothoe, 200–201, 200f
Lyonia, 210–211, 210f, 211f
Pernettya, 233–234, 233f, 234f
Pieris, 241–242, 241f, 242f
Rhododendron, 194, 252–253, 252f, 253f
Schoenocaulon, 266–267, 267f
Veratrum, 176, 267, 296–297, 296f, 297f

Soil products, 46
Solanaceae family, 6t, 88, 107, 118, 145, 184,

208, 224, 238, 273–274

Index

Solandra

333

grandiﬂora, 140–142, 273, 140f, 141f, 273f
guttata, 273–274, 273f

Solanine, 238–239, 278
Solanine glycoalkaloids, 278
Solanum

americanum, 274–275, 277, 274f
capsicoides, 227, 274–275, 275f
carolinense, 274–275, 277, 275f
dulcamara, 275–278, 275f
linnaeanum, 275, 277, 275f
mammosum, 275–277, 276f
nigrum, 274–275, 277, 274f, 275f
pseudocapsicum, 275–277, 277f
ptychanthum, 274, 274f
seaforthianum, 275–277, 277f
sodomeum, 275–276, 275f, 276f
tuberosum, 275–278, 278f

Soldier’s Buttons, 104
Soldier’s Cap, 60
Solomon Island Ivy, 156
Solomon’s Lily, 84
Somnolence, 153, 161
Sophora

secundiﬂora, 279–280, 280f
tomentosa, 279, 279f

Sorci, 217
Sorosie, 217
Souci d’Eau, 104
Spadix, 15
Spanish Carnation, 96
Sparteine, 207
Spathe, 15
Spathe Flower, 281
Spathiphyllum species, 281
Spearhead shape, 15
Spearwort, 248
Species, overview of, 3

See also speciﬁc species

Speckled Loco, 86
Speech, garbled, 22, 23
Spicebush, 106
Spicy Jatropha, 190
Spider Lily (Crinum species), 138–139
Spider Lily (Hymenocallis species), 183
Spider Lily (Lycoris radiata), 209–210
Spigelia

anthelmia, 282–283, 283f
marilandica, 282–283, 283f

Spigeline, 282
Spike shape, 15
Spindle Tree, 159–160
Spines, 15, 76, 96, 142, 250, 258

334

Index

Split Leaf Philodendron, 218
Spoonwood/Spoonwood Ivy, 192
Sporophylls, 15
Spotted Cowbane, 122
Spotted Hemlock, 131
Spotted Laurel, 89
Spotted Parsley, 131
Spray structures, 15
Spurge (Euphorbia species), 162
Spurge Laurel (Daphne mezereum), 144–145
Spurge Olive, 144
Squash Pepper, 107
Squaw Root, 115
Squill (Scilla species), 268
Squill (Urginea maritima), 294–295
Squirrel Food, 305
St. Anthoney’s Turnip, 248
St. Bennett’s Herb, 131
St. John’s Wort, 186–187
Staff Tree, 116
Staff Vine, 116
Stagger Bush, 210
Stamen, 15
Star Cactus, 76
Star Hyacinth, 268
Starch Root, 84
Starleaf, 94
Star-of-Bethlehem, 177
Star-Potato Vine, 276
Starve-Acre, 248
Steadfast, 255
Stem structure, 12
Steroidal alkaloids, 267
Stinging Nettles, 37
Stink Weed (Datura species), 145
Stinking Nightshade, 184
Stinking Weed (Cassia species), 112
Stinking Willie, 269
Stipule, 15
Strangler Fig, 165–166
Strap Flower, 81
Strap shape, 15
Strawberry Bush (Euonymous americanus),

160

Strawberry Bush/Shrub (Calycanthus

species), 106

Strawberry Tomato, 238
Strobilus, 15
Strychnine, 283–284
Strychnine poisoning

fasciculations in, 30, 33, 284
opisthotonic posturing in, 284
overview of, 25–26

resemblance to, 124, 132
syncope in, 80, 105, 125, 249
Strychnos nux-vomica, 283–284
Stump Tree, 172
Styptic Weed, 112
Substance P, 107–108
Sugar-Bowls, 124
Summer Snowﬂake, 228
Surreau, 260
Swainsonine, 87
Swallow Wort, 120
Swamp Andromeda, 210
Swamp Hellebore, 296
Swamp Wood, 152
Sweating. See Diaphoresis/sweating
Sweet Bells, 200
Sweet Bettie, 106
Sweet Honeysuckle, 205
Sweet Potato Plant, 212
Sweet Shrub, 106
Swelling. See Edema/swelling
Swietenia mahagoni, 284–285
Swiss Cheese Plant, 218
Switch Ivy, 200
Symphoricarpos

albus, 286, 286f
occidentalis, 286
orbiculatus, 286–287, 287f

Symplocarpus foetidus, 287–288, 288f
Symptoms, main presenting

of allergens, 42–45
altered mental status, 22, 27
of anticholinergic/antimuscarinic agents,

21

atrioventricular blocks, 33
bradycardia, 22, 24–25, 33, 60–61, 64,
66, 103, 134, 142, 151, 176, 193,
201, 211, 224, 229, 233–234, 242,
253–254, 267–268, 285, 290–291,
297, 295, 305

of calcium oxalate crystals, 23,

252

of cardioactive steroids/cardiac

glycosides, 24

of chemical irritants, 37, 42
coma, 61, 92–93, 115, 132, 158, 161, 173,

178, 181, 194, 197, 201, 205, 211,
212–213, 226, 234, 238, 242, 246,
253, 255, 261, 267, 278, 280, 285,
302, 305

contact dermatitis/phytodermatitis,
38–41, 95, 122, 137, 157, 167,
173–174, 180, 266, 294

Index

335

convulsions/seizures, 25–27, 93, 105,

106, 115, 123, 136, 158, 161, 170,
177, 255

of cyanogenic compounds, 27
delirium/hallucinations, 22, 161, 238,

278

diaphoresis/sweating, 27, 30, 69, 91, 115,

156, 226, 246, 261, 280

oropharyngeal, (most poisonous

species ingestions), 23

paralysis, 195
paresthesias, 33, 93
premature ventricular contractions, 60,

64, 134, 142, 151, 176, 233, 268,
290–291, 295

pupils, dilated, 91, 115, 132, 153, 177,

diarrhea, 28, 29, 34, 72, 114, 115, 129,

226, 280, 290

161, 193, 243, 267

bloody, 80, 105, 124, 249, 253
dysphagia, 88, 144, 148, 169, 274
edema/swelling, oropharyngeal, (most

poisonous species ingestions)

electrolyte imbalance, 23–24, 60, 65, 71,

304

fasciculations, 30, 33, 106, 169, 284
fever, 161, 247
ﬁbrillation, 24
of gastrointestinal toxins, 28
hallucinations, 22, 161, 278
headache, 69, 169, 267, 297, 305
hepatitis, 140, 175, 271
hepatotoxicity/hepatosplenomegaly, 31
hyperkalemia, 24, 134, 142, 151, 176, 295
hypertension, 30, 91, 106, 115, 132, 156,

177, 193, 226, 280

hyperthermia, 255
hypocalcemia, 252
hypoglycemia, 93, 255
hypokalemia, 93
hypotension, 33, 285
ileus, adynamic, 22
jaundice, 31
keratoconjunctivitis, 178, 180
lethargy, 27, 93, 247, 261, 302
of mechanical irritants, 37, 41t, 42
of mitotic inhibitors, 29
mucous membranes

blistered/ulcerated, 62, 75, 80, 82, 85,

94, 98, 249, 303

dry/parched, 22, 88, 148, 169, 290

multiple organ system failure, 230
muscular weakness, 30, 32, 169, 195,

267, 290, 297, 305

mydriasis. See Pupils, dilated
nausea/vomiting, (most poisonous

species ingestions)

of nicotine-like alkaloids, 30
pain

of pyrrolizidine alkaloids, 31
respiratory paralysis, 195
salivation, increased, 30, 61, 62, 80, 123,
124, 193, 227, 234, 242, 249, 253,
267

seizures. See Convulsions/seizures
skin

blistered/ulcerated, 62
burning sensation of, 108
dry, warm, ﬂushed, 22, 148
prickling sensation of, 61, 193, 234,

241, 253, 267, 296, 305

rash on, 294

of sodium channel activators, 32
somnolence, 153, 161
speech (garbled, dysphonia), 22, 23, 88,

148, 169, 274

syncope, 80, 105, 125, 156, 169, 249, 290
tachycardia, 22, 24, 30, 88, 148, 153, 274
thermal changes, 71, 119, 153, 186–187,

255

of toxalbumins, 33, 112, 180, 192, 218,

237, 259, 262, 298

trismus, 123, 227
ulcers, oral, 29
urinary retention, 22, 88, 148, 274
visual disturbances, 169, 267, 297, 302,

305

See also Poisons/poisoning syndromes;

Toxic mechanisms

Syncope, 80, 105, 125, 156, 169, 249, 290
Syrian Bead Tree, 214
Syringin, 203
Syrup of ipecac, 52

T

Tabac du Diable, 287
Tabachin, 96
Tabac/Tabaco, 224
Tabasco Pepper, 107
Tachycardia, 30, 88, 148, 153, 274

abdominal, (most poisonous species

ingestions), 24, 27–31

ocular, 23

sinus, 22
ventricular, 24

Tail Flower, 81

336

Index

Tambalisa, 279
Tannins, 97
Tansy Ragwort, 269
Tantan, 199
Tapioca, 212
Tararaco, 77
Tararaco Blanco, 183
Taro (Alocasia species), 74
Taro, Blue, 299–300
Taro (Colocasia species), 130
Taro Vine, 156
Tartago Emetico, 190
Tautuba, 190
Taxaceae family, 6t, 288–290
Taxas Sarsparilla, 215
Taxine alkaloids, 289
Taxus

baccata, 288–290
brevifolia, 288–290, 289f
canadensis, 288–290
cuspidata, 288–290, 289f
ﬂoridanda, 288–290

Tayo Bambou, 130
Tendrils, 15
Terminal clusters, 16
Tete Jeune Fille, 276
Tetranortriterpene neurotoxins, 215
Tetter Bush, 210
Tetterwort, 120
Texas Green Lily, 266
Texas Mountain Laurel, 279
Texas Umbrella Tree, 214
Thevetia peruviana, 290–291
Thevetin A and B/thevetoxin, 291
Thimbles, 150
Thimbleweed, 78
Thin-layer chromatography (TLC), 196
Thorn Apple, 146
Thorns, 16, 163
Thorny Popolo, 275, 276
Threadleaf Groundsel, 269
Throat structures, 16
Throatwort, 150
Thymelaeaceae family, 6t, 144, 152
Tickle Weed, 296
Tinaja, 191
TLC (thin-layer chromatography), 196
Tobacco, 224, 226
Toddy Fishtail Palm, 108
Toloache, 146
Tomates, 238
Tooth shape, 16
Tope-Tope, 238
Toxalbumin genera, 33

Abrus, 57–59, 57f
Hura, 179–180, 179f
Jatropha, 190–192, 192f
Momordica, 217–218, 217f
Phoradendron, 236–238, 237f
Ricinus, 255–257, 305, 256f
Robinia, 258–260, 259f
Viscum, 298–299, 298f

Toxic mechanisms

of allergens, 42–45
anticholinergic/antimuscarinic, 21
of calcium oxalate crystals, 23
of cardioactive steroids/cardiac

glycosides, 24

of chemical irritants, 42
of convulsant (siezure) poisons,

25

of cyanogenic compounds, 27
of gastrointestinal toxins, 28
of mechanical irritants, 37, 42
of mitotic inhibitors, 28–29
of nicotine-like alkaloids, 30

of pyrrolizidine alkaloids, 31

of sodium channel activators, 32
of toxalbumins, 33
See also Poisons/poisoning syndromes;

Symptoms, main presenting

Toxicodendron

diversilobum, 292–294, 292f
pubescens, 292–294
radicans, 292–294, 293f
rydbergii, 292–294
vernix, 292–294, 293f
Trailing Monkshood, 60
Traveler’s Joy, 124
Tread Softly, 275
Tree Datura, 146
Treesail, 258
Trepedora Pothos, 156
Trichomes, 37
Trifoliate Orange, 244
Trismus, 123, 227
Triterpenes, 240, 266
Tropic Laurel, 166
Trumpet Plant, 273
Tuatua, 190
Tubers/tuberous roots, 16, 60
Tue Chien, 275
Tuft Root, 149
Tufted Fishtail Palm, 108
Tula, 102
Tullidora, 195
Tung nut, 70–71
Tung Oil Tree, 70

Index

337

U

‘Uala-Kahiki, 276
Ulcers, oral, 29
Umbelliferae (Apiaceae) family, 6t, 68, 122,

131, 226

Umbrella Leaf, 242
Urechitoxin, 232
Urginea maritima, 294–295
Urinary retention, 22, 88, 148, 274
Urtica dioica, 37
Urushiol, 294

V

Variegated appearance, 16
Variegated Philodendron, 156
Vase Flower/Vine, 124
Vegetable Humming Bird, 271
Vejiga de Perro, 238
Vellorita, 128
Velo de Novia, 153
Velvety texture, 16
Veratrum

album, 296–298
californicum, 296–298, 296f
parvifolium, 296–298
tenuipetalum, 296–298
viride, 296–298

Veratrum alkaloids, 267, 296
Verbenaceae family, 6t, 153, 197–198
Vesicants, 62, 75, 80, 82, 85, 94, 98, 249, 303
Vinca, 113–114
Vinca-related alkaloids, 114
Vines, 58
Viperine, 154
Viper’s Bugloss, 154
Virgin’s Bower, 124
Viscum album, 298
Viscumin, 298
Visual disturbances, 169, 267, 297, 302, 305
Vitamin D intoxiﬁcation, 118–119
Vomiting, 24, 27–30

W

Wahoo, 159
Walnut, 70
Warty appearance, 16
Water Arum, 99–100
Water Crowfoot, 248
Water Dragon, 99
Water Dropwort, 226, 228
Water Goggles, 104
Water Hemlock, 122–123
Water Lily, 305
Water-Fennel, 226

Waterweed, 282
Wax Leaf Privet, 201
Waxberry, 286
Weather Plant/vine, 57
Weeds, 16
Weeping Fig, 166
Weeping Laurel, 166
West Indian Lilac, 214
West Indian Pinkroot, 282
Western Burning Bush, 159–160
Western Poison Ivy, 292
Western Poison Oak, 292
Western Snowberry, 286
Western Soapberry, 263
Western Yew, 288
White Anthurium, 281
White Baneberry, 62
White Cedar, 214
White Clary, 175
White Cohosh, 62
White Hellebore, 296
White Honey Flower, 258
White Kerria, 254
White Locust, 258
White Osier, 200
White Popinac, 199
Whole bowel irrigation, 53
Wickerby Bush, 152
Wicks, 210
Wickup, 152
Wicky, 192
Wicopy, 152, 210
Wild Allamanda, 232
Wild Balsam Apple, 217
Wild Calla, 99
Wild China Tree, 263
Wild Clary, 175
Wild Coffee, 112
Wild Crocus, 78
Wild Indigo, 90
Wild Jalap, 242
Wild Lemon, 242
Wild Licorice, 57
Wild Mamee, 127
Wild Monkshood, 60
Wild Seaside Lavender, 175
Wild Tamarind, 199
Wild Tobacco, 203
Wild Unction, 232
Wild Yam Bean, 230
Wilelaiki, 264
Windﬂower, 78
Window Plant, 218
Windowleaf, 218

338

Index

Wine Palm, 108
Wine Plant, 251
Winged seeds, 16
Wingleaf Soapberry, 263
Winter Cherry, 238
Winter Fern, 131
Wintersweet, 59
Wistaria, 299
Wisteria, 300
Wisteria

ﬂoribunda, 299–300, 299f
sinensis, 299–300, 300f

Witches’ Thimbles, 150
Wode Whistle, 131
Wolfberry, 286
Wolfsbane, 60
Wolly Loco, 86
Wonder Bulb, 128
Wonder Flower, 228
Wonder Tree, 255
Wood Vine, 168
Woodbine, 168, 205
Woodbine Honeysuckle, 205
Woody Nightshade, 276
Wooten Loco, 86
Wooton Milkvetch, 86
Worm Grass, 282

X

Y

Xanthosoma

sagittifolium, 301f
violacea, 301f

Yam bean, 230–231
Yaupon, 187
Yautia, 300
Yautia Malanga, 130
Yedra, 173
Yellow Allamanda, 71

Yellow Ginseng, 115
Yellow Gowan, 248
Yellow Henbane, 238
Yellow Indigo, 90
Yellow Jasmine, 168
Yellow Locust, 258
Yellow Nightshade, 232
Yellow Oleander, 290–292
Yellow Parilla, 215
Yellow Popolo, 276
Yellow Sage, 197
Yellow Sarsparilla, 215
Yerba Cotorra, 175
Yerba de Pordioseros, 124
Yerba Hedonia, 112
Yerba Lechera, 162
Yesquin, 217
Yew, 288, 290
Yuca Cimarrona, 190
Yuca/Yuca Brava, 212
Yugulla, 301

Z

Zábila/Zavila, 76
Zamia

furfuracea, 301–303
integrifolia, 301–303, 302f
pumila, 301–303, 302f
Zamiaceae family, 6t, 301
Zantedeschia aethiopica, 303,

303f

Zarcilla, 199
Zephyr Lily, 304
Zephyranthes atamasco, 304, 304f
Zombi, 146
Zongnon, 72
Zygadenine/zygacine, 305
Zigadenus (Zygadenus)

fremontii, 305f
nuttallii, 306f

Disclaimer

This  book  is  a  work  of reference  and  is  not  intended  to  supply  medical 
advice to any particular individual. Readers should always consult their personal
physicians for medical advice and treatment. The authors, editors, and publisher
of this work have checked with sources believed to be reliable in their efforts 
to  conﬁrm  the  accuracy  and  completeness  of the  information  presented 
herein  and  that  the  information  is  in  accordance  with  the  standard  practices
accepted at the time of publication. However, neither the authors, editors, and
publisher, nor any party involved in the creation and publication of this work
warrant  that  the  information  is  in  every  respect  accurate  and  complete, and 
they are not responsible for errors or omissions or for any consequences from
the  application  of the  information  in  this  book. In  light  of ongoing  research 
and  changes  in  clinical  experience  and  in  governmental  regulations, readers 
are  encouraged  to  conﬁrm  the  information  contained  herein  with  additional
sources, in  particular  as  it  pertains  to  drug  dosage  and  usage. Readers  are 
urged  to  check  the  package  insert  for  each  drug  they  plan  to  administer  for 
any change in indications or dosage or for additional warnings or precautions,
especially  for  new  or 
infrequently  used  drugs. This  book  does  not 
purport to be a complete presentation of all poisonous plants, and the genera,
species, and  cultivars  discussed  or  pictured  herein  are  but  a  small  fraction 
of the  plants  known  to  have  caused  poisonings  to  humans  and  animals 
that might be found in the wild, in an urban or suburban landscape, or in a
home. Given  the  global  movement  of plants, we  would  expect  continual 
introduction  of species  having  toxic  properties  to  the  regions  discussed  in 
this book. We have made every attempt to be botanically accurate, but regional
variations  in  plant  names, growing  conditions, and  availability  may  affect 
the  accuracy  of the  information  provided. A  positive  identiﬁcation  of an 
individual  plant  is  most  likely  when  a  freshly  collected  part  of the  plant 
containing  leaves  and  ﬂowers  or  fruits  is  presented  to  a  knowledgeable 
botanist or horticulturist. Poison Control Centers generally have relationships
with  the  botanical  community  should  the  need  for  plant  identiﬁcation 
arise. Medicine  is  an  everchanging  science  and  subject  to  interpretation. We 
have  attempted  to  provide  accurate  medical  descriptions  of clinical  manage-
ment  strategies, but  there  is  no  substitute  for  direct  interaction  with  an 
expert  clinician  for  assisting  in  patient  care  as  well  as  a  trained  botanist  or 
339

340

Disclaimer

horticulturist  for  plant  identiﬁcation. In  cases  of exposure  or  ingestion,
contact  a  Poison  Control  Center  (1-800-222-1222), a  medical  toxicologist,
another  appropriate  healthcare  provider, or  an  appropriate  reference
resource.

